rU 


t 


cM 


#'CS7I.BII8    1903 


Copy   2 


I'lKtHASKI)  FROM  THE  INCOMK  OK  THK 

JOSIAH   H.   BENTON    FUND 


5^ 


TO   MY   DEAR   WIFE, 

Whose  faithful  assistance  has  never  faltered 

during  the  long  years  which  have  been 

necessary  to  connplete  my  task,  I 

gratefully  dedicate  this 

volume. 


The  Author. 


PREFACE. 


THE  compiler  of  this  work  has  for  more  than  thirty  years 
given  much  time  to  gathering  Babcock  family  records, 
with  at  first  no  expectation  of  including  more  than  the 
records  of  the  descendants  of  his  grandfathers,  both  of  whom 
were  Babcocks,  though  remotely  related.  As  the  work  grew 
the  idea  of  publishing  developed,  and  for  the  past  four  years 
the  most  of  his  otherwise  leisure  time  has  been  given  to  it. 

The  work  begins  with  James  Badcock  (Babcock),  who  set- 
tled in  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  in  1642,  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  1662,  and 
died  there  June  12,  1679.  It  includes  records  of  about  two 
thousand  families,  which  can  be  traced  with  certainty  to  the 
James  Babcock  referred  to  above.  Some  of  these  are  of  the 
eleventh  generation  of  Babcocks  in  America. 

Records  for  this  book  have  been  collected  from  Westerly 
and  other  town  records  and  from  scores  of  published  works, 
among  the  most  valuable  of  which  are :  Colonial  Records  of 
Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut.  Arnold's  Vital  Records  of 
Rhode  Island.  Wheeler's  History  of  Stonington,  Smith's  Civil 
and  Military  Lists  of  Rhode  Island,  Town  Meeting  Records 
of  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Ancient  Landmarks  of  Plymouth,  and 
History  of  the  Town  of  Plymouth,  the  last  two  by  William  T. 
Davis.  ]\Iuch  the  larger  part  have  l^een  gathered  from  family 
records  never  before  published. 

The  author  has  been  assisted  in  this  work  by  many,  among 
whom  should  be  mentioned  Col.  A.  J.  Babcock,  of  Springfield, 
111.,  who  for  more  than  twenty  years  has  been  an  enthusiastic 
collector  of  Babcock  genealogy.  He  loaned  the  author  all  of 
his  Babcock  records,  which  included  several  hundred  pages 
of  manuscript,  and  has  written,  perhaps,  hundreds  of  letters 
to  the  author  and  others  in  his  efforts  to  make  this  volume  a 
full  and  accurate  genealogical  record. 

Mr.  A.  Emerson  Babcock,  of  Brighton,  N.  Y.,  has  spent 
much  time,  effort,  and  money  in  collecting  records  of  the  de- 
scendants of  his  progenitor,  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  of  the  fifth 


vi  Preface. 

generation.  His  records  are  included  in  this  book,  and  are 
published  as  prepared  by  him  in  the  last  part  of  the  volume. 

Mr.  Edwin  Babcock,  of  Westerly,  R.  I.,  has  for  a  genera- 
tion been  collecting  Babcock  family  records,  and  is  considered 
authority  on  Babcock  genealogy.  By  his  kind  permission  the 
author  has  had  free  access  to  his  records. 

Space  forbids  mentioning  by  name  the  hundreds  who  have 
given  records  of  one  or  several  families,  but  the  author  wishes 
to  especially  thank  the  following,  who  have  given  much  help 
in  collecting  genealogical  records:  Rev.  Charles  H.  Babcock, 
D.D.,  Providence,  R.  I.;  Mr.  William  P.  Abbott,  St,  Paul, 
Minn. ;  Hon.  Henry  L.  Green,  Riverpoint,  R.  I. ;  the  late  Hon. 
Horatio  Gates  Jones.  Philadelphia,  Pa.;  the  late  Rev.  Rufus 
Babcock,  D.D.,  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y. ;  Miss  Mary  Rodman, 
Groton,  Conn. ;  the  late  Mr.  Nathan  Babcock,  Westerly, 
R.  I. ;  Phebe  J.  B.  Wait,  M.D.,  New  York  City ;  Mrs.  Julia 
M.  B.  Ambler,  Chatham,  N.  Y. ;  Rev.  Theodore  Babcock, 
D.D.,  Syracuse,  N.  Y.;  Mr.  W.  I.  Babcock,  New  York  City; 
Mrs.  Persis  Gray,  San  Francisco,  Cal. ;  Mr.  Stephen  E.  Bab- 
cock, .South  Bend,  Ind. ;  Mrs.  Judge  Edward  Thomas,  Brook- 
lyn, N.  Y.;  Lucy  A.  Babcock,  M.D.,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  Mr. 
Raymond  E.  Dodge,  New  York  City ;  Miss  Flora  I.  Babcock, 
St.  Paul,  Minn. ;  Mr.  Cyrus  Henry  Brown,  Westerly,  R.  I. ; 
Mrs.  Mary  A.  Babcock,  Phenix,  R".  I. ;  Mrs.  Mary  Gooding, 
Los  Angeles,  Cal. ;  Miss  Margaret  L  Van  Patten,  Westerly, 
R.  L  ;  Mrs.  Prudence  Carter,  New  York  City ;  Mrs.  Clara 
Babcock  Wadsworth,  Binghamton,  N.  Y. ;  Mr.  Charles  H. 
Green,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  Mr.  Daniel  Babcock,  Phenix,  R.  L; 
]\Iiss  Grace  D.  Wheeler,  Stonington,  Conn. 

For  reasons  given  in  the  explanations,  many  dates  found  in 
this  work  may  be  questioned  by  some,  although  the  author  has 
taken  great  pains  to  verify  dates  and  statements.  Trusting  that 
unavoidable  errors  will  be  excused  if  such  be  found,  this  work 
is  now  submitted  to  the  public. 


THE  COAT  OF  ARMS  AND  THE  FAMILY  ORIGIN. 

By  Rev.  Charles  Henry  Babcock,  D.D. 

THE  Babcock  Coat  of  Arms,  which  is  used  as  the  fron- 
tispiece of  this  book,  is  from  the  Dictionary  of 
American  Family  Antiquity.  It  is  described  in  the 
language  of  Heraldry  thus:  He  beareth  Argent;  three 
pale  cocks  on  a  Fesse  cotised,  gules.  Crest,  a  cock's  head. 
Motto,  "Dens  spcs  mea."  Defined,*  for  the  benefit  of  those 
unversed  in  Heraldry,  the  meaning  of  these  queer  terms  is  as 
follows:  Argent  means  silver,  sometimes  represented  by 
white,  Fesse  cotised  means  a  broad  band  crossing  the  shield 
horizontally  in  the  middle  between  two  narrow  bands  parallel ' 
to,  and  near,  the  Fesse.  The  Fesse  is  emblematic  of  the  mili- 
tary girdle  worn  round  the  body  over  the  armor.  Gules  means 
red.  The  crest  is  placed  on  the  top  of,  or  above,  the  shield, 
and  the  motto,  or  legend,  is  usually  below  it.  Hence,  ex- 
pressed in  ordinary  English,  our  coat  of  arms  relates  that 
The  Babcock  bears  a  white,  or  silver,  shield  with  three  pale 
cocks  emblazoned  on  a  broad  red  band,  crossing  the  shield 
horizontally,  with  a  narrow  red  band  on  each  side  of  it ;  with 
a  cock's  head  above,  and  a  motto  beneath  the  shield,  which 
motto  expresses  the  sentiment,  God  is  my  Hope. 

Attempting  to  trace  this  coat  of  arms  to  its  origin,  we  dis- 
cover that  it  seems  to  be  a  composite,  made  of  parts  of  several 
coats  of  arms  of  the  same  general  family.  Of  this,  however, 
we  cannot  be  perfectly  sure,  because  no  modern  book  of  Her- 
aldry may  be  supposed  to  contain  all  the  multitude  of  devices 
of  this  sort  which  were  stamped  on  ancient  documents,  copied 
in  books  and  manuscripts  now  lost,  and  embossed  on  seals 
and  surcoats  of  armor  which  have,  apparently  forever,  dis- 
appeared. Some  such  or  other  undiscovered  repository  may 
yet  reveal  the  original  of  our  escutcheon,  intact,  in  its  present 
form.  But,  meantime,  we  must  base  our  opinion  only  upon 
what  we  have  been  able  to  definitely  ascertain  after  consid- 
erable research,  the  results  of  which  are  as  follows.  Accord- 
ing to  the  best  available  information  there  are  four  coats  of 

*  Vide  Burke's  GeneralJArmory. 

vii 


viii  Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin. 

arms  borne  by  different  families  of  the  Babcock — or  rather 
Badcock — name  in  England,  and  ours,  as  presented  in  the 
frontispiece  to  this  volume,  is  not  one  of  them.  One  of  the 
four  pertains  to  the  Badcocks  of  St.  Winow,  County  Corn- 
wall; another  is  displayed  by  the  family  in  Essex  and  Mid- 
dlesex; a  third  is  distinctive  of  the  Devonshire  branch,  while 
the  fourth  is  borne  by  Lieut.-Col.  Lovell  Benjamin  Badcock, 
of  Lincolnshire  and  Bucks.  A  fifth  variety,  moreover,  is  de- 
scribed by  Burke,  but  is  unlocated  by  him  further  than  the 
general  identification  implied  by  attaching  to  it  the  name  "Bad- 
cock." Our  device  resembling,  and  yet  differing  from,  each 
one  of  these  in  some  respect,  seems,  we  repeat,  a  composite, 
which  levied  upon  each  of  the  five  for  its  own  composition. 
Thus,  the  argent  or  silver  shield  corresponds  with  the  unlo- 
cated arms ;  the  three  pale  cocks  are  found  in  the  Cornwall 
arrangement;  the  gules,  or  red,  is  displayed  in  the  color  of 
the  cocks  in  Essex-Middlesex  and  in  Devonshire,  and  is  also 
found  in  the  shield  color  of  the  Lincolnshire  and  Bucks  device. 
As  for  our  crest,  it  appears  to  have  been  derived  from  the 
Devonshire  version,  which  is  a  cock's  head — or  demi-cock — 
colored  gules,  or  red.  Two  other  and  entirely  different  crests 
are  also  used  by  the  Badcocks  in  England — one  a  talbot  in 
white,  or  silver,  which  surmounts  the  Lincolnshire-Bucks 
shield,  and  the  other  a  stag  between  two  branches  of  laurel, 
which  distinguishes  the  Essex-Middlesex  armor.  Sable,  or 
black,  is  introduced  in  coloring  some  parts  of  three  of  the 
above-mentioned  arrangements,  and  appears,  too,  in  some 
copies  of  our  device  as  the  color  of  the  crest  and  of  the  scroll 
and  motto. 

For  the  substance  of  these  details  we  are  indebted, 
mostly,  to  Burke's  Heraldry;  but  that  encyclopedic  and 
recondite  compilation  does  not  enable  us  to  trace  the  con- 
stituent parts  of  our  armorial  blend  to  their  origin,  nor 
does  it  enable  us  to  determine  the  time  of  the  adoption 
of  them,  severally,  by  the  different  county  families  who 
made  them  their  own.  While,  therefore,  the  coat  of  arms 
we  sport  is  seemingly  a  composite  one,  we  are  not,  and 
so  far  as  we  know  nobody  is.  informed  as  to  when  or  w^hy  it 
was  thus  composed.  Perhaps  its  composition  was  due  to  mar- 
riage, at  different  times  in  the  remote  past  and  within  the 
family  connection,  which  might  have  induced  the  individuals 
concerned  to  blend  their  armorial  bearings  while  uniting  their 
joys  and  dividing  their  sorrows.  But  if  this  be  the  true  ex- 
planation of  the  composition  in  question  no  proof  of  it  can  be 


Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin.  ix 

here  produced,  because,  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  decide,  no 
such  proof  exists.  Whenever  and  however  our  escutcheon 
acquired  its  present  form,  there  were,  at  that  unknown  time, 
brought  together  in  it  symbols  of  ancient  family  life,  which 
serve  to  remind  us  that  that  life  reaches  in  many  directions, 
and  a  long  way  into  the  past  of  England.  Mere  conjectures 
upon  this,  as  upon  most  subjects,  are  worthless,  based  as  they 
are  upon  no  sustaining  evidence.  Indeed,  there  seems  to  be 
but  one  clear  and  positive  statement  which  here  may  safely  be 
made,  and  that  is,  that  at  any  rate  the  coat  of  arms  printed  in 
this  book  has  been  long  known,  at  least  as  a  picture,  in  this 
country;  for  it  is,  in  all  essential  particulars,  the  duplicate  of 
a  copy  in  the  present  writer's  possession,  the  original  of  which 
hung,  during  said  writer's  early  boyhood,  in  the  dining  room 
of  his  grandfather,  John  Babcock,  of  New  Haven,  Conn. 

And  this  last  statement  leads  to  the  reflection  that  in  the 
opinion  of  all  good  Americans  coats  of  arms  are,  in  this  coun- 
try, valuable  only  as  pictures,  anyway.  They  are  looked  upon 
by  most  of  us  as  part  of  the  worn-out  trappings  of  a  state  of 
society  which,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  has  passed  away. 
To  us  they  are  merely  curious  reminders  of  ancient  and  obso- 
lete standards  for  estimating  human  worth,  and  the  sight  of 
them  nowadays,  in  our  land,  is  apt  to  provoke  either  good- 
natured  derision  or  contemptuous  sneers.  Well,  so  may  it 
always  be,  in  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  the  perpetuation  of 
republican  institutions.  Nevertheless,  coats  of  arms,  in  their 
palmy  days,  so  far  from  being  mere  flauntings  of  pride  of 
place,  served  a  most  serious,  practical  purpose.  They  saved 
many  times,  no  doubt,  valuable  human  lives.  For,  in  those 
old  days  when  men  went  into  battle  clad  from  head  to  foot  in 
armor,  with  faces  completely  concealed  by  the  closed  visors 
of  their  steel  helmets,  there  was  no  way  of  recognizing  a  war- 
rior thus  accoutered  save  by  his  coat  of  arms.  This  was  so 
called  because  of  the  fact  that  it  was  embroidered  on  the  sur- 
coat,  or  "camise,"  made  of  leather  or  silk,  or  other  stuff,  which 
was  worn  over  the  annor,  in  full  view.  Seeing  this  symbol  of 
rank  and  leadership  in  the  midst  of  an  affray,  friends  would 
rally  to  support  the  wearer  of  it,  while  foes,  if  victorious, 
would  spare  that  wearer's  life  for  the  sake  of  making  a  valu- 
able prisoner.  It  is  said  that  the  last  of  the  De  Clares  owed 
his  death  in  the  battle  of  Bannockburn  to  his  having^  neo-lected 
to  wear  his  coat  of  arms,  by  which  he  might  have  been  recog- 
nized and  his  life  saved  for  captivity.  And  so,  doubtless, 
many  another  good  man  and  true  was  killed,  on  other  battle- 


X  Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin. 

fields,  and  many  another  spared,  because  of  the  absence,  or  the 
presence,  on  his  surcoat  of  the  heraldic  emblem,  which  told,  or 
failed  to  tell,  who  he  was  for  the  information  of  friends  and 
foes. 

But,  beyond  this  humane,  though  incidental,  service  ren- 
dered by  the  coat  of  arms,  its  blazonry  as  a  family  distinction 
tended  to  emphasize  that  individuality  of  being  and  of  doing, 
which  is  so  necessary  to  progress  and  prosperity  in  human 
life.  Individuality  stamps  itself,  for  good  or  evil,  on  the 
world's  history,  strive  to  submerge  it  in  the  community  as  we 
may.  Judah  with  his  lion,  and  the  old  Romans  with  their 
eagles,  sought  by  those  emblems  to  indicate  the  possession  of 
strength  and  swiftness  in  doing  what  was  conceived  by  them 
to  be  right  in  ethical  and  social  ways.  When  Judah's  lion 
reared  his  head,  righteousness  was  declared,  as  becoming  a 
nation.  Where  the  Roman  eagles  were  uplifted,  there  law  and 
order  was  proclaimed  to  all  the  world.  And,  similarly,  the 
adoption  of  a  distinctive  armory,  with  crest  and  legend,  more 
or  less  descriptive  of  individual  qualities,  or  deeds,  was  the 
declaration  of  a  personality  distinct  and  separate,  because  it 
was  connected  with,  and  pledged  to,  a  certain  line  of  conduct 
worthy  of  remembrance  with  pride. 

Coats  of  arms  were  not  granted,  or  assumed,  save  for  cause 
worthy  of  perpetuation.  Such  insignia,  from  being  personal 
at  the  first,  soon  became  hereditary,  subject  to  the  rules  and 
laws  which  governed  the  descent  of  titles  and  property.  Fam- 
ilies in  the  legitimate  possession  of  such  devices  traced  thereby 
connection  with  the  name  and  fame  of  their  ancestors,  and 
were  thus  stimulated,  in  their  individual  membership,  to  be 
worthy  of  the  blood  they  shared  with  those  who,  in  olden 
times,  had  done  something  worth  while.  If  there  is  anything 
in  this  consideration  which  is  morally  stimulating  to  the  Bab- 
cocks  of  our  day,  then  our  coat  of  arms  is  not  quite  useless — 
it  has  not  come  down  to  us  in  vain.  Our  escutcheon  suggests 
a  somewhat  belligerent  character,  it  must  be  confessed.  Three 
fighting  cocks  on  a  fiery  background,  with  a  head  of  the  same 
game  bird  lustily  crowing  as  a  crest,  do  not  altogether  bode 
for  peace.  'Tis  true  the  cocks  are  pale,  but  paleness  in  a 
fighter  sometimes  denotes  great  determination.  If  the  content 
of  our  shield  is  indeed  indicative  of  our  ancestral  or  our  actual 
temperament,  let  us,  under  the  encouragement  of  our  motto, 
hope  that  the  fighting  was,  and  is,  always  done  on  the  right 
side.  Without  victories,  of  one  sort  or  another,  the  world 
could  not  go  on.    Our  weapons  now  must  be  of  the  moral  and 


Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin  xi 

intellectual  sort.  The  crossbow  and  the  mace,  the  battle-ax 
and  the  shield  have  passed,  and  forever,  out  of  our  hands.  No 
camise,  or  surcoat,  bearing  argent  with  three  pale  cocks  on  a 
fesse  gules  will  ever  grace  our  shoulders  as  we  fight,  for  those 
tokens  of  a  fighter  have  long  since  gone  the  way  of  outworn 
garments.  Sic  transit  gloria  mtmdi.  But  there  are  other 
glories  to  win,  in  another  kind  of  warfare.  Let  us  take  heart 
of  grace,  even  though  some  portion  of  our  ancestral  ward- 
robe has  gone  into  the  inevitable  ragbag  which  Time  holds, 
always  open,  for  the  reception  of  things  unfit  for  present  use. 
From  what  has  now  been  said  it  goes  without  saying  that 
the  Babcock  family  is  of  English — perhaps  we  may  say  of 
Saxon — origin.  Precisely  when  and  where  in  England  it 
originated  it  is  impossible  now  to  ascertain.  Hence  the  amount 
of  credence  to  be  given  to  the  assertion*  that  it  was  founded 
A.  D.  449  by  a  Saxon  warrior  in  the  ranks  of  Hengist  and 
Horsa,  who  came  with  a  Saxon  army  to  succor  the  English 
against  the  Picts  and  Scots,  must  be  determined  by  each  reader 
for  himself.  Wherever  it  originated,  the  family — judging  by 
the  name — is  numerous  in  the  United  Kingdom;  representa- 
tives of  it  being  found  in  Cornwall,  Devonshire,  Lincolnshire, 
Middlesex,  and  Essex,  but  found,  seemingly,  most  numerous 
in  Essex.  The  name  Badcock — probably  pronounced  "Badco" 
— may  have  been  of  Saxon  origin,  for  the  family  may  be  pro- 
visionally traced  to  residence  in  Essex  County  at  the  time  of 
the  Norman  Conquest.  The  word  "provisionally"  is  used 
advisedly  here,  and  the  proviso  attaches  to  the  reliability  of 
the  following  statement.  It  is  saidf  that  a  certain  Sir  William 
Seager  narrated,  as  a  result  of  his  visit  to  Essex  County  in 
1612,  that  Sir  Richard  Badcock  was  the  nineteenth  in  descent 
from  the  first  holder  of  the  family  mansion  there.  If  we  ac- 
cept this  statement  and  allow  a  century  to  represent  the  lives 
of  three  generations,  then  six  centuries  must  have  elapsed  be- 
tween Sir  Richard  and  his  eighteenth  ancestor,  who,  conse- 
quently, lived  early  in  the  eleventh  century — the  century  of 
the  Norman  Conquest.  It  is  hereupon  conjectured  that  while 
the  Badcocks  were  among  the  Saxon  settlers  in  England  they 
had  no  family  name  or  seat  in  a  formal  way  until  Richard 
Badcock's  ancestor  permanently  located,  as  aforesaid,  in  the 
eleventh  century,  at  Wivenhoe,  Essex  County,  near  the  sea. 
It  is  alleged,*  upon  the  authority  of  a  reference  to  Wright's 
History  of  Essex,  that  the  Badcock  mansion  which  was  occu- 

*  American  Family  Antiquity,  vol.  iii,  p.  igg. 

+  fit'd. ;  also  Hinman,  Puritan  Settlers,  pp.  92,  106. 


xii  Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin. 

pied  by  Sir  Richard  in  Wivenhoe  was  still  standing  there  in 
i8so-  but,  as  neither  volume  nor  page  in  Wright  s  big  work 
is  quoted,  the  reference  cannot  conveniently  be  verihed. 

The  foregoing  sketch  of  our  ancestry  in  England  is  given— 
in  the  absence  of  documentary  corroboration— for  precisely 
what  it  is  worth,  and  having  by  this  gentle  word  of  warning 
justified  ourselves,  we  gingerly  proceed  along  our  somewhat 
uncertain  way.    We  are  about  to  try  to  get  the  family  aero  s 
from  England  to  New  England,  and  the  only  means  available 
for  our  purpose  seems  to  be  "family  tradition."     Now,  tradi- 
tion is  unwritten  history,  and  if  it  be  genuine  and  authentic   t 
is  iust  as  good  as  written  history,  which,  notwithstanding    ts 
supposed  superiority,  has  itself  been  defined  as  the  most  de- 
lightful of  fictions.    Now,  it  may  be  fiction  and  it  may  be  fact 
bSt  it  is  certainly  tradition  that  the  first  Badcock    o  come 
from  England  to  our  America  was  one  James,  alleged  to  be 
a  younge^r  brother  of  that  Sir  Richard  Badcock  who    in  Sir 
William  Seager's  time,  lived  at  Wivenhoe  in  Essex.    The  fact 
that  there  w?re  Badcocks  at  Wivenhoe,  at  all,  --  -^e^^' ^^  ^^ 
UP  to  doubt.    A  list  of  persons  of  that  name  born  at  Wivenhoe 
"s^  'tl  true,  given  in  Hinman's  Puritan  Settlers  of  the  Colony 
of  Connecticut;*    but  a  gentleman  who  is,  we  beheve   a  Ba  - 
cock  by  maternal   descent  writesf   that   m    1863   he   vis  te 
Wivenhoe  and  examined  the  parish   register   m  the  churd 
there  without  finding  a  single  entry  of  the  Badcock  name.      n 
producing  this  testimony  it  may  be  said  that  perhaps  the  ge  - 
Ueman'siarch  was  not  sufficiently  thorough,  and  we  ought 
to  add  that  not  far  from  Wivenhoe-probab ly  a  mi  e  or  two- 
there  is  a  locality  named  Wivenhoe  Cross,t  about  which  we 
know  nothing,  and  which  possibly  may  have  been  confused 
bv  the  pi^servirs  of  our  tradition,  with  the  first-named  place. 
At  all  events    that  the  family  abounded,  and,  at  a  very  early 
^me  flo  1     i;d,  in  Essex  County,  is  beyond  reasonable  ques- 
i^n     The  county  was  settled  and  named  by  the  Saxons  who 
divided  this  district  of  England  and  erected  it  into  a  king- 
om  r  Formerly,  and  for  long,  it  was  considered  unusually 
merger  in  its  historical  remains,  but  later  discoveries  have 
^,own  it  to  be  quite  rich  in  that  particular.     Incidental,  and 
herTfore  most  valuable,  references  in  its  history  prove  the 
presence  of  the  Badcock  people  there  as  early,  presumably   as 
the  twelfth  century.     In  the  parish  of  Abberton,  or  Adbur- 

+  W  f  Appleton,  A.M.,  in  New  England  Genealogical  Society  Reports,  vol.  xix,  p.  .^S- 
t  ^Imap  of  Essex  County  in  Wright's  Essex.  §  Wright's  Essex,  vol.  ..  p.  x.  «. 


Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin.  xiii 

toil — which  extends  eastward  from  Layer  de  la  Haye,  four 
and  one  half  miles  from  Colchester  and  fifty-five  miles  from 
London — in  Essex,  there  is,  a  quarter  of  a  mjle  northwest 
from  the  church,  a  manor  house  of  Badcocks*  which  is  sup- 
posed to  be  the  estate  which  belonged  to  one  Alice  le  Des- 
penser,  daughter  and  heiress  of  Philip  Bassett,  at  the  time  of 
her  decease  in  1281.  The  land  of  this  manor  house  appears 
to  have  been  given  by  Thomas  Whot  and  John  Henny  to  St. 
Botolph's  priory  in  Colchester  in  1398.*  How  those  gentle- 
men became  possessed  of  the  land  does  not  appear.  Later,  in 
1523,  Thomas  Springe  died  possessed  of  the  manor  of  Adbur- 
ton  called  Badcocks;"  still  later  Thomas,  Lord  Audeley,  had 
this  estate,  as  had  also,  his  nephew,  Thomas  Audeley,  Esq., 
who  died  in  1572;  and  yet  later  it  passed  through  several 
hands  to  the  ownership  of  Francis  Canning,  Esq.*  This  is 
pretty  circumstantial  and  reliable,  and  although  the  property 
mentioned  evidently  passed  out  of  the  family  holding  previous 
to  1 28 1,  it  shows  the  antiquity  of  the  Badcocks  as  residents 
of  Essex  County. 

Again,  at  East  Thorp — which  is  a  village  name  of  Saxon 
derivation — there  is  confirmatory  evidence  of  the  ancient  resi- 
dence of  the  Badcock  people  in  Essex  in  the  existence  there 
of  a  manor  of  Badcocks,  which  at  one  time  belonged  to  the 
Tey  family  and  later  came  to  a  family  by  the  name  of  Shep- 
herd, f  But  East  Thorp  is  not  Wivenhoe,  and  Abberton  is 
not  Wivenhoe,  and  we  are  assured,  as  above,  that  the  name 
Badcock  is  not  in  the  Wivenhoe  parish  register.  Nevertheless, 
"family  tradition"  has  it  that  at  Wivenhoe  lived — born  about 
1580 — a  younger  brother  of  Sir  Richard,  named  James  Bad- 
cock, a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  of  Puritanical 
persuasion,  who  became  an  exile  in  1620  to  Leyden,  Holland, 
for  the  sake  of  religious  liberty,  and  sailing  thence,  with 
others  landed  in  New  England — some  say  at  Plymouth, 
Mass. — in  1623,  thus  becoming  the  founder  of  the  family  in 
this  country.?:  Whatever  doubt,  or  denial,  there  may  be  of  the 
truth  of  this  tradition  arises,  presumably,  in  the  first  place, 
because  the  tradition  is  entirely  unsupported  by  documentary 
evidence.  There  are  no  passenger  lists  of  ships  arriving  at 
Plymouth  in  1623,  or  in  1624;  no  deeds,  or  land  apportion- 
ments; no  mention  of  election,  or  of  appointment,  to  local 
civil,  or  military  offices  or  duties;    no  wills  or  other  probate 

*  Wright's  Essex,  vol.  ii,  p.  732.  t  Ibid.,  vol.  i,  p.  390. 

%  Dictionary  of  American  Family  Antiquity,  vol.  iii,  p.  199  ;  also   Hinman,  Puritan   Settlers, 
etc.,  p.  106. 


xiv  Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin. 

papers;  no  references  in  contemporaneous  literature — in 
short,  there  is  nothing  in  the  shape  of  discovered  records  to 
show  that  James  Badcock,  aforesaid,  landed  in  1623,  as  tradi- 
tion relates,  at  Plymouth,  or  elsewhere,  in  Massachusetts.  On 
the  contrary,  there  are  circumstances  and  also  records,  which 
tend  to  impair,  and  for  some  minds  to  destroy,  the  trustworthi- 
ness of  said  tradition.  What  those  circumstances  and  facts 
of  record  are  may  easily  be  learned  by  reading  the  pages  fol- 
lowing, in  the  body  of  this  book,  for  it  does  not  fall  within  the 
scope  of  this  Preface  to  relate,  or  to  comment  upon  them. 
One  remark,  however,  we  may  permit  ourselves,  which 
is  that  there  can  be  no  slightest  doubt  that  a  man  named 
James  Badcock  was  living,  in  the  year  1642,  at  Portsmouth, 
R.  I.  Who  was  this  man?  Was  he  the  traditionary  James 
said  to  have  been  born  in  Essex,  England,  about  1580  and  to 
have  landed  in  America  in  1623?  This  man  himself,  upon 
one  occasion,  in  an  affidavit,  made  it  certain  that  he  was  born 
in  1611-12.  Was  he,  then,  a  son  of  that  reputed  Plymouth 
James,  or  was  he,  possibly,  a  nephew  or  other  relative? 

The  man  who  is  able  to  successfully  reply  to  these  queries 
has  a  most  enthusiastic  welcome  awaiting  him  at  the  hands 
of  many  good,  and  would-be  grateful,  people.  It  is  an  in- 
tricate and  a  difficult  question — the  question  as  to  precisely 
where,  and  by  whom,  the  Badcock  connection  was  made  be- 
tween old  England  and  our  New  England  shores — and  who- 
ever deals  with  it  is  entitled  to  his  own  conclusion.  Fortu- 
nately for  himself,  the  writer  of  this  article  is  not  called  upon 
to  settle  this  question,  but  he  may  commend  it  to  the  earnest 
consideration  of  the  reader  of  these  lines.  Entered  upon  with 
interest  and  pursued  with  fidelity,  we  are  confident  this  ques- 
tion would  provide  occupation  during  active  life  and  even 
afiford  food  for  thought  during  declining  years.  But  of  one 
thing  herewith  connected  we  may  be  sure.  James  Badcock 
was  in  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  in  1642.  How  he  came  to  be  there, 
and  how  long  he  had  at  that  time  been  in  this  country,  we  do 
not  know.  To  him  those  of  us  who  are  concerned  in  this  vol- 
ume trace  our  origin  in  this  land.  And  as  he  evidently  did  not 
spring  out  of  the  earth  in  Portsmouth,  or  fall  from  the  sky 
there,  and  as  he  said  he  was  born  in  1611-12 — and,  therefore, 
not  born  in  this  country — it  is  pretty  plain  that  he  came  here 
from  England,  and  there  is  strong  presumptive  evidence  that 
Essex  County  was  the  region  of  his  birth. 

The  solid  ground  of  fact,  therefore,  upon  which  at  last  we 
stand  may  be  indicated  in  about  two  words:     i.  Our  branch 


Coat  of  Arms  and  Family  Origin.  xv 

of  the  Babcock  folk  came  from  old  England  to  New  England 
early  in  the  seventeenth  century — certainly  prior  to  1642. 
2.  We  share  with  the  English  Badcocks  a  coat  of  arms  which 
helps  to  show  that,  as  a  family,  we  have  lived  long  enough  in 
the  world  to  know  how  to  live  wisely  and,  therefore,  well. 
The  point  of  this  last  observation,  as  the  renowned  Cap'n 
Ed'ard  Cuttle  might  remark,  lies  in  the  application  of  it. 
What  more  ought  we  to  say  ?  Farewell ! 
New  York,  July  i,  1903. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FACING 
PAGE 


Babcock  Coat  of  Arms  (Frontispiece) 

Stephen  Babcock i 

Tomb  of  Captain  James  Babcock. i6 

Tomb  of  George  and  Elizabeth  Babcock  20 

Home  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah  (Vose)  Babcock 28 

Mrs.  Hannah  (Stanton)  Babcock 32 

Dr.  Joshua  Babcock  (Chief  Justice) 36 

House  Built  by  Dr.  Joshua  Babcock .  .     44 

Tomb  of  OUver  and  Anna  Babcock 48 

Colonel  Harry  Babcock 64 

Adam  Babcock 68 

Mrs.  Abigail  (Smith)  Babcock 80 

Tomb  of  Captain  Oliver  Babcock 106 

Home  of  Hon.  Daniel  Babcock 112 

Stephen  Babcock 128 

Samuel  Babcock 140 

Mrs.  Polly  (Babcock)  Morgan 1 54 

Asher  Miner  Babcock 1 68 

Rev.  Rufus  Babcock,  D.D 184 

Daniel  Babcock 192 

Jacob  D.  Babcock 1 94 

Oliver  Babcock 200 

Phoebe  (Babcock)  Babcock 206 

S.  Willard  Babcock 208 

Elder  Daniel  Babcock 212 

Mrs.  Elisabeth  Smith  (Babcock)  Lathrop 216 

Mrs.  Abigail  S.  (Babcock)  Blake 220 

Oliver  Babcock 226 

Elias  Babcock 238 

Sarah  Taylor  Cranor 240 


XVU 


xvHi  tllustrations. 


FACING 
PAGB 


Katherine  Taylor  Cranor 242 

Samuel  Babcock 244 

John  Babcock 252 

Rev.  Deodatus  Babcock,  D.D 254 

Edwin  Babcock 256 

E.  Howard  Babcock,  D.D.S.,  M.D 258 

George  H.  Babcock 300 

Mrs.  Emily  E.  (Babcock)  Watts 334 

George  Avery  Babcock 338 

Judge  William  H.  Potter 340 

Nathan  Babcock 342 

Amanda  (Babcock)  Greene 346 

Daniel  Babcock 348 

Henry  S.  Ambler 350 

Colonel  Andrew  Jackson  Babcock 356 

Sarah  Otis  Babcock 364 

Elisha  Gardner  Babcock 37° 

Albert  Franklin  Babcock 384 

Joseph  Alonzo  Babcock 400 

Rev.  Oscar  Babcock ■ 4^4 

Herman  A.  Babcock 406 

Henry  Holmes  Babcock 41° 

George  D.  Babcock 412 

Theodore  H.  Babcock 424 

Silver  Tankard  Owned  by  Mrs.  Emma  (Babcock)  Horton. . .    440 

Dr.  W.  Wayne  Babcock,  Jr 456 

John  Babcock 464 

Daniel  A.  Langworthy,  M.D 504 

George  M.  Moulton 478 

Charles  Henry  Babcock 5 '  4 

Rev.  De  Grand  Delos  Babcock 5 '  ^ 

Langdon  Babcock 5^8 

Henry  Ernest  Babcock 522 

Frederick  H.  Babcock 5^4 

Rev.  Charles  H.  Babcock,  D.D 526 

James  Leland  Babcock 536 


INTRODUCTION 


MANY  readers  of  this  volume  may  be  surprised  to 
find  that  dates  and  incidents  pertaining  to  James 
Babcock,  the  first  immigrant  ancestor  of  the  Babcock 
family,  as  well  as  records  of  his  children,  differ  from  records 
which  they  have  long  believed  to  be  true.  The  reason  is  not 
difficult  to  find.  In  1844  Mr.  Sidney  Babcock,  of  New 
Haven,  Conn.,  printed  a  leaflet  containing  the  Babcock  coat 
of  arms,  and  certain  Babcock  family  records  which  he  states 
were  copied  from  records  prepared  by  Albert  Wells,  of  Pal- 
myra, N.  Y.  This  leaflet  must  have  been  sent  out  in  great 
numbers,  as  the  author  of  this  volume  has  learned  of  it  from 
many  parts  of  the  country. 

In  American  Family  Antiquity,  published  in  1881  by  Albert 
Wells,  the  dates  and  incidents  found  in  the  leaflet  referred  to 
are  essentially  repeated.  A  catalogue  of  the  First  Puritan 
Settlers  of  the  Colony  of  Connecticut,  published  by  R.  R. 
Hinman,  1846,  contains  virtually  the  same  Babcock  records  as 
those  given  by  Wells.  In  1852  Hinman  published  another 
volume  of  the  same  name,  in  which  his  Babcock  records  are  re- 
peated and  enlarged,  and  at  the  end  of  these  records  he  states 
"Communicated  by  Wells ;"  hence  it  appears  that  Wells  was 
responsible  for  Babcock  records  published  by  Hinman. 

^^'ell-authenticated  historical  facts  show  that  their  dates  and 
statements  of  incidents  are  zvrong.  While  W^ells  and  Hinman 
differ  slightly  as  to  details,  the  general  statements  given  by 
them  are  about  as  follows :  James  Babcock,  born  in  England 
1580,  removed  to  Leyden,  Holland,  in  1620,  and  in  1623  em- 
barked in  the  ship  Anne  and  arrived  at  Plymouth,  ]\Iass.,  in 
July,  1623,  where  he  lived  the  residue  of  his  life  and  died. 
At  the  time  of  his  immigration  he  had  four  children,  James, 
John.  Job,  and  Mary,  who  were  born  in  England  from  16 12 
to  1620,  and  were  brought  over  with  their  father.  He  was 
married  again  about  1650  in  Plymouth,  and  had  one  son, 
Joseph.    James,  the  first,  Job,  the  third,  and  Mary,  the  fourth, 

xix 


XX  Introduction. 

remained  with  their  father  in  Plymouth.  Joseph,  the  fifth, 
removed  to  Connecticut,  near  Saybrook,  where  he  made  settle- 
ment. John  Babcock,  the  second  son,  removed  with  a  number 
of  others  about  the  year  1648  into  that  part  of  Rhode  Island 
now  called  Westerly,  where  the  company  began  a  settlement 
and  named  the  place.  Here  he  remained  the  residue  of  his 
life  and  died  July  19,  17 19,  aged  over  one  hundred  years.  He 
left  ten  children  at  the  time  of  his  death.  (End  of  statements 
from  Wells  and  Hinman.  ) 

While  we  are  forced  to  admit  that  we  have  no  knowledge  as 
to  the  exact  date  when  James  Badcock  came  to  America,  it  is 
certain  that  he  did  not  come  in  the  ship  Anne  and  that  he  did 
not  settle  in  Plymouth.  In  August,  190J,  the  author  of  this 
volume  searched  carefully  in  the  library  of  Plymouth  for 
records  that  might  indicate  that  James  Badcock  came  to  Amer- 
ica in  the  ship  Anne  or  that  he  lived  in  Plymouth,  but  found 
no  trace  of  any  such  record.  In  the  History  of  the  Town  of 
Plymouth,  by  William  T.  Davis  (former  President  of  the  Pil- 
grim Society),  published  in  1885,  is  the  following  statement: 
"No  passenger  list  of  the  Anne  and  the  Little  James,  which 
arrived  July  and  August,  1623,  has  been  preserved;  but  unless 
some  died  before  the  division  of  lands  in  1624,  a  list  is  given 
which  must  approximate  to  accuracy."  In  this  list  the  name 
of  Badcock  or  Babcock  does  not  appear,  hence  it  is  evident 
that  James  Badcock  did  not  come  to  America  in  the  ship  Anne. 
Ancient  Landmarks  of  Plymouth,  by  William  T.  Davis,  pul)- 
lished  in  1899,  contains  a  genealogical  register  of  all  Plymouth 
families,  including  all  the  births  and  marriages  to  the  present 
generation.  The  author  in  his  preface  says,  "It  is  believed  to 
contain  nearly  every  name  connected  with  Plymouth  before 
the  present  century."  The  name  Badcock  or  Babcock  is  not 
found  among  his  settlers  of  Plymouth ;  hence  it  is  safe  to  con- 
clude that  the  statement  so  often  repeated,  that  James  Badcock 
settled  in  Plymouth,  is  not  true.  Records  in  this  book  will 
show  that  James,  Sr.,  was  born  in  161 2 ;  that  he  was  in  Ports- 
mouth, R.  I.,  1642,  where  he  resided  for  about  twenty  years; 
tliat  March,  1661-2,  he  removed  to  that  part  of  Rhode  Island 
which  -  w^as  later  named  Westerly,  where  he  s]3ent  the  re- 
mainder of  his  life  and  died  there  June  12,  1679.  It  is  not 
true  that  "he  married  his  second  wife  in  Plymouth  about 
1650."  His  first  wife,  Sarah,  was  living  in  Westerly  in  1665, 
and  joined  with  her  husband  in  deeding  land  owned  by  them 
in  Portsmouth.  James  Badcock  by  his  first  wife,  Sarah,  did 
have  four  children,  James.  John,  Job,  and  Mary,  as  stated  by 


Introduction.  xxi 

\\'ells,  but  it  is  not  true  that  they  "were  born  in  England  from 
the  year  1612  to  1620,"  neither  is  it  true  that  James,  Job,  and 
Mary  settled  with  their  father  in  Plymouth.  Records  of  these 
children  found  in  this  volume  will  show  that  they  all  settled 
in  Westerly.  R.  1.,  where  each  married,  had  children,  and  died 
there. 

It  is  true  that  one  of  James  Badcock's  children  by  his  second 
w'de,  Elizabeth,  was  named  Joseph,  but  it  is  not  true  that  he 
was  born  about  1650  in  Plymouth,  nor  that  he  settled  near 
Saybrook,  Conn.  He  was  born  in  Westerly  about  1670,  as 
is  shown  by  his  father's  will  and  inventory,  and  settled  in 
Stonington,  Conn,  (which  town  join.s  \\"esterly,  R.  I.),  where 
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.  (See  records  of  6  Joseph.) 
A  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  the  First  Settlers  of  New  Eng- 
land, pul)lished  in  i860  by  James  Savage  (former  President 
of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  and  Editor  of  Win- 
throp's  History  of  New  England),  contains  the  following: 
"Strange  is  the  combination  of  errors  in  Hinman,  that  one 
James  Babcock  who  went  to  Leyden  in  Holland,  1620,  joined 
the  friends  of  Robinson,  came  in  the  Anne  1623  to  Plymouth. 
.  .  .  Now  we  know-  that  no  passenger  of  this  name  came  in 
that  ship,  and  I  have  a  very  strong  reason,  after  much  inquiry, 
to  doubt  that  any  such  man  lived  in  the  colony  during  its 
earliest   forty   years." 

In  the  same  volume  ^Ir.  Savage  also  states  that  James  Bab- 
cock gave  evidence  in  1670  that  his  own  age  was  fifty-eight 
years,  that  his  sons  James  and  John  were  twenty-nine  and 
twenty-six  years  respectively.  From  this  statement  it  will  be 
observed  that  James,  Sr.,  was  born  in  1612,  that  his  son  James 
was  born  in  1641  and  John  in  1644. 

The  following  quotation  is  taken  from  the  History  of 
Stonington,  published  in  1900  by  Judge  Richard  A.  Wheeler: 
''James  Babcock,  born  in  1612,  who  was  the  first  progenitor 
of  the  Babcock  family  of  ^^^esterly  and  the  region  round  about, 
first  appears  in  Portsmouth  in  1642.  .  .  .  During  the  year 
1670  he  gave  testimony,  calling  his  age  fifty-eight  years,  his 
son  James  twenty-nine,  and  his  son  John  twenty-six." 

In  reply  to  an  inquiry  by  the  author  of  this  volume.  Judge 
Wheeler  w^rote  Sept.  2Q.  1900.  that  he  was  well  acquainted 
with  Mr.  Savage  in  i860,  and  that  IMr.  Savage  informed  him 
that  his  authority  for  the  testimony  given  by  James  Babcock 
as  to  his  age  and  that  of  his  sons  w^as  unquestionable.  J.  O. 
Austin  in  his  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  Rhode  Island,  pub- 
lished in  1887,  p.  8,  states  the  following  of  James  Babcock, 


xxii  Introduction. 

Sr. :  "J^"''^  1 8,  1670,  he  was  warned  by  warrant  from  the 
Commissioners  of  Connecticut  to  appear  before  them  to  make 
answer  for  seizure  of  three  Connecticut  men  on  a  warrant 
issued  by  Tobias  Sanders.  He  was  released  on  bail.  He  gave 
testimony  this  year,  calling  his  age  fifty-eight  years,  his  son 
James  twenty-nine,  and  his  son  John  twenty-six  years."  From 
the  records  of  James  Badcock  in  this  volume  it  will  be  seen  that 
in  1670,  during  a  controversy  between  Rhode  Island  and  Con- 
necticut as  to  the  boundary  line  between  the  two  colonies, 
James  Badcock  was  arrested  in  Westerly  by  Connecticut  au- 
thorities and  taken  June  23  to  Stonington  for  trial.  The  orig- 
inal records  of  that  trial  have  not  been  found  l)y  the  author  of 
this  book,  but  it  is  believed  the  evidence  of  James  Badcock  as 
to  his  age  and  that  of  his  sons,  referred  to  by  Savage,  Wheeler, 
and  Austin,  was  taken  at  this  trial. 

The  following  statement  is  taken  from  Family  of  Babcocks 
of  Milton,  Mass.,  by  William  S.  Appleton,  A.M.,  1865  :  "The 
Babcock  family  has  been  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  honored  with 
an  elaborate  traditional  pedigree  more  richly  furnished  with 
mistakes  than  is  usual  even  in  such.  It  may  be  read  at  length 
in  Hinman's  First  Puritan  Settlers  of  Connecticut,  pp.  92  and 
106,  and  has  justly  excited  the  indignation  of  Mr.  Savage.  The 
long  list  of  births  supposed  to  have  happened  in  England  and 
Dorchester,  Mass.,  is  certainly  wrong.  Two  years  ago  I  ex- 
amined the  register  of  the  Church  of  Wivenhoe,  England,  and 
none  of  them  can  be  found  there,  nor  did  I  see  a  single  entry 
of  the  name  of  Babcock." 


HINMAN   AND   WELLS   BABCOCK   RECORDS. 

By  Col.  Andrew  J.  Babcock. 

MANY  persons  whose  surname  is  Babcock  in  searching 
for  their  early  ancestors  have,  unfortunately,  fallen  in 
with  the  records  prepared  by  Mr.  Royal  Hinnian,  in 
his  First  Puritan  Settlers  of  Connecticut,  and  the  statements 
of  i\lr.  Albert  Wells. 

In  1 88 1  I  first  saw  their  writings,  and  with  many  others 
believed  them  implicitly,  but  after  the  most  diligent  and  care- 
ful research  I  am  convinced  there  is  but  little  truth  in  the 
writings  of  either  Hinman  or  Wells  concerning  the  Babcock 
family.  I  would  advise  all  of  our  name  who  are  interested  in 
their  earthly  origin  not  to  credit  the  writings  of  Wells  and 
Hinman,  for  they  are  certainly  fabrications.  Hinman  states : 
"James,  the  first  of  the  name  known  in  New  England, 
was  an  Episcopal  clergyman,  and  settled  in  the  rectory  of 
Wivenhoe,  Essex  County,  England.  He  went  to  Leyden, 
Holland,  for  the  purpose  of  embarking  for  America,  and,  per- 
suading others  to  unite  with  him,  and  actually  became  one  of 
the  'Puritan  Fathers.'  .  .  .  James  was  born  at  Wivenhoe,  Essex 
County,  England,  in  1580,  .  .  .  came  to  New  England  in  the 
ship  Anne,  and  landed  at  Plymouth  in  July,  1623,  and  after- 
ward removed  to  Dorchester,  ]\Iass.  (now  Milton),  where  he 
resided  the  remainder  of  his  life." 

]\Ir.  Hinman  then  gives  the  children  of  James  as  follows: 
James.  Jr.,  born  1616;  John,  born  161 8;  Job,  born  1620; 
Mary,  born  162 1.  He  states  that  James,  Jr.,  married  at  Dor- 
chester about  1637,  and  had  children  (gives  the  names  of  four- 
teen). Now,  there  was  no  James  Babcock  came  in  the  ship 
Anne  in  1623,  or  in  any  ship  which  reached  Plymouth  later. 
His  removal  to  Dorchester,  Mass.,  where  he  resided  the  re- 
mainder of  his  life,  the  marriage  of  his  son  James,  Jr.,  at 
Dorchester,  1637,  to  Jeanne  ,  the  birth  to  them  of  four- 
teen children,  have  no  foundation  in  fact  whatever.  The  true 
history  of  this  James,  Jr.,  is  entirely  different  from  the  above. 

Now  comes  Mr.  Albert  Wells,  who  in  1844  compiled  a 
record  of  the  early  Babcocks  in  this  country,  which  many  of 
us  have  seen,  read,  and  believed  until,  by  a  personal  investiga- 

xxiii 


xxiv  Hinman  and  Wells  Bahcock  Records. 

tion,  we  found  it  was  devoid  of  truth.  Mr.  Wells  states  nearly 
the  same  as  Mr.  Hinman.  Which  was  first  out,  we  know  not, 
but  it  looks  very  much  as  if  one  copied  from  the  other. 

Mr.  Wells  recites  the  ship  Anne,  Plymouth,  1623,  tale,  and 
that  "J'lrn^s  Badcock  lived  in  Plymouth  the  residue  of  his  life. 
...  At  the  time  of  his  immigration  he  brought  four  children, 
James,  John,  Job,  and  Mary,  who  were  born  in  England  from 
the  years  t6i2  to  1620.  .  .  .  James,  the  first  child.  Job.  the 
third,  and  Mary,  the  fourth,  remained  with  their  father  in 
Plymouth.  .  .  .  John  Babcock,  the  second  son,  removed  about 
1648,  to  that  part  of  Rhode  Island  now  called  \\'esterly.  .  .  . 
died  there  July  19,  1719,  aged  over  one  hundred  years." 

In  1889  we  made  a  trip  to  Plymouth,  the  chief  reason  for 
going  being  to  substantiate  Hinman's  and  Wells's  statements, 
and  examined  every  document  likely  to  impart  information 
upon  this  subject,  but  found  nothing  whatever.  Since  then 
we  have  read  several  of  the  histories  of  the  Pilgrims  and  of 
Plymouth,  and  are  much  impressed  with  Baylies's  History  of 
Plymouth  Colony,  Boston,  1830.  From  it  we  learn  the  ships 
Anne  and  the  Little  James  arrived  at  Plymouth  in  July  and 
August,  1623.  The  Anne  brought  sixty  immigrants,  some  of 
whom  were  the  wives  and  children  of  those  already  there. 
Nothing  has  been  found  to  show  that  any  Badcock  or  Babcock 
came  on  either  ship.  From  a  record  of  the  division  of  cattle 
which  occurred  on  the  27th  of  May,  1627,  it  is  believed  that 
every  family  and  person  in  the  town  can  be  ascertained,  and 
the  town  was  at  that  time  the  colony.  No  person  named  Bad- 
cock or  Babcock  appears  in  that  record.  Again,  on  p.  264, 
vol.  i,  Baylies's  History,  is  a  catalogue  of  names  of  all  persons 
in  the  colony,  but  the  name  Badcock  or  Babcock  does  not  ap- 
pear among  them. 

The  names  of  the  first  settlers  of  the  towns  of  Duxbury, 
Scituate,  Taunton,  Sandwich,  Barnstable.  Yarmouth,  etc..  all 
in  Plymouth  Colony,  have  been  examined,  and  the  name  Bad- 
cock or  Babcock  does  not  appear  upon  any  of  the  early  records 
of  these  towns.  The  first  date  we  find  the  name  of  Badcock 
or  Babcock  in  records  of  Plymouth  Colony  is  Nov.  27,  1685. 
Benjamin  Badcock,  ct  al,  all  of  New  Dartmouth  (New  Bed- 
ford), are  defendants  in  a  suit  of  law  brought  by  William 
Woods  ct  al.  to  recover  damages  for  land  alleged  to  have  been 
purchased  by  Wood  ct  al.  of  W^oosamquin  and  Waumesetta. 
Case  again  heard  Mar.  2,  1686.  The  Court  grants  a  nonsuit. 
Again,  we  find  the  name  Return  Badcock  among  the  names 
of  the  proprietors  of  Dartmouth  in  the  confirmatory  deed  of 


Hinnian  and  Wells  Bahcock  Records.  xxv 

William  Bradford,  Dept.  Gov.  of  the  Colony,  and  executed 
Nov.  13,  1694. 

We  now  know  that  Benjamin  and  Return  Badcock  were  of 
Milton  Mass.,  set  off  from  Dorchester  in  1662.  It  appears 
quite  evident  there  was  no  James  Badcock  who  came  to  Plym- 
outh in  the  ship  Anne  1623,  and  no  settlers  of  an  early  date, 
surnamed  Badcock,  in  Plymouth,  nor  in  the  Colony  of  Plym- 
outh. The  first  official  information  we  find  of  James  Badcock 
he  is  admitted  an  inhahitant  of  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Feb.  25, 
1642.  That  he  was  related  to  Robert  and  George  Badcock 
of  Dorchester,  Mass.,  later  of  Milton  (set  off  from  Dorches- 
ter), we  believe  there  is  no  doubt.  They  may  have  been 
brothers.  W'e  have  examined  all  the  lists  of  immigrants  who 
came  to  this  country  from  1600  to  1700  that  we  could  find, 
and  failed  to  find  mention  of  either  of  the  above.  We  are  of 
the  opinion  they  came  between  the  years  1630  and  1640. 

Soon  after  James  Badcock  removed  from  Portsmouth  to 
Westerly  he  with  others  became  invoU^ed  in  the  dispute  with 
Connecticut  relating  to  the  boundary  line ;  Connecticut  claiiii- 
ing  jurisdiction  east  of  Pawcatuck  River.  Jtme  17,  1670, 
Tobias  Sanders,  Justice  of  the  Peace  in  Westerly,  R.  L,  is- 
sued a  warrant  "To  James  Badcock,  constituted  constable  to 
serve  this  Warrant."  He  was  required  to  apprehend  any  per- 
son "that  shall  presume  to  exercise  any  atithority  in  this  juris- 
diction if  it  be  not  duly  derived  from  the  authority  to  whom  we 
doe  belong,  and  bring  them  before  me  and  Mr.  John  Crandell 
forwith."  He  was  further  directed  to  "Favle  not  at  your 
perill." 

On  this  warrant  our  first  immigrant  ancestor.  James  Bad- 
cock, arrested  and  brought  in  John  Frinck,  Benjamin  Palmer, 
and  Thomas  Ball.  Whereupon  a  warrant  was  issued  by  the 
Connecticut  authorities  to  T^Iarshall  Cheesbrough  "to  forwith 
go  over  the  River  PaW'Catuck  to  those  people  that  are  there 
planted,  and  to  warne  Tobias  Sanders  ancl  James  Badcock, 
Senr.,  j^ersonally  to  appear  before  us  at  Mr.  Stanton's  house 
or  Capt.  Gookin's  house  to  make  answer  for  their  seizing,  de- 
taining, and  unjustly  molesting  John  Frink  constable,  Benj. 
Palmer,  and  Thomas  Ball."  June  18,  1670,  Tobias  Sanders, 
James  Badcock,  Sr.,  and  Samuel  Brown,  all  of  Westerly,  were 
arrested  on  this  warrant,  and  placed  on  boiid  of  one  hundred 
pounds  each. 

It  w-as  probably  at  the  hearing  of  this  case  that  James  Bad- 
cock gave  testimony,  under  oath,  calling  his  age  fiftv-eight 
years,  his  son  James,  Jr.,  twenty-nine,  and  his  son  John  twenty- 


xxvi  Hinman  and  Wells  Bahcock  Records. 

six  years.  This  testimony  under  oath  establishes,  beyond  a 
shadow  of  doubt,  the  year  of  his  birth  to  be  1612,  his  son 
James,  Jr.,  1641,  and  his  son  John,  1644.  His  first  four  chil- 
dren were  born  in  Portsmouth,  R.  I.  At  all  events,  that  was 
where  the  parents  of  James  and  John  were  then  living. 

In  1623  James  Badcock  was  eleven  years  of  age.  It  will, 
for  obvious  reasons,  be  readily  seen  that  he  brought  no  chil- 
dren with  him  from  England,  as  claimed  by  Messrs.  Hinman 
and  Wells.  His  son  John  died  early  in  1685  at  Westerly,  aged 
forty-one  years,  and  not  July  19,  17 19,  aged  over  one  hundred 
years,  as  given  by  Wells. 

In  conclusion.  I  will  add  that  these  records  have  led  many 
of  the  Babcock  family  astray  and  given  untold  annoyance  to 
the  genealogist  to  explain  away  the  delusion  they  labored  un- 
der, caused  by  the  erroneous  records  of  Royal  R.  Hinman,  of 
Connecticut,  and  Albert  Wells,  of  Palmyra,  N.  Y. 

Springfield,  111.,  Feb.  4,  1903. 


So  much  space  has  already  been  given  to  controverting  the 
Wells  history  that  the  author  of  this  volume  would  drop  the 
discussion  were  it  not  that  Wells'  early  dates  and  incidents  are 
so  nu'sleading,  and  so  many  have  believed  them,  that  facts  de- 
mand that  his  errors  and  inconsistencies  ht  further  shown. 

Wells,  in  his  pamphlet  containing  Babcock  history  and  coat 
of  arms,  claims  that  John,  the  son  of  James,  was  born  in  Eng- 
land, between  161 2  and  1620.  Again,  in  American  Family 
Antiquity,  he  states  that  John  Babcock  settled  in  Westerly 
1648,  was  a  brother  of  James,  Sr.,  and  that  he  was  born  about 
1625.  Then  follows  the  story  of  love  and  elopement,  reference 
to  which  is  made  in  the  records  of  John  Babcock  in  this  volume. 
He  then  says,  "There  have  been  contradictions  of  this  romance, 
but  they  come  from  persons  who  could  not  make  the  John  born 
1644  old  enough  for  the  elopement  story." 

Town  Records  of  Westerly,  Colonial  Records  of  Rhode 
Island,  and  Colonial  Records  of  Connecticut  make  it  perfectly 
sure  that  among  the  early  settlers  in  Westerly  there  was  but 
one  John  Babcock,  and  that  lie  was  a  son  of  James  the  immi- 
grant. Hence  it  will  be  seen  that  Wells  has  given  three  dif- 
ferent dates  for  the  birth  of  John  Babcock  the  son  of  James — 
namely,  about  1615,  1625,  and  1644.  It  will  be  seen  from 
the  records  of  John  Babcock,  mentioned  above,  that  he  with 


Hinman  and  Wells  Bahcock  Records  xxvii 

his  father  and  others  first  settled  in  Westerly  in  Alarch, 
1661-2;  hence  the  statement  of  Wells  that  John  settled  in 
Westerly  in  1648  cannot  be  true. 

The  further  quotations  from  WeWs  will  all  be  taken  from  his 
American  Family  Antiquity. 

He  says,  "It  is  further  stated  that  John  Babcock  owned 
nearly  all  of  Westerly  and  a  portion  of  South  Kingston,  R.  I." 
The  truth  is,  all  of  the  present  township  of  Westerly  was 
bought  from  the  Indians  by  the  Misquamicut  Company.  (See 
copy  of  the  company's  deed  in  Westerly  and  Its  Witnesses.) 
Joltn  Babcock  in  common  w4th  other  members  of  the  company 
received  an  apportionment  of  land.  (See  records  of  John 
Babcock  in  this  book.)  No  record  has  been  found  showing 
that  he  owned  land  in  South  Kingston. 

Wells  states,  "John  Babcock  and  others  signed  an  agree- 
ment to  allow  bounty  in  Misquamokuck  (Westerly)  on  Sat- 
urday, 226.  of  Feb.,  1662.  (R.  I.  Hist.  Collections,  vol.  iii, 
p.  260.)" 

The  above  quotation  by  Wells  is  wrong  and  misleading. 
The  names  of  James  and  John  Badcock  do  occur  in  the  book 
and  page  quoted  by  Wells,  but  it  is  with  reference  to  a  meeting 
held  at  Newport  Feb.  22,  166 1-2,  at  which  eighteen  men  were 
selected  to  go  and  abide  at  Misquamicut.  (See  records  of 
John  Babcock.) 

Wells  says,  "In  the  list  of  inhabitants  in  Westerly,  in  the 
W.  T.  R.,  book  i,  p.  2,  dated  May  18,  1669,  the  name  of  John 
Babcock  and  his  son  John  may  be  found." 

In  the  book  and  on  the  page  referred  to  is  a  list  of  the  free- 
men of  Westerly.  Among  them  were  four  Badcocks,  and  only 
four,  namely,  James,  Sr.,  James,  Jr.,  John,  and  Job.  There  is 
110  reference  to  a  John  Badcock,  Jr. 

Wells  gives  the  date  of  birth  of  the  eldest  of  John's  children 
at  1650,  and  the  youngest  at  1675,  and  places  the  births  of 
the  remaining  eight  children  at  intervals  between  these  tw'O 
dates.  These  dates  are  all  wrong,  and  much  too  early;  for 
instance,  he  says,  "George  was  born  1663."  George  Babcock 
and  his  wife  were  buried  in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  in  what 
was  formerly  known  as  the  Babcock  bui-ying  ground,  but  is 
now  known  as  the  Tucker  burying  ground,  and  is  about  four 
miles  from  the  railroad  station  at  Kingston.  In  the  summer 
of  1900  these  graves  were  visited  by  the  author  of  this  book, 
and  the  gravestones  were  found  in  a  good  state  of  preserva- 
tion. From  George's  monument  was  copied  the  following: 
"He  departed  this  life  May  the  ist.,  A.  D.   1756,  in  ye  83d. 


xxviii  Hinman  and  Wells  Bahcock  Records. 

year  of  his  age."  This  record  shows  that  George  Babcock 
was  born  in  1673,  or  ten  years  later  than  the  date  given  by 
Wells. 

Again,  Wells  states  that  "Robert  was  born  1670,  Joseph 
1672,  and  Oliver  1675."  In  another  place  he  states  that  Rob- 
ert, Joseph,  and  Oliver  chose  ''our  beloved  brother  James  to 
be  our  guardian,  at  Westerly,  21st  of  April,  1698."  ( W.  T.  R., 
vol.  ii,  p.  170.)  The  last  of  his  two  quotations  is  correct.  If 
the  dates  of  birth  given  of  these  three  boys  were  also  correct, 
it  would  follow  that  when  they  chose  their  guardian  Robert 
was  twenty-eight  years  old,  Joseph  twenty-six,  and  Oliver 
twenty-three;  but  such  a  conclusion  is  absurd,  hence  it  is  cer- 
tain that  the  dates  of  birth  as  given  by  Wells  for  this  family 
are  all  wrong. 

While  the  records  of  this  volume  are  of  the  descendants  of 
James  Badcock,  who  it  is  believed  was  the  first  of  that  family 
to  settle  in  this  country,  it  is  well  known  that  there  were  two 
brothers  George  and  Robert  Badcock  who  settled  in  Dorches- 
ter (now  Milton),  Mass.,  alx)ut  the  year  1650.  In  a  w^ork 
by  William  S.  Appleton,  A.M.,  1865, ^called  Appleton's  Bad- 
cock Family,  or  Family  of  Badcocks  of  Milton,  Mass.,  the 
author,  referring  to  George  and  Robert  Badcock,  says :  "While 
I  cannot  prove  that  they  were  related  to  James  Babcock,  born 
about  1612,  of  Newport  1642,  and  of  Westerly  1661  (1662), 
I  have  no  doubt  of  the  fact.  They  were  probably  his  brothers. 
John,  a  son  of  James,  named  two  children  George  and  Robert, 
and  a  great-grandson  of  James,  Sr.,  went  to  Milton  (where 
his  presumed  cousins  lived)  for  a  wife,  Sarah  Vose." 

In  a  note  on  the  margin  of  Appleton's  work  is  the  follow- 
ing: "James  Babcock,  of  Stonington,  m.  June  12,  1706,  Sarah 
Vose.     (Milton  Town  Records.)" 

A  daughter  of  Robert  of  Dorchester,  named  Elizabeth,  and 
two  of  his  granddaughters,  named  Hannah  and  Mary,  mar- 
ried in  Milton  men  also  named  Vose.  The  Massachusetts 
Badcocks  had  become  very  numerous  by  1 700.  ( See  The  New 
Eng.  Gen.  and  Hist.  Reg.  for  1865,  vol.  xix,  p.  215,  and  fol- 
lowing pages.) 

Appleton's  Badcock  Family  of  Milton,  Mass.,  contains 
records  of  many  families  who  sprang  from  George  and  Robert 
and  settled  in  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut. 

A  History  of  Ancient  Windham,  Conn.,  by  William  L. 
Weaver,  1864,  contains  records  of  many  families  who  de- 
scended from  George  and  Robert  Badcock  of  Milton. 


EXPLANATIONS. 


A  NUMBER  found  at  the  left  of  a  child's  name  is  repeated 
where  that  name  appears  as  the  head  of  a  family. 

The  generation  is  indicated  by  an  exponent  placed  after  the 
Christian  name,  thus:  John^  Babcock  means  John  Babcock 
of  the  second  generation. 

After  the  name  of  the  parents  of  the  head  of  a  family  there 
follow  in  parentheses  the  names  of  the  ancestors  in  genealog- 
ical order. 

Until  after  the  death  of  James,  Sr.,  1679,  the  family  name 
was  spelled  Badcock,  or  Badcocke;  since  the  death  of  John, 
Sr.,  1685,  it  has  been  spelled  Babcock. 

Much  the  larger  part  of  the  records  in  this  book  were  ob- 
tained from  family  Bibles,  and  in  multitudes  of  cases  different 
members  of  the  same  family  have  given  different  dates  for  the 
same  event,  hence  errors  in  dates  are  unavoidable.  In  one 
case  the  date  of  the  same  death  was  found  in  the  family  Bible, 
upon  the  town  records,  and  on  the  gravestone  to  be  different 
in  each  case,  no  two  agreeing. 

The  spelling  of  surnames  has  undergone  many  changes,  and 
in  numerous  cases  members  of  the  same  family  spell  their 
names  differently.  It  seems  certain  that  the  Babcocks  of  this 
country  sprang  from  the  Badcocks  of  England,  and  in  that 
country  the  name  has  undergone  further  changes,  as  at  present 
some  of  the  family  have  changed  the  name  to  Badco,  and 
others  to  Budco. 

DOUBLE    DATING. 

By  the  Julian  calendar,  or  old  style,  New  Year's  Day  was 
the  25th  of  March,  March  being  the  first  month  in  the  year. 
September,  October,  November,  and  December  were,  as  their 
names  imply,  the  seventh,  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  months  of 
the  year.  By  the  Gregorian  calendar  or  new  style,  which  was 
introduced  1582  New  Year's  Day  was  changed  to  Jan.  i. 
Great  Britain  did  not  fully  adopt  the  new  style  until  Septem- 
ber, 1752,  but  prior  to  that  date,  commencing  about  1700, 
used  both  old  and  new  style,  or  double  dating.  For  example  : 
Capt.  James  Babcock  died  Jan.  17,  1736,  old  style,  or  Jan.  17, 
1737,  new  style,  and  is  written  Jan.  17,  1736-7. 

xxix 


ABBREVIATIONS. 


A.  V.  R.     Arnold's  Vital  Records. 

Austin,  J.  O.     Austin's  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  Rhode  Island. 

b.     born. 

bap.     baptized. 

C.  R.  of  Conn.     Colonial  Records  of  Connecticut. 

C.  R.  of  R.  I.     Colonial  Records  of  Rhode  Island. 

Ch.  R.     Church  Records. 

d.     died. 

dau.     daughter. 

E.    East. 

Jr.    Junior. 

m.     married,     m.   (i),  married  first;    m.   (2),  married  second,  etc. 

N.     North. 

N.  H.  R.     Newport  Historical  Records. 

p.    page;    pp.    pages. 

P.  R.     Portsmouth  Records. 

R.  of  F.  Ch.  of  S.     Records  of  First  Church  of  Stonington. 

res.     resides,  or  resided. 

S.     South. 

S.  D.  B.     Seventh  Day  Baptist. 

S.  K.  T.  R.     South  Kingston  Town  Records. 

S.  T.  R.     Stonington  Town  Records. 

Smith.     Smith's  Civil  and  Military  List  of  Rhode  Island. 

Sr.     Senior. 

unm.     unmarried. 

vol.     volume. 

W.     West. 

W.  and  W.     Westerly  and  Its  Witnesses. 

W.  T.  R.     Westerly  Town  Records. 

Wheeler.     Wheeler's  History  of  Stonington. 


XXX 


^ 


f( 


i^i^tiim  IOxIaah)^ 


Compiler  of  this  book. 


Page  348. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy 


1.  James^  Badcock,  b.  1612,  probably  in  Essex  County, 
England;  d.  June  12,  1679;  ^-  (^)  Sarah,  who  d.  1665 
or  later;  m.  (2)  1669  (?)  Elizabeth;  she  m.  (2)  Sept.  22, 
1679,  William  Johnson  and  settled  in  Stonington.  Conn. 

A  myth  often  repeated  and  published  by  writers,  who  prob- 
ably believed  it  true,  states  that  James  came  to  this  country  in 
the  ship  Anne,  etc.  (See  Introduction.)  From  the  Early  Rec- 
ords of  the  Town  of  Portsmouth,  edited  by  the  State  Libra- 
rian, under  direction  of  the  Rhode  Island  Legislature,  pub- 
lished 1 90 1,  and  from  Colonial  Records  of  Rhode  Island,  the 
account  of  James  Badcock's  first  twenty  years  in  Rhode  Island 
was  copied.  His  residence  for  that  period  was  in  Portsmouth, 
and  the  records  of  that  town  show  that  his  name  was  spelled 
in  various  ways,  probably  according  to  the  fancy  of  the  clerk 
of  the  town  meeting,  namely,  Badcock,  Badcooke,  Badcocke, 
and  Badcook. 

For  the  first  forty  years  the  surname  of  James  and  his  sons 
was  usually  written  Badcock.  In  the  Probate  records  of  John 
Badcock's  estate  the  name  is  spelled  Babcock,  and  at  that  time 
that  spelling  seems  to  have  been  adopted  by  the  family.  The 
Massachusetts  branch  of  the  family  appear  to  have  adopted 
the  new  spelling  still  later. 

The  English  descendants  of  the  family  from  which  James 
undoubtedly  sprang  still  retain  the  name  Badcock.  In  Feb., 
1900,  Mr.  Jasper  C.  Badcock,  who  was  Comptroller  of  the 
London  Postal  Service,  expressed  the  opinion  that  he  and  the 
American  Babcocks  sprang  from  the  same  source. 

James  Badcock  was  admitted  an  inhabitant  of  the  "towne" 
of  Portsmouth  Feb.  25,  1642.  At  that  time  no  one  was  al- 
lowed to  "build  or  plant"  without  first  having  been  voted  at 
town  meeting  an  inhabitant.  At  a  town  meeting  held  Oct.  5, 
1642,  James  Badcock  and  Richard  Moris  were  ordered  "to 
look  up  all  the  armes  in  the  Towne  within  the  month  above 
writ,"  and  "to  mend  any  which  were  defective  for  use."  Own- 
ers were  to  forfeit  five  shillings  if  they  failed  to  bring  the  arms 


2  The  Bab  cock  Genealogy. 

in  time.  At  the  same  meeting  ten  acres  of  land  were  ordered 
to  be  "laide  out  to  James  Badcock  at  the  first  brooke,  next  the 
footpath  eastward."  The  land  is  described  as  "lying  Toward 
the  head  of  said  brooke."     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.) 

About  this  time  there  must  have  been  a  threatening  of  war 
in  the  air,  as  every  man  was  ordered  to  have  "four  pounds  of 
shot  and  two  pounds  of  powder  lying  by  him  in  readiness  by 
the  24th  of  this  month,  and  to  be  in  readiness  to  assemble  at  the 
beat  of  the  drum."  (P.  R.)  James  Badcock  was  made  a  free- 
man July  10,  1648,  and  was  appointed  a  member  of  a  large 
committee  "for  the  tryall  of  the  general  officers."  Dec.  28, 
1648,  it  was  granted  "to  have  four  acres  added  to  his  house 
lot."  He  was  chosen  a  juryman  Nov.  21,  1649,  June,  1653, 
Aug.  II,  1656,  March  2,  1657,  and  Oct.,  1661.  He  was  chosen 
an  assessor  Feb.  19,  1650.     (P.  R.) 

May  2,  1650,  James  Badcock  with  five  others  was  ordered 
by  the  "General  Courte,  all  excuses  set  aparte,  to  mende  and 
make  all  locks,  stocks,  and  pieces  which  by  order  from  the 
w^arden  of  each  towne  shall  be  presented  to  them."  If  this 
duty  was  not  performed  a  penalty  of  £10  was  levied,  and  men 
who  failed  to  bring  in  their  arms  forfeited  los.  each. 

In  1655  his  name  appears  in  the  "Roule  of  ye  Freemen"  of 
Portsmouth.     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.) 

James  Badcock  was  appointed  an  appraiser  of  the  estate  of 
John  Wood,  May  7,  1655.  April  8,  1656,  James  and  seven 
others  were  "appointed  to  go  over  to  the  mayne  to  treat  with 
the  Indian  Sachems  to  inform  them  of  the  mynd  of  the  towne, 
that  they  come  not  upon  the  Island  but  according  to  order 
given."  Jan.  6,  1657,  "James  Badcock  and  John  Sanford  are 
again  authorized  to  meet  with  Newport  men  according  to  for- 
mer order,"  James  Badcock  and  six  others  were  chosen  a 
committee  to  meet  with  committees  appointed  from  other 
towns. 

Nov.  30,  1657,  James  and  four  others  were  "appointed  to 
apportion  land  to  those  that  want  land."  (P.  R.)  He  re- 
ceived a  grant  of  eight  acres  of  land.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
General  Court  of  Commissioners  of  Rhode  Island  for  Ports- 
mouth in  1657,  1658.  and  1659.     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.) 

James  Badcock  was  appointed  with  others  to  lay  out  high- 
ways. Dec.  27.  1660.  and  May  it.  1661.  he  was  appointed  to 
settle  disputed  land  boundaries.  Aug.  8,  1661.  he  was  one  of 
a  coroner's  jury. 

James  Badcock  morved  to  Westerly  in  Mar.,  1662,  but  the 
last  record  which  refers  to  him  in  Portsmouth  is  dated  Dec.  19, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  3 

1662.  At  this  time  reference  is  made  to  a  committee  which 
was  previously  appointed  to  lay  out  certain  lands,  and  this 
committee,  or  the  larger  part  of  them,  were  ordered  to  restore 
to  William  Wilbor  three  quarters  of  an  acre  of  land  which  the 
committee  had  previously  taken  from  him  in  their  official  work. 
James  Badcock  was  one  of  this  committee,  and  as  he  is  referred 
to  as  James  Badcock,  Sr.,  it  is  probable  that  James,  Jr., 
who  had  reached  his  majority  that  year,  was  then  living  in 
Portsmouth. 

June  29,  1660,  a  tract  of  land,  estimated  to  be  twenty  miles 
by  ten  miles,  known  as  Misquamicut,  afterward  Westerly,  was 
purchased  from  the  Indian  chief  Sosoa,  by  a  company  headed 
by  William  Vaugn.  This  company,  numbering  sixty  or  more, 
was  organized  at  Newport,  R.  I.  The  purchasers  well  knew^ 
that  in  1658  the  Massachusetts  colony  claimed  this  tract,  call- 
ing it  a  part  of  Southertown  and  adding  it  to  Suffolk  County, 
Boston  being  the  county  seat.  Aug.  27,  1661.  the  company 
appealed  to  the  Colonial  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island  for  assist- 
ance in  defending  their  purchase  against  "adversaries  which 
by  a  species  of  intrusion  are  seeking  to  make  inroads  upon  our 
privilege  of  colonies  jurisdiction."     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.) 

From  Col.  of  R.  I.  Hist.  Soc,  published  1835,  vol.  iii.  pp. 
257-261,  the  following  is  taken:  "Aug.  31,  1661,  all  pur- 
chasers were  ordered  by  the  trustees  to  meet  at  Cabel  (Caleb) 
Carrs,  at  Newport,  to  go  to  Squamucuck."  Two  weeks  later, 
Sept.  15.  the  company  was  at  '"Misquamicut,"  and  a  certain  part 
of  the  tract  was  apportioned  by  lot.  The  number  of  James 
Badcock's  lot  w-as  52.  At  the  time  of  this  visit  arrangements 
were  made  for  a  temporary  occupancy  of  the  land.  The  com- 
pany was  divided  into  small  parties,  each  party  to  stay  upon 
the  land  for  a  certain  number  of  weeks.  Anyone  who  refused 
to  serve  had  to  provide  a  substitute  or  pay  a  fine.  Nov.  i', 
1 66 1,  Tobias  Sanders,  Robert  Burdet  (Burdick),  and  Joseph 
Clark  were  arrested  upon  the  land  by  the  authority  of  Massa- 
chusetts. Sanders  and  Burdick  were  taken  to  Boston,  where 
they  were  fined  forty  pounds  each  and  imprisoned  "until  their 
fines  should  be  paid,  and  until  each  should  give  security  in 
£100  for  his  future  good  conduct."  Nov.  12,  1661,  the  number 
of  trustees  for  the  "Squamicuck"  purchase  was  increased  from 
eight  to  eighteen.  Two  of  the  names  added  were  James  Bad- 
cock and  John  Badcock. 

The  following  Mar.,  1661-2.  the  company  made  their  first 
permanent  settlement  at  Misquamicut  (Westerly).  For  de- 
tails of  the  preparation  and  starting  for  their  new^  home,  see 


4  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

records  of  3  Johir  Badcock.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  name 
of  the  company  in  the  early  records  was  spelled  in  several  dif- 
ferent ways. 

Before  starting  from  Newport  the  company  named  James 
Badcock  and  four  others  who  were  appointed  and  "commis- 
sionated  to  act  for  us  as  to  the  managing  of  our  affairs  at 
Misquamucock  who  are  to  discourse  and  answer  to  any  that 
shall  come  to  debate  matters  Avith  them.  They  or  any  two  of 
them,  to  forewarn  any  whatsoever  either  to  build  or  sow,  mow 
or  fall  timber  upon  that  tract  of  land,"  (End  of  quotation 
from  Col.  of  R.  I.  Hist.  Soc.) 

In  1662  Connecticut  laid  claim  to  the  tract,  and  did  not  en- 
tirely relinquish  her  claim  until  1728.  Soon  after  arriving  at 
Misquamicut  disputes  arose  with  Connecticut  authorities  about 
the  boundary  line.  These  disputes  led  to  arrests,  imprison- 
ments, fines,  appeals,  and  the  appointment  of  commissions  be- 
tween the  two  colonies. 

Mar.  18,  1664,  James  Badcock  petitioned  the  General  Court 
(Assembly),  sitting  at  Newport,  for  protection  "against  such 
riotous  actings  as  are  done  and  committed  by  the  men  of 
Southertown  against  him."  (Southertown  being  in  Connecti- 
cut.) The  court  requested  the  Governor  and  Deputy  Governor 
to  send  a  letter  to  the  government  of  Connecticut  "to  see  what 
they  will  say  by  way  of  answer  to  such  riotous  acting  as  are 
done  and  committed  by  the  men  of  Southertown  against  the 
said  Badcock."  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  32-34.)  In  1665 
James  sold  his  dwelling  house,  barn,  orchard,  etc.,  in  Ports- 
mouth, R.  I.,  to  Thomas  Fish  for  fifty  pounds;  his  wife, 
Sarah,  giving  her  consent.     James,  Jr.,  witnessed  the  deed. 

It  appears  that  in  May,  1667,  James  Badcock  with  a  com- 
pany of  men  drove  the  Pequot  Indians  from  planting  ground 
claimed  by  the  Indians,  located  on  the  Misquamicut  purchase 
east  of  the  Pawcatuck  River.  May  18,  1667,  Harmon  Garret 
(alias  Wequascooke,  chief  of  the  Pequots)  petitioned  the  Gen- 
eral Court  of  Connecticut,  praying  "that  such  men  as  wear  hats 
and  clothes  like  Englishmen,  but  have  dealt  with  us  like 
wolves  and  bears,  may  be  called  to  account."  At  a  Connecticut 
court  held  at  Wickford  (which  is  now  in  R.  I.),  June  21,  1670, 
James  Badcock  was  charged  by  Mr.  Gookin,  of  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  with  driving  Harmon  Garret  and  his  Indians  (tenants 
of  Gookin)  from  their  land.  (All  of  the  alcove  is  from  Pub- 
lic Records  of  the  Colony  of  Connecticut,  book  1665-78,  pp. 
52Q-.S46.) 

Westerly  was  incorporated  May,  1669,  at  which  time  there 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  5 

were  twenty-four  freemen  in  the  town,  lour  of  whom  were 
Badcocks,  viz.,  James  and  his  three  sons,  James,  John,  and 
Job.  (  \\\  and  \V.)  Westerly  then  comprised  the  present 
towns  of  Westerly.  Charlestown,  Hopkinton,  and  Richmond. 

On  June  17,  1670,  James  Badcock,  Sr.,  by  virtue  of  a  war- 
rant issued  by  Tobias  Sanders,  arrested  three  Connecticut  men, 
John  Frink,  Benjamin  Palmer,  and  Thomas  Bell,  who  had 
crossed  into  Rhode  Island  to  summon  the  Westerly  men  to 
appear  before  a  certain  court  to  be  held  in  Connecticut.  Said 
Frink  was  sent  to  Rhode  Island  Jail.  The  next  day  Mr.  Bad- 
cock  was  arrested  by  officers  from  Connecticut  and  placed 
under  a  bond  of  £100  to  "personally  appear  and  surrender 
himself  to  Nehemga  Palmer,  Constable  of  Stonington,  pro 
tempore,  Wednesday  morning  next  by  six  of  the  clock." 

Tobias  Sanders  and  Thomas  Stanton  became  his  bonds- 
men, each  for  £50.  (C.  R.  of  R.  L,  vol.  ii,  pp.  319,  320.) 
Col.  A.  J.  Babcock,  of  Springfield,  111.,  says:  "We  take  it  for 
granted  that  bright  and  early  'six  of  the  clock,'  on  the  morn- 
ing of  June  23,  1670,  Badcock  was  there  ready  to  answer  all 
charges  of  the  adverse  faction;  but  it  appears  they  were  not 
ready  to  prove  these  charges.  The  case  was  continued  until 
June  of  the  next  year,  Badcock  giving  a  bond  in  the  sum  of 
£20  to  appear  at  the  County  Court  in  New  London,  Conn." 

The  details  of  these  arrests,  counter-arrests,  bonds,  and 
trials  are  repeated  substantially  as  here  stated  in  Public  Rec- 
ords of  the  Colony  of  Connecticut,  1665-78,  p.  553. 

June  23,  1670,  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  date  that  James, 
Sr.,  made  affidavit  to  the  ages  of  himself  and  his  two  sons. 
(See  Preface  in  this  volume.) 

May  18,  1 67 1,  James  Badcock  and  John  Badcock  are  re- 
corded as  renewing  their  allegiance  to  Rhode  Island  and  the 
king;  most  of  the  inhabitants,  including  James,  Jr.,  and  Job 
Badcock.  having  renewed  their  allegiance  the  previous  dav. 
(C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  388,  389.) 

James  in  his  fifty-ninth  year,  1678,  was  baptized  by  Elder 
William  Hiscox,  and  united  with  the  Seventh  Day  Baptist 
church  of  Newport  and  Westerly.     (R.  I.  Hist.  Soc,  vol.  iii.) 

That  James  owned  land  in  Westerly  is  proved  by  Westerly 
Town  Records,  book  i,  p.  66.  These  records  show  that  April 
17.  1 69 1,  "Joseph  Babcock  of  Stonington  relinquished  to  his 
brother  James  Babcock.  of  Westerly,  for  a  consideration,  his 
claim  to  land  l^elonging  to  their  father,  the  late  James  Bab- 
cock of  Westerlv,  and  Iving  on  the  east  side  of  the  Pawcatuck 
River." 


6  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

He  declared  his  last  will  and  testament  to  his  sons  John  and 
Job,  June  12,  1679,  and  they  appeared  Sept.  17,  1679,  before 
the  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  at  a  court  held  at  Westerly, 
and  "being  solemnly  engaged"  testified  to  the  truth  of  their 
father's  will  as  he  verbally  gave  it  to  them.  The  will  is  re- 
corded in  vol.  i,  Land  Evidence,  in  the  office  of  the  Secretary 
of  State,  Providence,  R.  I.  A  copy  of  the  will  is  printed  in 
the  appendix  of  this  volume. 

Among  the  several  legacies  named  in  the  will,  he  "be- 
queathed unto  his  son  Joseph  all  his  housing  and  lands  for 
him,  the  said  Joseph  Badcock  to  take  unto  his  possession  when 
he  shall  attain  to  the  age  of  twenty-one  years." 

The  following  extract  from  the  will  shows  that  James  had 
three  children  by  his  second  wife:  "He  willed  and  declared 
that  all  the  remaining  part  of  his  estate,  beside  what  he  hath 
herein  bequeathed,  he  did  give  unto  his  wife,  Elizabeth  Bad- 
cock,  for  the  maintenance  and  bringing  up  of  the  three  chil- 
dren he  had  by  his  second  wife." 

Accompanying  the  records  of  the  will  and  inventory  is  the 
following,  which  shows  that  his  eldest  child  by  the  second  wife 
was  born  about  1670:  "An  inventoiy  of  the  estate  of  James 
Badcock,  Sr.,  deceased  in  June  last,  1679,  in  Stonington,  with- 
otit  a  will,  leaving  a  widow  w-ith  three  children,  the  eldest  a 
son  about  nine  years  old." 

These  glimpses  of  an  interesting  life  show  that  James  Bad- 
cock (Babcock),  Sr.,  w^as  a  man  of  sterling  integrity  and  of 
strong  convictions.  He  was  respected  by  his  neighbors,  hon- 
ored and  trusted  as  a  citizen,  and  ready  to  serve  the  commu- 
nity in  w^hatever  capacity  he  w^as  appointed. 

Children  by  his  first  w^ife : 

2  James,''  b.  1641 ;  m.  Jane  Brown. 

3  John,  b.  1644 ;    ni.  Mary  Lawton. 

4  Job,  b.  1646  (?)  ;    m.  Jane  Crandall. 

5  Mary,  b.  1648  (?);    m.  William  Champlin. 


Children  by  his  second  wife : 

6  Joseph,  b.  1670  (?);    m.   (i)   Dorothy  Key;    m.    (2)   Mrs.  Hannah 
Coates. 
Nathaniel,  date  of  birth  unknown.     J.  O.  Austin  says  he  d.  Jan.  2, 

1719. 
Elizabeth,  date  of  birth  unknown.  In  the  History  of  First  Church 
of  Stonington,  by  R.  A.  Wheeler,  is  the  following:  "Sept.  14, 
1692,  Elizabeth  Babcock,  daughter-in-law  (stepdaughter)  of  Wil- 
liam Johnson,  baptized  by  Rev.  James  Noyes,  Pastor  of  First 
Stonington  Church." 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  7 

2.  James-  Badcock,  Jr.,  son  of  James  and  Sarah  Badcock, 
b.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.  (?),  1641  (see  statement  of  his 
father);  d.  Westerly,  now  Woodville,  R.  I.,  1698;  m.  Jane, 
dau.  of  Nicholas  Brown.  She  d.  1719  (?).  James  was  a 
blacksmith  and  a  farmer  in  that  part  of  Westerly  which  is  now 
Woodville,  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  where  he  manufactured  iron 
from  bog  ore  and  from  black  sand  gathered  upon  the  sea- 
shore. 

About  1875  or  1880  Thomas  A.  Edison  manufactured  iron 
of  a  peculiar  quality  from  ore  gathered  from  the  seashore  in 
the  same  vicinity. 

Fifty  years  ago  Woodville  was  known  as  the  "Lower  Iron 
Works,"  though  no  iron  had  been  manufactured  there  within 
the  memory  of  the  oldest  inhabitant.  James  and  his  wife, 
Jane,  were  in  1692  members  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  New- 
port and  Westerly,  R.  I. 

In  1665  James  was  witness  to  a  deed  by  which  his  father 
conveyed  to  Thomas  Fish  orchard,  dwelling  house,  etc.,  in 
Portsmouth. 

May  18,  1669,  he  and  his  brothers  John  and  Job  were  made 
freemen  by  the  Legislature ;  the  same  date  James  received  title 
to  a  town  lot  in  Westerly,  No.  35.  The  same  year  he  received 
another  town  lot,  No.  48.     (Westerly  Records.) 

May  17,  1 67 1,  upon  petition,  it  was  ordered  by  the  court  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Westerly  be  called  upon  "To  see  how  they 
stand  as  to  their  fidelity  to  his  Majestic  and  this  Colony." 

Records  show  that  James  Badcock,  Jr.,  constable,  had  been 
directed  to  "warn  in"  the  inhabitants  of  Westerly  to  appear  at 
this  court,  but  he,  probably  fearing  the  Connecticut  authorities, 
did  not  obey  the  injunction.  The  General  Constable  (Henry 
Palmer)  was  ordered  to  bring  "said  James  Badcock  before  this 
court." 

He  appeared,  and  with  others  renewed  his  allegiance.  After 
King  Philip's  War  was  over,  Sept.  17,  1679,  the  oath  of  alle- 
giance was  again  taken  by  the  inhabitants  of  Westerly.  Among 
them  were  James,  John,  and  Job  Badcock.  James  was  chosen 
Deputy  to  the  General  Assembly  March  15,  168 1-2,  March  15, 
1683-4,  and  October,  1692.     (Westerly  Records.) 

Dec.  13,  1687,  James  Badcock  was  a  member  of  the  Grand 
Jury.  He  was  chosen  a  Selectman  for  the  years  ensuing.  May, 
1688,  and  May,  1689.  He  was  chosen  a  Town  Councilman 
July  2,  1693. 

Nov.  16,  1694,  his  wife,  Jane,  had  a  legacy  of  £10  from  her 
father.  In  1696  James  was  chosen  Town  Councilman.   He  died 


8  Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

intestate,  1698,  and  by  the  law  of  primogeniture  the  real  estate 
went  to  his  oldest  son,  James.  The  inventory  of  his  personal 
property,  amounting  to  £97  8d.  was  dated  Jan.  10,  1699.  An 
agreement  was  made  l)y  the  widow  and  children  as  to  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  property.     (See  Austin,  p.  8.) 

The  will  of  Jane  (Brown)  Badcock,  widow  of  James,  is 
dated  April  30,  17 18,  and  proved  Feb.  4,  17 19.  Executor,  son 
James,  l)lacksmith.     (Austin.) 

Children : 

7  James,^  m.  . 

Sarah,  m.  James  Lewis,  son  of  John  Lewis.     They  settled  in  Exeter, 

R.  L     She  d.  1740. 
Jane,   m.   at   Richmond,    1696   (?),   Israel   Lewis,   brother   of  James. 

They  were   married   by  Tobias   Saunders,   Justice.     One  child   of 

record,  Jane. 
Mary,  m.  George  Brown. 
Hannah,  m.  Roger  Larkin. 
Elizabeth,  m.   Daniel   Lewis,  brother  of  James.      She  d.    1716.     One 

child  of  record,  Elisha. 

3.  John-  Badcock,  second  son  of  James,  Sr.,  and  Sarah 
Badcock,  b.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  1644  (his  father  made  oath 
to  the  age  of  his  son  1670 — see  records  of  James  in  Pref- 
ace) ;  d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  1685;  m.  Mary  Lawton,  dali.  of 
George  and  Elizabeth  (Hazard)  Lawton,  of  Portsmouth. 
Mary  m.  (2)  Apr.  21,  1698,  Erasmus  Babbitt  (Wheeler), 
and  d.  Westerly,  Nov.  8,  171 1.  For  records  of  her  parents, 
see  Appendix. 

Tradition  says  that  John  and  his  wdfe,  Mary,  eloped  from 
Newport,  settled  upon  the  east  bank  of  the  Pawcatuck  River, 
on  Massatuxet  Cove  (near  what  is  now  Avondale,  town  of 
Westerly,  R.  I.),  with  no  neighbors  but  the  friendly  Indians, 
and  that  they  were  not  discovered  by  their  parents  for  several 
3^ears.  Much  poetry  and  romance  have  been  written  upon  this 
tradition,  but  as  no  history  has  been  found  to  establish  it  as 
a  fact,  and  as  authentic  records  seem  clearly  to  disprove  the 
statement,  w'e  must  class  the  elopement  story  as  fiction. 

Rhode  Island  Historical  Society  Records,  vol.  iii,  pp.  257- 
261,  published  1835,  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the  formation 
of  the  Misciuamicut  Company,  of  its  purchase  of  Misquamicut. 
or  what  is  now  Westerly  and  three  other  adjoining  towns,  and 
of  its  first  permanent  settlement.  Mar.,   166 1-2. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  company  held  at  Newport,  Jan.  20, 
1661-2,  the  following  action  was  taken:  "It  is  agreed  that 
some  shall  be  appointed  to  survey  the  tract  of  land  at  Misquami- 
cut and  take  a  plat  of  the  circumference  thereof,  and  that  also 


lo  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

engagements,  both  to  his  Majesty  and  this  Colony."  (C.  R. 
of  R.  1.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  389,  390.) 

"About  that  time  King  Philip's  War  broke  out,  and  the 
treachery  and  cruelty  of  the  Indians  was  such  that  most  of  the 
pioneers  of  Westerly  were  obliged  to  flee  from  their  homes 
and  take  refuge  on  the  island  of  Rhode  Island.  No  delegate 
from  the  town  appears  in  the  General  Assembly  for  five  years." 
(W.  and  W.) 

The  following  is  taken  from  Early  History  of  Rhode  Island, 
vol.  ii,  p.  256,  by  Richman,  published  1902:  "At  the  end  of 
King  Philip's  War  the  Rhode  Island  occupants  of  Narragan- 
sett  were  pretty  nearly  all  upon  the  island  of  Rhode  Island, 
whither  they  had  fled  for  their  lives.  But  by  Sept.  and  Oct., 
1676.  they  had  begun  to  return  to  their  abandoned  lands  and 
to  rebuild  their  ruined  houses  and  barns." 

From  the  time  of  its  settlement  by  the  Misquamicut  Com- 
pany, Westerly  was  claimed  by  both  Rhode  Island  and  Con- 
necticut, and  Connecticut  did  not  relinquish  her  claim  to  the 
town  until   1728. 

The  indications  are  that  when  the  war  broke  out  John  Bad- 
cock  and  his  familv  remained  in  their  home  in  Westerlv,  which 
was  across  the  river  from  Connecticut,  and  as  he  could  have 
no  protection  from  Rhode  Island  sought  the  protection  of  Con- 
necticut. Tradition  says  that  John  volunteered  with  the  Con- 
necticut Alilitia,  which  was  organized  for  protection  against 
the  Indians ;  that  in  King  Philip's  War  he  was  with  the  Con- 
necticut Militia  in  the  "Great  Swamp  Fight,"  Dec.  19,  1675, 
and  that  his  son  Elihu  was  born  at  that  time. 

In  vol.  i,  Narragansett  Historical  Register,  is  an  article  by 
Judge  Richard  A.  Wheeler,  author  of  History  of  Stonington, 
giving  names  of  the  Connecticut  volunteers  in  King  Philip's 
"\\^ar  who  received  bounty  land  from  the  Colony  of  Connecticut. 
Among  the  names  of  the  Stonington  Militia  appears  that  of 
John  Babcock. 

Voluntown  records  show  that  "bounty  land  which  was  set 
off  to  John  Babcock,  deceased,  was  conveyed  Apr.  14,  1749, 
by  Oliver  Babcock  (youngest  son  of  John)  to  John  Dickinson, 
of  Stonington." 

"John  Badcock  was  propounded  a  freeman  of  the  Colony  of 
Connecticut  May  14.  1676,  and  later  was  admitted  a  freeman." 
(C.  R.  of  Conn.,  book  1665-78.)  This  must  have  occurred 
during  King  Philip's  W^ar,  while  John  was  a  lone  settler  in 
Westerly. 

After  King  Philip's  W^ar  was  over,  and  the  white  settlers  of 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  9 

a  sufficient  party  shall  go  along  with  the  surveyor  or  surveyors 
thereof,  to  abide  upon  the  saicl  land  to  hold  possession  thereof, 
in  the  beginning  of  March  next  ensuing." 

On  page  260  is  found  this  quotation :  "At  a  meeting  of  the 
company  held  the  next  month,  Feb.  22,  166 1-2,  eighteen  per- 
sons were  selected  to  go  the  following  March  and  abide  at 
Misquamicut,  to  be  there  till  November  next,  and  that  £5  be 
allowed  to  every  man."  James  Badcock,  Sr.,  and  John  Bad- 
cock  were  two  of  the  eighteen  selected.  At  the  same  meeting, 
"It  was  ordered  that  the  vessel  and  all  provisions  be  fitted  to 
go  away — of  March  next,  and  all  men  that  are  to  go  be  ready 
against  that  day."  The  foregoing  shows  that  John  Badcock 
and  his  father  were  members  of  the  Misquamicut  Company 
formed  at  Newport,  and  that  they  went  from  there  to  Mis- 
quamicut (Westerly),  wnth  the  first  permanent  settlers.  At 
that  time  he,  John,  was  about  eighteen  years  of  age. 

John  Badcock  received  from  the  company  an  ap])ortionment 
of  land  the  same  as  other  settlers.  The  Town  Records  of 
Westerly  show  that  in  1669  John  Badcock  was  given  the 
twenty-seventh  lot.  It  is  certain  that  he  settled  in  Westerly  on 
the  banks  of  the  Pawcatuck  River,  near  what  is  now  Avondale, 
R.  I.,  and  that  his  oldest  son,  James,  inhegted  and  occupied 
the  homestead.  Some  of  the  homestead  land  has  never  passed 
from  the  ownership  of  the  descendants  of  John,  as  the  widow 
of  Ezra  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Nancy  (Babcock)  Bab- 
cock, owns  and  occupies  a  house  at  Avondale,  R.  I.,  which,  it 
is  claimed,  stands  upon  the  same  lot  on  which  John  and  Mary 
(Lawton)  Badcock  built  their  first  home. 

The  following  is  taken  from  Colonial  Records  of  Rhode 
^  Island,  vol.  ii,  p.  238 :    "The  names  of  such  as  inhabit  Mis- 

quamicut, who  have  formerly  presented  their  names  to  be  made 
free  of  the  colony,  doe  now  againe  [present  them]  to  this  pres- 
~\^  ent  Assembly    [that  is,   the  Colonial   Legislature]    setting  the 

28th  of  Oct.,  1668,  and  are  admitted."  Among  the  names  are 
James  Badcock,  Jr.,  John  Badcock,  and  Job  Badcock. 

The  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  evidently  fearing  that  Connect- 
icut was  alienating  certain  settlers  of  Westerly,  "ordered  by 
the  court,  May  17,  1671,  that  the  several  inhabitants  bee  called 
on  to  see  how  they  stand  as  to  their  fidelity  to  his  Majesties 
and  this  Colony."  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  ii,  p.  388.)  Among 
the  twenty-two  who  appeared  were  James  Badcock,  Jr.,  and 
Job  Badcock.  "James  Badcock,  Sr.,  and  John  Badcock,  who 
yesterday  did  not  attend,  did  this  morning  make  their  personal 
appearance,  and  did  promise  to  stand  faithful  to  their  former 


i\ 


12  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

are  not  given  exactly,  they  are  believed  to  be  approximately 
correct : 

8  James,''  b.  1663  (?)  ;  ni.  (i)  Elizabeth  ;  m.  (2)  Content  Max-on. 

Ann,  b.   1665   (?). 

Mary,  b.  1667  (?).  In  Mass.  Gen.  Hist.  Society's  Works,  vol.  ix, 
is  found  the  marriage  in  Taunton  of  Mary  Babcock  and  John 
Macomber,  Sr.,  Jan.  7,  1685-6.  This  may  have  been  Mary,  daugh- 
ter of  John  and  Mary  Lawton  Babcock. 

9  John,  b.   1669  (  ?)  ;    m.   18  Mary  Champlin. 

10  Job,  b.  1671   (  ?)  ;    m.  Deborah  . 

11  George,  b.  1673;    m.  Elizabeth  Hall. 

12  Elihu,    b.,   tradition    says,    the    "day    of    the   Great    Swamp    Fight," 

Dec.  19,  1675,  unm. 

13  Robert,  b.  1678  (?);    m.  Lydia  Crandall. 

14  Joseph,  b.  1681    (?);    m.  Rebecca  Stanton. 

15  Oliver,    b.    1683    ( ?)  ;     m.    (i)    Susanna    Clark;     m.    (2)    Deborah 

Knowles. 

4.  JoB^  Badcock,  third  son  of  James,  Sr.,  and  Sarah  Bad- 
cock,  b.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  1646  (?)  ;   d.  Westerly,  17 18; 

m.,  at  Westerly,  Jane  Crandall,  dau.  of  Rev.  John  Crandall,  a 

5.  D.  B.  minister.     She  d.  Westerly,  1715  (?). 

Job  Badcock  settled  at  Westerly.  R.  I.  He  owned  a  black- 
smith shop  and  a  grist  mill  on  the  Pawcatnck  River.  He  was 
made  a  freeman  May  18,  1669.  He  took  the  oath  of  allegiance 
May  17,  1 67 1,  and  again  Sept.  17,  1679.  He  was  elected  Con- 
stable of  Westerly  Oct.,  1680,  and  Fel3.  15,  1693.  His  wife, 
Jane,  had  a  deed  of  one  hundred  acres  of  land  made  to  her  by 
Samuel  Lewis,  and  Job  Babcock,  husband  of  said  Jane,  de- 
clared that  he  had  given  his  wife  full  power  to  purchase  the 
land.  May  24,  1703,  he  bought  land  of  the  Sachem  Ninecraft 
for  £6.  He  deeded  to  his  son  Job,  for  love,  etc.,  one  hundred 
and  ten  acres  Oct.  31,  1706. 

In  1678  Job  and  his  wife  were  members  of  the  S.  D.  B. 
Church  of  Newport,  and  Westerly,  R.  T. ;  Job  Badcock,  Indian 
interpreter,  1680.     (Newport  Hist.  Register,  vol.  vii,  p.  39.) 

Job  Badcock  with  his  brother  John  received  verbally  the  will 
of  their  father,  James  Badcock,  June  12,  1679.  (See  copy  of 
will  in  Appendix.)  By  the  will.  Job  received  all  his  father's 
"smith  tools  of  what  sort  or  kind  he  died  possessed." 

Job  Babcock  made  his  will  Mar.  26,  1715;  d.  1718;  will 
proven  Apr.  7,  17 18,  son  John  executor.  He  gave  to  his  sons 
Job  and  Benjamin  and  to  daughters  Jane,  Sarah,  Mary,  Eliza- 
beth, and  Mercy  one  shilling  each ;  ''to  daughter  Hannah  a 
feather  bed,  pewter,  and  rest  of  household  stuff;  to  son  John 
my  now  dwelling  house,  grist  mill,  etc.,  and  all  that  is  due 
after  payment  of  debts  and  legacies." 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  ii 

Westerly  had  returned  to  their  homes,  the  Colony  of  Rhode 
Island  must  have  resumed  its  jurisdiction  over  Westerly,  for 
John  Badcock  was  elected,  by  the  General  Court  of  Rhode 
Island,  Conservator  of  the  Peace  for  Westerly,  June  12,  1678. 
(C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  10-13.) 

Sept.  17,  1679,  "The  inhabitants  of  Westerly  being  by  war- 
rant required  to  appear  at  this  Court  to  give  the  oath  of  al- 
legiance to  his  Majesty,  and  of  fidelity  to  his  Majesty's  author- 
ity, for  this  Colony,"  John  Badcock  and  thirty-two  others,  in- 
cluding his  brothers  James  and  Job,  appeared  and  took  the 
oath.  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  68,  69.)  This  event  occurred 
three  months  after  the  death  of  his  father. 

John  Badcock  was  Deputy  from  Westerly  to  the  Colonial 
Legislature  in  1682  and  1684.  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  iii,  pp. 
107,  150.)  The  exact  date  of  his  death  has  not  been  ascer- 
tained, but  it  probably  occurred  in  May  or  June,  1685.  He 
died  intestate  and  a  will  disposing  of  his  estate  was  made  by 
the  Town  Council,  June  25,  1685.  In  the  Appendix  of  this 
volume  can  be  found  a  copy  of  the  will,  also  the  inventory  of 
the  personal  property,  dated  June  4.  1685,  which  amounted  to 
£790  3s.,  and  was  the  largest  recorded  in  the  town  for  many 
years.  By  the  law  of  primogeniture  the  oldest  son,  James,  re- 
ceived all  the  real  estate,  one  half  of  which  he  conveyed  by  deed 
to  his  mother,  June  26,  1685.  A  copy  of  the  deed  will  be  found 
in  the  Appendix. 

By  the  will  the  widow  received  one  third  of  the  personal 
property,  the  remaining  two  thirds  being  divided  equally  among 
the  nine  younger  children.  Mary,  the  widow  of  John,  was  by 
the  Town  Council,  made  executrix  of  the  will,  and  guardian 
of  the  minor  children,  which  included  all  except  James. 

When  the  will  of  James  Badcock,  Sr.,  was  written,  June  12, 
1679,  the  first  syllable  of  the  family  name  was  written  Bad, 
and  had  been  so  written  up  to  that  time.  Six  years  later,  when 
the  will  of  John  Babcock  was  made  by  the  Town  Council  of 
Westerly,  June  26,  1685,  the  first  syllable  was  spelled  Bab,  and 
has  been  so  spelled  ever  since. 

Mary  Babcock  made  an  agreement  December  26,  1689,  with 
John  Fairfield  and  wife  to  maintain  them  in  meat,  drink,  cloth- 
ing, etc.,  they  binding  themselves  to  her  in  all  their  estate  to 
be  entirely  hers.  (W.  T.  R.,  vol.  ii,  p.  129.)  Dec.  26,  1696, 
she  deeded  to  her  son  George,  for  love,  etc.,  one  hundred  and 
six  acres  of  land.      (W.  T.  R.) 

-     Children  all  born  in  Westerly — their  names  are  mentioned 
in  the  will  in  the  order  here  given.     While  the  dates  of  birth 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  13 


Children : 

Job,  b. 

John.  b.  . 

Benjamin,   b. 

Jane,  b.  : 

Sarah,  b.  

Mary.  b.  

Elizabeth,  b.  - 

Hannah,  b.  — 

16  Mercy,^  b.  

ni.  Branian. 
;    m.  James  Hall. 
;    m.  Tanner. 

;    m.  Brand. 

— ;    unm.  when  her  father's  will  was  written. 
-;    ni.  Daniel  Stanton. 

5.  Mary-  Badcock.  fourth  child  of  James.  Sr.,  and  Sarah 
Badcock,  b.   Portsmouth,  R.  I.,   1648   (  ?)  :    d.  Westerly, 

1747;  m.  Capt.  William  Champlin,  son  of  Jeffrey  Champlin, 
b.  Rhode  Island,  1654.  d.  17 15. 

The  following  was  copied  from  the  will  of  her  father,  James 
Badcock,  Sr. :  "He  bequeathed  one  cow  to  be  delivered  unto 
his  daughter.  Mar}'  Champlin." 

William  Champlin  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Westerly  ;  he 
was  also  Deputy  for  Westerly  at  the  General  Assembly,  1690, 
'91,  '96,  '98.  '99,  1700,  '03.  '05.  '06.  '08.  '10.  '12.  At  a  town 
meeting  held  Apr.  7.  1709.  he  was  "voted  to  have  a  grant  of 
one  hundred  acres"  of  land,  and  was  empowered  to  agree  with 
Ninecraft.  sachem,  for  "a  perpetual  high  road  to  the  salt  water 
from  Queen's  Rhoade." 

For  further  records  of  Mary  (Badcock)  Champlin,  wife  of 
William,  see  records  of  her  son  William. 

Children,  born  in  \\^esterly : 

17  William.^  b.  ;    m.   Mary  Clark. 

18  Alary,  m.  her  cousin  Capt.  John  Babcock.     (See  his  records.) 

19  Ann,  m.  Samuel  Clark. 

6.  Joseph-  Babcock,  son  of  James,  Sr.,'  and  .second  wife, 
Elizabeth  Babcock.  b.  W^esterly  or  Stonington.  1670;  set- 
tled in  N.  Stonington,  where  he  d.  1762.  (S.  T.  R.)  He  m. 
(i)  Apr.  3.  1696.  Dorothy  Key,  d.  Dec.  14,  1727.  She  was 
admitted  to  the  Stonington  church  May  11.  1707.  and  was 
recommended  to  membership  in  the  N.  Stonington  church  Apr. 
9,  1727.  Joseph  m.  (2)  Jan.  i.  1729,  Mrs.  Hannah  Coates.  It 
is  probable  she  was  the  widow  of  William  Coates,  of  Stoning- 
ton, Conn.,  to  whom  she  was  m.  June  9,  17 14,  and  by  whom 
she  had  four  children.  If  so.  her  maiden  name  was  Hannah 
Bill,  (\\nieeler.)  Josq3h's  farm  was  in  or  near  the  present 
village  of  Milltown.  Conn. 

A  town  meeting  authorized  by  the  Governor  and  Council  of 
Connecticut  was  held  at  the  home  of  Joseph  Babcock,  of  Ston- 


14  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

ington,  Jan.  18,  1720-1.  (See  C.  R.  of  Conn.,  1717-1725, 
p.  229.) 

Mar.  29,  1 74 1,  Joseph  Babcock  was  baptized  and  "gave  his 
concent  to  the  covenant  of  Grace  and  was  admitted  to  the 
N.  Stonington  Congregational  Church."     (N.  Ston.  Ch.  R.) 

The  following  is  taken  from  his  father,  James  Babcock's, 
will :  "He  bequeathed  unto  his  son  Joseph  all  his  housing  and 
lands  for  him  the  said  Joseph  to  take  unto  his  possession  when 
he  shall  attain  unto  the  age  of  twenty  one  yrs." 

The  will  of  Joseph  Babcock,  dated  Oct.  13,  1760,  admitted 
to  probate  Apr.  13,  1762,  recorded  in  office  of  county  clerk  in 
New  London,  Conn.,  book  H,  pp.  104-6,  mentions  "well- 
beloved  wife  Hannah  Babcock,  daughters  Dorothy  Jones  and 
Abigail  Billings,  my  only  son  John  Babcock  yet  surviving, 
granddaughter  Mary  Babcock,  dau.  of  my  son  Joseph  Babcock, 
deceased."  Nominates  and  appoints  son,  John  Babcock,  with 
his  mother  to  administer  the  estate. 

Child  by  first  wife  : 

Elizabeth,  b.  Stonington,  Jan.  29.  1698;  m.  Sept.  30,  1714,  Elisha, 
son  of  John  and  Abigail  (Cheesebrough)  Avery,  b.  1694. 
(Wheeler.) 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Dorothy,  b.  Feb.  2.  1730;  m.  Mr.  Jones.  By  the  will  of  her 
father  she  as  Dorothy  Jones  is  given  a  portion  of  his  farm. 

20  Abigail,^  b.  April  20.  1731  ;    m.  Christopher  Billings. 

21  Joseph,  b.  Oct.  15,  17.33;    m.  Mrs.  Mary  Bently. 
John,  b.  Jan.  26,   1736;    no  record  of  marriage. 

7.  James"  Babcock,  son  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Jane   (Brown) 
Babcock    (James   ist),  b.   Westerly.      He  inherited   from 

his  father  his  blacksmith's  tools  and  a  heifer,  and,  by  law,  the 
real  estate.  His  mother  d.  1719.  The  executor  of  her  will 
was  her  son  James,  blacksmith.  To  James's  sons,  Peter  and 
William,  she  gave  two  beds.  To  ''James's  three  sons,  rest  of 
household  stuff,"  and  to  her  "son  James  the  rest  of  her  per- 
sonal property."  We  have  no  record  of  the  wife  of  James 
Babcock. 

James  Babcock,  Jr.,  was  admitted  a  freeman  Feb.  13,  1689- 
90.  He  was  chosen  a  constable  for  Westerly  June  5,  1690; 
same  day  chosen  sergeant.     (W.  T.  R.) 

8.  James^   Babcock,  better  known  as  Capt.  James,   eldest 
child  of  John  and  Mary  (Lawton)  Babcock  (James  ist), 

b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  1663  (  ?)  ;  d.  there  Jan.  17,  1736-7.  He  was 
buried  in  the  Babcock  burj^ing  ground  at  Massattixet,  which  is 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  15 

upon  the  east  side  of  the  road,  about  midway  between  Westerly 
and  Watch  Hill.  His  grave  is  covered  by  a  horizontal  tablet, 
six  feet  long  and  four  feet  wide,  and  is  al30ut  three  feet  above 
the  surface  of  the  ground.  The  inscription  upon  the  tablet  is 
as  follows:  'Tn  memory  of  Capt.  James  Babcock,  who  died 
January  ye  17th,  1736,  in  ye  year  of  his  age.     Having 

been  in  his  life  of  extensive  charity  and  beneficence  and  not 
wholly  silent  at  his  death."  The  year  of  his  age  has  been,  by 
time  or  vandalism,  completely  obliterated. 

John  Babcock,  father  of  Capt.  James,  when  eighteen  years 
of  age,  went.  Mar.,  1662,  to  Westerly  with  the  first  company 
of  permanent  settlers.     (See  records  of  John.) 

Tradition  says  that  James  was  the  first  white  male  child  born 
in  Misquamicut  (Westerly).  Presuming  this  to  be  true,  James 
was  no  doubt  born  in  1662  or  1663.  He  m.  (i)  1687  (?), 
tradition  says,  Elizabeth  Saunders,  dau.  of  Tobias  Saunders. 
Another  tradition  savs  her  name  was  Elizabeth  Babbit,  dau. 
of  Erasmus  Babbit.  Upon  her  tombstone,  which  is  near  her 
husband's  grave,  is  inscribed  the  following:  "Here  lieth  in- 
terred ye  body  of  Elizabeth,  ye  wife  of  Cap.  James  Babcock, 
died  March  ye  3rd,  1 730-1,  in  the  69th  year  of  her  age."  She 
was  probably  a  year  or  more  older  than  her  husband. 

James  m.  (2)  in  Westerly,  by  Theodoty  Rhodes,  Justice, 
July  7,  1 73 1,  Content,  eldest  child  of  Jonathan  and  Content 
(Rogers)  Maxson,  b.  at  Westerly  Jan.  28,  1708-9.  She  was 
in  the  twenty-third  year  of  her  age. 

June  22,  1 73 1  (fifteen  days  before  his  second  marriage),  he 
signed  a  "Covenant  made  and  contracted  betweene  Capt.  James 
Babcock  of  Westerly  yeoman,  and  Content  Maxson  daughter 
to  Jona.  Maxson,"  viz. ;  "I  ye  sd.  Babcock  do  hereby  covenant 
with  sd.  Content  that  on  condition  shee  doth  take  me  as  her 
husband  and  doth  outlive  me  I  do  oblige  my  heirs  to  pay  her 
within  3  years  after  my  decease  £100  currant  Money  in  Lieu 
of  her  right  to  her  thirds. — On  these  terms  Content  is  willing 
and  satisfied  to  be  married."     (W.  T.  R.,  1719,  p.  26.) 

Content  m.  (2)  Dec.  22,  1742,  William  Hiscox  (widower), 
son  of  Thomas  and  Bethia  (Clark)  Hiscox,  by  whom  she  had 
four  children. 

Capt.  James,  being  the  eldest  son,  was  by  the  English  law  of 
primogeniture  heir  to  all  the  real  estate  of  his  fither.  "With  a 
devotion  to  his  mother  worthy  of  all  praise,"  he  surrendered 
to  his  "loving  and  natural  mother,  Man,-  Babcock,"  one  half 
of  all  the  real  estate  left  by  his  father,  "to  have  and  enjoy  and 
to  dispose  of  as  she  shall  see  it  meet  during  the  time  of  her  life 


1 6  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

or  after  her  decease,  provided  she  shall  dispose  of  it  unto  my 
father's  male  children."  The  contract  was  dated  June  26,  1685. 
(W.  T.  R.,  book  i,  p.  65.)      Copy  of  contract  in  Appendix. 

In  public  records  he  is  often  referred  to  as  "James,  the 
widow's  son." 

Apr.  22,  1686,  he  was  made  a  freeman  at  Westerly.  At  a 
town  meeting  held  Mar.  28,  1692,  land  was  voted  to  each  of 
twenty-five  citizens,  among  whom  were  "J^"^^^  Babcock,  the 
widow's  son,"  and  Job  Babcock.  They  received  one  hundred 
acres  each.  In  1692  James  united  with  the  S.  D.  B.  Church 
of  Newport  and  Westerly.  When  the  Westerly  branch  (which 
now  exists  as  the  First  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Hopkinton)  became 
an  independent  body,  in  1708,  he  was  a  constituent  member 
and  continued  a  member  until  his  death,  as  is  shown  by  an  item 
in  his  will,  as  follows :  "I  give  and  bequeath  unto  the  Church 
of  Christ  in  Westerly,  unto  which  I  belong,  keeping  ye  Seventh 
Day  Sabbath,  one  hundred  pounds  in  money,  etc." 

His  title  and  rank  of  Captain  came  from  his  being  commis- 
sioned Captain  of  Militia  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  date  unknown  but 
prior  to  1690. 

Apr.  I,  1698,  Elihu,  Robert,  Joseph,  and  Oliver  chose  their 
brother  James  Babcock  to  be  their  guardian.  (W.  T.  R.) 
This  was  twenty  days  before  their  mother  m.  Erasmus 
Babbitt.  xA.t  the  time  of  her  first  husband's  death  she  was 
appointed  guardian  to  the  minor  children,  which  included  all 
the  children  except  James,  the  eldest. 

Apr.  5,  1698,  James  deeded  land  to  his  brother  John  (W. 
T.  R.)  Mar.  11,  1699,  James  and  John,  "for  brotherly  love," 
etc.,  deeded  to  their  brother  Oliver  "certain  land  commodious 
and  convenient  to  dwelling  house,  which  was  formerly  our 
father  John  Babcock's,  and  also  land  that  was  formerly  our 
father-in-law  (i.  e.,  stepfather)  Erasmus  Babbitt's,  said  land 
to  be  Oliver's  at  decease  of  our  mother,  Mary  Babbitt." 

For  many  years  Capt.  James  was  Town  Treasurer;  was 
Town  Councilman  1690,  '93,  and  '95;  was  often  Moderator 
at  town  meetings,  and  for  the  years  1701,  '06,  '07,  '08,  '09, 
and  '16  he  represented  Westerly  in  the  Legislature  of  the 
Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  held  at  Newport. 

Nov.  4,  1704,  James  and  John  deeded  certain  lands  to  their 
mother,  Mary  (Babcock)  Babbitt.  Oct.  10,  171 5,  Capt.  James 
Babcock  and  his  wife,  Elizabeth,  sold  for  £300  sterling  two 
hundred  acres  of  land,  bounded  south  by  the  salt  pond  and  the 
ocean  and  on  the  east  by  John  Babcock's  land. 

In   17 1 5  the  colony  was  desirous  of    establishing  a  credit 


From  a  photograph   taken    1902. 


Page  15. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  17 

currency  which  shouhl  circuhite  as  money,  'i'u  this  end  the 
Colonial  Legislature,  held  at  Newport,  July  5,  1715,  passed  an 
act  providing  for  the  loaning  without  interest  to  certain  citi- 
zens, in  severalty,  £30,000  in  currency  or  bills  of  credit.  On 
Monday,  Oct.  10,  171 5,  Capt.  James  Babcock  borrowed  £300 
of  this  currency,  payable  in  five  years.  The  security  he  gave 
was  a  mortgage  upon  a  certain  two-hundred-acre  tract  of  land. 
This  mortgage  was  paid  off  three  years  after  his  death  by  the 
administrator  of  the  estate,  his  son  Joshua,  who  on  Mar.  16, 
1739,  settled  the  claim  by  paying  to  the  colony  £60,  twenty 
per  cent  of  the  currency  borrowed.  The  mortgage  above  re- 
ferred to  is  a  very  long  and  carefully  worded  document,  and  is 
recorded  in  Westerly  Records,  bfX)k  i,  pp.  168,  169.  Among 
the  many  who  gave  similar  mortgages  to  the  colony  was  George 
Babcock,  a  brother  of  James.  In  1717  he  was  Justice  of  Peace 
for  Westerly. 

Feb.  7,  1 717-8,  Thomas  Clark  and  wife,  Elizabeth,  having 
received  "3  tracts  of  land  by  deed''  from  Capt.  James  Babcock 
(father  of  Elizabeth),  "do  thankfully  acknowledge  and  except 
the  same  in  full  of  our  portion  of  our  father's  estate."  (W.  T. 
R.,  1719,  p.  130.) 

Capt.  James's  last  will,  w^ritten  Jan,  9,  i7})()-y.  eight  days 
before  his  death,  was  entered  for  probate  Jan.  31,  1736-7.  A 
copy  can  be  found  in  the  Appendix  to  this  volume.  By  his  will 
he  gave  to  his  children  and  grandchildren  eight  or  ten  farms, 
comprising  some  two  thousand  acres  of  land,  each  farm  care- 
fully bounded.  He  provided  that  his  infant  son  James  should 
receive  a  college  education ;  and  also  that  in  case  his  wife 
should  marry  again  the  three  younger  children  should  be  taken 
from  her  and  brought  up  by  his  executor,  their  half-brother 
Joshua,  Another  clause  provides  that  if  the  widow  should 
refuse  to  abide  by  the  terms  of  the  wmII  her  three  children 
should  receive  from  his  estate  only  twenty  shillings  each.  The 
family  burying  ground  is  reserved  from  his  farm,  "for  a  bury- 
ing place  of  my  relations  and  as  many  others  as  they  shall  see 
cause  to  except  of."  No  doubt  his  parents  and  grandparents 
were  buried  upon  the  same  grounds.  It  has  been  said  of  Capt. 
James  Babcock  that  he  was  as  good  as  he  was  rich,  a  true 
]ihilanthropist  who  lived  for  God  and  his  fellow-men. 

Children  of  Cai)t.  James  and  Elizabeth : 

22  James,*  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  23,  1688:   m.  Sarah  Vose. 

23  Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  8.  1691  ;    m.  Elder  Thomas  Clark. 

24  Samuel,  b.  Feb.   15.  1697;    m.  Ann  Pendleton. 

25  Daniel,  b,  Apr.  23.  1699;    m.  Abigail  Thompson. 


1 8  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

26  Anna,  b.  Nov.  29,  1701 ;    m.  Elder  Joseph  Clark. 
Sarah,  b.  Dec.   13,  1704;    d.  Nov.   13,   1705. 

27  Joshua,  b.  May  17,   1707;    m.    (i)    Hannah  Stanton;    m.    (2)   Ann 

Maxson. 

Children  of  Capt.  James  and  Content,  all  bom  in  Westerly : 

28  Ann,  b.  IMar.  30,  1732;    m.  Simon  Rhodes. 

29  Col.  James,  b.  Nov.  i,  1734;    m.  (i)  Sarah  Stanton;    m.  (2)  Joanna 

McDowell. 

30  Jonathan,  b.  Oct.   11,   1736;    m.   Esther  Hazard. 

9.  Capt.  JoHN^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Lawton) 
Babcock  (James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R,  I.,  1669  ( ?)  ;  was 
admitted  a  freeman  Feb.  13,  1689  (W.  T.  R.);  d.  Westerly, 
Mar.  28,  1746;  m.  1700  (?)  his  cousin,  Mary  Champlin,  sec- 
ond child  of  William  and  Mary  (Babcock)  Champlin.  They 
lived  about  two  miles  east  of  Pawcatuck  Bridge,  Westerly, 
on  what  is  now  the  Post  Road.  Later  the  house  was  a  hotel 
kept  by  Sylvester  Gavitt. 

John  Babcock  was  chosen  in  1691  to  assist  in  surveying  the 
town  lands.  In  1695  he  was  chosen  a  fence  viewer.  He  was 
Tax  Assessor  for  the  years  1697-99.  In  1699  he  was  Town 
Councilman;  Town  Clerk,  Apr.  26,  1700;  appointed  Probate 
Clerk,  Aug.,  1700,  and  served  one  year;  was  with  others 
chosen  a  rate  maker  Mar.  22,  1703.  He  was  Captain  of  Mili- 
tia for  the  years  1709,  '11,  '15,  '18,  '19,  '20,  '21,  '23.  (Smith.) 
He  served  as  Town  Clerk  from  1706  to  1732,  when  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  his  son  William.  He  served  as  Deputy  for  the  town 
of  Westerly  in  the  General  Assembly  in  the  vears  1695,  1702, 
'13,  '15,  '17,  '18,  '20,  '23,  '24.  '25,  '26.  (R.  I.  Col.  Rec, 
vol.  iv.)  He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Westerly  from  1730 
to  1737.     (Smith.) 

May  19,  1 7 10,  John  Babcock  and  Robert  Babcock  with  ten 
others  bought  from  the  colony  a  tract  of  land  containing  2,684 
acres,  known  as  the  "Maxson  purchase."  John  and  his  wife, 
Mary,  "quit  claim,  Jan.  18,  1715-16,  unto  William  Champlain 
all  manner  of  action,  suits,  bills,  bonds,  debts,  etc.,  on  account 
of  any  legacy,  sum  or  sums  of  money  due  us  out  of  our  deceased 
father,  William  Champlain's,  estate."  (W.  T.  R.,  book  i, 
p.  102.) 

John  Babcock's  will,  written  Feb.  10,  1745-6,  about  five 
weeks  before  his  death,  is  found  in  the  W.  T.  R..  book  i  i,  p. 
53.     A  copy  is  found  in  this  volume.     (See  Appendix.) 

Children,  born  in  Westerly : 

John,  b.  May  4,  1701  ;    d.  July  10,  1719,  unm. 

31  Ichabod,*  b.  Nov.  21,  1703;    m.  Jemima  Babcock. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  19 

32  Stephen,  b.  May  2,  1706;    m.  Anna  Thompson. 

33  WilHam,  b.  Apr.  15,  1708;    m.  Sarah  Denison. 

34  Amy,  b.  Feb.  8,  1712-3;    m.  Ezekiel  Gavitt. 
Mary,  b.  July  23,  1716;    m.  Benj.  Randall. 

Ann,  b.   Sept.   14,   1721.     Not  being  mentioned  in  her  father's  will, 
she  probably  died  young. 


10.  JoB^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Lawton)  Bab- 
cock (James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  1671  (?);  d.  S. 
Kingston  between  the  date  of  his  will,  Aug.  23,    1754,  and 

probate  of  will,  Feb.  10,  1755.    Hem.  1695  (?)  Deborah . 

She  d.  before  her  husband. 

The  first  Town  Council  of  S.  Kingston,  elected  in  1723,  con- 
sisted of  Job  Babcock  and  five  others.  (N.  H.  R.,  vol.  vii, 
p.  241.) 

In  May,  1727,  Job  Babcock  was  chosen  Deputy  from  S. 
Kingston  to  the  General  Court  of  Rhode  Island.  (C.  R.  of 
R.  I.,  vol.  iv,  p.  385.)  In  June,  1727,  he  was  appointed  pro- 
thonotary.     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  iv,  p.  390.) 

"Feb.,  1712,  in  a  lawsuit  between  John  Knight  and  Job  Bab- 
cock about  some  Narragansett  land,  an  appeal  was  allowed  to 
Great  Britain."  (Potter's  Early  History  of  Narragansett,  p. 
12,  also  C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  pp.  138,  139.) 

"In  1 73 1  Job  conveyed  to  each  of  his  sons.  Job,  Samuel,  and 
John,  certain  lands  respectively."     (S.  K.  T.  R.,  No.  3.) 

The  will  of  Job  Babcock,  dated  Aug.  22,  1754,  proved  Feb. 
10,  1755,  and  recorded  in  Probate  Book  No.  5,  page  7,  w^ife  is 
not  named.  She  probably  died  earlier.  Sons  mentioned  are 
Job.  Samuel,  John  (executor)  ;  daughters,  Mary  Stanton,  De- 
borah Hoxie;  grandsons.  Job  son  of  Samuel,  Daniel  Stanton, 
Job  son  of  Job;    granddaughter,  Isabel  Tefft. 

Children : 

35  Job.M).   1697  (?);    m.   (i)   Elizabeth  Hull:    m.   (2)   Mary  . 

36  Samuel,  b.  ;    m.  Bethiah 


27  John.  b.  ;    m.  (i)  Sarah  Segar ;    m.  (2)  Jenn'ma  Reynolds. 

Mary,  b.  ;    m.  Stanton. 

38  Deborah,*  b.  ;    m.  Joseph  Hoxie. 

Abigail,  b.  ;    m.  John  Segar,  of  South  Kingston. 

11.  George^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Lawton) 
Babcock  (James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I..  1673;  d. 
S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  i,  1756,  in  the  eighty-third  year  of 
his  age;  m.  Nov.  28,  1694,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Henry  and 
Content  Hall,  of  Kingston,  d.  S.  Kingston,  May  8,  1762,  in 
the  ninety-first  year  of  her  age. 


20  The  Babcock  Gcncolo(^v 


George  Babcock's  mark  for  his  cattle  was  recorded  in  West- 
erly, May,  1696.  In  December,  of  the  same  year  he  received 
from  his  mother  a  deed  of  a  tract  of  land  in  Westerly.  Dec. 
31,  1706,  he  resided  in  Kingston  and  sold  land  to  his  brother 
James  in  Westerly.     (W.  T.  R.,  book  i.) 

In  June,  1707,  he  was  baptized  by  Elder  William  Hiscox 
and  united  with  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Newport  and  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  in  which  church  for  the  rest  of  his  life  he  was  a  promi- 
nent member,  and  by  his  will  left  a  legacy  of  £300  for  his 
church.  A  few  weeks  later,  July  20,  his  wife  joined  the  same 
church.     (S.  D.  B.  Memorial.) 

June  28,  1709,  he  with  twenty-six  others  bought  from  the 
Colony  of  Rhode  Island  a  large  tract  of  land  in  Kingston  and 
Westerly  known  as  the  "Shannock  Purchase."  His  part  of  the 
purchase  was  laid  out  in  Westerly  on  the  south  side  of  Shan- 
nock Hill  and  extended  west  to  the  Pawcttuck  River,  in  what 
was  afterward  Hopkinton  and  Richmond.  His  son  Hezekiah 
settled  on  the  part  in  Hopkinton,  and  had  at  least  eight  hundred 
acres.  His  son  Elisha  settled  on  the  part  tint  was  afterward 
Richmond.  In  171 5  George  Babcock  and  others  assisted  in 
circulating  Rhode  Island  colonial  money.  See  details  in  rec- 
ords of  Capt.  James  Babc(xk,  a  brother  of  George.  He  served 
as  Deputy  to  the  Legislature  in  17 16  and  1721. 

He  was  for  many  years  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  was  often 
called  upon  to  perform  marriage  ceremonies.  He  and  his  wife 
w^ere  buried  upon  their  ow-n  farm  in  a  plot  formerly  known  as 
the  "Babcock  Burying  Ground."  It  is  about  five  miles  from 
the  Kingston  R.  R.  Station,  and  is  still  used  as  a  cemetery,  is 
inclosed  by  a  neat  iron  fence.  The  farm  was  sold  in  1799  by 
Gideon  Babcock,  grandson  of  George  and  son  of  David,  to 
Joshua  Tucker,  and  the  cemetery  is  now  known  as  the  "Tucker 
Burying  Ground."  Near  by  is  a  body  of  water  formerly  known 
as  Babcock's  Pond,  now  called  Tucker's  Pond.  The  place  was 
visited  in  the  summer  of  1900  by  the  writer  and  his  brother, 
Mr.  Nathan  Babcock,  of  Westerly.  The  graves  of  George 
Babcock  and  his  w^fe  were  each  covered  with  slate  stone  slabs 
about  five  and  one  half  feet  long  by  two  and  one  half  feet  wide 
and  five  inches  thick,  lying  horizontal,  and  on  foundations  so 
that  they  w-ere  about  one  foot  from  the  ground.  The  letters 
were  much  worn  and  overgrown  with  moss,  but  w^ere  finally 
read. 

The  two  graves  are  side  by  side,  about  three  feet  apart,  and 
the  stones  differ  only  in  their  inscriptions.  The  writing  upon 
the  husband's  stone  consists  of  eleven  lines,  as  follows : 


m 


V 


^^•jr.tA  -^  c-  E?  '"" .  • 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  21 

In  Memory 
OF  MR.  GEORGE  BABCOCK, 

WHO   LIVED  A   PROFESSOR  WITH 

THE  Seventh  Day  Baptist  Church, 

AND  ALSO  HIS  WIFE  AND  EIGHT  OF 

THEIR  Children  Were  Members 

WITH    HIM   OF  THE  SaME  ChURCH 

BOATH    IN    FAITH    AND    PRACTICE. 

He  DEPARTED  THIS  LIFE  MaY 

THE    1ST,   A.   D.    1756,   IN   YE  83   YEAR 

OF  HIS  Age. 

A  notice  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  Babcock,  written  from  S. 
Kingston,  appeared  in  the  Boston  Evening-  Post  two  weeks 
after  her  death,  Alay  24,  1762.  Among  other  things  it  states 
that  "She  has  left  8  children,  61  grandchildren;  in  all  140 
descendants,  which  whole  number  live  in  this  colony  except 
one  granddaughter,  and  her  children." 

A  tradition  often  repeated  states  that  soon  after  the  mar- 
riage of  George  and  Elizabeth  Hall  Babcock  he  threw  a  long 
rope  over  his  dwelling  house;  he  remained  at  one  end  of  the 
rope,  while  his  wife,  Elizabeth,  went  as  requested  to  the  other 
side  of  the  house  and  tried  to  pull  the  rope  over,  but  without 
success.  George  called  out,  "Pull,  Betty,  pull  harder!"  Again 
she  struggled,  but  with  no  better  results  than  before.  George 
then  called  for  her  to  come  to  him ;  the  two,  taking  hold  of 
the  same  end  of  the  rope,  easily  pulled  it  over  the  house.  The 
lesson  taught  was  that  when  husband  and  wife  pull  apart  no 
satisfactory  results  can  be  reached,  but  when  both  pull  to- 
gether ever}' thing  is  easy. 

George  Babcock  by  his  will,  dated  Nov.  13.  1750,  probated 
and  recorded  in  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  10,  1756,  gives  away 
a  number  of  farms,  a  large  amount  of  personal  property,  in- 
cluding thousands  of  pounds  in  money.-  To  his  wife  he  gave 
various  personal  property,  including  "my  negro  gall  Peg." 
To  his  son  David  he  gave  the  homestead  farm,  a  negro  man 
named  "Bristo,"  a  negro  woman  named  "Geney,"  and  ap- 
points David  as  executor  of  his  will.  No  reference  to  his  son 
Jonathan  is  found  in  the  will.     (Will  published  in  Appendix.) 

Children ; 

39  Mary.*  b.  Sept.  20,  1695  ;    ni.  Thomas  Potter,  Jr. 

40  George,  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  9.   1699:    m.  Susanna  Potter. 

41  David,  b.  Dec.  22,  1700;    m.  Dorcas  Brown. 

42  Jonathan,  b.   Mar.  22,   1702-3:    m.  Elizabeth  . 

Elizabeth,  b.  Mar.  16,  1705;    m.  Edward  Sanders.     (Wheeler.) 


pa  BLIC 


22  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Abigail,  b.  Feb.  6,  1707;    m.  (by  Christopher  Allen,  Justice,  Apr.  29, 

1731)  Benjamin  Hall,  of  Portsmouth,  R.  I. 
Ruth,  b.   Mar.   14,   1709;    m.    (by  Christopher  Allen,  Justice)    Caleb 

Hill,  of  Prudence  Island,  R.  I.,  Feb.  25,  1730-1. 

43  Eunice,  b.  Jan.   13,   1712-3;    m.  Silas  Greennian. 

44  Hezekiah,  b.  Mar.  25,  1715-6;    m.  Mary  Packham. 

45  Elisha,  b.  May  18,  1718;    m.  Elizabeth  Perry. 

12.  Elihu^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Lawton)  Bab- 
cock (James  ist),  b.  about  1675.  Tradition  says  his  birth 

occurred  at  the  time  of  the  "Swamp  fight,"  Dec.  19,  1675, 
King  Phihp's  War. 

He  was  of  Hmited  mental  capacity,  which  misfortune  tradi- 
tion also  predicates  upon  the  personal  alarms  his  mother, 
Mary,  suffered  from  an  accidental  meeting  with  a  hostile  In- 
dian the  summer  preceding  his  birth. 

He  was  original  in  speech  and  manner.  His  remarks  were 
sometimes  more  emphatic  than  elegant.  One  summer  day  he 
tied  a  brush  harrow  to  a  bull's  tail  and  turned  the  animal 
into  a  field  of  wheat.  His  riotous  mirth  as  the  enraged  bull 
ran  through  the  ripening  grain  was  a  measure  of  his  mind, 
and  the  mischief  done  a  fair  exponent  of  his  deeds. 

The  date  of  his  death  is  not  known,  but  he  w^as  living  when 
about  seventy  years  of  age. 

Forty  years  after  the  death  of  his  father,  his  six  surviving 
brothers,  who  always  treated  him  w^ith  kindness  and  respect, 
entered  into  an  agreement  providing  for  his  care  and  support. 
This  compact  was  signed  at  Westerly,  "february  the  2d  day 
in  ye  12  year  of  the  Regn  of  King  George,  Anno  Domini, 
1725-6,"  by  his  six  brothers,  James,  John,  Job,  George,  Jo- 
seph, and  (Oliver,  and  three  witnesses,  and  was  recorded  upon 
the  town  records  of  Westerly.  The  compact  wnll  be  found  in 
the  Appendix  of  this  volume. 

13.  Robert^   Babcock,   son  of  John  and  Mary    (Lawton) 
Babcock  (James,  ist),  b.  Westerly,  1678  (?);    d.  Aug. 

2y,  1719;  m.  1701,  Lydia  Crandall,  dau.  of  Rev.  Joseph 
Crandall.  Robert  and  his  wife,  Lydia,  were  in  Sept.,  1712, 
members  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Westerly.  The  church  is 
now  known  as  the  First  Hopkinton  S.  D.  B.  Church,  and  is 
at  Ashaway,  R.  L  Apr.  21,  1698,  Roljert  with  his  brothers 
Elihu,  Joseph,  and  Oliver  chose  their  brother  Capt.  James  as 
guardian.  About  a  year  later.  Mar.  4,  1699,  Robert  Babcock 
was  made  a  freeman.  This  shows  that  he  was  a  minor  in 
1698,  but  had  reached  his  majority  in  1699;  hence  the  above 
date  of  his  birth  must  be  correct.     He  bought  land  in  West- 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  23 

erly  of  Job  Babcock,  Jr..  Jan.  6,  1706-7,  and  in  1710  with 
others  bought  from  Rhode  Island  the  Maxson  Purchase.  See 
the  biography  of  his  brother  John. 

His  will,  which  was  dated  Aug.  26,  17 19,  proved  Sept.  7, 
1719  (W.  T.  R.),  states:  "Being  very  sick  in  body  but  of 
perfect  mind  and  memory,  I  give  and  bequeath  all  my  per- 
sonal property  to  beloved  wife  Lydia."  He  mentions  by  name 
all  his  children  except  the  youngest.  Remember,  who  was  born 
six  months  after  her  father's  death. 

Robert  Babcock's  death  was  caused  by  a  murderous  assault 
comm.itted  by  one  John  Ross,  and  his  will  was  evidently  writ- 
ten upon  his  deathbed.  The  day  following  his  death,  Aug. 
28,  1 719,  Joseph  Stanton,  Justice  of  Westerly,  wrote  to  Gov. 
Cranston  at  Newport  giving  a  report  of  the  jury  of  inquest 
on  the  body  of  Robert  Babcock. 

.  The  following  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  letter,  taken  from  the 
original,  which  in  Aug.,  1900,  was  owned  by  Dr.  George  D. 
Stanton,  of  Stonington : 

"Westerly  August  the  28th  day  17 19,  Honnored  Sur  these 
with  grief  com  to  Inform  Your  Honner  that  yesterday  Rob- 
ert babcock  of  this  town  departed  this  life  and  it  is  to  be 
feared  that  the  cans  of  his  deth  came  by  abuse  or  hurt  that 
he  Reseved.  Sur  the  Jur>-  of  Inquest  have  sat  on  him  and 
viewed  the  outward  and  Inward  part  of  his  body  and  they 
find  his  body  brused  and  his  blader  broked. 

"Sur  it  is  suspected  that  John  Ross  of  Westerly  Is  the 
man  that  hath  dun  the  hurt  and  committed  the  fact  and  I  am 
informed  that  he  is  gone  out  of  this  town  In  a  bote  of  Mr. 
Christopher  Champlin's  1x)und  for  Newport  the  bote  hath 
tow  masts  the  man  hath  often  bin  att  newport  and  is  know- 
there. 

"Sur  I  nede  not  In  struct  your  Honnor  butt  h(jpe  that  If 
he  be  at  newport  you  in  your  wisdom  will  take  care  that  the 
said  Ross  be  secured:  Sur  I  humbly  pray  your  advice  con- 
carning  the  premeses  and  wather  the  Evidences  ought  to  be 
bound  over  to  Cort  before  the  Ross  be  Taken:  no  more  at 
presant  but  Remain 

"Your  most  humble  sarvant, 

"Joseph  Stanton,  Justice." 

Children  : 

Mary,  b.  Aug.  31.  1702. 
46  Lydia,"  b.  Nov.  3,  1703;    m.  Roger  Elderton. 

Robert,  b.  May  8,  1706;    admitted  a  freeman  Feb.,  1729-30.     By  his 
father's  will  he  received  all  the  real  estate;    was  to  have  one  half 


24  riic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

of  it  at  twenty-one  years  of  age,  the  other  half  when  his  mother 
should  die  or  marry.  T.  Barher  states  that  Robert  settled  in 
East  Greenwich,  had  seven  children,  was  there  in  1774. 

Elihu,  b.  June  5,  1708. 

Sarah,  b.  Mar.  18,   1710. 

Patience,  b.  Dec.  23,  171 1. 

Simeon,  b.  Oct.  17,  1714.  T.  Barber  says  m.  Abigail  Hudson,  Oct.  5, 
1736;    moved  to  Coventry,   Conn.;    d.   Nov.   30,    1751. 

47  Ezekiel,  b.  June  22,  1716;    m.  Eunice  Billings. 
Joseph,  b.  Apr.  9,   1718. 

Remember,  b.  Feb.  11,  1720. 

14.  Joseph^   Babcock,   son  of  John  and   Mary    (Lawton) 

(James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  1681  ( ?) ;  d.  Feb.,  1741-2; 
m.  Rebecca,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Hannah  (Lord)  Stanton,  b. 
Apr.,  1678,  d.  July  5,  1747. 

Apr.  21,  1698,  Joseph,  a  minor,  chose  Capt.  James  Bab- 
cock, his  brother,  to  be  his  guardian.  Jan.  9,  1706-7,  Joseph 
deeded  one  hundred  acres  of  land  in  Westerly  to  Robert  Stan- 
ton. He  deeded  land  to  his  brother,  Robert  Babcock,  Aug. 
31,  1 7 10.  His  will,  which  was  written  Sept.  6,  1741,  con- 
tains the  following:  "I  give  and  bequeath  unto  Rebecca,  my 
beloved  wife  ye  use  of  my  negro  man,  named  Primus,  during 
her  natural  life,  and  after  h^r  decease  to  my  son  Joseph,  his 
heirs  and  assigns  forever." 

The  said  Primus  was  valued  in  the  inventory  at  £150.  The 
will  was  probated  Feb.  22,  1 741-2.  and  Rebecca,  the  widow, 
was  appointed  executrix.     (W.  T.  R.) 

Joseph,  Jr.,  was  appointed  administrator  for  the  estate  of 
his  mother,  Rebecca,  July  27,  1747.     (W.  T.  R.) 

Children : 

Rebecca,  b.  ;    d.  July  15,  1747;    m.  Mr.  Ingraham. 

Ann,  b.  ;    m.  Enos. 

48  Jemima,*  b.  ;    m.  31  Ichabod^  Babcock   (her  cousin).     See  his 

records. 

49  Joseph,  b.  ;    m.  Susanna  Thompson. 

15.  Col.  Oliver''  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary   (Law- 
ton)  Babcock  (James  ist).  b.  Westerly.  R.  L,  1683  (?)  ; 

d.  Oct.  (?),  1773;  m.  (i)  Jan.,  1704-5,  Susanna,  dau.  of 
Joseph  and  Betliiah  (Hubbard)  Clark,  and  sister  to  Rev. 
Thomas  Clark,  who  married  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Capt.  James 
Babcock.  Susanna  b.  Westerly,  Aug.  31,  1683.  She  joined 
the  S.  D.  B.  Church  at  Newport,  July,  1707.  At  that  time  the 
Newport  Church  had  a  branch  at  Westerly.  Oliver  m.  (2) 
Dec.  2,  1 76 1,  Deborah  Knowles.     She  had  no  children. 

Oliver  was  a  minor,  Apr.  21,  1698,  at  which  time  he  chose 
his  brother,  Capt.  James,  as  guardian. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  25 

On  Nov.  25,  171 5,  Oliver  gave  a  mortgage  on  one  hundred 
and  thirty  acres  of  land  for  £100  currency,  which  he  borrowed 
from  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  without  interest.  A  month 
earlier  his  brother  James  had  borrowed  £300  under  similar 
conditions,  fully  described  in  his  biography. 

Oliver  was  admitted  a  freeman  May  i,  17 16.  fie  w'as  Dep- 
uty from  Westerly  to  the  General  Assembly  in  1730,  '34,  'T,y, 
'38,  '52.  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  V.)  For  a  large  part  of  his 
life  public  records  refer  to  him  as  "Col.  Oliver  Babcock."  At 
a  meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  held  at  Warwack,  R.  I., 
on  the  second  Monday  of  Aug.,  1735.  Capt.  Oliver  Babcock 
was  appointed  one  of  a  committee  "for  creating  a  new  harbor 
in  Westerly  by  turning  the  Pawcatuck  River  into  the  largest 
salt  pond  along  the  Westerly  shore,  so  that  said  pond  would 
become  a  very  commodious  and  navigable  harlx)r,  and  would 
likewise  be  very  convenient  for  the  catching  and  making  of 
codfish."  The  proposed  work  was  no  doubt  found  to  be  im- 
practicable, as  it  was  never  performed. 

The  same  year  he  was  a  commissioner  to  lay  out  twenty 
acres  of  land  upon  which  to  build  an  Indian  meetinghouse  in 
W^esterly.  W'as  also  one  of  the  commissioners  to  build  a 
bridge  across  the  Pawcatuck  River  at  Westerly.     (W.  and  W., 

P-  1 39-) 

Mar.  19,  1757,  Hopkinton  was  set  off  from  Westerly,  and 
Col.  Oliver  Babcock's  home  was  in  the  new  town.  He  was 
probably  ninety  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  death  in  1773. 

Apr.  14,  1749,  Oliver  Babcock,  of  Westerly,  conveyed  lands 
in  Voluntown  to  John  Dixon,  of  Stonington,  Conn.  Said  land 
was  laid  out  to  John  Babcock,  father  of  Col.  Oliver,  who  w^as 
one  of  the  Connecticut  volunteers  in  the  Narragansett  War. 

Col.  Oliver's  will  was  dated  Dec.  3,  1761,  and  was  proved 
and  recorded  in  Hopkinton  Nov.  i,  1773.  It  mentions  wife 
Delx^rah,  daughters  Susanna  Beebe  and  Mary  Cobb,  sons 
Thomas,  Nathan,  Oliver,  Simeon,  Jose])h,  John.  He  appoints 
his  sons  Simeon,  Oliver,  John,  and  Joseph  to  be  the  executors 
of  his  will. 

Children,  all  by  first  wife: 

Susanna,    b.    Sept.   20,    1705;    m.   James    (?),    son   of   Samuel    and 
Elizabeth   (Rogers)  Beebe,  b.  Oct.  lO,  1710.     (Rogers  Genealogy.) 

50  Thomas,*  b.  Mar.  7,  1710;    m.   (i)   Mary  Davidson  (  ?)  ;    (2)  Judith 

Davis. 

51  Mary,  b.  Feb.  8,  1712-3;    m.  Henry  Cobb. 
Nathan,  b.  Oct.  12,  1715. 

52  Simeon,  b.   Sept.  27,  1717;    m.  Sarah  Gardner. 
John,  b.  May  12,  1720. 


26  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

53  Oliver,  Jr.,  b.  Sept.  i6,  1722;    ni.  Patience  Pendleton. 

54  Joseph,  b.  Oct.   18,   1726;    m.  Anna  Harris. 

(Dates  of  birth  found  A.  V.  R.) 

16.  Mercy^  Babcock,  clan,  of  Job  and  Jane  (Crandall)  Bab- 
cock   (James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.;    m.  at  Westerly, 

Capt.  Daniel  Stanton,  son  of  Joseph  and  Charity  (Brown) 
Stanton,  b.  Westerly,  Apr.  i,  1694.  He  m.  (2)  Elizabeth, 
dan.  of  George  and  Charity  Bacon,  of  Westerly. 

By  the  will  of  her  father,  proved  in  Westerly,  Apr.  17, 
1718,  she  received  one  shilling.     (From  Stanton  Genealogy.) 

Child  of  Mercy  Babcock  Stanton : 

Daniel,*  Jr.     b.  ;    m.  Mary  Wilcox. 

17.  William^  Champlin,  son  of  Capt.  William  and  Mary- 

(Babcock)    Champlin    (James   ist),  b.  ;    d.    1747; 

m.  Jan.  18,  1699- 1700,  Mary  Clark,  dan.  of  Joseph  and 
Bethiah  (Hnbbard)  Clark,  b.  Dec.  27,  1680,  d.  1760. 

He  was  made  a  freeman  of  Westerly  in  1700,  and  June  25, 
1707,  he  was  chosen  "Rattemaker"  (i.  e.,  assessor).  His 
wife  "Mary  (Clark)  Champlin  was  baptized,  and  under  lay- 
ing on  of  hands  was  admitted  into  the  [S.  D,  B.]  Church  the 
loth  of  the  5th  month,   1708." 

Jan.  18,  1 7 16,  he  made  an  agreement  with  Mary  (Babcock) 
Champlin  (his  mother),  Capt.  John  Babcock,  and  Samuel 
Clark,  and  their  wives,  in  which  he  agreed  to  maintain  his 
mother  as  long  as  she  pleased  to  live  with  him,  to  pay  her 
£200  dow'n  and  £10  annually,  and  make  over  to  her  two  beds 
and  other  household  goods  in  lieu  of  her  dower;  also  to  pay 
£100  to  brother-in-law  John  Babcock  and  w^ife  Mary,  and 
brother-in-law  Samuel  Clark  and  wife  Ann. 

His  will,  dated  Aug.  3,  1747,  probated  Dec.  29,  1747,  ap- 
points son  William  executor.  Among  other  provisions  his 
executor  is  bidden  "to  care  for  my  ancient  mother  if  she  out- 
lives me." 

Children : 

William,  b.  May  31,  1702. 
Jeffrey,  b.  Mar.  6,  1704. 

Joseph,  b.  . 

Samuel,  b.  . 

Joshua,  b.  . 

James,  b.  . 

Susannah,  b. ;   m. Stanton. 

The  foregoing  records  taken  chiefly  from  Clarke  Genealogy 
bv  Cvrus  Clark  Van  Deventer. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  27 

19.  Ann^  Champlin,    dau.    of    Capt.    William    and    Mary 
(Babcock)  Champlin  (James   ist),  m.  Jan.    19,    1698-9. 

Samnel,   son  of  Joseph,  Jr.,  and   Bethiah    (Hubbard)    Clark, 
I).  Sept.  29,  1672. 
Children : 

Samuel,  1).  Jan.,  1699-1700. 
Mary,  b.  Nov.  27,  1701. 
Bethiah,  b.  Aug.  29,   1705. 
Joseph,  b.  Aug.  29,  1705. 
Ann,  b.  Sept.  3,  1707. 
William,  b.  May  21,  1709. 
James,  b.  Jan.  20,  1710-1. 
Joshua,  b.  Sept.  22,  1712. 
Amos,  b.  Nov.  14,  1714. 
Simeon,  b.  Apr.  7,   1716. 
Christopher,  b.  Oct.  26,  1717. 

20.  Abigail,^    Babcock,     dau.     of     Joseph     and     Hannah 

(Coates)    Babcock    (James    ist),   b.  Stonington,    Conn., 
Apr.  20,   1 731;    m.  Christopher,  son  of  Lieut.  Ebenezer  and 
Phebe   (Denison)   Billings,  of  Stonington,  b.  there  Feb.    10, 
1723.     She  was  his  second  wife. 
Children : 

Anna,  b.  Aug.  26,  1759. 
John,  b.  Apr.  8,  1761. 
Joseph,  b.  Apr.  18,  1763. 
Jonas,  b.  Feb.  15,  1765. 

21.  Joseph^  Babcock.  son  of  Joseph  and  second  wife,  Han- 
nah  (Coates)   Babcock   (James   ist),  b.  Oct.    15,   1733, 

was  a  Revolutionary  soldier;  m.  Dec.  28,  1755,  Mrs.  Mary 
Bently. 

It  is  evident  from  the  following  clause  of  the  will  of  Joseph 
Babcock,  Sr.,  that  Joseph,  Jr.,  was  deceased  prior  to  the  date 
of  the  will,  1760.  The  will  mentions  "granddaughter,  Mary 
Babcock,  dau.  of  mv  son  Joseph  Babcock,  deceased." 

Child : 

Mary,  b.  Jan.  8,  1757. 

22.  Jambs'*  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Capt.  James  and  Elizabeth 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  23,  1688; 

d.  Stonington,  now  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  9,  1731 ;  m.  in 
Milton,  Mass.,  June  12,  1706,  by  Mr.  Peter  Thatcher,  pastor, 
Sarah  Vose,  dau.  of  Edward  and  Abigail  Vose,  b.   Milton, 
Aug.  30,  1684,  d.  in  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  25,  1758. 
Her  father,  Edward  Vose,  was  b.  in  England  in  1636,  and 


28  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

(1.  in  Milton,  Mass.,  Jan.  29,  1716.  Abigail,  the  mother  of 
Sarah  Vose,  d.  in  Milton,  May  18,  17 12,  aged  sixty-five 
years.  Her  grandfather,  Robert  Vose,  b.  in  Lancaster, 
England,  about  1599,  came  to  America  with  his  three  sons, 
Edward,  Thomas,  and  Henry,  and  bought  land  in  Milton, 
Mass.,  July  13,  1654. 

James  and  his  wife,  Sarah,  settled  upon  a  farm  in  that  part 
of  Stonington,  Conn.,  which  is  now  Pendleton  Hill,  N.  Ston- 
ington.  It  was  owned  by  his  father.  Capt.  James  Babcock, 
and  was  afterward  found  to  lie  partly  in  Stonington  and 
partly  in  Voluntown.  Much  of  the  land  was  retained  in  the 
family  for  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  years.  James  and 
wife,  Sarah,  joined  Stonington  Church  (Congregational), 
Rev.  James  Noyes,  pastor,  Aug.  8,  1708,  and  left  with  others 
to  form  the  N.  Stonington  Church,  1727.  Records  of  births, 
deaths,  and  baptisms  found  on  town  and  church  records. 

James  d.  in  the  forty-third  year  of  his  age,  and  was  buried 
on  the  farm,  upon  which  he  lived ;  later  his  widow,  children, 
and  grandchildren  were  buried  near  him.  The  burying  ground 
having  become  overgrown  with  bushes  and  briars,  and  being 
in  a  desolate,  neglected  spot  remote  from  the  highway.  Col. 
Andrew  J.  Balxock,  of  Springfield,  111.,  and  the  writer,  in  the 
fall  of  1900,  caused  the  graves  of  James  and  his  wife,  their 
sons  Oliver  and  Timothy,  and  their  wives,  to  be  removed  to  a 
well-kept  cemetery  near  the  Pendleton  Hill  meetinghouse, 
which  was  about  a  half  mile  from  the  original  burying  ground. 

All  of  these  bodies  were  found  to  be  in  a  measure  preserved, 
although  one  of  them  had  lain  in  the  ground  about  one  hun- 
dred and  seventy  years.  Ten  years  previous  to  this  removal 
the  graves  of  Capt.  Oliver  Babcock,  grandson  of  James  and 
Sarah,  and  that  of  Oliver's  brother  Joshua  and  wife  had  been 
removed  to  the  same  cemetery,  at  Pendleton  Hill. 

Children : 

55  James,''  b.   May  29,    1708;    m.   Phebe   Swan. 

56  Nathaniel,  b.  Mar.  6,  1709-10;    m.  Sarah  BilHngs. 

57  Elias,  b.  Feb.  20,  171 1-2;    m.  Anna  Plumb. 

Sarah,   baptized   Jan.    11,    1714;     birth   not   recorded   on    Stonington 
records,  but  baptism  recorded  on  church  records. 

58  Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  25,   1715;    m.  John  Davidson. 
Martha,  b.  Mar.,  1717;   d.  Apr.  18,  1717. 

59  Isaiah,    b.    Jan.    29,    1719;     m.    Elizabeth    Plumb.      The    records    of 

the  descendants  of  Isaiah  will  appear  in  this  volume  carefully  pre- 
pared by  Mr.  A.  Emerson  Babcock  of  Brighton.  N.  Y. 

60  Oliver,  b.  July  27,   1720;    m.  Anna  Avery. 

61  Grace,  b.  Dec.  31,  1722;    m.  Samuel  Plumb. 

62  Timothy,  b.  Oct.  12,  1724;    m.   (i)  Lois  Billings;    m.   (2)  Thankful 

Read. 


n 

00 


o 
o 

-t 


"< 


^  7= 


O       ^_^ 


O 

o 


en 


o 

=   > 


^    O)     oq    O 

-t  '-t 

n 


V)      ^     < — I 


o    :i 


^   <      -^ 


►+1  ro 


o  . 


2   :d 
O 

o    O 
P    71 


r 

o 

2 


r 

o 
o 


?5 

75     2 


V 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  29 

23.  Elizabeth"*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Capt.  James  and  Eliza- 
beth Babcock    (John,  James   ist),  b.   Westerly,  Feb.  8, 

1 69 1,  m.  1 7 10  (?),  Elder  Thomas  Clark,  son  of  Joseph  and 
Bethiah  (Hubbard)  Clark,  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  17,  1686,  and  d. 
there  Nov.  26,  1767. 

For  the  last  seventeen  years  of  his  life  he  was  assistant  pas- 
tor of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  in  Westerly,  now  the  First  S.  D.  B. 
Church  of  Hopkinton. 

Elder  Thomas  Clark  was  buried  in  the  Clark  burying 
ground  in  \\'esterly,  near  the  bank  of  tlie  Pawcatuck  Rjver, 
about  half  a  mile  alx)ve  the  "meetinghouse  bridge."  Later 
his  remains  were  removed  to  the  site  formerly  occupied  by  the 
"meetinghouse"  in  which  he  preached,  and  his  name  is  in- 
scribed upon  "The  Ministers'  Monument,"  erected  in  1899 
upon  the  same  site. 

Children,  recorded  in  W'^esterly : 

Sarah,  b.  Alaj'  11.  1712;    m.  Nov.  26,  1730,  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Edward 

Burdick. 
Thomas,  b.  Mar.  4,  1715;    m.  May  27,  1740.  Thankful  Violet.     By 

the  will  of  his  grandfather,  Capt.  James  Babcock,  he  received  a 

tract  of  land. 

63  Joshua,^  b.  Apr.  26.  1717;    m.  Hannah  Cottrell. 
James,  b.  Mar.  3,   1720. 

Joseph,  b.  Oct.  ID,  1728;    m.  June  16,  1752,  Deborah  Pendelton. 

24.  Samuel"*   Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  James  and  Elizabeth 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Feb.  15,  1697; 

m.  May  15,  1723,  Ann,  dau.  of  Caleb  Pendleton,  bap.  Aug.  22, 
1703.     (Mass.  Genealogical  and  Historical  Society,  vol.  xv.) 

Samuel  was  admitted  freeman  in  Westerly,  Oct.,  1721.  By 
his  father's  will  he  received  two  hundred  acres  of  land,  being 
a  part  of  the  homestead  farm  in  Westerly. 

Children,  all  born  and  recorded  in  Westerly : 

64  Nathan. Ml.  Nov.  25.  1726;    m.  (i)  Deborah  Stafford;    ni.   (2)  Eliza- 

beth Brown:    m.  (3)  Anne  Lewis;    ni.   (4)  Dorcas  Babcock. 

65  Elizabeth,  b.  May  6,  1729;    m.  John  Burdick. 

66  Samuel,  Jr.,  b.  Alay  16,  1731 ;    m.  ]\Iary  Smith. 
Andrew,  b.  Apr.   12,  1733. 

Silas,  b.  Dec.  31,  1735. 

Thankful,  b.  1736;    m.  Caleb  Barber  of  Richmond,  R.  T. 

25.  Daniel*   Babcock,  son  of  Capt.   James  and   Elizabeth 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Apr.  23,  1699, 

d.  Westerl3^  1740;  inventory  recorded  Sept.  i,  1740;  m. 
1723  (?),  Abigail  Thompson,  b.  Jan.  i,  1701,  dau.  of  Isaac 
and  Mary  (Holmes)  Thompson.  He  was  made  a  freeman 
Oct.,  1721. 


30  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

By  his  father's  will,  he  received  a  farm  of  two  hundred 
acres,  a  lot  one  hundred  feet  wide  on  the  Pawcatuck  River, 
and  certain  personal  property. 

Children,  recorded  on  Westerly  Records : 

67  Isaac."  b.  Apr.  24,   1724;    m.   Mary  Wordeii. 

68  William,  b.    Mar.    11.    1725-6;    m.    Patience   Cottrcll. 

69  Joshua,  b.  Dec.  7,  1728;    m.  Sarah  Berry. 

70  Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  1.3,  1730-1  ;    m.  Nathan  Smith. 

71  James,  b.  June  2,  1733;    ni.  Mary  Satterlee. 
Daniel,  b.  Mar.  14,  1735. 

^2  Elkanah,  b.  Aug.  21,  1738;    m.  Esther  Crandall. 

These  births  were  entered  on  p.  74  of  W,  T.  R.,  Dec.  ly, 
1738,  by  William  Babcock,  Town  Clerk. 

26.  Anna^    Babcock,   dau.   of   Capt.   James   and   Elizabeth 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Nov.  29,  1701  ; 

d.  May  13,  1731;  m.  (i)  about  1717,  to -Elder  Joseph  Clark, 
Jr.,  son  of  Joseph  and  Bethiah  (Hitbbard)  Clark  (and  brother 
of  Elder  Thomas  Clark,  who  m.  Elizabeth,  eldest  daughter 
of  Capt.  James  Babcock).  Elder  Joseph  Clark  w^as  b.  at 
Westerly,  R.  I.,  Apr.  14,  1670,  d.  Westerly,  17 19.  He  was 
an  assistant  elder  in  Westerly  S.  D.  B.  Church. 

His  burial,  the  removal  of  his  grave,  and  the  inscrijition  of 
his  name  upon  "The  Ministers'  Monument"  was  the  same  as 
that  of  his  brother  Thomas,  and  is  fully  described  in  the  rec- 
ords of  Thomas. 

Joseph's  first  wife  was  Dorothy  Maxson. 

Anna  (Babcock)  Clark  m.  (2)  Mar.  23,  1731  (two  months 
before  her  death),  Silas  Greenman. 

By  her  first  husband  she  had  one  son,  Elisha^  Clark,  b.  Nov. 
17,  1718,  m.  Mary  Potter  (?). 

27.  Dr.  Joshua^  Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  James  and  Elizabeth 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  May  17,  1707; 

d.  Westerly,  Apr.  i,  1783;  m.  (i)  Aug.  11,  1735,  Hannah, 
dau.  of  Joseph  Stanton  (granddaughter  of  Thomas  Stanton, 
Sr.,  who  was  an  Indian  interpreter),  b.  Stonington,  1714,  d. 
Sept.  19,  1778;  m.  (2)  May  28,  1780,  Ann,  dau.  of  Elder  John 
and  Tacy  (Rogers)  Maxson,  of  Newport.  (She  was  a  great- 
granddaughter  of  Elder  John  Maxson.  b.  1638,  who  was  the 
first  white  child  born  on  the  island  of  Rhode  Island,  and  who 
was  the  first  pastor  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Westerly,  R.  I.) 
Ann  Babcock  d.  Aug.  25.  1812,  aged  seventy-one  years.  She 
was  buried  in  what  is  now  the  First  Hopkinton  Cemetery.  Her 
grave  is  a  few  rods  northwest  of  "The  Ministers'  Monument." 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  31 

Joshua  Babcock  graduated  at  Yale  College  in  the  class  of 
1724,  and  was  the  first  graduate  of  this  college  from  Rhode 
Island.  Soon  after  his  graduation  he  began  the  study  of  medi- 
cine and  surgery  in  Boston,  and  about  1730  went  to  London 
to  attend  the  hospitals  there.  On  his  return  he  settled  in 
Westerly  (being  admitted  a  freeman  of  the  colony  Apr. 
30,  1734),  and  for  nearly  twenty-five  years  practiced  his 
profession  extensively.  He  also  opened  a  retail  country  store, 
which  it  is  said  did  as  much  business  as  any  like  establish- 
ment between  Boston  and  New  York,  and  thus  increased  his 
already  large  estate.  He  represented  his  town  in  the  Colonial 
Legislature  in  the  years  1740,  '47,  '49,  '52,  '58,  '59,  '72>^  '76, 
and  '78,  serving  repeatedly  as  Speaker. 

He  was  Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Colony 
from  May,  1747,  to  May,  1749,  and  from  May,  1750,  to  May, 
1764.  In  this  capacity  he  pronounced  the  sentence  of  death 
upon  Thomas  Carter  for  the  murder  of  Jackson.  He  w^as  one 
of  the  original  corporators  of  Brown  University,  in  1764,  and 
continued  on  the  Board  of  Fellows  until  his  death.  He  is 
recorded  in  the  History  of  the  University  as  a  Seventh  Day 
Baptist.  He  was  connected  with  that  Church  early  in  life, 
but  later  became  a  Unitarian  in  his  religious  belief. 

The  large  and  elegant  mansion  which  he  owned  is  still 
standing  (1903)  upon  Quarry  Hill  in  the  village  of  Westerly. 

Benjamin  Franklin,  when  on  his  official  tours  through  the 
country  as  Postmaster-General,  frequently  made  Dr.  Bab- 
cock's  house  his  resting  place.  Tradition  says  that  the  favorite 
sport  of  the  two  men  was  catching  blackfish  from  the  ocean, 
a  few  miles  from  Dr.  Babcock's  house,  at  a  place  then  called 
Noyes  Rocks,  now  known  as  Weekapaug.  The  place  is  still 
a  favorite  fishing  ground. 

Dr.  Franklin  established  the  first  post  office  in  the  tow^n 
in  1776,  and  appointed  Dr.  Babcock  Postmaster.  The  re- 
ceipts of  the  office  for  this  year  were  £1  3^.  Sd.  Prior  to  the 
Revolution  the  nearest  post  office  w^as  New  London,  Conn., 
twenty  miles  distant. 

It  is  said  that  George  Washington  when  passing  between 
New  York  and  Boston  stopped  more  than  once  at  the  home 
of  Dr.  Joshua. 

Before  the  Revolution  Dr.  Babcock  was  closely  identified 
with  the  colonists  w'ho  expressed  dissatisfaction  with  the  tyr- 
anny of  Great  Britain  and  who  demanded  greater  liberty  for 
the  people.  He  was  one  of  the  signers  of  the  Declaration  of 
Independence  passed  by  the  Legislature  of  Rhode  Island  more 


32  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

than  two  months  prior  to  July  4,  1776.  (Arnold's  Hist,  of 
R.  I.) 

In  May,  1775,  Joshua  Babcock  was  appointed  to  carry  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Rhode  Island  Assembly  to  Connecticut.  In 
Nov.,  1775,  by  Act  of  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island, 
he  was  appointed  Major  General  of  the  Colony's  forces.  This 
position  he  held  until  Dec,  1776,  when  he  was  appointed  as 
a  member  of  the  Council  of  War.  He  was  reappointed  to  the 
latter  position  in  the  years  1778  and  1779. 

The  Rhode  Island  records  of  Revolutionary  times  show  that 
no  man  was  more  active  in  the  service  of  his  country,  or  held 
more  responsible  positions,  than  did  Dr.  Joshua  Babcock.  A 
history  of  his  remarkable  career  and  merits  would  fill  an  in- 
teresting volume. 

His  remains  were  buried  near  the  graves  of  his  parents  in 
the  ancient  Babcock  burial  ground  of  Westerly.  A  large  and 
finely  sculptured  tablet  covers  his  grave.  The  inscription  is 
as  follows : 

This  Stone 
covers  the  mortal  part 

OF 

THE  HON.  JOSHUA  BABCOCK, 

OF  Westerly, 

Who  died  April  i,  1783, 

Aged  75  years. 

His  ability  and  integrity 

As  a  statesman. 

In  the  discharge  of  several 

Important  offices  of  trust, 

the  public  records 

of  his  country 

testify. 

As  do  all  who  knew  piim. 

As  a  physician. 

He  was  eminent 

In  his  profession  ; 

As  a  Christian,  . 

Exemplary; 

As  A  gentleman, 

Polite  and  enga<jing; 

as  a  husband  and  father, 

Master  and  friend, 

Worthy  of  imitation. 


■^■H 

S^'*              m^                      ^^^^^^^^^H 

a^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H 

^^^H 

^^^^^^9 

•^                       M 

MRS.    HANNAH    (STANTON)    BABCOCK 

(Wife  of  Joshua  Babcock). 

1714-1778. 

From  a  portrait  !)y  J.  Blackburn,  of  London,  1757.  owned  1)y 

Miss  Mary  E.  Pray,  of  Dover,  N.   H. 

Page  30. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  33 

Children,  recurded  in  Westerly: 

JT,  Col.   Henry,'  b.   May  25,    1736;    m.   Mary   Stanton. 

74  Luke,  1).  July  6,  1738;    ni.  Grace  Isaacs. 

75  Adam,  b.  Sept.  27,   1740;    m.    (i).  Abigail   Smith;    m.    (2)    Martha 

Hubbard. 

76  Hannah,  b.  Jan.  22,  1742-3;    m.  John  Bours. 

77  Frances  Nancy,  b.  May  11.  174.S;   m.  Commodore  Dudley  Saltonstall. 
Paul.  b.  Dec.  5,  1748. 

Amelia,  b.  Apr.  19.  1751. 
Sarah  (Sally),. b.  Oct.  18,  1753- 
Harriet,  b.  May  18,  1756. 

28.  Anne^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Capt.  James  and  Content  (Max- 

son)  Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  30, 
1732;  d.  Stonington,  Nov.  7,  1768;  m.  at  Westerly,  Dec.  15, 
1756,  Capt.  Simon  Rhodes,  probably  son  of  William  and 
Sarah  (Mansfield)  Rhodes.  William  was  a  mariner  of  New- 
port, R.  I.  Ann  Babcock's  great-grandson,  Hon.  Henry  L. 
Green,  of  River  Point,  R.  I.,  says  Anne  was  m.  at  Trinity 
Church,  Newport,  R.  I.  Capt.  Simon  Rhodes  was  b.  Jan.  24, 
1 7 16,  d.  Apr.  22,  1784.  He  was  a  graduate  of  Yale  College 
in  the  Class  of  1737.  He  m.  (2),  Aug.  27,  1769,  Martha 
Balx:ock,  dau.  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Susanna  (Potter)  Babcock. 

Anne  and  her  husband  settled  in  Stonington  about  a  mile 
west  of  the  village  of  Westerly,  on  land  which  she  and  her 
brother  Jonathan  inherited  from  their  father  by  his  will.  The 
contract  of  division  between  Capt.  Rhodes,  his  wife  Ann,  and 
her  brother  Jonathan  is  dated  July  9,  1759,  and  is  found  in 
Stonington  records. 

Capt.  Simon  Rhodes,  his  wife,  and  four  of  their  children 
were  baptized  in  the  Stonington  Congregational  Church, 
1761-69. 

Children,  recorded  in  Stonington: 

James,  b.  Stonington,  Nov.  4.   1757;    d.  July  15,  1761. 

78  Mary,*  b.  Dec.  11,  1758;     m.  Lieut.  Robert  Rogers. 

79  Simon,  b.  June  22.  1760;   m.  Sally  Woodbridge. 

80  Henry,  b.  Apr.  25,  1762;    m.  Foster. 

Anne,  b.  Sept.  18.  1761  ;    d.  Feb.  9,  1789;    m.  Benjamin  TTimting.  of 
Long  Lsland,  Nov.  6,  1784. 

81  Abigail,  b.  Oct.  27.  1768;    m.  Col.  Job  Greene. 

29.  Col.  James^  Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  James  and  Content 
(Maxson)    Babcock    (John,    James    ist),    b.    Westerly. 

R.  I.,  Nov.  I,  1734;  d.  Westerly,  Sept.,  1781,  of  camp  fever 
contracted  while  serving  in  the  army;  m.  (i)  Dec.  2,  1754, 
Sarah  Stanton,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Hester  (Gallup)  Stanton, 
b.  in  Stonington.  1719.  (Wheeler.)  James  m.  (2)  at  Stoning- 
3 


34  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

ton,  Aug.  27,  1769,  Joanna  McDowell,  dau.  of  James  and 
Lucy  (Stanton)  McDowell.  She  d.  1820,  aged  eighty- 
four  (?). 

James,  was  but  little  more  than  two  years  old  when  his 
father  died.  His  father  made  ample  provision  for  him  in  his 
will.  That  instrument  provided  that  Dr.  Joshua  (his  half- 
brother),  the  executor,  should  also  Ije  guardian  to  the  minor 
children :  "My  said  Exec.  Shall  take  my  said  son  James  when 
he  shall  arrive  at  the  age  of  five  years  &  put  him  to  school 
&  when  he  is  qualified  ye  Enter  ye  College  then  to  Enter 
him  into  the  college  there  to  be  educated  until  he  be  commis- 
sioned twice  according  to  custom." 

This  provision  of  the  will  was  faithfully  executed.  "Son 
James"  graduated  at  Yale  College,  Class  of  1752,  at  the  age 
of  eighteen  years.  Later  he  was  educated  as  a  medical  doc- 
tor, studying  with  Dr.  Joshua. 

He  was  admitted  a  freeman  in  May,  1757.  He  represented 
Westerly  in  the  General  Assembly  in  the  years  1762,  '64,  'yy, 
'78.  He  was  Major  of  the  Kings  County  Militia  Regiment 
in  1764,  '66,  '68,  and  in  '74  and  '75  was  its  Lieutenant  Col- 
onel. He  was  a  Baptist,  and  for  many  years  prior  to  his  death 
was  clerk  of  the  so-called  Hill  Church  in  Westerly. 

Prior  to  and  during  the  Revolutionary  War  town  meetings 
were  frequently,  sometimes  monthly,  held  in  Westerly.  Rec- 
ords show  that  Col.  James  Babcock  was  a  prominent  factor  in 
all  these  meetings. 

That  the  intense  patriotism  of  its  citizens  was  manifest  is 
proven  by  the  fact  that  a  Declaration  of  Independence  was 
passed  by  the  Rhode  Island  Legislature,  receiving  the  unan- 
imous vote  of  the  Upper  House  and  fifty-four  out  of  sixty  in 
the  House  of  Deputies,  two  months  before  the  passage  of  the 
famous  Declaration  of  Independence,  July  4,  1776.  Westerly 
was  then  represented  by  Joseph  Noyes  and  Joshua  Babcock, 
a  brother  of  Col.  James. 

The  following  items  were  taken  from  town  meeting  reports : 

At  a  town  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  of  Westerly  held 
Feb.  2,  1774  (which  was  the  largest  ever  held  in  town),  very 
patriotic  resolutions  were  adopted  without  a  dissenting  vote 
expressing  their  sentiments  regarding  the  manifest  usurpation 
and  oppression  of  the  colonies  by  the  mother  country. 

Major  James  Babcock  and  his  brother  Joshua  were  two  of 
a  committee  of  five  appointed  at  this  meeting  "to  correspond 
with  all  other  committees  appointed  by  any  town  in  this  or 
other  colonies;    and  the  committee  is   directed  to   give  the 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  35 

closest  attention  to  evervthin"-  which  concerns  the  hberties  of 
America;  and  if  any  tea.  subject  to  a  duty,  should  be  im- 
ported into  this  town,  or  anything  else  attempted  injurious  to 
liberty,  the  committee  is  directed  and  empowered  to  call  a 
special  town  meeting  forthwith  that  such  measures  may  be 
taken  as  the  public  safety  may  require." 

At  a  town  meeting  held  Sept.  18,  1776,  Col.  Joseph  Noyes 
and  Col.  James  Ba1x:ock  were  appointed  a  committee  with 
power  "to  purchase  or  impress  into  the  service  blankets,  arms, 
etc.  The  men  were  to  be  equip])ed  as  aforesaid,  and  supplied 
with  two  days'  rations,  by  12  of  the  clock  to-morrow\" 

At  a  town  meeting  held  Nov.  29.  1776,  voted  that  Col. 
James  Babcock  and  Joseph  Crandall  be  appointed  to  go  to  the 
island  of  Rhode  Island  according  to  the  Act  of  the  General 
Assembly. 

June  3.  1777.  Col.  James  Babccjck  chosen  Captain  of  the 
Train  of  Artillery.    (\V.  and  W.) 

His  will,  dated  Sept.  17,  1781,  was  offered  for  probate  the 
eighth  of  the  following  month,  and  was  recorded  in  Westerly. 
By  its  terms  he  disposed  of  his  homestead  farm  in  Westerly, 
and  of  a  farm  in  Stonington,  which  appears  to  have  been 
owned  by  his  then  living  wife,  Joanna.  In  order  to  provide 
money  for  his  debts  and  funeral  charges,  his  will  directs  that 
"my  Negro  man  Humphrey,  one  of  my  best  cows,  my  oxen, 
horse,  and  sheep  ...  be  sold."  Among  other  legacies  to  his 
wife,  Joanna,  he  gave  "my  Negro  woman  Chloe  and  my  best 
cow." 

Children,  dates  recorded  in  ^V.  T.  R. : 

82  Amelia,®  b.  1755;    m.  Nathan  Pendleton. 

83  Simon,  b.  Feb.  27,  1758;    m.  Hannah  Cbaniplin. 

Sarah,  b.  Mar.  25.  1764;  ni.  Sylvester  Gavitt,  son  of  Benijah  and 
Lois  (Pendleton)  Gavitt.  She  d.  June  16.  1787.  Had  one  child, 
Lois,  b.  Nov.  8,  1783;    m.  Sherman  Barber. 

Children  of  second  wife,  Joanna  : 

84  Joanna,  b.  June  10,  1770;    m.  Joseph  Wilbur,  Jr. 
James,  b.  Dec.   10,   1771  ;    d.  unm. 

Ezra,  b.  May  13,  1773;    d.  unm. 

Charlotte,  b.  Nov.  30,  1775;    d.  unm. 

Ann  (Nancy),  b.  Dec.  19,  1778;    m.  215  Capt.  Daniel  Babcock. 

30.     Jonathan'*   Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  James  and    (Con- 
tent Maxson)   Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
Oct.    II,    1736;    lost  at  sea   in  a  passage   from   Stonington, 
Conn.,  to  his  home  in  Boston,  1767;   m.  1753,  Esther,  dau.  of 


36  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Gov.  Robert  Hazzard.  She  was  b.  Dec.  7,  1732,  d.  Mar.  25, 
1 83 1.  Esther  Hazzard's  grandfather,  Jonathan  Nichols,  was 
Deputy  Governor  of  Rhode  Island  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
"^  1757-  Her  great-grandfather  Nichols  was  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor when  he  died,  1727.  Her  great-great-grandparents, 
Thomas  and  Hannah  Nichols,  emigrated  from  Wales  to  the 
island  of  Barbados,  and  soon  afterward,  about  1650,  they 
emigrated  to  Rhode  Island. 

Jonathan  Babcock  was  about  three  months  old  when  his 
father  died.  He  graduated  from  Yale  College  in  1755,  was 
a  Lieutenant  in  1756.  Hazzard  Genealogy  says  he  was  a 
Captain  in  the  English  army  and  distinguished  himself  in 
the  French  and  Indian  War,  and  that  he  was  with  Gen. 
Wolfe,  under  Gen.  Amherst,  at  the  taking  of  Louisburg,  July 

7.  1758- 

Jared  Star  Babcock,  of  2083  Fifth  Avenue,  a  great-grand- 
son of  Jonathan,  wrote  (1902)  that  Jonathan  was  Lieutenant 
Colonel  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg,  and  that  he  has  a  copy  of 
Jonathan's  commission  as  Lieutenant  in  the  Provincial  troops 
raised  to  cooperate  with  the  royal  troops  in  the  expedition 
against  Plattsburg,  and  that  he  has  the  diploma  (A.B.)  given 
by  Yale  College  to  Jonathan  in  1755. 

Soon  after  the  close  of  the  war  Jonathan  with  his  family 
removed  to  Boston,  where  he  was  engaged  in  business.  He 
was  amply  provided  for  by  his  father's  will.  Among  other 
legacies  he  received  a  two-thirds  interest  in  a  large  farm  about 
a  mile  west  of  Westerly  village.  The  farm  was  afterward 
known  as  the  Simon  Rhodes  farm.  His  half-brother,  Dr. 
Joshua  Babcock,  was  his  guardian. 

Children : 

Esther,  b.  June  23,  1759;    m.  Nathan  Brand. 

85  Jonathan,^  b.  May  30,  1761  ;    m.  Ruth  Rodman. 

86  Robert  H.,  b.  Dec.  13,   1763;    m.  Mary  Hazzard. 
Hannah,  b.  Feb.  11,  1766. 

31.  IcHABOD'*  Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  John  and  Mary 
(Champlin)  Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  Nov.  21,  1703;  m.  Dec.  i,  1731.  his  cousin,  48  Jemima'* 
Babcock,  dan.  of  Joseph  and  Rebecca  (Stanton)  Babcock. 
Jemima's  father,  Joseph,  was  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Lawton) 
Babcock  (James  ist).  Ichabod  was  appointed  administrator 
of  his  mother's  estate  Nov.  25,  1760.  In  July,  1768,  Ichabod 
Babcock  and  his  wife,  Jemima,  were  members  of  the  S.  D.  B. 
Church  in  Westerly,  now  Ashaway,  R.  I.     (A.  V.  R.,  vol.  x.) 


DR.    JOSHUA    BABCOCK    (Chief    Justice). 
I 707- I 783. 

From  a  portrait  b}-  J.  Blackburn,  of  London,  1757.  owned  l)y 

Rev.  S.  S.  Mathews,  D.D.,  Daniel  son.  Conn. 

Page  30. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  2>7 

Ichabod  Babcock,  Sr.,  was  Lieutenant  First  Company  West- 
erly Militia  1734-36.      (Smith.) 
Children: 

87  Ichabod,'  Jr.,  I1.  Dec.  12,  1731 ;     m.  E.sther  Stanton. 
Mary,  b.  May  9,  173.^;    m.  Joseph  Davis. 

88  Josepii,  b.  Fel).  3,  1735-6;    in.   (i)   Hannah  Chaniplin;    in.   (2)   Han- 

nah Ross. 

89  John,  b.  July  27,  1739;    d.  Oct.  27,  1798;    m.  Lucy  . 

32.  Stephen'*  Babcock,  better  known  as  Elder  Stephen,  son 
of  Capt.  John  and  Mary  (Champlin)  Bal)crx:k  (John, 
James  ist),  b.  in  Westerly,  Alay  2,  1706;  d.  Westerly,  Dec. 
22,  1775;  m.  Oct.  12,  1726,  Anna,  dan.  of  Isaac  and  Mary 
Thompson,  b.  Westerly,  Sept.  4,  1707.  She  d.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Jan.  10,  1775.  vStephen  was  made  a  freeman  Feb.,  1729- 
30;  was  a  Justice  of  the  Peace  1735-38,  and  is  often  referred 
to  as  Justice  Stephen  Babcock. 

Records  of  the  First  Congregational  Church  of  Stonington 
show  that  he  and  his  wife  were  members  of  that  church  before 
they  became  members  of  Elder  Parks  Presbyterian  Church 
of  Westerly,  May  5,  1742.  He  was  a  deacon  in  the  Elder 
Parks  Church. 

About  1750  a  religious  sect  known  as  the  New  Lights  had 
sprung  up.  Their  doctrines  seemed  to  have  been  embraced 
by  Stephen,  as  he  withdrew  from  Elder  Parks  Church,  was 
rebaptized,  and  on  Apr.  5,  1750,  a  meeting  was  held  at  his 
house,  at  which  "The  Church  of  Christ  in  Stonington  and 
Vv'esterly  in  LInion"  was  organized  and  he  was  ordained  its 
.  first  pastor.  This  church  remained  a  distinct  organization  for 
nearly  a  hundred  years,  and  wdien  its  members  were  finally 
scattered  many  of  them  united  with  the  Baptist  Church,  others 
with  the  Christian  Qiurch,  in  the  village  of  Westerly. 

In  the  early  part  of  Elder  Stephen's  pastorate,  a  church 
edifice  was  erected  which  was  afterward  known  as  the  Bab- 
cock Meetinghouse,  as  its  first  four  pastors  were  Babcocks. 
The  house  was  standing  in  1900,  upon  a  high  hill,  not  far 
from  "the  Dr.  Joshua  Babcock  house."  It  is  often  called  "the 
Hill  Meetinghouse." 

During  his  pastorate  the  New  Light  churches  became  very 
numerous  in  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  and  parts  of  ]\Iassa- 
chusetts.  and  Elder  Stephen  Babcock  seems  to  have  been  one 
of  their  most  distinguished  pastors.  He  continued  to  serve 
his  cIuutIi  as  pastor  until  his  death,  his  service  covering  a 
period  of  alx)ut  twenty-five  years.  His  son  Elder  Oliver  suc- 
ceeded him  as  pa.stor. 


3^  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Chiklren,  records  partly  from  A.  V.  R.,  partly  from  family 
records : 

John,    b.    July     i6,     1727;     m.    Mar.    8,     1753,    Abigail     Pearcc    of 

Richmond   (?). 
Anna,  b.  Jan.  30,  1729;    m.  Westerly,  Jan.  t8,  1749-50,  Joseph  Davis. 

She  d.  Aug.  11,  1750;    left  a  child  4  days  old. 

90  Mary,''  b.   Nov.    12,    1730;    m.  Joseph  Davis. 
Lucy,  b.  Dec.  8,  1732;    d.  young. 

Lucretia,  b.  Nov.  2,  1734;  m.  Westerly,  July  21,  1757,  James'  Bab- 
cock. He  was  a  son  of  55  James  and  Phebe  (Swan)  Babcock,  of 
Stonington. 

Stephen,  b.  Sept.  i,  1736;  m.  Aug.  21,  1766,  Prudence  (?),  dau,  of 
Amos  and  Martha  (Gallup)  Denison,  b.  Stonington,  Mar.  20, 
1748.  "May,  1777,  the  Assembly  of  Conn,  appointed  Stephen,  Jr.,  to 
be  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  the  County  of  New  London.  He  was 
reappointed   May.    1778."      (State  of  Conn.,   by   Hoadley.) 

91  Rev.  Oliver,  b.  July  2y,  1738;    m.  Sylvia  Belcher. 
Amey,  b.  July  19,  1740. 

Thankful,  b.  Nov.  17,  1747;    d.  Apr.  29,   1749. 
Thankful,  b.  Apr.  13,  1750. 

33.  William"*  Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  John  and  Mary 
(Champlin)  Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  Apr.  15,  1708;  d.  Westerly,  Jan.  15,  1750-51;  m.  at 
Seabrook  (now  Saybrook),  Conn.,  Ang.  11,  1730,  Sarah 
Denison,  eldest  child  of  Samuel  and  Mary  (Minor)  Denison, 
b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Jan.  6,  1710.  She  m.  (2)  Stephen 
Chalker,  or  Chaucer,  of  Saybrook,  Conn.,  and  was  his  fouth 
wife.  Stephen  Chalker's  will,  dated  1773,  mentions  daughter, 
Mehitable  Babcock,  wife  of  Christopher  Babcock,  of  Westerly. 

John  Babcock,  William's  father,  held  the  office  of  Town 
Clerk  from  William's  boyhood  until  1732,  at  which  time  he, 
resigned,  and  William  was  elected  to  the  office  and  continued 
to  hold  the  office  until  his  death,  about  twenty  years.  He  was 
a  farmer,  and  w^as  a  freeman  in  1735.  It  is  presumed  he  was 
the  William  Babcock  that  represented  Westerly  in  the  General 
Assembly  of  Rhode  Island  in  the  year  1744.  He  was  a 
Justice  of  the  Peace. 

The  will  of  William  Babcock,  dated  Jan.  4,  1750-51,  eleven 
days  before  his  death,  was  proved  and  ordered  recorded  in 
Westerly,  Feb.  4,  1750-51.  The  will  directs  that  the  west 
half  of  the  farm  be  sold  to  pay  debts  and  legacies.  It  also 
states,  "I  give  and  l^equeath  unto  my  dear  and  beloved  wife 
the  use  and  profit  of  all  the  Remainder  of  my  estate  for  the 
bringing  up  of  my  small  children,  until  my  small  sons  be  fit 
to  go  to  trades."  To  sons  Joshua  and  Christopher  he  gives 
"all  the  remaining  part  of  my  homestead  farm,  equally  to  be 
devided  between  them."     He  gives  to  son  Phineas  when  he 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  39 

becomes  of  age  £100,  to  be  paid  by  son  Joshua;  also  gives 
£100  to  son  Samuel,  when  of  age,  to  be  paid  by  son  Christo- 
pher. He  gives  to  son  EHas  "that  Lott  of  land  that  was  given 
me  by  my  uncle  James  Babcock."  He  gives  legacies  to  daugh- 
ters Sarah  and  Jklercy,  also  gives  "a  Silver  Cane  unto  James 
and  Jonathan  and  Anne  Babcock,  the  children  of  Capt.  James 
Babcock,  deceased."  This  cane  was  doubtless  the  one  that 
William  received  by  will  from  his  uncle  Capt.  James  Babcock. 

Rev.  Thomas  Barber's  mother,  Eunice  (Babcock)  Barber, 
from  childhood  lived  with  her  grandparents,  Christopher  and 
Mehitable  (Chalker)  Babcock.  Elder  Barber  wrote:  "Sarah 
(Denison)  Babcock  and  her  second  husband  Stephen  Chalker 
lived  upon  her  Westerly  homestead  farm  until  her  eldest  liv- 
ing son  Christopher  had  reached  his  majority,  and  had  mar- 
ried his  stepsister  Mehitable  Chalker.  Then  the  parents  left 
the  Westerly  farm  and  removed  to  Saybrook,  taking  with  them 
Sarah's  two  youngest  living  children,  and  remained  in  Say- 
brook  the  rest  of  their  earthly  life.  The  young  couple  Christo- 
pher and  Mehitable  from  that  time  on  owned  and  occupied  the 
Westerly  homestead  farm." 

Oiildren,  b.  Westerly : 

William,  b.  May  14,  1731 ;  d.  Feb.  5,  1750-1.  It  is  believed  the 
date  of  his  death  though  taken  from  W.  T.  R..  is  wrong,  for  his 
father's  will  bears  an  earlier  date  than  the  death  of  his  son.  The 
will  mentions  all  the  children  except  William.  Had  he  been  living 
at  that  time  his  name  no  doubt  would  have  been  mentioned  in  his 
father's  will. 

Joshua,  b.  Dec.  2.  1732;    d.  1752,  unm. 

92  Christopher,"  b.  Sept.  12,  1734;    m.  IMehitable  Chalker. 
Sarah,  b.  Oct.   17,   1736;    m.  Robert  Thompson,  of  Westerly. 
Elijah,  b.  July  19,  1738;    d.  young. 

Elias,  b.  July  28,   1740. 
Phineas,  b.  Sept.  18,  1742;    d.  unm. 

Mary  (or  Mercy),  b.  July  14,  1745;  m.  Hon.  Samuel  Denison,  of 
Saybrook,  Conn. 

93  Samuel,  b.  Sept.  4,  1747;    m.  Rachel  Conklin. 

Mayflower  Records  of  Sarah  (Denison)  Babcock.  wife 
OF  William  Babcock  (Capt.  John.  John,  James  ist). 

The  following  records  prove  that  Sarah  Denison  Babcock, 
wife  of  William  Babcock,  descended  from  passengers  of  the 
Mayflower;  also  from  Capt.  John  Gorham,  a  celebrated  In- 
dian fighter;  also  from  Capt.  George  Denison,  who  won  a 
reputation  in  England  as  a  soldier  and  after  coming  to  this 
country  became  a  very  celebrated  Captain  in  King  Philip's 
and  other  Indian  wars. 

John  Howland.  b.  1592,  came  to  America  in  the  Mayflower 


40  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

in  1620  will)  the  family  of  Gov.  John  Carver.  He  m.  Eliza- 
beth Tilly  and  d.  in  1673.  Elizaljeth  Tilly,  wife  of  John  How- 
land,  b.  1607,  came  to  America  in  the  Mayflower  in  1620  with 
her  parents,  John  Tilly  and  wife,  and  d.  in  1687. 

Desire  Howland,   daughter  of  John   and   Elizabeth   Tilly 

Howland.  b  ,   m.   in    1643   Capt.   John   Gorham.      Capt. 

John  Gorham,  son  of  Ralph  Gorham,  of  Plymouth,  was  b.  in 
England,  baptized  at  Benefield,  Northamptonshire,  Jan.  28, 
1621-2,  came  to  America,  and  in  1643  m.  Desire  Howland.  In 
1675  he  was  Captain  of  the  second  expedition  sent  from  Yar- 
mouth, Mass.,  to  Narragansett,  and  his  name  is  in  a  list  of 
soldiers  that  were  present  in  the  country's  service  and  went  to 
Mount  Hope  against  the  Indians.  He  d.  1676.  (Authority 
to  this  point  Austin's  One  Hundred  and  Six  Allied  Families, 
and  corroborated  by  Savage  in  his  Genealogical  Dictionary  of 
New  England,  also  by  Wheeler  in  his  History  of  Stonington.) 

Mercy  Gorham,  daughter  of  Capt.  John  and  Desire  How- 
land Gorham,  b.  Jan.  20,  1659.  m.  George  Denison,  Jr.,  and 
d.  Sept.  24,  1725.  George  Denison,  Jr.,  fourth  child  of  Capt. 
George  and  Ann  (Borodell)  Denison,  b.  at  New.  London, 
Conn.,  1653,  was  reared  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  his  parents 
havino-  removed  there  the  vear  after  his  birth.  As  stated 
above,  he  m.  Mercy  Gorham,  by  whom  he  had  eight  children. 
He  d.  Dec.  27,  171 1. 

Samuel,  fourth  child  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Mercy  (Gorham) 
Denison,  b.  1685  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  baptized  there  1686, 
m.  Mrs.  Mary  (Lay)  Miner,  by  whom  he  had  ten  children. 
The  first  four  were  b.  in  Stonington.  Conn.,  the  remaining  six 
in  Saybrook,  Conn.  The  wife  of  Samuel  was  the  widow  of 
Christopher  Miner. 

Sarah  (Denison)  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Samuel  and  Mary 
(Lay)  (Miner)  Denison,  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  Jan.  6, 
1710,  reared  at  Saybrook,  Conn.,  m.  (i),  at  Saybr(^>k,  Conn., 
by  Rev.  Hezekiah  Marther,  Aug.  11,  1730,  William  Babcock, 
by  whom  she  had  nine  children;  m.  (2)  Nov.  5,  1753,  Ste- 
phen Chalker,  or  Chaucer,  of  Saybrook,  Conn. 

(Authority  for  the  alx>ve,  from  George,  Jr.,  and  Mercy 
[Gorham]  Denison  to  Sarah  [Denison]  Babcock  inclusive,  is 
J.  O.  Austin's  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  Rhode  Island  and 
Wheeler's  History  of  Stonington.) 

The  following  history  of  Capt.  George  Denison,  the  great- 
grandfather of  Sarah  Denison  Babcock,  was  taken  from  His- 
tory of  Stonington,  Conn.,  by  Judge  Richard  A.  Wheeler: 

Capt.   George  Denison,  youngest  son  of  William  Denison 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  41 

and  wife  Margaret  (Chandler)  Monck,  b.  in  England,  bap- 
tized at  Stratford,  England,  Dec.  10,  1620,  went  with  his 
parents  to  New  England  1631,  and  settled  at  Roxbury,  Mass. 
Later  his  parents  d.  there.  In  1640  he  m.  at  Roxbury  Bridget 
Thompson,  daughter  of  John  Thompson  (gentleman  of  Cres- 
ton,  Northamptonshire,  England),  and  wife  Alice.  Brid- 
get was  b.  Sept.  11,  1622,  d.  1643,  leaving  two  daughters. 
The  same  year  after  his  wife's  death  Capt.  George  Denison 
returned  to  England  and  for  more  than  a  year  served  in  the 
British  Army.  He  was  at  the  battle  of  York,  or  Marston 
Moor,  where  he  did  good  service  and  was  afterward  taken 
prisoner.  After  his  release  he  married  a  second  wife,  Miss 
Ann  Borodell,  and  with  her  returned  to  New  England  in  the 
year  1645,  ^i^^l  settled  for  a  time  at  Roxbury,  Mass.  In  165 1 
he  removed  with  his  family  to  New  London,  Conn.  In  1652 
the  town  of  New  London  granted  him  two  hundred  acres  of 
land  in  the  Pequot-se-pos  valley,  at  Mystic,  Conn.,  upon  which 
he  subsequently  built  him  a  dwelling  house  (May  3,  1663,  it 
was  raised),  wherein  he  and  his  family  made  their  permanent 
home.  The  records  of  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut  show 
that  Capt.  George  Denison  was  not  only  distinguished  as  a 
civilian,  but  became,  with  the  exception  of  Maj.  John  Mason, 
the  most  distinguished  soldier  of  Connecticut  in  her  early 
history.  Capt.  George  Denison  was  Captain  of  New  London 
County  forces  in  King  Philip's  War,  and  was  with  Capt.  John 
Mason,  Jr.,  under  Maj.  Robert  Treat,  in  the  great  Swamp 
fight,  Dec.  19,  1675.  He  also  served  the  next  year  in  command 
of  the  forces  raised  by  him  as  Provo-Marshal,  and  pursued 
the  remnant  of  the  Narragansett  and  Wampanaug  Indians, 
and  succeeded  in  defeating  them  and  capturing  the  Indian 
chief,  Canonchet,  who  was  brought  to  Stonington,  and  on  his 
refusal  to  make  peace  with  the  English  was  shot.  He  assisted 
as  ]\Tagistrate  to  enable  the  I^equot  chiefs  designated  by  the 
English  to  control  the  remnants  of  the  Pequots.  He  was  as- 
sistant and  Deputy  from  Stonington  to  the  General  Court  for 
fifteen  sessions.  He  d.  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  Oct.  24,  1694, 
and  his  widow  d.  Sept.  26,  17 12,  aged  ninety-seven  years. 
Their  graves  may  be  found  in  the  Elm  Grove  Cemetery  at 
Mystic,  Conn. 

Admiral  George  Dewey,  the  hero  of  Manila,  traces  his  an- 
cestry to  this  Capt.  George  Denison  the  distinguished  Indian 
warrior. 

By  Capt.  Denison's  will,  dated  Nov.  20,  1693,  he  gave  away 
many  hundred  acres  of  land  and  much  other  property. 


42  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

One  legacy  given  his  son,  George,  was  one  half  of  a  tract 
of  one  thousand  acres  of  land  nejir  Norwich,  which  land  was 
given  him,  Capt.  George,  as  a  legacy  by  Joshua  the  son  of 
Uncas,  the  same  time  Mohegan  sachem.  The  son  George  was 
also  given  two  Indian  servants,  a  young  man  and  woman, 
together  with  a  considerable  stock  of  neat  cattle,  horses,  sheep, 
and  swine.  The  will  further  states,  "I  give  to  my  son  John 
my  great  sword  and  the  gauntlet  which  I  wore  in  the  wars  of 
England ;  I  also  give  him  a  silver  s^won  of  ten  shillings, 
marked  'G.  and  A.'  I  give  to  my  son  George  twenty  shillings 
in  silver  or  a  cutlas  or  rapier." 

Much  property  was  given  to  his  son  William.  One  legacy 
reads,  "I  give  unto  my  son  William  Denison  my  rapier  and 
broad  buff  belt,  and  tin  cartridge  box,  which  I  used  in  the 
Indian  wars,  together  with  my  long  carbine,  which  belt  and 
sword  I  used  in  the  same  service."  William  was  also  given 
two  Indian  servants  as  follows,  "John,  whom  I  bought  of  the 
county,  and  his  son  Job,  who  was  torn  in  my  house." 

To  William  was  given  five  hundred  acres  of  land,  being 
one  half  of  an  allotment  at  Windham,  "which  is  a  part  of  a 
legacy  given  me  by  Joshua  son  of  Uncas,  the  same  time 
sachem  of  Mohegan,  as  may  more  fully  appear  on  the  court 
Records  at  New  London." 

34.  Amy^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Capt.  John  and  Mary  (Champ- 
lin)  Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Feb.  8, 
1712-3;   m.  Aug.  9,  1732,  Ezekiel  Gavitt. 

He  and  his  wife  were  constituent  members  of  Elder  Parks 
Presbyterian  Church,  organized  in  Westerly  May  5,  1742. 
Ezekiel  was  ordained  as  a  deacon.  One  of  the  entries  upon 
the  old  records  of  their  church  is  as  follows :  "Lords  Day  De- 
cember ye  2th  1753 — We  judge  it  worthy  the  Lord  and  be- 
coming his  People  to  place  in  our  Public  Records  Ye  Signal 
appearance  in  his  Power  and  Grace  in  Answer  to  our  Prayers, 
in  Blessing  a  field  of  corn  of  Deacon  Ezekiel  Gavit's  which 
was  planted  with  a  foreign  sort  of  corn  not  natural  to  our  Soil, 
which  beyond  all  expectation  and  Hope  yielded  a  good  crop 
of  Corn,"  etc.     (W.  and  W.) 

Children  (from  A.  V.  R.,  Westerly)  : 

Elijah,  b.  May  28,  1734. 

John,  b.  July  13,  1736. 

William,  b.  Nov.  11,  1737. 

Amy.  b.  Dec.  i,  1739;    "i-  Nov.  12,  1780,   180  Isaac  Babcock. 

Ezekiel,  b.  June  15.  1741 ;    m.  Mar.  22,  1767,  178  Phebe  Babcock. 

Hannah,  b.  Mar.  8,  1742-3. 


The  Babcock  Goiealogy.  43 

Lucy,  b.  Dec.  5.  1744. 
Elijah,  b.  Jan.  6,  1746. 
Ichabod,  b.  Oct.  30,  1750. 

35.  JoB^    Babcock,    son    of    Job    and    Deborah    Babcock 

(John,  James  ist),  b.  1697  (?);  m.  (1)  Oct.  10,  1717, 
EHzal)eth   Hull    (North    Kingston   Record);     m.    (2)    Mary 

,  name  mentioned  in  his  will.    When  in  1723  the  town  of 

Kingston  was  div'ided  Job  Babcock,  Jr.'s,  house  was  left  in  N. 
Kingston,  near  its  southern  line,  dividing  it  from  S.  Kings- 
ton "He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  S.  Kingston  1758- 
60.  He  was  Ensign  (might  have  been  Job  3d)  in  Second 
Company  of  S.  Kingston  Militia,  Capt.  Nathaniel  Helme, 
Commander,  1758."     (Smith.) 

Job's  will  recorded  Mar.  13,  1775,  in  S.  Kingston,  men- 
tions children  Job,  Deborah,  Isabel,  and  Hannah,  grandchil- 
dren "Paul  Babcock,  son  of  Hannah  Armstrong,  xA.nn  Bab- 
cock, dau.  of  Hannah  Armstrong." 

In  1756  Job  and  his  wife  sold  certain  lands  to  Joseph 
Hammond. 

Children : 

94  Josiah,"  b.  1720  (?)  ;    m.  Miss  Maraw,  "an  Irish  lady  of  culture." 
Job,  b.  ;    m.  South  Kingston,  Nov.  20,  1748,  Susanna  Hopkins. 

"Job    Babcock    of    Exeter,    Lieut.     Militia,     1759,     Capt.     1760." 

(Smith.) 
Deborah,  b.  ;    m.    (will  says)    Lsaac  Moon,  Records  in  Exeter 

say  Asa  Moon,  Aug.  13,  1758. 

Isabel,  b. ;    m.  South  Kingston,  Nov.  11,  1762,  James  Steadman. 

Hannah,  b.  ;    m.  Michael  Armstrong. 

36.  Samuel^   Babcock,   son  of  Job  and  Deborah  Babcock 
(John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  name  found  in  his 

father's  will ;  m.  Bethiah .     By  his  father's  will,  recorded 

S.  Kingston  Feb.  lo,  1755,  he  received  a  legacy.  He  and  his 
wife  sold  certain  lands  in  1755  to  his  brother  Job.  (S.  Kings- 
ton Records.)  Samuel  d.  intestate.  Peleg  Brown  was  ap- 
pointed his  administrator.  An  inventory  of  his  property  was 
taken  at  the  house  of  John  Babcock  Dec.  7,  1805.  Samuel 
was  Justice  of  the  Peace,  S.  Kingston,  in  1744-7;  Ensign, 
1735-6.     (Smith.) 

Children,  recorded  in  S.  Kingston  (A.  Y.  R.)  : 

Mary,  b.  Dec.   i8,  1721 ;     ni.  Richard  Bass. 

95  Jonathan,'  b.  Nov.  26,   1723;    m.  Lydia  Lee. 

Samuel,  Jr.,  b.  Nov.  5.  1725;  m.  Jan.  18,  1748,  Elizabeth  Cottrell. 
Had  two  children,  Samuel  and  Elizabeth.  He  was  Ensign  in 
S.  Kingston  Militia  1750-1. 

96  John,  b.  Jan.  27,  1727-8;    m.  Lydia  . 


44  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

97  Job,  b.  Jan.  20,  1729-30;    m.  Susanna  Champlin. 

98  Simeon,  b.  Jan.  6,   1731-2;    m.  Elizabeth  Gaboon. 

99  James,  b.  June  14,  1734;    m.  Sarah  Sheldon. 
100  Joseph,  b.  Oct.  4,  1737;    m.  Sarah  Wait. 

37.  John'*  Babcock,  son  of  Job  and  Deborah  Babcock 
(John,  James  ist),  b.  in  S.  Kingston;  d.  about  Nov.  i, 
1763;  m.  (i)  Sarah  Segar;  ni.  (2)  Mar.  17,  1747,  in  S. 
Kingston,  Jemima  Reynolds  (A.  V.  R.).  That  Jemima  after- 
ward married  John  Sheldon  is  proved  from  the  following 
items  of  S.  Kingston  records:  "May  20,  1775,  John  Babcock 
(no  doubt  son  of  John  deceased)  bought  of  John  Sheldon 
and  Jemima  his  wife  (formerly  the  wife  of  John  Ba1x:ock) 
certain  devises  and  bequests  (under  the  will  of  her  former 
husband,  said  John  Babcock),  for  60  pds." 

In  1 73 1  John  Babcock  received  certain  lands  by  deed  from 
his  father.  Job  Babcock.  By  the  will  of  Job  Babcock,  proved 
Feb.  10,  1755,  certain  lands  were  conveyed  to  son  John  who 
was  named  as  executor  to  the  \\\\\. 

John  Babcock  bought  of  Job  and  Deborah  Babcock  (pre- 
sumal>ly  his  parents)  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  Mar.  28, 
1733.  John  Babcock  quitclaimed  to  brother  Job  certain 
lands  June  17,  1741.  John  Babcock  and  Sarah,  his  wife,  sold 
to  Nathan  Tanner  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  June  30.  1741. 

S.  Kingston  records  show  that  in  1761  John  Babcock  deeded 
land  in  S.  Kingston  to  his  sons,  John,  Samuel,  Jonathan, 
Gideon,  and  Joseph.  By  his  will,  dated  Oct.  13,  1763,  pro- 
bated Nov.  4,  1763,  son  John  executor  and  residuary  legatee, 
he  gives  to  his  wife,  Jemima.  £1,000,  old  tenor,  and  certain 
other  legacies,  including  use  of  parts  of  dwelling  house  for  her 
use  and  "my  small  children."  He  also  gives  legacies  to  his 
son  Jonathan,  John,  Gideon,  Joseph,  and  Ichabod,  and  refers 
to  land  that  formerly  belonged  to  "my  son  Samuel,  deceased." 
He  gives  legacies  to  his  daughter  Sarah  Langworthy  and 
her  daughter  Mary,  to  his  grandsons  Benjamin  Langworthy 
and  John  Babcock,  to  his  granddaughters  Elizabeth  and  Sarah. 

From  the  foregoing  it  appears  that  by  his  first  wife  he  had 
five  children,  as  follows   (dates  of  birth  unknown)  : 

lOi  John,"  b.  1740  (?);    m.  Mehitable  Sheldon. 

102  Jonathan,  b.  ;    m.   Amey  Clarke. 

Samuel,  died  prior  to  date  of  will. 

103  Sarah,  b.  1737  (?);    m.  Amos  Langworthy. 

104  Ichabod,  b.  1745  (?)  ;    m.  Amy  Card. 

Children  by  second  wife  (dates  given  A.  V.  R.)  : 


HOUSE  BUILT  AND  OCCUPIED  BY  DR.  JOSHUA  BABCOCK. 

The  house  is  located  on  Quarry  Hill,  Westerly,  R.  I., 

and  is  still  in  good  repair.  Page  30. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  45 


105  Gideon,  b.  Apr.  28,  1757;    m.  Hannah . 

Joseph,  b.  Aug.  19,  1759. 

Mary,  b.  Feb.  4.   1762. 

38.  Deborah^  Babcock,  daii.  of  Job  and  Deborah  Babcock 
(John.  James   ist),  b.  S.  Kingston;    m.  Oct.  27,   1728, 

Joseph  Hoxie,  b.  1696.  They  settled  in  Richmond,  R.  I.  Their 
children  are  recorded  in  Richmond,  as  follows  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Joseph,  b.  May  15,  1729;    d.  Apr.  15,  1815. 

Job,  b.  May  21,  1731. 

Mary,  b.   Sept.   19,   1733. 

Jeremiah,  b.  Nov.  8,  1735. 

John,  b.  Jan.  22,  1737. 

Thomas,  b.   May  25,   1740. 

Samuel,  b.  Dec.  25,  1742. 

Simeon,  b.  July  31,  1745. 

Elijah,  b.  Oct.  4,  1748. 

39.  Mary^  Babcock.  dau.  of  George  and  Elizabeth   (Hall) 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  W^esterly,  R.  I.,  Sept.  20, 

1695;  date  of  death  not  fonnd ;  m.  Mar.  19,  1717,  Thomas 
Potter,  Jr.,  son  of  Thomas  and  Susanna  (Tripp)  Potter,  of 
N.  Kingston,  R.  L.  b.  Feb.  8,  1695.  d.  in  Hopkinton,  Jan.  8, 
1773,  buried  near  Wcwjdville,  R.  I.  Remains  of  husband  and 
wife  removed  about  a  hundred  years  later  by  Judge  William 
H.  Potter,  of  Mystic,  Conn.,  to  First  Hopkinton  Cemtery, 
near  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.  Thomas,  Jr.,  m.  (2)  Judith  Rogers, 
b.  1712.  d.  1805. 

Children,  born  in  Hopkinton. 

Susanna,  b.    Feb.   20.    1718-9. 

Thomas,  b.  Sept.  14,  1720;    d.  1749. 

Jonathan,  b.  1723;    m.  Jan.  18.  1748.  Mary  West. 

Mary.  h.  ;  m.  Elisha  Clark. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  29,   1727:    m.  Isaac  Saunders;    moved  to  Peters- 
burg. N.  Y. 

106  George."  b.  Jan.   3.   1731-2;    m.   Content   Maxson. 
Stephen,  b. ;    m.  Sept.  2,   1756,  Sarah  Sheldon. 

(For  further  record  of  the  descendants  of  Mary  Bal)Cock 
Potter,  see  part  iv  of  the  History  and  Genealogies  of  the  Pot- 
ter families  in  America,  by  Charles  Edward  Potter.) 

40.  George*    Babcock.   Jr.,    son   of   George  and   Elizabeth 

(Hall)  Babcock  (John.  James  ist).  b.  Westerly.  Apr. 
9,  1699.  d.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  1767,  aged  sixty-eight  years;  m. 
N.  Kingston.  Dec.  20,  1721,  Susanna  Potter,  dau.  of  John  and 
Sarah  (Wilson)  Potter,  b.  N.  Kingston.  Sept.  17,  1704,  d. 
Hopkinton.  date  unknown. 

George,  Jr.,  was  admitted  a  freeman  Feb.,  1727-8. 


46  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  in  that  part  of  Westerly  which  is  now  Hopkin- 
ton,  R.  I.     (W.  T.  R.): 

107  Elizabeth,''  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  25,  1725-6;    m.  John  Burdick. 

108  George,  b.  Dec.  29,  1727;    ni.  Mehitable  Wheeler. 

109  Martha,  b.   Dec.  8,   1729;    m.    (i)    Capt.    Simon   Rhodes;    (2)    Col. 

James  Rhodes. 
Susanna,    b.    Mar.    16,    1731-2;     m.    (by    William    Babcock,   Justice, 
Nov.  3,  1748)  Benj.  Clark  (?). 
no  Christopher,   b.   Feb.  27,    1736-7;    m.   Martha   Perry. 

111  Samuel,  b.  May  30,  1739;    m.  Ruth  Babcock. 

112  Hezekiah,  b.  May  30,  1739;    m.   Martha  Hoxie. 

113  Rowse,  b.  Apr.  29,   1746;    m.  Ruth  Maxson. 

41.  David*  Babcock,  son  of  George  and  Elizabeth  (Hall) 
Babcock  (John,  James  1st),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  22, 
1700;  d.  S.  Kingston,  Mar.,  1783;  ni.,  by  his  father,  George 
Babcock,  justice,  Feb.  24,  1730,  Dorcas,  dau.  of  Daniel  and 
Dorcas  (Gardner)  Brown,  of  Westerly,  b.  May  23,  171 3.  d. 
S.  Kingston,  Dec.  18,  1798.  At  the  time  of  his  marriage  it 
is  probable  that  his  home  w^as  in  S.  Kingston,  and  that  he  con- 
tinued to  live  there  through  life.  Records  of  four  children  are 
found  in  Westerly.     His  wnll  mentions  ten  children. 

The  will  of  David  Babcock,  dated  Apr.  10,  1782,  probated 
and  recorded  at  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Mar.  10,  1783,  gives  to 
his  wife  much  personal  property,  including  tw^o  negro  women 
named  "Phylis"  and  "Coocoo;"  gives  personal  property  to 
each  of  his  four  daughters,  Ruth  Babcock,  Dorcas  Babcock, 
Mary  Denison,  and  Miriam  Watson ;  gives  a  farm  and  other 
property  to  each  of  his  five  living  sons,  David,  Jonathan,  Gid- 
eon, Abijah,  and  Asa;  to  his  grandson  Benedict,  eldest  son 
of  his  deceased  son  Benedict,  a  farm ;  also  mentions  two 
brothers  of  Benedict,  Jr.,  namely,  Gardner  and  Denison,  and 
three  sisters,  Sarah,  Mary,  and  Frances.  The  will  appoints 
son  Gideon  as  executor. 

From  the  first  clause  of  the  will  there  is  reserved  from  the 
"household  plate"  given  to  his  wife  "my  silver  tankard."  By 
the  second  clause  of  the  will,  in  addition  to  real  estate  given 
to  "my  beloved  son  David,"  is  given  "my  silver  tankard  herein 
before  reserved  out  of  the  plate  given  my  wife."  The  tankard 
has  been  handed  down  in  the  family,  and  is  now  owned  by 
Mrs.  Emma  Balx:ock  Horton,  of  Chicago,  and  daughter  of 
548  George  Babcock  and  Emily  (Brown)  Babcock.  (For  pic- 
ture of  tankard,  see  records  of  Mrs.  Horton.) 

Children,  all  b.  S.  Kingston : 

114  David,°  b.  Apr.   10,  1734:    m.   Sarah  Perry. 

115  Jonathan,  b.  Nov.  19,   1735;    m.  Susanna  Perry. 

116  Benedict,  b.  Oct.  21,  1737;   m.  Mary  Thompson. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  47 

Ruth,  b.  May  28,  1739;    m.  her  cousin  iii  Samuel  Babcock. 
Abijah,  b.  Jan.  8,  1741. 

117  Gideon,  b.  July  2,   1744;    m.   Alary  Chesebrough. 

Dorcas,  b.  Mar.  14,  1745;   m.  64  Nathan  Babcock.    (See  his  records.) 

118  Mary,  b.  Sept.  27,   1747;    ni.  Joseph  Denison. 
Asa.  b.  . 

Miriam,  b.  . 


42.  Jonathan*    Babcock,    son    of    George    and    Elizabeth 

(Hall)    Babcock    (John,  James   ist),  b.   Westerly    (?), 

Mar.  22,  1702-3;   m.  Elizabeth .     It  may  be  possible  that 

one  of  his  children  was  Mary  Babcock,  recorded  upon  the  S. 
Kingston  Records,  b.  Sept.  i,  1724;  m.  Aug.  8,  1745,  to  Rich- 
ard Boss,  of  Charlestown,  b.  Feb.  26,  1724. 
Child: 

119  Jonathan,"  b.  ;    m.  Phebe  Perkins.     (Tradition.) 

43.  Eunice*  Babcock,  dau.  of  George  and  Elizabeth  (Hall) 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston  (?),  Jan.  13, 

1 712-3;   m.  May  10,  1737,  Capt.  Silas  Greenman,  of  Stoning- 
ton.  Conn.     She  was  his  third  wife.     (Records  of  the  marriage 
and  their  children  found  in  Wheeler's  History  of  Stonington.) 
Children : 

Katherine,  b.  Apr.  22,  1738. 
Abigail,  b.  Aug.  15,  1740. 
Anna,  b.  Jan.  30,   1742. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Nov.  5,  1744. 

44.  Hezekiah*  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  George  and  Eliza- 
beth (Hall)  Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kings- 
ton (?),  Mar.  25.  1715-6;  d.  1798;  m.  at  Newport,  Jan.  3, 
1739-40,  by  Daniel  (^uld.  Justice,  Mary  Peckham.  She  d. 
1796,  aged  eighty. 

He  was  a  freeman  May  2,  1738,  was  a  representative  of 
S.  Kingston  1761,  Moderator  of  town  meeting  1764-5,  Town 
Councilman  1769-71,  Justice  of  the  Peace  1740-6. 

(Records  of  children  obtained  from  Mr.  Edwin  Babcock,  of 
Westerly,  R.  I.  Some  of  the  children  found  on  S.  Kingston 
records;   probably  all  were  born  there.) 

Children : 

Caleb,  b.  Dec.  7,  1740;    d.  July  10,  1741. 

120  Peleg  W.."^  b.  Apr.  18,  1742;    d.  June  7,  1828;    m.  his  cousin,  Lucy 

Babcock. 
Eunice,  b.  Feb.   11,   1744;    d.  Aug.   13,   1844. 

121  Caleb,  b.  Nov.  28,  1745  :    m.  Waite  Peckham. 
George,  b.  Mar.  2,  1747;    d.  unm. 

Augustus,   b.   Nov    25,    1749;    d.  Jan.   11,    1753. 


48  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Joseph,  b.  Jan.  28,  17.52.    d.  Sept.  26,  1776,  iinni. 

Mary,   b.   Aug.   20,    1754;    d.    Mar.   9,    1807;    111.  Joseph   Peckham, 

May  25,  1774. 
Augustus,  b.  Feb.  9,  1757;    drowned  May,  1798;    m.  (i)  Mary,  dau. 

of  Joseph  Browning;    m.  (2)  Sarah  Slocum.    He  served  as  Capt. 

of  Militia  in  S.  Kingston,  1794-5.     (Smith.) 

45.  Elisha^  Babcock,  son  of  George  and  Elizabeth  (Hall) 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  May  18.  17 18,  S.  Kings- 
ton; m.  July  4,  1744,  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Elizabeth,  dan.  of 
Samuel  and  Susanna  (Hazzard)  Perry,  b.  Nov.  3,  17 19.  Her 
sister  Sarah  m.  David  Babcock,  a  nephew  of  Elisha. 

Elisha  settled  in  Richmond,  R.  I.,  on  a  farm  of  three  hun- 
dred and  fifty  acres,  which  he  received  by  deed  of  gift  from 
his  father  in  1751,  it  being  part  of  the  "Shannock  Purchase." 
He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  from  1753  to  1759,  also  1775. 
(Smith.) 

In  1768  Elisha  was  a  member  of  the  Westerly  S.  D.  B. 
Church,  S.  D.  B.  Memorial. 

In  Sept.,  1787,  it  was  voted  that  Elisha  Babcock,  of  Rich- 
mond, be  paid  one  quarter  part  of  his  claim  against  the  State, 
that  being  the  same  rate  that  others  had  been  paid. 

Children : 

122  Simeon,*  b.  May  31,  1745 ;   m.  Mary  Perry. 

Eunice,  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  July  28,  1746;  m.  Mar.  6,  1771, 
Nathaniel,  son  of  Jonathan  Clark,  of  Charlestown. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Richmond,  Sept.  23,  1747;   m.  Daniel  Greene. 

Elisha,  b.  Richmond,  Dec.  17,  1748;    d.  at  sea,  unm. 

Alice,  b.  Richmond,  May  29,  1750;  m.  Nov.  24,  1773,  Michael  John- 
son, of  East  Greenwich. 

Sarah,   b.   Richmond,   Apr.   23,    1742;   unm. 

Susanna,  b.  Richmond,  Feb.  i,  1754;    m.  William  Champlin. 

Deliverance,  b.  Richmond,  May  9,  1755;    m.  Elijah  Kimball. 

123  Ruth,  b.  1757;    m.  Simeon  Perry. 

124  Jesse,  b.  Apr.  19,  1759;    m.  Hannah  Cross. 

Maribah,  b.  ;   m.  Russel  Crandell. 

Lydia,  b.  Mar.  11,  1763;    m.  Alfred  Hurlburt. 

46.  Lydia^   Babcock,   dau.  of  Robert  and  Lydia   Babcock 
(John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Nov.  3,  1703,  m. 

by  her  uncle,  John  Babcock,  Justice,  Westerly,  Sept.  20,  1722, 
Roger  Elderton. 

Records  of  children,  found  in  A.  V.  R. : 

Joseph,"*  b.  Jan.  6,  1723. 
Robert,. b.  Mar.  12,  1724. 
Bridget,  b.  Mar.  27,  1726. 
Mary,  b.  Apr.  10.  1728. 
Sarah,  b.  Jan.  8,  1732. 
Lydia,  b.  Dec.  10,  1736. 
Joseph,  2d,  b.  Jan.  10,  1744-5. 


M'Oliver'B„i>wdi 
wri.  died 


J^'l^/lj 


fn  memory    ijf'' 
Reiic  of 


From  a  photograph  taken   1902. 


Page  55- 


The  Bab  cock  Genealogy.  49 

47.  EzEKiEL'*  Babcock,  son  of  Ruljert  and  Lydia  (Crandall) 
Babc()ck:  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  June  22,  1716; 
ni.  Oct.  26,  1740,  by  Elder  John  Maxson,  Eunice  Billings, 
dan.  of  James  and  Mary  (Hewitt)  Billings,  b.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Aug.  17,  1721.  Marriage  recorded  in  Westerly;  rec- 
ords of  wife  and  children  from  History  of  Stonington  by 
Wheeler. 

Nathan  Hinckley,  husband  of  Mary  Babcock,  was  brother 
to  the  wives  of  Robert  and  David  Babcock.  Wheeler  states 
that  the  sons  of  this  Babcock  family  settled  in  New  York 
State  in  1794. 

Children : 

Elihu.  b.  July  8,   1741  ;    m.  Elizabeth  Jefferies  Aug.  28,  1766.     Elihu 

and  his  brother  Robert  served   in  the  Revolution,   six  months  on 

frigate  Trumbull,  under  Capt.   Saltonstall. 
Mary,    b.    1744:     m.    Stonington,    Sept.    8,    1776,    Nathan    Hinckley, 

sixth  child  of  Samuel  and  second  wife,  Mary  (Wyatt)   Hinckley, 

b.  Feb.  2T,.  1748. 

125  David.''  b.  Feb.  2,   1745;    m.   Mary  Hinckley. 

Martha,   b.  ;    m.   Dec.  24.   1772,   Nathaniel   Eells,   eldest   son  of 

Rev.   Nathaniel  and  first  wife,   Mercy   Gushing  Eells,  b.   Stoning- 
ton, May  9,  1735. 

126  Robert,    b.    Sept.    17,    1753;     ni.    Stonington,    Feb.    27,    1780,    Grace 

Hinckley. 

49.  Joseph^  Babcock,  J''-,  youngest  child  of  Joseph  and  Re- 
becca (Stanton)  Babcock,  b.  \\'esterly;  m.  Dec.  9,  1730, 
Susaniia  Thompson,  dau.  of  Isaac  and  Mary  Thompson,  of 
Westerly,  b.  Nov.  25,  1713. 

By  the  will  of  Joseph's  father,  entered  in  Westerly,  Feb.  22, 
1741-2,  he  was  to  receive  after  the  death  of  his  mother,  the 
negro  man  Primus.  Joseph  was  appointed  administrator  for 
the  estate  of  his  mother,  July  27,  1747. 

Oct.,  1733,  Joseph  Baljcock,  Jr.,  of  Westerly,  was  made  a 
freeman  by  the  General  Court  of  Rhode  Island.  (C.  R.  of 
R.  I.,  vol.  iv.) 

Children,  from  Westerly  Records: 

Hosanna,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Prudence,  b.  Oct.  22,  1732;    m.  Jan.  9,  1755,  to  William  Saunders,  Jr. 

Found  no  record  of  children. 
Joseph,  b.  Dec.  9,  1734;    d.  young. 
Jesse,  b.  Apr.  3.   1737;    m.    (by  Ichabod  Babcock,  Justice)    Mar.  8, 

1763.  to  Abigail,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Abigail  Mulkins.  b.  Oct.   15, 

174 1.     (A.  V.  R.)     No  record  of  children. 
Hannah,  b.  Jan.  27,  1739-40. 
Joseph,  b.  Jan.  9,  1741-2 ;    m.  ]\rary . 

127  Rebecca,"*  b.  Apr.  14,  1744;    m.  Ghamplain  Lanpheare. 

128  Joshua,  b.  Oct.  5,   1747;    m.   Nancy  Hawkins. 

129  Ann,  b.  June  18,   1749;    m.  William  West. 
Ichabod,  b.  June  10,  1751. 

4 


50  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

50.  Thomas'*  Babcock,  Sr.,  son  of  Col.  Oliver  and  Susan- 
na   (Clark)     Babcock,    b.    Westerly,    now    Hopkinton, 

R.  I.,  Mar.  7,  1710;    d.  ;    m.   (i)   Mary  Davidson   (?). 

Early  records  of  Shrewsbury  Church  mention  "Ruth  Bab- 
cock, wife  of  Thomas  Babcock."  He  m.  (2)  Judith,  dau.  of 
Rev.  John  and  Elizabeth  (Maxson)  Davis,  b.  Apr.  7,  1731,  in 
Westerly.  He  settled  first  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  or  Stonington, 
Conn.,  where  he  was  a  ship  carpenter.  Prior  to  1752  he  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Squam,  Monmouth  Co.,  N.  J.,  where 
there  was  a  S.  D.  B.  settlement  and  church  near  the  ocean. 
Church  records  show  that  the  last  Sabbath  in  Feb.,  1752, 
Thomas  Babcock  and  Thomas  Davis  were  chosen  deacons  of 
the  Shrewsbury  S.  D.  B.  Church. 

The  latest  mention  of  Thomas  Babcock,  Sr.,  in  the  Shrews- 
bury Church  records  is  1785.  The  name  of  Judith  Babcock 
occurs  the  same  date.  In  New  Jersey  he  manufactured  salt 
from  sea  water. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

130  Mary,"  b.  ;    m.  Simeon  Maxson. 

Simeon,  b.  . 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Experience,  b.  ;    m.  John,  son  of  Rev.  William  Davinson. 

Elizabeth,  b.  ;  m.   Henry  McLafferty,   who  in   1797  was   Pastor 

of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  at  Piscataway,  N.  J. 

131  Thomas,  b.  Feb.   12,   1759;    m.  Martha  Davis. 
Amey,  b.  ;    unm. 

51.  Mary*    Babcock,    dau.    of    Col.     Oliver    and    Susanna 
(Clark)   Babcock,  b.  Westerly,  now  Hopkinton,  Feb.  8, 

1712-3;  d.  Stonington,  Conn.,  prior  to  1768;  m.  about  1732  or 
1733,  Henry  Cobb,  son  of  Henry,  Jr.,  and  Lois  (Hallet)  Cobb, 
b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  15,  17 10.  He  m.  (2)  Mar.  2, 
1768,  Prudence  Champlin. 

Children,  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn. : 

Nathan,  b.  June  12,  1734;    d.  1805. 

Susanna,   b.    Nov.    10,    1735;    m.    (i)    Oct.    15,    1760,   Azariah   Stan- 
ton;   m.    (2)    1774,  Jeremiah  Tenney. 
Lois,  b.  Oct.  24.  1737;    m.  Nov.  26,  1761,  Acors  Sheffield. 
Mary,  b.  Feb.   15,   1740;    m.  Jan.   24,   1760,   Thomas  Noyes;    she  d. 

1833. 
Ebenezer,  b.  Mar.  30.  1742. 
Oliver,  b.  Mar.  13,  1744. 
Elkanah,  b.   Mar.  6,   1746. 

Eunice,  b.  Aug.  3,  1748;    m.  Apr.  11,  1773.  Sylvester  Pendleton. 
Sarah,  b.  Sept.  30.  1750;    m.  Feb.  14,  1771,  Andrew  Brown. 
Anne,  b.  Jan.  4,  1756;   m.  Ward.     (Wheeler.) 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  51 

52.  Simeon"*  Babcock,  son  of  Col.  Oliver  and  Susanna 
(Clark)  Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  now 
Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Sept.  27,  1717;  m.  at  Hopkinton,  Oct.  3, 
1743,  Sarah  Gardner,  b.  Apr.  6,  1725.     (A.  V.  R.) 

In  Probate  records  of  Hopkinton,  1796,  the  will  of  Simeon 
Babcock  is  found.  The  will  mentions  sons  Jeremiah,  Jason, 
Lucas,  and  Jonathan,  and  daughters  Eunice  Landphere,  Lucy 
Randal,  Dorcas  Tieft.  Lydia  Alaxson,  and  Hannah  Burdick. 
Wife  Sarah  has  use  of  property  during  her  life  with  son  Jona- 
than as  executor. 

Children  : 

Eunice,  b.  Oct.  3,  1744. 
1,32  Jeremiah.'  b.  May  i6,   1746;    m.  Susannah  Rogers. 

Thomas,  b.  July  21,  1748. 

Lucy,  b.  Jan.  11.  1750. 

Dorcas,  b.  Dec.  i,  1753. 
132a  Jason,  b.  July  9,  1756:    m.  Mary  . 

Lydia,  b.  June  20.   1759. 

Hannah,  b.  Apr.  28.  1762. 

Lucas,  b.  Apr.  24,  1765. 

Jonathan,  b.  Apr.  18,  1768;   m.  Priscilla  Wheeler  (?),  of  Stonington. 
He  sold  his  father's  homestead  in  1797  to  Joseph  Maxson. 

53.  Oliver,^  Jr..  son  of  Col.  Oliver  and  Susanna  (Clark) 
Babcock  (John,  James  ist),  b.  Sept.  16,  1722,  in  that 
part  of  Westerly  set  off  Mar.  19.  1758,  and  now  called  Hop- 
kinton; d.  in  Leyden,  Mass.,  Feb.  24,  1806;  m.  at  Westerly, 
1744  (?),  Patience  Pendleton,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Sarah 
(Worden)  Pendleton,  b.  in  Westerly,  June  13,  1726,  d.  in 
Leyden,  Mass.  Date  of  removal  from  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  to 
Leyden,  Mass.,  not  known,  but  many  of  his  children  lived  for 
a  time  in  Leyden. 

Extensive  records  of  the  descendants  of  the  above-named 
parents  will  appear  in  this  volume.  Many  of  them  were, 
through  years  of  effort,  collected  by  Asher  Miner  Babcock. 
He  was  the  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillman)  Babcock,  and 
grandson  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience  (Pendleton)  Babcock. 

The  records  above  mentioned  were  loaned  to  the  writer  by 
the  family  of  the  late  George  H.  Babcock.  of  Plainfield.  N.  J. 
He  was  son  of  Asher  Miner  Bal^cock,  and  assisted  his  father 
in  collecting  the  records. 

Children,  b.  Hopkinton : 

133  Oliver.'  b.  June  28.  1746;   m.  Tacy  Maxson. 

134  Peleg.  b.  Oct.  4,  1748;    m.  Lucy  Maxson. 

135  Susanna,  b.  June  25,   1750;    m.   Mr.   Fen. 

136  Deborah,  b.   Apr.   11.    1752;    m.   Nathaniel    Stillman. 

Lucy,  b.  1754;   m.  Benjamin  Baker,  of  Hopkinton,  R.  L    No  children. 


52  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Sarah,    b.    Apr.    27,    1756;     m.    Philemon    Steadman    and    lived    in 

Lej'den,  Mass. 
Mary.  b.  June  11,  1758;    ni.  Benjamin  Baker;   lived  in  Leyden,  Mass. 

No  children. 
Ruth,  b.   Apr.  20,   1760;    m.  James  Kenyon. 
Clarke,    b.   June    10,    1762;     lived   and   d.    at   Winfield,    N.    Y. ;     m. 

Baker. 

137  Ruhannah,  b.   May   16,   1764;    m.  Edward  Denison. 

138  Capt.   Paul,  b.   May   18,   1766;    m.   Hannah  Burdick. 

139  Ezra,  b.  Sept.  16,  1769;    m.  Saberah  Stillman. 

140  Capt.  Luke,  b.  Aug.  6,  1772;    m.  Betsey  Main. 

54.  Capt.  Joseph,**  son  of  Col.  Oliver  and  Susanna  (Clark) 
Babcock   (John,  James   ist),  b.  Westerly,  now  Hopkin- 

ton,  Oct.  18,  1726;  d.  Leyden  (?),  Mass.,  Jan.  24,  1796;  m. 
Sept.  6,  1757,  Anna  Harris,  of  Colchester,  Conn.,  b.  Oct.  17, 
1730,  d.  June  14,  1805;  moved  to  Leyden.  Mass.,  1776.  He 
was  Lieutenant  in  Hopkinton  Militia  in  1761,  Captain  1762, 
'63, '64, '66.     (Smith.) 

Nov.  16,  1 76 1,  Col.  Oliver  Babcock  deeded  to  his  son  Jo- 
seph Babcock  "for  and  in  consideration  of  the  Natural  Love 
and  affection  which  I  bear  unto  my  son  Joseph  Babcock  eighty 
acres,  dwelling  house."     (Hopkinton  T.  R.,  book  i,  p.  374.) 

In  1762  Oliver  Babcock,  Jr.,  deeded  land  to  his  brother 
Joseph.  (Hopkinton  T.  R.,  book  i,  p.  375.)  Joseph  was  one 
of  the  executors  named  in  his  father's  will. 

Children : 

Annie,  b.  Nov.  26,  1758;    unm. 

141  Polly*    (Mary),   b.    Nov.    17,    1760;     m.   David   Denison,   of  Leyden, 

Mass. ;    d.  Eeb.  15,  1817. 

142  Harris,  b.  March  15.  I7(?3;    m.  Sally  Newell. 

143  Lieut.  Joseph,  b.  July  29,  1765;    m.  Jane  Wallace. 
Fanny,  b.  Dec.   17,   1767;    d.  unm. 

144  Darius,  b.  June  17,  1770;    m.  Louisa  Beebe. 

Allah,  b.  Sept.  5,  1774  (first  letter  of  name  obliterated). 

55.  James, ^  son  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah   (Vose)   Babcock 

(James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  now  N.  Ston- 
ington,  May  29,  1708;  bap.  Stonington,  Aug.  i,  1708;  m.  at 
Stonington,  by  Justice  Palmer  S.  Clark,  May  7.  1730,  Phebe 
Swan.  May  13,  1733,  he  joined  the  N.  Stonington  Church 
at  Milltown. 

By  the  will  of  his  grandfather,  Capt.  James  Babcock,  of 
Westerly,  dated  Jan.  9,  1736,  he  received  two  certain  tracts 
of  land  in  Westerly,  each  containing  one  hundred  acres.  This 
land  he  sold.  Oct.  15,  1741,  to  Stephen  Babcock,  of  Westerly. 
In  the  deed  he,  James,  is  mentioned  as  residing  in  Stoning- 
ton, Conn.    It  is  believed  that  he  lived  on  what  is  novv  known 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  53 

as  the  Daniel  Brown  Farm  on  the  Stonington  road,  midway 
between  Westerly  and  Stonington. 
Children   (Wheeler): 

145  Plichc,"  b.   May  2,    1731 ;    111.   Rufus   Palmer. 
Sarah,  b.  Feb.   12,   1733. 

James,  b.  Feb.  22,  1735;  bap.  1735;  m.  July  21.  1757,  Lucretia' 
Babcuck,  dau.  of  2>-  Eld.  Stephen  and  Anna  (Thompson)  Bab- 
cock, of  Westerly,  b.  Nov.  2,  1734.     (A.  V.  R.) 

Elias,  b.  Dec.  16,  1736.  In  N.  Y.  in  the  Revolution,  p.  18,  the  name 
Elias  Babcock  appears  among  the  enlisted  men  in  Col.  Goose  Van 
Schaick's  First  Regiment  of  the  Line. 

146  Abel.  b.  Apr.  28,   1739;    m.    (ij    Hannah  Lewis;    m.    (2)    Elizabeth 

Williams. 
Manila,  b.  Feb.  22,  1741 ;    bap.  June  7,  1741. 

56.  Capt.  Nathaniel,^  son  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah  (Vose) 
Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Mar.  6,  1709-10;  bap.  Stonington,  Mar.  6,  1710; 
joined  N.  Stonington  Congregational  Church  1738;  d.  be- 
fore Oct.,  1772;  m.  Nov.  20,  1733,  Sarah  Billings,  of  Pres- 
ton, Conn.,  b.  1715,  d.  Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  25,  1794. 

Mar.  13,  1735-6,  he  bought  for  £300,  of  John  Gallup  and 
John  Dixon,  the  west  half  of  the  farm  previously  deeded  to 
him  by  his  grandfather,  a  survey  having  shown  that  part  of 
the  farm  lay  in  Voluntown,  hence  Capt.  James  had  no  good 
title  to  it. 

Feb.  25,  1760,  Nathaniel  Babcock  conveyed  to  his  son  Na- 
thaniel, Jr.,  "the  east  part  of  the  land  the  granter  now  lives 
on,  in  Voluntown,  bounded  on  the  south  by  Stonington  land." 

The  second  Thursday  of  Oct.,  1772,  the  General  Assembly 
of  Connecticut  authorized  Nathaniel  Babcock  and  Sarah  Bab- 
cock, joint  administrators  of  the  estate  of  the  late  Capt.  Na- 
thaniel Babcock,  to  sell  forty  and  one  half  acres  of  land.  Mar. 
25,  1773,  the  land  was  sold  to  Elias  Babcock.  The  following 
day  Elias  Babcock  sold  the  same  land  to  Nathaniel  Babcock,  Jr. 

Nathaniel  was  commissioned  Ensign  in  Connecticut  Mili- 
tia in  1740,  Captain  1750,  by  the  General  Assembly  of  Con- 
necticut.    (Book  1735-43,  p.  291,  C.  R.  of  Conn.) 

Children  (Records  gathered  from  town  records  of  Stoning- 
ton, deeds,  and  records  of  N.  Stonington  Church.  Dates  from 
records  prepared  by  Nathaniel  Babcock,  Sr. )  : 

147  Nathaniel,"  Jr.,  b.  Jan.  24,  1735;    m.  Mary  Larrison. 

Jonas,  b.  Feb.  21.  1737;  d.  Oct.  15,  1755.  The  following  was  copied 
from  a  journal  left  by  Nathaniel  Babcock,  Sr. :  "June,  the  9th 
day.  1755,  my  well-beloved  son  Jonas  Babcock  left  home,  and 
June  Ti  he  set  out  for  Norwich  (Ct.)  and  Crown  Point,  and 
Sept.  5  he  arrived  at  Lake  George,  and  the  8th  of  the  month  they 


54  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

had  a  battle  with  the  French  and  Indians ;  24th  of  Sept.  he  was 
taken  sick.  The  4th  of  Oct.  he  left  Lake  George  and  came  to 
Albany.  He  died  Oct.  15,  about  2  o'clock  at  night,  being  in  the 
19th  year  of  his  age.  Oct.  18,  1755,  I  got  to  Albany  in  four  days 
to  see  my  son's  grave  and  fetch  his  clothes,  which  almost  broke 
my  heart.  I  was  gone  eight  days  and  half  from  home." 
Sarah,  b.  Apr.  18,  1739;  d.  Petersburg,  N.  Y.  (?),  Aug.  27,  1792; 
m.  Joseph  Hewett.  They  had  a  son  Joseph  and  a  daughter  Polly, 
who  m.  Caleb  Bentley,  of  Berlin,  N.  Y. 

148  Lucy,  b.  Feb.  12,  1742;    m.  Benjamin  Randall. 

Comfort,   b.  July  3,    1746;    m.    (i)    Apr.   4,    1765,  Wells    (?); 

m.    (2)    Stephen  Hull. 
Amy,  b.  Apr.  14,  1749;    d.  Genesee  Co.,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  18,  1826. 

149  Reuben,  b.   Mar.  2,   1758;    m.   Hannah  Hendricks. 

57.  Elias^  Babcock,  son  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah  (Vose) 
Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  Conn., 
Feb.  20,  171 1-2;  bap.  Stonington,  May  18,  1712;  d.  N.  Ca- 
naan, Conn.,  Feb.  7,  1795;  m.  Nov.  10,  1737,  Anna,  dan.  of 
George  and  Prudence  (Richardson)  Plumb  (?),  b.  1714;  d. 
N.  Canaan,  Conn.,  Nov.  19,  1807.  He  joined  the  N.  Stoning- 
ton Church  June  5,  1738,  and  later  he  belonged  to  a  religious 
sect  known  as  the  Separatists.  Between  1750  and  1775  there 
were  many  Separatist  churches  in  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut, 
and  in  central  and  western  Massachusetts. 

The  following  clause  is  quoted  from  the  will  of  his  grand- 
father, Capt.  James  Babcock :  "My  Will  is  that  in  case  my 
grandson  Elias  Babcock  shall  loose  his  land  (that  I  give  him 
by  Deed  of  Gift)  by  ye  Voluntown  men,  then  I  give  him  the 
one  half  of  the  240  acres  to  be  Equally  Divided  Between  him 
and  Isiah,  to  them,  their  heirs  &  assigns  forever." 

In  1775  Elias  removed  with  his  family  to  N.  Canaan,  Conn., 
where  he  and  wife  spent  the  remainder  of  their  lives.  They 
had  eight  children,  four  of  whom  died  in  infancy  and  four 
lived  to  adult  age. 

Rev.  Rufus  Babcock,  D.D.,  b.  1798,  d.  1875,  was  a  grand- 
son of  the  above-mentioned  Elias.  He  ga.\e  much  time  and 
attention  to  collecting  Babcock  genealogy.  The  writer  met 
and  received  from  him,  in  1870.  certain  Babcock  records.  Af- 
ter Dr.  Babcock's  death  his  son-in-law,  the  Hon.  Horatio 
Gates  Jones,  of  Philadelphia  (since  deceased),  prepared  for 
the  writer,  from  the  records  and  papers  of  Dr.  Babcock,  a 
large  part  of  the  records  of  the  descendants  of  Elias  Babcock, 
found  in  this  volume.     We  believe  these  records  to  be  correct. 

Children : 

Elias,  b.  July  5,  1738;    d.  young. 

150  Elijah,''  b.  Aug.  15,  1739;    m.  Sarah  Brown. 

151  Anna.  b.  July  5,  1743;    m.  Henry  Stevens. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  55 

Nancy,  b.  Apr.  4.  1746;    d.  young;    bap.  June  i,  1746. 

Lydia,  b.  Dec.  9,  1752;    m.  Jabez  Reed.     No  issue.     She  d.  May  14, 

182 1. 
152  Rufus,  b.   Apr.  22,   1758;    m.    (,1)    Zeruiali  Moses;    m.    (2)    Mercy 

Brousmaid. 
Stephen  and  one  other  child ;    d.  young. 

58.  Elizabeth,^  dan.  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah  (Vose)  Bab- 
cock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  Conn., 
Aug.  25,  17 15,  "alx)ut  one  of  ye  clock  in  ye  morning  being 
Thursday;"  bap.  by  Rev.  James  Noyes,  Pastor  of  the  Ston- 
ington  Church,  Aug.  28,  17 15.  She  was  m.  Feb.  5,  1736,  to 
John  Davidson.  It  is  presumed  they  owned  and  Hved  on  a 
farm  close  by  the  farms  of  their  brothers  in  N.  Stonington, 
as  the  will  of  her  grandfather,  Capt.  James  Babcock,  mentions 
land  in  N.  Stonington  that  he  had  sold  "unto  my  grandson 
in  law  Davidson."     No  record  of  their  children  is  found. 

60.  Oliver^  Babcock,  son  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah 
(Vose)  Babcock  (James,  John.  James  ist),  b.  Stoning- 
ton, Conn,  (now  Pendleton  Hill,  N.  Stonington),  July  27, 
1720;  d.  N.  Stonington,  Sept.  25,  1771  ;  m.  Mar.  6,  1740, 
Anna  Avery,  third  child  of  Lieut.  William  and  first  wife, 
Anna  (Richardson)  Avery,  b.  N.  Stonington,  bap.  Apr.  5, 
1724,  d.  Feb.  7,  1803,  in  the  80th  year  of  her  age.  Her  father, 
b.  1687,  was  son  of  John  and  Abigail  ( Cheesebrough )  Avery. 
John,  b.  1654,  was  son  of  Capt.  James  Avery,  b.  England 
1620,  came  to  America  with  his  father,  Christopher  Avery, 
and  settled  at  Poquonoc,  in  the  town  of  Groton,  Conn.,  where 
he  owned  a  large  tract  of  land.  He  was  very  celebrated  both 
in  civil  and  military  life.  In  King  Philip's  War  he  com- 
manded a  company  of  friendly  Indians.  A  monument  erected 
to  his  memory  by  the  Avery  family  stands  upon  the  site  of  his 
former  dwelling  house.  It  is  near  the  Stonington  R.  R.,  sev- 
eral miles  east  of  New  London.  Conn. 

These  records  were  taken  from  Wheeler's  Hist,  of  Stoning- 
ton, which  contains  an  extended  account  of  the  family. 

From  Mr.  Elroy  Avery,  of  657  Woodland  Hills  Avenue, 
Cleveland,  O.,  we  learn  that  nine  of  the  brothers  and  half 
brothers  of  Anna  Avery  were  in  colonial  military  service  be- 
fore or  in  the  Revolutionary  War,  or  both,  and  that  four  of 
them  died  in  service. 

Oliver  Bal3cock  and  his  wife,  Anna,  were  buried  in 
the  "Babcock  Burying  Ground,"  Pendleton  Hill.  His  grave- 
stone is  marked  as  follows:  "In  memory  of  Oliver  Bab- 
cock,   who    died    Sept.    25,    1771,    age    51    yrs."      Later   the 


56  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

remains  of  Oliver  and  his  wife  were  removed  to  the 
Pendleton  Hill  Cemetery.  For  details  of  removal,  see  records 
of  James  Babcock,  Jr.,  father  of  Oliver. 

The  will  of  Capt.  James  Babcock,  of  Westerly,  provided 
that  his  grandsons  Oliver  and  Timothy  were  to  have  the  home- 
stead farm  at  the  death  of  their  mother  Sarah  (Vose)  Bab- 
cock, "to  be  divided  equally  between  them  for  quantity  and 
quality." 

Oliver  built  his  house  about  eighty  rods  south  of  the  old 
homestead,  on  the  land  inherited  from  his  grandfather. 

July  6,  1 77 1,  he  bought  of  Solomon  Avery,  for  £100,  one 
hundred  and  fifty  acres  of  land  in  Voluntown,  "bounded  on 
the  south  by  the  Stonington  line  and  on  the  east  by  Oliver 
Babcock's  land." 

Feb.  27,  1770,  Job  Babcock  conveyed  sixty  acres  of  land  to 
Oliver  Babcock  of  Stonington  for  £75.  and  Mar.  12,  1771, 
Oliver  sold  the  said  land  to  Rev.  Wait  Palmer  for  £80. 

Mar.  3,  1 74 1,  Oliver  and  Anna  Babcock  were  baptized  by 
Joseph  Fish.  Pastor,  and  joined  the  N.  Stonington  Congrega- 
tional Church. 

Oliver  and  Anna  had  twelve  children,  three  of  whom,  viz., 
Rufus,  Charles,  and  Elias,  d.  young. 

Children : 

153  Oliver,"  b.  Jan.  22,   1740;    m.  Mercy  Kinney. 

154  Joshua,  b.  June  5,  1743 ;    m.  Elizabeth  Palmer. 

155  Anne.    b.    July    15,    1745;     ni.    (i)    Sanford    Langworthy ;     m.    (2) 

Anthony  Rhodes. 

156  William  A.,  b.  Mar.  31.  1747;    m.  Lucretia  Davis. 

157  Gersham,  b.  Nov.  9,  1752;    m.  Chloe  Davis. 

158  Altana,  b.  Jan.   14,   1755;    m.  John  Langworthy. 

159  Christopher,  b.  Jan.  28,  1757;    m.  Polly  Benedict. 

160  Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.   15,   1759;    m.  John  Foot. 

161  Daniel,  b.  Aug.  31,  1762;    m.  Content  Potter. 

61.  Grace^  Babcock,  dau.  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah  (Vose) 
Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist).  b.  Dec.  31,  1722, 
Pendleton  Hill,  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  d.  Sept.  2,  1785;  m. 
Aug.  16,  1738.  Samuel  Plumb,  son  of  George  and  Prudence 
(Richardson)  Plumb  (?),  b.  Oct.  4,  1712,  Stonington  (?), 
Conn.,  lived  there  till  1792,  d.  Sept.  5,  1799. 

Her  grandfather,  Capt.  James,  who  in  his  will  forgot  none 
of  the  children  of  his  "son  James  deceased,"  provided  for 
Grace  as  follows :  "I  give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  grand- 
daughter Grace,  the  Daughter  of  my  Son  James,  Deed,  fifty 
pounds  in  money  to  be  pd.  to  her  by  my  Execd.  When  She 
Arrives  at  the  full  age  of  Twenty  years,  or  at  Ye  day  of  Mar- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  57 

riage  Which  Shall  first  Hapi^eii."     It  will  be  noticed  that  she 
married  before  she  "arrived  at  the  full  age"  of  sixteen  years. 
Records    of   children    from    Plumb    Genealogy;     all    b.    in 
Stonington : 

Grace,  b.  Apr.  29,  1739;    "i-  David  Palmer. 

Twins   (not  named),  b.  Apr.   14,   1741  ;    d.   same  day. 

George,  b.  May  28,  1742;  d.  Oct.  2,  1765,  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.  Was 
in  the  French  and  Indian  War  from  1757  to  1763. 

Sarah,  b.  July  10.  1744;    m.  John  Safford. 

Samuel,  b.  Aug.  14,  1746;  m.  (i)  Lucy  Layton,  and  removed  to 
Vermont;   m.  (2)  . 

Tames,  b.  Sept.  30,  1748;  d.  Halifax,  Vt.,  July  12,  1827;  m.  (i) 
Lydia  Safford;  m.  (2)  Phebe  Miner;  m.  (3)  Eunice  Miner,  and 
removed  to  Vt.  1798.  Had  sixteen  children,  twelve  born  in  Ston- 
ington, four  in  Vt.     Was  a  Revolutionary  soldier. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  23,  17S0-1 ;  m.  Christopher  Clark,  Dec.  18,  1771, 
in  R.  I. 

Prudence,  b.  May  11.  1753:    d-  Sept.  6.  1754. 

Joseph,  b.  July  2.  1755:  was  twice  married.  Eleven  children.  Re- 
moved to  Castleton.  Vt.,  then  to  Westfield.  N.  Y. ;  d.  in  Castle- 
ton,  Vt.  Was  at  Fort  Griswold  when  the  massacre  occurred ; 
escaped. 

Mary.  b.  July  17,   1757;    m.  Sands  Perkins,  in  R.  I. 

Nathaniel,  b.  Apr.  4,  1760;  m.  Aug.  17,  1781.  Anna  Langworthy. 
and  settled  in  Brownsville.  N.  Y.  Nathaniel  was  a  Revolutionary 
soldier  from  Apr.,  1777.  to  Apr..  1778. 

David,  b.  Mar.  6.  1763;    d.  Mar.  17.  1764. 

Temperance,  b.  May  i.  1765;    m.  Robert  Peckham. 

62.  Timothy,^  youngest  son  of  James.  Jr.,  and  Sarah 
(Vose)  Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  at  the 
homestead  on  Pendleton  Hill,  Conn.,  Oct.  12,  1724,  "about 
9  or  10  of  ye  clock,  afternoon  being  Munday"  (S.  T.  R.)  ;  d. 
there  Dec.  3.  1795;  m.  (i)  Lois  Billings,  dau.  of  James  and 
Mary  (Hewitt)  Billings.  Shed.  Oct.  14,  1756:  m.  (2)  Nor- 
wich, (Tonn.,  Oct.  20.  1757.  by  Peter  Powers.  Pastor,  Thank- 
ful Read,  dau.  of  John  and  Lydia  (Caswell)  Read,  of  Nor- 
wich, Conn.,  b.  Oct.  31,  1725. 

Timothy  owned  and  occupied  the  old  homestead.  By  the 
will  of  his  grandfather,  Capt.  James  Babcock,  the  homestead 
farm  was  to  be  divided  e(jually,  "for  quantity  and  quality," 
between  Oliver  and  Timothy  at  the  death  of  their  mother, 
Sarah  (Vose)  Babcock. 

Dec.  20,  1746,  Timothy  received  by  deed  from  his  mother 
fifty  acres  of  land  in  Voluntown,  bounded  on  the  south  by 
Nathaniel  Babcock's  land  and  otherwise  carefully  bounded  on 
all  sides.  This  may  have  been  a  part  of  the  homestead  which 
was  to  be  hers  during  life.  Feb.  11,  1753,  she  deeded  to  her 
son  Timothy  "in  consideration  of  ye  sum  or  annual  payments 
of  £85  old  tenor,"  a  "parcel  of  land,"  etc.     There  is  no  doubt 


58  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

that  this  deed  conveyed  that  part  of  the  homestead  farm  which 
by  the  will  of  Capt.  James  was  hers  during  life  and  at  her 
death  was  to  be  Timothy's. 

Timothy  was  a  farmer  and  a  merchant,  having  a  country 
store  adjoining  his  house.  The  house  stood  partly  in  Volun- 
town  and  partly  in  N.  Stonington.  It  was  destroyed  by  fire 
in  1880,  was  rebuilt,  and  was  again  destroyed  by  fire  in  1901. 

His  will  bears  date  Mar.  3,  1776,  nineteen  years  prior  to 
his  death.  It  provides  that  his  wife  shall  have  the  use  of  the 
property  during  her  life,  or  until  she  should  again  marry.  His 
five  girls  and  four  boys  are  mentioned  in  this  will.  His  eldest 
son,  Timothy,  is  named  as  sole  executor. 

Children : 

Lois,  b.  Apr.  18,  1746;  m.  Oliver  Clark,  Jan.  7,  1797.  Oliver  Clark 
and  wife,  Lois,  gave  a  receipt  for  £5  sterling  to  Timothy  Bab- 
cock, the  executor,  for  the  legacy  received  from  her  honored 
father,   Timothy  Babcock. 

162  Timothy,"  b.  Aug.  22,   1747;    m.  Esther  Billings. 

Jesse,  b.  Mar.  29,  1750.  "May  16,  1796,  Timothy  Babcock,  of  Ash- 
ford,  Conn.,  and  Jesse  Babcock,  of  Stonington,  Conn.,  for  £300 
conveyed  to  Amos  Crandall,  one  half  part  of  all  the  real  estate 
with  buildings  thereon  of  their  father  Timothy  Babcock,  deceased, 
partly  in  Stonington  and  partly  in  Voluntown." 

163  Grace,  b.   Sept.  4,   1753;    m.   Samuel   Plumb,  Jr. 

Desire,  b.  May  17,  1756;  m.  Vose  Palmer,  probably  son  of  William 
and  Phebe  (Darrow)  Palmer,  b.  Oct.  9,  1754.  "Dec.  5,  1795, 
John  Babcock,  brother  of  Desire,  conveyed  to  Vose  Palmer,  for 
i'loo,  all  his  interest  in  the  real  estate  of  his  father,  Timothy 
Babcock.  This  occurred  two  days  after  the  death  of  Timothy. 
The  year  following,  June  16,  Vose  Palmer  and  wife.  Desire,  con- 
veyed the  property  bought  of  John,  to  Amos  Crandall,  of  Volun- 
town. for  £135.  Later  Vose  Palmer  and  wife  sold  the  farm  on 
which  they  lived  and  moved  west,"  which  in  those  days  meant 
the  State  of  New  York. 

Children  of  second  wife,  b.  in  N.  Stonington : 

Sarah,  b.  Jan.  20,  1761  ;  m.  Jan.  22,  1792,  Stanton  Campbell,  of 
Voluntown.  Town  records  show  that  on  Feb.  23,  1793,  James 
Babcock,  conveyed  any  interest  which  he  might  have  in  his 
father's  property,  to  Stanton  Campbell,  his  brother-in-law,  for 
£30,  and  on  Feb.  i,  1796,  Stanton  Campbell  conveyed  this  interest, 
which  the  deed  reads  was  "one  fourth  of  the  whole  real  estate 
Timothy  Babcock  died  possessed  of,"  to  Amos  Crandall  for  £30. 

Anne,  b.  Mar.  20,  1763.  She  with  her  sister  received  by  her  father's 
will  certain  personal  property. 

164  John,  b.  July  26,  1765;    m.  Louisa  Gilmore. 

165  James,   b.   July   5,    1770;     m.    (i)    Sarah   Budlong;     m.    (2)    Dolly 

Scott;    m.    (3)    Prudence  Waters;    m.   (4)    Lois  Hibbard. 

The  records  of  Timothy  Babcock  and  his  descendants  found 
in  this  volume  were  supplied  by  Col.  Andrew  Jackson  Bab- 
cock, son  of  Robert  and  Lucy  (Blackman)  Babcock,  and  great 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  59 

grandson  of  Timothy  and  Thankful  (Read)  Babcock.  For 
further  history  see  Col.  Babcock's  records. 

63.  Joshua'^   Clark,   son  of  Elder  Thomas  and   Elizabeth 
(Babcock)  Clark  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

Apr.  26,  1717;  d.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Mar.  8,  1793;  m.  1738, 
Hannah  Cottrell,  b.  1719,  d.  Nov.  4,  1808.  Settled  in  that  part 
of  Westerly  which  is  now  Hopkinton,  R.  I.  In  the  early  part 
of  his  life  he  was  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  by  virtue  of  his 
office  solemnized  marriages.  He  represented  Westerly  in  the 
Colonial  Legislature  in  1753,  '54,  '56;  represented  Hopkinton 
at  its  incorporation  in  1757,  also  in  1758  and  1766. 

He  was  one  of  the  original  incorporators  of  Brown  Univer- 
sity, was  ordained  an  elder  of  what  is  now  the  First  S.  D.  B. 
Church  of  Hopkinton,  Alay,  1768.  For  the  last  twenty-five 
years  of  his  life  he  was  pastor  of  that  church.  During  his 
ministry  three  hundred  and  ninety-five  members  were  added 
to  the  church. 

His  remains  were  interred  in  the  Clark  burying  ground, 
which  is  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Pawcatuck  River  a  half  mile 
above  the  "meetinghouse"  bridge.  His  remains  were  after- 
ward removed  and  reinterred  in  the  First  Hopkinton  Ceme- 
tery upon  the  spot  formerly  occupied  by  the  "meetinghouse" 
in  which  he  so  long  preached.  His  name  is  recorded  upon 
"The  Ministers'  Monument,"  erected  there  in  1899. 

His  eighth  child.  Elder  Henry  Clark,  m.  Dec.  5,  1776, 
Catherine  Pendleton,  dau.  of  Sylvester  (?)  and  Anna  ( ?) 
Pendleton,  of  Westerly,  b.  Mar.  13,  1757.  Elder  Henry  Clark 
was  for  many  years  pastor  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Brook- 
field,  N.  Y.  In  1902  Mr.  Cyrus  Clark  Van  Deventer,  of  King- 
man, Kan.,  published  a  book  called  Ancestors  and  Descend- 
ants of  Rev.  Henry  Clark  and  Wife,  Catherine  Pendleton. 

Children,  all  recorded  in  Hopkinton  (see  A.  V.  R.)  : 

Phineas."  b.  Feb.  2t„  1740. 
Joshua,  b.  Aug.  17,  1741. 
Ethan,  b.  Mar.  7,  1745. 
Hannah,  b.  May  4.  1747. 
Thomas,  b.  June  10.  1749. 
Elizabeth,  b.   Nov.   14,   1751. 
Arnold,  b.  Mar.  17,  1754. 
Henry,  b.  Dec.  2,  1756. 
Willett,  b.  Oct.  20,  1759. 
Nathan,  b.  Feb.  7,  1762. 
Job  Bennett,  b.  May  13,  1765. 

64.  Col.  Nathan^  Babcock.  son  of  Samuel  and  Ann  Pendle- 
ton)   Babcock    (James,  John,  James   ist),  b.   Westerly, 


6o  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

R.  I.,  Nov.  25,  1726;  d.  Westerly,  Jan.  24,  1804  (date  from 
gravestone  in  Babcock  burying  ground);  m.  (i)  May  19, 
1748,  Deborah  Stafford,  of  Warwick,  b.  17 18,  d.  Nov.  28, 
1763;  m.  (2)  Westerly,  May  20,  1764,  Elizabeth  Brown,  of 
Stonington;  d.  Apr.  23,  1779,  in  her  fifty-first  year  (record 
from  gravestone)  ;  m.  (3)  Aug.  26,  1779,  Nancy  (or  Anne) 
Lewis,  dau.  of  Nathaniel  Lewis,  of  Hopkinton ;  m.  (4)  Feb. 
6,  1782,  Dorcas  Babcock,  dau.  of  41  David  and  Dorcas 
(Brown)  Babcock,  of  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  b.  Mar.  14.  1745. 

Col.  Nathan  Babcock  represented  Westerly  in  the  Rhode 
Island  General  Assembly  1 760-1.  He  was  appointed  by  the 
General  Assembly  in  May,  1761,  Colonel  of  Kings  County 
Regiment  of  Militia.  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  vi.)  He  was  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace  in  1755. 

The  town  of  Westerly,  Feb.  12,  1776,  voted  that  "the  tw'O 
field  pieces  ordered  by  the  General  Assembly  to  be  deposited 
in  this  town  be  stationed  near  the  sea  on  the  land  of  Nathan 
Babcock,  2d  Esq.,  and  to  be  used  on  any  sudden  invasion  as 
need  requires." 

June  3,  1777,  Nathan  Babcock  was  appointed  one  of  a  com- 
mittee of  three  to  secure  materials  for  an  "Amunition  Cart." 

It  is  noticed  that  Oliver  Babcock,  youngest  son  of  John  and 
Mary  (Lawton)  Babcock  had  a  son  Nathan,  b.  Oct.  12,  171 5. 
It  is  possible  that  some  of  the  records  above  given  apply  to  him. 

Children,  all  b.  in  Westerly  (see  A.  V.  R.)  : 

166  Thomas,"  b.  July  29,  1749;    m.  Sarah  Wareman. 

Benjamin,  b.  Apr.  7,  1751;  m.  Desire  Billings,  of  Stonington, 
Feb.  4,  1779.     Emigrated  to  Pa. 

167  Anna,  b.  Nov.  9,  1752;    m.  Rowland  Champlain. 
Mercy,  b.  Oct.   12,   1754;    d.  young. 

Samuel,  b.  Mar.  22,  1757;  m.  May  22,  1779,  Lucy  Wilcox.  Re- 
moved to  Brookfield,  N.  Y. 

Nathan,  b.  June  19.  1759.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been  one  of  eight 
men  drowned  off  Point  Judith  by  the  upsetting  of  a  boat.  They 
were  on  their  way  to  join  Sullivan's  expedition  at  Newport. 

Children  of  Nathan  and  second  wife: 

168  Andrew,  b.  Apr.  6,  1765;    m.  Bathsheba  Pendleton. 
i6g  Jonathan,  b.  Dec.  14,  1766;    m.  Elizabeth  Adams. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Westerly,  Oct.  30,  1768;  m.  Sept.  21,  1801,  John  Wil- 
bur, of  Brookfield,  N.  Y. 

170  Charles,  b.  Aug.  23,   1770;    m.  Tacy  Langworthy. 

171  Deborah,  b.   Aug.   16,   1772;    m.   George  Pendleton. 

Child  of  Nathan  and  third  wife: 

Mercy,  b.  July  21,   1780. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  6l 

Children  of  Nathan  and  fourth  wife: 

172  Nathan,  b.  Oct.  30,  1783;    m.  Patty  Barber. 
172)  David,  b.  Aug.  16,  1784;    m.  Fanny  Tifft. 

Dorcas,  b.  Apr.  20,  1786;    d.  i860;    m.  Nathan  Barber,  Jr.,  son  uf 
Nathan  and   Marv    (Pendleton)    Barber. 

Asa,  b.  Feb.  25,  1788. 

65.  Elizabeth^,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Ann  (Pendleton)  Bab- 
cock, b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  May  6,  1729.  There  was  an- 
other Elizabeth  Babcock  contemporary  with  the  above,  dau.  of 
Daniel  and  Abigail  Balxock,  b.  Jan.  13,  1 730-1.  Which 
one  of  the  two  Elizabeths  married  John  Burdick  we  cannot 
determine. 

Elizabeth  Balxock  and  John  Burdick  were  m.  in  Westerly, 
Dec.  I,  1750,  by  William  Hern,  Justice.  John  Burdick,  son 
of  Hubbard  (  ?)  and Burdick  was  b.  May  19,  1721. 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly,  R.  I.  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Maxson,  b.  Jan.  22,  1752. 
Thompson,  b.   Sept.    i,    I7.S3- 
Anne,  b.  Feb.  2,  1755. 
John.  b.  Sept.  20,  1756. 
Paul,  b.  Oct.  24,  1759. 
Abigail,  b.  Nov.  22,  1761. 
Sarah,  b.  Sept.  7,  1763. 
Frances,  b.   Alar.  29,    1765. 

66.  Samuel^  Babcock,  Jr.,  second  son  of  Samuel  and  Ann 
(Pendleton)    Babcock    (James,    John.    James    ist),    b. 

Westerly,  R.  I.,  May  16,  1731;  d.  there  Mar.  23.  1813;  m. 
Westerly,  Jan.  23,  1755,  Mary  Smith,  dau.  of  Benoni  and 
Ruth  (Pendleton)  Smith,  b.  W'esterly.  Oct.  2,  1733,  d.  West- 
erly, May  I,  1822.  Both  were  buried  in  the  Masatuxet  (Bab- 
cock) burying  ground.  Westerly,  and  have  inscribed  stones. 

On  Oct.  2,  1777,  three  boats,  each  containing  seven  men, 
were  fitted  out  in  Westerly  to  join  Sullivan's  expedition  on 
the  island  of  Rhode  Island.  In  passing  Point  Judith  in  the 
night,  when  the  sea  was  very  rough,  two  of  the  boats  were 
capsized,  and  of  the  fourteen  men  thrown  into  the  sea  eight 
were  drowned.  So  far  as  known,  their  names  were  William 
Babcock,  Nathan  Babcock,  Nathan  Babcock,  Joseph  Hall,  Zeb- 

ulon  Pendleton,  Isaac  Pendleton,  and Bigelow.    The  first 

two,  William  and  Nathan  Babcock,  were  the  eldest  sons  of 
Samuel,  Jr.,  and  Mary  Smith  Babcock.  Their  third  son,  Paul, 
was  amonsf  the  number  thrown  into  the  sea  but  was  rescued. 
The  second  Nathan  drowned  was  son  of  Col.  Nathan.  West- 
erly and  Its  Witnesses,  by  Dennison,  contains  an  interesting 
account  of  the  accident. 


62  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children  : 

William,  b.  Dec.  22,  1755;    drowned  Oct.  2.  1777. 
Nathan,  b.  Mar.  5,  1758;    drowned  Oct.  2,  1777. 

174  Paul,"   b.    Mar.    30,    1760;     m.    Charlotte   Crandall. 
Fanny,  b.  Jan.  25,   1762;    unm. 

175  Silas,  b.  Apr.    10,    1764;    m.   Mercy  Kenyon. 

176  Jared.  b.  Feb.  11,  1766;    m.  (i)  Martha  Lewis;    ni.  (2)  Amy  Lewis. 

177  Thankful,  b.   Feb.    15,   1768;    m.  James  Crandall. 
Zebulon,  b.  Mar.  2,  1770. 

Ruth,  b.  Dec.  14,  1771. 

Mary  (Polly),  b.  May  20,  1773;    unm. 

Anna,  b.  Nov.  20,  1776;    d.  1859;    m.  in  Hopkinton,  Mar.  22,  1818, 

Peleg  Babcock. 
Hannah,  b.  Feb.  11,  1779. 

67.  IsAAC^  Babcock.  son  of  Daniel  and  Abigail  (Thomp- 
son) Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  Apr.  24,  1724;  m.  at  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  17,  1746, 
Mary,  dan.  of  Jonah  and  Rebecca  (Prentice)  Worden,  b.  Bos- 
ton, England.  Isaac  was  made  a  freeman  May  6,  1746.  He 
was  Justice  of  Westerly  1763-4. 
Children,  recorded  in  Westerly : 

178  Phebe."  b.  July  24,  1748;    m.  Ezekiel  Gavitt,  Jr. 

179  John  Prentice,  b.  Oct.  4,  1750;    m.  Anna  Gavitt. 

180  Isaac,  b.  Jan.  15,  1754;    m.  Amy  Gavitt. 

181  Mary,  b.  Mar.  11.  1757;    m.  Peleg  Ross,  Jr. 

182  Amos,  b.  Aug.  i,  1759:    m.  Mary  Babcock. 
Rebecca,  b.  Oct.  21,  1761. 

Rhoda,  b.  Aug.  21,  1764,  in  Westerly;  d.  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  20, 
1852;  m.  (i)  Mar.  31,  1788,  George,  son  of  Ezekiel  and  Mary 
(Brian)  Gavitt,  b.  Westerly.  Oct.  28,  1766;  m.  (2)  Oct.  20.  1816, 
Nathan  Pendleton,  whose  first  wife  was  Amelia,  dau.  of  Col. 
James  Babcock.     He  d.   Norwich,   N.  Y.,  Jan.   26,   1841. 

Judah,  b.  July  13,  1766.  Was  a  lawyer.  Went  to  England  to  ob- 
tain money  claimed  by  the  family  but  failed  in  his  efforts. 

183  Jesse,  b.  June   16,   1768;    m.   Hannah  Thompson. 
Abigail,  twin  to  Jesse,  b.  June  16,  1768. 

184  Joshua,  b.  June  2^,,  1770;    m.  Ruth  Greene. 

Hannah,  twin  to  Joshua,  b.  June  23,  1770;    m.  Denison  Avery. 

68.  William^  Babcock,  second  son  of  Daniel  and  Abigail 
(Thompson)  Balxock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b. 
Westerly,  R.  I.,  Mar.  11,  1725-6;  m.  by  William  Babcock,  Jus- 
tice, Jan.  28,  1749,  Patience  Cottrell.  He  was  Justice  of  the 
Peace  for  Westerly  1769-70. 
Children,  born  in  Westerly  : 

185  William,"  b.   Feb.  2^,   1750;    m.   Penelope 


186  Anna,  b.   Mar.  26,   1753;    m.   Robert  Thompson. 
Esther,  b.  Jan.  2.  1755. 
Eunice,  b.   Feb.  23,   1757. 
Hannah,   b.    May  29,    1763. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  63 

69.  Joshua,-'''  third  son  of  Daniel  and  Abigail   (Thompson) 
Babcock   (James.  John,  James   ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 

Dec.  7,  1728;    m.  Jan.  10,  1754,  Sarah  Berry. 
Children  (\V.  T.  R.)  : 

Susannah,  b.  Jan.  11,  1755. 
Richard,  b.  Feb.  ic,  1756. 
Daniel,  b.  Sept.   10,   1757. 

70.  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  only  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Abigail 
(Thompson)    Babcock    (James,    John,    James    ist),    b. 

Westerly,  Jan.    13.   1730-1  ;  d.   Nov.   12,   1760;  m.   Sept.    19, 
1754,  Nathan  Smith,  son  of  Benoni  and  Ruth    (Pendleton) 
Smith,  of  Westerly,  b.  Feb.  18,  1732-3. 
Children : 

Joseph,  b.  June  15,  1755. 
William,  b.  Mar.   18,  1757. 
Joshua,  b.  May  6,   1759. 

71.  James,^  fifth  child  of  Daniel  and  Abigail   (Thompson) 
Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  June  2,  1733;  m. 

Mary  Satterlee. 
Children  : 

187  James,"  b.  July  31,   1753;    m.  Jan.  26,   1777,   Sarah  Ross. 
1S8  Daniel,  b.  Feb.  25.  1755;    m.  Hannah  Burdick. 
189  Henry,  b.  June  23,  1757,  Prudence  Gavitt. 
Mary,   b.   Sept.   22,   1761. 
Content,  b.  Mar.  19,  1764. 

Barrodell,  b.  Jan.    19.   1766;    m.   in  Hopkinton,  Mar.  24,   1791,  John 
Tanner,   son  of  John   and   Mary   Tanner,   b.    Aug.   27,    1766.     (A. 
V.  R.) 
Lois,   b.    May   20,    1768;     m.    Mar.   3,    1794,    in   Hopkinton,    Stephen 
Tanner,     son    of    John    and    Mary    Tanner,    b.     Dec.     14,     1769 
(A.  V.  R.) 
Patience,  b.   Dec.  25,    1770. 
Gideon,  b.  Apr.  30,  1773. 

72.  Elder  Elkanah,^  son  of  Daniel  and  Abigail   (Thomp- 
son)   Babcock    (James,  John,  James    ist).  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Aug.  21,  1738;  (1.  Westerly,  June  27,  1821;  m.  Mar. 
14,  1762,  Esther  Crandall,  dau.  of  John,  Jr.,  and  Esther  Cran- 
dall,  of  Westerly.  She  d.  Oct.  2,  183 1,  in  her  ninety-second 
year. 

Elkanah  Babcock  was  Captain  of  Westerly  Militia  in  1770, 
Justice  of  the  Peace  in  1774.  'Tn  July,  1780,  he  was  appointed 
recruiting  officer  for  the  army  from  the  town  of  Westerly." 
(C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  ix.)  By  a  vote  of  the  town  of  Westerly, 
June  8,   1777,  a  military  company  was  organized  with  Elka- 


64  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

nah  Babcock  Captain.  Elkanah  was  the  third  pastor  (all 
Babcocks)  of  the  "Hill  Church"  of  Westerly.  He  was  or- 
dained Apr.  ly,  1787.  For  a  portion  of  his  life  he  was  in- 
clined to  the  theory  of  Universalism.  After  his  return  from 
a  Western  trip,  he  again  preached  his  early  faith. 

Both  Elder  Elkanah  and  his  wife  Esther  were  buried  in 
the  so-called  Babcock  ground,  "a  sjwt  in  the  open  pasture, 
about  two  hundred  yards  south  of  the  Robinson  Frazer  house 
and  near  the  railroad."     (W.  and  W.) 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Melinda,    b.    Feb.   25,    1763;     m.    May    16,    1791,   Walter  Brand,    of 
Westerly. 

190  Joshua,"  b.  May  8,  1766;    ni.  Nancy  Crandall. 

191  Delight,  b.  Feb.  8,  1768;    m.  Lemuel  Vose. 

192  Amelia,  b.  Mar.  5,  1770;    m.  Amos  Stanton. 
Bradley,  b.  May  14,  1772;    d.  young. 

193  Rev.  Luke,  b.  May  i,  1774;    m.  Desire  Frink. 
Hannah,  b.   May  28,    1777. 

194  Chauncey,  b.  Nov.  28,  1779;    m.  Prudence  Stanton. 

195  Lodowic'k,  b.  Jan.  27,  1781  ;    m.  Mary  Davis. 

196  Esther,  b.  Apr.  9,  1784;    m.  Stephen  Smith. 

Elder  Elkanah,  Jr.,  b.  June  29,  1786;    m.  Demsey  Stanton. 

73.  Col.  Henry'"'  Babcock  (Col.  Harry),  eldest  son  of  the 
Hon.  Joshua  and  Hannah  (Stanton)  Babcock  (James, 
John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  May  25,  1736;  d.  Ston- 
ington,  Oct.  7,  1800  (date  of  death  of  Henry  and  wife  from 
gravestones)  ;  m.  at  Stonington,  Dec.  2,  1764,  Mary  Stanton, 
dau.  of  Robert  and  Anna  Stanton,  of  Stonington,  I3.  Nov.  8, 
1 74 1  (record  of  Mary  by  Wheeler)  ;  d.  Apr.  19,  18 18. 

Henry  Babcock  entered  Yale  College  when  he  was  twelve 
years  old,  and  was  graduated  at  the  head  of  his  class  in  1752, 
at  the  age  of  sixteen.  Records  show  that  Oct.  14,  1751,  he 
was  bap.  and  united  with  the  First  Baptist  Church  in  Boston. 
In  1788  he  united  with  the  First  Ecclesiastical  Society  of  Ston- 
ington, by  letter  from  the  First  Baptist  Church  of  Boston. 

In  1755  he  was  Captain  of  a  Westerly  company  raised  to 
join  the  British  forces  against  the  French  at  Crown  Point ; 
served  in  Col.  Harris's  Regiment.  In  1756  he  was  Major; 
1757,  Lieutenant  Colonel.  In  1758  he  was  Colonel  of  a  Rhode 
Island  Regiment  of  one  thousand  men,  which  marched  against 
the  French  at  Ticonderoga.  In  the  engagement  one  hundred 
and  ten  of  his  men  were  killed  or  wounded,  and  he  was 
wounded  in  the  knee  by  a  musket  l)all.  In  1759  he  served  un- 
der Gen.  Amherst,  by  w'hom  he  was  publicly  thanked,  in  the 
taking  of  Ticonderoga  without  the  loss  of  a  man.     He  had 


COLONEL    HARRY    BABCOCK. 
I 736- I 800. 

From  a  portrait  by  J.  Blackburn,  of  London,  1756,  owned  by 

W.  Irving  Babcock,  New  York  City.  Page  64. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  65 

then  served  with  (hstinguished  honors  in  five  campaig-ns 
a<iainst  the  French.  {\\\  extended  account  of  his  military 
career  can  be  found  in  the  C.  R.  of  R.  I.) 

In  1 76 1  he  visited  England,  where  he  was  treated  with  great 
respect.  He  was  introduced  to  the  Queen,  and  it  is  said  that 
instead  of  kissing-  her  hand,  as  was  the  custom  of  people  in  his 
rank,  he  boldly  kissed  her  cheek,  remarking  that  such  was  the 
"mark  of  politeness  in  America."  The  correctness  of  this 
statement  is  doubted.  A  portion  of  the  time  while  there  he 
served  as  an  engineer  at  the  Woolwich  Arsenal,  and  the  train- 
ing gained  there  pro\ed  of  great  service  to  him  in  the  War 
of  the  Revolution. 

Soon  after  his  return  to  America  he  married,  settled  upon 
his  farm  in  the  town  of  Stonington,  upon  the  Pawcatuck 
River,  a  mile  below  the  village  of  Westerly,  R.  I.,  and  com- 
menced the  practice  of  law.  When  the  struggle  against  the 
mother  country  commenced,  he  was  a  stanch  patriot.  He  was 
appointed  by  the  Rhode  Island  Legislature  commander  of  the 
forces  at  Newport.  Here  he  displayed  the  skill  acquired  at 
Woolwich,  England.  On  an  open  beach  he,  by  his  own  firing, 
with  an  eighteen-pounder,  drove  off  a  British  man-of-war. 

In  1777  he  had  a  severe  fit  of  sickness  which  so  affected  his 
mind  that  he  never  entirely  recovered. 

It  is  said  that  "Col.  Henry  Babcock  was  a  man  of  fine 
physique,  accomplished  manners,  commanding  voice,  and  an 
eloquent  speaker." 

He  died  Oct.  7,  1800,  and  was  buried  in  the  family  burying 
ground  on  his  own  farm.  The  writer  in  1900  visited  the 
grave.  The  well-kept  burying  ground,  surrounded  by  a  hand- 
some wall,  is  near  the  west  bank  of  the  Pawcatuck  River, 
about  a  mile  below  the  village  of  Westerly,  and  near  the  Clark 
thread  mills.  In  this  cemetery  are  the  graves  of  Col.  Bab- 
cock. his  wife,  and  many  of  their  descendants. 

Children,  b.  in  Stonington : 

Benjamin  Franklin,  b.  Nov.  6,  1765;    d.  July  27.  1781. 

197  Major  Paul,"  b.  Mar.   13,   1768;    m.    (i)   Nancy  Bell;    m.    (2)   Lucy 

Bell. 

198  Dudley,  b.  Jan.  7,    1770;    m.   Ann    (Nancy)    Wright. 

Capt.   Joshua,   b.   Oct.   25,    1772;    d.   at   sea,    Mar.,    1798,   on   voyage 
from  Havana  to  Hamburg   (date  from  gravestone). 

199  Hannah,  b.  Nov.  30,  1773;    m.  Joseph  Denison  Phelps. 

74.     Rev.  LuKE^  Babcock,  son  of  Dr.  Joshua  and  Plannah 
(Stanton)  Balxock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, July  6,   1738;    d.  at  Phillipsburg   (?),  N.  Y.,  Feb.   18, 
5 


66  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

1777;   ni.  1770  (  ?),  Grace,  dan.  of and  Mary  (Rumsey) 

Isaacs,  1).  June  15,  1743.  Her  father  was  a  converted  Jew 
from  Hambnrg,  Germany,  who  m.,  at  Fairfield,  Conn.,  Mar. 
7,  1725,  Mary  Rumsey,  b.  1705,  d.  Jan.  16,  1770.  Husband 
and  wife  were  buried  at  Norwalk,  Conn.  Grace  was  a  cousin 
of  Judg'e  Isaacs,  of  Connecticut. 

Luke  Babcock  graduated  at  Yale  College,  class  of  1755.  In 
1774  King's  College,  New  York  City,  conferred  upon  him  the 
degree  of  A.M.  He  was  ordained  an  Ej^iscopal  clergyman  by 
the  Bishop  of  London,  England,  and  appointed  to  a  mission 
in  Westchester,  N.  Y. 

While  his  father  and  brothers  were  stanch  patriots,  Rev. 
Luke  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  War  of  the  Revolution  was 
an  ardent  supporter  of  the  king  and  the  Church  of  England. 
In  Apr.,  1775,  a  large  number  of  Loyalists  assembled  at  White 
Plains  and  adopted  the  following  Protest :  "We  the  subscrib- 
ers, freeholders  and  inhabitants  of  Westchester,  having  as- 
sembled at  the  White  Plains  in  consequence  of  certain  adver- 
tisements, do  now  declare  that  we  met  here  to  declare  our 
honest  abhorrence  of  all  unlawful  congresses  and  committees, 
and  that  we  are  determined,  at  the  hazard  of  our  lives  and 
properties,  to  support  the  King  and  Constitution ;  and  that 
we  acknowledge  no  Representatives  but  the  General  Assembly, 
to  whose  wisdom  and  integrity  we  submit  the  guardianship 
of  our  rights,  liberties,  and  privileges." 

The  fourth  name  affixed  to  this  document  was  that  of  Rev. 
Luke  Babcock,  while  the  third  was  that  of  Rev.  Samuel  Sea- 
buiy,  afterward  Bishop  Seabury,  the  first  Bishop  of  the  Epis- 
copal Church  in  the  United  States. 

The  allegiance  of  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Seabury  and  Babcock  to 
the  king  of  Great  Britain  was  so  offensive  to  the  Whigs  that 
a  party  from  Hartford  and  New  Haven,  Oct.,  1776,  seized 
the  two  gentlemen,  probably  at  their  homes  in  Westchester 
County..  Mr.  Seabury  was  lodged  in  jail  in  New  Haven,  but 
soon  afterward  was  liberated  by  Gov.  Trumbull,  of  Connecti- 
cut. Mr.  Balxock  was  imprisoned  in  Hartford.  Why  Gov. 
Trumbull  did  not  liberate  him  does  not  appear.  He  remained 
in  prison  at  Hartford  until  the  following  Eebruary,  when  his 
health  failed  and  he  was  ordered  to  remove  within  the  lines 
of  the  British  army.  "He  reached  his  home  in  Phillipsburg, 
N.  Y.,  in  a  raging  fever  and  delirious,  and  died  Feb.  18,  1777, 
in  the  thirty-ninth  year  of  his  age.  His  remains  were  de- 
posited in  the  family  vault  of  the  Van  Cortlands."  Bishop 
Seabury  said,  "I  know  not  a  more  excellent  man." 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  67 

Children  (as  given  by  Wells)  : 

Frederick,  b.  Aug.    lo,   1771. 
Courlland,  b.   1773. 

Harriet,  b.  1775;    ni.   (1)  Gilbert  Saltonstall ;    in.  (2)  Marvin  Wait, 
Esq.,  1805. 

75.  Adam*"'  Babcock,  son  of  Dr.  Joshua  and  Hannah  (Stan- 
ton) Bal)cock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
Sept.  zy,  1740;  d.  Boston,  1817;  m.  (i)  at  New  Haven, 
Conn.,  1764  (  ?),  Abigail  Smith,  d.  Dec.  16,  1777,  aged  33 
years;  m.  (2)  Mar.  23,  1779,  Martha  Hubbard,  dau.  of 
Daniel  Hubbard,  of  Boston,  bap.  June  18,  1758,  and  d.  Bos- 
ton, 1837  (?).  (Some  of  the  records  of  births,  marriages, 
and  deaths  in  this  family  were  taken  from  a  work  written  by 
Albert  Wells.) 

Adam  Babcock  seems  to  have  settled  first  in  New  Haven, 
where  he  was  a  merchant  and  an  extensive  ship  owner,  and 
during  the  Revolutionary  War  owned  and  fitted  out  one  or 
more  privateers.  Wells  says  that  for  nine  years  he  lived  in 
Calcutta ;  later  in  life  he  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  d.  He 
and  his  brother  Harry  were  as  zealous  in  the  cause  of  the  colo- 
nies as  their  brother  Luke  was  ardent  in  the  cause  of  the  king. 

From  official  records  of  Connecticut  in  the  War  of  the  Rev- 
olution the  following  is  gathered  : 

Adam  Babcock  with  others  signed  notes  amounting  to  £810, 
the  money  to  be  used  for  fitting  out  an  expedition  against 
Ticonderoga,  but  in  the  meantime  the  fort  was  taken  by  Col. 
Ethan  Allen.  The  money  was  afterward  refunded  by  the 
General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island. 

Dec.  14.  1775,  the  General  Assembly  of  Connecticut,  held 
at  New  Haven,  gave  Adam  Babcock,  of  New  Haven,  permis- 
sion to  export  five  thousand  pounds  of  cheese  to  North  Caro- 
lina to  defray  the  expense  of  a  voyage  there,  to  recover  his 
debt  for  the  sale  of  a  brigantine  there  sold,  provided  he  should 
procure  a  quantity  of  rice  for  the  use  of  the  army. 

Apr.  29,  1776,  the  Council  of  Safety  or  Committee  of  War 
permitted  Adam  Babcock  to  purchase  two  hundred  pounds  of 
gunpower  for  his  privateer  then  fitting  out,  and  Col.  Fitch  was 
authorized,  if  necessary,  to  lend  Mr.  Babcock  powder  from  the 
colony's  stores. 

May,  1776,  Adam  Babcock  and  others  were  licensed  to  erect 
a  powder  mill  at  New  Haven. 

Oct.  22,  1776,  "Adam  Babcock  &  Co.  were  permitted  to  ex- 
port to  Rhode  Island  60  barrels  of  salt  beef  for  their 
privateer." 


68  The  Babcock  Genealogy 


6>.' 


"Voted  to  sell  Adam  IJaljcock  &  Co.  two  cannons  and  car- 
riages taken  on  Ijoard  ship  Guineamon,  and  brought  in  by 
Capt.  Harding  to  New  London." 

In  session  Apr.  22,  1777,  Adam  Babcock  was  allowed  to 
purchase  of  Col.  Porter  ten  four-pound  cannons  and  six  swiv- 
els w^ith  shot  for  them.  June  13,  1777,  he  was  directed  to 
receive  at  Bedford,  in  Massachusetts,  fifty  barrels  of  pork  and 
beef,  property  of  the  State  of  Connecticut,  for  the  ship  Fanny, 
in  return  for  articles  furnished  several  privateers  of  Con- 
necticut. June  I,  1777,  Adam  Babcock  furnished  the  State  of 
Connecticut  for  the  use  oi  the  Continental  liattalions  eight 
bales  of  woolen  cloth,  and  two  bales  of  blankets,  also  sixteen 
bales  woolen  cloth  to  be  transported  to  the  clothier  general. 
In  1777  he  sold  to  Rhode  Island  cloth  for  six  hundred  suits 
of  clothes  for  Continental  soldiers.     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  viii.) 

Adam  Babcock,  of  New  Haven,  was  the  original  complain- 
ant in  the  celebrated  "Leather  breeches  suit"  against  Phineas 
Stanton,  Jr.,  of  Stonington.  The  breeches  in  controversy  w^ere 
worth  thirteen  shillings.  This  suit  and  others  growing  from 
it  were  continued  in  the  courts  for  nine  years.  The  final 
result  was  in  favor  of  Stanton,  who  said  the  case  had  cost 
him  $2,000  more  than  he  received.  A  pamphlet,  consisting  of 
168  pages,  descriptive  of  the  case  was  published.  (Stanton 
Genealogy  by  William  A.  Stanton,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  pp.  45-52.) 

Children  (as  given  by  Wells)  by  first  wife: 

200  William  Smith,"  b.  Nov.  15,  1764;    m.  Elisabeth  Merrill. 

Joshua,  b.   1770;    d.   1790  on   a  voyage  to  Calcutta  with  his  father. 

Another   record   says   he   died   at  "Nonfleur,"   France,   Jan.,    1791, 

of  smallpox. 
A  son,  b.  1773. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Eliza,  b.   Feb.  21,   1780;    d.   in  Boston,  May  9,   1870;    m.  Nathaniel 

Ingersol. 
]\Iartha  Hubbard,  b.   Apr.   7,    1781  ;   m.    (i)   G.   Higginson;    m.    (2) 

his  brother,  James  Higginson. 
Mary  Green,  b.  July,   1782;    m.  John  Gore,  1805. 
Henry,  b.  Apr.  i,  1784.     Settled  on  the  island  of  Bourbon,  m.  there, 

and  had  three  children,  viz.:     (a)   Henry,'  b.   1810   (?);    d.  unm. 

1830    (?).      (b)    Eliza,    b.    1812    (?);     m.    1832.      (c)    Louisa,    b. 

1815   (?);    was  unm.  in  1848. 

201  Francis,  b.  May  6,  1786;    m.  Alice  Wyer. 

Louisa,  b.  Dec.  6,  1799  (?);    d.     Boston,  1824,  unm. 

76.     Hannah^   Babcock,   fourth  child  of  the  Hon.   Joshua 

and  Hannah    (Stanton)    Babcock    (James,   John,  James 

1st),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  22,  1742-3 ;  m.  at  Westerly,  1770, 


ADAM    BABCOCK. 

1 740-1817. 
From  a  portrait  by  Copley,  of  London,  owned  by  Rev.  Edwin  A. 

Blake,  Ph.D.,  D.D..  of  Boston,  :Mass.  Page  67. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  69 

John  Bonrs,  of  Newport,  R.  I.     Settled  at  Newport,  wliere  she 
Hved  the  remainder  of  her  hfetime. 
Chikh'en,  b.  at  Newport : 

Anna,  b.   1771    ( ?). 
Peter,  b.  1773  (?). 

77.  Frances''  Babcock,  dan.  of  Dr.  Joshna  and  Hannah 
(Stanton)  Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, May  II,  1745;  d.  New  London,  Conn.,  Oct.,  i/cS/;  m. 
Westerly,  Dec,  17(^^)5,  Capt.  Dudley  Saltonstall,  son  of  Gov. 
Gurdon  and  Rebecca  (Winthrop)  Saltonstall,  b.  New  London, 
Conn.,  Sept.  8,  1738,  d.  in  West  Indies,  1796. 

Li  early  life  Capt.  Saltonstall  made  numerous  voyages  in 
mercantile  pursuits.  In  the  Revolutionary  War  he  attained 
the  rank  of  Commodore.  We  first  find  him  in  command  of 
the  ship  Trumbull,  twenty-eight  guns.  Apr.  19,  1777,  he  fell 
in  with  two  armed  transports  off  New  York.  After  a  smart 
action  he  captured  both  the  transports,  with  their  stores  of 
value  on  board.  Jn  this  affair  the  English  suffered  severely, 
and  the  Trumbull  herself  lost  seven  men  and  eight  wounded. 
In  1779  his  ship  was  the  Warren,  thirty-two  guns. 

The  same  year  he  had  command  of  the  American  fleet  in 
the  disastrous  Penobscot  expedition.  The  unfortunate  issue  of 
that  expedition  was  attributed  to  unforeseen  obstacles  and  the 
insufficiency  of  the  force,  and  not  to  any  want  of  skill  or 
bravery  in  the  commander.  He  was,  however,  blamed  for  the 
disaster.  He  afterward  commanded  the  privateer  Minerva, 
and  among  the  prizes  taken  was  the  Hannah,  a  merchant  ship 
of  London  bound  for  New  York,  having-  the  most  valuable 
cargo  sent  to  America  during  the  war. 

Children,  h.  in  New  London,  Conn. : 

Hannali,    b.    1767;     m.    Joseph    Wallcy,    a    native    of    England    who 

settled  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y. 
Dudley,  b.  1771  ;    graduated  at  Yale,  settled  in  the  South. 
Thomas,  b.   1772;    d.  in  West  Indies,   1795. 
Frances,  b.  1769. 

Catherine,  b.  . 

Martha,  b.  . 

Joshua,  b.  ;    m.  Abbie,  dau.  of  Thomas  Lewis,  of  Farmington, 

Conn. 

78.  Mary^   Rhodes,   dau.   of  Simon   and  Anne    (Babcock) 
Rhodes  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  Conn., 

Dec.    II,   1758;    m.  Apr.  2,   1780,  Lieut.   Robert  Rogers,  of 
Newport,  son  of  William  Rogers,  a  merchant  of  Newport. 


70  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Robert  Rogers  graduated  from  Rhode  Island  College,  after- 
ward Brown  University,  in  1775;  ser\'ed  as  Second  and.  First 
Lieutenant  in  the  Continental  army  until  the  close  of  the  War 
of  Independence,  and  then  adopted  teaching  as  a  profession, 
first  in  Coventry  and  afterward  in  his  native  town,  Newport, 
R.  I.  He  was  noted  as  being  one  of  the  foremost  educators 
of  his  time;  was  a  Fellow  and  Trustee  of  Rhode  Island  Col- 
lege (Brown  University)  for  many  years,  and  was  Secretary, 
Treasurer,  and  Librarian  of  Redwood  Library,  Newport,  from 
1788  to  his  death,  in  1835.  His  son,  William  Sandford  Rog- 
ers, became  wealthy,  and  by  his  will,  probated  in  1870,  be- 
queathed $50,000  to  Brown  University  to  found  the  Newport 
Rogers  Professorship  of  Chemistry,  in  honor  of  his  father  and 
uncle  William  Rogers,  Jr.,  both  of  whom  were  graduates  of 
Brown  University. 

Children : 

William  S.,  b.  ;    d.   1870. 

Anne,   b.   ;     m.   John   Allston,   brother   of   Washington   Allston, 

the  celebrated  painter. 

79.  SiMON^  Rhodes,  third  child  of  Simon  and  Anne  (Bab- 
cock) Rhodes  (James,  John,  James  ist),  h    Stonington, 

Conn.,  June  22,    1760;    d.    Feb.   8,    1844;    m.   at   Hartford, 
Conn.,  Jan.  14,  1790,  Sally  Woodbridge,  dau.  of  Dr.  Dudley 
and   Sarah    (Sheldon)    Woodbridge,   of   Hartford,   Conn.,  b. 
June  28,  1767;   d.  Feb.  9,  1855. 
Children : 

Nancy,  b.  Sept.  6,  1790;    d.  unm.    Feb.  8,  1871. 
Dudley,  b.  Mar.  8,  1792;    d.  Oct.  18,  1840,  at  Zanesvillc,  O. 
Lucy,   b.   Jan.   12,   1794;    d.   unm.    Mar.   7,   1871. 
Sally,  b.  Aug.  8,  1801  ;    d.  Aug.  28,   1801. 

Simon  Henry,  b.  Jan.  i.  1803;    d.  Oct.  13,  1877;    m.  Bridget  Palmer 
at  Stonington,  Jan.  7,   1828. 

80.  Henry^''  Rhodes,  fourth  child  of  Simon  and  Anne  (Bab- 
cock) Rhodes  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b    Stonington, 

Apr.  25,  1762;    d.  Jan.  7,   1848;    m.  Foster,  settled,  at 

Southampton,  L.  I.  One  of  his  sons,  Foster"  Rhodes,  was  a 
noted  ship1:)uilder,  and  was  employed  in  that  capacity  in  the 
navies  of  Great  Britain  and  Turkey. 

81.  Abigail^    Rhodes,    sixth    child    of    Simon    and    Anne 

(Babcock)  Rhodes  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Ston- 
ington, Conn.,  Oct.  27,  1768;  d.  Warwick,  R.  I.,  Apr.  18, 
1845;  "i-  at  Newport,  R.  I.  (  ?),  Nov.  29,  1785,  Col.  Job 
Greene,  son  of  Col.  Christopher  and  Anne  (Lippitt)   Greene, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  71 

b.  Warwick,  R.  I.,  Nov.  19,  1759,  d.  Warwick,  Aug.  23,  1808. 
Abigail  was  bap.  at  Stonington,  Aug.  20,  1769. 

Children,  all  b.  at  Warwick,  R.  I.   (records  given  by  Hon. 
Henry  L.  Greene,  of  Riverpoint,  R.  I.,  son  of  Simon  Henry)  : 

Christopher,  b.  ;   d.  at  St.  Stephen's  Parish,  S.  C,  Nov.  6,  1825; 

m.,  Charlestown.  S.  C,  Dec.  26,  1815,  Mary  Ann  Lehre,  dau.  of  Dr. 
William  and  Ann  (Miller)  Lehre,  b.  Charlestown,  S.  C,  July  7, 
1793,  cl.  July  I,  1828. 

Susanna,  b.  ;  d.  Warwick.  R.  I.,  Nov.  15,  1869;  m.  at  War- 
wick, June  10,  1809,  Lowell  Spalding,  son  of  Philip  and  Thankful 
(Waterman)  Spalding,  b.  Plainfield,  N.  H.,  Nov.  24,  1780,  d. 
Jan.  12,  1853. 

]\Liry   Ann,    b.    ;     d.    Warwick,    R.    L,    Jan.    30,    1849;     m.    at 

Warwick,  Feb.  21,  1813,  Abner  M.  Warrenson,  b.  Wilbraham, 
Mass.,  Apr.  15,  1787,  d.  Feb.  i,  1816. 

Simon    Henry,    b.    ;    d.    at    Warwick,    Apr.    26,    1885;    m.    at 

Providence,  R.  L,  Mar.  22,  1822,  Caroline  C,  dau.  of  Edward 
and  Susan  (Potter)  Aborn,  b.  Providence,  R.  L,  Feb.  13,  1802, 
d.  Mar.  29,  1829. 

82.  Amelia,^  eldest  daughter  of  Col.  James  and  Sarah 
(Stanton)  Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  1755;  d.  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27,  1814;  m.  Jan. 
22,  1775,  to  Nathan  Pendleton,  son  of  Col.  William  and  Mary 
(Cheesbrough)  Pendleton,  of  Westerly,  b.  there  Apr.  2,  1754, 
d.  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  26,  1841.  Nathan  Pendleton  m.  (2) 
in  Westerly,  Oct.  20,  18 16,  Rhoda  (Babcock)  Gavitt,  dau.  of 
67  Isaac.  Sr.,  and  Mary  (Worden)  Babcock,  and  widow  of 
George  Gavitt,  of  Westerly.  She  was  b.  at  Westerly,  Aug.  21, 
1764;  d.  at  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  20,  1852.  Nathan  with  his 
wife  and  seven  of  the  children  removed  from  Pendleton  Hill, 
Conn.,  to  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  about  1800.  Five  of  the  children 
remained  in  Connecticut  for  a  time. 
Children  of  Nathan  and  first  wife: 

Amelia,  b.  Oct.  20,  1775;    unm. 

Sally,  b.  Aug.  13,  1777;  m.  369  Dea.  John'  Langworthy. 
202  Nathan,"  li.  June  i,  1779;  m.  Phebe  Cole. 

Isaac,   b.   Jan.    16,    1781  ;     m.    (i)    Bridget   Stanton;     m.    (2)    Mary 

Davis. 
Keturah.  b.  Dec.  5,  1782;    m.  Charles  Randall,  son  of  John  Randall. 

Had   sons   Peleg'   and   Simeon,'  and   one   daughter,   Amelia,'   who 

never  married. 
Charlotte,  b.  Oct.  24,  1784;    m.  Christopher  Brown. 
Molly   (Mary),  b.   Dec.   16,   1786;    m.   Charles   Randall,   husband  of 

her  deceased  sister  Keturah. 
Catherine,  b.  July  22,   1789;    m.  ;    d.  in  Oxford,  N.  Y. 
Simeon,  b.  Feb.  7,   1792;    d.  young. 
Simeon,   b.  July  30,   1793 ;    unm. 

William,  b.  ;    m.   (i)   Betsey  Pettet ;    m.   (2)   Rhoda  Wade. 

Peleg,  b.  ALar.  20,  1798;    m.  Lucy  Babcock,  of  Mystic,  Conn.     Lived 

and  died  in  Norwich,  N.  Y. 


72  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

83.  SiMON^  Babcock,  second  child  of  Col.  James  and  Sarah 
(Stanton)  Babcock  (James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, Feb.  27,  1758;  d.  at  Columbia,  Tolland  County,  Conn., 
Apr.,  1851;  m.  at  Westerly,  Apr.  6,  1780,  Hannah  Champ- 
lin,  d.  Dec.  13,  183 1. 

Simon  Babcock  was  a  soldier  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution, 
enlisted  as  a  private  in  Capt.  Samuel  Prentice's  Stonington 
Company  of  Col.  Parsons's  6th  Connecticut  Continental 
Regiment.  The  regiment  took  post  at  Roxbury,  Mass.,  in 
Gen.  Spencer's  Brigade,  and  remained  until  the  expiration  of 
term  of  service,  Dec.  10,  1775. 

We  next  find  Simon  Babcock  a  Sergeant  in  Capt.  Amos 
Green's  Company,  Col.  Joseph  Noyes's  Regiment;  service 
from  Dec.  5,  1776,  to  Jan.  8,  1777 — thirty-five  days;  also 
Ensign  on  pay  roll  for  twenty-nine  days'  service  at  S.  Kings- 
ton ;   reported  discharged  at  Charlestown,  R.  I. 

He  was  a  Revolutionary  Pensioner  under  the  Act  of  Con- 
gress of  1832;  was  then  a  resident  of  Columbia,  Tolland 
County,  Conn.  Under  the  census  of  1840,  he  is  recorded  as  a 
resident  of  Columbia. 

The  following  records  of  his  children  were  taken  from  His- 
tory of  Ancient  Windham,  Conn.,  by  Weaver,  published  in 
1864,  which  states  that  some  of  the  children  were  b.  in  West- 
erly, others  in  Stonington,  Preston,  Franklin,  and  the  young- 
est in  Lebanon,  Conn. : 

Simon,  b.  Apr.  28,  1781. 
John  C,  b.  Sept.  13,  1782. 

203  James,"  b.  June  20,   1784;    m.   Mary  Champlin. 
Hannah,  b.  Dec.  13,  1785. 

Sally,  b.  Dec.  20,  1787. 
Aurelia,  b.  Sept.  3,  1789. 
Thankful,  b.  June  6,  1791. 

204  Stanton,  b.  Dec.  20,  1793;    ni.   (i)  Maria  Robertson;    m.  (2)  Almira 

Barrows. 
Nancy,  b.  Sept.  27,  1795. 
William,  b.  July  30,   1797. 
George  W.,  b.  Mar.  29,   1799  (?). 
Christopher,  b.  Mar.  3,  1801. 
Mariette,  b.  Sept.  30,  1802. 
Betsy,  b.    1804. 

84.  Joanna,^  fourth  child  of  Col.  James  and  first  by  his  sec- 
ond wife,  Joanna   (McDowell)    Babcock   (James.  John, 

James   ist),  b.  Westerly,  June   10,   1770;    m.  June,  6,   1790, 
Capt.  Joseph  Wilbur,  Jr.,  son  of  Joseph  and  Sarah  Wilbur,  b. 
Westerly,  June  14,  1767. 
Children   (A.  V.  R.)  : 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  73 

Joanna,  b.  Oct.  18,  1790. 
Ethan,  b.  Jan.  20,  1792. 
Sally,  b.  Jan.  22,  1793. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  Apr.  17,  1795. 
Colia,  b.  Aug.  17,  1797. 
Charlotte,  b.  Nov.  2,  1800. 

85.  Jonathan,^  Jr.,  son  of  Jonathan  and  Esther  (Hazzard) 
Babcock    (James,  John,  James    ist),  b.   May  30,    1761 

(Wheeler)  ;  m.  Jan.  29,  1795,  Ruth,  dait.  of  Benjamin  and 
Hannah  (Niles)  Rodman,  of  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  b.  there  Aug. 
12,  1763,  d.  S.  Kingston,  Dec.  16,  1795.  Ruth  Ro(hnan  was 
brouglit  up  in  the  village  afterward  called  Peacedale,  in  the 
old  lu>use  which  stood  on  the  site  of  Mr.  John  Hazzard's  man- 
sion house.  Ruth  was  one  of  the  six  daughters  of  Benjamin 
Rodman.  Tradition  says  that  a  gentleman  who  had  been  a 
great  traveler,  was  asked,  "What  is  the  most  beautiful  sight 
you  have  ever  seen  in  your  travels  ?"  and  his  answer  was,  "The 
six  beautiful  daughters  of  Benjamin  Rodman."  They  were 
not  only  beautiful  in  person,  but  were  gifted  with  good  voices 
and  sang  delightfully.  Jonathan  belonged  to  the  Society  of 
Friends. 
Children : 

Ruth  Hannah,  b.  Nov.  25,  1795  (three  weeks  before  the  death  of 
her  mother)  ;    m.  Solomon  Harley. 

86.  Robert  Hazzard-^  Babcock,  third  child  and  second  son 
of  Jonathan   and   Esther    (Hazzard)    Babcock    (James, 

John,  James  ist).  b.  at  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  13,  1763 
(Wheeler);  d.  New  York  City,  Dec.  8,  1848;  m.  at  Point 
Judith,  R.  I.,  Oct.  3,  1793,  Mary,  dau.  of  Stephen  and  Sarah 
(Nichols)  Hazzard,  and  granddaughter  of  Deputy  Gov.  Jona- 
than Nichols.  She  was  b.  at  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Sept.  28, 
1764;  d.  at  New  York  City,  xA.ug.  26,  1851.  Robert  was  En- 
sign in  S.  Kingston  Militia  1792-4.  (Smith.) 
Children : 

205  Jared  Star,"  b.  May  14,  1795;    m.  Diedama  Douglass. 

Sarah  Ann,  b.  Sept.  7,  1797,  at  Stephentown,  N.  Y. ;  d.  Hoboken, 
N.  J.,  May  2,  1877;  ni.  June,  1833,  at  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  John 
Withey,  b.  Apr.  30,  1795,  at  Sand  Lake,  N.  Y.,  son  of  Henry 
and  Esther  (Dimmock)  Withey.  Had  four  children,  who  died 
in    infancy. 

206  Esther,  b.  July  26.   1799;    m.  Roljert  Tift. 

207  Nicholas  Hazzard.  b.  Apr.   17,  1801 ;    m.  Martha  M.  Hamlin. 
Twins,  b.   1803 ;    d.   in  infancy. 

87.  lcii.\B0D^    Babcock,    Jr..    first    child    of    Ichabod    and 
Jemima  (Babcock)  Bal3cock  (John,  John,  James  ist),  b. 

Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.   12,   1731;    d.  Westerly   (?),  Aug.  22, 


74  T^hc  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1801,  m.  Mar.  17,  1756,  Esther,  dan.  of  Col.  Joseph  and  Mary 
(ChanipHn)  Stanton,  of  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  b.  Nov.  23,  1741, 
d.  Westerly,  Nov.   17,  181 3. 

Ichalxul,  Jr.,  was  Ensign  of  a  company  raised  in  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  in  1755,  of  which  Henry  Babcock,  of  Joshua,  was  Cap- 
tain, and  attached  to  Col.  Christopher  Harris's  Rhode  Island 
Regiment  for  the  capture  of  Crow'n  Point.  They  marched  to 
Lake  George,  where  they  joined  the  forces  under  Sir  William 
Johnson. 

He  was  made  a  freeman  in  1757.  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  ix.) 
He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Westerly  in  1761,  '62,  '65. 
(Smith.)  He  was  cornet  in  Capt.  George  Thurston's  Com- 
pany in  ist  Battalion  of  Militia  in  the  County  of  Kings,  R.  I., 
troop  of  horse  in  1780. 

During  the  Revolutionary  War,  May,  1777,  Ichabod  was 
paid  £2  14s.  "for  carrying  express  from  Westerly  to  Little 
Rest  Hill  in  S.  Kingston,  and  from  there  to  Providence." 

Records  dated  Oct.,  1778,  show^  that  Ichabod  Babcock,  Jr., 
Nathan  Babcock,  and  six  others  represented  to  the  Rhode 
Island  Colonial  Legislature  that  their  boats  were  taken,  Oct., 
1777,  by  Gen.  Cornell,  of  the  United  States  Army  for  the 
intended  expedition  against  the  enemy  on  the  island  of  Rhode 
Island,  that  the  boats  were  lost  off  Point  Judith,  and  that  "their 
families  depended  chiefly  on  the  advantages  accruing  from 
their  use  in  fishing."  It  was  voted  by  the  Legislature  that  a 
committee  consisting  of  Brig.-Gen.  Cornell,  Col.  Parsons  Grey, 
and  Maj.  Thomas  Sheffield  be  appointed  to  ascertain  the 
amount  to  be  paid  to  each  for  damages  sustained.  Dec,  1778, 
Ichabod  and  Nathan  Babcock  were  each  allowed  £40  for  the 
loss  of  their  boats.     (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  viii.) 

Children,  b.  Westerly  (the  first  four  children,  Esther,  Jo- 
seph, Lodowick,  and  Esther,  d.  young)  : 

208  Ichabod,"  b.  Jan.  15,  1758;    m.  Dorcas  Hoxie. 

209  Lucy,  b.  Apr.  25,  1760;    m.  Christopher  Crandall. 

210  Joseph,  b.  Apr.  i,  1762;    m.  Sarah"  Babcock. 

Mary,  b.  Apr.  8,  1765;  m.  223  William  Babcock.  (See  his 
records.) 

211  Lodowick,  b.   Feb.    18,    1767;    m.   Lydia  Wiglit. 

Augustus,  b.  Jan.  30,  1769;  ni.  Oct.  13,  1792  or  1796,  Rachel  Reed. 
Capt.  John,  b.  Sept.  i,  1772;  d.  Oct.  19,  1798;  m.  Aug.  22.  1796, 
Rebecca  Wilts.     He  was  a  sea  captain  ;    d.  of  yellow  fever. 

Hannah,  b.  July  2,  1776;  d.  Apr.  iS,  1798;  m.  Anr.  19,  1796,  Pardon 
Baker   (?). 

Esther,  b.  July  18,  1778;    m.  Aug.  21,  1796.  John  Sherwood. 

212  .Anstice,  b.   Feb.   25.   1780;    m.  Joseph  Goodrich. 
Stephen,  No.   i,  d.  in  infancy. 

Stephen.   No.   2,  d.   in  infancy. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  75 

88.  Joseph^  Babcock,  son  of  Ichabod  and  Jemima  (Bab- 
cock)  Bahcock  (John,  Jolm,  James  ist).  h.  Westerly,  Feh. 
3,  1735-6:  d.  Alar,  or  Apr.,  1804  (?)  ;  m.  (  i)  Mar.  31,  1765, 
Hannah,  dan.  of  Samnel  and  Hannah  (Clark)  Champlin.  b. 
S.  Kingston.  Dec.  9,  1747,  d.  Westerly.  K.  I.,  1767.  Joseph 
m.  (2)  1 77 1  (  ?),  Hannah,  dan.  of  John  and  Hannah  Ross,  of 
Westerly,  R.  1.,  h.  Apr.  21,  1749. 

Joseph  Babcock,  Jr.,  was  appointed  by  \\'csterly  Town 
Council  administrator  on  his  father's  estate,  iVpr.  30,  1804. 

The  first  wife.  Hannah  Champlin,  had  but  one  child,  viz. : 

Hannah,   b.   Jan.   2,    1767;    m.   at   Westerly,    Nov.    17,    1796,   Arnold 
West,  son  of  James  and  Susanna  West,  b.   Sept.   11,   1762. 

By  his  second  wife  Joseph  had  ten  children.  Their  records 
were  obtained  principally  from  family  Bibles.  Those  of  John, 
Thankful.  Daniel,  and  Molly  are  no  doubt  correct,  as  they  were 
gathered  from  many  of.  their  children  and  grandchildren. 
Records  of  Elihn  were  obtained  from  one  of  his  children  and 
from  his  grandchildren.  Those  of  the  other  children  were 
gathered  from  the  relatives  above  mentioned  and  from  public 
records,  and  are  approximately  correct.  A  question  mark  will 
follow  doubtful  dates. 

213  Joseph,"  b.   1772   (  ?)  ;    m.   Keturah  Gavitt. 

214  John,  b.   Nov.   19.   1773;    m.  Damarias  Crandall. 

Thankful,   b.    1775    (?);     m.   227  Phineas"   Babcock,    of    Christopher 
and    Mehitable.      (See   his    records.) 

215  Daniel,    b.    Sept.    20.    1777;     m.    Nancy    Babcock. 

Molly,  b.   1778   (?);    m.  228  Asa"  Babcock.      (See  his  records.) 

216  James.  1).   1780   (?);    m.   Hannah   Rhodes. 

217  Oliver,  b.   1782   (?);    m.  Eunice  Haskins. 
Edward,  b.  1784  (  ?)  ;    d.  young. 

218  Elihu,  b.   1786   (?);    m.  Celia  Wilbur. 

219  George,  b.   1787;    m.   Mary  Gavitt. 

Ichabod,    b.  1789  (?);     d.    at    Sandusky.    O..    1869;     m.    (i)  Lois 

Greeman ;  m.  (2)     at    Sandusky,    Lois    Laurens.      Settled  first 

Allegany,  Co.,  N.    Y.,    later    removed    to    Sandusky,    O.  Had 
children. 


89.     JoHN,^  son  of  Ichabod  and  Jemima  (Babcock)   Ba1)Cock 
(John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  July  27,  1739;   d. 

Oct.  27,  1798;    m.  Lucv . 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Lucy,  b.  Aug.  14,  1765. 
Jeremiah,  b.   Dec.  28.   1767. 

John,    b.    Jan.    13,    1769;     m.    by   Elder   Joslin,    Jan.    10,    1790.    .\nna 
jMaxson,  dau.  of  Jonathan,  of  Richmond. 


76  Tlic  Bahcock  Goiralof^y. 

90.  Marv,-'^  (laii.  of  Elder  Stcplicn  and  Anna    (Tliompson) 
Babcock    (John,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Westerly,   R.   I., 

Nov.  12,  1730;  m.  at  S.  Kingston,  Jan.  10,  1753,  Joseph 
Davis,  son  of  William  Davis.  Mary  was  his  second  wife; 
his  first  wife  was  Anna  Babcock,  sister  of  Mary,  m.  Jan.  10, 
1749.  Joseph  and  Anna  had  one  child,  Anna,  b.  Aug.  7,  1750. 
Children  of  Mary  and  Joseph  Davis.  1).  in  ^^^esterly : 

Henry,  b.  Oct.   15,  1754. 
Lucretia,  b.  Sept.  20,   1756. 
Mary,  b.  Aug.  21,  1758. 
Joseph,  b.   Aug.   27,   1760. 
Lucy,  b.   Nov.  7,   1763. 
Ephraim,  b.  Sept.  12,  1765. 
Lydia,  b.  June  7,  1767. 
Amey,  b.  Mar.  6,  1769. 
Clarke,  b.  Feb.  23,   1771. 

91.  Rev.  Oliver,^  son  of  Elder  Stephen  and  Anna  (Thomp- 
son)   Babcock    (John,   John,   James    ist),    b.    Westerly, 

July  27,  1738;  d.  Feb.  13,  1784;  m.  July  2,  1761,  Sylvia  (Sil- 
vestre)  Belcher,  dan.  of  John  Belcher,  of  Westerly. 

Rev.  Oliver  Babcock  was  a  man  of  uncommon  ability  and 
unflinching  integrity.  He  stood  high  in  the  community,  both 
as  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  and  a  statesman.  In  1768-9  lie 
was  Captain  in  the  Westerly  Militia. 

In  1770  he  represented  Westerly  in  the  Colonial  Legisla- 
ture. In  1776  he  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Westerly.  At 
the  death  of  his  father,  Rev.  Stephen,  Oliver  was  called  to 
succeed  him  as  pastor  of  the  Hill  Church,  being  ordained  to 
that  office  Sept.  18,  1776,  which  position  he  continued  to  hold 
until  his  death. 

It  will  be  observed  that  his  pastorate  covered  the  period  of 
the  Revolutionary  War.  He  was  not  only  beloved  by  the  mem- 
bers of  his  church,  but  his  encouragement  and  aid  of  patriot 
soldiers  and  his  untiring  efforts  on  behalf  of  their  widows  and 
orphans,  endeared  him  to  all.  He  d.  in  the  forty-sixth  year 
of  his  age.  He  had  a  family  of  eight  children.  "His  widow, 
Sylvia  Babcock,  was  so  eminent  for  piety  and  ability  as  to  win 
the  appellation  of  'Elder  Sylvia.'  She  supplied  the  pulpit, 
zealously  cared  for  the  church,  which  often  met  at  her  house, 
until  a  successor  to  her  husband  was  chosen."  (W.  and  W. ) 
She  was  succeeded  by  Elkanah  Babcock,  who  was  ordained 
Apr.  18,  1787,  and  whose  records  are  found  on  a  previous  page 
in  this  volume. 

Rev.  T.  Barber  says  Elder  Elkanah  was  succeeded  by  Elder 
Jesse  Babcock,  making  four  Babcocks  in  succession  that  were 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  yy 

pastors  of  the  Ilill  Church  exchisive  of  the  service  of  Elder 
Sylvia. 

Dennisoii.  in  Westerly  and  Its  Witnesses,  says:  "Eld. 
Jesse  Babcock  was  ordained  an  evangelist  in  1802.  He  died 
]\Iay  26,  1844,  aged  seventy-six.  He  was  the  last  pastor  of 
the  Wilcox  Chnrch." 

Children  of  Rev.  Oliver  and  Sylvia  (Belcher)  Babcock,  as 
recorded  by  Rev.  T.  Barber ;   all  b.  in  Westerly : 

John,  b.   Mar.  6,    1762;    d.   Oct..    1782. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  29,  1764;    in.  Nov.  7,  1781,  William  Blackington. 

220  Arnold,"  b.  Dec.  22,   1765;    in.  Lucy  Davis. 
Joshua,  b.  Jan.  8,   1771 ;    m.    1792. 

Jason,  b.   Mar.  7,   1774. 

221  Steplien,  b.  July  26,  1777;    m.  . 

222  Oliver,  Jr.,  b.  Mar.  29,  1780;    m.  Anna  Heartt. 
Anna,   b.    1782. 

92.  Ctiristopher,^  "son  of  William  and  Sarah  (Denison) 
Babcock  (John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Sept.  12,  1734;  d.  Smyrna,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  15,  1815,  and  was 
buried  there.  No  stone  was  erected  by  his  grave,  but  years 
later  his  son  Stephen  had  a  gravestone  placed  for  him  beside 
the  grave  of  his  wife  Mehitable,  in  Westerly. 

Christopher,  m.  1754,  his  stepsister  Mehitable  Chalker 
(sometimes  written  Chaucer,  or  Chalkens),  b.  in  Saybrook, 
Conn.,  Sept.  9.  1733,  d.  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  June  8,  1810  (date 
taken  from  g-ravestone) .  She  was  buried  in  the  Babcock  or 
]\Iassattixet  burying  ground  near  Avondale,  R.  I.  About  1884 
her  remains,  with  those  of  her  son  Stephen  and  his  wife, 
Phebe,  were  removed  from  the  neglected  spot  where  they  were 
first  buried,  to  the  First  Hopkinton  Cemetery,  near  Potter  Hill, 
R.  I.  This  removal  was  directed  by  Phebe  Babcock,  grand- 
daughter of  Mehitable,  dau.  of  Stephen  and  wife  of  Oliver 
Babcock.  Phebe's  remains  were  afterward  interred  in  the 
adjoining  lot. 

The  father  of  ]\Iehitable  (Chalker)  Babcock  was  Stephen 
Chalker,  b.  Saybrook,  Conn.,  July  19,  1707.  He  was  of  the 
fourth  generation  from  Gen.  Alexander  Chalker,  who  was  one 
of  the  original  proprietors  of  the  town  of  Saybrook,  Conn.,  and 
was  killed  in  the  Narragansett  War.  (Chapman  Genealogy.) 
Mehitable's  mother  was  Mehitable  Chapman,  b.  Nov.  17,  1705, 
dau.  of  Capt.  Samuel  Chapman. 

Stephen  Chalker  and  Mehital)le  Chapman  were  m.  Dec.  14, 
1727.  An  item  in  Stephen's  will,  dated  1773,  mentions  daugh- 
ter Mehitable  Babcock,  wife  of  Christopher  Babcock. 


78  TJic  Bahcuck  Genealogy. 

Cliristopher  Bal)cock  owned  and  occupied  a  farm  near  the 
seashore  in  the  town  of  Westerly.  He  was  achiiitted  a  free- 
man ])}•  llie  Cieneral  Assem1)ly  of  Rhode  Island,  May,  1758. 
(C.  R.  of  R.  I.)  He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Westerly 
in  1769,  "79,  '83.  (Smith.)  In  1767  Christopher  Babcock 
was  Lieutenant  in  Capt.  Champlain's  Train  Band,  Westerly 
Militia.  (R.  J.  Hist.  Mag.,  vol.  vi.)  In  1813,  three  years 
after  the  death  of  his  wife,  he  sold  to  his  youngest  son,  Asa, 
sixty  acres  of  land  for  $1,000.  (W.  T.  R.)  The  same  year 
Asa  sold  the  land  and  moved  to  Smyrna,  N.  Y.  Christopher 
evidently  went  with  him,  for  he  d.  at  the  home  of  his  son  Asa 
in  Smyrna,  Mar.  15,  1815. 

Children: 

223  VViiliam,"  b.  Dec.  10,  1755 ;    m.  Mnry  B.ibcock. 

Amy,  b.  June   12,   1757;    ni.   Mr,   CofFm,   from   Block  Island,   settled 

in  the   State  of  New  York. 
Joshua,  b.  Mar.   15,   1759;    d.  Westerly,  R.' 1.,  Oct.,  1786. 

224  Christopher,  Jr.,   b.  July  26,    1761  ;    m.   Polly   Burdick. 

Sarah,    b.    Mar.    10,  .1763;     m.    (i)    210  Joseph"   Babcock;     m.    (2) 

Thomas  Grant. 
Eunice,  b.  Dec.  28,  1764. 

225  Jeremiah,  b.  Nov.  23,   1766;    m.   Amy  Angel. 
Asa,  b.  July  6,   1768;    d.  Apr.,   1777. 
Wealthy,  b.  June   12,   1770;    d.  June,    1772. 

226  Stephen,  b.   Feb.  2y.   1772;    m.   Phebe  Burch. 

Elias,  b.   Oct.  26,   1773;    d  at  sea,   Apr.   1794,   when  returning  from 
the  West  Indies. 

227  Phineas,    b.    Feb.    14,    1776;     m.    (i)    Thankful    Babcock;     m.    (2) 

Miss  Huntington. 

228  Asa,   b.    Oct.   7,    1777;    m.    (i)    Molly   Babcock;     m.    (2)    Elizabeth 

Barber. 

93.  Samuel,-'''  son  of  William  and  Sarah  (Denison)  Bab- 
cock (John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Sept.  4,  1747,  at  West- 
erly, R.  I.  Moved  in  early  boyhood  with  his  mother  and  step- 
father (Stephen  Chalker)  to  Sayl^rook,  his  mother's  birth- 
place; d.  there  1828,  aged  eighty-one  years;  m.  at  Saybrook, 
Sept.,   1773,  Rachel  Conklin. 

Children,  b.  in  Saybrook  (records  from  family  Bible)  : 

Phebe,  b.  June  26,   1774;    m.   Rev.   Asa  Bushnell,     Settled  at  West 

Hartland,   Conn. 
Rachel,   1).    Aug.    11,    1776;     m.   Stevens.      Settled    in    Oswego 

Co.,    N.   Y. 
Fanny,  b.  Aug.   11,   1779;    m.   Daniel  Griswold;    d.  at  Essex,  Conn. 
Elizabeth,    b.    Nov.    21,    1781  ;     m.    Basset,    of    Sag    Harbor, 

Long  Island. 
Lucretia,  b.  Sept.  11,  1784;    m.  Davison.     Resided  at  Saybrook. 

229  Samuel,"  Jr.,   b.    Mar.   20,    1788;     m.    (i)    Hannah    Miller;     m.    (2) 

Jane  Corwell. 

230  William  Christopher,  b.  Aug.  7,   1790;    m.   Betsy  Parmlee. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  79 

94.  JosiAir"'  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Jol),  Jr.,  and  Elizabeth 

(Mull)  Babccxk  (Job,  John,  James  1st),  b.  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  1720  (  ?)  ;  m.  1745  ( ?),  Miss  Alaraw,  "a  notable  young 
Irish  lady." 

As  the  name  of  Josiah  does  not  appear  in  his  father's  will, 
it  is  probable  he  was  not  living  when  the  will  was  written,  and 
that  he  d.  between  1769,  the  date  of  birth  of  his  youngest  child, 
and  1775,  the  date  of  probate  of  his  father's  will.  Family 
records  from  two  different  sources  state  that  Josiah  was  the 
eldest  S(^n  of  Job,  Jr.  In  1742  Josiah  removed  from  Rhode 
Island  to  Mansfield,  Conn. 

Children,  b.  presumably  at  Mansfield,  Conn. : 

231  Jolm,''   b.   Aug.    26,    1746;     m.    Lydi.-i    Woodward. 
Irene,  b.  July   i,    1748. 
Josiah,  Jr..  b.  Apr.  18,  1750. 
Eunice,  b.  July  18,   1752. 
David,  b.  Sept.  14,  1753. 

Deliverance,  b.  July  13,  1755.  ' 

Betty,  b.  Mar.  29,   1757. 
Mary,  b.  May  18,  1759. 
Jesse,  I).  Mar.  29,  1761. 
Huldah,  b.  June   18,    1763. 
Richard,  b.  Feb.  14,  1765. 
Samuel,  b.  July  24,  1767. 
Justus,  b.  July  31,   1769. 

Records  of  Josiah  given  by  Rev.  Theodore  Babcock,  D.D., 
Dean  of  St.  Andrew's  Divinity  School,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 

95.  Jonathan,"''^  son  of  Samuel  and  Bethiah  Babcock 

(Job,  John.  James  ist).  b.  S.  Kingston,  Nov.  26,  1723; 

d ;   m.  at  S.  Kingston,  Nov.  26,  1749,  Lydia  Lee. 

Children,  b.  in  Exeter: 

Mercy,  b.  Oct.   14,   1750. 

Mary,  b.  Oct.   15,  1751  :    d.  Nov.   17,   1751. 

John,  b.  ;    d.   INIar.  30,   1760. 

96.  John,"'  son  of  Samuel  and  Bethiah  Babcock  (Job, 

John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  Jan.  27,   1727-8;    d. 

Exeter,  R.  I.,  Mar.  30,  1760.  (A^  V.  R.,  S.  Kingston.  R.  I., 
give  his  birth  June  2y,  1727-8,  but  that  is  an  impossible  date. 
Substituting  January  for  June,  the  date  agrees  with  age  at 
time  of  death  as  recorded  in  Exeter,   R.   I.)      He  m.  Lydia 

,  and  settled  in  Exeter.  R.  I. 

It  is  probable  that  Lydia.  the  widow  of  John,  married  a 
second  time,  as  Exeter  town  records  sho\^'  that  Joseph  Hollo- 
way  m.  Lydia  Babcock,  Oct.   11,   1761.     One  of  the  children 


8o  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

of  Joseph  and  Lydia  llolloway  was  named  John  W^aite,  b. 
Exeter,  June  i8,  1765;  was  killed  Sept.  7,  1779,  by  a  cannon 
ball  while  contending  for  the  rights  of  his  country  on  board 
the  privateer  ship-of-war  Gen.  Miffin,  Capt.  George  VVaite 
Babcock  commanding. 

Children  of  John  and  Lydia  Baljcock,  as  recorded  in 
Exeter: 

232  Capt.    George    Waite"    Babcock,    b.    Jan.    25,     1751;      m.     Susanna 

Fowler. 

Samuel,   b.   Jan.   i,   1754;    d.   Feb.   24,    1757. 

Sarab,  b.  July  17,   1756. 

Jobn,  b.  Nov.  28,  1758. 

Samuel,  b.  Oct.  ig,  1760;  m.  Mary  Holloway  (?).  From  Massa- 
cbusetts  Records  of  Soldiers  and  Sailors,  War  of  the  Revolution, 
the  following  quotation  is  taken:  "Samuel  Babcock,  Gunner 
of  the  ship  General  Miffin,  commanded  by  Capt.  George  Waite 
Babcock."  Description  and  list  of  officers  and  crew  dated  Sept. 
9,   1780.     "Age  19  yrs.,  Complexion  light,  Residence  Mass." 

97.  JoB,^  son  of  Samuel  and  Bethiah  Babcock    (Job, 

John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  Jan.  20,  1729-30;    m. 

Susanna,  dau.  of  Jeffery  and  Mary  (Northrup)  Champlin, 
b.  Exeter,  Jan.  i,  1731. 

Children,  b.  in  S.  Kingston : 

Champlin,  b.  Oct.   10,   1752. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  27,   1755   (?). 

98.  Simeon,^    son    of    Samuel    and    Bethiah   Babcock 

(Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  Jan.  6,  1731-2; 

m.  Apr.  19,  1750,  Elizabeth  Gaboon,  of  Warwick. 

Simeon  Babcock  lived  in  Exeter  in  1774,  and  tought  land 
of  his  brother  Samuel  in  S.  Kingston.  Simeon  and  many  of 
his  descendants  were  Baptists.  His  first  two  children  were 
born  in  S.  Kingston,  the  remaining  six  probably  in  Exe- 
ter, R.  I. 

Children,  as  recorded  by  Rev.  T.  Barber: 

Stephen,   b.   July   19,    1751. 
Bethiah,  b.  Dec.   i,  1752, 

Samuel,  b.   1754;    m.  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Nicholas  Cottrell,  of  West- 
erly, R.  I. 
Elizabeth,  b.  1756;    m.  A.  Browning.     Went  West. 

233  John,"  b.    1759;     d.    Mar.    i,    1807;     m.    Mary   Heeferman. 

234  Simeon,    Jr.,  b.  May  14,   1760;    ni.  Rhoda  Smith. 
Elihu,  b.   1763;    d.  young. 

William,  b.   1764. 

99.  James,^  son  of  Samuel  and  Bethiah  Babcock  (Job, 

John.  James   ist),  b.   S.   Kingston,  June  14,    1734;    m. 


MRS.  ABIGAIL  (SMITH)  BABCOCK 

(Wife  of  Adam  Babcock). 

1 744- 1 777. 

From  a  portrait  by  Copley,  of  London,  owned  by  Rev.   Edwin  A. 

Blake,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  of  Boston,  Mass.  Page  67. 


The  Bahcock  Gcneology.  8i 

at  S.  Kingston,  Jan.  31,   1754,  Sarah  Sheldon,  dan.  of  Isaac 
Sheklon. 

Children,  b.  in  Exeter. 

James,  b.  June  22,  1755.  It  is  presumed  this  family  removed  to 
N.  Y.  State.  Col.  History  of  New  York,  vol.  xv,  contains 
records  as  follows:  "James  Bahcock  horn  in  R.  I.,  age  20  yrs. ; 
trade  cordwainer,  enlisted  in  Capt.  Denton's  Co.,  3d  Regt.  of 
N.  Y..  at  Goshen,  Orange  Co.,  July  7,  1775." 

Sarah,  h.  Aug.   10,   1756. 

Mary.  h.   Aug.  4,   1758. 

100.  Joseph,-'"'    son   of   Samuel    and    Bethiah   Babcock 

(Jol),  John,  James   ist),  b.  Oct.  4,    1737;    m.  Feb.  9, 

1758,  Sarah,  dan.  of  John  Wait. 
Children,  b.  in  Exeter,  R.  I. : 

Elizabeth,  h.   Nov.  29,   1758. 
Joseph,  h.   Mar.  29,   1768. 

101.  John-'"'  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  first  wife,  Sarah 
(Segar)  Babcock  (Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kings- 
ton, probably  about  1740;  m.  Feb.  14,  1765,  in  S.  Kingston, 
Mehitable  Sheldon,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth  Sheldon,  b. 
July  20,  1746. 

In  1 76 1  John  Babcock  received  from  his  father  land  by  deed. 
By  his  father's  will,  dated  Oct.  3,  1763,  probated  Nov.  4,  1763, 
he  was  executor  and  residuary  legatee. 

"John  Babcock  mortgages  to  Benj.  Reynolds  75  1-2  acres 
bounded  southerly  by  lands  belonging  to  Gideon  Babcock  and 
Joseph  Babcock  sons  of  John  Babcock  deceased,  for  £67  19,?. 
11^.  3/.  April  10,  1772."     (Recorded  S.  K.  R.,  No.  7,  p.  95.) 

"John  and  Mehitable  Babcock  sold  Henry  Marchant  75  1-2 
acres,  being  the  same  premises  devised  to  John  by  his  father 
John  Babcock  in  his  will."  (Recorded  in  L.  E.,  book  No.  7, 
p.  285.) 

"John  Babcock,  bought  of  John  Sheldon  and  Jemima,  his 
wife,  formerly  the  wife  of  John  Babcock,  certain  devises  and 
bequests  under  the  will  of  her  former  husband,  said  John  Bab- 
cock for  60  pounds.  May  20,  1775."     (Recorded  in  L.  E.) 

After  the  close  of  the  Revolutionary  War  John  Babcock 
with  his  brother  Ichabod  removed  from  Rhode  Island  to 
Alburg,  Vt.  John  had  daughters  who  married  and  had  fami- 
lies, but  no  records  of  his  children  are  published  in  this  book. 

Mr.  Henrv'  Babcock.  of  St.   Albans,  Vt.,  states  that  John 
was  buried  in  Alburg,  Vt..  and  that  the  following  inscription 
is  upon  his  gravestone:     "In  memory  of  John  Babcock,  who 
departed  this  life  Aug.  10,  1822,  aged  82  yrs." 
6 


82  .  The  Babcock  Gcncalo<^y. 

102.  Jonathan-'''  Babcock,  son  of  J.ihn  and  Sarah  (Segar) 
IJabcock    (Job,   John,   James    ist),   b.  ;    m.    Mar. 

5'  ^755:'  Amy  Clarke,  dau.  of  Simeon  and  Elizabeth  (San- 
ford)  Clarke,  1).  in  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Aug.  23,  1737.  Jona- 
than received  by  deed  from  his  father  in  1761  a  tract  of  land 
in  S.  Kingston.  By  his  father's  will,  ])robated  Nov.  4,  1763, 
he  received  two  specific  tracts  of  land.  Jonathan  was  Lieuten- 
ant of  Militia  of  S.  Kingston  1759.  (Smith.) 
Children,  b.  S.  Kingston  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Sarah,  b.  Oct.  30,  1755. 
John,  b.  Aug.   18,   1757. 
Elizabeth,  b.   Nov.  28,   1760. 
Amie,  b.  July  2,  1763. 
Thankful,  b.  Feb.  15,  1766. 
Segar,  b.  May  8,  1769. 

103.  Sarah,"^    dan.    of  John   and    Sarah    (Segar)    Babcock 
(Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  1737  (?)  ;   d.  Oct.  22,  1797, 

aged  about  sixty  years;  m.  Feb.  15,  1758,  Amos  Langworthy, 
son  of  Thomas  and  Content  (Sanford)  Langworthy,  of  Hop- 
kinton,  b.  Nov.  12,  1733;  d.  Aug.  9,  1818.  Their  home  was 
that  part  of  the  Langworthy  Purchase  located  in  Hopkinton, 
R.  L,  about  one  mile  west  of  Hopkinton  City,  so-called. 

Two  brothers  of  Amos  Langworthy,  namely,  Sanford 
and  John,  m.  daughters  of  Oliver  and  Anna  (Avery)  Babcock. 

Children : 

Mary,  b.   Nov.  28,   1758;    d.  Oct.   18,   1771. 

Benjamin,  b.  Feb.  29,  1760;  d.  Apr.  23,  1826;  m.  (i)  Eleanor 
Kenyon,  had  four  children;  m.  (2)  Mrs.  Patience  Peckham 
Bcntly,  no  issue;  m.  (3)  Hannah  Kenyon,  had  three  children. 
Benjamin  was  a  farmer,  in  the  town  of  Hopkinton;  was  prom- 
inent as  a  military  man,  serving  for  many  years  as  Captain  of 
a  military  company,  and  was  familiarly  known  as  Capt.  Benja- 
min  Langworthy. 

Anna.  b.  Sept.  8,  1761  ;  d.  Oct.  8,  1830;  m.  Perry  Maxson,  moved 
to  N.  Y.  State:  had  eight  children.  She  visited  her  old  home 
but   once   after   marriage. 

Sarah,  b.  July  25.   1763;    d.  July  27,   1816. 

Amos,  Jr.,  b.  Mar.  2,  1765;    d.  July  17.   1830. 

Content,  b.  Jan.  21,  1767;    d.  Apr.  22,   1774. 

Thomas,  b.  Dec.  17,  1768;    d.  June  17,  1812. 

Mary,  b.  Aug.  26,   1770;    d.  Apr.  27,   1836. 

Alice,  b.  June  26,   1772;    d.  Apr.  3,   1850. 

Elizabeth,  b.   Mar.  9,   1774;    d.  Jan.    14,    1849. 

John,  b.   Feb.  3,   1776;    d.  Apr.  6,   1777. 

John  BalKOck,  b.  May  5.  1778;    d.  Nov.  17,   1815. 

Sanford,  b.  Dec.   18,   1782;    d.  Mar.  20,  1869. 

Mary,  Alice.  Elizabeth,  Amy.  and  Sarah  all  remained  unmarried, 
and   lived   and   died   at   the  old  homestead. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  83 

104.  IciiABOD-''  Babcock,  Sr.,  son  of  John  and  Sarah   (Se- 
g-ar)  Babcock  (Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R. 

I.,  1745  ( ?)  ;  d.  Albnrg,  Vt.,  Apr.  30,  1813;  m.,  Rhode  Island, 
Amy  (family  records  say  Amy  Card),  dau.  of  a  sea  captain. 

From  his  father's  will,  dated  Oct.  13.  1763.  recorded  in 
S.  Kingston,  is  fonnd  the  following:  "I  give  to  my  beloved 
son  Ichabod  Babcock  one  hnndred  acres  of  land."  Bonndaries 
are  given  and  then  follows:  "So  as  to  make  die  hnndred 
acres,  said  land  lie  in  ye  towai  of  Richman-town."  He  also 
gives  Ichabod  one  silver  spoon.     (S.  K.  Records.) 

Apr.  16,  1767,  Ichabod  and  Amy  Babcock  bonght  land  of 
Jonathan  Babcock. 

May  20,  1770,  Ichabod  Baljcock  sold  land  to  George  Tefft. 

Nov.  27,  1 77 1,  Ichabod  Babcock  bonght  land  of  George  and 
Mary  Tefft. 

Nov.  2y,  ijyi,  Ichabod  and  Amy  Babcock  sold  land  to 
Phineas  Kenyon. 

"Apr.  7,  1778,  Ichabod  and  Amy  Babcock  now  residing 
in  Charlestown.  R.  I.,  sold  certain  lands,  lying  partly  in  S. 
Kingston  and  Charlestown.  to  Joh  Card,  and  personal  estate 
of  which  Job  Card  died  seized  and  possessed,  consideration 
$1,150."  It  is  presnmed  that  the  land  and  personal  estate 
above  referred  to  was  inherited  by  Amy  Card  Babcock  from 
her  father.  Job  Card,  Sr.,  and  that  she  sold  it  to  her  brother 
Job  Card,  Jr. 

The  following-  is  from  Conncil  Records  of  S.  Kingston: 
"April  i},.  1773,  voted  that  Ichabod  Babcock  have  a  certificate 
to  Richmond  for  himself,  wife  and  children." 

Abont  the  close  of  the  Revolntionary  War  Ichabod  Babcock 
with  his  motherless  children  removed  from  Rhode  Island  to 
Albnrg,  Vt.  At  the  same  time  his  brother  John  and  family 
removed  to  the  same  place. 

Children,  all  b.  in  Rhode  Island : 

Hannah,    b.    Nov.    13,    1766;     d.    Alburg,    Vt.,    Apr.    4,    1836;     m. 

Green. 

Sarah,  b.  Dec.  6,  1768;    d.  Hoosick,  N.  Y.,  Apr.,  1814;    m.  Samuel 

Sweet. 

235  Job."  b.  May  18,   1771  ;    m.  Emeline  Pike. 

Amy,  b.  July  26.  1774;    d.  near  Albany;    m.   (i)  Thomas  Andrews; 
m.   (2)   Samuel  Sweet. 

236  Ichabod,  b.  June  5,   1777;    m.   Sarah   Pike. 

Elsey,  b.  May  19,  1782;    d.  Beekmantown,  N.  Y. ;    ni.  John  Dawson. 

105.  Gideon,^  son  of  John  and  second  wife,  Jemima  (Rey- 
nolds) Babcock  (Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston, 

Apr.  28,  1757;   m.  Hannah . 


84  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  in  S.  Kingston,  R.  I. : 

Amie,  b.  Dec.  27,  1777.  '  * 

John,  b.   Feb.    i,   1780. 

Sanniel,  b.  Mar.  22,  1782. 

Henry,  b.  Aug.  3,  1784. 

Hannah,   b.   July   i,    1786. 

Charles,  b.  July  24,   1791. 

Lydia,  b.  Aug.   12,   1795. 

106.  George^  Potter,  son  of  Thomas  and  Mary  (Babcock) 
Potter  (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  in  that  part  of 
Westerly,  R.  I.,  which  is  now  Hopkinton,  Jan.  3,  173 1-2;  d. 
at  his  home,  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Aug.  29,  1794;  m.  Sept.  18, 
1754,  Content  Maxson,  dan.  of  Rev.  Joseph  Maxson  and  Be- 
thiah,  his  wife.  George  Potter's  wife,  Content  Maxson,  was 
b.  in  Westerly  (or  Stonington),  1733,  d.  at  Potter  Hill,  R.  I., 
Oct.  9,  181 5,  aged  eighty-two. 

When  George  Potter  was  first  married  he  settled  on  the 
homestead  farm,  near  Woodville,  R.  I.,  which  he  afterward 
inherited.  In  Jan.,  1775,  he  bought  a  grist-mill,  fulling-mill, 
saw-mill,  and  several  other  buildings,  together  with  the  water 
power,  at  what  has  since  been  known  as  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.  In 
addition  to  his  manufactories,  he  built  several  coasting  vessels, 
most  of  the  work  being  done  at  Potter  Hill ;  the  vessels  w^ere 
then  taken  apart,  transported  to  Westerly,  where  they  were 
set  up,  finished,  and  launched.  George,  his  wife,  and  all  his 
children,  as  well  as  his  progenitors  for  two  generations  were 
S.  D.  Baptists. 

Children,  b.  in  Hopkinton,  R.  I. : 

Mary,  b.  May  30,   1755;    d.   Sept.   10,   1793;    ni.  Juhii,  son  of  John 

Stillman. 
George,   b.   Feb.   10,   1757;    d.    1801  ;    m.   Apr.   20,   1780,   Mary,  dau. 

of  Benjamin  Stillman. 
Joseph,  b.  Feb.  6,  I759;    d-  Dec.  14,  1822;    m.  Apr.  7,  1784,  Phebe, 

dau.  of  Thomas  and  Sarah  Wells. 
Hannah,  b.  Mar.  9,  1761 ;    m.  Amos,  son  of  Torrey  Maxson. 
Susan,    b.    Mar.    18,    1763;     d.    Dec.    20,    1825;     m.    (i)    Nov.    29, 

1781,  Samuel,  son  of  Joseph  Wells;    m.   (2)  June  10,  1802,  Isaac, 

son  of  Isaac  and   Martha   Potter   Saunders. 
Content,   b.    May   25,    1765;     d.    Sept.    14,    1850;     m.   Apr.    18,    1784, 

Hon.  Daniel  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver. 
Lydia,  b.  Oct.   10,   1766;    d.  June  15,   1843;    m.   Dec.   17,    1795,  Jo- 
seph, b.    1771,   son  of  Sylvanus  Maxson. 
Col.   Nathan,   b.   May  31,    1769:    d.   Aug.   25,    1825;    m.   Lucy,   dau. 

of  Ezekiel   and  Hannah   Rogers. 
Lucy,   b.    Oct.    10,    1771;     d.   Jan.   28,    1807;     m.    (i)    John    Barber; 

m.    (2)    Feb.    12,    1797,   Rogers   Crandall,  b.    1771,   son  of   Phineas 

and   Grace   Crandall. 
Elizabeth,   b.   Sept.    19,    1775;    d.   Aug.   2,    1853;    m.   Nov.    17,    179S, 

Elisha,  son  of  Nathan  Landphere,  b.  1773,  d.  1820. 


The  Bab  cock  Genealogy.  85 

(For  further  records  of  this  family,  see  Potter  Genealogy, 
part  iv,  by  Charles  Edward  Potter.) 

107.  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dan.  of  George  and  Susanna 
(Potter)  Babcock  (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, Jan.  25,  1725-6;  m.  at  Westerly,  Dec.  i,  1750,  John 
Burdick,  son  of  Hubbard  and  Hannah  (Maxson)  Burdick,  b. 
May  19,  1 72 1,  d.  Mar.,  1790. 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly  : 

Maxson,  b.  Jan.  22,  1752. 

Thompson,  b.  Sept.  i,  1753;    m.  Tal)itha  Wilcox. 

Anne,  b.  Feb.  2,  1755;    m.  Simeon  Bromley. 

John,  b.  Sept.  20,  1756;    m.  Sept.  23,  1779,  Elizabeth  Beers. 

Paul,  b.  Oct.  24,   1759. 

Abigail,  b.  Nov.  22,  1761 ;    m.  Nov.  20,  1783,  Amos  Chapman. 

Sarah,  b.  Sept.  7,   1763;    m.   1785,  Reuben  Maine. 

Frances,  b.   Mar.  29,   1765;    m.   Lyman  Maine. 

Hannah,  b.  ;    m.  Mar.  4,   1792,  Robert  Brown. 

108.  George,^   son  of   George,   Jr.,   and   Susanna    (Potter) 
Babcock  (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 

Dec.  29,  1727;   m.  at  Stonington,  Conn.,  June  26,  175 1,  Me- 
hitable,  dan.  of  Thomas  and  Mary  (Miner)  Wheeler,  b.  Sept. 

5-  1731- 

In  1777  Newport  was  in  the  hands  of  the  British,  and  the 

Gaines  Weekly  Mercury,  published  Apr.  14,  1777,  was,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  following,  controlled  by  the  British  or  Tories : 
"Last  Thursday  a  party  of  rebels,  under  the  command  of 
one  George  Babcock,  came  into  the  house  of  Mr.  Charles  Slo- 
cumb,  at  North  Kingston,  R.  I.  His  son,  coming  to  the  door, 
was  immediately  collared  by  one  of  the  banditti.  Young  Slo- 
cumb  clenched  with  him,  and  would  soon  have  made  him  re- 
pent his  rashness,  had  it  not  been  for  the  interference  of  the 
rest  of  the  gang.  His  father,  seeing  the  scuffle,  came  out  of 
the  house  to  interfere  in  behalf  of  his  son,  when  the  infamous 
Babcock  discharged  a  pistol  at  him.  The  ball  entered  a  little 
below  the  heart  and  he  died  in  al)out  three  hours.  Not  content 
with  the  misery  they  had  already  occasioned  to  this  unhappy 
family,  they  took  both  his  sons,  and  dragged  them  before  their 
Assembly,  who  in  their  clemency  permitted  them  to  return 
under  a  strong  guard  to  attend  the  funeral  of  their  murdered 
father.  The  mourning  relatives  were  accordingly  escorted  to 
the  grave  by  this  unfeeling  clan,  who  immediately  on  their 
return  home  carried  both  the  young  men  to  Providence  jail. 
This  unparalleled  barbarity  is  said  to  be  occasioned  by  the 
information  of  some  villain  that  has  escaped  from  Newport. 


86  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

''Every  breast  siisccptil)le  of  the  miseries  of  its  fellow-crea- 
tures must  feel  for  this  unhappy  family — a  husband  murdered, 
a  number  of  orphans  deprived  of  him  to  whom  they  were  wont 
to  look  up  for  support ;  and,  to  complete  the  tragic  scene,  two 
sons,  whose  presence  at  home  might  in  some  measure  have 
alleviated  the  loss  of  their  parent,  are  likewise  torn  from  their 
wi\'es,  expecting  soon  to  share  the  same  cruel  fate.  And  all 
of  this  performed  by  men  who  have  decorated  their  standard 
W'ith  the  specious  names  of  Liberty  and  Justice." 

Children,  b.  in  S.  Kingston : 

George,   b.    Sept.   22,    1753.      Removed   to  Connecticut. 

Lvicy,  b.  Dec.  15,  1754:    m.  her  cousin  120  Peleg  W.,  son  of  Hezekiah 

Babcock. 
Cyrus,  b.  Dec.   11,   1756. 
Ephraim,  h.  May  19,  1758. 
Susannah,   b.   May   19,   1760. 
Mary,  b.  Jan.   17,  1767. 
Frederick,  b.   Sept.   10,   1771. 
Thomas   Wheeler,   b.    Aug.    13,    1773. 

109.  Martii.\,''''  third  child  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Susanna  (Pot- 
ter)  Balicock  (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Dec.  8,  1729;  d.  Mar.  30,  1809;  m.  (i)  Aug.  22,  1769, 
Capt.  Simon  Rhodes,  of  Stonington,  Conn.  She  was  his  sec- 
ond wife.  Capt.  Simon  d.  Apr.  22,  1784,  aged  sixty-nine. 
They  had  one  child : 

George,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  July  30,  1771  ;    d.  Stonington,  May  3, 
1776. 

Capt.  Rhodes's  first  wife  was  Anne  Babcock,  dau.  of  Capt. 
James  and  Content  Maxson  Babcock. 

Martha  m.  (2)  Col.  James  Rhodes,  of  Westerly,  May  12, 
1800.     He  d.  June  21,  1806,  aged  seventy-five  years. 

110.  Christopher,-''  son  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Susanna  (Pot- 
ter) Babcock  (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  in  Hopkin- 

ton,  R.  L,  Feb.  27,  1736-7;  d.  Charlestowm,  R.  I.,  July  28, 
1803;  m.  Martha  Perry,  of  S.  Kingston. 

In  1767  Christopher  Babcock  was  Lieutenant  of  the  second 
company  of  militia  in  Rhode  Island.  Lie  was  (according  to 
R.  I.  Hist.  Mag.,  vol.  vi,  p.  280)  with  Col.  Barton  in  the  cap- 
ture of  Gen.  Prescott  on,  the  night  of  July  5,  1777. 

Both  Christopher  and  his  wife  were  large  in  stature.  A 
•tradition  states  that  he  weighed  four  hundred  pounds  and  his 
wife  three  hundred  pounds.     He  was  of  a  jovial  disposition. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  87 

and  many  stories  are  told  of  his  practical  jokes.  The  census  of 
Charlcstown  in  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  taken  1774,  shows 
that  the  family  of  Christopher  Babcock  consisted  as  follows : 

"Whites,    I  male  above  sixteen. 

Whites,   I   male  under  sixteen. 

Whites,  2  females  above  sixteen. 

Whites,  1  female  under  sixteen. 

Blacks,  5.     Total,  10." 
Children : 

2^7  Christopher,"  Jr..    b.    Hopkinton,    Sept.    i,    I759;     i"-    Pully    Potter. 
238  Martha,  b.  Jan.  i8,  1761  ;    m.  George  Hazard,  Jr. 

Mary   (or  IMollie).  b.  Jan.   i,   1763;    m.  Lieut. -Gen.  Joseph   Stanton, 
son   of  Augustus   and   Eunice    (Crandall)    Stanton,    b.    1766    (?). 
She  d.  Sept.  6,  1817.     No  children. 
Hannah,  b.  Apr.  25,  1766;    m.  Gov.  Joseph  Wilcox,  of  Charlcstown. 

111.  Capt.  Samuel^  Babcock,  son  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Su- 
sanna (Potter)  Babcock   (George,  John,  James  ist),  b. 

Westerly,  R.  L,  May  30,  1739;  d.  Apr.  7,  1807;  m.  1769,  his 
cousin,  Ruth,  dau.  of  41  David  and  Dorcas  (Brown)  Babcock, 
b.  S.  Kingston,  1739. 

"Jan.,  1779.  Samuel  Babcock  w^as  allowed  £9  12s.  for  valu- 
ing the  negro  slaves  enlisting  into  Col.  Greene's  Reg."  (C. 
R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  viii.) 

"Primus  Babcock,  the  Revolutionary  soldier,  was  a  slave 
of  Samuel  Babcock,  of  Hopkinton,  valued  at  120  pounds." 
(Narragansett  Historical  Register.) 

Samuel  and  Ruth  Babcock  were  members  of  the  Westerlv 
S.  D.  B.  Church  in  1786. 

Children,  recorded  in  Hopkinton,  R.  I.  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Ruth,  b.  Jan.    10.    1771  ;    d.   Oct.    16,   1847;    m.    (i)    John   Gardner; 

m.   (2)  Eleazor  Brown. 
Miriam,  b.  Sept.  16,  1772;    d.  Apr.  26,  1850.  unm. 
Samuel,   b.    Oct.    19,    1775;     d.    Sept.    19,    1853:     m.   Lydia   Davis,   d. 

Brookfield,   N.   Y..   Mar.   4.    1876,   age  87. 
George  Rhodes,  b.   May  23.   1778;    d.  Jan.   3.   185Q,   unm. 
Martha,  b.  June  29,  1780;    d.  Mar.  3.  1863;    m.  Nathan  Clark. 
Beriah,  b.  July  6,   1782;    d.  Sept.  7,   1866,  unm. 

112.  Hezekiah,^  son  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Susanna  (Potter) 
Babcock  (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  May 

30,  1739;  m.  Dec.  12,  1769,  Martha  Hoxie,  b.  Sept.  6.  1754. 
Hezekiah  was  a  farmer  and  owned  eight  htmdred  acres  of  land 
in  the  town  of  Hopkinton.  He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  for 
Hopkinton  in  1770.  (Smith.)  In  July,  1780,  he  was  ap- 
pointed b\'  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island  for  the  town 
of  Hopkinton  to  procure  Ijlankets  for  the  use  of  soldiers  during 


88  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

the  War  of  the  Revolution.  In  May,  1785,  he  was  paid  by  the 
State  £13  2s.  "for  boarchng  and  nursing  a  sick  soldier  belong- 
ing to  the  State  battalion." 

Children  (births  taken  from  A.  V.  R. ;  marriages  from  rec- 
ords of  Edwin  Babcock,  of  Westerly,  R.  I.)  : 

239  Hezekiah,"  b.  Nov.  25,  1770;    m.  Mary  Brown. 

Rowland,  b.  Sept.  17,  1773;  m.  (i)  Jan.  12,  1797,  Miss  White; 
in.  (2)  Mrs.  Mary  (Babcock)  Babcock,  widow  of  his  brother 
Luke.  No  children.  He  was  Capt  of  Hopkinton  Militia  1797-9, 
Justice  of  the  Peace  for  Richmond  1800-5,  and  Justice  for  Hop- 
kinton  181 1-7. 

Luke,  b.  Apr.  16,  1778;  m.  Mary  A.  Babcock,  dau.  of  237  Chris- 
topher," Jr.,  and  Polly  (Potter)  Babcock,  of  Charlestown,  R.  L, 
b.  Middletown,  R.  L,  Jan.  22,  1783;  No  children.  "He  was 
Ensign   in   Hopkinton   Militia    1800,   Lieut,   in    1801-2."      (Smith.) 

Susanna,  b.  May  2,  1780;    m.  Peter  Congdon. 

240  Martha,    b.  Aug.  30,   1781 ;    m.   Sanford  Noyes. 

Dorcas,  b.  Mar.  13,  1785;  m.  (i)  Ellery  White;  m.  (2)  Benedict 
Eldridge. 

113.  RowsE,^  son  of  George,  Jr.,  and  Susanna  (Potter)  Bab- 
cock (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Apr.  29,  1746;  d.  June  13,  1801;  m.  Mar.,  1769,  Ruth  Max- 
son,  dau.  of  Capt.  John  and  Martha  Prosser  (Lewis)  Max- 
son,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Jan.  31,  1747,  d.  May  3,  1813.  Both 
Rowse  and  his  wife  are  buried  in  the  "River  Bend  Cemetery," 
Westerly,  R.  I.     Inscribed  stones  mark  their  graves. 

Rowse  Babcock  was  a  prominent  business  man.  He  re- 
moved from  Hopkinton  to  Westerly  about  1781,  and  opened 
a  store  on  the  hill,  east  of  the  village  of  Westerly,  and  near  the 
store  and  post  office  of  Dr.  Joshua  Babcock,  who,  as  previously 
stated,  was  first  postmaster  of  Westerly.  Afterward  he  moved 
into  the  village,  though  in  1800  it  contained  no  more  than  fif- 
teen residences. 

In  October,  1785,  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Island 
granted  the  petition  of  Messrs.  Rowse  Babcock,  Walter  White, 
Thomas  Noyes,  and  Oliver  Davis  to  establish  a  lottery  for 
raising  the  sum  of  $4,000  for  the  ptu'pose  of  clearing  the  shoals 
and  bars  in  the  Pawcatuck  River. 

The  third  bank  in  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  was  the  Wash- 
ington Bank  in  Westerly,  chartered  at  the  June  session  of  the 
General  Asseml)ly  in  1800.  Rowse  Babcock  was  chosen  first 
director  and  subsequently  ])resident  of  the  bank,  filling  that 
position  until  his  death,  in  1801. 

"Rowse  Babcock  was  Justice  for  Hopkinton  in  the  years 
1775. '77' '78, '79, '80, '81."  (Smith.)  He  represented  West- 
erly in  the  Legislature  1793-9. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  89 

Children : 

Rhoda,  Ij.  Westerly,  R.   I.,  Dec.   17,   1769;    d.  Aug.  29,   1801;    in.  at 

Slonington,   Conn.,  Jan.  6,   1709,  Gen.   William   Wiiliams. 
Rowse,  b.  Feb.  27,   1771 ;    d.   young. 

241  Rowse,"  Jr.,  b.  May  12,  1773;    m.  Hannah  Brown. 

242  Elizabeth,   b.    Mar.    14,    1775;     d.   July    i,    1846;     m.   Jan.    13,    1799, 

Joseph    Noyes. 
Martha,   b.   May  2,    1777;     d.   young. 

243  Benjamin,  b.  Sept.  2,  1779;   m.  Ann  (Nancy)  Wilcox. 

Sally,  b.  Apr.  6,   1782;    d.   Feb.  27,    1841  ;    m.  Jeremiah   Thurston. 
Nancy    (or    Anne),    b.    May    15,    1786;     d.    Oct.    23.    1855;     m.    at 

Stonington,  Conn.,   Dec.  23,    1804,   Gen.   William   Williams,   whose 

first  wife  was  her  deceased  sister  Rhoda. 

114.  David,-''  Jr.,  son  of  David  and  Dorcas   (Brown)    Bab- 
cock  (George,  John,  James  istj,  b.  Apr.   10,  1734,  at 

S.  Kingston;  m.  at  Charlestown,  by  Benjamin  Hoxie,  Justice, 
Mar.  30,  1757,  Sarah  Perry,  dan.  of  Samuel  and  Susanna 
(Hazzard)  Perry,  b.  at  Charlestown,  Feb.  16  or  Mar.  30, 
1738.    Her  sister  m.  Elisha  Babcock,  uncle  of  David. 

David,  Jr.,  was  admitted  a  freeman  of  N.  Kingston  May, 
1756.  (C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  V.)  He  was  a  sailor,  and  late  in 
life  removed  to  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  with  his  sons.  "In 
1758  he  was  Ensign  in  Capt.  John  Wilson's  Company  of  Mi- 
litia, S.  Kingston."     (Smith.) 

Children : 

244  David,''  b.   May  17,   1760;    m.  Sarah  Beardsley. 
Sarah,  b.  Aug.   14,   1762. 

Elizabeth,  b.  July  20,  1764. 
Benjamin,  b.  June  7,   1766. 
Edward,   b.    Sept.    18,    1769. 
Paul,  b.  Apr.  9,  1771. 
Simeon,   b.   June    10,    1773. 
Daniel,  b.  June  28,  1775. 
Joshua,  b.  Aug.  4,  1779. 

115.  Jonathan,^  son  of  David  and  Dorcas   (Brown)    Bab- 
cock (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I., 

Nov.  19,  1735;  d.  Granville,  Mass.;  m.  at  Charlestown,  R.  I., 
Feb.  10,  1759,  Susanna  Perry,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Susanna 
(Hazzard)  Perry,  b.  Mar.  25.  1742.  Two  of  her  sisters, 
Elizabeth  and  Sarah,  m.  respectively  Elisha  Babcock  and  Da- 
vid Babcock. 

Jonathan  was  admitted  a  freeman  of  S.  Kingston,  May, 
1759.  He  with  his  family  removed  to  Granville,  Mass.,  in 
1775-  On  the  29th  of  Nov.  1774,  the  Sons  of  Lil)erty  met  at 
the  house  of  Jonathan  Babcock,  innkeeper  in  the  western  part 
of  S.  Kingston,  and  erected  a  liberty  pole  eighty-five  feet  in 


90  The  Babcock  Gcncaloi^y. 

lieii;ht,  al)(>nt  four  miles  from  Little  Rest  (Kiiii^ston  Hill.) 
"Jonathan  Babcock,  son  of  David,  Captain  of  Militia,  S.  Kings- 
ton, 1 76 1,  "65,  '66."     (Smitli.) 

Children,  probably  b.  in  S.  Kingston  and  Westerly : 

Susan,  b.  ;    m.   Soth  Parsons. 

Dorcas,    b.    ;     m.    George    Landphere. 

Jonatban,  b.  ;    lived  and  died  in  Camilhis,  N.  Y. 

245  Perry  H.,''  b.    1766  ;   m.   Cyntbia   Hiscox. 

Etban,  b.  ;    d.  in  N.  Y.  State.    No  children. 

Sylvester,   b.  ;    d.   unm. 

116.  Benedict,^   son  of  David  and  Dorcas    (Brown)   Bab- 
cock (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Oct.  21, 

^7Z7'^    ^-  ;    '''''•  ^^^'-  -'   ^7^3'  Mary  Thompson,  dau.  of 

Capt.  Joshua  and  Sarah   (Stanton)    Thompson,  of  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  b.  Apr.  17,  1741  (?)   (A.  V.  R.). 
Child : 

246  Denison,-'  b.   Feb.   18,   1777;    m.    (i)    Fanny  Marsh;    m.    (2)    Desire 

Eldridge ;    m.    (3)    Lucy  Bishop. 

From  the  will  of  David  Babcock,  father  of  Benedict,  Sr., 
dated  Apr.  10,  1782,  is  the  following:  'T  give  and  devise 
unto  my  beloxed  grandson  Benedict  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  my 
son  Benedict  Babcock,  deceased,  fifty  acres  of  land."  The  will 
then  directs  that  Benedict  pay  to  his  two  brothers  Gardner  and 
Denison  each  ten  siher  dollars,  and  to  his  three  sisters,  Sarah, 
Mary,  and  Frances,  each  five  silver  dollars. 

117.  Gideon,^  son  of  David  and  Dorcas  (Brown)   Babcock 

(George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  July  2, 
1744;  d.  South  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  at  Stonington,  Conn., 
June  27,  1776,  Mary,  dau.  of  Amos  and  Mary  Chesebrough, 
b.  1755;  d.  S.  Brookfield,  Feb.  5,  1843. 

Gideon  was  Lieutenant  in  S.  Kingston  Militia  1775-7.  He 
was  Justice  1795-9.  (Smith.)  He  was  executor  to  his 
father's  will.  He  first  settled  in  S.  Kingston,  but  in  1799  re- 
moved to  S.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  where  he  took  up  a  section  of 
land,  six  hundred  and  forty  acres,  and  built  a  gristmill,  saw- 
mill, distilling  plant,  potash  works,  and  a  store,  so  that  each 
son  would  have  some  occupation  that  would  keep  him  from 
the  sea;  but  three  of  his  sons  went  to  sea,  and  two  were 
drowned.  In  1902  one  of  the  mills  was  in  operation,  and  a 
small  settlement  still  has  the  name  of  "Babcock  Mills."  A 
grandson  Gideon  resides  on  the  old  farm. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  91 

Children,  all  b.  in  Rhode  Island  except  the  youngest : 

247  Gideon,''   b.    Nov.   22,    1777;     m.    Sarah    Saycr. 
Amos,  b.  Oct.  31,  1779;    lost  at  sea. 

248  Richard,  1).  April  19,   1781  :    m.   Mary  C.   Perry. 
Mary.  b.  Jan.  21,   1783;    m.   Calom  Guitian. 
Henry,   b.    Nov.   21.   1784;     lost  at   sea. 

249  Asa,   b.   Nov.  29,    1786;    m.   Elizabeth   Noyes. 
Nancy,  b.   Sept.    10.    1788:    d.  young. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  23,  1790;  m.  Dr.  A.  Blanchard.  Their  dan., 
Mary  Elizabeth,  m.   May  25,   1841,   William  P.  Lynde. 

Frances,  b.  Jan.  8,  1794;    m.  Norman  Guiteon. 

Abigail,   b.    May  23,    1796;    d.    1799. 

Corrington,  b.  Brookficld,  Apr.  18,  1802;  d.  1878;  m.  Fanny 
Slocum. 

118.  Mary,^  dau.  of  David  and  Dorcas   (Brown)    Babcock 

(George,  John,  James   ist),  b.  in  S.  King.ston,  R.   I., 
Sept.  2"/,  1747;   d.  Dec.  15,  1798;   m.  Oct.  10,  1765,  Joseph, 
son  of  \\'illiam  and  Hannah  (Burrows)  Denison,  b.  Stoning- 
ton,  Feb.  24,  1735,  d.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  15,  17S5. 
Children : 

IVIary,  b.  April   i6,   1767;    m.   Nathan  Smith. 

Hannah,  b.   Oct.  6,   1768;    m.  Stephen  Brown. 

Dorcas,   b.   Aug.  9,   1770;    m.    Benjamin  Eells. 

Am}\  b.   Nov.  4,    1771  ;    m.    Paul   Rhodes. 

Sarah,  b.  Dec.  14,  1773;    m.  Thomas  Butler. 

Abigail,  b.  Feb.   18.  1776;    m.  Oliver  Cobb. 

Joseph,  b.  Feb.  12,  1778. 

Betsey.  1).  June   19.   1780:    m.   Peter  Crary. 

Samuel,  b.   Sept.   19.   1782. 

Charles,  b.  Feb.  16,  1785;    m.  Rebecca  Sherwood. 

119.  Jonathan,'^   son  of  Jonathan   and    Elizabeth   Babcock 

(George,  John.  James  ist),  m.  Phebe  Perkins. 
Child : 

250  Jonathan  Perkins,"  b.  Oct.  19,  1784;    m.  Elizabeth  Wright. 

120.  Peleg  W.,^  son  of  Hezekiah  and  Mary  (Peckham)  Bab- 
cock (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Apr.  18,  1742;    d. 

June  7,  1826;  m.  his  cousin,  Lucy  Babcock,  dau.  of  108  George 
and  ]\Iehital)le  (Wheeler)  Babcock,  b.  Dec.  15,  1754,  d.  June 
7,  1826.  In  1765  he  was  Lieutenant  ist  S.  Kingston  Com- 
pany; in  1768,  Captain.  (Smith.)  He  belonged  to  the  So- 
ciety of  Friends. 
Children : 

Mehitable,  b.  Sept.  23.  1770;    d.  Sept.  16,  1820,  unm. 

Esther  H.,  b.  May  24,  1772;    d.  Apr.  21,  1819;    m.  Robert  Hazard. 

251  Peleg,"  b.  July  14,  1774;    d.  May  20,  1845;    m.  Sarah  Potter. 


92  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

George  P.,  b.  Oct.  19,  1776;  d.  Oct.  14,  1844;  in.  Amy  Green.  He 
was  Ensign  in  S.  Kingston  Militia  1802-3,  Lieut.  1804-5,  Capt. 
1806-7-10.      (Smith.) 

Lucy,  b.  Dec.  2,  1778;    d.  Apr.  14,  1813,  unin. 

Mary,  b.  Mar.  22,  1781 ;    d.  Mar.  29,   1834,  unm. 

252  Joseph  P.,"  b.  Jan.   17,   1783;    m.   (i)    Sarah  Potter;    m.   (2)   Waite 

Segar;    m.   (3)   Feb.   15,  1824,  Hannah  Babcock. 
Hezekiah,  b.  Mar.   15,  1785;    unm. 

Susan  P.,  b.  Jan.  22,  1787;    d.  May  3,   1824;    m.  John  B.  Perry. 
Waite,  b.  Jan.  22,  1787;    unm. 

253  Ethan,  b.  Aug.  7,   1789;    m.   Elizabeth   Kenyon. 

254  Charles  H.,  b.  Mar.   14,   1792;    m.   Martha   Paine. 
Benjamin,   b.   Apr.   29,    1794;     unm. 

Abigail,  b.  Oct.  26,  1795;    d.  June  7,  1855.  unm. 
Francis  H.,  b.  Sept.  5,  1798;    d.   Feb.  18,  1850,  unm. 

121.  Caleb, ^  son  of  Hezekiah  and  Mary   (Peckham)    Bab- 
cock (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  King-st(jn,  Nov. 

28,  1745;  d.  S.  Kingston,  1826;  rn.  at  S.  Kingston,  Oct.  5, 
1782,  Waite  Peckham,  of  Middletown,  R.  I.,  She  d.  Apr.  12, 
1836,  aged  seventy-five,  at  S.  Kingston. 

In  the  Revokitionary  War  Caleb  was  a  memlDcr  of  Col  Ells- 
worth's Regiment.  In  1776  the  pay  due  him  was  ^1^14  i^s.  ^d. 
(Smith.) 

Children : 

255  Hezekiah,"  b.  Jan.   3,    1784;    m.   Dorcas   Peckham. 

Mary,  b.  Sept.  23,  1785;    d.  Sept.  7,  i860;    m.  Samuel  Hathaway,  of 

Fair  Haven,  Mass. 
Joseph,  b.  Dec.  7,   1787;    d.   i8s9;    m.   Abby  Hazard,  of  Newport, 

R.  L 
Hannah,  b.   Sept.   18,   1789;    d.   Sept.  27,   1876,  unm. 
Gulielma,   b.   Oct.    12,    1791 ;    d.   Apr.   3,    1847;    m.    Capt.    Sylvester 

R.  Hazard,  of  Newport.  R.  L ;    d.  1875,  aged  81. 
John  M.,  b.  Oct.  11,  1793;    d.  June  12,  1824,  on  the  coast  of  Africa. 

He  was  chief  mate  of  the  brig  Paragon,  of  Boston. 
Susanna,  b.  Sept.  29,  1798;    d.  1799. 
Adam,  b.  Mar.  15,  1800;    d.  Nov.  16,  1822,  unm. 
Alice,  b.  May  9,  1802;    d.  Dec.   18,   1824;    m.  George  Wagner  Hull, 

of  Block  Island. 

122.  Simeon,^   son  of   Elisha  and   Elizabeth    (Perry)    Bab- 
cock (George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  May  31,  1745;    d. 

Richmond,  R.  I.,  Sept.  21,  1806;  m.  at  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Jan. 
7,  1770,  Mary  Perry,  his  cousin,  dan.  of  Simeon  and  Penelope 
(Kenyon)    Perry,  b.   Sept.    18,    1750,  d.   Richmond,  July  20, 

1847- 

Children,  b.  in  Richmond : 

256  Elisha,"  b.  May  17,   1774;    m.  Huldah  Green. 
Penelope,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Penelope,  b.  ;    m.   Sheffield  Rathbon. 

257  Simeon,  b.  Mar.  12,   1782;    m.  Mary  Green. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  93 

258  Samuel   Perry,  b.  Jan.   5,    1785:    m.   Susanna   Clark. 

Elizabeth,  b.  ;    d.  in  New  Shorehani,  R.  I.,  aged  90  years,  unm. 

Ann,    b.   ;     d.    in    New    Shorehani,    R.    I.,    aged   92    years;     ni. 

Josiali   Peckhani. 

259  James,    b.    Oct.,    1794;     m.    (i)    Martha    Card;     m.    (2)    Elizabeth 

Davis. 


123.     RuTii,^  dau.  of  Elislia  and  Elizabeth  (Perry)  Babcock 
(George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  1757;   d.  1823;   m.  Sim- 
eon, son  of  Simeon  and  Penelope  (Kenyon)   I'erry,  b.   1758, 
d.  1838.     He  was  her  cousin. 
Children  : 

Simeon,  b.  . 

Elisha,  b.  . 


Elijali,  b.  Mar.  22,  1790;    m.  Eliza  Hurlbut. 

Lydia,   b.  . 

Eliza,  b. . 

Ruth,  b.  . 

Susan,  b.  . 

124.  Jesse,^  son  of  Elisha  and  Elizabeth    (Perry)   Babcock 

(George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Apr.  19, 
1759;  d.  Shannock,  R.  I.,  Jan.  17,  1837;  m.  Hannah  Cross,  b. 
Mar.  20,  1760,  d.  Shannock,  May  25,  1835. 
Children,  b.  at  Shannock : 

Phebe,  b.  ;    d.  I\Iar.  i,  1865:    m.  Peckham  Green. 

260  Jesse,"  b.  Apr.  7,   1785 ;    m.   Sally  Shetificld. 

Anna.  b.   Feb.  23,  1789;    d.   Carolina,  R.   I.,   Feb.  7,   1874,  unm. 
Elizabeth,   b.    Mar.    16,    1791  ;     d.   in   Indiana;    m.    Mr.    Sheffield,   b. 
Sept.    13,    1795. 

261  George,  b.  May  31,  1793;    m.  Nancy  Perry. 
Joseph,  b.  June  7,  1795;    d.  ,  Ohio,  unm. 

Mary,  b.  May  14,   1797;    d.   Carolina,  R.   I.;    m.  577  Simeon^  Bab- 
cock, of  Elisha. 
David,  b.  Sept.  26,   1799;    m.  and  settled  in  Ohio. 
Perry,  b.  Apr.   18.  1803 ;    m.  and  settled  in  Ohio. 

262  Ruth,  b.  July  7,  1805  ;    m.  Richard  Chappell. 

125.  David,^  son  of  Ezekiel  and  Eunice  (Billings)   Babcock 

(Robert.  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Feb. 
2,  1745;  d.  Worcester,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  6,  1820; 
m.  at  Stonington.  Mar.  12,  1767,  Mary  Hinckley,  b.  Stoning- 
ton, July  8,  1750,  d.  at  Worcester,  Mar.  5,  1838. 

David  with  his  family  and  two  brothers  removed  from  Ston- 
ington to  Worcester.  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  Rev- 
olutionary soldier  and  served  in  Capt.  Samuel  Prentice's  Ston- 
ington Company  of  Col.  Parsons's  6th  Connecticut  Continental 
Regiment. 


94  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  in  Stoninglon : 

263  Darius,"  b.   May   13,   1769;    m.  . 

264  David,  Jr.,  b.   Feb.  28,   1770;    m.  . 

265  Flcnry,  b.  July  29,   1771  ;    m.  Anna  Bull. 

266  Robert,  b.  July  6,   1773;    m.  Sally  Gallup. 

Gurdon,  b.  Oct.  6,  1775;  d.  Feb.  6,  1800,  unni.  He  was  engaged 
to  be  married,  and  being  obliged  to  pass  through  Albany,  where 
smallpox  was  raging,  they  knew  no  other  way  than  for  him  to 
have  it  before  he  went,  so  he  was  inoculated,  and  died  of  small- 
pox in  1800.  He  left  $18  to  his  sister  Polly  for  her  to  buy  a  string 
of  gold  beads,  with  the  request  that  they  should  descend  to  the 
oldest  daughter,  and  so  on  down. 

267  Polly,   b.   Apr.  22,   1778;    m.   Rev.   Elisha   Morgan. 

268  Dudley,  b.  Apr.  29,   1780;    m.  Abig;nl  Littcll. 

269  Frederick,   b.   June   16,    1782;     m.    Fanny   Gallup. 

270  Merritt,   b.    Sept.    18,    1784;     m.    Olive   Dickerson. 

271  Fanny,  b.  July  5,   1787;    m.  Amos  Gill. 
Franklin,  b.   Dec.   15,   1789;    d.  young,  and  unm. 

126.  Robert,^   son  of  Ezekiel  and  Etmice   (Billings)    Bab- 
cock (Robert,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  Conn., 

Sept.  17,  1753;  d.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22,  1832;  m.  at  Ston- 
ington, Feb.  27,  1780,  Grace  Hinckley,  dau.  of  Samuel  and 
Mary  (Wyatt)  Hinckley,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  14,  1760. 

Robert  removed  with  his  family  and  two  brothers,  Elihii  and 
David,  to  the  State  of  New  York,  1794,  according  to  Wheeler 
in  History  of  Stonington;  others  say  1803.  In  the  Revolu- 
tionary War  he  served  six  months  on  the  frigate  Trumbull, 
under  Capt.  Saltonstall. 

Children : 

Lucretia,  b.   1780  (?);    d.  Worcester,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Vincent  Freeman. 

272  Sarah,"  b.  Aug.  22,   1782;    m.   Philip  Duel. 

Polly,   b.   June  29,    1784;     d.   in   the   West;    m.   Philip   Burlingham. 
Robert,    b.    Aug.    12,    1786;     d.    Schenectady,    N.    Y. ;     m.    Esther 

Ostrander. 
Patty,  b.  Sept.  6,  1788;    d.  in  the  West. 
Betsey,    b.    Dec.    8,    1790;     d.    near    New    York    City;     m.    Reuben 

Holden. 

273  Russel,  b.   Feb.   i,   1793;    m.   Sarah   Fuller. 

Phebe,  b.  May  18,  1795;    d.  in  Peoria,  111.;  m.  John  Brown. 
Matilda,  b.  Mar.  16,  1798;    d.  Union,  Broome  Co.,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Isaac 

Pierce. 
Lucy.    b.    Nov.    11,    1801  ;     d.    Richmondville,    N.    Y. ;     m.    Samuel 

Fuller. 

127.  Rebecca,^  child  of  Joseph,  Jr.,  and  Susanna   (Thomp- 
son)  Babcock   (Joseph,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Apr.   14, 

1744;  m.  Mar.  9,  1772,  Champlin  Lanpheare. 
Children : 

Joshua,  b.  Mar.  5,  1774. 
Joseph,  b.  Oct.  3,  1775. 
Stephen,  b.  Aug.  16,  1778. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  95 

rrciuicc,    1).    July    ii,    17K1. 
Rebecca,  b.  May  5,  1784. 
Polly,  b.  Jan.   11.   1786. 

128.  Joshua,^  son  of  Joseph  and  Snsanna  (Thompson)  Bab- 
cock (Joseph,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  1\.  I.,  Oct. 

5,  1747;   m.  Nancy  Hawkins. 

Tlie  foHowing-  is  taken  from  Spirit  of  '76  in  Rhode  Island, 
by  Benjamin  Cowcll : 

"Joshna  Babcock,  private  in  Capt.  Arnold's  Co.,  Col.  Lip- 
pet's  Reg.,  Se])t.,  1776;  again  in  1780.  Joshna  Babcock,  Capt. 
Enlisted  in  both  cases  in  Iv.  T." 

Children: 

274  Joshua,"  b.   Oct.   16,   1774;    m.   Elizabeth   Frazier. 

Joseph,   b.  . 

Hannah,  b.  . 

129.  Ann,^  dau.  of  Joseph,  Jr.,  and  Snsanna    (Thompson) 
Babcock  (Joseph,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jnne  i8,  1749; 

m.  at  \\'esterly,  Nov.  i,  1772,  William,  son  of  Timothy  West. 
Children,  b.  W^esterly  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Sarah,   b.  ,    1773. 

Timothy,  b.  Jime  22,   1774. 
Prudence,  b.  Aug.  19,   1775. 
Jesse,  b.  May,  31,  1779. 
Joseph,  b.   Aiay  8,   1781. 
Jesse,  b.  Oct.  9,  1783. 
Nancy,   b.   May  4,   1785. 
William,  b.  Feb.  24.  1787. 
Asa,  b.  Feb.  18,  1789. 
George,  b.   Feb.   18,   1789. 

130.  Mary,-'^   dan.   of  Thomas,   Sr.,'and   ]Mar\^    (Davidson) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Shrewsbnry  (?), 

N.  J. ;   m.  Simeon  IMaxson. 
Children : 

Nathan,  b.  .  . 

Joseph,  b. 


William,  b.  ■ 
Thomas,  b.  - 
Moshurc,  b. 
Simeon,  b.  - 
James,  b.  — 
George,  b.  — 

John,   b.   

Ruth,  b. 


Susannah,  b 


96  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

131.  Thomas,-'''  Jr.,   son  of  Thomas  and  Judith    (ATaxson) 
Babcock     (Ohver,    John,    James    1st),    b.    Monmouth 

Comity,  N.  J.,  Feb.  12,  1759;  d.  Greene  County,  O.,  Feb.  3, 
1825;  m.  (1)  in  Monmouth  County,  N.  J.,  1781  (?),  Martha, 
youngest  dau.  of  Wilham  and  lacy  (CrandaH)  Davis,  b. 
Scjuam,  N.  J.,  Aug.  15,  1760,  d.  in  Shell)y  County,  O.,  Jan.  2, 
1854.     She  m.  (2),  after  1825,  John  Smally. 

Thomas  moved  from  New  Jersey  to  Monongahela  County, 
W.  Va.,  in  1789.  He  then  moved  to  Salem,  W.  Va.,  thence 
to  two  different  places  in  Ohio.  Each  of  these  four  homes  were 
comparatively  in  the  wilderness,  with  wild  beasts  and  wild  In- 
dians for  neighbors.  At  one  place  they  settled  twelve  miles 
from  any  white  settlers. 

Thomas  was  bap.  Dec.  13,  1786,  at  Shrewsbury,  N.  J.  He 
was  deacon  of  the  Little  Bethel  (Mad  River)  S.  D.  B.  Church 
of  Greene  Countv,  O. 

Children : 

275  Nancy  Anna,"  b.   1782;    m.   Samuel  Davis. 

276  Rev.   Simeon,  b.   Sept.   13,   1784;    m.    (i)   Charity  Maxson;'   m.    (2) 

Elizabeth  Stout. 
Oliver,  b.   1786   (  ?)  ;    d.  young. 

277  William,   b.   Jan.   26,    1789;     ni.   Mary   Loofboro. 

Judith,  b.   1792   ( ?)  ;    m.  Cornelius  Sutton.     Had   seven  children. 
Thomas,  b.   1794;    d.  in  War  of  1812,  unm. 

278  Jacob,  b.  Apr.  26,  1797;    m.  Lydia  Maxson. 

279  Joel,  b.  Apr.  20,   1799;    m.  Amy  Greene. 

280  John,  b.   Mar.    16,    1802;    m.    (i)    Sarah   Searl ;    m.    (2)    Elizabeth 

Hardman. 

132.  Jeremiah,^  son  of  Simeon  and  Sarah  (Gardner)  Bab- 
cock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  in  Westerly,  R.  I., 

now  Hopkinton,  May  16,  1746;   m.  Susannah  Rogers.    Settled 
first  in  Voluntown,  Conn. ;   a  few  years  later  removed  to  Ash- 
ford,  Conn.,  and  late  in  life  removed  with  his  only  son,  James, 
to  Wales,  Mass.,  where  he  died. 
Children : 

281  James,"  b.  Aug.  12,  1776;    m.  Phila  Coddington. 

There   were  also  three  daughters,   each   of  whom  married   in  Ash- 
ford,  Conn.      (T.  Barber's  records.) 

132a.  Jason,^  son  of  Simeon  and  Sarah   (Gardner)   Babcock 
(Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  July  9,  1756;   d.  Jan.  19, 

1842;   m.  Mary  • ,  b.  1762,  d.  1817. 

Child : 

281a  Benjamin,"  b.  Feb.  8,   1782;  m.    (i)    Polly  Reynolds;  m.    (2)   Han- 
nah Reynolds. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  97 

133.  Uli\  KR,"'  son  of  Oliver.  Jr.,  and  Patience   (Pendleton) 
Balx:ock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I., 

June  jS,  1746;  (1.  Leyden.  Mass.,  Sept.  11,  1806  or  '09;  m. 
July  18,  1767,  Tacy,  daii.  of  Samuel  and  Ruth  (Rogers)  Max- 
son,  1).  Feb.  13.  1754,  d.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y. 

The  will  of  Oliver  Babcock,  3d,  dated  at  Leyden,  Mass., 
Sept.  5,  1806,  mentions  his  wife  Tacy  and  his  seven  sons  and 
three  daughters,  the  names  given  in  order  of  ages.  His  home- 
stead farm  at  Leyden,  containing  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres, 
he  gave  to  his  wife  during  her  life  and  at  her  death  to  his 
youngest  son  Ezra.  His  sons  Ethan,  01i\-er,  and  Joseph  had 
each  ])reviously  received  their  share.  On  the  same  day  the 
will  was  signed  he  deeded  to  each  of  his  sons  Phineas  and 
Nathan  a  tract  of  land.  To  his  son  Hezekiah  he  gave  a  farm 
of  two  hundred  acres  lying  in  Brookfield,  N.  Y.  To  each  of 
his  three  daughters  he  gave  $200. 

Children : 

282  Ethan,"  b.  Nov.  4,   1771  ;    m.    (i)   Polly  Fen;    m.   (2)   Phebe  White. 

283  Oliver,  b.  Oct.  4,   1773;    ni.  Liiranna  Foster. 

284  Joseph,  b.  Jan.  i,   1776;    m.  Sally  Babcock. 

285  Phineas,  b.  June,   1777;    m.   Sarah   Fen. 
2S6  Lois,  b.   Apr.   30,   1779;    m.    Patten   Fitch. 

287  Nathan,  b.   Alar,   i,   1782;    m.    (i)    Hnldah  Burdick;    m.    (2)    Polly 

Palmer;     m.    (3)    Vashti  Cheesbrough. 

288  Hezekiah,  b.  Jtily  17,  1784;    m.  Nancy  Burdick. 
Patty   (Martha),  b.   1786;    m.  Lemuel  Palmer. 

289  Susan,   b.   Aug.   28,    1788;     m.    Billings    Palmer. 

290  Ezra,  b.  Aug.  18,  1794;    m.  Hannah  Brusie. 

Most  of  Oliver  3d's  children  settled  in  Brookfield,  Madison 
County,  N.  Y.,  when  the  country  was  new.  There  they  lived 
and  died.  ]\Iost  of  the  above  dates  were  taken  from  tomb- 
stones at  Brookfield. 

134.  Peleg.^  son  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience   (Pendleton) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L, 

Oct.  4,   1748;    m.   (i)   bee.   14,   1769,  Lucy,  dau.  of  Samuel 
and  Ruth  Maxson,  b.  Aug.  27,  1751,  d.  July  5,  1775;   m.  (2) 
Jan.  18,  1776,  Ruth,  sister  of  first  wife,  b.  Mar.  5,  1747. 
Children : 

Maxson,  b.  Oct.  20,   1770;    m.   Sept.  5,   1790,  Experience  Brown. 

291  Peleg,  Jr.,*  b.  May  29,  1772:    m.  Patty  Morgan. 

Polly,  b.  1774;    d.  Mar.  16,  1806;    m.  George  Denison. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

292  Solomon    (Dea.),  b.    Sept.   2.   1776;     m.   Amy  Morgan. 
Lucy,  b.  Aug.  5.   1778;    d.   1793,  unm. 

7 


98  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

293  John,    b.    July    26,    1780;     ni.    (i)     Phrhc    Wilhcr;     m.    (2)    Betsy 

Bulfinch. 
F.uke,  b.  Feb.  21,   1782;    d.   Feb.,   1784. 

294  Taber,  b.  Apr.  30,  1784;    ni.  Anna  Ste(hnan. 

Jared,  b.  Feb.  26,  I7S();    111.   (i)   Susan  Clapp ;  m.    (2)    Eliza  Clapp. 
Benjamin,  b.  Feb.  6,   1788;    ni.   Lydia  . 

135.  Susanna/'  dait.  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience   (Pendle- 
ton) Babcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton, 

R.  I.,  June  25,  1750;    m.  Mr.  Fen;  lived  near  Fort  Edward, 
N.  Y. 

Children : 

Polly,  b.    1774;    d.    1808;    ni.   Jan.    13,    1800,   her  cousin,   282  Ethan" 

Babcock. 
Sally  Fen,  b.  Dec,  1776;  d.  Mar.  8,  1856;  m.  her  cousin,  285  Phineas" 

Babcock. 

William,  b.  . 

Martha,  b.  ;    m.  Mr.  Vedder. 

John,  b.  . 

136.  Deborah,^  dan.  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience  (Pendle- 
ton) Baljcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton, 

R.  I.,  Apr.   II,  1752;    m.  at  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Feb.  26,   1777, 
Nathaniel  Stillman,  b.   May  29,    1753.     He  was  drowned  in 
Mr.  Bnrdick's  mill  pond,  Pawcatuck  River,  Apr.  7,  1804. 
Children : 

Nancy,  b.  Oct.  31,  1777;    m.  Daniel  Truman;    lived  Newport,  N.  Y. 

Sarah  (Polly),  b.  Aug.  27,  1779;  d.  July  30,  1845;  m.  Lyman  Berry, 
b.   1780,  d.  Jan.  29,   181 7. 

Desire,  b.   Oct.  3,   1781;    m.   Isaiah  Wilber. 

Nathaniel,  Jr.,  b.   Sept.  24,  1783. 

Oliver  Davis,  b.  Aug.  28,   1785;    m.  Ruth  Burdick. 

Benjamin,   b.  July   i,   1789;    m.   at   Westerly,   Susan   Burdick. 

Ezra,  b.  July  i,  1789;  m.  Polly  Newberry,  and  lived  in  New- 
port,  N.   Y. 

Ruhannah,  b.  July  11,  1791;    m.  Isaac  B.  Taylor. 

Jarvis,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Aug.  28,  1794;  d.  Aug.  4,  1881 ;  m.  Miss 
Jerome. 

137.  Ruhannah,^  dan.  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience  (Pendle- 
ton)   Babcock    (Oliver,  John,  James   ist),  b.   Hopkin- 
ton, R.  I.,  May  16,  1764;    m.  Edward  Denison,  of  Stoning- 
ton.    They  settled  in  Leyden,  Mass. 

Children : 

Amy,  b.  ;    m.  Philemon,  Jr.,  son  of  Philemon  and  Sally   (Bab- 
cock)   Steadraan. 
Eunice,  b.  — ;    m.  Samuel   Cole. 

Ruhannah,  b.  ;    m.  Wheaton  Talbot. 

Edward,  b.  . 

Desire,  b.  ;    m.  Dr.  Smith. 

Almira,  b.  ;    d.  unm. 

George  Washington,  b.  ;    d.  unm. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  99 

138.  Capt.  Paul,^  son  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience  (Pendle- 
ton) Babcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton, 

R.  I.,  May  18,  1766;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  24,  1840;  m.  Jan.  10, 
1788,  Hannah  Burdick,  b.  July  21,  1772,  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
27,  1845.  After  living  for  a  time  at  Leyden,  Mass.,  they  re- 
moved to  Scott,  X.  Y.,  about  1813. 

Tradition  says  Capt.  Paul  was  a  teamster  in  the  last  years 
of  the  War  for  Independence.  He  was  afterward  Captain  in 
the  militia. 

Children  : 

Hannah,  b.  Jan.  to,  1789;  d.  in  Leyden,  Mass.,  i8og;  m.  Nchcmiah 
Brown. 

Panl,  Jr.,  b.  [May  31.  1791;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1836;  ni.  Bar- 
bara Burdick,  his  cousin.     She  d.  Aug.  7,  1846,  aged  55. 

295  Silas,"  b.  Apr.   22,   1793;    m.    (i)    Clarrisa   Palmer;    m.    (2)    Polly 

Vosburg. 

296  Russel,  b.  June  11,   1795;    m.  Lucinda  ^laxson. 

297  Sally,   b.  July   14,    1797;    m.   Capt.   Jesse  Burdick. 

298  Minard    V.,    b.    June    15,    1799;     m.    (i)    Maria    Taylor;     m.    (2) 

Sophia  Bennett. 

299  Henry    (Harry),  b.    Scott,    N.   Y.,   Aug.   28,    1801 ;    m.   his   cousin, 

Harriet  Babcock. 

300  Elder  Rouse,  b.  July  27,    1803;    m,    (i')    Lucinda   Gilbert;    m.    (2) 

Maria  Coon. 
Adaline,  b.  Sept.   11,   1805;    m.  Zoriaster  Clark. 
Cynthia,  b.  Sept.   16,  1809;    m.  William  Fowler. 

301  Hulda,   b.   Dec.   31,   181 1;     m.   Dr.   William   Truman. 

302  George  Washington,  b.  July   19,   1814;    m.  Lavina  Eddy. 

303  Martin   W.,   b.   May   4,    1817;     m.    Mary   Kenyon   Maxson. 

139.  EzRA,^   son  of  Oliver,  Jr.,   and   Patience    (Pendleton) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton.  R.  I., 

Sept.  16,  1769;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  16,  1844;  m.  Oct.  20, 
1 79 1,  Saberah,  dau.  of  Deacon  Joseph  and  Eunice  Stillman,  b. 
Hopkinton.  R.  I.,  Oct.  28,  1771,  d.  Scott,  N.  Y..  Apr.  19,  1865. 

Ezra  and  wife  moved  from  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  to  Leyden  or 
Colerain.  ]\Iass.,  in  1798,  thence  to  Scott,  N.  Y.,  in  1812. 

Children : 

304  Ezra,*  Jr..  b.  July  17,  1792;    m.  Lucinda  Shepherdson. 

305  Ephraim  Stillman,  b.  Aug.  20,  1794!    m-  Amy  Crandall. 

306  Saberah,  b.  July  3.  1796;    m.  Peter  Knapp. 

307  Asher  Miner,  b.  June   16.    1798;    m.    (i)    Mary  Eleanor   Stillman; 

m.    (2)    Prudence   Cleveland. 

308  Abel.  b.   Apr.   12,   1800;    m.   Lucy  Ann   Huntington. 

309  Daniel,  b.  Jan.  23,   1802;    m.  Almira  Burdick. 

310  Beriah   L.,   b.   Jan.   29,    1804 :     m.    Clarrissa   Babcock. 
Lydia.  b.  Nov.  30,  1805  ;    m.  672  Luke  P.  Babcock. 

311  Jerome  Ripley,  b.   Oct.  30,   1807;    m.   Emily  McDaniels. 

312  Hiram,   b.   June   16,   1810;    m.    (i)    Survilla   Barber;    m.    (2)    Tacy 

Frink. 

313  Lauren  Hotchkiss,  b.  June  30,   1812:    m.  Lucy  Ann  Maxson. 
Phebe   Babcock,  b.   Aug.   7,   1815;    m.   Dec.    11,    1834,   .\lonzo  D.   C. 

Barber,  b.  Mar.   15,   1810,  d.   Scott,  N.  Y.,  June  3,   1870. 


lOO  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

140.  Capt.  LuKE,^  son  of  Oliver,  Jr.,  and  Patience  (Pendle- 
ton)   Babcock    (Oliver,  John,  James    ist),  b.  Aug.   6, 

1772;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  11,  1844;    m.  1795,  Betsey,  dau. 
of  Amos  and  Abigail  Brown  Main,  b.  May  3,  1777,  d.  Oct.  6, 
1864,  in  Friendship,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Betsey,   b.    Mar.    10,    1797;     d.    Leyden,    Mass.,   Mar.    i,    1819,    unm. 

314  Raymond  Perry,"  b.  Apr.   19,   1799;    m.   (i)   Olive  Dcnison;    ni.   (2) 

Phebe  Ann  Camp. 
Luke,  b.   Aug.   19,   1801  ;    d.   Friendship,   N.   Y.,   Sept.  22,   1869;    m. 

1S31   Eliza  Dyer,  b.   1804,  d.  Mar.  20,   1882.     No  children. 
Silas  Halsey,  b.  Dec.   i,  1803;    d.  Stonington,  Dec.   i,  1828,  unm. 

315  Ira  Leonard   (M.D.),  b.  Apr.  i,   1806;    m.   (i)   Nancy  Arnold;    m. 

(2)  Alice  Seaton. 

316  Eunice  P.,  b.  Mar.  22,  1808;    m.  John  B.  Cottrell. 

317  Simon  Milton,  b.  May  21,  1810;    m.  Celia  Kellog. 

Sophia  King,  b.  Feb.  2,   1818;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  May  21,   1843,  unm. 

318  Henry  Denison,  b.  Aug.  2,   1812 ;    m.   Anna  Woodward. 

319  Daniel    Braton,    b.    Oct.    31,    1814;     m.    (i)    Miss    Smith;     m.    (2) 

Juliette  Colton ;    m.   (3)   Juliette  Utter. 

320  Lucy  Elvira,  b.  Nov.  7,  1822;    m.  Dr.  James  Crocker  Sibley. 

141.  Mary,^   dau.   of  Joseph  and  Anna    (Harris)    Balxock 

(Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Nov.  7,  1760,  d.  Leyden, 
Mass.,  Feb.   15,   1817;    m.  David,  son  of  David  and  Keziah 
(Smith)  Denison,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  16,  1761. 
Children : 

David,  b.  April  5,  1780. 

I\Lary,  b.  Jan.   30,   1782. 

Clarissa,  b.  Jan.  23,  1784;    m.  Ezra  Conable. 

Charles  H.,  b.   Mar.   5,    1786;    m.    Sarah   Billings. 

Nancy,  b.  Apr.  29,   1789;    d.  young. 

Desire,  b.  Apr.   14,   1791  ;    d.  Oct.,   1867. 

Elizabeth,  b.  July  23,   1794. 

Joseph,  b.  Dec.  23,   1796. 

Sophronia,  b.  Mar.  23,   1799;    m.  J.  Budington. 

142.  Harris,^  son  of  Capt.  Joseph  and  Anna  (Harris)  Bab- 
cock (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  ]\Iar.   15,  1763;    d. 

Guilford,  Vt.,  Apr.  25,   1842;    m.   Sally  Newell,  b.  Feb.  22, 
1 77 1,  d.  Guilford,  Vt. 
Children : 

321  Henry,"  b.   Nov.  2,   1792;    m.   Elvina  L.   Baker. 

Charles,   b.   Dec.  9,   1794;     m.   and  d.   in  Guilford,   Vt.      Had   three 

children,   Marcia,    Elvina,  Nancy. 
Sally,  b.  Guilford,  Mass.,  Aug.   19,   1796;    d.  Leyden,  Mass.;    m.  at 

Guilford,    Stephen   Dorrel.      Had   two   children,    Harris,    m.    Miss 

Darling,  and  Mary,  m.  Mr.  Newcomb. 

322  George  W.,  b.  May  19,  1798;    m.  Lucy  Witt. 

323  Nancy  N.,  b.  June  7,  1802 ;    m.  Amsi  Wright. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  loi 

324  Thomas  J.,  b.  May  18,  1804;    m.  Louise  Newell. 

325  John   Wesley,  b.  Aug.  30.   1808;    111.   Harriet  Shattuck. 
Mary  A.,  b.  Feb.  26,   1813;    d.   Feb.    17.   1815. 

143.  Lieut.  Joseph,^  son  of  Capt.  Josq^h  and  Annie  (Harris) 

Ikibcock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jnly  29,  1765, 
at  Colchester,  Conn.;  d.  Leyden,  Mass.,  Oct.  23,  1843;  "i- 
Colerain,  Mass.,  Jan.  26,  1792,  Jane  Wallace,  dan.  of  James 
and  Mary  (McClellan)  Wallace,  b.  Colerain,  Mass.,  Mar.  26, 
1771,  d.  Leyden,  Mass.,  Apr.  24,  1835. 
Children,  b.  in  Leyden,  Mass. : 

326  Joseph,"  b.  Aug.  28,   1792;    m.  Eliza  Curtis. 
James,  b.  Mar.  20,  1794;    d.  Leyden,   1864,  unm. 

^2^  Jane,  b.  May  3,   1796;  m.  Joseph  Corbet. 

328  Hugh  Wallace,  b.  July  18,   1798;    m.   Sarah   Stone. 

329  Mary,  b.  Dec.  9,   1800;    m.  George  Riddell. 

330  Arminda,  b.  May  20,  1804;    m.  Gawn  Riddell. 

Lorenzo,  b.  Apr.  29,  1806;  d.  at  Halifax,  Vt.  ;  m.  ILalifax,  Lucy 
Ann,  dau.  of  Eben  and  Miranda  (Hines)  Clark,  b.  at  Halifax. 
Had  one  son,  who  settled  in  the  West. 

William,  b.  May  10,  1809;  d.  Whitingham.  Vt. ;  m.  (i)  Deerfield, 
Mass.,    Climena   Sheldon;     m.    (2)    Electia  Alexander. 

331  Lydia,  b.  Oct.  27,  181 1;    m.  (i)  John  Bell;    m.  (2)  Stephen  Dorrell. 

144.  Darius,^  son  of  Capt.  Joseph  and  Anna  (Harris)  Bab- 
cock  (Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  June  17,   1770;    d. 

McDonongh,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,  1844;  m.  Louisa  Bebee.  She  d. 
McDonongh,  N.  Y. 

Darius  was  elected  Commissioner  of  Highways  in  the  town 
of  McDonongh,  Mar.  4,  1817. 

Children : 

Louisa,  b.  1798:    d.  ]\Iar.   14,  1863. 

Experience,  b.  . 

Harriet,  b.  . 

Emeline,  b.  . 

Mark,  b.  Sept.  15,  1815;    d.  1891.  unm. 

332  Alonzo,"  b.  Oct.   16,   1816;    m.   Mercy  Gillette. 
Melissa,  b.  Aug.  6,  1819;    d.  1871;    m.  G.  Walker. 

333  Selwin,   b.    Feb.    12,    1821  ;     m.    (i)    Salina   Bowers;     m.    (2)    Ellen 

Prentice. 
Darwin,  b.  July  28,   1822;    d.   1874.     No  descendants. 
Lucinda.  b.  Aug.  30,   1824 ;    d.   Norwich,   1859 ;    m.  James  Isbell. 

334  Simon,  b.  July  29,   1826;    m.  Caroline  Wheeler. 

145.  Phebe,^'   dan.   of  James  and   Phebe    (Swan)    Babcock 
(James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington.  Conn., 

May  2,  1731;  bap.  1733;  m.  at  Stonington,  Conn.,  Feb.  15, 
1749,  Rufus,  son  of  Daniel  and  Margaret  (Smith)  Palmer, 
b.  Stonington,  Oct.  7,  17 13. 


I02  TJic  Bahcoch  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Welthie,  b.   Sept.  29,   1749. 
Sarah,   h.  June  2.   1751. 
Keturiah,  h.  Jan.  27,  1753. 
James,  b.  Aug.  2,  1754. 
Jonas,  b.  Jan.  19,  1759. 

Records  from  Palmer  Genealogy. 

146.  Arel,^'    son    of    James    and    Phehe    (Swan)     Babcock 

(James,  James,-  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington,  Conn., 
Apr.  28,  1739;    m.  (i)   1762,  Hannah  Lewis;    m.  (2)  Eliza- 
beth Williams,  of  Stonington.     Abel  was  bap.  Ang.  12,  1739. 
Children  by  first  wife,  b.  Stonington : 

Hannah,  b.  1763;  m.  Gideon  Wilbur.  Settled  in  Hopkinton,  R.  I. 
Gideon  Wilbur  was  expelled  from  the  "Quaker  meeting"  of 
Hopkinton  for  marrying  out  of  the  "Meeting."  Their  daughter 
Hannah  m.  Benjamin  Bentley,  Sr.,  and  settled  near  the  sea- 
shore, in  the  town  of  Westerly,   R.  I. 

Lucy,  b.  1765;  m.  Stonington,  William  Davis.  They  settled  at 
Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  and  one  of  their  daughters,  Sally  Davis,  m. 
her  cousin,  Elnathan  W.  Babcock,   son  of  Pelcg. 

335  Peleg,'  b.  Mar.   15,   1767;    m.    (i)   Elizabeth  Wells;    m.    (2)    Emma 

Babcock. 

Children  by  second  wife,  b.  Stonington : 

336  Mulford,  b.   1775;    m.  Anna  Miner. 

3^7  Abel,  b.  May  3,  1780;    m.   Sarah  Cheney. 

Elihu,  b.  ;    m.  Esther  Cobb. 

Sands,  b.  . 

Phebe,  b. ;    m.  Adam  Rathbun. 

147.  Nathaniel,*^  Jr.,   son  of  Nathaniel  and   Sarah    (Bill- 
ings)   Babcock    (James,  James,   John,   James    ist),   b. 

Stonington,  Conn.  (?),  Jan.  24,  1735;  bap.  Sept.  14,  1735;  d. 
Stonington,  Apr.  19,  1813.  Buried  in  Union  Cemetery,  near 
the  Minor  Meetinghouse,  N.  Stonington.  (Date  of  death  taken 
from  gravestones.)  He  m.  Dec.  i,  1756,  Mary,  dau.  of 
Thomas  and  Mary  (Landphear)  Larrison,  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  1741,  d.  Oct.  15,  1801.  They  lived  for  a  time  at  Can- 
terbury, Conn.,  later  settled  on  the  Larrison  farm,  N.  Ston- 
ington. Conn.,  where  he  and  his  wife  died. 

"Feb.  25,  1760,  Nathaniel  Babcock,  Sr.,  conveyed  to  his 
son  Nathaniel  land  where  the  grantor  now  lives  in  Voluntown 
bounded  on  the  south  by  Stonington  land." 

"June  14,  1772,  Nathaniel  Babcock,  of  Stonington,  con- 
veyed to  Amos  Babcock,  of  Voluntown,  land  bounded  west 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  103 

upon  land  which  Ijclonged  to  Capt.  Nathaniel  deceased." 
(Copied  from  \^>lunto\vn  Records.) 

May,  1778,  Nathaniel  Babcock.  of  Canterbury,  Windham 
County,  administrator  of  the  estate  of  Nathaniel  lialjcock,  Sr., 
deceased,  was  given  permission  to  sell  land  in  Voluntown  be- 
longing to  the  estate,  sufficient  to  pay  the  debts  of  the  estate. 
(From  Records  of  Connecticut  by  Hoadley.) 

Nathaniel  was  living  in  Canterbury  as  late  as  1798. 

Children : 

Jonas,  b.  1757.  Died  in  army  at  Valley  Forge,  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary War. 
Mary,  b.  1759:  m.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  8,  1776,  Nathaniel 
Hinckley.  (Wheeler  says  Nathaniel,  son  of  Sanuiel  and  Mary 
Wyatt  Hinckley.) 
338  Stephen,'  b.  1765;  m.  (i)  Mercy  Hinckley;  ni.  (2)  Elizabeth 
Stnart ;    ni.    (3)   !^Iercy  Davis. 

148.     LucY,*^  dau.  of  Nathaniel  and  Sarah    (Billings)    Bab- 
cock  (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Feb.   12,   1742;    d.  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  9,   1824;    m. 
Benjamin  Randall,  d.  June  17,  1816. 
Children,  order  of  births  not  known : 

Ichabod,  b.  . 

Nathaniel,  b. 


Benjamin,  Jr..  b.  ;    d.  June  23,   1847;    m.   Sarah  .      She  d. 

Dec.  30,   1817.    He  was  a  soldier  in  the  Revolutionary  War. 

Stephen,  b.  . 

Eunice,  b.  ;    m.  Sanford  Hewit.     She  d.  Sept.  27,  1829. 

Sally,   h.  ;    d.   Dec.   20,    1829;    m.   Luke   Hull. 

Lucy,   b.   . 

Elenor,  b.  . 

Lois,  b.  . 

Betsv,  b.  . 


Abigail,  b.  . 

149.  Reuben,"  son  of  Nathaniel  and  Sarah  (Billings)  Bab- 
cock (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Mar.  2,  1758, 
Stonington,  Conn.;  d.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  24,  1849; 
m.  Mar.  6,  1788,  Hannah,  dau.  of  Moses  or  Reuben  Hendricks, 
b.  Petersburg.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  4,  1763,  d.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y., 
]\Iar.  7,  1849. 

Reul)en  Babc(x:k  served  in  the  Revolutionary  War  as  a  pri- 
^•ate  and  sergeant  in  the  Continental  Army.  The  Troy  Budget 
of  Sept.,  1900,  had  an  account  of  the  discovery  of  old  records 
in  the  courthouse,  dated  1840,  including  a  list  of  j^ensioned 
Revolutionary  soldiers  then  (1840)  living  in  the  County  of 
Rensselaer.     Among  them  were  the  names  of  Reuben  Bab- 


I04  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

cock,  Saiullake  (that  part  now  called  E.  Poestenkill),  and 
Moses  Hendricks,  Berlin,  same  county. 

After  the  Revolution  Reuben  returned  to  Stonington  or  Vol- 
untown,  for  the  following  record  is  found:  "Reuben  Babcock, 
of  Voluntown.  conveyed  to  Anna  Langworthy,  of  Stonington, 
for  twenty-five  pounds,  land  lying-  partly  in  Voluntown  and 
partly  in  Stonington." 

Sept.  20,  1783,  he  conveyed  to  Anna  Langworthy  for  £30 
his  whole  right,  title,  and  interest  in  his  part,  as  he  said,  "of 
my  honored  mother's  thirds  in  the  real  estate  of  my  honored 
father,  Capt.  Nathaniel  Babcock,  as  set  off  by  the  probate 
court  of  Plainfield,  Ct."  In  the  same  sale  he  conveyed  the 
whole  of  the  share  of  said  thirds  "which  I  bought  of  Mr.  Ste- 
phen  Hull,  Jr.,  and  Comfort  Hull,  his  wife,  being  one  fifth 
part  of  said  thirds  of  the  real  estate  of  my  said  father  lying  in 
three  lots  containing  by  estimation  25  acres." 

Reuben  Babcock  left  Stonington  Oct.  16,  1786,  and  came 
to  New  York  State.  After  marriage  he  bought  a  farm  near 
Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  and  Nov.,  1796,  purchased  another  in  that 
part  of  Sandlake  now  called  E.  Poestenkill,  where  he  lived  the 
rest  of  his  life. 

Children : 

339  Reuben/  Jr.,  1).  Oct.  24,   1789;    m.   Susanna  Gould. 

340  Nathaniel,  b.   Apr.   15,    1791  ;    m.    Polly  Blivin. 

341  Sarah,  b.  June  23,   1794;    m.   Ophir  Gould. 

Jonas,  b.  Apr.  7,  1796,  Petersburg;  d.  Hartland,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31, 
1835.  Children  were  Polly,  Rachel,  Riley,  Emily,  Alfred,  and 
Leroy,   who  lived   in   Kendall,    N.   Y.,   until   his   death   recently. 

342  Polly,  b.  Dec.  25,   1797;    m.  James  Murray. 

343  Rufus,  b.  Aug.  23,  1800;    m.  Elma  E.  Walker. 
Infant  daughter,  b.  Apr.  22,   1806;    d.  same  day. 

150.  Capt.  Elijah, "^  son  of  Elias  and  Anna  (Plumb)  Bab- 
cock (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  N.  Stoning- 
ton, Conn.,  Aug.  15,  1739;  d.  Sept.  12,  1778;  m.  at  N.  Ston- 
ington, Nov.  5,  1761,  Mrs.  Sarah  Brown,  b.  1736,  d.  Apr.  23, 
1784.     He  was  bap.  Sept.  30,  1739. 

In  New  York  in  the  Revolution,  p.  61,  Capt.  Elijah  Bab- 
cock is  referred  to  as  a  member  of  Col.  Ethan  Allen's  Regi- 
ment of  "Green  Mountain  Boys."  Connecticut  War  of  the 
Revolution  states  that  Elijah  Babcock  was  with  the  party  that 
went  from  Connecticut  to  effect  the  capture  of  Eort  Ticon- 
deroga  May,  1775,  receiving  £20  for  said  duty.  In  proceed- 
ings of  the  Assembly  of  Connecticut,  May,  1779,  reference  is 
made  to  Capt.  Elijah  Babcock. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  105 

Children  : 

344  Esther/  b.  Jan.  3,   1763;    m.   Daniel  HtUchinson. 

345  Elias,   b.   Feb.   24,   1764;    m.   Hannah   Barber. 

Moses,   b.   June    19,    1768.     Believed   to   have   been   livmg  and   umn. 
in  1848. 

346  Silas,  b.  May  18,   1770;    m.  Rachel  Allen. 

347  Paul.   b.    Mav   18.    1770;     ni.   Mabel   Hatch. 

348  Ichabod,  b.  Mar.  3.   177^;    m.  Esther  Sprague. 
34Q  Lydia,  b.   1774;    m.  Dr.   Sylvanus  Church. 
350  Sally,  b.   1776;    ni.  James  Rood. 

Elijah,  b.  1778;    m.  Experience  Coburn.     Settled  in  Middlctown,  Vt. 

151.  Anna,*^    dau.    of    Elias    and    Anna    (Plumb)    Babcuck 

(James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  July  5,  1743,  Ston- 
ington,  Conn.;  d.  N.  Canaan,  Conn. ;   m.  June  17,  1773,  Henry 
Stevens,  N.  Canaan,  b.   1747,  d.  Feb.   11,   1825,  N.  Canaan. 
She  was  bap.  Aug.  14,  I743- 
Child: 

Ezra,  b.   May  20,   1782;    m.   1811,  Wealthy  Williams. 

152.  RuFUS,**    son    of    Elias    and   Anna    (Plumb)    Babcock 

(James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Apr.  22,  1758;  m.  (i)  May  24,  1781,  Zeruiah  Moses, 
b.  Apr.  24,  1763;  d.  Oct.  22,  181 1.  She  was  dau.  of  Capt. 
Timothy  and  Thankful  Moses;  m.  (2)  Mercy  Brousmaid. 
She  survived  her  husband,  but  had  no  children. 

During  the  Revolutionary  War  Rufus  was  called  out  to 
serve  several  times,  as  a  soldier,  and  was  in  the  company  of 
his  father-in-law.  In  1783  he  was  bap.  by  Rev.  Joshua  Moses, 
and  joined  the  Baptist  Church  in  Sandisfield,  Mass.,  by  which 
church  some  years  later  he  was  licensed  to  pre:ich.  He  gath- 
ered a  Baptist  Church  in  North  Colebrook,  Conn.,  and  in  1794 
was  ordained  as  its  pastor,  being  the  first  minister  in  that  town. 
He  served  this  church  until  he  was  seventy-three  years  old, 
with  good  success,  about  five  hundred  members  having  been 
added  to  it  during  his  pastorate.  After  his  resignation  he  con- 
tinued tu  preach  to  that  church  and  in  vacant  parishes,  but 
refused  to  become  a  pastor.  One  who  knew  him  well  said : 
•'Without  anv  oreat  advantages  of  earlv  culture,  without 
fluency  of  speech  or  any  of  the  graces  of  an  orator,  he  had  such 
native  soundness  and  vigor  of  mind  coupled  with  good  sense 
ruid  industry  that  he  was  highly  and  deservedly  esteemed,  not 
only  in  his  own  communion  but  by  intelligent  and  learned  min- 
isters of  other  denominations." 

His  autobiography  is  in  the  Baptist  Memorial,  \n\.  i.  ]). 
369,  and  in  Sprague's  Baptist  Pulpit,  p.  387. 


io6  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children  : 

Tiniulhy,  b.  Mar.  12,  1783;  d.  at  North  Colcbrook,  Conn.,  1837; 
ni.  Alay  26,  1803,  Christiana  Smith,  of  North  Colcbrook.  No 
issue.  They  adopted  as  a  son  their  nephew,  Timothy  E.  Bab- 
cock, when  he  was  eleven  months  old,  son  of  their  brother,  Cyrus 
G. ;  Christiana  survived  her  husband  many  years,  and  died  at 
North  Colcbrook. 

351  Cyrus  Giles,'  b.  Jan.  27,  1789;    m.  Mrs.  Amarilla  (Cowles)  Hawley. 

352  Rev.  Rufus,  b.   Sept.   18,   1798;    m.  Olivia  B.  Smith. 

153.  Capt.  Oliver,^  eldest  son  of  Oliver  and  Anna  (Avery) 
Babcock  (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stoning- 
ton,  Conn.,  Jan.  22,  1741 ;  bap.  May  3,  1741 ;  d.  at  his  home 
in  Stonington,  Jan.  25,  1777;  m.  Sept.  3,  1767,  Mercy  Kinney, 
of  Preston,  Conn.,  b.  July  12,  1751.  She  m.  (2)  in  Stoning- 
ton, Apr.  5,  1778,  Nathan  Brown,  and  lived  there  until  1790, 
when  with  their  six  children  they  removed  to  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
where  she  d.  Oct.  21,  1844. 

He  was  in  the  Continental  Army  in  the  War  of  the  Revolu- 
tion. His  first  commission  was  that  of  Ensign,  May  i,  1775, 
in  Capt.  Samuel  Parsons's  Company  of  Stonington  in  Col. 
Parsons's  6th  Connecticut  Continental  Regiment.  He  was  on 
duty  with  his  regiment  at  New  London,  Conn.,  until  June  17, 
1775,  when  they  were  ordered  by  the  Governor's  Counsel  to 
the  Boston  camps.  There  the  regiment  took  post  at  Roxbury 
Heights  in  Gen.  Spencer's  Brigade  and  remained  until  the  ex- 
piration of  service,  Dec.  10.  1775.  In  the  meantime  he  was 
promoted  from  Ensign  to  First  Lieutenant,  commissioned  July 
I,  1775.  He  reentered  the  army  Jan.  i,  1776,  as  Eirst  Lieu- 
tenant in  Col.  Samuel  Parsons's  Continental  Regiment  as  re- 
organized for  1776.  He  served  with  his  regiment  at  the  siege 
of  Boston  in  the  winter  of  1776,  after  which  the  loth  Regi- 
ment marched  under  Washington  to  New  London,  where  by 
vessels  they  proceeded  to  New  York.  They  continued  in  the 
vicinity  of  New  York  from  Apr.  till  the  close  of  the  year;  as- 
sisted in  fortifying  the  city;  ordered  Aug.  24,  1776,  to  the 
lines  around  Brooklyn;  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Long  Island, 
Aug.  27,  and  in  the  retreat  from  Long  Island,  Aug.  29,  1776. 
He  was  detailed  to  Lieut. -Col.  Thomas  Knowltoii's  Rangers 
in  Sept.,  1776.  He  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  British  at  the 
battle  of  Fort  Washinglon  on  the  Fludson,  Nov.  16,  1776. 
Tradition  says  he  was  greatly  opposed  to  the  surrender  of  the 
fort,  and  that  he  broke  his  sword  across  a  cannon,  declaring 
that  it  should  never  be  surrendered  to  the  hated  British.  While 
a  prisoner  he  was  confined  in  the  British  prison  ship  Glascow. 
He  was  exchanged  and  left  New  York  early  in  Jan.,  1777. 


From  a  photograph  taken   igo2. 


Page  1 06. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  107 

The  followin.G^  appeared  in  the  Connecticut  Gazette  of  Fel). 
14,  1777 :  "On  the  J5th  of  Jan.,  1777.  (hed  Lieut.  Ohver  Bab- 
cock, of  Stonington,  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  his  age.  He 
returned  home  from  imprisonment  in  New  York  on  the  eighth 
of  the  month,  and  was  taken  sick  with  smallpox  the  twelfth, 
of  which  distemper  he  died,  leaving  a  disconsolate  widow  and 
three  small  children." 

He  was  promoted  to  a  Captaincy  for  his  bravery  in  the  dis- 
astrous retreat  from  Brooklyn. 

A  special  report  from  the  U.  S.  War  Department,  dated 
July  13,  1900,  is  as  follows:  "The  records  of  this  office  show 
that  one  Oliver  Babcock  served  as  2nd  Lieut,  in  the  r)th  Conn. 
Reg.,  Revolutionary  War." 

His  name  is  first  borne  on  a  return  of  officers  in  Gen.  Spen- 
cer's brigade  about  Sept.  20,  1775,  without  remarks,  and  it 
last  appears  on  a  return  with  remarks  showing  that  he  was 
appointed  First  Lieutenant  Nov.  9,  1775,  and  that  he  was 
taken  prisoner  at  Fort  Washington  Nov.  16,  1776. 

Daniel  Babcock,  youngest  brother  of  Capt.  Oliver  and  grand- 
father of  the  writer,  referring  to  the  exchange  of  his  brother 
and  other  prisoners,  dictated,  Apr.  5,  1845.  the  following: 
"The  prisoners  were  taken  from  New  York  to  New  London  in 
a  vessel.  Soon  after  passing  through  Hellgate  a  man  broken 
out  with  smallpox  was  brought  up  from  the  hold  of  the  vessel 
and  made  to  circulate  among  the  prisoners,  with  the  deliberate 
intention  of  giving  that  disease  to  the  homeward-bound  pris- 
oners and  to  their  friends." 

At  a  meeting  in  Connecticut  of  the  Governor  and  Council 
of  Safety,  Feb.  i,  1777,  Daniel  Allen  is  appointed  Captain  of 
a  company  in  Col.  Durkee's  Regiment  instead  of  Oliver  Bab- 
cock, deceased.     (Hoadly. ) 

Children : 

Mercy,  b.  Dec.  10,  1768;    d.  Feb.  27,  1777. 
353  Abigail.'  b.   Stonington,   Conn.,  Oct.   ii,   1770;    m  Jabish  Brown. 
Elizabeth,  b.   Nov.   15,   1772;    d.   Mar.  4,   1777. 

Tradition  says  that  the  death  of  the  two  young  children,  who 
died  about  a  month  later  than  their  father,  was  caused  by 
smallpox  contracted  from  their  father. 

154.  Joshua,''  son  of  Oliver  and  Anna  (Avery)  Babcock 
(James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  June  5,  1743.  d.  N.  Stonington,  Oct.  i,  18 10,  m.  Sept. 
3,  1772,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth  Palmer,  of  Lis- 
bon, Conn.,  b.  Alar.  5,  1750;  d.  N.  Stonington,  Nov.  7,  1818. 


io8  The  Bahcock  Cicncalogy. 

Joshua  was  a  farmer  and  a  merchant.  For  about  thirty 
years  he  was  deacon  of  the  Piaptist  Church  at  Pendleton  Hill, 
Conn.,  and  for  about  twenty-se\-cn  years  Justice  of  the  Peace, 
and  l)y  virtue  of  his  office  solemnized  many  marriages. 

Children,  b.  in  N.  Stonington : 

354  Joshua,"  1).    Fel).   2,    1774;    m.   Eunice   Brown. 

355  Asa,  b.    Nov.   6,   1775;    m.   Catherine   Robljins. 

356  Oliver,  1).  Jan.  20,   1778;    m.   Polly  Randall. 

357  Elizabeth,  b.   May  4,    1780;    m.    Peleg  Brown. 

358  Martin,  b.   Mar.  20,   1783;    m.  Eunice  Rol)bins. 
Cyrus,  b.  Jan.  19,  1785;    d.  June  29,   1786. 

359  Charles,   b.  June  21,   1787;    m.    Nancy   Pratt. 

360  Henry,   b.   Feb.    14,    1790;    m.   Dolly   Stanton. 
Asher,  b.  May  25,  1792;    d.  Feb.   i,  1796. 

155.  Anne/'    dau.    of   Oliver   and    Anna    (Avery)    Babcock 

(James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  July  15,  1745;  d. 
Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  12,  1838;  m.  (i)  1763,  Sanford. 
son  of  Thomas  and  Content  (Sanford)  Langworthy,  b.  Oct. 
30,  1738,  d.  at  about  forty-six  years  of  age,  at  Pendleton  Plill. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church,  Rockville  branch, 
Hopkinton.  She  m.  (2)  Maj.  Anthony  Rhodes,  a  Revolu- 
tionary soldier,  b. ,  d.  May  25,  1843.     After  marriage  he 

removed  to  Bridgewater,  N.  Y. 
Children  by  first  husband : 

Anna,   b.    Nov.   7,    1764:     m.    Nathaniel    Palmer.      Settled   in    N.    Y. 

State. 
Content,    b.    May   2,    1766;     m.   Jeremiah    Alain.      Settled    in    N.    Y. 

State. 

Sanford,  b.  ;    m.  ;    d.,  leaving  three  sons. 

Altana,  b.  Aug.  24,  1769;    m.  John  W.  Brown,  and  lived  in  Canada. 

Oliver,  b.  ;    d.  Genesee,   N.  Y.,  leaving  one  son. 

Mercy  Langworthy,   b.  ;    m.    (i)   John   Collins,  of  Stonington, 

Conn.,  and  settled  in  Ohio;    m.  (2)   Mr.  Noyes ;    he  d.  and  she  m. 

(3)   Sanford.     She  d.   in  Ohio  with  son  Sanford  L.   Collins. 

Children  by  second  husl)and : 

Amy,   b.   ;     m.    Rodney   Randalls,   and    settled    in    N.   Winfield, 

N.  Y.     Had  5  children. 
Avery,   b.    1790,    Bridgewater,    N.    Y. ;     m.     Settled   in   Bridgewater. 

Had  5  children. 

156.  Capt.  William  Avery"  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and 
Anna    (Avery)    Babcock    (James,  James,  John,  James 

1st),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  31,  1747;  d.  Chat- 
ham, N.  Y.,  Sept.  21,  1829.  He  was  buried  in  the  Bab- 
cock family  burying  ground,  about  a  mile  from  the  house  of 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  109 

Senator  Henry  S.  Ambler,  of  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  near  the  road 
leading  to  New  Concord.  He  m.  Lucretia  Davis,  dau.  of  Capt. 
John  and  Sarah  (Beebe)  Davis.  (For  military  record  of  Capt. 
John,  see  records  of  Chloe,  wife  of  Gersham  Babcock.)  Lu- 
cretia was  b.  at  Sharon,  Conn..  Feb.  11,  1757,  d.  at  Chatham 
Center,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  26,  1819. 

Deacon  Daniel  Babcock,  grandfather  of  the  writer,  referring 
to  his  brother  Capt.  William  Avery  Babcock,  Apr.  5,  1845, 
said,  'A\'illiam  served  in  the  Revolutionary  Army,  and  was 
engaged  in  the  capture  of  Burgoyne."  Joshua  Bal)cock,  a 
nephew  of  Capt.  William,  said  that  he  was  Ensign  in  the  Rev- 
olutionary War  and  later  a  Captain  of  IMilitia. 

In  Apr.,  1777,  a  party  of  eleven  "Householders"  apparently 
from  Columbia  County,  commanded  by  Capt.  JMartin  Beebe. 
rode  to  Albany,  "to  do  all  in  their  power  for  the  defense  of 
America  in  general  and  New  York  State  in  particular,  fear- 
ing lest  timely  assistance  for  the  defense  of  the  city  and  stores 
should  fail."  They  arrived  on  the  17th  inst.  Their  bill,  which 
covered  only  their  expenses,  was  sent  to  the  committee  asking 
for  £6  i8s.  Among  the  eleven  persons  were  "Sergt.  Wm. 
Babcock"  and  his  wife's  father,  "Lieut.  John  Davis."  (New 
York  in  the  Revolution,  Supplement,  p.  139.) 

On  p.  203  of  the  same  book  is  a  list  of  persons  who  received 
Land  Bounty  Rights  for  services  or  willingness  to  serve  in 
defense  of  the  frontiers  of  the  State.  The  name  of  William 
Babcock  is  found  in  this  list. 

Capt.  \Mlliam  Aver>^  Babcock  was  a  farmer  and  owned 
much  land.  He  \\'as  the  boss  carpenter  at  the  building  of  the 
Spencertown  Presbyterian  Church,  which  is  still  standing. 
New  Lebanon,  N.  Y..  records  state  that  he  was  elected  As- 
sessor for  the  years  1787,  '88,  '90,  '92,  and  Fence  Viewer  for 
the  year  1791. 

Children : 

361  Anne/  b.  Nov.  S,  1773;    d.  at  Chatham,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Ebenezer  Cady. 
Sally,  b.  June  6,  1776.    d.  Oct.  29,  1777. 

William,  b.  June  6,  1776;    d.  July  11,  1812,  Chatham,  N.  Y. 

Sally,  b.   May  23.   1778;    d.  Aug.  26,   1861. 

Cynthia,  b.   Feb.   20,   1781  ;     d.  Jan.    10,    1857: 

Lucinda,  b.  Apr.  23,   1783;    d.   i860. 

Ruth  Gregory,  b.  Mar.  31,  1785;    d.  June  13,  1811. 

362  John  Davis,  b.  Apr.  30,  1789;    m.  Jane  Moorhouse. 
Altana,  b.  Nov.  i,  1795. 

157.     Capt.  Gersham,^  son  of  Oliver  and  Anna  (Avery)  Bab- 
cock (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  N.  Stoning- 
ton.  Conn.,  Nov.  9,  1752;  d.  Columbia  Coimty,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  17. 


110  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1815.  He,  his  wife,  and  son  Daniel  were  all  buried  in  the 
cemetery  at  New  Concord,  N.  Y.,  where  eiisi^raved  marble 
tombstones  mark  their  graves.  He  m.  Cliloe  Davis,  b. 
1 76 1,  and  settled  in  Austerlitz,  N.  Y. 

From  War  Department  records,  Washington,  D.  C,  July  14, 
1900:  "The  records  show  that  one  Gersham  Babcock,  rank 
not  mentioned,  served  in  Capt.  Hezekiah  Baldwin's  Company, 
2d  New  York  Regiment,  commanded  by  Col.  Goose  Van 
Schaick,  Revolutionary  War.  His  name  appears  on  a  roll 
dated  at  Fort  George,  Oct.  13,  1775,  with  remarks.  Enlisted 
July  30-17.     On  command." 

From  New  York  in  the  Revolution,  p.  29,  we  find  that  the 
service  of  Gersham  Babcock  above  referred  to  was  in  the  2d 
Regiment  of  the  line;  that  is,  the  regiment  was  in  the  U.  S. 
service  under  Gen.  Washington.  From  New  York  in  the  Rev- 
olution, Supplement,  p.  237,  we  find  that  Gersham  Babcock 
of  the  Albany  Company  Militia,  17th  Regiment,  had  land 
bounty  rights.  Deacon  Daniel  Babcock,  1)rother  of  Gersham, 
said,  Apr.  5,  1845,  that  Gersham  was  Sergeant  in  the  Re\'olu- 
tionary  Army  and  was  at  the  taking  of  Burgoyne.  His  nephew 
Joshua,  who  was  about  forty  years  old  when  Gersham  died, 
said  of  him  that  he  was  Captain  of  a  uniformed  company  and 
was  celebrated  for  his  military  tactics. 

Gersham  Babcock  was  a  Free  Mason,  and  joined  in  1788  at 
Canaan  Corners,  N.  Y.,  Unity  Lodge,  No.  9,  F.  &  A.  M. 

Chloe  Davis,  wife  of  Capt.  Gersham,  and  dau.  of  Capt.  John 
and  Sarah  Beebe  Davis,  sister  of  Lucretia,  wife  of  William 
Babcock,  brother  of  Gersham,  was  b.  in  Sharon,  Conn.,  Sept.  9, 
1761.  d.  Columbia  County.  N.  Y.,  July  13,  1815. 

Military  record  of  Capt.  John  Davis  is  as  follows : 

First.  His  commission  from  Sir  Harry  Moore,  Bart.,  Gov- 
ernor of  New  York,  as  Second  Lieutenant  in  the  British  Mili- 
tia, dated  Sept.  25,  1768. 

Second.  Another  commission  from  Sir  William  Tryon, 
Governor  of  New  York,  as  Second  Lieutenant  in  the  British 
Militia,  dated  July  18,  1772. 

Third.  He  is  commissioned  as  Captain  from  the  State 
of  New  York  "by  the  Grace  of  God  free  and  independent," 
dated  June  18,  1778,  "in  the  second  year  of  our  inde- 
pendence." 

The  original  three  commissions  of  Capt.  John  Davis,  or 
copies  of  them,  were  owned  in  Nov.,  1901,  by  H.  M.  Spence, 
member  of  the  firm  of  Spence  &  Smith,  office  19-21  Citizens' 
Bank  Building,  Parkersburg,  W.  Va. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  1 1 1 

Children : 

Daniel,  1).   1779  (  ?)  ;    d.  Apr.   12,   1814,  leaving  no  issue. 

363  Avery,'  b.  Jan.   18,  1781  ;    m.  Lydia  Darrow. 

364  Lucrctia,  b.   1785;    ni.   Dea.  Edward   Palmer. 

365  Chloe,  b.  Apr.   13,   1789;    m.   Ezekiel   l>urgess. 

366  Sarah,  li.  Feb.   i,   1792;    ni.  Elisha  Uriggs. 

367  John,  b.   Dec.  7,   1795;    ni.   Alary  B.   Burg. 

368  Rosvveli,  1).  June.  1799;    ni.  Christiana  Groat. 

158.  Ai.tana/'  (lau.  of  Oliver  and  Anna   (Avery)    Babcock 

(James.  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jan.   14,  1/55;    ^^■ 
Apr.  7,  1840;  m.  Dec.  30,   1772,  John  Langworthy ;    d.  Feb., 
1825.      They   settled   in    N.   Stonington,   Conn.,   near  Clark's 
P^alls,  where  all  their  children  were  born  and  reared. 
Children  : 

Abigail,  b.  June  17,   1774;  d.  Mar.  12,   1841,  unm. 

369  John,'  b.  Apr.   i,  1776;    m.  Sarah  Pendleton. 
Joshua,  b.    1778;    d.   when   3  weeks  old. 

Eli^alx'th,  b.  Jan.  23.  1780;  d.  Maiden,  N.  Y.,  Feb..  1870;  m.  in 
North  Stonington,  by  her  uncle,  Joshua  Babcock,  Sept.  24.  1797, 
Sylvanus  Maxson.  b.  Feb.  16,  1775.  They  settled  in  West- 
erly, where  their  two  sons  and  six  daughters  were  born.  In 
1819  the  family  removed  to  Malden-on-the-Hudson.  N.  Y. 

Asa,  b.  May  4.  1782;  d.  in  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  .Aug.,  1868;  m. 
(i)  Phebe  Thurston,  who  died  leaving  no  issue;  m.  (2)  Ruth 
Crandall.  Had  eleven  children.  They  settled  in  Little  Gene- 
see, N.  Y. 

370  Content,   b.    Oct.  2,    1788;    m.   Dea.   Daniel   Lewis. 

159.  Dr.  Christopher,^  son  of  Oliver  and  Anna   (Avery) 
Babcock  (James,  James,  John,  James  ist).  b.  N.  Ston- 
ington, Conn.,  Jan.  28,  1757;  d.  Tiverton,  R.  L,  Nov.  2,  1780; 
m.  1778  (?),  Polly  Benedict,  of  Danbnry,  Conn.,  d.  1802. 

The  following  records  are  taken  from  Hollister's  Histor)-  of 
Connecticut,  vol.  ii,  p.  266:  "At  the  age  of  eighteen  years 
Dr.  Christopher  Babcock  was  commissioned  as  a  surgeon  in 
the  army  of  the  United  Colonies,  and  immediately  joined  the 
troops  under  Gen.  Schuyler.  During  the  severe  sickness 
among  A\^ooster's  troops  at  Danbury  Gen.  AVashington  made 
a  requisition  upon  Schuyler  for  a  surgeon  to  be  sent  to  the  aid 
of  the  sufferers.  Dr.  Bal^cock  was  selected  for  this  sendee, 
and  was  recei\-ed  by  Wooster  with  great  cordiality,  w^ho  soon 
became  his  warm  personal  friend.  The  General  placed  the 
young  physician  in  charge  of  the  hospital,  where  he  remained 
until  the  town  was  destroyed  by  the  enemy.  His  residence  was 
in  the  family  of  Thaddeus  Benedict,  Esc[.,  a  prominent  lawyer 
of  the  place,  whose  daughter  he  married. 

"When  Gen.  \\''ooster  followed  the  retreating  British  troops 
from  Dan1)ury  to  Ridgefield  he  was  accompanied  by  Surgeon 


1 12  The  Bahcock  Gcncaloi^y. 

Bal)Cock,  who  was  the  only  Continental  snrgeon  present  and 
who  first  informed  the  dying  General  his  wound  was  mortal. 
He  assisted  in  conveying  him  to  the  house  in  which  he  died, 
where  he  was  joined  by  Dr.  Turner  and  other  physicians.  In 
the  year  following  Dr.  Babcock  was  placed  in  charge  of  the 
hospital  at  Fort  Arnold,  West  Point. 

"During  the  autumn  of  1780  he  was  sent  to  the  army  hos- 
pitals at  Newport  and  Tiverton,  R.  I.,  where  the  dysentery  was 
raging  violently  among  the  American  and  French  troops. 

"His  labors  and  exposures  were  excessive,  and  he  was  seized 
with  the  disease  of  the  camp  and  died  very  suddenly,  Nov.  2, 
1780.  His  only  child,  William,  was  about  six  months  old  at  the 
death  of  his  father.  To  him  while  yet  a  child  a  beautifully 
\\'rought  medal  was  given  by  sundiy  citizens  of  Danbury  ac- 
companied liy  a  resolution  expressive  of  respect  for  the  charac- 
ter, patriotism,  and  public  service  of  his  father." 

The  U.  S.  War  Department,  under  date  of  July  13,  1900, 
furnished  the  following  records : 

"Christopher  Babcock  served  as  S.  M.  in  the  Hospital  Dept. 
of  Conn.,  Rev.  War.  His  name  appears  on  an  account 
dated  at  office  of  Army  Account  Feb.  7,  1789,  with  remarks. 
Commencement  of  pav  Oct.  19,  1777.  Time  of  service, 
2-2-1 1." 

Child : 

371  William  Avery,'  b.  Apr.   15,  1780;    m.  Abigail  Cook. 

160.  Elizabeth,*'  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Anna  (Avery)  Bab- 
cock (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jan.  15,  1759; 
d.  Vernon  Center,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  10,  1832;  m.  1785,  John  Foot, 
of  New  Concord,  N.  Y.  For  the  last  eight  years  of  her  life 
she  was  blind. 
Children : 

Zilpha,  b.  ;    d.   in  old  age,  iinm. 

Oliver,   b.   ." 

Avery,  b.  

John,  b. 


Ephraim,  b. 
Clarrisa,  b.  - 
Sela,  b. 


Altana,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Daniel  B.,  b.  . 

161.     Hon.  Daniel,*'  son  Oliver  and  Anna  (Avery)  Babcock 

(James,   James,   John,  James    ist),   b.   N.    Stonington, 

Conn.,  Aug.   31,   1762,  the  youngest  of  nine  children.      His 


-  S.    z 


-    y 


^=1   S 


I'hc  Bohcock  Genealogy.  113 

father  died  when  he  was  nine  years  of  age  and  for  the  next 
five  years  his  home  and  that  of  his  mother  was  with  his  eldest 
Ijrother,  Joshua,  on  the  homestead  farm.  At  fourteen  he  was 
apprenticed  to  Elder  Henry  Clark,  who  was  a  blacksmith  and 
operated  iron  works  at  what  is  now  Woodville,  in  Hopkin- 
ton,  R.  1.  Wiien  Fort  Grisw^old,  at  Groton,  Conn.,  was  be- 
sieged by  the  British  the  young  man  started  with  others  to 
assist  the  garrison,  but  on  reaching  Mystic,  Conn.,  they  learned 
that  the  garrison  had  surrendered.  "He  and  his  comrades 
'wept  like  children'  at  not  being  able  to  render  assistance."  (S. 
S.  Griswold's  History  of  Hopkinton,  p.  83,  1876.)  From  other 
sources  we  learn  that  he  drove  an  ox  team  from  Hopkinton  to 
New  London,  a  distance  of  twenty-five  miles,  with  provisions 
for  the  army  and  did  other  home  guard  duty  along  the  Rhode 
Island  shore,  but  never  asked  for  a  pension.  Serving  out  his 
apprenticeship  he  began  business  as  a  blacksmith  at  Potter 
Hill,  R.  I.,  where  he  m.  Apr.  8,  1784,  Content"  Potter,  dau. 
of  106  George  and  Content  Maxson  Potter,  and  after  six  years 
he  removed  to  Hopkinton.  now^  Ashaway,  w'here  the  remainder 
of  his  life  was  spent.  He  was  a  man  highly  esteemed  lx)th  in 
the  church  and  community,  a  mem])er  of  the  First  S.  D.  B. 
Church  of  Hopkinton,  he  served  his  church  as  deacon  for 
about  fifty-eight  years,  and  as  chorister  for  almost  fifty  years. 
He  was  a  deacon  in  the  truest  sense,  his  home  being  ahvays 
open  to  the  poor  and  needy.  Alive  to  w'hatever  w^as  helpful 
to  individual  character,  we  find  him  one  of  the  first  pioneers 
for  total  abstinence  in  Rhode  Island.  He  was  a  devout  Chris- 
tian, and  a  true  gentleman  of  the  old  school. 

For  forty-six  years  he  was  Justice  of  the  Peace,  for  nine 
years,  1807-16,  he  was  a  member  of  the  Upper  House  of  the 
State,  elected  by  general  prox  and  carried  with  him  the  suf- 
frage of  all  parties,  retaining  the  ofiice  by  unanimous  vote. 
For  ten  years  he  w^as  Judge  of  the  County  Court  of  Washing- 
ton County,  and  several  times  represented  his  town  in  the 
Lower  House  of  the  Legislature.  Becoming  widely  known,  he 
was  called  near  and  far  as  arbiter  and  counselor  in  difficult 
cases,  in  both  Church  and  State.  He  was  an  intimate  friend 
and  counselor  of  Governors  Fenner,  Knight,  and  others;  was 
a  friend  and  relative  of  Rufus  Babcock,  D.D.,  and  was  loved 
and  honored  by  all.  His  brothers  Capt.  Oliver  and  Dr.  Chris- 
topher were  distinguished  officers  in  the  Revolutionary  War. 
He  died  at  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  Sept.  18,  1846. 

Reference  is  made  to  "Hon.  Daniel  Babcock"  in  Rhode 
Island    Biographical    Cyclopedia    of    Representative    Men,    in 

8 


114  '^/''^  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Westerly  and  Its  Witnesses,  and  by  William  Henry  Potter  in 
Narrag'ansett  Weekly,  Jan.  3,  1862.  To  these  sources  we  are 
in<lel)te(l  for  much  of  the  above  sketch. 

Content  Potter  Babcock,  wife  of  Hon.  Daniel,  was  born  at 
Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  May  25,  1765,  and  died  at  Ashaway,  R.  I., 
Sept.  14,  1850.     She  was  a  descendant  of  James  Babcock,  who 

was  born  in  England  in  161 2  and  m.  Elizabeth  .     Their 

son  John  m.  Mary  Lawton ;  John's  son  George  m.  Elizabeth 
Hall.  George's  dau.  Mary  Babcock,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Sept. 
20,  1695,  m.  Thomas  Potter,  who  was  b.  at  N.  Kingston,  R.  I., 
Feb.  8,  1696.  Their  son  106  George  was  the  father  of  Content 
Potter  Babcock.  He  was  b.  at  Westerly,  now  Hopkinton, 
R.  I.,  Jan.  3,  1732,  and  m.  Content  Maxson,  Sept.  18,  1754. 
They  settled  at  Potter  Hill,  R.  I. 

Children : 

372  Daniel,'  1).  Dec.  16,   1784;    m.  Ann  Almy. 

373  Betsy,   b.   Feb.  21,    1787;    m.   George   Irish. 

374  Jacob  D.,  b.  Jan.  20,  1789;    m.  Elizabeth  Almy. 

375  Nancy   (Ann),  b.  May  9,   1791  ;    m.  Col.   Henry  Potter. 

George  Potter,  b.  Nov.  4,  1795,  Hopkinton.  Was  a  merchant  in 
New  York,  where  he  died  Sept.  29,  1825  ;  m.  at  Hopkinton,  R.  I., 
Apr.  19,  1825,  Sarah  Babcock,  dau.  of  239  Hezckiah  and  Mary 
(Brown)  Babcock,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Mar.  29,  1804;  d.  Wind- 
ham, Conn.,  June  i,  1876.  She  m.  (2)  at  Windham,  Conn., 
Frederick  Campbell,  by  whom  she  had  a  number  of  children. 
George  had  no  children. 

376  Oliver,  b.  Dec.   12,   1797;    m.   Phebe  Babcock. 
2,77  Lucy,  b.   Jan.  24.    1801  ;    m.   David  Almy. 

378  Mary,  b.  Nov.  2,  1807;    m.  Peleg  Saunders. 

Emily,  b.  June  14,  1810,  Hopkinton  (Ashaway),  R.  I.;  d.  Asha- 
way,  May  23,   1890,   unm. 

162.  Timothy,*'   Jr.,   son   of   Timothy   and   Lois    (Billings) 

Babcock    (James,  James,   John,   James    ist),  b.   in    N. 
Stonington.  Conn.,  Aug.  22,  1747;    d.  in  Ashford,  Conn.;    m. 
Esther  Billings,  of  Stonington   (  ?).     Their  first  child  was  b. 
in  Stonington,  the  remaining  five  in  Ashford,  Conn. 
Children  : 

Billings,   b.   Aug.   4,    1771.     Living  in   Akron,   O.,   1S44. 
Daughter,  b.  ;     m.  Hutchins.     Lived  in  Vermont. 

379  Timothy,'  1).   1777  \    m-   Martha  Bugbee. 

380  Archil)ald,    b.    Mar.   8,    1780;     m.    (i)    Hannah    Richards;     m.    (2) 

Elizabeth  Wyman. 

Achsash,    b.    ;     m.    Thomas    Aspinwall.     Lived    in    Mansfield, 

Conn.-   It  is  said  the  Aspinwalls   introduced  the  silk  culture  into 
Mansfield,  near  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century. 

381  Thomas   Palmer,   b.   Nov.   26,   1793;    m.   Emily   Roice. 

163.  Gr.ace."  dau.  of  Timothy  and  Lois  (Billings)   Babcock 

(James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  at  the  old  Babcock 


Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  115 

homestead,  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  4,  1753;  m.  Sttming- 
ton.  Conn.,  Feb.  28,  1771,  Samuel  I'lunil),  Jr.,  her  full  cousin. 
He  was  the  sixth  child  of  Samuel  and  Grace  (Babcock)  Plumb, 
b.  Stonington.  Aug.  14,  1746.  Removed  to  Vermont,  where 
he  d.  1820  (?).  Most  of  his  family  m.  and  settled  in 
Vermont. 
Children : 

Sarah   Plumb,  b.  ;    m.  Sumner. 

Grace  Plumb,  b.  ;    m.  Samuel  Campbell. 

Samuel   Plumb,   b.    1778   (?);    m.   Elizabeth   Baldwin,   d.    1814. 
Green   Plumb,  b.   Sept.   29,    1780;    m.   Melinda   Richardson,  d.    1854. 

Lois  Plumb,  b.  .     Was  a  cripple;    unm. 

Philura  Plumb,  b.  ;    m.  Blake. 

164.  John,"  son  of  Timothy,  Sr.,  and  Thankful  (Read)  Bab- 
cock (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  N.  Stoning- 
ton, Conn.,  July  26.  1765;  d.  Apr.  24,  1806;  m.  at  N. 
Stonington,  Oct.  18,  1787,  Louisa,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Sarah 
Gilmore,  of  Keene,  N,  H.,  b.  there  June  30,  1764.  d.  in  W. 
Ouincy,  Mass.,  at  the  residence  of  her  youngest  son,  Robert 
Gilmore  Babcock,  Mar.  21,  1844.  Her  remains  are  buried  in 
lot  No.  15  of  the  Hall  Cemetery,  W.  Ouincy,  Mass.  A  head- 
stone with  the  word  "Grandmother"  marks  the  spot. 

Her  father,  Robert  Gilmore,  during  the  War  of  the  Revolu- 
tion, was  loyal  to  the  king  of  England.  He  had  the  courage 
of  his  convictions,  and  dearly  it  cost  him.  He  was  by  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  New  Hampshire  arrested,  confined  in  jail, 
his  estate  confiscated,  and  finally  he  was  banished  from  the 
State.  The  history  in  full  of  his  tribulations  can  be  found  in 
the  State  papers  of  New  Hampshire. 

The  date  of  birth  of  John  Babcock  appears  upon  the  Stoning- 
ton town  records  as  July  26,  1766. 

Children,  b.  in  Stonington  and  Pomfret,  Conn. : 

382  John  Read,'  b.  July  (?)  28,  1788;    m.  Eliza  Ely. 

383  Louisa  Miner,  b.  Dec.  17.   1789;    m.  Jesse  Brown. 

384  Robert    Gilmore,    b.    Feb.    29,    1792;     m.    (i)    Sally    Otis;     m.    (2) 

Lucy  Blackman. 

165,  James,^  son  of  Timothy  and  Thankful  (Read)  Bab- 
cock (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  at  the  old  Bab- 
cock homestead.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  July  5,  1770;  d.  Alex- 
andria, N.  Y.,  1854;  m.  (i)  at  N.  Stonington,  May  15,  1791, 
Sarah  Budlong,  of  Voluntown,  d.  Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  24, 
1809:  m.  (2)  Dec.  10,  1809,  Dolly  Scott,  d.  Sept.  10,  1814, 
no  issue;   m.  (3)  at  Hamilton,  N,  Y,,  Feb.  8,  1815,  Prudence 


ii6  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Waters,  d.  Sherburne,  Dec.  27,  1825;  m.  (4)  at  Sherburne, 
Nov.  5,  1826,  Lois  llibbard,  d.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  1845,  ^^^ 
issue. 

Vdh.  2;^,  1793.  James  Babcock  sold  his  interest  in  his  father's 
estate  to  his  brother-in-law,  Stanton  Campbell.  About  1798 
he  remoxed  from  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  to  Sherburne,  N.  Y. 
It  is  ^'ery  probable  that  he  removed  from  Sherburne  to  Ham- 
ilton, N.  Y.,  about  181 1 ;  later  moved  back  to  Sherburne; 
then  remo\ed  to  Alexandria,  where  several  of  his  children  were 
living  in  1832. 

Children  by  first  wife  (first  three  b.  at  N.  Stonington,  others 
at  Sherburne,  N.  Y.)  : 

Sarah,    b.    July   4,    1792;     m.   Bradshaw.      Lived   and   died    in 

Michigan.      No   children. 

385  Daniel,'  b.  July  14,   1794;    m.  Harriet  Page. 

386  Lydia,  b.  ]\Iay  2,  1797;    m.  Horace  Craine. 

387  Nancy,  b.  Apr.  28,  1799;    m.  Parnicter. 

388  Polly,  b.   May  5,   1801  ;    m.  William  Holmes. 

389  Rectina,  b.  May  9,  1803 ;    m.  Solomon  Porter. 

390  Rhodes,  b.  Apr.  30,  1805  ;    m.  Melisia  Thorn. 

Joseph,  b.  May  13,  1807;  d.  Alexandria,  July  27,  1871  ;  m.  Expe- 
rience George,  dau.  of  Page  George,  of  Alexandria.  They 
adopted  a  child,  which  they  called  Rhodes  Babcock ;  d.  at  2 
years  of  age. 

391  Philena,  b.  Feb.   18,  1809;    m.  Donning. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

Orra  Maria,  b.  Nov.  21,  1815;  d.  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  May  4,  1877; 
m.  Collins.     No  issue. 

392  Ora,  b.  June  16,   1817;    m.  Catherine  Derosie. 

393  Orrin,  b.  Apr.  6,  1819;    m.  Elmira  Babcock. 

166.  Thomas,*'  son  of  Nathan  and  Deborah  (Stafford)  Bab- 
cock (Samuel,   James,  John,   James    ist).   b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  June  29,  1749.  The  town  records  of  Warwick,  R.  I., 
show  that  Thomas  Babcock  of  Westerly  and  Sarah  Wareman, 
dau.  of  Capt.  John,  deceased,  of  Coventry,  were  m.  by  Elder 
Charles  Holden,  Nov.  3,  1774.  It  is  probable  the  above 
Thomas  Babcock  was  the  son  of  Nathan.  One  son  only  is  re- 
corded upon  the  town  records  of  Warwick,  R.  I.,  as  being  born 
to  them : 

Thomas,  b.   Mar.  20,    1778. 

167.  Anna,*5  ^i^^^^    Qf  Nathan  and  Deborah   (Stafford)   Bab- 
cock  (Samuel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Nov.  9,  1752,  d. ;   m.  May  lo,  1777,  Rowland,  son 

of  William  Champlain, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  i  1 7 

Children: 

Hannah,  b.  Oct.  31,  1779;    d.  Apr.   18,   1780. 
Nathan,  b.   Sept.  7,   1780. 
Jeffrey,  b.  Aug.  27,  1783. 

168.  Andrew/'  son  of  Nathan  and  EHzabeth  (Brown)  Bab- 
cock (Samuel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Apr.  6,  1765, 

at  Westerly;  d.  Oct.  29,  1817;  m.  at  Westerly,  Bathsheba, 
dau.  of  Simeon  and  Mercy  (Palmer)  Pendleton,  b.  July  13, 
1763,  Westerly,  d.  Mar.  10,  ICS54. 

Andrew  Babcock  left  a  large  estate  in  Westerly,  and  in  his 
will  mentions  his  sisters  Deborah  Pendleton,  Nancy  Ann  Cham- 
plain,  wife  of  Rowland,  Dorcas  Barber,  wife  of  Nathan  Bar- 
ber, Jr.,  Lucy  and  Nancy  Balx:ock,  daughters  of  his  brother 
Samuel,  deceased,  .Andrew,  son  of  his  brother  Charles,  and 
John,  son  of  his  late  brother  Thomas.  He  made  his  brother 
Charles  his  executor. 

169.  Jonathan,^    son   of   Nathan   and   Elizabeth    (Brown) 

Babcock  (Samuel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  Dec.  14,  1766;  was  thrown  from  his  wagon  in 
Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  and  killed,  Aug.  4,  183 1;  m.  Elizabeth 
Adams,  of  Norwich,  Conn.,  1794.  In  1807  removed  to  Brook- 
field, N.  Y. 
Children : 

394  Jonathan,'  b.  Sept.  13,  1795;    m.  Mary  E.  Babcock. 
Harry,  b.  Mar.  11,  1797.     Went  South. 
Betsey,   b.  June  20,   1799;    d.  young. 

Nancy,  b.  Jan.  24,  1801 ;    m.  Nathaniel  Greene,  of  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ; 
d.  soon  after. 

Elory,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Phebe,  b.  :    m.  Ruel  Keith. 

David,  b.   1808;    d.   1825. 

Elisa,  b.  ;    m.  Isaiah  Holmes;    res.   1880  Huron,  Dak. 

Bathsheba,  b.  ;    unni.  ;    d.  in  Syracuse. 

Harriet,  b.  ;    unni. ;    d.  in  Syracuse,  Oct.  11,  1901. 

Mary,  b.  ;    m.  Edward  Bartlet.     She  d.  Aug.  25,   1890,  at  Ver- 
milion, N.  Y. 
Hannah,  b.  ;    unm. ;    d.  at  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 

170.  Charles,"  son  of  Nathan  and  Elizabeth  (Brown)  Bab- 
cock  (Samuel,  James,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Aug.  23,  1770;  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Feb;  23,  1834; 
m.  Jan.  i,  1792,  Tacy,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Mercy  (Saunders) 
Langworthy,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  July  i,  1773,  d.  June  17, 
1838,  in  Brookfield. 

Tradition  savs  thev  were  the  second  white  family  in  Brook- 
field. N.  Y. 


ii8  TJic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children  : 

395  Charles,"  1).  Aug.  28,   1792;    m.  Martha  Gardner. 

396  Jonathan,  h.  July  20,  1794;    m.  Julia  T.  Chesebrough. 

Tacy,  b.  Nov.  14,  1796,  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  d.  at  Verona,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  6,  1852;  m.  at  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  July  18,  1844,  Ichabod 
Williams.      No   children. 

397  Samuel,  b.  July  7,   1799;    m.  Hannah  Williams. 

Welcome,  b.  Mar.  30,  1801,  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  d.  at  Danielsonville, 
Conn.,  July  18,  1868;  m.  (i)  Apr.  4,  1831,  Eliza  Scott;  m.  (2) 
Apr.  6,  1842,  Mary  Ann  Wood  ;    d.  Dec,  1894.    No  children. 

398  Andrew,  b.  Oct.  28.  1803;    m.  Orvilla  Bailey. 

399  Henry  C,   b.   Oct.    13,    1805 ;     m.   Temperance   Burdick. 

Martha,  b.  Brookfield,   N.   Y.,  Oct.  29,  1807;    d.  Oct.   18,   1872;    m. 

Brookfield,   N.   Y.,  Nov.  27.   1843,  Abel  G.  Lewis.     Had  one  son, 

who  married,  and  had  a  family. 
Horace,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  31,   1810;    d.  Aug.   11,   181 1. 

400  Ellery,  b.  Nov.  27,  181 1;    m.  Fanny  Burdick. 

401  Albert,  b.  July  6,  1814;    m.  Orletta  S.  Green. 

171.  Deborah,''    dan.    of    Nathan    and    Ehzabeth    (Brown) 
Bal)cock  (Samnel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Aug.  16, 

1772,  Westerly,  R.  I.,  d.  Warren,  Pa.,  Mar.  16,  1836;   m.  Oct. 
25,  1792,  George,  son  of  John  and  Sebra  (Thompson)  Pendle- 
ton, of  Westerly,  b.  there  July  24,  1768,  d.  Apr.  3,  18 14. 
Children : 

Deborah,  b.  Oct.  23,  1793. 
George,  b.  June  30,   1795. 

172.  Nathan,''  son  of  Nathan  and  Dorcas  (Babcock)   Bab- 
cock  (Samuel,  James,  John,  James   ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Oct.  30,  1783;   m.  Mar.  18,  1805,  Patty,  dau.  of  Peleg 
Barber.     He  removed  with  his  family  to  Pennsylvania. 
Children : 

Frank,  b.  Jan.   17,   1806   (?). 
William,  b.   1807   (?). 
Eliza,  b.  1808  (?). 
Nathan,  b.  1810  (?). 
Martha,  b.   1812   (?). 
Isaac,  b.   1814   ( ?). 
Sherman,  b.    1816   (?). 

173.  David,"  son  of  Nathan  and  Dorcas  (Babcock)  Babcock 

(Samuel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Aug.  16,  1784;  d.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  1863;  m. 
Westerly,  R.  I.,  Apr.  7,  1807,  Fannv,  dau.  of  John  and  Mary 
Tifft,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Mar.  29,  1788.  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  21,  1842. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  119 

Children  : 

402  Uavid  F./  b.   Sept.  21,   i8oy;    111.   Maria  York. 

403  John,  b.   Dec.   16,   1810;    m.    (i)    Sarah  Greenman ;    ni.    (2)    Lorctt 

Coon. 

174.  Paul,"  son  of  Samuel,  Jr.,  and  Mary  (Smith)  Babcock 

(Sanniel,  James,  John,  James  1st),  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  30, 
1760;  d.  Westerly,  Apr.  21,  ICS45;  m.  Nov.  30,  1780,  Char- 
lotte, dau.  of  James  and  Damarius  (Kenyon)  Crandall,  of 
Richmond.  She  was  half-sister  to  Damarius  Crandall,  wife  of 
John  Babcock.  She  was  b.  Westerly,  May  10,  1764,  d.  June 
20,  1843.  Both  were  buried  in  the  ancient  Babcock  burial 
ground  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  and  have  inscribed  gravestones, 
from  which  the  dates  of  their  deaths  were  copied.  Paul  Bab- 
cock was  a  Revolutionary  pensioner  in  1840. 

It  is  believed  that  Paul  Babcock  was  one  of  the  fourteen 
that  capsized  off  Point  Judith  en  route  from  Westerly  to  rein- 
force Gen.  Sullivan  in  1777,  and  who  by  a  merciful  Providence 
was  saved.  The  report  of  the  Committee  to  the  Rhode  Island 
General  Assembly  includes  the  following  (see  C.  R.  of  R.  I.)  : 

"Articles  belonging  to  Paul  Babcock,  one  gun,  one  hat,  one 
shoe  and  brass  buckle,  all  at  6  pounds  3  shillings." 

Children,  b.  Westerly : 

404  Charlotte,'  b.   Sept.   15,   1781  ;    m.   Augustus  Crandall,  Jr. 

405  Damarius,  b.  Oct.   14,   1783;    m.   Nathan  Burch. 

406  Mary,  b.  May  2,   1787;    m.  Kenyon  Crandall. 

407  Paul,  b.  June  3,    1791  ;    m.   Amy  Clark. 
Hannah,  b.  Jan.   16,  1800;    d.  Mar.  31,  1848. 

175.  SiLAS,*^    son    of    Samuel    and    Mary    (Smith)    Babcock 

(San.iuel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 

Apr.    10,    1764,  d.   Sept.   23,    18 19;    m.   at  Richmond,   R.   I., 

Jan.  18,  1787,  Mercy,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth  (Webster) 

Kenyon,  Richmond,  R.  I.,  b.  Oct.  29,  1763.  d.  Sept.  23,  1819. 

Children : 

Samuel,  b.  Preston,  Conn.,  Oct.  19,  1787;    d.  1863. 
Silas,  b.  Westerly,  Aug.  9,   1789;  d.  young. 
Silas,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

176.  Jared,"    son   of   Samuel   and   Mary    (Smith)    Babcock 

(Samuel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  W^esterly,  R.  I., 
Feb.  II,  1766;  d.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Dec.  8,  1842;  m.  (i) 
Hopkinton.  R.  I..  Oct.  25,  1789,  Martha,  dau.  of  Deacon 
Daniel  and  Amey  (Clark)  Lewis,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Nov. 
29,  1776,  d.  Nov.  26,  1826;  m.  (2)  June  25,  1830,  Charles- 
town,  R.  I.,  Amy  Lewis,  b.  1773,  d.  June  i,  1842.  No  children 
by  second  marriage. 


I20  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 


Jared  was  Lieutenant  of  Militia  in  1795  for  Westerly.  He 
was  Justice  for  Westerly  in  1817.  (Smith.)  Jared  and  his 
wives  and  children  were  buried  in  what  is  now  the  first  Hop- 
kinton  Cemetery,  near  Potter  Hill,  R.  I. 

Children : 

Martha,  b.  Aug.  8,  1790. 
408  Jarod,'  b.  Aug.  8,  1792;    m.  Lois  Ross. 
Clark,  b.  May  21,  1796;    d.  Jan.  8,  1827. 

177.  Thankful,^  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Mary  (Smith)  Bab- 
cock   (Samuel,   James,  John,    James    ist),   b.    Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Feb.   15,   1768;    d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  24,   1843; 
m.  James,  son  of  James  and  Damarius  (Kenyon)  Crandall,  d. 
Persia,  N.  Y.,  Sept.    12,   1842,  aged  seventy-six.     Thankful 
was  his  second  wife.     They  settled  at  Brookfield,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Charlotte,   b.   Apr.   24,    1794;    m.   Barton   Brand. 
Hannah,  b.  Jan.  25,   1796;    m.   Dr.   Darius  Chapin. 
Paul  K.,  b.  Aug.  10,   1799;    ni.   Nancy  Nichols. 

Rev.   Samuel,  b.   Feb.  8.   1803;    d.  ,  Apr.  28,   1836;    m.   Lorinde 

Otis. 
William,  b.  Aug.  8,  1806;    m.  Nancy''  (Ann)  Babcock. 
Mary,   b.   Dec.    11,    1808;    d.   Dec.    19,    1834. 

178.  Phebe,*^  dau.  of  Isaac  and  Mary    (Worden)    Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
July  24,  1748;  (1.  June  7,  1836;  m.  Mar.  22,  1767,  Deacon 
Ezekiel,  son  of  Ezekiel  and  34  Amy  (Babcock)  Gavitt,  b.  June 
15,  1741,  d.  Sept.  12,  1825.  Both  buried  in  the  Gavitt  burying 
ground  near  Quarry  Flill.  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Ezekiel  was  deacon  in  the  Hill  Church,  town  of  Westerly. 

Child : 

Hannah,  b.  1769;    d.  Feb.  7,  1826. 

179.  John   Prentice,*^  son  of  Isaac  and   Mary    (Worden) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Oct.  4.  1750;  d.  Sept.  6,  1781 ;  m.  Mar.  15,  1778,  Anna, 
dau.  of  William  and  Anna  (Gavitt)  Gavitt,  b.  Dec.  29,  1761. 
John  Prentice  was  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution, 
and  lost  his  life  at  the  battle  of  Fort  Griswold,  Conn.  In  a 
work  The  Battle  of  Groton  Heights,  by  Charles  Allyn,  New 
London,  Conn.,  1882,  is  the  following:  'Tn  the  old  burying 
ground  at  Burnett's  Corners  in  Groton  is  found  the  following 
epitaph  of  John  P.  Babcock :  'In  memory  of  John  P.  Baljcock, 
who  together  with  a  small  party  of  Americans  in  Fort  Gris- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  121 

wold  withstood  an  assault  made  by  a  detachment  of  British 
troops  until  being  overcome  by  superior  numbers.  He  was 
massacred  Sept.  6,  1781,  age  30  yrs.'  " 

Mr.  Allyn  in  his  work  gives  a  Hst  of  all  who  were  left 
widows  by  the  battle,  and  on  p.  135  is  found  the  following: 
"Anna  Babcock,  widow  of  John  Prentice,  clothier,  was  left 
with  two  small  children  and  small  real  estate,  not  much  more 
than  enough  to  pay  the  debts." 

Child : 

409  Stanton  Prentice/  b.  Dec.   15,   1778;    m.  Lucy  Crary. 

180.  Isaac,''  son  of  Isaac  and  Alary  (Worden)  Babcock 
(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  15, 
1754;  d.  Groton,  Conn.,  Aug.  31,  181 1;  m.  Nov.  12,  1780, 
Amy,  dau.  of  Deacon  Ezekiel  and  34  Amy  (Babcock)  Gavitt, 
b.  Westerly,  July  27,   1864,  d.  Dimock,  Pa.,  Aug.   17,   1849. 

Isaac  Babcock  removed  from  Westerly  to  Groton,  Conn., 
where  he  bought  a  farm  and  built  a  large  house,  "a 
mansion  for  those  days,"  on  the  bank  or  near  the  Thames 
River.  This  land  and  several  adjoining  farms  have  since  been 
purchased  by  the  United  States  for  a  Navy  Yard. 

Revolutionary  record  of  Isaac,  Jr.,  given  by  one  of  his  de- 
scendants, states  that  he  enlisted  in  Westerly  in  Capt.  Pendle- 
ton's Company  of  Col.  Joseph  Noyes's  Regiment,  and  served 
for  two  years.  On  the  5th  of  Sept.,  1781,  there  came  a  rap 
at  his  door  and  a  shout,  "The  British  are  landing."  He  kissed 
his  wife,  who  was  just  then  in  labor  with  her  first  child,  seized 
his  gun  and  started  for  his  regiment.  The  wife  fainted  and 
the  child  died. 

Years  after  the  death  of  her  husband  the  widow  of  Isaac 
Babcock  sold  her  property  in  Groton,  Conn.,  and  with  her 
family  removed*  to  Dimock,  Pa.,  and  settled  on  a  farm.  Her 
son  Isaac  owned  the  adjoining  farm.  In  1836  she  sold  land  to 
Stanton  Babcock  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  that  she  had  received  by 
will  from  her  brother  Ezekiel  Gavitt. 

Children : 

Lucy,  b.  Mar.   19,   1783;    d.   i860;    m.  Perkins. 

Sarah,  b.  Apr.   18,   1785;    d.   1870. 

John  Prentice,  b.  Preston,  Conn.,  Oct.  13.  1787. 

410  Isaac,'  b.  Dec.  25,  1789;    m.  Lucretia  Gardner. 
Mary,   b.    Groton,    Conn.,    May   31.    1794. 

Denison    Avery,    b.    Groton,    Conn.,    Feb.    28,     1792;     m.     Keziah 

Smith.     She  m.   (2)  D.  R.  Stoddard,  and  settled  in  Groton. 
Gurdon,  b.   Groton,   Conn.,  June  2.   1796. 

411  Ezekiel,  b.  May  22,   1798;    m.  Lydia  Gardner. 


122  The  Babcock  Gc}icaU)<z\ 


<s. 


412  Frances  Mitclicll,  1).   Nov.   12,   I79y;    m.   Panicll  Ely. 

Phehe,  b.   GrcitdU.   Apr.  24,    1802;    111.  and  settled  in  Diniock,   Pa. 
Clarimla,  1).  Groton,   Mar.  2y,   1805;    111.  and  settled  in  llarfijrd,   Pa. 

181.  Mary,**   dan.   of   Isaac  and   Mary    (Worden)    Babctjck 
(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  11, 

1757;    m.    Dec.   2,    1781.    Peleg,   son   of   Peleg  and   Hannah 
(Lewis)  Ross,  b.  Mar.  29,  1761. 
Chikh'en : 

Prentice   Bahcock,    h.   June   22,    1782,    in    Westerly. 
Mary,  b.  June  28,  1784,  in  Hopkinton. 
Anne,  b.  Oct.  26,   1786,  in  Voluntown,  Conn. 
Peleg,  b.  May  27,  1789,  in  Westerly. 
Isaac,  b.  May  12,  1793,  in  Sheffield,  Mass. 

182.  Amos,*^    son    of    Isaac   and    Mary    (Worden)    Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  Aug.  i, 
1759,  m.  Dec.  2,  1781,  Mary  Babcock. 

"In  1776  Amos  Babcock  was  a  Revolutionary  soldier  in 
Capt.  Arnold's  Company,  Col.  Lippit's  Reg."  (Spirit  of  '76 
in  Rhode  Island,  by  Benjamin  Cornell.) 

Children : 

Charlotte,  b.  Nov.  4,  1784. 
Amos,  Jr.,  b.  Mar.  30,   1790. 
Anne,  b,  Apr.  i,  1793. 

183.  Jesse,"    son   of    Isaac    and    Mary    (Worden)    Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  Westerly,  R.  I., 
June  16,  1768;  d.  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  May  26,  1844;  m.  at  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  June  2T^,  1789,  Hannah,  dau.  of  Isaac  Thompson, 
b.  Westerly,  1769,  d.  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  1851. 

June  23,  1802,  he  was  ordained  Elder,  and  succeeded  Elder 
Elkanah  Babcock  as  fourth  and  last  Babcock  pastor  of  the  old 
"Hill  Church."  "During  the  latter  part  of  his  ministry  a  per- 
son asked  a  member  of  the  church,  'Who  leads  your  meetings 
now?'  and  was  answered,  'Nobody  leads,  but  Elder  Jesse 
drives.'"  (W.  and  W.) 

Late  in  life  he  removed  to  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  where,  with  his 
children,  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days. 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly: 

Hannah,  b.  Sept.  22,  1790;    d.  Nashville,  Tenn.  ;  in.  Elder  Ferguson. 

Betsey,  b.  Oct.  7.  1792;  d.  Sept.  3,  1865,  Fulton,  N.  Y. ;  m.  West- 
erly, Jan.  3.  1813,  Joseph,  son  of  Samuel  and  Submit  (Palmer) 
Chesebrough,   b.   Jan.   21,    1782. 

Mary,  b.  Oct.  8.  1794;  d.  PhcL-ni.x,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14,  1885;  m.  Ful- 
ton,  N.   Y.,   Leman  Carnes. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy,  123 

RlKHla,   b.    Alar.   7.    1798;    d.    Milwaukee.   Wis.;    m.    Fulton,   N.    Y., 

Harvey  Canner. 
Lucy,    b.    July    31,     1800;     d.     Westerly;     m.     Paul     Bradford,    of 

Westerly. 
Phehe,   b.   Sept.   3.   1802;    d.    Milwaukee,   Wis.;    m.   Fulton,   George 

Parker. 

413  Jesse,''  b.  Aug.   31,   1806;    m.   Emelinc  Thompson. 

Lydia,  1).  Feb.  8.  1809:    d.  Feb.  8.   1832,  in  Fulton,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Oliver 

Burdick. 
A])I)y.  b.  June  21.  181 1;    d.  I'uilon.  Dec.  14,  1853;    m.  F"ulton,  Hiram 

Brad  way. 
John   C,  b.  July   i,    1814;    d.   Fultnn.    1886;    m.   Fulton,   Eliza,   dan. 

of  Roger  Nelson,  of  Fulton. 

184.  Joshua/'  son  of  Isaac  and  Mary   (Worden)    Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
June  22,,  1770;  m.  Mar.  ii,  1792,  Ruth  Greene. 
Children,  b.  in  Westerly : 

Oliver,  b.  Dec.  21,  1792. 
Silvia,  b.  Aug.  19,  1794. 
Ephraim,  b.   Mar.    15,    1796. 
Lodowick.  b.  Feb.   14,   1798. 
Thankful,  b.  Feb.  i,  1800. 

185.  William,*^    son    of    William    and    Patience    (Cottrell) 
Babcock   (Daniel,  James,  John,  James   ist),  b.   West- 
erly, Feb.  23,  1750;  m.  Penelope . 

Children,^b.  in  Westerly  (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Nancy,  b.  Jan.  27,   1775;    m.   William  Blivan. 

414  John,'  b.  Oct.  14.  1780;    m.  Catherine  Rhenhart. 
Sylvester,  b.  July   10,   1783. 

Jesse,  b.  Oct.   i,   1785. 
Daniel,  b.  July  10.  1788;  unm. 
Clark,  b.  Sept.  28,  1790. 
Eunice,  b.   Dec.   17,   1793. 

186.  Anna,"  dan.  of  William  anrl  Patience  (Cottrell)   Bab- 
cock   (Daniel,  James,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Mar.  26,  1753;    m.  Mar.  18,  1773,  at  Westerly,  Robert, 
son  of  Elias  and  Thankful  (Stanton)  Thompson,  of  Westerly, 
b.  May  21,  1752.     (A.  V.  R.) 
Child: 

Robert,  b.  Mar.  28,  1778. 

187.  James,'''  son  of  James  and  Mary   (Satterlee)    Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John.  James  ist),  b.  Westerly.  R.  L, 
July  31,  1753:  d.  Brookficld,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Jan.  26,  1777,  Sarah, 
dan.  of  John  and  Hannah  (Saunders)  Ross,  of  Westerly,  b. 
Aug.  28,  1 75 1. 


n 


124  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Hannah,  b.  Sept.  3,   1777;    m.  Richard  Berry   (?). 

415  Jesse,'  b.   May  20,   17S4;    m.   Prudence   Whitford. 

Martha,  b.  Mar.  30,  1789;    d.  Cleveland,  O. ;    ni.  James  Lewis. 
Abigail,  b.  July  20,  1786;    m.  Wilson. 

416  Joshua,   b.   Mar.   20,    1793;     m.    (i)    Betsy   Dornian ;     ni.    (2)    Lena 

Eades. 

188.  Daniel,^  son  of  James  and  Mary  (Satterlee)   Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  in  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Feb.  25,  1755;    m.  Mar.   i,  1784,  Hannah  Bnrdick.     She  and 
her  twin  sister  Desire  were  youngest  children  of  Peter  and 
Esther  (Gavitt)  Burdick,  b.  Apr.  20,  1768. 
Children,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.    (A.  V.  R.)  : 

Hannah,  b.  Feb.  12,  1785. 

417  Elder    Daniel,'   b.    Nov.    17,    1786;     m.    (i)    Lois    Potter;     m.    (2) 

Deborah  Teft. 
Hannah,  b.   Stonington,  Mar.  30,   1789;    m.  William  Hamilton. 

418  James,  b.  Jan.  16,  1791  ;    m.  Esther  Fish. 
Lee,  b.  Jan.  26,  1795. 

Desire,  b.  Feb.  21,  1797. 

189.  Henry,*''  son  of  James  and  Mary  (Satterlee)   Babcock 

(Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  June  2^^, 
17575  i'^'^-  Aug.  4,  1778,  Prudence,  dau.  of  Hezekiah  Gavitt,  of 
Westerly : 
Children : 

419  Henry,'  b.  July  22,  1779;    m.  Fanny  West. 

420  James,  b.  Oct.  16,   1781  ;    m.  Mary  Nugent. 
Ezekiel,  b.  Oct.  22,  1783. 

421  Asa,  b.  Apr.  26,  1786;    m.  Mary  Gavitt. 

Nancy,  b.  Oct.  17,  1788;  m.  Mar.  31,  1805,  Westerly,  William, 
son  of  John  and  Anna  (Rathbone)  Thompson,  b.  Mar.  19,  1760. 
No  record  of  children  found. 

Joshua,  b.  Apr.  18,  1791 ;    d.  Jan.,   1794. 

Hannah,  b.  Sept.  18,  1794;  m.  (i)  Sims;  m.  (2)  David  Rath- 
bun.     No  record  of  children. 

Sarah,  b.  July  17,  1796;  m.  (i)  Nathan  Thompson;  m.  (2) 
Sheldon  Clark. 

190.  Jo.SHUA,"  son  of  Elkanah  and  Esther  (Crandall)   Bab- 
cock   (Daniel.  James,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I.,  May  8,    1768;    d.  Aug.  2,    1802;    m.   Dec.    13,    1801, 
Nancy,  dau.  of  John  Crandall. 
Child : 

Nancy,  b.  1802;    m.  John  P.  Hall   (?). 

191.  Delight,*'  dau.  of  Elder  Elkanah  and  Esther   (Cran- 
dall)   Babcock    (Daniel,    James,   John,   James    ist),   b. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  125 

Westerly,  R.  I.,  Feb.  8,  1768;  m.  Mar.  13.  1794.  Lemuel  Vose, 
son  of  Joshua  and  Mary  Vose,  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  2,  1767. 
Children : 

422  Lemuel,'  Jr.,  b.  Oct.  9,  1796;    m.  Mary  A.  States. 

Sophia,  b.  Oct.  8,  1799;    in.  Westerly,  Oct.  21,   1814,   Stephen  Wil- 
cox, Jr. 
Charles,   b.    Feb.   6,    1807. 

192.  Amelia,"  dau.  of  Elder  Elkanah  and  Esther  (Crandall) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Mar.  5,  1770;    d.  Jan.  7,  1844;   m.  Amos,  son  of  John 
and  Susanna  (Champlain)  Stanton,  b.  Mar.  25,  1768,  in  Ston- 
ington.  Conn.;  d.  there,  June  8,  1841. 
Children,  b.  in  Stonington : 

Amelia  Stanton,  b.  Nov.  2,  1792 ;  m.  Sanmel  Hiscox,  her  cousin. 
Lived  in  New  York  City. 

Lodowick,  b.  Jan.  28,  1795 ;    m.  Hannah,  dau.  of  Dea.  John  Stanton. 

Susan,  b.  Aug.   17,  1798;    m.  Russel  Bentley,  of  North  Stonington. 

Sophronia,  b.  June,  1801 ;    m.  Saxton  Maine,  of  Stonington. 

Amos,  b.  July  22,   1804;    m.  Triphena  Brown. 

Avery,  b.  Sept.  21,   1806;    d.  May  22,   1827,  unm. 

Caroline,  b.  Oct.  10,  1810;  m.  Feb.  28,  1832,  Samuel,  son  of  Ste- 
phen  and   ^larcy    (Hinckley)    Babcock,   b.    1798,   in   Stonington. 

Hosea,  b.  Dec.  25,  1815;    m.  Mary  E.  Thompson. 

193.  Rev.  Luke,''  son  of  Elder  Elkanah  and  Esther  (Cran- 
dall)   Babcock    (Daniel,   James,   John,   James    ist),   b. 

Westerly,  R.  L,  May  i,  1774;  d.  Mar.  26,  1851 ;  m.  1796  (  ?), 
Desire  Erink,  of  Stonington,  b.  July  7,  1772,  d.  Pharsalia, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  26,  185 1. 

About  1800  Luke  Babcock  bought  and  located  on  three  hun- 
dred acres  of  land  at  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  but  later  sold  out  and 
settled  at  what  he  believed  a  more  healthy  location  at  Pharsa- 
lia, N.  Y.,  where  he  again  bought  three  hundred  acres  of 
land,  upon  which  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days.  Upon 
his  new  location  he  built  a  house  and  barn,  and  later  erected 
a  weaving  shop  (where  his  daughters  manufactured  all  kinds 
of  cloth),  a  blacksmith  shop,  a  cider  mill,  a  turning  lathe,  and 
a  saw  mill.  He  made  friends  with  the  Oneida  Indians  who 
were  his  neighbors,  and  with  his  gun  helped  to  rid  the  sur- 
rounding country  of  wolves  and  bears. 

He  was  an  excellent  Bible  scholar  and  for  many  years  was 
Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  as  such  his  decisions  were  seldom  re- 
versed. He,  like  his  father,  was  for  many  years  a  devout  Bap- 
tist, and  used  to  preach  and  conduct  funerals  all  over  the  coun- 
try.    Later,  to  use  his  own  words,  he  "outgrew  his  Baptist 


126  TJic  Babcock  Goicology. 

faith  and  became  a  Uiiiversalist,"  to  which  hehef  he  adhered 
throui^ii  the  remainder  of  his  hfe. 
Chikh'en  : 

Hannali,  b.  • ,   Stoniiigtnn  ;    d.   Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  unm. 

Delight,   b.  ,    Stuniiigloii.      At   the  age   of  26  111.  Joshua   Frink ; 

d.  Oct.  6,  1875,  aged  7.S. 

423  Prentice,'  b.  ;    m.  Thankful  Baluck. 

424  Desire,  b.  ;    m.   Samuel   Lord. 

425  Paul,  b.    1805;    m.   Adelaide   Wallace. 
Frances,  b.  ,   Pharsalia  ;    d.  young. 

426  Nancy,  b.  Sept.  29,   1809;    ui.   Nathaniel  D.   Peck. 

Phebc,    b.    Phar.salia,    1811;     d.    June    18,    1877;     ni.    1835,    William 
S.  Nye,  of  Pharsalia. 

194.  Chauncey,^   son  of  Rev.   Elkanah  and  Esther   (Stan- 
ton)   Babcock    (Daniek    James,    John,   James    ist),    b. 

Westerly,  R.  1.,  Nov.  28,  1779;   m.  Prudence  Stanton. 
Chiklren,  b.  in  Westerly,  R.  !.(?): 

427  Elkanah,'  b.  Dec.   11,   1804;    m.   Nancy  Maxson. 

Mary,   b.   ;     m.   Clark  James.     Lived   and   died   in   Voluntown, 

Conn. 

428  Stanton,  b.  Feb.  8,   1812;    m.   Sarah  J.  White. 

Rebecca,    b.    ;     m.    Samuel    G .      He   was   lost    at    sea.      No 

issue.     She  d.  Feb.  14,  1888. 
Benjamin,  b.  ;    m.  Harriet  Walker.     Settled  in  Westerly,  R.  L 

Has  six  children. 
John,  b.  ;    d.  Westerly,   1899;    m.  Mary  Bidgood. 

195.  LoDOWiCK,®    son    of    Elkanah   and    Esther    (Crandall) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jan.  27, 

1 781,  Westerly,  R.  I. ;  d.  N.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Mary  Davis, 
Dec.  13,  1 80 1.     (From  N.  Stonington  Records.) 
Children : 

429  Mary'   (Polly),  b.  Oct.  30,   1803;    m.   Abner  Tucker. 

Thankful,  b.  July  15,   ih'os  :    m.  423  Prentice  Babcock,  son  of  Elder 

Luke  Babcock. 
Melissa,  b.   Nov.  23,   1807. 
Lodowick,  b.  June  27,  1809. 
Eunice,  b.  Apr.  15,   181 1. 
Stanton,  b.   Mar.  20,   1813. 
Emma,  b.  Aug.  22,  1815. 

196.  Esther,*^  dan.  of  Rev.  Elkanah  and  Esther  (Crandall) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Apr.  9,  1784;   d.  Feb.  17,  1833. 

It  is  believed  she  was  the  Esther  Babcock  whose  marriage 
and  children  are  recorded  upon  the  Westerly  records  as  fol- 
lows :  "Esther  Babcock  and  Stephen  Smith  m.  N.  Stonington, 
Sept.  6,  1807." 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  127 

Children  : 

Slophcn,  1).  Aug.   10,   1808. 
Esther  Babcock.  1).   Mar.  7,   i8iO. 
David,   b.   Ucc.   8.    1811. 
Alary  F.,  b.  May  lo,  1814. 
Martha   H..   h.    Sept.   27.    1816. 
Elizabeth  M.,  b.  June  7,   1818. 
Charles  V.,  1).  Oct.  31.   1819. 
William   O..   b.    Sept.    I.    i8_m. 
Harriet   N.,  b.  June  5,   1823. 

197.  Alaj.  Paul,"  son  of  Col.  Henry  and  Mary   f Stanton) 
Baljcock  (Joslma,  James,  John,  James  ist),  1).  Mar.  13, 

1768.  at  Pawcatuck  ( Stonington),  Conn.;  d.  Mar.  14.  1839, 
at  Stonington;  m.  (i)  Apr.  2,  1789,  Nancy,  dan.  of  Maj. 
John  Bell,  of  Stonington,  b.  Sept.  30,  1767,  d.  Nov.  i,  1803; 
m.  (2)  Apr.  15,  1804,  Lucy,  dau.  of  Capt.  Joseph  and  Mary 
(Stanton)  Bell,  1).  Mar.  10,  1784,  d.  Stonington,  Feb.  8,  1846. 
He  was  a  farmer. 

Records  of  Maj.  Paul  Babcock  and  nearly  all  his  descend- 
ants were  prepared  in  1902  by  his  grandson,  W.  I.  Babcock,  of 
New  York,  son  of  Capt.  David  Babcock. 

Children,  b.  at  Stonington  : 

430  Benjamin  Franklin,'  b.   Feb.  3,  1790;    m.  Marie  Eells. 

Mary  Ann,  b.  Apr.  3,   1792;    d.  Aug.  3,  1815;    m.  Oct.  6,  1813,  Rev. 

David  Sherman.     No  children. 
Dudley,  b.   May   10,   1794;    d.   Nov.   17.   1794.  at  Stonington. 
Joshua,  b.  Alay  11,  1796;    d.  Sept.  i.  1818. 
Henry,  b.   Oct.  4,    1799:    d.   May   15.    1834;     m.   Dec.   3,   1828,   Anna 

C.  Smith.     No  children. 
Nancy   Bell.   b.    Mar.   5,    1802 ;    d.   Dec.   22,   1845 ;    m.   July  3.    1822, 

William  R.   Palmer,   son  of  Amos   Palmer.     No  children. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

431  Courtland,  b.  Mar.  25,  1806;    m.  Elizabeth  Carry. 

432  Giles,  b.  Jan.  8.   1808;    m.  Ann  E.   Denison. 

Eliza  Thompson,  b.  Feb.  13,  1810;  d.  Apr.  12,  1872,  at  Stonington; 
m.  Dec.  7.  1826,  Capt.  Nathaniel,  son  of  Nathaniel  and  Mercy 
(Brown)    Palmer,  b.   Aug.  8,   1799. 

433  Abby  E.,  b.   Sept.  4,   1811;    m.   (i)   Jedediah  Leeds;    m.    (2)    Rev. 

John  Beattie. 

434  George   W.,    b.    Oct.    26.    1813;     m.    (i)    Louise    Boucher;     m.    (2) 

Adele   Catonet ;    m.    (3)    Alaria   Shute. 

435  Lucy  Bell,  b.  Mar.  30,  1815;    m.  Giles  Ward. 

436  Robert  Stanton,  b.  Feb.  8,  1818;    m.  Emily  Hall. 

437  ALary  Ann,  b.  Apr.   i,   1821 ;    m.  John  Breckenridge. 

438  Capt.  David  Sherman,  b.  Aug.   12,   1822;    m.  Charlotta  Noyes. 
Hannah,  b.  June  6,   1825;    d.   Aug.  8,   1828. 

198.  Dudley,*'  son  of  Col.  Henry  and  Mary  (Stanton)  Bab- 
cock (Jo.shua,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington, 

Conn..  Jan.  7,   1770;    d.  ;    m.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.    15. 


128  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1799,  Ann  Wright,  of  Stoninoton.     Stanton  Genealog-y  says 

she  was  of  Newport,  R.  1. 

Children : 

439  Frances  Ann/  b.   Stonington,   Oct.   20,    1799;    m.    Phineas   Stanton, 
Apr.  6,   1826. 
Dudley  W.,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  5,  1802. 
Paul,   b.   Westerly,   Feb.   11,    1805. 

199.  Hannah,*'  dan.  of  Col.  Henry  and  Mary  (Stanton) 
Babcock  (Joshua,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stoning- 
ton, Conn.,  Nov.  30,  1773;  d.  Nov.  2,  1842;  m.  Sept.  30, 
1792,  Joseph  Denison,  son  of  Dr.  Charles  and  Hannah  Deni- 
son  Phelps,  b.  Stonington,  May  16,  1769,  d.  y\ng.  8,  1809. 

Chiklren : 

Hannah,  b.  June  24,  1793;    m.  Jan.  28,  1813,  Thomas  Noyes. 
Charles,  b.   Oct.    13,   1795.      Lost  on   the  steamer  Lexington,   which 

was  t)urned  in  Long  Island  Sound,   1840;    m.  Ann  Hammond,  of 

Newport,  R.  L 
Martha,  b.  Feb.  2,  1798;    d.  Oct.  20,  1834. 
Nancy,  b.   Mar.  25,    1800;    d.  ;    m.   Feb.   10,    1820,  James  W., 

son  of  Thomas  and  Lydia   (Rogers)    Noyes,  b.   Stonington,   Dec. 

22,  1784. 

200.  Rev.    William    Smith,^    son    of   Adam    and    Abigail 
(Smith)    Babcock   (Joshua,  James,  John,  James   ist), 

b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Nov.  15,  1764;  d.  Barrington,  N.  H. ; 
m.  at  Fisher's  Field,  N.  H.,  Jan.  8,  1809,  Elisabeth  Merrill,  b. 
Newburg,  N.  H.,  d.  Ipswich,  Mass. 

William  Smith  Babcock's  life  till  manhood  was  spent  at  his 
father's  home,  Boston.  Converted  to  Christianity  from  Deism 
about  a  dozen  years  after  graduation  from  Yale  College,  he 
was  ordained  to  the  Christian  ministr}^  at  Springfield,  Vt., 
Aug.  12,  1801.  Scholarly,  energetic,  and  deeply  spiritual,  he 
devoted  his  life  to  a  persistent  and  self-denying  effort  to  se- 
cure a  union  of  all  true  Christians.  With  propriety  claimed  as 
a  founder  of  the  Freewill  Baptist  denomination,  fourteen  vol- 
umes of  his  journals  still  existing  show  that  it  was  not  his  in- 
tention to  found  a  new  denomination.  He  was  far  ahead  of 
his  time. 

Biography  written  by  his  grandson.  Rev.  S.  S.  Mathews,  of 
Danielson,  Conn. 

Children : 

Joshua,  b.  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

Joshua   Merrill,   b.    Springfield,   Vt.,    Mar.,    1812;     d.    Oct.    8,    i88r, 

at    Barnstead,    N.    H. ;     m.    Barnstead,    Mar.,    1835,    Panthea    P., 

dau.  of  and  Rebecca    (Proctor)    Bunker,  b.   Barnstead,  Dec. 

8,  1815;    d.  Barnstead,  Jan.  15,  1898.     Had  no  children.     He  was 

a  manufacturer  of  woolen  goods. 


STEPHEN    BABCOCK. 
1772-1852. 


Page  138. 


The  Bcihcock  Genealogy.  129 

440  Elisabeth"   Smitli,   b.    Dec.   9,    1817;     m.    (i)    Rev.    S.    S.    Mathews; 

m.    (2)    M.   C.    Lathrop. 

441  A1)igail   Stanton,  b.  July  5,   1819;    m.   Samuel   Blake. 
William  Smith,  b.  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

Adam,  b.  ;    d.   in  infancy. 

201.  Francis,"  .son  of  Adam  and  Martha  (Hubbard)   Bab- 
cock    (Joshua,  James,  John,  James   ist),  b.   Westerly, 

May  6,  1786;  d.  May  27,,  1833;  m.  Boston,  Mass.,  Sept.  i6, 
1809,  AHce,  dau.  of  Edward  \\'yer,  of  Boston. 

About  181 5  he  removed  to  Woburn.  Mass..  where  he  hved 
until  about  1827,  when  he  removed  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.  In 
1830  he  removecl  to  New  York  City.  On  the  i6th  of  Dec, 
1832,  he  sailed  from  New  York  as  Supercargo  of  brig  Teras, 
bound  for  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  died  on  board  the  vessel. 

Records  of  Francis  Babcock  from  American  Family  .An- 
tiquity, by  Albert  Wells. 

Children : 

442  Francis  Henry,'   b.   Boston,   Mass.,   Feb.    14,   181 1. 
Alice   Wyer,   b.    Boston,    Mass.,    Mar.    11,    1814. 

^laria  Ann,  b.  Woburn,  Mass..  Feb.  12,  j8i6;    d.  Nov.  22,  1854,  unm. 
Louisa  Babcock,  b.   Woburn,   Mass.,   Dec.  30,   1817. 

443  William,  b.  Feb.  25,   1820;    m.  Kate  Babcock. 

444  Emily  W.,  b.  Oct.  30,   1821  ;    m.  Henry  W.  Howell. 
Eleanor,  b.  July  25,  1823 ;    d.  June  29,  1876,  unm. 

445  Frederick  A.,   b.  July  5,    1825:    m.   Caroline  Riddle. 

Edward  C,  b.  Rochester,  N.   Y.,  Aug.  21,   1828;    d.  unm.,  Dec.  30, 
1855. 

202.  Nathan*'    Pendleton,    son    of    Nathan    and    Amelia 
(Babcock)  Pendleton  (James,  James,  John,  James  ist), 

b.   Stonington,   Conn..  June    i,    1779;    d.  ;    m.   Oct.   6, 

1803.  Phebe  Cole,  of  Stonington.  b.  Feb.,  1786.     They  lived 
on  Pendleton  Hill,  now  N.  Stonington. 
Children  b.  in  Stonington: 

Nathan  S..  b.  Jan.  11,  1805. 

Richard  Ch.,  b.  Jan.   12,   1807. 

Enoch  B.,  b.  Sept.  5.  1808;    m.  Mary,  dau.  of  Andrew  and  Welthian 

(Palmer)    Chapman. 
Phebe  E.,  b.  Aug.  30.  1810. 
Dewitt  C,  b.  May  27,  1812. 
William  P.,  b.  Apr.  5,  1814. 
Sally  A.,  b.  Mav  23,  1816. 
Susan  A.,  b.  Alar.   18,   1818. 
Nancy  M.,  b.  Mar.  i,  1820. 
James  M.,  b.  Jan.   10,   1822. 
Lydia  E.,  b.  Apr.  4.   1824. 
Keturiah  C,  b.  May  13,  1827.     (Wheeler.) 

203.  James,*'  son  of  Simon  and  Hannah  (Champlain)  Bab- 
cock (James.  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  June  20, 
9 


130  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1784;  m.  Mary  Champlain,  of  Windham,  Conn.  Settled  in 
S.  Coventry,  Conn. 

This  family  is  extinct,  the  father,  mother,  and  all  the  chil- 
dren dying  of  consumption.  They  are  all  buried  in  the  family 
burying  ground  near  where  they  lived,  Flanders  District,  Cov- 
entry, Conn. 

Children : 

Mary  Ann,  b. 


James   S.,   b.   ;     graduated   at   Yale   College,   was   a   teacher   at 

the  South  some  years ;    d.  at  the  age  of  33. 

Charles  J.,  b.  . 

Lucy  D.,  b.  Oct.  7,  1822;    d.  Westerly,  R.  I..  Nov.  4,  1845;    was  the 

first  wife  of  Ezra  Babcock,  of  Capt.  Daniel,  of  Westerly. 
Sally  F.,   b.  . 

Records  from  History  of  Ancient  Windham,  by  William 
Weaver. 

204.  Stanton,*''   son   of   Simon   and   Hannah    (Champlain) 
Babcock  (James,  James,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Dec.  20, 

1793;  d.  Mansfield,  Conn.,  May  29,  1826;  m.  (i)  Maria  Rob- 
ertson; m.  (2)  Mar.  14,  1826,  Almira  Barrows,  of  Mans- 
field. Settled  first  in  Coventry,  but  removed  later  to  Mansfield, 
Conn. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

James  M.,  b.  Feb.   14,   1820.     Has  been  twice  married.     Settled  in 

Tolland,   Conn. 
Gurdon  Y.,  b.  June  19,  1822;    d.  Lebanon,  Conn..  Aug.  30,  1846. 
Horatio  B.,  b.  Feb.  6,  1824.     Settled  in  Cambridgeport,  Mass. 
Daniel   R.,  b.  Aug.  27,    1825,   Mansfield;    d.   Columbia,   Conn.,  June 

29,   1829. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

Mariah  L.,  b.  ;    m.  John  Perkins.     Settled  in  Willimantic,  Conn. 

Records  from  History  of  Ancient  Windham,  by  William 
Weaver. 

205.  Jared    Star,*'    son    of    Robert    Hazzard    and    Mary 

(Hazzard)  Babcock  (Jonathan,  James,  John,  James 
1st),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  14.  1795;  d.  Pittsfiek'l,  111.. 
Oct.  16,  1838;  m.  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  27,  1817, 
Diedama,  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Louis  (Mackay)  Douglass, 
b.  Stephentown,  Mav  7,  1800,  d.  Chicago,  111.,  Nov.  18, 
1877. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  131 

Children : 

Benjamin  Uuugias,  b.  Apr.  9,  i8ig;    d.  Apr.  10,  1819. 
Jane  Ann,  b.  June   ig,   1820;    d.  Chicago,   Sept.  6,   i860. 

446  KoI)ert  Fulton,'  b.   May  30,   1822;    m.  Mary  Oilman. 

447  Louis,  b.  May  4.  1824;    ni.  Jehail  Parkes. 

Myron  Wirt,  b.   Sept.   11,   1832;    d.   New  York  City,  Sept.   12,   1833. 

206.  Esther,*^    dan.   of   Robert   Hazzard   and   Mary    (Haz- 
zard)  Babcock  (Jonathan.  James,  John,  James  ist),  b. 

Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  July  26,  1799;    d.  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  Nov. 
I.  1880;    m.  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  May,  1825,  Robert,  son  of 
Joseph  and  Sarah    (Potter)    Tift,  b.   Stephentown,  June  28, 
1803,  d.  Nassau,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Mary  Lawton,  b.  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  June  i,   1826. 

Alana,   b.    Stephentown,    N.   Y.,   Apr.  4,    1828;     d.    Nassau,    N.   Y., 

Mar.  29,   1892. 
Martha  Maria,  b.  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27,  1831. 
Sarah  Ann,  b.  Newark,  N.  J.,  June  18,  1835  ;    d.  Stephentown,  July 

14,  1851, 
Esther,  b.  Stephentown,  Oct.  2,  ;    d.  New  York  City,  June  26, 

i860. 
Arline  Emeline,  b.  Aug.  14,  1843 ;    res.  Nassau,  N.  Y. 

207.  Nicholas  Hazzard,^  son  of  Robert  Hazzard  and  Mary 
(Hazzard)    Babcock    (Jonathan,   James,   John,   James 

ist),  b.  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  17.  1801 ;  d.  New  York 
City,  Aug.  14,  1865;  m.  Beekman,  N.  Y.,  Nov.,  1831.  Martha 
Maria,  dau.  of  Salmon  and  Margaret  (Vandeburg)  Hamlin, 
b.  Beekman,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  8,  181 1,  d.  New  York  City,  Aug.  30, 
1889. 

Children : 

448  Nicholas  Hazzard,'  b.  Nov.  18,  1832;    m.  IMary  Ottignom. 
Hamlin,  b.   Newark,   N.  J.,   Sept.   20,   1834;    res.   Fordham  Heights, 

New  York  City ;  m.  New  York,  Feb.  2,  1886,  Jennie  Wheaton, 
b.  Hartford  Conn.,  dau.  of  Noah  and  Amelia  (Ball)  Wheaton. 
No  children. 

449  Jared  Star,  b.  May  2,   1838 ;    m.   Mary  Lowrey. 

Almira    Simpson,   b.    New    York   City,   July   22,    1843 ;    res.   215   W. 

135th  St.,   New  York;    unm. 
Helen  Vandeburg,  b.   New   York  City,   May  20,    1845;    res.  215  W. 

135th  St.,   New  York;    unm. 
Emma  Lorraine,  b.   New  York  City,   Mar.  27,   1848;    d.   New  York 

City,  Mar.  2,   1898,  unm. 
Maria,   b.    New   York  City,    May   13,    1850;     res.   215   W.    135th   St., 

New  York  ;    unm. 

208.  IcHABOD,^  son  of  Ichal3od  and  Esther  (Stanton)   Bab- 
cock   (Ichabod,  John,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Jan.  15,  1758;  d.  Gales  Ferry,  Conn. ;  m.  May  26,  1782, 
Dorcas  Hoxie.     She  d.  at  Gales  Ferrv,  Conn. 


132  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Ichabod  was  a  Revolutionary  soldier  and  pensioner  livinj2^  at 
Ledyard,  Conn.,  in  1840.  (U.  S.  Revolutionary  Pension 
Record.) 

Children : 

Peleg,  b.  .     Lived  in  Iowa. 

Ephraim,  b.  

Gideon,  b. 


Marlborougb,   b  . 

John,  b.  . 

Luke,  b.  . ;   nnm. 

Joseph,  b.  . 

450  Ichabod,'  b.  June  22,  1785;    m.  Sarah  Clarke. 

Mary  Ann,  b.  ;    ni.  George  Wells;    d.  Plainfield,  N.  J. 

Caroline,   b.  ;    m.   Stephen  Grey. 

Hannah,  b.  ;    m. Bills. 

209.  LucY,*^  dau.  of  Ichabod  and  Esther  (Stanton)  Babcock 

(Ichabod,  John,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 

Apr.  25,  1760;   d. ;   m.  Apr.  17,  1777,  Christopher  Cran- 

dall,  son  of  James  and  Damarius  (Kenyon)  Crandall,  b.  Sept. 
I,  1755,  Westerly. 
Children : 

Pardon,   b.   Jan.   8,    1778,   Westerly;     m.    Esther,   dau.   of   Hezekiah 

and   Prudence    (Johnson)    Carpenter,  of  Hopkinton. 
Prudence,  b.  Oct.  29,  1779. 

210.  Joseph,^  son  of  Ichabod  and  Esther   (Stanton)    Bab- 
cock   (Ichabod,  John,  John,   James    ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I..  Apr.  I,  1762;  d.  of  smallpox  Dec.  26,  1796;  m.  Aug. 
10,  1782,  at  Westerly,  Sarah, "^  dau.  of  92  Christopher  and 
Mehitable  (Chalker)  Babcock,  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  10,  1763,  d. 
1825  (  ?).  She  m.  (2)  Thomas  Grant,  by  whom  she  had  one 
son,  Thomas  Grant,  Jr.  She  settled  with  her  second  husband 
in  New  York  State. 
Children : 

451  Joshua,'  b.  Oct.  14,  1783;    m.  Clarissa  Crandall. 

452  Sarah,  b.  May  3,  1785  ;    m.  Russel  Dewey. 

453  Eunice,   b.  July   16,    1786;    m.   Thomas   Barber. 
Hannah,  b.  Sept.  9,  1787;    m.  in  the  State  of  New  York. 
Esther,  b.  July  6,  1789;    m.  in  the  State  of  New  York. 

454  Joseph,  b.  June  3,   1792;    m.  Abby  Owens. 

Polly,  b.  Feb.  28,  1794;    m.  Stebbins.     No  issue. 

John,  b.  1796. 

211.  LoDOwiCK,^  son  of  Ichabod  and  Esther  (Stanton)  Bab- 
cock   (Ichabod,  John,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Westerly, 

Feb.   18,   1767;    d.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  28,   1828; 
m.  Preston,  Conn.,  Feb.  24,   1791,  Lydia,  dau.  of  Jabez  and 


TJw  Babcock  Genealogy.  133 

Sarah  ( Lord )  W'it^hl,  Ij.  Preston,  May  28,  1770,  d.  Lebanon 
Springs.  Mar.  4,  1865. 

Children,  1).  in  Lebanon  Springs.  N.  Y. : 

Hampton  C,  b.  June   i.   179-2;    d.   Lebanon,   N.  Y.,   1849;    m.   Mary 

Mannering.     Had  four  daughters. 
Lydia,  b.   1794;    d.  June  2,   1794. 

455  Jabez  Wight,'  b.  Sept.   11,  1795;    m.  Rebecca  Cook. 

456  Emily,   b.   Dec.   22,   1797;    m.    Rev.   Gardner   Hayden. 

457  Lodowick  S.,  Jr.,  b.  Nov.  18,  1799;    "i-   (O   Mary  Babcock;    ni.  (2) 

Sarah   Perry. 
George,  b.  Jan.  22,  1801  ;    d.  Sept.,  1857,  of  heart  disease  ;    m.  Han- 
nah Rich.     Removed  in  183.3  to  Brantford,  Canada. 

458  Lydia  Esther,  b.  Apr.  27,   1816;    m.   Alfred  Wilders. 

212.  Anstice,"  dan.  of  Ichabod  and  Esther  (Stanton)  Bab- 
cock   (Ichaliod,  John,  John,  James   ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  L,  Feb.  25.   T780;    d.  Oct.  3,  1846;    m.  Sept.  29,   1803, 
Joseph  Goodrich. 
Children : 

Joseph  A.,  b.  ,   1804;    d.  Oct.  30,  1834. 

Hannah  A.,  b.  Oct.  13,  1805;    m.  Oct.  5,  1826,  Dr.  John  Whiteside; 

d.  May  26,  1845. 
Rebecca   S..   b.    Feb.   25,    1807;     d.   June    i,    1857;     m.    Oct.   5,    1826, 

John   Sherwin. 
John  B.,  b.  Dec.  26,  1808;    d.  Feb.,  1833. 
Honora,    b.    Oct.    15,    1810;     d.    June    18,    1840;     m.    Oct.    15,    1829, 

Elbridge  Fein. 
Esther  Mary,  b.  Nov.  5,  1812;    d.  Jan.  26,  1840;    ni.  June  25,   1834, 

Joseph  Crane. 
Rachel  Emily,  b.  May  11,   1814;    m.  Jan.  5,  1832,  Michael  Fletcher. 
Zebulon,  b.  Mar.  4.   1816.     Lived  at  Marengo,  111. 
Revanna,  b.  Jan.  18,  1818. 
George  W.,  b.  Nov.  27,  1820;    m.  Feb.  3.   1841,  Mary  Feneck. 

213.  Joseph,'''  Jr.,  son  of  Joseph  and  Hannah   (Ross)   Bab- 
C(x:k    (Ichabod,   John,  John,   James    ist),   b.    \\^esterly, 

R.  L,  1772  (  ?)  ;  d.  Westerly.  Apr.  17.  1831;  m.  May  10. 
1803,  Keturah,  dau.  of  Capt.  John  and  Desire  (Wilcox) 
Gavitt,  of  Westerly.  R.  L,  b.  Dec.  8,  1778;  d.  Apr.  17,  1829. 
(A.  V.  R.) 

Joseph,  Jr.,  was  appointed  by  Westerly  Town  Council  ad- 
ministrator for  his  father's  estate.  Apr.  30,  1804.  He  was 
a  farmer.  In  1799  he  was  appointed  Ensign  in  the  Westerly 
Militia. 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly: 

Desire,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Hannah,   b.  ;    d.   young. 

Desire,  b.  Dec.   19,   1806;    d.  July  21,   1838,  unm. 
Thankful,   b.    Sept.   23,    1808;     d.   Feb.  28,    1841,   unm. 


134  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Sarah,  b.  Aug.  31,  1812;    d.  1866;    m.  Aug.   lo,  1844,  G.  W.  Foster. 

He  d.   1865,  aged  46. 
Ann,   b.   Jan.    11,    1814;     d.    Dec.   24,    1828,   unin. 
John,  b.  July  24,   1816;    d.  aged  16. 

459  Rhoda,'  b.  July  25,  1820;    m.  Dr.  L.  A.  Palmer. 

214.  John/'  son  of  Joseph  and  Hannah  (Ross)  Babcock 
(Ichabod,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Nov.  19,  1773;  d.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1851;  m.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  Dec.  4,  1794,  Damarius,  dau.  of  James  and  Eliza- 
beth (Chase)  Crandall,  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Jnly  26,  1776, 
d.  Persia,  N.  Y.  Damarins  was  half-sister  to  Charlotte  Cran- 
dall, who  m.  Paul  Babcock. 

John  with  his  family  removed  from  Westerly  to  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  soon  after  1796;  about  183 1  moved  to  Persia,  N.  Y., 
where  he  died.  When  a  young  man  he  taught  school ;  later 
he  was  a  contractor,  and  still  later  a  farmer. 

Children : 

460  John  C'  b.  Feb.   18,  1796;    m.  Achsah  Palmer. 

461  Hannah,  b.  Apr.  23,   1798;    m.   Hosea  Brown. 

Ira,   b.  .     Went   from   home  young,   was  not  heard  of  again. 

462  Eliza,  b.  ;    m.  Hosea  Whilford. 

463  Oliver  C,  b.  June  8,  1807;    m.  Emma  Langworthy. 

464  George,  b.  June  10,   1810;    m.   Almira  Ruth  Brown. 
Frank,  b.  ;    m.  Betsy  Knapp.     No  children. 

215.  Capt.  DyVNiEL,**  son  of  Joseph  and  Hannah  (Ross)  Bab- 
cock (Ichabod,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  Sept.  20,  1777;  d.  Westerly,  i860;  m.  Westerly, 
Oct.  29,  1801,  Nancy,^  dau.  of  29  Col.  James  and  Joanna  (Mc- 
Dowell) Babcock.  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  19.  1778,  d.  Westerly.  He 
was  at  one  time  a  sea  captain,  later  a  farmer  in  Westerly.  In 
1821  he  was  Captain  in  the  Westerly  Militia.  (Smith.) 
Children,  b.  in  Westerly : 

465  Nancy,'  b.  Nov.  29,  1803;    m.  John  Hall. 
Emory,  b.  Feb.  6,  1806;    d.  June  29,   1892,  unm. 

466  Oliver,  b.  June  26,  181 1;    m.  Martha  Dickens. 
Joseph,  b.  Dec.  24,  1813;    d.  May  12,  1892,  unm. 

467  Ezra,  b.  Jan.  16,   1816;    m.  Eunice  Palmer. 


216.     James,^   son   of  Joseph  and   Hannah    (Ross)    Babcock 

(Ichabod,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly.  R.  I., 

1780  (?)  ;   d.  Westerly,  Oct.  15.  1810;   m.  at  Westerly.  R.  I., 

May  6,  1802,  Hannah,  dau.  of  Col.  Joseph  and  Rhodes. 

She  m.  (2)  Noyes  Palmer  and  removed  to  Brookfield,  N.  Y. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  135 

Children,  b.  at  Westerly : 

468  James   Rhodes,'  b.    Aug.    16,    1804;    m.   Amelia   Barnum. 
Joseph,  b.  July  31,   1806;    m.  Sarah  A.  McNeil. 

Hannah,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Elizabeth,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

217.  Oliver,"  son  of  Joseph  and  Hannah  (Ross)  Babcock 
(Ichabod,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
1782  (?);  d.  Sandusky,  O.,  1843  (?)  ;  m.  Eunice  Haskins. 
Settled  as  a  farmer  in  Allegany  County,  N.  Y.,  later  removed 
to  Sandusky,  O. 

Children,  as  recorded  by  Thomas  Barber : 

Joseph,  b.  in  Steuben  Co.,  N.  Y. ;  d.  in  Oak  Harbor,  O. ;  m.  Alfred, 
N.  Y.,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Prudence  (Whitford)  Babcock, 
b.  Alfred,  N.  Y. 

Roswell,  b. . 

Ira,  b.  ;    m.  Miss  Lanphere,  of  Townsend,  O. 

Daniel,  b.  . 

John,  b. 


Hannah,  b. 
Oliver,  b.  - 
Henry,  b.  - 


218.     Elihu,"  son  of  Joseph  and  Hannah    (Ross)    Babcock 
(Ichalx)d,     John,     John,     James     ist),     b.     Westerly, 

1786  (?);    d.    ;    m.  Westerly    or    Stonington,    Jan.    17, 

1814,    Celia,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Joanna  Wilbur,  b.  Westerly, 
Aug.  17,  1797. 
Children : 

Elihu,  b. 


469  Thankful,'  b.  July  27,  1818;    m.  Darius  Satterlee. 
Ira,  b.  . 

470  Avilda.  b.  Nov.   10,   1821  ;    m.  Robert  Hemphill. 
John  Leander,  b.  ;    unm. 

Dow,  b.  . 

471  Cclia,  b.  Nov.  5,  1827;    m.  Benjamin  Van  Buskirk. 
Albert,  b.  . 

James  L.,  b.  .     Res.  Alfred  Station,  1902. 

Mary  Ann,  b.  ;    m.  Elijah  Lewis.     One  son.  Morton,  res.  Little 

Genesee.     Elijah,  1901,  res.  in  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y. 
Ichabod,  b.  . 

219.  George,*'  son  of  Joseph  and  Hannah  (Ross)  Babcock 
(Ichabod,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
1787;  d.  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  1836;  m.  Westerly,  Apr.  11,  181 1, 
Mary,  dau.  of  Col.  John  and  Desire  (Wilcox)  Gavitt,  b.  West- 
erly, May  7,  1795;  d.  Hudson,  Jan.,  1862.  He  first  settled  in 
Westerly,  but  afterward  removed  to  Hudson. 
Children : 

Susan,  b.  Westerly,  Feb.   11,   1812;    res.  1902,  214  State  St.,  Albany, 
N.  Y. ;    unm. 


136  The  Dabcock  Goicalogy. 

i\y2  Hannah,'  b.  May  31,   1817;    m.  Lemuel  Hopkins. 

George,  b.   Mar.  22,   18^0;    d.  Sacramento,  Cal.,  Nov.   10,  1853,  unm. 

473  Daniel  Lee,  b.  Aug.  22,  1822 ;    m.  Margaret  Schuyler. 

John  Courtland,   b.   Apr.    10,    1824;    d.   Nov.,   1901,   Albany,   N.   Y. ; 
in.  1898,  Margaret  Schuyler  Babcock,  widow  of  brother  Daniel. 

474  Claudius,   b.  ;    m.   Harriet  Guthrie. 

220.  Arnold,*^  son  of  Rev.  Oliver  and  Sylvia  (Belcher)  Bab- 
cock (Stephen,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Dec.  22,  1765  ; 

m.  Jan.  17,  1790,  Lucy,  dau.  of  Rev.  Joseph  Davis,  of  Westerly. 
Children,  as  recorded  by  Rev.  T.  Barber: 

Oliver,  b.  Dec.  21,  1792. 
Sylvia,  b.  Aug.   19,   1794. 
Ephraim,  b.  Mar.  15,  1796. 
Lodovvick,   b.   Feb.    14,    1798. 
Thankful,  b.   Feb.   16,   1800. 

221.  Stephen,^  son  of  Rev.   Oliver  and  Sylvia    (Belcher) 
Babcock  (Stephen,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  July  26,  1777;  m. . 

Children,  as  recorded  by  Rev.  T.  Barber : 

Stephen,  b.  1797;    m.  Miss  Scott. 
George,  b.    1800. 
Willard,  b.  ;    d.  1862. 

475  Milton,'  b.  Aug.  15,  1804;    m.  Lydia  Bowen. 

Sarah,  b.  ;    m.   Mr.   Fuller.     Settled  at  Rehoboth,   Mass. 

Orinda,  b.  . 

Peace,  b.  . 

Louisa,  b.  . 

Eliza,  b.  . 


222.  Oliver,*^  Jr.,  son  of  Rev.  Oliver  and  Sylvia  (Belcher) 
Babcock  (Stephen,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  West- 
erly, Mar.  29,  1780:  m.  Anna  Heartt,  at  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 
19,  1804.  He  died  at  Troy,  N.  Y.  She  was  b.  at  Troy,  Jan. 
23,  1783,  d.  at  Troy,  July  27,  1832. 

Children : 

476  Edward,'  b.   Sept.  7,   1805  ;    m.  Arminia  Eldridge. 

Emily,  b.  Feb.  29,  1808;  d.  Evansville,  Ind. ;  m.  Apr.  26,  1831, 
Peter  Sharp. 

477  Elizabeth,  b.  Dec.  28,  1810;    m.  John  Haff. 

478  Charles,  b.   Dec.    10,    1812;    m.   Amelia  Hopkins. 

479  Elisha  S.,  b.  Aug.   10,   1814;    m.  Agnes  Davidson. 

Ann  H.,  b.  Sept.  13,  1816;  m.  Apr.  11,  1837,  Rev.  Cornelius 
Edgar,  D.D.     She  d.  Eastern  Pennsylvania,   1890.     He  d.    1884. 

Mary  E.,  b.  Nov.  7.  1820;  d.  Detroit,  Mich.;  m.  Mar.  7,  1843, 
William  Edgar. 

480  Henry  O.,  b.  July  20,    1822;    m.   Mary  Houser. 

223.  William,^  son  of  Christopher  and  Mehitable  (Chalker) 
Babcock   (William,  John,  John,  James   ist),  b.  W^est- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  137 

erly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  10,  1755;  d.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Westerly,  Sept.  8.  1781  (?),.  Mary,  dan.  of  87  Ichabod,  Jr., 
and  Sarah  (Stanton)  Babcock,  b.  Westerly,  Apr.  8,  1765. 
They  settled  first  in  Westerly,  but  removed  later  to  Lebanon 
Springs,  N.  Y.     lie  was  a  farmer. 

Children,  tlrst  two  b.  Westerly,  others  in  Lebanon  Springs, 
N.  Y. : 

William,  b.   Nov.   22,   1782. 

Wealthy,  b.  June  15,   1784. 

Christoplier,  b.  ;    m.  Lebanon   Springs,  N.  Y.,   Polly  Monroe. 

Moved  West. 

Stanton,  b.  ;    d.  Lebanon,  unm. 

Almira,    b.   ;     m.    Major   E.    Tanner.      Lived    in   Catskill,   later 

moved  West. 

Lucy,  b.  ;    m.  Capt.  Dudley.     Settled  in  Hudson,  N.  Y. 

Mary,  b.  ;    ni.  George  Rich.     Settled  in  Lebanon,  N.  Y.    Their 

son,   William,   m.   and  settled  at   Pittsfield,   Mass. ;    d.  July,   1898. 

Had  two  sons.  Dr.  W.  B.  Rich,  of  Boston,  and  Walter  L  Rich, 

of  Pittsfield,  Mass. 

224.  Christopher,'^  son  of  Christopher  and  Mehitable 
(Chalker)  Babcock  (William,  John,  John,  James  ist), 
b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  July  26,  1761 ;  d.  Albany,  N.  Y. ;  m.  West- 
erly, 1783,  Polly,  dan.  of  Oliver  and  Susannah  Burdick,  b. 
Westerly,  Nov.  9,  1761,  d.  Coeymans,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  2,  1828. 

He  settled  at  Coeymans  on  the  Hudson,  twelve  miles  south 
of  Albany.  He  was  a  farmer  and  school-teacher,  and  held 
various  town  offices,  and  was  clerk  of  the  school  board  in  18 13. 
Lie  was  a  member  of  First  Baptist  Church  of  Albany.  Tradi- 
tion says  he  observed  the  Seventh  Day  Sabbath.  In  Apr.,  1794, 
wdiile  his  brother  Stephen  was  visiting  at  the  home  of  Christo- 
pher, the  two  brothers  received  a  letter  from  their  parents  in 
Rhode  Island  announcing  the  death  of  their  brother  Elias,  who 
had  just  died  at  sea.  The  letter  was  full  of  tender  sympathy 
and  Christian  resignation,  and  was  signed  "Your  loving 
parents,  Christopher  and  Mehitable."  In  1900  the  letter  was 
in  the  possession  of  a  descendant  of  the  family.  Miss  Mary  L. 
Burdick,  382  Hamilton  Street,  Albany,  N.  Y.  In  1836,  with 
his  granddaughter  Mary  Van  Antwerp,  he  made  an  extended 
visit  at  the  home  of  his  brother  Stephen  Babcock,  in  Stoning- 
ton,  Conn. 

The  familv  burving  ground  is  on  the  estate  of  "Old  Dr. 
Fredenburgh  of  Coeymans.  not  far  from  the  Albany  boat 
landing." 

From  records  obtained  from  the  L^.  S.  Pension  Department, 
Nov.,    1902,   the   following   facts   are   gleaned:      Christopher 


138  The  Babcock  Gcncalo</\ 


^.' 


Babcock  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  Revolutionary  Army  at 
four  different  times  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  first  for  one  year,  in 
1777  or  '78,  in  Capt.  Champlin's  Company.  Other  dates  of 
his  enlistment  not  given.  Second  enlistment  for  one  month 
in  Capt.  Stillman's  Company,  Col.  Stanton's  Regiment.  Third 
enlistment  for  one  month,  officers  not  stated.  Fourth  enlist- 
ment for  one  year  in  Capt.  Maxson's  Company  in  Col.  Kim- 
hall's  Regiment.  He  was  in  the  battle  of  Butts  Hill.  He 
ap])lied  for  a  pension  Sept.  29,  1832.  He  then  resided  in 
Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  was  seventy-one  years  old.  Pension  was 
granted. 

Children,  b.  at  Coeymans,  N.  Y. : 

Mehitable,  b.   Feb.  23,    1784;    d.   Aug.   17,   1784. 
Mehitable,  2d,  b.  May  14,  1785;    d.  Sept.   11,  1807. 
Polly,  b.  Nov.  2,  1786;    d.  Sept.  25,  1812  (  ?),  unm. 

481  Susan,'  b.  Jan.  20,  1788;    m.  Cornelius  Van  Antwerp. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  26,  1790;    d.  June  26,  1796. 

482  Elizabeth,  b.  May  2,  1799;    m.  George  B.  Lisbee.  * 

225.  Jeremiah,"  son  of  Christopher  and  Mehitable  (Chalker) 
Babcock  (William,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Nov.  23,  1766;  d.  Champion,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  9,  1847;  "i- 
Jan.  5,  1792,  Amy,  dau.  of  William  Angell ;  d.  Champion, 
Feb.  17,  1835.  About  1835  was  living  in  the  Black  River 
country,  and  visited  at  his  brother  Stephen's  home  in 
Stonington. 
Children : 

483  Christopher,'   b.    Oct.    13,    1792;     m.    (i)    Susan    Crandall ;    m.    (2) 

Janette  McNeil. 

484  Elias,  b.   Aug.  20,   1794;    m.   Sarah  Angel. 

485  Joshua  A.,  b.  Feb.  10,  1796;    ni.  Laura  Holmes. 

Drusilla,   b.    Sept.   2,    1797;    d.  ;    m.    Nov.    10,    1814,   James   R. 

Perigo.     Moved  to   Illinois,  where  she  died. 
James,   ist,  b.  Feb.  5,   1799;    d.  young. 

486  Ambrose,  b.  Dec.  2,   1800 ;    m.   Huldah  Babcock. 
James,  2d,  b.  Feb.  24,   1803;    d.  young. 

487  Jeremiah,  b.  Nov.  9,  1804;    ni.  Julia  Frances. 

Amy,  b.  Madison  Co.,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  23,  1806;  d.  Champion,  N.  Y., 
Mar.  24,  1894;  m.  Mav  27,  1824,  Benazah  Lewis.  Lived  in  Den- 
mark, N.  Y. 

488  William,   b.    Sept.    2,    1809;     m.    Roxey   Lewis. 

226.  Stephen,*'  son  of  Christopher  and  Mehitable  (Chalker) 
Babcock  (W^illiam,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Feb.  27,  1772;  d.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  22,  1852; 
m.  Westerly,  Mar.  22,  1801,  Phebe,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Mary 
(Irish)  Burch,  b.  Stonington.  Nov.  22,  1774,  d.  Stonington, 
Nov.  10,  1837. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  139 

Steplien  Babcock  was  a  man  of  clear  judgment  and  strict 
integrity,  which  gained  for  him  the  confidence  of  the  commu- 
nity in  which  he  hved.  When  (hfferences  arose  between  his 
townspeople  and  a  private  settlement  was  desired  he  \vas  often 
chosen  as  arbiter.  His  quiet,  gentlemanly  manner,  always  in 
evidence,  showed  best  in  his  own  household,  where  his  cheerful- 
ness and  politeiiess  radiated  an  atmosphere  of  refinement  and 
good  fellowship. 

He  was  studious  as  a  boy  and  scholarly  as  a  man,  though 
entirely  self-educated.  When  young  he  taught  district  school 
at  $6  a  month;  at  the  same  time  he  gave  private  instruction  in 
penmanship,  bookkeeping,  navigation,  and  surveying,  and  con- 
tinued to  give  lessons  in  these  branches  until  mature  years  were 
upon  him.  He  was  an  astronomer,  and  for  his  own  satisfac- 
tion was  author  of  several  almanacs.  He  was  a  farmer,  and 
at  the  time  of  his  death  resided  upon  his  own  farm  on  Walnut 
Hill.  Stonington,  Conn.  He  belonged  to  no  Church,  but  was 
a  constant  reader  of  the  Bible. 

For  records  of  graves  of  Stephen  and  Phebe,  see  records 
of  his  parents,  Christopher  and  Mehitable. 

Children : 

Phebe,  b.  Mar.  5,  1802;    m.  376  Oliver''  Babcock. 

489  Stephen,'  b.  May  10.   1804 ;    m.  Mary  Burch. 

490  Elias,  b.  Mar.  ig,  1806;    m.  Lucretia  Davis. 

Nathan,  b.   Stonington,   Conn.,  July  27,   1808;    d.   Stonington,   Dec. 

II,   1814. 
Amanda,  b.  Stonington,  Conn..  Nov.  29,  1810;    d.  Stonington.  Sept. 

19,  1812. 

227.  Phineas,^  son  of  Christopher  and  Mehitable  (Chalker) 
Babcock  (William,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 
R..I.,  Feb.  14,  1776;  d.  North  East,  Pa.,  July  12,  1844.  His 
death  was  caused  by  an  injury  received  by  the  explosion  of  a 
cannon  that  he  was  assisting  to  fire  July  4.  He  m.  ( i )  West- 
erly, Nov.  28,  1801,  Thankful,*'^  dau.  of  88  Joseph  and  Hannah 

(Ross)  Babcock,  b.  1775  (?),  d.  ;    m.   (2)  North  East, 

Pa.,  Miss  Huntington. 

He  settled  first  in  Westerly,  later  removed  to  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  and  still  later  to  North  East,  Pa. 

Children,  first  seven  b.  in  Westerly: 

Avilda,  b.  Aug.   i,  1802;    d.  Apr.  21,   1S20,  unin. 

491  Phineas,'  Jr.,  b.  Sept.  24,  1804 ;    m.  Esther  Cole. 

492  Christopher  D.,  b.  Jan.  2.  1806;    m.  Louisa  Cole. 
Mary.  b.  Oct.  2,  1807;    d.  unm. 

Hannah,  b.  Mar.  31.   1811  ;    d.  unm. 

493  Nancy   (Ann),  b.   Nov.    15.    1812:    m.    William  Crandall. 


140  TJie  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

494  Joseph  P.,  ]).   Sept.  5,  1814;    m.  Alarv  Cole. 

Thankful,  b.   Smyrna,   N.   Y.,  Oct.  3,   1816;    d.  ;    m.    (i)    Seth 

Cole;     m.    (2)    Charles   Haven. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Asher,  b.  Sept.  23,  1825;    d.  Jan.  26,  1826. 

Harriet,  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Nov.  10,  1827;    m.  Henry  Skellie. 

Abel,  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Dec.  19,  1828;    res.   {igoo)  Vrooman,  Pa.; 

m.    (i)   Jane  Palmer;    m.    (2)    Henrietta   Borland. 
Lucy,  b.  North  East,  Pa.,   Sept.   18,  1831  ;    m.  Call  Tolwell. 

228.  Asa,"  son  of  Christopher  and  Mehital)le  (Chalker)  Bal)- 
cock   (Wilham,  John,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Westerly, 

R.  I.,  Oct.  7,  1777;  d.  Champion,  N.  Y.,  Dec,  26,  1851;  m. 
(i)  Westerly,  Jan.  16,  1800,  Molly,''  dan.  of  88  Joseph  and 
Hannah  (Ross)  Babcock,  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  2,  1778;  d.  Dec. 
31,  1802,  at  Westerly;  m.  (2)  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Dec.  19, 1805, 
Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Thomas  and  Mary  (Barney)  Barber,  of 
Hopkinton,  b.  Oct.  17,  1779,  d.  Pitcher,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  3,  1823. 

Asa  removed  from  Westerly  to  Smyrna,  N.  Y.  "Asa  Bab- 
cock was  Lient.  of  Westerly  Militia  in  1802."     (Smith.) 

Child  by  first  wife: 

Caroline  Babcock,  b.  Sept.  18,  1801 ;    d.  Canton,  N.  Y.,  May,  1874 ; 
m.    Joseph    Brooks.      No    children. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

495  Thomas  B.,'  b.  Sept.  24,   1806;    m.  Abigail  Wentworth. 

496  George,  b.   Oct.  27,   1807 ;    m.   Mary  Richards. 

497  Mary,  b.  Feb.  3,  1809;    m.  Isaac  Burdick. 

498  Asa,  b.  Jan.  3,   181 1;    m.  Clemantine  Webster. 

499  Elizabeth,  b.  June  28,   1813;    m.  Allen  Prentice. 

500  Christopher,   b.    Dec.    14,    1814;     m.    (i;    Rebecca    Smith;     m.    (2) 

Harriet  Button;    m.   (3)   Sarah  Chase. 
Amy,  b.  Smyrna,  May  27,  1816;    d.  May  20,  1817. 

501  Amy,  2d,  b.  Sept.  7,  1818;    m.  Alonzo  Burdick. 

502  William  A.,  b.   Nov.   19,   1820;    m.   Harriet  Pelton. 

229.  Samuel,'''  eldest  son  of  Samnel  and  Rachel  (Conklin) 
Babcock  (William,  John,  John,  James  ist),  b.  in  Say- 
brook,  Conn.,  Mar.  20,  1788;  d.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Mar.  14, 
1857;  "1-  (0  Mar.  31,  181 1,  Hannah  Miller,  b.  Mar.  8,  1793, 
d.  Middletown,  Jan.  11,  1821;  m.  (2)  Aug-.  15,  1821,  Middle- 
town,  Jane  Cornwell,  b.  Mar.  15,  1803,  d.  Middletown,  May  4, 
1881. 

He  settled  at  Saybrook,  Conn.  He  was  Revenue  Collector  at 
the  port  of  Saybrook  under  President  Pierce,  and  held  other 
important  offices. 


SAMUEL    BABCOCK. 
I 788- I 857. 


Page  140. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  141 

Children  by  iirst  wife,  b.  Middlctown : 

503  Sarah  Ann,'  b.  Jan.  JO,   iSij;    ni.  Oliver  B.  Bebee. 

504  P^lizabcth,  Ij.   May  22.   i.Si^;    in.  Williain  Taylor. 

505  Jane,  b.   May   15.    1815;    m.   Gera  Goodell. 

506  Hannah,  b.  Apr.  9,   1817;    m.  William  Chapman. 

507  Charles,    b.    Oct.    5,    1818;     m.     (i)     Maria    S.    Bonf rev ;     m.     (2) 

Lavina  Goodrich. 

508  Maria,  b.  Aug.   13,   1820;    in.  Joseph  Bacon. 

Children  by  second  wife,  b.  Middletown: 

509  Samuel,  b.  Feb.  18,  i8j2;    m.   (i)  Ellen  L.  Hurlbut;    m.   (2)  Ellen 

M.  Carter. 
Henry,  b.  June,  2,   1824;    d.  Aug.  i,  1866,  unm. 
Franklin,  b.  Jan.  15,  1826;   d.  Oct.  6,  1895;   m.  Agnes  Hunter. 

510  Edward,  b.  Nov.  17,   1828;    m.  Anna  E.  M.  Crane. 
Mary,   b.   Nov.   21.    1830;    res.    Middletown,   Conn.,   unm. 
Emily,  b.  Dec.  4,  1832;    d.  July  17,  1834. 

William,  b.  Sept.  18,  1835;    d.  Dec,  1857,  unm. 

Frederick,    b.   Jan.    18,    1837 ;     ni.    Miss    Martin ;    res.    Middletown, 

Conn. 
John,  b.  Sept.  27,  1840;    d.  Sept.  30,  1842. 

230.  William   Christopher,*'   son  of   Samuel   and   Rachel 

(Conklin)   Balxock  (William,  John,  John,  James  ist), 
b.  in  Saybrook,  Conn.,  Aug.  7,   1790;    d.  June  6,   1863;    m. 
Betsy,  dau.  of  Samuel  Parmlee,  Aug.    15,   1820,  and  settled 
at  Saybrook,  on  the  homestead.     She  d.  Apr.  12,  1876. 
Children : 

Rachel  A.,  b.  Jan.  23,  1822;   m.  Alfred  Skinner. 

William    R..   b.    Dec.    15.    1823;     m.    Sarah   Adams,   of   New   York; 

res.  at  Albion,  Wis.     He  was  a  dentist. 
Cynthia  N.,  b.  Nov.,  1825;    m.  Gurden  L.  Tucker,  of  Essex,  Conn. 
Sarah  J.,  b.  Mar.  31,   1828;    d.  Jan.  26,   1878,  unm. 

511  Samuel  E.,'  b.  Jan.  25,  1831 ;    m.  Miss  Austin. 

512  George   F.,   b.    May    10,    1833;    m.   Cornelia   S.    Mings. 

231.  John,*'    son    of   Josiah    and    (Maraw)    Babcock 

(Job,  Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Mansfield,  Conn.,  Aug. 
26,  1746;  d.  Coventry,  Conn.,  Jan.  21,  181 5;  m.  Coventry, 
Conn.,  Oct.  7.  1779,  Lydia,  dau.  of  Nathaniel  and  Elizabeth 
Woodward,  b.  Coventry,  Aug.  19,  1754,  d.  Coventry,  May  19, 
1849. 

John  Babcock  had  nine  children ;   records  of  only  six  given ; 
all  b.  Coventry,  Conn. : 

Hannah,  b.  1780;  d.  Fayetteville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  28,  1844;  m.  S.  Car- 
penter.    Had  one  son,  Sands. 

Lydia,  b.  Mar.  5,  1782;  d.  Fayetteville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  2,  1864:  m. 
Manlius,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  21,  1836,  Col.  John  Sprague,  b.  Alilton, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  2,  1779;    d.  Fayetteville,  IMay  30,  1861.     No  children. 


142  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

513  John,'  b.  Apr.,  1786;    m.  Sally  Chamberlain. 

Dianlhc,  b.   1788,  d.   Coventry;    m.  Coventry,  Loomis.    Settled 

on  the  old  Babcock  homestead  in  Coventry.     Had  four  sons  and 
four  daughters. 

514  Deodatus,  b.  June  19,   1790;    m.   Mary  Hine. 

Betsy,  b.   1792;    d.   Fayetteville,   N.  Y..   Sept.  22,   1845,  unm. 

232.  Capt.  George  AVaite,"  eldest  child  of  John  and  Lydia 
Babcock  (Samuel,  Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Exeter, 
R.  I.,  Jan.  25,  1751;  m.  Feb.  21,  1771,  Susanna,  dau.  of 
Simeon  Fowler.  But  one  child  of  record,  namely,  George 
Waite  Babcock,  Jr.,  b.  Exeter,  R.  I.,  May  11,  1778. 

In  1776  George  Waite  Babcock,  Sr.,  was  Captain  of  the 
Newtown  Rangers,  an  independent  company  in  Kingston, 
R.  I.,  chartered  by  the  Colonial  Legislature  to  guard  the  shore 
in  that  part  of  the  colony.  (See  C.  R.  of  R.  I.,  vol.  viii,  p. 
196.)  Sept.  14,  1779,  commanding  the  privateer  Gen.  Miffin, 
he  fell  in  with  and  captured  the  British  store-ship  Elephant ; 
two  days  later,  after  an  obstinate  engagement,  he  captured,  off 
the  Irish  coast,  the  British  privateer  Tartar,  having  twenty-six 
guns  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  men — thirty  of  her  full  com- 
plement of  men  having  been  previously  detached  to  man  prizes 
that  were  captured  by  the  Tartar.  (From  History  of  Rhode 
Island,  by  Rev.  Edward  Peterson.) 

The  description  of  Capt.  George  Waite  Babcock,  Com- 
mander of  the  Gen.  Miffin,  found  in  Massachusetts  Records  of 
Soldiers  and  Sailors,  War  of  the  Revolution,  under  date  of 
Boston,  Sept.  9,  1780,  is  as  follows:  "Capt.  George  Babcock, 
age  29  years.  Complexion  light.  Stature  5  ft.  10  inches.  Resi- 
dence Massachusetts."  In  the  descriptive  list  of  the  same  ship 
is  also  found  the  following:    "Samuel  Babcock,  Gunner,  Age 

19  years,  Complexion  light.  Residence  Massachusetts.  The 
above  Samuel  was  a  brother  of  Capt.  George."  In  the  same 
book  is  found  that,  on  petitions,  the  following  commissions 
were  granted,  by  the  Council,  to  Capt.  George  Waite  Bab- 
cock :  June  11,  1781,  Commander  of  the  Privateer  Venus ;  May 
27,  1782,  Commander  of  the  schooner  Hero  Privateer. 

The  foregoing  are  extracts  from  records  compiled  by  Col. 
A.  J.  Babcock,  of  Springfield,  111.  Additional  records  (from 
Smith's  Civil  and  Military  List  of  Rhode  Island,  vol.  ii)  :  In 
1776  he  was  master  of  the  sloop  Diamond,  of  Providence  and 
Newport,  60  tons,  6  guns,  40  men.  Same  year  Captain  of  the 
sloop  Favorite,  74  tons,  10  guns,  10  swivels,  70  men.  In  Dec, 
1777,  he  was  Captain  of  the  ship  Marlborough,  Providence, 

20  guns,  125  men. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  I43 

233.  John,""'   son  of  Simeon  and   Eli/abcth    (Cahoon)    Bab- 
cock  (Samuel,  Jol),  John,  James   ist),  b.  S.  Kingston 

1759;  (I.  Mar.  I,  1807;  m.  1790,  Mary  Heeferman,  of  N. 
Kingston,  b.  May  25,  1766,  d.  Jan.  i,  1847. 

At  his  death  John  left  his  wife,  Mary,  with  seven  children, 
mostly  young.  One  child  was  lx)rn  five  months  after  John's 
death. 

Children,  as  recorded  by  Rev.  T.  Barber: 

Sanuiel,  h.  Mar.   11,   1791 ;    d.  Oct.  26.   1814. 

Elizabeth,  twin  to  Samuel,  b.  Mar.  11,  1791  ;    d.  Oct.,  1868. 

John,  b.  Sept.  il,  1795;    d.     Nov.,  1863. 

Lydia.  b.  Apr.   i,   1798. 

Benjamin   Wait,   b.   Dec.  22,    1800;     d.    Feb.    16,   1861. 

Roman,  b.  Alar.  6,  1803 ;    d.  Jvdy,  1867. 

Alfred,  b.  Apr.  15.  1805;    d.  Mar.  16,  1871  ;    m.  Laura  Davis. 

Edwin,   b.   July   21,    1807;     d.   Jan.    14,    1862. 

234.  Simeon,*'  Jr.,  son  of  Simeon  and  Elizabeth  (Cahoon) 
Babcock  (Samuel,  Job,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston, 

R.  I.,  May  14,  1760;  m.  Rhoda  Smith,  of  Washington  County, 
R.  I.,  May  18,  1782;  had  9  children,  b.  in  Rhode  Island.  In 
advanced  life  moved  to  Onondaga  County,  N.  Y. ;  was  a  cord- 
wainer.  He  d.  Kingsbury,  N.  Y.,  May  15,  1824;  wife  d. 
Feb.  7,  1837. 
Children : 

515  Samuel.'  b.   Apr.  8,    1783;    m.    (i)    Phebe  Couch;    m.    (2)    Rachel 

Burhite;    m.   (3)  Annie  M.  Thompson. 

516  John,  b.  Apr.   18,   1785;    m.  Marian  Stone. 

517  Simeon,   3d,  b.   Sept.    18,    1787;    m.    (i)    Clarissa   Clough;    m.    (2) 

Lydia  Smith;  m.  (3)  Liberty  Furman. 

518  Stephen,  b.  Oct.  24,  1789;    m.  Sophia  Carnahan. 

Elisha    S.,   b.    Mar.    16,    1792;    m.    Sarah   A.   Corbit,    June   6,    1815. 
No  issue. 

519  Elizabeth  C,  b.  Apr.  28,  1794;    m.  Oliver  Frink,  Jan.,   1818. 

520  Bethiah,  b.  Sept.   i,  1796;    m.  Jesse  Bartlett,   1817. 

521  William,  b.   Sept.  7,   1798;    m.  Perley  Hunt,  Sept.  20.   1822. 
Rhoda,  b.   Sept.  3,   1803 ;    d.  young. 

235.  Job,''  son  of  Ichabod  and  Amy  (Card)  Babcock  (John, 
Job,    John,  James  ist).  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  18, 

1771;  d.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Nov.  11,  1855;  m.  Alburg,  July  12, 
1805,  Emeline,  dau.  of  Ezra  and  Mary  (Garlie)  Pike,  b.  Lanes- 
boro,  N.  Y..  Apr.  17,  1790,  d.  Alburg,  Jan.  23,  1862.  When 
young  emigrated  with  his  father  from  Rhode  Island  to 
Alburg,  Vt.' 

Children,  b.  in  Alburg: 

Hiram,  b.  June  19,   1807;    d.  Alburg.  Jan.  21,   1857,  unm. 
Jonathan,  b.  July  27,   1809;    d.   Alburg,  ALir.   11,   1810. 

522  Job.'  b.    Sept.   4,    1811;    m.    (i)    Eliza  J.    McGregor;    m.    (2)    Mrs. 

Catherine  Davis;    m.    (3)    Mrs.  Mary  McMaster. 


144  ^^'^'  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

523  Ichabod.  b.   Aug.  28,   1813;    in.    (i)    Sally  Reynolds;    m.    (2)    Mer- 

sula  Sowler. 
Amy,  b.   Dec.  31,   1815;    d.   Plattsburg,   Mar.    14,   1894;    m.   Alburg, 
Feb.  8,   1838,  James  Sweet.     Had  two  children,  who  d.  young. 

524  Thomas,  b.  July  22,  1818;    m.  Saphronia  Darrow. 

525  Enieline,  b.  Dec.   ic,  1820;    m.  VValter  D.  Darrow. 

526  Ezra,  b.  June  20,  1823;    ni.  (i)  Julia  Spoon;    m.  (2)  Louisa  Weston. 

527  Mary,  b.  July  12.   1825;    m.  Elisha  McGregor. 

John,  b.   May  20,   1829;    d.   Milbrook,  Ont.,   Apr.   17,  1855,  unm. 
Parmelia  Ann,  b.  Aug.  3,  1834;    d.  Alburg,  Feb.   14.  1879,  unm. 

236.  Ichabod,^  son  of  Ichabod  and  Amy   (Card)    Babcock 

(John,  Job,  John,  James  ist),  1).  Rhode  Island,  Jnne  5, 
1777;  d.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Nov.,  182 1  ;  m.  at  All>nrg,  Sarah,  dau. 
of  Ezra  and  Mary  (Garlie)  Pike,  b.  Lanesboro,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
31,  1788;  d.  Alburg,  July  16,  1865.  She  m.  (2)  June,  1825, 
Walter  Darrow.  When  young  Ichalx)d,  Jr.,  emigrated  with 
his  father  from  Rhode  Island  to  Alburg,  Vt. 
Children,  b.  in  Alburg: 

528  Mary,'  b.  Apr.  2,   1804;    m.  James  McElroy. 

529  Ichabod,  b.   Mar.   10,   1805 :    m.   Emily  Boardman. 

530  Amy,  b.   1808;    m.   Samuel  Gibbs. 

Job,   b.   ;     m.    (i)    Drusilla    Robinson,    and   had    two   children. 

Married  again,  and  went  to  Australia;  when  returning  home 
stopped  in  California,  where  he  fell  from  a  building,  and  was 
killed. 

Sarah,  b.  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

531  Lucy,  b.  May  25,   1815;    m.  Joseph  Gossclin. 

532  James,    b.    Mar.   20,    1818;     m.    (i)    Lovey   Roberts;     m.    (2)    Mrs. 

Esther  Harrison. 

237.  Christopher,^  son  of  Christopher  and  Martha  (Perry) 
Babcock   (George,  George,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Hop- 

kinton,  R.  I.,  Sept.  i,  1759;   d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  July  28,  1803; 
m.  June  16,  1782,  Polly  Potter.     He  was  Ensign  in  Charles- 
town,  R.  I.,  Militia  in  1777;    Lieutenant  1779-81.     (Smith.) 
Children  : 

Mary  Ann,  b.  Middletown,  R.  L,  Jan.  22,  1783;  m.  (i)  Luke  Bab- 
cock; m.  (2)  Rowland  Babcock.  sons  of  112  Hezekiah  and  Martha 
(Hoxie)   Babcock.     No  children  by  either  husband. 

533  James,'  b.  Nov.  10,  1784;    m.  Lois  Ross. 

Martha,  b.  Charlestown,  R.  L,  Aug.  21,  1786;    d.  Oct.  27,  1803. 
Christopher,    3d,    b.    Charlestown,    R.    L,    May   23,    1788;     m.   . 

Had  a  daughter,  Mary  Elizabeth,  who  died  in  Hopkinton,  late  in 

life.     Was  blind  large  part  of  her  life. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Westerly.  R.  L.  Dec.  8.  1790. 
Benjamin  Perry,  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  8,  1792. 
Charles,    b.    Westerly,    Aug.    8,    1794. 
Susanna,  b.  Westerly,  Feb.   10,   1799;    d.  Oct.  27,  1803. 

238.  Martha,''    dau.    of   Christopher   and    Martha    (Perry) 
Babcock  (George,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Charles- 
town, R.  I.,  Jan.  18,  1761 ;   m.  George,  Jr.,  son  of  George  and 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  145 

Martha   (Wanton)   Hazard.     George  Hazard,  Sr.,  was  once 
Mayor  of  Newport. 
Children : 

Sally,    I).    June    14,    1780;     ni.    David    Larkin. 

534  Martha,'  1).  Jan.  25,   1782;    m.  Marlborough  Stanton. 
Brenton,  h.  Jan.   15,   1784;    m.  .^nn  G.  ChiMs,  of  Bristol. 
George  C,  b.  July  4,    1787;    ni.   Eliza  Butler. 

239.  Hezekiah,"    son    of    Hezekiah    and    Martha    (Hoxie) 
Babcock   (George,  George,  John,  James   ist),  h.  Hop- 

kinton,  R.  I.,  Nov.  25,  1770;  d.  Dec.  17,  1845;  "i-  ^I'^^"-  ^i, 
1803,  Mary  Brown,  h.  July  6,  1773,  d.  Mar.  3,  1757.  Hezekiah 
Babcock  was  Brigade  Inspector  for  Washington  County,  R.  I., 
fnnn  1799  to  1804,  and  Justice  for  S.  Kingston  1818-32. 
(Smith.) 
Children  : 

.Sally,  b.  Mar.  29,   1804;    m.    (i)   George  Potter  Babcock;    m.    (2) 

Frederick  Campbell. 

Hezekiah,    I).    Dec.    24,    1805;     d.    Dec.   26,    1834,    unm. 

535  George,"  b.  Jan.  4.   1808;    m.   Mary  Hinman. 

536  Courtland,  b    Jan.  29,   1810:    m.   Clarissa   Chapin. 

Mary,  b.  June  14,  1812;    d.  Sept.  7,  1881  ;    m.  George  Finley. 
•     Hannah,  b.   Nov.  4,   1814 ;    d.  Sept.  4,  1865 ;    ni.  Lucian  Clarke. 

240.  Martha,*'  dau.  of  Hezekiah  and  Martha  (Hoxie)  Bab- 
cock (George,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton, 

R.  I..  Aug.  30.   1781;    d.  ;    m.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Feb.  2, 

1800,  Sanford  Noyes.     (A.  V.  R.) 
Children : 

Anna  Maria,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  6,  1801. 
Sanford,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  9,  1802. 
Lydia  R.,  b.  Westerly,  Sept.  i,  1804. 
Patty,  b.  Hopkinton,  Mar.   11,   1806. 

241.  RowsE,^'  son  of  Rowse  and  Ruth   (Maxson)    Babcock 

(George,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly  R.  I., 
May  12,   1773;    d.  Apr.  21,   1841  ;  m.  S.  Kingston,  Jan.   13, 

1 80 1.  Hannah  R.,  dau.  of  George  and  Hannah  (Robinson) 
Brown,  of  S.  Kingston,  b.  S.  Kingston,  Oct.,  1785,  d.  West- 
erly, July  29,  1872.  "He  was  Public  Notary,  \\ Washington 
County,  R.  I.,  in  1801-2."     (Smith.) 

Children,  b.  in  Westerly : 

Rowse,  b.  Oct.  29,  1801 ;    d.  May  4,  1802. 

Rowse,  b.  May  4,  1803;  d.  Westerly,  Mar.  6,  1872;  m.  Providence, 
Apr.  27,  1852,  Mary  Townsend.  b.  Newport,  R.  I.,  Afar.,  1821  ; 
d.  Westerly,  May  14,  1898.  In  1825  he  was  Brigade  Quartermas- 
ter of  Washington  Co.,  R.  I.,  and  in  1833  Justice,  Westerly. 
(Smith's  Civil,  etc.)  Was  a  Manufacturer  and  President  of 
Phenix  Bank.     No  issue. 

10 


146  The  Bahcoch  Goicalooy. 

537  Hainiali,"  h.  Nov.  4,  1805;    m.  Oliver  Wells. 

5.58  Martha,  I).  Sept.   18,  1807;    m.  Thomas  P.  Stanton. 

539  Harriot,  h.  Oct.  5,  iSog;    ni.   Horatio  Campbell. 

540  Sally  Ann,  b.  Jan.  27,  1812;    m.  John  G.  Pierce. 

541  Rev.  William  R..  b.  Mar.  28,  1814;    m.  Catherine  Pearcc. 
Albert,  b.  Sept.  6,  1816;    d.  June  16,  1831. 

542  Edwin,  b.  Apr.  8,  1819;    ni.  Olivia  S.  Cady. 

543  Horace,  b.  Aug.  4,   1822;    m.    (i)    Abby  J.   Cross;    m.    (2)   Harriet 

B.  Cross. 

242.  Elizabeth,^'  clan,  of  Rowse  and  Rnth  (Maxson)  Bab- 
cock   (George,  George,  John,  Jame.s   ist),  1).  Mar.   14, 

1775;    d.  Jnly  I,   1846;    m.  Jan.   13.   1799,  Joseph  Noyes,  b. 
May  9,  1758. 
Children : 

Eliza,  b.  July  2,  1800;    d.  Sept.  18,  1885;    ni.  Sylvester  Robinson. 

Rhoda,  b.  Jan.  4,   1802;    d.   1802. 

Rhoda,  b.  Jan.  3.  1803;    d.  Apr.  23,  1847. 

Rowse,  b.  Feb.  2,   1805;    d.   Sept.   i,  1829. 

Charles,  b.  Feb.  11,  1807;    d.  Aug.  17,  1879. 

Ruth,  B.,  b.  Mar.  19,  1809;    d.  Aug.  19,  1861. 

Benjamin,  b.  Jan.  14,  181 1;    d.  Sept.  20,  1843;    m.  Eunice  Miner. 

Courtland,  b.  Dec.  6,   1813;    d.  Apr.  6,   188^;    m.   Susan  King. 

243.  Benjamin,*^  son  of  Rowse  and  Rnth   (Maxson)   Bab- 
cock  (George,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

Sept.  2,  1779;    d.  Jnly  10,  1815;    m.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Jan. 
26,   1806,  Anna   (Nancy),  dan.  of  Col.  Edward  Wilcox,  of 
Charlestown. 
Children : 

544  Benjamin,'  Jr..  b.  Apr.  25,  1807;    m.  Susan  Mannering. 

545  Edward  Wilcox,  b.   Sept.    i,   1810;    m.   Martha  Cross. 

244.  David,^    son    of    David    and    Sarah    (Perry)    Babcock 

(David,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I., 
May  17,  1760;  d.  Nov.  17,  183 1 ;  m.  at  Sharon,  Conn.,  Sarah, 
dan.  of  John  and  Deborah  (Knickerbocker)  Beardsley,  b. 
Sharon,  Conn.,  Sept.  2,  1765,  d.  Ames,  N.  Y.,  1856.  Family 
records  say  he  was  a  Revolntionary  soldier. 
Children : 

David,  b.  Sharon,  Feb.  10.  1794;    d.  Ithaca,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Eliza  Sayres, 

d.  Utica.     Had  two  sons,  David  and  Charles;    both  d.  as  young 

men. 
Sarah,   b.   Whitestone,   N.   Y.,   Jan.    16,    1796;     d.    1878,   or  '79;    m. 

Robert  Briggs. 
Maria,  b.   Marcy,   N.   Y.,   Feb.    10,    1800;    d.   Ames,   1866;    m.  

Tiffany.     Had  two  children,   Sarah  and   Henrietta,   both  married, 

and  live  at  Ames,  N.  Y. 

546  John,"  b.   Feb.   10,   1803 ;    m.   Martha  Rand. 

547  Jesse,  b.  Oct.  16,  1805 ;    m.  Maria  Morgan. 

548  George,  b.  May  3,  1810;    m.  Emily  Brown. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  147 

245.  PiiRRV    H./'    son    of   Jonathan    and    Susanna    (Perry) 
Babcock  (David,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  1766;   d. 

Ravenna,  O.,  Nov.  28,  1833;   m.  at  Granville,  Mass.,  Cynthia, 

dan.  of  and  Hazard  Hiscox,  b.  Granville,  Mass.,   1768, 

d.  Ravenna,  O.,  Aug.  3,  1829.  Perry  moved  with  his  parents 
from  Rhode  Island  to  Granville  in  1775.  He  removed  in  18 18 
to  Ra\-enna,  O. 

Children,  b.  in  Granville : 

549  Almon/  b.   Nov.   19,   1788;    m.  Mary  Collins. 

550  Edimind,  b.   May  28,   1793;    m.  Leura  Bates. 

551  Sally  ]\[..  b.   April  20,   1798;    m.    VVilliain   StinafF. 
Sylvester,  b. ;    d.  Franklin,  O. ;    m.  Elcctra  Bostwick. 

552  Cyntbia    M.,   b.    1804;     m.    (i)    Alexander   Frazer ;    m.    (2)    Waite 

Hickox. 
Etban  Allen,  b.  May  17,   1810:    d.  Feb.  14,   1877,  Ravenna,  O. ;    m. 
Feb.  22,   1834,   at  Ravenna.  Harriet   Robinson. 

246.  Denison,*'  son  of  Benedict  and  Mary  (Thompson)  Bab- 
cock (David,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kings- 
ton (?),  R.  I.,  Feb.  18,  177/;  d.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
(i)  Fanny  Marsh;  m.  (2)  Desire  Eldridge;  m.  (3)  Lucy 
Bishop. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

553  George  Denison,'  b.  Jan.  21,   1818;    ni.  Elizabeth  Clarke. 
Harry,  b.   1820;    d.  Jan.  30,   1845. 

Child  by  second  wife : 

Desire  Eldridge,  b.   1824;    d.  Feb.,   1848,  at  New  Hartford,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Dr.  J.  S.  May. 

247.  Gideon    Chesebrough,*^    son    of    Gideon    and    Mary 

(Chesebrough)  Babcock  (David,  George,  John,  James 
ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Nov.  22,  1777;  d.  New  York,  June 
30,  1809;  buried  at  Newport,  R.  I.;  m.  at  Newport,  Apr.  22, 
1803,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Capt.  Benjamin  and  Sarah  (James) 
Sayer,  b.  Newport,  July  i,  1776,  d.  New  Woodstock, 
N.    Y. 

After  his  marriage  Gideon  C.  Babcock  removed  from  Taun- 
ton, Mass.,  to  Boston,  where  he  became  a  wholesale  merchant. 
He  owned  many  vessels  which  sailed  between  Boston  and  the 
West  Indies.  He  made  two  trips  to  Demerara ;  on  the  second 
trip  was  captured  by  French  privateers,  but  slipped  aw^ay  in 
the  night  and  reached  port,  where  he  exchanged  his  goods  for 
a  fine  cargo.  On  his  homeward  trip  he  was  again  taken  by 
privateers  and  stripped  of  everything  and  then  allowed  to  go 


148  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

on  his  way.    He  died  soon  after  reaching  home,  from  exposure 
and  injuries  received  from  the  privateers.     Rev.  Dr.   Patton 
in  writing  of  him  spoke  of  his  noble  character  and  of  the  high 
regard  in  which  he  was  held  by  his  fellow-citizens. 
Children : 

554  Gideon  C./  b.  Feb.   17,   1804;    m.   Phebe  Noyes. 
Sarah,  b.  Boston,  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

555  Mary  Ann,  b.  Nov.  27,  1808;    m.  Stephen  Collins. 

248.  Richard,*^  son  of  Gideon  and  Mary  ( Chesebrough ) 
Babcock  (David,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kings- 
ton, R.  I.,  Apr.  19,  1781;  d.  S.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  17, 
1866;  m.  Rome,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1815,  Mary  Christopher,  dan. 
of  Hazard  and  Abigail  Perry,  b.  S.  Brookfield.  d.  S.  Brookfield, 
Jan.  I,  1866.  Mary  was  first  cousin  to  Commodore  Oliver 
Hazard  Perry,  and  they  both  lived  with  their  grandfather, 
Judge  Freeman  Perry,  of  S.  Kingston,  R.  I. 

Children : 

556  Harry  C.,'  b.  May  13,   1817;    m.  Harriet  Crandall. 

Frances,  b.  Truxton,  N.  Y. ;  d.  Waterloo,  la.,  1876;  m.  1842,  Wil- 
liam  Hammond. 

Richard  C,  b.  Truxton,  Nov.  25,  1819;  d.  Aug.  7,  1849;  m.  Dec. 
17,  1845,  Crandall. 

557  Abigail,  b.  Dec.  17,  1821 ;    m.  J.  H.  Sarle. 
Elizabeth,  b.   Truxton ;    d.   Sept.   19,    1882,  unm. 

Hazard,  b.   S.   Brookfield,   Dec.   i,   1824;   res.    (1902)    S.  Brookfield; 

m.  Shirland,  111.,  Sept.  30,   1874,  Villa  Macomber. 
Sarah  Sayer,  b.  Truxton,  July  28,  1827;    d.  Aug.  7,  1867,  unm. 

558  Gideon  Perry,  b.  Oct.   18,   1829;    m.  Lydia  Macomber. 

John  Milton,  b.  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  3,  1832;    res.   (1902)   Shirland, 

111.  ;    m.  July  22,   1851,  Betsey  Pope. 
Calvin  G.,  b.  Truxton,  Jan.  7,  1835;    res.   (1902)   Newport,  N.  Y. 

249.  AsA,*^  son  of  Gideon  and  Mary  (Chesebrough)  Babcock 

(David,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I., 
Nov.  29,  1786;  d.  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  23,  i860;  m.  Brook- 
field, N.  Y.,  Jan.  5,  1812,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth 
(Stanton)  Noyes,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  27,  1792,  d. 
Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  July  30,  1866. 
Children : 

559  Elizabeth   H.,'  b.   July   17,    1814;    m.    (i)    George   Stone;     m.    (2) 

Robert  Niven. 
Richard,  b.  Truxton,   N.   Y.,   1815;    d.   unm. 

560  Mary.  b.   May  8,    1817;    m.    (i)    Charles  Lynde ;    m.    (2)    Edward 

Wicks. 

561  Clara,  b.  Apr.  5,  1819;    m.  Amos  Westcott. 

562  Edward   H.,   b.  Jan.    12,    1822;    m.    (i)    Rhoda   Trobridge;    m.    (2) 

Catherine  Lynde. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  149 

John  Noyes,  b.  Truxton,  May  i6,  1828;  d.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 
24,  1894;  111.  (i)  Sarah  Barnes;  m.  (2)  May  16,  1870,  Mary, 
dau.  of  Henry  and  Phebe   (Dickinson)   GifFord.     No  children. 

563  Henry,  b.  Feb.  14.   1831  ;    m.  Emily  Maltbie. 

Frances  Julia,  b  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9,  1834;  d.  Chicago,  111., 
Oct.  7,   1866;    m.  Truxton,  Augustus  Hardy. 

250.  Jonathan    Perkins,*^    son    of    Jonathan    and    Phebe 

(Perkins)    Babcock    (Jonathan,    George,   John,   James 
ist),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Oct.  19,  1784;    d.  Ashaway,  R.  I., 
Mar.  23,  1875;   m.  Ehza1)eth  Wright,  of  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  b. 
Nov.  15.  1 78 1,  d.  Hopkinton,  Aug.  25,  1856. 
Chil(h"en,  b.  in  Hopkinton : 

Daniel  N.,  b.  Apr.   10,   1812;    d.  Jewett  City,  Conn.,   Nov.  8,   1898. 

564  George  A.,'  b.   Dec.  26.   1813;    m.    (i)    Abby   Ann  Brown;    m.    (2) 

Mrs.  Thankful  Burdick.    ' 
Jonathan  G.,  b.  June  22,  1816;    d.  Hopkinton. 
John  M.,  b.  Apr.  i,   1819;    d.  Dec.  28,  1841. 

565  Stephen  W.,  b.  Feb.  20,  1822;    m.  Mercy  Barber. 
Phebe  M.,  b.  Aug.  19,  1825. 

251.  Peleg,*^   son  of   Peleg  and   Lucy    (Babcock)    Babcock 

(Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston, 
R.  I.,  July  14,  1774;  d.  S.  Kingston,  May  20,  1845;  "i-  S. 
Kingston,  Nov.  14,  1818,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Rowse  Potter,  b. 
S.  Kingston,  Feb.,  1794,  d.  S.  Kingston,  May,  1854.  He  was 
Justice  for  S.  Kingston  1802,  '19,  '20.  (Smith.) 
Children,  b.  in  S.  Kingston : 

566  Hannah,^  b.   Sept.  9,   1820;    m.   Cornell   Peckham. 

567  Esther  H.,  b.  Dec.  15,  1821 ;    m.  Thomas  Gould. 
Martha  E..  b.  Sept.   13,  1823;    m.  592  Edmund'  Babcock. 

568  Peleg  F.,  b.  Oct.  3,   1825  ;    m.  Mary  Sherman. 

Rowse  Potter,  b.  June  14,  1827;  d.  Stonington,  Aug.  30,  1890;  m. 
May  2,  1861.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Mary  Nancy,  dau.  of  Charles  and 
Lovisa  (Brown)  Babcock,  b.  Groton,  Conn.,  Apr.  17,  1842;  res. 
(1902)    Stonington,    Conn.      No   children. 

569  Charles   H.,    b.    Feb.    14,    1832;     m.    (i)    Jane    B.    Segar;     m.    (2) 

Mary  E.  James. 

570  George  W.,  b.  May  18,  1838;    m.  Anna  Ennis. 

252.  Joseph  P.,^  son  of  Peleg  and  Lucy  (Babcock)  Babcock 

(Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston, 
R.  L,  Jan.  17,  1783;  d.  June  13,  1869;  m.  (i)  Apr.  19.  1812, 
Sarah  \\\,  dau.  of  George  Potter,  of  .S.  Kingston,  d.  Feb.  3, 
1813;  m.  (2)  Apr.  6,  1815,  Waite  T.  Segar,  d.  Nov.  28.  1821; 
m.  (3)  Hannah  P.,  dau.  of  Ephraim  Balxock,  of  S.  Kingston, 
d.  Oct.  5.  1856. 

Child  by  first  wife: 

Henry,  b.  1813;    d.  young. 


150  The  Bahcock  Gnicalo^^y. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Benjamin  S.,  b.   1817;    m.   Elizal)clli  Clark. 
Rebecca,  b.  Aug.   18,    i8ig. 

571  Henry   W.,'  b.    Sept.  9,    1821  ;     m.  . 

Waite,  b.   1824. 

Sarab,  1).  1826. 
Jobn,   b.    Nov.,   1836. 

253.  Ethan,''  son  of  Peleg-  and  Lucy    (Babcock)    Babcock 

(Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston, 
R.  I.,  Aug.  7.  1789;  d.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Aug.  8,  1836; 
m.  at  Charlestown,  Aug.  26,  1827,  Elizabeth  T.,  dau.  of  James 
and  Mary  (Perry)  Kenyon,  b.  Charlestown,  Aug.  28,  1809, 
d.  Charlestown. 

Children,  b.  in  Charlestown: 

Josepb  Tripp,  b.  June  7,  1829;    d.  Charlestown,  Aug.  10,   1844. 
Adeline,    b.    Aug.    2,    1830;     d.    Charlestown,    Oct.     15,    1865;     m. 

Charlestown,    Dec.    i,    1850,    Asa,    son    of    Robert    and    Susanna 

(Church)    Noyes,   b.    S.    Kingston. 
Lucy  Elizabeth,   b.  Apr.  3,   1833;    d.   Charlestown,  Oct.   16,   1834. 

572  George  F.,'  b.  Oct.  4,   1835  ;    m.  May  Cahoone. 

254.  Charles,*^  son  of  Peleg  and  Lucy  (Babcock)   Babcock 

(Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kingston, 
R.  L,  Mar.  14,  1792;   d.  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  Sept.  13,  1868; 
m.   Martha   S.,   dau.   of  John   S.   Paine,   b.   Block   Island,   d. 
E.  Greenwich,  R.  L,  Aug.  26,  1875. 
Children : 

Edward  Paine,  b.  ;    d.  June,   1892. 

James   C,   b.  ;    d.    Mobile,   Ala.,   Nov.,   1870. 

Esther  H.,  b.  ;    d.  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  Oct.  4,  1861,  unm. 

John  Paine,'  b.  Apr.  28,  1832;  d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  25,  1892; 
m.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  July  24,  1866,  Sarah  Brown  Stillman ;  one 
child,  Martha  Paine""  Babcock;  res.  1903,  W.  Broad  St.,  West- 
erly, R.  I. 

Nancy  D.,  b.  ;    res.  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I.;    unm. 

Francis  A.,  b.  ;    res.  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I.;    unm. 

Phebe  Paine,  b.  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.;  res.  (1902)  Marlboro  St., 
East  Greenwich,  R.  I. ;  m.  at  East  Greenwich,  Albert  M.,  son 
of  Lyman  Bailey;  d.  Providence,  Oct.  10,  1876.  He  was  a  police- 
man at  Providence,  R.  L 

255.  Hezkkiah,*^  son  of  Caleb  and  Waite  (Peckham)  Bab- 
cock (Hezekiah,  George,  Jolin,  James  ist),  b.  S.  Kings- 
ton, R.  L,  Jan.  3,  1784;  d.  S.  Kingston,  Mar.  4,  1870;  m. 
S.  Kingston.  Jan.  28,  181 3,  Dorcas,  dau.  of  William  and 
Mercy  (Perry)  Peckham,  d.  Oct.  22,  1859,  aged  seventy-three. 

Hezekiah  was  a  tanner  by  trade.  He  was  a  director  of  the 
National  Bank  and  also  of  the  Savings  Bank  of  Wakefield, 
R.  I.,  and  was  Town  Treasurer  for  many  years.  He  belonged 
to  the  Society  of  Friends.     He  had  a  wonderfully  retentive 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  1 5 1 

memory;    cuuld  late  in  life  repeat  whole  pages  of  Shakespeare 
and  of  history. 
Children : 

Dorcas,  b.  Feb.  23,   1816;    res.   (1901)   Wakefield,  R.  I.;    unm. 
William  P.,  b.  Apr.  28,   1818;    d.  Napoli,  N.  Y. ;    in.   Feb.  2,   1840, 
Sarah  M.  Woodmansee. 

573  Hczekiah/  b.  Oct.  31,   1820;    ni.   Hannah  Hazard. 

Adam,  b.  Dec.  24,  1822;  d.  Providence,  R.  I.,  Oct.  26,  1872;  m. 
July  3,  1870,  Mary,  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Alary  (Reynolds)  Buf- 
fington,  of  Perryville,  R.   I.;    res.  De  Blois  Ave.,   Newport,  R.  I. 

574  John.  b.   IMay  23,   183 1  ;    m.   Alary  Perry. 

256.  Elisiia,*'   son  of  Simeon  and  Alary    (Perry)    Babcock 

(Elisha,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I., 
May  17,  1774;  d.  Sq)t.  14,  1859;  m.  Hnldah,  dan.  of  Daniel 
and  Elizabeth  (Babcock)  Green.  (Elizabeth,  mother  of  Hnl- 
dah, was  dan.  of  Elisha  and  Elizabeth  Perry  Babcock.)  Hnl- 
dah was  b.  Feb.  2,  1775,  d.  Dec.  i,  1868. 
Children : 

575  Daniel.'  b.   May   18,    1796;    m.   Mary  Wilcox. 

576  Alary,  b.  Sept.  2t„  1798;    m.  Robert  Palmer. 
Elizabeth,  b.  June  9,   1800;    d.   1850,  unm. 

577  Simeon,  b.  Alar.  5,   1802;    m.   Alary"  Babcock. 

Elisha,  b.  Feb.  14,  1804 ;  d.  at  sea,  on  a  fishing  trip  to  Green 
Island. 

Penelope,  b.  Jan.  31,  1809;  d.  ;  m.  Isaac  Davis.  Had  a  num- 
ber of  children ;    all  d.  young. 

Samuel,   b.   July  25,    1810;     m. Adams.      Settled   in   Brooklyn. 

Had  children. 

Ruth,  b.  Dec.  24,  181 1;  d.  Providence,  R.  I.,  June  16,  1895;  m. 
Israel  Robinson.  Settled  in  Connecticut.  He  died  at  Alans- 
field,   Conn.,  Feb.  24,   1896.     No  children. 

578  Hoxie,   b.   July   24,    1813;     m.    (i)    Elizabeth   White;     m.    (2)    

Chesebrough. 

Huldah,  b.  ■ ;    m.  Israel  Robinson.     No  children. 

Charles,  b.   1818;    d.   Nov.   i.   1841,  unm. 

257.  Simeon,*'  son  of  Simeon  and  Mary   (Perry)    Babcock 

(Elisha,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I., 
Mar.    12,    1782;    drowned  at  Charlestown  Beach,   Richmond, 
Sept.  7,  1843;    "''•  Maiy,  dan.  of  Thomas  and  ]\Iary  (Peck- 
am)  Green,  d.  Richmond,  Mar.  18,  1865. 
Children,  b.  in  Richmond : 

Alary,  b.  Oct.  3,  1807;  d.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Oct.  21,  1890;  m. 
Solomon  Hoxie. 

579  Simeon,'  b.  Apr.  6,  1810;    m.  Alary  Coe. 
Ann.  b.   Alay  23,   1812;    m.   Stephen  Hoxie. 
Caroline,   b.   Feb.   23,    1815;    m.   Rodman   Kenyon. 

Sarah  Perry,  b.  Jan.  2,  1818;  d.  Charlestown,' R.  I.,  Aug.  21,  1850; 
m.  Stephen  Bates. 

580  Almira,  b.   Alay  21,   1822;    m.   Warren  Lillibridge. 

Frances  AI.,  b.  Sept.  24,  1825;  res.  (1902)  Hopkinton,  R.  I.;  m. 
Hiram   Tanner. 


15-2  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

581  Martha   E.,  b.  Jan.    11,    1828;    m.   George  Thayer. 

Benjamin  F.,  b.  June  11,  1832;  res.  (1902)  Caroline,  R.  I.;  m. 
Riclnnond,  June  10,  1859,  Susan,  dau.  of  Stephen  and  Susan 
(Kenyon)   Crandall,  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Sept.  29,   1839. 

258.  Samuel  Perry,"  son  of  Simeon  and  Mary  (Perry) 
Babcock  (Elisha,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Rich- 
mond, R.  I.,  Jan.  5,  1785;  d.  E.  Haddam,  Conn.,  May  5,  i860; 
m.  Richmond,  1812,  Susanna,  dau.  of  Rowse  and  Ruth  (Boss) 
Clark,  b.  Sept.  25,  1795,  d.  June  i,  1870.  He  first  settled 
in  Colchester,  Conn.,  later  removed  to  E.  Haddam,  Conn. ;  was 
a  ship  carpenter. 

Children : 

582  Mary  Ann,^  b.  Feb.  22,  1815 ;    ni.  Albert  D.  Northam. 

583  Charles,  b.    1816;    m.   Elizabeth  Gillette. 

584  Josephine,  b.  Nov.  20,  1820;    m.  Seldon  Gillette. 

Phebe  Tripp,  b.  Colchester,  Conn.,  Feb.  17,  1824;  d.  Smithfield, 
N.  C.  June  2,  1900;  m.  1848,  Col.  W.  H.  Morning.  She  went 
South  in  1844. 

Ellen  Susan,  b.  Colchester,  Mar.  7,  1831.  Lived  in  East  Haddam 
and  Providence. 

585  Dwight  Samuel,  b.  Jan.  6,  1835  ;    m.  Laura  E.  Cone. 

259.  James,*'   son   of   Simeon   and   Mary    (Perry)    Babcock 

(Elisha,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I., 
Oct.,  1794;  settled  first  in  Hopkinton,  R.  I. ;  d.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Jan.  22,  1852;  m.  (i)  Martha  Card;  m.  (2)  Elizabeth,  dau. 
of  Nathan  and  Elizabeth  (Burdick)  Davis,  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  May  19,  1806.  d.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Jan.  27,  1901. 
Child  of  first  wife: 

586  James,  Jr.,'  b.   Feb.   15,   1821  ;    m.   Sarah  A.  Lewis. 

Children  of  second  wife: 

Mary  E.,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Jan.  13,  1830;  living  (1901)  West- 
erly, R.  L  unm. 

Susannah  T.,  b.  Hopkinton,  Mar.  20,  1835;  d.  Jan.,  1852,  in 
Pawcatuck. 

587  William  Davis,  b.   Hopkinton,  Nov.   I,   1838:    m.   Sarah  M.   Taylor. 
Sarah  A.,  b.  Hopkinton,  Oct.  24,   1840;    m.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Jan., 

1861,  Orville  M.  Briggs,  son  of  Caleb  and  Ruth  Briggs,  b.  Smith- 
field,  R.  L,  Aug.  17,  1840;  both  living  (1901)'  Westerly,  R.  L 
No  children. 

588  Henry   L.,   b.    Hopkinton,    R.    L,    Dec.    5,    1842;     m.    (i)    Josephine 

Barber;    m.    (2)   Ida  E.   Sisson. 

589  Angeline  Rosetta  A.,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Oct.  19.  1851;    m.  Charles 

E.  Emmons. 

260.  Jesse,"    son   of   Jesse   and    Hannah    (Cross)    Babcock 

(Elisha,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I., 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  153 

Apr.  7,   1785;    (I.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Aug.    19,    1859;    ni.   New 
Shoreham,  R.  1.,  Mar.  7,  181 1,  Sally  I.,  dan.  of  Edmund  and 
Susannah    (Perry)    Sheffield,    b.    New    Shoreham,    Feb.    26, 
1786,  d.  Kingston,  Feb.  19,  1868. 
Children : 

590  John,'   b.    Aug.    17,    181 1;     m.    (i)    Lydia    C.    Wightnian ;     m.    (2) 
Wealthy  W.   Crandall. 
Harriot,   b.    Charlestown,   June   8,    181 3 ;     d.    Charlestovvn,    Mar.   20, 
1825. 
5pi   Susan,   b.    Mar.   5,   1815;    ni.   John   Kenyon. 

592  Edmund,  b.  Oct.  2,   1816;    m.  Martha  Babcock. 

Mary  Ann,  b.   Charlestown,   R.   I.,   Aug.    15,   i8ig;    d.  Charlestown, 
Aug.  19,  1820. 

593  Hannah,   b.   June  5,    1822;    m.   George  Whii)ple. 

594  Maria,  b.   Dec.  6,   1824;    m.  George  Crandall. 

595  Catherine,  b.  June  10,  1827;    m.  Peleg  Wightman. 

596  Dutce.  b.  July  27,  1829;    m.  Theresa  Hall. 

261.  George,^  son  of  Jesse  and  Hannah    (Cross)    Babcock 

(Elisha,    George,    John,    James    ist),    b.    Charlestown, 
R.  I.,  May  31,  1793;    d.  in  Killingly,  Conn.,  Feb.  27,   i860; 
m.  Nancy  Perry,  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Sept.  13,  1795,  d.  Kill- 
ingly, j\Iar.  27,  1873. 
Children : 

597  Edward,'  b.  Oct.    i,   1815 ;    m.   Harriet  Graves. 

Hannah  Ann,  b.  May  14,  1819;    m.  Erastus  Young.     No  children. 
Lois,  b.   .\ug.  5,   1823 ;    d.  Shannock,   R.  I. ;    m.  George  W.  Cross. 
No  children. 

598  Albert,  b.  Mar.  25,  1827;    d.  ;    m.  Frances  Pierce. 

599  Harriet  Ann,  b.   Oct.  24,   1830;    ni.  Alfred  Boswell. 

600  Elizabeth,    b.    May   25,    1833;     m.    (i)    William    Boswell;     m.    (2) 

Thomas  Wilson. 
David  J.,  b.  Jan.  27.  1836;    res.   (1901)   Moosup,  Conn.;    ni.  Amanda 

Tanner.      She    d.    Jan.,    1887.      They   had   one   child,    Emma;     m. 

Elliot. 

George   Gilbert,    b.    Apr.    i,    1840;     d.    Oneco,    Conn.;     m.    Maretta 

Townson.     They  had  one  son,  Walter. 

262.  RuTii,''   dau.   of  Jesse  and   Hannah    (Cross)    Babcock 

(Elisha,  George,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Shannock,  R.  I., 
July  7,  1805;    d.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Oct.   10,   1886;    m.  Rich- 
mond,   Mar.     12,    1848,    Richard   Chappell,    b.    S.    Kingston, 
Nov.  16,  1794,  d.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Apr.  9,  1878. 
Child : 

601  Mary  Hortense,'  b.  Dec.  16,  1849;    m.  Edward  K.  James. 

263.  Darius,''  son  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)   Babcock 

(Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James  ist),  b.  May  13,   1769; 
d.  Oct.  17,  183 1  ;   m. . 


154  Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children  : 

Darius,  Jr.,  b.   1791    ( ?). 
Betsey,   b.    1793    (?). 
David,  b.   1794   ( ?). 
Susan,   b.    1796    (?). 
Perry,  b.   1797   (?). 
Abigail,  b.   1799   (  ?). 

Daniel,  b.  . 

Polly,  b.  . 

264.     David,*^  Jr.,  son  of  David  and  Mary   (Hinckley)   Bab- 
cock  (Ezekiel,   Robert,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Feb.   28, 

1770;   d.  Feb.  21, ;   m. . 

Children : 

David,  b.  . 

Susan,  b.  . 


265.  Henry,*^  son  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)   Babcock 

(Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jnly  29,   1771  ; 
d.  Aug.  2,  1824;    m.  Annie,  dau.  of  Charles  and  Annie  Bull, 
b.  Feb.  24,  1 77 1,  d.  Camden,  N.  Y.,  May  8,  1863. 
Children : 

Henry,  b.   May  30,    1796;    d.   May   17,    1813,   unm. 

602  Oliver,'  b.  Dec.  30,   1798;    m.   Elizabeth  Ingalls. 

603  Gurdon,  b.  Feb.  23,  1801  ;    m.  Almira  Starkweather. 

604  Merritt,  b.  Aug.  5,   1804;    m.   Martha  Wells. 

605  Anna,  b.  Jan.  i,  1809;    m.  John  demons. 

606  James,  b.  Aug.  30,   181 1;    m.   Nancy  Lackey. 

266.  Robert,*^  son  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)  Babcock 

(Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James    ist),    b.    Stonington, 
Conn.,  July  6,   1773;    d.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  4,   1862;    m. 
Sally  Gallup,  of  Gallupville,  N.  Y.,  b.  Sept.  30,  1774,  d.  Deca- 
tur, N.  Y.,  Nov.  27,  1852. 
Children : 

607  Silas,'  b.  Oct.  6,   1796;    m.   Polly  Champion. 
Sally,  b.  Jan.  9,  1798;    d.  Aug.  30,  1798. 

608  Hannah,  b.  Nov.  9,  1800;    m.   Moses  Pettie. 

609  Maria,  b.  Nov.  7,   1805;    m.  Joel  Champlin. 

610  Lois,  b.   Dec.   17,   1810;    m.   Silas  Brewster. 

611  Elias,  b.  May  22,  1812;    m.  Jane  Thurber. 

612  Nathan,  b.  June  23,  1814 ;    m.  Lois  Thurber. 

267.  Polly,*'  dau.  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)   Babcock 

(Ezekiel,  Robert.  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Apr.  22,  1778;  d.  N.  Adams,  N.  Y.,  Aug.,  1858;  m. 
at  Berne,  Albany  County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  21,  1800,  Rev.  Elisha 
Morgan,  b.  Lyme,  Conn.,  June  13,  1779,  d.  Oct.  30,  1866. 


MRS.  POLLY    (BABCOCK)   MORGAN. 

1 778- 1858.  Page  154- 


Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy.  155 

Rev.  Elislia  Alorc^an  was  a  Baptist  minister  and  farmer; 
preached  in  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y.,  more  than  fifty  years. 
Polly  was  \ery  pious,  wrote  well,  mostly  religious  rhymes. 
She  received  a  string  of  gold  beads  referred  to  in  records  of 
her  brother  Gurdon  Babcock.  Tn  religious  zeal  she  threw  them 
in  the  collection  basket  at  church,  otherwise  they  would  to-day 
belong  to  Mrs.  Lucy  Eames  Blount.     (See  ber  records.) 

Children : 

Lucy,  b.  Jan.  31,  1804;    d.  same  day. 

Elijah  W..  b.  May  15,   1805;    m.  Lucy  Stowe.     He  moved  to  Ann 

Arbor,    Mich.,    where   he   practiced    law,   became   very   rich,    and 

died  at  about  86  years.     His  wife  survived  him  some  time.     No 

children. 
David    Henry,    b.    ALay   31,    1807;     d.    Sept.   4,    1S74 ;     m.    Elizabeth 

Merrick.     David  lived  in  Illinois,  had  several  children. 
613  Lucy  Celia,'  b.  June  22,   181 1;    m.  Lovett  Eames. 

268.     Dudley,'''  son  of  David  aad  Mary  (Hinckley)  Babcock 
(Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James    ist),    b.    Stonington, 

Conn.,  Apr.  29,  1780;  d. ;   m.  1808,  Abigail  Littell. 

Children : 

David,  b. 


614  Enos,'  b.  Nov.  21,  1819;    m.  Lucinda  Lovdell. 
Levi,  b.  . 

615  Eli,  b.   Apr.  23,   1824;    m.  Dolly  Woodin. 

269.  Frederick/  son  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)  Bab- 
cock (Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  June  16,  1782;   d. ;  m.  Fanny  Gallup. 

Children : 

616  Oliver,"   b.    1804    (  ?)  ;     m.    Maria    Barton. 
Sophronia,   b.  . 

270.  Merritt,*^  son  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)  Bab- 
cock (Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Stonington, 

Conn.,  Sept.  18,  1784;   d. ;   m.  Olive  Dickinson. 

Children : 

617  Amos,'  b.   Nov.   26,    1806;    m.    Mary   Card. 

618  Abel,  b.  Apr.  23,  1817;    m.   (i)   Eliza  Snyder;    m.   (2)   Mary  Purdy. 

619  Simeon,  b.  ALay  25.  1820;    m.  Sarah  Holden. 

271.  Fanny,^  dau.  of  David  and  Mary  (Hinckley)  Babcock 

(Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James    ist),    b.    Stonington, 

Conn.,  July  5,  1787;   d.  ;   m.  Amos  Gill. 

Children : 

John,  b. 


Harriet,  b. 


1^6  The  Babcock  Ccucalogy. 

272.  Sarah,"  daii.  of  Ro])ert  and  Grace  (Hinckley)  Babcock 

(Ezekiel,  I\ol)crt.  John,  James  ist),  b.  vXiig".  22,  1782; 

d.  ;   ni.  Philip  Duel. 

Children : 

Charles   Duel,   b.  ;    d.   Uniaha,   Neb. 

620  Sarah  C.,'  b.  ;    m.  Isaac  Born. 

Lucy  Ann,  b.  — . — . 

Clemenia,   b.   . 

Harriet,   b.  ■ . 

Joseph,  b.   .     Lived  at   Farmington,    111. 

273.  Rus.sel/'  son  of  Robert  and  Grace  (Hinckley)  Babcock 

(Ezekiel,  Robert.  John,  James   ist),  b.  Berne,  N.  Y., 
Feb.    I,   1793;    d.   Richmondville,   N.   Y.,   Mar.   2,    1871  ;    m. 
Sarah,  dau.  of  Samuel  and (Wellington)  Fuller,  b.  Rich- 
mondville, Nov.  3,  1794,  d.  Richmondville,  Mar.  13,  1854. 
Children,  b.  in  Richmondville: 

Samuel   Fuller,  b.   Apr.  23,    1816;    d.    Saugerties,   N.   Y.,   Nov.    11, 
1847,  unm. 

621  Robert.''  b.  Nov.   15,  1818;    m.  Lucy  McKinley. 

622  Eloise  Corrina,  b.  Oct.  11,  1823;    m.  Harvey  Waldorf. 

John  J.,  b.  Jan.  22,   1833;    res.    (1901)    East   Worcester,   N.   Y. 

274.  Joshua,*'  son  of  Joshua  and  Nancy  (Hawkins)  Bab- 
cock (Joseph,  Joseph,  John,  James  i.st),  b.  West- 
erly (?),  R.  I.,  Oct.  16,  1774;  d.  Bethlehem  Center,  N.  Y., 
May  22,  1852:  m.  at  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of 
William  and  Mar\^  (McClure)  Frazier,  b.  Ireland,  Feb.  20, 
1775,  d.  Bethlehem,  Aug.  26.  1843. 

Children,  b.  in  Bethlehem : 

Hiram,  b.  Feb.   18,  1802;    d.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  21,  1883,  unm. 
David,  b.   Mar.   5,   1804;    d.   Bethlehem,   Mar.   24.   1864;    m.   Salem, 

Mass.,   Eliza  Glover. 
Joshua  Frazier,  b.  Aug.  23,  1806;    d.  Bethlehem,  Sept.  23,  1873,  unm. 
Mary  Ann,  b.   Sept.   13,    1808;    d.   Bethlehem,   Feb.   i,    1885,   unm. 

623  William,'  b.   Oct.   11,   1811;    m.   Ann  Wilson. 

624  John,   b.   June   19,    1814;     m.    Hester   Van   Derzce. 
Robert,  b.  Apr.  24,   1817;    d.  Bethlehem,  Dec.  7.  1892,  unm. 

625  Henry,  b.  July  8,   1820;    m.    (i)   Rachel   McGill ;    m.    (2)    Margaret 

Moore. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  9,   1823;    d.  Bethlehem,  Feb.   17,   1901,  unm. 
James   Leonard,   b.    Dec.    15.    1825;    d.    Albany,    Feb.    13.    188 1  ;     m. 

Albany,  N.  Y.,  Mary,  dau.  of  Cornelius  Vosburgh,  b.  Albany. 

275.  Nancy  Ann,^  dau.  of  Thomas,  Jr.,  and  Martha   (Da- 
vis) Babcock  (Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  in 

Squam,  N.  J.,  1782  (?);    d.  Jackson  Center,  O. ;    m.  Samuel 
C,  son  of  Rev.  Jacob  and  Mary  Davis. 


Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy.  157 

ChiUlren : 

Daniel,  b.  ;    ni.  Ruth  Randall. 

Jcplha,  b.  Clark  Co.,  O.,  Jan.   i,   1816;    m.  Clark  Co.,  June  30,  1837, 

Eliza  Jane,  dau.  of  George  and  Amy  Davis,  b.  in  West  Virginia, 

May  5,  1817. 

Jacob,  b.  ;    m.  Amy  Lippcnoott. 

Francis,    b.    ;     m.    Vienna    Richardson. 

James  A.,  b.  ;    m.  Jane  ALcClure. 

Nancy,  b.  ;     m.  McClary. 

Thomas,  b.  ;    m.  Betsy  Moore.     No  children. 

276.  Rev.  Simeon,"  son  of  Thomas,  Jr.,  and  Martha  (Davis) 
Babcock  (Thomas,  OHver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Squam, 

N.  J.,  Sept.  13,  1784;  (1.  Jan.  14,  1870,  at  Jackson  Center,  O. ; 
m.  (i)  Harrison  County,  Va.,  Oct.  6,  1803,  Charity,  dau.  of 
Ephraim  and  EHzabeth  (Davis)  Maxson,  b.  Harrison  County, 
d.  Nov.  26,  1835;  m.  (2)  Mar.  16,  1837,  Mrs.  EHzabeth  D. 
Stout,  widow  of  Mihon  Stout  and  dau.  of  Moses  Hoffman. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

626  Jesse,'  b.   Salem,   W.   Va.,    1804;    m.    (i)    Amanda  Searl ;    m.    (2) 

Mary  Forsythe ;    m.   (3)   wid.  Jemima  McBurney. 

627  Gean,  b.  1814;    m.  Joseph  Furrow. 

628  Maxson,  b.   May  5,   1817;    m.    (i)    Phiottata  Davis;    m.    (2)    Mrs. 

Isabell  Tarpenning. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

629  Elizabeth  Martha,  b.  Jan.  16,  1838;    m.  Curtis  Lippencott. 

630  Simeon  Hoffman,  b.  Jan.  21,   1841  :    m.  Elizabeth  McCormick. 
Milton  Stout,  b.  Dec.  2,   1842;    m.    (i) ;    m.    (2)  . 

277.  William,'''   son  of  Thomas,  Jr.,  and  Martha    (Davis) 
Babcock  (Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Jan.  26, 

1789;   d.  in  Jackson  Center.  O.,  Oct.  11,  1847;   m-  (i)  5 

m.  (2)  Rebecca,  dau.  of  Jacob  and  Mary  (Davis)  Loofboro; 
m.  (3)  Arsentha  (Davis),  widow  of  Dudley  Hughes  and  dau. 
of  William  and  Elizabeth  (Johnson)  Davis. 
Children  by  first  wife : 

Martha,  b  ;    m.   William   Lippencott,   son  of  Samuel  and  Amy 

(Maxson)    Lippencott.     Had  one  child,   IMary  Ann. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  ;    m.  "Runa"  Jones. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

631  Priscilla,'  b.  Clark  Co.,  O. ;    m.  Lemon  Lippencott. 

632  Davis,  b.   Dec.    15,    1819;     m.    (i)    Emcline    Sayer;     m.    (2)    Anna 

Deihert. 
(^3,i  Jacob  H.,  b.  Apr.,   1S22:    m.  Elizabeth  Davis. 
634  Rebecca,  b.  Clark  Co.,  O. ;    m.  Lewis  Brandenburg. 


158  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

635  Emily,  b.  ;    m.    (1)  James  Hunt;    m.    (2)  John  A.  Lippencott. 

636  Simeon,  b.  ;    m.   Amy  Van  Horn. 

637  Anna,  b.  ;    m.  Abel  Davis. 

638  Azariah,  b.  ;    m.  Julia  Ann  Colwell. 

Enos,  b.  ;    m.  Ruah  A.   Hague. 

Silas,  b.  ;    m.  Elizabeth  Furrow. 

278.  Jacob,*^  son  of  Thomas,  Jr.,  and  Martha  (Davis)  Bab- 

cock    (Thomas,   Ohver,   John,    James    ist),   b.    Salem, 
W.  Va.,  Apr.  26,  1797;  d.  Northampton,  O.,  Jan.  2,  1835;  m. 
May  22,  181 7,  Lydia,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Sarah  (Sutton)  Max- 
son,  b.  Dec.  4,  1799. 
Children : 

639  Nancy'  (Anna),  b.  Apr.  6,  1818;    m.  John  Lippencott. 

Jeptha,  b.  Mar.  16,  1820;    m.  Lavina,  dau.  of  Jacob  and  Sarah  Davis. 

640  Hannah,  b.  June  30,   1822 ;    m.   Ezekiel  P.   Davis. 

Martha,   b.   Apr.  22,    1825;    m.  John   Livingston.     No  children. 
Julia  Ann,  b.  June  3,  1828;    m.  William  Staley. 

641  John,  b.  Dec.  2,  1830;    m.   (i)  Jemima  G.  Lippencott;    m.  (2)  Mrs. 

Frank  A.  Patterson. 

642  Cornelius  Sutton,  b.  Apr.  2,  1833;    m.   (i)   Rachel  Maxson ;  m.   (2) 

Wren. 

643  Jacob,   b.    Feb.    17,    1835;     m.    (i)    Lydia    Maxson;     m.    (2)    Isabell 

Davis. 

279.  Joel  C.,^  son  of  Thomas,  Jr.,  and  Martha  (Davis)  Bab- 
cock   (Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Harrison 

County,  Va.,  Apr.  20,    1799;    d.  Oct.    11,   1867,   Richardson 
County,  Neb. ;    m.  in  Clark  County,  O.,  Dec.  25,  1824,  Amy, 
dau.  of  Joshua  and  Esther  (Styles)  Greene,  b.  Mar.  i,  1807, 
d.  Jan.  27,  1879. 
Children : 

644  Joshua  Greene,'  b.  Nov.  23,  1825  :    m.  Charlotte  T.  Lippencott. 

645  John  Smally,  b.   Aug.   12,   1828;    m.    (i)   Eliza  Lippencott;    m.    (2) 

Sarah  F.  Randolph. 

646  Esther,  b.  Feb.,   1830 ;    m.  John  Furrow. 

Uriah  Martin,  b.  Clark  Co.,  O.,  Aug.  20,  1837;  d.  at  Alfred,  N.  Y., 
June  9,  1900;  m.  Jackson  Co.,  O.,  Rebecca  Lucinda,  dau.  of 
Calvin  and  Lydia  (Maxson)  Davis,  b.  Jackson  Co.,  O.,  July  25, 
1838.  Address,  188  Rhode  Island  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  (1902). 
One  son,  Willie  Orville. 

647  Samuel  Davis,  b.  Aug.  13,  1839;    m.  Mary  S.  F.  Randolph. 
Joel  Jay,   b.    Feb.   22,    1841 ;     d.    unm. 

Jesse,  b.  Mar.  8,  1843.  Was  killed  in  the  United  States  service,  at 
the   battle   of  Vicksburg,    May  24,    1863. 

648  Benjamin  Thomas,  b.  Feb.  27,   1848;    m.  Mariah  Ayers. 

280.  JoHN,^  son  of  Thomas,  Jr.,  and  Martha  (Davis)  Bab- 
cock   (Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  May  16, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  159 

1802;   (1.  ;!t  Wcltoii.  la..  Mar.  3.  1872;    111.  (  [)  Dec.  5,  1822, 
Betsy,  dan.  ol  Tiniolliy  and  Sarali  Searl,  h.  June  26,  1805,  d. 
Nov.  27,  182^;   m.  (2)  Mar.  i  ^,  1828,  Elizabeth  Hardman,  b. 
Mar.  14.  1806,  d.  Dec.  28,  1878. 
Child  by  first  wife: 

649  Thomas,"  b.  Aug.  22,   1823;    m.   (i)   Jane  Hill;    in.   (2)   Mrs.  Mary 

(Stewart)   Terry. 

CliiUh'cn  b,y  second  wife: 

650  Margaret,  b.   May  24.   1829;    m.   Lewis  Sayer. 

651  Sarah,  b.  Nov.  26,  1831  ;    m.  Lcven  Hurley. 

652  Demsa,  b.   Nov.  9,   1833 ;    ni.   Henry  K.   Morris. 

653  Martha,  b.   May  26,   1836;    m.  John  B.  Van  Horn. 
James  Owen,  b.  Oct.  30,  1838;    m.  Almira  Van  Horn. 

Peter    Hardman.    b.    1841  ;     d.    in    U.    S.    Army   during   Civil    War. 

654  Nicander  Wilson,  b.  July  30,  1844  ;    m.  Louisa  Jane  Davis. 
Alexander   Campbell,   b.    1848;     d.    1851. 

Lewis  Hurlej',  b.  near  Defiance.  O..  Sept.  15.  i8so.  Resides  (1902) 
Cowrie.  la.;  m.  Welton.  la.,  Nov.  i,  1871,  Rocelia  C,  dau.  of 
William  C.  and  Mary  (Stearns)  Davis,  b.  near  Sullivan.  Ind., 
ALay  30,  1852.  They  had  one  son.  Dcios  O..  b.  Nov.  26.  1873.  m. 
at  Cowrie,  la..  May  31.  1898.  Florence  ALay,  dau.  of  Seldon  M. 
and  Ella   (Doud)   Claus.  b.  May  31,   1880,  at  Des  Moines,  la. 

281.  James,''  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Susannah  (Rogers)  Bab- 
cock  (Simeon,  Ohver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  \\'esterly 
R.  I.  (now  Hopkinton),  Aug.  12,  I77(');  d.  Feb.  20,  1853, 
Monmouth,  III.  In  early  hfe  he  removed  with  his  parents  to 
Voluntown,  Conn.,  thence  to  Ash  ford.  Conn.,  where  three  of 
his  sisters  married,  and  later  removed  to  Wales,  Mass.,  wdiere 
his  father  died.  James  m.  Phila,  dau.  of  Rev.  Elijah  Codding- 
ton,  a  Baptist  minister  who  preached  at  Wales,  Mass.,  for 
nearly  fiftv  years.  Phila  Coddington  Babcock  d.  Dec.  25, 
1858. 

Children : 

655  Elijah,"  b.  Jan.  16.  1802;    m.  Cynthia  Weld. 

Sally,  b.  :    d.  Monmouth,  111.,  }iLiy  24,  1877,  aged  71  years,  unm. 

George,  b.  at  Wales.  1815;    res.   (1902)   iNIonmouth,  111. 
Betsey,  b.  — — ;    m.  John   Smith. 
Mary,  b.  ;    m.   Sylvanus  G.   Shaw. 

656  Palace,  b.  ;    m.  Harrison  F.  Fay. 

281a.  Benjamin,*'  son  of  Jason  and  Mary  Babcock  (Simeon, 
Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Feb.  8.  1782;   d.  Sept.  13, 
1869;    m.   (i)  Polly  Reynolds,  no  children ;    m.   (2)  Hannah 
Reynolds,  b.  Mar.  14.  1784,  d.  Feb.  7,  1854. 


i6o  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

William  J.,  b.  1811. 
656"  Nelson,'  b.  Feb.  13,  1813;    in.  Catharine  Potter. 
Amy,   I). 


Minerva,  b.  . 

Oliver,  b.  Apr.  21,  1821  ;    d.   Dec.  8,   1855. 
Chester,   b.   . 

282.  Ethan/'  son  of  Oliver  and  Tacy  (Maxson)  Babcock 
(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  probably  in  Ley- 
den,  Mass.,  Nov.  4,  1771 ;  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  8,  1859; 
m.  (i)  Leyden,  Mass.,  Jan.  13,  1800,  Mary  (Polly),  dan.  of 
135  Susanna  (Babcock)  Fen,  b.  1774,  d.  in  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
1807,  leaving  two  children ;  m.  (2)  at  Brookfield,  Phebe,  dau. 
of  Godfrey  White,  b.  June  18,  1788,  d.  Brookfield,  Mar.  18, 
1872,  leaving  seven  children. 

In  the  latter  part  of  Apr.,  1799,  Ethan  Babcock  accompanied 
by  David  Gates  set  out  on  foot  from  Leyden,  Mass.,  and  after 
enduring  many  privations  arrived  at  W.  Winfield,  where  they 
rested  several  days.  Here  they  purchased  a  yoke  of  oxen,  a 
cow,  and  some  provisions,  with  which  on  the  25th  of  May  they 
started  for  Brookfield.  Their  progress  through  the  woods  was 
necessarily  slow,  and  it  was  nearly  night  before  they  reached 
their  destination,  the  Beaver  Creek  Valley,  where  Oliver  Bab- 
cock, father  of  Ethan,  had  previously  purchased  the  mill  site 
on  the  stream  in  the  north  part  of  Brookfield,  together  with 
two  lots  w^iich  now  include  the  east  half  of  the  village,  the 
north  and  south  road  running  through  it  for  some  distance 
being  the  lot  line.  Not  having  time  to  erect  a  shelter,  they 
felled  a  basswood  tree,  split  it  open,  and  lay  upon  it  until  morn- 
ing. They  were  the  first  to  locate  on  the  site  of  Brookfield, 
and  this  was  the  first  tree  cut  in  its  vicinity.  The  next  day 
they  built  a  cabin  and  commenced  clearing  the  land.  Game  be- 
ing plentiful,  they  had  no  lack  of  food.  They  very  soon  began 
the  manufacture  of  potash,  which  they  carried  in  tubs  on  the 
back  of  oxen  to  Winfield.  They  continued  clearing  the  land 
and  making  potash  during  the  summer,  and  in  the  fall  Mr. 
Babcock  returned  to  Massachusetts  and  married  Mai-y  Fen. 
The  next  spring,  with  his  bride  and  a  yoke  of  oxen,  he  re- 
turned to  Brookfield,  completed  the  log  house  he  had  partly 
built  the  year  before,  and  there  established  his  home. 

He  was  the  first  hotel  keeper  in  the  village  of  Brookfield  in 
the  opening  years  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  at  the  same 
time  conducted  his  well-chosen  farm  adjacent  thereto  with 
marked  success.      (History  of  Madison  County.) 


The  Bohcock  Genealogy.  i6i 

Children  of  first  wife,  ]).  Brookfield: 

Harriet,    b.    1803;     m.    her    father's    cousin,    299  Henry"    (Harry) 

Babcock. 
Orrissa,  b.   1805;    d.   1825. 

Children  of  second  wife,  b.  Brookfield: 

657  Mary,'  b.   1814 ;    ni.   Samuel   Woodworth. 

MacHson,  b.  1816;    m.  Ann  White.     Moved  to  Beaver  Dam,  Wis. 

Herrick,  b.    1818;    m.   Dclihah   Alclntyre   (?). 

EvcHne,  b.   1820.     Living   (iQOi)    in  Brookfield.  unm. 

Oliver,  b.  1822;    m.  Kate  Woodworth;    d.  leaving  no  children. 

Melissa,  b.    1824;    d.   Brookfield,   N.   Y.,   May  5.   1900. 

658  Joseph,  b.  Sept.  19,  1826;    m.  Mary  M.  Whitaker. 

283.  Oliver,*'  son  of  Oliver  and  Tacy   (Maxson)    Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  probably  in  Ley- 
den,  Mass.,  Oct.  4,  1773;    d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y..  Sept.,   1856; 
m.  Leyden,  Nov.  27,  1797,  Lorana,  dau.  of  Ezra  Foster,  b. 
Leyden,  Sept.  8,  1777,  d.  Brookfield,   1862. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y. : 

659  Cynthia,'   b.   1798;    m.   1817    (?),  James  Denison. 

660  Lorana,  b.   May,   1800;    m.   Hosea  B.   Clark. 

661  Oliver,  5th,  b.    1802 ;    m.  Electa  Burdick. 

284.  Joseph,^  son  of  Oliver  and  Tacy   (Maxson)    Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 

Jan.   I,   1776;    d.  ;    m.  in  1800,  Sarah,  dan.  of  Nathan 

Babcock   (?).     Removed  tO'  Leyden,   Mass..   where  he  lived 
seven  years ;    went  thence  to  Norw^ich,  N.  Y. ;    later  removed 
to  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life. 
Children : 

662  Julia,"  b.   Jan.  23,    1801 ;    m.   Clark  Brown. 

Rawson,  b.  Dec.  17,  1802 ;  m.  Mary  Foot ;  1829,  moved  to  Wis- 
consin. 

Laurence,  b.  Nov.  3.  1804.  Farmer  at  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  d. 
1890   (  ?).  unm. 

663  Leroy,  b.  Apr.  23,  1804 ;    m.  Sally  Markham. 

285.  Phineas,*'  son  of  Oliver  and  Tacy  (Maxson)  Babcock 

(Oliver.   Oliver,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Jnne.    1777;    d. 
Brookfield,   N.   Y. ;    m.   Apr.    12,    1807,   Sarah   Fen.   dan.   of 
135  Susanna  (Babcock)  Fen,  b.  Dec,  1776,  d.  Mar.  8.  1858. 
Children,  b.  in  Brookfield : 

Minard,  b.  ;    d.  Brookfield;    m.  Dorcas  . 

Belinda,  b.  ;    ni.  Bill  Lewis. 

Charlotta,  b.  ;  d.  Preston,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Robert  Davis. 

Maria,  b.  ;    d.  Brookfield;    mi.  Joseph  Denison. 

664  .Mzina/.  b.  Apr.  2,  i8t8;    m.  Darwin  Crandall. 

Alfred,  b.  ;    d.   Shcrburn,   N.  Y. ;    m.   PLarriet   Pelton. 

Leonard,  b.  ;    d.  Brookfield:    m.  Eimira  Burdick. 

William,  b.  ;    m.  Catharine  Hill. 

II 


1 62  The  Bahcoch  Genealogy. 

286.  Lois,"    dan.   of   Oliver   and    Tacy    (Maxson)    Bal)cock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James    ist).  b.   Leyden,   Mass., 
Apr.  30,  1779;    d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  May  13,  1859;   m.  Ley- 
den, 1798,  Patten,  son  of  Lenuiel  and  IMiebe  Fitch,  b.  Connect- 
icut, Aug.  31,  1775,  d.  Brookfield,  Oct.  3,  1861. 
Children : 

Armund  Fitch,  b.  Mar.  15,  1801  ;    d.  Nov.  12,  1820. 

Palten,  b.  June   18,   1803;    d.   Oct.  20,   1890;    m.   Polly   Carkc.     Six 

children. 
Philemon   Fitch,  b.   Apr.   23,   1805;    d.   Aug.  4,   1829. 
Tacy,  b.   Apr.    10,    1807;    m.   May  31,    1875,   Edmund  Livermore,   in 

Independence,  N.  V.     Five  children. 
Nathaniel,  b.  Aug.  7,   1809;    d.   181 1. 
Lodema,  h.   1813;    d.  May  29,   1813. 
James  M..  b.  Mar.  13,  1811;    m.  1830,  Eliza  Williams.     Six  children. 

Now   living    (1900). 
Lavinda,  b.   Aug.,   1814;    d.   Feb.,   1891  ;    m.    1833,   Sylvanus  Moore. 
Elliot  G.,  b.  May  4,   1817;    m.  Oct.   13,   1839.  Sabrina  Brown.     Four 

children. 
Julius  C,  b.  Feb.  27,   1819;    m.    (i)   Grace  York;    m.    (2)    Harriet. 

He  died  Feb.  4,  1897.     Four  children. 
Susannah   C,   b.   Nov.   21,    1821  ;    d.   Apr.  27,    1900;    m.   667  Oliver' 

Babcock. 

287.  Nathan,*'  son  of  Oliver  and  Tacy  (Maxson)  Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Mar.  i,  1782;    d. 
Dec.  10,  1866,  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;   m.   (i)  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec. 

22,  1803,  Huldah  Burdick,  b.  June  21,  1784,  d.  Feb.  9,  1810; 
m.  (2)  Dec.  16,  18 10,  Polly  Palmer,  b.  June  12,  1790,  d.  Aug. 

23,  1818,  at  Brookfield;  m.  (3)  Aug.  23,  1827,  at  Brookfield, 
Vashti,  dan.  of  Nathan  and  Bridget  (Stanton)  Chesebro, 
b.  Stonington,  Nov.  10.  1792,  d.  Brookfield,  July  24,  1856. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Huldah,  b.  May  2,  1806 ;    m.  486  Ambrose  Babcock. 
665  Nathan,'  b.  Aug.  25,   1807;    d.  Aug.  7,  1882;    m.  Fannie  Walrath. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

Ellen,  b.  June  14,  1828;    d.  Dec.  16,  1833. 

Juliette,  b.   Feb.   7,   1830;    res.    (1902)    Brookfield,   N.   Y.,   unm. 

Sherwood,  b.   Sept.  28,   1831  ;    d.   Mar.   i,   1888,  unm. 

Patten  Fitch,  b.   Apr.  21,   1834;    unm. 

288.  LIezekiah,"  son  of  Oliver  and  Tacy   (Maxson)    Bab- 
cock   (Oliver.    Oliver,    John,    James    ist),    b.    Leyden, 

Mass.,  July  17,  1784;  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  28,  1862; 
m.  Mar.  11,  1806,  Nancy,  dau.  of  Henrv  and  Judith  (Maxson) 
Burdick,  b.  July  18,  1786,  d.  July  17,  1858. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  163 

Children,  b.  in  Brookfield  : 

Hczekiah,   b.   ;     ni.    Amaii'la    Clarke.      He   d.    in    Lcoiiardsville, 

Feb.  4,  1871.  aged  67.     Had  one  dau.,  Malvina,  m.  Gralvini; 

both  dead.     No  children. 

Laurinda,  b.  ;    d.  j'onng. 

666  Henry,'   b.   Jan.   9,    i8og;     ni.    (i)    Angeline   Langworthy;     m.    (2) 

Eunice  Newell. 
Nancy,  b.  ;    m.   Silvanus  Barney.     They  had  one  dau.,   Sarah 

M..  and  res.   Scott,   N.   Y. ;    m.   Mr.  Richardson. 

Leander,  b. ;    m.   Roxaniia   Williams. 

Lodema.  b.  ;    d.  July  7,  1893;    m.   (i)   Silvanus  Barney;    m.  (2) 

Joseph  Miller. 

667  Oliver  P.,  b.  Mar.  6,   1817;    ni.   Susannah  C.  Fitch. 

Horace,  b. ;    d.   Aug.    11,    1892,  unm. 

Barbara,  b.  Mar.  i,  i8ji  ;    d.  June  30,  1885.  unni. 

Louis,    b.   July   21,    1824;     res.    (  1901  )    in    Brookfield;     unm. 

668  Joseph  T.,  b.  Oct.  9,   1827;  m.   (i)   Harriet  Colvin  ;  m.    (2)   Cather- 

ine Hilts. 
Tacy.  b.  Feb.  5,   18.31  ;  d.  Apr.  6,   1837. 

289.  Susan, ^^  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Tacy   (Maxson)    Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver.  John,  James   ist),  b.   Leyden,  Mass., 
Aug.  28,  1788;   d.  Tully,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  2,  1866;   m.  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  27,   1806,  Billings  Palmer,  b.  Stonington,  Conn., 
Feb.  26,  1779,  d.  Brookfield,  Oct.  9,  1849. 
Children : 

Emily  L.,   b.    Sherburn,    Dec.   2S,    181 1;     d.   Milton,   Wis.,   Jan.   31, 

1878;    m.  Sept.   18,   1830,  William  Wells. 
Leander,    b.    Brookfield,    N.    Y.,    May   20,    1814;     d.    McGrawville, 

N.  Y.,  Apr.  28.   1878;    m.  Phebe  Pierce. 
Julia   Ann,   b.   Brookfield,   N.   Y.,   Aug.   9,    1816;    d.   Dec.    19,    1887; 

m.  Jan.   11,   1849.  H.  M.  Denison. 
Henry  AL,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  4,  1818;    d.  Syracuse,  Apr.  14, 

1866;    m.  Miss  Adams. 
Arminda    F.,    b.    Feb.    12,    1821  ;     d.    Springfield,    N.    Y.,    Mar.    20, 

1895;    m.    Feb.    13,    1841,    A.    T.    Adams. 
Harriet  ^L,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  to,  1823;    d.  Fox  Lake,  Wis., 

May  5,   1893 :    m.  O.   N.   Groton. 
Huldah  B.,  b.   Feb.  20,   1826;    m.   A.   Catelv ;    res.    (1901)   at  Tully, 

N.  Y. 
Adaline  C,  b.  Nov.  24,   1828;    m.  Nov.  24,  1846,  William  Blanding. 
Tacy   L.,    b.    Jan.    4,    1833 ;     m.    Nov.    24,    1840,    Frank    Vail ;     res. 

(1901)   at  Tully,  N.  Y. 

290.  EzRA,*^   son   of   Oliver  and   Tacy    (Maxson)    Babcock 
(Oliver,  Oliver.  John.  James   ist),  b.  Aug.   18,    1794; 

d.  Nov.  9,  1879;    m.  Hannah  Brusie.     Moved  to  New  York 
State. 

Children : 

Laura,  b.   1815;    m.  Benjamin  Groton;    d.  Apr.,   1845. 

Roxa,  b.  . 

Henry,  b.   1822;    d.  Sept.   12,   1879. 

Gilbert,  b.  . 

John,  b.  . 


164  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Sophronia,  b.  . 

Cyiitliia,  1). . 

Hannah,  b.  . 


291.  Peleg,"   son   of   Peleg  and   Lucy    (Maxsoii)    Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I., 
May  29,  1772;   d.  New  York  State,  prior  to  1827;  m.  Martha 
Morgan,  d.  Ithaca.     Peleg  lived  for  a  time  in  Genesee  County. 
Children : 

669  Peleg,'  b.  Apr.  12,  1799;    m.   (i)   Rasetta  Nichols;    m.   (2)   Malinda 

McCart. 
Harriette,  b.  .     Lived  at  Oxford,   Mich. 

670  .Amanda,  b.  July  22,  1819;    ni.  Charles  Watson. 

671  Nathan,  b.  ;    m.  Ruby  Foster. 

Jonathan,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

David,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Dina,  b.  .     Lived  at  Ithaca,   N.  Y. 

Moses  and  Eber,  b.  . 

Huldah  and  Chloe,  b.  ;    both  d.  young. 

292.  Deacon  Solomon,^  son  of  Peleg  and  Ruth   (Maxson) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Westerly, 

Sept.  2,   1776;    d.  ;    m.    1803,  Amy  Morgan.     He  was 

deacon  in  First  S.  D.  B.  Church,  Scott,  N.  Y. 
Childrai : 

672  Luke  P.,'  b.  Jan.  28,  1805 ;    m.  Lydia  Babcock. 
Morgan,  b.  1806 ;    m.  Maria  Purdy. 

Ross,  b.  1809;    m.  Lydia  Wells.     Settled  in  Stephentown,  111. 

673  Ralph,  b.  Dec.   T,  1810;    m.  Azubah  Dodge. 
Anson,  b.   1813:    m.  Harriet  Price. 
Cornelius,  b.    1815 ;    d.  young. 

Cornelia,   b.   1816. 

Ira.  b.  1818;    d.  1902;    m.  Abigail  Curtis. 

674  Frederick,  b.  Mar.  29,  1820;    m.  Mary  Kelley. 
Chauncey,  b.   1822;    d.   1844. 

Curtis,  b.  1824;    d.  Galva,  111.;    m.  Dorana  Randall. 

293.  JoHN,*^    son    of    Peleg    and    Ruth    (Maxson)    Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  July  26,  1780, 
lived  when  young  at  Leyden,  Mass. ;  d.  in  Mansion,  Wis., 
Nov.  28,  1865;  m.  (i)  Nov.  13,  1803,  Phebe  Wilbur,  d.  May 
29,  1811,  in  the  thirty-first  year  of  her  age.  They  settled  in 
Spafford,  Cortland  County,  N.  Y.  John  m.  (2)  in  Leyden, 
Mass.,  Feb.  23,  181 2.  Betsy  Bullfinch. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

Nancy,  b.  Nov.  22.  1804;  m.  Spafford,  N.  Y.,  John  Mapes;  d. 
Battle  Creek,  Mich.,  leaving  three  children,  Solomon,  Wellcome, 
and  Henry. 

675  John  Wilbur,''  b.  Jan.  30,   1807;    m.  Ann  Davis. 

Ithamer  Day,  b.   Sept.   23,    1808.     Settled  at  Rockford,   111. 
Hiram,  b.  Dec.  3,  1810;    d.  Dec.  28,  1810. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  165 

Children  liy  second  wife: 

Eliza.  1).  Feb.  25.   1813;    m.  Seymour  Grinnell. 

676  Joseph.  1).  Oct.   17,   1814 ;    m.   Mrs.  Caroline  S.  Laraway. 

Lucy,  b.  Dec.  15,  1818.  Spafford.  N.  Y. ;  m.  John  Grinnel,  of 
Albion,  N.  Y.  She  died  in  Orleans  Co.,  N.  Y.,  leaving  two  sons, 
John  and  TTalsey. 

294.  Taber,^   son   of   Peleg  and    Ruth    (Maxson)    Babcock 

(Ohver,  Ohver,  John,  James   ist),  b.  Apr.  30,    1784; 
d.    Oct.   8.    1845;     m.    Leyden.    Mass.,    May   8,    1806,    Anna 
Steadman. 
Chikh'en : 

677  Horace  S.,'    b.  :Mar.  8.  1807;    m.  Saniantha  Crofoot. 

678  Anna  M.'  b.  Nov.  29,  1808;    m.  Rev.  James  Ross  Burdick. 
Mary,  b.  Apr.  i,  1812. 

Lucy,  b.   May  24,   1814. 

Harriet,  b.  Feb.  18,  1816. 

Laura,  b.  Aug.  24,   1818. 

Adena  C,  b.  July  29,  1820. 

Peleg,  b.  Dec.  20,   1823;    d.  Feb.   15.  1850,  unm. 

295.  Silas,*'    son    of    Capt.    Paul    and    Hannah    (Burdick) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Apr.  22, 

1793;   d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  8.  1861  ;   m.  (i)   1812,  Clarissa, 

dan.  of  Walter  Palmer,  of  Stonington,  Conn.,  b. ,  d.  Apr. 

20,  1827;   m.  (2)   1828,  Mary  Vosburg,  Scott,  N.  Y.,  d.  Feb. 

9,  1880,  aged  seventy-eight. 

Children : 

Aransa.  b.  Aug.   14.  1813;    bookkeeper. 

Leroy,  b.   Feb.    17,    1815:    d.    Nov.   5,    1847. 

Mary,  b.   Sept.  6,   ]8!6;    d.  young. 

Edward  D.,  b.  Mar.  29,  1818;    m.  Julia  Spencer. 

Ann  Maria,  b.   Mar.  31,   1820. 

Caroline,  b.   Sept.  25,   1822. 

Eli,  b.  Dec.  9.  i8^4- 

Clarissa,  b.  Apr.  8,  1827. 

Melissa,  b.  Apr.  12,  1S29. 

Burdet,  b.  Dec.  12.  1830. 

296.  RussEL,*'  son  of  Paul  and  Hannah  (Burdick)  Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Leyden,  Mass., 
June  II,  1795;  d.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  July  11,  1870;  m.  Lucinda,  dau. 
of  Paul  Maxson,  b.  Westerlv,  R.  I.,  1791,  d.  Scio,  Sept.  3, 
1863. 

Children : 

679  Nelson,'  b.  June  25,  1816;    m.  Lucy  Lee. 

680  Pardon,  b.  Oct.  21,   1820;    m.  Clarissa  Benjamin. 

681  Erastus,  b.  .\ug.  21,  1818:    ni.  Dorleski  Perkins. 
Manville,  b.  :    d.    1895. 

682  William,  b.  Dec.  8,  1829;    m.  Violet  Hazzard. 

683  Charles,  b.  Apr.  13,  1832;    m.  Caroline  Lee. 


i(^(\  The  Bahcock  Grucalocy. 

297.  Sally,"  dan.  of  Paul  and  Hannah   (Bnrdick)  Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jnly 
14,  1797;  d.  Scott,  Apr.  26,  1876;  m.  Scott,  May  4,  1817, 
Capt.  Jesse  Bur(Hck,  b.  Scott,  Aug.  18,  1794,  d.  Scott,  Sept.  12, 
1858. 

Children : 

Roxanna,   b.    Apr.   2S.    1820;     d.    Apr.    17,    1900;     m.   Jan.    16,    1842, 

E.  H.  Potter. 
Jesse  A.,   b.   July    i,    1830;     d.    California,    1877;    m.   Oct.    10,    1857, 

Jennie  A.   Oliver.     Had  3  children. 

684  Curtis  E.,'  b.  Nov.  9,   1832;    m.   Emma  Biers. 

685  Duane  D.,  b.  July  i,  1837;    m.  Junily  F.  Babcock. 

298.  MiNARD,*^   son  of   Capt.    Panl   and   Hannah    (Bnrdick) 
Babcock    (Oliver,   Oliver,  John,  James    ist),   b.   Scott, 

Jnne  15,  1799;    d.  Union  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Jnly  24,  1870;    m. 
(i)  Jan.  28,  1819,  Mary  Ann  Taylor,  b.  Sept.  20,  1799;    m. 

(2)  Aug.  4,   1832,  Sophie,  dan.  of  Eri  Bennett,  b.  ;  d. 

Union  Springs,  1878  or  '79. 
Children  by  first  wife : 

686  Marsend,'  b.  May  6,  1820;    m.  Charlotta  Mills. 

687  Miranda,  b.  June  2,   1822;    m.   Dewitt  Colony. 
Abigail,  b.  Jan.  8.  1824. 

Andrew,  b.  Dec.  30,   1825 ;    d.  Aug.  26,   1852 ;    m.  Helen  Rogers. 
La  Mott,  b.  Aug.  4,  1828. 
Alonzo,  b.  Mar.   16,  1830. 

Child  by  second  wife : 

688  Harriet  E.,  b.  Oct.  5,  1834 ;    m.  Joshua  Hoagland. 

299.  Henry,"   son   of   Capt.    Paul   and    Hannah    (Bnrdick) 
Babcock    (Oliver,   Oliver,    John,    James    ist),   b.    Scott, 

N.  Y.,  Aug.  28,  1801  ;  d.  Brookfield,  N.'Y..  Apr.  i,  1872;  m. 
Brookfield,  July,  182 1,  Harriet,'^  dan.  of  282  Ethan  Andrew 
and  Polly  (Fen)  Babcock,  b.  Brookfield,  1803,  d.  Brookfield, 
Nov.,  1874.  Henry  (or  Harry,  as  he  was  called)  owned  a 
farm  on  Beaver  Hill,  near  Brookfield.  For  a  nnmljer  of  years 
he  had  a  stage  route  between  Brookfield  and  Bridgewater. 
Children,  b.  in  Brookfield: 

689  Vermeda  Elvira,'  b.   1823;    m.  Jerry  Crandall. 

690  Orissa    Angeline,    b.    1826;     m.     (i)    Morris    E.    Brown;     m.     (2) 

Robert  Atkinson. 

691  Ethan  Andrew,  b.  Aug.  30,   1828;    m.  Olive  Brusie. 

692  Harriet  Electa,  b.  March  29,   183 1  ;     m.  Edmund  L.  Palmer. 
Emerancy,  b.   1835;    m.  Stafford  Williams.     Have  no  children.     Liv- 
ing (Jan.,   1901)    Brookfield,  N.  Y. 

693  Adelbert  Henry,  b.  Aug.  4,  1840;    m.  Lizzie  Bell  Atkinson. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  167 

300.  Elder  Rowse,*^  son  of  Paul  and  Hannah  (Biirdick) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver.  John,  James  ist),  b.  Leyden, 
Mass.,  July  2j.  1803;  d.  Cedar  Rapids,  la.,  J\Iar.  20,  1863; 
m.  (i)  Jan.  27.  1825,  Lucinda  Gilbert,  b.  Greene,  N.  Y.,  May 
4,  1804,  d.  Clarence,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  15,  1855;  m.  (2)  Aug.  2, 
1855,  Maria  Coon.  Elder  Rowse  was  a  S.  D.  B.  preacher. 
Children : 

Lorenzo,  b.  Scott,  Nov.  13,  1825;  d.  Wellsville,  Nov.  15,  1863;  m. 
Wcllsville,   N.   Y.,   Mar.    13,    1848,   Eleanor  Voorhis. 

694  Franklin/  b.  May  12,   1828;    m.  Kate  Howe. 

695  Rodolpbus,  b.   Nov.  8,   1831  ;    m.   Mary  E.  Schermcrhorn. 
Norman,  b.  July  15,  1834;    d.  Scott,  Dec.  10,  1835. 

Arinoe,  b.  Scott.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  18,  1836;  d.  Iowa,  July  13,  1885;  m. 
Clarence,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  18,  1855.  Henry  Clarke.  He  res.  (1901) 
454  Elm  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  Son  of  Henry  and  Deborah  Car- 
penter Clarke. 

696  Laura  E.,  b.  Oct.  7,  1839;    m.  Lyman  Clarke. 

Elniira,  b.  Richburg,  June  7,  1843;    res.   (1901)   Los  Angeles,  Cal. ; 

m.   (i)  Andrews;    m.   (2)  Squires. 

Mary  L..  b.  Hebron,  Pa.,  Mar.  18,  1846;    res.   (1901)   60  Bishop  St., 

East   Olean,    N.    Y. ;    m.    (i)    Putnam;     m.    (2)    Nathaniel 

Allen. 

301.  HuLUAU,'^  dau.  of  Capt.  Paul  and  Hannah   (Burdick) 
Babcock    (Oliver,   Oliver,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Scott, 

N.  Y.,  Dec.  31,  1811;    d.  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y.,  May  16,  1879; 
m.  Scott,  Apr.  22,  1834,  Dr.  William  M.  Truman. 
Children : 

Josephine.  1).  Otselic.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  26,   1836;    m.  Hamilton  Whiting. 

Abbv  Eloise.  b.  Scott,  N.  Y..  Sept.  11,  1839;    m.  William  N.  Moore. 

Marv  E.,  b.  Wirt.  N.  Y..  May  25,  1844;    d.  Oct.  27,  1862. 

Adeibert  W.,  b.  Wirt,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  8,  1846;  res.  (1901)  388  Plym- 
outh Ave.,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Hinsdale,  Augusta  Salesbury,  b. 
Dec.  12,  1843. 

302.  George  Washington,^  son  of  Paul  and  Hannah  (Bur- 
dick)   Babcock    (Oliver,   Oliver,   John,  James    ist),   b. 

Scott.  N.  Y.,  July  19,  1814;   d.  Cortland,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  2,  1899; 
m.  Nov.  23,  1844,    Lavina  Eddy,  b.  Sept.  22,  1824,  d.  Cort- 
land, Jan.  4,  1897. 
Children : 

Sylvester,  b.  July  21.    1846. 
Adelia.  b.  Apr.  27,   1850. 

697  Adeibert,'  b.  Apr.   13,  1852;    m.  Emma  A.  Carter. 

698  Ida,  b.  July  13,   1855;    ni.  Frank  Rice. 
Cora,  b.  Apr.  9,   1859:    d.  Apr.  20.   1865. 
Willie,  b.  Feb.  20,   1862 ;    d.  June  30,   1862. 
Fanny  May,  b.  Oct.   15,   1866;    d.  Aug.  2,   1867. 
Jennie,  b.  Feb.  5,   1870. 


1 68  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

303.  Martin  Wilcox,*^  son  of  Capt.  Paul  and  Hannah  (Bur- 
dick)    Babcock    (Oliver,   Oliver,   John,   James    ist),   b. 

in  Scott,  Cortland  County,  N.  Y.,  May  4,  1817;  d.  Alfred 
N.  Y.,  May  8,  1891 ;  m.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  17,  1842, 
Mary  Kenyon,  oldest  dau.  of  David  and  Mary  (Kenyon)  Max- 
son,  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  June  2,  1825.  Living,  Dec,  1900,  at 
Alfred,  N.  Y.     They  had  three  children. 

Martin  Wilcox  Babcock  was  an  officer  in  the  artillery  in 
the  militia  of  New  York  State  prior  to  1840.  Later  was  a 
peace  advocate,  and  the  first  abolitionist  in  the  town  of  Genesee, 
where  he  was  many  years  trustee  of  public  schools,  and  seven 
times  elected  Town  Clerk. 

Children : 

699  Dewane  Dee,'  b.  Aug.  27,  1844;    m.   (i)   Frances  E.  Heard;    m.   (2) 

Villie  Hotchkiss. 

700  Forest  M.,  b.  Little  Genesee.  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,   1846;    m.   (i)    Fronie 

H.   Marvin;    m.    (2)    Henrietta  Averill. 

701  Mary  Viola,  b.  Nile,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  16,  1849;    m.  Alpheus  B.  Kenyon. 

304.  Ezra,**  Jr.,  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah   (Stillman)   Bab- 
cock   (Oliver,   Oliver,   John,   James   ist),   b.   Westerly, 

R.  L,  July  17,  1792;   d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  2,  1878;   m.  Cole- 
rain,  Mass..  Feb.  9,  18 18,  Lucinda,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Serviah 
(Parker)    Shepardson,  b.   Leyden,  Mass.,   Dec.    12,    1795,   d. 
Scott,  Mar.  4,  1883. 
Children : 

702  Alfred  B.,'  b.  Dec.  17,  181Q;    m.  Amy  Giles. 

703  Lucv  Almeda,  b.  Dec.  4,   1824;    m.  Dolphin  Burdick. 

704  William  Henry,  b.  Apr.   14,  1830;    m.  Sarah  Burdick. 

Serviah,  b.  Oct.  24,   1832:    m.   Leander  Babcock,   son  of  312  Hiram 
and   Tacy  Frink  Babcock. 

305.  Ephraim     Stillman,^     son    of    Ezra    and     Saberah 
(Stillman)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist), 

b.  Scott,  Aug.  20,  1794;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec,  1832;  m.  Jan., 
181 7,  Amy  Wilcox  Crandall  (sister  of  Elder  Lucius  Crandall), 
b.  Rhode  Island,  Mar.  4,  1800,  d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Apr.  i,  1853. 
She  was  dau,  of  Oliver  Chase  and  Abigail  (West)  Crandall. 
Children : 

Edwin,  b.  Scott.  May  27,   1818;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Aug.   16,  1818. 
Joseph   Stillman.  b.   Scott,  July   18,   1819;    d.   Scott,   N.  Y.,   Sept.  8, 

1819. 
Eunice  S.,  b.  July  29,   1821  :    d.   Orleans,   Neb.,   Nov.  29,   1881  ;    m. 

Sept.   19,  1840.  Leonard  Woohvorth,  d.  1891. 
Salonia,    b.    Sept.    21,    1823;     d.    Milton,    Wis.,    Feb.    13,    1855;     m. 

Apr.,    1844,   Ezekiel   Frink. 


'^ 


^'^ 


ASHER  MINER  BABCOCK. 
1 798- 1890. 


Page  169- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  169 

Hawley  Maxson,  b.  May  10,  1825;    d.  Aug.  31,  1834. 

705  Esther  v./  b.  July  20,  1828;   ni.  Chas.  A.  Stillman. 

Sabcrah.   b.    Aug'   13,    1830;     d.    Wilton,    Wis.,    Nov.    11,    1857;    m. 
1855,  Elijah  Carr. 

306.  Saberah,"  dau.  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillman)  Bab- 
cock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Hopkinton, 

R.  I..  July  3,  1796;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  20,  1872 ;  m.  Feb.  26, 
181 5,  Peter  Knapp,  b.  Feb.  4,  1791,  d.  Mar.  24,  1875. 
Children : 

Stephen,  b.  Jan.  17,  1816;    ni.  Elizabeth  Smith. 

Uretta,  b.  Oct.  i,  1817;    m.  Henry  L.  Burdick. 

Sally  Ann.  b.  Feb.  16,  1820 ;    m.  William  F.  Davis. 

Asher.  b.   May  6,   1822;    d.  Utica,   Wis.,   Sept.  25,    1897;    m.   Amy 

Phillips. 
James  Rilev,  b.  Apr.  29,   1825;    m.  Caroline  Knorr. 
Saberah  M.,  b.  Dec.  14,  1827. 
Ezra  Babcock,  b.  Feb.  26,  1830;    res.  Skaneateles,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Loretta 

Wiltsey. 
Epenetus,  b.  Aug.   13.   1833;    m.   Nancy  Vandenburg. 
Clarence,  b.  Apr.  22,  1836;    m.  Oliva  Barber. 

307.  AsHER  Miner,*'  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillman) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver.  John,  James  ist),  b.  Ley- 
den,  Mass.,  June  16,  1798;  d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Aug.  25,  1890; 
m.  (i)  Unadilla  Forks,  Jan.  i,  1829,  Mary  E.,  dau.  of  Deacon 
Ethan  and  Polly  Lewis  Stillman,  b.  Unadilla  Forks,  May  19, 
1806,  d.  Westerly,  Sept.  10,  1846;  m.  (2)  Adams,  N.  Y., 
Oct.  21,  1847,  Prudence  C,  dau.  of  Elihu  and  Prudence  Cleve- 
land, b.  Adams,  N.  Y.,  July  16,  181 1,  d.  Sept.  17,  1885. 

Children : 

Edgar  Henry,  b    Unadilla  Forks.  Sept.  8,  1830;    d.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
May  23,   1850. 

706  George  H..'  b.  June   17,   1832;    m.    (i)    Lucy  A.   Stillman;    m.    (2) 

Harriet  M.  Clark;    m.    (3)   Eliza  Lua  Clark;    m.   (4)   Eugenia  L. 

Lewis. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  ^lay  27,  1834;    res.     (1901)    Santa 

Rosa,  Cal. 
Frances   Gertrude,    b.    Homer,    N.    Y.,    Oct.    25,    1835;     d.    Homer, 

N.  Y.,  Feb.  28,  1844- 

707  Celia  A.,  b.  Apr.  3,   1838;    m.   Ray  Clarke. 

708  Harriet  E.,  b.  Aug.  15,  1840;    m.  William  L.  Burke. 

Melvin,  b.   Homer,  Jan.    19,   1844;     d.    Stonington.   Conn.,   Sept.    19, 

1844. 
Boy,  b.  Aug.  27,  1846;    d.  Sept.  i,  1846. 

709  Herbert  A.,  b.  July  5,  1848;    m.  Fannie  E.  Watrous. 

308.  Abel,*'  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah   (Stillman)   Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Leyden,  Mass., 
Apr.  12,  1800;  d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Jan.  13,  1881  :  m.  Apr.  14, 
1821,  Scott.  N.  Y.,  Lucy  Ann  Huntington,  b.  Feb.  23,  1803, 
d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Oct.  8,  '1872. 


I/O  The  Babcuck  Gciicalugy. 

Children : 

Lucy   Ann,    h.    Homer,    N.    Y.,   Jan.    12,    1822;     res.    (1901)    Grand 

Marsh,   Wis. ;    m.  Oct.  18,   1841,  Horace  Atkins,  b.  Grand  Marsh, 

July  23,  1816.     No  children. 
AIniira,    b.    Mar.    30,    1824;     d.    Milton,    Wis.,    Oct.    23,    1865;     ni. 

Oct.  25,  1863,  Leander  Allen,  b.  Feb.  24,  1825. 
Philena,   b.   Apr.   30,    1826;     res.    (1901)    Milton  Junction,   Wis.;   ni. 

Mar.  20,  1846,  Ethan  Lee  Burdick,  b.  Mar.  18,  1822.     No  children. 

710  Harriet,'    b.  July  21,  1829;    m.  Stillman  Burdick. 

Abel,  b.  Nov.  4,  1831  ;    d.  Oct.  20,  1857;    m.  Loretta  Brown. 
Angeline,   b.    Jan.    14,    1834;     d.    May    14,    1854,    Berlin,    Wis.;     m. 

Walter  Brown. 
Margerite,  b.  Feb.  20,   1836;    d.   Milton,  Wis.,  Nov.  30,   1855. 
Lydia,  b.  Apr.  30,  1838 ;    res.  ( 1901 )  Lebanon,  Ore. ;    m.  George  R. 

Maxson. 

711  Edwin,  b.  Nov.   10,   1840;    ni.   Sophia  Kimball. 

712  Artimesia,  b.  Jan.  3,   1844;    m.  Ellis  Mendenhall. 
Gillespie,  b.  Dec.  5.  1845  ;    d.  Aug.  19,  1847. 

713  Ezra  S.,  b.  Jan.  3,  1851 ;    m.  Azelia  Castle. 

309.  Daniel,*^  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillman)  Babcock 
(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Colerain,  Mass., 

Jan.  23,  1802;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  31,  1878;    m.  Jan.  26, 
1826,  Almira,  dan.  of  Henry  and  Almira  Burdick,  b.  Scott, 
Sept.  23,  1805,  d.  Scott,  Mar.  10,  1879. 
Children : 

Daniel  Austin,  b.   Scott,   N.   Y.,  Apr.  21,   1827;    d.   Scott,   May  29, 

1877;    m.   May  8,    1854,   Mary  A.,  dau.   of   Paul  and  Clark, 

b.  Scott,  Nov.  22,  1829;  d.  Scott,  Nov.  11,  1884.  Had  one 
daughter. 

Denison,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  30,  1829;  d.  Port  Byron,  N.  Y., 
Apr.  25,  1880;    m.  Nov.  25,  1858,  Louisa  A.  Carmen. 

Almira  A.,  b.  Sept.  30,  1831 ;    d.  Oct.  7,  1833. 

Sarah  M.,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  9,  1834;  d.  Scott,  Mar.  16,  1859; 
m.   Scott,  Jan.   i,   1851,   Leonard  Mowry. 

Zemira  O.,  b.  Feb.  16,  1837;  d.  Mar.  25,  i860;  m.  Edwin  Burdick. 
He  res.  (1901)  at  Scott,  N.  Y. 

714  Jared,'  b.  Jan.  16.  1841 ;    m.  Mary  Clarke. 

715  Franklin  D.,  b.  Dec.  26,  1845;    m.  Marion  Jones. 

310.  Beriah,*^  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillman)  Babcock 
(Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James    ist),  b.   Leyden,  Mass., 

Jan.  29,  1804;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  28,  1852;  m.  Dec.  13, 
1825,  Clarissa  Babcock,  b.  Apr.  12,  1806,  d.  Milton,  Wis., 
Jan.  24.  1880. 

Children,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y. : 

Baby  girl,  b.  Oct.  30,   1826;    d.   1826. 

Rosetta,  b.  Aug.  13,  1828;    d.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Oct.  n,  1851. 
Maranda  M.,  b.  Nov.  2,   1833;    d.  Westerly,  R.  L,  0"ct.   18,  1851. 
Phebe  Irene,  b.  Apr.  g,   1838;    m.  Apr.   12,   1856,  Elery  Burdick,  b. 

Nov.   16,   1832. 
Alvira,  b.  May  24,  1843;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Nov.,  1843. 
Orison  Potter,  b.  1845;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Oct.,  1846. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  171 

311.  Jerome  Ripley,*'  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillnian) 
Babcock  (Oliver.  Oliver,  John,  James  ist),  b.  Lcyden, 

Mass.,  Oct.  30,  1807;  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  June  i,  1867;  m.  Scott, 
Dec.  31,  1840,  Emily  McDaniels,  b.  Oct.  17,  1819,  d.  Scott, 
May  I,  1896. 

Children,  b.  Scott : 

Emily  F.,  b.  Nov.  21,  1841 ;    m.  685  Duane  D.  Burdick. 

Sarah,  h.  Mar.  3,  1845;  res.  (1901)  Pontiac,  Mich.;  tn.  i86g,  Wil- 
liam Daily. 

Alice  M..  b.  Sept.  25,  1847;  res.  (1901)  Scott,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Scott, 
Austin  Brown. 

Porter  S..  b.  May  10.   1852;    d.  Scott,  July  9.   1873. 

Henrietta  C,  b.  Oct.  13,  1855;  m.  Scott,  Apr.  11,  1888,  Clayton 
C,  son  of  E.  R.  Clark,  b.  Nile,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  23,  1854.     No  children. 

716  Lizzie  M.,'  b.  Mar.   31,   1859;  m.  Byron  S.  Townsend. 
Haltie  M.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1862;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  17,  1868. 

312.  Hiram,*'  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Stillman)  Babcock 

(Oliver,  Oliver,  John.  James  ist),  b.  June  16,  18 10;  d. 
Homer,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  29.  1894;  m.  (i)  Jan.  5,  1831,  Survilla 
Barber,  b.  181 2.  d.  Feb.  11,  1834;  m.  (2)  Mar.  10,  1835, 
Tacy,  dau.  of  Jonas  and  Molly  (Barber)  Frink,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  26,  18 19,  d.  Scott,  June  29,  1893. 
Children  bv  first  wife: 

Teresa,  b.   1831 ;    d.   1859;    m.  Lewis  Jones. 

Leander,  b.  Sept.  i,  1833 ;  m.  Serviah  Babcock,  dau.  of  304  Ezra 
Babcock. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Henry  C,  b.  Apr.  22,,   1836;    m.  Climena  Ingersol. 

717  Lucy,'  b.  Oct.  31,  1839;    m.  Clayton  Atwater. 
Ephraim  S.,  b.  Dec.  19,   1842;    d.  June  8,  1858. 

Armeda  Elizabeth,  b.  Scott,  Sept.  11,  1844;  m.  Scott,  Dec.  10,  1865. 
Frank  Hammond,  son  of  Nathan  Hammond,  b.   Mar.   13,   1S46. 

718  William  Nelson,  b.  Mar.  27,  1847;    m.  Olive  Babcock. 

Albert  Willis,  b.  Jan.  3,  1850;  ni.  Florence  Skellie,  dau.  of  James 
Skellie. 

719  Edgar   Lucius,  b.   Sept.   11,   1855;    m.  Julia  Dibble. 

Myron  Grove,  b.  Scott,  Nov.  8,  1858;  m.  Lillie  Henry;  both  d. 
at  Scott,  N.  Y. 

313.  Lauren  H.^  Babcock,  son  of  Ezra  and  Saberah  (Still- 
man)   Babcock   (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  June 

30,  1812:   d.  at  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  5,  1891 ;  m.  Feb.  13, 
1835,  Lucy  A.  Maxson,  b.  Feb.  11,  1814. 

Children : 

Louis,   b.   July    10,    1836;    d.   young. 

Emma  L.,  b.  July  20,  1838;    d.  young. 

Aurila,  b.  Aug.  21,  1841  ;    m.  Fayette  Robinson. 

Sarah  Ann,  b.  July  21,   1844;    m.  Frank  Fellers. 

Howard  F.,  b.  July  20,  1847 ;    d.  young. 

Edwin,  b.  Jan.  28,  1851  ;    d.  De  Ruyter,  Nov.  i,  1878. 


172  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

314.  Raymond^   Babcock,  son  of    Capt.    Luke  and  Betsy 
(Main)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Hop- 

kinton,  R.  I.,  Apr.  19,  1799;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  18,  1877; 
m.    (i)    Fabiiis,   N.   Y.,    1823,   Olive  Denison,  b.   Fabius,   d. 
Scott,  Mar.  13,  1847;   m.  (2)  Phebe  A.  Camp. 
Children  by  first  wife,  b.  Scott: 

Lucy  L.,  b.   Nov.   15,   1824;    d.   Fountain,   Minn..  July  24,   1892;    m. 

Feb.,  1844.  Scott,  N.  Y. 

Washington  Brown,  b.  ;    d.  Feb.  23,  1893. 

Andrew  J.,  b.  Nov.  28,  1827;  m.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Lydia  Barber. 
George  P.,  b.  Sept.,  183 1 ;  d.  Wisconsin,  1853;  m.  Addie  Jones. 
Henry  W.,  b.  Jan.  27,    1836;    d.   Athol,   S.   Dak.,  Jan.   i,    1901  ;    m. 

Kendall,   Wis.,   Mar.   11,   1897,   Odessa   Hess. 

720  Adelia  E.,'  b.  Nov.  27.  1841  ;    m.  Wesley  Hathaway. 
Olive  J.,  b.  Jan.  30,   1847;    m.  718  W.  N.  Babcock. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

Sarah,  b.  Scott,  Sept.,  1848;    d.  Scott,  June  3,  1852. 

315.  Dr.  Ira  Leonard'^   Babcock,   son  of  Luke  and  Betsy 

(Main)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Ley- 
den,  Mass.,  Apr.  i,  1806;  d.  Norwalk,  O.,  Mar.  21,  1888;  m. 
(i)  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  I,  1829,  Nancy,  dau.  of  James  and 
Mary  (Foster)  Arnold,  b.  Scott,  Feb,  2,  181 1,  d.  Norwalk, 
Jan.  5,  1883;  m.  (2)  Alice  Seaton. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

721  Elizabeth  M.,'  b.  June  13,  1830;    m.  John  D.  Cheney. 

Harriet    Newell,    b.    Salem,    Ore.,    July    14,    1841  ;     d.    Toledo,    O., 
May  5,    1889;    m.   Norwalk,   O.,  June,    1862,   Henry   Royce. 

722  Mary  L.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1846;    m.  Robert  Ross. 

72s  John  Franklin,  b.   Oct.   18,   1850;    m.   Ida  Templar. 

Ann  Eliza,  b.  Bath,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  22,  1854;    d.  Norwalk,  O.,  Sept.  25, 
1866. 

316.  Eunice*'    Babcock,    dau.    of    Luke  and  Bet.sy  (Main) 
Babcock    (Oliver,    Oliver,    John,    James),    b.    Levden, 

Mass.,  Mm:  22,  1808;  d.  Alfred,' N.  Y.,  Dec.  18,  1899';  m. 
Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  21,  1827,  John  Boardman,  son  of  Capt. 
Daniel  and  Mary  (Saunders)  Cottrell,  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  July 
3,  1802,  d.  Richburj^,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  27,  1873.  Eunice  removed 
to  Scott,  N.  Y.,  when  about  twelve  years  of  age. 
Children : 

Eliza  A.  Jenette,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  22,   1829;    d.  Bolivar,  N.  Y. ; 

m.    Wirt,    N.    Y..    Sept.    14,    1848,    Benjamin    Kenyon,    b.    Potter 

Hill,  R.  I.,  Apr.  8,  1823. 
Mary,  b.  Scott,  July  7,  1831  ;    d.  Wisconsin,  Feb.  18,  1862;    m.  Wirt, 

N.    Y.,    A.    Hamilton    Main. 
Frances  A.,  b.  Scott.  Jan.  17,  1833;    d.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  15,  1898; 

m.  Wirt,   Charles  M.   Marvin. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  173 

Emma  L.,  b.   Scott,  Jan.  21,    1836;    res.    1902,   Madison,  Wis.;    m. 

Wirt,  A.  Hamilton  Main. 
Cclia  Theresa,  b.  Scott.   May  4.    1838;     d.  Oct.   18,   1862,  unni. 
Augusta  Cordelia,  b.    Scott.   Sept.    14,    1840;    res.    1902,   New   York 

City;    m.  Wirt.  Samuel  Carter,  deceased. 
Hon.   Albert  Boardman.  b.   Wirt.   Nov.  20,   1842;    res.   1902,  Alfred, 

N.  Y.«;    ni.  Friendship,  N.  V..   Isabelle.  dau.  of  George  and  Anna 

(Sherman)    Coon,   b.    Friendship,    Sept.    17,    1847. 

724  Ira  Lee,'  b.  Mar.  7,  1846;    m.  Angelia  Dye. 

George  E.,  b.   Wirt,   Feb.   23,    1849;    res.    1902,   Topeka,   Kan.;    m. 

Friendship,  N.  Y.,  Lillie,  dau.  of  Dr.  James  and  Maria  Pitts.     No 

children. 
Florence  A.,  b.  Wirt.  Oct.  5.  1851 ;    res.  1902,  Plainfield,  N.  J.;    m. 

Belmont,  N.  Y.,  John  P.  Mosher. 

317.  SiMON^  Babcock,  son  of  Luke  and  Betsy  (Main)  Bab- 
cock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Leyclen,  Mass., 

May  21,  1810;  d.  Friendship,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  20,  1880;  m.  Scott, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1839,  Celia,  dau.  of  Alvan  and  Sylvia  (Stowe) 
Kellogg,  b.  Scott,  Nov.  12,  1819;  res.  1902,  Franklin,  Pa. 
Children : 

725  Burton,'  b.  Oct.  28.   1839;    m.  Helen  Morris. 

726  Amelia,  b.  Scott.  N.  Y..  IMar.  20,  1841 ;    m.  Charles  Howard. 

Inez.  b.  Scott.  N.  Y..  Aug.  4,  1846;    d.  Friendship,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22, 
1878;    m.  Friendship.  Feb.,  1869,  Lucius,  son  of  Orris  and  Eunice 
(Corbin)   Rew.    Children:    Etta,  b.   Feb.   13,   1870,    res.   Franklin, 
Ind. ;    Ida,  b.  Feb.  i,  1875. 
72y  Charles,  b.  July  27,  1848;    m.  Ellen  Park. 

Edmund  J.,  b.  ;    res.  Friendship,  N.  Y. 

Metta  E.,  b.  Nov.  28,  1853;    m.  728  Joseph  Sibley.  (See  his  records.) 

318.  Henry  Denison*'   Babcock,   son  of  Luke  and  Betsy 

(Main)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Ley- 
den,  Mass.,  Aug.  2,  1812;  d.  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  2, 
1898;  m.  Scott.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  11,  1834,  Anna.  dau.  of  Henry 
and  Annie  (:\Iiller)  Woodward,  b.  Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
28.  1815;  res.  Friendship,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Charles,  b.  Aug.  25.   1850;    d.  Friendship,  N.  Y. 
Deforest,  b.  Friendship,  Feb.  18,  1854. 

319.  Dr.  Daniel  Brayton"^  Babcock,  son  of  Capt.  Luke  and 
Betsy  (Main)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  Leyden.  Mass.,  Oct.  31,  1814;  d.  Friendship,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  8, 
1887;  m.  (i)  Avoca,  N.  Y.,  1840,  Eunice,  dau.  of  Daniel  and 

Mary  (Peck)   Smith,  b.  .  d.  Friendship,  Feb.,  1847;    m- 

(2)  Julia  Landphere,  no  children;  m.  (3)  June  16,  1868,  Mrs. 
Juliette  (Major)  Utter,  b.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y.,  May  i,  1830; 
res.  1 90 1,  Albany,  N.  Y. 


174  T^fi^  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Orsen  M..  h.   Friendship;    d.  young. 

Eunice  Eleanor,  1).  Friendship,  Nov.  24,  1844;  res.  1901,  Slinger- 
land,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Friendship,  Jan.  29,  1866,  Charles  D.,  son  of 
Stephen  and  Martha  (Adams)  Hammond,  b.  Rushford,  N.  Y., 
Mar.  I,  1844,  res.  Slingerland.     No  children.. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

Brayton  Raymond,  b.  Ceres,  Pa.,  Apr.  15,  1869;  res.  1901,  Slinger- 
land, N.  Y. ;  unm. 

Claude  H.,  b.  Friendship,  May  31,  1873.  He  is  a  train  dispatcher 
for  the  D.  &  H.  Railway,  Albany ;  a  member  of  Troop  A,  N.  Y. 
N.  G. ;    res.  igoi,  Albany,  N.  Y. 

320.  Lucy  Elvira*'  Babcock,  dati.  of  Capt.  Lnke  and  Betsy 
(Main)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Cole- 
rain,  Mass.,  Nov.  7,  1822;  res.  Apr.  2,  1901,  Franklin.  Pa.; 
ni.  ( i)  Wirt.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  8,  1845,  Dr.  Joseph  C,  son  of  Abijah 
and  Lucy  (Macy)  Siblev,  b.  (Toncord,  N.  H.,  Dec.  19,  18 17, 
d.  Colden,  N.  H.,  Mar.  17,  1866;  m.  (2)  1872  (  ?),  Rev.  Ezra 
F.  Crane. 

Children  by  first  husband  : 

Ann  Adelaide,  b.  Friendship.  N.  Y.,  July  5,  1846;  res.  1901,  Frank- 
lin, Pa. ;  m.  Springfield.  N.  Y.,  Charles,  son  of  Simon  and  Chris- 
tine  Miller,   b.   Alsace,   France,   res.    1901,   Franklin,    Pa. 

728  Joseph  Crocker,'  b.  Feb.  18,  1850;    m.  Metta  E.  Babcock. 

729  Edwin  H.,  b.   Feb.   12,   1857;    m.  Jessie  A.  Williams. 

Mary  Eleanor,  b.  Springfi'eld,  N.  Y.,  Mar.,  1864;  d.  Franklin,  Pa., 
Apr.,   1881,  unm. 

Child  by  second  husband : 

730  Fanny,  b.  May  5,  1873 ;    m.  Albert  Logan. 

321.  Henry*'  Babcock,  son  of  Harris  and  Sally  (Newell) 
Babcock    (Joseph,   Oliver,   John,   James),   b.   Guilford, 

Vt.,  Nov.  2,  1792;    d.  Guilford,  Jan.   i,   1873;    m.  Guilford, 

Sept.  9,  1829,  Elvira  L.,  dau.  of  Capt.  Peter  and (Davis) 

Baker,  b.  Guilford,  Aug.  17,  18 10,  d.  Montague,  Mass.,  Sept. 
24,  1886. 
Children : 

731  Amanda,'  b.  Oct.  2t„  1830;    m.  Clark  Stark. 

Ellen    L.,    b.    Leyden,    Mass.,    Feb.    25,    1835;     d.    Sept.,    i860;     m. 

Mar.    15,    1856,    L.    Hunt.     He   was  b.    Guilford,    Vt.,    res.    1901, 

Guilford. 
Richard   B.,  b.  Leyden,   Mass.,  Apr.   6,   1837;    d.  Guilford,  Jan.   29, 

1858. 
Lura,  b.  Guilford,  July  22.   1842;    res.    1901,   Montague,   Mass.;    m. 

Brattleboro,   Vt.,   Apr.   24,    1861,   Jason,   son   of  Joseph   Mann,   b. 

July   17,    1838,   res.    1901,   Montague,   Mass.     No   children. 


TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  175 

322.  George"  Barcock,  son  of  Harris  and  Sally   (Newell) 
Babcock    (Joseph,   Oliver,   John,   James),   b.    May    19, 

1798;  d.  ;   m.  Lucy  Witt. 

Cdiildren  : 

John    W.,    b.    ;     settled    in    Chicopee,    Mass.,    m.    twice.      Had 

cliildrcn. 

Addison,  b.  .     Was  a  bridge  builder. 

Mary  Ann,  b.  ;    ni.   twice.      No  children. 

Minerva,  b.  ;    unm. 

323.  Nancy*'  Babcock,  dan.  of  Harris  and  Sally  (Newell) 
Babcock  (Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  June  7,  1802; 

d.  Providence,  R.  I. ;  m.  Amzi  Wright.     Settled  in  Providence, 
R.  I. 

Children : 

Nancy  Wright,  b.  ;    unm. 

Loomis ;    Charles. 

Mary,  b.  ;    m.  Chaffee.     No  children. 

Eddie. 

324.  Thomas  Jefferson'^  Babcock,  son  of  Harris  and  Sally 

(Newell)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 
Guilford,  Vt.,  May  18,  1804;  d.  Oriskany  Falls,  N.  Y.,  May, 
1892;  m.  Guilford,  1825,  Louise,  dau.  of  Jabez  and  Lydia 
(Palmer)  Newell,  b.  Vermont,  1802,  d.  Augusta  Center, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  23,  1857. 

Children,  b.  Augusta,  N.  Y. : 

Andrew,  b.   1826:  d.  1851  ;    m.  .    No  children. 

732  Mahlon,'^  b.  Feb.  20.  1830;    m.  Harriet  Yeaton. 

Julia  Ann,  b.  Dec.  25,   183 1  ;    res.   1901,  Oriskany  Falls,   N.  Y. ;    m. 

Augusta.  N.  Y.,  1858. 
Irving   Sperry,   b.   ;     d.    Oriskany   Falls,    Feb.,    1900:     m.   . 

No  children. 

733  Austin  H.,  b.  1835;    m.  Laura  Wade. 

734  John  W.,  b.  Aug.  3,  1838:    m.  Abbie  L.  Bagg. 

Josephine  L.,  b.  1841 ;    d.  Rome,  N.  Y. ;    m.  1867,  Ephraim  Phillips. 

No  children. 
Albert  L.,  b.  Mar.  18,  1843;    d.  Rome,  N.  Y.,  1868;    m.  .     No 

children. 

325.  John   Wesley''    Babcock.   son   of   Harris   and    Sally 

(Newell)    Babcock    (Joseph.   Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Guilford,  Vt.,  Aug.  30,  1808;   d.  ;   m.  Harriet  Shattuck. 

Children : 

Francis,  b.  ;    res.   1901,  Hoh'oke.  Mass. 

Ella,  b.  ;    m.  .     No  children. 

Hattie,  b.  ;    d.  ;    m.   Mr.  Eaton. 

Carrie;  Edward;  Willie;  Wendell. 


176  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

326.  Joseph*'"  Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  and  Jane  (Wallace) 
Babcock    (Joseph,    Oliver,    John,    James),    b.    Leyden, 

Mass.,  Aug.  28,  1792;   (1.  ;   m.  Cahaba,  Ala.,  Eliza  Cur- 

tiss.       Soon  after  leaving  college  he  went  South,  married  the 
daughter  of  a  Southern  planter  and  settled  at  Cahaba,  Ala. 
His  sons  were  all  in  the  Southern  army  except  William,  who 
was  deaf. 
Children : 

Joseph,  b.  ;    shot  at  the  battle  of  Cold  Harbor. 

Joel,  b.  ;    res.   1900,   Selnia,  Ala. 

Henry  C,  b.  • ;    d.   in  Army  Hospital. 

William. 

John,  b.  ;    wounded  but  survived;    res.   1900,  Selma,  Ala. 

Annie ;    Octava. 
Mary,  res.  Selma. 

327.  Jane^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Jane   (Wallace) 
Babcock    (Joseph,    Oliver,    John,   James),    b.    Leyden, 

Mass.,  May  3,   1796,  d.  Canisteo,  N.  Y.,  Mar.   i,   1880;    m. 
Joseph  Corbett,  b.  Whitingham,  Vt.,  d.  Hartsville,  N.  Y.,  Jan. 
II,  1849. 
Child : 

735  Mary,'  b.  Dec.  31,  1838;    m.  Samuel  Burdick. 

328.  Hugh  Wallace^  Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  and  Jane 

(Wallace)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 
Leyden,  Mass.,  July  18,  1798;  d.  W.  Leyden,  Mass.,  Feb.  11, 
1854;  m.  Guilford,  Vt.,  Sept.  21,  1820,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Mat- 
thew and  Hannah  (Eams)  Stone,  b.  at  Sudbury,  Mass.,  Oct, 
15,  1797,  d.  Iosco,  Minn.,  Feb.  8,  1890. 
Children : 

72,(>  Joseph  Hugh,"  b.  July  14.   1821  ;    m.  Eliza  Ann  Hosley. 
Sarah  Almira,  b.  Aug.  24,   1822;    d.  Mar.  2,  1832. 

737  Jane  Maria,  b.   May  25,   1825 ;    m.  Joseph  Tilton  Moulton. 

738  Charles   Rollin,   b.   Oct.   27,    1827;     m.    (i)    Maria   Stowe;     m.    (2) 

Marcia  Wing. 
Hannah  Annie,  b.  July  30,  1829;    d.  Waterville,  Minn.,  Sept.,  1900; 
m.   Saratoga,   N.   Y..   May  11,    1850,   Lewis   S.,   son  of  David  and 
Elizabeth  Stowe;    res.  1901,  Waterville,  Minn. 

739  Mary   E.,   b.    Apr.  29,    1832;     m.    (i)    Myron   S.    Sheldon;    m.    (2) 

Samuel  A.  Miner. 

740  John  Matthews,  b.   Nov.  20,   1834;    ni.    (i)   Alzina  Stowe;    m.    (2) 

Mary  Angeline  Robinson. 

329.  Mary'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Jane   (Wallace) 
Babcock    (Joseph,   Oliver,   John,  James),   b.    Colerain, 

Mass.,  Dec.  9,  1800;    d.  Canisteo,  N.  Y.,  July  8,   1880;    m. 


TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  177 

Colerain,  1822,  George  Riddell,  b.  Colerain,  Jan.  12,  1796,  d. 
Canisteo,  July  26,  1845. 
Children : 

741  George,'  b.  Aug.  30,  1823;    m.   (i)   Carrie  Shurtliff;    m.   (2)   Mary 

Warner. 
Mary  L.,  b.  Colerain,  Feb.  27,   1827;    d.  Canisteo,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  26, 

1852. 
Harriet,  b.  Colerain,  Dec.  27,  1828;    d.  Canisteo,  Mar.  10,  1885. 

742  Lorenzo,  b.  Apr.  25,   183 1  ;    m.  Caroline  F.  . 

743  Le  Roy,  b.  Sept.  11,  1833;    m.  Emma  L.  Pratt. 

744  William,  b.  Feb.  21,  1836;    m.  Helen  Jones. 
Lemuel,  b.  Canisteo,  Mar.  6,  1839;    d.  Aug.  26,  1868. 

Joseph,  b.  Canisteo,  Feb.  26,  1842;    m.  Oct.  11,  1871,  Agnes  L.  ; 

res.    1900,    Howard,    N.    Y. ;     address    Hornellsville,    N.    Y.      No 
children. 

330.  Arminda"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Jane  (Wal- 
lace) Bahcock  (Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Ley- 
den,  Mass.,  May  20,  1804;  d.  Leyden,  June,  1889,  m.  Gawn 
Riddell.  Had  nine  children,  all  born  in  Colerain.  Mass. ;  three 
d.  young.  In  1901  had  but  one  living  descendant,  namely, 
Mrs.  Caroline  Wheeler,  Whitingham,  Vt. 

Children : 

William;  John;   Sophronia ;   Elizabeth;   Ann;   Mary. 

331.  Lydia"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Jane  (Wallace) 
Babcock    (Joseph,    Oliver,    John,    James),    b.    Leyden, 

Mass.,  Oct,  27,   181 1 ;    d.  Greenfield,  Mass.;  m.   (i)   Leyden, 

John  A.,  son  of  Walter  and Bell,  b.  Colerain,  Mass.,  d. 

Leyden;   m.  (2)  Stephen  Dorrill. 
Children : 

John  A.,  b.  Colerain.  Mass.,  July  i,  1837;  res.  1900,  407  Columbus 
Ave..   Boston,  Alass. ;    m.  Boston,  Jane  Williams. 

William  L.,  b.  Colerain,  Jan.  5,  1839;  d.  Leyden,  Mass.;  m.  Bos- 
ton, Ruth  Purdy. 

Nancy  F.,  b.  Colerain,  Jan.  25,  1841 ;  res.  1901,  Guilford,  Vt. ;  m. 
Boston,  Walter  White. 

Charles,  b.  Colerain.  Dec.  9,  1845 ;  res.  Greenfield ;  m.  Brattleboro, 
Vt..  Ruth  Purdy  Bell. 

Jane,  b.  Colerain,  Jan.,  1848;    d.  young. 

745  Ellen  D..'  b.  Oct.  9,  1851;    m.  George  Williams. 

Esther  E.,  b.  Colerain,  Mar.  18,  1853;    d.  Leyden,  Mass.,  1876;    m. 

■Leyden,  Mass..  Israel  Purdy.  of  Boston. 
Cora  J.,  b.  Leyden,  Oct.  24.  1855;    res.  1901.  Greenfield,  Mass.;    m. 

Guilford,  Vt.,  Edward  Tracy,  of  Greenfield. 

332.  Alonzo*'  Babcock,  son  of  Darius  and  Louisa  (Beebe) 

Babcock    (Joseph,   Oliver.   John.   James),   b.    Oct.    16, 
1816;    d.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y..  Nov.  13.   1881 ;    m.  Mercy  Ann. 
dau.  of  Nathan  Gillett.  b.  Nov.  i.  1823;    res.  1901.  51  South 
Broad  St.,  Norwich.  N.  Y. 
12 


178  .  Tlic  Bahcnck  Gcncnlogy. 

Children,  b.  at  Pharsalia : 

Alonzo   D.,   1j.   June  29,    1841.     Disappeared  July,    if^57. 

Henry  II.,  b.  yVug.  25,  1842;    res.  igoi,  Washington,  D.  C. ;    unni. 

746  Frances  C.,'  b.  Mar.  14,  1844;    m.  Wilson  Lucas. 

Ransom  E.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1845;    d.  Allentown,  Pa.,  July  24,  1894. 
Josiah,  b.  Sept.  2,  1847;    d.  Oct.  22,  1848. 

Ansil,  b.  June  14,  1850;  d.  Pharsalia,  Feb.  21,  1890;  m.  Nettie, 
dau.  of  Moses  Franklin. 

747  Rose  Etta,  b.  July  11,  1853;    m.  Silas  Clarke. 

Nathan  E.,  b.  June  10,  1854.  Killed  in  Custer's  Battle  l)y  Sitting 
Bull,  June  25,  1876;    unni. 

748  Adelbert,  b.  Apr.  5,  1856;    m.  Addie  M.  Ford. 

Homer  B.,  b.  Apr.  6,  1858;    res.   1901,  Pharsalia,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Hattie 

Law. 
Lora  W.,  b.  Sept.  7,  i860;    res.  1901,  Pharsalia;    m.  Myra  Lawson. 
George,  b.   Aug.    11,    1861 ;     res.    1901,   Norwich,   N.   Y. ;    m.   Libbie 

Brown. 
Lillian  F.,  b.  Dec.  14.  1862;    d.  Brookficld,  N.  Y.,  July  2,  1889. 
Mary  A.,  b.  Sept.   13,   1864;    res.   1901,  Norwich,   N.  Y. ;    m.  Byron 

B.  Tucker. 
Hattie  L.,  b.  Feb.  13,  1866;    d.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y. 

333.  Selwin*'  Babcock,  son  of  Darius  and  Louisa  (Beebe) 
Babcock    (Joseph,    OHver,   John,   James),   b.    Felx    12, 

1821  ;   d.  June  22,  1896;   m.  (i)  Jan.  15,  1848,  Sahna  Bow- 
ers, d.  Feb.,  1868;  m.   (2)   Ellen  Prentice. 
Child  by  first  marriage : 

Lina  M.,  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  10,  1868;  res.  1901,  2630  Douglas 
St.,  Philadelphia.  Pa.;  m.  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  July  15,  1890, 
Howard  R.   Proper.     Has  one  son,   Howard. 

334.  Simon  Bolivar^  Babcock,  son  of  Darius  and  Louisa 

(Beebe)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 
McDonough,  N.  Y.,  July  29,  1826;  res.  1901,  Northbridge 
Center,  Mass.;  m.  Worcester,  Mass.,  Aug.  2,  1849,  Caroline 
E.,  dau.  of  A.  and  Deidamia  (Forbush)  Wheeler,  b.  Sterling, 
Mass.,  Dec.  18,  1824,  d.  Northbridge  Center,  July  19,  1896. 
Children : 

Clara  E.,  b.  Northbridge  Center,  Jan.  16,  1854;    d.  Mar.  29,  1854. 
Emily   L.,   b.    Nov.    27,    1855;     res.    1901,    Northbridge    Center;     m. 

Nov.   29,    1899,   George   F.,   son   of  Elijah   and   Lucinda    (Winter) 

Smith. 

335.  Peleg^   Babcock,  son  of  Abel  and  Hannah    (Lewis) 
Babcock  (James,  James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  Ston- 

ington,  Conn.,  Mar.  15.  1767;  d.  Ashaway,  R.  L,  Sept.  28, 
1858;  m.  (i)  Hopkinton.  R.  L,  June  18,  1789.  Elizabeth, 
dau.  of  Jonathan  and  Amey  Wells,  b.  Feb.  11,  1769,  d.  Ches- 
ter, Mass.,  Nov.  8,  181 7.  Had  eight  children.  Peleg  m.  (2) 
Westerly,  R.  L,  Mar.  22,  1818,  Anna,  dau.  of  Samuel,  Jr.,  and 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  179 

Mary  (Smith)  Babcuck,  b.  Westerly,  Nov.  20,  1776,  d.  West- 
erly, Aug.  29,  1858.    No  children. 

Pcleg  Babcock  was  a  farmer  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  in  Ches- 
ter, Mass.,  and  later  owned  and  occupied  a  farm  on  the  Paw- 
catuck  River,  near  Avondale.  R.  I.  He  was  Captain  of  Hop- 
kinton  Alilitia  in  1800  and  1808.     (Smith.) 

Children: 

749  Elnathan  Wells,'*  b.  Sept.  30,  1790;    m.  Sally  Davis. 

Hannah  W..  b.  May  30,   1792;    d.  May  29,  1828;    m.  Horace  Smith. 

750  Mary,  b.  Jan.  9,   1794;    ni.  Oct.  28,   1813,  Joseph  Potter,  of  Potter 

Hill,  R.  I. 

Fanny,  b.  Nov.  5,  1796;  d.  Wisconsin,  Nov.  28,  1869;  m.  Dec.  25, 
1817.  Elder  Daniel  Coon,  b.  Jan.  g,  1792,  d.  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  May 
27,  1858.  He  was  a  S.  D.  B.  minister  and  for  many  years  served 
the  First  Hopkinton  S.  D.  B.  Church.     No  children. 

Lucy,  b.  Mar.   11,  1799;    d.   18 17.  unm. 

751  Peleg,  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  7,  1801  ;    m.   (i)  Lucinda  Brown;    m.  (2)  Emily 

Nichols. 
Abel.  b.  Dec.  5.  1807;    d.  Oct.  8,  1826,  unm. 

752  Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  31,   1811;    m.  Dr.  Francis  Murphy. 

336.  Mulford"  Babcock,  son  of  Abel  and  Elizabeth  (Wil- 
liams)  Babcock   (James,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.   Stonington,   Conn.,    1775;    d.    Franklin,    Conn.,    Sept.    12, 
1847;  "i-  Anna,  dau.  of  Capt.  Daniel  Miner,  b.  Bozrah,  Conn., 
d.  Sept.  20,  1848. 
Children  : 

753  William  IMulford,*  b.   1800;    m.   Palmyra  Densmore. 

Sarah  L.,  b.  ;    m.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Hiram  Clark. 

Weltha,  b.  ;    m.  Jed  Huntington. 

Betsey  E.,  b.  ;    m.  Cook. 

754  Perry  G..  b.  Feb.  28,   1812;    m.   (i)   Eunice  Wilcox;    m.   (2)  Eliza 

Sheffield. 
Sands,  b.  ;  unm. 

755  John  R.,  b.  ;    m.  Caroline  Rouse. 

Lucy    H..    b.    ;     m.    Hopkinton,    John    H.    Sisson.      Has    three 

daughters. 

337.  Abel'^  Babcock,  son  of  Abel  and  Elizabeth  (Williams) 
Babcock  (James,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  ]\Iay 

3,  1780;    m.  Sarah  Cheney,  of  Norwich,  Conn. 
Children : 

Lucy,  b.  ;    drowned  in  her  nineteenth  year. 

Abel ;    Fitch ;    Raymond. 

Camden   H..  b.  :  m.    (i)    Nancy  E. ;    had  one  child;    m.    (2) 

Jane  Sheldon,  of  Suffield,  Conn. 
James;  Elizabeth;  Sarah;  Ann;  Lucy;  Peleg. 

338.  Stephen"  Babcock,  son  of  Nathaniel,  Jr.,  and  Mary 

(Larrison)    Babcock   (Nathaniel,  James.  James,  John, 
James),  b.   N.   Stonington,  Conn.,    1765;    d.   N.   Stonington, 


i8o  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Aug.  30,  1845;  "1-  (0  1790  (?),  Mercy  Hinckley,  b.  1771, 
d.  Oct.  22,  1802;  m.  (2)  Elizabeth  Stuart,  of  Voluntown, 
Conn.,  d.  Jan.  19,  1807,  aged  29;  m.  (3)  Mercy,  dau.  of  Bill 
Davis,  of  Preston,  Conn.,  d.  Sept.  26,  1854.  He  was  a 
farmer,  lived  in  N.  Stonington. 
Children  by  first  wife : 

.    756  Eunice,*  b.   1791 ;    111.  Ethan  Crandall. 

757  Stephen,  b.  1793;    m.  Emma  Bentley. 

758  Samuel  H.,  b.  1798;    m.  Caroline  Stanton. 

759  Henry,  b.  Jan.  19,  1800;    m.  Mary  Ross. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

760  Elizabeth  S.,  b.  Dec.  28,  1806;    m.  Cyrus  W.  Brown. 

Children  by  third  wife : 

Nathaniel  S.,  b.  Mar.  7,  1813;    d.  Feb.  27,  1894,  unm. 

Charles,  b.  ;  unm. 

Mercy  Ann,  b.   Dec.  8,    1815 ;    d.    Sept.   20,    1845 ;    m.   Thomas  M. 
Brown.     Had  four  sons. 

761  John  Davis,  b.  Feb.  5,  1818;    m.  Harriet  D.  Bentley. 

762  Jonas  L.,  b.  Mar.  i,  1820;    m.  Abby  C.  Stanton. 

763  William  Stuart,  b.  Mar.  20,  1822;    m.  Frances  E.  Maine. 

339.  Reuben"^  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Reuben  and  Hannah 
(Hendricks)  Babcock  (Nathaniel,  James.  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  24,  1789;  d.  E.  Pembroke, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  15,  1877^111.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  25,  1810, 
Susanna  Moore  Gould,  b.  Woodstock,  Conn.,  May  22,  1790, 
d.  E.  Pembroke,  Aug.  30,  i860. 

Reuben  was  Sergeant  in  the  Militia  in  1809,  and  two  years 
later  w^as  mack  a  Eieutenant.  He  became  a  Captain  Feb., 
1 81 2.  Two  months  later  the  "War  of  1812"  was  declared. 
In  Jan.,  181 3,  he  was  appointed  brevet  Captain  by  Governor 
Daniel  D.  Tompkins  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  uniformed 
rifle  company.  In  this  he  was  successful  and  received  a  Cap- 
tain's commission  Mar.,  1814.  In  July  following,  however, 
his  company  stood  a  draft  for  active  service  at  the  front.  Not 
being  among  the  number  drawn,  he  volunteered  to  go  as  a 
substitute.  He  served  as  First  Lieutenant  until  the  close  of 
the  war.  For  his  military  service  he  received,  about  i860,  a 
land  warrant  for  one  hundred  and  sixtv  acres  of  land. 

Capt.  Babcock  some  years  later  became  a  contractor  and 
builder  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  where  he  erected  among  other  build- 
ings a  large  mill,  which  was  standing  a  few  years  ago,  near  the 
State  dam.  In  1833  he  removed  with  his  family  from  Troy  to 
Pembroke,  where  he  bought  a  farm  and  also  carried  on  the 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  i8i 

business  of  contractor  and  Iniilder,  until  he  was  appointed  post- 
master at  E.  Pembroke.  This  office  he  held  over  eight  years, 
and  although  a  strong  Democrat  was  one  of  the  first  to  buy 
a  Union  flag  and  unfurl  it  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  Civil  War. 
Children: 

764  Eliza,*  b.  1811;    m.  Walter  Ives. 

765  Cynthia,  b.  Dec.  3,   1812;    m.  Chester  Brockway. 

766  Harry,   b.   Jan.    14,    1815;    m.    (i)    Fanny   Fonda;    m.    (2)    Calista 

Fordham ;    m.    (3)    Christine  Fonda. 

Samantha  J.,  b.  E.  Poestenkill,  Feb.  i,  181 7;  m.  Lyman  P.  Griffin,  at 
Troy,  N.  Y.  No  children.  Toward  the  close  of  the  Civil  War 
she  became  a  nurse  in  the  Union  army  and  was  placed  in  charge 
of  the  hospital   in   New   Orleans;    d.   Aug.  3,    1869. 

William  Eaton,  b.  Nov.  27,  1818;  res.  1902,  E.  Pembroke,  N.  Y. ; 
unm.  He  commenced  business  as  a  contractor  and  builder,  and 
erected  many  large  buildings  in  his  town.  He  then  took  up  the 
business  of  building  wooden  bridges,  which  he  followed  fifteen 
years.  In  1879  he  became  the  owner  of  a  custom  and  merchant 
flouring  mill  at  E.  Pembroke.  Since  retiring  from  that  business, 
farming  has  been  his  principal  occupation. 

Twin  boys,  b.  Grafton,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  28,  1820;    d.  Dec.  30,  1820. 

767  Lucy,  b.  Mar.  15,  1822;    m.  Ebenezer  Allen. 

768  Mary,  b.  Jan,  18,  1824:    m.  William  Sears. 

769  Amanda  Melvina,  b.  Nov.  9,  1825;    m.  Samuel  Loomis. 

770  Sarah  Anna,  b.  Dec.  21,  1829;    m.  Elias  E.  Dodge. 

771  Charles,  b.  Oct.  31,  1832;    m.  Maria  L.  Schermerhorn. 

340.  Nathaniel'    Babcock,    son   of   Reuben   and   Hannah 
(Hendricks)  Babcock  (Nathaniel,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.   Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  Apr.    15,   1791  ;    d.   Sept.    15, 
1843;  "i-  l^^c.  24,  1820.  Sally,  dau.  of  John  Bliven,  of  Peters- 
burg, b.  Dec.  28,  1799.     Nathaniel  served  in  the  War  of  18 12 
for  three  months,  being  stationed  near  New  York. 
Children : 

771a  John,"  b.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  2,  1821 ;    m.  Sept.  15,  1845.  Lucy 

Austin. 
IVIatthew,    b.    Nov.   6,    1822;     d.    Sept.    20,    1897;     m.    Mahala.    dau. 

of  William   Morgan. 
Sally  J.,  b.  Aug.  20,  1825 ;    d.  Mar.,  1891 ;    m.  July  4,  1843,  William 

Cooper,  d.   Poestenkill.  Oct.  7,  1898. 
Lorella.  b.  Feb.  29,   1828;    m.  Dec.  25,   1846,  John  Cooper.     Had  a 

son  John,  who  res.   1902,  at  Gloversville,   N.  Y. 
Mary  A.,  b.  Aug.  16,  183 1  ;    m.  George,  son  of  Peleg  Horton. 
Barbara  Tvlaria.  b.  Nov.  24,   1834;    m.  Peleg  Horton,  Jr. 
Reuben,  b.  May  22,  1838;    m.  Altha.  dau.  of  Loren  and  Patty  Hull. 
Bathsheba,  b.  Nov.  10,  1844;    m.  William  Adams. 

341.  S.\r.\h"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Reuben  and  Hannah  (Hen- 
dricks)    Babcock     (Nathaniel,     James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  June  23,  1794;  d.  Beaver  Cen- 
ter, Pa.,  Mar.  20,  1873;  m.  Ophir  Gould,  d.  E.  Pembroke. 
The  family  removed  Aug.  29,  1840,  from  Rensselaer  County 
to  E.  Pembroke,  N.  Y. 


1 82  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Mary,  b.  Sept.,  1831. 

Andrew  J.,  1).  Apr.  20,  1833. 

Sarahelta  and  Maryetta,  twins,  b.  Oct.  5,  1835. 

Ruth,  b.  ;    m.  Orlando  Horton. 

Sally,  b.  Apr.  29,  1839;    d.  1855. 
Judediah;   William;   Zeno. 

342.  PoLLY^  Babcock,  daii.  of  Reuben  and  Hannah  (Hen- 
dricks)    Babcock     (Nathaniel,     James,     James,    John, 

James),  b.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  25,  1797;   d.  Michigan, 
1863;   m.  Poestenkill,  1832,  James  H.  Mm-ray,  of  E.  Poesten- 
kill.    Polly  went  to  E.  Pembroke  early  in  the  fifties,  and  later 
removed  to  Michigan. 
Children : 

Delia  D.,  b.  May  26,  1833;    m.   (i)  ,  lived  in  Michigan;    m.  (2) 

Warden;    res.  Peach  Belt,  Mich.   (?). 

Child,  b.  Aug.  24,  1834;    d.  1834. 
Nancy,  b.  Oct.  5-  1835 :    d.  1838. 

343.  RuFUs'  Babcock,  son  of  Renben  and  Hannah   (Hen- 
dricks)      Babcock    (Nathaniel,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Ang.  23,  1800;  d.  E.  Poesten- 
kill,  1888;    m.  Dec.  25,   1838,  Elma  E.  Walker,  b.  Ume  10, 
1822,  d.  1885. 
Children : 

Erastus,  b.  Sept.  25,  1839;  m.  Corean  Bailey.  Had  two  daughters 
and  a  son. 

Lucyett,  b.  May  17,  1844;  m.  Isaiah  C.  Horton;  removed  to  Mich- 
igan before  the  Civil  War. 

Hannah,  b.  Aug.  18,  1847;    d.  1879;    m.  Strunk.     Had  one  son. 

Horace,  b.  Aug.  5,  1850;    d.  unm.,  in  Poestenkill  about  1878. 

344.  Esther'^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Elijah  and  Sarah  (Brown) 
Babcock  (Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Jan.  3, 

1763;    d.  Apr.,  1840;    m.  Daniel  Hntchinson,  of  Jericho,  Vt. 
Children : 

Alice,  b.  ;    m.  Deacon  Abel. 

David,  b.  ;    m.   Polly  Curtis. 

Sophia;  Ruliy ;  Eliza;  Nancy;  Mary. 

345.  Elias"   Babcock,  son  of  Elijah  and   Sarah    (Brown) 
Babcock  (Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Ston- 

ington,  Conn.,  Feb.  24,   1764;    d.   1836;  m.  Hannah  Barber, 
of  Connecticut. 

Elias  W'ith  his  brother  Ichabod  moved  in  1788  from  Canaan, 
Conn.,  to  Poultney,  Vt.,  and  settled  in  Finel  Hollow  on  a  farm 
he  bought  of  Philip  Plowe,  which  he  paid  for  in  part  with 
cattle  which  he  drove  from  Connecticut.     In  the  early  part  of 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  183 

his  life  he  was  an  acti\e  citizen,  and  rendered  efficient  service 
in  snstaining  the  Cong^regational  Church.     He  did  the  stone 
work  free  of  charge  in  the  present  Congregational  Church 
edifice  of  Poultney. 
Children : 

Hannah,  b.  ;  d.   i860. 

yy2  Stevens,*'  b.  Feb.  2,  1802;    m.  Mary  Hi  Mott. 

Harry,  b.  ;    d.   1837.     Left  one  son,  Harry  C,  b.   1836,  settled 

in  Arkansas,  was  living  in  1878. 
Anna,  b. ;    d.  1869. 

346.  Silas"   Babcock,  son  of  Elijah  and   Sarah    (Brown) 
Babcock   (Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  May 

18,  1770;    d.  Wayne,  O.,  Aug.  10,  1843;    m.  Mar.  16,  1797, 
Rachel,  dau.  of  Dr.  Elisha  Allen,  b.  Apr.  4,  1778,  d.  Sept.  28, 
1834;   m.  (2)  ]\Iay  11,  1835,  Charity  Brainerd. 
Children : 

yji  Daphene,'*  b.  Feb.  22.   1798;    m.   Robert  French. 
Anna,  b.  Mar.  13,  1800;    m.  1841,  James  Davidson. 

774  Hiram  A.,  b.  1802;    m.  Eliza  P.  Andrews. 

Eveline,  b.  Feb.  i,  1805;    m.  David  Babcock,  son  of  347  Paul. 
Orville,   b.    1807;     m.    1841,   Sophia  Avery.     Grad.    1841   at   College. 
Rachel  Allen,  b.    1809. 

775  Daniel  H.,  b.  Dec.  17,  1810;    m.   (i)  Amanda  Avery;    m.   (2)   Abby 

L.  Blackman. 

776  Sarah  T.,  b.  Jan.   17,   1812;    m.  James  Gibson. 

347.  Paul'''   Babcock,  son  of   Elijah  and   Sarah    (Brown) 
Babcock   (Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  May 

18,  1770;   d.  May  12,  1839,  at  Jericho,  Vt. :   m.  Mable  Hatch, 
moved  to  Essex,  Vt.,  thence  to  Jericho.     She  was  b.  at  Jeri- 
cho, May,  1773,  d.  at  Jericho,  Sept.  30,  1842. 
Children : 

Lyman,  b.  Mar.  3,  1708;    d.  1833,  unm. 

Ann,   b.   Mar.    11,    1800;    d.   Feb.   8,    1875,   at   N.   Brookfield,   Mass., 
unm. 

777  Horace,'*  b.  Mar.  22,  1802;    m.  Sarah  Reynolds. 
77^  Selah,  b.  July  2t„   1804 ;    m.   Prudence  Buxton. 

779  Julius,  b.  Dec.  16,  1806;    m.  (i)  Miriam  Moulton ;   m.  (2)  Charlotte 

Ball. 

780  Submit,  b.  Oct.  30,  1808;    m.  Asa  Moulton. 

David,  b.  Apr.  23,  1812;    d.  Unionville,  O. ;    m.   (i)  his  cousin  Eme- 
line.    dau.    of   346  Silas    Babcock,    of   Wayne,    O. ;     m.    (2)    Amy 

Warner,  of  Madison,   O. ;    m.    (3)    Sarah  ,  of  S.   Plymouth, 

Mass. 

781  Rufus,  b.  Sept.  3.  1814:    m.  Lucinda  Pettie. 

348.  Ichabod"  Babcock,  son  of  Elijah  and  Sarah  (Brown) 
Babcock    (Elias,   James,   James,   John,   James),    b.    N. 

Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  3,  1772;    d.   1846;    m.  1794,  Esther 
Sprague. 


184  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Ichabod  with  his  brother  EHas  moved  from  Canaan,  Conn., 
to  Poultney,  Vt.,  about  1788;  settled  in  West  Village;  was 
a  hatter  by  vocation,  and  was  for  many  years  Justice  of  the 
Peace. 

Children :  .  , 

Lydia,  b.  1795   (?). 

Pauline,  b.  1797  (  ?). 

William,  b.  1799  (  ?)  ;    moved  to  Wisconsin  about  1840. 

Edwin,  b.   1801    ( ?). 

Caroline,  b.  1803. 

George,  b.   1805   ( ?). 

349.  Lydia'   Babcock,  dau.  of  Elijah  and  Sarah   (Brown) 
Babcock  (Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  1774; 

d. ;  m.  (i)  Dr.  Sylvanus  Church;   m.  (2)  Esq.  Whipple. 

No  issue  by  second  marriage. 
Children  by  first  husband : 

Betsey,  b.  ;    m.  Harvey  Newcombe.     Had  one  son. 

Sylvanus,  b.  . 

Lucinda,  b.  ;    m.  Meacham. 

Sophronia,  b.  ;    m.  Uriel  Smith.     Had  five  children. 

Lydia,  b.  ;    ni.   Hiram  Todd. 

350.  Sally"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elijah  and  Sarah   (Brown) 
Babcock  (Elias,  James,  James,  John.  James),  b.  1776; 

d.  1804;  m.  James  Rood.     Settled  in  Roodsville,  111. 
Children : 

Levi,  b.  ;    m.  Laura  A.  Phillips. 

Launcelot,  b.  ;    m.  Ann  D.  Newton. 

Ann,  b.  ;    ni.  James  Graves. 

Lydia,  b.  ;    m.  Solomon  Smith. 

Albert  J.,  b.  ;    m.  Hope  Townsend. 

Sarah,  b.  ;    m.  William  Smith. 

351.  Cyrus    Giles'^    Babcock,    son    of    Elder    Rufus    and 
Zeruiah  (Moses)  Babcock  (Elias.  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Jan.  27,  1789;  d.  N.  Colebrook,  Conn.,  Mar.  6, 
1817;  m.  Mar.,  1812,  Mrs.  Amarilla  Hawley,  d.  Apr.  12, 
1826.  He  was  a  graduate  from  Brown  University,  and  was 
called  as  pastor  to  the  Baptist  Church  of  New  Bedford,  Mass., 
but  declined  on  account  of  ill  health. 
Children : 

782  Timothy  Erastus,"  b.  Oct.  16,  1812.     Adopted  by  his  uncle  Timothy; 

m.  Alice  Wheeler. 
Daniel  Sharp,  b.  1814;    d.  young. 

783  Cyrus  Giles,  b.  May,  .1817;    m.  Maria  Kellogg. 

352.  Rev.  Rufus^  Babcock,  D.D.,  son  of  Elder  Rufus  and 
Zeruiah  (Moses)  Babcock  (Elias,  James,  James,  John, 


REV.  RUFUS  BABCOCK,  D.D. 

1798-1875.  Page  184. 


1 86  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Tlie  Baptist  Memorial.  In  1828  was  made  a  Trustee  of  Brown 
University  and  so  continued  during  his  life. 

He  lived  in  Poughkeepsie  in  his  later  life,  and  was  a  warm 
personal  friend  of  Matthew  Vassar,  the  founder  of  Vassar 
College,  Poughkeepsie,  and  assisted  him  in  preparing  plans  for 
his  large  charity.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Vassar  College  from 
its  organization  until  his  death.  While  living  in  Poughkeepsie 
he  was  accustomed  to  spend  the  month  of  August  at  Barring- 
ton,  R.  I.,  the  birthplace  of  his  wife.  Both  he  and  his  wife 
are  buried  in  the  cemetery  at  Poughkeepsie. 

Children : 

784  Caroline  Elizabeth,'  b.  Feb.  10,  1825;    m.  Hon.  Horatio  Gates  Jones. 

785  Emily  Eddy,  b.  Aug.  3,  1826;    m.  George  H.  Swift. 

786  Harriet  S.,  b.  Sept.  26,  1831 ;    m.  James  H.  Weeks. 

353.  Abigail^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Capt.   Oliver  and   Mercy 

(Kinney)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Oct.  11,  1770;  d.  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  July  18,  185 1 ;  m.  Stonington,  by  her  uncle  Joshua  Bab- 
cock, Justice,  Jan.  31,  1788,  to  Jabish  Brown.  June  7,  1794, 
the  family  removed  to  Brookfield ;  they  went  in  an  ox  cart, 
and  were  seventeen  days  on  the  road.  She  d.  July  18,  1843. 
Children : 

Susanna,  b.  Jan.  7,   1790;    d.   Brookfield,  June  6,   i860;    m.  Jan.  3, 

181 1,  David  Hinckley. 
Catharine,  b.  June  2,   1792;    d.  Brookfield,  Mar.  30,   1881 ;    m.  Noah 

Brown,  Jan.  31,  181 1. 
Betsey,   b.    Mar.   2,    1795;    d.   Brookfield,   Apr.   20,    1839;    m.   Elisha 

Randall,  Oct.   13,   1813. 
Abigail,   b.    Dec.    12,    1798;     d.    Edgerton,    Wis.,   Jan.    13,    1865;     m. 

Ephraim    Palmer,    June    5,     1823. 
Lois,   b.   Mar.    12,    1801  ;    d.   Brookfield,   Feb.   12,    1854;    m.   Nathan 

Birch,  Mar.  17,  1842. 

787  Jabish,*  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  3,  1806;    m.  Selina  Davis. 

Temperance,  b.  Dec.  3,  1811;    d.  Brookfield,  Sept.  5,   184 1  ;    m.  Na- 
than Birch,  Jan.  24,   1832. 

354.  Joshua"  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth  (Pal- 
mer)   Babcock    (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Feb.  2,  1774;  d.  Unadilla  Forks,  N.  Y., 
Oct.  9,  1857;  m.  Stonington.  Dec.  29,  1799,  Eunice,  dau.  of 
Christopher  and  Margaret  (Holmes)  Brown,  b.  Stonington, 
Dec.  2,  1780,  d.  Unadilla  Forks,  Sept.  6,  1855.  Moved  to  the 
town  of  Paris,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  in  1801. 

He  held  many  public  offices,  the  gift  of  the  people;  was  for 
many  years  Justice  of  Peace,  served  as  County  Judge,  and  was 
twice  a  member  of  the  Legislature  (about)  1 821-1823. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  187 

Children : 

788  Elizabeth  Palmer,"  b.  July  ii,  1804;    m.  Ephraim  B.  Crumb. 

789  Henry   H.,   b.   Nov.   28,    1806;    m.    (i)    Tammison   Rogers;    m.    (2) 

Catherine  G.  Rowell ;    m.   (3)    Laura  N.  Huntley;    m.    (4)   Mary 
J.  Penny. 

790  Eunice  Evangeline,  b.  Mar.  2,   1812;    m.  Rowland  Gardner. 
Lucy  Palmer,  b.  July  19,   1817;    unm. 

791  Joshua  Franklin,  b.   Sept.  9,   1823;    m.   Elizabeth  Bassett. 

355.  As.v  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Ehzabeth  (Pahner) 
Babcock   (Ohver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.   N. 

Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  6,  1775;  d.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
3,  1824;    m.  Catherine  Robl)ins. 

Asa  settled,  1797,  in  Oneida  County.  The  place  was  called 
for  him,  Babcock  Hill. 

Children : 

Augustus,  b.  ;    unm. 

792  Elizabeth,'  b.  — — ;    m.  S.  H.  Reynolds. 

793  Leander,  b.  Mar.  i.  181 1;    m.  Ellen  Bronson. 
Loren,  b.  ;  unm. 

356.  Oliver'''  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth  (Palm- 
er)   Babcock    (Oliver,    James,    James,    John,    James), 

b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Jan.  20,  1778;  d.  Bridgewater, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  23,  1866;  m.  Voluntown,  Conn.,  Mar.  3,  1803, 
Polly  Randall,  b.  Pendleton  Hill,  Conn.,  June,  1782,  d. 
Bridgewater,  July,   1845.     Settled  at  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,    in 

1799. 

Children : 

794  Oliver,"  b.   Sept.  7,   1805;   m.   Sarah  Brown. 

795  Maria,  b.  Babcock  Hill,  Jan.  15,  1804;    m.  Albert  Burke. 

796  Clarissa,  b.  Apr.  9,  1809:    m.  S.  H.  Reynolds. 

797  Peleg,  b.  Sept.   10,   1813;    m.   Cornelia  Scott. 

357.  Elizabeth'''   Babcock,   dau.   of  Joshua  and   Elizabeth 
(Palmer)     Babcock     (Oliver,     James,     James,     John, 

James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  4.  1780;  d.  Bridge- 
water,  N.  Y..  Jan.  2,  1871  ;    m.  Oct.   19,  1800,  Peleg,  son  of 

Amos  and Brown,  of  Preston,  Conn.,  b.  Mar.  23,  1775, 

d.  Bridgewater.  Oct.  3,  i860.     She  made  two  trips  on  horse- 
back from  Stonington,  Conn.,  to  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  one 
prior  to  and  one  after  her  marriage,  after  which  she  and  her 
husband  settled  at  Babcock  Hill  for  their  future  home. 
Children : 

798  Charles  Babcock."  b.   Oct.  24.   1802;    m.   Catherine   Mabbett. 

799  Amos  H.,  b.  Apr.  26,  1805 ;    m.  Susan  Munroe. 


1 88  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Franklin,  b.  Sept.  i,  1807;    d.  Oct.  5,  1889,  unm. 

800  Lorenzo  S.,  b.  June  6,  1809;    m.  (i)  Elizabeth  C.  Brainard;    m.   (2) 

J^aura  B.   Birdseye. 

358.  Martin"  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth  (Pahn- 
er)    Babcock   (OHver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  20,  1783,  d.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  22,  1867;  m.  Aug.,  1821,  Eunice  Robbins,  b.  Vokmtown, 
Conn.,  Sept.  29,  1797,  d.  Bridgewater,  Apr.  19,  1878. 
Children : 

801  Elizabeth  G.,*  b.  June  2,  1822;    m.  Giles  Scott. 

802  Clark  Hinckley,  b.  Nov.  9,  1823;    m.  (i)  Kate  Shields  Cole;    m.  (2) 

Amelia  Cole. 

803  Catherine  A.,  b.  Sept.  6,  1826;    m.  Bryan  Scott. 
Henry  R.,  b.  Oct.  23,  1828;    unm. 

804  Keziah  G.,  b.  Nov.  13,  1831 ;    m.  Jerome  J.  Budlong. 

359.  Dr.  Charles^  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth 

(Palmer)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  June  21,  1787;  d.  New  Hart- 
ford, N.  Y.,  July  4,  1850;   m.  New  Hartford,  by  Rev.  D.  D. 

Norton,  Jan.   5,    1813,   Nancy,  dau.   of  Peleg  Bill  and  

Pratt,  b.  Paris,  N.  Y.,  May  i,  1793,  d.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  18, 
1891. 

Charles  Babcock  was  a  doctor  who  settled  in  New  Hartford 
about  18 1 2,  where  he  devoted  his  life  to  his  profession,  gain- 
ing the  confidence  and  love  of  the  entire  community. 

When  in  18 14  the  militia  was  called  on  for  war  duty  Dr. 
Babcock  volunteered  as  surgeon  and  was  detailed  to  go  to 
Sackett's  Harbor,  where  he  served  faithfully  for  many  months. 

He  with  his  sister  and  four  brothers  inaugurated  an  annual 
family  dinner  called  "The  Babcock  Party,"  which  was  con- 
tinued long  after  all  the  originators  had  passed  away.  The 
custom  is  still  kept  up,  known  as  "The  Cousins'  Party." 

He  was  active  in  Church  and  missionary  work,  beloved  as 
husband  and  father  and  left  an  imperishable  memory  in  the 
hearts  of  his  friends.  His  wife,  Nancy  Pratt  Babcock,  sur- 
vived her  husband  over  forty  years,  dying  at  the  age  of  nearly 
ninety-eight.  She  was  a  descendant  of  John  Alden,  of  the 
Mayflower ;  was  affable,  obliging,  and  affectionate,  a  fine  con- 
versationalist, and  a  woman  possessed  of  unusual  physical  and 
mental  powers. 

Children : 

805  Bill  Pratt,'  b.  Mar.  29,   1814;    unm. 

806  William  R.,  b.  Apr.  10,  1816;    m.  Myra  Marsh. 

807  Mary  Curtis,  b.  Mar.  11,  1820;    m.  Henry  G.  Abbott. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  189 

360.  Henry"  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth  (Palm- 

er) Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  Jolin,  James),  b. 
N.  Stonington,  Conii.,  Feb.  14,  1790;  d.  N.  Stonington,  July 
4,  1858;  m.  Feb.  10,  181 1,  Dolly  (Dorothy),  dau.  of  Ama- 
riah  and  Dorothy  (Whipple)  Stanton,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Feb. 
14,  1787,  d.  N.  Stonington,  Nov.  16,  1865. 

Henry  remained  upon  the  old  homestead  until  death,  having 
inherited  the  property. 

Children,  b.  N.  Stonington : 

Charles   Henry,   b.   Apr.   28,    1813 ;    d.  Jewett  City,   Conn.,   Apr.  4, 
1903,  num. 
808  William  Avery,"  b.  Sept.  4,  1817;    m.  Harriett  Coates. 
8og  Betsey  A.,  b.  June  21,   1819;    ni.  Benjamin  Palmer. 

810  Mercy  Amelia,  b.  Mar.  19,  1821 ;    m.  George  Henry  Lewis. 

811  Irving  Franklin,  b.  Sept.  28,  1823;    m.  Sarah  M.  Tracy. 
Mary  A.,  b.  Dec.  4.  1825 ;    unm. 

812  Nancy  A.,  b.  Mar.  4,  1828;    m.  B.  P.  Parks. 

361.  Anne'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Capt.  William  A.  and  Lucretia 

(Davis)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Nov.  5,  1773;    d.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  May  7,  1852;    m.  Apr. 
28,  1790,  Ebenezer  Cady,  b.  Chatham,  Apr.  4,  1771,  d.  May  5, 
1859.     She  was  his  second  wife. 
Children : 

Alpheus,   b.    Oct.   21,    1791 ;    d.   Jan.,    1865;    m.    (i)    Jan.    10,    1813, 

Eunice  Caulkins ;    m.   (2)   Nov.  19,  1817,  Pattey  Ann  Chambers. 
Harriet,    b.    Oct.    10,    1792;     d.    Feb.    22,    1869;     m.    Mar.    31,    1814, 

William  Bailey. 
Sophia,  b.  Oct.  25,  1794;    d.  Feb.  4.   1809. 
William,   b.   Jan.    18.    1797:     d.    ]\Iichigan.   June,    1850;    m.   Apr.   20, 

1820,   Betsey   Tompkins,   d.    Dec,    1850. 
Nelson,  b.  Jan.  24,   1799;    d.  Aug.  2,   1868;    m.  Apr.  3,  1828,  Eliza 

IMerritt.  d.   iNIichigan,  Aug.  31,   1854. 
Dexter,  b.  Sept.  4,  1802;    d.  Oct.  20,  1805. 
Winthrop.  b.  Sept.  23,   1804;    d.  July  22.  1820. 
Ebenezer,  b.  Oct.  7,  1806;    d.  Oct.  13,  1809. 
George  W.,  b.  Feb.  8,  1808;    d.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  May  4,   1898;    m. 

(i)   Sept.  17,  1834,  Pernilla  Hamilton,  d.  Sept.  12,  1841  ;    m.   (2) 

Dec.  20,  1843,  Sally  Noyes.  d.  Nov.  19,  1892.     His  dau.  m.  George 

Morris,  res.  1902,  Chatham,  N.  Y. 
Sally,  b.  July  20,   1810;    d.  Lee,  Mass..  July  13,   1850;    m.   Mar.  22,, 

1830,  Alarshall  Foot. 
John  B.,  b.  Sept.  20,   1813;    d.  ^Michigan,  Oct.  31,  1847;    m.  Jan.  5. 

1836,  Susan  Merritt. 

362.  John  Davis'^  Babcock,  son  of  William  A.  and  J^ucretia 

(Davis)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  30,  1789:  d.  Alden,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25, 
1865;  m.  Chatham,  Jane,  dau.  of  David  and  Jane  (Belding) 
Morehouse,  b.  Chatham,  Apr.  2,  1780,  d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
Apr.  5,  1847.    He  was  a  farmer. 


190  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  in  Challiani : 

813  Louise/  b.   Oct.  S,  1808;    m.   Burden  Catlin. 
Harry,  b.  Nov.   i,  1810;    d.  Feb.   14,  1832,  unm. 
William  Avery,  b.  Oct.  4,   181 1;    d.   May  12,   1812. 

814  Mariette  B.,  b.  Apr.  4,  1814;    ni.  William  Lyman. 
Jane  Ann,  b.   Oct.   14,   1815;    d.  young. 

815  George  B.,  b.  Dec.  6,  1819;    m.  Soloma  Freeland. 

816  Jane  Ann,  b.  Mar.  26,  1821 ;    m.  Edmund  Cadwell. 
Lucinda,  b.  Apr.  5,  1822;    d.  Oct.,  1825. 
William,  b.  Nov.  5,  1825 ;    d.  young,  unm. 

Altana,  b.  Nov.  5.   1825  ;    m.  Tbomas  Nelson,  of  Poestenkill,  N.  Y. 

817  David,  b.  May  10,   1829;    m.  Sarab  E.  Van  Tine. 

818  Emily  E.,  b.  Sept.  8,  183 1 ;    m.  Josepb  C.  Watts. 

363.  Avery'  Babcock,  son  of  Gershani  and  Chloe  (Davis) 

Babcock  (Oliver.  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Co- 
lumbia County,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  icS,  1781 ;  d.  Lysander,  N.  Y., 
Apr.  25,  1866;  m.  Columbia  County,  Oct.  18,  1801,  Lydia 
Darrow,  of  Columbia  County,  b.  Feb.  17,  1784,  d.  May  14, 
1 86 1.  They  removed  in  1822  from  Columbia  County  to  Ly- 
sander, N.  Y.  Their  remains  are  buried  in  the  Baldwins ville 
Cemetery,  near  their  home. 
Children : 

819  Allen,*  b.  Aug.  24,  1802 ;    m.  . 

820  Cyntbia.  b.  Sept.  24.   1804;    m.  Edwin  Corning. 

821  Russel,  b.  Dec.  6,  1806;    m.  Susan  Ouderkirk. 

822  Chloe,  b.  Feb.  27,  1810;    m.  Nelson  Dunham. 

823  Harry,  b.  May  17,  181 1;    m.  Catherine  Goff. 
John,  b.  Oct.  30,   1813;    d.  Mar.  6,  1819. 

824  Abram,  b.  Jan.  4,  1816;    m.  Eliza  S.  Newton. 

825  Gesham  A.,  b.  July  22,   1818;    m.  Caroline  Runnels. 

826  Edwin  M.,  b.  May  26,   1826;    m.    (i)    Catherine  Bellinger;    m.    (2) 

Sarah  Babcock;    m.  (3)  Mrs.  Catherine  E.  Martin  Babcock. 

364.  I^ucretia'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Gersham  and  Chloe  (Da- 
vis) Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  1785;  d.  Penfield,  O.,  Jan.  29,  1862; 
m.  Feb.   14,   1804,  Deacon  Edward  Palmer,  d.  Jan.  5,   1858. 
They  lived  in  Columbia  County  until  about  1830,  when  they 
removed  to  Penfield,  O. 
Children : 

Harriet  S.,  b.  Sept.  24.   1805;    d.  Aug.   16,   1834;    m.  John  W.,  son 

of  Andrew  and   Sarah    (Hurlbut)    Lovejoy. 
Giles  E.,  b.  Sept.  26,   1807. 
Charles  B.,  b.  July  9,  1810;    d.  Apr.  23,  1863. 
Sarah  A.,  b.  Jan.  10,  1817. 
Peyton  R.,  b.  Mar.  15,  1820;    d.  July  14,  1864. 

365.  Ciiloe'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Gersham  and  Chloe  (Davis) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Aus- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  igi 

terlitz,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  13.  1789;  d.  Lysandcr,  N.  Y.,  June  6.  1843; 
m.  Sept.  13.  1810,  Ezckiel  Burgess,  d.  July,  1865.  Soon  after 
marriage  they  removed  from  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  to 
Cortland  County,  N.  Y.  In  1836  they  again  removed  to 
Lysander. 
Children : 

827  Edwin    E.,"   b.   Jan.    19,    1812;     m.    (i)    Diantha    Hibbard;     m.    (2) 

Carrie  Temple. 
Eleazer  D..  1).  Jan.  11.  1817;    d.  young. 
William  V.,  b.  Apr.  3.   182 1  ;    d.  Apr.,   1874;    m.  Jan.  4,   1848,  Mary 

E.  King.     Tb.ey  bad  two  cbildrcn,  Edward  E.  anfl  Alaggie. 

828  Prudence,  b.  June   11,    1825;    m.   Russel   Carter. 

366.  Sarah"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Gersham  and  Chloe  (Davis) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Co- 
lumbia County,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  i,  1792:  d.  Apr.  13,  1874,  at 
Johnstown,  N.  Y. ;  m.  May  3,  1821,  Elisha  Briggs,  of 
Jolmstown. 

Children : 

Garrett  E.,  b.   May   17,    1823;    d.  Jan.   18,   1866;    m.   Almira  Dillen- 

beck.     She  d.  Dec.   12,  1870. 
Thomas  R.,  b.  Dec.  24.  1824;    d.  Nov.  18,   1889;    m.  Rachel  .  b. 

May  25,  1829;    d.  Aug.  31,  1885. 
William  A.,  b.  Oct.  24.  1826;    d.  Dec.  27.  1852;    m.  Eleanor  Dorn. 

829  Delevan,''  b.  Oct.   14,   1828 ;    m.  Almira  Dockstader. 

Charles  E.,  b.  .A.pr.  24,   1831  ;    m.    (i)  Julia  Farling;    m.    (2)   Sabra 

Burton. 
Mary  E.,  b.  Nov.   12,  1832;    m.  Charles  M.  Knox. 
Daniel  Cady,  b.  Jan.  14,  1836.     Settled  at  Malta,  N.  Y.     Was  at  one 

time  a  member  of  the  New  York  Legislature. 

367.  John"  Babcock,  son  of  Gersham  and  Chloe  (Davis) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Co- 
lumbia County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  7,  1795;  d.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  1832: 
m.  Jan.  i,  18 18,  Mary  B.  Burg,  b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  June  6, 
1797,  d.  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  28,  1836. 

Children : 

Mary  T.,  b.  Oct.  5.  1820;    m.  Oct.  5.  1847,  Edward  Smith. 

830  Eliza,"  b.  Apr.  20,  1822;    m.  James  Cleveland. 
Chloe.  b.  Mar.  16,  1824;    d.  July  2,  1826. 
Cynthia,  b.  Jan.  23,   1826;    d.  July  8,   1827. 

831  George  A.,  b.  July  4,  1828;    m.  Lucy  Chesebro. 

368.  Roswell"  Babcock,  son  of  Gersham  and  Chloe  (Da- 
vis)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Canaan,  N.  Y.,  June.  1799;  d.  Franklin,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  24,  1852; 
m.  Feb.  28,  1819,  Christiana,  dau.  of  Jacob  Groat,  Chatham, 
N.  Y.,  b.  1802,  d.  Franklin,  N.  Y.,  1888.  She  m.  (2)  Harry 
Taylor. 


192  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Martha,  b.  Oct.  28,  1820,  Chatham,  N.  Y. ;  d.  Avon,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  16, 
1899;  m.  New  Britain,  Conn.,  Jan.  21,  1837,  Jacob  I.  Miller,  of 
New  Britain.  Settled  at  Avon.  Had  two  children,  Charles  and 
George. 

832  George  L.,"  b.  Jnne  7,   1824;    ni.   Catherine  E.  Butler. 

833  Sidney,  b.  Aug.  25,   1825 ;    m.  Maria  Hubbell. 

Eveline,   b.    Hudson,    N.    Y.,   July   21,    1828;     d.    1856;     m.    George 

Darling.  Had  two  sons;  both  are  dead. 
Aaron,   b.   Ghent,    N.   Y.,   Feb.   7,   1833;    d.   Oct.,   1884;    m.   Amelia 

Brown,  of  Deposit,  N.  Y.  No  children. 
Jacob,   b.   New  Britain,   Conn.,   Sept.   11,    1836;    d.   Aug.   28,    1841. 

834  Edward,  b.  July  7,  1839;  m.  Fanny  I.  Teed. 

835  Giles  M.,  b.  July  20,  1843;    m.   (i)   Agnes  M.  Leach;    m.   (2)   Eliza 

J.  Carmon. 

836  Julia  A.,  b.  Jan.   11,  1847;    m.  Stephen  Millichamp. 

369.  Deacon  John^  Langvvorthy,  son  of  John  and  Altana 

(Babcock)  Langworthy  (Ohver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  i,  1776;  d.  Alfred,  N.  Y., 
Jnne  5,  1856;  m.  Nov.  29,  1798,  Sarah,  dan.  of  Nathan  and 
Amelia  (Babcock)  Pendleton,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Aug.  13, 
1777,  d.  Apr.  7,   1851. 

He  was  Deacon  in  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  at  Hopkinton, 
R.  I.  He  removed  to  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  late  in  life,  where  he  was 
also  made  Deacon. 

Children,  b.   N.   Stonington : 

836a  John  Avery,*'  b.  Dec.  27,  1799;    m.   (i)  Eliza  Lewis;    m.   (2)   Mary 

Utter. 
Thomas,  b.  Mar.  20,   1802 ;    d.  July,   1828. 
836b  William  P.,  b.  Mar.  20,  1802;    m.  Susan  Stillman. 

Charles  D.,  b.  Feb.  25,   1804;    d.  June  9,   1876;    m.  Aug.   17,   1829, 

Susan   Saunders. 
Rev.   Isaac  P.,  b.  Jan.   19,   1806;    d.  Jan.  5,   1889;    m.  Aug.  8,   1842, 

Sarah  Williams. 
Asa  Albert,  b.  Mar.   17,   1808;    d.   May  23,   1845;    m.  Jan.   i,   1839, 

Eunice   Stillman. 
Benjamin   F.,   b.   May  7,   1810;    d.   Nov.  7,    1895;    m.    (i)    Apr.    11, 

1833,  Amy  Lewis;    m.   (2)   841  Eliza  Irish;    m.   (3)   Dec.  25,  1877, 

Maria  Wells. 
Nathan  Henry,  b.  Oct.  17,  1812;    d.  May  28,  1889;    m.  Feb.  20,  1837, 

Elizabeth  Carr. 
Sarah  A.,   b.   Dec.    i,    1814;     d.    Mar.   27,    1844;     m.   Mar.   27,    1837, 

Albert  Palmer. 
Altana,  b.  Apr.  8,  1817;    d.  Apr.  2,  184 1 ;    m.  Sept.  20,  1839,  Alfred 

Clark. 
James  B.,  b.  June  23,  1819;    m.  Mar.  20,  1843,  Martha  Stillman. 

370.  Content^    Langworthy,    dan.    of   John   and   Altana 
(Babcock)    Langworthy   (Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),    b.    Oct.    2,    1788,    at    Pendleton    Hill    (N.    Ston- 
ington, Conn.),  d.  in  Westerly,  R.  L,  at  the  home  of  her  son- 


^P*!W*^5**' 


DANIEL    BABCOCK. 
I 784- 1874. 


Page  193. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  193 

in-law,  Rev.  A.  B.  lUinlick,  1874;    ni.  juiic  i,  1823,  Deacon 
Daniel  Lewis,  of  Tlopkinton,  R.  I.     She  was  his  second  wife. 
Children : 

Sarali  Content,  1).  July  6,  1824;  ni.  ^^ar.  13,  1859,  Rev.  A.  B.  Bur- 
dick,  a  S.  U.  B.  minister. 

.\l)l)y  .\Ilana,  1).  Jan.  i.S,  1830;  ni.  .May  26,  1859,  David  Bliss,  of 
Allegany  County,  N.  V. 

371.  William   Avery"    Babcock,   son   of  Christopher   and 
P*olly  (Benedict)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Danbury.  Conn.,  Apr.  15,  1780;  d.  New  Haven, 
Conn.,  May  30,  1814;  m.  Danbury,  Jan.  31,  1802,  Abigail, 
dan.  of  Samuel  and  Rel)ecca  (Dickinson)  Cooke,  b.  Danbury, 
Nov.  13,  1779,  d.  New  Haven,  June  26,  1871. 

William  Avery  Babcock  w^as  a  soldier  in  the  Wav  of  18 12 
and  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  Colonel.  He  was  stricken 
with  apoplex}'  and  fell  from  his  horse  while  at  the  head  of  his 
battalion  on  the  New  Haven  Green.  He  was  carried  into  the 
Courthouse,  where  half  an  hour  later  he  died. 

He  was  one  of  the  pioneers  for  the  introduction  and  manu- 
facturing of  soft  felt  hats  in  this  country,  owning  a  large  fac- 
tory at  Bethel,  Conn.  In  1808  he  removed  his  family  and 
factory  to  New  Haven,  Conn. 

Children : 

837  Avery  C.,'*  b.  Dec.  8,  1802;    m.   (i)  Eliza  A.  Brown;    m.   (2)   Mary 

A.  Hodley. 

838  Christopher,  b.  Dec.  2,   1804 ;    m.  Jane  M.  Rose. 
William   Henry,  b.   Feb.  27,   1807;    d.   in  infancy. 

839  James  Fairchild.  b.  July  9,   1809;    m.  Catherine  A.  Mills. 

Ann  Maria,  b.  New  Haven.  Conn.,  July  7,  181 1;    d.  New  York  City; 

m.   New    Haven,    Bennett   Fowler.      They   had   one   son,    Charles 

Edward. 
Jane  A.,  b.  New  Haven.  Conn.,  May  8,  1813;    d.  May  9,  1815. 

372.  Daniel'^   Babcock,   son  of  Daniel  and   Content    (Pot- 
ter)   Babcock    (Oliver.    James,    James,    John,    James), 

b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Dec.  16,  1784;  d.  Potter  Hill, 'Apr.  2, 
1874;  m.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Oct.  19,  1816,  Ann,  dau.  of 
Peleg  and  Hannah  (Cory)  Almy,  b.  Portsmouth,  Nov.  3, 
1787,  d.  Potter  Hill,  Feb.  14,  1873'. 

He  was  a  blacksmith  and  probably  learned  his  trade  in  his 
father's  shop.  In  1803  he  was  working  at  Washington  Fac- 
tory, R.  I.,  and  in  18 15  was  in  business  at  Potter  Hill  in  the 
shop  which  he  bought  about  that  time.  In  1824  or  '25  he  took 
into  partnershi])  his  brother  Oliver,  and  the  two  were  asso- 
ciated in  business  until  1867,  wlien  the  partnership  was  termi- 
13 


194  ^/"-'  Babcock  Genealogy. 

nated.  the  liiisincss  closed,  and  the  shop,  which  had  hecn  sold 
to  E.  and  11.  Babcock,  was  torn  down. 

In  1807  he  was  Ensign  in  the  Westerly  Militia,  and  in  1808 
Lieutenant  in  the  same  company,  and  in  1842  served  as  a  law 
and  order  volunteer  in  the  Dorr  rebellion.  In  1816,  '17,  and 
'29  he  was  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  in  1821,  '23,  '39,  and  '40 
he  represented  his  town  in  the  State  Legislature. 

Children : 

Hannah  Almy,  b.  Potter  Hill.  Oct.  13,  1819;    d.  Potter  Hill,  May  3, 
1853,  unm. 

840  Mary  Ann,"  b.  Sept.  11,  183 1  ;    m.   (i)  Charles  N.  Crandall ;    m.  (2) 

Dr.  John   H.    Merrill. 

373.  Betsy'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Content  (Potter) 
Ba1)cock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Pot- 
ter Hill,  R.  1.,  Feb.  21,  1787;  d.  Hopkinton  (Ashaway),  R.  I., 
June  4,  1858;  m.  Hopkinton,  Nov.  25,  1807,  George,  son 
of  Benjamin  and  Martha  (Irish)  Irish,  b.  Newport,  R.  I., 
Oct.  I,  1786,  d.  Ashaway,  Apr.  19,  1869.  He  m.  (2) 
Sally  (Potter),  widow  of  Philip  Fenner ;  m.  (3)  Martha  Bab- 
cock, widow. 

George  Irish  when  young  learned  the  blacksmith  trade  of 
Daniel  Babcock,  whose  daughter  he  afterward  married ;  later 
became  a  farmer  on  a  hired  farm  in  N.  Stonington ;  still  later 
settled  upon  his  own  farm  in  Hopkinton. 

Children : 

841  Eliza,"  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  24,  1808;    m.  Benjamin  Frank- 

lin Langworthy. 

842  George,  Jr.,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Feb.  7,   1810;    m.    (i)   Maria  Potter; 

m.   (2)  Mary  S.  Adams. 

843  Rev.  James  Reed,  b.   N.   Stonington,  Dec.   18,   181 1;    m.    (i)    Char- 

lotte C.  Babcock;    m.   (2)   Eliza  Green  Browning. 
Emeline    M.,    b.    N.    Stonington,    May   23,    1815 ;     d.    New    London, 
Conn.,  Sept.  9,  185 1  ;    m.  at  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Mar.,  1838.  Thomas, 
son  of  Abel  and  Temperance   (Averv)    Avery,  b.   N.   Stonington, 
July  16,  1808.  d.  at  Brattleboro,  Vt.,  Sept.  8,  1883.     No  children. 

844  Daniel  B..  b.  N.   Stonington,  Feb.  9,  1818;    m.   Mary  Babcock. 

845  Lucy  Ann,  b.  June  7.   1819;    m.  Deacon  Matthew  S.  Kenyon. 

846  Mary  C.  b.  N.  Stonington,  Sept.  27,  1821  ;    m.  Albert  C.  Greene. 

847  Oliver  B.,  b.  N.   Stonington,  Aug.   12,  1826;    m.   Sarah  Anthony. 

374.  J.\coB   Davis'^   Babcock,    son   of  Daniel   and   Content 

(Potter)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Potter  Hill.  R.  I..  Jan.  20.  1789:  d.  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  June 
17,  1867:  m.  Portsmouth,  R.  I..  Apr.  19,  1825,  Elizabeth, 
dau.  of  Peleg  and  Hannah  (Cory)  Almy,  b.  Portsmouth, 
Apr.  23,  1803;   d.  Ashaway,  Apr.  17,  1884. 

In  his  early  manhood  he  taught  school,  but  in  18 10  went 


JACOB    D.    BABCOCK. 
I 789- I 867. 


Page  194. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  195 

for  four  years  to  Coventry,  R.  I.,  to  learn  the  machinist's 
trade,  but  in  1812,  while  setting  up  machinery  in  Massachu- 
setts, he  was  induced  to  go  "out  West"  to  Schenectady,  N.  Y., 
to  establish  a  machine  shop.  Shortly  thereafter  the  war  broke 
out,  and  Mr.  Babcock  enlisted  in  Col.  I'hiletus  Swift's  Regi- 
ment ''to  go  when  called,"'  but  was  never  called  into  the  field. 
He  remained  in  Schenectady  eight  years,  making  many  friends, 
among  whom  was  Dr.  Eliphalet  Nott,  President  of  Union  Col- 
lege. He  constructed  the  first  town  clock  in  that  city  which 
remained  in  use  until  i860.  In  1820  he  went  to  Cornwall, 
N.  Y.,  to  start  machinery  which  he  had  built,  and  remained 
there  to  superintend  the  mill. 

In  1825  he  purchased  a  half  interest  in  a  carding  mill  at 
Ashaway,  R.  I.,  and  removed  there,  where  he  spent  the  rest 
of  his  life  as  a  manufacturer,  miller,  and  country  merchant. 
He  was  one  of  the  pioneers  in  total  abstinence,  and  so  zealous 
was  he  in  advocating  teetotahsm  that  in  derision  his  neighbors 
called  the  place  Temperance  Hollov/. 

Mr.  Babcock  with  Miss  Sally  Knowles  organized  the  first 
Sabbath  school  in  the  town,  although  the  pastor  disapproved 
the  measure.  He  also  was  one  of  the  first  to  enlist  in  the  cause 
of  freedom  to  the  blacks,  becoming  a  pronounced  Abolitionist 
when  that  meant  ostracism,  and  even  danger  to  life  and  prop- 
erty. But  his  zeal  and  influence  gained  friends  for  the  cause, 
and  his  house  became  the  "depot  for  the  underground  rail- 
road." Seven  times  he  was  nominated  for  Lieutenant-Governor 
on  the  Abolition  ticket,  not  anticipating  election,  but  simply  to 
show  his  faith  in  his  principles.  One  of  the  most  beautiful 
events  in  his  life  occurred  when  Mr.  Lincoln's  Emancipation 
Proclamation  on  Jan.  i,  1863,  liberated  four  million  of  slaves. 
After  midnight  of  Dec.  31  his  neighbors  came  in  a  body  to 
congratulate  him  on  the  great  event  which  w^as  so  near  to  his 
heart,  calling  him  from  his  bed  with  drums  and  music.  He 
spoke  to  them  eloquently  and  feelingly,  saying  among  other 
things,  "^[y  joy  is  that  I  have  li\'ed  to  see  this  day,  w^hich  until 
lately  I  never  expected  to  see.  I  must  leave  the  rest  to  you 
younger  men." 

Jacob  Babcock  w^as  Justice  for  Hopkinton  183 1,  '33.  '38. 
He  was  Ensign  in  Hopkinton  Militia  in  181 1- 12.     (Smith.) 

Children: 

848  Harriet,**  b.  Mar.  5,  1826:    m.  John  Cnndall. 

George,  b.  Ashawav.  R.  I.,  July  5.  1828;    d.  Ashaway,  Aug.  12.  1830. 
Marv  Almy,  b.  Ashaway,  R.  I..  Aug.  14,  1831  ;    d.  Ashaway,  Oct.  7, 
1831. 


196  Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Peleg  A.,   b.   Ashaway,   R.   I.,   Sept.   7,   1832;    d.  Ashaway,   Aug.   3, 
1844. 

849  Sarah  .Xntoinette.  b.  Apr.  25,  1836;    in.   (i)  826  Edwin  Babcock;    m. 

(2)   William  M.  Humphrey. 
Jacob  D.,  b.  Ashaway,  R.   I.,  Jan.  29,   1839;    d.  Ashaway,  Mar.  i, 
1841. 

850  John  J.,  b.  Apr.  14,  1842;    m.  Marion  B.  Devoll. 

375.  Nancy'''  (Ann)  BABC(3CK.(lan.  of  Daniel  and  Content 

(Potter)  Babcock  (Oliver,  James.  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  May  9,  1791";  d.  Potter  HiH,  R.  I.,  Nov. 
20,  1868;  m.  Hopkinton,  Nov.  12,  1812.  Col.  Henry,  son  of 
Joseph  and  Phebe  (Wells)  Potter,  b.  Potter  Hill,  Mar.  12, 
1790,  d.  Waterford,  Conn.,  Nov.  22,  1864. 
Children : 

851  William  H.,'  b.  Aug.  26.   1816;  jn.  Bridget  Rathbun. 

852  Phoebe  A.,  b.  Mar.  22,  1823:    m.  Thomas  Carey  Potter. 

376.  Oliver'^  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Content  (Potter) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  James.  James,  John.  James),  b.  Hop- 
kinton, R.  I.,  Dec.  12,  1797.  d.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Sept.  9, 
1869;  m.  Stoning-ton,  Conn.,  Jan.  11,  1824,  Phebe, '^  dan.  of 
226  Stephen^  and  Phebe  (Bnrch)  Babcock,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Mar.  5,  1802,  d.  Potter  Hill,  Oct.  15,  1886. 

Educated  in  the  schools  of  his  native  town,  with  their  limita- 
tions, he  supplemented  his  schooling  with  good  reading,  of 
which  he  was  very  fond  all  his  life,  and  which  served  him,  like 
many  another,  in  good  stead  for  more  liberal  opportunities 
in  school.  As  a  young  man  he  taught  singing  school  during 
winter  evenings,  and  was  an  excellent  choir  singer,  having 
acted  as  chorister  in  his  church  for  about  twenty-five  years. 

When  only  twelve  years  of  age  he  was  baptized  and  united 
with  the  First  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Hopkinton,  with  which  he 
remained  a  member  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  always 
showed  a  dee])  interest  in  the  schools  of  his  neighborhood 
and  for  many  years  acted  as  school  trustee,  hiring  the  teachers 
and  always  making  them  welcome  guests  in  his  home  at  a  time 
when  "boarding-  around"  was  the  method  of  taking  care  of 
the  teachers  during  the  school  terms. 

He  served  his  town  as  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Assessor  of 
Taxes,  and  in  various  other  capacities.  Bv  his  efforts  the  Pot- 
ter Hill  post  office  was  established,  and  he  was  the  first  post- 
master. He  was  always  faithful  to  whatever  trust  was  im- 
posed upon  him,  honoring  the  position  rather  than  being  hon- 
ored by  it. 

About    1824   he   entered   into   partnership   with    his   eldest 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  197 

brother,  Daniel,  for  the  manufacture  of  edged  tools  at  Potter 
Hill,  R.  I.,  and  the  name  of  D.  Babcock  &  Co.  upon  any  tool 
was  always  a  sign  of  real  excellence.  The  partnership  con- 
tinued about  forty  years,  when  the  water  power  was  sold  to 
the  factory  o^vners  at  Potter  Hill. 

In  June,  1842,  when  the  Dorr  war  occurred  in  Rhode  Island 
and  the  State  government  was  threatened,  Mr.  Babcock,  as 
Sergeant,  "shouldered  his  musket"  and  with  his  brother  Daniel 
and  his  own  son  Nathan,  then  a  young  man  less  than  eighteen 
years  of  age,  went  to  Providence  in  the  company  of  Capt. 
William  Potter,  3d  Regiment,  3d  Brigade  of  State  Volunteers, 
to  light,  if  need  be,  for  "law  and  order;"  but  no  fighting  oc- 
curred. His  youngest  son,  the  author  of  this  book,  remembers 
well  the  bright  flintlock  musket  which  his  father  brought  home 
from  this  campaign. 

]\Ir.  Babcock  was  eminently  a  social,  genial  man,  fond  of  his 
family  and  friends,  devoted  to  his  Church,  a  temperance  re- 
former among  the  first  of  his  town,  and  an  enthusiast  in  the 
cause  of  antislavery,  though  not  an  adherent  of  the  Aboli- 
tion Party.  He  was  an  all-around  broad-minded  man.  Pre- 
vious to  his  marriage  he  settled  at  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  where 
the  remainder  of  his  life  was  spent.  His  wndow,  who  survived 
him  seventeen  years,  lived  in  the  same  house  for  sixty-two 
years.  "He  was  Justice  of  the  Peace  of  Westerly  in  1843, 
'46,  '47,  '48."     (Smith.) 

Children,  b.  at  Potter  Hill,  R.  I. : 

853  Nathan,*'  b.  Nov.  19,  1824;    m.  Phebe  Johnson. 

Phebe  Maria,  b.  Feb.  20.  1826;    d.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  May  18,  1833. 

854  Amanda,  b.  Oct.  20.  1827;    m.  Thomas  R.  Green. 

855  Daniel,  b.  Dec.  4.   1828;    m.    (i)    Phebe  Stillman ;    m.   (2)   Mary  A. 

Stillman. 

856  Ann  Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  7,  1831  ;    m.  Charles  A.  Fennier. 

857  Stephen,  b.  Dec.  22,  1832;    m.  Mrs.  Henrietta  Van  Patten  Taylor. 

858  Lucy  .•Mmy,  b.   Sept.   17.   1834;    unm. 
Martha  Jane,  b.  Dec.  8.  1836;    d.  Oct.  31,  1837. 

859  Phebe  Jane,  b.  Sept.  30,  1838;    m.  William  B.  Wait. 
Cynthia  Cogswell,  b.  May  28,  1841  ;    d.  Apr.  25.   1842. 

860  Julia  Maria,  b.  Apr.  13.  1843 ;    m.  Henry  S.  Ambler. 

377.  Lucy'  Babcock.  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Content  (Potter) 
Babcock  (Oliver.  James,  James,  John.  James),  b.  Hop- 
kinton.  R.  I.,  Jan.  24,  1801  ;  d.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Aug.  8, 
1853;  m.  Hopkinton,  Dec.  26,  1819,  David,  son  of  Pe- 
leg  and  Hannah  (Cory)  Almy,  b.  Portsmouth,  May  13, 
1794,  d.  Portsmouth,  Aug.  2,  1872.  Settled  at  Portsmouth, 
R.  I.,  on  their  own  farm,  where  all  their  children  were  born 
and  reared. 


198  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

861  Elizabeth,'"  b.  Sept.  26,  1820;    m.  Horatio  Alonzo  Stone. 

862  Lucy  Maria,  b.  Aug.  3,   1824;    m.  Andrew  Jackson  Cory. 

863  Harriet  Wayland,  b.  May  16,  1832;    m.  Elijah  Anthony. 
Daniel,  b.  Apr.  18,  1837;    unni. 

864  Altana  Erances,  b.  Mar.  12,  1843;    m.  William  C.  Chase. 

The  above  Daniel  owns  and  occupies  the  family  homestead,  at  Ports- 
mouth, R.  I.,  1903. 

378.  Mary'  Babcock,  dan.  of  Daniel  and  Content  (Potter) 
Babcock  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Hop- 

kinton,  R.  I.,  Nov.  2,  1806,  or  '07;  d.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Jan. 
18,  1883;  m.  Hopkinton,  Jan.  15,  1839,  Peleg,  son  of  Clark 
and  Sally  (Rogers)  Saunders,  b.  Potter  Hill,  Mar.  9,  1809, 
d.  Providence,  R.  I.,  Jan.  16,  1889. 

Peleg  Saunders  was  a  ship  carpenter;  settled  at  Mystic, 
Conn.,  where  for  many  years  he  worked  at  his  trade;  later 
owned  and  occupied  a  home  at  Potter  Hill,  and  worked  a  por- 
tion of  the  time  at  ship  building  in  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Children : 

Ann  Amelia,  b.  Mystic,    Conn.,  Oct.  31,  1840;    d.  Hopkinton,  R.  I., 

June  8,  1843. 
George,  b.    Hopkinton,   R.   I..   May  3,   1844;    d.   Hopkinton,   Feb.  8, 

1847. 

865  Ella  B.,'  b.  May  i,  1851;    m.  Wellington  L.  Lewis. 

379.  Timothy"  Babcock,  son  of  Timothy  and  Esther  (Bill- 
ings) Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  in  Ashford,  Conn.,  in  1777;  m.  Nov.  13,  1806,  Martha, 
dau.  of  Ames  and  Martha  (Woodward)  Bugbee.  He  d. 
Ware.  Mass.,  Dec.  15,  1828. 

In  181 5  he  moved  from  Ashford,  Conn.,  to  Ware,  Mass., 
where  he  owmed  and  cultix^ated  a  farm  of  two  hundred  and 
sixty  acres.  He  also  owned  and  kept  a  tavern  stand  on  the 
main  road  between  Boston  and  Albany,  which  he  piuxhased, 
it  is  said,  of  his  brother  Archibald.  In  1836  the  heirs  sold  the 
homestead  farm  and  tavern  stand  in  Ware  and  all  wxnt  West, 
going  by  the  Ohio  River  to  Cairo,  111.,  thence  up  the  Missis- 
sippi River  to  St.  Louis,  where  the  winter  of  1836-7  was 
spent.  In  the  following  spring  they  removed  to  Hampton 
Township,  Rock  Island  Count3^  111.  They  were  the  pioneers 
of  that  township,  and  their  descendants  still  reside  there. 

Martha  (Bugbee)  Babcock,  widow  of  Timothy,  d.  in  Hamp- 
ton Township,  111.,  Sept.  17.  1849,  aged  sixty-five. 

Children : 

866  Esther  Palmer,^  b.   Sept.   11,   1807;    m.    (i)   Hinckley  Andrews;    m. 

(2)  Aaron  Gould. 


The  Dahcuck  Genealogy.  199 

867  Martha  Woodard,  b.  Jan.  9,  181 1;    m.  Lemuel  Andrews. 

868  Julia  Maria,  b.  Oct.  13,   1813;    m.  David  Hawes. 

869  Timothy  Alpheus,  b.  Mar.  25.  1816;    m.  Amanda  McNeil. 

870  Francis  Bugbce,  b.  May  i,  1819;    unm. 

871  John  Elias.  b.  Dec.  18,  1821  ;    m.  Eliza  Wells. 
Stephen  Fielder,  b.  Nov.  17.   1825;    d.  Nov.  24,  1825. 

872  George  Mills,  b.  Aug.  10,  1828;    m.  Helen  Negus. 

380.  Archibald'    Babcock,    son    of    Timothy    and    Esther 
(Bilhngs)    Babcock    (Timothy,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Mar.  8,  1780;  d.  Charlestovvn, 
Mass.,  Aug.  10,  1862;  m.  (i)  Hannah,  dau.  of  Thaddeus  and 
Mary  (Coburn)  Richards,  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Aug.,  1785,  d. 
Feb.  17,  181 7;  m.  (2)  18 18,  Ehzabeth,  dan.  of  Nehemiah 
and  Susannah  (Stearns)  Wyman,  of  W'oburn,  Mass.,  b.  ]\Ied- 
ford,  Mass.,  Jan.  6.  1796,  d.  Jan.  27,  1859. 

Archibald  settled  first  in  Ashford  or  Mansfield,  Conn., 
thence  removed  to  Ware,  Mass.,  where  he  kept  a  tavern  on  the 
main  road  from  Boston  to  Albany.  He  later  sold  the  tavern 
to  his  brother  Timothy  and  removed  to  Boston,  and  finally  to 
Charlestown.  He  owned  much  real  estate  on  Bunker  Hill  and 
vicinity.  At  his  death  he  left  to  the  city  of  Charlestown 
$3,000,  the  income  of  which  was  to  be  used  to  furnish  music 
on  the  4th  of  July  and  17th  of  June;  also  $3,000  for  same 
piu'pose  to  town  of  Ashford.  Conn.,  his  native  town,  and  also 
$3,000  toward  a  public  library  in  same  place. 

The  remains  of  himself,  of  his  two  wives,  and  a  number  of 
his  children  are  interred  in  a  burying  grovmd  near  Bunker 
Hill,  Charlestown,  where  a  granite  monument  of  elaborate 
design  marks  the  place.  His  marriages,  children,  etc.,  can  be 
found  in  W'yman's  Charlestown  Genealogies  and  Estates. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

873  Archibald  D.,*  b.  Dec.  13,   1808;    m.  Fanny  Richards. 
Elbridge.  b.  Ware,  Mass..  June  i,  1811;    d.  1815. 
Hannah  R.,  b.  ;    d.  Nov.  7,   1815. 

Thaddeus.  b.  Boston,  Mass.,  May  11,  1813;    d.  Nov.  21,  1818. 
Maria,  b.  Mar.  26,  1815;    d.  Oct.  30,  1833. 
Hannah,  b.  Feb.  8,  1817;    d.  Mar.  29.  1817. 

Children,  by  second  wife : 

Elizabeth    Wyman.    b.    Dec.    13,    1818;     d.    ;     m.    1840,    Abijah 

Wyman,  son  of  Abijah  and  Martha  (Story)  Hovey.  She  was  a 
widow  in  1889. 

Esther  Ann,  b.  ;    d.   Sept.  28,   1821. 

Isaac  W.,  b.  ;    d.  Aug.  4,  1826. 

381.  Thomas  Palmer"  Babcock,  son  of  Timothy  and  Es- 
ther (Billings)  Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James.  John, 

James),  b.  in  A.shford,  Conn.,  Nov.  26,  1793;    d.  Owensboro, 


200  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Ky.,   1848;    111.  Emily  Ruice,  b.  Williiigtoii,  Conn.,  d.  Onon- 
daga, N.  Y.,  1827. 
Children,  b.  Ashford  : 

Dwight,  b.   1815;    (1.   New   Orleans,    1848. 

874  Sanford,-  b.  Oct.   15,   1817;    m.  Adeline  J.  Green. 

875  Palmer,  I).  Aug.  12,  i8ig;    d.  ;    m.   (i)   Lucenia  Case;    m.   (2) 

Mrs.   Henry. 

876  Jasper,  b.  1821  ;    m.  in  New  York  State  in  1844. 

Emily,   b.  Apr.,   1823;    d.  ;    m.   Charles  McCarthy,   New  York. 

No  issue. 

382.  John  Read'  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Louisa  (Gil- 
more)  Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  N.  Stoning-ton,  Conn.,  Jan.  28,   1788;  d.  Carbondale,  Pa., 
Oct.   15,   1836;    m.  Nov.   I,   1815.  Eliza,  dan.  of  Zelophehad 
Ely,  of  Lyme,  Conn.,  b.  Lyme,  1798,  d.  1835. 
Children : 

877  Jacob  Ely,'  b.   Oct.  28,   1817;    m.   Lucy  Lathrop. 

878  Elizabeth    Sterling,    b.    July    24,    1820;     m.    Jan.    i,    1843,    Andrew 

Rogers. 

879  Louisa  Gilmore,  b.  Dec.  15,  1821 ;    m.   (i)   Samuel  W.  Spencer;    m. 

(2)  James  G.  Packer. 
Lyman  Robert,  b.  Pennsylvania,  Sept.  25,  1823 ;    d.  Sept.  26,  1826. 

880  Charles  March,  b.  Pennsylvania,  Dec.  22,  1825  ;    m.  Clara  D.  Connor. 

881  John  Read,  Jr.,  b.  Pennsylvania.  Apr.  i,  1828;     m.  Betsy  Warner. 

882  Lucy   Amanda,   b.    Pennsylvania,    Nov.   5,    1830;     m.   Oct.    14,    1852, 

George  C.   Brundage. 
Samuel  Benjamin,  b.  Carbondale,   Pa.,  Feb.  21,   1833;    d.  Salt  Lake 
City,  Mar.,   1877.     He  served  as  a  scout  under  Gen.  Rosecrans  in 
the  War  of  the  Rebellion. 

883  James  Thomas,  b.  Pennsylvania,  Feb.  4,  1835 ;    m.  Julia  A.  Mason. 

383.  Louisa   Miners    Babcock,   dan.   of  John   and   Louisa 

(Gilmore)    Babcock    (Timothy,    James,    James,    John, 
James),  b.  Dec.  17,  1789;  d.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Sept.  11,  1870; 
m.  Oct.   13,   18 1 5,  Jesse  Brown,  b.  Brooklyn,  Conn.,  Aug.   i, 
1790,  d.  Hopkinton,  July  27,  1869. 
Children,  b.  Hopkinton : 

Son,  b.  July  13,   1817;    d.  same  day. 

Maria  Louisa,  b.  Apr.  19,  1819;    d.  Oct.  9,  1819. 

Son,  b.  May  20,  1820;    d.  same  day. 

884  Adeline  Hester",  b.  Nov.  5,  1821  ;  m.  Dennis  S.  Wilbur. 
Eliza  Averill,  b.  Jan.  10,  1823;    d.  Apr.  7,  1833. 

885  Jesse,  b.  July   10,   1824;    m.    (i)    Malvina  Newsbury;    m.    (2)    Mrs. 

Susan  West. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  Mar.  30,  1826;    d.  Feb.  4,  1841. 

384.  Robert  Gilmore"  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Louisa 

(Gilmore)    Babcock    (Timothy,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Pomfret,  Conn.,  Feb.  29,  1792;    d.  ;    m.  (i) 

Boston,  Aug.  3,  1817,  Sally  Otis,  b.  Roxbury,  Mass.,  May  15, 


OLIVER    BABCOCK. 
1 797- 1 869. 


Page  196. 


The  Bab  cock  Genealogy.  201 

1798,  d.  Sept.  2^,  1819;  m.  (2)  Dorchester,  Mass.,  Apr.  25, 
1822,  Lucy,  dau.  of  Unite  and  Jernslia  (Glover)  Blackman, 
b.  Dorchester,  June  10,  1803,  d.  Mihvaukee,  Wis.,  June  10, 
1875,  at  the  residence  of  her  dauj^hter,  Mrs.  Louisa  G.  Bol- 
ton.    She  was  buried  in  her  father's  tomb  in  Dorchester. 

In  the  War  of  1812  Robert  was  a  privateer's  man  on  board 
the  American  privateer  Prince  de  Neufchatel.  Oct.  11,  1814, 
his  vessel  had  a  bloody  but  victorious  engagement  with  the 
British  frigate  Enclymion.  A  thrilling  account  of  this  en- 
gagement is  given  by  Roosevelt  in  his  Naval  War  of  181 2.  In 
181 5  Mr.  Babcock  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  British  and  con- 
fined in  Dartmoor  until  the  close  of  the  \var. 

He  was  a  skillful  blacksmith.  He  obtained  the  contract  in 
1843  for  the  iron  doors  and  shutters  for  Bunker  Hill  Monu- 
ment. He  invented  a  machine  for  making  horse  shoes,  and 
patented  the  same  Feb.  24,  1851. 

Children  by  second  wdfe: 

Jerusha  Glover,  b.  Roxbury,  Mass.,  Ma\'  2,  1824;    d.  Aug.  26,  1826; 
ni.  George  La  Fayette,  b.  Roxbury,  Mass.,  May  2,  1824;    d.  Nov. 
25.  1848. 
886  Louisa  Gilmore,"  b.  Oct.  7,  1827 ;    m.  G.  W.  Bolton. 
9Sy  Andrew   Jackson,   b.   July   12.    1830;     m.    Harriet   Palmer. 

888  Lucy  Blackman,  b.  Sept.  8,  1832 ;    ni.  Henry  Fobes. 

889  Sarah  Otis,  b.  Apr.  22,  1834;    unm. 

Josephine  Augusta,  b.  Neponset  Village,  Dorchester,  Mar.   11,   1836; 
d.  Mar.  i.  1850. 

890  Robert  Gilmore.  Jr.,  1).  June  27,   1838;    ni.  Lizzie  Young. 
Elizabeth  Averil,  b.  Quincy,  Mass.,  July  6,  1842;    d.  young. 
John  Read,  b.  Quincy.  Mass.,  July  6,  1842 ;    d.  Apr.  24,  1865. 
Solomon   Willard,   b.    Quincy,    Alass.,   Dec.    13,    1844 ;     res.    1902.    S. 

Boston,    ^lass. ;     m.    1868,    Louise  J.,    dau.   of   Samuel   and   Eliza 
Rhodes,  of  Fall  River.     No  issue. 

385.  Daniei7  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Sarah  (Btullong) 
Babcock  (Timothy,  James.  James,  John,  James),  b.  N. 

Stonington,  Conn..  July  14,  1794;  d.  Alexandria,  N,  Y.,  Aug. 
26,  1875;  m.  Harriet,  dau.  of  George  Page,  d.  Oct.  2,  1872, 
aged  se\'enty-two. 

Daniel  and  his  sister  Polly  were  the  first  of  this  Babcock 
family  to  settle  in  Alexandria,  N.  Y. 

Children: 

891  Angeline,'*  b.  Dec.  16,  1821  ;    m.  John  P.  Hibbard. 

892  Thankful,  b.  Dec.  29,  1823 ;    m.  William  H.  Curtis. 
Elmira,  b.  ;    m.  Orin  Babcock. 

386,  Lydia'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  and  Sarah  (Budlong) 
Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  N. 

Stonington.  Conn..  May  2,  1797;  d.  Portsmouth,  O. ;  m. 
Horace  Craine. 


202  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Lydia,  b.  ;    in.  Beatie;    Melissa;    Horace. 

387.  Nancy"  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  and  Sarah  (Budlong) 
Babcock    (Timothy,   James,    James,   John,   James),    b. 

Sherburne.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  28,  1799;  d.  Erie,  Pa.,  Nov.  22,  1822; 

m.  Parmeter. 

Children : 

Had  a  daughter,  now   (1902)   living  at  Erie. 
Oliver;    a  Judge  at  Elkhart,  Ind. 

388.  PoLLY^  Babcock,  dan.  of  James  and  Sarah  (Budlong) 
Babcock    (Timothy,   James,   James,   John,   James),    b. 

Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  May  5,  1801  ;  d.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  July 
26,  1884:  m.  Dec,  1822,  William  Holmes,  b.  Oct.  19,  1787, 
d.  Alexandria,  Apr.  26,  1866. 

He  was  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  and  was  wounded  in 
the  battle  of  Oueenstown  Heights.  They  settled  in  1822  at 
Alexandria,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  Alexandria : 

893  Sarah  B.,*  b.  Sept.  13,  1826;    m.  John  Burdick. 

Lois  B.,  b.  June  28,  1828;    m.  Dec.  26,  1848,  Daniel  Reynolds.    They 
had  ten  children. 
895  Mary  E.,  b.  Sept.  15,  1831  ;    m.  Daniel  Ebblie. 

Harriet  E.,  b.  Nov.  27,  1839;  m.  Dec.  31,  1859,  Zera  Wakefield. 
Lived  in  Watertown ;  had  seven  children,  all  of  whom  died  but 
one,  Ida,  who  m.  Waller  Woodward;    res.  Great  Bend,  N.  Y. 

389.  Rectina''^  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  and  Sarah    (Bud- 
long) Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  May  9,  1803;   lived  and  died  in  Steuben 
Valley,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Solomon  Porter. 
Children : 

George,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Sarah,  b.  ;    m.   (i)  Hawkins;    m.   (2)   George  Hunt.    Had 

four  children. 

Mary,  b.  ;    m.  Ball,  now  deceased. 

Emily,  b.  ;    m.  Ball,  now  deceased. 

390.  Rhodes    Reed'^    Babcock,    son    of   James    and    Sarah 
(Budlong)    Babcock    (Timothy,   James,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  30,  1805;  d.  Alexandria, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  20,  1885;  m.  Alexandria,  July  26,  1832,  Melissa, 
dau.  of  Richard  and  Betsy  (Leonard)  Thorn,  b.  Feb.,  18 15. 
Rhodes  Babcock  moved  from  Sherburne  in  1824  to  what  is 
now  known  as  Barnes  Settlement,  Alexandria,  N.  Y. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  203 

Children,  b.  at  Alexandria : 

898  Nancy  Jane,"  b.  Sept.  19.  1833;    m    (0  Augustus  Caprins;    m.   (2) 

William  McGrann. 

899  James  Richard,  b.  Sept.   17,  1835;    m.   (i)   Lucretia  Evans;    m.   (2) 

Josephine  Luther. 

900  John  Rhodes,  b.  Oct.  26,  1837;    m.  Mary  A.  Loan. 

901  Betsy  Caroline,  b.   May  4,   1840;    m.    (i)   Ledsmar  Randel ;    m.   (2) 

George  Barden. 

902  William    Reed,   b.   Apr.   23,    1842;     m.    (i)    Julia  Johnson;    m.    (2) 

Polly   Hill. 
Hiram  Westley,  b.  Apr.  19,  1844;    d.  July  14.  1845. 

903  Joseph  Hill,  b.  May  14,  1847;    m.  Martha  J.  Dollings. 

904  Daniel  Franklin,  b.  Sept.  30,  1849;    m.  Annie  S.  Dickey. 

905  Liliie  Melissa,  b.  Jan.  25,  1856;    m.  Edward  D.  Herrick. 

391.  Philena"  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  and  Sarah    (Bud- 
long)  Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James.  John,  James), 

b.  Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  18.  1809;   m.  Giles  Downing.   Lived 
with  her  son  in  Galesburg,  111. 
Child : 
Frank. 

392.  Ora"  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Prudence  (Walters) 
Babcock    (Timothy,   James,   James,   John,   James),   b. 

June  16,  1817;  d.  Marquette,  Mich.;  m.  Alexandria,  N.  Y., 
Catherine  Derosie. 

•    Ora  Babcock  was  a  soldier  in  a  New  York  regiment  in  the 
Civil  V\\ar.     He  was  a  competent  teacher,  and  lived  for  many 
years  in  Oswego,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Eunice,  b.  1857  (?)  ;    m.  John  Fenner.  of  Oswego,  d.  soon  after. 
Hattie,  b.  1874;    m- Marshall;    res.  1902,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 

393.  Orrin'    Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Prudence   (Wal- 
ters) Babcock  (Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.   Hamilton,   N.  Y.,   Apr.  6,    1819;    d.   Alexandria,  Apr.   7. 
1883;  m.  Elmira  Babcock,  dau.  of  his  half-brother  Daniel.   Or- 
rin lived  at  Fairfax,  Va.,  until  after  the  Civil  War,  when  he 
moved  to  Alexandria. 
Children : 

La  Mott,  deceased ;    Dewitt,  deceased. 

394.  JoxATHAN'   Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Jonathan  and  Eliza- 
beth (Adams)  Babcock  (Nathan,  Samuel,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Westerlv.  R.  I.,  Sept.  13,  1795;  d.  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  2T,  1852;  m.  Plainfield,  N.  Y.,  Mary  (Polly), 
dau.  of  Perry  C.  Clark,  d.  Plainfield,  Aug.  31,  1830. 


204  ^^"'  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children: 

906  Morris,'*  b.  Aug.   14.   1820;    m.  Elizabeth  Brand. 

907  Mary,  b.  Jan.  3,  1823;    ni.  Milton  W.  St.  John. 
Sophia,  b.  Feb.,   1826;    d.  Aug.  9,  1856. 

395.  Charles'  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  and  Tacy  ( Lang- 
worthy)     Babcock     (Nathan,     Sanincl,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Aug.  28,  1792;  d.  Aug.  29,  1830; 

m.  Aug.  15,  1816,  Martha  Gardner,    b.  ,  d.  Onarga  Uill, 

Aug.  26,  1868  or  '69. 
Children : 

908  Eliza  Ann,"  b.  Oct.  8,   1817;    m.  Francis  Utter. 

909  Elisha,  b.  Apr.  2:^,  1819;    m.  Jane  Clark. 

910  Horace,  b.  Sept.  13,  1821 ;    m.  Sarah  M.  De  Show. 
Samuel  Stennett,  b.  May  28,  1826. 

396.  Jonathan"  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  and  Tacy  (Lang- 
worthy)     Babcock     (Nathan,     Samuel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly  R.  L,  July  20,  1794;  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
May  28,  1864;  m.  (i)  Norwich,  Conn.,  Aug.  12,  1821,  Julia 
T.,  dau.  of  Perry  and  Julia  (Thompson)  Chesebrough,  b.  Nor- 
wich, Nov.  9,  1800,  d.  Brookfield,  Feb.,  1831 ;  m.  (2)  Feb., 
1832,  Caroline  L.  Chesebrough,  sister  of  first  wife,  b.  Nor- 
wich, Apr.  15,  1802,  d.  Brookfield,  Feb.,  1891. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield : 

Cornelia,  b.  Mar.  23,  1823;    d.  Brookfield,  Mar.  12,  1842,  unm. 
Julia  C,  b.  Feb.  10,  1831  ;    d.  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  July  19.  1900,  unm. 
Charles  Felix,  b.   May  2,   1833;    d.   Chicago,   111.,  Jan.  27,   1S82;    m. 

West  Union,  la.,  Dec.   16,  1874,  Anna  A.  Rogers.     She  res.   1902, 

West  Union. 
9TI   Hamden  R..'  b.  July  8,  1835;    m.  Adclia  D.  Beebc. 

George   Hubbard,  b.   Dec.  23,   1841  ;    d.   Hamilton,   N.   Y.,  Aug.    14, 

1897,  unm. 

397.  Samuel  Langvvorthy'  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  and 
Tac_y  (Langworthy)  Babcock  (Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1799;  d.  Adams, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  18,  1872;  m.  (i)  Brookfield,  Nov.  3,  1826,  Han- 
nah Williams,  b.  ,  d.  July  4,  1830;   m.  (2)  Apr.  5,  1831, 

Almyra,   dau.   of  Samuel  and   Polly    (Stillman)    Burdick.  b. 
Brookfield,  Feb.  12,  181 1,  d.  Nortonville,  Kan.,  Nov.  13,  1883. 
Children  by  second  wife : 

Hannah,   b.   Brookfield,   N.   Y.,   May   13,    1832;     d.   Adams,    N.   Y., 

June  22.  1853. 
912  Herbert  E.,*  b.  Sept.  28,  1833 ;    m.  Lua  Card. 

Angeline,  b.  Brooicfield,  Nov.  12,  1835 ;    res.  1902,  Northville,  Kan. ; 

unm. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  205 

913  Sophronia  B..  b.  June  29,  1S37;    m.  Oliver  Davis. 

914  Osnian,  h.  Dec.  ,^o.   iS,V):    in.  Harriet  Latidpliere. 

Charles  O..  b.  .Adams,  Mar.  0,  184 1  ;  d.  Fori  Carrol,  D.  C,  July  31, 
1863. 

915  Cornelia,  b.  Jan.   18,  1844:    m.  John  G.  Spiccr. 

916  IMalonc  S.,  b.  July  16,  1849;    m.  Amy  F.  Green. 

398.  Andrew''^  B.xbcock,  .son  of  Charles  and  Tacv   (Lan<:^- 
wortliy)     Bal)Cock     (Natlian,     Samuel,    James,     J^lm, 

James),  b.  Oct.  28,  1S03;  d.  Kankakee,  111.,  Nov.  17,  i860; 
m.  1830,  Orilla,  dan.  of  Rev.  Elias  Bailey,  b.  New  York,  Dec. 
10,  18 10,  d.  Kankakee. 

Children,  h.  Rrookfield,  N.  Y. :         • 

917  Norman,'  b.  Apr.  17,  1831  :    m.  Emogene  Bardeen. 

Elmer,  b.  June  12,  1836;    d.  West  Winfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1890. 
Dwight  I.,  b.  Feb.  22,  1845;    d.  1888,  Kankakee,  111. 
Flora,  b.  Sept.  12,  1849. 

918  Florence  O.,  b.  Apr.  10,  1852;    m.  Herbert  H.  Wilcox. 

399.  Henry  C?  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  and  Tacy  (Lang- 
worthy)     Bal)Cock     (Nathan.     Samuel,    James,    John, 

Tames),  b.  Brookfield.  N.  Y..  Oct.  13,  1805;   d.  Albion.  Wis., 
Jan.  8.  18S4:  m.  De  Ruyter.  N.  Y..' Nov.  16.  183T,  Temper- 
ance, dau.  of  William  and  Anna  (Coon)   Burdick,  b.  Albion, 
Wis..  Nov.  15,  181 T,  d.  Jan.  10,  1900. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield: 

Charles  W.,  b.  May  15.  1833 :    d.  Brookfield.  Feb.  8,  1834- 

919  Emilus  W..'  b.  Jan.  9,  1835 ;    m.  Marie  E.  Brown. 

920  Henry  De  Los.  b.  Aug.  30,  1837;    m.  Sarah  E.  Reynolds. 

921  Lorene  E.,  b.  May  24,  1841  ;    m.  Irving  Winnek. 
Cornelia,  b.  Oct.  28,  1844:    d.  Albion.  Wis.,  Nov.  27,  1864. 
Tacv  M..  b.  Apr.  2.  1846:    d.  De  Ruvter,  N.  Y.,  Mav  29,  1847. 
IMartha  V.,  b.  Nov.  15,  1849;    d.  Albion,  Wis..  May  25,  1882. 

922  Frances  D.,  b.  June  4,  1852 ;    m.  Nathan  Kelley. 

400.  Elery'''  Babcock,    son    of    Charles    and  Tacy  (Lang- 
worthy)     Babcock     (Nathan,  .Samuel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  27,  181 1  ;   d.  Albion.  Wis., 
May  4,   1865:  m.  Clarksville,  N.  Y.,  Mar.   13,   1833.  Fanny, 
dau.  of  Amos  and  Catherine  (Clark)  Burdick,  b.  Clarksville, 
Mar.  13.  1 8 14,  d.  Albion,  Apr.  24,  189 1. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield: 

Catherine,  b.  Jan.  6,  1834  :    res.   IQ02,  Albion.  Wis. 

Emma  L..  b.  Aug.  16.  1836;  res.  1902,  Minneapolis,  Minn.;  m. 
Albion.  Wis.,  W.  D.  Hillyer. 

Hermon.  b.  Apr.  9,  1839;  d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Oct.  2,  1892;  m.  Char- 
lotte Odell. 

Florus  W..  b.  Tan.  22,  1842;    res.  1902,  Sparta,  Wis. 

923  Charles  I.,'  b.  May  11,  1850;    m.  Clara  J.  Wilcox. 


2o6  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

401.  Albert''^  Babcock,  son   of   Charles    and    Tacy  (Lang- 
worthy)     Babcock     (Nathan,     Samuel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Brookhekl,  N.  Y.,  July  6,  1814;  d.  Adams  Center, 
N.  Y.,  May  8,  1884;  m.  Verona,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20,  1845,  Sophro- 
nia  O.,  dan.  of  Caleb  and  Snsan  (Williams)  Green,  b. 
Verona,  Feb.  14,  1816,  d.  Adams  Center,  Mar.  7,  1890. 

Albert  Babcock  at  one  time  was  a  merchant,  later  owned  a 
large  flouring  mill  at  Rome,  N.  Y.,  which  was  destroyed  by 
fire. 

Children : 

Charles,  b.  1846,  Brookfield;    res.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Adams 

Center,  Ella  Williams. 
Hamilton,   b.    1848,    Brookfield ;     res.    1902,   Watertown,    N.    Y. ;    m. 

Lee,  N.  Y.,  Nellie  Putman. 

924  Orletta  A.,"  b.  July  18,  1849;    m.  Orville  Potter. 

925  Mary  A.,  b.  July  20.  1853 ;    m.  Morris  Merriman. 
George   N.,  b.   Verona,   1855 ;    d.   Verona,   unni. 
Irving,  b.  Verona,   1858;    unm. 

402.  David^    Babcock,  son   of    David   and    Fanny    (Tifft) 
Babcock    (Nathan,    Samuel,   James,   John,   James),   b. 

Westerly,  R.  L,  Sept.  21,  1809;  d.  Mason  City,  la.;   m.  Maria 
York.  d.  California. 
Children  : 

925a  William,"  b.  Oct.  2,  1843 ;    m.  Emma  Ingraham. 
Frank;  Candace ;  Sarah;  Fannie. 

403.  JoHN^  Babcock,  son  of  David  and  Fanny  (Tifft)  Bab- 
cock (Nathan,  Samuel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Lot- 
tery Village,  near  Westerly,  R.  L,  Dec.  16,  1810;  d.  Leonards- 
ville,  N.  Y.,  Oct..  1894;  m.  (i)  Leonardsville,  Mar.  i,  1841, 
Sarah  M.,  dau.  of  Reynolds  and  Sarah  (Clark)  Greenman,  b. 
Edmeston,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  19,  1818,  d.  Leonardsville,  Dec.  12, 
1877;   m.  (2)  Lorett  Coon. 

Child : 

926  Henry  Dwight,**  b.  June  24,  1845  ;    m.  Nancy  Brown. 

404.  Charlotte^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Paul    and    Charlotte 
(Crandall)    Babcock    (Samuel,    Samuel,   James,    John^ 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Sept.  15,  1781  ;  d.  Brookfield. 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  22,  1844;  m.  Sept.  17,  1803,  Westerly,  Augustus, 

son  of  Augustus  and  Thankful  (Saunders)  Crandall,  b. ; 

d.  Oct.  9,  1847,  Brookfield. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield : 

Welcome,   b.    Mar.   28,    181 1;    d.   Walworth,   Wis.,   Feb.,    1889;    m. 
Aug.  26,  1830,  Emily  Douse. 


PHEBE  (BABCOCK)   BABCOCK. 

1802- 1886.  Page  196. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  207 

Damarius,  t).  ;    m.   Gardner  Coon. 

Jarcd,  b.  Nov.  4,  1814;    d.  Brookfield,  Apr.  5,  1893;    m.   (i)   Alzina, 

dau.    of  Josiah    Mason;     m.    (2)    Corey.      Two   children   by 

each   wife. 
Jerry,  b.  Nov.  4,  1814;    m.   (i)   Polly  Palmer,    d.  Oct.  20.  1855;    m. 

(2)   689  Vermeda  Babcock. 

Fidelia,  b.  ;    ni.  July  10,  1836.  John  Brown. 

Phebe,  b. ;    m.  Feb.  4.  1840.  Sila.s  Burdick,  of  W.  Genesee. 

Cynthia,  b.  ;    m.   Charles  Coon. 

405.  Damarius'    Babcock,    dau.     of     Paul   and    Charlotte 
(Crandall)    Babcock    (Samuel,    Samuel,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  14,  1783;  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  30,  1869;  m.  Westerly,  Dec.  22,  1803,  Nathan,  son  of 
Henry  and  Mary  (Irish)  Burch,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Jan.  16, 
1 78 1,  d.  Brookfield,  June  16,  1858. 

In  the  winter  of  1805-6  they  moved  from  Stonington,  Conn., 
on  an  ox-sled  to  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  where  their  five  children 
who  lived  to  adult  life  were  all  born,  married,  and  died. 

While  living  in  Connecticut  the  wife  observed  the  seventh 
day  and  the  husband  the  first  day  of  the  week  as  the  Sabbath. 
The  first  week  after  reaching  their  new  home  the  husband 
observed  his  wife  knitting  on  her  Sabbath.  In  response  to 
questions  from  her  husband  she  said  that  she  had  decided  to 
leave  her  Sabbath  and  observe  his.  He  replied.  "Put  up  your 
w^ork,  and  we  will  both  observe  your  Sabbath,"  which  they 
continued  to  do  the  remainder  of  their  lives,  as  did  also 
their  children  and  grandchildren. 

Children : 

Damarius.  b.  Apr.  13,  1805 ;    d.  May  7,   1805. 

Nathan,  b.  May  23,  1806:  d.  Nov.  8.  1849:  m.  (i)  Jan.  24,  1S32, 
Temperance,  dau.  of  Jabish  and  Abigail  (Babcock)  Brown,  b. 
Dec.  3.  181 1,  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y..  Sept.  5,  1841 ;  m.  (2)  her  sis- 
ter, Lois,  b.  Mar.  12.  1801.  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  12,  1854. 

Paul,  b.  Sept.  15,  1808;  d.  Aug.  28.  1890;  m.  Jan.  13,  1835,  Cynthia, 
dau.  of  Judge  Elisha  and  Betsy  (Brown)  Randall,  d.  Nov.  30, 
1898. 

Charlotte,  b.  Mar.  23,  1812;  d.  Apr.  18.  1842;  m.  Oct.  24,  1833, 
Dewitt,  son  of  Samuel  H.  and  Olive  (Brown)   Coon,  d.  June  30, 

189s. 
John  Henry,  b.  June  3,   1815;    d.   Apr.  2},.   1900;    m.   Nov.   17.   1836, 

Phebe,   dau.   of  David  and   Susannah    (Brown)    Hinckley,  b.  July 

31,  1885. 
IMary  Burch.  b.  June  10.  1819;    d.  Sept.  24.  1858;    m.  Dec.  30,  1841, 

Siias,   son  of  William   and   Hannah    (Clarke)    Whitford,   b.    1810. 

d.  Jan.  30,  1892. 

406.  Mary'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Paul  and  Charlotte   (Cran- 
dall) Babcock  (Samuel,  Samuel,  James,  John,  James). 

b.  May  2,  1787;   d.  Feb.  8,  1880;   m.  Sept.  17,  1803,  Kenyon, 


2o8  The  Bahcock  Gcucaloiix 


tij 


son  of  Aui;usliis  and  Thankfnl   (Sanndcrs)   Crandall.     They 
settled  in  Brook  field,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Jarcd  B.,  b.  July  22,   181 1. 

EiiDcli,  b.  June  27,  1813;    m.  Jan.  30,  1834,  Parmelia  Williams. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  Sept.  2,  1815;    m.  June  i,  1835,  Roswell  P.  Douse. 
Nancy  B.,  b.  Apr.  8,  1818;    m.  May  10,  1839,  Herman  Hull. 
William  Henry,  b.  July  27,  1820;    m.  Nov.   10,  1842,  Anna  Brand,  d. 

June  12,  1897. 
Cbarlotta  B.,  b.  Aug.   17,  1822;    d.   Sept.   19,  1842. 

Tbankful,  b.  . 

Almira  Jane,  b.  Feb.  6,  1S27;    m.  Feb.   13,   1845,  Roswell  Brand,    d. 

July  4,  1867. 
Martin  Louis,  b.  May  20,   1829;    d.  . 

407.  Paul"  Babcock,  son  of  Paul  and  Charlotte  (Crandall) 
Babcock    (Samuel,    Samuel,   James,   John,   James),   b. 

June  3,  1791 ;  d.  Sept.  19,  1872;  m.  Sept.  5,  181 1,  Amy,  dau. 
of  Job  Clark,  of  Hopkinton. 

He  owned  and  occupied  a  farm  near  Lottery  Village,  West- 
erly, and  was  Justice  of  Peace  18 19,  '21,  '35,  and  '48.  "He 
was  Ensign  in  Hopkinton  Militia  in  1813,  Lieutenant  in  1814, 
Captain  1816-17."     (Smith.) 

Children : 

Mary  A.,  b.   May  21.   1812;    d.  June  24,    1861 ;    m.   Sept.  22,    1842, 

Benjamin  Cbamplain. 
Charlotte,  b.  May  30,  1816;    m.  843  Rev.  J.  R.  Irish. 
Paul  Clark,  b.  Aug.  22,   1828;    d.  young. 

408.  Jareiv  Babcock.  Jr.,  son  of  Jared  and  Martha  (Lewis) 
Babcock    (Samuel,    Samuel,   James,   John,    James),    b. 

Aug.  8,  1792;   d.  Charlestown,  R.  L,  Jan.  i,  1827;  m.  Hopkin- 
ton, R.  L,  Mar.  6,   1817,  Lois,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Elizabeth 
(Browning)  Lewis,  b.  Hopkinton,  Mar.  27,  1793,  d.  Ashaway, 
Feb.  18.  1852. 
Children : 

927  Samuel  F.,"  b.  Mar.  7,  1818;    m.  Susan  M.  Berry. 

928  Welcome  B.,  b.  Nov.  22,  1819;    m.  Mary  Roger.s. 

929  Daniel  L.,  b.  June  19,   1822;    m.  Martha  Champlin. 

930  Elias  L.,  b.  Dec.  8,  1824;    m.  Martha  J.  Chipman. 

409.  Stanton  Prentice''^  Babcock,  son  of  John  Prentice 
and    Anna    (Gavitt)    Babcock    (Isaac,    Daniel,    James. 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L.  Dec.  15,  1778;  d.  Salina, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  7,  1856;  m.  Lucy  Crary,  b.  June  15,  1779,  d.  1864. 
Stanton  Babcock  settled  on  a  farm  in  the  town  of  Groton, 
Conn.,  on  the  turnpike,  six  miles  east  of  New  London,  Conn., 
where  his  children  were  born.     PTe  tended  a  gristmill.     He  was 


S.    WILLARD    BABCOCK. 


Page  201. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  209 

a  deacon  in  a  Hajitist  Church.     He  removed  to  Sahna,  X.  Y., 
about  1844. 
Chil(h"en : 

931  John  Prentice,"  b.  May  24,   1802;    ni.   (i  )   Miss  Aycrs;    m.   (2)   Ann 

Ayers. 

Lucy  Ann.  b.  Nov.  2,  1S03;  m.  Pelcg  Pendleton;  lived  near  Nor- 
wich, N.  Y.  Had  a  large  family  of  children;  one  of  her  sons, 
Isaac,  was  .Attorney  at  Law  and  was  one  time  Mayor  of  Sioux 
City,  La. 

Frances,  b.  Dec.  21,   1805:    m.  Daniel  Morgan.     No  children. 

932  Mary,  b.   Dec.  5,   1807;    ni.   Hadlin  F"ish. 

933  -Abby  Eliza,  b.   .*\pr.  22,   1817;    m.  Abel  Hinckley. 
Edwin,  b.   Nov.  20,   1822. 

410.  Isaac'  Babcock,  son  of  Isaac  and  Amy  (Gavitt)  Bab- 
cock   (Isaac.  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Groton, 

Conn..  Dec.  25,  1789;  d.  ;  m.   Lucretia  Gardner.     They 

settled  on  a  farm,  adjoining  his  mother's  farm  at  Dimock,  Pa. 
Chilch'en  : 

Sally,  b.  ;    d.  Apr.  9,  1897,  unm. 

Henry  b.  ;    d.  Mar.  17,  1897,  unm. 

.    George,  b.  ;    d.  Dimock.  Pa. 

Gurdon,  b.  ;    d.  Scranton,  Pa. 

William,  b.  ;    d.  Dimock,  Pa. 

Thomas,  b.  ;  d.  Dimock,  Pa. 

Philander,  b.  ;    moved  West;    killed  by  a  prairie  fire. 

Ann ;    res.   1902,  Dimock,   Pa. ;    m.  Frank  Newton.     He  d.  Dec. 

1896. 
Charles ;    res.  1902,  Dimock,  Pa. 

411.  EzEKiEiJ  Babcock,  son  of  Isaac  and  Amy  (Gavitij 
Babcock  (Isaac,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Gro- 
ton, Conn.,  Alay  22,  1798;  d.  Bridgewater,  Pa.,  1822;  m. 
Lydia.  dau.  of  Jonathan  Gardner,  b.  Gales  Ferry,  Conn.,  d. 
Bridgewater.  Jan.  i.  1891. 

Children,  b.  at  Bridgewater: 

Mary  Ann,  b.  May  5,  1824;    d.  Kirksville;    m.  Bridgewater,  John  J. 

Spencer. 
Gardner,  b.  Dec.  7,  1825;    d.  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  May  17,  1899;    m. 

Amanda  Carpenter. 
Alyn.   b.   Sept.    13.    1827 ;    d.   Hawlcy,   Pa. ;    m.    Bridgewater,   Chloe 

Bisbee. 

934  Lucy,"  b.  July  5,   1829;    m.  Luther  Moore. 

Laura,  b.  July  5,  1829;  res.  1902,  Pawling,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Montrose, 
S.  P.  Longstreet. 

Gillson.  b.  Sept.  5,   1831  ;    d.  . 

Ellen  A.,  b.  Dec.  18.  1833;    res.  1902,  Binghamton.  N.  Y. 

Eunice,  b.  June  10,  1837;  res.  Pawling,  N.  Y.  ;  m.  1857,  Rev.  Robert 
Hunt,  b.  Liberty,  N.  Y.  Children  :  Eugene ;  Eunice ;  J.  E. ;  Pres- 
ton, and  Robert. 

Amy,  b.  June  10,  1837. 

Phebe  and  Mason,  twins ;    d.  . 

14 


2IO  The  Bahcock  Gcncalop\ 


S.' 


Willis  E.  B..  h.  Oct.  8,  1839;    m.  Florila  Sweet. 

Love,  I).  June  11.  1843;    d.  . 

Dove,  twill  to  preceding;    m.  Edwin  Dorr,  of  Binghamton,  N.  Y. 

412.  Francis  Mitchell"  Babcock,  son  of  Isaac  and  Amy 

(Gavitt)  Babcock  (Isaac,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Groton,  Conn.,  Nov.  12,  1799;  d.  Rockford,  111.,  Feb.  8, 
1873;  m.  Brooklyn,  Pa.,  Mar.  2,  1825,  Parnel,  dau.  of  Zelo- 
phehad  Ely,  b.  Aug.  13,  1802,  d.  Dec,  1886.  They  settled  first 
in  Tunkhannock,  Pa.,  then  in  Dimock,  Pa.,  later  in  Rockford, 
111.,  1856. 
Children : 

Isaac,  b.  Oct.  12,  1825,  Dimock,  Pa.;    res.  1901,  at  Brooklyn,  Pa. 

Priscilla,  b.  Tunkhannock,  Pa.,  Apr.  4,  1831 ;  res.  1901,  Cruell,  Vt. ; 
m.  (i)  Nov.  24,  1857.  Joseph  F.  Crosby,  merchant,  Rockford,  111., 
d.  May  11,  1861  ;  no  issue;  m.  (2)  June  16,  1870,  Dr.  George,  son 
of  Ephraim  and  Hannah  (Gibbs)  Bliss;  practiced  medicine  in 
Poultney  more  than  forty  years,  d.  Apr.  10,  1890.     No  children. 

936  Noyes  Eliab,"  b.  Dimock,  Pa.,  Jan.  8,  1833 ;    m,  Harriet  Crosby. 

937  Amy  Elizabeth,  b.   Jan.    19,    1835 ;    m.   George  Goodsell. 
Lyman  Francis,  b.  May  24,  1838;    m.  Mary  Stevens. 

413.  Jesse^    Babcock,    son    of    Rev.    Jesse    and     Hannah 

(Thompson)  Babcock  (Isaac,  Daniel,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Aug.  31,  1806;  d.  Fulton,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  12,  i860;  m.  Westerly,  1831,  Emeline,  dau.  of  John  and 
Bridget  (Berry)  Thompson,  b.  Westerly,  May  17,  1809,  d. 
Fulton,  Nov.  3,  1899. 
Children : 

938  Leeman  B.,'*  b.  Oct.  30,  1833 ;    m.  Harriet  Vose. 

939  Courtney  F.,  b.  Mar.  9,  1846;    m.  Cecilia  Kennedy. 

414.  John  C."  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Penelope  Bab- 
cock (William,  Daniel,  lames,  John,  James),  b.  W^est- 

erly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  14,  1780  (A.  V.'  R.),  d.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  12, 
1850,;  m.  Catherine,  dau.  of  William  and  Dolly  Rheinhardt, 
b.  New  York  State,  Nov.  14,  1792,  d.  New  York,  May  i,  1838. 
Children : 

Louisa,  b.  Jan.  26,  1814;    d.  Gowanda,  Aug.  21,  1891,  unm. 

940  Roanna,*  b.  Apr.   11,  1816;    m.  Norman  H.  Allen. 
John  R.,  b.  Jan.  27,  1819;    d.  Persia,  June  21,  1868,  unm. 

941  Horace,  b.  Apr.   12.   1825;    m.  Mary  Locke. 

415.  Jesse'  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Sarah  (Ross)  Bab- 
cock (James,  Daniel.  James,  John,  James),  b.  Westerly, 

R.  I.,  May  20,  1784;   d.  W^estfield,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  i,  1868:    m. 
Alfred,  N.  Y.,   Prudence,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Ruble   (Green- 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  211 

man)  Whitfunl,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  1805,  d.  Mina,  N.  Y., 
Feb.,  1864. 

Children,  b.  Alfred : 

Sarah,  b.  ;    m.  Joseph  Babcock. 

Joshua  W.,  b.  Sept.  7,  1825;    res.  1902.  Westfield,  N.  Y. 

Rue  G.,   b.  ;    d.  Apr.,   1866  or  '67,   Westfield,   N.   Y. ;    m.   New 

York.  Dudley  McHenry. 

Emma  H..  b.  ;    d.  May,  1867,  Westfield,  unm. 

William  D.  C,  b.  ;    d.  1870  unm. 

416.  Joshua"  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Sarah  (Ross) 
Babcock  (James.  Daniel.  James,  John,  James),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I..  Mar.  20,  1793;  d.  Westfield,  X.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1878; 
m.  (i)  Betsy  Dorman,  d.  Westfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  20,  1820;  m. 
(2)  Magdalene . 

Children : 

942  Jared  Ross.*  b.  Dec.  18,  1820;    m.  Adelia  M.  Mann. 
Henry  Ross. 

417.  Elder  Daniel"  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Hannah 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (James,  Daniel,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Nov.  17,  1786;  d.  Milton,  Wis., 
Oct.  26,  1868;  m.  (i)  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1809,  Lois, 
dau.  of  Clark  Potter,  b.  near  Westerly,  Mar.  16,  1789,  d. 
Johnstown,  Wis.,  Aug.  25,  1846;  m.  (2)  Almond,  N.  Y., 
May  13,  1847,  Deborah,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Susanna  (Saun- 
ders) Teft,  b.  Exeter,  R.  I.,  Aug.  6,  1807,  d.  Milton,  Jan.  27, 
1892.     No  children  by  second  marriage. 

W'hen  a  boy  he  removed  with  his  parents  to  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  where  later  he  was  baptized  and  united  with  the  S.  D. 
B.  Church  of  that  town.  Soon  after  his  marriage  he  settled 
in  Batavia,  N.  Y.  In  181 5  he  removed  to  Alfred,  N.  Y.  In 
1 8 16  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church,  a  year 
later  licensed  to  preach,  and  Sept.  16,  1824,  was  ordained  a 
S.  D.  B.  minister.  He  preached  in  Alfred  and  surrounding 
towns  far  and  near.  About  1840  he  removed  to  Milton,  Wis., 
where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life,  having  no  pastoral 
charge  after  1838. 

Children,  first  three  born  at  Batavia,  rest  at  Alfred: 

Lucy,  b.  Nov.  12,  1809:    d.  Batavia,  Dec.  11,  1809. 

Lucv  A.,  b.  June  22,  181 1;  d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Sept.  6.  1890:  m.  Alfred, 

Mar.  26,  1829,  Oran,  son  of  Joshua  Vincent,  b.  Brookfield,  Nov.  4, 

1807,  d.   Milton,  Jan.  21,   1893.     No  children. 

943  Hannah  R.,'  b.  Dec.  8.   1813;    m.   Samuel   Hamilton. 
Patty,  b.  Jan.  11.  1817;    d.  Alfred,  Mar.  12.  1817. 

944  Daniel  C.  b.  Apr.  2,   1818;    m.  Amorilla  Collins. 

945  Lois  M.,  b.  June  2,  1820;    m.  Stephen  Maxson. 


212  Tlie  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Mary,  b.  Jan.,   1823;    d.   Alfred,  Jan.,    1823. 

946  Tacy  A.,  h.    Nov.  30,   1823;  in.   Bcnjaniin  Collins. 

Susan    P.,    b.    July    10,    1825;     d.    AJbion,    Wis.,    Apr.    19,    1847;     m. 
Johnstown,  Wis.,  Israel  F.  Burdick. 

947  Annie  G.,  b.  Jan.  2,   1829;    m.  Christopher  Vincent. 
Samuel  R.,  b.  June  15,   1831 ;    d.  Johnstown,  Dec.  21,   1841. 

418.  James^  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Hannah  (Burdick) 

Bal:)cock  (James,  Daniel,  Jame.s,  John,  James),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  Jan.  16,  1791;  d.  Unadilla  Forks,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  19, 
1842;    m.   New  York  State,  Dec.  24,   181 1,  Esther,  dan.  of 

Thomas  and  Hannah  (Spicer)  Fish,  b. ;  d.  Albion,  Wis., 

1863  (?). 
Children: 

Martha  P.,  b.  ;    d.  Oxford,  Wis.;    m.  Silas  Tracy. 

James  W.,  b. ;   m.  Lorema  Oatley.   Was  a  Presbyterian  minister. 

Hannah  S.,  b.  ;    d.  Scott,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Flainfield,  N.  Y.,  George 

M.   Frisbee. 

948  Thomas  E.,'  b.  June  16,   1817;    m.   (i)   H.  M.  Wells;    m.   (2)   Eliza 

Potter. 

949  Hiram  W.,  b.  June  24.   1819;    m.  Catherine  M.  Wells. 

950  William  Fish,  b.  Jan.  16,  1824;    m.  Lydia  T.  Burdick. 

951  Daniel  Lee,  b.  Jan.  25,   1826;    m.  Wealthy  Burdick. 

Amos  Sattcrlee,  b.  Georgetown,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  26,  1828;    d.  1900  (?), 

Albion,  Wis.;    m.   (i)  Anna  ;    m.   (2)   Mrs.  Brown. 

Albert  S.,  b.  1830;    d.  San  Jose,  Cal. ;    m.  Stella  Bunda. 
Esther  E.,  b.  Unadilla  Forks,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Daniel  Maxson. 

419.  Harry'''  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Prudence  (Gavitt) 
Babcock  (James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  July 

22,  1779;    d.  Westerly.  R.  I.,  1836  (  ?)  ;    m.  Fanny,  dan.  of 
Timothy  and  Fanny  (Thompson)  West,  b.  1782  (?),  d.  Dec. 
12,  i860. 
Children : 

952  Charles,*  b.  Apr.  26,  1812 ;    m.  Louisa  Brown. 

Ezekiel,  b.  ;    d.  Feb.  13.  1843;    m.  Mary  Lee. 

Harriet,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Rhoda,  b.  ;    m.  Westerly,   1843,  Matthew  Barber. 

Mary,  b.  Oct.  10,  1818;    res.  Union  St.,  Westerly,  R.  L 

Martha,  b.  ;    m.   Charles  Champlin. 

Susan,  b.  ;    m.  George  Barber.    He  res.  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Sarah,  b.  ;  m.  George  Kenyon.     He  d.  Westerly. 

420.  James'''  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Prudence  (Gavitt) 
Babcock  (James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Oct. 

16,  1781  ;  d.  Lenox,  Mass.,  1866  (  ?)  :  m.  Mary,  dan.  of  Capt. 
Nuiw-ent,  who  fought  in  the  battle  of  Bennington,  Vt.,  d.  Lenox, 
Mass. 

Children : 

Mary,  b.  ,  Westerly. 

953  Henry,^  b.  Westerly,  1807;    m.  Jane  Northrup. 


■m^ 


ELDER    DANIEL    BABCOCK. 
I 786- I 868. 


Page  211. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  213 

Eliza,  h.  ;    Lucy;   John. 

954  lilihu,  1).   Feb.   13,   1815;    ni.   Sarah  Knowles. 

955  James,  b.  July  21,  1818;    m.  Martha  Rockwood. 

Nancy,  b.  ;    m.  Rodney  Root.     Children  live  in  Lenox,   Mass. 

421.  Asa'  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Prudence  (Gavitt) 
Babcock  (James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  Apr.  26.  1786;  d.  Chnrcliville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  4, 
1869;  m.  Westerly,  Sept.  12,  1813,  Mary,  dan.  of  George  and 
Abigail  (Hiscox)  Gavitt,  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  16,  1787,  d. 
Chnrcliville.  Aug.  21,  1857. 

Children : 

956  Lorenzo  D.,"  b.  Oct.  g,  1814;    m.  Lydia  Palmer. 

957  George  G.,  b.  June  8,  1816;    m.  Mrs.  Jane  Northrup  Babcock. 

958  Abigail,  b.  July   16,   1818;    m.    (i)    Daniel   Rogers;    m.    (2)    Abram 

Thomas. 

Emeline,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Rochester,  Mich. ;    m.  George  Webster. 

Julia,  b.  ;    m.  Bradford  Tibbie. 

Laura,  b.  ;    m.  William  North. 

422.  Lemuel'^  Vose,  son  of  Lemuel  and  Delight  (Babcock) 
Vose  (Elkanah,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Oct.  9, 

1796;  d. ;  m.  Dec.  29,  1825,  Mary  A.  States,  of  Stoning- 

ton.  Conn. 
Children : 

Lemuel,  b.  Westerly,  Oct.  2,  1828. 
Eliza  S.,  b.  Westerly,  Aug.  7,  1832. 

423.  Prentice'    Babcock,   son   of   Rev.   Luke   and   Desire 

(Frink)     Babcock     (Elkanah,     Daniel,     James,     John, 

James),  b.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y. ;  d.  ;   m.  (i)  Thankful,  dau. 

of  195  Lodowick  and  Mary  (Davis)  Babcock,  b.  July  15,  1805, 
d.  Lawson,  Mo.,  1897  (?).     Thankful  Babcock  m.   (2)  Wil- 
liam   Pryme.      Had    one    son,    William    Pryme,    settled    in 
Missouri. 
Child : 

Richard,  b.  . 


424.  Desire"     Babcock,   dau.    of    Rev.    Luke    and   Desire 

(Frink)     Babcock     (Elkanah,     Daniel,    James,    John, 
James),  b.  Pharsalia;    d.  Lincklaen,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Samuel  Lord. 
Child: 

Sherburne  Lord ;    res.  1902,  Little  York,  N.  Y. 

425.  Capt.  Paul  Randall"  Babcock,  son  of  Rev.  Luke  and 
Desire  (Frink)  Babcock  (Elkanah,  Daniel, James, John, 


214  TJic  Dahcock  Genealogy. 

James),  b.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  1805;  d.  Pharsalia;  m.  Adelaide 
Wallace,  b.  Preston,  Conn.,  Sept.  13,  181 1.  He  was  a  farmer 
and  a  Captain  of  Militia.  She  m.  (2)  Charles  Clarke  (the 
father-in-law  of  her  son  Francis).  She  d.  Hornellsville, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  29,  1890. 
Children : 

959  Francis  G.."  b.  Dec.  5.   1831  ;    m.  Elizabeth  Clarke. 

960  Devolson,  b.  Oct.  13,  1833 ;    m.  Mary  Browning. 

Casper  W.  R.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1835  ;   d.  Sun  Prairie,  Wis. ;    m.  Sun  Prairie, 
Sarah  Jones,  b.   Vermont,  d.   Sun   Prairie. 

961  James  N.,  b.  Feb.   13,   1837;    m.  Isabelle  Spaulding. 

Elizabeth   S.,   b.   May    i,    1839;     m.  Judson,   son   of  Charles   Clarke. 

One  son.  Devolson,  and  a  dau,  Mrs.  Blyn  Yates. 
Benjamin  P.,  b.  June  12,  1845;    d.  young. 

426.  Nancy'    Babcock,    dau.    of    Rev.    Luke    and    Desire 

(Frink)     Babcock     (Elkanah,     Daniel,    James,    John, 
James),   b.    Pharsalia,    N.    Y.,    Sept.    29,    1809;   d.    Feb.    18, 
1885;  m.  Sept.  24,  1828,  Nathaniel  B.  Peck,  of  Armenia,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Byfield;    Mary. 

427.  Elkanah"  Babcock,  son  of  Chauncey  and  Prudence 

(Stanton)    Babcock    (Elkanah,    Daniel,    James,    John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  11,  1804;  d.  Utica,  Wis.,  May 
18,  1882:   m.  Nancy  Maxson,  d.  Utica,  Wis.,  Oct.,  1850. 
Children : 

Nathan  ;  Thaddeus  ;  Helen  ;  Orlando  ;  Frances  Truman. 

George  Perry,  b.  ;    m.   Liberty  Prairie,  Wis.,   Rozina  Ryan. 

Horace  M.,  b.  Apr.,  1840;    d.  Otonna,  Minn.;    m.  Utica,  Wis.,  Dora 

Gilburt. 

Erzula  O.,  b.  ;    m.  Frank  Cottrell. 

Elizabeth   Ruth,   b.    May  25,    1844;    d.    Mankato,   Minn.;    ni.   Utica, 

Wis..  Alfred  Perry. 
Lavina  L.,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Lake  City.  Wash.;    m.  Alfred  Perry. 

962  Harriet, '^  b.  Oct.   10,  1848;    m.  Stephen  Hibbard. 

428.  Stanton'   Babcock,   son  of  Chauncey  and   Prudence 
(Stanton)    Babcock    (Elkanah,    Daniel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Feb.  8,   1812;    d.  July,   1899;    m.  Nov.  29,   1849, 
Sarah  J.,  dau.  of  Thomas  and  Susan  (Dring-)  White. 
Children  : 

Horace  Greeley,  b.  Oct.  22.  1850;    d.  Oct.  28,  1850. 

Samuel  Gavitt.  b.  Oct.  8,  1851  ;   m.  Dec.  25,  1876,  Abby  Green  Miller. 

of  Niantic,  R.  L     He  is  Rector  of  Christ  Church  at  Hyde  Park, 

Mass. 
Walter,  b.  Sept.  28,  1853:  m.   (i)  Carrie  D.  Wally,  of  Niantic,  R.  L, 

Aug.,  1873,  d.  Nov.  22,  1875;    m.   (2)   Christine  Hoddie,  of  Attle- 

boro,  Mass.,  Feb.  9,  1877. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  215 

Eva.  b.  July  25,   1855  ;    d.  Feb..   1857. 
Horace  Greeley,  b.  Nov.  27,  1858. 

Oscar   Searle,  b.   Apr.    13,    1861  ;    m.  Jan.   4,    1883,   Mary  A.   James, 
of  Scranton.  Pa.  ;    res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I. 

963  George  Henry."  b.  June  11,  1863;    m.  Minnie  G.  Clarke. 

Eva  Stanton,  b.  Salem,  Mass.,  June  27,  1866;   m.  Clarence  E.  Brown- 
ing, Oct.  7,  1891 ;    res.  1902,  Manhasset,  L.  I. 

429.  Mary"  (Polly)  Babcock,  dan.  of  Lodowick  and  Mary 

(Davis)     Babcock     (Elkanah,     Daniel,    James,    John, 
James),  b.  Oct.  30,  1803;  d.  N.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  Sept.   19, 
1895;   m.  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  Abner  Tucker,  b.  Rhode  Island,  d. 
N.  Pharsalia,  Mar.  12,  1876. 
Child : 

964  Abner,"  b.  Jan.  3,   1831  ;    m.  Laura  Lulher. 

430.  Benjamin  Franklin"  Babcock,  son  of  Maj.  Paul  and 
Nancy   (Bell)    Babcock   (Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Stonington.  Conn.,  Feb.  3.  1790;  d.  July  21,  1829, 
of  yellow  fe\er  on  board  the  ship  Talma  on  a  passage  from 
New  Orleans  to  New  York;  m.  Apr.  6,  18 13,  Maria,  dau.  of 
Benjamin  and  Dorcas  Eclls  and  niece  of  the  Rev.  Nathaniel 
Fells,  b.  Stonington,  Sept.  22,  1790,  d.  New  York,  Nov.  6, 
1852,  at  the  home  of  her  son. 
Children : 

965  Benjamin  Franklin.*  b.  June  6.   1814:    m.    (i)   Phebe  A.   Swan;    m. 

(2)  Maria  A.  Bicknell. 

966  Maria  E.,  b.  Jan.  21.  1816;    m    James  Deveril  Moore. 

967  Parthenia  Pardon,  b.  Jan.  12.  1817;    m.  William  R.  Babcock. 
Joshua,  b.  New  York,  Feb.  18,  1820;    d.  Nov.  30,  1821. 

968  Samuel  D.,  b.  May  16,  1822;    m.  Elizabeth  C.  Franklin. 

969  Charles  H.,  b.  Jan.  3,   1825:    m.  Cornelia  Franklin. 
James  Minor,  b.  Sept.  19.  1826;    d.  Feb.  26.  1827. 
Infant  son,  b.  and  d.  at  New  York,   1828. 

431.  Coi'Rtland"    Babcock,   son   of   Maj.    Paul   and   Lucy 
(Bell)  Babcock  (Harry,  Joshua.  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Stonington.  Conn.,  ]\Iar.  25,  1806,  d.  Brooklyn.  N.  Y..  Feb. 
10,  1853:    m.  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  May  3,  1834,  Elizabeth,  dau. 
of  Charles  Canv,  b.  Philadelphia,  Feb.   13.  181 2,  d.  Stoning- 
ton, Apr.  7,  1884. 
Children : 

970  Louise.*  b.    Mav    18,    1835;     m.    (i)    Edmund   D.    Stanton;     m.    (2) 

William  H.  Tillinghast. 

971  Georgia,  b.  May  18,  1837;    m.  Charles  P.  Williams. 

972  Courtland  G.,  b.  ;    m.  ]\Tary  Woodruff. 

973  Harry  Saltonstall.  b.  Nov.  30.   1847  ;    m.  Evelena  Dcnison. 
Amelia,  b.  July  23,  1853 ;    d.  New  York,  Jan.  23,  1893,  unm. 


2i6  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

432.  GiLES^  Babcock,  son  of  Maj.   Paul  and  Lucy   (Bell) 
Babcock  (Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Ston- 

ington,  Conn.,  Jan.  8,  1808;   d.  Stonington,  Mar.  4,  1862;   m. 
Stonington,  Oct.  i,  1832,  Ann  E.  Denison,  b.  Stonington,  Aug. 
18,  18 14,  d.  Stonington,  June  20,  1890. 
Children : 

974  Anna,"  b.  Nov.  15,  1837;    ni.  Samuel  Wood. 

975  Giles,  b.  Sept.  3,  1840;    m.  Sarah  Smith.   . 

976  John  B.,  b.  Feb.  7,  1843 ;    m.  Blaudina  Stanton. 

977  Mary  D.,  b.  June  5,  1846;    m.  Ephraim  Williams. 

Lucy  Bell,  b.  Mar.  28,  1849;  res.  1902,  in  Stonington,  Conn.;  m. 
June  II,  1884,  Stiles,  son  of  Stiles  Stanton,  b.  Dec.  10,  1849,  d. 
Stonington,  Feb.,  1888;    was  State  Senator.     No  children. 

978  Nathaniel  Palmer,  b.  Dec.  28,  185 1 ;    m.  Caroline  McGinnis. 
Stephen  T.,  b.  Sept.  2,  1854;    d.  Nov.  17,  1890,  unm. 

433.  Abby  Eldredge'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Maj.  Paul  and  Lucy 

(Bell)  Babcock  (Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Sept.  4,  181 1 ;  d.  1887  ( ?)  ;  m.  (i)  Nov.  13,  1833,  Jedediah 
Leeds,  of  New  Orleans;   m.  (2)  Rev.  John  Beattie. 
Children  by  first  husband  : 

Paul    Babcock,   b. -;     d.    in   Louisiana;    m.    Sarah   Avery;     res. 

1902,  at  Avery  Island,  La.     No  children. 
Grace. 

Child  by  second  husband  : 

John  B.,  b. ;    d.  in  Shreveport,  La.,  1901  (?). 

434.  George  W.^   Babcock,   son   of   Maj.    Paul   and   Lucy 

(Bell)  Babcock  (Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Oct.  26,  1813;  d.  New  Orleans,  La.,  Feb.  11,  1874;  m.  (i) 
New  Orleans,  Mar.  ig.  1842.  Louise  Boucher;  m.  (2)  New 
Orleans,  Apr.  24,  1855,  Adele  Catonel,  b.  July  22,  1825,  d. 
Feb.  4,  i860;  m.  (3)  New  Orleans,  Sept.  26,  1861,  Maria 
Shute,  b.  Dec.  28,  1829.  Res.  1902,  New  Orleans. 
Children : 

979  Mary  A.,"  b.  Dec.  9,  1844;    m.  Charles  Leverich. 
Henry  Boucher,  b.  June  28,  1846;    d.  Apr.  26,  1847. 
Eugene,  b.  Nov.  20,   1847 ;    d.  Dec.  3,   1847. 

Louise  Boucher,  b.  July  24,   1849;    res.   1902,  in  New  Orleans,  unm. 
Locadie,  b.  July  5,  1851  ;    res.  1902,  in  New  Orleans;    unm. 
George,  b.  Dec.  9,   1852;    d.  July  24,   1853. 

435.  Lucy  Bell"   Babcock,  dau.  of  Maj.   Paul   and  Lucy 

(Bell)  Babcock  (Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Mar.  30,  181 5;  res.  1902,  vSaybrook,  Conn.;  m.  Dec.  22, 
18^6.  Giles  F.  Ward,  b.  Oct.  24,  18 12,  d.  Savbrook,  Feb.  27, 
1885. 


MRS.  ELISABETH  SMITH  (BABCOCK)   LATHROP. 

Page  218. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  217 

Children : 

Giles,  b.  B\'l).  22,  1845;    d.  Virginia.  Jan.  28,  1865,  from  an  accidental 
shot. 

980  Lucy  Bell,*  b.  Apr.  4,  1847;    ni.  Joseph  Hayden. 

436.  Robert  Stanton^   Babcock,   son  of   Maj.    Paul   and 
Lucy    (Bell)    Babcock    (Harry,   Joshua,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Stoninoton,  Conn.,  Feb.  8,  1818;  d.  Kalamazoo, 
Mich.,  Apr.  20,  1885;  m.  Saybrook,  Conn.,  Sept.  11,  1850, 
Emily  M.,  dan.  of  William  and  Mary  T.  (Harris)  Hall,  b. 
New  York  Citv,  Dec.  i,  1831;  res.  1902  in  Washington, 
D.  C. 

Children : 

981  Robert  Hall,^^  b.  July  26,  1851 ;    m.  Lizzie  Weston. 

982  Courtland,  b.  Sept.  24,  1855;    m.  (i)  Marie  Sleight;    m.  (2)  Bertha 

Blakely. 
Eliza  Palmer,  b.  May  15.  1857;    res.  1902,  at  Parker  House,  Boston, 
Mass.;     m.    Sept.    11,    1880,   at   Kalamazoo,   Mich.,   Robert   Bruce 
Martin.     No  children. 

437.  Mary  Ann'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Maj.   Paul  and  Lucy 
(Bell)  Bal)cock  (Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Apr.  1,  1821  ;  d.  Hartford,  Conn.,  Apr.  12,  1891  ;   m.  Sept. 

I,   1840,  Rev.  John  Breckenridge,  of  Kentucky,  b.  ,  d. 

1841. 
Child : 

Agatha,  b.  July  13,  1841 ;    d.  Oct.  30,  1882. 

438.  Capt.  David  Sherman'^  Babcock,  son  of  Maj.  Paul  and 
Lucy    (Bell)    Babcock    (Harry,   Joshua,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Aug.  12,  1822:  killed  by  a 
moving  car  while  crossing  the  railroad  at  Stonington  Borough, 
Conn.,  on  a  dark  evening,  Aug.  24,  1885 ;  m.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y., 
May  28,  1850.  by  Rev.  Richard  Storrs,  to  Charlotta  A.,  young- 
est dau.  of  Joseph  and  Eunice  (Chesebrough)  Noyes,  of  Ston- 
ington, b.  Apr.  3,  1826;   res.  1902,  New  York  City. 

Capt.  David  Babcock  at  an  early  age  manifested  a  desire  for 
a  seafaring  life,  and  made  his  first  voyage  when  sixteen  years 
of  age.  At  the  age  of  twenty-five  he  commanded  a  ship  on  a 
voyage  to  Lima,  Peru.  He  made  many  fast  and  famous  voy- 
ages, and  cruised  all  over  the  world,  engaging  more  especially 
in  China  and  European  trade.  He  commanded  for  se\'eral 
years  the  famous  clipper  ship  Young  America,  in  which  he 
sailed  three  times  around  the  world,  his  wife  accompanving 
him.  At  the  breaking  out  of  the  Civil  War  he  was  offered  a 
position  on  the  staff  of  Brig.-Gen.  Silas  Casey,  and  also  the 


2i8  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Lieutenant-Colonelcy  of  the  Naval  Brigade  forming  in  New 
York,  but  he  declined  both  offers,  believing  he  could  be  of  more 
service  to  his  country  in  his  original  profession  than  in  a  new 
and  untried  one.  He  entered  the  service  at  the  first  of  the 
war  and  continued  to  the  end,  commanding  a  number  of  dif- 
ferent ships,  including  the  Illinois,  which  was  fitted  up  with  an 
iron  prow  and  sent  to  Hampton  Roads  to  watch  for  the  ex- 
pected Merrimac,  which  ncA^er  came  out  but  once  and  then  re- 
turned to  Norfolk  and  was  blown  up  by  her  friends.  At  one 
time  he  received  a  letter  of  thanks  from  Admiral  Dupont  for 
his  exhibition  of  skill  and  seamanship. 

In  1879  he  held  the  office  of  President  of  the  Pacific  Mail 
Steamship  Company.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  Presi- 
dent of  the  Stonington  and  Providence  line  of  steamers,  and 
Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  the  New  York,  Provi- 
dence, and  Boston  R.  R. 

Children : 

983  Ellen  Watkins**  Babcock,  b.  Feb.  i,  1851  ;    m.  William  R.  Brown. 
Lulu,  b.   Dec.  4,    1853,  at   Honolulu,   Sandwich  Islands;    d.  June  3, 

1854,  at  Saybrook,  Conn. 
Edith,  b.   Apr.  25,   1855,  at   Shanghai,   China ;    d.   Oct.   ig,   1855,  on 

the  American  ship  Young  America,  in  the  Indian  Ocean. 
David  Sherman,  b.  Sept.  21,  1856,  on  ship  Young  America,  in  harbor 

of  Hong  Kong,  China :    res.  1902,  in  White  Plains,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

984  Washington  Irving,"  b.   Sept.  26,   1858;    m.  Grace  W.   Kernochan. 
9SS  William  R.,  b.  Nov.  3,  i860;    m.  Jennie  Rider. 

986  Philip  S.,  b.  May  31.  1863;    m.  Lilly  Clark. 

Joseph   Noyes,   b.    Stonington,   Conn.,   May  22,    1865 ;     res.    1902,   in 
New  York ;    unm. 

987  Raymond,  b.  Oct.  18,  1868;    m.  Florence  Locke. 

439.  Frances   Ann'^    Babcock,   dau.   of   Dudley   and   Ann 
(Wright)     Babcock     (Harry,    Joshua,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Oct.  20,  1799;   m.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Phineas,  son  of 
Samuel  Stanton,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  17,  1795,  d.  New 
Orleans,  La.,  Mar.,  1839. 
Child : 

Edwin,  b.    Stonington,   Conn.,   Mar.    15,    1835;    res.    1902,   Brooklyn, 
N.  Y. ;   m.  July  17,  1862,  Emma  W.  Stark,  of  New  Orleans. 

440.  Elisabeth   Smith"   Babcock,   dau.   of  Rev.   William 
S.   and  Elisabeth    (^Merrill)    Babcock    (Adam.  Joshua, 

James,  John.  James),  b.  Barrington.  N.  H.,  Dec.  9,  1817;  res. 
1903.  Dover,  N.  H. ;  m.  (i)  Barnstead,  N.  H.,  Mar.  27.  1836, 
Rev.  Samuel  Sherberne.  son  of  John  and  Nancy  (Eaton) 
Mathews,  b.  London,  N.  H.,  Jan.  7,  1816.  d.  Rochester.  N.  H.. 
Sept.  5,  1847;  "''•  (-)  ^^^^-  -3'  ^^5.3'  Dr.  M.  C.  Lathrop,  who 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  219 

was  a  surgeon  U.  S.  A.  in  the  Ci\il  War  and  was  at  one  time 
President  of  a  New  Hampshire  jMedical  Society. 
Children : 

987a  VVilliani  Sinilli  Babcock/  1).  May  8,  1837;  res.  1903,  at  3638  Lake 
Ave.,  Chicago,  111. ;  m.  Flora  E.  Swain. 
John  Sherberne,  b.  London,  N.  H.,  Mar.  21,  1839;  d.  1839. 
Martha  Ann,  b.  London,  Apr.  18,  1841  ;  d.  Dover,  N.  H.,  Nov.  5, 
1900;  m.  Dover,  June  i,  1870,  Dr.  Thomas  Jefferson,  son  of  Maj. 
Moses  and  Lydia  W.  Pray,  b.  Lebanon,  Me.,  Sept.  2,  1819,  d. 
Dover,  N.  H.,  Dec.  9,  1888.  Dr.  Pray  was  in  the  Legislature  from 
Dover  in  1858  and  '59.  He  was  President,  1880,  of  the  New 
Hampshire  Medical  Society.  They  had  one  daughter,  Mary  Eliza- 
beth, b.  Dover,  Jan.  17.  1873;  res.  Dover,  N.  IL,  with  her  grand- 
mother. 

987b  Mary  Elisabeth,  b.  Oct.   15,   1843;    res.   1903,  Clear  Lake,  la.;    m. 
Willard  A.  Burnap. 
John   Wesley,   b.   Salisbury,   Mass.,   Sept.    19,    1845;    d.   New   Iberia, 
La.,  Apr.  5,  1866.    He  served  in  the  Civil  War ;    was  a  Lieutenant. 

988  Samuel  Sherberne,  b.  June  3,  1847;    m.  Anna  E.  Wright. 

441.  Abigail'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  WilHam  S.  and  EHsabeth 

(Merrill)     Babcock     (Adam.     Joshua,     James,     John, 
James),   b.  Barrington.    N.    H..   July   6,    1819;   d.    Brooklyn, 
Oct.  12,  1895:  m.  Barrington,  June  3,  1838,  Samuel  Blake,  b. 
Barrington,  Sept.  16,  1814,  d.  Ipswich,  Mass.,  Jan.  15,  1890. 
Children  : 

Dr.  Charles  Wesley,  b.  Pittsfield.  Feb.  18,  1841 ;  res.  1903,  New- 
buryport,  Mass.;  m.  Ipswich,  Mass.,  Sept.  15,  1864,  Hannah  Ellen, 
dau.  of  Capt.  P.  H.  and  E.  S.  (Wise)  Condon,  b.  Ipswich,  June 
9,  1846.  He  has  one  daughter,  Gertrude  H.,  b.  Ipswich,  Jan.  2, 
1866;    res.  1903,  Newburvport. 

Rev.  Edwin  A.,  b.  Pittsfield,  N.  H..  July  10,  1847;  res.  1903.  at 
57  Rutland  St.,  Boston,  Mass. ;  m.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  July  10, 
1873,  Amanda  H.,  dau.  of  D.  W.  Tinkham,  b.  Endfield,  Mass., 
May  28,  1851.  No  children.  He  is  Pastor  of  the  Tremont  Street 
M.  E.  Church,  Boston. 

442.  Francis  Henry'  Babcock,  son  of  Francis  and  Alice 

(Wyer)  Babcock  (Adam.  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Boston,  Mass.,  Feb.  14,  1811  ;  d.  New  York  City,  Feb.  7. 
1862;  m.  New  York  City.  Dec.  9,  1841,  Rebecca,  dau.  of  Ben- 
jamin B.  Howell,  of  New  York. 

He  moved  with  his  parents  when  a  small  child  from  Boston 
to  Woburn,  Mass.,  thence  in  1827  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.  In 
1830  he  removed  to  New  York  City,  which  continued  to  be 
his  home  until  his  death.  He  had  nine  children,  eight  of  whom 
d.  in  infancy. 

Child : 

Francis  Howell,  b.  New  York  City,  Sept.  3,  1842;  d.  Elizabeth,  N.  J., 
Oct.  9,  1866. 


220  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

443.  William'  Babcock,  son  of  Francis  and  Alice  (Wyer) 
Babcock  (Adam,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Bos- 
ton, Mass.,  Feb.  25,  1820;  d.  San  Francisco,  after  1882;  m. 
New  York  City,  Oct.  15,  1850,  his  second  cousin,  Kate  Duer, 
dau.  of  Henry  Ba])cock,  d.  San  Francisco,  Aug.  3,  1879. 

When  sixteen  years  of  age  he  entered  the  Counting  Room 
of  Messrs.  Davis,  Brooks  &  Co.,  of  New  York  City.  From 
1845  to  '49  he  conducted  the  business  of  the  company  in  New 
Orleans.  He  removed  in  1852  to  San  Francisco,  where  for 
two  years  he  again  conducted  the  business  of  Davis,  Brooks 
&  Co.  of  New  York.  In  1854  he  entered  the  management  of 
the  Pacific  Mail  Steamship  Company,  remaining  with  that 
company  until  1862.  In  1864  he  became  President  of  the 
Spring  Valle}^  Water  Company  of  San  Francisco,  and  held 
the  ofiice  until  1875.  WHien  he  assumed  the  presidency  of  that 
company  they  were  delivering  to  the  city  of  San  Francisco 
about  five  or  six  hundred  thousand  gallons  per  day.  Under  his 
management  the  supjjly  was  increased  to  twelve  million  gal- 
lons per  day,  with  provisions  for  an  uninterrupted  supply  at 
that  rate  during  long  droughts,  which  are  frequent  in  Cali- 
fornia. In  i860  he  entered  the  firm  of  Alsop  &  Co.,  In  1871 
the  firm  name  was  changed  to  Parrot  &  Co.,  ]\Ir.  Babcock  still 
continuing  a  partner  in  the  business. 

He  was  President  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  of  San 
Francisco  for  the  years  1874,  '75,  '80.  '81.  He  was  a  vestry- 
man in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  of  the  Trinity  in  San 
Francisco.     In  politics  he  was  a  Republican. 

Children : 

989  William.'  b.  New  Orleans.  La.,  Aug.   12.  1851  ;    m.  Helena  Kimball. 

990  Alice  Wyer.  b.  Dec.  25.   1852;    m.  diaries  Brigbam. 

Edward  Courtland.  b.  San  Francisco,  Jan.  30.  1856;    d.  Jan.  31,  1856. 
Harry,  b.   San  Francisco.  Oct.   12,   1857;    res.   1881,   San  Francisco. 
Kate  Duer,  b.  San  Francisco,  Dec.  24,   1859;    res.  1881,  San  Fran- 
cisco. 

444.  Emily  Wilson'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Francis  and  Alice 

(Wyer)  Babcock  (Adam,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Woburn,  Mass.,  Oct.  30,  182 1  ;  m.  New  ^^ork  City,  Dec.  3, 
185 1,  Henry  W.,  son  of  Benjamin  Howell,  of  New  York. 

After  marriage  she  removed  to  Baltimore,  ]\Id.,  but  returned 
to  New  York  City  in  1861.  In  1865  removed  to  Elizabeth, 
N.  J.,  where  she  was  living  in  1881. 

(Children : 

Francis  Babcock,  b.  New  York,  Oct.  8.  1852;    res.   1881,  St.   Paul, 
Minn. 


MRS.  ABIGAIL  S.   (BABCOCK)   BLAKE. 

1819-1895.  Page  219. 


Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy.  221 

Edward,   b.   Baltiinurc,    Md.,   May    15,    1855;     res.    1881,    New   York 

City. 
Henry  Wilson,  b.  Baltimore.  June  17,  1859;    res.  1881,  in  New  York 

City. 

445.  Frederick  Adam"  Babcock,  son  of  Fi"ancis  and  Alice 

(W'yer)  Babcock  (Adam,  Jo.shna,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  W'obnni.  Mass..  July  5.  iSj.S;    res.   1881,  Eli;<abeth,  N.  J.; 
m.  New  York,  Jan.  17,  1849,  Caroline,  dau.  of  Edward  Riddle. 
Children : 

Eliza,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  1850;    d.  young. 
George  H.,  b.  Brooklyn.  June,  185—  (?). 
Edward  B..  b.  Brooklyn,  1854   (?)• 
Frederick,  b.  Harlem.  N.  Y.,  1856. 
Caroline,  b.  EHzabetb,  N.  J.,  1858. 
Eleanor,  b.  Elizabeth,   i860. 

446.  Robert   Fulton^    Babcock,   son   of   Jared    Star   and 
Diedama      ( Douglas)      Babcock      (Robert,     Jonathan, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  May  30,  1822; 
m-  Barry,  111.,  Jan.   15.  1849,  Mary  Sapronia,  dau.  of  Daniel 
and  Mary   (Siller)   Ciilman,  b.  Newburyport,  Mass.,  Feb.  7, 
1829;   res.  1901,  Anderson,  Ind. 
Children : 

Douglas,  b.  Pike  County,  111..  Dec.  21,  1849;    d.  Rock,  111. 

Ella  Jane,  b.  Oct.  17,  1852;  d.  Kansas,  Dec.  20,  1883;  m.  Milan,  111., 
Charles  Seward. 

Edith  Lois,  b.  Jan.  3.  1855  :    d.  Pike  County,  III.,  Mar.,  1855. 

Flora  Grace,  b.  Jan.  30,  1857 ;    d.  Mar.  4,  1878,  Illinois. 

Emile  Clymenia.  b.  Alay  18,  1859;    d.  Kansas,  Dec.  6.  1878. 

Robert  Gilman,  b.  Oct.  8,  1861  ;  res.  1901,  at  1710  Nical  Ave.,  An- 
derson, 111.  ;  m.  Yates  Center,  Kan.,  May,  dau.  of  George  and 
Sarah  (Grambell)  Hadley,  b.  Illinois,  Aug.  19,  1862;  res.  1901, 
Anderson,  111. 

Mary  Diedama,  b.  Oct.  4.  1863;  d.  Kansas,  Dec,  1896;  m.  Eugene 
A.  Sawyer;    he  res.   1901.  Shorey,  Kan. 

Clara  Frances,  b.  Apr.  4,  1867;  res.  1901,  at  916  5th  St.,  Anderson, 
111. ;  m.  Greensburg,  Kan.,  Frank,  son  of  Allen  Richwine,  b.  Per- 
kinsville,  Ind. :    res.   1901,  Anderson,  111. 

Daniel  Jared,  b.  Nov.  14,  1868;    d.  Colorado,  Oct.  24,  1890. 

447.  Lois  Douglas'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Jared  Star  and  Die- 
dama   (Doucflas)    Babcock    (Robert,  Jonathan,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  StejMientown,  N.  Y.,  May  4,  1824;  res.  1901, 
122  Ashland  Boulevard,  Chicas'O,  111.;  m.  Pittsfield,  111.,  Oct., 
1848,  Jahiel,  son  of  Norman  Parkes,  b.  Athens,  O.,  Aug.  2, 
1826,  d.  Lebanon,  111.,  Apr.  20,   1856. 
Cliildren,  d.  young: 

Teressa  E. ;  Mary;  Robert  J.;  Anna  D. 


222  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

448.  Nicholas  Hazzard"  Babcock,  son  of  Nicholas  Haz- 
zard  and  Martha  (HamHn)  Babcock  (Robert,  Jona- 
than, James,  John,  James),  b.  New  York  City,  Nov.  i8,  1832, 
d.  New  York  City,  July  30,  1896;  m.  New  York  City,  Mar.  it,, 
1867,  Mary  Frances,  dan.  of  Pierre  M.  and  Lncy  (Canfield) 
Ottignon,  b.  New  York  City,  July  4,  1843;  ^^^-  190-J  1982 
Webster  Ave.,  New  York  City. 

Children,  b.  New  York  City : 

Edward  Whitiman,  b.  Jan.  6,   1868;    d.  Aug.  2,   1868. 

Francis  Nicholas,  b.  Mar.  6,  1869;    res.  1902,  at  1982  Webster  Ave., 

New  York  City. 
Edward   Whitiman,   b.   Jan.    6,    1871  ;     res.    1902,    at   Webster   Ave., 

New  York  City. 
Frederick  Stanton,  b.  Mar.  2,  1873 ;    res.  1902,  at  Webster  Ave.,  New 

York  City. 
Arthur  C,  b.  Jan.  3,  1875 ;    d.  Dec.  4,  1880. 
Nicholas  Hazzard,  b.  Mar.  2,  1878;    res.  1902,  at  1982  Webster  Ave., 

New  York  City. 
Walter,  b.  May  18,  1880;    d.  Aug.  28,  1881. 
Albert  P.,  b.  Aug.  20,  1882 ;    res.   1902,  at  1982  Webster  Ave.,  New 

York  City. 
Mary  F..  b.  Aug.  10,   1887;    res.   1902,  at  1982  Webster  Ave.,  New 

York  City. 

449.  Jared  Star^  Babcock,  son  of  Nicholas  Hazzard  and 
Martha  (Hamlin)  Babcock  (Robert,  Jonathan,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Newark,  N.  J.,  May  2,  1838;  res.  1902,  at 
2083  Fifth  Ave.,  New  York  City;  m.  New  York  City,  Nov. 
6,  1867,  Mary,  dau.  of  John  and  Mary  Scott  (Peck)  Lowrey, 
b.  New  York  City,  Feb.  14,  1841 ;  res.  1902,  New  York  City. 
Children,  all  b.  New  York  City : 

Mary  Lowrey,  b.  Aug.  19,  1868 ;    res.  1902,  New  York  City ;    unm. 
Frederick  Stanton,  b.  Jan.  8,   1871  ;    d.  June  27,   1871,  in  New  York 

City. 
Mabel,  b.  July  i,  1872;    d.  May  18,  18S8,  at  New  Yoik. 
Harry  Vandeburgh,  b.  Nov.  i,  1874;    res.  New  York  City. 

450.  Ichabod'''     Babcock,     son    of    Ichabod    and    Dorcas 
(Hoxie)     Babcock     (Ichabod,     Ichabod,    John,    John, 

James),  b.  Gales  Ferry,  Conn.,  June  22,  1785;  d.  Andover, 
N.  Y.,  May  26,  1865;  m.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  22,  1816, 
Sarah,  dau.  of  Stephen  and  Susannah  (Potter)  Clarke,  b. 
Leonardsville.  Feb.  2,  1796,  d.  Andover,  N.  Y.,  May  4,  1871. 

Ichabod  Babcock  was  in  the  War  of  18 12,  and  received  a 
land  warrant  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  in  the  West. 

Children : 

Sarah   M.,  b.   Oct.    22,    1817;    d.    Sackets  Harbor,   Oct.,    1880;    m. 
Nelson  Clarke. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  223 

991  Amanda  M./  b.  Feb.   10,   1819;    in.   (i)    Matlbcw  SliHman;    m.    (2) 

George  Rosebusb. 

992  Gideon  Hoxie,  b.   Nov.   18.   1822;    ni.   Lydia  Cainpl)ell. 

Alanson  Clarke,  b.  Aug.  24.   1826;    res.   1902,  Little  Genesee,   N.   Y. 

993  Caroline  Dorcas,  b.  July  28,  1834;    m.    (i)   James  Young;    m.    (2) 

Asa  Maxson. 

451.  Joshua'  Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  and  Sarah  (Babcock) 

Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b. 
Westerly,  R.  I..  Oct.  14.  1783;  d.  S.  New  Berhn,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
18,  1828;  m.  J\lar.  17.  1808,  Clarissa,  dau.  of  Archibald  and 
Susanna  (Maxson)  Crandall.  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Dec.  2, 
1788,  d.  Nov.  28,  1864. 
CI  I  i  Id  r  en  : 

A.lbert,  b.  Apr.  2,  1809 ;    d.  young. 
Mary,  b.  Dec.  30,   1810;    d.  young. 

994  Adaline  S.,"  b.  Feb.  5.   1S12;    m.  Dec.  31,   1839,  Frederick  Pbelps. 

995  Albert  F.,  b.  Jan.  22,  1814:  m.  Dec.  23,  1832,  Ann  Almira  Crandall. 

996  William  Deloss,  b.  Oct.  26,  1817;    m.  Cornelia  Rockwell. 
Susan,  b.  June  12,  1819;    d.  Mar.  3,   1838. 

Harriet,  b.  June  5,  1821  ;    d.  July  i,  1862;    m.  1839,  Nelson  Crandall, 
son  of  Lodowick  and  Susan  ( Crippen )  Crandall,  d.  Sept.  28,  1870. 

997  Mary  L.,  b.  Apr.  2,  1826;    m.  German  Potter. 

452.  Sarah'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Sarah  (Babcock) 
Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  May 

3,  1785  ;  d.  Dec.  3.  183 1  ;  m.  1808,  Russel  Dewey,  of  Hancock, 
IMass. 

Children : 

Sarah,  m.  Clarke ;    Jerusha ;    Hannah,  m.  Ferguson  ;    Jo- 
seph ;    John. 

453.  Eunice"^   Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and   Sarah    (Bab- 
cock) Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod.  John.  John,  James), 

b.  Westerly.  R.  I.,  July  16,  1786;   d.  Sheffield.  Mass.,  July  11, 
1869;  m.  "\\'esterly.  May  25.  1808  (?).  Thomas,  son  of  Peleg 
and  Isabel   (Sherman)   Barber,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Oct.  24, 
1783,  d.  Granville,  Mass.,  Dec.  11,  1840. 
Children,  all  but  the  last  b.  Westerly: 

998  Thomas,*  b.  June  4,  1809;    m.  Sarah  Stanton. 

999  Sarah,  b.  Nov.   17,   1810;    m.  B.  N.  Burch. 

Phebe.  b.  Apr.  27,  1812 :    d.  Salisbury,  Conn.,  Jan.  6,  1870;    m.  Mar- 
tin Decker. 

Joseph,  b.  Jan.  10,  1814:   d.  Jan.  27,  18S0;    m.  Ann  Drake. 

Eunice,  b.  Oct.   16,  1819:    d.  Dec.  20.   1844,  unm. 
1000  William  D.,  b.  Apr.  27.  1821  ;    m.  Helen  Taft. 

Caroline,  b.  Mar.  28,  1823;    d.  Ore  Hill,  Conn..  Feb.  21.  1861,  unm. 
looi   Susan,  b.  Salisbury,  Conn.,  July  4,  1826;    m.  Thomas  Peckham. 


i4  ^ili'-'  Babcock  Genealogy. 

4,.        Joseph  Stanton^  Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  and  Sarah 
(Babcock)    Babcock    (Ichabod,    Ichaljod,    John,    John, 
\  b.   Westerly,   R.   I.,  June  3,    1792;    d.   Cannonville, 
^*>b.    5,    1855;    m.  Cannonville,    May    10.  1827,  Abby, 
d.:  ^ohn   and   Olive    (Killbnrn)    Owens.     When    young- 

Jo.  d  for  a  time  with  his  maternal  uncle,  Christopher 

Balx  Coeymans,  N.  Y. 

Chi  '■■     1,  1).  at  Cannonville: 

Join!  Henry,  h.  Oct.  2,  1829;  killed  on  the  Corning  &  Blossburg 
Railroad,  Jan.  9,  1S68;  m.  Corning,  N.  Y.,  May  15,  1865,  Mary 
A.  Hallenbcck.  He  served  through  the  Civil  War  in  the  36th 
Regiment,  N.  Y.  Infantry,  and  when  discharged  from  the  army 
settled  in  Corning,  N.  Y.     No  children. 

1002  Flelen  Adelia,^  b.  May  22,   1831  ;    ni.  Ezra  W.  Gillette. 

1003  Joseph  Alonzo,  b.  Mar.  9,   1833 ;    m.  Elizabeth  M.  Burdick. 
Sarah  Amelia,  b.   Feb.  23,   1835;    d.   Oct.   i,   1836. 

1004  Sarah  Amelia,  b.  Nov.  20,  1837;    m.  Shepard  C.  Smith. 

1005  Olive  Celestia,  b.  Nov.  8,   1845  ;    m.  Whiting  G.  Pomeroy. 

455.  Jabez  Wight'^  Babcock,  son  of  Lodowick  and  Lydia 

(Wight)  Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  11,  1795;  d.  Leb- 
anon Springs,  Aug.  i,  1869;  m.  Rebecca,  dau.  of  Joel  and 
Rebecca  (Hart)  Cook,  b.  Wallingford,  Conn.,  Apr.  5,  1798, 
d.  Lebanon  Springs,  Sept.  20,  1846. 

Jabez  W.  served  his  town  as  Supervisor  and  Town  Clerk. 
He  was  in  the  War  of  18 12. 

Children,  b.  at  Lebanon  Springs : 

Jabez  Cook,  b.  June  17,  1821  ;  d.  Lebanon  Springs,  Jan.  24,  1847;  m. 
Lebanon  Springs,  Mar.  24,  1844,  Lavina  Jinks.     No  children. 

1006  Harriet  Rebecca,'*  b.  Feb.  26,   1824;    m.  Edmund  Harrison. 

1007  William  H.,  b.  July  i,  1826;    m.  Penelope  Andrews. 

George  Frederick,  b.  Sept.  14,  1829;  res.  IQOI,  New  York  City;  m. 
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  Oct.   17,   1863,   Helen  Rogers. 

Lucy  Maria,  b.  Apr.  11,  1832;  res.  1901,  at  124  E.  Housatonic  St., 
Pittsfield,  Mass. ;  m.  Lelianon  Springs,  Oct.  29,  1851,  Henry,  son 
of  Nathan  and  Sophia  (Berelette)  Richardson,  m.  Belchertown, 
Mass.,  Jan.  25,  1826;    res.  1901,  Pittsfield,  Mass. 

Emma,  b.  July  20,  18^7;  res.  1901,  ^o  W.  Clifford  St.,  Providence, 
R.  L 

Anna,  twin  to  Emma;  res.  1901,  124  E.  Housatonic  St.,  Pittsfield, 
Mass. 

Kitty  M.,  b.  Lebanon  Springs.  N.  Y..  Nov.  10,  1840;  res.  1901,  at 
242  Baltic  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;  m.  New  York  City.  Apr.  10,  1892, 
John  S.  Ferris,  b.  Scotland,  Apr.  21,  1837;  res.  Brooklyn.  No 
children. 

456.  Emily'''     Babcock,     dau.     of    Lodowick     and     Lydia 

(Wight)     Babcock     (Ichabod,    Ichabod,    John,    John, 

James),  b.  Lebanon  Springs.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22,  1797;    d.  ; 

m.  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  May  27,  1820,  Rev.  Gardner  Hayden, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  2.7- , 

Children : 

George    L.,    b.    Egrcmont,    Mass.,    Nov.    22,    1823;     m.    Feb.,     i:-.  . 

Mary  J.  SI  iter. 
Mary  Emily,  b.  Egreniont,  Mass.,  Aug.  6,   1827;    m.  Peter  Wet.sc' 
Lydia,  b.  Oct.  24,  1829;   111.  Feb.  24,  1848,  Charles  Baker. 
Helen  L.,  b.  June  20,  1834. 

Ethvin  \V..  b.  Dec.  21,  1835;    ni.  Cornelia  Bryan. 
Thomas  Alfred,  b.  Brunswick,  June  16,  1840. 

457.  LonowicK  Stanton"  Babcock,  son  of  Lodowick  and 
Lydia  (Wight)  Bal)cock  (Ichahod,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  18,  1799;   d.  Sept. 
19,  1858;  ni.  (i)  Mary  Babcock,  d.  Sept.,  1822;  m.  (2)  May 
5,  1828,  Sarah  R.  Perry. 
Chikl: 

Mary,  b. ;   m.  James  Hotchess,  of  Plainfield,  N.  J. 

458.  Lydia  Esther'  Babcock,  dan.  of  Lodowick  and  Lydia 

(Wight)  Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  2^,  1816;  res.  1900, 
205  Lawrence  St.,  Fkishing,  L.  I. ;  m.  Nov.  9,  1835,  Alfred 
M.,  son  of  Col.  Josiah  and  Susan  (Carlton)  Wilder,  b.  Rindge, 
N.  H.,  Apr.  17,  1804. 

Jnne  25,  1900,  the  author  of  this  book  called  on  Mrs. 
Wilder,  and  though  she  was  eighty-four  years  of  age  her  mind 
was  clear  and  memory  good. 

Children : 

Emma  C,  b.  Brunswick,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  8,  1836;    d.  June  11,  1837. 

Emma  C,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  18,  1838;  res.  1900,  at  205  Law- 
rence St.,  Flushing.  L.  I. ;  m.  Brooklyn,  Oct.  26,  1859,  Thomas 
L.  Bonsell,  of  Portage  Fort,  Canada,  d.  New  York  City,  Feb.  22, 
1890.     Thev  had  six  children. 

Ella  H.,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  6,   1840. 

Alfred  M.,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  May  19,  1844;  m.  Jersey  City,  June 
10,  1886,  Anna  G.  Addis.     He  is  a  merchant  in  New  York  City. 

459.  Rhoda"   Babcock,   dau.   of  Joseph,   Jr.,   and   Keturah 
(Gavitt)     Babcock     (Joseph,     Ichabod,     John,     John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L.  July  25.  1820;    res.  1901,  Provi- 
dence, R.  I.:   m.  Jan.  28,  1845,  Dr.  L.  A.  Palmer,  of  N.  Ston- 
ington,  d.  Westerly,  Aug.  i,  1878.     They  had  seven  children; 
four  of  the  seven  d.  prior  to  1880. 
Children : 

Fred  M.D.,  b.  ;    d.  1900:    Harriet,  d.  190T. 

Frank  G.,  b.  ;    res.   1901,  Providence.  R.   I. 

460.  John  C'  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Damarius  (Cran- 
dall)    Babcock   (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James), 

15 


226  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1).  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Feb.  i8,  1796;  d.  Toledo,  O. ;  m.  Achsah 
Palmer. 

John  C.  went  with  his  family  to  Toledo,  O.,  and  helped  to 
lay  out  the  city,  and  died  there.  His  father,  John  Babcock, 
went  to  Ohio  and  brought  the  widow  and  children  home  with 
him  and  cared  for  them  until  the  children  reached  adult  life. 

Children : 

1007a  William  P./  b.  Sept.   15,  1825;    m.  Elizabeth  Poe. 

1008  John,  b.  Mar.  25,   1832;    in.  Elizabeth  Doughty. 

1009  Noyes,  b.  Apr.   ii,   1834;    m.   Mary  A.   Burrell. 
Jane,  b.  ;    m.  Morrison;    Marah. 

461.  Hannah^  Babcock,  dan.  of  John  and  Damarius  (Cran- 
dall)    Babcock   (Joseph,   Ichabod,  John,  John.  James), 

b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  23,  1798;  d.  Villanova,  N.  Y.,  May 
23,  1866;    m.  Madison  County,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20,  1823,  Hosea, 
son  of  Luther  Brown,  b.  Brooktield,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  7,   1798,  d. 
Villanova,  Aug.  5,  1872. 
Children : 

Ira,  b.  Dec.  8,  1823. 

Franklin  L.,  b.  Mar.  17,  1827;    d. 

Esther,  b.  Apr.  30,  1829. 

George  A.,  b.  Aug.  i,  1831. 

Rebecca,  b.  Nov.  4,   1833. 

Eliza  W.,  b.  Aug.  22,  1836. 

Milo  and  Merton  L.,  twins,  b.  May  17,  1839. 

Hosea  J.,  b.  Aug.  6,  1841. 

462.  Eliza'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Damarius   (Cran- 
dall)    Babcock   (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James), 

b.  ;   m.  Hosea  Whitford. 

Child: 

Eliza,  b.  ;    m.  Clark  Whitford.     No  children. 

463.  Oliver  Chase'''  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Damarius 

(Crandall)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John. 
James),  b.  Brookfiekl,  N.  Y.,  June  8,  1807;  d.  Persia,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  22,  1886;  m.  Brookfiekl,  Nov.  10,  1827,  Emma,  dau.  of 
Joseph  and  Persis  (Cotton)  Langworthy,  b.  Bridgewater, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  18,  1806,  d.  Persia,  May  30,  1892.  Moved  in  1828 
from  Brookfiekl  to  Persia  with  oxen  and  sled,  being  fourteen 
days  on  the  road.  He  was  a  Deacon  in  the  S.  D.  B.  Church 
from  1830  to  1854. 

Children,  b.  Persia,  N.  Y. : 

loio  Marion  Francis,**  b.  Dec.  8,  1828;    m.  Avilda  Babcock. 

Damarius.  b.  July  22,   1830;    d.  Persia,  July  23,  1848,  unm. 


OLIVER    BABCOCK. 

iSii-icoo. 


Page  227. 


The  Ilabcock  Genealogy.  227 

ion   Henry,  b.  June:,  183J ;    m.  Dora  Bristol. 

1012  Abner  L.,  b.  JJec.  11,  1833;    m.  Orsa  Rich. 

1013  Albert  A  ,  D.  Apr.  16,  1835 ;    m.  Rosalthe  Randall. 

1014  Cyrus.  Li.  Mar.  31,  1837;    m.  Emma  Saw. 

Aciisah,   b.    Apr.   5,    1841  ;     m.    Milton    M.    Burnliam,   at   E.   Jordan, 
Mich.,  July  9,   1884;    res.   1902,  E.  Jordan.   Mich.     No  children. 

1015  Julia,  b.  Feb.  27,  1843;    m.  Milton  M.  Burnham. 

1016  Calista  Ellen,  b.  Jan.  25,  1845;    m.  John  S.  Philbrick. 

1017  George  C,  b.  May  27,  1848;    m.   (i)  Emma  Snyder;    m.   (2)  Olive 

Bryant. 

464.  Re\-.  George  C/  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Datnarius 
(Crandall)    Baljcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    John,    John, 

James),  b.  Brookfield.  N.  Y.,  June  10,  1810;  d.  Xorth  Loup, 
Neb.,  July  14,  1818:  ni.  Brookfield,  Apr.,  1834,  Almira  Ruth, 
dau.  of  Amos  Brown,  b.  Brookfield,  Sept.  26,  18 12,  d.  Brook- 
field, Mo.,  Mar.  5,  1869. 

Rev.  George  C.  Babcock  was  ordained  to  the  S.  D.  B.  min- 
istry at  Berlin,  Wis..  Sept.  28,  1855,  was  pastor  of  the  church 
at  Dakota  and  Berlin.  Wis.,  also  of  the  Brookfield,  Mo., 
church ;  was  a  good  Bible  scholar  and  a  good  historian  for  his 
time. 

Children : 

1018  Rev.  Oscar.*  b.  Mar.  15,  1835;  m.   (i)  June  i,  1858,  Metta  Bristol; 

m.  (2)  Hattie  Payne:    ni.  (3)  Mrs.  Adaline  J.  Preston. 

1019  Delia,  b.  Jan.  9,  1838;    m.  Henry  Chase. 

1019a  Heman  A.,  b.  May  19,  1842 ;  res.  1902,  Lincoln,  Neb. ;  m.  Retta 
Bristol.  He  is  a  lawyer  and  General  Agent  of  the  Equitable  Life 
Insurance  Company  for  Iowa. 

465.  Nancy"   Babcock,   dau.   of  Daniel   and  Nancy    (Bab- 
cock)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James), 

b.  Westerly.  Nov.  29,  1803 ;  d.  Avondale,  R.  I.,  Aug.  31,  1891 ; 
m.  Sept.  3!  1826,  John  P.  Hall. 
Children,  b.  in  Westerly  : 

Eunice  A.,  b.  Apr.  2;^.  1828 ;    res.  1902,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Albert 

Barber. 
John  F..  b.  Oct.  3,  1829:    res.  1902,  Westerly.  R.  I.;    m.  Mary  Gavitt. 
Maria  F.,  b.  Apr.   14.   1832;    res.   1902,  Westerly,  R.  I.;    m.  George 

Barber. 
Daniel  C,  b.  Sept.  10.  1840;    res.  1902,  Westerly,  R.  I.:    m.  Nancy 

Wilcox. 
Lyman  E..  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Springfield.  Mass.;    m.  Lucy  Dickens. 

466.  Oliver''  Babcock.  son  of  Daniel  and  Nancy  (Babcock) 
Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John.  John,  James),  b.  \\^est- 

erly,  June  26,   1811  ;    d.  Westerlv,  R.  I.,  Oct.  22.   1900;    m. 
Mar.,    1837.   Martha,   dau.   of  Tristam  and  Hannah    (Ross) 
Dickens,  b.  Sept.  9,  181 7.  d.  Avondale.  R.  I.,  Mar.  10.  1888. 
Oliver  Babcock  was  for  many  years  Captain  of  a  whale  ship 


228  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

which  sailed  from  Stonington,  Conn.     He  -^^as  a  man  highly 
respected  Ijy  all  w  ho  knew  him. 

Children :  "   . 

1020  Tristam  D.,"  b.  Dec.  lo,   1842;    ni.  Charlotte  Irish. 

Nancy,  b.  Sept.  20,  1852,  Avonciale ;  res.  1902,  E.  Greenwich,  R.  1. ; 
m.  Westerly,  Aug.  20,  1884,  John  Tourjec,  b.  N.  Kingston,  Feb.  27, 
1848.     No  children. 

1021  James  Oliver,  b.  Dec.  5,  1859;    m.  Louise  Austin. 

Daniel  Courtland,  b.  Aug.  14,  1863 ;  res.  1902,  Avondale,  R.  I. ;  m. 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  10,  1896,  Margaret  Stillman  Burke,  b. 
Brooklyn,  Mar.  6,  1868;    res.  1902,  Avondale.     No  children. 

467.  Ezra'''  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Nancy  (Babcock) 
Babcock  (Joseph,  Tchabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Jan. 

16,  1816;  d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  31,  1898;  m.  (i)  Lucy, 
dau.  of  James  and  Mary  Babcock,  of  Coventry,  Conn.,  b.  Oct. 
7,  1822,  d.  Nov.  4,  1845;  i""^-  (-)  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  12, 
1855.  Eunice  E.,  dau.  of  Frederick  and  Lucy  (Burdick)  Palm- 
er, b.  Stonington,  Aug.  9,  1833;  res.  1902,  Westerly. 
Children : 

1022  Frederick,*  b.  Jan.  27,  1858;    m.  A.  Elizabeth  Chapman. 
Hannah,  b.  Stonington,  Aug.  24,  i860. 

1023  Charlotte,  b.  June  20,    1865 ;    m.   Austin   H.   Keyes. 

468.  James  Rhodes'''  Baecock,  son  of  James  and  Hannah 

(Rhodes)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Tchabod.  John.  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Aug.  16,  1804;  d.  Pekin.  111.,  Dec. 
29,  1863;  m.  Dec.  27,  1829,  Amelia  J.  Barnum,  of  Trumans- 
burg,  N.  Y. 

He  settled  first  at  Freemont,  111.,  about  1837,  later  removed 
to  Pekin,  111.  He  held  the  office  of  County  Treasurer  for  six- 
teen successive  years. 

Children : 

Joseph  P. ;    d.  young ;    James. 

1024  George,*  b.  Mar.  24,  1842;    m.  Caroline  Amesbury. 

469.  TiiANKFUiJ  Babcock.  dau.  of  Elihu  and  Celia   (Wil- 
bur)   Babcock   (Joseph,  Ichabod.  John.  John.  James), 

b.   July  27.    1818;   d.  Wells   Crossing,   Hornellsville,   N.    Y., 
July  7.  1874:   m.  Alfred.  N.  Y..  Aug.  30.  1834,  Darius  Sat- 
terlee,  b.  Berlin.  N.  Y..  Mar.  22.   1817.  d.  Dansville.  N.  Y., 
Mar.  12.  T885. 
Children : 

Celia  Thankful,  b.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y,  June  7.  1837;  d.  Alfred, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  i,  1862;  m.  Hornellsville,  I\Iay  4,  1854,  Chester  R. 
Shaw,  son  of  Remington  and  Tacy  (Burdick)   Shaw. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  229 

Emma,  h.  Horncllsvillc,  Dec.  16,  1843;  d.  HorncU^ville,  Oct.  17, 
1876. 

1025  Julia  A..  1).  Dec.  i.|,  1845;    m.  Cyrenus  P.  Ormsby. 

Amelia  A.,  h.  Alfred,  Aug.  2,  1849;  res.  1902,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Alfred,  Aug.  17,  1867.  Isaac  H.,  son  of  Hiram  and  Emily  (Porter) 
Burdick.  b.  Plartsville.  N.  Y.,  Dec.   19,   1846;    res.   1902,  Alfred. 

William,   b.   Hornellsville.   Aug.  27.   1854;     res.    1902,   Ulysses,   Pa.; 
m.  Whitesville,  Aug.  24,  1889,  Edna  L.,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Lydia 
(Coflf)    White,    b.    Whitesville.    Apr.    3,    1870.      One    child,    Dean 
Babcock  Satterlee.  b.  May  16,  1902. 

470.  Avilda"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elihii  and  Celia  (\\'ill)ur) 
Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Al- 
fred, N.  Y.,  Nov.  20,  182 1 ;  d.  May  4,  1884;  m.  Alfred,  Dec. 
25,  1839,  Robert,  son  of  James  and  Sally  (Morrison)  Hemp- 
hill.    He  was  a  farmer. 

Children : 

Adrian,  b.  Hartsville,  Feb.  5,  1841 ;    m.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  i,  1850, 

Verona  Monroe. 
Silvia,  b.  Alfred.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  23.  1842;    m.  Wellsville.  N.  Y.,  Jan.  i, 

1866,  Joseph  W..  son  of  James  and  Olive  (Brown)  Cooper. 
Ellen,  b.  Alfred.  N.  Y..  July  22.  1844:    d.  Hartsville.  N.  Y..  Dec.  4, 

1864;    m.  Almond,  N.  Y..  June  6,  1862.  Joseph  W.  Cooper. 
Elizabeth,   b.    Hartsville.    N.    Y.,   July  29.    1846;     m.    (i)    Almond. 

N.   Y..   Aug.,    1867.   Leonard   Beckwith ;    m.    (2)    Alfred.   N.    Y., 

Jan.  I,  189 1,  Albert  Sherman. 
James,  b.  Alfred.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  22.  1848;    m.  Alfred.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  25, 

1867,  Arphelia  Gavitt. 

Betsey  A.,  b.  Hartsville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1850;    living  1901,  Alfred. 

N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Ruth.  b.  Hartsville,  Alay  8.  1853;    res.   1901.  Alfred  Station,  N.  Y. ; 

m.  Alfred,  N.  Y..  Nov.  26,  1879.  Harley  Sherman,  b.  Apr.  28.  1849. 
Sarah,   b.   Alfred.   N.   Y.,   Apr.   2t„    1855;    res.    1901.   Diamond  City, 

]\Iont. ;    m.  Hartsville.  Alexander  Watson. 
Martha,  b.  Hartsville.  Aug.  4.  1857;    d.  Hartsville.  Jan.  15,  i860. 

471.  Celia'^   Babcock,   dan.   of  Elihn  and  Celia    (Wilbur) 
Babcock  (Jose])h,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Nov. 

5,  1827:  d.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  20,  1894;  m.  Hartsville, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1849,  Benjamin  Van  Buskirk,  b.  Romulus,  May 
■26,  1812,  d.  Hartsville,  Jan.  21,  1866. 
Children : 

Eliza  Jane.  b.  Dec.  21.  1850:  res.  1901.  Glenwood  Springs.  Col.;  m. 
Milo  N.  Edwards.     No  children. 

1026  Benjamin   S..**  b.  July  26.   1852:    m.  Eva  R.   Cook. 

1027  Emeline.  b.  Mar.  7.  1854;    m.  Herbert  Edwards. 

472.  Hannah"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Georr^c  and  Mary  (Ga- 
vitt) Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  May  31,  1817;  d.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1899;  m. 
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  Au^-.  23,  1843,  Lemuel  Hopkins,  b.  Hudson, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  15,  1820,  q\.  Albany,  N.  Y. 


230  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

1028  Susan  Bahcock,''  b.  June  29,   1844;    ni.   Samuel  Munson. 
Mary  Gavitt,  b.  Hudson;    d.  . 

Jane  Rose,  b.   Pougbkeepsie,   N.   Y. ;    res.   1902,  Albany,   N.  Y. ;    m. 

George  E.  Gorham. 
Lemuel  J.,  b.  Pougbkeepsie,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Sarah  Devlin. 
Annie   P.,   b.    Pougbkeepsie;     res.    1902,    Boston,   Mass;     m.   Edwin 

Ford. 

473.  Daniel    Lee"    Babcock,    son    of    Georg-e    and    Mary 

(Gavitt)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 
James),  1).  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  1822;  d.  Albany,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  17,  1888;  m.  Albany,  Aug.  2,  1858,  Margaret  V.,  dan. 
of  Thomas  and  Ellen  Bradford  Schuyler,  b.  Albany,  Jan.  18, 
1840,  d.  Albany,  Dec.  7,  1899.  She  m.  (2)  1898,  John  Court- 
land  Babcock,  brother  of  Daniel  Lee. 

Children,  first  b.  in  Pougbkeepsie,  rest  in  Albany: 

Courtland  Schuyler,  b.  May  18,   1859;    res.   1902,  Troy,  N.  Y. ;    m. 

Margaret  J.  Oliver.     No  children. 
Ellen  B.,  b.  Dec.  25,  i860:    res.  1902,  Sackets  Harbor,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Susan  Bell,  b.  June  i,  1862;    res.  1902,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Sept.  17, 

1890,  Leland  Chubb. 

1029  Hannah  Ross."  b.  Jan.  21,  1869;    m.  William  J.  Halpen. 

1030  Margaret  M.,  b.  Oct.  18,  1870;    m.  J.  V.  Williams. 

Mary  G.,  b.  Aug.  9,  1872;    res.  1902,  at  139  W.  84th  St.,  New  York 

City ;    unm. 
Clara  Louise,  b.   May  10,   1875 ;    res.   1902,   New  Glasgow,  Va. ;    m. 

Chatham  Center,  Mar.  i,  1896,  John  J.  Williams. 

474.  Claudius"  Babcock,  son  of  George  and  Mary  (Gavitt) 
Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    John,    John.    James),    b. 

;    d.  Key  West,  Fla.,  Feb.  i,  1877;    m.  Harriet  Guthrie, 

b. ,  res.  Key  West,  Fla.     He  was  a  naval  officer. 

Children : 

Mary  Gavitt;  George  Lee,  b.  Mar..  1869;  Claude,  b.  Dec,  1872; 
Harriet,  b.  Dec,   1875. 

475.  Milton"  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  Babcock 

(Oliver,  Stephen,  John,  John.  James),  b.  Aug.  15,  1804; 
m.  June  3,  1832,  Lydia,  dan.  of  John  Bowen.  of  Attleboro, 
Mass. 

Children : 

Henry,  b.  Taunton,  Mass.,  Apr.  28,  1834;  m.  Miss  King.  He  was 
a  naval  officer  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  commanded  a  number 
of  sloops  of  war;    in  1882  he  was  boss  nailer  at  Wheeling,  W.  Va. 

George,  b.  Mar.  8,  1836;  d.  Jan.  26,  1873,  unm.  He  also  served  in 
the  navy  during  the  War  of  the  Rebellion. 

Mary  Scott,  b.  Aug.  17,  1838;  m.  Capt.  Clement.  Had  twelve  chil- 
dren; eldest  in  1882  was  editor  of  the  Daily  News,  New  Bedford, 
Mass. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  231 

476.  Edward"    Babcock,    son    of    Oliver,    Jr.,    and    Anna 

(Heartt)     Babcock     (Oliver,     Stei)hen,     John,     John, 
James),  b.  Sept.  7,  1805;   d.  Oct.  28,  1876;   m.  i3ec.  9,  1828, 
Arniinia  Eldridgc.  d.  Dec.  2"/,  1876, 
Children : 

Augustus  E.,  b.  Apr.  23,  1834;    d.  Aug.   15.  1867. 

Stephen  Eldridge,  b.  Alar.  3.    1837 ;    ni.  June  30,   1874,  .     Is  a 

Civil  Engineer ;    res.  1903,  Utica,  N.  Y. 

477.  Elizabeth"     Babcock,     dau.     of    Oliver    and     Anna 

(Heartt)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Stephen,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  28,  1810:  d.  Kalamazoo,  Mich., 
Apr.  18,  1891  ;  m.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  25,  1834,  John,  son  of 
Jacob  and  Elizabeth  Haft",  b.  New  York  City,  1808,  d.  Evans- 
ville,  Ind.,  Nov.  24.  1850. 
Children : 

Anna,  b.  New  York;    m.  Evansville,  Ind.,  William  H.  Wales. 

1031  Elizabeth  W.,**  b.  Dec.  11,  1838;    m.  George  Kidder. 

Jacob,   b.    Evansville;     res.    1902,    Cripple   Creek,   Colo.;    ni.   Agnes 

Hopkins. 
Alary  Babcock  Hall,  b.  Evansville ;    d.  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.  ;    m.  C.  W. 

Pyke. 

C.  Josephine,  b.  ;    d.  Evansville;    ni.  L.  Coran. 

Edward,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Omaha,  Neb. 

Emily,  twin  to  Edward ;    res.  1902,  Kalamazoo,  Mich. ;    unm. 

478.  Charles'''  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Anna  (Heartt) 
Babcock    (Oliver,    Stephen,    John,    John.    James),    b. 

Utica,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  10,  1812;  d.  Evansville,  Ind.,  July  22, 
1894;  m.  Evansville,  Dec.  15.  1842,  Amelia,  dan.  of  Edward 
and  Mary  (Stuart)  Hopkins,  b.  Evansville;  res.  1902, 
Evansville. 

Children,  b.  Evansville : 

1032  Mary  V.,"  b.  ;    m.  Henry  Gooding. 

Edward  O.,   b.  ;    m.  Jessie   Goodlet.     No  children;    res.    1902, 

Evansville. 

Amelia  Gertrude,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Evansville. 

Annie  Heartt,  b.  ;    res.   1902.  at   118  Putnam  St.,   New  Haven, 

Conn. 

Charles  Clinton,  b.  ;    res.   1902.  Evansville,   Ind. 

William  S..  b.  ;    res.  1902,  New  Haven,  Conn. 

Rubv  Grace,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Chicago,  III.;    m.  Evansville,  Ind., 

Dwight  W.  Ball. 

479.  Elisha   Spurr"    Babcock,    son   of   Oliver   and   Anna 

(Heartt)  Babcock  (01i\er,  Stephen,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  10,  1814;  d.  Coronado.  Cal., 
Apr.  2,  1890;  m.  Madison,  Tnd.,  May  28,  1844,  Agnes  Suther- 


232  The  Bahcuck  Genealogy. 

land  Davidson,  1).  Wick,  Scotland;   res.  1902,  94(S  Grand  Ave., 
Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

Children,  b.  Evansville,  Ind. : 

1033  Oliver,'*  b.  ;    m.  Mary  G.  Hodge. 

Louisa,  b.  ;    d.  Evansville. 

1034  Elisba  S.,  b.  May  i,  1849;    m.  Isabel  Graham. 

Dr.  William  D.,  b.  Mar.  29,  185 1  ;  res.  1902,  Los  Angeles,  Cal.;  m. 
(I)  Harriet  Mclntire ;  m.  (2)  Los  Angeles,  Cal.,  Jan.  30,  1901, 
Catherine  Casey.  He  graduated  from  a  medical  school  in  1878. 
Holds  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  from  Lafayette  College, 
Easton,  Pa.  Dr.  Babcock  holds  the  chair  of  Professor  of  Dis- 
eases of  Ear,  Nose,  and  Throat  in  the  College  of  Medicine,  Uni- 
versity of  Southern  California;    is  also   Secretary  of  the  College. 

Alexander  E.,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Evansville,  Ind.;    unm. 

Cornelius,  b. ;    d.   Evansville,  unm. 

Amelia,  b.  ;    d.  Evansville;    John,  d.  Evansville. 

480.  Henry  Oliver^   Babcock,   son  of  Oliver  and  Anna 
(Heartt)     Babcock     (Oliver,     Stephen,     John,     John, 

James),  b.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  July  20,   1822;    d.  Evansville,  Ind., 
Sept.  10,  1879;  m.  Jeffersonville,  Ind.,  June  8,  1848,  Mary  E., 
dan.  of  Christian  and  Sarah   (Fisher)   Honser,  b.  Cincinnati, 
O.,  Feb.  15.  1831;   res.  1902,  Evansville,  Ind. 
Children,  b.  Evansville : 

Annie  H.,  b.  ;    d.  Evansville.  1851. 

Henry   H.,   b.  ;    d.   Evansville,   Ind,    1894;    m.   Orange,   N.   J., 

1877,   Annie  E.  Maghee ;    res.   1902,  Orange,   N.  J.,  b.  Evansville. 

1035  Mary  K.,**  b.  ;    m.  Harry  Veatch. 

1036  Lucy  A.,  b.  ;    m.  James  T.  Walker. 

Elwood  P..  b.  ;    d.  1858. 

Morgan,   b.   ;     res.    1902,   Evansville,    Ind.;     m.    Delia,    dau.    of 

George  Beal. 

Howard  L.,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  at  290  1-2  S.  Clark  St.,  Chicago,  111. 

Sarah  Maud,  b.  ;    d.  Evansville.   1867. 

Agnes  E..  b.  ■ ;    d.  Evansville,  1873. 

1037  Guilford  Carlile,  b.  ;    m.  Alida  M.  Kelsey. 

481.  Susan'''  Babcock,  dan.  of  Christopher  and  Polly  (Biir- 
dick)     Babcock     (Christopher,    William,    John,    John, 

James),  b.  Jan.  20,  1788;  m.  Cornelius  Van  Antwerp. 

Cornelius  Van  Antwerp  was  at  one  time  Sheriff  of  Albany 
Coimty,  and  in  1840  was  connected  with  the  Custom  House  in 
New  York  City. 

Child: 

1038  Mary  E.,*  b.  June  29,  1815;    m.  George  N.  Burdick. 

482.  Elizabeth'''  Babcock.  dau.  of  Christopher  and   Polly 

(Burdick)  Balicock  (Christo])her,  William,  John,  John, 
James),  b.   May  2,   1799;  m.  Rev.  George  Brown  Lisbee,  a 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  233 

Universalist,  who  preached  the  first  sermon  on  Universalism 
ever  given  in  Albany. 
Children  : 

George,   d.  young ;    Dudle}',   d.   young. 

1039  Mary  Elizabeth,"  b.  ;    m.  William  Updyke. 

483.  Christopher'   Babcock,   son  of  Jeremiah   and   Amy 
(Angel)    Babcock   (Christopher,   William,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Oct.  13,  1792;  d.  Champion,  N.  Y.,  June  29,  1869; 
m.   (i)  June  5.   1815,  Susan  Crandall,  d.  Feb.  29,   1844;    m. 
(2)  Janette  McNeil." 
Child : 

Mary  A.,  b.  1815;    d.  Dec.  17,  1835. 

484.  Elias"  Babcock,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Amy   (Angel) 
Babcock  (Christopher,  William,  John,  John,  James),  b. 

Aug.  20,  1794;  d.  Champion,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  11,  1859;  m.  Apr. 
2y,  1817,  Sarah  Angel,  b.  Feb.  zy,  1799,  d.  Champion,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  26,  1 88 1. 

Children,  b.  Champion : 

1040  Hiram.'*  b.   Sept.   13,   1818;    m.  Ann  J.   Penfield. 

1041  Eunice,  b.  Sept.  23,  1825  ;    m.  Joseph  M.  Gardner. 

Horatio  D.,  b.  Oct.  29,  1840;  res.  1902,  Deer  River,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Deer 
River,  Mary.  dau.  of  William  Bedell,  b.  Deer  River,  1840;  res. 
1902,  Deer  River,   N.  Y.     No  children. 

485.  Joshua  Angel"^  Babcock,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Amy 

(Angel)  Babcock  ("Christopher,  William,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Flamilton,  N.  Y.,  Fel).  10,  1796;  d.  Felts  Alills, 
N.  Y..  Mar.  23,  1843;  m.  Hamilton,  July  24,  1820,  Laura, 
dan.  of  Chandler  Holmes,  b.  Hartland,  Vt.,  Sept.  2,  1793,  d. 
Felts  Mills.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  29,  1845. 
Children : 

1042  Henry  H.,'  b.  IMar.  28.   1821  ;    m.  Eliza  Wheeler. 
Amy,  b.  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

1043  Periey  J.,  b.  Aug.  31,  1826;    m.   (i)   Sarah  Furness ;    m.   (2)  Helen 

M.  Green. 
Martha  L..  b.  June  3,  1828;    d.  Aug.  12.  1829. 

1044  George  D.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1834;    m.  Mary  O'Neill. 

486.  Ambrose  S."  Babcock,    son    of    Jeremiah    and  Amy 

(Angel)  Babcock  (Christopher,  William,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  2,  1800;  d.  Champion, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  28,  1891:  m.  Brookfield.  N.  Y.,  Mar.  9,  1825, 
Huldah,  dnu.  of  287  Nathan  and  Huldah  (Burdick)  Babcock, 
b.  Brookfield,  May  2,  1806,  d.  Champion,  Jan.  11,  1899. 


234  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Champion : 

Albert  Oscar,  b.  July  4.  icS26;  res.  1902,  Carthage,  N.  Y. ;  in.  Cham- 
pion, N.  Y.,  Eliza,  dan.  of  Noah  McNitt,  b.  Brookline,  Vt. ;  res. 
1902,  Carthage. 

1045  Adelia  R.,"  b.  July  7,  ICS29;    m.  Orville  Cutler. 

1046  Maria  A.,  b.  Feb.  2t„  1835  ;    m.  Marcus  Coughlin. 

1047  Althea  J.,  b.  July  11,  1838;    ni.  Obed  W.  Pierce. 

487.  Jeremiah'^   Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Amy 

(Ang-el)  Babcock  (Christopher,  Wilham,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Nov.  9,  1804;  d.  Carthage,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  13,  1886; 
m.  Felts  Mills,  Dec.  7,  1826,  Julia,  dau.  of  Jason  and  Betsey 
(Merrill)  Frances,  b.  Hartford,  Conn.,  Dec.  31,  1803,  d.  Car- 
thage, N.  Y.,  Sept.  3,  1885. 
Children : 

1048  Austin  A.,*  b.  Sept.  11,  1827;     m.  Arcelia  Crittenton 
Adelia,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Adelia  Julia,  b.  May  25,  1830;    d.  Felts  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  20,  1854; 

m.  Felts  Mills,  May,  1847,  Henry  Munn,  d.  July,  1853. 
James,  Jr.,  b.  Oct.  28,   1832;    d.  N.  Y.,  Dec.   15,   i8(x). 
Wilbur  v.,  b.  May  16,   1835 ;    d.  Carthage,  Dec.  22.   1861  ;    m.  June, 

1858,   Lora   Rice,   b.    Hermon,    N.    Y.,    Feb.    i,    1841,    d.    Hermon, 

Sept.,  1862. 

1049  Harriet  E.,  b.  Jan.  5,  1838;    m.  John  Brown. 
Eldridge  J.,  b.  Aug.  21,  1840;    d.  Feb.  23,  1843. 
Andrew,  b.  July  17,   1842;    d.  Feb.   19,  1843. 

Elmer  E.,  b.  Aug.  8,  1844;    d.  Petersburg,  Va.,  Mar.  31,  1865. 

488.  WiLiAM  P."  Babcock,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Amy  (An- 
gel)    Babcock     (Christopher,     William,     John,     John, 

James),  b.  Sept.  2,  1809;   d.  near  Champion,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  12, 
1875;  m.  Roxey  Lewis. 
Children : 

William;    Augustus;    Lysander;    Elizur. 

489.  Stephen'''     Babcock,     son    of     Stephen     and     Phebe 

(Burch)  Babcock  (Christopher,  William,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  May  10,  1804;  d.  Simsbury, 
Conn.,  Jan.  22,  1856;  m.  Salisbury,  Mar.  20,  1831,  Mary,  dau. 
of  Thomas  and  Susanna  (Pendleton)  Burch,  b.  Goshen,  Conn., 
Apr.  22,  1807,  d.  Simsbury,  Nov.  22,  1891.  He  was  a  farmer, 
settled  first  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  later  removed  to  the  north- 
west part  of  Connecticut. 
Children : 

Susan  Mary,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  21,  1832;  m.  Simshurj', 
Conn.,  Feb.  14,  1862,  Henry  J.,  son  of  Roswell  F.  and  Betsey 
(Case)  Noble,  b.  Hartford,  Conn.,  Oct.  20,  1819,  d.  Simsbury, 
Conn.,  Apr.  13,  1900.     No  children.     He  was  a  farmer. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  235 

Pbebe    Maria,    1).    Westerly,    R.    I.,    Mar.    28,    1834;     d-    Stonington, 

Conn.,  Oct.  9,  1838. 
Stephen,  b.   Stonington,  Conn.,   Feb.   17,   1837;    d.  Simsbury,  Conn., 

Sept.  17,  1858. 

1050  Phebe  Catherine,"  b.  Mar.  29,  1839;    m.  James  Hunt. 

1051  Sarah  Maria,  b.  Dec.   14,  1841  ;    m.  Apolias  Wilcox. 

Thomas  Henry,   b.    Salisbury,   Conn.,   Oct.  30,    1844;    d.    Salisbury, 
Oct.  2,  1849. 

490.  Elias'  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  Pliebe  (Burch) 
Babcock  (Christopher,  Wilhani,  John,  John,  James),  b. 

Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  19,  1806;  d.  Stonington,  Mar.  19, 
1881  ;  m.  Stonington,  Dec.  i,  1836,  Lncretia  Davis,  dan.  of 
Clark  and  Mary  (Miner)  Davis,  b.  Stonington,  Jnne  22,  181 7. 
He  was  a  farmer,  Hving  on  several  hired  farms  in  Stonington, 
including  liis  father's  farm  on  Walnut  Hill,  about  two  miles 
from  Milltown.  For  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  he  was  a 
merchant  at  Stonington  Borough. 
Children : 

Mary  Lucretia,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  22,  1837;    d.  Stonington, 
Aug.  4.  1838. 

1052  Lncretia  Maria,""  b.  Oct.  12,  1839;    m.  Samuel  H.  Chesebro. 

1053  Elias,  Jr.,  b.  Nov.  24,  1843;    m.  Alice  D.  Hancox. 

491.  Phineas'^    Babcock,    son    of    Phineas    and    Thankful 
(Babcock)  Babcock  (Christopher,  William.  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Sept.  24.  1804;  d.  California,  Dec, 
1856;  m.  North  East,  Pa.,  Eeb.  5,  1830,  Esther  Cole,  dau.  of 
James  and  Delilah  (Brown)  Cole,  b.  North  East,  Jan.  9,  1813, 
d.  North  East,  Nov.  24,  1849.  He  went  to  California  in  1852, 
Children : 

Avilda,  b.  Dec.  3,  1833 ;    m.  loio  Marion  Babcock. 

1054  Delilah,'  b.  Nov.  8.  1835:    m.  Harley  Adams. 

John  C,  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Oct.  14,  1837;    drowned  May  2.  1849, 

North  East ;    unm. 
Phineas,  b.  North  East,  Pa..  Dec.   17.  1839;    d.  Libby  Prison,  Rich- 
mond, Va..  Mar.  10,  1864.     Enlisted  Aug.  9,  1862,  taken  prisoner, 
1864 ;    unm. 
105s  Seth,  b.  Mar.  22.  1844;    m.  Sarah  Ann  Hite. 

1056  Sarah  J.,  b.  July  4,  1845  :    m.  Ebenezer  Skellie. 

1057  Winfield  S.,  b.  June  i,  1847;   m.  Florence  A.  Sherman. 

492.  Christopher  Denison'^  Babcock,  son  of  Phineas  and 
Thankful    (Babcock)    Babcock    (Christopher,   William, 

John,  John.  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  2,  1806:  d.  North 
East,  Pa.,  June  21,  1870;  m.  North  East,  Mar.  6,  1838,  Louisa, 
dau.  of  James  and  Delilah  (Brown)  Cole,  b.  North  East,  Apr. 
6,  1822.  d.  North  East,  Apr.  23,  1891.  He  was  a  farmer  at 
North  East,  Pa. 


236  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

1058  Delilah  R.,"  b.  Apr.  4,  1841;    111.   (1)  Charles  Brown;    111.   {2)  James 

Slater. 
Mary   D.,   b.    Persia,    N.    Y.,   July   24,    1843 ;    d.    North    East,    Pa., 
Nov.  7,  1865,  iinm. 

1059  William,  b.   Feb.  9,   1846;    m.   Harriet  Archer. 

Warren  Cole,  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  30,  1851  ;  res.  1901,  Knapps 
Creek ;    unni. 

1060  Julia  Louise,  b.  Nov.  10,  1856;    ni.   (i)   Stephen  W.  Baker;    m.   (2) 

John  B.  Currie. 

493.  Nancy"  (Ann)  Babcock,  dan.  of  Phincas  and  Thank- 
ful   (Babcock)    Bal^ock    (Christopher,   William,  John, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Nov.  15,  1812;  d.  Linn 
Comity,  Mo.,  1874;  m.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  William,'  son  of 
James  and  177  Thankful  (Babcock)  Crandall.  They  settled 
first  in  Persia,  N.  Y.,  moved  thence  to  Wisconsin,  and  later 
to  Nebraska. 

Children,  the  first  eight  born  in  Cattaraugus  County,  N.  Y., 
the  others  in  W'isconsiii : 

Mary,  b.  1834 ;  res.  1900,  Brookfield,  Mo. ;  m.  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
1854,   Matthew   McCormick,   d.    1891. 

Lorenda,  b.  Aug.,  1835 ;  res.  1900,  North  Loup,  Neb. ;  m.  Wau- 
shara County,  Wis.,  June  14,  1857,  Henry  Thorngate. 

James  Herbert,  b.  1837.  He  was  Sergeant  Co.  E,  Missouri,  of  the 
Iron  Brigade,  and  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Gainesville,  Va., 
Aug.  28,  1862. 

Samuel  B.,  b.  1839;    res.  Apr.,  1900,  Brookfield,  Mo. 

Porter,  b.  1841  ;    res.  1900,  North  Loup,  Neb. 

Arjoicna,  b.  1844;  res.  1900,  North  Loup,  Neb.;  m.  George  T. 
Thorngate. 

Angelia.   b.    1846;     res.    1900,   North   Loup,   Neb.;    m.   Mosier. 

Devills  P.,  b.   1852;    res.   1900,  Stockton,  Kan. 

Josephine,  b.  1856;  res.  1900,  135  S.  Tenth  St.,  Denver,  Col.;  m. 
Morris. 

494.  Joseph  Page"  Babcock,  son  of  Phineas  and  Thankful 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Christopher,  W^illiam,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Sept.  5,  1814;  d.  lone,  Cal.,  Feb. 
16,  1899;  m.  North  East,  Pa.,  Dec.  10,  1840,  Mary  B.,  dau. 
of  James  and  Delilah  Cole,  b.  North  East,  May  23,  1819,  d. 
Des  Moines.  la.,  vSept.  3,  1895. 
Children : 

1061  Annie  E.,"  b.  Oct.  3.  1842;    m.  Wilbur  Easton. 

1062  Lovilla.  b.  Oct.  7,   1847;    m.  H.  Allen  Titus. 

495.  Thomas  Barber'^  Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth 

(Barber)  Babcock  (Christopher,  William,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Sept.  24,  1806;  d.  Earlville,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  II,  1871 ;    m.  Eaton,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  5,  1843,  Abigail,  dau. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  237 

of  Burret  and  Rebecca  Wentworth,   b.   Georgetown,   N.   Y., 
Apr.  12,  1810,  d.  Randallsville,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  13,  1886. 
Cbildren : 

1063  Henry  C,"  b.  Dec.  21,  1843;    111.  Dora  Beach. 

William  F.,  b.  July  31,   1845;    res.   1900,  Poolville,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

1064  IMary  A.,  b.  Feb.  24,   1847;    m.  Adelbert  A.   Stune. 

1065  James,  b.  June  24,  1850;    m.  Ida  L.  Peck. 

Charles  E.,  b.  Jan.  18,  1852;    res.  1900,  Lebanon,  N.  Y. 

496.  George  \\  ~'  Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Bar- 
ber)    Babcock     (Christopher,     WilHam,    John,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  27,  1807;  d.  Vesper,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  4,  1885.  buried  at  Tully,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Xorwicii,  Conn.,  Oct. 
28,  1834,  Alary  King,  dau.  of  Stephen  B.  and  JMary  (Gordon) 
Richards,  b.  Saco,  Maine,  July  15,  1816,  d.  Onondaga  Hill, 
Jan.  31,  189 — ,  buried  at  Tully,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

1066  George  W.,*  b.  Dec.  23.  1835 ;  m.  Ella  A.  Robinson. 

1067  William  S.,  b.  Sept.  27,  1837;    m.  Sarah  C.  Allen. 

1068  Duane  Perry,  b.  Alay  19,  1841  ;    m.  Rosalie  Wickham. 

1069  Mary  Ellen,  b.  Mar.  26.   1843;    m.  Rev.  D.  W.   Sherman. 

Amy  J.,  b.  Worcester,  Mass.,  Oct.  16,  1846;  d.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y., 
Apr.   12.   1862. 

1070  Lucinda,  b.  June  i,  1848;    m.   (i)   Elias  Rowland;    m.    (2)   Charles 

W.  Smith. 
Wilbur  F.,  b.  June  i,  1857;    d.  Leonardsville,  Sept.  20,  1858. 

497.  Mary  1^7  Babcock,  dau.  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Bar- 
ber)    Babcock     (Christopher.     William,     John,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I..  Feb.  3,  1809;  d.  Pawcatuck,  Conn., 
Sept.  I,  1866;   m.  Smyrna,  N.  Y.,  Isaac  Burdick,  b.  Hopkin- 
ton.  R.  I.,  Aug.  28,  1808,  d.  Westerly,  Mar.  29.  1878. 
Children  : 

Elizabeth  M.,  b.  Mar.,  1835 ;    m.   1003  Joseph  Aionzo  Babcock. 

Isaac  F.,  b.  Hopkinton.  R.  L,  Aug.  i,  1836;  m.  Westerly,  Oct.  8, 
1872.  Ann  F.  Hiscox,  of  Charlestown.  R.  L  He  served  in 
the  Civil  War  in  ist  Regiment  Rhode  Island  Cavalry.  Has  two 
children ;    res.  1900,  Westerly.  R.  I. 

Edward  H.,  b.  Hopkinton.  July  4,  1838;  res.  1900,  Westerly,  R.  I.; 
m.  Jersey  City,  N.  J..  Sept.  28,  1865.  Sarah  A.,  dau.  of  Daniel  and 
Ann  E.  Mosher.  b.  New  Market,  N.  J.  He  served  in  the  Civil 
War  in  9th  Regiment,  Rhode  Island  Infantry.     Has  three  children. 

Benjamin  Babcock,  b.  Hopkinton,  Mar.  11,  1840;  d.  Pawcatuck, 
May  23,  1863. 

Thomas  T.,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Feb.  5,  1842;  res.  1900.  S.  Brook- 
field.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y..  July  24,  1873.  Harriet  V., 
dau.  of  Roswell  and  Mary  Crandal!  Douse.  He  served  in  the  Civil 
War.  9th  Regiment.  Rhode  Island  Infantry.     Has  four  children. 

Catharine  E.,  b.  in  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Jan.  4,  1844;  d.  Pawcatuck, 
Conn.,  Apr.  23,  1863. 


238  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Martha  Caroline,  b.  Hopkinton,  ATay  12,  1845:  d.  Alfred,  N.  Y., 
May,  1S73;  m.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Jolni  M.,  son  of  Daniel  P. 
and  Ann  E.  Mosher,  Oct.  6,  1862,  after  John  M.  had  enlisted  in 
the  army  in  the  26th  Regiment  Connecticut  Infantry.  She  left  two 
children. 

Solonian  Carpenter,  h.  River  Point,  R.  I.,  Jan.  31.  1847;  living  May, 
1900,  in  Westerly,  R.  I. ;  m.  in  Stonington  Borough,  Conn.,  May 
3,  1882,  Hannah  C,  dau.  of  Orin  and  Hannah  (Hancox)  Doty. 
Has  three  children. 

George  Noyes,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Mar.  29,  1849;  1900,  lived 
at  Potter  Hill,  R.  I. ;  m.  Potter  Hill,  Ada,  dau.  of  Henry  and 
Jeannette  (Potter)  Langworthy,  b.  Sept.  12,  1872.  Have  one 
child,  Henry  L. 

Hannah  Mehitable  Chaucer,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Nov.  5,  1850; 
d.  July  6,  1851. 

Annie  Marie,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Aug.  15,  1852;    d.  Dec.  26,  1852. 

498.  Asa'''   Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and   Elizabeth    (Barber) 
Babcock    (Christopher,   Wihiam,   John,   John,  James), 

b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  3,  181 1 ;  d.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  July 
18,  1891  ;  m.  Leonardsville,  Feb.  2,  1833,  Cleniantine,  dau.  of 
James  and  Nancy  (Owen)  Webster,  b.  Burlington,  N.  Y.,  June 
25,  1810,  d.  Leonardsville,  June  i,  1898. 
Children,  b.  Leonardsville: 

Elizabeth  Babcock,  b.  Aug.  21,  1836;  res.  1900,  Leonardsville,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Leonardsville,  Jan.  i,  1878,  Henry  C,  son  of  Corwall  and 
Nancy  (Wilcox)  St.  John,  b.  Leonardsville,  June  30,  1826.  No 
children. 

1071  James  W.,"  b.  Aug.  22,  1838;    m.  Helen  Clark. 

Caroline,  b.  Dec.  4,  1839;    d.  Leonardsville,  Oct.  i,  1870,  unm. 
Sarah  A.,  b.  Aug.  5,  1848;    d.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1883. 

499.  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Bar- 
ber)    Babcock     (Christopher,     William,     John,     John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  June  28,  1813;  d.  Adams  Center, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  20,  1892;   m.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22.  1831,  Allen, 
son  of  Ira  and   Abigail    (Allen)    Prentice,   b.   Worthington, 
Mass.,  Jan.  11,  1806,  d.  Dakota,  Wis.,  Jan.  9,  1872. 
Children : 

Hannah  E.,  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  24,  1832;  res.  1900,  Oconomo- 
woc.  Wis. ;  m.  Dakota,  Wis.,  Sept.  26,  1856,  William  J.,  son  of 
William  and  Priscilla  (Whittaker)  Rosecrans,  b.  Wayland,  N.  Y., 
Aug.   16,  1828. 

Mary  A.,  b.  Persia.  N.  Y..  May  20,  1835;    d.  Persia,  Feb.  12.  1837. 

Alpheus  John.  b.   Persia,  July  21,   1836;    d.  Persia,  June  21,   1838. 

1072  Asa  B.,'  b.  July  29,    1838;    m.    (i)    Marion  Greene;    m.    (2)    Mary 

A.  Greene. 
Nathan  Barber,  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  26,   1840;    m.  Richford,  Wis., 

Oct.   10,   1867,   Ellen   F.,   dau.  of  Silas  and  Eliza   (Farrand)    Rist, 

b.  Dec.  20,   1846.     In  Feb.,  1900,  he  was  employed  in  the  Pension 

Office,  Washington.  D.  C. 
Ira  B.,  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  July  20,  1842 ;    d.  Persia,  Mar.  19,  1845. 


ELIAS    BABCOCK. 
1806-1881. 


Page  235. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  239 

Amy   Jane,    li.   J(jhnsto\vn,    Wis.,    Apr.    13,    1846;     cl.    Dakota,   Wis., 

July  6,  i8()5. 
William  A.,  h.  July  6,  1851;    m.  1242  Nancy  C.  Babcock. 

500.  Christopher  John"  Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Eliza- 
beth   (luirljer)    Babcock    (Christopher,   William,  John, 

John,  James),  b.  Smyrna,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1814;  d.  S.  Day- 
ton, N.  Y.,  Jan.  i,  1894;  m.  (i)  Smith  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Nov. 
10,  1838,  Rebecca  Ann  Smith,  b.  Dec.  22,  1817,  d.  Apr.  11, 
1843.  No  children  by  first  marriage.  He  m.  (2)  Madison, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.  5,  1844.  Harriet,  dau.  of  Richard  and  Amelia 
(Sims)  Bntton,  b.  Erieville.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  i,  1820,  d.  Irving, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1861  ;  m.  (3)  Irving,  N.  Y.,  Mrs.  Sarah  A, 
Chase,  dan.  of  William  and  Orpha  Rawlett,  b.  E.  Hamburg, 
N.  \.,  Apr.  29,  1827;  res.  1900,  Ba'com,  N.  Y^.  No  children 
by  third  marriage. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

1073  Louise.''  b.    Nov.    12,    1845;     m.    (i)    Air.    Bowen ;     m.    (2)    Francis 

Powers. 

1074  Willis  A.,  b.  May  i.  1852;    m.  Barbara  F.  Clark. 

1075  Frank  P.,  b.  Oct.  8,  1854;    m.  Frances  Redman. 

1076  Hermon,   b.   June  6,    1856;     m.    (i)    Viroqua  Ames;    m.    (2)    Lina 

Young. 

501.  Amy"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth    (Barber) 
Babcock  (Christopher,  William,  John,  John,  James),  b. 

Trnxton,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  7,  1818;    d.  Persia,  N.  Y^,  Feb.,  1837; 
m.  Alonzo,  son  of  Silas  Burdick. 
Child : 

George  Whitford,  b.  Persia,  Cattaraugus  County,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  16. 
1837.  When  five  weeks  old  his  mother  died,  and  he  was  reared 
in  the  family  of  Hosea  Whitford,  and  took  the  name  of  his  fos- 
ter parents — Whitford.  In  the  fall  of  1861  he  enlisted  in  the  85th 
Regiment,  New  York  State  Volunteers,  several  months  later  dis- 
charged on  account  of  sickness.  About  a  year  later  he  reenlisted 
in  the  ist  New  York  Veteran  Cavalry  and  served  until  the  close 
of  the  war.  In  1866  he  m.,  at  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Marian 
A.,  dau.  of  Willoughby  and  Caroline  Jaques,  b.  Little  Genesee, 
1848.  They  have  three  daughters.  In  Dec.  1899.  this  family 
lived  in  Vinton,  la. 

502.  William  A.'^  Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Bar- 
ber)    Babcock     (Christopher,     \\'illiam,    John,    John. 

James),  b.  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  19.  1820:  res.  1900.  Leon- 

ardsville,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Leonardsville.   Sept.  9,    1846,   Harriet, 

dan.  of  William  and  Lucy  (Webster)  Pelton,  b.  Feb.  22,  1822. 

Children : 

Mary,  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  17.  1847;  m.  Leonardsville, 
Feb.  3,  1873,  Calvin  Burch,  b.  Brookfield,  Jan.  14,  1850.  No 
children. 


240  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Charles  F.,  h.  Lconardsvillc,  Oct.  9,  1856;  d.  Leonardsville,  July  5, 
1862. 

1077  Harriet,'*  h.  Jan.  24,  1864;    m.  Merton  FI.  Brown. 

503.  Sarah  Ann"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Hannah 

(Miller)  Babcock  (Samuel,  William,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Jan.  20,  1812;  d.  Wooster, 
O.,  Apr.  27,  1895;  m.  Middletown,  Sept.  30,  1832,  Oliver 
Earlier  Beelje,  b.  New  London,  Conn.,  Oct.  17,  1807,  d.  Cuya- 
hoga Falls,  O.,  Sept.  i,  1886. 
Children,  b.  Cuyahoga  Falls  : 

Jane,  b.  Sept.  8,  1833 ;    d.  Mar.  3,  1836. 
May  E.,  b.  Apr.  22,  1835  ;    d.  Sept.  3,  1837. 

1078  William  O.,'  b  .July  24,  1838;    m.  Fanny  A.  Sill. 
Robert  Goodell,  b.  May  9,  1842;    d.  Nov.  10,  1842. 

504.  Elizabeth'^    Babcock,   dau.    of   Samuel   and   Hannah 
(Miller)     Babcock     (Samuel,     William,    John,    John, 

James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  May  22,  1813;  d.  Fayette- 
ville,  N.  C,  Apr.  11,  1865;  m.  Fayetteville,  1838,  William 
Taylor,  b.  Manchester,  England,  Oct.  18,  1810,  d.  Fayetteville, 
July,  1877. 

Children,  b.  Fayetteville : 

William   T.,  b.  ;    d.   Fayetteville,    i88r ;    m.   Oct.,    1866,   Edith 

Cranor. 

Sarah,  b.  Sept.  15,  1844;  m.  Nov.  2y.  1872,  John  S.  Cranor;  d. 
Wilkesboro,  N.  C,  May  22,  1902.  Mrs.  Cranor  was  a  woman 
of  rare  endowments,  a  blessing  to  her  family  and  the  community 
in  which  she  lived.  In  early  life  she  made  a  profession  of  reli- 
gion, and  became  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
and  adorned  her  profession  by  a  most  devoted  Christian  life. 
Children,  b.  Wilkesboro:  Katherine  Taylor,  b.  Apr.  22,  1874; 
Hugh  Armfield,  b.  Nov.  20,  1875 ;  Edith  Josephine,  b.  Mar.  6, 
1877;  William  Taylor,  b.  July  24,  1878;  Sarah  Elizabeth,  b. 
Jan.  6,  1880,  m.  Nov.  19,  1902,  William  H.  McElwee;  Fannie 
Susan,  b.  Oct.  12,  1881 ;  John  Samuel,  b.  Apr.  25,  1883 ;  Frank 
Taylor,  b.  Apr.  6,  1885;    Charles  Moses,  b.  Jan.  28,  1887. 

Laura,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Chattanooga,  Tenn. ;    m.  Sept.,   1865,  C. 

C.  McMurry. 

Elizabeth,  b.  ;    res.  1902.  Durham,  N.  C. 

1079  Charles  C.,'^  b.  Dec.  25,  1847;    m.  Elizabeth  Richards. 

George  S.,  b.  :    d.  Dec.  27,  1897;    m.  Mary  Wilbor. 

James  E.,  b.  ;    d.  Apr.,  1883. 

Frank  H.,  b.  ;    d.  Jan.  27,  1892;    m.  Agnes  Cornish. 

505.  Jane'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Hannah  (Miller) 
Babcock    (Samuel,    William,    John,    John,    James),    b. 

Middletown,  Conn.,  May  15,  1815;  res.  1902,  Liberty  St., 
Middletown;  m.  Middletown,  Jan.  24,  1836,  Gera  Goodell,  b. 
Glastonbury,  Conn.,  July  25,   1806,  d.  Middletown,  Dec.    18, 

1853- 


SARAH    TAYLOR    CRANOR. 

1844-1902.  Page  240. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  241 

Children,  b.  Aliddlctown : 

Gertrude  S.,  b.  Apr.  26,  1837;    res.  1902,  Middlctown ;    m.  Aug.  17, 

1856,  William  C.  Bowen. 
George  D.,  b.  Dec.  5,  1839;    d.  Middletown,  Dec.  9,  1901  ;    m.  Bing- 

haniton,  N.  Y.,  Julia  Shields. 
Rol)crt,  b.  Oct.  6,   1841  ;    d.   Middlctown.  Apr.  22,   1842. 
Gustavus,  b.  Apr.  26,  1843.     Left  htjnie  when  16  years  old. 
Jane,  b.  July  21,  1845;    res.  1902,  Meriden,  Conn.;    m.  Middletown, 

Oct.   7,    1868,    Clarence   H.,    son   of  Otis  and   Esther    (Hubbard) 

Fisk,  b.  Meriden,  Nov.  15,  1842.     They  have  one  child,  Louis  Fisk. 

1080  Lucy  C./  b.  Dec.   10,   1847;    m.  George  A.  Church. 
Clara,  b.  July  4,  185 1 ;    d.  Sept.,  1851. 

506.  Hannah'^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Samuel    and    Hannah 

(Miller)     Babcock     (Samuel,     William,     John.    John, 
James),  1).  Middletown,  Conn.,  Apr.  9,  1817;   d.  Middletown, 
Dec.  22,  1894;   m.  Middletown,  Oct.  20,  1833,  William  Chap- 
man, b.  Pittsfield.  Mass.,  Feb.  28,  18 13. 
Children,  b.  Middletown : 

1081  William  H.,"  b.  Aug.   10,   1834;    m.    (i)    Sarah  C.  Brooks;    m.   (2) 

Eliza  Brooks. 
Samuel,  b.  ]\Iay  19,  1838,  d.  young;  Samuel,  b.  1840,  d.  young. 
Emma  ^L,  b.  Aug.  i,  1842;    res.  1902,  Middletown. 

507.  Charles"    Babcock,    son    of    Samtiel    and    Hannah 

(IVIiller)  Babcock  (Samuel,  William,  John.  John, 
James),  b.  Hig^ganum,  Conn.,  Oct.  5,  1818;  d.  Hillsdale, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  20,  1894;  m.  (i)  Maria  S.  Bonfoey;  m.  (2)  Sims- 
bury,  Conn.,  May  28,  1848,  Lavina.  dau.  of  Chauncey  and 
Amy  L.  (Case)  Goodrich,  b.  Bloomfield,  Conn.,  Feb.  10,  1816, 
d.  Hartford,  Conn.,  Mar.  13,  1890. 
Child  by  first  wife : 

Asabel  Carlos,  b.  July  15,  1843. 

Child  by  second  marriage: 

1082  Maria  L.,"  b.  Feb.  13,  1849;    m.  Myron  Thompson. 

508.  Maria'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Hannah  (Miller) 
Babcock    (Samuel,    William.    John.    John.    James),    b. 

Middletown,  Conn.,  Kno;.  13,  1820;   d.  Middletown,  Nov.  20, 
1842;   m.  Middletown.  July  9,  1837.  Joseph  Bacon,  b.  IMiddle- 
town.  Oct.  22,  1817,  d.  Middletown,  Sept.  14,  1859. 
Children,  b.  Middletown : 

Adelaide,  b.  ;    d.  Middlctown.  183S. 

Sarah  E,  b.  Apr.  25.  1840:    d.  Middletown.  Jan.   16.  1854. 

1083  Joseph  Edgar.**  b.  Feb.   11,  1842;    m.  Helen  Mann. 
16 


242  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

509.  Samuel'   Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Jane    (Corn- 
well)  Babcock  (Samuel,  William,  John,  John,  James), 

b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Feb.  18,  1822;  d.  Middletown,  Oct.  12, 
1892;  m.  (1)  Feb.  19,  1844,  Ellen  L.,  dau.  of  James  and  Lucy 
Hurlbut,  b.  Haddam,  Conn.,  Aug.  29,  1822,  d.  May  18,  i860; 
m.  (2)  Apr.  23,  1862,  Ellen  M.,  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Maria 
(Savage)  Carter,  b.  Middletown,  Jan.  6,  1842;  res.  Middle- 
town. 

Samuel  was  Postmaster  at  Middletown  under  Presidents 
Pierce  and  Buchanan.  He  was  also  Collector  of  U.  S.  Inter- 
nal Revenue  under  President  Andrew  Johnson,  and  was  after- 
ward Mayor  of  the  city  of  Middletown,  President  of  the  Con- 
necticut Valley  Railroad  Company,  and  President  of  Middle- 
town  Savings  Bank.  He  was  largely  interested  in  the  manu- 
facture of  locks  at  Middletown. 

Children  by  first  marriage : 

1084  Theodore,'*  b.  Jan.  20,  1845;  m.   (i)   Nellie  Granger;  m.   (2)   Cather- 

ine Wilson. 
Louise  M.,  b.  July  6,  1846;    d.  young. 

1085  Arthur  H.,  b.  Mar.  20,  1849;  m.  Esther  Brewer. 
Fredrick  S.,  b.  Sept.  16,  1853;    d.  May,  1863. 
Charles,  b.  Oct.  18,  1855. 

Children  by  second  marriage: 

1086  Samuel,  b.   Nov.   i,   1863;    m.   Ellen  Johnson. 
Elizabeth  L.,  b.  Oct.  22,  1879;    d.  Mar.  30,  1880. 

510.  Edward'  Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Jane   (Corn- 
well)  Babcock  (Samuel,  William,  John,  John,  James), 

b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Nov.  17,  1828;  res.  1902,  Paxton,  111.; 
m.  Wall  Township,  111.,  May  i,  1866,  Anna  H.,  dau.  of  A.  M. 
and  Anna  E.  (Miller)  Crane,  b.  Newark,  N.  J.,  May  11,  1845; 
res.  Paxton,  111.  He  served  in  a  Missouri  cavalry  regiment 
during  the  Civil  War. 
Children,  b.  Wall : 

Annie,  b.  May  18.  1867;    res.  1902.  Buckley.  111.;    m.  Buckley,  B.  E. 

Morgan,  son  of  S.  S.  Morgan  ;    res.  Buckley. 
Mary.  h.  Apr.   12.   1870;    d.  Aug.  4,  1872. 
Eliza,  b.  June  11,  1872;    res.  1902,  Paxton,  111. 
Augustus,  b.  Dec.  2,  1873 ;    res.  1902,  Paxton,  111. 
Jane  C,  b.  Oct.  19,  1876;    res.  1902,  Paxton,  111. 
Edward  S.,  b.  Sept.  15,  1879;    res.  1902,  Paxton,  111. 
William,  b.  Mar.  12,  1882;    res.  1902,  Paxton,  111. 

511.  Samuel  E.''^  Babcock,  son  of  William  Christopher  and 
Betsy    (Parmlee)    Babcock    (Samuel,    William.    John, 

John.  James),  b.  Jan.  25,  1831.  Saybrook.  Conn.;  m.  dau.  of 
Austin  Merret.  of  Southampton.  L.  I.  Lived  Center  Brook, 
Conn. 


KATHERINE    TAYLOR    CRANOR. 


Page  240. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  243 

Children : 

William  E..  b.  Sept.  i8,  1856;    m.- Julia  Adams,  E.  Bloomfield,  N.  Y. 

Fredrick  M.,  b.  Sept.  4.   1^58. 

Samuel  P.,  b.  Nov.  5.   i860;    d.  young. 

George  A.,  b.  Jan.  4,   1865. 

Sarah  A.,  b.  Nov.  6,  1867. 

Mary  E.,  b.  May  5,  1870. 

Nettie  G.,  b.  Jan.  23,  1873. 

512.  George  Frederick^  Babcock,  son  of  William  Christo- 
pher and  Betsy  (Parmlee)  Babcock  (Samuel,  Wil- 
liam, John,  John.  James),  b.  Saybrook,  Conn.,  May  10,  1833; 
m.  Mar.  29,  1856,  Cornelia  S.,  dan.  of  Joseph  and  Elizabeth 
Mings. 

Children : 

Ida  Estelle,  b.  Feb.  21.   1857;    d.  young. 

Frank  Etton,  b.  Nov.  3,  i8s8;    d.  young.  1 

Wilbcrt  L..  b.  May  21,  1864. 

Edgar  C,  b.  Jan.  17,  1868;    d.  young. 

Jennie  M.,  b.  January  31,  1869. 

Nettie  G.,  b.  July  24,  1874 ;    d.  young. 

Lucy  M.,  b.   Apr.   20,    1879. 

513.  JoHN^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Lydia  (Woodward) 
Babcock  (Josiah,  Job,  Job,  John,  James),  b.  Coventry, 

Conn.,  x\pr.  18,  1786;   d.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Jnne  16,  1839; 
m.  Hartford,  Conn.,   1813,  Sally  Chamberlain,  b.  Fairhaven, 
Conn.,  Apr.  2,  1789,  d.  New  Haven,  June  12,  1863. 
Children,  b.  New  Haven  : 

1087  Harriet  Matilda,'  b.  Feb.   11,  1814;    m.  Edward  P.  Camp. 

1088  John  Newton,  b.  May  18,  1816;    m.  Charlotte  Bromley. 
Sarah  Maria,  b.   May  18,   1816:    d.  Apr.  5,   1817. 

1089  Henry  Chamberlain,  b.  Apr.   15,   1818:    m.    (i)    Maria  Warner;    m. 

(2)   Mrs.  Mary  E.  Thompson  Wells. 
Mary  Julia,  b.  May  31,  1822;    d.  Chicago,  Mar.  11,  1879,  unm. 
Sarah  Jane,  b.  May  18,    1824;    res.    1902,  Oak  Park,  111.;    m.   Port 

Chester.  N.  Y.,  Douglas  W.  Coan.     He  d.  1902. 

1090  Elizabeth  Stella,  b.  Sept.  5,  1826;    m.  Henry  Thomas  Hart. 

1091  Frances  Theresa,  b.  May  13,  1829:    m.  Frederick  Van  Denburg. 
Emily  Lydia.  b.  Apr.  20,  1833 ;    d.  New  Haven,  Sept.  20.  1849. 

514.  Rev.  Deodatus'^  Babcock,  D.D.,  son  of  John  and  Lydia 

(\\'oodward)  Babcock  (Josiah,  Job,  Job,  John,  James), 
b.  Coventry,  Conn..  June  19,  1790:  d.  Ballston  Spa,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  2,  1876;  m.  Cairo.  N.  Y.,  May  14,  1821.  Mary,  dau.  of 
Isaac  and  Rhoda  (Wright)  Hine,  b.  Cairo,  June  10.  1794,  d. 
Ballston  Spa.  Feb.  27.  t866. 

Dr.  Ba1)COck  received  his  early  education  from  the  public 
schools  in  Connecticut.  He  became  a  teacher  and  followed  this 
vocation,  more  or  less,  all  his  after  vears.  and  became  noted 
as  an  educator,  opening  successful  schools  in  Greene  County, 


244  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

N.  Y.,  Manliiis  1 8 14- 19,  Ballston  Spa  1826-46,  and  later 
in  Troy.  \i  Manlius  he  began  studying  for  tlie  min- 
istry of  the  Episcopal  Church,  receiving  Deacon's  orders 
Nov.  10,  1819,  from  Bishop  Hobart,  and  Priest's  orders 
at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  1821.  He  united  his  calling  to 
the  ministry  in  faithful  pastorship  to  his  service  as  instructor. 
His  longest  rectorship  was  that  of  Christ's  Church,  Ballston 
Spa,  extending  from  May,  1824,  to  Oct.,  1846.  He  passed  in 
peace  the  remaining  years  of  his  life,  honored  and  revered  by 
all  who  knew  him,  as  a  Christian  teacher  and  faithful  pastor. 
He  received  his  degree  of  D.D.  from  Hobart  College,  1848. 
Children : 

1092  Theodore,**  b.   May  23,    1822;     m.   Elizabeth   Nash. 

George,  b.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  May  i,  1824;  d.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  3, 
1892;  m.  Troy,  Apr.  25,  1848,  Jane  Amelia,  dau.  of  Harry  and 
Renah  (Brown)  Betts,  b.  Troy,  Mar.  11,  1826;  res.  1902,  Troy. 
He  had  one  dan.,  Julia,  who  m.  Harry  Alden. 

1093  John  Henry,  b.  Aug.  11,  1826;  m.  IMargaret  A.  Pierce. 

Charles,  b.  Ballston  Spa,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29,  1829;  m.  Garrisons,  N.  Y., 
Apr.  14,  1853,  Elizabeth  Ann.,  dau.  of  Richard  and  Mary  (Perry) 
Upjohn,  b.  Martins,  July  ii,  1830;  res.  1903,  Ithaca,  N.  Y.  No 
children.  He  is  a  retired  Episcopal  clergyman,  and  is  (1903) 
Professor  of  Architecture  in  Cornell   University. 

Mary  Jane,  b.  Ballston  Spa,  July  28,  1831 ;    d.  Ballston  Spa,  Jan.  10, 

1835. 

1094  Edward   Davis,   b.    Ballston   Spa,    Mar.   29,    1834;     m.    Philadelphia, 

Sarah  V.  Danforth. 
Cynthia  H.,  b.  Ballston  Spa,  Sept.  13,  1838;    res.  1903,  Ithaca,  N.  Y. 

515.  Samuel'''  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Rhoda 
(Smith)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James), 
b.  Bath,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  8.  1783;  d.  Eldora,  la..  Sept.  18,  1880; 
m.  (i)  Aug.  18,  1805,  Phebe  Couch,  d.  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  Mar., 
1826;  m.  (2)  Rachel,  dau.  of  Walter  and  Katherine  (Magee) 
Burhite,  b.  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  12,  1800,  d.  Mil- 
waukee, Wis.,  Oct.  8,  1864;  m.  (3)  Annie  M.  Thom])son.  No 
children  by  last  marriage.  Date  of  Samuel's  birth  from  old 
family  Bible ;   date  on  his  gravestone  wTong. 

Samuel  Babcock  at  one  time  kept  a  "Temperance  Hotel"  at 
Waterloo,  N.  Y.  He  resided  in  the  following  places :  Geneva, 
Waterloo,  Bath,  Avoca,  N.  Y.,  in  the  Counties  of  Tioga  and 
Mercer,  Pa.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  Dundee,  Mich.,  and  Eldora, 
la.  It  is  not  certain  that  he  lived  in  the  above  named  places 
in  order  named. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

1095  Naomi,' b.  July  27.  1808;    m.  Simeon  Furman. 

1096  Rhoda  Lura,  b.   May  8,   1811:    m.   Daniel   F.   Ellsworth. 

1097  Samuel,  b.  May  13,  1813;    m.  Emily  Frink. 

1098  Aaron  C,  b.  Oct.  29,  1815;    m.  Matilde  Mendell. 


SAMUEL    BAB  COCK. 
1822- 1892. 


Page  242. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  245 

1099  Elizabeth  C,  b.  Oct.  10.  1817;    ni.  Daniel  Funiiaii. 
Iioo  Bcthiali,  b.  Dec.  14,  1819;    m.  Edward  Smith. 

Hannah  P.,  b.  Feb.  26.  1822;    d.  Sept.  19.  1880;    ni.  James  II.  Chap- 
man.    Settled  in  Trumbull  County,  Ohio. 

Children  bv  second  wife: 

■■  « 

iioi  Henry  C.  b.  Sept.  17,  1828;    m.  lantha  Hurlbut. 

Walter  Scott,  b.  Babcock  Hill,  near  Bath,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  12,  1830.  He 
was  Capt.  Co.  B,  ist  Wisconsin  Hy.  Artillery;  promoted  to 
Lieutenant  Colonel,  I2th  U.  S.  Hy.  Artillery,  mustered  out  at 
close  of  w-ar.  He  was  a  lumber  merchant ;  unm. 
Stephen  Van  Rensaler,  b.  Babcock  Hill.  N.  Y..  Apr.  18.  1831  ;  d. 
Chicago,  III.,  June  22,   1888;    m.    (i)    Milwaukee,   Wis.,  Josephine 

;    m.     (2)     Milwaukee,    June     14,     i8<S2.     Lucinda,     dau.     of 

Joshua  and  Polly  (Palmiter)  Decker,  b.  June  16,  1850;    res.  1902, 
at  3121   Indiana  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.     No  children. 

1 102  Simeon,  b.  July  i.  1832;    m.  Sarah  Reynolds. 

Robert  R.,  b.  Tioga  County,   Pa.,  Oct.  25.   1833;    d.  Vernon  Center, 

O.,   Mar.   14,   1846. 
Maria  Jane,  b.  Tioga  County,  Pa.,  July  27,  1835 ;    d.  Vernon  Center, 

O..  ^lar.  II,  1840. 

1103  Hettie  Ann  (Hattie),  b.  Sept.  19,  1841 ;    m.  Samuel  Martin. 

516.  Joiix'   Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Rlioda   (Smith) 
Babcock     (Simeon,    Samuel,    Job,    John,    James),    b. 

Onondaga  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  18,  1785;  d.  Dundee,  Mich.; 
m.  Dec.  23,  1807  (?),  Marium,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Fanny 
(Moore)  Stone,  d.  Dundee,  Mich. 

About  1837  John  Babcock  removed  to  Dundee,  Mich., 
where  he  resided  the  rest  of  his  life.' 

Children : 

Eliza,  b.  Jan.   16,   1809;    d.   1890:    m.   Seymour  Porter. 

Laura  M.,  b.  July  31,  1810;    d.  Mar.,  1850;    m.  Arnold  Kinney. 

1104  Titus.'*  b.  June  20,  181 1  ;    m.  Maria  Daily. 

1105  John  S..  b.  June  30.  1813;    m.  Jane  Fleming. 

David,  b.  INIar.  13.  1815;    d.  Feb.  2.  1852;    m.  Elisabeth  Miller.    They 

had  two  children,  George  and  Marium. 
Rhoda,  b.  Mar.  11.  1817:    d.  Nov.  15,  1859;    m.  Daniel  E.  Buck. 
Daniel  H..  b.  Mar.  i^,  1819;   d.  June  7.  1896;    m.  Harriet  Du  Bois. 
Elisha  S..  b.  Mar.  25,  1821  ;    d.  Feb..  1841^ 
Clarissa,  b.   Mar.  7.   1823;    d.  Feb..   1841' 
James  L.,  b.  Feb.  24,  1826;    m.  Mar.,  1854,  Mary  Humphry. 
Peter  H.,  b.  Aug.  8,  1828;    res.  1902,  Dundee,  IVIich. 
Mary  P.,  b.  May,  1832;    d.  Mar.  17.  1872;    m.  Dundee.  1866,  Daniel 

Ostrander. 

517.  Simeon'  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Rhoda  (Smith) 
Babcock  (Simeon,  Samuel,  Job.  John.  James),  b.  Sept. 

18,  1787;  d.  Iowa.  July  27.  1855:  m.  (i)  Westerly,  Mar.  12, 
1809,  Clarissa  Clough,  d.  Apr.  17.  181 1 ;  m.  (2)  Jan.  13,  1813, 
Lydia  Smith,  b.  Jan.  18.  1793:  m.  (3)  Feb.  12,  1835,  Liberty, 
dau.  of  William  and  ]\Tary  (W^aldorf)  Furman,  b.  Gaines, 
Pa.,  1807,  d.  Desoto,  Wis.,  Jan..  1889.  No  children  by  first 
marriage. 


246  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

1107  Oliver,"*  b.  Nov.  19,  1813;    in.  Elizabeth  Frink. 
Bettie,  b.  Sept.  5,  1817;    m.  A.  W.  Chapin,  Dec,  1834. 

1 108  Olive,  b.  Nov.  9,  1819;    m.  John  W.  Sawyer. 

1 109  Simeon,  b.  Apr.  3,  1820;    m.  Sarah,  J.  Gower. 
mo  Enos,  b.   Nov.   16,   1823;    m.  Abbe^  J.   Huyler. 

Harry  Willis,  b.  Mar.  4,  1825 ;    m.  Sept.  25.  1848,  Roxanna  Briggs. 
nil  Sarah,  b.  Apr.  30,  1827;    m.  Anson  Warren. 

Lydia  Ann,  b.  July  3,  1830;    drowned  June,  1832. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

William  Henry  H.,  1).  Mar.  11,  1838;  d.  Feb.,  1862,  unm. 
Martha,  b.  June  15,  1840;  m.  May  i,  1855,  Smith  Caney. 
Samuel,  b.  June  19,  1842;   d.  Oct.  20,  1862. 

1 1 12  Betsy  Ann,  b.   Oct.   i,    1846;    m.   William  Green. 

1113  John  D.,  b.  Sept.   17,  185 1  ;    ni.  Rosia  Green. 
Adalaid,   b.   Jan.,    1855;     d.   young. 

518.  Stephen'^     Babcock,     son     of     Simeon    and     Rhoda 

(Smith)      Babcock     (Simeon,     Samuel,     Job,     John, 
James),  b.  Oct.  24,  1789;  d.  Mar.,  1871 ;  m.  Steuben  County, 
N.  Y.,  Sophia  Carnahan. 
Children : 

1 1 14  Andrew,'^  b.  May  24,  1825;    m.  (i)  lanthe  A.  Carriel ;    m.  (2)   Mary 

Garrison. 
Thadeus  S. ;  Naomi  Jane. 

519.  Elizabeth"^  Babcock,    dau.    of    Simeon    and    Rhoda 

(Smith)      Babcock      (Simeon,      Samuel,     Job,     John. 
James),  b.  Apr.  28,  1794;   d.  Michis^an,  July  4.  1849;   m.  Jan. 
6,  1818,  in  Michicran,  her  first  cousin,  Oliver  Frink,  b.  Feb., 
1790,  d.  June,  1862. 
Children : 

Emily,  b.  Oct.  29,  1818;    d.  Apr.  5,  1897;    m-  Samuel  W.  Babcock. 
Daphine  B.,  b.  ;    d.   Nov.  26,   1889;    Lemuel;   Simeon;  Laura. 

520.  Bethiah'^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Simeon    and    Rhoda 
(Smith)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James), 

b.  Sept.  I,  1796;    d.  Aug.  24,  1862;   m.  181 7,  Jesse  Bartlett, 
b.  Mar.,  1796,  d.  Aug.  14,  1863. 
Child : 

Jessie,  b.  ;    m.  Charles  M.  Brown. 

521.  William'''     Babcock,     son     of     Simeon    and     Rhoda 

(Smith)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Livingston  County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  7,  1798;  d.  El- 
dora,  la.,  July  8,  1890;  m.  Bath,  N.  Y..  Sept.,  1822,  Perlie, 
dau.  of  Ezekiel  and  Lovina  (Thaver)  Hunt,  b.  Bennington, 
Vt.,  Sept.  8,  1802,  d.  Eldora,  Sept.' 28,  1880. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  247 

Children : 

1115  Buel  Hunt,"  b.  June  18,  1823;    m.  Crissy  Decker. 

Christiana,  b.  Oct.  lo,  1824;    d.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Tioga,  Pa., 

George  Aldrich.  d.  Bath,  N.  Y. 
y\masa,  b.  Bath.  N.  Y.,  June  5,  1826. 
Eunice  Lovina.  b.  Bath,  Jan.  28,   1828;    m.  Tioga,   1842,  Horace  W. 

Merrick.     They  res.  1902,  Eldora,  la. 
Eliza,  b.  Dec.  25,  1830;    d.  1836. 
William  W.,  b.  Oct.  14,  1834 ;    res.  1902,  Pullman,  Neb. ;    m.  Eldora, 

Dec.  26,  1866,  Catherine  Rhodes. 
Rhoda  P.,  b.  Dec.  2.  1839;    res.  1902,  Eldora,  la.;    m.  Eldora,  Oct. 

24,  i860,  William  Ibath. 

522.  Job"   Babcock,   Jr.,   son   of  Job  and   Emeline    (Pike) 
Babcock    (Ichabod,   John.   Job,   John,   James),   b.    Al- 

burgh,  Vt.,  Sept.  4.  181 1;  d.  Burke,  N.  Y.,  May  20,  1895; 
m.  (i)  Alburgh,  Mar.  14,  1835,  EHza  Jane,  dan.  of  John  and 
Deborah  (Hoxie)  McGregor,  b.  Alburgh,  Feb.  8,  1814,  d. 
Alburgh,  Apr.  i,  1874;  m.  (2)  Bangor,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1875, 
Mrs.  Catherine  Davis,  sister  of  first  wife,  b.  Alburgh,  Dec. 
8,  1818,  d.  Alburgh.  Sept.  29.  1876;  m.  (3)  Burke,  N.  Y., 
June  2,  1881,  ]\Irs.  Mary  McMaster. 
Children  by  first  wife,  b.  Alburgh: 

Deborah  Ann.  b.  Nov.   19,   1837;    d.  North  Bangor,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  7, 

1873;    m.  Alburgh,  Oct.   15,   1867,  George  Gibbs. 
Job  Harrison,  b.  June  5.  1840;    d.  Nov.  8,  1840. 

1 1 16  William  Henry,**  b.  June  21,  1843;    m.  Celia  Kinsley. 
Thomas,  b.  Jan.  11,  1846;    d.  Alburgh,  Nov.  7,  1874,  unm. 

523.  Ichabod"  Babcock,  son  of  Job  and  Emeline  (Pike) 
Babcock  (Ichabod.  John.  Job.  John,  James),  b.  Al- 
burgh, Vt.,  Aug.  28.  1813;  d.  Sutton.  Quebec,  Feb.  i.  1872; 
m.  (i)  Isle  La  Motte.  Mar.  5.  1839.  Sally  Reynolds,  b.  Al- 
burgh; m.  (2)  Alburgh.  Mar.  i,  1842,  Mersula,  dau.  of 
David  Sowles,  d.  West  Brome,  Quebec. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Ichabod.  b.  Alburgh.  Dec.  9,  1842;    d.  Alburgh.  May  7,  i860. 

1 1 17  Philyer  L..*  b.  Oct.  20,  1846;   m.  Sarah  Jane  Bright. 

Albert  Butler,  b.  Alburgh,  Feb.  20,  1852;    d.  Sutton,  Quebec,  Feb.  2, 
1866. 

1 1 18  Sarah  Aseneth,  b.  Alburgh,  Oct.  29,  1856:    m.  Ransom  J.  Parsons. 

1 1 19  Emma  S.,  b.  Sept.  12,  1858;    m.  Lewis  H.  Lovejoy. 

524.  Thomas^   Babcock.  son  of  Job  and  Emehne   (Pike) 
Babcock  (Ichabod.  John.  Job,  John,  James),  b.  Alburgh, 

Vt.,  July  22,  1818;  d.  Andersonville,  Ga.,  Nov.  4,  1864;  m. 
Alburgh.  Mar.  23,  1847,  Saphronia.  dau.  of  Walter  and  Sally 
(Matthews)  Darrow,  h.  Alburgh,  Feb.  25,  1819,  d.  Boston, 
Mass.,  Dec.  14,  1897. 


248  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Thomas  Babcock  was  a  Sergeant  in  Company  K,  nth  Ver- 
mont Vokinteers,  in  the  Civil  War. 
Cliil(h-en,  b.  Alburgh : 

1 120  Henry,"  b.  May  21,  1848;    m.  Adelc  C.  Stiles. 

Cynthia  Evelyn,  b.  Sept.  15,  1849;    res.  1902,  Washington,  Kan.;    m. 

Alburgh,    Apr.     11,    1867,    J.    Morse,    son    of    Edwin    and    Delia 

(White)   Landon,  b.  Hero,  Vt.,  Nov.   17,   1844. 
Agnes  E..  b.  Oct.  26,   1854;    d.  Alburgh,  Apr.   17,   1856. 
Thomas,  b.  May  i,  1857;    d.  Alburgh,  May  4,  1857. 

1 121  Perrin  Dwight,  b.  Jan.  25,  i860;    m.  Ella  L.  Barnes. 

1122  Leslie  W.,  b.  Oct.  5,  1861 ;    m.  Carrie  A.  Chesebrough. 

525.  Emeline'''  Babcock,  dan.  of  Job  and  Emehne  (Pike) 
Babcock  (Ichabod,  John,  Job,  John.  James),  b.  Al- 
burgh, Vt.,  Dec.  10,  1820;  d.  Alburgh,  Mar.  23,  1853;  m. 
Alburgh,  Dec.  29,  1842,  Walter,  son  of  Walter  and  Sally 
(Matthews)  Darrow,  b.  Alburgh,  Aug.  11,  1817;  res.  1902, 
Cresco,  la. 

Children : 

Wesley,  d. ;    Emeline ;    Frances. 

Job,  b.  ;    m.  ;    res.  1902,  Cresco,  la. 

526.  EzRA^  Babcock,  son  of  Job  and  Emeline  (Pike)  Bab- 
cock  (Ichabod,  John,  Job,  John,  James),  b.  Alburgh, 

Vt.,  June  20,   1823;    d.  Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  25,   1899; 
m.   (i)  Alburgh,  Jan.  i,  185 1,  Julia,  dau.  of  Orange  Spoon, 
d.  Burke,  N.  Y.,  Nov.,  1865;   m.  (2)  Belmont,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9, 
1867,  Louisa  W^eston;   res.  1902,  Oshawa,  Ontario. 
Children,  b.  Alburgh : 

Amy.  b.  Feb.  24.  1852;  m.  Burke,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  18,  1872;  M.  G. 
Smith. 

1 123  John  Wesley,*  b.   Nov.  25,   1854;    m.   Augusta   Dickie. 

Mary  Ann,  b.  Aug.  19.  1857;  res.  1902,  Malone,  N.  Y.  ;  m.  Burke, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  I,  1900,  Putnam  W.  Hutchins.     No  children. 

1 124  William  Austin,  b.  Aug.  11,  i860;    ni.  Carrie  E.  Williamson. 

1125  Elizabeth,  b.  Sept.   13,   1862;    m.  George  H.  Williamson. 

527.  Mary'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Job  and  Emeline  (Pike)  Bab- 
cock  (Ichabod,  John,  Job,  John,  James),  b.   Alburgh, 

Vt.,  July  12,  1825;   d.  Plattsburg,  Mar.  3,  1875;  m.  Alburgh, 
Mar.  24,  1846,  Elisha,  son  of  Daniel  McGregor,  b.  Alburgh, 
1820,  d.  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  Mar.,  1863. 
Children,  b.  Plattsburg: 

Mary  Ann,  b.  Dec.  11.  1847;  m.  Plattsburg,  Sept.  15,  1864,  Charles 
Calkins.  He  d.  Aug.  19,  1899.  She  res.  1902,  at  9  Eagle  Street, 
Newburyport,   Mass.     Has  three  children. 

Daniel,  b.  Oct.  14.  1849;  res,  1902.  Lexington,  Neb.;  m.  Leadville, 
Col.,  Lida  Silver.     Has  four  children. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  249 

Emeline,  b.  Jan.  20,  1853;  res.  1902,  Plattsburg,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Josiah 
Hewitt,  Feb.  26,  1880,  b.  Peru,  N.  Y.,  1850. 

James,  b.  Aug.  14,  1854;  res.  1902,  Plattsburg,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Platts- 
burg, Sept.  25.  1895,  Nettie  E.  Hull,  b.  Mar.  9,  1867. 

Effie,  b.  Feb.  5,  1857;    unm. ;    res.  1902,  Plattsburg. 

Elisha  Elmer,  b.  May  14,  1859;    unm.;    res.  1902,  Chester,  N.  H. 

Alice,  b.  Feb.  18.  1861 ;    res.  1902,  Plattsburg,  N.  Y. 

L.  Gertrude,  b.  }.Iar.  14.  1863 ;  res.  1902,  at  144  High  St.,  New- 
buryport,  Mass. ;    m.  William  G.  Fisher.     Has  three  children. 

528.  Mary"  Babcock,  dan.  of  Ichabod  and  Sarah   (Pike) 
Babcock    (Ichabod,   John,   Jol),   John,   James),   b.    Al- 

biirgh,  \'t.,  Apr.  2,  1804;  d.  Albtirgh,  Apr.  12,  1872;  m.  Sept. 
3,  1 82 1,  James  McElroy,  b.  Ireland. 
Chiklren : 

Catherine ;    James ;    Barnard  ;    Lucy ;    Marianah ;    William. 

529.  Ichabod^  Babcock,  son  of  Ichabod  and  Sarah  (Pike) 
Babcock    (Ichabod,   John,   Job.   John,   James),   b.   Al- 

burgh,  Vt.,   Mar.    10,    1805;    d.   South  Hero.   Vt.,   Nov.   25, 
1836;     m.  South  Hero,  Dec.  18,  1828,  Emily  Boardman. 
Children,  b.  Alburgh : 

1 126  Joseph    Carlton,'*   b.    Oct.    15,    1829;     m.    (i)    Jane    Rose;     m.    (2) 

Mahala  Sherwood. 
Deborah,  b.  June  11,  1831 ;    d.  E.  Troy,  Wis.,  May  8,  1898;    m.  E. 

Troy,  July  5,  1853,  Washington  C.  Reats.     She  had  three  children, 

Frank,  Clara.  Willis. 
Orpha  L..  b.  Aug.   12.   1833;    res.   1902.  Troy  Center,  Wis.;    m.   (i) 

Troy,   Wis.,    Sept.  25,    1851,   Geo.    H.   Taylor;    m.    (2)    Palmyra, 

Aug.  22,  1874,  Charles  Watkins.    Has  one  son,  George  W.  Taylor. 

530.  Amy^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Ichabod   and   Sarah    (Pike) 
Babcock      (Ichabod,   John,  Job,    John,  James),  b.  Al- 
burgh, Vt.,   1808:    d.  N.  Bangor.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  8,   1862;    m. 
Alburgh.  Jan.  10,  1825,  Samuel  Gibbs. 

Children : 

John  ;  George ;  James. 

531.  Lucy'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Ichabod  and  Sarah  (Pike) 
Babcock  (Ichabod.  John.  Job.  John,  James),  b.  Al- 
burgh. Vt..  May  25,  1815;  (1.  Alburgh,  Aug.  15,  1873;  m. 
Alburgh,  Tidv  3,  1850,  Joseph  Gosselin,  b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y., 
d.  Alburgh.  Vt! 

Children,  b.  Alburgh  Center: 

Sarah,  b.  ]\Iar.  22,  1851  ;  res.   1902,   Springfield,  Mo. ;  m.   Humboldt, 

la..  Samuel  Rogers. 
Cecilia  A.,  b.  Dec.  22.  1854;    d.  Isle  La  IMotte ;    m.  James  Ritchie. 


250  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

532.  James^   Babcock,  son  of  Ichabod  and  Sarah    (Pike) 
Babcock    (Ichabod,   John,   Job,   John,    James),   b.    Al- 

burgh.  Vt.,  Mar.  20,  1818;  d.  Center,  Wis.,  June  29,  1865; 
ni.  (i)  Alburgh,  Lovey  Roberts,  b.  Fairfax,  Vt.  (?),  Apr.  22, 
1 814,  d.  July  29,  i860;  m.  (2)  Wisconsin,  Feb.  18,  1861, 
Mrs.  Esther  Harrison. 

Children  b}'^  first  marriage : 

Susan  M.,  b.  July  29,   1843;    d.  Sept.  9,  1843. 

Charles  B.,  b.  Aug.   11,  1845;    res.   1902,  Center,  Wis. 

Susan  P.,  b.  Feb.  22,  1848;    d.  Sept.  17,  1849. 

Justina,  b.  Aug.  26,  1850;    res.  1902,  Center,  Wis.;    m.  Jan.  3,   1877, 

Eli  Crall. 
James  W.,  b.  Jan.   18.  1852;    m.  Oct.  24,  1876,  Mary  McGhee. 
Leroy  J.,  b.  Oct.  2,  1854 ;    m.  June  29,  1876,  Libbie  Thomas. 
Marian,  b.   Feb.   19,   1857;    res.   1902,   St.   Paul,  Minn.;    m.  Dec.  25, 

1881,  J.  W.  Roberts. 

Children  by  second  marriage: 

Nellie  S.,  b.  Mar.  12,  1862;    m.  Nov.  24,   1881,  John  Fisher. 
Willie  G.,  b.  Mar.  6,  1864. 

533.  James'  Babcock,  son  of  Christopher  and  Polly   (Pot- 
ter)    Babcock     (Christopher,    George,    George,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Nov.  10,  1784;    d.  Cheektowaga, 
N.  Y.,  Dec,    1859;    m.   Westerly,  Lois,   dau.  of  James  and 
Esther  (Burdick)  Ross,  b.  Westerly,  Apr.  30,  1790,  d.  Cheek- 
towaga, N.  Y.,  Oct.  15,  1 87 1. 
Children : 

1 127  Christopher,*  b.  ;    m.  Lucy  Valentine. 

Martha,  b.  Westerly ;    d.  young. 

1 128  James  Ross,  b.  July  20,  1817;    m.  Ruth  Phillips. 

1 129  Benjamin,  b.  ;    m.  Susan  Darner. 

Edwin,  b.  Cohocton,  N.  Y. ;    d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  28,   1894.  unm. 
Mary   Elizabeth,    b.    Cohocton;     res.    1902,    at    174    Whitney    Place, 

Buft'alo,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Esther  Jane,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

1130  William  C,  b.  1827  (?)  ;    m.  Lucy  Burton. 

534.  Martha'''  Hazard,  dau.  of  George  and  Martha  (Bab- 
cock)   Hazard    (Christopher,    George,    George,    John, 

James),  b.   Charlestown,   R.   I.,  Jan.   25,    1782;    d.  Apr.    11, 
i860;    m.  Marlborough,  son  of  Augustus  and  Eunice  (Cran- 
dall)  Stanton,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  1779,  d.  Dec.  21,  1835. 
Children,     b.  Charlestown: 

Albert  W.,  b.   1807;    d.  Dec.  24.  1886,  unm. 

1 131  George.*  b.  Jan.  24,   1809;    m.   (i)   Catherine  Sands;    m.    (2)   Sarah 

M.  Brown;    m.   (3)   Bridget  Babcock  Browning. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  251 

535.  Georgr'     Babcock,     son     of     Hezekiah     and     Mary 

(Brown)    luibcock    (Hezekiah,   George,   George,  John, 
James),    b.    Jan.    4,    1808;    d.  Nov.,    1887;   m.    Apr.,    1850, 
Mary  Hinnian. 
Children : 

Myra  C,  b.  Feb.   19,  185 1 ;    living  May.   1897. 
Mary  Augusta,  b.  Oct.  2.  1852;    d.  June  24,   1854. 
Mela,  b.  Apr.  21,  1855;    living,   1897. 
Martha  Louise,  b.   Mar.  9,   1858;    d.  July  3,   186,3. 
Clara  Georgia,  b.  Dec.  29,   i860;    living,  1897. 

George  Grant,  b.  June  8,  1864;    d.  . 

Josephine,  b.   Sept.    i,   1867;    living,    1897. 

536.  Courtland'    Babcock,    son    of    Hezekiah    and    Mary 

(Brown)    Babcock   (Hezekiah,   George,  George,  John, 
James),   b.    Jan.    29,    1810;    d.    Mar.    7,    1883;    m.    Clarissa 
Chapin,  of  W'illimantic,  Conn. 
Children : 

Henry  Harrison,  b.  Apr.  8,  1841 ;   living  May,  1897. 
Courtland,  b.  Apr.  13,  1845 ;    m.  Mar.  3,  1867. 
Hezekiah.  b.   May  31,   1847;    d.  Jan.  22,  1858. 
Herman  Chapin,  b.  Oct.  6,  1853 ;    living,  in  1897. 
Brainard  C,  b.  Apr.  9,  1856;    d:  Aug.  16,  1865. 

537.  Hannah  Brown"  Babcock,  dan.  of  Rowse,  Jr.,  and 
Hannah    (Brown)    Babcock    (Rowse,  George,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Nov.  4,  1805:   d.  Westerly, 
July  30,   1879;    m.  Westerly,  Nov.  29,   1825,  Oliver  D.,  son 
of  George  and  Lvdia  Dodge  Wells,  b.  Westerly,  Sept.  2,  1802, 
d.  Westerlv.  Oct  5,  1888. 
Child: 

Hannah  Babcock  Wells,  b.  Aug.  20,  1826;  res.  1900,  Westerly, 
R.  I.  :  m.  Westerly,  Sept.  i,  1852,  Edwin  R.,  son  of  George  Brown, 
of  S.  Kingston,  R.  I. 

538.  Martha"  Babcock,  dan.  of  Rowse,  Jr..  and  Hannah 

(Brown)     Babcock     (Rowse,    George,    George,    John, 
James),  b.  \\'esterly,   R.   I.,   Sept.    18,    1807;    d.   New  York 
City,   Apr.   24,    1864;     m.    Oct.   25,    1827,   Thomas   Palmer 
Stanton,  b.  Stonington,  Conn. 
Children : 

Thomas  Nelson,  d.  unm. ;    Albert ;  Walter. 

539.  Harriet"  Babcock,  dan.  of  Rowse,  Jr.,  and  Hannah 

(Brown)     Babcock    (Rowse,    George.    George,    John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  5,  1809;   d.  Providence,  R.  I., 


252  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Aug.  28,   1884;    m.  Sept.  8,   1846,  Horatio  N.,  son  of  Win- 
throp  Campbell,  b.  Voluntown,  Conn.,  Mar.  13,  1815,  d.  Provi- 
dence, Mar.,  1899. 
Children: 

Harriet  Stewart,  b.  Mar.  11,  1848;    res.  1900,  Providence. 
Horatio  Nelson,  b.  Aug.  7,   i8si  ;    res.   1900,   Providence;    m.   Mary 
Buffin. 

540.  Sally.  Ann'  Babcock,  daii.  of  Rowse,  Jr.,  and  Hannah 
(Brown)     Babcock    (Rowse,    George,    George,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  27,  1812;    d.  Westerly,  Jan. 
10,  1881 ;    m.  June  i,  1840,  Dr.  John  G.  Pierce,  b.  Lebanon, 
Conn.,  d.  Westerly. 
Children: 

Sarah  Augusta,  b.  Mar.  24,  1841  ;    d.  Jan.  28,  1861,  unm. 
John  Leverett,  b.  Mar.  2,  1845 ;    res.  1900,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 
William  Babcock,  b.  Dec.  11,  1847;    d.  June  6,  1849. 

541.  Rev.   William   Robinson"   Babcock,   son   of   Rowse, 
Jr..  and  Hannah    (Brown)    Babcock   (Rowse,  George, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Mar.  28,  1814;  d. 
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  June  22,  1899;  m.  Newport,  R.  I.,  Oct.  6, 
1840,  Catherine  A.,  dan.  of  Duty  J.  Pearce,  b.  Newport,  R.  I., 
May  3,  1 81 6,  d.  New  York  City,  Mar.  23,  1894. 

"He  was  a  Brigade  Inspector  for  Washington  County, 
1834."     (Smith.) 

Children : 

Ann  Brown,  b.  June  26.  1841 ;  d.  March  24,  1900;  m.  Oct.  14,  1864, 
John  P.  Poland,  b.  Oct.  14,  1836;  d.  Aug.  8,  1898.  Colonel  of 
U.  S.  Infantry  and  Brigadier  General  of  Volunteers. 

Emma,  b.  Apr.  26,  1845 ;  d.  Aug.  7,  1868 ;  m.  Apr.  23,  1867,  Alonzo 
P.  Howard. 

Catherine,  b.  June  21,   1847;    d.  Aug.  26,  1848. 

542.  Edwin'    Babcock,    son   of    Rowse,    Jr.,    and    Hannah 

(Brow'n)  Babcock  (Rowse,  George,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Apr.  8,  1819;  res.  1900,  Westerly; 
m.  New  York  City,  Apr.  21,  1845,  Olivia  S..  dau.  of  Ebenezer 
and  Elizabeth  (Smith)  Cady,  b.  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  Nov. 
27,   1821. 

"Edwin  Babcock,  Brigade  Inspector  for  Washington 
County.  R.  I.,  1838-9."  (Smith.)  He  was,  1900,  President 
of  the  Phenix  National  Bank,  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Children: 

Elizabeth  Cady,  b.  Westerly,  Aug.  21,  1846;  res.  1900,  Westerly; 
unm. 


JOHN    BABCOCK. 

1786-1839. 
From  an  oil  portrait. 


Page  243. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  253 

1 132  Albert."  b.  Dec.  5,  1848;    m.  Sarah  Johnson. 

John  Cady,  b.  Apr.  11,  1854;    d.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  July  29,   1870. 

543.  Horace^   Babcock,   son   of   Rowse,   Jr.,   and   Hannah 
(Brown)     Babcock     (Rowse,    George,    George,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  1.,  Aug.  4,  1822;  d.  Westerly,  May 
27,  1883;  ni.  (i)  Westerly,  Sept.  11,  1843,  Abby  J.,  dau. 
of  George  D.  and  Abby  (Hinckley)  Cross,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
Nov.  8,  1824,  d.  Westerly,  Nov.  29,  1859;  m.  (2)  Dec.  18, 
i860,  Harriet  B.,  sister  of  first  w4fe,  b.  Jan.  8,  1838;  res. 
1900,  Westerly,  R.  I. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

1 133  Rowse.*  b.  Aug.  30,  1844:    ni.  Kate  Munger. 

Abby.  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  8,  1846;    res.  iQoo,  Westerly,  R.  I.;    unm. 

Martha  Stanton,  b.  Westerly,  Oct.  2,  1848;  m.  Westerly,  Oct.  12, 
1870,  Edmund,  son  of  Rodman  Moulton.  Both  res.  igoo,  Provi- 
dence, R.  I.     No  children. 

1 134  Hannah,  b.  Nov.  7,  1850;    m.  Rev.  William  M.  Groton. 

1 135  Horace  Hobert,  b.  Mar.  29,  1854;    m.  Abby  J.  Cross. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Jane,  b.  Dec.  5.  1861 ;    d.  Feb.  24,  1865. 

Mary  Townsend.  b.  Mar.  26,  1867 ;  res.  1900,  Westerly ;  m.  Feb.  27, 

1889,  Dr.  Edwin  R.,  son  of  Dr.  Edwin  and  (Brown)  Lewis. 

No  children. 

544.  Benjamin'''  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Nancy 

(Wilcox)    Babcock    (Rowse,    George,    George,    John, 
James),  b.  Apr.  25,  1807;    d.  Jan.  29,  1874;    m.  New  York 
City,  May  19,  1835,  Susan  Mannering. 
Children : 

Cordelia  L.,  b.  Mar.,  1837. 

Benjamin,  b.  ;    d.  Feb.,  1842. 

Henry,  b.  ;    d.  Nov.,  1867. 

545.  Edward    Wilcox'^    Babcock,    son    of   Benjamin    and 

Nancy  (Wilcox)  Babcock  (Rowse,  George,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Sept.  i,  1810;  d.  Westerly,  Dec.  18,  1857; 
m.  Westerly,  Nov.  27.  1833,  ^lartha  B.,  dau.  of  John  and 
Mary  Cross,  b.  Westerly,  Oct.  2,  18 14,  d.  Apr.  27,  1873. 

He  w-as  a  merchant  of  Westerly,  at  Nos.  10-14  Main  Street; 
Avas  chosen  a  vestryman  of  Christ's  Church  "at  the  first  elec- 
tion of  officers  in  1836,"  and  was  a  member  of  the  Rhode 
Island  Legislature  in  1841. 

Mrs.  Babcock  was  in  1875  memorialized  by  an  endowment 
for  the  High  School  of  Westerly,  R.  I.,  of  $1,000,  known  as 
the  "]\Iartha  C.  Babcock  Memorial."     The  endowment  pro- 


254  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

vides  that  the  annual  income  shall  be  divided  into  three  cer- 
tain parts  and  paid  to  the  three  students  who  shall  present  the 
best  three  essays  on  subjects  previously  announced  by  the 
school  Principal.  The  endowment  proves  a  continual  incen- 
tive to  good  work  among  the  pupils  of  the  school. 
Children : 

Harriet,  b.  June  30,   1836;    d.  Aug.  30,   1836. 

Edward  Wilcox,  b.  June  6,  1852 ;  res.  Troy,  N.  Y. ;  m.  at  Church 
of  the  Heavenly  Rest,  New  York  City,  Oct.  9,  1890,  Fanny  Ball 
Star.  No  children.  He  is  an  Episcopal  clergyman ;  graduated 
from  Phillips  Academy,  Andover.  Mass.,  in  1870,  Brown  Univer- 
sity in  1874,  and  Berkeley  Divinity  School,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in 
1879.     He  is  rector,  1903,  of  the  Holy  Cross  Church,  Troy,  N.  Y. 

546.  John"  Babcock,  son  of  David  and  Sarah  (Beardsley) 
Babcock    (David,    David,    George,    John,    James),    b. 

Utica,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  10,  1803;  d.  Willoughby,  O.,  Sept.  3,  1888; 
m.  Martha  O.,  dau.  of  Ebenezer  and  Dorothy  (Rice)  Rand, 
b.  Montague,  Mass.,  Dec.  20,  1810,  d.  Willoughby,  Apr.  3, 
1892: 

Children,  b.  Willoughby: 

1 136  Augusta,**  b.  Feb.  13,  1836;    m.  Chauncey  Wicker. 
George,  b.  Nov.  5,  1837. 

Harriet,  b.  Aug.  5,  1843;    d.  Willoughby,  Jan.  9,   1871  ;    m.  Chicago, 

Jan.  I,  1867,  Henry  Moore. 
John,  b.  Oct.  12,  1853;    d.  California,  Apr.  13,  1874,  unm. 

547.  JessfJ  Babcock,  son  of  David  and  Sarah  (Beardsley) 
Babcock    (David,    David,    George,    John.    James),    b. 

Marcy,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  16,  1805;   d.  Dexter,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1885; 
m.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  26,  1831,  Maria  Morgan,  d. 
Dexter,  June  14,  1854. 
Children : 

1 137  Mary,*  b.  Sept.  22,  1832;    m.  Joseph  G.  Smith. 

David,  b.  Dexter,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  4,  1834;  d.  Hot  Springs.  Ark.,  Mar. 
28,  1899 ;  m.  1872,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Timothy  Strong.  She  res.  1902, 
Fond  du  Lac,  Wis. 

Elizabeth,  b.  May  31.  1836;  res.  1902,  San  Francisco,  Cal. ;  m.  Dex- 
ter,  N.   Y.,   1859,   Sandford  E.   Herrick. 

George,  b.  Jan.  3,  1844;    d.  Dexter.  1879. 

1138  William,  b.  June  29,  1848;   m.  Mary  Blake. 

548.  George'^  Babcock,  son  of  David  and  Sarah   (Beards- 
ley) Babcock  (David.  David,  George,  John,  James),  b. 

Deersfield.  N.  Y.,  May  3,  1810;  d.  Waupun,  Wis.,  Oct..  1877; 
m.  New  York.  June  i.  1845.  Emily,  dau.  of  Deliverance  and 
Mary  (Hyde)  Brown,  b.  Vermont,  Sept..  181 2,  d.  Waupun, 
Mar.  21. . 


REV.    DEODATUS    BABCOCK.    D.D. 

1 790- 1 876.  Page  243. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  255 

Child: 

1139  Emilia,"  I).  Apr.  2.  1846;    111.  Horace  E.  Horton. 

549.  Almon"  Babcock,  son  of  Perry  and  Cynthia  (Hickox) 

liabcock  (Jonathan,  Daxid,  Ceorge,  John,  James), 
h.  Grninillo,  Mass..  Nov.  19,  1788;  d.  Rootstown,  O.,  May  4, 
1850;  ni.  ivootstown,  Dec.  25.  1814,  Mary,  dau.  of  Robert 
and  Chloe  ( Wadsworth )  Colhns,  1).  Hartford,  Conn.,  Aug.  15, 
1789,  d.  Rootstown,  May  28,  1859. 

In  June,  1810,  .\hnon  went  from  \\\  Granville,  Mass.,  to 
Ohio  as  a  member  of  the  Charlestown  Land  Company  to  look 
after  his  father's  land. 

Children : 

1 140  Perry  H.,"  b.  Jan.  23,   1816;    m.   (i)    Marie  Hurd  ;    m.   (2)   Caroline 

Baldwin. 
John.  b.  Ravenna.  O.,  Dec.  25,   1819;    d.  Dec.  22,  1822,  at  Ravenna. 
Mary  Ann.  b.  Mar.   12,   1822;    res.  1902.  Ravenna.  O. 

1 141  Albert,  b.  Sept.   12,   1824;    m.  Betsey  Avery. 

Eliza,  b.  Aug.  4,  1S27 ;  d.  Aug.  16,  1861 ;  m.  Apr.  24.  1853,  Dr. 
Stephen  Aliller,  b.  Amherst,  Mass. ;  d.  Feb.  2,  1854.  Had  one 
daughter,   who   d.   young. 

550.  Edmund'   Babcock,   son  of  Perry  and   Cynthia   (Hi- 
ckox)    Babcock     (Jonathan,     David,     George,     John, 

James),  b.  Granville,  Mass.,  May  28,  1793;    d.  Ravenna,  O., 
Sept.  9,   1871;    m.  Granville,  May   10,   1815,  Leura,  dau.  of 
James  and  Abigail  (Burt)  Bates,  b.  Hartland,  Conn.,  Jan.  13, 
1795.  d.  Ravenna,  Aug.  12,  1866. 
Children : 

Abigail   Cornelia,  b.   Granville.   Mass.,   Sept.  20,   1817;    d.   Ravenna, 

May    12,    1877;     m.    (i)    Ravenna,    Nov.    19,    1839,   Julius   Hotch- 

kiss ;    m.   (2)  John  McClur. 
Betsey  Maria,  b.   Ravenna.   Oct.    i,   1818;    res.    1902.   Ravenna;    m. 

Ravenna,  Aug.  8.  1850;    Nelson,  son  of  John  Ward;    d.  Ravenna, 

Nov.  26,  1900. 
Sarah  M.,  b.  Ravenna,  Aug.  26,  1820;    d.  Osage,  la.,  Feb.  12,  1887; 

m.  Ravenna,  July  4.  1840,  William  H.  Williamson. 
David  Bates,  b.  Ravenna,   Sept.   17,   1822;    m.   Eagle  Prairie,  Wis., 

Maria,  dau.  of  Henry  Knapp,  b.  Eagle  Prairie. 

1 142  Emeline  E.,*  b.  Oct.  28.  1824;    m.  William  L.  Coolman. 

1 143  Harriet  C,  b.  Jan.  8,  1827;    m.   (i)   Luke  Sawyer;    m.   (2)  Jackson 

D.  Carrington. 

1144  Ethan  Elijah,  b.  Dec.  18,  1828;    m.  Mary  Tombs. 

Charles  Killboune,  b.  Apr.  6.  1831 ;    d.  Ravenna,  Sept.  7.  1832. 

551.  Sally  M.'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Perry  and  Cynthia   (Hi- 
ckox)    Babcock     (Jonathan,     David,     George,     John, 

James),  b.  Granville,  Mass.,  Apr.  20,  1798;  d.  Ravenna,  O., 
1863;  m.  Ravenna,  1820,  William  Stinaff,  b.  Connecticut, 
1787,  d.  Kent,  O. 


256  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Ravenna : 

Maria,  b.   1821  ;    unm. 

Henry  William,  b.  1823;  d.  Kent,  O. ;  ni.  (i)  Kent,  Lydia  Button; 
m.  (2)  Ravenna,  Alaretta  Loomis;  m.  (3)  Austinburg,  O., 
Mrs.  Emily  Phin ;    m.   (4)   (jreenville.  Pa.,  Mrs.  Ellen  Whitney., 

Sylvanus  Perry,  b.  1828;  res.  1902,  Kent,  O. ;  m.  Jan.  i,  1851, 
Kent,  Mary  L.,  dau.  of  David  and  Mary  Parnham  Day. 

552.  Cynthia   M."    Babcock,   dau.   of   Perry  and   Cynthia 

(Hickox)  Babcock  (Jonathan,  David,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Granville,  Mass.,  1804;  d.  Rose  Hill,  la.,  Nov.  7, 
1878;  m.  (i)  Alexander  Frazer ;  m.  (2)  Ravenna,  O.,  Jan. 
9,  1 83 1,  Waite  Hickox,  b.  Litchfield  County,  Conn.,  Oct.  20, 
1790,  d.  Ravenna,  May  16,  1845. 
Children,  b.  Ravenna : 

Stephen,  b.  Nov.  27,  1831 ;    res.  1902,  Union  Mills,  la. ;    m.  Kent,  O., 

1863,  Dorliska  Sapp. 
Seth,  b.  Dec.  20,  1834 ;    res.  1902,  Rose  Hill ;    unm. 
Chauncey,  b.   Oct.  20,   1837;    res.   1902,  at  459  G  St.,  Washington, 

D.  C. ;    m.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  1867,  Lucy  Bryant. 
Henry,  b.  Mar.  20,  184 1 ;  d.  Rose  Hill,  May  11,  1898,  unm. 

553.  George  Denison'''  Babcock,  son  of  Denison  and  Fanny 

(Marsh)  Babcock  (Benedict,  David,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1818;  d.  New 
Hartford,  May  6,  1874;  m.  New  Hartford,  Oct.  i,  1843, 
Elizabeth,  dau.  of  George  and  Sarah  (Horton)  Clark,  b. 
Milan,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  27,  182 1  ;  res.  1902,  at  833  Genesee  St., 
Utica,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  New  Hartford : 

Fanny,  b.  July  19,  1844;    d.  Sept.  20,  1849,  at  New  Hartford. 
Alice,  b.  Oct.  25,  1846;    d.  young. 
Albert,  twin  to  Alice,  d.  Mar.  10,  1847. 
George  H.,  b.  Dec,   1848;    d.  Sept.  16,   1850. 
Marv  Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  7,  1851;  d.  Jan.  8.   1852. 
I145  Clara  N.,'  b.  Oct.  31,  1865;    m.  Frank  C.  Ogden. 

554.  Gideon  Chesebrough'^  Babcock,  son  of  Gideon  and 
Sarah  (Saver)  Babcock  (Gideon,  David,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Boston,  Mass.,  Feb.  17,  1804;  d.  Homer,  N,  Y., 
May  19,  1866;  m.  McLean,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  8,  1827,  Phebe,  dau. 
of  Capt.  John  and  Elizabeth  (Stanton)  Noyes,  b.  McLean, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  14,  1805,  d.  Homer,  May  21,  ^868.  In  1809 
he  removed  to  Brookfield,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Sarah  Sayre,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Concord, 

N.   C.  Jan.   5,   1853.  George  L.   Gibson.     Had  two  children,  both 
d.  young. 


EDWIN    BABCOCK. 


Page  252. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  2$y 

Fdith   M.,   1).  ;    d.   Aug.  8,    1.S80;    m.   Homer,   N.   Y.,   Sept.  7, 

1854,  Edward  1.  Thurber. 
Gideon  Chesebrough  ;    d.  young. 
Lois   Noyes,  b.  ;    d.   May  18,   1882;    m.   Homer,   Dec.   16,   1858, 

David  M.  Hammond.     Had  one  child,  d.  young. 
Marv   EIizal)eth,   1).   ;    d.    Feb.    14,    1879;    m.    Homer,   Sept.    12, 

1865.  Alburtus  Webb. 
Sophronia  M.,  b. ;    m.  Homer,  Apr.  8,   1873,  George  W.  Payne. 

1 146  Alice  C,"  b.  ;    m.  John  Win.slo\v  Trolt. 

555.  i\r.\RY    Ann"    Babcock,    dau.    of    Gideon    and    Sarah 
(Sayer)     Babcock     (Cjideon,     David,     George,     John, 

James),    b.    Boston,    Mass.,    Nov.    27,   1808;    d.  Rochester, 
Minn.,  Nov.  2,  1901  ;  m.  S.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Jan.   i,  1827, 
Steplien  Perry  ColHns,  b.  Brookfiekl  (  ?),  1800  (  ?). 
Chikhxn : 

Gideon  Babcock,  b.  New  Woodstoclf,  N.  Y. ;    d.  Manitowoc,  Wis. ; 

m.  Rachel  Piatt. 
Norman  G.,  b.  New  Woodstock;    res.  1902,  San  Diego,  Tex. 

1147  Mary  A.,"  b.  ]\Iay  5,  1832;    m.  Harrison  W.  Garrett. 

556.  Harry  Chesebrough^  Babcock,  son  of  Richard  and 
Mary   C,    (Perry)    Babcock    (Gideon,   David,    George, 

John.  James),  b.  May  13,  1817;   d.  Newport,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  30, 
1892;    m.    1844,    Harriet    M.,    dan.    of   Saunders   and    Polly 
(Maxson)  Crandall,  b.  June  10,  1824,  d.  Mar.  28,  1885. 
Children : 

1148  Frank  H.,'  b.  Dec.  7,  1851;    m.  Nancy  Burdick. 
Frederick,  b.  ;    d.  young;    Irving,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

557.  Abigail  Perry'  Babcock,  dan.  of  Richard  and  Mary 

(Perry)  Babcock  (Gideon.  David,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  17,  1821;  res.  1902,  New 
Berlin,  N.  Y. ;  m.  S.  Brookfield.  N.  Y.,  May  14,  1845,  Jor- 
dan, son  of  Thomas  Sarle,  b.  New  Berlin,  Nov.  22,  18 17,  d. 
New  Berlin,  Mar.  26,  1900. 
Children,  b.  New  Berlin : 

Thomas  H.,  b.  1850;  res.  1902,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  1875,  Libbie 
Logan. 

Ida  Florence,  b.  1854,  res.  1902,  New  Berlin.  N.  Y.  ;  m.  New  Ber- 
lin, 1878,  Lewis  G.  Brown.     Has  one  son,  Lewis,  b.  June  3,  1893. 

Willis  Clayton,  b.  1858;  res.  1902,  Corning,  Cal. ;  m.  S.  New  Berlin, 
N.  v.,   Grace  Warren. 

Alice  Caroline,  b.  1863;  res.  1902,  Oneonta,  N.  Y. ;  m.  New  Berlin, 
1884,  Otto  L.  Nichols. 

558.  Gideon  Perry'^   Babcock,  son  of  Richard  and  ]\Tary 

(Perry)     Babcock     (Gideon,     David,     George,     John, 
James),  b.  S.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Oct.   18,   1829;    res.    1902, 
17 


258  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

S.  Brookfield ;    ni.  Wcstcnivillc,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  19,  1861,  Lydia, 
dau.  of  Abiel  and   Harriet   (Felton)    Maconiber,  b.   Western, 
N.  Y.,  d.  S.  Brookfield,  Nov.  15,  1886. 
Children : 

Charles,  b.  Sept.  8,  1864;    res.  1902,  Berkley,  Cal. 

Harriette  Ann,  b.  July  11,  1866;    m.  Walter  I.  Sweet. 

Corrington  Milton,  b.  June  8,  1876;  res.  1902,  Oneida  Castle,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Aug.  30,  1899,  Maud  Watson,  dau.  of  James  and  Eliza  Wat- 
son.    No  children. 

Frances  Myra,  b.  Oct.  13,  1877. 

559.  Elizabeth  H."  Babcock,  dau.  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth 
(Noyes)     Babcock     (Gideon,     David,     George,    John, 

James),  b.  Brookfield,   N.   Y.,  July   17,   1814;    d.   Syracuse, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  I,  1889;    m.   (i)  George  Stone;    m.   (2)   Robert 
J.  Niven,  b.  Peekskill,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20,  1814,  d.  Southampton, 
England,  Nov.  24,  1885. 
Children,  b.  Montrose,  Pa. : 

Charlotte   Elizabeth,   b.  ;     res.    1902,    Paris,   France;    m.    Paris, 

Paul  de  Sers.     No  children. 
William   Hegan,    b.   ;    d.   Jan.   25,    1894;     m.    Syracuse,    N.   Y., 

Amelia .    No  children. 

1 149  Eliza,**  b. ;    m.  William  A.  McKinney. 

560.  Mary'   Babcock,  dau.  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Noyes) 
Babcock    (Gideon,    David,    George,    John,    James),    b. 

Truxton,  N.  Y.,  May  8,  1817;  d.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  May  9, 
1882;  m.  (i)  Aug.  6,  1839,  Charles,  son  of  T.  and  Eliza 
(Warren)  Lynde,  b.  Apr.  7,  1816.  He  died  at  the  burning 
of  the  steamer  Erie,  on  Lake  Erie,  Aug.  12,  1841,  at  which 
time  more  than  one  hundred  lives  were  lost.  The  only  woman 
among  the  thirty  passengers  saved  was  Mary  Babcock  Lynde. 
She  m.  (2)  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  4,  1846,  Edward  Bartlett 
Wicks,  b.  Paris,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  9,  1805,  d.  Syracuse,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  3,  1872. 

Child  by  first  husband : 

Charles  J.  Lynde,  b.  Apr.  21,  1842;    d.  July  23,  1843. 

Children,  by  second  husband,  b.  Syracuse: 

Ellen  L.,  b.  Oct.  30,  1846;    d.  Feb.  21,  1848. 
Edward  B..  b.  Jan.  16,  1848;    d.  July  8.  1849. 

1 150  Frederick  S.,'*  b.  Apr.  25,  1851  ;    m.  Lily  M.  Doane. 

Edward  Bartlett,  b.  Apr.  28,  1856;  res.  1902,  Salt  Lake  City,  LTtah ; 
imm. 

56L     Clara'^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Noyes) 
Babcock    (Gideon,    David,    George,    John,    James),    b. 


Page  259. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  259 

Truxtoii,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1819;    d.  S3n-acnse,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  16, 
1855;   111.  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  July  14,  1842,  Dr.  Amos  Wescott, 
d.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  July  5,  1873.     He  m.  (2)  Harriet  Nash, 
and  had  a  family  of  children. 
Children : 

Watts,  b.  ;    d.  young;    Catherine. 

1 151  Edward  Noyes,*  b.  Sept.  27,  1846;    m.  Jane  Dows. 

562.  Edward"  Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth  (Noyes) 
Babcock    (Gideon,    David,    George,    John,    James),    b. 

Truxton,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  12.  1822;  d.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  May  2, 
1882;  m.  (i)  Truxton,  Aug.,  1843,  Rhoda  Ann,  dau.  of 
William  and  Mary  (Stuart)  Trobridge,  b.  Truxton,  Mar.  3, 
1822,  d.  Dec.  8,  1848;  m.  (2)  Sept.  15,  1853,  Catherine  Cyn- 
thia, dau.  of  Charles  and  Cynthia  (Thompson)  Lynde,  b. 
Homer,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  15,  1829. 
Children  by  first  wife : 

Charles,  b. ;    d.  in  infancy. 

1152  Mary  Elizabeth,"  b.  July  24,  1848;    m.  Judge  Edward  Beers  Thomas. 

Children,  by  second  wife : 

1153  Charles  L.,  b.  Mar.  23,  1855;    m.  Hester  Wortendyke. 

Frances,  b.  Brooklyn,  Feb.  18,  1859;  d.  Brooklyn,  May  27,  1890; 
m.  Nov.  30,  1889.  John  Oscar  Ball.     No  children. 

1154  Augusta  W..  b.  Nov.  4,  1861 ;    m.  (i)  Cyrus  Porter  Smith;    m.  (2) 

James  A.   Ostrum. 

1155  Edward  Howard,  b.  Oct.  29,  1863;    m.  Alice  Talbot. 
Watts,  b.    Sept.   21,   1865;    d.   Brooklyn,    Nov.   6,    1865. 
Catherine,  b.  Nov.  10,  1869;    d.  Brooklyn,  May  31,  1887. 

563.  Henry^  B.\bcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Elizabeth   (Noyes) 
Babcock    (Gideon,    David,    George,    John.    James),    b. 

Truxton.  N.  Y.,  Feb.  14,  1831;    d.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  5, 
1899;   m.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  15,  1857.  Emily  Marie,  dau. 
of  Rev.  Ebenezer.  D.D.,  and  Mary  A.    (Davis)    Maltbie,  b. 
Clinton,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9,  1836,  d.  Syracuse,  Mar.  11,  1895. 
Children : 

1156  Rev.  Maltbie  D..*  b.  Aug.  3.  1858:    m.  Katherine  E.  Tallman. 

1 157  Howard  N.,  b.   Oct.   7,   i860;    m.   Caroline  Lathrop. 

Clara  Emily,  b.  Sept.  5.  1865 ;  m.  Harry  H.  Wadsworth ;  res. 
1902,  195  Front  St.,  Binghamton,  N.  Y. 

Henry  Townsend,  b.  Mar.  ,30,  1872;  res.  1902,  at  309  McBride  St., 
Syracuse.  N.  Y. 

Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  i,  1874:  res.  1902,  at  .340  W.  57th  St.,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Syracuse,  Sept.  5.  1895,  Charles,  son  of  Thomas  and  Harriet 
(Este)  Shojes.  b.  Cleveland,  O.,  June  6,  t868.     No  children. 

Ann  Trcdwell,  b.  Feb.  2,  1878;  res.  1902,  3  Colonial  Place,  Pitts- 
burg, Pa. 


26o  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

564.  George  A7  Babcock,  son  of  Jonathan  and  Elizal)eth 

(Wri^iit)  Babcock  (Jonathan,  Jonathan,  (icorge,  John, 
James),  b.  IJopkinton,  R.  1.,  Dec.  26,  1813;  livins,^  1901, 
Ashaway,  R.  I.;  m.  (i)  Mar.  i,  1840,  Abby  Ann  Brown,  cl. 
Ashaway,  Oct.,  1852;  m.  (2)  Mar.  5,  1853,  Ashaway,  Mrs. 
Thank fnl  L.  Bnrthck. 
Chikh-en  by  first  wife: 

Eliza  A.,  b.  in  Rockville,  R.  I.,  ;    d.  1841. 

Hannali  Abby,  b.  Jan.  25,  1843;    "i-  Russel  Maxson. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  Ashaway,  Aug.,   1852;    d.   i860. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

1 158  Alice  L.,**  b.  Apr.  4,   1856;    ni.  John  G.  Campbell. 

565.  Stephen'^    Babcock,   son   of  Jonathan   and    Ehzabeth 
(Wrio-ht)  Babcock  (Jonathan,  Jonathan,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Feb.  20,  1822;    d.  Hope  Valley, 
R.   I.,   Sept.    12,    1898;    m.   Richmond,   R.   I.,  Jan.    i,    1855, 
Mercy,  dan.  of  John  and  Mercy   (Moore)    Barber,  b.  Rich- 
mond, Apr.  2,  1830;    res.  1902,  Hope  Valley,  R.  I. 
Children,  b.  Hope  Valley : 

Mercy,  b.  ;    m.  William  J.  Brag. 

Susan  Ann,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Hope  Valley. 

Phebe  Maria,  b. ;    res.   1902,  Hope  Valley. 

566.  Hannah  H.'^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Peleg  and  Sarah  (Pot- 
ter) Babcock  (Peleg,  Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James), 

b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Sept.  9,  1820;  d.  June,  1862;  m.  Cornell 
Peckham. 
Child : 

Sarah,  b.  ;    m.  John  Wheaton;    res.  1902,  Lebanon,  Conn. 

567.  E.sther'^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Peleg  and  Sarah   (Potter) 
Babcock    (Peleg,  Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James),  b. 

S.  Kingston,  R.  T.,  Dec.  15,  1821;    d.  S.  Kingston,  Sept.  30, 
1862;    m.   S.   Kingston,   Apr.    10.    1839,  Thomas  A.   Gonld, 
b.  S.  Kingston,  Oct.  11,  1819,  d.  S.  Kingston,  June  4,  1898. 
Children : 

Charles  Horace,  b.  May  5,  1843 :     res.  1902,  Gould,  R.  I. ;    m.  Dec. 
26,  1875,  Susan  T.  Nichols,  b.  June  6,  1853. 

Peleg  Edmund,  b.  ;    d.   in   infancy. 

Clarence  A.,  b.  :    m.  Sarah  E.   Pendleton. 

1159  Susan  Mellissa,*  b.  Apr.  22,  1851  ;    m.  Rowland  R.  Gardner. 

568.  Peleg  F.^  Babcock,  son  of  Peleg  and  Sarah  (Potter) 
Babcock   (Peleg,  Hezekiah,  George,  John,  James),  b. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  261 

S.  Kingston,  Oct.  3,  1825;  res.  1902,  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I.;   m. 
Dec.  29,  1856,  ]\Iary  F.,  dau.  of  Niles  and  Fanny  (Burdick) 
Sherman,  b.  R.  I.,  Mar.  15,  1835. 
Children : 

Franklin  Niles,  b.  Aug.   13,  1858;    res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I.;    m. 

June   22,    1899,    Mrs.    Elizabeth    (Lajjliani)    Treat,    dau.    of   Enos 

and  Abbie   (Austin)   Lapham.     No  children. 
Clarence  Vernon,  b.  Sept.   i6,   1861 ;    d.  Mar.  21,   1901 ;    m.  June  20, 

1889,   Mrs.   Sarah   (Weeden)    Bennett,  dau.  of  Elam  and  Hannah 

(Spencer)    Weeden.     No  children. 
Mary  C,  b.  Dec.  11,  1865;    res.  1902,  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I. 
Row.se  Potter,  b.   Mar.  28,   1868;    d.  Jan.  25,   1875. 

569.  Charles  Hazard'  Babcock,  son  of  Peleg  and  Sarah 

(Potter)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Hezekiah,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Feb.  14,  1832;  res.  1902,  S. 
Kingston;  m.  (i)  Perryville,  R.  I.,  Aug.  15,  1858,  Jane  B., 
dau.  of  Joseph  and  Elizabeth  (Tucker)  Segar;  m.  (2)  Apr. 
23,  1888,  Mary  Elizabeth  James. 
Child  by  first  wife: 

Sarah  Jane,  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  8,  i860;  d.  Sept.  20, 
1885 ;  m.  Albert  Wright.  Had  one  son,  Charles  Albert,  b.  May  10, 
1885. 

Child  by  second  wife: 
Mina  Ethel,  b.  Mar.  4,  1889. 

570.  George  Washington'''   B.abcock,   son   of   Peleg  and 
vSarah    (Potter)    Babcock    (Peleg,    Hezekiah,    George, 

John,  James),  b.  S.  Kingston.  R.  I.,  ]\Iay  18,  1838;   res.  1902, 
Wakefield,  R.  I.;  m.  S.  Kingston,  Nov.  14,  1858,  Anna  Ennis, 
b.  Rhode  Island,  185 1,  d.  Wakefield,  Nov.  17,  1881. 
Child : 

Nellie  R.,  b.  Westerly;  res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I.;  m.  Wakefield, 
Henry  C.  Mitchell,  b.  E.  Greenwich. 

571.  Henry  W.''   Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  P.  and  Waite  T. 
(Segar)    Babcock    (Peleg,    Hezekiah,    George,    John, 

James),  b.  Sept.  9,  1821 ;  m. . 

Children : 

Waite.  b.  ;    m.  William  Steadman. 

Sarah,  b.  ;    was  unm.   in   1882. 

John  D.,  b.  ;    m.   Mary  Segar. 

572.  George  Franklin'''  Babcock,  son  of  Ethan  and  Eliza- 
beth   (Kenyon)    Babcock    (Peleg,    Hezekiah.    George, 

John,  James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Oct.  4,  1835;   res.  1902, 


262  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Carolina,  R.  I.;  m.  Providence,  R.  I.,  Mar.   19,   1868,  Mary 
Jane,  dan.  of  Henry  and  Harriet  Cahoone,  b.  Bristol,  R.  1., 
Apr.  13,  1842,  d.  Carolina,  Nov.  19,  1888. 
Children: 

1 160  S.  Franklin,"  b.  Dec.  16,  1870;    m.  Annie  Watson. 

Henry  Ethan,  b.  June,  1872;  res.  1901,  Carolina,  R.  I.;  m.  Caro- 
lina, June  21,  1899,  Jessie  R.,  dau.  of  William  and  Harriet  (At- 
wood)  Collins,  b.  Woodville,  R.  I.,  May  20,  1875.  No  chil- 
dren   (1901). 

1 161  Edward,  b.  May  19,  1876;    m.  Carrie  Collins. 

573.  Hezekiah'  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Hezekiah  and  Dorcas 

(Peckham)  Babcock  (Caleb,  Hezekiah,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Oct.  31,  1820;  d.  S.  Kingston, 
Oct.  6,  1863.  While  working  in  a  gristmill  at  S.  Kingston  he 
was  canght  in  the  gear  of  the  mill  and  killed ;  m.  S.  Kingston, 
Oct.  6,  1844,  Hannah,  dau.  of  Richard  and  Mary  (Peckham) 
Hazard,  b.  S.  Kingston,  Oct.,  1826.  She  m.  (2)  Jonathan 
Allen;  res.  1901,  S.  Kingston. 
Children : 

1 162  George  Hazard,**  b.  Aug.  10,  1845;    m.  Alice  Houser. 

Mary  Dorcas,  b.  S.  Kingston.  July  5.  1848;  res.  1901,  Wakefield, 
R.  I. ;  m.  S.  Kingston,  Dec.  22,  1868,  George  P.,  son  of  George 
and  Martha  (Coughlin)   Sherman. 

574.  John'''  B.vbcgck,  son  of  Hezekiah  and  Dorcas   (Peck- 
ham)    Babcock     (Caleb,     Hezekiah,     George,     John, 

James),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Mar.  23,  1831;  res.  1901, 
Wakefield,  R.  I. ;  m.  Sept.  23,  1856,  Mary  P.,  dau.  of  William 
S.  and  Lois  Perry,  of  S.  Kingston. 

Mr.  Babcock  was  a  Dii"ector  of  the  Wakefield  National 
Bank  from  1854  to  1882.  In  1870  he  was  elected  President 
of  the  Wakefield  Institution  for  Savings,  which  position  he 
held  for  many  years.  He  has  several  times  been  a  member  of 
the  State  Legislature. 

Children: 

Lois  Elma,  b.  Sept.  6,  1857;  res.  1901.  Fair  Haven,  Mass.;  m.  1886, 
Thomas  Tripp. 

1163  John  E.,*  b.   Oct.   7,    1858;    m.   Marjorie   Rodman. 

William  H.,  b.  Dec.  15,  1864;    res.  1901,  Wakefield,  R.  I.;    unm. 

575.  Daniel^  Babcock.  son  of  Elisha  and  Huklah  (Green) 
Babcock    (Simeon.    Elisha,    George,   John.   James),    b. 

Charlestown,  R.  I.,  May  18,  1796;  d.  Aug.  23.  1832;  m. 
Mary,  dau.  of  Huldah  (Sherman)  Wilcox,  b.  Charlestown, 
R.  I.,  Aug.  II,  1801,  d.  Dec.  30,  1841. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  263 

Children : 

1 164  Daniel  S.,"  b.  Sept.  i6,  182 1  ;   m.  Henrietta  P.  Kceney. 
Joiin  S.,  b.  Oct.  14,  1823;    d.  Westerly,  Oct.  14,  1848. 

1 165  riuklah,  b.  Apr.  26,   1826;    m.  Amos  Taylor. 

Matilda,  b.  Feb.  7,  1829;    res.  1901,  New  London,  Conn.;    ni.  Perry 
Hoxie,  son  of  Solomon  and  Mary  (Babcock)   Hoxie. 

576.  ]M.\Rv'   Babcock,  dau.  of  Elislia  and  Hnldah  (Green) 
Babcock    (Simeon,    Elisha,   George,   John,   James),    b. 

Charleslown,  R.  I..  Sept.  23,  1798;    m.  Roljert  Pahner.     He 
was  a  farmer;    Hved  in  N.  Stonington,  Conn. 
Children : 

Robert;  Elisha;  Perry  G. ;  Dwight  R. 

577.  Simeon'''  Babcock,  son  of  Elisha  and  Hnldah  (Green) 
Babcock    (Simeon,    Elisha,   George,   John,   James),   b. 

Charlestown,  R.  L,  Mar.  5,  1802;   d.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  July 
7,   1875;  m.   Mary,  dau.   of   124  Jesse  and  Hannah    (Cross) 
Babcock,  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  May  14,  1797,  d.  Charlestown, 
R.  I.,  Apr.  23,  1870. 
Children,  b.  Hopkinton : 

David  and  Ruth,  b.  ;    d.  j^oung. 

1166  Joseph  H.,"*  b.   Sept.   15,   1832:    m.  Mary  Barber. 

Horace,  b.  July  11,  1837;    d.  Feb.  27,  1892;    m.  Mary  E.  Fry. 

578.  Hoxie'''  Babcock,  son  of  Elisha  and  Huldah  (Green) 
Babcock    (Simeon,    Elisha,    George,   John,   James),   b. 

July  24,  1813;  d.  N.  Stonington,  Oct.  29,  1883;  m.  (i)  Noy. 
19,   1837,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Charles  and  Elizabeth   (Perry) 

\Miite,  d.  Mar.  i6,  1877;   m.  (2)  Chesebrough. 

Children : 

1167  Mary  Elizabeth,^  b.  Sept.  20,  1838;    m.  Edward  Cundall. 

Horace  W.,   b.    N.   Stonington,    Sept.    10,    1840;    d.   N.   Stonington, 

Aug.  28,  1848. 
Leroy,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Sept.  17,  1842;    d.  Apr.  11,  1843. 

1 168  Henry  F.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1846;    m.  Hannah  Ellen  Maine. 
Harriet  L.,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Aug.  20.  1848;    d.  Jan.  10,  1870. 

1 169  Ruth  C,  b.  Nov.  I.  1850;    m.  Leonard  E.  Bell. 
Sarah  E..  b.  Aug.   i.  1853;    d.  Sept.  18,  1854. 

1 1 70  Ella  L..  b.  Apr.  16,  1857;    m.  Elisha  Chesebro. 
Percy  Hazzard.  b.  Apr.   14,  1859;    d.  Aug.  14,   1862. 

579.  Simeon"  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Mary  (Green) 
Babcock    (Simeon,    Elisha.   George.   John,   James),   b. 

Richmond,  R.  I..  Apr.  6,  1810;  d.  Block  Island,  R.  L,  May  22, 
1874;  m.  Block  Island,  Mary,  dau.  of  Benjamin  T.  and 
Martha  (Rodman)  Coe,  b.  Block  Island,  d.  Block  Island,  Oct. 
5,   1894. 


264  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  New  Shurchain : 

John  Coe,  b.  ;    d.  Stonington,  May  8,  1855. 

Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  25,  1834;    m.  Feb.  23,  1856,  Edward  Hayes. 
Lucinda,  b.  Jan.  27,   1839;    m.   Newport,  Jan.  4,   1856,  Emile  Van- 

denbrick. 
Samuel,  b.  Nov.  28,  1841  ;    d.  Feb.  27,  1863. 

Almira  Green,  b.  Feb.  15,  1844;    m.  Apr.   10,  1865,  James  Durfee. 
1 171   Benjamin  Simeon,*  b.  Oct.  27,  1846;    m.  Sallie  Sprague. 

Anna  R.,  b.  Feb.  26,  185 1  ;    m.   New  Shoreham,   (i)   William  Lills- 

field;  m.  (2)  Amos  Mitchell. 
Perry  Clark,  b.  July  2,  1837;    d.  New  Shoreham,  Oct.  26,  1837. 

580.  Almira''^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Simeon  and  Mary  (Green) 
Babcock    (Simeon,    Elisha,    George,   John,   James),   b. 

Richmond,  R.  I.,  Alay  21,  1822;  res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I.; 
m.  June  3,    1844,   Warren  LilHbridge,  b.  Dec.    15,    1817,   d. 
Exeter,  R.  I.,  Sept.  6,  18^5. 
Child : 

Amy  D.,  b.  Oct.  16,  1850. 

581.  Martha  Elizabeth^   Babcock,  dau.   of  Simeon  and 
Mary    (Green)     Babcock     (Simeon,     Elisha,    George, 

John,    James),    b.    Richmond,    R.    I.,    Jan.     11,     1828;    res. 
1902,  Hopkinton,  R.  I.;    m.  Richmond,  Jan.  i,   1846,  George 
K.,  son  of  Rnssel  and  Elizabeth   (Kenyon)   Thayer,  b.  Hop- 
kinton, June  29,  1823. 
Children : 

1 172  ]\Iary  E.,**  b.  Mar.  11,  1847;    m.  Edwin  Robinson  Allen. 

Sarah  Perry  Babcock,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  11,  1850;  res. 
1902,  Westerly.  R.  I. ;  m.  Pleasantville,  Pa.,  Sept.  18,  1877,  Edwin 
S.  Holdridge,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Feb.,  1842;  d.  Westerly,  Apr.  20, 
1901. 

582.  Mary  Ann"   Babcock,   dau.  of  Samuel  and  Susanna 

(Clark)     Babcock     (Simeon.     Elisha,     George,    John, 
James),    b.   Colchester,   Conn.,   Feb.   22,    1815;    d.   Dec.   20, 
1889;  m.  Albert  Day  Northam,  d.  Dec.  16,  1859. 
Children : 

Jane,  b.  :    d.  young. 

1 173  Julia  Marie,*  b.  1836;    m.  Richard  Meader. 

Mary  America,  b.  Apr.  2,  1840;    d.  Apr.  5,  1891  ;    ni.  Henry  Hobbs. 

1174  Ellen  Caroline,  b.  Dec.  23,   1842;    m.  Edwin  Parker. 

1 175  Emma  Eloise,  b.  Oct.  21,  1844;    m.  Dr.  Joseph  Rose. 
Florence,  b.  . 

Edgar  Russel,  b.  Nov.  12,  1848.    Merchant  at  Raleigh,  N.  C. 
Ida,  b.  . 

1 176  Frances,  b.  1852;    m.  William  Philip  Norwood. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  265 

583.  Charles"     Babcock,    son    of    Samuel    and    Susanna 
(Clark)     Babcock     (Simeon,     Elisha,     George,     John, 

James),  b.  1816;  m.  May  21,  1836,  Elizabeth  Gillette. 
Children : 

Ellen;  Jennie;  Monroe,  m.  Sarah  Wiley,  had  children,  Minnie  and 
Sarah. 

584.  Josephine"    Babcock,    dau.   of   Samuel   and   Susanna 

(Clark)     Babcock     (Simeon,     Elisha,     George,    John, 
James),  b.  Nov.  20,   1820;    d.  Feb.   10,   1877;    m.  Aug.  28, 
1838,  Selden  Gillette. 
Children : 

1178  Charles,^  h.  July  15,  1840;  m.  Emma  Laing. 

Asa  Oscar,  h.  Mar.  7,  1845;    d.  New  Orleans,  La.,  May  8,  1863. 
Dwight,  b.  July  11,  1848;    m.  Mar.  27,  1877,  Jennie  Babcock. 
Selden  Lord,  h.  July  23,   1855 ;    m.  Miss  Graham. 

585.  Dwight  Samuel'^  Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Su- 
sanna (Clark)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Elisha,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Colchester,  Conn.,  Jan.  6,  1835;  res:  1900,  54 
Wesley  Ave.,  Providence.  R.  I. ;  m.  E.  Haddam,  Conn.,  Mar. 
23,  1858,  .Laura  Ellen,  dau.  of  George  and  Sophia  (Tyler) 
Cone,  b.  E.  Haddam,  Sept.  6,  1835. 

He  has  been  a  music  teacher  most  of  his  life;  business  in 
Providence. 

Children : 

1179  Laura  J..*  b.  June  25,  1863;    m.  William  E.  Webster. 
Dwight  Samuel,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Frank  Wilson,  b.  E.  Haddam,  Apr.  8,  1873;    res.  1900,  Providence; 
m.  Feb.,  1900,  Sadie  Burns. 

586.  James'''   Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Martha    (Card) 
Babcock    (Simeon,    Elisha,    George,   John,   James),    b. 

Feb.  15,  1821;  d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Sept.  13,'  1885;'  m.  West- 
erly, Feb.  5,  1843.  Sarah  A.,  dau.  of  Pardon  and  Susan  (Peck- 
ham)  Lewis,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  16,  1820;  d.  Westerly,  Nov.  8, 
1885. 

James  Babcock  was  Lieutenant  in  the  Civil  War;  was  in 
the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run. 

Children,  b.  Westerly : 

Pardon   L.,  b.    Nov.    17,    1846;    d.   Worcester,    1895;    m.   Westerly, 

Lizzie  Taylor. 
James  B..  b.  Nov.  25.  1848;    d.  Westerly,  1849. 
Julia  E.,  b.  Apr.  27.  18^1  ;    res.  1902.  Moosup,  Conn. ;    m.  Westerly, 

T.  E.  Maine. 
Clark,  b.  July  7,  1855:    d.  Westerly:    m.  Westerly,  Louisa  Clark. 
Jessie  F.,  b.  June  4,  1858;    res.  1902,  Moosup,  Conn. 


266  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

1180  James  Burnside,"  b.  Mar.  21,  1861 ;    m.  (i)  Hattie  Phillips;    in.   (2) 

Alice  Musgrave. 

587.  William   T>?   Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Elizabeth 
(Davis)    Babcock     (Simeon,     Elisha,     George,    John, 

James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Nov.  i,  1838;  res.  1902,  West- 
erly, R.  1.;  nL  Westerly,  Oct.  2,  1862,  Sarah  Maria,  dau. 
of  J.  D.  and  Lydia  (Taft)  Taylor,  b.  Grafton,  Mass.,  July  i, 
1845,  ^1-  Westerly,  Mar.  22,  1895. 

William  D.  Babcock  was  a  carpenter  and  stair  builder. 

Children,  b.  Stonington: 

Elmer  E.,  b. ;    m.  Westerly,  Ida  May  Chapman,  b.  Westerly; 

both  res.   1902,  Westerly. 

Betsey  Wilbur,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Viola  M.,   b.  ;     res.    1902,    Hope   Valley,    R.   I.;    m.  Westerly, 

George  Henry,  son  of  George  L.  Burdick,  b.   Hopkinton. 
Mary  Ethel,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Westerly,  R.  I. 

588.  Henry  L.'^  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Elizabeth  (Da- 
vis)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Elisha,  George,  John,  James), 

b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Dec.  5,  1842;  d.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  12, 
1878;  m.  (i)  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  5,  1867,  Josephine,  dau. 
of  George  and  Mary  Ann  (Boss)  Barber,  b.  Westerlv,  R.  I., 
Feb.  8,^846,  d.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Jan.,  1878;  m.  (2)' Alfred, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  5,  1878,  Ida  E.,  dau.  of  Alonzo  and  Patience 
(Allen)  Sisson,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  17,  1850.  She  res. 
1902,  Westerly,  R.  I.,  and  m.  (2)  Mar.  14,  1894,  1302  Abel 
BaJjcock. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

1 181  Gertrude  E.,'  b.  June   16,   1870;    m.  Frank  B.   French. 
Walter  O.,  b.  Alfred.   1874;    d.  Alfred,   1878. 

Bourdan  A.,  b.  Alfred,  July  23,  1877;  m.  Stonington,  June  1901, 
Mable  . 

Child  by  second  wife : 
Frank  Earle,  b.  Jan.,  1881. 

589.  Angeline    Rosette'''    Babcock,    dau.    of    James    and 
Elizabeth   (Davis)    Babcock   (Samuel,  Elisha,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.    (Pawcatuck,  Conn.),  Oct. 
19,   1851;  res.    1902,  Moodus,  Conn.;  m.  Westerly   (Pawca- 
tuck), Sept.  17,  1874,  Charles  Emmons. 
Children : 

Julius  Ely,  b.  Moodus,  Conn.,  Oct.  22,  1877;  res.  1902,  Westerly. 
He  was  a  machinist. 

Sarah  Elizabeth,  b.  Moodus,  Conn.,  Sept.  17,  1881  ;  res.  1902,  Moo- 
dus. Conn. 

Caroline  E.,  b.  Jan.  6,  i88g;    res.  1002,  Moodus.  Conn. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  267 

590.  John  Perry'  Babcock,  son  of  Jesse  and  Sally  (Shcf- 
tield)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George,  John,  James),  b. 

New  Shoreham,  R.  1.,  Aug.  17,  181 1;   d.  Mystic,  Conn.,  Jan. 

20,  1868;  m.  (i)  N.  Kingston,  Sept.  3,  1838,  Lydia  Case,  dau. 
of  Benjamin  and  Patience  (Allen)  Wightman,  b.  N.  Kingston, 
Apr.  4,  1812,  d.  Wickford,  R.  1.,  Aug.  29,  1850;   m.  (2)  June 

21,  1855,  Wealthy  M.,  dau.  of  Ethan  and  Eunice  (Babcock) 
Crandall.  b.  Sept.  23,  1820,  d.  June  7,  1878. 

Children : 

Melissa  Jane,  b.  N.  Kingston,  Aug.  2-j,   1839;    res.   1902,  Wickford, 

R.  I. ;    unm. 
Jesse,  b.  N.  Kingston,  July  10,  1843 ;    d.  Wickford,  May  28,  1846. 

591.  Susan  Sheffield'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Sally 

(Sheffield)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Alar.  5,  1815;  d.  Providence, 
R.  I.,  May  15,  1869;  m.  Kingston  Hill,  R.  I.,  Jonathan  C. 
Ken3'on,  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  July  17,  18 12,  d.  Providence, 
Dec.  21,  1898. 

Children,  b   Providence: 

Benjamin  Franklin,  b.  ;    res.  1902.  Providence,  R.  I. 

1182  William  Clark,''  b.  Jan.  21,  1843;    m.  Mary  L.  Seaver. 
Nancy,  b.  Sept.  18,  1844. 

Edward,  b.   IMay  5,   1846. 
Sarah,  b.  Nov.,  1849. 
Isabell,  b.  Apr.,  1858. 

592.  Edmuxd'  Babcock,  son  of  Jesse  and  Sally  (Sheffield) 
Babcock     (Jesse,    Elisha,    (jeorge.     Joli'i,     James),    b. 

Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Oct.  2,  1816:  d.  Wakefield.  R."l.,  Feb.  14, 
1881  ;  m.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  i,  1843.  Martha  E.,  dau.  of 
251  Peleg  and  Sarah  (Potter)  Babcock,  b.  S.  Kingston,  Sept. 
13.  1823:    res.  1902,  Groton,  Conn. 
Children : 

1 183  Susan  Harriet,"  b.  Nov.  30,  1844;    m.  Charles  H.  Briggs. 

1 184  Jesse  Peleg,  b.  Nov.  24,   1845;    m.   Ellen  Gardner. 

1185  Herbert   Whipple,   b.   Aug.   27.    1848:     m.    (i)    Martha   Brown;     m. 

(2)    Harriet  Lewis. 

1186  James  Edmund,  b.  Feb.  12,  1851 ;    m.  Sarah  C.  Tallman. 

1 187  Sarah   Elizabeth,   b.   Apr.    18,    1854;    m.   John  B.   Rodman. 

Maria  Esther,  b.  Wickford,  R.  f.,  Apr.  11.  1858;  res.  1902,  West- 
erly, R.  I.;  m.  Westerly,  Nov.  15,  1900,  Charles  H.,  son  of 
Stephen  Kenyon,  b.   Hopkinton,  Jan.   13,   1842. 

593.  Haxnatt  Peckiiam'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Sally 

(Sheffield)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  L,  June  5,  1822;  d.  Providence, 
R.   L,  Apr.    13.    i88t;    m.   Kingston,   R.  I.,   Oct.    10,    1848, 


268  The  Bohcock  Genealogy. 

George  Arnold   Whipple,  b.   N.   Providence,  Apr.    i8,    1825; 
res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I. 
Children : 

1 188  George  Edward/  b.  Sept.  2,  1850;    m.  Mary  Gardiner. 

Crawford  Bernon,  b.  Attleboro,  Mass.,  Aug.  21,  1857;    d.  Attleboro, 
July   13,   1858. 

594.  Maria'   Babcock,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Sally  (Sheffield) 
Babcock     (Jesse,    Elisha,    George,    John,    James),    b. 

Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Dec.  6,  1824;  d.  Jan.  14,  1856;  m.  Kings- 
ton, R.  I.,  Oct.  I,  1845,  George  N.,  son  of  George  and  Thank- 
ful Crandall,  b.  Charlestown;  res.  1902,  Attleboro,  Mass. 

595.  Catherine    Weedin^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Jesse    and 
Sally     (Sheffield)     Babcock     (Jesse,    Elisha,     George, 

John,  James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  June  10,  1827;  res.  1902, 
Wickford,  R.  I.;   m.  Wickford,  Jan.  22,  1857,  Peleg  W.,  son 
of  Theodore  and  Mary   (Weedin)    Wightman,  b.  Wickford, 
Nov.  4,  183 1,  d.  Wickford,  Feb.  19,  1898. 
Children,  b.  Wickford : 

Ii8g  Sarah  Maria,"  b.  May  18,  i860;  m.  Thomas  J.  Pierce. 

MiUon  J.,  b.   Sept.   24,   1861  ;    res.   1902,   Wickford,   R.   I. 
Mary  Weedin,  b.  Aug.  28,   1865  ;    res.   1902,  Wickford,  R.  I. 
Alfred  R.,  b.  Mar.  31,  1871 ;    res.   1902,  Wickford,  R.  I. 

596.  DuTEE  Jerald  Pierce'''  Babcock,  son  of  Jesse  and  Sally 

(Sheffield)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  July  27,  1829;  d.  E.  Greenwich, 
R.  I.,  July  24,  1889;  m.  E.  Greenwich.  June  30,  1859,  Theresa 
Slocum,  dau.  of  Slocum  and  Charlotte  (Gardiner)  Hall,  b. 
N.  Kingston,  Nov.  25,  1830,  d.  E.  Greenwich,  Aug.  20,  1877. 
Child : 

ugo  Charlotte  Hall,**  b.  July  23,  1861  ;     m.  George  A.  White. 

597.  Edward  Perry'''  Babcock,  son  of  George  and  Nancy 

(Perry)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George,  John,  James), 
b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Oct.  i,  1815;  m.  New  Lebanon,  June  8, 
1844,  Harriet,  dau.  of  Leonard  and  Nancy  (Harris)  Graves, 
b.  July  31,  1825.     Both  res.  1902,  E.  Chatham,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Susan  Esther,  b.   Greenbush,   N.   Y.,  Jan.   i,   1848;    d.   E.   Chatham, 

Oct.  2,  1862. 
Ellen   H.,   b.    Worcester,   Mass.,   Oct.    14,    1851  ;     d.    East   Chatham, 

Sept  .30,  1862. 
iiqi  Perry  G.,"  b.  Dec.  20,  1853;    m.  Augusta  Boice. 

Juliet,  b.  Plainfield,  Conn.,  Jan.  4,  1856;    d.  East  Chatham,  Sept.  25, 

1884. 


TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  269 

598.     Albert"  Rabcock,  son  of  George  and  Nancy  (Perry) 
Bal)cock  (Jesse,  EHsha,  George,  John,  James),  b.  Kill- 
ingly.  Conn.,  Mar.  25,  1827;  d.  Sterling,  Conn.;  m.  Frances 
Pierce. 
Children : 
David,  b. 


1192  Ellen   E.,**  b.    Feb.   24,    1859;     m.    (i)    Leonard    Burdick ;     m.    (2) 

Amory  Keblcr. 
George  P.,  b.  ;    m.  Addie  Carr. 

1193  Edward,  b.  July  4,   1867;    m.  Ettie  Winchester. 

Frank,  b.  ;    res.  1902.  Sterling,  Conn.;  m.  Sarah  Chapman. 

John.  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Sterling,  Conn. 

Albert,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Sterling,  Conn.;    m.  Nellie  Wilcox. 

Nancy,  b.  ;    d.  Sterling,  Conn.,  May  5,  1900;    m.  Nathan  Carr. 

Frances,  b.  ;    res.   1902,   Sterling,   Conn. 

599.  Harriet  Ann"  Baecock.  dan.* of  George  and  Nancy 

(Perry)  Bahcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George,  John,  James), 

b.  Oct.  24,   1830;    m.  Alfred  Boswell. 

Children : 

Susan,  b.  ;    ni.  Waller  Kers. 

Adelbert,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I.     Has  two  children. 

George,  b.  ;  unm. ;    res.  1902,  Donnelsonville.  Conn. 

600.  Elizabeth'''    Babcock,    dan.    of    George    and    Nancy 
(Perry)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Elisha,  George.  John,  James), 

b.  Charlestown.  R.  I..  May  25,  1833;    d.  S.  Killingly.  Conn., 
Sept.  5.  1898;  m.  (i)  Sterling,  Conn.,  Jan.  30,  1852,  William 
S.  Boswell.  b.  Eoster,  R.  I.,  Aug.  6,  1823.  d.  S.  Killingly,  Feb. 
20,  1878;  m.  (2)  Thomas  Wilson. 
Children : 

Ella  Josephine,  b.  S.  Killingly,  Nov.  30,  1858;  res.  1902,  S.  Kill- 
ingly; m.  Foster.  R.  I..  Dec.  24,  1879,  Eugene  Shippie.  b.  S.  Kill- 
ingly. Dec.  30.  1857. 

Jennie  Ann,  b.   Feb.  21.   1868;    m.   George  F.   Curtis. 

William  Henry,  b.  S.  Killingly,  Oct.  13.  1872;  res.  1902,  S.  Kill- 
ingly;   m.  S.  Killingly.  Oct.  20.  1897.  Eva  Dawley. 

601.  Mary    Hortense'^    Chappell,    dau.    of    Richard    and 
Ruth  (Babcock)  Chappell  (Jesse,  Elisha.  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Shannock  Hill  (Richmond),  R.  T..  Dec.  16,  1849; 
res.   1902,  Kenyon.  R.  I. :    m.  Richmond.  Sept.  4,   1877,  Ed- 
ward K.,  son  of  George  W.  and  Sarah  (Saunders)  James,  b. 
Exeter.  R.  I..  Oct.  18,  1850,  d.  Kenyon,  Oct.  29,  1901. 
Children : 

Richard  Eugene,  b.  Aug.   16.   1878;    res.   1902.  Kcnvon,  R.  f.  ;  unm. 
Sarah  T.ila,  b.  Dec.  20.   1879:    res.   1902.  Kenvon,  R.  I.;  unm. 
Ruth  Hortense.  b.  Sent.  20.  i88r  ;    res.  1002,  Kenyon,  R.  I. :    unm. 
Marcia  H..  b.  Adv.  20.   1883;    res.   1902.  Kenyon.  R.  I.;    unm. 
George  E..  b.  Jan.  10,  i88q  ;    res.  1902,  Kenyon.  R.  T. ;  unm. 
Mary  V.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1886;    res.  1902,  Kenyon,  R.  I. 


270  TJic  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

602.  Oliver"  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Anna  (Bnll)  Bab- 
cock  (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James),  b.  Berne, 

Albany  County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  30,  1798;  d.  Richland,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  14,  1883;  m.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  30,  1823,  Elizabeth 
(Betsey),  dau.  of  Philip  W.  and  Elizabeth  (Blake)  Ingalls, 
b.  in  Swasey,  Mass.,  June  i,  1801,  d.  Richland,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  i, 
1868. 

Oliver  carried  on  the  business  of  cloth-dressing  and  wool- 
carding  in  Fernwood,  Newfane,  and  Oswego,  N.  Y.  He  was 
a  Baptist. 

Children : 

1 194  Mary  Ann,"  b.  Nov.  20,   1824;    m.  Davis  J.  Cross. 

1 195  Amanda  O.,  b.  Sept.  25,  1826;    m.  Epbraim  M.  Averill. 

Diana  F.,  b.  June  15,  1828;  m.  James  N.  Bradford.  Sbe  d.  Hans- 
boro,  Minn.,  Oct.  i,  1872.     No  children. 

1 196  Philip  Eugene,  b.  July  5,  1831  ;    m.  Polly  S.  Parish. 

1 197  Harriet  Louise,  b.  July  27,  1838;    m.  Albert  Stowell. 

603.  GuRDON^  Babcock,    son   of   Henry   and   Anna  (Bull) 
Babcock    (David,   Ezekiel.     Robert,    John,  James),   b. 

Berne,  Albany  County,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  23,  1801  ;  d.  Sun  Prairie, 
Wis.,  Mar.  23,  1887;  m.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,  1824, 
Almira,  dau.  of  Amos  and  Elizabeth  (Benjamin)  Stark- 
weather, b.  Jan.  6,  1805,  at  Canaan,  N.  Y.,  d.  Sunbury,  O., 
Oct.  19,  1880. 
Children : 

Henry  Gurdon,  b.  May  14.   1825;    d.  Asheville,  N.  C,  Feb.  5,  1884; 

m.   Washington,   D.   C,   Oct.   29,    1861,    Mary   Van   Buskirk.      No 

children. 
Phebe  Ann,  b.  Apr.  5,  1827;    d.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  May  12,   1829. 

1 198  Oliver  Morrell,"  b.  Apr.  27,  1830;    m.  Lidie  B.  Yarnall. 

Lucinda  Florilla,  b.  Camden,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  17,  1832.  Living  igoo, 
Sunbury,  O. ;    m.  July  6,   1866,  John  Knox.     No  children. 

James  S.,  b.  Newfane,  N.  Y.,  July  19,  1835;  d.  Columbus,  Wis., 
Dec.  26,  1864,  unm. 

Sophronia  Almira,  b.  Newfane,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  30,  1840;  d.  Sunbury, 
O.,  Oct.  I,  1896;  m.  Aug.  10,  1862,  John  Ditmas.  Had  one  son, 
Morrell  C,  living  igoo,  at  Berkshire,  Delaware  County,  O. 

1 199  Alonzo  Nelson,  b.   Sept.   13,   1842;    m.  Evaline  Carris. 

George  Riley,  b.  July  25,  1848;  drowned  at  Columbus,  Wis.,  July  26, 
1862. 

604.  Merritt'''   Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Anna    (Bull) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Aug.  5,   1804;    m.   1821,  Martha  Wells.     Lived  in  Camden, 
N.  v.,  in  1885. 
Children : 

Ogden,  b.  Apr.  16,  1827.  •     •> 

Oliver,  b.  Apr.  15,  1829. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  271 

Samuel,  1).  Oct.  30,  1830. 

Henry,  b.  Nov.  9,   1832. 

James,  b.  Aug.  30,  1835. 

Olive,  b.   Sept.  8,   1836;    m.   Alar.  4,   1863,  Abiah  Whitmore.   Lived 

i88o,  at  Camden,  N.  Y. 
Silas,  b.  Aug.  12,  1838. 
Susan,  b.  Jan.  12,  1843. 
Merritt,  b.  Apr.  16,  1845. 

605.  Anna  Fidelia'   Babcock,   dan.  of  Henry  and  Anna 
(Bnll)  Babcock  (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James), 

b.  Otsego  Connty,   N.   Y.,  Jan.    i,    1809;    d.   Circleville,  O., 
Sept.  9,  1853;  m.  Williamstown,  N.  Y.,  May  28,  1829,  John 
demons,  b.  XVilHamstown,  Oct.  17,  1804,  d.  Circleville,  Apr. 
3.  1859. 
Children : 

Infant,  b.  June  i,   1830. 

1200  Fidelia  Ann/  b.  June  17,  1831 ;    m.  Ira  Proseus. 
John,  b.  Sept.   18,   1833. 

Harry  B.,  b.  Cleveland,  O.,  Nov.  22.  1836;    res.  1902,  Circleville,  O. ; 

m.   Circleville.   Maria   Stover. 
Charles,  b.  Dec.  16.  1838;    d.  Aug.  22,  1839. 
Cynthia  Ann,  b.  Circleville,  Dec.  20,  1843;    res.  1902,  Taylorville,  O. ; 

ni.   Sunbury,  O.,  Emery  Holmes. 

1201  Sarah  Ann,  b.  Apr.  20.   1846;    m.  Albert  R.   King. 

Ira  H.,  b.  Circleville,  O.,  July  17,   1850;    m.  Taylorville,  Oct.,  1876, 

Margaret  Zimmerman. 
Willie,  b.  Circleville,  Dec.  5,  1853;    d.  Circleville,  Apr.  9,  1854. 

606.  James^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Anna  (Bull)  Bab- 
cock  (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James),  b.  Aug. 

30,  1811 ;  d.   1852;  m.  Nancy  Lackey. 
Children : 

Mercy ;  William ;    res.   1900,  Niles,  Mich. 
Annie;  res.   1902,  Niles,  Mich. 

607.  Silas'''   Babcock,   son  of  Robert  and   Sally    (Gallup) 
Babcock  (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James),  b.  De- 
catur, N.  Y.,  Oct.    6,    1796;    d.    Mar.    26,    1875;    m.  Polly 
Champion. 

Children : 

John  Robert,  b.  :    m.  Annis  Ferguson,  of  Otsego  County;    d. 

Otsego  County,  1850.     Was  a  teacher  of  much  merit. 
Sarah  Elizabeth,  b.  .     Was  a  woman  of  literary  ability;    d.  unm. 

608.  Hannah''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Sally   (Gal- 
lup)  Babcock   (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James), 

b.  Nov.  9,  1800;  d.  Oct.  22,  1870;  m.  Moses  Pettie. 


272  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Nathan,  d.  1853  ;  Caroline  ;  Minnie. 

609.  Maria'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Sally   (Gallup) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Nov.  7,  1805;  d.  Starkville,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1890;  m.  Joel 
Champion : 

Children  (all  married,  d.  without  issue)  : 

Oscar;    Byron;    Delisa. 

610.  Lois'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Sally  (Gallup)  Bab- 
cock (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James),  b.  Deca- 
tur, N.  Y.,  Dec.  17,  1810;  d.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  3,  1884; 
m.  E.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  2,  1842  (?),  Silas  Brewster, 
Jr.,  b.  in  town  of  Wight,  N.  Y.,  July  29,  1803,  d.  in  town  of 
Wight,  June  13,  185 1. 

Children,  b.'  Wight : 

A  son,  b.  Mar.  13,  1843 ;    d.  Mar.  14,  1843. 

1202  Sarah  B.,**  b.  June  10,  1844;    m.   Chester  Jaycox. 

1203  Anna,  b.  Feb.  25,  1846;    m.  Samuel  F.  Ames. 

1204  Wayne,  b.  Feb.  20,  1850;    m.  Cora  L.  Rose. 

611.  Elias'    Babcock,  son  of   Robert   and   Sally    (Gallup) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Berne,  N.  Y.,  May  22,  1812;    d.  E.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Sept. 
27,  1890;    m.  E.  Worcester,  Oct.  i,  1840,  Jane  Ann,  dau.  of 
Samuel  and  Elizabeth  (Hull)  Thurber,  b.  Westford,  May  10, 
1820;    res.  1902,  Davenport,  N.  Y. 
Children,  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y. : 

1205  William  Wayne,*  b.  Jan.   11,  1842;  m.  Sarah  Jane  Butler. 

Nelson   Eugene,   b.    Sept.    12,    1844;     m.    Oneonta,    N.   Y.,    Sept.    12, 
1866,  Sophina  Rich. 

1206  Maria  Josephine,  b.  Jan.  23,  1847;    m.  John  A.  Griffin. 
Julian,  b.  Dec.  14,  1849;    d.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  14.  1853. 

1207  Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Apr.  24,  1852;    m.  William  A.  Winters. 
Robert   David,  b.  Jan.  3,   1855;    m.   E.  Worcester,   N.   Y.,   Sept.   12, 

1882,  Maggie  Pratt. 
Charlie,  b.  July  27,  1857:    d.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  19,  1858. 

1208  Cora  Lois,  b.  Oct.  31,  i860;    m.  Everett  Lockwood  Carpenter. 

612.  Nathan'^  Babcock,  son  of  Robert  and  Sally  (Gallup) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Berne  (?),  N.  Y.,  June  23,  1814:  d.  Warnerville,  N.  Y.,  July 
23,  1892;  m.  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  29,  1841,  Lois  Anna, 
dau.  of  Samuel  and  Elizabeth  (Hull)  Thurber,  b.  Westford, 
N.  Y.,  July"  23,  1822;  res.  1902,  Northport,  N.  Y. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  273 

Children : 

1209  Mary  Jane,"  h.  Oct.  3,  1844;    111.  Horatio  G.  Cass. 

1210  Jackson,  b.  July  12,  1848;    m.  Emeline  L.  Smith. 

121 1  George,  b.  Fel).  5,  1859;    111.  Sarali  A.  Sanford. 

613.  Lucy  C."  Morgan,  dau.  of  Rev.  Elisha  and  Polly  (Bab- 
cock)  Morgan  (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James), 

b.  June  22,  1811;    d.  Kalamazoo,  Mich.,  June  14,  1900;    m. 
N.  Adams.  N.  Y.,  May  23,  1835,  Lovett  l^^ames,  b.  Rutland, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  18 10,  (1.  Kalamazoo,  Mich.,  Sept.  6,  1863. 
Children,  b.  Kalamazoo : 

Eii>ha  I).,  b.  May  2^.  1836;  res.  1902,  Watertown,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Evans- 
ville,  Ind.,  June  18,  1862,  ^[ary,  dau.  of  Judge  L.  A.  and  Caro- 
line (Johnson)  Robinson,  b.  Logansport,  Ind.;  d.  Watertown, 
July  I.  1898. 

1212  Lucia  Augusta, "■  b.  June  7,   1841  ;    m.  Henry  F.  Blount. 
Frederick  William,  b.  Nov.   19,   1843;    d.  Watertown,  Apr.  20,  1883. 
Alfred,  b.  Feb.  6,   1846;    res.   1902,  Kalamazoo,  Mich.;  m.  July  28, 

1873,  Harriet  Case. 

Judson,  b.  May  18,  1848;    d.  Dec.  15,  1857. 

Gardner  T.,  b.  Mar.  10,  1851  ;  res.  1902,  Cincinnati,  O.  ;  m.  June  i, 
1881,  Fannie  Vinton. 

Charles  Bridge,  b.  June  8,  1853;  res.  1902,  St.  Louis,  ]\Io. ;  m. 
Mary  Schmucker. 

Ellen  Dorcas,  b.  Sept.  22,  1854;  res.  1902,  Chicago,  111.;  m.  Kala- 
mazoo, Mich.,  Dec,  1873,  Christian  De  Graff. 

614.  Ends  J.^  Babcock,  son  of  Dudley  and  Abigail  (Littell) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Richmondville.  X.  Y.,  Nov.  21.  1819;   d.  Holley,  Mich.,  Dec. 
20,  1891  ;   m.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  1846,  Lucinda,  dau.  of  John  M. 
and  Sally  (Warner)  Goodell,  b.  Decatur,  Sept.  24,   1821,  d. 
Choconu't  Center,  N.  Y.,  May  16,  1886. 
Child : 

1213  Charles  W.,**  b.  July  16,  1847;    m.  Emily  Sperry. 

615.  Eli  L."  Babcock,  son  of  Dudley  and  Abigail  (Littell) 
Babcock    (David.    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Richmondville,  N.  Y..  Apr.  23.  1824:  d.  Decatur.  N.  Y..  Dec. 
23,  1873;   m.  Decatur,  Aug.  17,  1853,  Dollv  S.,  dau.  of  Riley 

T.  and  (Flint)    Woodin,  b.   Decatur,   N.  Y.,  Oct.    17, 

1830;  res.  1901.  Decatur.  N.  Y. 
Children,  b.  Decatur: 

1214  Emory  J.,'  b.  June  20.  1855;    m.   (r)  Lovila  ]\Iurry ;    m.   (2)  Hattie 

Darely. 
Anna  M..  b.  Mar.  23.  1856;    res.  1901,  Decatur,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Luther 

J.  Shelland.    Has  one  child. 
Delevan,  b.  Aug.  3,  1858;    unm. :    res.  igoi,  Decatur,  N.  Y. 

1215  Frank  Earnest,  b.  Sept.  12,  1863;  m.  Elsie  Mae  Preston. 
18 


274  77/('  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

616.  Oliver'  Babcock,  son  of  Frederick  and  Fanny   (Gal- 
lup)  Babcock   (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James), 

b.  1804;  m.  Dec.  27,  1827,  Maria  Barton. 
Children : 

Salome,  b.  Oct.  13,  1830;    m.  Henry  Carpenter.    No  issue. 
Matilda,  b.  Dec.  9,  1831 ;    d.  1857;    ni.  John  Wexderby.     No  issue. 

Lydia,  b. ;    m.  Samuel  Carpenter. 

Amanda,  b.  Mar.  20,  1837;    d.  Mar.  31,  1845. 
Sarah,  b.  July  11,   1843;    d.  young. 

617.  Amos'^  Babcock,  son  of  Meritt  and  Olive  (Dickinson) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Nov.  26,  1806;  d.  Jan.  10,  1877;  m.  Mary  Card. 
Children : 

James,  b.  Aug.  21,  1834;    d.  young. 

Edwin,  b.  Oct.  6,  1837;    d.  in  the  army,  Oct.  7,  1864. 

Daniel,  b.  July  2,  1839. 

Olive,  b.  July  17,  1841 ;    d.  Dec.  8,  1846. 

618.  Abel'  Babcock,  son  of  Meritt  and  Olive  (Dickinson) 
Babcock    (David,    Ezekiel,    Robert,    John,    James),    b. 

Apr.  23,  1817;    m.   (i)   Eliza  Snyder;  m.   (2)   Mary  Purdy. 
Abel  Babcock  was  a  preacher. 
Child  by  first  wife: 

Peter,  b.  Dec.  3,  1842;   d.  young. 

619.  Simeon'   Babcock,  son  of  Meritt  and  Olive  (Dickin- 
son)  Babcock   (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James), 

b.  May  25,  1820;    m.  Sarah  Holden. 
Children : 

Silas ;  Robert ;  Oliver. 

620.  Sarah  C^  Duel.  dan.  of  Philip  and  Sarah  (Babcock) 
Duel  (Robert,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John.  James),  b.  ; 

d.  Worcester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Worcester,  Isaac  Born,  b.  Worcester, 
d.  Decatur,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Chas.  P.,  b. ;    res.  1901,  Peoria,  111. 

Tacy  Ann,  b.  ;    res.  1901,  Council  Bluffs,  la. 

1216  Nathan  W.,'  b.  Feb.  14,  1834;    m.  Rhoda  Hadsell. 

621.  Robert'''  Babcock,  son  of  Russel  and  Sarah   (Fuller) 
Babcock    (Robert,    Ezekiel,    Robert,   John,    James),    b. 

RichmondviHe,  Nov.   15,  1818;  d.  Lockport,  N.  Y..  Dec.  28, 
1891;   m.  Berne,  N.  Y.,  Lucy  McKinley. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  275 

Children : 

Ophelia;  Euphemia. 

622.  Eloise  Corrina'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Russel  and  Sarah 
(Fuller)    Babcock     (Robert,     Ezekiel,     Robert,    John, 

James),  b.  Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  11,  1823;  d.  E.  Wor- 
cester, N.  Y.,  May  22,  1892;  m.  Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  2, 
1849,   Harvey  Waldorf,   b.   Richmondville,   Feb.   3,    1821,  d. 
E.  Worcester,  Nov.  29,  1900. 
Children : 

1217  Minerva,''  b.  Nov.  4,   1850;    ni.  Rev.  J.  Jones. 

1218  Berlin  Harvey,  b.  Dec.  20,   1853;    m.  Helen  Treadwell. 

1219  Alice  Eloise,  b.  July  27,  1859;    m.  Fayette  Howard  Barnes. 

623.  William"  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth  (Fra- 
zier)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Joseph,  Joseph.  John,  James), 

b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  Oct.   11,   181 1;  d.  Bethlehem,  Jan.  25, 
1886;    m.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Nov.   16,   1870,  Anna  Mary,  dau. 
of  Dr.  John  and  Mary  (Van  Buren)  Wilson,  b.  Albany,  Feb. 
5,  1838;    res.  1902,  Selkirk,  N.  Y. 
Children,  b.  Bethlehem : 

Mary.  b.  May  18.  1872;  res.  1902.  Selkirk.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Bethlehem, 
Nov.  21,  1894,  Francis,  son  of  John  and  Marie  (Leedings)  Wag- 
oner, b.  Colby.  Mass.,  Feb.  i,  1858. 

Martha  Frazier.  b.  May  7,  1874;    res.  1902,  Bedford,  N.  Y. ;    tinm. 

Helen,  b.  Sept.  23,  1875 ;  res.  1902,  at  65  N.  Pearl  St.,  Albany, 
N.  Y. ;  iinm. 

Harriet  Frances,  b.  Nov.  29,  1876  res.  1902,  Cedar  Hill,  N.  Y. ;  ni. 
Palmer  H.,  son  of  Stephen  and  Lucy  Barnes,  b.  Cedar  Hill, 
Dec.  24,   1869. 

624.  John"   Babcock,   son  of  Joshua  and  Elizabeth    (Fra- 
zier)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Joseph,  Joseph,  John,  James), 

b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y..  June  19.  1814;    d.  Bethlehem.  Mar.  13, 
1879;  ""■•  Bethlehem.  June  28,  1S42.  Hester,  dau.  of  Cornelius 
and  Maria  (Van  Berg-en)  Van  Derzee,  b.  Bethlehem,  Feb.  17, 
1822;  res.  1902.  Bethlehem. 
Children,  b.  Bethlehem : 

1220  Elizabeth  Frazier,*  b.  Oct.  i.  1843;    in.  John  F.  Shafer. 

1221  Maria  Van  Bergen,  b.  July  25.  1845  :    m.  Thomas  H.  Fearey. 
Cornelius  Van  Bergen,  b.  July  7,  1847;    d.  Bethlehem,  Feb.  26,  1848. 
Hester,  b.   Mar.  27,   1849:    res.   1902,   South  Bethlehem,   N.  Y. ;    m. 

Bethlehem,   Feb.   2,    1887,   Veeder,   son   of  David  and   Eliza  Van 
Derzee. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  Dec.  10,  185 1 ;    d.  1854. 

1222  John,  b.  July  4,  1855 :   m.  Annie  Scharbute. 

1223  Robert,  b.   Dec.  2,    1857;    m.   Maria  Witbeck. 


2/6  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

625.  Henry  Ostrum"  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Eliza- 
beth (Frazier)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Joseph,  Joseph,  John, 

James),  b.  Bethlehem  Center,  N.  Y.,  July  8,  1820;  d.  Albany, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  26,  1874;  m.  (  1)  I'ethlehem  Center,  Rachel,  dau. 
of  John  W.  and  Rachel  (Frazier)  McGill,  b.  Bethlehem,  d. 
Bethlehem;  m.  (2)  Albany,  Mar.  26,  1856,  Margaret,  dau. 
of  William  and  Jean  (Campbell)  Moore,  b.  Albany,  Dec.  9, 
1828,  d.  Albany,  Mar.  26,  1870. 

Children  by  first  wife,  b.  Bethlehem : 

1224  Anna,*'  b.  Mar.  22,   1846;    m.  J.  C.  Moore. 

1225  James,  b.  May  3,  1848;    m.  Eleanor  Clark. 

Children  by  second  wife : 

Margaret  J.,  b.  Albany,  Aug.  22,  1858;  res.  1902.  Glenmont,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  All^any,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  25,  1902,  John,  son  of  John  and  Catherine 
(Wilbur)   Patterson,  b.  Chemung,  111.,  July  10.   1857. 

Joshua,  b.  Feb.  22,  1861  ;  res.  1902,  at  124  Morton  St.,  Albany, 
N.  Y. ;   m.  Albany,  1884.  Anna  James. 

1226  Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  31,   1862;    m.  James  Hunter. 

626.  Jesse"    Babcock,    son    of    Rev.    Simeon  and    Charity 

(Maxson)    Babcock    (Thomas,  Thomas,   Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.   Salem,  Va.,   1804;    d.  Humboldt,  Neb.;    m.    (i) 

Amanda  Searl ;  m.  (2)  Mary,  dau.  of  Deacon  John  Forsythe ; 

m.  (3)  wid.  Jemima  McBurney. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Mary,  b.  ;    m.  Jesse  Furrow. 

Second,  b.  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

Child  by  second  wnfe: 

Oliver  Perry,  b.  ;    d.  in  U.  S.  Army  during  the  Civil  War. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

Adolphus,  b.   1856;    m.  Isadore,  dau.  of  636  Simeon  and  Amy   (Van 

Horn)  Babcock;  res.  1902,  Alfred,  N.  Y. 
Loren  R..  b.  1858:  m.  "Dosia"  Lippencott. 
Rosa,   b.   ;     m.    Henry   S.,   son   of   Dudley   and    Minerva    (Van 

Horn)  Hughes. 

627.  Gean'   Babcock,  dau.  of  Rev.   Simeon  and  Elizabeth 

(Hoffman)   Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  1814;  d.  Northampton,  O.,  Nov.,  1851;    m.  Jesse 
Furrow,  b.  1805,  d.  1865. 
Children : 

Lavina   F.,   b.   ;     d.    in   Cole   County,    111.,    1883;     m.   James   J. 

Smith. 

Simeon,  b.  ;    d.  in  Champaign  County,  O. 

William,  b.  ■ . 

Jacob  B.,  b.  Aug.  26.   1833 ;    m.  Elizabeth,   dau.  of  John  and  Mary 

(Davis)  Knight. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  277 


Charity,  b. 


Jesse  B.  Jefferson,  b.  Aug.  25,  1838;  m.  Nov.  12,  1863,  Amanda 
C.  Kyle,  d.  Winterset,   la.,  Feb.  7,   1898. 

Joseph,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Toledo,  la. 

Joshua  B.,  b.  ;    d.  1895. 

1227  Melissa  Gean,"  b.  Nov.  2,  1850;  m.  Adam  Jamieson. 

628.  Rev.    Maxson'''    Babcock,    son   of    Rev.    Simeon    and 
Charity  (Maxson)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  OHver, 

John,  James),  b.  Clark  County,  O.,  May  5,  1817;  d.  Garwin, 
la.,  Apr.  8,  1891;  m.  (i)  Sept.  i,  1835,  Phiothata,  dau.  of 
James  and  Elizabeth  Davis,  b.  Feb.  2,  1813,  d.  Dec.  20,  1882; 
m.  (2)  Nov.  13,  1884,  Mrs.  Isabell  (Hill)  Tarpening,  dau. 
of  James,  Jr.,  and  Deborah  (Davis)  Hill. 
Children  by  first  wife : 

1228  Bethuel  Church.'*  b.  Oct.  28.   1841  ;    m.  Phebe  Ann  Moyer. 
Granville   Sayer,   b.   Apr.   29,    1846;    d.   Alilton,  Wis.;    m.   in   Tama 

County,  la.,  Harriet  E.  Bishop.     Her  res.  1902,  Milton,  Wis.  There 
were  six  others;    all  died  in  early  life. 

629.  Elizabeth  Martha"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rev.  Simeon 
and  Elizabeth  (Hoffman)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Northampton,  O.,  Jan.  16,  1838;  m. 
Jackson  Center,  O.,  Jan.  16,  1856,  Curtis,  son  of  Samuel  and 
Hannah  (Maxson)  Lippencott;   res.  1902,  Maplewood,  O. 
Children : 

Charlotte  Temple,  b.  ;    m.  James  M.,   son  of  John  and  Mary 

(Davis)    Knight;     res.    1902.    Catawba,    Blaine    County,    Ok.    T. 

Darwin  C,  b.  ;  m.  Evaline,  dau.  of  Lewis  and  Sarah  (Fur- 
row) Van  Horn.  He  is  a  S.  D.  B.  minister;  res.  1902,  Sugar 
Camp,  W.  Va. 

Jesse  M.,  b.  ;    m.  Marv  Alvanettie,  dau.  of  James  and  Elizabeth 

(Randall)   Knight. 

Clara  L.,  b.  ;    d.  May  13,  1899;    m.  Apr.  4,  1880,  John  Groves; 

res.  1902,  Maplewood,  O. 

Charity  G.,  b.  ;    d.  Aug.  25,   1896. 

Samuel   D..   b.   ,   Jackson   Center,    O. 

Laverna ;    Simeon. 

1229  Perry  B.,*  b.  ;    m.  Rebecca  Sly. 

630.  Rev.  Simeon  Hoffman"^  Babcock,  son  of  Rev.  Sim- 
eon   and    Elizabeth     (Hoffman)     Babcock     (Thomas, 

Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  near  Northampton,  O., 
Jan.  21,  1841  :  m.  Jackson  Center,  Feb.  21,  1861,  Elizabeth, 
dau.  of  Valentine  and  Anna  (Clayton)  McCormick,  b.  Shelby 
County,  O.,  June  29,  1842;   res.  xMbion,  Wis. 

Children : 

Lillian  E.,  b.  Feb.  26,  1862;    d.  July  12,   1862. 

Emenetta  Jane.  b.  July  18.  1864;  res.  Edgerton,  Wis.;  m.  Albion, 
Wis.,  Oct.  28,  1885,  De  Florence  Whitford;    res.  Edgerton,  Wis. 


2/8  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Milton  James,  h.  Shelby  County,  July  5,  1S67 ;  res.  Albion,  Wis.; 
m.  All)ion.,  Dec.  26,  1894,  Edith  B.,  dau.  of  Stephen  R.  and  Har- 
riet  (Greene)   Potter.  1).  Albion,  Oct.,  1875. 

Orissa  Estella,  b.  Shelby  County,  July  25,  1870;  res.  Milton.  Wis.; 
m.  Walworth,  Wis.,  Nov.  15,  1894,  Mark  L.,  son  of  Jeremiah 
Brown. 

Louis  A.,  b.  Albion,  Wis.,  Mar.  9,  187.3 ;  res.  Albion,  Wis. ;  m. 
Hammond,  La.,  Aug.,  1896,  Lettie,  dau.  of  H.  B.  and  Emma 
(Brown)   Landphere,  b.  Aug.,  1875;    res.  1902,  Milton,  Wis. 

Abbie  Ida,  b.  Albion,  Apr.  8,   1878;    res.  Albion. 

Lester  Dwight,  b.  Albion,  Dec.  27,   1880;    d.  Mar.  2,   1882. 

631.  PriscillX"    Babcock,    dau.    of   William    and    Rebecca 

(Loofboro)   Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Clark  County,  O. ;    m.  Lemon  Lippencott,  son  of 
Samuel,  Sr.,  and  Amy  (Maxson)  Lippencott. 
Children : 

Henry,   b.   ;     m.    Martha   Davis. 

Robinson,  b.  ;    m.   Rebecca  Davis,  dau.  of  Jeptha  and  Matilda 

(Loofboro)    Davis. 
Cynthia,  b.  1841  ;   m.  George  W.,  son  of  Calvin  and  Lydia  (Maxson) 

Davis,  b.   Clark  County.   1836.     They  had  the  following  children : 

Herbert  M.,  Alice  O.,  Elnora  W.,  Erastus,  Willie,  Clara  E. 
Cinderella,  b.  ,   Clark  County ;    m.   Lorenzo  Dow,   son  of  John 

and  Mary   (Davis)   Knight. 

Orfah  L.,  b.  ;    m.  John   Shoultz. 

Jackson,  b.  ;    d.  unm. 

Indiana,  b.  ;    m.   Christopher  Bogard. 

Maria,  b.  ;    m.  John  W.,  son  of  Jeptha  and  Matilda  (Loofboro) 

Davis. 

632.  Davi.s'   Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Rebecca  (Loof- 
boro)    Babcock     (Thomas.     Thomas,     Oliver.     John, 

James),    b.    Clark    County,    O.,    Dec.    15,    1819:    d.    Jackson 
Center.  June  13.  1901;  m.  (i)  Aug.  18,  1846,  Emaline,  dau. 
of  Solomon  and  Lydia  (Davis)  Sayer.  d.  Jackson  Center,  O., 
1885;  m.  (2)  Anna  Deihert. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

Sebathial ;    Alice. 

Semanthia,  b.  • — — ;  m.  Francis  Marion,  son  of  Brooks  and  Mariah 
Ann  (Howell)  Akers.     One  dau.,  Lora. 

633.  Jacob    H."    Babcock.    son    of    \\'illiam    and    Rebecca 

(Loofboro)  Babcock  (Thomas.  Thomas.  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Clark  County,  O.,  Apr.  14,  1822;  res.  1902,  Jack- 
son Center,  O. ;  m.  Jackson  Center,  Jan.  12,  1849,  Elizabeth, 
dau.  of  Jeptha  and  Matilda  (Loofboro)  Davis,  b.  Clark 
County.  Aug-.  28,  1832,  d.  Jackson  Center,  Feb.  2,  1880. 
Children : 

R .,  b.   Mar.   8,    1850;     res.  Jackson   Center;    m.   George  M.   F., 

son  of  John  and  Charlotte  Davis  Randolph. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  279 

Thyatima,   b.    Aug.   26,    1859;     res.    1902,   Jackson    Center.    O. ;     m. 

James  A.,  son  of  Dudley  and  Minerva   (Van  Horn)    Hughes,  b. 

Apr.  4,  1849. 
Alhalia,  b.   Sept.   5,    i860;    res.   1902,  Jackson  Center,  O. ;    in.   Egar 

C,  son  of  Luther  and  Jane  (Morris)  Davis. 
Emma,  b.  Feb.  14,  1866;    res.  1902,  Jackson  Center;    m.   (i)   Albert 

Cargill;    m.  (2)  Apr.  4,  1893,  Schlosser. 

Cleophas,    b.   Jackson    Center,    Nov.    24,    1876;     res.    1902,    Jackson 

Center ;    ni.  Sept.  28,  1897,  Sidney,  O.,  Clara  Way. 

634.  Rebecc.V    Babcock,    dau.    of    William    and    Rebecca 
(Loofboro)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Clark  Connty,  O. ;   m.  Lewis,  son  of  Samuel  Bran- 
denburg-, d.  1899. 
Children : 

Lucetta ;    Belle,  m.  George  Snyder. 

635.  Emily'  Babcock,  dau.  of  William  and  Aseneth   (Da- 
vis) Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b. ;  m. (i)  James  Hunt;  m.  (2)  John  A.,  son  of  Ephraim 

Lippencott. 

Children  by  first  husband: 

William,  b.  - — -;    d.  in  U.  S.  service  during  Civil  War. 
David,  b.  ;    d.  unm. ;    Silas;    Lucinda ;    May;    Malinda. 

636.  Simeon'^  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Aseneth   (Da- 
vis) Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  :    m.  Jan.   i,   1845,  -'^mV'  f^^i^i-  of  AVilliam  and  Mary 

(Davis)  \'an'Horn.  b.  Oct.  10,' 1826,  d.  May  i,  1897,  Milton 
Junction,  Wis.     He  d.  Sept.  2t,,  1876. 
Children : 

1230  John  Albert,''  b.  Aug.   12,   1850;    m.   Nancy  Lippencott. 

Isadore,  b.  ;    m.  Adolphus,  son  626  Jesse  and  Jemima  McBurney 

Babcock. 
Jesse ;    Wilber  Teres.sa ;    Joseph  Sobrina. 

637.  Anna'  Babcock,  dau.  of  William  and  Aseneth    (Da- 
vis) Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  ;    m.  Abel,  son  of  Rev.  John  and  Permilla  (]\Iaxson) 

Davis,  1).  July  28,  1825;   d.  Nov.  i,  1869. 
Children : 

Percilla,  b.  . 

Jdhn  ]\r.,  1).  Aug.  18.  1850;  m.  Dec.  12,  1870,  Nancy  A.  Moots,  b. 
July  25,  1850.  Children :  Josephine.  Hester  L.,  Isaac  S.,  Alfred, 
Rosa.  ]\Iinnie,  Mav,  Pearl.  NelUe  Eva,  Cora  B. 

Isaac,  b.  ;    m.  Victoria,  dau.  of  Eli  and  Delila  F.    (Randolph) 

Davis. 


28o  TJic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

638.  AzARiAH^  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Aseneth  (Da- 
vis) Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  ;   m.  Julia  Ann  Cohvell. 

Children : 

David,  b.  ;    ni.  Lydia  Ann,  daii.  of  Calvin  and  Lydia  (Maxson) 

Davis,  b.  Jackson  Center,  O.,  Dec.  4,  1847;  d.  Feb.  24,  1885,  m 
Logan  County.  No  children.  He  is  a  Seventh-day  Adventist 
minister. 

Ephraim,  b.  ,  d.  young;    Eli,  d.  young. 

639.  Nancy   Anna'^    Babcock,    dan.    of   Jacob   and   Lydia 

(Maxson)    Babcock   (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Apr.  6,  18 18;    m.  John,  son  of  Samuel  and  Amy 
(Maxson)   Lippencott. 
Children : 

Lydia;  Jacob. 

Susan  Madelia,  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  Oct.  3,  1851 ;  m.  Pawnee  City, 
Neb.,  Dec.  i,  1869.  Joel  B.,  son  of  645  John  S.  and  Eliza  (Lip- 
pencott) Babcock,  b.  Shelby  County,  O.,  Mar.  25,  1849.  Children: 
Leah  A.,  Gertrude,  Ennietta,  Edwin,  Grace,  August,  Dessie. 

640.  Hannah'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Jacob  and  Lydia   (Max- 
son) Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  June  30,   1822;    m.   1841,  Ezekiel  P.,  son  of  Milton  and 
Elizabeth  (Hoffman)  Davis. 
Children : 

Sarah  and  Jay  L.,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Mary  Louisa,  b.  Apr.  29,   1848;    m.   Nov.  5,   1865,  Israel  L.,  son  of 

Luther  and  Jane  (Morris)  Davis,  b.  near  Jackson  Center,  O.,  May 

22,  1843.     Children:  Otis  G.,  b.  1866;    Milton  E.,  b.  1869;    Arthur 

W.,  b.  1876;  Harrold  S..  b.  1887. 
Moses  Ira,  b.  ;    m.  Ida  E.,  dau.  of  Dudley  and  M.  (Van  Horn) 

Hughes.     He  is  a  farmer ;    res.  Jackson  Center,  O. 

Charity,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Evaline  A.,  b.  Lake  View.  O..  June  29,  1857;    m.  June,  1877,  William 

L.,   son  of  Job  Van  Horn ;    res.  Lake  View,   O. 
Jennie  Elmira.  b.  Jackson   Center,   O.,   Oct.   29.   1861 :    d.    Sept.  22, 

1S98,    Jackson    Center;     m.    Cassius    S.,    son   of   John   Wade   and 

Maria   (Lippencott)   Davis,  b.  Jackson  Center,  Oct.  25,   1863;  res. 

Jackson  Center,  O. 

64L  John'''  Babcock,  son  of  Jacob  and  Lydia  (Maxson) 
Babcock  ('Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John.  James),  b. 
Clark  County,  O.,  Dec.  2,  1830;  m.  (i)  Jackson  Center,  O., 
Mar.,  1856,  Jemima,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Hannah  (Maxson) 
Lippencott,  b.  Clark  County.  O..  Mar.  11.  1832,  d.  Humboldt, 
Neb.,  Feb.  8,  1888;  m.  (2)'  Mrs.  Frank  A.  Patterson. 
Children  by  first  Avife: 

Sarah  Ann,  b.  Milton,  Wis. ;  m.  Sept.  28,  1875,  Thomas  Wool- 
strom ;    res.  Milton  Junction,  Wis. 


The  Bahcuck  Genealogy.  281 

Ernest  Franklin,  b.   Nov.  8,   1858;    unm. 

Walter  V.,  b.   ^lar.  zy.   i860;    unm. 

Martha  Lillian.  I).  Sept.  15,   1862,  Milton  Wis.;    m.  Humboldt.  Neb., 

July  5.   1879,  Oscar  S.  Babcock,  son  of  645  John  S.  and  Sarah  F. 

(Randolph)   Babcock,  b.  Jackson  Center,  O.,   Mar.   13,   1853;    res.. 

1902,  Nortonville,    Kan. 
Martin  Van  Huren.  b.  Apr.  26.  1867;    unm. 
Mary  Eliza  May.  b.   May  13,   1869;    umn. 
Ella  Rosemond,  b.  Apr.  C,  1871 ;  unm. 

642.  Cornelius  Sutton'''  Babcock,  son  of  Jacob  and  Lydia 

(Maxson)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Ohver,  John, 
James),  b.  Northampton,  O.,  Apr.  2,  1833;  m.  Clark  County, 
1850,  Rachel,  dau.  of  Sutton  and  Vienna  Maxson,  b.  Clark 

County,  O.,  Oct.  6,  1835,  d.  Dayton,  O. ;  m.   (2)   Miss  

Wren;  res.   1899,  Jordan,  Ind. 
Children : 

John  R.,  b.  ;    m.  Rebecca  E.  Trobridge. 

Vianna,  b.  ;    m.  William  Trobridge. 

Sarah  Lsabell,  b.  ;    m.  William  Allen. 

Martha  Ellen,  b.  Jackson  Center;    d.  Apr.  g,  1885;    m.  1884,  Richard 
Crouse. 

Lydia  Jane,  b.  ;    m.  Frank  Allen. 

Rosa  Leah,  b.  June  6,   1876    m.  Charles  Taylor. 
Lizzie  A.,  b.  Sept.  6,  1882. 
Maggie   Delia,  b.   Sept.  28,    1886. 

643.  Jacob^   Babcock,  son  of  Jacob  and  Lydia   (Maxson) 
Babcock   (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Clark  County,  O.,  Feb.  17,  1835;  res.  Gentry,  Ark.,  1902;  m. 
(i)  at  Jackson  Center,  O.,  Feb.  20,  1855,  Lydia.  dau.  of  Dea- 
con Jac.  D.  and  Anna  (Bond)  Maxson;  m.  (2)  Welton,  la.. 
May  IS-  1858.  lsabell,  dau.  of  Uriah  and  Viana  Davis,  b.  Feb., 

1837..  ^ 

Child  by  first  wife: 

Wilhelmina,  b.  May  3,  1856;    m.  John  Corlette. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Alvira  E.,  b.   Feb.   13,  1863:    m.  Ira  Bond. 

Olive  Lucy,  b.  Aug.   12,   1867;    m.  A.  Jay  Van  Horn. 

Eleanor  L.,  b.  June  29,  1877;    unm. 

644.  J0.SHUA  Greene'''  Babcock,  son  of  Joel  C.  and  Amy 

(Greene)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John, 
Lames),  b.  Clark  County,  O.,  Nov.  23,  1825;  m.  ]m\e.  24, 
1848,  Charlotte  T.,  dau.  of  Samuel,  Jr.,  and  Hannali  (Max- 
son) Lippencott,  b.  Jan.  26,  1827,  d.  Lake  View,  Cal.,  Feb.  26, 
1896. 


282  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Louisa,  b.  1851;    d.  1853. 

Julius  Todd,  b.  Shelby  County,  O.,  Feb.,  1853;  m.  Nortonville,  Kan., 

Feb.   4,    i88x,    Sarah   I'etty;     two  children,   Roy,   b.   Apr.  8,   1881, 

and  Ruth,  b.  Nov.  23,  1885. 
Florace  Greeley,  b.  1854;   d.  1873. 
L.  C,  b.  Jan.  3,  1857;    m.  Tristam  Bond. 
Cassius  Clay,   b.  Humboldt,   Neb.,   Nov.    1,    i860;    m.   Effie,  dau.   of 

Joseph  and  Rebecca   (Davis)    Simpkins.     No  children. 
Laura  R.,  b.  Humboldt,  Neb.,  May  21,  1863;    m.  Wilber  Babcock. 
Roena   M.,   b.   Humboldt,    Neb.,    Feb.   25,    1865;     d.    1890    (?);     m. 

Luther,  son  of  Dennis  and  Lydia  (Furrow)   Ayres. 
Uri  Curtis,  b.   1867;    d.   1884. 
Curtis  L.,  b.  1870;    d.  1889. 

645.  John  S.  Babcock,  son  of  Joel  C.  and  Amy  (Greene) 
Babcock   (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Clark  County,  O.,  Aug.  12,  1828;  d.  Nortonville,  Kan.,  Sept. 
28,  1898;  m.  (i)  June  24,  1848,  Eliza,  dau.  of  Samuel  and 
Hannah  (Maxson)  Lippencott,  b.  Aug.  15,  1830;  m.  (2) 
Mar.  12,  185 1,  Sarah  F.,  dau.  of  Samuel  Randolph,  b.  Salem, 
W.  Va.,  Dec.  22,  1826,  d.  Feb.  11,  1898. 
Child  by  first  wife : 

Joel  B.,  b.  ALir.  25,  1849;  m.  Susan  AL,  dau.  of  John  and  639  Nancy 
(Babcock)  Lippencott. 

Children  by  second  wife : 

Eliza  L.,  b.  Dec.  25,  1851  ;    m.  Thomas  C.  Davis. 

Oscar  Scott,  b.  Mar.  13,  1853;  m.  Martha,  dau.  of  641  John  and  Je- 
mima (Lippencott)   Babcock. 

Adassa  F.,  b.  July  7.  1854;    m.  Gerrit  S.  Maxson. 

Lysander,  b.   1855 ;    d.  1857. 

Clementina,  b.  1857;    d.  1857. 

Walter  B.,  b.    1858;    d.    1859. 

Ida  May,  b.  i8S9;    d.  i860. 

Oliver  J.,  b.  1861 ;    d.  1862. 

Areno  Isabelle,  b.  Feb.  21,  1864;  d.  Sept.  12,  1887;  m.  Apr.  5,  1885, 
William,  son  of  James  and  Mary  (Davis)  Kennedy,  b.  Stokes,  O., 
Sept.  21,  1858.     One  child.  Sylvia  B.  Kennedy,  b.  Apr.  12,  1887. 

Ai  A.,  b.-  June  3,  1865  ;    m.  Laura  Whitney. 

Colfax  S.,  b.  July  2.S,  1867 ;  m.  Sept.  27,  1897,  Addie.  dau.  of  Nor- 
man and  Lucy  (Stillman)  Maxson,  b.  Feb.  22,  1866;  res.  1902, 
Nortonville,  Kan. 

646.  Esther^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joel  C.  and  Amy  (Greene) 
Babcock   (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John.  James),  b. 

Feb.,  1830;  d.  May  10,  1857;  m.  Aug.  17,  1848.  John,  son  of 
William  and  Elizabeth  (Maxson)  Furrow,  b.  Mar.  3,  1827. 
Children : 

Anna  Olive;  Thomas;  Albert. 

Rosina  P.,  b.  ;    m.   Charles  J.,   son  of  Charles  and  ]\fary  Ann 

(Thorngate)    Rood. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  283 

647.  Samuel    Davis'    Babcock,    son    of    Joel    and    Amy 
(Greene)    Babcock    (Thomas,    Thomas,    OHver,    John, 

James),  b.  Chirk  County,  O.,  Aug.   13,   1839;    ^^^-  ^i^y   16, 
1866,  Mary  Sahna  F.,  dau.  of  John  and  Charlotte  F.    (Da- 
vis) Randolph,  b.  Oct.  31,  1849. 
Children : 

George  L.,  h.  Jackson  Center,  O.,  June  20,  1867;    cl.  Aug.  29,  1869. 
Jt)hn  R.,  b.  Jackson  Center,  O.,  Feb.  16,  1869. 
Ira  P.,  b.  Humboldt,  Neb.,  May  29,   1871. 
Ezra  H.,  b.  Jackson  Center,  Oct.   13,   1875. 
Theodore  R.,  b.  Auglaize  County,  O..  Dec.  17,  1878. 

648.  Benjamin    Thomas'    Babcock,    son   of  Joel   C.   and 
Amy    (Greene)    Babcock    (Thomas,    Thomas,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Clark  County,  O.,  Feb.  27,  1848;  m.  Mariah, 
dau.  of  Dennis  and  Lydia  (Furrow)  Ayres. 
Children : 

Martin;  Lillie;  William;  Albert;  Robert;  Bessie;  Jesse. 

649.  Thomas"   Babcock,   son  of  John  and  Betsy    (Searl) 
Babcock   (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Defiance,  O.,  Aug.  22,  1823:    d.  Welton,  la.,  1863;    m.   (i) 
Jackson  Center,  O..  June  3,  18-13,  Jane,  dau.  of  Joshua  Hill,  b. 
May  27.  1823.  d.  Feb.  i.  1857;  m.  (2)  Sept.  15,  1858,  JMrs. 
Mary  (Stewart)  Terry,  d.  Hammond,  La.,  Nov.  2,  1896. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

Elizabeth,  b.  Apr.  24.  1844 ;  m.  Nov.,  1859,  James  R.,  son  of  Job 
and  Prudence  (Davis)  Van  Horn.  Children:  Minnie  and  Leon. 
Res.  Boulder,  Col. 

John  Hill,  b.  Nov.  16.  1846;    m.  Metta  Platts. 

Charlotte  D.,  b.  Jan.  10,  1848,  Shelby  County,  O. ;  res.  Boulder, 
Col.;  m.  Welton,  la.,  Apr.  8,  1871,  Albert  L.  Clark,  son  of  Rich- 
ard and  Isabel  (Davis)  Clark,  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  1846  (?);  res. 
Boulder. 

Peter  Owen,  b.  Jan.  15,  1854;  d.  1884,  Moscow,  Idaho;  m.  Ida 
Stewart. 

650.  Margaret"^    Babcock,    dau.    of    John    and    Elizabeth 
(Hardman)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Thomas,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  May  24,   1829;    m.  May  20,  1845,  Lewis,  son  of 
Solomon  and  Lydia  (Davis)  Sayer.     She  res.  Welton,  la. 
Children : 

Moses,  b.  July  8,  1846;  m.  Dewitt,  la..  Aug.  2^.  1867;  Mary  M., 
dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Lydia  Ann  (Baker)  Clement,  b.  Port  Jef- 
ferson, O.,  Aug.  II,  1847.  Children:  George  O.,  b.  1863  (?); 
Jesse  A.,  b.  1869;  Walter,  b.  Farina.  III.,  Oct.  14,  1873:  d. 
North  Loup,  Neb.,  Oct.  23.  1888;  Jennie  B.,  b.  Farina.  June  3, 
1875,  m.  Nov.  23.  1892,  Charles  L.  Hurly;  Alpha  D.,  b.  North 
Loup,  Aug.  4,  1888.  d.  Sept.  18,  1890. 


284  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

John,  b.  ;    m.   (i)   Martha  Hardman ;    ni.    (2)  .    Children: 

Anna  and  Orpha. 

Delila,  b.  ;    m.  Thomas  Gilbert.     Children:  Vena  and  James. 

Deniza,  b.  — ■ — ;    m.   Henry  Clayton. 

Sarah,    b.   ;     m.    Frank   Arrington.      Children:     Edwin,    Clyde, 

01  in.  Fay. 

Rosa,  b. ;    m.  David  Arrington,     One  child.  Earl. 

Euphrema,  I).  ;    m.  Beecher,  son  of  John  and  Susan  (Forsythe) 

Loofboro,  b.  May  4,  1862.     One  child,  Uwight. 
Rev.  Charles,  b. ;    m.  Mabel  Clark;    res.  1902,  Hammond,  La. 

651.  Sarah'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth  (Hard- 
man)     Babcock     (Thomas,     Thomas,     OHver,     John, 

James),    b.    Clark    County,    O.,    Nov.    26,    183 1;    m.    Defi- 
ance, O.,  July  7,   1850,  L.  Hurley,  b.  Ohio,  June  7,   1824,  d. 
Welton,  la.,  Oct.  6,  1872. 
Children : 

Lewis  Alexander,  b.  Ohio,  May  27,  1851;    m.  (i)   Delmar,  la..  Mar. 

13,   1873,   Sylvia  E.,  dau.  of  Orville  C.  and  Clarissa  E.  Bailey,  b. 

Ft.   Ann,  N.  Y.,  June  18,   1854.    Children:    Orville  A.,  b.   North 

Loup,  Neb.,  1873;  Oliver,  b.  Welton,  la.,  July  19,  1876;  Bertha  A., 

b.  Welton,  Oct.  19,  1878;  Clarissa  May,  b.  Welton,  June  28,  1881. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Nov.  23.  1852;    m.  Sept.  6,  1873,  N.  George,  son 

of  Benjamin  Clement.     Children:    Guy,  Clara,  and  Ada. 
John  Gilbert,  b.  Aug.  31,  1854;    m.  Aug.  5,  1876,  Athalia  A.,  dau.  of 

Ai  and  Aniaranda  (Loofboro)  Van  Horn. 
James    Hardman,    b.    Welton,    Dec.    21,    1856;     m.    May    15,    1876, 

Mary  A.    Pierce. 
Theodore   Sipher,   b.   near  Welton.   Dec.   17,   1858;    m.  Garwin,   la., 

Dec.  25,   1880,  Eva  M.,  dau.  of  Dennis  and  Jane  Davis. 
Deniza  Calista,  b.  Welton,  i860;    d.  1862. 
Charles  Freemont,  b.  near  Welton,  Dec.  29,  i860;    m.  Feb.  12,  1882, 

Emma  L.  Mullett. 
Ulysses   Grant,   b.   near   Welton,   Apr.   4,    1865 ;     m.    Mar.    10,    1889, 

Angle  Brown. 
Maleta  Alice,  b.  near  Welton,  Nov.   14,  1868;    d.  Mar.  26,   1893;  m. 

May  28,   1887,   Christopher   Columbus  Van  Horn,    son  of  Ai   and 

Amaranda    (Loofboro)    Van   Horn. 

652.  Demsa'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth  (Hard- 
man)     Babcock     (Thomas,     Thomas,     Oliver,     John, 

James),    b.    Nov.    9,    1833;     d.    Aug.    25,    i860;   m.    Henry 
K.  Morris. 
Children : 

John  ;  James  ;  Louisa. 

653.  Martha'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth  (Hard- 
man)     Babcock     (Thomas,     Thomas,     Oliver,     John, 

James),  b.  May  26,  1836;  m.  Apr.  8,  1856,  John  B.,  son  of 
Bernard  and  Elizabeth  (Davis)  Van  Horn.  Both  res.  1902, 
Welton,  la. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  285 

Children : 

Sylvanus  D..  b. 


Joseph  Judson,  b.  . 

Ulysses  Sherinaii,  b.  ;  m.  Lucy,  dau.  uf  Jesse  and  Mary  (Bab- 
cock)   Furrow. 

Clara  Lorena,  b.  :    111.  Leonard  A.,  son  uf  Marion  and  Malinda 

(Davis)   Van  Horn,  b.  Oct.  7,  1870. 

Ruth.  b.  . 

Lizzie,  b.  ;    ni.  John,   son  of  Jaqies  and  Elizabeth    (Randall) 

Knight. 

654.  XicANDER  Wilson'   Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Ehza- 
beth   (Harchnan)    Babcock   (Thomas,  Thomas,  Ohver, 

John,  James),  b.  Shelby  County,  O.,  July  30,  18^4;   res.  1902, 
North  Loup,  Neb.;  m.  Welton,   la.    Sept.   22,    1866,  Louise 
Jane,  dau.  of  William  C.  and  Alary  (Stearn)  Davis,  b.  Sulli- 
van, la.,  Dec,  1847. 
Children  : 

Winnie  Ethel,  b.  Dec.  11,  1867;    res.  1902,  North  Loup;    m.  Dec.  27, 

1888,  Sherman  Clement. 
Carrie  Elnora.  b.  May  22,  1870;    res.  1902,  North  Loup;    m.  Apr.  9, 

1891,  Orel  Van  Horn. 
Walter  Orel,  b.   1872;    d.  Mar.  17,  1885. 
Rolla  Orvil,  July  28,  1875;    res.  1902,  North  Loup,  Neb.;    m.  Nov. 

26,  1900,  Estella  Green. 
Eunice,  b.  Feb.  i,  1877;    d.  Sept.  16,  1877. 
Ray,  b.  June,  1886;    d.  Aug.,  1888. 

655.  Elijah  Coddington''^  Babcock,  son  of  James  and 
Phila  (Coddin^^ton)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Simeon,  Oli- 
ver, John,  James),  b.  Wales,  Mass.,  Jan.  16,  1802;  d.  Mon- 
mouth, 111.,  Feb.  16.  1884;  m.  Brimfield,  Mass.,  Jan.,  1822, 
Cynthia,  dau.  of  Benjamin  Dra])er  and  Persis  (Whicker)  Weld, 
b.  Brimfield,  Aug-.  29,  1800,  d.  Monmouth,  Sept.  29,  1878. 

Elijah  Babcock,  in  the  early  forties,  removed  from  Wales, 
Mass.,  to  Monmouth.,  111.,  and  established  a  sreneral  merchan- 
dise  store  in  which  his  sons,  John  and  Draper,  were  associated 
with  him.  He  was  a  leading  member  of  the  Baptist  Church 
in  his  town. 

Children,  b.  Wales,  Mass. : 

1231  John.'  b.  Apr.  7,   1826:    m.  Lorinda  Munger. 

1232  Persis,  h.  July  9,   1824 ;    m.  Wyatt  Stapp. 

Draper,  b.  Dec.  i,  1828;  res.  1902,  Monmouth,  III.;  m.  Monmouth, 
Dec.  22,  1852,  Mary  Elliott. 

Mary,  b.  May  22.  1830;  d.  Monmouth.  111.,  Jan.  4,  1891.  ;  m.  Mon- 
mouth. Oct.   18.   1849,  Azro  Patterson. 

Kate.  b.  Oct.  0.  1837;  res.  1902,  Monmouth,  111.;  m.  ^Monmouth, 
1862,  Alex.  Holt. 


286  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

656.  Palace'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  and  Phila  (Codding- 
ton)      Babcock      (Jeremiah,     Simeon,     Oliver,     John, 

James),  b.  ;    d.  Southbridge,  Mass.,  1842;    m.  Harrison 

Fay. 
Child : 

George  H.,  b.  Wales,  Mass.,  Feb.  8,  1836;    res.  1902,  Galesburg,  111. 

656a.  Nelson"  Babcock,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Hannah 
(Reynolds)  Babcock  (Jason,  Simeon,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  13,  1813;  d.  Hoosick, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  4,  1893;  m.  Catharine  A.  Potter,  b.  Dec.  28,  1815, 
d.  Dec.  3,  1880. 
Children : 

Mary  A.,  b.  Oct.  10,  1837;    d.  1863;    m.  Charles  A.  Brown. 

Charles  P.,  b.  1843;    d.  1853. 

William   F.,   b.    Hoosick,   July   30,    1858;    m.    June   22,    1887,    Jessie 

Helen  Pratt,  of  Hoosick,  b.  Apr.  2,  1861.     No  children.     They  res. 

igo2,  Hoosick,  N.  Y. 

657.  Mary"    Babcock,    dau.    of    Ethan    and    Polly    (Fen) 
Babcock    (Oliver,     Oliver,     Oliver,    John,     James),   b. 

Brookfield,     N.     Y.,     1814;      d.     1900     ( ?)  ;      m.     Samuel 
Woodworth. 
Children : 

George,  b. ;    m.  Sarah  Hills. 

Daughter,  b.  ;    m.  James  Brown,  of  Hudson,  N.  Y. 

658.  Joseph  H.'''  Babcock,  son  of  Ethan  and  Polly   (Fen) 
Babcock    (Oliver,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John,    James),    b. 

Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  19,  1826;   d.  Beaver  Dam,  Wis.,  June 
21,  1899;   m.  Beaver  Dam,  Sept.  21,  1849,  Mary  M.,  dau.  of 
Robert    and    Mary    H.    (Cheney)    Whitaker,    b.    Saxonville, 
Mass.,  Sept.  25,  1831;  res.  1902,  Beaver  Dam. 
Children,  b.  Beaver  Dam : 

Mary  J.,  b.  ;  m.  F.  R.,  son  of  E.  R.  and  Martha   (Hamilton) 

Hoyt,  b.  Beaver  Dam.     Both  res.   1902,  Beaver  Dam. 

C.   F.   Babcock,  b.   ;    d.   Beaver   Dam,    1862,   unm. 

Agnes  L..  b.  — — ;    d.  Beaver  Dam,  1856,  unm. 

B.  F.  B.  Babcock,  b.  July  4,  1864;    res.  1902,  Beaver  Dam,  Wis. 

659.  Cynthia''^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Lorana  (Fos- 
ter) Babcock  (Oliver.  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  1798;  d.  Brookfield,  1842;   m.  about  1817, 
James  Denison. 
Children : 

Harriet,  b.   Brookfield,  N.  Y..   1818;    living  1901,  Clinton,   la.;    m. 
(i)   Chauncy  Gillette;    m.   (2)  Mr.  Stiles. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  287 

Fidelia,  h.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  1820;  d.  Morrisville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Lucius 
P.,  son  of  Joseph  and  Esther   (Lanphi-rc)   Clark. 

Olivia,  b.  Brookfield,  1822;    d.  Brookfield;    m.  Allen  Greene. 

Orrin  B.,  b.  Brookfic-ld.  ]824;  d.  Brookfield,  igoo;  m.  Arlone,  dan. 
of  George  Langworthy. 

Vashti,  b.  Brookfield,  1827 ;    m.  and  d.  in  Iowa. 

Jennette,  b.  Brookfield,  1829;  d.  Brookfield;  m.  John  T.,  son  of 
Ethan  and  Clarissa  Stillman. 

James  Ray,  b.  Brookfield;    d.  1900;    m.  INliss  Elliot. 

660.  Lorana'  Babcock,  dan.  of  Oliver  and  Lorana   (Fos- 
ter) Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  May,  1800;   d.  Brookfield.  1867;  m.  Brook- 
field, Hosea  B.,  son  of  Samuel  and  Chloe   (Maxson)   Clark, 
b.  W^esterly,  R.  I.,  Nov.,  1797. 
Children : 

R.  Le  Roy,  b.  Brookfield,  1818;  d.  1889;  m.  Angeline,  dau.  of 
Jeremy  Crandall. 

John  D.,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  1820;  d.  Portsmouth,  R.  I., 
1892;  m.  Portsmouth,  Eleanor,  dau.  of  Gardner  and  (Bur- 
den) Thomas. 

La  Fayette,  b.  Brookfield,  Sept.  9,  1822 ;  res.  1902,  Oneida,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Charlotte,  dau.  of  Richard  and  Anna   (Rogers)   Sherman. 

1233  Albert  M.,"  b.  Dec.  16.  1824;    m.  Phebe  Gorton. 

Barbara  M.,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  4,  1827;    res.  1901,  Clayville; 

m.  George  W.  Holman. 
E.   Antoinette,  b.   Brookfield,   N.    Y.,   Aug.,    1829;    d.   at    Sanquoit, 

Jan.,  1894. 
H.   Moran,  b.   Brookfield;    res.   1901,   Brookfield;    m.  Lucinda,  dau. 

of  Moses  and  (Hill)  Johnson. 

Norman  L.,  b.  Brookfield;    res.  1901,  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Damare, 

dau.  of  Paul  and  Randall  Burch. 

661.  Oliver"  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Lorana  (Foster) 
Babcock    (Oliver,    Oliver.    Oliver.    John,    James),    b. 

Brookfield.   N.   Y.,    1802;   d.   Brookfield;    m.   Lecta,   dan.   of 
Ashel  and  Desire  (Palmer)  Burdick.  b.  Brookfield,  Sept.   12, 
1804.  d.  Brookfield,  Apr.  10,  1900. 
Children : 

1234  Joseph   Julian,    b.    Sept.    19,    1826;     m.    (i)    Esther    Coggshell  ;     m. 

(2)  Sarah  Burwell. 
123s  Asacl  Luther,  b.  May  9,  1828;    m.  Harriet  Brusie. 

662.  Julia"^  Babcock.  dan.  of  Joseph  and  Sarah  (Babcock) 
Babcock  (Oliver.  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  Tames),  b.  Ley- 
den.  Mass..  Jan.  23.  1801  :  d.  Oneida,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  30.  1880; 
m.  Brookfield.  1820.  Clark  Brown,  b.  Rhode  Island.  Feb.  23. 
1796,  d.  Oneida  Castle.  N.  Y..  June  23.  1872. 

Children  (first  two  born  at  Brookfield.  others  at  Morrisville, 
N.  Y.)  : 

Edwin,  b.  March  26,  1S21  ;  m.  July.  1841,  Mary  Wells,  d.  Titus- 
villc.   Pa.,   Dec.  7,   1881. 


288  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Lceman,  b.  May  7,  1822;    d.  young. 

Julia  M.,  1).  Feb.   16,   1824;    d.  young. 

Adelia   P.,   b.   Mar.   28,    1826;    m.   Calvin,   son  of  Joseph   Wells,   b. 

June  8,  1823;    d.  Sept.  16,  1896,  Oneida  Castle,  M.  Y. 
Harvey,   b.  June   15,    1829;    ni.    Verona,   N.    Y.,   Mary  Gardner;    d. 

Oneida  Castle,  June,  1885. 
A.  Marrila,  b.  Oct.   11,   1831 ;    m.  Jerome  Carskaden ;    res.  1901,  in 

Iowa. 
Le   Roy,   b.    Dec.   24,    1833;     ni.    Cclestia    Buxton;     res.    1901,    3255 

Prairie  Ave.,  Chicago,  111. 
S.   Maria,  b.  Apr.   11,   1838;    m.   Daniel   Lewis,   May   17,   1871  ;    res. 

1901,  Sandy  Creek,  N.  Y. 
F.  Rosalie,  b.  June  28,  1840;    m.  George  Forbes,  Dec.  24,  1862;  res. 

1901,  Oneida,  N.  Y. 

663.  Le  Roy'''   Babcock,   son  of  Joseph   and   Sarah    (Bab- 
cock)  Babcock   (OHver,  Ohver,  Ohver,  John,  James), 

b.   Leyden,   Mass.,  Apr.  23,    1804;    d.   Utica,   N.  Y.,  July  9, 
1881;  m.  Richfield,  N.  Y.,  1850  or  '51,  Sally  Ann  Markham. 
Children : 

Ann,  b.  ;    res.   1901,  Redbank,   N.  J.;    m.  Utica,   N.  Y.,   1892, 

Orrin   Curry.     No  children. 
Julia,  b.  Brookfield;    res.  1901,  Utica,  N.  Y.  ;    unm. 

1236  Ida  E.,"*  b.  June  12,  1857;    m.  Edgar  Luce. 

664.  Alzina''^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Phineas  and  Sarah   (Fen) 
Babcock    (Oliver,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John,    James),    b. 

Brookfield,   N.   Y.,   Apr.   2,    1818;   d.   Leonardsville,   N.   Y., 
Aug.  21,  1888;  m.  Brookfield,  Darwin  Crandall,  b.  Brookfield. 
Children : 

Sarah  Adalaide,  b.  . 

1237  Irving  Alexander."  b.   Aug.  5,   1848;    m.   Algerose  Higley. 
Arthur  William,  b.   Leonardsville,   1854;    res.   1901,   West  Winfield, 

N.  Y. ;    m.  Cooperstown,  Phebe  Adams. 
Alice   May,   b.   Leonardsville,   N.   Y.,   1856;    res.    1901,   Division   St., 
Plainfield,  N.  J. ;    m.  Leonardsville,  De  Valois,  son  of  Milton  and 
Mary    (Babcock)    St.  John,  b.   Leonardsville. 

665.  Nathan^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Huldah  (Bur- 
dick)   Babcock   (Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  25,   1807;  d.  Little  Falls,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  7,  1882;   m.  Little  Falls,  Mar.  26,  1843,  Fannie,  dau.  of 
George  and  Eva   (Seber)   Walrod,  b.   Little  Falls,  Apr.   30, 
1824,  d.  Little  Falls,  Feb.  4,  1897. 
Children,  b.  Little  Falls : 

1238  Alice  J.,*  b.  May  18,   1848;    m.  John  France. 

Washington  P.,  b.  Dec.  28,  1846.  Enlisted  in  1862.  in  121st  Regi- 
ment, Co.  H,  N.  Y.  S.  v.,  6  Corps.  Wounded  at  Fredericksburg, 
May  3.   1863;    d.   May  4,   1863. 

1239  Edward  H.,  b.  June  26,  1850;    m.  Mary  Hall. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  289 

1240  William;  1).  May  2i.  iSs?;    m.  Nancy  Dyslin. 

Huldah,  b.  1854;    d.  1880;    m.  1879.  William  Miller.     No  children. 
Eve  L.,  b.  Dec.  31,   1856;    d.    1858. 

1241  George  N.,  b.  Mar.  31,  1859;    m.  Fanny  Cross. 
Orvis,  b.  Feb.  23,  1861 ;    d.  Aug.  13,  1861. 

666.  Henry    Burdick"    Babcock,    sou    of    Hezekiah    and 
Nancy    (Burdick)     Babcock    (Olivier,    Oliver,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Jan.  9,  1809;  d.  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  19,  1891 ; 
m.   (i)   Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  26,   1844,  Angeline,  dan.  of 
Elias  and  Martha  (Mills)  Langworthy,  b.  Brookfield,  d.  Ber- 
lin, Wis.,  Sept.,  1864;  m.  (2)  Eunice  Newell. 
Children : 

1242  Nancy  C..''  b.  ^lay  6.  1845;    m.  William  Allen  Prentice. 
Emogene   Mariah,   b.   Berlin,   Wis.,   Sept.  6,   1856;    d.   Berlin,   Sept., 

1883 ;    m.  Berlin,  Albert,  son  of  Henry  Payne. 

667.  Oliver'  Babcock,  son  of  Hezekiah  and  Nancy  (Bur- 
dick)  Babcock   (Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  6,  1817;  d.  Mar.  27,  1876;  m.  Feb. 
3.   1846,  Susannah,  dau.  of  Patten  and  286  Lois   (Babcock) 
Fitch,  b.  Nov.  3,  1821,  d.  Apr.  2,  1900. 
Children : 

Roselie  G.,  b.  Dec.  3,  1849;    d.  young. 
iMarcella  E.,  b.  Oct.  12,  185 1 ;    unm. 

Annette  B.,  b.  Nov.   14,   1855;    m.  Jan.   12,   1881,  Barton  Stillman; 
res.  1901,  Brookfield.     No  children. 

668.  Joseph    T.'    Babcock,    son    of    Hezekiah    and    Nancy 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John. 
James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  9,  1827;  res.  1901,  Nor- 
way Ridge,  Wis.;  m.  (i)  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Harriet  Colvin;  m. 
(2)  New  Lisbon,  Wis.,  Nov.  14,  1861,  Catherine,  dau.  of 
Lawrence  and  Nancv  Hilts,  b.  St.  Catherine,  Canada,  Sept.  8, 

1837, 
Children : 

Nancy,  b.   Sept.  2,   1862 ;    d.   Sept.   14.   1863. 

Cora  Ellen,  b.  Mar.  2.  1865 ;    d.  New  Lisbon,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  23,  1865. 

Maud,   b.    Berlin,    Wis..    Feb.    24,    1869;     res.    1901,    Norway   Ridge. 

Wis. ;    m.   Aug.    17,   1890,   Lawrence,   son  of  Daniel   and   Hannah 

(Spade)  Cook.  b.  Feb.,  1861. 
George   Albert,  b.   Berlin.   Wis..   Jan.   25,    1872:     res.    1901,   Norwaj^ 

Ridge,  Wis. ;    m.  Oct.  18.  1900,  Myrtle,  dau.  of  Delford  and  Cora 

Burger. 
William  Horace,  b.  Norway  Ridge,  Sept.  15,  1874;    res.  igoT,  Nor- 

wav    Ridge;     m.    Dec.    24.    1900,    .\nnic,    dau.    of    Eli    and    Mary 

(Murphy)    Grimshaw. 

19 


290  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

669.  Peleg"  Babcock,  son  of  Pelcg  and  Martha  (Morgan) 
l>abcock  (I'eleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Apr. 

12,  1799;  d.  Makando,  ill.;  ni.  (i)  New  York  State,  Ro- 
setta   Nichols;    m.    (2)    Tippecanoe,    Ind.,    Malinda,   dan.   of 

Edward  McCart,  b.  Chillicothe,  O.,  Jnly  10,  ;    d.  Jasper 

County,  Ind.,  Jnly  6,  1856. 

Peleg  Babcock  moved  to  Indiana  in  1827;  was  then  living 
with  his  first  wife,  Rosetta  Nichols. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Rosetta;  Helen. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Martha;  Anna;  May;  Edward;  Frank  W.,  m.  Maria  Potter;  James 
M.,  m.  Viola  Cox;    Wesley;    Charles;    William;    Henry  E. 

670.  Amvvnda'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Peleg  and  Martha  (Mor- 
gan) Babcock  (Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  July  22,  1819;  d.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  May  8,  1868; 
m.  Delphi,  Ind.,  Nov.  24,   1837,  Charles  M.  Watson,  b.  Vir- 
ginia, July  4.  1809,  d.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  Feb.  14,  1877. 
Children  : 

1243  Henry  H.,"  b.  July  10,  1840;    m.  Mary  Shortridge. 

James  F.,  b.  Pittsburg,  Ind.;    d.   Sept.  10,   1897;    m.  Kate  Ritchey, 

b.  Feb.  I,  1867;    res.  1901,  Rensselaer,  Ind. 
Charles  Spears,  b.  Pittsburg;    d. 

1244  Elizabeth  A.,  b.  June  12,  1849;   m.  William  H.  Gwin. 

671.  Nathan^  Babcock,  son  of  Peleg  and  Martha   (Mor- 
gan) Babcock  (Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Cortland  Coimty,  N.  Y^. ;  d.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  Sept.  10,  1874; 
m.  Cortland  County,  Ruby  Foster,  d.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  Oct. 

5>  1859- 
Children : 

Harriette,  b.  New  York  State ;    d.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  1895 ;    m.  Henry 

Bruce;    d.  Rensselaer,  1899. 
Annette,  b.  New  York  State,  ;    d.  Rensselaer;    m.  Jesse  Elston. 

1245  Augustus  Dorr,'  b.  ;    m.  Abigail  Iliff. 

1246  James,  b.  Aug.   i,  1834;    m.  Ellen  Price. 
Charles,  b.  Rensselaer;    Dwight ;    Peleg. 
William,  b.  Rensselaer;    res.   1901,  Rensselaer. 

672.  Luke  P.'''  Babcock,  son  of  Deacon  Solomon  and  Amy 

(Morgan)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver.  John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  28,  1805;  d.  Milton,  Wis., 
Sept.  14,  1878;  m.  Scott.  1824.  Lydia,  dau.  of  139  Ezra  and 
Saberah  (Stillman)  Babcock,  b.  New  York  State,  Nov.  30, 
1805,  d.  Kasson,  Minn.,  Jan.  26,  1888. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  291 

Luke  P.  Babcock  was  an  undertaker  and  cabinetmaker  be- 
fore removing  to  Milton,  Wis. ;  he  was  there  a  grocer  and  kept 
a  restaurant. 

Chikh'en : 

1247  Ellen  A.,"  b.  Aug.  21.  1825;    m.  James  M.  Saunders. 

1248  Anna,  b.  1827;    ni.  Isaac  H.  Smith. 

1249  Erwin  Luke.  b.  June  2't^.  1829;    m.  Delia  M.  Sweet. 

1250  Edwin  S.,  b.  July  10,   1831  ;    m.   (i)   .Mrs.  Isabelle  Maxson ;    m.   (2) 

Susan  M.  Mooney. 
Susan,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,   1833;    d.  Kasson,  Minn.,  June  i,  1893;    m. 
New   York   State.   William  Reese. 

1251  Oscar  A.,  b.  June  13,   1838;    m.  Lauraett  Mallby. 

Elsie,  b.  New  York  State ;    d.  Milton  Junction,  Wis.,  Apr.  5,  1872., 

unm. 
Bethuel,  b.   New  York  State;    d.  young. 
Franklin,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

673.  Ralph^  Babcock,  son  of  Deacon  Solomon  and  Amy 
(Morgan)     Babcock     (Peleg,     OHver,     Ohver,    John, 

James),  b.  TuUy,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  i,  1810;  d.  Elroy,  Wis., 
Sept.  19,  1897;  m.  near  Chicago,  Ilk,  Mar.  9,  1836,  Azubah, 
dau.  of  William  and  Matilda  (Lyon)  Dodge,  b.  Brandon,  Vt., 
Mar.  14,  1818;    res.  1901.  Elroy. 

Ralph  Babcock  served  three  years  in  the  Civil  W^ar  in  the 
20th  Regiment  of  Wisconsin.     He  was  a  farmer. 

Children : 

1252  Oscar  Almeron,*  b.  Mar.  13,  1837;    m.  Philena  L.  Douglass. 

Elsie  A.,  b.  Dec.  19,  1840:    res.  1901,  Hampton,  la.;    m.  Walter  H. 

Hoxie.     Has  ten  children. 
Elgen  Eugene,  b.  Sept.  21,  1842;    res.   1901,  Elroy.  Wis. 

674.  Frederick"    Babcock,    son    of    Deacon    Solomon   and 
Amy  (Morgan)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.   Scott,   N.   Y.,   Mar.   29,    1820;    d.   Hillsborough, 
Wis.,  Nov.  4,  1877:  m.  Scott,  Mar.  16,  1852,  ALary  ]\L,  dau. 
of  James  and  Eleanor   (Gardner)   Kelley,  b.  Verona,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  3,  1833;   res.  1901,  Enterprise.  Miss. 
Children : 

1253  Omer  A.,**  b.  Julv  9.  i8s3 :    m.  Emma  Potter. 

William  Wirt,  b.  Hillsborough.  Wis..  Oct.  3,  1856;    d.  Oct.  12.  1864. 
Ida  Elnora,  b.   Hillsborough,  Aug.  21,    1870;    res.    1901,   Enterprise, 
Miss. 

675.  John  \\'ilbur"  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Phebe  (Wil- 
bur) Babcock  (Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Barry,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  30,  1807;  d.  Greenfield,  Pa.,  Apr.  18, 
1882;  m.  Greenfield,  Nov.  24,  1841,  Ann,  dau.  of  Isaiah  Da- 
vis, b.  Vermont,  Jan.  27,  1821,  d.  (Greenfield,  Sept.  25,  1881. 


292  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Ithaincr,  b.  Greenfield;    res.  1901,  North  East,  Pa.;    m.  North  East, 
Lucy,  dau.  of  Austin  and  Mary   (Bird)   Allen. 

1254  Phebe  Ann,"  b.  Sept.  4,  1847;    m.  Elijah  P.  Davis. 
Mary,  b.  Aug.  29,  1851  ;    d.  North  East,  Sept.  26,  1852. 

Alice,  b.  Sept.  26,  1855;    res.  1901,  Buflfalo,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Watsburgh, 

Oppenhimcr. 

Eva,  b.  June  2,  1858;    d.  Mar.  14,  1859. 

Deli,  b.  Greenfield,  Pa.,  Nov.  15,  1864;    res.  1901,  Hornby,  Pa.;    ni. 

Irving,  son  of  William  Smith,  b.  Greenfield. 

676.  Joseph^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Betsy   (Bulfinch) 
Babcock  (Peleg,  Ohver,  OHver,  John,  James),  b.  Spaf- 

ford,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  17,  1814;  settled  in  Battle  Creek,  Mich.;  m. 
Battle  Creek,  Oct.  26,    184c;,   Mrs.   Caroline  S.  Laraway,  b. 
Ovid,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  14,  1824.^ 
Children,  b.  Battle  Creek : 

Frank  J.,  b.  July  30,  1847. 

Corolis,  b.  July  21,  1849. 

Viola  I.,  b.  June  28,  1852. 

Isadore,  b.  June  28,   1852 ;    d.   Sept.  26,   1852. 

Lucy  Luella,  b.  Nov.  3,  1857. 

677.  Horace  Steadman'''  Babcock,  son  of  Taber  and  Anna 

(Steadman)     Babcock    (Peleg,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John, 
James),  b.  Mar.  8,  1807;  m.  Jnne  23,  1833,  Samantha  Crofoot, 
of  Homer,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

1255  Almeron,^  b.  July  4,  1834 ;    m.  Sarah  Cobb. 
Celia,  b.  May  10,  1838;    m.  Elias  Gibbs. 

Isaac,   b.   Apr.    14,    1844;    m.   May,    1868,    Lavina   Bean,   of  Homer, 

N.  Y. 
Horace,  b.  Nov.  20,  1851 ;    d.  Sept.  20,  1873. 
George,   b.   May  31,   1854;    m.   Nov.   27,   1877.   Emma   Cummins,   of 

Sprague,  N.  Y. 

678.  Anna  M.'''  Babcock,  dan.  of  Taber  and  Anna  (Stead- 
man)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Leyden,  Mass..  Nov.  29,  1808;  d.  Oakland,  Cal.,  Nov.  30, 
1880;  m.  1828,  Rev.  James  Ross,  son  of  Henry  and  Lydia 
(Crandall)  Burdick,  b.  Jnne  29,  1797,  d.  Syracnse,  Feb.  8, 
1867. 

Rev.  James  R.  Bnrdick  gradnated  at  Brown  University  in 
1822.  He  was  Principal  of  the  Capitol  Hill  Seminary,  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  his  wife  also  being  a  teacher  in  th.e  same  insti- 
tntion.  Later  he  was  ordained  a  Baptist  minister,  and  was 
pastor  of  chnrches  at  Tioga  and  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  and  Owego 
and  Ithaca,  N.  Y.     Failing  in  health,  he  retired  to  Onondaga 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  293 

Hill,  where  he  died.  His  widow  passed  the  remainder  of  her 
life  with  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Hattie  Shorkley,  at  Oakland, 
Cal. 

Children : 

Anna  M..  b.  Sept.  25,  1829;    d.  in  infancy. 

James  Tabor,  b.  Mar.  29,  1831  ;    m.  Oct.  22,  1855,  EUinda  Tiffany. 

Lydia  Ann,  b.  Apr.  19,  1833;    d.  Syracuse,  1866. 

Henry  Day,  I1.  .Vug.   18,  1835;    m.  /\pr.  28,  1868,  Sarab  A.  Corey. 

WilHam  Pendleton,  b.  May  8.  1838;    m.  Mandanc  Elliott. 

Harriet  Roxana,  b.  June  7,  1841  ;    ni.  Aug.  3,  1870,  Allen  Shorkley. 

Mary  Cornelia,  b.  Aug.  27,  1844;    d.   1864. 

Helen  Augusta,  b.  Dec.  25,  1846;  m.  Aug.  3,  1872,  Alonzo  Crawford. 

John  F.,  b.  Sept.  25,  1849;    m.  Mar.  16,   1882,  Carrie  Hibbard. 

Maria  M.,  b.  July  15,  1852. 

679.  Nelson"  Babcock,  son  of  Rassel  and  Lncinda  (Max- 
son)   Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Scott,  N.  Y.,  June  25,  1816;   d.    Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
27,   1864;    m.  Adams  Center,  Dec.   16,   1837,  Lucy,  dau.  of 
Angel  and  Eunice  Lee,  b.  Adams,  Mar.  28,  18 13,  d.  Adams 
Ceiiter,  Nov.  18,  1886. 
Children : 

Leafy  Lucretia,  b.  Scott.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14.  1838;  res.  1901,  Amster- 
dam, N.  Y. ;  m.  Adams  Center,  Apr.,  1861,  Ephraim  Crosby,  b. 
Amsterdam,  Feb.  19,  1838. 

1256  Willis  A.,"  b.  June  16.   1840;    m.  Harriet  Overton. 

1257  Lucinda  A.,  b.  Aug.  23,  1842;    m.  Daniel  S.  Greene. 

Albert  Russel,  b.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  i,  1847;  res.  1901, 
Adams  Center,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Adams  Center,  Apr.  24,  1873,  Flora 
A.,  dau.  of  John  and  Dorcas  (Vars)  Coon,  b.  Adams  Center, 
Mar.  5,  1850,  d.  Adams  Center,  Mar.  20,  1901. 

680.  Pardon'  Babcock,  son  of  Russel  and  Lucinda  (Max- 
son)  Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Oct. 

21,  1820;    d.  Watertown.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  30,   1895;  m.  Feb.  2, 
1843,  Clarissa  Benjamin,  b.  Oct.  20,   1820,  d.  S.  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  23,  1896. 
Children : 

Frances  V.,  b.  Adams  Center,  July  22.  1844;  res.  1901,  Chicago 
Heights,  Chicago;  m.  (i)  Adams  Center,  July  8,  1862,  Stillman 
Whitford.  son  of  Maxson  Whitford ;  m.  (2)  Mr.  Amelsbury,  d. 
Farina,  111. 

1258  Lizzie  M.,"  b.  Aug.  20,  i860;    m.  Corydon  L.  Maxson. 

681.  Erastus'''  Babcock,  son  of  Russel  and  Lucinda  (Max- 
son)  Babcock   (Paul,  Oliver.  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Aug.  21.  1818;  d.  ^Virt,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  i6,  1863;  m.  Wirt,  June 
9,  1842,  Doroleski  R.,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Phila  (Trumbel) 


294  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Perkins,  b.  Spafford,  N.  Y.,  May  6,  1823;    res.  1901,  Block- 
ville,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

1259  Gurdon,'*  b.  Apr.  15,  1843;    m.  Freelovc  Wright. 

Emory  D.,  b.  Bolivar,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1847;  d.  Emonton,  British 
Cohinibia ;  111.  Cuba,  N.  Y.,  Lydia,  dau.  of  Liinan  and  Clari.ssa 
(Welch)   Keller,  d.  Cuba,  N.  Y.,  1901. 

1260  Emma  D.,  b.  Oct.  i.  1848;    m.  Calvin  P.  Stanton. 

1261  Samuel  R.,  b.  Oct.  31,   1852;    m.  Ettie  M.   Smith. 

Archibald,  b.  Wirt,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  3,  1854;  res.  1901,  Randolph,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Cambridgeport,  Mass.,  Oct.  7,  1884,  Emma  L.,  dau.  of  William 
H.  and  Cclia  (Baker)  Parmentcr,  b.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  June  i,  1867. 

682.  William'''  Babcock,  son  of  Russel  and  Lucinda  (Max- 
son)   Babcock   (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1829;  res.  1901,  Allentown,  N.  Y. ;    m. 
Allentown,  Violet,  dau.  of  David  and  Violet  Hazard,  d.  Al- 
lentown, Jan.  12,  1893. 
Children : 

1262  Frank,^  b.  Sept.  2T),  1856;   m.  Lillie  Barnes. 

1263  Leora,  b.  Sept.  27,   1868;    m.  Milton  Case. 
Willie,  b.  ;    d.  July  23,  1884. 

683.  Charles   H.'''   Babcock,   son   of   Russel  and   Lucinda 

(Maxson)  Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  13,  1832;  d.  Adams  Cen- 
ter, Aug.  10,  1894;  m.  Lyons  Corners,  N.  Y.,  Caroline,  dau. 
of  Benjamin  F.  Lee,  b.  Adams  Center,  June  13,  1840,  d.  Ad- 
ams Center,  Mar.  19,  1887. 
Child : 

1264  Benjamin  C.,**  b.  Aug.  3,  1866;    m.  Minnie  Bass. 

684.  Curtis   E.'''    Burdick,   son   of   Capt.    Jesse   and   Sally 
(Babcock)      Burdick      (Paul,     Oliver,     Oliver,     John, 

James),    b.    Nov.    9,    1832;     d.    Brooklyn,    N.    Y.,    Jan.    6, 
1883;   m.  Oct.  17,  1861,  Emma  Biers. 
Child : 

Jessie   L.,   b.   ;     m.    Edwin   Gladwin,   of   Brooklyn,    N.    Y.      No 

children. 

685.  DuANE   D.'''    Burdick,    son   of   Capt.   Jesse  and    Sally 
Babcock)  Burdick  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  i,  1837;  ^^-  E-  Saginaw,  Mich.,  Nov.  23, 
1889;  m.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  10,  1859,  Emily  F.,  dau.  of 
311  Jerome    Ripley'''    and    Emily    (McDaniels)    Babcock,    b. 


Tlic  Babcock  Gcncalugy.  295 

Scott,  Nov,  21,  1841;  res.  1901,  119  Sheridan  Ave.,  Saginaw, 
Mich. 

Children : 

Dan,  b.  ;    d.  in  infancy. 

1265  Harley  Bond,'*  b.  June   14,   1863;    ni.  Grace  Green. 

686.  Marsend'    Babcock,    son    of    Minard    and    Mary    A. 

(Taylor)  Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James), 
b.  May  6,  1820;   m.  Apr.  16,  1845,  Charlotta  Mills. 
Child : 

Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  25,  1846. 

687.  Maranda'^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Minard  and  Mary  (Tay- 
lor)  Babcock   (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

June  2,  1822;   m.  Jan.  6,  1845,  De  Witt  Colony. 
Child : 

Arthur  La  Mott,  b.  Sept.  16,  1846. 

688.  Harriet'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Minard  and  Sophia  (Ben- 
nett)  Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Oct.  5,  1834;   d.  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  1900;  m.  Union 
Springs,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  25,  185 1,  Joshua  M.  Hoagland,  b.  Apr. 
5,  1830,  d.  Moravia.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1885. 
Children,  b.  Union  Springs  : 

Alice  Sophia,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Sarah  Jane,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

1266  Mary  L.,  b.  Sept.  10,  1858;    m.  William  H.  Bell. 

William  A.,  b.  ;    res.  1901,  Auburn,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Union  Springs, 

Nettie   J.    Richardson. 
Anna  C.,  b. ;    res.  1901,  Bayonne,  N.  J.;   m.  C.  D.  Rice. 

689.  Verme:da^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Henry    (Harry)    and 
Harriet    (Babcock)     Babcock    (Paul,    Oliver.    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  1823;  d.  Columbus.  N.  Y., 
1892  ;  m.  Brookfield,  Jerry,  son  of  Augustus,  Jr.,  and  404 Char- 
lotte (Babcock)   Crandall.     Vermeda's  mother,  Harriet  Bab- 
cock, was  daughter  of  Ethan  and  Pollv  (Fen)  Babcock. 
Child: 

Harriet  Angelia.  b.  June   19,    1858:    m.   Brookfield.   N.   Y.,   Feb.   13, 
1878,  Alvin  Washburn,  d.   Brookfield,   Sept.  2,   1879. 

690.  Orissa  a.'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Harriet  (Bab- 
cock) Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Brookfield,  N.  Y..  1826;  d.  Romeo,  Mich.;  m.  (i)  Brook- 
field, N.  Y..  Morris  E.  Brown,  d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  (2) 
Detroit,  Mich.,  Robert  Atkinson,  d.  Romeo,  Mich. 


296  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

1267  Harriet  A."  Brown,  b.  ;    m.  John  Brown. 

Chas.  H.,  b. ;  res.  1901,  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  ni.  (i)  Alice  Host- 
ler;   m.   (2)   Minnie  Clark.     Had  one  son,  Ira. 

691.  Ethan  Andrew^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Harriet 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  30,  1828;  d.  Utica, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.  13,  1892;  m.  Sangerfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  29,  1854, 
Olive,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Ketura  (Egleston)  Brusie,  b.  Aug. 
10,  1830;  res.  1901,  Oriskany  Falls,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

1268  Erving  O.,"  b.  July  29,  1855;    m.  Mary  E.  Dye. 
George  E.,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  28,  1862. 

Arloene  O.,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1867;  d.  Port  Leyden,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  22,  1894;  m.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  17,  1884,  Thomas  Williams; 
res.   1901,   Lyons   Falls,  N.   Y. 

1269  Jessie  Bell,  b.  Feb.  14,  1870 ;    m.  Michael  M.  Connor. 

692.  Harriet  Electa^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Har- 
riet   (Babcock)    Babcock    (Paul,   Oliver,   Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Bro(M<field,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29,  1831  ;  m.  Brookfield, 
N.  Y.,  May  4,   i860,  Edmund  L.  Palmer.     They  res.   1901, 
26  Stone  St..  Oneida,  N.  Y. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield : 

Albert  E.,  b.  Jan.  3,  1862;    res.  1901,  Oneida,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Rochester, 

N.  Y.,  Dec.  10,  1881,  Clara  Emery. 
Herbert  H.,  b.  Apr.  4,  1864;    res.  1901,  Utica,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Rochester, 

N.  Y.,  Apr.  7,  1888,  Maggie  Hone. 
Carrie  I.,  b.  June  30,  1865 ;    d.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  19,  1865. 

693.  Adelbert  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Har- 
riet   (Babcock)    Babcock    (Paul,   Oliver,   Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  W.  Winfield.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  4,  1840;  res.  1902, 
Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Almont,  Mich.,  May  17,  1868,  Lizzie 
Bell,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Jane  (McCutchron)  Atkinson,  b. 
London,  Ontario,  Apr.  10,  1850. 

Adelbert  Babcock  was,  1902,  Detroit  Manager  of  the  Phre- 
nix  Life  Insurance  Company  of  Hartford,  Conn. 

Children  : 

Jennie  Maud,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  16,  1871  ;    m.  Detroit,  Mich., 

Apr.   27.    1891,   Dr.    George   I.,    son   of   Daniel   Dakin.     They   res. 

1902,  Detroit,   and  have  one  child,   Lucile  Maud. 
Bessie  H.,  b.  Dec.  29,  1879;    res.  1902,  Washington,  D.  C. ;    m.  Nov. 

8,   1900,  John  W.  Hunt. 
Mabel  Florence,  b.  Nov.  19,  1881  ;    m.  Tune,  1902,  Walter  Haves,  of 

Buffalo. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  297 

694.  Franklin"    Babcock,   son   of   Elder   Rowse   and   Lu- 
cinda   (Gilbert)   Babcock   (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  Jobn, 

James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  May  12,  1828;   d.  Chicago,  111.,  Jan. 
30,   1892;    m.  Alden,  N.  Y.,  Sept.    18,    1855,  Katherine  C, 
dau.  of  John  and  Sarah    (Cutter)    Howe,  b.   Williamstown, 
Vt.,  July  25,  1828,  d.  Chicago,  Bl.,  Jan.  2,  1890. 
Children : 

1270  Fred,"  b.  Oct.  28,  i860;    m.  Elizabeth  M.  Porter. 

1271  Forrest  Frank,  b.  Apr.  30,  1867;    m.  Blanche  S.  Sturtevant. 

695.  RoDOLPHUs'^    Babcock,    son    of    Rowse    and    Lucinda 

(Gilbert)  Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  8,  1831 ;  res.  1902,  Mason  City, 
la.;  m.  Galva,  111.,  Nov.  22,  1857,  Mary  E.,  dau.  of  Jeremiah 
and  Harriet  (Swift)  Schermerhorn,  b.  S.  Worcester,  N.  Y., 
June  6,  1837. 
Children : 

1272  Willis  A.,''  b.  May  23,  1861 ;    m.  Henrietta  Roden. 
Arthur  R.,  b.  Mason  City,  la.,  Mar.  14,   1876. 

696.  L.\URA  Elnora"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elder  Rowse  and 
Lucinda  (Gilbert)  Bal^cock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  1839;   res.  1902,  W.  Chicago, 
111.;    m.  Clarence,  N.  Y.,  Sept.   18,  1855,  Lyman  C,  son  of 
Henry  and  Deborah    (Carpenter)    Clark,   b.   Darien,   N.    Y., 
June  10.  1833,  d.  W.  Chicago,  111.,  Feb.  15.  1901. 
Children : 

Altie  F.,  b.  Prince  Albert.  Canada,  Mar.  26,  1857;  res.  if)02,  West 
Chicago,  111. ;  ni.  West  Chicago,  Charles  E.,  son  of  Augustus  and 
Caroline  (Avard)  Norris,  b.  Rome,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  6,  1853. 

Clarence,  b.  Prince  Albert,  Canada,  ]\Iar.  26.  1857;    d.  Mar.  27,  1857. 

Clara  L.,  b.  Prince  Albert,  Canada,  Aug.  4,  1859;    d.  Aug.  4,  1859. 

Emma  H.,  b.  Prince  Albert  Canada.  Jan.  22,  1862;    d.  Dec.  28,  1863. 

Charles  H.,  b.  Prince  Albert,  Canada,  July  9,  1866;  d.  Nov.  2, 
1871. 

Ella  Laura,  b.  Davenport,  la.,  Nov.  ig,  1868;  res.  1902,  West  Chi- 
cago, 111. ;  m.  Turner,  111.,  Sept.  30,  1890,  Emory  B.,  son  of  Clark 
and  Louisa  (]\IcChesney)  Holmes,  b.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  June  i,  1861. 

Lulu  Pauline,  b.  Turner,  111.,  July  31,  1880;  res.  1902,  West  Chicago, 
111. ;  m.  West  Chicago,  Jan.  i,  1901.  William  S.,  son  of  James 
and  Sarah  (Smith)  Henry,  b.  Watseka.  111.,  Mar.  24,  1878. 

697.  Adelbert  Oscar"^   Babcock,   son   of  George  W.   and 
Lavina   (Eddy)   Babcock   (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Spafiford.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  13.  1852;  res.  1902,  I\Iil- 
waukee.  Wis.;  m.  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  19,  1872,  Emma  A., 
dau.  of  George  Carter,  b.  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  July  7,  185 1,  d. 
Chicago,  111.,  June  9,  1891. 


298  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Frank,  b.  Auburn.  N.  Y.,   1873;    d.  young. 

Bertram,  b.  Sayre.  Pa.,  Apr.,   i(S74;    res.  1902,  Vliet  St.,  Milwaukee, 

Wis.;    m.  Sept.  12,  189O,  Julia,  dan.  of  Henry  Kowalskey. 
Pearlie,  b.  Chicago,  111. ;   d.  Chicago,  111. 

698.  Ida'    Babcock,   dau.   of  George   and   Lavina    (Eddy) 
Babcock   (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.   Ho- 
mer, N.  Y.,  July  13,  1855;   res.  1902,  49  Clinton  Ave.,  Cort- 
land, N.  Y. ;   m.  Dec.  26,  1877,  Frank  H.  Rice. 

Children: 

Lizzie  E.,  b.  Dec.  5,  1878;    d.  Dec.  14,  1883. 
Harry,  b.   Nov.   7,    1882;    d.   Aug.   22,   1883. 
Edith  M.,  b.  Aug.  22,  1884;    d.  Oct.  22,  1890. 
Florence,  b.  June  5,  1886. 
Alice,  b.  Nov.  2,  1888. 
Mary,  b.  Nov.  16,  1891. 

699.  Dewane  D.'^  Babcock,  son  of  Martin  W.  and  Mary 
Kenyon    (Maxson)     Babcock    (Paul,    Oliver,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  27,  1844;  res.  1900, 
137  Warren  Ave.,  Milwaukee,  Wis.;  m.  (i)  Chicago,  111., 
Jan.  8,  1868,  Frances  Ellen,  dau.  of  Deming  S.  and  Sarah 
(Mosher)  Heard,  b.  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  June  21,  1844;  d.  S. 
Dansville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  2,  1881 ;  m.  (2)  Potter,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
24,  1882,  Villie,  dau.  of  Phelps  and  Gabrilla  (Miner)  Hotch- 
kiss,  b.  Prattsburg,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  13,  1842. 

Dewane  D.  Babcock  was  principal  of  various  seminaries 
and  graded  schools,  and  twice  served  as  conductor  of  County 
Teachers'  Institutes  in  Iowa.  He  declined  the  superintend- 
ency  of  the  public  schools  of  Canajoharie,  N.  Y.,  and  an  ap- 
pointment as  conductor  of  County  Institutes  of  the  State  of 
New  York.  He  served  in  the  United  States  Navy  from  1864 
to  1865. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

1273  Paul  Heard,**  b.  June  11.  1872;    m.  Helen  Roberts. 

1274  Faith  Ellen,  b.  Aug.  4,  1874 ;    m.  Charles  Sumner  Kent. 

David  Dewane,  b.  in  Le  Claire.  la.,  Jan.  12,  1877.  In  Dec,  1900, 
was  traveling  salesman  for  a  Dental  Mfg.  Co.,  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y. ; 
unm. 

Garrison,  b.  Cazenovia,  N.  Y.,  July  21,  1879.  During  the  Spanish- 
American  War  enlisted  in  the  Navy  as  Assistant  Electrician  on 
cruiser  Buffalo.  Was  promoted  to  Electrician  and  given  charge 
of  the  largest  Fla-^h-Light  in  the  service.  Later  was  Electrician  in 
the  Navy  at  Manila.  Dec,  1900,  was  President  of  the  Electricians' 
Union  of  Milwaukee,  Wis. ;    res.  1901,  137  Warren  St.,  Milwaukee. 

Frances  Heard,  b.  S.  Dansville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  2.  1881,  the  day  her 
mother  d. ;    res.  1901,  Alfred,  N.  Y. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  299 

Child  by  second  wife: 

Sumner  Hotchkiss,  b.  Wayland,  N.  Y.,  May  20,  1883. 

700.  Forest  M."  Babcock,  son  of  Martin  and  Mary  (Max- 
son)   Babcock  (Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,  1846;  res.  1901,  Alfred, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  (i)  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  July  20,  1872,  Fronie  H.,  dan.  of 
Charles  and  Jane  (Knight)  Marvin,  b.  Aug.  9,  1842,  d.  Bel- 
mont, N.  Y.,  Sept.  10.  1878;  m.  (2)  Belmont,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  3, 
1879,  Henrietta,  dan.  of  Julius  and  Mary  (Richardson) 
Averill,  b.  Belmont.  Sept.  14,  i860. 
Children  by  second  marriage: 

Marion,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  June  7,  1881 ,    d.  Belmont,  Apr.  27,  1883. 
Florence,  b.  Belmont,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  27,  1883. 

701.  Mary   Viola"    Babcock,    dau.    of   Martin    and    Mary 
(Maxson)     Babcock     (Paul,     Oliver,     Oliver,     John, 

James),  b.   Nile,   N.   Y.,   Oct.    16,    1849;  m-  Alfred,   N.   Y., 
Aug.  30,  1873,  Prof-  Alpheus  B.,  son  of  Edwin  and  Cordelia 
(Burdick)  Kenyon.  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Aug.  2,  1850.     Both 
res.  1 90 1,  Alfred. 
Children,  b.  Alfred : 

Grace,  b.  July  3,  1874;   d.  June  9.  1882. 

Dora.  b.  Oct.  6,  1876:    res.  1901,  Alfred.  N.  Y. 

Agnes,  b.  Oct.  26,  1886;    res.  1901,  Alfred,  N.  Y. 

702.  Alfred  Bennett"  Babcock,  son  of  Ezra  and  Lucinda 
(Shepardson)    Babcock    (Ezra,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John, 

James),    b.     Scott,    N.    Y.,    Dec.     17,     18 19;     d.    Newark, 
N.  J.,  Aug.  19.  1879;   m.  New  Market,  N.  J.,  Sept.  7,  1848, 
Amy  A.  Giles,  dau.   of  John  and   Sarah    (Morse)    Giles,  b. 
New  Market,  Feb.  8.  1829;  res.  1901,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Albert  Leslie,  b.  New  Market,  N.  J..  May  12.  1852;    res.  1901.  New 
Market.  N.  J. ;    m.   Newark.   N.  J.,   Apr.  6,   1880,  Dora,  dau.  of 
Charles  and  Margaret  (Malcom)  Clark,  b.  Newark,  Nov.  16,  1858. 
No  children. 
1275  William  Alfred,''  b.  Feb.  ig,  1858;    m.  Lida  R.  Doane. 

703.  Lucy  Almeda"  Babcock.  dau.  of  Ezra  and  Lucinda 

(Shepardson)  Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver.  John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1824:  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Apr. 
27,  1896:  m.  Scott,  Apr.  5,  184.S,  Dolpliin  D.  Burdick,  b. 
Truxton,  N.  Y.,  June  22,  1825,  d.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  1901. 


300  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Cliiklren,  b.  Scott : 

Lillie   A.,    b.    Oct.    3,    1857;     m.    Lincklacn,    N.    Y.,    Aug.    12,    1889, 

George,    son    of   George   and    Abigail    (Fenn)    Fox,    b.    Lcdyard, 

N.  Y.,  Mar.  27,  1833;    res.   1902,  Scott,  N.  Y. 
Alfred  Russel,  b.  Dec.   15,   1859;    m.   Scott,  Jan.   i,   1880,  Ella  M., 

dau.  of  Warren  and  Jane  (Prill)  Kenyon,  b.  Scott,  Apr.  7,  1862; 

both  res.  1902,  Scott,  N.  Y. 
Howard  G.,  b.  May  9,  1865 ;    d.  Scott,  June  5,  1874. 

704.  William  Henry'  Babcock,  son  of  Ezra  and  Lucinda 

(Shepardson)  Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  New  York  State,  Apr.  14,  1830;  m.  Scott,  June 
30,  1853.  Sarah  A.,  dan.  of  Paul  and  Deborah  (Sprao-uc) 
Burdick,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1831.  Both  res.  1902,  Ho- 
mer, N.  Y. 
Children : 

1276  Josephine  A.,**  b.  Apr.  30,  1857;  m.  Adelbert  Eastman. 

Laura  Ella,  b.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  2^,.  1863;  address  1902,  Library 
of  Congress.  Washington,  D.  C. ;    unm. 

Katherine  Chittenden,  b.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  13,  1869;  res.  1902, 
21  Fifth  Ave..  New  York  City;  m.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  26,  1899, 
Enrico  Thomey  Cavalleris,  b.  Alba,  Italy,  June  15,  1854. 

705.  Esther  V.'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Ephraim  S.  and  Amy 
W.    (Crandall)    Babcock    (Ezra,   Oliver,   Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y..  July  20,   1828;    d.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
iVTar.  18,  1853;    m.  Westerly,  Oct.  21,  1846,  Charles  A.,  son 
of  Adam  and  Lydia  (Spaulding-)   Stillman,  b.  Westerly,  Jan. 
30,  1825;  res.  1902,  Westerly,  R.  I. 
Children : 

George  E.,  b.   De  Ruyter,   N.   Y. ;    res.   1902,   Plainfield,   N.  J. ;    m. 

Westerly,  Carrie  Powers. 
Luen,  b.  Westerly,  R.  L  ;    res.  1902,  Westerly ;    m.  Hattie  Mitchell. 

706.  George  H."  Babcock,  son  of  Asher  M.  and  Mary  E. 
(Stillman)     Babcock     (Ezra,     Oliver,     Oliver,     John, 

James),  b.  Unadilla  Eorks,  N.  Y.,  ^nne  17,  1832:  d. 
Plainfield,  N.  J..  Dec.  16,  1893;  m-  (O  Watch  Hill.^  R.  1., 
Sept.  28.  1852,  Lucy  Adelia,  dau.  of  Adam  and  Mary 
(Spauldino^)  Stillman,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  28,  1833,  d. 
Mav  20,  1861  ;  m.  (2)  Sept.  25.  1862,  Harriet  M.  Clarke,  b. 
Mar.  31,  1834,  d.  Plainfield,  N.  J.,  Mar.  5,  1881  ;  m.  (3) 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  Feb.  14,  1883,  Eliza  Lua,  dau.  of  Job  B. 
and  Emily  (Pardee)  Clark,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  q,  1844,  d. 
Plainfield.  N.  J.,  Mar.  21,  1891  ;  m.  (4)  Apr.  11.  1893.  Euo-e- 
nia  Louisa,  dau.  of  Nathan  K.  and  Louisa  (Lang-worthy) 
Lewis,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Mar.  29,  1847;  res.  1902,  Plain- 
field,  N.  J. 


^ 


1832- 1893. 


Page  300. 


The  Bobcock  Genealogy.  301 

Mr.  Babcock  was  in  the  widest  sense  a  self-made  man. 
With  but  few  opportunities  for  an  education  except  such  as 
were  found  in  the  pubhc  schools  qf  his  boyhood,  he  ranked 
among  the  educated  men  of  the  country.  He  was  President 
of  the  School  Board  of  his  own  city,  was  President  of  the 
Board  of  Trustees  of  Alfred  University,  was  one  of  the  regu- 
lar lecturers  of  Cornell  University,  and  was  for  a  time  Presi- 
dent of  the  large  and  influential  organization  known  as  the 
"American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers." 

He  was  a  thorough  representative  of  the  best  type  of  suc- 
cessful business  men.  From  a  boy  he  showed  remarkable 
mechanical  ability,  and  his  inventive  genius  resulted  in  giving 
to  the  world  about  one  hundred  patents.  At  the  time  of  his 
death  he  was  President  of  the  "Babcock  &  Wilcox  Company," 
organized  with  a  caj^ital  of  $1,000,000  for  the  manufacture 
of  "Patent  Water-tube  Steam  Boilers,"  and  the  company  is 
still  doing  an  extensive  business  both  in  Europe  and  America. 

He  not  only  gave  strict  attention  to  the  many  lines  of  his 
own  business  affairs,  but  also  found  time  to  take  a  leading 
part  in  the  various  public  interests  of  the  day,  especially  in 
the  line  of  education  and  the  general  uplifting  of  his  fellow- 
men.  After  achieving  financial  success  he  was  a  generous 
patron  of  deserving  charities,  and  by  his  will  he  left  about 
$200,000  for  public  benefactions,  including  $70,000  for  Al- 
fred University  and  $50,000  for  Milton  College.  He  was  by 
faith  and  practice  a  Seventh  Day  Baptist. 

Children : 

George  Luason,  b.  Jan.  7.  1885;    res.  1902,  Plainfield,  N.  J. 
Herman  Edgar,  b.  July  9,  1886 ;    d.  Aug.  6,  1886. 

707.  Celia   Annette'^    Babcock,    dau.    of   Asher   M.    and 
Mary   E.    (Stillman)    Babcock    (Ezra,   Oliver,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  3,  1838;   res.  1902,  Santa 
Rosa,  Cal. ;   m.  W^esterly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  31,  1863,  Ray  P.,  son  of 
Paul  and  ]\Iary  (Perkins)  Clark,  b.  Scott,  Aug.  21,  1838,  d. 
Santa  Rosa,  June  13,  1901. 
Children : 

Mary  Eleanor,  b.  Scott.  N.  Y.,  Sept.  i.  186.=; :    res.  1902,  Santa  Rosa. 

Cal. ;    m.  Santa  Rosa,  Nov.  27.  1898.  Dr.  Frederick  D.,  son  of  Rev. 

Daniel  Webley,  b.  London.  England.  Mar.  26.  t86i. 
Frances  Gertrude,  b.  Nov.  23,  1870 ;    res.  1902,  Santa  Rosa.  Cal. 

708.  Harriet  Eugenia"^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Asher  M.  and 
Mary   E.    (Stillman)    Babcock    (Ezra,   Oliver,   Oliver, 


302  TJic  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

John,  James),  b.   Homer,  N.  Y.,  Aug.    15,   1840;    res.   1902, 
Brooklyn,  N.   Y. ;    m.  Apr.    11,   1865,   William  L.   Burke,  b. 
May  25,  1829,  d.  Brooklyn,  June,  1901. 
Children : 

Margaret  S.,  b.  Mar.  6,  1866. 

Orsamus  M.,  b.  Feb.  7,   1868;    d.  July  22,  1868. 

Eleanor  R.,  b.  Jan.  10,  1870. 

Caroline  A.,  b.  May  31,  1871. 

Gertrude   S.,   b.   July   29,    1872;     d.    Aug.,    1872. 

George  William,  b.  Nov.  2,  1874;    d.  July  22,  1875. 

Mabel   M.,   b.   Nov.  2,    1874. 

William  L.,  b.  July  3,  1876. 

George  B.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1878. 

709.  Herbert  Alberti"   Babcock,   son  of  Asher  M.   and 
Mary   E.    (Stillman)    Babcock    (Ezra,    Oliver,   Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  July  5,    1848;    res.    1902, 
Westerly,  R.  I.;   m.  Stonington  (Pawcatuck),  Conn.,  June  23, 
1875,  Fanny  E.,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Mary  (Dickinson)   Wat- 
rous,  b.   Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.   14,    1854. 
Child : 

Mary  Esther,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  July  27,  1880;  m.  Oct.  10,  1900, 
Elisha  C.  Burdick. 

710.  Harriet'^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Abel  and  Lucy    (Hunt- 
ington) Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James), 

b.  Greenfield,  Pa.,  July  21,  1829;    m.  Lima,  Wis.,  Apr.   19, 
1849,  George  vS.,  son  of  G.  S.  and  Dianna  (Macomber)  Bur- 
dick, b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Apr.   18,   1827.  Both  res.   1902,  Mil- 
ton, Wis. 
Children : 

Dr.  Justin  H..  b.  Lima,  Dec.  29,  185 1 ;  res.  1902,  Milton.  Wis.;  m. 
(i)  Utica,  Wis.,  Aug.  30,  1882,  Fannie  E.,  dau.  of  Daniel  and 
Lucy  Coon.  b.  Utica,  Wis.,  Dec.  29,  1861 ;  d.  Milton,  Nov.  29. 
1896;  m.  (2)  Watch  Hill,  R.  L,  Sept.  i,  1898,  Clara  E.,  dau.  of 
Jarus  and  Clara  /Langworthy)  Stillman,  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  L, 
Jan.  6,  1869;    res.  1902,  Milton,  Wis. 

Clifford  R.,  b.  Milton,  July  14.  1858;    d.  Nov.  9,  1858. 

711.  Edwin  P.'''  Babcock,  son  of  Abel  and  Lucy  (Hunting- 
ton)  Babcock   (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Erie  County,  Pa.,  Nov.   10,   1840;    res.   1902,  Clinton,  Wis.; 
m.  Clinton.  Oct.  25,  1863,  Sophia  M.  Kimball,  b.  Burlington, 
Vt.,  Eeb.  18,  1845,  ^-  Clinton,  Sept.  9,  1899. 
Children : 

Ruth  A.,  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  July  17.  1864;  res.  1902,  Clinton,  Wis.; 
m.  Clinton,  June  5,  1890,  Deon  B.  Smith. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  303 

Charles   S.,   b.    Milton,    Oct.    24.    1866;     m.    Clinton,   June    10.    1890, 

Cora  V.  Ishani. 
Eklon  H..  b.  July  28,  1869;    res.  1902,  Clinton. 

Milton  John,  b.  Parkersljiirg,  la.,  Sept.   18,   1872;    res.  1902,  Clinton. 
Mary  11.,  b.  Sept.   17.  1875;    res.   1902,  Clinton. 
Julia  J.,  b.  Sept.  2,  1878;    res.  1902,  Clinton. 
Fred,  b.  Feb.  16,  1882;    res.  1902,  Clinton. 
Eva,  b.  Clinton,  Oct.  22,   1886;    d.  Aug.  20,   1887. 

712.  Artimesia  Mendenhall'^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Abel  and 
Lucy    (Huntington)    Babcock    (Ezra,    Oliver,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Lima,  Wis.,  Jan.  3,  1844;    res.  1902,  Water- 
town,  Wis. ;    m.  Milton,  Wis.,  Oct.  18,  18G2,  Ellis  A.,  son  of 
Abner  and   Martha   (ALanvill)    Mendenhall,  b.   Hunting,  Pa., 
Sept.  7,  1840. 
Children : 

Elmira.  b.  Clinton,  Wis.,  Mar.  28,  1869;  d.  Oct.  6,  1895;  m.  June, 
1889,   Alvin   Stanton. 

Mattie  A.,  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  Dec.  1873;  res.  1902,  Milton;  m.  Water- 
town,  Harold  Burdick. 

Ellis  A.,  b.  Watertown,  May  16,  1876;  res.  1902,  Green  Bay,  Wis.; 
ni.  Huldah  Piper. 

Lee  Chester,  b.  Watertown,  Dec.  13,  1880. 

713.  "EzR.\,  Stillman'^    Babcock,    son   of   Abel   and   Lucy 

(Huntington)    Babcock    (Ezra,    Oliver,    Oliver.    John, 

James),    b.    Lima,    Wis..    Jan.    3,    1851;    res.   1902,    Milton. 

Wis.;   m.  Alilton,  Aug.  4,  1871,  F.  Azelia,  dau.  of  Asher  and 

Louisa  (Bishop)  Castle,  b.  Whitewater,  Wis.,  Jan.  19,  1852. 

Children,  b.  Milton : 

Edwin  A.,  b.  July  9.   1872;    res.   1902.  Milton. 
Ernest,  b.  IMay  9.  1874;    res.   1902,  Milton. 
Elston  D.,  b.  Apr.  11,  1876;    res.  1902,  Milton. 
Louis,  b.  Mar.  30,  1878;    res.  1902,  Milton. 
Lillian  V.,  b.  May  9,  1883;    res.  1902,  Milton. 
Mina  C,  b.  May  29,  1890;    res.  1902,  Milton. 

714.  Jared  E.'''  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Almira   (Bur- 
dick) Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan.   16,   1841  ;    res.   1902,  Homer,  N.  Y. ;    m. 
Homer.   Nov.    7,    i860.   Mary,   dau.   of  Elmer  and   Theresa 
Clark,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y. 
Child : 
1277  Addie  May,*  b.  Feb.  27,  1874;    m.  ATerton  Whiting. 

715.  Dr.  Franklin  Duane'  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and 
Almira  (Burdick)  Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  26,  1845;  res.  1902,  Morrisville, 


304  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

N.  Y. ;  m.  Scott,  May  19,  1868,  Miriam,  dau.  of  Rev.  William 
M.  and  Elizabeth  (Postlewait)  Jones.  (Rev.  William  M. 
Jones  was  first  missionary  to  Hayti,  later  S.  D.  B.  missionary 
to  Jerusalem,  and  later  pastor  of  the  Millyard  S.  D.  B.  Church 
in  London,  England,  where  he  died.)  She  was  b.  Island  of 
Hayti,  Apr.  27,  1845. 
Children : 

Archer,  b.  Scott,  Feb.  16,  1870;  res.  1902,  E.  Genesee  St.,  Syracuse, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  Nov.  21,  1894,  Newton,  Mass.,  Jane  O.,  dau.  of  Richard 
and  Jane  B.   (Drake)   Harwood,  b.  Newton. 

Elizabeth  T.,  b.  Morrisville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1883;  res.  1902,  Morris- 
ville. 

716.  Lizzie  M.'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Jerome  Ripley  and  Emily 

(McDaniels)    Babcock    (Ezra,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  31,  1859;   m.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan. 
II,   1879,  Byron  S.,  son  of  Vernon  Townsend,  b.  Moravia, 
N.  Y.    Both  res.  1902,  Ithaca,  N.  Y. 
Child : 

M.  Evelyn,  b.  Moravia,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  8,  1882;    res.  1902,  Ithaca. 

717.  Lucy  Euretta'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Hiram  and  Tacy 

(Frink)  Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1839;  res.  1902,  Ho- 
mer, N.  Y. ;  m.  Homer,  Nov.  7,  i860,  J.  Clayton,  son  of  Jo- 
seph and  Lucy  (Brown)  Atwater,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  8, 
1837,  d.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  22,  1901. 
Child : 

Fred  Clayton,  b.  Homer,  Nov.  11,  1861 ;    res.  Homer. 

718.  William  Nelson'''  Babcock,  son  of  Hiram  and  Tacy 

(Erink)      Babcock      (Ezra,      Oliver,      Oliver,     John, 
James),  b.   Scott,   N.  Y.,   Mar.   27,    1847;    I'^s.    1902,  Scott; 
m.  Scott,  Nov.  13,  1867,  Olive  Jenette,  dau.  of  314  Raymond 
and  Olive  (Denison)  Babcock,  b.  Scott,  Jan.  30,  1847. 
Children : 

George  R..  b.  Scott.  Mar.  28,  1870;    d.  Scott,  Oct.  26,  1877. 
Miriam  G.,  b.  Scott,  Oct.  14,  1874;    res.  1902,  Scott;    unm. 

719.  Edgar  'L?  Babcock,  son  of  Hiram  and  Tacy  (Frink) 
Babcock  (Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Scott, 

N.  Y.,  Sept.  II,  1855;  res.  1902,  Amherst,  Minn.;  m.  Am- 
herst, May  2,  1880,  Julia  A.,  dau.  of  Orrin  and  Mary  (John- 
son) Dibble,  b.  NewlDurg,  Minn.,  Feb.  20,  1862. 


Tlic  Biibcock  Genealogy.  305 

Cliilclren : 

Efliie  E.,  h.  Amherst,  Mar.  11,  1881 ;    res.  1902,  Amherst. 
Clayton  E.,  b.  Aug.  8,   1886;    res.  1902,  Amherst. 

720.  Adelia   E.'    Babcock,   clait.   of   Raymond   and   Olive 
(Denison)     Bal)cock     (Lnke,     Oliver,     Oliver,     John, 

James),  b.    Scott,   N.   Y.,   Nov.   27,    1841 ;    res.    1902,  Foun- 
tain, Minn.;   m.  Virgil,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  3,  1861,  Wesley  Hatha- 
way, d.  Mason,  Mich.,  Aug.  4,  1875. 
Children : 

Marion  L.,  b.   Mason,   Mich.,   Nov.   12,   1872;    m.   P'ountain.   Minn., 

Leo  .S.,  son  of  O.  W.  Scott,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  14,  1865 ;    both 

res.   1902,   Fountain. 
Raymond  Wesley,  b.  Mason,  Mich.,  Aug.  19,   1875 ;    res.  Fountain, 

Minn. ;    m.  Fountain,  Sept.  2,  1896.  Esther  L.,  dau.  of  D.  D.  Far- 

rell,  b.  Fountain,  Sept.  10,  1875. 

721.  Elizabeth    M.'''    Babcock,    dau.    of   Dr.    Ira   L.    and 
Nancy  (Arnold)  Babcock  (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Scott.  N.  Y.,  June  13,  1830;    res.  1902,  Norwalk, 
O. ;   m.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  23,  1848,  John  D.,  son  of  Oliver 
and  Rebecca  Cheney,  b.  Ovid,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  8,  1825. 
Children : 

Mary  R..  b.  Scott,  July  28,  1849;  res.  1902,  Toledo,  O. ;  m.  Adrain. 
Miss.,  Sept.  2},.  1867,  W.  W.,  son  of  Jesse  and  Sarah  (Phillips) 
Wetmore,  b.  Hartford,  O.,  Sept.,  1843 ;    d.  June  24.  1898. 

S.  Evelyn,  b.  Norwalk,  O.,  Oct.  2,  1862;  res.  1902,  Friendship, 
N.  Y. ;    m.  Norwalk,  Oct.  i,  1883,  Fred  C.  Milkin. 

722.  Mary  L.'^   Babcock,  dau.   of  Dr.   Ira  L.   and   Nancy 

(Arnold)  Babcock  (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  6,  1846;  res.  1902,  Hen- 
sel,  N.  D. ;  m.  Norwalk,  O..  Oct.  24,  1867,  Robert  W.,  son  of 
Ebenezer  and  Jane  (Walker)  Ross,  b.  Savannah,  O.,  Oct.  15, 
1841. 

Children : 

Otis  L.,  b.  Savannah,  O.,  Jan.  11.  1869;  res.  1902,  Crystal,  N.  D. ; 
m.  Grafton,  N.  D.,  Mar.  14,  1893,  Martha  A.,  dau.  of  John  and 
Elizabeth   (Austin)   Livingston,  b.  Canada,  Nov.  28,  1868. 

Howard  O.,  b.  Norwalk,  Apr.  27.  1875 ;    d.  .Aug.  28,  1875. 

723.  John    Franklin^    Babcock,   son   of   Dr.    Ira   L.    and 
Nancy  (Arnold)  Babcock  (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Bath.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  18,  1850;  res.  1902,  Sugar  Creek, 
Pa.;  m.  Norwalk,  O.,  Dec.  19,  1872,  Ida,  dau.  of  James  and 
Jane  (Flansburg)  Templar,  b.  Bronson,  O.,  Nov.  2,  1856. 
20 


3o6  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  h.  Hartland,  O. : 

1278  James,"  b.  Nov.  8,   1873;    111.  Cora  Norton. 

Maud  A.,   1).   Sept.   20,    1875;     res.    1902,   Franklin,   Pa.;    m.   Frank- 
lin, Frank,  son  of  Robert  and  P]iel)e  (StaceyJ  Bedford,  b.  1874. 
Bertha  B.,  b.  Nov.  11,  1878;    d.  1897. 

Ira  L.,  b.   Dec.   5,   1881  ;    res.   1902,   Franklin,   Pa.  ;    nnni. 
Ethel  L.,  b.  Jan.  4,   1883;    res.   1902,  Franklin,  Pa. 
Jennie,  b.  June  15,   1886. 
Edith,  b.  Oct.  20,  1889. 
Clarence  S.,  b.  May  23,  1893. 

724.  Rev.  Ira  Lee"  Cottrell,  son  of  John  and  Eunice  (Bab- 
cock)  Cottrell  (Luke,  Ohver,  OHver,  John,  James),  b. 

Richbufg-,    N.   Y.,    Mar.    7,    1846;   res.    1902,   Leonardsville, 
N.  Y. ;     m.  Richburg,  Mar.  29,  1871,  AngeHa,  dau.  of  John 
and  Susan  (Crandall)  Dye,  b.  Ceres,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1848,  d. 
Shiloh,  N.  J.,  May  3,  1897. 
Children : 

1279  John   Boardman,**  b.   Sept.   10,   1873;    m.  Julia  Randolph. 
Royal  Lee,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  1875 ;    res.  1902,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 
Herbert  L.,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,   1878;    res.   1902,  Alfred.   N.  Y. 
Arthur  Montrose,  b.  Ashaway,  R.  I. ;    res.  1902,  Alfred,  N.  Y. 

725.  Burton  M.'''  Babcock,  .son  of  Simon  and  Celia  (Kel- 
logg) Babcock  (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Scott,  N.  Y..  Oct.  28.  1839;  d.  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  23, 
1899;  m.  Binghamton,  Helen  E.,  dau.  of  Lewis  and  Julia 
(Collier)  Morris,  b.  Morris,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  4,  1844,  d.  Bingham- 
ton, July  29,  1886. 

Children,  b.  Binghamton,  except  one: 

Lewis  M.,  b.  Oct.  27,  1870;    d.  Binghamton,  Oct.  31,  1881. 
Frederick  M.,  b.  New  York  City,  Dec.  16,  1872;    d.  New  York  City, 
Feb.  23,   1873. 

1280  Charles  B..'*  b.  Mar.  7.  1874;    m.  Adeline  Metzgar. 
Julia  L.,  b.  Feb.  16,  1877;    d.  Binghamton.  Feb.   18,  1877. 
Harriette  E.,  b.  Jan.  10,  1879;    res.  1902,  Binghamton,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

726.  Amelia'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Simon  and  Celia  (Kellogg) 
Babcock  (Luke.  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Scott, 

N.  Y.,  Mar.  20,   1841  ;  res.   1902,  Kent,  O. ;    m.  Friendship, 
N.  Y.,  Charles  Howard. 
Children : 

Harriet,  b.  1862;    m.  B.  Frank  Drake;    res.  1902,  Friendship,  N.  Y. 

They  have  two  children. 
Nora,  b.  1867;    m.  ATilton  Knerfel ;    res.  1902,  Kent.  O.     They  have 

two  children. 
Nina,  b.  1871  ;    m.  Charles  Powers.     She  d.  Kent,  O.,  Mar.,  1902. 

727.  Ch.\rle.s  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Simon  and  Celia 

(Kellogg)     Babcock     (Luke,     Oliver,     Oliver,     John, 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  307 

James),    b.    Cazenovia,    N.    Y.,    June    27,    1848;    res.    1902, 
Lafayette,   Ind. ;  m.   Lafayette.  June    10,    1889,   Ella,  dau.  of 
James  and  Kli/.a  i'arks,  b.  Dec.  15,  i860. 
Children,  b.  Lafayette: 

Joseph  P.,  b.  1893,    d.  young;    Burton,  b.  1895,  d.  young;  Charles, 
b.  1899. 

728.  Hon.  Joseph  C."'  Sibley,  son  of  Dr.  Joseph  C.  and  Lucy 
Elvira  (Babcock)   Sibley  (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Friendship,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  18,  1850;  res.  1902,  Frank- 
lin, Pa.;  m.  Wellsville,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  17,  1870,  Metta  E.,  dau. 
of  3i9Simon'^  and  Celia  (Kellogg)  Babcock,  b.  Friendship, 
Nov.  28,  1853. 

Joseph  C.  Sibley  is  an  oil  refiner.  He  was  first  elected  as 
member  of  Congress  as  a  Democrat  from  the  Erie-Crawford 
district ;  second  w^as  elected  as  a  Democrat  from  his  home  dis- 
trict, including  Warren  County ;  was  reelected  for  his  present 
term  from  the  same  district  as  a  Republican. 

Children : 

Josephine,  b.  Friendship,  Jan.  16,  1873;    res.  1902,  Franklin,  Pa.;    m. 

Franklin,   Mar.   17,   1897,   William  E.   Heathcote. 
Celia,  b.  Franklin.  Sept.  19,  1874;    res.  1902.  Franklin;    m.  Franklin, 

June  5,  1901  ;   William  AI.,  son  of  Alexander  and  Mary  (McBride) 

Wilson,  b.  Nov.  15,  1870. 

729.  Edwin  Henry'''  Sibley,  A.]\L,  son  of  Dr.  Joseph  and 
Lucy  Elvira   (Babcock)    Sibley   (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Bath,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  12,  1857:  res.  1902,  Frank- 
lin. Pa.;    m.  Dunkirk.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  23.   1884,  Jessie  A.,  dau. 
of  Richard  and  ]\Liria   (Thompson)    \Villiams,  b.   New  Ha- 
ven. O..  Apr.  29.  1863.  d.  Franklin,  Pa.,  Apr.  2.  1901. 
Children,  b.  Franklin: 

Edna,  b.   Dec.  23.   1885 :    res.   1902,  Franklin,   Pa. 
Joseph  C.  b.  Jan.  27,  1888 :    res.  1902,  Franklin.  Pa. 
Jeanette,  b.   Mar.  23,   1889;    res.    1902,   Franklin.   Pa. 

730.  Fanny  L."   Crane,   dau.   of  Rev.   Ezra  F.   and  Lucy 
Elvira   (Babcock)   Crane  (Luke.  Oliver.  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  May  5,  1873;   d.  Franklin,  Pa.;   m 
Albert  F.  Logan. 
Child: 

Charles  Miller  Logan,  b.  . 

731.  Amanda   M.'''   Babcock.   dau.    of  Henry   and   Elvina 
(Baker)  Babcock  (Harris,  Joseph, Oliver, John,  James), 


3o8  The  Dabcock  Genealogy. 

b.  Guilford,  Vt.,  Oct.  23,  1830;  res.  1902,  Brattleboro,  Vt. ; 
ni.  lirattleljoro,  Aug.  29,  1850,  Clark,  son  of  Daniel  and 
Esther  Stark,  b.  Guilford,  i\pr.  12,  1825,  d.  Brattleboro, 
Mar.  16,  1893. 

Children,  b.  Guilford : 

Williard,  b.  July  10,  1851  ;  d.  Brattleboro,  Feb.  8,  1899;  in.  New- 
port, N.  H.,  JMar.  17,  1872,  Edith  M.,  dau.  of  Hiram  and  Mariette 
(Jackson)  Fletcher,  b.  Newport,  N.  H.,  Aug.  22,  1859;  res.  1902, 
Brattleboro. 

Minnie  A.,  b.  Oct.  27,  1858;  m.  Brattleboro,  Dec.  30,  1880,  Dwight 
Winchester. 

732.  Mahlon   Palmer^   Babcock,  son  of  Thomas  J.   and 
Louise    (Newell)     Babcock     (Harris,    Joseph,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Oriskany  Falls,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20,  1830;  d. 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  11,  1898;  m.  New  York  City,  Sept.  18, 
i860,  Harriet  A.,  dau.  of  James  and  Amelia  (Arnold)  Yeaton, 
b.  New  York. 

Children,  b.  New  York  City : 

Frank,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  at  210  Ninth  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

Carrie  A.,   b.   ;     res.   1902,   at   Dover,   N.   J.;    ni.    (i)    Dec.    16, 

1886,  Frank  B.  Wood;    m.   (2)   Dec,  1902,  William  Chamberlain. 
Ella    A.,   b.    1864;     res.    1902,    Dover,    N.    J.;     m.    (i)    Aug.,    1893, 

William    Sullivan ;     m.    (2)    1899,   Arthur   Losey. 
Fanny  J.,  b.  1867;    res.  1902,  at  210  Ninth  St.,  Brooklyn;    unm. 
Albert,  b.  1869;    res.  1902,  at  210  Ninth  St.,  Brooklyn;    unm. 
Harry,**  b.  1875;  res.  1902,  at  520  Fourth  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;  m. 

Oct.,  1901,  Annie  Duff,  of  Canada.     They  have  one  child,  Harry." 
William;  Walter;  Estelle,  b.   1886;  d. 

733.  Austin  H.'''  Babcock,  son  of  Thomas  J.  and  Louise 

(Newell)     Babcock     (Harris,     Joseph     Oliver,    John, 
James),     b.    Augusta,    N.    Y.,    1835;     res.    1902,    Oriskany 
Falls.  N.  Y. ;    m.  E.  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  2t,,  1857,  Laura 
C,  dau.  of  Jared  Wade. 
Children : 

1281  Lillian  E.,^  b.  June  16,  1858;    m.  Alphonso  Kimbrick. 

1282  Irncss  Eugene,  b.  May  2.S.   1861  ;  m.  Gertrude  Rohl. 
Birge  L.,  b.  Oronoco,  Minn.,   1864. 

Willis  Austin,  b.  Hcnryville,  Minn.,  Nov.,  1869;  res.  1902,  at  1568 
Edgerton  St.,  St.  Paul,  Minn. 

734.  John  We.sley"  Babcock.  son  of  Thomas  J.  and  Lou- 
ise  (Newell)    Babcock    (Harris,  Joseph,   Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Augusta  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,  1838;  res. 
1902,  Minneapolis,  Minn.;  m.  Bernardston,  Mass.,  Mar.  i, 
1859,  Abbie  L.,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Lucretia  (Johnson)  Bagg, 
b.  Waterloo,  111.,  Apr.  7,  1840,  d.  Minneapolis,  July  22,  1901. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  309 

Children : 

1283  Henry  R.,"  b.  Jan.  i8,  i860;    ni.  Martha  A.  Palmer. 

1284  Charles,  1).  Aug.  3,  1862;    m.  Leoline  Booth. 

Alice   j\I.,  b.    Douglass,   Minn.,   Apr.   7,    1864;     d.   Oronoco,    Minn., 

Oct.   I,   1865. 
Nellie,  b.  Oronoco,  Feb.  23,  1866;    d.  Dodge  Center,  Alinn.,  Jan.  i, 

1884. 

1285  John  Wesley,  b.  Aug.  3,  1868;    ni.  Susie  Kees. 

Fred   R.,   b.    Pine    Island,    Minn.,    Mar.    26,    1872;     d.    Minneapolis, 

Dec.  14,  1892. 
Burt  E.,  b.  Pine  Island,  Dec.  11,   1873;    d.  Apr.  4,   1874. 
Luella  A.,  b.  Pine  Island,  Feb.  12,  1875 ;    d.  Sept.,  1876. 

1286  Estelle  May,  b.  May  13,  1878;  m.  Samuel  C.  Yeaton. 

735.  Mary  E."  Corbett,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Jane  (Bahcock) 
Corhett  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Ohver,  John,  James),  b.  Mas- 
sachusetts, Dec.  31,  18^8;  res.  1902,  Alfred  Station,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Hartsville,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  18,  1864,  Samuel  P..  son  of  Wel- 
come and  Prudence  (Pettibone)  Burdick,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y., 
Nov.  30,  1838. 

Children,  b.  Alfred  Station : 

Welcome  F.,  b.  Nov.  18,  1864;    res.  1902,  Alfred;    m.  Alfred,  1890, 

Mina,  dau.  of  Albert  and   Susan    (Burdick)   Westcott. 
Jane,  b.  Oct.  14,  1870;    d.  Alfred,  May  18,  1901  ;    m.  Alfred,  Jan.  19, 

1890,    Milo,    son    of    Milo   and    Lydia    (Langworthy)    Palmer,    b. 

Alfred;    res.    1902,   Alfred  Station. 
Lee  Roy,  b.  Sept.  25,   1871 ;  res.  1902,  Alfred  Station;    m.  Andover, 

Oct.  25,  1890,  Rachel  Slocum,  b.  Andover. 
Arlton,  b.  Dec.  8,  1880 ;    res.  1902,  Alfred  Station ;    unm. 


736.  Joseph  Hugh'   Babcock,  son  of  Hugh  Wallace  and 
Sarah  (Stone)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Leyden,  Mass.,  July  4.   1821;    d.  New  Corydon, 
Ind.,  Mar.   15.   1848;    m.  Aug-.  6,   1840,  Eliza  Ann,  dau.  of 
Celah  and  Annie  (Blanchard)  Hosley,  b.  Woodford,  Vt.,  Jan., 
1820,  d.  North  Adams.  Mass.,  Jan.  6,  1850. 
Children : 

1287  Sarah  Eliza^  b.  Sept.  30,  1844 :    m.  Elbrige  Myron  Haynes. 

Louisa  Anna,  b.  New  Corydon,  Ind.,  Dec.  9,  1846;   d.  North  Adams, 
Mass.,  May  21,  1849. 

737.  Jane  Maria"   Babcock,   dau.   of  Hugh  Wallace  and 
Sarah  (Stone)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Leyden.  Mass..  May  25,  1825;  d.  Taunton,  Mass., 
Apr.  19.  1857;  m.  Lowell,  Mass.,  Apr.  12,  1846,  Joseph  Til- 
ton,  son  of  Joseph  Tilton  and  Betsy  (Sanburn)  ]\Ioulton,  b. 
Augusta.  Me.,  Aug.  27.  1826;   d.  Aug.  30,  1896. 


310  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Charles  Tilton,   b.   Waltham,    Mass.,   Apr.   2,    1848;    d.    Elgin,   111., 
Oct.  30,  1877,  unm. 

1288  George  M.,"*  b.  Mar.   15,   1851;    m.  Anna  Florence  Garland. 

738.  Charles  Rollin"  Babcock,  son  of  Hugh  Wallace  and 
Sarah  (Stone)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Halifax,  Vt.,  Oct.  27,  1827;  d.  Faribault,  Minn., 
Feb.  23,  1864;  m.  (i)  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Maria,  dan. 
of  David  and  Elizabeth  (Crosier)  Stowe,  b.  Halifax,  d.  Wa- 
terville,  Minn.,  Aug.,  1862;  m.  (2)  Faribault,  Oct.  30,  1863, 
Marcia  Wing. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

1289  Sarah  Elizabeth,*'  b.  May  9,   1852 ;    m.   Frank  Leon  Brainard. 

1290  Ella  Maria,  b.  Jan.  24,  1854;    m.  Frank  Douglass  Flyde. 
Adaline,  b.  Waterville.  Feb.  7,  1857;    d.  Waterville,  Feb.  7,  1857. 
Adalaide,  twin  to  Adaline,  d.  young. 

Mary   Etta,   b.   Waterville.    Feb.   28,    1859;     d.    Waterville,    May   15, 
1885;    m.  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Oct.  25,  1881,  Charles  A.  Gray. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

1291  Charles  J.,  b.  July  17,  1864;    m.  Helen  Murray. 

739.  Mary  Ellen'^   Babcock,  dau.  of  Hugh  Wallace  and 
Sarah  (Stone)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Leyden.  Mass.,  Apr.  29,  1832;  res.  1900,  Water- 
ville, Minn.;  m.  (i)  North  Adams,  Mass.,  Dec.  25,  1853, 
Myron  S.,  son  of  Dr.  Hiram  and  Lydia  (Balam)  Sheldon,  b. 
Monroe,  Aug.  21,  1831,  d.  Waterville,  Jan.  21,  1865:  m.  (2) 
Milton,  Minn.,  Feb.  23,  1869,  Samuel  A.,  son  of  Henry  W. 
and  Mary  B.  (Williams)  Miner,  b.  Colerain,  Mass.,  Feb.  8, 
1843,  d.  Mar.  2,  1901. 

Children  by  first  husband  : 

Inez  Imogene,  b.  Iosco,   Minn.,   Sept.   17,   1857;    d.  Iosco,  Apr.   19, 

1859. 
Edwin  Ruthwin,  b.  Iosco,  Feb.  22,  i860;    d.  Iosco,  Sept.  15,  1865. 
Ida    Bell,    b.    Blooming    Grove,    Minn.,    Mar.    18,    1862;     res.    1900, 

Waterville ;    m.   Waterville,  June   18.   1890,   Silas  Edward,   son  of 

Gould   and   Julane   Grover,    b.    Rochester,    Minn.,    Nov.    18,    1855. 

They  have  four  children. 
Arthur  Myron,  b.   Iosco,   Mar.  25,   1864;    res.   1900,  Waterville;    m. 

Waterville,  Apr.  4,  1889,  Ada  Esther,  dau.  of  Byron  and  Victoria 

Williams,  b.   Crane  Creek,  Minn.,  Oct.  29,   1869.     They  have  five 

children. 

740.  John  Matthews'^  Babcock,  son  of  Hugh  Wallace  and 
Sarah  (Stone)  Babcock  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Leyden,  Mass.,  Nov.  20,  1834;   d.  Portland,  Ore., 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  311 

Dec.    18,    1890;    ni.    (i)    Colerain,   Mass.,   Alzina   Stowe,   d. 
Waterville,  Minn.,   1802;    m.   (2)   Faribault,  Minn.,  Dec.  23, 
1866,  Mary  .Vngeline  Robinson;   res.  1900,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 
Children : 

Cora  Alma,  h.   Faribault,  June  15,  1870. 
Charles  Hugh,  b.  Fariljault,  Apr.  9,  1874. 

Winnifrcd  E.,  b.  Faribault,  Feb.  2,  1877;    m.  Nov.  13,  1895,  Guy  S. 
Lapham. 

741.  Dr.  George^  Riddell,  son  of  George  and  Mary  (Bab- 
cock) Riddell  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Colerain,  Mass.,  Aug.  30,  1823;  d.  Canisteo,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  26, 
1885;  m.  (i)  Canisteo,  Apr.  2,  1854,  Carrie  Shurtliff,  d.  June 
4,  1864;  m.  (2)  Aug.  28,  1865,  Mary  Warner. 

George  Riddell  graduated  at  the  University  of  New  York 
Mar.  10,  1855;  practiced  medicine  at  Canisteo  until  1878, 
when  he  removed  to  Bradford,  Pa. 

Children,  b.  Canisteo,  N.  Y. : 

Chester,  b.  Feb.  14.  1855;    d.  Aug.  17,  1855. 

Lizzie  L.,  b.  Apr.   11,   1856. 

Sarah,  b.  Jan.  10,  1859;    d.  I\Iar.  20,  1872. 

742.  Lorenzo  B."  Riddell,  son  of  George  and  Mary  (Bab- 
cock) Riddell  (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Colerain,  Mass.,  Apr.  25,  1831  ;   res.  1902,  Hallock,  Minn.;  m. 

Canisteo,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1855,  Caroline  F.  . 

Children : 

Helen,  b.   May  27.   1859 ;    d. 
Lemuel  C,  b.   Canisteo.  Dec,   1868. 
Laura  E.,  b.  Canisteo,  July  15,  1871. 
Lewis,  b.  . 

743.  Dr.  Le  Roy"  Riddell,  son  of  George  and  Mary  (Bab- 
cock) Riddell  (Joseph.  Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b. 

Colerain,  Mass.,  Sept.  11,  1833;  res.  1902,  Canisteo,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Canisteo,  Dec.  17,  1863,  Emma  L.,  dau.  of  Hiram  and 
Elmira  Pratt,  b.  New  Woodstock,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  i,  1833,  d.  Can- 
isteo, Apr.  26,  1901.  He  graduated  at  the  L^niversity  of  New 
"N^ork  in  1863,  and  has  practiced  medicine  in  Canisteo  since 
that  date. 

Children,  b.  Canisteo: 

Hirani  P.,  b.  Oct.  20,  1864;    d.  Canisteo.  Apr.  18,  1886,  unni. 

John,   b.   Jan.    14.    1866;    d.   Canisteo,   Dec.    IQ.    1893.   unm. 

Carrie  Elmira,  b.   Nov.   12,   1868;    res.   1902,  Rush  City,  Minn.;    m. 

Canisteo,  June  27.  1888,  Dr.  Alva  J.  Stone.     Has  two  sons. 
Harriet,  b.  Dec.  4.   1874:    res.  1902.  Canisteo;    m.  Canisteo,  Apr.  21, 

1897,  Gay  W.  Hall.     Has  two  children. 


312  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

744.  William'^   Riddell,  son  of  George  and  Mary    (Bab- 
cock)   Riddell   (Joseph,  Joseph,  OHver,  John,  James), 

b.  Colerain,  Mass.,  F'eb.  21,  1836;   res.  1902,  Canisteo,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Avoca,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  26,   1867,  Helen  C,  dau.  of  David 
Jones,  b.  Avoca,  June  10,  1844. 
Children : 

Hettie  M.,  b.  Oct.  5,  1868;  res.  1902,  Canisteo. 
George  H.,  b.  Jan.  31,  1870;  res.  1902,  Canisteo. 
Sara,  b.  Aug.  9,  1876;    res.  1902,  Canisteo. 

745.  Ellen  A.'^  Bell,  dau.  of  John  and  Lydia  (Babcock) 
Bell   (Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Heath, 

Mass.,  Oct.  9,  185 1 ;    res.  1902,  Leyden,  Mass.;   m.  Guilford, 
Vt.,  Dec.  29,  1869,  George  E.,  son  of  David  and  Sarah  (Dean) 
Williams,  b.  Stanford,  Vt.,  June  3,  1851. 
Children : 

Nellie  AI.,  b.   Leyden,  Nov.  2,   1870;    res.   1902,  Greenfield,  Mass.; 

m.   Greenfield,   Arthur,   son   of  Brainard  and   Ellen    (Boyd)    Cro- 

mack,  b.  Colerain,  Mass. 
Walter,  b.  Leyden,  Nov.  11,  1872. 
Alvah,  b.  Leyden,  Nov.  27,  1876;.  d.  1877. 
Leon,  b.  Leyden,  Mar.  20,  1879. 
Ethel,  b.  Greenfield,  Aug.  14,  1887. 

746.  Erances  Charlotta'''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Alonzo  and 
Mercy    (Gillette)    Babcock    (Darius,    Joseph,    Oliver, 

John,    James),    b.    Pharsalia,    N.    Y.,    Mar.    14,    1844;    res. 
1902,  Norwich,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Morrisville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  22,  1866, 
Wilson  W.,  son  of  William  and  Phebe  (Scarriot)   Lucas,  b. 
Smyrna,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  14,  1842. 
Children,  b.  Randallsville: 

Lillie  May,  b.  • ;    res.  1902.  Norwich.  N.  Y. ;    m.  Oneida,  N.  Y., 

May  14,  1901,  William,  son  of  Edwin  and  Rosa  (Gadsby)   Haight. 

Bertha  F.,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Plymouth,  N.  Y. ;    m.  O.xford,  N.  Y., 

June  20,  1898,  William,  son  of  Henry  Hall,  d.  Fulton,  N.  Y., 
Sept.   I,   1898. 

747.  Rose  Etta'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Alonzo  and  Mercy  Ann 

(Gillette)     Babcock     (Darius,    Joseph,    Oliver,    John, 
James),  b.   McDonough,   N.  Y.,    Tulv   n,    1853;    res.    1902, 
Oneida,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Earlville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  14,  1873,  Silas  M. 
Clarke. 
Children : 

Archie  A.,  b.  Sangerfield,  N.  Y. ;    res.  1902,  Oneida,  N.  Y. 

Bernie   S.,   b.   Bridgewater,   N.   Y. 

Freddie,  b.  Bridgewater;    res.  1902.  Watkins. 

Caroline,  b.  Oneida ;    res.  1902,  Watkins. 


TJic  Babcuck  Genealogy.  313 

748.  Adelbert*^  Babcock,  son  of  Alonzo  and  Mercy  Ann 

(Gillette)  Babcock  (Darins,  Joseph,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1856;  res.  1902,  Pool- 
ville,  N.  Y.;  m.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  20,  1882,  Addie  M., 
dait.  of  Isaac  and  Mary  (Guthrie)  Ford,  b.  Madison,  N.  Y., 
June  22,  1864. 
Children : 

Hattie  G.,  b.  Brookfield,  Mar.  14,  1887;    res.  1902,  Poolville,  N.  Y. 

Howard,  b.  Poolville,  May  7,   1899. 

Warren  D.,   b.   Binghamton,   N.   Y.,   May  25,    1900. 

749.  Elnathax  W'ells^  Babcock,  son  of  Peleg  and  Eliza- 
beth   (Wells)    Babcock    (Abel,   James,   James,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Sept.  30,  1790;  d.  Ash- 
away,  R.  I.,  Feb.  26,  1858;  m.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  3, 
1814,  Sally  (his  cousin),  dau.  of  William  and  Lucy  (Bab- 
cock) Davis,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  17,  1794,  d.  Ash- 
away,  R.  I.,  Sept.  7,  1857. 

"Elnathan  Babcock  was  Captain  of  the  Hopkinton  Militia 
in  18 1 5- 16.  He  was  Justice  for  Hopkinton  in  1826  and  1844." 
(Smith.) 

Children,  b.  Hopkinton: 

1292  Lucy  ]\I.,"  b.  May  9,  1815;    m.  Lebbeus  M.  Cottrell. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  6,  1818:    res.  1902.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Mary,  b.  Apr.  7,   1820 ;    m.  844  Daniel  Irish. 
Lydia  P.,  b.  Apr.  30,  1822;    d.  IMar.  i,  1837. 
Sally  Ann.  b.  Feb.  3,  1830 ;    d.  Nov.  3,  1864,  unm. 
William  D.,  b.  May  23,  1832;  d.  Oct.  3,  1833. 

750.  Mary^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Wells) 
Babcock  (Abel,  James,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Jan.  9,  1794:  d.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Sept.  29, 
1862;  m.  Oct.  28.  1813,  Joseph,  son  of  Joseph  and  Phebe 
(Wells)  Potter,  b.  Potter  Hill,  Aug.  4,  1787,  d.  Potter  Hill, 
Mar.  4.  1880. 

He  and  his  brother,  Thomas  W.,  were  partners  in  business 
at  Potter  Hill,  where  they  for  many  years  owned  and  operated 
a  cotton  factory,  fulling-mill  and  grist-mill,  and  at  the  same 
time  had  a  country  store. 

Children : 

Julia,  b.  Jan.  9,  1815;    d.  May  6.  1826. 

George,  b.  Jan.   12.  1823 ;    d.  Feb.  17,  1852,  unm. 

Lucy,  b.  Nov.  11,  1829;    d.  young. 

751.  Peleg^    Babcock,    Jr.,    son    of    Peleg    and    Elizabeth 

(Wells)   Babcock    (Abel,    James,  James,  James,  John, 


314  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

James),  b.  Rhode  Island,  Apr.  7,  1801  ;  d.  De  Riiyter,  N.  Y., 
May  6,   1858;  m.    (i)   Lucinda  Brown,  b.  July  21,   1804,  d. 
Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  2,  1841  ;   m.  (2)  Emily  Nichols. 
Children  by  iirst  wife: 

1293  Fanny,"  b.   Nov.  4,   1826;    m.  James  Greonman. 

1294  Daniel  E.,  b.  July  12,  1828;    in.  Hannab  Witter. 

1295  Elizabetb  A.,  b.  Aug.  27,  1830;    m.  Caleb  Lewis. 

Ann  Elizabetb,  b.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  27,  1830;  d.  W.  Gene- 
see, N.  Y.,  Feb.  15,  1889;  m.  Luke,  son  of  Peleg  iVlaxson,  b.  Hop- 
kinton,  R.  L  ;    res.  1902,  Weekapung,  R.  L     No  cbildren. 

Harriet  Newell,  b.  Aug.  27,   1833  ;    d.  Oct.  3,   1847. 

Mary  Esther,  b.  Oct.  25,  1835  ;  res.  1902,  Fern  Hill,  Tacoma,  Wash. ; 
m.  Mason  Holmes. 

Alanson  A.,  b.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  3,  1838;  d.  Genesee, 
Jan.  20,  1841. 

1296  Elnathan  Wells,  b.  Aug.  24,   1840;    m.   Eva  Harter. 

752.  Elizabeth  Ann^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Peleo;-  and  Eliza- 
beth   (Wells)    Babcock    (Abel,   James,   James,   James, 

John,  James),  b.  Chester,  Mass.,  Oct.  31,  181 1 ;  d.  Pawcatuck, 
Conn.,  July  4,  1883;  m.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Feb.  27,   1831,  Dr. 
Francis  Murphy,  b.  Oct.  31,  1808,  d.  Pawcatuck,  Nov.  9,  1880. 
Children : 

Ann  Maria,  b.  Newport,  R.  L,  Oct.  2,  1835;  d.  Bridgeport,  Conn., 
June  14,  1899;    m.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Sept.  26,  1851,  Courtland  West. 

Julia  Ann,  b.  Newport.  May  18,  1837;  d.  New  York  City,  Jan.  12, 
190T  ;    m.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Jan.  17,  1858,  Benjamin  F.  Burdick. 

Harriet  P.,  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  19,  1839;  d.  Westerly,  Jan.  16,  1902; 
m.   Westerly,  Dec.   31,   1856,   Thomas  J.   Noyes. 

William  F.,  b.  Westerlv,  R.  L,  Nov.  27,   1840;    d.  Westerly,  Jan.  2, 

1843. 
William  P.,  b.  Westerly,  Mar.  27,  1844;    d.  Westerly,  Oct.  10,  1899; 

m.   (i)   Bridgeport,  Conn.,  Sept.  20,  1870,  Sophia  Savage;    m.   (2) 

Westerly,   Feb.,    1878,   Mary  Landphere. 
Mary   Elizabeth,    b.    Westerly,    Feb.    21,    1846;     res.    1902,    Trenton, 

N.  J.;    m.    (i)    Westerly.   May  23,   1868,   Samuel   Moyle;    m.    (2) 

Bridgeport,  Conn.,  Mar.  12,  1889,  Robert  E.  Peterson. 
Peleg  B.,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.   16,   1849;    d.  Bridgeport,  Dec.   12,   1872; 

m.   New  York  City,   Dec.  29,   1868,   Minnie  Grant. 

1297  Oscar  F.,"  b.  June  21,  185 1  ;    m.  Ann  E.  Chapman. 

753.  William    Mulford^    Babcock,    son   of   Mulford   and 
Anna   (Miner)    Babcock   (Abel,  James,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Apr.  18,  1800;   d.  Anderson,  Ind.,  Mar.  31, 
1878;   m.  Burlinolon,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  31,  1828,  Palmyra,  dan.  of 
Eri   and   Polly    (Joice)    Densmore,    b.    Burlington,  Apr.   24, 
1809.  d.  Mexico,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  6,  1837. 
Children : 

Mary  A.,  b.  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y..  May  28,  1830;  res.  1902,  Weeds- 
port,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Weedsport,  Dec.  19,  i860,  Alonzo  L.  Putnam,  b. 
Brutus,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  2,  1823. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  315 

Eri  1).,  1).  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  21,  183 1  ;  res.  1902,  Harbor 
Springs,  Mich.;  m.  Vermilion,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  8,  1855,  Catherine 
Keller. 

1298  John  W.,"  b.  July  17,   1833;    ni.  Julia  A.  Sherman. 

1299  Henry  M.,  b.  Aug.  19,  1836;    m.  Ruby  M.  Joice. 

754.  Perry  G.*^   Babcock,  son  of  Mill  ford  and  Anna  Mi- 
ner)   Babcock     (Abel,    James,     James,     James,    John, 

James),  b.  Feb.  28,  1812;  d.  Scriba,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  29, 
1892;  m.  (i)  Mar.  16,  1837,  Eunice  Wilcox,  b.  Westerly, 
R.  I.,  May  25,  1815,  d.  Sept.  11,  1840;  m.  (2)  Westerly, 
1841,  Eliza,  dau.  of  Nathaniel  Sheffield,  b.  Westerly,  Nov.  11, 
1818,  d.  Scriba,  Aug.  21,  1873. 

In  1856  Perry  with  his  famil}-  removed  from  Stonington, 
Conn.,  to  Scriba. 

Child  by  first  wife : 

1300  William  P.,''  b.  Sept.  11,  1839;    m.  Cecilia  Davis. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

1301  Edward,  b.  Jan.  30,   1842;    m.  Hettie  Hynds. 
Abel,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  June  19.   1843;    d.  young. 

1302  Abel.  b.  Dec.  11,  1844;    m.  (i)  Ella  Baker;    m.  (2)  Mrs.  Ida  (Sis- 

son)  Babcock. 
Sans,  b.   Westerly,   Aug.   14,   1846;    d.  young. 
Martha  E.,  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  30,  1849;    d.  young. 
Frances,   b.   Westerly,    Feb.  22,    185 1 ;    d.  Scriba,   N.   Y.,    1877;    m. 

Fayette  Forward.     No  children. 

1303  Geo.  S.,  b.   Sept.  5,   1852 ;    m.  Ida  Daniels. 

Arthur,   b.    Stonington,    Conn.,    Feb.   27,    1854;     res.    1902,    Oswego, 

N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Thomas  W.,  b.  Scriba,  June  15,  1855;    I'es.  1902,  New  Haven,  N.  Y. ; 

m.   Scriba,    1887,  Cora  Farmer. 
Mary  J.,   b.    Aug.   29,    1864;     res.    1902,    Stonington;    m.   Westerly, 

Landphere. 

755.  John  R.^**  Babcock,  son  of  Mulford  and  Anna  (Miner) 
Babcock  (Al)el.  James,  James,  James.  John.  James),  b. 

Preston,  Conn.;   d.  Oneco.  Conn.,  IMay  26,  1900;   m.  Caroline 
Rouse,  d.  W^ashington,  R.  I.,  1890. 
Children : 

Samuel  T.,  b.  . 


John  S.,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Bristol,  Soldiers'  Home. 

Thomas   W.,   b.   ;    res.    1902,    Summit. 

Susan,  b.  Voluntown ;    d.  Cranston,  1884. 

James,  b.  ;    d.  Centerville. 

Sarah,  b.  ;    d.   Centerville,   1858. 

756.     Eunice^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Stephen  and  ISfercy  (Hinck- 
ley)   Babcock    (Nathaniel,    Nathaniel.    James.    James, 
John,  James),  b.  1791  ;   d.  Aug.,  1877;   m.  Ethan  Crandall,  of 
Potter  Hill,  R.  T. 


3i6  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Wealthy,  h.  Sept.  23,  1820;  d.  June  7,  1878;  m.  (i)  June  21,  1855, 
John  P.,  son  of  Jesse  Babcock,  Jr.,  b.  Aug.  17,  181 1,  d.  Mystic, 
Conn.,  Jan.  20,  1868;    m.   (2)   Charles  P.  Gallup. 

Nancy    J\I. ;    Carrie. 

757.  Stephen*^   Babcock,  Jr.,   son  of   Stephen  and   Mercy 
(Hinckley)     Babcock    (Nathaniel,    Nathaniel,     James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  1793;   d.  Nov.  10,  1870;  m.  Dec.  23, 
18 18  ( ?),  Emma  Bentley,  d.  Jan.  14,  1876,  aged  80.     He  was 
a  farmer  in  Stonington,  Conn. 
Children : 

Mary  Ann,  b.  June  15,  1820;    d.  Mar.  24,  1892;    m.  Edwin  P.  Berry. 

Stephen  L.,  b.  1822;    d.  Jan.  28,  1824. 

Lucy  G.,  b.   Mar.  9,   1825 ;    d.   Aug.  30,    1827. 

Frank  W.,  b.  Nov.  5,  1827;    d.  May  31,  1893. 

1304  Ira  B.,"  b.  July  24,  1830;    m.  Maria  G.  Green. 

758.  Samuel   Hinckley^    Babcock,    son   of   Stephen   and 
Mercy    (Hinckley)     Babcock     (Nathaniel,    Nathaniel, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  1798; 
d.  N.  Stonington,  Apr.  3,  1877;  m.  Feb.  28,  1832,  Caroline 
S.,  dan.  of  Amos  and  Amelia  (Babcock)  Stanton,  of  N.  Ston- 
ington, b.  Oct.  19,  1808,  d.  Jan.  11,  1867. 

Samuel  lived  in  N.  Stonington ;  was  a  farmer. 

Children,  b.  N.  Stonington  (from  Stanton  Genealogy  and 
Family  Records)  : 

1305  Samuel   Avery,"  b.   Dec.  29,    1832;    m.   Mary  J.   Barber. 
Daniel  H.,  b.  July  2,   1834;    d.   Nov.  28,   1857. 

Horace  S.,  b.  June,  1837;    res.  1902,  Westerly,  R.  I.;    unm. 
Albert   Clinton,   b.   Dec.    12,    1840.     Enlisted   in   the  21st   Regiment, 
Connecticut  Volunteers;    d.  New  Haven  Hospital,  Jan.  31,  1863. 

759.  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  Mercy  (Hinck- 
ley)   Babcock    (Nathaniel,    Nathaniel,    James,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  Jan.  19,  1800;    d.  Sept.  16,  1875;    m.  Feb. 
4.  1839,  Mary  Ross,  of  Westerly,  R.  I. 
Child : 

Mary  Esther,  b.  ;   m.  and  res.  1902,  New  York  City. 

760.  Elizabeth   Stuart''   Babcock,   dan.   of  Stephen   and 
Elizabeth     (Stuart)     Babcock     (Nathaniel,     Nathaniel, 

James.  James,  John,  James),  b.  Dec.  28,  1806;  d.  N.  Ston- 
ington, Sept.  22.  1886;  m.  Dec.  21.  1826,  Cyrus  W.  Brown, 
Jr.,  b.  Mar.  11,  1806,  d.  Nov.  27.  1875. 

Cyrus  W.  Brown  was  a  farmer,  a  wool  merchant,  and  buyer 


Tlic  Babcuck  Gcncalugy.  317 

and  seller  of  poultry  in  Boston.     He  was  a  Deacon,  and  much 
respected  by  the  townspeople  in  N.  Stonington. 
Children : 

1306  Emily  E.,"  b.  Jan.  16,  1828;    m.  Thomas  W.  Wheeler. 

1307  Cyrus  Henry,  b.  Nov.  24,  1829;    m.  Sarah  C.  JMaxson. 

1308  Louise  A.,  b.  Mar.  21,  1832;    m.  Dr.  E.  R.  Lewis. 

1309  Gideon,  b.  Aug.  3,  1834;    m.   (i)   ^Liry  L.  Hollis;    m.   (2)    Martha 

C.  Hollis. 
J3I0  Bcnadam  Williams,  b.   Apr.  4,    1836;    m.  Almira   McGlaflin. 

131 1  Thomas,  b.  June  28,  1838;    m.  Mary  Colby. 

John  B.,  b.  Feb.  3,   1841,  N.   Stonington ;    m.  Oct.  5,   1865,  Lavina 

Richardson,  of  Windsor,  Conn. ;    res.  Westerly,  R.  L     They  had 

three  children. 
Sarah   E.,   b.    May  23.    1843 ;     m.    Nov.   29,    1863,   Allen   Barber,  of 

Westerly.     They  had  one  son. 
William  S.,  b.  July  11,  1845;    m.  Dec.  27,  1870,  Carrie  Colby.     They 

have  three  children. 
James  S..  b.  Mar.  2.  1848;    m.  Apr.  29,  1872,  Mary  E.  Brayton,  of 

Westerly.     One  child. 

761.  John  D.^  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  IMercy  (Davis) 
Babcock    (Nathaniel,    Nathaniel,   James,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Feb.   5,   1818;  d.  Jan.   11,    1887;  m.    (i)   Jan.   5, 

1843,  Harriet  D.  Bentley,  d.  Jan.  31,  ;    m.   (2)   Eunice 

A.  Maine. 

Children  by  first  wife : 

Susan  H.,  b.  Oct.  21,  1845;    res.  1902,  Old  Mystic,  Conn. 

John  R.,  b.  June  17,  1848;    res.  1902,  Old  Mystic,  Conn.;  m.  Mar.  19, 

1896,   Martha   Eliza   Chipman.     They  have  one  daughter,  Emily, 

b.  Nov.  2,   1899. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

1312  William,"  b.  Julv  14,  1855;    m.  Mary  E.  Burdick. 
Wealthy  E.,  b.  Feb.  24.  1858;    d.  Oct.  5,   1880. 
Betsey  A.,  b.  Feb.  24,  1861 ;    d.  1863. 

Abby  L.,  b.  Mar.  26,  1865;    m.  May  22,  1890,  Wallace  A.  Phillips; 
res.  1902,  Bridgeport,  Conn. 

762.  Jonas  Larrison^  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  Mercy 

(Davis)  Babcock  (Nathaniel,  Nathaniel.  James,  James, 
John.  James),  b.  ]\Iar.  i,  1820;  d.  Apr.  21,  1855;  m.  Abby 
C.  Stanton,  of  Stonington,  Conn.,  b.  Mar.  i,  1822,  d.  Nov.  12, 

1853- 
Child : 

Edwin  Lewis,  b.  Sept.  5,  1843 ;    d.  Apr.  8,  1849. 

763.  William    Stuart^    Babcock,    son    of    Stephen    and 
Alercy  (Davis)  Babcock  (Nathaniel,  Nathaniel,  James, 

James.  John.  James),  b.  Mar.  20,  1822;   d.  May  8,  1899;   m. 
Oct.  4,  1859,  Frances  E.  ]\Iaine,  b.  June  15,  1840, 


3i8  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

Children : 

1313  William   P.,"  b.   Feb.  5,   1862;    m.   Carrie  A.  Green. 

1314  Nellie  F.,  b.  July  28,   1865;    111.  (Jeorge  L.   Bradford. 

1315  Anna  E.,  b.  Jan.  16,  18O7  ;    m.  Nathan  Exeley. 

1316  Stephen  B.,  b.  Feb.  6,  1870;    ni.  Birdie  M.  Kenyon. 

13 17  Callie  M.,  b.  Nov.  16,  1871  ;    m.  Albert  Exeley. 

764.  Eliza^  Babcock,  daii.  of  Reitben  and  Susanna  (Gould) 
Babcock    (Reuben,     Nathaniel,     James,     James,    John, 

James),    b.  E.  Poestenkill.  N.  Y.,  181  r;  d.  Lockport,  N.  Y., 
May  14,  1881  ;   m.  E.  Poestenkill,  Dec.  31,  1829.  Walter  Ives, 
b.  Mar.  8,  1809,  d.  Lockport,  June  18,  1878.     They  lived  in 
Lockport,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Warren  Ashley,  b.  Dec.  6.  1830;  res.  1902,  Lockport,  N.  Y.  ;  ni.  (i) 
Nov.  22,  1851,  Lucy  Richards;  m.  (2)  Frances  Van  Wic.  He 
had  three  children  by  his  second  wife.  He  enlisted  in  the  Union 
Army  in  1862,  and  served  until  the  end  of  the  Civil  War,  15th 
New  York  Volunteers.     Is  engaged  in  the  Insurance  business. 

Amanda    Jane,    b.    • -;    m.    Horatio    Wells.       She    d.    Lockport, 

1858  (?)  or  1868  (?). 

1318  Lewis  C*  b.  Oct.  26,  1833;    m.  Martha  A.  Bixler. 
Cynthia,  Harry,  and  John  d.  young. 

765.  Cynthia'^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Reul)en    and    Susanna 

(Gould)    Babcock    (Reuben,   Nathaniel,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  3,  1812;  d.  Troy, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.   13,   1896;    m.  June  6,   183s.  Chester  Brockway, 
of  Troy,  N.  Y.,  d.  Apr.  i,  1874. 
Children : 

Sarah  Frances,  b.  Nov.  i,  1839;  res.  1902,  Eighth  Ave.  and  South 
St.,  Troy,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

1319  Albert  E.,°  b.  May  9.  1842 ;    res,  Troy.  N.  Y. ;    ni.  Amaryllis  Myers. 

1320  Emma,  b.  Dec.  7,  1844;    m.  Robert  Hatchman. 

766.  Harry^  Babcock,  son  of  Reuben  and  Susanna  (Gould) 
Babcock    (Reuben,     Nathaniel,     James,     James,    John, 

James)  b.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  14,  1815;  d.  Devil's 
Lake,  Mich.,  Nov.  29,  1902,  buried  Brookl}^,  Mich;  m.  (i) 
Mar.,  1835,  Fanny  Fonda:  m.  (2)  July,  1844,  Calista,  dau. 
of  Hezekiah  and  Betsey  (Blodgett)  Fordham,  b.  Nov.  21, 
1818,  d.  Brooklyn,  Mich.,  Jan.  29,  1875;  m.  (3)  Christine 
Fonda. 

Harry  lived  in  E.  Pembroke,  N.  Y.,  until  1874,  when  he 
removed  to  a  farm  at  Brooklyn,  Mich. 

Child  by  first  wife : 

1321  John  Lester,*  b.  Jan.   15,   1839;    m.  Fanny  Peard. 


llic  Babcock  Genealogy.  319 

Children  by  secoiul  wife: 

Emil}-,    I).    May    18,    1845;     res.    1902,    Brooklyn,    Mich;     m.    James 

Reed. 
1322  Eliza  Jane,   h.  June    18.    1849;     res.    1902,   Devil's   Lake,    Mich.;    m. 

Jeremiah  Wilsey. 
Charles  Reuben,  b.  Dec.   13,  1852.     Is  a  farmer,  res.  1902,  at  Custer, 

Mich.;    m.  E.  A.   Dimond. 
Robert,    b.    May   21,    1855;     res.    1902,    Brooklyn,    Mich.     He    is    a 

farmer;    ni.    Mary   Dereniier. 

767.  LucY^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Reul)en  and  Susanna  (Gould) 

Babcock     (Reuben,     Nathaniel,    James,    James,    John, 
James),  b.  E.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Mar.   15,  1822;    res.   1902, 
Batavia,  N.  Y. ;  m.  EI)enezer,  son  of  John  Allen. 
Children : 

Nancy  Jane,  b.  Jan.  22,  1840;  d. ;  m.  East  Pembroke,  N.  Y..  June  8, 
1859,  Jacob  T.  Arnold.  He  res.  1902,  Rochester,  N.  Y.  Their 
children  are  Lillian  and  Flora  ;    res.  1902,  Rochester. 

John  Thomas,  b.  Dec.  2,  1842;  res.  1902,  East  Pembroke;  m.  Me- 
lissa Seeley.  Children :  Eva,  b.  1872,  d.  1873 ;  Charles  b.  Nov.  16, 
1884. 

Susan,"  b.  Apr.  15.  1845;  res.  1902,  Batavia,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Sept.  8, 
1868,  Dr.  Lucius  B.  Parmelee,  b.  Nov.  16,  1840.  They  had  four 
children:  Alice,'"  who  m.  William  P.  Curtis;  Lucius;  Edith; 
and  Porter. 

768.  M.vRv^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Reuben  and  Susanna  (Gould) 
Bal)cock     (Reuben,    Nathaniel,    James,    James,    John, 

James),   b.   E.   Poestenkill,   N.    Y.,   Jan.    18,    1824;    d.    Sept. 
II,  1890;   m.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1847,  William  A.  Seers. 
Children : 

James,  b.   June  20,    1848;    res.    1903,   at    1904   Seventh   Ave.,   Troy, 

N.  Y. 
Ransom,  b.  ;    res.  1903,  Troy,  N.  Y. ;    m.  June  21,  1869,  Kate 

Bigelow.     No  children. 
Ella  Moore,  b.  1864  (?)  ;    m.  ALir.  4,  1886,  William  O.  Ives.     They 

have  five  children. 

769.  Amanda  Melvina^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Reuben  and  Su- 
sanna   (Gould)    Babcock    (Reuben,    Nathaniel.   James. 

James.  John,  James),  b.  E.  Poestenkill.  N.  Y.,  Nov.  9.  1825; 
res.  1903,  E.  Pembroke.  N.  Y. ;   m.  Clarence.  N.  Y.,  May  15, 
1844.  Samuel  Loomis.  b.  Cicero.  N.  Y..  Nov.  20.  1820,  d.  E. 
Pembroke,  Dec.  17,  1902. 
Children : 

Cyrus  C.  b.  Feb.  23,  1846;    d.  1846. 

Herbert  W.,  b.  July  26,  1848:    d.   1851. 

Eugene  Sandford,"  b.  Feb.  26.  1852;  d.  Potsdam.  N.  Y.,  Jan.  18, 
1879;  m.  Lima.  N.  Y..  Dec.  22,  1873,  Delia  A.  Chappell.  Thev 
had  one  daughter.  Mabel ,^"  m.  Verne  L.  Shepard,  of  Lima,  N.  Y. 


320  TJic  Babcock  Goicalogy. 

Charles  Raymond,"  b.  May  2,  1858;  res.  1903,  Sherburne,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
July  5,  1892,  Kate  M.  Shotwell,  J>:il)a,  N.  Y.  ilave  one  child, 
Charles,'"  who  is  Principal  of  the  High  School  at  Sherburne. 

Clara  Voletta,"  b.  June  2O,  1863;  res.  1903,  E.  Pembroke,  N.  Y. ; 
m.   Daniel   S.   Wilkinson.     They  have  one  child,  Florence.'" 

770.  Sarah  Ann^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Reuben  and  Snsanna 
(Gould)    Babcock   (Reuben,  Nathaniel,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Sand  Lake,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  21,  1829;   res.  1903, 
4  Ball  Place,  Watervliet,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Troy,  Dec.  31,  1848,  Elias 
E.,  son  of  John  and  Sarah  (Weaver)  Dodge,  b.  Pownal,  Vt., 
Feb.  28,  1826,  d.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  17,  1879. 
Children,  b.  Troy: 

Elias  Eaton,  b.   Sept.  2,   1852;    d.  Dec.  29,   1852. 
1323  Raymond  Eadie,'"*  b.  Feb.  24,   1854;    m.  Harriet  Payne. 

Ellis  Reuben,"  b.  Aug.  25,  1856;  res.  1903,  New  York  City;  m.  (i) 
Albany,  Sept.  23,  1879,  Lucy,  dau.  of  John  and  Emma  (Gray)  Max- 
well, b.  Delhi,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  7,  1856,  d.  Troy,  Feb.  8,  1887.  No 
children.  M.  (2)  Pittsfield,  June  26,  1889,  Almeda,  dau.  of  John 
and  Helen  (Thayer)  Webster,  b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  17,  1859. 
They  have  two  children,  Helen  Edna,'"  b.  Oct.  7,  1890,  and  Leroy 
W.,  b.  June  24,  1892. 

Charles  F.,  b.  June  8,  1863;    d.  Troy,  Mar.  2,  1870. 

Clara  May,  b.  Oct.  i,  1864;  res.  1903,  Watervliet,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Sept. 
16,  1883,  Charles  T.,  son  of  Charles  and  Sarah  (Saunders)  Clark, 
b.  Troy,  Mar.  5,  1863.     No  children  living. 

771.  Charles^    Babcock,    son    of    Reuben    and    Susanna 

(Gould)  Babcock  (Reuben,  Nathaniel.  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1832;  d.  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Apr.  17,  1903;  m.  Maria  Louise  Schermerhorn, 
b.  1831  (?),  d.  Dec,  1902. 

Charles  Babcock  was  a  Jeweler  for  forty  years  in  Troy, 
N.  Y.,  and  for  a  large  part  of  that  period  was  city  official 
time  keeper. 

Children : 

Charles  Edward,"  b.  Feb.  8,  1856;    res.  1903,  Watervliet.  N.  Y. ;    m. 

Brooklyn,   May   17,   1844,   Annie  M.   Silvey.     They  have  one  son, 

James.'" 
William,  b.  Sept..  1857;    res.   1903,  Watervliet,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Charlotte,  b.  Feb.  5,  1861 ;    d.  Mar.  4,  1865. 
Jennie  G.,  b.  July  18,  1864;    res.  1903,  Watervliet,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 
Mary,  b.  Sept.  18,  1868;   d.  Watervliet,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  16,  1901. 
Frederick,  b.  July  29,  1872;    res.  1903,  Troy,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Troy,  Feb. 

14,   1893,   Georganna  Odell,  b.  Troy.     No  children. 

772.  Stevens^   Babcock,  son  of  Elias  and  Hannah    (Bar- 
ber)   Babcock     (Elijah,     Elias.    James,    James,   John, 

James),  b.  E.  Poultney,  Vt.,  Feb.  2,  1802;  d.  Hampton,  N.  Y., 
Apr.  14,  1884;    m.  Fairhaven,  Vt.,  Feb.   10,  1832,  Mary  A., 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  321 

dau.  of  Elias  and   IJclsy   (^W'liipplcj    Jli  AhAl,  b.  Fairhaven, 
Vt.,  Aug.  13,  1808,  d.  W'obuni,  Mass.,  Feb.,  1899. 
Children : 

1324  Cornelius   L.,"   b.    Mar.   4,    1833;     111.    (i)    llattic   Weaver;    m.    (2) 

Laura  Burroughs. 

Francis  R.,  b.  Sept.  4,  1839;    d.  Fairhaven,  Vt.,  Aug.  15,  i860. 

George  C,  b.  Oct.  2,  1842.  Killed  at  the  Battle  of  the  Wilderness, 
May  5,  1864.  He  was  Lieutenant  of  Co.  F,  6th  Regiment  Volun- 
teers, enlisted  Sept.   19,   1861,  at   Rutland,  Vt. 

Mary  P.,  b.  Poultney,  Aug.  8,  185 1  ;    res.  1903,  North  Woburn,  Mass. 

773.  Daphene'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Silas  and  Rachel  (Allen) 
Babcock   (Elijah,   Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Feb.  22,  1798;   d.  1816;   m.  Apr.  20,  1815,  Robert  French. 
Child : 

Cynthia,''  b. ;    m.  R.ezin  Chebondy.     Had  one  daughter,  Nancy.'" 

774.  Rev.  Hiram*  Babcock,  son  of  Silas  and  Rachel  (Al- 
len)   Babcock     (Elijah,     Elias,    James,    James,   John, 

James),  b.  Essex,  Vt.,  Apr.  14,  1802;  m.  Nov.  16,  1837, 
Eliza,  dau.  of  Calvin  Andrews,  d.  July  22,  1871. 

Rev.  Hiram  moved  with  his  father  to  Wayne,  O.  He 
graduated  at  IMiddlebury  College,  Vt.,  1833.  In  1836  he 
graduated  from  the  Lane  Theological  Seminary ;  was  ordained 
to  preach  Oct.  7,  1841,  his  first  pastorate  being  Oil  Creek,  Pa. 

Children : 

Lyman  Beecher,  b.  May  18,  1843 ;    d.  Dec.  25,  1862. 

1325  Silas  Allen,''  b.  May  23,  1845  ;    m.  Martha  Brainard. 
Anna  E.,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Daniel,  b.  July  23,  1849:    d.  young. 

Clara  E.,  b.  Nov.  25,  1853 ;  m.  Des  Moines,  la.,  Sept.  13,  1882,  John 
H.    Goldman. 

775.  Rev.  Daniel*  Babcock,  son  of  Silas  and  Rachel  (Al- 
len)   Babcock     (Elijah,     Elias,    James,    James,   John, 

James),  b.  Wayne,  O.,  Dec.  17.  1810;  d.  W.  Townsend,  Vt., 
1875;  m.  (i)  Apr.  8.  1840,  Amanda  Avery,  of  Boston;  m. 
(2)  Abbie  L.  Blackman,  of  Plymouth,  Mass.;  res.  1903, 
Manomet. 

He  graduated  at  college,  Aug.  24,  1836.  (It  is  supposed  in 
Ohio.)  Graduated  at  Andover  Theological  Seminary.  Massa- 
chusetts. Sept.  4,  1839;  ^^'^^  ordained  a  Congregational  min- 
ister Nov.  7,  1839.  He  preached  for  thirty- four  years.  Among 
other  places,  at  Talmouth,  Plymouth,  and  lastly  at  Townsend. 

No  children  by  either  marriage. 
21 


322  llic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

776.  Sarah  T.'*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Silas  and  Rachel  (Allen) 
Babcuck    (Elijah,   Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Jan.  17,  1812;   m.  Oct.  5,  1842,  James  Gibson. 
Children : 

Eveline  M.,  b.  ;    d.  1845;    Amanda;  Hiram. 

777.  Horace^  Babcock,  son  of  Paul  and   Mable    (Hatch) 
Babcock  (Elijah,  Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Essex,  Vt.,  Mar.  22,  1802;    m.  Sarah  Reynolds;  res.  Jericho, 
Vt.     Was  a  farmer. 
Children : 

Henry,  b.  June  i,   1841  ;    d.  Jericho. 
Hiram,  b.  Sept.  15,  1845;    d.  Jericho. 

778.  Selah^  Babcock,   son    of    Paul  and  Mable    (Hatch) 
Babcock  (Elijah,  Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Jericho,  Vt.,  July  23,   1804;    d.  Jericho,  Sept.   18,   1880;    m. 
Oct.    13,    1842,  Prudence,  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Lydia   (Case) 
Buxton,  b.  Westford,  Vt.,  June  11,  1815.     He  was  a  farmer 
at  Jericho. 
Children : 

Reuben,  b.  June  30,  1843 ;    d.  Fairfax,  Va.,  Jan.  29,  1863. 

1326  Adelia,"  b.  July  20,  1845  :    "i-  Russel  D.  Johnson. 
Julia,  b.   Mar.   19,   1850;    d.  Jericho,  Nov.   11,   1892. 

779.  JuLiu.s^   Babcock,   son   of  Paul   and   Mable    (Hatch) 
Babcock   (Elijah,   Elias,  James.  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Jericho,  Vt.,  Dec.  16,  1806;  d.  N.  Brookfield,  Mass.,  1893; 
m.  (i)  N.  Brookfield,  1833,  Miriam  Moulton,  b.  New  Hamp- 
shire, 1806.  d.  N.  Brookfield,  Dec.  13,  1845;  "i-  (2)  Charlotte 
Ball,  of  Holden,  Mass.,  b.  1804,  d.  N.  Brookfield,  Oct.  13, 
1873.  Julius  was  a  manufacturer  of  shoes. 
Children : 

Mary,"  b.  Jan.  3,  1835 :  m-  Edward  Kermpton,  of  Westport,  Mass. ; 
res.  1902,  North  Brookfield,  Mass.  Had  one  child,  Ellen  F.,^"  who 
m.  Adrian  Miller;    res.  Palmer,  Mass.    Has  six  children. 

1327  Rev.  Edwin,"  b.  Aug.  10,  1838:   m.  Caroline  Gifford. 

Lydia,  b.  Feb.,  1841  ;  m.  David  Penery ;  res.  Canterbury,  Conn.;  d. 
Canterbury,    1892. 

780.  Submit^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Paul  and  Mable   (Hatch) 
Babcock   (Elijah,  Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Oct.  30,  1808;    d.  Spencer,  Mass.,  Feb.  22,  1875;    m.  Asa 
Moulton. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  323 

Child : 

Charlutta,''  b.  N.  Bru(jkticld,  Mass.,  .May  8,  1846;  d.  Spencer,  Mass., 
Apr.  14,  1891  ;  111.  May  8,  1870,  Cliarles  P.  Barton,  b.  Oakham, 
Mass.,  June  18,  1846.  They  had  two  children,  Charles  H.,'"  b.  Apr. 
7,  1872,  res.  1903,  Spencer,  Mass.,  nnni. ;  Rosella,  b.  Sept.  2, 
1877,  res.  1903,  Spencer,  Mass. 

781.  RuFus**    Babcock,   son   of   Paul   and   Mable    (Hatch) 
Babcock  (Elijah.  Elias,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Jericho,  Vt,  Sept.  3,  1814;    d.  N.  Brookfield,  Mass.,  Feb.  10, 
1875;    m.  Oct.,  1836,  Liicinda  Pettie,  b.  May  2,  1815,  d.  N. 
Brookfield,  July  30,  1890.     They  settled  at  N.  Brookfield. 
Children,  b.  N.  Brookfield : 

1328  Roswell  Halch,''  b.  Mar.  25,  1838;    m.  Estella  Dean. 

1329  Caroline,  b.  Oct.  10,   1840;    m.   (i)   Charles  Sumner;    m.   (2)   Ben- 

jamin Barnes. 

1330  John,   b.   Aug.    13,    1848;    m.   Evelyn   Bowen. 

782.  Timothy  Erastus^   Babcock,   son  of   Cyrus   G.   and 
Amarilla    (Hawley)    Babcock    (Rufus,    Elias,    James, 

James,  John.  James),  b.  Oct.  16,  1812;  m.  Dec,  1838,  Alice 
M.  Wheeler.  ' 

He  was  adopted  at  an  early  age  by  his  uncle.  Timothy 
Babcock. 

Children : 

Laura  C,  b.  Dec.   18,   1840. 
Emily   ]M.,  b.   Apr.,    1842. 

783.  Cyrus  Gile.s^  Babcock,  son  of  Cyrus  G.  and  Ama- 
rilla f Hawley)  Babcock  (Rufus,  Elias,  James,  James.  John, 
James),  b.  Colebrook,  May.  1817;  d.  Colebrook,  Dec.  13, 
1843;  m.  .Sherman,  Conn..  Nov.,  1838.  Maria,  dau.  of  Jesse 
and  Amanda  Kellog'g,  b.  Sherman,  May  26,  18 16,  d.  Sherman, 
Oct.  29.  1853. 

Children : 

1331  Amarillis,"  b.  May  i,  1840;    m.  Philip  Smith. 

1332  Emily  A.,   b.    Sept.    15,    1842;    m.   George  Hungerford. 

784.  Caroline  Elizabeth  Vas.sar^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rev. 
Dr.  Rufus  and  Olivia  (Smith)  Babcock  (Rufus,  Elias, 

James,  James.  John.  James),  b.  Barrington,  R.  I.,  Feb.  10, 
1825;  d.  Philadebhia.  Pa..  Mar.  7.  1889;  m.  Poughkeepsie, 
N.  Y.  (by  her  father).  May  27.  1852,  Hon.  Horatio  Gates 
Jones,  son  of  Rev.  Dr.  Horatio  Gates  and  Deborah  (Lever- 
ing) Jones,  b.  Roxborough,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Jan.  9,  1822, 
d.  Philadelphia,  Mar.  13,  1893. 


324  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Caroline  E.  V.  Babcock  was  educated  chiefly  l)y  her  father, 
and  also  attended  a  young"  kuhes'  seminary  at  Phikidelphia 
and  liuished  under  Miss  Lydia  Booth,  of  I'oughkeepsie,  N.  Y., 
the  acconiphshed  niece  of  Matthew  Vassar,  founder  of  Vas- 
sar  College.  While  her  father  was  pastor  in  Philadelphia 
Miss  Babcock  met  Horatio  Gates  Jones. 

Mr.  Jones  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania 
1 841,  was  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  Bar,  President  of  the 
Webster  Society  of  Philadelphia,  Vice  President  Historical 
Society  of  Pennsylvania,  a  member  of  the  American  Antiqua- 
rian Society,  Honorary  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Historical  So- 
ciety of  Great  Britain.  Was  elected  as  a  Republican  to  the 
Senate  of  Pennsylvania  in  1874,  and  held  the  office  continu- 
ously (by  reelections)  for  eight  years. 

Both  he  and  his  wife  were  members  of  tlie  Baptist  Church. 
They  had  no  children.  Mr.  Jones  was  the  author  of  sev- 
eral Historical  Works,  wrote  a  number  of  articles  for  Dr. 
Sprague's  Baptist  Pulpit,  and  published  a  Genealogy  of  the 
Levering"  Family,  \\diile  in  the  Legislature  he  earnestly  ad- 
vocated the  repeal  of  the  Sunday  law  of  1799,  which  makes 
it  possible  for  designing  people  to  have  persons  wdio  believe 
the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  punished  for  working  on  Sun- 
day. He  prepared  from  documents  and  menioranda  collected 
by  his  father-in-law  the  larger  part  of  the  records  of  the  de- 
scendants of  Elias  Babcock  (his  wife's  great  grandfather) 
that  appear  in  this  volume. 

785.  Emily  Eddy^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rev.  Dr.  Rufus  and 
Olivia  (Smith)   Babcock  (Rufus,  Elias,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,  1826;  d.  Nov., 
1845;  "''•  Feb..  1844,  George  H.  Swift,  of  the  Poughkeepsie 
(N.  Y.)  Bank. 

She  was  educated  with  her  sister  Caroline,  and  was  a  young 
ladv  of  high  intellectual  attainments. 

Child:  ' 

Rufus   Eddy   Swift,   b.   ;    d.    soon  after  attaining  his   majority, 

unm. 

786.  Harriet  Shepard^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rev.  Dr.  Rufus 
and   Olivia    (Smith)    Babcock    (Rufus.    Elias,   James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Salem,  Mass.,  Sept.  26,  1831 ;  m.  (by 
her  father.  Rev.  Rufus  Babcock,  D.D.),  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y., 
June  28,  1866,  James  Henry  Weeks,  b.  Hackensack,  N.  J., 
Dec.  22,   1822.     Miss  Babcock  was  educated  chiefly  at  New 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  325 

Bedford,  Mass.     Mr.  Weeks  was  a  lawyer  of  Poughkeepsie, 
N.  Y.     He  represented  Dutchess  County  in  the  New  York 
Assembly  in  1853. 
Children : 

Caroline  Babcock  Weeks,  b.  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y. 
Elizabeth  Mauran  Weeks,  b.  at  Poughkeepsie. 

787.  Jabish^  Brown,  Jr.,  son  of  Jabish  and  Abigail  (Bab- 
cock)   Brown    (Oliver,    Oliver,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  3,  1806;    d.  Leonardsville, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  5,   1862;    m.  Brookfield,  Sept.  23,  1830,  Selma, 
dau.  of  John  and  Lydia  (Taylor)  Davis,  b.  Brookfield,  Mar. 
8,  1807,  d.  Bridgewater,  Apr.  23,  1883. 
Children,  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y. . 

1333  Sophronia  A.,"  b.  May  18,  1833 ;    m-  Henry  B.  Booth. 

Harriet  E.,  b.  Oct.  8,  1834;  d.  Columbus,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22,  1868;  m. 
Leonardsville,  Dec.  28,  1857,  Fuller  P.  King,  b.  Unadilla  Forks, 
d.  Columbus,  Dec.  6,  1868. 

Fidelia  D.,  b.  Aug.  26,  1838;  d.  Leonardsville,  Feb.  10,  1890;  m. 
Leonardsville,  Oct.  28,  1862,  Frank  Champlin,  b.  Mystic  Bridge, 
Conn.,  1825,  d.  Greenmanville.  Conn.,  Oct.  8,  1872.     Had  one  child. 

George  Taylor,  b.  Feb.  24,  1842;  res.  1902,  Leonardsville,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  4,  1873.  Emily  D.  Douse,  b.  Brook- 
field, N.  Y.  They  have  four  children,  Harriet,  Edna,  Myra,  and 
Helen. 

788.  Elizabeth    Palmer^    Babcock,   dau.    of  Joshua   and 
Eunice     (Brown)     Babcock     (Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Paris,  N.  Y.,  July  11,  1804;   d.  Una- 
dilla Forks,  N.  Y^,  Oct.  20,  1889;    m.  Unadilla  Forks,  Mar. 
10,   1825,  Ephraim  Crumb,  b.  Stephentown,  N.  Y".,  June  22, 
1800,  d.  Unadilla  Forks,  Feb.  26,  1850. 
Children : 

Eunice  Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  28,   1827 ;    d.  Apr.   13,   1850,  unm.  , 

Lucius  Henry,  b.  July  4,   1831  ;    unm. 

Maria  Louise,  b.  May  9,  1833;    d.  June  30,  1866,  unm. 

Lucy  Eleanor,  b.  Apr.   12,  1836;    unm. 

Mary  Angeline,  b.  Apr.  19,  1840;    unm. 

Franklin  Everett,  b.  Oct.  29,  1843;    unm. 

Wallace  E.,  b.  Dec.  17,  1846;    unm. 

789.  Henry   H.^    Babcock,     son    of    Joshua     and    Eunice 

(Brown)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  N.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y..  Nov.  28,  1806;  d. 
Unadilla  Forks,  .N.  Y.,  Apr.  26,  1887;  m.  (i)  Massachusetts, 
May  10.  183T,  Tammison  W.  Rogers;  m.  (2)  Hamilton, 
N.  Y.,  May  4,  1846,  Catherine  G.  Rowell ;  m.  (3)  Plainfield. 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  25.  1850,  Laura  W.  Huntley;  m.  (4)  Unadilla 
Forks,  N.  Y..  Jan.  29,  1867,  Mary  Jennie  Penney. 


326  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children  by  first  wife : 

Helen,  b.  Mar.  12,  1832;    d.  aged  15  years. 

1334  Juliet,'"'  b.   Feb.  5,   1835;    m.  George  Strickland. 

1335  Mary  Tammison,  b.  Oct.  3,  1837;    m.  W.  L.  Bassett. 

1336  H.  Lee,  b.  Jan.  11,  1840;    m.  Elizabeth  Chapman. 

Child  by  second  wife : 

Ella  C,  b.  Sept.  6,  1848;    m.  Sept.  i,   1870,  Clark  Brown.     No  issue. 

Children  by  third  wife: 

Herbert  Huntley,  b.  May  15,   1854;    unni. 
James  Joshua,  b.   Nov.  9,   1859;    d.  young. 
Fannie,  b.  July  6,  1864;    d.  young. 

Child  by  fourth  wife: 
Laura,   b.   Oct.   i,   1873. 

790.  Eunice  Evangeline^   Babcock,  dau.   of  Joshua  and 
Eunice     (Brown)     Babcock     (Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 

James.  John,  James),  b.  Plainfield,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  2,  1812;    d. 
Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Sept.   14,   1852;  m.  Unadilla  Forks,  N.  Y., 
Rowland  Gardner. 
Children : 

Victor,  b.  ;    d.  aged  21  ;    ni.  Georgia  Taylor.     No  issue. 

Charles  and  Jane ;    d.  young. 

791.  Joshua  Frankijn-^  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Eu- 
nice (Brown)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Unadilla  Forks,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  9,  1823;  res. 
1902,  Plainfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Kendall,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  11,  1851, 
Elizabeth  Bassett. 

In  1902  he  was  still  a  prominent  promoter  of  the  Babcock 
annual  g-athering,  known  as  the  Babcock  Cousins  Party,  held 
during  Christmas  week.  The  custom  has  been  kept  up  for 
more  than  fifty  years,  and  is  ]:)articipated  in  by  many  of  the 
families  from  far  and  near. 

Children : 

Mary  Eva,  b.  Mar.  13,  1853;    unm. 
Irving,  b.  June  28,   1855 ;    d.  Mar.  29.  1863. 
Eunice  Cornelia,  b.  Aug.  8,  1858;    d.  Sept.  23,  1863. 
Edith  May.  b.  July  17.   1864;    d.  Apr.  28,   1867. 
Victor,  b.  July  4,   1866;    unm. 

792.  Elizabeth'^    Babcock.    dau.    of    Asa    and    Catherine 

(Robbins)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James, 

John.  James),  b.  ;    m.   S.  H.   Reynolds;    d.  Galesburg, 

N.  Y.,  Jan.  19,  1869. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  327 

Child : 

Elizal)etli.  b.  ;    m.  Charles  S.  Benton. 

793.  Leander^  Babcock,  son  of  Asa  and  Catherine  (Rob- 
bins)    Babcock    (Joshua,   Ohver,   James,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Paris,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  i,  181 1;  d.  Richfield  Springs, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  18,  1864;  m.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  June,  1837,  Ellen, 
dau.  of  Alvin  and  Mary  (O'Connor)  Bronson,  b.  Oswego, 
18 1 6,  d.  Oswego,  June  21,  1887. 

Leander  Babcock  graduated  from  Union  College,  Schenec- 
tady, X.  Y.,  in  1830.  Studied  law  under  Mr.  Crafts,  of  Utica, 
N.  Y. ;  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1834,  and  settled  at  Os- 
wego, X.  Y.  He  was  chosen  District  Attorney  for  Oswego 
County  in  1840-3.  In  Mar.,  1850,  was  elected  Mayor  of  Os- 
wego. In  X^ov.,  1850,  was  elected  member  of  the  Thirty- 
second  United  States  Congress  from  the  Twenty-third  District 
of  X^ew  York,  and  was  one  of  the  youngest  members  of  that 
Congress.  He  was  President  of  the  Board  of  Education  in 
1853  and  again  in  1855.  He  was  a  man  above  reproach,  hon- 
ored by  all  his  fellow  citizens,  and  left  to  his  family  the  herit- 
age of  a  spotless  name. 

Children : 

^iiJ  Bronson,' b.  Oct.   18.   1838:    m.  Cecelia  Lewis. 

1338  Catherine,  b.  Aug.  17,  1840;    m.  Albert  E.  Hastings. 
MarJ^  b.  June   16,   1842;    d.  June  21,    1889.   unm. 
Edward,  b.   May  18,   1844;    d.   Sept.,   1845. 

1339  William  A.,  b.  Mar.  30.   1850:    m.  Blanche  Aldenhoff. 

Charles  Leander.  b.  Alay  21,  1856.     Address,  care  of  Coal  Companies, 
Equitable   Building.   St.   Louis.    Mo. ;    unm. 

1340  John  L.,  b.   Sept.   10,   1859;    m.  Elizabeth  Merrill. 

794.  Oliver  R.^  Babcock.  son  of  Oliver  and  Polly  (Ran- 
dall)   Babcock    (Joshua,   Oliver,   James,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Babcock  Hilf,  X.  Y.,  Sept.  17,  1805:  d.  Xew  Hart- 
ford, X^.  Y.,  May  10,  1879;   m.  Bridgewater,  X^.  Y.,  Sept.  23, 
1830,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Dennison  and  Polly  (Robbins)   Brown, 
b.  Mar.  25,  1805. 
Children : 

Mary  R..  b.  Mar.   11.  1832:    d.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  13.  1877: 
m.  (\)  Benjamin  F.  Joslyn  :    m.  (2)  Porter  S.  Huntley.     No  issue. 

1341  Sophronia."  b.  July  19,  1833;    m.  Walter  S    Hurd. 

1342  George  K.,  b.  June  18,  1836:    m.  .A.lice  Coollidge. 

1343  Charles  ]\L,  b.  June  6.  1841  ;    m.  Alaggie  McChesney. 

795.  Maria^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Polly  (Randall) 
Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 


328  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

b.  Bahcock  Hill,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  15,  1804;   in.  Oct.  27,  1827,  Al- 
bert G.  Burke;    res.  1902,  Batavia,  111. 
Children : 

Ellen  AL,  b.  Jan.  23,  1831  ;    nnni. 

1344  Albert  G.,"  b.  Jan.  8,  1833;   m.  Clara  Booth. 
Olivia,  b.  Oct.  5,  1834;    d.  Feb.,  1838. 

796.  Clarissa**  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Polly   (Ran- 
dall)   Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,   James,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  Paris,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  9,  1809;  d.  Babcock  Hill,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  S.  H.  Reynolds,  d.  Galesburg,  111.,  Jan.  19,  1869. 
Children : 

1345  Leander,"  b.  Aug.  23,  1837 ;    m.  Sarah  B.  Turner. 
Sarah  B.,  b.  May  15,   1840;    d.   Mar.  9,   1885,  unm. 

797.  Peleg    Brovvn^    Babcock,    son    of    Oliver   and    Polly 

(Randall)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Babcock  Hill,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1813;  d. 
Babcock  Hill,  Apr.  2,  1857;   m.  Jan.,  1843,  Cornelia  Scott. 

At  the  time  of  his  death  Peleg  Babcock  was  member  of  the 
New  York  State  Legislature. 

Children : 

1346  Stephen  Moulton,"  b.  Oct.  22,  1843;    m.  May  C.  Crandall. 

1347  Linn  Boyd,  b.  May  26,  1850;    m.  Minnie  Ellsworth. 

798.  Charles  B.**  Brown,  son  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Bab- 
cock)   Brown    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James,   John, 

James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  24,  1802;   d.  New  Hart- 
ford, N.  Y.,  Oct.  28,  1889;    m.  Bridgewater,  1830,  Catherine 
Mabbett,  b.  Bridgewater,  Oct.   23,    1808,  d.  Unadilla  Forks, 
N.  Y.,  June  12,  i860. 
Children : 

1348  Lee  C*  b.  Dec.  15,  1832;    m.  Martha  Babcock. 

1349  Emily,  b.  Jan.  3T,  1835;   m.  Edwin  Aiken. 

1350  Cora  H.,  b.  Apr.  16,  1838;    m.  J.  Morris  Childs. 

799.  Amos  H.^  Brown,  son  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth   (Bab- 
cock)   Brown    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  26.  1805;  d.  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  26,  1880;  m.  Dresden,  O.,  Apr.  9,  1829,  Susan 
Monroe,  b.  Zanesville,  O.,  Feb.  2,  1812,  d.  Zanesville,  July  16, 
1867. 

Children : 

Lewis,  b.  July  11.  1832;    d.  Oct.,  1837. 
Franklin,  b.  Jan.  12,  1835  ;    d.  Aug.  16,  1836. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  329 

1351  Henry,"  h.  Mar.  25,  1837;    m.   (i)   Mary  M.  Cox;    m.  (2)   Alary  W. 

Hodge. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Sept.  15,  1839;    d.  Nov.  9.   1851. 

1352  Joseph  M.,  b.  Oct.  5,  1842;    ni.    (i)   Anna  Price;    m.    (2)    Blanche 

K.  Seaman. 
Alice  A.,  b.  Mar.  2,  1845 ;    unni. 

1353  Ella  S..  b.  Apr.  21,  1849;    ni.  Charles  H.  Abbott. 
Annie  S.,  b.  Nov.  3,  1852;    ni.  Lowell  M.  Dyer. 

800.  Lorenzo  S.**  Brown,  son  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Bab- 
cock)   Brown    (Joshua,    OHver,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Briclgewater,  N.  Y.,  June  6,  1809;  d.  Bridge- 
water,  Jan.  3,  1891  ;  m.  (i)  Litchfield,  N.  Y.,  Jaa  16,  1839, 
Elizabeth  C.  Brainard ;  m.  (2)  Saquoit,  N.  Y.,  Nov.,  1857, 
Laura  M.  Birdsey. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

1354  Clara."  b.  Mar.  14,   1842;    m.  Timothy  E.  Wilcox. 
Arthur,  b.  Sept.  26.  1845 ;    m.  Florence  Shaw. 

1355  Susan,  b.  June  6,  1848;    m.  Adelbert  Rhodes. 
Grace,  b.  May  26,  1850;    d.  Apr.  17,  1851. 

801.  Elizabeth  G.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Martin  and  Eunice 

(Robbins)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James, 
John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  June  2,  1822;  d.  Bridge- 
water.  July  22,  1892;  m.  Mar.,  1844,  Giles  Scott,  b.  Oct.  13, 
181 8.  d.  Mar.  6,  1892. 
Children : 

1357  Loren  R.,  b.  Nov.  24,  1846;    m.  Clara  Ferris. 
Washington,  b.  Apr.  8,   1849;    m.  Alice  Robbins. 

802.  Clark  Hinckley^  Babcock,  son  of  Martin  and  Eu- 
nice (Robbins)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  9,  1823;  d.  Bridge- 
water;   m.  (i)  Mar.  24,  1868,  Kate  S.  Cole;  m.  (2)  Nov.  14, 
1877,  Amelia  Cole. 
Child  by  first  wife: 

1358  May  K.,"  b.  Mar.   17,   1869;    m.  Fred.  J.  Ludeman. 

803.  Catherine  A.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Martin  and  Eunice 

(Robbins)    Babcock    (Joshua.    Oliver.    James.    James, 
John.  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  6,  1826;    d.  Nov. 
2,  i88s;  m.  Sept.,  1849,  Brvan  Scott. 
Child : 

Nellie."  b.  July  7,  1850:    d.  Nov.  4,  1881  ;    m.  Oct.  5,  1870,  Homer  W. 
Seals.     Lived  at  Utica,  N.  Y.     No  children. 


330  •  The  Babcock  Ccjiralogy. 

804.  Keziah    G.^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Martin    and    Eunice 

(Rol)l)ins)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John.  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  13,  183  i  ;  m.  Feb. 
15'  i^53»  Jerome  J.  Budlong,  b.  Oct.  20,  1830,  d.  July  21, 
1889. 

Chilch^en : 

1359  Jennie  L.,"  b.   Dec.  24,   1853;    m.   Willis  Hoyt. 

1360  Florence  F.,  b.  Nov.  21,  1855;    m.  Charles  A.  Doud. 

1361  Elizabeth,  b.   Nov.  2,   1858;    m.  Fred  W.  Lester. 

1362  Irving  J.,  b.  Sept.  7,   1868;     m.  Ada  M.  Titus. 

805.  Judge  B.   Pratt^   Babcock,   son   of   Dr.    Charles  and 
Nancy  (Pratt)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Mar.  29,  18 14;   d.  Sept.  24,  1893,  unm. 

Judge  Babcock  entered  Hamilton  College  when  eighteen 
years  old,  but  graduated  from  Union  College  in  1835.  He 
studied  law  with  a  firm  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  admitted 
to  the  bar.  In  1847  he  settled  in  Livingston  County,  111., 
where  in  1852  he  was  elected  County  Judge,  serving  three 
years  in  an  efficient  manner.  He  was  of  a  retiring  disposition, 
and  of  noble  and  generous  (pialities,  and  aided  many  humane 
and  charitable  projects  with  the  wealth  he  acquired. 

806.  William    R.^    Babcock,   son   of   Charles   and    Nancy 
(Pratt)    Babcock   (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  New  Hartford.  N.  Y.,  Apr.   10,   1816;    d.  Esmen 
Township,   III,   Sept.    11,    1866;  m.   New  Hartford,  July   15, 
1845,  Myra  F.,  dau.  of  Horace  Marsh,  b.  Kirkland,  N.  Y., 
Mar.  12.' 1828. 
Children : 

1363  Mary,'  b.  Jan.  6,  1848;  m.  John  Hossack. 
Charles,  b.  Mar.  21,  1851  ;  d.  Oct.  9,  1855. 
Helen  M.,  b.  Sept.  13,  1856;    d.  Nov.  29,  1859. 

1364  Ella.  b.  Apr.   25,   i860;    m.   Fred   N.   Hossack. 
William,  b.  Mar.  17,  1863;   d.  Sept.  24,  1866. 

807.  Mary  Curtis^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Charles  and  Nancy 
(Pratt)  Babcock  (Joshua.  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  "11,  1820;  d.  Utica, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  i,  1894;  m.  New  Hartford,  Oct.  9.  1844,  Henry 
Green  Abbott,  son  of  Paul  Abbott,  b.  Lowville,  N.  Y.,  Julv  29, 
1818,  d.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  17,  1896. 

She  was  a  woman  gi\'en  to  g-ood  works,  having  been  offi- 
cially connected  with  public  philanthropies  as  manager  and 
visitor  for  many  years.  She  was  an  active  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church;    a  devoted  daughter,  wife,  and  mother. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  331 

Her  husband  was  an  active  business  man,  having  Ijeen  lo- 
cated in  cities  both  East  and  West.  In  Chicago  his  estabhsh- 
nient  was  destroyed  by  the  great  fire  of  1870.  The  latter  part 
of  his  life  was  spent  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  where  he  is  described  as 
a  gentleman  and  a  Christian. 

Children,  first  two  born  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  others  Utica, 
N.  Y. : 

Charles  Babcock,  b.  Nov.  25,  1845  ;    d.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1846. 

1365  Thomas  Alden,"  b.  June  16,  1847;    in.  Ennna  Van  Nostrand. 
Mary  Klla,  b.  July  31,  1849;    1901.  lived  in  Utica;    unm. 
Jane  Hulbut.  b.  Nov.  2^,  1852;    1901,  lived  in  Utica;    unm. 
William  Pratt,''  b.  May  24,  1856;    m.  Mary,  dau.  of  Austin  Eastman. 

William  is  a  merchant  and  manufacturer  in  St.   Paul,   Minn.     He 
is  a  graduate  of  Cornell  University. 
Henry  J.,  b.  Mar.  20,   1858;    d.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  July  31,  1863. 

808.  William  Avery^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Dolly 
(Stanton)    Babcock     (Joshua,     Oliver,     James,    James, 

John.  James),   b.    N.   Stonington.   Conn.,   Sept.   4,    1817;    d. 
Onarga  Hill,  111.,  A])r.  7,  1875;    m.  N.  Stonington,  Apr.   14, 
1845,  Harriet  Coates. 
Child : 

1366  Georgiana,"  b.  Aug.  23,  1846;    m.  Ezra  Durham. 

809.  Betsey  A.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Dolly  (Stan- 
ton)   Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,   James,   James,    John, 

James),  b.   N.   Stonington,  Conn.,  June  21,   1819;    d.  Jersey 
City,  X.  J.,  Dec.   i,   1871  ;  m.  Pendleton  Hill,  Conn.,  July   i, 
1838,  Benjamin  Palmer,  b.  Voluntown,  Conn.,   1813,  d.  Lis- 
bon, Conn.,  July  14,  1873. 
Children : 

1367  Benjamin  H..°  b.  Jan.  8,  1840;    m.  Eliza  Brown. 

Amos  F.,''  b.  Oct.  18.  1842;    d.  June  6,  1870;    m.  Helen  Porter.     Had 
a  son,   Charles,"'  who  d.  young. 

1368  James  B.,  b.  Aug.  6.  1844;    m.  Abbey  IMorgan. 
Mary  E..  b.  Nov.  8,  1846;    d.  Dec.  29.  1870.  unm. 
Endora,  b.  May  10.   1S49;    d.  June  6,  1871. 

1369  Charles,  b.  Nov.  6.   1851  ;    m.  Julia  Morgan. 
Clara  E.,  b.  Dec.  28,  1858;   unm. 

810.  Mercy  Amelia^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Dolly 
(Stanton)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn..  Mar.    19,   1821  ;    m. 
Pendleton  Hill,  Feb.   14.  1847,  George  Henry,  son  of  Beriah 
Lewis,  b.  N.  Stonington. 
Children : 

Ada.  b.  Nov.  14,  1847. 

George,  b.  Feb.  8,  1849;  'd.  Sept.  15,  1864. 


332  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Julia,  b.  Mar.  30,   1851  ;    d.  Feb.   15,   1864. 

1370  Mary  E.,"  b.  June  11,  1854;    m.  George  H.  Beebe. 

1371  Horace  G.,  b.  Sept.  28,  1857;   in.  Carrie  Kenyon. 

811.  Irving  Franklin**  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Dolly 

(Stanton)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James, 
John,  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  28,  1823;   m.  Aug-. 
18,    1863,   Sarah  N.,  dau.  of  Douglas  and  Sarah    (Barnes) 
Tracey,  b.  Griswold,  Conn.,   Mar.  9,    1843. 
Children : 

1372  Mabel,"  b.  Sept.  3,   1864;    111.  Herbert  Clifford. 

1373  Jennie,  b.   Mar.  3,   1866;    m.  Albert  L.  Thompson. 

1374  M.  Kate,  b.  Dec.  17,  1870;    m.  Henry  J.  Wheeler. 

Charles,   b.    Sept.    15,    1872;     ni.    Idelle   Richardson,    Mar.    18,    1896; 

res.  1901,  Jewett  City,  Conn. 
Martha,  b.  Nov.  5,  1876;    m.  Edward  Briggs,  Aug.  18,  1898. 
George,  b.  Feb.  7,  1882;    res.  1901,  Westerly,  R.  I.;    unm. 

812.  Nancy  A.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Dolly  (Stan- 
ton)   Babcock    (Joshua,    Oliver,   James,   James,   John, 

James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  4,  1828;    m.  Pendle- 
ton Hill,  Conn.,  Jan.  2,   1854,  B.  P.,  son  of  Israel  Parks,  b. 
N.  Stonington,  1813,  d.  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  July  19,  1873. 
Children : 

Ada,  b.  Apr.  22,  1855. 
Cora,  b.  Apr.  10,  i860. 

813.  Louisa''  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  Davis  and  Jane  (More- 
house)   Babcock    (William   A.,    Oliver,   James,   James, 

John,  James),  b.  Spencertown,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  8,  1808;   d.  Alden, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.  15,  1886;   m.  Evans,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  26,  1826,  Bur- 
den Catlin,  b.   Maryland,   N.   Y.,  Dec.    11,    1799,   d.   Alden, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.,  1 89 1. 
Children : 

Lewis,   b.    1827;     res.    1901.    Alden,    N.    Y. ;     m.    Alden,    (i)    Sarah 
Norris;    m.    (2)   Katherine  Bixby. 

1375  Eliza  J.,"  b.  Aug.   18,   1828;    m.   Newell  Skinner. 

John  M.,  b.  1831  ;   m.  (i)  Meda  Pennel ;   ni.  (2)  Elizabeth  Colbraith. 
Caroline,  b.  1833;    d.  1901. 
Marietta,  b.   1835;    d.   1853. 

1376  Julia  Ann,  b.  June  6,  1837;    m.  Henry  H.  Angel. 
Laura,  b.  1839;    m.  Alden,  Sept.  6,  i8so,  Robert  Neel. 
Melissa,  b.    1845;    d.   Feb.  7,    1848. 

Marilla,  b.  1845;    d.  Feb.  9,  1848. 

814.  Marietta  B.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  Davis  and  Jane 

(Morehouse)    Babcock    (\A'illiam    A..    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  4,   1814;    d. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  333 

Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  7.  1889:    ni.  Buffalo,  Oct.  9,  1836,  Wil- 
liam E.,  son  of  Nathan  and  Jane  (\'an  V'aler)  Lyman,  b.  New 
York  City,  July  9,  1814;   res.  1900,  389  Franklin  St.,  Buffalo. 
Children,  b.  Buffalo: 

Emma  C,  b.  ;    unm. 

Cornelius   M.,   b.  Jan.   28,    1842;    ni.   Buffalo,   N.   Y.,   Oct.    10,   1862, 

Helen  L.  Washburn. 
Carlton  M.,  b.  Jan.  21,  1849;  m.  Mary  V.  Lyons,  of  Adams,  N.  Y. 
Mary  Josephine,  b.  Nov.  10,  1852;    unm. 
Marion  Justin,  twin  to  preceding;    d.  Feb.  24,  1868. 

iil5.  George**  Babcock,  son  of  John  Davis  and  Jane  (More- 
house) Babcock  (William  A.,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  16,  1819;  d.  Princess 
Anne,  Va.,  Apr.  26,  1880;  m.  Dec.  12,  1850,  Solona,  dau.  of 
Jonathan  and  Sophronia  Freeland. 

At  the  age  of  seventeen  enlisted  in  the  U.  S.  Army,  was 
on  recruiting  service  in  New  York,  and  in  the  frontier  with 
13th  U.  S.  Infantry  until  the  breaking  out  of  the  Mexican 
War,  when  he  entered  the  2d  U.  S.  x\rtillery,  and  was  in  every 
engagement  but  one.  In  the  Civil  War,  1861  to  1865,  he 
served  in  the  23d  New  "^^ork  X'^olunteer  Infantry,  and  after 
the  war  settled  at  Norfolk,  Va. 

Children : 

Julius  A.,*  b.  Hudson,  Mich.,  Feb.  20.  1853 ;  m.  Oct.  26,  1882,  Mary 
E.  Bradbrook ;  res.  1901,  Norfolk,  Va.  They  have  three  chil- 
dren: Grace,^"  b.  Nov.  7,  1887;  Walter,  b.  Sept.  29,  1890;  Jesse, 
b.  Dec.   10,   1895. 

John  Lyman,®  b.  Leslie,  ^lich.,  Feb.  25,  1856;  res.  1901,  Norfolk, 
Va. ;  m.  Mar.  4,  1877,  Adelia  (Carson)  Skelton.  of  Princess  Anne, 
Va.  Children,  b.  at  Princess  Anne :  Minnie,"  b.  Aug.  6,  1878 ; 
George  L..  b.  Nov.  5,  1880,  d.  1893:    Vinton  S.,  b.  July  22,  1895. 

Jane  E..  b.  Leslie,  Mich,  July  30,  1859;  d.  Jan.  13,  1894;  m.  Na- 
thaniel Kellv,  of  Peekskill,  N.  Y.    Two  children,  both  d. 

Lillie  S.,'  b.  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  21,  1865;  m.  Nov.  28.  1889,  Joseph 
J.  Wispell,  of  Woodstock,  N.  Y.  Children :  Bessie,  b.  Nov.  28, 
1890;   Edna  E.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1896. 

816.  Jane  Ann^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  Davis  and  Jane 
(Morehouse)  Babcock  (William  A.,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John.  James),  b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  26.  1821;  d. 
Adrian,  j\Iich.,  Aug.  15,  1899;  m.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  7, 
1842,  Edward  J.  Cadwell,  b.  Granby,  Conn.,  Feb.  2,  18 19, 
d.  Seneca,  Mich.,  Jan.  9.  1871. 
Children : 

Edmond  Austin,  b.  Buffalo,  Jan.  3,  1844;    d.  Hudson,  ]\Iich.,  Julv  27, 

1857. 
1377  George  B.,''  b.  Feb.   15,  1848;     m.  Susan  Page. 


334  ^/^^  Babcock  Genealogy. 

817.  David  Morehouse**  Babcock,  son  of  Jolin  Davis  and 
Jane     (Morehouse)     Babcock     (William     A.,     Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Java,   N.   Y.    (?),   May   lo, 
i8jy;  d.  New  York  City,  ]\Iay  i,   1874;  m.  New  York  City, 
May  10,  1 85 1,  Sarah  E.  Van  Tine,  b.  New  York  City,  Nov. 
24,  1827,  d.  Melrose,  N.  Y.,  May  15,  1890. 
Children,  b.  New  York  City: 

1378  Horace  Edstrom,"  b.  Jan.  30,   1852;    m.  Sarah  E.  Todd. 

1379  Henrietta  Watt,  b.  Aug.  29,  1853 ;    m.  John  H.  Crookes. 

Malissa  Lyman,  b.  Dec.   14,  1859;    d.  NewiYork  City,  July  29,  i860. 
Amelia  Morehouse,  b.  Jan.  26,   1861. 

Emma  Cornelia,  b.  Apr.  20,  1863;    d.  New  York  City,  May  18,  1864. 
Alice  Norwood,  b.  Jan.  i,  1868;    d.  New  York  City,  Apr.  15,  1869. 
Minnie  Sparling,  b.  May,  1870;    d.  New  York  City,  Apr.  4,  1871. 

818.  Emily   E.*   Babcock,   dan.   of  John    Davis   and   Jane 
(Morehouse)    Babcock    (William    A.,    Oliver,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Evans,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  8,  183 1;  d.  Ann 
Arbor,  Mich.,  Feb.  9,  1896;  m.  Ann  Arbor,  Joseph  C. 
Watts,  b.  Gresham,  Norfolk  County,  England,  Apr.  4,  1830; 
came  to  America  in  1830.  Went  to  Ann  Arbor  in  1847,  where 
he  was  in  the  jewelry  iDusiness  until  1894. 
Children,  b.  Ann  Arbor : 

Dr.  Virginia  J.,  b.  June  20,  1853;    d.  July  23,  1891. 

Julia  C,  b.  Sept.  10,  1855  ;    d.  Dec.  25,  1875. 

Carrie  L.,  b.  June  4,  1858;    res.  1900,  331  E.  Liberty  St.,  Ann  Arbor. 

Herbert  Clarence,  b.  May  9,  1871  ;  m.  Great  Bend,  Pa.,  Nov.  8, 
1899,  Clarissa,  dau.  of  Porter  C.  Burns.  Herbert  is  an  optician, 
living  Feb.,  1900,   127  S.  Salina  St..  Syracuse. 

Harry  Howard,  b.  May  9,  1871.  Optician,  Feb.,  1900.  living  in  Kan- 
sas City,  Mo. 

819.  Allen^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia  (Darrow) 
Babcock      (Gersham.     Oliver,     James,     James,     John, 

James),  b.  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  Aug-.  24,  1802;  d.  Nov. 

22,  1835;    m.  ;   d.  early,  leaving  two  children,  who  were 

brought  up  by  their  grandparents. 
Children : 

Charles,  b.  July  28.  1827;    d.  Hinsmanville,  N.  Y..  July  5,  1899,  unm. 
Amanda,  b.  1831  ;    d.  1851,  unm. 

820.  Cynthia^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Avery  and  Lydia   (Dar- 
row)  Babcock   (Gersham,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  24,  1804;   d.  Hast- 
ings, N.  Y.,  Oct.,  ;    m.  May  26,   1826,  Edwin  Corning, 

of  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  b.  Mar.   16,   1798,  d.  Mar.  25, 
1874.    They  removed  to  Hastings  soon  after  marriage. 


i    ^^  1 


MRS.  EMILY  E.   (BABCOCK)   WATTS. 

1831-1896.  Page  334. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  335 

Children : 

1380  John,"  b.  July  28,  1827;    111.  Elizabeth  Crump. 

Avery,  b.  Apr.   16,   1831 ;    settled  in  Cicero,  N.  Y. ;    was  a  farmer; 
unm. 

1381  Erasmus,  b.  Juno  6,   1834;    m.  Mary  E.  Thurston. 

Clarissa,  b.  Aug.  9,  1836;    d.  Sept.  20,  1861 ;    m;    had  no  children. 

821.  Russell'^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia  (Darrow) 
Babcock     (Gersham,     Oliver,     James,     James,     John, 

James),    Ix    Canaan,    N.    Y.,    Dec.    6,    1806;    d.    Lysander, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  4,   i860;    m.  Apr.  9,   1836,  Susan  Ouderkirk,  b. 
Nov.  20,  1 8 10,  (1.  Lysander,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  28,  1854. 
Children : 

Theodore,  b.  May  9,  18 — ;    res.  1899.  Gloversville,  N.  Y.     A  business 
man ;   unm. 

1382  Orlando,''  b.  ;    m.  Candis  L.  Taylor. 

1383  Emma  J.,  b.  Oct.  26,   1840;    m.  Aaron  Bush. 

Lydia,   b.   Aug.    i8,    1842;    d.   Aug.   31,    1900;    m.    1863,   John  Van- 

veichten.     Settled  at  Gloversville.     No  issue. 
Albert,  b.  .     Settled  at  Waverly,  la.     Deals  in  horses ;    unm. 

822.  CiiLOE^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Avery  and  Lydia  (Darrow) 
Babcock     (Gersham,     Oliver,     James,     James,     John, 

James),  b.  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  27,  1810;  d. 
Apr.  14,  1845;  m.  Lysander,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  24,  1834,  Nelson,  son 
of  Nelson  and  Lucy  (Cogswell)  Dunham,  b.  Greenville, 
N.  Y..  Jime  20,  1807,  d.  Little  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  10,  1887. 
Child : 

Cynthia,  b.   Aug.   2,   1836;    m.   Azariah  Tenbrook.     They  settled  at 
Little  Utica,  N.  Y. 

823.  Harry  D.^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia   (Dar- 
row)  Babcock  (Gersham,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  May  17.  181 1;  d.  May,  1891 ;    m.  Oct.  21,  1835, 
Catherine  Goff. 
Children : 

Eliza,  b.   1837:    m.   1862,  Edward  Dunston.     Settled  at  Weedsport, 
N.  Y.     Has  children. 

1384  John  D.."  b.   Sept.  24,   1838;    m.  Marietta  Betts. 

1385  William  Henry,  b.  1840  (?)  ;    m.  Catherine  Martin. 
Chloe,  b.  1841  (  ?)  ;    d.  unm. 

1386  Corydon,  b.  1842  (?)  ;    m.  Martha  Pelton. 
Joel,  b.  1844  (  ?)  ;    d.  unm. 

Mary,  b.  1845  (?);    d.  unm. 

824.  Abram^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia  (Darrow) 
Babcock     (Gersham,     Oliver,     James,     James,     John, 

James),  b.    Canaan,    N.    Y.,    Jan.    4,     1816;    d.    Svracuse, 


33^  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

N.    Y.,    Oct.    I,    1884;     m.    Fond    du    Lac,    Wis.,    June    21, 
1846,    Eliza    S.,    dau.    of   Seline   and    Margaret    (Edgerton) 
Newton,  b.  Greenwich,  Mass.,  Dec.  8,  1828;    res.  1899,  2112 
Seventh  Ave.,  Seattle,  Wash. 
Children : 

Seline  A.,  b.  Hannibal,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  6,  1848;  res.  1899,  3024  Fifth 
Ave.,  Minneapolis,  Minn. ;  m.  Worthington,  Ind.,  Dec.  21,  1880, 
Flora  D.  Mondy,  b.  Wingate,  Ind.,  Apr.  28,  1859.     No  children. 

1387  Cora  M.,"  b.  Aug.  22,  1851  ;    m.  Charles  A.  Vanderhoof. 

Charles  Edwin,  b.  Victory,  N.  Y.,  Jvnie  21,  1854;  d.  Syracuse,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  25,  1872. 

1388  Thomas  A.,  b.  Jan.   18,   1857;    m.  Minnie  Carpenter. 

Sarah,  b.   Little  Utica,   N.   Y.,   Dec.  7,    1859;    m.   Syracuse,  N.  Y., 

Dec.  30,   1880,  Arthur  Marvin. 
Lillie  S.,  b.  Little  Utica,  Nov.  12,  ;    d.  New  York  City,  May  14, 

1888. 
Mary  A.,  b.  Lysander,   N.   Y.,  Aug.  23,   1864;  d.   New  York  City, 

July  31,  1888. 
Anna  L,  b.  Lysander,  Apr.  25,  1866;    d.  Cicero,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  27,  1869. 
Fred  N.,  b.  Cicero,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  4,  ;    d.  Cicero,  Mar.  5,  1869. 

825.  Gersham  Avery^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia 
(Darrow)  Babcock  (Gersham,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  July  22,  1818;  d. 
Sept.  23,  1851;  m.  Apr.  4,  1842,  Caroline  Runnels,  b.  1820, 
d.  Apr.  23,  1 85 1. 
Children: 

Delia,  b.   1843;    d.   May   10,   1851. 
Wallace,  b.   1846;    d.   May  21,   1850. 

1389  Walter,"  b.   Nov.   10,   1848;    m.    (i)   Lovina  B.  Hair;    m.    (2)    Mary 

A.  Bird. 


826.  Edwin  M.^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia  (Dar- 
row) Babcock  (Gersham,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Chatham,  N.  Y.,  May  26,  1826;  d.  Lysander. 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  5,  1888;  m.  (i)  Aug.  8,  1847,  Catherine,  dau.  of 
Richard  Bellinger,  d.  June  5,  1849;  m.  (2)  Sarah,  dau.  of 
374  Jacob  D.  and  Eliza  (Almy)  Babcock;  m.  (3)  Catherine 
E.  (Martin)  Babcock,  widow  of  1385  William  Henry 
Babcock. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Richard."  b.  Lysander;  m.  1885.  Has  two  children,  Edwin.^"  b. 
1888,  and  Theodore,  b.  1891.  Richard  Babcock  was  (1899)  pro- 
prietor of  "The  Jefferson,"  cor.  Salina  and  Jefferson  Sts.,  Syra- 
cuse, N.  Y. 

Mary,"  b.  Lysander,  May.  1849;  m.  Lysander.  Apr.,  1885,  Reuben 
Scripture.  Had  one  child,  who  d.  voung.  She  res.  1899,  Sandy 
Creek,  N.  Y. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  337 

827.  I"j)\\  ARD  E.**  Burgess,  son  of  Ezekiel  and  Cliloe  (Bab- 
cock)   Burgess  (Gersham,  Oliver,  James,  James,  Jolin, 

James),  b.  Jan.  19,  1812;    tn.   (i)  Dianthe  Hibbanl;    m.   (2) 
Jan.,  1863,  Carrie  Teni[)le. 
Chiklren  by  second  wife: 

Harriot,  1).  Apr.  i,  |S()4. 
Francfs,  h.  May,  i8(j6. 
Mary,  1>.  1H68. 

828.  I'RrnENCE  Davls^  Burgess,  dan.  of  Ezekiel  and  Cbloe 

(Babcock)    Burgess    (Gersham,   Oliver,  James,   James, 
John,  James),  b.  June   11,   1825;    m.  June   10,   1847,  Russel 
Carter : 
Children: 

Cliloe  E.,  b.  Lysander,  N.  Y.,  May  i,  1847;    m.  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  Dec. 

18,  1873,  G.  H.  Hallock.     They  have  three  daughters. 
Annie   M.,  b.  Lysander,   Dec.  7,   1849;   unm. ;    res.   1903,   New  York 

City. 

829.  Delevan  Babcock^  Briggs,  son  of  Elisha  and  Sarah 

(Babcock)    Briggs    (Gersham,    Oliver,   James,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14,  1828;   res.  1902, 

Fonda,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Fonda,  Dec.  i8,  1851,  Almira,  dau.  of  John 

and  Phoebe  (Dillinbeck)  Doxstader,  b.  Fonda,  Nov.  i,  1831. 

Children,  b.  Fonda : 

Wilnam  A.,  b.  Oct.  23,  1852;    res.  1902,  Fonda;    m.  St.  Johnsville, 

Sept.   5,    1877.   Jessie,   dau.   of   Sidney   and    Anna    (Tefft)    Smith, 

b.  Mar.   12,   1856. 
Phoebe  B.,  b.  Aug.   15,   1855;    m.   Fonda,  May  25,   1881,  Alfred,  son 

of  Cornelius  and  Sarah   (Darrow)   Norton,  b.  Rome,   N.  Y.,  Jan. 

31,  1851;    res.  1902,  at  246  N.  Main  St.,  Gloversville,  N.  Y. 
Henry  F..  b.  Nov.  6,  1857;    res.  1902,  Fonda. 
John  R.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1859;    res.  1902,  Fonda. 
Edward  T.,  b.  Mar.  6,  i86r ;    res.  1902,  Fonda. 
Carrie  E.,  b.  Mar.  27,  1868;    res.  1902,  Johnstown;    m.  Fonda,  June 

26,  1895,  Thomas  J.  Barclay. 

830.  Eliza^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Mary  (Burg)  Bab- 
cock (Gersham.  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Apr.  20,  1822;    m.  Sept.  24,  1840,  James  Cleveland.     Settled 
in  Bridgeport,  Conn. 
Children : 

1390  James  H..°  b.  Sept.  30,  1841 ;    m.  Julia  Berkley. 
John,  b.  Sept.  30.  1843:    d.  July  13.  1853. 

1391  Mary  E.,  b.  Sept.  19.  1845;    m.  William  J.  Wheeler. 
George,  b.  Oct.  25,  1847 ;    m.  Estelle  Beach. 

William  B.,  b.  Oct.  26,  1849;    m.  and  settled  in  the  Highlands,  N.  C. 
22 


338  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

831.  George  A.^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Burg) 
Babcock      (Gershani,     Oliver,     James,     James,     John, 

James),  b.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1828;  d.  Westerly,  R.  1., 
Aug.  19,  1900;  m.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Jan.  14,  1856,  Lucy, 
dau.  of  Gilbert  and  Lucy  (Stanton)  Chesebro,  b.  Stonington, 
Dec.  9,  1837. 

Children,  b.  Westerly : 

Lula,  b.  Aug.  15,  1861 ;  res.  1902,  Westerly;  m.  Sept.  2,  1899,  Henry 
R.,  son  of  Thomas  and  Jane  (Bradford)  Segar,  h.  Westerly, 
Nov.  30,  1859.     No  children. 

George  L.,  b.   Dec.   11,   1865. 

Annie  B.,  b.  Dec.  11,  1869;  m.  Westerly,  Amos,  son  of  Amos  and 
Prudence  (Chapin)   Collins. 

832.  George  L.^  Babcock,  son  of  Roswell  and  Christiana 

((jroat)    Babcock    (Gersham,    Oliver,    James,    James, 
John,  James),  b.  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  June  7,   1824;    m.  June  4, 
1 85 1,  Catherine  E.  Butler,  of  Deposit,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

1392  Charles  E.,"  b.  Oct.  13,  1856;  m.  Ida  Barton. 

George  A.,"  b.  Deposit,  Aug.  5,  1869;  d.  Winson,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14. 
1897;  m.  Nov.,  1887.  Abby  C.  Chafee;  res.  1902,  Winson.  Chil- 
dren: Earl  C.,'"  b.  Winson,  Feb.  16,  1892;  Leigh  A.,  b.  Winches- 
ter, N.  Y.,  Apr.  8,  1896. 

833.  Sidney  S.^   Babcock,  son  of  Roswell  and  Christiana 
(Groat)    Babcock    (Gersham,    Oliver,    James,    James, 

John.  James),  b.  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  25,   1825;    m.  Maria 
Hul)bell.     Settled  at  Franklin,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Simon,  b.  . 


Alice,  b.  ;    m.  George  Birdsall. 

Carrie,  b.  ;    m.  Cherry. 

834.  Edward  A.*  Babcock,  son  of  Roswell  and  Christiana 
(Groat)  Babcock  (Gersham,  Oliver.  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Stockport,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1839;  res.  1899, 
Deposit,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Deposit,  Nov.  25,  1861,  Fanny  L,  dau.  of 
Lebbeus  and  Letitia  (Page)  Teed. 

In  1 86 1  he  enlisted  in  the  89th  Regiment,  New  York  State 
Volunteers ;  served  in  Burnside's  Corps  and  elsewhere  for 
two  years.  He  was  Orderly  Sergeant  of  his  company.  In 
1899  was  a  contractor  and  builder  at  Deposit,  N.  Y. 

Children : 

Bertha  L.."  b.   Centerville,   N.  Y.,   Tune  29,   1864:    m.   Oct.   6,    1885. 

N.  C.  Oakley.     They  had  one  child.  Edward,"  b.  Aug.  13,  1886. 
Pearl,  b.  Deposit,  June  18,   1872;    d.  Apr..   1878. 


\: 


GEORGE  AVERY  BABCOCK. 

1828-1900.  Page  338. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  339 

835.  Giles   ]\I.'*   Babcock,   son  of   Roswell   and   Christiana 

(Groat)     Babcock     ((icrsham,    Oliver,    James,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  Frankhn,  X.  V.,  July  20,  1843;   d. ;   m. 

(i)  Jan.  6,  1865,  Agnes,  dan.  of  Rev.  D.  F.  and  Levanthia 
Leacii.  1).  Ten  Mile  River,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  29,   1844,  cl-  J"ly  6, 
1875;    m.  (2)  Eliza  J.,  dau.  of  Philip  and  Elizabeth  Carmen, 
b.  Monticello,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  24,  1846. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

Eva  B..  b.   Franklin,  May  i,   1867:    m.  July  21,   1897,   Peter  F.,  son 

of  Agnes  L.   Van   Noy.  b.   Aug.    13,   1878. 
Arthur  Leslie,  b.  Mecklenburg  County.  Va.,  Jan.   12,   1871  ;    ni.  Oct. 

23,   1898,   .Susie  A.,  dau.  of  J.  W.  Simpkins,  of  Magnolia  Farm, 

Lunenburg  County.  Va. 
Frederick  \\ ..  b.   Deposit,  N.   Y..   Dec.  20.   1872;    ni.  Dec.  28,   1898, 

Anna  E.,  dau.  of  William  B.  Netherland. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Homer  C.  b.  June  11,   1880. 

Kenneth  R..  b.  Sept.  29,  1885:    d.  at  Deposit,  Jan.  16,  1886. 

Darton  L.,  b.  Oct.  25,  1886. 

Rauldon  K.,  b.  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Apr.  13,   1890. 

836.  Julia  A.^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Roswell   and  Christiana 

(Groat)  Babcock  (Gersham,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Franklin,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  11,  1847;  "i-  Avon, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  20.  1866,  Stephen  W.,  son  of  Joseph  and  Cather- 
ine Millichamp,  b.  St.  Clair,  Mich.,  Sept.  23,  1843;  ^^^-  1902, 
1936  G  Street,  San  Diego,  Cal. 
Children,  b.  at  Rochester,  N.  Y. : 

Lucy  W.,  b.  Aug.  30,   1868;    res.   1902,   San  Diego;    m.  San  Diego, 

Samuel  Eldredge. 
Charles  H..  b.  Dec.  21,  1871  ;    d.  El  Paso,  Tex.,  Sept.   13,  1891. 
Catherine  E..  b.  Oct.  7,   1879;    res.   1902,  Fruit  Vale,  Cal.;    m.  San 

Diego.  June  24,   1900.  Roderick  L.  Gould. 
Helen'"  E.,  b.  Feb.   13.  1889. 

836a.  Deacon  John  Avery^  Langworthy,  son  of  John  and 
Sarah  (Pendleton)  Langworth3^  of  John  and  Altana 
(Babcock)  Langworthy  (Oliver,  James,  James,  John.  James), 
b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  27,  1799:  d.  Little  Genesee, 
N.  Y.,  July  27,  1894;  m.  (i)  Eliza,  dau.  of  Deacon  Daniel 
and  Sarah  Lewis,  b.  Aug.  7,  1806,  d.  1857  ( ?)  ;  m.  (2)  Mary 
Utter. 

He  was  a  farmer,  and  a  deacon  of  the  Little  Genesee  S.  D. 
B.  Church. 

Children : 

Sarah   Elizabeth,   b.    May    18.    1828;     res.    1903,   Lincoln,    Neb.;     m. 
Sept.,  1856,  Dr.  George  H.  Taylor. 


340  I^J^c  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1393  Daniel  Avery,"  b.  Jan.  3,  1832;    ni.  Sarah  P.  Cooke. 

Ralph,  b.  Jan.  30,   1S37;    m.  Sept.   10.   1868,  Louise  Paterson. 

Oiin,  1).  Apr.  24.   1842;    d.  July  7,   1804,  unm. 

Enieline,    b.    1847    (  ?)  ;     d.     i'874    (  ?)  ;     ni.    Oct.    4,     1871,    Frank 

Titsworth. 
Lucretia  M.,  b.   1852;    res.  Little  Genesee;    unm. 

836b.  William  P.^  Langvvorthy,  son  of  John  and  Sarah 
(Pendleton)  Langworthy,  of  John  and  Altana  (Bab- 
cock) Langworthy  (OHver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
Mar.  20,  1802;  d.  1889;  m.  Sept.  14,  1826,  Susan  StiUman, 
b.  Dec.  29,  1803,  d.  May  27,  1894. 
Chikh'en : 

Harriet  Adella,  b.  Aug.   10,  1827;    m.  Frank  R.  Wcstcott. 

Eliza  Albino,  b.  Sept.   12.   1829;    d.  July  24,   1897,  unm. 

Horace,  b.  May  30,   1832 ;    m.  Jane  McPherson. 

Sarah  Louise,  b.  Aug.  22,  1834;  d.  1899;  m.  Oct.  25,  1865,  Safford 
Thatcher. 

Edmund  Francis,  b.  Nov.  24,  1836;    d.  Nov.  22,  1858,  unm. 

Altana  Maria,  b.  June  26,  1839;  d.  Aug.  19,  1892;  ni.  Sept.  8,  1877, 
Dr.  John  D.   Kenyon. 

Isaac  Maxson,"  b.  Aug.  26,  1843;  res.  1903,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Jan. 
II.  1868,  Ruth  Sherman  Place,  b.  Feb.  21,  1845.  They  have  two 
children,  Clarence  E.,^"  b.  Mar.  27,  1870,  m.  Sarah  A.  Marvel, 
Nov.  25,  1891,  and  Susie  May,  b.  June  18,  1878. 

Leslie  Pendleton,  b.  June  8,  1848. 

837.  Avery   Cook^    Babcock,   son   of   WilHam   Avery  and 
Abigail   (Cook)   Babcock   (Christopher,  Oliver,  James, 

James,  Jolm,  James),  b.  Danbnry,  Conn.,  Dec.  8,  1802;  d. 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,  1861  ;  m.  (i)  New  Haven,  Conn., 
Oct.  II.  1824,  Eliza  A.,  dau.  of  Stephen  and  Elizabeth  (Chat- 
terton)  Brown,  b.  Augusta,  Ga.,  May  13,  1804,  d.  New  Ha- 
ven, Apr.  21,  1841  ;  m.  (2)  New  Haven,  Nov.  22,  1843,  Mary 
Ann  Hoadley,  b.  New  Haven,  1804,  d.  July  9,  1850. 

Avery  was  prominently  engaged  in  the  clothing  business  at 
New  Haven. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Jane  A.,  b.  Feb.  18,  1826;    res.  1900.  55th  St.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;    m. 
Danbury,    Dec.    17,    1862,    William    F.    Chichester,    of    Brooklyn. 
No  issue. 
1394  William  Avery,"  b.  Jan.  29,   1829;    m.  Eliza  Hulpz. 
1,395  James  A.,  b.  May  16,   1831  ;    m.  Ida  A.  Gates. 

1396  Stephen,  b.  Mar.  7,   1833 :    m.  Kate  B.  Brown. 
Elizabeth  C,  b.  Apr.  3,  183=;;    d.  Apr.  29.  1836. 

1397  Elizabeth  C,  b.  Nov.  11,  1838;    m.  Frank  H.  Smith. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

Rebecca  Milford,  b.  June  6,   1849;    d.  Mar.  15,  1850. 

838.  Christopher  S.^   Babcock,   son   of  WilHam   A.   and 
Abigail   (Cook)   Babcock  (Christopher,  Oliver,  James, 


^^^^   ¥<i 


JUDGE    WILLIAM    H.    POTTER. 

1 816-1887.  Page  346- 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  341 

James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Dec.  2,  1804;  d. 
New  Haven,  Feb.  i2>'  i^54j  "i-  New  Haven,  June  18,  1828, 
Jane  M.  Rose,  b.  May  7,  1809;   res.  1900,  New  Haven. 

Christopher  made  many  improvements  in  the  rubber  shoe 
business,  and  was  associated  for  a  time  with  Charles  Good- 
year.    They  had  one  daughter,  Maria. 

839.  James  Fairchild^  Babcock,  son  of   W'ilHam  A.  and 
Abigail   (Cook)   Babcock  (Christopher,  Ohver,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  July  9,  1809;  d. 
New  Haven,  June  18,  1874;  m.  Apr.  29,  1833,  Catherine 
Ann,  dau.  of  Frederick  and  Susan  (Grant)  Mills,  b.  New 
Haven,  Mar.  21,  18 14,  d.  New  Haven,  Aug.  15,  1877. 

James  F.  Babcock  founded  and  edited  for  many  years  the 
New  Haven  Daily  Palladium,  at  that  time  the  leading  news- 
paper of  Connecticut.  He  retired  from  the  editorship  and 
ownership  of  that  paper  in  1865.  Having  studied  law 
some  years  previous,  he  entered  the  legal  profession,  where  he 
highly  distinguished  himself.  He  became  the  Judge  of  the 
County  Court,  and  held  that  position  until  his  death.  While 
trying  a  vexatious  and  complicated  case  of  arson  he  was 
stricken  with  paralysis  and  fell  from  his  chair  in  the  presence 
of  the  court,  and  without  a  moment's  notice  passed  "to  that 
undiscovered  country  from  whose  bourne  no  traveler  returns." 
On  this  very  spot  his  father,  the  Colonel,  breathed  his  last, 
when  carried  by  the  soldiers  into  the  courthouse,  fifty-eight 
years  before,  though  not  in  the  same  building,  as  a  new  one 
had  been  erected. 

Children,  b.  New  Haven : 

Cornelia  E.,  b.  Jan.  30,  1834;   d.  Feb.  26,  1835. 

Catharine  Ann,  b.  Dec.  28,  1835 ;    d.  Jan.  28,  1836. 

Evalina  Peck,  b.  Nov.  23,  1836;    d.  Aug.  30,  1854. 

Mary  Eh'zabeth,  b.  July  22,   1839;    d.  Dec.  29,   1865;    m.  E.  Haven. 

Conn.,    Oct.    18,    1865,   William   Clark   Wittemore,   of  New   York 

City.     No  issue. 
James  Mills,  b.  June  i,  1845;    d.  Feb.  22,  1862. 
Lucy  Fredricka,  b.  June  17,  1850:    d.  Oct.  17,  1851. 
Frederick  William,  b.  May  14.   1853;    living  July,  1900,  at  50  Bright 

St..  New  Haven ;    m.  New  Haven,  Aug.  3,  1875,  Amy  Eliza,  dau. 

of  Hannibal  and  Keziah  Preston.     No  children. 

840.  Mary  Ann*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Ann  (Almy) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  J^nies,  John,  James), 

b.  Potter  Plill,  R.  I..  Sent.  it.  1831;  'm.  (t)  Potter  Hill. 
R.  L,  Sept.  12,  1853,  Charles  N.,  son  of  John  and  Sallv 
(Pendleton)  Crandali.  b.  183 1,  d.  Potter  Hill,  Mar.  8,  1857, 
no  children:    m.  (2)  Potter  Hill,  May  6,  1861,  Dr.  John  H., 


34-  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

son  of  Henry  Ambrose  and  Abij^ail   (Hill)   Merrill,  b.  Nor- 
way, Me.,  Jan.  9,  1834,  d.  Potter  ilill,  July  4,  1893. 
Child : 

1398  John  J.,''  b.  Nov.  14,  1861  ;    m.  M.  Leona  Burdick. 

841.  Eliza**   Irish,   dan.   of   George  and   Betsy    (Babcock) 
Irish   (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  24,  1808;  d.  Alfred  Center, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  26,  1876;  m.  N.  Stonington,  Aug.  24,  1835,  Dea- 
con Benjamin  Franklin,  son  of  John  and  Sarah  (Pendleton) 
Langworthy,  b.  N.  Stonington,  May  7,  1810,  d.  Alfred  Center, 
Nov.  7,  1895. 
Children : 

1399  George  L,"  b.  May  g,  1839;    m.  Ann  Lockhart  Karr. 

1400  Mary  Emma.  b.  May  27,  1840;    m.  Charles  E.  P.  Noyes. 

1401  John  Franklin,  1>.  Apr.  5,  1847;    m.  Maria  Louise  Stillman. 

1402  William  Isaac,  b.  May  12,  1851  ;    m.  Odessa  Blanchard. 

1403  Daniel  Babcock,  b.  July  13,   1852;    m.  C.  Elizabeth  Day. 

842.  George'*  Irlsh,  Jr.,  son  of  George  and  Betsy  (Babcock) 
Irish   (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Feb.  7,  1810;  d.  W.  Genesee,  N.  Y., 
June  I,  1888;  m.  (i)  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  June  5,  1837,  Maria, 
dan.  of  Benjamin  and  Eliza  (Green)  Potter,  b.  Hopkinton, 
Sept.  20,  1810,  d.  W.  Genesee,  Oct.  3,  1844;  m.  (2)  (i^enesee, 
Dec.  ly,  1845,  Mary  S.,  dan.  of  John  and  Avon  L.  (Brown) 
Adams,  b.  Prattsburg,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  29,  1823,  d.  Centralia,  111., 
Feb.  2,  1889. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

1404  Edgar   Walton,"  b.   Mar.   25,    1838;     m.    (i)    Charlotte  E.   Maxson ; 

m.    (2)   Helen  E.  Coon. 
Sarah  Elizabeth,  b.  W.  Genesee,  Nov.  19,  1839;    d.  W.  Genesee,  Apr. 

22,   1840. 
George   Hadwin,   b.   W.   Genesee,   Nov.    19,    1841  ;    d.   Andersonville 

Prison.   Georgia.   Aug.   2.   1864.  unm. 

1405  Sarah  Maria,  b.  July  24,   1843 ;    m.  Z.  Stanley  Potter. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

1406  Mary  Elizabeth,   b.   Dec.   31,    1846:    m.    fi)   James   H.   Norton;    m. 

(2)  Byron  Alford. 
Martha  Amelia,"  b.  W.  Genesee.  Mar.  3t.  1848;  res.  1902,  Cen- 
tralia. 111.  ;  m.  W.  Genesee,  July  8,  1865.  Silas  G.,  son  of  Silas 
and  Phebe  (Crandall)  Burdick.  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  June  30, 
1H42.  Children:  Floyd  Hadwin,'"  b.  Farina,  June  8,  1866,  d. 
Sept.  9,  1866:    Mary.  b.  :    d.  June  21,  1871. 

1407  Nathan  Wardner.  b.  Feb.  2a.  1850;    m.  Ida  M.  Wightman. 

Viola  S..®  b.  W.  Genesee.  Nov.  4,  18,^2;  res.  190T,  Bennett.  III.;  m. 
W.  Genesee,  Nov.  i,  1876,  Guy  C,  son  of  Samuel  and  Jemima 
Parish  Carpenter,  b.  Ellington,  Conn.,  Aug.  27,  T850.  Children: 
Earl  C.,'"  b.  Tidy  29,  1877;  Guy,  b.  Apr.  4,  1879;  and  George  I., 
b.  Mar.  9,  iP"" 


*  *A'%A^'fe^Hl- 

rpil^^n^ 

m 

r««| 

.'$#1 

1 

IcV- 

r.     \ 

''Ip;  /     jy  i^' — . 

NATHAN    BABCOCK. 
1824- 1902. 


Page  346. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  343 

1408  Myron  H..  h.  Julv  4,  1S55 ;    in.  Ellen  A.  Crandall. 

Flora  Belle,"  b.  VV.  Genesee,  Aug.  8,  1861 ;  m.  Friendship,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  I,  1881,  Henry,  son  of  James  and  Ordelia  (Blakley) 
Crandall.  b.  Brookfield,  Mar.  4.  1858.  They  res.  Farmington, 
Conn.     Cliild  :     Ruth  Ellen,'",  b.  Nov.  7.  1884. 

Albertine  Steinway,"  b.  W.  Genesee,  Mar.  10,  1864;  res.  Gueydan, 
La.;  m.  Hinsdale,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  i,  1878,  Emmet,  son  of  William 
and  Jane  A.  (Curtis)  Slocum,  b.  Leyden,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  14,  1858. 
They  have  three  children:  Leslie  D.,'"  b.  Nov.  30,  1879;  Edgar 
R.,  b.  Aug.  20,   1888;    Floyd  H.,  b.  Nov.  20,  1895. 

843.  I\cv.   James    Reed**    Irish,    D.D.,    son  of   George   and 
Betsy  (Babcock)   Irish   (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  18,  181 1;  d. 
Rockville,  R.  I.,  Mar.  3,  i^g\\  m.  (i)  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Aug. 
26,  1839,  Charlotte,  dan  of  407  Paul  and  Amy  (Clark)  Bab- 
cock, b.  Westerly,  May  30,  1816,  d.  De  Ruyter.  N.  Y.,  June 
24,  1 86 1  ;  m.  (2)  Hopkinton,  July  3,  1862,  Mrs.  Eliza 
(Green)  Browning,  dan.  of  Job  and  Fanny  Green,  b.  Rich- 
mond, R.  I..  Jan.  20,  1812,  d.  Rockville,  Jan.  21,  1893. 
Children : 

Amy  Elizabeth,  b.  Alfred.  N.  Y.,  Mar.  19.  1841  :  res.  1903,  Syra- 
cuse, N.  Y. ;  m.  Alfred.  Mar.  28,  1866.  Thomas  J.,  son  of  Jere- 
miah and  Mary  (Prosser)   Place,  b.  Alfred,  Feb.  14.   1843. 

Charlotte  J.,  b.  Oct.  28,   1843 ;    m.    1020  Tristam  Babcock. 

James  O'Connell,  b.  De  Ruyter.  Aug.  2,  1847;  d.  Rockville,  R.  L, 
1902. 

Marv  Etneline,  b.  De  Ruyter,  Sept.  14,  185 1  :  d.  De  Ruyter.  Apr.  24. 
1852. 

1409  Miranda  F.,"  b.  Jan.  23,  1854:    m.  George  N.  Crandall. 

Paul,"  b.  De  Ruyter,  I\Lir.  i,  1856;  m.  Rockville,  Mar.  14,  1878, 
Lydia,  dau.  of  Gersham  P.  and  Mary  E.  (Tabor)  Johnson,  b. 
Richmond.  Nov.  8.  i860.  Children:  Charles,  b.  June,  1879;  James 
G.,  b.  July  2S,  1881.  d.  1882;  Arthur,  b.  June,  1885;  George  C.  b. 
Apr.  20,  1888. 

844.  Deacon  Daniel  Babcock^  Irish,  son  of  George  and 
Betsy   (Babcock)   Irish   (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James, 

John.   James),   b.    N.    Stonington,   Conn.,   Feb.   9,    1818;     d. 
Farina,   111.,   Apr.    16,    1896:    m.   Hopkinton,   R.   I.,  Jan.   28, 
1843,  Mary,  dau.  of  749  Elnathan  W.  and  Sally  (Davis)  Bab- 
cock, b.  Hopkinton,  Apr.  7,  1820. 
Children : 

1410  William"  Babcork.  b.  June  20.   1S46:    m.  Amy  E.  Potter. 

Henry  P..°  b.  Westerly.  Tan.  10.  18^2:  res.  Farina.  111.;  m.  Ci) 
Nov.  17,  1881,  Eva  R.,  dau.  of  Dr.  Elnathan  and  Sarah  (Wright) 
Bond.  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  Aug.  21.  18^6.  d.  Farina.  Jan.  28.  1885; 
m.  (2)  Milton.  Jan.  t8.  1S92.  Marv  J.,  dau.  of  Horace  and  Maud 
R.  (Platts)  Haven,  b.  South  Bend.  Ind..  Sent.  17.  1855.  Chil- 
dren :    Harry.'"  b.  Aug.  7,  1883 ;    Edith,  b.  Sept.  22,  1884. 


344  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

845.  Lucy  ^Ynn^   Irish,  dau.  of  George  and  Betsy   (Bab- 
cock)    Irish     (Daniel,    Oliver,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  June  7,  1819;    d.  Ashaway, 
R.  I.,  Mar.  26,  1885;  m.  Ashaway,  Mar.  9,  185 1,  Deacon  Mat- 
thew S.,  son  of  Simon  and  Mary    (Brightman)    Kenyon,  b. 
Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Aug.  23,  181 1  ;   res.  1902,  Ashaway. 
Children : 

Matthew  Herbert,  b.  Nov.   13,   1853 ;    res.   1902,  Ashaway ;    unm. 
Abbey  E.,  b.  Oct.  20,  1855;    res.  1902,  Ashaway;  unm. 

846.  Mary    Content^    Irish,    dau.    of    George    and    Betsy 

(Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  27,  1821;  res.  1902, 
Ashaway,  R.  I.;  m.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Oct.  8,  1843,  Albert  C, 
son  of  Benjamin  and  Sarah  A.  (Baker)  Green,  b.  Phenix, 
R.  I.,  Mar.  28,  1822,  d.  Hopkinton,  Aug,  20,  1852. 
Children : 

Henry  A.,  b.   Pawcatuck,   Conn.,  Apr.  3,  1845 ;    d.   Pawcatuck,  Oct. 

8,   1848. 

Mary  E.,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Aug.  2,  1846;    d.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  June  25, 

1889. 

Avery,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Nov.  21,   1848;    d.  Pawcatuck,   Dec.  22,   1848. 

1411   Thomas  H.,"  b.  Pawcatuck,  July  6,  1850;  m.  Martha  A.  Bergen. 

847.  Deacon  Oliver  B.^   Irish,   son  of  George  and  Betsy 

(Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Aug.  12,  1826;  m.  Chelsea, 
Mass.,  Apr.  25,  1854,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Ruth  (Hath- 
away) Anthony,  b.  Middletown,  R.  I.,  Nov.  28,  1832.  Both 
res.  1902,  Farina,  111. 
•  Children : 

Edward  A.,  b.  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  Oct.  17,  1855;    d.  Sept.,  1857. 

Joseph  Herman,"  b.  Ashaway,  Mar.  4,  1857 ;  res.  Farina,  111. ;  m. 
Farina,  Sept.  7,  1892,  Ethel,  dau.  of  Dr.  Arnold  and  Carrie  Ran- 
dolph Davis,  b.  Farina.  June  3,  1868.  Child :  Elaine,'"  b.  Dec.  8, 
1893. 

Wilfred  A.,  b.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Julv  31,  i860;  d.  Ashaway,  Apr. 
8,  1861. 

Alice  W.,  b.  Ashaway,  Mar.  27,   1865 ;    d.   Farina,  Aug.  24,   1866. 

Albert  H.,  b.  Ashaway,  Mar.  27,  1865;    d.  Farina,  Oct.  18,  1866. 

848.  Harriett  Elizabeth^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Jacob  Davis 
and  Elizabeth  (Almy)  Babcock  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Cornwall,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  5,  1826;  res. 
1902,  Potter  Hill,  R.  I, ;  m.  Ashaway,  R.  I..  Nov.  28.  1847, 
John,  son  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  (Wallace)  Cundall,  b.  Ash- 
away, Feb.  25,  18 1 7,  d.  Ashaway,  Feb.  4,  1891. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  345 

Children,  first  and  last  b.  Ashaway,  others  Mystic,  Conn. : 

Emeline  Ahiiy,  1>.   Sci)t.  5.   1848;    d.  Ashaway,  Oct.,   1848. 

Hannah  Almy.  1).  July  29,  1851  ;  res.  1902,  Potter  Hill;  ni.  .\sh- 
avvay,  Nov.  15,  1880.  Daniel  A.,  son  of  Amos  B.  and  Huldah 
(Bal)cock)  Taylor,  b.  Stilhnanville,  Conn.,  Apr.  22,  1852;  d. 
Westerly,  Jan.,  1900.     No  children. 

Frank  Constant,"  b.  June  18,  1853;  res.  1902,  Greenwich,  R.  I.;  m. 
Block  Island,  R.  I.,  Apr.  14,  1880,  Effie  A.,  dau.  of  Nicholas  and 
Eliza  Milliken  Ball,  b.  New  Shoreham,  Nov.  28,  1855.  Child: 
Helen  B..'"  b.   Sept.  6,    1896. 

Jacob  D.,"  b.  Apr.  29,  1856;  m.  Charlotta  A.,  dau.  of  Jirah  and 
Nancy  Palmer  Gray,  b.  Potter  Hill,  May  20,  1858;  divorced; 
m.  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  July  7,  1894,  Carrie  E.,  dau.  of  Travton  and 
Velvis  (Cahill)  Davis,  b.  Markesan,  Wis.,  :Mar.  19,  1862.  No 
children. 

Elizabeth"  (called  Bess  or  Bessie),  b.  Mar.  3,  1867;  res.  1902,  Peace 
St.,  Providence,  R.  I. ;  m.  Westerly,  Oct.  3,  1885,  Charles,  son 
of  Job  and  Abigail  (Gardner)  Taylor,  b.  Ashaway.  Children: 
Bvron  C..'"  b.  1887;  (Tlarence,  b.  Apr.  11,  1888,  d.  Ashaway,  Aug. 
^6,  1888. 

849.  Sarah    Antoinette^    Babcock,    dau.    of   Jacob    and 
Elizabeth    (Almy)    Babcock    (Daniel,    Oliver,    James, 

James,  John.  James),  b.  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  Apr.  25,  1836;  d. 
Ashaway,  Oct.  21,  1887;  m.  (i)  Lysander,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14, 
1854,  826  Edwin,  son  of  Avery  and  Lydia  (Darrow)  Bab- 
cock, b.  Lysander,  May  7,  i82(5,  d.  Lysander,  Dec.  5,  1888; 
divorced;  m.  (2)  Ashaway,  Dec.  14.  1863,  William  M.,  son 
of  William  and  Lncinda  Humphrey,  b.  Lima,  N.  Y.,  May, 
1830.  d.  New  York  City,  Mar.  12,  1890.  No  children. 
Children  bv  first  husband  : 

Freddie,  b.  Lysander,  July  25,  1856;    d.  Ashaway,  Oct.  16,  1858. 
Clara,  b.  Lysander,  Aug.  28,  1857;    d.  Ashaway,  Oct.  14,  1858. 

850.  John  Jacob'^  Babcock,  son  of  Jacob  D.  and  Elizabeth 
(Almy)  Babcock  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Ashaway.  R.  L,  Apr.  14,  1842;    res.  Ashaway;   m. 
Westerly,  R.  L,  Dec.  7.   1869,  Marion  B.,  dau.  of  David  S. 
and  Mary   (Taylor)   Devoll,  b.  Westerly,  Dec.  21,   1844,  d. 
Ashaway,  Apr.  10.  1884. 
Children,  b.  Ashaway : 

Amy  L..®  b.  Mar.  12,  1872;  m.  Ashaway,  Nov.  23,  1891,  Alven  E., 
son  of  Eden  D.  and  Annis  (.Vndrcws)  Shaw,  b.  Wales.  Mass., 
Aug.  20.   1862.     Child :  Harold  Eden.'"  h.   Ashaway,  Apr.  3,   1893. 

Jacob  D.."  b.  Jan.  19.  1875 ;  m.  Brooklvn.  N.  Y..  Dec.  21,  1896, 
Millicent,  dau.  of  John  and  Martha  (Hargin)  Wood.  b.  Brussels, 
Ontario,  May  17,  1876.  Child:  Marion^Braidfoot,'"  b.  Nov.  3, 
1897. 

Daniel  Clark,  b.  Oct.  27.   1876;    res.   1902,  Alfred,  N.  Y. :    unm. 

Clara  Elizabeth.  1).  Jan.  29,  18S0;    res.  1902,  Potter  Hill.  R.  L 


34^>  77u"  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

851.  Jud^e   William   Henry^  Potter,  son  of  Col.   Henry 
and  Nancy   (Ann)    (Babcock)   Potter   (Daniel,  Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Aug.  26, 
1816;  d.  Mystic.  Conn.,  Mar.  28,  1887;  m.  Mystic,  Apr.  12, 
1842,  Bridget,  dau.  of  Capt.  Elisha  and  Liicretia  (Packer) 
Rathbun,  b.  Mystic,  Apr.  12,  1824,  d.  Mystic,  Jan.  24,  1899. 
Children,  b.  Mystic  River,  Conn. 

Calista  Vinton,"  b.  Feb.  28,  1843 ;  res.  1902,  Norwich,  Conn ;  m. 
Mystic  River,  May  28,  1878,  Seneca,  son  of  Asahel  and  Lydia 
M.  (Handy)  Thresher,  b.  Swansea,  Mass..  Apr.  8,  1832.  Chil- 
dren: Annie  Hayward,'"  b.  Mar.  12,  1879,  Mabel  S.,  b.  Sept.  22, 
1880. 

1412  Annie  B.,"  b.  Sept.  12,  1846;    m.  Horace  Walworth  Fish. 

852.  Phcebe  Ann^  Potter,  dan.  of  Col.  Henry  and  Nancy 
(Ann)      (Babcock)     Potter     (Daniel,     Oliver,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Waterford,  Conn.,  Mar.  22,  1823; 
d.  Waterford,  May  31,  1863;  m.  Waterford,  Sept.  9,  1844, 
Thomas  Carey,  son  of  Thomas  and  Prudence  (Latham)  Pot- 
ter, b.  New  London,  Conn.,  Apr.  13,  1822,  d.  New  London, 
Aug.  27,  1849. 
Child : 

1413  Thomas   Wells.'  b.   June  27,    1846;    m.    (i)    Ellen  Culver;    m.    (2) 

Nellie  M.   Smith. 

853.  Nathan^   Babcock,  son  of  Ohver  and   Phebe    (Bab- 
cock)   Babcock    (Daniel,   Oliver,   James,   James,   John, 

James,),  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  L,  Nov.  19,  1824;  d.  Westerly, 
R.  L  (Pawcatuck),  May  31,  1902;  m.  Mar.  2,  1847,  Phebe 
W.,  dau.  of  Ray  and  Esther  (Russel)  Johnson,  of  Phenix, 
R.  L,  b.  Washington,  R.  L,  Sept.  20,  1826,  d.  Westerly  (Paw- 
catuck), Apr.  14,  1 89 1. 

When  eighteen  years  of  age  Mr.  Babcock  entered  the  em- 
ploy of  the  Lan(l])here  IMachine  Com])any,  at  Phenix,  R.  L, 
where  as  apprentice,  journeyman,  and  subcontractor  he  con- 
tinued for  thirteen  years.  In  1855  he  entered  into  partnership 
with  Calvert  B.  Cottrell,  under  the  firm  name  of  Cottrell  & 
Babcock,  at  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  where  at  first  they  built  textile 
machinery  and  later  printing  presses.  In  1880,  when  the  busi- 
ness was  employing  two  himdred  men,  he  sold  out  to  his  part- 
ner and  retired.  Two  years  later  he  organized  the  Babcock 
Printing  Press  Manufacturing  Company,  at  New  London, 
Conn.,  which  under  his  management  came  to  be  one  of  the 
most  prominent  manufactories  of  printing  machinery  in  Amer- 
ica.    The  business  is  still  continued  (1903)  with  his  nephew. 


AMANDA    (BABCOCK)    GREENE. 

1827- 1887.  Page  347. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  347 

George  P.  Fenner,  President  and  Treasurer,  and  his  brother, 
Daniel  Babcock,  Secretary. 

in  his  early  manhood  he  was  a  Whig,  becoming  a  Repub- 
lican at  the  organization  of  that  party,  but  later  as  a  Prohibi- 
tionist he  exercised  a  powerful  inilucnce  in  the  cause  of  tem- 
perance, which  was  very  dear  to  his  heart,  and  for  which  he 
never  considered  any  sacrifice  too  great.  He  was  honored  by 
beinir  made  candidate  for  Lieutenant  Governor  of  his  State 
upon  the  Prohibition  ticket  for  a  number  of  years.  Was  a 
member  of  the  State  Committee  of  that  party,  and  in  his  own 
town  did  valiant  service  in  the  cause  of  no  license. 

Actixe  in  local  school  matters,  he  was  largely  instrumental 
in  raising  the  standard  of  the  schools  in  his  district,  and  in 
the  building  of  large  and  commodious  schoolhouses.  Every 
Christmas  for  years  he  regularly  sent  a  gift  to  every  scholar 
in  the  school,  and  each  member  of  every  graduating  class 
received  some  appropriate  gift  from  his  hand. 

For  vears  he  taught  a  class  of  boys  in  a  Loyal  Temperance 
Legion,  and  in  this  connection  organized  an  anti-tobacco 
league  which  met  regularly  at  his  home;  and  the  scientific 
teaching  gi^'en  them  resulted  in  keeping  many  young  men  from 
using  tobacco.  Believing  in  the  equality  of  the  sexes,  he  never 
lost  an  opportunity  to  record  himself  upon  the  side  of  wom- 
an's sufifrage  and  when  school  suffrage  was  given  to  the 
women  of  his  town  his  horses  were  busy  on  election  days  car- 
rying women  voters  to  and  from  the  polls. 

At  the  as^e  of  seventeen  he  united  with  the  First  S.  D.  B. 
Church  of  Hopkinton.  R.  L.  retaining  his  membership  with 
and  continuing  his  support  of  this  church  through  life. 

Children : 

Hannah  Almy.  b.  Phenix,  I\Iar.   ii.   1855;    res.   1903,  Westerly. 
Clara  Jane,  b.  Westerly.  Aug.   14,   1859;    d.  Westerly,  Mar.  2,   1863. 

854.  Amand.x*  B.xbcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Phebe  (Bab- 
cock) Babcock  (Daniel,  Oliver.  James.  James.  John. 
Tames),  b.  Potter  Hill.  R.  L,  Oct.  20.  1827;  d.'  Potter'Hill, 
July  15,  1887;  m.  Potter  Hill.  Nov.  2.^,  1858.  Thomas  R., 
son  of  Benjamin  and  Grace  (Rogers)  Greene,  b.  Hopkinton, 
R.  L,  Dec.  10.  1800.  d.  Hopkinton.  Dec.  2y,  1873. 
Children,  b.  Hopkinton  : 

Daniel  B.,*  b.  Feb.  25,  1861  :  d.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Apr.  24,  1894:  m. 
Westerly,  Mar.  2q.  1886,  Phebe  A.,  dau.  of  George  A.  and  Anne 
F.  (Burdick)  Holland,  b.  S.  Kingston.  R.  I.,  Mar.  16,  1867.  They 
have  one  child.  Howard  Arnold.'"  b.  Westerly,  Oct.  7.  1887. 

Charles  Henry,  b.  Mar.  11,  1866;    res.  1903,  at  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  unm. 


348  J^hc  Bahcock  Genealogy, 

855.  JJaniel''  Baucock,  son  of  Oliver  and  I'liebc  (Babcock) 
Babcuck  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James j, 

b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  1.,  Dec.  4,  1828;  res.  1903,  Bhenix,  R.  1. ; 
m.  (i)  Westerly,  Nov.  i,  1852,  Phebe  E.,  dau.  of  Jonathan 
and  Phebe  (Carr)  Stillman,  b.  Voluntown,  Conn.,  Aug.  11, 
1830,  d.  Phenix,  Jan.  16,  1857;  m.  (2)  Westerly,  Apr.  12, 
1806,  Mary  A.  Stillman,  sister  of  first  wife,  b.  Connecticut, 
May  I,  1 84 1.     No  children. 

For  ten  years  Daniel  Babcock  was  a  member  of  the  Town 
Council  of  his  town,  a  part  of  the  time  being  President  of  the 
Board,  and  for  two  terms  represented  his  town  in  the  lower 
house  of  the  Legislature.  He  was  a  valuable  director  of  both 
the  National  and  Savings  Banks  of  his  town,  and  is  a  director 
of  the  Phenix  Trust  Company.  Many  have  found  in  him  a 
trusted  counselor  and  friend.  When  eighteen  years  of  age  he 
learned  the  machinist's  trade  in  Westerly,  and  in  1853  settled 
in  Phenix,  where  for  thirty  years  he  had  charge  of  a  depart- 
ment in  the  shop  of  the  Landphere  Machine  Company.  Since 
1884  he  has  been  connected  with  the  Babcock  Printing  Press 
Manufacturing  Company,  of  New  London,  Conn.,  and  at 
present  (1903)  is  Secretary  of  the  company.  At  fourteen 
years  of  age  he  was  baptized  and  united  with  the  First  S.  D. 
B.  Church  of  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  of  which  he  is  still  a  member. 

856.  Ann  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Phebe 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  L,  Jan.  7,  1831  ;  d.  Mystic 
River,  Conn.,  Apr.  2,  1859;  m.  Potter  Hill,  Apr.  2,  1853, 
Charles  A.,  son  of  Philip  and  Sally  (Potter)  Fenner,  b.  Po- 
land, N.  Y.,  Sept.  16,  1826,  d.  Providence,  R.  L,  June  13, 
1895. 

Children : 

Philip,  b.  Jan.  18,  1854;    d.  Jan.  24,  1854. 
Mary,  b.  Jan.  18,  1854;    d.  Feb.  i,  1854. 
1414  George  Potter,"  b.  June  5,  1855;    m.  Annie  C.  Smith. 

857.  Stephen^   Babcock,  author  of  The  Babcock  Geneal- 
ogy,   son    of    Oliver    and    Phebe    (Babcock)    Babcock 

(Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Potter  Hill, 
R.  L,  Dec.  22,  1832;  res.  1903.  344  W^est  Thirty-third  Street, 
New  York  City;  m.  Washington,  D.  C,  July  10,  1878,  Hen- 
rietta Van  Patten  (widow  of  John  H.  Taylor,  of  Amsterdam, 
N.  Y.),  and  dau.  of  Adam  C.  and  Maria  (Groot)  Van  Patten, 
b.  Glenville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  25,  1840. 


■^*^ 


%i 


Dx^NIEL    BABCOCK. 


Page  348. 


TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  349 

From  an  injury  receixed  when  sixteen  years  of  age  Mr. 
Babcock's  sight  became  impaired  and  gracUially  diminished 
until  at  the  age  of  nineteen  he  became  totally  blind.  In  1853 
he  entered,  as  a  pupil,  the  New  York  School  for  the  Blind, 
New  York  City,  and  in  1855  began  to  teach  in  the  same  school, 
which  now  (  1903)  employs  a  corps  of  twenty  teachers,  Mr. 
Babcock  being  the  principal  teacher,  which  position  he  has 
held  since  1857.  He  directed  the  construction  of  the  first 
raised  dissected  maps  for  the  1)]in(l,  which  he  afterward  im- 
proved and  ])erfected.  furnishing  a  com])lete  set  for  his  own 
school,  and  other  sets  for  Institutions  for  the  Blind  in  Eu- 
rope and  America.  His  style  of  maps  is  still  the  standard,  and 
is  used  in  all  schools  for  the  blind.  For  sixteen  years  he  was 
Treasurer  of  the  American  Association  of  Instructors  for  the 
Blind.  He  has  for  many  years  been  Trustee  and  Treasurer 
of  the  First  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  New  York  City,  of  which  he 
is  a  member.  He  is  First  Vice  President  of  the  American 
Sabbath  Tract  Society,  and  a  Trustee  of  the  S.  D.  B.  Me- 
morial Board.  In.  1902  he  received  from  Alfred  University 
the  honorarv  degree  of  A.M. 

Child : 

Phebe   Maria,  b.    Potter  Hill,   Aug.    11,    1879;    d.    New  York   City, 
Nov.  I.  1885. 
Mrs.   Babcock  had  one   son,  l)y  her  first  husband,   Ralph  Vorhees  Tay- 
lor, b.  Amsterdam,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  16,  1869;    d.  at  his  mother's  home  in  New 
York  City,  Jan.  24,  1893,  unm. 

858.  Lucy  x\lmyS  Babcock,  M.D.,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Phebe 

(Babcock)    Bal)cock    (Daniel,    Oliver,    James,    James, 
John,  James),  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I..  Sept.  17.  1834. 

Dr.  Babcock  graduated  at  the  New^  York  Medical  College 
and  Hospital  for  Women.  New  York  City,  and  for  fifteen  years 
thereafter  practiced  medicine  in  Westerly.  R.  I.  Later  she 
sojourned  in  Alfred.  N.  Y.  She  is  by  faith  and  practice  a 
Seventh  Day  Baptist. 

859.  Phebe    J.^ne^    Babcock.    M.D..    dau.    of    Oliver    and 
Phebe     (Babcock)     Babcock    (Daniel.    Oliver,    James, 

James.  John,  Jnmes).  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  L.  Sept.  30.' 18^8; 
res.  1903.  412  Ninth  Avenue.  New  York  Citv;  m.  Potter  Hill, 
Oct.  27,  1863,  William  B.,  son  of  Christopher  and  Betsy  G. 
(Bell)  Wait,  b.  Amsterdam.  N.  Y..  Mar.  25.  18^9. 

Dr.  Wait  was  educated  in  the  i)ublic  schools  of  her  town  and 
later  at  Alfred  Universitv.  Alfred.  N.  Y.,  from  which  she  re- 
ceived the  degree  of  A.B.  in  i860  and  A.M.  in   1869.     She 


350  'i  he  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

taught  for  a  time  in  country  schools,  and  later  for  four  years 
was  a  teacher  in  the  School  for  the  Blind,  New  York  City. 
Taking  up  the  study  of  medicine,  she  received  the  degree  of 
M.D.  from  the  New  York  Medical  College  and  Hospital  for 
Women  in  1871,  and  after  two  years'  postgraduate  study  she 
received  the  diploma  of  the  New  York  Ophthalmic  Hospital 
College.  After  having  served  one  year  (1875)  as  lecturer 
to  the  Chair  of  Obstetrics  in  the  College  for  W^omen,  she  was, 
in  1880,  appointed  Professor  of  the  Chair,  which  position  she 
held  for  eighteen  years,  eight  years  of  the  time  being  Presi- 
dent of  the  Faculty  and  Dean  of  the  College.  She  also  served 
her  alma  mater  as  a  member  of  the  Hospital  Staff  for  many 
years,  and  was  for  eight  years  its  Chairman. 

She  is  a  member  of  the  New  York  State  and  New  York 
County  Homeopathic  Medical  Societies,  the  American  Insti- 
tute  of  Homeopathy,  the  American  Obstetrical  Society,  a 
member  of  the  Consulting  Staff  of  the  Memorial  Hospital, 
Brooklyn,  an  Examiner  in  Lunacy,  and  has  served  the  Alumni 
Association  of  her  college  as  President  and  in  other  official 
capacities. 

In  philanthropic  and  sociologic  work  she  is  President  of 
the  Society  for  Promoting  the  Welfare  of  the  Insane,  Presi- 
dent of  a  local  Woman's  Christian  Temperance  Union,  Vice 
President  of  the  New  York  Legislative  League,  member  of 
the  New  York  Equal  Suffrage  League,  and  has  served  as  Man- 
ager of  the  New  York  Baptist  Home  for  the  Aged  and  Presi- 
dent of  the  New  York  County  Woman's  Christian  Temper- 
ance Union. 

Having  retired  from  college  and  hospital  activities  in  1898, 
she  has  since  given  some  time  to  literary  and  club  work,  and 
is  an  active  member  of  both  "Phalo"  and  "Sorosis." 

She  is  a  member  of  the  First  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  New  York 
City. 

Children,  b.  New  York  City: 

1415  T.ucy  Bell.*  b.  May  ix,  1865:    m.  Frank  Battles. 

Fanny  Stone,  b.  Aug.  18,  1866;  d.  New  York  City,  Mar.  17,  1881. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Apr.  10,  1868;  d.  New  York  City,  Feb.  17,  1879. 
Phebe  Ann,  b.  Sept.  23,  1870;  d.  Potter  Hill.  R.  T.,  May  20,  1871. 
William   Bell,    b.   July   i.S.    1872;     res.    1903,   412   Ninth   Ave.,    New 

York;    unm.     Is  a  lawyer. 
Oliver  Babcock,  M.D.,  b.  July  13,  1872;    res.  1230  S.  57th  St..  Phil- 
adelphia,  Pa. ;    unm. 
Amelia,  b.  May  19,  1875 ;    d.  New  York  City,  Jan.  28,  1886. 

860.     Julia   Mart.\^   Babcock,   dan.    of  Oliver   and   Phebe 
(Babcock)    Babcock    (Daniel,    Oliver,    James,    James, 


HENRY    S.    AMBLER. 


Page  350. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  351 

John,  James),  h.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Apr.  13,  1843;  res.  1903, 
Chatham,  N.  V.;  m.  Potter  Hill,  Sept.  2y,  iH()4,  Henry  S. 
Ambler,  son  of  John  and  Eliza  (Nestelle)  Ambler,  b.  New 
York  City,  June  30,  1836. 

She  was  educated  at  the  Hopkinton  Academy,  a  school  char- 
tered by  members  of  the  First  Hopkinton  S.  D.  B.  Church 
and  conducted  under  their  patronai^e  for  many  years.  In  1862 
she  taut^ht  the  English  branches  and  music  at  Passaic,  N.  J. 

In  1864.  she  was  married  to  Henry  S.  Ambler,  of  New 
York  City,  and  went  to  Pleasants  County,  \V.  Va.  Later  they 
lixed  in  New  York  City,  and  in  1873  removed  to  their  present 
residence  in  Chatham.    They  have  four  sons  and  one  daughter. 

She  is  a  life  member  of  the  Woman's  Christian  Temperance 
Union  of  New  York  State,  a  member  of  the  New  York  State 
Woman's  Suffrage  Association,  and  of  the  New  York  State 
Grange.  In  1892  she  organized  the  Woman's  Christian  Tem- 
perance Union  of  Spencertown,  N.  Y.,  and  has  served  as  its 
President  to  the  present  time  (1903).  Later,  wilh  others,  she 
organized  the  Woman's  Christian  Temperance  L^nion  at  Aus- 
terlitz,  N.  Y.,  and  together  with  these  two  Societies  she  is 
acknowledge  a  strong  factor  in  making  and  maintaining  a 
public  sentiment  which  has  prevented  the  licensed  sale  of  liquor 
in  the  town  of  Austerlitz  for  twelve  successive  years. 

She  is  a  charter  member  of  Austerlitz  Patrons  of  Hus- 
bandry (819),  and  for  three  years  served  this  Society  as  lec- 
turer ;  for  three  years  was  President  of  the  Columbia  County 
Woman's  Christian  Temperance  Union,  but  resigned  both 
these  offices  on  account  of  poor  health. 

In  1855  she  joined  the  First  S.  D.  B.  Church  of  Hopkin- 
ton, R.  I.,  and  is  now  a  member  of  the  First  S.  D.  B.  Church 
of  New  York  City. 

Senator  Henry  S.  Ambler  (husband  of  Julia  M.  [Babcock] 
Ambler)  descended  from  ancestors  on  his  father's  side  who 
came  from  England  about  1625.  while  those  on  his  mother's 
side  came  from  Prussia.  Leaving  their  mother  country  on 
account  of  religious  persecution  and  taking  onlv  what  thev 
could  carry  in  their  hands,  they  fled  by  night  to  Holland,  and 
from  thence  sailed  to  New  Amsterdam  (afterward  New 
York),  among  the  early  Dutch  settlers  of  that  place. 

Mr.  Ambler  was  educated  at  tlie  Mount  \\^Tshington  Col- 
lesfiate  Institute  and  the  Citv  Institute  of  New  York,  and  grad- 
uating from  the  latter  in  18^3  he  immediatelv  accepterl  a  posi- 
tion as  bookkeeper  at  the  Morgan  Iron  Works. 

In  1856,  on  account  of  impaired  health,  he  left  the  city  for 


35-  ^  //('  Babcock  Genealogy. 

his  father's  farm  in  the  town  of  Austerhtz,  Ct)hinibia  County, 
N.  v.,  where  he  remained  until  1861,  engaging  in  agricuUural 
pursuits. 

in  Dec.,  1 86 1,  Mr.  Ambler  became  agent  and  steward  for 
the  New  York  Institution  for  the  Blind,  New  York  City,  and 
filled  this  position  until  Sept.,  1864,  when  he  married  and  went 
to  Pleasants  County,  W.  Va.  Returning  to  New  York  City 
in  1866,  he  opened  a  mercantile  business  in  the  line  of  dairy 
produce.  In  1873  he  purchased  his  father's  farm  and  engaged 
somewhat  in  stock  raising  until  1888,  when  he  retired  from 
mercantile  business,  wishing  to  devote  his  entire  attention  to 
farming". 

Politically  he  is  a  Republican,  and  as  such  represented  his 
town  in  the  Columbia  County  Board  of  Supervisors  for  ten 
years.  In  1896  he  was  appointed  Assistant  Commissioner  of 
Agriculture,  and  took  charge  of  the  third  division  of  the  State 
of  New  York,  retaining  this  position  until  1898,  when  he  re- 
signed to  take  his  seat  in  the  State  Senate,  to  which  he  had 
been  elected  from  the  Twenty-fourth  District.  He  was  re- 
elected in  1900,  and  received  20,367  votes  to  14,296  cast  for 
his  Democratic  opponent.  Again  re-elected  in  1902,  he  still 
(1903)  represents  his  district. 

Since  entering  the  Senate  he  has  served  continuously  as 
Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Agriculture,  and  is  the  leading 
representative  in  the  Legislature  of  the  farmers'  organizations. 
His  zealous  and  constant  efforts  to  further  their  interests  have 
given  him  ])rominence  throughout  the  entire  State.  He  has 
been  a  relentless  opponent  of  the  present  proposed  plan  of  en- 
larging the  Erie  Canal,  because  he  has  believed  the  project 
would  be  detrimental  to  the  interests  of  the  farmers  of  the 
State,  and  his  position  has  been  strenuously  supported  by  the 
New  York  State  Grange,  which  is  a  powerful  nonpartisan  or- 
ganization comprising  62,000  members,  among  whom  he  is 
highly  popular  by  reason  of  his  devoted  and  efficient  service 
in  their  behalf.  He  is  also  author  of,  and  has  had  enacted  into 
law,  many  bills  which  greatly  benefit  dairymen  and  farmers. 

Mr.  Ambler  believes  in  w^oman's  suffrage,  and  is  ever  ready 
to  present  bills  for  the  Equal  Suffrage  Association,  and  w^orks 
persistently  for  their  passage  regardless  of  strong  opposition. 

He  is  actively  identified  with  other  agricultural  societies  of 
the  State,  as  well  as  with  the  Grange.  He  is  Vice  President 
of  the  State  Fair  Association,  Vice  President  of  the  State 
Farmers'  League,  Vice  President  of  the  State  Farmers'  Con- 
gress, and  has  been  successively  appointed  by  Governors  Mor- 


TJic  Babcuck  Genealogy.  353 

ton,  Black,  Roosevelt,  and  Odell  to  represent  the  State  at  the 
annual  sessions  of  the  National  Farmers'  Congress. 

ChiUlren,  hrst  two  b.  Potter  Hill,  the  others  b.  Chatham: 

Henry  Babcock,  b.  Mar.  23,  1866;  res.  1903,  Chatham;  m.  West- 
erly, R.  I.,  Sept.  27,  1894,  Edna,  dau.  of  James  and  Sarah  F. 
(Lewis)  Barber,  b.  Westerly.  He  graduated  Mar.,  1888,  from 
the  American   Veterinary  College,  New  York  City. 

John  Edgar,  M.D.,  b.  July  24,  1871 ;  res.  1903,  at  134  E.  19th  St., 
New  York  City;  unm.  Graduated  May,  1893,  at  the  New  York 
Homeopathic  Medical  College,   New  York  City. 

Nathan  Babcock,  b.  May  29.  1876;  res.  1903,  at  134  E.  19th  St., 
New  York  City;  unm.  Graduated  June,  1900,  at  Columbia  Uni- 
versity, New  York  City,  as  Electrical  Engineer. 

Elenora,  b.  Oct.  11,  1880;  res.  1903,  Chatham.  June.  1903,  finished 
her  third  year  in  Vassar  College. 

Stephen  Babcock,  b.  Dec.  13,  1888;    res.  1903,  Chatham. 

861.  Elizabeth^  Almy,  dau.  of  David  and  Lucy  (Babcock) 
Alniy  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John'*,  James),  b. 

Hopkinton,  R.  I.  (Ashaway),  Sept.  26,  1820;  d.  Phenix, 
R.  I.,  Sept.  4.  1848;  m.  Portsmouth.  R.  I.,  Nov.  10,  1847, 
Horatio  Alonzo,  son  of  Nathan  and  Cilda  (IMatterson)  Stone, 
b.  Coventi-y,  R.  I..  Sept.  30,  1814,  d.  Phenix,  Mar.  13,  1872. 
Child: 

1416  Elizabeth  Almy.''  b.  Aug.  24,  1848;    m.  John  J.  Bellows. 

862.  Lucy  Mari.\'^  Almy,  dau.  of  David  and  Lucy   (Bab- 
cock)   /\lmy     (Daniel,     Oliver,    James.    James,   John, 

James),  b.  Portsmouth.  R.  L.  Aug.  3.  1824;  d.  New  York 
City,  .\pr.  lu  1891  ;  m.  Portsmouth,  Apr.  28.  1845.  -^.ndrew 
Jackson,  son  of  Andrew  and  Jane  (Seaberry)  Cory,  b.  Tiver- 
ton, R.  L,  Sept.  17.  18 1 7.  d.  Jamestown.  R.  L.  ]\Iay  30,  1887. 
Children : 

1417  Maria  Elizabeth,"  b.  July  6,   1849;    m.  Abram  A.   Brown. 

George    A.,    b.    Portsmouth,    Dec.    2.    1851  ;     d.    Jersey   City,    N.    J., 

Feb.  23.  1882. 
Alfred  R.,  b.  Portsmouth,  June  29,  1854;    d.  Newport,  Jan.  19,  1858. 

1418  Lucy  Jane,  b.  Jan.  3,  1856;    m.  Thomas  Giles  Carr. 

Alfred  Richards."  b.  Jamestown,  Mar.  27.  1861  ;  res.  1902,  James- 
town ;  m.  Jamestown,  Oct.  25,  1892,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  John  J. 
and  Gertrude  (Stanhope)  Watson,  b.  Jamestown,  Sept.  is.  1871. 
Child:    Alfred  R.,'"  b.  Oct.  6,  1893. 

Nancy  S.,"  b.  Jamestown,  Jan.  2,  1863 ;  res.  1902.  67  Lutheran  St., 
New^burg,  N.  Y. :  m.  Jamestown,  Nov.  14.  1895,  George  J.,  son 
of  Gurdon  B.  and  Esther  (Fate)  Barnes,  b.  Montgomery.  N.  Y.. 
Mar.  22,  1865.  Child:  Cornelia  Andes.'"  b.  Newburg,  May  12, 
1898. 

Cornelia  Meade,  b.  Jamestown,  Feb.  25.  186^ ;  m.  Oct.  24,  i88g, 
Lionel  H.,  son  of  William  .\.  and  Miriam  F.  (Clark)  Champlin, 
b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  L,  July  26,  1863. 

23 


354  ^/^^'  Babcock  Genealogy. 

863.  JIarkiet  Wayland*^  Almy,  dau.  of  David  and  I.iicy 
(Uabcock)  Almy  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Portsmouth,  R.  i..  May  i6,  1832;  d.  Jamestown, 
l\.  J.,  Apr.  25,  1894;  m.  Newport,  Iv.  I.,  Dec.  20,  1855,  Elijah, 
son  of  George  and  Margaret  (Hathaway)  Anthony,  b.  Mid- 
dletown,  R.  L,  May  28,  1835,  res.  1902,  Jamestown. 
Children : 

Louis  Wayland.'"'  b.  Portsmouth,  Dec.  9,  1856;  res.  1902,  James- 
town ;  m.  Newport,  Apr.  27,  1893,  Maud  L.,  dau.  of  Henry  R. 
and  Sarah  E.  (McDonald)  St.  Clair,  b.  Newport,  Sept.  30,  1872. 
They  have  two  children,  both  b.  in  Jamestown ;  Ledyard,'"  b. 
May  9,  1894,  and  Elijah,  b.  Feb.  25,  1897. 

Hannah  Maria,"  b.  Middletown,  Dec.  14,  1858;  res.  1902,  at  Cali- 
fornia Ave.,  Providence,  R.  I.  ;  m.  Jamestown,  Mar.  4,  1896, 
Henry  L.,  son  of  Daniel  and  Lydia  (Cutter)  Smith,  b.  Wick- 
ford,  R.  I.,  July  6,  1858.  Children,  b.  Providence:  Dalton  An- 
thony,'" b.  Apr.  26,  1897 ;    Wayland  Almy,  b.  Oct.  24,  1898. 

George  •David,''  b.  Jamestown,  Oct.  23.  i860;  res.  1902,  Jamestown; 
m.  S.  Dartmouth,  Mass.,  Jan.  4,  1887,  Emma,  dau.  of  Charles 
Frederick  and  Almira  (Weeks)  Cushman,  b.  S.  Dartmouth,  Aug. 
17,  1861.  Children,  b.  Jamestown:  Alma,^"  b.  May  9,  1890;  Mil- 
dred, b.  Apr.  7,   1892;    Doris,  b.  Sept.  26,   1897. 

Frederick,"  b.  Jamestown,  Dec.  7,  1862 ;  res.  1902,  Jamestown ;  m. 
Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Nov.  7,  1889,  Sarah  Louise,  dau.  of  Henry 
and  Louise  (Sherman)  Anthony,  b.  Portsmouth,  Jan.  i,  1867. 
Children,  b.  Jamestown:  Kathryn,'"  b.  Aug.  4,  1890;  Marguerita, 
b.  May  14,  1892. 

Abraham  Lincoln, °  b.  Jamestown,  Apr.  3,  1865 ;  d.  Jamestown, 
July  31,  1867. 

Margret,*  b.  Jamestown,  June  28,  1867;  res.  1902,  Jamestown;  m. 
Jamestown,  May  2,  1887,  .Adolphus  Clark,  son  of  William  Hazard 
and  Ann  Elizabeth  (Clark)  Knowles,  b.  Jamestown,  June  22, 
1863.  Children,  b.  Jamestown :  Ruth  Hathaway,'"  b.  Feb.  27, 
1888;  Foster  Sherman,  b.  Aug.  23,  1889;  Kenneth  Hopkins,  b. 
Mar.  29,  1891  ;  Beulah  Anthony,  b.  July  2,  1892;  Harriet,  b. 
Apr.   17,   1897. 

Elijah,  Jr.,  b.  Jamestown,  Jan.  30.  1873;  d.  Jamestown,  Feb.  18, 
1873. 


864.  Altana  Frances^  Almy,  dau.  of  David  and  Lucy 
(Babcock)  Almy  (Daniel  Oliver,  James,  James,  John. 
James),  b.  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Mar.  12,  1843;  ^-  l^ec.  g.  1900; 
m.  Portsmouth,  Nov.  26.  1863,  William  C.,  son  of  Philip  B. 
and  Sarah  E.  (Cook)  Chase,  b.  Portsmouth,  Sept.  10,  1840, 
d.  Providence,  R.  I.,  Dec.  i,  1901. 
Children : 

Earnest,"  b.  Portsmouth,  Oct.  9,  1864;  res.  1902.  405  Potter  Ave., 
Providence;  m.  Providence.  Ausr.  t8,  1890,  Alice  R.,  dau.  of 
Thomas  and  Emma  (Slade)  Jollie.  b.  Providence.  Dec.  3,  186';, 
d.  Providence,  Feb.  7,  1807.  Children,  b.  Providence:  Harold 
Almv"  b.  Anr.  23,  t8q2;  d.  Apr.  24,  1892;  Howland  C,  b.  July 
30,  1893,  d.  Jan.  II,  1894. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  355 

vValtcr  Wcyland,''  1).  Providence,  Dec.  15,  1866;  res.  1903,  261  Pine 
St.,  Providence;  ni.  Providence,  Oct.  14,  1891,  Florence  E.,  dau. 
of  William  E.  and  Emma  (Buffiington)  Green,  b.  Providence, 
July  6,  i8()8.  Child,  Edith  l'\,"'  b.  Providence,  Alar.  12,  1893,  d. 
Mar.  17,  1893. 

865.  Ella  B.**   Saunders,  dau.   of  Pelcg-  and  Mary   (Bab- 
cock)   Saunders    (Daniel,  Oliver.  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  1.,  May   i,    1851;    d.  Providence, 
R.  I.,  Oct.  20.  1901  :   m.  Potter  lliil,  Jan.  5.  1882,  Wellington 
L.,  son  of  Denison  and  Susan  A.   (Bishop)   Lewis,  b.  Provi- 
dence, Apr.  5,  1856;    res.  Johnstown,  R.  I. 
Children : 

Leverrier,  b.   Potter  Hill.  Oct.   19,   1882. 

Susan  M.,  b.  Oinewille,  R.  I.,  July  2^.  1884;    d.  Olnevville,  July  26, 

1884. 
Denison  Pelcg,  b.  Olneyville,  Aug.  15,  1885;    d.  July  27.  1886. 

866.  Esther  Palmer^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Timothy  and  Mar- 
tha   (Bugbee)     Babcock    (Timothy,    Timothy,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Sept.  11,  1807;  d. 
Ware,  Mass..  May  3,  1838;  m.  (i)  Ware,  Mass.,  1830,  Hinck- 
ley, son  of  Aaron  Andrews,  d.  1833  (?).  He  was  a  farmer. 
They  had  one  son,  now  in  the  West.  She  m.  (2)  Dec,  1835, 
Aaron  Gould,  a  farmer.     Two  children  were  b.  to  them. 

867.  Martha  Woodward^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Timothy  and 
Martha  (Bugbee)  Babcock  (Timothy,  Timothy,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Jan.  9,  1811;  d. 
Rock  Island,  111.,  Feb.  9,  1848;  m.  Ware,  Mass.,  Lemuel  An- 
drews, a  cousin  of  Esther's  husband.  They  went  West  in  1836 
and  settled  in  Rock  Island.  Mr.  Andrews  was  Sheriff  of  Rock 
Island  County  for  many  years.     They  had  two  dausfhters. 


'&>' 


868.  Julia  Maria^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Timothy  and  Martha 
(Bugbee)  Babcock  (Timothy,  Timothy,  James.  James, 
John.  James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Oct.  13,  1813;  d.  (~^alena, 
111.,  Sept.  15,  1870:  m.  Ware,  Mass.,  Nov.  27,  1831,  David 
Hawes,  b.  Enfield,  Mass.,  1810.  Removed  West  with  the  Bab- 
cock family  in  1836. 

Mr.  Hawes  has  been  vSheriff  of  Rock  Island  County,  111., 
and  was  (1895)  in  his  eighty-sixth  year  Justice  of  the 
Peace  and  Coroner  in  the  city  of  Rock  Island.  Of  their  larcfe 
family,  but  two  are  now  h'vine,  one  of  which.  Charles  \\f. 
Hawes,  b.  Mar.  7,  184T.  is  Chief  Clerk  in  the  office  of  ^lodern 
Woodmen  of  America,  of  the  State  of  Illinois,  at  Fulton,  111. 


356  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

869.  Timothy  Alpheus^   Babcock,   son   of   Timothy  and 
Aiartlia  (Bugbee)  Babcock  (Tiniutliy,  Timothy,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Ware,  Mass.,  Mar.  25,  1816;  d.  Rock 
Island,  BL,  Feb.  21,  1880;  m.  Feb.  24,  1840,  Amanda  Mc- 
Neil, d.  Rock  Island,  Oct.  22,  1891. 

He  owned  and  operated  a  farm  in  Hampton  Township,  111., 
also  owned  a  tannery  in  Rock  Island  and  later  converted  it  in- 
to an  iron  foundry.  In  1849  he  with  his  brothers  Francis  and 
George  made  the  journey  from  Illinois  to  California  overland, 
with  two  ox  teams.  He  returned  in  185 1  to  his  farm,  and 
later  sold  it  to  his  brother  George  and  started  a  wholesale  gro- 
cery store  in  Rock  Island. 

Children,  b.  Hampton  Township,  111. : 

Jane,  b.  Sept.  11,  1841  ;    m.  George  Dodd. 
William,  b.  May  12,  1845;    d.  Aug.  31,  1870. 
Frank,  b.  June  19,   1848;    unm. 
Homer,    b.    July    16.    1852;     d.    Aug.    20,    1855. 
Gregg,  b.  Aug.  7,  1854;    d.  Sept.  11,  1854. 
Timotby  Alpheus,  Jr.,  b.  Jan.  4,   1861  ;    d.   Oct.   1885. 
William    and   Timothy    Alpheus,   Jr.,    were   both   m.    and   had   children. 
Both  d.  in  Hampton  Township,  of  consumption. 

870.  Francis  Bugbee^  Babcock,  son  of  Timothy  and  Mar- 
tha   (Bugbee)    Babcock    (Timothy,    Timothy,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Ware,  Mass.,  May  i,  1819;  d.  Cali- 
fornia, Dec,  1857. 

He  went  West  with  the  family  in  1836,  and  worked  on  a 
farm  in  Hampton  Township,  111.,  until  1847;  then,  in  com- 
pany with  Lemuel  Andrews,  his  brother-in-law,  went  into  the 
business  of  general  merchandising  in  Rock  Island.  In  1849 
he,  with  his  brothers  Timothy  and  George,  made  the  journey 
overland  to  California,  where  he  was  very  successful,  leaving 
an  estate,  real  and  personal,  valued  at  $40,000 ;    unm. 

871.  John  Elias^  Babcock,  son  of  Timothy  and  Martha 

(Bugbee)  Babcock  (Timothy,  Timothy,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Ware,  Mass.,  Dec.  18,  1821  ;  d.  Watertown, 
111.,  Sept.  24,  1895;  m.  Eliza  Wells,  of  Hampton  Towai- 
ship.  111. 

He  settled  in  1837  on  Section  28,  Hampton  Township,  near 
Watertown,  and  there  with  his  own  hands  and  by  hard  work 
developed  one  of  the  finest  pieces  of  agricultural  and  stock- 
raising  property  in  Illinois.  He  retired  from  active  life  a 
few  years  ago  after  having  become  one  of  the  most  successful 
and  prosperous  farmers  in  the  country.  He  was  a  jovial  and 
pleasant  man,  and  his  company  was  much  enjoyed  by  the  Rock 


COLONEL    ANDREW    JACKSON    BABCOCK. 

Page  361. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  357 

Island  County  Pioneer  Society,  of  wliich  he  was  a  prominent 
nienil)er. 

Children,  b.  Hampton  Township : 

Ralph  Miner,"  b.  July  29,  i860;  ni.  1885,  Louisa,  dau.  of  Thomas 
G.  Silvis.  He  was  a  farmer  in  Black  Hawk  Township,  111.  Had 
three  children:     Milton,'"   Ethel,   John. 

John  Earnest,  h.  ]\Iar.  15,  1862;  ni.  June,  1893,  Ida  Putnam,  of 
Carthage,  Mo.     Has  one  child,  Maurice,  b.  1894. 

George  Merrill,  b.  Hampton  Township,  Apr.  13,  1864;  res.  1896, 
Rock  Island,  111.:  m.  Feb.,  1893,  Harriet,  dau.  of  William  Jack- 
son, of  Rock  Island.  No  children,  1896.  He  is  a  dentist,  and 
also   engaged   in  real   estate   business. 

Lillian  Louisa,  b.  Hampton  Township,  Oct.  27,  1866;  m.  Feb.  14, 
1895.  Sherman  Arenschild,  of  Iowa.  They  res.  Elden,  la.  She 
was  a  teacher. 

Martha  IM.,  b.  Oct.  3,  1869;    d.  1896. 

872.  George  Mills^  Babcock,  son  of  Timothy  and  Martha 

(Bngbee)  Babcock  (Timothy,  Timothy,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Ware,  Mass.,  Aug.  10,  1828;  d.  Rock  Island, 
111.,  1880;   m.  Helen  Negus,  of  Rock  Island. 

He  moved  with  his  family  in  1837  to  Illinois.  In  1849  he 
removed  with  his  brothers  Timothy  and  Francis  to  California, 
where  he  engaged  in  mining,  herding,  etc.  About  1852  he  re- 
turned to  Rock  Island,  and  conducted  a  large  grain  business. 
He  had  three  children,  who  grew  to  adult  life  and  married. 

873.  Archib.\ld    Dorrence^    Babcock,    son    of   Archibald 
and  Hannah   (Richard)    Babcock   (Timothy,  Timothy, 

James,  James,  John.  James),  b.   Mansfield,  Conn.,   Dec.    13, 
1808;    d.  Boston,   Mass.;    m.  May  19,   1835,   Fannie  Fidelia 
Richards,  of  Montague,  Mass.,  b.  Aug.  11,  1807. 
Children,  b.  Boston : 

Charles  Thaddeus.  b.  June  6,   1837 :    d.  Boston,  Nov.  20,   1862. 
1419  James  Francis,"  b.  Feb.  2t,.  1844;    m.   (i)   Mary  P.  Crosby;    m.   (2) 
Marion  B.  Alden. 

874.  Sanford^  Babcock,  son  of  Thomas  and  Emily  (Roice) 
Babcock     (Timothy,    Timothy,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Oct.  15,  1817;  d.  Evergreen, Colo., 
July  4,  1899;   m.  1843,  Adeline  J.  Green,  of  Rochester,  N.  Y. 

He  was  a  dentist  in  Springfield,  111.,  having  practiced  his 
profession  there  for  thirty-five  years. 

Children : 

Jasper,  b. ;    res.   1902.  Evergreen.     He  served  in  Battery  C,  2d 

Regiment,  Lieht  Artillery,  and  also  on  the  stafT  of  Maj.-Gen. 
John  A.  McCernard.  War  of  the  Rebellion.  He  m.  a  grand- 
daughter of  Lieut. -Gov.  Dougherty,  of  Illinois.  Now  lives  in 
Evergreen,  Jefiferson  County,  Colo. 


358  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

William  N.,  b.  ;    m.  Miss  Nash,  of  California.     Is  now   (1902) 

General  Western  Freight  Agent  of  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna  & 
Western  Railway ;    res.  1902,  at  103  Adams  St.,  Chicago. 

875.  Palmer*^  B.\bcock,  son  of  Thomas  and  Emily  (Roice) 
Babcock     (Timothy,    Timothy,    James,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn.,  Aug.  12,  1819;  res.  1902,  Raleigh, 
N.  C. ;  m.  (i)  Onondaga,  N.  Y.,  Lucenia  Case;  m.  (2)  Mrs. 
Henry,  of  Raleigh. 

He  is  a  dentist,  and  has  practiced  his  profession  in  Raleigh 
for  many  years.  He  had  three  children :  Dwight,  Sandford, 
and  Palmer. 

876.  Jasper'*  Babcock,  son  of  Thomas  and  Emily  (Roice) 
Babcock    (Tiinothy,     Timothy,     James,     James,   John, 

James),  b.  Ashford,  Conn,  1821  ;  m.  New  York  State  in  1844. 
He  has  been  a  railroad  contractor.  Of  late  years  has  been 
a  resident  of  the  State  of  Nevada ;  was  two  terms  Secretary 
of  State  for  Nevada.  Records  of  none  of  his  children  have 
been  gathered.  One,  a  daughter,  is  an  actress,  stage  name 
"Eleanor  Barray." 

877.  Jacob   Ely^   Babcock,    son   of  John   Reed   and   Eliza 

(Ely)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Brooklyn,  Pa.,  Oct.  28,  181 7;  d.  Hazleton,  Pa., 
Jan.  2,  1896;  m.  1844,  Lucy  Maria  Lathrop,  b.  May  2,  1821, 
d.  Hazleton,  Mar.  21,  1897. 

In  early  life  he  learned  the  printer's  trade  and  worked  at 
Ouincy,  Mass. ;  later  he  taught  school  at  Ouincy,  but  finally 
settled  in  Pennsylvania. 

Children : 

Leonard  L.,  b.  1845;  m.  Hazelton,  Pa.,  t866,  Mrs.  Priscilla  (Train- 
er) Gilbraith.  He  enlisted  in  Co.  F,  147th  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teer Infantry,  War  of  the  Rebellion,  .'Xug.,  1862.  He  was  in  the 
battles  of  Chancellorsville,  Gettysburg,  Lookout  Mountain,  and 
in  all  the  battles  and  skirmishes  in  which  the  regiment  took  part 
until  the  close  of  the  war. 

Lvman  R.,  b.   1847. 

Mary  E.,  h.  1840;    d.  1872:    m.  William  H.  Davis. 

Charles  R.,  b.  Dec.  29,   1851  ;    d.  1853. 

Emma  P.,  b.  May  9,  1855;    d.  1857. 

Ada  L.,  b.  Jan.   10,   1858. 

Son,  d.  young. 

Francis  E.,  b.  Feb.,  1861  ;    d.  young. 

878.  Elizabeth   Sterling^   Babcock,   dau.   of  John   Read 
and   Eliza    (Ely)     Babcock     (John,    Timothy,   James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Brooklyn,  Pa.,  July  24,   1820;    res. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  359 

1902,  Factoryville,  Pa.;  111.  Jan.  i,  1843,  Andrew,  son  of  Leb- 
beus  and  Fanny  (Ely)  Rogers,  of  Brooklyn.  He  is  a  farmer 
and  stock  dealer. 

Children,  b.  Brooklyn,  Pa.: 

Fanny  E..  b.  Aug.   12,   1844;    ni.  Dec.  26,   1884,   Frederick  I^indsey; 

res.    1902,     Factoryville,    Pa.       They     have     three    sons    and    two 

daughters. 
Cliarles  L.,  b.   Dec.  9,   1852;    res.   1902.   Milford,   Pa.;    ni.   Nov.  25, 

1891,  Etta  Stanton.     One  child,  dau. 
Willie  J.,  b.  Nov.  27,  1861  ;    m.   Nov.  27,   1888,   Martha  E.  Lindsey; 

res.   1902,   Factoryville.     They  have  two  children. 
Lillie  May,  b.  Nov.  27,  1861 ;    m.  Nov.  27,   1888,  Walter  Ely;    res. 

1902,   Brooklyn,   Pa.     They  have  one  daughter. 

879.  Louisa  Gilmore^   Babcock,   dan.  of  John  Read  and 
Eliza   (EI3O    Babcock   (John,  Timothy,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Brooklyn,  Pa.,  Dec.  15,  1821  ;   m.  (i)  1842, 
Samuel  W.  Spencer,  b.  Brooklyn,  Nov.  24,  1820,  d.  Janesville, 
Wis.,  Dec.  9.   1864;    m.   (2)  James  G.  Packer,  d.  Brooklyn, 
Pa.,  1 87 1.     No  issue  by  the  last  marriage. 
Children  by  first  husband,  b.  Janesville: 

Charles  H.,  b.  1846;  d.  Janesville,  1870;  m.  Addie  E.  Reed.  One 
son. 

Frank  H.,"  b.  Jan.  2,  1851 ;  m.  Omaha,  Neb.,  June  15.  1873,  Sadie 
C.  Wood.  b.  Pekin,  111.,  June  15,  1851.  Four  children:  Charles 
Henry,'"  Lily  May,  Frank  Lyman,  and  Arthur  Leroy. 

Mary  L.,  b.   1858.     Taught  school,  Brooklyn,  Pa. 

880.  Charles  Marsii^   Babcock,   son  of  John   Read   and 
Eliza  (Ely)     Babcock  (John,  Timothy,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Carbondale,  Pa.,  Dec.  22,  1825;  d.  Janes- 
ville, Cal. ;  m.  Nov.  25,  1856,  Clara  Davis  Connor,  of  Mauch 
Chunk,  Pa.,  b.  Jan.  25.  1835,  d.  Aug.  16,  1861. 

He  was  by  profession  a  civil  engineer;  served  in  the  Engi- 
neer Corps  of  the  army  in  the  Civil  War  and  ranked  as  Cap- 
tain.    He  removed  to  California  in  1865. 

Children: 

Josephine,  b.  Nov.  7.  1857.     Lived  in  Mauch  Chunk. 
Margaret,   b.   Dec.   30,   i860;    d.   1861. 

881.  John  Read'^   Babcock,   son  of  John  Read  and  Eliza 

(Ely)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy.  James,  James, .John, 
James),  b.  Brooklyn,  Pa.,  Apr.  i.  1828;  m.  Betsey  Warner, 
Dec.  31,  1857. 

He  removed  to  Ilh'nois  soon  after  marriage,  and  settled  on 
a  farm  four  miles  from  ^^'ilmington,  where  all  their  children 
were  born.     He  is  now  deceased. 


360  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Robert  Eugene,  b.   Nov.   8,    1858. 

Laura  Kent,  b.  Apr.  25,  1861  ;  is  a  school  teacher. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Mar.  31,  1863. 

Mary  KUa,  b.  Feb.  22,   1865. 

Emma  Louisa,  b.  Feb.  i,  1867. 

Clara  Jane,  b.  Jan.  6,  1869. 

George  Read,  b.  Dec.  2,   187 1. 

Charles  Arthur,  b.  Mar.  26,  1874. 

John  Atherton,  b.  Dec.  3,  1876. 

Bertha  Lillian,  b.   Feb.  21,   1880. 

882.  Lucy  Amanda**  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  Read  and  Ehza 

(Ely)  Babeock  (John,  Timothy,  James,  James,  John, 
Jjunes).  b.  Carbondale,  Pa.,  Nov.  5,  1830;  m.  Oct.  14,  1852, 
George  Clinton  Brnndage,  b.  Unioiiville,  Apr.  3,  1829. 

Mr.  Brnndage  is  a  farmer,  and  lives  at  S.  Gibson,  Pa. 

Children : 

Eva  Louisa,"  b.  S.  Gilison,  Pa.,  Sept.  14,  1853;  m.  May  9,  1875, 
Maurice  Gardiner.  Three  children :  Nellie  Leona,"  Harry  Ho- 
mer, Grace  Emma. 

Mary   Ella,   b.   Dec.   27,    1868. 

883.  Jame.s  Thomas^  Babcock,  son  of  John  Read  and  Eliza 

(Ely)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Carbondale,  Pa.,  Feb.  4,  1835;  res.  1902,  Minne- 
apolis, Minn.;  m.  Little  Falls,  Wis.,  Jan.  31,  1861,  Jnlia  A., 
dan.  of  Isaac  and  Adeline  (Gates)  Mason,  b.  Oct.  20,  1840, 
d.  Minneapolis,  July  6,  1892. 
Children : 

Frank   Howard,   b.   Wisconsin,   Aug.   21,    1863;    res.    1902,   Hillyard, 

Wash.  ;    m.  Nov.,   1896,  Alice  Golden. 
Carrie  Elizabeth,  b.   Nov.  7,   1877. 

884.  Adeline   H.^   Brown,    dan.   of  Jesse  and   Louisa   M. 

(Babcock)     Brown    (John,    Timothy,    James,    James, 
John,  James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Nov.  5,  1821  ;   d.  May  22, 
1892;   m.  1842,  Dennis  S.  Wilbur,  of  Hopkinton. 
Children,  b.  Hopkinton  : 

Louisa  T.,  b.  Aug.  21,  1843;  res.  1902,  Farina,  111.;  m.  Peter 
Switzer.     They  have  six  children. 

Charles  Dorr,  b.  Dec.  14,  1844.  He  was  a  recruit  in  the  62d  Illi- 
nois Volunteers,  War  of  the  Rebellion;  d.  at  Camp  Butler,  near 
Springfield,  111.,  Mar.  18,  1864;  is  buried  in  the  Camp  Butler 
National  Cemetery. 

Jesse  W.,  b.  Aug.  5,   1847. 

Mary  E.,  b.  July  14,  1850;    d.  Nov.  10,   1870. 

Daughter,  b.  ;    d.   young. 

Edwin,  b.  Aug.  26,   1855;    d.'  Oct.   14,   1856. 

John  G.,  b.  Nov.  15,  1857;  res.  1902,  Irwin,  Col.;  m.,  and  had 
one  child. 


TJic  Dabcock  Genealogy.  361 

885.  Jesse**  Brown,  Jr.,  son  of  Jesse  and  Louisa  M.   (Bab- 
cock)    Brown    (John,    Timothy,    James,   James,    John, 

James),  b.  Ilopkiiiton,  R.  I.,  July  10,  1824;  d. ;  m.  (i)  June 
22,  1851,  Alalvina  Xewl)ury,  of  Westerly,  R.  I.;  m.  (2)  Aug. 
27,  1859,  j\Irs.  Susan  West,  d.  Sept.  26,  1873;  m.  (3)  May, 
1874,  . 

In  the  War  of  the  RebelHon  he  served  as  a  sokHer  in  Com- 
pany C,  2ist  Regiment,  Connecticut  Vokinteers.  The  com- 
pany was  raised  in  N.  Stonington  and  Vokmtown. 

Chikh"en  by  first  wife: 

George  Thompson,  b.  June  23,   1852. 
Frederic   Newbury,  b.  Apr.   ig,   1854. 
Louisa  Malvina,  b.  June  2,  1856. 
Helen  Mabel,  b.  Aug.  24,  1858. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Georgeanna,' b.  Aug.  22,,  i860. 

Jesse   Shubal,   b.   Apr.   2,    1862;    d.   Apr.    14,   1864. 

He  had  three  children  by  third  wife. 

886.  Louisa^  Gilmore,  dau.  of  Robert  Gilmore  and  Lucy 

(Blackman)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Dover,  N.  H.,  Oct.  7,  1827;  m.  Holden, 
Mass.,  Apr.  4,  1855,  George  W.,  son  of  John  and  Olive  (Bige- 
lov/)  Bolton,  b.  Oct.  21,  1828. 

Children,  b.  W.  Boylston,  Mass.,  anl  Milwaukee: 

Esther  Vreeland,  b.  Jan.   13.   1856. 

Sarah  Estelle  Bigelow.  b.  Apr.  11,  1858.  Has  taught  school  in  Mil- 
waukee many  years ;    unm. 

Alma  Louisa,  b.  July  18,   i860;    d.  Apr.  4,    1868. 

Frances  Everett  Barnard,  b. :    m.  Apr.  24,  i8go,  Fred  W.  Snell. 

He  d.  May  19,  1896.  Two  children:  Althea  E.,  b.  Apr.  5,  1891, 
and  Fred  C,  b.  Aug.  22,,  1894. 

George  Albert,  b.  Apr.  29,  1866;    d.  ^Lir.  i,  1868. 

Gertrude,  b.  June  5,  1873;    d.  June  29,  1881. 

887.  Col.  Andrew  Jackson^  Babcock,  son  of  Robert 
Gilmore  and  Lucy  (Blackman)  Babcock  (John,  Tim- 
othy, James.  James,  John,  James),  b.  Dorchester,  Mass.,  July 
12,  1830;  res.  1903.  Springfield,  111.;  m.  Concord,  N.  H., 
Feb.  25,  1852  (by  Rev.  John  Moor,  Pastor  of  the  Univer- 
salist  Church),  Harriet  Ann,  dau.  of  Wesley  Balch  and  Sarah 
(Abbot)   Palmer,  b.  Hopkinton,  N.  H.,  May  10,   1832. 

As  is  shown  in  the  Preface  of  this  volume.  Col.  Babcock 
has  rendered  great  assistance  to  the  author  in  the  preparation 


362  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

of  this  work.  In  Aug-.,  1901,  he  loaned  to  tlie  writer  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty-two  lei^al  cap  pages  of  manuscrij)t,  written  Ijy 
himself.  He  gathered  and  compiled  nearly  all  the  records  of 
his  great-grandfather,  Timothy  Babcock,  and  for  the  past  four 
years  has  sent  to  the  author  frequent  and  voluminous  commu- 
nications containing  the  results  of  his  genealogical  researches. 

When  nineteen  years  of  age  he  joined  the  Lowell  Mechanic 
Phalanx,  5th  Regiment,  Massachusetts  Militia.  He  was  three 
years  a  member,  and  was  a  well-drilled  soldier.  Later  Gen, 
Benjamin  F.  Butler  was  Major  and  afterward  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel of  the  same  regiment.  In  1856  he  moved  to  Springfield, 
111.  Two  years  later  he  joined  as  a  private  the  military  com- 
pany then  organized,  called  the  Si:)ringfield  Grays.  Lie  rose 
in  rank  from  step  to  step,  until  in  1861  he  was  First  Lieutenant 
of  the  company.  At  the  breaking  out  of  the  w^ar  he  enlisted, 
Apr.  16,  1 86 1,  under  the  first  call  for  three-months'  men,  and 
was  mustered  into  service  Apr.  25,  1861,  as  Captain  of  Com- 
pany I,  7th  Illinois  Infantry,  by  Capt.  John  Pope,  wdio  was 
later  Gen.  Pope.  The  Seventh  was  the  first  Illinois  regiment 
mustered  into  service,  but  was  called  the  7th  to  keep  intact 
the  six  regiments  that  Illinois  furnished  in  the  Mexican  War. 

At  the  expiration  of  the  term  of  enlistment  he  with  his  com- 
pany was  mustered  out  of  service  near  Cairo,  111.,  and  the 
same  day,  July  25,  1861,  he  was  remustered  into  service  for 
three  years  as  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  In- 
fantry. Although  he  ranked  as  Lieutenant-Colonel,  he  com- 
manded his  regiment  almost  from  the  start,  and  was  in  com- 
mand during  the  three  days'  battle  at  Fort  Donelson,  Feb.  13- 
15,  1862,  and  on  the  25th  of  Mar.,  1862,  for  gallant  and  mer- 
itorious service  rendered  at  Fort  Donelson,  was  commissioned 
Colonel  of  the  regiment. 

When  the  war  broke  out  Col.  Babcock,  his  wife,  and  two 
children  lived  in  Springfield,  where  he  w^as  in  business.  He 
hired  a  man  to  conduct  his  business,  and  left  for  the  war. 
After  nearlv  two  years  of  service,  sickness  in  his  familv  and 
business  afl^airs  demanded  his  immediate  attention  at  home. 
He  then  offered  his  resignation  from  the  army,  which  was  re- 
turned indorsed,  "Owing  to  the  exigencies  of  the  service  the 
resignation  of  Col.  Babcock  cannot  be  accepted.  U.  S.  Grant, 
Maj.-Genl."  His  resignation  was  repeated  from  time  to  time, 
and  was  finallv  accented  in  Mar.,  1863.  The  following  resolu- 
tions dated  Mar.  18,  1863,  were  unanimously  adopted  by  the 
ofificers  and  men  of  his  regiment,  and  were  published  in  the 
newspapers  of  that  period  : 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  363 

"The  Resignation  of  Col.  A.  J.  Babcock — Testimonial 
FROM  his  Companions  in  Arms. 

"Corinth,  Miss.,  March  18,  1863. 

"At  a  meeting  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  7th  Reg-inient 
of  IlHnois  Infantry  Vokmteers,  held  on  the  17th  inst.,  were 
unanimously  adopted  the  following  preamble  anrl  resolutions : 

"JVIicrras,  Col.  Andrew  J.  Babcock  has  resigned  his  commission  as  Col- 
onel of  the  7th  regiment  of  Illinois  Infantry  Volunteers,  and  we  the  officers 
and  men  of  the  7th,  having  been  long  under  his  command,  both  appreciate 
his  worth  and  deeply  regret  his  separation  from  us ;    be  it 

"Resolved,  That  in  Col.  A.  J.  Babcock  the  State  of  Illinois  and  the  army 
of  the  United  States  have  lost  a  brave,  competent,  and  meritorious  officer. 

"Resok'cd,  That  we,  who  have  for  nearly  two  years  been  associated 
with  him  in  his  duties  in  the  garrison  and  in  the  field,  through  many 
toilsome  marches,  and  in  the  hard-fought  battles  of  Donelson  and  Corinth, 
bear  witness  that  he  has  proved  himself  a  most  daring,  discreet,  and 
loyal  leader;  and  that  in  the  execution  of  his  office,  as  well  as  his  per- 
sonal bearing,  he  has  won  not  only  the  confidence  and  respect,  but  also 
the  esteem  and  affection,  of  all  imder  his  command. 

"Resolved,  That  Col.  Babcock,  from  the  first  organization  of  the  first 
regiment  of  Illinois,  from  the  opening  of  the  war  to  the  present  date, 
has  proved  himself  before  us,  as  a  commander,  most  efficient ;  as  a  man 
and  a  brother  in  arms,  at  once  just,  genial,  and  generous.  We  sincerely 
hope  and  trust  that  his  affairs  may  again  permit  the  government  to  avail 
itself  of  his  invaluable  services  in  the  field  ;  and  should  such  be  the  case, 
it  will  be  our  highest  happiness  to  be  again  associated  with  him  in  the 
service  of  our  common  country. 

"Resolved.  That  a  copy  of  these  resolutions  be  sent  to  Col.   Babcock, 
and  to  the  Springfield  Journal.  Chicago  Tribune,  and  St.  Louis  Democrat. 
"R.  L.  ]\Ietcalfe,   Surgeon  7th  Illinois  Infantry,  President. 
"J.  Robinson,  Adjutant,  Secretary." 

Children : 

1420  Susan  Louisa,°  b.  Oct.  5,   1852 ;    m.  Z.  Dayton  Graham. 

Charles  Andrew,  b.  Springfield,  Nov.  10,  1856;  res.  1903,  Spring- 
field ;    unm. 

Lucy  Blackman,  b.   Springfield,  Mar.  30,   1859;    d.  Apr.   12,  1859. 

George  Shepherd,  h.  Springfield,  Feb.  8,  1866;  res.  Springfield; 
m.  pec.  4,  1888,  Mary,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Nellie  (Brody)  Bugg. 
No  issue. 

1421  James  Clayton,  b.   Sept.  2,   1868:    m.  Bertha  Pease. 

Robert  Gilmore,  b.  Springfield,  Sept.  11,  1871  ;    d.  Oct.  29,  1871. 

888.  Lucv  Blackman^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Robert  Gilmore 
and  Lucy  (Blackman)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Cape  Cod,  Mass..  Sept.  8. 
1832;  d.  Dorchester,  Mass.,  Mar.  9,  1890;  m.  Dorchester, 
Dec.  14.  1 85 1.  Henry  Fobes,  b.  Dorchester,  Aug.  19,  1821,  d. 
Dorchester.  June  21,  1899.  Both  are  buried  in  Mount  Hope 
Cemetery,  Roxbury,  Mass. 


3^4  The  Babcock  Gcncalo'^y. 

Children,  b.  Dorchester : 

Frank  Pierce,  b.  Oct.  14,   1852;    d.  May  6,  1853. 

Lucy  Otis,   b.   Aug.  23,   1854;    d.   Nov.    18,    1858. 

Waiter   Henry,   b.  June  22,    1857;    il.   Sept.    10,    1858. 

Sarah  Allen,  b.  Dec.  20,  1858. 

Mary  Louise,   b.   Sept.  8,    i860. 

Willard  Henry,  b.  Jan.  20,  1862;  ni.  I\Liy  18,  1902.  One  child,  b. 
ALilden,  Mass.,  July  16,   1903. 

Harriet  Carlton,  b.  Jan.  i,   1864. 

Emily  Frances,  b.  Dec.  25,  1865. 

Katharine  Gilmore,  b.  Jan.  6,   1868. 

Elizabeth  Babcock,  b.  June  25,  1870;    d.  Aug.  11,  1875. 

Alice,'"'  b.  Mar.  15,  1873;  res.  Rosindale,  Boston,  Alass. ;  m.  Dor- 
chester, Sept.,  1899,  Warren  H.  Gleason.  She  was  a  teacher  in 
the  public  schools  of  Dorchester.     Child:  Allen  Gleason,'"  b.  1900. 

889.  Sarah  Otis^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Robert  Gihnore  and 
Lucy  (Blackmail)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Apr.  22,  1834,  in  a  house  which  for- 
merly stood  near  the  entrance  of  the  old  cemetery  upon  the 
south  corner,  in  Milton,  Mass. 

In  the  spring  of  1837  her  parents  with  their  family  removed 
to  Ouincy,  Mass.,  living  in  the  black  post  house  on  Common 
Street,  called  so  from  the  cedar  posts  painted  black  which  sup- 
ported the  front  veranda.  She  first  attended  a  little  private 
school  kept  by  a  Miss  Nightengale,  and  later  the  public  school. 
About  the  year  1845  the  family  removed  to  S.  Boston,  and 
Sarah  attended  the  Hawes  School,  from  which  she  graduated 
at  the  age  of  thirteen. 

At  seventeen  years  of  age  she  began  to  teach  in  the  public 
schools  of  Roxbury,  Mass.,  a  work  which  with  slight  inter- 
mission was  continued  for  a  period  of  forty  years.  About 
this  time  she  went  to  James  Freeman  Clarke's  Church,  and 
here  probably  was  laid  the  foundation  for  a  long  life  of  men- 
tal activity  of  a  rare  quality.  The  year  following  her  work 
and  life  in  Roxbury  she  became  a  member  of  the  Parker  Fra- 
ternity. She  here  received  impressions  which  stimulated  her 
character  in  the  direction  of  the  most  advanced  thought  and 
action,  adding  to  the  natiu'al  intensity  of  her  character  mate- 
rial which  gave  color  to  her  whole  future. 

About  this  time  the  rigors  of  the  New  England  climate  left 
their  mark  upon  her,  and  a  change  was  necessary.  She  went 
alone  to  what  seemed  then  the  great  West.  Chicago,  to  build 
new  fortunes,  taking  with  her  the  inheritance  of  New  Eng- 
land history  and  thought,  detestation  of  slavery,  and  a  strong 
love  of  home.  She  secured  a  position  as  teacher  in  the  North 
Rolling  Mill  District,  and  at  the  close  of  her  long  work  in 


SARAH    OTIS    BABCOCK. 

1834-1901.  Page  364. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  365 

Chicago  we  find  her  enrolled  as  Principal  of  the  North  Wells 
Street  primary  schools.  The  exact  records  of  her  work  were 
lost  in  the  great  Chicago  fire.  We  know  she  labored  conscien- 
tiously, looking  after  the  children  under  her  care  in  all  ways, 
encouraging  and  strengthening  younger  women  who  taught 
under  her.  We  know  that,  although  she  was  a  stern  disci- 
plinarian, this  seemed  only  to  make  stronger  the  bonds  between 
teacher  and  pupil.  She  usually  passed  her  vacation  with  a 
sister  in  Milwaukee  or  with  her  sister,  Mrs.  Fobes,  in  the  more 
than  a  century-old  red  house  near  Harvard  Street  bridge,  Dor- 
chester, Mass.,  which  sheltered  three  generations  of  this  fam- 
ily. She  was  elected  Principal  of  the  Atlantic  schools, 
Ouincy,  Mass..  where,  commencing  about  1887,  she  taught 
four  years. 

She  had  an  intense  love  of  music,  and  possessed  a  rare 
speaking  voice,  a  voice  clear,  vibrating,  and  sweet.  As  we 
write  the  air  seems  again  to  echo  this  dear  voice.  She  traveled 
extensively  in  her  own  country ;  visited  Florida,  passed  a 
spring  in  Virginia,  a  winter  in  California,  and  a  year  in  Eu- 
rope. She  was  a  deep  student,  especially  of  biology,  German, 
botany,  philosophy,  and  German  metaphysics.  She  was  never 
married,  yet  her  love  of  children  was  almost  her  strongest 
hold.  Her  friends,  her  contemporaries  were  loyal  to  her,  as 
she  was  ever  loyal  to  them  and  theirs.  In  person  Miss  Bab- 
cock  was  very  erect,  tall,  with  a  graceful  form,  carrying  after 
mature  age  a  good  weight.  She  had  fine,  beautiful  hair,  a 
medium  shade  of  brown  which  was  not  touched  bv  asfe.  Her 
character  was  unselfish,  noble,  and  consistent.  Her  faith  in 
the  goodness  of  the  Creator  and  in  his  designs  never  faltered. 

On  the  7th  day  of  December,  190T,  while  at  her  home  in 
Boston,  she  started  to  enter  an  adjoining  room,  but  by  acci- 
dent opened  the  door  leading  to  the  basement  stairs  and  fell 
to  the  floor  below,  receiving  injuries  from  which  she  passed 
in  an  instant  of  time  from  the  enjoyment  and  fullness  of  life 
to  the  merciful  unconsciousness  which  preceded  death.  Her 
strong,  brave  heart  did  its  work  six  days  and  nights,  during 
which  time  her  youngest  brother  and  his  faithful  wife,  and  a 
gentle  nurse,  aided  by  the  kind  people  with  whom  she  was 
staying,  ministered  to  her.  Old  and  long-tried  friends  and 
young  friends  came  and  stood  by  the  side  of  that  stricken 
form,  and  held  the  dear,  delicate  hands,  and  the  manner  of 
going  out  was  merciful  to  her.  She  died  Dec.  13,  igor.  at 
c;  p.  M..  and  on  the  afternoon  of  the  followinsf  IMondav  the 
few  nearest  of  kin  and  friendship  gathered  to  hear  prayers 


366  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

before  her  form  so  appropriately  ami  beautifully  lying  siir- 
rouiuletl  ])y  flowers. 

She  was  taken  to  the  little  Norfolk  Unitarian  Chapel,  where 
friends  had  been  bidden  to  gather  to  pay  the  last  tribute  of 
affection  and  respect  to  her.  There  was  no  suggestion  of 
gloom,  but  the  rays  of  a  bright  sun  streamed  through  the 
stained-glass  wind(^ws.  Flowers  rare  and  lovely  seemed  to 
recognize  her  love  for  them  and  awaited  her  there.  The  offi- 
ciating minister  read  beautiful  sentences  of  comfort.  His 
voice  was  a  rare  one,  and  its  tones  vibrate  now.  It  seemed 
symbolic  that  a  rare  voice  should  speak  for  her  whose  tones 
were  an  especial  charm  in  her.  Rev.  Charles  G.  Ames  offered 
prayer,  and  said,  "We  call  this  death  in  life,  but  it  is  life  in 
death,"  and  gaxe  as  a  charge  the  lesson  that  death  should 
teach  us  kindness  to  the  living.  The  Ruggles  Street  quartette 
gave  sweet  vocal  melody,  and  the  selections,  "Still,  still  with 
Me,"  "Lead,  kindly  Light,"  "Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee,"  and 
"I  shall  see  Him  face  to  face." 

The  winter  air  was  sharp,  but  we  went  on  to  the  Hall  Cem- 
etery, West  Ouincy,  Mass.,  where  by  a  written  request  it  was 
found  her  wish  to  be  buried.  LTpon  the  picturesque  hills  of 
her  early  home,  by  the  side  of  the  grave  of  her  beloved  grand- 
mother, the  last  rites  ended,  and  the  beyond,  for  which  her 
good  life  had  fitted  her,  was  a  part  of  her,  and  a  memory  that 
will  never  fade  is  ours. 

The  foregoing  was  taken  from  a  biography  of  Miss  Sarah 
Babcock  prepared  by  Mrs.  Annie  E.  Faxon,  Ouincy,  Mass. 

890.  RoRERT  GiLMORE^  Babcock,  SOU  of  Robert  Gilmore 
and  Lucy  (Blackman)  Babcock  (John,  Timothy, 
James,  James,  John.  James),  b.  Ouincy,  Mass.,  June  27,  1838; 
res.  1903,  Newport,  R.  L;  m.  June  8,  1881,  Lizzie,  dau.  of 
Henry  H.  and  Sarah  C.  (Sharp)  Young.  He  served  in  the 
Civil  War  in  Company  C,  21st  Connecticut. 

Children,  first  two  b.  S.  Boston,  Mass.,  the  others  in 
Newport : 

Edith  Youna:.  b.   Dec.   11,   1881.     Is  a  teacher  in  the  public  schools 

of  Newport. 
Ethel  Gilmore,  b.  Nov.  25.   1883. 
Lizzie   Sharp,  b.   Nov.   4,   1885;. 
Robert  Gilmore.  b.  May  5,  1887. 
Henry  Hatch,  b.  July  25,  1889. 

89L     Angeline^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Daniel    and    Harriet 
(Page)  Babcock  (James.  Timothy,  James,  James,  John, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  367 

James),  b.  Dec.  16,  1821 ;  d. ;  ni.  June  2y,  1842,  John  P.  Hib- 
bard,  b.  Dec.  12,  1820,  deceased.  Thev  were  both  of  Alexan- 
dria, N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  Alexandria  (all  d.  except  John)  : 

Emogene,  b.   Mar.   31,    i<S45. 

Clarissa   A.,   h.    Feb.    14,    1847. 

Charles  W.,  b.  July  6.  1850. 

Almirin,  b.  Oct.  6,   1852. 

John  P.;'  b.   .Vpr.  8,   1855;    m.   Aug.    15,   1876,  Mary  A.   Conley,  b. 

Aug.    31.    i8s7.      Thev   res.    190^.    Syracuse,    N.    Y.      Children,    b. 

Syracuse:    Charles  H.,'"  b.  July  4.   1877;    John  P.,  b.  Jan.  6,  1880; 

James  F..  b.  June  5.   1882;    Irene  F.,  b.  July  17,   1894. 
Daniel  B.,  b.  Nov.   17,   1857. 

892.  Thankful'^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Daniel    and    Harriet 

(Page)  Babcock  (James,  Timothy,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b,  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  29,  1823;   d.  Jan.  3,  1886; 
m.  Oct.  6,  1 84 1,  William  Henry  Curtis,  of  Lowell,  Mass.,  b. 
Jan.  16,  1819,  d.  Jan.  24,  1875. 
Children  : 

Harriet,   b.    Dec.    14,    1842 ;     res.    1902,    Omaha,    Neb. ;     m.   Thomas 
Enrigh. 

1422  Roxana,"'  b.  Apr.  12,  1845;    m.  Christopher  C.  Chichester. 

Daniel   H.,  b.   Alexandria,   Feb.    12,   1849;    d.  Fairfax,  Va.,   Oct.   11, 

i860. 
Edwin  F.,  b.  Nov.  7,   1852;    m.   Mar.   5,   1885,  Barbara  Thompson. 

Had  one  child,  Ira  E..  b.  Sept.  i.  1890. 

1423  La  Mott,  b.  May  9,  1855 ;    m.  Jennie  F.  Elmer. 

Lillie  A.,"  b.  Jan.  26,   1859;    m.  June  18.   1S84,  George  H.  Helmer; 

res.  Redwood.  N.  Y.     Child :    Ida,'"  b.  Sept.  25,  1889. 
Daniel   H.,   b.   Nov.    i,    1861.   in   Fairfax   County,   Va.  ;     m.   Oct.    19, 

1887,  Nellie  A.   Bander,  of  Redwood.     No  children. 
William  E.,  b.  May  14,  1864;   d.  Aug.  6,  1876. 
Elmer   C,"   b.    Feb.   8,    1868;    m.    Maggie   L.    McLellan.      Had   one 

child.   Erna.'" 
Charles,  b.  Jan.  20,  1871 ;    m.  Feb.  6,  1889,  Mable  E.  Sayles.     Has 

one  son,  Charles,  b.  Aug.  10,  1902. 

893.  Sarah  Budlong^  Holmes,  dau.  of  William  and  Polly 

(Babcock)    Holmes    (James,   Timothy.   James.   James. 
John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  13,  1826;    m.  June 
15,  1854.  John  Burdick. 
Children : 

Jenny,  b.   Alexandria,   Jan.  31,    1855;    m.   Wilson   Ebbie. 
Polly,  b.  Feb.  21,  i860;    m.  Bradley  Window. 

895.     Mary    Eliz.\^    Holmes,    dau.    of   William    and    Pollv 

(Babcock)    Holmes    (James,   Timothy.   James.   James. 

John,  Tames),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  15,  183 1  ;  res.  1902, 

Utica.'N.  Y. ;  m.  Plessis,  N.  Y.,  IMar.  17,  1857,  Daniel  Ebblie. 


368  TJic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children :  • 

Malton   E.,   (Irovvned   near   Redwood,   N.   Y. ;    Josephine,   deceased; 

Henrietta,   deceased. 
Ella,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Utica,  N.  Y. ;    m.  William  Mcintosh,  who 

was  soldier  in  the  Civil  War. 

898.  Nancy   Jane^    Babcock,    tlau.    of   Rhodes    Reed    and 
MeHssa    (Thorn)    Babcock    (James,    Timothy,   James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  19,  1833;  d. 
Luce,  Minn.,  Mar.  4,  1898;   m.  (i)  Alexandria,  1848,  Augus- 
tus Caprins;   m.  (2)  Alexandria,  Nov.  15,  i860,  William  Mc- 
Grann.     In  1882  the  family  removed  to  Luce,  Minn. 
Children  by  first  husband,  b.  Alexandria  : 

Hiram  W.,  b.  Sept.  4,  1849;    d.  July  22,  1850. 
Armena,  b.  Feb.  5,  1853;    d.  1855. 
Clara,  b.  July  5.   1855;    d.   1858. 
1424  Almira  W.,"  b.  Sept.  8,  1857;    m.  Edwin  S.  Rogers. 

Children  by  second  marriage,  b  Alexandria : 

Ellen,"  b.  Aug.,  1861 ;  m.  Redwood,  N.  Y.,  Nov.,  1879,  Lewis  Albert- 
son.  Children:  Willie,"  b.  Sept.  23,  1880,  d.  Dec.  27.  1880;  Oris  F., 
b.  May  24,  1883 ;  Francis  B.,  b.  Sept.  10,  1885 ;  John  L.,  b. 
Nov.  3,  1887;    Addison,  b.  Aug.  14,  1895. 

Mary  E.,"  b.  Oct.  25,  1862;  m.  Luce,  Minn.,  Oct.  19,  1886,  Dennis 
S.  Durkins,  b.  Warsaw,  England,  Mar.  19,  1863.  Children : 
Howard  W.,'"  b.  Oct.  22,  1887,  d.  Dec.  7,  1896;  Jesse  M.,  b. 
Sept.  4,  1890;  Francis  L,  b.  May  28,  1898;  Helen  M.,  b.  Aug.  23, 
1902. 

Florence,"  b.  May  21,  1864;  m.  Fargo,  S.  D..  Aug.  11,  1897,  William 
Day;    res.   1902,  425  Taylor  St.,  Portland,  Ore.    No  children. 

William  R.,"  b.   May   17,    1866;    m.   Perham,    Minn..   Nov.  8.   1887, 

Agnes  .     Children:    John  A.,'°  b.  Sept.  28,  1888;    Preston,  b. 

Nov.  8,  1891  ;  George  T.,  b.  Nov.  5,  1893;  Ethel  M.,  b.  July  11. 
1896;    Jane  E.,  b.  June  4,  1898;  Florence  A.,  b.  Sept.  i,  1900. 

John  F.,"  b.  June  28,  1868;  m.  Jan.  30,  1893,  Laura  Rossmunson. 
They  have  two  children :     Arloine,^"  b.   1894,  and  Lenore,  b.  1896. 

Charles,"  b.  Apr.  17,  1873. 

Joseph,  b.  July  29,  1876. 

899.  James  Richard^  Babcock,  son  of  Rhodes  Reed  and 
Melissa    (Thorn)    Babcock    (James,    Timothy,    James. 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria.  N.  Y.,  Sept.   17,   1835; 

res.  1902,  Clayton,  N.  Y. ;    m.   (i)  Theresa.  N.  Y.,  Jan.  17, 

1862,  Lucretia  F.  Evans,  d.  Clayton,  May,  1893;  m.  (2)  Oct., 

1900,  Josephine  Luthers.     He  is  a  farmer  and  conducts  the 

Clayton  Cheese  Factory. 

(Children : 

Dealton  E.,  b.  Sept.  23.  1862. 

Alice  S.,  b.  Sept.  20,  1863;    m.  Charles  Svlvester. 
Rhodes  J.,  b.  Oct.  7,  1864;    d.  May  3.  1867. 
Lula  AL,  b.  Sept.  20,  1868;    m.  Eber  Myers. 
Sarah  P.,  b.  Jan.  25,   1870;    m.   George  Wheeler. 
Jennie  M.,  b.  Mar.  31,  1874;    m.  William  Snyder. 


Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  369 

900.  John  Rhodes''  Babcock,  son  of  Rhodes  Reed  and 
Melissa  (Thorn)  Ba'Dcock  (James,  Timothy,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexanch-ia.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  26,  1837;  res. 
1902,  Depauville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Theresa,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  28,  1862, 
Mary  Ann  Loan.  He  owned  and  operated  several  large  cheese 
manufactories  in  Jefferson  and  St.  Lawrence  Counties. 
Children,  b.  Alexandria : 

Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Apr.  9,   1867;    m.  Frank  Devendorf. 
Lydia  Viola,  b.  Mar.  i,  1878;    m.  Edgar  V.  Mount. 

90L  Betsy  Caroline^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rhodes  Reed  and 
Melissa  (Thorn)  Babcock  (James,  Timothy,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  X.  Y.,  May  4,  1840;  res. 
1902,  Clio,  Mich.;  m.  (i)  Redwood,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  25,  1865, 
Ledsmar  Randel,  d.  La  Forgeville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.,  1883;  m. 
(2)  Clio,  Mich.,  George  Barden. 
Child  by  first  marriage: 

Lillie  Melissa,  b.  Dec.  13,  1868;    m.  Charles  Hurd. 

902.  William   Reed^  Babcock,  son  of  Rhodes   Reed  and 
jMelissa    (Thorn)    Babcock    (James,    Timothy,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  23, 
1842;  m.  (i)  (3swego,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  1861,  Julia  Johnson,  d. 
Dec.  7,  1893;  m.  (2)  Nov..  1900,  Polly  Hill.  Both  res.  at 
Clayton,  N.  Y. 

Child  by  first  marriage : 

Fred  Erwin,  b.  June  2,  1867 ;    d.  Apr.  9,  1883. 

903.  Joseph  Hill^  Babcock,  son  of  Rhodes  Reed  and  Me- 
lissa    (Thorn)     Babcock     (James,     Timothy,     James, 

James,    John,    James),    b.    Alexandria,     N.    Y.,     May     14, 
1847;    res.    1902,   Alexandria;    m.   May  8,    1879,   Martha  J. 
Dollings,  b.  Alexandria,  Dec.  17,  1863.    He  is  a  farmer. 
Children : 

Jessie,  b.  Dec.  24,   1880. 

James  E.,  b.  Apr.  21,  1882. 

Ray  E.,  b.  Aug.  25,  1883. 

Freddie  E.,  b.  May  11,   1886;    d.  Nov.  22.  1887. 

Pearl,  b.  Dec.  19,  1891. 

Florence,  b.  Jan.    15,   1892. 

Harold,  b.  Aug.  13.  1895. 

904.  Daniel  Franklin^^  Babcock,  son  of  Rhodes  Reed  and 
Melissa    (Thorn)    Babcock    (James,    Timothy,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  30,   1849; 
24 


3/0  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

m.  Plessis,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1870,  Annie  S.  Dickey.  He  owned 
and  operated  several  cheese  manufactories  in  Jefferson  and 
St.  Lawrence  Counties,  and  is  still  (1902)  at  the  business,  near 
Hammond,  N.  Y. 

Children :  » 

Rhodes  Hugh,  h.  May,  1872;    m.  Maud  Reed. 
Nora  Viola,  1).  July,   1875. 

905.  LiLLiE  Melissa^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rhodes  Reed  and 
Melissa    (Thorn)    Babcock    (James,    Timothy,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1856;  m. 
Alexandria,  Jan.  14,  1885,  Edward  D.,  son  of  Delos  and  So- 
phronia  (Curtis)  Herrick,  b.  Theresa,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  30,  1861. 
He  is  a  farmer,  residing  about  six  miles  from  Alexandria  Bay 
and  six  miles  from  Redwood,  N.  Y. 
Children,  b.  Alexandria : 

Edna  L.,  b.  Jan.  28,  1887. 

Minie   S.,   b.   Dec.    16,    1888. 

Arloine,  b.  May  9,   1891. 

Lillie  M.,  b.   Nov.  24,   1893 ;    d.  July   19,   1899. 

Iva  B.,  b.  Apr.  27,  1903. 

906.  Morris^  Babcock,  son  of  Jonathan  and  Mary  (Clark) 
Babcock     (Jonathan,    Nathan,    Samuel,    James,    John. 

James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  14,  1820;  d.  Leon,  N.  Y., 
Nov.  12,  1898;  m.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  25,  1840,  Eliza- 
beth, dau.  of  Nathan  and  Eunice  (Crandall)  Brand,  b.  May 
27,  1 8 19,  d.  Little  Valley,  Feb.  26,  1895.  Settled  at  Leon, 
N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  Leonardsville : 

Alfred,  b.  Dec.  30.  1841 ;    res.  1902,  Leon,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

Charles  F.,"  b.  Leonardsville,  Sept.  28,  1844;  res.  1902,  Cattaraugus, 
N.  Y. :  m.  Gowanda,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20.  1875,  Malinda,  dau.  of  Caleb 
and  Rhoda  (Smith)  Tarbox,  b.  1853,  d.  Cattaraugus,  1893.  Chil- 
dren, b.  at  Carrolton,  N.  Y. ;  Fred  L.,^"  b.  Aug.  6,  1876;  res. 
1902,  Cattaraugus;    Charles  E..  b.  Sept.  8,   1885. 

William  Morris,"  b.  Leonardsville,  May  11,  1846;  res.  1902.  Cat- 
taraugus ;  m.  Leon,  N.  Y..  Mar.  23,  1873.  Lois  C,  dau.  of  Charles 
and  Polly  Kysor,  b.  Leon,  Dec.  11,  1846.  Children,  b.  Leon: 
Essie  E.,  b.  Nov.  11,  1879;  Leo  A.,  b.  Feb.  25,  1882;  Charles  D., 
b.  Apr.  2,  i88.q. 

E.  Eunice,"  b.  Feb.  9,  1848;  d.  Cattaraugus,  June  12.  1898;  m. 
Clarendon  Day. 

David,  h.  May  2.  1850:  res.  1902,  at  950  Bedford  Ave.,  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  Nicholson,  Mar.  8.  1899,  Eunice,  dau.  of  L.  H.  Ste- 
phens, b.  May  8.  i8.s8.     No  children. 

Susan,  b.  Feb.  6.  iS'^2:  res.  1902.  Little  Valley,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Leon, 
N.  Y..   Sent.   18.   1878.  Almon  Stephen^. 

Samuel,  b.  Apr.  17,  1854;    d.  Leon,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  13,  1862. 


ELISHA    GARDNER    BABCUCK. 

1819-1889.  Page  371. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  371 

Mary  L.,  b.  Oct.   ig.  1856;    m.  Mar.  6,  1878,  Emory  Shannon. 

C.  C,"  b.  Leonard^ville,  Dec.  23,  1859;  res.  1902,  Leon,  N.  Y.  ;  m. 
Indian  Falls,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  16,  1891,  Amelia,  dau.  of  John  and 
Joanna  (Brunier)  Rohr,  b.  Indian  Falls,  Nov.  20,  1869.  Chil- 
dren, b.  Morgantown,  W.  Va.,  and  Leon :  Harry  A.,"  b.  Dec.  10, 
1891  ;  Joseph  AL,  b.  Mar.  9,  1893;  Samuel  D.,  b.  Dec.  15,  1896; 
Elizabeth  J.,  b.  May  i,   1899. 

907.  Mary**  Bap.cock,  dan.  of  Jonathan  and  Mary  (Clark) 
Babcock    (Jonathan,    Nathan,    Samnel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Plaintiekl,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  3,   1823;    d.  Leonardsvnlle, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  16,  1900;  m.  Leonardsville,  May  16,  1847,  Milton 
W.  St.  John,  b.  Plainfield,  Aug.  7,  1824,  d.  Westerly,  R.  I., 
June  28,  1876. 
Children : 

John  AL,  b.  Plainfield^  May  15,  1848;  d.  Leonardsville,  Mar.  20, 
1850. 

Mary  Matilda,  b.  Plainfield,  June  4,  1850;  m.  Leonardsville,  Albert 
N.  Crandall,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.  They  res.  1902,  at  27  Elm  St., 
Westerly,   R.   L 

De  Valoise,  b.  Leonardsville.  Mar.  29,  1852 ;  res.  1902,  Plainfield, 
N.  J. ;    m.   Leonardsville,   Feb.   4,   1882,   Alice   M.   Crandall. 

William  Elijah,  b.  Leonardsville,  Aug.  15,  1864;  res.  1902,  Leon- 
ardsville. 

908.  Eliza  Ann^    Babcock.   dau.   of   Charles   and   Martha 
(Gardner)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Oct.  8,   1817:    d.   Whitesborough,  Aug.  8, 
1882;   m.  Aug.  2,  1842,  Francis  A.  Utter. 
Children : 

Ann  Eliza,  b.  May  31,   1844. 
Francis  A.,  b.  Sept.  27,  1856. 

909.  Elisha  Gardner-  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  and  Mar- 
tha   (Gardner)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan.    Samuel, 

James,  John.  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  23,  1819;  d. 
Saginaw,  Mich.,  July  28,  1889;  m.  Oxford,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  i, 
1840,  Jane  C,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Katherine  (Pendleton) 
Clarke,  b.  Brookfield,  Jan.  18,  1818,  d.  Saginaw,  Apr.  6.  1890. 
He  was  a  real  estate  acent : 
Children: 

Clara  J.,*  b.  Oxford.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  19.   1842:    d.  Utica.  N.  Y.,  Mar. 

29.    1876;    m.   Onarga.    111..    Feb.   2,    1865,    Solon   N.   Corkingham. 

Children,  b.  Utica:  Mary.  b.  Jan.  17.  1868,  d.  young;  Marion."  b. 

Aug.  2,   1869;    Frank,  b.  Oct..  1871,  d.  young;    Margaret,  b.  1872, 

res.  1902.  Boston. 
Amanda  L..°  b.  Brookfield,  July  20.   1848 ;    res.   Searsport,  Me.  ;    m. 

Chicago.  111.,  Jime  17,  i86q.  Frank  Curtis.     Children,  h.  Saginaw: 

Frank  E.,'"  b.  Mar.  13,  1872,  and  Jane  C,  b.  Mar.  26,  1882. 
1425  Kate  Eliza,®  b.  June  21.   1854;    m.  Ezra  G.   Rust. 

Kindrick.  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Jan.   19,   1856;    d.  Onarga,  Nov. 

20,  1857. 


3/2  TJic  Dahcock  Genealogy. 

910.  Horace**  Baecock,  son  of  Charles  and  Martha  (Gard- 
ner)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James,  John, 

lames),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  13,  1821;   d.  (Jnarga,  111., 
July  9,  1886;    m.  Oxford,  N.  Y.,  Sept.   16,  1845,  Sarah  M., 
dau.   of   Henry  and   Fanny    (Corel)    De   Show,   b.    I'reston, 
N.  Y. ;  res.  1902,  Onarga. 
Children : 

Charles  Horace,  b.  Oct.  3,   1846;    d.  Onarga,   1857. 
1426  Martha."  b.   Feb.   i,   1848;    in.  Lee  C.   Brown. 

Harriet  E.,"  h.  Onarga,  Aug.  20,  i860;  res.  Kankakee,  111.;  m.  (i) 
Feb.  28,  1881,  Louis,  son  of  James  and  Eliza  Denison  Baldwin, 
b.  Onarga,  d.  Onarga,  Sept.  23,  1891 ;  m.  (2)  Onarga,  Mar.  6, 
1894,  Joseph  E.  Smith.     Child :    Lucia,'"  b.  Jan.  5,  1882. 

911.  Hamuen   Randolph^  Babcock,  son  of  Jonathan  and 
Caroline    (Chesebrough)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan, 

Samuel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,   N.  Y.,  July  8, 
1835;    res.  Hamilton,  N.  Y. ;   m.  N.  Brookfield,  Dec.  2,  1857, 
Adelia  D.,   dau.   of   Eleaser  and   Lois    (Kingsley)    Beebe,   b. 
N.  Brookfield.  N.  Y.,  Feb.  4,  1837;   res.  Hamilton. 
Children,  b.  Brookfield : 

Dolph  Lionel,"  b.  Aug.  10,  1859;  res.  1902,  Albion,  Wis.;  m.  Al- 
bion, Nov.  I,  1881,  Martha  J.,  dau.  of  Jacob  and  Josephine  (Bur- 
dick)  Langworthy.  b.  Albion,  Apr.  6,  1858.  Child:  Harold 
H.,'"  b.  Nov.  14,  1882. 

Nettie  L.,"  b.  Aug.  10,  1859:  res.  1902,  Attica,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Ham- 
ilton, N.  Y.,  Dec.  27,  1883,  Arthur  M.,  son  of  Riley  and  Lucy 
(Maine)  Preston,  b.  Lincklaen,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  22.  i8s3.  Child: 
Elsie,'»  b.  Jan.,  1887. 

Lois  Caroline,"  b.  Oct.  12,  1869;  res.  1902,  Hamilton;  m.  Hamil- 
ton, July  I,  1890,  William  F..  son  of  H.  and  Rosina  (Pope)  Lang- 
worthy,  b.  W.  Edmeston,  N.  Y.,  May  4,  1864.  Children:  Caro- 
line,'" b.  Apr.  4,  1891  ;    Margaret,  b.  Oct.  21,   1892. 

912.  Herbert   E.^    Babcock,   son   of   Samuel   and   Almyra 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James. 
John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  28,  1833;  res.  1902, 
Laton,  Cal. ;  m.  Burtville,  Pa.,  June  21,  1874,  Lua  E.,  dau.  of 
Benjamin  Card,  b.  Burtville.  Feb.  3,  1852. 

Herbert  E.  Babcock  graduated  at  Alfred  University  in 
1869,  taking  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts,  and  in  1872  re- 
ceived the  degree  of  A.M.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry 
at  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.  In  1869-70  he  was  Missionarv  Pas- 
tor of  the  S.  D.  B.  Church  at  Woodville,  R.  L,  and  1870-3 
occupied  the  same  position  for  the  church  at  Hebron.  Pa. ; 
1874-6  was  pastor  of  the  church  at  Alden,  Minn.;  1878-90 
acted  as  Home  Missionary  for  Nebraska  and  Kansas.  Dur- 
ing his  work  he  organized  churches  at  Hebron,  Roulette,  and 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  373 

Osweg-o,    Pa.,   Orleans  and   Walnut   Creek,   Neb.,    Adcll   and 
Friend,  Kan. 
Children : 

Herbert  E.,  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  30.  1875;  res.  1902,  Monica.  111.;  m.  Glass- 
ford,  111.,  Nellie  O.  Watson. 

Louisa  Elvira,  b.  Alden.  Aug.  23,  1876;  m.  Friend,  Kan.,  Mar.  28, 
1897,  IMahlon  K.  Pickrell ;    res.  1902,  Fresno,  Cal. 

Edwin  Arthur,  h.  Mar.  12,  1880,  at  Orleans,  Neb.;  res.  1902,  Scott, 
Kan. 

Edna  Almyra,  b.  Mar.  12,  1880;    res.  1902,  Laton,  Cal. 

Nina  Belle,  b.  Orleans.  Apr.  17,  1886;  d.  Nortonville,  Kan.,  Nov.  28, 
1899. 

913.  SoPHRONiA  BuRDiCK^  Babcock,  daii.   of  Samuel  and 
Almyra  (Burdick)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Adams,   N.  Y.,  June  29,    1837;    d. 
Albion,  Wis.,  Nov.  10,  1866;   m.  Adams,  Mar.  12,  i860,  Oli- 
ver, son  of  Pardon  Davis,  b.   Hopkinton,  R.   I.;    res.    1902, 
Nortonville,  Kan. 
Child : 

Lillian,  b.  ;    d.    1883. 

914.  OsMAN  WiNSLOW-    Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Al- 
myra   (Burdick)    Babcock    (Charles,   Nathan,    Samuel, 

James,  John.  James),  b.  Adams,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  30,   1839;    res. 
1902,  Nortonville,  Kan.;    m.  Nile,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  8,  1866,  Har- 
riet A.,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Hannah   (Potter)  Landphere,  b. 
Alfred.  N.  Y.,  Jan.  10,  1841,  d.  Oct.  31,  1902. 
Child  (ado])ted)  : 

Maude  Culver,  b.  Nortonville,  Jan.  24,  1880;    res.  1902,  Nortonville. 

915.  Cornelia^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Samuel    and    Almyra 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  18,  1844;  res. 
1902,  Edelstein,  PL;  m.  Adams  Center,  June  29,  1863,  John 
G.,  son  of  Joseph  and  Content  (Potter)  Spicer,  b.  Hopkin- 
ton, R.  L,  Jan.  14,  1839. 
Children : 

Minnie,  b.  Lawn  Ridge,  111.,  May  22.   1869;    d.  Edelstein,  Aug.   17, 

1895. 
Clara  Almyra.   b.   W.   Hallock    (now  Edelstein),   Sept.  26,   1873;    d. 

Edelstein,    Feb.   23,    1875. 
Clarence,  W.."  b.  W.  Hallock,  111.,  Nov.  30.  1875:    m.  Alfred.  Dec.  i. 

1896,  Anna  O.,  dau.  of  James  R.  and  Sarah    (Burdick)   Burdick, 

b.   De   Ruyter.    N.   Y..   Dec.   8,    1875.     Child:    Harold   Willis,'"  b. 

Edelstein.  Oct.   12,  1897. 
Ernest  S.,  b.  Edelstein,  June  27,   1877;    d.  July  15,   1880. 


374  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

916.  i\lAi.oNi£    S.''    Babcock,    sun    of    Sanmcl    and    Ahnyra 

(Bnrdick)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  June  i6,  1849;  res. 
1903,  Nortonville,  Kan. ;  m.  Houndsfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  28, 
1869,  Amy,  dan.  of  William  B.  and  Elvira  (Benjamin)  Green, 

b.  Houndsfield,  Oct.  22,  . 

Children : 

Orester  M.,  h.   Nov.  21,   1870;    res.   1902,  Atchinson,  Kan. 
Florence  A.,  b.  Apr.  9,   1874;    res.   1902,   170  N.   Main  St.,  Concord, 

N.  H. ;    m.  Boston,  Mass.,  June  25,  1890,  J.  W.  Gone. 
Dr.  Ralph  W.,  b.  Apr.  10,  1875.     Is  a  dentist,  1903,  at  136  W.  Ii6th 

St.,  New  York ;    m.   1903,   Muriel  Rogers. 
Shelton  G.,  b.  Oct.   12,   1880;    res.   1903,  Alfred,  N.  Y. 
Harry  M.,  b.  Feb.   i,   1890. 

917.  Norman    Andrew^    Babcock,    son    of    Andrew    and 
Orilla    (Bailey)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan,    Samuel 

James,  John.  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  17,  183 1  ;  res. 
1902,  Kankakee.  111.;  m.  W.  Winfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  26,  1849, 
Emogene,  dau.  of  Americus  and  Emogene  Bardeen,  b.  W. 
Winfield,  d.  Kankakee,  Oct.  28,  1869.  He  was  a  farmer,  and 
conducts  a  livery  business. 
Children : 

Flora   Ella,  b.   W.   Winfield,   Nov.   29,    1853;     d.    Kankakee,   Dec.   2, 

1893;    m.   Kankakee,    1881,   Frederick   Tupper. 
Norman  A.,  b.  Irwin,  111.,  1859;    d.  Kankakee,  Dec.  14,  1866. 
1427  Earl  B.,"  b.   Dec.  28,   i860;    m.  Gertrude  McCoy. 

Blanche  O.,   b.   Kankakee,   Dec.   22,    1867;     res.    1902,   Chicago,   111.; 
m.  Kankakee,   Mar.  27,   1885,  John  Malloy. 

918.  Florence    Orilla^    Babcock.    dau.    of    Andrew    and 
Orilla    (Bailey)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan,    Samuel, 

James,   John,  James),  b.   Brookfield,   N.   Y.,  Apr.    10,    1852; 
res.  190*1,  W.  Winfield,  N.  Y. ;   m.  W.  Winfield,  May  6,  1879, 
Herbert  H.,  son  of  Elijah  and  Lydia  (Strait)  Wilcox,  b.  Ce- 
darville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  23,  1852. 
Children,  b.  W.  Winfield: 

Fannie  B.,  b.  Dec.  30,   1880;    d.   Mar.  30,   1882. 

F.  Elmer,  b.  Feb.  21,  1889:    res.  1901,  W.  Winfield. 

919.  Emilus  W.^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Temperance 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  9,  1835;  res.  1901, 
1.443  Bush  .Street,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. ;  m.  La  Crosse,  W^is., 
Aug.  26,  1 86 1,  Marie  E.,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Susan  (Allen) 
Brown,  b.  Cincinnati,  O.,  June  30,  1839. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  375 

Children,  b.  Edgerton,  Wis.: 

William  E.,  b.  Apr.  28,  1863;  res.  1901.  Chicago,  111.;  m.  Edger- 
ton, Wis.,  Anga,  dau.  of  James  and  Catherine  Hain,  b.  Edgerton, 
Nov.  7,   1862.     No  children. 

Bertha  L.,  b.  Dec.  28,  1805;    res.  1901,  Los  Angeles. 

Clarence  H.,"  b.  Feb.  22,  1868;  res.  1902,  Edgerton;  m.  Edgerton, 
June  30,  1896.  Elizabeth  Ann.  dau.  of  Richard  Trevorrah,  b. 
Morris  Plains.  N.  J..  Dec.  8,  1875.  Children:  Marie,'"  b.  Los 
Angeles,  July  5,  1897;    Dorothy,  1).  Edgerton,  Feb.   i,  1902. 

John  L,  b.  Oct.  26.   1870,  d.  Edgerton,   May  31,   1891. 

Charles  F.,  b.  Dec.  18,  1874.  d.  Cedar  Falls,  la.,  Nov.  5,  1878. 

Earnest  B.,  b.  July  10,  1879. 

Harold,  b.  Jan.  24,  1882. 

920.  Henry  De  Los^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Temper- 
ance   (Burdick)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan,    Samuel, 

James,  John,  James),  b,  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  30,   1837; 
res.  1901,  Nortonville,  Kan.;   m.  Hebron.  Pa.,  Feb.  22,  1863, 
Sarah  E.,  dau.  of  Foster  and  Fanny   (Potter)    Reynolds,  b. 
Hebron,  Dec.  16,  1837. 
Child : 

Varena  Belle,  b.  W.  Ilallock,  111.,  June  12,  1873;  d.  Nortonville, 
Dec.  31,  1886. 

921.  Dr.  LoRENE  E.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Temper- 
ance   (Burdick)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan,    Samuel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  May  24,  1841  ;  res. 
1901,  at  805  Logan  Avenue,  San  Diego,  Cal. ;  m.  Albion, 
Wis..  Dec.  22,  1863,  Irving  F.,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Fuller) 
Winnek.  b.  Fort  Covington,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  3,  1838. 

Lorene  Babcock  is  a  graduate  from  Milton  College,  \\'is., 
and  a  graduate  from  the  State  Medical  College  of  Iowa. 

Children : 

Grace,  b.  Portsmouth,  Va.,  July  25,  1865  ;    d.  young. 

Charles  I.,"  b.  Nashua,  la.,  Aug.  22,  1867 ;    res.  1902,  Prineville,  O. ; 

m.  Antwerp,  Ore.,  Oct.  2,   1889,  Anna  L.  .     Children:  Lorene 

E.,*"  b.  Dec.   19,  1893;    Irving,  b.  Oct.   19.  1900,  d.  young. 
Mary  L.,  b.  Osage,  la.,  Jan.   10.   1874;    d.  Mar.  28,  1875. 
Emilus  v.,  b.  Osage,  May  20,   1876;    res.  1901,  San  Diego,  Cal.     Is 

a  lawyer,  and  an  officer  in  the  State  Naval  Militia. 
Ruth,  b.   Osage,  July  g,    1880;    res.    1901,   San  Diego.     Is  a  normal 

student  and  teacher. 

922.  Frances  D.*^   Babcock,   dau.  of  Henry  and  Temper- 
ance   (Burdick)    Babcock    (Charles,    Nathan,    Samuel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  June  4,  1852;  res. 
1901.  Albion.  Wis.;  m.  Albion,  Feb.  7,  1884,  Nathan,  son  of 
Asa  and  Emily  (Ford)  Kelley,  b.  Milton,  W.  Va.,  Jan.  21, 
1855- 


3/6  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Child : 

Henry  A.,  b.  June  6,   1887. 

923.  Charles  Irving*  Babcock,  son  of  Elery  and  Fanny 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Rock  Prairie,  Wis.,  May  11,  1850;  res.  1901, 
Albion,  Wis.;  m.  Sparta,  Wis.,  Nov.  11,  1873,  Clary  J.,  dau. 
of  Thomas  and  Fanny  (Hungerford)  Wilcox,  b.  Angelo, 
Wis.,  Feb.  26,  1856. 

Children,  b.  and  reside  in  Albion : 

Lillian  May,  b.  Oct.  18,  1874. 
Charles  Henry,  b.  July  24,   1876. 
Grace  E.,  b.  Dec.  14,  1879. 
Frederick  I.,  b.  Apr.  20,  1889. 

924.  Orletta  S.*  Babcock,  dan.  of  Albert  and  Sophronia 
O.  (Greene)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  July  18,  1849;   ^'^s.  1901, 
North  Loup,  Neb.;    m.  North  Loup,  Mar.  4,  1869,  Orvill  S., 
son  of  Samuel  M.  Potter,  b.  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  19,  1847. 
Children,  b.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y. : 

Minnie,  b.  Jan.  29,  1870;    d.  Apr.  6,  1880. 
Mary  O.,  b.  Oct.  8,  1881. 

Marford,  b.  Jan.  7,  1883;  res.  1901,  North  Loup;  ni.  North  Loup, 
May  Kitty,  dau.  of  Dr.  F.  O.  Burdick,  b.  Milton. 

925.  Mary  A.*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Albert  and  Sophronia  O. 

(Greene)  Babcock  (Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Verona,  N.  Y.,  July  20,  1853;  res.  1901, 
Watertown,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  16,  1884, 
Morris,  son  of  Benjamin  IMerriman,  b.  Lowville,  N.  Y.,  July 
26,  1839,  d.  Copenhagen,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  14,  1890. 
Child : 

Benjamin  C,  b.   Copenhagen,  Aug.,   1888. 

925a.  William*  Babcock,  son  of  David  and  Maria  (York) 
Babcock  (David,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  2,  1843;  d.  Brook- 
field,  Dec.  3,  1870;  m.  Brookfield,  Feb.  10,  1866.  Emma,  dau. 
of  Asel  and  Triphena  Ligraham,  b.  Columbus,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29, 
1843:  res.  1902,  Earlville,  N.  Y. 
Child : 

Arlouine,  b.  Brookfield.  May  12,  1870;  res.  1902,  Earlville;  m.  Earl- 
ville, Jan.  4,  1893,  C.  F.,  son  of  Henry  and  Eliza  (Coon)  Foster, 
b.  Brookfield. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  2)77 

926.  Henry   Dwight**    Babcock,   son   of  John   and    Sarah 

(Greenman)  Babcock  (David,  Nathan,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  June  24,  1845;  I'cs. 
1902,  Leonardsville;  m.  Leonardsville,  Oct.  14,  1868,  Nancy, 
dau.  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  (Randolph)  Brown,  b.  Leonards- 
ville, Sept.  2y,  1846. 

Children,  b.  Leonardsville : 

Agnes,  b.   Sept.  21.  1869;    res.   1902,  Leonardsville. 

Frederic  H..  b.  July  12,  1872;  res.  1902,  Leonardsville;  m.  Leon- 
ardsville, Oct.  17,  1894,  Mary  J.,  dau.  of  Delos  Giles,  b.  Burling- 
ton, N.  Y.,  Aug.  26,  1872. 

John  R.,  b.  Aug.  26,    1874;    res.   1902,  Leonardsville. 

Isaac  A.,  b.  June  3,   1876;    res.  1902,  Denver,  Col. 

Sarah  R.,  b.  Mar.,   1883;    res.   1902,   Leonardsville. 

927.  Samuel  Franklin**  Babcock,  son  of  Jared  and  Lois 

(Lewis)  Babcock  (Jared,  Samuel,  Samuel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  L,  Mar.  7,  1818;  d.  Ash- 
away,  R.  L,  Dec.  28,  1887;  m.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Oct.  17,  1842, 
Susan  Maria,  dau.  of  Lyman  and  Sally  (Stillman)  Berry,  b. 

Westerly,  Jan.  27, ;  d.  Ashawav,  Nov.  21,  1876. 

Child : 
1428  Sarah  E.,"  b.  Jan.  29,  1846;    m.  William  L.  Crandall. 

928.  Welcome  B.^  Babcock,  son  of  Jared  and  Lois  (Lewis) 
Babcock  (Jared,  Samuel,  Samuel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.   Charlestown,   R.   L,   Nov.   22,    1819;    d.   Ashaway,   R.   L, 
Feb.  22,  1892;   m.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Oct.  3,  1847,  Mary  Rog- 
ers, d.  May  8,  1894. 
Children,  b.  Ashaway: 

Herbert  E.,"  b.  Feb.  7,  1850;  m.  Hope  Valley,  R.  I.,  Nov.  27, 
1879,  Ella  J.,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Martha  Chipman  Babcock,  b. 
Hope  Valley.  Aug.  23,  1854.  Children :  Walter,'*  b.  Mar.  16, 
1887;  Lawrence,  b.  Aug.  25,  1892;  Elias  L.,  b.  June  11,  1895,  d. 
1898.     They  res.  Ashaway. 

Albert  S.,°  b.  Nov.  4,  185 1  ;  m.  Rockville,  May  4,  1878,  Lantie  A., 
dau.  of  Gardner  and  Betsv  Crandall  Burdick,  b.  Rockville,  Mar. 
4,  1852.     Child ;  Lyra,'"  b.  Aug.  20,  1880. 

929.  Daniel    Lewis*    Babcock,    son    of    Jared    and    Lois 

(Lewis)    Babcock     (Jared,     Samuel,     Samuel,    James, 

John,    James),    b.  Quonochontau.s:,  R.  L,  June  19,   1822;    d. 

Alton,  R.  L,  Nov.   16,  1899;    m.  Deans  Mills.  Conn.,  Jan.  4, 

1846.  Martha  B..  dau.  of  John  A.  and  Lucy  (Green)  Champ- 

lin,  b.  Kingston,  R.  L,  Apr.  10,  1826,  d.  Alton,  Nov.  22,  1899. 

Children : 

Jared.  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Oct.  7,  1850;  res.  1902,  Pawcatuck 
(Stonington).  Conn.;  ni.  Westerly.  R.  I.,  Feb.  9,  1875,  Kate, 
dau.  of  Thomas  Way,  b.  Westerly,  July  30,  1850. 


3/8  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Lewis,  b.  June  21,  1854;    d.  Nov.  4,   1854. 

Daniel  Lewis.  Jr..  b.  June  17.  1856;  d.  Oct.  2.  1898;  ni.  Westerly, 
June  4.  1881,  Emma.  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Elizabeth  (Scott)  Mor- 
timer, b.  Bean  Mill,  Conn.,  Feb.  16,  i860;    res.  1902,  Madison,  Me. 

Martha  J.,  b.  July  20.  1862;    d.  Aug.  3.  1863. 

Lucy  Jane.  b.  Niantic.  R.  I.,  Nov.   14.  i86g;    res.   1902.  Alton;  unm. 

Mabel  A.."  b.  Niantic,  R.  L,  Mar.  31.  1871  ;  m.  Alton,  R.  L,  Feb.  3, 
1897.  William,  son  of  George  and  Elizabeth  Moodic  Battye,  b. 
Tillicoultry,  Scotland.  Mar.  20,  1868.  Child:  George,'"  b.  Ash- 
away,  May  13,  1899.     They  res.  Ashaway,  R.  L 

930.  Elias  Lewis^  Babcock,  son  of  Jared  and  Lois  (Lewis) 
Babcock  (Jared,  Samuel,  Samuel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Charlestown,  R.  L,  Dec' 8,  1824;    res.  Hope  Valley.  R.  L; 
m.  Hope  Valley,  Nov.  14.  1849,  Martha  Jane,  dau.  of  Nathan 
F.  and  Martha  Chipman,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Oct.  19,  1831, 
d.  Hope  Valley,  Mar.  30,  1902. 
Children  : 

Morton  E.."  b.  Hope  Valley.  Apr.  30.  1851  ;  res.  1902.  Taunton, 
Mass. ;  m.  Norton.  Mass.,  Nov.  6,  1872,  Caroline,  dau.  of  John 
and  Catherine  (Irwin)  Burdick.  b.  Hope  Valley,  May  10,  1854. 
Child :    Albert  'E..'"  b.  Aug.  22.  1882. 

Infant  son,  b.  July.   1853 ;    d.  young. 

Ella  J.,  b.  ;    m.  Herbert  C.  Babcock. 

Edwin  Orson,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Hope  Valley. 

931.  John    Prentice^    Babcock,   son   of   Stanton    Prentice 
and     Lucy     (Crary)     Babcock     (John,    Isaac,    Daniel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Groton,  Conn.,  May  24,  1802; 
m.  (i)  Miss  Avers;  m.  (2)  Ann  Ayers,  sister  of  first  wife. 
The  two  wives  were  from  Preston.  Parents  and  children  set- 
tled in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.  Children  were  John  x^yers,^  Frank, 
Louisa,  Georsre,  and  Nellie. 

932.  Mary*^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Stanton  Prentice  and  Lucy 

(Crary)  Babcock    (John.    Isaac,    Daniel,    James,  John, 
James),  b.  Groton,  Conn..  Dec.  5,   1807;    m.  Aug.  27,   1822, 
Lladlin  Fish,  d.  Feb.  9,  1837. 
Children : 

George  H..  b.  Oct.  2.   1828.     Lost  at  sea,  Feb.,   1855. 

Stanton,  b.  July  28,   1830. 

Mary   Ellen,    b.   Oct.    5,    1832 ;     m.     Joseph     A.     Lamb.      Had    four 

children. 
Sarah  Jane.  b.  Nov.  30.  1834;    m.  Allen;    res.  1902,  Old  Mystic, 

Conn. 

933.  Abby  Fliza^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Stanton  Prentice  and 
Lucy    (Crary)    Babcock    (John,   Isaac,   Daniel,   James, 

John,  James),  b.  Groton,  Conn.,  Apr.  22,   1817;    d.  Apr.    i, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  3/9 

1894;    m.   May   5.    1836,  Abel   Hinckley,  b.   Xuv.  2,   1803,  d. 
Sept.  22.  1883. 
Children : 

Abel  H.,  b.  Oct.   19,  1839;    res.   1902,  Old  Mystic,  Conn. 

Alice,  b.  July  31,   1845;    m.  Avery;    res.  Old  Mystic. 

Agnes  J.,  b.  Feb.  18,  1848;  m.  Jefferson  O.  Bailey;  res.  1902, 
Groton. 

934.     LucY^.  Babcock,  dan.  of  Ezekiel  and  Lydia  (Gardner) 
Babcock  (Isaac,  Isaac,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
July  5.  1829;   res.  1902,  Binghamton,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Bridgewater, 
Pa.,  Luther  Moore,  b.  Kirkwood,  N.  Y. 
Child : 

Willis  L.  Moore,  b.  .  Is  Chief  of  Weather  Bureau,  Wash- 
ington, D.  C. 

936.  NoYEs  Eliab^   Babcock,   son  of  Francis   and   Parnel 

(Ely)    Babcock    (Isaac,    Isaac,    Daniel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Dimock,  Pa.,  Jan.  8,  1833;    d.  Ruthven,  la.,  Dec. 

II,  1895;    m.  Rockford,  111.,  Aug.  31,  1865,  Harriet,  dau.  of 

Asa  and  Mary  (Howe)   Crosby,  m.  Rockford,  May  3,  1840. 

Children : 

Herbert  Mitchell,  b.  Aug.  10,  1867;  res.  1901,  Ruthven,  la.;  m. 
Dubuque,  la.,  Jan.  24,  1900,  Hettie  A.,  dau.  of  Isaac  and  Cor- 
nelia  ( Schermerhorn)   Beekman.  b.  Eden,  111,  Nov.   12,   1868. 

Cora  Alice,  b.  Oct.  10,  1871  ;    res.   1901,  Ruthven. 

937.  Amy  Elizabeth*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Erancis  and  Parnel 
•  (Ely)    Babcock    (Isaac,    Isaac,    Daniel,    James,    John, 

James),  b.  Dimock,  Pa.,  Jan.  19,  1835;   d.  Rockford,  111.,  June 
7,   1875;    m.  Feb.   18,   1852,  George  D.  Goodsell ;    res.   1902, 
Waltham,  Mass. 
Children : 

Albert  M.,  b.  Dimock,  Dec.  3.   1854. 

Carrie  Louise,"  b.  May  15,  1856;  res.  1902,  Orwell,  Vt. ;  m.  Feb. 
9.  1881,  Elos,  son  of  Elos  and  Abigail  Hopkins  Ray.  Children: 
Elos  A.,"  b.  Dec.  6,  1885  ;  Jennie  A.,  b.  June  9,  1892 ;  Annie  E., 
b.  Apr.  25,   1895. 

Stella  May,  b.  Rockford,  Apr.   14,  1858;    d.  Dec.  26,  1866. 

Minnie  Mary,  b.  Rockford.  Nov.  27,   1864;    m.  B.  W.  Lee. 

938.  Leeman     B.*     Babcock,     son   of   Jesse   and    Emeline 

(Thompson)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Isaac,  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Babcock  Homestead,  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  30, 
1833;  res.  1903,  Fulton,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Westerly.  R.  I.,  Jan.  25, 
i860.  Harriet,  dau.  of  Joshua  and  Sarah  (Berry)  Vose,  b. 
Westerly,  Feb.  23,  1837. 


380    •  The  Bahcock  Goiralogy. 

Children,  b.  Fulton : 

Weeden  E.,  b.  Mar.  12,  1861 ;    d.  Dec.  17.  1863. 

Edward,  b.  Jan.  30,  1864;  res.  1903,  Pittsburg,  Pa.;  m.  Fulton, 
June  25,  1890,  Emma  N.,  dau.  of  Martin  and  Minerva  (Saunders) 
Connell,  b.  Dec.  19,  1865;    d.  Fulton,  Dec.  i,  1899. 

Fred  Raymond,  b.  Apr.  16,  1865;  res.  1903,  Pittsburg;  m.  Charles- 
town,  W.  Va.,  Mar.  25,  1897,  Frances  Jacobs,  b.  Kentucky. 

Oscar  H.,  b.  July  10,  1869;  res.  1903,  Pittsburg;  m.  Johnstown, 
Pa.,  June  21,   1900,  Annie  Morley,  b.  Johnstown,   1869. 

Clarence  Lee,"  b.  Fulton,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  10,  1870;  m.  Pittsburg,  Dec, 
1896,  Alta  L.,  dau.  of  H.  H.  Porter,  b.  Mexico,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  29, 
'1869.  Child:  Robert  P.,'"  b.  Ashtola,  Pa..  June  14,  1899;  res. 
Ashtola. 

Lena,  b.  Aug.  10,  1872;    res.  1903,  Fulton;    unm. 

939.  Courtney  Fitch^  Babcock,  son  of  Jesse  and  Emeline 
(Thompson)     Babcock     (Jesse,    Isaac.    Daniel,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  Volney,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  9,  1846;   m.  Caledonia, 
Ontario.  Se])t.   i,  1875,  Cecelia,  dan.  of  Hngh  and  Catherine 
(O'Dowd)  Kennedy,  b.  Caledonia.  Jan.  9,  1855. 
Children : 

Catherine  E.,  b.  Hamilton,  Ont.,  Oct.  9,  1878;    res.  1903,  Johnstown. 
Jesse   L.,   b.   Chatham,   Ont..   Oct.    17,    1881  ;     d.   Chatham,    Dec.    11, 

1882. 
Harriet,  b.  Chatham,  Oct.  27,  1883. 
Martha  Helen,  b.  Nov.  22,  1886;    d.  Detroit,  Mich..  Nov.  23.   1897. 

940.  RoANNA^     Babcock,     dau.     of    John    and     Catherine 
(Rheinhart)      Babcock      (William.     William,     Daniel, 

James.     John,     James),     b.     Apr.     it.    181 6;     d.    Gowanda, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  2,   1863;    m.  Gowanda,  N.  Y..   Nov.  29.    1846, 
Norman  H.,  son  of  Ahaz  and  Syble  (Hibbard)  Allen,  b.  Go- 
wanda, Aug.  22,  181 1,  d.  Gowanda,  Jan.  22,  1897. 
Children : 

Millard  N.,"  b.  Sept.  2;^.  1847;  res.  1903,  Gowanda;  m.  Silver 
Creek,  July  23,  1874,  Eliza  M.,  dau.  of  Lyman  and  Betsey  Ben- 
nis  Bennett,  b.  Harrison  Valley,  Pa.,  Apr.  19,  1849.  Child : 
Arthur,'"  b.   Gowanda,  Apr.  8,   1881  ;    res.   Gowanda. 

Norman  Babcock,  b.  June  29,  185 1  ;  res.  1903.  Gowanda;  m.  (i) 
Attg.  26,  1872,  Ella  A.,  dau.  of  Samuel  C.  Springer,  b.  Gowanda, 
d.  Apr.  12,  1898 ;  m.  (2)  June  29,  1900,  Agnes  M.,  dau.  of 
Joseph   Mabbett. 

Harmony  R.,  b.  July  29,  1856;  res.  1903,  Fredonia,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Edmund  M.  Bartlett. 

941.  Horace^''  Babcock.  M.D..  son  of  John  C.  and  Catherine 

(Rheinhart)  Babcock  (William,  William,  Daniel. 
James.  John,  James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  12.  1825;  res. 
Gowanda,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Gowanda.  May  14.  1856.  Mary.  dan.  of 
James  and  Fucinda  (Wheeler)  Focke.  b.  Gowanda.  Aug.  16. 
1831. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  381 

Children,  b.  Gowanda : 

Blanche,  h.  Sept.  6,  1858;  res.  1903,  Gowanda;  m.  Gowanda.  June 
27,  1878,  William  R..  son  of  William  and  Florilla  (Roberts) 
Smallwood,  b.  Gowanda,  Jan.  26,   1856. 

1429  Catherine  B.,"  b.  Sept.   18.   1864;    m.  William  Chaffee. 

Louis  L.,"  b.  Dec.  14,  1868;  res.  28  Erie  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Gowanda,  June  18,  1896,  Georgia,  dau.  of  Eri  and  Harriet  (Stil- 
con)  Woodin,  b.  Perrysburg,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  26,  1870.  He  is  a 
lawyer,  and  is  connected  with  the  firm  of  Rogers,  Locke  &  Mill- 
burn,  of  Buffalo.     Child :  Frances/"  b.  Sept.  25,   1902. 

942.  Jared  Ross**  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  Ross  and  Betsey 

(Dorman)  Babcock  (James,  James,  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Westfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  18,  1820;  d.  Buffalo, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.  26,  1890;  m.  Westfield,  Sept.  23,  1845,  Adelia 
M.,  dau.  of  David  and  Adeline  (Morrison)  Mann,  b.  May- 
ville,  Jan.  i,  1827,  d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  27,  1900. 
Children : 

1430  Charles  A.."  b.  ;    m.  Millie  Jones. 

Clara."  b.  Sept.  25,  1852;  res.  159  Fourteenth  St.,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Buft'alo,  Oct.  24,  1882.  Sherman  S.,  son  of  Samuel  and  Lois 
(Sherman)    Rogers,    b.    Lawtons.    N.    Y.,    Oct.,    1837,    d.    Buffalo, 

Dec.   24,    1885.     Children,  b.   Buffalo:     Charles   E.,'"  b.  ;    d. 

June  27,  1895 ;    Harry,  b.  . 

943.  Hannah*'  Babcock,  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Lois  (Potter) 
Ba.bcock  (Daniel,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1813;   d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Dec.  26, 
189 1  ;  ni.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27.  1832,  Samuel  C.  Hamilton, 
b.  Brookfield,  Oct.  12,  1809,  d.  Milton,  Wis.,  July  13,  1865. 
Children : 

Walter  G.,  b.  Alfred.  June  24,  1833;    d.  Feb.  14.  1885,  unm. 

1431  Emma,'*  b.  May  25,   1841  ;    m.  T.  C.  Hoxsie. 

944.  Dr.  Daniel  Clark^  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Lois 

(Potter)  Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  Daniel,  James.  John, 
James),  b.  Alfred.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  1818;  d.  San  Jose.  Cal., 
Jan.  19,  1875;  m.  Alfred,  June  i,  1843.  Amorilla,  dau.  of  Dr. 
John  and  Catherine  (Burdick)  Collins,  b.  Brookfield,  Mar.  2, 
1818.  d.  Milton  Junction.  Wis.,  May  18,  1890. 
Child,  b.  Johnson  Center,  Wis. : 

Dollie,''  b.  Jan.  8.  1857;  res.  1902,  Milton  Junction;  m.  Milton, 
Apr.  4,  1882,  Dr.  Albert  S.,  son  of  Sylvanus  and  Mary  Holcomb 
Maxson,  b.  Milton,  Mav  11.  i8t7.  Children,  b.  Milton  Junction: 
Mabel.'"  b.  Mar.  25,  1886;    Mary,  b.  Feb.  i,  1896,  d.  young. 

945.  Lois  M.^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Lois  (Potter) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  Daniel.  James,  John,  James), 


382  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  June  2,  1820;   d.  Medical  Lake,  Wash.,  Dec. 
25,  1889;    m.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  26,   1837,  Stephen,  son  of 
Benjamin  Maxson,  h.  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,   i8i(:),  d.   Walla 
Walla,  Wash.,  Sept.  27,  1879. 
Children : 

Caroline,'-'  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  July  4,  1840;  res.  Medical  Lake;  m. 
Janesville,  Wis.,  Oct.  23,  1856,  James  F.,  son  of  Erastus  and 
Emily  Heath  Wood,  b.  Springfield,  Mass.,  Sept.  30,  1830.  They 
have  had  nine  children :  Ralph,'"  Minnie,  Marion,  Rufus,  Ste- 
phen. Francis  G.,  Ben  C,  Grace  M.,  and  Edith. 

Samuel  R.,  b.  Milton,  Jan.,  1843 ;  res.  1903,  Walla  Walla,  Wash. ; 
m.  Walla  Walla,   M.  E.   Paul. 

Lucy  M.,  b.  Albion,  Wis.,  Mar.  2,  1845;  res.  1903,  Walla  Walla; 
m.  Walla  Walla,  J.  Drumheller. 

Frances  Adelia,  b.  July  7,  1850;  res.  1903,  Clearwater,  Idaho;  m. 
Walla  Walla,  George  Brinkerhoff,  d.  Walla  Walla. 

946.  Tacy  A.^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Daniel  and  Lois  (Potter) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  30,  1823;   d.  St.  Peter,  Minn.,  Feb.  2, 
1888:    m.  Alfred,  1841,  Benjamin  F.,  son  of  Benjamin  Col- 
lins, b.  Alfred,  Nov.  6,  181 3,  d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Oct'.  10,  1864. 
Children : 

Lois,  b.  Alfred,  May  30,  1842;  m.  Greenman  ;  res.  1902,  Mil- 
ton Junction,  Wis. 

Mary  A.,  b.  Albion,  June  15,  1845;  d.  Dec.  6,  1884;  m.  James 
Snyder. 

Walter  J.,  b.  June  5.   1847:    m.  ;    res.   1902,  Montrose,  Col. 

Daniel,  b.  Apr.  24,  1849;    d.  St.  Peter,  Minn.,  Feb.  14,  1898. 

Charles  R.,  b.  Albion,  Feb.  10,  1851. 

Benjamin  F..  b.  Milton,  Apr.  4,  1857;  res.  1902,  at  60  Highland 
Ave.,   Minneapolis,   Minn. 

Alice  T.,  b.  Milton,  Aug.  6,  i860;    m.  Johnson.     She  res.  1902, 

Red  Lake,  Minn. 

Willard  R.,  b.  Milton,  Mar.  4,  1863;  res.  1902,  New  York  City; 
m.  . 

947.  Annie  G.^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Daniel  and  Lois  (Potter) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Alfred,  Jan.  2,   1829;    d.  Milton,  Wis.,  Sept.  9,  1847;    rn. 
Johnstown,  Wis.,   Christopher  S.,  son  of  David  Vincent,  b. 
Almond,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  20,  1820,  d.  Milton,  Feb.  18,  1884. 
Child : 

Albert  O.,  b.  Dec.  20,  1846;    res.  1902,  Milton  Junction,  Wis. 

948.  Thomas  E.^  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Esther  (Fish) 
Babcock  (Daniel,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Jnne  16,  1817:   d.  Albion,  Wis..  Jan.  29, 
1879;  m.  (i)  1841,  Hannah  M.,  dan.  of  David  and  Catherine 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  383 

(Bunlickj  Wells,  d.  previous  to  i860,  no  children;  ni.  (2) 
Albion,  Dec.  7,  1861.  Eliza,  dau.  of  Perry  and  Sally  (Palme- 
ter)  Potter,  h.  Westerly.  R.  I. ;   res.  1902,  Albion. 

Thomas  Bahcock  was  a  S.  D.  B.  minister.  He  received  his 
education  at  De  Ruyter  Institute,  New  York,  commencing 
public  ministry  at  the  age  of  twenty-two.  He  was  at  one  time 
Missionary  for  the  State  oi  Kansas  and  Pastor  at  Persia,  Rich- 
burg,  and  Independence,  X.  Y. ;  also  Albion,  Wis.,  where  he 
spent  the  most  of  his  married  life. 

Children  : 

Delia,   b.   Albion.   Aug.   31.    1862;    d.   young. 

Pearl"  (son),  b.  Fremont,  Kan.,  Aug.  23,  1863;  res.  1902,  Oshkosh, 
Wis.;  m.  .Mbion.  Wis.,  Lois  Westcott,  b.  Albion,  Oct.  17,  1869. 
Children:  Letta  C.,'"  b.  Albion.  Nov.  11,  1887;  Harriet,  b.  Mil- 
ton, Mar.   15,   1889;  Lc  Claire,  b.  July  i,  1890. 

949.  Rev.  Hiram  W.''  B.\bcock.  son  of  James  and  Esther 

(Fish)  Babcock  (Daniel.  James,  Daniel,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Edmeston,  N.  Y.,  June  24,  1819;  res.  1902,  Cot- 
tage Grove,  Ore.;  m.  Lincklaen,  N.  Y".,  Apr.  9,  1845,  Cathe- 
rine M.,  dau.  of  David  and  Catherine  (Burdick)  W^ells.  b. 
Lincklaen.  X.  Y..  Xov.  11.  1826.  d.  Cottage  Grove.  Nov.  27, 
1901. 

He  is  a  S.  D.  B.  minister. 

Children : 

1432  Edward.''  b.  Apr.  10.  1846;    m.  Emily  A.  Burdick. 

Emogene  S..  b.  Watson,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  2,  185 1  ;  d.  Boulder,  Col., 
Sept.  I,  1888;    m.  Transit.  Minn..  Apr.  15,  1871,  E.  B.  Coon. 

1433  Morton  P.,  b.  July  10.  1857 ;    m.  Marian  A.  Burdick. 

Clara  A.,  b.  Coloma,  Wis.,  Nov.  i,   1862;    d.  Coloma,  May  26,  1863. 
Eloise    M.,    b.    Albion,    Dec.    26,    1864;     res.    1902,    Cottage    Grove, 

Ore. :  m.  Transit.  Minn..  Oct.  8.   1881.  Walter  N.  Wheeler. 
Wells  G..  b.  Transit,  July  6,   1866;    d.  Transit,  Jan.  31.   1867. 
Delia,  b.   Transit.  Jan.   17,   1869;    d.  Transit,  Feb.   15,   1883. 
Stella,  b.  Transit,  Jan.  17,  1869;    d.  Royal,  Ore.,  July  4,  1889. 

950.  William   Flsii^   Babcock.   son  of  James  and   Esther 
(Eish)   Babcock  (Daniel.  James.  Daniel.  James.  John, 

James),  b.  Georgetown.  N.  Y..  Jan.   t6,  1824;    res.   1902,  at 
38  S.  Eirst  Street.  San  Jose.  Cal. ;  m.  Lincklaen  Center.  N.  Y., 
Mar.   I.   1845.  Lydia.  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Hannah    (Still- 
man)  Burdick.  b.  Lincklaen  Center,  Nov.  30.  1824. 
Children,  b.  Lincklaen: 

Morris  J.,  b.  Aug.  21,  1846;    d.  Missouri,  Dec.   11,   1871. 

Emogene,  b.  Aug.  2,  1848;    m.  Transit,  Minn.,  Charles  H.  Maxson. 

95L     Daniel    Lee*    Babcock.    son    of    James    and    Esther 
(Eish)   Babcock   (Daniel.  James.  Daniel.  James,  John, 


384  l  he  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

James),  b.  Georgetown,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1826;  d.  Vernonia, 
Ore.,  Sept.  24,  1899;  m.  (i)  T.incklaen  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  23, 
1845,  Wealthy  Ann.  dan.  of  Benjamin  and  Hannah  (StiH- 
man)  Bnrdick,  b.  Lincklaen  Center,  d.  Wells,  Minn.,  Jnne  5, 
1877;  m.  (2)  1895.  No  children  by  second  marriage. 
Children : 

1434  Mary  L.,"  b.  Aug.  25,  1846;    m.  Arthellow  M.  Randolph. 
William  De  Ver,  b.  Lincklaen,  June  7,   1849;    d.  Sept.,   1849. 

1435  Benjamin  D.,  b.  Mar.   16,  1852;    m.  Enuna  Richmond. 

Hannah  Leenore,  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1854;  d.  Albion,  Wis., 
Nov.  2,  1857. 

Leela,  b.  Albion,  Oct.  22,  1859;  res.  1902,  Breed,  Wis.;  m.  Linck- 
laen, 1878,  Frank  P.  Davis. 

952.  Charle.s^  Babcock,  son  of  Harry  and  Fanny  (West) 
Babcock  (Henry,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Apr.  26,  181 2;    d.  Westerly,  Apr.  6,  1888; 
m.  Ledyard,  Conn.,  1833,  Lonisa,  dan.  of  Samnel  and  Tentie 
(Latham)   Brown,  b.  Ledyard,  Apr.  4,   181 1,  d.   Stonington, 
Conn.,  Dec.  5,  1884. 
Children : 

Amanda  M..  b.  Ledyard,  Apr.  11,  1834;  res.  1902,  Mystic,  Conn.; 
unm. 

1436  Charles  Henry,"  b.  July  16,   1838;    m.    (i)    Abby  Hinckley;    m.   (2) 

Mary  Gardner. 

John  W.,  b.  Westerly,  May  12,  1840;  d.  Kansas,  Jan.  15,  1870;  m. 
Westerly,   1862,   Antoinette  Brand. 

Mary  Nancy,  b.  Apr.   17,   1842;    m.  Rowse  Babcock. 

Sarah  Frances,  b.  Groton,  Jan.  19,  1844;  res.  Westerly;  m.  Mys- 
tic, 1865,  Amos  H.,  son  of  Hezekiah  and  Mary   (Lewis)   Dickens. 

Helen  Maria,  b.  Groton,  Aug.  22,  1846;  res.  1902,  Mystic;  m. 
Stonington,   1876,  Jesse,  son  of  Jesse  Hall. 

William  Dudley,  b.  Ledyard,  July  11,  1848;  res.  1902,  Hampton, 
Conn.  ;  m.  Westerly,  Annie,  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Mary  (Bab- 
cock)   Champlain,  d.  Westerly,   1875. 

Abby  Jane,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Conn.,  Sept.  11,  1850;  d.  Stonington. 
Apr.  3,   1880;    m.  Westerly,   1875,  John  Cross,  d.  Westerly,   1875. 

Erastus  W.,  b.  Pawcatuck,  Apr.  8,  1852;  res.  1902,  Stonington; 
m.  Griswold,   Conn.,  Jane,  dau.  of  Andrew  Edmond. 

953.  Henry^    Babcock.   son   of  James   and    Mary   Nugent 
Babcock  (Henry.  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  1807;  d.  Williamsburg,  O.,  July  22,  1841  ; 
m.  Lenox,  Ma.ss.,  July  14.  1835,  Jane,  dau.  of  Elijah  and  Lura 
(Millard)  Northrup,'b.  Manlius,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  15,  "1817,  d.  Vic- 
tor, N.  Y.,  Dec.  21,  1897.  She  m.  (2)  George,  son  of  Asa 
Babcock. 
Children : 

1437  James  N.,''  b.  July  28,  1836;    m.  Caroline  Saunders. 

Lura  M.,  b.  Williamsburg,  1840;    d.  Rochester,  Apr.  6,  1872. 


ALBERT    FRANKLIN    BABCOCK. 

1814-1881.  Page  398. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  385 

954.  Rev.  lu.ijiu'*  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Mary   (Nu- 
gent)   Bahcock    (Henry,   James,    Daniel,   James,  John, 

James),  h.  Old  Stockhridge,  Mass.,  Feh.  13,  1815;  d.  Say- 
brook,  O..  July  5,  1898;  m.  Saybrook,  1839,  Sarah  Ann,  dau. 
of  William  and  Rhoda  Knowles,  b.  New  York  State,  Oct., 
1820,  <1.  Saybrook,  Apr.  16,  1891.  Elilm  was  a  Baptist  min- 
ister, ordained  Oct.  i,  1846. 
Children : 

Hepsibah  H.,  b.  Rome,  O..  Fel).  22.  1840;  d.  Jacksonville,  Fla., 
Apr.  17,  1891  :  111.  Saybrook,  1859,  Joseph  Bugbee,  res.  1902, 
Jacksonville,  Fla. 

Melissa,  b.  Saybrook;  d.  Michigan,  Apr.,  1867;  m.  Saybrook,  Ezra 
Clark,  res.   1902,  Marshall,  Mich. 

William,  b.   Saybrook,  ;    d.  Saybrook,  . 

Mary,   b.    Saybrook,  ;     d.    Saybrook,  . 

Helen,  b.  Saybrook,  ;    d.  Saybrook,  . 

Sarah  Emma,"  b.  Saybrook,  O.,  Dec.  3,  '1857;  res.  I902,«  Say- 
brook; m.  Charles  E.,  son  of  Henry  and  Olive  French 
Landphere,  b.  Nov.  19.  1848.  Children :  Guy  K.,'"  b.  Saybrook, 
Dec.  3,  1878;    Millie  Jessie,  b.  Ashtabula,  O.,  Oct.  11,  1883. 

955.  James    Palmer*"*    B.\bcock,    son   of   James   and    Mary 

(Nugent)  Babcock  (Henry,  James,  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Becket,  Mass.,  July  21.  1818;  d.  Benning- 
ton, \^t.,  Sept.  14,  1888;  m.  Bennington,  Apr.  6,  1854,  Mar- 
tha E.,  dau.  of  David  and  Joanna  (Knowlton)  Rockwood,  b. 
Bennington,  Apr.  i,  1831  ;  res.  1902,  513  Main  Street, 
Bennington. 
Children : 

Harry  R.."  b.  Lenox,  Mass.,  Feb.   17,   1855;    res.   1902,  Bennington; 

m.    Hoosic   Falls,    Sept.   2y.    1885,    Louise  Wood.     Child:    Lucre- 

tia  R..'"  b.  Dec.  7.  1886. 
George  K..  b.  Ashtabula.  O.,  Dec.  5,  1857;    d.  Aug.  12,  1861. 
Frank,  b.   Bennington.  Tvlar.  5.   1859;    d.  June  6,  1877. 
William   C,"  b.    Bennington.    Oct.   8,    1861  ;     res.    1902,   Bennington; 

m.    Jan.    7,    1887,    Lillie    J.,    dau.    of    Calvin    and    Addie    Parsons 

Root.    b.    Lenox,    Mass.,    Jan.    4,    1867.      Child:     Sarah    R.,'"    b. 

Lenox,  Feb.  13,  1888. 

956.  Lorenzo    Dow^    Babcock,    son    of    Asa   and   Mary 

(Gavitt)  Bal)Cock  (Henry,  James,  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  9,  1814:  d.  Church- 
ville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1890;  m.  Churchville,  Mar.  8,  1843, 
Lydia,  dau.  of  William  and  Ednah  (Armstrong)  Palmer,  b. 
Churchville,  July  30,  18 19.  d.  Churchville,  Nov.  6,  1892. 
Children,  1).  Churchville: 

1438  Oscar, °  b.  Feb.  4.  1844;    m.  Caroline  P.  Adams. 

William  P.,"  b.  Feb.  28.  1846;  res.  1902.  Caledonia,  N.  Y.  ;  m.  (i) 
Wheatland,  N.  Y..   Mar.  20,   1870.  J.  Adelle  Blackmer,  b.  Wheat- 

25 


386  The  BabcDck  Genealogy. 

land,   (1.    Sept.    19,    1883;     111.    (2)    Ellen   C.   Conistock,  b.    Shelby, 
N.    v.,  June  20,    1850.     Child:    Charlolta,'"  h.    Wheatland,    Feb.   7, 
1879,   res.   Mumford,   N.   Y. 
Mortimer  [).,  b.  Oct.  22,   1850;    d.  Jan.   11,   1858. 

957.  George    Gavitt^    Babcock,    son    of    Asa    and    Mary 

(Gavitt)  Babcock  (Heiny,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  June  8,  1816;  d.  North  Chili, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  21,  1867;  m.  Deansville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  27,  1842, 
Jane  Northrup,  widow  of  Henry  Babcock  and  dan.  of  Elijah 
and  Lnra  (Millard)  Northrnp,'b.  Manlins,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  15, 
1 81 7,  d.  Victor,  N.  Y.,  Dec,  1897. 
Children : 

Emeline,  b.  Wheatland,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  7,  1843;  res.  1902,  Oakland, 
Cal. ;    m.   Denver,   Colo.,   Ang.  8,   1882,   Herbert  Irvine. 

Mary  Jane,  b.  CJiili,  N.  Y.,  -Apr.  7,  1846;  res.  1902,  Victor,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Apr.,  1896,  Eber  N.,  son  of  Andrew  and 
Matilda   (Norton)   Cone,  b.  July  24,  1831.     No  children. 

Burdette,  b.  Chili,  Dec.  24,  1851  ;    d.  Chili,  Sept.  i,  1854. 

Ida  Estelle,  b.  Dec.   18,   1857;    d.  Chili,  Oct.   11,   1864. 

958.  Abigail^   Babcock,   dan.   of  Asa  and  Mary    (Gavitt) 
Babcock  (Henry,  James,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James), 

b.  Tyringham,  Mass.,  July  16,  1818;    res.  1902,  Riga,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  ( i)  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  5,  1840,  D.  V.  Rogers,  b.  Alden, 
N.  Y. ;   m.  (2)  Abram  Thomas. 
Children,  by  first  marriage : 

Mary    F.,    b.    Oct.    18,    1842;     res.    1902,    San    Francisco,    Cal.;     m. 

Corfu,  N.  Y.,  Sept.   19,   1868,  G.  W.  Rumble. 

Laura  J.,  b.  June  24,  1845 ;    d.  . 

James   E.,   b.   Jan.    16,    1848;     res.    1902,   Corfu,    N.   Y. ;     m.   Jan.   6, 

1878,  Sarah  A.  Hitchcock. 
Daniel,  b.  May  i,   1850;    res.   1902,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 
George  W.,  b.  May  15,   1852. 

959.  Francis  Granger^   Babcock,  son  of  Paul  and  Ade- 
laide    (Wallace)     Babcock     (Luke,    Elkanah,    Daniel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  5,  1831  ;  d. 
Ellsworth,  Kan.,  June  26,  1901  ;  m.  Belmont,  N.  Y.,  July  27, 
1854,  Elizabeth,  dan.  of  Charles  and  Gitty  (Smith)  Clarke, 
b.  Tyrone,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  19,  1836,  d.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y.,  Feb. 
15,  1899. 

Francis  Babcock  was  educated  at  Bacon  Academy,  Colches- 
ter, Conn.  About  1852  he  removed  to  Allegany  County, 
N.  Y.,  where  for  twenty  years  he  carried  on  a  mercantile  and 
lumber  business.  He  owned  extensive  woodlands  in  northern 
Pennsylvania,  which  later  proved  to  be  rich  oil  territory,  from 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  387 

Avliich  he  obtained  an  extensive  fortune.  In  1875  he  estab- 
hshed  a  private  bank  at  IlornellsviUe,  N.  Y.,  and  later  with 
his  brother  D.  D.  Babcock  owned  in  Kansas  a  stock  farm  of 
twelve  thousand  acres.  He  was  at  one  time  President  of  the 
New  York  State  Forest  Commission. 

In  1898  he  removed  to  his  stock  farm,  near  Ellsworth, 
Kan.,  where  he  died  three  years  later. 

Children : 

Charles  C,  b.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  June  11,  1855;  res.  1902,  Hornellsville, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  Hornellsville,  June,  1881,  Mary  Gildersleeve,  b.  Brook- 
lyn, N.  Y.     No  children. 

Adelaide  G..  b.  Scio,  Dec.  19,  1857;  res.  1902,  Hornellsville;  m. 
Hornellsville,  Mar.  31,  1880,  Charles  O.,  son  of  Walter  G.  and 
Glovina  Olendorf  Rose,  b.  Hornellsville,  Oct.  i,  1846.  Children, 
b.  Hornellsville :  Harold  B.,  b.  July  24,  1881 ;  Carolton  C.,  b. 
Apr.   25,   1883. 

1439  Elizabeth  C."  b.  Jan.  30,  i860;    m.  Horatio  L.  Lang. 

Francis  Granger,  Jr.,  b.  Scio,  Apr.  27,  1862;  res.  1902,  Terra 
Cotta,  Kan. ;  m.  Hornellsville,  Apr.  28,  1886,  Minnie,  dau.  of 
E.  T.  and  Delia  (McConnell)  Young,  b.  Paterson,  N.  J.;  res. 
Hornellsville.  No  children.  Francis  Babcock,  Jr.,  was  Captain 
of  Co.  K,  3d  Regiment,  New  York  Volunteers,  in  the  Spanish- 
American  War. 

Gertrude,  b.  Scio,  Nov.  14,  1865  :  res.  1902,  Hornellsville ;  m.  Hor- 
nellsville. Nov.  3,  1890,  Edwin  S.,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Swine- 
burn)  Brown,  b.  Paterson,  N.  J. 

1440  Blake  B.,  b.   Feb.   i,   1868;    m.  Louise  Parkhill. 

Martha  G.,  b.   Scio,  Feb.  25,   1871 ;    d.  Hornellsville,  July  26,   1872. 

960.  Devolson  D.^  Babcock,  son  of  Paul  and  Adelaide 
(Wallace)  Babcock  (Luke,  Elkanah,  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  13,  1833;  d.  Hornells- 
ville, N.  Y.,  Apr.  4.  1895;  m.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  15,  1858, 
Mary  A.,  dau.  of  Davis  and  Elizabeth  (Palmer)  Browning, 
b.  Scio.  June  14,  1833;  res.  1902,  Hornellsville. 
Children : 

Ogden  D..°  h.  Scio.  July  4,  1859;  res.  1902,  at  84  Plymouth  Ave., 
Rochester  :    unm. 

Mary  Antoinette.'"'  b.  Belmont,  N.  Y..  Apr.  20,  1862;  res.  Arling- 
ton, N.  J.  :  m.  Hornellsville,  Sept.  5,  1888.  Charles,  son  of  Wil- 
liam H.  and  Lois  (Winter)  Weeks,  b.  Ware,  Mass.,  May  15, 
1852.  Have  one  child:  Charles  Porter,"  b.  Mt.  Vernon,  N.'Y., 
Sept.  2},.  1889. 

Kate  Hannah,  b.  Warren.  Pa..  Apr.  30.  1866;  m.  (i)  William  H. 
Martin,  b.  Rochester,  d.  Rochester,  Apr.  4,  1896:  m.  (2)  George 
Clay  Cox,  b.  Virginia,  111.  Both  res.  1903,  at  85  E.  Avenue 
Rochester. 

Devolson  D..  b.  Pittsfield.  June  T2.  1869;  res.  1902.  72,  State 
Street.  Rochester;  m.  Belmont,  Sept.  2t„  1896,  Ella  ^L  Norton, 
b.  BuflFalo.  N.  Y. 

Grace  Browning,  b.  Aug.  9,  1877;  res.  1902,  at  85  E.  Avenue, 
Rochester. 


388  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

961.  James  N.^  Babcock,  son  of  Paul  and  Adelaide  (Wal- 
lace)   Babcock    (Luke,   Elkanah,   Daniel,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  Feb.    13,   1837;    d.  Scio,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  18,   1869;    m.  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  May  2,  1861,  Isabelle  H., 
dau.  of  Alexander  and  Rebecca  (Miller)  Spaulding,  b.  Lock- 
port,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  10,  1836,  d.  Scio,  Jan.  7,  1896. 
Children : 

1441   Cassie  M.,''  h.  Dec.  18,  1862;    m.  J.  Gaylord  Snapp. 
Rebecca  S.,  b.  Scio,  Apr.   16,  1865;    d.   1866. 

Catherine,*  b.  Scio,  July  30,  1868;  res.  1902,  Caledonia,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Rochester,  Oct.  6,  1898,  Fraser  A.,  son  of  John  and  Mary  A. 
(Fraser)  Christie,  b.  Caledonia,  Mar.  26,  1858.  Child:  Fraser,^" 
b.   Caledonia,   Sept.  22,   1902. 

962.  Harriet  Newell^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elkanah  and 
Nancy  (Maxson)  Babcock  (Chauncey,  Elkanah,  Dan- 
iel, James,  John,  James),  b.  Milton  Junction,  Wis.,  Oct.  10, 
1848;  res.  1902,  Parkers  Prairie,  Minn.;  m.  Utica,  Wis., 
June  18,  1870,  Stephen  H.,  son  of  Thomas  and  Ruth  (Collins) 
Hibbard,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1838. 

Children,  b.  Utica,  Wis. : 

Willie  B.,  b.  Jan.  31,  1874;  res.  1902,  Parkers  Prairie;  m.  June  10, 
1897,  Nellie  V.,  dau.  of  David  and  Mary  (Middleton)  Mahan,  b. 
Sparta,  Wis.,   Nov.  2,   1874. 

Fred,  b.  Dec.   13,  1879;    res.   1902,  Parkers  Prairie. 

963.  George    H.^     Babcock,    son   of    Stanton   and    Sarah 

(White)  Babcock  (Chauncey,  Elkanah,'  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Newport,  R.  L,  June  11,  1863;  m.  Westerly, 
R.  L,  Aug.  3,  1886,  Minnie  G.,  dau.  of  Leander  F.  and  Hester 
(Derve)  Clarke. 

He  was  a  clothier,  formerly  of  Westerly,  R.  L,  but  now  of 
Bridgeport,  Conn. 

Children,  b.  Westerly: 

Mildred  S.,  b.  Nov.  26,  1887. 

George  H.,  b.  Aug.   14,  1891 ;    Doris,  b.  . 


964.  Abner  Tucker,^ son  of  Abner  and  Polly  M.  (Babcock) 
Tucker  (Lodowick,  Elkanah,  Daniel,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  N.  Pharsalia,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  3,  1831;  res.  1902,  N. 
Pharsalia:  m.  Pharsalia,  Sept.  25,  1856,  Laura,  dau.  of  Wil- 
liam Luther,  b.  Pharsalia,  Mar.  25,  1835. 
Children,  b.  N.  Pharsalia : 

Florence,   b.   ;     res.    1902,    Norwich,   N.   Y. ;     ni.    N.    Pharsalia, 

Adolphus  Newton. 
Phebe  E.,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Norwich;    in.   N.   Pharsalia,  J.   Bur- 

dette  Newton. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  389 

George  A.,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  N.  Pharsalia;    rn.  N.  Pharsalia,  Cora 

Webb  Robbins. 
•    Charles     O.,    b. ;      res.     1902.     Seattle,    Wash.;      m.     Seattle, 

Laurene , 

Hubert,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Norwich,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Norwich,  Florence 

Pratt. 

965.  Benjamin    Franklin^    Babcock.    son    of    Benjamin 
Franklin   and   Maria    (Eells)    Babcock    (Paul,    Harry, 

Joshua.  James,  John,  James),  b.  June  6,  1814;  d.  Liverpool, 
England,  Jan.  28,  1869;  m.  (i)  Phebe  Ann  Swan,  Aug.  25, 
1836,  b.  Jan.  12,  1814,  d.  Sept.  8,  1841  ;  m.  (2)  Apr.  3,  1844, 
Maria  i\ugusta  Bicknell,  b.  Sept.  9,  1824,  d.  Liverpool,  Eng- 
land, Oct.  3,  1894. 
Children  by  first  wife : 

Jessie  Hnggins,  b.  Jan.  22,  1840;  m.  Feb.  25,  1873,  John  P.  Camp- 
bell, of  Providence.  R.  I.,  b.  Dec.  28,  1822.  Both  res.  1902, 
Providence. 

1442  Phebe  Ann,"  b.  Aug.  7,  1841 ;    m.  James  M.  Campbell. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

1443  Benjamin  Franklin,  b.  June  12.  1845;    m.  Adela  Barry. 
Frederick-  A.,"  b.   Sept.  23,   1846;    d.  Liverpool,   England;    m.   Mary 

L.  Braun,  Sept.  3.  1874.     She  was  b.  Dec.  9,   1855.     Child :    Fred- 
erick Augustus,'"  b.   Sept.,   1876;    res.   1902,  Liverpool. 

1444  Marie  A.,"  b.  May  4.  1854;    m.  Arnold  J.  Cleaver. 
Rosalie  Bicknell,  b.  Mar.  9,   1861. 

Lilias  Erving,  b.  Mar.  9,  1861 ;    res.  1902,  Liverpool. 

966.  Maria  E.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Benjamin  Franklin  and 
Maria   (Eells)   Babcock   (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Liverpool,  Eng-.,  Jan.  21,    1816;    d.  Provi- 
dence, R.  L,  Jan.  zt,,  1884;   m.  J\Lar.  15,  1841,  James  Deverill 
Moore,  d.  Jan.  17,  1869. 
Children  : 

1445  Marie  Babcock,"  b.  Dec.  20.  1845;    ni.  James  Clinton  Kimball. 
Parthenia  B.,  b.   Apr.   12.   1848:    d.   Mar.   16,   1873. 

Jessie  D.,  b.  June  i.  1850;    d.  July  7.   1872. 

Jane  Denison.  b.  Dec.   11.   1851  ;    d.   Feb.   11,   1862. 

967.  Parthenia    Pardon^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Benjamin 
Franklin   and   Maria    (Eells)    Babcock    (Paul,    Harry, 

Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  London,  England,  Jan.   12, 
1817;   res.  1902,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Sept.  9,  1841,  William 
R.,  son  of  Dudlev  Babcock,  d.  Oct.  19,  1862. 
Child : 

Charles,   b.   ;     res.    1902,   Brooklyn ;     unm. 


^go  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

968.  Samuel  D.*^  Babcuck,  son  of  Benjamin  F.  and  Maria 
(Eells)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  i6,  1822;  d.  at  his  sum- 
mer home  in  Lenox,  Mass.,  Sept.  14,  1902;  m.  Dec.  2,  1846, 
Ehzabeth  Crany  FrankHn,  b.  Feb.  2,  1828,  d.  Riverdale,  N.  Y., 
May  28,  1 88 1. 

At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  became  a  bank  messenger,  and 
from  that  time  on  his  Hfe  was  spent  in  New  York  City. 
The  following  is  taken  from  the  New  York  Times  of 
Sept.  15,  1902: 

"Mr.  Babcock  was  President  of  the  International  Bell  Tele- 
phone Company,  Limited,  and  of  the  Central,  Manhattan,  Colo- 
nial, and  New -York  Real  Estate  Associations;  Vice  Presi- 
dent of  the  Providence  and  Stonington  Steamship  Company 
and  the  City  and  Suburban  Homes  Associa.tion ;  Treasurer  of 
the  Improved  Dwellings  Association ;  a  Director  of  the  New 
York  Central  and  Hudson  River  Railroad,  the  New  York  and 
Harlem  Railroad  Company,  the  National  Bank  of  Commerce, 
the  American  Exchange  National  Bank,  the  Continental  In- 
surance Company,  the  Guarantee  Trust  Company,  the  Metro- 
politan Opera  and  Real  Estate  Company,  the  United  States 
Mortgage  and  Trust  Company ;  Trustee  of  the  Central  and 
Fifth  Avenue  Trust  Companies  and  of  the  Mutual  Life  In- 
surance Company  of  New  York,  and  a  member  of  the  Advisory 
Committee  of  the  United  States  Lloyds.  His  business  office 
was  at  32  Liberty  Street. 

"Outdoor  life,  nature  study,  and  art  were  very  attractive  to 
Mr.  Babcock.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Suburban  Riding  and 
Driving  Club,  and  Turf  and  Field,  and  a  supporter  of  the 
National  Academy  of  Design,  the  Metro^xjlitan  Museum  of 
Art,  the  American  Fine  Arts  Society,  the  American  Museum 
of  Natural  History,  and  the  American  Geographical  Society, 
in  all  of  which  organizations  he  held  memberships.  He  also 
belonged  to  the  following  clubs :  Metropolitan,  Manhattan, 
Union,  Downtown,  Century,  New^  York  Yacht,  and  Church, 
and  to  the  New  England  Society." 

Children  : 

1446  Henry  Denison,"  b.   Sept.  6.   1847;    m.   Anna  M.  Woodward. 

1447  Evelena,  b.  ]\Iay   13,   1840;    m.   William  Palmer  Dixon. 

1448  Emily   F.,   b.    Tan.    12,    1855;    m.    Fordyce   D.   Barker. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.   i,   1857;    res.  1902.  New  York  City;    tinni. 

1449  Fanny  Morris,  b.   Oct.  25.   1858;    m.  Henry  A.  Murray. 
Maria,  b.   Aug.  28,    i860;    res.   IQ02,   New  York  City;    unm. 

Kate  Spaulding,  b.  Apr.  10.  1868;    res.  1902,  6,36  Fifth  Avenue,  New 
York  ;    unm. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  391 

969.  Charles  Henry  Phelps^  Babcock,  son  of  Benjamin 
Franklin  and    Maria    (Eells)    Babcock    (Paul,    Harry, 

Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.   Stonington,  Conn.,  Jan.   3, 

1825;   d.  Riverdale,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  25,  1897;   m.  Apr.  17,  1855, 

Cornelia  Fulton  Franklin,  sister  of  Elizabeth  C.  Franklin,  b. 

Sept.  12,  1 83 1,  d.  Riverdale,  Nov.  24,  1883. 

Children : 

Richard  F.,  b.  Jan.  27,  1856;    d.  Sept.  26,  1857. 

Edward  C.  b.  Aug.   15.   1857;    d.  July  26,   1876. 

William   Edward,"   b.    Mar.   23.    1859;     res.    1903,    New   York   City; 

ni.   Apr.   28,    1897.   Mary   A.    Knevels,   of  New   York.  b.    Mar.    12, 

1870.      Child:     William    E.,"   b.    Nov.    i,    1898;     res.    1902,    New 

York  City. 
Samuel  D.,  b.  Nov.   17,  i860;    d.  Sept.  3,   1866. 
Cornelia  P.,  b.  Mar.  17.  1862 ;    res.  1902.  Riverdale,  N.  Y. 
Charles  P.,  b.  May  20,  1864;    res.  1902,  Riverdale. 
Son.  b.  Dec.  28.  1865 ;    d.  Jan.  26.  1866. 

Edith,  b.  Apr.  29,   1868;    m.  Oct.  9,   1901,  Eugene  Pintard  Bicknell. 
Amy  Denison."  b.  Mar.  10,  1872;    m.  Sept.  29,  1898,  John  B.  Dash, 

b.  May  18,  1873.     Child :    Amy  Louise,'"  b.  Feb.  28,  1900. 
Franklin  Lawrence,  b.  Mar.   19,   1874. 

970.  Louise^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Courtland    and    Elizabeth 

(Cany)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James.  John, 
James),  b.  ]\Iay  18,  1835;  res.  1902,  26  E.  64th  Street,  New 
York  City;  m.  (i)  1853,  Edmund  D.,  son  of  Stiles  Stanton, 
of  Stonington,  Conn.,  d.  Mav  29,  1873:  m.  (2)  1893  (?), 
William  H.  Tillinghast,  New  York  City. 
Children : 

Edmund  Courtland,"  b.  1854;  d.  London,  England:  m.  1878,  Mary 
Lane.  They  had  four  children :  Georgia,'"  b.  1885 ;  Louis,  b. 
1887;    Edmund,  b.  1889:    Virginia,  b.  1891. 

Louis  Lee."  b.  July  3,  1859;  m-  Nov.  3,  1887.  Pauline  Dixon,  of 
Brooklyn,  b.  Jan.  6,  1862.  They  res.  New  York  City.  Children  : 
Priscilla.'"  b.  1888;  Louis  Lee,  b.  1894,  d.  1895;  Louis  Lee,  b. 
1897:    William  F.,  b.  1899. 

971.  Georgia^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Courtland  and  Elizabeth 

(Cany)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  May  i8,  1837:  res.  I902.'28' E.  64th  Street.  New 
York  City;  m.  June  11.  1861.  Charles  P.,  son  of  Ephraim  and 
Hesebeth  Williams,  of  Stonington,  Conn.,  b.  June  11,  1804,  d. 
Oct.  28.  1879. 
Children : 

Georgia,"  b.  July  31,  1863:  res.  1902.  28  E.  64th  Street.  New  York; 
m.  May  14.  1885,  George  Henrv  Warren,  of  New  York,  b.  Oct. 
17,  1855-  Children:  Constance  W.,'"  b.  Jan.  17,  1888;  George  H., 
b.  July  29,    1889. 

Charles  Phelps,"  b.  June  15,  1866;  res.  1902.  514  Washington  Ave- 
nue. Brooklyn.  N.  Y. ;  m.  .^nr.  11.  1&S9,  Elizabeth  P.  Brooks, 
b.  Jan.  4.  1868.  Children:  Elizabeth,'"  b.  Jan.  2,  1890;  Georgia, 
b.  Nov.   18,  1894. 


39-  rjic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

972.  CouRTLAND  G.^  Babcock,  son  of  Courtland  and  Eliza- 
betli    (Cany)    Babcock    (Paul,    Harry,   Joshua,   James, 

John,  James),  b.  New  York  State;   d.  Apr.  i,  1896;   m.  New- 
York  City,  Feb.  21,    1871,   Mary,  dau.  of  Judge  Woodruff; 
res.  1902,  Stonington,  Conn. 
Children : 

Lewis  B.   Woodruff,  b.  ,   New   York  City ;    d.  ,   Litchfield, 

Conn. 

Rieta  VV.,  b.  .  New  York  City;  res.  1902,  Stonington;  m.  Ston- 
ington, June,  igoo,  Henry  R.,  son  of  George  H.  and  Harriet 
(Trumbull)    Palmer,   b.   Stonington. 

Harry   W.,  b.  ,   New   York   City;    res.    1902,   Stonington. 

Infant  son.  b.  and  d.  New  York  City. 

Courtland  W.,  b.   Stonington,  ;    res.   1902,   Stonington. 

Mary  W.,   b.   ,    Stonington ;     res.    1902,    Stonington. 

973.  Harry  Saltonstall^  Babcock,  son  of  Courtland  and 
Elizabeth     (Cany)     Babcock     (Paul,     Harry,    Joshua, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  30,  1847;   res. 
no  stated  place;  m.  Stonington,  Conn.,  June  5.  1879,  Evelena, 
dau.  of  Edward  and  Elizabeth  (Lathrop)   Denison,  b.  Ston- 
ington. 
Children : 

Harry  S.,  b.  Plainfield,  N.  J.,  Apr.  10,  1881. 
Edward  D.,  b.   Flushing,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  9,   1886. 

974.  Anna''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Giles  and  Ann  E.  (Denison) 
Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b. 

Nov.   15,   1837;    res.    1902,  Stonington,  Conn.;    m.  Apr.  25, 
186 1,  Samuel  Wood,  b.  Nov.  20,  183 1. 
Children : 

Laura,  b.   Sept.  22,   1869;    res.   1902,  Stonington. 

Mabel,  b.  Nov.  6,  1871  ;  d.  Sept.  28,  1878.  Killed  in  explosion  of 
the  boiler  of  steamer  Adelphi,  at  New  York. 

975.  GiLES^  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Giles  and  Ann  E.  (Denison) 
Babcock   (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James), 

b.   Sept.   3,    1840;    res.    1902,   Providence,    R.   I.;    m.   Sarah 
Smith,  b.  Mav  12,  1842,  d.  Sept.  27,  1872. 
Child : 

Oliver,  b.  Mar.  28,  1870. 

976.  Gen.  John  B.^  Babcock,  U.  S.  A.,  son  of  Giles  and  Ann 
E.    (Denison)    Babcock   (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Feb.  7,  1843;    m.  May  18,   1875,  Blandina, 
dau.  of  Samuel  and  Cornelia  Stanton,  b.  Aug.  3,  1850. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  393 

Children : 

Conrad  Stanton,  Lieutenant.  U.  S.  A.,  b.  Feb.  25,  1876. 
John,  Ensign.  U.  S.  N..  b.  Sept.  5,  1879. 
Franklin,  b.  Aug.   11,   1885. 

977.  Mary  Denlson*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Giles  and  Ann  E. 
(Denison)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  June -5,   1846;    res.   1902,  Stonington,  Conn.;    m. 
July  3,   1873.  Judg-e  Ephraim  Williams,  b.  Dec.    i,   1826,  d. 
Stonington,  June  12,   1902. 
Children : 

Maud,  b.  Apr.  22,  1874;    res.   1902,  Stonington. 
Ephraim,  b.  June  15.   1875;    res.  1902,  Stonington. 

978.  Nathaniel  Palmer'*  Babcock,  son  of  Giles  and  Ann 
E.  (Denison)    Babcock    (Paul,    Harry,   Joshua,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Dec.  28,  1851;    res.  1902,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Oct.  I,  1879,  Caroline  A.  McGinnis,  b.  May  25,  1856. 
Children : 

Ruth  A.,  b.  July  14,  1880. 
Natalie,  b.   Mar.   12,   1883. 
Denison,  b.  Sept.  29,  1886. 
Stanton,  b.  Oct.   10,  1898. 

979.  Mary  Amella,-   Babcock,  dau.  of  George  and  Louise 

(Boucher)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  New  Orleans,  La.,  Dec.  9.  1844;    res.   1902,  New 
Orleans;   m.  May  16,  1866,  Charles  E.  Leverich,  of  New  Or- 
leans, b.  Oct.  31,  1834.  d.  New  Orleans. 
Children : 

Louise  Fanny,  b.  Nov.  27,   1868;    res.   1902.  in  New  Orleans;    unm. 

George  Babcock.*  b.  Nov.  16,  1870;  ni.  Jan.  15,  1890,  Julia,  dau. 
of  Rev.  Mr.  Drysdale.  of  New  Orleans,  b.  Sept.  5,  1871.  Chil- 
dren, b.  New  Orleans:  Mary,^'*  b.  Dec.  4,  1895;  George  Drys- 
dale, b.  Feb.  17,  1899. 

980.  Lucy  Bell''  Ward,  dau.  of  Giles  and  Lucy  B.   (Bab- 
cock)   Ward     (Paul,     Harry,     Joshua,     James,    John, 

James),  b.  Apr.  4,  1847;  ^^s.  1902.  Saybrook,  Conn.;  m.  Oct. 
5,  1881,  Joseph  Hayden,  b.  July  11,  1837,  d.  Saybrook,  Apr. 
23,  1900. 

Ward.  b.  Sept.  3.  18S2 ;    res.  1902.  Saybrook,  Conn. 
Joseph,  b.  June  13,   1885. 

981.  Dr.   Robert  Hall^   Babcock,   son  of  Robert   S.   and 
Emily   (Hall)    Babcock   (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James, 


394  T^h^  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

John,  James),  b.  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  July  26,  1851  ;  res.  1902, 
466  Dearborn  Avenue,  Chicago,  111. ;  m.  Montclair,  N.  J., 
June  12,  1879,  Lizzie,  dau.  of  Milton  and  CeHa  (Stone)  Wes- 
ton, b.  Peru,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14,  1850. 

At  the  age  of  twelve  years  l)r.  Babcock  lost  his  sight  by 
accident.     He  is  a  celebrated  physician. 

Children : 

Robert   Stanton,  Jr.,  b.   Municb,   Germany,  Apr.  26,    1883;    d.   Apr. 

14,   1885. 
Edwin  Clinton,  b.  Chicago,  Dec.  31,  1888. 
Robert  Weston,  b.  Chicago,   May  9,   1893. 

982.  CouRTLAND^   Babcock,   SOU  of  Robert   S.   and   Emily 

(Hall)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Kalamazoo,  Mich.,  Sept.  24,  1855;  res.  1902, 
Montclair,  N.  J. ;  m.  (i)  Marshalltown,  la.,  Nov.  26,  1879, 
Marie,  dau.  of  Edward  and  Emily  Sleight,  b.  Kalamazoo, 
Mich.,  Jan.  20,  1858,  d.  Chicago,  111.,  July  15,  1896;  m.  (2) 
Dec.  22,  1897,  Bertha,  dau.  of  David  and  Adeline  Blakely,  b. 
Chicago,  Apr.  16,  1869. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

Lilian   Marie,   b.   Minneapolis,   Minn.,   Mar.   28,    1886;    res.    1902,   at 

Montclair. 
Robert  Stanton,  b.  Minneapolis,  Nov.  26.  1889;  res.  1902,  Montclair. 
Courtland   Sleight,   b.   New  York  City,   Feb.   11,   1891. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

Adeline  Low,  b.  Bradford,  Vt.,  Aug.  2,  1899. 

983.  Ellen  Watkins^  Babcock,  dau.  of  David  Sherman 
and  Charlotta  (Noyes)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Feb.  i,  185 1;    res.  1902,  New  York 
City;   m.  May  7,  1872,  William  Reynolds  Brown,  son  of  Wil- 
liam Smith  Brown,  b.  Feb.  15,  1846. 
Children : 

Warren    Day,   b.    New    York    City,    Feb.    5,    1873 ;     res.    1902,    New 

York ;    unni. 
Cleveland  Hall,  b.  June  11,   1874:    d.   White  Plains.  N.  Y. 
Donald    Winchester,    b.    White    Plains,    Sept.    9,    1877;      res.    1902, 

New   York ;    unm. 

984.  Washington  Irving^  Babcock,  son  of  David  Sher- 
man and   Charlotta    (Noyes)    Babcock    (Paul.    Harry, 

Joshua,  James,  John.  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn..  Sept.  26, 
1858;  res.  1902.  374  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York;  m.  New  Or- 
leans, La.,  l)y  Bishop  Galleher,  Jan.   i,   1890,  Grace  Walton, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  395 

dan.  of  Henry  P.  and  Grace  W.  (Ogden)  Kernochan,  of  New 
York  and  Scarsdale  Plantation,  Lonisiana. 

Mr.  Babcock  rendered  nmch  assistance  to  the  author  of  this 
book  by  gathering-  records  of  nearly  all  the  numerous  descend- 
ants of  his  grandfather,  Maj.  Paul  Babcock,  of  Stonington. 

Child : 

Irving,  b.  Chicago.  111.,  Nov.  15.  1890;    res.  1902,  New  York  City. 

985.  William  Robinson^  Babcock,  son  of  David  Sherman 
and  Charlotta  (Noyes)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  3,  i860;  res. 
1902,  Boston,  Mass.;  m.  Oct.  27,  1886,  Jennie  Rider,  of 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  July  12,  1861. 
Children : 


William   Rider,  b.   Dec.  24,   li 
Beatrice,  b.   Brooklyn.   Sept.   17,   1890. 

986.  Philip  Sheridan^   Babcock,  son  of  David  Sherman 
and  Charlotta  (Noyes)  Babcock  (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua, 

James,  John,  James),  b.   Stonington,  Conn.,  May  31,   1863; 
res.    1902,  White  Plains,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Nov.  8,  1890,  Lily  Clark, 
of  White  Plains. 
Children : 

Philip   Sheridan,  Jr.,  b.   White   Plains,   Aug.   7,   1891. 
Arthur  Clark,  b.  White  Plains.   May,   1893. 

Charlotta  Augusta,  b.  .   New  York. 

David  Sherman,  b.  ,  New  York. 

987.  Raymond^  Babcock,  son  of  David  Sherman  and  Char- 
lotta  (Noyes)   Babcock   (Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Oct.   18,  1868;    res.   1902,  New  York  City; 
m.  Feb.  9,  1893,  Florence  Jeannette  Locke,  of  Cincinnati. 
Child,  b.  NeW  York  City : 

Helen,  b.  Apr.  9,   1896. 

987a.  William  Smith  Babcock^  Mathews,  son  of  Samuel 
S.  and  Elisabeth  S.  (Babcock)  ALithews  (William, 
Adam,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  ]\Iay  8,  1837;  res. 
1903,  6541  Monroe  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.;  m.  Nunda,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  6,  1857,  Flora  E.,  dau.  of  Edward  and  Almira  (Waite) 
Swain,  b.  Nimda,  Nov.  17,  1838. 
Children : 

Helen  E..  b.  Nov.  16,  1858:    d.  Aurora,  111..  Feb.  13.  1859. 
Grace   Edna,   b.    Oct.   28.    i860;     res.    1903,    1712   Livingston   Street, 
Evan'-ton.   111. ;    m.   Chicago,  Apr.,   1900,  Richard  Waterman. 


39^  The  Bahcoch  Genealogy. 

Edith  C,  b.  La  Grange,  Ga.,  July  lo,  1865;  res.  1903,  1881  Pros- 
pect Place,   Madison,  Wis. ;    ni.   Chicago,   1897,  Louis  W.   Claude. 

Anna  Louise,   b.   Sept.  30,    1868;    res.   1903,   Chicago. 

Albert  Prescott,  b.  Nov.  26,  1871  ;  res.  1903,  Woodlawn  Avenue 
and  60th  Street,  Chicago;    m.  Boston,   Mass.,  Jesse  L.  . 

John  Lathrop,  b.  N.  Evanston,  111.,  Jan.  8,  1874;  res.  1903,  6582 
Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago;  m.  S.  Evanston,  111.,  Gertrude  M. 
Singleton. 

William  Hope,  b.  N.  Evanston,  Mar.  17,  1877;    res.   1903,  Chicago. 

987b.  Mary  Elizabeth^  Mathews,  dau.  of  Samuel  S.  and 
Elisabeth  S.  (Babcock)  Mathews  (William,  Adam, 
Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Goffstown,  N.  H.,  Oct.  15, 
1843;  ^^^-  1903-  Clear  Lake.  la.;  m.  Chicago,  111.,  Mar.  20, 
1871,  Willard,  son  of  Abijah  and  Rachel  (Howe)  Burnap,  b. 
Paxton,  Mass.,  Oct.  17,  1840. 
Children : 

Alethea,  b.  June  20,  1872;  res.  1903,  Champaign,  111.;  m.  Cham- 
paign, Oct.   15,   1896,   Charles  W.  Foster. 

Willard  L.,  b.  Jan.  28,  1874;  res.  Cooperstown,  N.  Dak.;  m.  Min- 
neapolis,  Minn.,  June  25,    1901,   Mary  A.   Merrill. 

Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Dec.  27,   1875 ;    res.  1903,  Clear  Lake. 

Martha,  b.  Apr.  29,  1879;    d.  Dover,  N.  H.,  Apr.  8,  1882. 

Sherburne,   b.  May  2^,   1882 ;    res.   1903,   Clear  Lake. 

John  Wheeler,  b.  Aug.  31,   1884:    d.   Apr.  2,   i^"" 


988.  Rev.  Samuel  Sherberne^  Mathews,  D.D.,  son  of 
Samuel  S.  and  Elisabeth  S.  (Babcock)  Mathews  (Wil- 
liam, Adam,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Salisbury,  Mass., 
June  3.  1847;  m.  Taunton,  Mass.,  Apr.  25,  1870,  Anna  E., 
dau.  of  Edward  and  Mary  E.  (Wilson)  Wright,  b.  Billerica, 
Mass..  Apr.  25,  185 1,  d.  Boston,  July  7,  1886. 

Dr.  Mathews  is  (1903)  pastor  of  the  Westfield  Congrega- 
tional Church,  Danielson,  Conn. 
Children : 

Anna  Elisabeth,  b.  Billerica,  Mass.,  June  30,  1872;  res.  1903,  Daniel- 
son,  Conn. 

Edith  Lathrop,  b.  Wilmington,  Mass.,  Mar.  i,  1875;  res.  1903, 
"The  Fairview,"  9th  and  State  Street,  Milwaukee,  Wis. ;  m. 
Milwaukee,  June  30.  1897,  William,  son  of  Archibald  and  Jene 
(Thompson)   Beveridge,  b.   Kircald,   Scotland,   Mar.  21,   1874. 

Mabel  Babcock,"  b.  Maynard,  Mass.,  Jan.  31,  1877;  res.  1903,  Biller- 
ica; m.  Milwaukee,  June  8,  1898,  Harry  K.,  son  of  William  and 
Amanda  King,  b.  Baie  Verte,  New  Brunswick,  June  i,  1876.  They 
have  one  child,   Edith   Lathrop,"  b.  June  8,    1899. 

989.  W^illiam^  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Kate  D.  (Bab- 
cock)  Babcock   (Francis,  Adam,  Joshua,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  New  Orleans,  La.,  Aug.  12,  185 1;  res.  1903,  San 
Francisco,  Cal. ;  m.  London.  England.  Oct.  31,  1877,  Helena, 
dau.  of  George  Kimball,  of  Augusta,  Me. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  397 

Child : 

Helen  Kimball,  b.   San  Francisco,   Nov.  22.   1879:    d.   Afay  29,   1880. 

990.  Alice  Wyer*^  P>abcock,  dan.  of  William  and  Kate  D. 
(Babcock)    Babcock    (Francis,   Adam,  Joshua.   James, 

John.  James),  b.  New  Orleans.  La.,  Dec.  25,  1852;   res.  1903, 
San  Francisco,  Cal. ;  m.  San  Francisco,  A])r.  23,  1879,  Charles 
B.,  son  of  William  Brigham,  of  Boston,  Mass. 
Children : 

Alice  Wyer,  b.   Paris,  France,  Jan.,   1880. 
Son,  b.  San  Francisco,  July  27,  1881. 

991.  Amanda^    Babcock,    dau.    of   Ichabod   and    Sarah    M. 

(Clarke)  Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John, 
John.  James),  b.  Feb.  10.  1819;  d.  Friendship,  N.  Y. ;  m.  (i) 
Matthew  Stillman;  m.  (2)  George  R.  Rosebush.  He  res. 
1903,  Alfred.  N.  Y. 

Children  by  first  marriage: 

Adelbert  M..  b. ;    res.   1903,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. 

Edward  A.,  b.  ;    res.  1903.  Alfred. 

Matthew  D.,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Child  by  second  marriage : 

Jennie  Bell,  b.  ;    m.   d)  Walter  Hutchinson;    m.   (2)   William 

L.  Nichols ;    res.  1903.  Boliver,  N.  Y. 

992.  Gideon  Hoxie^  Babcock.  son  of  Ichabod  and  Sarah 
M.    (Clarke)     Babcock     (Ichabod,     Ichabod,    Ichabod, 

John.  John.  James),  b.  Cattaraugus  County,.  N.  Y.,  Nov. 
18.  1822:  d.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  11,  1895:  m.  Brook- 
field.  N.  Y..  Oct..  1847.  Lvdia,  dau.  of  Richard  and  Jerusha 
(Church)  Campbell,  b.  Plainfield.  N.  Y.,  Feb.  13,  1824,  d. 
Leonardsville,  Jan.  20,  1895. 
Children : 

Adelia  M.,  b.   1848:    d.  Leonardsville,  1862. 
Henry  W.,  b.   1850:    d.   Leonardsville,   1862. 

1450  Clara,''  b.  Oct.  22,   1855  ;    m.  John  Rogers. 
Hattie,  b.   1857;    d.   Leonardsville,   1862. 

1451  Caroline,  b.  Apr.  20,   1861  ;    m.  Dr.  Herbert  C.  Brown. 
Mary.  b.  1865  :    d.  Leonardsville,  1875. 

Frank  D.,  b.  1870;  res.  1902,  123  S.  12th  Street,  Olean,  N.  Y.  ; 
m.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Mav  16,  1893,  Alice,  adopted  dau.  of 
James  W.  and  993  Caroline  (Babcock)  Young,  b.  Genesee,  Aug. 
31.  1875. 

993.  Caroline  D.^   Babcock.   dau.   of  Ichabod  and   Sarah 
M.    (Clarke)     Babcock     (Ichabod,     Ichabod,   Ichabod, 


39^  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Plainfield,  N.  Y.,  July  28,  1834;  res. 
190J,  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y. ;  ni.  (  1)  Nile,  Apr.  5,  1856,  James 
W.,  son  of  Samuel  and  Abigail  (Holmes)  Young,  1).  Aug.  12, 
1833,  d.  Little  Genesee,  Mar.  9,  1882;  m.  (2)  Nile,  July  11, 
1883,  Asa  L.  Maxson. 
Child   (adopted)  : 

Alice   Elizabeth,    b.    Aug.    3,    1875 ;     in.    Frank,    son    of   992  Gideon 
and  Lydia   (Campbell)   Babcock. 

994.  Adaline^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joshua  and  Clarissa  (Cran- 
dall)   Babcock  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  S.  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  5,  1812;  m.  S.  New 
Berlin,  Jan.  Si  1830  (?),  Frederick  Phelps,  b.  New  Berlin,  d. 
Millport,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  S.  New  Berlin: 

H.  H.,  b.  ;    d.  Olean,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Margaret  E.   Hannel. 

Susan  M.,  b.  Alay  17,   1836;    res.   1902,  Memphis,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Israel 
Angell.     She  has  two  children,  Louis  and   William   D. 

J.  J.,   b.  ;    res.    1902,   Sturgis,   Mich. 

R.  R.,  b.  ^. 

995.  Albert  Franklin^  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Clar- 
issa   (Crandall)    Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  S.  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  22,  1814; 
d.  Millport,  N.  Y.,  July  15.  1881  ;  m.  Millport,  1830,  Ann 
Almira  (his  cousin),  dau.  of  Erastus  and  Nancy  (Rhodes) 
Crandall,  b.  S.  New  Berlin,  Sept.  20,  181 3,  d.  Millport,  Jan. 
19,  1895. 

Mr.  Babcock  was  Clerk  of  Chemung  County  from  1850  to 
1856,  and  held  other  public  offices.  He  was  a  lawyer  and 
member  of  the  Chemung  County  Bar  Association,  and  for  a 
time  was  member  of  the  State  Legislature.  In  politics  he  was 
a  Democrat.  His  "purity  of  life,  nobility  of  character,  and  in- 
tegrity of  purpose"  endeared  him  to  all  who  knew  him. 

Children,  b.  Millport: 

1452  Erastus  F.,"  b.  Dec.  22,   1834;    m.  Martha  A.  Nicks. 

Lewis    Hamilton,    b.   ;     d.    LTtica,    N.    Y. :     m.    Geneva,    N.    Y., 

Martha   Jane,    dau.   of   Hon.   J.   J.   Wicks,   b.    Elmira,   d.    Elmira. 
He    was    a    noted    criminal    lawyer. 

1453  Rev.  De  Grand  Delos,  b.  Jan.  a.  1839;    m.  Harriet  Monkhouse. 
Albert  L.,  b.  Nov.   i,  1840;    d.  Ossining,  N.  Y.,  July  20.   1903.     Was 

County  Treasurer  of  Westchester  County,  and  for  thirteen  years 
Chief  Clerk  of  the  State  Prison  at  Sing  Sing;    unm. 

996.  William  Deloss^  Babcock,  son  of  Joshua  and  Clar- 
issa   (Crandall)    Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  S.  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  26,  1817; 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  399 

(1.  Butternuts,  N.  Y.,  July  21,  1889;    m.  Butternuts,  Nov.  4, 
1841,  Cornelia  Ann.  dan.  of  Ashbee  Rockwell,  b.  Butternuts, 
Jan.  I  I,  1820,  d.  Butternuts,  Oct.  14,  1855. 
Cliiklren,  b.  Butternuts: 

Mary  E.,  1).  Sept.  7,  1842;    d.  Dec.  18,  1857. 

Russel  Prentice,  h.  Jan.  i,  1845;  res.  1902,  60  E.  i8th  Street, 
Chicago,  111. ;  m.  Chicago,  Apr.  29,  1899,  Mary  Agnes,  dau.  of 
Angus  and  Sarah  (iMcCush)  Bethune,  b.  Cape  Breton,  Nova 
Scotia.  Oct.  31,   1855.     No  children   (1903). 

Franklin  R.,  h.  Jan.   18.   1846;    d.  Oct.  22,  1868. 

Sarah  Adell,  b.  Oct.  4,  1849;   d.  Nov.  17,  1876. 

997.  Mary  L.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joshua  and  Clarissa  (Cran- 
dall)   Babcock   (Joseph,  Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  S.  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  1826;  d.  S.  New 
Berlin,  Feb.  7,  1875;  m.  S.  New  Berlin,  Jan.  17,  1844,  Ger- 
man Plotter,  b.  Laurens,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  27,  1820,  d.  S.  New  Ber- 
lin, Dec.  14,  1881. 

Children,  b.  S.  New  Berlin : 

1454  Amelia  P.."  b.  July  7.  1847;    m.  Julian  A.  Goodrich. 

Ellen  S.,  b.  ;    res.   1902.  Norwich,  N.  Y. 

Nelson  O.,  b.  ;    d.  S.  New  Berlin,  Apr.  7,  1855. 

998.  Rev.   Thomas^   Barber,   son   of  Thomas   and    Eunice 
(Babcock)    Barber    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod,   John, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  June  4,  1809;  d.  Westerly 
(Pawcatuck),  Oct.  4,  1883;  m.  Westerly,  Apr.  30,  1838, 
Sarah  (Breed),  dau.  of  Thomas  and  Experience  (Barl^er) 
Stanton,  b.  Westerly,  Nov.  25,  1814,  d.  Waterbury,  Conn., 
Mar.  24,  1887. 

Toward  the  close  of  his  life  Mr.  Barber  commenced  to  write 
a  Babcock  Genealogy,  but  at  the  time  of  his  death  his  work 
was  very  incomplete,  and  was  never  published. 

Children : 

Thomas   Stanton,   b.   Coventry,   R.   I.,  Apr.    19,   1842;    m.   N.    Ston- 

ington.   Conn.,   1864.   Aurelia  Holmes. 
Charles,    b.    Union.    Conn..    Apr.    10.    1844;     d.    Pawcatuck,    Conn., 

Apr.  26,  1897,  unm. 
John.  b.   N.   Stonington,  June  5.   1847;    d.   young. 
Sarah,    b.    Dec.    23.    1848;     d.   young. 
Sarah  I.,  b.  Sept.  9,   1850:    res.   1902.  Bristol,  Conn;    m.    (i)   John 

Bentley;     m.    (2)    Mar.    20.    1886.    Albert    Nettleton.    b.    Bristol, 

July  I,  1858. 
Mary  I.,  b.   Aug.  3,   1852;    m.  Waterbury,   Conn.,  June,    1887,  John 

Ward ;    res.   1902.  Waterbury.  Conn. 

999.  Sarah®  Barber,   dau.   of  Thomas  and   Eunice    (Bab- 
cock)  Barber   (Joseph,   Ichaliod,   Ichabod.  John,  John, 


400  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Nov.  17,  1810;  d.  Sheffield,  Mass., 
Apr.   10,   1888;    ni.  VV.  (jranville,  Mass.,  Birdsey  N.,  son  of 
Thomas  and  Susanna  (Pendleton)  Burtch,  b.  New  Hartford, 
Conn.,  June  9,  1810,  d.  Sheffield,  May  19,  1897. 
Children,  b.  Salisbury,  Conn. : 

Sarah,  b.   Nov.   11,   1841  ;    d.   Sheffield,   Feb.  8,   1896. 

Eunice  Agnes,  b.  Mar.  16,  1845.     She  is  Postmistress  at  Sheffield. 

Ida  A.,  b.   Feb.  26,   1856;    d.   Swarthmore,   Pa.,   Dec.    12,    1901 ;    m. 

Sheffield,  July  5,  1876,  George  Hoadley,  b.  Sheffield,  Dec.  2,  1850; 

res.  1902,  Swarthmore,  Pa. 

1000.  William  Denison^  Barber,  son  of  Thomas  and  Eu- 
nice   (Babcock)    Barber    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Watch  Hill,  R.  I.,  Apr.  27,  1821;    d. 
Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  19,  1892;  m.  Triangle,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  5, 
1853,  Helen  T.,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Elizabeth  Taft,  b.  Tri- 
angle, Feb.  12,  1 83 1,  d.  Triangle,  Feb.  17,  1880. 
Children,  b.  Triangle: 

Bryon  C,  b.  Jan.  22.  1854;  res.  1902,  198  Hawley  Street,  Bing- 
hamton ;  m.  Sept.  28,  1882,  Cora  H.,  dau.  of  A.  C.  and  Catherine 
(Hancie)   Clark,  b.  Mt.   Pleasant,   Pa.,  Feb.  7,   1859. 

Velina  A.,  b.  Mar.  3,  1856;  res.  1902,  35  Cary  Street,  Binghamton; 
m.  Cortland,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  17,  1883,  William  A.,  son  of  T.  and 
Hepsey   (Livermore)    Smith,  b.  German,   N.  Y.,  Oct.  22,   1854. 

Frank  D.,  b.  Dec.  7,  1858;  res.  1902,  Pere  Cheney,  Mich.;  m. 
Frances  Rodem. 

Ellen  R.,  b.  Oct.  19,  i860;  d.  Helena,  Mont.,  May  i,  1892;  m. 
Triangle,  Dec.  26,  1882,  Fred  R.  Salisbury. 

Clarence  E.,  b.  Aug.  22,  1862;  res.  1902,  Horsehead,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Emma  Harvey,  b.   Cameron   Mills,   N.   Y. 

William  Barton,  b.  Aug.  24,  1868;  res.  1902,  40  Clinton  Street, 
Binghamton,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Binghamton,  Feb.  12,  1887,  Lena,  dau. 
of  George  and  Clara  (Mead)  Wilson,  b.  Binghamton,  July  27, 
1862. 

Arthur  T.,  b.  Jan.  3,  1873 ;  res.  1902,  781  Chapel  Street,  New- 
Haven,  Conn. 

1001.  Susan  Esther^  Barber,  dau.  of  Thomas  and  Eunice 

(Babcock)  Barber  (Joseph,  Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Simsbury,  Conn.,  July  4,  1826;  res.  1902, 
Pawcatuck,  Conn.;  m.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  3,  1847, 
Thomas  W.  Peckham,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Mar.,  1824,  d.  Ston- 
ington, July  6,  1874. 
Children : 

Eugenia,  b.  Westerly;  d.  Oct.  29,   1863. 

Susan,  b.  Westerly;    d.  Nov.  29,  1851. 

Byron,  b.   Stonington;    res.   1902,    (Pawcatuck)   Westerly.  R.   I. 

Jessie   W.,   b.   Westerly;    m.    Alten   Pilling;     res.    1902,    Pawcatuck. 

George  B.,  b.   Westerly;    d.   May  7,   1865. 

Edward  E.,  b.  Westerly;    d.   Aug.  25,   1865. 


JOSEPH    ALONZO    BABCOCK. 


Page  40T. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  401 

1002.  Helen  Adelia^  Babcock,  daii.  of  Joseph  and  Abby 
(Owens)    Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod,   John, 

John,  James),  b.  CannonviHe,  N.  Y..  May  22.  1831 ;  res.  1902, 
Cannonville;    ni.  Oct.   11,   1854.  Ezra  \V.,  son  of  Capt.  Isaac 
and  Carohne  (Glezen)  Gillette. 
Children : 

Harriet  A.,  b.  Dec.  23,   1855. 

Helen,  b.  Oct.  16,  1857;    d.  1877. 

Eudora    S.,    b.    Apr.    10,    i860;     m.    Sept.,    1886,    Ai)ram    Constable; 

res.   1902,  Cannonville. 
Joseph  S.,  b.   Mar.   i,   1864;    ni.   Nov.   i,    1896,  Carrie   Walley;    res. 

igo2,  Cannonville. 
Edward  G.,  b.  Nov.  15,  1873;    d.  young. 

1003.  Joseph  Alonzo'^  Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  and  Abby 
(Owens)    Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod,   John, 

John,  James),  b.  Mar.  9,  1833;  res.  1900,  Westerly,  R.  I.; 
m.  Westerly,  Sept.  i,  1856,  Elizabeth  M.,  dati.  of  Isaac  and 
497  Marv  (Babcock)   Burdick,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  May  1.4, 

1835-       ' 

Joseph  Baljcock  served  during-  the  Civil  W  ar  in  the  ist  Regi- 
ment. Rhode  Island  Cavalry.  He  represented  Westerly  in  the 
Rhode  Island  Legislature  in  1873-6. 

Children : 

Edward  H.,  b.  Westerly,  Nov.  21,  1857;  m.  Jan.  9,  1895,  H.  Ella, 
dau.  of  Franklin  and  Martha  (Coon)   Crumb.     No  children. 

Mary  Abby.  b.  Westerly,  June  10,  i860;  d.  Washington,  D.  C, 
Jan.  20.   1892,  unm. 

1004.  Sarah  Amelia^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Abby 
(Owens)    Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod,   John, 

John,  James),  b.  Nov.  20,  1837;    d.  Apr.  8,  1901 ;    m.  Sept. 
28,  1856,  Shepard  C.  Smith.    He  res.  1903,  Cannonville,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Bertha  A.,  b.  Oct.   17,   1863;    m.  Nov.  30,   1883,  William  P.  Hoag; 

res.  1903,  Cannonville. 
Lucius,  b.  June  2,  1866. 

1005.  Olive  Celista^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Abby 
(Owens)    Babcock    (Joseph,    Ichabod,    Ichabod,   John, 

John,  James),  b.  Nov.  8.    1845;  J*^s.    1903,  Cannonville;    m. 
Nov.  14,  1867,  Whiting  G.,  son  of  Orange  and  Sally  (Mon- 
fret)  Pomeroy. 
Children : 

Elizabeth,  b.  Apr.  3,   1870;    m.  Aug.  22,  1889.  James  T.  Lightfoot ; 

res.  1903,  Bismarck.  Mo. 
Whiting  G.,  b.  Oct.   18.  1874;    d.   May  17,  1878. 
26 


402  TJic  Bahcock  Griiralogy. 

Winifred  G.,  h.  June  23,  1879;  m.  Aug.  14,  1902,  liol)crt  W.  Scott; 
res.  1903,  Walton,  N.  Y. 

1006,  Harriet   Rebecca'^'   Babcock,   dan.   of    Tabez  Wight 
and   Rebecca    (Cook)    Babcock    (Lodovvick,    Ichabod, 

Ichal)od,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Feb. 
26,  1824;  res.  1902,  24  Amherst  Street.  Springfiekl,  Mass.; 
m.  Lebanon  Springs,  May  26,  1848,  Edmund,  son  of  Noah 
and  Susan  (Morey)  Harrison,  b.  Lebanon  Springs,  Nov.  16, 
1823,  d.  Baltimore,  Md.,  Jan.  31,  1899. 
Chiklren : 

Alice  R.,  b.  Lebanon  Springs;    res.  1902,  Springfield,  Mass. 

Jabez  B.,  b.  Lebanon  Springs ;    res.  1902,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

Frank,  b.  Long  Brancli,  N.  J.;  res.  1902,  1313  F  Street,  Wash- 
ington, D.  C. ;  m.  Washington,  Feb.  22,  1889,  Camilla  Greenwood, 
b.  Austin,  Tex.,  Oct.   11,  1870. 

1007.  William  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Jabez  Wight  and 
Rebecca  (Cook)  Babcock  (Lodowick,  Ichabod,  Icha- 
bod, John,  John,  James),  b.  Leijanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  July  i, 
1826;  d.  Providence,  R.  I.,  Mar.  8,  1893;  m.  Providence,  May 
17,  1853,  Penelope  P.,  dau.  of  George  and  Cornelia  (Lippitt) 
Andrews,  b.  Providence,  Sept.  27,  1830;  i-es.  1902, 
Providence. 

Children : 

Cornelia  A.,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  16,  1854;  res.  1902,  229 
Morris  Avenue,  Providence ;  m.  Lebanon  Springs,  Feb.  8.  1882, 
Winslow.  son  of  James  and  Sarah  (Ropes)  Upton,  b.  Salem, 
Mass.,  Oct.  12.  1853. 

Mary  Frances,  b.  Brooklyn,  Apr.  28,  1856;    res.  1902,  Providence. 
1455  William  Henry,"  b.   Aug.  3,   1858;    m.   Mary  E.  Fayerweather. 

Emma  H.,  b.  Providence,  Nov.  19,  1866;  res.  1902,  Golding  Cay, 
Andros  Island,  Bahamas ;  m.  Providence,  June  18,  1896,  George 
W.,  son  of  Edward  and  Melvina  Cutler,  b.  Hartford,  Conn., 
Apr.  2,   1866. 

1007a.  William*  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Achsah  (Palm- 
er) Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Sej^t.  15.  1825;  d.  Maple  Grove,  Mich.;  m.  Cuya- 
hoga County,  O.,  May  26,  1854,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  David  and 
Mary  (Need)  Poe,  b.  Wayne  County,  O.,  Mar.  13,  1826. 
Children : 

Meria,  b.   May    13,    1855;     res.    1902,   Langsburg,   Mich.;    m.   M.   P. 

Mason. 

Adam,  b.  ;    d.   i860. 

William   S.,  b.   Nov.  26,   i860. 

Joseph  M.,"  b.  Maple  Grove.  Mich.,  Oct.  8,  1866;    res.   1902,  Layton 

Corners.   Mich. ;     m.    Maple   Grove,   Estella,   dau.   of  M.    Sprayth. 

b.   N.  Washington,   O.,   Apr.  9,   1872.     Had  one  dau.,   Elizabeth,'" 

b.  May  26,  1899,  d.  1899. 


Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy.  403 

1008.  Joiix  J.*^  Babcock.  son  of  John  and  Achsah  (Palmer) 

l>al)cock  (John,  Joseph,  Icliahod,  John,  John,  James), 
b.  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  25,  1832;   d.  Des  Moines,  la.,  Aug. 
16,  1899;    m.  Des  Moines,  Nov.  10,  1869,  EHzabeth,  dati.  of 
John  Doughty;    res.  1902,  Des  Moines. 
Chil(h-en,  1).  Des  Moines: 

Clara,  b.  ;    m.  June  10,   1902,  Giles  Fairly. 

Mary,  b.  ;    m.  Sept.  13,  1902,  Frank  Shankland. 

Nellie,  b.  ;    uniu. 

1009.  NoYES^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Achsah  (Palmer) 
Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James), 

b.  Lockport,  N.  Y..  A\)V.   ir,   1834;    res.    1902,  Blue  Island, 
111.;    m.  Monmouth,  III,  May  30,   1859,  Mary  A.  Burrell,  b. 
Perrv  County,  Pa.,  Oct.  30,  1834,  d.  Blue  Island,  1902. 
Child : 

Frank,"  b.  I\Iar.  15,  i860;  res.  1902,  Blue  Island;  m.  Rock  Island, 
111..  Feb.,  1899,  Abbie,  dau.  of  Silas  Sprague.  b.  June  15,  1872. 
They  have  one  child.   Irene  E..'"  b.  Oct.  26,   1900. 

1010.  Marion    F.^    Babcock,    son    of    Oliver    and    Emma 

(Langworthy)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Dec.  8,  1828;  d.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  May  31,  1882; 
m.  Persia,  Jan.  i,  1852,  Avilda,  dau.  of  491  Phineas  and  Es- 
ther (Cole)  Babcock,  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Dec.  3,  1833;  res. 
1900,  Nashville,  N.  Y.  She  m.  (2)  Persia,  May  23,  1890, 
Franklin  Beardsley,  b.  Genoa,  N.  Y.,  July  11,  1812,  d.  Eden, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  24,  1894.  No  issue  bv  second  marriage. 
Child: 

1456  Oliver  C,®  b.  Oct.   15,  1854;    m.  Flora  Cook. 

1011.  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Emma   (Lang- 
worthy)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  June  i,  1832;  d.  Apr.  6,  1862;  m. 
Dakota,  Wis.,  July  31,  1861,  Dora,  dau.  of  Ira  S.  and  Nancy 
(Warner)  Bristol,  b.  Dakota,  Jan.  2"/,  1840;  res.  1902,  Ord, 
Neb.  She  m.  (2)  Samuel  P.  Horr,  by  whom  she  had  two 
children. 

"Henry  Babcock  was  First  Sergeant,  Company  H,  i6th 
Regiment,  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  in  the  Civil  War.  He  d. 
in  battle,  Apr.  6,  1862.  In  the  first  volley  of  the  first  day  of 
the  battle  of  Shiloh  a  bullet  pierced  his  forehead."  (State- 
ment given  by  his  son,  H.  E.  Babcock.) 

Child : 

1457  Henry  E.,"  b.  July  22,  1862;    m.  Jennie  Bell  Powell. 


404  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1012.  Abner  L.*^  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Emma  (Lang- 
worthy)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  11,  1833;   res.  1902,  Cattarau- 
gus, N.  Y. ;    m.  New  Albion,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  8,  1863,  Orsa  M. 
Rich,  b.  New  Albion,  Dec.  8,   1839,  d.  Cattaraugus  County, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  28,  1 90 1. 
Child : 

Carrie  Bell.  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Cattaraugus,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Cattaraugus, 

John  Wilson,  b.  Mansfield,  N.  Y. 

1013.  Albert    A.^    Babcock,    son    of    Oliver    and    Emma 

(Langworthy)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.   Persia,  N.  Y.,  Apr.    16,    1835;    res.    1902, 
Nashville,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Persia,  Oct.  11,  1855,  Rosalthe  Randall, 
b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  1836. 
Children : 

Lemond  H.,  b.  1857;  m.  Nashville,  Lucy  Havard.  Children:  Fred, 
b.  1882;    Bert,  b.  1884. 

1014.  Cyrus  W.*  Babcock,  M.D.,  son  of  Oliver  and  Emma 

(Langworthy)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  31,  1837;  res.  1902,  151 
Allen  Street.  Buffalo,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Rutland,  Wis.,  Jan.  25,  1861, 
Emma  M.  Saw. 

Cyrus  W.  Babcock  and  his  son  Stanley  C.  are  both  prac- 
ticing physicians  of  Buffalo,  N.  Y. 

Children : 

Ella,"  b.  Rutland,  Wis.,  May  30,  1862 ;  res.  1902,  4^7  W.  Seventh 
Street.  Erie.  Pa.;  m.  Sept.  8,  1891,  Arthur  C.  Hills.  Child: 
Mary  E.,'"  b.  Dec.  27,  1892. 

Carrie  L.,  b.  Oregon,  Wis.,  Nov.  30,  1863;  res.  1902,  Norwich, 
N.   Y. ;    m.   Nov.  30,   1896,   Fred  Fairchild. 

Stanley  C,  M.D.,  b.  Oct.  12,  1867;  res.  1902,  151  Allen  Street,  Buf- 
falo ;    widower.     No  children  living. 

1015.  JuLiA^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  C.  and  Emma  (Lang- 
worthy) Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.   Persia,  N.  Y.,   Feb.   27,    1843;    ^-   Holly,   Mich., 
Sept.   12.   1883;    m.  Persia,  Oct.   15,   1863,  Milton  M.  Burn- 
ham,  b.  Dayton,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  22,   1839.     He  m.   (2)  Achsah 
Babcock,  sister  of  Julia,  and  res.  1902,  East  Jordan,  Mich. 
Children : 

Marion  M.,  b.  Holly.  Aug.  18,  1869;    d.  East  Jordan,  Sept.  7.   1886. 

Olive  Lucy,  b.  Persia,  Mar.  7,  1871 ;  res.  1902,  Petoskey,  Mich. ; 
m.  East  Jordan,  Mar.  28.  1892,  John  C.  son  of  John  C.  and  Mary 
Jane    (Shepard)    Wilde,  b.   Bedford,   Mich.,  July  4,   1868. 


REV.    OSCAR    BABCOCK. 


Page  405. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  405 

1016.  Calista  Ellen*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Emma 

(Langworthy)  Babcock  (John,  Josepli,  Ichabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.   Persia,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,   1845;    rn-   Persia, 
July  27,  1865,  John  S.  Philbrick,  b.  Oct.  30,  1844;   res.  1902, 
Buffalo,  N.  Y. 
Child: 

Georgia  Emma.  b.  Holly.   Mich.,  Oct.  30,   1868;    d.  Apr.  9,  1886. 

1017.  George  C*  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Emma  (Lang- 
worthy)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  May  27,  1848;  res.  1902,  Persia; 
m.  (i)  Persia,  Oct.  5,  1869,  Emma,  dau.  of  Augustus  and 
Ann  (Rich)  Snyder,  b.  Persia,  June  4,  1850,  d.  Persia,  June 
23,  1892;  m.  (2)  Ellicottville,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  17,  1895,  Olive 
Bryant,  dau.  of  Levi  and  Cornelia  (Hide)  Bryant,  b.  Ellicott- 
ville, Jan.  4.  1867. 
Child  by  first  wife : 

Maud   A.,*  b.   Persia,  June  7,   1871  ;  res.   1901,   Dayton,   N.   Y. ;    m. 

Persia,    Clarence,     son    of    Jolin  and     Margaret    Gouldsborough 

Becker,  b.  Collins,  June  lo,  1870.  Children:    Howard,  b.  Apr.  17, 
1896;    Gordon,  b.  Apr.  7,  1899. 

1018.  Rev.  Oscar*   Babcock,  son  of  Rev.   George  C.  and 
Alniira    (Brown)    Babcock    (John,    Joseph.    Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Mar.  15.  1835;  res.  1903.  North  Loup, 
Neb.;  m.  (i)  June  i,  1858.  Metta.  dau.  of  Ira  S.  and  Nancy 
(Warner)  Bristol;  m.  (2)  Hattie  Payne;  m.  (3)  Mrs.  Ade- 
line (Johnson)  Preston. 

Elder  Oscar  Babcock  was  twice  elected  to  the  Legislature 
in  \\'isconsin.  and  then  led  a  pioneer  colony,  in  1872,  mostly 
S.  D.  Baptists,  to  the  beautiful  North  Loup  Valley,  at  North 
Loup,  Neb.  He  was  pastor  of  this  church  for  many  years, 
and  for  seventeen  consecutive  years  superintendent  of  the  Sab- 
bath school.  He  was  elected  County  Judge,  and  afterward 
elected  as  a  member  of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  Ne- 
braska, in  each  of  which  positions  he  served  conspicuously. 
His  personality  is  most  striking,  and  to  know  him  is  to  become 
a  warm  friend  and  admirer.  Few  men  have  been  more  uni- 
versally loved  and  respected. 

Children : 

Edwin  J.,  b.  ;    res.   1903,  North  Loup;    m.  Jessie  True.     They 

have  four  children :    Kate,  Oscar.  Edwin,  and  Archie  Bristol. 

Arthur  H.,  b.  ;    res.   1903,  North  Loup;    m.  Esther  Davis. 

Two  children  ;    Metta  and   Albert. 

Myra,    b.    ;     res.    1903,    North    Loup;     m.   William   E.    Gowan. 

They  have  two  children. 


4o6  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

George,   b.  ;    m.   Omaha,   Neb.,   Cora  Cliaffee.     They  have  one 

child,   Mary.     George  is   Secretary  of  .the  Y.   M.   C.   A.,   Mexico 
City,   Mexico. 

1019.  Delia*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Rev.  George  C.  and  Almira 

(Brown)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  9,  1838;  res.  1902,  North  Loup, 
Neb.;    m.   Dakota,  Wis.,   Sept.   28,    1859,   Henry  A.,   son  of 
Jacob  Chase,  b.  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  12,  1837. 
Chikl : 

Nellie,  b.  Dakota;  res.  1902,  North  Loup;  ni.  North  Loup,  Dec.  28, 
1884,  E.  W.   Black. 

1019a.  Heman  a.*  Babcock,  son  of  Rev.  George  C.  and 
Almira  (Brown)  Babcock  (John,  Joseph,  Ichabod, 
John,  John.  James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  May  19,  1842;  res.  Lin- 
cohi.  Neb.;  m.  Dakota,  Wis.,  Aug.  28,  1861,  Retta,  dau.  of 
Ira  S.  and  Nancy  (Warner)  Bristol 

Mr.  Babcock  served  four  years  in  the  i6th  Wisconsin  Vol- 
imteers  in  the  Civil  War.  In  1872  he  moved  from  Dakota, 
Wis.,  to  North  Loup,  Neb.,  was  elected  the  first  Sheriff  of  the 
County  (V^alley  County),  and  later  he  was  County  Clerk  for 
eight  and  one  half  years  and  assisted  in  organizing  the  First 
National  Bank  of  the  county.  He  was  afterward  elected  Audi- 
tor of  Public  Accounts  of  the  State  of  Nebraska.  He  also 
possessed,  to  a  most  remarkable  degree,  the  power  of  making 
friends  of  everyone  whom  he  met,  and  is  universally  esteemed 
in  the  State,  where  he  has  been  active  in  developing  its  re- 
sources from  pioneer  days. 

Children : 

Everett  Cicero,"  b.  Dakota,  June  27,   1863  ;    m.  Laura  Vale  Bristol ; 

res.  Lincoln.     They  have  two  children :    Vale'"  and  Harry. 
Royal  Oscar,   b.  ;    m.   Mamie  . 

1020.  Tristam    D.*    Babcock,    son   of   Oliver   and    Martha 

(Dickens)  Babcock  (Daniel,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Avondale,  R.  I.,  Dec.  10,  1842;  res.  1902, 
Avondale;  m.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Aug.  3,  1868,  Charlotte, 
dau.  of  843  Rev.  James  and  Charlotte  (Babcock)  Irish,  b.  Al- 
fred, N.  Y.,  Oct.  28,  1843. 
Child : 

William  Tristam,*  b.  Avondale,  July  5,  i86g;  d.  Avondale,  Feb.  17, 
1809;  m.  Sept.  27,  1892,  Minnie,  dau.  of  James  and  Sarah 
(Gavitt)  Austin;  res.  1902,  Avondale.  They  had  one  child.  Mar- 
tha,'" b.  Avondale,  Jan.  31,   1899. 


HERMAN    A.    BABCOCK. 


Page  406. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  407 

1021.  James  Oliver'*  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Martlia 

(Dickens)  Babcock  (Daniel,  Joseph,  Icliabod,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  5,  1859;  res.  1902, 
Avondale,  R.  1.;  ni.  North  Franklin,  Conn.,  Sept.  23,  1884, 
Louise,  dan.  of  James  and  Sarah  (Gavitt)  Austin,  b.  Charles- 
town,  R.  I.,  Apr.  17,  1859. 
Child : 

Louis  A.,  b.  Dec.  10.  1890. 

1022.  Frederic^  Babcock,  son  of  Ezra  and  Eunice  (Palm- 
er)   Babcock    (Daniel,   Joseph,    Ichabod,   John,   John, 

James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  27,  1858;  res.  1902,  Westerly; 
m.  Westerly,  Dec.  25,  1880,  A.  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  H.  P.  and 
B.  A.  (Kenyon)  Chapman,  b.  W'esterly,  Oct.  i,  1861. 
Children,  b  .Westerly: 

Grace  E.,  b.  Nov.  8,   1886. 
Dorothy,  b.  Aug.  8,  1889. 
Harold  F.,  b.  May  31,   1891. 
Helen  M.,  b.  Feb.  21,  1895. 

1023.  Charlotte**    Babcock,    dau.    of    Ezra    and    Eunice 

(Palmer)    Babcock    (Daniel,   Joseph,    Ichabod,    John, 
John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  June  20,   1865;    res.   1902, 
Plymouth,   N.   H. ;    m.   Westerly,  July  30,    1890,   Austin   H. 
Keves,  b.  Westerlv,  Oct.  i,  1861. 
Child : 

Donald,  b.  Feb.  7,  1892  (?). 

1024.  George  Rhodes^  Babcock,  son  of  James  Rhodes  and 
Amelia  (Barnum)   Babcock  (James,  Joseph,  Ichabod, 

John.  John.  James),  b.  Tremont.  111..  Mar.  24.  1842;  d.  July 
^o,  1895;  m.  Oct.  16,  1867,  Caroline  Amesbury,  d.  Feb.  25, 
1878. 

He  was  for  many  years  in  the  banking'  business  in  Pekin, 
111.  The  following  is  copied  from  the  Pekin  Morning  Times : 
"He  was  the  living  exponent  of  kindness,  generosity,  and  hos- 
pitality :  socially  he  was  the  most  genial  of  men." 

Children : 

James  Adelbert.  b.  Dec.  24,   1869;    d.  Apr.   19,   1872. 
Eugene  N.,  b.  Oct.  23.   1873;    d.  Oct.,   1877. 
Mary  Alice,  b.  Dec.  4,   1875. 

1025.  Julia  A.^  Satterlee,  dau.  of  Darius  and  Thankful 

(Babcock)    Satterlee    (Elihu,  Joseph,   Ichabod,   John, 


4o8  TJic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

John,  James),  b.  Hartsville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  14,  1845;    ^^s.  1903, 
Alfred  Station,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Alfred,  July  4,  1863,  Cyrenus  P. 
Ormsby,  son  of  Daniel  and  Sarah  D.  (Satterlee)  Ormsby,  b. 
Hornellsville,  Jan.  28,   1842. 
Children : 

Alton,  b.  Alfred,  Apr.  30,   1867;    d.  Hornellsville,  Jan.  2,  1885. 
Ethel  I.,  b.  Hornellsvilie,  Sept.  2^,  1875 ;    d.  Jan.   10,  1877. 
Amelia,  b.  Hornellsville,  Aug.  25,  1883;    d.  Sept.  2,  1883. 

1026.  Benjamin  S.**  Van  Buskirk,  son  of  Benjamin  and 
Celia   (Babcock)   Van  Buskirk   (Elihu,  Joseph,  Icha- 

bod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  July  26,  1852;    res.  1902,  Purdy 
Creek,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Aug.  14,  1878,  Eva  R.,  dau.  of  James  and 
Harriet  (Wallace)  Cook. 
Children : 

Carrie  I.,  b.  Aug.  8,   1885. 
Floyd,  b.  May  i,  1888. 

1027.  Emeline*  Van  Buskirk,  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Celia 

(Babcock)    Van    Buskirk    (Elihu,    Joseph,    Ichabod, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Mar.  7,  1854;    res.  1902,  Alfred  Sta- 
tion, N.  Y. ;   m.  July  6,  1872,  Herbert  Edwards. 
Children : 

Agnes,  b.  Aug.  25,  1889;    d.  Aug.  27,  1889. 
Fred  M.,  b.  Dec.  5,  1891. 

1028.  Su.san  Babcock^  Hopkins,  dau.  of  Lemuel  and  Han- 
nah   (Babcock)    Hopkins    (George,   Joseph,    Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  June  29,   1844;    res. 
1902,  84  Lancaster  Street,  Albany,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Albany,  May  29, 
1868.  Samuel  L.,  son  of  G.  and  Harriet  (Lyman)  Munson,  b. 
Huntington,  Mass.,  June  14,  1844. 
Children,  b.  and  res.  in  Albany : 

Harriet  L. ;  Anna,  deceased;    Edward;    Paul;    Samuel,  Jr.;    Amey 
F.  ;    Robert. 

1029.  Hannah  Ross^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Daniel  Lee  and 
Margaret  (Schuyler)  Babcock  (George,  Joseph,  Icha- 
bod, John,  John,  James),  b.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1869;  res. 
1902,  71  Grand  Street,  Albany;  m.  Albany,  Sept.  10,  1890, 
William  J.,  son  of  William  and  Bridget  (Dorney)  Halpen,  b. 
Albany,  May  25,  1865. 

Children : 

Ellen  Schuyler,  b.  July  6,  i8gi. 
Margaret  Babcock,  b.  Nov.  27,  1893. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  409 

1030.  Margaret  M.*^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Daniel  Lee  and  Mar- 
garet  (Schnylcr)   Babcock   (George,  Joseph,  Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Albany,   N.   Y.,  Oct.    18,   1870;    res. 
1902,  Chatham  Center,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Albany,  Nov.  21,    1894, 
James  V.  V.,  son  of  A.  Ford  and  Katherine   (Van  Volken- 
bnrg)  Williams,  b.  Chatham  Center,  Apr.  25,  1870. 
Children,  b.  Chatham  Center : 

Schuyler,   b.   Sept.   25,    1895. 

Katherine  Van  Volkcnburg,  b.  Jan.  4,   1897. 

1031.  Elizabeth   W.^   Haff,   dan.   of  John  and   Elizabeth 

(Babcock)  Haff  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Stephen,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  New  York  City,  Dec.  11,  1838;  res.  1902,  Kala- 
mazoo, Mich.;  m.  Evansville,  Ind.,  Mar.  9,  1865,  George  H., 
son  of  Joseph  and  Eliza  Kidder,  b.  Perkinsville,  N.  Y.,  June  5, 
1824: 

Children,  b.  Kalamazoo : 

William   Edgar,   b    May   15,   1867;    res.    1902,   Kalamazoo;    m.  July 

17,  1900,  Charlotte  Kent. 
Kate  J.,  b.  July  10,  1877;    res.  1902,  Kalamazoo;    unm. 

1032.  Mary  Viele^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Charles  and  Amelia 

(Hopkins)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Stephen,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Evansville,  Ind.;  res.  1902,  Los  Angeles, 
Cal. ;  m.  Evansville,  Henry  C,  son  of  Asa  and  Matilda 
(Hunt)  Gooding,  b.  Greenfield,  Ind.  They  have  two  children, 
Gertrude  and  Clay  Paul,  both  b.  in  Evansville,  and  res.  in  Los 
Angeles. 

1033.  Oliver^  Babcock.  son  of  Elisha  and  Agnes  (David- 
son)   Babcock    (Oliver,   Oliver,   Stephen.  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Evansville,  Ind.;    d.  Evansville;    m.  Morgansfield, 
Ky.,  June  10,  1872,  Mary  G.,  dan.  of  Dr.  and  Martha  (John- 
son) Hodge,  b.  Morgansfield;    res.  1902,  Los  Angeles. 
Children : 

Agnes  L.,  b.  ;    m.  Herbert  Jones;    res.  1902.  Chicago,  111. 

Mary  D.,  b.  ;    res.    1902,  Los  Angeles;   unm. 

1034.  Elisha  Spurr^  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Elisha  and  Agnes 

(Davidson)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Stephen,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Evansville,  Ind.,  May  i.  1849;  res.  1902, 
Coronado  Beach.  Cal.:  m.  Georgetown,  O..  July  18,  1870, 
Isabel,  dau.  of  John  and  Susan  (Patterson)  Graham,  b.  Cin- 
cinnati, O.,  Sept.  29,  1850;  d.  Coronado  Beach,  Jan.  14,  1902. 


410  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Evansville: 

Elisha  S.,  Jr.,  b.  May  28,  1871  ;    d.  July  29,  1872. 

Arnold   Edgar,   h.   Aug.   21.  1873;     res.    1902,   Coronado;    m.   Santa 

Anna,  Cal.,  Dec.  i,  1894,  Edith  L.  Snider,  of  Chicago,  b.  Rock 
Island,  111. 

Graham  Elisha,  b.  Oct.  18,  1875;  res.  1902,  Coronado;  m.  Glen- 
wood  Springs,  Col.,  Sept.  22,  1895,  B.  Myers,  of  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
b.  Alton,  111. 

1035.  Mary  Kate^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Henry  O.  and  Mary 

(Honser)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Stephen,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Evansville,  Ind. ;  d.  Evansville,  Feb.  22, 
1890;  m.  Evansville,  Harry,  son  of  James  and  Eliza  (Ander- 
son) Veatch,  b.  Rockport,  Ind.,  May  12,  1846;  res.  1902, 
Savannah,  Ga. 

Children,  b.  Evansville: 

Henry  B.,  b.  Jan.  2,   1876;    res.   1902,  Evansville. 
1458  Arthur  C,"  b.  Oct.  17,  1878;    m.  Caroline  Evans. 

Mary  K.,   b.    Sept.    16,    1887;     res.    1902,    Rockford,    Ind. 

1036.  Lucy   A.^    Babcock,    dan.    of   Henry   O.    and    Mary 

(Houser)    Babcock    (Oliver,    Oliver,    Stephen,    John, 
John,  James),  b.  Evansville,  Ind.;    res.  1902,  Evansville;    m. 
Evansville.  Feb.  28,   1882,  James  T.,  son  of  James  and  Ann 
(Burtis)   Walker,  b.  Evansville. 
Children,  b.  and  res.  at  Evansville : 

Henry  Babcock.  b.  Mar.   10,   1885. 
James  T.,  b.  Dec.  22,  1888. 
Mary  Houser,  b.  Sept.  24,  1891. 

1037.  Guilford  Carlile^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  O.  and 

Mary  (Houser)  Babcock  (Olivier,  Oliver,  Stephen, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Evansville,  Ind.,  Mar.  8,  1874;  address 
1902,  1917  Park  Row  Building,  New  York  City;  m.  Evans- 
ville, Oct.  17,  1894,  Alida,  dan.  of  Percival  and  Alida  (Stnr- 
ges)  Kelsey,  b.  De  Koven,  Ky.,  Sept,  29,  1874. 
Children : 

Alida  Kelsey,  b.  Evansville,   Sept.   i,   1895. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.   Evansville,  July  25,   1897. 
Guilford  Carlile,  b.  Cambridge,  Mass.,  Jan.  5,  1899. 

1038.  Mary  E.^  Van  Antwerp,  dan.  of  Cornelins  and  Snsan 

(Babcock)  Van  Antwerp  (Christopher,  Christopher, 
William,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Jnne  29,  181 5;  m.  Albany, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.,  1839,  George  N.  Bnrdick,  b.  Westerly,  N.  Y., 
1819. 


HENRY    HOLMES    BABCOCK. 


Page  412. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  411 

In  childliood  she  lived  with  her  grandfather,  Christopher, 
antl  with  him  visited  his  friends  in  Stunington,  Conn.  She 
w^as  educated  at  the  Sarsfield  Seminary  and  the  Female  Acad- 
emy of  Albany.    She  became  a  school  teacher. 

Children : 

Georgiana.  b.  1840;    res.  1902,  222  Lark  Street,  Albany;    m.  William 

Winne,  a  dentist. 
G.  Uudley,  b.   1842;    res.   1902.  344  Hudson  Avenue,  Albany. 
Mary  E.,  b.   1845 ;    res.   1902,  382  Hamilton  Street,  Albany.     She  is 

a  school  teacher. 
Josephine,    b.    1853;     res.    1902,    382    Hamilton    Street,    Albany;     m. 

William   K.   Templeton. 

1039.  Mary  Elizabeth*  Lisbee,  dan.  of  Rev.  George  B.  and 
Elizabeth    (Babcock)    Lisbee    (Christopher,    Christo- 
pher,   William,   John,   John,   James),   b.    ;    m.    William 

Updyke. 

Children : 

Susan   Amelia,   b.   ;     m.   Leander   Bartlett;     res.    1900,   408   Elk 

Street,  Albany,  N.  Y. 

Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  ;    d.  New  York  City;    m.  Ambrose  Peacock. 

Elinore,  b.  ;    d.  New  York  City;    m.  Elmer  Wands.     Had  one 

son. 

1040.  Hiram  A.*  Babcock,  son  of  Elias  and  Sarah   (An- 
gell)  Babcock,  (Jeremiah,  Christopher,  William,  John, 

John,  James),  b.  Sept.   13,  1818;    d.  Mar.  15,  1855;    m.  Jan. 
21,  1 84 1.  Ann  J.  Penfield,  b.  May  21,  1819,  d.  Nov.  7,  1854. 
Children : 

Infant  son.  b.  Dec.  10,  1841. 
Mary  E..  b.  Apr.  21,   1843 ;    d.  July  22.   1865. 
Martha  J.,  b.  Aug.  11,  1843;    d.  Apr.  23,  1887. 
1459  Jesse  P.,"  b.  Nov.  24,  1847;    m.  Anna  Stimpson. 
Hiram  A.,  b.  Sept.   14,   1851  ;  d. 

1041.  Eunice  A.*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Sarah  (An- 
gell)  Babcock  (Jeremiah.  Christopher,  W^illiam,  John, 

John,  James),  b.  Champion,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  23,  1825;  d.  Low- 
ville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  28,  1896;  m.  Champion,  Jan.  17,  1844, 
Joseph  M.  Gardner,  b.  Norwich.  N.  Y.,  Sept.  18,  18 19,  d.  Low- 
ville.  Jan.  15,  1900. 

Children,  b.  Champion : 

Sarah  M.,  b.  Apr.  17,  1845;  res.  1902,  Howesville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Low- 
ville,  Jan.  i,  1875,  Jacob  A.,  son  of  John  G.  and  Anna  (Lutz) 
Niebergall.  b.  Feb.  5,  1843. 

Emma,*  b.  Apr.  18,  1849;  res.  1902,  Lowville ;  m.  Copenhagen, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  i,  1868.  Henry,  son  of  John  and  Anna  (Lutz)  Nie- 
bergall. b.  Port  Levden.  N.  Y..  Apr.  14,  1845,  d.  Watertown, 
Feb.  18,  1882.    Child:    Mary  E.,'"  b.  Montague,  July  29,  1869. 


412  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1042.  Henry    H.^     Babcock,    son    of    Joshua  and   Laura 

(Holmes)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher,  WilHam, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  28,  1821 ;  res. 
1902,  Watertown,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Felts  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  25, 
1 84 1,  Eliza,  dau.  of  Joel  C.  and  Betsy  (Gould)  Wheeler,  b. 
Westminster,  Vt.,  May  i,  1820,  d.  Watertown,  June  29,  1900. 
Children,  b.  Watertown : 

1460  Marion  R.,''  b.  Nov.  28,  1842;    m.  Lloyd  Woodruff. 

Herbert  Perley,'"'  b.  Nov.  28,  1842;    d.  Apr.  24,  1884;    m.  Waterville, 

N.   Y.,   Oct.    14,   1875,   Rose,   dau.   of  Jobn  and   Mariette    (Priest) 

Monroe,  b.  Waterville,  Apr.  25,  1853;    re.s.  1902,  Watertown.     Had 

one  child,  Henry  H.^" 
Amelia  Laura,  b.  Dec.  25,   1848;    d.   May  15,   1874;    m.  Watertown, 

June  9,   1870,  Anson  R.  Flower,  b.  Theresa,  N.  Y.,  June  20,  1843. 

No  children. 
George  Henry,  b.   Oct.  25,    1852;    res.   1902,   Watertown;    ni.   Saint 

Albans,  N.  Y.,  Oct.   14,   1874,  Alice  L.,  dau.  of  Levi  and  Ellen  S. 

(Meech)   Webster,  b.  Saint  Albans,  Feb.  9,   1852.     No  children. 
Ida  May,  b.  Aug.  28,  1854;    res.  1902,  601  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York 

City;    ni.  Dec.  31,  1878,  Anson  R.,  son  of  Nathan  and  Mary  Ann 

(Boyle)   Flower.     No  children. 
Adella,'*  b.   Aug.   31,   1856;    res.    1902,   Watertown;    m.   Watertown, 

June  4,  1879,  Richard,  son  of  Richard  and  Helen  (Osgood)   Hun- 

gerford,    b.    Watertown,    Sept.    2J,    1854.      Child :     Ida    Rose,'"   b. 

Watertown,  Nov.   11,   1880. 
Frederick   W.,''   b.    Apr.   26,    1858;     res.    1902,   Watertown;     m.    (i) 

Watertown,  Apr.  28,   1881,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Frederick  Haas,  b. 

New   York  City,  Jan.  7,    i860,  d.   Watertown,   Feb.  28,   1895 ;    m. 

(2)   Dec,   1897,'  Ida  M.  Willey,  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  June  12,  i860. 

Children,   b.   Watertown;     Frederick   Howard,'"  b.    Mar.   4,   1887; 

Alice  Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  31,   1888. 
Frank  Earnest,   b.   Nov.  9,   1861  ;     res.    1902,   Watertown. 

1043.  Perly    J.^     Babcock,     son    of    Joshua    and    Laura 

(Holmes)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John.  James),  b.  Felts  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  31,  1826;  d. 
Aug.  24,  1863;  m.  (i)  Oct.  17,  1853,  Sarah  E.  Furness,  b. 
Nov.  3,  1836,  d.  Dec.  22,  1858;  m.  (2)  Helen  M.  Green.  She 
d.  at  the  home  of  H.  H.  Babcock,  Watertown. 
Children  by  first  wife: 

Charles  P.,  b.  Sept.  6,  1854;    d.  Bradford,  Pa. 
Carrie  S.,  b.  ;    d.  . 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Ellen  M.,  b.  Nov.  30,  1861 ;    d.  young. 

Mary  L.,  b.  Mar.  31,  1863;    m.  James  Lane;    res.  1902,  Oil  City,  Pa. 

1044.  George    D.^    Babcock,    son    of    Joshua   and   Laura 

(Holmes)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Felts  Mills.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  6,  1834;  res. 
1902,  Mexico,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  May  8,  1861,  Mary 


GEORGE    D.    BABCOCK. 


Page  412. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  413 

E.,  dan.  of  John  and  lianict   (Cuiie)   O'Neill,  b.  Waterloo, 
Apr.  22,  1 84 1. 
Children  : 

Florence  H.,  h.  Waterloo.  Nov.  ig.  1862;  res.  1902,  Mexico;  m. 
Mexico,  Aug.  ,30.  iSq.V  George  P.  Johnson. 

Henry  P..  b.  Jan.  4.  1864;  res.  1902,  Watertown.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Water- 
town.  Apr.  25,   1901.   Maud  M.  Andros. 

Grace  L.,  b.  Me.xico,  Nov.  5,  1865:    res.  1902,  Afexico;    unm. 

Mabel,  b.  Mexico,  June  14,  1868 ;  res.  1902,  Fayetteville,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Mexico,  Nov.  27,  1895,  John  D.  Nichols,  1).  Fayetteville.  No 
children. 

Amelia,  b.  Mexico,  July  16,  1870:  res.  1902,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.; 
ni.   Mexico,  June  10,   1891,  Fred  P.  Himes,  b.  Oswego,  N.  Y. 

1045.  Adeit.a   Roxanna*   Babcock,   dan.  of  Ambro.se  and 

Hiildah  (Babcock)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher, 
William,  John.  John,  James),  b.  Champion,  X.  Y.,  July  7, 
1829;  res.  1902,  Carthag-e,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Champion,  Oct.  8, 
1854  (  ?),  Orville  L.,  son  of  Isaac  and  ]\Iary  (Willard)  Cutler, 
b.  Brookline,  Vt.,  Jan.  16.  1820. 
Children : 

Mary  Althea,  b.   Aug.  28,    1855 ;    res.   1902,  Worcester,   Mass. ;    m. 

Carthage,    Dec.    22.    1880,    Oakley,    son   of    Benjamin   Walker,    b. 

Rutland,  N.   Y..   Feb.   11,   1855. 
Charles  Ambrose,  b.  Carthage,  Feb.  9,  1859;    d.  Mar.  15,  1861. 
Jennie   Isabelle,   b.    Carthage,   Dec.   22,    1867 :     res.    1902,   Carthage ; 

m.   Apr.   28.    1891,   George   D.   Rythur,   son   of  Charles  and   Mary 

(De  Groot)   Rythur,  b.  and  res.  in  Carthage. 

1046.  Maria  Amev^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Ambrose  and  Huldah 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Jeremiah.  Christopher,  William, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Feb.  23,  1835;   res.  1902,  25  Westland 

Street,  Worcester,  Mass.;    m.  Feb.  22,  1855,  Marcus,  son  of 

George  Coughlin,  b.  and  d.    in  Champion,  N.  Y. 

Children : 

Willie  Babcock.  b.  June  8.   1857;    d.  Jan.  7,  1859. 
Eva  Maria,  b.   Nov.   14,   1867;    m.   Sept.   15,   1896,  John  Tracers,  of 
Worcester.     Has  one  child,   Robert. 

1047.  Althea  Josephine^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Ambrose  and 

Huldah  (Babcock)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher, 
\\'illiam,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Champion,  N.  Y.,  July  n, 
1838;  res.  1902,  Champion;  m.  Chamnion.  June  30,  1859, 
Obed  W..  son  of  P.  and  Lina  (Randall)  Pierce,  b.  Rutland, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  9,  1829. 
Children : 

Albert  Oscar,  b.  Champion.  Jan.  11.  1867:  res.  1902.  .356  W.  Ii6th 
Street,  New  York:  m.  New  York.  §ept.  17,  1894.  Jennie  Bryne. 
b.   New  York  Cit^^ 

Lina  May,  b.  Feb.  27,  1877;    res.  1902,  Champion. 


414  7^^'^  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1048.  Austin  Angel**  Babcock,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Julia 

(Frances)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Felts  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  ii,  1827;  m. 
Henderson,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  7,  1852,  Arcelia  M.,  dan.  of  Stephen 
and  Charlotte  (Dunham)  Crittenton,  b.  Henderson,  Aug.  18, 
1830.  Both  res.  1902,  Ogdensburg. 
Children : 

Sarah  M.,  b.  Rome,  N.  Y.,  Nov.   14,   1853;    res.   1902,  Ogdensburg; 

unm. 
Charlotte  T.,  b.   Ogdensburg,   Nov.   11,   1856. 
Frederic  S.,  b.  Apr.  21,   i860;    d.  June  5,   i860. 
Jason  W.,  b.  May  4,   1862;    d.  Sept.  18,   1862. 
Myron  Gleason,  b.  Dec.  19,  1865  ;    res.  1902,  Ogdensburg ;    unm. 
Julia  A.,  b.  Apr.  17,  1870;   res.  1902,  16  W.  104th  Street,  New  York. 

Is  a  teacher  in  the  New  York  Public  Schools. 
Bessie  A.,   b.  July  31,    1872;    res.    1902,   16  W.    104th   Street,   New 

York.     Is  a  Stenographer  in  the  Chesapeake  &  Ohio  R.   R.  Co., 

New   York. 

1049.  Harriet   E.^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Jeremiah   and  Julia 

(Frances)  Babcock  (Jeremiah,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Felts  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  5,  1838;  d. 
Watertown,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  26,  1895 ;  m.  De  Kalb,  N.  Y.,  May  5, 
i8s6,  John  A.  Brown,  b.  St.  Albans,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1818,  d. 
CaVthage,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1882. 
Children : 

Ada  A.,^  b.  De  Kalb,  Jan.  27,  1859;  res.  Palenville.  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Carthage,  May  27,  1885,  Mansfield,  son  of  James  and  Melinda 
(Hamon)  Gardner,  b.  Palenville,  Apr.  3,  1859.  Children:  Linda, 
B.,'"  b.  Feb.  26,  1887;  Harold,  b.  Feb.  9,  1889;  Luella  V.,  b. 
Jan.  18,  1895. 

Alice,  b.  Wellsville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  5,  1861 ;    d.  Carthage,  Feb.  5,  1865. 

1050.  Phebe  Catherine^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Stephen  and 
Mary  (Burch)  Babcock  (Stephen,  Christopher,  Wil- 
liam, John,  John,  James),  b.  Granville,  Mass.,  Mar.  29,  1839; 
d.  Simsbury,  Conn.,  July  i,  1862;  m.  Simsbury,  Feb.  8,  1858, 
James,  son  of  Charles  and  Uranea  (Bently)  Hunt,  b.  Cole- 
brook,  Conn.,  Mar.  28,  1836,  d.  Colebrook,  Feb.,  1877. 

Child: 

1461  Stephen,"  b.  July  15,  i860;    m.   (i)  Myra  Pixley;    m.   (2)   Mary  L. 
Busha. 

1051.  Sarah    M.^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Stephen    and    Mary 

(Burch)  Babcock  (Stephen,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.-  Granville,  Mass.,  Dec.  14,  1841 ;  d. 
Simsbury,  Conn.,  Dec.  11,  1884;  m.  Simsbury,  Dec.  29,  1861, 


Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  415 

Apollas,  son  of  Chester  and  Elizabeth  (Andrews)  Wilcox,  b. 
Siiiisbury,  Apr.  18,  1838. 
Children : 

Mary  S..  b.  Canton.  Conn.,  June  21,  1865;  m.  Union  City,  Conn., 
June  5.  1885,  Walter  L.,  son  of  Robert  and  Julia  (Welton)  Ben- 
ham,   b.   Waterville,  Conn..   Oct.  21,   1861.     No  children. 

George  A.,   b.   Simsbury.   Oct.  9.    1869;    d.  Jan.  28,    1897. 

Stephen  H.,'"'  b.  Simsbury.  July  16,  1872;  m.  Union  City,  Dec.  31, 
1892,  Inez  L.,  dau.  of  Enoch  L.  and  Florence  (Noble)  Broad- 
bent,  b.  Hindsdale,  June  6.  1873.  Children:  Helen  L.,'"  b.  July 
12,    1894,  Georgiana.  b.  Jan.  31,   1897. 

Sarah,  b.  Aug.   13,   1879. 

1052.  LucRETiA  Maria^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Lticre- 
tia  (Davis)  Babcock  (Stephen,  Christopher,  William, 

John,  John.  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Oct.  12,  1839;   res. 
1902,  Stonington;   m.  Stonington,  Sept.  26,  1865,  Samuel  H., 
son  of  Samuel  and  Harriet  (Haskell)  Chesebro,  b.  Stonington, 
Dec.  8,  1838.    He  is  a  merchant  in  Stonington. 
Child : 

Pauline,  b.  Stonington,  Aug.  3,   1879;    unm. ;    res.  1902,  Stonington. 

1053.  Elias^  Babcock,  son  of  Elias  and  Liicretia   (Davis) 
Babcock  (Stephen,  Christopher,  W^illiam,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  Town  of  Stonington,  Nov.  24,  1843;  ^-  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1888;  m.  Stonington  Borough,  Conn.,  Oct.  28, 
1867,  Alice  D.,  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Eunice  (Stevens)  Han- 
cox,  b.  Stonington  Borough,  Aug.  10,  1845;  ^^•^-  1902, 
Brooklvn. 
Child : 

Maria  Chesebro,  b.  Stonington,  Sept.  18.  1868;  unm.;  res.  1902, 
Brooklyn. 

1054.  Delilah^     Babcock,     dau.    of    Phineas   and   Esther 

(Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  William, 
John.  John,  James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Nov.  8,  1835; 
res.  1900,  Erie,  Pa. ;  m.  Harbor  Creek,  Pa.,  Harley  Adams, 
son  of  Jeremiah  and  Catherine  (Bowen)  Adams,  b.  Erie,  1823, 
d.  Harbor  Creek,  July  i,  1868. 
Children,  b.  Harbor  Creek : 

Mary  J.,  b.  Oct.  24,   1852;    res.   1900,  Erie  City;    m.   Harbor  Creek, 

1872,   Newell  Heath. 
John  D..  b.  Jan.   i,   1854;    res.  1900,  Harbor  Creek;    m.  North  East, 

Apr.  13,  1878,  Susan  Henkson. 
Henry   R.,   b.  July  2,    1855;     res.    1900.   Harbor   Creek;     m.    Ripley, 

N.  Y.,  Dec.  2,  1884,  Emma  Parker. 
Alice   A.,    b.    Jan.    23.    1857;     res.    1900,    Erie;     m.    Harbor    Creek, 

Dec.  31,   1879,  Frank  L.  Sillnian. 


4i6  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Jennie  S.,  b.  Aug.  31,   1859;    d.   Northville,   Pa.,   Apr.   17,   i8(/);    ni. 

Adrian,  Mich.,  Mar.  27,   1889,  Frank  Avery. 
Loveca   E.,   b.    Mar.   24,    1861 ;     res.    1900,    Erie;     m.   July   26,    1884, 

Vincent  Bowen. 
Phineas  F.,  b.  Jan.  23,   1864;    res.   1900,   Langdon   Station,   Sunnnit, 

N.  Y.;    m.  Ripley,  N.  Y..  Mar.  25,  1886. 

Frank  L.,  b.  Feb.  21,  1866,  d.  Mar.  2,  1874. 

1055.  Setii  H.^  Babcock,  son  of  Phineas  and  Esther  (Cole) 
Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  WiUiam,  John,  John, 

James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Mar.  22,  1844;    res.  1900,  Grand 
Mound,  la. ;  m.  De  Witt,  la.,  Aug.  20,  1872,  Sarah  Ann  Hite, 
b.  Canada,  Dec.  12,  1851. 
Children : 

John,  b.  . 

Avilda,   b.   Jan.    13,    1876;    m.   Grand   Mound,   Apr.   29,    1897,   Allen 

Miller. 
Jasper,  b.  Apr.   17,  1879. 
Jennie,  b.  Feb.  28,   1882. 

1056.  Sarah    J.'^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Phineas    and    Esther 

(Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  William,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  July  4,  1845;  '"^s.  1900, 
Eindley  Lake,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Findley  Lake,  Oct.  11,  1865,  Ebene- 
zer,  son  of  James  and  Janett  (Dorg)  Skellie,  b.  Findley  Lake, 
Aug.  16.  1842,  d.  July  2,  1898. 
Child: 

Minnie  G.,  b.  Findley  Lake,  Nov.  7,  1868;  d.  Findley  Lake,  Feb. 
21,  1894;  m.  Findley  Lake,  Nov.  11,  1891,  H.  Reid  Weaver,  b. 
Sept.  30,  1867.  No  children. 

1057.  WiNFiELD  ScoTT^  Babcock,  SOU  of  Phincas  and  Es- 
ther (Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  William, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  June  i,   1847;    res. 
1900,  Cattaraugus,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Otto,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  4,  1869,  Flor- 
ence, dau.  of  Thomas  and  Amanda  (Harrington)  Sherman,  b. 
Otto,  Oct.  8,  1853. 
Child : 

Jessie,  b.  Otto,  Nov.  29,  1876;    unm. 

1058.  Delilah  Ruth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Christopher  and 
Louisa  (Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  Wil- 
liam, John.  John,  James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  4.  1841 ;  res. 
1900,  North  East.  Pa.;  m.  (i)  North  East,  June  2,  t866, 
Charles,  son  of  John  and  Lucinda  Brown,  b.  Otto,  N.  Y.,  Apr. 
16,  1844.  d.  Oil  A^illey,  Pa.,  Dec.  4,   1880;    m.    (2)   Knapps 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  417 

Creek,  X.  V.,  Mar.  13,  1884,  James,  son  of  Samuel  and  Thank- 
ful  (Phillips)   Slater,  b.  Crawford,  Pa.,  Mar.  23,   1839.     No 
children  by  second  marriage. 
Children,  b.  North  East: 

William  E..  b.  May  10,  1867:    m.  July  24,   1889.  Mary  Eleanor  Cliff. 
Myrtle  L.,  b.  Feb.  6,  1872;    m.  July  16,  1888,  George  IMosher. 
John  D.,  b.  July  3,   1876;     res.  1900,  North  East;    unm. 

1059.  W'lLLi.wi**   Babcock,  son  of  Christopher  and  Louisa 

(Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  William,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9,  1846;  res.  1900,  North 
East,  Pa.;  m.  Greenfield,  Pa.,  Feb.  7,  1879,  Harriet,  dau.  of 
John  and  Mirah  (Allen)  Archer,  b.  Northville,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29, 
1846,  d.  North  East,  Jan.  20.  1898.  William  is  a  farmer. 
Children,  res.  North  East: 

Perry  J.,   b.   Gridleyville.    Pa..   Feb.   2,    1882. 
Emmet  E.,  b.  Feb.  10,  1884. 

1060.  Julia    Louise^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Christopher    and 

Louisa  (Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  Wil- 
liam, John,  John,  James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Nov.  10,  1856; 
res.  1900,  Knapps  Creek.  N.  Y. ;  m.  (i)  North  East.  July  4, 
1872,  Stephen  W.  Baker;  m.  (2)  Dunkirk,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  22, 
1883,  John  B.  Currie,  b.  Rhode  Island,  Apr.  4,  1841. 
Children  by  first  marriage : 

Burton  W..  b.  North  East.  Apr.  3.  1877. 
Donald,  b.  North  East.  Sept.  21.  1881. 

Children  by  second  marriage : 

Lillian,   b.   Duke   Center.   Pa..  July  2t,.   1887. 
John  B.,  b.  Duke  Center,   May   18.   1891. 

1061.  Annie   E.^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Joseph   and   Mary   B. 

(Cole)  Babcock  (Phineas,  Christopher,  W^illiam, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Oct.  3,  1842;  res. 
1900.  Des  Moines,  la.;  m.  Westfield.  N.  Y..  Sept.  21,  1865, 
Wilbur,  son  of  Ebenezer  and  Eunice  (Shattock)  Easton,  b. 
Greenfield,  Pa.,  Aug.  19,  1840. 

Children,  b.,  except  first,  at  Des  Moines: 

Geary,  b.  North  East.  Oct.  21,   1866. 
John  W.,  b.  May  29,   1870. 
James  W.,  b.   Dec.    17.    1871. 
Bessie  L..  b.  Dec.  23,   1874. 
A.  Nettie,  b.  May  15.  1877. 
George  W..  b.  Dec.   12.   1879. 
Sadie  E.,  b.  Apr.  12.  1883. 

27 


41 8  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1062.  hoviLL.v'^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Joseph    and    Mary    B. 

(Cole)     Bahcock     (I'hineas,     Christopher,  WilHani, 

John,    John,    James),    b.    North    East,    Pa.,    Oct,  7,   1847; 

res.    1900,  Des  Moines,  la.;    ni.  Des  Moines,  Jan.  28,  1877, 

H.  AHen,  son  of  Lyman   and   Alniira    (Wheaton)  Titus,  b. 
Vermont,  Feb.  24,  1835. 
Children : 

Willie  H.,  b.  Feb.  10,  1880. 
Julia  A.,  b.  Oct.  11,  1883. 

1063.  Henry    C.^    Babcock,    son   of   Thomas    and   Abigail 

(Wentworth)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Dec.  21,  1843;  ^^^-  1902,  Lebanon, 
N.  Y.  ;*  m.  Earlville,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  18,  1871.  Dora,  dau.  of  Wil- 
liam and  Lovina  (Fox)  Beach,  b.  Columl)us,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  12, 
1848. 

Children : 

Lizzie  A.,  b.   Lebanon,  July  23,    1872;    m.   Earlville,   Feb.   15,   1894, 

Eugene   N.,    son   of   Hartley   and   Sarah    (Williamson)    Poole,   b. 

Lebanon,  Nov.   19,   1871.     No  children. 
Fannie  A.,  b.  Lebanon,   Sept.  28,   1874;    m.   Earlville,  Feb.  15,   1894, 

Richard   J.,    son   of   Henry   and    Fanny   Faulkner,   b.    Canterbury, 

England,  Nov.  25,   1867.     No  children. 
Richard,  b.  Randallsville,   N.   Y.,   Sept.  7,   1879. 
Florence  A.,   b.   Lebanon,   Sept.    18,    1882. 

1064.  Mary   A.^    Babcock,    dau.    of   Thomas    and    Abigail 

(Wentworth)    Babcock    (Asa,    Christopher,    William, 

John,  John.  James),  b.  Feb.  24,  1847;  *^1-  Earlville,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 

27,   1895;    m.  Deansboro,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  7,   1871,  Adelbert  A., 

son  of  David  and  Delia  Stone,  b.  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  6,  1849. 

Child : 

Jennie  A.,  b.  Lebanon,  Sept.  19,  1872;    m.  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  29, 
1892,  Verne  Figary. 

1065.  James  H.  M.*^  Babcock.  son  of  Thomas  B.  and  Abigail 

(Wentworth)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Brockport,  N.  Y..  June  24,  1850;  res. 
1902,  6358  I^eoria  Street,  Chicago,  111. ;  m.  Elkhart,  Ind..  Nov. 
15,  1882,  Ida  L.,  dau.  of  Charles  H.  and  Jennette  J.  Peck.  He 
is  a  policeman. 

Children,  b.  Elkhart: 

Abbic  Leonette,  b.  Mar.  31,  1884. 

Harold,  b.  Nov.  16,  1892;    d.  Sept.  29,  1893. 

1066.  George  W.^   Babcock,   Jr.,   son   of  George  W.   and 
Mary    K.     (Richards)     Babcock     (Asa,    Christopher, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  419 

William,  John,  John.  James),   b.    Norwicli.   Conn.,    Dec.   2t^, 
1835;    d.    Juniata,    Neb.,    IMay    8,    189 1  ;    m.  Leonardsville, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  10,  1861,  Ella  A.  Robinson,  b.  Leonardsville;   res. 
1900,  Pasadena,  Cal. 
Children : 

Carrie,  b.  Tully.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  24,  1865;    d.  Juniata,  Feb.  5.  1887. 
Freddie,  b.  July  27,   1878;    d.  in  infancy. 

1067.  William  Stephen*  Babcock,  son  of  George  W.  and 
Mary  (Richards)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher,  Wil- 
liam, John,  John,  James),  b.  La  Grange,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27,  1837; 
res.  1900,  Fayetteville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Dec.  18,  1867,  Sarah  C., 
dati.  of  Spafford  and  Almena  (Hill)  Allen,  b.  Feb.  i,  1838. 

Children : 

Lovera  H.,  b.  Morrisville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  11,  1872;    res.  1900,  Fayette- 
ville ;    unm. 
Mary  Almina,  b.  Fabius,  N.  Y.,  Jan.   14.   1874:    d.   Fabius,  May  4, 

1874. 
Oren  A.,  b.  Fabius,  Dec.  11,  1875;    d.  Fayetteville,  Oct.  29,  1881. 

1068.  DuANE  Perry*  Babcock,  son  of  George  W.  and  Mary 
K.    (Richards)    Babcock   (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  La  Grange,  N.  Y.,  May  19,  1841 ;   res. 
1900,  Fayetteville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Tully,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  14,  1867,  Ro- 
salie, dan.  of  William  and  Susan  (Morse)  \\'ickham,  b.  Tully, 
Feb.  8,  1844. 
Children : 

Glen   Le  Roy,  b.   Fayetteville,   Aug.    18,   1871  ;   m.  Norwich,   Conn., 

Nov.  4,  1896,. Bessie  J.  Gates. 
Susan  Rosalie,  b.  Fayetteville,  Aug.  16.  1873;    res.  1900,  Fayetteville. 

1069.  Mary  Ellen*  Babcock,  dau.  of  George  W.  and  Mary 
K.    (Richards)    Babcock   (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Norwich,  Conn.,  Mar.  26,  1843;  I'^s. 
1900,  Onondaga,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Vesper,  N.  Y.,  June  3,  1868,  Rev. 
D.  W.,  son  of  Hiram  S.  and  Sophronia  (Curtiss)  Sherman,  b. 
Virgil,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  18,  1840. 

Rev.  D.  W.  Sherman  is  a  Methodist  Episcopal  clerg}mian. 

Children : 

Fred  W.,  b.  S.  Onondaga.  Nov.  16.  1877. 
Frank  R.,  b.  Summit  Station,  Jan.  14.  1880. 
■  Floyd  C.  b.  Perryville.  N.  Y..  Nov.  2.  1881. 
Mary  Floss,  b.  Perryville.  Mar.  6,   1884. 

1070.  LuciNDA  J.*  Babcock,  dau.  of  George  W.  and  Mary 
K.    (Richards)   Babcock   (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 


420  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

John,  John,  James),  b.  W'oonsocket,  R.  I.,  June  i,  1848;  res. 
1900,  S.  Omaha,  Neb.;  m.  (i)  Vesper,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  25,  1871, 
EHas,  son  of  Harry  and  Mary  Ann  (Parkerson)  Rowland,  b. 
Vesper,  Se])t.  3.  1848,  d.  Juniata,  Nelx,  Sept.  i,  1875;  m.  (2) 
Chicago,  III.,  June  15,  1892,  Charles  \V.,  son  of  Charles  G.  and 
Harriette  B.  Smith,  b.  Center  Village,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  12,  1844. 
Child  by  first  marriage: 

Grace  Mabel,  b.  Vesper,  Dec.  25,  1875;    unm. ;    res.  1900,  S.  Onialia. 

1071.  James    W.*    Babcock,    son   of   Asa   and    Clemantine 

(Webster)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  1838; 
res.  1900,  Geneva,  O. ;  m.  Leonardsville,  Aug.  27,  i860,  Helen 
M.,  dan.  of  Perry  W.  and  Annie  (Coon)  Clarke,  b.  Leonards- 
ville, Nov.  7,  1838. 
Child : 

Callie  E.,  b.  St.  Catharines,  Ontario,  Canada,  Apr.  10,  1871 ;  res. 
1900,  Geneva. 

1072.  Asa  Babcock*  Prentice,  son  of  Allen  and  Elizabeth 

(Babcock)  Prentice  (Asa,  Christopher,  William,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  July  29,  1838;  res.  1903, 
North  Loup,  Neb.;  m.  (i)  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  11,  1865,  Mar- 
ion W.,  dau.  of  George  S.  and  Amelia  (Maxson)  Greene,  b. 
Scott,  June  3,  1838,  d.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  30,  1875; 
m.  (2)  Verona,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,  1877,  Mary  A.,  dau.  of  Dea- 
con Ira  and  Nancy  (Perry)  Greene,  b.  Verona,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  27, 
1837.  No  children  by  second  marriage. 
Children : 

Lucy  A.,"  b.  Christiana,  Wis.,  Aug.  6,  1867;  res.  1903,  Leonards- 
ville, N.  Y.  ;  m.  Adams  Center.  Oct.  17,  1888,  Alfred  T.,  son  of 
S.  C.  and  Theresa  (Clark)  Stillman.  b.  Scott,  Apr.  i,  1864.  Chil- 
dren :    Marion,^"  Lucile,  Carol,  Hazel. 

Mary  Louise,  b.  Adams  Center,  Oct.  ,30,  1868;    d.  Aug.  3,  1870. 

Harry  W.,  D.D.S..  b.  Adams  Center,  Oct.  26,  1873;  m.  Alfred, 
N.Y.,  Sept.,  1901,  Alice  L  Toop ;  res.  1903,  Washington  Avenue, 
Lincoln  Park,  Yonkers,  N.  Y. 

Alfred  Carlyle,"  M.D.,  b.  Adams  Center,  Feb.  18,  1875;  res.  New 
York  City:  m.  Alfred,  June  27.  1897,  Lily,  dau.  of  Abiel  and 
Margaret  (Gilchell)  La  Forge,  b.  New  York  City,  Mar.  16,  1875. 
Have  one  son,  Carlyle  La  Forge,'"  b.  New  York  City,  June  24, 
1902. 

1073.  Louise  E.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Christopher  J.  and  Har- 

riet (Button)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Irving,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  12,  1845  ;  res.  1900, 
Winfield,  Kan.;   m.  (i)  Mr.  Bowen;   m.  (2)  Francis  G.,  son 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  421 

of  Luther  and  Polly   (Randal)   Powers,  I).    Harmony,  N.  Y., 
1838.   Proprietor  Arlington  Hotel,  Wintield. 
Children : 

Dr.  Fred.  J.  Bowen.  1).  ;    m.  Wiscoy.  N.  Y.,  Amanda  Whitney; 

1900  was  Coroner  at   Mt.   Morris,   N.   Y. 
Bessie  Powers,   b.   South   Bend,   Ind.,    1886;     res.    IQOO,   Winfield. 

1074.  Willis  A.*^  Babcock,  son  of  Christopher  J.  and  Har- 
riet   (Button)    Babcock    (Asa,   Christopher,    William, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Irving-,  N.  Y..  May  i,  1852;   res.  1900, 
Smyrna,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Hubbardsville,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  28,  1875,  Bar- 
bara F.,  dau.  of  Pardon  and  Emeline   (Murphy)    Clark,  b. 
Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  2,  1846. 
Child: 

Harriet,  b.  Hubbardsville,   1876;    m.  E.  C.  Cook;    res.   1900,  Oneida 
Castle,   N.  Y. 

1075.  Frank  P.^  Babcock,  son  of  Christopher  J.  and  Har- 

riet (Button)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher.  William, 
John,  John,  James),  h.  Irving,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  8,  1854:  res.  1900, 
Washington,  Pa. ;  m.  \Vheeling,  W.  Va.,  Feb.  4,  1880,  Francis 
v.,  dau.  of  William  and  Juliana  (Harris)  Redman,  b.  Hone- 
oye  Falls.  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Harriet   L.,  b.   Foster  Brook,   Pa.,   Dec.   16,    1881. 
Jessie,   b.   Washington.  July  24,    1888;    d.  July   18,    1895. 

1076.  Hermon  I.^  Babcock,  son  of  Christopher  J.  and  Har- 

riet (Button)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher,  William, 
John,  John,  James),  1).  Irving,  N.  Y.,  June  6,  1856;  d.  S. 
Dayton,  N.  Y.,  May  28,  1885;^  m.  (i)  Villanova,  N.'  Y.,  Sept. 
29,  1875,  Viroqua.  dau.  of  Luther  and  Sarah  J.  Ames,  b. 
Cherry  Creek,  N.  Y..  June  24,   185s,  d.  Pine  Valley,  July  5, 

;  m.  (2)  Arkansas  City.  Kan.,  Lina  Young.   No  children. 

Children  by  first  marriage : 

Nellie   G.,  b.   Cherry   Creek.    Sept.    16,    1876;    d.   Kenerdsville,    Pa., 

Aug.  4,    1877. 
Cecil  H.,  b.  Pine  Valley,  Mar.  20,  1879;    d.  Cherry  Creek,  Nov.  24, 

1889. 

1077.  Harriet^    Babcock,    dau.    of    William    and    Harriet 

(Pelton)  Babcock  (Asa,  Christopher.  William.  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Peterboro,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  24,  1864:  m.  Leon- 
ardsville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  8,  1885.  Merton  H.,  son  of  Henry  and 
Ardicicia   (Palmeter)   Brown,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.   16, 

1859- 


422  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Child: 

Elsie  L.,  b.  Brookfield,  Sept.  22,   1888. 

1078.  William  O.*^  Beebe,  son  of  Oliver  and  Sarah  Ann 

(Babcock)    Beebe    (Samuel,    Samuel,    William,   John, 
John,  James),  b.  July  24,  1838;    res.  1902,  Wooster,  O. ;    m. 
Hartford,  Conn.,  Sq\A.  8,  1870,  Fanny  Allyn  Sill. 
Children : 

Julia,   1).   Cuyahoga   Falls,   O.,   Mar.   20,    1872;    m.   Minnesota,   June 

2j,   1900,   Russel   B.  Thompson.     No  chihlren    (1902). 
Elizabeth,  b.  Cuyahoga  Falls,  July  20,   1878;    unm. 

1079.  Charles  C.^  Taylor,  son  of  William  and  Elizabeth 

(Babcock)   Taylor   (Samuel,  Samuel,   William,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  Dec.  25,  1847;   ^'^^-  190-. 
Durham,  N.  C. ;   m.  Hillsboro,  N.  C,  Nov.  4,  1873,  Elizabeth, 
dau.  of  Henry  Richards,  b.  Hillsboro,  Oct.  23,  1850. 
Children,  b.  Durham : 

Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  12,  1877;    m.  T.  C.  Chuk. 
Sarah  J.,  b.   Sept.   18.   1879. 
Kate  T.,  b.  Feb.  9,  1886. 

1080.  Lucy  Catherine^  Goodell,  dau.  of  Gera  and  Jane 

(Babcock)  Goodell  (Samuel,  Samuel,  William,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Dec.  10,  1847;  res.  1902, 
93  Crown  Street,  Meriden,  Conn. ;  m.  Middletown,  May  19, 
1875,  Georg-e  A.,  son  of  Abner  and  Lucy  (Lung)  Church,  b. 
Hartford,  Conn.,  May  11,  1847,  d.  Mericlen,  Sept.  13,  1898. 
Children,  b.  and  res.  Meriden : 

Robert  G.,  b.  May  24,  1877. 
Howard,  b.  Aug.  21,   1881. 
William  B.,  b.  Jan.  19,  1886. 

1081.  William  Henry^  Chapman,  son  of  William  and 
Hannah  (Babcock)  Chapman  (Samuel,  Samuel,  Wil- 
liam, John,  John,  James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Aug.  10, 
1834;  res.  1902,  Middletown;  m.  (i)  Middletown,  Apr.  9, 
1855,  Sarah  C,  dau.  of  Asahel  and  Sarah  (Brown)  Brooks,  b. 
Hebron,  Conn.,  July  25,  1835,  d.  Middletown,  Nov.  18,  1898: 
m.  (2)  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  June  15,  1900,  Eliza,  sister  of  first 
wife. 

Child: 

Lila,  b.  Middletown,  Aug.  17,  1856:  res.  1902.  200  W.  98th  Street, 
New  York;  m.  Middletown,  1876,  Edward,  son  of  Anthony 
Parshley. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  423 

1082.  Maria    L.*^    Babcock,    daii.    of    Charles    and    Lavina 

(Goodrich)  Babcock  (Samuel,  Samuel,  William,  John, 
John.  Tames),  h.  Collinsville,  Conn.,  Feb.  13,  1849;  res.  1902, 
Hillsdale.  N.  Y. :  m.  Collinsville,  Sept.  21,  1870,  Myron  \V., 
son  of  John  and  Sarah  (Westfall)  Thompson,  b.  Chicopee 
Falls,  Mass..  Apr.  21,  1847,  d.  Hillsdale,  Feb.  13,  1894. 
Children,  b.  Collins\'ille : 

Sarah   L.,  b.   Sept.   14.   1871  ;    res.    190J.   Hillsdale. 

diaries  J.,  b.  June  16,  1873;  res.  1902,  621  E.  i62d  Street.  New 
York ;  m.  Nov.  16,  1898,  Laura,  dau.  of  Edward  and  Ophelia 
(Flewellyn)   Quinby,  b.  Mt.  Kisco,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  28,   1879. 

Vietta  E.,  b.  May  25,  1875;  res.  1902.  Warwick.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Car- 
mel,  N.  Y..  June  24.  1897.  Rev.  Elmer,  son  of  Thomas  and  Polly 
(Downs)  Count,  b.  EUenville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  5,  1861. 

Helen  Alberta,  b.  Feb.  15.  1877;  res.  1902,  Craryville,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Hillsdale,  Jan.  i,  1896,  Wallace  D.,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Hattie 
(Barnes)    Ostrander,  b.   Hillsdale,  Oct.  27,   1873. 

1083.  Joseph  Edgar^  Bacon,  son  of  Joseph  and  Maria  (Bab- 

cock) Bacon  (Samuel,  Samuel,  \\'illiam,  John,  John, 
James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Feb.  11,  1842;  res.  1902, 
Middletown:  m.  Longmeadow,  Mass.,  Oct.  13,  1863,  Helen 
A.,  dau  of  William  and  Jane  Mann,  b.  Middletown,  Dec.  6, 
1842. 

Child,  b.  Middletown: 

Alice  M.,  b.  May  4,  1866;  res.  1902,  Middletown;  m.  Middletown, 
May  6,  1885,  Charles  H.  Lewis,  b.  July  4,  1869.     Has  five  children. 

1084.  Theodore  Hurlbut*  Babcock.  son  of  Samuel  and 
Ellen  L.   (Hurlbut)   Babcock   (Samuel.  Samuel,  W^il- 

liam,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Jan.  20,  1845  ; 
res.  1903,  48  W.  70th  Street.  New  York ;  m.  ( i )  Hoboken.  N. 
J..  Apr.  15,  1864,  Nellie  L.  Granger,  b.  Apr.  15,  1847,  d.  Hart- 
ford, Conn.;  m.  (2)  New  York,  June  3,  1873,  Catherine  H., 
dau.  of  John  and  Delia  (Johnson)  W^ilson,  b.  England,  Dec.  9, 
1844. 

Theodore  Babcock  was  Supervisor  of  the  Twenty-second 
Ward.  Brooklyn,  188 1-2.  He  was  Captain  in  the  13th  Regi- 
ment. National  Guard,  N.  Y..  1881-90.  when  he  was  promoted 
to  Ordnance  Officer,  with  rank  of  Major  on  stafif  of  the  2d 
Brigade,  National  Guard,  New  York,  which  position  he  now 
holds. 

In  1902  he  was  Democratic  candidate  for  Congress  in  the 
20th  New  York  District  (Orange.  Rockland,  and  Sullivan 
Counties),  but  was  defeated  by  a  strict  party  vote. 


424  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Helen  Louise,  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  May  9,  1865;  res.  1903,  201 
T  Street,  N.  W.,  Washington,  D.  C. ;  m.  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  Oct. 
27,  1887.  Philip  N.,  son  of  William  and  Ann  (Haviland)  Robin- 
son, b.   Wilkesbarre,   Pa.,   Feb.  21,   1864. 

1462  Frederick  H.,"  b.  Mar.  29,  1867;    m.  Mabel  E.  Montgomery. 

1463  Theodore  H.,  b.  July  3,   1870;    m.   Margaret  A.  Daly. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

Margaret  Theodora,   b.   Feb.    14,   1892. 

1085.  Arthur  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Ellen 

L.    (Hurlbut)    Babcock    (Samuel,    Samuel,    William, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Mar.  20,  1849;    ^^-  J'^"-  20,  1898;    m. 
Dec.  18,  1873,  East  Hartford,  Conn.,  Esther  Brewer,  b.  East 
Hartford,  June  14,  1848. 
Children : 

Henry  Arthur,  b.  May  11,  1879:    res.  1903,  Middletown,  Conn. 
Le  Roy,  b.  Dec.  16,  1880;    d.  Mar.  30,  1889. 

1086.  Samuel^    Babcock,    son    of    Samuel    and    Ellen    M. 

( Carter)  Babcock  ( Samuel,  Samuel,  William,  John, 
John,  James),  b.  Middletown,  Conn.,  Nov.  i,  1863;  res.  1903, 
Middletown;  m.  Durham,  Conn.,  Oct.  9,  1890,  Ellen  C,  dau. 
of  Jerome  and  Elizabeth  R.  (Hull)  Johnson,  b.  Diudiam,  Jan. 
31,  1869. 

Children,  b.  Middletown : 

Nathalie  L.,  b.  Mar.  24,  1892. 
Helen  D.,  b.  Sept.  25,   1897. 

1087.  Harriet  Matilda^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Sally 

(Chamberlain)  Babcock  (John.  Josiah,  Job.  Job.  John, 
James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Eel).  11,  1814  (  ?)  ;  d.  Durham, 
Conn.,  Jan.  i,  1900;  m.  New  Haven.  Edward  P.  Camp,  of 
Durham.  Children,  b.  New  Haven:  Henry  L..  Mary  G.  (d. 
in  infancy),  Mary  Ella,  Harriet  Babcock,  M.  W.  Wadsworth, 
Edward  P. 

1088.  John    Newton^    Babcock,    son    of   John    and    Sally 

(Chamberlain)  Babcock  (John,  Josiah.  Job,  Job,  John, 

James),  b.   New  Haven,   Conn.,  May   18.    1816:    d.   Morgan 

Park.  111.,  Nov.  23,   1891  ;    m.  Durham,  Conn.,  Charlotte  R. 

Bromley,  of  Norwich.  Conn.,  d.  Morgan  Park,  Jan.  (  ?),  1903. 

Children : 

John    Henry,    b.    Norwich,    1838. 

Mary  Caroline,  b.  Norwich,  1839;  res.  1903,  Morgan  Park;  m. 
Charles  Ten  Brooke. 


THEODORE  H.  BABCOCK. 


Page  423. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  425 

1464  Einclinc  C'  b.  Feb.  22,  1842;    m.  Clarence  E.  Diitton. 

George   Bromley,  b.   New   Haven,   Conn.,   Nov.    11,    1849;    res.    1903, 

Morgan   Park. 
Frederic,  b.   New   Haven,   1856;    res.   1903,  Chicago,  111. 
William   Bromley,  b.   New   liaven,   1859. 

1089.  liiiXRv    Chamberlain^   Babcock,   son   of  John   and 
Sally  (Chamberlain)  Babcock  (John,  Josiah,  Job,  Job, 

John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Apr.  15,  1818;   d.  New 
Haven,  Sept.  3,   i860;  m.   (i)   Maria  Warner;  m.   (2)   New 
Haven,  Dec.  12.  1841,  Mrs.  Mary  E.   (Thompson)  Wells,  b. 
\\'aterbury,  Conn.,  18 16,  d.  New  Haven,  May  9,  1878. 
Children,  b.  New  Haven: 

1465  Rev.  Charles  Henry,"  b.  July  3,  1845;    m.   (i)   Emily  C.   (Goodrich) 

INlcad;    m.    (2)    Mrs.   Isabelle   (Wood)    Brown. 
Frank  Chamberlain,  b.  Mar.   17,   1847;    d.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  8, 
1901. 

1466  Mary  Emily,  b.  Apr.  15,  1855;    m.  Albert  L.  Northrup. 

1090.  Elizabeth  Stella^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Sally 

(Chamberlain)  Babcock  (John,  Josiah,  Job,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Sept.  5,  1826;  res.  1903,  322 
N.  Grove  Avenue,  Oak  Park.  111. ;  m.  New  Haven,  June  9, 
1848,  Henry  Thomas,  son  of  Georg-e  and  Clarissa  (Parmalee) 
Hart,  b.  Guilford,  Conn.,  Feb.  10,  1827,  d.  Guilford,  May, 
.1863. 

Children : 

Elizabeth,  b.   New  Haven;    d.  Oct.  3.   1851. 

Henry  Thomas,  b.  New  Haven  ;      res.   1903,  Chicago,  111. 

Clara,  b.  Brooklyn;  res.  1903.  Chicago;  m.  Oct.  21,  1879,  George 
D..   son   of   George  and   Mary    (Griswold)    Conklin. 

Mary,  b.  Brooklyn ;  res.  1903.  Chicago ;  m.  May  24,  1883,  Fred- 
erick W.  Sandberg,  b.  Gothenburg,  Sweden. 

1091.  France.s  There.sa^  Babcock.  dau.  of  John  and  Sally 

(Chamberlain)  Babcock  (John,  Josiah,  Job,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  May  13.  1829;  d.  Oak  Park, 
111.,  Jan.  3.  1903;  m.  New  Haven.  Nov.  16,  1852,  Frederick 
A.  Vandenburo-h,  b.  Nassau,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  1827,  d.  Chicago, 
111.,  July  27,  1865. 

Children,  b.  New  Haven : 

IMary,  b.  Sept.   19.  1853  ;    d.  New  Haven,  Aug.  8,   1854. 

Frederick  Lyman,  b.  July  4.  1858;  res.  1902.  120  N.  Oak  Park 
Avenue,  Oak  Park,  111.;  m.  Albion,  N.  Y..  Mar.  2,  1894,  Mary 
G.,  dau.  of  James  and  Mary  (Bosworth)  Richardson,  b.  Sept. 
10,   1863.     No  children. 

1092.  Rev.  Theodore^  Babcock,  D.D.,  son  of  Deodatus  and 

Mary    (Hine)    Babcock    (John,    Josiah,    Job,    Job, 


426  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

John,  James),  b.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  May  23,  1822;  res.  1903, 
221  Green  Street,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Saratoga  Springs, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  1847,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  David  and  Hannah 
(Payn)  Nash,  b.  Watervliet,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  16,  1825,  d.  Man- 
lius,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  8,  1895. 

Dr.  Babcock  was  ordained  a  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Epis- 
copal Church  in  1847,  and  three  years  later  advanced  to  the 
priesthood,  since  which  time  he  has  been  Rector  of  the  follow- 
ing Episcopal  Churches  in  New  York  State:  Charlton,  Co- 
hoes,  Watertown,  Hudson,  Oswego,  Manlius,  and  Jamesville. 
He  was  Head  Master  of  St.  John's  School  at  Manlius  from 
1875  to  '81.  He  has  also  served  on  many  important  commit- 
tees in  the  erection  and  organization  of  the  new  diocese  in 
Central  New  York.  Since  1900  he  has  held  the  very  respon- 
sible position  of  Dean  of  St.  Andrew's  Divinity  School,  Syra- 
cuse, N.  Y. 

Children : 

Theodore,  Jr.,  b.  Ballston  Spa.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1848.  Secretary  of 
Board  of  Civil  Examiners,  Custom  House,  New  York  City ;  unm. 
1467  Henry  Nash,"  b.  Dec.  20.  1850;    m.  Charlotte  Morgan  Stoddard. 

Lewis  Wainwright,"  b.  Ballston  Spa.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  3,  1852;  d.  New 
York,  Aug.  27,  1901 ;  m.  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  3,  1878,  Ger- 
trude S.,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Sarah  Hastings,  b.  Theresa,  N.  Y., 
July  23,  1859;  res.  190^,  Syracuse.  Had  one  child,  Gertrude 
Sarah.'"  b.  Aug.  28,  1879.'  d.  Aug.  16,  1880. 

Mansfield,  b.  Cohoes,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  14,  1855;  d.  Watertown,  N.  Y., 
Mar.  15,  1858. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Cohoes.  Feb.  19,  1857:    d.  Cohoes.  Oct.  31,  1857. 

Charles  Edward  Payn.  b.  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  1858;  m. 
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  June  4,  1885,  Lucy  B.,  dau.  of  Charles  and  Martha 
(Bartlett)  Shackford,  b.  Lyim,  Mass.,  July  24,  1857.  They  res. 
1903,    47  Norwood  Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.     No  children. 

Mary,  b.  Watertown.  Dec.  27,   i860;    res.   1903,  Syracuse. 

Katherine  McLean,  b.  Watertown,  June  24,  1863 ;  d.  Watertown, 
Aug.  5,   1863. 

1093.  Rev.  John  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Deodatus  and 
Mary  (Hine)  Babcock  (John,  Josiah,  Job,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Ballston  Spa,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  ii,  1826;  res.  1903,  503 
Minnesota  Avenue,  Sioux  Falls,  S.  D. ;  m.  Troy,  N.  Y..  Dec. 
28,  i8s3.  Margaret  A.,  dau.  of  Archibald  and  Polly  Pierce,  b. 
Troy,  V823,  d.^  Mitchell,  S.  D..  Apr.  8,  1888. 

He'is  a  clergvman  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church. 

Child : 

George,  b.  Ballston  Spa,  Jan.  9,  1855:  res.  1903.  Fresno,  Cal. ;  m. 
Irvington,  Cal..  July  20,  1882,  Louise  E.,  dau.  of  Edmund  and 
Lucretia  (Polk)  Cearley,  b.  Hot  Springs,  Ark.,  May  10,  1856.  No 
children. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  427 

1094.  Edward  Davis**  Babcock,  son  of  Deodatiis  and  Mary 

(Hine)  Babcock  (John,  Josiah,  Job,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Ballston  Spa.,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29,  1834;  d.  New  York 
City,  June  3,  1884;  m.  Philadelphia,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  20,  i860, 
Sarah  V.,  daii.  of  Henry  and  Fidelia  (Barron)  Danforth,  b. 
Ballston  Spa,  June  15,  1840;  res.  1903,  Detroit,  Mich. 
Children : 

Edward  Danforth,  b.  Port  Henry.  N.  Y.,  May  12,  1862;  res.  1903, 
Philadelphia,  N.  Y. ;  tn.  Philadelphia,  June  ii,  1893.  Cana  Bell, 
dau.  of  Clark  and  Caroline  (Stephens)  White,  b.  Philadelphia, 
Oct.   15.  1872. 

George  Worthington,  b.  Ballston  Spa.  Dec.  8,  1866;  res.  1903, 
Detroit. 

1095.  Naomi^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Phebe  (Couch) 
Babcock  (Simeon.  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James), 

b.  New  York  State.  July  27,   1808;    d.  Eldora,  la..  May  5, 
1884;  m.  Bath.  N.  Y.,  Nov.  15.  1829,  Simeon  Furman. 
Children : 

Simpson,  b.  Jan.  i,  1831  ;    d.  Apr.,  1855,  unm. 

Louise,  b.  June  9.  1833:    d.  Jan.  14,  1882;    m.  Calvin  Carriel. 

Darius,   b.   Alar.   24,    1837;     d.   Jan.   21,    1896;     m.    Delia    (Graves) 

Lewis. 
John  M..  b.  Dec.  27.  1839;    m.  E.  J.  Conger. 

Lura  R..  b.  Mar.  i,  1842;    m.  Frank  J.  Bach;    res.  1903,  Eldora,  la. 
Lorinda  E..  b.  June  25,  1844;    d.  Sept.,  1863,  unm. 
Lodentia,  b.  Dec.   16,   1846. 

1096.  Rhoda  Lura^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Phebe 

(Couch)  Babcock  (Simeon.  Simeon.  Samuel.  Job, 
John.  James),  b.  New  York  State.  May  8.  181 1;  d.  Eldora, 
la.,  Aug.  26.  1861 ;  m.  Nov.  23,  1831.  Daniel  F..  son  of  Wil- 
liam and  Sarah  (Marshall)  Ellsworth,  b.  Oct.  6,  181 1.  He 
was  Sheriff  for  Potter  Countv,  Pa.,  for  a  number  of  years;  res. 
1898.  Eldora. 
Children : 

Mahala.  b.  June  25,  1833 ;    m.  Sheldon  S.  Winchester. 

De  Roy.  b.  May  26.  1834:    d.  Oct.  13.  1892:    m.  Charity  S.  Westfall. 

Freeman  D.,  b.  July  25,  1836;    m.  Mary  Starkweather. 

Daniel  V..  b.  May  13,  1840;    d.  Nov.  18,  1892;    m.  Saloma  Bowman. 

Orlando  M.,  b.  Oct.   17,   1844;    m.  Alice  Baine. 

1097.  Samuel*  Babcock.  son  of  Samuel  and  Phebe  (Couch) 
Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job.  John.  James), 

b.  May  13.  1813;  m.  Emily  Frink. 
Children : 

1468  Laura  S.."  h.  July   11,   1842;    m.    (i)   William  P.   Simpson;    m.    (2) 
Jesse  B.  Knight. 


428  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1469  Lincoln,  b.  Aug.  22,  1858;    in.  Eftio  F.  Lackey. 

1470  Sheridan,  b.  May  7,   i86j  ;    m.   Liiinia  L.  Wchrnian. 

1098.  Aaron  Couch^^  Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Phebe 

(Couch)    Babcock    (Simeon,    Simeon,    Samuel,    Job, 
John,   James),   b.    Bath,    N.    Y.,    Oct.    29,    1815;     res.    1902, 
Corienne,   Utah;    m.   Ixonia,  Wis.,   Nov.    14,    1847,   Matilda 
Mendell. 
Children : 

Phccbe  A.,  b.  Sept.  14,  1848;    m.  Edwin  R.  LLadley. 

Mary  H.,  b.  Aug.  24,   1850;    d.  Sept.  24,   185 1. 

Ida  M..  b.  May  29,  1855;    d.  Sept.  29,   1856. 

Willard,  b.  July  2,   1859;    d-  Jan.  8,  1868. 

Pearline  Ella,  b.   Aug.    14,   i860;    m.   Edward  Spencer. 

Matilda,  b.  Mar.  5,  1862;   d.  Dec.  23,  1863. 

1099.  Elizabeth  C.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Phebe 

(Couch)    Babcock    (Simeon,    Simeon,    Samuel,    Job, 
John,  James),  1).  Dryden,   N.  Y.,  Oct.   10,   1817;    res.   1896, 
Eldora,  la. ;  m.  Tioga,  Pa.,  Oct.  2,  1836,  Daniel,  son  of  Aaron 
and  Hannah  (Howe)  Furman,  d.  Eldora,  June  14.  1888. 
Children : 

Horace  H.,  b.  Apr.  17,  1839;  d.  May  8,  1892;  m.  Theresa  R.  Ried ; 
res.  1902,  Eldora.  He  enlisted  Sept.  12,  1861,  2d  Regiment,  Penn- 
sylvania Infantry,  Volunteers;  discharged  Dec.  20,  1863.  Re- 
enlisted  next  day,  105th  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  Volunteers.  Pro- 
moted to  Corporal  and  Sergeant.     Mustered  out  Feb.  22,  1865. 

Alanson  W..  b.  Jan.  25,  1842;    d.  June  19,  1892,  unm. 

Hannah,  b.  Apr.  8,  1844;  res.  1902,  Garden  Prairie,  la.;  m.  Emery 
E.    Howe. 

Aaron  H.,  b.  Nov.  7,  1845;    d.   Nov.   14,   1861. 

Amos  D.,  b.  Mar.  20,  1847;    d.  Mar.  16,  1859. 

Junias  A.,  b.  Apr.  11,  1850:    d.  Feb.  6,  1888;    m.  Anna  Walker. 

Ernest  M.,  b.  Mar.  18,   1853;    m.  Belle  Ackerman. 

Alice  I.,  I1.  June  21,  1855;    d.  Feb.  25,  1864. 

1100.  Bethiaii^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Samuel    and    Phebe 
(Couch)     Babcock    (Simeon,    Simeon,    Samuel,    Job, 

John,  James),  b.  Dec.  14,  1819;   m.  Milan,  Mich.,  June,  1845, 
Edward  A.  Smith. 
Children  : 

Almond,  b.  Nov.   10,   1846;    res.   1902,  Tappan,   N.  Dak. 
Melvin,   b.   Mar.  25,    1850;    res.   1902.   Muir,   Mich. 

1101.  Henry  Clay^   Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Rachel 

(Burhite)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job, 
John,  James),  b.  Waterloo,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  17,  1828;  res.  1902, 
2349  Vine  Street,  Denver,  Col. ;    m.  Waukesha,  Wis.,  Nov.  7, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  429 

1852,  lantha  C,  dait.  of  Reubeii  and  Hannah  (Moore)  Hurl- 
but,  b.  New  York  State,  May  31,  1826. 

Henry  Babcock  enHsted  at  Fond  du  Lac,  Wis.,  Sept.  19, 
1864,  Company  B,  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  serving  from 
1864  to  1866.  He  was  pronu^ed  Nov.  30,  1864,  to  First  Lieu- 
tenant, iJtIi  U.  S.  Heavy  Artillery.  He  was  a  carpenter  by 
trade,  a  lnml)er  dealer  in  Lincoln,  Neb.,  and  a  dealer  in  agri- 
cultural implements. 

Children: 

1471   Stephen  E.,"  b.  Feb.   14,   1854;    in.  Ava  Kaufman. 

Clarence  H..''  b.  Waiipun.  Wis.,  May  8,  1856;  res.  1902,  2349  Vine 
Street,  Denver;  m.  (i)  Eva  Botsford ;  m.  (2)  Miss  Ott ;  m. 
(.3)   Carrie  M.  Wood;    m.   (4)   Malinda  ^ . 

Walter  Scott,"  b.  Waupun,  Apr.  6,  1862 ;  res.  1902,  2342  Race  Street, 
Denver;  m.  Nov.  26,  1884,  Mary  Jean,  dau.  of  Lewis  and  Mar- 
garet (Gilroy)   Gorham.     Child:    Carrie  A.,'"  b.  Dec.  2,  1885. 

Hattie  K.,""  b.  Waupun,  Nov.  22,  1864;  res.  1902,  2361  Vine  Street, 
Denver;  m.  Denver,  Aug.  15,  i88g,  Albert,  son  of  William  and 
Sarah  (Bigwood)  Sechrist,  b.  Freeport,  111.,  Oct.  30,  1862.  He  is 
a  dealer  in  electrical  supplies.     No  children. 

1102.  Simeon^  Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  and  Rachel   (Bur- 
hite)   Babcock   ( Simeon,'  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John, 

James),  b.  Avoca,  N.  Y..  July  i,  1832;  d.  Manistee,  Mich., 
Jan.  3,  1896;  m.  June  11,  1863,  Sarah,  dau.  of  Joseph  and 
Sarah  (Jarvis)  Reynolds;    res.  1902,  Manistee. 

Simeon  was  First  Lieutenant,  ist  Wisconsin  Infantry,  three 
months.     Mustered  out  with  regiment. 

Children : 

Frederick  R..  b.  May  4,  1865. 

Robert,    b.    Milwaukee,    Wis.,    Apr.    13,    1868;     m.    Kathleen   Winn, 

Mar.   18.   1896 ;    res.   1902,  Manistee,   Alich. 
Ella  L.,  b.   Milwaukee.   May  2.   1870. 
Helen  May,  b.  Milwaukee,  May  2,  1870;    m.  Aug.  11,  1896,  Earl  W. 

Dow. 

1103.  Hetty  Ann^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Rachel 

(Burhite)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job, 
John,  James),  b.  Vernon,  O.,  Sept.  19,  1841  ;  res.  1902,  2600 
Michigan  Avenue,  Chicago,  Bl. ;  m.  Dec.  2y,  1865,  Milwau- 
kee, Wis.,  Samuel  B.  Martin,  d.  Aug.  11,  1896. 

Had  five  children :  Elmer  B. ;  Wilton  W.,  m.  Kate  L  Dixon; 
Samuel,  Jr. ;    Walter,  and  Marion  E. 

1104.  Titus  B.'^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Marium  (Stone) 
Babcock  (Simeon.  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John.  James), 

b.  June  20.  181 1  ;  d.  Hastings.  Neb.,  Feb.,  1892;  m.  Dec.  24, 
1840,  Maria  Dailey,  d.  Adams  County,  Neb.,  May  16,  1877. 


430  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Julia  S.,  b.  Aug.,   1842;    ni.  A.  H.  Bowen  ;    res.  1902,  Hastings,  Neb. 
Russel,  b.  Dec,   1845;    m.  Freda  Russel ;    res.- 1902,  Hastings. 
Carlos,  b.  May,   1850;    ni.  and  res.  1902,  in  Denver,  Col. 
Nellie   D.,   b.   July.    1856. 

Elisa,  b.  Oct.,  1857;  ni.  S.  P.  Howland.  Both  res.  1902,  Juniata, 
Neb. 

1105.  John  Smith^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Marium 
(Stone)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job, 
John,  James),  b.  Bath,  N.  Y.,  June  30,  1813;  d.  Dundee, 
Mich.,  Dec.  30,  1889;  m.  Painted  Post,  N.  Y.,  June  14,  1835, 
Jane  H.,  dau.  of  Thomas  and  Nancy  (Hale)  Fleming,  b. 
Painted  Post,  d.  Dundee,  1892. 
Children,  b.  Dundee,  Mich : 

Albert  H.,  b.  June  21,  1836;  res.  1902,  Beatrice,  Neb.;  m.  Pawnee 
City,  Neb..  Jeanette  Derbois,  b.  Atlanta,  Ga.,  d.  Beatrice,  Sept.  18, 
1892. 

Laura,"  b.  Mar.  12,  1843 ;  m.  Dundee,  Oct.  12,  1870,  John,  son  of 
Cyrus  and  Almira  Parsons  McBride,  b.  Villanova,  N.  Y.,  July  7, 
1831.  Children,  b.  Dundee:  Nettie,^"  b.  Apr.  2,  1880,  res.  Forest- 
ville,  N.  Y. ;    Grace  J.,  twin,  res.  Dundee. 

George  D.,  b.  Dec.  28,  1848;    res.  1902,  Toledo,  O. ;    unm. 

1107.  Oliver^  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Lydia  (Smith) 
Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job.  John,  James), 

b.  Nov.  19,  1813;  m.  Sept.  2,  1838,  Elizabeth  Frink.  Had 
six  children :  Emily,  Stephen,  Dauphin,  Lemuel,  Simeon,  and 
I.aura. 

1108.  Olive^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Simeon  and  Lydia  (Smith) 
Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon.  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James), 

b.  Nov.  9,  1819;  d.  Sabinsville,  Pa.;  m.  John  W.  Sawyer,  d. 
Potter  County,  Pa. 

Children,  b.  in  Tioga  and  Potter  Counties,  Pa. : 

Lydia  C,  b.  ;    d.  Lansing,  Pa.;    m.  Aaron  Schoonmaker. 

1472  Jane  M.,°  b.  Aug.  13,  1834;    m-   d^  T.  S.  Boyd;    m.   (2)  Joel  Dick- 
ens;   m.   (3)   George  M.  Dimmick. 

Delana,  b.  ;    m.  Abraham  Bass. 

Sally  E.,  b.  ;  res.  1902,  Lansing;    m.   (i)  Wells;    m.   (2) 

William  Durant. 

Martha,  b.  ;    res.   Sabinsville,   Pa.;    m.  George  Roberts. 

Albert  W.,  b.  . 

Susan  D.,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Sabinsville. 

Adelaide,  b.  ;    d.   Pennsylvania;    m.  Mesler. 

1109.  Simeon^  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Lydia  (Smith) 
Babcock  (Simeon.  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James), 

b.  Steuben  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  3,  1820;    res.  1902,  Hewitt, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  431 

]\Jinn. ;    111.  Tioga  County,  Pa.,  Feb.,   1848,  Sarah  Jane,  dan. 
of  Daniel  and  Susan  Govver,  b.  Dec.  11,  1829. 
Children : 

Bruce,  h.  Sal)insville,  Pa.,  Feb.  11,  1X49;  res.  1902,  Wells,  Minn.; 
ni.  Blue  Earth  City,  Minn.,  Marcia  Cook. 

1473  Viola  O.,"  b.   Dec.  30.   185 1  ;    m.  IMiineas  R.  Taylor. 

1474  Susie  E.,  1).  July  20,  1856;    m.  Theodore  J.  Barton. 

Ida  May.  b.  Nov.  11.  1859;  res.  1902,  Winnebago  City,  Minn.;  m. 
Wells,  Charles  W.   Wise. 

Effie,  b.  Sabinsville,  May  3,  1862;  res.  1902,  Wells;  m.  Wells, 
Elmer   Remington. 

Lewis  Edson,"  b.  Rochester,  Oct.  8,  1864;  res.  1902,  Hewitt.  Minn.; 
m.  Wisconsin,  Oct.  24,  1895.  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  T.  Hansom,  b.  Nor- 
way. Feb.  22,  1872.  Children,  b.  Wells:  Mildred  R.,'"  b.  Aug.  12, 
1897;    Raymond   L.,  b.   May  22,   1899. 

Elton.  1).  Apr.   16,  1867;    d.  Wells,  Jan.  21,  1871. 

Orvis  S.,  b.  Wells,  Sept.  30,   1874 ;    res.   1902,  Slayton,  Minn. 

1110.  Enos^  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Lydia  (Smith) 
Babcock  (  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James), 
b.  Bath.  N.  Y..  Nov.  i6,  1823;  d.  Gold  Hill,  Ore.,  Dec.  27, 
1890;  m.  Tioga  County.  Pa.,  1844,  Abby  J.,  dau.  of  George 
and  Sarah  (  Ferman )  Hurler,  b.  Tioga  County,  June  3,  1828, 
d.  Webster,  S.  Dak.,  Oct.'i;.  1889. 
Children : 

1475  Wilmenia  A.,*  b.  May  4.  1846;    m.  James  R.  Webster. 

Lydia,  b.  June  29.  1849:  d.  Thorp,  Kan.,  Aug.  21,  1866;  m.  Dec. 
25,  1874,  John  De  Lack. 

1476  Clara  A.,  b.  July  26.  1856;    m.  Lucius  Bell. 

Annie  M..  b.  Rochester.  Minn.,  Sept.  8,  1859;  d.  Brooten.  June  19. 
1901  ;    m.  Rochester,  July  4.   1877,  Frank  Devereau. 

Georgia  May,  b.  ;    d.  young. 

Edith,  b.  :    d.  voung. 

Stella  Maud,^  b.  R'ochester.  Apr.  8,  1867:  res.  1902,  Gold  Hill, 
Ore.;  m.  (i)  1883,  Isaac  N.  Blakely;  m.  (2)  Jacksonville,  Ore., 
Aug.  10,  1891,  Joel,  son  of  John  and  Catherine  Stover,  b.  Dec.  22, 
1855.     Child:    Vernon  R."  Blakely,   b.   Thorp,   Wis. 

Jesse,  b.   Rochester,  Jan.    i,    1869;    d.   Eagle  Bend,  Minn.,   Aug.  6, 

1897. 
Florence,  b.  Rochester,  Aug.  21.  1873;    res.  1902,  ^Montevideo.  Minn.; 
m.  Montevideo,  Oct.  9.  1901,  Walter  Cosgriff. 

1111.  Sarah^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Simeon  and  Tydia  (Smith) 
Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon.  Samuel.  Job,  John,  James), 
b.  Tioga,  Pa.,  Apr.  30,  1827;  d.  Dexter.  Minn..  Oct.  13,  1888; 
m.  Tioga,  June,  1845.  Anson  Warren,  b.  New  York  City,  July, 
1823.  d.  Clymer.  Pa.,  Apr.,  185 1. 
Children.  1).  Clymer: 

Clarence,    b.    :     res.    1902,    Minneapolis,    Minn.;     m.    Dunkirk, 

N.  Y..  Cora  L.  Smith,  b.  Dunkirk. 
1477  Oscar  C."  b.   Oct.    i,    1850:    m.   Ida   L.   Hartwell. 

Arthur   B..    b.   ;     res.    Brownsdale,    IMinn. ;     m.    Austin,    Minn., 

Delia  Bull,  b.  New  York  State. 


43-  T^hc  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1112.  Betsy  Ann**  Babcock,   dan.  of  Simeon  and  Liberty 

(Furnian)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job, 
John,  James),  b.  Gaines,  Pa.,  Oct.  i,  1846;  d.  De  Soto,  Wis., 
Jan.  6,  1902;  m.  ])e  Soto,  Mar.  22,  1864,  William  M.,  son  of 
Sewall  and  Phoebe  (Hoyt)  Green,  b.  Dansville,  Vt.,  May  10, 
1838;  res.  1902,  De  Soto. 
Children,  b.  De  Soto: 

Chester,  b.  May  3.  1865  ;    d.  Sept.  2,  1868. 

Nellie,  b.   Feb.  25,   1869;    res.    1902,   Harlton,   Mont.;     m.   De   Soto, 

Dec.  26,   1894,  J.  L.,  son  of  W.  G.  and  Nettie   (Miller)   Davis,  b. 

June  6,   1866. 
Clarence,  b.  May  26,   1S71  ;    res.   1902,  Garrison,  Mont.;    m.  Soldiers 

Grove,  Nov.  18,   1900,  Laura  Guardner,  b.  Soldiers  Grove,  Oct.  3, 

1874. 
Alfred,  b.  Sept.  29,  1874;    res.   1902,  Garrison. 

1113.  John  D.*  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Liberty  (Fur- 

man)   Babcock   (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Sept.   17,  1851;    res.   1902,  Maiden  Rock,  Mont.; 
m.  June  30,  1875,  Rosia  Green. 
Child : 

Harvey,  b.  Sept.  6,  1879. 

1114.  Andrew^  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  Sophia  (Car- 
nahan)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John, 

James),  b.  Steuben  County,  N.  Y.,  May  24,  1825;  d.  Eldora, 
Ja.,  July  10,  1899;  m.  (i)  Pikes  Mills,  Jan.  4,  1852,  lantha 
A.,  dau.  of  John  and  Eunice  (Smith)  Carriel,  b.  Broome 
County,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  4,  1830,  d.  June  8,  1873;  m-  (2)  Mary 
E.  Garrison. 

Andrew  enlisted  in  Tioga  County,  Pa.,  Company  D,  57th 
Pennsylvania  Volunteer  Infantry,  served  in  Virginia ;  mus- 
tered out  Mar.  29,  1863.  Moved  to  Minnesota,  thence  to 
Eldora,  la.,  Jan.,  1868. 

Children : 

1478  Vernon  E.."  b.  Oct.  8,   1852;    m.  Anna  Hunter. 

Eunice  S.,  b.  Oct.  10,  1854;  res.  1902,  714  E.  Adams  Street,  Spring- 
field, 111. ;    unni. 

Lawrence  W.,  b.  June  30.   1856 ;    res.  1902,  Rocky  Ford,  Col. 

John  S.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1858;  res.  1902,  1421  Morris  Street,  Cheyenne, 
Wyoming. 

Andrew  H.,  b.  May  4,  i860;    res.  1902,  Rocky  Ford;    unm. 

lantha  A.,  b.  Feb.  26,  1864;  m.  Lawrence  Sindlar;  res.  714  E. 
Adams  Street.   Springfield. 

Bertie  R.,  b.  Mar.  11.  1866.  Missionary  in  Japan;  res.  1902,  Aomori, 
Japan. 

1115.  BuEL  HuNT^   Babcock,   son  of  William   and   Perlie 

(Hunt)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  433 

James),  1).  Bath,  N.  Y..  June   i8,   1823;    res.   1902,  Willard 
State  Hospital;    111.   Bath,   Nov.    i,    1848,   Crissy  J.,  dau.   of 
David  and  Margaret  (Michaels)  Decker,  b.  Newburgh,  N.  Y., 
May  10,  1823,  (1.  W.  Bay  City,  Mich.,  Alar.  31,  1890. 
Children : 

Eugene  Jeffrey,"  b.  Painted  Post.  N.  Y..  Oct.  31,  1851 ;  res.  1902, 
Lockport,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Geneva.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7.  1880,  Anna  R.  Wil- 
son. He  is  rector  of  Christ's  Church,  Lockport,  N.  Y.  They 
have  one  daughter,  Alarjorie  Bell,^"  b.  Grand  Rapids,  June  i,  1883. 

1479  Otis  H.,''  1).  Oct.   31,   1851;    m.   Susan  Blake. 

1480  Ida  Jane,  b.  Sept.  23,  1857;    m.  Frank  F.  Cole. 

1116.  William  Henry'^  Babcock,  son  of  Job  and  Eliza  J. 

(McGregor)  Babcock  (Job,  Ichabod,  John,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Jnne  21,  1843;  ^^s.  1902,  Hiawatha, 
Kan.;  nL  Alburg,  Jan.  i.  1866,  Celia  A.,  dau.  of  Nathan 
and  Lois  (Hazen)  Kinsley,  b.  Alburg,  Sept.  14,  1841. 

William  Babcock  served  three  years  in  the  Civil  W^ar,  ist 
Vermont  Artillery,  nth  Vermont  Volunteers;  was  wounded 
at  Cold  Harbor,  Va.    He  and  his  sons  are  farmers. 

Children,  b.  Hiawatha : 

Fred  E.,  b.  Feb.  2,   1870;    res.   1902,  Hiawatha;    m.   Dec.   12,   1897, 

Annie  Klimfeltre,  b.  Hiawatha,  Mar.  17,  1870. 
Burton,  b.  Sept.  8,   1872;    res.   1902,   Hiawatha;    m.   Norah,  dau.  of 

Joseph  and  Mary  (Becket)  Rogers. 
Lois  J.,  b.  Jan.  7,   1879. 

1117.  Philyer  L.'*  Babcock,  son  of  Ichabod  and  Mersula 

(Soles)    Babcock    (Job,    Ichabod,    John,    Job,    John, 
James),  b.  Portland,  Mich.,  Oct.  20,  1846;    res.  1902,  Park- 
man  Place,  Dorchester,  Mass. ;    m.  Patton,  Canada,  Apr.  26, 
1 87 1,  Sarah  Jane  Bright,  b.  Sutton.  Canada,  June  24,  1850. 
Children,  res.  Dorchester: 

Albert,  b.  Sutton,  Canada.  Jan.  23.  1872 ;    m.  Boston,  Nov.  27.  1895, 

Jennie  Powell. 
Edith  Anne,  b.  Aug.  21,  1873. 
Ethel  Louise,  b.  Oct.  26,  1878. 

1118.  Sarah  Aseneth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Ichabod  and  Mer- 
sula (Soles)  Babcock  (Job,  Ichabod,  John,  Job.  John, 

James),  b.   Alburg,  Vt.,  Oct.   29,    1856;    res.    1902,   Sutton, 
Ouel)ec;    m.  West  Broome,  Quebec,  Oct.   11,   1874,  Ransom 
J.,  son  of  Harmon  and  Fannie  (Durkee)  Parsons,  b.  Sutton, 
Canada,  Dec.  29,  1851. 
Child : 

Mabel  P.,  b.  Boston,  Mass.,  June  20,  1892. 
28 


434  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1119.  Emma  Sopjiia''*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Ichalxxl  and  Mer- 
snla  (Soles)  Baljcock  (Job,  Icliabod,  John,  Job,  John, 

James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Sept.   12,  1858;    res.  1902,  25  Park- 
man  Street,  Dorchester,   Mass. ;    m.  Boston,   Mass.,   Sept.  6, 
1888,  Lewis  Howard,  son  of  Thomas  L.  and  Mary  R.  (Shel- 
den)  Lovejoy,  b.  Reading,  Mass.,  Jan.  10,  1858. 
Children,  b.  Boston ; 

Carl  H.,  b.  June  22.  1889. 
Josephine,  b.  Mar.  13,  1892. 

1120.  Henry^    Babcock,    son    of    Thomas    and    Saphronia 

(Darrow)  Babcock  (Job,  Ichabod,  John,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  May  21,  1848;  res.  1902,  St.  Albans, 
Vt. ;  m.  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  Aug.  4,  1880,  Adele  C,  dau.  of 
Hollis  and  Arminda  (Sprague)  Stiles,  b.  St.  Johnsbury,  Dec. 
8,  1854. 

Henry  Babcock  is  a  farmer ;  was  formerly  a  teacher,  having 
taught  thirty-five  terms  in  public  schools,  academies,  and 
seminaries. 

Children : 

Arthur,  b.  Alburg,  Sept.  29,   1882. 

Arminda  Stiles,  b.  St.  Albans,  Mar.  3,  1886;    d.  St.  Albans,  Mar.  8, 

1886. 
Rodney  Whittemore,  b.  Milton,  Vt.,  July  22,  1890. 

1121.  Perrin  Dwight^  Babcock,  son  of  Thomas  and  Sa- 
phronia (Darrow)  Babcock  (Job,  Ichabod,  John,  Job, 

John,  James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Jan.  25,  i860;    res.   1902,  304 
E.  Winnifred  Street,   St.    Paul,   Minn. ;    m.   Augusta,   Wis., 
Oct.   15,   1884,  Ella  L.,  dau.  of  Harvey  S.  Barnes,  b.  West 
Point.  Wis.,  Mar.  10,  1864. 
Child : 

Bernice  Eva,  b.  Ashland,  Wis.,  Mar.  20,   1886. 

1122.  J^ESLiE  W.^  Babcock,  son  of  Thomas  and  Saphronia 

(Darrow)  Babcock  (Job.  Ichabod,  John,  Job,  John, 
James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Oct.  5,  1861  ;  res.  1902,  329  Wash- 
iilgton  Street,  Dorchester,  Mass. ;  m.  Alburg,  Mar.  8,  1883, 
Carrie  Augusta,  dau.  of  Sylvester  and  Jane  (Call)  Chese- 
brough,  b.  Constable,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29,  1863,  d.  New  Boston, 
N.H.,Jan.  5,  1895. 
Children : 

Cynthia  E.,  b.  Alburg,  June  19,   iSSs. 
Howard  Leslie,  b.  Manchester,  N.  H.,  Oct.  15,  1888. 
Harold  O.,  b.  Manchester,  Dec.  15,   1890. 
Mildred,  b.  Aug.  5,   1893;    d.   1895. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  435 

1123.  John    Wesley^    Babcock,    son    of    Ezra    and    Julia 

(Spoon)    Babcock    (Job,    Ichabod,    John,    Job,   John, 
James),  b.  Albnrg-,  Vt.,  Nov.  25,  1854;    res.   1902,  Oshawa, 
Ontario;    ni.  Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  29,  1880,  Augusta  J., 
dau.  of  John  Dickie,  b.  Oshawa,  Oct.  4,  1856. 
Chiklren : 

Ernest  F.,  b.  Burke,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  17.  1881 ;    d.  1882. 
Eula  May,  b.  Burke,  May  9,  1883. 
Harold  A.,  b.  Oshawa,  July  8,  1895. 

1124.  William  Austin*  Babcock,  son  of  Ezra  and  Julia 

(Spoon)    Babcock    (Job,    Ichabod,   John,   Job,   John, 
James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Aug.   11,   i860;    res.   1902,  Oshawa, 
Ontario;   m.  Malone,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  15,  1882,  Carrie  E.,  dau.  of 
Darwin  and  Tryphena  Williamson,  b.  Malone,  Sept.  8,  1859. 
Children : 

Grace,  b.  Burke,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  26,  1885. 

Mabel,  b.  Aug.  15,  1886. 

Floyd  A.,  b.  Malone,  June  19,   1892;    d.   1892. 

1125.  Elizabeth'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Ezra  and  Julia  (Spoon) 
Babcock   (Job,  Ichabod,  John,  Job.  John,  James),  b. 

Alburg,  Vt.,  Sept.  13,  1862;  res.  1902,  Burke,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Burke,  Jan.  26,  1882,  George  H..  son  of  William  D.  William- 
son, b.  Malone,  N.  Y..  June  29,  1854.  They  had  five  children: 
Roy,  Robert,  Mae,  Floyd,  and  Elizabeth. 

1126.  Joseph    Carleton*    Babcock,    son    of    Ichabod    and 

Emily  (Boardman)  Babcock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John, 
Job,  John,  James),  b.  Alburg,  Vt.,  Oct.  15,  1829;   d.  Feb.  24, 
1899:   m.  (i)  South  Hero,  Vt.,  May  3,  1851,  Jane  Rose;   m. 
(2)  Little  Prairie,  Jan.,  1883,  Mahala  Sherwood. 
Children : 

Oren  W.,  b.  Troy  Center,  Wis.,  Mar.  14,  1853;    d.  Sept.  14,  1855. 
Emma  Jane,  b.  Apr.  10,  1855. 

Carlton    Eugene,   b.    Weyauwega,    Wis.,    Aug.    25,    1857;     res.    1902, 
Troy  Center ;    m.  Edith  Babcock. 

1127.  Christopher*    Babcock.    son    of    James    and    Lois 

(Ross)    Babcock    (Christopher,    Christopher,   George, 
George,  John.  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  1.;    d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 

b.  '-\    m.    Buffalo.   Lucy,   dau.   of  George  and   Charlotte 

Valentine,  b.  Lincolnshire,  England,  d.  Buffalo,  Sept,  21,  1896. 
Four  cliildren  :  Edward,  deceased:  Charles:  Alfred,  deceased; 
and  Olivia,  who  res.  1902,  174  Whitney  Place,  Buffalo. 


436  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1128.  James  Ross^  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Lois  (Ross) 

Babcock  ( Christoplier.  Christopher,  George,  George, 
Jolin.  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  July  20,  1817;  d.  Fremont, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  21,  1897;  m.  Cohocton,  N.  Y.,  June  4,  1837, 
Ruth,  dau.  of  Asa  and  Fannie  (Crawford)  Phillips,  b.  Cohoc- 
ton, Aug.  J  8,  1819;  res.  1902,  Fremont. 
Children : 

Esther  J.,  b.  Cohocton,  June  3,  1840;    d.  July  30,   1841. 

1481  Maryette,"  b.   Nov.  27,   1841  ;    m.  John  M.  Kelley. 

1482  Harriet  F.,  b.  Apr.  5,  1844;    m.  Carlos  G.  Lowell. 

1483  William  W.,  b.  May  21,  1849;    m.  Harriet  Helmer. 

Edwin  P.,  b.  Aug.  12,   1851  ;    d.  Fremont,  Aug.  17,   1895;    m.  Lottie 

Bardeen,   b.   June  24,    1876.     They  had   two  children.    Frank   and 

Fay. 
Stanton   Charles,"   b.    Fremont,   Jan.   4,    1859;     m.   Canisteo,    N.    Y., 

Nov.   24,    1881,   Mary,   dau.   of  Thomas  and   Elizabeth   Acomb,   b. 

S.    Dansville,    N.    Y.,    Dec.    27,    1855.      Child:     Harrison    L.,^"   b. 

Castile,  Sept.  20,  1887.     They  res.  Haskinville,  N.  Y. 

1129.  Benjamin^  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Lois  (Ross) 
Babcock    (Christopher,   Christopher,   George,   George, 

John,  James),  b.  ;    d.  Aurora,  111.,  Feb.,   1892;    m.  Co- 
hocton, Susan  Darner,  d.  Aurora.    He  moved  from  New  York 
State  to  Illinois  about  1870. 
Child : 

Sarah,  b.  ;    m.  Frank  Ireland.     Had  three  children. 

1130.  William    Champion^    Babcock,   son   of  James   and 
Lois     (Ross)     Babcock     (Christopher,     Christopher, 

George,  George.  John,  James),  b.  Cohocton,  N.  Y.,  1827  (  ?)  ; 
d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  3,  1901  ;   m.  Buffalo,  1853,  Lucy,  dau. 
of  Silas  and  Lucretia  (Miller)  Burton,  b.  Buffalo.  Jan.  3.  1832, 
d.  Buffalo,  Dec.  3,  1901. 
Children : 

Gertie,    d.    age    16;     Jennie,    age    14;     Bertie,    age   9;     Eddie    Ross, 
age  6  mos.     All  died  of  scarlet  fever,  Jan.,  1875. 

1131.  George  A.*  Stanton,  son  of  Marlborough  and  Mar- 
tha (Hazard)   Stanton  (Martha,  dau.  of  George,  Jr., 

and  Martha  [Babcock]  Hazard)  (Christopher,  George, 
George,  John,  James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Jan.  24, 
1809;  d.  Westerly.  R.  I..  Feb.  4,  1894;  m.  (i)  Mar.  8,  1835, 
Catherine,  dau.  of  \\'illiam  P.  Sands,  b.  Block  Island.  Nov.  9, 
1 81 3,  d.  Sept.  30,  1846;  m.  (2)  June  5,  1848,  Sarah  M. 
Brown,  of  Stonington,  b.  July  16,  1822,  d.  Apr.  16,  1849.  Left 
no  child.  M.  (3)  Feb.  14,  1857,  Bridget  Babcock  Browning, 
b.  Charlestown,  Jan.  10,  1832. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  437 

Children  by  tirst  wife: 

Nathaniel   G.,   M.D.,   h.   Block  Island,   R.   I..  July  8,   1836   (?);    res. 

1903,   Newport,  R.  I.  ;    unm. 
Kate  Sands,  M.l).,  b.  Apr.  i,  1838;    res.  1903.  New  York  City;  unm. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.   Feb.,   1841 ;    d.  Jan.   17,   1867;    m.   Nathan  Hale, 

of  Providence. 
George  A.,  Jr.,  b.  June   18,   1844 ;    res.   1903,  Wrentham,   Mass. ;    m. 

Harriet  Aldrich,   of  Wrentham. 
Martha  B.,  b.   1845;    d.  young. 
B.   Frank,  b.   Sept.  20,   1846;    m.   Miss  Harris,  of  Providence;    res. 

1903,  Providence. 

Chiklreii  by  third  wife: 

Martha  B.,  b.  Oct.  22.  1S57;    d.  young. 

Harriet  B.,  b.   Feb.   12,   1859;    res.   1903,  Westerly;    unm. 

Fanny  P.,  b.  Oct.   16,  1861  ;    unm. ;    res.  1903,  Westerly. 

Annie  L.,  b.  June  30.  1864;  m.  Aug.  25,  1886,  Daniel,  .son  of  Charles 
and  Eliza  (Cottrell)  Chaniplin.  She  res.  1903,  Hyde  Park,  Chi- 
cago, 111. 

1132.  Albert^  Babcock,  son  of  Edwan  and  OHvia  (Cady) 

Babcock     (Rowse,     Rowse,     George,    George,    John, 
James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  5,   1848;    res,   1900,  Provi- 
dence. R.  I.;  m.  Norwich,  Conn.,  June  9,  1881,  Sarah  P.,  dau. 
of  Isaac  Johnson,  b.  Norwich. 
Children,  b.  Providence: 

Frederick  H.,  b.  ^lay  14.   1886. 
Harold  P..  b.  Jan.   18,   1888. 
Donald   S.,  b.   Mar.    19,    1890. 

1133.  RowsE'*^  Babcock,  son  of  Horace  and  Abby  J.  (Ci"oss) 
Babcock     (Rowse,     Row^se,     George,    George,    John, 

James),  b.  Westerly.  R.  I.,  Aug.  30,  1844;  d.  New  York  City, 
Oct.  16,  1899;   m.  Baltimore,  Md.,  Apr.  22,  1868,  Kate.  dau. 
of  S.  Lewis  and  Emeline  Munger;   res.  1900,  Kanona,  N.  Y. 
Child : 

Jane  Cross,  b.  May  10,  1875;  res.  1902,  Kanona;  m.  Rev.  Arthur 
R.  Teal. 

1134.  Hannah^   Babcock,   dau.    of   Horace   and   Abby   J. 

(Cross)  Babcock  (Rowse,  Rowse,  George,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Nov.  7,  1850:  res.  1902, 
5000  \\'oodland  Avenue.  Philadelphia.  Pa. ;  m.  Westerly,  Jan. 
24,  1883,  Rev.  William  M.,  son  of  James  R.  and  Helen  M. 
(Richmond)  Groton,  b.  Waldoboro.  Me.,  Nov.  28,  1850. 

Rev.  William  Groton  is  Dean  and  Professor  in  the  Episcopal 
Theological  Seminary,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 


43^  1  lie  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Westerly: 

Natliaiiiel.   h.   Jan.    19,    1885. 
John  Al.,  b.  July  14,  1887. 

1135.  Horace  Hobart*  Babcock,  son  of  Horace  and  Abby 
J.  (Cross)  Babcock  (Rowse,  Rowse,  George,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Mar.  29,  1854;    res.  1900, 
Westerly;  m.  Dec.  10,  1884,  Abby  J.,  dau.  of  J.  Hobart  Cross, 
b.  Westerly,  Sept.  22,  i860,  d.  Westerly,  June  6,  1899. 
Children,  b.  Westerly : 

Horace  Hobart,  b.  Nov.  20,  1885. 
Rowse,  b.  Feb.  22,  1887. 

1136.  Augusta^    Babcock,    dau.    of   John   and    Martha    O. 

(Rand)  Babcock  (David,  David,  David,  George,  John, 
James),  b.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  13,  1836;  res.  1902,  Willoughby, 
O. ;  m.  W^illoughby,  Aug.  16,  1864,  Chauncey  W.,  son  of 
Augustus  and  Emeline  (Cooley)  Wicker,  b.  Vermont,  Dec.  10, 
1835,  d.  Willoughby,  Dec.  10,  1890. 
Children : 

Sherman    A.,    b.    Bridgeport,    Vt. ;     res.    Willoughby;     m.    Apr.    27, 

1887,  Estelle  J.  Beebe. 
Augusta,   b.    Duquoin,    Feb.   27,    1868;     res.    1902,    Willoughby;     m. 

Carlos  F.   Smart. 
George  C,  b.  July  31,   1866;    d.  Duquoin,  111.,  July  3,   1867. 
Charles  A.,   b.   Nov.   20,   1870;    res.   1902,   Willoughby;    m.    Paines- 

ville,  Apr.  7,  1893,  Edith  Wade. 

1137.  Mary^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Maria  (Morgan) 
Babcock  (David,  David,  David,  George,  John,  James), 

b.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1832;   d.  St.  Cloud,  Minn.,  Jan.  11, 
1903;    m.  Dexter,  N.  Y.,  June  19,   1855,  Joseph  G.,  son  of 
Levi  and  Adaline  (Cory)  Smith,  b.  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y., 
May  15,  1833;   res.  1903,  St.  Cloud. 
Children,  b.  Watertown,  N.  Y. : 

Edmund  Beardslee,  b.  Mar.  24,  1856;  res.  1903,  St.  Cloud.  He  is 
Cashier  of  the  First  National  Bank  of  St.  Cloud. 

George  B.,  b.  Oct.  24,  1859;  res.  1903,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. ;  m.  Minne- 
apolis, Minn.,   1889,  Laura  Mitchell. 

1138.  William^  Babcock,  son  of  Jesse  and  Maria   (Mor- 
gan)  Babcock   (David,  David,  David,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Dexter,  N.  Y.,  June  29,  1848;  res.  1902,  Boulder, 
Colo.;  m.  Denver,  Colo.,  Apr.  1875,  Mary  Blake,  b.  Wis.,  d. 
Boulder,  Sept.  17,  1878. 


The  BabcQck  Genealogy.  439 

Children,  b.  Boulder : 

Gaylord  D.,  b.  May  24.   1876;    d.  Oct.  20,   1898. 
Howard,  b.  Nov.  21,  1877;    res.  1902,  Gold  Field,  Cal. 

1139.  Emma^  Babcock,  dan.  of  George  and  Emily  (Brown) 
Babcock  (David,  David,  David,  George,  John,  James), 

b.  Wheeling,  111.,  Apr.  2,  1846;    res.  1903,  10206  Longwood 
Avenue,   Chicago,    111.;    ni.    Waupun,   Wis.,   Dec.    28,    1871, 
Horace  E.,  son  of  Hiram  and  Mary  (Hurd)  Horton,  b.  New 
York,  Dec.  20,  1843.     See  page  46,  description  of  tankard. 
Children,  b.  Rochester,  Minn.,  except  first: 

George  Terry,  b.  Waupun,  Aug.  25,  1873. 

Susy  M.,  b.  Jan.  13,  1876. 

Jessie,  b.  Aug.  25,  1879. 

Helen,  b.  Apr.  25.  1881 ;    d.  Oct.  i,  1881. 

Horace   B.,   b.    Dec.   25,    1885. 

Hiram  T.,  b.  Apr.  25,  1888. 

1140.  Perry   Harrington^   Babcock,   son  of  Almon   and 
Mary    (Collins)    Babcock    (Perry,   Jonathan,    David, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Ravenna,  O.,  Jan.  23,  18 16;  d. 
Cleveland,  O.,  Apr.  15,  1897;  m.  (i)  Dec.  21,  1843,  Marie 
Hurd,  d.  July  16,  1882;    m.  (2)  Caroline  Baldwin. 

Perry  Babcock  was  a  merchant  in  Ravenna  from  1846 
to  1853.  He  removed  to  Cleveland  in  1853,  and  was  senior 
partner  of  the  wholesale  grocery  firm  of  Babcock,  Hurd  & 
Co.  until  his  death. 

Children : 

George  H.,  b.  Sept.   17.   1844;    d.  Nov.  15.  1883. 
Charles,   b.  Jan.   28,    1853;    m.   Jan.    13,   1875,    Sarah   K.   Holloway. 
They  have  three  children  :    Virginia,  Lila,  Georgia. 

1141.  Albert-  Babcock,  son  of  Almon  and  Mary  (Collins) 

Babcock    (Perry,     Jonathan,     David,     George,    John, 
James),  b.  Ravenna,  O.,  Sept.   12,   1824;    res.   1902,  Roots- 
town,  O. ;   m.  Aurora.  O.,  Apr.  26.  1854,  Betsy,  dau.  of  Reu- 
ben and  C.  (Lewis)  Avery,  b.  Aurora,  May  30,  1831. 
Children,  b.  Rootstown : 

John   F.,°  b.   Apr.   30.    1855 ;     res.    Ravenna ;     m.   Ravenna.   Dec.   6, 

1877,   Celestine  C,   dau.  of  Tobias  and  Maria  Hoover  Cooffman, 

b.   Berlin,  O..  Feb.  21.   1853. 
Adalaid,"   b.    May   21,    1857;     res.    1902,    Ravenna;     m.    Rootstov^rn, 

Oct.   30,   1878,   Kelsie   S.,   son  of   Bela  and   Elizabeth    (Hutchins) 

Wing,  b.   Louisville,   N.   Y.,  Jan.    10,    1852.     Child:    Albert  K.," 

b.   Sept.   12,   1879. 
Mary  C,  b.  Jan.  20.  1859;    res.  Cleveland.  O.  :    m.  Rootstown.  Dec. 

24,  1879,  Charles  D.,  son  of  David  and  Elizabeth  (Davis)  Hughes, 

d.  May  26,  1892. 


440  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Martha  M.,  h.  July  15,  1861;  res.  1902,  Ravenna;  m.  Ravenna, 
Mar.  21,  188S,  Lester  ].,  son  of  Henry  and  Ellen  (Uavis)  Good- 
dard,  b.  Aurora,  O.,  July  26,  1859.     No  children. 

Jannctte  Marie,  b.  July  2,   1864 ;    res.  1902,  Ravenna ;    unm. 

Josephine  B.,"  b.  June  16,  1868;  m.  Rootstown,  July  3,  1892,  Charles 
A.,  son  of  Thomas  and  Ellen  Hughes  Clark,  b.  Oct.  28,  1866. 
Child :    Hazel  E.,'"  b.  July  26,  1893. 

1142.  Emeline  Eliza^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Edmund  and  Leu- 
ra  (Bates)  Babcock  (Perry,  Jonathan,  David,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  Ravenna,  O.,  Oct.  28,  1824;    res.  Ravenna; 
m.   Ravenna,   William  L.,  son  of  William  and   Polly    (Bur- 
roughs)  Coolman,  b.  Shalersville,  O.,  Aug.  29,  18 18,  d.  Ra- 
venna, Mar.  3,  1888. 
Children : 

Edmund  B.,  b.   Shalersville,  Dec.   12,   1845;    res.   1902,  New  Albany, 

Ind. ;    m.  New  Albany,  Aug.   16.  1882,  Sarah  E.  McCurdy. 
Horace  Clinton,   b.   Shalersville,   Sept.  9,    1848;     res.   1902,   Hudson, 

O.  ;    m.    Atlanta,    O.,   July  4,    1876,   Ida   N.,   dau.   of   Samuel  and 

Clarissa   (Streator)    Price,  b.   Dec.  22,   1859. 
Leura  A.,  b.   Oct.    i,   1850;    res.   1902,   Ravenna;    m.   Ravenna,  Jan. 

ig,  1895,  Charles  H.  Porter,  b.  Orange,  Mass.,  June  5,  1850. 
Eliza  P.,  b.  Ravenna,  Feb.  3,   i860;    d.  Mar.  25,   1864. 

1143.  Harriet  C*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Edmund  and  Leura 

(Bates)    Babcock    (Perry,   Jonathan,   David,   George, 
John,  James),  b.  Ravenna,  O.,  Jan.  8,  1827;    res.  1902,  New 
Castle,  Pa.;   m.  (i)  Luke  Sawyer;    m.  (2)  Ravenna,  Jan.  5, 
1853,  Jackson  D.  Carrington. 
Children,  b.  Ravenna : 

Nettie,   b.   May  23,    1858;    m.   Oct.    17,    1883,  John   S.   Whitla;     res. 

1902,  Alliance,  O.     Have  4  daughters. 
Jennie,  b.   Sept.  5,   i860;    d.  July  9,   1874. 

1144.  Ethan  Elijah^  Babcock,  son  of  Edmund  and  Leura 

(Bates)  Babcock  (Perr3^  Jonathan,  David,  George. 
John,  James),  b.  Ravenna,  O.,  Dec.  18.  1828;  res.  1902, 
Chester,  la.:  m.  Wisconsin,  Apr.  17,  1854,  Mary,  dau.  of 
Henry  and  Nancy  (Farland)  Tombs,  b.  Rome,  N.  Y.,  July 
2y,  1832. 
Children : 

Edmond  H.,  b.  Ravenna,  Jan.  25,   1855;    res.   1902,  Chester,  la.;    m. 

Preston,  Minn.,  Phebe  Jones. 
Kate  M.,  b.  Ripon,  Wis.,  July  11,   1859;    d.  Ripon. 
Bertha  O.,  b.   Ripon,   Sept.  20,   1866;    res.   1902,  Lime  Springs,  la.; 

m.  York,  Minn.,  J.  A.  Phifer. 
Helen  P.,  b.  York,  Mar.  23,  1872;    res.  1902,  Chester. 
Elmer   F.,  b.   York,  Dec.  8,   1875;    res.   1902,   Chester;    m.   Chester, 

Myrtle  Nichols. 


SILVER    TANKARD. 

Owned  by  Mrs.   Emma    (Babcock)   Horton,  Cliicago,  III.     It  has 
been  in  her  l)ranch  of  the  family  for  hve  generations. 

Pages  46  and  439. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  44 1 

1145.  Clara  N.^   Babcock,  dan.  of  George  and   EHzaljeth 

(Clark)  Babcock  (Denison,  Benedict,  David,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1865;  res. 
1902,  853  Genesee  Street,  Utica;  m.  New  Hartford,  Jnne  i, 
1887,  Frank  C,  son  of  Henry  and  Caroline  (Clark)  Ogden, 
b.  Binghaniton,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  12,  1862. 
Children : 

Elizabeth,  b.  July  29,  1888. 
George  B.,  b.  Sept.  17,  1891. 
Henry  B.,  b.  Aug.   15,   1896. 

1146.  Alice  C*   Babcock,   dan.   of  Gideon   C.   and   Phebe 

(Noyes)    Babcock    (Gideon,   Gideon,   David,   George, 
John,  James),  b.  Homer,  N.   Y. ;    res.    1902,  Niagara  Falls, 
N.  Y. ;   m.  Homer,  Nov.  9,  1870,  John  W.,  son  of  James  and 
Eliza  (Whitney)  Trolt.  b.  Niagara  Falls. 
Two  children :   Alice  A.  and  John  Winslow. 

1147.  ]\Iary  A.^  Collins,  dan.  of  Stephen  and  Mary  (Bab- 
cock) Collins  (Gideon,  Gideon,  David,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  New  Woodstock,  N.  Y.,  May  5,  1832;    res.  1902, 
Rochester,  Minn.;    m.  New  Woodstock,  Ang.  3,  1858,  Harri- 
son W.,  son  of  Rnfus  and  Mary  (Brown)  Garrett,  b.  Nelson 
Flats,  N.  Y.,  May  6. 
Children,  b.  Rochester : 

Francis  M.,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Corpus  Christi,  Tex.;    m.  Rochester, 

Lillic   Adams. 

Harry  W..  b.  ;    res.  1902.  Alice,  Tex.;    m.  Frances  . 

Herbert  N.,  b.  ;    res.   1902.   San  Diego,  Tex.;    m.  Ada  French. 

Clifford,  b.  ;    d.   Alice,    1900. 

1148.  Frank  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Harry  C.  and  Har- 
riet M.  (Crandall)  Babcock  (Richard,  Gideon,  David, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  W.  Edmeston,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  7,  185 1; 
res.  1902,  Indianapolis,  Ind. ;  m.  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  30, 
1869,  Nancy  M.,  dan.  of  Daniel  and  Anna  (Angell)  Bnrdick, 
b.  Cnvler,  N.  Y. ;  res.  1902,  22  Upson  Place,  Rochester, 
N.  Y.' 
Child: 

Clyde,"  b.  De  Ruyter,  June  16,  1871  ;  res.  1902.  Rochester;  m. 
Rochester,  Oct.  10,  1894,  Luah,  dau.  of  Edwin  and  Luah  (Grant) 
Griffin,  b.  July  18,  1872.  Have  one  child,  Anna  L.,^"  b.  Sept.  16, 
1900. 

1149.  Eliza^   Niven,  dan.  of  Robert  and   Elizabeth    (Bab- 
cock)   Niven    (Asa,    Gideon,    David,    George,    John, 


442  Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

James),  b.  Montrose,  Pa.;  res.  1902,  at  187  Court  Street, 
Bingliamton,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  May  8,  1880,  Wil- 
liam A.,  son  of  Edwin  and  Marcia  (Philips)  McKinney,  b. 
Cooperstown,  N.  Y. 

They  had  two  children:  Elizabeth,  d.  young,  and  Charlotte, 
b.  June,  1886. 

1150.  Frederick   Stanton^    Wicks,   son   of   Edward   and 
Mary   (Babcock)  Lynde  Wicks  (Asa,  Gideon,  David, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  25,  1851  ;  res. 
1902,  201  Green  Street,  Syracuse;    m.  Chicago,  111.,  Apr.  24, 
1889,  Lily  M.,  dau.  of  John  and  Julia  (Moulton)   Doane,  b. 
Thompson,  Conn.,  Sept.  3,  1865. 
Children : 

Stanton  D.,  b.  Chicago,   111.,  Jan.  4,   1892. 
Bartlett,  b.  Chicago,  Apr.  16,  1895. 
John  D.,  b.   Syracuse,  July  18,   1897. 

1151.  Edward   Noyes^   Westcott,   son  of   Dr.   Amos   and 
Clara    (Babcock)     Westcott     (Asa,    Gideon,    David, 

George,  John.  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27,  1846;  d. 
Mar.  31,  1898;   m.  June  11.  1874,  Jane  Dows,  d.  Jan.  6,  1890. 

In  1898  he  wrote  David  Harum.  In  Jan.,  1902,  there  had 
been  sold  530.000  copies  of  the  book. 

Children,  b.  Syracuse : 

Harold,  b.  ;    res.  Texas;    unm. 

Violet,  b.  ;    res.   New  York  State ;    unm. 

Philip,  b.  -;    res.   Black  Hall,   Conn. 

1152.  Mary  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Edward  and 
Rhoda  A.  (Trowbridge)  Babcock  (Asa,  Gideon,  Da- 
vid, George,  John,  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  July  24,  1848; 
res.  1903,  83  Remsen  Street,  Brooklyn.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Brooklyn, 
May  21,  1873,  Edward  B.,  son  of  John  and  Mary  (Stiles) 
Thomas,  b.  Cortland,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  4,  1848. 

Edward  Beers  Thomas  was  appointed  U,  S.  Judge 
of  the  Eastern  District  of  New  York,  Feb.,  1898,  by  Presi- 
dent McKinley. 

Children : 

Katherine,"  b.  Brooklyn,  Feb.  26,  1874 ;  res.  1902,  142  Willow  Street, 
Brooklyn;  m.  Brooklyn,  Nov.  24.  1897,  William  H.  Cary.  Chil- 
dren: William  H.,^"  b.  Nov.  9,  1898;  Edward  Thomas,  b.  Nov. 
30,    1901. 

Edward  S.,  b.  Mar.  12,  1876;  res.  1903,  83  Remsen  Street, 
Brooklvn ;    unm. 

William  R.,  b.  Dec.   12,  1877;    d.  May  17,   1887. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  443 

1153.  Charles    Lynde**    Babcock,    son    of    J'ldward    and 
Catherine    (Lynde)    Babcock    (Asa,    Gideon,    Uavid, 

George,  John.  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  23,  1855;  res. 
1902,  140  Remsen  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Wortendyke, 
N.  J.,  Oct.   15,   1884,  Hester,  dan.  of  CorneHus  and  Rachel 
(Hopper)  \\'ortendyke,  b.  Wortendyke,  Nov.  10,  i860. 
Children : 

Charles  L.,  b.  July  28,  1886. 
Helen  W.,  b.  July  22,   1889. 

1154.  Augusta    Wicks^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Edward    and 
Catherine    (Lynde)    Babcock    (Asa,    Gideon,    David, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  4,  1861 ;  res. 
1902,  5039  Washington  Ave.,  Chicago,  111.;  m.  (i)  Apr.  26, 
1882,  Cyrus  P.,  son  of  Bryaic  and  Elizabeth  (Buckley)  Smith, 
b.  Jan.  30,  1859,  d.  Mar.  20,  1895;  m.  (2)  Nov.  i,  1898, 
James  A.  Ostrum. 

Children  by  first  marriage: 

Eloise  B.,  b.  Aug.  18,  1883. 

Cyrus  Porter,  b.  Feb.  15,  1886;    d.  in  infancy. 

Katherine  L.,  b.  July  22,   1887. 

1155.  Edward  Howard^  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Edward  and 
Catherine    (Lynde)    Babcock    (Asa,    Gideon,    David, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  29,  1863:   res. 
1902,    Bay   Ridge,    Brooklyn;    m.    Brooklyn,   June    i,    1893, 
Alice,   dau.   of  Theodore  and   Clara   A.    (Cory)    Talbot,   b. 
Providence.  R.  L,  June  11,  1868. 
Children : 

Edward  Howard,  Jr.,  b.  Aug.  12.  1894. 
Olive,  b.  Feb.  28,  1897. 
Emily,  b.  Nov.  11,  1900. 

1156.  Rev.  Maltbie  Davenport^  Babcock,  D.D.,  son  of 
Henry  and  Emily  M.  (Maltbie)  Babcock  (Asa,  Gid- 
eon, David,  George.  John,  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3, 
1858;  d.  Naples,  Italy,  May  18,  1901,  of  Continental  fever; 
m.  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  4,  1882,  Katharine  E.,  dau.  of 
Hon.  John  P.  and  Sarah  (Anderson)  Tallman,  b.  Poughkeep- 
sie, Aug.  9,  1857;  res.  1903,  3  Colonial  Place,  Pittsburg,  Pa. 
No  chiklren. 

Rev.  Maltbie  Babcock  graduated  from  the  Syracuse  High 
School  in   1875,  and  from  the  Syracuse  University  in   1879, 


444  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Ijoth  with  honors.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Upsilon  Frater- 
nity and  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  Society.  He  graduated  from 
Auburn  Theological  Seminary  in  May,  1882,  going  directly 
to  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Lockport,  N.  Y.  In  1887 
he  went  to  the  Brown  Memorial  Church  of  Baltimore,  Md., 
and  in  1900  to  the  Brick  Presbyterian  Church  in  New  York. 
He  was  a  man  of  remarkable  ability,  and  had  great  popularity 
as  a  pulpit  orator  both  in  Baltimore  and  New  York. 

1157.  Howard  Noyes^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Emily 

(Maltbie)  Babcock  (Asa,  Gideon,  David,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  i860;  m.  Torring- 
ton,  Conn.,  Feb.  7,  1888,  Caroline  C,  dau.  of  Norman  and 
Sarah  (Comstock)  Lathrop,  b.  Torrington,  Sept.  12,  i860; 
both  res.  1902,  3  Colonial  Place,  Pittsburg,  Pa. 
Children,  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y. : 

Howard  L.  ;     Maltbie ;     Perrin. 

1158.  Alice  L.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  George  and  Abby  Ann 

(Brown)     Babcock     (Jonathan,    Jonathan,    Jonathan, 
George,  John,  James),  b.  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  Apr.  4,  1856;    d. 
Apr.  26,  1896;  m.  Ashaway,  Feb.  14,  1880,  John  G.  Campbell. 
Children : 

Bertha,  b.  Dec.  18,  1881  ;    d.  Apr.  12,  1882. 
Alice  T.,  b.  Apr.  20,   1883. 
Ellen,  b.  June  17,  1885. 
Alfred,  b.   Aug.    16,    1888. 

1159.  Susan  M.'^  Gould,   dau.   of  Thomas  A.  and  Esther 

(Babcock)  Gould  (Peleg,  Peleg,  Hezekiah.  George, 
John,  James),  b.  S.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  Apr.  22,  18^1  ;  res.  1902, 
Wickford,  R.  I. ;  m.  Gould,  R.  I.,  Dec.  8,  1867^  Rowland  R., 
son  of  Rowdand  and  Anna  (Holley)  Gardner,  b.  S.  Kingston, 
Dec.  10,  1846. 
Children : 

Anna  E..  b.  S.  Kingston,  Mar.  26,  1869;    res.  1902,  Cranston,  R.  I.; 

m.  J.  M.  Cornell. 
Florence  M.,  b.  Cranston.  Mar.  5.   1871  ;    d.  Nov.  24,  1874. 
Susan,  b.  Oct.  15,  1873;    d.  Mar.,  1878. 
Martha,  b.  Nov.  24,  1875;    res.  1902,  Gould,  R.  I.;    m.  Apr.  3,  1901, 

Charles,   son  of  John  and   Mary    (Nichols)    Sweet,  b.  July,   1875. 
Millard  T.,  b.  Oct.  8,   1878;    res.  1902,  Cranston;    m.  Dec.  10,  1899, 

Aland  B.,  dau.  of  George  and  Evelyn  Rose. 
Walter,  b.  Dec.  26,    1880. 
Willard,  b.  Dec.  26,   1880. 
Harold  R.,  b.  May  8,   1887. 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  445 

1160.  S.   Franklin**   Babcock,   son  of  George  and   Mary 

(Cahoone)  Babcock  (Ethan,  Peleg,  Hezekiah, 
George,  John,  James),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  Dec.  16,  1870; 
res.  1902,  Slocumville,  R.  1.;  m.  Slociimville,  Aug.  21,  1892, 
Annie,  (kui.  of  Thomas  and  JMary  (Cooper)  Watson,  b.  Slo- 
cumville, Aug.  20,  1869. 
Child : 

George  Thomas,  b.  Slocumville,  Feb.  18,  1897. 

1161.  Edward  Bradford^  Babcock,  son  of  George  F.  and 
Mary   (Cahoone)   Babcock   (Ethan,  Peleg,  Hezekiah, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Richmond,  R.  I.,  May  19,  1876   res. 
1902,  Roslindale,  Mass.;    m.  Carolina,  R.  I.,  Nov.   16,   1898, 
Carrie  M.,  dau.  of  William  and  Harriet   (Atwood)    Collins, 
b.  Woodville,  R.  L,  Nov.  6,  1876. 
Child : 

Donna  Collins,  b.  Carolina,  Aug.  19,  1900. 

1162.  George  Hazard^  Babcock.  son  of  Hezekiah  and 
Hannah  (Hazard)  Babcock  (Hezekiah,  Caleb,  Heze- 
kiah, George,  John,  James),  b.  Wakefield.  R.  I.,  Aug.  10, 
1845 ;  res.  1902,  Rollers ville,  O. ;  m.  Franklin,  Pa.,  Dec.  20, 
1875,  Alice  I.,  dau.  of  Col.  Cornelius  and  Isabelle  (Craig) 
Houser,  b.  East  Sandy,  Pa.,  July  28,  1854. 

About    1875   George  Babcock  was   in  the  oil   business   at 
Penn,  later  removed  to  Rollersville. 
Children : 

Richard  Hazard,®  b.  Monroeville,  Pa.,  June  27,  1877;  res.  Rollers- 
ville: m.  Kenton,  O.,  Dec.  9,  1899.  Lettie  E..  dau.  of  William 
and  Harriet  (Thomas)  Lloyd,  b.  Ada,  O..  July  31,  1879.  Both 
Richard  and  his  wife  are  graduates  of  the  Ohio  Normal  Uni- 
versity.     Child:    Evonelle,'"  b.   Rollersville,  Jan.    17,    1901. 

Earl  Allen,  b.  Friendship,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  20,  1882;  res.  1902, 
Rollersville. 

1163.  John  E.^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Mary   (Perry) 

Babcock    (Hezekiah.   Caleb.  Hezekiah.   George,  John. 
James),  b.  Wakefield,  R.  I..  Oct.  7,  1858:    res.  1902,  Wake- 
field:   m.  Peacedale,  R.  I.,  Feb.  27,  1890.  Marjorie,  dau.  of 
■George  and  Kate  PI.   ( Dickrav)   Rodman,  b.  Peacedale,  Feb. 
29,  1868. 
Child : 

Edith  Rodman,  b.   Wakefield,  May   17,   1891, 


44^  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1164.  Daniel  S.^  Babcock,  son  of  Daniel  and  Mary  (Wil- 
cox) Babcock  (Elisha,  Simeon,  Elislia,  Geori^e,  John, 

James),  b.  Sept.   16,  1821  ;    he  was  lost  at  sea;    m.  May  13, 
1847,  Henrietta  P.  Keeney. 
Children : 

Mary  Ella,  b.  Apr.  2,  1848. 

George  P.,"  b.   May  5,   1854;    "i-   Lois  A.   Matterson,  Jan.  24,   1876. 

They   had   three  children :     Grace,'"   Daniel,   George. 
Herman  V.,  b.  Jan.  22,   1857;    m.  Catherine  T.  McWilliams. 
Virginia,  b.  Aug.   i,   1859. 

1165.  HuLDAH^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Daniel  and  Mary   (Wil- 
cox) Babcock  (Elisha,  Simeon,  Elisha,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Apr.  26,  1826;   d.  Old  Mystic, 
Conn.;    m.  Westerly  (?),  R.  I.,  Oct.  6,  1844,  Amos  B.,  son 
of   Benjamin   F.    and   Amy    (Landphere)    Taylor,    b.    Lynn, 
Mass. ;   res.  1902,  Old  Mystic. 
Children : 

Anna,  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Aug.  20,  1846 ;  res.  1902,  39  Baldwin 
Place,  Yonkers,   N.   Y. ;    m.  June  7,   1877,  Arthur  Parton. 

Lillie,  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Oct.  24,  1848;  res.  1902,  Old  Mystic;  m. 
Apr.  16,  1872,  Simon  Gallup. 

Daniel  A.,  b.  Groton,  Conn.,  Sept.  22,  1852;  d.  Westerly,  Jan.  5, 
1900;  m.  Nov.  15,  1880,  Hannah,  dau.  of  John  and  Harriet  (Bab- 
cock) Cundell,  b.  Mystic,  Conn.,  July  29,  185 1  ;  res.  1903,  Potter 
Hill,  R.  I. 

Adrian  B.,  b.   Sept.  26,   1854;    d.  Oct.  31,   1855. 

Henry  B.,  b.  Groton,  Aug.  16,  1857:  res.  1902,  Riverpoint,  R.  I.; 
m.   1878,  Emily,   dau.  of  Elisha  and  Lydia  Landphere. 

Huldah  M.,  b.  Stonington,  Dec.  18,  1859;  res.  1902,  5746  Madi- 
son Avenue,  Chicago,  111. ;  m.  Oct.  16,  1883,  Frederic  E. 
Devv^herst. 

Matilda  A.,  b.  Mar.  16,  1863;    d.  Jan.  18,  1868. 

Amos  B.,  b.  May  29,  1867;    d.  Oct.  6,   1868. 

1166.  Joseph  H.^  Babcock,  son  of  Simeon  and  Mary  (Bab- 

cock) Babcock  (Elisha,  Simeon,  Elisha,  George,  John, 

James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Sept.    15,   1832;    res.   1901,  40 

Moore  Street,  Providence,  R.  I. ;  m.  Mary,  dau.  of  Joseph  and 

Sarah  (Huling)  Barber,  b.  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I.,  Feb.  6,  1835. 

Child : 

Charles  F.,  b.  Charlestown,  R.  I.,  Aug.  25,  1856;  d.  Charlestown, 
July  3,   i860. 

1167.  Mary    Elizabeth^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Hoxie    and 
Elizabeth   (White)   Babcock  (Elisha.  Siineon,  Elisha, 

George,  John.  James),  b.    N.    Stonington,   Conn.,    Sept.    20, 
1838;    res.    1903,   Ashaway,   R.   I.;    m.   Ashaway,   Nov.   22, 


The  Dabcock  Genealogy.  447 

1856,  Kdwanl  Ci..  son  of  Isaac  and  Triphena   (Clark)    Cun- 
dall,  1).  Ashawav,    |nne   11,   1838. 
Child : 

Constamiiic  Tabor,   b.   Ashaway,   May   14,   1872;     1902,   unni. 

1168.  ITicNRY   F.''    Babcock,    son   of   Hoxie   and    Elizabeth 

(White)  Babc(5ck  (Elisha,  Simeon,  Elisha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Aug.  18,  1846;  m. 
Aug.  12,  1 87 1,  Hannah  Ellen  Maine,  b.  N.  Stonington,  Oct. 
II,  1850. 

Children,  b.  N.  Stonington : 

Arllnir.  1j.  Dec.    14.    1S72;    111.   Daisy  Biirdick. 

Pearl,  b.   Apr.   30,    iSSo;    d.   N.   Stonington,   Sept.   13,   1898. 

1169.  Ruth    C.^    Babcock,    dan.    of    Hoxie    and    Elizabeth 

(\Miite)    Babcock    (Elisha,    Simeon,    Elisha,    George, 
John,  James),  b.   X.   Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.   i,    1850;    res. 
1902,  N.  Stonington;  m.  Oct.  25,  1873,  Leonard  Eugene  Bell. 
Children : 

Herbert,   b.  Jan.   27.    1875;     m.    Mar.   31,    1898.   Dora   A.   Brown,   b. 

N.  Stonington,  June  13.  i88r. 
Grace  D..  b.  Nov.  3.  1876;    d.  Dec.  2,  1900;    m.  May  25,  1896,  John 

Maine.      Had  two  children. 
Allison,  b.  Aug.  30,  1878;    unm. 
Addie  E..  b.  Apr.  7,  1880;    unm. 
Mabel  E.,  b.  Nov.  12,  1882;    unm. 
James  B.,  b.  Apr.  12,  1888. 
Bertha,   b.   Alay  3,    1890;    d.    in   infancy. 

1170.  Ella    L.^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Hoxie    and    Elizabeth 

(White)  Babcock  (Elisha,  Simeon,  Elisha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Apr.  16,  1857;  d.  Aug.  19,  1896;  m.  1876, 
Elisha  Chesebro.  .  One  child,  Orville  Hoxie,  b.  Jan.  i,  1886. 

1171.  Benjamin   S.^   Babcock,   son  of  Simeon  and  Mary 

(Coe)    Babcock    (Simeon,    Simeon,    Elisha,    George, 

John,  James),  b.  Block  Island,  R.  T.,  Oct.  27,  1846;   res.  1902, 

Block  Island;    m.  Block  Island,  Jan.  5,   1871,  Sallie,  dau.  of 

Jonathan  and  Mercy  Sprague,  b.  Block  Island,  May  5,  1852. 

Children,  b.  Block  Island  : 

John  Coe,*  b.  Feb.  28.  1873 ;  m.  Irena,  dau.  of  Charles  and  Helen 
Allen  Gilbert.  Children:  Sybil  I.,'"  b.  Mar.  15,  1900;  George, 
b.  Nov.  10,  1901. 

Mary  A.,  b.  Aug.  23.  1879. 

Lizzie  Mabel,  b.  July  7,   1883. 

1172.  Mary  Elizabeth*  Thayer,  dau.  of  George  K.  and 
Martha  Elizabeth  (Babcock)  Thayer  (Simeon,  Sinie- 


44^  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

on,  J^lisha,  Cieori;"e,  John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Mar.  ii, 
J 847;  res.  1902,  H()])kinton,  R.  1.;  ni.  li(jpkinton,  Jan.  i, 
1868,  Edwin  I\.,  son  of  Edwin  and  Ruth  (Noyes)  Allen,  b. 
\Vindham,  Conn.,  Nov.  24,  1840. 

Edwin  R.  Allen  was  Lieutenant-(io\'ernor  of  Ivliode  Island 
from   1894  to   1897. 

Children,  b.   Hopkinton: 

George  Edwin,  b.  Aug.  i,  1869;  res.  1902.  Hope  Valley,  R.  I.;  m. 
Hope  Valley,  July  3,  1892,  Annie  E.  Green,  b.  Hope  Valley, 
June  30,   1870. 

Frederick  C.,  b.  Aug.  6,  1871  ;  res.  1902,  Boston,  Mass. ;  m.  Bos- 
ton, Jan.  30.   1901,  Sadie  M.  Beach,  b.  Maine,  July  7,  1872. 

1173.  Julia  Marie'*  Nortiiam,  dau.  of  Albert  D.  and  Mary 

Ann   (Babcock)    Northam    (Samuel,   Simeon,   Elisha, 
George,  John,  James),  b.   1836;    d.   1871 ;    m.  Richard  Dana 
Meader,  b.  1827,  d.  1889. 
Children  : 

Laura,"  b.  1854;  d.  Apr.  30,  1903;  m.  William  W.  Wilder,  of 
Albany,  Ga. ;  d.  1881.  They  had  two  children:  Julia  M.,'"  b. 
Mar.  14,  1878;  m.  June  11,  1902,  George  E.  Greeley,  of  Marl- 
borough, Mass. ;  and  William  W.,^"  b.  Apr.  27,  1881 ;  res.  1902, 
Savannah,  Ga. 

Charles  Herbert,  b.   i8s7;    d.   i8s8. 

Ellen  Douglas,  b.   1859;    d.   1878. 

Eugene  Albert,   b.   1862.     Civil   Engineer  at   Savannah. 

Richard  D.,  b.   1869.     Lawyer  of  Brunswick,  Ga. 

Julian,  b.    1871 ;    d.   1872. 

1174.  Ellen  Caroline^  Northam,  dau.  of  Albert  D.  and 
Mary    Ann    (Babcock)    Northam    (Samuel,    Simeon, 

Elisha,  George,  John,  James),  b.  Dec.  23,  1842;    m.  Edward 
S.  Parker,  b.  June  14,  1838.     She  res.  1902,  Graham,  N.  C. 
Children : 

lone,  b.  Oct.  9.  1864;    d.  May  8,  1887;    m.  Robert  Oscar  Holt. 

Junius,  b.  Sept.  24,  1867;  m.  Mary  Whitney  Locke.  He  is  As- 
sistant General  Counsel  of  the  American  Tobacco  Company,  in 
Fifth  Avenue,  New  York. 

Frederic  E.,  b.  Aug.  8,  1869;    d.  Aug.  22.  1870. 

Ellen  N.,  b.  Nov.  24,  1873;    d.  July  31.  1874. 
"     Helen  C,  b.  Oct.  30,  1875;    d.  June  17,  1876. 

Mary  E.,  b.  Sept.   17,   1877. 

Norman  N.,  b.  Dec.  21,  1879;    d.  Julv  19,  1880. 

Caro  S.,  b.  Dec.  24,  1882;    d.  June  27,  1883. 

1175.  Emma  Eloise^  Northam,  dau.  of  Albert  and  Mary 
Ann   (Babcock)    Northam    (Samuel,   Simeon,   Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Oct.  21,  1844:  d.  July  23,  1883; 
m.  Dr.  Joseph  G.  Rose,  b.  Aug.  31,  1830,  d.  Nov.  18,  1887. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  449 

Children : 

Hortense,  b. ;    lu.    I.  Turlington,  of  Southfield,  N.  C. 

Ellen,  b.  ;    d.  igoo. 

Eunice,  b. ;    deceased. 

Anne.  b.  ;    m.  Otis  Parker. 

Lena  R.,  b.  . 

Abrani,  b.  . 

1176.     Frances**  North  am,  dau.  of  Albert  and  Mary  Ann 
(Babcock)      Northam      (Samuel,      Simeon,      Elisha, 
George,    John.    James),    b.    1852;    m.    William    Philip    Nor- 
wood;  both  (1. 

Four  children:    All)ert  D.,  Walter,  Edgar,  and  Cornelia. 

1178.  Charles^    Gillette,    son    of    Selden    and    Josephine 
(Babcock)   Gillette  (Samuel,  Simeon,  Elisha,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  July  15,  1840;   m.  Oct.,  1869,  Emma  Laing. 
Children : 

Charles,  b.  Aug.  31.   1873;    d.  Mar.,   1878. 
Dwight,  b.  Mar.  3,  1882. 

1179.  Laura  Josephine*^    Babcock,   dau.   of   Dwight   and 
Laura  E.   (Cone)   Babcock  (Samuel.  Simeon,  Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  E.  Haddam,  Conn.,  June  25,  1863; 
res.  1900,  54  Wesleyan  Avenue,  Providence,  R.  L  ;  m.  Provi- 
dence. Dec.  25,  1884,  William  E.,  son  of  William  and  Mar- 
tha (Presturch)  Webster,  b.  Dec.  11,  1859,  d.  Fort  Collins, 
Col..  Feb.  I,  1900. 

Children,  b.  Providence: 

Laura  Ellen,  b.  Nov.  15,  1885. 
Dwight  William,   b.   Mar.  24,    1888. 

1180.  James  Burnside^  Babcock,  son  of  James  and  Sarah 
A.  (Lewis)  Babcock  (James,  Simeon,  Elisha,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  L,  Mar.  21,  1861 ;    res.  1902, 
Westerly:    m.    (i)   Westerly,  May  i,   1880,  Hattie  Phillips; 
m.   (2)   Alice,  dau.  of  Thomas  and  Catherine  Musgrave. 
Children,  b.  Westerly: 

Alice,  b.  Jan.  14,  1884;    res.  1902,  Westerly. 

James  Edwin,  b.  Apr.  21,   1888;    res.  1902,  Westerly. 

1181.  Gertrude  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and 
Josephine  (Barber)  Babcock  (James,  Simeon,  Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  June  16,  1870; 
res.    1002,  Lawrence,   Mass.;    m.   Methuen,   Mass.,   Apr.   20, 
29 


450  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1896,  Frank  B.,  son  of  George  and  EUie  (Crittenden)  French, 
b.  Plainiield,  N.  H.,  Oct.  30,  1867. 
Children,  b.  Lawrence: 

Ellen   Marion,  b.   May  9,   1897. 
Orville  B.,  b.   Feb.   19,   1899. 

1182.  William  Clark*  Ken  yon,  son  of  Jonathan  and  Su- 
san S.  (Babcock)  Kenyon  (Jesse,  Jesse,  Ehsha, 
George,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Providence,  R.  I.,  Jan. 

21,  1843;    res.  1902,  Cleveland,  O. ;    m.  Providence,  Nov.  21, 
1865,  Mary  L.,  dau.  of  William  and  Louisa  (Olney)  Seaver, 
b.  Providence,  July  10,  1845. 
Children : 

William  Seaver,  b.  Providence,  Apr.  23,  1867;  res.  1902,  1005 
Cedar  Avenue.  Cleveland,  O. ;  m.  Cleveland,  Oct.  16,  1890,  Flor- 
ence, dau.  of  Miles  and  Margaret  Beebe,  b.  Cleveland,  Sept.  5, 
1866. 

Mary  L.,  b.  N.  Stonington,  July  5,  1868;  res.  1902,  Cleveland; 
m.  Cleveland,  F.  W.  Reiser. 

1183.  Susan  Harriet*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Edmund  and 
Martha    (Babcock)    Babcock    (Jesse,    Jesse,    Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Kingston,  R.  L,  Nov.  30,  1844;   d. 
Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  7,   1900;    m.  S.  Kingston,  Feb.  27, 
1865,  Charles  H.  Briggs,  b.  S.  Kingston,  Apr.  14,  1844;   res. 
1902,  Stonington. 
Children : 

Charles  Edmund,^  b.  Kingston,  Nov.  28,  1865 ;  res.  1902,  Provi- 
dence, R.  I. ;  m.  Providence,  Sept.  24,  1890,  Luella  E.,  dau.  of 
William  G.  Snow.  Children,  b.  Providence :  Doris,'"  b.  Nov.  4, 
1891  ;    Helen,  b.  Aug.  16,  1893. 

Martha  Elizabeth,®  b.  Stonington,  July  26,  1867;  res.  1902,  New 
London,  Conn.  ;  ni.  Groton,  Sept.  30,  1890,  James  A.,  son  of 
Cyrus  Beckwith,  b.  Sept.,  1868.  Child:  Natalie,'"  b.  Groton,  Aug. 
21,    1891. 

Harry  Howard,"  b.  Stonington,  May  30,  1872 ;  res.  1902,  Stoning- 
ton ;  m.  Groton,  Oct.  4,  1893,  Maude,  dau.  of  Sandford  Miner, 
b.  Sept.  26,  1871.  Children:  Harry  M.,'"  b.  June  27,  1896;  Philip 
S.,  b.  Oct.  I,  1897,  and  Charles,  b.  May  30,  1901. 

1184.  Jesse  Peleg^  Babcock,  son  of  Edmund  and  Martha 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Jesse,  Elisha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Newport,  R.  L,  Nov.  24,  1845;  ^-  Provi- 
dence, R.  I.,  May  17,  1887;  m.  Wakefield,  R.  L,  Jan.  19, 
1876,  Ellen,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Mary  (Cross)  Gardner,  b. 
Wakefield,  Sept.  30,  1848;  res.  1902,  Wakefield. 
Children : 

Royal  Gardner,  b.  June  4,  1878. 

Rodney  S.,  b.  Mar.  25,  1880.  ' 


TJic  Babcock  Genealogy.  451 

1185.  Herbert  Whipple*   Babcock,  son  of  Edmund  and 
Martha  E.    (Babcock)   Babcock   (Jesse,  Jesse,  Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  Wickford,  R.  I.,  Aug.  27,  1848; 
res.  1902,  Groton,  Conn.;  m.  (i)  Nov.  4,  1874,  Martha,  dau. 
of  Daniel  and  EHza  (Carpenter)  Brown,  b.  Sept.  7,  1850,  d. 
Jan.  29,  1882;  m.  (2)  Wickford,  Dec.  i,  1886,  Harriet,  dau. 
of  Wilham  and  Phebe  E.  (Garchier)  Lewis,  b.  Wickford,  Feb. 

25-  1854- 

Child  by  second  marriage: 

William  H.,  b.  Wickford,  Dec.  11,  1888. 

1186.  James  Edmund*  Babcock,  son  of  Edmund  and  Mar- 

tha E.  (Babcock)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Jesse,  Elisha, 
George,  John,  James),  b.  Wickford,  R.  I.,  Feb.  12,  185 1; 
d.  Wakefield,  May  25,  1896;  m.  Wickford,  May  26,  1878, 
Sarah  C,  dau.  of  Benjamin  and  Sarah  (Dennis)  Tallman,  b. 
Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  Nov.  16,  1845;  ^^s.  1902,  Wakefield. 
Child : 

Archie  Tallman,  b.  May  29,  1880 ;  res.  1902,  Wakefield.  R.  I. ;  m. 
Wakefield.  June  4,  1902.  Edith,  dau.  of  Horace  and  Martha  Bur- 
dick  Tucker,  b.  Wakefield,  Aug.  5,  1880. 

1187.  Sarah  Elizabeth*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Edmund  atid 
Martha  E.    (Babcock)   Babcock   (Jesse,  Jesse,  Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.   Wickford,   R.   L,  Apr.    18,    1854; 
res.  1902,  Groton.  Conn. ;  m.  Wakefield,  R.  I.,  Nov.  18,  1874, 
John  B.,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Harriet  (Brown)   Rodman,  b. 
Peacedale,  R.  I..  Feb.  15,  1839. 
Children,  b.  W^akefield : 

Mary,  b.  Aug.  30,  1875 ;    res.   1902,  Groton.     She  collected,  for  this 

volume,  records  of  many  families  of  Babcocks  in  her  line. 
Bertha,  b.  Jan.  3,  1878. 

1188.  George  Edward*   Whipple,  son  of  George  A.   and 
Hannah  P.  (Babcock)  Whipple  (Jesse,  Jesse,  Elisha, 

George,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Providence.  R.  I..  Sept.  2,  1850; 
res.   1902,  Auburn,  R.  I.;    m.  N.  Providence.  May  28,   1871, 
Mary,   dau.   of  Willett  and   Mary    (Whitford)    Gardiner,   b. 
N.  Kingston.  R.  I.,  May  28,  1850. 
Children,  b.  Providence: 

Frederick,  b.  July  2,  1875 ;  res.  1902,  Cranston.  R.  I. ;  m.  Provi- 
dence, Feb.  2,  1899,  Alice,  dau.  of  Stephen  and  Anna  L.  (Wil- 
liams)  Greene,  b.  Mar.  4.  1874. 

Herbert  E.,  b.   Oct.   18.    1878;    res.   1902,   Auburn,   R.   I. 

Maude  E..  b.  June  5,   1881  ;    res.   1902,  Auburn. 


452  The  Dahcock  Genealogy. 

1189.  Sarah  M.**  Wightman,  dau.  of  Peleg  and  Catherine 

(Babcock)  Wightman  (Jesse,  Jesse,  EHsha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  N.  Kingston,  R.  I.,  May  i8,  i860;  res.  1902, 
Wickford,  R.  I.;  m.  Wickford,  Oct.  12,  1880,  Thomas  J.,  son 
of  John  and  Mary  (Brown)  Pierce,  b.  Providence,  R.  I.,  June 
20,  1857. 

Children,  b.  Wickford: 

Mary,  b.   Sept.   14,   1881. 
John  P.,  b.  Feb.  5,  1883. 
Raymond  W.,  b.  Aug.  1,  1893. 

1190.  Charlotte  Hall**   Babcock,   dan.   of  Dntee  J.   and 
Theresa  (Plall)  Babcock  (Jesse,  Jesse,  Ehsha,  George, 

John,  James),  b.  New  London,  Conn.,  July  23,   1861 ;    res. 
1902,  E.  Greenwich,  R.  I.;    m.  New  London,  Nov.  2,   1883, 
George  A.,   son  of  Joseph   and   Mary    (Bartlett)    White,   b. 
North  East  Village,  Mass.,  Mar.  19,^858. 
Children,  b.  E.  Greenwich : 

Dutee  J.,  b.  Aug.  30,  1884. 
George  A.,  b.  Mar.  5,  1888. 
Jesse  B.,  b.  Feb.  12,  1892. 

1191.  Perry    G.^    Babcock,    son    of    Edward    and    Harriet 

(Graves)  Babcock  (George,  Jesse,  Elisha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Worcester,  Mass.,  Dec.  20,  1853;  res.  1901, 
Chatham,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Chatham,  Sept.  6,  1876,  Augusta,  dan. 
of  Eli  and  Eva  (Plass)  Boice,  b.  Martindale,  N.  Y.,  June  6, 
1856. 

Children : 

Bertha,  b.  E.  Chatham,  June  9,   1879;    res.    1901,  Cliatham,   N.  Y. ; 

m.    Chatham,    Feb.    17,    1899,    Harold,    son   of    Newton    Sweet,   b. 

Webster,  Mass.,  May,  1878. 
Edith  Harriet,  b.  Chatham,  Aug.  2,  1883;    res.   1901,  Chatham. 

1192.  Ellen    E.^    Babcock,    dau    of    Albert    and    Frances 

(Pierce)  Babcock  (George,  Jesse,  Elisha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Sterling,  Conn.,  Feb.  24,  1859;  res.  1902, 
Sterling.  Conn.;  m.  (i)  Leonard  Burdick ;  m.  (2)  Sterling, 
Jan.  13,  1 88 1,  .A.mory  J.,  son  of  Fred  and  Emeline  (Pierce) 
Kebler,  b.  Needham,  Mass.,  Jan.  6,  1851. 
Children  by  first  marriage  : 

Lizzie  J.,   b.   Voluntown ;     res.    1902,    Sterling,   Conn. ;    m.   Sterling, 

Benjamin  Parkhurst. 
Amy  K.,  b.  Voluntown;    res.   1902,   Sterling. 

Child  by  second  marriage: 

Emeline  L.,  b.   Sterling;    res.   1902,   Sterling. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  453 

1193.  Edward  Perry**  Babcock,  son  of  Albert  and  Frances 

(Pierce)  Babcock  (George,  Jesse,  Elisha,  George, 
John,  James),  b.  Oneco,  Conn.,  July  4,  1867;  res.  1902,  Ca- 
naan Four  Corners.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Chatham  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
8,  1888,  Ettie  M.,  (lau.  of  Edward  and  Rachel  (Sigbee)  Win- 
chester, b.  Chatham  Center,  Aug.  i,  1871. 
Children : 

Ray  W.,  b.  Chatham  Center,  Apr.  7.   1891. 

Ward  P.,  b.  Chatham  Center,  Sept.  6.   1894;    d.  Rensselaer,  N.  Y., 

May  3,  1898. 
Ruth  Irene,  b.  Aug.  9,  1897;    d.  Rensselaer,  Apr.  14,  1898. 

1194.  Mary  Ann^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Elizabeth 

(Ingalls)    Babcock    (Henry,   David,    Ezekiel,    Robert, 
John,  James),  b.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  20,  1824;   res.  1900, 
Fern  wood,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  29,  1844,  Davis  J. 
Cross,  b.  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  June  25,  1821. 
Children,  b.  Albion : 

Sarah  E.,  b.  July  17,  1846;    res.  1900,  Fernwood ;    m.  Oct.  30,  1866, 

Jerome,   son  of  William  S.  and  Harriet   (Tubbs)    Perry,  b.  Aug. 

25,  1842,  d.  Fernwood,  Feb.  21,  1900. 
Florence  D.,  b.  Jan.  27,   1857;    d.  Mar.  2,   1882. 
Hadarah  J.,  b.  June  28.   1859;    res.   1900,  Lacona,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Dec. 

30,   1890.  Charles  J.,  son  of  Theron  and  Sarah  (Alton)   Salisbury, 

b.  Sept.,  1857. 

1195.  Amanda  O.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Elizabeth 

(Ingalls)  Babcock  (Henry,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John,  James),  b.  Sidney,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  25,  1826;  d.  Sandy 
Creek,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1873;  m.  Oswego,  N.  Y..  Apr.  17, 
1845,  Ephraim  M.,  son  of  Henry  and  Polly  (Harmon) 
Averill,  b.  Pulaski,  N.  Y.,  Mav  S-  1825;  res.  looi,  Richland, 
N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  Richland : 

Elizabeth  H.,  b.  Sept.  4,  1847;  res.  1901,  Richland;  m.  Mexico, 
N.  Y.,  June  10,  1868,  Albert,  son  of  George  and  Selinda  (Wel- 
den)   Sheley.  b.  Dexter,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  19,  1843. 

Adalaid  F.,  b.  Oct.  i,  1849;    res.  1901,  Richland;    unm. 

Edgar  E.,  b.  Nov.  2,  1851  ;  res.  1901,  Adams,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Williams- 
town.  N.  Y.,  June  22,  1876,  Emma,  dau.  of  Solomon  and  Sa- 
mantha   (Burnham)  Magee,  b.  Hillsboro,  N.  Y.,  June  22,  1854. 

William  H.,  b.  Oct.  19.  1853;  res.  1901.  Richland:  m.  Utica,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  21.  1883.  Birdella.  dau.  of  Solomon  and  Samantha  (Burn- 
ham)   Magee,  b.  Hillsboro,  Apr.   13.   1861. 

Martha,  b.  1856;  res.  1901,  Richland;  m.  Richland,  June  6,  1882, 
Ellis  H.,  son  of  Daniel  Kenyon,  b.  Fernwood,  N.  Y.,  June  7,  1850. 

James  B.,  b.  June  8,  1862;  res.  1901,  Du  Boise,  Pa.;  m.  Richland, 
Apr.  23,  1889,  Lulu,  dau.  of  Seward  and  Clara  (Niles)  Ripsom, 
b.  Pulaski,  N.  Y.,  Nov.   17,   1867. 


454  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1196.  Philip  Eugene**  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Eliza- 
beth (Ingalls)  Babcock  (Henry,  David,  Ezekiel,  Rob- 
ert, John,  James),  b.  Amboy,  N.  Y.,  July  5,  1831 ;   d.  June  4, 
1865;   m.  Pulaski,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  20,  1851,  Polly  S.  Parish. 

Philip  served  three  years  in  the  Civil  War,  and  was  dis- 
charged Sept.,   1864. 
Children : 

1484  Myra  D.,'  b.  Oct.  21,  1854;    m.  John  Pickett. 

Charles  J.,  b.  Ellisburg.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  25,  1856;  d.  New  Centerville, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  17,  1900;  m.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  7,  1893,  Mary 
E.  dau.  of  John  and  Mary  (Nicholson)  Hall,  b.  Sandy  Creek, 
N.  Y.,  June  7,  1849;  res.  1901,  New  Centerville,  N.  Y.  No 
children. 

1197.  Harriet  Louise^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Eliza- 
beth (Ingalls)  Babcock  (Henry,  David,  Ezekiel,  Rob- 
ert, John,  James),  b.  Richland,  N.  Y.,  July  27,  1838;  d.  New 
Orleans,  La.,  Nov.  30,  1870;  m.  Jan.  i,  1855,  Albert  Stowell, 
b.  1835,  d.  Carrolton,  La.,  Jan.  16,  1863.  He  was  a  U.  S. 
soldier,  and  d.  in  a  hospital. 

Children : 

Fred.    Oliver,    b.    Richland,    N.    Y.,   Jan.    28,    1856;     res.    1901,    St. 

Joseph,   Mich.;    m.    (i)    Bay  City,   Mich.,  June  6,   1877,  Julia  A. 

Haff.  b.  Copenhagen,  N.  Y.,  June  6,  1856;    d.  Dec.  19,  1881 ;    m. 

(2)   New  Market,  Canada,  May  15,  1883,  Mary  Ellen  Hooper,  b. 

Nov.  6,  i860. 
Diana  S.,  b.  Orwell,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  23,  1862;    d.  Apr.  7,  1862. 

1198.  Oliver  Morrell^  Babcock,  son  of  Gurdon  and  Al- 
mira  (Starkweather)  Babcock  (Henry,  David,  Eze- 
kiel, Robert,  John,  James),  b.  E.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  27, 
1830;  res.  1902,  Austin,  Chicago,  111.;  m.  Bloomington,  111., 
Mar.  12.  1 86 1,  Lidie  B.,  dau.  of  Nathan  and  Rebecca  (Smith) 
Yarnall,  b.  Shannonville,  Pa.,  Apr.  15,  1841,  d.  Philadelphia, 
Pa.,  June  2,  1873. 

Children : 

Emma,  b.   Bloomington,   Feb.  28.   1862;    d.  July  21,   1863. 

Mary  Ella,"  b.  Chicago,  July  i,  1865;    res.   1902,  2019  N.  32d  Street, 

Philadelphia,    Pa. ;    m.    Philadelphia,    1884.    Harrington   Bailey,   b. 

1862.     They  have  one  child,  Morrell,"  b.  Oct.  30,  1886. 

1199.  Alonzo  Nelson^  Babcock,  son  of  Gurdon  and  Al- 
mira  (Starkweather)  Babcock  (Henry,  David,  Eze- 
kiel, Robert,  John.  James),  b.  Sept.  13,  1842;  res.  1900,  219 
N.  53d  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.;  m.  Chicago,  Sept.  14,  1871, 
Evaline.  dau.  of  John  and  Sally  Carris,  of  Sterling,  N.  Y.,  b. 
May  5,  1848,  d.  July  3,  1880. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  455 

Child : 

Eva   F.,   b.   Chicago,   Jan.   26,    1873;     res.    1900,   Chicago,    with   her 
father. 

1200.  Fidelia  A.^  Clemons,  dan.  of  John  and  Annie  (Bab- 
cock) demons  (Henry,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John, 

James),  b.  WiUiamstown,  N.^Y.,  June  17,   1831 ;    res.   1902, 
7320  Earns  Avenue,  Chicago,  III. ;    m.  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  Apr. 
14,  1859,  Ira  Proseus,  b.  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  30, 
1810,  d.  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  i,  1873. 
Children,  b.  Geneva : 

William  D.,  b.  Oct.   11,    1861 ;    res.   1902,  Chicago. 
Janet  Louise,  b.  . 

1201.  Sarah    Ann^    Clemons,    dau.    of    John    and    Anna 
(Babcock)   Clemons   (Henry,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 

John,  James),  b.   Circleville,  O.,  Apr.   20,    1846;    res.    1902, 
643  Fulton  Street,  Chicago,  111.;    m.  Chicago,  Oct.  20,  1867, 
Albert  R.,  son  of  Aaron  and  Sarah   (Ayers)   King,  b.  Har- 
mony, N.  Y.,  May  2,  1844. 
Children : 

Nellie  E.,  b.  Chicago,  Apr.  6,  1869;    d.  Sept.  18.  1890. 

Meritt  A.,  b.  Chicago,  Aug.  19.  1871  :    res.  1902,  6807  Peoria  Street, 

Chicago;    m.   1894,  Alice  M.  Chillingworth. 
Walter,   b.   Nov.    18,    1873;     res.    1902.   Chicago. 
Ella,  b.   Matteson,  111..   Nov.   14.   1875;    d.  Jan.  5.   1880. 
Frank,  b.  July  10,  1878;    res.   1902,  Chicago. 
Cora,  b.  July  21,   1880;    res.   1902,  Cleveland,  O. ;    m.   1897,  Milton 

Fields. 
Willie,  b.   Sept.  21,   1882;    res.  1902,  Chicago. 

1202.  Sarah^    Brewster,    dau.    of    Silas    and    Lois    (Bab- 
cock)    Brewster     (Robert.    David,    Ezekiel,    Robert, 

John,  James),  b.  Wright,  N.  Y.,  June  10,   1844;    res.   1902, 
Hamilton,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  27,  i860,  Ches- 
ter, son  of  John  Jaycox. 
Child: 

Florence,    b.    Worcester,    Jan.    13.    1877;     m.    June    28,    1897,    Rev. 
Albert  R.  Mills.     Has  two  children. 

1203.  Anna^  Brewster,  dau.  of  Silas  and  Lois  (Babcock) 
Brewster     (Robert,    David,     Ezekiel,    Robert,    John, 

James),  b.  Berne,  N.  Y..  Feb.  25,  1846;  res.  1902,  13  Park 
Street,  Albany,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Worcester,  June  6,  1877,  Samuel 
F.  Ames,  b.  Canterbury,  North  Hampshire,  England,  May  6, 
1821. 


456  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Albany : 

Brewster  F.,  b.  Oct.  20,  1S79.  (iraduated  from  Yale  College  in 
1901.  Went  directly  to  Manila,  P.  I.,  to  take  a  position  as  teacher 
of  languages.  ^ 

Miriam,  b.   Nov.   30,   1883. 

1204.  Wayne^  Brewster,  son  of  Silas  and  Lois  (Babcock) 
Brewster     (Robert,    David,    Ezekiel,     Robert,    John, 

James),  b.  Wright,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20,  1850;    res.  1902,  Brook- 
ton,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Schuyler  Lake,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  30,  1879,  Cora  L., 
dau.  of  Orion  S.  Rose,  b.  May  18,  1856. 
Child: 

Lois  R.,  b.  Dec.  11,  1880. 

1205.  William  Wayne**  Babcock,  son  of  Elias  and  Jane  A. 

(Thurber)  Babcock  (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John,  James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  11,  1842;  res.  1902, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah;  m.  Middlefield.  N.  Y.,  Apr.  25,  1865, 
Sarah  J.,  dau.  of  Uriah  and  Elizabeth  (Elliot)  Butler,  b. 
South  Valley,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  20.  1843. 
Children : 

Maud  May,  b.  E.  Worcester,  May  2,  1867 ;  res.  1902.  Salt  Lake 
City.     Professor  of  Elocution,  University  of  Utah. 

William  Wayne,  Jr.,  M.D.,  b.  June  10,  1872;  res.  1902,  3302  W. 
Broad  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.  Dr.  Babcock,  in  1902,  in  a  com- 
petitive contest  for  the  best  essay  on  Preventive  Medicine,  was 
one  of  the  two  hundred  and  nine  competitors.  He  won  the  first 
prize,  one  thousand  dollars. 

1206.  Maria  J.*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Jane  A.  (Thur- 
ber)  Babcock   (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John, 

James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  23,  1847;    ^^s.  1902,  Daven- 
port, N.  Y. ;   m.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  17,  1868,  John  A.,  son 
of    Augustus    and    Esther    (Skinner)    Griffin,    b.    Sandford, 
N.  Y.,'Aug.  7,  1844. 
Children : 

Claribel,  b.  Korbright,   N.  Y. 
Austin,  b.  Davenport. 

1207.  Mary  E.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elias  and  Jane  A.  (Thur- 
ber) Babcock  (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John, 

James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  24,  1852;    res.  1902,  Dobbs 
Ferry,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Decatur,  June  3,  1886,  William  A.,  son  of 
William  and  Eliza  (Fox)  Winters,  b.  Jan.,  18^0. 
Child: 

Jane,  b.  June  24,    1887. 


DR.  W.   WAYNE  BABCOCK.  JR. 


Page  456. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  457 

1208.  Cora  Lois*  Babcock,  dan.  of  Elias  and  Jane  A.  (Thur- 
ber)   Babcock  (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John, 

James),  b.  Decatnr,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,   i860;    res.    1902,  Har- 
pursville,   N.   Y. ;    m.   E.   Worcester,   N.   Y.,  Feb.   24,    1881, 
Everett  Lockwood,  son  of  David  and  Jemima  (Belden)  Car- 
penter, b.  E.  Worcester,  Nov.  24,  1856. 
Children,  b.  Harpnrsville : 

Edith  Lockwood,  b.  July  29,  1887. 
Julian  E.,  b.  May  14.  1895. 
Vernon  A.,  b.  May  12,  1898. 

1209.  Mary    Jane*    Babcock,    dau.    of    Nathan    and    Lois 
(Thurber)  Babcock  (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 

John,  James),  b.  Oct.  3,   1844;    d.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  4, 

1869;  "m.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  8,  1866,  Horatio  G.  Cass,  b. 

Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  18,  1841  ;   res.  1902,  Aurora,  Neb. 

Child : 

Carlton  B.,"  b.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  June  9,  1867;  res.  Ravenna.  Neb.; 
m.  Ord,  Neb.,  Jan.  24,  1900,  Theresa,  dau.  of  Karl  and  Barbara 
Wesley  Petrich,  b.  Geneva,  Neb.,  Aug.  10,  1874.  Children,  b. 
Ravenna:  Mildred  F.,'"  b.  Dec.  27,  1900;  Horatio,  b.  Aug.  5, 
1902. 

1210.  JACK.SON*  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Lois   (Thur- 
ber)  Babcock  (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John, 

James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  July  12,  1848;   res.  1902,  Bath-on- 
Hudson.   N.   Y. ;    m.   Schoharie  Courthouse,   N.   Y.,   May  3, 
1874,   Emeline,   dau.   of   Hu1)bard   and    Roxanna    (Jackson) 
Smith,  b.  Cicero,  N.  Y..  June  29,  1855. 
Children : 

Frank,   b.    Warnerville,    N.    Y.,   June  4,    1875;     res.    1902,   Bath-on- 

Hudson. 
Nathan,    b.    Albany,    N.    Y.,    Nov.    23,    1876;     res.    1902,    Bath-on- 

Hudson.     Served  as  Private  in  Spanish  War. 
Bess  J.,  b.  Albany,  Dec.  13,  1880;    res.  1902,  Bath-on-Hudson. 

1211.  George^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Lois    (Thur- 
ber) Babcock  (Robert,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John, 

James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y..  Feb.  5,  1859;  res.  1902,  North- 
port,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Northport,  July  16,  1884,  Sarah  A.,  dau.  of 
Charles  and  Mary  (Burr)  Sanford,  b.  Northport,  Jan.  10, 
1856,  d.  Northport,  July  29,  1901. 

George  Babcock  was  Principal  of  the  Public  School  of 
Northport  188 1-6.  He  was  Instructor  in  Physical  Science 
in  Boys'  Academy,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  1886-7,  also  Instructor  in 
Mathematics  in  Staten  Island  Academy  1887-92.     He  is  chief 


458  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

accountant   in   the   Edward   Thonii)son    Coni[)any,    publishers 
of  law  books,  Northport;    has  held  the  position  since  1892. 
Children,  b.  Northport: 

George  S.,  b.   Mar.  8,   1895. 
Wallace  Charles,  b.  Jan.   16,  1897. 

1212.  Lucia  Augusta^  Eames,  dau.  of  Lovett  and  Lucy  C. 

(Morgan)  Eames,  of  Elisha  and  Polly  (Babcock) 
Morgan  (David,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James),  b.  Kalama- 
zoo, Mich.,  June  7,  1841.  Owns  and  occupies  "The  Oaks," 
Georgetown,  D.  C. ;  m.  Kalamazoo,  Aug.  2,  1864,  Henry  P., 
son  of  Walter  and  Rebecca  (Ripley)  Blount,  b.  May  i,  1829. 

See  account  of  gold  beads  in  records  of  her  grandmother, 
267  Polly  Babcock  Morgan. 

Children,  b.  Evansville,  Ind. : 

Mary  Forbes,  b.  June  27,  1866;    res.  1902,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Harry,  b.  Mar.  31,   1871 ;    d.  June  22,   1871. 

Bessie  H.,  b.  June  20,  1872 ;  res.  1902,  66  Virginia  Street,  Dor- 
chester, Mass. ;  m.  Washington.  Apr.  18,  1900,  Rev.  Eugene  R., 
son  of  Rev.  R.  R.  Shippen,  b.  Worcester,  Mass.,  Jan.,   1865. 

Helen  Eames,  b.  Feb.  8,   1876;    d.   Mar.   11,   1892. 

Henry  F.,  b.  Apr.  2,   1880. 

Walter,  b.  Sept.  4,  1881. 

1213.  Charle.s  W.^   Babcock,   son   of   Enos   and   Lucinda 

(Goodell)   Babcock   (Dudley,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John.  James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  July  16,   1847;    res.   1902, 
Decatur;   m.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  19,  1868,  Emily,  dau.  of 
Henry  Sperry,  b.  Oct.  26,  1847. 
Children : 

Lena,  b.  Worcester,   Aug.   31.   1875;    res.   1902,   Lestershire,   N.  Y. ; 

m.   New  Milford,   Pa.,  Jan.,   1897.  Charles,  son  of  Silas  Rider,  b. 

Maryland,  N.  Y. 
Lara,  b.   Worcester,   Nov.  24.    1880;    res.    1902,   Lestershire,   N.   Y. ; 

m.   New  Milford.   Dec,   1898,   Maurice,  son  of  William  Chapman. 
Fred,    b.    Preston,    N.    Y.,   June   24,    1883;     res.    1902,    Lestershire, 

N.  Y. ;    unm. 

1214.  Emery  J.^  Babcock,  son  of  Eli  and  Dolly  (Woodin) 
Babcock    (Dudley,     David,     Ezekiel.     Robert,    John, 

James),  b.  Westford,  N.  Y.,  June  20,   1855;    res.    1902,  E. 

Worcester.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Worcester.  Mar.  17.  1875.  Lovila,  dau. 

of  Thomas  and  Margaret  (Homes)  Murray,  b.  Worcester,  d. 

June  19,  1880;  m.  (2)  Nov.  15.  1881.  Hattie  Darely,  of  Rich- 

mondville.  N.  Y. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

Mary  Ann,  b.   Decatur,   N.  Y.,  June  28,    1876;    res.    1902,   Schenec- 
tady, N.  Y. 
Lynn,   b.    Decatur,   June   21.    1879;     res.    1902,    Schenectady. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  459 

Children  by  second  wife,  b.  Worcester,  N.  Y. : 

Wayne,  b.   Nov.  3,   1884. 
Bessie,  b.  Dec.  31,   1888. 
Edith,  b.  Aug.  22,  1891. 
Ethel,  b.  Aug.  22,   1891. 
Dayton,  b.  July  20,  1894. 
Ora,  b.  July  17,  1898. 

1215.  Frank   Earnest^    Babcock,   son   of   Eli   and   Dolly 

(Woodin)  Babcock  (Dudley,  David,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John,  James),  b.  Decatur,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  12,  1863;  res.  1902, 
Rensselaer,  Ind. ;  m.  Goodland.  Ind.,  Aug".  13,  1889,  Elise  M., 
dau.  of  Jerome  and  Sarah  (Starkweather)  Preston,  b.  Ken- 
dall, 111.,  Jan.  13,  1866. 
Children : 

George  M.,  b.  Goodland. 
Delevan  J.,  b.  Remington.  Ind. 

1216.  Nathan  W.^  Born,  son  of  Isaac  and  Sarah   (Duel) 
Born.     Sarah  was  dau.  of  Philip  and  Sarah  Babcock 

Duel  (Robert,  Ezekiel,  Robert,  John,  James),  b.  Worcester, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  14,  1834;  res.  1902,  Kirkwood  Center,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Worcester,  Dec.  25,  1868,  Rhoda,  dau.  of  Elijah  Hadsell,  d. 
Decatur,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  Decatur : 

Walter    H..    b.    ;     res.    1902,    Jersey    City,    N.    J.;     m.    Katie 

Townsand. 
Pearl,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Binghamton,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Jesse  Jones. 

1217.  Minerv.\^    Waldorf,    dau.    of    Harvey    and    Eloise 

(Babcock)  Waldorf  (Russel,  Robert,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John,  James),  b.   Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  4,   1850;    res. 
1902,  E.  Smithfield,  Pa. ;    m.  E.  Worcester,  Apr.   30,   1876, 
Rev.  J.  Jones,  b.  Wales,  Great  Britain,  Nov.  9,  1838. 
Children : 

Grace,  b.  Afton.  N.  Y.,  Feb.  12,  1878;    d.  E.  Smithfield.  Pa. 
Harvev   L.,  b.   E.   Worcester,   June   i.    1880;     res.    1902,   E.    Smith- 
field;  Pa. 
Clare  E.,  b.  Big  Flats.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  9,  18S4;    res.  1902,  E.  Smithfield. 

1218.  Berlin    H.^    Waldorf,    son    of   Harvey    and    Eloise 

(Babcock)  Waldorf  (Russel.  Robert,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John,  James),  b.  Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  20,  1853;  ^^s. 
1902,  E.  Worcester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Alton,  N.  Y..  May  22,  1878, 
Helen,  dau.  of  Aaron  Tredwell,  b.  Middlefield,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
16,  1855. 


460  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  E.  Worcester : 

Myrtie,  b.  Nov.  7,  1879;    res.  1902,  Middlefield ;    m.  Lynn  Brown. 
Maud,  b.  Oct.  28,  1885. 

1219.  Alice  Ei.oise*^  Waldorf,  dau  of  Harvey  and  Eloise 

(Babcock)  Waldorf  (Riissel,  Robert,  Ezekiel,  Robert, 
John,  James),  b.  Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  July  27,  1859;  res. 
1902,  E.  Worcester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  E.  Worcester,  Mar.  21,  1870, 
Fayette  H.,  son  of  Rufus  and  Rhoda  (Miller)  Barnes,  b. 
Seward,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  3,  1848. 

Children,  b.  and  res.  E.  Worcester : 

Euleta,  b.  May  3,  1879;    m.  Mar.  23,  1898,  Ora  Rury. 
Rufus   F.,   b.   Oct.   29,    1880;    unm. 
Harvey,  b.  July  9»  1892. . 

1220.  Elizabeth  Frazier^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and  Hes- 
ter (Van  Derzee)   Babcock   (Joshua,  Joshua,  Joseph, 

Joseph,  John,  James),  b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  i,  1843;   res. 
1902,   Selkirk,   N.   Y. ;    m.   Bethlehem,   Jan.   26,    1871,   John 
Franklin,  son  of  Francis  J.  and  Rebecca  Shafer,  b.  Bethlehem, 
Jan.  28,  1843,  d.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1900. 
Children,  b.  Bethlehem : 

Bertha,  b.  Nov.  13,  1871  ;  d.  May  16,  1873. 
Frazier,  b.  Dec.  27,  1873;  d.  Aug.  8,  1874. 
John  Franklin,  b.  Oct.  5,   1875 ;    d.   May  24,   1890. 

1221.  Maria  Van  Bergen^  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  and 
Hester  (Van  Derzee)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Joshua,  Jo- 
seph, Joseph.  John,  James),  b.  Beechers  Corners,  N.  Y.,  July 
25,  1845;  ^"^s.  1903,  65  Spear  Street,  Quincy,  Mass.;  m.  Feb. 
18,  1869,  Thomas  H.,  son  of  Thomas  and  Sarah  (Porter) 
Fearey,  b.  Bedford,  England,  Feb.  19,  1844. 

Children,  b.  Albany: 

Robert  Healey,  b.  Apr.  14,  1870 ;    res.  1902,  Carthage,  Mo. ;    m.  Buf- 
falo, June   14,   1900,  Emma  Day. 
Ruth,  b.  July  9,  1872;    res.  1902,  Wilmington,  N.  C. ;    unm. 
Bessie,  b.  Jan.   19,   1878;    res.   1902,  Quincy. 
Porter,  b.  Oct.   14,  1880;    res.  1902,  Quincy. 

1222.  JoHN^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Hester  (Van  Der- 

zee) Babcock  (Joshua,  Joshua,  Joseph,  Joseph,  John, 
James),  b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1855;  res.  1902,  Sel- 
kirk, N.  Y. ;  m.  S.  Bethlehem,  July  5,  1883,  Annie,  dau.  of 
Ferdinand  and  Rosanna  (Metz)  Scharbute,  b.  Bethlehem, 
Mar.  24,  1855. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  461 

Children,  b.  Bethlehem : 

John  Raymond,  b.  June  28,   1889. 
Guy  v.,  b.  May  10,  1896. 

1223.  Dr.  Robert*^  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Hester  (Van 
Derzee)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Joshua,    Joseph,    Joseph, 

John,  James),  b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  2,  1857;    res.  1903, 
Albany,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Coeymans,  N.  Y.,  Feb.   18,  1886,  Maria, 
dau.  of  John  V.  A.  and  Henrietta  (Van  Denburgh)  Witbeck, 
b.  Coeymans,  Mar.  10,  1862. 
Children,  b.  Albany: 

Robert,  b.  July  26.   1895. 
Jenny  H.,  b.  Aug.  29,  igoo. 

1224.  Anna^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  O.  and  Rachel  (Mc- 
Gill)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Joshua,  Joseph,  Joseph,  John, 

James),  b.  Bethlehem,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  22,  1846;    res.  1903,  422 
Delaware  Avenue.  Albany,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Albany,  Apr.  14,  1875, 
James  C,  son  of  William  and  Jean    (Campbell)    Moore,  b. 
Albany,  Oct.  i,  1830,  d.  Albany,  June  19,  1901. 
Children : 

William,   b.   Albany,   Feb.    11,    1876;    d.  July  24,   1876. 
Jean  Campbell,  b.   Mar.  5,   1880;    d.  Dec.    13,   1901. 

1225.  James  H.*   Babcock,   son   of  Henry  O.   and   Rachel 

(McGill)    Babcock    (Joshua,  Joshua,  Joseph,  Joseph, 
John,  James),  b.  Bethlehem  Center,  N.  Y.,  May  3,  1848;   res. 
1903,  Bethlehem  Center;    m.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  5,  1877, 
Eleanor  C,  dau.  of  Philip  Clark,  b.  Albany,  Apr.  22,  1845. 
Child : 

James  C.  b.  Albany,  Aug.    14,   1883;    res.   1903.   Bethlehem  Center; 
m.   Bethlehem  Center,  Aug.  21,   1902,  Rose  Hazelton,  b.   Albany. 

1226.  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  O.  and  Mar- 
garet (Moore)  Babcock  (Joshua.  Joshua.  Joseph,  Jo- 
seph, John,  James),  b.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1862;  res.  1903, 
422  Delaware  Avenue.  Albany;  m.  Albany.  June  24,  1891, 
James,  son  of  Robert  and  Elizabeth  (Greer)  Hunter,  b.  Ire- 
land, Jan.  4,  1865. 

Children : 

Henry  B.,  b.   Mar.  23.   1892. 
Charlotte,  b.  Jan.  i,  1895. 

1227.  Melissa^  Furrow,  dau.  of  Jesse  and  Gean  (Babcock) 

Furrow    (Simeon,    Thomas,    Thomas,    Oliver.    John, 


462  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

James),  b.  Champaign  County,  O.,  Nov.  2,  1850;  res.  1902, 
Forest  City,  la.;  m.  Cambridge,  Wis.,  Jan.  2,  1876,  Adam, 
son  of  John  and  Christina  Jamieson,  b.  Ayrshire,  Scotland, 
Apr.  II,  1836. 

Children,  b.  Cashton,  Wis. : 

Addie  V.,  b.  ;    res.  Kiester,  Minn. 

John,  b.  ;    d.  Cashton,  June  8,   1887. 

1228.  Betiiuel  C.^  Babcock,  son  of  Rev.  Maxson  and 
Phiothata  (Davis)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Thomas,  Thom- 
as, Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Montra,  O.,  Oct.  28,  1841 ;  res. 
1902,  Dana,  la.;  m.  Garwin,  la.,  June  20,  1863,  Phebe  Ann, 
dau.  of  Peter  and  Mary  (Maneval)  Moyer,  b.  Blockhouse, 
Pa.,  Jan.  31,  1845.     He  is  a  farmer.  • 

Children : 

Everzallinc,   b.   May   15,    1864;     res.    1902,   Toledo,   la.;    m.   Garwin, 

1887,  John,   son  of  Henry  Cooper,  b.   Oct.    19,    1865. 
Harriet,  b.  Nov.  28,  1868 ;    res.  1902,  Gentry,  Ark. ;    m.  Grand,  la., 

Herbert,    son    of    William    and    Eliza     (Babcock)     Saunders,    b. 

Rhode  Island,  Mar.  20,  1853. 
Grace,  b.   Sept.    10,   1875 ;    res.   1902,   Dana,   la. 
Samuel,   b.   Feb.    i.    1886;    res.    1902.    Dana,   la.;    ni.   Grand,   Lottie 

C.  Malory,  b.  Valisca,  la.,  Nov.  27,  1872. 

1229.  Perry  B.^  Lippencott,  son  of  Curtis  and  Elizabeth 

(Babcock)    Lip])encott    (Simeon,    Thomas,    Thomas, 
Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Bloomcenter,  O.,  July  15,  1866;    res. 
1902,  Walworth,  Wis.;    m.  Bloomcenter,  July  4,    1889,   Re- 
becca, dau.  of  John  Sly,  b.  Sidney,  O.,  Nov.  2,  1869. 
Children : 

Flossie,  b.   Bloomcenter,   Oct.    i,   1890. 
Josephine,   b.    Bloomcenter.   Jan.   20,    1892. 
Lula  v.,  b.  Bloomcenter,  Oct.  23,   1893. 
Herbert  L.,  b.   Maplewood,   O.,   Oct.    14,   1896. 
Claud,  b.  Walworth,  Apr.  25,  1899. 

1230.  John   Albert^   Babcock,   son  of   Simeon   and   Amy 

(Van  Horn)  Babcock  (William,  Thomas,  Thomas, 
Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Shelley  County,  O.,  Aug.  12,  1850; 
res.  1902,  Jackson  Center,  O. ;  m.  Montra,  O.,  Nov.  14,  1871, 
Nancy  Ellen,  dau.  of  John  Lippencott,  b.  Montra,  Aug.   13, 

1853-. 

Children : 

Mertie  L.,  b.  Sept.  10,  1873;    d.  May  6,  1886. 

Columbus,  b.  June  2,   1875  ;    res.  Walworth,   Wis. 

Augusta  M.,  b.  Aug.  20,  1877;    d.  Sept.,   1878.  '        ;' 

Delmer,  b.  Sept.  16,  1880;    res.  1902,  Jackson  Center,  O. 

Dennis,  b.  Sept.  16,  1880;    d.  July  10,  1889. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  463 

William,  b.  Feb.  20,  1889;    d.  July  10,  1889. 
Erven  S.,  b.  Feb.  20,  1889. 

1231.  John**  Babcock,  son  of  Elijah  and  Cynthia  (Weld) 

Babcock  (James,  Jeremiah,  Simeon,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Wales,  Mass.,  Apr.  7,  1826;  d.  Denver,  Colo.,  Apr. 
9,  1900;  m.  Wales,  Apr.  16,  1854,  Lorinda,  dau.  of  Whitman 
and  Esther  (Moiilton)  Mungar,  b.  Wales,  Apr.  13,  1837;  res. 
1903,  Denver. 

In  early  manhood  John  Babcock  was  associated  in  mercan- 
tile business  with  his  father  and  brother  Draper  in  Monmouth, 
111.,  but  being  afflicted  with  asthma  he  later  settled  in  Denv^er, 
Colo.,  where  he  remained  through  life  and  where  his  children 
were  educated. 

Children,  b.  Monmouth : 

Charles  Whitman,  b.  Feb.  28,  1856 ;    res.  1903,  Denver ;    unm. 

Frank  E.,  b.  Oct.   i,   1858;    res.  Denver;    unm. 

Luella  Roxa,"  b.  July  25,  1862 ;  res.  1902,  Denver ;  m.  Denver,  Jan. 
17,  1884,  N.  M.,  son  £)f  H.  A.  and  Augusta  Pierce  Tabor,  b. 
Augusta,  Me.     Child :    Persis  Augusta,'"  b.  May  29,  1894. 

Persis  L.,  b.  Dec.  14,  1864;  res.  1902.  California  Hotel,  San  Fran- 
cisco, Cal. ;  m.  Ci)  Dec.  25,  1884,  William  F.  Wilson,  d.  Apr.  19, 
1889;  m.  (2)  Denver,  Jan.  17,  1898,  Harry,  son  of  Judge  J.  H. 
and  Maria  Gray,  b.  Des  Moines,  la.,  June  i,   1862. 

John,  Jr.,  b.   Mar.   13,   1872;     res.    1903,   Denver;    unm. 

1232.  Persis  Weld^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Elijah  and  Cynthia 

(Weld)    Babcock   (James,  Jeremiah,   Simeon,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Wales,  Mass.,  July  9,  1824;    d.  Monmouth, 
111.,  Feb.  18,  1847;    m.  Oct..  1843,  Wyatt  B.  Stapp,  b.  May- 
ville,  Ky.,  Apr.  27,  181 3,  d.  Monmouth,  July  11,  1851. 
Children,  b.  Monmouth : 

Guy,   b.    Sept.    18,    1844;     res.    1903,    Chicago,    111.;    m.    Monmouth, 
Sept.  20,  1866,  Caroline  E.,  dau.  of  Rev.  Anson  Tucker,  b.  Spring- 
field, N.  Y.,  May  18,   1843.     No  children. 
1485  Lucy,"  b.  June  3,   1846 ;    m.  James  B.   Clark. 

1233.  Albert  M.^  Clark,  son  of  Hosea  and  Laurana  (Bab- 
cock)   Clark    (Oliver,    Oliver,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John. 

James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  16,  1824;  res.  1903.  Clav- 
ville,  N.  Y.;  m.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  13,  1851,  Phebe  M., 
dau.  of  Thomas  and  Prudence  Gorton,  b.  Brookfield,  Dec.  11, 
1830. 

Children : 

Lillian  A.,  b.  Verona.  N.  Y.,  July  2,  1854;  res.  1903,  Redondo, 
Cal. ;  m.  Clayville,  Aug.  13,  1873.  Loren  J.,  son  of  Horace  Perry, 
b.  Medina,  N.  Y.,  1850. 


464  Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Ida  Marie,  b.  Verona,  Oct.  17,  1856;  res.  1903,  Earlville,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Clayville,  Dec.  28,  1878,  John  M.,  son  of  Thomas  Jennings, 
b.   Caddsdon,   England. 

Flora  P.,"  b.  Clayville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14,  i860;  res.  1903,  No.  i 
Stanley  Place,  Yonkers,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Clayville,  Dec.  20,  1888, 
Charles  Clarence,  son  of  Charles  H.  and  Frances  (Saunders) 
Chipman,  b.  Hope  Valley,  R.  I.,  Feb.  6,  1859.  Mr.  Chipman  is 
an  Architect  in  New  York  City,  and  himself  and  family  are 
Seventh  Day  Baptists.  Children :  Charles  Albert,'"  b.  Clayville, 
N.  Y.,  July  30,  1891 ;  Phebe  Miriam,  b.  Clayville,  May  22,  1893; 
Robert  Clark,  b.  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  29,  1898;  Frances  Mar- 
garet, b.  Yonkers,  Mar.  26,   1900. 

1234.  Rev.   Joseph   Julian*   Babcock,   son  of  Oliver  and 
Lecta    (Burdick)    Babcock    (Oliver,    Oliver,    Oliver, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  19,  1826;  d. 
Wheeling-,  W.  Va.,  June,  1865  ( ?)  ;  m.  (i)  Esther  Cogshell, 
of  Portsmouth,  R.  I.;  m.  (2)  Mariah,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  26,  1859, 
Sarah  C,  dau.  of  John  and  Susan  (Houghton)  Burwell,  b. 
Vermont,  June  17,  1825;  res.  1902,  Crown  Point,  N.  Y. 
Children  by  second  marriage : 

i486  Ira  J.,'  b.   Sept.   16,   1859;    m.   Isabelle  Woof. 

Althea  Adeline,  b.  Jay,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  5,  i860;    res.  1902,  Glasco,  N.  Y. 
Fred  C,  b.  Jay,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1863;    d.  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  Dec, 
1864. 

1235.  AsAEL  Luther*  Babcock,  son  of  Oliver  and  Lecta 

(Burdick)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Brookfield.  N.  Y.,  May  9,  1828;  d.  Brook- 
field,  Sept.  3.  1900;  m.  Waterville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  10,  1858, 
Harriet  M.,  dau.  of  Robert  Brusie,  b.  Dutchess  County,  N. 
Y.,  Oct.  28,  1835;  res.  1902,  Tallette,  N.  Y.  She  m.  (2)  Mr. 
Crandall. 

Children,  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y. : 

Ella  Maria,  b.  June  6,  1859;    d.  Sept.  10.  1870. 

Carrie  L.,  b.  Sept.  28,  1861 ;    res.  1902,  Tallette,  N.  Y. ;    unm. 

Oliver  W.,  b.  May  12,  1870;  res.  1902,  New  Berlin.  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Oct.  27,  1897,  Matilda,  dau.  of  Marvin  and  Sarah  (Wilson) 
Brazil,  b.  Lathrop,  Pa.,  Sept.  5,  1873.     No  children. 

1236.  Ida  E.*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Leroy  and  Sally  A.  (Mark- 
ham)   Babcock   (Joseph,  Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Brookfield.  June  12,  1857;   res.  1902,  South  Street, 
"Utica,  N.  Y. ;   m.  LTtica,  June  ^,  1885,  Edgar  P.  Luce. 
Child : 

Sarah  Esther,  b.  Utica,  May  19.  1889. 

1237.  Irving  Alexander*  Crandall.  son  of  Darwin  and 
Alzina  (Babcock)   Crandall  (Phineas,  Oliver,  Oliver, 


JOHN    BABCOCK. 
1826- 1900. 


Page  46.3. 


The  Babcuck  Coicalogy.  465 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  5,  1848; 
res.    1902,   Leonardsville;    m.   Leonardsville,   Apr.    25,    1870, 
Algerose,  dau.  of  John  and  Elizabeth   (Burdick)    lligley,  b. 
Spafford,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  7,  1850. 
Children,  b.  Leonardsville : 

Elva  E.,  b.  1871  ;  m.  1893.  E.  F.  Champlin,  son  of  Frank  and 
Fidelia  (Brown)  Champlin,  b.  Mystic,  Conn,  1870;  res,  1902, 
516  Main  Street.  Little  Falls,  N.  Y. 

Ralph  Emerson,  b.   1878;    res.    1902,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

Mabel  Alay,  b.  1880;  res.  1902,  Plainfield,  N.  J.;  m.  Leonardsville, 
N.  Y.,  1901,  Dr.  O.  B.  Whitford,  son  of  Abert  and  Ella  Ed- 
wards W'hitford,  b.   Leonardsville. 

Blanche  AL,  b.   1882;    res.   1902,  Leonardsville. 

1238.  Alice    J.^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Nathan    and    Fannie 

(Walrod)  Babcock  (Nathan,  Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  May  18,  1848;  res.  1902, 
Little  Falls;  m.  Little  Falls,  May  19,  1864,  John  France,  b. 
England. 

Children,  b.  Little  Falls: 

Washington  P..  b.   1865;    d.  May  30.   1892;    m.  Little  Falls,  June  5, 

1889,  Mary  Daley.     Has  one  son. 
James,   b.    1867;     res.    1902,   Little   Falls;    m.   Little   Falls,   Nov.  27, 

1889,   Nora  Van  Victen.     Has  two  daughters. 

1239.  Edward  Henry^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Fan- 
nie (Walrod)  Babcock  (Nathan,  Oliver,  Oliver,  Oli- 
ver, John,  James),  b.  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  June  26,  1850;  res. 
1902,  Little  Falls;  m.  Little  Falls,  Dec.  27,  1872  (?),  Mary, 
dau.  of  William  and  Helen  (Garwin)  Hall,  b.  Little  Falls, 
June  26,  1854. 

Children,  b.  Little  Falls : 

William  Horace,  b.  Apr.  13,  1874;  res.  1902,  No.  11  Garfield  Place, 
Albany,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Little  Falls,  Jan.   16,   1897.  Lulu  Youngs. 

Edward  W.,  b.  May  26,  1875;  res.  1902,  W.  Main  Street,  Little 
Falls;    m.  Little  Falls,  Dec.  14,   1896,  Ida  Howard. 

1240.  William   C.^   Babcock,  son  of  Nathan   and   Fannie 

(Walrod)   Babcock    (Nathan,  Oliver,  Oliver,   Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Little  Falls.  N.  Y.,  May  21,  1853:   d.  South 
Dakota,  Sept.  6,  1896;  m.  Illinois,  Dec.  25,  1879,  Nancy  Dys- 
lin.     She  m.  (2)  W.  W.  Aurand;  res.  1902,  Rockford,  111. 
Children : 

Fannie,  b.  Shannon.  111.,  Sept.  29,  1880:    res.  1902,  Rockford,  111. 
Versula,   b.   Shannon,    111.,    Feb.   22,    1882;     res.    1902,   Atlanta,   Ga. ; 

m.  Aug.  27,   1901,  Frank  G.  North. 
Frank,  b.  Canton,  S.  I).,  1896;   res.  1902,  Rockford. 

30 


466  Tlic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1241.  George  Nathan^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Fan- 
nie (Walrod)   Babcock  (Nathan,  OHver,  Ohver,  OH- 

ver,  John,  James),  b.  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  31,  1859;   res. 
1902,  Little  Falls;    m.  Little  Falls,  June   10,    1886,   Fannie, 
dan.  of  Sylvester  and   Mary   (Conklin)    Cross,  b.   Sylvester, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  4,  1866. 
Child : 

Gertrude  Huklah,  b.  Oct.  3,  1891. 

1242.  Nancy   Calphrona^   Babcock,   dan.   of   Henry  and 
Angeline   (Langworthy)   Babcock   (Hezekiah,  Oliver, 

Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,   N.  Y.,  May  6, 
1845;   J'^s.  1902,  North  Loup,  Neb.;  m.  Berlin,  Wis.,  Jan.  18, 
1872,  William  Allen,  son  of  Allen  and  499  Eliza  (Babcock) 
Prentice,  b.  Dakota,  Wis.,  July  6,  1851. 
Children : 

Gallic  A.,  b.   Berlin,   Wis.,   Dec.   4,   1872;     res.   1902,    1030  E.   26th 

Street,   Erie,    Pa. ;    m.   Allen,   Pa.,   Dec.   4,    1893,  John  J.,   son   of 

James  Abbey,  b.  Alien,  Feb.  10,  1868. 
William   Asa   L.,   b.    North   Loup,   Feb.   6,    1875;    res.    1902,   North 

Loup. 
Henry  Allen  L.,  b.    North   Loup,   Nov.   3,    1876;    res.    1902,  North 

Loup. 
Emogene   Elaine,  b.   North   Loup,   Dec.  25,   1882 ;    res.    1902,   North 

Loup. 
Earnestine,  b.   North  Loup. 

1243.  Henry  H.^   Watson,   son  of   Charles   and   Amanda 

(Babcock)    Watson    (Peleg,    Peleg,    Oliver,    Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.   Battle  Ground,   Ind.,  July   10,    1840;    res. 
1902,  Rensselaer,  Ind.;    m.  Rensselaer,  Nov.  17,  1869,  Mary 
Shortridge. 
Children : 

Dee  Everett,  b.  Aug.  13,  1870;    d.  Aug.  11,  1900;    m.  Mabel  Sulida. 

Had  3  children. 
Daisy  Alice,  b.  Jan.   14.   1872;    res.   1902,  Albuquerque,   N.  M. ;    m. 

Jan.  28,  1897,  Robert  Abraham.     They  have  two  children. 
Helen,  b.  Jan.   17,   1874;    m.  1894,  Peter  Kohles,  of  Chicago. 
James  F.,  b.  Nov.  23,   1876. 
Henry  H.,  b.   Nov.   18,   1877. 
Elizabeth  A.,  b.  July  8,  1881. 
Charles,  b.  Feb.   12,   1883. 
Jeanette,  b.  Apr.  7,   1887. 

1244.  Elizabeth  Amanda^  Watson,  dau.  of  Charles  and 
Amanda    (Babcock)    Watson    (Peleg,    Peleg,    Oliver, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  June  12,  1849;   res. 
1902,  Rensselaer;    m.  Rensselaer,  Apr.  7,  1870,  William  H., 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  467 

son  of  Jolin  and  Mary  Gwin,  b.  Nov.  6,  1842,  d.  Rensselaer, 
Oct.  8,  1895. 

Children,  b.  Rensselaer : 

William,  h.  Jan.  30,   1872;    res.    lyoj,   Rensselaer;    in.   Oct.  2,   1902, 

Frances  Wood. 
Elvia  Alice,  b.  Nov.  23,  1876  (?). 
Pleasant  Marion,  b.  Alar.  9,  1879.     Address,  U.  S.  R.  S.  Columbia, 

Brooklyn  Navy  Yard,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 
Carrie,  b.  Apr.  28,   1882. 
Slierman  L.,  b.  Sept.  30.  1885. 
Hayes  G.,   b.  June   12,   1889. 
Annie,  b.   Mar.  20,   1892;    d.   1898. 

1245.  Augustus  Dorr^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Ruby 

(Foster)     Babcock     (Peleg,     Peleg,    Oliver,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  ;    d.   Rensselaer,  Ind. ;  m.   Rensselaer, 

Jan.   I,  1852,  Abigail,  dan.  of  William  and  Hannah  (Morri- 
son) Iliff. 
Children : 

1487  Augustus  Dwight,^  b.  Sept.  28,   1852;    m.  Maggie  A.  Watt. 
Ruby  A.,  b.  . 

Addie  B.,  b.  . 

1246.  James  B.^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathan  and  Ruby  (Fos- 
ter)   Babcock    (Peleg,    Peleg,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John, 

James),  b.   Cortland,   N.   Y.,  Aug.    i,    1834;    d.   Rensselaer, 
Ind.,  Sept.  6,  1859;   m.  Rensselaer,  Aug.  14.  1853,  Ellen,  dau. 
of  Joseph  and  Esther  (Ehvood)  Price,  b.  Ohio,  Apr.  i,  1852; 
res.  1902,  near  Goodland,  Ind. 
Children : 

Frank  J.,*  b.  Rensselaer,  Aug.  4,  1854 :  res.  1902,  Goodland ;  m. 
Goodland.  Oct.  22,  1884.  Mary,  dau.  of  John  and  Esther  (Miller) 
May,  b.  Remington,  Ind.,  Apr.  22,  1865.  Children,  b.  Goodland : 
Ruby  A.,'°  b.  1885;  Willie,  b.  1887;  Paul,  b.  1888;  Victor,  b. 
1892;    Frank,  b.  1901. 

Nathan,  b.   1856;    d.  Goodland. 

James,  b.   1858;    res.   1902,   Parr,   Ind.;    m.  Goodland,  Alice  Grey. 

1247.  Ellen  A.*  Babcock,  dau.  of  Luke  and  Lydia   (Bab- 
cock) Babcock  (Solomon,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  21,   1825;    d.  Dodge  Center, 
Minn.,  Apr.  29,  1885;  m.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  3,  1845,  James 
M.  Saunders, 
Children : 

Nettie,  b.  Apr.  19,  1846;  d.  Dodge  Center,  Oct.  31,  1893;  m.  (i) 
William  F.  Fox;    m.  (2)  Dec.  25.  1892,  George  Myers. 

Mary  L..  b.  Feb.  20,  1850:  res.  1902,  Clear  Lake.  Wis.;  m.  Oct. 
23,  1872,  L.  J.  Briggs.     They  have  two  children:    Nellie  and  Rena. 

Charles  A.,  b.  June  24,  1853;    d.  Nov.  9,  1854. 

1488  Henrietta  L.,*  b.  Feb.   15,   1857;    m.  Edward  L.  Ellis. 


468  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1248.  Anna    M.*    Babcock,    dait.    of   Luke   P.    and    Lydia 

(Babcock)   Babcock  (Solomon,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  1827;  d.  Lincklaen,  N.  Y.,  July 
31,  1885 ;  m.  Scott,  June  22,  1850,  Isaac  H.  Smith,  b.  Jan.  25, 
1826,  d.  Lincklaen. 
Children,  b.  Scott : 

Ellen,  b.   Feb.   10,   1851  ;    d.  May  25,   1870. 

Norman,  b.  Oct.  8,   1852;    d.  Dec.  25,  1872. 

Lydia,  b.  Mar.  31,   1856;    d.  Oct.  27,   1883. 

James  R.,  b.  Jan.  3,  1859;    d.  Lincklaen,  Dec.  22,  1897. 

1249.  Erwin  Luke^  Babcock,  son  of  Luke  P.  and  Lydia 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Solomon,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  June  28,  1829;  d.  Dodge  Cen- 
ter, Minn.,  May  5,  1892;  m.  Milton,  Wis.,  Apr.  12,  1856, 
Delia  M.,  dau.  of  Perry  and  Eusebia  (Maxson)  Sweet,  b. 
Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27,  1834,  d.  Dodge  Center,  Mar.  15,  1891. 

Erwin  Babcock  was  a  member  of  Company  E,  i6th  Regi- 
ment, Wisconsin  Volunteers,  from  the  fall  of  1861  to  1863, 
and  was  Sergeant  in  the  battles  of  Shiloh  and  Corinth  under 
Rosecrans ;  was  honorably  discharged  on  account  of  chronic 
sickness.  He  w^as  a  farmer.  In  1854  he  moved  from  Homer, 
N.  Y.,  to  Milton,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  settled  at  Dodge 
Center. 

Children : 

Everett  Eugene,  b.  Waushara  County,  Wis.,  May  17,  1857;  d.  Dodge 
Center,  May  29,  1881,  unm. 

Flora  L^abelle,  b.  Adams  County,  Wis.,  Feb.  25,  1859;  res.  St. 
Paul,  Minn.  She  is  a  school  teacher,  having  taught  most  of  the 
time  since  1879.  In  May,  1893,  she  graduated  from  the  State 
Normal  School,  at  Manketo,  Minn.  She  rendered  much  assist- 
ance in  collecting  records  for  this  volume. 

Louise  Gertrude,"  b.  June  6,  1861  ;  res.  1902,  Rochester.  Minn.  ;  m. 
Rochester,  Dec.  10,  1885,  Ellis  D.  Fisk,  b.  Minnesota,  Mar.  17, 
1862.  Children:  Avis  M..'"  b.  Dodge  Center,  Feb.  18,  1888,  d. 
1888;  Clinton  B.,  b.  Rochester,  Feb.  7,  1889;  Erma  L.,  b. 
Rochester,  Oct.  19,  1891. 

Rollin  Hewett,*  b.  Dodge  Center,  Mar.  4,  1864:  d.  Dodge  Center, 
Jan.  25,  1900;  m.  Dodge  Center,  Oct.  6,  1886,  Jemima  L.,  dau. 
of  John  and  Lovina  Richmond  Langworthy,  b.  Aug.  15,  1863; 
res.  Dodge  Center.  Children,  b.  Dodge  Center:  Julia  L,^"  b. 
Aug.  22,  1888;  Lucile,  b.  July  4,  1892. 

Frank  Erwin,'  b.  Dodge  Center,  Aug.  16,  1866;  d.  Redwood  Falls, 
Minn.,  Oct.  18,  1899;  m.  Milton,  Wis..  Dec.  3,  1891,  Mrs.  Addie 
Wells  Saunders  dau.  of  A.  Judson  and  Adalaid  Utter  Wells,  b. 
Mar.  18,  1861.  Children:  George  Lester,"  b.  Nov.  5,  1893,  d. 
Oct.  18.  1899;    Robert  W.,  b.  Apr.  5,  1895,  d.  Oct.  18,   1899. 

Minnie  Madelia,'  b.  Dodge  Center,  Aug.  16,  1866;  res.  1902,  Cas- 
selton,  N.  D. :  m.  Dodge  Center,  Nov.  6,  1890,  Floyd  B.,  son  of 
William  and  Sarah  Brown  Wells,  b.  May  31,  1861.  Children: 
Zelora  B.,"  b.  Feb.   15,   1892;  Laura,  b.   Sept.  25,   1893. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  4^9 

1250.  Edwin  S.**  Babcock,  son  of  Luke  P.  and  Lydia  (Bab- 
cock)  Babcock  (Solomon,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  lo,  1831 ;  d.  Eagle  Lake,  Minn., 
May  9,  1902;  m.  (i)  Milton,  Wis.,  Sept.  1857,  Mrs.  Isabelle 
(Wells)  Maxson,  d.  Farina,  111,  1866;  m.  (2)  De  Ruyter, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.,  1867,  Susan  M.  Mooney,  b.  Dec,  1829,  d.  Eagle 
Lake,  Nov.  17,  1900. 
Child : 

Ross  Edwin,  b.  De  Ruyter,  June  26,  1868;    d.  Dorge  Center,  Minn., 
1876. 

1251.  Oscar  Almeron®  Babcock,  son  of  Luke  P.  and  Lydia 

(Babcock)  Babcock  (Solomon,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y.,  June  13,  1838;  d.  Homer, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  1903;  m.  Homer,  June  5,  1866,  Lauraett,  dau. 
of  Ezra  and  Lorain  (Hotchkiss)  Maltby,  b.  Liverpool,  N.  Y., 
Oct.  19,  1844,  d.  Homer,  Sept.  27,  1898. 

He  enlisted  in  the  157th  Regiment,  New  York,  Sept.  30, 
1862,  and  was  discharged  July  10,  1865.  He  was  a  Sergeant; 
served  in  many  battles,  and  was  in  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea. 

Children,  b.  Homer : 

1489  Lydia  L.,**  b.  Feb.  9,  1867;    m.  Chauncey  Baker. 

Maud  E.,  b.  Oct.  30,  1871 ;    m.  Jan.  31,  1894,  Willis  Green,  of  Cort- 
land, an  engineer.     She  is  an  artist. 
Mabel  J.,  b.   Oct.  30,   1871 ;    m.  June  22,   1892,   William  A.  Wads- 
worth,  of  Cortland.     They  have  one  child,  Lawrence,  b.  July  4, 
1897. 

1252.  Oscar  Almeron^  Babcock,  son  of  Ralph  and  Azubah 

(Dodge)  Babcock  (Solomon,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Babcock  Grove,  III,  Mar.  13,  1837;  res. 
1902,  Athol,  S.  D. ;  m.  Hillsborough,  Wis.,  Oct.  4,  1858, 
Philena  L.,  dau.  of  E.  D.  Douglass,  b.  Canal,  Pa.,  Feb.,  1838, 
d.  Hillsborough,  Wis. 

Children,  b.  Lincoln,  Wis. : 

Ralph  A.,  b.   1861 ;    res.  1902,  Rockville,  Mo. ;    m.  1886,  Annie  Der 

Hertoz.  b.  Iowa,   1862. 
Mae  Aris,  b:  1864;    d.  1880. 
Elsie  A.,  b.  1868;    res.  1902,  Athol,  S.  D. ;    m.  Athol,  1888,  Charles 

Baldings.  b.   Wisconsin,   1866. 
Fern,  b.  1871 ;    res.  1902,  Amherst,  S.  D. ;    m.  Athol,  Charles  Smith, 

b.  Pennsylvania,  1867. 
Mary,  b.  1873;    res.   1902,  Athol;    m.  Athol,   1890,  W.  S.  Brown,  b. 

Pennsylvania,    1852. 
Annie  A.,  b.  1875 ;    res.  1902,  Athol ;    m.  Athol,  1893,  George  Meade, 

b.  Michigan,  1866. 


470  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1253.  Omer   Alvarado**    Babcock,    son   of    Frederick   and 

Mary    (Kelley)    Babcock    (Solomon,    Peleg,    Oliver, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  1).  Ridott,  111.,  July  9,  1853;    res.  1902, 

Enterprise,   Miss.;    m.   Elroy,   Wis.,   Mar.    19,    1877,    Emma, 

dan.  of  Benjamin  and  Hannah  (Gills)  Potter,  b.  July  3,  1857, 

Child : 

Wirt  Alberti,  b.  Jan.   11,   1878;    res.   1902,  Enterprise;    unm. 

1254.  Phebe  Ann**   Babcock,  dau.  of  John  W.  and  Ann 
(Davis)  Babcock  (John,  Peleg,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 

James),  b.  North  East,  Pa.,  Sept.  4.  1847;    ^"^s.  1902,  Green- 
field,  Pa.;    m.   Greenfield,   Sept.   6,    1864,   Elijah   P.,  son  of 
Jerome  B.  Davis,  b.  Greenfield,  Oct.  28,  1842. 
Children,  b.  Greenfield: 

John  W.,  b.  June  6,  1866;  res.  1902,  North  East;  m.  Findley  Lake, 
N.  Y.,  Ruth,  dau.  of  Asa  Landphere,  b.  Ripley,  N.  Y. 

Bertie   B.,  b.   Apr.    12,   1870;    d.    1876. 

Carrie,  b.  ;    res.   1902,  Ashton,  Pa.;    m.  Oct.  21,   1892,  Charles, 

son  of  Abel   Wilkinson. 

Nancy,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Ashtabula,  O. ;    m.  Ashtabula,  L.  Cutler, 

b.  Rock  Creek,  O. 

Pearl,  b.  Apr.  25,   1881  ;    res.   1902,  Greenfield. 

Blanch,  b.   Nov.  25,   1882. 

Alice,  b.  Jan.  28,  1887;    d.  Oct.  18,  1892. 

1255.  Almeron^   Babcock,  son  of  Horace  and   Samantha 

(Crofoot)    Babcock    (Taber,    Peleg,    Oliver,    Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  July  4,   1834,  d.  June  17,   1868;    m.   i860, 
Sarah  A.  Cobb. 
Children : 

Horace,  b.  Oct.  29,   1861. 
Claroline,  b.  Jan.  23,   1864. 

1256.  W1LL1.S  Angell^  Babcock,  son  of  Nelson  and  Lucy 

(Eee)  Babcock  (Russel,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Adams,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1840;  res.  Adams;  m. 
Adams,  Aug.  31,  1867.  Harriet  A.,  dau.  of  Elisha  and  Ruth 
(Carter)  Overton,  b.  Henderson,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  20,  1842;  res. 
Adams. 

Children,  b.  Adams : 

Mary  Frances,  b.  June  14,  1868;    d.  Adams,  July  16,  1883. 
Henry    Nelson,    b.    Mar.    5,    1873;     res.    1902,    195    Broadway,    New 
York  City. 

1257.  Lucinda    A^.    Babcock,    dau.    of    Nelson    and    Lucy 

(Lee)    Babcock    (Russel,   Paul,  Oliver,   Oliver,  John, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  471 

James),  b.  Adams,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,,  1842;   d.  Adams,  Jan.  21, 
1891 ;    m.  Adams,  Dec.  24,   1865,  Daniel  S.,  son  of  Thomas 
and  Polly   (Whitford)   Greene,  b.  Rodman,  N.  Y.,  June  12, 
1842;    res.  1902,  Adams  Center,  N.  Y, 
Children,  b.  Adams: 

Jaris,  b.  June  5,  1876:    res.  1902,  Adams  Center,  N.  Y. 
Clark  B.,  b.  Dec.  16.   1878;    res.  1902,  Dillin.  N.  Y. 
Alice  A.,  b.  Feb.  8,  1881 ;    res.   1902,  Adams,  N.  Y. 

1258.  Lizzie  M.^   Babcock,   dan.   of   Pardon   and   Clarissa 

(Benjamin)  Babcock  (Russel,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Adams  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  20,  i860;  res. 
1902,  S.  Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Adams  Center,  Mar.  21,  1883, 
Corydon  L.,  son  of  Daniel  and  Louisa  (Felton)  Maxson,  b. 
W.  Edmeston,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  2,  i860. 

Children,  b.  S.  Brookfield,  except  first,  b.  W.  Edmeston : 

Ethel,  b.  Mar.   13,   1884. 

Gilbert,   b.   Apr.    3.    1886. 

Daniel,  b.  Oct.  5,  1887. 

Ruth  B..  b.  Feb.  3.   1892;    d.  Apr.  25,   1892. 

Rolland  B..  b.  May  13,  1895. 

Carlton,  b.   Mar.   15,   1898. 

1259.  GuRDON  Evans''  Babcock,  son  of  Erastus  and  Doro- 
leski  (Perkins)  Babcock  (Russel,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Wirt,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  15,  1843;   res.  1902,  Scio, 
N.  Y. ;    m.   Scio,  July  4,    1865,  Freelove,  dau.  of  John  and 
Clarissa  (Welch)  \\'right,  b.  Scio,  Oct.  20,  1843. 
Children : 

John   W.,"  b.    Scio.   June   24,    1866;     res.    1902,    Scio;     m.    Belmont, 

N.   Y.,   Jan.   20,    1887,   Nellie,   dau.   of  John  and   Ellen   Simon,   b. 

Scio.    Mar.    31.    1865.      Children,    b.    Scio:     Maurice,'"   b.    Mar.    7, 

1888;    Raymond,  b.   Mar.  27,   1890. 
Charles   E.,   b.   June   26,    1871  ;     res.    1902,   Scio;     m.   Scio,   June   29, 

1898.  Grace  Reynolds. 
May  Belle."  b.  Wirt.  May  9,  1875  ;    res.  Wellsville,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Scio, 

Julv   S.    1893.   John   B.,   son  of  Peter  and   Alice  Gleason   Murray, 

b.    Wellsvilie.    .Mar.    14,    1872.      Child:     Gladys    F.,'"   b.    Belmont, 

Apr.   18.   1897. 

1260.  Emma  D.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Erastus  and  Doroleski 
(Perkins)     Babcock    (Russel,    Paul,    Oliver.    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.   Scio,   N.   Y..  Oct.    i,    1848;    d.   Scottville, 
Mich.,  Apr.  3,  1901  ;   m.  Scio,  May  6,  1869,  Calvin  P.,  son  of 
Samuel    and    Sarah    T.     (Patterson)     Stanton,    b.    Spafford, 
N.  Y.,  Ttine  12,  1846;   res.  1902,  Ludington.  Mich. 
Child  : 

Edith  D.,  b.  Ludington,  Oct.  28,  1877;    res.  1902,  Washington,  D.  C. 


47-  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1261.  Samuel  Russel**  Babcock,  son  of  Erastiis  and  Doro- 
leski  (Perkins)  Babcock  (Rtissel,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oli- 
ver, John,  James),  b.  Honeoye  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31,  1852; 
res.  1902,  Block ville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Panama,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  23, 
1873,  Ettie  M.,  dau.  of  Erastus  Smith,  b.  New  York  State, 
July  15,  1856. 

Children : 

Carrie    E.,    b.    Oct.    15,    1879;     m.    Blockville,    Jan.,    1901,    Earnest 

Wiltsie. 
Ralph  R.,  b.  May,  1881. 
Dora  F.,  b.  Blockville,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  19,  1887. 

1262.  Frank    L.^    Babcock,    son    of    William    and    Violet 

(Hazard)  Babcock  (Russel,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  23,  1856;  res.  1902,  Al- 
lentown,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Wirt,  N.  Y.,  May  13,  1880,  Lillie  A., 
dau.  of  Porter  and  Lydia  (Babcock)  Barnes,  b.  Scio,  Feb.  28, 
1861. 

Children : 

Porter  W.,  b.  Nov.  15,  1882;    res.  1902,  Allentown. 
Paul   F.,  b.   Feb.   10,    1893. 
Pearl  V.,  b.  Sept.  3,  1894. 
Raymond,  b.  Apr.  23,   1896. 

1263.  Leora^     Babcock.     dau.     of     William     and     Violet 

(Hazard)  Babcock  (Russel,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  27,  1868;  res.  1902,  Ina- 
vale,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Scio,  Sept.  19,  1883,  Milton,  son  of  A.  J. 
Case,  b.  Inavale,  Sept.  9,  1859.     One  child.  Earl. 

1264.  Benjamin  C.^  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  H.  and  Caro- 
line   (Lee)    Babcock    (Russel,    Paul,    Oliver,    Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Lyons  Corners,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,   1866;    res. 
Sacketts  Harbor,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Sacketts  Harbor,  Oct.  13,  1886, 
Minnie,   dau.   of   Dyer   and   Bell    (Fields)    Bass,    b.    Dexter, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1868. 
Children : 


Bertha,  b.   Sacketts  Harbor,  June  14,   li 
Carl,  b.  Adams  Center,   N.  Y..  Mar.  30,   1890. 
Lillie,   b.   Adams   Center,   July  22,    1897. 
Earl,  b.  Lyons  Corners,  Aug.  9,  1899. 

1265.     Harley  Bond^  Burdick,  son  of  Duane  D.  and  Emily 

F.   (Babcock)   Burdick.     Duane  D.  was  son  of  Capt. 

Jesse   and   Sally    (Babcock)    Burdick    (Paul,    Oliver,    Oliver, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  473 

John,  James),  b.  Sa^-inaw  City,  Mich.,  June  14,  1863;  res. 
1902,  Sag-inaw ;  m.  Moravia,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  20,  i888,  Grace, 
dau.  of  Thomas  and  Akhea  (McClean)  Greene,  b.  Moravia, 
Feb.  24,  1869. 

Children,  b.  Saginaw. 

Frank  D.,  b.  Nov.  i,  1889. 
Walter  T.,  b.  Apr.  19,  1892. 

1266.  Mary  L.^  Hoagland,  dau.  of  Joshua  and  Harriet  E. 

(Babcock)  Hoagland  (Minard,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  I).  Union  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1858;  res. 
1902,  Detroit,  Mich.;  m.  Union  Springs,  Oct.  29,  1879,  Wil- 
liam H.,  son  of  William  and  Mary  (Delano)  Bell,  b.  Monte- 
zuma, N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  1856. 
Children,  b.  Auburn,  N.  Y. : 

Fred  R.,  b.  Sept.  11,  1880;    res.   1902,  Detroit;    unm. 
Lester  H.,  b.  May  23,  1883. 

1267.  Harriet    A.^    Brown,    dau.    of    Morris    and    Orissa 

(Babcock)     Brown     (Henry,     Paul,    Oliver,     Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  ;    deceased;    m.  John  Brown. 

Child : 

Carrie,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Sturgis,  Mich.;    m.  William  B.  Church. 

1268.  Erving    Otis^     Babcock,    son    of    Ethan    A.    and 
Olive  (Brusie)  Babcock  (Harry,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  N.  Y.,  July  29,  1855;  res.  1902, 
Oriskany  Falls,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Rome,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  17,  1879,  Mary 
Eliza,  dau.  of  Birdsall  and  Harriet  (Hibbard)  Dye,  b.  Pool- 
ville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  11,  1859. 

Erving  Babcock  was  in  California  from  1869  to  1872.  He 
was  a  carpenter  and  builder  by  trade;  took  many  contracts 
in  Salamanca,  N.  Y.  Later  was  a  merchant  in  Clair,  ]\Iich., 
and  Georgetown,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  Salamanca : 

Alice  L.."  b.  Aug.  26,  1880;  res.  1902,  Tyner,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Oxford. 
June  14,  1899,  Charles  F..  son  of  John  and  Eliza  Terwilliger 
Hendrickson,  b.  Sept.  18,   1878.     Child:    Louise.'"  b.  Apr.  7,   1900. 

Matie  A.,  b.  May  10,  1882;    res.  1902,  Oriskany  Falls. 

Jessie  O.,  b.   May   17.    1884.     ' 

1269.  Jessie  Bell^  Babcock.  dau.  of  Ethan  A.  and  Olive 

(Brusie)  Babcock  (Harry,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Modiste,  Cal..  Feb.  14,  1870;    res.   1902,  Jerome, 


474  ^/^^  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Ariz.:    m.  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  30,  1888,  Michael  M., 
son  of  ]<ichar(l  and  Elizabeth  (Dugal)  Connor,  b.  Tipperary, 
Ireland.     He  was  a  merchant  tailor. 
Children : 

William;    Earl   E. ;    Mildred  A.;    Verne  J. 

1270.  Fred  Howe^  Babcock,  son  of  Franklin  and  Kathe- 
rine  (Howe)   Babcock   (Rowse,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Galva,  111.,  Oct.  28,  i860;    res.  1902,  High- 
land Park,  111.;    m.  Chicago,  111.,  Sept.  5,  1891,  Elizabeth  W. 
Porter,  b.  Springfield,  Vt.,  June  4,  1868. 
Children,  b.  Chicago: 

Catherine  S.,  b.  Sept.  3,  1893. 
Porter  T.,  b.  June   15,   1896. 

1271.  Forrest    Frank*    Babcock,    son    of    Franklin    and 
Katharine    (Howe)    Babcock    (Rowse,    Paul,    Oliver, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Davenport,  la.,  Apr.  30,  1867;    res. 
1902,  163  Eggleston  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.;   m.  Chicago,  July 
29,  1890,  Blanche  S.,  dau.  of  J.  C.  and  Mary  (Tuttle)  Sturte- 
vant,  b.  Chicago,  Dec.  2t,,  1868. 
Children,  b.   Chicago : 

Forrest  Ralph,  b.   Aug.    18,   1893. 
Franklin  H.,  b.   Nov.   10.   1899. 

1272.  Willis  A.®   Babcock,   son  of  Rodolphus  and   Mary 

(Schermerhorn)   Babcock  (Rowse,  Paul,  Oliver,  Oli- 
ver, John,  James),  b.  Chatham,  111.,  May  23,  1861 ;   res.  1902, 
Mason  City,  la.;    m.  Mason  City,  Sept.  17,  1891,  Henrietta, 
dau.  of  Henry  and  Marie  (Moss)  Roden,  b.  Germany. 
Children,  b.  Mason  City  : 

Lucile,  b.   Aug.  5,   1892. 
Henry,  b.  July  3,    1894. 

1273.  Paul  Heard*  Babcock,  son  of  Dewane  D.  and 
Frances  E.  (Heard)  Babcock  (Martin  W.,  Paul,  Oli- 
ver, Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  June  11,  1872; 
res.  1901,  107  Warren  Avenue,  Milwaukee,  Wis.;  m.  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.,  Oct.,  1893,  Helen  Roberts,  only  dau.  of  Dr.  Burt 
B.  and  Delyra  P.  (Wilcox)  Roberts,  b.  May  30,  1867. 

Paul  Heard  Babcock  is  printer  and  pressman ;  has  been 
superintendent  for  Myer-Rotier  Printing  Company,  Milwau- 
kee, Wis.,  and  of  other  printing  establishments,  and  in  Dec, 
1900,  was  traveling  salesman  for  Inland  Type  Foundry. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  475 

Children : 

Paul   Roberts,   b.   Buffalo,   Sept.   24,    1894. 
Allan   Heard,  b.  Cleveland,  O.,  July  14,   1896. 
Faith   Virginia,   b.   Cleveland,   Apr.    13,    1898. 
Burt  Dewane,  b.  Milwaukee,  Dec.  21,  1899. 

1274.  Faith   Ellen*^   B.a.bcock,   dau.   of  Dewane   D.    and 
Frances  (Heard)  Babcock  (Martin  W.,  Paul,  Oliver, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  S.  Dansville,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  4,  1874; 
res,  1901,  141  Park  Street,  Buffalo,  N.  Y. :  m.  Buffalo,  Oct.  i, 
1896,  Charles  S.  Kent. 
Child : 

Paul  B.,  b.  Buffalo,  Oct.,   1898. 

1275.  William   Alfred**   Babcock,  son  of  Alfred  B.   and 
Amy    (Giles)    Babcock    (Ezra,   Ezra,   Oliver,   Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  New  Market,  N.  J.,  Feb.  19,  1858;  res.  1902, 
398  Boylston  Street,  Boston,  Mass. ;  m.  Hampden  Corner, 
Me.,  Aug.  26,  1884,  Lida  R.,  dau.  of  Calvin  and  Mercy 
(Deane)  Doane,  b.  Hampden  Corner,  Apr.  17,  1859,  d.  E. 
Somerville.  Mass.,  May  i,  1887. 
Children : 

Alfred  B.,  b.   Hampden  Corner,  July  23,   1885. 
Albert  Leslie,  b.  W.   Somerville,   Mar.   14,   1887. 

1276.  Josephine  Amarette^  Babcock,  dau.  of  William  and 

Sarah  A.  (Burdick)  Babcock  (Ezra,  Ezra,  Oliver, 
Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  30,  1857;  res. 
1902,  Arcade,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Cortland,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  25,  1879, 
Adelbert  J^.,  son  of  Ira  and  Mary  (Lyon)  Eastman,  b.  Eagle, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  29,  1856. 
Children : 

Mary  L.,  b.  Homer.  Oct.   11,   1880;    res.  1902,  Arcade. 

Burr.  b.   Oberlin,   Dec.    11,    1883;    d.   Dec.  24,   1883. 

William  V.,  b.  Oberlin,  Jan.  2.   1885. 

Laura  A.,  b.  Provo.  Utah,  Apr.  20.   1887. 

Gertrude  Katherine,  b.   New  York  City,  Feb.   18,   1890. 

Bernice,  b.  Arcade,  Aug.  31,  1891. 

1277.  Addie    May^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Jared    and    Mary 

(Clark)  Babcock  (Daniel,  Ezra,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John, 
James),  b.  Scipio,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  27,  1874;  res.  1902,  38  Clinton 
Street,  Homer,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Scott,  N.  Y.,  July  8,  1891,  Merton 
A.,  son  of  Hamilton  and  Josephine  (Truman)  WHiiting,  b. 
Scott,  June  26,  1868. 


4/6  TIic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Child : 

Archer  B.,  b.   Scott,  July  9,   1898. 

1278.  James  B.**  Babcock,  son  of  John  and  Ida  L.   (Tem- 

plar)    Babcock     (Ira,    Luke,    Oliver,    Oliver,    John, 
James),  b.  Hartland,  O.,  Nov.  8,  1873;   res.  1902,  Olena,  O. ; 
m.  Townsend,  O.,  Mar.  18,  1896,  Cora  E.,  dau.  of  W.  R.  and 
Abbie  Norton,  b.  Townsend,  Oct.  21,  1874. 
Children : 

Marian   C,   b.   Bronson. 
Raymond  D.,  b.   Hartland. 

1279.  John  Boardman^  Cottrell,  son  of  Ira  Lee  and  An- 

gelia  (Dye)  Cottrell  (John  and  Emma  Babcock 
Cottrell)  (Luke,  Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Richburg, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1873;  res.  1902,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Shiloh, 
N.  J.,  Dec.  26,  1895,  Julia,  dau.  of  Alfred  T.  F.  and  Lizzie 
(Swing)  Randolph,  b.  Shiloh,  Oct.  17,  1871. 
Children,  b.  Brooklyn : 

Celia,  b.  Feb.  6,  1897. 

John  B.,  Jr.,  b.  May  15.  1898. 

Beatrice,  b.  June  28,   1900. 

1280.  Charles  Burton^  Babcock,  son  of  Burton  and 
Helen  (Morris)  Babcock  (Simon,  Luke,  Oliver,  Oli- 
ver, John,  James),  b.  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  7,  1874;  res. 
1902,  Binghamton;  m.  Binghamton,  June  23,  1898,  Adeline, 
dau.  of  John  and  Mary  (Derkins)  Metzgar,  b.  Binghamton, 
Nov.  30,  1872. 

Child : 

A  daughter,  b.  Aug.,  1901. 

1281.  Lillian  Estelle^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Austin  and  Lau- 

ra (Wade)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Harris,  Joseph,  Oliver, 
John,  James),  b.  Oriskany  Falls,  N.  Y..  June  16,  1858;    res. 
1902,  Cashton,  Wis.;    m.  Austin,  Minn.,  Mar.  20,  1878,  Al- 
fonso, son  of  John  Kimbrick,  b.  July  29,  1853. 
Children : 

Leonard  A.,  b.  Dodge  Center,   Sept.   18,   1879;    res.  1902,  Cashton. 

Harry  W.,  b.  May  6,  1883. 

Ray  W.,  b.  Apr.  5,   1886. 

Walter,    b.    Cashton,    1892. 

Laura  E.,  b.  Nov.   12,  1895. 

Lynn,  b.  Cashton,  Mar.  5,   1900. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  477 

1282.  Irness  Eugene**  Babcock,  son  of  Austin  and  Laura 

(Wade)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Harris,  Joseph,  Ohver, 
John,  James),  h.  Oronoco,  Minn.,  May  25,  1861  ;  res.  1902, 
Cass  Lake,  Minn.;  m.  Hudson,  Wis.,  Sept.  19,  1887,  Ger- 
trude, dan.  of  Leonard  and  Mary  Rohl,  b.  Germany,  Nov.  i, 
1852. 

Children : 

Eugene  R.,  b.  St.   Paul,  Minn..  Dec.   10,   1889. 
Robert  Austin,  b.  Nov.  22,  1891. 

1283.  Henry    Ruggles*    Babcock,    son    of   John   W.    and 
Abbie  L.   (Bagg)  Babcock  (Thomas,  Harris,  Joseph, 

OHver,  John,  James),  b.  Augusta  Center,  N.  Y..  Jan.  18, 
i860;  res.  1902,  3223  Emerson  Avenue,  Minneapohs,  Minn.; 
m.  Dodge  Center.  Alinn.,  Apr.  3,  188 1,  Martha  A.,  dau.  of 
Harver  and  Olive  M.  (Ash)  Palmer,  b.  Pine  Island,  Minn., 
Dec.  8,  1856. 
Children : 

George  Henry,  b.  Dodge  Center,  Oct.  26,   1882. 
Frank  Palmer,  b.  Dodge  Center,  Oct.  17,  1883. 
Nettie  Olive,  b.   Dodge  Center,  Dec.   19,   1885. 
Jennie  May,  b.  Webster,  S.  D.,  Oct.  20,   1887. 
Abbie  A.,  b.  Webster,  Mar.  25,  1890. 
Fred  A.,  b.  Webster,  Aug.  29,   1891. 

1284.  Charles   Palmer®    Babcock,   son   of  John   W.   and 
Abbie    (Bagg)    Babcock    (Thomas,    Harris,    Joseph, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Magnolia,  111.,  Aug.  3,   1862;    res. 
1902,    1631    Penn   Avenue.    Minneapolis,    Minn.;    m.    Farm- 
ington,    Minn..    Apr.    2.    1891.    Leoline,    dau.    of   Ansel   and 
Kate  (Clark)  Booth,  b.  Silver  Creek,  N.  Y.,  Jan,  12.  1870. 
Children,  b.  Minneapolis : 

Charles  Lee,  b.  June  29,  1892. 
Edward  Berth,  b.  Sept.  3,  1894. 
Marjorie  E.,  b.  Jan.  19,  1897. 

1285.  John  Wesley®   Babcock.  Jr..  son  of  John  W.  and 
Abbie    (Bagg)    Babcock    (Thomas.    Harris.    Joseph, 

Oliver.  John,  James),  b.   Pine  Island.  Minn..  Aug.  3.   1868; 
res.  1902.  227  Xerxie  Avenue.  Minneapolis;    m.  Minneapolis, 
Oct.  2.  1895.  Susie  May,  dau.  of  John  and  Susan  (Knaeble) 
Kees.  b.  Minneapolis.  ]\Iay  i.  1875. 
Children,  b.  Minneapolis : 

Viola  L..  b.  Nov.  2,  1896. 
Vernon  M.,  b.  June  i,   1899. 


47^  Tlic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1286.  EsTELLE    May^    Babcock,    dan.    of    John    W.    and 
Abbie    (Bagg)    Babcock    (Thomas,    Harris,    Joseph, 

Ohvcr,  John,  James),  1).  Dodge  Center,  Minn.,  May  13,  1878; 
m.  MinneapoHs,  Ang.  8,  1899,  Samuel  C,  son  of  Samuel  and 
Ahna  (Sylvester)  Yeaton,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  14,  1874. 
Child:' 

Abbie  Alma,  b.  Nov.  29,  1900,  Brooklyn. 

1287.  Sarah  Eliza^   Babcock,   dan.  of  Joseph  Hugh  and 
Ehza   Ann    (Hosley)    Babcock    (Hugh   W.,    Joseph, 

Joseph,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Adams,  Mass.,  Sept.  30, 
1844;    res.   1900,  Wilmington,  Vt. ;    m.  N.  Adams,  Dec.  25, 
1866,  Elbridge  Myron,  son  of  Israel  and  Elizabeth  (Barnard) 
Haynes,  b.  Wilmington,  Mar.   i,   1846. 
Children : 

Charles  Elbridge,  b.  Wilmington,  Sept.  18,  1870;  living  1901, 
Limestone,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Wilmington,  Aug.  21,  1894,  Lina  May- 
Robinson,  dau.  of  Spencer  and  Mary  (Fits)  Robinson,  b.  Wards- 
boro,   Vt. 

Nora  Elizabeth,  b.  Sept.  14,  1873;  res.  1901,  Wilmington;  m. 
Asheville,  N.  C,  Dec.  8.  1896,  Leslie  Henry,  of  Wilmington,  son 
of  Henry  and  Sarah  (Smith)  Adams,  b.  Wilmington,  Sept.  15, 
1874.  They  have  one  child,  Hilma  Rose,  b.  Wilmington,  Sept. 
20.  1900. 

Rose  Ellen,  b.  July   12,   1877. 

1288.  Col.  George  M.^  Moulton,  son  of  Joseph  and  Jane 
M.    (Babcock)    Moulton   (Hugh  W.,  Joseph,  Joseph, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Readsboro,  Vt.,  Mar.  15,  1851;  res. 
1901,  at  21 19  Calumet  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.;  m.  Burlington, 
la..  Mar.  12,  1873,  Anna  Florence,  dau.  of  Seth  and  Martha 
Anne  (Ware)   Garland. 

With  his  parents  he  removed  to  Chicago  in  1853;  grad- 
uated at  the  high  school  in  1868;  in  1870,  with  his  father, 
erected  the  first  grain  elevator  in  Duluth ;  since  that  time  has 
managed  the  erection  of  many  of  the  largest  elevators  in  the 
country.  From  its  organization  he  has  been  President  of  the 
Pioneer  Fire-Proof  Construction  Company,  which  owns  and 
controls  the  largest  clay  manufacturing  establishment  in  the 
world. 

Since  Feb.,  1894,  he  has  been  Colonel  of  the  Second  In- 
fantry Regiment,  Illinois  National  Guard.  With  his  regiment 
he  participated  in  the  campaign  of  July  and  August,  1894,  for 
the  suppression  of  the  railroad  riots  in  the  vicinity  of  Chicago. 
He  with  his  regiment  served  in  the  Spanish  War.  He  was  the 
first  United  States  Chief  of  Police  in  Havana,  and  is  (1901) 
Inspector  General  of  Illinois. 


Page  478. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  479 

Children : 

Edith  May,  h.  Winona,  Minn..  Aug.  31,   1874;    m.  Chicago,  Oct.  6, 

1898,   John   Henry    Murphy. 
Arthur  G.,  b.   Chicago,   Feb.   15,    1876. 

1289.  Sarah  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Charles  Rollin 
and  Maria  (Stowe)   Babcock  (Hugh  W.,  Joseph,  Jo- 
seph, Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Readsboro,  Vt.,  May  9,  1852; 
m.  St.  I^aul.  Minn.,  Oct.  21,  1874,  Frank  Leon  Brainard. 

Child : 

Florence  Marie,  b.  St.  Paul,  Mar.  18,  1876. 

1290.  Ella  Maria*  Babcock,  dan.  of  Charles  Rollin  and 
Maria  (Stowe)   Babcock  (Hugh  \V.,  Joseph,  Joseph, 

Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Leyden,   Mass.,  Jan.  24,    1854;    m. 
St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Oct.  25,  1876,  Frank  Douglass  Hyde. 
Child : 

Josephine  Etta,  b.   Mazeppa,   Minn.,  July  3,   1878. 

1291.  Charles  J.*  Babcock,  son  of  Charles  R.  and  Marcia 

(Wing)    Babcock  (Hugh  W.,  Joseph,  Joseph,  Oliver, 

John,  James),  b.  Waterville,  Minn.,  July  17,  1864;   res.  1901, 

Perin  Avenue,  Minneapolis,  Minn. ;   m.  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  June 

19,  1889,  Helen  C.  Murray,  b.  Hastings,  Minn.,  Dec.  17,  1868. 

Child : 

Lucile.  b.  St.  Paul,  June  27,  1891. 

1292.  Lucy   Maria^    Babcock,   dau.   of   Elnathan   W.    and 

Sally  (Davis)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Abel,  James,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  May  9,  181 5;  d. 
Westerly,  R.  L,  Aug.  21,  1891 ;  m.  Ashaway,  R.  L.  Sept.  16, 
1852,  Rev.  Lebbeus  M..  son  of  Lebbeus  and  Lydia  (Maxson) 
Cottrell.  b.  Westerly,  Nov.  15,  1819;  res.  1902,  De  Ruvter, 
N.  Y.  ' 

Child : 

Dr.   Bourdnian   M..  b.   W.   Edmeston,   N.   Y.,   Nov.    15,    1856;    res. 
1902,   Hornellsville,   N.   Y. 

1293.  Fanny   M.^    Babcock.    dau.    of   Peleg   and   Lucinda 

(Brown)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Abel,  James,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Independence,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  4,  1826;  d.  La- 
mont.  Pa.,  Aug.  7,  1893;  m.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y..  James  A. 
R.  Greenman,  b.  Steventown.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  10,  1820;  d.  Hatch- 
ville.  Pa.,  Sept.   19,  1900. 


480  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Lamoiit : 

1490  Benjamin  F.,'"  h.  Feb.  23,   1851  ;    m.  Emily  Preston. 

Electa  Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  3,  1861  ;  res.  1902,  Hatchville;  ni.  Inde- 
pendence, Aug.   12,  1894,  Charles  W.  Nelson. 

1294.  Daniel  Ends''  Babcock,  son  of  Peleg  and  Lticinda 

(Brown)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Abel,  James,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Independence,  N.  Y.,  July  12,  1828;  d.  Wirt 
Center,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  5,  1898;  m.  Wirt  Center,  Aug.  12,  1854, 
Hannah  Ann  Witter,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  June  5,  1835;  res. 
1902,  Wirt  Center. 

Daniel  Babcock  was  a  farmer  and  carpenter.  He  was  Dea- 
con of  the  Nile  S.  D.  B.  Church  for  thirty-seven  years. 

Children,  b.  Wirt  Center : 

Alice  Lema,  b.  May  7,  1855;  d.  Wirt,  Dec.  21,  1881  ;  m.  Wisconsin, 
Apr.  25,  1875,  George,  son  of  Samuel  and  Elizabeth  (Bagnell) 
Clark;    res.   1902,  Friendship,  N.  Y. 

Lewis  Daniel,  b.  Jan.   18,   1857;    d.  Jan.  31,   1857. 

George  Peleg,  b.  June  24,  1858;    d.  Cuba,  N.  Y.,  June  10,  1881. 

Mary  Emogene,  b.  Sept.  30,  i860;  d.  Wirt,  Aug.  12,  1889;  m. 
Wirt,  Sept.  16,  1885,  Andrew,  son  of  Enoch  and  Maria  (Harter) 
Shaven,  b.  Wayland,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  9,   1861  ;    res.   1902,  Wayland. 

Susan  T.,  b.  Oct.  31,  1871  ;  res.  1902,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Wirt, 
Feb.  14,  1884,  Ely,  son  of  Elisha  and  Harriet  (Smith)  Fenner, 
b.  Alfred,  Apr.  28,   1870. 

Arthur  Lewis,  b.  Apr.  22,  1873 ;    res.   1902,  Wirt  Center. 

1295.  Elizabeth  A.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Peleg  and  Lucinda 

(Brown)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Abel,  James,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  27,  1830;  res.  1902, 
Genesee;  m.  Hebron,  Pa.,  July  10,  1847,  Caleb,  son  of  Caleb 
and  Johanna  (Wade)  Lewis,  b.  Stafford,  N.  Y.,  June  22, 
1820,  d.  Genesee,  June  6,  1891. 
Children : 

Clarrisa,  b.  Farmersville,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1849;  res.  1902,  Port- 
ville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Genesee,  Mar.  12,  1868,  Andrew  J.,  son  of 
Almond  and  Sarah  (Ellis)  Robinson,  b.  Clarksville,  N.  Y., 
Apr.  7.   i845. 

F.   Etheline,  b.  Genesee,   Sept.  5,   1852 ;    d.  Jan.  29,   1854. 

Harriet  L.,  b.  Genesee,  Nov.  27,  1855 ;  res.  1902,  Genesee,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Cuba,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  2,  1873,  George  D.,  son  of  Asa  and  Jane 
(Keller)   Munger,  b.  Hume,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  17,  1852. 

1296.  Elnathan  Wells^  Babcock,  son  of  Peleg  and  Lu- 
cinda (Brown)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Abel,  James,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  24,  1840; 
d.  Dansville,  N.  Y.,  June  20.  1898;  m.  Canasaragua,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  3,  1863,  Eva,  dau.  of  Andrew  and  Margaret  (Conder- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  481 

man)  Harter,  b.  Fremont,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  ly,  1843;  ^^s.  1902, 
Dansville. 

Children,  b.  Dansville: 

1491  Daniel   W.,'"  b.    May    18,    1864;     m.   Julia    F.    Westlake. 

Matie,    b.    Mar.    24,    1866;     res.    1902,    Berlin,    Md. ;     m.    Dansville, 

Edinond    B.,    son    of    Peter   and    Maranda    (Brown)    Rogers,    b. 

Independence. 
Maggie  F.,  b.   Mar.  2;^.   1868;    d.  Dansville,   Sept.  21,   1870. 
Carrie  M.,  b.  Oct.   13.  1871  ;    res.   1902.  Dansville. 
Eva  K.,  b.  Jan.  9.    1874;    res.   New   Berlin.   N.   Y. ;    m.   Dansville, 

Aug.  8.  1900,  Rollin  E.,  son  of  Ellis  and  Kate   (Hall)   Wilson,  b. 

Fairtield  Center,   Pa.,   Aug.   12.   1873. 
Lizzie  E.,  b.  Sept.  i,  1876;    res.  1902,  Dansville. 

1297.  O.scAR    Fitzgerald''    Murphy,    son    of    Dr.    Francis 
and  Elizabeth  Ann  (Babcock)  Murphy  (Peleg,  Abel, 

James,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  June 
21,   185 1 ;    res.   1902,  Pawcatuck,  Conn.;    m.  Westerly,  Feb. 
20,   1873,  Ann  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Alfred  and  Betsey  (Gard- 
iner) (Thapman,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  8,  1853. 
Children : 

Minnie  Etta,  b.  Westerly,  Jan.  3,   1874;    d.  Oct.   15,   1875. 
George  O.,  b.  May  8,  1878;    res.  1902,  Pawcatuck. 

1298.  John  Wesley^  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Pal- 
myra  (Densmore)    Babcock    (Mulford,   Abel,  James, 

James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  Mexico,  N.  Y.,  July  17,  1833; 
res.  1902,  Owosco,  Mich.;  m.  Chardon,  O.,  Oct.  10,  1859, 
Julia  A.,  dau.  of  Isaac  and  Julia  A.  (Todd)  Sherman,  b.  Kirt- 
land,  O. 

Children,  b.  Chardon,  except  last; 

T492  Minnie  Elizabeth,"  b.  Feb.  16,  1863;    m.  Adam  M.  Carver. 

Jennie,  b.  Jan.  4,  1866;  res.  1902,  Mentor,  O. ;  m.  Benjamin  P. 
Warren,   b.    Mentor. 

Annie  B.,  b.  Jan.  14,  1869;  res.  1902,  Burlington,  Kan.;  m.  Bur- 
lington,  Ulysses  G.   Keevn,  b.   Burlington. 

Mattie  Estelle,"'  b.  Little  Mountain.  O.,  Mar.  12.  1872;  res.  1902, 
S.  Woodland  Avenue,  Cleveland,  O. ;  m.  Weedsport,  N.  Y., 
June  I,  1894,  Fred  J.,  son  of  C.  Harris,  b.  Mentor,  O.,  Oct.  27, 
1871:    Child:    Stanley  J.,"  b.  Feb.  3,  1895. 

1299.  Henry  Morell^  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Pal- 
myra   (Densmore)    Babcock    (Mulford,  Abel,  James, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Mexico,  N.  Y.,  Ausf.  19,  1836; 
res.    1902.  Little  Mountain,   O. ;    m.   Chardon,   O.,   Oct.   27, 
1861,  Ruby  Maria,  adopted  dau.  of  Parish  and  Marie  (Fox) 
Joyce,  b.  Kirtland,  O.,  Jan.  27,  1840. 
31 


zl82  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Cliildren : 

Mary  R.,  b.  Utile  Mt.,  Sept.  5,  1862;  res.  1902,  32  Cudcll  Street, 
Cleveland,  O. ;  m.  Little  Mt.,  June  13,  1888,  Benjamin  Ralph 
Lathrop. 

Leo   W.,   b.   Little   Mt.,   Jan.    10,    1867;    d.   Michigan,   Nov.    i,   1867. 

Francis  M.,  b.  Mentor,  O.,  Mar.  24,  1869;    res.  1902,  Little  Mt. 

Olive  Joyce,  b.  Mentor,  June  21,  1872;    res.  1902,  Little  Mt. 

Henry  Densmore,  b.  Mentor,  July  23,  1874;  d.  Mentor,  Sept.  20, 
1880. 

Ruth  O.,  b.  Little  Mt.,  June  16,  1889. 

1300.  William  Perry^  Babcock,  son  of  Perry  G.  and  Eu- 
nice    (Wilcox)     Babcock     (Mulford,     Abel,     James, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Sept.  11, 
1839;  d.  Milwood,  Ga.,  June  24,  1899;  m.  Oswego,  N.  Y., 
Mar.  16,  1864,  Cecilia  M.  Davis,  b.  Trenton,  N.  J.,  June  9, 
1838;   res.  1902,  Milwood,  Ga. 

William  Babcock  was  a  physician  and  clergyman.  He  was 
in  the  mercantile  business  when  he  died. 

Children : 

Dr.  William  Herbert,  b.  June  12,   1871 ;    d.  Milwood,  Mar.  9.  1894. 
Arthur  W.   E.,  b.   Nov.  9,   1872;    d.   Sept.   19,  1883. 

1301.  Edward^  Babcock,  son  of  Perry  G.  and  Eliza  (Shef- 
field) Babcock  (Mulford,  Abel,  James,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  30,  1842;  res.  1902, 
132  1-2  Academy  Street,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.;  m.  Scriba,  N.  Y., 
Dec.  22,  1868,  Hettie  Belle,  dau.  of  George  and  Weltha 
(Rice)  Hynds,  b.  Sharon,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  23,  1841,  d.  Oswego, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  13,  i8;6. 
Child : 

Weltha  E.,  b.  Oswego,  Nov.  28,  1874;  res.  1902,  132  E.  Second 
Street,  Oswego. 

1302.  Abel^  Babcock,  son  of  PeiTy  G.   and  Eliza    (Shef- 
field) Babcock  (Mulford,  Abel,  James,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Dec.  11,  1844;  res.  1902, 
Westerly;  m.  (i)  Mexico,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  9,  1870,  Ella,  dau.  of 
G.  W.  Baker,  b.  Philadelphia.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  1850,  d.  Scriba, 
N.  Y.,  July  29,  1889;  m.  (2)  Mar.  14,  1894,  Ida  E.  (Sisson) 
Babcock,  widow  of  588  Henry  Babcock. 
Children,  b.  Scriba: 

Fred  A.,  b.  Nov.  3,  1874;  m.  Jan.  i.  1898,  Mabel,  dau.  of  Joseph 
Buch,  b.   Shannock,   R.  L.   Aug.   18,   1872.     They  res.   Stonington. 

Roscoe  C,  b.  Dec.  30,  1878;  res.  1902,  Westerly;  m.  Westerly, 
Oct.    14,    1899,    Minnie   Dalson,   b.    Westerly. 

Mattie.  b.  June  16,  1884;    d.  Mar.  10,  1888. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  483 

1303.  George    S.^    Babcock,    son    of    Perry    G.    and    Eliza 

(Sheffield)  Babcock  (  Mnlford,  Abel,  James,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  5,  1852; 
res.  1902,  Lansing,  N.  Y. ;  m.  N.  Scriba,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  1874, 
Ida,  dau.  of  Richard  and  Eleanor  Daniels,  b.  New  Haven, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  30.  1856. 
Child : 

George  Amos,  b.  Scriba.  Aug.  24,   1875;    res.   1902,  N.   Scriba;    m. 
Oswego,  Apr.  3,  1901,  Rose  Jones,  b.  Lansing. 

1304.  Ira  Bentley''  Babcock,  son  of  Stephen  and  Emma 

(  Bentley)  Babcock  (Stephen,  Nathaniel,  Nathaniel, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  July  24,    1830;    res.    1902, 
Torrington,  Conn.;   m.  Feb.  22,  1857,  IMaria  G.  Green. 
Children : 

Edwin,  b.  Mar.   15.   1859:    m.  and  res.  Torrington.     No  children. 
Ida    M.,    b.    Sept.    14,    1864;     m.    George    L.    Harrison;     res.    1902, 
Torrington. 

1305.  Samuel  Avery*^   Babcock,   son  of   Samuel   H.   and 
Caroline    (Stanton)     Babcock     (Stephen,    Nathaniel, 

Nathaniel,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Dec.  29,  1832;  d.  Mar.  10,  1892;  m.  S.  Kingston, 
R.  I.,  Dec.  24,  1863.  Mary  J.  Barber. 

He  was  a  teacher  for  twenty-five  years,  and  afterward  a 
farmer  in  N.  Stonington. 

Children,  b.  N.  Stonington : 

Emma  E..  b.  ;    res.  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Edwin  A.,  b.  ;    res.  Westerly. 

Frank  H.,  b.  ;    res.  Westerly. 

1306.  Emily  E.^  Brown,  dan.  of  Cyrus  W.  and  Elizabeth 
S.  (Babcock)  Brown  (Stephen,  Nathaniel,  Nathaniel, 

James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  Jan.  16.  1828;    res.  1902,  N. 
Stonington.  Conn. ;   m.  N.  Stonington,  Nov.  7,  1844,  Thomas 
W.  Wheeler. 
Child : 

Nancy  M..  b.  Sept.  2,  1847;    d.  Jan.  5,  1902;    m.  Dec.  3,  1878,  Wil- 
liam H.  Hillard. 

1307.  Cyrus  Henry^  Brown,  son  of  Cyrus  W.  and  Eliza- 
beth S.    (Babcock)   Brown   (Stephen,  Nathaniel,  Na- 
thaniel. James,  James,  John.  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Nov. 
24,    1829;    res.    1902,   Westerly,   R.   I.;    m.    Mar.   23,    1856, 


484  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Sarah  C,  dan.  of  Horace  Maxson,  of  Ashaway,  R.  I.,  b.  Mar. 
4,  1837,  (1.  Oct.  I,  1897. 

Mr.  Brown  was  a  teacher  in  pubhc  schools  in  Connecticut 
and  Rhode  Island  for  eight  years,  until  married,  then  removed 
to  Boston,  Mass.,  and  was  a  merchant  for  forty  years,  then 
returned  to  Westerly,  R.  I. 

Children,  b.  Brighton,  Mass. : 

Elizabeth  L.,  b.  June  15,  1858;  res.  Westerly;  m.  May  19,  1880, 
George   H.    Utter,   of   Westerly.      Has   four   children. 

Henry  E.,  b.  Apr.  5,  1861 ;  res.  1902,  Boston,  Mass. ;  m.  Dec.  3, 
1890,  Caroline  C.  Rollins.     Has  one  child. 

Katherine  M.,  b.  Nov.  5,  1865 ;  res.  1902,  Melrose,  Mass. ;  ni.  Oct. 
23,  1895,  John  L.  Howard.     Has  two  children. 

Wilfred  M.,  b.  Apr.  4,  1870;    res.  Boston,  Mass. 

Horace  C,  b.  June  22,   1873 ;    res.   Boston. 

Grace  E.,  b.  July  19,  1881 ;    res.  1902,  Westerly. 

1308.  Louise  A.^  Brown,  dau.  of  Cyrus  W.  and  Elizabeth 
S.  (Babcock)  Brown  (Stephen,  Nathaniel,  Nathaniel, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar. 
21,   1832;    d.  Apr.    II,   1888;    m.  Dec.   17,   1850,  Dr.  E.  R. 
Lewis,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  L,  Jan.  31,  1837,  d.  Jime  15,  1887. 
Both  d.  in  Westerly,  R.  L 
Children : 

Henrietta  L.,  b.  Dec.  8,  1854;    res.   1902,  Plainfield,  N.  J.;    m.  Dec. 

30,  1879,  Henry  M.  Maxson,  of  Pawcatuck,  Conn.     Has  one  child. 
Dr.    Edwin   R.    Lewis,   b.   June   5,    1863 ;     res.    1902,    Westerly ;     m. 

Feb.  27,  1889,  Mary  F.  Babcock.     Their  child,  Edwin,  b.  Mar.  21, 

1890.  d.  Oct.,  1890. 
Hannah  B.,  b.  June  6,   1870;    d.   Nov.  4,   1876. 

1309.  Gideon  Perry^  Brown,  son  of  Cyrus  W.  and  Eliza- 
beth S.  (Babcock)  Brown  (Stephen,  Nathaniel,  Na- 
thaniel, James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Aug. 
3,  1834;  deceased;  m.  (i)  Dec.  16,  1862,  Mary  L.  Hollis, 
b.  Brighton,  Mass.,  Apr.  2,  1838,  d.  Feb.  14,  1870;  m.  (2) 
June  24,  1873,  Martha  C.  Hollis,  sister  of  first  wife: 

Children : 

Marion  L.,  b.  Sept.  30,  1865 ;    m.  Mar.  19,  1890,  Virgil  M.  Richards. 
Adelaide  C,  b.  Boston,  Mar.  4,  1874. 
George,  b.   Boston,  Nov.  29,   1876. 

1310.  Benadam  Williams"  Brown,  son  of  Cyrus  W.  and 
Elizabeth     (Babcock)     Brown     (Stephen,     Nathaniel, 

Nathaniel,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington, 
Conn.,  Apr.  4,  1836;  m.  Hartford,  Conn.,  Sept.  19,  i860, 
Almira  M.  McGlaflin,  b.  Sept.  22,  1842.  They  res.  1902, 
Prairie  City,  la. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  485 

Children : 

Lee  E.,  b.  Hartford,  July  22,  1863;  m.  Newton,  la.,  Feb.  8,  1888, 
Lena  McGregor.     Have  one  child.     They  res.   1902,  Newton. 

Minnie  L.,  b.  Fairview,  la.,  Dec.  19,  1870;  m.  Nov.  27,  1895, 
Joseph  H.   Freeman.     They  res.   1902,  Prairie  City. 

Benjamin  W.,  b.  Fairview,  Oct.  21.  1880;  m.  Feb.  12,  1902,  Wini- 
fred Ball,  of  Nebraska.     They  res.    1902,   Prairie  City. 

1311.  Thomas^    Brown,   son   of   Cyrus    W.    and   Elizabeth 

(Babcock)    Brown    (Stephen,    Nathaniel,    Nathaniel, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  June  28,  1838;    m.  Apr.  24, 
1866,  Mary  A.  Colby,  of  Brighton,  Mass. 
Children: 

Annie  B..  b.  Aug.  15,  1868;    m.  George  M.  Brooks,  of  Boston,  Mass. 
Thomas  C,  b.  Brooklyn,  Dec.   15,   1870;    ni.  Apr.  6,   1898,  Petis  D. 
Damon. 

1312.  William    P.^    Babcock,    son    of    John    and  Eunice 

(Maine)     Babcock     (Stephen,    Nathaniel,    Nathaniel, 
James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  July  14,  1855;    res.  1902,  N. 
Stonington,  Conn.;  m.  Sept.  24,  1882,  Mary  E.  Burdick. 
Children: 

AUis  M..  b.  Oct.  16,  1883. 
Ida  B.,  b.  Jan.  21,  1885. 
Anna  L.,  b.  Aug.  20,  1886. 
Betsey  E..  b.  July  9,   1889. 
Susan  v.,  b.   Dec.  29,    1890. 
Frances  A.,  b.   Sept.  6,   1892. 

1313.  William    Payson^    Babcock,    son    of    William    and 
Frances    E.    (Maine)    Babcock    (Stephen.    Nathaniel, 

Nathaniel,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Feb.  5.  1862:    res. 
1902,  Plainfield,  Conn.;  m.  May  11,  1892,  Carrie  A.  Green. 
Children : 

Frances  E.,  b.  June  26,  1894. 
Lillian,  b.   Aug.  3,    1898. 
William  E.,  b.  Nov.  3,  1901. 

1314.  Nellie    Frances^    Babcock,    dau.    of   William    and 
Frances    E.    (Maine)    Babcock    (Stephen,    Nathaniel, 

Nathaniel,  James.  James.  John,  James),  b.  July  28,  1865;   res. 
1902,  Plainfield,  Conn.;  m.  Jan.  i,  1890,  George  L.  Bradford. 
Children : 

Alice  N.,  b.  Oct.  3.   1891. 
John  William,  b.  Aug.  16,  1895. 
Cecil,  b.  July  19,   1897. 


486  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

1315.  Anna  E.'-^  Babcock,  dan.  of  William  and  Frances  E. 

(Maine)     Babcock     (Stephen,    Nathaniel,    Nathaniel, 
James,  James,  John,  James),   b.   Jan.    16,    1867;    res.    1902, 
Plainfield,  Conn.;    m.  Apr.  25,  1889,  Nathan  Exeley. 
Children : 

William  S.,  b.  Jan.   14,   1891. 
Edith  M.,  b.  Sept.  18.  1893. 
Florence  R.,  b.  Sept.  27,  1896. 
Lucius  M.,  b.  Sept.   i,  1901. 

1316.  Stephen  B.^  Babcock,  son  of  William  and  Frances 
E.  (Maine)  Babcock  (Stephen,  Nathaniel,  Nathaniel, 

James,  James,   John,  James),   b.   Feb.   6,    1870;    res,    1902, 
Plainfield,  Conn. ;    m.  Apr.  6,  1898,  Birdie  May  Kenyon. 
Child : 

Ella  May,  b.  Jan.  25,   1899. 

1317.  Callie    Maine*^    Babcock,    dan.    of    William    and 
Frances    E.    (Maine)    Babcock    (Stephen,    Nathaniel, 

Nathaniel,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Nov.  16,  1871 ;  res. 
Plainfield,  Conn. ;   m.  Oct.  6,  1897,  Albert  Exeley. 
Children : 

Bertha  E.,  b.  Nov.   10,  1898. 
Clara  C,  b.  Nov.  20,  1900. 

1318.  Lewis   Chauncey^    Ives,    son   of   Walter   and    Eliza 

(Babcock)   Ives   (Reuben,  Reuben,  Nathaniel,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Oct.  26,  1833;   d.  Tonawanda,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  7,  1891  ;   m.  Nov.  7,  1861,  Martha  Ann  Bixler,  b.  Sept. 
15,  1845,  d.  May  2,  1888. 
Children : 

Mary  Eliza,  b.  Oct.  13,  1862;  m.  Dec,  1888,  James  Weaver.  No 
children. 

Charles  L.,"  b.  Aug.  29,  1867;  res.  1902,  Lockport,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Sept. 
4,  1887,  Anna  E.  Platts,  b.  Feb.  10,  i86g.  They  have  two  chil- 
dren :    Frank,"  b.  July  29,  1889,  and  Roy,  b.  Mar.  9,  1892. 

John  W.,  b.  Mar.  i,  1870;  res.  1902,  Lockport;  m.  Dec.  16,  1890, 
Jennie  M.  Ozard,  b.  Apr.  13,  1872.  They  have  two  children : 
Clarence  D.,  b.  Apr.  4,   1893,  and  Florence  G.,  b.  Jan.   13,   1899. 

1319.  Albert  E.^  Brockway,  son  of  Chester  and  Cynthia 

(Babcock)  Brockway  (Reuben,  Reuben,  Nathaniel, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  May  9,  1842;  res.  1902, 
Eig-hth  Avenue,  Troy,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Dec.  12,  1863,  Amaryllis 
Myers,  b.  Port  Schuyler,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  13,  1843.   He  is  a  builder. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  487 

Children : 

Walter  H..  b.  Dec.   19.   1864:    in.   Dec.   14.   1887,  Sarah  R.   Miller,  b. 

Jan.  6,    1888.     They  have  one  child,   Walter.  • 

Lillian  M.,  b.   May   10,   1866;    ni.    (i)    Nov.  27,   1885,  Samuel  Flack, 

he.  d.  1888;    ni   (2)   Oct.   11.  1893,  George  A.  Rutherford. 
Caroline  A.,  b.  Feb.  9,  1868;    unni. 
George   A.,   b.    Sept.   8,    1869;     ni.    May    13,    1891,   Maggie   Apps,   b. 

Oct.,   1870.     They  have  one  child. 
Edward  C.,  b.  June  2t,.   1872 ;    d.   1873. 
Elmer,  b.   Nov.  4,   1874;    d.    1875. 
Georgia  C,  b.  June  22,  1880;    m.  Oct.  26.  1898,  Charles  B.  Marble, 

b.  Troy,  1878. 

1320.  Emma^    Brockway,    dau.    of    Chester    and    Cynthia 

(Babcock)    Brockway    (Reuben,    Reuben,    Nathaniel, 
James,    James,    John,    James),    b.    Troy,    N.    Y.,    Dec.    7, 
1844;     ^ii-    Troy,    Robert    Hatchman,    d.    Rochester,    N.    Y., 
1893.     He  served  in  the  Union  army. 
Children : 

Charles  Francis,  b.  Oct.  25,  1866;  res.  1902,  Troy;  m.  Dec.  14, 
1891,  Minnie  S.  Roden.  b.  Troy,   Nov.   12,   1867. 

Frederick  I.,  b.  Troy,  Mar.  19,  1870;  res.  1902,  Rochester;  m. 
Rochester,  June  28,   1894,  Jessie  Dean.     They  have  two  children. 

Herbert  Earnest,  b.  Troy,  Aug.  4,  1872.  Is  a  student  at  the  Roches- 
ter Theological  Seminary. 

1321.  John   Lester'^    Babcock,   son  of   Harry  and   Fanny 

(Fonda)  Babcock  (Reuben,  Reuben,  Nathaniel, 
James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  Jan.  15,  1839;  res.  1902, 
Aberdeen.  S.  D. ;    m.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Fanny  Peard. 

He  enlisted  in  1862,  and  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of 
Monocacy. 

Children,  b.  Troy : 

Violette,  b.  1861   (?). 

Charles,  b.    1866;     res.    1902,   Aberdeen. 

Jessie,  b.  i86g. 

Lillian,  b.   1870;    m.  Carpenter. 

1322.  Eliza  Jane^   Babcock,   dau.   of   Harry   and   Calista 

(Fordham)  Babcock  (Reuben,  Reuben.  Nathaniel, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Pembroke,  N.  Y.,  June  18, 
1849:  res.  1902.  Devils  Lake.  Mich.;  m.  W.  Pembroke,  Apr. 
30,  1868,  Jeremiah,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Betsey  (Sanders) 
Wilsey,  b.  Woodstock,  Mich.,  June  17,  1839. 
Children : 

May  Delia,  b.  July  24.   1873:    res.   1902,   Devils  Lake. 

Hugh  Harry, ^"  b.  Sept.  27,  1875;  res.  1902,  Devils  Lake;  m.  Pe- 
tersburg, Mich.,  Jan.  15.  1902,  Leora  Brockway,  b.  Mar.  14,  1878. 
Has  one  child,  Merwin  Wilsey,"  b.  Nov.  13,  1902. 


488  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Ina  B.,  b.  Feb.  9,  1878;    res.  1902,  Clayton,  Mich.;    m.  Devils  Lake, 

Nov.  25,  1898,  Clarence  Newton,  b.  Erie,  Pa.,  Jan.  15,  1877. 
Grace,  b.   Sept.  25,   1884. 
Lucy,  b.  June  3,  1887. 
Jay  Eaton,  b.  Apr.  16,  1890. 

1323.  Raymond  Eadie^    Dodge,    son    of    Elias    and    Sarah 

(Babcock)  Dodge  (Reuben,  Reuben,  Nathaniel, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  24,  1854; 
res.  1902,  CHfton  Park,  N.  J.;  m.  Troy,  May  30,  1877,  Har- 
riet Susan,  dau.  of  George  and  Harriet  (Watts)  Payne,  b. 
Troy,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  4,  1854. 

The  following  sketch  is  taken  from  a  biographical  volume, 
Who  is  Who  in  America :  "Raymond  Eadie  Dodge,  editorial 
writer,  .  .  .  educated  in  Troy,  N.  Y.  .  .  .  In  editorial  charge  of 
Local  Associated  Press  Bureau,  New  York,  1887-91  ;  polit- 
ical statistician  to  Republican  National  Committee  1892-6; 
Editor  Money  Magazine,  New  York,  since  1897;  Republican 
author  of  Republican  Reference  Book  1891,  Necessary  Mon- 
etary Reforms,  American  Currency;  also  wrote  (magazine 
articles)  Tariff  Reductions  and  Fiat  Money,  Gunton's  Maga- 
zine, Feb.,  1896,  Sketches  from  American  History,  Money 
Magazine  1897. 

Records  of  the  descendants  of  Reuben  Babcock,  Sr.,  found 
in  this  volume  were  copied  from  records  prepared  by  Mr.  Ray- 
mond E.  Dodge. 

Children,  both  engaged  in  business  in  New  York  City: 

Willard  Elias,  b.  Jan.   19,   1879. 
Raymond   Eadie,   Jr.,   b.    Sept.   25,    1880. 

1324.  Cornelius  L.^   Babcock,  son  of  Stevens  and  Mary 

(Hi  Mott)  Babcock  (Elias,  Elijah,  Elias,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  E.  Poultney,  Vt.,  Mar.  4,  1833;  res. 
1902,  N.  Woburn,  Mass.;  m.  (i)  July  3,  1863,  Hattie 
Weaver;  m.  (2)  Newbury,  Vt.,  Dec.  18,  1867,  Laura,  dau. 
of  Thomas  and  Louise  (Ruggles)  Burroughs,  b.  Newbury, 
Sept.  26,  1842. 
Children : 

Helen  B.,  b.  Fairhaven,  Vt.,  Jan.  29,  1870;    res.  1902,  N.  Woburn; 

m.    N.    Woburn,   June  25.    1895,    Samuel   W.,    son  of  George  and 

Caroline   (Deane)    Merrill,   b.   Rutland,   Dec,    1862.     No  children. 
Mary  B..'"  b.  Mar.  27,  1873 ;    m.  N.  Woburn,  Dec.  2,  1896,  Nathaniel 

Currier.     They  res.    1902,   Reading,    Mass.     They   have  one  dau., 

Barbara,"  b.  Aug.  18,  1897. 

1325.  Silas  Allen^  Babcock,  son  of  Rev.  Hiram  and  Eliza 

(Andrews)    Babcock    (Silas,    Elijah,    Elias,    James, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  489 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Wayne,  O.,  May  23,  1845;    "i-  Mar. 
31,    1869,   Martha,   dan.   of  L.   D.    Brainard;    res.  .1902,   in 
Wayne. 
Children : 

Lena,   b.  Aug.  2,    1870. 

Martha,  b.  Aug.  13,  1872;    d.  young. 

1326.  Adelia''  Babcock,  dan.  of  Selah  and  Prndence  (Bux- 
ton)   Babcock    (Paul,    Ehjah,    EHas,    James,    James, 

John,  James),  b.  Jericho,  Vt..  July  20,  1845;    ^^s.  1902,  Jer- 
icho;  m.  Jericho,  Apr.  26,  1867,  Russel  D.,  son  of  David  and 
Ruth  (Goodrich)  Johnson,  b.  Georgia,  Vt.,  Dec.  10,  1844. 
Children : 

Hattie  A.,  b.  Feb.  22.  1868;    d.  Worcester,  Vt.,  June  23,  1875. 
Emma  M.,  b.  Jericho,  July  22,  1869;    res.   1902,  Underbill,  Vt. 

1327.  Rev.   Edwin^   Babcock,   son   of  Julius   and   Miriam 

(Moulton)  Babcock  (Paul,  Elijah,  Elias,  James, 
James.  John,  James),  1).  N.  Brookfield,  Mass.,  Aug.  10,  1838; 
m.  June  28.  1872,  Caroline,  dan.  of  Peleg  and  Sarah  (Tripp) 
Gifford,  of  West  Point,  Mass.,  b.  Dec.  3,  1845.  He  res.  South 
Carver,  Mass. 
Children : 

Charles,   b.   West  Point,   Mass.,   Oct.   5,   1874;    unm. 
Grace,  b.   Fall  River,   Mass.,  June  20,    1876;    unm. 

1328.  Ro.swELL  H.^   Babcock,   son  of  Rufus  and   Lucinda 

(Pettie)  Babcock  (Paul,  Elijah,  Elias,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Mar.  25,  18^8;    m.  Apr.   12,   1877,  Estella 
I.  Dean.     He  d.  July  2,  1884.' 
Children  : 

Frank,  b.   Feb.    13,    1878. 

Ethel  Josephine,  b.  June  20,  1881 ;    m.   Daniel  Holden. 

1329.  Caroline  D.^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Rufus  and  Lucinda 

(Pettie)  Babcock  (Paul,  Elijah,  Elias,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  N.  Brookfield,  Mass.,  Oct.  10,  1840;  res. 
1902,  Rockland,  Mass.;  m.  (i)  Georgetown,  Mass.,  Charles 
Sumner;  m.  (2)  Jan.  i,  1895,  Benjamin  F.  Barnes,  b.  Sher- 
bridge,  Mass.,  d.  N.  Brookfield,  Mar.  3,  1901. 
Children,  b.  N.  Brookfield : 

Rufus  William,  b.  Aug.  27,  1865;    d.  Sept..   1865. 

Hattie   I.,   b.   Nov.   29.  ;    m.   Brookfield,   Jan.    15,    1886,   T.   W. 

McCarthy ;    res.   1902,  Rockland,  Mass. 
Fred  L.,  b.  June  25,  1870;    res.   1902,  Rockland. 


490  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1330.  John''  Babcock,  son  of  Rufus  and  Lucinda  (Pettie) 

Babcock  (Paul,  Elijah,  Elias,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  N.  Brookfield,  Mass.,  Aug.  13,  1848;  res.  1902,  N. 
Brookfield;  m.  Sept.  26,  1876,  Evelyn  M.  Bovvan,  of 
Brookfield. 

Children,  b.  N.  Brookfield: 

William  Rufus,  b.  May  25,  1879. 
A.   Ernest,  b.  Oct.  27,   1883. 

1331.  Amarillis^   Babcock,   dan.   of  Cyrns  G.   and  Maria 

(Kellogg)  Babcock  (Cyrns,  Rufns,  Elias,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Colebrook,  Conn.,  May  i,  1840; 
res.  1900,  Pawling,  N.  Y. ;  m.  New  York,  Dec.  4,  1867, 
Philip  H.,  son  of  Horace  and  Ruth  (Nichols)  Smith,  b.  Kent, 
N.  Y.,  June  20,  1842.  He  is  a  printer. 
Children,  b.  Pawling,  except  one: 

Nellie  M.,  b.  Sept.  5.  1868;    res.  1900,  Richmond  Hill,  L.  I. 

Josephine,  b.  Carmel,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  26,  1869;  m.  Pawling,  Oct.  22, 
1895,  Lester  H.,  son  of  Renihold  and  Theresa  (Cook)  Messenger, 
b.  Norwalk,  Conn.,  June  12,  1866;    res.  1900,  New  Canaan,  Conn. 

Elena  R.,  b.  June  2,  1871 ;    d.  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  June  20,  1875. 

Carrie  B.,  b.  June  30,  1874;    res.  1900,  Pawling. 

1332.  Emily  A.'^   Babcock,   dan.   of  Cyrns   G.   and   Maria 

(Kellogg)    Babcock    (Cyrus,    Rufus,    Elias,    James, 
James,    John,    James),     b.     Sept.     15,     1842;     m,     George 
Hungerford. 
Child: 

William  B.,  b.  Sherman,  Conn.,  Mar.  9,  1871 ;  res.  1900,  Gaylords- 
ville,   Conn. ;     m.    Feb.    15,    1894,   Josephine   Merrick. 

1333.  SoPHRONiA   A.^  Brown,    dau.    of  Jabish    and    Selma 

(Davis)  Brown,  of  Jabish  and  Abigail  (Babcock) 
Brown  (Oliver,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Leon- 
ardsville,  N.  Y.,  May  18,  1833 ;  res.  1900,  Onarga,  111. ;  m. 
Leonardsville,  June  16.  1853,  Henry  B.,  son  of  Elijah  and 
Eimice  (SafTord)  Booth,  b.' Paris,  N.  Y.,  July  6,  1829,  d. 
Onarga,  May  i,  1894. 
Children,  b.  Onarga : 

Wallace  Elijah,   b.    Oct.    15,    i860;    d.    Onarga.   Oct.    18,    1888;    m. 

Aug.  27,  1887,  Anna  Knoche. 
Charles  H.,  b.  May  30,   1863;    d.  Onarga,  July  4,   1890. 
Chauncey  B.,  b.  Oct.  17,  1866;    d.  May  15,  1900. 
La  Mott  R.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1868;    d.  Onarga,  Feb.  27,  1894;    m.  Thaw- 

ville.    111.,    May    2,    1892,    Gertrude,    dau.    of   Jay    C.    and    Sarah 

Shear. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  491 

George,  b.  Mar.  22,  1871  ;  res.  1900,  Onarga;  m.  Saginaw,  Mich., 
Mar.  29,  1901,  Elizabeth,  dau.  of  Alderman  B.  and  Jening  (Era- 
ser)   Paine,  b.  Saginaw,  Nov.   16,   1873. 

Jennie  Fidelia,  b.  Oct.  5,   1873;    d.   Mar.  27,   1875. 

1334.  Juliet^    Babcock,   dau.    of    Henry    and  Tammison 

(Rogers)    Babcock    (Joshua,   Joshua,    OHver,   James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Feb.  5,  1835;    m.  Utica.  N.  Y.,  Apr. 
14,  1858,  George  Strickland. 
Child:     . 

Frank,  b.  Aug.  2j,  1863. 

1335.  Mary  Tammison^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Henry  and  Tam- 
mison   (Rogers)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Joshua,    Oliver, 

James,   James,   John,  James),   b.   Oct.   3,    1837;    m.    W.    L. 

Bassett. 

Children : 

Fannie,  b.  Dec.  17,  1869;    m.  Dec.  14,  1893,  Lynn  B.  Palmiter. 
Harry  H.,  b.  Sept.  11,  1874. 
Edith  Cornelia,  b.  Jan.  20.  1880. 

1336.  H.    Lee^    Babcock,    son    of    Henry    and    Tammison 

(Rogers)    Babcock    (Joshua,   Joshua,    Oliver,   James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Jan.  11,  1840;    res.  1900  New  Hart- 
ford, N.  Y. ;   m.  Dec.  18,  1872,  Elizabeth  Chapman. 
Children : 

William  Lee,  b.  187S ;    d.  1878. 

Sarah  B.,  b.   1877. 

Martha,   b.    1879;     d.    1883. 

Louise,  b.  1879;    m.  1896,  James  Benton. 

1337.  Bronson®  Babcock,  son  of  Leander  and  Ellen  (Bron- 
son)    Babcock    (Asa,   Joshua,    Oliver,    James,   James, 

John,  James),  b.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  18,   1838;    res.   1900, 
Oswego;   m.  Oswego,  May  20,  1868,  Cecilia  E.,  dau.  of  Wil- 
liam and  Elizabeth   (Fish)  Lewis,  b.  Oswego,  Nov.  8,  1839. 
Child: 

Pauline  B.,  b.  Oct.  5,  1875 ;  res.  1900,  Oswego,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Oswego, 
Dec.  29,  1893,  Allen  S.  McGie,  b.  Oswego. 

1338.  Catherine^    Babcock.    dau.    of   Leander    and    Ellen 

(Bronson)  Babcock  (Asa,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  17,  1840:  d. 
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  May  7,  1899;  m.  Oswego,  Dec.  30,  1863, 
Albert  E.  Hastings,  Id.  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  1832,  d.  N.  Tona- 
wanda,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  26,  1894.    Children,  all  b.  in  Oswego,  and 


492  The  Bahcoch  Genealogy. 

unm. :   George  B. ;  Agnes,  d.  1900;   Dora,  Margaret  C,  Paul, 
and  Annie  F. 

1339.  William   A.^   Babcock,   son   of   Leander   and    Ellen 

(Bronson)     Babcock    (Asa,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  30,   1850;    d. 

Dallas,  Tex.,  Jan.  20,  1895;   m.  Dallas,  Jan.  5,  1887,  Blanche 

Aldenhoff,  b.  Cleveland,  Tenn.,  Apr.    10,    1859;    res.   Dallas. 

Children,  b.  Dallas : 

Florence,  b.   Mar.  30,   1890. 
John  L.,  b.  Dec,  1891. 
William  A.,  b.  June  28,  1893. 

1340.  John    Low*^    Babcock,    son    of    Leander    and    Ellen 

(Bronson)  Babcock  (Asa,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  10,  1859;  d. 
Apr.  8,  1891;  m.  Portland,  Me.,  Apr.  12,  1886,  Elizabeth  R., 
dau.  of  Samuel  and  E.  A.  (Foster)  Merrill;  res.  1900,  San 
Diego,  Cal. 
Child : 

Ellen  Bronson,  b.  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  June  2,  1888. 

1341.  SoPHRONiA  M.''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oliver  and  Sarah 

(Brown)    Babcock    (Oliver,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Jidy  19,   1833; 
m.  Oct.  3,   1854,  Walter  S.  Hurd. 
Children : 

Mary,  b.  • ;    d.  young. 

Sarah,  b.  Feb.  18,  1859. 

Edith,   b.  ;    d.   young. 

Clara,  b.   Nov.  9,   1862. 

Nettie,  b.  Jan.  14,  1865  ;    m.  June  2,  1896,  Charles  F.  Marquis. 

Sophronia,   b.  Dec.  23,   1867. 

1342.  George    K.^    Babcock,    son    of    Oliver    and    Sarah 

(Brown)    Babcock    (Oliver,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  June  18,  1836; 
d.    Nashville,    Tenn.,    July,    1896;     m.    Mar.    7,    1872,    Alice 
Coollidge. 
Children : 

Mary  H.,  b.  May,  1876;    m.  Aug.,  1895,  Lafayette  Smith. 
Jessie,  b.  Jan.  5,   1879;    d.  1879. 

1343.  Charles    M.^    Babcock,    son    of    Oliver    and    Sarah 

(Brown)    Babcock    (Oliver,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  493 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  June  6,   1841 ; 

res.    1900,   Galcsburg,    111.;    m.   Nov.    5,    1867,   Maggie   Mc- 

Chesney. 

Children : 

George  M.,  b.  Fort  Wayne,  Ind..  Apr.  20,  1869;    m.  Sept.  12,  1894, 

Bulia  Kavanaugh. 
Mabel  L.,  b.  Detroit,  Mich.,  July  7,   1871. 
Clara  S..  b.  Detroit,  Mich.,  Oct.  4,   1872. 
Oliver  F.,  b.  Detroit,  Oct.  7,  1881. 

1344.  Albert  G.^  Burke,  son  of  Albert  G.  and  Maria  L. 

(Babcock),  Btirke    (Oliver,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Jan.  8,  1833;  m.  Jan.  19,  1862,  Clara 
Booth. 
Children : 

Fred  H..  b.  Sept.  29.  1863;    m.  June  24,  1890,  Mary  W.  Smith. 
Walter  S.,  b.  Dec.  31,  1866;    ni.  Apr.  5,  1893,  Frances  M.  Beeman. 
Mary  L.,  b.  Feb.   10,   1872. 
Albe'rt  G.,  b.  Apr.  24,  1879. 

1345.  Leander  Babcock^  Reynolds,  son  of  S.  H.  and  Clar- 
issa   (Babcock)     Reynolds    (Oliver,    Joshua,    Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Aug.  .23,  1837;    m.  Sept.   i, 
1859,  Sarah  B.  Turner. 
Children : 

Ellen  T.,  b.  May  2,  1865;    m.  Oct.  6,  1895,  Frank  Ambrose  Hamblin. 
Clarissa  B.,  b.  Aug.  29,  1868;    d.  Oct.  2,   1895. 
Sarah  A.,  h.  Aug.  23,   1870. 
Leander  E.,  b.  Jan.   i,   1874. 

1346.  Stephen  Moulton''  Babcock,  Ph.D.,  son  of  Peleg 
and  Cornelia  (Scott)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Joshua,  Oli- 
ver, James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Babcock  Hill,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 
22,  1843;  ''^s.  1902,  Madison,  Wis.;  m.  Winfield,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 
27,  1896.  Mav  Cornelia,  dau.  of  Otis  and  Flora  (McKee) 
Crandall,  b.  Winfield. 

Dr.  Babcock  studied  in  several  of  the  universities  of  Amer- 
ica, and  in  1879  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.D.  from  the 
University  of  Gottingen,  Germany.  In  1895  ^^^  announced 
a  method  by  which  casein  can  be  mechanically  separated  from 
the  other  constituents  of  milk.  In  recognition  of  his  services 
in  inventing  the  Babcock  Milk  Test  the  State  of  Wisconsin  in 
1901,  through  its  Governor  and  Legislators,  presented  him 
with  "the  largest  bronze  medal  ever  struck  in  England." 

He  is  at  present  Professor  of  Agricultural  Chemistry  in  the 
Agricultural  College  and  assistant  director  and  chief  chemist 


494  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

in     the     Agricultural     Experiment     Station,     University     of 
Wisconsin, 

1347.  Linn    Boyd''    Babcock,    son   of    Peleg   and    Cornelia 

(Scott)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Babcock  Hill,  N.  Y.,  May  26,  1850; 
res.  1902,  724  Olive  Street,  St.  Louis,  Mo. ;  m.  Ithaca,  N.  Y., 
Nov.  16,  1871,  Minnie  D.,  dau.  of  Perry  and  C.  A.  (Deming) 
Elsworth,  b.  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  24,  1850. 
Child: 

Frances  Vida,  b.  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  12,  1878;  d.  Ithaca,  Aug.  9, 
1879. 

1348.  Lee  C."  Brown,  son  of  Charles  and  Catherine  (Mab- 
bett)     Brown,    of    Peleg    and    Elizabeth     (Babcock) 

Brown    (Joshua,    Oliver,    James,    James,    John,    James),    b. 
Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  15,  1832;   m.  Chicago,  111.,  Mar.  8, 
1866,  Martha  Babcock. 
Child : 

Charles  F.,  b.  Onarga.   Mar.   12.   1867;    m.   Evanston.   111.,   Apr.   28, 
1897,  A.   Marie   Shurer. 

1349.  Emily  M.^  Brown,  dau.  of  Charles  B.  and  Catherine 

(Mabbett)  Brown,  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Babcock) 
Brown  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Jan. 
31,  1835;   res.  1902,  Saginaw,  Mich.;    m.  Oct.  17,  1859,  Ed- 
ward Aiken. 
Children : 

Charles,  b.  Aug.  5,  i860. 
Katherine,   b.  June  3.   1864. 

Mary,  b.  Oct.  25,  1866;    m.  William  S.  Conklin ;    res.   1902,  Duluth, 
Minn. 

1350.  Cora    H.^    Brown,    dau.    of    Charles    and    Catherine 
(Mabbett)  Brown,  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Babcock) 

Brown  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Apr. 
16,  1838;   m.  J.  Morris  Childs ;   res.  1902,  Utica,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Walter,  b.  1867. 
Fannie,   b.    1872. 

1351.  Henry  C.^  Brown,  son  of  Amos  and  Susan   (Mon- 
roe)    Brown,    of    Peleg    and    Elizabeth     (Babcock) 

Brown  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Mar. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  495 

25,  1837;    d.  Nov.  25,   1884;    m.   (i)   Apr.  20,   1865,  Mary 
M.  Cox;  ni.  (2)  June  26,  1883,  Mary  W.  Hodge. 
Children : 

Alary  S.,"  b.  May  8,   1867;    m.  Aug.  18,   1888,  Henry  R.  Stranburg. 

Tbey  have  one   son.   Henry." 
Henry  F.,  b.  Apr.  6,   1884. 

1352.  Joseph  M.''  Brown,  son  of  Amos  and  Susan  (Mon- 

roe)    Brown,    of    Peleg    and    Elizabeth     (Babcock) 
Brown  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Oct. 
5,  1842;    d.  Aug.  5,  1886;    m.   (i)  Mar.  31,  1873,  Anna  L. 
Price;    m.  (2)  May  21,  1879,  Blanche  K.  Seaman. 
Children : 

Anna  M.,  b.  Jan.  27,   1876;    d.   i88q. 
Harold,  b.  Aug.  25.   1880. 
Munroe  S.,  b.  Sept.  28,  1885. 

1353.  Ella  S.^  Brown,  dau.  of  Amos  and  Susan  (Monroe) 
Brown,    of    Peleg   and    Elizabeth    (Babcock)    Brown 

(Joshua,   Oliver.   James,   James.   John,   James),   b.    Apr.   21, 
1849;    res.   1902,  Zanesville,  O. ;    m.  June  10,   1873,  Charles 
H.  Abbott. 
Children : 

Henry,  b.   Sept.  2,  1874. 

Helen,  b.  Feb.   12,   1877. 

Cheever  D.,  b.  Apr.  12.  1879;    d.  1880. 

Munroe  L.,  b.  May  18,  1881. 

1354.  Clara'^  Brown,  dau.  of  Lorenzo  S.  and  Elizabeth  C. 

( Brainard)  Brown,  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Babcock) 
Brown  (Joshua.  Oliver,  James,  James.  John,  James),  b. 
Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,  1842 ;  d.  Fort  Schuyler,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  28,  1899;  m.  Jan.  29,  1867,  Dr.  Timothy  E.  Wilcox, 
who  was  a  surgeon  in  the  United  States  Armv,  with  the  rank 
of  Lieutenant  Colonel. 
Children : 

Victor  I.,  b.  Dec.  29,  1867;    d.  Nov.  13,  1871. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Sept.  12,   1870. 
Glover  P.,  b.  Nov.  9,  1878. 

1355.  Su.SAN  M.^  Brown,  dau.  of  Lorenzo  S.  and  Elizabeth 
C.  (Brainard)  Brown,  of  Peleg  and  Elizabeth  (Bab- 
cock) Brown  (Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
June  6,  1848;  res.  Clayville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Sept.  7,  1867,  Adel- 
bert  Rhodes. 


49^  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Frederick  A.,  b.   Oct.  2,   1874. 
Blanche  E.,  b.  Oct.  12,  1878. 
Clara  V.,  b.  July  9,  1887. 

1357.  LoREN  RoBBiN^  Scott,  son  of  Giles  and  Elizabeth  G. 

(Babcock)     Scott    (Martin,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Nov.  24,   1846;    res.   1900,  Bridge- 
water,  N.  Y. ;   m.  Nov.  23,  1870,  Clara  Ferris. 
Children : 

Giles  Ferris,  b.  Nov.   17,  1871. 

Jay  Dimmick,  b.  June  10,  1875 ;    d.  Aug.  8,  1879. 

Fred  Loren,  b.  Sept.   14,   1877. 

Charles  Thatcher,  b.  July  26,  1881. 

Earl  Babcock,  b.  Aug.  20,  1884. 

Irving  Underwood,  b.  Apr.  26,  1887. 

Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  8,   1892. 

1358.  May  K."  Babcock,  dau.  of  Clark  H.  and  Kate  (Cole) 
Babcock  (Martin,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 

James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Mar.   17,   1869;    m.  June  7, 
1893,  Fred  J.  Ludeman,  b.  Aug.   10,  1865. 
Children : 

Arthur,  b.   Sept.   11,   1894. 
John  Herman,  b.  Oct.  27,  1896. 

1359.  Jennie   L.®    Budlong,    dau.    of  Jerome   and    Keziah 

G.    (Babcock)     Budlong     (Martin,     Joshua,    Oliver, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  24, 
18^3;  res.  1900,  Aurora,  III;   m.  Oswego,  111.,  Apr.  14,  1874, 
Willis  Hoyt. 
Child : 

Allen  G.,  b.  Apr.   16,  1876. 

1360.  Florence  F.^  Budlong,  dau.  of  Jerome  and  Keziah 
G.     (Babcock)     Budlong     (Martin,    Joshua,     Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  21, 
1855;   m.  Oswego,  111.,  Oct.  29,  1878,  Charles  A.  Doud. 
Children : 

Edna  F.,  b.  Sept.  12,  1880. 
Edith,  b.  Feb.  21,   1882. 
Giles,  b.  Oct.   II,   1886. 
Willis,  b.  Feb.  24,  1888. 

1361.  Elizabeth®  Budlong,  dau.  of  Jerome  and  Keziah  G. 

(Babcock)   Budlong  (Martin,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  497 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  2,   1858; 
m.  Aurora,  111.,  Feb.  24,  1881,  Fred  W.  Lester. 
Children : 

Jerome  B.,  b.  Jan.  8,  1885. 
Fred,  b.  Aug.  31,   1889. 

1362.  Irving  J.*^  Budlong,   son  of  Jerome  and  Keziah  G. 

(Babcock)   Budlong   (Martin,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Oswego,  111.,  Sept.  7,  1868;  m.  Sept. 
18,  1890,  Ada  M.  Titus. 
Children : 

Irene  M..  b.  July  27,  1891. 
Anna  K.,  b.  Aug.  27,  1893. 
Doris,  b.  June,   1896. 

1363.  Mary"  Babcock,  dau.  of  William  R.  and  Myra  F. 

(Marsh)    Babcock    (Charles,   Joshua,    Oliver,   James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  6,  1848; 
res.  1900,  Odell,  111.;    m.  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  16,  1867,  John 
Hossack,  b.  Sept.  14.  1840;   d.  Odell,  June  10,  1887. 
Children,  b.  Odell : 

Charles  B.,  b.  May  24,  1876. 
Frances  E.,  b.  Mar.  i6.  1879. 
John  A.,  b.  June  18,   1881. 
Ella,  b.  June  29,  1886. 

1364.  Ella"   Babcock,   dau.   of  William   R.   and   Myra   F. 

(Marsh)    Babcock    (Charles,   Joshua.    Oliver,   James, 
James,  John,   James),   b.    Livingston   County,   111.,   Apr.   25, 
i860;    res.   1900,  Odell,  111.;    m.  Odell,  Oct.  27,   1881,  Fred 
N.  Hossack.  b.  Jan.  8,  1856. 
Children,  b.  Odell. 

Pratt,  b.  May  i,  1883. 
Archie,  b.  Jan.  23,   1889. 
Gertrude,  b.  Mar.  21,  1891. 
Myra  L..  b.  Oct.  23,  1897. 

1365.  Thomas  Alden"  Abbott,  son  of  Henry  G.  and  Mary 

C.  (Babcock)  Abbott  (Charles.  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  June  16.  1847;  n^- 
Morristown,  N.  J.,  Sept.  25,  1883,  Emma,  dau.  of  Henry  D. 
and  Elizabeth  (Armstrong)  Van  Nostrand,  b.  Brooklyn,  N. 
Y.,  Mar.  9,  1852. 

Thomas  graduated  at  Hamilton  College.     In   1900  was  a 
merchant  and  manufacturer  at  St.  Paul,  Minn. 
32 


498  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Child : 

Mary  B.,  b.  St.  Paul,  Oct.  20,  1884. 

1366.  (]eorgiana^    Babcock,   dau.    of   William   Avery   and 
Harriet    (Coates)    Babcock    (Henry,   Joshua,    Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Aug.  23,  1846;   m.  1876,  Ezra 
Durham. 
Child: 

Hattie,  b.  Mar.  16,  1880. 

1367.  Benjamin  H.''  Palmer,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Betsey 
A.  (Babcock)  Palmer  (Henry,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Jan.  8,  1840;  d.  Oct.  26,  1893;  m.  Nov.  30, 
1864,  Eliza  Brown. 

Children : 

Mira  B.,  b.  Apr.  10,   1866. 

Benjamin  H.,  b.  July  13,   1868;    m.  Apr.   18,   1894,  Lucy  M.  Otis. 

Shepard,  b.  Jan.  23,   1871. 

Bessie,  b.  June  18,  1874. 

1368.  James  B.^   Palmer,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Betsey  A. 

(Babcock)    Palmer    (Henry,   Joshua,    Oliver,   James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Aug.  6,   1844;    m.  Dec.   20,    1870, 
Abbey  Morgan. 
Children : 

Son,  b.  Nov.   II,   1873;    d.  Nov.   15,   1873. 

James  B..  b.  Aug.  7.  1875. 

Son,  b.   Mar.   10,   1885;    d.   Mar.   10,   1885. 

1369.  CH.A.RLE.S  C.^   Palmer,  son  of  Benjamin  and  Betsey 
A.  (Babcock)  Palmer  (Henry,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Nov.  6,  1851 ;   m.  Feb.  6,  1876,  Julia 
Morgan. 
Child : 

Charles  B.,  b.  July  17,  1879. 

1370.  Mary  Emma^  Lewis,  dau.  of  George  H.  and  Mercy 
Amelia    (Babcock)    Lewis    (Henry,    Joshua,    Oliver, 

James,  James,  John.  James),  b.  June  11,  1854;  res.  1900, 
Guilford,  Conn. ;  m.  Apr.  29,  1879,  George  Hoxie  Beebe. 
M.D. 

Children : 

Grace,  b.  Sept.  15,  1884. 
Florence,  b.  Dec.  7,   1886. 
Albert  Lewis,  b.  Mar.  6,  1889. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  499 

1371.  Horace   Greeley^    Lewis,    son   of    George    H.    and 
Mercy  A.   (BalKock)   Lewis   (Henry,  Joshua,  Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.   Sept.   28,    1857;    res.    1903, 
Ashaway,  R.  L;    m.  Jan.  7,  1884,  Carrie  Kenyon. 
Children : 

Mary,  b.  Mar.  31.   1887. 
Phoebe,  b.  May  19,  1890. 

1372.  Mabel''   Babcock,  dau.  of  Irving  F.   and  Sarah   M. 

(Tracy)    Babcock    (Henry,    Joshua,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Sept.  3,  1864; 
m.  Sept.  23,  1885,  Herbert  Clifford.    Lives  Waukegan,  111. 
Children : 

Warren  Tracy,  b.  Feb.  20.  1891. 
Ralph  Goodell,  b.  May  3,  1893. 

1373.  Jennie  June^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Irving  F.  and  Sarah 

M.   (Tracy)  Babcock  (Henry,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Mar.  3,  1866; 
m.   Sept.   23,    1885,   Albert  L.   Thompson,   son  of  Benjamin 
Thompson,  b.  Pendleton  Hill,  d.  Feb.  20,  1898. 
Children : 

Cliflford  Babcock,  b.  Mar.  4,  1890. 
Irving  Hillard,  b.  Feb.  20,  1895. 

1374.  M.   Kate^    Babcock,   dau.    of   Irving   F.    and    Sarah 
M.   (Tracy)  Babcock  (Henry,  Joshua,  Oliver,  James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  N.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  17,  1870; 
res.    1902,  Hopkinton,  R.   L;    m.   Mar.   27,    1894,  Henry  J., 
son  of  Noyes  Wheeler. 
Child : 

Mary  S.,  b.  May  18,  1898;    d.  young. 

1375.  Eliza   Jane^    Catlin,    dau.    of   Burden    and    Louisa 

(Babcock)  Catlin  (John,  William,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Evans,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  18,  1828;  res. 
1900  Mumford,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Alden,  N.  Y.,  May  17,  1849, 
Newell  K.,  son  of  Thomas  and  Lois  (Hyde)  Skinner,  b.  Leb- 
anon, Conn..  Oct.  29,  1822,  d.  Mumford,  Jan.  6,  1885. 
Children,  b.  Mumford : 

Julia  M..  b.  Sept.  i.  1850;  res.  1900.  IMumford.  N.  Y. ;  m.  Mum- 
ford, Oct.  3,  1900.  John  E.,  son  of  Ransom  and  Betsey  Harvey, 
b.  Conesus.  Mar.  4.  1856. 

Clara  M.,  b.  July  4,  1855;    d.  Feb.  3,  1891. 


500  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Frank  N.,  b.  Jan.  23.  1864;  d.  Muniford,  Jan.  12,  i8gi  ;  m.  Elmira, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  19,  1888,  Margaret,  dan.  of  B.  C.  Hoagland,  b.  Elmira, 
Mar.  27,   1870;    res.  1902,  First  Street,  Elmira. 

1376.  Julia  A.^  Catlin,  dan.  of  Burden  and  Louisa  (Bab- 

cock)  Catlin  (John,  William,  Oliver,  James,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Java,  N.  Y.,  June  6,  1837;  res.  1901,  1409 
South  Hill  Street,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. ;  m.  Alden,  N.  Y.,  1865, 
Henry  H.,  son  of  Ephraim  and  Mary  (Thorn)  Angell,  b. 
Chatham,  N.  Y.,  July  11,  1829,  d.  Oak  Park,  111.,  Apr.  16, 
1889. 

Children : 

Katherine  L.,'"  b.  Lisle,  111.,  Apr.  14,  1869;  res.  1901,  924  Baldwin 
Avenue,  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.  ;  m.  Chicago,  June  27,  1901,  Dr. 
Alfred  S.  Warthin.  She  was  Professor  of  Bacteriology  in  the 
Woman's  Medical  College  of  Northwestern  University  for  five 
years.     Her  husband  is  a  Professor  in  the  University  of  Michigan. 

Frederic  R.,  b.  Oct.  19,  1870;    res.  1901,  3608  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago. 

Julia  M.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1872;  res.  1901,  58  Hancock  Avenue,  Detroit, 
Mich.     She  is  a  Teacher  of  Literature  and  English  in  Detroit. 

Henry  C,  b.  Oct.  6,  1872;    res.  1901,  3608  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago. 

1377.  George  Babcock®  Cadwell,  son  of  Edmund  J.  and 
Jane  Ann  (Babcock)  Cadwell  (John,  William,  Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  Feb.  15, 
1848:  res.  1901.  32  Delaware  Avenue,  Detroit,  Mich.;  m. 
Hudson,  Mich.,  May  5.  1864,  Susan  E.,  dau.  of  William  D. 
and  Fannie  (Morris)  Page,  b.  Fairfield,  Mich.,  Mar.  19,  1846. 
Children : 

Edmond  G.,  b.  June  26,  1865;  d.  Adrian,  Mich.,  1896;  m.  Hudson, 
May  9,   1883,  Ida  A.  Daniel. 

Rev.  Fred  George,'"  b.  Mar.  28.  1868;  d.  Bay  View,  Mich.,  1901 ; 
m.  Celina,  O.,  1891,  Nettie  B.,  dau.  of  Joel  and  Ann  (Goodall) 
Brandan  ;  res.  1901,  Detroit,  Mich.  He  was  a  very  gifted  Pres- 
byterian minister. 

Clara  B..  b.  Feb.  12,  1870;  res.  1901,  Adrian,  Mich.;  m.  Adrian, 
1889,   Fred  Ladd. 

Florence  L.,  b.  July  24,  1875;  res.  1901,  Detroit;  m.  Adrian,  1895, 
Herbert  R.  Earle. 

Kirk,  b.   Aug.  2,   1885;    d.   Chicago,   1894. 

1378.  Horace  Edstrom^  Babcock,  son  of  David  M.  and 
Sarah  E.  (Van  Tine)  Babcock  (John,  William,  Oli- 
ver, James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  New  York  City,  Jan.  30, 
1852;  res.  1900,  Elmira,  N.  Y. ;  m.  New  York  City.  June  22, 
1 88 1,  Sarah  E.,  dau.  of  James  and  Louise  (Hartman)  Todd, 
b.  New  York  City,  Dec.  31,  1849,  d.  Elmira,  Dec.  4,  1890. 

Children : 

Nellie  E.,  b.  Bath  Beach,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  30,  1883. 
William  T.,  b.  New  York  City,  July  23,  1887. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  5^1 

Walter  H.,  b.  New  Y(irk  City,  Aug.   i8,  1889. 
Rosvvell,  b.  New  York  City,  Aug.  7,   1892. 

1379.  Henrietta  W.^  Babcock,  dan.  of  David  M.  and 
Sarah  E.  (Van  Tine)  Babcock  (John,  William,  Oli- 
ver, James,  James,  John,  James),  1).  New  York  City,  Aug.  29, 
1853;  d.  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  May  30,  1885;  m.  Aug.  27, 
1872,  John  H.  Crookes. 

Children,  b.  New  York  City  and  Morrisania,  N.  Y. : 

George  D..  i).  June  21,  1873. 
Edward  E.,  b.  Nov.  2,  1877;    d.  young. 
Edgar,  b.  Mar.  2,  1883 ;    d.  young. 
Mary  H.,  b.  May,  1885. 

1380.  JoHN^    Corning,  son  of   Edwin  and   Cynthia    (Bab- 

cock) Corning  (Avery,  Gersham,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  July  28,  1827;  d.  July  5,  1897; 
m.  Jan.  i,  1870,  Elizabeth  Crump.  Settled  as  a  farmer  in 
Cicero,  N.  Y.     One  child,  Lewis. 

1381.  Era.smus^  Corning,  son  of  Edwin  and  Cynthia  (Bab- 
cock)    Corning     (Avery,    Gersham,    Oliver,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  June  6,  1834;    d.  Nov.  i,  1890;    m. 
Sept.  14,  1 86 1,  Mary  E.  Thurston,  b.  Sept.  16,  1844. 
Children : 

Clara,  b.  May  29,  1873. 
Anna,  b.   Sept.,   1875. 

1382.  Orlando^  Babcock,  son  of  Russell  and  Susan   (Ou- 
derkirk)    Babcock    (Avery,   Gersham,   Oliver,   James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  ;    m.  Nov.  10,  1866,  Candis  L. 

Taylor,  of  Batavia,  N.  Y.     Settled  at  Waverly,  la. 
Children,  b.  Waverly: 

1493  Landy  Bert.'"  b.   Sept.  21,    1867;    m.   IVIatilda  Myers. 

Charles,  b.  July  t2,   1869;    m.  Clara  L.   Curtis,  Aug.   16,   1893;    res. 
Waverly. 

1383.  Emma    J.^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Russell    and    Susan 

fOuderkirk)  Babcock  (Avery,  Gersham,  Oliver, 
James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  Oct.  26,  1840;  d.  Osseo, 
Mich.,  Mar.  18,  1874;  m.  Baldwinsville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  29,  1869, 
Aaron,  son  of  Lewis  R.  Bush,  b.  Osseo,  Sept.  23,  1839.  In 
1900  was  a  farmer  at  Osseo. 
Children,  b.  Osseo : 

Lewis  R..  b.   Sept.  24.   1871 ;    res.    1900,   120  Broadway,  New  York 
City;    unm.     Transfer  Clerk  for  Erie  R.  R. 


502  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Frank  Dclos,  b.  Jan.  i8,  1873 ;  res.  1900,  Csseo,  Mich. ;  m.  Jones- 
ville,  Mich.,  Aug.  20,  1896,  Carrie  L.,  dau.  of  Edgar  A.  and 
Maryetta  Holden,   b.   Michigan,  June  23,    1874.      He   is  a   farmer. 

1384.  John  D.''  Babcock,  son  of  Harry  D.  and  Catherine 

(Goff)    Bal)cock    (Avery,    Gersham,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Sept.  24,   1838;    res.   1898,  307  N. 
West  Street,  Syracuse,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Marietta  Betts. 
Children : 

Frederick,  b.   187 1 ;    d.  young. 
Francis,  b.  Aug.  3,   1877. 
Raymond,  b.  May  11,   1883. 

1385.  William   Henry^   Babcock,   son  of  Harry  D.   and 
Catherine   (Goff)   Babcock   (Avery,  Gersham,  Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.   1840  (  ?)  ;    d.  Lysander,  N. 
Y.,  Mar.,  1865;   m.  1863,  Catherine  E.  Martin.     She  m.   (2) 
Edwin  M.  Babcock,  uncle  of  William  Henry. 
Child : 

WilHam  Henry,"'  Jr.,  b.  Lysander,  June  6,  1865;  res.  1901,  Waverly, 
la. ;  m.  Nov.  5,  1890,  Edith  P.  Dove,  of  Waverly,  b.  July  21, 
1869.     They  have  one  dau.,  Iva." 

1386.  CoRYDON^  Babcock,  son  of  Harry  D.  and  Catherine 

(Goff)    Babcock    (Avery,    Gersham,    Oliver,    James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.    1842    ( ?)  ;    m.   Martha  Pelton,   of 
Baldwinsville,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Bertram,  b.  1876. 
Ella,  b.  1878. 

1387.  Cora    M.^    Babcock,    dau.    of   Abram    and    Eliza    S. 

(Newton)  Babcock  (Avery,  Gersham,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Westbury,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  185 1 ;   m. 
Kansas  City,   Mo.,   Dec.    16,    1885,   Charles  A.   Vanderhoof. 
She  res.  1899.  114  Eighth  Avenue,  Seattle,  Wash. 
Child: 

Guy  Newton,  b.   South  Bend,   Ind.,  Jan.  28,   1888. 

1388.  Thomas  Avery^  Babcock,  son  of  Abram  and  Eliza 

(Newton)  Babcock  (Avery,  Gersham,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Victory,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  18,  1857;  res. 
1899,  1607  Boren  Avenue,  Seattle,  Wash.;  m.  Detroit,  Mich., 
June  17,  1878,  Minnie  Carpenter. 


The  Babcuck  Genealogy.  503 

Child  : 

Veda,  b.  Boston,  Mass.,  Mar.  27,  1879. 

1389.  Walter^  Babcock,  son  of  Gersham  A.  and  Caroline 

(Runnels)  Babcock  (Avery,  Gersham,  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Lysander,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  10,  1848;  m. 
(i)  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  11,  1868,  Lavina  B.,  dau.  of  Bax- 
ter Hair,  divorced  Aug.  10,  1889;  ^"f""-  (2)  Sept.  29,  1892, 
Mary  A.  Bird,  of  Faribault,  Minn.  No  children. 
Children  by  first  marriage: 

Jennie  Bell,  b.  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  i86g. 
Edwin  Chester,  b.  Granby,   N.   Y.,  Feb.  22,   1871. 
Fred  Walter,  b.   Minneapolis,   Minn.,  Mar.  22,   1873. 
Cora,  b.  Minneapolis,  Apr.  3,  1875. 
Florence,  b.   Minneapolis,  Jan.  7,   1878. 

1390.  James  H.^  Cleveland,  son  of  James  and  Eliza  (Bab- 
cock)   Cleveland     (John,     Gersham,     Oliver,    James, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Sept.  30,   1841  ;    d.  Nov.  20,   1879; 
m.  June  7,  1870,  Julia  Berkley. 
Children : 

Edith,  b.  Sept.,  1871. 
Mary,  b.  Oct.,  1872. 

1391.  Mary  E.^  Cleveland,  dau.  of  James  and  Ehza  (Bab- 
cock)   Cleveland     (John,     Gersham,     Oliver,    James, 

James,    John,    James),    b.    Sept.    19,    1845;    "i-    William    J. 
Wheeler, 
Children : 

Frederick,  b.  Nov.   17,   1875. 
James  H.,  b.  July  4,   1879. 
Robert  C,  b.  Apr.  9.  1882. 
Harry   E.,   b.   Jan.   28,    1884. 
William  B.,  b.  May  28.  1885. 
Jessie  E.,  b.  Mar.  28,  1889. 

1392.  Charles  E.'^  Babcock,  son  of  George  L.  and  Cathe- 
rine E.  (Butler)  Babcock  (Roswell.  Gersham,  Oliver, 

James,  James.  John,  James),  b.  Deposit,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  13,  1856; 
m.  Feb.,   1876,  Ida  Barton,  of  Susquehanna,  Pa.     Settled  in 
Winchester,  N,  H.    He  is  a  printer. 
Children : 

Nellie,  b.   1880;    d.   1893. 
Jessie,  b.  1885. 

1393.  Daniel  A.^  Langworthy,  IM.D.,  son  of  Deacon  John 
A.  and  Eliza  (Lewis)  Langworthy,  of  John  and  Sarah 


504  The  Bahcuck  Genealogy. 

(Pendleton)  Langworthy,  of  Deacon  John  and  Altana  (Bab- 
cock)    Langworthy   (Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
Jan.  3,  1832;   res.  Corinne,  N.  D. ;   m.  Jan.  5,  1864,  Sarah  P. 
Cooke,  b.  Feb.  22,  1836,  d.  June  20,  1899. 
Children : 

Belle  C./"  b.   Dec.    i,    1864;    in.   Apr.   18,   1900,  George  A.   Tucker. 

They  have  one  son.  George  Avery,"  b.   Apr.   19,   1903. 
Oiin  L.,  b.  Jan.  11,  1868;    m.  June  14,  1899,  Maud  Bronson. 

1394.  William  Avery^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  Cook  and 
Eliza  (Brown)  Babcock  (William,  Christopher,  Oli- 
ver, James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Jan. 
29,  1829;  res.  1902,  35  Elm  Street,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Aug.  15,  1854,  Eliza,  dau.  of  John  and 
Eliza  Hulpz,  b.  June  11,  1835. 

Child : 

James  Avery/"  b.  Philadelphia,  June  24,  1855 ;  res.  1902,  Oneida, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  Oneida,  Feb.  22,  1882,  Eleanor  Seeley,  b.  Oneida.  No 
children. 

1395.  James    Augustus''    Babcock,    son    of    Avery    Cook 

and  Eliza  (Brown)  Babcock  (William,  Christopher, 
Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn., 
May  16,  183 1  ;  res.  1903,  474  Washington  Avenue,  Brook- 
lyn, N.  Y. ;  m.  Brooklyn,  Jan.  30,  1866,  Ida  Amelia,  dau.  of 
Edwin  and  Susan  (Cornell)  Gates,  b.  Brooklyn,  Oct.  28,  1844. 

James  has  for  many  years  been  in  the  silver  plating  busi- 
ness at  22  John  Street,  New  York  City. 

Children : 

Annie  Gates, ^"  b.  Brooklyn,  Oct.  17,  1866;  res.  1900,  783  St.  Mark's 
Avenue,  Brooklyn ;  m.  Brooklyn,  May  7,  1889.  Frederick,  son 
of  James  Truslow,  b.  Sept.,  1864.  Children,  b.  Brooklyn :  Per- 
cival,"  b.   Nov.   12.   1892;   Helen,  b.   May   11,   1894. 

Augustus  Fraprie,^"  b.  Brooklyn.  Oct.  29,  1868;  res.  1900,  Cran- 
ford,  N.  J.;  m.  Brooklyn,  Oct.  26,  1898,  Lillian  A.,  dau.  of 
Augustus  and  Julia  Voris  Sloan,  b.  Brooklyn,  Jan.  13,  1868.  Chil- 
dren, b.  Cranford :  Lillian,"  b.  Mar.  26,  1901 ;  Augustus  S.,  b. 
June   17,   1902. 

Edwin  Gates,  b.  Nov.   10,   1876 ;    unm. 

1396.  Stephen  B.^  Babcock,  son  of  Avery  Cook  and  Eliza 

(Brown)  Babcock  (William,  Christopher,  Oliver, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Mar.  7, 
1833;  d.  New  York  City,  Mar.  29,  1892;  m.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y., 
Feb.,  1857,  Kate  B.,  dau.  of  William  and  Kate  Brown,  d. 
New  York  City. 


DANIEL    A.    LANGWORTHY,    M.D. 


Page  503. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  505 

Children,  b.  New  York  City : 

Camilla,  b.  ;    d.  Jan.    i6,    i88g;    m.   Alfred  T.   Meyn    (?),    d. 

Greenwich,  Conn.,  July  3,   1900. 
Henry,  b.  July  12,  1864;    res.  1902,  Arvcrne,  L.  I.;    unm. 
Helen  Hunt,  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Cairo,  Egypt. 

1397.  Elizabeth  C.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Avery  Cook  and 
Eliza  (Brown)  Babcock  (William,  Christopher,  Oli- 
ver, James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Nov. 
II,  1838;  res.  1903,  1437  56th  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Brooklyn,  Sept.  7,  1862,  Frank  H.,  son  of  Alfred  and  Ann  E. 
(King)  Smith,  b.  New  York  City,  Oct.  10,  1838,  d.  Brooklyn, 
Apr.  16,  1891. 

Children : 

Frank  B.,'"  b.  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  Feb.  14,  1864;  res.  1903,  Kapaa 
Kania,  Hawaiian  Islands;  m.  Brooklyn,  Gertrude,  dau.  of  Frank 
and   Sarah    (Rhodes)    Chichester,  b.   Brooklyn,   1866. 

Philip  S.,  b.   Sept.  9,   1867;    d.  Brooklyn,  June  24,   1868. 

Annie  K.,  b.  Brooklyn,  Jan.  16,  1869;  res.  1903,  1437  56th  Street, 
Brooklyn  ;  m.  Brooklyn.  Jan.  25,  1893,  Frank  S.  Winchester,  Jr., 
b.  Brooklyn,  Nov.  30,   1870. 

Ethel  E.,  b.  Brooklyn.  June  30,  1874;  res.  1903,  525  Macon  Street, 
Brooklyn ;  ni.  Brooklyn.  Feb.  21,  1899,  George  C.,  son  of  Caleb 
and  Maria   (Harris)   Taft,  b.  New  York,  Mar.   16,  1866. 

1398.  John  J.^  Merrill,  son  of  John  H.  and  Mary  A.  (Bab- 
cock)  Merrill  (Daniel,  Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James, 

John,  James),  b.  Potter  Hill,  R.  I.,  Nov.  14,  1861  ;  m.  Alfred, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  18,  1891.  Marv  Leona,  dau.  of  Silas  C.  and  Mary 
A.  (Taylor)  Burdick,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  20.  1867.     Busi- 
ness address,  Comptroller's  Office,  Albany,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Mary  Margaret.'"  b.  Alfred.   Oct.  23.   1893. 
Anna  Abigail,  b.  Albany,  Apr.  25,   1900. 

1399.  George  Irish^  Langworthy.  son  of  Deacon  Benja- 
min   Franklin    and    Eliza     (Irish)     Langworthy,    of 

George  and  Betsy  (Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel.  Oliver,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  9,  1839;  d. 
New  York  City,  July  27,  1882:  m.  Almond,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  10, 
1866,  Ann  Lockhart,  dau.  of  Isaiah  and  Julia  (Ellis)  Karr,  b. 
Almond,  May  19,  1842,  d.  New  York  City,  July  2,  1899. 

He  was  First  Lieutenant  in  Company  E,  85lh  New  York 
Regiment,  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion. 

Children : 

Julia  E..'"  b.  Almond,  June  4.  1867;  res.  1903,  Pittsburg,  Pa.;  m. 
June  20,  1901,  Dr.  William  A.  Stewart. 


5o6  The  Babcuck  Genealogy. 

Dr.  Anne  L.,  b.  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  Nov.  9,  1869;  res.  1903,  1381 
Boston  Road,  New  York;    ni.  Nov.  6,  1901,  Loren  G.  Waite. 

Benjamin  Franklin,'"  b.  Jersey  City,  N.  J..  Oct.  q,  1871  ;  in.  Plain- 
field,  N.  J..  Oct.  25.  1897,  Mary  A.,  dau.  of  Rev.  A.  H.  and 
Augusta  (Johnson)  Lewis,  b.  Mar.  31,  1872.  He  is  a  lawyer  at 
218  La  Salle  Street,  Chicago,  111.  Children,  b.  Chicago :  Frances 
Lewis,"  b.  July  25,  1898,  and  Marigold  Lockhart,  b.  July  22,  1901. 

Ruth  K.,  b.  Jersey  City,  Oct.  9,   1878;    res.   1903,   Pittsburg. 

George  L,  b.   Oct.   7,    1880;     res.    1903,   Minneapolis,   Minn. 

1400.  Mary   Emma^   Langworthy,   dau.   of   Benjamin   F. 
and  Eliza  (Irish)   Langworthy,  of  George  and  Betsy 

(Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  27,  1840;  res.  Stonington  Bor- 
ough; m.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  12,  1864,  Charles  E.  P.,  son 
of  Frank  and  Susan  B.  (Pendleton)  Noyes,  b.  Stonington, 
Apr.  15,  1831. 

Children,  b.  Stonington : 

1494  Carrie  E.  P.,'"  b.  Mar.  25,  1865 ;    ni.  Capt.  Charles  E.  Nichols. 
Emma  Jane,  b.  Feb.  8,   1868;    d.   Stonington,  Mar.   19,   1879. 
Benjamin  Franklin,  b.  Apr.  5,   1879. 

1401.  John  Franklin^  Langworthy,  son  of  Benjamin  F. 
and  Eliza  (Irish)  Langworthy,  of  George  and  Betsy 

(Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Apr.  5,  1847;   res.  1903,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Alfred,  Nov.  9,  1870,  Maria  Louise,  dau.  of  Samuel  and 
Chloe  (Sherman)  Stillman,  b.  Alfred,  May  24,  1850. 
Children,  b.  Alfred : 

Frank  Olin,  b.   Apr.  23,   1876. 
Howard  Sherman,  b.  May  23,   1879. 
Dean,  b.   Feb.  26,   1882. 

1402.  William  Isaac^  Langworthy,  son  of  Benjamin  F. 
and  Eliza  (Irish)   Langworthy,  of  George  and  Betsy 

(Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  12,  185 1  ;  res.  1903,  Alfred,  N.  Y. ; 
m.  Belmont,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  29,  1880,  E.  Odessa,  dau.  of  William 
and  Mary  (Jenks)  Blanchard,  b.  Grove,  N.  Y.,  July  20,  1858. 
Children,  b.  Alfred : 

William  L,  b.  July  14,   1881  ;    d.  Alfred,   Nov.   10,   1881. 

Mary  E.,  b.  Feb.   10,   1884. 

Frank  A.,  b.  July  10,   1885. 

Helen  O.,  b.  Mar.  5,  1887. 

Ella  L,  b.  Jan.  10,  1890. 

Floyd  B.,  b.  Aug.  17,  1891. 

Marguerite,  b.  Mar.  25,  1893. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  5^7 

1403.  Daniel  Babcock^   Langworthy,   son  of   Benjamin 
F.    and    Eliza    (Irish)    Langworthy,    of   George    and 

Betsy  (Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  July  13,  1852;  res.  Alfred, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  Alfred,  Feb.  13,  1875,  Catherine  Elizabeth,  dau.  of 
William  and  Laura  (Campbell)  Day,  b.  New  York  City,  Aug. 
21,  1854. 

Children,  b.  Alfred: 

Bertha/'  b.   Dec.    11,    1876. 

William  N.,  b.  Aug.  9,   1880. 

Henry  W.,  b.  June  5,  1884. 

Gladys  L.,  b.  Apr.  25.  1893;    d.  Alfred,  Mar.  21,  1896. 

Lily,  b.  Aug.   13,   1896. 

1404.  Deacon  Edgar  Walton^   Irish,  son  of  George  and 
Maria  Edgerton  (Potter)  Irish,  of  George  and  Betsy 

(Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James), 
b.  \y.  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  25,  1838:  d.  Hammond,  La.,  Apr, 
26,  1897;  m.  (i)  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Jan.  9,  1866,  Charlotte  E., 
dau.  of  Deacon  William  and  Sarah  (Rogers)  Maxson,  b. 
Waterford,  Conn.,  Dec.  3,  1843,  ^-  Farina,  111.,  Aug.  12,  1877; 
m.  (2)  Farina,  June  14,  1879,  Helen  E.,  dau.  of  Asa  S.  and 
Eliza  (Green)  Coon,  b.  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  May  26,  1852. 
Children  of  first  wife,  b.  Farina: 

Earnest  M.,'"  b.  Nov.  13,  1866;  res.  1902,  Hammond;  m.'  Ham- 
mond, Dec.  31,  1892,  Maud,  dau.  of  Frank  Rand  and  Marv  E. 
(Witter)  Saunders,  b.  Akron,  111.,  Oct.  9,  1873.  Child:  Glen 
W.,'^  b.   Hammond,   Nov.  9,   1894. 

Bertha  L.,^"  b.  Jan.  20,  1869;  res.  1902,  Hammond;  m.  Westerly, 
Jan.  9,  1894.  J.  Adelford,  son  of  Daniel  and  Rebecca  (Bowler) 
Potter,  b.  Little  Genesee,  Apr.  16,  1844.  Child :  Charlotte  E.," 
b.  May  19,  1895. 

William  Edgar,  b.  Nov.  25.  1870;    d.  Farina,  Feb.  28.  1871. 

George  M.,  b.  Aug.  11,   1877;    d.   Farina,  Aug.  31,   1877. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Roy  Edgar,  b.  Apr.  30.  1880;    d.  Farina,  May  26,   1881. 
Harold  R.,  b.  Oct.  4.  1881. 

1405.  Sarah  Maria^  Irish,  dau.  of  George  and  Maria 
Edgerton  (Potter)  Irish,  of  George  and  Betsy  (Bab- 
cock) Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
W.  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  July  24,  1843;  "i-  Westerly,  R.  I.,  Apr.  7, 
1866.  Z.  Stanley,  son  of  Benjamin  F.  and  Lucy  M.  (Maxson) 
Potter,  b.  W.  Genesee,  Aug.  18,  1842,  d.  Farina,  111.,  Jan.  20, 
1892. 


5o8  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Edwin  S.,"  b.  Ashaway,  R.  I. ;  res.  1902,  Farina ;  m.  Farina,  Oct.  18, 
1892,  Alvena,  dau.  of  A.  and  Emma  (Gocing)  King,  b.  Chi- 
cago, 111.,  Nov.  28,  1867.  Children:  Zelina,'^  b.  Farina,  Sept.  10, 
1893. 

Lucy  Maria,'"  b.  Nov.  22,   1870;    d.  Farina,  July  11,   1894. 

Harold,  b.  Farina,  Oct.  2,  1876;    d.  Farina,  Jan.  31,   1877. 

1406.  Mary  Elizabeth^  Irish,  dau.  of  George  and  Mary  S. 

(Adams)  Irish,  of  George  and  Betsy  (Babcock)  Irish 
(Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  W.  Genesee, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  31,  1846;  res.  1902,  Eldred,  Pa.;  m.  (i)  Cuba, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  25,  1863,  James  H.  Norton.  She  m.  (2)  Olean, 
N.  Y.,  June  7,  1884,  Byron,  son  of  Milo'C.  and  Emily  (Lath- 
rop)  Alford,  b.  Ridgeville,  O.,  Mar.  25,  1842,  d.  Dec.  28, 
1898. 

Children,  b.  Farina: 

Nora  D.,"'  b.  Jan.  27,  1867;  m.  Eldred,  Jan.  28,  1888,  David  H., 
son  of  Jacob  M.  and  Mary  J.  Bell  Muthersbough,  b.  Miffin, 
Pa.,  Jan.  6,  1861.  Children:  Mary  Desire,"  b.  Huron,  S.  D., 
Aug.   15,   1880;    Byron  Alford,  b.  Bennett,  111.,  June  5,   1892. 

Dessie  W.,  b.  July  29,  1868;  m.  Bennett,  Nov.  13,  1899,  Edson  A. 
Cornell. 

1407.  Nathan  Wardner^  Irish,  son  of  George  and  Mary 
S.    (Adams)    Irish,  of  George  and  Bet.sy    (Babcock) 

Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  W. 
Genesee,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  24,  1850;  res.  1903,  Hoop  Street,  E. 
Olean,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Richburg,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  26,  1874,  Ida  M., 
dau.  of  William  and  Emeline  Wightman,  b.  Friendship,  N.  Y., 
July  10,  1852. 
Children : 

Bennie  W.,  b.  Nile,  N.  Y.,  June  8,  1878. 

Bertha    M.,   b.   Westons    Mills,    N.    Y.,    May    14,    1880;     m.    Olean, 

N.  Y.,  Mar.   13,   1896,  Elmer,  son  of  William  and  Lucy  Raub,  b. 

Oct.  I,  1875. 

1408.  Myron  H.  Clark^  Irish,  son  of  George  and  Mary  S. 

(Adams)  Irish,  of  George  and  Betsy  (Babcock)  Irish 
(Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  W.  Genesee, 
N.  Y.,  July  4,  1855;  res.  Friendship,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Nile,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  7,  1876,  Ellen  A.,  dau.  of  Samuel  P.  and  Marion 
(Weber)  Crandall,  b.  Genesee,  Nov.  6,  1856. 
Children,  b.  Friendship: 

Jessie  Marion,  b.  Dec.  24,  1883;    res.  1901,  Utopia,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Nile, 

N.  Y.,  Oct.  18,   1902.  Arvis  Burrows.     He  is  a  farmer. 
Mary  Louise,  b.  Mar.   11,  1887. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  509 

1409.  Miranda  F.**  Irish,  dati.  of  James  R.  and  Charlotte  C. 
(Babcock)    Irish,    of   George    and    Betsy    (Babcock) 

Irish    (Daniel,   Oliver,   James,   James,   John,   James),   b.    De 
Riiyter,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  23,  1854;   res.  1901,  Rockville,  R.  I.;   m. 
Rockville,  Jan.   21.    1874,  George   N.,   son   of   Nicholas   and 
Nancy  (Davis)  Crandall,  b.  Exeter,  R.  I.,  Mar.  24,  1848. 
Children,  b.  Rockville: 

Minnie  G.,  b.  I\Iay  27,  1875;  m.  Hopkintnn,  R.  I.,  Feb.  28,  1897, 
Charles  N.,  son  of  Alexander  C.  and  Mary  S.  (Wheeler)  Ken- 
yon,  b.  Hopkinton,  July  17,  1873. 

George  V.,  b.  Apr.  10,  1888. 

1410.  William  Babcock^  Irish,  son  of  Daniel  and  Mary 
(Babcock)    Irish,    of   George    and    Betsy    (Babcock) 

Irish  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  West- 
erly, R.  I..  June  20,  1846;   d.  Farina,  111.,  Aug.  28,  1875;   m. 
Farina,  Oct.  24,  1868,  Amy  E.,  dau.  of  Benjamin  F.  and  Lucy 
(Maxson)  Potter,  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  28,  1846. 
Children,  b.  Farina : 

William  Arthur,'"  b.  Mar.  23.  1871  ;  res.  1903.  Alfred;  m.  (i) 
Farina,  May  14,  1891,  Anna  E.,  dau.  of  Philip  and  Elizabeth 
(Row)  Glick,  b.  Aug.  i.  1870,  d.  Farina,  July  30,  1892;  m.  (2) 
Alfred,  June  5,  1897,  Hattie  E.,  dau.  of  Edmund  and  Eliza 
(Hadly)  Burdick,  b.  Sept.  4,  1865.  Child  of  first  wife:  Ralph 
G.,'^  b.   Farina,  July  6,   1892,  d.   Farina,  Mar.  8,   1893. 

Gertrude  E.,  b.  Oct.  8.  1876;    d.  Farina,  . 

1411.  Thomas  H.''  Green,  son  of  Albert  C.  and  Mary  C. 

(Irish)  Green,  of  George  and  Betsy  (Babcock)  Irish 
(Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Pawcatuck, 
Conn.,  July  6,  1850;  res.  1901,  Ashaway,  R.  I.;  m.  Morrison, 
Colo.,  June  11,  1876,  Martha  A.,  dau.  of  Thomas  C.  and 
Judith  R.    (Fletcher)    Bergen,  b.   Bloomington,  111.,  Aug.   2, 

1857- 

Children,  first  b.  at  Idaho  Springs,  Colo.,  others  Hopkin- 
ton, R.  I. : 

Pauline  E.,"  b.  Dec.  26.   1877. 
Albert  H.,  b.  June  2,   1880. 
Benjamin  F.,  b.  Mar.   12,   1883. 
Grace  R.,  b.  Sept.  24,   1886. 
Bergen  I.,  b.  Feb.  22,   1890. 
David,  b.  Mar.  11,  1893. 
Lewis  R.,  b.  June  21.   1895. 
Margarite  Adella,  b.  Feb.  14,  1898. 

1412.  Annie    B.^    Potter,    dau.    of    William    Henry    and 
Bridget  (Rathbun)  Potter,  of  Henry  and  Nancy  (Bab- 


5IO  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

cock)  Potter  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
Mystic  River,  Conn.,  Sept.  12,  1846;  m.  Mystic  River,  Oct. 
24,  1867,  Horace  W.,  son  of  Nathan  Gallup  and  Emeline 
(Miner)  Fish,  b.  Mystic,  Oct.  24,  1840.  They  res.  1903,  31 
W.  90th  Street,  New  York  City. 
Children : 

Edith,'"  b.  Mystic,  Conn.,  Sept.  9,  1868;  m.  New  York  City,  Apr. 
17,  1895,  Charles  E.,  son  of  Charles  and  Agnes  (Spill)  Spencer, 
b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  2,  i860.  Have  one  child,  Horace  Fish'' 
Spencer,  b.   New  York  City,   Oct.    11,   1896. 

Alice,'"  b.  Mystic,  Dec.  23,  1870;  ni.  New  York  City,  Mar.  21,  1899, 
Samuel  A.,  son  of  Samuel  K.  and  Mary  J.  (McCullough) 
McGuire.     Have  one  child,  Grace  Evelyn,"  b.  Jan.  29,  1901. 

Harry,  b.  New  York  City,  Apr.  29,  1887. 

1413.  Thoma.s  Wells^  Potter,  son  of  Thomas  Cary  and 

Phebe  Ann  (Potter)  Potter,  of  Henry  and  Nancy 
(Babcock)  Potter  (Daniel.  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  New  London,  Conn.,  June  27,  1846;  d.  New  Lon- 
don, Mar.  30,  1898;  m.  (i)  New  London,  Oct.  22,  1868, 
Ellen,  dau.  of  Christopher  and  Ellen  (Harris)  Culver,  b.  New 
I>ondon,  Dec.  6,  1846,  d.  New  London,  Alar.  7,  1889;  m.  (2) 
New  London,  May  27,  1890,  Nellie  M.,  dau.  of  Ezra  C.  and 
Ann  (Coffin)  Smith,  b.  New  London,  Jan.  13,  1859;  res. 
1903,  2  William  Street,  New  London. 
Children,  b.  New  London : 

Ellen  Culver.'"  b.  Aug.  5,  1871.  Received  the  degree  of  M.D.,  May 
20,  1903,  from  Woman's  Medical  College  of  Pennsylvania,  at 
Philadelphia. 

Mary  Lamb,  b.  Nov.  18,  1873 ;  ni.  New  London,  Dec.  25,  1902, 
Rev.  Joseph  A.  Elder. 

Thomas  W.,  Jr..  b.  Sept.  3,   1875;    d.   New  London,  Nov.  4,   1880. 

Susan  Green,  b.  Nov.  19,  1877;    d.  New  London,  Nov.  5,  1880. 

1414.  George  Potter''  Fenner,  son  of  Charles  A.  and  Ann 
Elizabeth   (Babcock)   Fenner   (Oliver,  Daniel.  Oliver, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Mystic.  Conn..  June  5,  1855; 
res.  1903,  New  London,  Conn. ;  m.  Hanover,  Conn.,  July  7, 
1887,  Annie  C,  dau.  of  Norman  and  x'Xdeline  (Cutler)  Smith, 
b.  Hanover,  Oct.  19,  1855.  He  is  President  and  Manag"er  of 
the  Babcock  Printing  Press  Manufacturing-  Company  of  New 
London.  Has  invented  and  patented  many  ])rinting  press 
devices. 
Child : 

Mildred,'"  b.  New  London.  Oct.  24,  1889.  -    i 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  ^ii 

1415.  Lucy  Bell''  Wait,  dan.  of  William  Bell  and  Phebe 
Jane  (Babcock)  Wait  (Oliver,  Daniel,  Oliver,  James, 

James.  John,  James),  b.  New  York  City,  Alay  ii,  1865;    res. 
1903,  4167  Chester  Avenue,  W.  Philadelpliia;    m.  New  York 
City,  Apr.  18,  1888,  Frank,  son  of  Augustus  and  Susan  (Giles) 
Battles,  b.  Lynn,  Mass.,  Apr.  23,  1856. 
Children,  b.   Philadelphia : 

Frank  Farnham.'"  b.  Feb.  25,  1889. 
William  Wait,   b.  June  23,    1890. 
Winthrop  Bell,  b.   Oct.  24,   1893. 
Paul,  b.  Aug.  4,  1900:    ci.  Aug.  4,   1900. 
Elizabeth  Bell,  b.  Mar.   11,  1903. 

1416.  Elizabeth   Almy^    Stone,   dau.   of  Horatio  Alonzo 
and    Elizabeth    (Almy)    Stone,    of    David    and    Lucy 

(Babcock)  Almy  (Daniel.  Oliver,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Phenix,  R.  I.,  Aug.  24,  1848;  res.  1902,  142  Pearl 
Street,  Providence,  R.  L;  m.  Providence,  May  14,  1868,  John 
J.,  son  of  Eliphalet  and  Lois  Ellen  (Wicks)  Bellows,  b.  N. 
Providence,  May  25,  1847. 
Child : 

Horatio  Eliphalet,'"  b.  Sept.  16,  1869;  m.  Oakland,  Cal..  May  17, 
1899,  May,  dau.  of  Charles  and  Sabra  Smith,  b.  Colfax,  Cal., 
Mar.  25.  1872.  They  res.  1902,  135  Prairie  Avenue,  Providence, 
R.  I.    They  have  one  son,  John  F.,"  b.  Providence,  Feb.  28,  1900. 

1417.  Maria  Elizabeth^  Cory,  dau.  of  Andrew  Jackson 
and  Lucy  M.  (Almy)  Cory,  of  David  and  Lucy  (Bab- 
cock) Almy  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b. 
Portsmouth,  R.  L,  July  6,  1849;  res.  1902,  Middletown,  R. 
L;  m.  Middletown,  Nov.  10,  1875,  Abram  Arnold,  son  of 
William  Coggeshell  and  Emma  (Baker)  Brown,  b.  Middle- 
town,  Oct.  26,  1846. 

Children,  b.  Middletown : 

Albert   Cory,'"  b.    Feb.   4.    1878. 
Abram  A.,  b.  June  28,   1880. 
George  Andrew,  b.  July  3.  1882. 
David  Almy,  b.  Aug.  30,   1884. 
Gladys,  b.  Jan.  20,   1887. 

1418.  Lucy  Jane''  Cory,  dau.  of  Andrew  Jackson  and  Lucy 

M.    (Almy)    Cory,   of  David   and   Lucy    (Babcock) 
Almy  (Daniel,  Oliver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  New- 
port, R.  L.  Jan.  3,   1856;    res.   1902,  Jamestown,  R.  L;    m. 
Jamestown.  Feb.  7,  1883,  Thomas  G.,  son  of  Peleg  Cross  and 
Catherine  (W'eeden)  Carr,  b.  Jamestown,  Jan.  16,  1843. 


512  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  b.  Jamestown : 

Nicholas  Elkinton/"  b.  Jan.   ii,   1884. 

Alfred  Richards,  b.  Mar.  29,   1885;    d.  Jamestown,  Mar,  8,  1892. 
Maria  Aimy,  b.  June  5,   1886. 
George  Caleb,  b.  Apr.  25,   1888. 
Louise,  b.  Oct.  21,   1889. 
'Kathleen   Frances,   b.   Apr.   8,    1891  ;     d.   Jamestown,   Apr.   21,    1895. 

1419.  James  F.^  Babcock,  son  of  Archibald  and  Fanny  R. 

(Richards)  Babcock  (Archibald,  Timothy,  Timothy, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Boston, 'Mass.,  Feb.  23,  1844; 
d.  Dorchester,  Mass.,  July  19,  1897  (his  remains  are  buried 
in  Cedar  Grove  Cemetery,  Dorchester);  m.  (i)  Mar.  28, 
1869,  Mary  P.,  dau.  of  Walter  Crosby,  b.  Boston,  May  27, 
1845,  '^-  ^'^^y  3)  1890;  m.  (2)  Aug.  24.  1892,  Marion  B.,  dau. 
of  Bartlett  R.  Alden,  of  E.  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  b.  July  28, 
1853.  She  is  a  direct  descendant  of  John  Alden,  of  Duxbury, 
Mass.     No  children  by  this  marriage. 

James  Francis  Babcock  was  educated  in  the  public  schools 
of  Boston,  graduated  from  the  Ouincy  Grammar  School  in 
1857,  and  from  the  English  High  School  in  i860.  Entered  the 
Lawrence  Scientific  School  of  Harvard  University,  devoting 
himself  exclusively  to  the  study  of  Chemistry,  graduating  in 
1862,  after  which  he  practiced  his  profession  as  analytical  ex- 
pert in  Boston.  In  1869  he  became  Professor  of  Chemistry 
in  "Boston  University.  In  1875  he  was  appointed  by  Governor 
Gaston  as  State  assayer  and  inspector  of  licjuors,  and  was  re- 
appointed continuously  until  1885,  when  he  declined  further 
service  and  became  inspector  of  milk  for  the  city  of  Boston, 
continuing  in  that  office  until  1889.  He  was  a  chemical  ex- 
pert in  many  important  cases  in  Massachusetts  and  other 
States;  was  a  popular  lecturer  upon  scientific  subjects,  and 
was  the  inventor  of  the  Babcock  Fire  Extinguisher. 

Children : 

1495  Walter  C.,^"  b.  Aug.  16,  1870;    m.  Mary  A.  Bernard. 

Frank  C,  b.   Sept.  22,   1872;    m.   May  3,   1896,   Mamie  E.  Kerwich, 

b.  Mar.  18,  187S. 
Maria  C,  b.   Feb.   10,   1882. 

1420.  Susan  Louisa^  Babcock,   dau.   of  Andrew  Jackson 
and  Harriet  Ann    (Palmer)    Babcock   (Robert.  John, 

Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Concord,  N.  H., 
Oct.  5,  1852;  res.  1902,  359  Grace  Street,  St.  Paul,  Minn.; 
m.  Oct.  21,  1876,  Z.  Dayton  Graham,  b.  Chatham,  111.,  Dec. 
24,  1850. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  513 

Children : 

Clifford/"  b.  Springfield,  111.,  Jan.  3,  1879;    res.  1902,  Portland,  Ore. 
Daughters   (one  named  Hattie),  twins,  b.   St.   Paul,  Minn.,  Apr.  i, 

1882;    d.  Apr.,  1882. 
Harry,  b.  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Apr.  27,  1884. 
Frances  Louise,  b.  Chicago,  111.,  Sept.  6,  1892. 

1421.  James  C.^  Babcock,  son  of  Andrew  Jackson  and  Har- 

riet Ann  (Palmer)  Babcock  (Robert,  John,  Timothy, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Springfield,  111.,  Sept.  2,  1868; 
res.  1902,  Springfield;  m.  Jnne  30,  1896,  by  Rev.  Euclid  B. 
Rogers.  Pastor  of  the  Central  Baptist  Church,  Springfield, 
Bertha  Alice,  dau.  of  Calvin  and  Mary  (Tericker)  Pease.  She 
was  a  teacher  in  the  public  schools  of  Springfield.  Her  father 
was  Captain  of  Company  D,  26th  Regiment,  Illinois  Infantry, 
War  of  the  Rebellion. 
Children : 

Doris  Elizabeth,'"  b.  Nov.  7,   1898,   1:10  A.,  m. 
Palmer  Glover,  b.  Feb.   13,   1901,   1 130  a.   m. 

1422.  Roxanka'^  Curtis,  dau.  of  William  H.  and  Thank- 
ful    (Babcock)     Curtis     (Daniel,     James,     Timothy, 

James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Apr.  12,  1845;    "i-  J^^iie  27, 
1864,  Christopher  C.  Chichester,  of  Alexandria,  Va. 
Children : 

George  H.,^"  b.  Oct.  27,  1865;    m.  Georgia  Garry. 
Martha  H.,  b.  Feb.  14,  1S67;    m.  James  Bradfield. 
]Myrtle,  b.  Aug.  8,  1869;    m.  Thomas  Cleveland. 
Harriet  E.,  b.  Dec.  4,  1874;    m.  William  Nash. 

Esther   M.,   b.    Aug.   3,    1877;     m.    Edward    Spindler,    of   Washing- 
ton. D.  C. 
Harry  C,  b.   May   18,   1889;     unm. 

1423.  La  Mott'^  Curtis,  son  of  William  H.  and  Thankful 

(Babcock)    Curtis    (Daniel,   James,   Timothy,   James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Alexandria,  N.  Y.,  May  9,  1855;   m. 
Dec,  1 88 1,  Jennie  F.  Elmer,  of  Lowville,  X.  Y. 
Children,  b.  Lowville: 

Gertrude,'"  b.  June  28,  1883:    m.  Sept.  10.  1902.  Fred  Bowman. 
Elmer  E.,  b.  Nov..  1884. 
Ora,  b.  Aug.  17,  1894. 

1424.  Almira  B.^   Caprins,   dau.  of  Augustus  and   Nancy 

(Babcock)  Caprins  (Rhodes,  James,  Timothy,  James, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Plessis.  N.  Y.,  Sept.  8,  1857;  res. 
1902,  Erazee,  Minn. ;  m.  Philadelphia,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  25,  1876, 
Edwin  S.  Rogers,  b.  Redwood,  N.  Y..  S<^pt.  25,  1852. 

33 


514  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Children : 

Emerson/"  b.   Apr.   10,    1877. 

Henry/"  b.  June  27,  1878;    ni.  Tarrytown,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1901,  Kate 

McDermott ;    res.  1903,  Elinsford,  N.  Y.     They  have  one  daughter. 
Dora,    b.    Redwood ;     res.    1903,    Frazee ;     m.    Black    River,    Minn., 

July  3,   1898,  William  S.  Fredenburg. 

1425.  Kate    Eliza''    Babcock,    dau.  of    Elisha    and    Jane 

(Clark)  Babcock  (Charle.s,  Charles,  Nathan,  Samuel, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  June  21,  1854; 
res.  1902,  Saginaw,  Mich.;  m.  Saginaw,  Aug.  29,  1877,  Ezra 
G.,  son  of  Amasa  and  Marietta  Rust,  b.  Marine  City,  Mich., 
Oct.  23,  1854. 

He  is  interested  in  the  lumber  business,  and  is  a  large  real 
estate  dealer. 

Children,  b.  Saginaw : 

Clara  L.,'"  b.  July  4,  1878;    d.  young. 
Gardner  R.,  b.   Sept.  25.   1880;    d.  young. 
Marietta,  b.  May  4,  1882. 
Ezra,  b.  Apr.  25,  1886;    d.  young. 
Katherine,  b.  Feb.  5.  1888. 

1426.  Martha^   Babcock,   dau.   of  Horace  and   Sarah  M. 

(De  Show)  Babcock  (Charles,  Charles,  Nathan, 
Samuel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Feb.  i,  1848;  res.  Onarga, 
111.;  m.  Chicago,  Mar.  8,  1866,  Lee  C,  son  of  Charles  and 
Catharine  (Mabbett)  Brown,  b.  Bridgewater,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  15, 
1830. 
Child : 

Dr.  Charles  F.,"  b.  Onarga,  Mar.   12,  1867;    res.  1902,  y^2)  Warren 
Avenue,  Chicago ;    m.  Apr.  28,  1897,  Marie  Scheurer. 

1427.  Earl  B.^  Babcock,    son    of    Norman  and  Emogene 

(Bardeen)  Babcock  (Andrew,  Charles,  Nathan,  Sam- 
uel, James,  John,  James),  b.  Kankakee,  111.,  Dec.  28,   i860; 
res.   1902,  Kankakee;    m.  Muncie,  Ind.,  Aug.  30,  1885,  Ger- 
trude, dau.  of  Holmes  McCoy,  b.  Muncie,  Sept.  19,  1865. 
Children,  b.  Kankakee: 

Norman  H.,^"  b.  Aug.   3,   1890. 
Emogene,  b.  Feb.  25,  1895. 
Richard,   b.    May   14,    1899. 

1428.  Sarah  Elizabeth^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  F.  and 
Susan  M.   (Berry)    Babcock    (Jared,    Jared,  Samuel, 

Samuel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Ashaway,   R.   I.,  Jan.   29, 
1846;    res.    1902,   Ashaway,;    m.   Ashaway,   Nov.    13,    1867, 


CHARLES    HEXRY    BABCOCK. 

1838- 1903.  Page  517. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  515 

William  Lorenzo,  son  of  Daniel  and  Nancy   (Greene)   Cran- 
dall,  b.  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  Nov.  20,  1840. 
Children,  b.  Ashaway: 

Frank  Howard/"  b.  Aug.  25,   1868;    d.  Hopkinton,  May  22,   1897. 
Albert  B.,  b.  Apr.  24,  1875;    res.   1902,  Alfred.  N.  Y. 
Martha  A.,  b.  Apr.  24,  1875. 

1429.  Catherine  B.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Horace  and  Mary 

(Locke)  Babcock  (John,  William,  William,  Daniel, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Weyauwega,  Wis.,  Sept.  18,  1864; 
res.  1902,  Gowanda,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Gowanda,  Mar.  2,  1887,  Wil- 
liam W.,  son  of  Charles  and  Lydia  (Worden)  Chaffee,  b. 
Gowanda,  Sept.  25,  1864. 
Children,  b.  Gowanda: 

Robert  C./"  b.  Jan.  i.  1888. 

Catherine,  b.  July  4,  1892. 

Mary  L.,  b.  Mar.  28,  1895. 

Dorothy,  b.  Feb.  16,  1898. 

John  R.,  b.  Oct.  2,  1900;    d.  young. 

William  W.,  b.  Oct.  2,  1900;    d.  young. 

1430.  Charles  Ares^  Babcock,  son  of  Jared  R.  and  Adelia 
(Mann)    Babcock     (Joshna,    James,    James,    Daniel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  W^estfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  W'estfield,  July 
13,  1881,  Millie,  dau.  of  John  and  Mary  Jones,  b.  Watertown, 
N.  Y.,  Julv  4,  1852.  They  res.  1902,  576  W.  Avenue,  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.' 

Children,  b.  Westfield: 

Clara  L.."  b.  ;    res.  1902,  754  Seventh  Street,  Bufifalo;    m.  1900, 

Fred  J.  Dwidan. 
Clarence,  b.  1883. 
Mary  L..  b.  1885. 
Arthur  E.,  b.  1893. 

1431.  Emma  H.^  Hamilton,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Hannah 

(Babcock)  Hamilton  (Daniel,  Daniel,  James,  Daniel, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  May  25,   1841 ;    res. 
1902,  Britt,  la.;    m.  Milton,  Wis.,  T.  C.  Hoxie,  b.  Carolina 
Mills,  R.  L,  June  8,  1837. 
Children,  1).  Milton : 

Lillian  H.,'"  b.  IMar.  18,  i860;  res.  1902,  Britt,  la.;  m.  Milton,  Dec. 
15,  1880,  Edwin  P.,  son  of  Abraham  and  Phebe  C.  (Warren) 
Healey,  b.  Greenwich,  O.,  Nov.  30,  1852.     They  have  two  children. 

Frank  H.,  b.  Nov.  29,  1862;    d.  young. 

1432.  Edward  H.^  Babcock,  son  of  Hiram  and  Catherine 

(Wells)    Babcock     (James,     Daniel.     James,    Daniel, 


5i6  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Chenango  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  lo, 
1846;  res.  1902,  Hutchinson,  Minn.;  m.  Transit,  Minn.,  May 
7,  1870,  Emily  A.,  dau.  of  B.  F.  and  Antoinette  Burdick,  b. 
June  18,  1853. 

Children,  b.  Sibley  County,  Minn. : 

Nellie  E.,^"  b.  Feb.  22,  1871 ;    d.  young. 

Inez  A.,  b.  Aug.  31,  1873;    res.  1902,  Hutcbinson;    m.   1893,  Cbarles 

E.  Tucker. 
Frank  E.,  b.  July  10,  1875 ;    res.  1902,  2  and  4  33d  Place,  Cbicago,  111. 
Charles  M.,  b.  June  13,  1879;    res.   1902.  Hutchinson. 
De  Forest  E.,  b.  Apr.  26,  1882. 

1433.  Morton    Francis^    Babcock,    son    of    Hiram    and 
Catherine    (Wells)    Babcock    (James,   Daniel,   James, 

Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Coloma,  Wis.,  July  10,  1857; 
res.  1902,  Royal,  Ore.;  m.  New  Auburn,  Minn.,  Nov.  2,  1882, 
Marian  A.,  clau.  of  Benjamin  F.  Burdick,  b.  Rapids,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  3,  1862. 
Children : 

Edward  M.,"  b.  Hutchinson,  Nov.  13,  1883. 

Clyde  E.,  b.  Jan.  4,   1886. 

Walter  R.,  b.  Royal,  Ore.,  Nov.  6,  1895. 

1434.  Mary    Lohana'^    Babcock,    dau.    of    Daniel    L.    and 
Wealthy  A.  (Burdick)   Babcock  (James, Daniel,  James, 

Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Lincklaen  Center,  N.  Y.,  Aug. 
25,    1846;    res.    1902,   Vernonia,   Ore.;    m.   Trenton,   Minn., 
Dec.  16,  1864,  Arthellow  M.,  son  of  Albert  and  Annie  (Stand- 
ard) Randolph,  b.  July  4,  1846. 
Children : 

Leeona,^"  b.  Trenton,  Dec.  17.  1866;    res.   1902,  Vernonia,  Ore.;    m. 

Wacouta.  Minn..  William  G.  Woods,  b.  May  4,  1863. 
Edna  M.,  b.  June  6,    1879;    res.    1902,   Monmouth,   Ore.;    m.   Dec. 

25,  1898,  Harrison  K.  Shirk,  b.  Mar.  8,  1869. 

1435.  Benjamin   De   Forest'^    Babcock,   son  of   Daniel  L. 
and    Wealthy    (Burdick)    Babcock    (James,    Daniel, 

James,   Daniel,   James,  John,   James),   b.   Lincklaen,    N.    Y., 
Mar.   16,   1852;    res.   1902.  Wells,  Minn.;    m.  Dodge  Center, 
Minn.,  Nov.  12,  1874,  Emma.  dau.  of  D.  A.  and  Aurilla  Rich- 
mond, b.  De  Ruyter,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  7,  1851. 
Children,  b.  Wells : 

Earl  D.,'"  b.  . 

Edna  E.,  b. ;    res.  1902,  Mountain  Lake.  Minn.;    m.  Dr.  O.  A. 

Allen,  b.   MiUon,  Wis.,   1855. 
Inez  L..  b.  ;    res.  1902,  Wells. 


REV.   DE   GRAND    DELOS    BABCOCK. 

1839-1885.  Page  5-21- 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  517 

1436.  Charles   Henry^    Babcock,    son    of    Charles    and 
Louisa    (Brown)    Babcock*  (Harry,    Henry,    James, 

Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Ledyard,  Conn.,  July  16, 
1838;  d.  Norwich,  Conn.,  Mar.  24,  1903;  m.  (i)  Stoning- 
ton.  Conn.,  Mar.  30,  1863,  Abbie  Helen,  dau.  of  Harry  and 
Prudence  (Chesbro)  Hinckley,  b.  Stonington,  July  15,  1842, 
d.  Stonington,  Mar.  14,  1883;  m.  (2)  Mary  Gardner.  He  was 
for  years  Superintendent  of  Schools  of  Westerly,  R.  I. 
Children,  b.  Stonington  : 

1496  Annie  L.,^"  b.  May  22,,  1865 ;    m.  Dr.  John  H.  Eldred. 
Edith  Vincent,  b.  Jan.  8,  1869;    res.  1902,  Westerly,  R.  I. 
Harry  Hinckley,  b.  June  30,  1872;    d.  Stonington,  Oct.  20,  1892. 

Child  by  second  wife: 

]Mae  Gardner,  b.  July  3,  1892 ;    res.  1902,  Westerly. 

1437.  James  N.^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Jane  (North- 

rup)  Babcock  (James.  Henry,  James,  Daniel,  James, 
John,  James),  b.  Canaan  Corners,  N.  Y.,  July  28,  1836;  res. 
1902,  xAlden,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Darien,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  12,  1865,  Caro- 
line A.,  dau.  of  Edward  and  Margaret  (Williams)  Saunders, 
b.  Darien,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  7,  1841. 
Children,  b.  Alden : 

Edward  S.,'"  b.  1867:  res.  1903.  Alfred,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Cuba,  N.  Y., 
1890.  Elsie,  dau.  of  A.  A.  and  Eunice  (Enos)  Gail,  b.  E.  Aurora, 
N.  Y.,  1867.  He  is  a  Professor  in  Alfred  University,  Alfred, 
N.  Y.  Children:  Edna  Gail,^^  b.  Memphis,  Tenn.,  Jan.  29.  1892; 
Arthur  Le  Rov.  b.  Limestone,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  9,  189^;  Willard  Gail, 
b.  Hinsdale.  N.  Y..  Dec.  24,  1895;  Edward  S..  Jr..  b.  Portville, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  26,  1898. 

Elsie,^"  b.  May  27,  1871 ;  res.  1902.  Alden,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Alden,  1890, 
W.  H..  son  of  H.  L.  Bass,  b.  St.  Albans.  "Vt.,  1868.  Children : 
Hannah. ^^  b.  July  30,  1893 ;    Elmer  W.,  b.  Nov.  6,  1895. 

Jennie,  b.  Jan.  27,  1871 ;    d.  1882. 

J.  Le  Rov.^"  b.  1874;  res.  1902,  469  Fourteenth  Street,  Buffalo, 
N.  Y. ;    m.  Buffalo,  1897,  May  Andrews.     Child :    Joy.'" 

1438.  Oscar    S.^    Babcock.    son    of    Lorenzo    and    Lydia 

(Palmer)  Babcock  (Asa.  Henry,  James,  Daniel, 
James.  John.  James),  b.  Churchville,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  4.  1844;  res. 
1902,  202  1-2  Frank  Street,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Churchville, 
Sept.  25,  1867,  Caroline  P..  dau.  of  Julius  and  Eunice  (Shel- 
don) Adams,  b.  Churchville,  June  i,  1847. 
Children,  b.  ChurchA'ille : 

Ada  N.,'"  b.  Nov.   12,   1868;    res.   1902,  Rochester. 

Eugene  E.,  b.  May  19,  1871  ;  res.  1902,  Bergen,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Church- 
ville, Mar.  18,  1896.  Nellie,  dau.  of  Andrew  Bebee,  b.  Bergen. 
They  have  two  children :  Harold,^^  b.  Nov.  20,  1897  (  ?)  ;  Elea- 
nor, b.  Sept.  19,  1899. 


5i8  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Hattie  E.,  b.  Nov.  22,  1874;    res.  1902,  Rochester. 
Alta  M..  b.  July  11,  1887. 
Orvill  E.,  b.  Nov.  18,  1889. 

1439.  Elizabeth  Clayton^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Francis  G. 
and  Elizabeth   (Clarke)   Babcock   (Paul,  Luke,  Elka- 

nah,  Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  30, 
i860;    res.  1902,  Hornellsville,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Hornellsville,  Oct. 
29,   1884,  Horatio  Lyman,  son  of  John  and  Emily  (Green) 
Lang,  b.  Watkins,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  4,  1861. 
Children : 

Francis  Granger,^"  b.  Corning,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1886. 

Horatio   Lyman,   b.   Apr.  30,    1887. 

Gertrude  E.,  b.  Corning,  Dec.   14,   1888. 

Florence  E.,  b.  Hornellsville,  Nov.  30,  1892;    d.  Aug.  30,  1893. 

John,  b.  Hornellsville,  Mar.  30,   1897. 

1440.  Blake  B.^  Babcock,  son  of  Francis  G.  and  Elizabeth 
(Clarke)    Babcock    (Paul,    Luke,    Elkanah,    Daniel, 

James,  John,  James),  b.  Scio,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  i,  1868;   res.  Hor- 
nellsville, N.  Y. ;    m.  Hornellsville,  Oct.  4,  1893,  Louise,  dau. 
of  Dr.  Clare  and  Marjorie  (Rice)  Parkhill,  b.  Howard,  N.  Y., 
July  22,  1868.' 
Children : 

Howard  P.,'"  b.  Aug.  17,  1894. 
Norman  C,  b.  Jan.   13,  1897. 
Marjorie  E.,  b.  Mar.  6,  1899. 
Paul  R.,  b.  Oct.   14,   1901. 

1441.  Cassie  M.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  and  Isabelle  H. 

(Spaulding)  Babcock  (Paul,  Luke,  Elkanah,  Daniel, 
James,  John,  James),  b.  Buffalo,  N,  Y.,  Dec.  18,  1862;  res. 
1902,  222  Plymouth  Avenue,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Hor- 
nellsville, N.  Y.,  Oct.  6,  1887,  J.  Gaylord,  son  of  Abram 
and  Carohne  (Cummings)  Snapp,  b.  Sparta,  Pa.,  June 
^7^  1857. 
Children : 

Reba  Kate,'"  b.  Caledonia,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,  1889. 
James  Babcock,  b.  Warsavi^,  N.  Y.,  June  8,  1892. 
Donald  C,  b.  Rochester,  Apr.  21,  1899. 

1442.  Phebe   Ann^    Babcock,    dau.    of   Benjamin   F.    and 
Phebe   Ann    (Sw^an)    Babcock    (Benjamin    F.,    Paul, 

Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Aug.  7,  1841 ;  res. 
1902,  Providence,  R.  L;  m.  June  26,  1867,  James  M.  Camp- 
bell, of  Providence,  b.  Oct.  9,  1824. 


LANGDON    BABCOCK. 


Page  --,22 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  519 

Children : 

Jessie  B./"  b.  July  26,  1868;    res.  1902,  Providence,  R.  I. 

Phebe  A.,  b.  June  27,  1870;    m.  Jan.  i.  1896,  Knight  O.  Richmond. 

Mary  S.,  b.  Nov.  8,   1873;    res.   1902,  Providence. 

James  W.,  b.  JMay  18,  1876;    res.  1902,  Providence. 

Edith,  b.  Sept.   19.   1878;    res.   1902,  Providence. 

Rowena,  b.  Nov.  28,  1880;    res.  1902,  Providence. 

1443.  Benjamin  Franklin^  Babcock,  son  of  Benjamin 
Franklin  and  Maria  A.  (Bicknell)  Babcock  (Benja- 
min F.,  Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  June  12, 
1845;  !"•  J"ne  9,  1861,  Adela  Barry,  b.  July  16,  1846;  res. 
Liverpool,  England. 

Children,  all  res.  1902,  Liverpool,  England: 

Benjamin  F.,^"  b.  June  23,  1871. 
Mary  A.,  b.  Mar.  8,  1873. 
Adela  Nera,  b.  June  20,  1875. 
Sibyl  A.,  b.  Oct.  9,  1878. 
Guy  B.,  b.   Apr.  5,   1882. 
Ernest,  b.  Oct.  31,  1883. 

1444.  Marie  Augusta^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Benjamin  Frank- 
lin and  Maria  A.   (Bicknell)   Babcock  T Benjamin  F., 

Paul,  Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  May  4,  1854; 
res.   1902,  Liverpool,  England;    m.  June  i,   1876,  Arnold  J. 
Cleaver,  of  Liverpool,  b.  Mar.  30,  1852. 
Children,  res.  1902,  Liverpool,  England: 

Marie  A.,'"  b.  Jan.  26,  1878. 
Arnold  B.,  b.  Jan.  27,  1880. 
William  B.,  b.  July  29,   1882. 

1445.  Maria  Babcock^  Moore,  dau.  of  James  D.  and  Maria 
E.    (Babcock)    IMoore    (Benjamin    F..    Paul,    Harry, 

Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.   Dec.  20,   1845;    res.    1902, 
Providence,  R.  L;   m.  June  10,  1868,  James  Clinton  Kimball. 
Children,  res.  Providence: 

Caroline  ^NI.,^"  b.  Jan.  11,  1870;    d.  Feb.  3,  1871. 

Laura  B.,  b.  Mar.  4.  1872. 

Jessie  M..  b.  June  17,  1874. 

Alice,  b.  Sept.  30,  1876. 

James  M.,  b.  July  22,  1880. 

Frederick  H.,  b.  Feb.  20,  1883. 

Henry  H.,  b.  Nov.  12,  1884. 

Margaret  W.,  b.  Nov.  27.  1889. 

1446.  Henry  Denison^  Babcock,  son  of  Samuel  D.   and 
Elizabeth  C.  (Franklin)  Babcock  (Benjamin  F.,  Paul, 

Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Sept.  6,   1847;    i*^-*'- 


520  TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

1902,  New  York  City;    m.  May  28,   1873/ Anna  M.  Wood- 
ward, b.  Mar.  13,  1846. 

He  graduated  at  Columbia  College  in  1868. 

Children,  res.  in  New  York  City: 

Samuel  D./"  b.  Apr.  19,   1874. 
Woodward,  b.  June  14,  1876. 
Alice  W.,  b.  Dec.  27,  1877. 
Henry  D.,  b.  Aug.  11,  1883. 
Richard  F.,  b.   Mar.   27,   1895. 

1447.  EvELENA^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  D.  and  Elizabeth 
C.    (Franklin)    Babcock    (Benjamin  F.,   Paul,   Harry, 

Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  May  13,   1849;    res.    1902, 
New  York  City;    m.  Apr.  26,  1871,  William  Palmer  Dixon, 
son  of  Courtland  Dixon,  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  19,  1847. 
Children : 

Evelena  Babcock/"  b.  Jan.  6.   1873;    res.   New  York  City;    ni.   Dec. 

2.  1896,  Eben  Stevens,  of  New  York,  b.  Feb.  7,  1871.    Child:  Byam 

K.,"  b.  Nov.  16,  1897. 
William  H.,  b.  Aug.  16,  1877;    res.  1902,  New  York  City;  m.  Jan.  31, 

1901,  Josephine  Williams. 
Courtland    Palmer   Dixon,    b.   July   2,    1884 ;     res.    1902,    New    York 

City. 

1448.  Emily  Franklin''  Babcock,  dau.  of  Samuel  D.  and 
Elizabeth  C.  (Franklin)  Babcock  (Benjamin  F.,  Paul, 

Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John.  James),  b.  Jan.   12,  1855;    res. 
1902,  New  York  City;   m.  1878,  Fordyce  D.,  son  of  Dr.  For- 
dyce  Barker,  of  New  York  City,  b.  1847,  ^-  1892. 
Children : 

Elizabeth  Crary  F.,'"  b.  Apr..   1879;    res.   1902,  New  York  City;    m. 

Feb.  6,  1900,  Murry  W.  Dodge,  of  New  York. 
Lillian  Lee  F.,  b.  Apr.  4,   1883;    res.   1902,  New  York  City. 

1449.  Fanny   Morris^   Babcock,   dau.   of   Samuel   D.   and 

Elizabeth  C.  (Franklin)  Babcock  (Benjamin  F.,  Paul, 
Harry,  Joshua,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Oct.  25.   1858;    res. 
1902,  New  York  City;    m.  May  8,   1889,  Henr}^  Alexander 
Murray,  of  Scotland,  b.  June  6.  1857. 
Children,  res.   New  York  City: 

Virginia,^"  b.  Sept.  6,  1890. 
Henry  A.,  b.  May  13.  1893. 
Cecil  Dunmore,  b.  Dec.  20,  1897. 

1450.  Clar.'V^    Babcock,    dau    of    Gideon    H.    and    Lydia 
(Campbell)    Babcock     (Ichabod,     Ichabod.    Ichabod, 

Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Plainfield,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  22, 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  521 

1855;    ^"^^-    190--  Leonardsville,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Uiiadilla  Forks, 
Jan.  13,  1881,  John,  son  of  Charles  W.  and  Rhoda  (ColHns) 
Rogers,  b.  Plainfield.  Dec.  7,  1855. 
Children,  b.  Plainfield : 

John  B.."'  1).   June  30,    1883. 
Howard,  1).  Sept.  29,  1884. 
Barton  R.,  b.  Oct.  6,  1886. 
Edna  C,  b.   Alar.  24,  1891. 

1451.  Caroline^   Baecock,   dan.   of  Gideon  H.   and  Lydia 

(Campbell)  Bal)cock  (Ichabod,  Ichabod,  Ichabod, 
Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Apr.  20,  1861 ;  res.  1902, 
Brookfield,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Leonardsville,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  20,  1877, 
Dr.  Herbert  C,  son  of  Stephen  and  Lncinda  (Ellison)  Brown, 
b.  Brookfield,  Feb.  14,  1857. 
Children : 

Herbert  J./"  b.  Sept.  17.  1882;    d.  1883. 

Kearn  B.,  b.  Sept.  3,   1891. 

Ruth  L..  b.   Mar.  2,   1895. 

Elston  S.,  b.  iMay  8,  1896;    d.   1898. 

1452.  Erastus  Franklin'^  Babcock,  son  of  Albert  F.  and 
Ann  A.  (Crandall)  Babcock  (Joshua,  Joseph,  Icha- 
bod, Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Millport,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22, 
1834;  res.  1902,  322  W.  Church  Street,  Elmira,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Elmira,  Nov.  4,  1858,  Martha  Ann,  dau.  of  Hon.  John  and 
Margaret  (McWhorten)  Nicks,  b.  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  14, 
1842,  d.  Elmira,  June  27,  1898. 

Erastus  Babcock  was  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court,  Post- 
master of  Elmira,  under  Cleveland's  administration,  and  at- 
torney for  years  of  the  Erie  Railroad. 

Children : 

John  R,"  b.  Feb.  8,  1863 ;    d.  Ehnira,  July  9.   1896. 

Harry  H.,  b.  Dec.  10,  1864;    d.  July  26,  1865. 

Margaret  Maud,  b.  Elmira,  Jan.  21,  1867;  res.  1902,  2,--  W.  Church 
Street,  Elmira ;  m.  Elmira,  Feb.  16,  1898,  Edward  B.,  .«on  of 
Edson  and  Elizabeth  (Hyer)  Rogers,  b.  Cincinnati,  O.,  Apr.  8, 
1864. 

1453.  Rev.  De  Grand  Delos''  Babcock,  son  of  Albert  F. 
and    Ann   A.    (Crandall)    Babcock    (Joshua,    Joseph, 

Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Millport,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  4,  1839;  d.  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  8,  1885;  m.  Newport, 
N.  Y.,  July  14,  1866,  Harriet  Louise,  dau.  of  Richard  and 
Mary  (De  Castaing)  Monkhouse,  b.  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  Feb. 
25,  1846;   res.  1902,  12  Gibbs  Street,  Rochester,  N.  Y. 


522  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

"Though  bhnd  from  youth,  Mr.  Babcock  was  a  finely  edu- 
cated man  and  a  proficient  musician."  He  graduated,  1881, 
from  the  Baptist  Theological  Seminary  of  Rochester.  For 
several  years  he  was  pastor  of  a  Baptist  Church  in  Rochester; 
was  also  chaplain  at  the  Elmira  Reformatory.  He  was  an 
eloquent  speaker,  had  a  wonderful  memory,  and  his  knowledge 
of  the  Bible  was  extraordinary. 

Children : 

1497  Anah  F./"  b.  Sept.  9,  1869;    m.  Frederick  W.  Yates. 

Langdon,  b.   Rochester,  Nov.   16,   1884;    res.   1902,   136  South  Fitz- 
hugh  Street,  Rochester,  N.  Y. 

1454.  Amelia  P.^   Potter,   dau  of  German  and   Mary  L. 

(Babcock)  Potter  (Joshua,  Joseph,  Ichabod,  Ichabod, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  S.  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1847; 
res.  1902,  Utica,  N.  Y. ;  m.  S.  Mt.  Upton,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  21, 
i860,  Julian  A.,  son  of  Jeremiah  and  Content  (Main)  Good- 
rich, b.  S.  New  Berlin,  July  30,  1835,  d.  Angola,  N.  Y.,  Apr. 
13,  1900. 

Children,  b.  S.  New  Berlin : 

Fred,'"  b.  1864 ;    res.  1902,  S.  New  Berlin. 
Mabel,  b.  1869;    res.  1902,  Utica,  N.  Y. 
Maria,  b.  1871 ;    res.  1902,  Chicago,  111. 

1455.  William  Henry''  Babcock,  son  of  William  H.  and 

Penelope  P.  (Andrews)  Babcock  (Jabez  W.,  Lodo- 
wick,  Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Brooklyn,  N. 
Y.,  Aug.  3,  1858;  res.  1902,  Downers  Grove,  111.;  m.  Den- 
mark, la.,  May  6,  1886,  Mary  E.,  dau.  of  James  R.  and 
Frances  (Fox)  Fayerweather,  b.  Denmark,  Oct.  30,  1859. 
Children : 

Richard  F.,"  b.  Denmark,  June  4.  1887. 
Dorothy,  b.   Hinsdale,   111.,  July   11,   1889;    d.   1896. 
Henry  A.,  b.  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,  July  7,  1891. 
Frederick  M.,  b.  Feb.  5,  1898. 

1456.  Oliver  C.''  Babcock,  son  of  Marion  F.  and  Avilda 

(Babcock)    Babcock    (Oliver,  John,  Joseph,  Ichabod, 

John,  John,  James),  b.   Persia,   N.   Y.,   Oct.    15,    1854;  res. 

1900,  Cattaraugus,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Silver  Creek,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  16, 

1879,  Flora,  dau.  of  George  and  Eliza  (Laid)  Cook,  b.  Irving, 

N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1856. 

Children : 

Olive,'"  b.  Persia,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  15,  1881. 
Walter,  b.  Persia,  Nov.  21,   1883. 
George,  b.  Persia,  June  21,  1886. 
Harold,  b.  Cattaraugus,  Nov.  2,  1896. 


HENRY    ERNEST    BABCOCK. 


Page  523. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  5^3 

1457.  Henry  Ernest^  Babcock,  son  of  Henry  and  Dora 

(Bristol)  Babcock  (Oliver,  John,  Joseph,  Ichabod, 
John,  John,  James),  b.  Dakota,  Wis.,  July  22,  1862;  res. 
1903,  Columbus,  Neb. ;  m.  Battle  Creek,  Mich..  Dec.  24,  1885, 
Jennie  Bell,  dau.  of  Alden  and  Euphemia  (Salisbury)  Powell, 
b.  Battle  Creek,  Oct.  18,  1862. 

Henry  Babcock  is  President  and  General  Manager  of  the 
Nebraska  Central  Irrigation  Company,  Columbus,  Neb.  He 
is  by  profession  an  attorney  at  law. 

Children,  b.  Ord,  Neb.,  except  one : 

Dora  E.,^"  b.  Feb.  6,   1887. 

Heman  E.,  b.  Oct.   11,   1888. 

John  P.,  b.  Aug.  19,  1890. 

Fred  L..  b.   Oct.   31,    1892. 

Alden  P.,  b.  Dec.  8,  1895;    d.  1857. 

William  Earle,  b.  Columbus,  Neb.,  Dec.   12,   1898. 

George  Everett,  b.  Aug.  5.  1901. 

1458.  Arthur  Clifford^  Veatch,  son  of  Harry  and  Mary 
Kate     (Babcock)     Veatch     (Henry,     Oliver,    Oliver, 

Stephen,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Evansville,  Tnd.,  Oct.  17, 
1878;  res.  1902,  Baton  Rouge,  La.;  m.  Evansville,  Apr.  16, 
1902,  Caroline  H.,  dau.  of  Samuel  and  Anna  Evans,  b.  Evans- 
ville, Apr.  17,  1870. 

Arthur  Veatch  graduated  at  the  Rockport  High  School  in 
1895.  He  was  a  teacher  of  mathematics  in  the  Rockport  High 
School  from  1896  to  1898.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Indiana 
University  Geological  Survey  in  the  summer  of  1897,  and  a 
member  of  the  Cornell  Geological  Survey,  summer  of  1898; 
Assistant  State  Geologist  of  Louisiana,  1898- 1900;  Assistant 
in  charge  of  areal  and  topographic  geology,  Cornell  School 
of  Field  Geology,  summer  of  1900-1 ;  assistant  stratigraphic 
geology,  Cornell  University,  1901-2;  Consulting  Geologist, 
Houston  Oil  Company  of  Texas,  winter  of  1901-2;  Professor 
of  Geology,  Louisiana  State  LTniversity,  and  Geologist  in 
charge  Louisiana  Geological  Survey,  1902.  Publications: 
Proc.  Ind.  and  Science,  Journal  of  Geology,  University  of 
Chicago;  Report  of  Louisiana  Geological  Survey. 

1459.  Jesse  P.^  Babcock,  son  of  Hiram  and  Ann  J.   (Pen- 

field)  Babcock  (Elias,  Jeremiah,  Christopher,  Wil- 
liam, John,  John,  James),  b.  Nov.  24,  1847;  ^'^s.  1902,  Boon- 
ville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Mar.  19,  1873,  Anna  E.  Stimpson,  b.  July  10, 
1849. 


5-24  TJic  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children: 

Clinton  L.,'"  b.  Aug.    12,   1874.     He  is  a  Professor  in   Cornell   Uni- 

vcrsitv,  Ithaca.  N.  V.;    unm.  igoi. 
Fred  J.,  b.  Mar.  20,  1880;    d.  1884. 
Perley  S.,  b.  June  10,   1884. 
Harry  J.,  b.  Oct.  3,   1886. 
Jessie  L.,  b.   Mar.   i,   1891. 

1460.  Marion  Rosetha^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Henry  H.  and 
Eliza  (Wheeler)  Babcock  (Joshna,  Jeremiah,  Christo- 
pher, William,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Felts  Mills,  N.  Y.,  Nov. 
28,  1842;  res.  1902,  Cape  Vincent,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Watertown, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  4,  1864,  Lloyd,  son  of  Horace  W.  and  Maria 
(Osgood)  Woodrnff,  b.  Watertown,  Oct.  13,  1841. 

Children : 

Marion  C./"  b.  Cape  Vincent,  July  28,  1872;  res.  1902,  222  80th 
S.,  son  of  Silas  and  Elizabeth  Holcombe,  b.  Ogdensburg,  Oct.  29, 
1869. 

Amelia  F.,  b.  Watertown,  Apr.  29,  1874;    d.  1875. 

Edith  Louise,  b.  Cape  Vincent,  Mar.  24.  1879;  res.  1902,  Cape 
Vincent. 

1461.  Stephen^  Hunt,  son  of  James  and  Phebe  C.   (Bab- 
cock) Hnnt  (Stephen,  Stephen,  Christopher,  William, 

John,  John,  James),  b.  Simsbury,  Conn.,  July  15,  i860;  m. 
(i)  Milton,  N.  Y.,  Myra,  dan.  of  Bennet  and  Myra  Pixley,  b. 
Geneva,  N.  Y.,  no  issue;  m.  (2)  Milton,  Mary  L.,  dan.  of 
Frank  and  Angeline  (Bremer)  Busha,  b.  St.  Albans,  Canada. 
Children  by  second  marriage: 

Stephen,"'  b.  N.  Hartford,  Conn.,  Oct.  19,  1882. 

Kate  M.,  b.  W.  Warren,  Mass.,  Aug.  17,  1884;    d.  1885. 

Mary  L.,  b.  Norwich,  Conn.,  Apr.  9,  1886. 

Benjamin,  b.  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  Jan.  5,   1888. 

Julia  M.,  b.   Norwich,  Apr.  4,   1892. 

1462.  Frederick   Henry^'   Babcock,   son   of   Theodore   H. 
and  Nellie  L.   (Granger)   Babcock   (Samuel.  Samuel. 

Samuel,  William,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Hartford,  Conn., 
Mar.  29,  1867;  res.  1902,  666  Carroll  Street,  Brooklyn,  N. 
Y. ;  m.  Brooklyn,  Apr.  5,  1893,  Mabel  Elizabeth,  dau.  of 
James  and  Elizabeth  Lester  Hunter  Montgomery,  b.  Brook- 
lyn, 1870. 

Children,  b.   Brooklyn : 

Theodora,"  b.  Apr.   18,   1896. 
Gordon  M..  b.  Feb.  6,  1898. 


FREDERICK   H.    BABCOCK. 


Page  524. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  525 

1463.  Theodore  Hurlbut"  Babcock,  Jr.,  son  of  Theodore 

H.  and  Xellie  L.  (Granger)  Baljcock  (Samuel.  Sam- 
uel, Samuel,  \\'illiam,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Hartford, 
Conn.,  July  3,  1870;  res.  1902,  70  \V.  I02d  Street,  New 
York;  m.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  18,  1895,  Margaret  Agnes, 
dau.  of  Cornelius  and  Margaret  (Gahvin)  Daly,  b.  Mt.  Ridge, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  12,  1868. 

Children,  b.  New  York  and  Brookh-n : 

Theodore  Hurlbut,"  Jr.,  b.   Feb.  g,   1897. 
John  Henry,  b.  Mar.  5,  1898;    d.  Feb.  26,  1899. 
Cornelius  RT,  b.  June  i,  1899;    d.  Aug.   12,  1900. 
Jessie  Margaret,  b.  July  12,   1901. 
Anna  M.,  b.  July  31,   1902. 

1464.  Emeline    Clark^  Babcock,    dau.    of   John    N.    and 
Charlotta  R.  (Bromley)  Babcock  (John,  John,  Josiah, 

Job,  Job,  John,  James),  b.  Norwich,  Conn.,  Feb.  22,  1842; 
res.  1902,  1 1330  Lothair  Avenue,  Morgan  Park,  111.;  m.  New 
Haven,  Conn.,  Apr.  18,  1864,  Clarence  E.,  son  of  Samuel  and 
Emily  (Curtis)  Button,  b.  Wallingford,  Conn.,  May  15,  1841. 
He  is  a  retired  U.  S.  Army  Major. 
Children,  b.  New  Haven : 

Marion,'"  b.  June  24,  1865 ;  m.  Washington.  D.  C,  May  16,  1886, 
William  A.  Prime,  b.  New  York  City,  May  13,  1862;  business, 
1902,  58  William  Street,  New  York. 

Clarence  E.,  b.  Aug.  7,  1871 ;    res.  1902,  Englewood,  N.  J. 

1465.  Rev.  Charles  Hexry^  Babcock,  D.D.,  son  of  Henry 

C.  and  Mary  E.  T.  (Wells)  Babcock  (John,  John,  Jo- 
siah. Job.  Job,  John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  July  3, 
1845;  ^^^-  1902,  Providence,  R.  I.;  m.  (i)  New  Haven, 
Oct.  5,  1865,  Emily  Chauncey  (Goodrich)  Mead,  dau.  of  Rev. 
Darius  and  Emily  (Chauncey)  Goodrich,  b.  Greenw^ich, 
Conn.,  1842,  d.  Columbus,  O.,  May,  1880;  m.  (2)  Columbus, 
Sept.  20,  1886,  Mrs.  Isabelle  (Wood)  Brown,  d.  New  York 
City,  Feb.  2,  1899. 
Children : 

Margaret  Chauncey,'"  b.  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  2.  1866;  res.  1902, 
Columbus.  O.  ;  m.  Columbus.  Apr.  26.  1888,  George  B.  Mony- 
peny.  Children,  b.  Columbus :  Brunson,"  b.  Aug.  10,  1892 ;  Wil- 
liam M..  b.  Nov.  18.  1894. 

Worthington  Ely.^"'  b.  Brooklyn.  Mar.  16.  1869;  res.  1902.  Colum- 
bus, O.  ;  m.  Columbus.  Nov.  22.  1898,  Kate.  dau.  of  William  K. 
and  Adaline  M.  (Ayers)  Deshlef.  b.  Columbus,  Oct.  28,  1876. 
Child:    George  Nash.",  b.   Columbus.   Apr.  22.   1901. 

Charles  Henry.'"  b.  Flushing.  N.  Y.,  Dec.  30,  1871  ;  res.  1902.  East 
Orange,  N.  J. ;    m.  Delaware.  O.,  May  30,  1894,  Eleanor  A.,  dau. 


526  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

of  James  W.  and  Lillian  L.  Nightingale,  b.  Uubuque,  la.,  Oct.  26, 
1870.  Children:  Ethel,"  h.  Washington,  D.  C,  Mar.  20,  1895, 
and  Eniil.v,  b.  New   York,  Oct.  28,  1898. 

1466.  Mary  Emily^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Henry  C.  and  Mary 

E.  (Wells)  Babcock  (John,  John,  Josiah,  Job,  Job, 
John,  James),  b.  New  Haven,  Conn.,  Apr.  15,  1855;  res. 
1902,  New  Haven;  m.  New  Haven,  Oct.  29,  1890,  Albert  L., 
son  of  Lennon  and  Sarah  Northup,  b.  Trumbull,  Conn.,  Oct. 
29,  1857. 
Child : 

Sarah  Esther,'"  b.  New  Haven,  Dec.  28,  1891. 

1467.  Henry  Nash^  Babcock,  son  of  Theodore  and  Eliza- 
beth  (Nash)    Babcock   (Deodatus,  John,  Josiah,  Job, 

Job,  John,  James),  b.  Ballston  Spa,  Dec.  20,  1850;   res.  1902, 
Pelham  Manor,  N.  Y. ;  m.  New  London,  Conn.,  Oct.  7,  1884, 
Charlotte  Morgan,  dau.  of  Enoch  and  Sarah   (Allen)   Stod- 
dard, b.  New  London,  Mar.  2,  1858. 
Children : 

Sarah,'"  b.  New  London,  Sept.  27,  1886;    d.  Yonkers,  Mar.  18,  1887. 
Theodore  Stoddard,  b.  Feb.  26,  1888. 
Henry  Stoddard,  b.  Dec.  15,  1900. 

1468.  Laura    S.^    BxVbcock,    dau.    of    Samuel     and    Emily 

(Frink)  Babcock  (Samuel,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel, 
Job,  John,  James),  b.  Dundee,  Mich.,  July  11.  1842;  res. 
1902,  Iowa  Falls,  la.;  m.  (i)  Berlin,  la.,  Sept.  17,  1864,  Wil- 
liam P.,  son  of  John  Simpson,  b.  Daleville,  Ind.,  July  5,  1843, 
d.  Iowa  Falls;  m.  (2)  Dec.  11,  1880,  Jesse  B.  Knight,  b. 
Marion,  Ind.,  June  21,  1834. 
Children,  b.  Berlin : 

Emma  J.,'"  b.  Oct.  9,  1865 ;    res.  1902,  Ingersoll,  Okla. ;    m.  Charles 

Madden, 
laphene,  b.  Oct.  30,  1867;    res.   1902,  Ikeville,  La.;    m.  Eldora,  la., 

Elmer  E.,  son  of  Wheeler  Davis. 
Mahala,  b.  Aug.  31,  1869;  d.  1869. 
Mary  D..  b.  Mar.  2,  1873;    res.  1902,  Iowa  Falls,  la.;    m.  Mar.  17, 

1898,  Ore  B.,  son  of  Jonathan  Poer,  b.  Nov.  7,  1867. 
Eva,  b.  Dec.  29,  1874;    d.  1875. 
Bert,  b.  Jan.  2,  1876;    res.  1902,  Iowa  Falls;    unm. 
Bessie  B.,  b.  Dec.  29,   1878;    res.    1902,  Iowa  Falls,   la.;    m.   Iowa 

Falls,  John  E.   Pearce. 

Children  by  second  marriage : 

Minnie  M.,  b.   Sept.  9,   ]?8i ;    res.   1902,  Hubbard  la. ;    m.  Eldora, 

Dec.  18,  1901,  Samuel,  son  of  Andrew  Mossman. 
Rolland,  b.   Sept.  6,   1884;    res.   1902,  Iowa  Falls. 


REV.  CHARLES  H.  BABCOCK,  D.D. 


Page  525. 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  5^7 

1469.  Lincoln'^     Babcock,    son    of    Samuel    and    Emily 

(Frink)  Babcock  (Samuel,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel, 
Job,  John,  James),  b.  Eldora.  la.,  Aug.  22,  1858;  d.  Berlin, 
la.,  Feb.  19,  1898;  m.  Iowa  Falls,  la.,  Feb.  3,  j88o,  Effie  F., 
dau.  of  Richard  and  Elizabeth  Lackey,  b.  Marietta,  la.,  Sept. 
12,  1858.  She  m.  (2)  Alfred  Pierce;  res.  1902,  Iowa  Falls. 
Children,  b.  Berlin : 

Florence  M.,'"  b.  Sept.  4,  1881 ;    res.  1902,  Owasco,  la. ;    m.  Eldora, 

Dec.  4,   1900,  George  Baughman. 
Eugene  L.,  b.  Jan.  3,  1884. 
Ethel  M.,  b.  June  13,  1886. 

1470.  Sheridan^     Babcock,    son    of     Samuel   and    Emily 

(Frink)  Babcock  (Samuel,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel, 

Job,  John,  James),  b.  Eldora,  la.,  May  7,   1862;    res.   1902, 

Owasco,  la.;    m.  Sept.  6,   1886,  Emma  L..  dau.  of  William 

and  Hannah  (Luceke)  Wehrman.     He  is  a  machinist. 

Children : 

Donald  S..^"  b.  July  22,  1887. 
Lloyd  L..  b.  July  5,   1889. 
Lulu  May.  1).  Jan.  3.  1892. 
Leona  Thankful,  b.  Nov.  30,  1893. 
Mertin  [Maxwell,  b.  June  24,  1897. 
Ila  L.,  b.  Owasco,  Oct.  5,  1902. 

1471.  Stephen   Edwin^   Babcock,   son  of   Henry   C.   and 
lanthe    C.     (Hurlbut)     Babcock     (Samuel,     Simeon, 

Simeon,  Samuel,  Job,  John,  James),  b.  Milwaukee,  \\\s.,  Feb. 

4,  1854;   res.  1902,  South  Bend,  Ind. ;   m.  Lincoln,  Neb.,  May 

5,  1880,  Ava,  dau.  of  Daniel  W.  and  Mary  Ann  (Neff)  Kauf- 
man, b.  Keosauqua,  la..  Mar.  16,  1854. 

In  early  manhood  Mr.  Babcock  was  employed  in  Milwau- 
kee and  Chicago ;  later  was  in  business  with  his  father  at 
Lincoln,  Neb.  In  1880  he  was  in  the  railroad  business  at 
Denver,  Colo. ;  later  was  connected  with  the  Pueblo  Smelting 
and  Refining  Company.  In  1889  he  entered  the  employ  of 
Studebaker  Manufacturing  Company,  at  South  Bend.,  Ind., 
and  still  (1903)  holds  a  responsible  and  important  position 
with  said  company. 

Children : 

Lillian  Gertrude,'"  b.   Denver,   ISIay  2,    1883;    d.   South  Bend,  Ind., 

Apr.  21,   1890. 
Mildred  Ethel,  b.  South  Bend.  Aug.  30.  1891. 
Marion  Ava,  b.  South  Bend,  July  16,  1895. 

1472.  Jane  M.^  Sawyer,  dau.  of  John  and  Olive  (Babcock) 

Sawyer    (Simeon,     Simeon,     Simeon,     Samuel,    Job, 


528  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

John,  James),  b.  Aug.  13,  1(834;  res.  1902,  Hewitt,  Minn.; 
111.  (i)  Gaines,  Pa.,  May  4,  1851,  T.  S.  Boyd,  b.  Andover, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.  29,  1829;  d!  lA"b.  i,  1862;  m.  (2)  July  7,  1867, 
Joel  Dickens,  d.  1899;  ni.  (3)  Gaines,  June  30,  1901,  George 
M.  Dimmick,  b.  Oct.  17,  1824. 
Children  by  first  marriage  : 

Hiram    W.,'"   b.    Apr.   30.    1853;     res.    1902,    Hewitt;     m.    Emma   E. 

Webster. 
Mary  M.,  b.   Apr.  25,   1855;    res.   1902,   Ord,   Neb.;    m.   1870,  Jacob 

Burkle. 
Eliza  J.,  b.  May  i,   1857;    res.   1902,  North  Loup,  Neb.;    m.  Wells, 

Dec.  3,  1874,  Harrison  Davis. 
John  S.,  b.  May  24,   1859;    d.  Becker,  Minn.,   1896;    m.   1880,   Pliihi 

Mclntre. 
Theron,  b.  Jan.  24,   1862;    res.'  1902,  Union,  Ore. 

Children  by  second  marriage : 

Nettie,  b.  June  18,  1870;    res.  1902,  Hewitt;    m.  E.  T.  Russel. 
Addie,  b.  Sept.  28,   1872;    m.  Albert  Campbell;    res.   1902,  Wrights, 

Minn. 
Maggie  E.,  b.  Nov.  29,   1875  ;    res.   1902,  Hewitt ;    m.  A.  O.  Russel. 

1473.  Viola   O."  Babcock,   dan.   of   Simeon  and   Sarah  J. 

(Gower)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel, 

Job,  John,  James),  b.   Sabinsville,  Pa.,  Dec.   30,    1851  ;    res. 

1902,  Wells,  Minn.;    m.  Wells,  Aug.   11,   1875,  Phineas  R., 

son  of  Luzern  and  Hannah  (Platner)  Taylor,  b.  Apr.  2,  1838. 

Children,  b.  Wells: 

Frank  P.,^"  b.  May  19,  1876;    res.  1902,  Blaine,  Wash. 
Leona  M.,  b.  Feb.  i,  1878;    res.  1902,  Minnesota  Lake,  Minn. 
Hazel  A.,  b.  Apr.  19,  1883. 
Phineas  R.,  b.  Feb.  i,  1895. 

1474.  Susie   E.^    Babcock,   dan.   of   Simeon   and    Sarah  J. 

(Gower)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel, 
Job,  John,  James),  b.  Tioga  County,  Pa.,  July  20,  1856;  res. 
Alden,  Minn.;  m.  Wells,  Minn.,  Nov.  30,  1881,  Theodore  J., 
son  of  Carlos  C.  and  Lemira  Barton,  b.  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  July 
16,  1855. 
Children : 

Harriet  S.,'"  b.  Wells,  Oct.  25.  1883. 
Louis  L.,  b.  Apr.  29,  1888. 
Sidney  S.,  b.  May  17,  1896. 
Cedris  C,  b.  Oct.  29,   1899. 

1475.  WiLMENiA  A.^  Babcock,  dan.  of  Enos  and  Abby  J. 

(Huyler)    Babcock   (Simeon,   Simeon,   Simeon,   Sam- 
uel, Job,  John,  James),  b.  Wellsborongh,  Pa.,  May  4,   1846; 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  529 

res.  1902,  St.  Cloud,  Aliiin. ;    m.  Rochester,  Minn.,  Apr.  20, 
1867,  James  P.,  son  of  Cyrus  and  Eliza  (Thompson)  Webster, 
b.  Boston,  O.,  Sept.  i,  1837. 
Children : 

George  E./"  b.  Rochester,  Dec.  22,  1870;  res.  1902,  St.  Cloud,  Minn.; 

m.  Montevideo,  Minn.,  Aug.  2,  1894,  Loa  O.,  dan.  of  Albert  and 

Hester  (Prosser)   Shepherd,  b.  Preston,  Minn.,  Apr.  9,  1875. 
Cora  IMay,  b.  Rochester,  Jan.  4,   1875 ;    res.   1902,   Webster,   S.  D. ; 

m.    Montevideo,    Oct.    25,    1896,    Wilber   L.,    son    of   Dvvight   and 
Mary  (Barker)   Dow,  b.  Cresco,  la.,  June  27,  1870. 
Clara  J.,  b.  Rochester,  Apr.  29,  1878;    res.  1902,  St.  Cloud;    m.  St. 

Cloud,    Mar.   22,,    1901,   John,    son   of  George  and   Sarah   Palmer 

Bower,  b.  Hoopstown,  111.,  Aug.  24,   1875. 
Earl  J.,  b.  Feb.  26,  1884;    res.  1902,  St.  Cloud. 

1476.  Clara  A.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Enos  and  Abby  J.  (Huy- 
ler)  Babcock  (Simeon,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Samuel,  Job, 

John,  James),  b.  Rochester,  Minn.,  July  26,  1856;  res.  1902, 
Rochester;  m.  Rochester,  May  26,  1877,  Lucius,  son  of  Wil- 
lard  and  Louisa  (Marsh)  Bell,  b.  St.  Lawrence,  N.  Y,,  Jan. 
II,  1845. 

Children,  b.  and  res.  Rochester : 

Inez  M.,^"  b.  Aug.  15,  1879;    m.  Oct.,  1895,  Joseph  Bandel. 
Ethel,  b.  Oct.  25.  1881. 
Winifred,  b.  June  4,    1884. 
Eva  Maud,  b.  Oct.  6,  1886. 
Anna,  b.  June  21,  1888. 

1477.  Oscar  C.®  Warren,  son  of  Anson  and  Sally  (Bab- 
cock)   Warren    (Simeon,    Simeon,    Simeon,    Samuel, 

Job,  John,  James),  b.  Tioga  County,  Pa.,  Oct.  i,  1850;    res. 
1902,  Dexter,  ]\Iinn. ;  m.  ]\Iinnesota,  Jan.  i,  1879,  Ida  L.,  dau. 
of  G.  W.  and  Mary  (Hughes)   Hart  well,  b.  Dodge  County, 
Wis.,  Oct.  I,  1859. 
Child : 

Clara  Bell.^"  b.  Dexter,  Nov.  18.  1879;    res.  1902,  Dexter;    m.  Dex- 
ter,   1896,   B.   E.    Warn. 

1478.  \''erxon  E.'^  Babcock,  son  of  Andrew  and  lantha  A. 

(Carriel)    Babcock   (Stephen,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Sam- 
uel, Job,  John,  James),  b.  Oct.  8.  1852;   res.  1902,  Savonburg, 
Kan.;    m.  Hubbard.  la.,  Sept.  8.  1881,  Anna  Hunter,  b.  Illi- 
nois, Nov.  29,  1854. 
Children : 

Theo  lantha,^"  b.  Sept.  29.  1882. 

Annie  M.,  b.  Hubbard,  1884. 

Ina  L.,  b.  Trenton,  Neb.,  Feb.  8,  1890. 

34 


53°  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

Carriel  H.,  b.  Eldora,   la..   Nov.   lo,   1891. 
Vernon  E.,  b.   Hubbard,   Dec.    14,    1893. 
Dora  G.,  b.  Hubbard,  Mar.  23,  1895. 

1479.  Otis   Hunt''   Babcock,   son  of  Buel   H.   and   Crissy 
J.     (Decker)     Babcock    (William,    Simeon,    Simeon, 

Samuel,  Job,  John,  James),  b.  Painted  Post,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  31, 
185 1 ;  res.  1902,  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.;  m.  Grand  Rapids, 
Oct.  7,  1875,  Susan  B.,  dau.  of  Alexander  and  Susan  (Cros- 
by) Blake,  b.  Medina,  Sept.  7,  1850. 

Otis  H.  is  a  Banker,  having  Ijeen  in  the  business  fifteen 
vears. 

Children : 

Mary  L.,'"  b.  Aug.  28,  1878;    res.  1902,  Grand  Rapids. 
Eugenia,  b.  Dec.  6,   1880;    res.   1902,  Grand  Rapids. 

1480.  Ida  Jane^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Buel  H.  and  Crissy 
(Decker)  Babcock  (William,  Simeon,  Simeon,  Sam- 
uel, Job,  John,  James),  b.  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.,  Sept.  23, 
1857;  res.  W.  Bay  City,  Mich. ;  m.  Perry,  Mich.,  Feb.  7,  1880, 
Frank  Ferris,  son  of  Isaac  and  Polly  B.  Cole,  b.  Hinsdale, 
Mich.,  May  22,  1855. 

Children : 

Ella  May,"  b.  Lansing.   Mich.,   Nov.  6,   1880;    unm. 

Myra  Mitchell,  b.  Hinsdale,  Apr.   i.   1885. 

Fred  Isaac,  b.  W.  Bay  City.  Mich.,  Feb.  i,  1886;    d.  1886. 

Arthur  Burt,  b.  W.  Bay  City,  May  30,  1887. 

Ray  Irving,  b.  W.  Bay  City,  Nov.  26,   1889. 

Clarence,  b.  W.  Bay  City,  May  3,  1893 ;    d.  1893. 

Guy  Wendall,  b.  W.  Bay  City,  May  21,  1901. 

1481.  Maryett^    Babcock,    dau.    of   James    R.    and    Ruth 

(Phillips)  Babcock  (James,  Christopher,  Christopher, 
George,  George,  John,  James),  b.  Hornellsville,  N.  Y.,  Nov. 
27,  1841;  res.  1902,  Stephens  Mills,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Cohocton, 
N.  Y.,  Dec.  I,  1859,  John  M.,  son  of  John  and  Catherine  (Mc- 
Kenzie)  Kelley,  b.  Dansville,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  i,  1836. 

Children,  first  b.  Wayland,  N.  Y.,  others  Fremont,  N.  Y. : 

Scott  L.,"  b.  Jan.  9,  1861 ;  res.  1902,  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Dec. 
15,  1886,  Maggie  L.  Campbell,  b.  Dansville. 

Libbie  M.,  b.  May  6,  1863;  res.  1902,  Stephens  Mills.  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Fremont,  N.  Y.,  Samuel  B.  Hendee,  b.  Fremont. 

Cora  R..  b.  July  25,  1866;    d.   1871. 

Meritt  B.,  b.  May  31,  1868;  res.  1902,  Stephens  Mills;  m.  Fre- 
mont,   Nov.    10,    1891,   Olive   Welch. 

Myron  J.,  b.  May  31,  1868;  res.  1902,  Canisteo,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Nov.  24, 
1889,  Leona  Osborn. 

Archie,  b.  May  14,  1874;  res.  1902,  Stephens  Mills;  m.  Mar.  15, 
1899,   Lizzie  McClesey. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  531 

1482.  Harriet  Frances^  Babcock,  dau.  of  James  R.  and 

Ruth  (Phillips)  Babcock  (James,  Christopher, 
Christopher,  George,  George,  John,  James),  b.  Hornellsville, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  5,  1844;  res.  1902,  1445  Abbott  Road,  Buffalo, 
N.  Y. ;  m.  Canaseraga,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  14,  1866,  Carlos  G.,  son 
of  Daniel  and  Louisa  (Baldwin)  Lowell,  b.  Xunda,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  21,  1840.  He  is  a  Methodist  minister. 
Children : 

1498  Edward  L..'"  b.  ;    m.    (i)    Philomela  Lowell;    m.    {2)    Leona 

Kimball. 

William   D.,   b.    Brookfield,   Pa.;     res.    1902,    Buffalo. 

Bertha  M.,  b.  Dalton,  N.  \". ;  res.  1902,  1485  Abbott  Road,  Buf- 
falo;   m.  Angelica,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  29,  1894,  Charles  W.  Lewis. 

Julian,  b.  Cameron,  N.  Y. ;  res.  1902,  19  1-2  Arnett  Street,  Roches- 
ter, N.  Y. :    m.  1899,  Lavinda  Butts. 

Ruth  A.,  b.  Whitesville,  N.  Y. ;  res.  1902,  Perry,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Aug. 
29,  1894,  Myron  H.  Luce,  d.  Perry,  Dec.  30,  1900. 

Carlos  F.,  b.  Naples,  N.  Y. ;    res.  1902,  Buffalo. 

Harriette,  b.  Canisteo;    res.  1902,  Buffalo. 

1483.  William  Washington^  Babcock,  son  of  James  R. 

and  Ruth  (Phillips)  Babcock  (James,  Christopher, 
Christopher,  George,  George,  John,  James),  b.  Fremont,  N. 
Y.,  May  21,  1849;  res.  1902,  Hornellsville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Fre- 
mont, Dec.  29,  1870,  Harriet  E.,  dau.  of  Adam  and  Elizabeth 
Helmer,  b.  Fremont,  May  14,  1853. 
Children,  b.  Fremont: 

Hermione  R.,'"  b.  Dec.  25,  1871 ;    d.  Fremont,  Jan.  24,  1880. 
Claude  F.,  b.  Oct.  16,  1875 ;    res.  1902,  Hornellsville. 
Lela  AL,  b.  Nov.  28,  1879;    res.  1902,  Hornellsville. 

1484.  Myra  D.'^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Philip  Eugene  and  Polly 
S.  (Parish)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Henry,  David,  Ezekiel, 

Robert,  John,  James),  b.  Richland,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  21,  1854;  res. 
Jan.,  1901,  New  Centerville,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Adams,  N.  Y.,  July  10, 
1877,  John,  son  of  Ed.  and  Sally  (Barden)  Pickett,  b.  Leroy, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  5,  1848. 

Children,  b.  New  Centerville: 

George,^"  b.  Oct.  10,  1878;  m.  Altmar,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  i,  1899,  Lena, 
dau.  of  Harvey  and  Ellen  (Jones)  Wright,  b.  Pulaski.  N.  Y,  May 
4,  1877.     Both  res.  Jan.,  1901.  New  Centerville. 

Charles,  b.  Aug.  8,  1882;    d.  New  Centerville,  Alar.  14,  1896. 

Jennie,  b.  Aug.  16.  1884. 

Leata.  b.  Oct.  10,  1887. 

Deforest,  b.  Sept.  23,  1891. 

1485.  Lucy®  Stapp,  dau.  of  Wyatt  and  Persis  (Weld)  Bab- 
cock  Stapp    (Elijah,   James,   Jeremiah,    Simeon,   Oli- 


532  The  Bahcock  Genealogy. 

ver,  John,  James),  b.  Monmouth,  111.,  June  3,  1846;  res.  1902, 
Monmouth;  m.  Monmouth,  Oct.  3,  1865,  James  B.,  son  of 
William  and  Margaret  (Black)  Clark,  b.  Monmouth,  Jan.  10, 
1841. 

Children,  b.  Monmouth : 

Guy  S.,"  b.  1866;    res.  1902,  Monmouth;    ni.  1891,  Sarah  Fleharty. 

Leigh,   b.    Sept.   28,    1868;     res.    1902,    Monmouth;     unm. 

Eva,    b.   July   3,    1871 ;     res.    1902,    Moline,    111. ;     m.    Nov.    4,    1896, 

Charles  E.   While. 
Grace,  b.  June  21,    1874;    res.   1902,   Monmouth;    m.   Dec.  6,   1898, 

James  W.  Scott,  b.  Monmouth. 
Delia,  b.   Feb.  26,   1877;    res.   1902,  Monmouth;    m.  Mar.    14,   1899, 

W.   Clyde  Berry. 

1486.  Ira  Julian^  Babcock,  son  of  Joseph  J.  and  Sarah  C. 

(Burwell)  Babcock  (Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver,  Oliver, 
Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Jay,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  16,  1859;  res.  1902, 
895  W.  Jackson  Boulevard,  Chicago,  111. ;  m.  Tarrytown,  N. 
Y.,  May  15,  1889,  Isabelle,  dau.  of  Joseph  and  Helen  J.  Woof, 
b.  Appleby,  England,  Dec.  22,  1864. 
Children : 

Alice,'"  b.  New  York  City,  Aug.  27,  1890. 
Florence,  b.  New  York  City,  Apr.  10,  1893. 
Stella,  b.  New  York  City,  Feb.   17,  1895. 
Lillie,  b.  Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  Dec.  17,  1898. 
Sarah,  b.  Woodbine,  N.  J.,  May  10,   1900. 

1487.  Augustus  Dwight^  Babcock,  son  of  Augustus  D.  and 
Abigail  (Iliff)  Babcock  (Nathan,  Peleg,  Peleg,  Oli- 
ver, Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Rensselaer,  Ind.,  Sept.  28,  1852; 
res.  1902,  Goodland,  Ind.;  m.  Goodland,  July  5,  1888,  Mag- 
gie A.,  dau.  of  James  and  Lydia  (Hazenbuck)  Watt,  b.  Illi- 
nois, Dec.  8,  i860. 

Children : 

James  E.,"*  b.  Benton,  Ind.,  June  2,  1889. 

Luella   F.,  b.  . 

Augustus  D.,  b.  Feb.  2,   1898. 
Charles  D.,  b.  July  16,  1899. 

1488.  Henrietta  Lydia**  Saunders,  dau.  of  James  M.  and 

Ellen  A.    (Babcock)    Saunders   (Luke,   Solomon,   Pe- 
leg, Oliver,  Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Milton,  Wis.,  Feb.   15, 
1857;    res.    1902,   Dodge  Center,   Minn.;    m.   Dodge  Center, 
Mar.  21,  1877,  Edward  L.  Ellis. 
Children : 

Hattie,'"  b.  Dodge  Center,  May  10,  1878;    d.  1878. 

George  M.,  b.   Ashland,   Minn.,    Sept.    14,    1879;     res.    1902,   Dodge 


The  Bahcock  Genealogy.  533 

Center;    m.   Aug.,   1901,   Shiloh,   N.  J.,   Phebe  Davis.     He  grad- 
uated at  Alfred   University,   N.   Y.,   June,    1901. 
Hattie  B.,  b.  Ashland,  May  29,  1889. 

1489.  Lydia  L.^  Babcock,  dau.  of  Oscar  A.  and  Laurette 

(Maltby)    Babcock    (Lnke,    Solomon,    Peleg,    Oliver, 
Oliver,  John,  James),  b.  Homer,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9,   1867;    res. 
1902,  Homer;   m.  Homer,  Aug.  17,  1887,  Chaiincey  Baker. 
Ciiildren,  b.  Homer: 

Lois  H.,'°  b.  Jan.  29,  1890. 
Norene  Laura,  b.  Sept.  i,  1891. 
Hazel  A.,  b.  Oct.  21,  1894. 
Valentine  O.,  b.  June  4,  1899. 

1490.  Benjamin    Franklin^^    Greenman,    son   of   James 
A,  R.  and  Fanny  M.    (Babcock)    Greenman   (Peleg, 

Peleg,  Abel,  James,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Hebron, 
Pa.,  Feb.  23,    1851;    res.    1902,   Eldred,   Pa.;    m.   Lincklaen 
Center,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  25,  1877,  Emily,  dau.  of  Riley  Preston, 
b.  Lincklaen,  Mar.  27,   1845. 
Children : 

Georgia,^'  b.  Eldred,  Apr.  25,  1879;    d.  1880. 
James,  b.  Hebron,  Sept.  18,  1880;    res.  1902,  Eldred. 
Elsie,  b.   Mar.   19,    1883. 
Cecil,  b.  Sept.  12,  1884. 

1491.  Daniel  Wells^®  Babcock,  son  of  Elnathan  W.  and 

Eva  (Harter)  Babcock  (Peleg,  Peleg,  Abel,  James, 
James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Dansville,  N.  Y.,  May  18, 
1864;  res.  1902,  Berlin,  Md. ;  m.  Perry,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14, 
1888,  Julia  F.,  dau.  of  Charles  Westlake,  b.  Batavia,  N.  Y., 
JMar.  31,  1863,  d.  Berlin,  Mar.  i,  1901. 
Children : 

Gordon  S.,"  b.  Dansville,  Feb.  28,   1889;    d.   1889. 

Ramond  S.,  b.  Mav  17,  1890;    d.  1893. 

Mildred,  b.  Aug.  8.    1891. 

Ruth  M.,  b.  Jan.  18,  1893. 

Charles  E.,  b.   Perry,  June   18,    1894. 

Edmond  L.,  b.  Cromwell,  Conn.,  July  29,  1895. 

Harold  W..  b.  Cromwell,  Aug.  30,  1896. 

Helen,  b.  Cromwell,  May  18,  1899;    d.  1900. 

Julia  E.,  b.   Cromwell,  Feb.  26,  1901 ;    d.   1901. 

1492.  Minnie  Elizabeth^*'  Babcock,  dau.  of  John  W.  and 
Julia    A.     (Sherman)    Babcock    (William,    Mulford, 

Abel,  James,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Little  Mountain, 
O.,  Feb.  16,  1863;    res.  1902,  Little  Mountain;    m.  Chardon, 


534  ^  ^'<^  Bahcuck  Genealogy. 

O.,  Dec.   29,    1878,  Adam  M.,  son  of  Hamilton  Carver,  b. 
W'cllino^ton,  O.,  Mar.  23,  1859. 

Children,  first  b.  Owosso,  Mich.,  others  at  Little  Mountain : 

Harry  W.,"  b.  Jan.   i,  1882. 
Roy  H.,  b.  May  12,  1885. 
Florence  T.,  1).   May  23.   1888. 
Forest  M.,  b.  June  2,  1894. 
Irma  G.,  b.  Feb.  20,  1897. 
Wales,  b.  May  18,   1901. 

1493.  Landy  Bert^^  Babcock,  son  of  Orlando  and  Candis 

L.   (Taylor)   Babcock  (Rnssel,  Avery,  Gersham,  Oli- 
ver, James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Sept.  21,  1867;  res.  1902, 
Waverly,  la. ;  m.  June  30,  1888,  Matilda  Myers. 
Children,  b.  Waverly: 

Mary  May,"  b.  May  16,  1890. 
Lydia,  b.  Feb.   13,   1892. 
Grace,  b.  Nov.  6,  1893. 
Howard,  b.  Sept.  25,  1895. 

1494.  Carrie  E.  P.^*^  No  yes,  dau.  of  Capt.  Charles  and  Mary 

(Langworthy)  Noyes,  of  Benjamin  and  Eliza  (Irish) 
Langworthy,  of  George  and  Betsy  (Babcock)  Irish  (Daniel, 
OHver,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Alfred,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
25,  1865;  m.  Stonington,  Conn.,  Feb.  8,  1883,  Capt.  Charles 
E.,  son  of  Capt.  Joe  B.  and  Mary  (Hallock)  Nichols,  b.  James- 
port,  L.  I.,  Aug.  13,  1865. 
Children : 

Joseph  B.,"  b.  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  May  3.  1884. 

Jennie   E.,   b.    Stonington,   July    17.    1885;     d.    Stonington,   June   13, 

1886. 
Juniata,  b.  Jersey  City,  Dec.   16,   1886. 
Charles  E.,  b.  Jersey  City,  Apr.  28,   1891. 
Gladys  M.,  b.  Jersey  City,  Feb.  28,  1895. 

1495.  Walter  C.^*^  Babcock,  son  of  James  F.  and  Mary  P. 

(Crosby)  Babcock  (Archibald,  Archibald,  Timothy, 
Timothy,  James,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Boston,  Mass.,  Aug. 
16,  1870;  res.  1902,  West  Point,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Mar.  12,  1896, 
Mary  A.,  dau.  of  Gen.  R.  F.  Bernard,  U.  S.  Army,  b.  Mar.  18, 

1875- 

Mr.  Babcock  entered  the  United  States  Mditary  Academy 

at  West  Point,  June  15,  1889;  graduated  June,  1893,  after 
which  he  was  elected  to  the  position  of  Instructor  in  Draw- 
ing; also  appointed  Second  Lieutenant  in  the  United  States 
Cavalry;  Mar.  2,  1899,  was  promoted  to  First  Lieutenant  in 
same  command. 


TJic  Bahcock  Genealogy.  535 

Child: 

Ellis  B.,"  b.  June  21,,  1897. 

1496.  Annie  L.^"  Babcock,  dau.  of  Charles  H.  and  Abbie 

(Hinckley)  Babcock  (Charles,  Harry,  Henry,  James, 
Daniel,  James,  John,  James),  b.  Stonington,  Conn.,  May  23, 
1865;  res.  1902,  Norwich,  Conn.;  m.  Stonington,  Nov.  24, 
1S87,  Dr.  John  H.,  son  of  Charles  and  Abbie  J.  (Dyer)  El- 
dred,  b.  Sept.  6,  1862. 
Children,  b.  Norwich: 

Raymond  B.,'^  b.  Feb.   11,   1889. 
Edith  Camilla,  b.  Feb.  23,   1891. 
Roger  Mortimer,  b.  Feb.  13,  1894. 
Beatrice  Hinckley,  b.  Oct.   13,   1895. 
Jessica  Dyer,  b.  Jan.  4,   1899. 

1497.  Anah  Fredericka^*'  Babcock,  dau.  of  De  Grand  D. 
and  Harriet   (Monkhouse)   Babcock   (Albert,  Joshua, 

Joseph,  Ichabod,  Ichabod,  John,  John,  James),  b.  Millport, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.  9,  1869;  res.  1903,  136  S.  Fitzhugh  Street, 
Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Rochester,  Oct.  15,  1809,  Frederick 
William,  son  of  Arthur  G.  and  Virginia  (Holden)  Yates,  b. 
Rochester,  Sept.  7,  1868. 
Children,  b.  Rochester: 

Arthur,"  b.   Oct.  9,    1894. 
Frederick  L.,  b.  Mar.  21,  1896. 
John  Rowland,  b.  July  21,  1901. 

1498.  Edward  V.^*^  Lowell,  son  of  Carlos  G.  and  Harriet 
F.    (Babcock)    Lowell    (James,    James,    Christopher, 

George.  George,  John,  James),  b.  Brookfield,  Pa.;  res.  1902, 
4  Birch  Street  Buffalo,  N.  Y. ;  m.  (i)  Boston,  Mass.,  Mar. 
17,  1891,  Philomela,  dau.  of  Daniel  Lowell,  b.  Boston,  d.  Bos- 
ton, Dec.  I,  1891 ;  m.  (2)  Perry,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1897,  Leona, 
dau.  of  L.  and  Mary  (Gardner)  Kimball,  b.  Gainesville,  N.  Y. 
Children : 

Dorothy,"  b.  Boston.  Jan.  i8,  1899. 
Grace,  b.  Buffalo.  Nov.  18,  1900. 

771a.  JoHN^  Babcock,  son  of  Nathaniel  and  Sally  (Bliven) 
Babcock  (Reuben,  Nathaniel,  James,  James,  John, 
James),  b.  Poestenkill,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  2,  1821;  d.  Petersburg, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  15,  1897;  m.  Berlin,  N.  Y.,  Lucy  L.,  dau.  of 
Rufus  and  Polly  (Maxson)  Austin,  b.  Berlin,  Jan.  11,  1821  ; 
res.  1903,  Petersburg,  N.  Y. 


53^  The  Babcock  Genealogy. 

Children,  all  b.  Poestenkill : 

Austin,"  b.  June  22,,  1845 ;  res.  1903,  Wyoming,  111. ;  m.  1867,  Alice 
Sipley. 

Eunice  A.,  b.  Nov.  15,  1846;  res.  1903,  Petersburg,  N.  Y. ;  m. 
Poestenkill,  Mar.  26.  1864,  Melvin  D.,  son  of  John  and  Amy 
(Hakes)   Church,  b.  Petersburg,  June  4,  1841. 

Thalia  A.,  b.  Feb.  5,  1851  ;  d.  Berlin,  June  19,  1891;  m.  Poesten- 
kill, Aug.  17,  1873,  Byron  W.,  son  of  Darius  and  Jane  (Maine) 
Jones,  b.  Berlin;    res.   1903,  Raymerton,   N.  Y. 

Maria  P.,  b.  Mar.  25,  1852;  res.  1903,  Berlin;  m.  Poestenkill, 
Nov.  25,  1874,  Joseph  L.  Horton,  d.  Sandlake,  June  14,  1882. 

Sarah,  b.  June  19,  1854 ;  res.  1903,  Petersburg ;  m.  Petersburg, 
Mar.  20,  1879,  James  E.  Steele,  b.  Petersburg. 

Rufus  J.,  b.  Oct.   12,   1858;    d.  Poestenkill,  Feb.  5,  1869. 

Laura  J.,  b.  Feb.  13,  i860;  res.  1903,  BulTalo,  N.  Y. ;  m.  Poesten- 
kill, Aug.   II,   1882,  Jacob  Ladrick,  b.  Poestenkill. 

Elytie  L.,  b.  June  26,  1866;  res.  1903,  Berlin;  m.  Grafton,  N.  Y., 
Oct.  20,  1886,  Calvin,  son  of  Perry  and  Maria  (Eldredge)  Max- 
son,  b.  Petersburg. 


While  the  progenitors  of  Amos  Babcock  cannot  be  traced 
with  certainty,  there  seems  no  doubt  that  he  descended  from 
James  Babcock,  b.  161 2. 

Amos  Babcock,  b.  Apr.  28,  1767;  d.  Petersburg,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  16,  1846;  m.  Mary  Reynolds,  b.  Apr.  23,  1774,  d.  Peters- 
burg, Sept.  20,  1850. 

Children : 

Harriet,  b.  May  31,   1799. 
Susan,  b.  May  12,  1801 ;    d.  Apr.  2,  1868. 
Justus,  b.  Sept.  I,  1802;    d.  Sept.  i,  1802. 
Mary  Ann,  b.  Oct.  9,   1804. 
Amanda  M.,  b.  May  15,  1806;    d.  Mar.  12.  1836. 
Matilda,  b.  May  28,  1807;    d.  June  15.  1810. 
Desire,  b.  July  7,  1808;    d.  July  21,  1808. 
Sophia,  b.  Aug.  9,  1809. 
Julia,  b.  Feb.  9,   1811. 
Welcome  A.,  b.  Apr.  3,  1813. 
Rosalinda,  b.  Jan.  7,  1815. 
Zachias  R.,  b.  Sept.  18,  1816. 

Leland   Almanzo,   b.   Apr.   29,    1818;     m.    (1)    Elizabeth   L.  James; 
m.   (2)   Margaret  E.  Bechtol. 

Leland  Almanzo  Babcock,  M.D.,  son  of  Amos  Babcock, 
b.  Petersburg,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  29,  1818;  d.  Chicago,  Nov.  28, 
1893;  m.  (i)  Goshen,  Mass.,  Nov.  28,  1838,  Elizabeth  Ly- 
man,   dau.    of    Malachi    and    Elizabeth    (Lyman)    James,    b. 


JAMES    LELAND    BABCOCK. 


Page  536. 


The  Babcock  Genealogy.  537 

Goshen,  Nov.  24,  18 10,  d.  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.  She  descended 
from  the  Pilgrim  Fathers.  M.  (2)  Margaret  Ella,  dau.  of 
William  and  Millie  Bechtol,  b.  Freeport,  111.,  1847,  d.  Chicago, 
Jan.  10,  1892. 

In  the  early  fifties  Dr.  Babcock  settled  in  Chicago,  where  he 
became  a  physician  of  much  note.  He  invented  several  med- 
ical appliances. 

Children  by  first  wife: 

James  L.,  b.  Feb.   10,   1840;    m.  Ella  S.  Butler. 
Gertrude  Elizabeth,  b.  New  York  City,  Nov.  24,   1845. 

Children  by  second  wife: 

Leland  Almanzo,  b.  Freeport,  111.,  Oct.  6,  1868;  m.  Chicago,  Nov. 
19.  1890.  Grace  A.,  dau.  of  William  Heap,  b.  Chicago,  Jan.  2, 
1869.  Children,  b.  Chicago:  Grace  Elizabeth,  b.  Dec.  4,  1891 ; 
Basil  Phillipe,  b.  Aug.  3,  1894.  Leland  Babcock  is  a  lawyer  in 
Chicago ;    res.  1903,  at  Oak  Park,  Chicago. 

James  Leland  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Leland  and  Eliza- 
beth (James)  Babcock,  b.  Goshen,  Mass.,  Feb.  10,  1840;  m. 
Waukesha,  Wis.,  Sept.  29,  1892,  Ella  S.,  dau.  of  Walter  C. 
and  Cynthia  (Stanley)   Butler,  b.  New  Britain,  Conn. 

Mrs.  Babcock,  who  is  a  highly  accomplished  woman,  re- 
ceived her  literary  and  musical  education  at  her  early  home. 
New  Haven,  Conn. 

Mr.  Babcock  took  his  preparatory  course  for  Amherst  Col- 
lege at  Northampton,  ]\Iass.  He  was  afterward  in  business  in 
Chicago,  111.,  until  the  great  fire  of  1871,  when  he  removed 
to  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  investing  his  capital  largely  in  bank 
stock  of  various  cities  and  in  bonds  and  mortgages.  He  is 
interested  in  whatever  tends  to  the  advancement  of  his  city, 
and  is  a  liberal  giver  to  all  benevolent  objects.  He  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Sons  of  the  Revolution,  having  joined  in  Detroit. 


BIRTHS. 


538 


MARRIAGES. 


539 


DEATHS. 


540 


APPENDIX. 


Will  and  Inventory  of  James  Badcocke,  Immigrant  Ancestor,  Born  1612, 

Died  June  12,  1679. 

The  last  Will  and  Testament  of  James  Badcocke  Scn'r  as  he  verbelly 
declared  before  us  Under  written. 

Imp  he  willed  and  bequeathed  unto  his  Son  Job  Badcocke  all  his 
Smith  tooles  of  what  sort  or  Kind  Soever  that  he  dyed  posesed  of: 

2ly  he  Bequeathed  one  cow  to  be  delivered  unto  his  daughter  Mary 
Champlin  by  his  Administratrix  hereafter  mentioned  with  in  convenient 
time  after  his  decease. 

3!y  he  bequeathed  a  Cow  Calfe  to  William  Champline  Eldest  daugh- 
ter to  be  delivered  as  above  said. 

4ly  he  Bequeathed  unto  his  Sonn  Joseph  all  his  housing  and  lands 
for  him  the  said  Joseph  Badcocke  to  take  into  his  posesion  when  he  shall 
attaine  to  the  age  of  twenty  one  yeares. 

sly  he  Willed  and  declared  that  all  the  Remaining  part  of  his  Estate 
besides  what  he  hath  herein  Bequeathed,  he  did  give  unto  his  wife  Eliza- 
beth Badcocke  for  the  Maintanence  and  bringing  up  of  the  three  children 
he  had  by  his  said  wife  and  for  her  and  her  heires  and  asignes  forever. 

Lastly  of  this  his  Will  he  declared  that  his  loveing  wife  Elizabeth 
Badcocke  should  be  Administratrix  to  this  his  last  Will  and  Testament. 

This  Testator  dyed  the  12th  of  June  1679. 

John  Badcocke. 
Job  Badcocke. 

John  Badcocke  and  Job  Badcocke  personally  appeared  before  the 
Governor  and  Court,  and  being  Solemnly  Engajed  Testefyed  to  the  truth 
of  what  is  above  subscribed  by  Them :  Taken  at  a  Court  Held  at  West- 
erly  the    17th   of   September    1679   in    the    King's   province. 

As  Attests  John  Sanford, 

Secretary. 

The  Above  written  are  True  Copys  of  the  Origonall  entred  and 
Recorded  the  8th  of  Decemb'r  1680  pr  John  Sanford  Recorder. 

An   Inventory  of  the   Estate   of  James   Badcocke   Sen'r   Deceased   in 

June  last  in  Stoning  Towne  without  any  written  Will  leaving  a  Widow 
with  three  children  the  Eldist  a  Sonn  about  nine  year  old. 

£    s.    d. 

Imp.   house   &   Land   about   twenty   Acres 30  00  00 

A  Bellows,   Anvill,   Vise  &  other   Smiths  tooles 05  00  00 

A  2  Cowes  2  yearlings  &  2  Calves 11  0000 

A  7  Small  Swine,  i  bed  &  bedstead  with  beding 07  00  00 

A  I   Small  bed  &  beding  itli  5.?.,  2  chests   io.y 00  15  00 

A  churn,    pailes   &   tubbs   &  other   vessels 00  10  00 

A  Iron  pot,  Scillitt,  pan,  tramills,  smuin  Iron,  spitt  &  slice.  .  02  00  00 

A  3  Spining  wheels,  12  axes,  spade  &  old  Iron  ho 00  02  00 

A  handsaw,  drawing  Knife,  Reaping  hooks,  2  botles,  i  hamer.  .  00  05  00 

A  puter  &  tin  one  brass  skillit,  2  sives 00  04  00 

A  I  paire  of  Cards  with  some  wool  &  flax  &  yarne 00  05  00 

A  chaires,    cradle    with    other   lumber 00  10  00 

Sum  Totall.  .       61  01  00 
541 


54-  Appendix. 

This  Inventory  was  Taken  This  5th  of  July  1679  hy  us. 

Ephkain  Minor. 
James   Pendleton. 
Thomas  Welles. 

This  above  written  Inventory  was  by  the  subscribers  James  Pendle- 
ton and  Thomas  Wells,  in  open  Court  on  their  SoUemn  Engagements 
Testefied  to  be  a  true  Inventory  to  the  best  of  their  Knowlidge  and  this 
was  Testefied  in  the  Court  held  at  Westerly  in  the  King's  province,  the 
17th  of  September  1679  as  Attests  John  Sanford, 

Secretary. 

The  above  written  are  True  Copys  of  the  origonall  Entered  and 
Recorded  the  8th  of  Decemb'r  1680  pr  John  Sanford   Recorder. 

Secretary  of  State's  Office,  Providence, 

March  12th  1868. 
I  certify  the  above  to  be  true  copies  of  the  will  &  inventory  of  James 
Badcocke  Sen'r — taken  from  the  book  of  Land  Records  in  this  office. 

John   R.    Bartlett, 
Secretary  of  State  [for  Rhode  Island]. 

It  will  be  observed  that  at  the  date  of  writing  and  probating  the 
will  of  James  Badcocke,  Sen.,  1679,  the  family  name  was  spelled  Badcocke. 
It  had  been  spelled  Badcocke  or  Badcock  in  public  records  previous  to 
that  date.  Six  years  later,  1685,  when  the  will  of  his  son  was  made,  the 
family  name  was  spelled  Babcock. 

A  Copy  of  the  Wh.l  Made  by  the  Tow.n  Counxil  Respecting  the  Seitle- 
ment  of  the  Estate  of  John  Babcock  of  the  Town  of  Westerly,  De- 
ceased, the  Twenty-sixth  Day  of  June,  1685. 

These  are  to  certify  all  persons  whom  it  may  concern.  That  where- 
as John  Babcock  of  the  town  of  Westerly,  deceased  without  a  will, 
whereby  the  care  of  the  widow  and  orphans  respecting  the  settlement 
of  the  deceased  mans  estate  is  by  law  commended  to  the  cognizance  of 
the  Town   Council. 

We  therefore  who  are  the  Council  appointed  by  the  town  according 
to  trust  committed  unto  us  having  taken  an  inventory  of  the  deceased 
persons  estate,  and  likewise  finding  a  settled  agreement  between  the 
widow  and  the  eldest  son  James  Babcock  the  son  of  John  Babcock  re- 
specting his  own  portion  out  of  his  deceased  fathers  estate,  judge  it  meet 
to  make  no  alteration  of  the  said  agreement;  and  likewise  finding  the 
remaining  part  of  the  movable  estate  to  amount  to  the  sum  of  79o£  3.y.  op. 
we  do  order  and  appoint  unto  the  widow  of  the  deceased  John  Babcock 
the  sum  of  26t,£,  seven  shillings  &  8  pence  for  her  part  of  the  above  said 
sum  it  being  one  third  part.  And  whereas  there  are  nine  children  more 
to  wit  Ann  Babcock  Mary  Babcock  John  Babcock  Job  Babcock  George 
Babcock  Elihu  Babcock  Robert  Babcock  Joseph  Babcock  Oliver  Bab- 
cock: we  do  order  and  appoint  to  the  several  children  the  sum  of  fifty 
seven  pounds  two  shillings  &  four  pence  for  each  child  out  of  the  re- 
maining part  of  the  aforesaid  sum  as  they  come  of  age.  And  further 
more  we  do  by  these  presents  order  constitute  and  appoint  Mary  Bab- 
cock, the  widow  of  the  deceased  John  Babcock,  executrix  of  all  the 
orphans  estate  consisting  of  lands  or  cattle  or  horses  or  monies  and  what- 
soever else  valuable  according  to  inventory,  And  likewise  to  take  the 
charge  and  care  of  the  orphans  during  their  nonage,  and  in  case  any 
one  or  more  of  the  orphans  die  before  they  come  of  age  then  his  or 
their  portion  to  be  equally  divided  among  those  that  survive,  we  do  here- 


Appendix. 


543 


by  also  order  and  appoint  that  llic  widow  shall  pay  or  cause  to  be  paid  the 
several  legacies  unto  the  children  as  is  before  expressed  and  in  the  mean 
time  to  give  bond  to  the  concil  for  the  performance  thereof. 

This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  orig-  William  W.  Champlin. 

inal  compared  and  ordered  by  Jo-  Tobias  Saunders. 

seph   Clark   clerk   to   ye   town   7th  mark 

Feby.  Jeffre    X    Champlin. 

mark 
Edwarj)       )  )  )        Larkin. 

(Town   Records  Land  Evidence,  etc.,   1661-1706-7,  book  i,  p.  65.) 


An  Invintory  of  the  Estate  of  the  Late  deseased  John  Babcock  of  the 

TowNE  of  westerle. 


Lnprimus. 

Forty  three  steers 

Thirty-three  Cowes  and  the  Calve 

Eight  working  oxen 

nine  Three  yeare  old  steers 

nine  two  yeare  old  Cattle 

Twenty,  one  yeare  olds 

Fifty  two  horsseis,  mares  and  Colts 

Three  Rideing  horsseis 

And  the  old  ambline  horse 

And  the  horse  that  is  called  Jamesis 

one  hundred  sheep  and  fifty  lambs 

one  ox  and  two  bulls 

Seven  beds  and  bedsteads,  apayer  ] 

of  sheets  valued  at  six  pounds  a  ( 
peace  the  seven  beds  so  furnished  1 
Cometh  to  ) 

In  Current  mony  of  New  England 

one  new  bed  more 

three  setts  of  Curtains 

twenty-eight  yars  of  { 

Trucking  Cloath         S 

ten  years  of  Red   Cotten 

ten  yars  of  blue  linin 

fifteen  yars  of  fulled  Cloath 

A  small  quantity  of  Calleco 

in  Trimeing  and  Ribbcn  and  [ 
two  payer  of  stocks  ) 

in  Braslet  beads 

one  silver  cup 

ten  yards  of  homespun   Cloath 

In  Table  Linnen 

one  duzen  of  putter  platters 

and  one  duzen  putor  porringers 

two  putter  flagens  and  two 

putter  Candlesticks  all 

more   putir 

Seven   Chaines   and   plow   tackling 

Seven  payer  of  staples  and  hooks  ) 

staples  and   rings  two   Clauis  and  pines  ,- 

4  exeltree  pinnes  all  these  ) 

A  parsell  of  shot 


valued  at 


valued  at 


valued    at 


valued  at 


£    ,y.    d. 
129  00  00 

82  10  GO 
32   00   00 

20  05   00 

14  00  00 

21  00  00 
78  00  00 
10  00  00 
10  00  00 
12  GO  00 
30  00  00 
07    10  00 


42   00   00 

141    15   00 

006  00  00 

3    12   00 

5  OS  00 
I  00  09 

00  10  00 

02  05   00 

03  00  00 

02   08  00 

01  00   00 

02  00   00 

1  09  00 

2  00   00 


3  10  00 

3  00  00 

4  05  00 

4  00  00 

1  05  00 

2  10   00 


544 


Appendix. 


Six    pound    of    powder  valuc<l  at 

Fowertccn  pots  and  Celtics  "  " 

40  brass  and  bellmettle  Celtics  and  skillets 

nine  frying  pans  "  " 

A  dripping  pan  "  " 

Seven  guns  "  " 

A  number  of  pots  "  " 

three  duzen  of  glass  bottles  "  " 

Seven  chests  and  boxes  togeather  "  " 
A  Trunk 

thirteen  bushells  of  salt  "  " 
Sythes,  sickels  and  sheep  sheers 
two  smoothing  Irons  and  healers 

Tramell  and  pothooks  and  a  payer  of  fetters  "  " 

two  iron  bars  "  " 

three  stocks  of  bees  "  " 

earthen  ware  "  " 

one  hundred  and  fifty  wait  of  sheeps  wool  "  " 

barrells,  tubs,  bogheads,  disshes  |                        "  " 

and  pails,  baskets  and  wooden  ware  all    )                        "  " 

Carpenters  tools  "  " 

eight  howes  five  axes  "  " 

A  warming  pan  "  " 

two  steel  Traps  "  " 

Three   Canooes  and  three   padles  "  " 

one  negger  boy  "  " 

two  Injin  men  and  Indian  garls  "  " 

fower  Iron  wedges  and  a  beetle  ring  "  " 

two  tables  and  seven  Chairs  "  " 

one  steer  more  "  " 

three  young  horses  "  " 

one   ridden   horse  "  " 

This  Inventory  taken  and  valued  at  the  rate  Current,  silver  of  New 
England  by  Mr.  Jefifres  Champlin  and  Liftenant  Joseph  Davoll  the  4th 
day  of  June  in  the  year  1685. 

£      s.    d. 
The  sum  totall  of  this  Invintory  errors  exapted  is  814  03  00 

There  being  severall  things  Inventor'd,  That  aught  not,  to  the 

sum  of  24  00  00 

which  being  deducted  out  of  the  above  said  sum  There  remains     790  03  00 
This   is   a   True   Copie   of   the   originall   and   entered   the  8th   day   of 
ffebberary  1686.  Joseph  Clarke, 

Clerk  to  the  town. 
(Westerly  Town  Records,  book  i,  pp.  66,  67.) 


£ 

s. 

d. 

00 
06 

09 
02 

00 
00 

3  05 
I  16 

00 

00 

00 

12 

00 

04 
00 

00 

ID 

00 

00 

00 

10 

00 

01 
00 

01 
06 

00 

00 

01 

12 

00 

01 

00 

00 

GO 
00 

09 
18 

00 
00 

00 

14 

00 

00 

15 

00 

00 

10 

00 

3 

5 

15 

00 

00 

00 

00 

12 

00 

00 
I 

12 
06 

00 
00 

00 

10 

00 

I 

16 

00 

I 

ID 

00 

20 

00 

00 

30 
00 
00 

00 

OS 

12 

00 
00 
00 

3 

00 

00 

4 

10 

00 

3 

10 

00 

A  Copy  of  the  Agreement  between  James  Babcock  and  his  Mother  Mary 
Babcock  concerning  his  Portion  of  his  Father's  Estate. 

To  all  persons  whom  these  presents  may  consern  greeting.  Know 
ye — That  I  James  Babcock  son  of  John  Babcock  of  the  town  of  Westerly 
in  the  Colony  of  Rhode  Island  &  Providence  plantation  &  Kings  province 
&c  deceased  who  dicing  intestate,  I  being  the  rightful  heir  by  law  unto  all 
my  fathers  inheretance  consisting  of  lands,  do  by  these  presents  declare 
that  for  and  in  consideration  of  the  premises  hereafter  to  be  expressed 
I  do  covenant  &  agree  with  my  loving  and  natural  mother  Mary  Babcock 
to  accept  of  the  one  half  of  the  farm  that  we  are  now  dwelling  on,  my 


Appendix.  545 

part  to  begin  at  the  west  end  of  the  farm  and  go  to  extend  eastward  until 
the  Complement  be  made  up  upon  an  equal  division,  and  also  the  value 
of  a  double  portion  of  the  movable  estate  to  be  divided  among  my  brothers, 
and  the  new  dwelling  house  now  standing  upon  the  farm.  1  say  I  do 
accept  of  what  is  above  said  in  full  satisfaction  for  my  part  or  portion  of 
my  deceased  fathers  estate,  and  do  further  declare  by  these  presents  that 
I  do  freely  surrender  unto  my  loving  mother  my  whole  right  title  and 
interest  unto  all  the  rest  of  the  lands  belonging  unto  my  deceased  father 
with  all  the  preveleges  &  appurtanances  thereunto  belonging  or  any  wise 
appertaining  to  have  and  enjoy  and  to  dispose  of  as  she  shall  see  it  meet 
during  the  time  of  her  life  or  after  her  decease  provided  she  shall  dispose 
of  its  unto  my  fathers  male  children. 

I  say  given  granted  &  surrendered  by  me  James  Babcock  from  me  my 
heirs   executors   administrators   and   assigns   unto   my   mother   Mary   Bab- 
cock her  heirs  and   assigns  forever  upon  the   conditions   above   said,    in 
witness  wher  of  we  have  here  unto  set  our  hands  and  seals. 
Signed  &  sealed  in  James  Babcock.     [Seal] 

presence  of 

her 
Tobias  Saunders.  Mary    1  ]  1    Babcock.     [Seal] 

his  mark. 

Jeffra  {   Champlin. 
mark. 

This  present  twenty  sixth  day  of  June   1685. 

This  is  a  true  copy  compared  with  the  original  &  entered  by  Joseph 
Clark  clerk  to  the  town  28th  June  1685.  (Book  i,  p.  65,  Westerly  Town 
Records.) 

Records  of  the  Family  of  George  Lawton,  Father  of  Mary  Lawton 
Babcock,  Copied  from  The  Ancestors  and  Descendants  of  Rev. 
Henry  Clark,  by  Cyrus  Clarke  Van  Deventer,  1902. 

The  Lawtons  were  an  "armorial"  family  if  we  may  so  infer  from  a 
seal  used  by  some  of  its  members  in  the  early  days  of  the  Colony.  This 
seal  bore  as  its  device  a  demi-fox,  salient,  with  a  motto  on  a  ribbon. 
Liberie,  toute  entiere.  The  English  home  of  the  emigrant  was  in  York- 
shire. The  first  of  the  name  of  whom  we  have  knowledge,  George  Law- 
ton,  arrived  in  New  England  in  1634,  and  is  found  in  Rhode  Island  a 
few  years  later.  He  died  Oct.  5,  1693,  and  was  interred  in  his  orchard  at 
Portsmouth,  R.  L;   he  married  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Thomas  and  Martha 

Hazard.   ...  In  1638,  he    (George)    was  admitted  an  inhabitant  of 

Acquidneck.  Apr.  30,  1639,  he  was  one  of  the  incorporators  of  Ports- 
mouth, R.  I.  Jan.  25,  1648,  he  was  given  a  grant  of  forty  acres  of  land; 
1648  member  of  the  Court  of  Trials;  1655  freeman;  1665,  '72,  '75,  '76- 
'79,  '80  deputy  to  the  Assembly.  Mar.  2,  1672  he  sold  to  Richard  Smith, 
merchant,  of  Newport,  twenty-four  acres  on  Conanicut  Island.  Apr.  4, 
1676,  the  Assembly  voted,  "That  in  these  troublesome  times  and  straights 
in  this  Colony"  they  desired  the  company  and  counsel,  at  their  next  ses- 
sion, of  George  Lawton  and  fifteen  others. 

"May  2,  1676,  he  and  John  Easton  sent  to  Providence  with  all  con- 
venient speed  to  determine  wheather  garrisons  shall  be  kept  there  at  the 
expense  of  the  Colony.  (Three  garrisons  with  twenty  men  each  were 
ordered  for  one  month.)"  1680  he  and  two  others  purchased  of  Freelove 
Arnold  for  £3  10s.  a  bell,  "to  call  together  the  Assembly,  Courts  of  Law," 
etc.,  having  been  so  empowered;  1680-90,  Assistant.  Jan.  2,  1688,  he 
deeded  to  son  Robert,  for  love,  all  his  real  and  personal  property.  Jan.  30, 
1690,  he,  with  five  other  Assistants,  wrote  a  congratulatory  letter  to  Wil- 
liam and  Mary,   detailing  the   state  of  affairs  of  the  Colony. 

35 


54^  Appendix. 

George  is  supposed  to  have  had  the  following  children : 

Isabel,  b.  ;    d.  Apr.,  1730;    m.  Samuel  Albro. 

John,  b.  ;    d.  1678;    m.  Mary  Boomer. 

Mary,  b.  ;    d.  Nov.  8,  1711;   m.  John  Babcock. 

George,  b.  ;    d.  Sept.  i,  1697;    m.  1677,  Naomi  Hunt. 

Robert,  b.  ;    d.  Jan.  25,  1706;    m.  1681,  Mary  Wodell. 

Susanna,  b.  ;    d.  Dec.  9,  1712;    m.  Thomas  Cornell. 

Ruth,  b.  ;    d.  Apr.  15,  1726;    m.  Feb.  10,  1681,  William  Wodell. 

Mercy,  b. ;    d.  1685;   m.  Jan.  19,  1682,  James  Tripp. 

Job,  b.  ;    d.  Oct.  8,  1697. 

Elizabeth,  b.  ;    d.   1724;    m.  Robert  Carr. 

Agreement  between  the  Surviving  Sons  of  John  Babcock. 

At  a  meeting  held  in  Westerly  at  ye  dwelling  of  Our  Eldest  Brother 
James  Babcock  in  ye  Colony  of  Rhode  Island,  Viz,  Six  Brothers  James, 
John,  Job  George  Joseph  &  Oliver  Babcock  all  Sons  to  John  Babcock 
Deed,  in  sd.  Westerly  we  the  said  Brothers  who  are  ye  subscribers  hereof 
have  Joyntly  &  Severally  Concluded  on  these  following  Entailes  made  and 
done  by  Each  and  Every  of  us  is  as  followeth.  &  we  have  taken 
it  into  Our  Mature  Consideration  ye  Great  Necessity  of  Maintaining  Our 
Brother  Elihu  Babcock  he  not  having  Understanding  Sufficient  to  Main- 
tain himself  by  reason  that  God  hath  not  given  him  that  Reason  Judg- 
ment Understanding  that  God  hath  Commonly  blessed  other  mankind 
withal.  These  are  therefore  to  Signifie  to  all  persons  or  people  Whom  it 
may  concern  that  we  have  Joyntly  Agreed  for  ourselves  Our  heirs  &  suc- 
cessors to  Allow  good  &  Comfortable  Maintainance  to  &  for  Our  Brother 
Elihu  So  long  as  it  shall  please  God  to  Continue  him  in  this  Life.  Viz 
Each  of  us  shall  now  pay  or  cause  to  be  paid  forty  Shillings  per  year  & 
when  by  ye  providence  of  God  he  shall  be  Sick  or  diseased  by  any  Dis- 
temper Whatsoever,  that  then  shall  be  paid  for  his  maintainance  so  much 
more  money  as  by  the  Majority  of  us  Six  Brothers  then  Living  shall  be 
thought  fit  and  it  is  Concluded  that  if  One  or  more  of  us  Brothers  shall 
Die  Before  Our  sd.  Brother  Elihu  that  Each  &  Every  of  such  Deed. 
Brother  or  Brothers  heir  or  heirs  Shall  pay  so  much  and  no  more  To- 
wards our  sd.  Brother  Elihu  Maintainance  as  Each  of  us  Brothers  Sub- 
scribers Shall  then  pay  being  Living  .  .  .  and  it  is  further  Agreed  upon  by 
us  the  Six  Brothers  Subscribers  that  ye  heir  or  heirs  of  Each  &  Every 
Such  Deed.  Brother  or  Brothers  Shall  have  no  Voyse  Nor  Vote  Con- 
cerning Our  sd.  Brother  Elihu's  Maintainance  that  is  how  he  shall  be 
Maintained  or  how  much  money  shall  be  paid  for  ye  same.  But  only 
pay  their  part  as  above  sd.  When  Demanded  of  them  by  the  sd.  Brother 
or  Brothers  then  Living.  It  Being  for  and  in  Consideration  of  a  Valuable 
sum  of  money  already  received  by  us  in  hand  to  our  full  Satisfactory 
Content. 

Westerly  february  the  2"  day  in  ye  12  year  of  the  Regn  King  George 
Anno  Domini,  1725-6. 

Signed  Sealed  &  Deliv'd 

in  presence  of  J.\mes  Babcock.         [l.  s.] 

Samuel  Stack.  John   Babcock.  [l.  s.] 

Edward  Burdick.  Job   Babcock.  [l.  s.] 

John  Dodge.  George  Babcock.        [l.  s.] 

Joseph  Babcock.       [l.  s.] 
Oliver  Babcock.        [l.  s.] 
Entered  february  ye  9"  day  1725,  6. 

per  John  Babcock  Town  Clerk. 

True  Copy  of  the  Records  Belonging  to  Westerly  in  Kings  County  Jan. 

25"   1743-4- 

Test  W.  Babcock,  Town  Clerk. 


Appendix.  547 

About  twenty  years  later  an  additional  compact  concerning  the  sup- 
port of  Elihu  was  made. 

On  the  fifteenth  day  of  Jan.,  1745,  the  major  part  of  the  surviving 
brothers,  namely  John,  George,  and  Oliver  met  in  Westerly  and  signed 
an  agreement  that  thereafter  "because  of  ye  Great  Decay  of  Nature  of 
him  by  Reason  of  his  age  which  Renders  the  Keeping  of  him  more  trouble- 
•  some  and  Difficult''  that  each  of  the  six  brothers  or  his  representatives 
"pay  Eight  Pounds  per  year." 

At  that  date  James  and  Joseph  were  not  living  and  Job  resided  at 
Kingston,  twenty  miles  away. 

Copy  of  Capt.  James  Babcock's  Will  krom  the  Westerly  Town  Records, 

Book  i,  p.  150. 

Ill  the  name  of  God  amen  the  9th  day  of  Jan.  in  ye  Fourth  year  of 
his  mag'ty  reign  George  the  Second,  King  of  Great  Brittain,  Anno-Dom 
^73^-7  I  James  Babcock  of  ye  town  of  Westerly  in  ye  county  of  Kings 
County  and  colony  of  Rhode  Id.  &  Providence  Plantations  in  New-Eng- 
land yeoman.  Being  very  weak  &  much  Indispos'd  of  Body.  But  of  a 
Sound  mind  &  deposing  memory.  Thanks  be  given  unto  God  for  ye 
same  &  calling  to  mind  the  mortality  of  my  body  &  Thinking  I  have  but 
a  Short  Continuance  in  this  World  &  Knowing  that  it  is  appointed  for  all 
men  once  to  Die  I  do  make  &  ordain  this  to  be  my  Last  Will  &  Testa- 
ment that  is  to  say,  Principally  &  first  of  all  I  give  &  Recommend  my  Soul 
into  the  hands  of  Almighty  God  Which  Gave  it  to  me.  Hoping  Through 
the  Merits  Death  &  passion  of  my  Lord  &  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  to  have 
full  &  free  pardon  &  forgiveness  for  all  my  Sins  &  To  Inheritt  Everlasting 
Life  &  my  body  I  Commit  to  ye  Earth  to  be  Decently  Buried  at  ye  Dis- 
cresion  of  my  Exec.  Hereafter  named  nothing  Doubting  but  at  ye  Gen'll 
Ressurection  I  shall  receive  ye  Same  Again  by  ye  Mighty  Power  of  God 
&  as  Touching  such  worldly  Estate  Where  with  it  hath  Pleased  God  to 
Bless  me  in  this  life,  I  give  Devise  &  Dispose  of  the  same  in  the  manner 
&  form  following. 

Imp.  I  Give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Beloved  Son  Samuel  Babcock  a 
Tract  of  Land  Lying  in  Westerly  afor'sd  being  part  of  my  Homested 
farm  containing  by  Estimation  Two  hundred  acres  be  ye  same  more  or 
Less  bounded  as  follows.  Beginning  at  a  Stake  &  Heap  of  Stones  which 
is  ye  northeast  corner  Bound  of  Land  I  Gave  my  Son  Sam'll  by  Deed  of 
Gift  &  from  thence  on  a  Straight  Line  Northwestward  to  a  Deep  Fresh 
pond  Known  by  ye  name  of  Johnsons  pond  to  ye  Southwest  part  of  the 
Sheep-yard  where  it  runs  into  sd  pond  thence  across  sd  pond  to  a  short 
piece  of  fence  &  so  to  Run  as  sd  piece  of  fence  runs  from  sd  Pond  in 
to  the  Head  of  a  Cove  Thence  Bounding  Northerly  on  Pawcatuck  river 
&  Westerly  on  Elias  Joseph  Pendletons  Land  &  Southerly  on  my  sd  son 
Samuels  Land  all  ye  Land  Within  the  Bounds  above  mentioned.  I  give 
unto  my  sd  Son  Samuel  Babcock  his  heirs  and  assigns  forever,  Provided 
my  sd  Son  Samuel  his  heirs  &  assigns  shall  make  and  maintain  a  good 
&  Lawful  fence  on  ye  East  side  of  afores'd  Trace  of  Land  and  the  Land 
I  gave  him  by  Deed  forever  from  the  Sea  to  Pawcatuck  river.  Itein.  I  give 
&  Bequeath  unto  my  Beloved  Son  Daniel  Babcock  a  Tract  of  Land  Lying 
in  Westerly  afores'd  Containing  by  Estimation  Two  Hundred  acres  be 
the  same  more  or  Less  Bounded  as  follows  Begining  at  John  Browns 
Southwest  corner  stake  Thence  South  i6  chains  to  a  Great  Rock  with 
Stones  thereon  thence  South  30  degrees  West  to  a  small  White  oak  Tree 
marked  Standing  Between  Two  Small  rock  in  a  Hollow  a  little  to  ye 
South  of  ye  Long  Rye  Field  from  Thence  a  Straight  Line  to  ye  Salt  Water 
Pond  South  12  Degrees  East  to  a  Stake  &  Stones  about  it  thence  Bound- 
ing on  ye  sd  pond  South  &  East  on  John  Babcocks  Land  &  partly  on 
Isaac  Thompson  Land  &  northerly  on  John  Browns  Land  all  ye  Land 
Within  the  Bounds  above  mentioned  I  give  unto  my  sd  son  Daniel  his 


54^  Appendix. 

heirs  &  assigns  forever  he  ye  sd  Daniel  his  heirs  &  assigns  to  make  and 
maintain  a  good  &  Lawful  fence  in  the  Line  from  ye  afors'd  Rock  to  yc 
pond  forever. 

Item  I  Give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  Beloved  Grand-son  James  Babcock 
the  Son  of  my  Son  James  Dec'd  Two  Certain  tracts  of  Land  Lying  in 
Westerly  afores'd  the  one  containing  about  One  Hundred  Acres  more 
or  Less  and  Bounded  Northerly  by  Francis  Wests  Land  &  part  on  Wm 
Fannings  Land  &  part  on  Fleas.  Thompsons  Land  &  Fasterly  on  Capt. 
Isaac  Thompsons  Land  &  part  on  John  Browns  Land  &  part  on  Land  I 
have  above  Bequeathed  to  my  son  Daniel  to  a  Great  Rock  i6  chains  South 
from  sd  Browns  S.  W.  Corner,  thence  West  to  a  Red  oak  Tree  marked 
being  Joshua  Thompsons  S.  F.  corner  thence  Bounded  Westerly  on  sd 
Thompsons  Land.  I  give  ye  sd  Land  With  the  appurtenances  unto  my 
sd  Grand  son  James  &  his  heirs  &  assigns  forever  Provided  he  sd  James 
his  heirs  or  assigns  Shall  make  &  maintain  a  Good  and  Lawful  fence  in 
the  Line  at  ye  South  Fnd  of  sd  Bequeathed  Land  &  my  Land  and  also 
the  fence  in  the  Line  Between  ye  sd  Bequeathed  Land  &  my  Son  Daniels 
Land  forever.  The  Other  Tract  containing  a  Hundred  acres  or  there 
abouts  it  being  beach  &  Salt  Marsh  Bounded  northerly  on  ye  salt  pond 
Easterly  on  Wm  Champlins  Land  Southerly  on  the  Sea  &  Westerly 
on  ye  Beach  as  it  is  now  to  him  his  heirs  &  assigns  forever. 

Item  I  give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  Son  Daniel  Babcock  &  my  Son 
Joshua  Babcock  &  my  Grandson  James  Babcock  the  Son  of  my  Son  James 
Dec's  my  Grandson  Thomas  Clark  and  my  Cousin  Wm  Babcock  son 
of  my  brother  John,  Fach  of  them  a  Lot  of  Land  of  One  Hundred  Feet 
front  on  Pawcatuck  river  &  Three  Hundred  feet  Back  ye  sd  Lotts  to  be 
Laid  out  any  where  on  my  Land  Between  ye  Land  I  have  Before  Be- 
queathed unto  my  Son  Samuel  &  Mastucksett  Cove  to  them  and  each  of 
them  their  heirs  &  assigns  forever  they  and  each  of  them  to  make  &  main- 
tain the  fence  around  each  of  their  Lotts  forever. 

Item.  I  Give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  Dearly  Beloved  Wife  Content 
all  the  remaining  part  of  my  Homestead  farm  Bounded  as  follows,  North- 
erly on  Joshua  Thompsons  Land  &  partly  on  Land  I  have  above  Be- 
queathed unto  my  Grandson  James.  Easterly  on  Land  I  have  above  Be- 
queathed unto  my  son  Daniel  &  Southerly  on  ye  Salt  Pond  &  Partly  on 
ye  Sea  &  Westerly  on  Land  I  have  Given  unto  mj^  Son  Samuel  by  Deed 
and  by  this  Will  &  Partly  on  Pawcatuck  river.  All  the  Lands  Within 
ye  Bounds  above  sd  with  all  ye  houses  Buildings  fencings  Orchards 
&  Improvements  thereon  I  Give  as  above  sd  unto  my  said  Wife  Content 
During  the  time  of  her  being  my  Widow  &  this  to  be  in  Lieu  of  ye  Hun- 
dred Pounds  I  Contracted  to  give  her  before  Marriage  &  When  she  Shall 
marrie  or  Die  Which  shall  first  Happen,  then  my  Will  is  &  I  do  Hereby 
Bequeath  ye  sd  Land  With  all  the  Houses  Buildings  Orchards  &  fences 
thereon  as  above  sd  unto  my  Son  James  Babcock  his  heirs  &  assigns 
forever. 

I  also  Give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  sd  Beloved  Wife  Content  all  ye 
Eatables  yt  'Shall  be  in  my  house  when  I  Die  as  all  ye  Grain  that  Shall 
be  On  my  farm  Whether  Growing  or  Harvested  &  my  Will  is  &  I  do 
hereby  Order  my  sd  Wife  Content  to  Bring  up  &  Maintain  my  Daughter 
Ann  &  my  Son  Jonathan  untill  they  Respectively  come  to  Lawful  age  & 
Likewise  to  bring  up  my  Son  James  until  he  comes  to  ye  age  of  five 
years  &  then  my  Exec'd  Hereafter  named  to  Take  him  &  provide  for  him 
as   Hereafter  shall  be  expressed. 

Item  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  youngest  Son  Jonathan  the 
Two  thirds  of  my  Stonington  farm  Which  I  Purchased  of  the 
Yorks  and  the  Other  Part  of  Said  farm  I  give  &  bequeath  unto  my  Daugh- 
ter Ann  ye  sd  farm  to  be  Divided  in  that  Proportion  Fquall  for  Quantity 
&  Quality  Between  them  at  ye  space  of  Ten  years  after  my  Decease  the 
afore  sd  Land  in  proportion  as  afore  sd.     I  give  to  them  &  Fach  of  them 


Appendix.  549 

their  heirs  &  assigns  forever  and  further  my  will  is  &  I  do  hereby  Order 
my  Exec'd  Hereafter  named  To  Rent  out  ye  sd  Stonington  farm  for  ye 
space  of  Ten  years  next  after  my  Decease  &  Improve  ye  Rents  thereof 
in  Bringing  up  my  sd  Son  James  to  Learning  (that  is  to  say)  my  will  is 
that  my  sd  Exec'd  shall  Take  my  sd  Son  James  When  he  shall  arrive 
to  the  age  of  five  years  &  put  him  to  school  &  when  he  is  Qualified  to 
Enter  ye  College  then  to  enter  him  into  the  College  there  to  be  Edu- 
cated until  he  be  commissioned  Twice  according  to  Custom  &  all  his 
school  &  College  Learning  to  be  pd,  Together  With  all  other  necessarys 
by  my  sd  Exec  with  sd  rents  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Grandson 
Isaiah  Babcock  the  Son  of  my  Son  James  Dec'd  a  Tract  of  Land  Lying 
in  Stonington  Containing  Two  Hundred  &  forty  acres  more  or  Less 
Bounded  as  follows  Northerly  on  Land  I  have  Given  unto  my  Grandson 
Nath'll  Babcock  by  Deed,  Easterly  on  Common  Land  Southerly  on  Land 
I  sold  unto  my  Grandson  in  Law  Davison  &  Westerly  on  Land  of  the 
Palmers  to  him  his  heirs  &  assigns  forever  &  further  my  Will  is  that 
if  in  case  my  Grandson  Elias  Babcock  Shall  Loose  his  Land,  That  I  gave 
him  by  Deed  of  Gift  by  ye  Volentown  men  then  I  Give  him  the  One 
half  of  the  sd  240  acres  to  be  Equally  Divided  Between  him  &  Isaiah  to 
them  their  heirs  &  assigns  forever. 

Item.  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Daughter  in  law  Sarah  Babcock 
the  Widow  of  m.y  Son  James  Dec'd  all  ye  Remaining  part  of  my  Puck- 
hungamuck  farm  Which  I  have  not  Disposed  of  it  Being  that  part  Where- 
on she  now  Lives  to  her  During  the  Term  of  Time  So  Long  as  She 
Shall  Remain  my  sd  Sons  Widow  &  When  she  marries  or  Dies  Which 
Shall  first  Happen  then  I  give  ye  sd  Land  unto  my  Two  Grandsons 
Oliver  &  Timothy  Babcock  the  Sons  of  my  sd  Son  James  to  them  their 
heirs  &  assigns  forever  to  be  Equally  divided  Between  them  for  Quantity 
&  Quality. 

Item.  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Beloved  Brother  John  Babcock  my 
Silver  Headed  Kane. 

Item.  I  give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  Son  Samuel  Babcock  One  Cow 
&  One  yearling  neat  Kine. 

Item.  I  give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  Son  Daniel  Babcock  all  ye  bills, 
Bonds,  Book  Debts,  Dues  &  Demands  that  I  have  against  him  by  any 
ways  or  means  Whatsoever  I  also  Give  unto  my  sd  Son  Daniel  Two  Cows 
&  one  yearling  neat  Kine  &  Twenty  Good   Sheep. 

Item.  I  give  and  Bequeath  unto  my  Son  in-Law  Thomas  Clark  One 
Cow  &  one  yearling  neat  Kine. 

Item.  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Grand-daughter  Grace  the  Daugh- 
ter of  my  Son  James  Dec'd  fifty  pounds  in  money  to  be  pd  to  her  by  my 
Exec'd  When  she  arrives  to  the  full  age  of  Twenty  years  Or  at  ye  day 
of  marriage  Which  shall  first  Happen. 

Item.  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  the  church  of  Christ  in  Westerly 
unto  Which  I  Belong  Keeping  ye  Seventh  Day  Sabbath  One  Hundred 
Pounds  in  money  to  be  pd  to  the  Elders  or  Deacons  of  sd  Church  or 
their  Successors  Within  Two  Years  after  my  Decease  by  my  Exec'd 
the  sd  money  always  to  be  Left  Out  upon  Interest  &  the  Rents  to  be 
Improved  for  ye  ape  of  sd  Church. 

Item.  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  afores'd  Wife  Content  my  Two 
Best  Working  Oxen  &  Two  Cows  &  Twenty  Two  pounds  Ten  Shillings 
in  money  Which  Jonathan  ]\Iaxson  Owes  to  me  by  bond  to  her  Own 
Proper  use  &  Behoofe  forever  &  also  ye  Profits  of  Johnson  in  IMeadow 
the  next  year. 

Item.  I  Give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Son  Joshua  afore  Named  my 
Great  Square  Bed  &  Bedstead  with  the  furniture  Thereunto  Belonging 
&  one  of  my  Silver  Canes. 

Item.  I  give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  cousin  Wm  Babcock  afores'd  the 
other  of  my  Silver  Canes. 


550  Appoidix. 

Item.  I  Give  &  Bequeath  unto  my  Three  youngest  Children  Ann 
James  &  Jonathan  all  my  Plate  or  Silver  that  I  have  in  my  House  Which 
1  have  not  yet  Disposed  of  to  be  Equally  Divided  Between  Them  &  as 
for  all  the  rest  of  my  Personal  Estate  Which  I  have  not  yet  Disposed 
of  after  my  just  Debts  &  funorall  Charges  are  paid  Out  of  them  I  give 
&  Bequeath  unto  my  Wife  Content  &  my  Three  youngest  Children 
afores'd  to  be  Equally  Divided  Between  them  &  it  is  my  Will  that  my  sd 
Wife  shall  have  the  use  &  Profits  of  the  sd  Three  Childrens  parts  of 
Personal  Estate  untill  they  Respectively  Come  to  Lawful  age  unless  She 
marries  Before  but  if  She  marries  Before  then  I  do  Hereby  Order  my 
Exec'd  to  Take  ye  sd  Three  childrens  part  into  his  hands  Both  Reall 
&  personall  &  Keep  maintain  &  Bring  up  ye  sd  Three  untill  they  Re- 
spectively come  to  Lawful  age  Notwithstanding  What  is  last  Bequeathed 
I  do  hereby  Order  my  Exec'd  &  my  Will  is  that  he  take  all  ye  Personal 
Estate  of  my  afores'd  Son  James  into  his  hands  When  he  arrives  to  the 
full  age  of  iive  years  &  Improve  it  for  ye  Profits  of  my  sd  Son  James. 
And  Further  my  will  is  That  Whichsoever  of  my  sd  Three  youngest 
children  Shall  Die  Before  they  come  to  Lawfull  age  or  Without  Lawful! 
Issue  that  his,  her  or  their  part  so  Dicing  Shall  be  Equally  Divided  Be- 
tween the  Survivors  or  Survivor  of  the  sd  three  in  case  all  three  so  die 
that  their  Estate  shall  be  Equally  Divided  between  all  my  children  to 
them  their  heirs  or  assigns  forever  notwithstanding  What  I  have  Before 
Given  away.  I  do  Reserve  Out  of  my  Homestead  farm  a  Convenient 
Burying  place  Where  the  Burying  Place  now  is  on  Mastucksett  plain 
for  a  Burying  place  of  my  Relations  &  as  many  others  as  they  shall  see 
cause  to  Except  of.  Further  my  Will  is  &  I  do  hereby  Order  that  in 
case  my  afore  named  Wife  Content  shall  Refuse  to  Except  of  What  I 
have  before  Bequeathed  unto  her  to  be  in  full  of  her  Right  of  Dowry  & 
power  of  thirds  of  my  Estate  then  I  give  unto  my  afores'd  Three  Chil- 
dren Ann,  James  &  Jonathan  But  Twenty  Shillings  in  money  Each  of 
Them  &  What  I  have  before  Given  unto  my  sd  Wife  &  Three  Children 
Both  Reall  &  personal  I  give  to  all  my  Children  Besides  them  to  be 
Equally  Divided  Between  them. 

Item.  I  do  Order  &  my  Will  is  that  my  Exec'd  Hereafter  named 
Shall  pay  all  my  Just  Due  Debts  &  Demands  that  I  Owe  in  Right  to 
Any  Person  or  Persons  Whatsoever  8z:  my  funerall  charges  Out  of  my 
Personall  Estate  Within  Some  convenient  Time  after  my  Decease. 

Lastly  I  do  hereby  Order  Constitute  make  Ordain  &  appoint  my  Son 
Joshua  Babcock  to  be  Whole  &  Sole  Exec'd  to  this  my  Last  Will  and 
Testament  Hereby  Disalowing  &  Revoking  all  Others  &  former  Wills 
Legacies  &  Bequests  Ratifying  &  contirming  this  &  no  Other  to  be  my 
Last  Will  &  Testament. 

In  Witness  Whereof  I  have  hereunto  Sett  my  hand  &  Scale  the  Day 
&  Year  first  afore  Written. 

Signed  Sealed  Published  &  Declared  by  ye  sd  James  Babcock  to  be 
his  Last  Will  &  Testament  in  ye  Presence  of  us  ye  Subscribors. 

William   Pendleton. 

C.^LEB  Pendleton,  Jun. 

William  Dearby. 

James  Babcock.     [l.    s.] 

The  3  Witnesses  Wm  Pendleton,  Caleb  Pendleton  Jun  &  Wm 
Dearby  appeared  in  Coun'll  this  31  Day  of  January  A.  D.  1736-7  &  made 
Oath  that  they  Saw  ye  Testator  James  Babcock  Sign  Seal  &  Declare  this 
Will  to  be  his  Last  Will  &  Testament  &  That  he  was  in  his  Perfect  Sane 
mind  &  memory  at  ye  same  time  according  to  the  Best  of  their  Knowl- 
edge &  sd  they  signed  as  Witness  to  this  Will  in  ye  presence  of  ye 
Testator. 

Test  Wm  Babcock 

Coun'll  Clerk. 


Appendix.  55 1 

Voted  &  Excepted  by  this  Coun'll  to  be  the  Last  Will  &  Testament 
of  ye  said  Deceased  James  Babcock. 

Test  Wm   Babcock  Coun'll  Clerk 
Entered  January  31st  1736-7. 
Westerly  Town  Records,  Pr.  Wm  Babcock 

Book  i,  commencing  on  p.  150.  C.  Clerk. 

(It  will  be  observed  that  the  will  of  James  Babcock  was  written 
Jan.  9,  1736-7,  eight  days  prior  to  his  death,  Jan.  17,  1736-7-) 

Inventory  of  Personal  Property  of  Capt.  James  Babcock.  Copied  from 
Genealogical  History  of  Clark  Family,  by  Cyrus  Clarke  Van  De- 
venter. 

Inventory  filed  Feby.  28th  1736-7:  Wearing  apparel,  £22;  riding 
mare,  saddle  and  bridle,  hay,  oats,  straw,  18  cows,  6  two-years,  30  year- 
lings, 9  oxen,  227  sheep,  16  swine,  Indian  corn,  rye,  flaxseed,  beans,  peas, 
salt,  horse  kind  £40;  flax  broke  and  unbroke,  brakes  and  hatchells, 
shovels,  turkeys  and  dunghill  fowls;  carts,  rakes,  forks,  sleds,  2  silver 
cans,  (£2y)  ;  Plate,  £55 ;  linen  and  cotton  sheets,  table  cloths,  pillow 
biers,  and  towels,  £g;  bed,  trundle  bed,  candlestick,  warming  pans,  cane 
£31  indigo,  tobacco  pouch,  "raysor,"  pepper,  thread,  sugar,  honey,  glass 
bottles,  chafifing  dishes,  steelyards  and  seals,  beeswax,  tongs  and  andirons, 
case  of  bottles,  books  of  sundry  sorts,  £3;  106  lbs  of  swingled  flax,  £8: 
logwood,  great  square  bed,  high  case  drawers,  glass,  etc.,  3  hogshead 
"syder,"  2  of  "syder  beer,"  i  of  rum,  one  of  molasses,  great  bottle  of 
metheglin;    negro  man  and  woman  not  valuable.     Total  £1563,    I2,y.,  sd. 

Will  of  George  Babcock,  Son  of  John  and  Mary  Lawton  Babcock, 
Dated  Nov.  13,  1750,  Probated  May  10,  1756,  is  Recorded  in  S.  K. 
T.  R.  Pro.  Book  5,  pp.  44  to  49. 

The  introduction  is  essentially  the  same  as  the  will  of  his  brother 
James.  The  first  item  makes  ample  provision  for  his  widow.  The  second 
item  gave  silver  buttons  and  wearing  apparel  to  sons,  George  and  David. 

To  his  son  George  he  gave  a  farm  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  acres 
in  South  Kingston,  besides  two  tracts  of  land  previously  given  him,  and 
also  gave  him  "one  thousand  pounds  in  bills  of  credit  of  old  tenor." 

Item.  "I  give  &  devise  unto  my  son  David  Babcock  all  my  home- 
stead farm  together  with  ye  land  I  bought  of  Mr.  Ward  with  all  houses 
&  building  thereon  &  orchards  and  all  other  privileges  to  ye  same  be- 
longing, and  a  negro  man  named  Bristo  and  a  negro  woman  named 
Geney."  ... 

To  his  son  Hezekiah  he  gave  four  tracts  of  land,  viz. :  A  farm  of 
one  hundred  and  forty  acres,  "the  Island  I  bought  of  James  Ferry,"  the 
farm  on  which  Hezekiah  was  then  living,   and  a  certain  thirty  acre  lot. 

To  his  son  Elisha  he  gave  four  certain  farms  containing  by  estimate 
total,    six   hundred   and   twenty   acres. 

Item.  "I  give  and  devise  to  my  three  sons  George,  David  and 
Elisha,  ye  Sedge  Island  and  all  ye  marsh  and  sedge  lying  between  ye 
pond  and  sea."  ...  He  gave  one  hundred  and  forty  pounds  to  be  divided 
equally  among  the  following  children,  of  his  deceased  daughter  Mary 
Potter,  Jonathan  Potter,  George  Potter,  Stephen  Potter,  Susanna  Mary 
Elizabeth  and  Martha ;  "this  is  besides  the  land  I  gave  to  her  son  Thomas 
Potter  ye  land  he  now  liveth  on  which  containeth  one  hundred  and 
seventy  nine  acres  which  I  gave  by  her  desire  in  lewe  of  her  portion." 

He  gave  to  his  daughter  Elizabeth  Sanders,  "six  hundred  pounds  in 
bills  of  credit  old  tenor  besides   what   I   have  given  her   in   time   past." 


552  Appendix. 

He  gave  to  his  daughter  Abigail  Hall,  "five  hundred  pounds  in  bills  of 
credit  old  tenor,  besides  what  I  have  given  her  already." 

He  provides  that  the  children  of  his  daughter  Eunice  Greenman  sh^U 
be  paid  one  hundred  pounds  apiece  as  they  become  of  age. 

Item.  "I  give  three  hundred  pounds  to  ye  church  &  society  to  which 
I  belong  to  in  Westerly  and  places  adjacent,  keeping  and  observing  ye 
Seventh  day  of  ye  week  for  a  Sabbath,  to  be  let  out  for  ye  benefit  of  ye 
church  above  mentioned."  After  the  specific  legacies  are  paid,  "my 
will  is  that  all  my  estate  that  is  movable  shall  be  equally  divided  amongst 
all  my  children  sons  and  daughters  now  living  or  to  their  successors 
namely  George,  David,  Hezekiah,  and  Elisha,  Elizabeth,  Abigail,  Ruth 
&  Eunice."  .  .  .  Lastly  I  do  hereby  constitute  make  and  ordain  my  loving 
son  David  Babcock  to  be  my  executor  of  this  my  last  will  and  testa- 
ment" .  .  . 


INDEX 


First    generation    commences  on 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 

Fifth 

Sixth 

Seventh 

Eig-hth 

Ninth 

Tenth 


Page. 
I 

7 

14 
27 

lOI 

178 

313 

479 
533 


Note. — B.  in  parentheses,  (B.),  is  used  as  an  abbreviation  for  Babcock, 


and  indicates  the  individual's  original  name. 


Abbey,    Callie    A.    Pren 
tice,  466. 

James,  466. 

John  J.,  466. 
Abbot,  Emma  Van  Nos 
trand,  497. 

Helen,   495 

Henry,   495. 

Henry  G.,  330. 

Jane   H.,   331. 

Mary  B.,  498. 

Mary  C.   (B.).  330. 

Mary  E.,  331. 

Mary  Eastman,  331. 

Munroe  L..  495. 

Paul,  330. 

Sarah,  361. 

Thomas  A.,  497. 

William    P.,    vi,    331. 
Aborn,  Caroline  C,  71. 

Edward.   71. 

Susan   Potter,   71. 
Abraham,  Daisy  A.  Wat 
son,  466. 

Robert,  466. 
Ackerman.   Belle,  428. 
Acomb,  Elizabeth,  436. 

Mary,  436. 

Thomas,  436. 
Adams,  A.  J.,  163. 

Alice  A.,  415.  tj, 

Arminda     F.     Palmer,ki 
163.  ■ 


Adams,  Avon  L.  Brown, 
342. 

Bathsheba  (B.),  181. 

Caroline  P.,  517. 

Catherine  Bowen,  415. 

Delilah   (B.),  415. 

Elizabeth.   117. 

Emma  Parker,  415. 

Eunice  Sheldon,  507. 

Harley,  415. 

Henry,  478. 

Henrv  R.,  415. 

Hilma  R.,  478. 

Jennie  S.,  416. 

Jeremiah,  415. 

John,  342. 

John  D.,  415. 

Julia,  242. 

Julius,  517. 

Leslie  H.,  478. 

Lillie,  441. 

Loveca  E.,  416. 

Alartha.  174. 

Mary  J.,   415. 

Mary  S.,  342. 

Nora  E.  Haynes,  478. 

Phebe,  288. 

Phineas  P.,  416. 

Sarah,   141. 

Sarah  Smith,  478. 

Susan  Henkson.  415. 

William,   181. 
Adis.  Anna  G.,  225. 

553 


Aiken,  Charles,  494. 

Edward,  494. 

Emily  M.  Brown,  494. 

Katherine,  494 

Mary,  494. 
Akers,    Brooks.    278. 

Francis  M.,  278. 

Lora,  278. 

Mariah      A.      Howell, 
278. 

Semanthia    (B.),  278. 
Albertson,   Addison.  368. 

Ellen  McGrann,  368. 

Francis  B..  368. 

John  L.,  368. 

Lewis.  368. 

Oris  F.,  368. 
Albro,     Isabel     Lawton, 

546. 

Samuel,  546. 
Alden,  Bartlett  R.,  512. 

Harry,   244. 

John,  512. 

Julia  (B.),  244. 

Marion  B.,  512. 
Aldenhoff,   Blanche,  492. 
Aldrich,  Christiana  (B.), 
247. 

Harriet,  437. 
Alexander,  Electa,  loi. 
Alford,  Byron.  508. 

Emily  Lathrop,  508. 

Mary  E.  Irish,  508. 


554 

Alford,  Milo  C,  508. 
Allen,    Agnes    M.    Mab- 
bett,  380. 

Abigail,  238. 

Ahaz,  380. 

Almeiui    Hill,   419. 

Almira  (B.),  170. 

Annie  E.  Green,  446. 

Arthur,  380. 

Charles,  319. 

Christopher,   22. 

Daniel,  107. 

Ebenezer,  319. 

Edna  E.   (B.),  516. 

Edwin   R.,  448. 

Elisha,  183. 

Eliza  M.  Bennett,  380, 

Ella  A.  Springer,  380. 

Eva,  319. 

Frank,  281. 

Frederick  C,  448. 

George  E.,  448. 

Hannah   Hazard    (B.), 
262. 

Harmony  R.,  380. 

Helen,  447. 

John,  319. 

John  T.,  319. 

Jonathan,  262. 

Leander,    170. 

Lovera  H.,   419. 

Lucy,  292. 

Lucy  (B.),  319. 

Lydia  J.   (B.),  281. 

Mary  E.  Thaver,  447. 

Mary  L.    (B.),   167. 

Melissa  Seelcv,   319. 

Millard  N.,  380.' 

Mirah,  417. 

Nancy  J.,  319. 

Nathaniel,   167. 

Norman  B.,  380. 

Norman  H.,  380. 

O.  A.,  S16. 

Patience,    266,    267. 

Rachel,  183. 

Roanna  (B.),  380. 

Sadie  M.   Beach,  448. 

Sarah,  526. 

Sarah  C,  419, 

Sarah  L    (B.),  281. 

Sarah  J.  (B.),  378. 

Spafiford.  419. 

Susan,  319. 

Syhle  Tiibbard,  380. 

William,  281. 
Allston,     Anne     Rogers, 
70. 

John,  70. 

Washington,  70. 


Index. 

Almy,     y\ltana     Frances, 

354- 

Ann,   193. 

Daniel,   198. 

David,   197. 

Elizabeth,  194,  353. 

Hannah     Cory,     193, 
194,     197. 

Harriet  W.,  354. 

Lucy   (B.),   197. 

Lucy  M.,   353. 

Peleg,   193,  194,   197. 
Alton,  Sarah,  453. 
Ambler,     Edna     Barber, 

353- 

Elenora,   353. 

Eliza  Nestelle,  351. 

Henry  B,,  353. 

Henry  S.,  351,  352. 

John,   351. 

John  E.,  353. 

Julia  M.   (B.),  vi,  351- 

Nathan  B.,  353. 

Stephen  B.,  353. 
Amelsbury,     Frances    V. 

(B.),  293. 
Ames,     Anna     Brewster, 

455- 

Brewster  F.,  456. 

Luther,  421. 

Miriam,  456. 

Samuel  F.,  455. 

Sarah  J.,  421. 

Viroqua,  421. 
Amesbury,  Caroline,  407. 
Anderson,   Sarah,  443. 
Andrews,  Aaron,  355. 

Amy  (B.),  83. 

Annis,  345. 

Calvin,   321. 

Cornelia  Lippitt,  402. 

Eliza,   321,   410, 

Elizabeth,  415. 

Elmira   (B.).  167. 

Esther  P.   (B.),  355. 

George,  402. 

Hinckley,  355. 

Lemuel,  3S5. 

Martha  W.    (B.),  355. 

May,  517. 

Penelope  P.,  402. 

Thomas,  83. 
Andros,  Maud  M.,  413. 
Angel,  Sarah,  233. 
Angell,  Amy,  138. 

Anna,  441. 

Ephraim,  500. 

Frederic  R.,  500. 

Henry  C,  500. 

Henry  H.,  500. 


Angell,  Israel,   T,()i^. 

Julia  A.   Catlin,  500. 

Julia   M.,   500. 

Katherine  L.,  500. 

Louis,   398. 

Mary  Thorn,  500. 

Susan  M.  Phelps,  398. 

William,  138. 

William   D.,   398. 
\nthony,   Doris,  354. 

Elijah,   354. 

Emma  Cushman,  354. 

Frederick,    354. 

George,   354. 

George  D.,  354. 

Hannah  M.,  354. 

Harriet  W.  Almy,  354. 

Henry,  354. 

Joseph,   344. 

Kathryn,  354. 

Ledyard,  354. 

Louis  W.,  354. 

Louise    Sherman,    354. 

Margaret      Hathaway, 

354- 
Margret,   354. 
Marguerita,  354. 
Maud  L.  St.  Clair,  354. 
Mildred,   354. 
Ruth  Hathaway,  344. 
Sarah,  344. 
Sarah  L.,  354. 
Sarah      L.      Anthony, 

354- 
Appleton,      William      S., 

xxii. 
Apps,   Maggie.  487. 
Archer,  Harriet,  417. 
John,  417. 
Mirah  Allen,  417. 
Arenchild,      Lillian       L. 

(B.),  357. 
Sherman,   357. 
Armstrong,    Ann     (B.), 

43- 

Ednah,  385. 

Elizabeth,  497. 

Hannah   (B.),  43. 

Michael,  43. 

Paul   (B.),  43- 
Arnold,  Amelia,  308. 

Flora,  319. 

Lillian.  319. 

Jacob  T..  319. 

James,  172. 

Mary   Foster,   172. 

Nancy,  172. 

Nancy  J.  Allen,  319. 
Arrington,  Clyde,  284. 

David,   284. 


Arrington,   Earl,  284. 

Edwin,  284. 

Fay,  284. 

Frank,  284. 

Olin,  284. 

Rosa  Sayer,  284. 

Sarah  Sayer,  284. 
Ash,  Olive  M.,  477. 
A  s  p  i  n  w  a  11,    Achsash 
(B.),  114. 

Thomas,  114. 
Atkins,   Horace,   170. 

Lucy  A.    (B.),  170. 
Atkinson,      Jane      Mc- 
Cutchron.    296. 

Lizzie  B.,  296. 

Orissa      A.       (B.), 
Brown,  295. 

Robert,  295,  296. 
Atwater,  Fred  C,  304. 

J.  Clayton,  304. 

Joseph,  304. 

Lucy  Brown.  304. 

Lucy  E.   (B.),  304. 
Atwood.      Harriet,      262, 

445- 
Aurand,     Nancy     DysHn, 

465- 

W.  W.,  465- 
Austin,  Abbie,  261. 

Elizabeth,  305. 

James,  406,  407. 

Louise,  407. 

Lucy  L..  535. 

Minnie,  406. 

Polly  Maxson,  535. 

Rufus,  535. 

Sarah  Gavitt,  406,  407. 
Avard,  Caroline.  297. 
Averill,  Adalaid  F.,  453. 

Amanda  O.  (B.),  453. 

Biddella  Magee,  453. 

Edgar  E..  453. 

Elizabeth  H.,  453. 

Emma  Magee,  453. 

Ephraim  M.,  453. 

Henrietta,  299. 

Henry.  453. 

James  B.,  453. 

Julius.  299. 

Lulu  Ripsom,  453. 

Martha.  453. 

Mary  Richardson,  299. 

Polly  Harmon,  453. 

William  H.,  453. 
Avery,  Abel.  194. 

Abigail    Cheesebrough, 

14.    55- 
Adalaid,  439. 
Alice  Hinckley,  379. 


Index. 

Avery,  Amanda.  321. 
Anna,  55. 

Anna   Richardson,   55. 
Betsy,  439. 
C.  Lewis,  439. 
Christopher,  55. 
Celestine  C.  Coofifman, 

439- 

Denison,  62. 

Elisha,   14. 

Elizabeth   (B.),    14. 

Elroy,  55. 

Emeline  M.   (B.),  194. 

Frank,  416. 

James,  55. 

Jennie   S.   Adams,  416. 

John,  55. 

Mary  C,  439- 

Reuben,   439. 

Sarah,  216. 

Solomon,  56. 

Sophia,  183. 

Temperance,    194. 

Thomas,   194. 

William.   55. 
Ayers,  Adaline  M..  525. 

Ann,  378. 

Dennis,   282,    283. 

Luther,  282. 

Lydia      Furrow,      282, 
283. 

Mariah,  283. 

Roena  M.    (B.),  282. 

Sarah,  455. 
Babbit,  Elizabeth,   15. 

Erasmus,  8,   15.   16. 

Mary    (B.),  8,   16. 
Babcock,     A.     Elizabeth 
Chapman,  407. 

A.    Emerson,   v,   28. 

A.  Ernest,  490. 

Aaron,    192. 

Aaron  C,  428. 

Abbie  A.,  477. 

Abbie     H.      Hinckley, 

517- 
Abbie  L,  278. 
Abbie  L.,  418. 
Abbie  L.  Bagg,  308. 
Abbie     L.     Blackman, 

321. 
Abbie  Sprague,  403. 
Abby,  123.  253. 
Abby  A.  Brown,  260. 
Abby  C.  Chafee,  338- 
Abby  C.  Stanton,  317. 
Abby  E..  216,  378. 
Abby  G.  Miller,  214. 
Abbv  Hazard,  92. 
Abby  J.,  384. 


ODD 

Babcock,  Abby  J.  Cross, 

-^53,    438. 
Abby  J.  Huyler,  431.  ' 

Abby  L.,  317. 
Abby  Owens,  224. 
Abel,     102,     140,     169, 

170,     179,     266,     274, 

482. 
Abigail,  22,  27,  61,  62, 

124,     154,     166,     186, 

219,  386,  552. 
Abigail   C,   255. 
Abigail  Cooke,  193. 
Abigail  Curtis,   164. 
Abigail  Hudson,  23. 
Abigail  Iliff,  467. 
Abigail  Littell,  155. 
Abigail   Mulkins,  49. 
Abigail  P.,  257. 
Abigail  Smith.  67. 
Abigail  Thompson,  29. 
Abigail     Wentworth, 

237- 
Abijah,  46,  47. 
Abner  L.,  404. 
Abram,    335. 
Achsah,  227,  404. 
Achsash,   114. 
Ada  L.,  358. 
Ada  N..  517. 
Adalaid,  439. 
Adaline,  99,  398. 
Adam,  67,  68,  150. 
Adassa  F.,  282. 
Addie  B.,  467. 
Addie  Carr,  269. 
Addie  Jones,  172. 
Addie  M.,  475. 
Addie  M.  Ford,  313. 
Addie  Maxson,  282. 
Addie  Wells,  468. 
Addison,   175. 
Adela  Barry,  519. 
Adela  N.,  519. 
Adelaid  G.,  387. 
Adelaide  Wallace,  214. 
Adelbert.  313. 
Adelbert  H.,  296. 
Adelbert  O.,  297. 
Adele  C.  Stiles,  434. 
Adele  Catonel,  216. 
Adelia,   167,  305,  489. 
Adelia  D.   Beebe,   2i72- 
Adelia  J.,  234. 
Adelia  M.  Mann.  381. 
Adelia  R.,  413- 
Adelia  Skelton,  333. 
Adeline,  150. 
Adeline  J.  Green,  357. 
Adeline  Johnson,  405. 


556 

Babcock,  Adeline  L.,  .394. 
Adeline  IMelzgar,  476. 
Adella,  412. 
Adena  C,   165. 
Adolphus,  2yo,  2yg 
Agnes,  Z77- 
Agnes  Hunter,   141. 
Agnes  L.,  409. 
Agnes  Leach,  339. 
Agnes     S.     Davidson, 

231. 
Augustus,    187,   234. 
Augustus  D.,  532. 
Ai  A.,  282. 
Alanson  C,  223. 
Albert,    135,    206,    269, 

283,    30S,     335,    405, 

433,  437-  430- 
Albert  A.,  404. 
Albert  C,  316. 
Albert  E.,  378. 
Albert  F.,  398. 
Albert  H.,  430. 
Albert     L.,     175,     299, 

398,  475- 
Albert  O.,  234. 
Albert  P.,  222. 
Albert  R.,  293. 
Albert  S.,  212,  ^jj. 
Albert  W.,  171. 
Alexander   E.,   232. 
Alfred,    104,    143.    161, 

370. 
Alfred  B.,  299,  475. 
Alice,  92,  278,  292,  33S, 

449,  532. 
Alice  C,  257,  441. 
Alice   Coollidge,  492. 
Alice  D.  Hancox,  415. 
Alice  E.,  412. 
Alice  Golden,  360. 
Alice  Grey,  467. 
Alice  I.  Houser,  445. 
Alice  J.,  465. 
Alice  L.,  444.  473,  480. 
Alice  L.  Webster,  412. 
Alice  M.,  171. 
Alice  M.  Wheeler,  323. 
Alice   Musgrave,   449. 
Alice  S.,  368. 
Alice  Seaton,  172. 
Alice  Sipley,  537. 
Alice  Talbot,  443. 
Alice  W..  129,  397,  520. 
Alice  Wyer,  129. 
Alice  Young,  397,  398. 
Alida  K.,  410. 
Alida  Kelsey,  410. 
Allan  H.,  475. 
Allen,  334. 


Index. 

Bal)cock,   Allis   M.,  485. 
Almeron,  470. 
Ahnira,   137,   170,  264. 
Almira  Barrows,   130. 
Ahnira  Burdick,   170. 
Almira  G.,  264. 
Almira  R.  Brown,  227. 
Almira  S.,  131. 
Almira  Van  Horn,  159. 
Almon,  255. 
Almyra  Burdick,  204. 
Alonzo,  166,  177. 
Alonzo  D.,  178. 
Alonzo  N.,  454. 
Alta  L.  Porter,  380. 
Alta  M.,  S18. 
Altana,    109,    11 1,    190. 
Altha  Hull,  181. 
Althea  A.,  464. 
Althea  J.,  413. 
Alvira  E.,  281. 
Alyn,  209. 
Alzina,  288. 
Alzina  Stowe,  311. 
Amanda,  290,  347,  397- 
Amanda   Avery,   321. 
Amanda    Carpenter, 

209. 
Amanda  Clarke,  163. 
Amanda  L.,  371. 
Amanda   M.,   307,   319, 

384. 
Amanda   McNeil,   356. 
Amanda  O..  453. 
Amanda   Searl,  276. 
Amanda  Tanner,  153. 
Amarilla  Hawley,   184. 
Amarillis,   490. 
Aniasa,  247. 
Ambrose  S.,  233. 
Amelia,  2,3,  62,  71,  125. 

232,  306,  316.  413- 
Amelia  Brown,   192. 
Amelia  Cole,  329. 
Amelia  G.,  231. 
Amelia   Hopkins,   231. 
Amelia      J.      Barnum, 

228. 
Amelia  L.,  412. 
Amelia  M.,  334. 
Amelia  Rohr,  371. 
Amey  Clarke,  82. 
Amey  Gavitt,  42. 
Amorilla  Collins,  381. 
Amos,    102,    122,    274, 

536. 
Amos  S.,  212. 
Amy,    38,    54,    78,    82, 

83,  84,   138,   144,   160, 

209,  239,  248,  249. 


Babcock,  Amy  A.   Giles, 

299. 
Amy  Angell,   138. 
Amy  Card,  83. 
Amy  Clark,  208. 
Amy  D.,  391. 
Amy  E.,  379. 
Amy  E.  Preston,  341. 
Amy  Gavitt,  121. 
Amy  Green,  92,  374. 
Amy  Greene,  158. 
Amy  L.,  345. 
Amy  Morgan,  164. 
Amy  Van  Horn,  279. 
Amy  W.  Crandall,  168. 
Amy  Warner,  183. 
Anah  F.,  535. 
Andrew,   29,    117,    175, 

205,  432. 
Andrew  H.,  432. 
Andrew    J.,    v,     xxiii, 

xxvi,     58,     172,    361, 

362. 
Anga  Hain,  375. 
Angel ine,  170,  204,  366. 
Angeline    Langworthy, 

289. 
Angeline  R.,  266. 
Ann,  12,  24,  22,,  35,  39, 

58,   93,   95,    108,   122, 

151,     179,     183,     189, 

209,  542,  548.  550. 
Ann  A.  Crandall,  398. 
Ann  Almy,  193. 
Ann  Ayers,  378. 
Ann  Davis,  291. 
Aim  E.,  314,  348. 
Ann  E.  Denison,  216. 
Ann  H.,  136. 
Ann  J.  Penfield,  411. 
Ann  M.,  165,  193. 
Ann  Maxson,  30. 
Ann  Pendleton,  29. 
Ann  T.,  259. 
Ann  White,  i6r. 
Ann  Wright,  128. 
Anna,    30,    38,    76,    77, 

105,     116,     123,     178, 

183,    212,     224,    264. 

279,   2C0.   392,   461. 

Anna    (B.),  62,   178. 
Anna  A.  Rogers,  204. 
Anna  Avery,  55,  56. 
Anna  C.  Smith,  127. 
Anna  E.,  486. 
AnnaE.  Stimpson,  523. 
Anna  F.,  271. 
Anna  F.  Garland,  478. 
Anna    Gavitt,   62,    120, 

I2T. 


B  a  b  c  o  c  k,    A  n  n  a 
Crane.  242. 
Anna  Harris,  52. 
Anna  Hart,   136. 
Anna  Hunter,  529. 
Anna  James,  276. 


H. 


Anna  L., 
Anna  M., 


M. 
M. 


468, 


Wilson,    275 
Woodward, 


485. 
273.  292 

Anna 
Anna 
520. 
Anna  IMaxson,  75. 
Anna  IMiner,   170. 
Anna  Plnmb,   54. 
Anna   R.   Wilson,  433. 
Anna  Steadman,    165. 
Anna    Thompson,     t,7, 

53- 
Anna  Wilcox,  146. 
Anna  Woodward,   173. 
Annette,  290. 
Annette  B.,  289. 


Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
xA.nn 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 

339- 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 

244. 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ann 
Ans 
Anson 


e,  176,  242,  271. 
e  A.,  469. 
B..  338,  481. 


Bull,  li  , 
Champlin,   384. 
Der  H'.Ttoz,  469. 
Duff,  308. 
E.,  417. 

E.  Maghee,  232. 
E.    Netherland, 

Ennis,  261. 
G.,  382. 
Gates,   504. 
Grimshaw,   289. 
H..  231. 
Klimfeltre,  433. 

L-  535- 
M.,  431,  529. 
M.   Silvey,  320. 
M.    Thompson, 


Morley,  380. 

S.  Dickey.  370. 

Scharbute.  460. 

Watson,  445.. 

Ferguson,  271. 

178. 
.  ,   164. 
Anstice,    133. 
Antoinette  Brand.  384. 
Aransa,  165. 
Arcelia   'SI.   Crittenton, 

414. 
.Archer,  304. 
Archibald,    199,   294. 
.\rchibald  D.,  357. 


Index. 

Babcock,  Archie  B.,  405. 
Archie  B.,  405. 
Archie  T.,  451. 
Areno  I.,  282. 
Arinoe,  167. 
Arloene  O.,  296. 
Arlouine,  376. 
Armeda  E.,  171. 
Arminda,  177. 
A  r  m  i  n  i  a     Eldridge, 

231. 
Arnold,   136. 
Arnold  E.,  410. 
A  r  s  e  n  t  h  a    D  a  \-  i  s 

Hughes,  157. 
Arthur,    315,   434.   447- 
Arthur  C.,  395- 
Arthur  E.,  515. 
Arthur  H.,  405,  424. 
Arthur    L.,     339,     480, 

517- 
Arthur  R..  297. 
Artimesia  M.,  303. 
Asa,     46,     47,     61,     78, 

140,    148.     187,     213, 

238.    384. 
Asa  Bushnell,  78. 
Asabel  C.  241. 
Asael  L.  464. 
Asher  M.,  169. 
Asher  Miner,  51. 
Athalia,  279. 
August.  280. 
Augusta.  438. 
Augusta  Boice.  452. 
Augusta  J.  Dickie.  435. 
Augusta   W.,   443. 
Augustus,  74,  242. 
Augustus  D.,  467. 
Augustus  F..  504. 
Augustus   S.,   504. 
x\ure!ia,    72. 
Aurila,   171. 
Austin,    536. 
Austin  A.,  414. 
Austin  H..  308. 
Ava  Kaufman.  527. 
Avery.  190. 
Avery  C..  340. 
Avilda,  229.  403.  416. 
Avilda  (B.),  403. 
Azariah,  280. 
A  z  a  r  i  a  h    Tenbrook. 

335- 
Azubah  Dodge.  291. 
B.  F.  B.,  286. 
B.   Pratt,   330. 
Banodell.  63. 
Barbara,    163. 
Barbara  Burdick,  99. 


557 

B  a  ij  c  o  c  k,    Barbara  F. 

Clark.   421. 
Barbara  M.,   181. 
Basil    P..  537. 
Balhshcba,   181. 
Batlishcba     Pendleton, 

117. 
Beatrice,  395. 
Belinda,  161. 
Benjamin,    12,    13,    89, 

98,  126,   146,  159,  -253, 

436. 
Benjamin  C,  472. 
Benjamin  D.,  516. 
Benjamin  F.,   152,  215, 

389,  5.19- 
Benjamin  P.,   144. 
Benjamin  S.,   150,  447. 
Benjamin  T.,  283. 
Benjamin  W.,   143. 
Beriah.  87,  170. 
Bernice  E.,  434. 
Bert,  404. 
Bertha,  452,  472. 
Bertha  A.  Pease,  513. 
Bertha  Blakely,  394. 
Bertha  L.,  338,  375. 
Bertha   Lillian,   360. 
Bertie  R.,  432. 
Bertram.  298,  502. 
Bess  J.,  457- 
Bessie,  283,  459. 
Bessie  A.,  414. 
Bessie  H.,  296. 
Bessie  J.  Gates,  419. 
Bethiah,    43,    80,    246, 

428. 
Bethuel  C,  462. 
Betsey,  72,  94,  122,  142, 

154,  159,  194- 
Betsey  A.,  331,  432. 
Betsey  Avery,  439. 
Betsey  Bulfinch,   164. 
Betsey  C,  369. 
Betsey  Dorman,  211. 
Betsey  E..  179.  485. 
Betsey  M..  255. 
Betsey  ]\Iain.  100. 
Betsey  Parmlee.  141. 
Betsey  Pope,  148. 
Betsey  Searl.  159. 
Betsey  W..  266. 
Betsey   Warner.    359. 
Bettie,  246. 
Betty,  79. 
Billings.  114. 
Birdie    M.    Kenvcn. 

486. 
Birge  L..  308. 
Blake  B..  518. 


558 

Babcock,    Blanche,    381. 
Blanche  Aldenhoff, 

492. 
Blanche  O.,  374. 
Blanche  S.  Sturtevant, 

474- 
Blandina  Stanton,  392. 
Bourdan  A.,  266. 
Brayton  R.,   174. 
Bridget    B.    Browning, 

436- 
Bronson,  491. 
Bruce,  431. 
Buel  H.,  432. 
Burdet,  165. 
Burt  D.,  475- 
Burton,  433. 
Burton  M.,  306. 
C.  C,  371. 
Caleb,  92. 
Calista  E.,  405. 
Calista   Fordham,    318. 
Callie  M.,  486. 
Camden  H.,  179. 
Camilla,  505. 
Candace,  206. 
Candis  L.  Taylor,  501. 
Carl,  472. 
Carlos,  430. 
Carlton  E.,  435. 
Caroline,  132,  140,  151, 

165,     184,    221,     238, 

312,  470,  521. 
Caroline  A.  McGinnis, 

393- 
Caroline  A.    Saunders, 

517-   . 
Caroline    Amesbury, 

407. 
Caroline  Baldwin,  439. 
Caroline  Burdick,   378. 
Caroline     C.     Lathrop, 

444- 
Caroline    D.,    397,   489. 
Caroline    E.    V.,     32^, 

324-. 
Caroline    E.    Wheeler, 

178. 
Caroline  Gifford.  489. 
Caroline     L.     C  h  e  s  - 

brough.  204. 
Caroline  Laraway.  292. 
Caroline  Lee,  294. 
Caroline      P.      Adams, 

517. 
Caroline   Riddle,   221. 
Caroline  Rouse,  315. 
Caroline  Runnels.  336. 
Caroline     S.     Stanton, 

316. 


Index. 

Babcock,      Carolton      C, 

387. 
Came,  175,  338. 
Carrie  A.,  308. 
Carrie  A.  Chese- 

brough,     434. 
Carrie  A.  Green,  485. 
Carrie  B.,  490. 
Carrie  S.,  412. 
Carrie  D.  Wally,  214. 
Carrie     E.,     285,     360 

472. 
Carrie  E.   Williamson 

435- 
Carrie  L.,  404. 
Carrie   L.   Brusie,   464 
Carrie  M.,  481. 
Carrie  M.  Collins,  445 
Carrie  M.  Wood,  429. 
Carrie  Noyes  Nichols 

534- 
Carriel  H.,  530. 
Casper  W.,  214. 
Cassie  M.,  518. 
Cassius  C,  282. 
Catherine,      205,      388, 

491.  _ 
Catherine  A.,  329. 
Catherine      A.      Mills, 

341-  . 

Catherine  A.  Pearce, 
252.  _ 

Catherine  A.  Potter, 
286.  ^ 

Catherine  B.,  515. 

Catherine  Bellin- 
ger,   336. 

Catherine     C.     Lynde, 

259- 
Catherine  Casey,  232. 
Catherine  Derosie,  203. 
Catherine  E.,  380. 
Catherine     E.     Butler, 

338.  . 
Catherine    E.     Martin, 

336,  502. 
Catherine     E.     Martin 

(B.),    336. 
Catherine    G.     Rowell, 

325-  . 
Catherine  Goff,  335. 
Catherine    H.    Wilson. 

423- 
Catherine  Hill,  161. 
Catherine  Hilts,  289. 
Catherine  Keller.  31=;. 
Catherine     M.     Wells. 

383.  . 
Catherine      McGregor. 

247. 


Babcock.  Catherine 
Rhcinhardt,  210. 

Catherine  Rhodes,  247. 

Catherine  Robbins, 
187. 

Catherine  S.,  474. 

Catherine  T.  McWil- 
liams,  446. 

Catherine  W.,  268. 

Cecelia  Kennedy,  280. 

Celestine  C.  Cooffman, 

439- 

Celia,  229,  292. 

Celia  A.,  301. 

Celia  A.  Kinsley,  433. 

Celia  Kellogg,  173. 

Celia  Wilbur,  135. 

Cecilia  E.  Lewis,  491. 

Cecilia  M.  Davis,  482. 

Champlin,  80. 

Charity  Maxson,  157. 

Charles,  84,  100,  117, 
144,  146,  150,  151, 
173,  180,  188,  204, 
206,  209,  231,  241, 
242,  244,  265,  290, 
307,  320,  332,  334, 
384,  389,  435,  439, 
487.    489,    501. 

Charles    A.,    360,    363, 

515- 
Charles  B.,  250,  476. 
Charles  C,  231,  387. 
Charles  D.,  532. 
Charles    E.,    2:^7,    320, 

370,     471,     503,     533. 
Charles  E.  P.,  426. 
Charles  F.,  204,  370. 
Charles     H.,     vi,     189, 

261,     294,    306,     311, 

376,    5 1 7,    525. 
Charles  H.  P.,  391. 
Charles  L,  376. 
Charles    J.,     130,    454, 

479- 
Charles    L.,    327,    443, 

477. 
Charles    M.,    359,    492, 

516. 
Charles    P.,    387,    391, 

412,    477. 
Charles    R.,    310,    319. 
Charles  S.,  290,  303. 
Charles  T.,  357. 
Charles  W.,  458,  463. 
Charlotta,  161,  386. 
Charlotta  A.,   395. 
Charlotta     A.     Noyes, 

217. 
Charlotta  Mills,  295. 


Babcock,  Charlotte,  35, 
122,  206,  343,  407- 

Charlotte  Ball,  322. 

Charlotte  Cran- 
dall,    119. 

Charlotte  D.,  283. 

Charlotte  H.,  452. 

Charlotte  Irish,  406. 

Charlotte  Al.  Stod- 
dard, 526. 

Charlotte  Odcll,  205. 

Charlotte  R.  Bromley, 
424. 

Charlotte  T..  414. 

Charlotte  T.  Lippen- 
cott,  281. 

Chauncey,   126. 

Chester,  160. 

Chloe,   190,  335- 

Chloe  Bisbee,  209. 

Chloe  Davis,  108,  no. 

Christiana,  247. 

Christiana  Groat.   191. 

Christiana  Smith.  106. 

Christine  Fonda,  318. 

Christine  Hoddie,  214. 

Christopher.  38,  39,  T2, 
77,   78,   86,    III,    112, 

113,     137,     138,     144, 

224,    233,  238.    435. 

Christopher  D..  235. 

Christopher  J..  239. 

Christopher      S.,      340- 

341- 
Clara,    258,    381,    425. 

520,  529. 
Clara  D.  Connor,  359. 
Clara  E.,  321.  345. 
Clara  F.,  221. 
Clara  J.,  360,  371. 
Clara  G..  251. 
Clara  L.,  230,  515. 
Clara  L.   Curtis,   501. 
Clara  N.,  441. 
Clara  S..  493. 
Clara  Way,  279. 
Clare  E.,  259. 
Clarence,  515. 
Clarence  H.,  375.  429. 
Clarence  L..  380. 
Clarence  S..  306. 
Clarence  V..  261. 
Clarinda,   122. 
Clarissa,  165,  170.  328. 
Clarissa  (B.).  170. 
Clarissa  B  e  n  j  a  m  i  n. 

293- 

Clarissa  Chapin,  251. 

Clarissa  Clough.  245. 

Clarissa  Crandall,  223. 


Index. 

Babcock,  Clarissa  Palm- 
er,  165. 

Clark,  52,  120,  123, 
265. 

Clark  H.,  329. 

Clary,  403. 

Clary  J.  Wilcox,  376. 

Claud  F.,  531. 

Claude,  230. 

Claude  H.,  174. 

Claudius,  230. 

Clayton  E.,  305. 

Clemantine  Webster, 
238. 

Cleophas,  279. 

Climena   Ingersol,   171. 

Climena  Sheldon,  loi. 

Clinton  L.,  524. 

Clyde,  441. 

Clyde  E.,  516. 

Colfax  S.,  282. 

Comfort,  54. 

Content,   63,   550. 

Content  Maxson  Bab- 
cock,  15,   548- 

Content  Potter,  113, 
114. 

Cora,  503. 

Cora  A.,  311,  379- 

Cora   Chafifee,   406. 

Cora  E.  Norton,  476. 

Cora  L.,  457. 

Cora  M.,  502. 

Cora  V.  Isham.  303. 

Cordelia  L.,  253. 

Corean  Bailey,   182. 

Cornelia,  373. 

Cornelia  A.,  402. 

Cornelia  A.   Rockwell, 

399- 
Cornelia  F..  391. 
Cornelia    F.    Franklin. 

391- 
Cornelia  S.  Mings,  243. 

Cornelia   Scott,   328. 

Cornelius,  232. 

Cornelius  L.,  488. 

Cornelius  S..  281. 

Corolis,  292. 

Corrington.  91. 

Corrington  ^I.,  258. 

Corydon,  502. 

Courtland,  67.  215.  251. 

394- 
Courtland  G.,  392. 
Courtland  S.,  230,  394. 
Courtland  W.,  392. 
Courtney  F.,  380. 
Crissy  J.  Decker,  433. 
Curtis,  164. 


559 

Babcock,      Cynthia,      99, 
109,     164,    256,     286, 

318.    334- 
Cynthia  E.,  248,  434. 
Cynthia  H..  244. 
Cynthia  Hickox.   147. 
Cynthia  N.,  141. 
Cynthia  Weld,  285. 
Cyrus,  86. 
Cyrus     G.,     106,      184. 

323- 
Cyrus  W.,  404. 
Daisy  Burdick,  447. 
Damarius,  207. 
D  a  m  a  r  i  u  s  Crandall, 

134- 

Daniel,  vi,  9,  29,  30, 
35.  61,  63,  75,  89, 
107,  109,  no,  112, 
n3,  n4,  123,  124, 
134-  135.  136,  154. 
170,  193,  194,  197. 
201,  203,  211,  248, 
262,  274,  321,  347, 
348,    446,     547,    549- 

Daniel  A.,  170. 

Daniel  B.,  173. 

Daniel  C,  228,  345. 
381. 

Daniel  E..  480. 

Daniel  F.,  369. 

Daniel  H.,  245. 

Daniel  J..  221. 

Daniel  L.,  230,  2,77, 
378,   383. 

Daniel  N.,  149. 

Daniel  S.,  446. 

Daniel  W.,  533- 

Daphene,  321. 

Darius.   loi,   153,   154. 

Darton  L..  339. 

Dauphin.  430. 

David,  20,  21,  46.  48, 
49,  60,  79,  87,  89.  90, 
93.  94,  n8,  146,  154, 
155.  156.  183.  206, 
24s,    254.    269,     280, 

370.    551.    552. 
David  B..  253. 
David  D..  298. 
David  J..  153- 
David  M.,  334. 
David  S.,  217.  218,  395. 
Davis.  278. 
Dayton,  458. 
De  Grand  D.,  521. 
Dealton  E..  368. 
Deborah.  19.  43,  44.  45, 

98.  118.  249. 
Deborah  A.,  247. 


56o 


Index. 


Babcock,    Deborah 
Knowles,  24. 
Deborah    Stafford,    60. 
Deborah  Teft,  211. 
Deforest,  173,  516. 
Delevan,  27;^. 
Delevan  J.,  459. 
Delia,  406. 
Delia  AI.  Sweet,  468. 
Delight  B.,  126. 
Delihah  Mclntyre,  i6r. 
Delilah,  415. 
Delisa,  272. 
Deliverance,  48,  79. 
Dell,   292. 
Delia  Beal,  232. 
Delmer,  462. 
Delos  O.,  159. 
Demsa,  284. 
Demsey  Stanton,  64. 
Denison,    46,    90,    147, 

170,  393- 
Denison  A.,   121. 
Deodatus,  243. 
Desire.     58,     124,     133, 

213. 
Desire  Billings,  60. 
Desire  E.,   147. 
Desire  Eldridge.  147. 
Desire  Frink,   125. 
Dessie,  280. 
Devolson,  387. 
Dewane  D.,  298. 
Devvitt,  203. 
Diana  F.,  270. 
Dianthe,   142. 
D  i  e  d  a  m  a  Douglass, 

130. 
Dina,  164. 
Dollie,  381. 

Dolly  S.  Woodin,  273. 
Dolly  Scott.   115. 
Dolly  Stanton,   189. 
Dolph  L.,  2/2. 
Donald  S.,  437,  527. 
Donna   C,  445. 
Dora  Beach,  418.. 
Dora  Bristol,  403. 
Dora  Clark,  299. 
Dora  E.,  523. 
Dora  F.,  472. 
Dora  G.,  530. 
Dora  Gilbnrt.  214. 
Dorana  Randall.  164. 
Dorcas.   47.   51.  60,  61, 

88,  90,  150.  161. 
Dorcas     (B.).    4'j,    47, 

60. 
Dorcas  Brown,  60.  87. 
Dorcas  Hoxie.  131. 


Babcock,     Dorcas     Peck- 
ham,    150. 
Doris,  388. 
Doris  E.,  513. 
Doroleski   R.    Perkins, 

293- 
Dorothy,  375,  407. 
Dorothy  Key,    13. 
Dosia   Lippencott,   276. 
Douglas,  221. 
Dove,  210. 
Dow,  135. 
Draper,  285. 
Drusilla,   138. 
Drusilla  Robinson,  144. 
Duane  Perry,  419. 
Dudley,    127,    128,    155, 

389. 
Dutee,  J.,  268. 
Delilah  R.,  416. 
Dwight,  200,  290. 
Dwight  I.,  205. 
Dwight  S.,  265. 
E.  A.  Dimond,  319. 
E.  Eunice,  370. 
Earl,  472. 
Earl  A.,  445. 
Earl  B.,  514. 
Earl  C,  338. 
Earl  D.,  516. 
Eber,   164. 

Electa  Alexander,  loi. 
Edgar  L.,  304. 
Edith,  306,  391.435.459. 
Edith   (B.),  435- 
Edith  A..  d33. 
Edith  B.  Potter,  278. 
Edith  H.,  452. 
Edith  L.  Snider,  410. 
Edith  M..  257. 
Edith  P.  Dove,  502. 
Edith  R.,  445. 
Edith  Tucker,  451. 
Edith  v..   517. 
Edmond  H.,  440. 
Edmond  L.,  533. 
Edmund,   255,   267. 
Edmund  J.,  173. 
Edna,  307. 
Edna  A..  373. 
Edna  E.,  516. 
Edna  G.,  517. 
Edward,    89,    175.    221. 

231,     242,     259,     290, 

380,    482. 
Edward   A..   338. 
Edward    B..    221,    445. 

477- 
Edward    D.,    165,    392, 
427. 


Babcock,  Edward  H., 
401,  443,  465,  515. 
Edward  M.,  516. 
Edward  O.,  231. 
Edward    P.,    150,    268, 

453- 
Edward  S.,  242,  517. 
Edward   W.,   222,   253, 

254,  465- 

Edwm,  vi,  143,  171, 
184,  209,  250,  252, 
280,  336,  345,.  405, 
483,    489. 

Edwm  A.,  303,  373,  483. 

Edwin  C,  394. 

Edwin  G.,  504. 

Edwin  J.,  405. 

Edwin  M.,  336. 

Edwin  O.,  378. 

Edwin  P.,  302,  436. 

Edwin  S.,  469. 

Effie,  431. 

Effie  E.,  305. 

Effie  F.  Lackey,  527. 

Effie  Simpkins,  282. 

Eldon  H.,  303. 

Eleanor,   129,  221,  518. 

Eleanor  A.  Nightin- 
gale, 525. 

Eleanor  C.  Clark,  461. 

Eleanor  L.,  281. 

Eleanor  Seeley,  504. 

Eleanor  Vorhis.  167. 

Electra  Bostwick.   147. 

Elery,  205. 

Elgen  E.,  291. 

Eli,   165. 

Eli  L..  273. 

Elias,  39.  53.  54.  78. 
137,  182,  184,  233, 
235,    272,     324,     377, 

415,    549- 
Ehas  L.,  377,  378. 
Elihu,    10.    16,    22.    23, 

49,   75-   94,    102,    135. 

385.  542,  546. 
Elijah,  104,  105. 
Elijah  C,  285. 
Elisa,  117,  430. 
Elisabeth  Merril,  12S. 
Elisabeth  Miller,  245. 
Elisha,  20.  48,  89.   151. 

551,  552. 
Elisha  G..  371. 
Elisha  S..  143.  409. 
Elisha  W..  231. 
Eliza,  68,  118,  136,  165, 

213,    226,    242,    245, 

255.  318,    335,    337, 
462. 


Index. 


■/n 


Babcock.   Elizu   A..  371. 

Eliza  A.  Brown,  340. 

Eliza  A.  Hosley,  309. 

Eliza  Andrews,  321. 

Eliza  Clapp,  98. 

Eliza  Curtiss,  176. 

Eliza  Dyer,  100. 

Eliza  Ely,  200. 

Eliza  Glover,  156. 

Eliza  Hulpz,  504. 

Eliza  J.,  487. 

Eliza  J.   Carmon,   339. 

Eliza  L.,  282. 

Eliza  L.  Clark,  300. 

Eliza  Lippcncotl,  282. 

Eliza  McGregor,  247. 

Eliza  McNitt,  234. 

Eliza  Nelson,    123. 

Eliza  P.,  217. 

Eliza  Potter,  383. 

Eliza  S.  Newton,  336. 

Eliza  Scott,  118. 

Eliza  Sheffield,  315. 

Eliza  Snyder.  274. 

Eliza  T.,  127. 

Eliza  Wells,  356. 

Eliza  Wheeler,  412. 

Elizabeth,  6,  8.  12, 
13,  14.  21,  29.  43. 
47,  48,  50.  55.  (^o, 
61,  63,  77.  78,  80,  81, 
82,  8s,  89,  91,  93, 
112,     143,     144,     146, 


148,   15 

I.     156, 

179, 

187,  23 

I,    232, 

238, 

240,    246.   254, 

2bg. 

283,  31 

3-     326, 

.^60, 

390,    435.     461. 

552. 

Elizabeth 

A.,  314. 

480. 

Elizabeth 

A.    Trevor- 

rah,  375 

Elizabeth 

A.    Upjohn, 

244. 

Elizabeth 

Adams, 

117. 

Elizabeth 

Almy, 

[94. 

Elizabeth 

BablMt 

15. 

16. 

Elizabeth 

Barber, 

140. 

Elizabeth  Bassett. 

326. 

Elizabeth 

Beers,  85. 

Elizabeth 

Brand, 

370. 

Elizabeth 

Brown, 

60. 

Elizabeth 

C,   252, 

428. 

505- 

Elizabeth 

C.    Franklin, 

390. 

Elizabeth 

Gaboon 

,  80. 

Elizabeth 

Cany,  2 

IS- 

E  1  i  z  a  b 

e  t  h    C  h  a  p- 

man,    491. 

36 

Babcock,  Elizabeth 
Clark,    150,  256. 

Elizabeth  Clarke,  386. 

Elizabeth  Cottrell,  80. 

Elizabeth  D.  Hoffman 
Stout,  157. 

Elizabeth  Davis,  152, 
278. 

Elizabeth  Doughty, 

403- 
Elizabeth  F.,  460. 
Elizabeth  Frazier,   156. 
Elizabeth  Frink,  430. 
Elizabeth  Furrow,  158. 
Elizabeth  G.,  329. 
Elizabeth  Gillette,  265. 
Elizabeth   H.,   258. 
Elizabeth   Haas,   412. 
Elizabeth  Hall,   19,  21. 
Elizabeth     H  a  n  s  o  m, 

431- 
Elizabeth    Hardman, 

159- 
Elizabeth  Hull,  43. 
Elizabeth  Ingalls,  270. 
Elizabeth  J.,  371. 
Elizabeth  Jeffries,  49. 
Elizabeth  L.  James,  536. 
Elizabeth     L  a  p  h  a  m, 

261. 
Elizabeth  M.,  277,  305. 
Elizabeth    McCormick, 

277. 
Elizabeth  Nash,  426. 
Elizabeth    Noyes,    148. 
Elizabeth  P.,  325. 
Elizabeth     P.     Brooks, 

391- 
Elizabeth  Palmer,   107. 
Elizabeth  Perry,  48. 
Elizabeth    Pluml).    28. 
Elizabeth  Poe,  402. 
Elizabeth   R.,   214. 
Elizabeth    R.     Merrill, 

492. 
Elizabeth   S.,   214,   218, 

316,  358,  425. 
Elizabeth    Saunders, 

15- 
Elizabeth   Stuart,    180. 
Elizabeth  T.,  304. 
Elizabeth    T.    Kenyon, 

150. 
Elizabeth  W.,   199. 
Elizabeth    W.     Porter, 

474- 
Elizabeth  Wells,  178. 
Elizabeth  White,  263. 
Elizabeth   Williams, 

102. 


Babcock,     Elizabeth 

Wright,    149, 
Elizabeth  Wyman,  199. 
Elizur,   234. 
Elkannah,    63,    64,    76, 

122,  214. 
Ella,  175,  404,  497,  502. 
Ella  A.,  308. 
Ella  A.  Robinson,  419. 
Ella  Baker,  482. 
Ella  C,  326. 
Ella  J.,  221,  377,  378. 
Ella  J.   (B.),  378. 
Ella  L.,  429,  447. 
Ella  L.  Barnes,  434. 
Ella  M.,  479,  486. 
Ella  M.  Norton,  387. 
Ella  Parks,  307. 
Ella  R.,  281. 
Ella  S.  Butler,  536. 
Ella   Williams,   206. 
Ellen  A.,  209,  467. 
Ellen  B.,  230,  265,  492. 
Ellen  Bronson,  327. 
Ellen      C.      Comstock, 

386. 
Ellen  C,  Johnson,  424. 
Ellen  E.,  452. 
Ellen  Gardner,  450. 
Ellen  L.  Hunt,   174. 
Ellen  L.   Hurllnit,  242. 
Ellen  M.  Carter,  242. 
Ellen  Price,  467. 
Ellen  S.,  152. 
Ellen  W.,  394. 
Ellis  B.,  535. 
Elma  E.  Walker,  182. 
Elmer,  205. 
Elmer  E.,  266. 
Elmira,  167,  201,  203. 
Elmira   (B.),  201,  203. 
Elmira  Burdick,  161. 
Elnathan  W.,  102,  313, 

480. 
Eloise  C.  275. 
Eloise  M.,  383. 
Elorus  W.,  205. 
Elsey,  83. 
Elsie,  291,  517. 
Elsie  A.,  291,  469. 
Elsie  Gail.  517. 
Elsie  M.  Preston,  459. 
Elston  D.,  303. 
Elvina,  100. 
Elvira  L.  Baker,  174. 
El  wood  F.,  232. 
Elytie  L.,  536. 
Emaline  Sayer,  278. 
Emeline,   loi,  213.  248. 

386. 


562 

Babcock,    Emeline    (B.), 

183. 
Emeline  C,  525. 
Emeline  E.,  440. 
Emeline  M.,  194. 
Emeline  Pike,  143. 
Emeline  Smith,  457. 
Emeline  T  h  (i  m  p- 

son,   210. 
Emenetta  J.,  277. 
Emerancy,  166. 
Emery  J.,  458. 
Eniilus  W.,  374. 
Emily,     104,     114,     136, 

200,     224,     279,     319, 

430,    443,    5-'6. 
Emily  A.,  490. 
Emily  A.  Burdick,  516. 
Emily  Boardman,  248. 
Emily  Brown,  46,  254. 
Emily      C.      Goodrich, 

525. 
Emily  E.,  324,  334. 
Emily  F.,  294,  520. 
Emily  Frink,  246,  427. 
Emily  L.,  178. 
Emily  M.,  s^;^. 
Emily  M.  Hall,  217. 
Emily  M.  Rlaltbie,  259. 
Emily  McDaniels,   171. 
Emily  Nichols,  314. 
Emily  Roice,  200. 
Emily   Sperry,   458. 
Emily  W.,  220. 
Emma,    46,     126,     153, 

224,  279,  439. 
Emma  A.  Carter.  297. 
Emma  Bentley,  316. 
Emma  Cummins,  292. 
Emma  D.,  471. 
Emma  E.,  483. 
Emma  H.,  211,  402. 
Emma  Ingraham,  376. 
Emma  J.,  435,  50i. 
Emma     L.,     131,     205, 

360. 
Emma    L.    Parmenter, 

294. 
Emma     L.     Wehrman, 

527- 
E  m  m  a     Langworthy, 

226. 
Emma  M.  Saw,  404. 
Emma   ]\Iortimer,    378. 
Emma  N.  Connell,  380. 
Emma  Potter,  470. 
Emma  Richmond,  516. 
Emma  S.,  434. 
Emma  Snyder,  405. 
Emmet  E.,  417. 


Inde.v. 

Babcock,    Emogene,   383, 

514- 
Emogene  M.,  289. 
Emogene  S.,  383. 
Emory,  134. 
Emory  D.,  294. 
Ennietta,  280. 
Enos,  158,  431. 
Enos  J.,  273. 
Ephraim,  85,   123,    132, 

136,   149- 
Ephraim  S.,   168. 
Erastus,    182,  293. 
Erastus  F.,  521. 
Erastus  W.,  384. 
Eri  D.,  315. 
Ernest,  303,  519. 
Ernest  B.,  375. 
Ernest  F.,  281. 
Erven  S.,  463. 
Erving  O.,  473. 
Erwin  L.,  468. 
Erzula  O.,  214. 
Essie  E.,  370. 
Estella  Dean,  489. 
Estella  Green,  285. 
Estella   Sprayth,  402. 
Estelle  M.,  478. 
Esther,  36,  62,  74,  126, 

131,     132,     182,    260, 

282. 
Esther  Billings,  114. 
Esther  Brewer,  424. 
Esther  Cobb,  102. 
Esther  Cogshell,  464. 
Esther  Cole,  235. 
Esther     Crandall,     63, 

64. 
Esther  Davis,  405. 
Esther  E.,  212. 
Esther  Fish,  212. 
Esther  H.,  91,  150. 
Esther  Harrison,  250. 
Esther  Hazard,  35. 
Esther  Ostrander,  94. 
Esther  P.,  355. 
Esther  Sprague,   183. 
Esther  Stanton,  74. 
Esther    V.,    300. 
Ethan  A.,   147,  296. 
Ethan  B.,  97,  150,  160. 
Ethan  E.,  440. 
Ethel,  458,  526. 
Ethel  J.,  489. 
Ethel  L.,  306,  433. 
Ethel  M.,  527. 
Ettie  M.  Smith,  472. 
Ettie    M.    Winchester, 

453- 
Eugene  E.,  517. 


Babcock,  Eugene  J.,  433. 

Eugene  L.,  527. 

Eugene  R.,  477. 

Eugenia,    530. 

Eugenia  L.  Lewis,  300. 

Eula  M.,  435. 

Eunice,  47,  48,  51,  62, 
78,  79,  123,  126,  172, 
203,    209,    223,    267, 

315,    537,    552. 
Eunice  A.,  411,  536. 
Eunice  Billings,  49. 
Eunice  E.,  174,  326. 
Eunice  E.  Palmer,  228. 
Eunice  Haskins,  135. 
Eunice  L.,  247. 
Eunice   Maine,   317. 
Eunice  Newell,  289. 
Eunice  Robbins,   188. 
Eunice  S.,   168,  432. 
Eunice  S.,  432. 
Eunice  Smith,  173. 
Eunice   Stephens,   370. 
Eunice  Wilcox,  315. 
Euphemia,  275. 
Eva  B.,  339. 
Eva  Bostford,  429. 
Eva  F.,  455. 
Eva  Harter,  480. 
Eva  K.,  481. 
Eva  S.,  215. 
Evaline  Carris,  454. 
Evelena,  520. 
Evelena  Denison,  392. 
Eveline,    161,    183,    192. 
Evelyn  M.  Bowan,  490. 
Everett  C,  406. 
Everzalline,   462. 
Evonelle,   445. 
Experience,  50,   loi. 
Experience  Brown,  97. 
Experience  C  o  b  u  rn, 

105. 
Experience   George, 

116. 
Ezekiel,  49,  209,  212. 
Ezra,  9,  35,  97,  99,  130, 

163,   168,  228,  248. 
Ezra  H.,  283. 
Ezra  S.,  303. 
F.  Azelia  Castle,  303. 
Faith  E.,  475. 
Faith  v.,  475. 
Fannie,  206,  465. 
Fannie  A.,  418. 
Fannie  Cross,  466. 
Fannie     F.     Richards, 

357- 
Fannie  Walrod,   288. 
Fanny,  78,  155,  179. 


Babcock,     F  a  n  n  y     B. 

Starr,  254. 
Fanny  Burdick,  205. 
Fanny      E.      Watrous, 

302. 
Fanny  Fonda,  318. 
Fanny  Gallup,   155. 
Fanny  I.  Teed,  338. 
Fanny  J.,  308. 
Fanny  M.,  479,  520. 
Fanny  Al.,  520. 
Fanny  Peard,  487. 
Fannv  Slocum,  91. 
Fanny  Tifft.   118. 
Fanny  West.   212. 
Fay,  436. 
Fern,  469. 
Fitch,   179. 
Flora,  205. 
Flora  A.   Coon,  293. 
Flora  Cook,  522. 
Flora  D.  Mondy,  336. 
Flora  E.,  374. 
Flora  I.,  vi,  468. 
Florence,  299,  369,  431, 

492,  503,  53-2. 
Florence  A.,  374.  418. 
Florence  H..  413. 
Florence  J.  Lccke,  395. 
Florence  M.,  527. 
Florence    M.    Clans, 

159- 
Florence  O.,  374. 
Florence    Sherman, 

416. 
Florence  Skellie,    171. 
Florilla  Sweet.  210. 
Floyd  A.,  435. 
Forest  M..  299. 
Forrest  F.,  474. 
Forrest  R.,  474. 
Frances,  46,  69,  90.  91. 

148,    209.    214,    259, 

269.  315.  381. 
Frances  A.,  218,  485. 
Frances  C,  312. 
Frances  D.,  375. 
Frances  E.,  485. 
Frances    E.     Heard. 

298. 
Frances  E.  Maine,  317. 
Frances  H..  298. 
Frances  J.,  149. 
Frances  Jacobs,    380. 
Frances  M.,   151,  258. 
Frances  Pierce.  269. 
Frances  T.,  425. 
Frances  V..  293. 
Frances    V.     Redman, 

421. 


Index. 

Babcock,     Francis,     129, 
150,  175,  220,  502. 
Francis  B.,  356,  357. 
Francis  G.,  386,  387. 
Francis  H.,  219. 
Francis  AI.,  210,  482. 
Francis  N.,  222. 
Frank,    118.    206.    269, 
308,     378,     403,     436, 

457,    465,    467,    489- 
Frank  C,  425,  5i2. 
Frank  D.,  397,  398. 
Frank     E.,     412,     459, 

463,  468,  516. 
Frank     H.,     360,     441, 

483. 
Frank  J.,  292,  467. 
Frank  L.,  472. 
Frank  P.,  421,  477. 
Frank    W.,     265,     290, 

316. 
Franklin,  141,  188,  297, 

393- 
Franklin  D..  304. 
Franklin  H..  474. 
Franklin  L.,  391. 
Franklin  N.,  261. 
Fred,  303,  404.  458. 
Fred  A.,  477,  482. 
Fred  E.,  433. 
Fred  H.,  474. 
Fred  L.,  370,  523. 
Fred  O.  Stowell,  454. 
Fred  R.,  380. 
Fred  W.,  503. 
Freda  Russel,  430. 
Freddie,  312. 
Frederic.  407.  425. 
Frederic  H.,  Tfyj. 
Frederick,  67,  86,   141, 

155.  221,  291.  320. 
Frederick  A.,  221,  389. 
Frederick  H..  412,  437, 

524-  . 
Frederick  I..  2)7^- 
Frederick  ;\[..  243.  522. 
Frederick  R.,  429. 
Frederick  S.,  222,  242. 
Frederick  W..  339,  341, 

412. 
Freelove  Wright.  471. 
Fronie  H.  Marvin.  299. 
Gardner,  46,  90,  209. 
Garrison.  298. 
Gean,  276. 
George,    xxvii.    xxviii. 

II,  17.  19,  20,  21,  22, 

33,   45,  46.  85.  86.  91. 

133.  13s,  136.  i.i3. 

IS9,  175.  177.  184. 


Babcock,  Geo.  {cont'd) 
209,  230,  244,  24s 
251,  252,  254,  332 

?>zz,   356,  378,  384 

406,  426,  447,  457 

522,  542,  551,  552 

George  A.,  243,  260 
289,  338,  483. 

George  Aldrich,  247. 

George  B.,  425. 

George  C,  227,  321, 

405- 
George  D.,  256,  412, 

430. 
George  E.,  296,  523. 
George  F.,  224,  243, 

261. 
George  G.,  153,  251, 

386. 
George  H.,  51,  204, 

221,  300,  301,  378, 

388,  412,  445,  477. 
George  K.,  492. 
George  L.,  230,  301, 

3?,i^     338. 
George  M.,  357,  459, 

493- 
George  N.,  206,  466 

525- 
George  O.,  481. 
George  P.,  92,  145. 

172.  214.  269,  446. 
George  Page.  201. 
George  R.,  87.  360, 

407. 
George  S.,  363.  458, 

483- 
George  T..  445. 
George  W.,  72,     142. 

167.  2x6,  237,  261, 

418,   427- 
Georganna   Odell,   320. 
Georgia,  391,  439. 
Georgia  Wood  in,  381. 
Georgiana,  498. 
Gersham,  109,   no. 
Gersham  A..  2>?)^- 
Gertrude,  280,  387. 
Gertrude  E..  449.  537. 
Gertrude   H..   466. 
Gertrude  McCoy.  514. 
Gertrude  Rohl.  477. 
Gertrude    S.    Hastings, 

426. 
Gideon.  20.  44,   46.   62,. 

81.  83.  90,  13T. 
Gideon  C,  147,  256. 
Gideon  H.,  397. 
Gi'deon  P.,  257. 
Gilbert,  163. 


564 

Babcock,  Giles,  216,  339, 

392. 
Gill  son,  209. 
Glen  L.,  419. 
Gordon  M.,  524. 
Grace,     56,     114,     ii5> 

280,    333,    435,    446, 

462,   489,    534. 
Grace  A.  Heap,  536. 
Grace  B.,  387- 
Grace     E.,     376,      407. 

537- 
Grace  Hinckley,  94. 
Grace  Isaacs,  Ob. 
Grace  L.,  413. 
Grace  Reynolds,  471. 
Grace    W.    Kernochan. 

394- 
Graham  E.,  410. 
Granville  S.,  277. 
Guilford  C.,  410. 
Gulielma,  92. 
Gurdon,    94,    121,    209, 

270. 
Gurdon  E.,  471. 
Gurdon  Y.,  130. 
Guy  B.,  519. 
Guy  v.,  460. 
H.  Ella  Crumb,  401. 
H.  Lee.  491. 
Hamden  R..  372. 
Hamilton,  206. 
Hamlin.   131. 
Hampton  C.,   133. 
Hannah,  8,   12.    13,  36, 

43,  51,  62,  64.  68.  72, 

74,  75.  83.  P4.  87,  95. 

99,       102,       119,       120, 
122,      124.      128,      132, 

135,  I39>  141-  145. 

164,  182,  183.  223, 

226,  228,  229,  241, 

260,  271,  280,  381, 

437- 
Hannah    A..    153.    176, 

194,  260,  347- 
Hannah   A.    Witter. 

480. 
Hannah  B.,  251. 
Hannah  Barber,  182. 
Hannah     Bill     Coates. 

13.  14- 
Hannah  Brusie,  163. 
Hannah     Burdick,     99, 

124. 
Hannah   Champlin,   72. 

75- 
Hannah  Cross.  93. 
Hannah    E..    149. 
Hannah  E.  Maine,  447. 


Index. 

Babcock,  Hannah  H.,  260. 
Hannah  Hazard,  262. 
Hannah   Hendricks, 

103. 
Hannah  Lewis,   102. 
Hannah    M.    Wells, 

382. 
Hannah  Miller,   140. 
Hannah    P.,    149,    245, 

267. 
Hannah  P.    (B.),   149. 
Hannah  R.,  408. 
Hannah  R.   Brown, 

145- 
Hannah  Reynolds,  159. 
Hannah  Rhodes,   134. 
Hannah  Rich,  133. 
Hannah  Richards,  199. 
Hannah  S.,  212. 
Hannah   Stanton,   30. 
Hannah  Thompson, 

122. 
Hannah  W.,  179. 
Hannah    Williams.  204. 
Harold,   369.   375-   5 18. 
Harold  A.,  435. 
Harold  B.,  387. 
Harold  F.,  407. 
Harold  H.,  372. 
Harold  O.,  434. 
Harold  P.,  437. 
Harold  S.,  280. 
Harold  W.,  533 
Harriet,    33, 

140,     164, 

223,     230, 

290,    295. 

383,    421, 
Harr 
Harr 


Harr 

373 
T^arr 
Harr 

470 
Harr 

308 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 
Harr 

317 
Harr 
Harr 

344, 


67. 

165. 

251. 

302, 

462. 
et  (B.),   166. 
iet  A.,  269. 


lOI. 

166, 

254. 
380, 
536. 


et  A.  Landphere. 


et  A.  Palmer.  361. 
et     A.     Overton, 

et      A.      Yeaton, 

et  Archer,  417. 
et  B.  Cross,  253. 
et  Burgess,  337. 
et  Button,  239. 
et  C,  440. 
;et  Coates.  331. 
et   Colvin.   289. 
et  Crosby.  379. 
et      D.      Bentley, 

et  Du  Bois,  245. 
et    E.,    296,    301, 
372.   414- 


Babcock,    Harriet    E. 
Bishop,    277. 
Harriet  E,  H  e  1  m  e  r, 

531- 
Harriet  F.,  275,  531. 
Harriet  Graves,  268. 
Harriet  Guthrie,  230. 
Harriet  Jackson,   357. 
Harriet  L.,  421,  454. 
Harriet  Lewis,  451. 
Harriet  M.,  424. 
Harriet  M.  Brusie, 

464. 
Harriet  M.  Clarke, 

300. 
Harriet    M.    Crandall, 

257- 
Harriet   Mclntire,  232. 
Harriet  N.,  172,  388. 
Harriet  Page,  201. 
Harriet  P  e  1 1  o  n,  161, 

239- 
Harriet  Price,  164. 
Harriet  R.,  402. 
Harriet  Robinson,  147. 
Harriet  S.,  324. 
Harriet   Shattuck,    175. 
Harriet  Vose,  379. 
Harriet  Walker,   126, 
Harriette  A.,  258. 
Harriette  E.,  306. 
Harris,   100. 
Harrison  L.,  436. 
Harry,     67,     117,     I47, 

183,    212,     220,     308, 

318,    406. 
Harry  A.,  371. 
Harry  C,  183,  257. 
Harry  D.,   335. 
Harry  J..  524. 
Harry  M..  374. 
Harry  R.,  385. 
Harry  S.,  392. 
Harry  V.,  222. 
Harry  W.,  246,  392. 
Harvey,  432. 
Hattie,  175.  203. 
Hattie  Darely.  458. 
Hattie  E..  518. 
Hattie  G.,  313. 
Hattie  K.,  429. 
Hattie  L.,  178. 
Hattie  Law.  178. 
Hattie  Phillips,  449. 
Hattie  Weaver,  488. 
Hazard,  148. 
Helen,    214,    275,    290, 

.^85,    395. 
Helen  A.,  401. 
Helen  B.,  488. 


Babcock,  Helen  C.  Mur- 
ray, 479- 

Helen  D.,  424. 

Helen  E.  Morris,  306. 

Helen  Hunt,  505. 

Helen  L..  424. 

Helen  M.,  384,  407, 
429. 

Helen  M.   Clarke,  420. 

Helen  M.  Green,  412. 

Helen  Negus,  357. 

Helen  Roberts,  474. 

Helen  Rogers,  224. 

Helen  V.,  131. 

Helen  W.,  443. 

Helena  Kimball,  396. 

Heman  A.,  406. 

Heman  E.,  523. 

Henrietta  Averill,  299. 

Henrietta  C,   171. 

Henrietta  P.  Keeney, 
446. 

Henrietta   Roden,    474. 

Henrietta  Van  Patten 
Taylor,  348. 

Henrietta  VV.,  501. 

Henry,  64,  65.  68,  74- 
84,  124,  127,  135, 
141,  154,  163,  166, 
174,  189.  209,  220, 
230,  259,  271,  316, 
322,  384,  403,  434, 
474,    482,    505. 

Henry  A.,  376.  424. 
522. 

Henry  B..  289. 

Henry  C,  171,  176, 
205,    418,    425,    428. 

Henry    D.,     173,     375, 

zn,  5 19,  520. 

Henry     E.,     262,     290, 

523. 
Henry  P.,  447. 
Henry  G.,  270. 
Henry     H.,     178;     232, 

251^   325.    412. 
Henrj'  L.,  266. 
Henry  M.,  481. 
Henry  N.,  470,  526. 
Henry  O.,  232,  276. 
Henry  P.,  413. 
Henry     R.,     188,     21  t, 

477- 
Henry  S.,  526. 
Henry  T..  259,  425. 
Henry    W.,     172.    221, 

261. 
Hepsibah  H.,  385. 
Herbert,  378. 
Herbert  A.,  302. 


maex. 

Babcock,      Herbert      E., 
^72,  ?,-7i,  2,77. 
Herbert  H.,  326. 
Herbert  M.,  379. 
Herbert  P.,  412. 
Herbert  W.,  451. 
Herman  C,  251. 
Herman  V.,  446. 
Hermon,  205. 
Hermon  I.,  421. 
Herrick,  161. 
Hester,  275. 
Hester  Van  Derzee, 

275- 
Hester  Wortendyke, 

443- 
H  e  1 1  i  e  A.  Beekman, 

379- 
Hettie  B.  Hynds,  482. 
Hetty  A.,  429. 
Hezekiah,    20,    47,    87, 

97,     145,     150,     162, 

163,    262,    551,    552. 
Hiram,    143,    156,    171, 

321,  322. 
Hiram  A.,  411. 
Hiram  W.,  383. 
Homer  B.,  178. 
Homer  €.,  339. 
Horace,    163,    182.   253. 

263,     322,     372,     380, 

470. 
Horace  E.,  500. 
Horace  G.,  215. 
Horace  H.,  438. 
Horace  M.,  214. 
Horace  S..  292.  316. 
Horatio  B.,   130. 
Horatio  D.,  233. 
Howard,  313,  439,  534. 
Howard    L.,    232,    434, 

444. 
Howard  N.,  443. 
Howard  P.,  518. 
Hoxie,  263. 
Hugh  W.,  176. 
Huldah,    79,    151,    167, 

233,    288.    345,    446. 
Huldah  (B.),  233. 
Huldah  Burdick.   162. 
Huldah  Green,  151. 
lantha  A.,  432. 
lantha  A.  Carriel.  432. 
lantha    C.    Hurlbut, 

429. 
Ichabod,     36,     27-     44- 

49,    7i-    74.    75,    81, 

83.     131,     132,     135. 

144,     183,     184,    247, 

249. 


Baljcock,  Ida,  298. 
Ida  A.  Gates,  504. 
Ida  B.,  485. 
Ida  Barton,  503. 
Ida  Daniels,  483. 
Ida  E.,  291,  464. 
Ida     E.     Sisson,     266, 

482. 
Ida    E.     Sisson     (B.), 

482. 
Ida  Howard,  465. 
Ida  J.,  530. 
Ida  L.  Peck,  418. 
Ida  M.,  412,  431,  483. 
Ida  M.  Chapman,  265. 
Ida  M.  Willey,  412. 
Ida  Putnam,  357. 
Ida  Stewart,  283. 
Ida  Templar,  305. 
Idelle  Richardson,  ZZ^- 
Ila  L.,  527. 
Ina  L.,  529. 
Inez,   173,  516. 
Inez  A.,  516. 
Ira,  134,  135,  164. 
Ira  B.,  483. 
Ira  J.,  532. 
Ira  L.,  172,  306. 
Ira  P..  283. 
Irena  Gilbert,  447. 
Irene,  79. 
Irness  E.,  477. 
Irving,  206,  395. 
Irving  F.,  332. 
Irving  S.,  175. 
Isaac,  42,  71,   118,   121, 

209,  210,  292. 
Isaac  A.,  377. 
Isabel,  43. 

Isabel  Graham,  409. 
Isabel  Hill,  277. 
Isabell  Davis,  281. 
Isabelle  Brown  Wood. 

525- 
Isabelle  H.   Spaulding, 

388. 
Isabelle  Wells.  469. 
Isabelle  Woof,  532. 
Isadore,  292. 
Isadore  (B.),  276,  279. 
Isaiah,  v,    28,    54,    549. 
Ithamer.  292. 
Ithamer  D.,  164. 
Iva.  503. 
J.  A  d  e  1 1  e  Blackmer, 

38s. 
J.  Le  Roy.  517. 
Jabez  C.  224. 
Jabez  W.,  224. 
Jabez  Wight,  132,  133. 


566 

Babcock,  Jackson,  457. 

Jacob,  158,    281. 

Jacob  D.,  194,  195,  345- 

Jacob  E.,  358. 

Jacob  H.,  278. 

James,  xxviii,  5,  14, 
15,  16,  17,  20,  22, 
24,  25,  27,  28,  29, 
30,  3^,  34.  35.  38, 
39,  52,  53.  54.  55, 
56,  57,  58,  62,  63, 
80,  81,  115,  116, 
123,     129,    134,     152, 

159,  179.  212,  228i 
234,      250,      265,      271, 

315,  3^0,  542,  544, 
545,  546,  547,  548, 
549,    550,  551. 

James  A.,  504. 

James  B.,  449,  467,  476. 

James  C,  150,  461,  SU- 

James     E.,     369,     449, 

451,    532. 
James  F.,  290,  341,  512. 
James  H.,  461. 
James  H.   M.,  418. 
James  L.,  135,  156,  245, 

537- 
James  M.,  130,  290. 
James  N.,  388,  517. 
James  O.,   159,  407. 
James  P.,  385. 
James  R.,  228,  368,  436. 
James  S.,  130. 
James  T.,  360. 
James    W.,     212,     250, 

420. 
Jane,    12,    13,    176,   226, 

240,   356. 
Jane  A.,  131,  333,  340. 
Jane  A.  Betts,  243. 
Jane  A.  Tburl)er,  272. 
Jane  B.  Segar,  261. 
Jane  C,  242,  437. 
Jane  C.  Clarke.  371. 
Jane  Cornwell,   140. 
Jane  E.,  333. 
Jane  Edmond,  384. 
Jane  H.  Fleming,  430. 
Jane  Hill,  283. 
Jane  Knight,  299. 
Jane  M.,  309. 
Jane  M.  Rose,  341. 
Jane  Morehouse,  189. 
Jane    Northrup,    384, 

386. 
Jane     Northrup     (B.), 

384. 
Jane  O.  Harwood,  304. 
Jane  Palmer,   140. 


Illdc.V. 

Babcock,    Jane    Rose, 

435- 
Jane  Sheldon,  179. 
Jane  Wallace,   loi. 
Janette  M.,  440. 
Janette  McNeil,  233. 
J  a  red,     98,      119,      120, 

208,    277. 
Jared  E.,  303. 
Jared  R.,  381. 
Jared  S.,  130,  222. 
Jason,  51,  77,  96. 
Jasper,  357,  358,  416. 
Jeanette,  307. 
Jeanette  Derbois,  430. 
Jemima  (B.),  36. 
J  e  m  i  m  a   L.    L  a  n  g- 

worthy,    468. 
J  e  m  i  m  a    Lippencott, 

280. 
Jemima    McBurney, 

276. 
Jemima  Reynolds,  44. 
Jennie,    167,    265,    306, 

416,  481. 
Jennie  B.,  503. 
Jennie  B.  Powell,  523. 
Jennie  G.,  320. 
Jennie     M.,     243.     296, 

368,    477- 
Jennie  J.,  499. 
Jennie  Powell,  433. 
Jennie  Rider,  395. 
Jennie  Wheaton,  131. 
Jenny  H.,  461. 
Jeremiah,    51,     75,     95, 

138,    234. 
Jerome  R.,  171. 
Jerusha,  223. 
Jerusha   G.,   201. 
Jesse,   49,    58,    76.    77. 

79,      93,      122,      123, 

135,     152,     158,     210, 

222,     254,     276,     279, 

283,    316,    2,33,- 
Jesse  Brown,  200. 
Jesse  P.,  450,    523. 
Jessie,     369,    416,    487, 

503- 
Jessie   A.   Williams, 

307- 
Jessie  B.,  473. 
Jessie  F.,  265. 
Jessie  H.,  389. 
Jessie  H.  Pratt,  286. 
Jessie  L.,  524. 
Jessie  M.,  525. 
Jessie  R.  Collins,  262. 
Jessie  True,  405. 
Joanna,  72. 


Babcock,  Joanna  Mc- 
Dowell, 34,  35. 

Job,  13,  15,  19,  22,  43, 
44,  56,  78,  80,  143, 
144,  247,  542,  546. 

Joel,   176. 

Joel  B.,  280,  282. 

Joel  C,  158. 

John,  iv,  13,  14,  15, 
16,  18,  22,  23,  25, 
26,  36,  38,  43,  44, 
48,  58,  74,  75,  79, 
80,  81,  82,  83,  84, 
IIS,  117,  119,  126, 
132,  134,  135,  141, 
143,  144,  150,  158, 
163,  164,  176,  181, 
191,  206,  213,  223, 
243,  245,  254,  262, 
269,  275,  280,  285, 
393,  416,  460,  463, 
490,  535.  542,  543. 
544,     546,     547,     549. 

John  A.,  360,  378,  462. 

John  B.,  392. 

John  C,  72,  123,  136, 
210,     225,    226,    230, 

447- 
John  D.,  189,    261,  317, 

432,    502. 
John  E.,  356,  357,  445. 
John  F.,  305,  439. 
John  H.,  224,  283,  424, 

426. 
John  J.,   156,   345,  403. 
John  L.,   135,  2,2,2,  487, 

492. 
John  M.,  92,    148,   149, 

310. 
John  N.,   149,  424. 
John  P.,   120,   121,  150, 

267,  316.  378,  523. 
John  P.  Tallman,  443. 
John  R.,  200,  210,    271, 

281.     315,     317,     359, 

369.    377^    460. 
Jolm  S.,  282,  315,  430, 

432. 
John  W.,  17s,  291,  308, 

384,     435,     471,    477, 

481. 
Jonas,  53,  103,  104. 
Jonas  L.,  317. 
Jonathan  B.,  21,  33, 

35,  36,    39.  44,  46, 

47.  51,  73'    79,  82, 

83,  89,  90,  91.  117, 

149,  203,  204,  548, 

550. 
Jonathan  P.,  149. 


Babcock,  Joseph,  xxviii, 
5,  13,  14,  16,  22,  23, 
24,  25,  27,  36,  44,  45, 
49,  52,  74,  81,  92, 
95.  97,  loi,  u6,  132, 
133,  134,  135,  161, 
176,  211,  223,  279, 
292,   542,   546. 

Joseph  A.,  401. 

Joseph  C,  307,  435. 

Joseph    H.,    286,    309, 

369,   446. 
Joseph  J.,  464. 
Joseph  M.,  371,  402. 
Joseph  N.,  218. 
Joseph  P.,  149,  236. 
Joseph  S.,  224. 
Joseph  T.,  289. 
Josephine,      245,      251, 

265,    359- 
Josephine  A.,  475. 
Josephine  B.,  440. 
Josephine  Barber,  266. 
Josephine  L.,  175. 
Josephine    Luther  s, 

368. 
Joshua,    17.   28,   30,   31, 

32,  34,  36.  38,  39.  (33. 

65,  68,  74,  77.  88.  89. 

95,     107,     108,      109, 

no,     III,     113,     123, 

124,     127,     156,     186, 

211,    223,    276,    548. 
Joshua  A.,  233. 
Joshua  F.,  156,  326. 
Joshua  G.,  281. 
Joshua  M.,    128. 
Joshua  W.,  211. 
Josiah,  79. 
Judah.  62. 
Judith,  50,  96. 
Judith  Davis,  50. 
Julia,     213,     244,     287, 

322,    404,    536. 
Julia  A.,  158,  175.  339, 

414- 
JuHa  A.  Cohvell,  280. 
Julia  A.  Dibble,  304. 
Julia  A.  Sherman,  481. 
Julia  Adams,  242. 
Julia  C,  204. 
Julia  E.,  265. 
Julia  F.  Westlake,  533. 
Julia  Frances,  234. 
Julia  I.,  468. 
Julia  J.,  303. 
Julia  Johnson,  369. 
Julia  Kowalskey.  298. 
Julia  L.,  417. 
Julia  Landphere,   173. 


Inde.v. 

Babcock,   Julia    M.,   350, 

351,    355- 
Julia  jMason,  360. 
Julia  S.,  430. 
Julia  Spencer,  165. 
Julia  Spoon,  248. 
Julia    T.     Chesbrough, 

304. 
Juliet,  491. 
Juliette,  162. 
Juliette  Major,    173. 
Julius,  322. 
Julius  A.,  233. 
Julius  T.,  282. 
Justina,  250. 
Justus,  79. 
Kate,  285,  405. 
Kate  B.  Brown,  504. 
Kate  C.  Howe,  297. 
Kate  D.,  220. 
Kate  D.    (B.),  220. 
Kate  Deshler,  525. 
Kate  E.,  514. 
Kate  H.,  387. 
Kate  Hunger,  4^. 
Kate  Ritchey,  290. 
Kate  S.,  390. 
Kate  S.  Cole,  329. 
Kate  Way,  377. 
Kate  Woodworth,  161. 
Katherine  C,  300. 
Katherine  E.  Tallman, 

443- 
Kathleen  Winn,  429. 
Keturah  Gavitt,   133. 
Keziah  G.,  330. 
Keziah  Smith,  121. 
Kitty  M..  224. 
L.  C.,  282. 
La  Mott,  166,  203. 
Landy  B.,  534. 
Langdon,   522. 
L  a  n  t  i  e   A.    Burdick. 

377- 
Lara,  458. 
Laura,    163,     165,    209, 

213,    326,    430. 
Laura  Burroughs,  488. 
Laura  C,  323. 
Laura  C.  Wade,  308. 
Laura  E.,  297,  300. 
Laura  E.   Cone,  265. 
Laura  Holmes,  233. 
Laura  J.,  449.  536. 
Laura  K.,  360. 
Laura  M.,  245. 
Laura  R.,  282. 
Laura  R.    (B.),  282. 
Laura  S.,  526. 
Laura  V.  Bristol,  406. 


Babcock,     Laura    W. 
Huntley,  325. 
Laura   Whitney,   282. 
Lauractt  Maltby,  469. 
Lauren  H.,  171. 
Laurence,  161. 
Lavina  B.  Hair,  503. 
Lavina  Eddy,  167. 
Lavina  Goodrich,  241. 
Lavina  Jinks,  224. 
Lavina  L.,  214. 
Lawrence,   377. 
Lawrence   W.,   432. 
Leafy  L.,  293. 
Leah  A.^  280. 
Leander,  163,  168,  171, 

327- 
Le  Claire,  383. 
Lecta  Burdick,  287. 
Lee,  124. 
Leela,  384. 
Leeman  B.,  379. 
Leigh  A.,  338. 
Lela  M.,  531. 
Leland  A..  537. 
Lemond  H.,  404. 
Lemuel,  430. 
Lena,  380,  458,  489. 
Leo  A.,  370. 
Leoline  Booth,  477. 
Leon,  370. 
Leona  T.,   527. 
Leonard,  161. 
Leonard  L.,  358. 
Leora,    472. 
Leroy,   104,    165,   288. 
Leroy  J.,  250. 
Leslie  W.,  434. 
Letta  C,  383. 
Lettie  E.  Lloyd,  445. 
Lettie  Landphere,  278. 
Leura  Bates,  255. 
Levi,    155. 
Lewis  B.  W.,  392. 
Lewis  E.,  431. 
Lewis  H.,  159,  398. 
Lewis  W.,  426. 
Libbie  Brown,    178. 
Libbie  Thomas,  250. 
Liberty  Furman,  245. 
Lida  R.  Doane,  475. 
Lida  Silver,  248. 
Lidie  B.  Yarnall,  454. 
Lila,  439. 
Lilian  ^L,  394. 
Lilias  E..   389. 
Lillian,  485,  487,   504. 
Lillian    A.    Sloan,    504. 
Lillian  E.,  476. 
Lillian  L.,  357. 


568 

Babcock,  Lillian  M.,  376. 
Lillian  V.,  303. 
Lillie,  283,  472,  532. 
Lillie   A.    Barnes,   472. 
Lillie  Henry,   171. 
Lillie  J.  Root,  385. 
Lillie  M.,  370. 
Lillie  S.,  333,  336. 
Lily  Clark,  395. 
Lina  M.,  178. 
Lina  Young,  421. 
Lincoln,  527. 
Linn  B.,  494. 
Lizzie  A.,  281,  418. 
Lizzie  B.   Atkinson, 

296. 
Lizzie  E.,  481. 
Lizzie  M.,  304,  447.  47i- 
Lizzie  Taylor,  265. 
Lizzie  Weston,  394. 
Lizzie  Young,  366. 
Lloyd  L.,  527. 
Locadie,  216. 
Lodema,   163. 
Lodowick,      123,      126, 

132,    136,    225. 
Lois,  58,  63,   153.   T<^^- 
Lois    A.     Matterson, 

446. 
Lois  A.  Thurber,  272. 
Lois  Billings,  57. 
Lois  C,  372. 
Lois  C.  Kysor,  370. 
Lois  D.,  221. 
Lois  E.,  262. 
Lois  Greenman,  75. 
Lois  Hibbard,   116. 
Lois  J.,  433. 
Lois  Laurens,  75. 
Lois  Lewis,  208. 
Lois  M.,  381. 
Lois  N.,  257. 
Lois  Potter,  211. 
Lois  Ross.  250. 
Lois  Westcott,   383. 
Lora  Rice,  234. 
Lora  W.,  178. 
Lorana,  287. 
Lorana  Foster,   161. 
Lorella  B.,  181. 
Lorema   Oatley,    212. 
Loren,  187. 
Loren  R.,  276. 
Lorene   E.,   375. 
Lorenzo,   lor,   167. 
Lorenzo  D.,  385. 
Lorett  Coon,  206. 
Loretta  Brown,  170. 
Lorinda  Mungar,  463. 
Lorinde  Otis,   120. 


Index. 

B  a  b  c  o  c  k,   Lottie  Bar- 

deen,  436. 
Lottie  C.  Malory,  462. 
Louis,  163,  303. 
Louis  A.,  278. 
Louis  L.,  381. 
Louisa,    68,     loi,     129, 

136,    378. 
Louisa  A.    Carmen, 

170. 
Louisa  Brown,  384. 
Louisa  Clark,  265. 
Louisa  Cole,  235. 
Louisa  E.,  373. 
Louisa  G.,  359,  361. 
Louisa  Gilinore,   115. 
Louisa  M.,  200. 
Louisa  Silvis,  357. 
Louisa  Weston,  248. 
Louise,  391,  407. 
Louise  Austin,  407. 
Louise  B.,  216. 
Louise  Bebee,  loi. 
Louise  Boucher,  216. 
Louise  E.,  420. 
Louise   E.  Cearley,  426. 
Louise  Davis.  285. 
Louise  G.,  468. 
Louise  J.  Rhodes,  201. 
Louise  Newell,   175. 
Louise  Parkhill,  518. 
Louise  Wood,  385. 
Love,  210. 
Lovey  Roberts,  250. 
Lovila  Murray,   458. 
Lovilla,  418. 
Lua  E.  Card,  372. 
Luah  Griffin,  441. 
Lucas,  51. 
Lucenia  Case,  358. 
Lucile,  468,  474,  479. 
Lucinda,  loi.  109,  264. 
Lucinda  A.,  480. 
Lucinda  Brown,  314. 
Lucinda  Decker,  245. 
Lucinda  F.,  270. 
Lucinda  Gilbert,   167. 
Lucinda  J.,  419. 
Lucinda   Alaxson,    165 
Lucinda   Pettie,   323. 
Lucinda      Shepardson, 

168. 
Lucretia,  38,  53,  78,  94. 

190. 
Lucretia  (B.),  38,  53. 
Lucretia     Davis,      109, 

TIG,    235;. 
Lucretia  F.  Evans,  368. 
Lucretia  Gardner,  209. 
Lucretia  M.,  415. 


Babcock,  Lucretia  R.,  385. 
Lucy,  51,  71,  75,  91, 
94,  102,  103,  117, 
121,  123,  132,  137, 
140,  165,  179,  197, 
213,     228,     313,     319, 

379- 
Lucy  (B.),  91,  228. 
Lucy   A.,   vi,    170,   209, 

211,    299,     349,     360, 

410. 
Lucy  A.  Clark,  loi. 
Lucy  A.   Huntingtgon, 

169. 
Lucy  A.  Maxson,  171. 
Lucy  A.  Stillman,  300. 
Lucy  Allen,  292. 
Lucy  B.,  216,  363. 
Lucy    B.    Shackford, 

426. 
Lucy  Bell,  127. 
Lucy  Bishop,  147. 
Lucy   Blackman,   201. 
Lucy  Burton,  436. 
Lucy  Chesebro,   338. 
Lucy  Crary,  208. 
Lucy  D.,  130. 
Lucy  D.    (B.),   130. 
Lucy  Davis,   136. 
Lucy  E.,  174,  304. 
Lucy  H.,  179. 
Lucy  Havard,  404. 
Lucy  J.,  378- 
Lucy   L.,   172,  292, 
Lucy  L.  Austin,  537. 
Lucy  Lee,  293. 
Lucv  M.,  224,  243,  479. 
Lucy  .M.  Lathrop,  358. 
Lucy  Maxson,  97. 
Lucy  McKinley,  274. 
Lucy  P.,   187. 
Lucy  Valentine,  435. 
Lucy  Wilcox,  60. 
Lucy  Witt,  175. 
Lucyett,  182. 
Lueila  A.,  309. 
Luella  F.,  532. 
Lueila  R.,  463. 
Luke,  65,    66,    67,    88, 

100.  125,  126,  132, 144. 
Luke  P.,  290,  291. 
Lula,  338. 
Lulu  M.,  527. 
Lulu  Youngs,  465. 
Lura,  174. 
Lydia,  48,    51,    55,    79. 

80,   84,   98,    123,    141, 

143,     170,     177,     184, 

201,     274,     290,     322, 

335,    431,    472,     534. 


Babcock,    L  y  d  i  a    (B.), 
290. 
Lydia  A.  Davis,  280. 
Lydia  Barber,   172. 
Lydia   Bowen,  230. 
Lydia  Biirdick,  383. 
Lydia     C.     Wightman, 

267. 
Lydia  Campbell,  397. 
Lydia  Crandall,  22,  23. 
Lydia  Darrow,  190. 
Lydia  Davis,  87. 
Lydia  E.,  225. 
Lydia  Gardner,  209. 
Lydia  J.,   281. 
Lydia  Keller,  294. 
Lydia  L.,  533. 
Lydie  Lee,  79. 
Lydia  Macomber,  258. 
Lvdia  INI  a  X  s  o  n,   158, 

'281. 
Lydia  Palmer,  385. 
Lydia  Smith,  245. 
Lydia  V.,  369. 
Lydia  Wells,   164. 
Lydia  Wight,   132,  133. 
Lydia  Woodward,   141. 
Lyman  F.,  210. 
Lyman   R.,   358. 
Lynn,  458. 

Lynn   Kimbrich,  476. 
Lyra,  377- 
Lysander,  234. 
M.  Kate,  499. 
Mabel,  435>  499- 
Mabel  A.,  378. 
Mabel  Buch,  482. 
Mabel  E.  Montgomery, 

524- 
Mabel   F.,  296. 
Mabel  J.,  469. 
Mabel  L.,  493. 
Mable,  266. 
Mable  Hatch,   183. 
Madison,    161.  • 

Mae  G.,  517. 
Magdalene,  211. 
Maggie  A.  Watt,  532. 
Maggie   D.,   281. 
Maggie  McChesney, 

493- 
Maggie   Pratt,  272. 
Mahala  Morgan,  181. 
]\I  a  h  a  1  a     Sherwood, 

435- 
Malinda,  429. 
Malinda  McCart,  290. 
Malinda  Tarbox,   370. 
Malone  S.,  374. 
Maltbie  D.,  443,  444. 


Index. 

Babcock,   Malvina,    163. 
Mamie,  406. 
Mamie     E.      Kerwich, 

512. 
Manville,  165. 
Marah,  226. 
Maranda,  295. 
Marcclla  E.,  289. 
Marcia,   100. 
Marcia  Cook,  431. 
-Marcia  Wing,  310. 
Maretta  Townson,  153. 
Margaret,   283,   359. 
^Margaret  A.  Daly,  525. 
IMargaret  C,  525. 
Margaret    E.    Bechtol, 

537. 
Margaret  J.,  276. 
Margaret     J.      Oliver, 

230. 
Margaret  M.,  409,  521. 
^Margaret  Moore,  276. 
Margaret     S.      Burke, 

228. 
Margaret   Schuyler, 

(B.),  136. 
Margaret  T.,  424. 
^largaret  V.  Schuyler, 

230. 
Maria,     131,     146,    241, 

268,     272,     327,     341, 

390. 
Maria  A.,  129,  413. 
Maria  A.  Bicknell,  389. 
Maria  Barton,  274. 
Maria  Chesebro,  415. 
Maria   Dailey,   429. 
Maria  E.,  389. 
INIaria  Eells,  215. 
Maria  G.  Green,  483. 
Maria  Hubbell,  338. 
Maria  J.,  456. 
Maria  Kellogg,  323. 
Maria  Knapp,  255. 
Maria  L.,  423. 
Maria  L.  Schermer- 

horn,  320. 
Maria  Morgan,  254. 
INLaria   P..   536. 
Maria  Potter,  290. 
Maria  Purdy,   164. 
]\Iaria  S.  Bonfoey,  241. 
J\laria  Shute,  216. 
ATaria  Stowe,  310. 
IMaria  V.,  460. 
Maria  V.   Feare}',  460. 
Maria  Warner,  425. 
Maria  York,  206. 
Mariah  Ayres,  283. 
Mariah  L.,  130. 


Babcock,   Marian,  250. 
Marian     A.     Burdick, 

516. 
Marian  C,  476. 
Maribah,  48. 
Marie,  375- 
Marie  A.,  519. 
Marie  E.,  267. 
IMarie  E.  Brown,  374. 
Marie  Hurd,  439. 
Marie   Sleight,   394. 
Marietta  B.,  332. 
Marietta  Betts,  502. 
Mariette,   72. 
Marion,  245. 
Marion  A.,  527. 
Marion  B.,  345. 
Marion  B.  Alden,  512. 
Marion    B.    Devoll, 

345- 

Marion  F.,  403. 

Marion  R.,  524. 

Marion  Stone,  245. 

Marjorie  B.,  433. 

IMarjorie  E.,  518. 

Marjorie  Rodman,  445. 

Marlborough,   132. 

Marlon  P.,  308. 

i\Iarsend,  295. 

ALartha,  33,  49.  53,  86, 
87,  97,  118,  120,  124, 
144,  145,  157,  158, 
192,  194,  212,  246, 
251,  282,  284,  290, 
332,  406,  494,  514- 

Martha  (B.),  194,  282. 

Martha   A.    Palmer, 

477- 
^ilartha    B.    Champlin, 

377- 
ALartha  B.  Cross,  253. 
Martha   Brainard,   489. 
Martha    Brown,   451. 
Martha  Bugbee,  198. 
Martha  Card,   152. 
Martha  Chipman,  377. 
Martha  Davis,  96,, 
Martha  Dickens,  227. 
Martha    E.,    264,    267, 

281. 
Martha  E.    (B.),  267. 
Martha   E.    Rockwood, 

38s. 
Martha  F..  275. 
Martha  Gardner.  204. 
Martha  H.,  68,  250. 
Martha    Hoxie,    87. 
]\rartha  Hubbard,  67. 
Martha  J.  Dollings, 

369- 


570 

B  a  b  c  o  c  k,    Martha    J. 
Langworthy,   372. 
Martha  J.  Wicks,  398. 
Martha  L.,  281. 
Martha  L.    (B.),  281. 
Martha  Lewis,  119. 
Martha  M.,  440. 
Martha     M.     Hamlin,. 

131- 

Martha  Morgan,  164. 

Martha  O.  Rand,  254. 

Martha  P.,  150,  212. 

Martha  PeUon,  502. 

Martha  Perry,  86. 

Martha  S.,  253. 

Martha  S.  Paine,   150. 

Martha  V.,  205. 

Martha  W.,  355. 

Martha  Wells,  270. 

Martin,    188,   283. 

Martin  V.,  281. 

Martin  W.,  168. 

Mary,  8,  12,  13,  15, 
18,  19,  21,  23,  25, 
27,    39,    43,    44,    45, 

46,    47,    48,    49,  50, 

52,    63,    74,    76,  79, 

81,    86,    87,    90,  91, 

92,   95,   96,    100,  103, 

117,     121,     122,  126, 

137,  139,  141,  145, 

149,  151,  159,  165, 

176,  198,  207,  212, 

215,  225,  228,  248, 

249,  258,  263,  275, 

276,  28s,  286,  288, 

313.  319,  320,  322, 

327.  336,  343,  371. 

378,  384,  38s,  403. 

406,  425,  426,  438, 

469,  497,  542,  544, 

545- 
Mary  (B.),  74,  88,  122, 

137,    149,  225,  263. 
Mary    (B.)    fB.),   88. 
Marv  (B.)   Irish,  343. 
Mary      A.,      88,      127, 

130,     132,     135,     144. 

156,     157,     17.S,     178, 

181,     189,     208,     209, 

2T7,  248,  25s,  257. 
264,      286,      314.      316, 

336,  34  T,  376,  387, 
393.  407,  418,  447, 
453.    458,    519.    S^6. 

Mary  A.  (B.)  (B.), 
144. 

ATary  A.  Bernard,  534. 

Mary  A.  Bethune,  399. 

Mary  A.  Bird,  503. 


Inde^:. 

B  a  b  c  o  c  k,    Mary    A. 

Browning,  387. 
Mary  A.  Burrell,  403. 
Mary  A.  Clark,  170. 
Mary    A.     Hallenbeck, 

224. 
Mary  A.  Hi  Mott,  320. 
Mary  A.  Hoadley,  340. 
Mary  A.  James,  215. 
Mary  A.  Knevels,  391. 
Mary  A.  Loan,  369. 
!M  a  r  y    A.    Robinson, 

3II-. 
Mary  A.    Stillman,   vi, 

348. 
Mary   A.    Taylor,    166. 
Mary  A.  Wood,  118. 
Mary  Acomb,  436. 
Mary  B.,  488. 
Mary  B.  Burg,  191. 
Mary  Barber,  446. 
Mary  Bedell,  233. 
Mary  Bentley.  27. 
Mary  Bidgood,   126. 
Mary  Blake,  438. 
Mary  Brown,   145. 
Mary  Browning,   48. 
Mary  Buffington,  150. 
Mary  Bugg,   363. 
Mary  Burch,  234. 
Mary  C,  261,  330,  424, 

439- 

Mary  C.  Perry,  148. 

Mary  Card,  274. 

Mary  Champlin.  130. 

Mary  Chesebrough,  90. 

Mary  Clark,  203,  303. 

Mary  Coe,  263. 

Mary  Collins,  255. 

Mary  D.,  221,  262,  393, 
409. 

Mary  Davidson,    50. 

Mary  Davis,  126. 

Mary  E.,  136,  144, 
152,  169,  243,  250, 
257,  259,  264,  266, 
281,  295,  302,  310, 
314,  316,  326.  341, 
358,  360,  369,  378, 
410.  419,  442,  446. 
454,     456,     480.     526. 

]\Iary  E.  Bradbrook. 
333. 

Mary  E.  Burdick,  485. 

Mary  E.  Chipman,  317. 

Mary  E.  Dye,  473. 

Mary  E.  Fayerweather, 
522. 

Mary  E.  Fry,  263. 

Mary  E.  Garrison,  432. 


Babcock,   Mary  E.   Hall, 

454- 
Mary  E.  Houser,  232. 
Mary   E.   James,   261. 
Mary  E.  O'Neill,  412. 
Mary    E.    Schermer- 

horn,   297. 
Mary  E.  Stillman,  169. 
Mary     E.     Thompson 

Wells,  425. 
Mary   Elliot,   285. 
Mary  F.,  222,  402,  484. 
Mary  F.  Ottignon,  222. 
Mary  F.  Sherman,  261. 
Mary  Fen,   160. 
Mary  Forsvthe,  276. 
Mary  G.,  68,  230. 
Mary  G.  Hodge,  409. 
Mary  Gardner,  517. 
Mary  Gavitt,   135,  213. 
Mary  Gifford,   148. 
Mary       Gildersleeve, 

387. 
Mary  Greene,  151. 
Mary  H.,  303,  492. 
Mary  Hall,  465. 
Mary  Heferman,  143. 
Mary  Hine,  243. 
Mary  Hinman,  251. 
Mary   Holloway,   80. 
Mary  Humphry,  245. 
J\lary  J.,  243,  286,  315, 

386,    457- 
Mary  J.  Barber,  483. 
Mary  J.   Cahoone,  262. 
Mary  J.  Giles,  377. 
Mary  J.    Gorham,   429. 
Mary  J.  Penny,  325. 
Mary  K.,  410. 
Mary  K.  Maxson,  168. 
Mary     K.     Richards, 

237- 
Mary     L.,      167,     222, 

237  <     305.     371-     399. 
•     412,     51S,     S16,    530. 
Mary  L.  Braun,  389. 
Mary  Larrison,   102. 
Mary   L  a  w  t  o  n,    545, 

546. 
Mary  Lee,  212. 
Mary  Locke,  380. 
Marv  Lowrey,  222. 
Mary  M.,  534. 
Mary  M.  Kelley,  291. 
Mary   Mannering,    133. 
]\Tary  May,  467. 
Mary  McGhee,  250. 
ATary   McMaster,   247. 
Mary  N.,   384. 
Mary  N.   (B.),  384. 


Babcock,    Miiry    Nugent, 
212. 

Mary  P.,  245,  321. 
Mary  P.  Crosby,  512. 
Mary  P.  Perry,  262. 
Mary  Peckham,  47. 
Mary   Perry,   92. 
Mary  Purdy,  274. 
Mary  R.,  327.  482. 
Mary  Reynolds,  535. 
Mary  Rogers,  377. 
Mary  Ross,  316. 
Mary  S.,  230. 
Mary  S.  F.  Randolph, 

283. 
Mary  S.  Oilman,  221. 
Mary  Satterlee,  63. 
Mary  Segar,  261. 
Mary  Smith,  61,   179. 
Mary  Stanton,  64. 
Mary  Stevens,  210. 
Mary    Stewart    Terry, 

283. 
Mary  T.,  igi,  253,  491. 
Mary  Thompson,  90. 
Mary  Tombs,  440. 
Mary  Townsend,  145. 
Mary  V.,  299,  409. 
Mary      Van     Buskirk, 

270. 
Mary    Vosbiirgh,     156, 

165. 
Mary  W.,  392. 
Mary  Wilcox,  262. 
Mary  Woodruff,  392. 
Mary  Worden.  71. 
Maryett.  530. 
Matie,  481. 
Matie  A.,  473. 
Matilda,  94,  263,  274. 
Matilda  Brazil.  464. 
IMatilda  IMendell.  428. 
IMatilda  Myers,  534. 
Matthew,  181. 
Mattie  E..  481. 
Mason,  209. 
Maud,    289. 
Maud  A.,  306,  405. 
Maud  E..  469. 
Maud  M..  456. 
Maud  M.  Andros,  413. 
]\raud  Reed.  370. 
ATaud  Watson.  258. 
Maurice.  357,  471. 
Maxson,  97,  277. 
May,  290. 

May  Andrews,  517. 
May  B.,  471. 
May   C.    Crandall.  493. 
May  Hadley,  221. 


Index. 

Babcock.  May  K.,  496. 
Mehitable,  "38. 
Mehitable  Chalker,  39, 

77- 
Mehitable  Sheldon,  81. 
Mehitable  Wheeler,  85, 

91. 
Mela,  251. 
iNIelinda,    64. 
Melissa,   loi,   126,   161, 

165,    385- 
Melissa  J.,  267. 
INIelissa  Thorn,  202. 
]\Iercy,    12,    14.   26,   39, 

60,   79,  260,   271. 
Mercy  A.,  180,  331. 
Mercy  A.  Gillett,  177. 
Mercy  Barber,  260. 
Mercy  Brousmaid.  105. 
Mercy  Davis,   180. 
Mercy  Hinckley,  180. 
Mercy  Kenyon,    1 19. 
-\Iercy  Kinney,  106. 
Meria,   402. 
Merrit,   155,  270,  271. 
Mersula  Sowles,  247. 
:\Iertin  M.,  527. 
Metta.  405. 
Metta  E.,  307. 
Metta  E.  (B.),  307. 
Metta  Bristol,  405. 
Metta  Platts,  283. 
Mildred,   533. 
Mildred  E.,  527. 
Mildred  R.,  431. 
Mildred  S.,  388. 
Millicent  Wood,  345. 
Millie  Jones,  515. 
Milton,   230. 
Milton  J.,  278,  303. 
Mina  C,  303. 
Mina  E.,  261. 
Minard,  161,  166. 
Minerva,  160,  175. 
Minnie,  265,  333. 
Minnie  Austin,  406. 
INIinnie  Bass.  472. 
]\Iinnie  C.  Clarke.  388. 
Minnie  Carpenter,  502. 
Minnie    D.    Ellsworth. 

494. 
Minnie  Dal  son,  482. 
Minnie  E.,  533. 
Minnie  M.,  468. 
Minnie  Young.  387. 
]\Iira  Robertson.  130. 
Miriam.  47. 
Miriam  G..  304. 
Miriam  Jones,  304. 
Miriam   Moulton,    322. 


Babcock,   Molly,  75,   HO- 

Molly  (B.),  140. 

Monroe,  265. 

Morgan,    164,  232. 

Morton  E.,  378. 

Morton  F.,  516. 

Moses,  150,   164. 

Mulford,  179. 

Muriel  Rogers,  374. 

Myra,  405- 

Myra  C,  251. 

Myra  D.,  531. 

Myra  F.  Marsh,  330. 

Myra   Lawson,    178. 

Myron  G.,  171,  414. 

Myrtle  Burger,  289. 

Nancy,  9.  72,  100.  1 17. 
123,  124,  134,  163, 
164,     175,     196,     202. 

213,  214,     227,     228, 
236,    269. 

Nancy  (B.),  134. 
Nancy    A.,     120,     156, 

280,     332- 
Nancy  Arnold,  172. 
Nancy  B.,  127. 
Nancy  Bell,  127. 
Nancy  Brown,  377. 
Nancy  Burdick.   162. 
Nancy  C.  466. 
Nancy  (B.)   Carr,  269. 
Nancy  Crandall,  124. 
Nancy  D..  150. 
Nancy  Dyslin,  465. 
Nancy  E.,  179. 
Nancy    E.    Lippencott, 

462. 
Nancy  Hawkins.  95. 
Nancy  J.,  368. 
Nancy  Lackey.  271. 
Nancy  Lewis.  60. 
Nancy    M.    Burdick, 

441. 
Nancy  Maxson.  214. 
Nancy  Perry,   153. 
Nancy  Pratt,   188. 
Naomi,  427. 
Naomi  J.,  246. 
Natalie,  393. 
Nathalie  L..  424. 
Nathan,  vi,  20,  25,  47, 

59,    60.    61,    62,    74, 

97,     118,     161,     162, 

214,  272,    288,    290, 
346,   457. 

Nathan  E.,   178. 
Nathaniel.    549. 
Nathaniel  P..  3Q3- 
Nathaniel  S.,  180. 
Nellie,   378,   403,   503- 


572 

Babcock,     Nellie     Bebee,    B 

517- 

Nellie  D.,  430. 

Nellie  E.,  500. 

Nellie  F.,  485- 

Nellie  L.  Granger,  423, 

Nellie  O.  Watson,  272,- 

Nellie  Putnam,  206. 

Nellie  R.,  261. 

Nellie  S.,  250. 

Nellie  Simon,  471. 

Nelson,  286,  293. 

Nelson  E.,  272. 

Nettie  Franklin.  178. 

Nettie  G.,  243. 

Nettie  L.,  272. 

Nettie  O.,  477- 

Nicander  W.,  285. 

Nicholas  H.,   131,  222. 

Nora  v.,  370. 

Norah  Rogers,  433. 

Norman   A.,   374. 

Norman  C.,  518. 

Norman  H.,  514- 

Noyes,  403. 

Noyes  E.,  379- 

Octava,   176. 

Odessa   Hess,   172. 

Ogden,   270. 

Ogden  D.,  387- 

Olive,  271,  430,  443. 
522. 

Olive  Brusie,  296. 

Olive  Bryant,  405. 

Olive   C.,  401- 

Olive  Denison,  172. 

Olive  Dickinson,  155. 

Olive   T.,   304.  482. 

Olive  J.    (B.),  304- 

Olive  L.,  281. 

Oliver,  xxviii,  10,  16, 
22,  24,  25.  28,  37, 
51,  52,  55.  56,  57, 
60,  76,  77,  97-  106, 
107,  113,  123,  135, 
136,  160,  161,  187, 
194,  196,  197,  227, 
270,  274,  287,  289, 
409,    430.     542,     546. 

549- 
Oliver  C.,  226,    522. 

Oliver  F..  493. 
Oliver   M.,    434- 
Oliver   P.,   276. 
Oliver  R.,  327. 
Oliver  W.,  464. 
Olivia,  435- 

Olivia  B.  Smith,  185.     ■ 
Olivia  S.  Cady,  252. 
Omer  A.,  469. 


Index. 

abcock,    Ophelia,    275. 
Ora,  203,  458. 
Orester  M.,  374. 
Orilla  Bailey,  205. 
Orin,  201. 
Orinda,   136. 
Orissa  A.,  295. 
Orissa  E.,  278. 
Orlando,  214,  501. 
Orletta  S.,  376. 
Orpha  L.,  249. 
Orra  M.,  116. 
Orra  M.   (B.)    Collins, 

116. 
Orrin,  203. 
Orsa  M.  Rich,  404. 
Orvil  E.,  518. 
Orville,    183. 
Orvis  S.,  431- 
Oscar,  405. 
Oscar  A.,  469. 
Oscar  H.,  380. 
Oscar  S.,  215,  281,  S'/- 
Oscar  Scott,  282. 
Osman  W.,  373- 
Otis   H.,   530. 
Palace,  286. 
Palmer,  358. 
Palmer  G.,  513- 
Panthea      P.      Bunker, 

128. 
Pardon,  293. 
Pardon  L.,  265. 
Parmelia  A.,  144. 
Parnel  Ely,  210. 
Parthenia  P..  389. 
Parthenia      P.       (B.), 

389- 
Patience,  62- 
Patience  Cottrell.  62. 
Patience   Pendleton, 

Patten  F.,  162. 
Patty  Barber,  118. 
Paul,    33.    61,    89,    99. 

119,     127,     128,     134. 

183.  208,  395-  467. 
Paul  F.,  472. 
Paul  H.,  474. 
Paul  R.,  213,  475,  5i8. 
Pauline,  184. 
Pauline  B.,  491. 
Peace,   136. 
Pearl,  383- 
Pearl  V.,  472. 
Pearlie,   298. 
Pearline,  428. 
Peleg,  62,  97,  132,  149. 

164,     165,     178,     179, 

260,  290,  313. 


Babcock,  Peleg  B.,  328. 
Peleg  W.,  91. 
Penelope,  92,   123,   151. 
Penelope  P.  Andrews, 

402. 
Perlie  Hunt,  246. 
Perley  S.,  524. 
Perly  J.,  412. 
Perrin,  444. 
Perrin  D.,  434. 
Perry,  93,   154. 
Perry  G.,  315,  452. 
Perry   H.,    147,  439- 
Perry  J.,  417. 
Persis  L.,  463. 
Persis  W.,  463. 
Peter,  14. 

Peter  H.,   159,  245. 
Peter  O.,  283. 
Phebe,   42,    78,   93.   94- 

99,      loi,      102,     117, 

120,     122,     123,     12&, 

196,  209. 
Phebe  (B.),  77,  196. 
Phebe  A.,  470,  518. 
Phebe  A.   Camp,   172. 
Phebe  A.  Moyer,  462. 
Phebe  A.   Swan,  389. 
Phebe    B.    Rathbun, 

102. 
Phebe   Burch,    77.   138. 

139- 
Phebe  C.  414. 
Phebe  Couch,  244. 
Phebe    E.    Stillman, 

348. 
Phebe  I.,  170. 
Phebe  J.,  349- 
Phebe  Jones,  440. 
Phebe  M..  149.  260,  349. 
Phebe  Noyes,   256. 
Phebe  P.,  150. 
Phebe  Perkins,  91. 
Phebe  Swan,  52. 
Phebe  T.,  152. 
Phebe   W.    Johnson, 

346. 
Phebe  White,  160. 
Phebe   Wilbur,    164. 
Phila  Coddington,  159. 
Philander,  209. 
Philena,   170,  203. 
Philena    L.    Douglass, 

469. 
Philip  E.,  454- 
Philip  S.,  395- 
Philyer  L.,  433. 
Phineas,    38,     39,     97, 

139,    161.    235. 
Phiothata  Davis,  277. 


Index. 


573 


B  a  b  c  o  c  k,    Phoebe    A., 

428. 
Polly,  94,  97-  104,  132, 

138,     154,     182,     201, 

202. 
Polly  Benedict,   iii. 
Polly  Burdick,   137. 
Polly  Champion,  271. 
Polly  Hill,  369- 
Polly  Monroe,    137. 
Polly   Palmer,    162. 
Polly  Potter,  144. 
Polly  Randall,   187. 
Polly  Reynolds,   159. 
Polly  S.   Parish,  454. 
Porter  T.,  474. 
Porter  W.,  472. 
Prentice,    126,   213. 
Priscilla,  210,   278. 
Priscilla  Trainer,  358. 
Priscilla  Wheeler,  51. 
Prudence,  49. 
Prudence     C.       Cleve- 
land, 169. 
Prudence  Denison,  38. 
Prudence   Gavitt,    124. 
Prudence  Stanton,  126. 
Prudence  Waters,   115. 
Prudence  Whitford, 

135.    210. 
Purl,  369. 

Rachel,  78,  104,  141. 
Rachel  A..  183. 
Rachel   Allen,    183. 
Rachel    Burhite,   244. 
Rachel    Concklin,    78. 
Rachel  >.Iaxson,  281. 
Rachel  ^IcGill,  276. 
Rachel  Reed,  74. 
Ralph,  291. 
Ralph  A.,  469. 
Ralph  J\I.,  357- 
Ralph  R..  472. 
Ralph  W  ,  374. 
Ransom  E.,  178. 
Rauldon  K.,  339. 
Ray  E..  369. 
Ray  W.,  453- 
Raymond.      172.      179, 

395,    471.    472.     502. 
Raymond  D.,  476. 
Raymond  L..  431. 
Rebecca.     24.     62,     94, 

126.  150,  270. 
Rebecca    A.    S  m  i  t  h, 

239- 
Rebecca  Cook,  224. 
Rebecca     E.     T  r  o  w  - 

bridge.    281. 
Rebecca  Howell,  219, 


B  a  b  c  o  c  k,   Rebecca    L. 
Davis,    158. 
Rebecca    Loofboro, 

157- 
Rebecca     Stanton,     24, 

36. 
Rebecca  Wilts,  74. 
Rectina,  202. 
Remember,   23. 
Retta  Bristol,  406. 
Reuben,    103.    104,    180. 

181. 
Rhoda,    62,     89,      123, 

212,  225,    245. 
Rhoda  A.  Trowbridge, 

259- 
Rhoda  L.,  427. 
Rhoda  P.,  247. 
Rhoda  Smith,   143. 
Rhodes,  116. 
Rhodes  H.,  370. 
Rhodes  R.,  202. 
Richard,    63,    79,     148, 

213,  336,    418,  514. 
Richard  C,   148. 
Richard   P.,   520.   522. 
Richard  H.,  445. 
Rieta  W.,  392. 
Riley,  104. 
Roanna,   380. 
Robert,   xxviii,   319, 

429,  461,    542. 
Robert  A.,  477. 
Robert  D.,  272. 
Robert  E.,  360. 
Robert  F.,  221. 
Robert    G.,     115,    200, 

201,   221,    366. 
Robert  H.,  393. 
Robert  P.,  380. 
Robert  S.,  217,  394. 
Robert  W.,  394. 
Rocelia  C.  Davis,  159. 
Rodney  S.,  450. 
Rodney  W.,  434. 
Rodolphus,  297. 
Roena  M.,  282. 
Rolla  O..  28s. 
Roll  in  H.,  468. 
Roman.   143. 
Rosa,  276. 
Rosa  L..  281. 
Rosalie  B.,  389. 
Rosalie  Wickham,  419. 
Rosalinda.  536. 
Rosalthe  Randall.  404. 
Roscoe  C,  482. 
Rose  E.,  312. 
Rose  Hazelton.  461, 
Rose  Jones,  483. 


Babcock,    Rose    Monroe, 

412. 
Rosetta,  290. 
Rosetta  Nichols,  290. 
Rosia  Green,  432. 
Ross,  164. 

Roswell,  135,  191,  501. 
Roswell  H.,  489. 
Rouse,  384,  437,  438. 
Rowland,  88,  144. 
Rowse,  88,  145,  167. 
Rowse  P.,  149. 
Rowse  Potter,  149. 
Roxa  B.,  163. 
Roxanna  Briggs,  246. 
R  o  X  a  n  n  a  Williams, 

163. 
Roxey    Lewis,    234. 
Roy,  282. 
Royal  G.,  450. 
Royal  O.,  406. 
Rozina  Ryan,  214. 
Ruah  A.  Hague,   158. 
Ruby  A..  467. 
Ruby  Foster,  290. 
Ruby  G.,  231. 
Ruby  M.  Joyce,  481. 
Rue  G.,  211. 
Rufus,  vi,  54,  105,  113, 

182,     184,     185,    2>22, 

324- 
Rufus  J..  536. 
Ruhannah,  98. 
Russel,    156,    165,    335, 

430. 
Russel  P.,  399. 
Ruth,    22,    47.    50,    52. 

62,   87,   93,    151,    153. 

282.  552. 
Ruth   (B.),  46,  47,  87. 
Ruth  A.,  302,  393. 
Ruth  C,  447. 
Ruth  Greene,  123. 
Ruth   H.,   7?,. 
Ruth  M.,  533. 
Ruth  Maxson,  88,  97. 
Ruth   O.,   482. 
Ruth   Phillips.  436. 
Ruth    Rodman,    J2>- 
S.  Franklin,  445. 
Saberah.  169. 
Sadie  Burns,  265. 
Salina  Bowers.  178. 
Sallie   Sprague.   447. 
Sally,  255. 
Sally  CB.),  145. 
Sally  A.,  252,  313. 
S  a  1  1  V    A.    IMarkham, 

288.' 
Sally  Blivin,  181. 


574 

Babcock,  Sally  Davis, 
102,  313- 

Sally  F.,  130. 

Sally  Gallup,  i54- 

Sally  I.  Sheffield,  I53- 

Sally  J.,  181. 

Sally  Newell,  100. 

Sally   Otis,   200. 

Sally  Reynolds,  247. 

Saloma,   168. 

Salome,  274. 

Samantha  C  r  o  f  o  o  t, 
292. 

Samantha  J.,   181. 

Samuel,  19,  29,  39, 
43,  44,  47,  60,  61, 
78,  79.  80,  84,  87, 
117,  119,  125,  140, 
142,  143,  151,  178, 
242,  244,  270,  370, 
424,    427,    462,    547, 

549- 

Samuel  A.,  483. 

Samuel  B.,  200. 

Samuel  C.  Yeaton,  478. 

Samuel  D.,  283,  37i, 
390,  520. 

Samuel  E.,  242. 

Samuel   F.,  ^y^T. 

Samuel  G.,  214. 

Samuel  H.,  316. 

Samuel  L.,  204. 

Samuel   P.,   152,  243. 

Samuel  R.,  472. 

Samuel   S..  204. 

Samuel  T.,  315. 

Samuel  W.,  246. 

Sanford,  357. 

Sands,  102,  179. 

Sarah,  12,  13,  23, 
28.  33.  35.  39-  46. 
48,  52,  53-  54.  58, 
80,  81,  82.  83,  89, 
90,  114,  116,  121, 
124,  132.  134,  135, 
136,  146,  150.  is6, 
161,  171,  179,  181. 
183,  191.  206,  211, 
212,  223,  261,  265, 
284,  315,  336,  431. 
436,  532.  .^36.  549. 

Sarah  (B.),  114,  132, 
135,     161,     211,     2,2,^. 

Sarah  A.,  "JZ-  152,  i7i. 
238,  240,  243,  280. 
320,  345.  401.  433- 

Sarah  A.  Burdick.  300. 

Sarah  A.  roVib.  470. 

Sarah  A.  Corbit,  143. 

Sarah  A.  Knowles,  385. 


Index. 

Babcock,    Sarah   A. 
Lewis,    265. 
Sarah  A.  Rawlett,  239. 
Sarah  A.  Sanford,  457. 
Sarah  Adams,  141. 
Sarah  Angel,   233. 
Sarah  Ann   Hite,  416. 
Sarah  B.,  491. 
Sarah  Barnes,   148. 
Sarah   Beardsley,    146. 
Sarah   Berry,   63. 
Sarah  Billings,  53. 
Sarah  Brown,  104,  327. 
Sarah  Brown  Stillman, 

150. 
Sarah  Budlong,  115. 
Sarah  C.  Allen,  419. 
Sarah  C.  Burwell,  464. 
Sarah  C.  Tallman,  451. 
Sarah    Chamberlain, 

243- 
Sarah   Chapman,  269. 
Sarah  Cheney,   179. 
Sarah  Clarke,  222. 
Sarah  Denison,  38,  40. 
Sarah  E.,  271,  385,  451, 

478,  479,  514. 
Sarah  E.  Furness,  412. 
Sarah     E.      Reynolds, 

375- 
Sarah  E.  Todd,  500. 
Sarah     E.    Van    Tine, 

334- 
Sarah  F.,  384. 
Sarah   F.   Randolph, 

282. 
Sarah  Fenn,  161. 
Sarah   Fuller,    156. 
Sarah    Gardner,    51. 
Sarah  Holden,  274. 
Sarah  L,  281. 
Sarah  J.,  141,  243,  261, 

378,  416. 
Sarah  J.  Bright,  433. 
Sarah  J.  Butler,  456. 
Sarah  J.  Gower,  431. 
Sarah  J.  White,  214. 
Sarah  Jones,  214. 
Sarah     K.     Holloway, 

439- 
Sarah  L.,  179. 
Sarah     M.,     170.     222, 

2S.'5-  414- 
Sarah    M.    De    Show, 

372. 

Sarah  M.  Greenman, 
206. 

Sarah  M.  Tavlor,  266. 

Sarah  M.  Woodman- 
see,  150. 


Babcock,     Sarah     N. 
Tracey,  332. 
Sarah  O.,  364,  365,  366. 
Sarah   P.,   151,  368. 
Sarah  P.  Johnson,  437. 
Sarah    Perry,    48,    89. 
Sarah  Petty,  282. 
Sarah  Pike,   144. 
Sarah  Potter,  149. 
Sarah  R.,  ^17,  385- 
Sarah  R.  Perry,  225. 
Sarah   Reynolds,   322. 
Sarah  Ross,   123. 
Sarah  S.,  148,  256. 
Sarah  Sayer,  147. 
Sarah   Segar,  44. 
Sarah  Sheldon,  81. 
Sarah  Slocum,  48. 
Sarah    Smith,   392. 
Sarah   Stanton,   33. 
Sarah  Stone,   176. 
Sarah  Strong,  254. 
Sarah  T.,  322. 
Sarah     V.     Danforth, 

427. 
Sarah  Vose,  27,  28,  56, 

57- 
Sarah  W.  Potter,   149. 
Sarah  Wait,  81. 
Sarah  Wareman,  116. 
Sarah  Weeden,  261. 
Sarah  Wiley.  265. 
Sebathial,  278. 
Segar,  82. 
Selah,  322. 
Seline  A.,  336. 
Selwin,  178. 
Serviah,  168,  171. 
Serviah  (B.),  168,  171. 
Seth  H..  416. 
Shelton   G.,   374. 
Sheridan,    527. 
Sherman,  118. 
Sherwood,   162. 
Siberah   Stillman,   99. 
Sibyl  A..  519. 
Sidney,  xix. 
Sidney  S.,  338. 
Silas,  29,  119,  158,  165, 

183.    271.    274. 
Silas  A.,  488. 
Silvia,    123. 
Simeon,  23,  25,  50,  51, 

80,   89,   92,    143,    151, 

157,     245,     263,     274. 

279,  42Q,  430. 
Simeon  H.,  277. 
Simon  B.,  72,  173.  178, 

338. 
Sobrina,  279, 


Babcock,    Solomon,    164. 
Solomon  W.,  201. 
Solona  Freeland,  3^3. 
Sophia,  536. 
Sophia  Averj',  183. 
Sophia  Bennett,  166. 
Sophia  Carnahan,  246. 
Sophia  A'l.  Kimball, 

302. 
Sophina  Rich,  272. 
Sophronia,   155,  164. 
Sophronia  A.,  270. 
Sophronia  B.,   373. 
Sophronia    D  a  r  r  o  w, 

247. 
Sophronia  M..  2^7, 

492. 
Sophronia     O.     Green, 

206. 
Stanley  C,  404. 
Stanton,  121.   126,   130, 

137,  214,     378,     393- 
Stanton  C,  436. 
Stanton   P.,   208. 
Stella,   532. 

Stella  Bunda,  212. 
Stella  M.,  431. 
Stephen,  37,  38,  52,  53. 
76,   77,   80.    136,    137, 

138,  139,  179,  234, 
235,  246,  260,  316, 
348,    349,    430. 

Stephen  B.,  486,  504. 
Stephen     E.,     vi,     231, 

527. 
Stephen  M.,  493. 
Stephen  T.,  216. 
Stephen  V..  245. 
Stevens,   320. 
Submit,  322. 
Sumner  H..  299. 
Survila  Barber,   171. 
Susan,    135,     154,     163, 

212,    232,    271,    291, 

31S,    370. 
Susan  A.,  260. 
Susan  B.,  230. 
Susan  B.  Blake,  530. 
Susan  Clapp,  98. 
Susan  Crandall,  151, 

233- 

Susan  Darner,  436. 
Susan  L.,  512. 
Susan  H.,  317,  450. 
Susan  M.,  234. 
Susan  M.  Berry,  377. 
Susan    M.    Lippencott, 

280. 
Susan    'SI.    Mooney, 

469. 


Index. 

Babcock,    Susan   Man- 

nering,  253. 
Susan  Ouderkirk,  335. 
Susan  P.,  92,  212. 
Susan  R.,  419. 
Susan    S.,    267. 
Susan  T.,  480. 
Susan  v.,  485. 
Susanna,  46,  48,  63,  86, 

88,    98. 
Susanna  Clark,  24. 
Susanna  Hopkins,  43. 
Susanna    M.    Gould, 

180. 
Susanna  Potter,  33,  45. 
Susanna    Thompson, 

49. 
Susannah       Champlin, 

80. 
Susannah  Fitch,  289. 
Susannah  Fowler,  142. 
Susannah  Perry,  89. 
Susannah  Royers,  96. 
Susie    A.    Simpkins, 

339- 
Susie  E.,  528. 
Susie  M.  Kees,  477. 
Sybil  I.,  447. 
Sylvester,      123,      147, 

167. 
Sylvia,  136. 

Sylvia  Belcher,  76,  77. 
Taber,  165. 
Tacy,  118. 
Tacy  A.,  382. 
Tacy  Frink,  171. 
Tacy  Langworthy,  117. 
Tacy  Maxson,  97. 
Tammison  W.  Rogers, 

325- 
Temperance     Burdick, 

205. 
Teresa,  171,  279. 
Thaddeus,  214. 
Thaddeus  S.,  246. 
Thalia  A.,  536. 
Thankful,    29,    38,    72, 

75,      82,      120,      123. 

126,     133,     136,     139. 

140,     213,     228,     367. 
Thankful     (B.),     126, 

139.  213. 
Thankful    L.    Burdick, 

260. 
Theodora,  524. 
Theodore,   vi,   79,   335, 

336,   425- 
Theodore  R.,  283. 
Theodore  H.,  423,  525. 
Theodore  I.,  529. 


575 

Babcock,     Theodore     S., 

526. 
Theresa  S.  Hall,  268. 
Thomas,  25,  50,  51,  96, 

116,     117,    209,    247, 

24.S,  283. 
Thomas  A.,  502. 
Thomas  B.,  236. 
Thomas  E.,  382,  383. 
Thomas  P.,  199. 
Thomas  T.,  175. 
Thomas  W.,  315. 
Thomas  Way,  377. 
Thomas  Wheeler,  86. 
Thyatima,   279. 
Tmiothy,  28,  56,  57,  58, 

106,     114,     198,     199, 

323,  362,  549. 
Tmiothy  A.,  356,  357. 
Timothy  E.,  323. 
Titus  B,,  429. 
Tristam  D.,  406. 
Truman,  214. 
Uriah  M.,  158. 
Vale,  406. 

Vashti   Chesebro,    162. 
Veda,  503. 
Vermeda,  295. 
Vernon  E.,  529,  530. 
Vernon  M.,  477. 
Versula,  465. 
Vianna,  281. 
Victor,   326,  467. 
Villa   Macomber,    148. 
Villie  Hotchkiss,  298. 
Vinton  S.,  333. 
Viola  C.,  290. 
Viola  I.,  292. 
Viola  L.,  477. 
Viola  M.,  266. 
Viola  O.,  528. 
Violet  Hazard,  294. 
Violette,  487. 
Virginia,  439,  446. 
Viroqua  Ames,  421. 
Waite,    150.  261. 
Waite  Peckham,  92. 
Waite  T.  Segar,  149. 
Wallace  €.,  458. 
Walter    B.,    214,    308, 

333^    377,    503,     522. 
Walter  C,  534. 
Walter  H.,  501. 
Walter  R.,  516. 
Walter  S.,  245,  429. 
Walter  V.,  281. 
Warren   C.,  236. 
Warren  D.,  313. 
Washington  B.,   172. 
Washington  I.,  127,  394. 


5/6 

B  a  b  c  ock,    Washington 
P.,    288. 
Wayne,  459. 
Wealthy,   137. 
Wealthy    A.    Burdick, 

384. 

Wealthy  Crandall,  316. 

Wealthy  M.  Crandall, 
267. 

Welcome,   118. 

Welcome  A.,  536. 

Welcome  B.,  277- 

Weltha,    179. 

Weltha  E.,  482. 

Wendell,  175. 

Wesley,   290. 

W.  I.,  vi. 

Wilber,  279,  282. 

Wilbert  L.,  243. 

Wilbur  v..  234. 

Wilhelmina,  281. 

Willard,   136. 

Willard  G.,  517. 

William,  14,  18,  30,  38, 
39,  40,  46,  61,  62,  72, 
74,  80,  loi,  112,  118, 
123,  136.  137,  141, 
157,  161,  175,  176, 
184,  209,  220,  234, 
242,  246,  271,  275, 
283,  290,  294.  308, 
320,  356,  376,  385, 
396,     402,     417,    438, 

548,   550,   551- 
William   A.,    193,    239, 
331,    435,    475,    492, 

504. 
William     Avery,      108, 

109,    no. 
William   B.,  425. 
William    C,    141,    385, 

436,    465- 
William    D.,    211,    232, 

265,    384.    398. 
William    E.,    181,    243, 

375.     391.    485.     523. 
William    P.,    2-57.    286, 

383. 
William   H..    262,    289, 

300.     402.     433,     451, 

465,    502,    522. 
William  J.,  160. 
William  M..  314,  370. 
William  N..  304,  358. 
William    P.,    i=;i,    234, 

385,    482,    485. 
William    R.,    14T,    252, 

330,     369.     39.S,     490. 
William    S..    128.    231. 

317,    402,    419. 


Index. 

B  a  b  c  o  c  k,  William  T., 
406,    500. 
William   W.,   247,   456, 

531. 
Willie,  467- 
Willie  G.,  250. 
Willis     A.,     308,     421, 

470,    474- 

Willis  E.,  210. 

Wilmenia  A.,  528. 

Winfield  Scott,  416.  ■ 

Winnie  E.,  285. 

Winnifred   E.,    311. 

Wirt  A.,  469. 

Woodward,   520. 

Worthington  E.,  525. 

Zachias  R.,  536. 

Zebulon,  62. 

Zemira  O.,  170. 

Zeruiah  Moses,  105. 
Bach,  Frank  J.,  427. 

Lura  R.  Furman,  427. 
Bacon,  Alice  M.,  423. 

Charity,  26. 

Elizabeth,  26. 

George,  26. 

Helen  A.  Mann,  423. 

Joseph,  241. 

Joseph  E.,  423. 

Maria  (B.),  241. 
Badcock,     B  e  n  j  a  m  i  n, 
xxiv,  XXV. 

Elizabeth,  xxi,  i,  541. 

George,  xxv,  xxviii. 

James,  v,  xii,  xiii,  xiv, 
xix,  XX,  xxi,  xxii, 
xxiii,  xxiv,  xxv, 
xxvi,  xxvii,  xxviii, 
xxix,  I,  2,  3,  4, 
5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  II, 
12,     13. 

Jane  Brown,  7,   8. 

Job,  xix,  XX,  xxi, 
xxiv,     xxvii.     5,     6, 

7,    9-    II,    12. 
John,    xix,     XX,      xxi, 

xxiv,  xxvi.   xxvii,   i, 

3.     4,     5-     6,     7,     8, 

9.    10,    II,    12. 
Joseph,  xxi.    6. 
Lovell  B..  viii. 
Mary,     xix,     xx,     xxi, 

xxiv. 
Mary    Lawton.     8,     9, 

IT.    12. 
Nathaniel.    6.     53,     ^7, 

102,     T03,     104,     181. 
Richard,   xi,   xii,   xiii. 
Return,  xxiv. 
Robert,  xxv,  xxviii. 


Badcock,    Sarah,    xx,    i, 

4,    7,    8,     12,    13. 
Badcocke,     James,     541, 

542. 

Job,  .541. 

John,  541. 

Joseph,  541. 
Bagg,  Abbie  L.,  308. 

Henry,  308. 

Lucretia  Johnson,   308. 
Bagnell,  Elizabeth,  480. 
Bailey,   Agnes  J.   Hinck- 
ley, 379- 

Albert  M.,  150. 

Clarissa  E.,  284. 

Corean,  182. 

Elias,  205. 

Harrie  Cady,   189. 

Harrington,  454. 

Jefferson  D.,  379. 

Lyman,   i  so. 

Mary  E.    (B.),  454. 

Morrell,   454. 

Orilla,  205. 

Orville  C,  284. 

Phebe  P.   (B.),  150. 

Sylvia  E.,  284. 

William,  189. 
Baine,  Alice,  427. 
Baker,  Benjamin,  51,  52. 

Burton  W.,  417. 

Celia,  294. 

Chauncey,   533. 

Donald,  417. 

Ella,  482. 

Elvira  L..  174. 

Emma,   511. 

G.  W.,  482. 

Hannah   (B.),  74. 

Hazel  A.,  533. 

Julia  L.    (B)..  417. 

Lois  H.,  533. 

Lucy  (B.),  51. 

Lydia  A..  283. 

Lydia  Hayden,  225. 

Lydia  L.   (B.),  533. 

Mary  (B.),  52. 

Norene  L.,  533. 

Pardon,  74. 

Peter,  174. 

Sarah  A..  344. 

Stephen  W.,  417. 

Valentine  O.,   533. 
Balam,  Lydia,  310. 
Baldings,  Charles,  469. 
Baldwin,   Caroline,   439. 

Eliza  Denison,  372. 

Elizabeth,  115. 

Harriet  E.   (B.).  372. 

James,  372. 


Baldwin,  Louis,  372. 

Louisa,  531. 
Ball,  Amelia,  131. 

Charlotte,  322. 

Dwight  W.,  231. 

Effie  A.,  345. 

Eliza  Milliken,  345. 

Emily  Porter,  202. 

Frances   (B.),  259. 

John  O.,  259. 

Mary   Porter,  202. 

Nicholas,  345. 

Ruby  G.  (B.),  231. 

Winifred,  485. 
Bandel,     Inez    M.     Bell, 

529- 

Joseph,  529. 
Bander,  Nellie  A.,  367. 
Barber,  Albert,  227. 

Allen,  317. 

Alonzo  D.,  99. 

Ann  Drake,  223. 

Arthur  T.,  400. 

Aurelia  Holmes,  399. 

Byron  C,  400. 

Caleb,  29. 

Charles,  399. 

Clarence  E.,  400. 

Cora  H.   Clark,  400. 

Dorcas  (B.),  61,  117. 

Edna,  353- 

Elizabeth,  140. 

Ellen  R.,  400. 

Emma  Harvey,  400. 

Eunice  (B.),  39,  223. 

Eunice  A.  Hall,  227. 

Experience    Barber, 

399- 
Frances  Rodem,  400. 
Frank  D.,  400. 
George,  212,   227,   266. 
Hannah,  182. 
Helen  T.  Taft,  400. 
Isabel  Sherman,  223. 
James,  353. 
John,  84,  260. 
Joseph,  223,  446. 
Josephine,    266. 
Lena  Wilson,  400. 
Lois  Gavitt,  35. 
Lucy  Potter,  84. 
Lydia,  172. 
Maria  F.  Hall,  227. 
Mary,  446. 
Mary  A.  Boss,  266. 
Mary  Barney,  140. 
Mary  I.,  399- 
Mary  J.,  483. 
Mary -Pendleton,  61. 
Matthew,  212. 

37 


Index. 

Barber,   Mercy,  260. 

Mercy  Moore,  260. 

Molly,  171. 

Nathan,  61,  117. 

Olivia,    169. 

Patty,   118. 

Peleg,  118,  223. 

Phebe,  223. 

Phebe  (B.),  99. 

Rhoda   (B.),  212. 

Sarah,  399. 

Sarah  B.  Stanton,  399. 

Sarah  E.  Brown,  317, 

Sarah  F.  Lewis,  353. 

Sarah  Huling,  446. 

Sarah  I.,  399. 

Sherman,  35. 

Survila,    171. 

Susan  (B.),  212. 

Susan  E.,  400. 

Thankful    (B.),  29. 

Thomas,  140,  223,  399. 

Thomas  S.,  399. 

Velina  A.,  400. 

William  B.,  400. 

William  D.,  400. 
Barclay,      Carrie     E. 
Briggs,  337. 

Thomas  J.,  337. 
Bardeen,  Americus,  374. 

Emogene,  374. 

Lottie,   436. 
Barden,    Betsy   C.    (B.), 
369. 

George,  369. 

Sally,   531. 
Barker,  Flizabeth  C.  F., 
520. 

Emily  F.  (B.),  520. 

Fordyce  D..  520. 

Lillian  L.  F.,  520. 

Mary,  529. 
Barnard,   Elizabeth,   478. 
Barnes,    Alice    E.    Wal- 
dorf, 460. 

Benjamin  F.,  489. 

Caroline  D.   (B.),  489. 

Cornelia  A.,  353. 

Ella  L.,  434. 

Esther  Fate,  353. 

Eulea.  460. 

Fayette  H.,  460. 

George  J.,  353. 

Gurdon  B..  353. 

Harvey,  460. 

Harvey  S.,  434. 

Hattie,  423. 

Lillie  A.,  472. 

Lucy,  275. 

Lydia  (B.),  472. 


577 

Barnes,   Nancy   S.   Cory, 
353. 

Palmer  H.,  275. 

Porter,  472. 

Rhoda  Miller,  460. 

Rufus,  460. 

Rufus  F.,  460. 

Sarah,  149,  332. 

Stephen,  275. 
Barney,     Lodema     (B.), 
163. 

Mary,  140. 

Nancy  (B.),  163. 

Sarah  M.,  163. 

Silvanus,  163. 
Barnum,  Amelia  J.,  228. 
Barodell,  Ann,  40. 
Barron,  Fidelia,  427. 
Barrows,  Almira,  130. 
Barry,  Adella,  519. 
Bartlet,  Edward,  117. 

Mary  (B.),  117. 
Bartlett,    Bethiah     (B.), 
246. 

Edmund  M.,  380. 

Harmony  R.  Allen, 
380. 

Jesse,  246. 

Martha,  426. 

Mary,  452. 
Barton,  Carlos  C,  528. 

Cedris  C,  528. 

Charles  H.,  323. 

Charles  P.,  323. 

Charlotta  M  o  u  1 1  o  n, 

323- 

Harriet  S.,  528. 

Ida,  503. 

Lemira,  528. 

Louis  L.,  528. 

Maria,  274. 

Rosella,  323. 

Sidney  S.,  528. 

Susie  E.   (B.),  528. 

Theodore  J.,  528. 
Bass,  Abraham,  430. 

Bell    Fields,  472. 

Delana  Sawyer,  430. 

Dyer,  472. 

Elmer  W.,  517. 

Elsie  (B.),  517. 

H.  L.,  S17. 

Hannah,  517. 

Mary  (B.),  43. 

Minnie,  472. 

Richard,  43, 

W.  H.,  517- 
Basset,    Elizabeth    (B.). 

78. 
Bassett,  Edith  C,  491. 


578 

Bassett,    Elizabeth,   326. 

Fannie,  491. 

Harry   H.,  491. 

Mary  T.   (B.),  491. 

Philip,  xiii. 

W.  L.,  491- 
Bates,  Abigail  Burt,  255. 

James,  255. 

Leura,  255. 

Sarah  P.  (B.),  151. 

Stephen,  151. 
Battles,  Augustus,  511. 

Elizabeth  B.,  511. 

Frank,  511. 

Frank  R,  511. 

Lucy  B.  Wait,  511. 

Susan  Giles,  511. 

William  W.,  511. 

Winthrop  B.,  511. 
Battye,    Elizabeth    Moo- 
dic,  378. 

George,  378. 

Mabel  A.  (B.),  378. 

William,  378. 
Baughman,   Florence  M. 

(B.),  527. 

George,  527. 
Beach,  Dora,  418. 

Lovina  Fox,  418. 

Sadie  M.,  448. 

William,  418. 
Beal,  Delia,  232. 

George,  232. 
Beardsley,    Avilda    (B.), 

403- 

Deborah     Knicker- 
bocker, 146. 

Franklin,   403. 

John,  146. 

Sarah,  146. 
Beattie,    Abby    E.    (B.), 
216. 

John,  216. 

Lydia  Craine,  202. 
Bebee,  Andrew,  517. 

Louisa,   loi. 

Nellie,  517. 
Bechtol,      Margaret      E. 
(B.),  537. 

Millie,  537. 

William,  537. 
Becker,  Clarence,  405. 

Gordon,  405. 

Howard,  405. 

John,  405. 

Margaret      Gouldsbor- 
ough,  405. 

Maud  A.   (B.),  405. 
Becket,  Mary,  433. 
Beckwith,  Cyrus,  450. 


Index. 

Beckwith,    Elizabeth 
Hemphill,    229. 

James  A.,  450. 

Leonard,  229. 

Martha  E.  Briggs,  450. 

Natalie,  450. 
Bedell,  Mary,  233. 

William,  233. 
Bedford,   Frank,   306. 

Maud  A.  (B.),  306. 

Phebe  Stacey,  306. 

Robert,  306. 
Beebe,  Adelia,  372. 

Albert  L.,  498. 

Eleaser,  372. 

Elizabeth,  422. 

Elizabeth    Rogers,   25. 

Fanny  A.  Sill,  422. 

Florence,   450,   498. 

George  H.,  498. 

Grace,  498. 

James,   25. 

Julia,  422. 

Lois  Kingsley,  372. 

Margret,  450. 

Mary  E.  Lewis,  498. 

Miles,  450. 

Oliver  B.,  240. 

Samuel,  25. 

Sarah,    109,    no. 

Sarah  A.   (B.),  240. 

Susanna   (B.),  25. 

William  O.,  422. 
Beekman,      Cornelia 
Schermerhorn,    379. 

Hettie  A.,  379. 

Isaac,   379. 
Beeman,      Frances      M., 

493- 
Beers,  Elizabeth,  85. 
Bell,  Addie  E.,  447. 

Allison,  447. 

Anna,  529. 

Betsy  G.,  349. 

Carrie  B.    (B.),  404. 

Charles,  177. 

Clara  A.    (B.),  529. 

Cora  J.,  177. 

Dora  A.  Brown,  447. 

Ellen  A.,  312. 

Esther  E.,  177. 

Ethel,  529. 

Eva  M.,  529. 

Fred  R.,  473. 

Grace  D.,  447. 

Herbert,  447. 

Inez,  M.,  529. 

James  B.,  447. 

Jane  Williams,   177. 

John.   127. 


Bell,  John  A.,  177. 
Joseph,  127. 
Leonard  E.,  447. 
Lester  H.,  473. 
Louisa  Marsh,  529. 
Lucius,  529. 
Lucy,   127. 
Lydia  (B.),  177. 
Mabel  E.,  447. 
Mary  Delano,  473. 
Mary    L.    Hoagland, 

473- 

Mary  Stanton,  127. 

Nancy,  127. 

Nancy  F.,  177. 

Ruth  C.    (B.),  447. 

Ruth  P.  Bell,  177. 

Ruth   Purdy,    177. 

Thomas,  5. 

Walter,  177. 

Willard,  529. 

William,   473. 

William  H.,  473. 

William  L.,  177. 

Winifred,  529. 
Belcher,  John,  76. 

Sylvia,   76. 
Belden,  Jemima,  457. 
Belding,  Jane,   189. 
Bellinger,  Catherine,  336. 

Richard,   336. 
Bellows,  Eliphalet,  511. 

Elizabeth   A.    Stone, 
Sir. 

Horatio  E.,  511. 

John  J.,  511. 

Lois  E.  Wicks,  511. 

May   Smith,    511. 
Benedict,  Polly,  in. 

Thaddeus,  in. 
Benham,    Julia    Welton, 

415- 

Mary   S.   Wilcox,   415. 

Robert,    415. 

Walter  L.,  415. 
Benjamin,    Clarissa,   293. 

Elizabeth,  270. 

Elvira,  374. 
Bennett,    Betsey    Bennis, 
380. 

Eliza  M.,  380. 

Lyman,  380. 

Sarah  Weeden,  261. 

Sophie,  166. 
Bennis,  Betsy,  380. 
Bentley,    Benjamin,    102. 

Caleb,  54. 

Hannah  Wilbur,  102. 

Mary,  27. 

Patience  Peckham,  82. 


Bentley,Polly'  Hewett,  54. 

Russel,    125. 

Sarah  I.  Barber,  399. 

Susan  Stanton,  125. 
Bently,  Emma,  316. 

Uranea,  414. 
Benton,  Charles  S.,  327. 

Elizabeth  Reynolds, 

James,  491. 

Louise  IB.,  491. 
Berelette,  Sophia,  224. 
Bergen,  Judith  R. 
Fletcher,  509. 

Martha  A.,  509. 

Thomas  C,  509. 
Berkley,  Julia,   503. 
Bernard,  Mary  A.,  534. 

R.  F.,  534. 
Berry,   Bridget,  210. 

Delia  Clark,  532. 

Edwin  P.,  316. 

Hannah   (B.),  124. 

Lyman,  98,  Zll- 

Mary  A.   (B.),  316. 

Richard.    124. 

Sally  Stillman,  m. 

Sarah,  63,  379. 

Sarah  Stillman,  98. 

Susan  M.,  y]-]. 

W.  Clyde,  532. 
Bethune,  Angus,  399. 

Mary  A.,  399. 

Sarah  McCush,  399. 
Betts,  Harry,  244. 

Jane  A.,   244. 

Marietta,  502. 

Renah  Brown,  244. 
Beveridge,  Archi- 
bald,    396. 

Edith    L.    Mathews, 

396. 
Jene  Thompson,  396. 
William,  396. 
Bicknell,  Edith  (B.), 

391- 

Eugene  P.,  391. 

Maria  A.,   389. 

Olivia,  185. 
Bidgood.  Mary,  126. 
Biers,  Emma,  294. 
Bigelow,  Kate,  319. 

Olive,  361. 
Bigwood,  Sarah,  429. 
Bill.  Hannah,  13. 
Billings,     Abigail      (B.), 
14,    27. 

Anna,  27. 

Christopher,  27. 

Desire,  60, 


Index. 

Billings,    Ebenezer,  27. 

Esther,  114. 

Eunice,  49. 

James,   49,   57. 

John,  27. 

Jonas,  27. 

Joseph,  27. 

Lois,  57. 

Mary  Hewitt,  49,  57. 

Phebe  Denison,  27. 

Sarah,  53,   100. 
Bills,  Hannah  (B.),  132. 
Birch,  Lois  Brown,  186. 

Nathan,  186. 

Temperance    Brow  n, 
186. 
Bird,  Mary  A.,  503. 
Birdsall,  Alice  (B.),  338. 

George,  338. 
Birdsey,  Laura  B.,  329. 
Bisbee,  Chloe,  209. 
Bishop,  Harriet  E.,  277. 

Louisa,  303. 

Lucy,  147. 

Susan  A.,  355. 
Bixby,   Katherine,  332. 
Bixler,  Martha  A.,  486. 
Black,  E.  W.,  406. 

Margaret,  532. 

Nellie  Chase,  406. 
Blackington,  Eliza- 
beth (B.),  -71. 
Blackman,  Abbie  L.,  321. 

Jerusha  Glover,  201. 

Unite,  201. 
Blackmer,  J.  Adelle,  385. 
Blake,  Abigail  (B.),  219. 

Alexander,  530. 

Amanda  H.   Tinkham, 
219. 

Charles  W.,  219. 

Edwin  A.  219. 

Elizabeth,  270. 

Gertrude  H.,  219. 

Hannah     E.     Condon, 
219. 

Mary,  438. 

Philura  Plumb,   115. 

Samuel.  219. 

Susan  B.,  530. 

Susan  Crosby,  530. 
Blakely,    Adeline,    394. 

Bertha,  394. 

David,  394. 

Isaac  N..  431. 

Ordelia,  343. 

Stella  M.  (B.),  431. 
Blanchard.  A.,  91. 

Annie,  309. 

E.  Odessa,  506, 


579 

Blanchard,    Elizabeth 
(B.),  91- 
Mary  E.,  91. 
Mary  Jenks,  506. 
William,  506. 
Blanding,  A  d  a  1  i  n  e  C. 
Palmer,    163. 
William,  163. 
Bliss,    Abby    A.    Lewis, 

193- 

David,  193. 

Ephraim,  210. 

George,  210. 

Hannah  Gibbs,  210. 

Priscilla  (B.),  210. 
Blivan,  Nancy  (B.),  123. 

William,   123. 
Blivin,  John,   181. 

Sally  B.,  181. 
Blodgett,  Betsey,  318. 
Blount,  Bessie  H.,  458. 

Henry  F.,  458. 

Lucia  A.  Eames,  458. 

Lucy  Eames.  155. 

Mary  F.,  4S8. 

Rebecca  Ripley,  458. 

Walter,  458. 
B  o  g  a  r  d,     Christopher, 
278. 

Indiana   Lippen- 
cott,  278. 
Boice,   Eli,   452. 

Eva  Plass,  452. 
Bolles,  Lucius,  185. 
Bolton,  Esther  V.,  361. 

Frances  E.  B.,  361. 

George  W.,  361. 

Louisa  G.   (B.),  361. 

Olive  Bigelow,  361. 

John,  361. 

Sarah  E.  B.,  361. 
Bond,  Alvira  (B.),  281. 

Anna,  281. 

Elnathan,  343. 

Eva  R.,  343- 

Ira,  281. 

Sarah  Wright.   343. 

Tristam,  282. 
Bonfoey,  Maria  S.,  241. 
Bonsell.  Emma  C.  Wild- 
er, 225. 

Thomas  L..  225. 
Boomer.  Mary.  546. 
Booth,   Anna   Knoche, 
490. 

Ansel.  477. 

Clara.  493. 

Elijah,   490. 

Elizabeth    Paine,    491. 

George,  491. 


58o 

Booth,    Gertrude    Shear, 
490. 

Henry  B.,  490. 

Kate  Clark,  477. 

La  Mott  R.,  490. 

Leoline,  477. 

Lydia,  324. 

Sophronia    A.    Brown, 
490. 

Wallace  E.,  490. 
Borland,   Henrietta,    140. 
Born,  Charles  P.,  274. 

Isaac,  274. 

Jesse  Jones,  459. 

Katie  Townsand,  459. 

Nathan  W.,  459. 

Pearl,  459. 

Rhoda  Hadsell,  459. 

Sarah  C.  Duel,  274. 

Tacy  A.,  274. 

Walter  H.,  459. 
Boss,   Mary    (B.),  47. 

Mary  A.,  266. 

Richard,  47. 

Ruth,  152. 
Bostford,  Eva,  429. 
Bostwick,  Electra,  147. 
Boswell,  Adelbert,  269. 

Alfred,  269. 

Elizabeth    (B.),  269. 

Ella  J.,  269. 

Eva  Dawley,  269. 

George,  269. 

Harriet  A.  (B.),  269. 

Jennie  A.,  269. 

Susan,  269. 

William  H.,  269. 

William  S..  269. 
Bosworth.   Mary,  425. 
Boucher,  Louise,  216. 
B  o  u  r  s,    Hannah    (B.), 
69. 

John,  69. 

Peter,  69. 
Bowan,  Evelyn  M.,  490. 
Bowdell,  Ann,  41. 
Bowen,  A.  H.,  430. 

Amanda  Whitney,  421. 

Catherine,  415. 

Fred  J.,  421. 

George  D.,  240. 

Gertrude     S.    Goodell, 
241. 

John,  230. 

Julia  S.   (B.),  430. 

Julia  Shields.  240. 

Louise  E.   (B.),  420. 

Loveca  E.  Adams,  416. 

Lydia,  230. 

Vincent,  416. 


Index. 

Bowen,  William  C,  241. 
Bower,    Clara    J.    Web- 
ster, 529. 

John,  529. 

Sarah  Palmer,  529. 
Bowers.  Salina,  178. 
Bowler,  Rebecca,  507. 
Bowman,  Fred,  513. 

Gertrude  Curtis,  513. 

Soloma,  427. 
Boyd,  Eliza  J.,  528. 

Ellen,  312. 

E  m  m  a    E.    Webster, 
528. 

Hiram  W.,  528. 

Jane  M.   Sawyer,  527. 

John  S.,  528. 

Mary  M.  528. 

Phila  Mclntre,  528. 

T.  S.,  528. 
Boyle,  Mary  A.,  412. 
Bradbrook,     Mary    E., 

333- 
Bradfield,  James,  513. 
Martha  H.  Chichester, 

513- 
Bradford.  Alice  N.,  485. 

Cecil,  485. 

Diana  F.  (B.),  270. 

Ellen,  230. 

George  L.,  485. 

James  N.,  270. 

Jane,    338. 

John  W.,  485- 

Lucy    (B.),   123. 

Nellie  F.    (B.),  485. 

Paul.  123. 
Bradshaw,    Sarah    (B.), 

116. 
Bradway,    Abby    (B.), 
123. 

Hiram,  123. 
Brag.  Mercy   (B.).  260. 

William  J..  260. 
Brainard,    Elizabeth    C, 

329- 
Florence  M.,  479. 
Frank  L..  479. 
L.  D..  489. 
Martha.  489. 
Sarah  E.    (B.).  479. 
Braman,  Jane   (B.).   13. 
Brand.   Almira  J.   Cran- 

dall,  208. 
Anna.  208. 
Antoinette,   384. 
Barton,  120. 
Charlotte  Crandall, 

120. 
Elizabeth  (B.),  13,370. 


Brand,  Esther  (B.),  36. 

Eunice  Crandall,  370. 

Melinda  (B.),  64. 

Nathan,  36,  370. 

Ro  swell,  208. 

Walter,  64. 
B randan,    Ann    Goodall, 
500. 

Clara  B.,  500. 

Joel,  500. 

Nettie  B.,  500. 
Brandenburg,   Belle,  279. 

George  S.,  279. 

Lewis,  279. 

Lucetta,  279. 

Rebecca    (B.),   279. 

Samuel,  279. 
Braun,   Mary  L.,  389. 
Brayton,  Mary  E.,  317. 
Brazil,  Marvin,  464. 

Matilda,  464. 

Sarah  Wilson,  464. 
Brecken ridge,  Agatha, 
217. 

John,  217. 

Mary  A.  (B.),  217. 
Brewer,  Esther,  424. 
Brewster,  Anna,  455. 

Cora  L.  Rose,  456. 

Lois  (B.),  272. 

Lois  R.,  456. 

Sarah,  455. 

Silas,  272. 

Wayne,  456. 
Brian,  Mary,  62. 
Briggs,     Almira    Dillen- 
beck,   191.. 

Almira     Doxstader, 

337- 
Caleb,  152. 
Carrie  E.,  337. 
Charles.  450. 
Charles  E.,   191,  450. 
Charles  H.,  450. 
Daniel  C,  191. 
Delevan  B.,  337. 
Doris,  450. 
Edward.  332. 
Edward  T.,  337. 
Eleanor  Dorn,  191. 
Elisha,    igi. 
Garret  E.,  191. 
Harry  H.,  450. 
Harry  M.,  450. 
Helen,  450. 
Henry  F.,  337. 
Jessie  Smith,  337. 
John  R.,  337. 
Julia  Farling,   191. 
L.  J.,  467. 


Briggs,  Luella  E.  Snow, 
450. 

Martha  (B.),  332. 

Martha  E.,  450. 

Mary  E.,  191. 

Mary    L.     Saunders, 
467. 

Maud  Miner,  450. 

Orville  M.,  152. 

Philip  S.,  450. 

Phoebe  B.,  337. 

Rachel,  191. 

Robert,   146. 

Roxanna,  246. 

Ruth,  152. 

Sarah   (B.),  146.    191. 

Sarah  A.   (B.),  152. 

Sabra  Burton,   191. 

Susan  H.  (B.),  450. 

Thomas  R.,  191. 

William  A.,  191,  337. 
Brigham,  Alice  W.,  397. 

Alice  W.  (B.),  397- 

Charles  B.,  397. 

William,   397. 
Bright,  Sarah  J.,  433. 
Brightman,  Mary,  344. 
Brinkerhoff,    Frances   A. 
Maxson,  382. 

George,  382. 
Bristol,  Dora,  403. 

Ira  S.,  403,  405,  406. 

Laura  V.,  406. 

Metta,  405. 

Nancy     Warner,     403, 
405,  406. 
Broadbent,      Enoch      L., 

415. 

Florence  Noble,  415. 

Inez  L.,  415. 
Brockway,  Albert  E., 
486. 

Amaryllis   Myers,   486. 

Chester,  318. 

Cynthia  (B.),  318. 

Emma,  487. 

George  A.,  487. 

Georgia  C,  487. 

Leora,  487. 

Lillian  M.,  487. 

Maggie  Apps,  487. 

Sarah  F.,  318. 

Sarah  R.  Miller,  487. 

Walter  H.,  487. 
Brody,  Nellie,  363. 
Bromley,  Anne  Burdick, 

85. 
Charlotte  R.,  424. 
Simeon,  85. 
Bronson,  Alvin,  327. 


Index. 

Bronson,   Ellen,   327. 

Mary  O'Connor,  327. 

Maud,  504. 
Brooks,   Annie   B. 
Brown,    485. 

Asahel,  422. 

Caroline  (B.),  140. 

Eliza,  422. 

Elizabeth  P.,  391. 

George  M.,  485. 

Joseph,  140. 

Sarah  Brown,  422. 

Sarah  C,  422. 
Brousmaid,  Mercy,  105. 
Brow,    Sarah,   490. 
Brown,    A.    Marie    Shu- 
rer,  494. 

A.  Marrila,  288. 

Abby  A.,  260. 

Abigail,  100,  186. 

Abigail  (B.),  186. 

Abram  A.,  511. 

Ada  A.,  414. 

Adelaide  C,  484. 

Adelia  P.,  288. 

Adeline  H.,  360. 

Albert  C,  511. 

Alice  A.,  329. 

Alice  Hostler,  296. 

Alice  M.   (B.),  171. 

Almira   M.    McGlaflin, 
484. 

Almira  R.,  227. 

Altana   Langworthy, 
108. 

Amelia,  192. 

Amos,  187,  227. 

Amos  H.,  328. 

Andrew,  50. 

Angeline  (B.),  170. 

Anna  L.  Price,  495. 

Anna  M.,  495. 

Annie  B.,  485. 

Annie  S.,  329. 

Ardicicia   Pal  meter, 
421. 

Arthur,  329. 

Austin,  171. 

Avon  L.,  342. 

Benadam  W.,  484. 

Benjamin  W.,  485. 

Betsey,   186,  207. 

Blanche     K.     Seaman, 

495- 
Caroline   (B.),  521. 
Caroline     C.     Rollins, 

484. 
Carrie,  473. 
Carrie  Colby,  317. 
Catharine,  186. 


581 

Brown,   Catharine 
Brown,   186. 
Catherine  M  a  b  b  e  1 1, 

328,   514- 
Celestia  Buxton,  288. 
Charity,  26. 
Charles,  416,  514. 
Charles  A.,  286. 
Charles  B.,  328. 
Charles  F.,  494,  514. 
Charles  H.,  296. 
Charles  M.,  246. 
Charlotte       Pendleton, 

71- 
Christopher,   71,    186. 

Clara,  495. 
Clark,  287,  326. 
Cora  H.,  494. 
Cyrus  H.,  vi,  483. 
Cyrus  W.,  316. 
Daniel,  46,  451. 
David  A.,  511. 
Delilah,  235. 
Delilah    Ruth     (B.), 

416. 
Deliverance,  254. 
Dennison,  327. 
Donald  W.,  394. 
Dora  A.,  447. 
Dorcas    (B.),    46,     60, 

87. 
Dorcas  Gardner,  46. 

Edna,  325. 

Edwin,  287. 

Edwin  S.,  387. 

Eleazor,  87. 

Eliza,  498. 

Eliza  A.,  340. 

Eliza   Carpenter,  451. 

Eliza  W.,  226. 

Elizabeth,  60. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  187. 

Elizabeth  C.  Brainard, 

329. 
Elizabeth      Chatterton, 

340. 
Elizabeth  L.,  484. 
Elizabeth   Randolph, 

377- 
Elizabeth  S.  (B.),  316. 
Ella   C.    (B.),   326. 
Ella  S.,  495- 
Ellen  W.    (B.),  394. 
Emily,  46,  254. 
Emily  D.  Douse,  325, 
Emily   E.,  483. 
Emily  M.,  494. 
Emma,  278. 
Emma  Baker,  511. 
Elsie  L.,  422. 


S82 

Brown,  Esther,  226. 
Eunice,   186. 
Eunice  Safford,  490. 
F.  Rosalie,  288. 
Fidelia,  465. 
Fidelia  Crandall,  207. 
Fidelia  D.,  325. 
Florence  Shaw,  329. 
Franklin  L.,  226. 
Frederic  N.,  361. 
George,    8,     251,     484. 
George  A.,  226,  511. 
George  T.,  325,  361. 
Georgeanna,  361. 
Gertrude  (B.),  387. 
Gideon  P.,  484. 
Gladys,  511. 
Grace  E.,  484. 
Hannah  (B.),  99,  226. 
Hannah  B.  Wells,  251. 
Hannah  Burdick,  85. 
Hannah  Denison,  91. 
Hannah  R.,  145. 
Hannah  Robinson,  145. 
Harold,  495. 
Harriet,  325,  451. 
Harriet  A.,  473. 
Harriet    A.    Brown, 

473- 
Harriet  E.  (B.),  414. 
Harvey,  288. 
Helen,  325,  421. 
Helen  M.,  361. 
Henry  C,  494. 
Henry  E.,  484. 
Henry  F.,  495. 
Herbert  C,  521. 
Horace  C.,  484. 
Hosea,  226. 
Hosea  J.,  226. 
Ida  F.  Sarle,  257. 
Ira,  226,  296. 
Isaac,  377. 
Jabish,  186,  325. 
James,  286. 
James  S.,  317. 
Jane,  7,    8. 
Jeremiah,  278. 
Jesse,  200,  361. 
Jessie  Bartlett,  246. 
John,     94,      207,      387, 

416,    473,    547. 
John  A.,  414. 
John  B.,  317. 
John  D.,  417. 
John  W.,  108. 
Joseph  M.,  495. 
Julia   (B.),  287. 
Kate  B.,  504. 
Katherine  M.,  484. 


Index. 

Brown,  Kearn   B.,   521. 
Laura  B.  Birdsey,  329. 
L  a  V  i  n  a    Richardson, 

317. 
Lee  C,  494,  514- 
Lee  E.,  485. 
Lena  McGregor,  485. 
Le  Roy,  288. 
Lewis  G.,  257. 
Libbie,  178. 
Lois,  186,  207. 
Lorenzo  S.,  329. 
Loretta,  170. 
Louisa,   384. 
Louisa  M.,  361. 
Louise  A.,  484. 
Lucinda,  314,  416. 
Lucinda  Ellison,  521. 
Lucy,  304. 
Luther,  226. 
Lynn,  460. 
M  a  1  V  i  n  a    Newbury, 

361 
Maranda,  480. 
Margaret  Holmes,  186. 
Maria  E.  Cory,  511. 
Marie  E.,  374. 
Marie    Scheurer,   514. 
Marion  L.,  484. 
Mark  L.,  278. 
Martha,  451. 
Martha  (B.),  494,  514. 
Martha  C.  Hollis,  484 
Mary,  145,  441,  452. 
Mary   (B.).  8,  469. 
Mary  A.   (B.),  286. 
Mary  A.  Colby,  485. 
Mary  E.  Cliff,  417. 
Mary  Gardner,  288. 
Mary  Hyde,  254. 
Mary  L.  Hollis,  484. 
Mary  M.  Cox,  495. 
Mary  S.,  495. 
Mary   Swineburn.   387. 
Mary  Wells,  287. 
Melow,  226. 
Mercy,  127. 
Mercy  A.  (B.),  180. 
Mercy    Kinney     (B.), 

106. 
Merton  H.,  421. 
Merton  L.,  226. 
Minnie  Clark,  296. 
Minnie  L.,  485. 
Morris   E.,    295. 
Munroe  S.,  495. 
Myra,   325. 

Myrtie  Waldorf,  460. 
Myrtle  L.,  417. 
Nancy,  377. 


Brown,   Nathan,    106. 
Nehemiah,  99. 
Nicholas,  7. 
Noah,    186. 
Olive,  207,  229. 
Orissa  A.  (B.),  295. 
Orissa  E.   (B.),  278. 
Peleg,  43,  187. 
Petis  D.  Damon,  485. 
Phebe  (B.),  94. 
Polly   Robbins,   327. 
Rebecca,  226. 
Renah,  244. 
Robert,  85. 
Ruth   (B.)    Gardner, 

87. 
Ruth  L.,  521. 
S.  Marie,  288. 
Sabrina,  162. 
Samuel,  xxv,  374,  384. 
Sarah,    104,    327,    422, 

468. 
Sarah  C.  Maxson,  483. 
Sarah  Cobb,  50. 
Sarah  E.,  317. 
Sarah  M.,  436. 
Selma  Davis,  325. 
Sophronia  A.,  490. 
Stephen,  91,  340,  521. 
Susan  Allen,  374. 
Susan  M.,  495. 
Susan  Monroe.  328. 
Susan  West,  361. 
Susanna,  186. 
Susannah,  207. 
Temperance,  186.  207. 
Tentie  Latham,  384. 
Thomas,  485. 
Thomas  C.,  485. 
Thomas  M.,  180. 
Triphena,   125. 
W.  S.,  469. 
Warren  D.,  394. 
Wilfred  M.,  484. 
William,  504. 
William   C,   511. 
William  E.,  417. 
William  R.,  394. 
William  S.,  317,  394. 
Winifred  Ball.  485. 
Browning,  A.,  80. 
Bridget  B.,  436. 
Clarence  E.,  215. 
Davis,  387. 
Eliza  Green,  343. 
Elizabeth,  208. 
Elizabeth    (B.),  80. 
Elizabeth  Palmer,  387. 
Eva  S.   (B.),  215. 
Joseph,  48. 


Browning,  Mary,  48. 

Mary  A.,  387. 
Bruce,    Harriette     (B.), 
290. 

Henry,  290. 
Brunier,  Joanna,  371. 
Brundage,  Eva  L.,  360. 

George  C,  360. 

Lucy  A.  (B.),  360. 

Mary  E.,  360. 
Brusie,    Hannah,    163. 

Harriet  M.,  464. 

Ketura  Egleston,  296. 

Olive,  296. 

Robert,  296,  464, 
Bryan,   Cornelia,  225. 
Bryant,    Cornelia    Hilde, 

405- 

Levi,  405. 

Lucy,  256. 

Olive,  405. 
Bryne,  Jennie,  413. 
Buch,  Joseph,  482. 

Mabel,  482. 
Buck,  Daniel  E.,  245. 

Rhoda  (B.),  245. 
Buckley,  Elizabeth,  443. 
Budington,  J.,   100. 

Sophronia   Denison, 
100. 
Budlong,  Ada  M.  Titus, 

497. 

Anna  K.,  497. 

Doris,  497. 

Elizabeth,  496. 

Florence  F.,  496. 

Irene  M.,  497. 

Irving  J.,  497. 

Keziah  G.  (B.),  330. 

Jennie  L.,  496. 

Jerome  J.,  330. 

Sarah.  115. 
Buffin,  Mary,  252. 
Buffington,  Daniel,   151. 

Emma,  355. 

Mary,  151. 

Mary  Reynolds,  151. 
Bugbee,   Ames,    198. 

Hepsibah  (B.),  385. 

Joseph,    385. 

Martha.  198. 

Martha  Woodward, 
198. 
Bugg.  Henry,  363. 

Nellie  Brody,  363. 
Bull,  Annie,  154. 

Charles,  154. 
Bullfinch.  Betsey,  164. 
Bunda,  Stella.  212. 
Bunker,  Panthea  P.,  128. 


Index. 

Bunker,    Rebecca    Proc- 
tor, 128. 
Burch,  Calvin,  239. 

Charlotte,  207. 

Cynthia  Randall,  207. 

Damare,  287. 

Damarius  (B.),  207. 

Henry,    138,   207. 

John  H.,  207. 

Lois  Brown,  207. 

Mary,  207,  234. 

Mary  Irish,  138,  207. 

Mary  Pelton,  239. 

Nathan,   207. 

Paul,  207,  287. 

Phebe,  138. 

Phebe  Hinckley,  207. 

Susanna    Pendleton, 
234,  400. 

Temperance   Brown, 
207. 

Thomas,  234. 
Burtch,  Eunice  A.,  400. 

Ida,  400. 

Sarah  Barber,  399. 

Thomas,  400. 
Burdick,  A.  B.,  193. 

Abigail,  61,  85. 

Ada  Langworthy,  238. 

Alfred  R.,  300. 

Almira,  170. 

Almyra,  204. 

Alonzo,  239. 

Amelia     A.     Satterlee, 
229. 

Amos,  205. 

Amy  (B.),  239. 

Amy  K.,  452. 

Ann  F.  Hiscox.  237. 

Anna  Angell,  441. 

Anna  Coon.  205. 

Anna  M.   (B.),  292. 

Anna  O.,  373- 

Anne,  61,  85. 

Anne  F.,  347. 

Antoinette,   516. 

Arlton,  309. 

Ashel,  287. 

B.  F.,  5.16. 

Benjamin  B.,  237. 

Benjamin  F.,  314,  516. 

Barbara,  99. 

Benjamin,  383,  384. 

Betsy  Crandall,  377. 

Catherine.  381.  382.383. 

Catherine  Clark.  205. 

Catherine  Irwin,  378. 

Clara  E.  Stillman,  302. 

Curtis  E.,  294. 

Daisy,  447. 


583 

Burdick,  Daniel,  441. 
Deborah  Sprague,  300. 
Desire,  124. 
Desire  Palmer,  287. 
D  i  a  n  n  a    Macomber, 

302. 
Dolphin  D.,  299. 
Duane  D.,   171. 
Edmund,  509. 
Edward,  546. 
Eliza  Hadly,  509. 
Edward,  29. 
Edward  H.,  237. 
Edwin,  170. 
Elery,  171. 
Elisha  C.,  302. 
Elizabeth,  152,  465. 
Elizabeth  (B.),  61,  85. 
Elizabeth  M.,  400,  401. 
Ella  M.  Kenyon,  300. 
Ellen  E.  (B.),  452. 
Ellinda  Tiflfany,  293. 
Elmira,  161. 
Emily  A.,  516. 
Emily  F.   (B.),  294. 
Emma  Biers,  294. 
Esther,  250. 
Esther  Gavitt,  124. 
Ethan  L.,  170. 

F.  O.,  376. 
Fanny,    261. 
Frances,  61,  85. 
Frank  D.,  473. 

G.  Dudley,  411. 
Gardner,  377. 
George,   239. 
George  H.,  266. 
George  L.,  266. 
George  N.,  238,  410. 
George  S.,  302. 
Georgiana,  411. 
Grace  Greene,  473. 
Hannah,  85,  99,   124. 
Hannah  (B.),  51. 
Hannah  C.  Doty,  238. 
Hannah  Maxson,  85. 
Hannah  Stillman,  383, 

384. 
Hattie  E.,  509. 
Harley  B..  472. 
Harold,  303. 
Harriet   (B.),  302. 
Harriet  R.,  293. 
Harriet  V.  Douse,  237. 
Helen  A..  293. 
Henry,   162,   170,  292. 
Henry  D.,  293. 
Henry  L.,  169. 
Hiram,  229. 
Hubbard,  61,  85. 


584 

Burdick,  Huldah,   162. 
Isaac,  237. 
Isaac  F.,  zzT- 
Isaac  H.,  229. 
Israel  F.,  212. 
James  R.,  292,  373. 
James  T.,  293. 
Jane,  309. 

Jennie  A.   Oliver,   166, 
Jesse,  166. 
Jesse  A.,  166. 
Jessie  L.,  294. 
John,  61,  85,  z(>T,  378. 
John  F.,  293. 
Josephine,  372,  411. 
Judith  Maxson,  162. 
Julia  A.  Murphy,  314. 
Justin  H.,  302, 
Lantie  A.,  m. 
Lecta,  287. 
Lee  Roy,  309. 
Leonard,  452. 
Lillie  A.,  300. 
Lizzie  J.,  452. 
Lucy,  228. 
Lucy  A.  (B.),  299. 
Lydia,  383. 
Lydia  (B.),  123. 
Lydia  Crandall,  292. 
Mandane  Elliott,  293. 
Maria  M.,  293. 
Marian  A.,  516. 
Martha,   451. 
Martha  A.  Irish,  342. 
Martha  C,  238. 
Mary  E.,  411,  485. 
Mary  E.  (B.),  302. 
Mary  E.   Corbett,  309. 
Mary     E.     Van    Ant- 
werp, 410. 
Mary  L.,  137,  505. 
Mary  L.   (B.),  237. 
Mary  Taylor,  505. 
Mattie  A.  Mendenhall, 

303- 
Maxson,  61,  85. 
May  K.,  376. 
Nancy,   162. 
Nancy  M.,  441. 
Oliver,   123,   137. 
Paul,  61,  85,  300. 
Peter,  124. 
Phebe  (B.),  207. 
Phebe   Crandall,    342. 
Phebe  L   (B.),  170. 
Philena  (B.),  170. 
Polly,  137. 
Polly  Stillman,  204. 
Prudence    Petti- 

bone,    309. 


Index. 

Burdick,  Rachel  Slocum, 

309. 

Robert,  3. 

Roxanna,  166. 

Ruth,  98. 

Sally   (B.),   166. 

Samuel,  204. 

Samuel  P.,  309. 

Sarah,  61,  85,  ZIZ- 

Sarah  A.,  300. 

Sarah  A.  Corey,  293. 

Sarah  A.  Mosher,  237. 

Sarah  B.  Holmes,  367. 

Sarah  C.  Lewis,  193. 

Sarah  Clark,  29. 

Silas,  207,  239,  342. 

Silas  C,  505. 

Solomon  C,  238. 

Susan,  98,  309. 

Susan  P.  (B.),  212. 

Susannah,  137. 

Tabitha   Wilcox,  85. 

Tacy,  228. 

Temperance,  205. 

Thankful  L.,  260. 

Thomas  T.,  237. 

Thompson,  61,  85. 

Uretta  Knapp,   169. 

Viola  M.  (B.),  266. 

Walter  T.,  473. 

Wealthy  A.,  384. 

Welcome,   309. 

William,  205. 

William  P.,  293. 

Zemira  O.    (B.),   170. 
Burgess,  Carrie  Temple, 
337. 

Chloe  (B.),  191. 

Chloe  E.,  337. 

Dianthe  Hibbard,   337. 

Edward  E.,  2)2>7- 

Ezekiel,  191. 

Frances,    337. 

Mary,  337. 

Mary  E.  King,   191. 

Prudence  D.,  337. 

William  V.,   191. 
Burg,  Mary  B.,  191. 
Burger,  Cora,  289. 

Delford,  289. 

Myrtle,  289. 
Burhite,    Katherine    Ma- 
gee,  244. 

Rachel,  244. 

Walter,  244. 
Burke.    Albert    G.,    328, 

493- 
Caroline  A.,  302. 
Clara  Booth,  493. 
Eleanor  R.,  302. 


Burke,   Ellen   M..   328. 
Frances    M.     Beeman, 

493. 

Fred  H.,  493. 

George  B.,  302. 

Harriet  E.    (B.),  302. 

Mabel   M.,  302, 

Margaret    S.,    228, 
302. 

Maria   (B.),  327. 

Mary  W.  Smith,  493. 

Walter   S.,   493. 

William  L.,  302. 
Burkle,  Jacob,  528. 

Mary  M.  Boyd,  528. 
Burlingham,  Philip,  94. 

Polly    (B.),  94- 
Burnap,  Abijah,  396. 

Alethea,  396. 

Mary  A.   Merrill,  396. 

Mary     E.     Mathews, 

396. 

Rachel  Howe,  396. 

Willard,   396. 

Willard  L.,  396. 
Burnham,  Achsah    (B.), 
227,  404. 

Julia  (B.),  404- 

Milton  M.,  227,  404. 

Olive  L.,  404. 

Samantha,  453. 
Burns,  Clarissa,  334. 

Porter  C,  334. 

Sadie,  265. 
Burr,  Mary,  457. 
Burrell,  Mary  A.,  403. 
Burroughs,    Laura,    488. 

Louise  Ruggles,  488. 

Polly,  440. 

Thomas,    488. 

Arvis,    508. 

Hannah,  91. 

Jessie  M.  Irish,  508. 
Burt,  Abigail,  255. 
Burtis,  Ann,  410. 
Burton,   Lucretia  Miller, 
436. 

Lucy,  436. 

Sabra,    191. 

Silas.  436. 
Burwell,  John,  464. 

Sarah  C.,  464. 

Sarah    Houghton,   464. 
Bush,  Carrie  L.  Holden, 

502. 

Emma  J.  (B.),  501. 
Frank  D.,  502. 
Lewis  R.,  501. 
Busha,     Angeline     Bre- 
mer, 524. 


Busha,  Fratik,  524. 

Mary  L.,  524. 
Bushnell,  Phebe   (B.), 

78. 
Butler,    Catherine   E., 
338. 

Cynthia  Stanley,  536. 

Eliza,   145- 

Elizabeth  Elliot,  456. 

Ella  S..  537- 

Sarah  Denison,  91. 

Sarah  J.,  456. 

Thomas,   91. 

Uriah,  456. 

Walter  C,  536. 
Button,  Amelia  Sims, 

239- 
Harriet,  239. 
Lydia,  256. 
Richard,  239. 
Butts,   Julian    Lowell, 

531- 

Lavina,  531. 
Buxton,  Celestia,  288. 

Daniel,  322. 

Lydia  Case,  322. 

Prudence,  322. 

Selah   (B.),  322. 
C  a  d  w  e  1 1,  Edmond  G., 
500. 

Edward  J.,  333. 

Florence  L.,  500. 

Fred  G.,  500.     . 

George  B.,  500. 

Ida  A.  Daniel,  500. 

Jane  A.   (B.),  333- 

Nettie  B.   Brandan, 
500. 

Susan  E.  Page,  500. 
Cady,   Alpheus,   189. 

Anne  (B.),  189. 

Betsey  Tompkins,   189. 

Ebenezer,   189,  252. 

Eliza    Merritt,    189. 

Elizabeth  Smith,  252. 

Eunice  Calkins,  189. 

George  W.,    189. 

Harriet,    i8g. 

John  B.,  189. 

Nelson,  189. 

Olivia  S..  252. 

Pattey    A.     Chambers, 
189. 

Pernilla  Hamilton, 
189. 

Sally,  189. 

Sally  Noyes.    189. 

Susan  Merritt,  189. 

William,  189. 
Cahill,  Velvis,  345. 


Inde.v. 

Gaboon,  Elizabeth,  80. 
Cahoone,  Harriet,  262. 

Henry,  262. 

Mary  J.,   262. 
Calkins,  Charles,  248. 

Eunice,   189. 

Mary  A.    (B.),  248. 
Call,  Jane,  434. 
Camp,  Edward  P.,  424. 

Harriet  M.    (B.),  424. 

Henry  L.,  424. 

M.     W.     Wadsworth, 
424. 

Mary  E.,  424. 

Phebe  A.,   172. 
Campbell,    Addie    Dick- 
ens,  528. 

Albert,  528. 

Alfred,  444. 

Alice  L.   (B.),  444. 

Alice  T.,  444. 

Edith,  519. 

Ellen,  444. 

Frederick,   114,   145. 

Grace  Plumb,  115. 

Harriet  (B.),  251. 

Horatio  N.,  252. 

Harriet   S.,  252. 

James  W.,   519. 

James  M.,  518. 

Jean,  276,  461. 

Jerusha  Church,  397. 

Jessie  B.,  519. 

Jessie  H.    (B.),  389. 

John  G.,  444. 

John  P.,  389. 

Laura,   507. 

Lydia,  397. 

]\Iaggie  L.,  530. 

Mary  Buffin,  252. 

Mary  S.,  519. 

Phebe  A.,  519. 

Phebe  A.  (B.),  518. 

Richard,  397." 

Rowena,  519. 

Samuel,  115. 

Sarah  {B.),  58. 

Sarah   (B.)    (B.),  114, 

14s. 
Stanton,  58,  116. 
Winthrop.   250. 
Caney,    Martha    (B.), 
246. 
Smith,   246. 
Canfield,  Lucy,  222. 
C  a  n  n  e  r,   Rhoda    (B.), 

123. 
Canning.  Francis,  xiii. 
Cany,  Charles,  215. 
Elizabeth,   215. 


Caprins,  Almira  B.,  513. 

Augustus,  368. 

Nancy  J.   (B.),  368. 
Card,  Amy,  83. 

Benjamin,  372. 

Job,    83. 

Lua  E.,  372. 

Martha,    152. 

Mary,  274. 
Cargill,   Albert,  279. 

Emma   (B.),  279. 
Carlton,   Susan,  225. 
Carmen,  Louisa  A.,   170. 
Carmon,  Eliza  J.,  339- 

Elizabeth,  339. 

Philip,  339. 
Carnahan,  Sophia,  246. 
Carnes,   Leman,    122. 

Mary    (B.),    122. 
Carpenter,  Amanda,  209. 

Cora    L.    (B.),   457- 

David,  457. 

Deborah,  297. 

Earl  C,  342. 

Edith  L.,  457. 

Eliza,  451. 

Esther,   132. 

George  L,  342. 

Guy,   342. 

Guy  C,  342. 

Hannah  (B.),  141. 

Henry,  274. 

Hezekiah,   132. 

Jemima  Belden,  457. 

Jemima  Parish,  342. 

Julian  E.,  457. 

Lillian  (B.),  487- 

Lydia  (B.),  274. 

INIinnie,  502. 

S.,  141. 

Salome    (B.),  274. 

Samuel,   274,   342. 

Sands,   141. 

Vernon  A.,  457. 

Viola    S.    Irish,   342. 
Carr.   Addie,  269. 

Catherine  Weedin,  511. 

Elijah,  169. 

Elizabeth,    192. 

Elizabeth  Lawton,  546. 

Lucy  J.    Cory,   511. 

IMaria  A.,  512. 

Nancy,   269. 

Nathan,  269. 

Nicholas  E.,  512. 

Peleg  C,  "^ii. 

Phebe,   348. 

Robert,  546. 

Saberah  CB.),  169. 

Thomas  G.,  511. 


586 

Carriel,  Calvin,  427. 

lanthe  A.,  432. 

John,   432. 

Louise  Furman,  427. 
Carrington,     Harriet     C. 
(B.),  440. 

Jackson  D.,  440. 

Nettie,  440. 
Carris,  Evaline,  454. 

John,  454. 

Sarah,   454. 
Carrs,   Caleb,  3. 
Carskaden,     A.     ^Marrila 
Brown,  288. 

Jerome,  288. 
Carter,  Annie  M.,  S37- 

Augusta     C.     Cottrell, 

173- 
Benjamin,  242. 
Chloe  E.,  337. 
Ellen  M.,  242. 
Emma  A.,  297. 
George,  297. 
Maria  Savage,  242. 
Prudence    (B.),  vi. 
Prudence   D.    Burgess, 

337- 

Russel,  337. 

Ruth,  470. 

Samuel,  173. 

Thomas,  31. 
Carver,  Adam  M.,  534. 

Florence  T.,   534. 

Forest  M.,  534. 

Hamilton,  534. 

Harry  W.,  534. 

Irma  G.,  534. 

John,  40. 

Minnie  E.    (B.),  533- 

Roy  H.,  534. 

Wales,  534. 
Cary,  Edward  T.,  442. 

Katherine    Thomas, 
442. 

William  H.,  442. 
Case,  A.  J.,  472. 

Amy  L.,  241. 

Betsey,  234. 

Earl,  472. 

Harriet,  273. 

Leora  (B.).  472. 

Lucenia,  358. 

Lydia,  322. 

Milton,  472. 
Casey,  Catherine,  232. 
Cass,  Carlton  B.,  457. 

Horatio,    457. 

Horatio  G..  457. 

Mary  J.    (B.),  457- 

Mildred  F.,  457. 


Index. 

Cass,     Theresa     Petrich, 

457- 
Castle,  F.  Azelia,  303. 

Asher,   303. 

Louisa   Bishop,  303. 
Caswell,   Lydia,   57. 
Cately,  A.,   163. 

Huldah   B.   Palme  r, 
.163, 
Catlin,   Burden,  332. 

Caroline,  332. 

Clara  M.,  499. 

Eliza  J.,  499. 

Elizabeth    Col- 
braith,  332. 

Frank  N.,  500. 

John  M.,  332. 

Julia  A.,  500. 

Julia  M.,  499. 

Katherine  Bixby,  332. 

Laura,  332. 

Lewis,    332. 

Louisa    (B.),   332. 

Meda   Pennel,  332. 

Sarah   Norris,    332. 
Catonel,  Adele,  216. 
Cavalleris,  EnricoiT.,300. 

Katherine  C.  (B.),300. 
Cearley,  Edmund,  426. 

Louise  E.,  426. 

Lucretia   Polk,  426. 
Chafee,  Abby  C,  338. 
Chaffee,  Catherine,  515. 

Catherine      B.       (B.), 

515- 
Charles,  515. 
Cora,  406. 
Dora,  505. 

Lydia  Worden,  515. 
ATary  L.,  515. 
Mary  Wright,   175. 
Robert  C.  515. 
William  W.,  515. 
Chalker,   Alexander,   77. 
Mehitable,  39.  77. 
Mehitable  Chapman, 

77- 
Sarah     Denison     (B.), 

38,   39- 
Stephen,    38,     39,     40, 

77.    78. 
Chamberlain,    Carrie    A. 
(B.),    308. 
Sarah,  243. 
William,  308. 
Chambers,   P  a  1 1  e  y  A., 

189. 
Champion.   Byron,   272. 
Joel,  272. 
Maria  (B.),  272. 


Champion,   Oscar,  272. 

Polly,  271. 
Champlain,    Mary     (B.), 

384, 
Champlin,  Ann,  27. 

Anna  (B.),  116. 

Annie,   384. 

Annie  L.  Stanton,  437. 

Benjamin,  208. 

Charles,  212,  437. 

Christopher,  23. 

Cornelia  M.  Cory,  353. 

Daniel,  437. 

E.  F.,  465. 

Eliza  Cottrell,  437. 

Elva  E.  Crandall,  465. 

Fidelia  Brown,  465. 

Fidelia  D.  Brown,  325. 

Frank,  325,  465. 

Hannah,   72,  75. 

Hannah  Clark,  75. 

James,   26. 

Jeffres,  543,  544,  545. 

Jeffrey,  13,  26,  80,  117. 

John  A.,  377. 

Joseph,  26. 

Joshua,  26. 

Lionel  H.,  353. 

Lucy  Green,   377. 

Martha  (B.),  212,  377. 

Mary,   18,  74,   130. 

Mary   (B.),   13,     26. 

Mary  A.    (B.),  208. 

Mary  Badcock,  13,  18. 

Mary  Clarke,  26. 

Mary  Northrup,  80. 

Miriam  F.  Clark,  353. 

Nancy  A.  (B.),  117. 

Nathan,   117. 

Prudence,  50. 

Rowland,  116,  117. 

Samuel,  26.  75. 

Susanna,   125. 

Susanna    (B.),  48. 

Susannah,  26,  80. 

William,     13,     18,     26, 
48,  116,  541. 

William   A.,   353. 

William  W.,  543. 
Champlins,  William,  548. 
Chandler,  Margaret,  41. 
Chapin,  A.   W.,  246. 

Bettie    (B.),    246. 

Clarissa,  251. 

Darius,   120. 

Hannah  Crandall,   120. 
Chapman,    A.    Elizabeth, 
407. 

Abigail  Burdick,  85. 

Alfred,  481. 


Chapman,  Amos,  85. 

Andrew,   129. 

Ann  E.,  481. 

B.   A.   Kenyon,  407. 

Betsy  Gardiner,  481. 

Eliza  Brooks,  422. 

Elizabeth,  491. 

Emma  M.,  241. 

H.  P.,  407- 

Hannah   (B.),  241. 

Hannah   P.    (B.),  245. 

Ida  M.,  266. 

James  H.,  245. 

Lara    (B.),  458. 

Lila,  422. 

Maurice,  458. 

Mary,  129. 

Mehitable,  ■7']. 

Samuel,  ^T. 

Sarah,  269. 

Sarah  C.   Brooks,  422. 

Welltrian  Palmer,  129. 

William,  241,  458. 

William  H.,  422. 
Chappell,  Delia  A.,  319. 

Mary  H.,  269. 

Richard,   153. 

Ruth  (B.),  153- 
Chase,    Alice    R.    Jollie, 

354- 
Altana  F.  Almy,  354. 
Delia   (B.),  406. 
Earnest,  354. 
Elizabeth,  134. 
Florence    E.    Green, 

355- 

Henry  A.,  406. 

Jacob,  406. 

Nellie,   406. 

Philip  B.,  354- 

Sarah  A.  Rawlett,  239. 

Sarah  E.   Cook,   354. 

Walter  W.,   355- 

William    C,   354. 
Chatterton,      Eliza- 
beth,   340. 
Chauncey,  Emily,  525. 
C  h  e  b  o  n  d  y,      Cynthia 
French,  321. 

Nancy,  321. 

Rezin,  321. 
Cheesebro,    Prudence, 

517- 
Cheesebrough,       Abigail, 

14.     55- 
Cheesbrough,   Mary,   71. 
Cheney,      Elizabeth      M. 
CB.).   305. 
John  D.,  305. 
Mary  H.,  286. 


Index. 

Cheney,  Mary  R.,  305. 

Oliver,  305. 

Rebecca,    305. 

S.  Evelyn,  305. 

Sarah,   179. 
Cherry,    Carrie    (B.), 

338.     • 
Chesebro,   Bridget   Stan- 
ton, 162. 

Gilbert,  338. 

Harriet  Haskell,  415. 

Lucretia  M.   (B.),  415. 

Lucy,  338. 

Lucy   Stanton,  338. 

Nathan,   162. 

Pauline,  415. 

Samuel,   415. 

Samuel  H.,  415. 

Vashti,  162. 
Chesebrough,  Amos,  90. 

Betsey  (B.),  122. 

Caroline   L.,  204. 

Carrie  A.,  434. 

Eunice,  217. 

Jane  Call,  434. 

Julia  T.,  204. 

Julia  Thompson,  204. 

Perry,  204. 

Samuel,  122. 

Submit  Palmer,  122. 

Sylvester,  434. 
Chichester,    Annie    K. 
Smith,  505. 

Christopher  C,  513. 

Esther  M.,    513. 

Frank,  505. 

Frank  S.,  505. 

Gertrude.  505. 

George  H.,  513. 

Georgia  Garry,  513. 

Harriet  E.,  513. 

Harry  C,  5i3- 

Jane   A.    (B.),   340. 

Martha  H.,  513. 

Myrtle,   513. 

Roxanna  Curtis,  513. 

Sarah  Rhodes,  505. 

William  F.,  340. 
Childs,  Ann  G.,  145. 

Cora  H.  Brown,  494. 

Fannie,  494. 

J.  M.,  494. 
Walter.  494. 
Chillingworth,   Alice  M., 

455- 
Chipman,  Charles  A., 

464. 
Charles  C.  464. 
Charles  H..  464. 
Flora  P.  Clark,  464. 


5S7 

Chipman,     Frances     M., 
464. 

Frances  Saunders,  404. 

Martha,  377,  378. 

Martha  J.,  378. 

Mary  E.,   317. 

Nathan  F.,  378. 

Phebe  M.,  464. 

Robert  C,  464. 
Christie,  Catherine  (B.), 
388. 

Eraser,  388. 

Eraser  A.,  388. 

John,  388. 

Mary  A.  Eraser,  388. 
Chubb,  Leland,  230. 

Susan  B.  (B.),  230. 
Chuk,    Elizabeth  Taylor, 
422. 

T.  C,  422. 
Church,    Abner,    422. 

Betsey,  184. 

Carrie  Brown,  473. 

Eunice  (B.),  536. 

George  A.,  422. 

Howard,  422. 

Jerusha,  397. 

Lucinda,  184. 

Lucy  Catherine  Good- 
ell,  422. 

Lucy  Lung,  422. 

Lydia,   184. 

Lydia   (B.),  184. 

Melvin  D.,  536. 

Robert  G.,  422. 

Sophronia,   184. 

Susanna,  150. 

Sylvanus,    184. 

William  B.,  422,  473. 
Clapp,  Eliza,  98. 

Susan.   98. 
Clark,   A.   C.  400. 

Adaline  (B.),  99. 

Adelaide     Wallace 
(B.),  214. 

Albert  L.,  283. 

Albert  M.,  463. 

Alfred,  192. 

Alice  L.    (B.),  480. 

Altana  Langworthy, 
192. 

Altie  F.,  297. 

Amey,   119. 

Amos,  27. 

Amy,  208. 

Angeline     Crandall, 
287. 

Ann  E.,  354. 

Barbara  F.,  421. 

Barbara  M.,  287. 


588 

Clark,  Benjamin,  46. 
Bethia,  27. 

Bethiah  Hubbard,  27. 
Callie  E.,  420. 
Caroline,  441. 
Catherine,  205. 
Catherine  Hancie,  400. 
Catherine      Pendleton, 

59- 
Celia  A.  (B.),  301. 
Charles,  214,  299,  320. 
Charles  T.,  320. 
Charlotte  D.  (B.),  283. 
Charlotte    Sherman, 

287. 
Chloe  Maxson,  287. 
Christopher,  57. 
Clara  M.  Dodge,  320. 
Clayton  C,  171. 
Cora  H.,  400. 
Damare  Burch,  287. 
Deborah    Carpenter, 

297. 
Deborah  Pendleton,  29. 
Delia,  532. 
Devolson,  214. 
Dora,  299. 

Dorothy  Maxson,  30. 
E.  Antoinette,  287. 
E.  R.,  171. 
Eben,  loi. 
Eleanor  C,  461. 
Eleanor  Thomas,  287. 
Elisha,  30,  45. 
Eliza  L.,  300. 
Elizabeth.  59,  150,  256. 
Elizabeth   (B.),  17,  24. 
Elizabeth  Bagnell,  480. 
Elizabeth  Plumb,  57. 
Elizabeth  S.  (B.),  214. 
Ella  L.,  297. 
Ellen  Hughes,  440. 
Elmer,  303. 
Emeline  Murphy,  421. 
Emily  Pardee,  300. 
Esther     Landphere, 

287. 
Ethan,   59. 
Eunice  (B.),  48. 
Eva,  532. 
Ezra,  385. 

Fidelia  Denison,  287. 
Flora  P.,  464. 
Frances  G.,  301. 
George,  256.  480. 
Guy  S.,  532. 
H.  Moran,  287. 
Hannah,  59,  75. 
Hannah  Cottrell,  59. 
Harriet  E.  (B.),  301. 


Index. 

Clark,  Hazel  E.,  440. 
Henrietta      C.       (B.), 

171. 
Henry,  59,  113,  297. 
Hiram,   179. 
Hosea  B.,  287. 
Ida  M.,  464.. 
Isabel  Davis,  283. 
James,  29. 
James  B.,  532. 
Job,  208. 
Job  B.,  300. 
Job   Bennett,   59. 
John  D.,  287. 
Jonathan,  48. 
Joseph,  3,  24,  287. 
Josephine      B.       (B.), 

440. 
Joshua,  27,  59. 
Judson,  214. 
Kate,  477. 
La  Fayette,  287. 
Laura  E.   (B.),  297. 
Leigh,  532. 
Lillian  A.,  463. 
Lily,   395- 
Lois  (B.).  58. 
Lorana   (B.),  287. 
Louisa,  265. 
Lucinda  Johnson,  287. 
Lucius  P.,  287. 
Lucy  A.,  loi. 
Lucy   Stapp,   531. 
Lulu  P.,  297. 
Lyman  C,  297. 
Mabel,  284. 
Margaret  Black.  532. 
Margaret     M  a  1  c  o  m, 

299. 
Martha   (B.),  87. 
Mary,  203,  303. 
Mary  A.,  170. 
Mary  E.,  301. 
Mary  Perkins,  301. 
Mary  Potter,  30,  45. 
Melissa  (B.),  385. 
Minnie.  296. 
Miranda  Hines,  lOi. 
Miriam   F.,   353. 
Nathan,  59,  87. 
Nathaniel,  48. 
Norman  L.,  287. 
Oliver,  58. 
Pardon,  421. 
Paul,  170,  301. 
Perry  C.  203. 
Phebe  M.  Gorton,  463. 
Philip,  461. 
Phineas.  59. 
R.  Le  Roy,  287. 


Clark,  Ray  P.,  301. 
Richard,  283. 
Rowse,  152. 
Samuel,  287,  480. 
Sarah,  206,  222. 
Sarah   Fleharty,   532. 
Sarah  Horton,  256. 
Sarah  L.   (B.),  179. 
Sarah  Saunders,  320. 
Simeon,  27. 
Susanna,  24,  152. 
Susanna    (B.),  46. 
Thankful   Violet,  29. 
Theresa,  303,  420. 
Thomas,    17,    24,    440, 

548,  549- 
Tryphena,   447. 
Willet,   59- 
William,  532. 
Zoriaster,  99. 
Clarke,  Amanda,   163. 
Amey,  82. 
Ann,  26,  27. 
Ann    (B.),   30. 
Ann   Champlin,   27. 
Annie  Coon,  420. 
Archie  A.,  312. 
Arinoe   (B.),  167. 
Bernie   S.,   312. 
Bethia     Hubbard,     26, 

27,    29,    30. 
Bethiah,  27. 
Callie  E.,  420. 
Caroline,  312. 
Charles,   386. 
Christopher,  27. 
Deborah   Carpenter, 

167. 
Elizabeth,  386. 
Elizabeth   (B.),  24.  29. 

30. 
Elizabeth  Sandford. 

82. 
Freddie,  312. 
Gitty  Smith,  386. 
Hannah,  207. 
Hannah  (B.),  145. 
Harriet  M.,  300. 
Helen  M.,  420. 
Henry,   167,  371. 
Hester  Derve,  388. 
James.  27. 
Jane  C,  371. 
Joseph,  26,  27,  29,  30, 

544-  . 
Katherine      Pendleton, 

371- 
Leander  F.,  388. 
Lucian,   145. 
Mary,  26,  27. 


Clarke,  Minnie  G.,  388. 

Nelson,  222. 

Perry  W.,  420. 

Polly,  162. 

Rose  E.  (B.),  312. 

Ruth  Boss,  152. 

Samuel,  26,  27. 

Sarah,  29. 

Sarah  (B.),  223. 

Sarah  M.  (B.),  222. 

Silas  M.,  312. 

Simeon,  82. 

Stephen,  222. 

Susannah    Potter,   222. 

Thomas,  29,  30,  59. 

William  27. 
Claude,     Edith    C.     Ma- 
thews, 396. 

Louis  W.,  396. 
Clans,  Ella  Doud,  159. 

Florence   M.,    159. 

Seldon  M.,  159. 
Clayton,  Anna,  277. 

Deniza  Sayer,  284. 

Henry,  284. 
Cleaver,  Arnold  B.,  519. 

Arnold  J.,  519. 

Marie   A.,  519. 

Marie  A.   (B.),  519. 

William  B.,  519. 
Clement,  Ada,  284. 

Benjamin,  283,  284, 

Clara,  284. 

Guy,  284. 

Lydia  A.   Baker,  283. 

Mary  E.  Hurley,  284. 

Mary  M.,  283. 

Mary  S.   (B.),  230. 

N.  George,  284. 

Sherman,  28=;. 

Winnie  E.  (B.),  285. 
demons,  Anna  F.   (B.), 
271. 

Cynthia  A.,  271. 

Harry  B.,  271. 

Fidelia  A.,  455. 

Ira  H.,  271. 

John,  271. 

Margaret  Zimmerman, 
271. 

Maria  Stover,  271. 

Sarah  A.,  455. 
Cleveland.    Edith,    503. 

Elihu,  169. 

Eliza  (B.),  337. 

Estelle  Beach,  337. 

George,   337. 

James,  337. 

James  H.,  503. 

Julia  Berkley,  503. 


Index. 

Cleveland,  Mary,  503. 
Myrtle     Chichester, 

513. 

Prudence,    169. 

Thomas,  513. 

William  B.,  337. 
Cliff,  Mary  E.,  417. 
Clifford,    Herbert,    499. 

Mabel  (B.),  499. 

Ralph  C.,  499. 

Warren  T..  499. 
Clough,   Clarissa.   245. 
Coan,  Douglass  W.,  243. 

Sarah  J.    (B.).  243. 
Coates,  Hannah  Bill,  13. 

Harriet,  331. 

William,    13. 
Cobb,     Abigail     Rhodes, 
91. 

Anne,  50. 

Ebenezer,  50. 

Elkanah,  50. 

Esther,  102. 

Eunice,  50. 

Henry,   50. 

Lois,  50. 

Lois  Hallet,  50. 

Mary,   50. 

Mary  (B.),  25,  50. 

Nathan,  50. 

Oliver,  50,  91. 

Prudence       Champlin, 
50. 

Sarah,  50. 

Sarah  A.,  470. 

Susannah,  50. 
Coburn,  Mary.   199. 
Coddington,   Elijah,    159. 

Phila.  159. 
Coe.  Benjamin  T.,  263. 

Martha  Rodman,  263. 

Mary,  263. 
Coff.  Lydia.  229. 
Coffin.  Amy   (B.),  78. 

Ann,  510. 

Mr..  78. 
Cogshell.  Esther,  464. 
Cogswell.  Lucy.  335. 
Colbraith.  Elizabeth,  332. 
Colby.   Carrie.   317. 

Mary  A..  485. 
Cole,   Amelia.   329. 

Arthur  B..  530. 

Delilah.    236. 

Delilah   Brown,   235. 

Ella  M..  530. 

Eunice  Denison,  98. 

Frank  F.,  530. 

Guv  W..  530. 

Ida  J.   (B.),  530. 


Cole,  Isaac,  530. 

James,  235,  236. 

Kate  S.,  329. 

Louisa,  235. 

Mary   (B.),  236. 

Myra  M.,  530. 

Phebe,  129. 

Polly  B.,  530. 

Ray  I.,  530. 

Samuel.  98.   140. 

Thankful   (B.),  140. 
Collier,  Julia,   306. 
Collins,  Alice  T.,  382. 

Amorilla.  381. 

Amos,  338. 

Annie  B.    (B.),  338. 

Benjamin,    382. 

Benjamin  F.,  382. 

Carrie  M.,  445. 

Catherine    B  u  r  d  i  c  k, 
381. 

Charles  R.,  382. 

C  h  1  o  e      Wadsworth, 

255- 
Daniel,  382. 
Gideon  B.,  257. 
Harriet    Atwood,    262, 

445- 

Jessie  R.,  262. 

John,  108,  381. 

Lois,  382. 

Mary,  255. 

Mary  A.,   382,  441. 

Mary  A.   (B.),  257. 

Mercy    Langworthy, 
108. 

Norman  G.,  257. 

Prudence  Chapin,  338. 

Rachel  Piatt,  257. 

Rhoda.  521. 

Robert.  255. 

Ruth.  388. 

Sanford  L.,  108. 

Stephen  P..  257. 

Tacy  A.   (B.),  382. 

Walter  J..  382. 

Willard  R.,  382. 

William.  262.  445. 
Colonv.  Arthur  L.,  295. 

DeWitt.  29.q. 

Maranda   (B.),  295. 
Colvin,    Harriet,   289. 
Colwell.  Julia  A..  280. 
Comstock,  Ellen  C,  386. 

Sarah,   444. 
Conable,    Clarissa    Deni- 
son, 100. 

Ezra,  100. 
Concklin,  Mary,  466. 

Rachel,  78. 


590 

Concklin,      William      S., 

494- 
Conderman,       Margaret, 

480. 
Condon,  Hannah  E.,  219. 

P.  H.,  319. 
Cone,  Andrew,  386. 

Eber  N.,  386. 

George,  265. 

Laura  E.,  265. 

Mary  J.    (B.),  386. 

Matilda    Norton,   386. 

Sophia   Tyler,   265. 
Congdon,  Susanna   (B.), 

88. 
Conklin,  Clara  (B.),  425. 

George,  425. 

George  D.,  425. 

Mary  A.  Connely,  367. 

Mary  Aiken,  494. 

Mary  Griswold,  425. 
Connell,  Emma   N.,   380. 

Martin,    380. 

Minerva    Saunders, 
380. 
Connor,  Earl  E.,  474. 

Elizabeth  Dugal,  473. 

Jessie  B.    (B.),  473. 

Michael  M.,  474. 

Mildred  A.,  474. 

Richard,  474. 

Verne  J.,  474. 

William,  474. 
Constable,   Abram.   401. 

E  u  d  o  r  a    S.    Gillette, 
401. 
Cooffman,    Celestine    C, 

439- 
Maria  Hoover,  439. 
Tobias,  439. 
Cook,    Betsey    E.    (B.), 

179. 
Daniel,  289. 
E.  C,  421. 
Eliza  Laid.  522. 
Eva  R..  408. 
Flora,  522. 
George,  522. 
Hannah   Spade,  289. 
Harriet    (B.).  421. 
Harriet  Wallace,   408. 
James,  408. 
Joel,  224. 
Lawrence,  289. 
Marcia.  431. 
Maud   (B.),  289. 
Rebecca,  224. 
Rebecca   Hart,   224. 
Sarah  E.,  354. 
Theresa,  490. 


Index. 

Cooke,  Abigail,  193. 
Rebecca  Dickinson, 

193- 

Samuel,    193. 

Sarah  P.,  504. 
Cooley,  Emeline,  438. 
Coollidge,  Alice,  492. 
Coolman,     Edmund     B., 
440. 

Emeline  E.    (B.),  440. 

Horace  C,  440. 

Ida  N.  Price,  440. 

Leura  A.,  440. 

Polly  Burroughs,  440. 

Sarah     E.      McCurdy, 
440. 

William  L.,  440. 
Coon,  Anna,  205,  420. 

Anna    Sherman,    173. 

Asa  S.,   507. 

Charles,    207. 

Charlotte  Burch,  207. 

Cynthia  Crandall,  207. 

D a m a  r  i  u  s  Crandall, 
207. 

Daniel,  179,  302. 

Dewitt,   207. 

Dorcas  Vars,  293. 

E.  B.,  383. 

Eliza,  376. 

Eliza  Green,  507. 

Emogene  S.  (B.),  383- 

Fannie    E.,    302. 

Fanny  (B.),  179. 

Flora   A.,   293. 

Gardner,  207. 

George.   173. 

Helen  E.,  507. 

Isabelle,  173. 

John,   293. 

Lorett.  206. 

Lucy,   203. 

Martha.  401. 

Samuel,    H..   207. 
Cooper.  Ellen  Hemphill, 
229. 

Everzalline   (B.),  462. 

Henry,  462. 

James.  229. 

John,    181. 

Joseph   W.,   229. 

Lorella    (B.),   181. 

Mary,  445. 

Sally  J.   (B.),  181. 

Silvia    Hemphill,    229. 

William,   181. 
Coran,  C.  Josephine 
Haff,  231. 

L.,  231. 
Corbett,  Jane  (B.),  176. 


Corbett,  Joseph,    176. 

Mary  E.,   309. 
Corbin,  Eunice,  173. 
Corbit,  Sarah  A.,  143. 
Corel,  Fanny,  2)7^- 
Corey,    Sarah   A.,    293. 
Corkingham,    Clara   J. 
(B.),  371. 

Margaret,  371. 

Marion,  371. 

Solon   N.,  371. 
Corlette,  John,  281. 

Wilhelmina   (B.),  281. 
Cornell,   Anna   E.   Gard- 
ner, 444. 

Dessie    W.    Norton, 
508. 

Edson  A.,  508. 

J.  M.,  444. 

Susan,  504. 

Thomas,  546. 
Corning,  Anna,  501. 

Avery,  335. 

Clara,    501. 

Clarissa,    335. 

Cynthia  (B.),  334. 

Edwin,   334. 

Elizabeth   Crump,   501. 

Erasmus,  501. 

John,   501. 
Cornish.  Agnes,  240. 
Cornwell.  Jane,   140. 
Cory.  Adaline,  438. 

Alfred  R.,  353. 

Andrew  J.,  353. 

Clara   A.,   443. 

Cornelia   M..   353. 

Elizabeth  Watson,  353. 

George  A.,   353. 

Hannah,   193,   194,   197. 

Jane  Seaberry,   353. 

Lucy  J..  Sir. 

Lucy  M.  Almy,  353. 

Maria  E.,  511. 

Nancy  S..  353. 
Cosgriff,   Florence    (B.), 

431. 
Walter.  431. 
Cotton.  Persis.  226. 
Cottrell,      Albert      (B.), 

1 73-. 
Angelia  Dye.   306. 
Arthur  M..  306. 
Augusta  C.   173. 
Beatrice.   476. 
Bourdman   M.,  479. 
Celia.  476. 
Celia  T.,  173. 
Daniel,  172. 
Eliza,  437. 


Cottrell,  Eliza  A.,  172. 

Elizabeth,  43,  80. 

Emma  L.,  173. 

Erzula  O.   (B.),  214. 

Frances    A.,    172. 

Florence  A.,  173. 

Eunice   (B.),  172. 

Frank,  214. 

George  E.,  173. 

Hannah,  59. 

Herbert   L.,   306. 

Ira   L.,   306. 

Isabelle  Coon,  173. 

John  B.,  172,  476. 

Julia  Randolph,  476. 

Lebbeus  M.,  479. 

Lillie  Pitts,   173. 

Lucy  M.  (B.),  479. 

Lydia  Maxson,  479. 

Mary,    172. 

Mary  Saunders,  172. 

Nicholas,   80. 

Patience,  62. 

Royal  L.,  306. 
Couch,   Phebe,  244. 
Coughlin,  Eva  M.,  413. 

George,  413. 

Marcus,  413. 

Maria  A.  (B.),  413. 

Martha,  262. 
Count,  Elmer,  423. 

Polly  Downs,  423. 

Thomas,  423. 

Viettta   E.    Thompson, 

423- 
Cox,  George  C,  387. 

Kate  H.   (B.),  387- 

Mary  M.,  495. 
Craig,    Isabelle.    445. 
Craine,  Horace,  201,  202. 

Lydia,  202. 

Lydia  (B.),  201. 

Melissa,  202. 
Crall,  Eli,  250. 

Justina  (B.),  250. 
Crandall,    Abigail    West, 
168. 

Albert  B.,  515. 

Albert  N.,  371. 

Alice  M.,  288,  371. 

Almira  J.,  208. 

Alzina  (B.),  288. 

Alzina  Mason.  207. 

Amos,  s8. 

Amy  W..  168. 

Ann  A.,  398. 

Anna  Brand,  208. 

Angelia,  236. 

Angeline.   287. 

Archibald,  223. 


Index. 

Crandall,   Arloiena,   236. 
Arthur  W.,  288. 
Augustus,  206,  208. 
Betsy,  377- 
Blanche  M.,  465. 
Carrie,   316. 
Charles,   341. 
Charlotte,      119,      120, 

134- 
Charlotte    (B.),  206. 
Christopher,   132. 
Clarissa,  223. 
Cynthia,  207. 
Damarius,      119,      132, 

134,  207. 
Damarius  Kenyon,  119, 

120. 
Daniel,  515. 
Darwin,  288. 
Devills  P.,  236. 
Elizabeth  Chase,   134. 
Ellen  A.,  508. 
Elva  E.,  465. 
Emily  Douse.  206. 
Enoch,  208. 
Erastus,  398. 
Esther,  63. 
Ethan,  267,  315. 
Eunice,  87.  250,  370. 
Eunice   (B.),  267,  316. 
Fidelia,  207. 
Flora  B.   Irish,  343. 
Flora  McKee,  493. 
George,  268. 
George  N.,  268,  509. 
George  V.,  509. 
Grace,  84. 
Hannah,  120. 
Harriet  (B.),  223. 
Harriet  A.,  295. 
Harriet  M..  257. 
Henry,  343. 
Irving  A..  464. 
James,    119,    120,    132, 

134,  343- 
James  H.,  236. 
Jane,  12. 
Jared,  207. 
Jeremy,  287. 
Jerry,   295. 

John,   12,  63.   124,  341. 
Joseph,  22,  35. 
Josephine,    236. 
Kenyon,   207. 
Lodowick,  223. 
Lorenda,  236. 
Lucius.  168. 
Lucy   (B.).   132. 
Lucy     Potter     Barber, 

84. 


Crandall,  Lydia,  22,  292. 
iMabel  M.,  465. 
Maria  (B.),  268. 
Maribah   (B.),  48. 
Marion  Weber,  508. 
Martha  A.,  515. 
Martin  L.,  208. 
Mary,  236,  237. 
Mary    (B.),  207. 
Mary  A.,  208. 
Mary  A.    (B.),  341. 
Mary  M.  St.  John,  371. 
May  C,  493- 
Minnie  G.,  509. 
Miranda  F.  Irish,  509. 
Nancy.  124. 
Nancy  (B.),  236. 
Nancy  A.   (B.),  120. 
Nancy  B.,  208. 
Nancy  Davis,  509. 
Nancy  Greene.  515. 
Nancy  M.,  316. 
Nancy    Nichols,    120. 
Nancy  Rhodes,  398. 
Nelson,  223. 
Nichols,  509. 
Oliver  C,    168. 
Ordelia    Blakely,    343. 
Otis,  493. 
Pardon.  132. 
P a  r  m e  1  i  a    Williams, 

208. 
Paul  K.,   120. 
Phebe,  207.  342. 
Phebe  Adams,  288. 
Phineas,  84. 
Polly  Maxson,  257. 
Porter.  236. 
Prudence,   132. 
Ralph  E..  465. 
Rogers,  84. 
Russel.  48. 
Ruth,  III. 
Ruth  E..  341. 
Sally   Pendleton,   341. 
Samuel.   120. 
Samuel   B.,   236. 
Samuel  P..  508. 
Sarah  E.  (B.),  514. 
Saunders,  257. 
Stephen,  152. 
Susan,    151,   233,   306. 
Susan  Crippen,  223. 
Susan  Kenyon,  152. 
Susanna  Maxson,  223. 
Tacv,  96. 
Thankful,   268. 
Thankful   (B.).  120. 
T  h  a  n  kful  Saunders, 

206,  208. 


592 

Crandall,  Vermeda  (B.), 

295- 

Wealthy,  316. 

Wealthy  M.,  267. 

Welcome,  206. 

William,  120,  236. 

William  H.,  208. 

William  L.,  515. 
Crandell,  John,  xxv. 
Crane,  A.  M.,  242. 

Anna  E.  Miller,  242. 

Anna  H.,  242. 

Esther    M.    Goodrich, 

133- 
Ezra  F.,  174. 
Fanny  L.,  307. 
Joseph,  133. 
•     Lucy   E.    (B.)    Sibley, 

174. 
Cranor,  Charles  M.,  240. 

Edith  J.,  240. 

Fannie  S.,  240. 

Frank  Taylor,  240. 

Hugh  Armfield,  240. 

John   S.,  240. 

John  Samuel,  240. 

Katherine  Taylor,  240. 

Sarah  Elizabeth,  240. 

William  Taylor,  240. 
Crary,     Betsey     Rhodes, 
91. 

Lucy,  208. 

Peter,  91. 
Crawford.  Alonzo,  293. 

Carrie  Hibbard,  293. 

Fannie,  436. 

Helen  A.  Burdick,  293. 
Crippen,    Susan,   223. 
Crittenden,  Ellie,  450. 
Crittenton,    Arcelia    M., 
414. 

Charlotte    D  u  n  h  a  m, 
414. 

Stephen,  414. 
Crofoot,   Samantha,   292. 
Cromack,  Arthur,  312. 

Brainard,  312. 

Ellen  Boyd,  312. 

Nellie     M.     Williams, 
312. 
Crookes,  George  D.,  501. 

Henrietta     W.      (B.), 
501. 

John  H.,  501. 

Mary  H.,  501. 
Crosby,  Asa,  379. 

Ephraim,  293. 

Harriet,  379. 

Joseph  F.,  210. 

Mary  Howe,  37Q. 


Index. 

Crosby,  Mary  P.,  512. 

Leafy  L.   (B.),  293. 

Priscilla   (B.),  210. 

Susan,  530. 

Walter,  512. 
Crosier,   Elizabeth,   310. 
Cross,     Abby     Hinckley, 

253- 

Abby  J.,  253,  438. 

Abby  J.   (B.),  384. 

Davis  J.,  453- 

Fannie,  466. 

George  D.,  253. 

George  W.,   153. 

Hadarah  J.,  453. 

Hannah,  93. 

Harriet  B.,  253. 

J.  Hobart,  538- 

John,  253,  384. 

Lois  (B.),  153. 

Martha  B.,  253. 

Mary,   253,   450. 

Mary  A.   (B.),  453- 

Mary  Concklin,  466. 

Sarah  E.,  453. 

Sylvester,  466. 
Crouse,  Martha  E.  (B.), 
281. 

Richard,  281. 
Crumb,     Elizabeth     P. 

(B.),  325- 

Ephraim,  325. 

Franklin,  401. 

Franklin  E.,  325. 

H.  Ella,  401. 

Martha  Coon,  401. 

Mary  A.,  325. 

Lucius  H.,  325. 

Lucy  E.,  325- 

Wallace  E.,  325. 
Crump,  Elizabeth,  501. 
Culver,  Christopher,  510. 

Ellen  Harris,  510. 
Cummings,  Caroline, 

518.        • 
Cummins,  Emma,  292. 
Cundall,    Carrie    E.    Da- 
vis,  345. 

Charlotta    A.     Gray, 

345- 
Constantine  T.,  447. 
Edward  G.,  446. 
Effie  A.  Ball,  345. 
Elizabeth,  345. 
Elizabeth    Wallace, 

344- 
Frank  S..  345. 
Hannah  A.,  345. 
Harriet  E.   (B.),  344. 
Helen  B.,  345. 


Cundall,  Isaac,  344,  446, 

447- 
Jacob  D.,  345. 
John,  344. 
Mary  E.    (B.),  446. 
Trephena    Clark,    446, 

447. 
Cundell,  Hannah,  446. 
Currie,  John  B.,  417. 

Julia  L.  (B.),  417. 

Lillian,    417. 
Currier,  Barbara,  488. 

Mary  B.  (B.),  488. 

Nathaniel,  488. 
Curtis,   Abigail,    164. 

Alice  Parmelee,  319. 

Amanda  L.  (B),  371. 

Barbara   Thompson, 

367. 
Charles,  367. 
Clara  L.,  501. 
Daniel  H.,  367. 
Edwin  F.,  367. 
Elmer  C,  367. 
Elmer  E.,  513. 
Emily,  525. 
Erna,   367. 
Frank,  371. 
Frank  E.,  371. 
George  F.,  269. 
Gertrude,  513. 
Harriet,  367. 
Ira  E.,  367. 
Jane  A.,  343. 
Jane  C,  371. 
Jennie  A.  Boswell,  269. 
Jennie  F.  Elmer,  513. 
La  Mott,  513. 
Lillie  A.,  367. 
Mable  E.  Sayles,  367. 
Maggie    L.    McLellan, 

367. 

Nellie  A.  Bander,  367. 

Ora,  S13. 

Polly,  182. 

Roxanna,  513. 

Sophronia,   370. 

Thankful    (B.),  367. 

William  H.,  367. 

William  P.,  319. 
Curtiss,  Eliza,  176. 

Sophronia,  419. 
Gushing,  Mercy,  49. 
C  u  s  h  m  a  n,     Almira 
Weeks,  354. 

Charles,  354. 

Emma,  354. 

Frederick,  354. 
Cutler,   Adelia   R.    (B.), 
413. 


Cutler,  Adeline,  510. 

Edward,  402. 

Emma  H.  (B.),  402. 

George  W.,  402. 

Isaac,  413. 

Jennie  I.,  413. 

L.,  470. 

Lydia,  354. 

Alalvina,  402. 

Mary  A..  413. 

Mary  Willard,  413. 

Nancy  Davis,  470. 

Orville>  413. 

Orville  L..  413. 
Cutter,  Sarah,  297. 
Dailey,  Maria,  429. 
Daily,   Sarah    (B.),    171. 

William,   171. 
Dakin,  Daniel,  296. 

George  I.,  296 

Jennie  M.  (B.),  296. 

Lucile  M.,  296. 
Daley,  Mary,  465. 
Daly,   Cornelius,   525. 

Margaret  A.,  525. 

Margaret  Galwin,  525. 
Dalson,   Minnie,  482. 
Damon,  Petis  D.,  485. 
Daniel.  Ida  A..  500. 

Prudence,    283. 
Daniels,  Eleanor,  483. 

Ida,  483- 

Richard,  483. 
Danforth,     Fidelia     Bar- 
ron, 427. 

Henry,  427. 

Sarah  V.,  427. 
Darely,  Hattie.  458. 
Darling,    Eveline     (B.), 
192. 

George,  192. 
Darner,   Susan.  436. 
Darrow,    Emeline    (B.), 
248. 

Frances.  248. 

Job.  248. 

Lydia,   190. 

Phebe,  58. 

Sally    Matthews,    247. 
.      248. 

Saphronia,  247. 

Sarah,  337. 

Sarah  Pike   (B.),   144- 

Walter,   144.  247,  248. 

Wesley,  248. 
Dash,  Amy  D.  (B.),  391- 
Amy  L.,  391. 
John  B.,  391. 
Davidson.  Agnes  S.,  231. 
Anna    (B.),   183. 
38 


hid  ex. 

Davidson,   Elizabeth 

(B.),  55- 
Experience  (B.),  50. 
James,   183. 
John,  50,  55. 
Lucretia    (.B.),   78. 
Mary,  50. 
William,  50. 
Davis,  Abel,  279. 
Alfred.  279. 
Alice  O.,  278. 
Amey,  76. 
Amy,   157. 

Amy  Lippencott,  157. 
Ann,  291. 
Anna,  76. 

Anna  (B.),  38,  76,279. 
Arnold,  344. 
Arsentha.    157. 
Arthur  W.,  280. 
Athalia  B.,  279. 
Betsey  Moore,   157. 
Bill,   180. 
Blanch,  470. 
Calvin,  158,  278,  280. 
Carrie,  470. 
Carrie  E.,  345. 
Carrie  Randolph.   344. 
Cassius   S.,   280. 
Catherine      McGregor, 

247. 
Cecilia  M.,  482. 
Charlotta    (B.),    161. 
Charlotte,  278,  283. 
Clara  E.,  278. 
Clark.  235. 
Clarke.  76. 
Cora  B..  279. 
Cynthia    Lippencott, 

278. 
Daniel.  157. 
Deborah.  277. 
Delila     F.      Randolph, 

279. 
Dennis.  284. 
Egar  C,  279. 
Eli.  279. 
Elijah  P..  470. 
Eliza  J..  157- 
Eliza  J.  Boyd.  528. 
Eliza  J.  Davis,   157. 
Eliza  L.   (B.).  282. 
Elizabeth,      152,       157, 

277,  284.  439. 
Elizabeth  Burdick.  152. 
Elizabeth    Hoffman, 

280. 
Elizabeth    Johnson, 

157- 
Elizabeth  Maxson,  50. 


593 

Davis,   Elmer,   526. 
Elnora  W.,  278. 
Ephraim,  76. 
Erastus,  278. 
Esther,  405. 
Ethel,  344. 
Evaline  A.,  280. 
Ezekiel  P.,  280. 
Francis,    157. 
Frank  P.,  384- 
George,  157. 
George  W.,  278. 
Hannah    (B.),  280. 
Harrison,  528. 
Henry,  76. 
Herbert  M.,  278. 
Hester  L.,  279. 
laphene  Simpson,   526. 
Ida  E.  Hughes,  280. 
Isaac,  151,  279. 
Isaac   S.,   279. 
Isabel,   283. 
Isabell,  281. 
Isaiah,  291. 
Israel  L.,  280. 
J.  L.,  432. 
Jacob,  156,  157- 
James,  277. 
James  A.,   157. 
Jane,  284. 

Jane  McClure,   157. 
Jane  Morris,  279. 
Jennie  E..  280. 
Jennie  E.  Davis,  280. 
Jeptha.  278. 
Jerome  B..  470. 
John.  50,  109,  no,  279, 

325. 
John  M..  279. 
John  W..  278.  280,  470. 
Joseph.  38,  76,  136. 
Josephine,  279. 
Judith.  50. 
Leela   (B.),  384- 
Louise.  285. 
Lucretia.   76,    109,   235. 
Lucy,  76,  136. 
Lucy  (B.).  102.  313. 
Luther,  279.  280. 
Lydia,  76,  87.  278,  283. 
Lydia  A..  280. 
Lydia  Maxson.  158,280. 
Lydia  Taylor,  325. 
Malinda.  285. 
Maria  Lippencott,  278, 

280. 
Martha.  96.  278. 
Mary,  71,  76,  126,  156, 

157,    276,    277,    278, 

279,  282. 


594 

Davis,  Mary   (B.),  70. 

Mary  A.,  259. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  358. 
■    Mary  L.,  280. 

Mary  L.  Davis,  280. 

Mary  Miner,  235. 

Mary  Stearn,  285. 

Mary  Stearns,  159. 

Matilda  Loofboro,  278. 

May,  279. 

Mercy,  180. 

Milton,   280. 

Milton  E.,  280. 

Minnie,  279. 

Moses  I.,  280. 

Nancy,  157,  470,  509. 

Nancy  A.   (B.),  156. 

Nancy  A.  Moots,  279. 

Nathan,  152. 

Nellie  E.,  279. 

Nellie  Green,  432. 

Nettie   Miller,  432. 

Oliver,    88. 

Otis  G.,  280. 

Pardon,  373. 

Pearl,  279.  470. 

Penelope   (B.).   151. 

Permilla  Maxson,  279. 

Phebe,  533. 

Phebe  A.  (B.).  470. 

Phiothata,   277. 

Oliver,   2,72,- 

Rebecca,  278,  282. 

Rebecca  L.,  158. 

Robert,  161, 

Rocelia  C,  159. 

Rosa,  279. 

Ruth   Landphere,   470. 

Ruth  Randall.  157. 

Sally,  102.  313. 

Sally  A.  Knapp,  169. 

Samuel  C,  156. 

Sarah  Beebe,   109,   no. 

Selma,  325. 

Sophronia  B.  fB.).373. 

Tacy    Crandall,    96. 

Thomas,  50,  157. 

Thomas  C.,  282. 

Trayton,  345. 

Uriah,  281. 

Velvis    Cahill,    345. 

Viana.  281. 

Victoria,  279. 

Victoria  Davis.  279. 

Vienna  Richardson, 

157. 
W.  G..  432. 
Wheeler,    526. 
William,    76,    96,    102, 

IS7,    278,    313. 


Index. 

Davis,    William   C,    159, 
285. 

William  F.,  169. 

William  H.,  358. 

William  T.,  xx. 
Dawley,   Eva,  269. 
Dawson,  Elsey   (B.),  83. 

John,   83. 
Day,  Catherine  E.,  507. 

Clarendon,  370. 

David,  256. 

E.  Eunice  (B.),  370. 

Emma,  460. 

Florence  McGrann,368. 

Mary  L.,  256. 

William,  368,  507. 
Dean,.  Estella,  489. 

Sarah,    312. 
Deane,  Caroline,  488. 

Mercy,  475. 
De  Castaing,  Mary,  521. 
Decker,    Crissy  J.,    433. 

David,  433. 

Joshua,   245. 

Lucinda,  245. 

Margaret    Michaels, 

433- 

Martin,  223. 

Phebe  Barber,  223. 

Polly  Palmiter,  245. 
De  Graff,  Christian,  273. 

Ellen  D.  Fames,  273. 
De  Groot,  Mary,  413. 
De  Lack,  John,  431. 

Lydia  (B.),  431. 
Delano,  Mary,  473. 
Deming,  C.  A.,  494. 
Denison,  Amos,  38. 

Amy,  91,  98. 

Ann  Barrodell,  40,  41. 

Ann  E.,  216. 

Ar  1  o  n  e  Langworthy, 
287. 

Bridget  Thompson.  41. 

Charles  H.,  100. 

Clarissa,   100. 

Cynthia  (B.),  286. 

David,   100. 

Desire,  98,   100. 

Dorcas,  91. 

Edward,  98,  392. 

Eliza.  372. 

Elizabeth,  100. 

Elizabeth    L  a  t  h  r  o  p, 
392. 

Eunice,    98. 

Evelena,  392. 

Fidelia,  287. 

George,  39,  40,  41,  42, 
97- 


Denison,  H.   M..   163. 

Hannah,  91,  128. 

Hannah  Burrows,  91. 

Harriet,  286. 

James,   286. 

James  R.,  287. 

Jennette,  287. 

John,  42. 

Joseph,  91,  100. 

Julia  A.    Palmer,   163. 

Keziah   Smith,    100. 

Margaret   Chandler 
Monck,  41. 

Martha  Gallup,   38. 

Mary,  91,   100. 

Mary   (B.),  39,  46,  91, 
100. 

Mary  Lay  Miner,  40. 

Mary  Minor,  38. 

Mercy  Gorham,  40. 

Olive,  172. 

Olivia,  287. 

Orrim  B.,  287. 

Phebe,  27. 

Philemon,  98. 

Polly   (B.),  97- 

Prudence.   38. 

Ruhannah,  98. 

Ruhannah    (B.),  98. 

Samuel,   38,  39,  40. 

Sarah,  38.  39,  9i- 

Sarah  Billings,   100. 

Sophronia,  100. 

Vashti,  287. 

William,  41,  42,  91. 
Dennis,   Sarah,  451. 
Densmore.    Eri,    314. 

Palmyra,   314. 

Polly  Joice,  314. 
Derbois,   Jeanette.   430. 
Derosie.   Catherine.   203. 
Derve.   Hester,  388. 
De    Sers.     Charlotte     E. 
Niven,  258. 

Paul.    258. 
D  e  s  h  1  e  r.    Adaline    M. 
Ayers.   525. 

Kate,  525. 

William  K.,  525. 
De   Show,    Fanny  Corel, 
372. 

Henry.  372. 

Sarah  M.,  372. 
Devendorf,   Frank,   369. 

Mary  E.    (B.),  369. 
Devereau.     Annie     M. 
(B.),  431. 

Frank.  431. 
Devlin.   Sarah,  230. 
Devoll,  David  S.,  345. 


Devoll,  Marion  B.,  345. 

Mary  Taylor,  345. 
Dewey,  George,  41. 

Russel,  223. 

Sarah  (B.),  223. 
Dewherst,     Frederic    E., 

446. 
Dibble,  Julia  A.,  304. 

Mary    Johnson,    304. 

Orrin,    304. 
Dickens,   Addie,   528. 

Amos  H.,  384. 

Hannah  Ross,  227. 

Hezekiah,  384. 

Jane   M.   Sawyer,  527. 

Joel,   528. 

Lucy,  227. 

Martha,  227. 

Mary  Lewis,  384. 

Nettie,  528. 

Sarah  F.   (B.),  384. 

Tristam,  227. 
Dickey,  Annie  S.,  370. 
Dickie.  John,  435. 
Dickinson,  John,   10. 

Olive,  155. 

Phebe,   149. 

Rebecca.   193. 
Dickray,  Kate  H..  445. 
Dillenbeck,    Almira.    191. 
Dillinbeck,   Phebe,   :i2>7- 
Dimmick,      George      M., 
528. 

Jane  M.  Sawyer,  527. 

Nettie,  528. 
Dimmock,   Esther,   7^. 
Dimond,  E.  A.,  319. 
Ditmas,  John,   270. 

Morrell  C.,  270. 

Sophronia     A.      (B.), 
270. 
Dixon,    Courtland    P., 

520. 

Evelena    (B.),   520. 

John,  25,  53. 

Josephine    Williams. 
520. 

Kate  L,  429. 

Pauline,  391. 

William  H.,  520. 

William  P..  520. 
Doane.  Calvin,  475. 

John,   442. 

Julia  Moulton,  442. 

Lily  M..  442. 

Mercy  Deane.  475. 
Dodd,  George,  356. 

Jane  (B.).  356. 
Dodge,  Almeda  Webster, 
320. 


Index. 

Dodge,  Azubah.  291. 

Clara   M.,   320. 

Elias,  320. 

Elizabeth  C.    F. 
Barker,  520. 

Ellis   R.,   320. 

Harriet  S.  Payne,  488. 

Helen  E.,  320. 

John,  320,  546. 

Leroy  W.,  320. 

Lucy  IMaxwell,  320. 

Lydia,   251. 

Matilda  Lyon,  291. 

Murry  W..  520. 

Raymond  E..  vi,  488. 

Sarah  A.    (B.),  320. 

Sarah  Weaver.  320. 

Willard  E.,  488. 

William,  291. 
Dollings,  Martha  J.,  369. 
Dorg,  Janett,  416. 
Dorman,  Betsy,  211. 
Dorn,  Eleanor,   191. 
Dorney,   Bridget,  408. 
Dorr,  Dove  (B.),  210. 

Edwin.  210. 
Dorrel.   Harris,   100. 

Mary,  100. 

Sally  (B.),  100. 

Stephen,   100. 
Dorrill.  Lydia  (B.),  177. 

Stephen,    177. 
Doty,  Hannah  C,  238. 

Orin,  238. 
Doud,  Charles  A.,  496. 

Edith,  496. 

Edna  F.,  496. 

Ella,  159- 

Florence    F.    Budlong. 
496. 

Giles,  496. 

Willis.  496. 
Douglass.  Benjamin.  130. 

Diedama.  130. 

E.  D..  469. 

Louis  Mackay.  130. 

Philena  L..  469. 
Doughty.   Elizabeth.   403. 

John.  403. 
Douse.  Emily,  206. 

Emily  D..  325. 

Harriet  V.,  237. 

Mary  A.  Crandall,  208. 

Mary  Crandall,  237. 

Roswell,  237. 

Roswell  P..  208. 
Dove,  Edith  P.,  502. 
Dow,  Cora  M.  Webster, 

529- 
Dwight,  529. 


595 

Dow,  Earl  W.,  429. 

Helen  M.  (B.),  429. 

Wilber  L.,  529. 
Downing,  Frank,  203. 

Giles,  203. 

Philena   (B.),  203. 
Downs,  Polly,  423. 
Dows,  Jane,  442. 
Doxstader,  Almira,  337. 

John,  2,2>7- 

Phoebe  Dillenbeck,  22,7- 
Drake,  Ann,  22^,. 

B.   Frank,  306. 

Harriet    Howard,    306. 

Jane  B.,  304. 
Dring,   Susan,  214. 
Drumheller,  J.,  382. 

Lucy  M.  Maxson,  382. 
Drysdale,  Julia,  393. 
Du  Bois,  Harriet,  245. 
Dudley,  Lucy  (B.),   137. 
Duel,  Charles,   156. 

Clemenia,   156. 

Harriet,  156. 

Joseph,  156, 

Lucy  A.,  156. 

Philip,  156. 

Sarah   (B.),  156. 

Sarah  C,  274. 
Duff,  Annie,  308. 
Dugal,  Ellizabeth,  474. 
Dunham,    Charlotte,  414. 

Chloe  (B.),  335. 

Cynthia,  335. 

Lucy  Cogswell,  335. 

Nelson,  335. 
Dunston,  Edward,  335. 

Eliza  (B.),  335. 
Durant,    Sally    E.    Saw- 
yer, 430. 

William.  430. 
Durfee,  Almira  G.    (B.), 
264. 

James,  264. 
Durham,  Ezra,  498. 

Georgiana   (B.),  498. 

Hattie,  498. 
Durkee,  Fannie,  433. 
Durkins,  Dennis  S.,  368. 

Francis  L,  368. 

Helen  AL,  368. 

Jessie  M..  368. 

Mary,  476. 

Mary    E.    McGrann, 
368. 
Dutton,  Clarence,  525. 

Emeline  C.  (B.),  525. 

Emily  Curtis,  525. 

Marion,  525. 

Samuel,  525. 


596 

Dwidan,   Clara  L.    (B.), 

Sis- 
Dye,  Angelia,  306. 

Birdsall,  473. 

Harriet  Hibbard,  473. 

John,  306. 

Susan  Crandall,  306. 
Dyer,  Abbie  J.,  535. 

Annie  S.  Brown,  329. 

Eliza,  100. 

Lowell   M.,  329. 
Dyslin,   Nancy,  46s. 
Eames,  Alfred,  2^^- 

Charles  B.,  273. 

Elisha  D.,  273. 

Ellen  D..  273. 

Fanny  Vinton,  273. 

Gardner  T.,  273. 

Hannah,  176. 

Harriet  Case,  273. 

Lovett,  273. 

Lucia  A.,  458. 

Lucy  C.  Morgan,  273. 

Mary  Robinson,  27s- 

Mary  Schmucker,  273. 
Earle,    Florence  L.    Cad- 
well,  500. 

Herbert  R.,  500. 
Eastman,     Adelbert     L., 

475- 
Austin,  331. 
Bernice,  475. 
Gertrude  K.,  475. 
Ira,  475. 
Josephine      A.       (B.), 

475- 

Laura   A.,  475. 

Mary,  331. 

Mary  L.,  475. 

Mary  Lyon,  475. 

William  V.,  475. 
Easton,  A.  Nettie,  417. 

Annie  E.   (B.),  417. 

Bessie  L.,  217. 

Ebenezer,  417. 

Geary,  417. 

George  W.,  417. 

James  W.,  417. 

John,  545. 

John  W.,  417. 

Sadie  E.,  417. 

Wilbur,  417. 
Eaton,  Hattie    (B.),  175. 

Nancy,   218. 
Ebbie,     Jennie     Holmes, 
.^67. 

Wilson,  367. 
Ebblie,  Daniel,  367. 

Ella,  368. 

Mary  E.  Holmes,  367. 


Index. 

Eddy,  Lavina,  167. 
Edgar,    Anna    H.     (B.), 
136. 

Cornelius,    136. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  136. 

William,  136. 
Edgerton.  Margaret,  ;i;^6. 
Edison,  Thomas,  7. 
Edmond,  Andrew,  384. 

Jane,  384. 
Edward,  Ella,  465. 
Edwards,    Eliza    J.    Van 
Buskirk,   229. 

Emeline   Van   Buskirk, 
408. 

Fred  M.,  408. 

Herbert,  408. 

Milo  N.,  229. 
Eells,  Benjamin,  91,  215. 

Dorcas,  215. 

Dorcas  Denison,  91. 

Maria,  215. 

Martha  (B.),  49. 

Mercy  Cushing,  49. 

Nathaniel,  49,  215. 
Egleston,  Ketura,  296. 
Elder,  Joseph  A.,  510. 

Mary  L.   Potter,  510. 
Elderton,  Bridget,  48. 

Joseph,  48. 

Lydia,  48. 

Mary,  48. 

Robert,  48. 

Roger,  48. 

Sarah,  48. 
Eldred,    Abbie    J.    Dyer, 

535- 

Annie  L.  (B.),  535. 

Beatrice  H.,  535. 

Charles,  535. 

Edith  C,  53S. 

Jessica  D..  535. 

John  H.,  535- 

Raymond  B.,  535. 

Roger  M.,  535. 
Eldredge,  Lucy  W.   Mil- 
lichamp,   339. 

Samuel,  339. 
Eldridge,   Arminia,  231. 

Benedict,  88. 

Desire,  147. 

Dorcas     (B.),     White, 
88. 
Elliot,  Elizabeth.  456. 

Emma   (B.),    153. 

Mandana,  293. 

Mary,  285. 
Ellis,  Edward  L.,  532. 

George  M.,  532. 

Hattie  B.,  533. 


Ellis,  Henrietta  L.  Saun- 
ders, 532. 

Julia,  SOS- 

Phebe  Davis,  533. 

Sarah,  480. 
Ellison,  Lucinda,  521. 
Ellsworth,    Alice    Baine, 
427. 

C.  A.  Deming,  494. 

Charity     S.     Westfall, 
427. 

Daniel  F.,  427. 

De  Roy,  427. 

Freeman  D.,  427. 

Mahala,  427. 

Mary     Starkweather, 
427. 

Minnie  D.,  494. 

Orlando,  427. 

Perry,  494. 

Rhoda  L.  (B.),  427. 

Sarah  Marshall,  427. 

William,  427. 
Elmer,  Jennie  F.,  513. 
Elston,     Annette      (B.), 
290. 

Jesse,  290. 
Elwood,  Esther,  467. 
Ely,  Fanny,  359. 

Lillie  M.  Rogers,  359. 

Parnell,  210. 

Walter,   359. 

Zelophehad,  200,  210. 
Emery,    Clara,   296. 
Emmons,     Angeline     R. 

(B.),  266. 

Caroline  E.,  266. 

Charles,  266. 

Julius  E.,  266. 

Sarah  E.,  266. 
Ennis,  Annie,  261. 
Enos.  Eunice,  517. 
Enright,    Harriet   Curtis, 

367- 

Thomas,  367. 
Este,  Harriet,  259. 
Evans,  Anna,  523. 

Caroline  H.,  523. 

Lucretia  F.,  368. 

Samuel,  523. 
Exeley,   Albert,   486. 

Anna  E.    (B.),  486. 

Bertha  E.,  486. 

Callie  M.  (B.),  486. 

Clara  C.  486. 

Edith  M..  486. 

Florence  R.,  486. 

Lucius  M.,  486. 

Nathan,  486. 

William  S.,  486. 


F  a  i  r  c  h  1 1  d,  Carrie  L. 
(B.),  404. 

Fred,  404. 
Fairfield,  John,  11. 
Fairly,  Clara  (B.),  403. 

Giles,  403. 
Farland,  Nancy,  440. 
Farling,  Julia,   191. 
Farrand,   Eliza,   238. 

Esther  L.,   305. 
Farrell,  D.  D.,  305. 
I'^ate,  Esther,  353. 
Kaulkner,    Fannie    A. 
(B.),  418. 

Fanny,  418. 

Henry,  418. 

Richard  J.,  418. 
Faxon,  Annie  E.,  366. 
P'ay,   George   H.,   286. 

Harrison,  286. 

Palace   (B.),  286. 
Fayerweather,  Frances 
Fox,  522. 

James  R.,  522. 

Mary  E.,  522. 
Fearey,  Bessie,  460. 

Emma  Day,  460. 

Porter,    460. 

Robert  H.,   460. 

Ruth,  460. 

Sarah  Porter,  460. 

Thomas  H.,  460. 
Fellers,   Frank,   171. 

Sarah  A.  (B.),  171. 
Felton,  Harriet,  258. 

Louisa,  471. 
Fen,  John,  98. 

Martha,   98. 

Mary,    160. 

Mr.,  98. 

Susanna  (B.),  98. 

William,  98. 
Feneck,  Mary,  133. 
Fenn,    Abigail,   300. 

Sarah,  161. 
Fenner.  Ann  E.  (B.),348. 

Annie   C.   Smith,  510. 

Charles  A.,  348. 

Elisha.  480. 

Ely,  480. 

Eunice   (B.),  203. 

George  P..  347,  510. 

Harriet  Smith,  480. 

John,  203. 

Mildred,   510. 

Philip.   194,  348. 

Sally  Potter,  194,  348. 

Susan  T.  (B.),  480. 
Ferguson.  Annis.  271. 

Hannah  (B.),  223. 


Index. 

Fcrman,  Sarah,  431. 
Ferris,  Clara,  496. 

John  S.,  224. 

Kitty  M.   (B.),  224. 
Fields,  Bell,  472. 

Milton,   455. 
Figary,  Jennie  A.  Stone, 
418. 

Verne,  418. 
Finley,  George,  145. 

Mary   (B.),   145. 
Fish,  Alice,  510. 

Annie  B.  Potter,  510. 

Edith,  510. 

Elizabeth,  491. 

Emeline  Miner,  510. 

Esther,  212. 

Hadlin,  378. 

Hannah  Spicer,  212. 

Harry,   510. 

Horace  W.,   510. 

Joseph,  56. 

Mary    (B.),   378. 

Nathan  G.,  510. 

Thomas,  4,  7,  212. 
Fisher,  Gertrude  Mc- 
Gregor, 249. 

John,  250. 

Nellie  S.   (B.),  250. 

William  G.,  249. 
Fisk,  Clarence  H.,  241. 

Clinton  B.,  468. 

Ellis  D.,  468. 

Erma.  468. 

Jane  Goodell,  241. 

Louis,  241. 

Louise  G.    (B.),  468. 

Otis,  241. 
Fitch,    Eliza    William, 
162. 

Elliot  G.,   162. 

Grace  York,  162. 

Harriet,  162. 

James  M.,  162. 

Julius  C,  162. 

Lavinda,    162. 

Lemuel,  162. 

Lois   (B.),  162. 

Patten,    162.^ 

Phebe,   162. ' 

Polly  Clarke,  162. 

Sabrina  Brown,   162. 

Susannah,  289. 

Tacy.   162. 
Fits.  Mary.  478. 
Flack.  Lillian  M.  Brock- 
way.  487. 

Samuel,    487. 
Flansburg.   Jane.    305. 
Fleharty,  Sarah,  532. 


597 

Fleming,  Jane  IL,  430. 

Nancy  Hale,  430. 

Thomas,  430. 
Fletcher,  Edith  M.,  308. 

Hiram,   308. 

Judith  R.,  509. 

Marietle  Jackson,   308. 

Michael,   133. 

Rachel     E.     Goodrich, 

133- 
Flewellyn,  Ophelia,  423. 
Flower,  Amelia  (B.),4I2. 

Anson  R.,  412. 

Mary  A.  Boyle,  412. 

Nathan,  412. 
Fobes,  Alice,  364. 

Emily  F.,  364. 

Harriet   C.,   364. 

Henry,  363. 

Katharine  G.,  364. 

Lucy  B.  (B.),  363. 

Mary  L.,  364. 

Sarah  A.,  364. 

Willard  H.,  364 
Fonda,  Christine,  318. 

Fanny,   318. 
Foot,  Avery,  112. 

Clarrisa.   112. 

Daniel  B.,  112. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  112. 

Ephraim,  112. 

John,  112. 

Oliver,  112. 

Sela,  112. 

Zilpha,    112. 
Foote.   Marshall.   189. 

Sally  Cady,   189. 
Forbes,     F.     Rosalie 
Brown.  288. 

George,  288. 
Forbush,   Deidamia,    178. 
Ford,  Addie  M..  313. 

Annie    P.    Hopkins, 
230. 

Edwin,  230. 

Emily,  375. 

Isaac,  313. 

Mary  Guthrie,  313. 
Fordham,    Betsey    Blod- 
gett,  318. 

Calista.  318. 

Hezekiah,  318. 
Forsythe,  John,  276. 

Mary,  276. 

Susan.  284. 
Forward,   Fayette,  315. 

Frances  (B.),  315. 
Foster,   Alethea   Burnap, 
396. 

Arlouine  (B.),  376. 


598 

Foster,  C.  F.,  376. 

Charles  W.,  396. 

E.  A.,  492. 

Eliza  Coon,  376. 

Ezra,   161. 

G.  W.,  134- 

Henry,  376. 

Lorana,  161. 

Mary,   172. 

Ruby,  290. 

Sarah  (B.),  I34- 
Fowler,    Ann    M.    (B.), 

193- 

Bennett,    193. 

Cynthia  (B.),  99. 

Simeon,  142. 

Susannah,    142. 

William,  99. 
Fox,  Abigail  Fenn,  300. 

Eliza,  456. 

George,  300. 

Lillie  A.  Burdick,  300. 

Lovina,   418. 

Marie,  481. 

Nettie  Saunders,  467. 

William  F.,   467. 
France,    Alice    J.     (B.), 

465- 
James,  465. 
John,  465. 
Mary  Daley,  465. 
Nora  Van  Victen,  465. 
Washington    P.,   465. 
Frances,   Betsey   Merrill, 

234- 

Jason,  234. 

Julia,  234. 
Franklin,    Benjamin,    31. 

Cornelia  F..  391. 

Elizabeth  C,  390. 

Moses,  177. 

Nettie,  177. 
Eraser,  Jening,  491. 
Frasier,  ]\Iary  A.,  388. 
Frazer,  Alexander,  256. 

Cynthia  M.    (B.),  256. 
Frazier,  Elizabeth,   156. 

Mary  McClure,   156. 

Rachel,  276. 

William,  156. 
Fredenburg,    Dora    Rog- 
ers, 514. 

William  S.,   514. 
Freeland,  Jonathan,  ;^23- 

Solona,  333. 

Sophronia,  333. 
Freeman,  Joseph  H.,  485. 

Lucretia   (B.),  94. 

Minnie  L.  Brown,  485. 

Vincent,  94. 


Indejn;. 

French,  Ada,  441. 

Cynthia,   321. 

Daphene   (B.),  321. 

Ellen    M.,   450. 

Ellie   Crittenden,   450. 

Frank  B.,  450. 

George,  450. 

Gertrude  E.  (B.),  449. 

Olive,  385. 

Orville  B.,  450. 

Robert,  321. 
Frinck,   John,   xxv. 
Frink,   Daphine,   246. 

Delight  (B.),  125. 

Desire,    125. 

Elizabeth,  430. 

Elizabeth   (B.),  246. 

Emily,  246,  427. 

Ezekiel,  168. 

John,  5. 

Jonas,  171. 

Joshua,  126. 

Laura,  246. 

Lemuel,  246. 

Molly   Barber,    171. 

Oliver,   246. 

Saloma    (B.),    168. 

Simeon,  246. 

Tacy,    171. 
Frisbee,  George  M.,  212. 

Hannah  S.   (B.),  212. 
Fry,  ALiry  E.,  263. 
Fuller,  Lucy  B.,  94. 

Mary,    375. 

Samuel,   94,    156. 

Sarah,   156. 

Sarah  (B.),  136. 
Furguson,  Hannah  (B.), 

122. 
Furman,  Aaron,  428. 

Anna  Walker,  428. 

Belle  Ackerman,  428. 

Daniel,  428. 

Daniel  V.,  427. 

Darius.  427. 

Delia  Graves,  427. 

E.  J.  Conger,  427. 

Elizabeth  C.  (B.),  428. 

Ernest  M.,  428. 

Hannah,   428. 

Hannah  Howe,  428. 

Horace  H.,  428. 

John  M.,  427. 

Junius  A.,  428. 

Liberty,  245. 

Lodentia,  427. 

Louise,  427. 

Lura  R.,  427. 

Mary  Waldorf,  245. 

Naomi  (B.),  427. 


Furman,     Saloma     Bow- 
man, 427. 

Simeon,  427. 

William,  245. 
Furness,  Sarah  E.,  412. 
Furrow,  Albert,  282. 

Amanda  C.   Kyle,  277. 

Anna  O.,  282. 

Charity,  277. 

Elizabeth,  158. 

Elizabeth   Knight,   276. 

Elizabeth     M  a  x  s  o  n, 
282. 

Esther  (B.),  282. 

Gean  (B.),  276. 

Jacob  B.,  276. 

Jesse,  276. 

Jesse  B.,  277. 

John,   282. 

Joseph,  276,  277. 

Joshua  B.,  277. 

Lavina  F.,  276. 

Lucy,  285. 

Lydia,  282,  283. 

Mary  (B.),  276. 

Melissa,  461. 

Rosina  P.,  282. 

Simeon,   276. 

Thomas,   282. 

William,  276,  282. 
Gadsby,  Rosa,  312. 
Gail.  A.  A.,  517. 

Elsie,   517. 

Eunice  Enos,  517. 
Gallup,   Charles   P.,  316. 

Fanny,   155. 

Hester,  33. 

John,   53. 

Lillie   Taylor,   446. 

Martha,  38. 

Sally.  154. 

Simon.  446. 

Wealthy     Crandall, 
316. 
Galwin,   Margaret.  525. 
Gardiner,  Betsy.  481. 

Eva  L.  Brundage,  360. 

Grace   E..   360. 

Harry  H..  360. 

Mary,  451. 

Mary  Whitford,  451. 

Nellie  L..  360. 

Willett,  451. 
Gardner.  Abigail,  345. 

Ada  A.  Brown,  414. 

Anna  E.,  444. 

Anna  Holley,  444. 

Charlotte,   268. 

Ellen,  450. 

Emma,  411. 


Gardner,    Eunice    A. 

(B.),  411. 

Eunice  E.  (B.),  326. 

Georgia    Taylor,    326. 

Harold,    414. 

Harold  R.,  444. 

James,  414. 

John,  87. 

Jonathan,  209. 

Joseph,  450. 

Joseph  M.,  411. 

Linda  B.,  414. 

Lucretia,  209. 

Luella  v.,  414. 

Lydia,  209. 

Mansfield,  414. 

Martha,  204,  444. 

Mary,  288,  517,  535- 

Mary  Cross,  450. 

Maud  B.  Rose,  444. 

Maurice,  360. 

Melinda  Hamon,  414. 

Millard  T.,  444. 

Phebe  E.,  451. 

Rowland,  326. 

Rowland  R.,  444. 

Ruth   (B.),  87. 

Sarah,  51. 

Sarah  M.,  411. 

Susan  M.  Gould,  444. 

Victor,  326. 

Walter,  444. 

Willard,  444. 
Garland,  Anna  P.,  478. 

Martha  A.   Ware.   478. 

Seth  Garland,  478. 
Garlie,  Mary.  143,  144. 
Garret.  Ada  French,  441. 

Clifford,   441. 

Frances,    441. 

Francis  M..  441. 

Harrison  W.,  441. 

Harry  W..  441. 

Herbert  N.,  441. 

Lillie  Adams.  441. 

Mary  A.  Collins,  441. 

Mary  Brown,  441. 

Rufus.    441. 
Garrison.  I\Iary  E.,  432. 
Garry.  Georgia.  513. 
Gates.  Adeline.  360. 

Bessie  J..  419. 

David,   160. 

Edwin,   504. 

Ida  A..  504. 
Susan  Cornell.  504. 
Gavitt,    Abigail    Hiscox, 
213. 
Amey,  42. 
Amey  (B.),  42. 


Index. 

Gavitt,  Amy,  121. 

Anna,  120. 

Anna  Gavitt,  120. 

Arphelia,    229. 

Benjah,   35. 

Desire  Wilcox,  I33,I3S- 

Elijah,  42,  43. 

Esther,   124. 

Ezekiel,  42,  62,  120, 121. 

George,  62,  71,  213. 

Hannah,  42. 

Hezekiah,  124. 

Ichabod,  43. 

John,  42,  133,  135. 

Keturah,  133. 

Lois,  35. 

Lois   Pendleton,  35. 

Lucy,  43. 

Mary,  135,  213,  227. 

Mary  Brian,  62. 

Phebe  (B.),  120. 

Prudence,  124. 

Rhoda   (B.),  62,  71. 

Sarah.   406,  407. 

Sarah  (B.),  35,  36. 

Sylvester,  35. 

William,  42,  120. 
George,  Experience,  116. 

Page.    116. 
Gibbs.  Amy  (B.),  249. 

Celia   (B.),  292. 

Deborah  A.   (B.),  247. 

Elias,  292. 

George.  247,  249. 

Hannah,  210. 

James,  249. 

John,   249. 

Samuel.  249. 
Gibson,  Amanda.  322. 

George  L.,  256. 

Hiram,  322. 

James.  322. 

Sarah  S.  (B.),  256. 

Sarah  T.  (B.),  322. 
Gifford,   Caroline,  489. 

Henry,    149. 

Mary,   149. 

Peleg.  489. 

Phebe   Dickinson.    149. 

Sarah  Tripp,  489. 
Gilbert,   Charles.   447. 

Delila  Sayer,  284. 

Helen  Allen,  447. 

Irena,   447. 

James.  284. 

Lucinda,    167. 

Thomas,  284. 

Vena,  284. 
G  i  1  b  r  a  i  t  h,    Priscilla 
Trainer,   358. 


599 

Gilburt,  Dora,  214. 
Gilchell,  Margaret,  420. 
Gildersleeve,  Mary,  387. 
Giles,  Amy  A.,  299. 

Delos,  377. 

John,  299. 

Mary  J.,  2,77- 

Sarah  Morse,  299. 
Gill,  Amos,  155. 

Fanny  (B.),  I55- 

Harriet,  155. 

John,   155. 

Gillette,   Caroline  Gle- 
zen,  401. 

Charles,  449. 

Chauncey,   286. 

D wight,  265,  449. 

Elizabeth,  265. 

Emma  Lang,  449. 

Eudora  S.,  401. 

Ezra  W..  400. 

Harriet  A.,  401. 

Harriet  Denison,  286. 

Helen  A.   (B.),  401. 

Isaac,  401. 

Jennie    (B.),   265. 

Joseph  S.,  400. 

Josephine   (B.),  265. 

Mercy  A.,  177. 

Nathan,  177. 

Selden,  265. 
Gills,  Hannah,  470. 
Gilman,   Daniel,  221. 

Mary  S.,  221. 

Mary  Siller,  221. 
Gilmore.   Louisa,   115. 

Robert,   115. 

Sarah.   115. 
Gilroy,  Margaret,  429. 
Gladwin,  Edwin.  294. 

Jessie  L.  Burdick.  294. 
Gleason,  Alice,  471. 

Alice  Fobes,  364. 

Allen.  364. 

Caroline,  401. 

Warren  H.,  364. 
Glover,  Eliza,  156. 

Jerusha,  201. 
Goeing.  Emma.  508. 
Goff.  Catherine.  335. 
Goldman,  Clara  E.  (B.), 
321. 

John   H.,   321. 
Gone,  Florence  A.   (B.), 
374- 

J.  w..  374. 

Goodall.  Ann.  500. 
Goodard,     Ellen     Davis, 
440. 
Henry,  440. 


6oo 


Index. 


Goodard,  Lester  J.,  440. 

Martha  M.  (B.),  440. 
Goodell,  George  D.,  241. 

Gera,   240. 

Gertrude  S.,  241. 

Gustavus,   241. 

Jane,  241. 

Jane  (B.),  240. 

Lucy  C.,  422. 

Robert,  241. 
Goodlet,  Jessie,  231. 
Gooding,  Asa,  409. 

Henry  C,  409. 

Mary  V.  (B.),  vi,  409. 

Matilda  Hunt,  409. 
Goodrich,    Amelia    P. 
Potter,  522. 

Amy  L.  Case,  241. 

Anstice  (B.),  133. 

Chauncey,  241. 

Content  Main,  522. 

Darius,  525. 

Emily,  525. 

Emily  Chauncey,  525. 

Esther  M.,  133. 

Fred,  522. 

George  W.,  133. 

Hannah  A.,  133. 

Honora,    133. 

Jeremiah,  522. 

Joseph,    133. 

Julian  A.,  522. 

Lavina,  241. 

Mabel,  522. 

Maria,  522. 

Mary  Feneck,  133. 

Rachel  E.,   133. 

Rebecca  S.,   133. 

Revanna,  133. 

Ruth,  489. 

Zebulon,   133. 
Goodsell,  Albert  M.,  379. 

Amy  E.    (B.),  379. 

George  D.,  379. 

Minnie  M.,  379. 
Gookin,  Mr..  4. 
Gordon,  Mary.  237. 
Gore.  John,  68. 

Mary  G.  (B.),  68. 
Gorham,    Desire    H  o  w- 
land,   40. 

George  E.,  230. 

Jane  R.  Hopkins,  230. 

John,  39,  40. 

Lewis,  429. 

Margaret  Gilroy,  429. 

Mary  J.,  429. 

Mercy,  40. 

Ralph,  40. 
Gorton,  phebe  M.,  463. 


Gorton,   Prudence,  463. 

Thomas,  463. 
Gosselin,  Cecilia  A.,  249. 

Joseph,  249. 

Lucy   (B.),  249. 

Sarah,  249. 
Gould,  Aaron,  355. 

Andrew  J.,  182. 

Catherine    E.    M  i  1 1  i- 
champ,  339. 

Charles  H.,  260. 

Clarence  A.,  260. 

Daniel,   47. 

Esther    (B.),  260. 

Esther  P.   (B.),  355. 

Judediah,    182. 

Mary,  182. 

Maryetta,   182. 

Ophir,  181. 

Roderick  L.,  339. 

Ruth,  182. 

Sally,   182. 

Sarah   (B.),  181. 

Sarah     E.     PendletoUj 
260. 

Sarahetta,  182. 

Susan  M.,  444. 

Susan  T.  Nichols,  260. 

Susanna  M.,   180. 

Thomas  A.,  260. 

William,  182. 

Zeno,   182. 
Gouldsborough,     Marga- 

get,  405. 
Go  wan,  Myra   (B.),  405. 

William  E.,  405. 
Gower.  Daniel,  431. 

Sarah  J.,  431. 

Susan,  431. 
Graham,  Clifford,  513. 

Frances  L.,  512. 

Harry,  513. 

Isabel,  409. 

John,  409. 

Malvina   (B.).  163. 

Susan  L.  (B.),  512. 

Susan   Patterson,   409. 

Z.  Dayton,  512. 
Grambell.   Sarah.  221. 
Granger,  Nellie  L.,  423. 
Grant,  Luah,  441. 

Minnie,  314. 

Sarah   (B.)    (B.),  132. 

Susan,  341. 
Graves.  Ann  Rood,  184. 

Delia.  427. 

Harriet,  268. 

James,  184. 

Leonard.  268. 

Nancy  Harris,  268. 


Gray,  Charles  A.,  310. 

Charlotta  A.,  345. 

Emma,  320. 

Harry,  463. 

J.  H.,  463. 

Jirah,  345. 

Maria,  463. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  310. 

Nancy  Palmer,  345. 

Persis  L  (B.),  vi,  463. 
Greeley,  George  E.,  448. 

Julia  M.  Wilder,  448. 
Green,  Adeline  J.,  357. 

Albert  C,  344. 

Albert  H.,  509. 

Alfred,  432. 

Amy,  92,  374. 

Annie  E.,  448. 

Benjamin,   344. 

Benjamin,  F.,  509. 

Bergen  L,  509. 

Betsy  A.   (B.),  432. 

Caleb,  206. 

Carrie  A.,  485. 

Clarence,  432. 

Daniel,  151. 

David,  509. 

Eliza.  342,  343,  507. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  151. 

Elvira    Benjamin,    374. 

Emily,  518. 

Emma  Bufifington,  355. 

Estella,  285. 

Fanny,   343. 

Florence  E.,  355. 

Grace  R.,  509. 

Hannah  (B.),  83. 

Helen   M.,  412. 

Henry  L.,  vi,  2>2,  71- 

Huldah,  151. 

Job,  343. 

Laura  Guardner,  432. 

Lewis  R.,  509. 

Lucy,   277- 

Margarite  A.,  509. 

Maria  G.,  483. 

Martha   A.    Bergen, 

509- 
Mary  C.  Irish,  344. 
Mary  E.,  344. 
Maud  E.   (B.),  469. 
Nellie,   432. 
Pauline  E.,  509. 
Peckham.  93. 
Phebe  (B.),  93. 
Phcebe  Hoyt,  432. 
Rosia,  432. 
Sarah  A.  Baker,  344. 
Sewall.  432. 
Simon  H.,  71. 


Index. 


60 1 


Green,    Susan    Williams, 
206. 

Thomas  H.,  509. 

William  B.,  374. 

William  E.,  355. 

William  AL.  432. 

Willis,  469- 
Greene,   Abigail    Rhodes, 
70,  71. 

Alice,  451- 

Alice  A.,  471. 

Allen,  287. 

Althea  McClean.  473. 

Amanda   (B.).  347. 

Amelia   Maxson,   420. 

Amy,  158. 

Anna  L.  Williams,  451. 

Anne  Lippitt.  70. 

Benjamin,  347. 

Caroline  C.  Aborn.  71. 

Charle.s  H.,  vi,  347. 

Christopher,  70,  71. 

Clark,  471. 

Daniel,  48. 

Daniel  B.,  347. 

Daniel  S.,  471. 

Elizabeth    (B.),  48. 

Esther  §tyles.   158. 

George   S.,  420. 

Grace,  473- 

Grace  Rogers,  347. 

Howard  A.,  347. 

Ira,  420. 

Jaris,  471. 

Job.  70. 

Joshua,  158. 

Lucinda  A.    (B.),  470. 

Marion  W.,  420. 

Mary,    151. 

Mary  A.,  71.  420. 

Mary  A.  Lehre,  71. 

Mary  Peckham.   151. 

Nancy,  515. 

Nancy  (B.),  117. 

Nancy  Perry.  420. 

Nathaniel.  ii7- 

Olivia  Denison,  287. 

Phebe  A.  Holland.  347- 

Polly  Whitford,  471. 

Ruth,  123. 

Stephen,  451. 

Susanna,  71. 

Thomas,  151.  471.  473- 

Thomas  R..  347. 
Greenman.   Abigail,   47. 

Anna,  47. 
.  Anna  (B.)   Clark.  30. 

Benjamin  P.,  533. 

Cecil,  533- 

Electa  E.,  480. 


Greenman,  Elizabeth,  47. 

Elsie,  533. 

Emily  Preston,  533. 

Eunice  (B.),  47. 

Fanny  M.   (B.j,  479. 

James,  533. 

James  A.  R.,  479. 

Katherine,  47. 

Lois,  75. 

Lois  Collins,  382. 

Reynolds,  206. 

Sarah  Clark,  206. 

Sarah  M.,  206. 

Silas,  30,  47. 
Greenwood,  Camilla,  402. 
Greer,  Elizabeth,  461. 
Grey,  Alice,  467. 

Caroline  (B.),  132. 

Stephen,   132. 
Griffin,  Augustus,  456. 

Austin,  456. 

Claribel,  456. 

Edwin,  441. 

Esther  Skinner,   456. 

John  A.,  456. 

Luah,  441. 

Luah  Grant,  441. 

Lyman  P.,  181. 

Maria  J.  (B.),  456. 

Samantha  (B.),  181. 
Grimshaw,  Annie,  289. 

Eli,  289. 

Mary  Murphy,  289. 
Grinnel,  Halsey,   165. 

John,  165. 

Lucy  (B.),  165. 
Grinnell,  Eliza  (B.),  165. 

Seymour.  165. 
Griswold,   Daniel.   78. 

Fanny   (B.),  78. 

Mary.  425. 
Groat.  Christiana,  191. 

Jacob.  191. 
Groot,  Maria.  348. 
Groton.   Benjamin.   163. 

Hannah  (B.),  437- 

Harriet     M.      Palmer, 

163. 
Helen    M.    Richmond. 

437- 
James  R..  437. 
John  M..  4.38. 
Laura  (B.).  163. 
Nathaniel.  438. 
O.  N..  163. 
William  M..  437. 
Grover.  Gould,  310. 
Ida  B.  Sheldon,  310. 
Julane.  310. 
Silas  E.,  310. 


Groves,  Clara  L.  Lippen- 
cott,  277. 

John,  277. 
Guardner,   Laura,  432. 
Guiteon,    Frances     (,B.), 
91. 

Norman,  91. 
Guitian,  Calom,  91. 

Mary  (B.),  91. 
Guthrie,  Harriet,  230. 

Mary,    313. 
Gwin,  Annie,  467. 

Carrie,  467. 

Elvia  A.,  467. 

Frances  Wood,  467. 

Hayes  G.,  467. 

John,  467. 

Mary,  467. 

P.   S.,  467. 

Sherman  L.,  467. 

William  H.,  466.  467- 
Haas,  Elizabeth,  412. 

Frederick,  412. 
Hadley,  Edwin  R.,  428. 

Eliza,   509. 

George,  221. 

May,  221. 

Phoebe  A.   (B.),  428. 

Sarah  Grambell,  221. 
Hadsell.  Elijah,  459. 

Rhoda,   459. 
Haff,     Agnes     Hopkins, 
231. 

Anna,  231. 

C.  Josephine,  231. 

Edward,  231. 

Elizabeth,  231. 

Elizabeth    (B.),  231. 

Elizabeth  W.,  409. 

Emily,  231. 

Jacob,  231. 

John,  231. 

Julia  A..  454- 
Hague,  Ruah  A.,  158. 
Haight.  Edwin,  312. 

Lillie  M.  Lucas,  312. 

William.   312. 
Hain,   Anga,  375. 

Catherine.   375. 

James,  375. 
Hair.   Baxter.  503. 

Lavina  B.,  503. 
Hale,    Mary  E.   Stanton, 

437- 
Nancy,  430. 
Nathan.  437. 
Hall.    Abigail    (B.),    22, 

55.2- 
Benjamin.  22. 

Bertha  F.  Lucas,  312. 


6o2 


Index. 


Hall,     Charlotte     Gardi- 
ner, 268. 

Content,  19. 

Daniel  C.,  227. 

Elizabeth,    19. 

Emily  M.,  217. 

Eunice  A.,  22'7. 

Gay  W.,  311. 

Harriet  Riddell,  311. 

Helen  G.,  465. 

Helen  M.  (B.),  384. 

Henry,  19,  312. 

Jesse,  384. 

John,  454. 

John  F.,  227. 

John  P.,  124,  227. 

Joseph,   61. 

Kate,  481. 

Lucy  Dickens,  22y. 

Lyman  E.,  227. 

Maria   F.,   227. 

Mary,  465. 

Mary  E.,  454. 

Mary  Gavitt,   22^. 

Mary  Nicholson,  454. 

Mary  T.  Harris,  217. 

Nancy  (B.),  227. 

Nancy   Crandall,    124. 

Nancy  Wilcox,    22y. 

Theresa  S.,  268. 

Sally  Randall,   103. 

Sarah  (B.),  13. 

Slocum,  268. 

William,  217,  312,  465. 
Hallenbeck,      Mary     A., 

224. 
Hallet,  Lois,  50. 
Hallock,  G.  H.,  2,t,7. 

Mary,   534. 
Halpen,  Bridget  Dorney, 
408. 

Ella  S.,  408. 

Hannah  R.   (B.),  408. 

Margaret  B.,  408. 

William  J..  408. 
Hamilton,      Emma      H., 

Sis- 
Hannah  (B.),  124,  381. 
Martha,  286. 
Pernilla.   189. 
Samuel  C,  381. 
Walter  G.,  381. 
William,   124. 
Hamlin,  Frank  A..  493. 
Margaret     Vandeburg, 

131. 
Martha  M.,  131. 
Salmon,  131. 
Hammond.   Ann,    128. 
Armeda  E.   (B.),  171. 


Hammond,  Chas.  D.,  174. 
David   H.,   257. 
Eunice  E.   (B.),  174. 
Frances  (B.),  148. 
Frank,  171. 
Joseph,  43. 
Lois  N.  (B.),  257. 
Martha  Adams,   174. 
Nathan,    171. 
Stephen,   174. 
William,   148. 
Hancie,    Catherine,    400. 
Hancox,  Alice  D.,  415. 
Benjamin,   415. 
Eunice  Stevens,  415. 
Hannah,  238. 
H  a  n  n  e  1,  Margaret  E., 

398. 
Hansom,   Elizabeth,   431. 

T.,  431- 
Harding,  Capt.,  68. 
Hardman,  Elizabeth,  159. 

Martha,  284. 
Hardy,  Augustus,  149. 

Frances  J.   (B.),  149. 
Hargin,   Martha,  345. 
Harley,  Ruth   (B.),  72,. 

Solomon,   jt,. 
Harmon,    Polly,   453. 
Harrington,    A  m  a  n  d  a, 

416. 
Harris,  Anna,  52. 
C,  481. 
Ellen,  510. 
Fred  J.,  481. 
Juliana,   421. 
Maria,  505. 
Mary  T.,  217. 
Mattie  E.   (B.),  481. 
Nancy,  268. 
Harrison,  Alice  R.,  402. 
Camilla  Greenwood, 

402. 
Edmund,  402. 
Esther,  250. 
Frank,  402. 
George  L.,  483. 
Harriet  R.    (B.),  402. 
Ida  M.  (B.),  483. 
Jabez  B.,  402. 
Noah,  402. 
Susan   Morey,  402. 
Hart,   Anna,   136. 

Clarissa  Parmalee,  425. 
Elizabeth  S.   (B.),  425. 
George,  425. 
Henry  L,  425. 
Rebecca,   224. 
Harter,  Andrew,  480. 
Eva,  480. 


Harter,    Margaret    Con- 
derman,  480. 

Maria,  480. 
Hartman,  Louise,  500. 
Hartwell,  G.  W.,  529. 

Ida  L.,  529. 

Mary  Hughes,  529. 
Harvey,  Betsey,  499. 

Emma,  400. 

John  E.,  499. 

Julia  M.   Catlin,  499. 

Ransom,   499. 
H  a  r  w  o  o  d,     Jane     B. 
Drake,   304. 

Jane  O.,  304. 

Richard,  304. 
Haskell,  Harriet,  415. 
Haskins,  Eunice,  135. 
Hastings,  Albert  E.,  491. 

Annie  F.,  492. 

Catherine    (B.),   491. 

Dora,  492. 

George  B.,  492. 

Henry,  426. 

Margaret  C,  492. 

Paul,  492. 

Sarah,  426. 
Hatch,  Mable.  183. 
Hatchman,  Chas.  F.,  487. 

Emma  Brockway,  487. 

Frederick   I.,  487. 

Herbert  E.,  487. 

Jessie  Dean,  487. 

Robert,  487. 
Hathaway,   Adelia    (B.), 

30S- 

Esther  L.  Farrell,  305. 

Margaret,  354. 

Marion  L.,  305. 

Mary   (B.),  92. 

Raymond  W.,  305. 

Ruth,  344. 

Samuel,  92. 

Wesley,  305. 
Havard,  Lucy,  404. 
Haven,   Charles,    140. 

Horace,  343. 

Mary  J.,  343. 

Maud  R.  Platts,  343. 

Thankful  (B.)  Cole,40. 
Haviland,   Ann,  424. 
Hawes,  David,  355. 

Julia  M.   (B.)\  355. 
Hawkins,   Nancy,  95. 

Sarah  Porter,  202. 
Hawley,  Amarilla,  184. 
Hayden,  Charles,  225.    • 

Cornelia  Bryan,  225. 

Edwin  W.,  225. 

Emily   (B.),  224. 


Hayden,  Gardner,  224. 

George  L.,  225. 

Helen  L.,  225. 

Joseph.  393. 

Lucy  B.  Ward,  393. 

Lydia,  225. 

Mary  E.,  225. 

Mary  J.  Sliter,  225. 

Thomas  A.,  225. 
Hayes,  Edward,  264. 

Mabel  F.  (B.),  296. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  264. 

Walter,  296. 
Haynes,  Charles  E.,  478. 

Eldridge  M.,  478. 

Elizabeth    Barnard, 
478. 

Israel,  478. 

Lena    M.    Robinson, 

478. 

Nora  E.,   478. 

Rose  E.,  478. 

Sarah  E.  (B.),  478. 
Hazard,  Abby,  92. 

Ann  G.  Childs,  145. 

Brenton,   145. 

David,  294. 

Elizabeth,    545. 

Esther  H.  (B.).  91. 

George,  144,  I45- 

George  C..  145. 

Gulielma   (B.),  92. 

Hannah,  262. 

Martha,  545. 

Martha  Wanton,   145. 

Mary  Peckham,  262. 

Richard,  262. 

Robert,  91. 

Sally.  145. 

Sylvester  R..  92. 

Thomas,  545. 

Violet.  294. 
Hazelton.  Rose,  461. 
Hazenbuck.  Lydia.  532. 
Hazzard.  Esther,  35. 

John.  73. 

Mary,   73. 

Robert.  36. 

Sarah  Nichols,  73. 

Stephen.   73. 

Susanna.  48.  89. 
Healey.  Abraham.  515. 

Edwin  P..  515. 

Lillian  H.  Hoxie.  515. 
Heap.  Grace  A..  537. 

William.  537. 
Heard.  Deming  S..  298. 

Sarah  Mosher.  298. 
Heath.  Emily,  382. 

Mary  J.  Adams,  415. 


Index. 

Heath,   Newell,  415. 
Heathcote,  Josephine 
Sibley,    307. 

William  E.,  307. 
Heeferman,  Mary,  143. 
Helme,    Nathaniel,    43. 
Helmer,  Adam,  531. 

Elizabeth,   531. 

George  H.,  367. 

Harriet  E.,  531. 

Ida,  367. 

Lillie  A.  Curtis,  367. 
Hemphill.  Adrian.  229. 

Arphelia    Gavitt,    229. 

Avilda  (B.),  229. 

Betsey  A.,  229. 

Elizabeth,    229. 

Ellen,  229. 

James,  229. 

Robert,  229. 

Ruth,  229. 

Sally   Morrison,   229. 

Sarah,  229. 

Silvia,  229. 

Verona  Monroe,  229. 
Hendee,   Libbie  M.   Kel- 
ley,   530. 

Samuel    B.,    530. 
Hendricks,      Hannah, 
103. 

Moses,  103. 

Reuben,  103. 
Hendrickson.     Alice     L. 
(B.).  473,  . 

Eliza  Terwilliger,  473. 

Jessie  O..  473. 

John,  473. 

Louise,  473. 
Henkson.    Susan.   415. 
Henny,  John.    xiii. 
Henry,  James,  297. 

Lillie,   171. 

Lulu  P.   Clark,  297. 

Sarah   Smith.   297. 

William  S..  297. 
Heme.  William.  61. 
Herrick,  Arloine,  370. 

Delos.  370. 

Edna  L..  370. 

Edward  D..  370. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  254. 

Iva  B..  370. 

Lillie  M.    (B.).  370. 

Minie  S..  370. 

Sandford  E..  254. 

Sophronia   Ctirtis,   370. 
Hertoz.  Annie  Der,  469. 
Hess.  Odessa,  172. 
Hewett,  Joseph,  54. 

Polly,  54- 


603 

Hewett,  Sarah   (B.),  54. 
H  e  w  i  1 1,    Emeline   Mc- 
Gregor, 249. 

Eunice  Randall,  103. 

Josiah,  249. 

Mary,  57. 
Hibbard,   Almirin,   367. 

Angeline  (B.).  366. 

Charles  H.,  367. 

Charles  W.,  367. 

Clarissa    A.,    367. 

Daniel  B.,  367. 

Dianthe,  337. 

Emogene.  367. 

Fred,  388. 

Harriet,  473. 

Harriet  N.  (B.),  388. 

Irene  F.,  367. 

James  F.,  367. 

John  P.,  367. 

Lois,  116. 

Mary  A.  Conley,  367. 

Nellie  V.  Mahan,  388. 

Ruth  Collins,  388. 

Stephen  H.,  388. 

Syble,  380. 

Thomas,  388. 

Willie  B.,  388. 
Hickox.   Chauncey,  256. 

Cynthia.   147. 

Cynthia  M.  (B.),  256. 

Dorliska  Sapp,  256. 

Henry.  256. 

Lucy  Bryant,  256. 

Seth,   256. 

Stephen,    256. 

Waite,  256. 
Hide,  Cornelia,  405. 
Higginson.  G.,  68. 

James,  68. 

Martha    (B.),   68. 
Higley.  Algerose.  465. 

Elizabeth  Burdick,  465. 

John.   465. 
Hill.  Abigail,  342. 

Almena,  419. 

Caleb.  22. 

Catherine,   161. 

Deborah  Davis,  277. 

Isabell,  277. 

James,  277. 

Jane,  283. 

Joshua.  283. 

Polly.  369. 

Ruth  (B.),  22. 
H  i  1  1  a  r  d.     Nancy     M. 
Wheeler,    483. 

William  H.,  483. 
Hills.  Arthur  C.,  404. 

Ella   (B.),  404. 


6o4 


Hills,  Mary  E.,  404. 

Sarah,  286. 
Hillyer,   Emma  L.    (B.), 
205. 

W.  D.,  205. 
Hilts,  Catherine,  289. 

Lawrence,  289. 

Nancy,   289. 
H  i  m  e  s,    Amelia    (,B.), 

413. 

Fred  P.,  413. 
Hi  Mott,  Betsy  Whipple, 
321. 

Elias,  321. 

Mary  A.,  320. 
Hinckley,  Abbie  H.,  517. 

Abby,   253. 

Abby  E.   (B.),  378. 

Abel,  379. 

Abel  H.,  379. 

Agnes  J.,  379. 

Alice,  379. 

David,   186,  207. 

Grace,  94. 

Harry,  517. 

Mary,  93. 

Mary   (B.),  49. 

Mary  Wyatt,  49,  94. 

Mercy,  180. 

Nathan,  49. 

Nathaniel,   103. 

Prudence  Chesebro, 

517- 

Samuel,  49,  94. 

Susanna  Brown,  186. 
Hine,  Isaac,  243. 

Mary,  243. 

Rhoda  Wright,  243. 
Hines,   Miranda,    loi. 
Hinman,  Mary,  251. 

Royal,  xxiii,  xxvi. 
Hiscox,  Abigail,  213. 

Amelia  Stanton,   125. 

Ann  P.,  237. 

Bethia  Clark,   15. 

Thomas,   15. 

William,  5,   15,  20. 
Hitchcock,    Sarah    A., 

386. 
Hite,  Sarah  Ann.  416. 
Hoadley,  George,  400. 

Ida  A.  Burtch,  400. 

Mary  A.,  340. 
Hoag,  Bertha  A.   Smith, 
401. 

William   P.,  401. 
Hoagland,  Anna  C,  295. 

B.  C,  500. 

Frank  N.  Catlin,  500. 

Harriet  (B.),  295. 


Index. 

Hoagland,  Joshua  M., 

295- 
Margaret,   500. 
Mary  L.,  473. 
Nettie    J.    Richardson, 

295- 

William  A.,  295. 
Hobbs,  Henry,  264. 

Mary  A.  N  o  r  t  h  a  m, 
264. 
Hoddie,    Christine,   214. 
Hodge,  Martha  Johnson, 
409. 

Mary  G.,  409. 
Hoffman,  Elizabeth,  280. 

Elizabeth  D.,   157. 

Moses,   157. 
Holcomb,   Mary,   381. 
Holcombe,  Chas.  S.,  524. 

Elizabeth,    524. 

Marion    C.    Woodruff, 

524- 

Silas,  524. 
Holden,  Betsey  (B.),  94. 

Carrie  L.,  502. 

Charles,    116. 

Daniel,  489. 

Edgar  A.,  502. 

Ethel  J.   (B.),  489. 

Maryetta,    502. 

Reuben,   94. 

Sarah,  274. 

Virginia,  535. 
Holdridge,    Edwin    S., 
264. 

Sarah  P.  Thayer,  264. 
Holland,    Anne    F.    Bur- 
dick,  347. 

George  A.,  347. 

Phebe  A.,  347. 
Holley,  Anna,  444. 
Hollis,  Martha  C,  484. 

Mary  L.,  484. 
Holloway,    John    Waite, 
80. 

Joseph,  79,  80. 

Lydia  (B.),  79,  80. 

Mary,  80. 

Sarah  K.,  439. 
Holman,   Barbara  M. 
Clark,  287. 

George  W.,  287. 
Holmes,    Abigail,    398. 

Aurelia,  399. 

Chandler,  233. 

Clark,  297. 

Cynthia    A.     demons, 
271. 

Elisa  (B.),  117. 

Ella  L.  Clark,  297. 


Holmes,  Emery,  271. 

Emory  B.,  297. 

Harriet  E.,  202. 

Isaiah,  117. 

Jenny,  367. 

Laura,  222,- 

Lois    B.,    202. 

Margaret,    186. 

Mary,  29. 

Mary  E.,  367. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  314. 

Mason,  314. 

Polly,   367. 

Polly   (B.),  202. 

Sarah  B.,  367. 

William,  202. 
Holt,  Alex,  285. 

lone  Parker,  448. 

Kate  (B.),  285. 

Robert  O.,  448. 
Hooper,  Mary  E.,  454. 

Rachel,  443. 
Hoover,  Maria,  439. 
Hopkins,  Abigail,  379. 

Agnes,  231. 

Amelia,  231. 

Annie  P.,  230. 

Edward  O..  231. 

Hannah   (B.),  229. 

Jane  R.,  230. 

Jessie  Goodlet,   231. 

Lemuel,  229. 

Lemuel  J.,  230. 

Mary   Stuart,  231. 

Sarah  Devlin,  230. 

Susan  B.,  408. 

Susanna,  43. 
Horr,  Dora  Bristol  (B.), 

403- 
Samuel  P.,  403. 
H  o  r  t  o  n,    Barbara    M. 
(B.),  181. 
Emma   (B.),  46,  439- 
George,  181. 
George  T.,  439. 
Hiram,   439. 
Hiram  T.,  439. 
Horace  B.,  439. 
Horace   E.,   439. 
Isaiah  C.   182. 
Jessie.  439- 
Joseph  L..  536. 
Lucvett   (B.),   182. 
Maria  P.  (B.),  5.36. 
Mary  A.   (B.),  181. 
Mary  Hurd,  439. 
Orlando.   182. 
Peleg,  181. 
Ruth  Gould,  182. 
Sarah,  256. 


Horton,  Susy  M.,  439- 
Hosley,     Annie    Blanch- 
ard.  309. 

Celah,  309. 

Eliza  A.,  309. 
Hossack,  Archie,  497. 

Charles  B.,  497. 

Ella,  497- 

Ella   (B.),  497- 

Frances  E..  497. 

Fred  N.,  497. 

Gertrude,  497. 

John,   497. 

John  A..  497. 

Mary   (B.),  497- 

Myra   L.,   497- 

Pratt,  497- 
Hostler,  Alice.  296. 
Hotchess,  James.  225. 

Mary  (B.),  225. 
Hotchkiss,  Abigail  C. 
(B.),  255. 

Gabrilla  Miner,  298. 

Julius,  255. 

Lorain,  469. 

Phelps,  298. 

Villie.  298. 
Houghton.    Sarah.   464. 
Houser.  Alice  I.,  445. 

Christian,  232. 

Cornelius,  445. 

Isabelle   Craig,   445. 

Mary  E..  232. 

Sarah  Fisher,  232. 
Hovey,  Abijah.   199. 

Elizabeth  W.   (B.), 
199. 

Martha  Story.   199. 
Howard,  Alonzo  P..  252. 

Amelia   (B.).  306. 

Charles.  306. 

Emma  Pearce,  252. 

Harriet,  306. 

Ida.   465. 

John  L.,  484. 

Katharine    M.    Brown, 
484. 

Nina,  306. 

Nora,  306. 
Howe,  Emery  E.,  428. 

Hannah,   428. 

Hannah  Furman,  428. 

John,   297. 

Kate  C.  297. 

Mary.    379. 

Philip,   182. 

Rachel,    396. 

Sarah  Cutter,  297. 
Howell.  Benjamin.  220. 

Benjamin  B.,  219. 


hidex. 

Howell,  Emily  W.   (B.), 
220. 

Henry  W.,  220. 

Mariah  A.,  278. 

Rebecca,  219. 
Howland,  Desire,  40. 

Elisa    (B.),  430. 

Elizabeth  Tilly,  40. 

John,  40. 

S.   P.,  430. 
Hoxie.  Ann   (B.),  151. 

Benjamin.  89. 

Deborah.  247. 

Deborah  (B.),  19,  45. 

Dorcas,  131. 

Elijah.  45. 

Ella  L.   (B.).  447. 

Elsie  A.   (B.).  291. 

Emma     H.     Hamilton, 

515.. 
Jeremiah,  45. 
Job,  45. 
John.  45. 
Joseph,  45. 
Lillian  H.,  515. 
Martha,  87. 
Mary.  45. 

Mary  (B.),  151.  263. 
Matilda  (B.),  263. 
Orville.  447. 
Perry.  263. 
Samuel,   45. 
Simeon.   45. 
Solomon,  151,  263. 
Stephen.   151. 
T.  C.  SIS- 
Thomas.  4S. 
Walter  H..   291. 
Hoyt.  Allen  G.,  496. 

E.  R.,  286. 

F.  R..  286. 
Jennie  L.   Budlong, 

496. 

Martha  Hamilton.  286. 

Mary  J.  (B.),  286. 

Phoebe,  432. 

Willis,  496. 
Hubbard.  Bethia,  26,  27, 
29.    30. 

Bethiah,  24. 

Daniel,   67. 

Esther.  241. 

^Martha.  67.  , 

Hubbell,  Maria.  338. 
Hudson,  Abigail,  23. 
Huges.  Dudley.  279. 

James  A..  279. 

Minerva  Van  Horn, 
279. 

Thyatima  (B.),  279. 


605 

Hughes,  Arsentha  Davis, 

157. 
Charles  D.,  439. 
David,  439. 
Dudley,  1S7,  276,  280. 
Elizabeth  Davis,  439. 
Ellen,   440. 
Henry   S.,   276. 
Ida  E.,  280. 
Mary,  529. 
Mary  C.   (B.),  439- 
Mary  C.  Avery,  439. 
Minerva  Van  Horn, 

276. 
Rosa   (B.),  276. 
Huling.   Sarah.   446. 
Hull.  Alice   (B.),  92 
Altha.    181. 
Amos,  181. 
Comfort,    104. 
Comfort     (B.)     Wells, 

54- 

Elizabeth,  43. 

Elizabeth  R..  424. 

George  Wagner,  92. 

Herman,  208. 

Nancy    B.    Crandall, 
208. 

Nettie  E.,  249. 

Stephen,  54,  104. 
Hulpz,  Eliza,  504. 

John,   S04- 
Humphrey,  Lucinda.  345. 

Sarah    A.    (B.)     (B.), 

345- 

William.  34s. 

William  M.,  345. 
Humphry.  Mary.  245. 
Hungerford,  Adella 
(B.),  412. 

Emily  A.   (B.),  490. 

Fanny.  376. 

George.  490. 

Helen  Osgood,  412. 

Ida  R..  412. 

Josephine    M  e  r  r  i  c  k, 
490. 

Richard.  412. 

William  B..  490. 
Hunt.  Benjamin.  524. 

Bessie  H.  (B.),  296. 

Charles.  414. 

David,  279. 

Emily   (B.).  279. 

Eugene.  209. 

Eunice.  209. 

Eunice   (B.),  209. 

Ezekiel.  246. 

George,  202, 

J.  E,,  209. 


6o6 


Index. 


Hunt,  James,  279,  414. 

John  W.,  296. 

Julia   M.,   524. 

L.,  174. 

Lovina  Thajer,  246. 

Lucinda,  279. 

Malinda,  279. 

Mary  L.,  524. 

May,  279. 

Myra  Pixley,  524. 

Naomi,  546. 

Perlie,  246. 

Phebe  C.   (B.),  414. 

Preston,  209. 

Robert,  209. 

Sarah  Porter,  202. 

Silas,  279. 

Stephen,    524. 

Uranea  Bently,  414. 

William,   279. 
Hunter,  Agnes,  141. 

Anna,  529. 

Charlotte,    461. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  461. 

Elizabeth  Greer,  461. 

Elizabeth  L..  524. 

Henry  B.,  461. 

James,  461, 

Robert,  461. 
Hunting,    Anne    Rhodes, 

33; 
Benjamin,   33. 

Huntington,  Jed,   179. 

Lucy  A.,  169. 

Weltha  (B.),  179. 
Huntley,  Laura  W.,  325. 

Mary  R.   (B.),  327. 

Porter  S.,  327. 
Hurd,   Charles,  369. 

Clara,   492. 

Lillie  M.  Randel,  369. 

Marie,  439. 

Mary,  439. 

Nettie,  492. 

Sarah,  492. 

Sophronia,  492. 

Sophronia     M.      (B.), 
492. 

Walter  S.,  492. 
Hurlbut.  Alfred.  48. 

Ellen  L.,   242. 

Hannah  Moore,  429. 

lantha  C,  429. 

James,   242. 

Lucy,   242. 

Lydia   (B.),  48. 

Reuben,  429. 

Sarah,  190. 
Hurley,     Angle     Brown, 
284. 


Hurley,  Althalia  A.  Van 
Horn,  284. 

Bertha  A.,  284. 

Charles  P.,  284. 

Clarissa  M.,  284. 

Emma  L.  Mullett,  284. 

Eva  M.  Davis,  284. 

James    H.,    284. 

John  G.,  284. 

L.,  284. 

Lewis,  284. 

Mary  A.  Pierce,  284. 

Mary  E.,  284. 

Oliver,  284. 

Orville  A.,  284. 

Sarah  (B.),  284. 

Sylvia  E.  Bailey,  284. 

Theodore  S.,  284. 

Ulysses  G.,  284. 
Hurly,  Charles  L.,  283. 

Jennie  B.   Sayer,  283. 
Hutchins,  ,    114. 

Elizabeth,  439. 

Mary  A.    (B.),  248. 

Putnam  W.,  248. 
Hutchinson,   Alice,   182. 

Daniel,    182. 

Eliza,    182. 

Esther   (B.),    182. 

Jennie     B.     Rosebush, 

397- 

Mary,  182. 

Nancy,  182. 

Polly   Curtis.    182. 

Ruby  H.,  182. 

Sophia,   182. 

Walter,  397. 
Huyler,  Abby  J.,  431. 

George,  431. 

Sarah  Ferman,  431. 
Hyde,  Ella  I\L  (B.).  479. 

Frank  D.,  479. 

Josephine  E.,  479. 

:\Iary,  254. 
Hyer.   Elizabeth,    521. 
Hvnds,   George,  482. 

Hettie   B..   482. 

Weltha  Rice,  482. 
Ibath,    Rhoda    P.     (B.), 
247. 

William,    247. 
Iliff,    Abigail,    467. 

Hannah  Morrison,  467. 

William.  467. 
Ingalls,  Elizabeth,  270. 

Elizabeth    Blake,   270. 

Philip  W.,  270. 
Ingersol,   Climena,   171. 
Ingersoll,    Eliza    (B.), 
68. 


Ingersoll,  Nathaniel,  68. 
Ingraham,  Asel,  376. 

Emma,   376. 

Rebecca  (B.),  24. 

Triphena,  376. 
Ireland,  Frank,  436. 

Sarah  (B.),  436. 
Irish,   Albertine   S.,  343. 

Amy  E.,  343. 

Amy  E.  Potter,  509. 

Arthur,  343. 

Benjamin,   194. 

Bennie  W.,  508. 

Bertha  L.,  507. 

Bertha  M.,  508. 

Betsy   (B.),   194. 

Charles,    343. 

Charlotte  (B.),  343. 

Charlotte    E.    Maxson, 

507- 
Daniel  B.,  343. 
Earnest  M.,  507. 
Edgar  W.,  507. 
Edith,  343. 
Elaine,  344. 
Eliza,  342. 
Eliza  Green,  343. 
Ellen  A.  Crandall,  508. 
Ethel  Davis,  344. 
Eva  R.  Bond,  343. 
Flora  B.,  343. 
George,   194,  342. 
George   C,   343- 
Gertrude  E.,  509. 
Glen  W..  507. 
Harold  R.,  507. 
Harry,  343. 
H  a  1 1  i  e    E.    Burdick, 

509. 
Henry   P.,   343. 
Ida     M.     Wightman, 

508. 
James  O.,  343. 
James  R.,  343. 
Jessie  M.,  508. 
Joseph  H..  344. 
Lucy  A..  344. 
Lydia  Johnson,  343. 
Maria   Potter,  342. 
!\Iartha,  194. 
Martha   A.,   342. 
Martha  Irish,  194. 
]\Iary,    138,    207. 
Mary  C,  344- 
Mary  E.,  .S08. 
Mary  T.  Haven,  343. 
Mary  L.,  508. 
Mary  S.  Adams,  342. 
Maud  Saunders,  507. 
Miranda  F.,  509. 


Irish,   Myron  M.   H.   C, 
508. 

Nathan  W.,  508. 

Oliver  B.,  344. 

Paul,  343- 

Sally  Potter,  194. 

Sarah  Anthony,   344. 

Sarah  M.,  507. 

Viola   S..   342. 

William  A.,  509. 

William  B.,  509. 
Irvine,  Emeline   (B.), 
386. 

Herbert,  386. 
Irwin,    Catherine,    378. 
Isaacs,  Grace,  66. 

Judge,  66. 

Mary  Rumsey,  66. 
Isbell,  James,  loi. 

Lucinda  B.,  loi. 
Isham,  Cora  V.,  303. 
Ives,  Amanda  J.,  318. 

Anna  E.  Platts.  486. 

Clarence  D.,  486. 

Eliza  (B.),  318. 

Ella  M.  Seers,  319. 

Florence  G.,  486. 

Frances  Van  Wic,  318. 

Frank.  486. 

Jennie  M.  Ozard,  486. 

John  W.,  486. 

Lewis  C,  486. 

Lucy  Richards,  318. 

Martha  A.  Bixler,  486. 

Mary  E.,  486. 

Roy.  486. 

Walter,  318. 

Warren  A.,  318. 

William   O.,   319. 
Jackson,  Mariette,  308. 

Roxanna.  457. 

William.   357. 
Jacobs,   Frances.  380. 
James,  Anna,  276. 

Clark,  126. 

Edward  K.,  269. 

Elizabeth  Lyman,  536. 

George  W.,  269. 

Malachi,   536. 

Marcia  H.,  269. 

Mary  A..  215. 

Mary  (B.).   126. 

Mary  E..  261. 

Mary  H.  C  h  a  p  p  e  1  1, 
269. 

Richard  E..  269. 

Ruth  H..  269. 

Sarah,  147. 

Sarah  L.,  269. 

Sarah  Saunders,  269. 


Index. 

Jamieson,  Adam,  462. 

Addie  V.,  462. 

Christina,  462. 

John,  462. 

Melissa  Furrow,  462. 
Jaques,  Caroline,  239. 

Marian  A.,  239. 

Willoughby,  239. 
Jarvis,  Sarah,  429. 
Jaycox,  Florence,  455. 

John,   455. 

Sarah  Brewster,  455. 
Jefferies,   Elizabeth,   49. 
Jenks,  Mary,  506. 
Jennings,  Ida   M.  Clark, 
464. 

John  M.,  464. 

Thomas.  464. 
Jerome,  Miss,  98. 
Jinks,  Lavina,  224. 
Johnson,  A  d  e  1  i  a  (B.), 
489. 

Adeline.  405. 

Alice  (B.),  48. 

Augusta,  506. 

Caroline,  273. 

David,  489. 

Delia.    423. 

Elizabeth,  157. 

Elizabeth  R.  Hull,  424. 

Ellen  C,  424. 

Emma  M.,  489. 

Esther  Russel,  346. 

Florence  H.  (B.),  413. 

George  P.,  413. 

Gersham  P.,  343. 

Isaac,  437. 

Jerome,   424. 

Julia,    369. 

Lucretia,    308. 

Lydia,  343. 

Martha,  409. 

Mary,   304. 

Mary  E.  Tabor,  343. 

Michael,  48. 

Moses,  287. 

Phebe  W.,  346. 

Ray,  346. 

Russel  D.,  489. 

Ruth  Goodrich,  489. 

Sarah  P..  437. 

William,  i.  6. 
JoHie,  Alice  R..  354. 

Emma  Slade,  354. 

Thomas.    354. 
Jones,  Addie.  172. 

Agnes  L.    (B.).  409. 

Bvron  W..   ^36. 

Caroline  E.V. (B.).323. 

Clare  E.,  459. 


607 

Jones,  David,  312. 

Deborah  Levering,  323. 
Dorothy  (B.),  14. 
Elizabeth      Postlewait, 

304- 
Ellen,   531. 
Harvey  L.,  459. 
Helen  C,  312. 
Herbert,  409. 
Horatio  G.,  323. 
Horatio   Gates,   vi,   54. 

J-,  459- 

Jesse,  459. 

John,  515. 

Lewis,   171. 

Mary,  515. 

Mary  A.    (B.),   157. 

Millie,  515. 

Minerva  Waldorf,  459. 

Miriam,  304. 

Phebe,  440. 

Rose,  483. 

Runa,    157. 

Sarah,  214. 

Teresa  (B.).  171. 

Thalia  A.  (B.),  536. 

William  M.,  304. 
J  o  s  1  y  n,    Benjamin    F., 
327. 

Mary  R.    (B.),   327. 
Joyce,  Marie  Fox,  481. 

Parish,    481. 

Ruby  M..  481. 
Karr,  Ann  L.,  505. 

George  C,  512. 

Isaiah,    505. 

Julia  Ellis,  505. 

Louise,  512. 
Kaufman,   Ava,  527. 

Daniel  W..  527. 

Mary  A.  Neff.  527. 
Kavanaugh,  Bulla,  493. 

Bulia   (B.),  493. 
Keblar,  Amory  J.,  452. 
Kebler,    Emeline    Pierce, 

452. 

Fred,   452. 
K  e  e  n  e  y.  Henrietta  P., 

446. 
Keevn,    Annie    B.    (B.), 
481. 

Ulysses  G.,  481. 
Kees,  John,  477. 

Susan  Knaeble,  477. 

Susie  M.,  477. 
Keith,  Phebe  (B.),  117. 

Ruel,   117. 
Keller,    Catherine,    315. 

Clarissa  Welch,  294. 

Jane,  480. 


6o8 


Index. 


Keller,  Liman,  294. 

Lydia,  294. 
Kelley,  Archie,  530. 

Asa,  375. 

Catherine,   530. 

Catherine      McKenzie, 
530. 

Eleanor,  291. 

Eleanor  Gardner,  291. 

Emily  Ford,  375. 

Frances  D.  (B.),  375. 

James,  291. 

John,  530. 

John  M.,  530. 

Leona  Osborn,  530. 

Libbie  M.,  530. 

Lizzie  McClesey,  530. 

Maggie    L.    Campbell, 
530. 

Mary  M.,  291. 

Maryett  (B.),  530. 

Merritt  B.,  530. 

Myron  J.,   530. 

Nathan,    375. 

Olive  Welch,  530, 

Scott  L.,  530. 
Kellogg,  Alvan,   173. 

Amanda,  323. 

Celia,    173. 

Jesse,   323. 

Maria,  323. 

Sylvia  Stowe,   173. 
Kelly,  Jane  E.  (B.),  ii?,- 

Nathaniel,  333. 
Kelsey,  Alida,  410. 

Alida   Sturges,   410. 

Percival,  410. 
Kennedy,  Areno  I.  (B.), 
282. 

Catherine O.  Dovvd,38o. 

Cecelia,  380. 

Hugh,  380. 

James,  282. 

Mary  Davis,  282. 

Sylvia  B.,  282. 

William,   282. 
Kent,  Charles  S.,  47s. 

Faith  E.  (B.),  475- 

Paul    B.,   475- 
Kenyon,  Abbey  E.,  344. 

Agnes,  299. 

Alexander  C,  509- 

Alpheus  B.,  299. 

Altana    M.    Langwor- 
thy,  340. 

B.  A.,  407. 

Benjamin,    172. 

Benjamin  F.,  267. 

Birdie  M.,  486. 

Caroline   (B.),   151- 


Kenyon,    Charles    H., 
267. 

Cordelia  Burdick,  299. 

Damarius,   119,   120. 

Daniel,  453. 

Dora,  .299. 

Edward,  267. 

Edwin,  299. 

Eleanor,  82. 

Eliza  A.  Cottrell,  172. 

Elizabeth,  264. 
•    Elizabeth  T.,  150. 

Elizabeth   Webster, 
119. 

Ella  M.,  300. 

Ellis  H.,  453. 

Florence  Beebe,  450. 

George,  212. 

Hannah,  82. 

Isabell,  267. 

James,  52,  150. 

Jane  Prill,  300. 

John,  119,  340. 

Jonathan  C,  267. 

Lucy  A.  Irish,  344. 

Marie  E.  (B.),  267. 

Martha  Averill,  453. 

Mary,   168. 

Mary  Brightman,  344. 

Mary  L.,  450. 

Mary  L.  Seaver,  450. 

Mary  Perry,   150. 

Mary  S.  Wheeler,  509. 

Mary  V.  (B.),  299. 

Matthew  H.,  344. 

Matthew  S.,  344. 

Mercy,  119. 

Minnie     G.     Crandall, 

509. 

Nancy,  267. 

Penelope,  92,  93. 

Phineas,  83. 

Rodman,  151. 

Ruth   (B.),  52. 

Sarah,  267. 

Sarah  (B.),  212. 

Simon,  344. 

Stephen,  267. 

Susan,   152. 

Susan  S.  (B.),  267. 

Warren,  300. 

William  C.,  450. 

William  S.,  450. 
Kermpton,   Edward,  322. 

Ellen  F..  322. 

Mary  (B.).  322. 
Kernochan,  Grace  W., 

394- 
Grace  W.  Ogden,  395. 
Henry  P.,  395. 


Kers,    Susan   Boswell, 
269. 

Waller,  269. 
Kerwich,  Mamie  E.,  512. 
Key,  Dorothy,  13. 
Keyes,  Austin  H.,  407. 

Charlotte   (B.),  407. 

Donald,  407. 
Kidder,    Charlotte   Kent, 
409. 

Eliza,  409. 

Elizabeth     W.  H  a  f  f , 
409. 

George  H.,  409. 

Joseph,  409. 

Kate  J.,  409. 

William  E.,  409. 
Killburn,  Olive,  224. 
Kimball,  Alice,  519. 

Deliverance  (B.),  48. 

Elijah,  48. 

Frederick  H.,  519. 

George,  396. 

Helena,  396. 

Henry  H.,  519. 

James  C,  519. 

James  M.,  519. 

Jessie  M.,  519. 

L.,  535- 

Laura  B.,  519. 

Leona,  535. 

Margaret  W.,  519. 

Marie  B.  Moore,  519. 

Sophia  M.,  302. 
Kimbrick,  Alfonso,  476. 

Harry  W.,  476. 

John,  476. 

Laura  E.,  476. 

Leonard  A.,  476. 

Lillian  E.  (B.),  476. 

Ray  W.,  476. 

Walter,  476. 
King,  Aaron,  455. 

Albert  R.,  455. 

Alice  M.  Chilling- 
worth,  455. 

Alvena.  508. 

Amanda,    396. 

Ann  E.,  505, 

Cora,  455. 

Frank,  455. 

Fuller  P.,  325. 

Harriet  E.  Brown,  325. 

Harry  K.,   396. 

Mabel    B.    Mathews, 
396. 

Mary  E.,   191. 

Meritt  A.,  455. 

Sarah  A.  demons,  455. 

Sarah  Ayers,  455. 


King,  Susan,  146. 

Walter,  455. 

William,  396. 

Willie,  455-. 
Kingsley,  Lois,  372. 
Kinney,  Arnold,  245. 

Laura  M.  (B.),  245. 

Mercy,  106. 
Kinsley,  Celia  A.,  433. 

Lois  Hazen,  433. 

Nathan,  433. 
Klimfeltre,  Annie,  433. 
Knaeble,  Susan,  477. 
K  n  a  p  p,   Amy   Phillips, 
169. 

Asher,  169. 

Clarence,   169. 

Elizabeth  Smith,    169. 

Epenetus,  169. 

Ezra  B.,  169. 

Henry,  255. 

James  R.,  169. 

Loretta  Wiltsey,  169. 

Maria,  255. 

Nancy    Vandenburg, 
169. 

Olivia  Barber,  169. 

Peter,  169. 

Saberah  (B.),  169. 

Sally  A.,  169. 

Stephen,  169. 

Uretta,  169. 
Knerfel,  Milton,  306. 

Nora  Howard,  306. 
Kneveles,  Mary  A.,  391. 
Knickerbocker,  Deborah, 

146. 
Knight,    Charlotte    T. 
Lippencott,  277. 

Cinderella    Lippencott, 
278. 

Elizabeth,  276. 

Elizabeth  Randall,  285. 

James,  277,  285. 

James  M.,  277. 

Jesse  B.,  526. 

John,  19,  276,  277,  278, 
285. 

Laura  S.  (B.),  526. 

Lizzie  Van  Horn.  285. 

Lorenzo  D.,  278. 

Maggie  E.,  528. 

Mary  A..  277. 

Mary  Davis,  276,  278. 

Minnie  M..  526. 

Rolland,  526. 
Knoche,  Anna.  490. 
Knorr,   Caroline,   169. 
Knowles,    Adolphus    C, 
354- 
39 


Index. 

Knowles,  Ann  E.  Clark, 

354- 

Beulah  A.,  354. 

Deborah,  24. 

Foster  S.,   354. 

Harriet,  354. 

Kenneth  H.,  354. 

Margret  Anthony,  354. 

Rhoda,  385. 

Ruth  H.,  354- 

Sarah  A.,  385. 

William,  385. 

William  H.,  354. 
Knowlton,  Joanna,  385. 
Knox,  Charles  M.,  191. 

John,  270. 

Lucinda  F.    (B.),  270. 

Mary  E.  Briggs,  191. 
Kohles,    Helen    Watson, 

466. 
Kowalskey,  Henry,  298. 

Julia,  298. 
Kyle,  Amanda  C,  277. 
Kysor,  Charles,  370. 

Lois  C,  370. 

Polly,  370. 
Lackey,  Effie  F.,  527. 

Elizabeth,  527. 

Nancy,  271. 

Richard,  527. 
Ladd,  Clara  B.  Brandan, 
500. 

Fred,  500. 
Ladrick,  Jacob,   536. 

Laura  J.  (B.),  536. 
La  Fayette,  George,  201. 

Jeru'sha  G.   (B.),  201. 
La  Forge,  Abiel,  420. 

Lily,  420. 

Margaret  Gilchell,  420. 
Laid,  Eliza,  522. 
Lamb,  Joseph  A.,  378. 

Mary  E.  (B.),  378. 
L  a  n  d  o  n,     Cynthia     E. 
(B.),  248. 

Delia  White,  248. 

Edwin,  248. 

J.  M.,  248. 
Landphear,  Mary,  I02._ 
Landpheare,      Champlin, 

94- 
Landpher,  Nathan,  84. 
Landphere,  Amy,  446. 

Asa,  470. 

Charles  E..  385. 

Dorcas    (B.),  90. 

Elisha,  84,  446. 

Elizabeth  Potter,  84. 

Emily,  446. 

Emma  Brown,  278. 


609 

Landphere,   Esther,  287. 

Eunice  (B.),  51. 

George,  90. 

Guy  K.,  385. 

H.  B.,  278. 

Hannah  Potter,  2,y2i- 

Harriet  A.,  272- 

Henry,  385. 

Joseph,  94. 

Joshua,  94. 

Julia,  173. 

Lettie,  278. 

Lydia,  446. 

Mary  J.   (B.),  315. 

Millie  J.,  38s. 

Olive  French,  385. 

Polly,  95. 

Prentice,  95. 

Rebecca,  95. 

Rebecca  (B.),  94. 

Ruth,  470. 

Samuel,  373. 

Sarah  E.  (B.),  385. 

Stephen,  94. 
Lane,  James,  412. 

Mary,  391. 

Mary  L.  (B.),  412. 
Lang,  Emily  Green,  518. 

Emma,  449. 

Elizabeth  C.  (B.),  518. 

Francis  G.,  518. 

Gertrude  E.,  518. 

Horatio  L.,  518. 

John,  518. 
Langworthy,  Ada,  238. 

Altana,   108,   192. 

Altana   (B.),   iii. 

Altana  M.,  340. 

Amos,  82. 

Amy  Lewis,  192. 

Angel ine,  289. 

Ann  L.  Karr,  505. 

Anna,  57,  82,   104,  108. 

Anne  (B.),  108. 

Anne  L.,  506. 

Arlone,  287. 

Asa,  III. 

Asa  A.,  192. 

Belle  C,  504. 

Benjamin,  44,  82. 

Benj.  F.,  192,  342,  506. 

Bertha,  507. 

Caroline,    372. 

Catherine  E.  Day,  507. 

Charles  D.,  192. 

Clara,  302. 

Clarence  E.,  340. 

Content,   108,   192. 

Content    Sanford,    82, 
108. 


6io 


Index. 


Langworthy,    Daniel    A., 

503. 
Daniel  B.,  507. 
Dean,   506. 
Eleanor  Kenyon,  82. 
Elias,  289. 
Eliza  A.,  340. 
Eliza  Irish,  342. 
Eliza  Lewis,   339. 
Elizabeth,  111. 
Elizabeth  Carr,  192. 
Ella  I.,  506. 
Emeline,    340. 
Emma,  226. 
Eunice  Stillman,  192. 
Floyd  B.,  506. 
Frank  A.,  506. 
Frank  O.,  506. 
George,   287. 
George  I.,  505,  506. 
H.,  372. 

Hannah    Kenyon,    82. 
Harriet  A.,  340. 
Helen  O.,  506. 
Henry,   238. 
Henry   W.,   507. 
Horace,  340. 
Howard  S.,  506. 
Isaac  M.,  340. 
Isaac  P.,  192. 
Jacob,  372. 
James  B..   192. 
Jane  McPherson,  340. 
Jemima  L.,  468. 
John,   71,  82,    III,    192, 

342,   468. 
John  A.,  339. 
John  B.,  82. 
John  F.,  506. 
Joseph,  226. 
Josephine    B  u  r  d  i  c  k, 

372. 
Julia  E.,  505. 
Leslie  P.,  340. 

Lily,  507. 
Lois  C.   (B.),  37^- 
Lovina  Richmond,  468. 
Louisa,  300. 
Louise  Paterson,  340. 
Lucretia  M.,  340. 
Lydia,  309. 
Margaret,    372. 
Marguerite,  506. 
Martha  J..  372. 
Martha  Mills.  289. 
Martha   Stillman,    192. 
Mary  A.  Lewis,  506. 
Mary  E.,  506. 
Mary  Utter,   339. 
Maud  Bronson,  504. 


Langworthy,  Mercy,  108. 
Mercy  Saunders,  117. 
Nathan  H.,   192. 
Olin  L.,  504. 
Oliver,    108. 
Patience    P  e  c  k  h  a  m 

Bentley,  82. 
Persis  Cotton,  226. 
Phebe  Thurston,  iii. 
Ralph,  340. 
Rosina  Pope,  372. 
Ruth  Crandall,   iii. 
Ruth  K.,  506. 
Ruth  S.  Place,  340. 
Sally   Pendleton,   71, 

192. 
Samuel,  117. 
Sandford,  82,  108. 
Sarah  A.,   192. 
Sarah  A.  Marvel,  340. 
Sarah   (B.),  44. 
Sarah  E.,  339. 
Sarah  P.  Cooke,  504. 
Sarah  Pendleton,  342. 
Sarah   Williams,    192. 
Susan    Saunders,     192, 

340. 
Susie  M.,  340. 
Tacy,  117. 
Thomas,  82,  108. 
William  I.,  506. 
William  N.,  507. 
William  P.,  340,  372. 
Lapham,    Abbie    Austin, 

261. 
Elizabeth,    261. 
Enos,  261. 
Guy  S.,  311. 
Winnifred     E.      (B.), 

311- 
Laraway,  Caroline,  292. 
Larkin,  David,   145. 

Hannah  (B.),  8. 

Roger,  8. 

Sally  Hazard,  145. 
Larrison,  Mary.   102. 

Mary  Landphear,   102. 

Thomas.  102. 
Latham,  Prudence,  346. 

Tentie,   384. 
Lathrop,     Benjamin     R., 
482. 

Caroline   C,  444. 

Edith.  396. 

Elizabeth.  392. 

Elizabeth  S.  (B.),  218. 

Emily,  508. 

Lucy   M..   358. 

M.  C.  218. 

Mary  R.  (B.),  482. 


Lathrop,  Norman,  444. 

Sarah  Comstock,  444. 
Laurens,  Lois,  75. 
Law,    Hattie,    178. 
Lawson,  Myra,  178. 
Lawton,   Elizabeth,  546. 

Elizabeth     Hazard,     8, 

545- 

George,  8,   545,   546. 

Isabel^.    546. 

John,  546. 

Mary,  8,  36,  546. 

Mary  Boomer,  546. 

Mary  Wodell,   546. 

Mercy,  546. 

Naomi  Hunt,  546. 

Robert,  546. 

Ruth,  546. 

Susanna,  546. 
Lay,  Mary,  40. 
Layton,    Lucy,   57. 
Leach,   Agnes,  339. 

D.  F.,  339. 

Levanthia,  339. 
Lee,  Angel,  293. 

Benjamin  F.,  294. 

Caroline,  294. 

Eunice,  293. 

Lucy,  293. 

Lydia,  79. 

Mary,  212. 

Minnie     M.     Goodsell, 

379- 
Leeds,    Abby    E.     (B.), 
216. 

Jedediah,    216. 

Paul  B.,  216. 

Sarah  Avery,  216. 
Leedings,  Marie,  275. 
Lehre,  Ann  Miller,  71. 

Mary  Ann.  71. 

William.  71. 
Leonard,  Betsy,  202. 
Lester,     Elizabeth     Bud- 
long,  496. 

Fred.  497. 

Fred  W.,  497. 

Jerome  B..  497. 
Leverich,  Charles  E., 

393- 

George    B.,   393. 

George  D.,  393. 

Julia  Drysdale,  393. 

Louise  F.,  393. 

Mary.  393. 

Mary  A.   (B.),  393. 
Levering,  Deborah,  323. 
Lewis.  A.  H.,  506. 

Abbie,  69. 

Abby  A.,  193. 


Lewis,  Abel  G.,  ii8. 
Ada,  331. 

Alice  M.  Bacon,  423. 
Amey  Clark,  119. 
Amy,  119,  192. 
Amy  (B.),  138. 
Augusta  Johnson,  506. 
Belinda   (B.),   161. 
Benazah,   138. 
Beriah,  331. 
Bertha  M.  Lowell,  531. 
Bill,  161. 
C.  439- 
Caleb,  480. 
Carrie.  Kenyon,  499. 
Cecilia  E.,  491. 
Charles  H.,  423. 
Charles  W..  531. 
Clarissa,  480. 
Content      Langworthy, 

193- 
Daniel,  8,  119,  193,  288, 

339- 
Delia  Graves,  427. 
Denison,  355. 
E.  R.,  484. 
Edwin  R..  253,  484. 
Elias,  208. 
Elisha,  8. 
Eliza.   339. 
Elijah,  135. 
Elizabeth   (B.),  8. 
Elizabeth  A.  (B.),  480. 
Elizabeth  Browning, 

208. 
Elizabeth  Fish.  491. 
Ella  B.  Saunders,  355. 
Eugenia  L.,  300. 
George  H.,  331. 
Hannah,  102.   122. 
Harriet.  451. 
Harriet  L..  480. 
Henrietta  L..  484. 
Horace  G.,  499. 
James.  8.  124. 
Jane  (B.),  8. 
Johana  Wade.  480. 
John.  8. 
Leverrier.  355. 
Lois.  208. 
Louisa    Langworthy, 

300. 
Louise  A.  Brown.  484. 
Martha  CB.).  118.  124. 
Martha  P..  88. 
Mary,  384.  499- 
Mary  A..  506. 
Mary     A.     (B.),     135, 

331- 
Mary  E.,  498. 


Index. 

Lewis,  Mary  F.  (B.).484. 
Mary  T.   (B.),  253. 
Morton,   135. 
Nancy,  60. 
Nathan  K.,  300. 
Nathaniel,  60. 
Pardon,  265. 
P  h  e  b  e    E.    Gardner, 

451- 
Phoebe,  499. 
Polly,  169. 
Roxey,  234. 
S.  Marie  Brown,  288. 
Samuel,    12. 
Sarah,  339. 
Sarah   A.,  265. 
Sarah  (B.),  8. 
Sarah  C.,   192. 
Sarah  F.,  353. 
Susan  A.  Bishop,  355. 
Susan  Peckham,  265. 
Thomas,  69. 
Wellington  L.,  355. 
William,  451.  491. 
Lightfoot,   Elizabeth 

Pomero)%  401. 
James  T.,  401. 
Lillibridge,  Almira  (B.), 

264. 
Amy  D.,  264. 
Warren.  264. 
Lillsfield,  Anna  R.   (B.), 

264. 
William.  264. 
Lindsey,  Fanny  E.   Rog- 
ers, 359- 
Frederick.  359. 
Martha  E..  359. 
Lippencott.  Amy.  157. 
Amy  Maxson.  157,  278, 

280. 
Charity  G.,  277. 
Charlotte  T.,  277,  281. 
Cinderella.    278. 
Clara  L.,  277. 
Claud.  462. 
Curtis.  277. 
Cynthia,  278. 
Darwin  C.  277. 
Dosia,  276. 
Eliza.  282. 
Elizabeth      M.      (B.), 

277. 
Emily  (B.)  Hunt,  279. 
Ephraim,  279. 
Eveline  Van  Horn, 

277; 

Flossie.  462. 
Hannah    Maxson.    277. 
280,  281,  282. 


611 

Lippencott,  Henry,  278. 

Herbert,  462. 

Indiana,  278. 

Jackson,  278. 

Jacob,  280. 

Jemima,  280. 

Jessie  M.,  277. 

John,  280,  462. 

John  A.,  279. 

Josephine,  462. 

Laverna,  277. 

Lemon,  278. 

Lulu  v.,  462. 

Lydia,   280. 

Maria,   278,   280. 

^lartha  (B.),  157,  158. 

Martha  Davis,  278. 

Marv  A.,  157. 

Nancy  A.  (B.),  280. 

Nancy  E.,  462. 

Orfah  L.,  278. 

Perrv  B.,  462. 

Priscilla  (B.),  278. 

Rebecca  Davis.  278. 

Rebecca  Sly.  462. 

Robinson,   278. 

Samuel,    157,   277,   278, 
281,  282. 

Simeon,   277. 

Susan  M.,  280,  282. 

William,   157. 
Lippitt,  Anne,  70. 

Cornelia,  402. 
Lisbee,    Elizabeth     (B.), 
232. 

George  B.,  232. 

?^Iary  E.,  411. 
Littell,  Abigail,   155. 
Livermore,     E  d  m  u  n  d. 
162. 

Hepsey,  400. 

Tacy  Fitch,   162. 
Livingston,    Elizabeth 
Austin.   305. 

John.   158.  305. 

Martha  A.,  305. 
Lloyd.   Harriet   Thomas, 

445- 

Lettie  E..  445. 

William.   445. 
Loan.  Mary  A.,  369. 
Locke.  Florence  J.,  395. 

James.  380. 

iVIary.  380. 
Logan.  Albert  F..  307. 

Charles  M..  307. 

Fanny  L.  Crane,  307. 

Libbie.  257. 
Longstreet,   Laura    (B.), 
209. 


6l2 

Longstreet,  S.  P.,  209. 
Loodell,  John  M.,  273. 
Lucinda,  273. 
Sally  Warner,  273. 
Loofboro,    Amaranda, 
284. 

Beecher,  284. 

Dwight,  284. 

Euphrema   Sayer,  284. 

Jacob,  157- 

John,  284. 

Mary  Davis,    157. 

Matilda,  278. 

Rebecca,    157. 

Susan  Forsythe,  284. 
Loomis,    Amanda    M. 
(B.),  319. 

Charles,  320. 

Charles  R.,  320. 

Clara  V.,  320. 

Delia  A.  Chappell,  319. 

Dianthe   (B.),   141. 

Eugene  S.,  319- 

Kate    M.    Shortwell, 
320. 

Mabel,  319. 

Maretta,  256. 

Samuel,   319. 
Lord,  Desire   (B.),  213. 

Hannah,  24. 

Samuel,  213. 

Sarah,  133. 

Sherburne,    213. 
Losey,  Arthur,  308. 

Ella  A.  (B.)-  308. 
Lovejoy,  Andrew,  190. 

Carl  H..  434. 

Emma  S.  (B.).  434- 

Harriet    S.    Palme  r, 
190. 

John  W.,  190. 

Josephine,    434. 

Lewis  H.,  434. 

Mary  R.  Sheldon.  434. 

Thomas  L.,  434. 
Lowell,  Bertha  M.,  531. 

Carlos  P.,  531. 

Carlos  G.,  531. 

Daniel,  531.  535- 

Dorothy.  535- 

Edward  V.,  535. 

Grace,  535- 

Harriet  F.   (B.),  531. 

Harriette,  531. 

Julian,  531. 

Lavina  Butts,  531. 

Leona  Kimball,  535. 

Louisa  Baldwin,  531. 

Philomela.  535. 

Ruth  A.,  531. 


Index. 

Lowell,  William  D.,  531. 
Lowrey,  John,   222. 

Mary,  222. 

Mary  S.  Peck,  222. 
Lucas,  Bertha  F.,  312. 

Frances  C.  (B.),  312. 

Lillie   M.,  312. 

Phebe   Scarriot,  312. 

William,  312. 

Wilson  W.,  312. 
Luce,  Edgar  P.,  464. 

Ida  E.   (B.),  464. 

Myron  H.,  531. 

Ruth  A.  Lowell,  531. 

Sarah  E.,  464. 
Luceke,  Hannah,  527. 
Ludeman,  Arthur,  496. 

Fred  J.,  496. 

John  H.,  496. 

May  K.   (B.),  496. 
Lung,  Lucy,  422. 
Luther,  Laura,  388. 

William,  388. 
Luthers,  Josephine,  368. 
Lutz,  Anna,  411. 
Lyman,  Carlton  M.,  S33- 

Cornelius  M..  ;i3^. 

Elizabeth,  536. 

Emma  C,  333. 

Harriet,  408. 

Helen     L.     Washburn. 

333- 
Jane  Van  Valer,  3^3. 
Marietta  B.   (B.),  333. 
Mary  J..  333. 
Mary  V.  Lyons,  333. 
Nathan,  333. 
William  E..  333. 
Lynde,  Catherine  C,  259. 
Charles.  258.  259. 
Cynthia   Thompson, 

259- 

Eliza  Warren.  258. 

Mary    (B.),   258. 

Mary    E.    Blanchard, 
91. 

T.,  258. 

William  P.,  91. 
Lyon.   Mary.  475. 

Matilda.  291. 
Lyons.  Mary  V..  333. 
Mabbett,  Agnes  M..  380. 

Catherine.  328,   514. 

Joseph,  380. 
Mackay,  Louis,  130. 
Macomber,  Abiel,  258. 

Dianna.   302. 

Harriet  Felton,  258. 

John.  12. 

Lydia,  258. 


Macomber,    Mary    (B.), 
12. 

Villa,  148. 
Macy,  Lucy,  174. 
Madden,  Charles,  526. 

Emma  J.   Simpson, 
526. 
Magee,   Birdella,  453. 

Emma,  453. 

Katherine,   453. 

Solomon,  453. 
Maghee,  Annie  E..  232. 
Mahan,   David,  388. 

Mary  Middleton,  388. 

Nellie  v.,  388. 
Main,  A.  Hamilton,  173. 

Abigail  Brown,  loo. 

Amos,  100. 

Betsey,   100. 

Content,    522. 

Content     Langworthy, 
108. 

Emma  L.  Cottrell,  172. 

Jeremiah,  108. 

Mary  Cottrell,  172. 
Maine,  Eunice,  317. 

Frances  Burdick,  85. 

Grace  D.  Bell,  447. 

Hannah  E.,  447. 

John,  447. 

Julia  E.  (B.),  265. 

Lucy,  372. 

Lyman,  85. 

Reuben.  85. 

Sarah  Burdick,  85. 

Saxton,  125. 

Sophronia  Stanton, 
125. 

T.  E.,  265. 
Major,  Juliette,  173. 
Malcom,  Margaret,  299. 
]\Iallov,    Blanche    O. 
(B.),  374. 

John,  374. 
Malory,  Lottie  C,  462. 
Maltbie,  Ebenezer,  259. 

Emily   M.,   259. 

Mary  A.  Davis,  259. 
Maltby.  Ezra.  469. 

Lauraett.   469. 

Lorain  Hotchkiss,  469. 
Maneval,  Mary.  462. 
Mann,  Adelia  M.,  381. 

Adeline  Morrison,  381. 

David,  381. 

Helen   A.,   423. 

Jane,  423. 

Jason,  174. 

Joseph.  174. 

Lura  (B.),  174. 


Mann,  William,  423. 
Mannering,   Mary,   133. 

Susan,  253. 
Mansfield,  Sarah,  33. 
Manville,   Martha,  303. 
Mapes,  Henry,   164. 

John,  164. 

Nancy   (B.),   164. 

Solomon,  104. 

Wellcome,    164. 
Maraw,   79. 
Marble,  Charles  B.,  487. 

Georgia  C.   Brockway. 
487. 
Marchant,  Henry,  81. 
Markham,   Sally  A.,  288. 
Marquis,  Charles  F.,  492. 

Nettie  Hurd,  492. 
Marsh,  Horace,  330. 

Louisa,  529. 

Myra  F.,  330. 
Marshall,     Hattie     (B.), 
203. 

Sarah,  427. 
Marther,  Hezekiah,  40. 
Martin,   Catherine  E., 
336,    502. 

Eliza  P.  (B.),  217. 

Elmer  B.,  429. 

Hetty  A.   (B.),  429. 

Kate  H.  (B.),  387. 

Kate  I.  Dixon,  429. 

Marion  E.,  429. 

Robert  B.,  217. 

Samuel  B.,  429. 

Walter,  429. 

William  H.,  387. 

Wilton  W.,  429. 
Marvel,  Sarah  A.,  340. 
Marvin,  Arthur,  336. 

Charles,  299. 

Charles  M.,  172. 

Frances     A.     Cottrell, 
172. 

Fronie  H.,  299. 

Sarah  (B.),  336. 
Mason,     Adeline     Gates, 
360. 

Alzina,  207. 

Isaac,  360. 

John,  41. 

Josiah,  207. 

Julia,  360. 

M.  P.,  402. 

Meria  (B.),  402. 
Mathews.  Albert  P..  396. 

Anna  E.,  396. 

Anna   E.  Wright,   396. 

Anna  L.,  396. 

Edith  C,  396. 


Index. 

Mathews,  Edith  L.,  396. 

Elizabeth  S.  (B.),  218. 

Flora  E.  Swain,  395. 

Gertrude     M.     Single- 
ton, 396. 

Grace  E.,  395. 

Jesse  L.,  396. 

John,   218. 

John  L.,  396. 

John  W.,  219. 

Mabel    B.,   396. 

Martha  A.,  219. 

Mary  E.,  396. 

Nancy  Eaton,  218. 

Sally,  247,  248. 

Samuel  S.,  218,  396. 

Sherburne,   396. 

William  H.,  396. 

William  S.  B.,  395. 
Matterson,  Cilda,  353. 

Lois  A.,  446. 
Mauran,  Charles  J.,  185. 

Olivia  Bicknell,  185. 

Wait,  185. 
M  a  X  s  o  n,    Adassa     F. 
(B.),    282. 

Addie,  282. 

Albert  S.,  381. 

Amelia.  420. 

Ainos,  84. 

Amy,  157,  278,  280. 

Ann,  30. 

Ann  E.  (B.),  314. 

Anna,   75. 

Anna  Bond,  281. 

Anna  Langworthy,  82. 

Asa  L.,  398. 

Benjamin,  382. 

Bethiah,    84. 

Calvin,   535. 

Carlton,  471. 

Caroline,  382. 

Caroline  D.   (B.),  397. 

Charity,    157. 

Charles  H.,  383. 

Charlotte   E.,   507. 

Chloe,  287. 

Content,  15,  84. 

Content  Rogers,  15. 

Corydon  L.,   471. 

Daniel.  212.  471. 

David.  168. 

Dollie  (B.).  381. 

Dorothy,  30. 

Elizabeth,  so,  282. 

Elizabeth  Davis.   157. 

Elizabeth  Langworthy, 
III. 

Elytie  L.  (B.),  537. 

Emogene  (B.),  383. 


613 

Maxson,  Ephraim,  157. 
Esther  E.  (B.),  212. 
Ethel,  471. 
Eusebia,  468. 
Frances  A.,  382. 
George,  95. 
George  R.,   170. 
Cierrit  S.,  282. 
Gilbert,  471. 
Hannah.   85,   277,   280, 

281,  282. 
Hannah  A.    (B.),  260. 
Hannah  Potter,  84. 
Henrietta  L.  Lewis, 484. 
Henry  M.,  484. 
Horace,  484. 
Jacob  D.,  281. 
James,  95. 
Jesse,   158. 

John,    30,    49,    88,    95. 
Jonathan,   15,  549. 
Joseph,  51,  84,  95. 
Lizzie  M.  (B.),  471. 
Lois  M.    (B.),  381. 
Louisa  Felton,  471. 
Lucinda,  165. 
Lucy,  97,  509. 
Lucy  A.,    171. 
Lucy  M.,  382,  507. 
Lucy  Stillman,  282. 
Luke,  314. 
Lydia,     158,    278,    280, 

281,  479- 
Lydia  (B.),  51,  170. 
Lydia  Potter,  84. 
M.  E.  Paul,  382. 
Mabel,  381. 
Maria  Eldredge,  536. 
Martha  P.  Lewis,  88. 
Mary  Holcomb,  381. 
Mary  K.,   168. 
Mary  Kenyon,  168. 
Moshure,  95. 
Nancy,  214. 
Nathan,   95. 
Norman,  282. 
Paul,  165. 
Peleg,  314. 
Permilla,  279. 
Perry,  82,  536. 
Polly,  257.  535. 
Rachel,  281. 
Rolland  B.^  471. 
Russel.  260. 
Ruth.  88,  95.  97- 
Ruth  Rogers,  97. 
Samuel.  97. 
Sarah  C,  483. 
Sarah   Rogers,   507. 
Sarah  Sutton,  158. 


6i4 

Maxson,  Simeon,  95. 

Stephen,  382. 

Susanna,  223. 

Susannah,  95. 

Sutton,  281. 

Sylvanus,  84,  in,  381. 

Tacy,  97. 

Tacy  Rogers,  30. 

Thomas,  95. 

Torrey,  84. 

Vienna,  281. 

William,  95,  507. 
Maxwell,  E  m  m  a  Gray, 
320. 

John,  320. 

Lucy,  320. 
May,     Desire     E.     (B.), 

147- 
Esther  Millie,  467. 

J.  S.,  147. 

John,  467. 

Mary,  467. 
McBride,  A  1  m  i  r  a  Par- 
sons, 430. 

Cyrus,  430. 

Grace  J.,   430. 

John,  430. 

Laura  (B.),  430. 

Nettie,  430. 
McBurney,  Jemima,  276. 
McCart,  Edward,  290. 

Malinda,    290. 
McCarthy,   Charles,  200. 

Emily    (B.),   200. 

Hattie  L  Sumner,  489. 

T.   W.,  489. 
McChesney,  Louisa,   297. 

Maggie,  493- 
McClary,    Nancy    Davis, 

157- 
McClean,  Althea,  473. 
McClellan,  Mary,  100. 
McClesey,  Lizzie,  530. 
McClur,     Abigail     C. 
(B.),    255. 

John,  255. 
McClure,  Jane,  157. 

Mary,    156. 
McConnell,   Delia,   387. 
McCormick,  Anna  Clay- 
ton, 277. 

Elizabeth,  277. 

Mary  Crandall,  236. 

Matthew,  236. 

Valentine,    277. 
McCoy,  Gertrude,  514. 

Holmes,  514. 
McCullough,    Mary   J., 

Sio. 
McCurdy,  Sarah  E.,  440. 


Index. 

McCush,   Sarah,  399. 
McCutchron,  Jane,  296. 
McDaniels,  Emily,   171. 
McDermont,  Kate,  514. 
McDonald,    S  a  r  a  h    E., 

354- 
McDowell,  James,  34. 

Joanna,  34. 

Lucy  Stanton,  34. 
McElroy,  Barnard,  249. 

Catherine,  249, 

James,  249. 

Lucy,  249. 

Marconah,  249. 

Mary   (B.),  249. 

William,  249. 
McElwee,     William     H., 
240. 

Daniel,  209. 
McGhee,  Mary,  250. 
McGie,   Allen,   491. 

Pauline    B.    (B.),   491. 
McGiU.  John  W.,  276. 

Rachel,  276. 

Rachel   Frazier,   276. 
McGinnis,     Caroline    A., 

393. 
McGlaflin,  A  1  m  i  r  a  M., 

484. 
McGrann,  Agnes,  368. 

Arloine,  368. 

Charles,  368. 

Ellen,  368. 

Ethel  M.,  368. 

Florence,  368. 

Florence  A.,  368. 

George  T.,   368. 

Jane   E.,  368. 

John  A.,  368. 

John  F.,  368. 

Joseph,  368. 

Laura    Rossmunson, 
368. 

Lenore,  368. 

Mary  E.,  368. 

Nancy  J.   (B.),  368. 

Preston,  368. 

William,  368. 

William  R.,  368. 
McGregor,   Alice,   249. 

Catherine,  247. 

Daniel,   248. 

Deborah   Hoxie,   247. 

Effie,  249. 

Elisha,  248. 

Elisha  E..  249. 

Emeline,  249. 

Eliza,  247. 

Gertrude,  249. 

James,  249. 


McGregor,  John,  247. 

Lena,  485, 

Mary    (B.),   248. 

Nettie  E.  Hull,  249. 
McGuire,    Alice    Fish, 
510. 

Mary    J.    McCullough, 
510. 

Samuel  A.,  510. 

Samuel  K.,  510. 
McHenry,  Dudley,  211. 

Rue  G.,  211. 
Mclntire,  Harriet,  232. 
Mcintosh,     Ella     Ebblie, 
368. 

William,  368. 
Mclntre,  Phila,  528. 
Mclntyre,  Delilah,   161. 
McKee,  Flora,  493. 
McKinley,  Lucy,  274. 
McKinney,    Charlotte, 
442. 

Edwin,  442. 

Eliza  Niven,  441. 

Marcia  Phillips,  442. 

William  A.,  442. 
McLafferty,    Elizabeth 
(B.),  50. 

Henry,  50. 
McLellan,  Maggie  L., 

367. 
McMaster,  Mary,  247. 
McMurry,  C.  C,  240. 
Laura  Taylor,  240. 
McNeil,  Amanda,  356. 

Janette,  233. 
McNitt,  Eliza,  234. 

Noah,  234. 
McWhorten,      Margaret, 

521. 
McWilliams,      Catherine 

T.,  446. 
M  e  a  c  h  a  m,       Lucinda 

Church,   184. 
Mead,    Emily    C.    Good- 
rich, 525'. 
Meade,   Annie   A.    (B.), 
469. 
George,  469. 
Meader,  Eugene  A.,  448. 
Julia    M.    Northam, 

448. 
Laura,  448. 
Richard    D.,   448. 
Meech,  Ellen  S.,  412. 
Mendell,  Matilda.  428. 
Mendenhall,   Abner,   303. 
Artimesia      M.      (B.), 

,303. 
Ellis  A.,  303. 


Mendenhall,  Elmira,  303. 

Huldah  Piper,  303. 

Lee  C,  303. 

Martha  Manvill,  303. 

Mattie  A.,  303. 
Merret,  Austin,  242. 
Merrick,    Elizabeth,    155. 

Eunice  L.   (B.),  247. 

Horace  W.,  247. 

Josephine,   490. 
Merrill,  Abigail   Hill, 

342. 

Anna  A.,  505. 

Betsey,  234. 

Caroline  Deane,  488. 

E.  A.  Foster,  492. 

Elisabeth,    128. 

Elizabeth  R.,  492. 

George,  488. 

Helen  B.   (B.),488. 

Henry  A.,  342. 

John  H.,  341. 

John  J.,  505. 

Mary  A.,  396. 

Mary  L.  Burdick.  505. 

Mary  M.,  505. 

Samuel,  492. 

Samuel   W.,   488. 
Merriman,     Benjamin, 
2,76. 

Benjamin  C.   376. 

Mary  A.  (B.),  376. 

Morris,   376. 
Merritt,  Eliza,  189. 

Susan.  189. 
Messenger,    Josephine 
Smith.  490. 

Lester  H.,  490. 

Renihold,  490. 

Theresa  Cook,  490. 
Metz,  Rosanna.  460. 
Metzgar,  Adeline,  476. 

John,  476. 

Mary  Derkins,  476. 
Meyn,  Alfred  T..  505. 

Camilla  (B.).  505. 
Michaels.  Margaret.  433- 
Middleton,   Mary,   388. 
Milkin,  Fred  C.  305. 

S.  Evelyn  Chenev.  .305. 
Millard,  Lura.  384'  386. 
Miller.  Abby  G.,  214. 

Adrian,  322. 

Allen,  416. 

Ann,  71. 

Ann  A.   Sibley,   174. 

Anna  E..  242. 

Annie,  173. 

Avilda  (B.).  416. 

Charles,  174,  192. 


Index. 

Miller,  Christine,  174. 

Elisabeth,    245. 

Eliza  (B.),  255. 

Ella  F.  Kermpton,  2-^- 

George,  192. 

Hannah,  140. 

Huldah   (B.),  289. 

Jacob  L,  192. 

Joseph,   163. 

Lodema    (B.)    Barney, 
163. 

Martha  (B.),  192. 

Nettie,  432. 

Rebecca,  388. 

Rhoda,  460. 

Sarah  R.,  487. 

Simon,  174. 

Stephen,  255. 

William,  289. 
Mi  1 1  i  c'h  a  m  p,   Cather- 
ine, 339. 

Catherine  E.,  339. 

Joseph.  339. 

Julia  A.  (B.),  339. 

Lucy  W.,  339- 

Stephen  W.,  339. 
]\Iillie,  Esther,  467. 
Milliken.  Eliza,  34=;. 
Mills.  Albert  R.,  455- 

Catherine  A.,  341.- 

Charlotta,  295. 

Frederick,  341. 

Martha.  289. 

Susan  Grant,  341. 
Miner.  Anna,   179. 

Christopher,   40. 

Daniel,  179. 

Emeline,  510. 

Eunice,  57,  146. 

Gabrilla,  298. 

Henry  W.,  310. 

IVIary,  85,  235. 

Mary  E.  (B.),  310. 

Mary  Lay,  40. 

Maud,  450. 

Phebe.  57. 

Samuel  A.,  310. 

Sandford,  450. 
Mings,  Cornelia  S..  243. 

Elizabeth.   243. 

Joseph.  243. 
Minor,  Ephrain.  542. 

Mary.  38. 
Mitchell.  Alfred.  264. 

Anna  R.   CB.),  264. 

Hattie.  300. 

Henry  C.,  261. 

Nellie  R.   CB.),  261. 
]\Ionck.     Margaret 
Chandler,  41. 


615 

Mondy,  Flora  D.,  336. 
Monfret,   Sally,  401. 
Monkhouse,    Harriet   L., 

521. 
M  a  r  y     De    Castanig, 

521. 

Richard,  521. 
Monroe.  John,  412. 

Mariette  Priest,  412. 

Polly,    137- 

Rose,  412. 

Susan,  328. 

Verona,  229. 
INIontgomery,     Elizabeth, 

524- 

James,  524. 

Mabel  E.,  524. 
Monypeny,  Brunson,  525. 

George  B.,  525- 

Margaret  C.  (B.),  525. 

William  M.,  525. 
Moodic,  Elizabeth,  378. 
Mooney,  Susan  M.,  469. 
Moore,     Abby    E.    Tru- 
man,  167. 

Anna  (B.),  461. 

Betsey,  157. 

Fanny.  245. 

Hannah,  429. 

Harriet  (B.),  254. 

Henry.  254. 

James  C,  461. 

James  D.,  389. 

Jean    Campbell,    276, 
461. 

Lavinda  Fitch,  162. 

Lucy  (B.),  379. 

Luther.  379. 

Margaret.  276. 

Maria  E.  (B.),  389- 

Marie  (B.),  519. 

Mercy,  260. 

Sylvanus,  162. 

William,   276,   461. 

William  N.,  167. 

Willis   L.,   379. 
]\Toon,  Asa,  43. 

Deborah  (B.),  43. 

Isaac,   43. 
Moots.  Nancy  A..  270. 
i\Torehouse>  David,   189. 

Jane.  i8g. 

Jane  Belding.   189. 
Morey.  Susan,  402. 
Morgan,  Amy,  164. 

Annie  (B.),  242. 

B.  E.,  242. 

Daniel.   209. 

David  H.,  iq-. 

Elijah  W.,  155. 


6i6 


Index. 


Morgan,  Elisha,  154,  155. 
Elizabeth    Merrick, 

155- 

Frances  (B.),  209. 

Julia,  498. 

Lucy  C,  273. 

Lucy  Stowe,  155. 

Mahala,  181. 

Maria,  254. 

Martha,  164. 

Polly  (B.),  154,  155. 

S.  S.,  242. 

William,   181. 
Moris,  Richard,   i. 
Morley,  Annie,  380. 
Morning,  Phebe  T.  (B.), 
152. 

W.  H.,  152. 
Morris,  Demsa   (B.), 
284. 

Fannie,  500. 

Helen  E.,  306. 

Henry  K.,  284. 

James,  284. 

Jane,  279,  280. 

John,  284. 

Josephine   C  r  a  n  d  a  1 1, 
236. 

Julia  Collier,  306. 

Lewis,  306. 

Louisa,  284. 
Morrison,  Hannah,  467. 

Jane  (B.),  226. 

Sally,  229. 
Morse,  Sarah,  299. 

Susan,  419. 
Mortimer.    Elizabeth 
Scott,   378. 

Emma,  378. 

Samuel,  378. 
Moses,  Joshua.   105.. 

Thankful,  105. 

Timothy,   105. 

Zeruiah,  105. 
Moss,  Marie,  474. 
Mossman.    Andrew,    526. 

Minnie   M.    Knight, 
526. 
Mosher,  Ann  E.,  237. 

Daniel,  237. 

Daniel    P.,    238. 

Florence    A.     Cottrell, 

173- 
George,  417. 
John  M..  238. 
John  P.,  173. 
Martha     C.     Burdick, 

238. 
Myrtle  L.  Brown,  417. 
Sarah  A.,  237. 


Moulton,  Asa,  322. 

Betsy  Sanburn,  309. 

Charlotta,  323. 

Edith  M.,  479. 

Edmund,   253. 

Esther,  463. 

George  M.,  478. 

Jane  M.   (B.),  309. 

Joseph  T.,  309. 

Julia,  442. 

Martha  S.  (B.),  253. 

Miriam,  322. 

Rodman,  253. 

Submit   (B.),  322. 
Mount,  Edgar  V.,  369. 

Lydia  V.  (B.),  369. 
Alowry,  Leonard,  170. 

Sarah  M.  (B.),  170. 
Moyer,    Mary    Maneval, 
462. 

Peter,  462. 

Phebe  A.,  462. 
Moyle,  Mary  E.  Murphy, 

314- 

Samuel,  314. 
]\Iulkins,  Abigail,  49. 

Henry,   49. 
Mullett,   Emma  L.,  284. 
Mungar,     Esther     Moul- 
ton. 463. 

Lorinda,  463. 

Whitman,  460. 
Munger,  Asa.  480. 

Emeline,  437. 

George  D.,  480. 

Harriet  L.  Lewis,  480. 

Jane  Keller.  480. 

Kate,  437. 

S.  Lewis.  437. 
Munn.  Adelia  J.,  234. 

Adelia  J.    (B.),  234. 

Henry,  234.  ^ 

Munson,   Amey   F.,   408. 

Edward,  408. 

G.,  408. 

Harriet  L.,  408. 

Harriet  Lvman,  408. 

Paul,  408.' 

Robert.  408. 

.Samuel.  408. 

-Samuel  L..  408. 

Susan   B.   Hopkins, 
408. 
Murphy.    Ann    E.    Chap- 
man. 481. 

Ann  M.,  314. 

Arthur  G..  479. 

Edith  M.  Moulton. 

479- 
Elizabeth  A.  (B.),  314. 


Murphy,    Emeline,   421. 

Harriet  P.,  314. 

John  H.,  479. 

Juha  A.,  314. 

Mary  E.,  314. 

Mary  Landphere,  314. 

Minnie  Grant,   314. 

Oscar  F.,  481. 

Peleg  B.,  314. 

Sophia  Savage,  314. 

William  P.,  314. 
Murray,  Cecil  D.,  520. 

Delia  D.,  182. 

Fanny  M.  B.,  520. 

Glady  F.,  471. 

Henry  A.,  520. 

James  H.,  182. 

John  B.,  471. 

Lovila,  458. 

Margaret   Homes,  457. 

May  B.   (B.),  471. 

Nancy,  182. 

Peter,  471. 

Polly  (B.),  182. 

Thomas,  457. 

Virginia,  520. 
Murry,  Helen  C,  479. 
Musgrave,  Alice,  449. 

Catherine,  449. 

Thomas,  449. 
Muthersbough,    Byron 
A.,  508. 

David  H.,  508. 

Jacob  M.,  508. 

Mary  D.,  508. 

Mary  J.,  508. 

Nora   D.   Norton,   508. 
Myers,  Amaryllis,  486. 

Eber,  368. 

George,  467. 

Lula  M.    (B.),  368. 

Matilda.  534. 

Nettie  Saunders,  467. 
Nash,  David,  426. 

Elizabeth,  426. 

Hannah  Payn,  426. 

Harriet,   259. 

Harriet  E.   Chichester, 

513. 
William,  513. 
Need,  Mary,  402. 
Neel,  Laura  Catlin,  332. 

Robert,  332. 
Neff,  Mary  A.,  527. 
Negus,  Helen,  357. 
Nelson,    Alt  an  a    (B.), 
190. 
Charles  W.,  480. 
Electa  E.  Greenman, 
480. 


Nelson,  Eliza,  123. 

Roger,  123. 

Thomas,   igo. 
Nestelle,  Eliza,  351. 
Netherland,  Annie  E., 

339. 

William  B.,  339. 
Nettleton,    Albert,    399. 

Sarah  I.  Barber,  399. 
Newberry,  Polly,  98. 
Newbury,    Malvina,    361. 
New  com  be,  Betsey 
Church,  184. 

Harvey,    184. 
Newell,    Eunice,   289. 

Jabez,   175. 

Lydia  Palmer,  175. 

Sally,  100. 
Newton,  Ann  (B.),  209. 

Ann  D.,   184. 

Adolphus,  388. 

Burdette,  388. 

Clarence,   488. 

Eliza  S.,  336. 

Florence  Tucker,  388. 

Frank,  209. 

Ina  B.  Wilsey,  488. 

Margaret        Edgerton. 
336. 

Phebe  E.  Tucker,  388. 

Seline,  336. 
Nichols,   Alice    C.    (B.), 
257. 

Charles  E.,  534. 

Emily,  314. 

Gladys  M..  534. 

Hannah,  36. 

Jennie  B.  Rosebush, 

397- 

Joe  B..  534. 

John  D..  413. 

Jonathan,  36,  y^. 

Joseph  B.,  534. 

Juniata,  534. 

Mabel  (B.),  413. 

Mary,  444. 

Mary  Hallock,  534. 

Nancy,  120. 

Otto  L..  257. 

Rosetta,  290. 

Ruth,  490. 

Sarah,  jt,- 

Susan  T.,  260. 

Thomas,  36. 

William  L..  397. 
Nicholson,   Mary,  454. 
Nicks,  John,  521. 

Margaret  McWhorten, 
521. 

Martha  A.,  521. 


Index. 

Niebergall,    Anna    Lutz, 
411. 
Henry,  411. 
Jacob  A.,  411. 
John  G.,  411. 
Mary  E.,  411. 
Sarah  M.  Gardner, 
411. 
Nightingale,  Eleanor  A., 

525. 

James  W.,  526. 

Lillian  L.,  526. 
Niles,  Clara,  453. 

Hannah,    y^. 
Ninecraft,    Sachem,    12. 
Niven,  Amelia,  258. 

Charlotte  E.,  258. 

Eliza,  441. 

Elizabeth  H.  (B.),258. 

Robert  J.,  258. 

William  H.,  258. 
Noble,  Betsey  Case,  234. 

Florence,  415. 

Henry  J.,  234. 

Roswell  F.,  234. 

Susan  M.  (B.),  234. 
Norris,    Alta    F.    Clark, 
297. 

Augustus,  297. 

Caroline   Avard,  297. 

Charles  E.,  297. 

Sarah,  332. 
North,  Frank  G.,  465. 

Laura  (B.),  213. 

Versula    (B.),  465. 

William,  213. 
Northam,  Albert  D.,  264. 

Edgar  R>»  264. 

Ellen  C,  448. 

Emma  E.,  448. 

Florence,  264. 

Ida,  264. 

Julia  M..  448. 

Mary  A.,  264. 

Mary  A.   (B.),  264. 
Northup,  Albert  L.,  526. 

Elijah,  384,  386. 

Jane,  384. 

Lennon.  526. 

Lura  Millard,  384,  386. 

Marv,  80. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  526. 

Sarah.   526. 

Sarah  E.,  526. 
Norton,  Abbie,  476. 

Alfred,    Z2>7- 

Cora  E..  476. 

Cornelius.    2>?i7- 

Dessie   W.,    508. 

Ella  M,,  387. 


617 

Norton,  James  H.,  508. 

Mary  E.  Irish,  508. 

Matilda,  386. 

Nora  D.,  508. 

Phcebe  B.  Briggs,  2>27- 

Sarah   Darrow,    337. 

W.  R.,  476. 
Norwood,    Albert   D., 

449-  . 
Cornelia,  449. 
Edgar,  449. 

Frances  Northam,  449. 
Walter,   449. 
William  P.,  449. 
N  o  y  e  s,    Adaline    (B.), 

150. 
Anna  M.,  145. 
Asa,   150. 
Benjamin,   146. 
Benjamin  F.,  506. 
Carrie,  534. 
Charles,   146. 
Charles  E.   P.,  506. 
Charlotta  A.,  217. 
Courtland,  146. 
Eliza,  146. 
Elizabeth,  148. 
Elizabeth    (B.),    146. 
Elizabeth  Stanton,  148. 
Eunice    Chesebrough, 

217. 
Eunice  Miner,  146. 
Frank,  506. 
Hannah  Phelps,  128. 
Harriet  P.  Murphy, 

314- 
James,  6,  28,  55. 
James  W.,  128. 
John,    148,  256. 
Joseph,     34,     35,     146, 

217. 
Lydia,  145. 
Lydia  Rogers,   128. 
M'artha  (B.).  145. 
Mary  Cobb,  50. 
]\Iary  E.    Langworthy, 

506. 
Mercy     Langworthy 

Collins,   108. 
Nancy  Phelps,   128. 
Patty,   145. 
Phebe,  256. 
Rhoda,  146. 
Robert,   150. 
Ruth,  447. 
Ruth    (B.),   146. 
Sally,  189. 
Sanford,    145. 
Susan  B.  Pendleton, 

S06. 


6i8 


Index. 


Noyes,  Susan  King,   146. 

Susanna  Church,   150. 

Thomas,  50,  88,  128. 

Thomas  J.,  314. 
Nugent,  Mary,  212. 
Nye,  Phebe  (B.),  126. 

William  S.,  126. 
Oakley,  Bertha  L.    (B.), 
338. 

N.  C,  338. 
Oatley,  Lorenia,  212. 
O'Connor,  Mary,  327. 
Odell,  Charlotte,  205. 

Georganna,  320. 
O'Dowd,   Catherine,   380. 
Ogden,     Caroline    Clark, 
441- 

Clara  N.  (B.),  441. 

Elizabeth,  441. 

Frank  O.,  441. 

George  B.,  441. 

Grace  W.,  395. 

Henry,  441. 

Henry  B.,  441. 
Olendorf,  Glovina,  387. 
Oliver,  Jennie  A.,  166. 

Margaret  J.,  230. 
Olney,  Louisa,  450. 
O'Neill.  Mary  E.,  412. 
Oppenhimer,  Alice  (B.), 

292. 
O  r  m  s  b  y,    Cyrenus    P., 
408. 

Daniel,  408. 

Julia  A.  Satterlee,  408. 

Sarah    D.    Satterlee, 
408. 
Osborn,  Leona,  530. 
Osgood,  Helen,  412. 

Maria.  524. 
Ostrander,     Benjamin, 

423- 
Daniel.  245. 
Hattie  Barnes,  423. 
Helen    A.    Thompson, 

423- 

Mary  P.   (B.).  245. 

Wallace  D..  423. 
O  s  t  r  u  m.   Augusta   W. 
(B.),  443- 

James  A..  443. 
Otis,  Lorinde.   120. 

Lucy  M.,  498. 

Sally,  200. 
Ottignon,  Lucy  Canfield, 
222. 

Mary  P..  222. 

Pierre  M..  222. 
Ouderkirk,  Susan,  335. 
Overton,  Elisha,  470. 


Overton,  Harriet  A.,  470. 

Ruth  Carter,  470. 
Owen,  ^  Nancy,  238. 
Owens,  John,  224. 

Olive  Killburn,  224. 
Ozard,  Jennie  M.,  486. 
Packer,  James  G.,  359. 

Louisa  G.  (B.),  359. 

Lucretia,   346. 
Page,   Fannie  Morris, 
500. 

Harriet,  201. 

Letitia,  338. 

Susan  E..  500. 

William  D..  500. 
Paine,  Elizabeth,  491. 

John  S.,  150. 

Martha  S.,  150. 
Palmer.   Abbey   Morgan, 

498.. 
Abigail   Brown.    186. 
Adaline  C.  163. 
Albert,  192,  251. 
Albert  E..   296. 
Amos  F.,  331. 
Anna      Langworthy, 

108. 
Arminda  F.,   163. 
Benjamin,  xxv.  5.  331. 
Benjamin  H.,  498. 
Bessie,  498. 
Betsey  A.  (B.),  331. 
Billings,  163. 
Bridget,  70. 
Charles,  331. 
Charles  B..  190,  498. 
Charles  C.  498. 
Clara  E..  3*?i. 
Clara  Emery.  296. 
Clarissa,  165. 
Daniel,  loi. 
David,  57. 
Desire,  287. 
Desire   (B.),  58. 
Dwight  R..  263. 
Edmund  L..  296. 
E  d  n  a  h      Armstrong, 

.385. 
Edward.  190. 
Elisha.  263. 
Eliza  Brown.  498. 
Eliza  T.    (B.).   127. 
Elizabeth,  107.  387. 
Emily  L..   163. 
Ephraim.    186. 
Eunice  E..  228. 
Frank  G..  225. 
Fred,  225.  228. 
George  H..  392. 
Giles,  190. 


Palmer,  Grace  Plumb,  57. 
Hannah  Rhodes   (B.), 

34- 
Harriet,  225,  361. 
Harriet  E.    (B.),  296. 
Harriet  M.,  163. 
Harriet   S.,    190. 
Harriet  Trumbull,  392. 
Harver,  477. 
Helen  Porter,  331. 
Henry,  7. 
Henry  R.,  392. 
Henry  M.,  163. 
Herbert  H.,  296. 
Huldah  B.,  163. 
James,  102. 
James  B.,  498. 
Jane,  140. 
Jane  Burdick,  309. 
John,   107. 
Jonas,   102. 
Julia  A.,  163. 
Julia  Morgan,  498. 
Keturiah,  102. 
L.  A..  225. 
Leander,   163. 
Lemuel,  97. 
Lucretia   (B.),   190. 
Lucy  Burdick,  228. 
Lucy  M.  Otis,  498. 
Lydia,  175,  385. 
Maggie  Hone.  296. 
Margaret  Smith,  loi.  . 
Martha   (B.),  97,  251. 
Martha  A.,  477. 
Mary   (B.),  263. 
Mercy,    117. 
Mercy  Brown,    127. 
Mira  B.,  498. 
Milo,   309. 
Nancy.  345. 
Nancy  B.   (B.),  127. 
Nathaniel,   108,   127. 
Neheniga,  5. 
Noyes,  134. 
Olive  M.  Ash,  477. 
Perry  G.,   263. 
Peyton  R..  190. 
Phebe  (B.),  loi. 
Phebe  Darrow.  58. 
Phebe  Pierce,   163. 
Pollv.  162. 
Rhoda   (B.).  225. 
Rieta  W.   (B.),  392. 
Robert,  263. 
Rufus,  loi. 
Sarah,   102,  529. 
Sarah  A.,  190. 
Sarah  A.  Langworthy, 
192. 


Palmer,     Sarah     Abbott, 
361. 

Shepard,  498. 

Submit,  122. 

Susan  (B.),  163. 

Tacy  L.,  163. 

Thomas,  251. 

Vose,  58. 

Walter,  165,  251. 

Welltrian,  129. 

Welthie,    102. 

Wesley  B.,  361. 

William,  58,  385. 

William  R.,  127. 
Palmeter,  Ardicicia,  421. 

Sally,  383. 
Palmiter,  Fannie  Bassett, 
491. 

Lynn  B.,  491. 

Polly,    245. 
Pardee,  Emily,  300. 
Parish,  Jemima,   342. 

Polly  S.,  454- 
Parker,  Anne  Rose,  449. 

Edward  S.,  448. 

Ellen  C.  Northam,  448. 

Emma,  415. 

George,  123. 

lone,  448. 

Junius,  448. 

Mary  E.,  448. 

Otis,  449. 

Phebe   (B.),   123. 
Parkerson,  Mary  A.,  420. 
Parkes,  Anna  D.,  221. 

Jabiel,  221. 

Lois  D.   (B.),  221. 

Mary,  221. 

Norman,  221. 

Robert  J.,  221. 

Teressa  E.,  221. 
Parkhill.  Clare,  518. 

Louise,  518. 

Marjorie  Rice,  518. 
Parkhurst,    Benjamin, 
.452. 

Lizzie  J.  Burdick,  452. 
Parks,  Ada,  332. 

Cora,  2,2,^. 

Eliza,   307. 

Ella,  307. 

Israel,  332. 

James,    307. 

Nancy  A.  (B.).  332. 
Parmalee,   Clarissa,  425. 
Parmelee.  Alice,  319. 

Edith,  319. 

Lucius,   319. 

Lucius  B.,  319. 

Porter,  319. 


Index. 

Parmelee,    Susan    Allen, 

319- 
Parmenter,   Celia   Baker, 
294. 

Emma  L.,  294. 

William   H.,   294. 
Parmeter,  Oliver,  202. 

Nancy   (B.),  202. 
Parmlee,   Betsey,   141. 

Samuel,    141. 
Parnaham,   Mary,  256. 
Par^hlcy,    Antliuny,   422. 

Edward,  422. 

Lela  Chapman,  422. 
Parsons,  Addie,  385. 

Fannie  Durkee,  433. 

Harmon,  433. 

Mabel  P.,  "433. 

Ransom  j.,  433. 

Sarah  A.  (B.),  433. 

Seth,  90. 

Susan    (B.),  90. 
Parton,  Anna  Taylor, 
446. 

Arthur,  446. 
Paterson,  Louise,  340. 
Patterson,  Azro.  285. 

Catherine  Wilbur,  276. 

Frank  A.,  280. 

John,  276. 

Margaret  J.   (B.),  276. 

Mary    (B.),  285. 

Sarah  T.,  471. 

Susan,    409. 
Paul,  M.  E.,  382. 
Payn,  Hannah,  426. 
Payne,  Albert,  289. 

Em  ogen  e  M.    (B.), 
289. 

George.  488. 

George  W.,  2^7. 

Harriet  S.,  488. 

Harriet  Watts,  488. 

Henry,   289. 

Sophronia     M.      (B.), 

257. 
Peacock,  Ambrose.  411. 

Mary  E.  Updyke.  411. 
Pearce,  Abigail,   18. 

Abigail  (B.),  38. 

Ann  B.,  232. 

Bessie   B.    Simpson, 
526. 

Catherine  A.,  252. 

Duty  J.,  252. 

Emma.   252. 

John  E.,  526. 
Peard.  Fanny.  487. 
Pease.  Bertha  A.,  513. 

Calvin,  513. 


619 


Pease,     Mary     Tericker, 

513- 
Peck,  Byfield,  214. 

Charles  H.,  418. 

Ida  L.,  418. 

Jennette  J.,  418. 

Mary,   173,  214. 

Mary  S.,  222. 

Nancy  (B.),  214. 

Nathaniel  B.,  214. 
Peckham,  Ann   (B.),  93. 

Byron,  400. 

Cornell,  260. 

Dorcas,  150. 

Hannah  H.  (B.),  260. 

Jessie  W.,  400. 

Joseph,  48. 

Josiah,  93. 

Mary,  47.    151.  262. 

Mary  (B.),  48. 

Mercy  Perry,  150. 

Patience,  82. 

Robert,  57. 

Sarah,  260. 

Susan,  265. 

Susan  E.  Barber,  400. 

Temperance    Plum  b, 

57- 

Thomas  W.,  400. 

Waite,  92. 

William,   150. 
Pelton,  Harriet,  161,  239. 

Lucy  Webster,  239. 

Martha,  502. 

William,  239. 
Pendleton,  Amelia   (B.), 
62,  71. 

Ann,   29. 

Anna,   59. 

Bathsheba,   117. 

Betsey  Pettet,  71. 

Bridget  Stanton,  71. 

Caleb,  29,   550. 

Catherine,  59,  71. 

Charlotte,   71. 

Deborah.   29. 

Deborah   (B.),  117, 
118. 

Dewitt.   129. 

Enoch,  129. 

Eunice  Cobb,  50. 

George.  118. 

Isaac,  6t,  71,  209. 

James,  542. 

James  M..  129. 

Joseph.  51.  547. 

John.  118. 

Katherine.  371. 

Keturah.   71,   129. 

Lois,  35. 


620 


Index. 


Pendleton,   Lucy  A. 
(B.),  209. 

Lucy  B.,  71. 

Lydia  E.,  129. 

Mary,  61,  71. 

Mary  Davis,  71. 

Mercy  Palmer,   117. 

Molly,  71. 

Nancy,   129. 

Nathan,    62,    71,     129, 
192. 

Patience,  51. 

Peleg,  71,  209. 

Phebe,   129. 

Phebe  Cole,  129. 

Rhoda      (B.)      Gavitt, 
62,  71. 

Rhoda  Wade,  71. 

Richard,    129. 

Ruth,  61,  63. 

Sally,  71,   129.  341. 

Sarah,  51,  192,  342. 

Sarah  E.,  260. 

Sarah  Worden,  51. 

Sebra  Thompson,    118. 

William,  550. 

Simeon,  117. 

Susan,    129. 

Susan  B.,  506. 

Susanna,  234. 

Sylvester,  50,  59. 

William,  71,   129. 

Zebulon,  61. 
Penery,  David,  322. 

Lydia  (B.),  322. 
Penfield,  Ann  J.,  411. 
Penney,   Mary  J.,    32s. 
Perigo,     Drusilla      (B.), 
138. 

James  R..  138. 
Perkins,     Doroleski     R., 

293- 
John,  130. 
Lucy  (B.),  121. 
Mariah  L.,  130. 
Mary,  301. 
Mary   Plumb,   57. 
Phebe,  91. 
Phila  Trumbel,  293. 
Samuel,  293. 
Perry,  Abigail,  148. 
Alfred,  214. 
Elisha.  93. 
Elizah,  93. 
Elizabeth  48,  263. 
Elizabeth  R.  (B.),  214. 
Freeman,  148. 
Harriet  Tubbs,  453. 
Hazard,  148. 
Horace,  463. 


Perry,  Jerome,  453. 
John  B.,  92. 
Lavina  L.  (B.),  214. 
Lillian  A.  Clark,  463. 
Lois,  262. 
Loren  J.,  463. 
Lydia,  93. 
Mary,  92,  150,  244. 
Mary  C,   148. 
Mary   P.,  262. 
Mercy,  150. 
Nancy,  153,  420. 
Oliver  H.,  148. 
Penelope    Kenyon,    92, 

93- 
Ruth,  93. 
Ruth    B.,   93. 
Samuel,  48,  89. 
Sarah,   48,   89. 
Sarah  E.  Cross,  453. 
Sarah  R.,  225. 
Simeon,  92,  93. 
Susan,  93. 
Susan  P.   (B.),  92. 
Susanna,  89,  153. 
Susanna    Hazzard,    48, 

89. 
William  S.,  262,  453. 
Peterson,  Mary  E.  Mur- 

Phy,  314- 

Robert  E.,  314. 
Petrich,  Karl,  457. 

Theresa,  457. 
Pettet,  Betsey,  71. 
Pettibone,  Prudence, 

309- 
Pettie,  Caroline,  272. 

Hannah  (B.),  271. 

Lucinda,  323. 

Moses,  271. 
Petty,   Sarah,  282. 
Phelps,  Adaline  (B.), 
398. 

Ann  Hammond,  128. 

Charles.  128. 

Frederick.  398. 

H.  H.,  398. 

Hannah   (B.).   128. 

Hannah  Denison,    128. 

Hannah  Phelps,  128. 

J.  J-  .398. 

Joseph  D..  128. 

Margaret    E.    Hannel. 
398. 

Nancy, 

R.  R.,  .398. 

Susan  M..  398. 
Philbrick,    C  a  1  i  s  t  a   E. 
(B.).  405. 

John  S.,  405. 


Phillips,   Abby   L.    (B.), 

317. 

Amy,   169. 

Asa,  435. 

Ephraim,   175. 

Fannie   Crawford,  436. 

Hattie,   449. 

Josephine  L.  (B.),  175. 

Laura,  184. 

Marcia,  442. 

Ruth,  436. 

Sarah,  305. 

Thankful,  417. 

Wallace  A.,  317. 
Phin,  Emily,  256. 
Pickett,  Deforest,  531. 

Ed.,  531. 

George,  531. 

Jennie,  531. 

John,  531. 

Leata,  531. 

Lena  Wright,  531. 

Myra  D.   (B.),  531. 

Sally  Barden,  531. 
Pickrell,  Louisa  E.  (B.), 
373. 

Mahlon  K.,  373. 
Pierce,  Albert  O.,  413. 

Alfred,  527. 

Althea  J.  (B.),  413- 

Archibald,  426. 

Augusta,   463. 

Emeline,  452. 

Frances,  269. 

Isaac,  94. 

Jennie  Bryne,  413. 

John,  452. 

John  G.,  252. 

John  L.,  252. 

John  P.,  452. 

Lena  M.,  413. 

Lena  Randall,  413. 

^Margaret  A.,  426. 

Mary,  452. 

Mary  A.,  284. 

Mary   Brown,  452. 

Matilda  (B.),  94. 

Obed  W.,  413. 

P-  413. 
Phebe,  163. 
Polly,   426. 
Raymond  W..  452. 
Sally  A.    (B.).  252. 
Sarah  M.  Weightman, 

452. 
Thomas  J.,  452. 
Pike,  Emeline,  143. 
Ezra.  143.  144- 
Mary  Garlie,   143,   144. 
Sarah,  144. 


Pilling,  Alten,  400. 

Jessie     W.     Peckham, 
400. 
Piper,  Huldah,  303. 
Pitts,  James,  173. 

Lillie,  173- 
Pixley,  Bennet,  524. 

Myra,  524- 
Place,  Amy  E.  Irish,  343. 

Jeremiah,  343. 

Mary   Prosser,  343. 

Ruth  S.,  340. 

Thomas  J.,  343. 
Plass,  Eva,  452. 
Platner,  Hannah,  528. 
Piatt,   Rachel,  257. 
Platts,  Anna  E.,  486. 

Maud  R.,  343- 

Metta,  283. 
Plumb,  Anna,  54.  / 

Anna       Langworthy, 

57. 
Elizabeth,  28,  57. 
Elizabeth    Baldwin, 

115- 
Eunice  Miner,  57. 
George,  54-  56,  57- 
Grace,  57,   115. 
Grace  (B.),  56,  ii5- 
Green,  1x5. 
James,  57. 
Joseph,  57. 
Lois,  115. 
Lucy  Layton,  57. 
Lydia  Safford,  57. 
Mary,   57. 
Melinda   Richardson, 

115- 

Nathaniel,    57. 
Phebe  Miner,  57. 
Philura,  115. 
Prudence    Richardson, 

54,  56. 

Samuel,  56,  57,  115. 

Sands,  57. 

Sarah,  57,  115. 

Temperance,  57. 
Poe,  David,  402. 

Mary  Need,  402. 
Poer,  Jonathan.  526. 

Marv  D.  Simpson,  526. 

Ore's..  526. 
Polk.  Lucretia.  426. 
Poland.  Ann  B.   Pearce, 
252. 

John,  P..  252. 
Pomeroy.  Elizabeth.  401. 

Olive  C.   (B.),  401. 

Orange,  401. 

Sally  Monfret,  401. 


Index. 

Pomeroy,     Whiting     G., 
401. 

Winifred  G.,  402. 
Poole,  Eugene  N.,  418. 

Hartley,  418. 

Lizzie  A.   (B.),  418. 

Sarah  Williamson,  418. 
Pope,  Betsey,  148. 

Rosina,  372. 
Porter,  Alta  L.,  380. 

Charles  H.,  440. 

Col.,  68. 

Eliza  (B.),  245. 

Elizabeth  W.,  474- 

Emilv,  202.  229. 

H.  H.,  380. 

Helen,  331. 

L  e  u  r  a    A.    Coolman, 
440. 

]\Iary,  202. 

Rectina  (B.).  202. 
.     Sarah,  202,  460. 

Seymour,  245. 

Solomon.  202. 
Postlewait,    Elizabeth, 

304. 
Potter,    Alvena   King, 

508. 
Amelia   P..   522. 
Amy  E..  509. 
Annie  B..  509. 
Benjamin.  342,  470. 
Benjamin  F..  507.  509. 
Bertha  L.  Irish.  507. 
Bridget  Rathbun,  346. 
Calista  V.,  346. 
Catherine  A.,  286. 
Charlotte  E.,  407. 
Clark.  211. 
Content     Maxson,    84, 

Daniel.  =;o7. 
E.  H..  166. 
Edith  B..  278. 
Edwin  S..  508. 
Eliza,  .383. 
Eliza  Green,  342. 
Elizabeth.  45.  84,  551. 
Ellen  C.  510. 
Ellen  Culver.  510. 
Ellen   S..   399. 
Emma.  470. 
Fanny.   37.> 
George.    84.    113,    114, 

149.  551- 
German.   399. 
Hannah.  84.  373. 
Hannah  Gills.  470. 
Harriet  Greene,  278. 
Henry,  196. 


621 

Potter,  J.  Adclford,  507. 
Jeanette,  238. 
Jonathan,  45,  551. 
John,  45. 

Joseph,  84,  196,  313. 
Judith  Rogers,  45. 
Lois,  211. 
Lucy,  84. 

Lucy  M.  Maxson,  507. 
Lucy  Maxson,  509. 
Lucy  Rogers,  84. 
Lydia,  84. 
Marford,  376. 
Maria,    290,    342. 
Alartha,  84.  551. 
Mary,  45,  84,  55 1- 
Mary  (B.),  45>  3i3- 
Mary  L.,  510. 
Mary  L.   (B.),  399. 
Mary  O..  376. 
Mary  Stillman,  84. 
Mary  West,  45. 
May  K.  Burdick,  376. 
Nancy  (B.),  196. 
Nathan.  84. 
Nellie  M.   Smith,  510. 
Orletta  A.    (B.),  2>7^. 
Orvil  S..  376. 
Perry,   383. 
Phebe  Wells,  84,    196, 

313. 
Phoebe  A.,  346. 
Phoebe  A.  Potter,  346. 
Polly,  144. 
Prudence    Latham, 

346. 

Rebecca  Bowler,  507. 
Roxanna  Burdick, 
166. 

Sally,  194,  348. 

Sally  Palmeter.  383. 

Samuel  M.,  376. 

Sarah.  131.  149. 

Sarah  M.  Irish,  507. 

Sarah    Sheldon,  45. 

Sarah  W..  149. 

Sarah  Wilson,  45. 

Stephen.  45.  557- 

Stephen  R..  278. 

Susan.  84,  71. 

Susanna,  33;  45.  5Si- 

Susanna  Tripp.  45. 
.     Susannah,    222. 

Thomas.  45.  114.  346. 

Thomas  C.  346. 

Thomas  W.,  510. 

William  H.,  45.  346. 

7.   Stanley.  507. 

Zelina.    508. 
Powell,  Alden,  523. 


622 


Index, 


Powell,  Euphemia  Salis- 
bury, 523. 

Jennie.  433. 

Jennie  B.,  523. 
Powers,  Bessie,  421. 

Carrie,   300. 

Francis  G.,  420. 

Louise  E.   (B.),  420. 

Luther,  421. 

Nina  Howard,   306. 

Peter,  57. 

Polly  Randal,  421. 
Pratt,   Elmira.   311. 

Emma  L.,  311. 

Hiram,   311. 

Jessie  H.,  286. 

Maggie,   272. 

Nancy.   188. 

Peleg  B..  188. 
Prav,  Lydia  W..  219. 

Martha  A.    (B.),  219. 

Mary  E.,  219. 

Moses,  219. 

Thomas  J.,  219. 
Prentice,    Abigail    xMlen, 
238. 

Alfred  C.  420. 

Alice  L  Toop,  420. 

Allen.  238. 

Asa    (B.),  420. 

Callie  A.,  466. 

Carlyle  L.  F.,  420. 

Earnestine,   466. 

Elizabeth    (B.),  238. 

Ellen,  178. 

Ellen  F.  Rist,  238. 

Emogene  E.,  466. 

Hannah   E.,   238. 

Harry  W.,  420. 

Henry  A.-L.,  466. 

Ira,  238. 

Lily  La  Forge,  420. 

Lucy  A.,  420. 

Marion  W.  Greene, 
420. 

Mary  A.  Greene,  420. 

Nancv  C.  (B.),  466. 

Nathan  B.,  238. 

William  A..  466. 
Preston.    Adeline    John- 
son. 405. 

Amy  E..  341. 

Arthur  M..  372. 

Elsie.  372. 

El?ie  M..  459. 

Emily,  533. 

Hannibal,  341. 

Jerome,  459. 

Keziah,    341. 

Lucy  Maine,  372. 


Preston.  Riley,  372,  533. 
Sarah  Starkweather, 

459- 
Presturch,   Martha,   449. 
Price,  Anna  L.,  495. 

Clarissa  Streator,  440. 

Ellen.  467. 

Esther  Elwood,  467. 

Harriet  Price,  164. 

Ida   N.,  440. 

Joseph,  467. 

Samuel,   440. 
Priest.  Mariette,  412. 
Prill,  Jane,  300. 
Prime,     Marion    Button, 

525. 

William   A.,   525. 
Proctor,   Rebecca,   128. 
Proper.  Howard  R.,  178. 

Lina  M.    (B.),   178. 
P  r  o  s  e  u  s,     Fidelia     A. 
demons,  455. 

Ira.  455- 

Janet  L.,  454. 

William   D..   455. 
Prosser,    Hester,   529. 

Mary,  343. 
Pryme.     Thankful     (B.) 
(B.),  213. 

William,  213. 
Purdy,    Esther    E.    Bell, 

177- 

Israel.   177. 

Maria,   164. 

]\fary.  274. 

Ruth,   177. 
Putnam.  Alonzo  L.,  314. 

Ida.  357. 

Mary  A.   (B.),  314- 

Marv  L.   (B.),  167. 

Nellie,    206. 
Pvke.  C.  W..  2^.. 

Mary  B.   Haff.  231. 
Quinby.  Edward.  423. 

Laura,    423. 

Ophelia    Flewellyn, 
423. 
Rand,  Dorothy  Rice,  254. 

Ebenezer,  254. 

Martha  O.,  "254. 
Randal.    Polly,   421. 
Randall.  Abigail,   103. 

Amelia.  71. 

Benjamin.    19.    103. 

Betsey.  T03. 

Betsev  Brown,   186. 

Charles.  71. 

Cynthia,   207. 

Dorana,  164. 

Elenor,  103. 


Randal  1,    Elisha,    186, 
207. 

Eunice,  103. 

Ichabod,  103. 

John,  71. 

Keturah  Pendleton,  71. 

Lina,  413. 

Lois,    103. 

Lucy,   103. 

Lucy  (B. ),  51. 

Mary  (B.),  19. 

Molly  Pendleton,  71. 

Nathaniel,    103. 

Peleg.  71. 

Polly.  187. 

Rosalthe.  404. 

Ruth,  157. 

Sally.  103. 

Sarah.   103. 

Simeon,   71. 

Stephen,   103. 
Randalls,    Amy    Rhodes, 
108. 

Rodney.   108. 
Randel,    Betsy    C.    (B.). 

369- 

Lillie  M.,  369. 
Randolph.    Albert.    516. 

Alfred  T.  F..  476. 

Annie  Standard,  516. 

Arthellow  M..  516. 

Carrie,   344. 

Charlotte    Davis,    278, 
283. 

Delila  F.,  279. 

Edna   M.,    516. 

Elizabeth,   377. 

George  M.  F..  278. 

John,  278,  283. 

Julia.   476. 

Leeona,  516. 

Lizzie  Swing,  476. 

Mary  L.   (B.).  516. 

Mary  S.   F..   283. 

Samuel,  282. 

Sarah  F..  282. 
Rathbon,  Penelope   (B.), 

92. 
Rathbun,  Adam,  102. 

Bridget,  346. 

Elisha,  346. 

Lucretia    Packer,    346. 
Raub,    Bertha    M.    Irish, 
508. 

Elmer,  508. 

Lucv,  508. 

William,   508. 
Rawlett,  Orpha.  239. 

Sarah  A.,  239. 

William,  239. 


Ray,     Abigail     Hopkins, 

379- 
Annie  E.,  379. 
Carrie  L.   Goodsell, 

379- 

Elos,  379. 

Jennie  A.,  379. 
Read,  John,  57. 

Lydia  Caswell,  57. 

Thankful,   57. 
Reats,  Clara,  249. 

Deborah  (B.),  249. 

Frank,  249. 

Washington   C,   249. 

Willis,  249. 
Redman,   Frances   V., 
421. 

Julian  Harris,  421. 

William,  421. 
Reed,  Addie  E.,  359. 

Emily  (B.),  319. 

Jabez,  55. 

James,  319. 

Lydia    (B.),   55- 

Maud,  370. 

Rachel,  74. 
Reese,  Susan   (B.),  291. 

William,   291. 
Reiser,  F.  W.,  450. 

Mary  L.  Kenyon,  450. 
Remington,     Effie     (B.), 

431- 

Elmer,  431. 
Rew,  Eunice  Corbin,  173. 

Inez   (B.),  173- 

Lucius,  173. 

Orris,   173. 
Reynolds,  Benjamin,  81. 

Clarissa  (B.),  328. 

Daniel,  202. 

Elizabeth,  327. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  326. 

Ellen  T.,  493. 

Fanny  Potter,  375. 

Foster,  375. 

Grace,  471. 

Hannah,  159. 

Jemima,  44. 

Joseph,  429. 

Leander  B.,  493. 

Leander  E.,  493. 

Lois  B.  Holmes,  202. 

Mary,   151,  536. 

Polly,  159. 

S.  H.,  326,  328. 

Sally,  247. 

Sarah,  322,  429. 

Sarah  A.,  493. 

Sarah  B.,  328. 

Sarah  B.  Turner,  493. 


Index. 

Reynolds,  Sarah  E.,  375. 

Sarah  jarvis,  429. 
Rheinhardt,  Catherine, 
210. 

Dolly,  210. 

William,  210. 
Rhodes,  Abigail,  70,  91. 

Adelbert,  495. 

Amy,    108. 

Amy  Denison,  91. 

Ann  (B.),  33. 

Anne,  33. 

Anne    (B.),   Langwor- 
thy,  108. 

Anthony,  108. 

Avery,  108. 

Betsey,  91. 

Blanche  E.,  496. 

Bridget  Palmer,  70. 

Catherine,   247. 

Charles,  91. 

Clara  V.,  496. 

Eliza,  201. 

Foster,  70. 

Frederick  A.,  496. 

Hannah,   134. 

Henry,  70. 

James,  86. 

Joseph,  134. 

Louise  J.,  201. 

Martha   (B.),  86. 

Martha    (B.j    Rhodes, 
86. 

Alary,  69. 

Nancy,  398. 

Paul,  91. 

Rebecca  Sherwood,  91. 

Sally  Woodbridge,  70. 

Samuel,  91,  201. 

Sarah,  505. 

Sarah  Mansfield,   33. 

Simon,  33,  36,  70,  86. 

Simon  Henry,  70. 

Susan  M.  Brown,  495. 

Theodoty,  15. 

William,  33. 
Rice,  Alice,  298. 

Anna    C.    Hoagland, 

295- 
C.  D.,  295. 
Dorothy,  254. 
Florence,  298. 
Frank,  298. 
Ida  (B.),  298. 
Lora,  234. 
Marjorie,   518. 
Mary,   298. 
Weltha.  482. 
Rich,   Ann,  405. 
George,   137. 


623 

Rich,  Hannah,  133. 

Mary   (B.),   137. 

Orsa  M.,  404. 

W.  B.,   137. 

Walter  I.,  137. 

William,  137. 
Richards,  Elizabeth,  422. 

Fannie  F.,  357. 

Hannah,  199. 

Henry,  422. 

Lucy,  318. 

Marion  L.  Brown,  484. 

Mary  Coburn,  199. 

Mary  Gordon,  237. 

Mary  K.,  237. 

Stephen  B.,  237. 

Thadeus,   199. 

Virgil  M.,  484. 
Richardson,  Anna,  55. 

Henry,  224. 

Idelle,  332. 

James,  425. 

Lavina,  317. 

Lucy  M.    (B.),  224. 

Mary,  299. 

Mary  Bosworth,  425. 
•Mary  G.,  425. 

Melinda,   115. 

Nathan,  224. 

Nettie  J.,  295. 

Prudence,  54,  56. 

Sarah  M.  Barney,  163. 

Sophia    Berelette,    224. 
Richmond,   Aurilla,  516. 

D.  A.,  516. 

Emma,   516. 

Helen  M.,  437. 

Knight  O.,  519- 

Lovina,  468. 

P  h  e  b  e  A.   Campbell, 

519- 
Richwine,  Allen,  221. 

Clara  F.    (B.),  221. 

Frank,  221. 
Riddell,  Agnes  L.,   177. 

Ann,   177. 

Arminda    (B.),    177. 

Caroline  F.,  311. 

Carrie  E..  311. 

Carrie  Shurtliff,  311. 

Elizabeth,  177. 

Emma  L.  Pratt,  311. 

Gawn,  177. 

George,  177,  311. 

George  H.,  312. 

Harriet,  177,  311. 

Helen,  311. 

Helen  C.  Jones,  312. 

John,  177. 

Joseph,   177. 


624 

Riddell,  Laura  E.,  311. 

Le  Roy,  311. 

Lemuel,  177. 

Lemuel   C,  311. 

Lewis,  311. 

Lizzie  L.,  311. 

Lorenzo  B.,  311. 

Mary,   177. 

Mary  (B.),  177- 

Mary  Warner,  311. 

Sara,  312. 

Sophronia,   177. 

William,  177,  312. 
Riddle,   Caroline,  221. 

Edward,  221. 
Rider,   Charles,  458. 

Jennie,  395. 

Lena  (B.),  458. 

Silas,  458. 
Ripley,  Rebecca,  458. 
Ripsom,   Lulu,  453. 

Seward,  4S3. 
Rist,  Ellen  F.,  238. 

Silas,  238. 
Ritchey,  Kate,  290. 
Ritchie,  Cecillia  A.  Gos- 
selin,  249. 

James,  249. 
Robbins,  Alice,  329. 

Catherine,  187.  . 

Cora  W.,  389. 

Eunice,  188. 

Polly,  327. 
Roberts,  Burt  B.,  474. 

Delyra  P.  Wilcox,  474. 

Florilla,  381. 

George,  430. 

Helen,   474. 

J.  W.,  250. 

Lovey,   250. 

Marian  (B.),  250. 

Martha  Sawyer,  430. 
Robertson,   Mira,   130. 
Robinson,   Almond,  480. 

Andrew  J..  480. 

Ann    Haviland,   424. 

Aurila  (B.),  171- 

Caroline  Johnson,  273. 

Clarissa  Lewis,  480. 

Drusilla,  144. 

Eliza  Noyes,  146. 

Ella  A.,  419. 

Fayette,   171. 

Hannah,  145. 

Harriet,  147. 

Helen  L.    (B.),  424. 

Huldah  (B.),  I5i- 

Israel,  151. 

L.  A..  273. 

Lina  M.,  478. 


Index. 

Robinson,  Mary,  273. 

Mary  A.,  311. 

Mary  Fits,  478. 

Philip  N.,  424. 

Ruth   (B.),   151. 

Sarah   Ellis,    480. 

Spencer,  478. 

Sylvester,  146. 

William,  424. 
Rockwell,  Ashbee,  399. 

Cornelia  A.,  399. 
Rockwood,  David,  385. 

Joanna  Knowlton,  385. 

Martha  E.,  385. 
Rodem,  Frances,  400. 
Roden,  Henrietta,  474. 

Henry,   474. 

Marie  Moss,  474. 

Minnie  S.,  487. 
Rodman,    Benjamin,    "j^x 

451. 
Bertha,  451. 
George,  445. 
Hannah  Niles,  y^. 
Harriet  Brown,  451. 
John  B.,  451. 
Kate  H.  Dickray,  445. 
Marjorie,  445. 
Martha,  263. 
Mary,    vi,   451. 
Ruth,  72,- 

Sarah  E.   (B.),  451. 
Rogers,  Abigail   ( B. ) , 

386. 
Almira  B.  C  a  p  r  i  n  s. 

Sis- 
Andrew,  359. 
Anna,  287. 
Anna  A.,  204. 
Anne,  70. 
Barton  R.,  521. 
Charles  E.,  381. 
Charles  L.,  359. 
Charles  W.,  521. 
Clara  (B.),  381,  521. 
Content,   15. 
D.   v..   386. 
Daniel,  386. 
Dora,   514. 
Edmond  B.,  481. 
Edna  C,  521. 
Edson,  521. 
Edward  B.,  521. 
Edwin  S.,  513.  '• 

Elizabeth,  25. 
Elizabeth  Hyer.  521. 
Elizabeth  S.  (B.),  359- 
Emerson,  514. 
Etta  Stanton,  359. 
Ezekiel,  84. 


Rogers,  Fanny  E.,  359. 

Fanny  Ely,  359. 

George  W.,  386. 

Grace,  347. 

Hannah,  84. 

Harry,   381. 

Helen,   224. 

Henry,  514. 

Howard,  521. 

James  E.,  386. 

John,  521. 

John  B.,  521. 

Joseph,  433. 

Judith,  45. 

Kate  McDermont,  514. 

Laura  J.,  386. 

Lebbeus,  359. 

Lillie  M.,  359. 

Lois  Sherman,  381. 

Lucy,  84. 

Lydia,  128. 

Maranda  Brown,  4§i. 

Margaret  M.   (B.), 
521. 

Martha  E.  Lindsey, 
359. 

Mary,   377. 
-  Mary  Becket,  433. 

Mary   F.,  386. 

Mary  Rhodes,  69. 

Matie  (B.),  481. 

Muriel,    374. 

Peter,  481. 

Rhoda  Collins,  521. 

Robert,  69,  70. 

Ruth,  97. 

Sally,  198. 

Samuel,  249,  381. 

Sarah,  507. 

Sarah  A.  Hitchcock, 
386. 

Sarah  Gosselin,  249. 

Sherman  S.,  381. 

Susannah,  96. 

Tacy,   30. 

Tammison  W.,  325. 

William,  69. 

William  Sandford,  70. 

Willie  J.,  359. 
Rohl,  Leonard,    477. 

Mary.  477. 
Rohr,  Amelia,  371. 

Joanna  Brumer,  371. 

John,  371. 
Roice,   Emily.  200. 
Rollins,  Caroline  C,  484. 
Rood,  Albert  J.,  184. 

Ann.   184. 

Ann  D.  Newton,  184. 

Charles,  282. 


Rood,  Charles  J.,  282. 

Hope  Townsend,   184. 

James,  184. 

Launcelot,  184. 

Laura  Phillips,  184. 

Levi,    184. 

Lydia,  184. 

Mary    A.    Thorgate, 
282. 

Rosina    P.    F  u  r  r  o  w, 
282. 

Sally  (B.),  184. 

Sarah,  184. 
Root,  Addie  Parsons, 

385. 

Calvin,  385. 

Lillie  J.,  385. 

Nancy    (B.),  213. 

Rodney,  213. 
Ropes,  Sarah,  402. 
Rose,  Abram,  449. 

Adelaid  G.  (B.),  38?: 

Anne,  449. 

Charles  O.,  387. 

Cora  L.,  456. 

Evelyn,  444. 

George,  444. 

Glovina  Olendorf.  387. 

Hortense,  449. 

Jane,  435. 

Jane  M.,  341. 

Lena  R.,  449. 

Maud  B..  444. 

Orion  S.,  456. 

Walter  G..  387- 
Rosebush,      Amanda 

(B.),  397- 

George  R.,  397. 

Jennie  B..  397. 
Rosecrans,  H  a  n  n  a  h  E. 
Prentice,  238. 

Priscilla  W  h  ittaker, 
238. 

William  J.,  238. 
Ross,  Anne,   122. 

Ebenezer,  305. 

Esther  Burdick,  250. 

Hannah,  75,  227. 

Hannah  Lewis,  122. 

Hannah  Saunders,  123. 

Isaac,  122. 

James,  250. 

Jane  Walker,  305. 

John,  23.  24,  75.   123. 

Lois,  250. 

Martha  A.  Livingston, 

305. 
Mary,  122,  316. 
Mary  (B.).  122. 
Mary  L.   (B.),  305. 
40 


Index. 

Ross,  Otis  L.,  305. 

Peleg,   122. 

Prentice   (B.),  122. 

Robert  W.,  305. 

Sarah,  123. 
Rossmunson,  Laura,  368. 
Rouse,  Caroline,  315. 
R  o  \v  e  1  1,   Catherine  G., 

325- 
Rowland,  Elias,  420. 

Grace  M.,  42. 

Harry,  419. 

Lucinda  J.    (B.),   419. 

r^I  a  r  y   A.    Parkerson, 
420. 
Royce,  Harriet  N.    (B.), 
172. 

Henry,  172. 
Ruggles,  Louise,  488. 
Rumble,  G.  W.,  386. 

Mary  F.  Rogers,  386. 
Rumsely,    Mary,   66. 
Runnels,   Caroline,   336. 
Rury,    Euleta   Barnes, 
460. 

Ora,  460. 
Russel.  A.  O.,  528. 

E.  T.,  528. 

Esther,  346. 

Freda,  430. 

Maggie  E.  Knight,  528. 

Nettie  Dickens,  528. 
Rust,  Amasa,  514. 

Ezra  G.,  514. 

Kate  E.    (B.),  SM- 

Katherine,    514. 

^Marietta,  514. 
Rutherford,    George    A., 
487. 

Lillian    M.    Brockway, 
487. 
Ryan,  Rozina,  214. 
Rythur,  Charles,  413. 

George  D..  413. 

Jannie  L  Cutler,  413. 

Mary  De  Groot,  413. 
Safford,  Eunice,  490. 

John,  57. 

Lydia,  57. 

Sarah   Plumb,   57. 
St.  Clair,  Henry  R.,  354. 

Maud  L..  354. 

Sarah     E.     McDonald, 

354- 
St.  John.  Alice  M.  Cran- 
dall,  288,  371. 
Corwall.  238. 
De  Valois,  288. 
De  Valoise,  371. 
Elizabeth   (B.),  238. 


625 

St.  John,  Henry  C,  238. 

John  M.,  371. 

Mary  (B.),  288,  371- 

Mary  M.,  371. 

Milton,  288,  371. 

Milton  W.,  371. 

Nancy    Wilcox,   238. 

William  E.,  371. 
Salesbury,  Augusta,   167. 
Salisbury,  Charles  J., 

453- 
Ellen  R.  Barber,  400. 
Euphemia,  523. 
Fred  R.,  400. 
Hadarah  J.  Cross,  453. 
Sarah  Alton,  453. 
Theron,  453. 
Saltonstall,  Abbie  Lewis, 

69. 

Dudley,  69. 

Frances,  69. 

Frances  (B.),  69. 

Gilbert,  67. 

Gurdon,  69. 

Hannah,  69. 

Harriet  (B.),  67. 

Joshua,  69. 

Rebecca  Winthrop,  69. 
Sanburn,    Betsy,   309. 
Sandberg,  Frederick  W., 

425- 

Mary   (B.),  425. 
Sanders,  Betsey,  487. 

Elizabeth,    551. 

Tobias,   xxii,  xxv. 
Sandford,     Content,     82, 
108. 

Elizabeth,  82. 

John,  2. 
Sands,  Catherine,  436. 

William  P.,  436. 
Sanford,  Content,  108. 

Charles,  457. 

John,  541,  542. 

Mary  Burr,  457. 

Mercy     Langworthy 
Collins  Noyes,   108. 

Sarah  A..  457. 
Sapp,   Dorliska,  256. 
Sarle,    Abigail    P.    (B.), 

257- 
Grace  Warren,  257. 
Ida  F.,  257. 
Jordan.  257. 
Libbie  Logan,  257. 
Thomas,  257. 
Thomas  H.,  257. 
Willis  C,  257. 
Satterlee,    Amelia   A., 

229. 


626 


Index. 


Satterlee,  Celia  T.,  228. 

Darius,  228. 

Edna  L.  White,  229. 

Julia  A.,  407. 

Mary,  63. 

Sarah  D.,  408. 

Thankful    (B.),  228. 

William,  229. 
Saunders,    Addie    Wells, 
468. 

Caroline  A.,  517. 

Clark,  198. 

Edward,  21,  517. 

Eliza  (B.),  462. 

Elizabeth,   15. 

Elizabeth    (B.),  21. 

Elizabeth  Potter,  45. 

Ella  B.,  355- 

Ellen  A.   (B.),  467- 

Frances,  464. 

Frank  R.,  507. 

Hannah,  123. 

Harriet  (B.),  462. 

Henrietta  L.,  532. 

Isaac,  45,  84. 

Isabelle  Wells,  469. 

James  M.,  467. 

Margaret  Williams, 

517- 
Martha  Potter,  84. 
Mary,   172. 
Mary  (B.).  198. 
Mary  E.  Witter,  507. 
Mary  L.,   467. 
Maud,  507. 
Mercy,  117. 
Minerva,  380. 
Nettie,  467. 
Peleg,  198. 
Prudence   (B.).  49- 
Sally  Rogers.  198. 
Sarah,  269,  320. 
Susan,  192. 
Susan  Potter  Wells, 

84- 

Susanna,  211. 

Thankful,  206,  208. 

Tobias,  15,  543-  545- 

William,  49.  462. 
Savage,  James,  xxi. 

Maria,  242. 

Sophia,  314. 
Saw,  Emma  M.,  404. 
Sawyer,  Adelaide,  430. 

Albert    W.,    430. 

Delana,  430. 

Eugene  A.,  221. 

Harriet   C.    (B.),  440. 

Jane  M.,  527. 

John  W.,   430. 


Sawyer,  Luke,  440. 

Lydia    C,   430. 

Martha,  430. 

Mary  D.   (B.),  221. 

Olive  (B.),  430. 

Sally  E.,  430. 

Susan  D.,  430. 

Theron,   528. 
Sayer,   Alpha   D.,   283. 

Anna,   284. 

Benjamin,  147. 

Charles,  284. 

Delila,  284. 

Deniza,  284. 

Emaline,    278. 

Euphrema,  284. 

George  O.,  283. 

Jennie  B.,  283. 

Jesse  A.,  283. 

John,   284. 

Lewis,  283. 

Lydia  Davis,  278,  283. 

Mabel  Clark,  284. 

Margaret  (B.),  283. 

Martha  Hardman,  284. 

Mary  M.  Clement,  283. 

Moses,  283. 

Orpha,  284. 

Rosa,  284. 

Sarah,  147,  284. 

Sarah  James,  147. 

Solomon,  278,  283. 

Walter,  283. 
Sayles,  Mable  E.,  367. 
Scar  riot,  Phebe,  312. 
Scharbute,    Annie,    460. 

Ferdinand,  460. 

Rosanna  Metz,  460. 
Schermerhorn,    Cornelia, 

379- 
Harriet  Swift,  297. 

Jeremiah,  297. 
Maria  L.,  320. 
Mary  E.,  297. 
Scheurer,   Marie,   514. 
Schlosser,    Emma    (B.), 

279. 
Schmucker,    Mary,   273. 
Schoonmaker,     Aaron, 
430. 
Lydia  C.   Sawyer,  430. 
Schuyler,   Ellen   Brad- 
ford, 230. 
Thomas,  230. 
Scott,    Alice    Robbins, 

329- 
Brvan,   329. 
Cather  i  n  e  A.    (B.), 

329- 
Charles  T.,  496. 


Scott,  Clara  Ferris,  496. 
Cornelia,   328. 
Earl  B.,  496. 
Eliza,    118. 
Elizabeth,  378,  496. 
Elizabeth  G.  (B.j,  329. 
Fred  L.,  496. 
Giles,  329. 
Giles  F.,  496. 
Grace  Clark,  532. 
Irving  N.,  496. 
James  W.,  532. 
Leo  S.,  305. 
Loren  R.,  496. 
Marion    L.    Hathaway, 

305. 

Nellie,  329. 

O.  W.,  305. 

Robert  W.,  402. 

Washington,  329. 

Winifred  G.  Pomeroy, 

.  402. 
Scripture,    Mary    (B.), 
336. 

Reuben,  336. 
Seaberry,  Jane,  353. 
Seabury,  Samuel,  66. 
Seager,  William,  xi,  xii. 
Seals,   Homer  W.,  329. 

Nellie  Scott,  329. 
Searl,  Amanda,  276. 

Betsy,  159. 

Sarah,    159. 

Timothy,   159. 
Seaton,  Alice,  172. 
Seaver,  Louisa  O  1  n  e  y, 
450. 

Mary  L.,  450. 

William,  450. 
Seber,  Eva.  288. 
Sechrist,   Albert,  429. 

Hattie  K.   (B.),  429. 

Sarah  Bigwood,  429. 

William,    429. 
Seeley,  Eleanor.  504. 

Melissa,  319. 
Sceman,  Blanche  K.,  495. 
Seers,  Ella  M.,  319. 

James,    31Q. 

Kate  Bigelow,  319. 

Mary   (B.),  319. 

Ransom,  319. 

William  A.,  319. 
Segar,  Elizabeth  Tucker, 
261. 

Henry  R.,  338. 

Jane  B.,  261. 

Jane  Bradford,  338. 

Joseph,   261. 

Lula   (B.),  338. 


Segar,  Mary,  261. 

Sarah,  44. 

Thomas,  338. 

Waite  T.,  149. 
Seward.    Charles,   221. 

Ella  J.   (B.),  221. 
Shackford,   Charles,   426. 

Lucy  B.,  426. 

Martha    Bartlett,    426. 
S  h  a  f  e  r,    Elizabeth    F. 
(B.),  460. 

Francis  J.,  460. 

John  F.,  460. 

Rebecca,  460. 
Shankland,    Frank,   403. 

Mary  (B.),  403- 
Shannon,  Emory,  371. 

Mary  L.    (B.f.  371. 

Sarah  C.  366. 
Shattock,  Eunice,  417. 
Shattuck,  Harriet,  175. 
Shaven,   Andrew,  480. 

Enoch,  480. 

Maria  Harter,  480. 

Alary  E.  (B.),  480. 
Shaw,  Alven  E.,  345. 

Amy  L.   (B.),  345. 

Annis  Andrews.  345. 

Celia  T.  Satterlee,  228. 

Chester   R.,   228. 

Eden  D.,  345. 

Florence,  329. 

Harold  E..  345. 

Mary   (B.),   159. 

Remington.  228. 

Sylvanus  G.,   159. 

Tacy  Burdick.  228. 
Shear,  Gertrude,  490. 

Jay  C.  490. 

Sarah  Brow,  490. 
Sheffield.  Acors,  50. 

Edmund.    1^3. 

Elizabeth   (B.),  93. 

Lois  Cobb,   50. 

Nathaniel,, 315. 

Sally  L.   153. 

Susannah  Perry,  153. 
Sheldon,    A  d  a    E,    Wil- 
liams, 310. 

Arthur  M..  310. 

Climena.   loi. 

Elizabeth.    81. 

Eunice,  517. 

Hiram,   310. 

Ida  B.,  310. 

Isaac,  81. 

Jane.  179. 

Jemima  (B.),  81. 

Jemima     Reynolds 
(B.),  44. 


Index. 

Sheldon,  John,  81. 

Lydia  Balain,  310. 

Mary  E.    (B.),  310. 

Mary  R.,  434. 

Mehitable,  81. 

Myron  S.,  310. 

Sarah,  70,  81. 
Sheley,  Albert,  453. 

George,  453. 
Shelland,  Anna  M.  (B.), 

273- 
Luther  J.,  273. 
Shelley,  Elizabeth  H. 

Averill,  453. 
Shepard,  Mabel  Looniis, 

319. 
Mary  J.,  404. 
Verne  L..  319. 
Shepardson.  Joseph,   168. 
Lucinda,   168. 
Serviah,   168. 
Serviah  Parker,  168. 
Shepherd,   Albert,   529. 

Loa  O.,  529. 
Sherman,  Albert,  229. 
Amanda      Harrington, 

416. 
Anna,   173. 
Anna  Rogers,  287. 
Charlotte,  287. 
Chloe,  506. 
D.  W.,  419- 
David,  127. 
Elizabeth   Hemphill, 

229. 
Fanny  Burdick,  261. 
Florence,  416. 
Floyd  C,  419. 
Frank  R.,  419. 
Fred  W.,  419. 
Harlcy,   229. 
Hiram   S.,  419. 
Huldax,  262. 
Isaac.  481. 
Isabel,  223. 
Julia  A..  481. 
Julia  A.  Todd,  481. 
Lois.  381. 
Louise.  354. 
Martha  Coughlin,   262. 
Mary  A.   (B.),  127. 
Mary  D.  (B.).  262. 
Mary  E.  (B.),  419. 
Mary  F.,  261,  419. 
Niles,   261. 
Richard,  287. 
Ruth  Hemphill.  229. 
Sophronia    C  u  r  t  i  s  s, 

419. 
Thomas,  416, 


627 

Sherwin,  John,  133. 
Rebecca    S.    Goodrich, 

133- 
Sherwood,   Esther    (B.), 

74- 

John.  74. 

Mahala,  435. 

Rebecca,  91. 
Shields,  Julia,  241. 
Shipen,  R.  R.,  458. 
S  h  i  p  p  e  n,     Bessie     H. 
Blount.  458. 

Eugene  R.,  458. 
Shippie,  Ella  J.  Boswell, 
269. 

Eugene,  269. 
Shirk.   Edna  M.   Ran- 
dolph, 516. 

Harrison  K.,  516. 
Sholes,  Charles,  259. 

Harriet  Este,  259. 

Mary  E.    (B.),  259. 

Thomas,  259. 
Shorkley.  Allen.  293. 

Harriet     R.      Burdick, 

293- 
Shortridge.  Mary.  466. 
Shortwell,  Kate  M.,  320. 
Shoultz,  John,  278. 

Orpha    L.    Lippencott, 
278. 
Shurer,  A.  Marie,  494. 
Shurtliffe,  Carrie,  311. 
Shute,  Maria,  216. 
S  h  u  y  1  e  r,  Margaret  V., 

230. 
Sibley,   Abijah,    174. 

Ann  A.,  174. 

Celia.  307. 

Edwin  H..  ,307. 

Joseph  C..  174.  307. 

Josephine.  ,307. 

Lucy  E.  (B.),  174- 

Lucy  Macy.   174. 
Sigbee,  Rachel,  453. 
Sill,  Fanny  A.,  422. 
Siller.   Mary.  221. 
S  i  1  I  m  a  n.     Alice    A. 
Adams.  415. 

Frank  L..  415. 
Silver.  Lida.  248. 
Silvey.  Annie  M.,  320. 
Silvis,  Louisa,  357. 

Thomas  G.,  357. 
Simon,  Ellen,  471. 

John,  471. 

Nellie,  471. 
Simpkins,  Effie,  282. 

J.  W..  339. 

Joseph,  282. 


628 


Index. 


Siinpkins,    Rebecca    Da- 
vis, 282. 

Susie  A.,  339. 
Simpson,  Bert,  526. 

Bessie  B.,  526. 

Emma  J.,  526. 

lapheme,  526. 

John,  526. 

Laura  S.  (B.),  526. 

Mary  D.,  526. 

William  P.,  526. 
Sims,  Amelia,  239. 
Sindlar,  lantha  A.   (B.), 

432. 
Lawrence,  432. 
Singleton,    Gertrude   M., 

396. 
Sipley,  Alice,  536. 
Sisson,  Alonzo,  266. 

Ida  E.,  266,  482. 

John  H.,  179. 

Lucy  H.   (B.),  179: 

Patience  Allen,  266. 
Skellie,  Ebenezer,  416. 

Florence.  171. 

Harriet  (B.),  140. 

Henry,  140. 

James,    171,  416. 

Janett  Dorg,  416. 

Minnie  G.,  416. 

Sarah  J.  (B.),  416. 
Skelton,    Adelia    Carson, 

333- 
Skinner,   Alfred,    141. 

Eliza  J.  Catlin,  499. 

Esther,  456. 

Lois  Hyde,  499. 

Newell  K.,  499. 

Rachel  (B.),  141. 

Thomas,  499. 
Slade,   Emma.   354. 
Slater,   Delilah  R.    (B.), 
416. 

James,  417. 

Samuel.  417. 

Thankful  Phillips.  417. 
Sleight,   Edward,  394. 

Emily,  394. 

Marie.  394. 
Sliter,  Mary  J.,  225. 
Sloan,  Augustus.  504. 
Sloane,  Julia  Voris.  504. 

Lillian  A..  564. 
S  1  o  c  u  m.    Albertine    S. 
Irish.  343. 

Edgar  R..  343. 

Emmet,  343. 

Fanny,  91. 

Floyd  H..  343. 

Jane  A.  Curtis,  343. 


Slocum,  Leslie  D.,  343. 

Rachel,  309. 

Sarah,  48. 

William,  343. 
Slocumb,  Charles,  85. 
Sly,  John,  462. 

Rebecca,  462. 
S  m  a  1  1  w  o  o  d,  Blanche 

(B.),   381. 
Smally,  John,  96. 

Martha  Davis   (B.), 
96. 
Smalwood,  Florilla  Rob- 
erts, 381. 

William  R.,  381. 
Smart.  Augusta  Wicker, 
438. 

Carlos  F.,  438. 
Smith,  Abigail,  67. 

Adaline  Cory,  438. 

Adeline  Cutler,  510. 

Alfred,  505. 

Almond,   428. 

Amarillis    (B.),  490. 

Amy  (B.),  248. 

Ann  Coffin,  510. 

Ann  E.  King.  505. 

Anna  C,  127.  510. 

Anna  M.  (B.),  468. 

Anna  Tefft,  337. 

Annie  K..  505. 

Augusta  W.  (B.),  443. 

Benoni,  61,  63. 

Bertha  A..  401. 

Bethiah  (B.),  428. 

Betsey  (B.),  159. 

Bryaic,   443. 

Carrie  B..  490. 

Charles  469,  511. 

Charles  G.,  420. 

Charles  V.,  127. 

Charles  W.,  420. 

Christiana.    106. 

Cora  L..  431. 

Cyrus  P..  443. 

Dalton  A..  354. 

Daniel.  173.  354- 

David.   127. 

Dell  (B.),  292. 

Deon  B..  302. 

Desire  Denison.  98. 

Edmund  B..  438. 

Edward.   191. 

Edward  A..  428. 

Elijah.  178. 

Elizabeth,   169.  252. 

Elizabeth  (B.).  63. 

Elizabeth  Buckley,  443. 

Elizabeth  C.  (B.),  505. 

Elizabeth  M.,  127. 


Smith,  Eloise  B.,  443. ' 
Emeline,  457. 
Emily  L.   (B.),   178. 
Erastus,  472. 
Esther    (B.),   126,   127. 
Ethel  E.,  505. 
Eunice,   173. 
Ezra  C,  510. 
Fern  (B.),  469. 
Frank  B.,  505. 
George  B.,  438. 
George  F.,  178. 
Gertrude  Chichester, 

505- 
Gitty,  386. 
Hannah    M.    Anthony, 

354- 
Hannah  W.   (B.),  179. 
Harriet,  480. 
Harriet  E.   (B.),  372 
Harriet  N..  127. 
Harriette  B.,  420. 
Henry  L.,  354. 
Horace,  179,  490. 
Hubbard,  457. 
Irving.  292. 
Isaac  H.,  468. 
James  J.,  276. 
Jessie,  337. 
John,  159. 
Joseph,  63. 
Joseph  E.,  372. 
Joseph  G.,  438. 
Josephine.  490. 
Joshua.  63. 
Katherine  L..  443. 
Keziah,  100,  121. 
Lafayette.  492. 
Lavina    F.    Furrow, 

276. 
Levi,  438. 

Lucinda  J.   (B.),  419. 
Lucinda  Winter,   178. 
Lucius,  401. 
Lydia,  245. 
Lydia  Cutter,  354. 
Lydia  Rood,   184. 
M.  G.,  248. 
Margaret.    loi. 
Martha.  127. 
Marv,  61.  179. 
Mary   (B.).  438. 
Mary  Denison,  91. 
Mary  F..  127. 
Mary  H.   (B.),  492. 
Mary  Peck,  173. 
Mary  T.   (B.),  191. 
Mary  W..  493- 
Melvin,  428. 
Nathan,  63,  91, 


Smith,  Nathaniel,  185. 
Nellie  M.,  490,  510. 
Norman,   510. 
Olivia  B.,  185. 
Philip  H.,  490. 
Rebecca,  454. 
Rebecca  A.,  239. 
Rhoda,  143,  370. 
Roxanna  Jackson,  457. 
Ruth  A.  (B.),  302. 
Ruth  Nichols,  490. 
Ruth    Pendleton,    61, 

63. 

Sabra,  511. 

Sarah,  297,  392,  478. 

Sarah  A.   (B.),  401. 

Sarah  Rood,  184. 

Shepard  C,  401. 

Sidney,  2,2,7- 

Solomon,  184. 

Sophronia    Church, 
184. 

Stephen,  126,  127. 

Velina  A.  Barber,  400. 

Uriel,   184. 

Wait  Mauran,  185. 

Wayland  A.,  354. 

William,  63,  184,  292. 

William  A.,  400. 

William  O.,  127. 
Snapp,  Abram,  518. 

Caroline    Cummings, 
518. 

Cassie  M.  (B.),  518. 

Donald  C,  518. 

J.  Gaylord,  518. 

James  B.,  518. 

Reba  K.,  518. 
Snell,  Althea  E.,  361. 

Frances  E.  B.   Bolton, 
361. 

Fred  C,  361. 

Fred  W.,  361. 
Snider,  Edith  L.,  410. 
Snow,  Luella  E.,  450. 

William  G.,  450. 
Snyder,  Ann  Rich,  405. 

Augustus,    405. 

Eliza,  274. 

Emma,  405. 

James,  382. 

Jennie  M.  (B.),  368. 

Mary  A.  Collins,  382. 

William.  368. 
Sosoa,  Indian  chief,  3. 
Sovvles,  David,  247. 

Mersula,  247. 
Spade,  Hannah,  289. 
Spalding,   Lowell,   71. 

Philip,  71. 


Index. 

Spalding,     Susanna 
Green,    71. 
Thankful      Waterman, 

71- 
S  p  a  u  I  d  i  n  g,    Alexan- 
der, 388. 
Isabelle  H.,  388. 
Lydia,   300. 
Mary,  300. 
Rebecca  Miller,  388. 
Spence,  H.  M.,  no. 
Spencer,  Addie  E.  Reed, 

359- 

Agnes  Spill,  510. 

Arthur  L.,  359. 

Charles  E.,  510. 

Charles  H.,  359. 

Edith  Fish,  510. 

Edward,  428. 

Frank  H.,  359. 

Frank  L.,  359. 

Hannah,  261. 

Horace   F.,   510. 

John  J.,  209. 

Julia.  165. 

Lily  M..  359- 

Louisa  G.  (B.),  359. 

Mary  A.   (B.),  209. 

Mary  L.,  359. 

Pearline    (B.),   428. 

Sadie  C.  Wood,  359. 

Samuel  W.,  359. 
Sperry,  Emily,  458. 

Henry,  458. 
S  p  i  c  e  r,  Anna  O.  Bur- 
dick.   373. 

Clarence  W.,  373. 

Content,  2>72>- 

Content  Potter,  2>72>- 

Cornelia  (B.),  272,- 

Hannah,  212. 

Harold  W.,  272- 

John  G.,  272- 

Joseph,    272- 
Spill,  Agnes,  510. 
Spindler,   Edward.  513. 

Esther   AL    Chichester, 

513- 
Spoon,  Julia,  248. 

Orange,  248. 
Sprague,   Abbie.   403. 

Arminda,  434. 

Deborah.  300. 

Esther,   183. 

John.  141. 

Jonathan.  447. 

Lydia   (B.),  141. 

Mercy.  447. 

SalHe,  447. 

Silas,  403. 


629 

Sprayth,  Estella,  402. 

M.,  402. 
Springe,  Thomas,  xiii. 
Springer,  Ella  A.,  380. 

Samuel  C,  380. 
Squires,  A  1  m  i  r  a  (B.), 

167. 
Stacey,  Phebe,  306. 
Stack,  Samuel,  546. 
Stafford,  Deborah,  60. 
Staley,    Julia    A.     (B.), 
158. 

William.  158. 
Standard,  Annie,  516. 
Stanhope,  Gertrude,  353. 
Stanley,  Cynthia,  536. 
Stanton,  Albert  W.,  250. 

Alvin,  303. 

Amariah,    189. 

Amelia,  125. 

Amelia  (B.),  125,  316. 

Amos,  125,  316. 

Anna,  64. 

Annie  L.,  437. 

Augustus,  87,  250. 

Azariah.  50. 

B.   Frank,  437. 

Blandina,  392. 

Bridget,  71,  162. 

Calvin  P.,  471. 

Caroline,   125. 

Caroline  S.,  316. 

Catherine    Sands,    436. 

Cornelia,  392. 

Daniel,  19,  26. 

Demsey,  64. 

Dolly.   115.   189. 

Dorothy  Whipple.   189. 

Edith  D..  471. 

Edmund,  391. 

Edmund  D.,  391. 

Edwin,  218. 

Elizabeth,  148,  256. 

Elizabeth  Bacon,  26. 

E  1  m  i  r  a    Mendenhali 

303. 
Emma  D.  (B.),  471. 
Emma  W.  Stark,  218. 
Esther.  74. 
Etta,  359- 
Eunice  Crandall,  87, 

250.  _ 
Experience    Barber, 

399- 
Fannie  P..  437. 
Frances  A.   (B.).  218. 
George  A..  436,  437. 
George  D..  23. 
Georgia.  391. 
Hannah,  30,  125. 


630 


Stanton,    Hannah    Lord, 
24. 
Hannah  Stanton,   125. 
Harriet  Aldrich,  437. 
Harriet  B.,  437. 
Hester  Galhip,  ^,3. 
Hosea,  125. 
John,   125. 
Joseph,  23,  24,  26,  30, 

33^  74,  «7- 
Kate  S.,  437. 
Lodowick,  125. 
Louis,  391. 
Louis  L.,  391. 
Louise  (B.),  391. 
Lucy,  34,  338. 
Lucy  B.  (B.),  216. 
Marlborough,   250. 
Martha  H.   (B.),  250. 
Mary,  64,   127. 
Mary   (B.),   19,  26,  87. 
Mary  Champlin,  74. 
Mary  E.,  437. 
Mary  E.   Thompson, 

125- 

Mary  Lane,  391. 
Mary  Wilcox,  26. 
Nathaniel  G.,  437. 
Pauline   Dixon,   391. 
Phineas,  68,  218. 
Priscilla,  391. 
Prudence,  126. 
Rebecca,  24,  36. 
Robert,  24,  64. 
Samuel,   218,   392,   471. 
Sarah,  33,  90. 
Sarah  B.,  399. 
Sarah  M.  Brown,  436. 
Sarah  T.   Patterson, 

471- 
Sophronia,  125. 
Stiles,  216,  391. 
Susan,   125. 
Susanna  Champlin, 

125. 
Susannah,  26. 
Susannah  Cobb,  50. 
Thankful,    123. 
Thomas,  5,  30,  399. 
Triphena  Brown,    125. 
Virginia,  391. 
William  F.,  39T- 
Stapp,  Caroline  E. 

Tucker,  463. 
Guy,  463. 
Lucv,  S^i- 

Persis  W.   (B.),  463. 
Wvatt  B.,  463. 
Stark,  Amanda  M.   (B.), 

308. 


Index. 

Stark,  Clark,  308. 

Daniel,   308. 

Edith  M.  Fletcher,  308. 

Emma  W.,  218. 

Esther,  308. 

Minnie  A.,  308. 

Willard,  308. 
Starkweather,   Al  m  i  r  a, 
270. 

Amos,  270. 

Elizabeth    B  e  n  j  a  m  i  n, 
270. 

Mary,  427. 

Sarah,  459. 
Starns,  Susannah,   199. 
Starr,  Fanny  B.,  254. 
States,  Mary  A.,  213. 
Steadman,  Anna,   165. 

Isabel    (B.),  43. 

James,  43. 

Philemon,  52. 

Sarah  (B.),  52. 

Waite  (B.).  261. 

William,   261. 
Stearn,  Mary,  285. 
Stearns,  Mary,   159. 
Stebbins,    Polly    (B.), 

132 
Steele,  James  E.,  536. 

Sarah  A.   (B.),  536. 
Stephens,   Almon,  370. 

Anna   (B.),   105. 

Caroline,  427. 

Eunice,  370. 

Ezra,  105. 

Henry,   105. 

L.  H.,  370. 

Susan    (B.),   370. 

Wealthy    Williams, 
105. 
Stevens,  Bryan  K.,  520. 

Eben,  520. 

Eunice,  415. 

Evelena  B.,  520. 

Mary,  210. 

Mr.,  78. 

Rachel   (B.).  78. 
Stewart,  Ida,  283. 

Mary,  283. 

William  A..  505. 
Stilcon,  Harriet,  381. 
S'iles,   Adele  C,  434. 

Arminda  Sprague,  434. 
,     Hollis,  434. 

Mary,  442. 
Stillman,  Adam,  300. 

Adelbert  M.,  397. 

Alfred  T.,  420. 

Amanda    (B.),   397. 

Annette  B.   (B.),  289. 


Stillman,  Barton,  289. 
Benjamin,  84,  98. 
Carol,  420. 
Carrie  Powers,  300. 
Charles   A.,   300. 
Chloe    Sherman,    506. 
Clara  E.,  302. 
Clara      Langworthy, 

302. 
Clarissa,  287. 
Deborah  (B.),  98. 
Desire,  98. 
Edward  A.,  397. 
Esther  V.  (B.),  300. 
Ethan,  169,  287. 
Eunice,  99,   192. 
Ezra,  98. 
George  E.,  300. 
Hannah,  383,  384. 
Hattie   Mitchell,   300. 
Hazel,  420. 
Jarus,  302. 
Jarvis,  98. 

Jenette  Denison,  287. 
John,  84. 
John  T.,  287. 
Jonathan,  348. 
Joseph,  99. 
Lucile,  420. 
Lucy,  282. 
Lucy  A.,  300. 
Lucy  A.  Prentice,  420. 
Luen,  300. 

Lydia   Spaulding,   300. 
Maria  L.,  506. 
Marion,  420. 
Martha,    192. 
Mary,  84. 
Mary  A.,  348. 
Mary  E.,    169. 
ATary  Potter,  84. 
Mary  Spaulding,  300. 
Matthew.  397. 
Nancv,  98. 
Nathaniel,  98. 
Oliver  D.,  98. 
Phebe   Carr,   348. 
Polly,   204. 
Polly  Lewis,   169. 
Polly  Newberry.  98. 
Ruhannah,  98. 
Ruth  Burdick,  98. 
S.  C,  420. 
Saberah,    99. 
Sally,  377. 
Samuel,   ^06. 
Sarah,  98. 
Sarah  Brown,  150. 
Susan,   340. 
Susan  Burdick,  98. 


Stillman,  Theresa  Clark_, 

420. 
Stimpson,  Anna  E.,  523. 
Stinaff,    Ellen    Whitney, 
256. 

Emily  Phin,  2561 

Henry  W.,  256. 

Lydia  Button,  256. 

Maretta  Loomis,  256. 

Maria.  256. 

Mary  L.  Day,  256. 

Sally  (B.),255. 

Sylvanus  P.,  256. 

William,  255. 
Stoddard,  D.  R.,  121. 

Enoch,  526. 

Keziah   Smith    (B.), 
121, 

Sarah  Allen,  526. 
Stone,  Adelbert  A.,  418. 

Alva  J.,  311. 

Carrie  E.  Riddell,  311. 

Celia,  394- 

Cilda  Matterson,  353. 

David,  418. 

Delia.  418. 

Elizabeth  A.,  511. 

Elizabeth  Almy,  353. 

Elizabeth  H.  (B.).  258. 

Fanny  Moore,  245. 

George,  258. 

Hannah  Eames,  176. 

Horatio  A.,  353. 

Jennie  A.,  418. 

Marion,  245. 

Mary  A.  (B.),  418. 

Matthew,    176. 

Nathan,  353. 

Samuel,  245. 

Sarah.   176. 
Storrs,  Richard,  217. 
Story,    Martha.    199. 
Stout.    Elizabeth   D. 
Hoffman,  157. 

Milton,  157. 
Stover,    Catherine,    431. 

Joel,  431. 

John,  431. 

Maria,   271. 

Stella  M.    (B.),  431. 

Vernon   R.,  431. 
Stowe.    Alzina,    311. 

David,    176,    310. 

Elizabeth.  176. 

Elizabeth    Crosier, 
310. 

Hannah  A.   (B.),  176. 

Lewis  S..  176. 

Lticy,  155. 

Maria,  310. 


Index. 

Stowe.  Sylvia,  173. 
StowcU,  Albert,  454. 

Harriet  L.   (B.),  454. 

Julia  A.  Haff,  454. 

Mary  E.  Hooper,  454. 
Strait.  Lydia,  374. 
Stranburgj    Henry    R., 

495- 

Mary  S.   Brown,  495. 
Streator,  Clarissa,  440. 
Strickland,  Frank,  491. 

George,  491. 

Juliet  (B.),  491. 
Strong,  Sarah,  254. 

Timothy,  254. 
S  trunk,  Hannah  (B.), 

181. 
Stuart,  Elizabeth,   180. 

Julia    E.    Langworthy, 
505. 

Mary,  231,  259. 
Sturges,  Alida,  410. 
Sturtevant,    Blanche    S., 
474- 

J.  C,  474. 

Mary  Tuttle,  474. 
Styles,  Esther,  158. 
Sulida,  Mabel,  466. 
Sullivan,    Ella    A.    (B.), 
308. 

William.  368. 
Sumner.  Caroline  D. 

(B.),  489. 

Charles,  489. 

Fred  L.,  489. 

Hattie  L,  489. 

Sarah  Plumb.   115. 
Sutton,    Cornelius,    96. 

Judith    (B.),  96. 

Sarah.  158. 
Swain.   Almira  W  a  i  t  e, 

395- 

Edward,  395. 

Flora  E..  395. 
Swan,   Phebe.  52. 

Phebe  A..   389. 
Sweet.  Amy   (B.),  144. 

Amy    (B.),    Andrews, 

83. 
Bertha  (B.\  452. 
Charles,  444. 
Delia  M..  468. 
Fusebia  Maxson,  468. 
Florilla,  210. 
Harold,  452. 
Harriett  e    A.    (B.), 

258. 
Tames,  144. 
John,  444. 
Martha  Gardner,  444. 


631 

Sweet,    Mary   Nichols, 
444. 

Newton,  452. 

Perry,  468. 

Samuel,  83. 

Sarah  (B.),  83. 

Walter  L,  258. 
Swift,    Emily    E.     (B.), 

324. 
George  H.,  324. 
Harriet,  297. 
Mary  Swineburn,  387. 
Swing,   Lizzie,  476. 
Switzer,  Louisa  T,  Wil- 
bur, 360. 
Peter,  360. 
Sylvester,  Alice  S.  (B.), 
368. 
Alma,  478. 
Charles,  368. 
Tabor,    Augusta    Pierce, 

463. 

H.  A.,  463. 

Luella  R.  (B.),  463. 

Mary  E.,  343. 

N.  M.,  463- 

Persis  A..  463. 
Taft.  Caleb.  505. 

Elizabeth,  400. 

Ethel   E.    Smith,   505. 

George  C.  SOS- 
Henry,  400. 

Lydia.  265. 

Maria  Harris.  SoS- 
Talbot.  Alice.  443. 

Clara  A.   Cory.  443. 

Ruhannah    Den  i  son, 
98. 

Theodore.  443. 

Wheaton.  98. 
Tallnian,   Benjamin,   4SI. 

Katherine  E..  443. 

Sarah  Anderson,  443. 

Sarah  C.  451. 

Sarah  Dennis.  4s i. 
Tanner.  Almira   (B.), 

137- 
Amanda.   m3. 
Barrodell    (B.).   63. 
E..   137- 

Frances  M.   (B.),  ISI- 
Hiram.  151. 
Tohn,  6^. 
Lots  (B.).  62,. 
Mary.  6-?. 
Mary   (B.).   13. 
Mr..  13. 
Stephen.  63. 
Tarhox,  Caleb,  370. 
Malinda.  370. 


632 

Tarbox,     Rhoda     Smith, 

370. 
Tarpening,    Isabell    Hill, 

277. 
Taylor,  Abigail  Gardner, 

345- 
Amos  B.,  345,  446. 
Amy  Landphere,  446. 
Anna,  446. 
Benjamin  F.,  446. 
Byron   C,   345. 
Candis  L.,  501. 
Charles,  281,  345. 
Charles  C,  422. 
Christiana    Groat 

(B.),  191. 
Daniel   A.,   345,  446. 
Edith  Cranor,  240. 
Elizabeth,  240,  422. 
Elizabeth   (B.),  240. 
Elizabeth  Cundall,  345. 
Elizabeth    Richards, 

422. 
Emily  Landphere,  446. 
Frank  H.,  240. 
Frank  P.,  528. 
George  H.,  339. 
George  S.,  240. 
Georgia,  326. 
Hannah     A.     Cundall, 

345. 
Hannah  Cundell,  446. 
Hannah   Platner,  528. 
Harry,   191. 
Hazel  A.,  528. 
Henrietta  Van  Patten, 

348. 
Henry  B.,  446. 
Huldah  (B.),  345,  446. 
Huldah  M.,  446. 
Isaac  B.,  98. 
J.  D.,  266. 
James  E.,  240. 
Job,  345. 
John  H.,  348. 
Kate  T..  422. 
Laura,  240. 
Leona  M.,  528. 
Lillie,  446. 
Lizzie,  265. 
Luzern,  528. 
Lydia,  325. 
Lvdia    Taft,    265. 
Mary,    345,    <;oS. 
Mary  A..  166. 
Mary  Wilbor.  240. 
Oroha   L.    (B.),   249. 
Phineas  R..  528. 
Ralph  v.,  349- 
Rosa  L.  (B.),  281. 


Index. 

Taylor,    Ruhannah   Still- 
man,  98. 
Sarah,  240. 
Sarah  E.  Langworthy, 

339- 

Sarah  J.,  422. 

Sarah  M.,  266. 

Viola  O.  (B.),  528. 

William,    240. 

William  T.,  240. 
Teal,  Arthur  R.,  437. 

Jane  C.   (B.),  437- 
Teed,  Fanny  L,  338. 

Lebbeus,   338. 

Letitia    Page,    338. 
Tefft,  Anna,  337. 

George,  83. 

Isabel,   19. 

Jessie,  211. 

Mary,  83. 

Susanna  Saunders, 
211. 
Templar,  Ida,  305. 

James,   305. 

Jane   Flansburg,  305. 
Temple,  Carrie,  337. 
Templeton.    Jose- 
phine  Burdick,  411. 

William   K.,   411. 
Ten  Brooke,  Charles, 
424. 

Mary  C.    (B.).  424. 
Tenbrook,  Cynthia  Dun- 
ham, 335. 
Tenney,   Jeremiah,   50. 

Susannah    Cobb    Stan- 
ton,  50. 
Tericker,  Mary,  513. 
Terry,    Mary   Stewart, 

283. 
Terwilliger,    Eliza,    473. 
Thatcher,   Peter,  27. 

Safford.  340. 

Sarah  L.   Langworthy, 
340. 
Thayer,    Elizabeth    Ken- 
yon,  264. 

George  K.,  264. 

Helen,    320. 

Martha 'E.    (B.),  264. 

Mary  E..  447. 

Russel,  264. 

Sarah  P..  264. 
Thresher,   Annie  Hay- 
ward,  346. 

Asahel.  346. 

Calista  V.  Potter.  346. 

Lydia  M.   Handy,  346. 

Mabel  S.,  .346. 

Seneca,  346. 


Thomas,     Abigail     (B.), 
386. 

Edward  B.,  442. 

Edward  S.,  442. 

Eleanor,  287. 

Gardner,  287. 

Harriet,  445. 

John,  442. 

Katherine,  442. 

Libbie,   250. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  442. 

Mary   Stiles, -442. 
Thorn,     Betsy    Leonard, 
202. 

Mary,  500. 

Melissa,  202. 

Richard,  202. 
Thorngate,    A  r  1  o  i  e  n  a 
Crandall,  236. 

George  T.,  236. 

Henry,   236. 

Lorenda  Crandall,  236. 

Mary  A..  282. 
Thompson,    Abigail,    29. 

Albert  L.,  499. 

Alice,  41. 

Anna,  37,  53. 

Anna  (B.),  123. 

Anna  Rathbon,  124. 

Annie  M.,  244. 

Barbara,  367. 

Benjamin,   499. 

Bridget,  41. 

Bridget  Berry,  210. 

Charles  J.,  423. 

Clifford  B.,  499. 

Cynthia,  259. 

Elias,  123. 

Eliza,  529. 

Emeline,  210. 

Fanny,  212. 

Hannah,  122. 

Helen  A.,  423. 

Irving  H.,  499. 

Isaac,    29,   37,   49,    122, 

547- 
Jene.  396. 

Jennie  J.   (B.),  499- 
John,  41,  124,  210,  423. 
Joshua,  90,  548. 
Julia,  204. 
Julia  Beebe,  422. 
Laura  Quinby,  423. 
Maria,  307. 
Maria  L.    (B.),  423. 
Mary,  37,  49,  90. 
Mary  E.,   125,  425. 
Mary  Holmes,  29. 
Myron  W.,   423. 
Nancy  (B.),  124. 


Thompson,     Robert,     39, 
123. 

Russel  B.,  422. 

Sarah    (B.),  39- 

Sarah  L.,  423. 

Sarah   Stanton,   90. 

Sarah  Westfall,  423. 

Sebra,    118. 

Susanna,  49. 

Thankful     Stanton, 
123. 

Vietta  E.,   423. 

William,   124. 
Thurber,  Edith  M.  (B.), 

257- 

Edward  I.,  257. 

Elizabeth  Hull,  272. 

Jane  A.,  272. 

Lois  A.,  272. 

Samuel,    272. 
Thurston,  Jeremiah,  89. 

Mary  E.,  501. 

Phebe,  iii. 

Sally  (B.),  89. 
Tibbie,   Bradford,  213. 

Julia  (B.).  213. 
Tieft,   Dorcas    (B.),   51. 
Tiffany,  Ellinda,  293. 

Henrietta,    146. 

Maria   B.,    146. 

Sarah,  146. 
Tifft,  Fanny,  118. 

John,   118. 

Mary,   118. 
Tift,  Alana,  131. 

Arline  E.,  131. 

Esther,    131. 

Esther   (B.),  131. 

Martha  M.,  131. 

Mary  L.,.  131. 

Robert.  131. 

Sarah  Potter,   131. 
Tillinghast,  Louise  B., 

391- 

William  H..  391. 
Tilly,   Elizabeth,   40. 

John,  40. 
Tinkham,     Amanda    H., 
219. 

p.  W.,  219. 
Titsworth,      B  m  e  1  i  n  e 
Langworthy,  340. 

Frank.  340. 
Titus,  Ada  M.,  497. 

Almira  Wheaton,   418. 

H.  Allen,  418. 

Julia  A..  418. 

Lovilla    (B.),  418. 

Lvman.  418. 

Willie  H.,  418. 


Index. 

Todd,   Hiram,   184. 

James,  500. 

Julia  A.,  481. 

Louise  Hartman,  500. 

Lydia  Church,  184. 

Sarah  E.,  500. 
Tolwell,  Call,  140. 

Lucy  (B.),  140. 
Tombs,  Henry,  440. 

Mary,   440. 

Nancy  Farland,  440. 
Tompkins.  Betsey,  189. 
Toop,  Alice  L,  420. 
Tourjee,  John,  228. 

Nancy  (B.),  228. 
Townsand,  Katie,  459. 

Lizzie  M.   (B.),  304. 

M.  Evelyn,  304. 

Mary.   145. 

Vernon,   304. 
Townsend,    Byron    S., 

304. 

Hope,   184. 
Townson,    Maretta,    153. 

Walter,   153. 
Tracers,  Eva  M.  Cough- 
lin,  413. 

John,  413. 

Robert,  413. 
Tracey,  Douglas,  332. 

Sarah  Barnes,  332. 

Sarah   N..  332. 
Tracy,  Cora  J.  Bell,  177. 

Edward.   177. 

Martha  P.   (B.),  212. 

Silas,  212. 
Trainer.    Priscilla.   358. 
Treat,    Elizabeth   Lap- 
ham,  261. 

Robert.  41. 
Tredwell.  Aaron,  459. 

Helen.   459. 
Trevorrah,  Elizabeth  A., 

375- 

Richard.  375. 
Tripp.  James.  546. 

Lois  E.  (B.).  262. 

Mercy  Lawton,  546. 

Sarah,  489. 

Susanna.  4.=;. 

Thomas.   262. 
Trobridge.    Rebecca    E.. 
281. 

Rhoda  A..  259. 

Vianna   (B.),  281. 

William,    281. 
Trolt,  Alice  A..  441. 

Alice  C.   CB.),  441. 

Eliza  Whitney.  441. 

James,  441. 


633 

Trolt,  John  W.,  441  • 
Trowbridge,     Mary 
Stuart,  259. 

William,  259. 
True,   Jessie,   405. 
Truman,  Abbye  E.,  167. 

Adelbert  W.,   167. 

Augusta    Salesbury, 
167. 

Daniel,  98. 

Huldah   (B.),  167. 

Josephine,    167,  475. 

Nancy  Stillman,  98. 

William   M.,    167. 
Trumbel,  Phila,  293. 

Harriet,  392. 
Truslow,  Annie  G.  (B.), 

504. 

Frederick,  504. 

James.  504. 
Tubbs,  Harriet,  453. 
Tucker,  Abner,  215,  388. 

Anson,  463. 

Belle    C.    Langworthy, 

504- 
Byron  B..  178. 
Caroline  E.,  463. 
Charles  E.,  516. 
Charles   O.,   389. 
Cora  W.  Robbins,  389. 
Cynthia  N.    (B.),   141. 
Edith,  451. 
Elizabeth,   261. 
Florence,   388. 
Florence   Pratt,   389. 
George  A..  389,  504. 
Gurden  L.,  141. 
Horace,  451. 
Hubert,   389. 
Inez  A.    (B.),  516. 
Joshua.  20. 
Laura  Luther,  388. 
Laurene  O.,  389. 
Martha  Burdick.  4=;!. 
Mary  A.    (B.).   178. 
Mary  CB.).  215. 
Phebe  E..  388. 
Tupper.    Flora   E.    (B.), 

374-  . 

Frederick,    374. 
Turlington.    Hortense 
Rose.   449. 

L.  449- 
Turner,    Sarah   B..   493. 
Tuttle,  Mary,  474. 
Tyler,   Sonhia.  265. 
LTpdyke,  Elinor,  411. 

Mary  E..  411. 

Mary  E.  Lisbee.  411. 

Susan  A.,  411, 


634 

Updyke,  William,  411. 
Upjohn,  Elizabeth  A., 
244. 

]\Iary  Perry,  244. 

Richard,  244. 
Upton,     C  o  r  n  el  i  a    A. 
(B.),  402. 

James,  402. 

Sarah  Ropes,  402. 

Winslow,  402. 
Utter,  Adalaid,  468. 

Ann  E.,  371. 

Eliza  A.   (B.),  371. 

Elizabeth  L.  Brown, 

484.. 

Francis  A.,  371. 

George  H.,  484. 

Juliette  Major,  173. 

Mary,  339. 
Vail,  Erank,  163. 

Tacy  L.  Palmer,  163. 
Valentine,    Charlotte, 

435- 
George,  435. 
Lucy,  435. 
Van  Antwerp,   Cornelius, 
232. 
Mary,  137. 
Mary  E..  410. 
Susan  (B.),  232. 
Van  Bergen,  Maria,  275. 
Van  Buren,  Mary,  275. 
Van  Buskirk,   Benjamin, 
229. 
Benjamin  S.,  408. 
Carrie  I.,  408. 
Celia  (B.),  229. 
Eliza  J.,  229. 
Emeline,  408. 
Eva  R.  Cook,  408. 
Floyd,  408. 
Mary,   270. 
Vandenbrick,     Lucinda 

(B.).  264. 
Van  Denburg,  Henrietta, 

461. 
Vandenburg,     Nancy, 

i6g. 
Vandenburgh,    Frances 
T.  (B.);  42s. 
Frederick  A.,  425. 
Frederick  L..  425. 
Mary    G.    Richardson, 
425. 
Vanderhoof.   Charles  A., 
S02. 
Cora  M.   (B.),  502. 
Guy  N.,  502. 
Van    Derzee,    Cornelius, 
275. 


Index. 

Van  Derzee,  David,  275. 
Eliza,  275. 
Hester,  275. 
Hester   (B.),  275. 
Maria   Van   Burgen, 

275- 
Veedcr,  275. 
Van  Deventer,  Cyrus  C, 

SSI- 
Van  Horn,  A.  Jay,  281. 

Ai,  284. 

Almira,  159. 

Amaranda      Loofboro, 
284. 

Amy,  279. 

Athalia  A.,  284. 

Bernard,    284. 

Carrie  E.    (B.),  285. 

Clara  L.,  285. 

Clara    L.    Van    Horn, 
285. 

Christopher  C,  284. 

Elizabeth   (B.),  283. 

Elizabeth  Davis,  284. 

Evaline,  277. 

Eveline  A.  Davis,  280. 

James  R.,  283. 

Job,  280,  283. 

John  B.,  284. 

Joseph  J.,  285. 

Leon,  283. 

Leonard  A.,  285. 

Lewis,  277. 

Lizzie,  285. 

Lucy  Furrow,  285. 

M..  280. 

Maleta  A..  284. 

Malinda  Davis,  285. 

Marion,  285. 

Martha   (B.),  284. 

Mary  Davis,  279. 

Minerva,  276,  279. 

Minnie,    28^. 

Olive  L.   (B.),  281. 

Orel,  285. 

Prudence  Davis,  28^. 

Ruth,    285. 

Sarah  Furrow,  277. 

Sylvanus  D.,  285. 

LTlysses  S.,  285. 

William,   279.   280. 
Van  Nostrand,  Elizabeth 
Armstrong,   497. 

Emma,   497. 

Henry  D.,  497. 
Van  Nov,  Agnes  L.,  339. 

Eva  B.  (B.).  339. 

Peter  F.,  339. 
Van    Patten,    Adam    C, 
348. 


Van    Patten,    Henrietta, 
348. 

Maria  Groot,  348. 

Margaret  L,   vi. 
Van  Tine,  Sarah  E.,  334. 
Van  Valer,  Jane,  ZiZ- 
Vanveichten,  John,   335. 
Vanvichten,  Lydia   (B.), 

335- 
Van  Victen,  Nora,  465. 
Van   Volkenburg,    Kath- 

erine,  409. 
Van  Wic,  Frances,  318. 
Vars,    Dorcas,   293. 
Vaugn,  William,  3. 
Veatch,  Arthur  C,  523. 
Caroline    H.    Evans, 

S23- 

Eliza  Anderson,  410. 

Harry,  410. 

Henry  B.,  410. 

James,  410. 

Mary  K.,  410. 

Mary  K.  (B.),  410. 
Vedder,   Martha   Fen, 

98. 
Vincent,  Albert  O., 

Annie  G.  (B.),  382. 

Christopher  S.,  382. 

David,   382. 

Joshua,   211. 

Lucy  A.   (B.),  211. 

Oran,  211. 
Vinton,  Fannie,  273. 
Violet,   Thankful,   29. 
Voorhes,  Eleanor,   167. 
Voris,  Julia,  504. 
V  o  s  b  u  r  g  h,    Cornelius, 
156. 

Mary,   156,    165. 
Vose,  Abigail,  27,  28. 

Charles,   125. 

Delight  (B.),  124,  125. 

Edward,  27,  28. 

Eliza  S.,  213. 

Harriet,   379. 

Henry,  28. 

Joshua,  379. 

Lemuel,  125,  213. 

Mary  A.   States,   213. 

Robert,  28. 

Sarah,  xxviii,  27. 

Sarah  Berry,  379. 

Sophia,   125. 

Thomas.  28. 
Wade,  Edith,  438. 

Jared.  308. 

Johana,  480. 

Laura  C,  308. 

Rhoda,  71. 


Wadsworth,    Chloe,    255. 

Clara  (B.),  vi. 

Clara  E.    (B.),  259. 

Harry  H.,  259. 

Lawrence,  469. 

Mabel  J.   (B.),  469. 

William  A.,  469. 
Wagoner,   Francis,   275. 

John,  275. 

Marie  Leedings,  275. 

Mary   (B.),  275. 
Wait,  Betsy  G.  Bell,  349. 

Christopher,  349. 

Harriet    (B.),    Salton- 
stall,  67. 

John,  81. 

Lucy  B.,  511. 

Marvin,   67. 

Oliver   B.,    350. 

Phebe  J.  (B.),  vi,  349. 

Sarah,   81. 

William  B.,  349,  350. 
Waite,  Almira,  395. 

Anne    L.    Langworthy, 
506. 

Loren   G.,   506. 
Wakefield,  Harriet  E. 
Holmes,  202. 

Zera,    202. 
Waldorf,  Alice  E.,  460. 

Berlin  H.,  459. 

Eloise  C.    (B.),  275. 

Harvey,   275. 

Helen  Tredwell,  459. 

Mary,  245. 

Maud,  460. 

Mertie,  460. 

Minerva.  459. 
Wales.  Anna  Haff,  231. 

William  H..  231. 
Walker,    Ann    Burtis, 
410. 

Anna,  428. 

Benjamin,  413. 

Elma   E.,   182. 

G.,  loi. 

Harriet,  126. 

Henry  B..  410. 

James,   410. 

James  T..  410. 

Jane,  305. 

Lucy  A.    (B.),  410. 

Mary  A.  Cutler,  413. 

Mary  H..  410. 

Melissa   (B.),  loi. 

Oakley.  413. 
Wallace.   Adelaide.  213. 

Elizabeth.  344. 

Harriet.   408. 

James,  lor. 


Index. 

Wallace,  Jane,  loi. 

Mary   McClellan,    loi. 
Walley,   Hannah   Salton- 
stall,  69. 

Joseph,  69. 
Wally,   Carrie  D.,  214. 
Walrod,  Eva  Seber,  288. 

Fannie,  288. 

George,  288. 
Wands,  Elinore  Updyke, 
411. 

Elmer,  411. 
Wanton.   Martha,  145. 
Ward,    Betsey   M.    (B.), 

255- 

Giles  F.,  216. 

John,  255. 

Lucy  B.,  393. 

Lucy  B.    (B.),  216. 

Mary   L    Barber,    399. 

Nelson,  255,  399. 
Warden,  Delia  D.   Mur- 
ray,   182. 
Ware,   Martha  A.,  478. 
Wareman,  John,   116. 

Sarah,  116. 
Warn,  B.  E..  529. 

Clara  B.  Warren,  529. 
Warner,  Amy,  183. 

Betsey,  359. 

Maria,  425. 

Mary,    311. 

Nancy,  403,  405,  406. 

Sally,  273. 
Warren,  Anson,  431. 

Arthur  B.,  431. 

Benjamin  P.,  481. 

Clara  B.,  529. 

Constance  W..   391. 

Cora   L.   Smith,  431. 

Delia   Bull,  431. 

Eliza.  258. 

George   H.,   391. 

Georgie  Williams,  391. 

Grace,  257. 

Ida  L.  Hartw^ell,  529. 

Jennie    (B.),    481. 

Oscar  C,  529. 

Sarah    (B.),  431. 
Warrenson,     Abner     M., 

71. 
Mary  A.  Greene.  71. 
Warthin.  Alfred  S.,  500. 
Katherine    L.     Angell, 
500. 
Washburn,   Alvin.  295. 
Harriet     A.     Crandall, 

295- 
Helen  L.,  333. 
Washington,  George,  31. 


635 

Waterman,  Grace  E. 
Mathews,  395. 

Richard,  395. 

Thankful,    71. 
Waters,  Prudence,  115. 
Watkins,  Charles,  249. 

Orpha  L.   (B.),  249. 
Watrous,  .Elias,  302. 

Fanny  E.,  302. 
Watson,  Alexander,  229. 

Amanda    (B.),   290. 

Annie,   445. 

Charles,  466. 

Charles  M.,  290. 

Daisy  A.,  466. 

Dee  E.,  466. 

Eliza,  258. 

Elizabeth,  353. 

Elizabeth  A.,  466. 

Gertrude  Stanhope, 

353- 

Helen,  466. 

Henry  H.,  466. 

James,   258. 

James  F.,  466. 

Jeanette,  466. 

John  J..  353. 

Mabel  Sulida,  466. 

Mary   Cooper,   445. 

Mary  Shortridge,  466. 

Maud,  258. 

Miriam    (B.),  46. 

Nellie  O.,  373- 

Sarah  Hemphill,  229. 

Thomas,  445. 
Watt,    James,    532. 

Lvdia  Hazenbuck.  532. 

Maggie  A..  532. 
Watts,  Carrie  L..  334. 

Clarissa  Burns,  334. 

Emily  E.    (B.),  334- 

Harry  H..  334. 

Herbert  C,  334. 

Joseph  C,  334. 

Virginia  J.,  334- 
Way,   Clara,  279. 

Kate,  377- 
Weaver,  Charles  L.,  486. 

H.   Reid,  416. 

Hattie,  488. 

James,   486. 

Mary  E.  Ives,  486. 

Minnie  G.  Skellie,  416. 

Sarah.  320. 

William  L.,  xxviii. 
Webb.  Alburtus,  257. 

INTary  E.    (B.).  257. 
Weber.  Marion.  508. 
Webley.  Daniel,  301. 

Frederick  D.,  301. 


636 

Webley,  Mary  E.  Clark, 

301. 
Webster,  Alice  L.,  412. 

Almeda,  320. 

Clara  J.,  529. 

Clemantine,   238. 

Cora  M.,  529. 

Cyrus,  529. 

Dwight  W.,  449. 

Eearl  J.,  529. 

Eliza  Thompson,   529. 

Elizabeth,   119. 

Ellen  S.   Meech,  412. 

Emeline  (B.),  213. 

Emma  E.,  528. 

George,  213. 

George  E.,  529. 

James,  238. 

James  P.,  529. 

John,  320. 

Laura  E.,  449. 

Laura  J.    (B.),   449. 

Levi,  412. 

Loa  O.  Shepherd,  529. 

Lucy,  239. 

Martha  Presturch.  449. 

Nancy  Owen,  238. 

William,  449. 

William  E.,  449. 

Wilmenia  A.    (B.), 

529- 
Weeden,  Elam,  261. 

Hannah  Spencer,  261. 

Sarah,   261. 
Weedin,   Catherine,  511. 

Mary,  268. 
Weeks,  Almira.  354. 

Caroline  B.,  325. 

Charles,  387. 

Elizabeth   M..  325. 

Harriet  S.   (B.),  324. 

James  H.,  324. 

Lois  Winters,  387. 

Mary  A.    (B.).  387. 

William  H.,  387. 
Wehrman,    Emma    L., 

527- 
Hannah  .Luceke,    527. 
William,   527. 
Weightman,    Sarah    M., 

452. 
Welch,  Clarissa,  294, 

471. 

Olive.  530. 
Weld.  Benjamin  D..  285. 

Cynthia.   285. 

Persis  Wicker.  285. 
Welden.  Selinda.  4S^. 
Wells,  A.  Judson,  468. 

Adalaid  Utter,  468. 


index. 

Wells,  Addie,  468. 
Adelia  P.  Brown,  288. 
Albert,     xix,     xxiii, 

xxvi. 
Amanda  J.  Ives,  318. 
Amey,    178. 
Calvin,  288. 
Catherine   B  u  r  d  i  c  k, 

382. 
Catherine   M.,   383. 
Comfort   (B.),  54. 
David,  382,  383. 
Eliza,  356. 
Elizabeth,  178. 
Emily  L.   Palmer,   163. 
Floyd  B.,  468. 
George,  132,  251. 
Hannah  B.,  251. 
Hannah  B.   (B.),  251. 
Hannah  M.,  382. 
Horatio,  318. 
Isabelle,  469. 
Jonathan,    178. 
Joseph,  84,  288. 
Laura,  468. 
Lydia,  164. 
Lydia  Dodge,  251. 
Maria,    192. 
Martha,  270. 
Mary,    287. 
Mary  A.   (B.),  132. 
Mary  E.   Thompson, 

425. 

Minnie  M.  B.,  468. 

Oliver  D..  251. 

Phebe.  84.  196,  313. 

Sally  E.   Sawyer,  430. 

Samuel,  84. 

Sarah.  84. 

Susan  Potter,  84. 

Thomas,  84. 

William.  163.  468. 

Zelora  B..  468. 
Welton,  Julia,  415. 
Wentworth,  Burret,  237. 

Rebecca,  237. 
Wequascooke     (Harmon 
Garret),    Indian 
chief,  4. 
Wescott,  Albert,  309. 

Amos,  259. 

Catherine.  259. 

Clara   (B.).  259. 

Harold.   442. 

Harriet   Nash,   259. 

Mina,  309. 
Wesley.  Barbara.  457. 
West,  Abigail,  168. 

Ann  (B.).  95. 

Ann  M.  Murphy,  314. 


West,  Arnold,  75. 

Asa,   95. 

Courtland,  314. 

Fanny,  212. 

Fanny  Thompson,  212. 

George,  95. 

Hannah   (B.),  75. 

James,  75. 

Jesse,  95. 

Joseph,  95. 

Mary,  45. 

Nancy,  95. 

Prudence,  95. 

Sarah,  95. 

Susan,  361. 

Susanna,  75. 

Timothy,  95.   212. 

William,   95. 
Westcott,  Edward  N., 
442. 

Frank  R..  340. 

Harriet    A.    Langwor- 
thy,  340. 

Jane  Dous,  442. 

Lois.  383. 

Philip,  442. 

Violet,   442. 
Westfall,   Charity   S., 
427. 

Sarah,  423. 
Westlake.   Charles,   533. 

Julia  F.,  533. 
Weston,    Celia   Stone, 

394- 

Lizzie,  394. 

Louisa.  248. 

Milton.  394. 
Wetmore,  Jesse,  305. 

Mary  R.  Cheney.  305. 

Sarah  Phillips.  305. 

W.  W..  305. 
Wetsel.    Mary    E.    Hay- 
den.  225. 

Peter,  225. 
Wexderby,  John,  274. 

Matilda  (B.),  274. 
Wheaton,  Almira,  418. 

Amelia  Ball,  131. 

Jennie,    131. 

John,  260. 

Noah,   131. 

Sarah  Peckham,  260. 
Wheeler,  A.,  178. 

Alice  M.,  323. 

Anne  Cobb,  50. 

Betsy   Gould.   412. 

Caroline,  177. 

Caroline  E.,  178. 

Deidamia   F  o  r  b  u  s  h, 
178. 


Wheeler,  Eliza,  412. 
Eloise  M.  (BJ,  383. 
Emily  E.  Brown,  483. 
Frederick,  503. 
George,   368. 
Grace  D.,  vi. 
Harry  E.,  503. 
James  H.,  503. 
Jessie  E.,  503. 
Joel  C.,  412. 
Lucinda,  380. 
M.  Kate   (B.),  499- 
Mary    E.    Cleveland, 

503- 

Mary  Miner,  85. 
Mary  S.,  509. 
Mehitable,    85,    91. 
Nancy  M.,  483. 
Noyes,   499. 
Priscilla,  51. 
Richard  A.,  xxi. 
Robert  C,  503. 
Sarah  P.   (B.),  368. 
Thomas,  85. 
Thomas  W..  483- 
Walter  N.,  383- 
William  B.,  503. 
William  J.,  503. 
Whipple,    Alice    Greene, 

451- 

Betsy.  321. 

Dorothy.  189. 

Frederick.  451. 

George  A.,  267. 

George  E..  451. 

Hannah  P.   (B.),  267. 

Herbert  E..  451. 

Lydia  (B.).  184. 

Mary  Gardiner,  451. 

Maude  E..  451. 
Whitaker,  Mary  H.  Che- 
ney, 286. 

Mary  M..  286. 

Robert,   286. 
White,  Ann,  161. 

Cana  B.,  427. 

Caroline  Stephens, 
427. 

Charles,  263. 

Charles  E..  5,^2. 

Charlotte  H.    (B.), 
452. 

Clark,  427. 

Delia.  248. 

Dorcas  (B.),  88. 

Dutee  J.,  452. 

Edna  L..  229. 

Elizabeth,  263. 

Elizabeth  Perry,  -i^})- 

Ellery,  88. 


Index. 

White,  Eva  Clark,  532. 

George  A.,  452. 

Godfrey,   160. 

Jesse  B.,  452. 

Joseph,  452. 

Mary  Bartlett,  452. 

Nancy  F.  Bell,  177. 

Phebe,  160. 

Samuel,  229. 

Sarah  J.,  214. 

Susan  Drmg,  214. 

Thomas,  214. 

Walter,  88.   I77- 
Whiteside,     Hannah     A. 
Goodrich,   133. 

John,  133. 
Whitford,  Albert,  465. 

Clark.  226. 

De  Florence,  277. 

Eliza,  226. 

Eliza  (B.).  226. 

Eliza  Whitford.  226. 

Emenetta  J.  (B.).  277. 

Frances   (B.),  293. 

George.  239. 

Hosea,  226,  239. 

Jesse,  210. 

Mabel   M.    Crandall, 

465- 
Marian  A.  Jaques,  239. 
Mary,  451. 
Mary  Burch.  207. 
IMaxson.  293. 
O.  B.,  465. 
Polly.  471. 
Prudence,    135.  210, 

211. 
Ruble  Greenman.  211. 
Silas.  207. 
Stillman.  293. 
William.  207. 
W  h  i  t  i  n  g.     Addie     M. 

(B.).  475- 
Archer  B..  476. 
Hamilton.    167.   475. 
Josephine    Truman, 

167-   475- 

Merton  A.,  475. 
Whitla.  John  S..  440. 

Nettie  Carrington,  440. 
Whitmore.  Abiah.  271. 

Olive   (B.).  271. 
Whitney,    Amanda.   421. 

Eliza,  441. 

Ellen,  2?6. 

Laura.  282. 
Whittaker,    Priscilla. 

238. 
Whot.  Thomas,  xiii. 
Wicker,  Augusta,  438, 


^17 

Wicker,    Augusta    (B.), 

438. 

Augustus,  438. 

Charles  A.,  438. 

Chauncey,   W.,  438. 

Edith  Wade,  438. 

Emeline    Cooley,    438. 

Estelle  J.,  438. 

Estelle  J.  Beebe,  438. 

Persis,  285. 

Sherman  A.,  438. 
Wickham,  Rosalie,  419. 

Susan  Morse,  419. 

William,  419. 
Wicks,  Bartlett,  442. 

Edward  B.,  258. 

Frederick  S.,  442. 

J.  J.,  398. 

John  D.,  442. 

Lily  M.  Doane,  442. 

Lois  E.,  511. 

Martha  J..  398. 

Mary     (B.),    Lynde, 
258. 

Stanton  D.,  442. 
Wight,  Lydia,  133. 

Sarah  Lord.  133. 
Wightman,  Al  f  r  ed  R., 
268. 

Benjamin,  267. 

Catherine     W.      (B.), 
268. 

Emeline.  c;o8. 

Ida  M.,  508. 

Lydia   C   267. 

Mary  W..  268. 

Mary  Weedin.  268. 

Milton  J..  268. 

Patience  Allen,  267. 

Pel  eg  W.,  268. 

Theodore.  268. 

William.  508. 
Wilbor.   Mary,  240. 

William,  3. 
Wilbur.    Adeline    H. 
Brown,    360. 

Catherine.   276. 

Celia.  77,.   135. 

Charles  D..  360. 

Charlotte.  T^. 

Dennis    S.,    360. 

Desire  Stillman,  98. 

Elizabeth  (B.),  60. 

Ethan,  jt,. 

Gideon.   102. 

Hannah,  102. 

Hannah    (B.),    102. 

Isaiah.  08. 

Jesse  W..  360. 

Joanna,  73.  135. 


638 

Wilbur,  Joanna   (B.), 

72. 

John,  60. 
John  G.,  360. 
Joseph,   -^2,    135. 
Louisa  T.,  360. 
Mary  Ann,  T},. 
Phebe,  164. 
Sally,   7Z. 
Sarah,  72. 
Wilcox,  Anna,  146. 
Apollas,  415. 
Chester,  415. 
Clara  Brown,  495. 
Clary  J.,  n^. 
Delyra  P.,  474. 
Desire.  Zi,  I35- 
Edward,  146. 
Elijah,  374. 
Elizabeth,  495. 
Elizabeth    Andrew  s, 

415- 
F.  Elmer,  374. 
Fanny    Hungerford, 

Florence  O.   (B.),  374- 
Georgiana,  415. 
Glover  P.,  495. 
Hannah  (B.),  87. 
Helen  L.,  415. 
Herbert  H.,   374. 
Huldah   Sherman.   262. 
I  n  e  X    L.    Broadbent, 

415- 

Joseph,  87. 

Lucy,  60. 

Lydia   Strait.   374. 

Mary,  26,  262. 

Mary  S.,  415. 

Nancy,  227,  238. 

Sarah.  415. 

Sarah  M.  (B.),  414. 

Sophia  Vose,   125. 

Stephen,   125. 

Stephen  H.,  415. 

Tabitha,  85. 

Thomas,  376. 

Timothy  E..   495. 
Wilde,  John  C,  404. 

Mary  J.   Shenard,  404. 

Olive    L.    Burnham, 
404. 
Wilder,   Alfred  M..  225. 

Anna  G.  Addis,  225. 

Ella  H..  225. 

Emma   C,   225. 

Tosiah.   225. 

Tulia  M..   448. 

Laura   Meader.   448. 

Lydia  E.  (B.),  225. 


Index. 

Wilder,    Susan    Carlton, 
225. 

William  W.,  448. 
Wiley,  Sarah,  265. 
Wilkinson,  Clara  V. 
Loomis,  320. 

Daniel    S.,    320. 
Willard,  Mary,  413. 
Willey,  Ida  M.,  412. 
Williams,   A.    Ford,   409. 

Ada  E.,  310. 

Anna  L.,  451. 

Arloene  O.    (B.),  296. 

Byron,  310. 

Charles  P.,  391. 

David,  312. 

Eliza,   162. 

Elizabeth,   102,  391. 

Ella,  206. 

Ellen  A.   Bell,  312. 

Emerancy  (B.),  166. 

Ephraim,  391,  393. 

Ethel,  312. 

George   E.,   312. 

Georgia,  391. 

Georgia   (B.),  391. 

Hannah.  204. 

Hesebeth,  391. 

Ichabod,   118. 

James  V.  V.,  409. 

Jane,    177. 

Jessie  A.,  307. 

Katherine  V..  409. 

Katherine    Van    Volk- 
enburg.  409. 

Leon,  312. 

Margaret,   517. 

Margaret      M.       (B.), 
409. 

Maria  Thompson.  307. 

Mary  B..  310. 

Mary  D.   (B.),  393. 

Maud.   30^. 

Nancy   CB.),  89. 

Nellie  M..  312. 

Parmelia.  208 

Rhnda   (B.),  89. 

Richard.  307. 

Roxanna.    163. 

Sarah.   192. 

Sarah  Dean.  312. 

Schiivler.  40Q. 

«^tafford.    t66. 

Susan.    206. 

Tncy   (B.).   T18. 

Thomas.  2q6. 

Victoria.  310. 

Walter,    312. 

Wealthy,  105. 

William,  89. 


Williamson,     Carrie    E., 

435- 

Darwm,  435. 

Elizabeth,    435. 

Elizabeth    (B.),  435. 

Floyd,  435. 

George  H.,  435. 

Mae,  435. 

Robert,  435. 

Roy,  435- 

Sarah,   418. 

Sarah  M.   (B.),  255. 

Tryphena.   435. 

William   D.,  435. 

William  H.,  255. 
Wilsev.   Betsey   Sanders, 
487. 

Eliza  J.    (B.),  487. 

Grace,  488. 

Hugh  H.,  487. 

Ina  B.,  488. 

Jay  E..  488. 

Jeremiah,  487. 

Leora  Brockway,   487. 

Lucy,  488. 

May  D.,  487. 

Merwin  W.,  487. 
Wilson,  Alexander,  307. 

Anna  M.,  275. 

Anna  R.,   433. 

Carrie  B.    (B.),  404. 

Catherine  H.,  423. 

Celia   Sibley,   307. 

Clara  Mead,  400. 

Delia  Johnson,  423. 

Elizabeth  (B.).  269. 

Ellis.  481. 

Eva  K.   (B.),  481. 

George,  400. 

John,  275,  404,  423. 

Kate  Hall.  481. 

Lena,  400. 

Mary  E.,  396. 

Mary  McBride.  307. 

Mary  Van  Buren.  275. 

Persis  L.   (B.).  463. 

Rollin  E.,  481. 

Sarah.  45.  464. 

Thomas,  269. 

William  F..  463. 

William   M..   307. 
Wilts.  Rebecca,  74. 
Wiltsie,   Carrie  E.    (B.), 
472. 

Earnest,  472. 
Wiltsey,  Loretta,   169. 
Winchester,     D  w  i  g  h  t, 
308. 

Edward.  453. 

Ettie   M.,    453. 


Winchester,    M  a  h  a  1  a 
Ellsworth,  427. 

Minnie  A.   Stark,  308. 

Rachel  Sigbee,  453. 

Sheldon  S.,  427. 
Window,    Polly  Holmes, 

367- 
Wing,  Adalaid    (.B.), 

439- 

Adalaid  Avery,  439. 
Albert  K.,  439. 
Bela,  439. 
Elizabeth   Hutchins, 

439- 

Helsie  S.,  439. 

Marcia,  310. 
Winn,  Kathleen,  429. 
Winne,    Georgiana    Bur- 
dick,  411. 

William,  411. 
Winnek,  Anna  L.,  375. 

Charles  I.,  375. 

Emilus  v.,  375. 

Irving  F.,  375. 

John,  375. 

Lorene  E.  (B.),  375. 

Mary  Fuller,  375. 

Ruth,  375. 
Winter,  Lucinda,  178. 
Winters,  Eliza  Fox,  456. 

Jane,  456. 

Lois,  387. 

Mary  E.   (B.),  456. 

William  A.,  456. 
Winthrop,  Rebecca,  69. 
Wise,  Charles  W.,  431. 

E.  S.,  219. 

Ida  M.  (B.),  431. 
Wispell,   Bessie,  333. 

Edna  E.,  333. 

Joseph  J.,  333. 

Lillie  S.    (B.).  333- 
Witbeck,    Henrietta   Van 
Denburgh,  461. 

John  V.  A.,  461. 

Maria   461. 
W  i  t  h  e  y,   Esther   Dun- 
nock,  73. 

Henry,  73. 

John,  73. 

Sarah  A.  (B.),  73. 
Witt,  Lucy,   175. 
Wittemore,     Mary     E. 

(B.),  341. 

William  C,  341. 
Witter,  Hannah  A.,  480. 

Mary  E.,  507. 
Wodell.   Mary,  546. 

Ruth  Lawton,  546. 

William,  546. 


Index. 

Wood,  Anna   (B.),  392. 

Ben  C,  382. 

Caroline  Maxson,  382. 

Carrie  A.   (B.),  308. 

Carrie  M.,  429. 

Edith,  382. 

Emily  Heath,  382. 

Erastus,  382. 

Frances,  467. 

Francis  G.,  382. 

Frank  B.,  308. 

Grace  M.,   382. 

Isabelle,  525. 

Isabelle  Brown,  525. 

James  F.,  382. 

John,  2,  345. 

Laura,  392. 

Louise,  385. 

M.  E.  Paul,  382. 

Mabel,  392. 

Marion,  382. 

Martha  Hargin,  345. 

Mary   A.,    118. 

Millicent,  345. 

Minnie,  382. 

Ralph.  382. 

Rufus,  382. 

Sadie  C.  359. 

Samuel,  392. 

Stephen,  382. 
Woodbridge,  Dudley,  70. 

Sarah  Sheldon,  70. 
Woodin,   Dolly   S.,   273. 

Eri,   381. 

Harriet    Stilcon,    381. 

Riley,  273. 
Woodmansee,  Sarah  M., 

150. 
Woodruff,  Edith  L.,  524. 

Horace  W.,  524. 

Lloyd,   524. 

Maria  Osgood,  524. 

Marion  C,   524. 

Marion  R.    (B.),  524. 

Mary,   392. 
Woods,  Leona  Ran- 
dolph, 516. 

William  G.,  516. 
Woodward,  Anna,  173. 

Anna  M.,  520. 

Annie  Miller,  173. 

Elizabeth,  141. 

Henry,  173. 

Lvdia,  141. 

Martha,  198. 

Nathaniel.  141. 
Woodworth,     George, 
286. 

Kate,   161. 

Mary   (B.),  286. 


Woodworth,    Samuel, 
286. 
Sarah   Hills,  286. 
Woof,  Helen  J.,  532. 
Isabelle,  532. 
Joseph,  532. 
Woolstrom,    Sarah   A. 
(B.),  280. 
Thomas,    280. 
Woolworth,  Eunice  S. 
(B.),   168. 
Leonard,    168. 
Worden,    Lydia,    515. 
Wortendyke,     Cornelius, 

443. 

Hester,  443. 

Rachel    Hooper,   443. 
Wright,  Albert,  261. 

Amzi,  175. 

Ann,  128. 

Anna  E.,  396. 

Charles,   175. 

Charles  A.,  261. 

Clarissa    Welch,    471. 

Eddie,    175. 

Edward,  396. 

Ellen  Jones,  531. 

Freelove,  471. 

Harvey,   531. 

John,  471. 

Lena,  531. 

Loomis,  175. 

Mary,  175. 

Mary  E.  Wilson,  396. 

Nancy    (B.),    175. 

Rhoda,  243. 

Sarah,  343. 

Sarah  J.   (B.),  261. 
Wyatt,  Mary,  49,  94. 
Wyer,  Alice,  129. 

Edward,    129. 
Wyman,    Elizabeth,    199. 

Nehemiah,   199. 

Susannah    Starns,    199. 
Yarnall,   Nathan,  454. 

Rebecca  Smith,  454. 
Yates,    An  ah   F.    (B.), 

535- 
Arthur,  535. 
Arthur  G.,  535. 
Blyn,   214. 
Frederick  L..  535. 
Frederick  W.,  535. 
John  H.,  535. 
Virginia   Holden,   535. 
Yeaton,  Abbie  A.,  478. 
Alma  Sylvester,  478. 
Amelia  Arnold,  308. 
Estelle  M.    (B.),  478. 
Harriet  A^.,  308. 


640 

Yeaton,  James,  308. 
York,  Grace,  162. 

Maria,  206. 
Young,  Abigail  Holmes, 
398. 

Alice,  397,  398. 

Caroline  D.    (B.),  398. 

Delia  McConnell,   387. 


Index. 

Young.  E.  T.,  387. 
Edith,  366. 
Erastus,  153. 
Ethel  G.,  366. 
Hannah  A.    (B.), 
Henry  H.,  366. 
James  W.,  398. 
Lina,  421. 


153- 


Young,  Lizzie,  366. 

Minnie,  387. 

Robert  G.,  366. 

Samuel,  398. 

Sarah  C.  Sharp,  366. 
Youngs,  Lulu,  465. 
Zimmerman,      Margaret, 
271. 


WELL   AND    WINDLASS 
At  the  old  homestead  where  Isaiah,  Sr.,  was  born. 


ISAIAH  BABCOCK,  Sr 


AND 


HIS  DESCENDANTS 


BY 

A.  EMERSON  BABCOCK 

OF   ROCHESTER,  N.  Y. 


NEW   YORK 

EATON   &   MAINS 
1903 


41 


TO    xMY    FOUR    CHILDREN, 

William  J.,  Ralph  B.,  Eleanore,  and  A.  Emerson,  Jr., 

This  work  is  affectionately  dedicated  by 

The  Author, 


PREFACE 


The  data  of  the  genealogy  of  "Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and 
His  Descendants"  which  appear  in  this  book  have  been  gath- 
ered from  official  sources  and  can  be  depended  upon  to  be  re- 
liable and  correct  in  all  details,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained, 
after  years  of  careful  research  and  study.  In  this  work  I  have 
aimed  at  brevity  rather  than  elaboration,  and  have  arranged 
the  records  in  the  simplest  and  easiest  way  I  could  devise,  so 
that  the  reader  of  any  branch  of  the  family  could  follow  the 
line  to  the  end  without  being  obliged  to  consult  the  index  or 
turn  over  a  large  number  of  pages  in  order  to  determine  any 
line  of  descent.  To  the  large  number  of  descendants  of  Isaiah 
Babcock,  Sr.,  who  have  assisted  me  in  procuring  the  following 
records  I  desire  to  extend  my  grateful  and  cordial  thanks. 
Those  who  have  especially  assisted  in  this  work  the  writer 
records  as  follows : 

Mrs.  Emily  W.  (Babcock)  Alward.  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 

Mrs.  Hattie  E.  Lacy,  M.D.,  Chicago,  111., 

Mrs.  Fannie  Burch,  Byron,  111., 

Miss  Mary  E.  Phillips,  Oneonta,  N.  Y., 

Mrs.  Mary  E.  Boardman,  Schenevus,  X.  Y., 

Mr.  Artemas  Bissell,  Montclair,  N.  J., 

Mrs.  Louise  C.  Sprague,  Athens,  N.  Y., 

Mrs.  James  E.  Scott,  Middletown,  N.  Y., 

Mrs.  A.  P.  Jones,  Catskill.  N.  Y., 

Hon.  Charles  Kelsey,  Marquette,  Mich., 

Mrs.  Clarence  De  Puy.  Brighton.  N.  Y.. 

Mrs.  Adelaide  Roper,  Wittenberg,  Wis., 

Mr.  Havilah  Babcock,  Neenah,  Wis., 

Mr.  Frank  S.  Wood,  Batavia,  N.  Y., 

Mrs.  Electa  (Babcock)  Reese,  Chadwicks,  N.  Y., 

Mrs.  Lucy  Olivia  (Babcock)  Clark,  Lansing,  Mich., 

Mr.  Bradley  W^  Babcock,  Concord  Depot,  Va., 

Hon.  I.  H.  Babcock,  Lockport,  N.  Y., 

and  a  large  number  of  others. 


vi  Preface. 

The  records  here  presented  are  the  resuh  of  years  ol  carefu\ 
research  and  study,  all  previous  genealogists  having  heen  un- 
able to  trace  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  successfully.  The  writer, 
without  the  assistance  of  previous  published  records,  was 
obliged  to  commence  at  the  beginning  and  trace  all  lines  care- 
fully to  the  end.  I  have  been  prompted  to  this  work  solely 
because  it  seemed  to  be  high  time  that  a  record  of  the  family 
be  gathered  before  the  present  generations  had  all  passed 
away,  the  writings  of  those  genealogists  Albert  Wells  and 
Royal  R.  Hinman  being  so  largely  at  variance  with  the  truth 
concerning  the  early  history  of  the  Babcock  family.  If  what 
is  here  presented  to  the  members  of  the  Babcock  famil}^  shall 
prove  to  be  a  source  of  information  and  pleasure,  the  writer 
will  be  contented  and  will  feel  his  labors  have  not  been  in  vain. 

A.  Emerson  Babcock. 

Brighton,  N.  Y.,  May  i,   1903. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FACING 
PAGK 


Well  and  Windlass,  Old  Homestead,  where  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  was 
Born  (Frontispiece) 

Peru,  Mass 6 

Partridgefield,  N.  Y 8 

Partridgefield,  N.  Y.,  Showing  Babcock  Settlement lo 

Congregational  Church,  Westford,  N,  Y 14 

Masonic  Medal  Presented  to  Col.  Samuel  Babcock  (page  14) 

Residence  of  Colonel  Samuel  Babcock,  Worcester,  N.  Y 18 

Sarah  Babcock  Wing 22 

James  M.  Babcock 24 

William  J.  Babcock 28 

Mrs.  Phoebe  W.  Cornell 30 

Eleonore  Babcock 30 

A.  Emerson  Babcock 34 

Hon.  Jeptha  W.  Babcock 36 

Hon,  Isaac  H.  Babcock 40 

Hon.  Charles  H.  Babcock 42 

Stephen  Henry  Babcock 46 

Henry  H.  Babcock 50 

George  S.  Babcock 54 

Leicester  Babcock 60 

George  Reed  Babcock 68 

Havilah  Babcock 82 

Adelbert  Archer  Babcock 90 

Brigadier-General  Orville  E.  Babcock,  U.  S.  A 94 

Bradley  W.  Babcock   98 

Louisa  Babcock  Green 102 

Jonas  Babcock's  Home 104 

Enoch  Babcock 106 

Carrie  Odell  (Green)  Strahorn 108 

Isaiah  Babcock  and  Wife ...  no 

William  Henry  Babcock  and  Wife no 

John  Barton  Babcock  and  Wife no 


ISAIAH  BABCOCK,  Sr., 

AND  HIS  DESCENDANTS. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  James,  Jr.,  and  Sarah 
(Vose)  Babcock,  was  born  in  North  Stonington,  Conn. 
(Pnng  hun  ga  mung  Farm),  Jan.  29,  1719.  He  was  baptized 
by  the  Rev.  James  Noyes,  pastor  of  the  First  Congregational 
Church,  Stonington,  Conn.,  Feb.  i,  1719.  On  Dec.  25,  1738, 
he  married  Miss  Elizabeth  Plumb,  daughter  of  George  and 
Prudence  (Richardson)  Plumb,  of  Stonington,  Conn.  She 
was  born  about  17 16.  Her  father,  George  Plumb,  son  of  John 
and  Elizabeth  (Green)  Plumb,  of  New  London,  Conn.,  re- 
moved to  Stonington  before  marriage,  and  married,  lived,  and 
died  there.  He  was  a  shipowner  and  shipmaster,  sailed  to 
the  West  Indies,  and  also  traded  along  our  coast.  From 
Plumb  Genealogy,  by  H.  B.  Plumb,  Peely,  Pa.,  we  learn  "he 
was  once  fined  in  Barbados,  Dec.  17,  171 5,  for  coming  there 
from  New  London,  Conn.,  without  his  clearance  papers  signed 
by  the  collector."  There  was  no  collector  of  the  port  of  New 
London  at  that  time,  which  was  certified  by  the  Governor  of 
Connecticut  to  the  Governor,  Col.  Lowthar,  of  Barbados, 
George  and  his  wife  joined  the  church  Mar.  12,  17 10.  He 
was  shipwrecked  and  drowned  off  Plumb  Island  in  a  severe 
gale.  He  was  called  an  Englishman.  "April  23,  17 19,  the 
Governor  and  Council  ordered  him  to  take  certain  measures  at 
his  sloop,  where  they  had  the  smallpox  on  board." 

Their  children  were: 

Prudence,   b.   Nov.    18.    1709;    m.   Ephraim   Fellows. 
Samuel,  b.  Oct.  4,  1712;    m.  Grace  Babcock. 
Anna.  b.  1714;    m.  Nov.  10,  1737. 
Elizabeth,  b.  about  1716;    m.  Isaiah  Babcock. 

There  were  probably  more  children,  but  I  can  find  no  record 
of  them. 

Isaiah  Babcock's  farm  was  in  Voluntown,  Conn.,  next  north 
to  North  Stonington.     A  jjortion  of  his  farm  was  in  Stoning- 


2  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

ton,  but  his  house  I  assume  was  in  Voluntown.  His  grand- 
father, Capt.  James  Babcock,  remembered  him  in  his  will  as 
follows : 

"Item.  I  give  and  bequeath  unto  my  grandson  Isaiah  Bab- 
cock, the  son  of  my  son  James  dec'd,  a  tract  of  land  lying  in 
Stonington  containing  two  hundred  and  forty  acres,  more  or 
less,  bounded  as  follows :  Northerly  on  land  I  have  given  un- 
to my  grandson  Nath'el  Babcock  by  deed:  Easterly  etc.  and 
further  my  Will  is  that  in  case  my  grandson  Elias  Babcock 
shall  lose  his  land  that  I  gave  him  by  deed  of  gift  by  ye  Volun- 
town men  then  I  give  him  the  one-half  of  the  said  240  acres 
to  be  equally  divided  between  him  and  Isaiah  to  them,  their 
heirs  and  assigns  forever." 

We  find  in  the  probate  records  of  Voluntown,  Conn.,  the 
following : 

"Isaiah  Babcock  and  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.,  of  Voluntown, 
conveyed  April  25th,  1772,  to  Isaac  Gallup  for  450  pounds, 
150  acres  of  land,  and  on  the  same  date  Isaiah,  Jr.,  conveyed 
to  Gallup  50  acres  of  land  for  20  pounds." 

This  was  Isaiah,  Sr.'s,  farm. 

Children  of  Isaiah  and  Elizabeth  (Plumb)  Babcock,  all  re- 
corded upon  the  town  records  of  Stonington  excepting  the  last 
three,  which  are  found  upon  the  town  records  of  Voluntown : 

Isaiah,  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  27,  1741. 
Enoch,  b.  Dec.  27,  1742. 
Elizabeth,  b.  June  9,   1745. 
Elisha,  b.  July  26,    1747. 
George,  b.  July  27,  1749. 
John,  b.  Nov.  13,   1752. 
Phebe,  b.  Oct.  5,  1755. 
Elias,  b.  Dec.  14,  1757. 
Samuel,  b.  Dec.  2,  1761. 
Jonas,  b.  May  14,  1764. 

It  is  noticed  that  Isaiah,  Sr.,  was  early  in  life  baptized  in  the 
First  Congregational  Church  of  Stonington,  Conn.  The  fol- 
lowing appears  on  record : 

"Isaac  Gallup,  Thos.  Douglas  and  others  and  Isaiah  Bab- 
cock upon  the  dismissal  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Dorrance  from  Vol- 
untown Church,  very  desirous  to  enjoy  public  worship  as  we 
think  right  which  is  according  to  the  Congregational  platform 
now  received  liberty  from  the  town  and  General  Assembly  to 
join  in  a  society  by  themselves  without  being  directed  bv  any 
other  society." 

This  was  on  Mar.  5,  1771,  at  the  Rev.  Mr.  Dorrance's 
dismissal. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  3 

"A  society  called  Nazareth  was  thereupon  formed  in  the 
south  part  of  Voluntown  and  the  church  gathered  there." 

The  writer  has  in  his  possession  a  letter  written  by  Joshua 
Babcock,  who  was  a  son  of  Squire  Joshua,  who  was  son  of 
Oliver,  brother  to  Isaiah,  Sr.     This  letter  is  as  follows : 

Unadilla  Forks,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  i6,  1856. 
Dear  Cousin  :  I  was  hiohlv  ""ratified  in  receivin"-  a  letter 
from  you  in  last  evening's  mail  in  which  you  make  incjuiries 
in  regard  to  your  Grandfather  which  was  my  much  respected 
Uncle  Christopher  A.  Babcock.  I  wish  it  was  in  my  power 
to  give  you  the  desired  information,  at  the  time  1  saw  him 
last  I  was  not  more  than  3  or  4  years  old,  of  course  cannot 
remember  much  of  him  as  to  his  size,  complexion  etc.  I  how- 
ever carry  in  my  left  arm  a  beautiful  schar  from  his  lancet  in- 
serting the  smallpox  matter.  I  will  relate  a  circumstance 
which  occurred  when  he  left  Stonington.  He  gave  me  a  sheep 
which  my  father  kept  until  I  had  five  when  he  let  them  out  to 
double  and  by  that  process  when  I  was  21  I  had  about  $40.00 
which  helped- to  give  me  a  start  in  the  world.  Aunt  Polly  your 
grandmother  and  her  little  son  made  a  visit  at  my  fathers.  I 
remember  them  well.  Your  Grandmother  was  the  first  per- 
son I  ever  heard  Parse  grammar,  it  was  not  known  in  those 
days  in  our  schools,  at  which  place  I  received  my  small  educa- 
tion. I  will  now  speak  of  our  ancestors,  the  family  of  brothers 
consisted  of  Isaiah,  James,  Elijah,  Elias  (Oliver  which  was 
my  Grandfather,  and  Timothy,  the  most  of  them  I  knew,  their 
Posterity  has  spread  almost  through  the  whole  of  these  United 
States,  recently  we  had  a  state  senator  by  the  name  of  George 
R.  Babcock  from  Buffalo.  I  took  the  liberty  to  write  him 
found  he  was  a  descendent  of  Uncle  Isaiah,  we  also  had  a 
Mem.  of  Assembly  from  Niagara  Co.  a  descendent  of  Isaiah. 
I  have  been  made  acquainted  with  Cous.  Samuel  Babcock  of 
this  county,  a  son  of  Isaiah,  and  of  course  own  cousin  to  your 
grandfather.  He  told  me  my  Grandfather  was  a  rude  man 
and  when  he  came  to  his  fathers  visiting  he  would  be  full  of 
glee,  and  that  his  father  was  a  Presbyterian  of  the  strictest 
order.  Would  say  to  our  Grandfather  in  the  evening  "Come 
Brother  Oliver  its  time  for  prayers."  His  Uncle  Oliver  would 
be  serious,  but  as  soon  as  prayer  was  said  would  be  as  rude  as 
ever,  and  at  the  time  he  had  fears  concerning  his  Uncle  Oli- 
vers children  but  traced  of  them  ever  since  and  he  was  satis- 
fied they  were  altogether  before  the  children  of  either  of  the 
brothers,  says  he  there  was  your  Uncle  Oliver 


4  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

was  a  very  celebrated  Capt.  in  the  Revolution,  lost  his  life  for 
his  coiintrys  good,  and  my  father  Jcjshna  a  Justice  Peace  27 
years  giving  great  satisfaction.  Uncle  William  and  Gersham 
both  Captains  soon  after  the  war.  your  grandfather  a  suc- 
cessful surgeon  and  physician  in  the  time  which  tried  mens 
souls,  and  some  womans,  Uncle  Daniel  was  a  Senator,  and  a 
Judge  and  all  of  them  stead}-  exemplary  men,  lived  respected, 
and  died  regretted  by  all  their  acquaintances.  I  have  now 
come  down  to  our  own  family  with  which  you  have  been  made 
partially  acquainted.  My  wife  died  more  than  one  year  since 
after  we  had  lived  togetlier  more  than  55  years.  I  have  just 
entered  my  83rd  year  is  it  not  passing  strange  that  a  Harp  of 
a  thousand  strings  should  keep  in  tune  so  long  but  we  must 
thank  God  and  take  courage. 

I  hope  to  see  your  Masonic  magazine.  I  think  I  have  seen 
your  name  connected  with  the  order 

I  also  am  that  I  am 

Yours  very  respectfully, 

Joshua  Babcock. 

Cousin  James  F.  Babcock. 

(The  Hon.  James  F.  Babcock  mentioned  was  editor  of  the 
Daily  Palladium,  Xew  Haven,  Conn.,  and  President  of  the 
Connecticut  Senate.) 

After  Isaiah,  Sr.,  had  sold  his  farm  in  Voluntown  to  Gal- 
lup, with  the  exception  of  his  eldest  son,  Isaiah,  Jr.,  and  his 
family,  he  and  the  remainder  of  his  family  removed  to  what 
was  then  Partridgefield,  now  Hinsdale  and  Peru,  Berkshire 
County,  Alass.  In  January,  1902,  I  inspected  the  county  rec- 
ords of  Berkshire  County,  at  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  and  found  the 
following  deeds  of  record,  which  are  exact  copies : 

Joseph  Loomer  of  Partridgefield 

To  (Book   12,  Page   13) 

Isaiah  Babcock. 
Know  all  Men  by  these  Presents,  that  I,  Joseph  Loomer  of 
Partridgefield  in  the  County  of  Berkshire,  In  Consideration 
of  thirty-two  Pounds,  ten  shillings  lawful  money,  paid  me  by 
Isaiah  Babcock  of  Voluntown,  in  the  County  of  Windham, 
and  Colony  of  Connecticut  yeoman.  The  Receipt  whereof  I 
do  Hereby  acknowledge,  do  hereby  give,  grant,  sell  and  con- 
vey unto  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock  and  his  Heirs,  One  half  part 
to  be  taken  on  the  Southerly  end  of  a  lott  of  land  in  Partridge- 
field aforesaid  being  the  Lott  No.  thirteen,  the  whole  Lott 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  5 

contains  one  Hundred  and  fifty  acres  more  or  less  Saveing 
only  the  Town  Road  crossing  said  Land  is  Reserved.  To 
Have  and  to  hold  the  same  to  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock  and  his 
Heirs,  to  his  and  their  use  and  Behoof  forever.  And  I  do 
covenant  with  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock  and  his  Heirs  and  As- 
signs, That  I  am  lawfully  seized  in  Fee  of  the  Premises.  That 
they  are  free  of  all  Incum])rances.  That  I  have  good  i'iight  to 
sell  and  cojucy  the  same  to  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock.  And 
that  1  will  warrant  and  Defend  the  same  to  the  said  Isaiah 
Babcock  and  his  Heirs  and  Assigns  forever,  against  the  Law- 
ful Claims  and  Demands  of  all  Persons. 

In  Witness  whereof  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  seal 
the  fifteenth  Day  of  June,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his  Majesty's 
Reign  Anno  que  Domini,  \'/'/2. 

Joseph  Loomer  (l.  s.) 
In  presence 

Olv.  Partridge. 

Solo.  Stoddard. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  above  deed  is  dated  June  15,  1772. 
Isaiah  sold  to  Gallup  in  Voluntown  Apr.  25,  1772.  So  it  took 
the  emigrants,  traveling  with  ox-teams,  wagons,  horses,  and 
on  horse  and  foot,  several  weeks,  through  a  wilderness  inhab- 
ited by  wolves  and  wild  beasts,  to  reach  their  destination.  The 
above  deed  was  recorded  Mar.  3,  1774,  and  acknowledged  be- 
fore Olv.  Partridge,  Justice  of  the  Peace. 

Two  years  from  the  date  of  the  above  deed  Isaiah  Babcock 
purchased  additional  land,  as  appears  in  the  following  deed, 
recorded  Mar.  3.  1774,  by  M.  Hopkins,  Regs.: 

(Book  12,  Page  19.) 

Thomas.  Marshal 
To 
Isaiah  Babcock. 
To  all  People  unto  whom  these  Presents  shall  come  Thomas 
Marshal  of  Boston  in  the  County  of  Suffolk  and  Province  of 
ye  Massachusetts  Bay  in  New  England  Esquire  sendeth  Greet- 
ing.    Know  ye  that  I  the  said  Thomas  Marshal  for  and  in 
Consideration  of  the  Sum  of  Two  Hundred  and  fifty  pounds 
Lawful  Money  to  me  in  Hand  well  and  truly  paid  by  Isaiah 
Babcock  of   Partridgefield   in   the   County   of   Berkshire   and 
Province  aforesaid  yeoman.     The  Receipt  whereof  I  do  here- 
by acknowledge  Have  Granted,   Bargained.    Sold,   Conveyed 
and  Confirmed,  and  by  these  Presents  Do  Grant,  Bargain,  Sell, 


6  IsaiaJi  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Convey  and  Confirm  unto  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock  One  Cer- 
tain Lott  of  land  in  the  Township  No.  2,  in  the  said  County 
of  Berkshire  being  the  SetHng  Lott  No.  2  containing  one 
Hundred  and  fifty  acres,  and  also  Fifty  acres  of  the  Setling 
Lott  No.  I  (Saving  and  reserving  out  of  the  said  Lott  No.  2 
the  Mill  Stream  running  thro'  the  same  and  the  Privilidges 
thereto  belonging  and  also  half  an  acre  of  land  adjoining  said 
Stream  that  is  to  say  three  eights  of  an  acre  on  the  East  side 
and  one  eighth  Part  of  one  acre  on  the  West  side  of  said 
Stream.  To  Have  and  to  hold  the  said  granted  Premises 
(saving  and  reserving  as  aforesaid)  unto  the  said  Isaiah  Bab- 
cock his  Heirs  and  Assigns.  To  his  and  their  only  proper 
use,  benefit  and  Behoof  forever.  And  the  said  Thomas  Mar- 
shal for  myself  my  Heirs,  Executors  and  Administrators  do 
hereby  Covenant  with  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock  his  Heirs  and 
Assigns.  That  I  am  lawfully  Seized  in  Fee  of  the  Premises. 
That  they  are  free  of  all  Incumbrances.  That  I  have  good 
right  to  Sell  and  convey  the  same  to  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock 
to  hold  as  aforesaid,  and  that  I  will  Warrant  and  Defend  the 
said  granted  Premises,  (Saving  and  reserving  as  aforesaid) 
unto  the  said  Isaiah  Babcock  his  Heirs  and  Assigns  forever 
against  the  LawfuU  claims  and  Demands  of  all  Persons. 

In  witness  whereof  I  the  said  Thomas  Marshal  and  Lucy 
my  wife  In  token  of  her  free  Consent  to  this  bargain  and  Sale 
and  full  Relinquishment  and  Quit  claim  of  all  her  right  of 
Dower  and  Thirds  of  and  in  the  afore-granted  Premises  have 
hereunto  set  our  hands  and  seals  the  twenty  third  Day  of  Feb- 
ruary Anno  Domini,  One  Thousand  Seven  Hundred  and  Sev- 
enty Four,  and  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  his  Majesty's  Reign. 

Signed,  Sealed  and  Delivered 

in  Presence  of 

Henry  Allen,  Junr.  Thos.  Marshal  &  Seal 

Nathanial  Coil  Allen.         Lucy  Marshal  &  Seal 

Suffolk  ss.  Boston, 
Feb.  23rd,  1774. 

Then  ye  above  named  Thomas  Marshal  Esqr,  and  Lucy  his 
wife  acknowledged  ye  Instrument  to  be  their  Act  and  Deed 
Before  me. 

Belcher  Noyes,  Justice  of  Peace. 

The  Town  of  Partridgefield  was  incorporated  as  a  town 
from  1 77 1  to  1806,  and  was  composed  of  a  portion  of  the  town 
of  Hinsdale  and  the  adjoining  town  of  Peru.  It  was  six  miles 
long  and  four  and  one  half  miles  broad.     This  township  in- 


PERU,    MASS. 
Where  I  found  the  town  records  of  Partridgefield,   Alass. 


Page  6. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  7 

eluded  the  greater  j)ortion  of  Hinsdale  and  all  of  Peru,  and 
was  purchased  at  public  auction  in  Boston,  June  2,  1762,  for 
£1,460  by  Oliver  Partridge  and  Elisha  Jones,  and  was  named 
in  honor  of  the  former.  It  is  located  on  the  Green  Mountains. 
Climate  is  cold  and  severe  in  winter,  and  the  soil  hard  and 
stony  and  only  adapted  to  grazing.  The  first  team  crossed 
over  the  mountains  in  1767,  and  it  has  since  become  a  regular 
turnpike  road.  Isaiah's  farm,  without  doubt,  was  as  fertile 
and  productive  as  any,  being  probably  located  in  the  valley 
along  Hinsdale  Creek  near  Dalton,  in  what  is  now  the  town 
of  Hinsdale.  That  he  was  active  and  prominent  in  town  af- 
fairs is  proven  by  the  official  town  records  of  Partridgefield. 
The  writer  examined  these  records  found  in  the  town  of  Peru 
in  January,  1902,  and  presents  them  in  full: 

Town  Meeting  held  at  Isaiah  Babcock's 

house. 
Adjourned  town  meeting  held  at  Isaiah 

Babcock's  house. 
Town  meeting  held  at  his  house. 
Isaiah  Babcock  chosen  Warden. 
Adjourned  Town  Meeting  at  house  of 

Isaiah  Babcock  in  Partridgefield. 
Chosen  Tythingman. 
Town  meeting  at  his  house. 
Town  Meeting  at  his  house. 
Ad.  Town  Meeting  at  Iiis  house. 
Ad.  Town  Meetinof  at  his  house. 
Town   Meeting.     Appointed   to   inspect 
accounts    of    Assessors.      Also    on 
Committee  to  inspect  a  new  road. 
Mar.   14th,   1775.     At  Town  Meeting  elected  Assessor  in 

place   of   Deacon   Kinnie  who  had 
gone  into  the  army. 
Mar.   1 8th,   1776.     Voted  that  Isaiah  Babcock  and  others 

be  innholders  in  the  town. 
Mar.  1 8th,   1776.     At  Town  Meeting  elected  Assessor  and 

Innholder. 
July      7th,   1777.      Voted  to  be  innholder  for  this  year. 
April  13th,    1778.     Voted  Isaiah  Babcock  care  for  ministry 

lot. 
Dec.  23rd,   1777.     Public  Meeting  appointed  on   Commit- 
tee to  assist  the  Assessors. 
Mar.    1 6th,   1778.     Town  Meeting  elected  Tythingman. 


May 

1772. 

1772. 

Mar. 

1 6th, 

1773- 

Mar. 

1 6th, 

1773- 

Aug. 

9th, 

1773- 

Mar. 

iStli, 

1774- 

Mar. 

26th, 

1774- 

April 

4th, 

1774- 

April 

1 8th, 

1774- 

April 

24th, 

1774- 

Oct. 

4th, 

1774- 

8  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Mar.   1 6th,   1778.     At  Town  Meeting  elected  Surveyor  of 

Highways. 

Mar.      ist,   1779.     Elected  to  Committee  on  Safety.    Also 

to  provide  preaching  for  the  year. 

Mar.  22nd,   1779.     Town  Meeting  was  held  at  his  house. 

April  2nd,  1779.  At  Town  Meeting  chosen  to  let  out  min- 
istry lands,  rent  to  be  paid  in  clear- 
ing. 

Isaiah  was  a  very  strict  church  member  and  took  an  active 
interest  in  everything  which  pertained  to  the  church. 

From  the  Town  Church  Records  of  Peru  I  have  gathered 
the  following: 

"April,  1773.  Town  Meeting  at  8  a.  m.  Voted,  the  Se- 
lectmen to  agree  with  Mr.  Isaiah  Babcock  concerning  meeting 
in  his  house  for  public  worship,  if  they  can  hire  it,  and  if  they 
cannot  have  his  house  for  that  purpose,  then  to  meet  in  Nathan 
Watkins'  barn  for  public  worship." 

At  another  Town  Meeting  Isaiah  Babcock  was  elected  to 
some  office,  but  the  record  was  so  badly  torn  as  to  be 
illegible. 

In  the  history  of  Berkshire  County,  vol.  ii,  page  266,  pub- 
lished in  1885,  appears  the  following: 

"Church  Meetings  that  year  were  held  in  the  house  of  Isaiah 
Babcock  and  in  Nathan  Watkins'  barn." 

Page  9,  Centennial  Congregational  Church  History,  Hins- 
dale, Mass.,  has  the  following: 

"At  a  regular  town  meeting  Jan.  2,  1792,  the  town  refused 
to  join  with  Nathanial  Kellogg,  Nathan  Warner,  James  Wing, 
Caleb  Goff,  Nathan  Webb,  James  Foot,  Charles  Babcock  and 
others  in  a  petition  to  the  legislature  for  a  committee  to  locate 
a  meeting  house  and  determine  whether  any  part  of  the  in- 
habitants ought  to  be  set  off  to  other  towns." 

Page  10.  "For  a  long  time  the  question  of  forming  a 
parish  or  new  town  had  been  much  agitated  which  culminated 
in  a  petition  to  the  Legislature  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  east 
part  of  Dalton  with  those  in  the  west  part  of  Partridgefield 
to  be  incorporated  as  a  parish  or  town." 

In  answer  to  the  petition  a  committee  was  appointed  who 
W'Cnt  to  Dalton  to  investigate.  As  a  result  of  their  report,  the 
West  parish  of  Partridgefield  w^as  incorporated  in  June,  1795, 
on  the  lines  designated  and  expected. 

The  following  is  the  copy  of  a  document  which  was  sent  to 
the  General  Court  over  one  hundred  3^ears  ago : 


% 


4^^ 


PARTRTDGEFIELD,    OTSEGO    CO..    N.    Y. 


Page  lo. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  9 

"To  the  Honorable  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives 
in  General  Court  assembled. 

"The  Petition  of  a  Number  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  West 
part  of  Partridgefield  and  the  South  East  part  of  Dalton, 
each  in  the  County  of  Berkshire  and  Commonwealth  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, Humbly  Sheweth,— that  it  is  their  re(|uest  on  Ac- 
count of  the  Situation  of  their  Towns  respectively  to  be  Set 
of  from  their  Town  and  Enexed  to  Each  other,  and  be 
formed  into  a  Town  or  Parish  as  Shall  be  Thought  most  for 
the  good  of  the  Towns  and  the  Petitioners  Respectively,  and 
for  that  purpose  your  Petitioners  Humbly  Pray  that  your 
Honours  would  take  the  matter  into  your  Deliberate  Consid- 
eration and  Grant  a  Committee  at  the  Expense  of  the  Peti- 
tioners to  View  the  Premises,  and  give  their  opinions  whether 
or  not  it  is  reasonable  that  the  Petitioners  Should  have  their 
Prayer  granted,  and  if  granted,  to  say  how  much  of  the  Towns 
Shall  be  So  Set  together,  and  Whether  in  their  opinion  it  will 
be  most  for  the  good  of  the  Towns  and  the  Petitioners  Re- 
spectively to  have  Said  Society  formed  into  a  Town  or  Par- 
ish— and  your  Petitioners  as  in  duty  bound  Shall  Ever  Pray. 

"Partridgefield  Jan'y  5th,  1795." 

Ninety-six  persons  signed  the  above  petition,  and  among 
them  were  Isaiah  Babcock  and  his  son  John  Babcock. 

In  answer  to  the  foregoing  petition,  a  committee  was  duly 
sent,  and  the  "West  Parish  in  Partridgefield"  became  incor- 
porated. It  had  a  legal  existence  of  two  days  less  than  nine 
years,  when  it  was  merged  and  lost  in  the  present  town  of 
Hinsdale.  The  General  Court  which  granted  the  request  was 
assembled  in  the  historic  old  statehouse,  still  preserved  at  the 
head  of  State  Street,  in  Boston.  The  towns  of  Partridgefield 
and  Dalton  were  not  represented  that  year,  a  local  option 
law  allowing  small  towns  to  send  a  representative  or  not 
as  they  chose.  The  act  was  signed  by  Governor  Samuel 
Adams,  fourth  governor  under  the  constitution  of  1780.  His 
customary  dress  on  public  occasions,  we  are  informed,  was  a 
tie,  wig,  cocked  hat,  knee  breeches,  silver  shoe  buckles,  and  a 
red  cloak.  The  act  was  signed  on  the  23d  of  June,  1795,  and 
the  news  of  its  passage  was  brought  from  Boston  to  Berk- 
shire by  stage,  but  arrived  forty-six  years  ahead  of  cars,  and 
sixty-six  before  a  telegram.  It  was  received  in  the  midst  of 
the  busy  season,  for  they  were  all  farmers  in  those  days. 

Each  town  and  parish  was  obliged  to  build  a  meetinghouse 
and  support  a  minister,  as  well  as  build  schoolhouses  and  sup- 
42 


lo  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

port  schoolmasters,  both  requirements  being  equally  binding. 
The  churches  must  be  orthodox,  which  was  construed  to 
mean  Congregational,  it  being  the  standing  order  in  the 
State. 

The  assessors'  tax  book  for  the  year  1798  shows  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty-one  resident  taxpayers  and  six  nonresident. 
The  valuation  of  the  parish  was  £17,322  New  England  cur- 
rency, or  $57,740.  The  valuation  now  of  the  same  territory 
is  $700,000.    There  were 

Works 


66  Houses 

I   Potash 

I   Inn 

112  Horses 

I   Store 

58  Colts 

7  Faculty  (trade  or 

pro- 

231   Cows 

fession) 

80  Oxen  . 

I   Grist  Mill 

343  Stock  ( 

5  Saw  Mills 

239  Swine 

6  Shops 

40   pairs. 


There  was  no  money  at  interest,  bank  stock,  or  other  invest- 
ments assessed.  Of  seventy-five  owners  of  horses,  but  five  had 
more  than  two.  Of  ninety-six  owners  of  cows,  but  one  had 
more  than  nine,  and  but  ten  more  than  seven.  Of  thirty- 
eight  owners  of  oxen,  but  ten  had  more  than  one  pair.  There 
were  no  sheep.  Farm  crops  were  taxed,  and  the  quantities 
produced  were  small  per  individual  producer.  Of  wheat  the 
average  produced  was  8^  bushels;  of  rye,  14  bushels;  corn, 
II  bushels;  oats,  12  1-3  bushels;  hay,  5  tons;  flax,  78  pounds. 
They  were  possessed  of  moderate  means,  but  nearly  all  owned 
homes.  Of  the  one  hundred  and  fifty-one  men  in  the  parish 
twenty  years  old  and  upward,  all  but  thirty  owned  a  house. 
They  showed  great  liberality  in  building  a  meetinghouse.  It 
was  built  by  taxation,  but  they  voluntarily  placed  themselves  in 
line  for  the  purpose,  and  it  is  the  voluntary  actions  of  people 
which  show  their  character.  The  tax  rate  for  building  this 
house  was  $43.60  on  a  thousand  dollars  valuation,  and  a  poll 
tax  of  $9.04;  the  town  taxes  being  additional.  A  similar  tax 
to-day  would  yield  enough  to  build  a  church  costing  over 
$55,000. 

On  Oct.  4,  1799,  the  meetinghouse  was  accepted  as  com- 
pleted, and  on  Oct.  17  was  dedicated.  This  meetinghouse  is 
not  now  standing,  but  upon  the  same  site  is  another  very  sim- 
ilar to  the  old  structure.  The  writer  has  been  to  the  site  of 
the  old  church.  For  twenty  years  or  more  the  church  was  not 
warmed.    Taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  the  thermom- 


PARTRIDGEFIELD.  OTSEGO  COUNTY. 

Showing   site   of   Babcock   settlement,   district   school,   etc. 

Page  12. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  1 1 

eter  in  winter  frequently  drops  to  30  degrees  below  zero  in  the 
Berkshire  Hills,  the  regular  attendants  at  the  church  services 
must  have  been  pretty  hardy  people  to  have  been  able  to  have 
remained  through  the  services.  The  first  sexton  was  paid  a 
salary  of  three  dollars  per  year.  They  were  a  hard-working, 
upright,  and  industrious  people.  Of  the  privations  they  en- 
dured we  can  form  our  own  opinion. 

The  following  deeds  appear  on  record  in  the  office  of  the 
Register  of  Deeds  of  Berkshire  County : 

Vol.  xix,  page  439:  "Isaiah  Babcock  conveyed  to  his  son 
Elisha  on  Dec.  6th,  1777,  52)4  acres  of  land  off  from  his  own 
farm  for  £30." 

Vol.  xxi,  page  395:  "To  his  son  John  Jan.  25th.  1787,  a 
large  portion  of  his  home  farm,  and  53  acres  additional  for 
£300." 

Vol.  XXX,  page  399:  "To  Jason  Goodrich  Mar.  loth,  1788. 
21J/2  acres  for  £43." 

"To  Isaiah  and  his  son  John  by  deed  dated  April  28th,  1792, 
to  Jesse  Goodrich.  38  acres  of  land  for  £96." 

This  is  the  last  of  record  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  in  Berkshire 
County.  Mass.,  His  wife's  name  does  not  appear  upon  any  of 
his  deeds  to  purchasers  of  land.  It  is  certain,  however,  she  was 
living,  for,  in  1795.  she  was  one  of  the  twenty-three  founders 
of  the  First  Congregational  Church  in  Hinsdale.  Mass..  which 
was  organized  at  her  son  John  Babcock's  house.  Isaiah  Bab- 
cock, Sr..  was  in  the  W^ar  of  the  Revolution,  as  is  evidenced 
by  the  following: 

George  Plumb  Bacon,  eighty-two  years  of  age  and  a  grand- 
son of  Phebe  (Babcock)  Blackman  (daughter  of  Isaiah,  Sr.), 
writes  as  follows:  "Grandma  Blackman  (Phebe  Babcock) 
would  sit  down  and  talk  about  the  battle  when  Cornwallis  was 
taken.  Her  father  was  in  the  battle."  According  to  this  story 
Isaiah,  Sr..  was  in  the  Continental  Army  at  the  battle  of  York- 
town,  which  terminated  in  the  surrender  of  Lord  Cornwallis. 
It  is  noticed  Isaiah,  Sr.,  was  elected  on  the  Committee  of 
Safety,  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  Mar.  i,  1779.  Cornwallis  sur- 
rendered Oct.  19,  1 78 1.  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  writer  that 
Isaiah,  Sr.,  along  with  others  volunteered  their  services  at  this 
critical  time,  but  did  not  serve  as  a  member  of  the  army  for 
any  long  period  of  time.  A  careful  examination  of  records  in 
the  War  Department  at  W^ashington  fails  to  find  him  recorded. 
This,  however,  is  not  absolute,  and  official  record  of  his  service 
may  be  found  before  this  is  printed.  Isaiah,  Sr.,  was  called 
"Zare"  for  short.    It  is  noticed  that  according  to  the  town  rec- 


12  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

ords  of  Partridgefield  he  was  elected  "Innkeeper."  The  tra- 
dition that  he  kept  a  pubhc  tavern  near  Partridge  Meadows, 
now  the  town  of  Dalton,  is  probably  correct.  He  with  his 
family  and  his  sons  and  their  families,  with  the  exception  of 
Elias  and  John,  sold  their  real  estate  about  1795,  and  joined 
the  emigration  out  of  Massachusetts  which  flowed  to  the  States 
of  New  York  and  Ohio.  Tlie  writer  was  informed  while  in 
Peru  last  year  there  are  eighteen  liundred  old  cellars  in  town 
without  house  over  them.  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  his  family  and  all 
his  sons  and  their  families,  with  the  exception  of  Elias  and 
John,  who  remained  in  Massachusetts,  emigrated  to  a  place  in 
New  York  State  in  what  was  then  Montgomery,  now  Otsego. 
County,  between  the  towns  of  Elk  Creek  and  Westford,  and 
made  a  settlement  there,  and  named  the  place  Partridgefield 
in  honor  of  the  place  they  came  from  in  Massachusetts.  Of 
their  journey  through  the  wilderness  to  this  spot  the  writer 
regrets  he  has  no  incidents  to  record.  They  must  have  suf- 
fered many  privations  incident  to  a  new  country.  The  writer 
has  been  to  the  site  of  the  Babcock  settlement,  and  was  very 
much  impressed  with  the  similarity  of  the  surrounding  coun- 
try, valleys,  and  streams  to  the  Berkshire  Hills  in  Massachu- 
setts where  the  pioneers  came  from.  The  settlement  was  lo- 
cated in  a  rich  and  fertile  valley  at  the  foot  of  a  long  hill  which 
is  called  to  this  day  Babcock  Hill.  Through  the  A-alley  flows 
a  stream  of  pure  spring  water,  in  which  brook  trout  are  found 
to  this  day  in  great  numbers.  Isaiah.  Sr.,  and  his  wife  and 
daughter  Elizabeth  made  their  home  with  their  son  Col.  Sam- 
uel. The  cellar  of  the  old  house  can  still  be  seen,  but  the  house 
proper  has  been  long  obliterated. 

It  has  been  claimed  by  some  previous  writers  that  Isaiah, 
Sr.,  died  in  Connecticut,  and  by  others  that  he  died  in  Massa- 
chusetts, all  of  which  was  wrong.  The  youngest  son  of  his 
large  family,  Jonas  Babcock,  was  very  methodical  and  kept  a 
daily  record  of  events  in  a  book  which  is  still  preserved.  The 
writer  in  his  visitation  to  Otsego  County  in  1902  saw  this  book, 
and  must  say  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  this  treasure,  which 
has  been  carefull  preserved  all  these  years  by  Jonas  Babcock's 
descendants,  the  place  where  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  his  fam- 
ilv  removed  to  when  they  left  Massachusetts  would  have  still 
remained  a -mystery.  In  Jonas  Babcock's  book  is  recorded  the 
following:  "Father  and  mother  removed  from  Partridgefield 
to  Worcester  March  loth,  1799.  Mother  died  October  4th, 
1804." 

To  guard  against  any  mistake  in  this  matter,  the  writer  cor- 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  13 

responded  with  the  Register  of  Deeds,  Worcester,  Mass..  and 
inquired  if  the  name  Isaiah  Bal)cock  appeared  on  record  in  his 
office  between  the  years  1794  and  1804,  and  received  the  fol- 
lowing reply : 

Worcester  District,  Registry  of  Deeds. 

Oct.  3.  8:53  .\.  M.,  T902. 
The  name  of  Isaiah  Babcock  cUjcs  not  appear  in  our  index 
from  1 73 1  to  1840. 

Yours, 

Daniel  Kent, 

Reg. 

The  writer  states  it  as  a  fact  that  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and 
his  wife  Elizabeth  (Plumb)  Babcock  made  their  home  with 
their  son  Col.  Samuel  in  the  town  of  Worcester,  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.,  and  both  died  there:  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  Oct. 
5,  1814,  aged  over  95  years;  and  his  wife  Elizabeth  (Plimib) 
Bal)cock,  Oct.  4,  1804.  A  living-  descendant,  grandson  of  Col. 
Samuel,  has  informed  the  writer  he  remembers  hearing  his 
brothers  and  sisters  speaking  of  the  decease  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and 
his  wife  at  his  grandfather  Col.  Samuel's  house.  A  grand- 
daughter of  Col.  Samuel  has  told  the  writer  the  same  circum- 
stance, and  another  granddaughter  related  this  circumstance 
to  the  writer:  "Elizabeth  (Plumb)  Babcock  made  her  home 
with  my  grandfather  Col.  Samuel.  She  called  a  boiled  dinner 
'pot  luck,'  and  also  used  to  play  with  the  rag  dolls  of  the  chil- 
dren on  the  floor,  as  she  became  cjuite  childish  with  advancing 
years." 

In  the  town  of  Westford,  not  over  ten  miles  from  where 
Col.  Samuel  and  his  family  resided  in  the  town  of  Worcester, 
is  the  Congregational  Church  of  Westford.  The  writer  has 
been  inside  of  this  church  and  examined  its  records,  which  are 
very  carelessly  kept.  The  decease  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  is 
recorded  upon  these  church  records.  This  was  once  a  pros- 
perous and  progressive  church.  Many  of  his  children  and 
grandchildren  and  great-grandchildren  were  members  of  this 
church.  The  early  records  of  this  church  seemed  to  be  in  a 
chaotic  state,  many  records  having  been  torn  out  by  people  in 
pursuit  of  information  and  carried  away.  The  records  state 
the  Westford  Congregational  Church  was  organized  by  brother 
Jeddediah  Bushnell  September,  1800.  Another  entry  the  writer 
noted  was:  "Revival  181 1.  July  1812  preached  in  a  neighbor- 
ing wood  the  house  being  insufficient."    It  is  noticed  that  some 


u 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 


of  Isaiah,  Sr.'s,  children  did  not  escape  the  censure  of  the 
church  society  for  being  derelict  in  attendance  at  church  meet- 
ings. This  was  once  a  prosperous  church,  but  it  has  dwindled 
down  in  membership  to  less  than  half  a  dozen  members.  It  is 
a  wooden  structure  located  on  a  hill.  Its  appearance  is  pleasing 
to  the  eye,  and  the  inside  is  neat  and  comfortable.  A  gallery 
is  in  the  rear  of  the  inside  of  the  church.  The  writer  noticed 
a  fine,  large,  handsome  Bible  on  the  pulpit  which  upon  opening 
was  found  dated  1798.  The  church  is  heated  by  a  large  stove. 
The  town  of  Westford  is  nine  miles  east  of  Cooperstown, 
eleven  miles  south  of  Cherry  Valley,  and  fifty-six  miles  west 


Masonic  Medal  Presented  to  Col.  Samuel  Babcock  in  Worcester, 
Otsego  Co.,  N.  Y.    (See  Page  95.) 


of  Albany.  The  surface  of  the  surrounding  country  is  uneven 
and  hilly,  but  the  valleys  are  fertile  and  productive  and  the 
uplands  are  used  generally  for  grazing.  The  timber  consists 
of  maple,  beech,  ash,  elm,  basswood,  and  pine,  and  the  whole 
country  is  abundantly  irrigated  by  springs  and  brooks.  The 
air  is  pure  and  invigorating.  It  is  the  region  of  health  owing 
to  its  elevation  and  delightful  surroundings.  It  was  in  such  a 
locality  as  this  that  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  his  wife,  and  many  of 
their  children  passed  the  latter  days  of  their  lives.  A  little 
way  outside  of  the  village  of  Westford  in  a  small  cemetery 
called  Grogh  Cemetery,  located  upon  a  knoll,  and  close  to  the 
graves  of  Col.  Samuel  and  his  wife  repose  the  remains  of  Isaiah 


CONGREGATIONAL  CHURCH, 
Westford,  Otsego  County, 

Where  Isaiah,   Sr.,  and  family  attended  church. 


Page  14. 


Isaiah  Bahcuck,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  15 

Babcock,  Sr.,  his  wife  Elizabeth  (Pkimb)  Babcock,  and  their 
daughter  Ehzabeth.  No  inscribed  stones  mark  their  last  rest- 
ing place.  A  rough  brown  stone,  native  and  peculiar  to  the 
country,  stands  at  the  head  of  the  graves.  The  cemetery  is 
overgrown  with  underbrush,  weeds,  briars,  and  thorns,  and  is 
evidently  used  for  a  pasture  lot  by  the  adjacent  farms.  The 
writer  was  deeply  pained  at  the  neglectful  condition  of  things, 
and  has  been  informed  this  whole  cemetery,  which  only  covers 
about  half  an  acre  of  land,  cannot  be  purchased.  Here  in  deso- 
late, neglected  graves  repose  the  founders  of  a  family  with  over 
one  thousand  descendants. 

Isaiah  Babcock.  Jr.,  eldest  son  and  firstborn  to  Isaiah,  Sr., 
and  Elizabeth  (Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn., 
Apr.  27,  1741.  He  was  m.  May  19,  1763,  to  Elizabeth  Doug- 
las of  the  same  place.     She  was  b.  in  Voluntowai,  Conn.,  Apr. 

4,  1745- 

The  Voluntown  town  records  record  the  followins:: 

"May  23rd,  1766,  James  Campbell  of  Killinly,  Ct.,  con- 
veyed to  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.  and  wife  Elizabeth  fifty  acres  of 
land." 

Elizabeth  Douglas  Babcock  d.  Dec.  13,  1768,  aged  2^  years. 

Their  children  were: 

Martha,  b.  Nov.  20,   1764;    d.  June,   1810,  aged  46  years. 
Mary,  b.  Nov.  14,  1766;    d.  Dec.  11,  1820,  aged  55  years. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  18,  1768;  d.  Jan.  15,  1785.  aged  16  years,  3  months. 

Isaiah,  Jr.,  m.  (2)  Freelove  Briggs  Aug.  9,  1770.  She  was 
b.  Jan.  20.  1743. 

"April  25th,  1772,  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.,  conveyed  to  Isaac 
Gallup  50  acres  of  land  for  £20."  He  removed  from  Volun- 
town. Conn.,  to  New  Fairfield,  same  State.  Here  a  number 
of  their  children  w^ere  born.  Selling  his  property  here,  he  took 
Continental  money  in  payment,  which  became  worthless,  and 
he  removed  to  a  farm  in  Windham,  Greene  County,  N.  Y.,  and 
commenced  all  over  again.  He  died  there  Jan.  18.  1827.  aged 
86  years.  His  wife  died  at  the  same  place  May  7.  1831.  also 
aged  86  years.  In  1803  the  town  of  Windham  included  with- 
in its  boundary  a  part  of  what  is  now  Ulster  County  and  the 
towns  of  Prattsville,  Lexington,  Hunter,  and  Ashland.  I  first 
found  where  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.,  lived  on  the  road  that  runs 
from  Capt.  Guns  to  Isaiah  Babcock  and  Eliphalet  Wheeler's 
houses.  His  farm  would  be  called  here  in  Western  New  York 
a  barren,  poor  piece  of  land.     It  was  stony,  hilly,  and  more 


1 6  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

adapted  to  j^ra/ing  purposes  than  good  agriculture.  Having 
lost  every  dollar  he  had  through  the  vvorthlessness  of  the  Con- 
tinental money  he  accepted  in  Connecticut  for  his  land,  he  prob- 
ably purchased  this  farm  because  he  bought  it  cheap.  Here  on 
this  farm  he  labored  until  Mar.  20,  1804,  when  he  is  found 
recorded  upon  the  town  records  of  Windham  as  being  an  in- 
habitant of  Road  District  No.  60.  This  is  all  that  appears  upon 
the  town  records  of  Windham  relating  to  him.  The  writer 
understands,  however,  that  this  farm  where  he  lived  until  his 
decease  was  better  adapted  to  grazing  than  agriculture.  Isaiah, 
Jr.,  was  a  hard-working,  industrious  man.  He  was  a  strict 
member  of  the  Congregational  Church,  being  so  blue  in  his 
religion  that  his  life  and  manner  of  living  was  very  much  like 
the  Blue  Presbyterians  in  the  early  days  in  Connecticut.  He 
was  honorable  and  upright  in  everything  pertaining  to  his  daily 
life.  His  house  was  cptite  a  place  for  the  assembling-  of  his 
relatives  in  those  days.  A  journey  by  horse  to  visit  relatives 
in  Massachusetts  or  Connecticut  was  not  considered  a  great 
undertaking.  It  has  been  said  by  writers  who  ought  to  know 
that  Isaiah,  Jr.,  was  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution  Avhile  a  resi- 
dent in  Connecticut.  The  writer  endeavored ,  to  establish  this 
as  a  fact,  but  is  informed  by  the  War  Department  at  Washing- 
ton, D.  C,  that  he  is  not  recorded  there,  and  also  that  his  not 
being  recorded  there  is  not  conclusive  that  he  was  not  in  this 
war.  I  have,  however,  failed  to  find  his  name  in  Record  of 
Connecticut  Men  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution.  The  fact  that 
all  his  brothers  were  in  this  w^ar  inclines  the  writer  to  the  belief 
that  he  may  have  been  in  this  war  also. 

In  a  cemetery  in  the  town  of  Windham  are  interred  the  re- 
mains of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.,  and  his  wife  Freelove  Briggs. 
They  have  inscribed  marble  headstones,  and  their  graves  are 
well  cared  for  by  their  descendants.  It  is  a  source  of  disap- 
pointment that  I  cannot  give  the  parentage  of  Freelove  Briggs. 
She  was  a  resident  of  Voluntown,  Conn.,  but  the  names  of  her 
father  and  mother  I  have  been  unable  to  learn.  From  her 
grandchildren  wdio  knew  her  and  visited  there  I  have  learned 
she  was  a  noble  woman  and  very  highly  esteemed  by  all  who 
knew  her. 

Through  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  Artemas  Bissell,  of  Montclair, 
N.  J.,  who  w^as  son  of  Norman  and  Olivia  (Babcock)  Bissell, 
his  mother  being  a  granddaughter  of  Isaiah.  Jr.,  and  Freelove 
(Briggs)  Babcock,  I  am  enabled  to  present  an  exact  copy  of 
a  letter  written  to  his  son  George  Babcock,  Mil  ford,  N.  Y., 
written  two  years  prior  to  his  decease : 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  17 

More  Ville 

Feby  3rd  Mr.  George  Babcock, 

Milforcl  Otsego  County 

State  of  New  York. 
Windham  January  29 — 1825 — - 

Dear  Children  :  I  send  you  a  few  lines  to  Inform  you 
about  our  circumstances  troubles  trials  &;  afflictions  attend  us 
where  ever  we  be  and  I  must  expect  them  for  1  lake  that  to  be 
my  lot  and  portion,  i  hope  they  will  be  for  our  good.  Wee 
have  moved  from  Turneys  and  wee  are  now  at  Levi  s.  We 
came  here  the  first  mond  in  December.  \\' ee  have  a  warm  and 
comfortable  room  to  live  in  last  Thursday  night  was  a  week 
your  Mother  just  before  bed  time  went  to  go  to  the  front  door 
through  the  Hall  in  the  dark  and  missing  her  way  went  to  the 
seller  door  and  opened  it  and  pitcht  down  to  the  bottom  and 
almost  kild  her  and  was  brout  up  almost  dead  and  was  in  great 
distress  and  so  til  last  night.  She  fell  on  her  rite  side  bruisd 
her  hip  so  bad  that  she  fainted  so  that  Levi  spoke  and  said  She 
was  gone  wee  though  she  was  dead  but  she  revived  again  but 
was  in  the  greatest  distress  she  could  live  in  and  has  never  lain 
down  nor  set  down  without  two  or  three  to  help  her  and  she 
would  cry  out  in  greatest  Distress  she  could  live  in.  Sabra  and 
Mrs.  Morse  watcht  with  her  that  night.  I  got  Docter  Benham 
to  blead  her.  Docter's  vinegar  and  salt  and  which  was  good 
to  take  out  the  anguish  we  tried  that  but  it  did  no  good  wee 
boiled  may  weeds  and  laid  that  on  hot  that  eased  her  a  little. 
She  has  had  considerable  fever.  I  got  some  powder  for  it.  I 
got  a  fial  of  dildock  and  rubt  that  on.  The  Docter  said  I  might 
get  some  high  wines  which  with  I  got  some  yesterday  and  wet 
her  hip  with  it  warm  and  took  a  pil  of  opium  and  restd  very 
well,  what  she  had  done  but  she  cant  stand  on  her  feet  only  on 
one  to  bare  any  ^^■ait  nor  can  she  set  down  nor  0^0  to  bed  with 
two  or  three  nor  git  up  without  the  same  help —  I  cant  say  any 
more — 

I  had  a  letter  from  Shubael  a  little  \vhile  ago.  He  said  his 
w'ife  began  with  the  dropsey  he  had  two  of  the  best  Docters  to 
attend  upon  her  they  said  she  could  not  live  he  said  he  would 
send  me  word  when  there  was  any  alteration  but  I  have  had 
none  yet  but  expect  one  soon.  Sally  Turney  has  been  very  sick 
a  child  is  to  but  they  have  got  better  I  suppose  it  like  you  hard 
that  Lucy  Wheeler  was  dead.  Wee  send  our  best  wishes  and 
love  to  all  of  you  hoping  you  are  all  well. 

I  remain  your  kind  Father,  Isaiah  Babcock, 

Give  my  respects  Alexander  and  his  famil}^ 


l8  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

It  is  noticed  that  the  postage  on  this  letter  was  ten  cents.  It 
Avas  mailed  at  "More  Villig  Fbe.  ye  3rd  5"  and  addressed  to 
Mr.  George  Babcock,  Milford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  and 
sealed  with  sealing  wax. 

Freelove  (Briggs)  Babcock  survived  her  injuries  mentioned 
in  the  letter  six  years. 

Their  children  were: 

Levi,  b.  June  11,  1771. 
Shubael,  b.  June  27,  1773. 
Sarah,  b.   Feb.  24,   1775. 
Isaac,  b.   Dec.  9,   1776. 
George,  b.  Feb.  21,   1779. 
Abel,  b.  Dec.  3,  1781. 

Martha  Babcock,  eldest  daughter  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  jr..  and 
Elizabeth  (Douglas)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Voluntown,  Conn., 
Nov.  20,  1764.  On  Dec.  7.  1786,  she  was  m.  to  Patrick  Camp- 
bell, and  d.  June  — ,  18 10,  aged  46  years. 

Mary  Babcock,  second  daughter  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.,  and 
Elizabeth  (Douglas)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Voluntown,  Conn., 
Nov.  14,  1766.  She  m.  May  8,  1788.  Hon.  James  Alexander, 
of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  d.  Dec.  11,  1820,  aged  55  years. 

Levi  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  firstborn  of  Isaiah  Babcock, 
Jr.,  and  Freelove  (Briggs)  Babcock,  was  b.  June  11,  1771,  in 
Voluntown,  Conn.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to  New  Fair- 
field, same  State,  and  later  with  his  parents  to  Windham, 
Greene  County,  N.  Y.  On  Nov.  10,  1800,  he  m.  Sabra  Hun- 
gerford,  and  resided  on  a  farm.  She  was  b.  Aug.  30.  1769. 
She  d.  Apr.  1 1,  1856,  aged  86  years.  Levi  Babcock  d.  Oct.  28, 
1854,  aged  83  years. 

Children : 

Albert  Evander,   b.   Aug.    17,    1801. 

Almus  Milo,  b.  Oct.   10.   1803. 

Lyman    Homeston,    b.    Nov.    5,    1805 ;     unm.  ;     d.    in    1887,    aged   82 

years. 
Linas  Briggs,  b.  Nov.  5,  1805.     Twin. 
Harry  Hungerford,  b.   Dec.  21,   1809. 

The  town  records  of  Windham  have  the  following  of  record  : 
1808.  Levi  Babcock  at  a  Town  Meeting  elected  Assessor. 
1816.  Overseer  Road  Dist.   No.    15. 

1821.  "  "  "  "     16. 

1822.  Annual  town  meeting  held  at  Levi  Babcock's  house 

April  2nd.     At  this  meeting  he  was  elected  Overseer 
of  the  Poor  and  Overseer  of  Road  Dist.  No.  21. 
1836-42-45.  Elected  Overseer  of  the  Poor 


IIa  ■■^^' " 


COLONEL  SAMUEL  BABCOCK'S  HOME, 
Worcester,  Otsego  Co.,  N.  Y. 

In  this  house  Isaiah,   Sr.,  and  his  wife  lived  and  died,  and  the  first 
Masonic  Lodge  in  Otsego  County  was  organized. 

Page  15. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  19 

1 83 1.  Town  Meeting  Elected  Overseer  uf  the  Vuuv. 

1832.  "  "  "  "  "  "  and 

Constable. 
1834.  Town  Meeting  Elected  Justice  of  the  Peace. 

Albert  E.  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  firstborn  of  Leva  and 
Sabra  (Hungerford)  Babcock,  was  b.  Aug.  17,  1801,  and  d. 
in  Middletown,  X.  V.,  June  27,  1873.  He  was  m.  to  Miss  Mar- 
garet Laraway,  by  the  Rev.  Clark  H.  Goodrich.  Oct.  28,  1829. 
She  was  b.  June  9,  1807,  and  d.  Jan.  22,  188 1. 

Mr.  Babcock  was  a  fine  business  man,  amassing  a  large  for- 
tune in  the  tanning  business,  which  he  conducted  in  partner- 
ship with  his  brother  Linas  Briggs  Babcock. 

Children,  b.  in  Middletown,  N.  Y. : 

A.  Le  Roy.  b.   Nov.  18,   1839;    d.  July  5.   1868. 

Sabra  Maretta,  b.  ;    d.  July  7,  1897,  aged  about  70  years. 

Sabra  Maretta  Babcock  married  John  Thrall,  of  Middle- 
town,  and  upon  her  decease  bequeathed  the  most  of  her  large 
fortune,  inherited  from  her  father,  to  the  city  of  Middletown. 
She  built  and  endowed  a  city  hospital  to  be  known  as  the  Thrall 
Hospital.  In  this  hospital  are  oil  paintings  of  Albert  E.  Bab- 
cock and  his  wife,  Margaret  (Laraway)  Babcock,  and  tablets  to 
their  memory.  She  gave  a  park  to  the  city  and  left  $30,000 
to  build  a  public  library,  which  has  since  been  built. 

Almus  M.  Babcock,  second  son  of  Levi  and  Sabra  ( Hunger- 
ford)  Babcock,  was  b.  Oct.  10,  1803.  He  was  m.  Nov.  13, 
1828,  by  Rev.  Mr.  Northrup,  to  Emily  C.  Noble. 

Children : 

Marcus  Stanley,  b.  Aug.  8,  1829;    d.  Apr.  i,  1897. 

Henry,  b.  Aug.  7,  1832;    d.  Nov.   13,  1832. 

Frances  Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  11.  1836;    m.  Addison  P.  Jones. 

Emily  C.  (Noble)  Babcock  was  b.  June  24,  1807 ;  d.  at  Ash- 
land, Greene  County,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  12,  1839. 

Almus  M.  Babcock  m.  (2)  Ann  Eliza  Hanford,  Sept.  i, 
1840.     She  d.  June  25,  1883. 

Children : 

Mary  Emily,  b.   Nov.  7,    1844;    m.   Ira  B.   Kerr. 

Louisa  Caroline,  b.  Sept.  5,  1848;    m.  Samuel  W.  Sprague. 

Linas  Briggs  Babcock,  third  son  of  Levi  and  Sabra  (Hun- 
gerford) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Ashland,  formerly  Windham, 
Greene  County,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  5,  1805.  He  was  m.  by  Rev.  Mr. 
Gregory,  of  Prattsville,  N.  Y.,  to  Lois  Ann  More.     She  was 


26  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

1).  in  Roxbury,  N.  Y.,  in  1815;  was  an  own  cousin  to  Jay 
Gould,  and  d.  in  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  21,  1887. 

Mr.  Babcock  was  an  extensive  manufacturer  and  business 
man,  and  accumulated  a  larf>-e  property.  He  d.  in  Middletown, 
N.  Y.,  July  17,  1880. 

Children,  b.  in  Mooresville,  N.  Y.,  and  Beaverkill,  N.  Y. : 

William    Hasbrouck,    b.    May    15,    18.^7. 

Robert   More,  b.  ;    m.   Hattie   McQuaid. 

Augusta,   b.   Dec.    10,   1839;    d.   Aug.    13,    1866. 

Susie  F.,  b.   Sept.  2,  1842;    d.  Fel).  5,  1862. 

Julia,  b.  July  29,   1845;    d.    Feb.   17,    1847. 

Julia  F.,  b.  Apr.  15, ;    ni.  Henry  R.  Russell.     Tbey  had  one  child, 

Harrv   Russell,   now   living   in   New   York   City.     She  d.   May  20, 

1898.' 
Annie,  h.  ;    d.   in  infancy. 

Harry  Hungerford,  last  born  of  Levi  and  Sabra  (Hunger- 
ford)  Babcock.  was  1).  Dec.  21,  1809,  and  d.  May  29,  1885.  He 
m.  Rachel  Rappelyea. 

Children : 

Dwight,  b.  Aug.  13,  1847;    m.  Sarah  J.  Smith. 
Josephena,  b.  Apr.  5,   1849;    ni.  James  E.  Scott. 
Harriet  A.,  b.  Mar.  4,  1851  ;    d.  Jan.  7,   1861. 
Arthur  L.,  b.  Aug.  26,  1852;    d.  July  18,  1898. 

Marcus  Stanley  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Almus  M.  and  Emily 
(Noble)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Ashland,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  8,  1829.  He 
m.  Mary  Christina  Smith,  of  New  York  City,  Jan.  5,  1857. 
She  was  b.  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  30,  1839.  Mr.  Babcock  d. 
in  Cat.skill,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  i,  1897. 

Children  : 

Edward  Henry,  b.  at  Iowa  City,  Dec.   19,   1857. 
William,  b.   Catskill,  June   10,    1871  ;    d.  July  15,   1871. 
Alice  Louisa,  b.  Catskill,  Feb.   15,  1875. 

William  Hasbrouck  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  child  of  Linas 
B.  and  Ann  (More)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Mooresville,  N.  Y., 
May  5,  1837.  On  Mar.  9,  1870,  he  m.  in  Middletown,  N.  Y., 
Mary  Augusta  Thompson.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Nelson 
M.  and  Ellen  Sherer  Th()m])son.  and  was  b.  in  Middletown, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  22,  1848.  She  d.  in  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  17, 
1876.    Mr".  Babcock  d.  in  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  16,  1874. 

Children,  b.  in  Middletown,  N.  Y. : 

Annie  L.,  b.  Jan.  17.  1872;  m.  Wm.  H.  Sexton,  of  Middletown, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  22,  igoo.  Mr.  Sexton  is  a  son  of  Wm.  H.  and  Lu- 
cretia  C.A.dams)  Sexton,  and  was  b.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,  May  16, 
1870.     They  have  no  children. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  21 

SliLibael  JJabcock,  the  second  son  of  Isaiah,  Jr.,  and  Free- 
love  (Briggs)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Voluntown,  Conn.,  June  zy, 
iy/2)-     He  ni.  and  had  two  children: 

Levi  Babcock. 
Harriet  Babcock. 

Sarali  Babcock,  (jnly  daughter  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Jr.,  and 
Freelove  (Briggs)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  New  Fairheld,  Conn., 
Feb.  24,  1775.  She  m.  Ira  Turney.  They  had  the  following 
children : 

Ira. 

Huldah. 

Susan,   d.   young. 

Mary  Ann. 

Abel  Bal)Cock,  last  born  to  Isaiah  Baljcock,  Jr.,  and  Freelove 
(Briggs)  Babcock,  was  b.  Dec.  3,  1781.  His  wife's  name  was 
Lecta  M.    He  d.  Nov.  7,  1827,  aged  46  years. 

Children,  b.  and  d.  in  Otsego  County : 

Isaiah. 

Jason. 

Dwight. 

Daughter,  d.  young. 

Isaac  Babcock,  fourth  cliild  and  third  son  of  Isaiah  Babcock, 
Jr.,  and  Freelove  (Briggs)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  New  Fairfield. 
Conn..  Dec.  9,  1776.  He  m.  Elizalieth  Wilbur,  of  the  town  of 
North  East,  now  called  Milan,  Dutchess  County,  N.  Y.,  in  the 
year  1799.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Jeptha  and  Elizabeth  ( Mo- 
sher)  W'illnu-,  of  Milan,  Dutchess  County,  N.  Y.  Jeptha  Wil- 
bur m.  Elizabeth  Mosher  in  1780.  He  was  1).  in  Milan  Jan. 
18,  1759,  and  d.  in  1843,  aged  84  years.  His  wife  Elizabeth 
Mosher  was  b.  in  the  same  place  Sept.  26,  1763,  and  d.  in  1828, 
aged  65  years.  Jeptha  Wilbur  was  by  trade  a  wheelwright, 
and  for  years  his  son-in-law  Isaac  Babcock  worked  with  him 
at  his  trade  and  general  blacksmithing.  They  were  Orthodox 
Friends,  and  when  Isaac  Babcock  married  into  the  Wilbur 
family  he  adopted  their  religion  and  was  a  very  strict  and  con- 
scientious Friend  up  to  the  day  of  his  decease. 

The  Wilbur  family  came  from  Doncaster,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land. The  original  name  was  Wildljore.  The  first  of  record 
is  Samuel  Wildljore,  who  died  Sept.  29,  1656,  in  Boston,  Mass. 
His  third  son,  William  Wildbore,  born  1630,  died  at  Ports- 
mouth. Mass.  Samuel,  the  fourth  son  of  William,  was  born 
1664  at  Little  Compton,  R.  I. 


22  Isaiah  Babcock,  Si\,  and  His  Descendants. 

The  second  generation  dropped  the  d.  in  Wildbore,  and  the 
fifth  generation,  Lemuel,  son  of  Meshach,  speh  the  name  Wil- 
bur. The  family  were  prominent  in  the  early  history  of  Rhode 
Island,  being  of  record  as  early  as  1637  in  Massachusetts,  and 
1654  in  Rhode  Island.  I  have  found  some  of  them  classed  as 
Congregationalists  and  Episcopalians  in  the  early  days.  Sam- 
uel, son  of  Samuel  fourth,  born  1692,  married  Elizabeth, 
daughter  of  Esek  Carn,  first  Treasurer  of  Rhode  Island. 

Esek,  son  of  Samuel  and  Elizabeth  Wilbur,  was  born  Dec. 
22,  1728.  This  Esek  was  the  father  of  Jeptha  Wilbur,  who 
was  the  father  of  Elizabeth,  Isaac  Babcock's  wife. 

Isaac  Babcock  and  his  wife  removed  from  Milan  to  the  town 
of  Rensselaerville,  Albany  County,  N.  Y.,  about  the  year 
1804-5,  '^'^'^^  purchased  a  farm  of  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer  con- 
taining one  hundred  and  fifty-four  and  one  half  acres.  It  was 
here  that  nearly  all  of  their  large  family  were  born. 

At  the  County  Clerk's  ofifice,  Albany,  Liber  t^j,  page  199,  is 
of  record  a  deed  from  Isaac  Babcock  to  his  son  Jeptha  Bab- 
cock, dated  Apr.  10,  1830,  "of  the  remainder  of  his  home  farm, 
he  having  previously  sold  off  parcels  of  it. 

In  Monroe  County,  N.  Y.,  is  a  deed  of  record,  dated  x\pr.  3, 
1839,  by  Leland  S.  Thompson  and  wife  to  Isaac  Babcock  of  a 
tract  or  parcel  of  land  in  the  town  of  Rush,  N.  Y.,  containing 
about  sixty  acres  of  land.  After  residing  here  for  a  number  of 
years  he  sold  his  farm  and  removed  with  his  son  H.  H.  Bab- 
cock to  a  farm  in  the  town  of  Greece,  Monroe  County,  N.  Y., 
where  he  lived  the  residue  of  his  lifetime  and  died  Apr.  21, 
1853,  aged  76  years. 

Isaac  Babcock  was  a  good  business  man,  very  athletic  and 
powerful,  standing  six  feet  in  height  and  weighing  about 
two  hundred  and  forty  pounds.  While  engaged  with  his 
father-in-law  at  Milan  in  blacksmithing  he  invented  an  im- 
proved grain  cradle  and  steel  hoe.  He  made  the  models  him- 
self, the  model  of  the  grain  cradle  now  being  in  iX)Ssession  of 
one  of  his  descendants.  His  wife  was  a  noble  woman,  and 
fulfilled  successfully  every  duty  that  devolved  upon  her  in 
those  days  when  women  were  often  compelled  to  labor  beyond 
what  woman  ought  ever  be  compelled  to  do.  She  made  the 
clothing  for  her  large  family,  and  was  a  woman  of  wonderful 
resources  and  strong  Christian  character.  There  were  no  fail- 
ures in  her  large  family  of  children.  All  grew  up  to  be  Chris- 
tian men  and  women,  and  none  were  more  respected  than  they 
were  in  the  communities  where  they  lived. 

Elizabeth  (Wilbur)   Babcock  died  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  at 


^ 


SARAH    BABCOCK    WING. 


Page  23. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  23 

the  home  of  one  of  her  daughters,  Mrs.  Cornell,  Nov.  28,  1880, 
aged  97  years,  3  months. 

Children  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  (Wilbur)  Babcock,  an  ex- 
act copy  as  entered  by  Isaac  Babcock  on  his  book  of  record : 

Sarah  was  born  27th  of  nth  month  1799. 
James  Morris  was  born  26th  of  ist.  mo.   1802. 
Phebe  W.  was  born  30th  of  5th  mo.  1804. 
Jeptha  W.  was  born  30th  of  4th  mo.  1806. 
George   S.   was  born   12th  of  8th  mo.   1808. 
Mary  was  born  20th  of  6th  mo.  1810. 
Isaac,  Jr.  was  born  8th  of  loth  mo.  1812. 
Eliza  was  born  4th  of  6th  mo.  181 5. 
Henry  was  born  ist  of  6th  mo.  1817. 
Stephen  was  born  3rd  of  8th  mo.   1819. 
William  was  born  nth  of  4th  mo.  1823. 
Mary  W.  was  born  i8th  of  4th  mo.  1826. 

Deaths : 

First  daughter  called  Mary. 

died  14th  of  7th  mo.   1813.     Aged  3  years  &  24  days. 
William  died  3rd  of  7th  mo.   1825. 

Aged  2  yrs.  2  mos.  &  22  days. 
Our  son   Stephen  departed  this  life  the  twenty-first  of  the  seventh 

month   1839    (drowned   in  Genesee   River).     Aged   nineteen  years 

eleven  months  and  fourteen  days. 

Sarah  Babcock,  oldest  child  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  Babcock, 
was  b.  Nov.  2y,  1799:  was  m.  to  Daniel  P.  Wing  Nov.  6, 
1828,  and  d.  Oct.  16,  1883. 

Their  children : 

Elizabeth  B.  Wing.  b.  Aug.   12,  1831  ;    m.  William  Morey,  Jan.   15, 

1880;    d.   Mar.  28.   1899.     No  children. 
Adelia  Antoinette  Wing,  b.  June   19,    1834 ;    m.   William   Post,   Dec. 

27.   1855,  who  d.  May  28.   1881,  aged  66  years. 
Marcus  and   Marcia  Wing    (twins),   b.   Nov.  26,    1836.     Marcus  m. 

Elizabeth  O.   Brown,  Nov.  29,   1863.     Have  one  son,  Marcus  Ed- 

mon   Wing,   b.   Apr.    17,    1864,   m.    Sarah   Elizabeth   Crippen,    Dec. 

29,    1891.      No  children.      Marcia    Wing   m.    Samuel    P.    Cornell, 

Nov.  24,   1885.     No  children. 
Joseph  W.  Wing,  b.  June  i,  1839;    m.  Helen  C.  Hess,  Jan.  14,  1864. 

Have  one  son.  Howard  J.  Wing,  b.   Oct.  4.   1879. 

Children  of  William  and  Antoinette  Post,  all  b.  at  Roches- 
ter, N.  Y. : 

Sarah  Elizabeth  Post,  b.  May  26,   1857. 
Helen   Augusta   Post,   b.   June   16,    1859. 
Nettie  W.  Post,  b.  Aug.  2,  1861. 
Marcia  W.  Post,  b.  June  27.   1864. 
Irene  W.  Post,  b.  Nov.  6,   1869. 

Sarah  Elizabeth  was  m.  to  Rev.  Sylvester  S.  Powell  at 
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  July  15,  1886. 


24  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children : 

Miriam  Gertrude  Powell,  b.  TuUy,   N.   Y.,  Aug.  30,   1888. 
Olive  Marguerite  Powell,  b.  Covert,  N.  Y.,  Feb.   10,   1890. 
Paul  Reginald  Powell,  b.  Covert,  N.  Y.,  June  13,  1891. 
Helen  Irene  Powell,  b.  Little  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  May  13,  1894. 
Heber  Theodore,  b.   Little  Genesee,  Apr.  30,   1897. 

Helen  Augusta  Post  was  m.  to  Frank  A.  Browne!!  at  Rocli- 
ester,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  27,  1882. 
Tlieir  cliildren : 

Frank  Raymond  Brownell,  b.  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  6,  1886. 
Mildred  Helen  Brownell,  b.   Rochester,   N.   Y.,   May  20,   1893. 

Nettie  W.  Post  was  m.  to  J.  Sears  Wooden  June  30,  1883. 
No  children.     D.  Mar.  30,  1884. 

Marcia  W.  Post  was  m.  to  Reuben  W.  Powell  at  Rochester, 
N.  Y.,  May  5,  1892.  One  child,  Hazel  Estelle  Powell,  b.  at 
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  7,  1893. 

Irene  W.  Post  was  m.  to  Dr.  Horace  L.  Hulett  at  Roches- 
ter, N.  Y.,  July  23,  1896.  They  have  one  daughter,  Irene  W. 
Hulett,  b.  Oct.  8,  1 90 1. 

James  Morris  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth 
(Wilbur)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Milan,  Dutchess  County,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  26,  1802.  He  m.  Sept.  20,  1829,  Lydia  E.  Jackson.  She 
was  b.  in  Rensselaerville,  Albany  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  27, 
181 1.  Previous  to  marriage  Mr.  Babcock  assisted  his  father 
in  his  blacksmithing  and  manufacturing  grain  cradles  in  the 
town  of  Rensselaerville.  Later  he  became  a  merchant  in  New 
York  City.  After  marriage  he  removed  to  Union  Springs, 
Cayuga  County,  N.  Y.,  where  he  and  his  brother  Georg^e 
manufactured  grain  cradles.  In  1832  he  removed  to  a  farm 
in  Groveland.  Livingston  County,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1836  into  the 
town  of  Rush,  Monroe  County,  N.  Y.,  where  he  conducted  a 
country  store  successfully  for  many  years.  His  health  being 
affected  by  the  confinement  incidental  to  liis  business,  lie  sold 
his  store  and  removed  to  a  farm  in  the  town  of  Irondequoit, 
same  county.  Disposing  of  his  farm  about  1863,  he  removed 
to  the  city  of  Rochester.  Later  they  remo\'ed  into  t!ie  town  of 
Brighton,  same  county,  to  a  farm  which  lie  and  Iiis  son  pur- 
chased together.  Hei"e  he  resided  the  reiuainder  of  his  life- 
time, and  died  Oct.  24,  1886,  in  his  85th  year. 

James  Morris  Balicock  was  universally  esteemed  by  all  who 
knew  him.  Brought  up  the  eldest  son  of  a  large  family  of 
children,  he  early  in  life  formed  those  sterling  principles  of 
true  manhood  which  made  him  as  a  man  a  leader  among  men 


JAMES    M.    BABCOCK. 


Page  24. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  25 

in  the  different  communities  in  wliich  he  resided.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  Orthodox  Society  of  Friends,  and  was  one  of 
the  most  genial  and  companionable  of  men.  He  was  fond  of 
rural  sports,  and  was  a  splendid  shot  wdth  either  rifle  or  shot- 
gun. His  reminiscences  of  his  early  life  were  as  interesting 
as  they  were  instructive.  He  was  very  athletic  and  much  given 
to  social  enjoyment.  In  politics  he  was  a  Whig  and  a  Repul)- 
lican.  He  was  not  ambitious  for  political  preferment,  and  on 
several  occasions  declined  the  candidacy  of  office  to  which  he 
had  been  urged  by  his  friends.  His  wife  was  a  noble  woman 
whose  strong  Christian  character  was  remarked  by  all  wdio 
knew  her.  She  had  that  greatest  of  all  gifts,  "charity"  for 
all,  and  none  were  more  highly  esteemed  and  respected  than 
she.  For  a  long  period  of  her  life  she  was  a  member  of  the 
First  Methodist  Church  of  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  also  one  of 
the  Board  of  Managers  for  the  Home  for  the  Friendless,  in 
the  same  city.  She  died  at  the  family  residence  in  Brighton, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  25,  1890. 

Children  of  James  Morris  Babcock  and  Lydia  E.  (Jackson) 
Babcock : 

Elizabeth,  b.  Groveland.  N.  Y.,  Aug.  2,  1830;    d.  Rush,  N.  Y.,  Jan. 

14,  1844. 
William  J.,  b.   Groveland,   N.   Y.,   Sept.  22,   1832. 
Julia  W.,  b.  Rush,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  28,   1841. 

William  J.  Babcock,  only  son  of  James  M  and  Lydia  E. 
(Jackson)  Babcock,  was  1).  in  Groveland,  Livingston  County, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1832.  The  most  of  his  boyhood  days  were 
passed  in  the  tow'n  of  Rush,  N.  Y.  He  was  educated  at  the 
Genesee  Wesleyan  Seminary,  Lima,  N.  Y.  While  there  he 
was  President  of  the  Amphiction  Literary  Society.  He  grad- 
uated with  high  honors,  being  valedictorian  of  his  class.  At 
the  age  of  eighteen  years,  he  was  Professor  of  Mathematics 
at  Walworth  Academy,  Walworth,  N.  Y.  It  w'as  a  large  and 
popular  school  in  those  days.  He  taught  trigonometry,  sur- 
veying, and  the  higher  branches  of  mathematics.  He  entered 
Genesee  College,  but  did  not  graduate,  being  obliged  to  leave 
college  at  the  end  of  his  junior  year  to  assist  his  father.  On 
Nov.  I,  1859,  he  married  Mrs.  Eleanore  Augusta  (Emerson) 
Collins.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Amos  Emerson  and 
Sarah  Emerson,  of  Charlotte,  Monroe  County,  N.  Y.  She  was 
born  in  Charlotte,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  30,  1833.  and  died  May  26, 
1863.  The  first  tw^o  years  of  their  married  life  they  resided 
in  Detroit,  Mich.  They  afterward  removed  to  Charlotte, 
N.  Y.,  and  resided  there  until  Mrs.  Babcock's  decease,  when 

43 


26  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

he  disposed  of  his  home  and  hved  tliereafter  with  his  father 
and  mother.  Wilham  J.  Babcock's  hfe  was  one  of  fihal  devo- 
tion and  self-sacrifice.  Fitted  by  education  to  adorn  any  posi- 
tion in  hfe,  he  sacrificed  his  own  personal  ambitions  in  order 
that  he  might  assist  and  be  a  comfort  and  companion  to  his 
father  and  mother.  Of  a  charming  personality,  being  over 
six  feet  in  height  and  splendidly  proiX)rtioned,  with  a  mind 
early  cultured  by  education  and  sound  reading,  he  was  looked 
up  to  and  respected  by  all  who  knew  him.  In  politics  he  was 
a  Republican,  and,  while  he  never  sought  public  office,  he  was 
honored  by  his  party  in  many  ways.  He  was  an  enthusiastic 
sportsman,  and  many  a  happy  day  was  passed  by  his  son  in 
his  company  in  pursuit  of  the  festive  woodcock  and  wily 
grouse.  In  modesty  of  deportment,  sweetness  of  character, 
and  constancy  of  friendship  he  was  an  illustration  and  an  ex- 
ample. He  had  a  host  of  friends,  and  has  left  behind  him  pleas- 
ant memories  that  will  never  be  effaced.  He  was  a  member  of 
Valley  Masonic  Lodge,  No.  109,  and  was  a  life  member  of 
Hamilton  Chapter  62.  R.  A.  M.  He  died  at  the  family  home- 
stead on  Clover  Street,  in  Brighton,  June  17,  1888. 
Child : 

A.   Emerson  Babcock,  b.  Charlotte,   N.  Y..  May  15,   1863. 

Julia  W.  Babcock,  last  born  of  James  M.  and  Lydia  E. 
(Jackson)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Rush,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  28,  1841. 
She  m.  W.  W.  Hibbard,  son  of  Rev.  F.  G.  Hibbard,  D.D..  of 
Clifton  Springs,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  3,  1880.  They  have  no  children. 
Reside  in  Washington,  D.  C. 

A.  Emerson  Babcock,  only  child  of  William  J.  and  E.  Au- 
gusta (Collins)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Charlotte,  Monroe  County, 
N.  Y.,  May  15.  1863.  He  m.  Aug.  i,  1889,  Blanche,  daugh- 
ter of  D.  B.  and  Lucy  (Burger)  Sias,  of  Spencerport,  N.  Y. 
She  was  b.  Mar.  16,  1868,  in  Logansport.  Ind. 

Children,  b.  in  Brighton,  N.  Y. : 

William  James,  b.   Nov.   28,    1890. 
Ralph  Burger,  b.  Sept.  2,   1892. 
Eleanore.  b.  July  11,   1894. 
A.  Emer.son,  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  2,   1896. 

Phebe  Wilbur  Babcock,  third  child  born  of  Isaac  and  Eliza- 
beth (Wilbur)  Babcock.  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville,  Albany 
County,  N.  Y..  May  30,  1804.  She  was  m.  three  times:  First 
to  David  Wing,  Oct.  4.  1826.  He  was  b.  Feb.  20,  1791,  and 
d.  Nov.  3.  1834,  aged  43  years. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  27 

She  m.  (2)  Daniel  H.  Cornell,  Feb.  24,  1844.  He  was  b. 
Oct.  10,  1804,  and  d.  Nov.  28,  1856,  aged  52  years,  i  month, 
and  18  days. 

She  m/(3)  William  Cornell,  Oct.  28,  1864.  He  was  b. 
July  21,  1799,  and  d.  on  Sept.  9.  1877,  aged  78  years,  i 
month,   and    19  days. 

There  was  no  issue  from  these  marriages.  Mrs.  Phebe  Wil- 
bur (Babcock)  Cornell  d.  at  the  residence  of  her  niece  in  Lock- 
port,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  23.  1902,  aged  98  years  and  6  months. 

Jeptha  Wilbur  Babcock,  fourth  clu'ld  and  second  son  of 
Isaac  Babcock  and  Elizabeth  (Wilbur)  Babcock.  was  b.  in 
Rensselaerville,  Albany  County.  X.  Y.,  Apr.  30,  1806.  Jeptha 
^^^  remained  about  two  years  in  Rensselaerville  in  the  old 
homestead,  and,  in  addition  to  his  duties  there,  eno-ao-ed  with 
his  father  in  manufacturing  grain  cradles.  He  was  m.  to 
jVIary  Hoag,  daughter  of  Henry  and  Sarah  Hoag,  in  1829. 
She  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville.  N.  Y.,  July  29,  1803.  Two  chil- 
dren were  b.  to  them  in  Rensselaerville.  The  family  removed 
to  Somerset,  Niagara  County,  N.  Y.,  and  purchased  a  farm 
of  176  acres  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Ontario,  the  trip  from 
Albany  to  Rochester  being  made  by  line  boat — railroads,  tele- 
phones, telegraph,  and  electric  lights  not  being  in  existence 
in  those  days.  The  prevailing  speed  by  boat  on  the  canal, 
three  to  four  miles  an  hour,  was  considered  fast  traveling  in 
those  days.  These  were  the  halcvon  davs  for  wheat  farming- 
in  Western  New  York,  and  prosperity  abounded  among  all 
classes. 

Jeptha  W.  Babcock  was  six  feet  in  height  and  of  stalwart 
frame,  and  was  able  to  cope  with  the  most  hardy  workman. 
He  could  easily  shoulder  alone  from  the  barn  floor  a  bag  con- 
taining three  bushels  of  wheat  and  load  it  on  a  wagon.  Long 
after  middle  life  it  was  his  boast  that  he  had  never  been  sick  a 
day  in  his  life.  He  took  an  active  interest  in  public  affairs, 
was  a  \\'hig  and  also  a  Republican.  In  1856,  he  was  a  dele- 
gate to  the  first  Republican  National  Convention  that  nomi- 
nated John  C.  Fremont  for  the  Presidency.  For  four  years  he 
represented  his  town  in  the  County  Legislature,  from  1839  to 
1842.  Was  President  of  the  County  Agricultural  Society.  In 
185 1  and  1852,  he  represented  the  Second  Assembly  District 
of  Niagara  County  in  the  New  York  State  Assemblv.  Just 
twenty  years  later,  in  1872  and  1873.  ^'''s  son  Isaac  H.  repre- 
sented the  First  Assembly  District  in  the  Legislature.  In 
Albany  Mr.  Babcock's  course  was  always  on  the  side  of  honest 
and  safe  legislation.    He  often  represented  his  party  in  State 


28  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

and  National  Conventions.  He  was  wont  to  remark  that  dur- 
ing his  experiences  as  a  candidate  for  office  he  never  asked  for 
a  nomination,  and  never  asked  a  man  for  his  vote.  Both  he 
and  his  estimable  wife  were  active  members  of  the  Orthodox 
Society  of  Friends.  When  about  sixty  years  of  age  he  dis- 
posed of  his  farm  in  Somerset  and  removed  to  Lockport,  N, 
Y.,  where  some  of  his  family  had  preceded  him.  In  later  years 
he  joined  the  membership  of  the  First  Congregational  Church. 
There  was  a  striking  resemblance  among  his  large  family  of 
brothers  and  sisters,  there  being  a  wonderful  bond  of  affection 
for  each  other  among  them  all  through  life.  When  the  golden 
leaves  of  the  maple  were  falling  on  Oct.  21,  1883,  at  the  home 
of  his  daughter,  in  Lockport,  his  spirit  took  its  departure  for 
that  better  land  where  the  sons  of  the  just  attain  to  eternal  rest. 
Children : 

Isaac  Hoag,  b.  Sept.  20,   1830. 

Henry  Hoag,  b.  Nov.  12,  1832;    d.  Mar.  26.  1850. 

Mary  Jane,  b.  Oct.  4,  1836,  Somerset,  N.  Y. ;    m.  Samuel  H.  White, 

i860;    d.  Sept.  18,  1862. 
Sarah  Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  24,  1842,  Somerset,  N.  Y. 

Isaac  Hoag  Babcock,  of  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  the  eldest  son  of 
Jeptha  W.  Babcock  and  Mary  (Hoag)  Babcock,  was  b.  in 
Rensselaerville,  Albany  County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  20,  1830.  He 
m.  Jan.  15,  1861,  Sarah  L.  Newhall,  who  was  b.  Dec.  2,  1833. 

Hon.  L  H.  Babcock  is  a  prominent  business  man  residing 
in  Lockport,  Niagara  County,  N.  Y.  As  previously  stated,  he 
has  served  two  terms  in  the  State  Legislature,  and  has  always 
been  recognized  as  one  of  the  leaders  for  the  Republican  Party 
in  Niagara  County.  A  number  of  years  ago  he  withdrew  from 
active  politics,  at  which  time  he  could  have  been  nominated 
and  elected  to  Congress  if  he  had  so  desired.  He  has  been 
identified  with  many  prominent  business  industries  in  Lock- 
port,  and  no  citizen  is  more  highly  esteemed  and  respected 
than  he. 

Children,  b.  in  Lockport,  N.  Y. : 

Mary  E.,  b.  May  5,  1866;    ni.  Edward  H.  Boynton,  Jan.  i,  1901. 

Henry  J.,  b.  Mar.  i,  1868. 

Frederick  N.,  b.  July  16,   1870:    d.  July  8,   1892. 

Infant  son,  b.  Oct.  2,  1873;    d.   Nov.  30,   1873. 

Henry  J.  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Hon.  L  H.  Babcock  and 
Sarah  L.  (Newhall)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
I,  1868.  He  m.  Ida  Noble  Yates,  of  Cleveland,  O.,  Feb.  13, 
1895.    She  was  b.  June  7,  1873. 


Page  25. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  29 

Children,  b.  in  Lockport,  N.  Y. : 

Florence  Mary,  b.  Feb.  25,  1897. 
Eveline  Noble,  b.  Sept.  14,  1898. 
Ruth  Nevvhall,  b.  Aug.  7,   1900;    d.  June  6,   1901. 

Sarah  EHzabeth  Babcock,  youngest  child  of  Jeptha  \V.  Bab- 
cock and  Mary  (Hoag)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Somerset,  Niagara 
County,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  24,  1842.  She  m.  A.  Frank  Balliett,  May 
19,  J 869,  at  Lockport,  N.  Y.  Mr.  Balliett  d.  Mar.  i,  1883,  a't 
Lockport,  N.  Y.,  aged  43  years,  3- months,  and  3  days. 

Children,  b.  in  Lockport: 

Louis  J.,  b.  July  i,   1870. 

Frank  Howard,  b.  Sept.  11,  1872;    m.  Margaret  T.  Fergu.son,  June 
9,   1898. 

Louis  J.  Balliett,  eldest  son  of  A.  Frank  Balliett  and  Sarah 
Elizabeth  (Babcock)  Balliett,  was  b.  July  i,  1870.  He  m. 
Mary  C.  Fargo,  Dec.  23,  1896,  at  New  York  Citv. 

Child : 

Fargo  Balliett,  b.  Dec.  24,  1897,  Montclair,  N.  J. 

George  S.  Babcock,  third  son  of  Isaac  Babcock  and  Eliza- 
beth (Wilbur)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville,  Albany 
Coimty,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  12,  1808.  He  lived  with  his  father  until 
he  was  twenty-one  years  of  age,  then  went  to  Union  Springs, 
Cayuga  County,  N.  Y.,  and  engaged  with  his  eldest  brother, 
James  M.  Babcock,  in  manufacturing  grain  cradles,  of  which 
his  father  had  the  patent.  He  met  here  Elizabeth  Winegar, 
and  they  were  m.  Oct.  31,  1831.  She  w^as  b.  in  Nassau,  Rens- 
selaer County,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  17,  18 10.  They  lived  in  Union 
Springs  until  after  the  birth  of  their  first  child,  Louisa,  then 
removed  to  Avon,  Livingston  County,  N.  Y.,  where  with  a 
partner  he  started  a  foundry.  He  lived  in  Avon  several  years, 
and  W'Cnt  to  Michigan  in  1837,  stayed  there  for  a  few  months, 
and  returned  East  for  his  family.  Li  1838  he  settled  in  Niles, 
Mich.  He  follow^ed  various  kinds  of  business,  and  experienced 
many  of  the  hardships  of  life  in  a  new  country.  Li  1857  he 
purchased  a  farm  one  mile  from  the  city  of  Niles,  and  lived 
there  the  residue  of  his  lifetime  and  d.  Ma}'  5,  1899.  His  es- 
timable wife  d.  June  8,  1886. 

Children : 

Louise,  b.  July  28,  1832,  Union  Springs,  N.  Y. 
Phebe  W.,  b.  Nov.  27,  1833,  Avon,  N.  Y. 

George  Willis,  b.  May  10,  1835,  Avon,  N.  Y. ;    d.  same  place,  aged 
15  months. 


30  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Mary  Eliza,  b.  Avon,  N.  Y..  Nov.  13,  1836. 

George  S.,  Jr.,  b.  Niles,  Mich.;    d.  July  19,  1884,  Niles,  Mich. 

Ludlow,   b.   Niles,   Mich.,    Dec.   24,    1841  ;    d.   Niles,   Mich.,   Jan.   29, 

1892. 
James  Morris,  b.  Niles,  Mich.,   Nov.  22,   1843;    unm. 
Stephen  Henry,  b.   Niles,  Mich.,   Dec.  26,    1845. 

Louise  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  George  S.  and  Elizabeth 
(Winegar)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Union  Springs,  N.  Y.,  July 
28,  1832.  She  m.  Francis  Ouinn,  June  26,  1851.  Mrs.  Ouinn 
d.  in  Jackson,  Mich.,  Mar.  22,  1897. 

Children : 

Ella,   d.   in   infancy. 

William,  b.  Niles,  Mich.,  Mar.  31.  1855. 
Belle,   b.    Niles,   Mich.,    Sept.  2,    i860. 
Lillian,  b.  Hyde  Park,  111.,  Nov.  6,  1866. 
Elizabeth,  b.  Hyde  Park,  111.,  Oct.  i,  1869. 

William  Ouinn,  eldest  and  only  son  of  Francis  and  Louise 
(Babcock)  Quinn,  was  b.  in  Niles.  Mich.,  Mar.  31,  1855.  He 
m.  Miss  Gussie  Grandin,  of  Washington,  D.  C.,  in  June,  1885. 
They  have  one  son,  b.  in  1890. 

Belle  Ouinn,  third  child  of  Francis  and  Louise  (Babcock) 
Quinn,  was  b.  in  Niles,  Mich.,  Sept.  2,  i860.  She  m.  in  Jack- 
son, Mich.,  May  12,  1881,  James  A.  Parkinson.  Mrs.  Park- 
inson d.  Oct.  19,  1896. 

Children : 

James  F.,  b.  Mar.  19,  1882. 
Helen,  b.  Nov.  10.   1884. 

Lillian  Ouinn,  fourth  child  of  Francis  and  Louise  (Bab- 
cock) Ouinn,  was  b.  in  Hyde  Park,  111.,  Nov.  6,  1866.  She  m. 
in  Jackson,  Mich.,  Feb.  12,  1898,  Charles  T.  De  Puy,  of  Roch- 
ester, N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y. : 

Louise,  b.  Apr.  3,  1900. 
Charles  T.,  Jr.,  b.  Dec.  23,  1902. 

Mary  E.  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  George  S.  and  Elizabeth 
(Winegar)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Avon,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  13,  1836. 
She  m.  in  Niles,  Mich.,  Oct.  i,  1863,  Homer  D.  Fisher.  Mr. 
Fisher  d.  Jan.  16,  1896. 

Children,  b.  in  Niles,  Mich. : 

Louise,  b.  Oct.  17,  1864;    d.  Sept.  2,  1870. 
Isabel,  b.  in  Jackson,  Mich.,  Apr.  27.   1875. 

Stephen  Henry  Babcock,  last  born  of  George  S.  and  Eliza- 
beth  (Winegar)   Babcock,  was  b.  in  Niles,  Mich.,  Dec.  26, 


MRS.   PHOEBE  W.  CORNELL, 

Aged  97  years,  and  her  great-great-niece,  Eleanore  Babcock, 

only  daughter  of  the  author,  aged  7  years 

Page  26. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  31 

1845.  He  was  educated  in  tlie  common  schools  in  his  native 
town.  In  1864  Mr.  Babcock  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  volun- 
teer army.  War  of  the  Rebellion.  He  was  soon  promoted  to 
Sergeant,  then  Serg-eant  Major,  then  First  Lieutenant  and 
Adjutant  in  the  30th  Regiment  of  Michigan  Infantry,  and 
was  honorably  discharged  at  the  close  of  the  war.  After  leav- 
ing the  army  he  has  been  engaged  continually  in  railroad 
service  with  \arious  of  the  important  railroad  systems  of  the 
West,  and  in  nearly  all  this  time  in  responsible  official  posi- 
tions. On  Sept.  30,  1897,  Mr.  Babcock  was  m.  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  LUah,  to  Miss  Lee  Judd,  daughter  of  Judge  John  W. 
Ju(l(l,  of  Nashville,  Tenn. 

Children,  b.  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah : 

Barbara  Gilberta.  b.  Aug.  16,  1898. 
Stephen  Henry,  Jr.,  b.   May  13,   1900. 

Isaac  Babcock.  Jr.,  seventh  child  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth 
(Wilbur)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville.  Albany  County, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  8,  18 1 2.    He  m.  CeHa  Haws. 

Children : 

Mortimer  C.  b.  Aug.  27.   1838;    m.  Mary  E.  Bristol. 
Mary  E..  b.   Sept.   i,   1840:    m.   Edwin  F.  Crandall. 
Royal  K.,  b.  Mar.  10,  1844 :    m.  Mary  E.  Stark. 
Harry  J.,  b.  1850;    m.  Elizabeth  Beebe. 

Mortimer  C,  eldest  son  of  Isaac,  Jr.,  and  Celia   (Haws) 
Babcock.  m.  Mary  E.  Bristol. 
Children : 

Harriet  Louise,  b.  Dec.  31,  1863. 
Janette  F.,  b.  Nov.   14,   1865. 
Barton  B.,  b.  Jan.  7,  1867. 
Royal  E..  b.  Mar.  3,   1874. 
Mary  C,  b.  June  3,  1875. 

Mary  E.,  second  child  of  Isaac,  Jr.,  and  Celia  (Haws)  Bab- 
cock. m.  Edwin  F.  Crandall. 
Children: 

Bessie,  b.   1880. 
Roy,  b.  1882. 

Harriet  Louise,  eldest  daughter  of  Mortimer  C.   Babcock 
and  Mary  E.  (Bristol)  Babcock,  m.  William  H.  Marston. 
Children : 

Eda  Mable,  b.  Oct.  8,  1885. 
James  Cassidv,  b.  June  3.   1887. 
Mary  Elizabe'th.   b.    Feb.    18,    1889. 
Henry  M.  Duffield,  b.  Nov.  29,   1890. 
Helen  Janette,  b.  Feb.  5,  1893. 


32  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Barton  B.  Babcock,  third  child  of  Mortimer  C.  and  Mary 
E.  (Bristol)  Babcock,  m.  Isabelle  MacDonald. 
Child: 

Fred  D.,  b.  Feb.  25,  1896. 

Royal  E.  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Mortimer  C.  and  Mary 
E.  (Bristol)  Babcock,  m.  Marguerite  A.  Nichols. 
Children : 

R.  Vernon,  b.  June  15,   1896. 
Harold  F.,  b.  July  23,  1898. 

Eliza  Babcock,  eighth  child  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  (Wil- 
bur) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville,  Albany  County,  N. 
Y.,  June  4,  181 5.  On  Sept.  21,  1837,  she  m.  Benjamin  Wing. 
He  was  b.  at  Duanesburg,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  8,  181 1,  where  his 
father,  Joseph  Wing,  was  a  farmer  and  dealer  in  live  stock. 
When  he  was  twenty-nine  years  of  age  he  removed  to  Ironde- 
quoit,  N.  Y.,  and  purchased  a  farm  of  two  hundred  acres,  and 
the  most  of  this  farm  he  cleared  the  timber  off  from  with  his 
own  hands.  For  thirty  years  he  resided  in  Irondequoit,  taking 
an  active  interest  in  town  affairs.  He  was  Supervisor  of  the 
town  for  one  term,  and  held  many  offices  of  responsibility.  In 
1870  he  sold  his  farm  and  removed  to  Brighton,  where  he 
lived  the  residue  of  his  lifetime,  being  highly  esteemed  and  re- 
spected by  all  who  knew  him.  He  d.  Sept.  16,  1899.  His 
wife  d.  Jan.  17,  1888,  in  Brighton,  N.  Y.,  aged  Jt,  years. 

Children,  b.  in  Irondequoit,  N.  Y. : 

David,  b.  Aug.   11,   1841 ;    m.  Mary  B.  Ayres,  Oct.  8,   1879. 
Stephen,  b.  Nov.  28,  1845 ;    m.  Anna  T.  Clarke,  May  17,  1883. 
Elizabeth  Babcock,  b.  July  16,  i8si ;    m.  Clarence  De  Puy,  Dec.  12, 
1877. 

David  Wing,  eldest  child  of  Benjamin  and  Eliza  (Babcock) 
Wing,  was  b.  in  Irondequoit,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  11,  1841.  He  m. 
Oct.  8,  1879,  Mrs.  Mary  B.  Ayres.  Mr.  Wing  was  one  of  the 
pioneers  in  the  fruit-evaporating  business  in  the  United  States. 
For  years  he  and  his  brother  Stephen,  under  the  firm  name  of 
"D.  Wing  &  Brother,"  did  a  large  business.  Mr.  Wing  died 
very  suddenly  Aug.  28,  1897.     No  children. 

Stephen  Wing,  second  child  of  Benjamin  and  Eliza  (Bab- 
cock) Wing,  was  b.  in  Irondequoit,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  28,  1845.  He 
married  Anna  T.  Clarke,  May  17,  1883.  Mr  Wing  early  in 
life  became  identified  with  his  brother  in  the  fruit-evaporating 
business.  In  1882  he  removed  to  Rogers,  Ark.,  and  made  his 
home  there  the  remainder  of  his  life.     He  was  one  of  the  pio- 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  33 

neers  in  the  fruit  industry  of  Northeast  Arkansas.  He  intro- 
duced the  first  genuine  budded  Elberta  Peach  ever  known  in 
Northeast  Arkansas,  and  planted  the  first  Elberta  orchards. 
In  1897  his  brother  and  he  shipped  the  first  car  of  Elberta 
peaches  ever  sent  out  of  Rogers,  and  handled  the  entire  crop 
from  Rogers  to  and  including  Van  Buren.  That  year  they 
were  known  as  the  "peach  kings  of  the  Ozarks."  They  were 
also  pioneers  in  the  evaporated  fruit  industry  and  erected  the 
first  large  evaporator  in  that  section.  The  history  of  Stephen 
Wing  and  his  brother  has  been  the  history  of  the  fruit  industry 
along  the  Frisco  in  Arkansas,  and  the  thousands  that  have 
profited  by  their  enterprise  and  example  render  a  grateful 
homage  to  their  memory.  Mr.  Wing  d.  very  suddenly  at  his 
home  in  Rogers,  Ark.,  Feb.  18,  1903.  His  quiet,  gentle  man- 
ners and  his  cheerful  greetings  made  him  hosts  of  friends.  He 
united  with  the  Congregational  Church  in  Rogers  a  few 
months  previous  to  his  decease.  The  daily  paper  in  Rogers, 
Ark.,  contained  an  extended  notice  of  his  life  and  expressed 
the  sorrow  of  that  community  in  his  sudden  decease. 
Child: 

Winifred  E.,  b.  Rogers,  Ark.,  Mar.  4,   1888. 

Elizabeth  Wing,  last  born  to  Benjamin  and  Eliza  (Bab- 
cock) Wing,  was  b.  in  Irondequoit,  N.  Y.,  July  16,  185 1.  She 
m.  Clarence  De  Puy,  of  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  12,  1877.  Mrs. 
De  Puy  is  the  last  surviving  member  of  her  father's  family, 
and  resides  in  Brighton,  N.  Y. 

Child: 

Frederic  Clarence,  b.  Brighton,  N.  Y.,  May  11,  1881. 

H.  H.  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  (Wil- 
bur) Babcock.  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville,  Albany  County,  N. 
Y.,  June  I,  181 7.  He  removed  with  his  parents  when  a  child 
to  the  town  of  Rush,  N.  Y.,  where  he  resided  for  twenty  years, 
during  which  time  he  m.  ]\Iaria,  the  daughter  of  Major  John 
Markham,  of  the  village  of  Rush,  ]\Iar.  6,  1839.  In  1850,  he 
removed  to  Greece,  N.  Y.,  to  a  farm,  and  it  was  here  at  his 
house  that  his  father,  Isaac  Babcock,  died.  In  1864,  he  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  engaged  in 
the  coal  business,  and  in  1867  became  the  senior  member  of 
the  firm  of  H.  H.  Babcock  &  Co.,  a  firm  which  has  become 
and  is  to-day  one  of  the  leading  business  houses  in  the  city  of 
Rochester.  In  1856  Mr.  Babcock  became  a  member  of  the 
Brick  Presbyterian  Church.     He  was  a  charter  member  of 


34  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Genesee  Falls  Masonic  Lodge.  In  politics  he  was  a  Repub- 
lican, being  prominently  identified  in  its  councils,  and  lending 
his  time,  money,  and  influence  to  its  advancement  and  success. 
He  was  of  a  retiring  disposition,  having  a  calm,  cool  judg- 
ment which  often  led  people  to  him  for  advice  and  counsel.  He 
d.  at  his  home,  i8o  University  Avenue,  Rochester,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  4,  1893.  His  wife  was  b.  in  181 8,  and  d.  June  29,  1894. 
Children,  b.  in  East  Rush  and  Greece,  N.  Y. : 

Louisa  M..  b.  June  8,  1840;    d.  Mar.  11,  1844. 

Helen   E.,  b.   Nov.   7,    1842;     m.   Elisha   M.   Carpenter. 

Charles  Henry,  b.   Nov.  4,   1848. 

Horace  John,   b.   Feb.  21,    1851. 

George  Edwin,  b.  Feb.  23,   1861. 

Helen  E.  Babcock,  second  child  of  Henry  H.  and  Maria 
(Markham)  Babcock,  was  b.  Nov.  7,  1842.  She  m.  Elisha 
M.  Carpenter,  Oct.  29,  1863.  Mr.  Carpenter  was  connected 
with  Reformatory  Institutions  for  forty  years.  For  nine  years 
he  was  Principal  and  Superintendent  at  the  Rochester  Indus- 
trial School  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.  For  twenty-five  years  he  was 
Superintendent  at  the  New  York  Juvenile  Asylum  in  New 
York  City.  For  four  years  he  was  Superintendent  at  the  New 
York  House  of  Refuge.  He  was  a  scholarly  man,  and  one 
whose  upright  Christian  manhood  and  high  principles  com- 
manded the  respect  and  esteem  of  all  who  knew  him.  Mr. 
Carpenter  d.  Jan.  23,  1902. 

Children : 

Henry  Babcock,  b.  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  i,  1864.  He  graduated 
at  New  York  University  in  1886.  and  College  of  Physicians  and 
Surgeons  in  1889.  He  d.  suddenly  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he 
was  a  practicing  physician,   Mar.  23,   i8gg;    unm. 

Herbert  Lawrence,  b.  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  29,  1867.  He  grad- 
uated at  New  York  University  in  1890,  and  is  now  a  broker  in 
New  York  City  ;    unm. 

Hallett  Manning,  b.  New  York  City,  Apr.  27.  1872.  He  graduated 
at  Columbia  College  School  of  Mines  in  1894.  He  is  Principal 
and  Proprietor  of  Boys'  College  Preparatory  School  in  New  York 
City.  He  m.  Gertrude  Harris,  June  10,  1892.  They  have  one 
child.  Helen  Marjorie.  b.  June  28,   1893. 

Helen  G.,  b.  New  York  City,   Nov.  22,   1877;    unm. 

Charles  Bronson,  b.  New  York  City.  June  28,  1886.  He  is  now  pre- 
paring at  Columbia  Preparatory  School,  New  York  City,  to  enter 
Yale  College,  in  1904. 

Hon.  Charles  H.  Babcock,  third  child  and  eldest  son  of 
Henry  H.  Babcock  and  Maria  (Markham)  Babcock,  was  b. 
in  East  Rush,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  4,  1848.  He  m.  Linda  Bronson,  of 
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  23,  1875.  She  was  b.  Oct.  16,  1850, 
and  d.  Apr.  5,  1893.     No  issue. 


A.    EMERSON    BABCOCK. 


Page  26. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  35 

He  m.  (2)  Edith  Holden.  of  New  York  City,  Mar.  i,  1900. 

Mr.  Babcock  is  a  prominent  business  man  of  Rochester,  N. 
Y.  He  has  been  one  of  the  Fish  Commissioners  for  the  State 
and  Member  of  the  Board  of  Forestry  for  several  years.  Since 
the  decease  of  his  father,  he  is  the  senior  meml)er  of  the  firm 
of  H.  H.  Babcock  &  Co.,  coal  dealers,  and  prominent  in  many 
corjix^rations  in  Rochester.  Also,  like  most  of  the  members  of 
the  Babcock  family,  holds  a  high  position  in  Masonry. 

When  the  Re])nblican  Party  was  returned  to  power  in  the 
State  of  New  York  on  Jan.  i.  1895.  Gov.  Morton  found  it 
necessary  to  reorganize  the  various  departments  at  Albany, 
and  among  others  the  departments  of  Forestry  and  the  Fish 
and  Game  Commission.  An  act  was  passed  by  the  Legislature 
consolidating  these  two  departments,  and  Gov.  Morton  in  look- 
ing about  through  the  State  for  suitable  members  of  the  For- 
est, Fish,  and  Game  Commission,  finally  selected  Mr.  Babcock 
as  one  of  its  members.  The  condition  of  the  forest,  fish,  and 
game  interests  in  the  State  was  unsatisfactory,  and  strong 
men  were  needed  to  brino-  about  the  reforms  that  were  ur- 


■&. 


gently  demanded.  A  better  selection  could  hardly  have  been 
made,  for -Mr.  Babcock  had  been  for  many  years  an  active  and 
deeply  interested  sportsman  of  the  highest  class.  He  entered 
upon  the  work  of  the  Commission  with  enthusiasm,  and  in- 
troduced business  methods  into  the  affairs  of  the  Commission 
in  the  conduct  of  its  work,  systematized  the  production  and 
shipping  of  spawn  and  young  fish  for  stocking  various  waters 
of  the  State,  which  increased  the  production  very  largely.  So 
well  was  this  work  done  that,  when  Gov.  Morton's  term  ex- 
pired and  Gov.  Black  succeeded  him.  public  appreciation  of 
Mr.  Babcock's  efforts  was  shown  by  the  creation  of  what  was 
known  as  the  Forest  Preserve  Board,  a  Board  created  by  law 
to  purchase  Adirondack  lands  for  a  public  park.  During  the 
four  years  this  Board  was  in  existence  more  than  one  quarter 
of  a  million  acres  of  land  was  purchased  by  the  Board,  and  a 
large  area  of  Adirondack  forest  was  reclaimed  largely  through 
Mr.  Babcock's  efforts  from  those  who  either  had  no  title  or 
whose  title  was  held  in  hostility  to  the  State. 

Gov.  Black  throughout  his  administration  relied  upon  ^Ir. 
Babcock  for  advice  upon  all  matters  connected  with  forestry 
and  fish  and  game  subjects.  Mr.  Babcock  continued  as  a 
member  of  the  Forest  Preserve  Board  through  the  adminis- 
tration of  Gov.  Roosevelt  and  through  the  first  term  of  Gov. 
Odell's  administration.  The  Legislature  in  the  meantime  had 
consolidated   the   Forest,    Fish,    and    Game   Commission   and 


36  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

the  Forest  Preserve  Board,  and,  the  work  of  purchasing  Adi- 
rondack forest  lands  having  been  completed,  Mr.  Babcock  re- 
tired from  the  consolidated  Commission  at  the  expiration  of 
his  term  of  office. 

Throughout  all  his  public  career  Mr.  Babcock's  work  has 
been  distinguished  for  a  faithfulness  to  public  interest  and  the 
application  of  business  principles.  An  excellent  business  man 
himself,  he  brought  his  business  methods  into  the  pul)lic  serv- 
ices and  conducted  the  affairs  of  his  office  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  not  only  prevent  criticism,  but  to  bring  about  results  that 
will  ultimately  be  of  the  greatest  possible  value  to  the  .State. 

Horace  John  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Henry  H.  and  Maria 
(Markham)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Greece,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  21,  1851. 
He  m.  Lillian  Emerson  Nov.  2,  1876.  She  d.  Mar.  13,  1896, 
and  he  m.  (2)  Dora  Miekle,  of  Cincinnati,  O.,  Nov.  19,  1899. 

Mr.  Babcock  has  no  children. 

Mary  Wilbur  Babcock,  youngest  child  of  Isaac  and  Eliza- 
beth (Wilbur)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Rensselaerville,  Albany 
County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  18,  1826.  She  removed  with  her  parents 
to  Monroe  County,  N.  Y.,  when  but  four  years  of  age.  On 
Apr.  3,  1 85 1,  she  was  m.  to  N.  Cleveland  Bradstreet,  of  Roch- 
ester, N.  Y.  Mr.  Bradstreet  was  b.  in  Danvers,  Mass.,  Apr. 
25,  1821. 

Their  children  were: 

Charles  Sumner,  b.  Nov.  10,  1855. 

Edward  Gould,  b.   Apr.  27,    1857. 

George  Henry,  b.  Oct.  2,  1859. 

Mary  Louise,  b.  Mar.  30,  1867;    m.  William  A.  Randall,  of  Boston, 

Mass.,  Dec.  25,  1895. 
J.  Howard,  b.  May  10,  1869. 

Hon.  N.  C.  Bradstreet  is  a  direct  descendant  of  George 
Simon  Bradstreet,  of  Massachusetts ;  has  lived  in  Rochester. 
N.  Y.,  over  sixty  years.  He  was  elected  Mayor  of  Rochester 
in  1863,  and  afterward  served  two  successive  terms  in  the  As- 
sembly of  the  State.  His  business  and  political  life  has  been 
an  active  one.  On  Apr.  3.  1901,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bradstreet 
celebrated  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  their  married  life,  at 
which  time  they  received  the  congratulations  of  a  host  of 
friends. 

Edward  Gould,  their  second  son,  d.  Jan.  26,  1881,  aged  23 
years. 

George  Henry,  their  third  son,  m.  Miss  Carolyn  Briggs,  of 
Rochester. 


HON.    JEPTHA    W.    BABCOCK. 


Page  27. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  37 

Their  children  are: 

Roy  C,  b.  Dec.  i.  1880. 
Florence  Ruth,  b.  July  4,  1882. 

George  Henry  d.  May  24,  1902. 

George  Babcock,  fourth  son  and  fifth  child  of  Isaiah  Bab 
cock,  Jr.,  and  Freelove   (Briggs)    Babcock,   was  b.   in  New 
Fairfiekl,  Conn.,  Feb.  21,  1779.     He  removed  with  his  parents 
to  Windham,  Greene  County,  N.  Y.     The  town  records  of 
Windham  have  the  following: 

April  1805.    Pathmaster  of  Road  Dist.  No.  60 

(Where  his  parents  resided) 
1 8 TO.  Overseer  Road  Dist.  No.  60. 

1814.  "  "         "     No.  15. 

Through  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  Artemas  Bissell,  of  Mont- 
clair,  N.  J.,  I  append  the  following: 

"This  is  to  Certify  that  Mr.  George  Babcock  was  Volun- 
tarily Enlisted  into  the  Company  of  Light  Infantry  under 

My  Command, 

Daniel  Gumbert. 
Windham,  26  June,  1802." 

George  Babcock  m.  in  Windham,  N.  Y.,  Olive  Simmons. 
They  had  a  family  of  eight  children,  all  of  whom  were  b.  in 
Windham,  Greene  County,  N.  Y.,  namely: 

Abel  Simmons,  b.  Sept.  30,  1807. 
Herman  Briggs,  b.  Apr.  21,   i8og. 
Hiram  Steele,  b.  May  12,  181 1. 
Horace  Havens,  b.  June  10,  1813. 
Harriet  Newell,  b.  Jan.  17,  1817. 
John  Porter,  b.   May   14,    1819. 
Olivia,  b.  Apr.  16,  1821. 
Mary,  b.   Aug.  22,    1824. 

About  1826  George  Babcock  and  his  family  removed  to  Mil- 
ford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.  At  the  County  Clerk's  office  in 
Cooperstown,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  is  of  record  a  deed  to 
him  of  land  in  Milford  by  John  and  Elizabeth  Moore.  Mr. 
Babcock  was  a  ver>^  strict  Presbyterian,  and  was  very  highly 
esteemed  and  respected  l)y  all  who  had  the  pleasure  of  his 
acquaintance.  He  died  at  his  home  in  Milford,  N.  Y.,  Jan. 
22.  1844,  aged  64  years  and  11  months.  Olive  Babcock,  his 
wife,  was  b.  Feb.  9,  1785,  and  d.  Jan.  20,  1858,  aeed  yz  years, 
1 1  months,  1 1  days.  The  following  notice  of  his  decease 
prepared  by  his  pastor  has  been  placed  in  my  hands,  and  is 
here  copied  verbatim : 


38  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

"Died  of  Consumption  at  his  residence  in  Milford,  Otsego 
Co.,  N.  Y.  January  22nd  Dea.  George  Babcock  in  the  65th 
year  of  his  age.  In  the  death  of  this  servant  of  Christ,  the 
Presbyterian  Church  and  society  of  which  he  was  a  member 
has  sustained  a  loss  though  to  him  we  beheve  a  great  gain.  He 
was  a  native  of  Connecticut  and  for  al^out  40  years  of  his  hfe 
a  professed  Christian.  He  retained  to  his  last  moments  a  re- 
markable attachment  to  the  distinguishing  doctrines  of  dixine 
grace.  It  was  manifest  to  all  who  intimately  knew  him  that 
he  felt  a  holy  jealousy  for  the  honor  of  God's  Character.  This 
undoul)tedly  arose  in  part  from  his  intimacy  with  the  Bible. 
The  Bible  was  his  constant  companion  and  he  was  a  systematic 
reader  of  it.  The  margin  of  almost  every  page  of  the  old 
Family  Bible  was  filled  with  pencil  marks  pointing  to  some 
important  passage  or  containing  some  important  thought.  One 
great  anxiety  of  his  mind  in  his  last  days  was  that  God  would 
permit  him  to  live  long  enough  to  complete  the  reading  of  his 
Bible  through  the  i8th  time.  But  his  spirit  took  its  flight  ere 
lie  had  completed  his  great  pleasure.  He  slept  sweetly  in 
Christ  and  devout  men  carried  him  to  his  grave  and  made 
lamentations  over  him." 

The  writer  also  here  inserts  an  exact  copy  of  the  original 
letter  written  by  Mr.  Babcock's  son,  Herman  Briggs  Babcock, 
to  the  writer's  great-grandfather,  Isaac  Babcock,  containing 
the  sad  news  of  the  decease  of  his  father,  who  was  Isaac's 
brother : 

Milford 
Jan.  23 
N.  Y. 

Mr.  Isaac  Babcock 
Rush 
Monroe  Co 
N.  Y. 

Milford  January  23,  1844. 
To  Lsaac  Babcock 
Dr.  Sir 
I  now  have  to  communicate  to  you  the  news  of  the  death 
of  my  Father,  who  expired  yesterday  li  before  q  a.  m.  ;    he 
died  in  the  triumph  of  faith  in  his  redeemer,  and  is  we  hope 
&  believe  now  Singing  praises  to  the  God  who  he  has  so  long 
professed  to  love  and  adore,  his  last  days  were  happy  days 
to  him,  he  often  expressed  himself  by  saying  "O  hapnv  hour," 
meaning  the  hour  of  his  death.     He  died  easy,  no  strangle  at 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  39 

the  last,  the  lamp  went  out  Gradually,  for  a  few  days  preceed- 
ing  his  death  he  was  at  times  deranged  some  what,  but  was 
generally  in  the  full  possession  of  his  faculties,  his  mind  clear, 
and  never  expressed  himself  in  favor  of  recovering  but  was 
willing  to  go,  willing  that  God's  will  should  be  done  in  refer- 
ence to  his  case,  his  disease  was  comsumption,  had  been  run- 
ning down  since  last  February,  but  has  not  been  confined  to 
his  room  but  nine  weeks  &  confined  to  his  bed  about  the  same 
time.  We  feel  we  have  lost  an  earthly  friend  and  one  the  less 
to  pray  for  us,  and  for  Sinners  in  this  place  one  to  give  us  re- 
ligious as  well  as  other  instruction,  but  we  must  now  look  to 
God  who  gave  and  who  has  the  right  to  take  away  at  such 
time  as  seemeth  good  to  him  and  this  dispensation  is  a  warn- 
ing to  us  be  also  ready  for  in  Such  an  hour  as  we  think  not 
the  Son  of  man  cometh,  the  family  takes  this  death  very  hard, 
the  family  are  all  at  home  except  Horace  and  he  would  have 
been  here  if  he  could  possibly  have  left  his  business,  the  Fu- 
neral will  be  tomorrow,  it  would  have  been  gratifying  to  Father 
if  he  could  have  seen  some  of  his  brothers  before  he  left  them 
but  did  not. 

The  friends  are  all  well  in  these  parts  as  far  as  I  know,  we 
would  like  to  hear  from  you  as  soon  as  convenient,  the  family 
send  their  best  regards  to  all  of  you  &  would  be  happy  to  have 
you  visit  Milford  as  soon  as  you  can.  Will  it  not  be  con- 
venient for  Cousin  Mary  to  make  us  a  visit  next  Spring,  let 
her  stop  with  me  at  Fort  Plain  as  I  shall  most  probably  locate 
there.  Still  I  may  not,  if  I  do  not,  I  shall  remain  there  next 
summer  I  would  be  most  happy  if  she  would  come  down  &  I 
speak  the  Sentiments  of  my  wife.  She  need  not  wait  until 
Spring,  we  are  keeping  house  and  are  always  happy  to  see 
our  friends. 

I  have  nothing  else  of  any  interest  to  communicate  to  you 
and  will  close,  let  us  hear  from  you  soon. 

H.  B.  Babcock. 

Herman  Briggs  Babcock.  second  child  of  George  and  Olive 
(Simmons)  Babcock.  was  b.  Apr.  21,  1809.  He  m.  Maria 
Adams,  of  Rahway,  N.  J.,  Jan.  9,  1840.  She  was  b.  May  29, 
1820,  and  d.  Dec.  3,  1886.     Mr.  Babcock  d.  Jan.  26,  1877. 

Children : 

William  Herman,  b.  June  5.   1845. 

Harry  Adams,  b.  May  23,  1848. 

Frederick  Adams,  b.  May  19,   1858:    d.  Oct.  26,   1886. 

Hiram  Steele,  third  child  of  George  and  Olive  (Simmons) 


40  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Babcock,  was  b.  Ma}^  12,  181 1.    He  m.  Lois  Elizabeth  Town- 
send,  Oct.  II,  1837.     She  was  b.  in  Gilbertsville,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
3,  1817,  and  d.  Mar.  19,  1866,  aged  49  years.     Hiram  Steele 
Babcock  d,  Feb.  20,  1868,  aged  56  years,  9  months. 
Children,  b.  in  Cooperstown,  N.  Y. : 

Eliza  L.,  b.  Apr.  24,  1839;    d.  Jan.  24,  1841. 

Helen  Eliza,  b.  Sept.  15,   1844. 

George,  b.  Feb.  10,  1856;    d.  Mar.  11,  1856. 

Horace  Havens  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  George  and  Olive 
(Simmons)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Windham,  Greene  County, 
N.  Y.,  June  10,  1813.  He  m.  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  2,  1839, 
Margaret  A.  Hall,  daughter  of  Green  and  Margaret  (Can- 
field)  Hall.  She  was  b.  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  27,  1817,  and 
now  resides  in  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.  Mr.  Babcock  d.  in  Albany, 
N.  Y.,  in  Feb.,  1879. 

Children : 

George  Green,  b.  Albany ;    d.  same  place. 
Alice,  b.  Albany. 
Horace   Green,   b.   Oct.   28,    1845. 
Anna,  b.  Albany. 

Harriet  Newell,  fifth  child  of  George  and  Olive  (Simmons) 
Babcock,  was  b.  Jan.  17,  181 7.  vShe  m.  Amos  Bissell,  Jan. 
19,  1843.  He  was  b.  Dec.  24,  1812,  and  d.  in  1889.  Mrs. 
Bissell  d.  at  Milford,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  11,  1879. 

Child,  b.  at  Milford,  N.  Y. : 

George  Norman,  b.  Dec.  25,  1846. 

John  Porter,  sixth  child  of  George  and  Olive  (Simmons) 
Babcock,  was  b.  May  14,  18 19.  He  m.  Sarah  Hubbell  and  d. 
at  Palatha,  Fla.,  and  was  buried  at  Bridgeport,  Conn. 

Olivia  Babcock,  the  seventh  of  eight  children  of  George 
and  Olive  (Simmons)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Windham,  Greene 
County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  i6th  of  Apr.,  1821.  The  following 
biography  of  her  written  by  her  son  Artemas  Bissell  is  given 
verbatim : 

"When  but  about  four  years  old,  she  removed  with  her 
parents  to  the  village  of  Milford,  N.  Y.,  and  until  her  decease 
on  the  2 1st  of  October,  1898,  she  made  that  place  her  home. 
Her  father,  a  deacon  in  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Mil- 
ford, and  her  mother  were  earnest  Christian  people,  bringing 
up  their  children  carefully  and  religiously.  She  was  given 
moreover  a  very  good  education,  being  especially  instructed  in 


HON.    ISAAC    H.    BABCOCK. 


Page  28. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  41 

the  Scriptures.     At  tlie  age  of  sixteen  she  united  with  the 
church  referred  to." 

On  the  3d  of  Feb.,  1847,  Ohvia  was  married  to  Norman 
Bissell.  Three  sons  blessed  their  union,  one  of  whom^  Arte- 
mas,  now  resides  in  Montclair,  N.  J.,  the  other  two  having  died 
in  childliood.  As  to  her  religion,  it  was  not  of  a  gloomy 
type,  but  rather  of  the  kind  which  produces  a  merry  heart  and 
a  glad  countenance.  While  thus  possessing  a  genial  disposi- 
tion, she  was  of  a  dignified  demeanor.  For  many  years,  she 
and  her  sisters  Harriet  and  Mary  were  leading  members  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church  choir.  A  distinguished  authority 
wrote  in  this  connection  as  follows :  "I  never  heard  so  sweet 
singers  as  those  Babcock  girls !" 

Mrs.  Bissell  was  noted  for  good  works;  in  fact,  on  the 
very  day  of  her  demise  at  the  age  of  seventy-seven  her  hands 
were  employed  in  needlework  for  a  missionary's  family  in 
Kansas.  Encouraged  by  her  husband,  her  home  was  a  place 
where  the  needy  could  obtain  material  assistance,  excepting 
those  who  had  squandered  their  money  for  intoxicants.  For 
such  persons  she  would  do  but  little,  if  anything,  until  they 
evinced  positive  signs  of  reformation. 

The  subject  of  our  sketch  was  very  forgiving  of  an  injury, 
and  was  almost  studious  in  her  efforts  to  avoid  any  injury  of 
the  feelings  of  others.  It  may  be  added  Mrs.  Bissell  was  a 
great  lover  of  all  outdoor  varieties  of  flowers.  She  was  also 
fond  of  large  umbrageous  trees,  admiring  in  particular  the 
gigantic  elms  upon  the  grounds  of  her  home,  sometimes  per- 
sonifying them  as  her  friends.  Often  in  conversation  and  cor- 
respondence, she  would  refer  to  their  varying  moods  and 
characteristics. 

Mrs.  Bissell  always  took  especial  pride  in  her  Babcock  lin- 
eage, regarding  it  as  one  of  eminent  usefulness. 

Children  of  Olivia  (Babcock)  Bissell  and  Norman  Bissell: 

Artemas,  b.  Jan.  ig,   1849. 

Abel  Babcock.  b.  May  17.  1852;    d.  Feb.  14,  1857. 

Charles,  b.  Mar.  23,  1859;    d.  June  12,  i860. 

Alary  Babcock,  eighth  child  and  last  born  to  George  and 
Olive  (Simmons)  Babcock,  was  b.  Aug.  22,  1824.  She  was 
m.  to  Albert  Steele,  of  Windham,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  6,  1875,  by  the 
Rev.  S.  C.  Van  Camp.  Mr.  Steele  was  b.  Sept.  15,  1803, 
and  d.  Sept.  19,  1890.     No  issue. 

Harry  Adams  Babcock,  second  child  of  Herman  Briggs  and 
Maria  (Adams)  Babcock,  was  b.  May  23,  1848.    He  m.  Mary 
Stewart  Smith,  Sept.  13,  1876, 
44 


42  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  Ilis  Descendants. 

Children: 

Stewart  Smith,  b.  June  27,   1878;    d.  Dec.   18,   1881. 
Harry  Adams,   b.   Oct.   5,   1879;    d.   Dec.  21,   1881. 
Frederick  Adams,  b.  May  19,  1858. 

Frederick  Adams  Babcock,  third  child  of  Herman  Briggs 
and  Maria  (Adams)  Babcock,  was  b.  May  19,  1858.  He  m. 
Jeanie  Carter.     Mr.  Babcock  d.  Oct.  26,  1886. 

Chikh^en : 

Edward  Carter,  b.  ;    d.  . 


Frederick  Adams,  b.  Sept.,  1879. 
Grace  Laflin,  b.  May,  1884. 
Mary  Augusta,  b.  Apr.,   1885. 

Helen  Eliza  Babcock,  second  cliild  of  Hiram  Steele  and 
Lois  Elizabeth  (Townsend)  Babcock,  was  b.  Sept.  15,  1844. 
She  m.  May  14,  1872,  Albert  Van  Dusen,  at  Stockbridge, 
Mass.    He  was  b.  at  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  Dec.  25,  1842. 

Children : 

Auger  Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.   19,   1875. 
Laura,  b.  Apr.  7,  1880. 

George  Norman  Bissell,  eldest  son  of  Harriet  Newell  (Bab- 
cock) Bissell  and  Amos  Bissell,  was  b.  at  Milford,  N.  Y..  Dec. 
25,  1846.  Hem.  (i)  Sarah  Hamlin,  June  29,  1871.  She  was 
b.  in  Rutland,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  9,  1848,  and  d.  May  31,  1877,  in 
Milford,  N.  Y. 

Children : 

Clarence  Hamlin,  b.  Apr.  6,   1873. 

Amos,  b.  Jan.  13.  187s. 

David,  b.  May  18,  187V;    d.  Oct.  8.  1877. 

He  m.  (2)  Hannah  Hayes,  Jan.  3,  1888.   She  was  b.  in  Lee, 
Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  18,  1856. 
Children : 

Addi.son  Hayes,  b.  Nov.  5.  1888. 
George  Norman,  b.  Mar.  13,  1890. 

Mr.  Bissell  d.  Dec.  31,  1901,  at  White  Plains,  N.  Y. 

Artemas  Bissell.  eldest  child  of  Norman  Bissell,  Jr.,  and 
Olivia  (Babcock)  Bissell,  was  b.  Jan.  19,  1849.  He  graduated 
at  Princeton  University  in  the  class  of  1873.  On  Feb.  3,  1881, 
he  was  m.  to  Nettie  Estelle  Sage,  of  New  Berlin,  N.  Y.  She 
was  b.  Oct.  2,  1856,  and  d.  in  Denver,  Colo.,  Jan.  29,  1894. 

Children : 

Cardera  Estelle,  b.  New  Berlin,  Jan.  19,  1882. 
Norman  Artemas,  b.  New  York  City,  Oct.  13,  1887. 


HON.    CHARLES    H.    BABCOCK. 


Page  34- 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  43 

Mr.  Bissell  111.  (2)  Mrs.  Mary  iMiinia  J>unc,  of  Chatham, 
N.  ].,  Sept.  6,  1895.  She  was  b.  Dec.  13.  1867,  and  has  one 
child  by  her  hrst  hns1)an(l,  Harriet  h^hzabeth  Lune,  b.  X(n.  1, 
1891. 

Horace  Green  Babcock,  eldest  ciiihl  and  son  of  Horace 
Havens  and  Maroaret  A.  (Hall)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  .\lbany, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  28,  1845.  He  ni.  at  Little  Falls.  N.  Y..  ban.  20, 
1 88 1,  Allie  M.  La  r3ue.  dan-hter  of  Daniel  W.  and  Mary  E. 
(Schuyler)  La  Due.  She  was  b.  in  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  Apr. 
17,  1859. 

Child: 

Robert  La  Due,  1).  Apr.  26,  1882. 

Enoch  Babcock,  second  son  of  Isaiah.  Sr.,  and  Elizal)eth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  2".  1742. 
He  removed  with  his  parents  into  the  State  of  Massachusetts 
in  1772.  He  is  not  recorded  U]3on  the  town  records  of  Par- 
tridgefield  or  in  the  county  records  of  Berkshire  County.  He 
was  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution,  and  is  thus  recorded  in 
Massachusetts  reports  of  her  soldiers  in  this  war : 

"Enoch  Babcock,  Sergeant,  Capt.  Frances  Stowes  Co.,  Col. 
James  Converse  (Worcester  Co.)  Regt.  Service  three  days 
in  August  T777  on  an  alarm  at  Bennington." 

In  the  book  entitled  New  York  in  the  Re\nlution,  by 
James  A.  Roberts,  Comptroller,  Enoch  Babcock  is  recorded 
member  of  the  Fourth  Regiment,  Albany  County  Militia,  Col. 
Kilian  Van  Rensselaer.  In  the  same  record  also  appears  an 
Enoch  Babcock.  Dutchess  County  Militia,  Col.  William  Hum- 
frey,  Fifth  Regiment.  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  writer  that  the 
three  Enochs  recorded  were  the  same  person,  and  was  the  son 
of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.  In  those  days.  Albany  County  ex- 
tended to  within  a  short  distance  of  the  town  of  Partridgefield, 
Mass. 

Mrs.  George  Reed  Babcock.  in  a  genealogy  she  wrote  over 
thirty  years  ago.  states  Enoch  Babcock,  son  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  died 
in  IMassachusetts.  The  waiter  knows  nothing  further  about 
him. 

Elizabeth  Babcock.  eldest  daughter  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  Eliza- 
l)eth  (Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stoninsfton,  Conn..  June  9, 
T745.  She  did  not  marry,  but  lived  with  her  parents  until 
after  their  decease,  when  she  was  cared  for  by  her  voungest 
brother,  Jonas  Babcock.  If  the  church  records  of  the  Con- 
gregational Church  at  Westford  had  been  properly  taken  care 
of,  I  presume  I  would  have  found  the  date  of  her  decease  en- 


44  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

tered  there.  She  was  a  very  rehgious  woman,  and  used  to 
wander  long  distances  from  her  home  in  order  to  attend  re- 
ligious meetings.  She  is  buried  in  the  Grogh  Cemetery  by 
the  side  of  her  father  and  mother. 

Elisha  Babcock,  the  third  son  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  Elizabeth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  July  26,  1747. 
He  removed  with  his  parents  to  Partridgefield  (now  Hins- 
dale and  Peru),  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  in  1772.  The  town 
records  of  Partridgefield  have  the  following  relating  to  him : 

March  24th,   1777.  Town  Meeting  elected  Constable. 

March   16th,   1778.  Town  Meeting  elected  on  Committee 

on  Safety. 

April     20th,   1785.  Town  Meeting,  one  of  a  committee  to 

take  census  of  school  district  of 
from  four  to  sixteen  years  of  age 
and  make  returns  at  next  meeting. 

Elisha  Babcock,  we  think,  w^as  twice  married.  First  to 
Elizabeth  Peirce.  I  believe  the  surname  is  correct,  for  the 
reason  that  one  Ebenezer  Peirce  seems  to  have  been  witness  to 
his  many  transfers  of  real  estate.  Ebenezer  Peirce  w-as  a  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace  in  Partridgefield,  and  while  I  cannot  state 
it  to  be  a  fact  that  his  first  wnfe  was  Mr.  Peirce's  daughter,  I 
feel  reasonably  certain  that  such  was  the  case.  I  am  also  very 
certain  that  the  following  were  their  children,  who  w^ere  b.  in 
Partridgefield,  Mass. : 

Elisha  P. 

Alice. 

Charles. 

Eunice. 

Eliza. 

Sylvester. 

John. 

Elisha  Babcock  was  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution,  and  is 
recorded  as  follow^s  in  Record  of  Massachusetts  Soldiers  in 
this  war: 

"Elisha  Babcock,  Private  Capt.  Peter  Porter's  Co.  Col.  Sam- 
uel Brewer's  Regt."  (Berkshire  County).  In  the  book  en- 
titled New  York  in  the  Revolution,  and  a  later  work.  Sup- 
plement, published  by  Ex-Comptroller  Roberts,  of  New  York 
State,  appears  the  name  of  an  Elisha  Babcock  from  Albany 
County.     This  county  in  those  days  extended  to  the  Massa- 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Si:,  and  His  Descendants.  45 

chusetts  line,  within  a  few  miles  of  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  and, 
as  Elisha  Babcock  finally  settled  and  died  in  the  town  of  New 
Lebanon  (set  off  from  Canaan  in  18 19),  Columbia  County, 
N.  Y.,  it  is  fair  to  assume  that  the  Elisha  recorded  from 
Albany  County  was  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.'s,  son.  His  name  ap- 
pears as  "Private,  in  Col.  Lewis  Duboy's  5th  Regiment,  The 
Line."  The  Line  were  regiments  in  the  United  States  service 
under  Gen.  George  Washington.  There  were  regiments  of 
artillery  and  an  organization  of  Green  Mountain  boys  in  the 
Line.  He  is  also  recorded  in  'The  Levies,''  enlisted  men.  Col. 
Frederick  W^eissenfel's  Regiment.  The  Levies  were  drafts 
from  different  militia  regiments,  and  from  the  people  direct 
as  well,  which  could  be  called  upon  to  serve  outside  the  State 
during  their  entire  term. 

He  is  also  recorded  in  the  "Albany  Co.  Militia  Col.  Kilian 
Van  Rensselaer  4th  Regiment."  In  the  New  York  in  the 
Revolution,  Supplement,  is  found  the  following: 

"Elisha  Babcock,  Assignor,  Land  Bounty  Rights.  Li 
1 78 1,  a  Bounty  of  Land  Rights, — a  Right  being  500  acres  of 
land,  was  offered  to  officers  and  men  for  two  regiments  there 
to  be  raised  for  the  defense  of  the  State  of  New  York.  A  pri- 
vate and  non-commissioned  officer  was  to  receive  one  Risfht." 

Elisha  Babcock  is  also  recorded  under  the  head  of  Land 
Bounty  Rights  as  Assignee.  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  writer 
that  Elisha  Babcock  finally  settled  upon  his  tract  of  land,  or 
a  portion  of  it,  received  for  his  services  in  the  War  of  the 
Revolution,  situated  in  the  town  of  New  Lebanon,  Columbia 
County,  N.  Y.,  and  there  lived  the  residue  of  his  lifetime. 

It  is  a  source  of  great  regret  to  the  writer  that  a  more  posi- 
tive and  full  record  of  Elisha  and  his  brother  John  cannot  be 
given  in  this  work.  In  1902,  while  the  writer  was  in  the  town 
of  Peru,  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  one  of  the  Selectmen  of 
this  town  informed  him  that  a  terrific  tornado  a  few  years 
ago  destroyed  their  town  house  and  ruined  a  large  number 
of  the  early  records  of  Partridgefield.  The  town  records  of 
Partridgefield  now  extant  contain  no  records  of  vital  statistics 
in  that  town. 

The  following  deeds  of  record  are  found  in  the  office  of  the 
Register  of  Deeds  of  Berkshire  County,  Mass. : 

"July  30th,  1785,  Isaiah  Babcock  to  Elisha  Babcock  52  ^ 
acres  of  land  in  Partridgefield.     Consideration  £30. 

Witnesses.  Signed.    Isaiah  Babcock." 

Elias  Babcock. 

Samuel  Babcock. 


46  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Book  33.     P.  221. 

"Dec.  31st,  1787.  Thomas  Marshal  to  Khsha  Bahcock,  of 
Partridgehekl,  one  undivided  third  part  of  three  hundred 
acres  of  kind  in  i'artridgefiekk     Consideration  ^y^. 

Witnesses.  Tiios.  Marshall,  Ijy  Atty." 

RoDY  Kinney. 

"Dec.  3Lst,  1787,  Elislia  Bahcock  to  Thomas  Marshal  for 
£70  on  purchase  price  of  kand  as  follows :  Conveys  one  un- 
di\ided  third  part  of  tliree  hundred  acres  of  land  in  Partridge- 
field  with  the  Lahour  clone  on  the  same,  etc. 

Witnesses.  Elisha  Babcock." 

Keen.  Peirce. 
Pebdy  Kinnie. 

''May  8th,  in  the  14th  year  of  our  independence  A.  D.  1793. 
Elisha  Bahcock,  of  Partridgefield  deeded  to  Ahner  Mason  for 
£70  fifty-six  acres  of  land  on  which  was  his  house  and  l)arn. 

Signed  Elisha  Babcock. 

Elizabeth  Babcock." 

"Dec.  nth,  1793.  Elisha  Babcock  to  Noah  Benson  for 
£ii-.s\  10  a  parcel  of  land  lying  in  Partridgefield,  part  of  a 
lot  of  Undivided  Land  of  300  acres,  containing  1 1  acres  and 
30  rods  of  land. 

Witnesses.  Elisha  Babcock." 

Ebenezer  Peirce. 
Alice  Babcock. 

"Sept.  3rd,  1794,  by  deed  to  Amos  Barret  all  his  right  and 
title  and  interest  in  an  undivided  300  acre  lot  of  land  lying  in 
Partridgefield,  said  lot  Ijeing  occupied  by  me  the  said  Elisha 
Babcock,  with  hay  and  Indian  corn  now  standing  on  the 
l)remises  together  with  the  buildings  and  all  the  appurtenances 
thereto  belonging. 

Witnessed  by  Signed.     Elisha  Babcock." 

Jeremiah  Hascall. 
Elisha  P.  Babcock. 

"Feb.  17th,  1794.  Elisha  Babcock,  of  Partridgefield,  con- 
veyed to  Isaah  Farnum  of  Dalton  a  tract  of  land  lying  in 
Partridgefield,  it  being  part  of  a  lot  of  300  acres  of  undivided 
land,  as  it  is  so-called  in  all  18^/2  acres.  No  consideration 
named. 

Witnessed  by  Signed.     Elisha  Babcock.' 

Eben.  Peirce. 
Oliver  Tenney. 


>) 


STEPHEN    HENRY    BABCOCK. 


Page  31. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Si\,  and  I/is  Descendants.  47 

Elisha  Babcock  and  family  joined  his  father  and  bruthers 
and  their  famihes  in  tlieir  emigration  ont  of  Massachusetts, 
which  flowed  to  the  State  of  New  York.  At  the  County 
Clerk's  Office,  in  Cooperstown,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  the 
following  deeds  are  recorded : 

"May  I  St,  1807.  Thomas  Colden  and  Alexander  Coklen, 
E.xrs.  of  Cadwallader  Colden,  of  Coldenham,  Orange  Co.  by 
their  Atty.  to  Elisha  Babcock,  of  Burlington,  Otsego  Co., 
N.  Y.,  a  tract  of  land  lying  in  Burlington,  upon  which  a  re- 
lease of  mortgage  had  been  given  by  said  Elisha  Babcock. 
dated  Dec.  24th,  1793,  for  £41  -  ^.10  to  the  said  Cadwallader 
Colden,  twenty-one  acres  of  land.     Consideration  $115.00." 

"Feb.  nth,  181 1.    Elisha  Babcock  of  the  Town  of  Burling- 
ton,  Otsego  Co.,  N.  Y.  to  Ebenezer  Rolo,  of  the  same  place, 
20  acres  and  24  rods  of  land  in  the  town  of  Burlington,  N.  Y.  • 
Consideration  $137.00. 

Signed.    Elisha  Babcock  l.  s. 

her 
"         Deborah      X      Babcock,  l.  s." 
mark  ^ 

When  Elisha  Babcock's  first  wife  died  the  writer  has  been 
unable  to  ascertain.  She  died  in  Partridgefield.  Mass.,  and 
Elisha  Babcock  must  have  married  his  second  w^ife,  Deborah, 
before  he  removed  to  New  York  State. 

"Feb.  nth,  181 1.  Elisha  Babcock  and  Deborah,  his  wife, 
of  the  town  of  Burlington,  Otsego  Co.,  to  Jared  Johnson,  of 
same  place,  12  acres  2  quarters  and  six  rods  of  land  for 
$170.00." 

Elisha's  signature  pn)\-ed  Ijy  Ebenezer  Rolo  a  subscribing 
witness,  wdio  made  affidavit  Jan.  15,  18 13,  that  he  saw  Elisha 
Babcock  sign  the  instrument. 

Nothing  further  appears  of  record  relating  to  him  in  Otsego 
County,  and  nothing  is  found  in  the  county  records  of  Dela- 
w^are  or  Montgomery  Counties  relating  to  him.  His  son 
Elisha  P.  Babcock  settled  in  the  town  of  Plainfield,  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.,  as  appears  by  the  following: 

"Jan.  8th,  18 10.  John  DeLancey  by  Atty.  to  Elisha  Bab- 
cock, Jr.  of  Plainfield,  Otsego  Co.,  N.  Y.  ^i  acres  of  land  for 
$255.00." 

"July  8th,  1819.  Ebenezer  Morgan  of  Winfield,  Herkimer 
Co.,  N.  Y.  to  Elisha  Babcock,  Jr.,  of  town  of  Plainfield,  Ot- 
sego Co.,  N.  Y..  36  acres  of  land  in  the  town  of  Plainfield. 
Consideration  $485.00." 


48  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

"Sept.  13th,  1830.  Elisha  Babcock  and  Polly,  his  wife,  of 
Plainfield,  Otsego  Co.,  N.  Y.  to  Ebenezer  Bass,  of  the  town 
of  Edmeston,  same  county,  Thirty-six  acres  of  land  in  Plain- 
field.     Consideration  $475.00." 

Signed.     Elisha  Babcock. 
"  Polly  Babcock." 

This  is  the  last  mention  of  Elisha  Babcock,  Jr.'s,  name  in 
the  records  of  Otsego  County.  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  writer 
that  Elisha  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  Jr.,  settled  finally  in  the  town 
of  New  Lebanon,  Columbia  County,  N.  Y.,  and  died  there. 
The  names  of  Elisha  and  John  Babcock  are  not  recorded  upon 
the  town  records  of  Canaan  or  New  Lebanon,  Columbia 
County,  N.  Y.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  Elisha  and  his 
brother  John  settled  there,  and  died  and  are  buried  in  some 
cemetery  in  that  town.  In  1902,  when  the  writer  visited  the 
town  of  Canaan  and  examined  its  records,  an  old  resident  in- 
formed him  that  an  Elisha  Babcock,  deceased  over  thirty 
years  ago,  once  kept  a  hotel  at  Lebanon  Springs,  and  is  de- 
scribed as  a  large,  portly  man,  blue  eyes,  fair  complexion,  and 
brown  hair. 

Charles  Babcock,  son  of  Elisha  and  Elizabeth  Babcock,  was 
b.  in  Partridgefield  (now  Hinsdale  and  Peru),  Berkshire 
County,  Mass.  The  date  of  his  birth  I  have  been  unable  to 
ascertain.  He  m.  Zilpha  Holcomb.  She  was  b.  in  Canaan, 
Conn. 

Their  children  were: 

Lorenzo  Babcock;  d.   Clarkson,   N.   Y. 

Orlonzo  Babcock;  d.  Burlington,  N.  Y. 

Charles   Babcock;  d.    Burlington.   N.   Y. 

Eliza  Babcock;    d.  Watertown,  N.  Y. 

Caroline  Babcock;  d.  Hartwick,  N.  Y. 

Page  9,  Centennial  Congregational  Church  History,  Hins- 
dale, Mass.,  states  that  "Jan.  2nd,  1792,  Charles  Babcock  and 
others  joined  in  a  petition  to  the  Legislature  for  a  committee 
to  locate  a  meeting  house,  etc." 

Charles  Babcock  d.  in  Burlington,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y. 

Orlonzo  Babcock,  second  child  of  Charles  and  Zilpha  (Hol- 
comb) Babcock,  was  b.  at  Otsego,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  18,  181 1.  He 
m.  at  Otsego,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  22,  1837,  Mary  Ann  Russell,  daugh- 
ter of  William  and  Sarah  (Garrett)  Russell.  Mr.  Babcock 
d.  at  Burlington,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  14,  1843.  Mrs. 
Babcock  d.  at  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  18,  1891. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  49 

Children,  b.  at  Burlington,  N.  Y. : 

L.  Louisa,  b.  Mar.  27,  1838. 

William  Sidney,  b.  Feb.  29,  1840;    d.  Aug.  5,  1848. 

L.  Louisa  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Orlonzo  and  Mary  Ann 
(Russell)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Burlington,  Otsego  County,  N. 
Y.,  Mar.  2y,  1838.  She  m.  at  same  place,  June  23,  1858, 
David  A.  Avery. 

Children,  b.  at  Burlington,  N.  Y. : 

Jennie  Louisa,  b.   May  5,   1859;    m.   Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  28, 
1888,  William  W.  Woodcock. 

Eliza  Babcock,  eldest  daughter  of  Charles  and  Zilpha  (Hol- 
comb)  Babcock,  was  b.  July  23,  1808,  probably  in  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.  She  m.  Truman  Stickney  Angel.  He  was  b. 
in  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  28,  1806,  and  d.  in  Watertown, 
Jefferson  County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  21,  1891.  Ehza  (Babcock) 
Angel  d.  at  Watertown,  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  19, 
1872. 

Children : 

Charles    Babcock    Angel,    b.    Clayton,    N.    Y.,    Feb.    10,    1834;     m. 

Watertown,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  9,  1856. 
Eliza  Seaver.  b.  Sept.  22,  1837;    d.  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  June  I,  1878. 
Burt  Crittenden,  b.  Clayton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  21,  1839;    m.  Ellen  Holden. 
Ellen   Burt.   b.    Clayton,    N.    Y.,   Nov.    7,    1842;    m.    Oct.    16,    1865, 

Edward  M.  Gates,  b.  Feb.  10,  1842.     He  d.  Watertown,  N.  Y. 

John  Babcock,  son  of  Elisha  and  probably  Elizabeth 
(Peirce)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  that  part  of  Partridgefield,  Berk- 
shire County,  Mass.,  now  called  the  town  of  Peru,  Jan.  22, 
1780.  He  m.  Clarissa  Harlow  Grey,  Mar.  17,  1808.  Mrs. 
Babcock  was  b.  Mar.  14,  1787,  and  d.  Feb.  21,  1856.  Mr. 
Babcock  d.  July  21,  i860.  He  was  a  first-class  cabinetmaker 
by  trade.  Early  in  life  he  removed  to  New  Lebanon,  Colum- 
bia County,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y. : 

Thaddeus  Grey,  b.  Apr.  7,  1809;    d.  in  Ohio. 

John  Jefferson,  b.  Apr.  28,  181 1;    d.  1854. 

Sylvia  Ann,  b.  Mar.  22,   1813 ;    m.  Henry  Roberts. 

Eliza  Ann,  b.   May  18,   1815 ;    d.   1854. 

James  Magee,  b.  July  4,  1818. 

Reuben  Madison,  b.  Oct.  24,  1820;    d.  in  Ohio. 

Edwin  H.,  b.  Nov.  15,  1822. 

Adaline  Amelia,  b.  Feb.  16,  1825;    m.  Dr.  Henry  C.  Bosworth;    d. 

Pittsfield,  Mass.,  May  15,  1887. 
George  Henry,  b.  Apr.  20,  1826;    m.   Sallie  Merrill. 
Horatio  Nelson,  b.  July  12,  1828;    d.  Jan.  23,  1853. 
Clarissa   Harlow,   b.    Feb.   4,    1830;    d.   May   15,    i860.    State  Line, 

N.  Y. ;    m.  Frank  Sparks. 


50  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

James  Magee  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  John  and  Clarissa  Har- 
low (Grey)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  New  Lebanon,  Columbia 
County,  N.  Y.,  July  4,  1818.  He  m.  at  Springfield,  Mass., 
Jan.  6,  1850,  Jane  Catherine  Allen.  She  was  b.  in  Springfield, 
Mass.,  Feb.  8,  1822,  and  d.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  Feb.  24,^875. 
Mr.  Babcock  d.  at  the  home  of  his  daughter  Mary  in  Pittsfield, 
Mass.,  Mar.  18,  1896. 

Children,  b.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass. : 

John  William,  b.  Aug.   19,   1851  ;    m.  Emma  Wright. 
Mary  Augusta,  b.  Aug.  9,   1854;    m.  Charles  A.  Crosier. 
James  Francis,  b.  Oct.   19,   1864. 

John  William  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  James  Magee  and 
Jane  Catherine  (Allen)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Pittsfield,  Berk- 
shire County,  Mass.,  Aug.  19,  185 1.  He  m.  at  Grand  Blanc, 
Mich.,  Emma  Wright,  July  22,  1877.  She  was  b.  at  Iosco, 
Mich.,  Apr.  13,  1853.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Babcock  reside  at  Hat- 
ton,  Mich. 

Children,  b.  at  Grand  Blanc,  Mich. : 

Leroy  A. ;    m.  Clara  Hayes. 
Carroll  E. ;    m.  Mabel  Crosby. 
Mabel  C. ;    m.  James  Dimmick. 
William  J. 
Alfred  W. 

Mary  Augusta  Babcock,  second  child  of  James  M.  and  Jane 
Catherine  (Allen)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  Aug. 
9,  1854.  She  m.  at  the  same  place  Sept.  20,  1875,  Charles  A. 
Crosier,  son  of  Henry  and  Betsey  (Cole)  Crosier.  He  was 
b.  at  Old  Windsor,  Conn.,  Apr.  23,  185 1,  and  d.  in  Pittsfield, 
Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  Feb.  14,  1901. 

Children,  b.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass. : 

Walter   Lawrence,   b.   July   5,    1877;    m.    Pittsfield,   Mass.,   Feb.    19, 

1897,  Rebecca  C.  Roghton. 
Bessie  Allen,  b.  Mar.  16,   1880;    m.  Glendale,  Mass.,  Oct.  26,   1898, 

George  J.  Warner. 
Albert  Henry,  b.   Mar.   30.   1883 ;    unm. 
Ernest  Leroy,  b.  Nov.  8,  1884 ;    res.  Springfield,  Mass. 
Florence  May,  b.  Jan.  i,  1887;    res.  Pittsfield,  Mass. 
Royal  Francis,  b.  Oct.  19,  1888. 
Isabel,  b.  Oct.  28,   1899. 

George  Henry  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  John  and  Clarissa 
Harlow  (Grey)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  New  Lebanon,  Columbia 
County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  20,  1826.  He  m.  Sarah  Gilbert  Merrill. 
She  was  b.  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  June  14,  1820,  and  d.  in  Lee, 
Mass.,  Jan.  2,  1898. 


^3%^ 


.>^~ 


^ 


1^ 


HENRY    H.    BABCOCK. 


Page  33. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  5I 

Their  children : 

Harmon  Seclcy,  b.  Apr.  11,  1849. 

Lyman  Baldwin,  b.  June  15,  1852;    m.  Rosa  L.  Pasha,  Oct.  7,  1875 

No  issue. 
Willard,   Willis    (twins),   d.   in   infancy. 

Harmon  Seeley  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  George  Henry  and 
Sarah  (iilbert  (Merrill)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  New  Lebanon. 
Cohmibia  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  Ji,  1849.  He  was  educated  at 
the  Public  Schools  in  Lee,  Mass.,  and  Lenox,  same  State,  and 
at  Brookside  Seminary,  Stockbridge,  ALass.  At  Lenox  High 
School  was  awarded  a  medal  for  being  the  best  scholar.  He 
graduated  at  Brown  University  June,  1874,  and  was  valedic- 
torian of  his  class  with  degree  of  A.B.  He  received  the  de- 
gree of  A.M.  in  1877.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1877, 
and  is  now  an  Attorney  and  Counselor-at-Law  in  Providence, 
R.  L  He  has  held  the  following  offices:  Superintendent  of 
Public  Schools,  E.  Providence,  R.  L,  three  years;  Coroner 
for  ten  years;  Solicitor  for  five  years;  Treasurer  Watch- 
market  Fire  District  for  ten  years. 

He  is  a  member  of  the  Beta  Theta  Pi  fraternity,  and  de- 
livered the  poem  at  two  conventions  of  this  fraternity,  one  at 
Cincinnati,  O.,  and  one  at  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y.  He  also  de- 
livered the  poem  at  the  dedication  of  Watchmarket  Fire 
Library,  and  also  before  the  Alumni  of  Brown  University. 

He  m.  June  11,  1879,  Eva  Sophronia,  daughter  of  Samuel 
and  Abby  Jane  (Mattoon)  Belden,  of  Lenox,  Mass. 

Children : 

Samuel   Belden,  b.  June  g,    1880. 

Sarah  Abby,  b.  Feb.   15,  1883 ;    d.  aged  3  years. 

Mary  Katherine,  b.  June  20,  1890. 

Mrs.  Babcock  d.  Oct.  17,  1899,  and  Harmon  Seeley  Bab- 
cock m.  (2)  Apr.  17,  1902,  Julia  Evelyn  Buckminster,  daugh- 
ter of  Capt.  Charles  West,  of  South  Portland,  Me. 

Child : 

Harmon  Seeley,  Jr.,  b.  Apr.  2,   1903. 

George  Babcock,  fourth  son  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  Elizabeth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  Julv  27,  1749. 
He  m.  Susanna  Sheldon,  of  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  about 
1767.  He  removed  with  his  family  in  the  year  1772  with  his 
parents  and  sisters  and  brothers  to  Partridgefield.  Berkshire 
County,  Mass.  The  writer  could  find  no  deeds  of  record  to 
him  in  Berkshire  County.  He  did,  however,  own  land  there, 
as  appears  from  the  following  deeds : 


52  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

"Jan.  15,  1790,  George  Babcock,  Mortgage  Deed  to  Wood- 
bridge  Little,  of  Pittslield,  Mass.  conditioned  on  the  payment 
by  George  Babcock  of  the  sum  of  £24,  s  \2  according  to  his 
note,  Conveys  45  acres  of  land  with  a  bridge  way." 

"Jan.  15th,  1790,  to  Woodbridge  Little  a  piece  of  land  in 
Partridgeheld  containing  45  acres  of  land  together  with  a 
bridge  way  for  £40." 

His  wife  did  not  sign  either  of  the  above  deeds. 

"Sept.  7th,  1790,  George  Babcock  and  Susanna,  his  wife, 
to  John  and  Josiah  Francis,  of  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  conveyed  a 
certain  tract  or  piece  of  land  in  Partridgefield,  Being  part  of 
Lot  No.  2,  and  is  Butted  and  Bounded  as  followeth :  Begin- 
ning at  a  stake  and  Stones  standing  at  the  Northeast  corner 
of  Jesse  Goodrich's  land  thence  running  North  twenty  degrees 
East  one  hiuidred  and  twenty-six  Rods  to  a  stake  with  stones 
about  it,  thence  west  three  Degrees  South  sixty-four  Rods  to 
a  hemlock  stump  marked  with  stones  about  it,  thence  south 
to  the  middle  of  the  River,  thence  up  the  River  to  a  sharp 
stone  which  is  an  original  corner  of  lands  formerly  belonging 
to  the  Grantor,  thence  west  eighteen  and  one-half  Degrees, 
North  twenty-two  Rods  to  a  stake  and  stones,  thence  South 
eleven  degrees.  East  forty-nine  rods  to  a  stake  and  stones, 
thence  south  eighteen  and  one-half  degrees  west  to  a  stake  and 
stones  standing  in  the  North  line  of  Jesse  Goodrich's  land,  then 
a  straight  line  to  the  first  bound  mentioned  Containing  forty- 
eight  acres  together  with  Bridgeway  from  the  main  road  to 
said  land. 

"Consideration  £90. 

(Signed)     George  Babcock. 

her 
Susanna    X    Babcock." 
mark 

The  town  records  of  Partridgefield  have  the  following  of 
record : 

"Mar.       1st,   1779.  Town  Meeting  elected  Constable." 
"Nov.     8th,   1779.  Town     Meeting.       Voted     and     chose 

George  Babcock,  Eleazor  Rhodes 
and  Ebenezer  Pierce  a  committee  to 
get  a  minister  to  preach  upon  pro- 
bation, and  so  all  run  off  without 
adjourning  or  dissolving  the  meet- 
ing." 


Isaiali  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  53 

"Jan.     25th,   1780.   Town  Meeting.    Voted  to  abate  the  rate 

of  Natlianicl  White  and  George 
Babcock'  bill." 

"Mar.      3rd,   1783.  Town   JMeeting.      Voted   to   reimburse 

George  Babcock  $50.00  Continental 
Money  which  he  paid  for  said  town 
in  1780." 

"April  1 6th,   1789.  Town       Meeting     elected     Sealer     of 

Leather." 

In  the  book  entitled  Massachusetts  Provincial  Congress 
Journals,  and  of  the  Committee  of  Safety  (Boston,  1838), 
page  538,  appears  the  following: 

"May  7th,  1775,  Mr.  George  Babcock  charged  with  the  care 
of  a  house  having  complained  that  certain  persons  came  to  said 
house  and  taken  from  thence  considerable  furniture.  Voted 
that  this  complaint  be  referred  to  Congress,  and  that  Mr. 
Gushing  be  desired  to  accompany  said  Babcock  there,  and  that 
the  above  vote  be  sent  to  the  council  of  war  for  their  approba- 
tion, which  vote  being  sent,  it  was  approved  accordingly." 

George  Babcock  was  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution.  From 
Record  of  Massachusetts'  Soldiers  in  this  war  I  append  the 
following : 

"George  Babcock,  Corporal,  Capt.  William  Watkins  Co. 
Col.  Benj.  Simonds  Regt.  (Berkshire  Co.).  Muster  roll  dated 
Ticonderoga,  Feb.  25,  1777.  Enlisted  Dec.  16,  1776.  Enlist- 
ment to  expire  Mar.  15,  1777. 

His  youngest  brother,  Jonas  Babcock,  has  the  following 
entry  in  his  book  of  record : 

"May  7th,  1793,  George  moved  out  of  Partridgefield." 

Children  of  George  and  Susanna  (Sheldon)  Babcock.  The 
first  three  b.  probably  in  Stonington,  Conn.  The  remainder  in 
Partridgefield,  Berkshire  County,  Mass. : 

Elizabeth,  b.  Aug.  4,   1768. 

Giffie,  b.  Nov.  4.   1771. 

Lemuel,  b.   1772;    m.  Lucy  Sawyer. 

George,  b.  1773:  m.  1802.  Mary  Gates,  dau.  of  Capt.  Daniel  Gates, 
of  Greene  County,  N.  Y. 

Susanna,  b.  1774;  ni.  (i)  Capt.  Daniel  Gates;  m.  (2)  Augustus 
Torry. 

Isaiah,  b.   1776;    m.  Almira  Landon. 

Sarah,  b.  1778;    m.  Fletcher. 

Anna,  b.  1780;    m.  Absolem  Russell. 

William,  b.  Feb.   11,  1783;    m.  Julia  Reed. 

Diadema,  b.  1785. 

Olivia,  b.  1787;  m.  (i)  Pliny  Ashby  Field;  m.  (2)  Isaac  Jen- 
nings:   m.    (3)    Dr.   John   R.   Mitchell. 

Oliver,  b.  1789;   m.  Hannah  Levalley.    He  d.  Jan.  25,  1884. 


54  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

George  Babcock  with  his  family  removed  in  1793  to  the 
town  of  Otsego,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  which  was  probably 
the  former  home  of  his  wife. 

The  following  appears  of  record  in  the  County  Clerk's  of- 
fice in  Otsego  County,  N.  Y. : 

"Sept.  3rd,  1793,  William  Cooper  of  Cooperstown,  N.  Y., 
in  the  County  of  Otsego,  Escjuire  of  the  first  part,  and  George 
Babcock  of  the  County  and  State  aforesaid  yeoman  of  the  sec- 
ond part.  That  the  said  William  Cooper  for  the  sum  of  ^t^t,, 
ST,  conveys  to  said  Babcock  all  that  tract  and  parcel  of  land, 
situate,  lying  and  being  within  the  bounds  of  a  patent  granted 
to  George  Grogham  and  others,  and  bounded  as  follows : 

"On  the  w^est  line  by  the  Bennington  settlement.  On  the 
north  by  part  of  lot  number  eleven  on  lands  of  Joel  Squire,  on 
the  east  by  lands  of  John  Pire,  and  on  the  south  by  part  of  lots 
number  nine,  or  lands  of  Darius  Warner  including  parts  of 
lot  number  ten  being  the  west  end  containing  (50)  fifty  acres 
of  land. 

Signed  William  Cooper." 

Signed  in  presence  of 

Richard  R.  Smith. 

R.  F.  Cooper. 

The  above  William  Cooper  was  the  father  of  the  celebrated 
novelist,  J.  Fennimore  Cooper. 

"Sept.  3rd,  1793.  Mortgage  to  William  Cooper  upon  the 
above  property  for  £33,  .^3  to  be  paid  within  three  years." 

"The  above  mortgage  discharged  April  23rd,  1801." 

"March  23rd,  1802,  to  secure  the  payment  of  $77.00,  he 
gave  a  Mortgage  to  Seth  Doubleday  and  John  Adams,  Over- 
seers of  the  Poor  for  the  Town  of  Otsego,  Covers  2 1  j^  acres 
of  land  in  the  town  of  Otsego." 

"May  31st,  1808,  the  above  was  discharged." 

When  George  Babcock  sold  his  property  in  Otsego  County 
the  writer  has  been  unable  to  determine.  He  however,  re- 
moved with  his  son  William  to  Plopewell,  N.  Y.,  and  died  at 
his  son  William's  house.  Mar.  18,  181 6.  His  wife,  Susanna 
(Sheldon)  Babcock,  died  in  Otsego  County,  N.  Y..  in  1798. 
There  are  numerous  families  of  Sheldons  still  living  in  Otsego 
County,  but  the  writer  has  been  unable  to  determine  the  parent- 
age of  Susanna  Sheldon,  George  Babcock's  wife. 

Elizabeth  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  George  and  Susanna 
(Sheldon)  Babcock,  was  b.  probably  in  Stonington,  Conn., 
Aug.  4,  1768.     She  m.  Mar.  29,  1781,  Frederick  Miller.    As 


GEORGE    S.    BABCOCK. 


Page  29. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  55 

her  parents  were  living-  at  the  time  of  her  marriage  in  Par- 
tridgefield,  Berkshire  County,  Alass.,  it  is  presumed  she  was 
married  there.  She  d.  May  6,  1848,  and  her  husband  d.  Jan. 
20,  1830. 

Their  children  were : 

Abigail    (Slosson),  b.   Feb.    13,    1788;    d.   1846. 

Electa  (Potter),  b.  Mar.  16,  1790;    d.  1854. 

William  F.,  b.  Jan.  20,  1792;    d.  1853. 

Sally,  b.  Oct.  i,  1794;    d.  1869. 

Susan,  b.  Oct.  26,  1796;    d.  Dec,  1796. 

David,  b.  Feb.  22,  1798;    d.  1833. 

Benjamin   Wells,  b.   Aug.    14,    1801 ;    d.    1832. 

Clarissa,  b.  Oct.   16,   1803 ;    d.   1854. 

Myron  H.,  b.  Apr.  26,  1806;    d.  1875. 

Cbarles  B.,  b.  Sept.  i,  1808;     d.  1850. 

Frederick  S.,  b.  Dec.  23,  1810;    d.  1885. 

Electa  Miller,  second  child  of  Frederick  and  Elizabeth  (Bab- 
cock) ]\Iiller,  was  b.  Mar.  16,  1790.  She  m.  July  12,  1812, 
Heman  Bradley  Potter.  He  w^as  the  son  of  Job  and  Mary 
(Bradley)  Potter,  and  was  b.  Jan.  8,  1786,  being  one  of  a 
family  of  tw^elve  children.  Gen.  Heman  B.  Potter  was  a 
prominent  lawyer  in  Buffalo.  It  was  at  his  law  office  that  the 
Hon.  George  Reed  Babcock  met  his  second  daughter,  w^hom  he 
married.  Gen.  Potter  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7,  1854.  His 
wife  d.  Nov.  6,  1806. 

Their  children  were: 

Mary  Eliza,  b.  Aug.   11,   1813;    d.   Sept.  25,    1814. 

Mary  Bradley,  b.  Oct.  7,  1815;    m.  George  Reed  Babcock;    d.  Sept. 

20,  1877. 
Frederick  Miller,  b.  May  15.   1817;    d.  May  23,   1818. 
Elizabeth  Miller,  b.  Apr.  19,  1819;    d.  Oct.  24,  1854. 
Heman  Bradley,  b.  Mar.  15,  1824 ;    d.  in  Calcutta,  July  30,  1859. 

Giffie  Babcock,  second  child  of  George  and  Susanna  (Shel- 
don) Babcock,  was  b.  presumably  in  Stonington.  Conn.,  Nov. 
4,  1 77 1.  She  m.  Capt.  Frederick  Follett.  He  was  b.  Mar. 
TO,  1761,  and  d.  May,  1804.    Giffie  Babcock  d.  July  13,  1845. 

Children: 

Benjamin,  b.  Nov.  22,  1790;    d.  Oct.  2,  1823,  in  Trinidad,  Cuba. 
Nathan,  b.  July  9.  1793;    d.  Oct.  14,   1875,  Ypsilanti,  Mich. 
George,  b.  Aug.  t6,  1795;    d.  at  age  of  14  years. 
Susan  Ann,  b.  Aug.  5,  1797;    d.  at  birth. 
Orrin,  b.   Sept.  4,   1798;    d.   Oct.   14.   1894.   Sandusky,   O. 
Foster  Morse,  b.  Feb.  i,  1801 ;    d.  Oct.  11,  1862,  Sandusky.  O. 
John,  b.  Feb.  3,  1803;    d.  Oct.,  1836,  Niagara  County,  N.  Y. 
Frederick,  b.  Nov.  i,  1804;    d.  Jan.  18,  1890,  New  York  City. 

Mrs.  Follett  m.  (2)  Dr.  Calvin  Bacon,  and  had  one  daugh- 


56  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

ter,  which  d.  in  infancy.  She  m.  (3)  John  LeMunyon.  No 
issue.    Date  of  marriage  unknown. 

Nathan  Follett,  second  son  of  Frederick  and  Giffie  (Bab- 
cock)  Follett,  was  b.  July  9,  1793.  He  m.  Nancy  Keith,  of 
Canandaigua,  N.  Y.    He  d.  in  Ypsilanti,  Mich.,  Oct.  14,  1875. 

Children: 

Benjamin. 

William. 

Nancy. 

Nancy    Keith    Follett,    last    born    to    Nathan    and    Nancy 
(Keith)  Follett,  ni.  James  E.  Learn,  of  Batavia,  N.  Y. 
Children: 

Ella. 

James  Everett. 

The  eldest  child  of  James  E.  Learn  and  Mary  (Keith)  Fol- 
lett, m.  Wright  Spencer,  of  Ypsilanti,  Mich.  Mr.  Spencer  d. 
in  1884. 

Children : 

Ray  Everitt. 
Harold  Follett. 

Lemuel  Babcock,  third  child  of  George  and  Susanna  (Shel- 
don) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  June  10,  1772. 
He  m.  Lucy  Ann  Sawyer,  daughter  of  Thomas  and  Prudence 
(Carter)  Sawyer,  probably  in  Partridgefield,  Berkshire 
County,  Mass.  They  came  on  horseback  to  the  town  of  Hope- 
well, Ontario  County,  N.  Y.  Lemuel  d.  at  Hopewell,  N.  Y., 
Mar.  14,  1830,  and  is  buried  there.  His  widow  d.  at  Green- 
field, Huron  County,  O.,  July  23,  a:bout  1846. 

Their  children,  b.  at  Hopewell,  N.  Y. : 

Laura,  b.  Sept.  18.  1799;    d.  Perry,  N.  Y.,  July  30,  1873. 
Luther,  b.  June  30,   1804. 

Alanson,  b.  July  10,  1806;    d.  New  York  State,  Sept.  15.  1831. 
Melinda,  b.  June  8,  181 1;    d.  Greenfield,  O..  May  17,  1864. 
Lucius,  b.  Apr.  13,  1812 ;    d.  Ionia,  Mich.,  Dec.  23,   1895. 
Lyman,  b.  about  1813 ;    d.  in  Ohio,  May  29,  1840. 
Leicester,  b.  July  18,  1814;    d.  June  21,  1903. 

Laura  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Lemuel  and  Lucy  (Sawyer) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the 
1 8th  day  of  Sept.,  1799.  She  m.  twice:  (i)  Andrew  Dick- 
son, and  (2)  William  Mitchell,  at  Perry,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  7, 
1840.  He  d.  at  Perry,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  i,  1856.  She  d.  at  Perry, 
N.  Y.,  July  30,  1870. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  57 

Children  of  Laura  (Babcock)  Dickson  and  Andrew 
Dickson: 

.  Charlotte  A.,  b.  Feb.  4,  1818;    m.  Henry  Cleveland. 
Samuel  Robert,  b.  Nov.  24,  1819. 
Lucy  Ann.,  b.  Mar.  13,  1822;    ni.  S.  D.  Barton. 
Andrew  Jackson,  b.  Alar.  23,  1824. 

Margarete  Melinda,  b.  Aug.  9,  1826;    m.  W.  H.  Markham. 
Mary  Jane,  b.  May  15,  1829. 
Alanson,  b.  Apr.  28,   1831. 

Chikl,  second  marriage,  William  Mitchell : 
Laura  Babcock,  b.  Perry,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  28,  1843. 

Laura  Babcock  Mitchell,  only  child  of  Laura  Babcock 
(Dickson)  Mitchell  and  William  Mitchell,  was  b.  in  Perry, 
N.  Y.,  Nov.  28,  1843.  She  m.  Nahuni  E.  Thomas,  son  of  Na- 
hum  and  .Susan  (Colburn)  Thomas.  He  was  b.  in  Perry, 
N.  Y.,  July  13,  1842,  and  d.  at  Port  Huron,  Mich.,  Apr.  8, 
1902. 

Children,  b.  at  Port  Huron : 

Eugene  Mitchell,  b.  Nov.  10,  1870;    m.  Lizzie  R.  Ross. 
Miles,  b.  Jan.  25.  1872;    m.  Addie  Looker. 
Clark  Williams,  b.  June  30,  1883. 

Luther  Babcock,  second  child  of  Lemuel  and  Lucy  (Saw- 
yer) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.. 
June  30,  1804.  He  m.  Harriet  Gibbs,  daughter  of  Erastus 
and  Susannah  (Goodwin)  Gibbs.  She  was  b.  in  Litchfield, 
Conn.,  July  8,  1804,  and  d.  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  4, 
1836.    Mr.  Babcock  d.  near  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  17,  1839. 

Children : 

Burton  Hickox,  b.  Batavia,   N.  Y.,  Mar.  31,   1829. 
Frances  Augusta,  b.   York.   N.  Y.,  July  20,   1832. 
Burton,  2d,  b.  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Dec,   1836. 

He  m.  (2)  Evelyn  (Smith)  Curtis,  Feb.,  1839,  and  had  one 
child,  Luther,  b.  Perry,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  10,  1840;  unm. 

Frances  Augusta  Babcock,  eldest  daughter  of  Luther  and 
Harriet  (Gibbs)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  York,  N.  Y.,  July  20, 
1832.  She  m.  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  George  Hinman  Hold- 
en,  son  of  Samuel  Gotten  and  Delia  (Turner)  Holden.  He 
was  b.  in  Batavia,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  10,  1824. 

Children,  b.  in  Batavia,  N.  Y. : 

William  Curtis,  b.  Jan.  26,   1857;    d.   Aug.,   1857. 
Harriet  Granger,  b.  Jan.  2,  i860. 
George  Turner,  b.  July  4,  1864 ;    unm. 
Mary  Anna,  b.  Nov.   i,  1865. 

45 


58  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Harriet  Granger  Holden,  second  child  of  Frances  Augusta 
(Babcock)  Holden  and  George  H.  Holden,  was  b.  in  Batavia, 
N.  Y.,  Jan.  2,  i860.  She  m.  in  Batavia,  N,  Y.,  Frank  Scott 
Wood,  Sept.  4,  1884.  He  was  the  son  of  Edward  F.  Wood 
and  Mary  Jane  (Humphrey)  Wood,  and  was  b.  in  Detroit, 
Mich.,  Sept.  14,  1856.    Is  practicing  law  in  Batavia.    No  issue. 

Mary  Anna,  last  born  to  Frances  Augusta  (Babcock)  Hol- 
den and  George  H.  Holden,  was  b.  in  Batavia,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  i, 
1865.  She  m.  Oct.  20,  1898,  John  Henry  Wood,  brother  to 
Frank  Scott  Wood.  He  was  b.  Oct.  21,  1863,  in  Elba,  N.  Y., 
and  resides  in  Batavia,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  in  Batavia,  N.  Y. : 

Frances  Holden,  b.   Aug.  24,    1899. 
Humphrey  Farmer,  b.  Aug.  25,  1901. 

Melinda  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Lemuel  and  Lucy  (Saw- 
yer) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y., 
June  8,  181 1.  She  m.  in  Greenfield,  O.,  in  1836,  John  Henry 
Wheeler.     She  d.  in  Greenfield,  O.,  May  17,  1864. 

Their  children,  b.  in  Greenfield,  O. : 

Mary  Ann,  b.  June  21,  1838. 

Augustus  Samuel,  b.  May  18,  1840;    d.  July,  1841,  Greenfield,  O. 

Lucy  Avaline,  b.  Mar.  4,   1842. 

Julia  Augusta,  b.  Sept.  2,  1844. 

Sarah  Amanda,  b.  Oct.  17,  1846;    d.  July,  1886,  Greenfield,  O. 

Franklin  Sawyer,  b.  Sept.  13,  1850;    d.  Feb.  28,  1886,  Greenfield,  O. 

Rose  Anness,  b.  Aug.  6,  1853;    d.  Aug.  24,  1856,  Greenfield,  O. 

Lucius  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Lemuel  and  Lucy  (Sawyer) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  13, 
1812.  He  m.  at  the  place  of  his  birth,  Feb.  25,  1840,  Matilda 
May,  daughter  of  Nehemiah  and  Anna  (Morse)  May.  She 
was  b.  in  N.  Woodstock,  Conn.,  Sept.  i,  181 3,  and  d.  in  Ionia, 
Mich.,  Nov.  7,  1893.    Lucius  Babcock  d.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Dec. 

23.  1895- 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich. : 

Lucy  A.,  b.  Mar.  9,  1841 ;    m.  J.  H.  Canfield,  and  d.  May  10,  1877. 
Burton,  b.  Mar.  7,  .1844. 
Herbert,  b.  Sept.  17,  1846. 
Pitt  May,  b.  Nov.  9,   1852. 
Anna  M.,  b.  Oct.   11,   1855. 

Burton  Babcock.  second  child  of  Lucius  and  Matilda  (May) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Mar.  7,  1844.  He  m.  in 
Ionia.  Mich.,  Nov.  16,  1871,  Ellen  W.  Williams.  She  was  b. 
at  Otisco,  Ionia  County,  Mich.,  Dec.  i,  1847,  ^"^^  was  daugh- 
ter of  Albert  and  Eliza  (Patterson)  Williams. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  59 

Children,  b.  at  Ionia,  Mich. : 

Frances  W.,  b.  July  25,   1875. 
Lucy  A.,  b.  Sept.  30,  1878. 

Frances  W.  Babcock,  eldest  daughter  of  Burton  and  Ellen 
W.  (Williams)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  July  25,  1875. 
She  m.  A.  B.  Sibley,  son  of  Frank  and  Anna  (Bell)  Sibley. 
They  have  one  child. 

Burton  Babcock  Sibley,  b.  Ionia,  Mich.,  Dec.  6,   1901. 

Leicester  Babcock,  last  born  to  Lemuel  and  Lucy  Ann 
(Sawyer)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  the  town  of  Hopewell,  Ontario 
County,  N.  Y.,  July  t8,  18 14.  He  was  educated  at  the  district 
schools,  and  at  Canandaigua  Academy,  in  Canandaigua,  N. 
Y.  He  adopted  law  as  a  profession,  and  w'as  admitted  to  the 
Monroe  County  bar.  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  prior  to  1836.  He  prac- 
ticed law  at  Perry,  X.  Y.,  until  1848,  when  he  removed  to  St. 
Louis,  Mo.  In  1856,  during  the  making  of  Lafayette  Park, 
that  city  (St.  Louis),  he  planted  many  of  the  trees  with  his 
own  hands.  He  also  was  a  member  of  the  City  Council  from 
1873  to  1875.  He  was  the  originator  of  many  ideas  which 
were  passed  by  the  Council,  and  was  of  much  benefit  to  the 
city  of  St.  Louis.  In  politics  he  was  an  unswerving  adherent 
to  the  Democratic  faith,  and  cast  his  first  vote  for  Martin 
Van  Buren  in  1836.  He  was  twice  married,  (i)  to  Miss 
Abigail  Helen  Guernsey,  of  Oueenstown,  Ontario  Province, 
Canada.  She  d.  in  St.  Louis,  in  May,  1879,  leaving  three  chil- 
dren, all  of  whom  are  living.  He  m.  (2)  in  1892,  Miss  Fan- 
nie Julia  Siebenmann,  of  St.  Louis,  who  survives  him.  Mr. 
Babcock  d.  June  21,  1903,  aged  89  years. 

Children  of  Leicester  and  Abigail  Helen  (Guernsey) 
Babcock : 

Frederick  E..  b.  Nov.  21,  1848. 
William  L.,  b.  Feb.  4,  i860. 
Lucy  H.,  b.  Oct.  19,  1861. 

Frederick  E.  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Leicester  and  Abigail 
Helen  (Guernsey)  Babcock,  was  m.  Apr.  23,  1874,  to  Belle  W. 
Rankin. 

Children : 

Leicester,  Jr.,  b.   Oct.   15,   1886;    d.  Nov.   14,   1886. 
Belle,  b.  Mar.  i,  1895. 

Mrs.  Babcock  d.,  and  her  husband  m.  (2)  Nov,  2,  1898, 
Etta  Mevers,  of  Seneca,  Mo.    No  children. 


6o  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

William  L.  Babcock,  second  child  of  Leicester  and  Abi- 
gail Helen  (Guernsey)  Babcock,  was  m.  in  1887,  to  Roberta 
Vaughn. 

Child : 

Helen,  b.   July   or   Aug.,    i8go. 

Lucy  H.  Babcock,  last  born  to  Leicester  and  Abigail  Helen 
(Guernsey)  Babcock,  was  m.  in  1884,  to  Robert  H.  Wood. 
Children : 

0 

Helen,  b.  Apr.  4,  1885. 
Robert  H.,  b.  Mar.  4,  1888. 

Mr.  Wood  d.  and  his  widow  m.  (2)  William  Grayson,  an 
Attorney-at-Law  in  St.  Louis,  Mo. 

George  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  George  and  Susanna 
(Sheldon)  Babcock  was  b.  in  1773,  in  Partridgefield  (now 
Hinsdale  and  Peru),  Berkshire  County,  Mass.  He  m.  in 
1802,  Mary  Gates,  daughter  of  Capt.  Daniel  Gates,  of  Greene 
County,  N.  Y. 

Susanna  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  George  and  Susanna  (Shel- 
don) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield  (now  Hinsdale  and 
Peru),  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  in  1774.  She  m.  twice, 
(i)  Capt.  Daniel  Gates,  of  Hopewell,  N.  Y. 

Children,  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y. : 

Daniel;     m.    (i)    Sarah   Baker;    m.    (2)    Miss   Wyckoff;     m.    (3) 

Miss  Downing. 
George  B. ;    m.   Sarah  Galligan. 
Spencer. 

Julia;    m.  Cyrus  Smith. 
Olivia ;    m.  Harry  Torry. 

Mrs.  Susanna   (Babcock)   Gates  m.    (2)   Augustus  Torry. 
Children,  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y. : 

William;    d. ;    never  married. 

Augustus;    m.   Miss   Leavens.   Windham   County,   Conn. 

Mercy  Freeman,  h.  June  7,  1818. 

Mrs.  Susanna  (Babcock)  Gates  Torry  d.  in  Rushville,  On- 
tario County,  N.  Y.,  about  1855. 

Olivia  Gates,  fifth  child  of  Capt.  Daniel  and  Susanna  (Bab- 
cock) Gates,  m.  Harry  Torry. 

Children : 

INIrs.  De  Bois,  Fifty-fifth  Avenue,  Omaha,  Neb. 
Mrs.  F.  Colpetzer,  Omaha,  Neb. 

Mercy  Freeman  Torry,  last  born  to  Augustus  and  Susan- 


LEICESTER    BABCOCK. 


Page  59. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  6i 

iia  (Babcock)  Gates  Torry,  was  born  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y., 
June  7,  1818.  She  m.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Apr.,  1846,  Jabez 
Holden  Metcalf.  He  was  b.  in  Naples,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  I,  1813,  and  d.  at  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  19,  1883. 
She  d.  in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  4,  1889. 
Children,  b.  at  Canandaigua,  N.  Y. : 

Fanny,  b.  Mar.   18,   1850;    d.   1852. 

Mary  Susan. 

Augustus  Torry;    d.  Sept.   11,   1896. 

Jabez   Henry. 

Elizabeth. 

Isaiah  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  George  and  Susanna  (Shel- 
don) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield  (now  Hinsdale  and 
Peru),  in  1776.  He  m.  Almira  Landon,  of  Batavia,  N.  Y. 
They  had  children,  but  I  have  been  unable  to  record  them. 

William  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  George  and  Susanna 
(Sheldon)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield  (Hinsdale  and 
Peru),  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  Feb.  11,  1783.  He  m.  in 
Gorham,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  15,  1805,  Julia  Reed,  daughter  of  Silas 
and  Bethia  (Hurd)  Reed.  She  was  b.  Apr.  16,  1787,  and  d.  in 
Ionia,  Mich.,  Apr.  23,  1845. 

William  Babcock  removed  with  his  parents  from  Partridge- 
field, Mass.,  to  the  Babcock  settlement  between  Elk  Creek  and 
the  Towai  of  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  wdiich  was 
named  Partridgefield  in  honor  of  the  place  they  came  from.  It 
is  noticed  in  record  of  his  father  that  they  settled  in  the  town 
of  Otsego  in  1793,  and  sold  out  and  left  there  in  or  about  1806, 
and  removed  to  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.,  and  at  his 
house  in  18 16  his  father  died.  During  the  William  Morgan 
excitement,  he  became  a  very  bitter  anti-Mason.  During  the 
War  of  18 1 2,  he  served  as  Second  Lieutenant  of  a  company 
on  the  Niagara  frontier.  He  was  an  industrious  and  very 
thrifty  man  and  accumulated  a  handsome  property.  In  1836, 
he  and  his  family  removed  to  Ionia,  Ionia  County,  Mich.  His 
farm  in  Hopewell  was  four  miles  east  of  Canandaigua,  and 
consisted  of  130  acres  of  land.  When  he  arrived  in  Michigan 
he  purchased  nearly  2,000  acres  of  land,  and  gave  his  sons 
good  farms  to  live  on  and  start  in  life.  He  w^as  a  very  strict 
Presbyterian,  and  was  deacon  in  the  church  at  Hopew^ell.  In 
the  church  organization  in  Ionia  he  held  the  same  position.  In 
1840,  he  was  a  candidate  for  Associate  Judge  of  Ionia  County, 
Mich.  The  election  resulted  in  a  tie  vote.  In  the  Spring,  he 
tried  again,  but  w^as  defeated.  In  politics,  he  was  a  Whig  until 
1855,  when  he  joined  the  Republican  party.    He  w^as  a  man  of 


62  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Si:,  and  His  Descendants. 

strong  will  and  determination,  and  respected  by  his  fellow-men. 
William  Babcock  d.  in  Jonia,  Mich.,  Dec.  7,  1871. 
Children,  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y. : 

George  Reed,  b.  Sept.  20,   1806. 

Seymour,  b.  Oct.   i,   1807. 

Julius,  b.  Apr.   i,  1809. 

Frances,   b.   June    10,    1810. 

Dolly,  b.  Jan.  21,  1812. 

Julia,  b.  Aug.   16,   1813. 

William  Sheldon,  b.  Jan.  26,  1815. 

Bethia  Hurd,  b.  Jan.   14,   1817. 

Herman,  b.  June  29,   1818. 

Joseph  Merrill,  b.  Jan.  16,  1820. 

Samuel  Henry,  b.  Oct.  11,  1821. 

Silas  Reed,  b.  May  11,  1823;    d.  Aug.  27,  T826. 

Lucy  Olivia,  b.   May  23,   1825. 

Marcus  Lansing,  b.  Oct.  20,  1827. 

Elizabeth  Miller,  b.  Jan.  10,   1829. 

Hon.  George  Reed  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  child  of  William 
and  Julia  (Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario 
County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  20,  1806.  He  m.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  May 
13,  1835,  Mary  Bradley  Potter,  daughter  of  Gen.  Heman  B. 
and  Electa  (Miller)  Potter.  She  was  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
Oct.  7,  1815,  and  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  20,  1877.  It 
affords  the  writer  great  pleasure  to  publish  the  following  bio- 
graphical sketch  verbatim,  as  prepared  by  the  Hon.  George 
Reed  Babcock's  daughter,  Mrs.  Emily  B.  Alward,  of  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y. : 

"George  Reed  Babcock,  the  subject  of  the  following  sketch, 
was  not  the  least  worthy  of  those  of  his  name  wdio  have  a 
claim  to  be  remembered  in  this  work.  He  was  born  in  the 
town  of  Gorham,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  20th  day  of 
Sept.,  1806,  the  eldest  of  the  fifteen  children  of  William  and 
Julia  Reed  Babcock.  His  early  education  was  such  as  he  could 
obtain  in  the  neighboring  public  schools  and  academies,  and,  at 
the  age  of  seventeen,  he  taught  in  the  district  school  scholars 
much  older  than  himself.  In  1824,  he  came  to  Buffalo  to  visit 
in  the  family  of  Heman  B.  Potter,  who  was  his  cousin  by  mar- 
riage. It  was  in  the  Courthouse,  on  the  occasion  of  the  trial 
of  the  three  Thayers,  which  was  conducted  on  the  part  of  the 
people  by  his  future  father-in-law.  Gen.  Potter,  then  District 
Attorney,  that  he  resolved  to  become  a  lawyer.  He  entered 
his  law^  office,  read  law  the  required  time,  and  was  admitted  to 
the  Bar  in  1829.  At  the  time  of  his  decease,  in  1876,  he  was 
the  oldest  member  of  the  Bar  of  Erie  County.  Soon  after  his 
admission,  he  entered  into  partnership  with  Gen.  Potter,  and. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  63 

ill  1835,  iiiarrietl  his  eldest  daughter.  From  that  time  for- 
ward, he  became  prominently  identified  with  all  the  public  in- 
terests of  the  county  and  city  of  Buffalo.  He  was  never  in  any 
sense  a  politician,  or  sought  public  honors.  His  political  pro- 
fessions were  always  with  the  Whigs  and  afterward  with  the 
Republican  party.  He  was  elected  to  serve  the  State  in  both 
Assembly  and  Senate  for  repeated  terms  from  1845  to  1854. 
As  one  of  the  many  instances  of  his  usefulness  in  the  discharge 
of  these  public  functions,  it  may  be  said  that  he  was  the  author, 
and,  with  his  own  hand  drafted,  the  railroad  act  of  1852,  the 
basis  of  all  railway  development  of  the  State  to-day,  and  the 
very  essence  of  the  railroad  law  of  the  State  as  it  stands  in 
the  present  revision.  His  knowledge  of  public  men  and  affairs 
was  very  great,  and  embraced  the  eventful  period  in  State 
politics  which  presented  the  formation  of  the  Republican  party. 
In  1876  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Tilden  as  member  of  the 
Commission  to  inspect  the  State  Prisons  and  suggest  reforms 
in  their  management  and  discipline  thought  necessary,  and, 
although  advanced  in  years,  he  willingly  entered  upon  the 
work  glad  of  a  further  opportunity  to  serve  his  fellow-men. 
He  was  engaged  in  this  onerous  duty  when  stricken  with  death 
on  the  22d  of  Sept.,  1876.  in  the  State  Prison  at  Danne- 
mora,  Clinton  County,  N.  Y.  This  imperfect  sketch  of  the 
principal  events  in  his  public  life  would  be  most  incomplete 
without  some  mention  of  his  remarkable  character.  Although 
so  well  fitted  to  serve  in  prominent  positions  and  to  compete 
with  his  contemporaries  in  the  possession  of  public  honors  for 
which  he  had  no  ambition,  with  him  it  may  be  truly  said  that 
'the  post  of  honor  is  a  private  station.'  It  was  in  the  home,  in 
intercourse  with  his  friends,  that  he  best  exhibited  his  well- 
balanced  character.  He  was  conspicuous  among  them  for  his 
unusual  intellectual  powers,  his  large  acquirements,  and  what 
(in  the  strong  language  of  one  who  knew  him)  certainly  is 
his  best  legacy,  his  unsurpassed  and  utter  probity.  He  was 
more  remarkable  for  what  the  general  public  did  not  know  of 
him  than  for  what  was  outwardly  manifested  in  him.  With- 
out being  a  man  of  genius,  he  was  a  man  of  very  great  ability. 
His  mind  was  not  of  a  brilliant  order,  but  was  broad,  sound, 
and  sedate.  He  had  rare  common  sense,  remarkable  powers  of 
observation,  a  prodigious  memory,  great  reasoning  powers, 
and  an  instinctive  idea  of  the  right  in  all  cases.  He  was  a 
veritable  encyclopedia,  with  never  a  suggestion  of  pedantry  in 
his  intercourse  wnth  men,  in  nothing  superficial.  Self-assertion 
was  an  attribute  foreign  to  his  nature.     The  wealth  and  hon- 


64  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

esty  of  his  mind  and  the  simpHcity  and  purity  of  his  heart 
found  harmonious  expression  in  the  personal  dignity  and  se- 
renity of  his  manners.  His  daily  hfe  spoke  to  all  in  his  daily 
praises,  and,  during  the  long  years  in  which  he  lived,  no  stain 
was  seen  cast  upon  the  spotless  purity  of  his  honored  name. 
Such  a  character  comes  but  once  in  many  years  to  illustrate 
the  wisdom,  sweetness,  and  majesty  of  which  a  human  life  is 
capable." 

Mrs.  George  Reed  Babcock  was  a  highly  educated  and  cul- 
tured lady.  Her  genealogical  writings  of  the  Babcock  family 
were  very  extensively  known. 

Children,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y. : 

Emily  Wight,  b.  Aug.  21,   1836. 
Elizabeth  Grant,  b.   Feb.  5,   1839. 
Heman  Bradley,  b.   Oct.  28,   1840. 

Emily  Wight  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  the  Hon.  George 
Reed  and  Mary  Bradley  (Potter)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Buffalo, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  21,  1836.  She  m.  in  London,  England,  Oct.  31, 
1865,  Dennis  R.  Alward,  son  of  Nathaniel  and  Betsey  (Free- 
man) Alward.  He  was  b.  in  Scipio,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  18,  1830,  and 
d.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  3,  1892. 

Children : 

Mary,  b.  London,  England,  Aug.  28,  1866. 
Henry  Stuart,  b.  Buffalo,  Mar.  22,  1868. 
Charles  Francis  Adams,  b.  Auburn,  Mar.  8,  1872. 

Charles  Francis  Adams  Alward,  last  born  to  Dennis  R. 
Alward  and  Emily  Wight  (Babcock)  Alward,  was  b.  in  Au- 
burn, N.  Y.,  Mar.  8,  1872.  He  m.  in  Lancaster,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 
10,  1895,  Leetta  Eaton,  She  was  b.  in  Chicago,  111.,  Jan.  23, 
1872. 

Children : 

Elizabeth,  b.   Lancaster,   N.  Y.,  July  28,    1896. 
Francis,  b.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  June  9,  1899. 

Heman  Bradley  Potter  Babcock,  last  born  to  Hon.  George 
Reed  and  Mary  Bradley  (Potter)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Buffalo, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  28,  1840.  He  m.  Nov.  26,  1863,  Sally  Harwood, 
daughter  of  Rear  Admiral  Andrew  A.  Harwood,  U.  S.  Navy. 
She  was  b.  in  Bladensburg,  Feb.  6,  1.843. 

Heman  Bradley  Potter  Babcock  was  a  physician.  Passed 
Assistant  Surgeon,  U.  S.  Navy,  and  was  Assistant  Secretary 
of  Legation,  London,  England,  when  Charles  Francis  Adams 
was  the  American  Minister. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  65 

Children : 

Allen  Harwood,  b.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  12,   1865. 
George  Reed,  b.  Oakland,  Cal.,  July  10,   1871. 

Dr.  Babcock  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  27,  1878,  and  his 
widow  m.  (2)  Henshaw  Ward,  of  Oakland,  Cal. 

Allen  Harwood  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Dr.  Heman  B. 
Potter  Babcock  and  Sally  (Harwood)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.,  Aug.  12,  1865.  He  m.  Mary  Barker  Folger,  Sept. 
I,  1890.  She  was  the  daughter  of  John  B.  Folger,  of  Boston, 
Mass. 

Child : 

Thomas  Folger  Babcock,  b.  Oakland,  Cal.,  July  27,   1893. 

Seymour  Babcock,  second  child  b.  to  William  and  Julia 
(Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y., 
Oct.  I,  1807.    He  d.  Dec.  7,  1829. 

Julius  Babcock,  third  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  i, 
1809.  He  m.  Apr.  8,  1835,  in  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  Margaret  Mor- 
row, who  d.  Aug.  19,  1858. 

Children : 

Charles  Grandison  Finney,  b.  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  July  11,  1836. 
Mary  Jane,  b.  Ionia,  Mich..  Aug.  27,  1838. 
Ellen  Morrow,  b.  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  23,  1843. 
Julius  Lackey,  b.  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1845. 

Julius  Babcock  m.  (2)  Maria  Robinson,  of  Lowell,  Mich. 
They  had  one  daughter,  b.  Dec.  31,  1856,  in  Lowell,  Mich. 
She  m.  Frank  Fox,  of  Lowell.  They  had  four  children.  All 
dead  but  one  daughter,  living  with  her  parents.  Grand  Rapids, 
Mich. 

Julius  Lackey  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Julius  and  Margaret 
(Morrow)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  June  16,  1846. 
He  m.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Oct.  17,  1882,  Martha  A.  Taylor, 
daughter  of  Palmer  H.  and  Arabella  (Jackson)  Taylor.  She 
was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  June  8,  1857.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Babcock 
now  reside  in  Battle  Creek,  la. 

Children,  b.  at  Battle  Creek,  la. : 

Beulah  A.,  b.  Oct.   15,  1883. 
Lucy  T.,  b.   Mar.  30,   1886. 

Frances  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  June  10,  18 10.  She  m. 
in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  16,  1830,  Philo  Bates.     He  was 


66  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

b.  near  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1797,  and  d.  in  Ionia, 
Mich.,  Dec.  20,  1838.     She  d.  in  Hopewell,  Ontario  County, 
N.  Y.,  June  19,  1836. 
Children : 

George  Philo,  b.  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  4,  1832;    d.  Feb.  4,  1835. 
William  Stephen,  b.   Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  4,   1834. 
Frances   Bethia,  b.    Hopewell,    N.   Y.,    May    16,    1836;     d.   Jackson, 
Mich. 

William  Stephen  Bates,  second  child  of  Frances  (Babcuck) 
Bates  and  Philo  Bates,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  4, 
1834.  He  m.  in  Grand  Blanc,  Mich.,  May  18,  1864,  Eliza 
Ann,  daughter  of  H.  and  Eliza  (Butter)  Goodnow.  She  was 
b.  in  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  18,  1834. 

Children : 

Frances  E.,  b.  Missoula,  Mont.,  May  13,  1867. 
Harry  Philo,  b.  Ionia,  Mich.,  Feb.  11,  1870. 
Harriet  Goodnow,  b.  Ionia,  Mich.,  Nov.  22,   1875. 

Dolly  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  21,  1812.  It  is  no- 
ticed that  after  the  decease  of  her  sister  Frances,  June  19, 
1836,  the  following  Sept.  17,  1836,  she  m.  her  former  brother- 
in-law,  Philo  Bates.  He  d.  Dec.  20,  1838.  They  had  one 
child : 

Philo  Thomson,  b.  Sept.  5,   1837. 

Dolly  (Babcock)  Bates  m.  (2)  Rev.  George  C.  Overhiser. 
Feb.  18.  1841.  He  was  b.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  16, 
181 1.  The  Rev.  George  C.  Overhiser  went  to  Ionia,  Mich.,  in 
1839,  as  a  Methodist  Evangelist.  After  marriage,  he  became 
a  farmer,  then  minister  again,  then  changed  to  Congregational 
work,  he  moved  to  Bristol,  N.  Y.,  then  to  Binghamton,  N.  Y., 
and  back  to  Ionia,  where  he  d.  One  of  their  children  d.  in  the 
Civil  War. 

Children : 

George   Eugene,   b.    Tonia,    Mich.,    Mar.    16,    1842 ;     d.    Binghamton, 

N.  Y.,  Julv  25,   1863. 
Elizabeth  Miller,  b.   Ionia,   Mich.,  Feb.   19,   1848. 
James  Harvey,  b.  Paupose,  Mich.,  Nov.   19,   1852;    d.   Ionia,  Mich., 

Aug.  I,  1892. 

Elizabeth  Miller  Overhiser,  second  child  of  George  C.  and 
Dolly  (Babcock)  Bates  Overhiser,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich..  Feb, 
19,  1848.  She  m.  Arthur  Henry  Tibbitts.  He  was  b.  in  Ionia, 
Mich.,  July  20,   1842.     Mr,  Tibbitts  was  in  the  War  of  the 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  67 

Rebellion  for  three  years  from  July,  1862,  until  the  surrender 
of  Lee.  He  was  in  the  Fifth  Corps,  Battery  D,  Artillery,  in 
the  regular  army. 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich. : 

Ada  M.,  b.  Oct.  23,   1870. 
George  C,  b.  Feb.  19,  1879. 

Julia  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Aug".  16,  1813.  She  m. 
Reuben  W.  Stevens.  He  d.  Nov.  18,  1837,  at  Phelps,  N.  Y. 
She  d.  in  Ypsilanti,  Mich. 

Child : 

Julia  Frances,  b.  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  29,  1836;    m.  Charles  Rennie, 
Binghamton,  N.  Y. 

William  Sheldon  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  William  and 
Julia  (Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  26, 
181 5.  He  m.  in  Ashford,  Conn.,  Oct.  24,  1842,  Caroline 
Whaley,  who  was  daughter  of  Alfred  and  Esther  Palmer 
Whaley.  She  was  b.  in  Ashford,  Conn.,  Nov.  27,  18 — .  Wil- 
liam Sheldon  Babcock  d.  in  Cincinnati,  O.,  Sept.  16,  1859. 

Children : 

Frederic  Whaley,  b.  Logansport,  Ind.,  1844. 
Jean  William,  b.  Toledo,  O.,  Jan.  9,  1848. 

Mrs.  Caroline  (Whaley)  Babcock  m.  (2)  J.  O.  Tesner, 
and  is  now  living  in  Port  Orange,  Fla. 

Frederic  Whaley  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  W^illiam  Sheldon 
and  Caroline  (\\^haley)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Logansport,  Ind., 
in  1844.  He  m.  in  Vincennes,  Ind.,  1871,  Celia  Taylor.  He 
d.  in  1899. 

Children: 

Jean  William,  b.  Nov.   ii,   T872. 
William  Sheldon,  b.  July  2,   1874. 
Frederick  Whaley,  b.   Mar.   14,   1876. 
Caroline,  b.  Feb.  4,  1878. 
Sidney  Tuttle.  b.  Nov.  30,  1879;    d.  1900. 
Cecil  Taylor,  b.  Dec.   17,   1881. 
Isaac  Tesner,  b.   Sept.  20,   1883. 
Emily  Margaret,   b.   Oct.  2^^,   1885. 
Willa  M.,  b.  May  11,   1888. 

Jean  Babcock,  last  child  born  to  William  Sheldon  and  Caro- 
line (Whaley)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Toledo,  O.,  Jan.  9,  1848. 
She  m.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  21,  1877,  Sidney  Tuttle,  son 
of  George  W.  and  Ruth  (Wey)  Tuttle.    He  was  b.  in  Shanda- 


68  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

ken,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  28,  1845.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Tuttle  reside  in 
Bloomington,  111.     They  have  no  children. 

Bethia  Hurd  Babcock,  eighth  child  of  William  and  Julia 
(Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  14,  1817; 
d.  May  27,  1836,  in  Lockport,  N.  Y. 

Herman  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  29,  1818.  He  m. 
Adeline  Bromley,  May  [t,,  1845,  in  Ionia,  Mich.     She  d.  Oct. 

28,  1901,  in  Petoskey,  Mich.     He  is  also  dead. 
Children,  b.  at  Ionia,  Mich. : 

James,  b.  ;    m.  Lucia  Young,  Jan.  28,  1876. 

Hattie  A.,  b. . 

Jessie  F.,  b.  . 

Richard,  b.  ;    m.  Mary  Elizabeth  Gish,  Oct.  30,  1880. 

Richard  Babcock,  last  born  to  Herman  and  Adeline  (Brom- 
ley) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.  He  m.  Miss  Mary  Eliza- 
beth Gish,  Oct.  30,  1880. 

Children,  b.  at  Petoskey,  Mich. : 

Frances  Ellen,  b.  Jan.  31,  1883. 
Marion  Ester,  b.   May   10,   1895. 

Joseph  Merrill  Babcock,  tenth  child  of  William  and  Julia 

(Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  16,  1820. 

He  m.  Harriet  M.  Clark,  Dec.   18,  1845.  She  was  sister  to 

Mrs.  Lucy  O.  Clark's  husband.  He  d.  June  9,  1885,  in 
Lowell,  Mich. 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich. : 

Edward  Seymour,  b.  Aug.  21,  1847;    m.  Ida  Tucker. 

Jennie  Mary,  b.  Sept.  24,  1853;    d.  July  29,  1855. 

Harriet   Clark,   b.    Apr.    14,    i860;     lives   Grand    Haven,    Mich. 

Samuel  H.  Babcock,  eleventh  child  of  William  and  Julia 
(Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  11,  1821. 
He  m.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Emily  Yeomans,  daughter  of  Erastus 
and  Phoebe  (Arnold) Yeomans.     He  d.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  June 

29,  1885. 
Child : 

Julia  Marian,  b.  Ionia,  Mich.,  Mar.  9,  1857. 

Samuel  Henry  Babcock  m.  (2)  Elon  Dolphin.  No  issue 
of  record. 

Silas  Reed,  twelfth  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed)  Bab- 
cock, was  b,  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  May  11,  1823,  and  d.  there 
Aug.  27,  1826. 


HON.  GEORGE  REED  BABCOCK. 


Page  62. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  69 

Lucy  Olivia,  thirtcentli  child  of  William  and  Julia  (Reed) 
Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  May  23,  1825.  vShe  m. 
in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Jan.  15,  1852,  Edward  O.  Clark,  son  of 
Joshua  and  Mary  (Andrews)  Clark.  He  was  b.  in  Trumans- 
burg,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  21,  18 16,  and  d.  in  Ionia,  Ionia  County, 
Mich.,  July  10,  1885.  Mrs.  Lucy  Olivia  (Babcock)  Clark  is 
still  living-,  and  the  writer  desires  here  to  thank  her  for  records 
neatl}',  accurately,  and  nicely  written,  sent  to  him  of  her 
people. 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.: 

George  Babcock,  b.  Mar.   15,  185.^;    d.  July  22,   1855. 
William  Joshua,  b.  Aug.  30,  1854;    d.  May  24,   1861. 
Mary,  b.  July  15,   1856;    m.  Louis  E.  Rowley. 
Edward  Morris,  b.   Feb.   12,   1864. 
Julia  Elizabeth,  b.  Oct.  17,  1865;    d.  Jan.  3,  1874. 
Lucy  Olivia,  b.   Dec.  31,    1869;    d.  Jan.  4,    1870. 

]\Iarcus  Lansing-  Babcock,  fourteenth  child  of  William  and 
Julia  (Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  20, 
1827.  He  m.  in  Cassopolis,  Mich.,  Dec.  31,  1855,  Sarah 
Mead. 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  ]\Iich. : 

Nettie  E.,  b.  Dec.  25,  1858;    d.  Aug.  27,  1859. 

George  Mead,  b.  June  15,  i860. 

William  ;    d  in  Dakota. 

Homer;    d.  Ovid,  Mich. 

Ralph.     Was  in  Minnesota,  do  not  know  where. 

George  Mead  Babcock,  second  child  of  Marcus  Lansing 
Babcock  and  Sarah  (Mead)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich., 

June  15,  i860.     He  m.  in  Dakota,  Emma .    Now  lives  in 

California. 

Children : 

Emma. 
Homer. 
Arthur. 

Elizabeth  Miller  Babcock,  fifteenth  child  and  last  born  to 
William  and  Julia  (Reed)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Hopewell,  N. 
Y.,  June  10,  1829.  She  m.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Oct.  29,  1850, 
Harvey  Harter,    Mr.  Harter  d.  Oct.  20,  1892. 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich. : 

William  Babcock,  b.  Sept.  29.   1851. 

Frank  Harvey,  b.  Nov.  29,   1852. 

Julia  Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  3,   1854;    m.  Charles  Gillett,  Dec.   ir,   1878. 

Frances  Bates,  b.  Dec.  27,  1855;    d.  July  28.   1871. 

Carrie  Brown,  b.  Jan.  19,   1857;    d.  Oct.  7,   1874. 

Frederick  Michael,  b.  Aug.  6,  1858. 


70  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Lucy  Olivia,  b.  Jan.  31,  1861 ;    d.  June  15,  1869. 
Benjamin  Seymour,  b.  Jan.  20,  1864;    d.  July  26,  1865. 

William  Babcock  Harter,  eldest  child  of  Harvey  and  Eliza- 
beth M.  (Babcock)  Harter,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Sept.  29, 

185 1.  He  m.  in  Grand  Rapids,  Helen  Maud  Boice,  Nov.  14, 
1878.    He  d.  in  Denver,  Colo.,  Oct.  9,  1893. 

Children : 

Helen  Maude,  b.  Apr.  3.  1880. 

Eugene  Boice,  b.  July  16,  1884;   d.  Denver,  Colo.,  May  7,  1898. 

Frank  Harvey  Harter,  second  child  of  Harvey  and  Eliza- 
beth M.  (Babcock)  Harter,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Nov.  29, 

1852.  He  m.  Alice  Hammond,  Jan.  25,  1882. 

Julia  Elizabeth  Harter,  third  child  of  Harvey  and  Elizabeth 
M.  (Babcock)  Harter,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Feb.  3,  1854. 
She  m.  Charles  Gillett,  Dec.  11,  1878. 

Children,  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich. : 

Frances  Harter,  b.  Sept.  25,  1879. 
Howard  Townsend,  b.  Jan.  22,  1887. 

Frederick  Michael  Harter,  last  b.  to  Harvey  and  Elizabeth 
M.  (Babcock)  Harter,  was  b.  in  Ionia,  Mich.,  Aug.,  1858.  He 
m.  Ida  Udell,  Aug.  7,  1882,  in  Dakota. 

Child,  b.  in  Dakota: 

Jessie  Gertrude,  b.  Aug.  7,  1883.    Now  res.  at  Roaring  Brook,  Colo 

Olivia  Babcock,  eleventh  child  of  George  and  Susanna 
(Sheldon)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield  (now  Hinsdale 
and  Peru),  Mass.,  Oct.  13,  1787.  She  was  m.  three  times: 
(i)  to  Pliny  Ashley  Field;  (2)  to  Isaac  Jennings;  (3)  to 
Dr.  John  R.  Mitchell. 

Olivia  Babcock  m.  first  at  Black  Rock,  now  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
Sept.  17,  1810,  Pliny  Ashley  Field.  Mr.  Field  was  b.  in  Ver- 
mont, June  2,  1783,  and  was  drowned  in  Niagara  River,  May 
31,  1817.    His  widow  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  10,  1858. 

Children,  b.  at  Black  Rock,  now  Buffalo,  N.  Y. : 

Charlotte  Ann.  b.  Oct.  6.  181 1;   d.  Bufifalo,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  22,  1813. 

Capt.  George  Pliny,  b.  Nov.  11,  1813;  m.  Elizabeth  Elliott  Vose, 
Apr.  18,  1842.  She  was  b.  July  29,  1813.  and  d.  in  Milton,  Mass., 
July  20,  1896.     He  was  killed  in  battle  in  Mexico,  Sept.  21,  1846. 

Caroline  Augusta,  b.  Oct.  3,  1815. 

Charlotte  Olivia,  b.  Aug.  26,  1817;  m.  James  Dennison  Sawyer, 
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  29,  1841. 

I  have  no  record  of  children  of  Mrs.  Field's  other  marriages. 
Dr.  John  R.  Mitchell,  her  last  husband,  d.  Feb.  10,  1858. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  yi 

Caroline  Augusta  Field,  third  child  of  Pliny  Ashley  Field 
and  Olivia  (Babcock)  Field,  was  b.  at  Black  Rock,  now  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.,  Oct.  3,  1815.  She  m.  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  July  20, 
1 83 1,  George  Hedge.  He  was  b.  Apr.  9,  1799,  and  d.  at  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.,  Oct.  13,  1859. 

Children,  b.  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y. : 

Caroline  Elizabeth,  b.  Apr.  24,   1832. 

George   Field,    b.    Mar.   23,    1835;     m.    (i)    Henrietta    E.    Ilendlen, 

i860;    m.   (2)  Mary  J.  Baird,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  June  25,  1873.     He 

d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  11,  1902. 
Charles  Lyman,  b.  Feb.  9,  1841 ;    res.  Syracuse,  N.  Y. 
Charlotte  Olivia,  b.  Jan.  16,  1843 ;    d.  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  29,  1843. 

Caroline  Elizabeth  Hedge,  eldest  child  of  George  and  Caro- 
line Augusta  (Field)  Hedge,  m.  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Jared 
Hyde  Tilden,  Oct,  3,  1855.  He  was  the  son  of  Thomas  Brown 
Tilden  and  Abby  H.  (Hyde)  Tilden.  He  w^as  b.  at  Franklin, 
Conn.,  Apr.  30,  1828.  and  d.  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  June  14,  1902, 

Children,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y. : 

Caroline  Olivia,  b.  Aug.  17,   1857. 
George  Thomas  Morrow,  b.  Apr.  24,  1861. 
Charlotte  Sawyer,  b.  Feb.  18,  1863. 
Hyde  Field,  b.  Apr.  13,  1875. 

Caroline  Olivia  Tilden,  m.  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y,,  Sept.  22,  1880, 
Harry  J.  Colman.  He  was  b.  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  May  26, 
1848. 

Children,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y. : 

Mabel  Tilden  Colman,  b.  May  9,  1881. 
George  Tilden  Colman,  b.  Jan.  3,  1888. 

Charles  Lyman  Hedge,  third  child  of  George  and  Caroline 
Augusta  (Field)  Hedge,  was  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9, 
184T.  He  m.  twice:  (i)  Kate  Stella  Mills,  in  Buffalo,  N. 
Y.,  June  22,  1864.  She  d.  in  Aug.,  1866.  No  issue.  Married 
(2)  Julia  Augusta  Wheeler,  Feb.  9,  1869.  She  was  b.  in 
Greenfield,  O.,  Sept.  2,  1844. 

Child,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y. : 

Agnes,  b.  Mar.  20,  1874;    m.  Rupert  Hughes,  Dec.  13,  1893. 

Charlotte  Olivia  Field,  fourth  child  of  Pliny  Ashley  Field 
and  Olivia  (Babcock)  Field,  w^as  b.  at  Black  Rock,  now  Buf- 
falo, N.  Y.,  Aug.  26,  1817.  She  m.  James  Dennison  Saw^yer, 
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y,,  Mar.  29,  1841.  He  was  b.  Sept.  17,  1813. 
and  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  16,  1881.  Mrs.  Sawyer  d.  in 
Buffalo,  Jan.  12,  1877. 


72  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children : 

James  Field,  b.  Oct.  8,  1842;    d.  Aug.  22,  1845. 

Elizabeth  Vose  Field,   b.  June  5,    1847;    m.   George  W.   Parkhurst, 

Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  July  16,  1889. 
George    Pliny,    b.    Jan.    26,    1851;     m.    Ida    M.    Wilcox,    of    New 

Haven,  Conn.,  May  6,  1874. 
Ida  Olivia,   b.  July  8,   1853;    d.   May   14,   1888. 
William  Babcock,  b.  Apr.  27,  1856;    d.  Nov.  7,  1880. 

John  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  Elizabeth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  Nov.  13, 
1752.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to  Partridgefield  (now 
Hinsdale  and  Peru),  Berkshire  County,   Mass.,  in  the  year 

1772.     He  m.  in  Partridgefield,  Eunice  .     Her  surname 

is  supposed  to  be  Rockwell,  daughter  of  Major  Elisha  and 
Eunice  Rockwell.  Her  supposed  parents  are  buried  in  Peru 
Hill  Cemetery,  Peru,  Mass.  They  have  inscribed  gravestones. 
With  much  difficulty  the  gravestone  of  her  mother  was  copied, 
as  follows:  "Mrs.  Eunice  wife  of  Elisha  Rockwell  died  Nov. 
8th."  The  balance  of  the  stone  was  so  deep  in  the  soil  that 
the  remainder  of  the  inscription  is  not  decipherable.  The 
gravestone  of  Major  Elisha  Rockwell  was  so  deeply  buried 
in  the  soil  that  its  inscription  could  not  be  copied.  The  chil- 
dren of  John  and  Eunice  (Rockwell)  Babcock,  b.  in  Par- 
tridgefield, Mass.,  and  recorded  upon  the  church  records  ot 
the  First  Congregational  Church  of  Hinsdale,  Mass.,  were  as 
follows : 

Phebe  Rockwell;    baptized  July,  1798. 
Roswell; -baptized  July,   1798. 
Triphesa;    baptized  July,   1798. 
Reuben ;    baptized   July,    1798. 
Polly;    baptized  July,   1798. 
Betsey;    baptized  July,   1798. 

The  above  children  were  baptized  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Leland. 
The  town  records  of  Partridgefield  record  John  Babcock  as 
follows : 

"1773.  Elected  at  Town  Meeting  Surveyor  of  Highways." 
"Mar.  14th,  1775.  Town  Meeting.     Elected  Hog  Reave." 
"Mar.    5th,  1 78 1.  Town    Meeting.       Elected    Suveyor    of 

Highways." 
''July  13th,  1 78 1.  Town   Meeting.    Voted   to  accept   road 

running  to  John   Babcock's   giving 

up  the  old  road  to  Samuel  and  John 

Babcock." 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  73 

"Mar.    5th,   1781.  Town    Meeting.     Elected    Surveyor    of 

Highways." 
"Mar.    4th,  1782.  Town    Meeting.      Elected    Surveyor    of 

Highways." 
"1799.  Town    Meeting.     Elected    Surveyor    of 

Highways." 

It  is  noticed  by  the  above  that  John  Babcock  and  his  family 
were  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  probably  as  late  as  1800,  which 
was  at  least  five  years  after  his  father  and  brothers'  families 
had  removed  from  there. 

In  the  office  of  the  Register  of  Deeds,  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  are 
recorded  the  following  deeds : 

Vol.  21.     Page  395  of  Deeds. 

"May  2nd,  1777.  Isaiah  Babcock,  of  Partridgefield,  to 
John  Babcock,  of  same  place,  for  £25  52  acres  of  land  in 
Partridgefield. 

Witnesses.  Isaiah  Babcock." 

George  Babcock. 

her 
Ana      X      Nichols. 
mark 

"July  29th,  1785.  John  and  his  brother  Elisha  conveyed  to 
Nathaniel  Tracy  for  £150,  47/^  acres  of  land  in  Partridge- 
field." 

Witnesses.  Elisha  Babcock. 

Isaiah  Babcock.  John  Babcock." 

Cornelius  Thayer. 

"Jan.  25th,  1787.  His  father.  Isaiah  Babcock.  conveyed  to 
him  as  follows :  One  certain  Tract  or  parcel  of  land  Situate 
in  the  Township  of  Partridgefield  aforesaid,  Being  part  of 
Lot  No.  2  Butted  and  Bounded  as  follows :  viz :  Beginning 
at  the  northwest  corner  of  said  lot  running  south  20°  west 
within  96  rods  of  the  south  line,  thence  east  20°  south  74 
rods  and  17  links,  thence  north  20°  east  to  Jonas  Babcock's 
northwest  Corner,  thence  East  20°,  south  611  rods  to  a  Stake 
and  Stones,  thence  North  20°  East  to  the  northwest  corner  of 
said  lot,  thence  to  the  first  mentioned  Bounds,  also  three  acres 
in  the  southwest  corner  of  lot  No.  3  the  land  on  the  south 
side  of  the  Road  as  far  east  as  to  be  Parallel  with  the  line  Be- 
tween me  and  Thos.  Miller,  also  fifty  acres  on  the  south  end 
of  lot  No.  I  joining  the  County  Road  N.  B.  a  Bridgeway  from 
Jonas  Babcock's  land  is  Reserved  to  the  main  road,  also  the 
46 


74  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Privilege  of  Building  a  corn  Mill  on  the  same  together  with 
a  mill  spot  already  reserved  by  Col.  Thos.  Marshal.     Consid- 
eration 300  pounds. 
Witnesses, 

Samuel  Blackman.  Isaiah  Babcock," 

Ebenezer  Pierce. 
Recorded  April  3rd,  1787. 

"Dec.  9th,  1788.  John  Babcock  to  Charles  Loomer  3  1-3 
acres  of  land  in  Partridgefield  for  four  pounds. 

Witnesses.  John  Babcock." 

Jacheriah  Watkins,  Jr. 

Joseph  Bacon. 

"Feb.  25th,  1793.  John  Babcock  to  Christopher  Leffing- 
well,  of  Norwich  County  of  New  London,  Ct.,  one  acre  of 
ground  for  £4  close  to  the  Dalton  line.       John  Babcock." 

"April  loth,  1795.  John  Babcock  to  Asa  Chamberlain  for 
Forty-two  pounds  28Xt  acres  and  2'j  rods  of  land  in  Par- 
tridgefield. 

Witnesses.  John  Babcock." 

Eben.  Pierce, 
Roger  Watkins. 

"June  4th,  1798.  John  Babcock  to  Asa  Goodrich  of  Dal- 
ton 15  acres  of  land  on  the  Dalton  line  for  $300.00.  Reserv- 
ing the  use  of  the  mill  stream  and  mill  spot. 

Witnesses.  John  Babcock." 

Eben.  Pierce. 
Lydia  Pierce. 

"July  13th,  1799.  John  .Babcock  to  Thomas  Gold  for 
$235.11  Sixty  acres  of  land  with  buildings,  also  eight  acres 
where  his  barn  stands,  said  conveyance  being  given  as  collat- 
eral for  a  note  for  the  above  sum  of  money,  with  four  years 
to  pay  the  same  and  interest  annually. 
Witnesses. 

Ebenezer  Curtis.  John  Babcock." 

Thos.  Belknap. 

"April  14th,  1800.  John  Babcock  to  George  Loveland,  of 
Dalton,  Berkshire  Co.,  cordwainer  and  Asa  Goodrich,  of 
Partridgefield,  Miller  for  $30.00  a  three  year  lease  of  ten  acres 
of  land  near  Dalton  line. 

Witnesses.  *  John  Babcock." 

Theodore  Hinsdale. 
Altmira  Hinsdale. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  75 

"Acknowledged  April  I4tli,  1800,  at  Dalton,  Mass.,  before 
Theodore  Hinsdale,  Just,  of  Ye  Peace.'' 

"June  24th,  1800.  John  Babcock  and  Elizabeth  Babcock, 
of  Partridgefield,  to  Riifus  Marsh,  of  Worthington  Co.  of 
Hampshire  Commonwealth  afores'd. 

"Consideration  of  $1000.00,  seventy  acres  of  land  extending 
to  and  along  Dalton  town  line.        John  Babcock. 

Elizabeth   Babcock." 

There  is  nothing  further  of  record  of  John  Babcock  in  the 
office  of  Register  of  Deeds  in  Berkshire  County. 
In  the  work  entitled 

Centennial 

OF  THE 

Congregational  Church 

Hinsdale,  Mass. 

With  Manual 

1795-1895. 

shown  to  the  writer  in  1902  during  his  visit  in  Berkshire 
County,  by  a  Mr.  Hosmer,  of  Hinsdale,  Mass.,  a  deacon  in 
said  church,  the  following  appears  of  record  in  relation  to 
John  Babcock  and  his  family.      I  copy  the  follow'ing: 

"One  hundred  years  ago  is  more  than  twice  as  far  back  as 
fifty  years.  The  time  when  our  original  twenty-three  mem- 
bers were  the  living  men  and  women  of  Hinsdale,  are  at  a 
far  remove  from  us  if  we  count  by  the  changes  which  the 
years  bring.  The  days  of  flax  hatchel,  the  spinning  v.-heel, 
the  hand  loom  and  homespun  garments  stand  easily  linked 
with  the  times  of  Solomon's  model  housewife  seeking  wool 
and  flax  and  laying  her  hand  to  the  spindle,  but  they  are  cut 
off  by  a  sharp  divide  from  our  time.  Would  that  the  phono- 
graph and  the  kinetoscope  had  preserved  for  us  the  sights  and 
sounds  and  movements  of  those  two  hours  on  that  Thursday 
afternoon  one  hundred  years  ago  in  the  house  of  John  Bab- 
cock. Primitive  sleighs  or  horses  pillioned  for  carrying 
double  are  about  the  door.  A\'ithin,  a  fire  of  logs  blazes  upon 
the  andirons  and  licks  its  flames  about  the  overhanging  crane. 
The  Windsor  chairs  support  plank  seats  for  the  thirty  or  more 
present.  The  old  wooden  clock  with  its  naked,  dangling 
weights  and  pendulum  slowly  beats.  There  was  no  'tick  of 
time'  to  begin  upon,  no  Dalton  steam  whistle,  few^  clocks  and 
fewer  watches  \vere  there  in  town,  so  they  straggled  in  assem- 
bling and  group  to  talk.     Mr.  Leland,  their  Pajtridgefield 


yd  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

pastor  then  in  his  prime  of  forty,  greets  the  friends  as  they 


come  m 


There  is  a  hush.  Parson  Leland  rises  and  with  proper  in- 
troductory words  reads  the  Confession  of  Faith  and  Covenant. 
Testimonials  of  good  standing  are  in  order.  *  *  *  The  young 
Dahon  minister  offers  prayer.  Mr.  Leland  preaches  a  ser- 
mon from  the  text  'The  King's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within. 
Her  clothing  is  of  wrought  gold.'  At  the  close  of  the  dis- 
course, the  twenty-three  arise,  solemnly  assent,  led  by  Mr. 
Hinsdale,  and  the  venerable  Deacon  Starr,  affix  their  names 
and  become  for  tlie  centuries  the  original  members  of  the 
Hinsdale  Congregational  Church." 

Page  25,  same  work,  continued : 

"Time  has  also  obscured  the  history  of  the  Babcock  family. 
Our  record  is  that  the  church  was  formed  in  the  house  of 
John  Babcock.  Later,  Eunice  Babcock  is  spoken  of  as  his 
wife.  Elizabeth  Babcock,  who  put  down  her  name  among  the 
twenty-three,  we  can  trace  no  further.  It  would  gratify  us 
to-day  to  put  our  feet  upon  the  spot  where  the  confession  and 
covenant  w-ere  accepted.  We  hope  yet  to  know  just  where 
John  Babcock  lived  in  1795.  He  and  Eunice  must  have  left 
descendants,  for  six  of  their  children  were  baptized  ninety- 
seven  years  ago." 

The  Elizabeth  Babcock  referred  to  as  one  of  the  original 
twenty-three  members  was  without  doubt  Isaiah  Babcock's 
estimable  wife  Elizabeth  (Plumb)  Babcock.  The  writer  in 
1902  stood  near  the  site  of  the  old  church,  which  is  gone  and 
replaced  with  a  new  church  very  similar  in  appearance  to  the 
old  original  structure. 

.     In  Record  of  Massachusetts  ]\Ien,  War  of  the  Revolution, 
we  find  of  record : 

"John  Babcock,  Private  Capt.  Joseph  Pierce  Co.  Col.  Asa 
Barnes  (Berkshire  Co)  Regt.  marched  on  an  alarm  by  order 
General  Fellows  Oct.  28th,  1781,  service  10  days." 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  above  that  he  served  in  the  War  of 
the  Revolution. 

It  is  noticed  that  John  Babcock's  wife  Eunice  did  not  sign 
his  deeds  of  conveyance  of  his  real  estate,  all  of  which  is  cer- 
tainly very  strange.  The  writer  is  certain  that  John  Babcock 
and  his  wife  did  not  remove  with  his  father  and  brothers' 
families  to  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  but  finally  removed  to  Ca- 
naan, Columbia,  County,  N.  Y.,  which  town  was  divided  in 
1 8 19,  a  portion  of  it  being  formed  into  the  town  of  New 
Lebanon. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  yy 

Mrs.  George  Reed  Babcock,  in  her  genealogical  history, 
written  over  thirty  years  ago,  has  stated  that  John  Babcock 
lived  and  died  in  New  Lebanon,  Cokimbia  Connty,  N.  Y.  The 
writer  is  satisfied  that  Airs.  l'>abc(jck  was  correct  in  her  con- 
ckisions.  Notwithstanding  a  carefnl  search  for  his  living 
descendants  none  have  been  fonnd.  The  town  records  of  Ca- 
naan, from  the  time  it  was  a  King's  Colony  to  date,  have  been 
carefnlly  searched,  and  his  name  is  not  recorded.  The  same 
with  New  Lebanon,  but  that  he  lived  and  died  in  the  latter 
town  the  writer  is  thoroughly  convinced. 

Phebe  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  Elizabeth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  Oct.  5,  1755. 
She  remo\-ed  with  her  parents  in  1772  to  Partridgefield,  Berk- 
shire County,  Mass.,  and  was  twice  married.  First,  to  a  Mr. 
Thayer,  and  the  writer  is  reasonably  certain  his  full  name  was 
Cornelius  Thayer,  but  cannot  prove  it.  I  have  no  record  of 
children  of  this  marriage.  I  know,  however,  there  were  chil- 
dren. She  m.  (2)  a  Mr.  Blackman.  I  am  satisfied  Mr.  Black- 
man's  given  name  was  Samuel,  and  I  shall  so  record  him. 
In  the  Sauquoit  Valley  Cemetery  appears  the  following  upon 
the  monument  erected  in  memory  of  many  members  of  the 

Bacon  family:  o.,,         t>,    ^ 

-^  Samuel  Blackman 

BORN  Nov  23  A.  D.  1736 

DIED  A.  D.  1820. 

AGED  84    YEARS. 

This  was  the  second  husband  of  Phebe  Babcock.  Air. 
Blackman  was  probably  born  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.  He  cer- 
tainly resided  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  and  his  name  appears 
as  the  subscribing  witness  to  many  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr., . 
and  son's  conveyance  of  real  estate.  I  know  nothing  further 
about  him.  Phebe  (Babcock)  Blackman  died  at  Sauquoit, 
Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  May  18,  1853.  Her  decease  is  thus 
described  by  her  grandson,  George  Plumb  Bacon :  "Grand- 
mother Blackman  died  at  father's  house  in  Sauquoit,  Oneida 
Count}^  N.  Y.  I  was  a  small  boy  at  the  time,  but  can  remem- 
ber it  well.  She  died  of  old  age,  bedridden  and  dried  up  to 
a  match,  could  not  tell  when  the  breath  left  her  body."  Mr. 
Bacon  also  states:  "Grandma  Blackman  (Phebe  Babcock) 
would  sit  down  and  talk  about  the  battle  when  Cornwallis 
was  taken.     Her  father  was  at  the  battle." 

In  the  Sauquoit  \^alley  Cemetery,  near  Sauquoit,  Oneida 
County,  N.  Y.,  on  a  monument  erected  "In  memory  of  the 
Bacon  family"  part  of  the  inscription  reads  as  follows : 


78  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

'Thebe  Blackman  died  April  A.  D.  1839  aged  83  y.  6  mos." 

The  writer  can  only  record  one  child  of  the  second  mar- 
riage, to  wit : 

Martha  Blackman,  date  of  birth  about  1780,  in  Partridge- 
field,  Mass.  She  married  Abner  Bacon,  Jr.,  son  of  Capt.  Ab- 
ner  Bacon  (Revolutionary  soldier)  and  Eve  (Lewis)  Bacon. 
Capt.  Bacon  was  a  son  of  William  Bacon,  who  was  a  soldier 
in  the  French  and  Indian  War,  and  whose  diary  of  march  to 
Fort  Ticonderoga  was  published  by  Dedham  Historical  So- 
ciety. His  name  heads  the  list  of  soldiers  on  monument  to 
soldiers  of  Colonial  Wars  in  Walpole,  Mass. 

Abner  Bacon,  Jr.,  was  b.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,  Jan.  11,  1781. 
He  and  Martha  Blackman  were  m.  in  Sauquoit,  Oneida 
County,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  31,  1806.  Mr.  Bacon  d.  while  visiting 
relatives  in  Iowa,  Feb.  6,  i860,  and  is  buried  at  his  home  in 
Sauquoit.  Martha  (Blackman)  Bacon  d.  at  Sauquoit,  N.  Y., 
May  18,  1853. 

Their  children,  b.  at  Sauquoit,  N.  Y. : 

Martha  Maryette,  b.  Mar.  4,  1809;    m.  Ambrose  Kelsey. 

Miranda,  b.  July  15,   1810. 

Abner  Bartlett,  b.  May  28,  1812. 

Sarah  Jane,  b.  Feb.  11,  1814. 

John  Dean,  b.  Aug.  13,  1816. 

Catherine,  b.  July  27,  1819. 

George  Plumb,  b.  Mar.  7,  1821 ;    m.  Elizabeth  M.  CoUis,  b.  Feb.  i, 

1826. 
Frances  C,  b.  June  2,   1824. 
De  Witt  C,  b.  Apr.  23,  1826. 

Martha  Maryette  Bacon,  eldest  child  of  Abner  Bacon,  Jr.. 
and  Martha  (Blackman)  Bacon,  was  b.  in  Sauquoit,  Oneida 
County,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  4,  1809.  She  m.  Ambrose  Kelsey,  at  Sau- 
quoit, N.  Y.,  Nov.  15,  1836,  and  d.  at  Clinton,  Oneida  County, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.,  1887.  Mr.  Kelsey  was  b.  at  Hawley,  Franklin 
County,  Mass.,  Dec.  15,  1804,  and  d.  at  Franklin,  Portage 
County,  O.,  Nov.  15,  1836. 

Children : 

Ambrose  Parsons  Kelsey,  b.  Aug.  30,  1832;    m.  Ellen  V.  Goodnow, 

and  d.  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  30,  1891. 
Charles  Kelsey,  b.  July  26,  1836. 

A.  p.  Kelsey  was  a  graduate  of  Hamilton  College,  Principal 
of  New  Hampshire  Normal  School,  Principal  of  Maine  Nor- 
mal School,  and  Professor  of  Natural  History  at  Hamilton 
College  at  time  of  his  decease. 

Charles  Kelsey,  second  child  of  Ambrose  and  Martha 
Maryette    (Bacon)    Kelsey,    was    b.    in    Franklin,    Portage 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  79 

County,  O.,  July  26,  1836.  lie  m.  Miss  Almira  Madeline 
Idc,  daughter  of  Daniel  and  Almira  Hurlburt  Ide,  at  Wilson, 
Niagara  County,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  29,  i860.  Mrs.  Kelsey  was  b. 
at  Wilson,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  8,  1839.  She  and  her  husband  reside 
at  Marquette,  Mich. 
Children : 

Lillian  May,  b.  Wilson,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1861 ;  d.  Sept.  22,  1862. 
Charles  Howard,  b.  Wilson,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,   1863;    m.  Elizabeth  F. 

Werner,  Nov.  14,  1900,  and  is  now  Editor  of  Mining  Gazette. 
Agnes   Mira,  b.   Alattawan,    Mich.,  June    10,    1867;    ni.   William   S. 

Hill,  Attorney-at-Law,  Oct.  26,  1887. 

Hon.  Charles  Kelsey  is  a  graduate  of  Hamilton  College, 
Phi  Beta  Kappa  in  i860,  and  has  been  a  teacher  most  of  his 
life.  He  is  now  Judge  of  Probate  Court,  Marquette,  Mich., 
and  to  him  the  writer  is  indebted  for  most  of  this  sketch  of 
Phebe  Babcock  and  her  descendants. 

Elias  Babcock,  sixth  son  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  Elizabeth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  according  to  the  town  records  of 
Voluntown,  Conn.,  Dec.  14,  1757.  Without  doubt  his  place 
of  birth  was  in  the  adjoining  town  of  Stonington,  his  father's 
residence  being  in  Voluntown,  and  his  farm  in  Stonington, 
He  removed  with  his  parents  during  the  year  1772  to  Par- 
tridgefield  (now  Hinsdale  and  Peru),  Berkshire  County, 
Mass.  During  the  month  of  Aug.,  1781,  he  m.  Huldah  Kin- 
nie,  daughter  of  Daniel  and  Huldah  Kinnie,  of  the  same  town. 
The  only  record  of  his  name  upon  the  town  records  of  Par- 
tridgefield  is  as  follows : 

July  14th,  1788,  in  laying  out  a  road  his  name  is  men- 
tioned. His  tax  for  the  building  of  the  ist  Cong.  Church  of 
Hinsdale  amounted  to  $16.26.  His  brother  John's  amounted 
to  $39.17.  In  the  office  of  the  Register  of  Deeds  of  Berkshire 
Co.  the  following  appears  of  record : 

"June  23rd,  1783,  Elias  Babcock  of  Partridgefield  pur- 
chased from  Nicholas  Cottrell,  of  Kinderhook,  Albany  Co., 
N.  Y.  Blacksmith  for  50  pounds  one  hundred  acres  of  land. 

Signed.     Nicholas  Cottrell." 

"Oct.  20th,  1784,  Elias  Babcock,  of  Partridgefield  for  75 
pounds  conveys  to  his  father-in-law,  Daniel  Kinnie,  of  same 
town,  100  acres  of  land  in  Windsor. 

Sisrned.     Elias  Babcock." 


'&' 


"June  15th,  1813,  Elias  Babcock  and  Benj.  Hazelton,  both 
of  Washington,  a  Mortgage  Deed  to  the  State  of  Connecticut, 


8o  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

66  acres  and  86  rods  of  land  in  Washington  close  to  Hins- 
dale.    Consideration  $450. 

"We  the  subscribers  do  hereby  relinquish  our  right  of 
Dower  in  the  above  Described  premises. 

Signed.  Content  Hazelton. 

her 
Nancy     X     Babcock." 
mark 

"April  4th,  1817,  Elias  Babcock,  of  Hinsdale,  a  Mortgage 
Deed  to  the  State  of  Connecticut.  Conditioned  on  payment 
of  $111  and  interest  to  Treasurer  of  the  State  of  Connecticut 
for  its  School  Fund.  His  wife  relinquished  her  right  of 
dower.  The  deed  conveys  12  acres  of  land  with  a  house  and 
barn  thereon  standing." 

"May  20th,  1819,  Elias  Babcock  of  Hinsdale  sold  and  con- 
veyed to  Isaac  Herrick,  of  Washington,  two  tracts  of  land, 
one  of  12  acres  with  buildings  thereon  in  Hinsdale,  and  one 
of  36  acres  of  land  in  Washington,  with  use  of  crops  now  in 
the  ground,  and  use  of  the  Barn  to  put  them  in.  No  consid- 
eration is  named. 

Signed.    Elias  Babcock." 


^fci' 


It  is  noticed  that  Elias  Babcock  did  not  remove  with  his 
parents  and  brothers  and  their  families  to  New  York  State, 
but  was  residing  in  Hinsdale  as  late  as  1818. 

In  Record  of  Massachusetts  Soldiers  in  the  War  of  the  Rev- 
olution, Elias  Babcock  is  recorded  as  follows: 

"Elias  Babcock,  Corporal,  Enlisted  May  19th,  1777  to  1780 
from  Partridgefield  and  Northampton.  Elias  was  in  the  Bat- 
tle of  Saratoga,  and  served  through  the  Carolinas  with  Gen. 
Gates's  army.  He  was  also  at  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis, 
and  was  in  a  number  of  severe  battles  which  occurred  during 
this  war. 

Children  of  Elias  and  Huldah  (Kinnie)  Babcock. 

Polly,  b.  Dalton,  Mass.,  June  29.  1782;  m.  Robert  Smith,  Sandy 
Lake,   N.  Y.     Settled  at   Sheldon,   Vt. 

Sabrina,  b.  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  Dec.  2,  1783;  m.  William  Smith. 
Settled  at  West  Haven.  Vt. 

Peabody,  b.  Nov.  10,  1785;    m.  Huldah  Whitney. 

Huldah,  b.  Feb.  18,  1787;  m.  John  Daives.  Settled  at  Fairfield, 
Mass. 

Phannelia,  b.  Feb.  12,  1788,  Dalton,  Mass.;  m.  Robert  Ross.  Set- 
tled in  Canada. 

Lucretia,  b.  Feb.  2,  1790,  Dalton,  Mass.;  m.  Roswell  Hurliburt. 
Settled  at  Sheldon,  Vt. 

Elias,  Jr.,  b.  May  9,  1794,  Dalton.  Mass. ;    m.  Clara  Olmstead. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  8i 

Electa,   b.   Apr.   23,    179 — ,   Washington,    Mass.;    m.   John    Capron. 

Settled    in    Saybrook,    O.      She   joined    the    First   Congregational 

Church,  Hinsdale,  in  1818. 
Lyman  K.,  b.  May  6,  1798;    m.  Lavinia  Warner. 
Amanda,  b.  1802,  in  Massachusetts ;    m.  John  Capron. 
William,  b.  Washington,   Mass. ;    m.   Angelina   Lackey.     Settled  at 

Sheldon,  Vt.,  afterward  removed  to  Munson  Hill,  O. 
Almira,   b.    Partridgefield,    Mass..    Aug.   4,    1805 ;     m.    Harvey   Mc- 

Master.     Settled  at  Fairfield,  Vt. 

Elias  Babcock  removed  from  Hinsdale,  Mass.,  and  settled 
in  W.  Berkshire,  Vt.,  and  d.  there,  May  12,  1839,  aged  82 
years.  His  widow  d.  at  the  same  place,  June  21,  1856,  aged 
98  years. 

Peabody,  eldest  son  and  third  child  of  Elias  and  Huldah 
(Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.  (Berk- 
shire County),  Nov.  10,  1785.  He  m.  at  Franklin,  Vt.,  Hul- 
dah Whitney.  She  was  b.  at  Carinden,  Rutland  County,  Vt., 
Aug.  22,  1788,  and  d.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  about  1855  or  '56. 
Peabody  Babcock  d.  at  Neenah,  Wis.,  in  Oct.,  1873. 

Children : 

David  v.,  b.  St.  Armand.  Canada.  Nov.   10,  1807;    d.  in  Vermont. 

Marvin  Kinney,  b.  Franklin,  Vt..  Sept.  14,  1809. 

Elias,  b.  St.  Armand,  Canada,  Oct.  12,  1811;    d.  young. 

Mary  S.,  b.  Sheldon,  Vt.,  Oct.  18,  1813;    d.  Neenah.  Wis. 

Lusena,  b.  Scranton,  Vt.,  May  4,  1816;    d.  Neenah.  Wis. 

Rev.  O.  W.,  b.  Scranton,  Vt.,  Aug.  12,  1818;    d.  Menasha,  Wis. 

John  D.,  b.  Fairfax,  Vt.,  Dec.  14,  1820:    d.  in  infancy. 

Lucy  A.,  b.  Fairfax,  Vt.,  Mar.   19,   1823;    d.  in  Vermont. 

Saraine,  b.  Fairfax,  Vt.,   Mar.  25,   1825 ;    d.   in  Vermont. 

Orpha  G.,  b.  Fairfax,  Vt..  Nov.  27,  1827;    d.  Evanston.  111. 

Sarah  Ann,  b.  Fairfax.  Vt.,  Oct.  22,  1829.     Living  Richford,  Vt. 

Bradley  W.,  b.  Franklin,  Vt.,  Mar.  20,   1833.     Living  Concord,  Va. 

Marvin  Kinney,  second  son  of  Peabody  and  Huldah 
(Whitney)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Sept.  14,  i8og. 
He  m.  at  Berkshire,  Vt.,  Elmira  Wheeler,  dau.  of  Josiah  and 
Sybil  (Tarbett)  Wheeler.  She  was.  b.  at  Berkshire.  Vt..  June 
13,  1814,  and  d.  at  Neenah,  Wis.,  May  13,  1S51.  Marvin 
Kinney  Babcock  d.  at  Neenah,  Wis.,  Sept.  4,  1881. 

Children : 

Haschel  Smith,  b.  Franklin,  Vt.,  Dec.  22,   1834;    d.  Appleton,  Mo., 

Nov.  8,  1877. 
Wheeler,  b.  Franklin,  Vt.,  Feb.  12,  1836;    d.  Neenah,  Wis. 
Havilah,  b.  Franklin,  Vt.,   Sept.  8,   1837. 
Elenor  Elvira,  b.  Enosburg.  Vt.,  Apr.   13,   1840. 
Herminas  Artemas,  b.   St.   Armand.   Canada.   Sept.  4.   1842. 
Adelbert  Archer,  b.  Franklin.  Vt.,  Nov.  26.  1844. 

Marvin  Kinney  Babcock  m.  (2)  Melinda  Wright,  Nov.  9. 
1851. 


82  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children,  b.  at  Neenali,  Wis. : 

Lucius  J.,  b.  Jan.  7.   1852;    d.   Feb.  23,   1855. 
Dwight  Alford,  b.  Feb.  3,  1854. 
Mattie  Lesta,  b.  Feb.  9,  1856. 
Loraine  H.,  b.  Aug.  6,  1857  (?),   Clayton,  Wis. 
Hattie  Menira,  b.  May  13,  i860,  Clayton,  Wis. 
Marvin  Kinney,  b.  Dec.  29,   1862,  Clayton,  Wis. 
Orpha  G.,  b.  Mar.  24,  1865,  Clayton,  Wis. 
Nathaniel  Robinson,  b.  Jan.  20,  1868,  Clayton,  Wis. 

Haschel  Smith  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Marvin  Kinney  and 
Elmira  (Wheeler)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Dec.  22, 
1834.  He  m.  in  Hartford,  Wis.,  Jane  Rowe.  Haschel  Smith 
d.  in  Appleton,  Wis.,  Nov.  8,  1877. 

Children : 

Delia  E. 
George  Haschel. 

Wheeler  Babcock,  second  son  of  Marvin  Kinney  and  El- 
mira (Wheeler)  Babcock,  w^as  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Feb.  12, 
1836.    He  m.  Priscilla  J.  West.     No  children. 

Havilah  Babcock,  third  son  of  Marvin  Kinney  and  Elmira 
(Wheeler)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Franklin  County, 
Vt.,  Sept.  8,  1837.  He  m.  at  W.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Frances  Eliza- 
beth Kimberly,  May  22,  1872.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
Henry  Kimberly,  and  was  b.  at  W.  Troy,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  10, 
1844. 

Children,  b.  in  Neenah,  Wis, : 

Helen  E..  b.  Oct.  28,  1873. 
Caroline  M.,  b.  Apr.  26,  1875. 
Henry  Kimberly,  b.  Jan.  31,   1877. 
George  Wheeler,  b.  May  12,   1879. 
Frances  Elizabeth,  b.  July  26,  1882. 

Elenor  Elvira  Babcock,  fourth  child  and  first  daughter  of 
Marvin  Kinney  and  Elmira  (Wheeler)  Babcock,  was  b.  in 
Enosburg,  Vt.,  Apr.  13,  1840.  She  m.  W.  P.  Peckham.  No 
children  living.     She  d.  in  Neenah,  Wis.,  May  17,  1864. 

Herminas  Artemas  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Marvin  Kinney 
and  Elmira  (Wheeler)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  St.  Armand,  Can- 
ada, Sept.  4,  1842.  He  m.  at  Clayton,  Wis.,  Oct.  i,  1862, 
Martha  M.  West.     She  was  b.  at  Laporte,  Ind.,  Mar.  4,  1846. 

Children : 

Eleanore  Elmira,  b.  Clayton,  Wis.,  Dec.  16,  1864;    m.  Apr.  3,  1884, 

Harland  Brenden. 
Roy  Francis,  b.  Appleton,  Wis.,  Apr.  25.   1874;    m.  Aug.  20,   1896, 

Ora  Prindel. 


HAVILAH    BABCOCK. 


Page  82. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  83 

Children  of  Eleanore  Elmira  (Babcock)  Brenden  and  Har- 
land  Brenden : 

Eleanore  Elmira,  b.  Feb.  27,  1885. 
Artemas,  b.   Mar.    i6,   1890. 
Wayne,  b.  July  26,  1892. 

Children  of  Roy  Francis  Babcock  and  Ora  (Prindel) 
Babcock : 

Theda,  b.  Jan.  17,  1900. 

Adelbert  Archer  Babcock,  last  bom  of  Marvin  Kinney  and 
Elmira  (Wheeler)  Babcock  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Nov.  26, 
1844.  He  m.  in  Appleton,  Wis.,  Louisa  M.  Tompkins,  daugh- 
ter of  James  and  Sarah  (Pierce)  Tompkins. 

Children,  b.  at  Appleton,  Wis. : 

Adelbert  Archer,  b.  Dec.  27,   1869;    m.   Mae  Rasmuson. 
Frank  C,  b.  May  5,  1875;    m.  Helen  Halbrook. 
Ina  L.,  b.  June  10,  1878. 

Mr,  Babcock  is  a  prominent  business  man  of  Appleton,  Wis. 

Dwight  Alford  Babcock,  second  child  of  Marvin  Kinney 
and  his  second  wife  Melinda  (Weight)  Babcock,  was  b.  at 
Neenah,  Wis.,  Feb.  3,  1854.  He  m.  at  Clayton,  Wis.,  Aug. 
14,  1873,  Harriet  Electa  Crittenden.  She  was  b.  at  Vinland, 
Wis.,  July  18,  1850. 

Children,  b.  at  Clayton,  Wis. : 

Orville  Clare,  b.  Feb.  i,  1875. 
Raymond  Haskel,  b.  Apr.  .30,  1878. 
Ada  Grace,  b.  May  29,  1881. 
Ethel  May,  b.  May  15,  1883. 

Mary  Smith  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Peabody  and  Huldah 
(Whitney)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Franklin,  Vt.,  Oct.  18,  1813. 
She  m.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Apollos  Austin.  He  was  b.  at  High- 
gate,  Vt.,  Jan.  9,  1810,  and  d.  in  Clayton,  W^is.,  July  7,  1893. 
She  d.  at  the  same  place,  Jan.  14,  1884. 

Children,  all  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  except  the  last,  who  was 
b.  in  Clayton,  Wis. : 

Ellen  M.,  b.  1833;    m.  Albert  Gillette. 
Ursula  S.,  b.  1837;    m.  J.  E.  Hughston. 
Edgar  H.,  b.  1839;    m.  Alvina  Bashford. 
Edna  N.,  b.   1839;    d.  Neenah.  Wis. 
Lucia  E..  b.  1842;    m.  Solon  Curtice. 
Franklin  P.,  b.  1852 ;    m.  Mary  J.  Wooledge. 

Franklin  Peabody  Austin,  last  born  to  above,  m.  Mary  J. 
Wooledge.  She  is  the  daughter  of  H.  H.  and  Laura  Sibley 
Wooledge,  and  was  b.  at  Mapleton,  Wis.,  Feb.  9,  1852. 


84  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children : 

Harry  A.,  b.  Aug.   17,   1872. 
Cora  B.,  b.  Jan.  8,  1874. 
Orville  F.,  b.  Feb.   19,   1875. 
Jessie  W.,  b.  Oct.  8,  1879. 
Roscoe  B.,  b.  Dec.  17,  1880. 
Marjorie  L.,  b.  Dec.  29,  1884. 
Clifford  E.,  1).  Feb.  17,  1891. 

Orpliia  Gillman  Babcock,  tenth  child  of  Peabody  and  Hul- 
dah  (Whitney)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Evanston,  111.,  Nov.  27, 
1827.     She  m.  Homer  Curtice,  of  Evanston,  111. 

Children: 

Charles  C,  b.  Big  Springs.  Va.,  Aug.  21,  1854. 
Herbert  A.,  b.  Evanston,   III. 
Norman   B.,  b.   Evanston,  111. 

Charles  C.  Curtice,  eldest  child  of  Homer  and  Orphia  Gil- 
more  (Babcock)  Curtice,  m.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  Sept.  21, 
1888,  Jennie  Read,  daughter  of  Erastus  and  Jennie  (Moore) 
Read.  Mrs.  Curtice  was  b.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  and  d.  there, 
Mar.  4,  1893. 

Children,  b.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind. : 

Hila  Aleen,  b.  July  11,  1889. 

Homer,  b.  Feb.  8,  . 

Nellie. 

Sarah  Ann  Babcock,  eleventh  child  of  Peabody  and  Hul- 
dah  (Whitney)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Fairfield,  Vt,  Oct.  22, 
1829.  She  was  m.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Mar.  12,  1848,  to  C.  V. 
Richard.     He  d.  at  Rich  ford,  Vt.,  Sept.  7,  1880. 

Children : 

Julius  Csesar,  b.  Franklin,  Vt.,  Feb.  2,   1851;    m.   Sylvia  Stanhope, 

dau.  of  Col.  L.   Stanhope,  Apr.  30,   1874. 
Franklin   Pierce,   b.   Franklin,   Vt.,   Nov.  27,    1852;    m.   Edna  Bick- 

ford,  Feb.  3,  1874.     She  d.  Richford,  Vt.,  Dec.  28,  1895. 
Anna  Huldah,  b.   Richford,   Vt.,  Jan.  30,   1873;    m.   Frank  Wilson, 

Sept.  6,  1893.     He  d.  June  11,  1899. 

Julius  Caesar  Richard,  first  born  to  C.  V.  and  Sarah  Ann 
(Babcock)  Richard,  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Feb.  2,  185 1.  He 
was  m.  Apr.  30,  1874,  to  Sylvia  Stanhope,  daughter  of  Col. 
L.  Stanhope. 

Child : 

Vaughn,  b.  Apr.,  1876;    d.  July,  1877. 

Franklin  Pierce  Richard,  second  child  of  C.  V.  and  Sarah 
Ann  (Babcock)   Richard,  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Nov.  27, 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  ■  85 

1852.     He  m.  Edna  Bickford,  Feb.  3,  1874.     She  d.  in  Rich- 
ford,  Vt.,  Dec.  28,  1895. 
Children : 

Don  Carlos,  b.  Aug.  31,  1875. 
]\Iinnie  Winifred,  b.  Nov.  22,   1880. 
Floyd  Franklin,  b.  July   17,   1882. 
Clayton  A.,  b.  Feb.  2,  1886. 
Lottie  May,  b.   1891 ;    d.  1892. 

Bradley  \\liitney  Babcock,  last  born  to  Peabody  and  Hiil- 
dah  (Whitney)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Franklin,  Vt.,  Mar.  20, 
1833.  He  was  m.  in  Campbell  Connty,  Va.,  to  Miss  Mary 
Elizabeth  Cordwell,  danghter  of  John  and  ]\Iary  (Barger) 
Cordwell.  She  was  b.  in  Campbell  County,  Va.,  June  8,  1836, 
and  d.  at  the  same  place,  June  14,  1881. 

Children,  b.  Campbell  County,  Va. : 

John   Marvin,  b.    Campbell   County,   Va..    Sept.   25,    1857;    d.    same 

place,    Sept.   28,    1859. 
Homer  Curtice,  b.  May  28,  i860;    m.  Appomattox  County,  Blanche 

R.   Moore,  Jan.  3,   1884. 
Blanche  Whitney,  b.   Sept.  20,    1862;    m.  Jan.    12,    1883,  Alfred  A. 

Lucerne,  b.  Dec.  28,  1859. 
Rev.    James    Oliver,    Methodist    Clergyman,    b.    Feb.    28,    1866;     m. 

Limestone,    Tenn.,    Annie   J.    Huffaker,    who    is    a    dau.    of    Rev. 

J.  N.  S.  Hufifaker.  She  was  b.  Nov.  12,  1863. 
Mary  Orpha,  b.  June  30,  1868;  d.  Aug.  6.  1883. 
Bradley  Chauncey,   b.    Oct.   21,    1871 ;    m.   Dec.    18,    1901,   Mary  K. 

Chatham.     She  was  b.  Aug.  15,  1871. 
Frank  Early,  b.  Sept.  14,  1876;    m.  Nov.  29,   1899,  Annie  E.  Collins. 

She  was  b.  Appomattox  County,  Va.,  Apr.  28,  1872. 

Mr.  Babcock  m.  (2)  Mary  Virginia  W^alker,  of  Appomat- 
tox County,  Va.,  Dec.  18,  1883.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Maj. 
S.  J.  Walker  and  Martha  (Christian)  W^alker. 

^Ir.  Babcock  removed  from  Vermont  to  Virginia  Avhen  he 
was  but  21  years  of  age.  He  served  in  the  5th  Virginia  Cav- 
alry, of  the  Confederate  Army,  during  the  War  of  the  Re- 
bellion, and  was  a  First  Lieutenant.  He  was  badly  wounded 
twace,  and  reached  home  before  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Lee,  at 
Appomattox  Courthouse,  about  eight  miles  distant  from  his 
home.  His  eldest  son.  Homer  C.  Babcock,  owns  a  part  of  this 
battlefield,  and  even  now  relics  are  found  upon  this  battlefield, 
made  an  historical  spot  for  all  time  to  come. 

Homer  Curtice  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Bradley  Whitney 
and  Mary  E.  (Cordwell)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Concord  Depot, 
Va.,  May  28,  i860.  He  m.  at  Beckham,  Appomattox  County, 
Va.,  Jan.  2,  1884.  Blanche  Moore,  daughter  of  Robert  W.  and 
Hester  (Burge)  Moore.  She  was  b.  at  Beckham,  Va.,  Apr. 
24,  1864. 


86  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children,  b.  at  W.  Appomattox,  Va. : 

Robert  W.,  b.  June  6,  1885. 
Theodore  H.,  b.  Feb.  9,  1888. 
Mary  H.,  b.  Oct.  28,  1890. 
Bradley  W.,  b.  Mar.  20.   1893. 
Rebecca  B.,  b.  Oct.  i,  1895. 
Havilah,  b.  Mar.  6,  1898. 
Adelbert  A.,  b.  June  2,  1901. 

Blanche  Whitney  Babcock,  third  child  of  Bradley  W.  and 
Mary  E.  (Cordwell)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Campbell  County, 
Va.,  Sept.  20,  1862.  She  was  educated  at  the  Bon  Air  Insti- 
tute in  Charlotte  County,  Va.  She  m.  Jan.  11,  1883,  Alfred 
Sweeney.     He  was  b.  in  Bedford,  Va.,  Dec.  28,  1855. 

Children,  b.  at  Appomattox,  Va. : 

Orpha   Loraine,    b.    Jan.    12,    1884;     m.    Dec.    29,    1902,    Hansford 

Cordwell. 
Wolyland  Whitney,  b.  Oct.  26,  1885. 
Mary  Elizabeth,  b.  Jan.  5,  1888. 

Bradley   Babcock,   b.   Jan.   23,    1892.  \ 

William  Peet,  b.  Aug.  4,   1894. 
Virginia  Evans,  b.  May  25,  1897. 
Alfred  Wheeler,  b.   Feb.    17,    1900. 

James  Oliver  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Bradley  Whitney 
and  Mary  Elizabeth  (Cordwell)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Concord 
Depot,  Campbell  County,  Va.,  Feb.  28,  1866.  He  m.  at  Lime- 
stone, Tenn.,  Dec.  22,  1887. 

Children : 

Edward  Garland,  b.   Orange  County,   Va.,  Jan.  9,   1880. 

James  Oliver  Babcock  is  a  Methodist  clergyman,  stationed 
at  Richmond,  Va. 

Bradley  Chauncey  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  Bradley  Whit- 
ney and  Mary  E.  (Cordwell)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Campbell 
County,  Va.,  Oct.  21,  187 1.  He  m.  in  Appomattox  County. 
Va.,  Dec.  18,  1890,  Mary  Catherine  Chatham,  daughter  of 
R.  A.  Chatham,  of  that  place.  Mrs.  Babcock  was  b.  in  Appo- 
mattox County,  Va. 

Child,  b.  in  Beckham,  Va. : 

Mary  Ina,  b.  Dec.  15,   1902. 

Frank  Early  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  Bradley  Whitney 
and  Mary  E.  (Cordwell)  Babcock.  was  b.  in  Campbell  County, 
Va.,  Sept.  14,  1874.  He  m.  Annie  E.  Collins,  at  Appomattox, 
Va.,  Nov.  29,  1899.  She  was  b.  in  Appomattox,  Va.,  Apr. 
21,  1872. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  87 

Child : 

Mary  Isabell,  b.  Appomattox,  Va.,  Oct.  2;^,  1902. 

Elias  Babcock,  Jr.,  second  son  of  EHas  Babcock  and  Hul- 
dah  (Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Dalton,  Mass.,  May  9,  1794- 
On  Dec.  — ,  181 7,  he  m.  Clara  Olmstead,  at  Sheldon,  Vt.  He 
served  as  a  soldier  in  the  War  of  18 12.  Was  in  the  battle  of 
Plattsburg-.  He  settled  in  W.  Berkshire.  Vt.,  was  a  farmer 
and  manufacturer.  He  was  a  man  of  affairs,  representing  his 
district  in  the  State  Legislature  for  two  terms.  He  d.  at 
E.  Franklin,  Vt.,  Sept.  18,  1871.  His  wife  d.  at  W.  Berk- 
shire, Feb.  7,  1857.    Both  are  buried  at  this  place. 

Children : 

Myron    Northrop,    b.    Sheldon,    Vt.,    Sept.    12.    1818;     m.    Blanche 

Virginia  Shaw,    1852.     He  d.   Saratoga  Springs,   N.   Y.,   May  22, 

1892.      No   issue. 
Lorenzo,    b.    Berkshire,    Vt.,    June    15,    1822;    m.    Amanda    Parish 

Pease.     He  was  an  Attorney-at-Law ;     d.  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Apr.  2, 

i860. 
Amanda,  b.  W.  Berkshire,  Vt.,  July  8,  1824;    m.  Dr.  H.  L.  Todd; 

res.  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y. 
Brainard,  b.  W.  Berkshire,  Vt.,  1826.     Massacred  by  the  Snake  In- 
dians, near  Port  Boise,  Ore.,  Aug.  20,  1854. 
Lucretia,  b.  W.  Berkshire,  Vt.,  1828;    m.  A.  C.  Wheeler;    d.  same 

place,  Sept.  14,  1864. 
Carmi  W.,  b.  W.  Berkshire,  Vt.,  Apr.  21,  1830;    m.  a  Miss  Gillette, 

and  removed  to  Kansas. 
Cordelia  P.,  b.  W.  Berkshire,  Vt.,  1832;    m.  Dwight  H.  Morse;    d. 

Winona.  Mich..  Feb.  13,   1859. 
Orville   Elias,  b.    Franklin,   Vt.,   Dec.   25,   1835. 
Horatio  Gates,  b.  Franklin.  Vt.,  Apr.,   1837.     First  Lieutenant  31st 

New  York  Volunteers.     Killed  at  battle  of  Eltham  Landing,  Va., 

on  the  Pamunkey,  War  of  the  Rebellion. 

Lorenzo  Allen  Babcock,  second  child  of  Elias,  Jr.,  and  Clara 
(Olmstead)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Berkshire,  Vt.,  June  15,  1822. 
He  m.  in  Cleveland,  O.,  Oct.  28,  1852,  Amanda  Pease,  daugh- 
ter of  James  and  Amanda  Parish  Pease.  She  was  b.  in  Man- 
tua, O.,  Dec.  28,  1827.  Mr.  Babcock  was  an  Attorney-at-Law 
in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  and  was  the  first  Attorney-Generfil  of  the 
State  of  Minnesota.  He  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Apr.  2,  i860. 
His  widow  m.  (2)  Mr.  C.  L.  Rhodes,  and  now  resides  at  The 
Colonial  Hotel,  San  Francisco,  Cal. 

Children,  b.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn. :  '       ' 

William  Carmi,  b.  Sept.  23,  1853. 

John  Pease,  b.  June  11,  1855. 

Clara  Olmstead,  b.  Apr.  23,  1858;    d.  Fayette,  Mich.,  Sept.  18,  1870. 

William  Carmi  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Lorenzo  Allen  and 
Amanda  (Pease)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Sept. 
23,   1853.     He  graduated   from  Annapolis  Naval  Academy 


88  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

June  6,  1 87 1.  At  the  time  of  his  decease,  which  took  place  in 
New  York  City,  Mar.  11,  1896,  he  was  a  Lieutenant  in  the 
U.  S.  Navy.  He  was  buried  at  Annapohs  Naval  Grounds. 
(Unmarried.) 

John  Pease  Babcock,  second  child  of  Lorenzo  Allen  and 
Amanda  (Pease)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  Jan.  11, 
1855.  He  is  unm.,  and  is  Commissioner  of  Fisheries,  Victo- 
ria, British  Columbia. 

Orville  Elias  Babcock,  eighth  child  of  Elias,  Jr.,  and  Clara 
(Olmstead)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Franklin,  Vt.,  Dec.  25,  1835. 
He  m.  at  Galena,  III,  Nov.  8,  1866,  Annie  Eliza  Campbell, 
daughter  of  Benjamin  H.  and  Harriet  H.  (Scott)  Campbell. 
She  was  b.  at  Galena,  111.,  Nov.  24,  1839. 

Their  children : 

Campbell  Elias,  b.  Galena,  111.,  Sept.  7,  1868;  res.  San  Francisco, 
Cal. 

Orville  Elias,  Jr.,  b.  Chicago,  111.,  Aug.  13,  1872;  m.  Chicago,  111., 
Nov.  20,  1901,  Miss  Ellen  Walsh.  She  was  b.  Mar.  3,  1882.  Mr. 
Babcock  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of  King,  Hodenpyl  &  Co.,  Chi- 
cago, 111. 

Adolph  Borie,  b.  Washington.  D.  C,  Aug.  10,  1876;  res.  Chi- 
cago,  111.     Associated  in  business  with  his  brother  Orville  E. 

Benjamin  Campbell,  b.  Washington,  D.  C,  Mar.  7,  1881 ;  d.  July  7, 
1881. 

Orville  Elias  Babcock  entered  West  Point  Military  Acad- 
emy July  I,  1856,  and  graduated  third  in  his  class  in  1861, 
and  appointed  brevet  Second  Lieutenant,  Corps  of  Engineers, 
promoted  Second  Lieutenant  May  6,  1861,  First  Lieutenant 
Nov.  17,  1861,  Captain  June  i,  1863,  Major  Mar.  21,  1867. 

He  served  as  Lieutenant-Colonel  and  Assistant  Inspector- 
General^Act  of  July  17,  1862 — from  Jan.  i,  1863,  to 
Mar.  28,  1864;  as  Lieutenant-Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp  to 
the  Lieutenant-General,  from  Mar.  29,  1864,  to  July  24,  1866; 
as  Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp  to  the  General,  from  July  25, 
1866,  to  Mar.  4,  1869,  and  as  Colonel  and  Superintendent  of 
Public  Buildings  from  Mar.  3,  1873,  to  Mar.  3,  1877. 

He  received  the  brevets  of  Captain  May  4,  1862,  "For  gal- 
lant and  meritorious  services  during  the  siege  of  Yorktown, 
Va. ;"  of  Major,  Nov.  29,  1863,  "For  gallant  and  meritorious 
services  during  the  siege  of  Knoxville,  Tenn. ;"  of  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel, May  6,  1864,  "For  gallant  and  meritorious  serv- 
ices at  the  Battle  of  the  Wilderness,  Va. ;"  and  of  Colonel, 
Mar.  13,  1865,  "For  gallant  and  meritorious  services  during 
the  war;"  of  Brigadier-General,  Mar.  13,  1865,  "For  gallant 
and  meritorious  services  in  the  field  during  the  war." 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  89 

His  record  of  service  in  the  army  is  as  follows:  On  duty 
drilling  volunteers  at  Washington,  D.  C,  May  8-25,  1861 ; 
as  Assistant  Engineer  in  the  construction  of  the  defenses  of 
Washington,  to  June  16,  1861 ;  in  the  Upper  Potomac  and 
Shenandoah  Valley,  Acting  Aide-de-Camp  to  General  Banks, 
and  other  duties,  to  Aug.  25,  1861 ;  in  the  construction  of 
the  defenses  of  Washington,  Aug,  27  to  Nov.  23,  1861 ;  in 
special  duty  at  Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  to  Feb. 
24,  1862,  and  detached  at  Harper's  Ferry,  Va.,  to  Mar.  4, 
1862;  with  Engineer  Battalion  during  the  Peninsula  cam- 
paign of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  from  Mar.  10  to  July 
19,  1862;  in  detached  duty  to  Oct.,  1862,  commanding 
Company  "D,"  Engineer  Battalion,  in  the  Army  of  the  Po- 
tomac, to  Nov.  16,  1862;  Chief  Engineer,  Left  Grand  Divi- 
sion, Army  of  the  Potomac,  to  Dec.  18,  1862;  Assistant  in 
Engineer  Office,  Washington,  D.  C,  to  Dec.  31,  1862;  As- 
sistant Inspector-General,  6th  Army  Corps,  to  Feb.  6,  1863; 
Assistant  Inspector-General  and  Chief  Engineer,  9th  Army 
Corps,  and  at  Headquarters,  District  of  Central  Kentucky, 
and  with  9th  Army  Corps,  to  Vicksburg  and  Jackson,  Miss., 
to  Aug.,  1863,  and  in  the  East  Tennessee  campaign  to  Jan.  23, 
1864;  Acting  Chief  Engineer,  Department  of  the  Ohio,  to 
Apr.,  1864;  Aide-de-Camp  to  Lieutenant-General  Grant,  in 
the  Richmond  campaign,  the  siege  of  Petersburg,  etc.,  to  Apr. 
9,  1865;  at  Headquarters  of  the  Army  as  Aide-de-Camp  to 
General  Grant,  to  Mar.  4,  1869;  on  duty  at  the  Executive 
Mansion,  and  in  addition  thereto,  from  June  i,  1871,  was  in 
charge  of  Public  Buildings  and  Grounds,  also  Chief  Engineer 
of  the  Washington  Aqueduct  from  Oct.,  1871,  and  in  charge 
of  the  construction  of  the  work  on  the  East  Wing  of  the  new 
State,  War,  and  Navy  Department  Building,  from  Mar.  25, 
1875,  to  Mar.  3,  1877;  Engineer  of  the  5th  Lighthouse  Dis- 
trict, with  station  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  from  Mar.  12,  1877,  and 
in  addition  thereto  of  the  6th  Lighthouse  District  from  Aug. 
31,  1882,  to  June  2,  1884,  when  he  was  drowned  in  crossing 
the  bar  at  Mosquito  Inlet,  Fla.,  while  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duty. 

The  above  is  the  official  record  as  prepared  and  made  in 
the  Adjutant-General's  Office,  War  Department,  Washing- 
ton, D.  C,  May  17,  1890,  of  the  military  record  and  service 
of  Brig.-Gen.  Orville  Elias  Babcock,  U.  S.  Army,  and  is  pre- 
sented verbatim  from  the  official  records. 

The  following  are  the  official  orders  relating  to  Gen.  Bab- 
cock's  appointment  as  Military  Secretary  to  the  President, 

47 


90  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

U.  S.  Grant,  and  President  Grant's  formal  letter  of  thanks  to 
him  for  his  services  after  his  formal  release,  which  was  granted 
at  his  own  request. 

Headquarters  of  the  x^rmy, 

Adjutant-General's  Office, 
Washington,  March  31ST,  1869. 
Special  Orders  ) 

No.  75.         f  Extract. 

I.  By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War  Brevet  Brigadier 
General  O.  E.  Babcock,  Major  Corps  of  Engineers,  will  re- 
port for  duty  to  the  President. 

This  order  to  date  from  the  4th  instant. 

By  command  of  General  Sherman. 
(Signed,  E.  D.  Townsend, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 
Official : 

R.  Williams^ 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 
Gen.  Babcock, 

Executive  Mansion, 
(copy) 

Executive  Mansion, 
Washington,  D.  C. 

March  4th,  1869. 

B'v't  Brigadier  General  O.  E.  Babcock  reported  in  accord- 
ance with  the  provisions  of  the  within  order  and  is  assigned 
to  duty  as  Secretary  to  the  President. 

Horace   Porter, 

(copy)  Secretary. 

Executive  Mansion, 

Washington,  D.  C. 

March  ist.  1877. 

Brevet  Brig.  Gen.  O.  E.  Babcock,  U.  S.  Engr.,  is  hereby 
relieved  from  the  operation  of  Special  Orders  No.  75  dated 
March  3rd,  1869. 

For  faithful  and  efficient  service  as  Private  Sec.  for  more^ 
than  six  years  of  my  two  terms  of  office  he  has  my  acknowl- 
edgement and  thanks  and  the  assurance  of  my  confidence  in 
his  integrity  and  great  efficiency. 

U.  S.  Grant. 

(copy) 


ADELBERT    ARCHER    BABCOCK. 


Page  83. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  ami  His  Descendants.  9I 

Gen.  Babcock  evidently  inherited  his  love  for  a  military  ca- 
reer from  his  sturdy  and  patriotic  grandfather,  who  served 
through  the  War  of  th.e  Revolution,  and  who  is  described  as 
"a  good  soldier  and  full  of  Babcock  grit."  When  Gen.  Grant 
was  elected  President  of  the  United  States,  Gen.  Bal)cock  be- 
came his  Private  Military  Secretary. 

The  writer  here  presents  a  correct  copy  of  a  letter  written 
by  Gen.  Babcock  to  the  Hon.  James  F.  Babcock,  Collector  of 
the  Port  of  New  Haven,  Conn.  The  original  letter  having 
been  in  the  writer's  possession,  is  presented  to  the  members  of 
Gen.  Babcock's  famiy : 

Washington,  D.  C, 

Nov.  7th,  1865. 
Jas.  F.  Babcock 

Collector  of  Port  of  New  Haven 
My  Dear  Sir: 

Your  kind  note  through  Genl.  Grant  reached  me  last  sum- 
mer and  in  a  time  so  busy  I  could  not  make  the  reply.  I  am 
under  manv  obligations  for  your  kind  invitation  and  shall  be 
most  happy  to  avail  myself  of  it  if  I  pass  through  New  Haven. 
My  information  though  meager  May  give  you  some  little  key 
to  the  subject.  My  great  grandfather  Isaah  Babcock  was 
born  in  Conn,  and  went  from  there  to  Partridgefield.  Mass 
(My  information  may  be  wrong  about  his  birth).  He  had 
six  sons,  all  of  whom  served  through  the  Revolutionary  War. 
and  afterwards  settled  in  various  places.  Isaah  (Jr)  settled 
in  New  York  State.  John  in  Albany,  N.  Y.  Elisha  in  New 
York  State.  Samuel  in  Schoharie  Co.,  N.  Y.  Was  a  Col.  in 
war  of  1 8 12,  and  afterwards  High  Sheriff.  Jonas  settled  in 
same  Co.  Elias  (my  grandfather)  settled  in  Franklin  Co., 
Vt.    One  daughter  Pheba  settled  in  Mass. 

My  grandfather  had  eleven  children,  only  four  now  living, 
two  in  Wis.,  one  in  Ohio,  and  (my  father)  in  Vt.  My  father 
has  always  lived  in  Vt.  Berkshire  Franklin  Co.  for  many  years 
His  family  consisted  of  nine  children,  seven  boys  and  three 
girls,  one  boy  died  when  an  infant,  one  was  massacred  by  the 
Indians  near  Ft.  Boise.  W.  T.  in  '54-  o"e  died  in  St.  Paul, 
Minn.,  one  (M.  N.  Babcock)  a  surgeon  and  physician  now 
living  at  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  one  (C.  W.  B.)  a  lawyer 
now  living  in  Kansas  (Lawrence).  One  was  killed  at  the  bat- 
tle near  Elthom  Landing  on  the  Pomunkey  in  1862.  He  was 
a  I  St  Lieut,  in  the  31st  N.  Y.  Vol  Infty.  Horatio  E.  Babcock. 
Two  of  my  sisters,  are  dead.  My  own  story  is  soon  told.  T 
entered  West  Point  in  56,  graduated  3rd  in  61,  went  in  the 


92  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Corps  of  Engineer,  served  in  the  field  during  the  whole  of  the 
rebellion.  With  McClellan,  on  engineer  duty  until  he  was  re- 
lieved of  the  A.  of  P.  under  Burnside  until  he  was  relieved — • 
appointed  Lieut.  Col.  and  Asst.  Inspt.  Genl.  9th  A.  C.  Jan- 
uary, 1863,  but  on  engineer  duty.  Went  with  9th  Corps  to 
Ky.  then  to  Vicksburg,  entered  the  City  with  Genl.  Grant  on 
the  4th  of  July,  went  to  East  Tenn.  with  the  Corps,  was  in 
Knoxville  during  the  siege  by  Longstreet,  was  appointed  sec- 
ond A.  D.  C.  to  the  Lieut.  Genl.  in  April  64,  served  from  the 
Rapidan  to  Petersburg,  was  with  Schofield  at  the  capture  of 
Wilmington,  and  with  Genl  Grant  at  the  campaign  termi- 
nating in  the  surrender  of  Lee  at  Appomattox,  C.  H.  at  which 
I  had  the  pleasure  to  taken  Genl  Lee  the  letter  from  Genl  Grant, 
and  conduct  him  to  the  C.  H.  and  after  the  surrender  back  to 
his  own  line.  I  am  now  Captain  Corps  of  Engineers  U.  S.  A. 
Brevet  Col.  U.  S.  A.  Lieut.  Col.  and  A.  D.  C.  to  Genl  Grant. 
Excuse  so  much  self. 

With  you  I  take  pleasure  in  obtaining  information  of  the 
family,  and  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  have  a  copy  of  your  notes 
when  printed.  I  send  you  the  address  of  a  Babcock  very  en- 
thusiastic on  this  subject  who  told  me  last  summer  that  he  had 
much  information.  I  would  suggest  your  writing  to  him. 
D.  L.  Babcock,  63  South  Ferry  St.,  Albany,  N.  Y.  His  an- 
cestors are  from  R.  L  Please  excuse  the  shape  this  is  in.  I 
shall  be  most  happy  to  give  you  any  information  I  can.  My 
P.  O.  address  is 

O.  E.  Babcock 

Brevet  Col.  A.  D.  C.  Head  Quarters  Lieut.  Genl  Grant, 

Washington,  D.  C. 
Believe  me  sincerely  yours. 

O.  E.  B. 

Campbell  Elias  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  child  of  Gen.  Or- 
ville  E.  and  Annie  Eliza  (Campbell)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Ga- 
lena, 111.,  Sept.  7,  1868.  He  is  First  Lieutenant,  7th  Infantry, 
U.  S.  Army,  at  present  stationed  at  the  Presidio,  San  Fran- 
cisco, Cal.  He  served  with  Roosevelt's  Rough  Riders  in  the 
Cuban  Campaign;  received  a  Presidential  appointment  of 
Second  Lieutenant ;  since  then,  promoted  to  a  First  Lieuten- 
ancy. He  served  in  the  Philippine  Campaign  with  the  12th 
Infantry,  and  on  duty  as  Quartermaster  in  the  Transport 
Service  between  San  Francisco  and  the  Philippine  Islands. 

Lyman  K.  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  Elias  and  Huldah  (Kin- 
nie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield,  Berkshire  Co.,  Mass., 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  93 

May  6,  1798.  He  m.  Lavinia  Warner,  of  Swanton,  Franklin 
County,  Vt.,  Sept.  23,  181 8.  She  was  b.  in  Swanton,  Frank- 
lin County,  Vt.,  May  12,  1801,  and  d.  in  Wittenburg,  Wis., 
Feb.  9,  1890.  Mr.  Babcock  d.  at  the  same  place  May  25,  1893. 
Children : 

William,  b.  Nov.   13,  1819;    m.  Mariette  Newton;    d.  May  19,  i860. 

Was   drowned.      Left   a   family   of   six   children. 
Warner  Daniel,  b.  in  Canada,  July   16,   1822;    m.   Sarah  A.  Butler, 

of  Morton,  Wis.     They  had  two  children,  a  girl  and  a  boy.     His 

wife  d.,  and  he  m.  again,  but  had  no  children.     He  d.   Nov.  26, 

1884. 
George  W.,  b.  May  13.  1822;    m.  Mary  Watson,  of  Waukesha,  Wis. 

He  ran  a  hotel  in  Sheldon,  la.     Had  two  children,  boy  and  girl. 

He  d.  Feb.  23,  1885. 
Elias  S..  b.  Dec.  30,   1825;    d.  June  9,  1827. 
Sanford  G.,  b.  June  19,   1827;    m.  Lucetta  Watterman.     He  served 

in  War  of  the  Rebellion,  and  d.  Jan.,   1902.  in  Louisiana. 
Lyman  A.,  b.  Jan.  14,   1829,  in  Canada;    m.  Sarah  J.  Tubbs.     They 

had  three  children.     His  wife  d.   and  he  m.  a   second  lime.     He 

was   in   the   War  of  the   Rebellion,   being   in   the   loth   Wisconsin 

Regiment ;     was   badly    wounded   at   Battle   of    Murfreesborough, 

which  about  destroyed  the  use  of  his  right  arm.     He  is  living,  and 

draws  a  pension. 
Chauncey  S.,  b.  Dec.   18,   1830;    m.  Fidelia  Tyler,  and  is  living  in 

Decorah,  la. 
Delight  P.,  b.  Mar.  4,  1832;    d.  1854. 
Melissa  A.,  b.   Dec.  3,   1834.     She  m.  at  Oak  Grove,   Wis.,  Josiah 

C.  Roper;    d.  Aug.  20,   1882. 
James  Madison,  b.  July  23,  1835 ;    m.  Minnie  .  Baltimore,  Md. 

He  was  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  and  served  in  the  2d  or  3d 

Minnesota  Regiment.     He  d.  Jan.  16,  1877.     No  children. 
Electa  A.,  b.  Dec.  24,  1838;   m.  Jesse  O.  Merickel,  Oak  Grove,  Wis.; 

living. 
Elias  J.,  b.  July  14,  1841 ;    m.  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  Mrs.  Isabel  Smith. 
Louise  Adelaide,  b.  July  10,  1843,  Berkshire,  Franklin  County,  Vt. ; 

m.  Osage,  la.,  Mar.  5,  1885,  Josiah  C.  Roper.     She  is  his  second 

wife,  he  previously  having  m.  her  sister.     They  have  no  children. 

William  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  Lyman  K.  and  Lavinia 
(Warner)  Babcock,  was  b.  at  Fairfield,  Franklin  County,  Vt., 
Nov.  13,  18 19.  He  m.  Mariette  Newton.  She  was  b.  in 
Franklin  County,  Vt.,  June  17,  1824.  Mr.  Babcock  d.  at 
Richmond,  McHenry  County,  III,  May  6,  1861.  She  d.  in 
Skagit  County,  Wash.,  Aug.  31,   1896. 

Children : 

Charles  Franklin,  b.  Fairfield.  Vt.,  July  6,  1844. 
Oscar  Newton,  b.   Fairfield,  Vt.,  June  24,   1847. 
Amanda  L.,  b.  Waukesha  County,  Wis.,  June  25.  1850. 
Amelia  L.,  b.  Waukesha  County,  Wis.,  Mar.,  1852. 
Orpha  Delight,  b.  Waukesha  County.  Wis. 
Lyman  William,  b.  Waukesha  County,  Wis. 

Charles  Franklin  Babcock,  eldest  son  of  William  and  IMari- 
ette  (Newton)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Fairfield,  Franklin  County, 


94  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Vt.,  July  6,   1844.     He  m.  in  Tazewell  County,  111.,  Oct.  4, 
1868,  Mary  A.  Powell,  daughter  of  William  W.  and  Mariah 
Powell.     She  was  b.  in  Hancock  County,  O.,  Aug.  12,  1846. 
Children,  b.  in  Peoria  County,  Til. : 

Isaac  Eugene,  b.  Aug.  16,  1870. 

William  Allen,  b.  Dec.  25,  1872;    d.  Jan.  31,  1896. 

Estella  Mariah,  b.  Mar.  15,  1875;    m.  Joseph  Francis. 

Charles  Franklin,  b.  Apr.  25,   1877;    d.  Feb.   19,  1897. 

Etta  Ida,  b.  Skagit  County.  Wash..  Sept.  25,  1879;    d.  Mar.  31,  1896. 

Minnie  May,  b.   Skagit  County,  Wash.,  Dec.   12,   1882;    m.  Jan.   12, 

1902,   Cary   McCroken. 
George  Albert,  b.  Skagit  County,  Wash.,  Mar.  5,  1884. 
Mabel  Maud,  b.  Skagit  County,  Wash.,  June  i,   1889. 

Melissa  A.  Babcock,  ninth  child  of  Lyman  K.  and  Lavina 
(Warner)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Berkshire,  Franklin  County, 
Vt.,  Dec.  3,  1834.  She  m.  at  Oak  Grove,  Wis.,  Josiah  C. 
Roper. 

Children,  b.  at  Oak  Grove,  Wis. : 

Eva  May,  b.  Apr.  i,  i860. 

Addie  Dora,  b.  Oct.  23,  1861. 

Hattie  A.,  b.  Mar.  2,  1864;    m.  F.  T.  Cottrell,  Dec.  9,  1884. 

Betia  J.,  b.  Sept.  17,   1866;    m.  Sarah  Taylor,  Mar.   17,  1891. 

Freddie  C,  b.  Dec.  10,  1871  ;    m.  Emma  Rice,  Oct.  24,  1896. 

Nellie  G.,  b.  Nov.  9,  1873;    m.  Mark  Cottrell.  Mar.  5,  1891. 

Mrs.  Melissa  A.  (Babcock)  Roper  d.  Aug.  20,  1882,  and  on 
Mar.  5,  1885,  Mr.  Roper  m.  her  sister,  Louise  Adelaide 
Babcock. 

Electa  A.  Babcock,  eleventh  child  of  Lyman  K.  and  Lavina 
(Warner)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Vermont.  Dec.  24,  1838.  She 
m.  at  Jumare,  Wis.,  Jan.  i,  1856,  Jesse  O.  Merickel.  He  was 
b.  in  Canada,  Feb.  20,  1833. 

Children,  b.  in  Wisconsin : 

Ida  May,  b.  Feb.  4,  1857;    d.  in  Wisconsin,  Mar.  22,  1863. 
Watson  D.,  b.  Apr.  2,  1859;    m.  Ella  Moore.  Sept.  8,  1889. 
Hattie  I.,  b.  Apr.  22,  1861  ;    d.  in  Wisconsin,  Sept.  10,  1862. 
Arthur  J.,  b.  Apr.  30.   1863;    m.  Pauline  Patrick,  Mar.  4,   1889. 
Frankie,  b.  July  6,  1865:    d.  Mar.  31,  1867,  in  Winconsin. 
Jennie  E.,  b.  Aug.  14,  1867  ;    m.  Olen  F.  Sawyer,  Aug.  30,  1885. 
Willie  S.,  b.  May  22,   1870;    m.   Mary  Miller,  Aug.  21,   1893. 
John   W.,   b.   Sept.   26,    1872,   in   Minnesota;     m.    Aurelia   Smith,    in 

Minnesota,  Feb.  22,  1898. 
Mabel  A.,  b.  Jan.   17,  1875;    m.  Frank  Fredenburg,  Dec.   1892. 
Tuella  E.,  b.   Mar.  26,   1877;    m.   George  Stever,  Dec,   1899. 
Fred  C,  b.  June  22,  1879;    unm. 
George  A.,  h.   Feb.  6,   1882;    unm. 
Olive  A.,  b.  July   12,   1884;    unm. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Merickel  reside  at  Eagle  Bend,  Minn. 


BRIGADIER-GENERAL  ORVILLE  E.  BABCOCK,  U.  S.  A. 

Page  88. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  ami  His  Descendants.  95 

Samuel  Babcock,  seventh  son  of  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  EHzabeth 
(Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  Dec.  2,  1761. 
He  removed  with  his  parents  in  1772  to  Partridgefield,  Mass. 
The  town  records  of  Partridgefield  have  the  following  of 
record : 

"March  22,  1779.  Town    Meeting   voted   to   relinquish   his 

poll  tax,  he  being  under  age. 
April      4.  1 78 1.  Elected  Constable.     At  this  Town  meet- 
ing voted  to  give  Samuel  Babcock 
'^s,  6p  on  £100  for  collecting  taxes." 

There  are  no  deeds  recorded  to  him  in  the  office  of  the  Reg- 
ister of  Deeds  of  Berkshire  County,  Alass.  That  he  owned 
land  there  is  unquestioned,  as  his  father  and  brothers  in  their 
real  estate  transactions,  the  descriptive  bounds  in  their  deeds, 
refer  to  land  owned  by  Samuel  Babcock.  He  was,  along  with 
the  rest  of  his  brothers,  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution. 

Record  of  Massachusetts  Soldiers,  War  of  Revolution,  has 
the  following: 

"Samuel  Babcock,  Private  enlisted  in  1779.  Seventeen 
years  of  age.  Stature  5  ft.  7  in.,  complexion  light,  residence 
Partridgefield." 

He  moved  with  his  family,  parents,  and  brothers'  families, 
about  1795,  to  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.  Col.  Samuel 
Babcock,  as  he  was  familiarly  known,  acquired  his  title  of 
Colonel  in  the  militia.  It  has  been  stated  that  he  was  in  the 
War  of  1 81 2,  but  the  writer  has  been  unable  to  verify  this 
statement.  (There  was  a  Col.  Samuel  Babcock,  of  Massachu- 
setts, graduate  of  West  Point,  under  whose  jurisdiction  the 
sea  coast  defenses  of  the  United  States  were  constructed.  He 
was  a  very  distinguished  officer,  and  was  a  descendant  from 
the  Milton,  Mass.,  branch  of  our  family,  and  not  from  James 
of  Rhode  Island.)  Probably  Col.  Samuel,  of  New  York,  and 
the  above  have  been  confounded.  Col.  Samuel  united  with  a 
Masonic  Lodge  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.  The  writer  visited 
the  site  of  his  old  home,  between  Elk  Creek  and  Westford, 
Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  in  1902.  The  old  homestead  is  gone, 
but  the  writer  has  a  photograph  of  the  old  house.  In  this 
house  many  of  Col.  Samuel's  children  were  born,  and  his 
father  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  his  mother  Elizabeth  (Plumb) 
Babcock  lived  while  in  Otsego  County,  and  died  there. 
The  first  Masonic  Lodge  organized  in  Otsego  County  was 
organized  in  this  house.  In  a  small  cemetery,  near  the  town 
of  Westford,  repose  the  remains  of  Col.  Samuel  Babcock  and 


g6  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.j  and  His  Descendants. 

his  wife.     Marble  headstones  mark  their  graves,  which  are 
inscribed  as  follows: 

In  memory  of 

Col  Samuel  Babcock 

WHO  DIED  Sept.  26th,  1839 

75    YEARS   OF   AGE. 
In    MEMORY   OF 

Sylvinia 

W^IFE  OF 

Col.  Samuel  Babcock 

WHO  DIED 

Nov.  26th,  1846.    Aged  83  years. 

Col.  Samuel  Babcock  and  his  wife  and  children  attended  the 
Congregational  Church  in  Westford,  N.  Y.  They  were 
members  of  this  church,  and  his  name  appears  in  many  places 
in  the  church  records.  He  married  Sylvinia  Kinnie.  She 
probably  came  from  Partridgefield,  Berkshire  County,  Mass., 
and  was  probably  related,  possibly  sister,  to  his  brother  Elias's 
wife,  Huldah  Kinnie.  When  and  where  they  were  married, 
the  writer  has  been  unable  to  find  out.  They  were  probably 
married  in  Partridgefield.  Their  fifth  child  was  b.  in  1795, 
which  was  the  year  he  and  his  family,  and  his  father  and 
mother,  and  his  brothers  and  their  families  removed  .from 
Partridgefield,  Mass.,  to  what  is  even  now  known  as  the  Bab- 
cock Settlement,  located  between  the  towns  of  Elk  Creek  and 
Westford,  in  Otsego  County,  N.  Y. 

Children,  first  four  b.  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  the  re- 
mainder in  Otsego  County,  N.  Y. : 

Cyrus;  d.  June  30,  1821. 

Erastus. 

Anna,  b.  Sept.  9,  1784;    m.  Dean  Chase. 

Harvey  W.,  b.  Mar.  16,  1786;    m.  Catherine  McCready. 

Artemas,  b.  Feb.  10,  1795;    m.  Mary  Queal. 

Richardson,   b.    Sept.   18,    1798;    m.    (i)    Mary  Robinson;    m.    (2) 

Lowendia . 

Daniel;    m.    (i)    Martha  Graves;    m.    (2)    Betsey  Moore;    m.    (3) 

Johannah  Lenoe ;   d.  and  is  buried  in  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y. 
Alexander  Hamilton,  b.  Apr.  6,   1805;    m.  Ann  Westcott. 
Sylvinia;    m.  Peleg  Chamberlain. 
Electa;    m.  Rev.  Graves,  of  Aurora,  111. 

It  is  noticed  that  in  Col.  Samuel  Babcock's  will  he  be- 
queathed to  his  wife  all  the  arrearages  of  Pension  money  from 
the  United  States.     A  copy  of  his  will  is  here  entered : 

"I,  Samuel  Babcock,  of  the  town  of  Westford,  in  the  county 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  97 

of  Otsego,  and  State  of  New  York,  considering  the  uncer- 
tainty of  this  mortal  Hfe  and  being  of  sound  mind  and  mem- 
ory, do  make  and  pubhsh  this  my  last  will  and  testament  in 
manner  and  form  following,  that  is  to  say :  I  first  give  and 
bequeath  unto  my  beloved  wife,  Sylvinia  Babcock,  one  cow, 
Twenty-eight  sheep,  all  my  household  furniture  and  all  ar- 
rearages of  Pension  from  the  United  States  at  my  decease 
together  with  all  Bonds,  awards,  bills,  notes  and  book  ac- 
counts due  and  owing  to  me  from  all  persons  whatsoever. 
Second.  I  give  and  bequeath  unto  my  daughter,  Sylvinia  Bab- 
cock, all  my  Real  Estate  whatsoever  to  hold  to  her,  her  heirs 
and  assigns  forever.  Lastly,  I  do  hereby  appoint  my  son, 
Richardson  Babcock,  my  sole  executor  of  this  my  last  will  and 
testament  hereby  revoking  all  former  wills  by  me  made.  In 
Witness  Whereof,  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  seal  this 
Twenty-fourth  day  of  November  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one 
thousand  and  eight  hundred  and  thirty-five. 

Samuel  Babcock.    (l.  s.)" 
Witnessed  by 

J.  W.  Paddock. 

Garret  Rosebroom. 

Robert  Rosebroom. 

Anna  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Col.  Samuel  and  Sylvinia 
(Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Partridgefield,  Berkshire  County, 
Mass.,  Sept.  9,  1784.  She  m.  Dean  Chase,  of  Otsego  County, 
-  N.  Y.  The  writer  has  stood  at  the  handsome  burial  vaults  of 
the  Chase  family,  in  the  cemetery  in  Schenevus,  and  copied 
the  following  from  the  inscribed  tablets : 

Dean  Chase 

Died  Oct.  25TH,  1854. 

Aged  75  years,  2  mos.,  13  days. 

Anna 

WIFE  OF 

Dean  Chase 

Died  Mar.  9,  1863. 

Aged  79  years,  9  mos.,  9  days. 

Their  children,  b.  in  Otsego  County : 

Oscar. 
Lavinia. 
Persis. 
Eliza. 


98  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

William. 

Samantha. 

Horace. 

Eveline. 

Catherine. 

Martha. 

Amanda. 

Artemas  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Col.  Samuel  and  Syl- 
vinia  (Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  10,  1795.  He  m.  in  the  town  of  Worcester,  same 
county,  Sept.  8,  18 16,  Mary  Queal,  dau.  of  Robert  and  Eliza- 
beth (Conroy)  Queal.  She  was  b.  at  North  Ireland,  May  8, 
1792,  and  d.  in  Worcester,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  13, 
1864.  Mr.  Babcock  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  7,  1871,  and  is 
buried  at  Worcester,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y. 

Children,  first  three  b.  in  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  the  remainder 
in  Westford,  N.  Y. : 

Elizabeth,  b.  Feb.  8,   1819;    m.  Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  Jeremiah  E. 

Atkins,  Aug.  3,   1848,  and  d.  at  same  place,  Nov.  20,   1891. 
Mary,  b.  Dec.  2,  1822;    d.  unm.,  Richmondville,  N.  Y..  Jan.  10,  1891. 
John,  b.  Apr.,  1828;    d.  Worcester,  N.  Y..  Sept.  28,  1828. 
Eleanor,  b.  Aug.  4,   1829;    d.  Pensacola,  Fla.,  Nov.  7,  1883. 
Robert  Queal,  b.  Jan.  18,  1832;    m.  Almira  Osborn. 
Electa  Annie,  b.  Jan.  13,  1836;    m.  John  Reese.     No  children.    They 

res.  Chadwicks,  N.  Y. 

Elizabeth  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Artemas  and  Mary 
(Queal)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Worcester,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y., 
Feb.  8,  1 8 19.  She  m.  Jeremiah  E.  Atkins,  in  Richmondville, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  3,  1848.  Mr.  Atkins  was  b.  in  Schoharie  County, 
Feb.  2,  1892.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  (Babcock)  Atkins  d.  in  Rich- 
mondville, N.  Y.,  Nov.  20,  1891. 

Children,  b.  in  Richmondville,  N.  Y. : 

Edward  Babcock,  b.  Sept.  26,   1850. 

Warren,  J.,  b.  June  9,  1853. 

Mary,  b.  Apr.   15,   1856. 

Helen,  b.  June  8,  1859;    d.  Feb.  5,  1864. 

Robert  Queal  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Artemas  and  Mary 
(Queal)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y., 
Jan.  18,  1832.  He  m.  in  Richmondville,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  17,  1858, 
Almira  Osborn.  She  was  b.  in  Summit,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  2,  1834, 
and  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  11,  1895. 

Children,  b.  in  Worcester,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y, : 

Mary,  b.  Jan.  28,   1862;    d.  Aug.  7,   1872. 
Zilpha,  b.  Jan.   17,  1865. 

Mr.  Babcock  m.  (2)  Mar.  12,  1899,  Pamela  Bruce. 


BRADLEY    W.    BABCOCK. 


Page  85. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  99 

Alexander  Hamilton  Babcock,  eighth  child  of  Col.  Samuel 
and  Sylvinia  (Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Worcester,  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  6,  1805.  He  m.  Dec.  29,  1829,  Ann 
Westcott,  daughter  of  Benjamin  and  Lavina  (Cohoon)  West- 
cott.  She  was  b.  Apr.  4,  1809,  and  d.  in  Otsego,  N.  Y.,  June 
2,  1893.     IVIr.  Babcock  d.  at  V\y  Creek,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  i,  1894. 

Children,  b.  in  Maryland,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y. : 

Jane  Helen,  1).  Dec.  22,  1832 ;  ni.  Joseph  H.  Manning. 
Julia  Ann  Francis,  b.  Mar.  i,  1840;  m.  David  Packer. 
Martha  Louisa,  b.  Nov.  25,  1841 ;  m.  Delos  Comstock. 
Inez  D.,  b.  Oct.  28,   1846;    m.  Austin  Chauncey. 

Jane  Helen  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Alexander  Hamilton 
and  Ann  (Westcott)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Maryland,  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  22,  1832.  She  m.  in  Milford,  N.  Y.,  Dec. 
29,  1850,  Joseph  H.  Manning.  He  was  b.  in  Westford,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  2,  1829,  and  d.  in  Cohoes,  N.  Y.,  IMay  11,  1897.  Mrs. 
Jane  Helen  (Babcock)  Manning  d.  in  Cohoes,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  7, 

1893. 

Children : 

Theron    Filmore,    b.    Milford,    N.    Y.,    May    15,    1852;    m.    Jennie 

Gurney. 
Olive  D.,  b.  Milford.  N.  Y.,  Feb.  9,  1859. 
Willis  Hamilton,  b.  Fly  Creek,  N.  Y.,  July  i,   1861 ;    m.  Harriet  E. 

Weed. 
Luta  Fiesta,  b.  Milford,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  9,  1865. 
Rena  Ann,  b.  Milford,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  13,  1869;    m.  W.  E.  Ackart. 

Harvey  W.  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Col.  Samuel  and  Syl- 
vinia (Kinnie)  Babcock.  was  b.  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  Mar. 
16,  1786.  He  m.  Catherine  McCready.  At  Lakewood  Ceme- 
tery, Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  are  interred  the  remains  of  Harvey 
W.  Babcock  and  his  wife  Catherine  (McCready)  Babcock. 
The  following  appears  upon  their  gravestones : 

Sacred  to  the  In  memory  of 

Memory  Catherine 

OF  Consort  of 

Harvey  W.  Babcock  H.  W.  Babcock. 

EsoR.  Died  Oct.  iith,  1839. 

Who  departed  this  life  Aged  50  years 

May  14TH,  183 1  5  months. 
Aged  44  years 
8  months  &  15 
days. 


loo         isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Harvey  W.  Babcock  was  a  man  of  great  prominence  in  Ot- 
sego County.  Sixty  deeds  appear  of  record  to  him  in  Otsego 
County,  showing  him  to  have  dealt  considerably  in  real  estate. 
He  was  elected  Sheriff  of  Otsego  County  for  one  term.  It  is 
noted  on  the  county  records  of  Otsego  County,  in  the  Surro- 
gate's office,  that,  upon  the  decease  of  Harvey  W.  Babcock, 
"Letters  of  Administration  were  given  to  Catherine  Babcock, 
his  widow,  and  Anna  St.  Brown  and  John  Harvey  Babcock 
May  27th,  1834." 

Their  children : 

Harrison  Gray  Otis. 
Mary  Jane;    d.  aged  21  years. 
Julia;    m.   Dr.   Harvey  M.   Hanor. 
Eliza   Maria;    m.   Dr.   Phillip   Roof. 

John   Harvey,   b.   Jan.   31,    1821 ;    m.    (i)    Lucia   Gregory;     m.    (2) 
Sophia  Beadle. 

John  Harvey  Babcock,  youngest  son  and  child  of  Harvey 
W.  and  Catherine  (McCready)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  31,  1821.  He  was  twice  married:  (i)  to 
Lucia  Gregory,  b.  1822,  d.  Dec.  21,  1871 ;  (2)  to  Sophia 
Beadle,  of  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.  In  the  Lakewood  Cemetery, 
Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  are  interred  the  remains  of  John  Harvey 
Babcock.  The  following  inscription  is  upon  the  Scotch  granite 
monument  in  his  lot: 

John  H.a.rvey 

.SON  OF  Harvey  W.  and 

Catherine  McCready 

Babcock 

Born  Jan.  31,  1821 

Died  Aug.  7th,  1881. 

In  the  Surrogate's  office  in  Cooperstown  is  found  the  will 
of  John  Harvey  Babcock,  dated  Jan.  10,  1876,  Brooklyn,  N. 
Y.  The  will  was  probated  Oct.  10,  188 1.  In  the  certificate 
of  probate,  it  states  that  the  residence  of  testator  was  the  town 
of  Otsego,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.  Executrix,  Sophia  B.  Bab- 
cock. Gives  all  property  to  wife,  Sophia  B.  Babcock.  Wit- 
nessed by  William  A.  Harwood  and  George  W.  Price,  both  of 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

John  Harvey  Babcock  was  well  known  by  many  of  the 
near  relatives  of  the  writer  of  this  sketch,  John  P.  Babcock, 
son  of  George,  of  Milford,  and  he  being  very  intimately  ac- 
quainted. It  is  a  source  of  great  regret  to  the  writer  that  he 
cannot  enter  in  this  work  a  fuller  and  more  complete  record 
of  him  and  his  father.       No  issue. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Dcsccndaiils.  lOi 

Richardson  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  Col.  Samuel  and  Syl- 
vinia  (Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Worcester,  Otsego  County, 
N.  Y.,  Sept.  1 8,  1798.     He  m.  Mary  Robinson. 

Children,  b.  in  Worcester,  N.  Y. : 

Adilia  White,  b.  Oct.  17,  1819. 

Samuel  B.,  b.  Apr.  21,  1821. 

Sarah  Jane,  b.  Jan.  29,  1823. 

Jarnes  Harvey. 

John  Richardson. 

Mary  Eliza;    m.  Dwight  Robinson. 

Sylvinia. 

Mr.     Babcock  ni.  (2)  Lowendia .     No  issue  by  second 

marriage. 

Adilia  White  Babcock,  eldest  child  of  Richardson  and  Mary 
(Robinson)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Worcester,  Otsego  County, 
N.  Y.,  Oct.  17,  1819.  She  m.  in  Westford,  X.  Y.,  Feb.  22, 
1837,  Josiah  Harrington  Draper.  He  was  b.  in  Westford, 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  6,  1812,  and  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1894. 

Children : 

James    Richardson,    b.    Westford,    N.    Y.,    Dec.    i,    1837;     m.    Ella 

Phelps. 
Marv  Jane.  b.  Davenport,  N.  Y. ;    m.  D.  L.  Plummer. 
Melville  Gregory,  b.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  16,  1848;    d.  Apr.  23,  1850. 
Maria  Elizabeth,  b.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  9,  1852;    d.  Mar.,  1889. 

Samuel  B.  Babcock,  second  child  of  Richardson  and  Mary 
(Robinson)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Worcester,  Otsego  County, 
N.  Y.,  Apr.  21,  1 82 1.  He  m. ,  and  they  had  the  follow- 
ing children : 

John  H. 
William  R. 
Florence. 
Sarah  Jane. 

James  H.  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Richardson  and  IVIary 
(Robinson)  Babcock,  m.,  and  had  the  following  children: 

Frank  W. 
John   R. 
Clarence. 
Mary. 
Anna. 

Daniel  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  Col.  Samuel  and  Sylvinia 
(Kinnie)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Otsego  County,  probably  town 
of  Worcester.  He  was  m.  three  times :  ( i )  to  Martha  Graves. 
(2)  to  Betsey  Moore,  and  (3)  to  Johannah  Lenoc.  He  d.  and 
is  buried  in  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y. 


102  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children,  by  which  wife  I  have  been  unable  to  procure 
information : 

William  H. 

Henry. 

Erastus. 

Cyrus. 

Jane;    ni.   Clement  Dean  Chase. 

Of  the  above  children,  William  H.  went  West,  m.  a  lady  in 
Cooperstown,  and  d.  in  some  Western  State.  Cyrus  went  to 
California.  The  remainder  of  this  family  I  know  nothing 
about. 

Jonas  Babcock,  youngest  son  and  last  born  of  Isaiah  Bab- 
cock,  Sr.,  and  Elizabeth  (Plumb)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Stoning-, 
ton,  Conn.,  May  14,  1764.  He  removed  with  his  parents  and 
brothers  to  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  in  1772.  The  town  records 
of  Partridgefield  has  the  following: 

"Mar.  3,  1783.  Town  Meeting  Voted  to  relinquish  Jonas 
Babcock's  rates  in  his  brother  George's  bill,  he  being  under 
age  to  pay  rales.  At  same  time  voted  to  reimburse  his  brother 
George." 

He  was  also  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution.  In  Record  of 
Massachusetts  Soldiers,  War  of  Revolution,  he  is  recorded 
as  follows : 

"Jonas  Private.  Capt.  Thayers  Co.  Col.  Barnes  Regt 
marched  on  an  alarm  to  Stillwater.  Service  ten  davs.  Roll 
dated  Partridgefield." 

Jonas  Babcock  was  very  methodical  in  his  business  and  daily 
life.  He  kept  a  daily  record  of  all  his  transactions  in  a  book, 
and  also  jotted  down  from  time  to  time  daily  happenings  of 
events.  The  writer  has  seen  this  book  and  frankly  states  if 
it  had  not  been  for  Jonas'  book,  the  full  history  of  his  father 
which  has  been  gathered  would  j^robably  have  never  been 
gathered,  all  previous  efforts  of  genealogists  having  met  with 
failure  in  tracing  Isaiah,  Sr.,  further  than  Partridgefield,  Mass. 
Jonas  makes  the  following  entry  on  the  cover  of  his  book : 

"Jonas  Babcock  Account  Book  Bought  July  30th,  1792." 

He  states  he  lived  in  Dalton,  Mass.,  the  adjoining  town  to 
Partridgefield.  He  m.  in  Partridgefield,  Mass.,  Nov.  25,  1784, 
Betsey  Parker,  of  the  same  place.     She  was  b.  Oct.  18,  1763. 

Children,  b.  in  Partridgefield,  Mass. : 

Pamela,  b.  June  21,   1785;    m.   Mr.  Wright;    d.  May  27,  1839,  aged 

53  years. 
Orril,  b.  Feb.  3,  1788;   m.  Mr.  Draper;   d.  Jan.  4,  1875,  aged  86  years. 


LOUISA  BABCOCK  GREEN. 


Page  109. 


Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  103 

Betsey  (Parker)  Babcock,  his  wife,  d.  May  3,  1790,  aged  26 
years. 

In  Jonas  Babcock's  Book  of  Record  appears  the  following: 

"Partridgefield,  Oct.  24th,  1792. 
"This  day  Jonas  Babcock,  of  Partridgefield,  and  Elizabeth 
Chester  of  Washington,  was  married  till  Death  parts  us.   What 
God  hath  joined  together,  Lett  no  man  put  a  Sunder.     So  Let 
it  be.  Jonas  Babcock. 

Elizabeth   Chester." 
Children : 

Amanda,  b.  June  6,   1793;    d.   in  infancy. 

Betsey,  b.  July  24,  1795. 

Hiram,  b.  Nov.  3,  1796. 

Almira,  b.  July  5,   1798. 

Lester,  b.  ]\Iar.   14,   1800. 

Pamelia,  b.  Apr.  6,  1802;    m.  Francis  Reed. 

Enoch,  b.  Mar.  7,  1804. 

Samantha,  b.  Aug.  30,  1806;    d.  Aug.  30,  1826. 

Olive,   b.   May  5,    1809. 

No  name,  b.  Oct.  9,  1812;    d.  in  infancy. 

Jonas  Babcock's  wife,  Elizabeth   (Chester)   Babcock,  d.  in 
Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  26,  1846. 
The  following  appears  in  Jonas's  book : 

"May  peace  forever  remain  between  the  United  States  and 
all  other  powers  if  possible.  If  not,  may  America  subdue  them 
and  bring  them  to  peace  again.  Amen." 

The  above  sentiment  was  the  spirit  of  the  Patriots  of  1776, 
and  Jonas  Babcock  evidently  entered  the  above  sentiment  when 
w^ar  again  threatened  the  United  States  by  England  in  1812. 

Jonas  entered  the  Patriot  army  when  but  fifteen  years  of 
age  in  the  War  of  the  Revolution,  and  remained  in  the  army 
until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  has  stated  he  was  never  aware 
of  having  killed  anybody  with  the  exception  of  one  man.  In 
passing  through  a  piece  of  woods,  he  was  fired  upon  by  the 
enemy  and  returned  his  fire,  and  the  enemy  ceased  firing.  He 
had  frequently  seen  Gen.  Washington  in  Newburgh  and  vicin- 
ity. He  was  fond  of  telling  stories  and  of  good  living,  and 
complained  of  poor  fare  in  the  army,  bean  porridge  being 
common,  made  in  cauldron  kettles,  and  all  the  meat  seasoning- 
consisted  of  a  large  bone  which  they  would  boil  a  few  mo- 
ments in  one  kettle  and  then  remove  to  another  and  another, 
and  so  allowing  only  a  few  minutes  to  each  kettle,  and  using 


104         Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

the  same  bone  day  after  day.  He  applied  for  a  pension  in  Oct., 
1832,  and  d.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  27, 
1847,  aged  83  years.  He  was  for  forty-two  years  a  Deacon 
in  the  Congregational  Church  in  Westford,  N.  Y.  This  church 
was  organized  by  Jeddediah  Bushnell,  in  Sept.,  1800,  and  Jo- 
nas Babcock  joined  this  church  Nov.  16,  1800.  After  six 
months'  trial,  he  was  admitted  Deacon,  Nov.  5,  1801.  "Dea- 
cons were  to  be  upon  trial  according  to  Timothy  3rd  Chap. 
6th  Verse."  Jan.  4,  1801,  he  had  six  of  his  children  baptized. 
The  writer  has  been  to  the  site  of  the  Babcock  settlement  be- 
tween Elk  Creek  and  the  town  of  Westford,  has  been  in  Jo- 
nas's  house  where  he  lived  and  died,  and  in  the  old  Congre- 
gational Church  at  Westford  where  Isaiah,  Sr.,  and  his  wife 
and  children  and  grandchildren  attended  church.  I  personally 
examined  the  church  records  of  this  church  which  are  care- 
lessly cared  for.  The  church,  at  one  time  thrifty  with  a  large 
congregation,  has  now  dwindled  down  to  less  than  a  dozen 
members.  The  church  records  are  full  of  the  prominent  parts 
taken  in  its  history  by  the  family  of  Isaiah  Babcock,  Sr.  The 
date  of  his  decease  appears  upon  these  records,  many  of  which 
have  been  lost.  In  the  rear  of  the  church  and  close  to  it  are 
buried  the  remains  of  Jonas  Babcock  and  his  family.  A  hand- 
some marble  monument  marks  Jonas's  resting  place.  All  his 
family  were  baptized  in  the  church,  and  his  forty-two  years  of 
service  in  active  church  work  probably  led  to  his  being  in- 
terred so  near  to  his  large  portion  of  his  lifework.  The  coun- 
try at  the  site  of  the  Babcock  settlement  strongly  resembles  the 
Berkshire  Hills  around  Partridgefield,  now  Hinsdale,  Mass., 
and  probably  influenced  these  pioneers  to  settle  here  and  name 
the  place  Partridgefield  in  honor  of  the  place  they  came  from. 
The  writer,  in  conversation  with  one  of  his  great  aunts, 
Mrs.  Phebe  (Babcock)  Cornell,  then  97  years  of  age,  was 
told  the  following  story:  When  she  was  a  little  girl,  living 
in  Albany  County,  there  came  a  great  fall  of  snow.  Some  per- 
sons driving  by  their  house  became  stalled  in  the  snow,  and 
her  father  and  brothers  shoveled  them  out  and  brought  them 
into  the  house  when  they  found  they  were  among  relatives, 
the  stranger  being  Jonas  Babcock  and  his  wife.  They  made 
an  extended  visit.  Jonas  Babcock  was  my  great  aunt's  fa- 
ther's own  uncle.  A  granddaughter  of  Jonas  Babcock,  Mrs. 
Mary  Boardman,  of  Schenevus,  states  her  mother  told  her  the 
above  story  corroborating  Mrs.  Cornell's  story.  My  great 
aunt  could  remember  nothing  further  about  this  circumstance 
except  that  Jonas  Babcock  was  a  fine  looking  and  appearing 


JONAS    BABCOCK'S    HOME. 

Where  he  Hved  and  died,  Westford.  Otsego  Co..   N.  Y. 

Page  104. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  105 

man,  and  his  wife  a  very  bright  and  fluent  talker.  The  writer 
has  recently  learned  that  during  the  latter  years  of  Jonas's 
life,  after  he  was  past  three-score  and  ten,  he  made  several 
visits  to  the  sites  of  his  campaigns  during  the  War  of  the  Rev- 
olution. A  few  days  before  his  decease,  he  suddenly  roused 
up,  and  said  ''he  must  go,  for  General  Washington  is  at  the 
door." 

Betsey  Babcock,  second  child  of  Jonas  and  Elizabeth  (Ches- 
ter) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  July 
24,  1795.  She  was  twice  married:  (i)  to  Olney  Rice,  who 
lived  but  one  year  and  by  whom  she  had  one  child,  Harriet 
E.  Rice.  She  m.  (2)  Nathan  Perrv,  of  Elk  Creek,  N.  Y.,  Oct. 
24,  1825.  He  d.  at  Elk  Creek,  N.' Y.,  Oct.  23,  1843.  She  d. 
at  Westford,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  27,  1881. 

Children : 

Harriet  E.,  b.  Oneonta,  N.  Y.,  June  5,  1823;    d.  1899;    m.  Jan.  29, 

184s,  Johnathon  Wilsey.     He  d.  July  14^  1897. 
Flavel  W.,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  24,  1827;    m.  Ann  O.  Prindle; 

d.   Mar.,   1897.     She  d.   Sept.  8,   1893. 
Austin,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  13,  1829;    d.  Aug.  28,  1830. 
Walter  L.,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  June  17,   1831 ;    m.  Dec.  25,   1865, 

Emma  Blackman.     He  d.  Dec.  15,  1897. 
Olney  B.,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  July  24,  1833;    m.  Libbie  Blackman, 

Nov.  18,  1869.     He  d.  June  18,  1899. 
Katherine  A.,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  13,  1836;    m.  May  2,  i860, 

Dovvd  Palmer.     He  d.  Aug.  19,   1893. 
Mary  E.,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  June  18,  1838;    m.  May  8,  i860,  Levi 

Boardman. 
Albert,  b.  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  May  5,  1841 ;    d.  July  30,  1842. 

Hiram  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  third  child  of  Jonas  and 
Elizabeth  (Chester)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego 
Comity,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  20,  1796.  He  m.  Olive  Wetmore,  Sept. 
12,  1820,  and  d.  in  Manchester,  la.,  Feb.  20,  1875.  His  wife 
d.  at  the  same  place,  Feb.  i,  1864. 

Children : 

William  Henry,  b.  Mar.  25,   1822;    m.  Almiret  Lee. 
Anna  L.,  b.  July  3,  1823;    m.  George  Thomas. 
Isaac  Watts,  b.  Nov.  8,  1825 ;    m.  Mary  Plummer. 
Frances  Amelia,  b.  June  26,  1828;    m.  John  G.  Chick. 
Elizabeth  Caroline,  b.  Aug.  8,   1830;    m.   Delien  Tiffany. 
Harry  Eggleston,  b.  Jan.  20,  1834;    m.  Hattie  Mason. 
Charlotte  Almira,  b.  Mar.  19,  1836;    m.  Erotas  Conger. 

Almira  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Jonas  and  Elizabeth  (Ches- 
ter) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  July 
5,  1798.     She  m.  John  Kelso,  Jr.,  May  17,  1820.     He  d.  in 
Albany,  N.  Y.,  Feb.,  1875.    She  d.  in  same  place,  Apr.,  1875. 
48 


io6  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Children,  b.  in  Worcester,  N.  Y. : 

John  Harvey  Kelso,  b.  May  20,   1822. 
Julia  Olive  Kelso,  b.  Dec.  27,   1826. 

Lester  Babcock,  fifth  child  and  second  son  of  Jonas  and 
Elizabeth  (Chester)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego 
County,  N.  Y.,  Mar.  14,  1800.  He  m.  Almira  Manning,  Feb, 
6,  1828.  She  was  b.  in  Westford,  N.  Y.,  Dec.  11,  1808,  and 
d.  in  the  same  place,  Aug.  7,  185 1.  Mr.  Babcock  was  a  promi- 
nent business  man  in  Westford,  and  was  a  deacon  in  the  Con- 
gregational Church  there  for  many  years.  He  d.  in  Westford, 
N.  Y.,  Aug.  10,  1876. 

Children,  b.  in  Westford,  N.  Y. : 

Lois  P.,  b.    Dec.  25,  1828 ;    d.  Aug.  28,  1856. 

Emily  L.,  b.  Alay  16,   1831 ;    m.  A.  P.  Child,  Sept.  2,   1855.     They 

had  three  children:    Charles  L.,  d.   18  years  of  age;    Flora  A.,  b. 

Mar.  6,  i860;   Kate  K.,  b.  June  6,  1868.    Emily  L.  d.  Oct.  18,  1888. 
Fannie  A.,  b.  Apr.  7,  1833;    m.  Levi  B.  Burch,  May  19,  1880. 
Olive,  b.  Jan.  25,  1835;    d.  Aug.  31,  1853. 
Philo,  b.  Dec.  21,  1839;    d.  Apr.  9,  1842. 
Mary,  b.  Mar.  9,  1843;    d.  Aug.  25,  1857. 

Pamelia  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  Jonas  and  Elizabeth  (Ches- 
ter) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
6,  1802.  She  m.  Francis  Eld.  Reed,  who  was  b.  in  Cairo, 
N.  Y.,  May  10,  1802,  and  d.  at  Cleveland,  O.,  Nov.  10, 
1838.  Mr.  Reed  resided  at  New  York  City  at  the  time  of  his 
decease,  and  while  in  Cleveland,  O.,  on  business  was  taken 
suddenly  ill  and  d.  there.  He  was  an  active  Christian,  and  one 
of  the  ruling  elders  of  Dr.  Patton's  church  in  New  York  City. 
There  were  no  railroads  at  the  time  of  his  decease,  and  his 
family  could  not  get  to  him  from  home.  He  was  buried  from 
a  Presbyterian  Church  in  Cleveland,  and  the  church  was  filled 
with  sympathizing  friends. 

Child: 

Emily  Amanda,  b.  Worcester,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  13,  1825 ;  m.  William 
Henry  Olin,  Sept.  10,  1846.  She  d.  in  Stockbridge,  N.  Y.,  June 
29,  1856. 

William  Henry  Olin,  husband  of  Emily  Amanda  Reed, 
was  a  Methodist  clergyman  for  twenty-two  years,  and  was 
Presiding  Elder  for  sixteen  years.  He  represented  his  Con- 
ference in  eight  General  Conferences.  In  1884-5  h^  was  Pre- 
siding Elder  in  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,  and  represented  Broome 
County  in  the  State  Legislature,  being  a  Member  of  the  As- 
sembly. At  the  time  of  his  decease  he  was  President  of  the 
Conference  Board  of  Trustees  and  a  Trustee  of  Svracuse  Uni- 


ENOCH    BABCOCK. 


Page  107. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  107 

versity.  Wesleyan  University  gave  him  the  degree  of  Mas- 
ter of  Arts,  and  Syracuse  University  that  of  Doctor  of  Divin- 
ity. He  d.  suddenly,  while  visiting  friends  in  Dexter,  Mich. 
Dr.  Ohn  was  b.  in  Lawrence,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  5,  1821,  and  d.  sud- 
denly, as  stated,  in  1889. 
Children : 

Harriet  Elizabeth,  b.  Albany,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  25,  1828;  in.  John  Hull, 
1857.     She  d.  at  St.   Paul.  Minn.,  Jan.  30,   1893. 

Mary  Eliza,  b.  New  York  City.  Oct.  8.  1833;  m.  Orson  Jackson, 
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  2,  1858.  He  was  the  .son  of  John  Jackson  and 
Gertrude  (Roseboom)  Jackson,  of  Westford,  N.  Y.,  and  was  b. 
Aug.  22.  1824.  He  d.  at  Prairie  du  Chien,  Wis.,  Feb.  13.  1885. 
Their  children,  b.  in  Prairie  du  Chien,  Wis. :  John  Ten  Brocck, 
b.  Nov.  2,  1859,  m.  Hattie  C.  Goodwin;  Frances  Reed,  i).  Jan. 
I,  1863;  Charles  Reed,  b.  Sept.  5,  1866,  d.  July  30,  1867;  William 
Reed,  b.  July  9,  1868;    d.  July  23,   1868. 

Pamelia  (Babcock)  Reed  m.  (2)  George  Skinner.  Pamelia 
(Babcock)  Reed  Skinner  d.  in  Westford,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  26,  1852. 

Enoch  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  Jonas  and  Elizabeth  (Ches- 
ter) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Mar. 
7,  1804.  He  m.  Elizabeth  Provost,  of  Pelham,  Westchester 
County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  7,  1825.  She  was  b.  in  Pelham,  West- 
chester County,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  26,  1806,  and  d.  in  Riley,  111., 
Feb.  17,  i860. 

Children,  first  two  b.  in  Westford,  N.  Y.,  the  balance  in 
Livonia,  N.  Y. : 

Caroline,  b.  Oct.   10,  1826;    d.  Sept.  20,  1827. 

Louisa,  b.  Oct.  24,  1827;    m.  Dr.  J.  W.  Green. 

Julia   Augusta,   b.    Sept.   27,    1829;     ni.    (i)    J.    P.   Waldo;     m.    (2) 

Allen  Lisson. 
John  Barton,  b.  May  14,  183 1  :    m.  Marcia  De  Wolf. 
Isaiah,  b.  Aug.  16,  1836;    m.  Lavina  De  Wolf. 
William  Henry,  b.  Nov.  2,  1838:    m.  Mrs.  Luella  De  Wolf  Terry. 
Helen  Elizabeth,  b.  Sept.  22,   1840;    m.  Lewis  M.  Gray. 
Sydney  S.,  b.  Mar.  23,  1842.    d.  Keokuk,  la.,  Aug.  19,  1861.     Soldier 

in  Camp  D,  15th  Regiment  of  Illinois. 
Francis  Dwight,  b.  Mar.  26,  1845;    m.  Persis  Delaney  Sears. 

Olive  Babcock,  youngest  daughter  of  Jonas  and  Elizabeth 
(Chester)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y., 
May  5,  1809.    She  m.  John  Phillips,  May  22,  1832. 

Children : 

W.  Irving,  b.   Sept.   11,   1833;    d.  Apr.   18,   1892. 

Owen,  b.  Apr.  7,   1837. 

Judith  Campbell,  b.  May  22,  1839;    d.  Jan.  30,  1901. 

Julia  Ella,  b.  Nov.  8.  1843- 

Amelia,  b.  Feb.  6,  1845. 

Edward  C.  b.  July  14.   1847. 

Elizabeth  Chester,  b.  Nov.  18,  1849;    d.  Jan.  11,  1856. 

Mary  Ellen,  b.  Dec.  24,  1852. 


lo8         Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

Mrs.  Olive  (Babcock)  Phillips  d.  May  21,  1892.  Mr.  Phil- 
lips d.  Dec.  9,  1 86 1. 

Mary  E.  Perry,  seventh  child  of  Nathan  and  Betsey  (Bab- 
cock) Perry,  was  b.  at  Elk  Creek,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  June 
18,  1838.  She  was  m.  May  8,  i860,  at  Westford,  N.  Y.,  to 
Levi  Boardman.  He  was  b.  in  Maryland,  N.  Y.,  Oct.  25, 
1830,  and  d.  at  Schenevus,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  Apr.  27, 
1872. 

Children,  b.  at  Schenevus,  N.  Y. : 

Edward,  b.   Nov.   19,   1862;    m.  Milford,   N.  Y.,  Miss  L.  E.  Hail 

well,   Feb.    12,   1893. 
William,  b.  June  12,  1864;    d.  June  27,   1895. 

William  Henry  Babcock,  eldest  son  and  child  of  Hiram  and 
Olive  (Wetmore)  Babcock,  was  b.  Mar.  25,  1822.  He  m.  at 
Darien,  Wis.,  Almira  Lee,  Mar.  30,  1848.  He  d.  at  Milton 
Junction,  Wis.,  Mar.  9,  1894.    She  d.  at  Aliens  Grove,  Wis. 

Anna  L.  Babcock,  second  child  of  Hiram  and  Olive  (Wet- 
more)  Babcock,  was  b.  July  3,  1823.  She  m.  George  Thomas, 
at  Delaware,  Wis.,  Apr.  18,  1850,  and  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  May 

9,  1853. 

Isaac  Watts  Babcock,  third  child  of  Hiram  and  Olive  (Wet- 
more)  Babcock,  was  b.  Nov.  8,  1825,  in  Westford,  N.  Y.  He 
m.  Mary  Plummer,  of  Elgin,  111.,  Mar.  4,  1858.  He  d.  at  Mil- 
ton Junction,  Wis.,  Dec.  6,  1892. 

Frances  Amelia  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Hiram  and  Olive 
(Wetmore)  Babcock,  was  b.  June  26,  1828,  in  Westford,  N. 
Y.  She  m.  John  Chick,  of  Rockford,  111.,  Dec.  30,  1858.  She 
d.  Jan.  13,  1*902.     Mr.  Chick  d.  Jan.  4,  1898. 

Children,  b.  in  Rockford,  111. : 

Olive  Hannah,  b.  July  3,  1861 ;    m.  Joseph  Antes. 
Frances,  b.  Dec.  25,  1864. 

Harvey  Eggleston  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  Hiram  and  Olive 
(Wetmore)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  N.  Y.,  June  20, 
1834.  He  m.  Hetta  Maine,  of  Jackson,  Cal.,  June  16,  1867. 
He  d.  in  Jackson,  Cal.,  Sept.,  1868. 

Child: 

Harvie  O.,  b.  Jan.  29,  1868;    m.  John  Anderson,  of  San  Francisco, 
Cal. 

Charlotte  A.  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  Hiram  and  Olive 
(Wetmore)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Tioga,  Pa.,  Mar.  19,  1836. 
She  m.  Erotas  R.  Conger,  in  Manchester,  la.,  Jan.  13,  1862. 


CARRIE   ODELL    (GREEN)    STRAHORN. 

Page  109. 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  109 

Children : 

Charles  Lincoln  Conger,  b.  Dec.   15,  1862;    d.  June  29,  1864. 
Carrie  B.  Conger,  b.  Apr.  4,  1864;    res.  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 
Nettie  May  Conger,  b.  Nov.  30,  1867;    res.  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 

Elizabeth  C.  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Hiram  and  Olive  (Wet- 
more)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford,  N.  Y.,  Aug.  8,  1830.  She 
m.  Delien  Tiffany,  May  17,  1852.  He  d.  at  Roberts,  Wis., 
Mar.  7,  1884.    She  d.  at  Darien  Center,  N.  Y.,  Jan.  4,  1898. 

Children : 

Henry,  b.  1854;    m.  Ella . 

Anna,  b.  1859;  m.  James  Kinsey;  d.  Minneapolis.  Minn.,  Nov.  25, 
1886.     Had  one  daughter,   Claria,  b.  July  15,   1880. 

Louisa  Babcock,  first  born  of  Enoch  and  Elizabeth  (Pro- 
vost) Babcock,  was  b.  in  Westford.  N.  Y.,  Oct.  24,  1827.  She 
m.  Dr.  J.  W.  Green,  of  Marengo,  111.,  Mar.  7,  1846.  Dr.  Green 
was  a  surgeon  in  the  95th  Regiment,  War  of  the  Rebellion. 
He  d.  Oct.  15,  1893.  Mrs,  Louisa  (Babcock)  Green  d,  in 
Chicago,  111.,  Jan.  12,  1899. 

Children : 

Mary  Emma,  b.  Marengo,  111.,  Dec.  23,  1852 ;  m.  Willey  B.  Waters, 
Chicago,  111.,  Feb.,  1875.  They  had  one  child,  Christina  Louisa, 
b.  July  9,  1876;    m.  Quintard  Johnson,  June  23,  1892. 

Carrie  Odell,  b.  Jan.  i,  1854;  m.  Robert  E.  Strahorn,  of  Spokane, 
Wash. 

Hattie  Elizabeth,  b.  Mar.  24,  1858;  m.  William  H.  Lacy,  May  14, 
1888.  Mrs.  Hattie  E.  Lacy  graduated  from  the  Woman's  Med- 
ical College,  Chicago,  111.,  1885. 

Julia  Augusta,  second  child  of  Enoch  and  Elizabeth  (Pro- 
vost) Babcock,  was  b.  Sept.  27,  1829,  in  Livonia,  N.  Y.  She 
m.  (i)  J.  P.  Waldo,  Jan.,  1849.  They  had  one  child,  Fred- 
erick D.,  b.  Riley,  111.,  Oct,  19,  1864,  She  m,  (2)  Allen  Sis- 
son,  of  Riley,  111.,  Feb.,  1864. 

Children : 

Helen  Elizabeth,  b.  Mar.  17.  1866:    m.  Hon.  Edward  D.  Shurtleff. 
Julia  Anna,  b.  May  19,  1868;    m.  Richard  Henry  Woleben,  June  26, 

1889. 
William  Allen,  b.  Feb.  3,  1871,  Riley,  111. ;    d.  Mar.  16,  1882, 
Carrie  Louise,  b.  Dec.  9,  1877,  Riley,  111. 

John  Barton  Babcock,  third  child  and  eldest  son  of  Enoch 
and  Elizabeth  (Provost)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Livonia,  N.  Y., 
May  14,  183 1.  He  went  West  in  1846,  and  m.  Marcia 
De  Wolf,  Apr.  14,  1853.  Mr.  Babcock  served  in  the  War  of 
the  Rebellion  from  1862  to  1864.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  he 
began  publishing  The  Marengo  Republican,  in  Marengo,  111., 


no  Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants. 

and  is  to-day  its  editor.     He  has  been  a  member  of  the  Metho- 
dist Episcoi)al  Church  for  forty-five  years,  and  for  thirty  years 
has  been  choirmaster  and  superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school. 
Cliildren,  b.  in  Marengo,  III: 

Jennie  Blanche,  h.  1854;  111.  Henry  E.  Patrick.  They  have  two 
children:  Clarence,  li.  1S74,  m.  Helen  Paddock;  John  Barton,  h. 
1878. 

Kate  Elizaheth,  b.   1857;    m.   Charles  M.  Crego.     She  d.   1890. 

Emily  Louise,  h.   1862;    ni.  John  Alexander. 

Harlan  Enoch,  b.   1867 ;    m.  Maud  Pfieffer,  of  South  Bend,  Ind. 

Francis  Dwight  Earl,  h.  1873;    ni.  Grace  Hall,  of  Kalamazoo,  Mich. 

Isaiah  Babcock,  fourth  child  of  Enoch  and  Elizabeth  (Pro- 
vost) Bahcock,  was  b.  in  Livonia,  Livingston  County,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  16,  1836.  He  ni.  Lavinia  De  Wolf  Apr.  4,  i860.  Mr. 
Babcock  is  a  prominent  business  man  in  Marengo,  111.,  and  is 
also  a  strict  member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  in  his 
town. 

Children,  b.  in  Riley,  111. : 

William  Scott,  b.  Feb.  20,   1861 ;    m.  Lila  M.   Swan,   Sept.   i,  1883. 

They  have  one  child,  Fannie  Mae;    m.  W.  Harold  Fries,  Dec.  6, 

1900;     both   of  Omaha,    Neb. 
Fannie  Louise,  b.  ;    m.   Horace  Elmer  Caley,   Sept.   21,    1890. 

Their  children:     Victor   Isaiah,   b.   Jan.   7,    1893;     Lila   Bethe,   b. 

Sept.  4,  1894.     Mr.  Caley  d.  June  15,  1897. 

William  Henry  Babcock,  fifth  child  of  Enoch  and  Elizabeth 
(Provost)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Livonia,  Livingston  County,  N. 
Y.,  Nov.  2,  1838.  He  m.  Mrs.  Luela  De  Wolf  Terry,  of 
Boonesboro,  la.,  Sept.  27,  1865.  Mr.  Babcock  served  for 
three  years  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  and  d.  of  disease  con- 
tracted in  the  army,  June  18,  1895,  in  Chappell,  Neb.  He  was 
a  physician,  and  also  a  Methodist  minister.  As  a  physician  and 
surgeon,  he  occupied  a  high  place  in  the  profession.  As  a 
clergyman,  I  am  informed,  he  was  natural,  forcible,  and  highly 
esteemed  by  all  who  knew  him. 

Children : 

Elizabeth  G.,  b.  Boonesboro.  la.,  Sept.  15,  1866;  m.  George  W. 
Gordon,  Chappell,  Neb.,  July  4,  1888.  They  had  one  child,  Mil- 
ton W.,  b.  May  16,   1890,  Grant.  Neb. 

Harvey  Isaiah,  b.  Sept.  19,  1870,  Bridgeport,  la. ;  m.  Helen  John- 
son, May  10.  1892,  Chappell,  Neb.  They  had  one  child.  Beryl 
Isaiah,  b.  May  12,   1897,  Chappell,  Neb. 

Leffie  A.,  b.  Dec.  13,  1875,  Bridgeport,  la. ;    d.  Mar.  28,  1879. 

Barton  B.,  b.  Dec.  13.  1877,  Bridgeport,  la.;    d.  Apr.  i,  1879. 

Marcia  L.,  b.  Mar.  28,  i88r,  Bradshaw,  Neb.;    d.  Aug.  7,  1881. 

Martin  A.,  b.  Mar.  28,  1881,  Bradshaw,  Neb.;    d.  Aug.  9,  1881. 

Helen  Elizabeth  Babcock,  sixth  child  of  Enoch  and  Eliza- 
beth   (Provost)    Babcock,    was    b.    in    Livonia,    Livingston 


<— 1 

^ 

> 

^* 

:2 

u 

> 

-t 
o 

td 

> 

> 

a 

^ 

> 

a 

% 

td 

< 
< 

9 

2 

K 

>• 

z 

?^ 

Q 

§ 

33 
> 

< 

> 

2 
^ 

Q 

w 

z 

<T; 

O 

> 

c 

^ 

O 

a 

7! 

<^ 

y 

^* 

■< 

-! 

> 

r-' 

>_ 

rt 

Z 

T> 

P5 

'X 

3 

> 

x' 

1— 1 

Z 

r 
> 

„    a 


<: 


o 
< 


h3  f^ 

CfQ    ii. 


O    o 


td 


o 
o 
o 

1r\ 


^5 


•    < 

r  E 


o 


Isaiah  Bahcock,  Sr.,  and  His  Descendants.  1 1 1 

County,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  22,  1840.  She  ni.  Lewis  ]\I.  Gray,  of 
Rockford,  111.,  Nov.  i,  1865.  She  d.  in  Marengo,  111.,  Mar. 
18,  1872.     . 

Sydney  S.  Babcock,  seventh  child  of  Enoch  and.  Elizabeth 
(Provost)  Babcock,  was  b.  in  Livonia,  Livingston  County, 
N.  Y.,  Mar.  23,  1842.  ]\Ir.  Babcock  was  in  the  War  of  the 
Rebellion,  served  about  four  months  as  a  soldier  in  Camp  D, 
15th  Regiment,  Illinois,  and  d.  in  Keokuk,  la.,  Aug.  19,  1861. 

Francis  Dwight  Babcock,  last  born  of  Enoch  and  Elizabeth 
(Provost)  Babcock,  was  b.  Mar.  26,  1845,  in  Livonia,  Liv- 
ingston County,  N.  Y.  He  m.  Persis  Delaney  Sears,  at  Rock- 
ford,  111.,  Nov.  I,  1865. 

Children : 

Sarah  Elizabeth,  b.   Nov.  30,   1869;    d.  May  28,   1893. 

Bertha  Bella,  b.  Oct.  29,  1871 ;    unm. 

Nellie  Louise,  b.  Jan.  24,  187s;  m.  Thomas  William  Purcell,  June 
16,  1896.  Their  children:  Ruth  Helen,  b.  Apr.  26,  1897;  Nellie 
Delaney,  b.  Jan.  15,  1898;  Frances  Bertha,  b.  May  i,  1900; 
Thomas  Babcock,  b.  Jan.  14,  1902. 

John  Vincent  Frederick,  b.  Nov.  24,  1876;    unm. 

Francis  Dwight,  Jr.,  b.  June  24,  1879;    m.  Edna  Grazella  Wilkinson. 

Persis  Augusta,  b.  Jan.  22,  1885. 


INDEX. 


Ahvard,  Charles  Francis 
Adams,  64. 

Dennis  R.,  64. 

Elizabeth,   64. 

Frances,   64. 

Henry  Stewart,  64. 

Leetta  (Eaton),  64. 

Mary,   64. 
Angel,    Burt   Crittenden, 
49. 

Charles  Babcock,  49. 

Eliza  Seaver,  49. 

Ellen  Burt,   49. 

Truman   Stickney,  49. 
Atkins,   Helen,  98. 

Jeremiah  E.,  98. 

Mary,  98. 

Warren  J..  98. 
Austin,  Apollos,  83. 

Clifford   E.,   84. 

Cora  B.,  84. 

Edgar  H.,  83. 

Edna  N.,  83. 

Ellen  M.,  83. 

Franklin  P.,  83. 

Harry  A.,  84. 

Jessie   W.,   84. 

Lucia  E.,  83. 

Marjorie   L..  84. 

Mary   J.    (Wooledge), 

83. 

Orville,  F.,  84. 

Roscoe  B.,  84. 

Ursula  S..  83. 
Avery.   David  A.,  49. 

Jennie  Louisa,   49. 
Ayres,   Mary  B.,   32. 
Babcock,     A.     Emerson, 
26. 

A.  Emerson,  Jr.,  26. 

A.  LeRoy,  19. 

Abel,  18,  21. 

Abel   Simmons,  37. 

Abigail     H.      (Guern- 
sey),   59- 

Ada  Grace,  83. 

Adaline  Amelia,  49. 

Adelbert  A.,  86. 


Babcock,       Adelbert 

Archer,  81,  83. 
Adeline    (Bromley), 

68. 
Adilia  White,  loi. 
Adolph  Borie,  88. 
Alanson,  56. 
Albert     Evander,      18, 

19. 
Albert  Henry,   50. 
Alexander,  17. 
Alexander  H.,  96,  99. 
Alfred  W.,  50. 
Alice,  40,  44,  46. 
Alice  Louise,  20. 
Allen  Harvi^ood,  65. 
Allie    M.     (La    Due), 

43- 
Amanda,  81,  87,  103. 
Amanda    (Pease),  87. 
Amanda  L.,  93. 
Amelia  L.,  93. 
Almira,  81,  103,  105. 
Almira  (Landon).  61. 
Almira   (Lee),  108. 
Almira    (Manning), 

106. 
Almira    (Osborn),   98. 
Almus  Milo,   18.   19. 
Ann  (Westcott),  99. 
Ann  Eliza  (Hanford), 

19. 
Anna,    40,    53,    96,    97, 

lOI. 

Anna  L.,  105,  108. 

Anna  M.,  58. 

Annie,  20. 

Annie     E.      (Collins), 
86. 

Annie     Eliza     (Camp- 
bell), 88. 

Annie  L.,  20. 

Artemas.  83,  96,  98. 

Arthur  L..  20,  69. 

Augusta,  20. 

Barbara   Gilberta,   31. 

Barton  B.,  31,  32,  no. 

Belle,  59. 

113 


Babcock,  Belle  W.  (Ran- 
kin), 59. 
Bertha  Bella,  in. 
Bethia  Hurd,  62,  68. 
Betsey,  72,  103,  105. 
Betsey    (Moore),   loi. 
Betsey  (Parker),  102. 
Beulah  A.,  65. 
Blanche    (Moore),  85. 
Blanche    (Sias),   26. 
Blanche    Whitney,    85, 

86. 
Bradley  Chauncey,  85, 

86. 
Bradley    Whitney,    85, 

86. 
Brainard,  87. 
Burton,  58. 
Burton,  2d,  57. 
Burton  Hickox,  57. 
Campbell  Elias,  88,  92. 
Carmi  W.,  87. 
Caroline,  48,  67,  107. 
Caroline    (Whaley), 

67. 
Caroline  M.,  82. 
Carroll  E.,  50. 
Catherine     ( Mc- 

Cready),  100. 
Cecil  Taylor,  67. 
Celia    (Haws),   3i- 
Celia   (Taylor),  67. 
Charles,  44,  48. 
Charles    Franklin,    93, 

94. 
Charles  G.  F.,  65. 
Charles  H..  34,  35- 
Charlotte  Almira,   105, 

108. 
Chauncey  S.,  93. 
Clara    (Olmstead),  87. 
Clarence,  loi. 
Clarissa     Harlow 

(Gray),    49. 
Cordelia   P.,  87. 
Cyrus.  96,  102. 
Daniel.  96,  loi,  102. 
David  v.,  81. 


114 

Babcock,  Deborah,  47. 
Delia  E.,  82. 
Delight  P.,  93- 
Diadema,  53. 
Dolly,  62-66. 
Dora  Miekle,  36. 
Dwight,  20,  21. 
Dwight  Alford,  82,  83. 
Edith  (Holden),  35. 
Edward,  98. 
Edward    Garland,    86. 
Edward   Henry,   20. 
Edward    Seymour,    68. 
Edwin   Carter,   42. 
Edwin  H.,  49. 
Eleanor,  98. 
Eleanore,   26. 
Eleanore     Augusta 

(Emerson),   25. 
Eleanore  Elniira,  82, 83. 
Electa,  81,  96. 
Electa  A.,  93,  94. 
Electa  Annie,  98. 
Elenor  Elvira,  81,  82. 
Elias,  2,  45,  79,  80,  81. 
Elias,  Jr.,  80,  87. 
Elias  J.,   93- 
Elias   S..   93. 
Elisha,    2,    44,    45,    46, 

48,  n- 
Elisha  P.,  44,  46,  47. 
Eliza,  44,  48,  49. 
Eliza  Ann,  49. 
•  Eliza  L.,  40. 
Eliza  Maria,  100. 
Elizabeth,  2,  12,  15,  25, 

32,  33,  43,  53,  54,  55, 

98. 
Elizabeth       (Chester), 

103. 
Elizabeth     (Douglas), 

Elizabeth    (Peirce), 

44,  46. 
Elizabeth    (Plumb),   i, 

2,   13,   14,  75,  76,  95- 
Elizabeth       (Provost), 

107. 
Elizabeth    (Wilbur), 

21,    22. 
Elizabeth     (Winegar), 

Elizabeth    Caroline, 

105,   109. 
Elizabeth  G.,  no. 
Elizabeth  Grant,  64. 
Elizabeth  Miller,  62, 69. 
Ellen  Morrow,  65. 
Ellen  W.    (Williams), 

58. 


Index. 

Babcock,  E  1  m  i  r  a 
(Wheeler),   81. 

Elon   (Dolphin),  68. 

Emily   (Yeomans),  68. 

Emily  C.   (Noble),   19. 

Emily  L.,    106. 

Emily  Louise,  no. 

Emily  Margaret,  67. 

Emily  Wight,  64. 

Emma,  69. 

Emma    (Wright),    50. 

Enoch,  2,  43,  103,   107. 

Erastus,   96,   102. 

Estelle    Mariah,   94. 

Ethel  May,  83. 

Etta    (Meyers),   59. 

Etta  Ida,  94. 

Eunice,  44. 

Eunice  (Rockwell), 
72,  76. 

Eva  S.    (Belden),   51. 

Eveline  Noble,  29. 

Evelyn  S.  Curtis,  57. 

Pamela,    102. 

Fannie  A.,   106. 

Fannie  J.  S.,  59. 

Florence,    loi. 

Florence  Mary,  29. 

Frances,   62,   65. 

Frances  Amelia,  105, 
108. 

Frances   Augusta,   57. 

Frances    E.     (Kimber- 

ly),  82. 

Frances   Elizabeth,    19, 

82. 
Frances  Ellen,  68. 
Frances  W.,  59. 
Francis    Dwight,     107, 

no.  III. 
Francis  Dwight,Jr.,i  1 1. 
Frank  C,  83. 
Frank  Early,  85,  86. 
Frank  W.,  loi. 
Frederick    Adams,    39, 

42. 
Frederick  D.,  32. 
Frederick  E.,   59. 
Frederick  N.,  28. 
Frederick  Whaley,   67. 
Freelove   (Briggs),  15, 

16,   17. 
George,    2,    17,    18,    yi, 

40,  51,  52,  53.  54,  55- 
George  Albert,  94. 
George   Edwin,   34. 
George  Haschel,  82. 
George  Henry,  49,  50. 
George    Green,    40. 
George  Mead,  69. 


Babcock,    George    Reed, 

62,  63,  64. 
George  S.,  23,  29. 
George  S.,  Jr.,  30. 
George  W.,  93. 
George  Wheeler,  82. 
George  Willis,  29. 
Giffie,  53,  55- 
Grace,    i. 
Grace    Laflin,    42. 
Harlan  Enoch,  no. 
Harmon  Seeley,  51. 
Harold  F.,  32. 
Harriet,   21. 
Harriet  A.,  20. 
Harriet    E.     (Critten- 
den), 83. 
Harriet  (Gibbs),  57. 
Harriet  Louisa,  31. 
Harriet  Newell,  Zl^  40- 
Harrison     Gray     Otis, 

100. 
Harry   Adams,   39,   41, 

42. 
Harry  Eggleston,   105. 
Harry    Hungerford, 

18,  20. 
Harry  J.,  31. 
Harvey  Isaiah,  no. 
Harvey     W.,     96,     99, 

100. 
Harvie   O.,    108. 
Haschel  Smith,  81,  82. 
Hattie  A.,  68. 
Hattie  Menira,  82. 
Havilah,  81,  82,  86. 
Helen,  60. 
Helen  E.,  34,  82,   107, 

no. 
Helen  Eliza,  40,  42. 
Heman  Bradley,  64. 
Henry,  19,  102. 
Henry  H.,  23,  33. 
Henry  Hoag,  28. 
Henry  J.,  28. 
Henry  Kimberly,  82. 
Herbert,  58. 
Herman,  62,  68. 
Herman     Briggs,      ZT, 

39- 
Herminas  Artemas,  81, 

82. 
Hetta   (Maine),  108. 
Hiram,  103,  105. 
Hiram  Steele,  Z7,  39- 
Homer,  69. 
Homer  Curtice,  85. 
Horace  Green,  40,  43. 
Horace  Havens,  37,  40. 
Horace  J.,  34,  36. 


Babcock,  Horatio  Gates, 

87. 
Horatio  Nelson,  49. 

Huldah,  80. 

Huldah  (Kinnie),  79, 
96. 

Huldali  (Whitney), 
81. 

Ida  Noble  (Yates),  28. 

Ina  L.,  83. 

Inez  D.,  99. 

Isaac,   18,  21,  22,  38. 

Isaac,  Jr.,  23,  31. 

Isaac  Eugene,  94. 

Isaac  H.,  28. 

Isaac  Tesner,  67. 

Isaac  Watts,  105.  108. 

Isabelle  (AlacDon- 
ald),  2>2. 

Isaiah,  i,  4,  5,  7,  8,  9, 
II,  12,  13,  14,  21,  45, 
S3-  61,  72,,  74,  95, 
107,     no. 

Isaiah,   Jr.,    2,    15,    16. 

James,   68. 

James  F.,  3. 

James  Francis,   50. 

James  Harvey,  loi. 

James  M.,  23,  24,  30. 

James  Madison,  93. 

James  IMagee,  49,  50. 

James  Oliver,  85,  86. 

Jane,  102. 

Jane  (Rowe),  82. 

Jane  Catherine  (Al- 
len),  50. 

Jane  Helen,  99. 

Janette,  31. 

Jason,  21. 

Jean  William,  6j. 

Jeanie   (Carter),  42. 

Jennie   Blanche,    no. 

Jennie  Mary,  68. 

Jeptha  W..  23,  27. 

Jessie  F.,  68. 

Johannah    (Lenoe), 

lOI. 

John,  2,  29,  40,  44,  49, 

72,  72,,  74,  75,  76,  98. 
John  Barton,   107,   109, 

no. 
John  D.,  81. 
John  H.,  loi. 
John  Harvey,   100. 
John  Jefferson.  49. 
John  Marvin.  85. 
John  Pease.  87,  88. 
John  Porter,  37,  40. 
John  Richardson,   loi. 
John  V.   F.,   III. 


Index. 

Babcock,   John    William, 

50. 
Jonas,    2,    12,    7i,    loa, 

103,  104,  105. 
Joseph  Merrill,  62,  68. 
Josephena,  20. 
Joshua,  3,  4. 
Julia,  20,  62,  67,  100. 
Julia   (Reed),  61. 
Julia  .'\nn  Francis,  99. 
Julia  Augusta,  107. 
Julia      E.      (Buckniin- 

ster),    51. 
Julia  F.,  20. 
Julia  Marion,  68. 
Julius,  62,  65. 
Julius  Lackey,  65. 
Kate  Elizabeth,  no. 
L.  Louisa,  49. 
Laura,  42,  56,  57. 
Lavinia   (Warner),  93. 
Lecta  M.,  21. 
Lee  (Judd),  31. 
Leffie  A.,  no. 
Leicester,  56,  59. 
Leicester,  Jr.,  59. 
Lemuel,  53,  56. 
Leroy  A.,  50. 
Lester,  103,  106. 
Levi,  17,  18,  21. 
Lillian  (Emerson),  2,^. 
Linas    Briggs,    18,    19 

20. 
Linda    (Bronson),    34 
Lois  Ann   (More),  19 

20. 
Lois  E.  (Townsend)  ,40 
Lois  P.,  106. 
Loraine  H..  82. 
Lorenso,  87. 
Lorenzo,   48. 
Louisa,  107,  109. 
Louisa     Adelaide,     93, 

94- 
Louisa  C.  19. 
Louisa    M.    (T  o  m  p- 

kins),  83. 
Louise,  29,  30. 
Louise  M.,  34. 
Lowendia,    lOi. 
Lucia    (Gregory),    100. 
Lucius,  56.  58. 
Lucius  J.,  82. 
Lucretia,  80,  87. 
Lucy  A.,  58,  59,  81. 
Lucv    Ann    (Sawyer), 

56. 
Lucy  H.,  59,  60. 
Lucy  Olivia,  62,  69. 
Lucy  T.,  65. 


115 

Babcock,  Ludlow,  30. 

Luella  De  Wolf  (Ter- 
ry), no. 

Lusena,  81. 

Luther,  56,  57. 

Lydia  E.  (Jackson), 
24. 

Lyman,  56. 

Lyman  A.,  93. 

Lyman  Baldwin,  51. 

Lyman  H.,   18. 

Lyman  K.,  81,  92. 

Mabel  C,  50. 

Mabel  Maud,  94. 

Marcia  (Dc  Wol'f), 
109. 

Marcia  L.,  no. 

Marcus  (Lansing),  62, 
69. 

Marcus  S.,   19.  20. 

Margaret      (Morrow), 

65. 

Margaret  A.  (Hall), 
40. 

Marguerite  A.  (Nich- 
ols), 32. 

Maria  (Markham),  33- 

Maria  (Robinson),  65. 

Maria  Adams,  39. 

]\rarietta    (Newton), 

93- 
Marion  Ester.  68. 
•Martha,  15,  18. 
Martha  (Graves),  loi. 
Martha    A.     (Taylor), 

65- 
Martlia  Louise,  99. 
Martha     M.      (West), 

82. 
Martin  A.,  no. 
]\Iarvin  Kinney,  81, 

82. 
]\Iary,    15,    18,    23,    37, 

41,  98,  loi,  106. 
Mary  (Gates),  60. 
Mary  (Hoag),  27. 
Mary  (Plummer),  108. 
Mary    (Queal).   98. 
Mary  (Robinson),  loi. 
^lary  A.   (Powell),  94- 
Mary    Ann    (Russell), 

48. 
Mary  Augusta,  42,  50. 
Mary    Augusta 

(Thompson),    20. 
Mary   Barker   (Fol- 

ger).   65. 
Mary    Bradley    Pot- 
ter), 62,  64. 
Mary  C,  31. 


ii6 


Index. 


Babcock,  Mary  Catherine 
(Chatham),  86. 

Mary     Christina 
(Smith),  20. 

Mary  E.,  28,  31. 

Mary  E.  (Gish),  68. 

Mary  Eliza,  30,    lOi. 

Mary  Elizabeth  (Cord- 
well),  85. 

Mary  Emily,  19. 

Mary  H.,  86. 

Mary  Ina,  86. 

Mary  Isabelle,  87. 
-  Mary  Jane,  28,  65,  100. 

Mary  Katherine,  51. 

Mary  Orpha,  85. 

Mary  S.,  81,  83. 

Mary  S.   (Smith),  41. 

Mary  W.,  23,  36. 

Matilda   (May),  58. 

Mattie  Lesta,  82. 

Melinda,  56,  58. 

Melinda  (Wright),  81. 

Melissa  A.,  93,  94. 

Minnie  May,  94. 

Mortimer  C,  31. 

Myron  Northiop,  87. 

Nathaniel,  2. 

Nathaniel  R.,  82. 

Nellie   Louise,    iii. 

Nettie  E.,  69. 

O.  W.,  81. 

Olive,  103,  106,  107. 

Olive   (Simmons),  37. 

Olive       (Wetmore), 
105. 

Olivia,    16,   37,   40,   41, 

53,   70. 
Orlonzo,  48. 
Orpha  Delight,  93. 
Orpha  G.,  81,  82,  84. 
Orril,  102. 
Orville    Elias,    87,    88, 

89,  90,  91,  92. 
Orville  Elias,  Jr.,  88. 
Oscar  Newton,  93. 
Pamela    (Bruce),  98. 
Pamelia,  103,  106. 
Peabody,  80,  81. 
Persis    Augusta,    iii. 
Phannelia.  80. 
Phebe,  2,  11,  77,  78. 
Phebe  Rockwell,  72. 
Phebe,  W.,  23,  26,  27, 

29. 
Philo,   106. 
Pitt  May,  58. 
Polly,  48,  72,  80. 
Priscilla     J.      (West), 

82. 


Babcock,  R.  Vernon,  32. 
Ralph,  69. 
Ralph  Burger,  26. 
Raymond  Haskel,  83. 
Rebecca  B.,  86. 
Reuben,  72. 
Reuben  J\ladison,  49. 
Richard,  68. 
Richardson,  96,   loi. 
Robert  La  Due,  43. 
Robert  Queal,  98. 
Robert  W.,  86. 
Roberta  Vaughn,  60. 
Royal  E.,  31,  32. 
Royal  K.,  31. 
Roswell,  72. 
Roy  Francis,  82,  83. 
Ruth  Newhall,  29. 
Sabra  H.,  18. 
Sabra  Maretta,   19. 
Sabrina,  80. 
Sally   (Harwood),  64. 
Samantha,   103. 
Samuel,   2,    12,    13,    14, 

45,  95.  96,  97-       -  • 
Samuel  B.,  loi. 
Samuel  Beldin,  51. 
Samuel  Henry,  62,  68. 
Sarah,  18,  21,  23,  53. 
Sarah  Abby,  51,  53- 
Sarah  Ann,  81,  84. 
Sarah     Elizabeth,     28, 

29.  III. 
Sarah  Hubbell,  40. 
Sarah  Jane,   loi. 
Sarah    L.     (Newhall), 

28. 
Sarah   Mead,  69. 
Saraine,  81. 
Seymour,  62,  65. 
Sbubael,   17.   18,  21. 
Sidney  Tuttle,  67. 
Silas  Reed,  62,  68. 
Sophia   (Beadle),   100. 
Stephen,  23. 
Stephen  Henry,  30. 
Stephen  Henry,  Jr.,  31. 
Stewart  Smith,  42. 
Susan,  21. 
Susanna  (Sheldon), 

51-  52. 
Susannah,  53,  60. 
Susie  F.,  20. 
Sydney  S.,  107,  iii. 
Sylvester,  44. 
Sylvia  Ann,  49. 
Sylvinia,   96,    loi. 
Sylvinia  (Kinnie),  96. 
Thaddeus  Grey,  49. 
Theda,  83. 


Babcock,    Theodore    H., 
86. 
Thomas  Folger,  65. 
Triphesa,  72. 
Virginia    (Walker), 

85. 
Warner,   Daniel,  93. 
Wayne,  83. 
Wheeler,  81,  82. 
Willa   M.,  67. 
Willard  Willis,  51. 
William,  53,  61,  62,  69, 

81,  93- 
William  Allen,  94. 
William  Carmi,  87,  88. 
William  H.,  102. 
William  Hasbrouck,20. 
William     Henry,     105, 

107,   108,  no. 
William   Herman,   39. 
William  J.,  25,  50. 
William  James,  26. 
William  L.,  59,  60. 
William  R.,  loi. 
William    Sheldon,    62, 

William  Sidney,  49. 

Zilpha,  98. 
Bacon,  Abner,  Jr.,  78. 

Abner  Bartlett,  78. 

Catherine,  78. 

De  Witt  C,  78. 

Dr.  Calvin,  55. 

Frances  C,  78. 

George  Plumb,  78. 

John  Dean,  78. 

Martha  Maryette,  78. 

Miranda,  78. 

Sarah  Jane,  78. 
Balliett,  A.  Frank,  29. 

Fargo,  29. 

Frank  Howard,  29. 

Louis  J.,  29. 
Bates,    Eliza   A.    (Good- 
now),  66. 

Frances  B.,  66. 

Frances  E.,  66. 

George  P.,  66. 

Harriet  Goodnow,  66. 

Harry  Philo,  66. 

Philo,  65,  66. 

Philo  T.,  66. 

William  S.,  66. 
Bissell,    Abel   Babcock, 

Addison  Hayes,  42. 
Amos,  40,  42. 
Artemas,  41.  42. 
Cardera  Estelle,  42. 
Charles,  41. 


Bissell,    Clarence    Ham- 
lin,  42. 
"     David,  42. 

George     Norman,     40, 

42. 
Hannah    (Hayes),   42. 
Alary    Emma    (Lune), 

43- 

Nettie  Estelle   (Sage), 
42. 

Norman,  41. 

Norman  Artemas,  42. 

Sarah   (Hamlin),  42. 
Blackman,  Martha,  78. 

Samuel,  "JJ. 
Boardman,  Edward,  108. 

Levi,    108. 

William,   loS. 
Bradstrcet,     Edward 
Gould,  36. 

Carolyn    (Briggs),    36. 

Charles  Sumner,  36. 

Florence  Ruth,  2>1- 

George  Henry,  36,  Z"]. 

J.  Howard,  36. 

Mary  Louisa,  36. 

N.  Cleveland,  36. 

Roy  C,  37. 
Brownell,     Frank     Ray- 
mond, 24. 

Mildred  Helen,  24. 
Carpenter,  Charles 
Bronson,  34. 

Elisha  M.,  34. 

Hallett  Manning,  34. 

Helen  G.,  34. 

Henry  Babcock,  34. 

Herbert  Lawrence,  34. 
Chase,  Amanda,  98. 

Catherine,  98. 

Dean,  97. 

Eliza,  97. 

Eveline,  98. 

Horace,  98. 

Lavinia,  97. 

Martha,  98. 

Oscar,  97. 

Persis,   97. 

Samantha,  98. 

William,  98. 
Chick.  Frances,  108. 

John,  108. 

Olive  H.,  108. 
Clark.  Edward  O.,  69. 

Edward  Morris,  69. 

George  Babcock,  69. 

Harriet  M.,  68. 

Julia  Elizabeth,  69. 

Lucy  Olivia,  69. 

Mary,  69. 


Index. 

Clark,    William    Joshua, 

69. 

Clarke,  Anna  T.,  32. 
Colman,    George   Tilden, 

71- 

Harry  J.,  71. 

Mabel  Tilden,  71. 
Colpetzer,  F.,  60. 
Conger,  Carrie  B.,  109. 

Charles  L.,  109. 

Erotas  R.,   109. 

Nettie  May,   109. 
Cornell,  Daniel  H.,  27. 

William,  27. 
Crandall,  Bessie,  31. 

Edwin  F.,  31. 

Roy,  31. 
Crosier,  Albert  Henry,50. 

Bessie  Allen,  50. 

Charles  A.,  50. 

Ernest  Leroy,  50. 

Florence  May,  50. 

Isabel.  50. 

Royal  Francis.  50. 

Walter  Lawrence,  50. 
Curtice,  Charles  C,  84. 

Herbert  A.,  84. 

Hila  Aleen,  84. 

Homer,  84. 

Jennie  Read,  84. 

Nellie,  84. 

Norman  B.,  84. 
De  Bois,  Mrs.,  60. 
De  Puy,   Charles  T.,   30. 

Charles  T.,  Jr.,  30. 

Clarence,  33. 

Frederick  C.,  33. 

Louise,  30. 
Dickson,  Alanson,  57. 

Andrew,  56. 

Charlotte  A.,  57. 

Lucy  Ann,  57. 

Mary  Jane,  57. 

Samuel  Robert.  57. 
Draper,   James   Richard- 
son,  lOI. 

J  o  s  i  a  h    Harrington, 

lOI. 

Maria  Elizabeth,  loi. 
Mary  Jane,  loi. 
Melville  Gregory.  loi. 
Field,  Capt.  George  P., 70. 
Caroline    Augusta,    70, 

71. 
Charlotte  Ann.   70. 
Charlotte  Olivia,  70. 
Elizabeth  Vose,  72. 
Pliny  Ashley,  70. 
Fisher,  Homer  D.,  30. 
Isabel,  30. 


117 

Fisher,  Louise,  30. 
Follett,  Benj.,  55,  56. 

Capt.   Frederick,   55. 

Foster    Morse,    55. 

Frederick,  55. 

George,  55. 

John,  55. 

Nancy,  56. 

Nancy  Keith,  56. 

Nathan,  55,  56. 

Orrin,   55. 

Susan  Ann,  55. 

William,   56. 
Fox,  Frank,  65. 
Gates,  Capt.  Daniel,  60. 

Daniel,  60. 

George  B.,  60. 

Julia,   60. 

Olivia,   60. 

Spencer,  60. 
Gillett,   Charles,   70. 

Francis  Harter,   70. 

Howard  T.,  70. 
Gray,  Lewis  i\L,   no. 
Grayson,  William,  60. 
Green,  Carrie  Odell,  109. 

Hattie    Elizabeth,    109. 

J.  W.,   M.D.,   109. 

Julia  Augusta,    109. 
Harter,    Alice    Ham- 
mond,  70. 

Benjamin    Seymour, 
70. 

Carrie  Brown,  69. 

Eugene  Boice,  70. 

Frances  Bates,  69. 

Frank  Harvey.  69,   70. 

Frederick  Michael,  69, 
70. 

Harvey.  69. 

Helen  M.   (Boice),  70. 

Helen  Alaud,  70. 

Ida   (Udell),  70. 

Jessie  Gertrude,  70. 

Julia  Elizabeth,  69,  70. 

Lucy  Olivia,  70. 

William    Babcock,    69, 
70. 
Hedge,  Agnes,  71. 

Caroline  Elizabeth.  71. 

Charles  Lyman.  71. 

Charlotte    Olivia,   71. 

George,  71. 

George  Field,  71. 

Julia     A.     (Wheeler), 

71- 
Kate     Stella     (Mills), 

71- 
Hibbard.  Julia  W.  (Bab- 
cock), 25,  26. 


ii8 


Index. 


Holden,  George  Hin- 

man,  57. 

George  Turner,  57. 

Harriet     Granger,     57, 
58. 

Mary  Anna,  57,  58. 

William  Curtis,  57. 
Hulett,  Irene  W.,  24. 
Jennings,   Isaac,   70. 
Kelsey,  Agues  Mira,  79. 

Almira  M.   (Ida),  77. 

Ambrose,  78. 

Ambrose    Parsons,    78. 

Charles,  78,  79. 

Charles  H.,  79. 

Lillian  May.  79. 
Kelso,  John,  Jr.,  105. 

John  Harvey,  106. 

Julia  Olive,   106. 
Learn,  Ella,  56. 

James  E.,  56. 

James    Everitt,    56. 
Le  Munyon,   John,    56. 
Manning,  Joseph  H.,  99. 

Luta  Elesta,  99. 

Olive  D.,  99. 

Rena  Ann,  99. 

Theron  Filman,  99. 

Willis   Hamilton,  99. 
Markham,    William    H., 

57- 
Marston,  Eda  Noble,  31. 

Helen  Janetta,   31. 

Henry,   M.D.,  31. 

James  Cassidy,  31. 

Mary   Elizabeth,   31. 

William  H.,  31- 
]\Ierickel,   Arthur  J.,   94. 

Frankie,   94. 

Fred  C,  94. 

George  A.,  94. 

Hattie  I.,  94. 

Ida  May,  94. 

Jennie  E.,  94. 

Jessie  O.,  94. 

John  W.,  94. 

Mabel  A.,  94. 

Olive  A.,  94. 

Tuella  E.,  94. 

Watson  D.,  94. 

Willis   S.,  94. 
Metcalf,    Augustus 
Torry,  61. 

Elizabeth,   6r. 

Fannie,  61. 

Tabez  Henry,  61. 

Jabez   Holden,   61. 

Mary  Susan,  61. 
Miller,    Abigail    Slosson, 
55. 


Miller,  Benjamin  Wells, 

55- 

Charles    B.,    55. 

Clarissa,  55. 

David,  55. 

Electa  Potter,  55. 

Frederick,  54,  55. 

Frederick  S.,  55. 

Myron  H.,  55. 

Sally,    55. 

Susan,  5S. 

William  F.,   SS. 
Mitchell,  John  R.,  M.D.. 
70. 

William,   56. 
More,    Robert,   20. 
Olin,    Harriet   Elizabeth, 
107. 

Mary  Eliza.    107. 

William     Henry,     106, 
107. 
O  V  e  r  h  i  s  e  r,    Elizabeth 
Miller,   66. 

George  C,  Rev.,  66. 

George  Eugene,  66. 

James   Harvey,   66. 
Parkinson.   Helen,   30. 

James  A.,  30. 

James  F..  30,  91. 
Perry,   Albert,    105. 

Austin.    105. 

Falvel  W.,   105. 

Harriet  E.,   105. 

Katherine   A.,   105. 

Mary  E..   105.   108. 

Nathan,  105. 

Olney   B.,    105. 

Walter   L.,    105. 
Phillips,   Amelia.    107. 

Edward  C.   107. 

Elizabeth  Chester.  107, 
108. 

John,    107,   108. 

Judith    Campbell,    107. 

Julia  Ella.   107. 

Mary   Ellen,    108. 

Owen.    107. 

W.  Irving,   107. 
Plumb,  Anna.  i. 

Prudence,  i. 

Samuel,  i. 
Post,    Helen    Augusta, 
2^,  24. 

Irene  W.,   23,  24. 

Marcia  W.,  23. 

Nettie  W.,  23,  24. 

Sarah   Elizabeth.   23. 
Potter.   Elizabeth  Miller, 

55- 
Frederick  Miller,  55. 


Potter,  Heman  Bradley, 

55- 

Mary  Bradley,    55. 

Mary  Eliza,  55. 

Powell,  Hazel     Estelle, 

24. 

Heber  Theodore,  24. 

Helen  Irene,  24. 

Miriam  Gertrude,  24. 

Olive  Marguerite,  24. 

Paul    Reginald,   24. 
Quinn,   Belle,  30. 

Elizabeth,   30. 

Ella,   30. 

Francis,    30. 

Gussie    (Grandin),   30. 

Lillian.  30. 

William,    30. 
Randall,  William  A.,  36. 
Read,  Francis  Eld.,   106. 
Reed.     Emily     Amanda, 

106. 
Rhodes.    C.    L.,   87. 
Rice,  Harriet,   105. 

Olney,   105. 
Richard,    Anna    Huldah, 

84. 

C.  v.,  84. 

Clayton,   A.,   85. 

Don  Carlos,  85. 

Edna    (Bickford),  85. 

Floyd   Franklin,  85. 

Franklin  P.,  84.  85. 

Julius   Caesar.   84. 

Lottie  Mav.  85. 

Minnie    Winifred,    85. 

S  V  1  v  i  a    (  Stanhope) , 
84. 

Vaughn,   84. 
Sawyer,     George     Pliny, 
72. 

Ida  Olivia,  72. 

James   Dennison,   71. 

James   Field,   72. 

William    Babcock,    72. 
Sibley.  A.  B..  59. 

Burton  Babcock.  59. 
Skinner,    George,    107. 
Spencer,   Harold   Follett, 
56. 

Rav  Everitt,  56. 

Wright.  56. 
Steele,  Alliert.  41. 

Mary   (Babcock),  41. 
Stevens,    Julia    Frances, 

67. 
Reuben  W..  67. 
Sweeney,    Alfred,   86. 
Alfred  W.,  86. 
Bradley  Babcock,  86. 


Sweeney,     Mary     Eliza- 
beth, 86. 

Virginia  Evans,  86. 

William  Peet,  86. 

Wolyland    Whitney, 
86. 
Terry,  Augustus,  6o. 

Harry,  6o. 

Mary  Freeman,  6o. 

William,  6o. 
Tesner,  J.  O.,  67. 
Thayer,  "Cornelius,  TJ. 
Thomas,  Clark  W.,  57- 

Eugene  M.,  57. 

George,    108. 

Miles,  57- 

Nahum  E.,  57. 
Tibbitts,  Ada  M.,  67. 

Arthur  Henry,  66. 

George  C,  67. 
Tififany,  Anna,   109. 

Delien,    109. 

Henry,    109. 


Index. 

Tilden,    Caroline    Olivia, 

71. 

Charlotte   Sawyer,  71. 

George  T.  M.,  71. 

Hyda   Field,   71. 

Jarcd    Hyde,    71. 
Turney,   Huldah,  21. 

Ira,  21. 

Mary  Ann,  21. 
Van  Dusen,    Albert,    42. 

Auger   Elizabeth,  42. 

Laura.  42. 
Vose,    Elizabeth    Elliott, 

70. 
Ward,    Henshaw,    65. 
Wheeler,      Augustus 
Samuel,  58. 

Franklin    Sawyer,   58. 

John  Henry,  58. 

Lucy   Caroline,   58. 

Mary  Ann,  58. 

Rose  Anness,  58. 

Sarah  Amanda,  58. 


119 

Wing,     Adelia     Antoin- 
ette, 23. 
Benjamin,   32. 
David,  26,  32. 
Eliza     (Babcock),    23, 

Elizabeth   B.,   23. 
Elizabeth  Babcock,  32. 
Joseph,  32. 
Joseph  W.,  23. 
Marcia,   2.2,. 
Marcus,  23. 
Stephen,  32. 
Winifred  E.,  33. 
Wood,   Frances  Holden, 
58. 
Frank  Scott,  58. 
Helen,  60. 
Humphrey    Farmer, 

58. 
John   Henry,    58. 
Robert   H.,  60. 
Robert  H.,  Jr.,  60. 


^ 


3  9999 


I 


06774  067  4 


:Siiiiii 


