CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University  Library 
F  129U8  B14 


olin 


3   1924  028  826  556 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028826556 


Memorial  History 


'  OF 


UTICA,  N.  Y. 


From  its  Settlement  to  the  Present  Time 


Edited  by  M.  M.  Bagg,  M.D. 


SYRACDSE,  N.  Y. 

D.  Mason  &  Co.,  Publishers 
1892 


PRESS  OF 

D.  MASON  &  CO., 

SYRACUSE,  N.  Y. 


PREFACE. 


IN  submitting  this  book  to  the  reader  its  editor  may  truly  say  that  he 
is  not  insensible  of  its  defects :  Several  topics  pertinent  to  the  his- 
tory of  Utica  have  been  left  unnoticed.  His  unwillingness,  however, 
to  offer  a  volume  too  unwieldy  to  be  handled  has  constrained  him  to 
withhold  some  chapters  which  were  already  in  part  prepared.  Had  the 
necessity  for  greater  condensation  been  earlier  foreseen,  some  of  these 
topics  might  have  found  a  place  at  the  expense  of  curtailing  parts  that 
are  presented.  Further  delay  in  order  to  effect  such  condensation  is 
impossible,  being  forbidden  both  by  the  demands  of  the  subscribers 
and  the  interests  of  the  publishers.  It  remains  to  mention  in  a  word 
only  a  few  of  these  omitted  subjects,  and  to  waive  any  attempt  at 
enlargement.  The  State  Hospital  for  the  Insane  is  not  one  of  the 
charities  of  Utica,  yet  its  location  within  the  bounds  of  the  city  is  so 
eminently  a  characteristic  of  the  place,  and  its  many  relations  connect 
it  so  intimately  with  our  people,  that  to  fail  of  a  sketch  of  it  is  to  fail  of 
an  important  part  of  our  later  history.  The  cemeteries  of  the  city,  the 
many  beautiful  monuments  of  Forest  Hill  and  its  Conservatory,  so 
unique  a  feature  of  a  burial  place  for  the  dead,  are  a  source  of  pride  to 
our  inhabitants,  and  objects  to  which  strangers  are  commonly  con- 
ducted. The  admirable  water  supply  of  the  place,  the  police  and  fire 
departments,  the  former  and  the  later  interests  of  some  of  the  citizens 
in  the  perfection  and  expansion  of  telegraphic  and  telephonic  commu- 
nication, are  all  entitled  to  survey.     The  noble  structure  in  use  by  the 


12  PREFACE. 

Y.  M.  C.  A.,  the  good  it  has  accomplished,  the  past  doings  of  the 
Oneida  Historical  Society,  the  multiplied  orders  and  associations  for 
social,  benevolent,  or  useful  purpose,  these  with  the  preceding  must 
remain  undescribed. 

For  the  assiduous  labors  of  H.  P.  Smith,  of  Syracuse,  in  gathering 
materials  for  the  history  as  well  as  in  writing  some  of  its  parts,  the 
editor  is  deeply  indebted.  To  others  he  would  likewise  accord  his 
thanks  for  hints  and  additions. 

The  cost  of  the  numerous  steel  portraits  which  adorn  the  book  has 
been  borne  by  the  parties  depicted,  or  by  their  relatives.  In  one  case 
only  has  the  expense  been  defrayed  by  another.  Hon.  Addison  C. 
Miller,  who  declined  to  admit  a  likeness  of  himself,  has  introduced  that 
of  the  late  S.  D.  Childs. 

In  behalf  of  the  Publishers, 

Dr.  M.  M,  Bagg,  Editor. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OLD   FORT   SCHUYLER. 

Its  Location  —  A  large  grant  known  as  Cosby's  Manor —  The  tract  surveyed  and 
mapped — Settlers — Peter  Smith,  father  of  Gerrit  Smith  —  John  Post  —  The 
first  bridge  across  the  Mohawk  —  Maj.  James  S.  Kip  —  More  early  Settlers  — 
Newcomers  in  1796  —  Dr.  Alexander  Coventry  —  Col.  Benjamin  Walker  — 
Utica  incorporated  as  a  Village 17-49 


CHAPTER  n. 

THE  FIRST  VILLAGE   CHARTER. 

Counties  Erected  —  Newcomers  of  1798  — Notes  from  Dwight's  Travels  —  The 
Holland  Land  Company  —  The  Phelps  and  GS^orham  Purchase  —  The  first  Hotel 
—  Its  Proprietors  —  Religious  interests  and  an  early  Preacher  —  The  Village 
tax  list  for  1800  —  Notes  of  another  Traveler  —  Highway  Improvements  — 
Business  Development  —  The  year  1801  —  Recollections  of  the  Welsh  Popu- 
lation —  General  characteristics  at  this  early  Period  —  Settlers  of  1801-04  — 
Petition  for  a  new  Charter  —  A  Map  of  the  Village  in  1806  —  General  Feat- 
ures   49- 


CHAPTER  HI. 

THE   SECOND   VILLAGE   CHARTER. 

Officers  elected  at  the  first  Town  Meeting  —  Their  Proceedings  and  those  of  suc- 
ceeding Tears  —  Newcomers  Noticed   89-130 


14  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

THE   THIRD   VILLAGE  CHARTER. 

Its  Principal  Provisions  —  The  Proceedings  of  the  Successive  Boards  of  Aldermen 
to  1824  —  The  Progress  of  the  Erie  Canal  —  The  Visit  of  General  Lafayette 
—  Newcomers  of  the  PerioS 131-173 

CHAPTER  V. 

THE  THIRD   VILLAGE   CHARTER   CONTINUED. 

Village  Proceedings  and  Incoming  Residents  to  the  Year  1832  — A  Period  of  large 

Expectations  —  Application  for  a  City  Charter 173-198 

CHAPTER  VI. 

FIRST   DECADE   UNDER   THE   CITY    CHARTER. 

Inauguration  of  the  City  Grovernment  —  Cholera  Epidemic  —  Details  of  its  Rav- 
ages—The An ti- Slavery  Convention  —  Proceedings  of  the  Successive  Coun- 
cils --  New  Comers  of  the  Era 199-243 

CHAPTER  VII. 
SECOND   DECADE   OF   THE   CITY'S    HISTORY. 

The  Washingtonian  Temperance  Movement  —  Establishment  of  a  Recorder's  Court 
— Inauguration  of  an  era  of  Manufactures  —  Incorporation  of  the  Utica  Water 
Works — Building  of  the  City  Hall 243  270' 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
THIRD    DECADE   OF   THE   CITY'S   HISTORY. 

The  Black  River  Railroad  Project  —  Extensive  Charter  Amendments  —  A  Period 
of  severe  financial  Stringency  —  Failure  of  local  Banks  —  A  Citizen's  political 
Movement  —  Beginning  of  the  War  Period . . . ; 270-308 


CONTENTS.  IS 

CHAPTER  IX. 
FOURTH   DECADE   OF  THE   CITY'S   HISTORY. 

The  War  record  Continued  —  A  new  Armory  built  on  the  site  of  the  Market  — 
List  of  business  Houses  of  1863  —  The  Draft  in  Utica  —  Burning  of  the  Female 
Academy  and  the  Free  Academy  —  Close  of  the  War  —  Grrowth  and  Prosper- 
ity in  the  dawn  of  Peace —  Efforts  toward  the  Establishment  of  a  Police  and 
Fire  Commission  —  Building  of  the  new  County  Clqrk's  Office       308-341 

CHAPTER  X. 

THE   CITY'S   HISTORY:    1872-1880. 

Important  charter  Amendment  —  Enlargement  of  the  city  boundary  on  the  West 

—  Formation  of  the  Utica  Manufacturing  and  Mercantile  Association ....  341-352 

CHAPTER  XL 

THE   LAST   DECADE   OF  THE   CITY'S    HISTORY. 

Summary  of  recent  History — Extensive  and  new  methods  of  Paving— Street  light- 
ing Improvement — Development  of  the  Street  Railway  System^Mohawk  Val- 
ley and  Skenandoa  factories  Built — Government  Building  and  new  Churches 
Erected — Toung  Men's  Christian  Association  and  Soldiers'  Monument 352-361 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

MODES  OF  TRAVEL  AND  TRANSPORTATION. 

The  Mohawk  River  as  a  Public  Waterway — The  Genesee  Turnpike — Early  Stages 
— Construction  and  Opening  of  the  Brie  Canal — Early  Railroads  East  and 
West — The  Plank  Road  Era— Northern  and  Southern  Railroads 361-395 

CHAPTER  Xni. 

CHURCHES   OF   THE   SEVERAL    DENOMINATIONS. 

Presbyterian  Societies — Congregational  Organizations — The  Reformed  Church — 
The  Episcopal  Denomination — The  Methodists — The  Baptists — The  Lutherans 
— The  Moravian  Church — Roman  Catholics — The  Hebrews  and  their  Syna- 
gogues— Welsh  Churches — Sketches  of  some  of  the  Clergymen  who  have 
preached  in  Utica 396-448 


1 6  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   XIV. 
THE  SCHOOLS  AND  THE  PUBLIC  SCHOOL  LIBRARY 449-476 

CHAPTER  XV. 
THE  PRESS 476-490 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
THE  BENCH  AND  BAR  OF  UTICA 491-567 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

FINANCIAL  INSTITUTIONS 567-590 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
MANUFACTURES 591-615 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
CHARITIES 616-632 


PART  II. 
BIOGRAPHICAL q33 


MEMORIAL 


HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


CHAPTER  I. 


OLD    FORT    SCHUYLER. 


Its  Location  —  A  large  grant  known  as  Cosby 's  Manor  —  The  tract  surveyed  and 
mapped  —  Settlers  —  Peter  Smith,  father  of  Gerrit  Smith  —  John  Post  — The  first  bridge 
across  the  Mohawk —  Maj.  James  S.  Kip —  More  early  Settlers  —  New  comers  in  1796 
—  Dr.  Alexander  Coventry  —  Col.  Benjamin  Walker — Utica  incorporated  as  a  \'illage. 

THE  original  settlement  made  at  Utica  took  its  name  of  Old  Fort 
Schuyler  from  a  fort  which  had  been  erected  here  during  the 
French  and  Indian  war.  This  fort,  which  was  designed  to  guard  the 
fording-place  in  the  Mohawk  River  above  it,  was  situated  on  the  south 
bank  a  very  little  distance  southeast  of  the  present  intersection  of  Sec- 
ond street  and  the  Central  Railroad.  The  left  bank  of  Ballou's  Creek, 
which  joins  the  river  just  below,  was  formerly  much  depressed  a  short 
distance  above  its  mouth,  so  as  to  form  in  high  water  a  lagoon  that 
must  have  reached  almost  to  the  walls  of  the  fort,  and  thus  have  facili- 
tated the  landing  and  embarkation  of  troops.  The  fort  consisted  of  an 
embankment  surrounded  by  palisades,  nearly  all  traces  of  which  had 
disappeared  at  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  fijst  settlers.  It  was  named 
in  honor  of  Col.  Peter  Schuyler,  an  uncle  of  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler  of 
the  Revolution.  During  and  subsequent  to  this  war  it  went  by  the 
3 


1 8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

name  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler  to  distinguish  it  from  another  fortress 
erected  at  Rome,  and  which  was  sometimes  known  as  Fort  Schuyler, 
though  it  had  been  christened  and  was  therefore  more  correctly  called 
Fort  Stanwix. 

The  choice  of  this  spot  as  a  place  of  settlement  after  the  war  was  prob- 
ably determined  by  the  following  circumstances:  The  presence  of  the 
hills  which  confine  the  Mohawk  at  Little  Falls,  and  their  close  approxi- 
mation for  some  way  above  that  point,  restricted  the  range  of  the  earlier 
immigrants  into  Central  New  York,  and  concurred  with  the  fertility  of 
the  soil  along  the  valley  to  fix  them  within  the  limits  of  the  latter.  To- 
'  ward  Old  Fort  Schuyler  these  hills  decline  in  height  and  begin  to  melt 
away  to  the  right  and  the  left.  Here,  therefore,  was  the  first  place  where 
facilities  appeared  for  a  divergence  from  the  former  course,  while  the 
beautiful  valleys  that  open  southward  at  this  point  and  at  Whitesboro 
tempted  settlers  who  found  t'he  lands  below  already  in  occupation  to 
depart  from  the  line  of  the  river  in  search  of  homes  more  remote.  The 
old  Indian  path  from  Oneida  Castle  here  intercepted  the  path  along  the 
river- side  leading  to  the  portage  at  Fort  Stanwix.  Both  crossed  the 
Mohawk  at  the  only  place  in  the  neighborhood  where  fording  was 
easily  practicable,  and  this  was  at  the  site  of  the  present  bridge  at  the 
foot  of  Genesee  street.  Asa  place  of  trade  with  the  outlying  settlements 
beyond,  which  required  supplies  that  could  best  be  brought  by  the 
river,  the  spot  seemed  an  advantageous  one. 

The  soil  along  the  stream  was,  it  is  true,  wet  and  marshy  and  the 
same  was  the  case  with  nearly  all  the  land  in  the  vicinity  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  low,  gravelly  ridge  lying  parallel  with  the  southern  bank 
some  dozen  rods  distant,  and  from  whose  upper  end  diverged  a  sHghter 
ridge  southward.  There  were  no  promising  mill  privileges,  no  quar- 
ries of  valuable  building  stone,  no  mines  of  metals  or  useful  minerals, 
no  salt  springs  or  other  special  features  of  the  spot  that  pointed  it  out 
as  an  attractive  site  for  a  settlement  and  gave  assurance  of  extended 
growth.  The  Mohawk  was  indeed  navigable  for  vessels  of  small  ton- 
nage from  Schenectady  to  Fort  Schuyler  and  even  to  Fort  Stanwix, 
whence,  after  a  short  portage  into  Wood  Creek,  water  passage  was  con- 
tinuous by  way  of  Oneida  Lake,  Oneida  and  Oswego  Rivers,  to  Ontario 
and  the   far  West ;    and  this  in  fact  had  from  the  earliest'  period    in 


EARL  Y  WA  TEH  WA  YS  AND  ROADS.  19 

the  country's  history  formed  the  principal  thoroughfare  of  travel  and  of 
trade.  The  real  and  practical  head  of  navigation  on  the  Mohawk  was 
at  Fort  Stanwix,  and  this  place  was  looked  upon — to  use  the  language 
of  the  commissioners  of  the  Inland  Navigation  Company — as  "  the 
future  great  city  west  of  Albany."  Even  the  mouth  of  the  Sauquoit 
formed  a  much  more  natural  and  important  landing.  Previous  to  the 
improvement  of  the  road  extending  west  from  Old  Fort  Schuyler  both 
Rome  and  Whitesboro  at  the  mouth  of  the  Sauquoit  far  exceeded  the 
former  place  in  the  amount  of  their  river  transportation. 

The  most  that  could  have  been  expected  by  its  earlier  traders  was  to 
make  it  a  landing-place  whence  goods  could  be  conveyed  to  the  places 
rapidly  settling  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  Thus  it  happened  that  for  a 
long  time  its  business  was  carried  on  near  the  river  on  Water  street  or 
in  the  street  which  ran  parallel  a  short  distance  above.  This  was  called 
Main  street,  its  extension  toward  Whitesboro  being  known  as  the 
Whitesboro  road.  Nor  did  the  settlement  reach  much  above  this  line  until 
the  village  had  had  several  years  of  existence.  Not  until  after  the  ap- 
propriations made  by  the  legislature  in  1794,  '95,  and  '97  had  been  ex- 
pended on  the  road  to  the  "  Genesee  country,"  and  especially  not  until 
after  the  incorporation  of  the  Seneca  Turnpike  Company  in  1800  and 
the  construction  by  it  of  a  more  perfect  road,  which,  starting  at  the 
ford,  ran  much  to  the  southward  of  Rome  and  Whitesboro,  did  Utica  in- 
crease materially  and  become  the  virtual  head  of  trade  upon  the  Mohawk. 

Southward  from  the  Hne  of  the  river  the  ground  rises  by  a  gentle  ac- 
clivity that  reaches  about  three  fourths  of  a  mile,  when  it  falls  over  a 
short  course  to  rise  again  beyond.  Curving  toward  the  northwest  on 
its  western  side  this  acclivity  approaches  the  river  more  nearly  on  the 
western  border  of  the  present  city  than  it  does  on  the  eastern.  It  is 
upon  this  hillside  that  the  Utica  of  today  is  mainly  built,  the  lower  por- 
tion having  the  larger  part  of  the  places  of  business.  Both  on  the  east 
and  on  the  west  this  hillside  is  cut  by  small  streams,  Ballou's  and  Nail 
Creeks,  that  join  the  Mohawk  nearly  at  right  angles.  Still  farther  east 
and  on  the  confines  of  the  city  another  creek,  the  Starch  Factory,  pur- 
sues a  similar  course. 

The  territory  on  which  Old  Fort  Schuyler  was  settled  formed  part  of 
a  tract  of  22,000  acres  granted  on  the  2d  of  January,  1734,  by  George 


2  0  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

II.,  King  of  England,  nominally  to  several  persons,  but  in  reality  to  in- 
ure to  the  benefit  of  William  Cosby,  colonial  governor  of  New  York 
and  New  Jersey;  it  was  thence  known  as  Cosby's  Manor.  In  default  of 
the  payment  of  arrears  of  quit-rents  it  was  on  the  4th  of  July,  1 7/2,  sold 
by  the  sheriff  under  warrant  from  Daniel  Horsmanden,  the  chief  justice 
of  the  colony,  and  was  purchased  by  Col.  (afterward  Gen.)  Philip 
Schuyler  for  the  joint  benefit  of  himself.  Gen.  John  Bradstreet,  Rutger 
Bleecker,  and  John  Morin  Scott.  They  paid  for  it  £\,Z^7,  4s.,  jd.,  or 
at  the  rate  of  fifteen  pence  per  acre.  By  them  or  their  heirs  it  was  held 
at  the  time  the  first  settlements  were  effected.  The  whole  tract  ex- 
tended easterly  from  the  mouth  of  the  Sauquoit  Creek  eleven  miles, 
seventeen  chains,  and  was  six  miles  wide,  three  upon  each  side  of  the 
Mohawk  River.  It  was  divided  into  lots  that  ran  back  from  the  river 
three  miles  and  were  sixteen  or  seventeen  chains  in  width. 

The  manor  formed  a  part  of  what  was  known  as  German  Flats  in 
Moiitgomery  County,  the  name  of  the  county  having  been  changed 
from  that  of  Tryon  in  1785.  On  the  7th  of  March,  1788,  the  district  of 
German  Flats  was  divided  and  "  Whitestown"  was  set  off  as  a  separate 
town,  which  was  bounded  on  the  east  by  a  line  crossing  the  Mohawk  at 
the  ford  and  running  thence  to  the  bounds  of  the  State.  It  cut  the 
settlement  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler  in  the  middle,  leaving  a  part  in  Whites- 
town  and  a  part  in  German  Flats.  Upon  the  formation  of  Oneida 
County  in  1798  this  east  line  was  thrown  eastwardly  to  the  present  line 
of  the  city  and  county^  This  immense  region,  now  teeming  with  peo- 
ple, then  numbered  less  than  200  inhabitants.  But  the  tide  of  immigra- 
tion had  already  begun  to  flow.  The  reaction  which  slowly  followed 
the  exhausting  struggle  for  the  nation's  independence  was  awakening 
enterprise  and  directing  it  into  new  paths  of  activity.  The  fame  of  "the 
Whitestown  country"  had  reached  New  England  and  was  enticing 
thither  the  adventurous  settler  as  to  a  land  of  promise.  The  neighbor- 
ing settlements  of  Whitesboro,  Oriskany,  Westmoreland,  etc.  had  been 
commenced  a  year  or  two  previously  ;  that  of  Deerfield,  broken  up  and 
destroyed  during  the  Revolution,  had  also  just  been  resumed. 

In  the  year  1786  a  survey  of  the  manor  of  Cosby  together  with  a  map 
of  the  same  was  made  by  John  R.,  son  of  Rutger  Bleecker.  It  appears 
therefrom  that  two  houses  were  located  near  the  ford  on  what  is  now 


FIRST  SETTLERS  AND  SETTLEMENTS.  21 

the  east  side  of  Genesee  street  and  one  on  the  west  side.  Improve- 
ments had  been  made  a  little  farther  westward  somewhere  between  the 
present  lines  of  Broadway  and  State  streets,  and  there  were  also  im- 
provements near  the  present  eastern  hmits  of  the  city.  Outside  of  these 
evidences  of  a  commencing  civilization  was  an  unbroken  forest  consisting 
chiefly  of  beech,  hemlock,  maple,  and  elm. 

The  occupant  of  the  house  nearest  the  river  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  road  was  John  Cunningham,  his  neighbor  beside  him  being  George 
Damuth.  The  resident  of  the  opposite  side  was  Jacob  Christman.  The 
settler  toward  the  west  was  a  man  named  McNamee,  and  the  clearings 
on  the  eastern  border  were  designated  as  those  of  McNamee  and  Abra- 
ham Boom. 

An  emigrant  who  passed  through  the  place  the  following  year  like- 
wise informs  us  that  there  were  three  log  huts  or  shanties  near  the  old 
fort.  The  statement  furnished  by  a  settler  who  arrived  in  1788  con- 
firms the  evidence  of  the  map,  showing  that  Cunningham,  Damuth,  and 
Christman  were  living  near  the  ford  while  it  adds  to  the  list  the  name 
of  Hendrich  Salyea.  Of  these  men  we  know  little.  Most  of  them  were 
of  Palatine  descent,  and  had  probably  removed  hither  from  settlements 
lower  down  the  Mohawk. 

The  lease  from  Rutger  Bleecker,  of  the  city  of  Albany,  to  "  George 
Damuth,  of  Montgomery  County,''  (the  name  then  applied  to  all  of  the 
State  west  of  Albany  County,)  is  dated  July  28,  1787.  It  demises  273^ 
acres,  being  part  of  lot  No.  94,  for  the  term  of  twenty- one  years  at  a 
yearly  rent  of  one  shilling  per  acre.  The  first  payment  was  to  be  made 
on  the  28th  of  July,  1793,  and  subsequent  ones  annually  thereafter. 
Mr.  Damuth  made  assignment  of  his  lease  and  probably  died  ere  1790. 
It  was  with  Cunningham  that  Moses  Foot,  who  began  the  settlement  at 
Clinton,  found  a  lodging  in  1787.^  His  legal  title  to  the  land  he  occupied 
he  probably  obtained  about  the  same  time  with  Damuth.  From  a  state- 
ment of  the  payments  received  thereon  it  would  appear  that  it  conveyed 
ninety-one  and  a  half  acres  of  lot  No.  94  for  the  term  of  ten  years  at  one 
shilling  an  acre  each  year,  and  that  the  times  of  payment  were  fixed  on 
the  26th  of  July,  1793,  and  annually  on  the  same  day  thereafter  ;  that  is 
to  say,  within  two  days  of  the  beginning  of  payments  on  the  lease  of 

1  Journal  of  Dr.  Alexander  Coventry  where  the  statement  is  made  on  the  authority  of  Mr.  Foot. 


22  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

George  Damuth.  As  with  the  latter  so  with  Cunningham,  not  one  of 
the  payments  were  made  by  the  original  lessee,  Cunningham  having 
already  before  1793  sold  his  lease  and  his  betterments  to  John  Post  and 
departed. 

Of  Jacob  Christman's  title  we  know  nothing,  nor  whether,  indeed,  he 
ever  had  any.  Of  McNamee  our  information  is  still  less.  Abraham 
Boom  obtained  from  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler  in  1790  a  life  lease  of  the 
land  on  which  he  had  located,  and  after  his  death  his  son,  William 
Boom,  disposed  of  it  to  the  Christmans. 

Hendrich  Salyea  had  a  twenty-one  years'  lease  from  Rutger  Bleecker 
dated  on  the  same  day  with  that  of  George  Damuth,  namely,  July  28, 
1787.  This  lease  on  the  19th  of  September,  1789,  he  covenanted  to  sell 
to  John  Post,  the  purchaser  of  the  interest  of  Cunningham  and  in  part  of 
that  of  Damuth.  The  improvements  which  he  had  made  on  a  strip  of 
land  lying  adjacent  and  Mke  the  former  on  lot  No.  93  he  sold  on  the 
15th  of  March,  1790,  to  Peter  Smith  for  the  sum  of  ^5.  He  squatted 
again  on  a  part  of  lot  No.  90,  occupying  a  log  house  that  stood  on  the 
north  side  of  the  present  Broad  street  opposite  the  site  of  the  subse- 
quent farm-house  of  Matthew  Hubbell.  The  improvements  on  the  lat- 
ter tract  he  sold  the  same  year  to  Mr.  Hubbell,  but  continued  to  live  a 
straggler  in  the  village  for  several  years  longer.  He  was  the  only  one 
of  these  earliest  settlers  near  the  ford  who  remained  in  the  vicinity. 
These  were  the  forerunners  of  the  settlement  which  was  presently  known 
as  Old  Fort  Schuyler. 

The  settlers  who  successively  came  in  to  swell  our  quota  of  this  now 
populous  district  let  us  proceed  to  consider.  In  March,  1788,  arrived 
Maj.  John  Bellinger,  the  first  who  effected  a  lodgment  after  the  persons 
whose  names  occur  on  Mr.  Bleecker's  map.  Major  Bellinger  was  a 
native  of  the  Mohawk  Valley,  and  with  two  other  members  of  his  fam- 
ily was  present  at  the  battle  of  Oriskany,  where  he  stood  by  the  side  of 
the  gallant  Herkimer  when  the  latter  received  his  mortal  wound.  At 
the  time  of  his  journeying  hither  the  ground  was  covered  with  four  feet 
of  snow.  Immediately  on  his  arrival  he  constructed  a  hut  of  hemlock 
boughs  in  which  he  lived  four  months.  It  was  placed  near  what  is  now 
the  east  corner  of  Whitesboro  and  Washington  streets.  The  same  year, 
it  is  said,  he  began  to   clear   up  a  piece  of  land  and  to  build  a  small 


ATEJV  COMERS  TO  THE  YOUNG  SETTLEMENT.  23 

frame  house,  he  being  his  own  artificer.  If  it  be  true  that  the  house 
now  pointed  out  by  old  residents  as  Mr.  Bellinger's  is  the  one  he  then 
erected  it  is  a  noteworthy  object  and  does  credit  to  the  builder's  skill. 
It  stands  in  the  rear  of  a  wagon  shop  on  the  south  side  of  Whitesboro 
street,  third  house  east  of  Washington,  and  is  a  story  and  a  half  gable- 
roofed  house.  It  has  a  tough,  weather-beaten  look  that  promises  for 
it  several  years'  duration.  Here  while  Mr.  Bellinger  managed  his  farm 
he  entertained  the  stream  of  emigrants  on  their  way  to  more  distant 
homes.  He  afterward  erected  a  larger  building  nearly  opposite,  a  part 
of  which  was  known  at  the  time  it  was  burned  as  the  New  England 
House.  This  he  continued  to  keep  as  a  public  house  until  his  death 
in  1815. 

At  this  time,  we  are  told  by  Judge  Jones.^  a  family  named  Morey, 
Philip  the  father,  and  Solomon,  Richard,  and  Sylvanus  his  sons,  from 
Rhode  Island,  were  living  as  squatters  on  lot  No.  97  and  Francis  Fos- 
ter was  then  a  squatter  on  lot  No.  96.  Philip  Morey  subsequently  had 
a  lease  of  his  land.  ' 

The  following  year  (1789)  came  Uriah  Alverson,  a  native  of  Rhode 
Island.  He  journeyed  through  the  place  some  two  years  before,  when 
he  determined  to  locate  here,  and  returned  east  for  his  family.  On  his 
second  arrival  he  took  up  some  land  in  what  is  now  West  Utica  on  a 
long  lease  from  General  Schuyler,  and  built  him  a  house.  His  son, 
William  Alverson,  accompanied  his  father  on  his  first  visit  as  well  as 
when  he  came  here  to  reside,  and  was  then  a  youth  of  nineteen.  He 
followed  several  different  pursuits  :  by  trade  a  journeyman  carpenter 
he  was  also  a  farmer,  a  brewer,  a  grocer,  and  a  painter. 

Some  time  during  the  year  1789,  or  the  latter  part  of  the  previous 
year,  came  one  of  those  remarkable  men  that  new  countries  are  apt  to 
produce,  and  whose  eminent  success,  especially  in  the  acquisition  of 
wealth,  is  not  surpassed  by  the  richest  gains  of  metropolitan  commerce. 
This  was  Peter  Smith,  father  of  the  more  widely  known  Gerrit  Smith. 
Peter  Smith  was  a  native  of  Rockland  County  and  was  born  in  1768. 
Apprenticed  at  sixteen  as  a  clerk  in  the  importing  house  of  Abraham 
Herring  &  Co.  he  left  them  at  the  end  of  three  years  and,  stocked 
with  a  supply  of  goods  for  a  country  store,  settled  himself  in  trade  at  a 

^  Annals  of  Oneida  County. 


24  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

small  place  called  Fall  Hill  a  couple  of  miles  below  Little  Falls.  Here 
he  remained  but  a  single  year,  and  while  yet  a  minor  came  to  Old  Fort 
Schuyler.  He  put  up  a  log  store,  which  as  nearly  as  he  could  recollect 
in  his  later  years  stood  where  Bagg's  Tavern  was  afterward  built. 
J.  F.  Watson,  in  his  "Antiquities  of  the  City  and  State  of  New  York," 
says  that  Peter  Smith  in  1787  bought  of  the  widow  Damuth  for  a  few 
pounds  of  Bohea  tea  her  log  house  that  stood  on  the  ground  where  was 
afterward  built  Bagg's  Hotel.  He  soon  built  another  store  of  the  same 
kindnear  the  lower  end  of  Main  street,  and  not  far  from  the  handsome 
two-story  dwelling  he  subsequently  erected  on  the  corner  of  Main  and 
Third  streets.  Mr.  Smith's  later  residence  was  the  house  on  Broad 
street,  beyond  the  gulf,  afterward  occupied  by  his  son-in-law,  Capt. 
Walter  Cochrane.  To  this  house  was  attached  a  farm  of  two  or  three 
hundred  acres.  Here  in  March,  1797,  was  born  his  noted  son  Gerrit. 
He  removed  in  1806  to  Peterboro  after  a  brief  residence  of  three  years 
at  Yorkville,  then  known  as  Wetmore's  Mills.  He  had  been  sheriff  of 
Herkimer  in  1795  when  that  county  included  Oneida  also.  On  the  or- 
ganization of  Madison  County,  the  same  year  of  his  removal  thither,  he 
was  appointed  one  of  its  judges  and  the  following  year  became  first 
judge.  This  position  he  continued  to  hold  until  1821,  and  as  it  was 
said  by  the  lawyers  of  the  day  made  an  excellent  magistrate. 

In  the  spring  of  1790  John  Post  with  his  wife,  three  young  children, 
and  a  carpenter,  supplied  with  a  stock  of  merchandise,  furniture,  and 
provisions,  embarked  upon  the  Mohawk  at  Schenectady  and  in  eight 
or  nine  days  landed  at  Old  Fort  Schuyler.  Besides  the  purchase  from 
Salyea  he  had  also  the  ownership  of  the  lease  of  John  Cunningham  and 
of  a  part  of  that  of  George  Damuth.  We  are  told  hy  a  settler  of  the 
Genesee  country  who  passed  up  the  river  the  summer  previous  that 
Mr.  Post  was  then  finishing  his  house  on  a  half  acre  of  land  that  he  had 
cleared. i  The  clearing  was  probably  made  by  Cunningham,  the  prev- 
ious settler.  The  house,  as  Mr.  Post  subsequently  informed  Dr.  Alex- 
ander Coventry,^  was  probably  the  first  frame  house  erected  in  the 
county.  Judge  White,  of  Whitesboro,  was  still  living  in  a  log  house. 
This  house  of  lyir.  Post  stood  on  the  west  side  of  what  is  now  lower  Gen- 

1  Turner's  "  History  of  the  Phelps  and  Gorham  Purchase," 
'^  Dr.  Coventry's  journal. 


JOHN  POST'S  PIONEERSHIP.  25 

esee  street  not  far  from  Whitesboro  street.  Mr.  Post  was  of  Dutch  ex- 
traction and  was  born  in  Schenectady  in  December,  1748.  He  had 
faithfully  served  his  country  during  the  entire  period  of  the  Revolution, 
and  was  at  the  taking  both  of  Burgoyne  and  Cornwallis.  For  some 
years  prior  to  his  settlement  at  Old  Fort  Schuyler  he  had  been  em- 
ployed in  trading  with  the  Six  Nations,  and  removed  to  this  place  to 
engage  in  the  same  business.  At  first  he  kept  his  goods  for  sale  in  his 
dwelling,  which  from  necessity  was  made  a  house  of  entertainment  also, 
and  until  the  year  1794  there  was  besides  this  and  the  extemporized 
lodging  place  of  Major  Bellinger  no  other  tavern  in  the  place.  In  the 
year  1 79 1  he  erected  a  store  beside  his  house  and  near  what  now  con- 
stitutes the  northwest  corner  of  Genesee  and  Wliitesboro  streets.  His 
trade  was  principally  with  the  neighboring  Indians,  who  would  bring 
him  in  the  furs  of  the  animals  they  killed,  and  also  ginseng,  a  plant 
growing  in  the  woods,  and  which  was  then  in  great  request  as  an  article 
of  export  to  the  Chinese.  In  return  he  furnished  them  spirits,  tobacco, 
blankets,  ammunition,  beads,  etc.  It  is  said  by  his  daughter  to  have  been 
a  common  occurrence  that  thirty  or  forty  Indian  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren remained  at  his  house  through  the  night,  and  if  the  weather  was 
cold  surrounded  the  immense  kitchen  fire  of  logs,  or  in  the  milder  sea- 
son lay  upon  the  grass  plats  by  the  side  of  the  log  and  brush  fences  of 
the  vicinity.  From  the  journal  of  travelers  ^  who  took  dinner  and  sup- 
per here  in  November,  1793,  and  then  looked  into  his  store,  we  learn 
that  "  it  was  well  stocked  and  a  favorite  place  for  tipplers  and  custom- 
ers." But  Mr.  Post  was  an  unwilling  landlord;  he  kept  tavern  with 
reluctance  and  no  longer  than  until  others  arrived  to  fill  the  duty.  Gen- 
eral traffic  by  land  and  water  was  more  suited  to  his  tastes.  He  erected 
on  the  river  bank  a  three-story  warehouse  of  wood,  which  was  after- 
ward moved  a  few  rods  above  the  site  of  the  bridge  and  was  still  there 
at  a  comparatively  recent  period.  Mr.  Post  owned  several  boats  which 
were  employed  in  taking  produce  to  Schenectady  and  in  bringing  back 
merchandise  and  the  families  and  effects  of  persons  removing  into  the 
new  country.  He  ran  three  stage-boats,  as  they  were  called,  fitted  up 
with  oil-cloth  covers  and  with  seats,  more  especially  for  the  accommo- 
dation of  passengers. 

4 

1  Journal  of  the  Castorland  Company. 


2  6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Within  a  few  years  of  his  arrival,  viz.,  on  the  13th  of  July,  1792,  Mr. 
Post  purchased  of  the  representatives  of  General  Bradstreet  eighty-nine 
and  a  half  acres  of  lot  No.  95,  which  now  includes  the  heart  of  the  city. 
He  had  by  his  trade  and  by  the  early  purchase  of  lands  acquired  what 
was  deemed  no  little  fortune,  and  it  was  said  was  about  to  cease  from 
business. 

Giles  Hamlin  was  taken  into  partnership  in  May,  1803,  and  the  bus- 
iness was  recommenced  on  a  large  scale,  for  Hamlin's  ambition  was  to 
do  a  wholesale  trade.  He  went  to  New  York  and  purchased  on  Post's 
credit  a  large  stock  of  goods,  which  he  soon  sold  to  small  dealers  in  the 
neighboring  settlements,  receiving  in  return  their  promissory  notes.  A 
second  trip  was  made  to  New  York  and  a  still  larger  supply  was 
bought  and  sold  on  credit.  In  1803  Post  &  Hamlin  advertised  five  tons 
of  candles  by  the  ton,  box,  or  pound,  also  1,000  hundred- weight  of 
cotton  yarn. 

But  just  as  their  New  York  creditors  were  pressing  them  for  pay- 
ment, and  when  in  making  collections  they  had  received  a  large 
amount  of  wheat  and  pork  together  with  a  sum  in  bank  notes,  came  a 
sudden  end  of  all  the  prosperity  of  Mr.  Post.  Between  2  and  3 
o'clock  in  the  morning  of  February  4,  1804,  a  fire  broke  out  in  his  store 
which  was  so  far  advanced  before  it  was  discovered  that  nothing  was 
saved  but  a  part  of  their  account  books  and  some  silver  money.  Post 
behaved  honorably  and  sold  all  his  lands  to  secure  some  preferred 
debts,  and  became  in  his  old  age  divested  of  all  the  property  for  which 
he  had  labored  during  his  whole  life. 

In  April,  1 790,  a  sm.all  colony  of  two  or  three  families  arrived  here 
from  Connecticut,  prominent  among  whom  was  Capt.  Stephen  Potter. 
Captain  Potter  was  born  January  12,  1739.  He  served  throughout  the 
war  of  the  Revolution,  and  there  is  reason  to  think  that  although  then 
young  he  was  also  a  soldier  in  the  old  French  war  that  preceded  it. 
His  several  commissions  as  ensign,  second  lieutenant,  first  lieutenant, 
and  captain  are  still  in  existence,  bearing  respectively  the  stirring  names 
of  Jonathan  Trumbull,  John  Hancock,  John  Jay,  and  Samuel  Hunting- 
ton. In  July,  1775,  he  was  second  lieutenant  in  the  regiment  known 
as  "  Congress's  Own,"  the  same  in  which  there  was  serving  under  the 
same  rank  the  lamented  Nathan  Hale,  who  was  executed  by  the  British 


CA  PTAIN  POTTER  AND  MA  TTHE  W  HUB  BELL.  2  7 

as  a  spy  in  the  following  year.  Captain  Potter  was  an  excellent  man  and 
greatly  esteemed.  His  piety  was  of  the  strict  Puritan  order  and  he  was 
himself  a  worthy  descendant  of  the  Potters  who  signed  the  "Plantation 
Covenant"  at  New  Haven  in  1638.  At  a  meeting  held  at  Whitesboro 
in  April,  1793,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  a  religious  society  he  was 
put  on  the  committee  to  draft  a  constitution,  and  when  the  society  was 
incorporated  shortly  afterward,  by  the  style  of  the  United  Society  of 
Whitestown  and  Old  Fort  Schuyler,  he  was  elected  one  of  its  trustees. 
When,  in  1803,  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  elect  a  portion  of  the  session 
from  that  part  of  the  church  residing  in  the  latter  place  Captain  Potter 
was  created  both  deacon  and  elder. 

In  company  with  Captain  Potter  came  his  son-in-law,  Benjamin  Plant, 
from  Brantford,  Conn.  Purchasing  a  portion  of  the  Potter  lot  he  set- 
tled thereon,  remaining  a  farmer  all  his  life.  Among  the  reminiscences 
of  Benjamin  Plant,  jr.,  the  eldest  son,  who  was  born  in  1794  and  who 
resided  on  the  New  Hartford  road  for  upward  of  fifty  years,  is  of  having 
once  come  very  near  to  encountering  a  bear  with  her  cub  in  the  road 
near  his  father's.  He  was  in  company  with  the  latter,'  who,  seeing  the 
bear  approaching,  advised  the  son  to  lie  down  and  keep  quiet.  This  he 
did,  when  the  mother,  being  intent  on  getting  her  young  one  through  a 
brush  fence  that  impeded  their  course,  passed  near  and  went  on  her 
way. 

Another  settler  of  1790  was  Matthew  Hubbell  from  Lanesboro,  Mass. 
Born  in  1762  he  was  drafted  into  military  service  at  the  age  of  fifteen 
and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Bennington.  Before  he  came  to  this 
place  he  had  occupied  for  a  single  season  a  farm  on  the  Phelps  and  Gor- 
ham  purchase  in  Ontario  County.  But  his  wife  being  discontented  in 
so  savage  a  wilderness,  where  bears  were  too  plenty  and  neighbors  too 
few,  he  sold  at  sixty-six  cents  -per  acre  the  land  he  had  bought  at  thirty- 
three  cents,  and  leaving  Bioomfield  returned  eastward.  He  bought 
Salyea's  interest  in  the  River  Bend  farm  and  subsequently  obtained  a 
deed  of  it  from  Agatha  Evans  and  Sir  Charles  Gould,  heirs  of  General 
Bradstreet.  This  purchase  cost  him  at  the  rate  of  $2.50  per  acre. 
SeUing  a  part  on  the  west  he  continued  to  cultivate  the  remainder  until 
his  death,  and  here  he  reared  a  large  family.  Possessed  of  a  fair  share 
of  New  England  energy  and  enterprise,  with  the  moral  and  virtuous 


2  8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

habits  there  inculcated,  Mr.  Hubbell  was  a  useful  and  respected  citizen. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  first  grand  jury  that  ever  sat  in  this  State 
west  of  Herkimer.  He  was  among  the  earhest  and  most  prominent 
of  the  Baptist  denomination  in  this  section,  having  received  immer- 
sion in  1803  at  the  hands  of  Elder  Covell,  a  Baptist  elder  then  on 
a  tour  of  visitation  and  preaching  throughout  the  State,  and  who  has 
published  a  journal  of  his  labors.  During  some  years  Mr.  Hubbell  was 
a  respected  magistrate  of  the  town.  He  died  October  12,  1819,  in  con- 
sequence of  sickness  contracted  at  Sackets  Harbor,  whither  he  carried 
supplies  in  the  War  of  181 2. 

Yet  another  comer  of  the  year  1790  was  Benjamin'  Ballou.  His 
native  place  was  somewhere  in  Rhode  Island,  whence  he  came,  bringing 
a  family  of  grown-up  children.  He  had  a  lease  from  the  Bleecker 
family  in  1797  of  126  acres  of  lot  No.  92,  and  occupied  a  house  east  of 
the  Big  Basin  near  the  site  of  the  boatyard.  Besides  farming  he  also 
carried  on  a  smalltannery. 

So  destitute  were  the  Mohawk  settlements  at  this  period  of  articles 
that  are  now  of  almost  daily  use  and  abundant  wherever  stores  exist 
that  a  gallon  of  wine  could  not  be  found  throughout  the  valley.  Such 
is  the  testimony  of  a  settler  of  Palmyra  who  journeyed  eastward  in 
1790  in  quest  of  wine  for  an  invalid  neighbor,  and  without  success  until 
he  reached  Schenectady.  ^ 

In  July,  1791,  Thomas  and  Augustus  Corey  purchased  200  acres 
of  lot  No.  95,  and  they  resided  nearly  on  the  site  of  the  brick 
house  now  standing  on  the  northeast  corner  of  Whitesboro  and  Hotel 
streets.  Their  house  was  remarkable  as  being  shingled  on  the  sides  as 
well  as  above.  In  1795  they  sold  out  to  Messrs.  Boon  and  Linklaen, 
agents  of  the  Holland  Land  Company,  and  left  the  place.  Peter  Bellin- 
ger purchased  this  year  150  acres  of  lot  89  lying  in  the  gulf  east  of 
Mr.  Hubbell.      He  remained  there  until  his  death. 

In  1792  Joseph  Ballou,  a  brother  of  Benjamin,  from  Exeter,  R.  I,, 
embarking  on  board  a  sloop  at  Providence  with  his  wife,  two  sons,  and 
a  daughter,  proceeded  by  the  route  of  Long  Island  Sound  and  the  Hud  • 
son  to  Albany ;  and  thence,  passing  overland  to  Schenectady,  came  in 
boats  up  the  Mohawk  and  landed  a  short  distance  below  the  ford.      Mr. 

1  Turner's  "  History  of  the  Phelps  and  Gorham  Purchase." 


BUILDINGS  AND  A  BRIDGE  ERECTED.  29 

Ballou  settled  himself  upon  lot  No.  94.  This  it  will  be  remembered  is 
the  lot  of  which  Rutger  Bleecker  leased  273^  acres  to  George  Damuth 
for  the  term  of  twenty-one  years.  Previously  to  the  date  agreed  on  for 
the  first  payment  (July,  1793)  Mr.  Ballou  would  seem  to  have  obtained 
from  Damuth  or  his  widow  an  assignment  of  a  part  of  this  lease,  the 
remainder  being  held  by  Mr.  Post  since  this  first  payment  was  made 
jointly  by  them  both.  The  payments  of  1794  to  1797  inclusive  are 
also  endorsed  as  made  in  part  by  Mr.  Ballou,  while  those  which  follow, 
of  1802-07,  were  wholly  received  from  him.  This  farm,  or  so  much  of 
it  as  reached  from  the  river  to  a  line  south  of  where  the  canal  now  runs, 
he  had  under  cultivation.  In  August,  1800,  he  and  his  sons  procured 
each  of  them,  from  the  executors  of  Mr.  Bleecker,  a  deed  of  a  lot  on 
Main  street  near  the  present  John,  and  upon  these  lots  they  erected  a 
house  and  a  store.  The  house  stood  where  John  street  opens  out  of 
the  square.  It  then  fronted  toward  the  square,  but  when  John  street 
was  opened  it  was  faced  about  to  the  latter  street  and  made  a  part  of  a 
public  house.  This  house,  once  known  as  Union  Hall  and  subsequently 
by  many  different  names,  occupied  the  site  of  the  present  Ballou  block. 
His  sons  were  merchants  and  occupied  a  store  which  was  adjacent  to 
the  farm-house  on  the  west.  He  was  one  of  the  village  trustees,  elected 
at  the  first  meeting  held  under  the  charter  of  1805,  and  held  the  office 
by  successive  re-elections  for  four  years. 

In  the  summer  of  1792  a  start  seems  to  have  been  given  to  the 
settlement  by  the  erection  of  a  bridge  across  the  Mohawk.  The  peti- 
tion to  the  legislature  asking  aid  to  build  it  fortunately  still  survives. 
It  is  valuable  at  the  present  day,  not  only  because  it  shows  the  difficulty 
of  the  work  without  such  assistance  as  well  as  the  inconveniences  that 
had  been  previously  felt,  but  because  it  has  preserved  in  the  names  of 
its  signers  what  may  be  termed  a  tolerably  complete  enumeration  of 
the  people  then  living  in  the  vicinity.  No  apology,  therefore,  can  be 
needed  for  transferring  it  in  full.  Those  of  the  petitioners  known  as 
settlers  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler  are  designated  by  italics : 

"Ti?  the  Honorable  the  Legislature,  &^c.,  Sr^c.  : 

"The  petition  of  the  subscribers,  Inhabitants  of  the  County  of  Herliimer,  Respect- 
fully sheweth : 

"  That  having  for  a  long  time  endured  the  inconveniences  and  dangers  of  fording  the 
Mohawk  River  at  Old  Fort  Schuyler,  did  some  time  past  associate  and  by  voluntary 


3° 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


subscription  attempt  to  raise  money  to  erect  a  bridge  across  the  river  at  said  place, 
but  after  their  most  strenuous  exertions,  find  themselves,  on  account  of  the  infant 
state  of  the  adjacent  settlements,  incapable  of  effecting  said  purpose ;  and  your  Peti- 
tioners beg  leave  to  state  that  in  addition  to  the  inconveniences  of  fording  said  river, 
(which  at  some  seasons  of  the  year  is  very  dangerous,)  the  pubHc  in  general  are  highly 
interested  in  the  erection  of  a  bridge  at  said  place,  as  it- is  one  of  the  greatest  roads  in 
the  State  of  New  York,  being  the  customary,  (and  in  consequence  of  the  erection  of 
bridges  over  the  Canada  Creeks  below,)  the  most  direct  route  from  the  eastern  to  the 
west  part  of  the  State.  In  this  situation,  while  the  more  interior  parts  of  the  State 
are  enjoying  liberal  donations  from  the  State  for  building  of  bridges,  your  Petitioners 
earnestly  implore  the  Legislature  to  extend  a  helping  hand  to  those  who,  having  but 
recently  settled  in  almost  a  wilderness,  have  devolved  upon  them  a  very  heavy  burden 
in  making  roads  and  building  bridges;  they  therefore  pray  the  Legislature  to  grant 
them  the  sum  of  Two  Thousand  Pounds  toward  defraying  the  expense  of  erecting  a 
bridge  at  the  place  above  mentioned,  as  it  will  require  nearly  double  that  sum  to  com- 
plete the  same ;  and  your  petitioners  will  ever  pray. 
"  Herkimer  County,  October  24,  1792. 


"  Thos.  R.  aold, 
Thomas  Hooker, 
Peleg  Hyde, 
Edward  Johnson, 
Ezra  Hovey, 
Jacob  Hastings, 
Elias  Kane, 
Jeremiah  Poibell, 
Asa  Kent, 
Claudius  Wolcoot, 
Archibald  Bates, 
John  Cunningham. 
Joseph  Harris, 
Sani-uel  Wells, 
fried  rieghauman, 
Uriah  Sayles, 
Jacob  (illegible), 
John  Whiston, 
Daniel  Campble, 
Isaac  Brayton, 
Caleb  Austin, 


Nathan  Smith, 
George  Doolittle, 
Daniel  Reynolds, 
Just's  Grriffeth, 
Benj'n  Johnson, 
Philip  Morey, 
Henry  Chesebrough. 
G-eorge  Staples, 
Solomon  Harter, 
Oliver  Trumbull, 
AVm  Bmm  {Boom) 
Daniel  C.  White, 
Matthew  Hiibhell, 
Solomon  Wells, 
David  Andrew, 
Theodore  Sprague, 
Benjamin  Carney, 
Abram  Jillet, 
Solomon  Whiston, 
Peleg  Briggs, 
Townsin  Briggs, 


Asa  Brunson, 
Robert  Bardwell, 
John  Post, 
Nath'l  Griffeth, 
John  H.  Pool, 
Silvanus  Mowry, 
Abr'm  Braer, 
WiUiam  Sayles, 
Nathaniel  Darling, 
John  Crandal, 
Sam'l  Wilbur, 
Jacoh  Chris/man, 

Ohadiah  Ballou, 
Ellis  Doty, 
Augustus  Sayles, 
George  Wever, 
Samuel  Griffith, 
Thomas  Scott, 

William.  Alverson, 
Samuel  Barnes, 
Wdliam  haile, 


Elizur  Moseley.) 
Gaius  Morgan, 
Phillup  Alesworth, 
John  Lookwood, 
Aaron  Bloss, 
John  Foster, 
John  Richardson, 
Noah  Kent, " 
Shadrach  Smith, 
Daniel  PoUett, 
John  Bellinger, 
John  Christman, 
John  D.  Petrye, 
Jeremiah  Read, 
William  Sayles,  jr., 
Seth  Griflfeth, 
Henry  Pall, 
David  Stafford, 
Francis  Guiteau, 
Samuel  Stafford." 


Having  been  assigned  to  a  committee  of  the  House  on  the  supple- 
mentary bill  favorable  action  was  taken.     The  bridge  had  been  raised 
however,  the  previous  summer.     It  was  placed  on  the  line  of  Second 
street  where  the  banks  were  somewhat  higher  than  at  the  site  of  the 


ADDITIONAL  INHABITANTS.  31 

present  bridge.  The  raising  took  place  on  Sunday  in  order  that  more 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  vicinity  might  be  at  leisure  to  assist.  There 
was  living  in  Deerfield  a  few  years  since  a  man  who,  when  a  child,  was 
present  at  the  raising.  This  was  Elder  George  M.  Weaver,  who  was 
born  in  January,  1788,  and  was  then  in  his  fifth  year.  An  incident 
which  he  related  as  connected  with  the  event  must  have  contributed  to 
fix  the  fact  in  his  memory.  On  the  way  over  with  his  parents  from 
Deerfield  they  spied  a  bear  in  a  tree  by  the  side  of  the  road.  While 
Mrs.  Weaver  bravely  remained  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  with  her  young 
son  and  another  child  in  arms,  keeping  watch  of  the  bear,  the  father 
returned  home,  procured  a  gun,  and  shot  the  animal,  after  which  they 
continued  their  course  to  the  river. 

From  the  preceding  list  of  signers  we  gather  a  few  additional  names. 
They  represent  farmers  who  lived  near  rather  than  within  the  settlement 
and  some  actually  outside  of  the  limits  of  Utica  as  determined  by  the 
first  village  charter.  These  limits  then  reached  from  the, eastern  line  of 
lot  No.  82  on  the  east  to  the  western  bounds  of  No.  99  on  the  west. 

In  the  year  1793,  as  we  learn  from  the  inscription  on  his  tombstone, 
came  Gurdon  Burchard  and  Elizabeth  his  wife.  They  were  from  Nor- 
wich, Conn.  Mr.  Burchard  was  a  saddle  and  harnessmaker,  and  occu- 
pied a  lot  fronting  on  Whitesboro  street,  south  side,  but  reaching  through 
to  Genesee,  a  gore  separating  it  from  the  corner  of  the  latter.  About 
1 8 10  he  abandoned  this  business  and  opened  a  tavern,  under  the  sign 
of  the  "  Buck,"  nearly  on  the  site  of  the  present  Dudley  House.  And 
here  he  continued,  with  the  exception  of  a  brief  period  when  he  was  in 
the  "  mercantile  line,"  until  his  death. 

James  P.  and  Stephen  Dorchester,  who  are  known  to  have  been  hv- 
ing  here  in  1794  and  who  were  related  to  Mr.  Burchard,  probably  came 
at  the  same  time  with  him.  They  were  hatters,  and  occupied  a  shop 
on  Genesee  street  a  short  distance  above  the  rear  end  of  the  Burchard 
lot.  On  this  site  James  P.  erected  the  first  brick  store  that  was  built 
on  Genesee  street.      He  soon  left  the  place. 

We  come  now  to  the  year  1794,  when  we  find  that  the  hamlet  is  in- 
creased by  the  presence  of  several  additional  inhabitants.  Inasmuch  as 
their  names  are  not  to  be  previously  met  with  it  is  presumed  they  had 
newly  arrived.      Prominent  among  them  was  James  S.  Kip,  who  would 


PIONEER  SETTLERS.  33 

life,  interested  in  all  matters  of  a  local  nature,  and  endowed  with  enter- 
prise and  independence  he  devoted  himself  assiduously  to  the  general 
interests,  and  became  more  successful  as  a  public  man  than  he  was  in 
acquiring  property  for  himself.  He  was  one  of  the  first  Board  of  Di- 
rectors of  the  Utica  Bank,  and  at  its  election  he  was  chosen  as  its  first 
president.  In  18 1 2  he  had  the  honor  of  being  one  of  the  presidential 
electors. 

Major  Kip's  earlier  residence  was  on  Main  street,  where  he  occupied 
for  a  time  the  handsome  house  on  the  corner  of  Third  street  which  was 
subsequently  the  home  of  Judge  Miller.  About  the  year  1809  he  built 
and  occupied  on  a  portion  of  his  first  purchase  the  finest  mansion  in 
the  village.  This,  which  was  of  cut  stone,  stood  on  the  westerly  side  of 
Broadway  within  a  very  short  distance  of  where  the  canal  was  after- 
ward laid  out.  It  was  surrounded  by  handsome  grounds,  which  formed 
on  the  south  a  fine  esplanade  for  military  parades. 

One  Joseph  Pierce  was  an  occupant  of  a  part  of  the  territory  acquired 
by  Mr.  Kip  in  his  purchase  of  July,  1794,  and  is  known  to  have  been 
living  thereon  in  April  previous  ;  how  much  longer  it  is  impossible 
to  say.  Mr.  Pierce  had  been  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution  and  bore  the 
title  if  not  the  rank  of  captain.  His  farm-house  was  near  the  eastern 
line  of  Broadway  a  little  way  up  from  Whitesboro  street.  Captain 
Pierce  afterward  lived  in  Deerfield  and  built  the  covered  bridge  across 
the  river,  which  in  18 10  succeeded  the  two  earlier  structures.  His  sons 
were  Joseph,  jr.,  John,  and  Parley.  The  former  removed  to  Cayuga 
County.  John  was  constable  and  village  tax  collector  and  afterward 
deputy  sheriff.  As  constable  he  was  often  traveling  over  the  country 
and  serving  processes  in  what  are  now  Lewis,  St.  Lawrence,  and  Jeffer- 
son.     He-once  went  to  Ogdensburg  to  serve  a  summons. 

Thomas  Norton,  who  married  Sarah,  second  daughter  of  Stephen 
Potter,  had  been  a  sea  captain  and  afterward  returned  to  a  sea- faring 
life.  His  residence  while  here  was  on  the  upper  end  of  the  Potter  lot 
and  subsequently  on  the  turnpike  near  the  residence  of  Mrs.  Butter- 
field,  where  he  kept  a  public  house. 

Another  resident  of  this  date  was  the  village  physician,  Dr.  Samuel 
Carrington.      He  was  a  young  man  of  very  gentlemanly  appearance  and 
manners   and  of  good  literary  education.      He  was  a  druggist,  though 
5 


34  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

he  was  titled  doctor,  and  may  have  taken  the  degree.  In  an  advertise- 
ment of  his  drugs,  paints,  and  dye  woods  dated  November,  1800,  he 
says  he  has  "determined  to  sell  them  at  very  low  prices  for  ready  pay. 
Having  found  from  sad  experience  that  credit  is  the  bane  of  trade  I 
decline  granting  that  indulgence  in  the  future  and  would  rather  cry  over 
than  after  my  goods."  He  succeeded  Mr.  Post  as  postmaster  on  the 
1st  of  April,  1799,  and  was  a  very  prosperous  man  in  a  pecuniary  way, 
though  his  emoluments  from  his  office  could  not  have  been  very  profit- 
able. 

Stephen  Ford,  a  merchant,  occupied  for  a  short  time  a  store  on  the 
south  corner  of  Genesee  and  Whitesboro  streets,  his  lot  being  the  larger 
end  of  the  gore  next  Mr.  Burchard.  He  married  the  third  daughter 
of  Stephen  Potter.  He  failed  and  left  the  place.  After  his  death  his 
widow  married  William  Alverson. 

Aaron  Eggleston  was  a  cooper  whose  shop  during  most  of  his  resi- 
dence stood  at  a  long  distance  from  other  buildings,  viz  ,  near  the  site 
of  Henry  W.  Millar's  store  on  the  east  side  of  Genesee.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  a  brief  stay  in  Clinton,  whence  he  returned  in  1804,  he  lived 
here  in  the  exercise  of  his  trade  until  his  death. 

John  Hobby  was  a  blacksmith,  his  shop  being  just  above  the  site  of 
the  Central  Railroad  depot.  He  had  a  brother  Epenetus,  a  tall,  stout 
man  with  but  one  eye,  who  was  a  good  hand  at  fires  ;  and  another 
brother  whose  name  was  Elkanah.  The  three  formed  the  chorus  of  a 
song  that  was  a  favorite  with  the  jolly  band  which  sometimes  met  of  an 
evening  at  the  village  inn.  The  song  was  entitled  "  All  on  Hobbies." 
At  the  end  of  the  first  verse  all  would  shout:  "That  's  John  Hobby  !  " 
after  the  next:  "That  's  Neet  Hobby  !  "  etc.  John  died  February  6, 
1812. 

Thomas  Jones  was  a  black  and  whitesmith  who  sometimes  worked 
for  Hobby.  He  was  a  superior  workman  and  is  said  to  have  been  so 
expert  a  picklock  as  to  have  been  in  durance  in  England  for  the  unlaw- 
ful exercise  of  his  skill.  Another  Jones,  Simeon  by  name,  lived  in  a 
house  on  stilts  that  stood  upon  a  knoll  in  a  swamp.  That  swamp  was 
near  the  eastern  end  of  the  site  of  the  Globe  Hotel. 

The  parties  who  are  known  to  have  been  new  comers  of  the  year  1794 
were   Moses  Bagg,   John   House,   Jason  Parker,   and   ApoUos  Cooper. 


EARLY  TAVERN-KEEPERS:  35 

Moses  Bagg,  of  Westfield,  Mass.,  with  his  wife  and  two  sons  landed 
from  the  river  about  two  miles  above  the  ford  in  the  autumn  of  1793, 
and  after  tarrying  through  the  winter  at  Middle  Settlement  arrived  at 
Old  Fort  Schuyler  on  the  12th  of  the  following  March.  In  August 
Mr.  Bagg  obtained  from  Joseph  Ballou  four  acres  of  his  leased  farm, — for 
which  he  subsequently  got  a  title  from  Mr.  Bleecker, — and  began  to 
practice  his  trade  of  blacksmith  on  what  is  now  Main  street  a  little 
east  of  the  corner  of  the  square.  His  house,  a  log  structure,  or,  as  one 
eye-witness  avers,  a  shanty  made  of  hemlock  boards  nailed  to  the  stubs 
of  trees,  stood  directly  on  the  corner;  and  this  he  opened  for  the  accom- 
modation of  travelers.  Shortly  afterward  he  put  up  a  two- story  wooden 
building  on  the  same  site. 

Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  the  preceding  family  came  another  inn- 
keeper who  opened  a  house  on  the  southeast  corner  of  Genesee  street 
and  the  Public  Square.  This  was  John  House,  of  whom  we  know  little 
besides  the  fact  that  he  was  a  pleasant  man  and  a  popular  tavern-keeper. 
He  removed  early  from  the  place,  and  by  the  year  1802  his  house  was 
kept  by  another.  His  daughter  became  the  wife  of  Myron  Holley,  of 
Ontario  County.  William  House,  his  son,  was  a  merchant  in  Lockport, 
N.  Y.  One  of  Utica's  most  useful  and  best  remembered  citizens  ap- 
peared on  its  stage  when,  in  1794,  Jason  Parker  took  up  his  abode 
therein.  He  undertook  the  employment  of  post- rider  between  Cana- 
joharie  and  Whitestown,  and  in  1795  began  running  a  stage  bfetween 
Albany  and  Old  Fort  Schuyler.  A  greater  part  of  his  life  was  there- 
after devoted  to  that  business,  either  alone  or  in  company  with  others, 
as  is  more  fully  explained  in  a  later  chapter  of  this  work.  Mr.  Parker 
also  served  as  a  trustee  of  the  village,  and  was  in  all  ways  an  active  and 
a  public  spirited  citizen. 

Apollos  Cooper  was  born  at  Southampton,  L.  I.,  February  2,  1767, 
was  a  carpenter  by  trade,  and  had  come  into  Oneida  County  in.  1790. 
Before  coming  to  Old  Fort  Schuyler  he  had  lived  at  Johnstown,  and 
was  also  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Scriba  at  Oneida  Lake.  On  the  nth 
of  April,  1795,  he  bought  of  James  S.  Kip  117  acres  of  great  lot  No. 
96,  which  the  latter  had  bought  the  year  previous.  This  land  consti- 
tuted a  narrow  strip  extending  from  the  river  nearly  to  the  intersection 
of  Genesee  and  State  streets.     Early  in  the  fall  of  1794  he  had  gotten 


36  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

possession  of  the  land  and  built  the  rear  part  of  the  house  on  Whites- 
boro  street,  where  he  afterward  resided  throughout  his  life.  The  home- 
stead yet  remains  while  the  farm  has  long  since  been  swallowed  up  by 
the  encroaching  city. 

Mr.  Cooper  does  not  seem  to  have  long  pursued  his  trade,  but  when 
not  engaged  in  official  duties  he  was  chiefly  busied  with  farming.  The 
bridge  across  the  river  at  the  foot  of  Genesee  street  which  replaced  the 
earlier  bridge  is,  however,  said  to  have  been  the  work  of  his  skill.  A 
peculiarity  of  this  bridge  consisted  in  the  long  covered  avenue  of  trestle 
work  that  led  down  to  it,  reaching  back  half  way  to  Main  street,  a 
proof,  as  it  would  appear,  that  the  river  bank  was  then  much  lower  than 
at  present  and  the  bridge  in  consequence  more  difficult  of  approach. 
This  bridge  had  a  stone  abutment  in  the  center,  and  was  of  more  sub- 
stantial construction  than  its  more  immediate  predecessor.  Mr.  Cooper 
was  also  the  artificer  of  Hamilton  Oneida  Academy,  the  precursor  of 
Hamilton  College.  His  early  location  in  the  county  secured  to  him  an 
extensive  acquaintance  and  obtained  for  him  no  small  share  of  public 
favor,  which  was  manifested  by  his  appointment  at  various  periods  as 
judge,  representative,  and  sheriff,  and  by  his  filling  also  many  subordi- 
nate stations  in  the  place  of  his  residence.  Mrs.  E.  A.  Graham,  his 
daughter,  is  still  a  resident. 

On  a  farm  next  west  of  Nathan  Smith,  and  half  way  to  Whitesboro, 
lived  William  Inman,  a  gentleman  who  was  in  habits  of  constant  inter- 
course with  the  people  of  the  settlement,  though  he  did  not  move  into 
it  until  a  few  years  later  ;  but  as  this  farm  has  by  a  recent  legislative 
ordinance  been  included  within  the  domain  of  Utica  we  introduce  him 
here.  Mr.  Inman  was  a  native  of  Somersetshire,  England,  and  in  early 
life  was  a  clerk  of  Lord  Pultney.  He  first  sailed  to  America  March 
13,  1792,  and  arrived  in  June.  He  soon  after  was  entrusted  with  the 
interests  of  certain  Englishmen,  prominent  among  whom  was  JPatrick 
Colquhoun,  high  sheriff  of  London,  for  whom  he  purchased  in  trust  the 
tract  of  land  called  Inman's  Triangle,  including  the  towns  of  Leyden 
and  Lewis  in  Lewis  County,  N.  Y.  The  following  year  he  returned 
to  England,  but  ere  long  he  was  again  in  this  country. 

In  1793  he  obtained  of  Rutger  Bleecker  two  leases  of  land  in  lot  No. 
104,  containing  in  all   153  acres,  and  not  long  after  came  to  reside  in 


SKETCH  OF  WILLIAM  INMAN.  37 

Oneida  County.  He  lived  at  first  in  the  house  that  is  situated  on  the 
north  side  of  the  Whitesboro  road,  opposite  the  half-way  bridge  over  the 
canal.  But  disgusted  with  the  "Yankee  dust"  which  reached  him  from 
the  neighboring  highway  he  built  the  large  house  that  stands  quite  back 
from  it  on  the  south  side,  and  which  has  been  of  late  years  known  as 
the  Champlin  house.  Possessed  of  ample  means  he  hired  laborers  and 
lived  upon  his  farm  as  a  private  gentleman.  "  He  had  considerable 
knowledge  of  English  literature,  was  fond  of  books,  and  exhibited  in 
his  conversation  the  superiority  which  results  from  culture  and  in- 
tercourse with  refined  society.  His  handwriting  was  handsome  ;  he 
was  accurate  and  methodical,  understanding  well  his  own  interests,  and 
apt  in  drafting  all  legal  papers  relating  to  his  property  and  dealings." 
He  consequently  maintained  a  high  social  standing  and  participated  in 
the  best  society  which  the  neighborhood  afforded.  He  rode  in  a  heavy 
English  carriage  and  wore  powdered  hair,  with  short  clothes  and  knee- 
buckles. 

As  early  as  1-804  he  erected  a  brewery  on  the  site  of  what  is  now  the 
northwest  corner  of  Broadway  and  Whitesboro  streets,  wherewith  Ed- 
ward Smith  and  Aylmer  Johnson,  under  the  firm  name  of  E.  Smith  & 
Co,  he  commenced  business  as  brewer  and  maltster.  In  April,  1805, 
the  partnership  was  dissolved  and  the  brewery  was  thereafter  for  some 
years  conducted  by  Mr.  Inman  alone.  Mr.  Inman  was  among  the  fore- 
most of  those  who  took  a  part  in  founding  Trinity  Church  ;  he  was 
placed  on  the  subscription  and  also  on  the  building  committee,  and  while 
he  lived  in  Utica  served  either  as  vestryman  or  warden.  William,  his 
eldest  son,  became  a  commodore  in  the  navy  of  the  United  States  ;  John 
was  an  editor  of  New  York  city,  being  connected  successively  with  the 
Standard,  the  Spirit  of  the  Times,  the  New  York  Mirror,  the  Commer- 
cial Advertiser,  and  the  Columbian  Magazine ;  Henry  distinguished 
himself  as  a  painter,  excelling  in  portraiture,  in  landscape,  and  in  genre 
painting. 

An  inhabitant  of  whom  we  get  the  first  hint  in  179S,  at  this  time  a 
carpenter,  but  who  afterward  developed  into  a  merchant  as  successful 
as  any  that  Utica  has  produced,  was  Watts  Sherman.  He  came  from 
Newport,  R.  I.  He  soon  obtained  the  office  of  constable,  and  as  we 
are  assured  manifested  unusual  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  having 


3S  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

on  one  occasion  descended  into  a  chimney  in  order  to  seize  a  silk 
dress  which  the  party  having  it  determined  he  should  not  obtain  pos- 
session of,  and  so  debarred  him  other  entrance  into  his  house. 

In  1802  Mr.  Sherman  formed  a  partnership  in  trade  with  Arnold 
Wells,  another  early  settler,  the  latter  furnishing  the  most  of  the  cap- 
ital. In  this  new  sphere  he  evinced  unusual  capacity,  for  he  was  un- 
commonly shrewd  and  stirring.  Being  too  ambitious  for  Mr.  Wells  they 
separated,  while  Mr.  Sherman  enlarged  his  business  and  directly  took 
rank  among  the  leading  merchants.  With  others  he  bestirred  himself 
in  the  creation  of  the  first  glass  works  of  the  county,  the  factory  at 
Vernon,  and  was  one  of  its  directors.  Under  date  of  May,  1813,  he 
informed  the  community  that  he  had  taken  into  partnership  Henry  B. 
Gibson  and  Alexander  Seymour  under  the  name  of  Sherman,  Gibson 
&  Co.  While  the  junior  member  remained  in  Utica  the  two  former 
established  themselves  in'New  York,  wherp  their  skillful  conduct  of  trade 
secured  an  independent  fortune  for  each  of  them. 

Samuel  Jewett  was  one  of  the  pioneer  settlers  of  New  Hartford  and 
used  to  say  that  he  had  helped  to  raise  the  first  barn,  the  first  frame 
house,  and  the  first  meeting-house  that  were  built  in  that  town.  He  re- 
moved hither  in  1795  and  purchased  of  Stephen  Norton  a  part  of  the 
Potter  farm.  His  late  residence  on  the  line  of  the  Seneca  turnpike, 
built  before  that  road  had  been  worked,  but  not  before  it  was  laid 
out,  forms  at  this  day  almost  the  only  remaining  landmark  of  its  gen- 
eration. 

We  come  now  to  the  year  1796,  in  which  (or  possibly  in  1795)  Eze- 
kiel  Clark  arrived  and  began  a  small  business  as  a  merchant  in  Bagg's 
Tavern.  He  continued  a  resident  almost,  if  not  quite,  until  the  hamlet 
became  a  city,  and  was  by  turns  merchant,  innkeeper,  baker,  cooper, 
and  merchant  again. 

Of  the  new  comers  one  was  a  merchant,  but  did  not  remain  long  a 
merchant.  With  him  there  was  abundant  reason  for  the  change  :  his 
educational  training  had  been  in  a  totally  different  direction,  and  was 
too  complete  a  one  to  admit  of  sacrifice  ;  this,  together  with  his  natural 
bias  and  the  needs  of  his  neighbors,  soon  inclined  him  to  pursuits  more 
congenial.  This  was  Dr.  Alexander  Coventry,  whose  character  and  ca- 
reer deserve  a  fuller  consideration.      He  was  born  near  Hamilton,  Scot- 


DR.  ALEXANDER  COVENTRY.  39 

land,  August  27,  1766,  the  son  of  Capt.  George  Coventry,  who  had 
served  under  his  majesty  George  III.  in  the  old  French  war.  The  son 
attended  medical  lectures  at  Glasgow  and  at  Edinburgh,  and  imbibed 
the  instruction  of  those  eminent  teachers,  Monro,  Cullen,  Hope,  and 
Gregory.  In  July,  1785,  he  sailed  for  America  and  first  settled  at  Hud- 
son in  this  State,  where  he  became  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits  in 
conjunction  with  the  practice  of  his  profession.  Thence  he  removed  to 
Romulus,  on  the  east  side  of  Seneca  Lake,  which  place  he  left  in  1796 
on  account  of  the  sickness  of  himself  and  his  family,  and  came  to  Old 
Fort  Schuyler.  At  first  he  entered  into  mercantile  business  with  John 
Post,  but  soon  separated  from  him  and  opened  a  physician's  office  just 
above,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Genesee  road  about  two 
doors  above  the  corner  of  Whitesboro  street.  About  1804  he  had  for 
a  partner  Dr.  David  Hasbrouck;  but  having  purchased  a  farm  m  Deer- 
field  he  removed  thither  and  once  more  engaged  in  agriculture. 

The  doctor  pursued  farming,  and  especially  fruit  growing,  with  all 
the  ardor  of  more  modern  amateurs,  and  his  grafted  apples  and  other 
fruit  were  famous  the  country  round.  From  this  period  onward  until 
his  death  his  time  and  attention  were  divided  between  his  farm,  his 
books,  and  the  practice  of  his  profession,  although  during  his  latter 
years  the  demands  of  his  profession  were  paramount  to  all  besides.  He 
had  formed  a  partnership  in  18 17  with  the  late  Dr.  John  McCall,  then 
also  residing  in  Deerfield.  In  the  following  year,  when  the  latter  came 
to  this  place,  their  office  was  in  a  small  wooden  building  on  the  north- 
west corner  of  Broad  and  John  streets,  and  here  joined  him  his  next 
and  last  partner,  his  son,  Dr.  Charles  B.  Coventry. 

As  a  family  physician  and  obstetrician  Dr.  Coventry  was  eminently 
distinguished ;  and  not  only  in  our  own  but  in  the  adjoining  counties 
he  maintained  a  standing  no  less  respectable  as  a  consulting  one.  His 
uniformly  courteous  and  sympathizing  manner  with  the  sick,  co-operat- 
ing with  his  clear  and  discriminating  judgment,  obtained  for  him  unriv- 
aled esteem  and  affection.  Every  one  felt  safe  when  his  skill  and 
experience  could  be  secured.  In  person  he  was  muscular  and  moder- 
ate in  height ;  in  manners  without  pretence,  but  affable  and  engaging; 
in  tastes,  social ;  in  temper,  sometimes  irascible. 

The  public  appreciation  of  the  science  and  standing  of  Dr.  Coventry 


40  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

is  shown  by  the  offices  he  held.  Besides-presiding  for  several  succes- 
sive years  over  the  medical  society  of  his  own  county  he  was  twice 
elected  president  of  the  medical  society  of  the  State.  He  was  a  trustee 
of  the  Fairfield  Medical  College,  a  member  of  the  Society  for  the  Pro- 
motion of  Agriculture,  Art,  and  Manufactures,  a  member  of  the  Albany 
Lyceum,  and  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Linnjean  Society  of  Paris. 
He  was  an  occasional  contributor  to  the  political  and  agricultural  jour- 
nals of  the  day,  and  was  also  the  author  of  some  professional  papers  for 
the  medical  serials.  From  the  period  of  his  studentship  to  the  last  year 
of  his  life  he  kept  a  diary  in  which  he  noted  at  length  t^is  medical  and 
agricultural  employments,  with  references  now  and  then  to  social  and 
other  current  events  of  the  day.  About  the  year  1817  he  led  the  way 
in  the  formation  of  the  first  agricultural  society  of  the  county,  and  was 
its  secretary  and  presiding  genius. 

While  attending  a  dangerous  case  of  sickness  in  the  family  of  Nicho- 
las Devereux  he  fell  a  victim  to  an  epidemic  influenza  and  died  De- 
cember 9,  1 83 1.  His  wife,  Elizabeth  Butler,  of  Brantford,  Conn.,  had 
died  some  years  before.  He  left  a  family  of  seven  sons  and  four 
daughters.  Of  these  the  late  Dr.  Charles  B.  Coventry  was  the  only  one 
who  made  a  home  in  Utica. 

A  merchant  who  may  be  set  down  as  of  this  date  was  Talcott  Camp, 
for  he  visited  the  place  in  the  fall  of  1796,  bringing  iVith  him  a  portion 
of  goods,  though  he  returned  east  for  the  winter,  to  come  again  with  his 
family  the  following  spring.  Shortly  before  the  date  above  named  he 
was  in  New  York  city,  and  a  sight  he  there  beheld  determined,  it  is  said, 
his  course  to  the  new  settlement.  This  was  a  barrel  or  two  of  silver 
coin  which  William  G.  Tracy,  of  Whitesboro,  had  brought  down  to  ex- 
change for  the  goods  he  needed  in  his  trade.  Returns  like  these  be- 
tokened a  market  that  was  worth  the  seeking,  and  he  sought  it.  Talcott 
Camp  was  born  in  Durham,  Conn.,  and  held  during  the  greater  part  of 
the  Revolution  ^  post  in  the  commissary  department.  Settling  after- 
ward in  Glastonbury  he  was  engaged  chiefly  in  mercantile  pursuits, 
although  he  was  also  associated  with  a  partner  in  the  manufacture  of  iron. 

For  a  few  years  after  his  removal  to  Old  Fort  Schuyler  he  devoted 
himself  to  trading,  and  was  not  at  all  unsuccessful  in  the  pursuit,  though 
he  ere   long  disposed  of  his  interest  and  engaged  in  the  purchase  and 


HON.  HORATIO    SEYMOTJR. 


TALCOTT  CAMP  AND  OTHER  TRADERS.  41 

sale  of  lands.  But  it  is  as  an  upright  and  esteemed  magistrate,  as  he 
long  was,  that  'Squire  Camp  is  best  known,  and  tradition  recalls  the 
impartial  dignity  with  which  he  was  wont  to  pronounce  "  the  opinion  of 
the  court."  In  1809  he  was  made  president  of  the  village,  a  station 
which  he  held  for  five  successive  years.  This  was  in  part  during  the 
turbulent  period  of  the  war,  when  troops  were  often  marched  through 
the  village  or  quartered  in  the  neighborhood,  and  when  aggressions  and 
quarrels  were  rife.  Much  responsibility  and  care  were  of  course  de- 
volved upon  him.  He  was  some  time  trustee  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church  and  bore  a  part  as  one  of  the  original  board  in  the  founding  of 
the  Utica  Academy.  Prominent  among  those  who  made  honorable  the 
beginnings  of  Utica  he  was  a  man  of  intelligence  and  integrity,  of  ster- 
ling sense  and  judgment,  "  of  marked  and  dignified  appearance  and 
courteous  manners,  who  always  commanded  respect  and  in  his  later 
years  veneration." 

Before  speaking  of  the  new  comers  of  1797  let  us  notice  a  few  individ- 
uals who  were  already  located  when  the  settlers  of  1797  themselves 
appeared.  Besides  other  merchants  than  those  we  have  mentioned  Clark 
&  Fellows  kept  at  this  time  the  largest  store  in  tlie  place,  that  is  to  say 
for  the  benefit  of  the  inhabitants,  Post's  trade  being  chiefly  with  the  In- 
dians. It  was  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the  Whitesboro  road  near  the 
present  Division  street,  and  was  in  fact  but  a  mere  hut.  Silas  Clark,  the 
elder  partner,  was  a  stirring  man  and  made  money.  He  owned  a 
farm  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  settlement ;  also  a  house  and  lot  some- 
what nearer,  besides  the  house  in  which  he  lived  on  the  south  side  of 
Whitesboro  street  and  almost  opposite  his  store. 

William  Fellows,  after  the  death  of  his  associate,  formed  a  connection 
with  Moses  Bagg,  jr.,  for  the  sale  of  the  miscellaneous  goods  of  a 
country  store.  This  connection  was  closed  in  the  year  1807,  when  John 
Camp,  who  had  been  their  clerk,  purchased  Mr.  Fellows's  interest. 

Men  of  higher  mark  than  these  were  Nathan  WilHams  and  Erastus 
Clark,  the  earliest  lawyers  of  the  place,  who  will  be  noticed  in  a  later 
chapter.  Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  admitted  as  an  attorney  of  the  Su- 
preme Court,  August  5,  1790,  made  his  debut  before  a  Fort  Schuyler 
audience  on  the  anniversary  of  our  nation's  independence,  1797.  His 
address    was    delivered    in    a    grove  in   the   rear   of  the   shingle-sided 


42  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

house  heretofore  mentioned,  and  on  whose  site  was  erected  the  fol- 
lowing year  The  Hotel,  as  it  was  called,  par  eminence.  Mr.  Blood- 
good  was  a  native  of  Albany  and  a  graduate  of  Union  College. 
What  headway  he  made  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  we  are  unable 
to  declare;  but  two  years  later  he  was  appointed  county  clerk,  and 
herein  he  found  what  was  almost  his  life  work ;  at  least  during  nearly 
the  whole  period  of  his  residence  did  he  hold  by  successive  re- appoint- 
ments this  remunerative  and  responsible  station.  His  political  feelings 
were  strong  and  his  influence,  both  by  means  of  his  pen  and  by  per- 
sonal efforts,  was  considerable.  Neither  was  he  by  any  means  indiffer- 
ent to  all  that  related  to  the  interests  of  the  town.  He  was  a  village 
trustee  in  1805,  and  on  the  organization  of  the  Bank  of  Utica  became 
one  of  its  trustees.  In  18 10,  as  senator,  he  represented  the  district  at 
Albany,  where  he  was  a  zealous  follower  of  De  Witt  Clinton.  He 
resided  on  W^hitesboro  street  within  a  short  distance  eastward  from  the 
office  over  which  he  presided. 

As  notable  a  person  as  any  we  have  yet  mentioned,  conspicuous  alike 
for  his  past  eminent  service  to  the  country  as  for  high  social  position 
and  influence  and  example  in  the  village  he  chose  for  his  later  residence, 
was  Colonel  Walker.  Col.  Benjamin  Walker  was  born  in  1753  in  England 
and  it  is  believed  in  the  city  of  London,  and  was  a  pupil  in  his  youth  of  the 
Blue  Coat  School.  He  did  not  receive  a  brilliant  but  a  solid  education, 
and  having  afterward  passed  some  time  in  France  he  became  a  mas- 
ter of  the  French  language.  At  an  early  age  he  entered  the  service  of 
a  respectable  mercantile  house  in  London,  under  whose  patronage  he 
came  while  yet  a  youth  to  this  country  and  resided  with  an  eminent 
merchant  in  New  York.  He  was  still  in  the  service  of  this  gentleman 
when  the  Revolutionary  war  commenced.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
contest  he  entered  warmly  into  the  cause  of  American  independence. 
He  was  serving  in  the  rank  of  captain  in  the  Second  Regiment  of  New 
York  when  he  was  appointed  to  act  as  aid-de-camp  to  the  Baron  Steu- 
ben. It  was  at  Valley  Forge  on  the  25th  of  April,  1778,  that  Steuben 
took  him  into  his  family  as  his  first  aid.  In  this  situation  he  gained  the 
warmest  friendship  and  most  intimate  confidence  of  the  baron,  and  was 
ever  after  regarded  by  him  with  the  affection  of  a  son.  Frederick  Kapp, 
in  his  Life  of  Steuben,  informs  us  that  Walker  superintended  all  his  cor- 


CAREER  OF  COL.  BENJAMIX  WALKER.  43 

respondence  and  writing  from  1778  to  1782.  Steuben  dictated  to  him 
in  French  and  Walker  wrote  it  out  in  English.  Thus  almost  all  the 
drafts  of  Steuben's  reforms  and  plans  are  written  in  Walker's  neat  hand  - 
writing.  He  accompanied  his  general  to  all  the  inspections  and  reviews, 
acted  as  translator  in  ease  of  need,  and  often  extricated  him  from  diffi- 
culties. Even  in  the  most  difficult  matters  Steuben  relied  chiefly  on 
Walker's  sound  judgment,  and  the  success  of  Steuben's  reforms  is  in  a 
great  measure  due  to  his  able  and  indefatigableaid-de-camp.  In  the  year 
1781-82  Walker  joined  General  Washington's  suite  and  acted  as  his  aid 
to  the  close  of  the  war.  He  was  one  of  the  persons  so  strongly  rec- 
ommended to  the  patronage  of  Congress  in  the  letter  of  Washington 
accompanying  his  resignation,  and  was  for  many  years  honored  with 
an  epistolary  correspondence  with  that  great  man.  After  the  con- 
clusion of  peace  he  was  at  first  secretary  to  the  governor  of  New  York, 
but  soon  after  established  himself  in  the  wholesale  hardware  and  com- 
mission business  in  company  with  Maj.  Benjamin  Ledyard.  He  was  also 
naval  officer  of  the  port  of  New  York  and  continued  to  hold  the  place 
until  1797.  In  the  latter  year,  when  he  was  appointed  agent  of  the  Earl 
of  Bath's  great  estate,  a  landed  property  lying  chiefly  in  Madison 
County,  he  removed  to  Old  Fort  Schuyler,  where  he  resided  the  remain- 
der of  his  life.  The  management  of  this  estate  as  well  as  the  care  of 
the  lands  devised  to  him  by  Baron  Steuben,  and  which  were  situated 
chiefly  in  the  northern  part  of  this  county,  occupied  much  of  his  atten- 
tion. He  was  in  1800  chosen  to  represent  this  district  in  Congress,  but 
could  never  afterward  be  prevailed  upon  to  enter  on  the  duties  of  public 
life.  Although  he  declined  the  public  services  of  his  country  he  was 
by  no  means  inattentive  to  the  welfare  of  his  fellow  citizens. 

Among  those  who  took  part  in  the  organization  and  erection  of  Trin- 
ity Church  he  was  perhaps  the  foremost.  The  Bleecker  family  had 
promised  the  donation  of  a  site  to  the  first  church  of  any  kind  that 
should  be  erected  in  this  place.  Lady  Bath,  of  England,  had  also 
pledged  the  gift  of  several  hundred  acres  of  her  land  in  Madison  County 
to  the  first  church  of  an  Episcopalian  character  that  should  be  built  in 
this  part  of  the  State.  Not  only  was  it  through  the  agency  of  Colonel 
Walker  that  this  latter  gift  was  realized,  but  his  name  also  heads  the  list 
of  individual  subscriptions  made  for  the  church,  and  in  association  with 


44  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Nathan  Williams  and  William  Inman  he  was  appointed  on  the  building 
committee. 

He  built  for  himself  a  fine  mansion  at  the  eastern  end  of  Broad  street 
which  then  had  a  large  farm  attached.  His  house  was  the  seat  of  re- 
fined and  elegant  hospitality  and  he  a  model  gentleman.  "  He  gave 
much  of  his  time  to  the  society  of  his  friends,  to  whom  his  gay  good 
sense,  his  unassuming  manners,  his  open,  generous  temper,  his  independ- 
ent spirit,  and  his  extensive  acquaintance  with  the  world  rendered  him 
a  most  enlivening  and  instructive  companion."  For  those  days  his  style 
was  considerable ;  he  kept  three  slaves,  employed  several  men  on  his 
garden  and  grounds,  had  a  good  deal  of  plate,  and  was  the  first  inhab- 
itant who  owned  a  coach.  Of  Colonel  Walker  it  is  said  that  "  it  was  his 
peculiar  delight  to  search  out  merit  in  distress,  to  cheer  the  poor  man 
in  despondency,  to  prove  himself  a  father  to  the  fatherless,  and  to  restore 
hope  and  comfort  to  the  breast  of  the  widow.  To  these  benevolent  pur- 
poses he  appropriated  a  large  share  of  his  income,  and  it  is  confidently 
believed  that  no  individual  in  tliis  part  of  the  country  distributed  more 
in  charity  than  he.  And  yet  in  all  this  there  was  no  ostentation  of  benef- 
icence." In  person  he  was  rather  short  and  fleshy,  having  a  decided 
English  physiognomy  and  an  expression  of  benevolence  coupled  with 
some  degree  of  sternness.  He  had  a  fine  voice,  and  when  he  presided 
at  one  time  at  a  meeting  of  citizens  called  to  express  their  disapproba- 
tion of  Mr.  Jefferson's  embargo  he  addressed  them  in  a  loud  tone  and 
with  a  curt,  martial  air,  as  he  would  have  issued  orders  on  the  field 
of  battle.  His  death  took  place  on  the  13th  of  January,  18 18.  His 
remains,  which  from  that  time  had  lain  in  the  village  burying  ground, 
were  on  the  17th  of  June,  1875,  reinterred  with  public  and  befitting 
ceremonies  in  Forest  Hill  Cemetery.  His  portrait  is  preserved  in  the 
picture  of  Washington  resigning  his  commission,  painted  by  Trumbull 
for  the  rotunda  in  the  capitol. 

The  next  to  be  chronicled  is  Bryan  Johnson,  widely  known  after- 
ward as  one  of  the  foremost  merchants  of  Utica.  He,  too,  was  a  native 
of  England,  and  was  born  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century.  A 
brother  of  his  had  lived  some  time  in  this  country  and  was  an  enthu- 
siast in  all  that  related  thereto.  Influenced  by  his  representations  Mr. 
Johnson  was  induced  to  relinquish  his  trade  in  London  and  to  embark 


BYRAN  JOHNSON,  AN  EARLY  MERCHANT.  45 

for  America.  Leaving  his  family,  then  consisting  of  his  wife  and  one 
son,  to  remain  until  he  should  have  secured  for  them  a  permanent  home 
he  departed  for  Dublin,  whence  he  sailed  for  New  York.  Proceeding 
to  Albany  and  thence  up  the  Mohawk  on  his  way  to  Canada  Mr.  John- 
son arrived  at  Old  Fort  Schuyler  on  the  4th  of  July,  1797.  He  was  so 
much  pleased  with  the  appearance  of  the  place  that  he  decided  to  re- 
main here,  and  soon  established  himself  in  a  small  building  on  the 
Whitesboro  road  near  where  is  now  Division  street. 

His  earliest  advertisement  acquaints  the.  public  that  he  will  advance 
ready  cash  on  all  kinds  of  produce.  He  kept  a  good  assortment  of 
goods,  which  he  sold  at  prices  unusually  low.  His  ambition  for  some 
time  seems  to  have  been  directed  more  to  the  transaction  of  a  large 
business  than  to  make  great  gains.  To  attain  his  object  he  sought  the 
reputation  of  selling  goods  cheaper  than  his  village  competitors  and 
to  purchase  country  produce  at  higher  prices.  His  greatest  compet- 
itors were,  however,  outside  the  village.  Messrs.  Kane  &  Van  Rens- 
selaer, a  highly  respectable  and  rich  firm,  were  established  at  Canajo- 
harie  and  were  transacting  a  great  business,  extending  far  beyond  this 
place.  Their  store  at  Canajoharie  was  near  the  Mohawk,  and  as  their 
business  kept  declining  they  would  hail  the  boats  passing  down  the 
river  with  wheat  and  potash  in  order  to  ascertain  to  whom  the  freight 
belonged.  The  answer  was,  "To  Bryan  Johnson,  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler"  ; 
and  as  boats  returned  up  the  river  loaded  with  merchandise  gave  the 
same  answer  when  questioned  as  to  the  ownership  of  the  goods  Messrs. 
Kane  &  Van  Rensselaer  resolved  to  go  to  the  new  emporium  and  to 
share  in  the  same  trade.  The  rivalry  thus  produced  continued  with  un- 
abated force  after  Messrs.  Kane  &  Van  Rensselaer  had  established  them- 
,  selves  here  and  as  long  as  Mr.  Johnson  remained  in  business. 

In  the  meantime,  however,  there  arrived  from  England  the  son  of  the 
latter,  the  late  A.  B.  Johnson,  who  became  an  associate  of  his  father. 
The  following  is  their  advertisement  of  1802:  "New  universal  cheap 
wholesale  and  retail  store.  B.  Johnson  takes  this  opportunity  of  inform- 
ing the  public  that  he  has,  in  addition  to  his  former  store,  opened  the 
above,  adjoining  the  printing  office  on  the  Genesee  road,  where  he  has 
received  a  large  and  fashionable  assortment  of  dry  goods,  &c.,  &c.  He 
continues  paying,  as  usual,  the  highest  prices  in  cash  for  seasoned  furs. 


46  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

rtax  seed,  wheat,  pot  and  pearl  ashes."  The  son  never  participated  in 
the  rivalry  so  far  as  to  disregard  the  great  object  of  trade,  the  acquisition 
of  property,  and  wielding  a  very  considerable  influence  over  his  father  ; 
notwithstanding  he  was  yet  much  under  age  he  succeeded  in  impress- 
ing him  with  his  own  views.  The  result  was  that  more  money  was 
realized  in  the  last  few  years  of  Mr.  Johnson's  business  than  in  all  the 
former.  But  in  1 809,  soon  after  the  son  had  attained  his  majority  and 
several  years  before  his  own  death,  he  thought  best  to  retire.  He  had 
now  for  many  years  maintained  his  position  as  a  leading  merchant,  and 
by  trade  as  well  as  by  some  fortunate  purchases  of  real  estate  had 
acquired  a  property  of  almost  $50,000. 

Maj.  Benjamin  Hinman  was  a  native  of  Southbury,  Conn.  He  served 
several  years  with  much  credit  in  the  army  of  the  Revolution  as  captain, 
commissary,  wagonmaster,  and  aid  to  General  Greene.  He  was  one 
of  the  thirteen  Hinmans  who  held  commissions  in  that  war  from  the 
town  of  Woodbury.  On  one  occasion,  when  the  British  threatened  to 
attack  the  fort  at  Rome,  he  was  sent  thither,  and  was  so  much  pleased 
with  the  character  of  the  country  through  which  he  passed  that  he 
determined  on  the  expiration  of  the  war  to  settle  there.  He  came  ac- 
cordingly about  the  year  1787  and  purchased  a  tract  of  about  2,000 
acres  at  Little  Falls.  In  1797  or  1798  he  removed  to  Fort  Schuyler. 
After  occupying  two  or  three  different  residences  on  this  side  of  the 
river  and  keeping  a  public  house  a  few  years  across  the  bridge  in  Deer- 
field  he  finally  took  up  his  residence  in  Main  street  a  few  doors  east  of 
the  square.  While  living  in  Deerfield  he  superintended  the  construction 
of  the  dike  across  the  flats.  The  former  road  had  been  an  ungraded 
and  meandering  one,  following  the  course  of  the  higher  portions  of  land. 

Rev.  John  Hammond  was  a  Baptist  minister  who  in  1797  was  living 
in  this  place,  his  house  being  on  the  public  square  a  little  below  Bagg's 
Tavern.  While  here  he  preached  at  Deerfield  and  elsewhere  in  this 
vicinity.  At  this  time  he  is  said  to  have  conducted  a  class  on  Sunday 
for  instruction  in  the  Scriptures,  and  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  a 
pioneer  in  the  work  of  Sunday  school  teaching.  He  also  labored  occa- 
sionally among  the  Indians;  but  Elder  Hammond  was  not  solely  and 
exclusively  devoted  to  ministerial  labors ;  he  was  also  a  land  surveyor 
as  were  his  three  sons.     Assisted  by  these  sons  he  surveyed  the  tract  in 


CAPTAIN  MACOMBER  AND  SAMUEL  HOOKER.  47 

the  northern  part  of  the  State  purchased  by  John  Brown,  of  Providence, 
and  known  as  Brown's  tract. 

In  the  course  of  this  year  Capt.  George  Macomber  conducts  hither 
his  eldest  son  and  leaves  him  to  manage  for  himself  while  he  goes  back 
to  Taunton,  Mass.,  and  after  a  year  or  more  comes  again,  bringing  with 
him  the  remainder  of  his  family.  This  family  claim  to  be  descendants 
of  one  of  the  historic  company  of  the  Mayflower,  and  still  cherish  as  a 
sacred  heirloom  a  ring  that  bears  the  name  of  Mary  Standish. 

Capt.  George  Macomber  had  previously  followed  the  sea,  but  leaving 
this  hazardous  pursuit  now  that  he  was  past  middle  life  and  responsible 
for  the  settlement  of  a  family  of  ten  children  he  emigrated  with  them 
to  the  new  country.  As  for  himself,  it  being  too  late  to  acquire  a  new 
profession,  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  gardening. 

Samuel  Hooker  was  another  carpenter  who  at  this  time  took  up  his 
residence  here.  Originally  from  Barre,  Mass.,  he  had  settled  in  Albany 
and  was  engaged  in  his  chosen  calling  when  he  was  induced  to  come  to 
Old  Fort  Scliuyler  to  superintend  the  erection  by  the  agents  of  the 
Holland  Land  Company  of  a  large  brick  hotel  on  Whitesboro  street. 
His  son  Philip  remained  in  Albany  and  became  eminent  as  an  architect, 
having  been  employed  in  the  erection  of  St.  Peter's  and  the  Lutheran 
Churches  as  well  as  the  State  capitoh  The  remainder  of  Mr.  Hooker's 
family  removed  with  him,  including  his  son  John,  who  was  also  a  car- 
penter and  builder.  These  two  were  the  only  persons  resident  who 
were  competent  to  project  and  carry  on  so  important  a  structure  as  the 
hotel.  It  was  probably  begun  in  1797  and  was  finished  near  the  close 
of  the  year  1799.  A  more  particular  account  of  it  will  be  given  here- 
after. In  June,  1803,  when  a  subscription  had  been  started  looking 
toward  the  building  of  Trinity  Church,  the  Messrs.  Hooker  presented 
plans  which  were  accepted,  and  they  were  engaged  to  go  on  with  the 
work  until  the  money  had  been  expended.  Beside  these  and  other 
more  private  undertakings  Mr.  Hooker  was  in  1808  acting  as  agent  for 
two  fire  insurance  companies.  He  was  an  unassuming,  industrious,  and 
upright  man.  That  he  was  much  respected  in  his  own  church  at  least 
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  for  twenty-one  years  he  was  annually 
elected  one  of  its  officers,  two-thirds  of  which  time  he  was  a  warden. 
Hooker,  son  of  the  foregoing,  after  following  for  some  years  his  trade  of 
carpenter  and  builder,  went  into  the  sale  of  lumber  with  Seth  Dwight. 


48  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Seventy  acres  of  lot  No.  96  were  on  the  2d  of  January,  1897.  bought 
by  Richard  Kimball  from  Jedediah  Sanger,  of  New  Hartford,  who  had 
himself  bought  of  James  S.  Kip.  This  farm,  which  Mr.  Kimball 
occupied  until  1804,  lay  chiefly  on  the  eastern  side  of  Genesee  Hill,  but 
extended  in  part  across  to  the  western  side  nearly  as  far  as  the  pres- 
ent Aikin  street,  where  it  bordered  on  the  southern  line  of  Judge  Coop- 
er's purchase.  The  farm-house,  which  since  Mr.  Kimball's  day  has  been 
the  home  of  numerous  successive  tenants,  stood  nearly  on  the  site  of 
the  sumptuous  mansion  of  Irvin  A.  Williams.  At  present  it  stands  on 
the  street  which  in  after  years  was  named  in  allusion  to  the  early  owner 
of  the  territory  it  traverses,  though  in  allusion  merely,  since  contempt 
for  a  name  so  wanting  in  honorable  belongings  as  Kimball  has  changed 
it  to  Kemble.  This  owner,  having  sold  his  farm,  went  back  to  Con- 
necticut. 

We  have  arrived  at  the  spring  of  1798,  a  period  which  to  their  suc- 
cessors is  an  entirely  arbitrary  one,  yet  which  to  the  inhabitants  of  our 
settlement  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  epoch.  They  had  begun  to 
realize  the  need  of  a  more  formal  civil  organization,  and  moreover  as- 
pired to  have  their  place  recognized  by  a  name  that  should  be  both 
more  distinctive  and  more  easy  to  speak  than  the  accidental  one  it  had 
thus  far  borne.  As  a  curious  illustration  of  the  nature  of  fame  the  orig- 
inator of  the  name  of  Utica  cannot  be  admitted  as  past  all  doubt.  The 
common  report  goes  that  the  inhabitants  were  assembled  in  the  public 
room  of  Bagg's  Tavern  and  the  question  was  raised  of  a  designation  for 
their  soon  to  be  incorporated  village.  A  number  of  names  were  pro- 
posed. Some  of  those  present  were  in  favor  of  retaining  the  present  one  ; 
one  individual  liked  Indian  names  and  wished  that  the  village  shouldtake 
the  patronymic  of  the  noble  Oneida  chief,  Sconandoa  ;  another  preferred 
a  more  national  hero  and  would  have  it  called  Washington  ;  another  who 
was  in  search  of  briefness  would  call  it  Kent,  an  euphonious  term  and  full 
of  pleasing  memories  to  the  descendant  of  English  ancestry.  This 
latter  had  strong  advocates,  but  was  defeated  by  the  ridicule  of  a 
citizen  of  whom  we  now  hear  for  the  first  time,  but  of  whom  I  can  pick 
up  nothing  more  except  that  his  name  was  Little,  and  that  he  afterward 
drowned  himself 

Finding  agreement  by  other  means  impossible  it  was  resolved  to  de- 


UTICA  NAMED  AND  INCORPORATED.  49 

cide  the  name  by  lot.  Each  person  present  deposited  in  a  hat  the  name 
of  his  preference  written  on  a  slip  of  paper,  and  of  these  there  were 
thirteen.  The  name  first  drawn  was  to  be  the  accepted  one.  And  so 
the  lot  fell  upon  the  heathen  name  of  Utica,  the  choice  of  that  eminent 
classical  scholar,  Erastus  Clark. 

In  due  time  came  from  the  State  legislature  the  act  of  incorporation 
already  applied  for.  This  act,  passed  April  3,  1798,  defined  the  bound- 
aries of  the  village  and  gave  the  citizens  the  right  of  self-government 
under  five  freeholders  duly  elected  as  trustees,  and  who  were  invested 
with  the  powers  usually  granted  to  small  incorporated  villages.  And 
yet  these  powers  were  quite  restricted,  amounting  to  little  more  than 
protection  against  nuisances  on  the  highways  and  the  prevention  and 
extinction  of  fires.  In  its  title  the  village  is  named  by  the  name  it  had 
previously  borne ;  in  the  body  of  the  act  it  is  named  only  by  its  new 
one.     And  thus  was  Old  Fort  Schuyler  merged  into  Utica. 


CHAPTER  II. 


THE   FIRST   VILLAGE   CHARTER. 

Counties  Erected  —  New  comers  of  1798  —  Notes  from  Dwight's  Travels  —  The 
Holland  Land  Company  —  The  Phelps  and  Gorham  Purchase  —  The  first  Hotel  —  Its 
Proprietors  —  Religious  interests  and  an  early  Preacher  —  The  Village  tax  list  for 
1800  —  Notes  of  another  Traveler  —  Highway  Improvements  —  Business  Develop- 
ment—  The  year  1801  —  Recollections  of  the  Welch  Population  —  General  character- 
istics at  this  early  Period  —  Settlers  of  1 801-04  —  Petition  for  a  new  Charter  —  A  Map 
of  the  Village  in  1806 — General  Features. 

NOT  the  settlement  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler  alone  dropped  at  this  time 
the  name  which  had  previously  attached  to  it;  the  territory  in 
which  it  was  located  received  Hkewise  a  new  christening  in  the  spring 
of  1798.  The  former  county  of  Montgomery  had  already  by  successive 
acts  of  the  legislature  been  curtailed  of  its  vast  dimensions,  and  the 
counties  of  Chemung,  Ontario,  Tioga,  Otsego,  Herkimer,  and  Onon- 
7 


50  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

daga  had  been  one  after  another  erected.  Whitestown  at  the  date  in 
question  was  still  a  part  of  Herkimer  County,  though  diminished  in  size 
by  the  setting  off  of  several  independent  towns.  By  an  act  passed 
March  15, 1798,  Herkimer  was  itself  divided  and  the  additional  counties 
of  Chenango  and  Oneida  were  formed.  Whitestown  now  fell  to  the 
belongings  of  Oneida,  and  Utica  was  but  an  inconsiderable  though  in- 
corporated village  in  this  still  extensive  township. 

Of  the  first  seven  years  of  its  corporate  life  all  records  are  lost;  they 
were  burned  in  the  fire  which  on  the  7th  of  December,  1848,  consumed 
the  council  chamber  and  the  most  of  its  contents.  A  like  fate  has 
befallen  the  early  town  records  of  Whitestown.  The  times  of  adoption 
of  a  few  streets  of  Utica,  which  were  copied  from  the  latter  before  their 
destruction,  are  the  sole  items  saved.  The  newspapers  of  that  date  are 
quite  barren  of  news  merely  local ;  engrossed  with  foreign  concerns  their 
editors  gave  little  heed  to  events  that  happened  directly  around  them  ; 
still  less  did  they  think  to  cater  for  those  who  at  this  day  might  study 
their  sheets  to  seek  out  the  past.  Thus  of  village  affairs  our  ignorance 
is  nearly  complete,  and  we  know  scarce  one  of  the  names  of  those  who 
then  were  in  rule.  From  a  manuscript  saved  we  gather  that  Francis  A. 
Bloodgood  was  treasurer  in  1800  and  1801  and  Talcott  Camp  in  1802. 
We  know  also  from  subsequent  minutes  that  at  the  first  freeholders' 
meeting  held  under  the  charter  of  1805  the  trustees  were  present.  But 
who  the  trustees  were  and  what  had  been  their  official  acts  has  perished 
forever.  On  the  occasion  of  the  fire  which  burned  the  store  of  Messrs. 
Post  Sz;  Hamlin  in  February,  1804,  a  card  was  issued  by  the  trustees  of 
the  village  in  which  they  present  "  their  warm  thanks  to  the  fire  com- 
pany and  to  the  citizens  and  strangers  in  general  for  their  eager  exer- 
tions in  saving  the  property  of  the  sufferers  and  in  extinguishing  the 
flames."  So  far  as  we  know  this  card  is  the  only  evidence  left  us  that 
as  a  corporate  body  the  trustees  ever  existed,  and  the  thanks  accorded 
the  firemen  the  only  proof  that  their  powers  had  once  been  in  exercise, 
as  they  would  seem  to  have  been  in  organizing  the  company.  For  as- 
sociate enterprise  the  time  was  much  too  new,  and  institutions,  commer- 
cial, manufacturing,  or  benevolent,  awaited  a  more  established  order  of 
things.  Dismissing  then  the  expectation  of  obtaining  any  light  from 
records  written  or  printed  upon  this  infantile  portion  of  the  civic  life  of 


THE  NEWLY  NAMED   VILLAGE.  51 

Utica  we  must  go  on  as  we  have  begun  with  the  narrative  of  the  com- 
ponent parts  of  the  population  and  be  content  to  infer  the  tenor  of  the 
public  acts  from  the  character  of  the  actors. 

It  so  happens  besides  that  the  period  of  the  first  charter  covers  the 
advent  of  many  whose  healthful  influence  was  felt  throughout  the  entire 
village  history,  who,  like  some  already  sketched,  were  men  of  nerve, 
fortitude,  and  energy,  honest  in  principle  and  in  conduct,  wise  and  dili- 
gent in  their  own  behalf,  yet  zealous  for  the  interests  of  the  place  of  their 
adoption.  These  for  their  private  worth  and  their  public  deeds  should 
be  held  in  perpetual  honor.  And  though  of  the  period  in  question  there 
is  little  of  the  heroic  to  relate,  though  it  may  have  been  "  a  day  of  small 
things,"  its  actors  were  steadily  laying  the  foundation  of  a  greater  future, 
were  forming  for  themselves  and  their  village  a  reputation  for  thrift,  en- 
terprise, and  virtue  which  their  descendants  glory  to  inherit,  and  were 
preparing  to  become  partakers  in  most  of  those  local  and  general  under- 
takings that  have  given  prosperity  to  town  and  county. 

Turning  to  the  fresh  comers  of  the  newly  named  village  the  first  we 
notice  is  Thomas  Skinner,  a  student  of  law.  A  graduate  of  Williams 
College  in  the  year  1797  we  find  him  the  next  year  prosecuting  his 
studies  and  boarding  at  the  house  of  Talcott  Camp,  on  Whitesboro  street, 
in  company  with  his  preceptor  and  former  fellow  townsman  at  Will- 
iamstown,  Nathan  Williams.  It  was  not  long  before  they  were  part- 
ners in  practice  and  were  still  further  united  by  the  marriage  of  the  lat- 
ter to  Mary,  the  sister  of  Mr.  Skinner.  Far  short  of  Mr.  Williams  in 
force,  learning,  or  legal  acumen  he  surpassed  him  in  fluency  and  grace 
as  a  speaker.  He  had  a  fine  imagination  and  a  classical  taste  improved 
by  the  choicest  reading.  Possessing  skill  also  as  a  writer  he  became 
one  of  the  principal  contributors  to  the  Columbian  Gazette.  In  1807 
he  was  the  attorney  of  the  village  and  somewhat  later  held  similar  re- 
lations to  the  Utica  Bank.  For  some  years  he  acted  as  treasurer  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church  and  was  also  a  village  trustee.  His  oratorical 
repute  and  his  skill  as  an  advocate  secured  him  at  one  time  a  nomination 
to  Congress,  but  he  was  beaten  by  that  abler  man,  Thomas  R.  Gold. 

The  year  1798  is  signalized  as  that  in  which  was  established  the  first 
newspaper  in  Utica.  This  was  the  Whitestown  Gazette,  which  had  been 
first  set  up  in  New  Hartford  in  1793.      Four  years  later  its  publisher. 


52  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

William  McLean,  removed  it  here,  changing  its  name  to  theWhitestown 
Gazette  and  Caio's  Patrol,  the  addition  having  reference  to  the  younger 
Cato,  who  was  the  defender  of  ancient  Utica.  Mr.  McLean  was  a 
native  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  where  he  was  born  December  2,  1774,  and 
could  not  have  been  long  out  of  his  apprenticeship  when  he  started  his 
paper.  He  was  assiduous  in  his  devotion  to  business  until  the  year  1 803, 
when  he  sold  out  to  two  of  his  apprentices,  Messrs.  Seward  and  Will- 
iams, and  moved  back  to  New  Hartford. 

Under  date  of  November  23,  1798,  John  C.  Hoyt  "begs  to  inform 
the  public,"  through  the  columns  of  the  Whitestown  Gazette,  "  that  he 
has  commenced  business  as  a  taylor  at  the  shop  formerly  occupied  by 
William  S.  Warner,  opposite  Bagg's  Inn,  Utica,  where  he  hopes  to  give 
satisfaction  to  all  who  may  favor  him  with  their  commands."  His  shop 
was  on  the  southwest  corner  of  the  Genesee  and  Whitesboro  roads. 
Here  he  continued  his  business  for  more  than  twenty  years,  reared  a 
family,  and  gained  the  respect  of  his  fellow  townsmen.  He  was  twice  a 
trustee  of  the  village  and  was  likewise  a  trustee  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  was  an  upright  and  benevolent  man.    ' 

The  appearance  of  the  place  at  the  period  in  question  we  have  a 
picture  of  from  the  pen  of  an  intelligent  and  trustworthy  traveler.  In 
the  year  1798  Rev.  Timothy  Dwight,  D.D.,  president  of  Yale  College, 
made  a  tour  through  this  portion  of  the  State,  and  in  the  published  vol- 
umes of  his  travels,  wherein  he  has  condensed  the  results  of  this  and  a 
somewhat  later  journey,  he  thus  discourses  of  Utica  :  "  Utica,  when  we 
passed  through  it,  was  a  pretty  village  containing  fifty  houses.  It  is 
built  on  the  spot  where  Fort  Schuyler  formerly  stood.  Its  site  is  the 
declivity  of  the  hill  which  bounds  the  valley  of  the  Mohawk,  and  here 
slopes  easily  and  elegantly  to  the  river.  The  houses  stand  almost  all  on 
a  single  street  parallel  to  the  river.  Generally  those  which  were  built 
before  our  arrival  were  small,  not  being  intended  for  permanent  habita- 
tions. The  settlers  were  almost  wholly  traders  and  mechanics,  and  it 
was  said  that  their  business  had  already  become  considerable.  Their 
expectations  of  future  prosperity  were  raised  to  the  highest  pitch,  and 
not  a  doubt  was  entertained  that  this  village  would  at  no  great  distance 
of  time  become  the  emporium  of  all  the  commerce  carried  on  between 
the  ocean  and  a  vast  interior.     We  found  the  people  of  Utica  laboring 


SOME  INTERESTING  DESCRIPTIONS.  53 

and  in  a  fair  way  to  labor  a  long  time  under  one  very  serious  disadvant- 
age. The  lands  on  which  they  live  are  chiefly  owned  by  persons  who 
reside  at  a  distance  and  who  refuse  to  sell  or  to  rent  them  except  on 
terms  which  are  exorbitant.  The  stories  which  we  heard  concerning 
this  subject  it  was  difficult  to  believe,  even  when  told  by  persons  of  the 
best  reputation.  A  company  of  gentlemen  from  Holland  who  have 
purchased  large  tracts  of  land  in  this  State  and  Pennsylvania,  and  who 
are  known  by  the  name  of  the  Holland  Land  Company,  have  built  here 
a  large  brick  house  to  serve  as  an  inn.  The  people  of  Utica  are  united 
with  those  of  Whitesboro  in  their  parochial  concerns." 

With  reference  to  the  sanguine  and  seemingly  fallacious  expectations 
of  the  settlers,  and  to  the  obstacle  which  in  the  opinion  of  this  author 
hindered  the  rapid  growth  of  their  place,  I  add  a  single  sentence  from 
the  recorded  notes  of  an  early  resident.  He  says  :  "  The  inhabitants 
always  entertained  a  very  hopeful  opinion  of  their  village,  and  real  estate 
was  in  more  request  and  at  higher  prices  than  in  the  surrounding 
villages.  This  was  much  induced  by  the  withholding  from  sale  of  the 
Bleecker  estate,  which  covered  a  large  part  of  Utica." 

A  noteworthy  fact  mentioned  by  Dr.  Dwight  is  the  existence  of  a 
large  brick  house  then  recently  erected  for  an  inn.  The  magnitude  of 
the  structure  for  the  time  and  place,  the  expectations  of  its  owners,  and 
the  fact  that  it  remains  today  almost  the  only  landmark  of  Utica  as  it 
was  upwards  of  ninety  years  ago  will  justify  us  in  devoting  a  few  para- 
graphs to  its  history. 

On  the  2d  of  November,  1795,  the  agents  of  the  Holland  Land  Com- 
pany bought  of  Thomas  and  Augustus  Corey  200  acres  of  great  lot 
No.  95,  which  purchase,  or  a  part  of  it,  was  commonly  known  afterward 
as  the  hotel  lot.  Within  two  years  the  company  proceeded  to  erect  upon 
it  a  large  brick  hotel,  which  was  not  only  the  first  brick  house  in  the 
village,  but  the  first  of  its  size  in  the  county  and  probably  in  the  State 
west  of  Albany.  Indeed  it  may  be  scarcely  an  exaggeration  to  say  there 
was  not  its  like  anywhere  between  the  Hudson  and  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
The  site  selected  was  near  the  shingle-sided  farm-house  of  the  Coreys  on 
Whitesboro  street,  and  was  probably  as  swampy  a  spot  as  any  in  the  vil- 
lage— a  veritable  flag-pond.  The  contract  for  the  erection  of  the  build- 
ing was  made  with  Samuel   Hooker  and  John,  his  son.       As  we  have 


54  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

seen  they  were  carpenters  and  architects  of  Albany  who,  being  invited 
to  undertake  the  job,  came  here  and  made  the  place  their  subsequent 
home.  The  bricks  were  made  by  Heli  Foot,  of  Deerfield.  After  suffi- 
cient earth  had  been  removed  there  were  laid,  as  foundations  for  the 
superincumbent  stone  and  brick,  hemlock  logs  placed  lengthwise  along 
the  sides  and  ends.  Perishable  as  such  a  foundation  may  seem  it  served 
well  for  a  while,  but  in  process  of  time  these  timbers  settled  consider- 
ably. Fortunately  this  settling  was  uniform,  so  that  while  it  diminished 
the  height  of  the  building  it  did  no  material  injury  to  the  walls  or  the 
flooring.  When  completed  it  was  a  square,  three-storied  structure 
with  a  four-sided  roof  It  contained,  besides  the  usual  public  rooms  and 
numerous  lodging  apartments  of  a  house  of  this  nature,  a  large  ball  room 
in  the  second  story  of  the  west  end  and  a  room  which  was  soon  occu- 
pied by  the  Masonic  lodge.  It  was  an  immense  edifice  for  the  time  and 
place,  and  loomed  above  all  the  story  and  a  half  wooden  houses  of  the 
village  like  a  palace  among  hovels.  Upon  its  front  was  displayed  in 
chiseled  letters  which  no  subsequent  repaintings  have  been  able  to 
wholly  obliterate  :    "  Hotel." 

Ten  years  before,  in  July,  1788,  Messrs.  Phelps  and  Gorham  bought 
from  the  State  of  Massachusetts  the  title  to  the  Genesee  country,  so 
called,  containing  more  than  a  million  of  acres  now  included  in  the  sev- 
eral counties,  and  began  to  offisr  these  lands  for  sale.  Within  two  years, 
as  we  learn  from  the  census  of  1790,  there  were  already  settled  upon 
them  a  population  of  upwards  of  1,000,  and  this  amount  was  annually 
augmenting.  The  Military  tract,  southwest  from  Utica,  and  the  Hol- 
land Land  Company's  purchase,  lying  beyond  that  of  Phelps  and  Gor- 
ham, were  soon  after  likewise  thrown  upon  the  market  and  like  it  were 
being  speedily  peopled.  The  rapidity,  in  fact,  with  which  Western  New 
York  was  now  filHng  up  is  paralleled  only  by  the  rapidly  growing  West- 
ern States  of  the  Union. 

Another  evidence  of  the  tide  of  emigration  that  was  now  flowing  to- 
ward this  western  El  Dorado  may  be  seen  in  the  following,  culled  from 
the  "Annals  of  Albany":  In  the  winter  of  1795  1,200  sleighs  loaded  with 
furniture  and  with  men,  women,  and  children  passed  through  Albany  in 
three  days,  and  500  were  counted  between  sunrise  and  sunset  of  February 
28th  of  that  year.     All  of  them  were  moving  westward.     Wearenotthen 


THE  FIRST  HOTEL  AND  ITS  LANDLORDS.  55 

surprised  to  learn  that  in  the  experience  of  the  small  taverns  of  Utica  it 
was  by  no  means  uncommon  to  have  not  only  all  the  beds  of  the  house, 
but  the  floors  also,  crowded  with  guests,  and  are  ready  to  believe  that  a 
hotel  of  large  dimensions  was  a  thing  of  necessity.  But  the  Holland 
Land  Company  had  another  object  in  view.  They  were  owners  of  ex- 
tensive tracts  of  land  north  and  also  southwest  of  Utica,  and  still  broader 
ones  at  the  west,  and  it  is  to  be  presumed  that  they  were  desirous  of  a 
house  where  they,  could  detain  some  of  these  many  emigrants  and  more 
easily  tempt  them  to  a  purchase  and  a  settlement. 

The  precise  era  when  work  was  begun  upon  the  hotel  cannot  be  accu- 
rately determined,  though  it  was  probably  in  1797.  But  if  there  is  a 
doubt  as  to  the  time  of  commencement  of  the  work  there  is  none  as  to 
the  date  of  its  completion  and  occupancy  as  a  hotel.  On  the  2d  of 
December,  1799,  it  was  formally  opened  by  its  first  landlord,  Philip  J. 
Schwartze.  Not  long  after  the  inauguration  of  the  hotel,  probably  in 
the  year  following,  a  street  was  opened  southward  from  it  and  intersecting 
the  Genesee  road  at  the  upper  part  of  the  village.  This  it  was  hoped 
would  divert  the  travel  from  the  west  and  bring  it  directly  to  the  doors 
of  the  company.  Naturally  it  took  the  name  of  Hotel  street.^  The 
proprietorship  of  Mr.  Schwartze  was  of  short  continuance,  for  within  a 
year  he  was  succeeded  by  Hobart  Ford,  whose  stay  would  seem  to  have 
been  as  brief  as  that  of  his  predecessor,  since  he  died  on  the  1st  of 
December,  1801.  Later  proprietors  were  Thomas  Sickles,  a  major  of 
the  Revolution  who  had  been  an  assemblyman  and  a  judge  in  Rensse- 
laer County  before  coming  to  Oneida ;  Henry  Bamman,  who  gave  to 
the  building  the  name  of  York  House  and  kept  it  until  the  success  of 
the  canal  drew  away  travelers  from  the  river  and  so  diminished  its  pat- 
ronage ;  and  Seth  Dwight,  a  previous  merchant  and  auctioneer  of  the  vil- 
lage who  opened  it  as  a  boarding-house.  During  the  war  it  was  for  a 
time  garrisoned  with  soldiers,  but  has  since  been  successively  a  board- 
ing-house, a  young  ladies'  seminary,  and  a  private  residence. 

Up  to  the  year  1801  the  only  existing  (and  continuous)  religious  soci- 
ety was  that  which  had  been  organized  at  Whitesboro   in   1793    under 

*  The  absence  of  parallelism  between  the  two  sides  of  this  part  of  Whitesboro  street  and  the 
deep  bay  which  exists  on  its  northern  side  are  portrayed  on  extant  maps  made  in  1798  and  1800. 
This  wide  space  was  doubtless  designed  for  the  easier  movements  of  stages  in  front  of  the  hotel. 
Its  convenience  made  it,  down  to  a  comparatively  recent  period,  a  parade  ground  for  military  com 
panics  and  a  rendezvous  for  partakers  in  civil  displays. 


S6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  title  of  the  United  Society  of  Whitestown  and  Old  Fort  Schuyler, 
and  over  this  there  was  settled  on  the  2ist  of  August,  1794,  the  Rev. 
Bethuel  Dodd.  One-third  of  the  services  were  to  be  bestowed  at  Utica 
and  two -thirds  at  Whitesboro,  and  the  salary  of  the  minister  was  to  be 
raised  in  rateable  proportion  from  the  two  parts  of  his  parish.  After  a 
few  months  the  connection  seemed  to  be  dissolved  ;  the  preaching  at 
Utica  was  discontinued  because  there  was  no  place  in  which  public 
worship  could  be  attended.  In  1797  this  obstacle  was  removed  by  the 
enlargement  of  a  school-house  on  Main  street.  And  to  this  building 
for  a  period  of  several  years  repaired  all  the  church-going  inhabitants  of 
Utica  of  whatever  denominational  persuasion.  Up  to  the  year  1 800  there 
were  not  above  four  members  of  the  church  who  resided  in  the  place, 
but  as  this  number  increased  Mr.  Dodd  preached  here  more  frequently, 
and  before  his  death  in  1804  one-half  of  the  time.  On  days  when  his 
duty  called  him  elsewhere  the  congregation  were  assembled  to  listen  to 
the  reading  of  a  sermon  by  Talcott  Camp,  Hiel  Hollister,  Solomon  P. 
Goodrich,  or  others.  Nathan  Williams,  with  becoming  taste  and  pro- 
priety, conducted  the  singing  and  was  assisted  in  the  bass  by  the  sten- 
torian lungs  of  Richard  Kimball.  Rev.  Bethuel  Dodd  was  a  native  of 
Bloomfield,  N.  J.,  and  was  graduated  at  Queens  (now  Rutgers)  College 
in  1792.  He  followed  the  tide  of  emigration  to  the  "Whitestown 
country,''  where  his  preaching  being  received  with  favor  he  was  called 
to  assist  in  forming  the  first  Presbyterian  Church  that  was  established  in 
Oneida  County,  those  of  Clinton  and  New  Hartford  being  Congrega- 
tional. Dr.  Dwight,  who  knew  him  personally  and  heard  him  preach 
at  Whitesboro,  says  :  "  He  was  a  very  worthy  and  excellent  person  who 
left  behind  him  a  name  which  is  as  the  odor  of  sweet  incense."  From 
one  who  was  a  child  during  his  pastorate  we  learn  that  for  a  few  months 
Mr.  Dodd  held  at  Utica,  during  the  intermission  between  the  morning 
and  afternoon  services,  a  meeting  for  the  children.  Requiring  of  them 
lessons  from  the  New  England  Primer,  and  especially  the  catechism,  he 
commented  and  taught  them  thereupon. 

The  old  school- house,  once  the  sanctuary  of  the  fathers  of  Utica,  the 
seat  of  learning  for  their  sons,  and  a  place  of  general  assembly,  still  exists 
as  a  shed.  It  stands  on  the  south  side  of  Main  street  about  midway 
between  First  and  Second  streets,  with  its  end  to  the  street ;   its  longer 


'-^^■^^  .<a^^ 


THE   WHITESBORO  ROAD.  57 

side  formerly  faced  the  highway.  It  formerly  embodied  all  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  the  old-time  school-house — rough,  uncomfortable,  and 
gloomy.  As  a  place  of  worship  the  building  was  used  until  the  comple- 
tion of  Trinity  Church  in  1806,  when  for  a  brief  period  the  two  congrega- 
tions alternately  worshiped  in  the  latter  edifice.  As  a  school-house  and 
for  town  meetings  it  held  out  a  little  longer,  but  after  its  stove  and  lamp 
had  been  sold  at  auction  in  1808  its  usefulness  we  may  presume  had 
departed. 

The  settlement,  as  we  have  learned  from  Dr.  Dwight,  was  mainly 
confined  to  a  single  street.  This  was  known  as  Main  street,  the  western 
end  being  called  the  "  Whitesboro  road."  A  few  settlers  were  located 
on  the  lower  end  of  the  "  Genesee  road  "  and  a'  few  were  scattered 
about  in  the  vicinity.  Manuscript  maps  of  this  date,  now  in  existence, 
show  two  or  three  additional  streets,  but  as  yet  they  were  unoccupied 
and  without  a  name. 

The  westward  course  of  the  road  to  Whitesboro  was  after  leaving 
Potter's  along  the  lines  of  the  present  Varick  and  Court  streets.  The 
public  square,  formed  at  the  intersection  of  the  Genesee  and  Whitesboro 
roads  and  now  known  as  Bagg's  Square,  was  then  more  deserving  of  the 
name  of  square  than  in  recent  times,  since  its  western  side,  instead  of 
diverging  from  the  eastern  one  as  it  now  does,  ran  up  from  the  river 
nearly  parallel  with  it  until  it  reached  a  point  a  little  short  of  the  north- 
ern line  of  Main,  when  it  curved  westward  in  a  quarter  circle  toward 
the  Whitesboro  street  corner.  Thus  its  shape,  in  place  of  being  tri- 
angular as  at  present,  approximated  to  that  of  an  oblong  whose  greatest 
length  was  east  and  west,  and  having  an  arm  extending  from  its  eastern 
end  toward  the  river. 

The  year  1800  furnishes  the  first  tax  list  of  the  population  of  Utica 
that  is  now  extant.  Merely  as  a  list  of  inhabitants  it  is  of  interest,  and 
more  especially  as  the  names  follow  pretty  nearly  in  the  order  of  resi- 
dence, beginning  at  the  eastern  limits  of  the  settlement  and  proceeding 
along  Main  street  and  the  northern  side  of  Whitesboro  as  far  as  Potter's, 
thence  back  on  the  southern  side,  and  a  little  way  up  Genesee.  The 
extreme  smallness  of  amount  of  tax  when  compared  with  the  course  of 
modern  taxation  would  lead  one  to  question  whether  it  comprises  the 
whole  levy  of  the  year  or  whether  it  is  not  rather  some  special  assess- 


S8 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


ment.     It  is  entitled,  however,  "  Utica  Village  Tax  List  for  1800, 
we  print  it  verbatim  as  an  interesting  list  worthy  of  preservation, 
as  follows : 

DoUs.  Cts. 

Silas  Clark 50 

J.  D.  Petrie 25 

Matthew  Hubbell   25 

Benjamin  Walker,   esq 1  00 

J.  Booking 25 

75 


Peter  Smith,  esq 

Benjamin  Ballou 

James  S.  Kipp,  esq 

Widow  Dawson  (Murphy) , 

Samuel  Carrington 

Sylvanus  P.  Dygert 

Samuel  Forman 

Clark ,. 


John  Curtis 

John  Hobby 1 

Benjamin  Ballou,  jr 

Jere.   Oowden 

Eiohard  Smith 1 

Joseph  Ballou 

0.  k  J.  Ballou   

John  House 1 

John  Post   2  00 

Daniel  Budlong 1  25 


(0 

25 

12i 

37i 

37i 

Ti\ 

37i 

]2i 

37i 

25 

12i 

75 

87i 

00 


William  Pritchard 

Nichols,  Bagg's  house . . . 

James  Bagg 

Moses  Bagg 

Worden  Hammond ,  . . .  . 

John  Smith 

Byran  Johnson 

Administrator  of  Daniel  Banks. 

Clark  &  Fellows 

Eemsen 

Proprietors  of  Hotel 


12i 

75 

12i 

00 

50 

87i 

00 

621 

87i 

50 

00 


Dolls. 

Nathan  Williams   

Barnabas  Brooks 

J.  Bissell 

John  Bellinger 

John  C.  Hoyt 

Samuel  Rugg.  . , 

Barabas  Coon 

John  Cooper ; 

Jeptha  Buell 

Stephen  Potter 

Ramsey  &  Co 1 

G-urdon   Burchard 

Francis  Bloodgood 1 

William  Halsey 1 

Nathaniel  Butler 1 

William  Williams 

Peter  Cavender 

Jan  Garrett 

Jonathan  Foot 

Simon  Jones 

Joseph  Peirce 

G.  Boon's  house 

ApoUos  Cooper 

John  Watley 

Gurdon  Burchard 

William  McLean 

James  P.  Dorchester 

Samuel  Hooker 

Watts  Sherman 

Erastus  Clark 

Charles  Easton 

—  Van  Sykes 


'  and 
It  is 

cts. 

75 

50 

25 

62i 

50 

25 

12i 

I2i 

25 

25 

25 

75 

00 

00 

I2i 

75 

50 

25 

25 

124 

25 

25 

25 

25 

25 

75 

50 

87i 

50 

50 

374 

124 


$40  00 


The  brief  notes  of  another  traveler  deserve  a  few  words  of  comment. 
This  was  an  Englishman  named  John  Maude,  whose  "  Visit  to  the  Falls 
of  Niagara  in  1800"  was  published  at  Wakefield  and  London  in  1826. 
And  this  is  what  his  journal  contains  under  date  of  Thursday,  July  3, 


THE  GREAT  GENESEE  TURNPIKE.  59 

1800:  "  Utica  [Fort  Schuyler]  ninety-six  miles.  Schwartz's  hotel; 
excellent  house  and  miserably  kept ;  built  by  Boon  &  Linklaen  [agents 
for  the  Holland  Land  Company],  the  proprietors  of  a  considerable  num- 
ber of  the  adjoining  building  lots.  Those  east  of  these  are  the  property 
of  the  Bleecker  family,  on  which  the  principal  part  of  the  present  town 
is  built ;  built,  too,  on  short  leases  of  fourteen  years,  after  which  the 
houses  become  the  property  of  the  owners  of  the  soil  to  the  certain  loss 
and  .probable  ruin  of  the  present  residents.  Utica  is  in  the  township  of 
Whitestown,  and  contains  about  sixty  houses.  No  _g-^«Z'^^/ family,  save 
Colonel  Walker's,  and  he  resides  at  a  small  distance  east  of  the  village. 
The  great  Genesee  road  turns  off  at  this  place.  An  act  has  lately 
passed  for  making  it  a  turnpike  road  to  Genesee  and  Canandaigua,  a 
distance  of  100  miles  and  upwards  ;  the  expense  is  estimated  at  $I,000 
per  mile;  the  road  to  be  four  rods  in  width.  The  inhabitants  of  Utica 
subscribed  to  finish  the  first  mile ;  they  formed  twenty  shares  of  fifty 
dollars  each  ;  these  shares  they  afterward  sold  to  Colonel  Walker  and 
Mr.  Post  for  forty-four  cents  on  the  dollar,  who  have  finished  the  first 
mile  ;  thirty  miles  it  is  expected  will  be  finished  before  winter  sets  in. 
Bridge  here  over  the  Mohawk  ;  the  river  narrow,  clear,  and  shallow  ;  no 
fish;  seven  boats  at  the  wharf  ;  heard  a  bull  frog;  groves  of  sugar  maple, 
a  tree  very  common'  here."  Friday,  July  4th,  Mr.  Maude  writes  : 
"Mounted  horse;  passed  Inman's  at  noon,  and  arrived  at  Whitesboro, 
100  miles." 

With  reference  to  the  great  Genesee  road  here  spoken  of  by  Mr. 
Maude,  and  whose  construction  was  so  important,  not  to  Utica  alone, 
but  to  the  whole  Western  country,  a  few  additional  facts  may  be  sub- 
joined. As  early  as  1790  a  road  along  the  course  of  the  Great  Trail 
had  been  opened  by  William  and  James  Wadsworth  on  their  way  to  the 
Genesee  country,  where  they  planted  a  colony.  The  State  afterward, 
in  the  year  1794,  appointed  three  commissioners  to  lay  out  a  road  from 
Utica,  by  Cayuga  ferry  and  Canandaigua,  to  the  Genesee  River  at  Avon, 
and  in  this  and  the  following  year  made  appropriations  for  its  con- 
struction. Though  laid  out  it  seems  not  to  have  been  constructed 
at  this  time,  for  in  June,  1797,  Colonel  Wilhamson,  of  Ontario,  repre- 
sents the  road  from  Old  Fort  Schuyler  to  the  Genesee  as  little  bet- 
ter than  an  Indian  trail.     In  this  latter  year  a   law  was   passed  by  the 


6o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

State  authorizing  the  raising  of  $45,000  by  lotteries,  which  was  to  be 
expended  in  improving  various  roads  in  the  State,  of  which  sum  $13,- 
900  was  to  go  toward  the  betterment  of  the  Genesee  road  in  all  its  ex- 
tent. The  improvements  now  made  upon  it  were  such  that  on  the  30th 
day  of  September,  1797,  a  stage  started  from  Old  Fort  Schuyler  and 
arrived  at  Geneva  in  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day.  The  extension  of 
this  thoroughfare  to  the  most  westerly  county  of  the  State,  and  the  un- 
exampled passage  of  a  stage  in  three  days  over  a  distance  of  nearly.  100 
miles,  sixty  of  which  had  been  the  same  season  in  their  original  state, 
were  to  the  dwellers  along  the  western  terminus  just  causes  of  gratu- 
lation.  This  road  was  as  yet  a  simple  highway  of  earth  ;  and  through 
swamps  and  in  low  places  the  crossing  was  made  over  layers  of  logs, 
such  causeways  occurring  even  within  the  limits  of  the  village.  There 
was  therefore  great  need  of  still  further  improvement,  and  in  the  year 
1800  the  Seneca  Turnpike  Company  was  chartered  to  effect  it.  The 
capital  stock  was  to  be  $i  10,000  in  shares  of  $50  each.  Jedediah 
Sanger,  of  New  Hartford,  and  Benjamin  Walker,  of  Utica,  were 
associated  with  Messrs.  Charles  Williamson  and  Israel  Chapin,  of  On- 
tario, as  commissioners.  According  to  one  traveler  one  mile  of  the 
road  was  finished  in  July,  1800.  A  citizen  who  rode  over  it  in  April 
following  as  far  as  New  Hartford  tells  us  that  he  met  squads  of  men  at 
work  along  the  way,  and  that  this  portion  of  it  was  then  a  good  passa- 
able  road. 

The  thoroughfare  leading  eastward  from  the  settlement  would  seem 
to  have  been  at  this  time  in  no  greater  forwardness  than  the  western 
one  if  we  may  infer  the  truth  from  an  advertisement  of  the  Mohawk 
Turnpike  and  Bridge  Company  that  appeared  in  the  village  paper  bear- 
ing date  October  21,  1800.  The  company  therein  solicits  proposals 
until  the  first  of  January  following  for  the  building  of  a  bridge  across  the 
Mohawk  at  Schenectady,  and  also  for  completing  ten  miles  of  turnpike 
road,  or  any  part  of  the  said  ten  miles,  beginning  at  the  bridge  at  the 
village  of  Utica  and  running  easterly,  as  well  as  for  completing  other 
portions  of  the  road  toward  its  eastern  end.  As  the  result  of  the  efforts 
of  this  company  a  beneficial  change  was  effected.  The  portion  of  the 
road  lying  between  Utica  and  Deerfield  was  straightened,  it  having  be- 
fore been  a  devious  way  that  meandered  carefully  from  pomt  to  point 


CHARLES  C.  BRODHEAD.  6i 

along  the  swampy  interval.  But  it  was  not  until  after  many  years  had 
elapsed  that  this  section  of  the  road  was  put  in  a  state  fit  to  be  traversed 
with  ease  and  comfort. 

Among  the  new  arrivals  of  1800  we  notice  first  one  whose  remark- 
able previous  experience,  his  long  residence  of  fifty  years,  and  the  con- 
spicuous position  he  held  justify  ample  consideration.  We  refer  to 
Charles  C.  Brodhead.  While  yet  a  lad  he  began  the  business  of  sur- 
veying, serving  under  the  instructions  of  W.  Cockburn,  an  eminent  sur- 
veyor of  Kingston  in  his  native  county  of  Ulster.  In  1793  Messrs. 
Desjardins  and  Pharoux,  agents  of  a  French  company  owning  a  large 
tract  of  land  on  the  Black  River  and  known  as  the  Castorland  Compan}', 
employed  him  to  assist  in  laying  out  this  tract.  This  appointment  was 
regarded  as  a  high  compliment  to  young  Brodhead,  both  as  a  surveyor 
and  an  honorable  man  ;  and  the  manner  in  which  he  fulfilled  his  engage- 
ments pleased  his  employers  so  well  that  in  addition  to  the  covenanted 
remuneration  they  gave  him  a  valuable  lot  of  land  as  a  testimonial  of 
their  appreciation  of  his  scientific  and  moral  worth.  In  the  course  of 
this  survey,  which  occupied  about  three  seasons,  Mr.  Brodhead  en- 
countered several  hazardous  adventures  and  made  more  than  one  hair- 
breadth escape  from  death.  After  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  service 
with  the  Castorland  Company  he  was  employed  as  a  deputy  by  the 
Hon.  Simeon  De  Witt,  surveyor- general  of  the  State  of  New  York,  and 
to  him  were  confided  all  important  surveys  and  negotiations.  He  like- 
wise carried  on  one  or  more  treaties  with  the  Indians,  and  these  he  con- 
ducted with  singular  ability  and  discretion,  in  every  case  winning  the 
confidence  of  the  redmen.  After  a  negotiation  of  this  kind  with  the 
St.  Regis  Indians  of  the  northern  border  of  the  State  he  was  adopted  as 
a  member  and  honorary  chief  of  the  tribe.  When  not  engaged  else- 
where Mr.  Brodhead's  headquarters  during  this  period  would  seem  to 
have  been  at  Whitesboro.  In  the  year  1800  he  received  from  the  Gov- 
ernor and  Council  the  appointment  of  sheriff  of  the  county.  In  August 
of  the  following  year  it  was  required  of  him  to  officiate  at  the  first  ex- 
ecution which  took  place  in  the  county.  The  criminal  was  an  Indian,  a 
native  of  Montauk  Point,  who  was  convicted  of  having  killed  his  wife 
and  was  hung  on  the  hill  west  of  Whitesboro  in  the  presence  of  a  large 
assembly  of  people. 


62  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

When  the  construction  of  the  Erie  Canal  was  resolved  on  the  surveyor- 
general  was  charged  with  the  preliminary  surveys,  and  Mr.  Brodhead 
was  in  the  year  i8i6  entrusted  by  him  with  the  eastern  section,  extend- 
ing from  Albany  to  Rome,  a  part  of  the  work  of  greater  extent,  im- 
portance, and  difficulty  than  any  other,  and  requiring  great  discretion, 
science,  and  practical  skill.  From  the  earliest  period  of  his  residence  here 
Mr.  Brodhead  was  often  called  upon  to  survey  lands  for  individuals  both 
in  town  and  county.  His  accuracy  of  work  was  much  confided  in,  and 
numerous  are  the  landholders  of  the  vicinity  who  are  indebted  to  him 
for  the  carefully  executed  and  trustworthy  maps  which  define  the  limits 
of  their  property.  Mr.  Brodhead  was  one  of  the  commissioners  who 
ran  the  lines  of  the  town  of  Utica  when  it  was  set  off  from  Whitestown 
in  1817.  From  this  period  he  ceased  to  act  professionally  except  when 
Mr.  De  Witt,  in  the  fullness  of  his  confidence,  pressed  him  into  the 
service  of  the  State  to  execute  some  work  demanding  great  accuracy 
and  prudent  negotiations.  For  a  few  of  his  more  cherished  friends  he 
would  consent  to  run  the  lines  of  their  estates,  but  otherwise  engaged 
in  no  occupation,  and  for  thirty  years  lived  almost  a  recluse.  Previous 
to  the  War  of  18 12  he  had  accumulated  a  competent  fortune,  but  had 
invested  a  large  portion  in  business.  The  reaction  of  the  peace  caused 
the  failure  and  dissolution  of  the  firm.  By  economy  and  prudence  as 
well  as  by  the  rise  in  the  value  of  real  estate  he,  however,  retrieved  his 
loss,  so  that  for  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  he  lived  in  comparative 
affluence. 

Under  date  of  July  10,  1800,  there  appeared  in  the  Columbian  Ga- 
zette the  following  announcement :  "  Archibald  Kane  and  Jeremiah  Van 
Rensselaer,  jr.,  under  the  firm  name  of  Kane  &  Van  Rensselaer,  have 
opened  a  house  at  Utica,  where  may  be  had  a  general  assortment  of  dry 
goods  and  groceries  on  moderate  terms."  This  brief  announcement  pre- 
ludes the  establishment  here  of  one  branch  of  a  widely  ramified  and 
prosperous  mercantile  house  that  long  held  a  leading  place  in  the  vil- 
lage, and  which,  from  its  far-reaching  and  successful  enterprise,  was  well 
known  throughout  the  State.  Its  resident  member  and  his  family  were 
conspicuous  in  society,  and  contributed  by  their  intelligence  and  refine- 
ment, by  their  liberality,  pubhc  spirit,  and  moral  purity,  not  less  than  by 
their  wealth  and  aristocratic  connections,  not  a  few  of  those  traits  that 


THE  FIRM  OF  KANE  b-  VAN  RENSSELAER.  63 

gave  a  charm  to  early  Utica.  Uniting  with  Archibald  Kane  he  settled 
at  Canajoharie,  Montgomery  County,  in  1795.  Here  they  soon  com- 
manded a  trade  which  was  the  largest  in  the  interior  of  the  State- 
Ere  long,  however,  encroachments  were  made  upon  their  customs  by 
stirring  rivals  in  Utica  and  they  determined  to  repair  thither.  Mr.  Kane 
did  not  himself  remove,  though  he  continued  a  partner  in  the  house. 
The  store  here  was  conducted  by  Mr.  Van  Rensselaer,  assisted  at  the  out- 
set by  his  brother  James,  with  whom  was  presently  associated  Fortune 
C.  White.  It  was  situated  on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street  a  little 
north  of  the  corner  of  Broad,  and  was  graced  by  the  sign  of  the  "  Eagle." 
It  was  oblong  in  shape,  presenting  its  broader  side  to  the  street.  When 
on  thelaying  outof  Broad  street  its  upper  end  was  found  to  encroach  upon 
the  projected  highway  and  it  became  necessary  to  turn  it  half  way 
round  ;  this  was  accomplished  by  balancing  the  building  on  a  cannon 
ball  as  a  pivot,  after  which  it  was  easily  swung  into  place.  The  store 
soon  became  popular  and  the  business  an  extended  one.  It  was  the 
fountain  head  whence  many  a  country  store  drew  its  constant  supplies. 
They  advertised  freely  and  constantly,  occupying  a  conspicuous  place  in 
the  weekly  papers  for  a  long  series  of  years. 

Mr.  Van  Rensselaer  built  himself  an  elegant  mansion  on  what  were 
then  the  outskirts  of  the  village,  on  grounds  as  remarkable  for  their  ex- 
tent as  for  the  taste  expended  upon  them.  They  were  situated  on  the 
east  side  of  Genesee  street  and  included  nearly  the  whole  space  that  is 
now  bounded  by  Devereux,  Genesee,  Carnahan,  and  Charlotte  streets. 
But  when  several  years  of  prosperity  had  rolled  over  him  there  came  at 
length  a  change.  The  firm  of  Kane  &Van  Rensselaer  encountered  the 
commercial  storm  which  followed  the  resumption  of  specie  payments 
after  the  War  of  181 2-1 5.  It  prostrated  the  house  of  John  Kane  in 
New  York  and  with  it  fell  all  the  associate  houses.  Resuming  business 
alone  Mr.  Van  Rensselaer  carried  it  on  for  a  few  years,  but  was  at  length 
obliged  to  suspend.  About  1825  he  left  the  village  and  went  to  Can- 
andaigua,  where  his  son-in-law,  Mr.  Granger,  resided,  and  was  there 
secretary  of  a  fire  insurance  company. 

As  a  foremost  participant  in  the  business  interests  of  the  place  as  well 
as  in  its  benevolent  and  religious  affairs,  not  less  than  as  a  dignified  and 
courtly  gentleman,  Mr.  Van  Rensselaer  ranked  high.      He  was  of  the  first 


64  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Board  of  Village  Trustees  under  the  charter  of  1805  and  two  years 
their  president ;  of  the  first  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Ontario  Branch 
Bank  and  president  of  the  Capron  factory  ;  of  the  first  Utica  Board  of 
Tustees  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  ;  and  president  of  the  first  Board  of 
Trustees  of  the  LJtica  Academy.  When  the  site  for  the  academy  was 
in  contemplation  he  offered  to  give  for  the  purpose  a  fine  lot  on  Gene- 
see street  adjoining  the. grounds  which  he  himself  occupied.  He  was 
also  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  College  until  his  removal. 

There  came  in  the  year  1 800  Jesse  Newell,  who  opened  a  department 
of  business  which  is  still  prosecuted  by  later  members  of  the  family, 
and  which  is  doubtless  the  oldest  establishment  in  Utica.  Together 
with  George  Macomber,  eldest  son  of  Captain  Macomber,  he  set  up  as 
a  painter  and  glazier.  To  the  practice  of  their  art  they  added  the  sale 
of  materials  pertaining  thereto,  and  ere  long  the  manufacture  of  brushes. 
Their  partnership  continued  twenty  eight  years  and  the  business  was 
continued  by  Mr.  Newell,  after  the  retirement  of  his  partner,  in  company 
with  his  son,  Norman  C.  Newell ;  next  by  the  latter ;  and  now  by  the 
grandson. 

Passing  on  to  the  year  1801  we  find  evidence  of  the  residence  of  the 
following  persons  :  Aylmer  Johnson,  brewer ;  Martin  Dakin,  clerk ; 
James  Ure,  brewer  ;  Bela  Hubbard,  tanner. 

Dr.  Francis  Guiteau,  jr.,  and  Abraham  M.  Walton  justify  more  de- 
tails. The  former  was  a  descendant  of  one  of  those  exiles  from  France, 
the  Huguenots.  His  father  was  a  physician  in  Pittsfield  and  after- 
ward in  Lanesboro,  Mass.,  but  passed  his  latest  years  in  Deerfield  in 
this  county.  Francis  was  the  eldest  of  several  sons,  of  whom  two,  Cal- 
vin, the  surveyor,  and  Dr.  Luther  Guiteau,  of  Trenton,  became  early 
denizens  of  Oneida  County.  He  moved  into  the  town  of  Deerfield  and 
assumed  his  professional  charge  as  early  as  1792.  His  circuit  of  prac- 
tice was  extensive,  embracing  not  merely  Utica  and  its  environs,  but 
sometimes  transcending  the  present  bounds  of  the  county.  He  occu- 
pied a  farm  east  of  the  Corners,  the  same  which  was  afterward  held  by 
Abraham  Walton,  and  he  was  the  first  supervisor  of  the  town.  April  4, 
1803,  he  announces  that  ill  health  induces  him  to  call  for  a  settlement; 
but  in  July  of  the  same  year  he  enters  into  partnership  as  practitioner 
and  druggist  with  Dr.  Solomon  Wolcott.     They  built  each  a  house  on 


PERSONAL  REMINISCENCES.  65 

Whitesboro  street  a  little  west  of  the  Globe  Hotel.  Their  announce- 
ments occurred  from  time  to  time  in  the  village  weeklies  until  January, 
1807,  when  they  dissolved  and  Dr.  Guiteau  devoted  himself  exclusively 
to  practice.  He  was  deemed  skillful  and  held  in  high  esteem  as  a  phy- 
sician, and  his  practice  was  considerable.  His  only  near  rivals  were  Dr. 
Alexander  Coventry,  who  was  still  a  resident  of  Deerfield,  and  Drs. 
Hasbrouck  and  Stockman,  of  Utica,  both  of  whom  as  well  as  Dr.  Wol- 
cott  were  in  part  druggists  also.  In  manners  Dr.  Guiteau  was  genial 
and  pleasant,  but  decided  in  his  opinions  and  free  in  the  expression  of 
them.  A  leading  man  among  the  Baptists,  and  a  zealous  advocate  of 
their  principles  of  belief,  he  was  sensitive  to  any  opposition  to  his  relig- 
ious views.  He  was  also  a  strong  Democrat.  His  death  occurred  about 
1823.     He  had  ten  children,  five  sons  and  five  daughters. 

Although  the  home  of  Abraham  M.  Walton  was  in  Deerfield  and  not 
in  Utica,  yet  the  latter  was  his  place  of  business,  and  with  its  people  he 
was  in  daily  intercourse.  He  was  the  son  of  Abraham  Walton,  of  New 
York,  and  a  descendant  of  one  of  the  old  families  of  that  city.  He 
opened  an  office  in  Utica,  and  besides  the  care  of  the  estate  he  was  sent 
to  manage  did  something  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  and  some- 
thing more  in  the  purchase  and  sale  of  lands.  His  brother  Charles 
was  associated  with  him  in  a  part  of  his  transactions;  his  law  partner  was 
Abraham  D.  Van  Home. 

A  notorious  member  of  one  of  the  proprietary  families  was  Martha, 
daughter  of  Maj.  Samuel  Bradstreet,  of  the  Fortieth  Regiment  of  Eng- 
lish Infantry,  who  was  a  stepson  of  Gen.  John  Bradstreet.  She  was  born 
on  the  island  of  Antigua,  W.  I.,  August  10,  1780,  and  married  in  Ire- 
land to  Matthew  Codd,  April  16,  1799.  They  came  to  America  in  the 
fall  of  the  same  year  and  not  long  after  were  living  in  Utica.  After  her 
divorce  from  Mr.  Codd  she  became  notorious  as  a  strenuous  and  perse- 
vering claimant  of  a  large  part  of  the  soil  of  Utica.  She  harrassed 
numbers  of  its  citizens  with  suits  at  law  and  besieged  the  courts  with 
her  causes.  These  trials  are  fully  reported  in  the  law  reports,  so  that 
it  will  be  hardly  worth  the  while  to  present  here  anything  more  than 
the  barest  outline  of  the  points  at  issue. 

General  Bradstreet,  one  of  the  joint  owners  of  Cosby's  Manor  after  a 
division  had  been  made  between  the  purchasers,  devised  his  share  to  his 
9 


66  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

two  daughters,  Martha  and  Agatha.  Martha,  who  died  unmarried,  de- 
vised her  portion  as  follows:  one-third  to  her  sister  Agatha,  one-third 
to  her  half-sister  Elizabeth,  and  one-third  to  the  children  of  her  half- 
brother  Samuel,  of  whom  one  was  Martha,  who  became  afterward  Mrs. 
Codd.  Elizabeth  willed  what  Martha  had  left  her  solely  to  this  same 
Martha.  Thus,  by  a  double  devise,  Mrs.  Codd  derived  title  to  a  large 
share  of  the  lands  of  General  Bradstreet.  The  executor  of  the  first 
above  mentioned  will  was  Sir  Charles  Gould,  and  he  by  its  terms  was  au- 
thorized to  sell  and  dispose  of  the  real  estate  therein  devised.  Through 
his  attorneys,  Edward  Gould  and  Daniel  Ludlow,  this  was  done,  and  be- 
tween the  years  1790  and  1794  several  of  the  earlier  settlers  thus  re- 
ceived titles  to  the  land  which  they  then  or  afterward  occupied.  Mrs. 
Codd  in  the  suits  which  she  brought  against  the  occupants  of  these 
lands  insisted  that  the  conveyances  by  these  attorneys  of  Sir  Charles 
Gould  were  not  valid,  because  no  authority  for  that  purpose  was  shown 
to  have  ever  existed,  and  because  Sir  Charles  Gould  could  not  have 
legally  delegated  to  another  the  power  he  possessed  under  the  will  of 
Martha  Bradstreet.  This  position  of  the  plaintiff  was  offset  by  the 
production  of  a  deed  executed  by  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler,  executor  of 
General  Bradstreet,  to  Agatha,  daughter  of  General  Bradstreet,  wherein 
in  order  to  invest  Agatha  with  her  portion  he  empowers  Edward  Gould 
to  sell  and  convey  the  lands  of  the  other  devisees  and  to  divide  the  pro- 
ceeds between  them.  This  Edward  Gould,  who  became  a  bankrupt, 
executed  afterward  a  deed  to  Mrs.  Codd  conveying  to  her  all  the  real 
estate  held  by  him,  but  with  covenant  of  warranty  that  he  should  not  be 
held  responsible  for  any. sales  which  he  might,  have  made  prior  to  his 
bankruptcy.  But  the  sales  to  the  occupants  of  the  lands,  the  same  lands 
which  Mrs.  Codd  was  now  laying  claim  to,  were  made  years  before  the 
bankruptcy  of  Edward  Gould  and  while  he  was  acting  as  attorney  of 
Sir  Charles  Gould.  Such,  in  brief,  was  the  claim  of  Mrs.  Codd,  and 
such  the  ground  of  defence  made  by  the  defendants  in  her  suits,  which 
defence  was  moreover  strengthened  by  the  fact  of  possession  for  thirty 
years,  for  it  was  not  until  after  the  lapse  of  this  length  of  time  and  not 
until  she  had  resumed  her  maiden  name  that  the  suits  were  in  prosecution. 
Mrs.  Bradstreet  was  a  woman  of  vigorous  natural  talent,  masculine  in 
features  and  in  temperament,  though   not  without  considerable  of  the 


SOME  EMINENT  BUSINESS  MEN  67 

refinement  and  bearing  of  a  lady.  Acquiring  by  study  a  mastery  of  the 
law  of  real  estate  she  was  a  host  in  herself;  but  she  enh'sted  in  her  aid 
some  of  the  ablest  counsel  of  the  State.  She  was  herself  invariably 
present  at  trial  of  her  causes,  an  eager  witness  of  every  step,  and  a  sed- 
ulous adviser  of  her  advocate. 

Capt.  James  Hopper  was  a  native  of  England.  For  many  years  he 
was  in  command  of  vessels  in  the  English  merchant  service  and  owned 
shares  in  them  and  their  cargoes.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  he  bought 
considerable  land  on  the  southern  borders  of  the  village.  Forty-nine 
acres  of  it  were  the  cleared  farm  of  Benjamin  Hammond  in  great  lot 
95,  which  the  latter  had  obtained  from  John  Bellinger ;  in  part  it  was  a 
portion  of  the  Holland  Land  Company',s  purchase,  and  other  smaller 
parts  were  bought  of  John  Post,  Richard  Kimball,  and  Jonathan  Evans. 
On  this  purchase  Captain  Hopper  put  up  a  house  that  he  enlarged  on 
the  arrival  of  his  family,  and  engaged  in  farming  and  also  in  tanning, 
both  of  them  pursuits  to  which  he  had  never  been  accustomed.  The 
land  which  he  bought  increased,  however,  in  value,  and  became  ulti- 
mately, through  the  skillful  management  of  his  sons,  a  handsome  estate. ^ 

Daniel  Thomas,  a  merchant  of  reputable  standing,  has  from  that  time 
to  the  present  been  worthily  represented  by  descendants  in  city  and 
county. 

Ebenezer  B.  Shearman  became  at  an  early  period  largely  interested 
in  the  manufacture  of  cotton  goods  and  window  glass,  for  the  sale  of 
which  his  store  formed  the  agency.  After  having  been  one  of  the  com- 
pany which  in  conjunction  with  Seth  Capron  set  in  operation  at  New 
Hartford  the  first  cotton  factory  in  the  county  he  purchased  the  bulk 
of  the  shares  and  managed  the  institution  with  skill  and  profit.  The  glass 
that  he  sold  was  made  at  the  Oneida  glass  factory  in  Vernon  by  a  com- 
pany of  which  Mr.  Shearman  and  his  brother,  Willet  H.,  formed  the  lead- 
ing members.  At  one  time  he  assumed  the  superintendency  of  the  Utica 
Glass  Works,  situated  in  the  town  of  Marcy,  but  relinquished  it  when 
he  found  that  crown  glass,  which  the  company  essayed  to  make,  could 
not  be  produced  cheaply  enough  to  compete  with  that  of  English  man- 
ufacture. By  his  energy  and  assiduous  devotion  to  business  he  became 
independently  wealthy.     Nor  was  his  enterprise  expended  in  his  own 

1  See  sketch  of  Thomas  Hopper  in  the  biographical  department  of  this  work. 


68  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

behalf  merely.  His  interest  in  public  affairs  was  conspicuous  and  the 
share  considerable  which  he  bore  in  the  civic  affairs  of  his  time.  For 
three  successive  years  he  was  village  trustee,  for  thirty  years  a  trustee  of 
the  Utica  Academy,  and  most  of  that  time  its  secretary.  From  its 
foundation  he  was  so  long  as  he  lived  a  director  of  the  Utica  Bank,  and 
in  1828  he  was  one  of  the  electors  for  President  of  the  United  States. 

A  few  individuals  of  the  Welch  race  were  settled  in  Utica  before  1801. 
Soon  afterward  they  were  coming  in  numbers  and  formed  the  only 
considerable  foreign  immigration  to  Oneida  County  which  occurred  at 
the  beginning  of  the  century.  Those  who  were  farmers  dispersed  them- 
selves over  the  rich  hillsides  of  Steuben,  Remsen,  and  Trenton,  while 
those  who  had  trades  lingered  in  the  villages  and  were  universally  cred- 
ited with  being  the  best  mechanics  and  especially  builders  of  the  time. 
Among  them  were  Elders  Abraham  Williams,  Joseph  Harris,  Daniel 
Morris,  David  Reed  &  Sons,  the  James  family,  Watkin  Powell,  Samuel 
George,  etc. 

A  settler  of  1802  and  a  very  prince  among  his  fellows  was  John  C. 
Devereux,  whose  honorable  career  and  many  deeds  of  charity  have  left 
behind  him  a  memory  as  verdant  as  that  of  the  green  isle  whence  he 
came.  He  was  born  at  Enniscorthy  in  County  Wexford  on  August 
5,  1774,  and  was  the  son  of  Thomas  and  Catharine  Corish  Devereux. 
The  family  were  wealthy  and  well  connected  throughout  the  county  and 
lived  at  ease  upon  a  handsome  estate  called  "  The  Leap,"  from  the  width 
of  the  ditch  that  surrounded  it.  But  they  sympathized  warmly  in  the 
agitations  which  preceded  and  attended  the  outbreak  of  the  Irish  rebel- 
lion in  1798,  supplying  food  and  assistance  to  the  patriot  army.  Com- 
ing up  to  this  county  in  order  to  locate  in  business,  and  prompted  per- 
chance by  the  advice  of  his  friend,  William  James,  Mr.  Devereux  stopped 
first  atRome,but  soon  turned  backto Utica.  From  hisfirstadvertisement, 
dated  November  8,  1802,  we  learn  that  he  "opened  an  assort~inent  of 
dry  goods  and  groceries  at  the  store  lately  occupied  by  John  Smith." 
This  was  upon  the  site  of  a  part  of  the  present  Bagg's  Hotel.  Some- 
what later  his  store  was  nearly  opposite  and  about  midway  between 
Whitesboro  and  Water,  a  store  that,  jutting  out  eastward  from  the  present 
line  of  the  street,  formed  the  west  point  of  the  square.  When  the  street 
was  afterward  straightened  he  built  a  brick  store  in  the  rear  of  the  above 


JOHN  C.  DEVEREUX.  69 

mentioned  spot.  The  goods  he  had  on  sale  were  unusually  handsome. 
The  salesman  had  energy,  shrewdness,  and  industry,  a  temper  most  gen- 
erous, a  tongue  that  was  persuasive  and  fluent,  and  manners  benignant 
and  polished.  These  brought  him  quick  custom  and  insured  suc- 
cess from  the  outset.  His  business  became  so  extensive  that  he  was 
probably  as  generally  known  through  Central  and  Western  New  York 
as  any  merchant  west  of  Albany.  His  sales,  as  reported  by  one  of  his 
later  clerks,  amounted  each  year  to  $100,000.  He  had  a  pride  in  his 
calling  and  kept  ever  in  view  a  high  standard  of  credit  and  honor.  Un- 
sparing of  himself  he  was  no  less  exacting  of  others.  Yet  he  contrib- 
uted freely  his  advice  and  personal  and  pecuniary  aid  to  young  men 
engaging  in  similar  pursuits.  Among  those  he  thus  helped  were  his 
brothers,  Luke,  Nicholas,  and  Thomas,  the  first  two  being  his  clerks  in 
succession  and  afterward  partners.  But  the  canal  was  just  opened  and 
the  Mohawk  about  to  be  left.  The  current  of  business  was  setting  up- 
ward, and  the  lonely  and  grass-covered  square  alarmed  the  merchants 
who  were  settled  about  it.  Not  backward  in  action  he  purchased  with 
Nicholas  the  land  next  above  the  newly  opened  canal  where  the  modern 
Devereux  block  is  now  located,  and  there  in  1821  they  placed  a  large 
warehouse  and  store.  At  this  place  the  trade  was  conducted  many  years 
by  Nicholas  Devereux  and  his  various  partners,  John  C.  continuing  as 
before  to  lend  his  countenance  and  credit.  Some  ten  or  twelve  years 
later,  when  there  was  started  a  Utica  branch  of  the  United  States  Bank, 
Mr.  Devereux  was  appointed  its  president  and  held  the  position  as  long 
as  the  bank  was  in  existence.  He  was  strongly  attached  to  the  place  of 
his  residence,  devoted  to  its  interests,  and  contributed  freely  to  its  insti- 
tutions. Some  of  them  in  fact  owed  their  existence  and  continued  sup- 
port largely  to  his  agency.  Such  was  the  Utica  Savings  Bank,  which  was 
established  by  the  two  Messrs.  Devereux  in  company  with  other  benevo- 
lent citizens  of  the  period.  Although  a  zealous  adherent  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  and  in  later  years  its  most  munificent  patron,  yet  when 
Utica  was  an  inconsiderable  hamlet,  and  when  all  of  its  inhabitants  met 
in  one  common  place  of  worship,  he  not  only  bore  about  the  plate  which 
was  to  receive  the  donations  of  the  worshipers,  but  gave  a  contribution 
of  $300  toward  the  erection  of  the  first  Presbyterian  Church.  Repeat- 
edly at  later  dates  he   contributed  freely  to  many  poor  and  struggling 


70  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

religious  societies.  To  his  own  church,  once  so  small  that  he  often  had 
all  of  its  members  assembled  in  his  own  parlor,  he  was  an  early,  a  con- 
stant, and  a  generous  benefactor. 

"Charitableness  and  hospitality  were  perhaps  the  most  striking  traits 
in  Mr.  Devereux's  character.  He  extended  the  hand  of  brotherhood  to 
all  who  were  not  utterly  abandoned,  while  his  house  was  always  open 
and  his  welcome  to  it  remarkably  courteous  and  earnest.  The  poor 
had  reason  to  bless  his  memory,  and  upon  no  citizen  were  there  more 
numerous  claims."  "The  city  manifested  its  sense  of  obligations  by 
electing  him  its  mayor  in  1840,  at  the  first  election  under  the  law  by 
which  the  office  was  derived  directly  from  the  people,  he  having  prev- 
iously held  it  by  appointment  of  the  common  council."  Others  of 
this  date  were  James  Delvin,  coppersmith  ;  Renajah  Merrill,  auctioneer 
and  sheriff;  Solomon  Goodrich,  bookseller  and  teacher;  Flavel  Bing- 
ham, watchmaker ;  Frederick  White,  promiscuous  trader;  Benjamin 
Hicks,  hatter;   Edward  Baldwin,  carpenter;  William  Rees,  farmer,  etc. 

Of  the  appearance  of  Utica  in  1802,  and  more  especially  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  its  people  as  they  presented  themselves  to  one  temporary 
visitor  among  them,  we  have  a  few  hints  in  the  journal  of  Rev.  John 
Taylor,  of  Westfield,  Mass.  His  journal  of  a  missionary  tour  through 
the  Mohawk  and  Black  River  country  is  contained  in  the  third  volume 
of  the  "  Documentary  History  of  New  York."  In  the  course  of  his  ex- 
cursion he  stopped  two  or  three  times  at  Utica,  and  the  following  pas- 
sages are  extracted  from  his  notes :  "  This  is  a  very  pleasant  and  beau- 
tiful village  ;  but  it  is  filled  with  a  great  quantity  of  people  of  all  nations 
and  religions."  "  There  is  but  a  handful  of  people  in  this  place  who 
have  much  ^regard  for  preaching  or  for  anything  in  this  world.  Eight 
years  ago  last  spring  there  were  but  two  houses  in  the  present  town 
plot.  There  are  now  above  ninety."  "  Utica  appears  to  be  a  mixed 
mass  of  discordant  materials.  Here  may  be  found  people  of  ten  or 
twelve  different  nations  and  of  almost  all  religions  and  sects;  but  the 
greater  part  are  of  no  religion.  The  world  is  the  great  object  with  the 
body  of  the  people." 

That  the  place  presented  at  this  early  period  of  its  existence  much  of 
the  roughness  both  of  morals  and  of  manners  so  commonly  found  in 
freshly  settled  districts  is  altogether  probable.      In  the  hurry  of  clearing 


A  PEN-PICTURE  FROM  MR.  TAYLORS  JOURNAL.  71 

and  of  building,  in  the  general  scramble  of  trade,  men  were  intent  on 
immediate  interests,  eager  to  fix  a  position  and  a  business,  and  might 
have  been  neglectful  of  the  courtesies  of  the  present  life,  still  more  of 
the  claims  of  the  future.  Beset  on  all  sides  by  strangers,  either  settling 
among  them  or  crowding  past  toward  new  homes  in  the  wilderness, 
they  hardly  knew  who  were  their  neighbors  or  had  come  to  realize  the 
fullness  of  their  social  obligations.  In  the  absence  of  churches  and  of 
schools  there  was  little  of  the  restraint  so  controlling  in  older  commun- 
ities, fewer  influences  to  persuade  to  the  practice  of  what  was  due  to 
themselves,  their  fellows,  and  their  Maker.  But  that  Utica  was  not 
wholly  made  up  of  the  worldly-minded  and  irreligious  people  which  this 
writer  would  have  one  to  believe,  that  there  was  a  goodly  leaven  at  work 
amid  the  fermenting  mass,  the  personal  sketches  thus  far  exhibited  will, 
I  trust,  sufficiently  show.  Churches  and  schools  were  obtaining  a  foot- 
hold, and  their  healthful  influence  with  that  of  the  many  educated  and 
superior  minds  now  beginning  to  assert  themselves  was  fast  shaping 
these  "discordant  materials"  and  giving  correctness  and  elevation  to 
the  morals  of  society.  Were  there  no  other  evidence  of  a  want  of 
charity  in  Mr.  Taylor  than  those  to  be  met  with  elsewhere  in  his  jour- 
nal there  is  certainly  some  inconsistency  in  the  picture  contained  in  the 
last  of  the  quotations  we  have  drawn  from  him  when  contrasted  with 
the  fact  recorded  under  the  same  date.  He  preached,  he  says,  on  the 
afternoon  of  that  day  (August  1st)  to  300  people.  In  the  morning  of  the 
same  day  his  congregation  at  Whitesboro  had  amounted  to  250,  though 
the  service  at  Whitesboro,  it  should  be  added,  was  the  communion, 
when  audiences  are  usually  smaller.  Three  hundred  people  were,  it  is 
probable,  at  least  half  the  population  of  Utica. 

Accompanying  the  journal  of  Mr.  Taylor  there  is  a  rude  diagram  of 
the  place  with  its  buildings  set  down  in  their  relative]position.  Eighty- 
two  are  figured  extending  about  seventy  rods  on  Main  street,  and  sixty 
on  Whitesboro,  and  on  Genesee  street  ten  rods  below  the  square  and 
sixty  above  it.  The  drawing  of  the  west  line  of  the  square  as  the  arc  of 
a  circle  concaves  inward  there  is  reason  to  believe  is  incorrect,  the 
saliency  being  in  fact  angular  and  toward  the  center,  while  the  quarter 
circle  which  connects  this  angle  with  Whitesboro  street'formed  but  an 
inconsiderable  part  of  the  whole  west  line ;  so  also  is  there  an  error  in 


72  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  drawing  of  Genesee  street  at  right  angles  with  the  intersecting 
street.  Notwithstanding  these  inaccuracies  the  map  is  valuable  as  the 
only  picture  of  the  hamlet  at  so  early  a  date  now  known  to  exist. 

Arrived  at  the  year  1803  we  encounter  several  additional  names, 
among  which  we  recognize  not  a  few  of  those  of  citizens  who  were 
afterward  prominent.  "  David  Ostrom  was  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution 
and  among  the  earliest  settlers  of  Oneida' County.  About  the  year  1790 
or  1 79 1  he  removed  from  Dutchess  County  to  New  Hartford,  and  after- 
ward lived  in  Paris,  whence  he  removed  to  Utica.  Upon  the  organ- 
ization of  Oneida  County  in  1798  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  county 
judges,  which  office  he  held  until  1815,  with  the  exception  of  three 
years  in  which  his  name  was  omitted  from  the  General  Commission  of 
the  Peace  of  the  county.  For  a  considerable  period  he  executed  the  du- 
ties of  a  magistrate  in  the  village  with  great  correctness  and  to  universal 
acceptance."  As  early  as  February,  1804,  he  was  installed  as  landlord 
of  the  Coffee  House,  a  well  known  public  house  which  occupied  the 
ground  now  covered  by  the  Devereux  block,  and  therein  remained  a 
number  of  years.  Later  he  lived  nearly  opposite  on  the  site  of  the 
Franklin  House,  now  covered  by  the  arcade. 

Dr.  Marcus  Hitchcock  came  with  his  father  from  New  Haven,  Conn., 
to  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  and  there  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Amos  G. 
Hull.  After  removing  to  Utica  he  began  to  practice,  but  was  not  satis- 
fied with  the  profession  and  soon  opened  a  drug  store  in  compan)?  with 
Dr.  John  Carrington.  The  latter  was  a  brother  and  brief  successor  of 
Samuel  Carrington.  The  postoffice  fell  to  him  with  the  drug  business 
of  his  predecessor,  and  of  this  he  was  the  official  head  from  July  i,  1803, 
down  to  January  21,  1828. 

In  July,  1803,  a  partnership  in  the  practice  of  medicine  and  in  the 
sale  of  drugs  was  effected  between  Dr.  Francis  Guiteau,  jr.,  and  Dr. 
Solomon  Wolcott,  jr.  Studying  medicine  with  Dr.  Hastings,  of  New 
London,  Dr.  Wolcott  settled  himself  in  Williamstown,  Mass.  There 
by  the  exercise  of  his  profession,  and  by  the  purchase  and  sale  of 
bounty  lands  given  to  the  soldiers  of  the  Revolution,  he  acquired  some 
property,  and  ttiere  he  was  married.  Thence  he  was  drawn  to  Utica 
chiefly  by  the  persuasion  of  his  former  fellow  townsman,  Nathan 
Williams. 


^  ^>^^. 


EDITOR  JOHN  H.  LOTHROP.  73 

After  Dr.  Guiteau  withdrew  Dr.  Wolcott  had  in  succession  two  or 
three  other  partners.  In  April,  1815,  he  was  appointed  garrison  sur- 
geon's mate  in  charge  of  the  hospital  established  for  the  relief  of  the 
government  soldiers,  the  care  of  whom  he  had  already  had  for  some 
months.  About  the  same  time  he  was  made  one  of  the  judges  of  Com- 
mon Pleas.  Toward  the  close  of  the  war  he  became  interested  as  a 
silent  partner  with  William  Gaylord  in  dealings  in  crockery.  Through 
ill-timed  business  ventures  and  the  disappearance  of  his  partner  Dr. 
Wolcott  practically  lost  an  estate  that  was  appraised  at  $iOO,ooo.  In 
1804  he  had  bought  the  farm  originally  settled  by  John  D.  Petrie  next 
east  of  Matthew  Hubbell,  and  to  it  had  added  another  by  a  subsequent 
purchase.  There  about  the  time  of  his  embarrassment  he  built  the 
large  wooden  house  where  some  ten  years  afterward  was  opened  the 
Utica  High  School. 

John  H.  Lothrop  —  lawyer,  farmer,  editor,  merchant,  and,  last  and 
longest,  a  banker — found  in  the  e.xercise  of  his  pen  the  calling  most  suited 
to  his  genius  and  which  he  most  persistently  practiced.  In  1803  he 
assumed  the  editorship  of  the  Whitestown  Gazette  and  Cato's  Patrol, 
at  that  time  relinquished  by  Mr.  McLean.  Its  name  he  changed  to  the 
Utica  Patriot  and  settled  himself  in  Utica  to  conduct  it.  The  following 
year  in  company  with  Ralph  W.  Kirkland  he  seems  to  have  made  a 
short  essay  in  trade  ;  at  least  their  names  appear  in  a  single  announce- 
ment to  that  effect.  The  editorship  of  the  paper  filling  up  neither  his 
time  nor  his  pockets  he  served  also  as  deputy  in  the  office  of  the  Supreme 
Court  clerk.  This  he  sold  in  181 1,  when,  having  disposed  of  his  interest 
in  the  paper,  he  removed  to  New  Hartford.  He  remained  there  about 
five  years,  striving  to  earn  his  livelihood  by  the  practice  of  law,  but 
having  been  appointed  cashier  of  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank  he  came 
back  to  Utica  to  assume  the  duties.  And  these  formed  his  principal 
employment  for  the  remainder  of  his  days,  while  he  still  continued  to 
contribute  to  the  Patriot  or  its  successor  almost  to  the  close  of  his  life. 
He  was  expert  as  a  writer  of  fluent  and  graceful  English,  enlivened  by 
playful  fancy  and  lively  wit,  and  chastened  by  a  cultured  taste.  He 
had  facility  also  in  the  making  of  verse  and  considerable  repute  in  its 
exercise. 

One  of  the  printers  and  publishers  of  Mr.  Lothrop's  paper  was  Ira 
10 


74  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Men-ell.  He  learned  the  printer's  art  with  William  McLean,  and  when 
the  latter  disposed  ofhis  paper  in  1803  he  joined  his  fellow  apprentice, 
Asahel  Seward,  in  printing  it  under  the  editorship  of  Mr.  Lothrop,  and 
continued  with  him  about  three  years.  Some  time  afterward  he  was 
for  five  or  six  years  foreman  of  Seward  &  Williams,  and  printed  for 
them  this  same  Patriot  when  they  were  its  proprietors.  A  later  paper 
on  which  he  did  the  press  work  was  the  Western  Recorder,  published  by 
Merrell  &  Hastings,  that  is  to  say  his  brothers,  Andrew  and  Charles 
Hastings,  and  edited  by  Thomas  Hastings,  the  brother  of  Charles. 
He  also  printed  a  good  deal  on  his  own  account.  Among  his  issues 
was  a  Welsh  hymn  book. 

Thomas  Walker,  who  had  learned  his  trade  as  a  printer  with  Isaiah 
Thomas,  of  Winchester,  camiC  to  Oneida  County  with  enterprise  and  in- 
dustry, here  to  seek  his  fortune  and  help  in  building  up  the  nascent  civ- 
ilization. In  conjunction  with  his  brother-in-law,  Ebenezer  Eaton,  he 
started  alone  a  newspaper  called  the  Columbian  Patriotic  Gazette.  This 
was  on  the  17th  of  August,  1799.  The  Whitestown  Gazette  had  been 
established  at  New  Hartford  in  1796;  the  Westertt  Seyitinel  at  Whites- 
boro  in  1794.  This  was  therefore  the  third  newspaper  published  in  the 
county.  They  brought  the  printing  materials  with  them  and  hired  a 
man  in  Rome  to  make  a  Ramage  press,  and  on  this  the  paper  was 
printed.  The  publication  price  was  $1.50.  Mr.  Eaton  was  connected 
with  the  paper  about  eighteen  months. 

In  March,  1 803,  through  the  influence  of  personal  and  political  friends, 
Mr.  Walker  removed  his  paper  to  Utica,  called  it  the  Columbian  Ga- 
zette, and  made  it  a  supporter  of  the  administration  of  Thomas  Jeffer- 
son. The  first  number  of  this  weekly  sheet  appeared  March  21st.  Its 
dimensions  were  ten  and  a  half  by  twelve  inches,  and  the  paper  was 
coarse  and  dingy.  The  second  page  and  about  one-half  of  the  third 
was  devoted  to  foreign  news,  editorials,  and  communications;  the  re- 
mainder was  filled  with  advertisements.  The  office  was  located  at  about 
44  Genesee  street.  As  editor  as  well  as  publisher  Mr.  Walker  con- 
ducted the  Gazette  for  twenty-two  years,  securing  success  by  his  enter- 
prise and  faithful  devotion  to  business.  He  wrote  little  himself,  but 
exercised  good  judgment  in  his  selections  and  was  assisted  by  able  con- 
tributors.     He  also  dealt  to  some  extent  in  the  sale  of  books.      A  large 


SOME  EDITORS  AND  PRINTERS. 


75 


share  of  the  population  whom  he  wished  to  reach  with  his  paper  re- 
sided at  the  north  as  far  as  Lewis  and  Jefferson  Counties,  and  there  were 
then  no  post  routes  and  no  eommunication  thither  except  by  chance 
passengers.  Mr.  Walker  obtained  the  requisite  authority  from  the 
Postmaster- General  and  established  several  post  routes,  contracted  for 
mail  conveyance,  etc.  Few  publications  were  issued  from  his  office  be- 
sides the  paper. 

During  the  War  of  1812-15  Mr.  Walker  held  the  position  of  collector 
of  United  States  revenue  for  this  district,  a  position  which  it  so  hap- 
pened that  his  son,  Thomas  R.,  was  the  first  to  hold  after  the  late  war  of 
the  Rebellion.  He  was  a  Democrat  in  all  the  forming  days  of  the  gov- 
ernment. In  the  Clintonian  struggle  in  this  State  he  took  sides  with 
De  Witt  Clinton,  was  afterward  a  Whig,  and  latterly  a  Republican.  In 
1825  Mr.  Walker  sold  the  Gazette  to  Samuel  D.  Dakin  and  William  J. 
Bacon,  by  whom  it  was  united  with  the  Sentinel  under  the  title  of  the 
Sentinel  and  Gazette.  These  gentlemen  having  purchased  also  the /'«//'Z£?/, 
the  successor  of  Mr.  McLean's  paper,  there  were  thus  brought  together 
the  remains  of  the  three  earliest  papers  of  the  county.  Mr.  Walker  was 
one  of  the  directors  named  in  the  charter  of  the  Bank  of  Utica.  For 
several  years  he  was  its  vice-president  and  in  1845,  when  Henry  Huat- 
ington  declined  a  re-election,  he  was  chosen  its  president,  and  was  an- 
nually re  elected  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  also  for  many 
years  president  of  the  savings  bank,  and  was  the  first  treasurer  and  the 
fourth  president  of  the  trustees  of  the  Utica  Academy.  He  was  a  man 
of  singular  modesty,  simplicity,  and  purity  of  character.  His  death 
occurred  June  13,  1863,  in  his  eighty-sixth  year. 

Asahel  Seward,  eldest  son  of  Col.  Nathan  Seward,  of  New  Hartford, 
was  born  in  Waterbury,  Conn.,  August  19,  1781.  Apprenticed  when 
fifteen  years  old  to  William  McLean,  printer,  at  New  Hartford,  he  after- 
ward worked  as  a  journeyman  in  different  offices  in  New  England  and 
New  York,  in  that  of  Isaiah  Thomas,  of  Worcester,  Mass.,  in  an  office  in 
Boston,  and  in  that  of  the  Morning  Chronicle  of  New  York,  of  which  the 
father  of  Washington  Irving  was  then  the  proprietor.  In  1803,  in  copi- 
pany  with  Ira  Merrell,  he  bought  of  Mr.  McLean  his  interest  in  the 
Utica  Patriot  and  removed  to  Utica  to  publish  it.  In  this  paper,  under 
its  varying  names  of  Patriot,  Patriot  and  Patrol,  and  Utica  Sentinel,  he 


76  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

retained  an  interest  until  1824,  successively  with  Mr.  Merrell,  with 
William  Williams,  and  still  later  as  one  of  the  firm  of  Seward  &  Will- 
iams with  William  H.  Maynard.  At  this  last  named  date  the  paper 
was  sold  to  Samuel  D.  Dakin  and  William  J.  Bacon,  the  sellers  giving 
a  bond  never  to  pubhsh  another  paper  in  Utica.  In  October,  1806,  he 
established  a  book  printing  house  and  bindery,  and  soon  afterward 
opened  also  a  book  store.  About  the  year  1 8 14  he  was  joined  in  this 
enterprise  by  Mr.  Williams,  till  then  associated  with  him  as  a  printer 
only.  The  house  was  a  prosperous  one  and  for  many  years  the  chief 
publishing  house  west  of  Albany;  if  rivaled  at  all  it  was  by  that  of 
H.  &  E.  Phinney,  of  Cooperstown.  The  foundation  for  a  respectable 
competency  was  early  laid  by  the  purchase  from  Noah  Webster  of  the 
right  to  publish  in  the  Western  District  of  New  York  his  Elementary 
Spelling  Book.  For  fourteen  years  this  was  the  leading  feature  of  their 
business,  affording  an  annual  income  of  $2,000.  The  other  works  they 
issued  were  chiefly  school  books,  though  not  exclusively  so.  After  his 
withdrawal  Mr.  Seward  was  not  again  actively  engaged  in  business.  He 
and  others  were  interested  in  the  Capron  cotton-mills,  established  in 
1814,  and  he  was  secretary  of  the  company. 

William  Williams  was  the  son  of  Dea.  Thomas  Williams,  of  Roxbury, 
Mass.,  though  he  was  born  in  Framingham  in  that  State,  October  12, 
1787.  With  his  fathers  family  he  migrated  to  New  Hartford  in  this 
county,  and  with  Asahel  Seward  he  moved  to  Utica  in  1803  and 
learned  of  him  the  trade  of  printing.  About  1808  he  became  a  partner 
in  the  business  of  printing,  and  at  a  later  period  the  partnership  was 
made  to  include  bookselling  likewise.  Together  they  published  the 
Utica  Patriot  and  its  successors,  the  Patriot  and  Patrol  and  the  Utica 
Sentinel,  down  to  the  year  1824.  As  publishers  and  dealers  in  a  great 
variety  of  books  the  firm  was  widely  known  and  was  distinguished 
for  its  enterprise  and  its  probity.  Their  partnership  was  termin- 
ated in  1824  by  the  withdrawal  of  Mr.  Seward,  but  the  business  in  all 
its  departments  was  actively  carried  on  several  years  longer.  About 
i8;28  Mr.  Williams  associated  himself  with  Messrs.  Balch  and  Stiles,  who 
had  commenced  business  in  Utica  as  engravers.  The  firm  issued  bank 
notes  for  the  Utica  and  some  Western  banks,  and  also  maps  of  New 
York,  Michigan,  etc.     Mr.   Williams  entered  heartily  into  the  cause  of 


WILLIAM  WILLIAMS  AND  SAMUEL  STOCKING.  77 

anti-Masonry  and  became  about  1829-30  the  publisher  of  the  Eliicidator, 
a  paper  designed  to  advocate  its  principles,  which  was  edited  by  B.  B. 
Hotchkin.  The  Elucidator,  like  the  "  Light  on  Masonry"  above  men- 
tioned, detracted  from  in  lieu  of  increasing  revenues.  Mr.  Williams 
was  conspicuous  among  his  townsmen  for  his  warm  interest  and  his 
efficiency  in  all  matters  that  concerned  the  general  welfare.  His  time 
was  all  given  either  to  business  or  to  some  public  enterprise  or  to  some 
religious  or  moral  mission.  Though  a  lover  of  peace  and  fruitful  in  the 
works  of  peace  he  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  could  not  be  negligent  of 
his  country's  claim  in  time  of  war.  When  in  1813  an  attack  on  Sack- 
ets  Harbor  was  expected  and  volunteers  were  called  for  he  was  the 
first  and  most  active  man  in  Utica  in  raieing  a  company.  In  1832,  dur- 
ing the  cholera  epidemic,  he  was  one  of  the  most  self  sacrificing  and 
heroic  men  in  the  place  and  was  unsparing  of  his  labors  for  the  afflicted. 
Mr.  Williams  was  early  identified  with  the  religious  movements  of  the 
place,  and  in  his  life  he  was  the  very  pattern  of  a  Christian  gentleman. 
From  1812  to  1836  he  occupied  the  post  of  elder  in  the  Presbyterian 
Church  and  was  one  of  its  most  honored  office  bearers.  On  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Utica  Sunday  School  in  18 16  he  became  its  first  super- 
intendent, and  for  years  afterward  and  until  he  was  summoned  to  act  as 
an  instructor  in  the  Bible  class  he  was  its  ruling  spirit.  Nor  were  his 
services  in  the  higher  department  less  devoted  or  valuable.  He  was 
also  president  of  the  Western  Sunday  School  Union, 

Within  a  year  of  his  arrival  Samuel  Stocking  erected  a  building 
on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  a  short  distance  above  the  corner,  which 
was  known  as  Mechanic  Hall,  and  was  soon  filled  with  tenants,  and  into 
this  his  own  hat  shop  was  ere  long  transferred.  But  in  1816  he  removed 
to  the  brick  store  fronting  Broad  street,  where  he  was  to  be  found 
during  the  rest  of  his  residence.  For  many  years  after  his  first  estab- 
lishment he  continually  enlarged  his  operations  until  they  assumed  a 
magnitude  in  his  particular  line  never  before  or  since  attained  in  any 
part  of  the  State.  His  purchase  of  furs  for  the  manufacture  of  hats 
brought  him  early  to  the  acquaintance  of  John  Jacob  Astor,  then  in  the 
zenith  of  his  usefulness.  Astor  soon  appreciated  the  person  with  whom 
he  thus  dealt,  and  yielded  to  him  implicit  confidence  and  unbounded 
credit.     Mr.  Stocking  acquired  gracfually  by  his  business  and  by  saga- 


78  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

cious  purchases  of  land  in  Utica  and  other  places  a  very  large  property, 
amounting  it  is  said  to  half  a  million  of  dollars  before  its  partial  reduc- 
tion by  the  revulsion  of  1837.  The  simplicity  of  his  personal  manners 
continued,  however,  unabated,  together  with  his  perseverance  in  the 
business  to  which  he  had  been  educated. 

As  closely  given  to  business  as  the  preceding,  as  charitable  and  as 
useful,  was  James  Dana,  who  attained  at  least  a  competence  of  worldly 
goods  while  securing  an  unusual  share  of  public  respect  for  his  straight- 
forward honesty  and  his  earnest  and  consistent  religious  life. 

David  P.  Hoyt  was  a  tanner  and  currier  and  a  shoemaker.  Possessed 
of  decided  energy  and  perseverance,^  with  an  excellent  judgment  in 
matters  of  business,  he  was  successful  therein  to  a  greater  degree  than 
any  other  person  in  the  same  employment.  For  many  years  he  carried 
on  his  trade  in  shoes  and  leather  on  Genesee  street  a  little  way  above 
Whitesboro.  His  tannery  was  on  the  latter  street  beyond  Broadway 
and  adjoining  the  lane  called  by  his  name.  Here  he  had  iio  vats 
covered  with  buildings  and  a  little  below  them  on  the  lane  a  windmill 
to  grind  his  bark.  Besides  his  tannery  he  had,  after  the  construc- 
tion of  the  canal,  a  warehouse  on  its  southern  bank  next  west  from 
Washington  street,  and  a  basin  beside  it.  Mr.  Hoyt  was  always  a  prom- 
inent man  in  the  affairs  of  the  place,  and  by  his  industry  as  well  as  by 
his  interest  in  its  good  assisted  much  in  promoting  the  prosperity  and 
growth  of  Utica.  He  was  treasurer  and  afterward  trustee  of  the  village, 
a  director  of  the  Bank  of  Utica,  and  in  1819  he  represented  the  district 
in  the  chamber  of  the  Assembly. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  first  Board  of  Trustees  held  under  the  new 
charter  of  1805  David  W.  Childs  was  appointed  their  clerk,  and  con- 
tinued to  record  the  meetings  until  September  of  the  following  year, 
when  ill  health  obliged  him  to  withdraw.  On  the  organization  of  the 
Bank  of  Utica  in  18 12  Mr.  Childs,  who  was  a  director,  obtained  also  a 
more  profitable  office,  being  made  its  attorney  and  notary.  In  suits  by 
the  bank  for  notes  that  were  not  paid  it  was  the  duty  of  the  attorney  to 
issue  writs  for  each  of  the  endorsers,  and  for  these  writs  he  received  a 
handsome  fee.  By  means  of  his  office  and  by  other  business,  for  he 
was  a  sound  and  industrious  lawyer,  he  acquired  a  valuable  property. 
Among  the   provisions  of  his  will   was  a  legacy  to  the   Utica  Sunday 


SKETCH  OF  ABRAHAM  VARICK,  JR.  79 

School  of  $250.  while  to  the  Theological  Seminary  at  Auburn,  to  the 
Western  Education  Society,  and  to  the  American  Bible  Society  he 
also  gave  $500  each. 

A  member  of  the  legal  profession,  though  conspicuous  chiefly  for  his 
business  enterprise  and  the  magnitude  of  his  undertakings,  and  who 
was  long  an  honored  citizen  of  Utica,  was  Abraham  Varick,  jr.  His 
ancestral  home  was  in  Hackensack,  N.  J.,  but  he  was  the  son  of  Abra- 
ham Varick,  of  New  York,  and  nephew  of  Col.  Richard  Varick,  of  Rev- 
olutionary memory,  former  mayor  of  that  city  and  attorney- general  of 
the  State.  In  the  summer  of  1804  he  came  to  Utica  to  settle.  Though 
educated  to  the  bar  he  was  never  an  attendant  on  the  courts  nor  took  in 
hand  the  suits  of  others.  For  many  years  he  acted  as  agent  for  the 
Holland  Land  Company,  and  was  busied  in  selling  for  them  the  lands 
they  owned  to  the  north  of  Utica.  Being  an  active  and  capable  busi- 
ness man  and  full  of  enterprise  he  devo'ted  himself  throughout  his  life 
to  dealing  in  lands,  to  the  management  of  factories  and  furnaces,  and  to 
other  financial  projects.  As  early  as  September,  1S04,  he  bought  the 
large  farm  lying  at  the  head  of  Genesee  street,  which  was  known  as  the 
Kimball  farm,  paying  for  it  the  sum  of  $5,500.  It  was  mapped  out  for 
building  purposes,  and  within  two  years  sales  were  made  at  prices 
which  were  then  deemed  quite  high.  Subsequently  Mr.  Varick  became 
possessed  at  various  periods  of  a  number  of  lots  and  buildings  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  village.  But  his  largest  investments  were  made  in  West 
Utica.  About  1827,  in  connection  with  A.  B.  Johnson,  he  bought  the 
Jason  Parker  farm,  which  extended  from  the  river  to  Court  street  oppo- 
site the  asylum.  And  together  with  Charles  E.  Dudley,  of  Albany,  he 
bought  about  the  same  time  from  Philip  Schuyler  a  part  of  great  lot 
No.  99,  being  the  farm  adjacent  to  the  preceding  on  the  east.  These 
were  also  converted  into  building  lots  and  yielded  rich  returns  to  their 
owners,  while  they  opened  the  way  for  the  extension  of  the  city  toward 
the  west.  His  name  is  preserved  in  the  main  avenue  of  these  western 
domains.  He  was  largely  interested  in  many  factories  of  different  kinds, 
as  in  the  cotton-mills  at  Clinton,  the  Oneida  factory  at  Yorkville,  the 
Oriskany  factory,  the  Utica  glass  factory,  etc.  An  iron  furnace  at 
Constantia  was  chiefly  controlled  by  him  as  well  as  mills  and  a  rope- 
walk  at  Denmark  in  Lewis  County,  and  he  was  a  heavy  stockholder  in 


8o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

one  of  the  earliest  railroads  of  the  State,  that  known  as  the  Ithaca  and 
Owego.  His  latest  and  most  considerable  operations  were  carried  on  at 
Oswego,  where  he  came  in  possession  of  a  property  which  included  no 
small  part  of  the  business  section  of  the  town.  There  he  built  a  fine 
cotton  factory,  of  which  the  machinery  alone  cost  him  $6o,ooo,  and  had 
also  a  dry  dock  and  a  marine  railway.  In  the  Presbyterian  Church  he 
was  a  prominent  person,  and  when  measures  were  set  on  foot  to  estab- 
lish a  Reformed  Dutch  Church  no  one  was  more  zealous  or  liberal 
than  he.  He  was  one  of  its  first  elders.  For  a  time  he  was  president 
of  the  Oneida  County  Bible  Society.  In  person  he  was  tall  and  impos- 
ing, in  demeanor  dignified  and  sedate. 

Dr.  David  Hasbrouck  was  a  native  of  Shawangunk,  Ulster  County, 
N.  Y.  He  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  James  Graham,  of  Shawangunk, 
and  attended  lectures  in  New  York.  He  came  to  Utica  in  1804  and 
formed  a  partnership  in  practice  with  Dr.  Alexander  Coventry,  he  occu- 
pying the  office  on  the  west  side  of  Genesee  street  next  door  below  the 
mouth  of  Broad  while  Dr.  Coventry  continued  to  reside  in  Deerfield. 
There  also  he  sold  drugs.  His  practice  was  for  the  most  part  restricted 
to  a  few  leading  families.  He  was  the  first  secretary  of  the  County  Med- 
ical Society  on  its  organization  in  1806.  About  1815  he  removed  to 
Kingston,  Ulster  County,  but  died  in  Schenectady  in  October,  1823,  at 
the  age  of  forty- five. 

"  Dr.  Christian  Stockman,  from  Germany  and  last  from  Albany, 
where  he  has  resided  for  the  last  ten  years,  has  opened  in  Utica  on  Gen- 
esee street  a  general  assortment  of  drugs  and  medicines.  He  will  like- 
wise attend  to  any  calls  in  the  line  of  his  profession  as  physician  and 
give  advice  at  his  store  in  all  cases,  and  when  requested  visit  any  pa- 
tient who  may  favor  him  with  a  call."  Besides  drugs  he  kept  also 
German  toys  for  sale.  His  announcement  a  few  years  later  of  a  Ger- 
man almanac  must  have  seemed  to  the  readers  of  the  Gazette  outland- 
ish and  strange.  He  was  lost  at  sea  on  his  return  from  a  trip  to 
Europe. 

Into  the  growing  hamlet  there  came  in  the  course  of  the  year  1804 
two  brothers  from  Connecticut,  and  with  them  there  came  one  who  has 
generally  passed  as  a  third  brother,  but  who  was  in  reality  a  cousin 
and  the  brother-in-law  to  each  of  them,  each  having-  married  one  of  his 


SKETCHES  OF  PIONEER  CITIZENS.  8i, 

( 
sisters.     These   were   Abijah   and  Anson  Thomas   and   their    relative, 

B.  W.  Thomas.     All  survived   by  many  years  the  early  period  of  our 

history  and   contributed   by  their  honorable   career  as  merchants  and 

their  responsible  position  in  the  church  to  the  fair  name  and  prosperity 

of  Utica.     Anson   Thomas  engaged    in  no  business  until   about  1815, 

when  he   began  as  a  merchant  in  company  with  B.  W.  Thomas,  which 

partnership  lasted  fifteen  years.      His  later  partner  until  he  retired  from 

business  was  James  Button.      In  March,  1839,  he  was  chosen  president 

of  the  Bank  of  Central  New  York,  which  .office  he  held  while  he  lived, 

discharging  its  duties  with  watchful  fidelity. 

The  earliest  hint  we  have  of  Hugh  Cunningham  is  furnished  by  him- 
self in  1804,  when  he  informs  the  newspaper  readers  that  Hugh  Cun 
ningham  &  Co.  have  opened  a  new  store  in  the  village  opposite  the 
postoffice,  which  was  lately  that  of  William  Fellows.  Next  we  get  a 
telescopic  peep  at  him  through  the  memory  of  one  of  his  contem- 
poraries. A  group  of  citizens  are  gathered  around  the  pump  in  the  pub- 
lic-square gazing  at  the  great  eclipse  of  1806,  and  prominent  among 
them  sits  Cunningham,  astride  the  pump  handle,  enlivening  the  com- 
pany with  his  waggery.  In  18 10  he  built  himself  a  store  on  the  east 
corner  of  Genesee  and  the  square,  the  site  of  the  early  House  Tavern  ; 
but  hardly  was  it  complete  when  on  the  night  of  the  3d  of  October  it 
was  burned  to  the  ground.  Presently  rebuilt  he  was  in  it  by  the  mid- 
dle of  January  ensuing   and  ready  to  wait  on  purchasers  of  dry  goods. 

Isaac  Coe  was  made  village  treasurer  at  the  first  election  held  under 
the  charter  of  1805,  and  continued  in  the  office  by  annual  re-elections 
as  long  as  he  remained  in  Utica.  I'ossessed  of  decided  enterprise,  an 
active  mover  in  the  project  for  establishing  a  glass  factory  at  Vernon, 
and  the  largest  subscriber  to  the  stock  of  the  company  he  was  if  not 
the  first  at  least  one  of  its  earliest  presidents.  But  his  ambition  outran 
his  resources  and  his  career  ended  like  that  of  many  another  :  he  failed 
and  went  West.  In  September,  1810,  a  new  treasurer  was  appointed 
"in  lieu  of  Isaac  Coe,  who  has  left  the  place."  Upwards  of  fifty  years 
after  the  abrupt  departure  of  Mr.  Coe,  and  when  nearly  all  who  had 
once  known  him  had  gone  down  to  their  graves,  he  re-appears  on  the 
scene  of  his  youthful  experience  to  make  good  his  delinquencies.  Call- 
ing upon  the  son  of  one  of  his  former  creditors  he  deposits  with  him  the 
II 


82  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

means  with  which  to  pay  with  interest  all  his  old  indebtedness.  Other 
men  have  made  restitution  after  years  of  pecuniary  indebtedness;  not 
many  have  carried  a  burdened  conscience  for  fifty  years  without  the 
power  to  absolve  themselves  and  yet  have  lightened  it  at  the  last. 

Enos  Brown  and  Daniel  Stafford  were  dealers  in  hardware,  and  after 
their  failure  in  18-20  the  former  became  again  a  butcher  as  he  had  been 
in  his  youth.  He  lived  here  in  feeble  health  until  1856.  A  tinman, 
coppersmith,  and  nailer  in  company  with  David  Stafford  was  Augus- 
tus Hickox,  whose  activity  and  zeal  for  the  public  good  brought  him  to 
the  front  and  eventually  made  him  president  of  the  village.  William 
Tillman  was  a  cabinetmaker ;  Ara  Broadwell,  a  mason,  much  employed 
both  on  public  and  private  constructions;  Elisha  Spurr,  a  jolly  tapster 
and  a  busy  politician ;  Chauncey  Phelps,  pavior  ;  Alfred  and  Solomon 
Wells,  carpenters  ;   Elisha  Rose,  blacksmith. 

August  13,  1804,  the  firm  of  Walton,  Turner  &  Co.  took  possession 
of  a  store  below  Bagg's  and  at  the  same  time  opened  the  forwarding 
business  in  two  warehouses  situated  a  little  distance  below  the  river 
bridge,  where  the  Central  Railroad  now  runs.  Duncan  Turner  was  a 
Scotchman  who  came  from  Nova  Scotia  to  Albany,  where  he  sold 
little  notions  and  accumulated  about  $500.  Joining  Jonathan  Walton, 
of  Schenectady,  he  engaged  in  forwarding  and  came  to  Utica  to  manage 
the  business  at  this  end  of  the  line.  The  warehouses  were  set  on  upright 
posts,  which  were  undermined  by  a  freshet  about  1807.  The  buildings 
were  secured  by  being  fastened  to  a  tree,  but  the  wheat  stored  therein 
was  so  much  damaged  that  it  was  sold  to  Mr.  Gilbert  to  be  made  into 
starch.  Their  later  store  was  on  Genesee  where  Broad  street  enters  it. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  War  of  181 2  Mr.  Turner  removed  to  Lowville 
and  shortly  after  to  Ogdensburg. 

In  approaching  the  year  1805  we  begin,  as  it  were  for  the  first  time, 
to  meet  with  evidences  of  united  interests  among  the  villagers,  and  we 
find  these  evidences  in  the  expression  of  a  desire  for  a  more  perfect 
corporate  life.  Their  wishes  in  this  respect  are  contained  in  a  petition 
to  the  legislature  for  a  new  charter,  which  was  received  in  the  Assemblyi 
February  12,  1805.  Their  reasons  are  so  fully  set  forth  that  we  make 
no  apology  for  copying  the  document  in  full  together  with  the  appended 
names : 


PETITION  FOR  A  NEW  CHARTER.  83 

"  To  the  Honorable  the  Legislature  of  the  State  of  New  York  in  Senate  and  Assem- 
bly convened: 

"The  petition  of  the  freeholders  and  inhabitants  of  the  village  of  Utica,  in  the 
County  of  Oneida,  humbly  sheweth  : 

"That  the  rapid  increase  of  buildings,  business,  and  population  in  said  village  seems 
to  demand  a  police  belter  regulated  and  more  enlarged  than  at  present  the  said  village 
enjoys,  particularly  with  respect  to  fires  and  the  prevention  of  public  nuisances  ;  That 
your  petitioners  have  already  in  many  instances  experienced  a  want  of  power  in  the 
inhabitants  of  said  village  and  the  Trustees  elected  by  virtue  of  the  law  under  which 
the  affairs  of  said  village  are  now  regulated  ;  That  a  greater  number  of  firemen  are  re- 
quisite than  is  at  present  allowed;- That  the  population  of  the  village  is  very  rapid  to- 
ward the  west  and  south,  so  that  the  bounds  of  the  same  as  now  settled  in  these 
directions  are  too  much  limited  ;  That  a  great  portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  said  village 
are  in  the  habit  of  consuming  baker's  bread,  and  there  being  no  assize  of  bread  the 
poor  as  well  as  others  are  obliged  to  pay  for  that  necessary  article  a  greater  price  than 
is  paid  in  New  York  and  Albany  ;  That  it  is  found  impossible  in  many  cases  to  carry 
into  effect  the  laws  respecting  swine,  &c.,  running  at  large  in  the  streets,  having  no 
power  to  distrain  and  impound,  and  the  owner  being  frequently  unknown. 

"For  these  and  other  reasons  your  Petitioners  therefore  pray  that  your  Honorable 
body  will  grant  to  the  freeholders,  inhabitants,  and  Trustees  of  the  said  village  powers 
similar  to  those  enjoyed  by  the  village  of  Poughkeepsie;  in  order  that  the  above  and 
many  other  existing  evils  may  be  avoided ;  That  the  bounds  of  said  village  may  be  ex- 
tended ;  and  that  the  annual  meetings  of  the  inhabitants  of  said  village  may  be  here- 
after on  the  first  Tuesday  in  April  in  each  year." 

B.  Walker,  Brastus  Clark,  N.  Williams,  Thos.  Skinner,  Daniel  Thomas,  S.  P. 
Goodrich,  Talcott  Camp,  Wra  Fellows,  M.  Hitchcock,  David  Hasbrouok,  Frederick 
White,  David  W.  Childs,  Watts  Sherman,  James  Dana,  Thomas  Walker,  J.  Ballou,  Apol- 
los  Cooper,  Benj'n  Ballou,  Jason  Parker.  Judah  Williams,  jr.,  Willett  Stillman,  John 
ilayo,  Rufus  Brown,  Ira  Dickenson,  Elkanah  Hobby,  William  Webster,  Samuel  Web- 
ster, Thaddeus  Stoddard,  Caleb  Hazen,  Augustus  Hickox,  Sam'l  Ward,  Benajah  Mer- 
rell,  Abraham  Williams,  John  Adams,  Ab'm  Varick,  jr.,  N.  Butler,  Jer.  Van 
Eensselaer,  jr..  Christian  Stockman,  Bryan  Johnson,  Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  John  B. 
Murdock,  Francis  Guiteau,  jr.,  John  Hobby,  Charles  C.  Brodhead,  Ezekiel  Clark,  Ayl- 
mer  Johnson,  Moses  Bagg,  jr.,  John  C.  Uoyt,  B.  Brooks,  Gurdon  Burchard,  D.  Turner, 
E.  B.  Shearman,  Philip  J.  Schwartze,  Joseph  Ballou,  Elisha  Capron,  James  Brown, 
Thomas  Ballou,  Joseph  Ballou,  Thomas  Jones,  Elisha  Eose,  Obadiah  Ballou,  James 
Hazen,  David  Stafford,  Bph'm  Wells,  John  Bissell,  Evan  D^vies. 

Having  thus  scanned  the  population  of  the  nascent  village,  and  passed 
in  review  many  of  its  members  from  the  origin  of  the  settlement  down  to 
the  beginning  of  extant  historic  records,  let  us  now  consider  the  people  as 
a  whole  and  the  appearance  of  Utica  at  the  date  in  question.  The  vil- 
lage, it  is  evident,  had  now  taken  a  start  and   was   growing  with  some 


84  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

degree  of  vigor  ;  and  this  start  would  seem  to  have  begun  from  about 
the  year  1794,  as  will  be  seen  from  a  glance  at  the  few  data  we  possess. 
The  three  log  shanties  of  the  Bleecker  map  of  1786,  and  as  observed 
by  a  passing  settler  in  1787,  had  in  1790  hardly  increased  in  number, 
for  this  is  the  sum  of  them  given  by  Morse  in  his  earlier  gazetteer,  and 
William  Miller,  of  Trenton,  found  no  more  in  1793  when  he  first  passed 
through  the  place.  In  1794  there  were,  according  to  Judge  Jones, ^  about 
ten  resident  families,  or  according  to  a  settler  of  that  date  seven  or 
eight  houses,  although  two  Welsh  emigrants  on  their  way  to  Steuben 
counted  the  next  year  only  four  houses  and  a  barn  on  the  main  street. 
In  1796  the  number  of  houses,  says  Morse,  had  increased  to  thirty- 
seven  and  in  1798  Dr.  Dwight  estimates  their  number  at  fifty.  Maude, 
two  years  later,  tells  us  there  were  sixty,  while  another  authority  ^  rates 
the  population  of  1801  at  200  souls.  In  1802  the  number  of  houses,  as 
we  learn  from  Rev.  Mr.  Taylor,  had  grown  to  nearly  ninety,  and  in 
1804,  when  Dr.  Dwight  was  here  again,  he  found  120  houses  and  a  long 
train  of  merchants'  stores  and  other  buildings. 

The  actual  narrowness  of  confine  of  the  Utica  of  1805  and  the  small 
progress  it  had  made  toward  its  present  measure  of  prosperity  will 
be  evident  when  we  know  that  the  only  streets  in  use  were  Main, 
Whitesboro,  Genesee,  Hotel,  and  a  portion  of  Seneca,  the  latter  having 
been  added  to  the  preceding  in  the  year  1804.  Others  were  laid  down 
on  the  manuscript  maps  of  the  proprietors,  but  unrecognized  by  author- 
ity and  as  yet  without  houses.  Business  found  its  way  from  the  river 
as  far  up  Whitesboro  as  Hotel  street,  as  far  up  Genesee  as  the  upper 
line  of  Broad,  and  a  little  way  along  Main  ;  beyond  these  limits  shops 
and  stores  were  sparingly  intermingled  with  private  residences.  The 
business  was  mostly  conducted  in  little  wooden  buildings.  Not  more 
than  two  brick  stores  had  yet  found  a  place.  The  dwelling  houses  of 
Main  and  Whitesboro  streets  may  be  judged  of  by  a  few  specimens  still 
to  be  seen  east  of  First  street  and  west  of  Broadway.  The  road  along 
Genesee  street  consisted  of  a  log  causeway  barely  wide  enough  for  teams 
to  pass  one  another,  and  having  a  ditch  on  either  side  into  which  if  the 
hindmost  wheels  slipped  a  vigorous  pull  was  required  to  raise  them 
again  to  the  track. 

1  Annals  of  Oneida  County. 
iJ  A.  B.  Johnson. 


A  CRITICAL  ESTIMATE  OF  EARLY  U2ICA.  85 

The  corduroy  road,  which  once  started  between  what  are  now  Broad- 
way and  Washington  streets  and  pursued  its  winding  way  to  New  Hart- 
ford, was  ere  this  abandoned  for  the  more  direct  turnpike  continuous 
with  Genesee  street.  The  transient  occupancy  of  many  of  the  stores 
and  houses  and  the  general  floating  habit  of  many  of  the  traders  and 
artisans  is  markedly  evident.  At  this  time,  as  well  as  for  some  years 
longer,-  there  was  doubtless  much  of  the  rawness  of  a  new  people  living 
apart  from  populous  centers  and  almost  destitute  of  schools  and 
churches.  Yet  there  was  on  the  whole  an  unusual  amount  of  intelli- 
gence and  good  morals.  Some  of  the  settlers  had  been  bred  at  college, 
others  had  enjoyed  a  wide  experience  abroad  and  had  moved  in  polished 
circles,  and  the  majority  had  been  trained  under  elevating  and  purify- 
ing influences.  Utica  was  surpassed  both  by  Whitesboro  and  New 
Hartford,  and  at  least  equaled  by  Rome,  its  later  and  more  enduring 
rival.  These  places  were  not  only  earlier  in  their  origin  and  had  already 
become  centers  of  trade,  but  Whitesboro  in  1802  became  with  Rome 
a  half-shire  town  of  the  county.  Here  the  courts  were  held  and  here 
the  chief  officers  and  many  of  the  leading  lawyers  had  their  abode. 
Already  there  were  clustered  in  it  a  few  legal  gentlemen  of  marked 
ability  who  would  have  been  distinguished  in  any  community,  whether 
for  their  eloquence  and  skill  as  advocates,  their  sound  learning,  or  their 
just  estimate  and  successful  practice  of  the  dignity  and  duties  of  their 
profession. 

But  as  yet  these  heads  of  the  profession  were  not  only  founders  of  this 
bar ;  they  had  also  a  monoply  of  its  privileges,  so  that  in  legal  as  in 
other  needs  Utica  was  but  secondary  and  dependent.  If  an  order  were 
to  be  procured  from  the  courts  or  any  other  business  to  be  transacted 
therein,  or  even  if  it  were  wished  that  a  deed  should  be  acknowledged, 
a  journey  to  Whitesboro  was  necessary.  In  matters  of  household  con- 
venience and  daily  consumption  a  like  dependence  was  also  though  not 
so  imperiously  felt.  If  a  fastidious  citizen  despaired  of  getting  from  the 
stores  of  his  own  traders  the  finest  loaf  sugar  or  a  nicer  kind  of  tea  than 
the  Bohea,  then  in  common  use,  he  would  be  sure  of  finding  them  with 
WilHam  G.  Tracy,  of  Whitesboro ;  and  both  this  place  and  New  Hart- 
ford had  for  many  years  thriving  merchants  who  drew  custom  from 
Utica.     New  Hartford,  too,  in  the  cultivation  and  polish  of  many  of  its 


86  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

families,  had  social  advantages  that  were  little  short  of  those  possessed 
by  Whitesboro. 

A  natural  characteristic  of  the  small  and  sparse  population  of  the 
vicinity  was  the  very  great  freedom  of  intercourse  which  existed.  De- 
pendent on  one  another  for  fellowship  and  assistance  they  were  knit  by 
the  closest  of  bohds  and  found  much  of  their  enjoyment  in  the  exchange 
of  hospitable  visits.  Ranks  and  degrees  in  society  there  were,  as  at 
present,  but  these  distinctions  were  less  marked  and  the  bars  easily 
broken  down.  Thus  each  was  impressed  by  his  fellow,  and  happily 
there  were  enough  of  ennobling  agencies  at  work  to  chasten  and  exalt 
the  whole.  Moreover  distances  were  of  little  account  and  bad  roads 
so  trifling  an  impediment  that  if  congenial  associates  were  deficient  or 
unsatisfying  at  home  they  were  sought  in  the  cultured  and  high  toned 
families  of  the  neighboring  settlements ;  and  so  it  was  that  Utica  was 
scarcely  more  indebted  to  its  own  leaders  than  to  the  foremost  people 
of  Whitesboro  and  New  Hartford  for  the  influences  that  formed  and  en- 
riched its  character. 

As  we  have  seen  a  goodly  number  of  stores  and  shops  were  dis- 
persed along  the  principal  street.  Yet  there  was  room  enough  outside 
of  it  for  the  operations  of  farmers,  and  some  of  these  were  cultivating 
the  soil  of  what  are  now  the  oldest  parts  of  the  city.  As  luxuriant  a 
crop  of  wheat,  said  an  eye-witness,  has  been  grown  in  the  Second 
ward  of  Utica  as  he  afterward  met  with  in  the  famous  wheat  regions 
of  Genesee ;  and  as  for  potatoes  the  most  abundant  growth  he  re- 
members to  have  witnessed  in  all  his  lifetime  was  the  product  of  this  same 
neighborhood.  The  few  simple  manufactories  as  yet  in  existence  have 
been  mostly  already  glanced  at.  There  was  the  shop  of  William  Smith 
for  the  making  of  wrought  nails  on  the  east  bank  of  Nail  Creek.  There 
was  a  small  shop  for  cut  nails  on  the  south  side  of  Main  street  a  little 
east  of  the  square.  It  was  followed  by  the  similar  shop  of  Delvin  on 
Genesee  street.  These  were  worked  by  no  other  power  than  the  hand 
and  foot,  the  nails  being  cut  by  one  process  and  headed  by  another. 
There  was  Ure's  brewery  on  Nail  Creek  opposite  Smith  and  there  was 
the  new  one  of  Inman  just  opened  on  the  corner  of  Broadway.  There 
were  four  tanneries,  viz.:  those  of  Ballou,  Hopper,  Hubbard,  and  Hoyt. 
There  was  the  wagon  shop  of  Abijah  Thomas  and  the  hat  factory  of  Sam- 


EARLY  TRADING  AND  BARTERING.  87 

uel  Stocking.  There  were  a  few  places  where  chairs  and  other  furniture 
were  made,  and  there  were  shops  where  other  mechanical  trades  were 
conducted.     And  these  constituted  the  whole  manufacturing  interests. 

It  was  trade  that  chiefly  commanded  the  enterprise  which  is  at  pres- 
ent enlisted  in  a  great  variety  of  pursuits.  Audit  found  a  vastly  wider 
field  for  its  exercise  than  is  enjoyed  by  the  local  merchants  of  to-day. 
From  Lewis  and  Jefferson,  from  Onondaga,  Madison,  and  Chenango 
Counties,  farmers  and  country  dealers  sent  hither  their  wheat  and  other 
grains,  their  pot  and  pearl  ashes,  and  the  surplus  of  their  farms  and 
dairies,  to  receive  in  exchange  for  consumption  or  for  sale  goods  from 
the  East  that  were  best  attainable  by  transport  on  the  river.  Compar- 
atively little  money  was  in  use,  and  business  was  largely  a  system  of 
barter  and  credit  wherein  the  merchants  on  the  Mohawk  held  toward  the 
outlying  settlements  relations  akin  to  those  now  existing  between  the 
importers  of  the  metropolis  and  inland  dealers  all  over  the  country  ;  they 
found  a  market  for  these  frontier  producers  and  supplied  them  in  return 
with  the  manufactures  of  Europe  and  the  groceries  and  liquors  of 
New  England  and  the  West  Indies.  The  following  are  a  few  only  of  the 
prices  of  articles  in  common  use,  both  imported  and  native.  A  kind  of 
East  India  muslin  that  would  scarcely  hold  together  to  be  measured 
was  sold  for  two  shillings.  This  was  called  bafters.  A  somewhat  finer 
variety  known  as  giirrers  commanded  a  sixpence  more.  Calicoes  were 
six  shillings  and  sixpence  per  yard;  better* and  handsomer  can  now  be 
bought  for  one  shilling.  West  India  sugar  sold  at  from  ten  to  fourteen 
cents  ;  maple  sugar  in  its  season  at  sixpence.  Board  was  $2.00  a  week  ; 
a  single  meal  two  shillings. 

Let  us  not  imagine  that  the  streets  were  thronged  with  traffickers  or 
that  they  ever  presented  a  scene  analogous  to  those  so  often  witnessed 
nowadays.  Many  years  yet  elapsed  ere  one  of  them  was  paved  or 
lighted,  while  the  sidewalks,  not  yet  taken  in  hand  by  the  trustees,  were 
scarce  distinguishable  from  the  roadways,  A  single  constable  formed 
the  total  police,  and  he  was  often  called  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  to 
distant  points  of  the  State,  for  Madison,  Lewis,  Jefferson,  and  St.  Law- 
rence formed  parts  of  his  bounds.  No  bank  had  yet  been  established. 
The  Welsh  had  the  only  church  actually  erected.  Trinity  was  in  progress, 
but  not  ready  for  use,  and  the  sole  mode  of  access  to  it  was  by  a  lane 


88  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

known  as  Church  lane,  which  anticipated  the  present  First  street ;  and 
even  this  was  entered  through  a  gate.  On  the  map  of  Whitestown 
made  by  Peleg  Gifford  in  1806,  of  which  a  part  is  shown  below,  this 
church  is  represented  as  standing  quite  alone  in  the  rear  of  the  row  of 
houses  that  line  the  course  of  Main  street.  The  other  church  pictured 
on  his  map  was  not  yet  begun.  For  most  worshipers  the  school-house 
was  the  customary  place  of  resort.     Baptists  who  did  not  understand 


Welsh  attended  the  Welsh  Baptist  Church  when  there  was  preaching  in 
English,  and  sometimes  made  a  journey  to  Herkimer  in  order  to  wor- 
ship.     Methodists  gathered  on  the  New  Hartford  road. 

The  village  had  its  burying  ground,  and  in  1806  a  deed  of  the 
premises  was  obtained  from  Stephen  Potter,  the  owner,  but  with  a  re- 
served clause  that  savors  little  of  the  modern  taste  and  sentiment  that  is 
exercised  in  providing  for  the  last  resting  place  of  our  departed  friends, 
as  it  reserved  to  the  former  owner  the  right  of  pasturmg  sheep  and  calves 
therein. 


PROVISIONS  OF  SECOND  CHARTER.  89 


CHAPTER  III. 
THE   SECOND    VILLAGE   CHARTER. 

Officers  elected  at  the  first  Town  Meeting  —  Their  Proceedings  and  those  of  suc- 
ceeding Years  —  New  comers  Noticed. 

THE  petition  heretofore  recorded  which  the  citizens  had  addressed 
to  the  legislature  was  granted,  and  a  new  and  more  compre- 
hensive charter  was  accorded  them.  By  order  of  Talcott  Camp,  clerk, 
the  inhabitants  were  called  to  meet  at  the  school-house  on  Tuesday,  May 
7,  1805,  in  order  to  choose  five  trustees  and  do  any  other  necessary 
business,  at  which  time  "  the  law  is  to  be  read."  This  charter,  which 
bears  date  April  9,  1805,  secured  all  the  privileges  that  were  asked. 
The  bounds  of  the  village  on  the  east  were  fixed  as  they  now  exist. 
Those  on  the  west  extended  to  the  west  line  of  lot  No.  99.  The  free- 
holders were  declared  a  body  corporate  with  power  to  raise  among  them- 
selves a  tax  not  exceeding  $1,000  in  one  year  for  public  buildings,  fire 
expenses,  and  necessary  improvements.  Five  trustees  were  to  be  elected 
annually  at  a  meeting  of  freeholders  to  be  held  on  the  second  Tues- 
day in  May.  Any  person  who  declined  to  serve  when  so  elected  was 
liable  to  a  fine  of  $25.  To  these  trustees  it  was  given  to  fix  the  price 
of  bread,  assess  all  taxes,  appoint  twenty-five  firemen,  make  all  by-laws 
necessary  for  protection  against  nuisances,  and  for  the  general  regula- 
tion of  municipal  affairs,  and  to  them  was  entrusted  full  power  to  enforce 
the  same  The  president  whom  they  should  appoint  was  required,  in 
addition  to  his  duties  as  presiding  officer  of  the  board  and  superintend- 
ent of  the  public  interests,  to  look  after  the  utensils  used  at  fires,  while 
the  trustees  were  to  serve  also  as  fire  wardens.  There  was  to  be  ap- 
pointed also  at  the  annual  meeting  a  treasurer  and  a  collector  who  were 
to  receive  compensation  for  their  services.  The  foregoing  is  an  out- 
line of  the  charter  which  the  inhabitants  were  now  met  to  hear  and  in 
accordance  with  whose  provisions  they  were  to  organize.  Their  pro- 
ceedings as  well  as  those  of  subsequent  annual  meetings,  and  those  also- 
12 


^o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

of  the  monthly  meetings  of  the  trustees  then  elected,  are  preserved  to  us 
in  the  records  which  still  remain,  so  that  we  may  from  this  time  onward 
trace  the  official  history  of  the  place  and  are  no  longer  restricted  to 
the  individual  histories  of  its  citizens. 

At  this  first  annual  meeting  the  former  trustees  presided.  The  fol- 
lowing were  chosen  trustees  for  the  ensuing  year :  Jeremiah  Van  Rens- 
selaer, jr.,  Nathan  Wilhams,  Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  Jerathmel  Ballou, 
and  Erastus  Clark.  Isaac  Coe  was  chosen  treasurer  and  Worden  Ham- 
mond collector.  It  was  resolved  that  the  sum  of  $300  be  raised  by 
assessment  on  the  freeholders,  of  which  two  and  one-half  per  cent,  was 
to  go  to  the  collector  and  one  per  cent,  to  the  treasurer  for  their  com- 
pensation, and  the  residue  be  devoted  by  the  trustees  to  the  payment 
of  the  expenses  of  digging  wells,  procuring  pumps  and  fire  utensils, 
and  the  contingent  expenses. 

At  the  first  meeting  of  trustees,  which  was  held  at  the  hotel  four  days 
afterward,  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  jr.,  was  appointed  president  and 
D.  W.  Childs  clerk.  The  early  provisions  for  extinguishing  fires  are 
detailed  in  a  later  chapter  devoted  to  the  fire  department.  At  the  same 
meeting  the  trustees  adopted  a  seal,  which  was  a  heart  with  the  letter  F 
in  the  center,  and  also  passed  an  ordinance  to  restrain  horses,  hogs,  and 
neat  cattle  from  running  at  large.  At  the  third  meeting  of  the  trustees 
an  ordinance  was  passed  in  relation  to  fire  buckets.  Its  provisions,  which 
seem  now  so  singular,  but  which  with  some  modifications  were  in  force 
for  several  years,  were  substantially  the  following :  The  owner  of  every 
dwelling,  store,  or  workshop,  or  occupant  of  the  same  if  the  owner 
were  a  non-resident,  was  required  to  keep  hung  up  in  the  principal  hall, 
or  in  some  conspicuous  place  in  the  building,  one  or  more  leathern  fire 
buckets  of  the  capacity  of  eight  quarts,  and  in  number  proportioned  to 
the  fire-places  or  stoves  the  building  might  contain,  though  no  one  was 
expected  to  have  more  than  six.  These  buckets  were  not  to  be  used 
for  any  other  purpose  than  to  carry  water  at  fires.  For  non-compliance 
with  the  ordinance  the  owner  or  occupant  was  subject  to  fine.  The 
operation  of  the  ordinance  was  to  extend  from  the  east  line  of  great  lot 
No.  93  to  the  west  line  of  lot  No.  96,  that  is  to  say  from  First  street  to 
the  present  State  street,  and  as  far  south  as  the  line  of  Blandina  street. 
The  next  meeting  was  held  on  the  3d  of  June,  when  the  assize  of  bread 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  TRUSTEES.  91 

was  fixed.  The  price  being  regulated  in  accordance  witli  the  price  of 
wheat,  this  first  assize,  which  was  made  when  wheat  was  selling  at  four- 
teen shilhngs  per  bushel,  was  as  follows  :  A  loaf  of  superfine  wheat 
flour  to  weigh  two  pounds  ten  ounces,  for  one  shilling;  a  loaf  of  super- 
fine flour  to  weigh  one  pound  five  ounces,  for  sixpence  ;  a  loaf  of  com- 
mon wheat  flour  to  weigh  three  pounds  three  ounces,  for  one  shilling; 
a  loaf  of  common  wheat  flour  to  weigh  one  pound  nine  ounces,  for 
sixpence. 

It  might  be  presumed  from  the  desire  the  citizens  had  expressed  for 
power  by  their  charter  to  adjust  the  price  of  bread  and  the  prompt 
exercise  of  this  power  by  the  trustees  that  baker's  bread  was  the  only 
kind  in  use,  and  that  few  if  any  families  baked  their  own.  And  this  was 
probably  the  case  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  at  present.  The  prac- 
tice arose  chiefly  from  the  difficulty  of  getting  brevi;er's  yeast  with  which 
to  leaven  their  bread.  The  very  earliest  settlers  made  their  own  beer 
from  wild  hops  they  gathered  in  the  woods,  and  the  emptyings  were 
used  for  yeast ;  but  such  yeast  was  troublesome  to  make  and  soon 
soured.  After  the  erection  of  a  brewery,  and  especially  after  Mr.  Inman, 
the  brewer,  announced  through  the  papers  that  private  families  would 
be  waited  on  with  fresh  yeast  every  Tuesday  and  Friday,  domestic 
bread,  as  we  may  conclude,  came  more  into  use.  But  that  manufactured 
by  the  bakers  was  always  in  demand.  Its  assize  was  renewed  or  newly 
regulated  at  each  monthly  meeting,  and  was  published  in  the  weekly 
papers  over  the  signature  of  the  president.  Any  baker  who  violated 
the  ordinance  was  subject  to  a  fine  of  $5. 

In  July  it  was  determined  to  dig  three  public  wells  for  the  supply  of 
the  village  with  water.  These  wells  were  all  dug,  were  fitted  with 
pumps,  and  in  use  for  sometime.  The  lower  one  on  Genesee  street  was 
found  to  afford  excellent  water,  and  was  so  great  a  convenience  to  man 
and  beast  as  to  be  kept  open.  It  served  as  a  notable  place  of  rendez- 
vous for  the  inhabitants  nearly  if  not  quite  down  to  the  time  when  the 
village  became  a  city.  At  the  same  meeting  laws  were  passed  forbid- 
ding the  deposit  of  firewood  any  further  in  the  street  than  fifteen  feet 
from  the  sides,  and  requiring  its  removal  within  twenty-four  hours  after 
purchase ;  requiring  the  removal  also  of  building  material,  potash  ket- 
tles, hogsheads,  standing  wagons,  and  rubbish  ;   excluding  slaughter- 


92 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


houses  between  lots  90  and  97  ;  forbidding  the  burning  out  of  chimneys 
on  other  than  rainy  days  or  the  burning  of  combustibles  in  the  street 
before  sunrise  or  after  sunset.  A  week  later  the  money  raised  by  assess- 
ment was  apportioned  according  to  a  schedule  agreed  on.  The  above 
was  in  substance  all  that  was  done  by  the  trustees  during  the  year, 
although  they  met  every  month  to  declare  the  assize  of  bread. 

The  firemen  held  also  monthly  meetings  and  were  duly  exercised  at 
each  of  them.  Those  who  failed  in  their  attendance  for  three  consecu- 
tive months  were  to  be  reported  to  the  trustees.  They  supped  together 
on  the  1st  of  January,  1806,  at  the  small  cost  to  the  company  of  $1. 
It  would  seem,  however,  that  they  presently'  devised  another  mode  of 
expending  the  fund  arising  from  the  accumulated  fines,  for  in  February 
they  voted  that  tickets  in  the  Lottery  for  the  Encouragement  of  Litera- 
ture to  the  amount  of  moneys  in  fund  be  purchased  and  that  numbers 
be  recorded  by  the  clerk  for  the  use  of  the  company.  The  amount  thus 
expended  was  $19.50. 

The  freeholders  of  Utica  held  likewise  two  other  meetings  during 
the  current  year  besides  the  annual  one  already  mentioned.  The  first 
was  for  the  election  of  a  new  collector  in  place  of  one  who  resigned. 
The  second  was  called  to  consider  the  means  of  supporting  a  night 
watch  and  was  to  be  held  at  the  hotel.  Of  the  proceedings  had  on  the 
occasion  no  record  is  left ;  the  result  we  may  infer  from  the  following  vol- 
untary pledge,  which  bears  date  the  following  day.  The  original,  a  time- 
stained  and  much- worn  paper,  has  attached  the  signatures  of  the  trustees 
and  a  large  number  of  the  active  men  of  the  era,  ninety-eight  in  all. 

This  pledge  reads  thus  : 

"Utica,  Dec'rio,  1805. 
"  We,  the  subscribers,  esteeming  a  Night  Watch  in  the  Village  of  Utica  as  necessary 
to  guard  us  against  the  clangers  of  fire,  do  hereby  associate  ourselves  for  that  purpose, 
and  mutually  pledge  our  honor  to  each  other  to  act  during  the  winter  ensuing  as  good 
and  faithful  watchmen,  under  the  direction  and  superintendence  of  the  Trustees  of 
said  village." 

These  watchmen,  as  we  learn  from  other  sources,  were  distributed 
into  squads  of  five  or  six  each  and  took  their  turns  in  patrolling  the 
village  from  end  to  end  of  its  two  principal  streets.  This  ample  pro- 
vision both  of  watchmen  and  of  firemen,  and  this  extreme  vigilance 
on  the  part  of  all  the  inhabitants  to  protect  themselves  against  de- 


VILLAGE  TEACHERS— JOHN  STEWART,  JR.  93 

struction  by  fire,  though  in  part  due  to  the  fact  that  the  buildings  were 
mostly  of  wood,  must  have  had  some  more  cogent  reason  peculiar 
to  this  special  time.  And  we  are  ready  to  believe  as  is  reported  that 
the  settlers  were  in  terror  from  the  attempts  of  incendiaries,  and  there- 
fore the  more  ready  to  sacrifice  their  ease  to  oppose  such  evil  minded 
marauders.  The  system  once  inaugurated  was  continued  for  some  time 
longer  as  appears  by  a  later  though  undated  list  of  volunteers,  and  it  is 
not  until  the  year  1810,  as  we  learn  from  the  records,  that  paid  watch- 
men were  employed  by  the  trustees. 

Rev.  Bethuel  Dodd,  the  first  Presbyterian  clergyman,  died  in  April, 
1804.  In  October  following  Rev.  James  Carnahan  arrived  to  succeed 
to  his  charge. 

The  first  master  who  ruled  the  village  school  after  the  departure  of 
Mr.  Dana  was  a  brother  of  Silas  Clark,  and  next  after  him  the  first  of 
whom  we  hear  was  R.  Holcomb.  The  teacher  of  whom  we  next  get 
any  intimation  was  Gideon  Wilcoxson  ;  and  of  him  little  is  known  as 
a  pedagogue,  though  we  have  a  better  acquaintance  with  him  as  a  law- 
yer. He  was  a  student  of  Hamilton  Oneida  Academy  and  in  Novem- 
ber, 1805,  he  opened  the  school- house  on  Main  street  for  pupils.  But 
he  soon  took  to  the  law,  becoming  a  student  of  D.  W..  Childs. 

Another  lawyer  who  spent  a  few  years  in  Utica  was  Abraham  D. 
Van  Home,  a  native  of  Montgomery  County  who  pursued  his  studies 
with  Joseph  Kirkland  at  New  Hartford  and  then  began  practice  in  Utica 
as  the  partner  of  A.  M.  Walton.  In  July,  1807,  he  was  made  village 
attorney,  but  resigned  in  October  and  returned  to  New  Hartford  to  join, 
his  preceptor. 

Among  the  newly  established  merchants  were  John  Stewart,  jr.,  who 
during  the  few  years  of  his  residence  in  this  place  was  conspicuous  for 
his  enterprise,  public  spirit,  and  pecuniary  success  ;  Jesse  Doolittle,  "a 
very  synonym  of  gentleness  and  integrity,"  who  lived  here  forty  years, 
occupying  positions  of  responsibility  and  usefulness;  and  Moses  Bagg,  jr., 
who  soon  relinquished  an  active  share  in  mercantile  pursuits  and  assumed 
the  charge  of  the  tavern  that  had  been  conducted  by  his  father. 

This  tavern  was  a  two-story  wooden  building  on  the  corner  of  Main 
street  and  the  square.  Its  meager  dimensions  when  compared  with  the 
present  enormous  pile  known  as  Bagg's  Hotel  may  be  judged  from  the 


94 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


following  :  When  the  first  Board  of  Canal  Commissioners  in  the  course 
of  their  preliminary  surveys  visited  Utica  in  July,  i8io,  two  of  them, 
Messrs.  Stephen  Van  Rensselaer  and  Gouverneur  Morris,  who  had  made 
the  journey  by  land,  occupied  with  their  servants  the  whole  of  the  tav- 
ern, while  the  rest  of  the  commissioners  who  came  on  by  the  river  were 
forced  to  seek  quarters  elsewhere.  In  1812-15  Mr.  Bagg  erected  on 
the  site  of  this  wooden  structure  the  central  portion  of  the  brick  hotel 
which  bears  his  name,  and  to  it  he  subsequently  added  on  either  side. 
This  he  conducted  with 
brief  intermissions  until 
the  year  1836,  when  it 
was  sold  to  a  company 
of  individuals.  In  the 
latter  part  of  his  career 
in  the  hotel  he  became 
associated  with  Alfred 
Churchill,  who  eventu- 
ally bought  the  compa- 
ny out  and  joined  also- 
the  Bleecker  house  on 
the  north.  Soon  after 
the  erection  of  the  ear- 
lier portion  J.  Parker  & 
Co.  established  their  of-  bagg-s  hotel  in  iSis. 

fice  in  the  basement  corner,  and  thus  the  house  became  the  principal 
stopping  place  for  the  stages  from  all  directions  and  was  more  generally 
resorted  to  by  travelers  than  any  other  public  house  of  the  village.  On 
the  opening  of  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad  the  nearness  of  the 
hotel  to  the  terminus  of  the  road  gave  it  an  advantage  that  was  enjoyed 
by  no  other  house  but  the  one  adjoining  it,  with  which,  as  has  been 
stated,  it  was  shortly  united.  It  has  been  kept  as  a  hotel  continuously 
to  the  present  time. 

Rudolph  Snyder,  a  prosperous  cabinetmaker,  was  long  a  trustee  of 
the  village  and  for  two  terms  its  president.  For  five  successive  years 
he  was  president  of  the  Mechanics  Association  and  for  two  years  one 
of  the  commissioners  of  common  schools.      In  the  Methodist  Society  he 


OTHER  SETTLERS  OF  1805-06.  95 

was  a  person  of  consideration  and  influence,  and  was  elected  one  of  the 
first  trustees  on  the  incorporation  of  the  society  and  the  erection  of 
their  chapel  in  1815.  At  an  earlier  period  he  had  put  up  a  school- 
house  on  ground  adjacent  to  the  Parker  block  which  was  used  by  them 
as  a  place  of  worship. 

Other  residents  of  1805  not  before  mentioned  were  James  A.  and 
Lynott  Bloodgood,  ironmongers  who  continued  here  about  five  years, 
but  of  whom  the  latter  returned  at  a  later  period  and  spent  his  declin- 
ing years  with  his  daughter  and  her  children ;  Seth  Dwight,  by  turns 
merchant  and  hotel-keeper;  George  Tisdale,  another  tavern-keeper; 
Joseph  Barton,  watchmaker;  Benjamin  Payne,  fashionable  tailor;  Will- 
iam Hayes,  earthenware  maker ;  William  Baxter,  gardener  and  baker 
and  progenitor  of  numerous  later  Uticans ;  Samuel  Hickox,  builder  of 
the  noted  political  boundary,  the  "Cayuga  bridge";  and  B.  B.  Rathbun, 
whose  chief  notoriety  was  acquired  at  Buffalo. 

At  the  annual  meeting  of  freeholders  and  inhabitants  held  in  May, 
1806,  the  former  trustees  were  re-elected.  The  proceedings  of  five  of 
their  monthly  meetings  are  duly  recorded,  those  of  the  remaining  seven 
months  being  wanting  in  consequence  of  -the  sickness  and  absence  of 
Mr.  Childs,  the  clerk.  The  sum  of  $200  was  deemed  sufficient  for  the 
expenses  of  the  year.  The  determination  of  the  assize  of  bread  seems 
to  have  been  the  only  business  occupying  the  attention  of  the  trustees 
that  is  deemed  worthy  of  a  place  in  their  minutes. 

By  direction  of  the  Whitestown  commissioners  of  highways  Wash- 
ington street,  which  had  just  been  opened  on  the  property  of  Mr.  Bell- 
inger, was  now  declared  a  public  street  as  far  as  the  present  Liberty, 
and  the  last  named  street,  extending  from  Hotel  to  meet  it,  was  also 
recognized  as  public. 

In  the  year  1798  John  Post  had  received  as  an  inmate  of  his  house- 
hold his  nephew,  Abraham  Van  Santvoort,  who  became  eventually  his 
successor  in  the  business  of  transporting  on  the  Mohawk.  He  informs 
the  public  in  1806  that  he  has  commenced  the  storage  and  forwarding 
business  to  and  from  Schenectady,  Albany,  and  New  York,  and  any 
part  of  the  western  country,  for  which  purpose  he  has  taken  one  of  the 
large  and  convenient  stores  of  John  Post  on  the  dock  in  Utica.  He  has 
made  arrangements  with  Eri  Lusher  for  conveying  by  water  between 


96  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

this  place  and  Schenectady  and  with  David  Boyd  between  Schenectady 
and  Albany.  The  storehouse  he  at  first  occupied  was  originally  above 
the  bridge,  but  very  near  to  it.  It  was  afterward  moved  up  the  stream 
to  the  foot  of  Division  street.  And  nearly  on  the  last  named  site  Van 
Santvoort  in  company  with  Mr.  Lusher  and  others  erected  toward  the 
close  of  the  War  of  1812  a  brick  warehouse  which  has  remained  stand- 
ing until  a  comparatively  recent  period. 

Mr.  Van  Santvoort  held  during  the  war  the  office  of  sub-contractor 
for  the  supf)ly  of  provisions  for  the  soldiers  and  acted  as  government 
storekeeper. 

Others  of  1805  were  Jonathan  Child,  teacher  and  afterward  first 
mayor  of  the  city  of  Rochester  ;  Bennett  Bicknell,  cabinetmaker,  after- 
ward a  leading  politician  of  Madison  County ;  Henry  Kip,  brother  of 
James,  ropemaker  here  and  at  Buffalo ;  two  brothers  Oudenarde ;  and 
the  rnechanics  John  Culver,  carpenter,  Thomas  James,  wagonmaker, 
and  John  Queal,  shoemaker,  who  were  much  less  transitory  in  their 
abode. 

At  the  freeholders'  meeting  of  May,  1807,  the  trustees  who  were 
elected  were  the  same  as  those  of  the  two  preceding  years,  except  that 
John  Hooker  was  substituted  for  Francis  A.  Bloodgood.  The  board 
made  Erastus  Clark  their  president.  The  principal  business  recorded 
as  done  by  them  throughout  the  year  related  to  the  fire  company. 
Having  in  July  examined  the  books  of  the  clerk  of  this  company  and 
discovered  frequent  absences  they  resolved  that  every  fireman  noted  as 
absent  from  the  monthly  meetings  seven  times  between  May,  1806, 
and  June,  1807,  should  be  ordered  to  appear  before  them.  Twelve  ap- 
peared agreeably  to  such  citation,  and  after  a  full  examination  of  their 
several  excuses  all  were  excused  except  one,  who  had  been  absent 
twelve  times  ;  he  was  removed.  The  clerk  of  the  company  was  directed 
to  report  thereafter  every  quarter  such  firemen  as  were  absent  from  the 
monthly  meetings,  and  as  a  consequence  a  few  were  subsequently  re- 
moved and  their  places  supplied  from  the  list  of  ready  candidates.  The 
coming  of  the  Fourth  of  July  brought  its  troubles  to  the  officials  of 
1807  just  as  its  approach  entails  anxiety  and  care  upon  the  authorities 
of  today ;  and  trivial  as  would  seem  the  prank  which  now  occupied 
their  attention  the  author  of  it  was  not  thought  unworthy  of  detection 


TRUSTEES'  PROCEEDINGS— A  TRAVELERS  NOTES.      97 

and  punishment  by  the  village  fathers.     Under  date  of  July  6th  we  find 
the  following: 

"  Resolved,  That  five  dollars  be  giveh  to  any  one  who  will  discover  the  person  who 
took  away  the  bolt  from  the  pump  at  the  lower  end  of  Genesee  street  on  the  evening 
of  the  3d  instant,  so  that  the  offender  may  be  prosecuted  ;  and  that  the  same  be  ad- 
vertised three  weeks  in  botli  the  papers.'' 

In  order  to  judge  rightly  of  the  gravity  of  the  offence  it  should  be  re- 
membered that  the  town  pump  was  an  important  auxiliary  in  the  ex- 
tinguishment of  fires,  as  it  was  the  usual  place  and  means  of  drill  for 
the  firemen  at  their  monthly  meetings ;  and  though  a  missing  bolt 
could  be  easily  replaced  it  might  be  lacking  when  most  it  was  needed, 
and  hence  exemplary  punishment  was  required.  An  ordinance  was 
passed  in  amendment  of  a  previous  one  which  was  designed  to  prevent 
the  erection  of  buildings  on  a  street  and  to  cause  the  removal  of  build- 
ings already  so  erected.  Besides  the  foregoing  proceedings  the  board 
granted  a  license  for  the  erection  of  a  slaughter-house.  Before  the  ex- 
piration of  the  year  they  resolved  that  with  their  consent  seven  per- 
sons and  no  more  be  licensed  to  keep  tavern  in  the  village  during  the 
ensuing  year. 

Another  traveler  has  left  us  his  impressions  of  the  appearance  of  Utica 
as  he  saw  it  in  the  summer  of  1807.  This  was  Christian  Schultz,  jr. 
He  speaks  of  it  as  a  flourishing  village,  and  tells  us  it  "contains  at 
present  about  160  houses,  the  greatest  part  of  which  are  painted  white, 
which  gives  it  a  neat  and  lively  appearance.  Foreign  goods  are  nearly 
as  cheap  here  as  in  New  York,  which,  I  presume,  is  owing  to  the  mer- 
chants underselling  each  other;  for  this,  like  all  other  country  towns,  is 
overstocked  with  shopkeepers.  Most  of  the  goods  intended  for  the  salt 
works  are  loaded  here  in  wagons  and  sent  on  overland,  a  distance  of 
fifty  miles.  The  carriage  over  this  portage  is  fifty  cents  a  hundred- 
weight.'' 

Peter  Bours,  at  first  a  hardware  merchant,  was  very  active  in  organ- 
izing the  Utica  glass  factory,  a  manufactory  started  at  Glassville,  so 
called,  in  the  present  town  of  Marcy.  He  acted  for  some  time  as  its 
superintendent  and  moved  thither  with  his  family.  The  factory  proved 
unsucpessful  as  will  be  shown  in  a  future  notice  of  its  operations,  and  ia 
1818  Mr.  Bours  opened  a  land  office  in  Utica  for  recording  and  exhib- 

13 


gS  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

iting  for  sale  unsettled  lands  and  improved  farms.  This,  too,  bringing 
him  no  compensation  he  next  entered  upon  the  profession  of  an  auction- 
eer, a  profession  in  which  his  active  spirit  and  plausible  address  soon 
secured  him  plentiful  employment.  The  frequent  noisy  cries  of  his 
sturdy  negro  as  he  patrolled  the  streets,  bell  in  hand,  proclaiming  a  sale, 
and  calling  bystanders  to  walk  up  to  Mr.  Bours's  auction  rooms,  are 
recollections  fast  in  the  memory  of  all  older  citizens  of  Utica. 

Stalham  Williams,  who  had  been  a  clerk  and  a  merchant  in  Utica,  was 
appointed  collector  on  the  newly  opened  middle  section  of  the  Erie 
Canal  and  served  some  time  as  such.  From  the  expiration  of  this  service 
until  he  again  entered  the  employ  of  the  Messrs.  Devereux  he  was  a 
short  time  book-keeper  for  James  Dana,  and  during  a  still  longer  period 
acted  as  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  Erie  Canal  Packet  Boat  Com- 
pany. After  John  C.  and  Nicholas  Devereux  had  retired  from  active 
business  they  retained  an  office  on  Bleecker  street  and  managed  a  sort 
of  unchartered  savings  bank.  Here  the  scant  savings  of  poorer  citizens 
who  confided  in  the  integrity  of  these  gentlemen  were  sacredly  guarded 
and  regular  interest  was  paid  on  all  accumulated  balances.  The  routine 
work  was  performed  by  Mr.  Williams  and  was  performed  with  rare  fidel- 
ity. When  in  process  of  time  the  deposits  had  grown  so  large  that  it 
was  deemed  best  for  the  accommodation  of  all  classes  of  depositors  that 
a  savings  bank  should  be  organized  Mr.  Williams  was  made  its  secre- 
tary and  treasurer.  This  was  in  1839,  and  the  office  he  continued  to 
hold  until  his  death.  When  he  had  reached  the  age  of  seventy  he  ten- 
dered his  resignation  to  the  directors  of  the  bank,  fearing  that  age  had 
impaired  his  usefulness.  But  they  refused  to  part  company  with  their 
faithful  officer  and  he  remained  long  after  he  had  passed  his  ninetieth 
year  in  the  daily  performance  of  his  duty.      He  reached  nearly  a  century. 

Another  long  continued  establishment,  started  in  November,  1807, 
was  that  of  Bagg  &  Camp.  John  Camp,  eldest  son  of  Talcott  Camp, 
became  a  clerk  for  William  Fellows,  and  two  years  after  the  latter  had 
associated  himself  with  Moses  Bagg  he  bought  out  the  interest  of  Mr. 
Fellows  and  the  new  firm  was  formed.  Under  the  name  of  Bagg  & 
Camp  the  two  carried  on  for  some  years  the  usual  miscellaneous  business 
of  the  time.  When  the  former  ceased  from  its  active  prosecution  the 
firm  assumed  the   name  of  John  Camp  &  Co.     Next  it  was  changed  to 


THE  BROTHERS  CAMP— JACOB  SNYDER.  99 

John  Camp  &  Brothers,  and  under  this  name  the  three  Messrs.  Camp, 
John,  Harry,  and  Charles,  continued  their  business  until  about  the  year 
1 834,  the  period  of  the  death  of  Charles,  when  John  withdrew.  The  store 
which  at  first  had  been  kept  in  the  building  next  adjoining  Bagg's  Tavern 
on  the  north  was  in  later  years  on  Genesee  street  nearly  opposite  Cath- 
arine. Mr.  Camp  continued  to  act  as  director  of  the  Bank  of  Utica  the 
remainder  of  his  days.  Of  unobtrusive  and  retiring  manners,  clear  and 
calm  in  judgment,  and  of  unblemished  private  character,  no  one  of  the 
earlier  merchants  left  behind  him  a  fairer  reputation  than  John  Camp. 

Harry  Camp  was  a  clerk  and  afterward  partner  of  Abraham  Van 
Santvoort.  Mr.  Van  Santvoort  was  both  forwarder  and  merchant,  and 
during  the  war  held  also  the  office  of  sub-contractor  of  supplies  for  the 
counties  of  Oneida  and  Madison.  While  in  his  service,  besides  his  ordi- 
nary duties  of  superintending  the  transportation  of  goods  between  Sche- 
nectady and  the  West,  Mr.  Camp  was  often  deputed  to  go  out  and  meet 
companies  of  soldiers  destined  to  or  from  the  seat  of  hostilities  and  pro- 
vide them  with  the  necessaries  of  subsistence.  He  once  made  a  journey 
on  horseback  to  Buffalo  in  order  to  carry  $2,200  with  which  to  cancel 
orders  for  goods  supplied  to  the  troops.  Not  long  after  the  close  of  the 
war  occurred  the  failure  of  the  important  transporting  firm  which  was 
epresented  in  Utica  by  Mr.  Van  Santvoort  as  its  head,  when  this  gentle- 
man moved  away  from  the  village  and  it  fell  to  Mr.  Camp  to  close  up 
its  concerns.  The  latter  then  joined  his  brothers,  John  and  Charles,  in 
general  trade  and  formed  an  important  factor  in  the  good  name  of  the 
honorable  house  of  John  Camp  &  Brothers.  After  its  dissolution  in  1834 
Harry  remained  at  the  old  stand  and  transacted  a  moderate  business  for 
some  years  longer. 

Jacob  Snyder  made  chairs  which  have  not  their  match  in  modern 
times  for  strength  and  durability,  and  in  the  sale  of  them  he  had  almost 
the  monopoly  of  the  market  until  after  the  War  of  18 12.  Some  thirty 
years  before  his  death  he  withdrew  from  business,  because,  as  he  believed, 
it  was  no  longer  carried  on  as  honestly  as  it  should  be.  He  was  a  leader 
among  the  society  of  Methodists  and  his  house  a  coveted  place  of  rest 
and  refreshment  for  the  traveling  preachers  of  the  sect.  With  a  voice 
like  rolhng  thunder  he  exercised  it  often  in  exortation  and  in  prayer, 
wherein  his  language  was  choice  and  scriptural.    Temperance  and  anti- 


100  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

slavei-y  were  reforms  which  were  near  to  his  heart  and  formed  themes  for 
his  tongue  and  his  pen. 

Bildad  Merrell  kept  a  livery  stable  on  Hotel  street,  was  godly  in  life, 
and  head  of  a  respectable  family.  In  the  fall  of  1814,  by  direction  of 
Postmaster  Hitchcock,  he  went  with  men  and  horses  to  organize  an 
express  system  between  Sackets  Harbor  and  our  army  at  Plattsburgh. 
The  battle  of  Plattsburgh  soon  followed,  the  enemy  withdrew,  and  but 
one  express  was  ever  carried.  After  the  opening  of  the  middle  section 
of  the  Erie  Canal  he  drew  up  a  boat  from  the  river  and  kept  it  on  livery 
for  pleasure  excursions.  Some  time  later,  when  he  had  gotten  together 
a  moderate  property,  he  engaged  in  staging,  running  lines  north  and 
south  of  Utica.  His  conscientious  objections  to  Sunday  traveling  led 
him  to  take  a  pecuniary  interest  in  the  Pioneer  line  which  was  run  on 
week  days  only. 

John  B.  Harrington,  butcher,  lived  until  1852;  John  B.  Gilbert,  and 
his  sons  after  him,  made  starch  just  over  the  eastern  border. 

In  May,  1808,  the  freeholders  met  to  elect  trustees,  and  for  the  last 
time  in  the  old  Main  street  school-house,  the  furniture  of  the  building 
having  been  advertised  for  sale  shortly  afterward.  The  new  trustees 
were  Morris  S.  Miller,  Jerathmel  Ballou,  John  Hooker,  Nathaniel  Butler, 
and  John  Bellinger.  Morris  S.  Miller  was  made  president  of  the  board. 
Of  their  proceedings  there  is  not  much  that  is  noteworthy;  the  meet- 
ings were  held  regularly  every  month  and  the  assize  of  bread  made  out 
and  published.  The  usual  vigilance  is  evinced  with  respect  to  danger 
from  fires  and  to  faithfulness  on  the  part  of  the  firemen,  absentees  being 
duly  reported  and  those  of  them  who  were  unexcused  removed  from 
position.  An  ordinance  was  passed  forbidding  the  use  of  firearms,  rock- 
ets, or  squibs  between  the  east  line  of  lot  No.  92  and  the  west  line  of  No. 
96  and  the  southern  boundary  of  the  village;  also  forbidding  fast  driv- 
ing and  ball  playing  between  90  and  96.  A  subscription  was  set  on 
foot  to  fence  the  burying  ground  and  another  to  procure  a  hearse,  and 
these  moneys  so  subscribed  the  collector  was  directed  to  collect. 

The  firemen  likewise  met  monthly  for  practice  with  the  engine,  but 
did  nothing  else  except  to  mark  the  absent  ones  and  assess  them  with 
fines  the  next  time  they  came.  During  the  summer  of  1808  an  addi- 
tional street  was  opened.     This  was  Broad  street,  which,  though  laid  out 


EMBARGO  MEETINGS— ARTHUR  BREESE.  loi 

and  partially  worked  a  little  time  before,  was  now  extended  to  Genesee 
street.     Two  brick  houses  were  commenced  upon  it. 

A  meeting  was  held  this  year  of  the  electors  of  the  county  to  take 
into  consideration  the  expediency  of  petitioning  the  President  of  the 
United  States  to  suspend  the  operation  of  the  embargo.  The  meet- 
ing was  held  at  the  hotel  on  the  3d  of  September.  It  was  a  large  and 
exciting  one.  Resolutions  were  proposed  by  Thomas  R.  Gold  and  adop- 
ted, and  a  petition  proposed  by  Jonas  Piatt  was  forwarded  to  President 
Jefferson  asking  for  the  suspension  of  the  embargo  act.  The  reply,  re- 
ceived six  weeks  later,  gave  the  petitioners  little  consolation.  They 
were  told  they  must  wait  the  action  of  Congress. 

It  was  during  this  same  exciting  era  that  a  military  company  was 
drafted  in  Utica  to  serve  in  case  hostilities  should  ensue.  The  drafting 
took  place  in  the  public  room  of  the  hotel.  Maj.  John  Bellinger  was 
chosen  captain,  the  second  and  third  officers  being  Silas  Clark  and  Ben- 
jamin Ballou,  jr.  But  their  military  prowess  was  not  then  called  to  the 
test. 

One  of  the  prominent  men  of  Oneida  County  while  the  county  was 
yet  new  was  Arthur  Breese.  As  early  as  1794  he  removed  to  Whites- 
boro,  where  he  became  a  partner  in  practice  with  Jonas  Piatt.  He 
acted  also  as  deputy  clerk  of  the  county  (Mr.  Piatt  being  clerk),  was  a 
master  in  chancery,  and  in  1796-97  was  a  representative  in  the  legislat- 
ure. Upon  the  organization  of  the  new  county  of  Oneida  he  was  ap- 
pointed surrogate,  and  held  the  office  so  long  as  he  remained  at  Whites- 
boro.  But  when  a  clerkship  of  the  Supreme  Court  was  established  at 
Utica  in  1808  he  was  made  clerk  and  removed  thither.  The  building  he 
occupied  stood  where  now  stands  the  office  of  the  county  clerk.  He 
soon  built  for  his  dwelling  a  large  stone  house  directly  opposite  and  next 
above  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer's,  a  site  now  filled  by  the  Miller  or  step- 
ladder  row.  On  the  death  of  its  first  president  Mr.  Breese  held  also  for 
a  time  the  position  of  president  of  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank.  He  left 
numerous  descendants. 

A  lawyer  of  standing  in  his  profession  and  an  eminently  pure  and  de- 
vout man  was  Walter  King.  Graduated  at  Yale  College  in  1805  he  came 
shortly  afterward  to  Utica  and  commenced  a  course  of  law  studies  in 
the  office  of  Erastus  Clark.     With  Mr.  Clark  he  then  became  a  partner 


I02  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  continued  this  connection  until  the  death  of  the  latter  gentleman  in 
1825.  He  subsequently  pursued  the  practice  of  his  profession  until  the 
year  1832,3  part  of  the  time  as  a  partner  of  James  Dean,  and  was  a  good 
office  lawyer.  He  was  for  a  long  period  a  leading  officer  in  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church  and  a  favorite  teacher  in  its  Bible  class.  His 
knowledge  of  sacred  literature  was  varied  and  exact.  The  Scriptures  he 
studied  in  their  original  tongues  and  by  the  aid  of  abundant  critical 
authorities.     He  prepared  and  published  a  Gospel  Harmony. 

About  this  time  came  the  first  of  two  brothers  Malcom,  of  most  hon- 
orable connection,  and  pending  their  few  years'  stay  their  polished  and 
engaging  families  held  a  noteworthy  place  in  the  society  of  Utica.  They 
were  sons  of  Col.  William  Malcom  of  the  Revolution.  Samuel  B.  Mal- 
com was  born  in  New  York,  was  private  secretary  of  John  Adams  during 
his  administration,  studied  law  and  entered  upon  practice,  but  about 
1808  removed  to  Oneida  County.  His  chief  employment  here  was  the 
care  and  sale  of  lands  in  Cosby's  Manor,  the  property  of  his  wife,  who 
was  Catharine  Van  Rensselaer  Schuyler,  youngest  daughter  of  Gen. 
Philip  Schuyler.  She  is  reported  to  have  received  at  her  marriage 
$100,000  in  money  and  a  like  value  in  real  estate,  situated  mostly  in 
this  vicinity.  Many  years  later  and  when  she  had  become  a  second 
time  a  widow  she  filled  the  office  of  postmistress  at  Oswego. 

The  freeholders'  annual  meeting  of  1809  was  held  at  the  hotel.  The 
trustees  who  held  office  during  the  year  were  Talcott  Camp,  president; 
Solomon  Wolcott,  John  Hooker,  Jerathmel  Ballou,  and  John  Bellinger. 
The  amount  assessed  on  the  inhabitants  was  but  $350.  Further  meas- 
ures were  adopted  to  provide  by  subscription  for  a  public  hearse.  A 
lot  for  an  engine-housfe,  situated  in  the  rear  of  Trinity  Church,  was  given 
by  the  Bleecker  family  through  their  representative,  Morris  S.  Miller. 
An  attempt  to  call  the  inhabitants  together  to  consider  the  propriety  of 
selling  the  engine  and  buying  a  new  one  failed  of  result,  inasmuch  as 
few  appeared,  and  no  action  was  taken.  The  resignation  of  the  clerk 
and  the  appointment  of  a  successor  seems  to  have  been  thought  so  press- 
ing a  matter  as  to  require  the  holding  of  an  extra  meeting  of  the  trus- 
tees on  a  Sunday  evening.  Occasion  for  another  Sunday  meeting  was 
found  when  the  president  reported  that  in  compliance  with  instructions 
previously  given  him    he  had  employed  three  watchmen  to  serve  from 


IMPROVEMENTS  OF  1809.  103 

10  o'clock  until  daylight.  A  practice  so  different  from  the  modern  one, 
and  apparently  so  little  in  accordance  with  the  pious  habits,  of  our  fath- 
ers, is  readily  explained  when  we  remember  that  a  majority  of  them  were 
emigrants  from  New  England,  where  the  evening  of  Saturday,  not  that 
of  Sunday,  was  looked  upon  as  a  part  of  the  sacred  day  of  rest,  and  where 
sundown  of  the  latter  day  still  ushers  in  the  secular  duties  of  another 
week.  Of  the  watchmen,  whom  the  president  now  informs  the  trustees 
he  had  put  on  duty,  two  were  to  patrol  the  streets  from  Judge  Cooper's 
to  Morris  S.  Miller's,  that  is,  from  the  westerly  end  of  Whitesboro  street 
to  the  easterly  end  of  Main  street  and  from  the  bridge  to  Arthur 
Breese's,  including  the  side  streets,  while  the  third  was  to  remain  as  a 
sentinel  at  the  watch-house. 

Broad  street,  we  have  seen,  was  opened  the  previous  summer.  On 
the  27th  of  February,  1 809,  it  was  formally  adopted  as  a  street  by  order 
of  the  commissioners  of  highways  of  the  town  of  Whitestown,  from 
Genesee  street  to  its  intersection  with  the  road  leading  to  Slayton's  set- 
tlement (2,052  feet),  that  is  to  say,  a  short  distance  east  of  Third  street. 
At  the  same  time  the  following  were  also  adopted,  viz.:  First  and  Sec- 
ond streets  from  Broad  to  the  river,  Third  street  from  Main  to  Broad 
and  from  thence  to  be  continued  to  the  intersection  of  the  road  to  Slay- 
ton's  Settlement,  and  Water  street  from  First  across  Genesee  to  Hotel 
street. 

During  the  present  year  Bridge  street — the  present  Park  avenue — was 
laid  out  and  macadamized.  This  was  a  great  undertaking,  and  involved 
much  forethought  and  care  as  well  as  a  very  considerable  pecuniary  out- 
lay. It  was  wholly  executed  at  private  expense,  being  like  Broad  street 
the  work  of  Judge  Morris  S.  Miller  with  the  co-operation  of  his  father- 
in-law  and  brother-in-law,  of  Albany.  Beginning  opposite  Mr.  Plant's, 
at  the  head  of  Genesee  street,  it  ran  in  a  northeastly  direction  behind  the 
southern  margin  of  the  village,  crossed  the  river,  and  continued  until  it 
intersected  the  river  road  in  Deerfield.  Designed  apparently  to  draw 
trade  and  travel  from  their  present  course  along  the  Genesee  road  it 
failed  of  wholly  accomplishing  its  object;  yet  it  did  much  to  promote 
the  extension  of  the  village  in  a  southerly  and  easterly  direction. 

Meantime  the  growth  of  the  village  was  inspiring  a  feeling  of  deeper 
interest  in  its  future  and  its  desirabihty  as  a  center  for  manufacturing 


I04  MEMORIAL  HISTORYOF  UTICA. 

industries.  Stimulated  by  the  offer  of  co-operation  and  assistance  from 
Lawrence  Schoolcraft,  superintendent  of  a  glass  factory  near  Albany,  a 
company  was  formed  in  Utica  for  the  establishment  of  a  similar  factory 
in  this  vicinity.  The  company  was  incorporated  February  17,  1809, 
with  a  capital  of  ioo,ooo,  and  was  known  as  the  Oneida  Glass  Factory 
Company.  It  carried  on  a  successful  business  until  1 836,  when  it  wound 
up  its  affairs. 

The  necessity  was  felt,  also,  about  this  period  for  a  larger  circulation 
of  currency,  and  particularly  the  need  of  bills  to  take  the  place  of  the 
silver  then  constituting  almost  the  entire  medium.  This  led  to  the  open- 
ing of  a  branch  of  the  Manhattan  Bank  of  New  York  in  Utica  and  the 
founding  of  the  Utica  Bank  in  18 12.  These  enterprises  are  further 
alluded  to  in  later  chapters  devoted  to  manufacturing  and  banking. 

On  the  1st  of  May,  18 10,  the  freeholders  met  at  Mr.  Dixon's  school- 
house  and  elected  as  their  trustees  for  the  ensuing  year  Talcott  Camp, 
John  C.  Hoyt,  John  C.  Devereux,  Rudolph  Snyder,  and  Abraham  M. 
Walton,  the  former  of  whom  was  appointed  president.  The  sum  voted 
to  be  assessed  was  $500,  which  after  remunerating  the  treasurer  and 
collector  was  to  be  appropriated  as  follows  :  First,  to  the  sexton  for 
ringing  the  bell  in  the  Presbyterian  meeting-house  ;  second,  to  fencing 
the  lot  presented  by  M.  S.  Miller  and  building  an  engine-house  thereon  ; 
third,  to  digging  and  stoning  a  sewer  on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street 
from  the  corner  of  Broad  ;  fourth,  to  pay  balance  due  the  watch;  fifth, 
to  pay  balance  due  for  hearse  and  other  contingent  expenses.  And 
these  were  accordingly  the  principal  matters  that  occupied  the  attention 
of  the  trustees  throughout  the  year.  A  new  subscription  was  started  to 
provide  for  the  watch  of  the  current  year  and  also  a  subscription  for  the 
purchase  of  a  new  engine,  the  avails  of  which  being  deemed  sufficient 
were  put  into  the  hands  of  Watts  Sherman  with  authority  to  buy  the 
same.  In  addition  to  the  foregoing,  as  also  the  repairing  of  the  fixtures 
about  the  wells,  the  appointment  of  a  new  treasurer  (E.  B.  Shearman), 
and  the  discharge  of  a  few  small  accounts,  the  only  other  transaction 
of  the  board  was  the  offer  of  a  reward  of  $150  for  the  detection  of 
the  incendiary  who,  on  the  night  of  the  2d  of  October,  set  on  fire  the 
new  store  of  Hugh  Cunningham. 

The   Whitestown  records  inform  us  that  in   November,  18 10,  C.  C. 


GRADUAL  EXTENSION  OF  THE   VILLAGE.  105 

Brodhead  surveyed  and  the  commissioners  of  highways  adopted  the  fol- 
lowing streets,  viz.:  Part  of  First  from  Broad  to  Rutger ;  Broad  street 
extended  to  the  lands  of  Colonel  Walker;  Catharine  street  from  Third 
street  to  the  Seneca  turnpike  (Genesee  street)  ;  First  street  extended  to 
Bridge.  Bridge  street,  which  as  we  have  seen  was  laid  out  in  1809,  was 
also  now  adopted.  A  map  made  by  Mr.  Brodhead  in  18 10  for  the  heirs 
of  John  R.  Bleecker  exhibited  all  the  streets  parallel  to  Broad  as  far 
upward  as  South,  laid  down  thereon  as  they  now  exist.  But  we  have 
no  evidence  of  the  acceptance  by  authority  of  any  other  than  Catharine 
street,  and  it  is  certain  that  most  of  them  were  not  in  use  until  some 
years  later.  By  a  newspaper  advertisement  of  September  in  this  year 
we  are  informed  that  the  house  situated  on  the  corner  of  Catharine  and 
Genesee  was  for  sale  and  must  be  removed  within  ten  days  of  date.  It 
is  reasonable  to  infer  that  Catharine  street  was  now  demanded  by  the 
growing  necessities  of  the  village,  or  at  least  its  western  end  ;  further 
on  it  remained  a  quagmire  until  after  the  opening  of  the  canal.  In  this 
connection  and  as  bearing  on  the  increased  value  of  real  estate  in  Utica 
we  quote  a  few  self-gratulatory  words  contained  in  a  village  paper  of 
this  era,  and  constituting  one  of  those  rare  occurrences  for  the  era,  an 
item  of  purely  local  interest.  "  We  are  informed,"  says  the  Patriot  ol 
October  9,  18  [O,  "  that  a  small  triangular  lot  on  the  corner  of  Genesee 
and  Whitesboro  streets  in  this  village  has  been  sold  after  the  rate  of 
$300,000  an  acre,  which  same  land  twenty-five  years  ago  might  have 
been  purchased  for  $1  an  acre."  Utica  contained  at  this  time  1,650 
inhabitants  and  300  houses.  A  journalist  records  that  he  "  counted 
forty-five  houses  on  the  street  leading  to  Judge  Miller's." 

A  beginning  was  made  this  year  in  the  construction  of  two  important 
roads  leading  north  and  south  from  the  place,  viz.:  The  Utica  and  Black 
River  turnpike  and  the  Minden  turnpike,  known  of  late  years  as  the 
Burlington  plank  road. 

Certain  citizens  of  1808-10  remain  to  be  chronicled,  yet  with  brevity. 
These  were  Eliasaph  Dorchester,  teacher,  bank  clerk,  assistant  on  the 
Columbian  Gazette,  founder  of  the  Utica  Observer,  and  again  a  teacher  ; 
Rev.  David  R.  Dixon,  teacher,  favored  by  the  Federal  families  as  Mr. 
Dorchester  was  by  the  Democratic  Republican ;  Henry  B.  Gibson, 
Motgomery  Hunt,  to  appear  hereafter  among  the  bankers;  Seymour 
u 


io6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTICA.  " 

Tracy,  attorney  and  notary  of  the  Manhattan  ;  James  Van  Rensselaer, 
merchant,  for  whom  was  erected  the  brick  row  on  the  southerly  side  of 
Liberty  street  between  Hotel  and  Seneca;  Thaddeus  Wakeman,  cap- 
italist, known  as  the  walking  bank  ;  Paul  Hochstrasser,  gentleman; 
Daniel  Stafford,  packet  boat  captain  after  his  failure  in  hardware  ;  Joshua 
Ostrom,  who  ran  stages  in  competition  with  Parker;  William  Whiteley, 
who  made  musical  instruments  down  to  1850,  and  who  in  181 1  leased 
to  Trinity  Church  a  barrel  organ  with  three  cylinders  of  fifteen  tunes 
each,  agreeing  to  perform  on  it  at  every  regular  service  ;  Shubael  Storrs, 
watch  and  instrument  maker;  Robert  McBride,  mason,  who  put  up  the 
nucleus  of  the  present  Bagg's  Hotel  and  had  a  part  in  the  construction 
of  the  Erie  Canal ;  Thomas  Thomas,  another  mason,  who  besides  other 
buildings  erected  one  of  the  structures  of  Hamilton  College;  William 
Penniman,  tanner ;  T.  H.  Nurse,  reedmaker ;  Thomas  and  Luther 
Christian,  of  varied  occupations;  Joseph  Simon,  furrier;  John  Bailey, 
who  was  the  father  of  the  four  brothers  of  the  nahie  that  are  mostly 
resident;  and  John  Robinson,  blacksmith,  father  of  the  notorious  Jack 
Robinson,  circus  performer  and  wealthy  proprietor. 

On  the  7th  of  May,  181 1,  the  citizens  convened  as  usual  at  Mr. 
Dixon's  school- house.  They  elected  as  trustees  Jeremiah  Van  Rens- 
selaer, Talcott  Camp,  Frederick  White,  John  C.  Devereux,  and  E.  B. 
Shearman,  and  as  treasurer  John  C.  Hoyt  in  place  of  Mr.  Shearman, 
thus  exalted  to  a  trusteeship.  Nicholas  Smith  was  elected  collectdr. 
The  amount  of  tax  ordered  to  be  raised  was  $500.  Very  little  was 
done  by  these  trustees  in  the  course  of  the  year  that  is  deserving  of 
remembrance.  They  held  their  meetings  regularly,  sometimes  at  the 
hotel,  sometimes  at  the  office  of  their  president,  Mr.  Camp ;  delinquent 
firemen  were  removed  and  their  successors  appointed,  watchmen  were 
procured,  the  ringing  of  the  bell  provided  for,  bills  were  paid,  and  the 
assize  of  bread  determined.  The  only  noteworthy  event  was  the  ar- 
rival in  the  fall  of  the  new  engine  for  which  payment  to  the  manufacturers 
had  been  forwarded  in  the  spring.  On  its  arrival  the  duty  was  imposed 
on  the  captain  of  the  fire  company  to  take  it  out  once  a  week,  and  to  be 
careful  also  to  keep  the  old  one  in  repair.  At  the  same  time  a  commit- 
tee was  appointed  to  make  inquiry  for  a  site  for  an  engine-house  near 
the  store  of  Hugh  Cunningham,  that  is  to  say  near  the  heart  of  the 
village. 


INFANTR  V  COMPANY—  J.  HELLISH' S  NOTES.  1 07 

An  intimation  of  the  prevalence  of  a  martial  spirit  at  this  time,  and  of 
a  readiness  on  the  part  of  young  men  to  engage  in  military  duty,  would 
appear  from  an  announcement  made  early  in  April.  Nathan  Williams, 
captain  of  the  Independent  Infantry  Company,  in  a  newspaper  call  in- 
vites the  band  of  the  company  to  meet  with  "  the  members  of  the  band 
of  music  "  at  the  hotel,  and  invites  also  young  men  who  are  inclined  to 
become  soldiers  in  the  above  company  to  attend  and  enroll  their  names. 
In  the  beauty  of  its  uniform,  in  its  discipline  and  drill,  this  company, 
which  had  probably  been  organized  a  year  or  two  before,  became  the 
distinguished  one  of  the  county.  It  was  at  first  commanded  by  Nathan 
Williams  and  afterward  by  William  Williams,  the  bookseller  and  pub- 
lisher. With  their  tight  pants  and  tasselled  boots  these  crack  soldiers 
were  wont  to  parade  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  villagers  in  front  of  the 
hotel;  and  there  they  had  a  public  dinner  on  the  Fourth  of  July,  1812, 
the  tables  being  arranged  under  booths  which  ran  along  the  street. 
The  company  went  into  the  public  service  in  the  War  of  1812  and  as 
an  organization  was  disbanded. 

We  extract  the  following  from  the  published  notes  of  J.  Mellish,  an 
English  traveler : 

"  Utica  is  the  capital  of  Oneida  County,  and  consists  at  present  of  about  400  houses, 
containing  2,000  inhabitants.  It  began  to  settle  about  twenty-three  years  ago,  but  it 
has  been  principally  built  since  1796  and  two-thirds  of  it  since  1800.  The  buildings 
are  mostly  of  wood,  painted  white,  but  a  good  many  have  lately  been  built  of  brick 
and  some  few  of  stone.  The  public  buildings  are  four  places  for  public  worship,  two 
of  them  elegant,  an  academy,  clerk's  office,  etc.,  and  there  are  six  taverns,  fifteen  stores 
and  two  breWeries.  There  are  three  printing  offices,  viz.,  one  for  books  and  two  for 
newspapers,  one  bindery,  two  morocco  factories,  and  one  manufactory  of  musical  in- 
struments, three  masons  and  a  number  of  brickmakers  and  carpenters,  four  cabinet 
and  chairmakers,  two  coopers,  seven  smiths  and  nailors,  two  tinsmiths,  one  copper- 
smith, four  silversmiths  and  watchmakers,  three  tanners  and  curriers,  one  furrier,  six 
butchers,  two  bakers,  three  hatters,  four  tailors,  four  painters,  and  four  druggists. 

"  The  village  lots  are  from  fifty  to  sixty  feet  front  and  one  hundred  to  one  hundred 
and  thirty  deep  and  sell  for  from  $200  to  $1,000.  The  out-lots  contain  twelve  acres 
and  $500  is  asked  for  them.  House  rent  for  mechanics  is  about  $60  to  $100;  wood 
$1.25  per  cord,  flour  $8  per  barrel,  potatoes  two  shillings  per  bushel,  turnips  thirty-one 
cents,  cabbages  four  cents  each,  beans  sixty-two  cents  per  bushel,  onions  seventy-five 
cents,  beef,  mutton,  and  veal  five  cents  per  pound,  venison  four  cents,  fowls  nine  cents 
each,  ducks  two  shillings,  geese  four  shillings,  turkeys  five  shillings,  butter  one  shilling, 
cheese  seven  cents,  hog's  lard  six  cents,  beer  $5  per  barrel,  whisky  forty-five  cents 
per  gallon,  boarding  $2.50  per  week. 


io8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

"  The  government  of  the  village  is  vested  in  a  board  of  five  trustees  chosen  annually 
bv  the  inhabitants.  There  are  five  schools  in  which  are  taught  all  the  various  branches 
of  education,  which  is  pretty  well  attended  to  ;  and  there  is  a  very  good  seminary  for 
young  ladies.  The  expense  of  tuition  is  about  from  %2  to  I4  per  quarter.  The  com- 
merce of  Utica  consists  of  dry  goods,  groceries,  crocl<ery,  hardware,  and  cotton,  im- 
ported ;  and  of  grain,  flour,  provisions,  ashes,  etc.,  exported.  The  chief  part  of  the 
commerce  is  with  New  York,  but  it  is  said  a  considerable  smuggling  trade  \\3.i,  of  late 
been  carried,  on  with  Canada.  Wheat  is  Si. 12  per  bushel,  corn  forty-four  cents,  bar- 
ley seventy-five  cents,  ashes  nominal,  cotton  twenty-one  cents,  horses  I50  to  $100,  cows 
$15  to  §22,  sheep  f2  to  12,50.  Lands  on  the  turnpikes  in  the  neighborhood  sell  for 
from  %^o  to  $100,  further  off  $40  to  $50;  but  the  lands  in  both  village  and  country 
have  greatly  depreciated  in  money  value." 

Richard  Montgomery  Malcom,  brother  of  Samuel  B.  Malcom  already- 
mentioned,  had  been  a  merchant  in  the  city  of  New  York  and  was  hv- 
ing  there  just  before  the  outbreak  of  the  War  of  181 2.  On  the  8th  of 
April,  18 12,  he  received  a  commission  as  captain  in  the  Thirteenth  Regi- 
ment of  United  States  Infantry.  On  the  13th  of  October  following  he 
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Queenstown  and  was  wounded  in  the  thigh  by  a 
musket  ball.  In  March,  1813,  he  was  promoted  to  major  and  in  June 
of  the  next  year  to  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  same  regiment.  In  June, 
1815,  he  was  disbanded.  His  family  meanwhile  were  living  in  Utica 
from  an  early  period  of  the  war.  A  few  months  after  leaving  the  army 
we  find  Colonel  Malcom  announcing  in  a  Utica  paper  that  he  "  will  pro- 
cure soldiers'  bounties,"  and  a  year  later  that  he  is  acting  as  commission 
broker  and  ready  to  serve  any  one  living  out  of  the  village  who  will 
make  him  his  agent  to  execute  business  at  the  banks  or  elsewhere. 
His  residence  in  Utica  continued  until  about  1823. 

The  enterprising  successor  of  the  Messrs.  Wolcott,  who  in  the  end 
was  more  fortunate  than  either,  was  John  Williams.  Received  into  part- 
nership by  Dr.  W.  H.  Wolcott  when  the  latter  separated  himself  from 
his  brother  he  soon  became  the  real  manager  of  the  firm  of  Wolcott  & 
Williams,  and  remained  therein  until  its  dissolution  in  18 17.  He  now 
opened  a  store  of  his  own  at  No.  34  Genesee  street,  where,  and  at  his 
later  store,  he  carried  on  for  many  years  a  large  trade  in  drugs  and 
groceries.  Partly  through  the  steady  accumulation  of  trade,  partly  by 
means  of  the  privilege  he  held  of  furnishing  supplies  for  the  packet  boats, 
and  partly  by  his  leading  interest  in  the  very  productive  stock  of  the 
Packet  Boat  Company  he  gained  a  large  fortune  and  came  to  be  one  of 
jthe  foremost  men  of  the  place. 


DR.  AMOS  G.  HULL. 


109 


One  of  the  earliest  and  best  remembered  surgeons  of  the  county- 
was  Dr.  Amos  G.  Hull.  In  1798  he  was  practicing  in  New  Hartford. 
In  the  year  mentioned,  with  a  zeal  in  behalf  of  science  that  was  character- 
istic of  a  young  and  ambitious  practitioner,  he  was  alert  in  obtaining  for 
purposes  of  dissection  the  body  of  the  first  criminal  of  the  cobnty  con- 
victed for  murder.  And  though  on  the  morning  of  the  day  appointed 
for  the  execution  the  criminal  was  found  dead  in  her  cell  at  Herkimer 
jail,  having  hanged  herself  with  the  expectation  that  she  could  thus 
evade  the  whole  of  her  sentence,  yet,  says  Judge  Jones,  in  this  she  was 
mistaken,  for  science  had  its  subject.  On  the  organization  of  the  Oneida 
County  Medical  Society  in  1806  Dr.  Hull  took  part  therein  and  was 
elected  its  first  president.  Four  years  later  we  find  him  announcing 
that  he  has  fitted  up  an  establishment  next  door  to  the  Coffee  House  in 
Utica  for  the  sale  of  mineral  waters. 

The  sale  of  Ballston  and  Saratoga  salts  in  solution,  which  he  would 
seem  to  have  been  the  first  to  introduce  into  the  village  of  Utica,  he 
continued  some  years  longer  in  his  office  on  Main  street,  adding  thereto 
the  practice  of  electricity  and  galvanism.  A  specialty  that  absorbed 
much  more  of  his  attention  was  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  hernial 
trusses.  These  he  first  advertised  in  March,  18 17,  but  continued  to 
modify  and  improve  so  long  as  he  remained  in  the  village.  They  were 
commended  by  his  medical  brethren  as  well  as  by  several  individuals  of 
intelligence  and  standing,  and  were  in  general  use  among  those  requir- 
ing such  appliances,  being,  in  fact,  almost  the  sole  truss  employed  in 
this  vicinity.  Personally  Dr.  Hull  was  amiable  and  upright,  a  Methodist 
in  reHgious  belief  and  an  influential  member  of  that  body,  beloved  by 
his  patients,  and  a  friend  of  every  child  who  knew  him.  Rather  short 
of  stature,  quick  and  impulsive  in  manner,  neat  in  attire,  he  was  withal  a 
Httle  vain  of  his  appearance,  and  looked  to  it  that  the  knee-buckles 
which  confined  his  silk  stockings  were  each  day  duly  polished.  His 
earliest  partner  in  Utica  was  Dr.  Ezra  Williams,  with  whom  he  remained 
until  September,  18 16.  In  September,  1 821,  he  was  bought  out  by  Dr. 
Theodore  Pomeroy  and  after  a  brief  association  with  him  removed  to 
New  York. 

Among  the   newly  elected   officers  of  the  year  occurs  the   name  of 
Nicholas  Smith,  collector.     He  had  been  a  resident  of  the  place  since 


no  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

1788,  having  come  into  it  as  a  boy  nine  or  ten  years  old  in  company 
with  that  pioneer  settler,  Major  Bellinger.  He  attended  school  one  or 
two  winters  and  these  were  all  the  educational  advantages  he  ever  en- 
joyed. He  next  served  his  uncle  and  two  or  three  of  the  earlier  mer- 
chants as  a  clerk,  and  now  he  is  made  village  collector.  The  next  year, 
catching  the  enthusiasm  enkindled  by  the  war  and  which  prevailed 
along  the  border  settlements,  he  volunteered  his  services  and  was  six 
months  on  duty  as  a  soldier.  In  18 14  he  enlisted  again  and  was  made 
adjutant  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Thirty-fourth  Regiment  called  for 
the  defence  of  Sackets  Harbor.  "Notwithstanding  some  peculiari- 
ties," says  a  comrade  of  the  regiment,  "his  habits  were  temperate  and 
his  heart  in  the  right  place."  This  military  service  was  followed  after 
the  contest  by  the  command  of  a  company  of  Utica  militia,  whence  he 
was  called  by  General  Weaver  to  his  staff,  and  still  retaining  his  rank 
in  the  line  rose  to  the  position  of  colonel.  Returned  from  the  war  Col- 
onel Smith  was  a  short  time  in  trade  and  next  filled  many  local  offices, 
being  successively  deputy  sheriff,  superintendent  of  the  poor,  and  alder- 
man, which  latter  post  he  held  eleven  years.  He  was  conspicuous  for 
his  assiduity  in  the  relief  of  the  sick  and  the  burial  of  the  dead  during 
the  fearful  visitation  of  the  cholera  in  1832.  Soon  after  this  time  he  re- 
moved to  his  farm  in  East  Utica. 

On  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  John  E.  Hinman,  the  son  of  Major 
Benjamin  Hinman,  volunteered,  served  gallantly  as  quartermaster  of 
the  One  Hundred  and  Thirty-fourth  Regiment  of  New  York  State 
militia,  and  was  a  popular  and  useful  officer.  By  service  then  and 
after  the  war  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel.  He  was  deputy  sheriff 
under  James  S.  Kip,  who  held  office  for  the  third  time  from  181 1 
to  1815;  and  in  February,  1 821,  he  was  appointed  sheriff.  This  post 
Colonel  Hinman  occupied  until  the  new  constitution  took  effect,  which 
changed  the  office  from  an  appointive  to  an  elective  one,  when  he  was 
elected  as  his  own  successor  in  November,  1822.  The  constitution 
prohibiting  a  re-election  he  retired  at  the  end  of  his  term,  but  in  No- 
vember, 1828,  was  again  made  sheriff  and  served  another  three  years. 
After  failing  of  an  election  as  State  senator,  for  which  he  was  nomi- 
nated in  1849,  he  was  in  1850  elected  mayor  of  the  city  and  by  suc- 
cessive re-elections  held  the  office  three  years.      His  energy  and  execu- 


J.  E.  HINMAN  AND  OTHERS  —  PROCEEDINGS  OF  1812.    1 1 1 

tive  ability  were  tested  at  this  time  by  the  destructive  operations  of  an 
organized  band  of  incendiaries.  The  mayor's  proclamations  were  fre- 
quent and  lengthy.  When  the  alarm  of  fire  was  sounded  he  hastened 
to  the  spot.  If  in  the  night  time  he  drew  a  white  handkerchief  about 
his  hat  to  designate  his  official  rank  and  distinguish  him'  from  the  crowd, 
and  while  on  the  ground  was  no  idle  spectator,  but  prompt  in  directing 
and  vociferous  in  his  orders. 

A  few  others  of  i8i  i  were  Joseph  S.  Porter,  a  watchmaker  and  jew- 
eler of  gentlemanly  bearing  who  kept  a  showy  and  attractive  store  and 
had  for  many  years  the  best  of  custom  ;  Alfred  Hitchcock,  druggist, 
who  with  many  removals  and  a  varying  though  never  very  prosperous 
tide  of  success  continued  many  years  in  the  place,  dying  in  1872  ;  Eras- 
tus  Cross,  a  marble  cutter  whose  chisel  cut  the  headstone  of  very  many 
of  our  earlier  citizens;   Riley  Rogers,  gunsmith. 

At  the  charter  election  held  on  the  5th  of  May,  18 12,  there  were  but 
four  trustees  elected  on  the  first  ballot,  viz.  :  Talcott  Camp,  Jeremiah 
Van  Rensselaer,  E.  B.  Shearman,  and  Morris  S.  Miller.  Frederick 
White,  of  the  former  board,  had  left  the  village  and  Mr.  Devereux  was 
dropped  for  a  reason  which  we  may  soon  surmise.  Mr.  Miller  was, 
however,  excused  from  serving  and,  on  a  fresh  ballot  for  two,  Bryan 
Johnson  and  Thomas  Skinner  were  elected.  Mr.  Johnson  also  asked  to 
be  excused,  when  Arthur  Breese  was  elected  to  the  vacant  place.  Mr. 
Hoyt  was  again  made  treasurer  and  Nicholas  Smith  collector.  The 
sum  of  $450  was  voted  to  be  raised  for  the  support  of  the  watch,  the 
ringing  of  the  bell,  and  for  contingent  expenses.  But  in  addition  it 
was  voted  to  build  a  market-house  on  the  public  square  between  Bagg's 
Tavern  and  the  store  of  John  C.  Devereux,  at  a  cost  of  $300,  which  sum 
was  to  be  assessed  on  the  inhabitants.  However  convenient  this  mar- 
ket-house might  be  to  the  citizens  at  large  it  is  natural  to  presume  that 
it  would  not  be  deemed  very  desirable  by  those  living  or  doing  busi- 
ness in  its  immediate  neighborhood,  and  the  reason  is  obvious  why  Mr. 
Devereux  was  not  placed  on  the  board.  We  are  prepared  also  to  learn 
that  within  a  few  weeks  the  president,  Mr.  Camp,  is  directed  to  confer 
with  Moses  Bagg  and  Hugh  Cunningham  and  ascertain  what  sum  they 
will  procure  to  be  paid  for  the  purchase  of  a  lot  on  which  to  place  the 
market,  if  it  can  be  removed  from  the  place  designed  for  it.     No  report 


112  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

appears  from  the  president;  but,  instead,  we  learn  of  another  public 
meeting  of  the  inhabitants  being  held  in  July  to  reconsider  the  action 
of  the  annual  meeting  with  reference  to  the  market- house.  A  vote  to 
repeal  this  action  was  lost.  Next  follows  the  payment  of  Mr.  Culver's 
account  for  building  the  market,  and  in  November  the  ordinance  reg- 
ulating the  same  and  the  authority  granted  to  the  president,  who  was 
made  clerk  of  the  market  to  lease  seven  of  its  stalls.  By  the  provisions 
of  this  ordinance  butchers  and  victualers,  licensed  by  the  payment  of 
six  shilling's,  were  the  only  persons  allowed  to  sell  meat  in  quantities 
smaller  than  the  quarter  of  an  animal,  and  this  only  in  the  stalls  of  the 
market,  at  least  during  market  hours;  butchers  refusing  for  six  days  to 
supply  their  stalls  with  good  meat  were  subject  to  penalties,  and  they 
were  required  to  pay  the  clerk  a  tax  of  ten  cents  for  every  cow  or  ox 
and  two  cents  for  every  sheep  or  lamb  they  sold;  other  provisions  ex- 
cluded standing  carts,  live  animals,  undressed  carcasses,  hides,  etc., 
and  unwholesome  meat,  and  insisted  on  rigid  attention  to  cleanliness. 
Aside  from  the  usual  routine  the  foregoing  were  all  the  proceedings  of 
the  board  during  the  year, 

The  Utica  turnpike,  leading  northward,  was  now  in  progress  and 
five  miles  of  it  already  complete.  The  Minden  turnpike,  running  south- 
easterly from  the  village,  was  opened  the  year  previous. 

Of  the  course  of  the  war  with  England,  which  began  in  1812,  the  in- 
habitants of  Utica  had  abundant  witness,  though  at  a  distance  from  any 
place  of  action  and  undisturbed  by  hostile  demonstrations.  Companies 
of  soldiers  were  frequently  passing  through  on  their  way  to  or  from 
some  military  post  and  were  quartered  for  a  time  in  or  near  the  village. 
Thus  its  residents  had  an  opportunity  of  becoming  cognizant  of  many 
of  the  regiments  enlisted,  while  between  these  and  the  villagers  who 
sometimes  suffered  from  their  depredations  disturbances  now  and  then 
took  place.  The  local  papers  were  prompt  to  relate  the  battles  and  the 
military  movements  on  both  sides,  and  everybody  was  interested  to 
learn  the  particulars  of  each  important  event.  Some  few  people  were 
busy  in  procuring  and  forwarding  supplies  to  the  nearer  scenes  of  hos- 
tilities and  many  others  responded  to  the  call  of  their  country,  and  left 
business  and  families  to  serve  in  the  ranks.  But  the  greater  portion 
pursued  their  usual  duties  as  in  times  of  peace. 

In  the  latter  part  of  February,  18 13,  about  sixty  volunteers  were  en- 


THE  WAR  OF  1812.  113 

rolled  at  Utica,  among  whom  were  included  some  members  of  its  Inde- 
pendent Infantry  Company.  They  formed  a  new  company  attached  to 
the  One  Hundred  and  Thirty-fourth  Regiment  and  were  commanded 
by  Capt.  William  Williams.  Of  its  men  the  only  names  that  can  be 
recalled  were  John  Grove,  orderly  sergeant,  John  George,  and  Theo- 
dore S.  Faxton.  The  company  remained  one  month  at  Smith's  Mills, 
when  they  were  paid  off  and  afterward  dismissed.  Another^company 
of  the  One  Hundred  and  Thirty- fourth  Regiment,  termed  the  Silver 
Grays,  was  commanded  by  Nathan  Seward,  of  New  Hartford,  and 
among  its  men  was  Thurlow  Weed  from  Utica.  It  was  probably  at 
this  time  also  that  Nathan  Williams  went  out  as  major  of  the  regiment, 
Nicholas  Smith  as  lieutenant,  becoming  adjutant,  and  John  E.  Hinman 
as  quartermaster.  Early  in  the  war  a  drafting  took  place  at  the  hotel, 
when  a  number  of  men  were  made  soldiers.  In  September,  1814,  the 
regiment  were  called  out  en  masse,  but  continued  only  a  month  in  arms 
and  without  active  service.  At  this  time  Benjamin  Ballou  was  captain 
of  a  company  and  Nicholas  N.  Weaver  orderly  sergeant,  but  subse- 
quently promoted  to  the  captaincy,  Ballou  having  been  taken  sick. 
To  Thomas  Skinner,  of  Utica,  was  given  the  captaincy  of  a  company  in 
a  regiment  of  artillery  under  Col.  Elijah  Metcalf,  but  as  he  did  not  serve 
the  company  was  commanded  by  its  first  lieutenant.  Five  or  six  from 
Utica  had  previously  volunteered  at  Buffalo  and  served  in  its  defence. 
Six  young  men  of  the  neighborhood  were  enlisted  as  midshipmen  during 
the  course  of  the  war,  viz.:  Samuel  Breese  and  William  Inman,  of  Utica  ; 
John  G.  Young,  of  Whitesboro  ;  Antill  Lansing,  of  Oriskany;  and  Ed- 
ward and  Benjamin  Carpenter,  of  Whitesboro.  There  was  a  recruiting 
station  here  under  the  charge  of  Capt.  P.  Mills  of  the  Twenty-third 
Regiment.     The  hospital  was  cared  for  by  Dr.  Solomon  Wolcott. 

Alexander  B.  Johnson  was  a  resident  of  Utica  from  the  year  1801, 
and  was  long  numbered  among  its  leading  inhabitants.  During  sixty- 
six  years  he  was  identified  with  its  business  interests:  a  director 
of  one  of  its  banks,  a  founder  of  another,  and  for  thirty-six  years  the 
head  of  a  third,  in  which  posts  of  responsibility  he  gained  an  extended 
celebrity  as  a  wise  and  skillful  banker.  His  earliest  personal  enterprise 
was  the  establishment  in  1810  of  a  large  glass  factory  near  the  village 
of  Geneva.     A  short  time  before  he  had  been  a  director  in  the  glass 

15 


114  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

factory  at  Vernon.  As  a  second  one  had  lately  been  set  up  in  Marcy 
he  feared  the  legislature  would  be  unwilling  to  grant  the  charter  for  a 
third  in  Oneida  County,  and  so  proposed  to  get  permission  to  start  one 
in  Ontario  County  ;  and  at  length,  after  numerous  journeyings  to  and 
fro,  after  much  vexatious  delay  and  many  difficulties,  the  factory  was 
put  in  operation  and  glass  was  made. 

In  1812,  while  living  in  New  York,  he  published  a  volume  entitled 
"  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Value  and  of  Capital,  and  into  the  Opera- 
tions of  Government  Loans,  Banking  Institutions,  and  Private  Credit, 
with  an  Appendix  containing  an  Inquiry  into  the  Laws  which  Regulate 
the  Rate  of  Interest  and  the  Price  of  Stocks."  The  book  found  a  few 
approving  readers  and  brought  him  into  notice  as  a  thoughtful  specu- 
lator on  the  subject  of  finance.  Immediately  that  news  came  of  the  exist- 
ence of  war  with  England,  filling  the  city  with  consternation,  Mr.  John- 
son sold  his  bank  stock  at  a  sacrifice  and  returned  to  Utica.  Here  he 
invested  his  funds  in  the  Bank  of  Utica,  which  was  then  organizing, 
and  was  ere  long  compensated  many  fold  for  the  loss  sustained  by  the 
panic  sale  of  his  New  York  stock.  In  April,  18 14,  he  married  Miss 
Abigail  Louisa,  daughter  of  Charles  Adams,  who  was  the  second  son  of 
President  John  Adams.  The  lady's  father  had  been  a  lawyer  in  New 
York  city,  but  was  now  deceased,  and  she  was  living  with  her  mother 
in  Utica.  Soon  after  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  State  directors  of  the 
Bank  of  Utica,  entering  therein  in  antagonism  with  Montgomery  Hunt, 
its  cashier.  The  latter  had  procured  the  removal  from  the  directorship 
of  Messrs.  Kip  and  Bloodgood,  for  which  they  in  retaliation  obtained  for 
Mr,  Johnson  the  place  of  director  for  the  State.  And  here  it  was  that 
he  began  his  first  practical  acquaintance  with  banking,  a  subject  which, 
as  we  have  seen,  had  already  occupied  his  thoughts.  It  was  not  long 
before  his  energies  were  enlisted  in  a  scheme  for  a  bank  of  his  own,  and 
these  resulted  in  the  creation  of  an  institution  now  almost  forgotten, 
whose  history  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  devoted  to  the  financial  insti- 
tutions of  the  city.  A  sketch  of  Mr.  Johnson  as  a  banker  only  would, 
however,  be  to  give  an  incomplete  notice  of  him  without  reference  to 
his  authorship.  He  adopted  banking,  as  he  himself  has  said,  in  order 
that  he  might  have  time  to  write.  His  writings  were  numerous.  They 
relate  mostly  to  language  in  reference  to  its  meaning  in  something  other 


JOHN  B RADISH—  E.  S.  COZIER.  1 1 5 

than  words.  The  ideas  he  expressed  in  several  different  works  upon 
this  topic  interested  a  few  minds  deeply,  but  were  too  abstruse  for  gen- 
eral readers.  He  wrote  also  on  banking,  on  politics,  etc.,  and  he  lect- 
ured before  public  associations. 

John  Bradish  was  for  some  time  deputy  in  the  office  of  the  Supreme 
Court  clerk.  At  that  time  notices  of  all  suits  begun  in  the  Supreme 
Court,  or  entering  on  new  stages  of  their  progress  were  sent  to  the 
office  of  the  clerk,  who  transmitted  them  to  the  attorney  of  the  oppos- 
ing party,  and  in  return  transmitted  the  answers  of  the  latter.  All  costs 
of  suits  were  likewise  taxed  by  the  clerk.  Lawyers  throughout  the  State 
were  obliged,  therefore,  to  depend  upon  agents  living  near  the  offices  of 
the  clerks  of  this  court  to  execute  the  services  required  therein.  Having 
secured  such  agency  at  Utica  Mr.  Bradish  continued  to  act  in  this  ca- 
pacity down  to  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  new  constitution  of  1846 
and  the  abolition  of  the  old  Supreme  Court.  By  the  exercise  of  these 
duties,  which  were  liberally  paid  for,  and  by  successful  undertakings  in 
real  estate  he  acquired  a  competency. 

Ezra  S.  Cozier  established  himself  in  1 8 12  as  a  hatter.  The  increas- 
ing estimation  of  his  fellows,  and  notably  those  of  the  brotherhood  of 
Masons,  brought  him  later  into  places  of  responsibility  and  honor. 
During  one  term  of  service  his  kindness  of  heart  found  full  play  as  over- 
seer of  the  poor.  Next  for  seven  successive  years  he  was  a  trustee  of 
the  village  board  and  more  than  half  that  time  (1819-23)  its  president. 
And  when  the  village  was  exalted  to  a  city  he  was  pressed  by  many  for 
the  mayoralty,  but  failing  in  this  he  was  made  the  treasurer.  Not  long 
afterward  he  was  among  the  first  of  the  victims  of  the  cholera  epidemic 
of  August,  1832. 

The  most  engrossing  topic  with  the  trustees  as  well  as  with  the  free- 
holders generally  during  the  year  1813  would  appear  to  have  been  the 
market  recently  erected  on  the  public  square.  A  determined  opposition 
to  its  presence  is  revealed  in  the  partial  change  now  effected  in  the  con- 
stituency of  the  board,  which  was  made  to  consist  of  Moses  Bagg, 
Montgomery  Hunt,  Seth  Dwight,  E.  B.  Shearman,  and  Talcott  Camp. 
It  is  still  more  evident  in  the  resolution  which  was  passed  at  the  annual 
meeting  directing  the  trustees  to  sell  the  market  at  vendue  after  the  rent 
of  the  stalls  should  have  expired.     At  an  early  session  of  these  trustees 


ii6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

they  passed  an  ordinance  enacting  that  from  the  25th  of  May  to  the  ist 
of  October  anybody  might  sell  meat  without  a  license,  provided  that  it 
be  sold  in  the  market  square  and  conformable  to  the  ordinances,  and 
provided  this  should  not  impair  any  claim  by  the  trustees  for  rent  of 
stalls.  But  the  friends  of  the  market  were  aroused,  and  at  a  special 
meeting  of  the  inhabitants  held  in  November  the  vote  of  the  annual 
meeting  to  sell  this  unwelcome  neighbor  was  rescinded.  A  little  later 
the  trustees  ordered  six  of  the  market  stalls  to  be  put  up  at  auction. - 
And  here  the  matter  rested  for  the  year.  Aside  from  the  above  and 
other  routine  business  nothing  was  done  by  the  board  of  1813. 
•  Spafford's  "  Gazetteer  of  New  York,"  published  at  Albany  in  1813, 
contains  a  notice  of  Utica,  though  it  adds  little  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
place  we  have  obtained  from  other  sources.  The  place  is  described  as 
a  flourishing  incorporated  post  village,  the  commercial  capital  of  the 
great  western  district  of  New  York,  and  though  small  in  area  com- 
prising a  population  of  1,700  souls  with  300  houses  and  stores,  a  Pres- 
byterian and  an  Episcopal  Church,  a  grammar  school,  mills,  factories, 
machine  shops,  printing  offices,  etc.  "  The  hotel  is  an  elegant  establish- 
ment, and  the  many  fine  private  mansions  of  gentlemen  of  taste  and 
opulence  give  Utica  a  character  in  this  respect  worthy  a  great  commer- 
cial town." 

Barent  Bleecker,  second  son  of  Col.  Garret  G.  Lansing,  opened  a 
store  just  below  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank.  In  this  he  was  unsuccess- 
ful, and  after  a  short  service  as  book-keeper  of  the  United  States  Bank 
he  became  cashier,  about  1835,  of  the  Bank  of  Belleville,  N.  J.  Thence 
he  was  called  in  December,  1836,  to  the  cashiership  of  the  Oneida  Bank 
and  filled  the  place  until  his  death. 

An  early  partner  of  Mr.  Lansing  was  James  Piatt,  brother  of  Judge 
Piatt.  He  became  a  forwarder,  occupying  a  large  warehouse  on  what 
was  known  as  Bleecker  slip,  a  narrow  basin  extending  from  the  canal  to 
Catharine  street.  For  a  short  time  he  was  postmaster.  Going  to 
Oswego  he  was  its  first  mayor  and  senator  from  the  district. 

A  merchant  of  much  weight  of  character,  both  personal  and  mercan- 
tile, was  Alexander  Seymour,  who  entered  this  year  into  an  arrange- 
ment with  Messrs.  Watts  Sherman  and  Henry  B.  Gibson  whereby  he 
was  to  represent  them  in  Utica  while   they  conducted  affairs  in  New 


THOMAS  ROCKWELL  —  E.  S.  BARNUM.  1 1; 

York  city.  In  1816  the  "  Co."  attached  to  his  name  signified  Ezekiel 
Bacon,  and  thus  it  continued  until  the  close  of  1822.  After  this  time 
the  principal  was  alone  at  104  Genesee  street  until  1833,  when  he  moved 
to  Cleveland,  Ohio. 

After  coming  to  Utica  Thomas  Rockwell  was  at  first  a  teacher,  but  in 
18 1 5  entered  the  service  of  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank  as  its  book-keeper. 
For  thirty-four  years  he  served  the  bank  with  unvarying  steadiness. 
"  Much  of  its  prosperity,"  says  its  president,  A.  B.  Johnson,  "  was  due 
to  his  vigilance  and  faithfulness.  He  was  never  a  borrower  from  the 
bank  and  never  left  his  post  for  recreation  or  business  other  than  that  of 
the  bank.  On  a  salary  far  too  small  for  the  value  of  his  services  he 
maintained  a  family  and  left  a  sufficiency  for  their  support  at  his  death." 

Ezra  S.  Barnum's  chief  claim  to  notice  and  remembrance  comes  from 
his  long  continued  and  varied  services  as  a  public  officer.  He  was  first 
elected  to  office  in  181 7  and  put  into  triple  harness,  as  it  were,  from  the 
outset,  being  made  constable,  collector,  and  coroner.  At  one  time, 
besides  these  three  offices,  he  held  also  those  of  police  officer  and  deputy 
sheriff.  And  when  to  these  functions  was  added  those  of  justice  of  the 
peace  it  was  well  said  of  him  by  the  editor  of  the  Club  that  "  Utica  con- 
tains one  officer  of  rare  qualifications,  for  he  can  issue  process,  serve  it,  try, 
convict,  hang,  hold  inquest,  and  sell  for  taxes  the  effects  of  the  convict.'' 
The  office  of  justice,  which  he  first  received  from  the  council  of  ap- 
pointment in  1 82 1,  he  continued  to  hold  for  seventeen  years.  How 
well  he  did,  notwithstanding  his  ignorance  of  law  at  the  start,  may  be 
inferred  from  the  fact  that  only  two  cases  were  ever  appealed  from  his 
decision  ;  one  of  these,  though  reversed  by  the  court  of  the  county,  was 
affirmed  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State  and  the  other  was  never 
tried  on  appeal.  On  retiring  from  the  justiceship  'Squire  Barnum  was 
appointed  deputy  United  States  marshal  and  commissioner  of  deeds. 
In  1832  he  was  elected  to  the  Board  of  Aldermen  and  was  several  times 
re-elected.  At  the  organization  of  the  Oneida  Bank  in  1836  he  was 
chosen  one  of  the  directors.  There  remains  to  add  a  record  of  long 
and  eminent  service  and  high  honors  in  the  order  of  Free  and  Accepted 
Masons.  Few  living  Masons  have  been  so  long  connected  with  the 
order ;  fewer,  if  any,  have  been  so  highly  honored  by  it.  He  was 
elected  a  member   of  Utica  Lodge  in  January,  181 7,  and  having  soon 


ii8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

gone  through  the  four  chapter  degrees  he  was  early  inducted  into  official 
position.  From  that  day  forward  he  was  not  released  from  the  duties 
and  the  responsibilities  of  office,  being  promoted  from  year  to  year  until 
the  highest  honor  in  the  gift  of  the  body  was  conferred  upon  him. 

A  neat  white  building  on  the  berm  bank  of  the  canal  south  of  Gene- 
see street  bridge,  known  as  the  Canal  Coffise  House,  was  long  kept  by 
John  Welles,  a  well  mannered  and  estimable  person.  Amos  Gay,  a 
rather  restless  man,  kept  in  turn  several  other  hotels  and  put  up  for  a 
theater  the  large  brick  building  which  also  became  a  hotel,  but  gave 
way  to  the  city  hall  as  its  successor.  Comfort  Butler,  a  saddler  by 
trade,  in  1828  took  charge  of  the  Utica  museum,  soon  afterward  be- 
coming totally  blind,  but  remaining  in  charge  with  the  aid  of  his  family 
until  1850.  William  Jones  was  long  the  official  surveyor,  while  his 
brother  going  South  became  president  of  Texas.  James  C.  De  Long 
was  a  morocco  dresser  and  prominent  with  the  Methodists.  Joshua  M. 
Church  and  Stephen  Herrick  were  carpenters  and  Nehemiah  Brown  was 
a  butcher. 

At  the  annual  meeting  held  in  the  spring  of  18 14  the  market-house 
was  still  a  matter  of  disagreement  among  the  inhabitants,  and  after 
much  discussion  and  the  holding  of  a  public  meeting  it  was  determined 
to  remove  the  market  to  the  corner  of  Division  and  Market  streets. 
Marketing  for  the  future  was  made  free  to  everybody  and  at  all  times 
and  places.  And  at  a  meeting  of  trustees  held  on  the  following  day 
the  by  laws  relating  to  the  market  were  rescinded,  and  thus  was  set  at 
rest,  for  some  years  at  least,  this  most  perplexing  and  faction-provok- 
ing question. 

The  trustees  who  held  office  during  the  year  18 14  were  Talcott  Camp, 
Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  Nathan  Williams,  Killian  Winne,  and  Sam- 
uel Stocking.  J.  C.  Hoyt  was  continued  as  treasurer  and  Nicholas 
Smith  as  collector.  When  the  board  first  met  after  their  election  they 
again  made  Mr.  Camp  their  president  and  John  H.  Ostrom  clerk.  At 
one  of  their  meetings  held  later  in  the  course  of  the  year  they  appointed 
William  H.  Maynard  village  attorney  in  the  place  of  Thomas  Skinner, 
the  latter  having  become  about  this  time  captain  of  an  artillery  com- 
pany destined  for  Sackets  Harbor. 

The  most  important  business  of  the  board  during  the  year  respects 


PROCEEDINGS  (9i^  1814.  119 

an  improvement  which  we  are  surprised  to  learn  has  not  been  made  be- 
fore. That  a  thrifty  village  of  1,700  to  1,800  inhabitants,  and  which  has 
already  earned  the  appellation  of  commercial  capital  of  the  county, 
should  be  destitute  of  so  common  a  convenience  as  sidewalks  seems  to 
us  who  enjoy  so  many  rarer  privileges  truly  astonishing.  Yet  so  it  is 
that  not  until  the  23d  of  May,  1814,  do  we  find  an  ordinance  passed 
"for  the  better  improving  the  streets  of  Utica  and  making  the  side- 
walks in  said  village."  This  ordinance  required  the  owners  or  occu- 
pants of  houses  on  both  sides  of  Genesee  street  from  Bleecker  to  Water, 
on  both  sides  of  Whitesboro  from  Genesee  to  the  corner  east  of  In- 
man's  brewery  (Broadway),  on  both  sides  of  Main  as  far  as  First  and 
thence  on  its  south  side  as  far  as  Bridge,  to  make  sidewalks  for  foot 
travelers  within  ninety  days  in  the  manner  prescribed,  or  be  subject  to 
a  fine  of  $20  and  a  further  one  of  $2.50  for  every  month  of  neglect 
thereafter.  The  sidewalks  of  Genesee  street  were  to  be  fifteen  feet  in 
width,  and  to  be  constructed  of  smooth  or  cobblestone,  from  Whites- 
boro to  Catharine,  except  between  the  stoops,  where  at  the  owner's 
option  they  might  be  made  of  gravel.  Elsewhere,  that  is  to  say  on 
Whitesboro  and  Main  streetis,  these  walks  were  to  be  ten  feet  from  the 
front  line  of  the  lots,  and  of  smooth  or  cobblestone,  or  of  good  clean 
gravel  at  the  option  of  the  maker.  The  same  liberty  with  respect  to 
material  was  allowed  on  Genesee  below  Whitesboro  and  above  Cathar- 
ine to  Bleecker,  a  street  which  seems  now  first  to  be  officially  recog- 
nized. The  outer  border  of  these  walks  was  to  be  protected  by  timber 
and  a  line  of  posts,  except  where  passages  to  barns  were  needed. 

The  ordinance  likewise  forbade  driving  upon  the  sidewalks  unless  it 
were  to  leave  or  take  away  loading,  the  making  of  fires  to  heat  wagon 
wheels,  or  the  fastening  of  a  horse  or  leaving  of  a  wagon  thereupon. 
In  September  additional  sidewalks  ten  feet  wide,  but  of  optional  material, 
were  ordered  to  be  constructed  on  the  north  side  of  Liberty  street  from 
the  office  of  Joseph  Kirkland  as  far  as  the  Presbyterian  meeting-house, 
and  on  the  south  side  of  Broad  street  from  the  corner  of  James  Van 
Rensselaer's  store  to  the  Episcopal  Church.  The  trustees  in  October 
proceeded  to  order  at  the  public  expense  the  laying  of  crosswalks  at 
all  the  principal  intersections.  The  work,  thus  ordered  by  the  trustees, 
involved  an  expense  not  anticipated  by  their  constituents  and  for  which 


120  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

no  funds  had  been  provided,  and  it  was  the  first  instance  in  which  the 
board  had  overrun  their  estimates.  But  at  the  special  meeting  of  inhab- 
itants which  occurred  shortly  afterward  the  latter  sanctioned  the  act, 
requested  the  trustees  to  procure  the  stone  that  would  be  needed,  and 
agreed  to  pay  for  the  same. 

One  further  proceeding  of  this  board  of  1814  is  worthy  of  mention, 
suggestive  as  it  is  of  the  war  and  the  scarcity  of  currency  which  this 
entailed.  Having  first  obtained  a  promise  from  the  officers  of  the  Man- 
hattan Branch  Bank  that  in  case  of  the  issue  of  notes  by  the  board  the 
bank  would  redeem  them  they  passed  in  February,  18 15,  the  following 
resolution  : 

"Resolved,  That  corporation  bills,  not  to  exceed  $5,000,  be  issued, 
signed  by  the  president,  and  made  payable  at  the  Manhattan  Branch 
Bank." 

The  bills  were  all  of  fractional  currency  and  of  six  different  denom- 
inations, ranging  from  three  to  seventy-five  cents.  Specimens  are  still 
preserved,  which  were  issued  during  this  and  the  two  succeeding  years, 
bearing  the  name  of  the  president  of  the  year. 

John  H.  Ostrom  in  February,  18 16,  opened  an  office  and  about  the 
same  time  was  made  village  attorney.  In  1820  he  became  a  partner 
of  Judge  Morris  S.  Miller.  A  partnership  of  a  later  date  and  which 
lasted  until  his  death  he  had  with  his  brother-in-law,  Thomas  R. 
Walker.  But  he  was  not  so  much  to  attain  eminence  in  the  law  as  by 
his  popular  manners  and  personal  influence  to  impress  himself  upon  his 
fellows,  to  manage  and  direct  the  affairs  of  town  and  county,  and  to 
serve  with  credit  in  numerous  public  offices.  Within  his  own  munici- 
pality he  filled  successively  the  posts  of  clerk,  trustee,  and  assessor  of 
the  village,  and  after  its  incorporation  as  a  city  those  of  member  of  the 
common  council  and  mayor,  besides  discharging  for  several  years  the 
duties  of  chief  engineer  of  the  fire  department.  He  rose  through  the 
various  grades  of  military  preferment  to  that  of  major-general,  and 
was  likewise  clerk  of  the  county  from  1826  to  1832.  He  was  an  orig- 
inal director  in  the  Oneida  Bank  and  was  of  service  in  the  concerns  of 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  His  life  was  one  of  constant  activity  and 
the  duties  of  his  several  offices  were  performed  with  unvarying  fidelity. 
As  a  lawyer  his  standing  was    respectable,  but  he  was  chiefly  distin- 


NICHOLAS  DE VERB  UX.  121 

guished  as  a  political  leader.  His  success  in  this  regard  was  largely 
due  to  the  enticement  of  his  manners,  which  were  elevated,  graceful, 
and  insinuating. 

A  merchant  who  filled  a  tolerably  large  place  in  the  concerns  of  Utica, 
mercantile,  social,  ecclesiastical,  and  charitable,  was  Nicholas  Devereux. 
Received  into  the  store  of  his  brother  John  he  served  him  for  a  time  as 
his  clerk,  and  next  in  turn  after  Luke  became  a  member  of  the  firm.  He 
prosecuted  with  ardor  his  chosen  calling,  a  calling  beset  for  him  with  few 
reverses,  and  Crowned  in  time  with  an  ample  fortune.  As  a  merchant 
Mr.  Devereux's  course  was  marked  by  industry,  accuracy,  and  economy. 
It  was  not  until  he  had  in  part  retired,  and  when  the  management  of 
matters  was  entrusted  to  his  partner,  that  such  pecuniary  stress  was  en- 
countered as  obliged  him  to  again  resume  the  reins.  At  this  time,  the 
fall  of  1827,  the  firm  was  called  on  to  pay  $90,000  within  ninety  days. 
But  Mr.  Devereux  was  now  owner  and  occupant  of  the  handsome 
grounds  that  had  once  been  the  home  of  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  and 
which  had  cost  the  purchaser  only  about  $7,000.  Dividing  it  into  lots 
and  intersecting  it  by  streets  he  sold  it  for  a  sum  which  added  largely 
to  his  revenues,  while  there  was  developed  thereby  that  spirit  of  enter- 
prise inherent  in  the  man  and  which  he  soon  afterward  manifested  on  a 
still  larger  scale.  In  the  interest  of  the  New  York  Life  and  Trust  Com- 
pany he  spent  a  portion  of  a  winter  at  Albany,  and  while  there  took  an 
active  part  in  the  organization  of  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad. 
Not  long  afterward,  while  still  in  the  employ  of  the  same  company,  he 
traveled  extensively  through  the  State  and  had  his  attention  attracted 
to  the  profitable  nature  of  transactions  in  the  uncultivated  and  fast  set- 
tling lands  of  its  western  part.  In  company  with  a  few  gentlemen  of 
New  York  he  bought  of  the  Holland  Land  Company  the  residue  of  their 
lands  in  Allegany  and  Cattaraugus  Counties,  amounting  to  400,000 
acres.  The  general  care  and  disposal  of  this  land  engaged  much  of  its 
owner's  time  during  the  remainder  of  his  life,  its  immediate  sale  being 
committed  to  his  son,  John  C.  Devereux.  But  his  vigorous  and  wide- 
embracing  mind  was  not  absorbed  in  his  mercantile  duties  or  his  personal 
investments.  Intelligently  busied  in  works  of  general  improvement 
throughout  the  State  he  was,  too,  deepljr  interested  in  improvements  for 
the  good  of  his  own  home  community,  while  as  an  ardent  Roman  Cath- 
ie 


122  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

olic,  consistent  and  faithful  in  every  requirement  of  his  faith,  he  was  a 
very  pillar  of  the  church  and  a  zealous  forwarder  of  its  interests  here  and 
abroad.  He  was  mainly  instrumental  in  procuring  the  establishment  at 
Utica  of  the  first  branch  of  the  United  States  Bank  that  was  located 
west  of  Albany.  He  was  also  a  director  of  the  Utica  Savings  Bank, — 
already  initiated  and  conducted  by  him  and  his  brother  before  a  charter 
was  obtained, — a  director  of  the  New  York  Life  and  Trust  Company,  a 
director  of  the  steam  woolen-mills,  and  a  manager  of  the  New  York  State 
Asylum  for  the  Insane. 

Briggs  W.  Thomas  experienced  his  share  of  the  variations  of  com- 
mercial life.  He  had  once  achieved  a  competence,  but  did  not  enjoy 
it  long,  unfortunate  endorsements  sweeping  away  all  that  he  had  made. 
When  nc  longer  a  young  man  he  was  glad  to  accept  of  a  clerkship  in 
the  Oneida  Bank,  where  he  again  acquired  the  means  to  live  without 
employment.  At  an  early  period  he  was  active  in  the  affairs  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  but  in  July,  1844,  he  was  one  of  those  who  sep- 
arated themselves  from  the  First  Presbyterian  and  united  to  form  the 
Westminster  Society.  From  the  inception  of  the  Utica  Sunday  School 
he  took  a  leading  part  therein,  was  its  third  superintendent,  and  many 
years  a  teacher.  The  interest  he  felt  in  Sabbath  schools  in  the  early 
part  of  his  life  did  not  abate  with  his  years,  for  in  i860,  at  the  age  of 
seventy- five,  being  convinced  of  the  need  of  such  a  school  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  city,  he  purchased  a  lot  on  Francis  street,  erected  a  building 
thereon,  placed  in  it  a  library  of  lOO  volumes,  and  gave  it  free  of  charge 
to  the  Westminster  Church  to  be  used  so  long  as  they  should  maintain 
a  Sunday  school  in  that  part  of  the  city.  In  proportion  to  his  means  he 
co-operated  in  many  of  the  public  enterprises  designed  to  develop  and 
advance  the  town  and  its  neighborhood. 

The  inhabitants,  at  the  annual  meeting  held  on  the  2d  of  May,  1815, 
ordered  that  $1,000  should  be  raised  by  tax  for  the  current  expenses  of 
the  year,  and  they  elected  the  following  persons  to  serve  as  tru.stees: 
Abraham  Van  Santvoort,  Augustus  Hickox,  Gurdon  Burchard,  Jason 
Parker,  and  William  Geere.  Mr.  Van  Santvoort  was  subsequently 
chosen  president.  Mr.  Parker  neglected  to  qualify  and  the  board  fined 
him  $25  for  his  neglect.  Little  was  done  throughout  the  year  that  de- 
serves mention.     Additional  sidewalks  were  ordered  on  both   sides  of 


PR  0  CEEDINGS  07^  1 8 1 5  —  EZEKIEL  BA  CON.  1 2  3 

Whitesboro  street  as  far  west  as  Washington  and  on  both  sides  of  the 
latter  ;  on  both  sides  of  Division  ;  of  Main  as  far  as  First ;  a  like  dis- 
tance on  the  northern  side  of  Broad;  and  on  both  sides  of  First  between 
Main  and  Broad.  The  market  was  leased  to  Henry  Sherman  and  John 
Roberts.  And  before  the  expiration  of  their  term  the  board  resolved  to 
discontinue  the  issuing  of  small  bills  and  appointed  Henry  Camp  to 
redeem  those  already  issued. 

In  August,  1 8 14,  Judge  Morris  S.  Miller,  joint  owner  of  the  Bleecker 
estate  and  who  looked  after  the  family  interest  in  Utica,  addressed  a 
letter  to  John  R.  Bleecker,  of  Albany,  with  reference  to  the  extension  of 
John  street,  which  had  been  opened  from  Main  to  Broad  some  four  or 
five  years  before.  The  improvements  he  proposed  were  probably  en- 
tered upon  the  following  year,  and  were  completed  in  the  course  of  the 
season,  for  in  the  fall  of  1 8 16,  when  the  first  village  directory  was  pre- 
pared, John  street  had  about  half  a  dozen  residents  and  Chancellor 
Square  and  Jay  street  each  half  as  many. 

Already  before  his  history  becomes  connected  with  that  of  Utica 
Ezekiel  Bacon  had  been  some  years  in  public  life  and  had  attained  high 
honor  and  exalted  position.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts 
legislature  in  1806-07  ^"d  represented  his  county  in  Congress  from  1807 
to  1813,  serving  on  the  Committee  of  Ways  and  Means  and  foroneyear 
as  its  chairman.  He  was  then  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  Circuit 
Court  of  Common  Pleas  for  the  Western  District  of  his  State,  and  im- 
mediately after  his  assuming  this  office  was  made  first  comptroller  of  the 
Treasury  by  Mr.  Madison.  Within  two  years  he  was  obliged  to  resign 
by  reason  of  ill  health,  when  he  removed  to  the  State  of  New  York  and 
settled  in  Utica.  His  first  interest  here  was  in  merchandise,  for  he  be- 
came a  partner  in  the  firm  of  Alexander  Seymour  &  Co.  In  181 8  he 
was  appointed  associate  judge  of  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas;  in  the 
following  year  he  went  as  a  representative  to  the  Assembly;  and  in 
1821  he  was  one  of  the  honorable  men  of  Oneida  who  had  seats  in  the 
Second  Constitutional  Convention  and  he  took  an  earnest  part  in  its 
deliberations.  About  the  year  1824  he  was  nominated  for  Congress  in 
opposition  to  Henry  R.  Storrs,  but  was  defeated  by  a  small  majority. 
In  October  of  the  following  year  he  was  selected  by  his  fellow  citizens 
to  do  honor  to  Gov.  De  Witt  Clinton,  and  in  a  forcible  and  eloquent 


124  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

manner  he  tendered  him  their  congratulations  on  the  completing  of  the 
Erie  Canal.  As  chief  of  a  packet  boat  company  he  already  had  in  this 
canal  an  interest  more  personal  and  profound  than  that  which  was  shared 
by  other  Hberal  and  enterprising  men  of  his  party.  From  that  time  on- 
ward he  lived  a  retired  life,  and  during  a  large  portion  of  it  suffered 
from  protracted  ill  health  and  manifold  bodily  infirmities.  At  times  he 
wrote  largely  for  the  public  press  and  wrote  with  force  and  pungency. 
For  a  period  he  was  the  main  editorial  writer,  and  for  a  longer  one  a 
regular   contributor,  of  the  Oneida  Whig  and  the  Utica  Daily  Gazette. 

Of  the  position  he  occupied  when  in  public  life,  and  the  influence  he 
exerted  when  in  the  vigor  of  health,  we  obtain  some  idea  when  we  learn 
that  with  Mr.  Madison  he  was  on  terms  of  great  confidence  and  intimacy, 
and  not  with  him  alone  but  also  with  many  other  leading  men  of  that 
era.  With  Judge  Story  his  intercourse  was,  from  an  early  period,  one 
of  unbroken  friendship  and  warm  mutual  regard,  and  the  appointment 
of  the  latter  to  the  position  he  so  highly  adorned  is  due  to  the  personal 
effort  and  solicitation  of  Judge  Bacon.  During  this  most  active  portion 
of  his  career  he  was  a  Democrat ;  after  coming  to  this  State  he  ranged 
himself  with  the  Whigs ;  but  when  the  Free  Soil  movement  arose  in 
1848  his  sympathies  with  the  oppressed  among  his  fellow  creatures  led 
him  to  take  sides  with  that  party.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  the 
oldest  living  graduate  of  Yale  College,  the  eldest  surviving  member  of 
Congress,  and  the  last  representative  of  the  administration  of  Mr. 
Madison. 

Henry  Green  was  born  in  New  York  about  1793  and  graduated  at 
Columbia  College.  Coming  with  the  family  to  Oneida  County  he 
studied  law  with  Judge  Piatt  and  set  up  an  office  in  Utica.  Not  long 
afterward  the  Utica  Insurance  Company,  closed  by  its  originators,  was 
resumed  by  some  of  the  directors,  and  Mr.  Green  was  made  secretary 
and  attorney  of  the  corporation.  Pursuits  so  alien  to  the  law  as  those 
of  banking  and  insurance  drew  him  aside  and  in  a  measure  disquahfied 
him  for  practice  in  a  profession  in  which  he  had  been  ably  fitted.  And 
thus  it  happened  that  after  the  concerns  of  the  company  had  been  closed 
he  found  employment  in  the  care  of  property  in  trust,  and  still  later 
became  the  financial  manager  of  a  large  estate.  Herein  he  was  regarded 
as  a  man  of  intelligence  and  accurate  habits,  neat  and  precise,  and  irre- 


DR.  THOMAS  GOOD  SELL.  125 

proachably  honest.  He  died  on  the  9th  of  March,  1869,  in  his  seventy- 
seventh  year. 

Dr.  Thomas  Goodsell  had  been  already  some  years  in  the  county 
and  when  he  fixed  his  residence  at  Utica  he  was  not  altogether  a  stranger. 
He  was  born  in  Washington,  Litchfield  County,  Conn.,  in  June,  1775, 
engaged  in  the  study  of  medicine  with  Dr.  Sheldon,  of  Litchfield,  and 
settled  in  Woodbridge,  New  Haven  County.  After  some  years  of  prac- 
tice he  repaired  to  Philadelphia,  attended  a  course  of  lectures  at  the 
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  received  there  his  licentiate  in  1809. 
On  his  return  he  passed  a  brief  period  in  New  Haven  and  in  18 10  re- 
moved to  Whitesboro,  where  he  engaged  in  practice  with  Dr.  -Seth  Cap- 
ron.  It  was  not  long  before  he  became  satisfied  that  Utica  would  give 
him  a  better  field,  and  he  removed  thither,  making  it  his  home  so  long 
as  he  lived.  He  soon  acquired  an  extensive  business.  Affable  and 
courteous,  guided  by  high  and  honorable  motives,  with  fair  intellectual 
endowments,  and  a  degree  of  medical  education  which  was  not  usually 
attained  by  his  brethren  of  the  time,  he  was  not  long  in  acquiring  the 
confidence  of  many  of  the  best  families  of  the  place.  For  one  year 
(1827)  he  was  professor  of  materia  medica  in  the  Medical  College  of 
Pittsfield  and  was  at  a  later  period  a  fellow  of  that  of  Albany.  He  re- 
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine  from  the  Medical  De- 
partment of  Yale  College  and  was  a  permanent  member  of  the  State 
Medical  Society.  For  some  years  he  was  much  interested  in  agricult- 
ural pursuits  and  was  secretary  of  the  earlier  society  of  the  county 
devised  to  foster  such  pursuits,  and  had  himself  a  farm  in  Clinton.  It 
is  said  that  Dr.  Goodsell  was  first  to  introduce  Merino  sheep  west  of  the 
Hudson  River.  By  his  brethren  he  will  be  remembered  for  his  uniformly 
kind  and  gentlemanly  bearing,  and  for  his  appreciation  of  the  dignity 
and  usefulness  of  their  vocation,  by  all  for  his  pure  and  upright  life,  and 
his  intelligent  interest  in  matters  that  concerned  the  general  welfare. 
He  lived  until  his  eighty-ninth  year  and  died  January  11,  1864.  His 
wife  was  a  Miss  Livingston,  niece  of  Mrs.  Jonas  Piatt.  She  survived  him 
but  a  few  weeks.      He  had  three  sons  and  two  daughters. 

WilHam  Clarke  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  army  of  18 12  and  was 
wounded  and  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Queenstown,  subsequently 
taking  fank  as  captain.     At  the  time  he  came  to  Utica  lotteries  enjoyed 


126  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

a  fair  reputation  and  were  extensively  employed  throughout  the  country 
for  many  important  and  beneficial  purposes.  Colleges  were  founded, 
roads  made,  bridges  built,  ferries  improved,  and  hospitals  erected  by 
their  aid.  The  lottery  business  which  he  established  in  connection  with 
Yates  &  Mclntyre,  of  Albany,  he  continued  to  prosecute  so  long  as  it 
was  a  business  that  was  countenanced  by  the  State.  He  was  a  man  of 
much  stir  and  enterprise,  and  kept  the  community  fully  acquainted  with 
him  and  his  dealings.  He  was  president  of  the  village,  was  one  of  the 
State's  directors  in  the  Bank  of  Utica,  and  by  State  authority  was  ap- 
pointed in  1837  one  of  the  commissioners  who  planned  the  building  of 
the  State  Asylum  for  the  Insane.  As  with  the  town  and  with  the  State 
so  with  the  church — he  was  always  responsive  to  its  claims,  and  as  un- 
selfish and  vigilant  a  trustee  as  he  was  while  head  of  the  village  or  pur- 
veyor to  a  noble  State  charity.  During  the  memorable  visit  of  the  Rev. 
Charles  G.  Finney  to  Utica,  in  1826,  Captain  Clarke  made  a  profession 
of  his  faith  in  Christ  and  carried  into  the  church  the  same  useful  qual- 
ities that  distinguished  him  in  concerns  of  secular  interest.  Although  of 
New  England  origin  for  the  sake  of  greater  usefulness  in  a  new  organ- 
ization he  united  with  others  in  the  formation  of  the  Reformed  Dutch 
Church,  and  soon  after  was  elected  a  member  of  its  consistory.  Not 
without  cause  did  his  townsmen  value  him  and  take  just  pride  in  his 
open,  benevolent,  and  impressive  face,  his  stout,  manly  frame,  and  the 
venerable  gray  hair  that  covered  so  much  of  capacity  and  disposition  to 
do  for  them.  Captain  Clarke  likewise  superintended,  in  behalf  of  the 
owners,  the  erection  of  the  Bleecker  House,  afterward  a  part  of  Bagg's 
Hotel.  And  for  himself  he  erected  the  brick  buildings  Nos.  42  and  44 
Genesee  street,  which  he  designed  and  for  some  time  kept  as  a  hotel. 

A  merchant  who  was  a  marked  one  among  his  fellows  was  Ephraim 
Hart — shrewd,  self-reliant,  and  diligent,  original,  out-spoken,  and  witty, 
capital  in  the  management  of  his  own  affairs  and  much  trusted  in  those 
of  others.  Succeeding  his  father  in  business  in  18 10  he  carried  it  on' 
for  some  years  in  Clinton.  His  success  and  the  wise  conduct  of  affairs 
he  evinced  were  generally  recognized,  and  he  was  already  a  director  of 
the  Bank  of  Utica  and  of  the  Mount  Vernon  Glass  Company  and  a 
trustee  of  Hamilton  College  when  he  moved  to  Utica  in  1815  ;  he  was 
engaged  in  iron  manufacture,  being  joined  therein  by  Andrew  S.  Pond 


EPHRAIM  HART  AND  OTHERS.  127 

and  afterward   by  his  son,  Henry   R.  Hart,  and   gained   a  handsome 
property. 

The  personal  influence  and  the  superior  business  qualifications  of  Mr. 
Hart  were  not  suffered  to  go  unimproved  by  the  community  among 
which  he  lived,  and  in  18 15  he  was  elected  State  senator  from  the  West 
ern  District.  This  office  he  continued  to  fill  during  the  last  five  sessions 
held  under  the  first  State  constitution,  1816-22,  and  during  a  part  of 
this  time  he  was  also  a  member  of  the  council  of  appointment.  An  ar- 
dent friend  of  De  Witt  Clinton  he  gave  a  determined  support  to  the 
Erie  Canal.  Against  the  Federalists  his  prejudices  were  deep  and  bit- 
ter. Though  not  specially  skilled  in  debate  and  without  training  as  a 
speaker  his  opinion  carried  weight,  but  "as  a  party  man  he  was  want- 
ing in  tact,  caution,  and  system."  ^  In  his  comments  on  men  and  meas- 
ures he  was,  as  has  been  said,  free,  pointed,  and  unsparing. 

A  few  more  of  the  people  of  this  date  require  at  least  a  word  of  men- 
tion. In  181 5  John  H.  Handy  sold  cotton  goods.  Purchasing  prop- 
erty opposite  Liberty  street  he  had  put  up  for  himself  a  store  and  after 
a  time  a  tavern  beside  it.  This  was  a  good  way  removed  from  the  rest 
of  the  merchants  of  the  place,  but  ere  his  death  in  1823  he  saw  them 
josthng  him  on  either  side  and  crowding  past  to  reach  the  neighbor- 
hood of  the  newly  opened  canal.  The  tavern  became  the  National,  a 
much- needed  hotel.  Robert  Shearman  was  a  merchant  associated 
with  his  brother,  William  P.,  at  No.  64,  an  association  that  was  contin- 
ued after  the  latter  opened  his  branch  in  Rochester.  Edward  Vernon 
at  No.  66  ("  don't  forget  the  number")  dealt  first  in  dry  goods  and  then 
kept  a  depository  for  the  sale  of  religious  tracts  and  papers.  Andrew 
Merrell  pubhshed  books  and  the  weekly  journal  known  as  the  Western 
Recorder.  Zenas  Wright,  William  Geere,  and  Collings  Locke  were  all 
dealers  in  leather,  but  independently,  the  former  being  likewise  a  just- 
ice of  the  peace  for  the  last  dozen  years  of  his  life.  Flavel  Gaylord 
made  looking-glasses  until  183S,  which  his  brother  Edwin  continued  to 
do  for  some  time  longer.  William  Blackwood  was  a  brass  founder; 
Nathan  Stevens  a  carpenter;  and  Ehsha  Lovett  a  grocer,  who  illustrated 
in  his  death  a  characteristic  of  the  past  which  seems  strange  enough  at 
present,  for  death  itself  did  not  absolve  the  body  of  this  debtor,  and  so 

1  Hammond's  Political  History. 


128  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

his  corpse  could  not  be  carried  out  for  burial  until  the  claim  of  the 
creditor  was  satisfied,  such  then  being  the  law  of  New  York.  It  was 
Dr.  Hull  who  advanced  the  money  and  comforted  the  afflicted  widow. 

The  freeholders  met  as  usual  in  May,  1816,  and  at  the  usual  place,  a 
school  house  on  Genesee  street,  which  was  at  this  time  occupied  by 
Rev.  Mr.  Townshend.  As  before  the  sum  of  $1,000  was  voted  to  be 
raised  by  taxation  to  defray  the  annual  expenses.  It  was  voted  like- 
wise to  continue  to  issue  small  bills,  but  not  to  exceed  the  amount  of 
those  already  issued.  For  trustees  they  chose  Rudolph  Snyder,  Ezra 
S.  Cozier,  Augustus  Hickox,  Gurdon  Burchard,  and  William  Geere,  of 
whom  Mr.-  Snyder  was  afterward  by  action  of  the  board  made  the  presi- 
dent. The  trustees  in  the  course  of  the  year  ordered  that  the  buildings 
on  Genesee  street  should  be  numbered  and  that  the  names  of  the 
streets  should  be  affixed  to  the  corners.  They  likewise  indulged  in 
further  legislation  about  the  market  and  the  vending  of  meat — selling 
six  stalls  of  the  former  at  auction  and  forbidding  the  sale  of  meat  out- 
side of  the  market  before  9  o'clock  A.  M.  in  quantities  less  than  a  quarter 
of  the  animal.  And  this  is  all  the  record  of  the  year.  Indeed  it  com- 
pletes the  record  of  proceedings  had  under  the  then  existing  charter, 
for  in  November  we  read  of  a  call  for  a  public  meeting  of  the  inhabit- 
ants at  the  school  house  of  Mr.  Bliss  to  receive  the  new  charter. 

The  first  directory  of  Utica  was  published  in  the  year  18 17  and  is  a 
thin  duodecimo  pamphlet  of  twenty- four  pages.  It  contains,  besides  a 
list  of  the  inhabitants  with  their  occupations  and  residence,  which  occu- 
pies eighteen  pages,  a  census  of  the  population.  This  census,  the  com- 
piler informs  us,  was  taken  in  the  fall  of  18 16.  No  further  directory  of 
Utica  appeared  until  1828. 

As  we  are  about  to  enter  upon  a  fresh  chapter  of  the  village  history, 
and  to  consider  the  proceedings  had  under  the  third  charter  of  this  now 
independent  town,  it  may  be  well  to  again  survey  the  place  as  a  whole 
and  seek  to  picture  to  ourselves  the  Utica  of  seventy- five  years  ago.  In 
order  to  form  some  conception  of  it  and  its  surroundings  let  us  approach 
it  from  the  north.  Standing  on  the  Deerfield  Hill,  four  or  five  miles 
away,  the  country  below  you  seems  like  a  level  swamp  covered  with  for- 
est, the  clearings  being  scarcely  discenible.  Beyond  the  river  you 
perceive  the  houses  on  the  hill  at  Utica  and  an  extensive  opening  in  the 


PICTURE  OF  THE  VILLAGE  /7\^  1816.  129 

vicinity.  Directly  south  and  west  nearly  one- third  of  the  country  is 
denuded  of  wood.  To  the  southeast  there  are  only  small  patches  of 
clearing.  Coming  down  toward  the  plain  you  discern  the  more  con- 
spicuous features  of  the  village.  Two  church  steeples  enliven  the  scene^ 
the  Presbyterian  and  the  Episcopal,  which  stand  like  sentinels  guarding 
the  approaches  on  the  west  and  the  east,  the  latter  rejoicing  in  a  pointed 
spire,  the  former  equally  happy  in  its  rounded  cupola.  As  you  cross 
the  dyke  you  see  plainly  before  you  and  towering  above  their  fellows 
the  imposing  York  House  on  the  right  and  its  closely  contesting  rival, 
Bagg's  Hotel,  directly  in  front.  Having  passed  over  the  bridge  }ou 
are  at  once  within  the  heart  of  the  settlement,  the  very  focus  of  the 
town.  For  the  limits  of  Utica  at  the  time  I  treat  of  were  rnostly  con- 
fined between  the  river  and  the  Liberty  street  road  to  Whitesboro  ; 
from  the  square  as  a  center  they  spread  westward  along  Whitesboro 
street  to  Potter's  bridge  and  eastward  along  Main  and  Broad  to  Third 
street.  The  course  of  Genesee  street  was  pretty  thickly  lined  with 
stores — a  few  residences  only  being  here  and  there  interspersed — as  far 
upward  as  Catharine  street,  beyond  which  private  houses  predominated 
over  business  places,  and  these  were  scattered  in  a  straggling  way  even 
to  Cottage  street.  The  roadway  was  guiltless  of  pavement  and  the  mud 
at  times  profound.  The  sidewalks  were  paved,  if  such  it  might  be  called, 
but  the  pavement  —  of  flagging,  of  cobble,  of  gravel,  or  of  tan  bark,  as 
suited  the  convenience  or  the  taste  of  the  householder — bore  httle  re- 
semblance to  the  modern  conventional  sandstone.  "  Stately  but  grace- 
less poplars  stood  in  unbroken  row  from  Bleecker  street  to  the  hill-top." 
On  the  west  Genesee  had  no  outlet  higher  than  Liberty  street,  and  on 
the  east  none  above  Catharine,  for  though  Bleecker  was  known  by  au- 
thority it  was  neither  fenced  nor  housed  and  was  only  a  path  to  past- 
ures beyond.  The  buildings  on  its  business  part  were  mostly  wooden 
and  of  moderate  size  and  pretension.  A  few  were  of  brick.  On  the  hill 
were  the  spacious  grounds  and  beautiful  houses  of  Jeremiah  Van  Rens- 
selaery  Arthur  Breese.and  Alexander  B.  Johnson.  In  Whitesboro  street 
were  the  Bank  of  Utica,  the  Manhattan  Branch  Bank,  and  the  York 
House  as  well  as  the  inns  of  Burchard  and  Bellinger.  This  was  the  Wall 
street  of  the  village  ;  it  harbored  several  stores  and  was  more  populous 
than  any  other   except   Main,  containing  probably  nearly  as  many  in- 

17 


130  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

habitants  as  it  now  does.  Hotel,  in  proportion  to  its  lengtli,  was  quite 
as  tiiickiy  peopled.  Seneca,  Washington,  and  Broadway  reached  only 
to  the  Liberty  street  road,  Broadway  bringing  up  at  the  elegant  stone 
mansion  of  James  S.  Kip,  while  Washington  conducted  passengers  no 
farther  than  the  Presbyterian  meeting-house. 

The  public  square  contained  the  town  pump  and  the  market-house. 
Main  street  was  lined  with  the  comely  residences  of  prosperous  citizens, 
and  was  terminated  by  the  Methodist  chapel  and  the  pleasant  home  and 
grounds  of  Judge  Miller.  Broad  street  was  occupied  as  far  as  the  line 
of  Third  street,  but  contained  only  a  small  fraction  of  its  present  num- 
ber of  buildings.  Between  it  Whitesboro  and  upper  Genesee  the  best 
dwelling-houses  of  the  village  were  unequally  distributed.  John  street 
had  here  and  there  a  residence,  which  in  all  reached  a  little  higher  than 
Jay,  while  beyond  were  the  rising  walls  of  the  academy  and  in  the  rear 
of  this  two  tenements  on  Chancellor  Square.  The  faint  attempts  of 
Catharine  to  rival  its  fellow  below  were  effectually  crushed  when  stakes 
were  planted  along  side  of  it  to  mark  the  course  of  the  future  canal. 
This  settled  its  fate  and  consigned  it  the  rank  it  has  held  ever  since. 
Water  street,  now  robbed  of  its  former  importance,  was  nearest  of  all 
to  the  then  channel  of  commerce,  and  besides  its  houses  for  storage  and 
forwarding  was  also  the  home  of  a  few  well-to-do  folks. 

Thus  as  it  appears  from  the  directory,  while  the  buildings  of  Genesee 
were  in  number  157,  of  Whitesboro  84,  of  Main  6y,  of  Broad  59,  of 
Hotel  34,  of  Catharine  20,  and  Water  as  many,  Seneca  had  15,  no  other 
street  more  than  10,  and  the  rest  but  half  or  less  than  half  of  that  num- 
ber. Of  those  running  eastward  not  one  is  named  above  Catharine. 
"  Cornhill  was  a  forest  from  South  street  to  the  New  Hartford  line. 
Another  forest  skirted  the  gardens  on  the  west  side  of  Genesee,  came 
down  the  slope  to  the  present  Fayette,  and  extended  west  to  the  Asylum 
Hill."  When  the  commissioners  in  the  following  year  ran  the  line  be- 
tween Whitesboro  and  Utica,  from  Jewett's  farm  to  the  county  line  on 
the  east,  and  to  the  river  on  the  north  they  were  obliged  to  fell  trees  so 
as  to  see  their  flag. 

Such  was  the  "pent  up  Utica"  of  18 16,  with  its  420  dwellings  and  stores, 
with  its  churches,  banks,  taverns,  printing  offices,  and  other  appendages 
■of  a  flourishing  country  town,  and  which,  according  to  the  enumeration 
made  by  the  compiler  of  its  directory,  contained  2,861  inhabitants. 


THE  THIRD  VILLAGE  CHARTER.  131 

CHAPTER  IV. 
THE   THIRD   VILLAGE   CHARTER. 

Its  Principal  Provisions  —  The  Proceedings  of  the  Successive  Boards  of  Aldermen 
to  1824 — The  Progress  of  the  Erie  Canal  —  The  Visit  of  General  Lafayette  —  New 
Comers  of  the  Period. 

ANEW  charter  of  Utica  was  enacted  April  7,  1817.  By  its  terms 
Utica  was  set  off  from  Whitestown  and  erected  into  a  separate 
town,  its  boundaries  remaining  the  same  as  before.  It  was  divided  into 
three  wards,  as  follows :  The  First  ward  included  that  portion  of  terri- 
tory lying  east  of  a  line  running  from  the  river  bridge  through  the  mid- 
dle of  lower  Genesee,  parts  of  John,  Broad,  and  First  streets,  to  the 
southern  boundary ;  the  Second  Ward,  next  west  of  the  First,  was 
limited  by  a  line  traversing  Hotel  and  upper  Genesee  streets;  and  the 
Third  embraced  all  west  of  the  preceding.  The  president  of  the  village 
was  to  be  appointed  annually  by  the  Governor  and  Council  of  the  State. 
Besides  presiding  at  the  meetings  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  he,  by  and 
with  their  advice,  granted  permits  to  retailers,  tavern-keepers,  and 
butchers,  and  was  ex-officio  a  justice  of  the  peace.  As  a  compensation 
for  his  services  he  received  fees  for  the  permits  that  were  given  or  in 
lieu  of  them  a  salary  amounting  to  $250.  At  the  annual  meeting 
held  on  the  second  Monday  of  May  there  were  to  be  chosen  by  bal- 
lot six  trustees,  two  from  each  ward,  a  supervisor,  three  assessors, 
and  two  constables.  The  trustees  appointed  a  clerk,  a  treasurer,  col- 
lectors, an  overseer  of  the  poor,  and  several  other  subordinate  officers. 
They  were  empowered  to  levy  a  tax  not  exceeding  in  amount  $1,500 
to  defray  the  expense  of  lighting  the  streets,  supporting  a  night  watch, 
the  making  of  local  improvements,  and  for  contingent  expenses;  and 
likewise  a  tax  not  exceeding  $100  to  keep  in  repair  the  building  erected 
for  a  free  school- house,  and  to  purchase  fuel  and  other  appendages  for 
such  school.  They  were  made  commissioners  of  highways  ;  could  open, 
alter,  pave,  or  improve  streets,  and  cause  the  construction  of  sewers  as 
they  might  deem  the  public  good   required  ;    and  after  the  expense  of 


132  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  same  had  been  estimated  by  five  disinterested  persons,  appointed  by 
them,  they  could  enforce  its  collection  from  the  parties  chiefly  benefited. 
They  had,  moreover,  full  authority  "to  make  all  such  rules  and  regu- 
lations, by-laws  and  ordinances  for  the  good  government  and  order  of 
the  village  as  they  might  deem  expedient,  not  repugnant  to  the  consti- 
tution and  laws  of  this  State,"  and  to  enforce  the  due  observance  of 
them  by  fine  or  imprisonment.  In  this  authority  are  enumerated  many 
particulars,  though  all  are  included  in  the  general  terms  above  quoted. 
The  share  of  the  school  moneys  appropriated  to  the  county  which 
these  trustees  received  from  the  county  treasurer  they  were  obliged  to 
devote  to  the  maintenance  of  a  free  school  for  the  education  of  such 
poor  children  residing  in  the  village  as  they  might  think  entitled  to  gra- 
tuitous instruction.  Such  is  a  very  brief  summary  of  the  thirty-one 
sections  of  the  charter.  The  annual  meeting  of  freeholders  was  done 
away  with,  the  government  of  affairs  became  wholly  representative,  and 
to  the  trustees  was  entrusted  much  more  power  than  they  had  before 
exercised. 

The  first  president  appointed  under  this  charter  was  Nathan  Williams, 
and  at  the  first  election  held  under  it  there  were  chosen  as  trustees  Ezra 
S.  Cozier  and  William  Williams  from  the  First  ward,  Jeremiah  Van 
Rensselaer  and  Abraham  Van  Santvoort  from  the  Second  ward,  and 
Erastus  Clark  and  John  C.  Hoyt  from  the  Third  ward.  The  assessors 
elected  were  Moses  Bagg,  David  P.  Hoyt,  and  Thomas  Walker.  Benja- 
min Walker  was  chosen  supervisor  and  Ezra  S.  Barnum  and  Joshua 
Ostrom  constables.  The  first  business  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  was  to 
enact  rules  for  their  own  guidance,  to  employ  a  surveyor  to  ascertain 
the  bounds  of  the  village  and  designate  them  by  boundary  stones,  to 
adopt  a  corporate  seal,  and  to  elect  additional  officers.  These  officer^ 
were  the  following:  John  H.  Ostrom,  clerk;  E.  S.  Barnum  and  Benja- 
min Ballou,  collectors;  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  overseer  of  the  poor  ; 
Judah  Williams,  treasurer;  Frederick  W.  Potter,  poundtnaster ;  Benja- 
min Hinman,  Aaron  Eggleston,  and  Jason  Parker,  fence  viewers  ;  James 
Hooker,  ganger;  Benjamin  Ballou,  superintendent  of  highways.  The 
ordinances  passed  by  the  board  in  the  course  of  the  year  were  the  fol- 
lowing: A  law  concerning  officers  of  the  village  and  town;  an  act  for 
ihe  regulation  of  groceries  and  victualling  houses;  an  act  to  prevent  the 


ORDINANCES  PASSED  IN  1817.  133 

digging  of  earth  or  stones  in  the  streets  and  highways ;  a  law  to  pre- 
vent nuisances  and  to  regulate  the  streets ;  a  law  relative  to  fences  and 
for  the  establishment  of  a  pound ;  a  law  for  the  establishment  of  the 
assize  and  regulating  the  inspection  of  bread ;  a  law  for  preventing  and 
extinguishing  fires  ;  an  additional  act  for  regulating  groceries  and  victu- 
alling houses;  a  law  for  the  appointment  of  a  village  superintendent  (of 
streets)  and  prescribing  his  duties ;  an  ordinance  in  relation  to  a  watch  ; 
a  law  regulating  the  streets  and  sidewalks.  Some  few  of  the  provisions 
contained  in  these  several  ordinances  it  may  be  of  interest  to  note,  for 
the  sake  of  their  relation  to  the  state  of  things  which  had  preceded  them 
as  well  as  to  that  which  has  followed,  as  showing  both  the  advance  made 
and  the  shortcomings  in  view  of  the  present. 

The  act  to  regulate  groceries  and  victualling  houses  which  was 
passed  in  May  required  those  keeping  such  establishments  to  acknowl- 
edge a  recognizance  to  the  trustees  in  the  penalty  of  $125,  conditioned 
that  they  would  not  sell  spirituous  liquors  to  be  drank  on  the  premises, 
nor  to  an  apprentice,  servant,  or  slave  without  permit  from  the  master, 
nor  harbor  noisy  persons  or  gamblers,  nor  keep  open  on  Sunday  or 
after  10  o'clock  at  night.  But  the  additional  act  passed  in  Decem- 
ber allowed  petty  grocers  who  had  obtained  a  license  to  retail  liquors  to 
be  drank  on  the  premises,  restricting  them  only  from  selling  to  appren- 
tices, servants,  and  slaves,  and  for  this  license  they  were  to  pay  $5 
and  also  a  fee  of  $2  to  the  president.  The  law  to  prevent  nuisances 
and  regulate  the  streets,  while  forbidding  the  deposit  of  rubbish, 
filth,  or  nuisances  of  any  kind  in  the  streets,  or  heaps  of  manure 
within  100  feet  of  the  principal  streets,  required  the  owners  or 
occupants  of  houses  and  stores  on  Genesee  street  from  the  bridge  to 
Liberty  street,  and  on  Main  and  Whitesboro  from  Second  street  to 
Broadway,  to  clean  the  street  in  front  of  their  premises  and  remove  the 
dirt  every  Saturday  forenoon.  It  allowed  the  deposit  of  building  ma- 
terial on  certain  defined  streets  only  on  the  written  permission  of  the 
president  and  for  a  term  not  exceeding  six  months,  which  permission 
might  be  revoked  or  prolonged  by  the  trustees.  It  granted  another 
permission  which  has  since  been  a  source  of  much  detriment  to  the 
general  good,  viz. :  The  right  to  build  open  stoops  six  feet  into  the 
iitreet;  on  the  other  hand  it  forbade  billiard  tables,  shuffle  boards,  E.  O. 


,34  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

tables,  faro  banks,  and  all  other  implements  of  gaming  ;  it  restrained  cows, 
oxen,  sheep,  and  swine  from  running  at  large  under  penalty  of  being 
impounded — whence  there  was  no  release  but  by  the  payment,  besides 
the  pound-keeper's  iee  of  a  fine,  one-half  of  which  was  to  go  to  the 
benefit  of  the  poor  of  the  town  and  the  other  to  the  person  delivering 
the  animal  to  the  pound-keeper,  but  it  made  exceptions  in  the  case  of 
cows  belonging  to  any  inhabitant  of  the  village,  and  also  in  the  case  of 
working  horses  the  property  of  any  such  inhabitant  who  had  first  ob- 
tained the  consent  of  the  president.  The  law  relating  to  the  assize  and 
inspection  of  bread  was  much  fuller  in  detail  than  the  one  that  had  been 
before  in  force.  Bakers  were  to  have  a  license ;  they  were  to  mark  their 
loaves  with  their  initials  and  in  addition  with  the  letters  S.  or  C.  in  order 
to  indicate  whether  these  loaves  were  made  of  superfine  or  common 
flour  ;  they  were  required  under  penalty  to  keep  on  hand  a  sufficient 
supply  ;  there  was  to  be  appointed  an  inspector  of  bread,  who  at  least 
once  a  month  was  to  examine  the  bread  baked  and  on  sale  in  the  vil- 
lage, with  power  to  enter  any  bakery  or  stop  and  examine  any  baker's 
cart  and  to  seize  such  bread  as  was  not  conformable  to  law,  which  if  fit 
for  use  was  to  go  to  the  overseer  of  the  poor  ;  none  was  to  be  forfeited 
for  want  of  weight  only,  unless  the  weight  had  been  ascertained  within 
eight  hours  after  baking,  and  if  more  than  eight  houj-s  had  elapsed  the 
inspector  was  to  "  make  just  allowance."  The  law  prescribed  also  how 
the  assize  of  bread  should  be  regulated,  and  contained  a  mathematical 
formula  to  be  used  in  determining  what  should  be  the  weight  of  a  shill- 
ing or  a  sixpenny  loaf  that  it  might  accord  with  the  varying  price  of 
flour.  But  as  this  whole  ordinance  was  so  inconvenient  and  difficult  of 
execution  as  to  be  almost  completely  nugatory  we  will  not  further  en- 
large upon  its  provisions.  With  respect  to  the  law  for  the  prevention 
and  extinguishing  of  fires  the  following  is  new:  A  fire  warden  and  a 
fire  engineer  were  to  be  appointed  for  each  ward.  The  wardens  were 
to  examine  at  least  once  a  month  chimneys,  hearths,  stoves,  stovepipes, 
ash-houses,  etc.,  and  if  the^e  were  found  insufficient  or  insecure  they 
were  to  order  their  repair  or  alteration,  or  cause  the  same  to  be  done 
at  the  expense  of  the  owner;  they  were  to  examine  into  the  suflSciency 
of  fire  buckets  in  the  possession  of  individuals  and  report  monthly  to 
the  trustees;   to  report  also  what  chimneys  take  fire,  to  remove  or  abate 


ORDINANCES  PASSED  IN  1817.  135 

anything  which  might  be  dangerous;  to  attend  all  fires,  bearing  staves 
as  badges  of  office,  and  there,  under  the  direction  of  the  engineers,  to 
pursue  such  measures  and  give  such  orders  to  the  citizens  as  they  might 
judge  necessary  and  proper.  The  fire  engineers  were  to  attend  all  fires 
with  the  crown  of  their  hats  covered  with  white  for  purpose  of  distinc- 
tion, and  there  to  have  control  of  the  fire  companies  and  engines,  and 
to  have  power  also  to  pull  down  buildings  if  necessary  to  arrest  the  fire. 
Three  conservators  of  property  were  likewise  appointed  who  were  to 
attend  fires  with  pieces  of  cloth  around  the  left  arm,  and  they  were  to 
exercise  such  functions  as  are  intimated  by  their  appellation,  viz.,  to 
take  the  charge  of  goods  and  furniture,  to  direct  their  removal  and  the 
place  of  deposit,  and  secure  them  from  theft.  Citizens  with  their  buck- 
ets were  to  go  to  all  fires  and  there  be  subject  to  the  orders  of  the  three 
above  mentioned  classes  of  officials  ;  and  if  the  fire  occurred  in  the  night- 
time they  were  to  place  a  lighted  candle  in  the  front  door  or  front  win- 
dow of  their  houses  and  keep  it  burning  through  the  night  or  until  the 
fire  was  extinguished.  From  the  fire  companies  there  were  set  off  ten 
men  to  act  as  a  hook  and  ladder  company.  Chimneys  blazing  out  at 
the  top  at  any  other  time  than  on  the  forenoon  of  a  day  when  the  roof 
was  wet  or  covered  with  snow  subjected  the  owner  to  a  fine  of  $3. 
Every  person  was  to  have  a  scuttle  on  his  roof  with  stairs  leading 
thereto,  or  a  ladder  standing  against  or  near  his  house ;  other  pro- 
visions related  to  the  burning  of  combustibles,  to  the  use  of  uncov- 
ered candles  in  barns  and  stables,  to  the  firing  of  squibs  and  crackers, 
and  to  the  keeping  of  gunpowder  in  quantity  in  any  other  place  than 
Van  Santvoort's  warehouse.  Four  watchmen  were  to  be  apppinted  by 
the  trustees  in  obedience  to  the  ordinance  relating  thereto,  of  whom  two 
were  to  patrol  the  streets  by  night  in  the  compact  part  of  the  village 
while  their  companions  remained  in  the  watch  house ;  they  were  to  cry 
the  hour  once  at  least  in  every  hour ;  were  to  look  after  and  arrest  sus- 
picious persons;  in  case  of  fire  were  to  give  the  alarm  to  the  inhab- 
itants and  more  particularly  to  the  trustees  and  the  bellman  ;  at  the 
fire  were  to  co-operate  with  the  conservators  in  the  protection  of  ex- 
posed property,  and  after  its  extinguishment  were  to  collect  the  buck- 
ets that  had  been  in  use  and  remove  them  to  the  market-house.  One 
law  which  was  substantially  a  repetition   of   one  passed   in    18 14  de- 


136  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

clared  the  streets  on  which  owners  of  property  should  make  sidewalks 
and  how  the  same  should  be  constructed,  and  another  created  a  village 
superintendent  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  that  this  ordinance  and  that 
relating  to  nuisances  were  faithfully  executed,  and  to  report  all  viola- 
tions thereof  to  the  Board  of  Trustees.  To  each  of  the  foregoing  there 
were  afifixed  fines  and  penalties  sufficient,  as  it  would  seem,  to  secure  a 
proper  observance. 

The  Board  of  Trustees  resolved  to  raise  by  tax  $1,000  for  the  ex- 
penses of  the  year  and  $50  additional  for  the  repair  and  fuel  of  the 
free  school.  The  meetings  of  the  trustees  in  the  course  of  the  year 
were  numerous,  well  attended,  and  apparently  harmonious.  The  board 
organized  two  companies  of  firemen  of  fifteen  and  of  twenty- five  mem- 
bers respectively  ;  they  granted  several  licenses  to  grocers  and  retail 
liquor  dealers,  and  a  few  to  keepers  of  taverns,  refusing  also  some  ap- 
plicants for  the  latter. 

Much  financial  embarrassment  existed  throughout  the  country  at  this 
time  and  for  two  years  longer,  and  in  this  distress  the  inhabitants  of 
Utica  suffered  likewise.  In  June  money  was  so  scarce  that  the  banks 
were  drawing  in  their  discounts  and  many  merchants  failed.  By 
December  money  commanded  three  per  cent,  a  month.  Provisions  of 
all  kinds  were  dear.  The  summer  of  18 16  had  been  unusually  cold,  frost 
having  occurred  during  every  month  of  the  year.  The  spring  of  18 1 7 
was  backward,  and  on  the  first  of  June  there  came  a  severe  frost  which 
destroyed  all  tender  vegetables.  Hay  was  selling  for  $20  a  ton,  wheat 
at  eighteen  shillings  and  it  rose  in  July  to  twenty-four  shillings,  and 
corn  the  same,  at  which  time  flour  was  worth  $12  a  barrel.  By  Octo- 
ber hay  had  fallen  to  $8  per  ton  and  other  commodities  also  diminished 
in  price.  But  the  scarcity  of  money  prevailed  some  time  longer  and 
the  failures  continued. 

On  the  25th  of  July  in  this  year  occurred  the  fiist  capital  execution 
that  had  taken  place  in  the  village  and  the  second  one  in  the  county. 
The  criminal  was  an  Indian  of  the  Brotherton  tribe  named  John  Tuhi, 
who  was  tried  at  Rome  in  the  previous  month  and  convicted  of  having 
killed  his  cousin,  Joseph  Tuhi,  in  a  quarrel  when  intoxicated.  The  ex- 
ecution took  place  a  little  east  of  the  present  intersection  of  John  and 
Rutger  streets,  then  a  lone  and  distant  suburb.     The  prisoner  was  at- 


FIUST  CAPITAL  EXECUTION.  137 

tended  in  the  wagon  and  at  the  gallows  by  two  Baptist  clergymen, 
who  addressed  the  crowd.  He  seemed  passive  and  insensible  and 
stood  like  a  statue  till  he  fell,  after  which  there  was  one  slight  struggle. 
The  sheriff  was  Apollos  Cooper,  assisted  by  the  under  sheriff,  John  B. 
Pease,  of  Whitesboro.  The  sheriff's  duties  were  fitly  performed  and 
with  an  amount  of  feeling  that  greatly  exceeded  that  of  the  criminal. 
He  wore  on  the  occasion  a  military  chapean  and  a  short,  heavj'  sword, 
with  which  he  struck  twice  the  rope  that  suspended  the  trap,  ^\■hen 
it  fell  and  he  wheeled  his  horse  and  rode  off  the  ground.  The  spec- 
tators were  careless  and  unfeeling.  Men,  women,  and  children  seemed 
to  make  a  frolic  of  the  occurrence,  and  there  was  laughing  and  swear- 
ing under  the  gallows,  but  not  much  drunkenness  except  among  the 
Indians,  of  whom  a  number  got  intoxicated.  The  execution  formed 
a  memorable  day  in  the  calendars  of  the  men  of  that  generation,  an 
epoch  not  easily  forgotten,  and  people  dated  events  as  happening  before 
or  after  the  Indian  was  hung. 

Among  the  accessions  to  the  happily  associated  society  of  Utica 
during  the  year  1817  were  James  and  Walter  L.  Cochrane,  sons  of  John 
Cochrane,  director-general  of  the  army  hospitals  during  the  war  of  the 
Revohition.  These  brothers  were  tvpes  of  an  order  of  gentlemen  born 
and  educated  in  the  later  colonial  period  of  the  Stale,  with  the  polish 
of  manner  that  resulted  from  aristocratic  associations  and  not  a  few  of 
the  accompanying  prejudices.  They  had  lived  in  several  different 
places  and  did  not  long  remain  here,  nor  had  they  while  here  any  espe- 
cial vocation. 

Thomas  Hastings  was  of  a  deeply  sensitive  nature  with  a  peculiar 
and  imperfect  vision,  and  manifested  an  early  predilection  for  music. 
This  predilection  was  soon  developed  into  a  pursuit,  which  he  followed 
through  an  unusually  long  life,  and  in  church  psalmody,  to  which  he 
especially  devoted  himself,  he  became  the  most  proficient  of  any  in  the 
country.  "  Whatever  true  reforms  were  made  in  the  spirit  of  praise 
during  the  first  half  of  the  present  century  were  largely  accomplished 
by  and  through  him."  He  began  his  career  as  a  teacher  of  it  in  1805, 
giving  instruction  in  some  of  the  neighboring  parishes,  and  continued 
it  in  the  winter  of  1806-07.  His  course  of  instruction  was  thorough 
and  a   great  improvement  on  that  which  had  preceded  it.     In    18 16,. 

18 


138  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

after  having  spent  one  year  in  business  and  four  in  managing  his  father's 
farm,  he  became  again  a  teacher.  His  lessons  were  given  at  New  Hart- 
ford, to  the  choir  of  Trinity  Church,  Utica,  in  1817,  to  that  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church  in  1 8 19,  and  in  several  other  places.  There  had 
been  a  county  musical  society  in  operation.  To  furnish  music  for  it  he 
and  Professor  Norton,  of  Clinton,  became  composers  This  was  the 
origin  of  the  collection  known  as  the  Musica  Sacra,  which  consisted  at 
first  of  two  numbers  of  pamphlet  size  and  was  afterward  enlarged  to 
a  considerable  volume  and  subsequently  united  with  Warriner's  Spring- 
field collection.  Several  successive  editions  were  pubhshed  at  Utica. 
From  this  vicinity  Mr.  Hastings  went  to  Troy  to  teach  and  thence  to 
Albany,  where  he  sang  in  the  church  of  Rev.  Dr.  Chester.  In  1823  he 
was  invited  to  come  to  Utica  to  take  charge  of  a  religious  paper  abou 
to  be  established,  and  in  January  of  the  following  year  there  was  issue( 
the  first  number  of  this  semi-monthly  paper  known  as  the  Western  Re 
corder.  His  editorial  labors  extended  to  the  ninth  volume.  He  neve 
lost  sight  of  the  interests  of  religious  music  and  his  articles  on  the  sub 
ject  were  widely  copied.  In  addition  to  his  conduct  of  the  paper  he  taugh 
singing  in  the  Sunday  school  and  elsewhere,  and  by  the  establishment 
of  societies  for  the  purpose  contributed  much  to  encourage  an  interest 
in  sacred  song.  He  held  that  every  one  could  learn  to  sing,  and  that 
it  was  a  duty  to  learn  and  to  join  audibly  in  divine  praise  in  the  house 
of  God,  that  "  religion  has  substantially  the  same  claim  in  song  as  in 
speech."  He  composed  hymns  and  tunes  and  made  collections  of  mu- 
sic, adapting  tunes  to  words  and  words  to  tunes,  and  thus  impressed  his 
own  tastes  upon  the  church  and  the  school  and  inspired  them  with  his 
own  zeal  in  the  cause  of  reform  and  progress.  For  many  years  he  was 
the  chorister  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  where  his  presence  and  his 
voice  seemed  as  essential  to  the  ministrations  of  the  sanctuary  as  were 
those  of  any  occupant  of  its  pulpit.  In  1832,  on  the  invitation  of  sev- 
eral churches,  he  repaired  to  New  York  and  entered  upon  the  specific 
work  of  elevating  the  standard  of  congregational  singing.  He  taught 
large  schools,  gathered  assemblies  and  trained  them,  infusing  into  the 
people  interest  and  spirit  on  his  favorite  subject.  He  continued  his 
efforts  as  a  composer  and  wrote  much.  No  man  in  the  United  States 
has  been  so  long  and  so  intimately  associated  with  our  church  music; 


THE  BROTHERS  HASTINGS—  J.  E.  WARNER.  139 

none  has  produced  more  of  the  hymns  and  lunes  which  are  now  a  part 
of  public  worship.  Between  the  years  18 19  and  1865  he  published  up- 
wards of  twenty  collections  of  sacred  music  besides  editing  seven  or 
eight  others.  Of  the  600  hymns  and  versions  of  the  psalms  which  he 
composed  200  are  current  in  this  country  and  Great  Britain.  He  re- 
ceived the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Music  from  the  New  York  University. 

Charles  Hastings  and  Andrew  Merrell  began  a  new  book  store  in  May, 
1817,  to  which  they  soon  added  a  circulating  library.  They  were  at 
the  sign  of  the  Bible,  No.  40  Genesee  street,  one  door  west  of  the  post- 
office.  They  published  a  few  books,  among  which  a\  as  one  with  the 
singular  .title  "The  Missionary  Arithmetic,"  prepared  by  Rev.  Will- 
iam R.  Weeks,  D.D.,  and  containing  problems  based  on  missionary  or 
rehgious' topics.  From  the  year  1824  they  published  also  the  Western 
Recorder.  As  agent  of  the  Sunday  School  Uniim  Mr.  Ha.stings  supplied 
its  auxiliaries  with  books,  and  he  acted  also  as  secretary  of  the  Western 
Domestic  Missionary  Society.  In  1826,  having  lost  his  partner,  he 
found  a  new  one  in  Gardiner  Tracy. 

By  the  present  generation  the  house  of  Jared  E.  Warner  has  been  as 
familiarly  known  as  were  those  of  the  Wolcotts,  Hitchcocks,  or  Williamses 
by  the  earlier  one.  An  heirloom  it  holds  direct  from  the  earliest  drug- 
gists' of  Utica  is  a  large  show  bottle  in  the  front  window  of  the  store, 
which  contains  the  identical  colored  fluid  that  was  poured  into  it  in 
18 1 2.  Articles  in  which  Mr.  Warner  once  dealt  largely  besi'les  his 
ordinary  trade  were  the  essential  oils  of  peppermint,  spearmint,  etc., 
which  were  distilled  for  him  in  the  northern  part  of  the  county  and 
which  he  exported.  Mr.  Warner  was  closely  attentive  to  his  concerns 
and  content  with  the  steady  acquisitions  of  his  calling.  Being  treasu- 
rer of  the  County  Bible  Society,  agent  of  the  American  Board  of  For- 
eign Missions,  of  the  American  Tract  Society,  etc.,  his  store  was  made 
the  place  of  deposit  and  distribution  of  numerous  relegious  publications. 
For  many  years  he  was  an  elder  in  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  and 
also  president  of  the  Utica  City  National  Bank. 

Party  spirit  seems  for  the  first  to  have  been  in  exercise  at  the  village 
election  in  the  year  1818.  As  a  consequence  some  changes  were  ef- 
fected in  the  constituent  members  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  ;  some  of  the 
older  citizens   and   larger  property    holders   of  the  Federal   party,   as 


140  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

John  C.  Devereux  and  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  who  had  been  held  up 
as  candidates,  were  rejected  and  new  men  elected  in  their  stead.  This 
new  board  was  composed  as  follows,  the  president  remaining  the  same; 
The  trustees  elected  from  the  First  ward  were  Ezra  S.  Cozier  and  John  E. 
Hinmati ;  from  the  Second,  Abraham  Van  Santvoort  and  Enos  Brown  ; 
from  the  Third,  Rudolph  Snyder  and  Marcus  Hitchcock.  The  assessors 
were  Benjamin  Ballou,  jr.,  Stalham  Williams,  and  Thomas  Walker.  The 
board  re- appointed  John  H.  Ostrom  clerk  and  made  Judah  Williams 
treasurer.  The  only  noticeable  fact  in  the  proceedings  of  the  year  was 
the  appropriation  of  $300  to  aid  the  trustees  of  the  academy  in  the  com- 
pletion of  the  court  room  in  the  academy  building,  which  room  they 
would  appear  to  have  taken  from  this  time  under  their  control.  The 
amount  levied  upon  the  citizens  for  the  annual  expenses  was  $1,422.25 
and  that  for  the  school  expenses  $50.60.  It  was  also  voted  that  $800 
be  raised  by  direction  of  the  supervisors  for  the  support  of  the  poor. 
The  public  school  was  continued  under  the  direction  of  Ignatius 
Thompson. 

Dr.  John  McCall,  a  physician  long  resident,  was  born  in  the  town  of 
Hebron,  Washington  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  25th  of  December,  1787. 
His  father  and  mother  emigrated  from  Scotland  and  commenced  their 
married  life  upon  a  new  farm  in  Hebron.  After  reaping  the  advantages 
of  two  courses  at  Columbia  College  from  Drs.  Post,  Stringham,  Mitch- 
ell, Edward  Miller,  and  others  he  was  for  four  months  the  private  pupil 
of  the  distinguished  surgeon,  Valentine  Mott.  Upon  his  recommenda- 
tion chiefly  the  doctor  obtained  the  appointment  of  assistant  surgeon 
in  the  army,  and  was  in  May,  1812,  assigned  to  duty  in  the  Thirteenth 
Regiment  of  Infantry.  In  September  of  that  year  he  was  with  the  regi- 
ment when  they  marched  through  Utica  on  their  way  to  Sackets  Harbor. 
He  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Queenstown,  and  dressed  the  wound  of 
Capt.  (afterward  Gen.)  John  E.  Wood.  Subsequently  and  when  he  had 
been  promoted  to  the  rank  of  surgeon  he  was  at  the  capture  of  Fort 
George,  and  under  General  Wilkinson  went  down  the  lake  to  French 
Mills,  where  the  army  spent  "  the  Valley  Forge  winter  "  of  18 14.  In 
July,  181 5,  he  left  the  army  at  Sackets  Harbor,  and  after  making  a  brief 
visit  home  returned  and  commenced  practice  in  Deerfield.  In  April, 
J8i8,  he  formed  a  partnership  with  Dr.  Alexander  Coventry,  which 


DR.   JOHN  M' CALL.  141 

somewhat  later  was  succeeded  by  a  longer  one  with  his  son,  Dr.  Charles 
B.  Coventry.  Still  later  he  was  alone  in  practice,  and  thus  he  remained 
until  disabled  by  illness,  some  two  years  before  his  death,  which  latter 
event  occurred  October  5,  1867.  During  all  this  period  of  nearly  fifty 
years  he  remained  in  constant  employment  at  Utica,  rarely  absenting 
himself,  and  that  mostly  to  attend  some  medical  meetmg. 

In  his  practice  Dr.  McCall  was  strictly  conservative,  relying  more  on 
careful  nursing  and  the  reparative  efforts  of  nature  than  on  the  effects  of 
medicine.  Not  only  toward  mercury,  which  was  his  especial  abhorrence, 
toward  bleeding,  and  the  other  heroic  means,  once  so  much  in  vogue, 
was  he  decidedly  averse,  but  toward  much  -less  harmful  appliances  he 
was  sparing  of  favor.  He  had  many  admiring  and  attached  employers 
who  felt  the  fullest  confidence  in  his  skill,  for  they  knew  it  to  be  based 
upon  careful  reading,  large  experience,  and  much  sound  sense.  He  was 
faithful  in  attendance,  watchful  as  a  nurse,  and  ready  in  expedient;  in 
manner  wise  and  oracular  he  knew  how  to  magnify  his  office  and  com- 
mand respect ;  he  was  cautious  in  forming  his  opinions  and  secretive  as  to 
their  utterance.  He  was  interested  in  the  elevation  and  standing  of  his 
profession,  and  himself  took  rank  among  its  leading  members  in  New 
York.  The  County  and  State  Medical  Societies  conferred  upon  him  their 
highest  honors,  for  he  was  president  of  both.  He  was  also  a  fellow  of 
the  College  of  Physicians  of  New  York.  Phrenology,  or  cerebral  physi- 
ology as  he  would  call  it,  engaged  the  doctor's  attention  for  more  than 
thirty  years  and  to  the  doctrines  ©f  Gall,  Spurzheim,  and  Combe  he  was 
a  thorough  convert.  He  possessed  in  a  marked  degree  what  are  con- 
sidered the  elements  of  the  Scotch  character.  He  was  positive,  firm, 
peremptory,  and  unyielding  to  opposition.  The  opinions  he  held  ad- 
mitted of  small  modification  and  his  rules  must  be  carried  out  to  the 
bitter  end.  He  was  honest  in  its  broadest  and  fullest  sense.  He  shrank 
with  disgust  and  hatred  from  everything  mean  or  dishonorable,  and  de- 
spised the  man  who  would  resort  to  trickery  to  get  business  or  "flatter 
that  favor  might  follow  fawning."  His  two  accomplished  children  died 
not  long  after  reaching  adult  life. 

Theodore  Sedgwick  Gold  as  a  merchant  obtained  a  fair  amount  of 
success,  and  his  discretion  in  matters  of  business  made  him  a  bank  di- 
rector.    But  his  literary  tastes  drew  him  much  into  diverging  and  more 


142  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

congenial  pursuits,  and  these  gave  occupation  to  his  time  and  pen.  He, 
took  interest  in  the  Utica  Library,  the  Utica  and  the  State  Lyceums,  etc. 
lie  was  a  large  reader,  possessed  a  good  degree  of  intelligence  and  re- 
fined taste,  and  was  able  as  a  writer.  For  two  years  or  more  he  edited 
the  Oneida  Whig  and  proved  a  vigorous  and  entertaining  journalist  and 
a  formidable  adversary.  In  1837  he  was  chosen  mayor  of  the  city.  For 
a  short  time  also  he  was  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  College  as  he  was  also 
of  the  Utica  Academy. 

Oren  Clark,  a  merchant  who  also  made  wall  paper,  removed  about 
1834.  Thomas  M.  Francis,  half-brother  of  WiUiam  Francis  the  car- 
penter, was  successively  deputy  scribe  for  the  county  clerk,  canal  col- 
lector, and  receiver  at  the  office  of  the  Central  Railroad.  Two  com- 
panies of  Welsh  emigrants  arrived  in  the  county,  leaving  in  Utica  among 
others  David  Lewis,  Watkin,  father  of  Hon.  Ellis  H.  Roberts,  and  Ed- 
ward Morris,  father  of  two  sons,  of  whom  one  is  a  professor  at  Oberlin 
and  another  at  Cornell. 

The  Board  of  Trustees  created  by  the  election  of  18 19  did  not  differ 
materially  from  that-  of  the  preceding  year.  Messrs.  David  P.  Hoyt  and 
Gurdon  Burchard  replaced  Messrs.  Brown  and  Van  Santvoortas  trustees 
in  the  Second  ward,  the  last  named  having  left  the  village,  and  William 
Alverson  was  elected  in  lieu  of  Marcus  Hitchcock  in  the  Third  ward.  In 
the  Third  ward  ApoUos  Cooper  was  elected  assessor  in  lieu  of  Thomas 
Walker.  The  supervisor,  constables,  collector,  and  clerk  remained  the 
same.  E.  S.  Cozier  was  made  treasurer  in  place  of  Judah  Williams  and 
there  were  a  few  other  changes.  The  only  business  transacted  during 
the  year  that  is  of  importance  enough  to  be  noted  was  the  engaging  of 
A.  I'Amoureux  to  take  charge  of  the  public  school  and  the  appoint- 
ment of  ten  persons  from  among  the  firemen  to  form  a  ladder  company, 
which  so  reduced  the  force  of  the  two  established  companies  as  to  make 
it  advisable  to  petition  the  legislature  for  a  change  in  the  charter  in 
order  to  allow  of  an  increase  in  the  number  of  firemen. 

The  Erie  Canal,  begun  in  July,  18 17,  and  on  which  work  was  steadily- 
progressing,  was  still  far  from  completion.  The  eastern  portion  of  its 
middle  section,  or  so  much  of  it  as  is  included  between  Rome  and  Utica, 
was,  however,  rendered  fit  for  navigation  by  the  fall  of  1819;  and  on 
the  22d  of  October  the  first  boat  sailed  on  the  canal  from  Rome  to  Utica, 


HENR  Y  SE  YMO  UR.  143 

the  channel  having  been  filled  from  the  Oriskany  Creek  the  day  prev- 
ious. It  was  an  elegant  boat,  constructed  to  carry  passengers,  and  was 
called  the  Chief  Engineer  in  compliment  to  Benjamin  Wright.  On  the 
ensuing  day  the  governor  of  the  State  and  the  Board  of  Commissioners, 
attended  by  about  seventy  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  Utica  and  vicinity, 
embarked  upon  it  to  return  to  Rome.  The  embarkation  took  place  amid 
the  ringing  of  bells,  the  roaring  of  cannon,  and  the  loud  acclamations  of 
thousands  of  spectators. 

There  is  one  able  commissioner  among  the  eminent  persons  appointed 
by  the  State  to  supervise  and  direct  its  cherished  work,  the  story  of 
whose  life  falls  within  the  compass  of  our  records,  since  toward  Utica  he 
held  the  relations  of  an  honored  citizen  and  for  a  time  was  ils  official  head. 
This  is  Henry  Seymour.  Henry  Seymour  entered  into  business  as  a 
merchant  at  Pompey  Hill,  Onondaga  County,  N.  Y.  By  his  integrity, 
sound  judgment,  and  capacity  to  execute  he  became  so  well  and  favor- 
ably known  that  from  18 16  to  18 19  he  was  sent  to  represent  the  West- 
ern District  in  the  State  Senate.  On  the  24th  of  March,  18 19,  he  was 
appointed  a  commissioner  of  the  canals  of  the  State  and  was  actively 
engaged  in  the  duties  of  this  office  until  he  resigned  in  May,  1831. 
Soon  after  becoming  commissioner  he  removed  to  Utica  and  continued 
to  reside  here  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  In  1820  he  was  elected 
to  the  Assembly  and  in  1822  he  became  a  second  time  a  senator.  In 
March,  1833,  he  was  appointed  mayor  of  Utica,  being  the  second  per- 
son who  held  the  office,  and  the  same  year  was  chosen  president  of  the 
Farmers  Loan  and  Trust  Company  of  the  city  of  New  York.  The 
change  from  an  active  life  in  the  country  to  the  sedentary  one  of  an  office 
in  the  city  destroyed  his  health  and  he  died  at  Utica,  August  26,  1837. 

Justus  H.  Rathbone  acquired  his  knowledge  of  law  in  the  office  of 
D.  W.  Childs,  and  though  versed  in  his  profession  he  was  precluded  by 
grave  physical  infirmity  from  attendance  on  the  courts.  He  was  a  mas- 
ter in  chancery  and  a  zealous  custodian  of  the  first  Utica  Library,  of  which 
he  was  virtually  the  founder.  He  was  an  elder  in  the  Reformed  Dutch 
Church  as  well  as  its  treasurer,  and  was  methodical,  accurate,  and  self- 
denying  in  all  he  undertook.  Dr.  Newell  Smith  was  a  physician  and 
druggist  and  a  fair  kind  of  man.  Henry  Burden,  inventor,  produced  in 
1820  the  first  cultivator  in  the  country,  and  after  his  removal  to  Troy 


144  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

became  the  artificer  of  numerous  important  improvements.  George 
&  Bradford  S.  Merrill,  book-binders,  continued  their  work  for  many- 
years,  the  latter  until  1874,  busy  and  respected. 

The  village  trustees  of  the  year  1820  were  E.  S.  Cozier,  John  E. 
Hinman,  James  Hooker,  Abraham  Culver,  Ezekiel  Bacon,  and 
Thomas  Walker.  Rudolph  Snyder  was  appointed  president  by  the 
State  council  on  the  resignation  of  Judge  Williams.  Measures  were 
initiated  this  year  for  the  construction  ofa  new  road  above  the  canal 
running  westward  from  Genesee  street  and  in  continuation  of  Bleecker, 
a  road  which  met  with  opposition  from  individuals  owning  land  along 
its  intended  course,  and  which  not  until  after  litigation  and  much 
delay  resulted  in  the  year  1823  in  the  present  Fayette  street.  Other 
matters  that  engaged  the  attention  of  the  corporation,  and  in  which  they 
felt  called  on  to  advise  and  direct,  were  the  location  and  construction 
by  the  canal  commissioners  of  bridges  over  such  part  of  the  canal  as 
was  included  within  the  bounds  of  the  village,  the  proper  adjustment 
of  Liberty  street  in  its  relation  to  the  canal,  the  sanctioning  of  a  basin 
and  slip  which  John  R.  Bleecker  had  obtained  leave  to  construct,  the 
basin  on  the  south  side  of  the  canal,  and  the  slip  extending  from  it  to 
Catharine  street. 

An  act  of  the  legislature  was  passed  this  year  incorporating  the  Utica 
Savings  Bank,  but  for  some  reason  now  unknown  the  bank  did  not  go 
into  operation  untjl  the  year  1839,  when  a  new  charter  was  procured. 
This  first  charter  was  probably  in  advance  of  the  actual  necessity  for 
such  an  institution  and  the  stock  was  not  taken.  The  president  named 
in  this  first  charter  was  the  same  as  the  one  who  headed  the  later  board, 
viz.,  John  C.  Devereux. 

A  merchant  who,  after  five  years'  residence  in  Utica,  returned  to  New 
York,  became  bankrupt,  and  then  burst  upon  the  world  as  an  admired 
actor  of  comedy  was  James  Henry  Hackett.  His  earlier  and  less  dis- 
tinguished but,  for'  our  purpose,  most  interesting  career  he  himself 
relates  as  follows  :  "  Early  in  i8i"9,  when  just  turned  of  nineteen  years 
of  age,  I  married.  In  April,  1820,  I  chose  Utica,  in  the  State  of  New 
York,  as  a  promising  town  to  settle  in,  and  I  took  there  a  stock  of 
groceries  and  began  business.  I  had  a  cash  capital  of  about  $3,000,  and 
obtained  credit,  too,  through  the  late  John  Beekman,  my  mother's  first 


yA  MES  HA  CKE TT—  DR.  POMERO  Y.  145 

cousin,  and  also  the  father-in-law  of  my  own  first  cousin,  Abraham  K. 
Fish,  with  whom  I  had  been  a  clerk  for  some  two  years  before  my  mar- 
riage. Finding  no  regular  dealer  in  earthenware  in  Utica  at  this  time 
I  resolved  to  try  a  small  assortment  of  this  article,  and  accordingly  pur- 
chased it.  It  proved  a  valuable  adjunct  to  my  grocery  business,  and  I 
soon  became  a  wholesale  dealer  in  it,  and  occasionally  imported  earth- 
enware from  the  Scotch  manufacturers.  I  was  cordially  received  there 
and  was  regarded  as  an  enterprising  and  industrious  young  man  of  busi- 
ness. My  society  was  generally  courted  for  my  acceptable  manners 
and  good  humor,  and  that  of  my  dear  wife  for  hers  and  her  proficiency 
as  an  accomplished  singer.  We  lived  there  very  happily  full  five  years, 
when,  having  accumulated  about  $18,000  and  thinking  that  New  York 
city  afforded  a  more  favorable  locality  for  my  capital  and  enlarged  facil- 
ities, I  changed  my  residence  back  to  New  York  in  March,  1825."  ^ 
Here  was  born  their  son,  James  K.  Hackett,  the  late  esteemed  recorder 
of  New  York,  and  here  he  afterward  imbibed  his  law. 

Dr.  Theodore  Pomeroy,  who  came  from  Cooperstown,  was  born  at 
Southampton,  Mass.,  March  14,  1785,  was  graduated  at  Yale  Col- 
lege in  1808,  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  James,  of  Albany  and  after- 
ward of  Utica,  and  also  with  Dr.  Chester,  of  Hudson,  attended  lectures 
at  Pittsfield,  and  had  made  a  successful  stand  in  Cooperstown.  His 
new  venture  in  Utica  was  a  fortunate  one,  for  he  soon  fell  into  a  large 
and  profitable  business,  and  for  ten  or  a  dozen  years  at  least  was  the 
medical  adviser  of  some  of  the  best  families  of  the  place.  His  pleasant 
manner  and  his  engaging  exterior  attracted  admirers  who  were  changed 
to  friends  when  they  realized  the  purity  and  uprightness  of  his  life.  He 
loved  his  profession  as  an  art  more  than  as  a  science.  He  cared  less 
for  brilliant  exploits  in  surgery  than  to  relieve  the  common  ailments  of 
humanity,  and  win  the  rewards  of  his  exertion  as  well  as  the  gratitude 
of  those  on  whom  he  waited.  Other  pursuits  akin  to  medicine  into 
which  he  was  drawn  tended  to  lead  him  more  and  more  from  his 
chosen  calling  and  eventually  took  him  wholly  out  of  it.  With 
Thomas  R.  Walker  he  had  become  interested  in  an  oilcloth  factory 
from  their  having  loaned  money  to  J.  D.  Edwards,  its  founder,  and 
which   the  latter   was    unable  to  re-imburse  them.     They  assumed  the 

19 
•  Galaxy. 


146  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

charge  of  the  factory  aad  for  many  years  continued  its  management. 
After  Mr.  Walker  withdrew,  about  the  year  1854,  Dr.  Pomeroy  kept  on 
in  the  concern  in  company  with  his  son  Theodore.  As  a  citizen,  neigh- 
bor, and  friend  the  rank  of  Dr.  Pomeroy  was  among  the  hberal,  the 
useful,  and  the  trusted.  He  died  at  St.  Anthony,  June  26,  i860.  His 
first  wife  and  the  mother  of  three  of  his  children  was  Mary,  daughter  of 
Dr.  Thomas  Fuller,  of  Cooperstown.  His  second  was  Miss  Cornelia 
Voorhees,  of  New  Brunswick,  N.  J. 

James  Sayre,  a  long  continued  hardware  dealer,  served  considerably 
as  a  bank  director,  at  first  in  the  United  States  Branch,  then  for  a  short 
time  in  the  Ontario  Branch,  and  later  for  many  years  in  the  Oneida 
National,  of  which  he  was  president  at  his  decease.  Of  the  Black  River 
.  Railroad  he  was  a  director  from  its  organization,  and  participated  in  all 
labors  and  responsibilities  until  stricken  down  by  disease, — "  a  valued 
and  pleasant  associate,  in  whom  the  public  placed  such  confidence  that 
his  name  was  a  symbol  of  strength  to  the  enterprise."  For  many  years 
he  was  a  trustee  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  and  for  no  little 
period  its  treasurer.  Of  the  Utica  Cemetery  Association  he  was  also 
for  a  time  the  prudent  and  judicious  head. 

The  village  corporation  of  1821  was  constituted  as  follows:  Ezra  S. 
Cozier,  president;  Benjamin  Ballou,  jr.,  and  Joh,n  Baxter,  of  the  First 
ward,  James  Hooker  and  John  H.  Handy,  of  the  Second,  and  Thomas 
Walker  and  David  P.  Hoyt,  of  the  Third,  trustees;  Benjamin  Ballou, 
jr.,  Stalham  Williams,  and  Apollos  Cooper,  assessors  of  their  respective 
wards;  John  H.  Ostrom,  clerk ;  John  Bradish,  treasurer;  Thomas  E. 
Clark,  overseer  of  the  poor;  Daniel  Stafford,  superintendent  of  streets  ; 
and  Joshua  Ostrom  and  Robert  Jones,  constables. 

The  sum  of  $723.25  was  raised  for  contingent  expenses  and  $400 
for  the  support  of  the  poor ;  the  market,  that  former  source  of  conten- 
tion and  which  had  been  banished  to  Water  street,  was  sold  to  Daniel 
Thomas  for  $50;  an  alley  was  ordered  to  be  opened  from  Genesee  to 
Hotel  street,  starting  from  between  the  stores  of  William  Tillman 
and  Peter  Bours.  A  deed  was  obtained  from  the  Seneca  Turnpike 
Company  of  that  part  of  the  turnpike  lying  east  of  the  Supreme 
Court  clerk's  office,  and  a  fresh  committee  was  empowered  to  treat  with 
landholders  along  the  line  of  Bleecker  street  continued. 


GEORGE  DUTTON  AND  OTHERS.  i^-j 

The  sons  of  St.  Patrick  were  now  numerous  enough  and  their  enthu- 
siasm ardent  enough  to  prompt  them  to  a  public  observance  of  his  natal 
day.  About  seventy  persons,  Irishmen  and  their  guests,  sat  down  to  an 
elegant  repast,  during  which  much  conviviality  prevailed. 

Born  with  an  instinctive  passion  for  music  George  Button  had  played 
on  several  instruments  from  his  boyhood,  and  had  when  quite  young 
taken  an  organ  in  pieces  and  reconstructed  it.  Moreover  he  had  the 
high  wrought  organization,  the  lively  susceptibilities  of  the  enthusiast  in 
musical  art,  his  keen  delights  and  his  proneness  to  melancholy.  In 
Philadelphia  he  received  a  quarter's  lessons  on  the  organ,  and  this  was 
all  the  instruction  he  ever  had  ;  his  taste  was  innate,  his  skill  wholly  self 
acquired.  While  there  his  inclination  showed  itself  so  strongly  that  he 
was  supplied  by  a  house  of  that  city  with  the  goods  to  furnish  a  music 
store  in  Utica.  His  was  the  first  of  the  kind  that  had  been  opened  here 
and  the  pianos  were  a  curiosity  to  most  of  its  citizens.  On  Sundays  he 
handled  the  organ  of  one  of  the  churches,  at  first  of  Trinity  and  after- 
ward of  the  Presbyterian  Church.  In  concerts,  in  the  rehearsals,  private 
and  public,  of  the  Musical  Academy,  and  in  all  musical  exhibitions 
where  the  piano  or  violin  accompanied  a  chorus  or  solo  he  directed  the 
entertainment,  for  his  skill  was  unrivaled  and  his  taste  was  law.  He 
trained  two  sons  until  they  attained  unusual  musical  excellence,  and 
lived  to  see  one  of  them  succeed  him  in  the  trade  and  become  as  much 
of  an  oracle  in  the  art  as  he  himself  had  been.  His  death  occurred 
December  21,  1854. 

Other  citizens  of  1820—21  were  as  follows:  Levi  Cozzens,  innkeeper 
and  much  longer  a  dealer  in  lumber,  twelve  years  treasurer  of  the  Me- 
chanics Association,  and  a  trustee  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church ; 
the  four  brothers  Thurber,  for  the  most  part  bakers,  of  whom  Philip,  a 
hardware  merchant,  built  the  first  brick  house  on  Fayette  street ;  Jabez 
Miller,  baker;  Edward  Bright,  brewer;  Elisha  Backus,  stage  proprie- 
tor —  most  of  them  fathers  of  sons  who  held  relations  of  interest  with 
the  subsequent  affairs  of  Utica  ;  Otis  Whipple,  of  protracted  residence,,- 
justice  of  the  peace;  Major  Satterlee  Clark,  United  States  paymaster; 
Robert  Jones,  grocer  and  provision  dealer ;  Elisha  Wells,  shoe  dealer  ; 
Joseph  Blake,  tailor  ;  Cyrus  Grannis,  innkeeper ;  Robert  R.  Rhodes, 
carpenter  ;  Thomas  Sidebotham,  butcher. 


148  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  trustees  of  the  year  1822  consisted  of  Benjamin  Ballou,  John 
Baxter,  Ezekiel  Bacon,  Richard  R.  Lansing,  Thomas  Walker,  and 
David  P.  Hoyt.  Ezra  S.  Cozier  was  the  president;  Erastus  Clark, 
supervisor;  Thomas  Walker,  overseer  of  the  poor;  the  clerk  and  treas- 
urer remained  as  before.  In  June  it  was  resolved  that  Genesee  street 
be  paved  from  the  canal  to  the  south  line  of  Whitesboro  and  Main  streets, 
and  a  committee  of  five  prominent  citizens  was  appointed  to  make  the 
necessary  estimates  and  assessments.  The  cobblestone  used  at  that  time 
were  larger  than  those  subsequently  used,  and  this  first  pavement  was 
well  laid  and  of  a  durable  character.  The  board  determined  to  open  a 
new  street  from  Broad  to  Catharine.  This  likewise  was  done,  and  in 
October  the  new  street  was  recognized  by  the  name  of  Franklin  street. 
The  project  broached  two  years  before  of  continuing  Bleecker  street 
westward  to  the  intersection  with  the  Whitesboro  road  was  attended  with 
more  difficulty  and  delay.  A  committee  that  was  appointed  to  treat  with 
the  owners  and  occupants  of  land  along  the  line  of  the  proposed  road 
found  that  a  majority  of  them  were  unwilling  to  treat,  or  else  asked  more 
for  their  land  than  the  committee  deemed  reasonable.  A  jury  of  twelve 
men  were  then  called  together  to  assess  the  damages  they  thought  each 
person  might  sustain,  and  their  assessment  was  ratified  by  the  trustees. 
From  this  adjudication  several  of  the  landholders  appealed  to  the  Court 
of  Common  Pleas.  Their  appeal  was  sustained  by  the  court  so  far  as 
respected  that  portion  of  the  intended  road  lying  between  Genesee  and 
Seneca  streets  inasmuch  as  it  involved  the  removal  of  a  building  stand- 
ing on  Genesee  street  and  in  the  line  of  the  proposed  road.  The  court 
having  confirmed  the  appraisal  as  to  the  remainder  of  the  road,  and 
such  a  road  being  deemed  essential  to  the  prosperity  of  the  place,  a 
new  committee  of  freeholders  was  created  to  prepare  a  fresh  assessment 
on  a  line  slightly  varying  from  the  former  one.  Their  assessment  was 
ratified  May  6,  1823,  and  on  the  28th  of  the  same  month  Messrs.  Cozier 
and  Ballou,  of  the  board  of  1822,  were  authorized  to  contract  for  the 
making  of  the  road.  Other  proceedings  of  the  trustees  of  1822  were 
the  ordering  of  sidewalks  on  the  south  side  of  Jay  street  and  the  fixing 
-of  the  assessment  for  the  support  of  the  poor  at  $400,  that  for  contin- 
gent expenses  at  $1,029,  and  that  for  the  common  school  at  $65.  • 

I  have  before  quoted  the  record  of  prices  of  many  articles  of  daily 


MARKET  PRICES.  149 

use  which  was  made  by  a  traveler  of  181 1.  Another  foreign  visitor 
who  was  at  Utica  in  September,  1822,  gives  also  its  market  prices. 
These  with  some  other  particulars  he  furnished  to  a  magazine  published 
in  Wales.  They  are  as  follows  :  "  A  barrel  of  196  pounds  of  white 
wheat  flour,  $5;  of  medium  flour,  $4.50;  Indian  meal,  3s.;  oats 
IS,  gd.  per  bushel;  beef  and  mutton,  5c.;  cheese,  6  to  7c.;  potatoes, 
IS.  6d.  to  2s.  per  bushel;  best  tobacco,  2s.  per  lb.;  beer,  $4.50  per  bar- 
rel; cider,  $1  a  barrel;  rum,  $1;  brandy,  $1.25  a  gallon;  whisky, 
2s.  a  gallon  ;  tea,  5s.;  cofifee,  2s.  6d.;  white  sugar,  2s.,  and  best  brown, 
IS.  Wages:  Carpenters,  from  $1  to  $1.25  a  day;  masons,  $1.37-5-.; 
laborers,  6s.  as  a  rule,  but  sometimes  more;  servant  girls  from  los.  to 
i6s.  a  week,  though  many  get  twice  as  much;  servant  men,  about  the 
same  as  laborers.  They  can  be  taught  any  trade  and  paid  for  their 
work;  I  know  some  who  are  learning  trades  and  earning  $8  a  month. 
Shoes  from  12s.  to  20s.  per  pair ;  a  tailor  for  making  a  good  suit  of 
clothes,  $6;  blacksmiths  for  shoeing  a  horse,  $1,  iron  being  about 
the  same  as  with  us.  Instead  of  coal  they  generally  use  coke,  which  is 
very  cheap."  By  the  word  coke  the  writer  probably  means  charcoal, 
for  coke  was  not  made  until  the  introduction  of  gas,  being  aproduct  of  its 
manufacture.  In  stating  the  wages  of  servant  girls  at  los.  to  i6s.  a  week 
it  is  reasonable  to  surmise  that  the  writer  was  influenced  by  a  desire  to 
encourage  emigration  among  his  countrywomen,  and  has  presented  mat- 
ters in  the  most  favorable  light,  since  it  is  a  fact  that  very  many  girls 
received  at  that  time  only  about  half  that  amount  of  wages,  8s.  a  week 
being  common  and  6s.  not  a  rare  amount. 

Edmund  A.  Wetmore  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  October,  1820,  and 
not  long  after  became  the  partner  of  Judge  Morris  S.  Miller.  After  the 
premature  death  of  the  latter  he  formed  a  partnership  with  Hiram  De- 
nio,  which  continued  nearly  thirty  years  and  was  ended  by  the  elevation 
of  Judge  Denio  to  the  bench  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  in  June,  1853. 
Mr.  Wetmore  now  gradually  withdrew  from  the  active  duties  of  his  pro- 
fession, though  he  kept  himself  informed  in  the  current  legal  lore,  and 
was  in  all  respects  a  sound,  judicious,  and  trustworthy  counselor.  Soon 
after  the  organization  of  the  State  Lunatic  Asylum  he  was  elected  its 
treasurer,  a  position  of  much  responsibility  and  care.  The  duties,  dis- 
charged as  they  were  with  unsurpassed  fidelity,  filled  up  a  large  measure 
of  his  time  throughout  the  remainder  of  his  life. 


Tjo  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

"  Public  honors  might  well  have  been  his  had  he  aspired  to  them,  for 
no  man  would  have  more  faithfully  served  his  constituents.  His  fellow 
citizens  sought  him  more  than  once,  and  in  1845  he  was  elected  to  the 
mayoralty  of  the  city  and  re-elected  the  following  year  with  great  una- 
nimity. After  this  he  declined  all  public  life  and  devoted  himself  to 
other  interests  in  which  he  rendered  invaluable  service.  On  the  organ- 
ization in  1843  of  the  admirable  public  school  system  of  Utica  he  was 
elected  as  one  of  the  original  six  commissioners  and  continued  to  be  re- 
elected as  long  as  he  could  be  prevailed  on  to  serve,  performing- duties 
little  appreciated,  but  of  the  most  important  and  far  reaching  character 
He  was  elected  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  College  in  1849,  and  continued  in 
that  office  while  he  lived,  rendering  the  institution  a  large  amount  of 
valuable  and  gratuitous  service."  As  trustee  of  the  Female  Academy 
the  attention  he  gave  to  its  duties  and  the  work  he  performed  during  a 
long  series  of  years  were  surpassed  by  those  of  scarce  another  member 
of  the  board,  while  outside  of  it  he  was  the  special  and  trusted  adviser 
of  the  principal  and  her  teachers.  In  the  Cemetery  Association,  the 
Water  Works  Company,  and  the  cotton  and  woolen-mills  he  took  an 
active  part  from  their  incipiency,  concurred  heartily  in  the  management 
of  them,  and  was  much  depended  on  by  reason  of  the  cautious  and  dis- 
creet advice  he  gave.  One  of  the  most  important  offices  he  held  was 
that  of  trustee  of  the  Utica  Savings  Bank.  He  was  named  as  trustee  in 
the  original  charter  and  after  the  death  of  Judge  Denio  was,  by  the 
common  voice  of  his  associates,  elected  to  the  presidency,  which  he  held 
at  the  time  of  his  death. 

The  relations  of  Augustine  G.  Dauby  to  the  press  of  Utica  and  his 
characteristics  as  an  editor  will  be  treated  of  in  the  chapter  on  the  press. 
It  remains  to  contemplate  him  in  his  other  relations.  In  1829  he  was 
made  postmaster.  His  incumbency  lasted  full-twenty  years  and  through 
the  administration  of  four  different  Presidents,  viz. :  From  the  22d 
of  May,  1829,  to  the  17th  of  May,  1849.  It  was  marked  by  fidehty  to 
his  trust,  diligence  and  attention  to  his  duties,  and  unfailing  courtesy 
toward  those  tor  whose  benefit  it  was  administered.  "  During  much  of 
this  period  he  was  a  controlling  power  in  the  Democratic  party  of 
Oneida.  His  management  was  dextrous,  conciliatory,  constructive. 
He  did   not  care  to   push  himself  into   prominence,  but  his  will  was 


A.  G.  DA  UBY—  DR.  I.  N.  ME  A  CHAM.  151 

strong,  and  'of  the  able  men  who  were  his  associates  all  recognized  his 
sagacity  and  his  skill  in  leadership.  As  divisions  came  into  the  party  he 
stood  with  his  life-long  friends,  and  with  Judges  Beardsley  and  Bronson 
and  Mr.  Croswell  became  the  champion  of  the  Hards.  He  was  one  of 
those  who  early  won  for  Utica  its  political  eminence.  He  distributed 
prizes;  he  did  not  seek  them.  He  set  up  men  and  put  them  down;  he 
assisted  in  constructing  policies  and  parties.  He  was  an  ally  to  be 
sought  and  an  adversary  to  be  feared."  When  the  scheme  was  on  foot 
of  setting  up  the  Oneida  Bank  he  was  zealous  in  promoting  it.  It  was 
mainly  by  his  personal  exertions  that  the  charter  was  procured,  and 
when  the  bank  was  organized  he  became  its  president.  As  chief  ofificer 
he  was  active  in  ferreting  out  the  robbers  who  entered  the  bank  the 
night  before  the  day  when  it  was  to  go  into  operation  and  despoiled  it 
of  a  portion  of  its  funds  ;  with  another  director  he  went  to  Canada,  se- 
cured the  chief  culprit,  and  brought  him  to  punishment.  Though  he 
did  not  long  remain  president  he  was  a  director  from  that  time  to  the 
day  of  his  death  and  a  regular  attendant  at  its  board.  At  the  first  ap- 
proach of  the  attack  which  terminated  his  life  he  made  his  way  to  the 
bank,  saying  :  "  If  I  am  to  die  I  want  to  die  there."  For  long  years  he 
pursued  no  avocation  which  kept  him  in  business  relations  with  the  com- 
munity, but  was  able  to  enjoy  the  leisure  of  a  modest  competence. 

Dr.  I.  N.  Meacham  came  in  1822  from  the  "  limits  "  at  Whitesboro 
and  settled  in  Utica,  confinement  for  debt  being  still  in  accordance  with 
law.  Dr.  Meacham  was  then  a  spruce  and  showy  young  man,  fond  of 
a  good  horse  and  riding  him  gracefully,  fond  of  his  flowers  and  delight- 
ing to  cultivate  them.  Sharp  and  sagacious,  acute  in  diagnosing  disease, 
and  bold  in  the  treatment  of  it  he  won  the  public  confidence  and  a 
good  circuit  of  practice.  By  many  he  was  thought  to  be  unusually  well 
informed  and  more  than  ordinarily  skillful,  and  he  knew  how,  by  a 
wise  and  unoffending  self-assertion,  to  keep  them  in  this  opinion.  He 
was  social  in  his  tastes  and  with  his  intimates  truly  companionable. 
These  intimates  were  not,  however,  among  his  fellows  in  the  healing  art. 
Separated  from  his  family  he  lived  some  years  alone  in  his  office,  but 
died  in  the  New  York  State  Lunatic  Asylum.  His  first  wife,  Marcia  M. 
Tilden,  of  Whitesboro,  who  was  a  woman  of  beauty,  died  February  19, 
1835.  His  second  was  a  daughter  of  Todd  Dewey,  of  Walesville.  He 
had  one  son  and  one  daughter. 


152  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTICA. 

Hiram  Greenman  was  a  packet  captain  and  largely  interested  in  the 
stock  of  one  of  the  boat  companies  wherein  the  bulk  of  his  property  was 
made.  He  was  among  the  foremost  in  all  public  undertakings,  had  a 
share  in  steamboats  on  Lake  Ontario  and  in  the  earlier  telegraph  lines, 
possessed  a  remarkable  degree  of  enterprise  and  energy,  and  practically 
knew  not  the  meaning  of  the  word  fail.  Whatever  he  turned  his  hand 
to  was  sure  to  succeed.  His  success  culminated  in  the  possession  of  a 
handsome  estate. 

Owen  O'Neil,  apprentice  and  then  successor  of  James  Delvin,  carried 
on  copper  and  tinsmithing  with  general  hardware  until  his  death  in 
July,  1875.  His  interest  in  whatever  aimed  at  the  public  good  conspired 
with  his  accurate  and  honorable  dealings  to  secure  him  the  favorable  re- 
gard of  his  fellow  townsmen.  St.  John's  Church  and  all  its  institutions 
of  charity  had  in  him  a  devoted  friend.  He  was  one  of  its  trustees  and 
its  treasurer,  and  was  also  a  trustee  of  the  Hibernian  Benevolent  Society. 
He  was  a  director  of  the  Utica  Savings  Bank,  a  director  of  the  Oneida 
Branch  Bank,  and  among  the  originators  of  the  Oneida  Bank. 

The  chairmaking  of  Augustus  Hurlburt  he  removed  at  this  time  from 
New  Hartford  to  Utica.  His  business  excellence  had  already  obtained 
him  a  directorship  in  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank,  and  this  with  his  ex- 
cellent sense  and  irreproachable  private  character  led  to  his  serving  two 
terms  in  the  council.      He  took  to  farming  and  died  at  Clinton  in  1871. 

Samuel  Thompson,  a  friendly  and  many-friended  merchant,  lively  and 
sociable,  had  a  store  that  was  known  by  the  sign  of  "  the  green  door 
and  brass  knocker,"  the  door  being  in  the  front  of  the  second  story  and 
embossed  with  a  gigantic  knocker  in  gilt.  After  the  discovery  of  gold 
in  California  he  joined  the  train  of  the  seekers  and  there  he  has  only 
recently  found  his  final  resting  place. 

James  Murdock  and  Elon  Andrews  set  up  a  watchmaking  firm  that 
long  enjoyed  the  public  confidence,  the  partners  themselves  holding  it 
still  longer.  Thomas  F.  Field,  crockery  merchant,  remained  until  the 
canal  was  completed,  when  he  imported  and  sold  ware  decorated  with 
pictures  of  navigation  thereon.  James  McGregor  accomplished  as  a 
mason  a  good  deal  in  the  place,  building  among  other  str.uctures  the 
earlier  edifice  occupied  by  the  Reformed  Dutch  Society  and  the  public 
house  that  succeeded  the  Burchard  Tavern,  long  known  as  the  McGregor 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1823.  153 

House  and  now  as  the  Dudley.  John  Lloyd,  wagonmaker,  was  best 
known  in  his  later  years  as  the  tender  hearted  but  firm  and  faithful 
almoner  of  the  charities  of  the  city,  esteemed  alike  by  the  givers  and 
the  receivers  of  the  people's    money. 

The  village  trustees  of  the  year  1823  were  Benjamin  BalJou,  James 
Hooker,  Ezekiel  Bacon,  Daniel  Stafford,  Thomas  Walker,  and  Jesse  1^ 
W.  Doolittle.  The  assessors  were  Benjamin  Ballou,  John  Bradish,  and 
ApoUos  Cooper.  John  H.  Ostrom  was  clerk  and  Thomas  Walker 
treasurer  and  overseer  of  the  poor.  The  following  streets  were  paved  : 
Liberty  from  Genesee  to  the  west  line  of  Hotel;  Catharine  from 
Genesee  to  John;  Broad  from  Genesee  to  John;  and  Genesee  from  the 
termination  of  the  pavement  of  the  previous  year,  viz.,  the  line  of 
Whitesboro  street,  to  the  river  bridge.  The  street  lately  laid  out  from 
Genesee  to  Nail  Creek  received  the  title  of  Rome  street  and  a  new  one 
running  southerly  from  it — the  modern  Pine — was  ordered  to  be  opened. 
Fourteen  hundred  and  twenty  dollars  was  the  sum  voted  for  contingent 
expenses,  $94  for  school  expenses,  and  $400  for  the  support  of  the  poor. 
Early  in  January,  1824,  the  board  learned  "  with  deep  regret  that  Ezra 
S.  Cozier,  president  of  the  village,  had  been  superseded  in  office  by  the 
act  of  the  governor  and  Senate  of  the  State."  His  successor  was  Capt. 
William  Clarke.  However  aggrieved  the  trustees  may  have  been  by 
the  "  clandestine  manner"  in  which  the  change  was  brought  about  it 
was  the  result  doubtless  of  political  sympathies  and  influence,  and  the 
agents  at  work  in  it  were,  notwithstanding,  most  worthy  men. 

A  concert  that  was  given  on  the  6th  day  of  February  was  for  a 
purpose  unlike  to  any  that  influences  our  modern  Utica,  and  intimates 
a  state  of  society  still  .primitive  and  dependent,  when  denominational 
differences  were  subordinate  to  the  actual  needs  of  ecclesiastical  exist- 
ence. It  was  for  the  joint  benefit  of  the  Presbyterian  and  Episcopal 
Churches  and  took  place  in  Trinity.  The  choir  was  led  by  Thomas 
Hastings  and  the  orchestra  by  George  Dutton,  the  singing  being  done 
by  volunteers. 

The  village  was  favored  in  the  summer  of  1823  by  the   sojourn   of 

William  Dunlap,  the  historical  and  portrait  painter.      He  exhibited   at 

the  court  room  his  picture  of  "  Christ  Rejected,"  a  copy  from  West,  and 

it  was  very  generally  visited.      Henry  Inman,  a  native  of  the  village, 

20 


154  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

but  now  settled  in  New  York,  came  also  in  November  in  the  exercise 
of  his  profession  as  a  painter  of  miniatures. 

Alfred  Munson,  coming  hither  with  slender  means,  worked  his  way  to 
a  leading  place  among  the  men  of  business  of  Utica,  and  while  enrich- 
ing himself  by  his  operations  he  was  not  unmindful  of  the  public  inter- 
est and  accomplished  much  to  enrich  and  to  advance  the  place  of  his 
adoption.  For  about  fifteen  years  after  his  removal  to  Utica  in  1823 
he  was  occupied  with  the  manufacture  of  burr  millstones  and  the  sale 
of  these  and  other  articles  used  in  milling.  To  his  pursuit  he  devoted 
himself  with  unceasing  industry,  enlarging  his  business  by  degrees  until 
it  came  to  be  the  chief  dependence  of  millers  throughout  an  extensive 
range  of  country.  From  boyhood  Mr.  Munson  had  been  frail  of  con- 
stitution and  he  was  much  of  his  time  a  sufferer  from  bodily  infirmity. 
But  his  mind  was  unusually  active  and  clear.  Joined  to  sound  sense  and 
prudence,  to  a  penetrative  and  discriminating  judgment,  he  had  sagacity 
to  conceive  and  boldness  and  wisdom  to  plan.  He  was  not  a  hasty  or 
inconsiderate  man,  and  his  long-sightedness  was  almost  of  a  prophetic 
character.  His  plans,  when  matured,  needed  only  the  will  in  execution, 
his  most  conspicuous  and  commanding  trait  to  overcome  overy  obsta- 
cle and  ensure  success.  Qualities  such  as  these  naturally  sought  a  wider 
scope  for  their  exercise  than  was  afforded  by  the  calling  in  which  he 
was  at  first  employed.  Moreover  he  was  influenced  by  purity  as  well  as 
vigor  of  purpose,  and  was  liberal  minded  and  public  spirited  in  his  aims. 

The  list  is  a  long  one  of  the  many  public  projects  in  which  he  par- 
ticipated as  well  as  of  the  positions  of  responsibility  and  honor  he  was 
called  to  fill.  For  several  years  he  was  engaged  in  the  transportation 
of  passengers  by  the  canal  and  by  steamers  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  was 
trustee  and  treasurer  of  the  Ontario  and  St.  Lawrence  Steamboat  Com- 
pany until  within  a  few  weeks  of  his  death.  He  took  a  prominent  part 
in  the  building  of  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad,  as  he  did  also 
in  those  of  the  Syracuse  and  Utica  and  the  Syracuse  and  Oswego  roads. 
Of  the  first  named  he  was  a  director  from  1834  until  about  1844.  He 
was  active  in  the  construction  of  the  Utica  and  Binghamton,  which  fol- 
lowed very  nearly  the  course  of  the  State  road  that  he,  as  one  of  a  com- 
mission appointed  by  the  State,  had  laid  out  thirty  years  before.  And 
of  this  railway  company  he  was  president  at  the  time  of  his  decease. 


ALFRED  MUNSON.  155 

No  one  has  done  more  than  Mr.  Munson  in  promoting  the  manufactur- 
ing interests  of  Utica.  For  he  was  the  early  and  by  the  application  of 
his  means  the  efficient  advocate  of  introducing  and  testing  the  value  of 
steam-power  in  the  making  of  cotton  and  woolen  goods.  And  he  was 
called  to  the  presidency  of  both  of  the  original  boards  that  managed  the 
steam  cotton  and  Globe  woolen-mills.  Of  the  Water  Works  Company, 
the  Mechanics  Association,  and  the  Female  Academy  he  was  one  of, 
the  instigators  and  early  managers.  Over  the  Oneida  Bank  he  was 
summoned  to  preside  when  it  was  suffering  from  difficulties  which  it 
incurred  at  its  opening.  For  seventeen  years  he  held  the  office,  and  to 
his  efforts  and  supervision  that  institution  has  been  greatly  indebted  for 
its  prosperous  condition.  From  the  incipiency  of  the  New  York  State 
Lunatic  Asylum  he  was  a  manager  and  chief  of  the  Board  of  Managers  ; 
from  1842  until  his  decease  he  was  its  devoted  friend  and  much  relied  on 
by  his  associates  for  his  discernment  and  wisdom  of  counsel.  Outside 
of  Utica  he  was  interested  in  a  real  estate  company  whose  headquarters 
were  at  Baltimore;  he  was  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  iron  at  that 
place  and  at  Clinton  in  this  county  and  in  the  purchase  of  extensive  coal 
lands  in  Pennsylvania,  which  later  became  very  valuable. 

Among  the  benevolent  schemes  which  engaged  his  later  years  was 
the  construction  of  an  edifice  for  the  parish  of  Grace  Church,  with 
which  he  had  been  for  some  years  connected  and  of  which  he  was  a 
vestryman.  Early  in  1851,  some  three  years  before  his  death,  twelve 
gentlemen  of  the  parish  having  purchased  the  lot  on  which  the  present 
edifice  stands,  he  procured  plans  and  elevations  from  Richard  Upjohn, 
the  most  eminent  ecclesiastical  architect  of  his  day  and  who  it  was 
generally  understood  by  the  vestry  should  be  consulted.  With  him 
Mr.  Munson  matured  these  plans  with  great  care,  leaving  nothing  over- 
looked to  make  the  building  complete.  Nearly  a  year  and  a  half  before 
his  death  he  secured  and  vested  in  his  own  name  the  title  to  the  lot, 
the  gentlemen  who  had  previously  held  the  title  with  him  having  relin- 
quished it  because  of  their  discouragement  at  the  delays  experienced  in 
the  prosecution  of  the  subscription  that  had  been  set  on  foot  to  build 
the  church.  In  the  meantime  and  in  the  course  of  its  circulation  Mr. 
Munson  died,  though  not  without  making  provision  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  kind  intentions  toward   the  parish.      By  his  will  he  be- 


iS6  MEMORJAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

queathed  $io,000  toward  purchasing  a  lot  and  erecting  a  church  edifice 
thereon,  $i,ooo  for  improving  the  grounds,  $i,ooo  for  the  erection  of  a 
Sunday  school  room  in  the  rear  of  the  church,  $500  for  a  Sunday  school 
library,  $1,500  for  an  organ,  $500  for  a  church  bell,  and  $500  for  church 
furniture,  on  condition  that  the  parish  should,  within  two  years,  raise  at 
least  an  equal  amount  for  like  purposes,  or,  if  this  were  insufficient,  such 
other  sum  as  might  be  necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  church  ac- 
cording to  the  plans  and  specifications  of  Mr.  Upjohn.  Another  object 
which  received  most  substantial  aid  from  his  generosity  was  the  Utica 
Orphan  Asylum.  To  it  he  bequeathed  the  sum  of  $5,000  toward  the 
erection  of  a  new  and  suitable  building,  and  the  sum  of  $25,000  to  be 
securely  invested,  the  income  of  which  should  be  forever  applied  to  the 
support  and  maintenance  of  the  asylum,  together  with  lands  in  Penn- 
sylvania valued  at  $4,000  on  condition  that  the  citizens  of  Utica 
should  raise  and  apply  the  sum  of  $10,000  toward  the  purchase  of  three 
acres  of  ground  within  the  city  arid  toward  the  erection  of  the  build- 
ing. Both  of  the  above  mentioned  erections  were  accomplished  in  con- 
sequence and  by  the  aid  of  these  munificent  gifts,  the  conditional  obli- 
gations, which  the  testator  had  imposed  having  the  effect  as  he  desired 
to  stimulate  others  to  perfect  the  amounts  that  were  requisite.  In  the 
case  of  Grace  Church,  however,  the  original  legacy  represents  but  a 
moiety  of  what  it  has  received  from  the  heirs  and  representatives  of  the 
estate  of  Mr.  Munson.  For  the  parish,  finding  it  difficult  to  obtain  a 
subscription  which  should  entitle  it  to  the  first  part  of  the  legacy, — the 
$10,000,  namely,  given  for  the  purchase  of  a  lot  and  the  erection  of  the 
church  according  to  the  specified  plan, — relinquished  its  latter  part  with 
the  consent  of  three  representatives  and  afterward  received  from  them 
a  subscription  of  a  like  sum  toward  this  church  edifice.  This,  with 
later  gifts  from  the  same  source  toward  the  completion  of  the  tower 
and  its  equipment  with  a  chime  of  bells  and  for  other  purposes,  has 
raised  the  whole  amount  which  the  church  has  received  fsom  the  estate 
and  from  its  heirs  individually  to  $31,500.  The  whole  amount  left  by 
Mr.  Munson  for  charitable  and  religious  purposes  and  in  remembrance 
of  remote  relations  was  understood  to  be  not  less  than  $60,000,  or  fully 
■one  tenth  of  his  estate. 

To  neutralize  the  zealous  efforts  of  a  runner  in  the  service  of  their 


JOHN  BUTTERFTELD.  157 

rivals  J.  Parker  &  Co.,  stage  proprietors,  engaged  John  Butterfield.  He 
proved  equal  to  his  duties  and  thoroughly  identified  himself  with  the 
success  of  the  line.  After  a  time  he  met  at  the  Canal  Coffee  House  a 
traveler  wishing  to  part  with  his  horse  and  his  one-horse  conveyance. 
These  he  bought  and  inaugurated  a  livery.  To  it  he  added  as  his 
means  admitted,  and  after  his  marriage  kept  also  a  boarding  house. 

Such  were  the  beginnings  of  a  life  of  great  activity  and  enterprise, 
and  which  was  bound  up  with  most  of  the  different  kinds  of  transporta- 
tion now  practiced.  For  in  every  means  undertaken  to  increase  the 
facilities  of  travel  and  intercommunication  John  Butterfield  was  for  a 
generation  one  of  the  foremost  of  the  citizens  of  Utica.  His  livery  grew' 
until  it  became  the  leading  one  of  the  place.  The  connection  with 
Parker  &  Co.  lasted  so  long  as  they  were  still  in  business  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  important  lines  of  his  own,  wherein  he  was  a  leading  mana- 
ger in  the  State  until  staging  was  superseded  by  railroads.  He  had 
his  share,  too,  in  the  packet  boats  and  then  in  the  steamboats  on  Lake 
Ontario.  He  gave  his  earnest  personal  efforts  to  create  the  companies 
and  raise  the  funds  required  for  the  construction  of  some  of  the  plank 
roads  leading  out  of  the  city  and  was  the  originator  of  its  street  rail- 
roads. His  labors  were  arduous  in  stirring  up  the  citizens  to  the  im- 
portance of  roads  to  the  north  and  to  the  south  ;  and  to  him  is  Utica 
largely  if  not  principally  indebted  for  the  Black  River  and  both  of  the 
southern  railways.  He  was  among  the  first  who  realized  how  a  lucrative 
business  could  be  formed  by  the  rapid  transportation  of  such  articles  as 
.  could  afford  to  pay  express  charges,  and  he  became  an  early  director 
in  the  express  company.  To  him  as  much  as  to  any  other  individual 
was  due  the  high  reputation  which  thie  company  obtained  in  commer- 
cial circles  throughout  the  country  as  well  as  the  success  that  has  at- 
tended it.  In  that  organization  he  remained  a  directing  power  until  the 
close  of  his  life  and  reaped  from  it  a  large  pecuniary  profit.  He  was 
also  among  the  first  to  appreciate  the  capacities  of  the  electric  telegraph, 
and  immediately  upon  the  practical  adaptation  of  the  invention  he 
joined  with  Messrs.  Faxton,  Wells,  Livingston,  and  others  in  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  New  York,  Albany,  and  Buffalo  Telegraph  Company. 
His  faith  followed  upon  his  sagacity  and  he  steadily  urged  and  aided 
in  the  extension  of  lines  and  companies.     He  assisted  likewise  in  putting 


158  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

in  operation  the  overland  mail  route,  the  precursor  of  the  Pacific  rail- 
roads, and  which  did  much  to  demonstrate  the  importance  of  a  continu- 
ous connection  between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  States.  Having 
long  been  a  mail  contractor  he  had  the  experience  and  practical  knowl- 
edge essential  for  the  execution  of  the  work.  Besides  his  part  in  the 
various  operations  above  referred  to  Mr.  Butterfield  was  a  director  in 
the  Utica  City  National  Bank  and  was  interested  in  other  stock  com' 
panics  and  business  undertakings.  At  the  same  time  he  invested 
largely  in  city  property  while  his  cultivated  land  in  the  vicinity  covers 
no  inconsiderable  space.  The  Butterfield  House  and  the  Gardner  block 
are  among  the  handsome  edifices  which  he  planned  and  built,  and  which 
have  added  materially  to  the  city  of  his  residence.  On  taking  posses- 
sion of  the  land  on  the  New  Hartford  road,  on  a  portion  of  which  his 
late  residence  now  stands,  he  extended  his  operations  in  farming  already 
carried  on  to  a  limited  extent  on  Pleasant  street.  He  was  prompt  to 
avail  himself  of  the  inventiveness  of  others.  A  scheme  unfolded  and 
what  it  could  accomplish  once  exhibited  he  was  quick  to  note  its  bear- 
ings and  remoter  tendencies,  and  ready  in  plan  and  action  to  grasp  suc- 
cess while  as  yet  practicability  was  talked  of  This  success  he  achieved 
by  careful  insight  and  minute  attention  to  detail,  wherein  he  was  aided 
by  a  memory  wonderfully  retentive,  by  a  strong  and  enduring  will,  by 
the  contagious  influence  his  determination  exerted  upon  others,  bearing 
them  along  in  the  current  of  his  own  enthusiasm,  and  by  an  energy  that 
was  balked  by  no  obstacle  and  never  asked  for  rest.  He  took  but  little 
part  in  politics  and  was  never  an  office  seeker.  By  the  Republicans  of, 
1865  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Utica  and  in  the  same  year  was  the  un- 
successful candidate  for  the  office  of  senator.  In  October,  1867,  Mr. 
Butterfield  was  stricken  with  paralysis  in  New  York  city,  but  lingered 
until  the  14th  of  November,  1869. 

Succeeding  to  Charles  C.  Brodhead  in  the  office  of  village  surveyor 
there  was  appointed  in  1824  Holmes  Hutchinson.  His  professional 
training  he  acquired  on  the  Erie  Canal,  having  been  appointed  an  en- 
gineer in  1819.  In  this  position  he  acted  until  the  year  1835,  when  he 
was  made  chief  engineer,  performing  the  duties  of  this  office  during  the 
period  of  the  enlargement  of  the  canal  until  1841.  He  surveyed  and  made 
maps  for  the  Erie  and  Champlain  Canals,  the  Oswego,  the  Black  River, 


HOLMES  HUTCHINSON— MILLING.  159 

the  Chenango,  Crooked  Lake,  and  the  Chemung,  completing  the  latter 
canal  for  an  amount  much  less  than  his  estimates.  His  plans  of  locks 
on  the  Chenango  were  adopted  and  those  he  made  for  the  double  en- 
larged locks  on  the  Erie  were  used  as  a  basis  in  its  construction.  He 
had' charge  also  of  the  Cumberland  and  Oxford  Canal  in  Maine  and 
the  Blackstone  in  Rhode  Island  and  Massachusetts,  and  was  frequently 
employed  in  locating  and  defining  valuable  tracts  of  land  in  Oneida  and 
other  counties  of  the  State.  He  likewise  projected  a  scheme  for  the 
improvement  of  the  harbor  of  Oswego,  and  this,  though  it  was  deemed 
impracticable  and  rejected,  was  at  a  later  period  successfully  carried 
out  by  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and  Western  Railroad  Company. 
He  was  one  of  the  directors  of  the  Utica  and  Syracuse  Railroad  and 
remained  so  until  its  consolidation  with  the  New  York  Central ;  and 
was,  too,  a  director  in  the  Syracuse  and  Oswego  Railroad,  of  which 
company  he  was  some  years  president.  In  the  Ontario  and  St.  Law- 
rence Steamboat  Company  and  in  the  Bank  of  Utica  Mr.  Hutchinson 
had  also  a  managing  interest. 

An  influence  of  the  canal  that  was  manifested  near  at  home  here  de- 
serves our  notice.  The  Mohawk  River  being  now  abandoned  for  pur- 
poses of  navigation  the  thought  of  making  it  available  for  other  uses 
took  possession  of  the  public  mind.  It  had  been  proposed  the  previous 
season  to  construct  a  dam  at  Utica  and  thus  create  hydraulic  power. 
Some  opposition  arose  and  there  was  a  newspaper  discussion  upon  the 
probable  evils  that  might  ensue  from  interrupting  the  course  of  the 
stream.  A  public  meeting  was  called  of  those  friendly  to  the  project, 
though  of  its  proceedings  we  are  uninformed.  Despite  all  opposition  an 
act  was  obtained  from  the  legislature  in  1823,  a  dam  was  thrown  across 
the  river  in  September  two  or  three  rods  below  the  bridge,  and  a  mill 
erected  for  the  grinding  of  flour  with  three  runs  of  stone.  The  dam  was 
erected  by  William  Alverson  for  the  proprietors,  Messrs.  Parker  &  Sey- 
mour. The  first  miller  employed  not  succeeding  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  owners  Ira  D.  Hopkins  was  at  the  end  of  three  months  engaged 
to  run  the  mill,  and  he  continued  to  do  so  while  it  was  in  operation. 
But  ere  long  parties  owning  property  on  the  river  some  miles  above 
complained  that  their  land  was  flooded  by  the  setting  back  of  the  water 
to  the  height  as  they  alleged  of  four  feet.      A  suit  was   brought  against 


i6o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  mill  owners,  and  although  it  proved  unsuccessful  it  impaired  the 
popularity  and  custom  of  the  mill  so  that  when  a  second  suit  was  after- 
ward begun  they  anticipated  its  verdict  by  giving  up  their  enterprise. 
This  was  about  1829. 

Michael  McQuade  held  numerous  positions,  from  the  collectorship  to 
that  of  candidate  for  mayor,  but  most  signalized  himself  as  the  long 
continued  alderman  of  the  First  ward,  wherein  matters  were  accustomed 
to  go  much  as  he  directed,  his  side  being  in  general  the  winning  one. 

Horace  Butler,  an  amiable  and  respected  merchant,  was  in  turn  doing 
business  in  New  Hartford,  one  of  the  firm  of  N.  Devereux  &  Co.  here, 
a  forwarder  as  head  of  Butler,  McDonough  &  Co.  and  next  Butler,  Liv- 
ingston &  Co.,  and  later  doing  forwarding  with  Samuel  Farwell.  Charles 
Morris,  another  forwarder,  made  but  a  limited  stay.  Jonathan  R.  War- 
ner, a  diligent  and  intelligent  maker  and  seHer  of  hats,  bore  a  creditable 
share  in  matters  of  a  public  nature,  amassed  property,  and  was  a  friend 
of  the  Reformed  Church,  giving  to  it  the  bell  it  now  has  in  use.  Chester 
Griswold  was  inspector  of  boats  and  weighmaster  on  the  canal.  Henry 
White,  grandson  of  the  founder  of  the  Whitestown  country,  superin- 
tended the  interests  of  the  packet  boat  company. 

The  trustees  chosen  in  May,  1824,  would  seem  to  have  been  a  diligent 
and  enterprising  body,  and  they  effected  numerous  improvements  in 
comparison  with  some  of  their  predecessors.  They  were  as  follows  : 
Benjamin  Ballou,  James  Hooker,  Ezekiel  Bacon,  James  Lynch,  Thomas 
Walker,  and  Nicholas  Smith.  The  assessors  were  Benjamin  Ballou, 
John  Bradish,  and  David  P.  Hoyt,  and  the  supervisor  was  Ezra  S. 
Cozier.  Thomas  Walker  was  treasurer  and  overseer  of  the  poor  and 
John  H.  Ostrom  clerk.  Charles  C.  Brodhead  was  elected  surveyor,  but 
declining  to  serve  his  place  was  filled  by  the  appointment  of  Holmes 
Hutchinson.  William  Clarke  continued  to  be  the  president.  The  do- 
ings of  the  board  in  the  course  of  the  year  were  these:  Genesee  street 
was  paved  from  the  canal  to  the  east  line  of  the  Supreme  Court  clerk's 
office  above  Pearl  street;  John  street  from  the  canal  to  Main  street ; 
Rome  street  was  widened  to  its  intersection  with  Genesee  by  the  pur- 
chase and  removal  of  a  building  that  fronted  on  the  latter  street  and 
hindered  its  width,  and  in  compliment  to  the  distinguished  guest  of  the 
nation   then  traveling  through  the  country   its  name  was   changed  to 


PROCEEDINGS  OE  1824.  16 1 

Lafayette  street;  Water  street  was  extended  from  its  termination  at 
the  foot  of  Hotel  (Williams)  street  to  the  west  line  of  the  land  of  David 
P.  Hoyt;  the  street  now  known  as  Hoyt's  alley  was  opened  from  Water 
street  to  Whitesboro ;  Charles  street  was  cut  midway  of  the  property 
of  Levi  Cozzens;  and  a  "private  road  "  for  the  benefit  of  Joshua  M. 
Church  and  John  Bradish  was  opened  through  the  land  of  Apollos 
Cooper  from  Rome  street  to  the  canal  along  the  line  of  the  present 
Pine  street.  Sewers  were  constructed  on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street 
from  opposite  the  clerk's  office  to  Hotel  street,  from  John  street  to  a 
connection  at  Main  street  with  the  one  befoie  opened  down  Genesee 
street,  on  Burnet  street,  on  Charlotte  from  Elizabeth  to  Bleecker,  and 
on  Bleecker  from  Burnet  to  Genesee.  Sidewalks  were  ordered  on  both 
sides  of  Jay  street  from  the  packet  basin  to  Bridge  street,  and  on  both 
sides  of  First  from  Jay  to  Broad,  except  on  the  north  side  of  that  part 
of  Jay  which  lies  between  John  and  First  streets.  In  November  aside- 
walk  was  directed  on  one  side  of  Elizabeth  from  Genesee  as  far  only  as 
Charlotte,  and  in  the  following  March  both  sides  of  it  from  Genesee  to 
John  streets  were  to  be  pitched  and  paved  with  brick.  Moreover  it 
was  resolved  that  in  "  all  cases  in  which  sidewalks  are  hereafter  paved,  in 
pursuance  of  law  or  resolution,  they  shall  be  paved  or  flagged  with 
good  sound  hard  brick  or  square  flat  stone."  A  new  engine-house  was 
leased  from  the  president  on  Franklin  street,  and  the  lot  in  the  rear  of 
Trinity  Church,  which  had  been  given  to  the  village  for  an  engine-house 
by  Morris  S.  Miller  and  others,  was  sold  to  the  church.  A  committee 
was  appointed  to  treat  with  Apollos  Cooper  for  six  acres  of  land  for  a 
burial  ground.  The  provisions  of  the  ordinance  of  June  6,  1817,  relat- 
ing to  nuisances  were  now  extended  to  all  the  streets.  Repairs  were 
paid  for  keeping  the  town  pump  in  good  condition,  and  Ara  Broadwell 
was  armed  with  full  powers  as  a  fire  inspector  to  look  after  the  safety 
of  every  tenement.  Eight  watchmen  were  now  needed  to  guard  the 
village  by  turns  through  the  night.  The  tax  for  general  expenses  was 
fixed  at  $1,437.25  and  the  supervisors  of  the  county  were  requested  to 
levy  an  additional  tax  of  $400  for  the  support  of  the  poor.  Roswell 
Holcomb,  the  former  pedagogue  of  1797  and  1803  or  1804,  was  in- 
stalled as  instructor  of  the  public  school  at  a  salary  equivalent  to  $350 
a  year. 
21 


i62  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Milton  Brayton  and  Truman  Parmelee  formed  a  partnership  at  this 
time  to  do  business  in  dry  goods.  To  Truman  Parmelee  a  wide  and 
important  field  of  usefulness  was  presented  in  the  Sunday  school.  He 
became  a  teacher  and  before  he  was  eighteen  was  made  superintendent, 
a  position  which  he  filled  with  great  satisfaction  to  teachers  and  scholars 
until  his  removal  from  the  town.  His  lessons  were  instructive  and  full 
of  interest.  He  was  exceedingly  patient,  gentle,  and  forbearing.  Hand- 
some and  engaging  in  person  his  manners  also  were  winning  and  at- 
tractive, and  his  influence  over  the  school  was  of  the  purest  and  strong- 
est kind.  As  experience  demonstrated  to  him  the  defects  in  the  system 
of  instruction  which  at  first  existed  he  applied  himself  to  their  correc- 
tion. In  1824  'ic  published  for  the  use  of  Sunday  schools  questions  on 
the  historical  parts  of  the  New  Testament,  and  this  was  the  first  ques- 
tion book  used  in  such  schools  in  this  country.  The  impressions  made 
by  the  teaching  and  example  of  Mr.  Parmelee  were  deep  and  permanent 
and  the  amount  of  good  he  accomplished  was  very  great.  The  first 
generation  of  children  born  in  Utica  remember  him,  and  till  all  are  dead 
will  continue  to  remember  him,  with  love  and  gratitude.  His  trade  of 
book-binding  he  never  practiced,  but  was  concerned  with  Mr.  Brayton 
in  trade  until  his  removal  to  New  York  about  1829-30.  Mr.  Brayton 
was  a  faithful  coadjutor  in  the  good  works  of  his  time  and  especially 
in  the  religious  enterprises  that  occupied  the  attention  of  Mr.  Parmelee. 

About  1829  Alrick  Hubbell  was  a  deputy  sheriff  under  John  E. 
Hinman,  He  acted  for  several  years  as  chief  engineer  of  the  fire  de- 
partment and  has  had  few  peers  in  the  discharge  of  duties  wherein 
■courage  and  power  over  large  bodies  of  men  are  requisites  to  success. 
He  wa3  an  alderman  in  1841,  was  one  of  the  commissioners  for  building 
the  present  jail,  and  was  twice  mayor  of  the  city  in  1856  and  1857.  In 
1858-59  he  served  in  the  State  Senate.  In  all  of  these  capacities  he 
made  the  public  interest  his  object,  and  Utica  has  had  few  officers  who 
have  served  it  more  diligently  and  more  faithfully.  He  was  a  director 
in  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  and  to  the  street  railroad  he  gave 
no  little  time  and  attention.  ,  As  a  stockholder  he  was  interested  in 
many  public  enterprises  and  contributed  to  the  growth  and  prosperity 
of  the  city.  He  was  an  earnest  member  of  the  Baptist  denomination, 
joined  the  Broad  Street  Church  in  1820,  and  was  its  first  clerk.     He  was 


ELHANAN  WILLIAMS^ ISAIAH  TIFFANY.  163 

a  teacher  in  its  Bible  class  and  was  not  diverted  from  this  duty  by  public 
labors,  even  while  at  Albany.  Of  the  Baptist  Education  Society  he  was 
a  leading  member,  and  for  many  years  rendered  good  service  in  the 
corporation  of  Madison  University,  for  though  he  had  not  enjoyed  a 
liberal  education  he  was  yet  the  advocate  and  supporter  of  colleges  and 
theological  seminaries. 

Elhanan  Williams,  who  had  lived  in  the  village  since  1807,  having 
graduated  at  Union  College  in  18 18  and  pursued  the  study  of  law  with 
John  Bradish,  was  now  engaged  with  him  in  the  office  of  the  Supreme 
Court  clerk.  He  succeeded  to  the  agent  department  established  by 
Mr.  Bradish,  and  after  the  abolition  of  the  old  Supreme  Court  his  busi- 
ness became  chiefly  that  of  collecting  and  loaning  money.  He  died  April 
15,  1872,  leaving  a  widow  and  sons  still  resident. 

Three  physicians  became  inhabitants  of  Utica  in  1824,  of  whom  Za- 
dock  P.  Maine  was  just  retiring  from  practice  and  the  others  about 
entering  upon  its  duties.  Robert  C.  Wood  after  two  or  three  years 
entered  the  army  as  a  surgeon  and  by  long  and  meritorious  service 
rose  to  the  rank  of  assistant  surgeon-general.  James  Douglas  formed 
an  association  with  Dr.  Coventry  for  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  eye,, 
connected  himself  with  the  County  Medical  Society,  married  a  wife,  and 
then  removed  to  Quebec. 

A  gentlemanly,  fine  looking  man  and  much  valued  citizen  was  Isaiah 
Tiffany,  who  had  been  clerk  in  the  publishing  house  of  H.  &  E.  Phin- 
ney,  of  Cooperstown,  and  came  to  Utica  to  supervise  the  establishment 
they  opened  here.  As  a  bookseller  he  remained  until  1868,  when  he 
removed  from  the  city.  His  store  was  a  place  of  resort  for  a  few  leading 
Democrats  and  for  many  intelligent  citizens,  and  himself  and  his  family 
were  of  influence  in  the  church  and  in  society. 

Another  stirring  man  of  the  same  political  party  and  forward  in  mu- 
nicipal interests  was  Harvey  Barnard,  paper  hanger  and  dealer  in  wall 
paper,  who  with  his  sons  have  held  a  conspicuous  place. 

Three  hotel- keepers  of  the  time  were  Abraham  Shepard,  successively 
of  Bagg's,  the  United  States,  and  the  Coffee  House,  who  finished  his 
career  in  Utica  as  a  seller  of  crockery  ;  Richard  Sanger,  landlord  in  turn 
of  the  Clinton,  the  National,  the  Franklin,  and  the  Coffee  House;  and 
Thomas  Midlam,  of  the  Catharine,  and  then  a  grocer,  and  lastly  keeper 
of  a  boarding-house. 


1 64  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Of  several  printers  now  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  their  wnrk  the 
most  memorable  because  the  longest  engaged  in  it  in  Utica  was  Rufus 
Northway,  who  was  publisher  of  the  Oneida  Whig  and  the  Daily 
Gazette.  As  he  pursued  the  quiet,  industrious,  even  tenor  of  his  way 
he  was  marked  by  all  and  honored  with  universal  respect.  He  was  an 
officer  of  the  Reformed  Church  and  superintendent  of  its  Sunday  school. 
He  removed  to  Illinois  and  died  in  1871. 

Another  who  is  best  remembered  for  his  Sunday  school  work  was 
George  S.  Wilson,  a  man  of  fervent  piety  and  self-denying  faithfulness; 
and  while  the  spiritual  good  of  his  boys  was  ever  uppermost  in  his  mind 
he  strove  also  to  make  them  intelligent  and  useful  men.  As  a  place  in 
his  class  was  much  coveted  and  more  boys  applied  than  could  be  received 
he  projected  a  plan  by  which  his  own  pupils  and  other  boys  might  meet 
often  for  religious  and  intellectual  improvement.  An  association  was 
formed  called  the  "Juvenile  Society  for  Learning  and  doing  Good,"  an 
unique  organization  which  was  officered  by  its  own  members,  but  of 
which  Mr.  Wilson  was  the  head.  The  meetings  were  held  weekly  and 
he  never  failed  to  be  present,  the  life  and  spirit  of  the  whole.  Reading 
and  conversation  were  the  staple  of  the  exercises,  and  their  conductor 
never  failed  in  the  ingenuity  of  his  devices  to  interest  and  instruct.  This 
society  soon  increased  so  as  to  embrace  a  large  number  of  boys  and 
he  had  for  several  years  in  the  class  fifty  or  more,  and  happier  pu- 
pils never  sat  under  the  instruction  of  a  revered  and  loving  teacher. 
It  was  impossible  to  resist  the  influence  of  such  a  character  as  his,  and 
he  molded  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  scholars,  impressing  them  with 
his  own  noble  and  elevated  views.  At  the  same  time  he  edited  and 
printed  a  small  magazine  called  the  Stmday  School  Visitant.  On  the 
■completion  of  his  apprenticeship  Mr.  Wilson  entered  more  fully  into  his 
favorite  pursuit  of  Sunday  school  instruction.  He  was  active  in  the 
formation  of  the  Oneida  Sunday  School  Union  and  afterward  of  the 
Western  Sunday  School  Union  of  the  State  of  New  York.  Of  the  last 
named  society  he  was  made  corresponding  secretary,  and  about  the 
same  time  a  depository  for  the  sale  of  Sunday  school  books  was  estab- 
lished in  Utica  of  which  he  was  the  manager.      He  died  May  17,  1841. 

Henry  Ivison  came  with  his  father  to  the  place  in  1820  while  he  was 
yet  a  boy,  and  became  book-binder's  apprentice  to  Seward  &  Williams. 


SEVERAL  PRINTERS.  165 

With  the  latter  he  remained  until  1830,  and  after  his  father's  removal 
was  an  inmate  in  the  household  of  Mr.  Williams.  Then  after  a  residence 
of  sixteen  years  in  Auburn  he  established  himself  in  New  York,  where 
he  carried  on  an  extensive  business  as  publisher  of  school  books. 

Other  printers  apprenticed  in  Utica  nearly  at  this  date,  perchance  a 
little  later,  were  Henry  Day,  brother-in-law  of  George  Button,  who  es- 
tablished the  New  York  Sun;  William  Swain,  who  founded  the  Phila- 
delphia Ledger  as  well  as  the  Baltimore  Sun;  James  O.  Rockwell,  whose 
name  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  Bryant's  collection  as  one  of  the  galaxy  of 
American  poets,  was  editor  of  the  Providence  Journal  and  edited  it 
credi,tably  ;  Francis  M.  Hill,  a  rival  poet  of  Mr.  Rockwell,  who  edited 
the  Kingston  Chronicle  of  Canada  and  was  mayor  of  Kingston  ;  Charles 
N.  Everest,  who  edited  the  "  Poets  of  Connecticut  "and  became  an  Epis- 
copal minister  of  repute,  and  who  died  early  in  1877;  Amos  E.  Law- 
rence, who  also  became  a  Doctor  of  Divinity;  O.  N.  Worden,  editor  of 
the  Louisburg  Chronicle oi  Pennsylvania;  Edward  P.  Wetmore,  brother 
of  Edmund  A.  Wetmore,  who  was  largely  engaged  in  publishing  in 
Cleveland  and  Cincinnati;  William  Schram,  for  thirty-one  years  con- 
nected wi.th  the  Poughkeepsie  Eagle ;  Edward  Bright,  editor  of  the 
Baptist  Register ;  Francis  D.  Fenniman ;  and  Cephas  Bennett,  who  be- 
came a  missionary  to  Burmah.and  his  brother  Dolphas,  a  later  publisher 
of  the  Baptist  Register. 

A  copperplate  engraver  named  Vistus  Balch,  who  located  himself  in 
the  village  as  early  as  1824,  found  considerable  employment  as  engraver 
of  bank  notes,  maps,  etc.  Acquiring  reputation  he  removed  to  New 
York  and  established  with  others  the  American   Bank   Note  Company. 

A  few  more  of  the  denizens  of  1824  must  be  briefly  summarized; 
Ammi  Dows,  forwarder  and  flour  dealer  in  company  with  Ira  B.  Carey, 
soon  removed  to  New  York,  but  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Harry, 
with  whom  the  title  of  the  firm  was  in  turn  Dows  &  Hurlburt,  Dows  & 
Whiting,  Dows  &  Guiteau,  Dows  &  Kissam,  and  ran  on  for  many  years; 
Thomas  Davies  was  a  long  continued  watchmaker;  Stafford  Palmer, 
Charles  Churchill,  Andrew  O.  &  Norman  Downer  traded  or  worked  in 
lumber  ;  John  F.  Vedder  in  leather  ;  Elisha  Cadwell  and  David  L.  Per- 
kins in  groceries ;  William  G.  AUyn  and  John  S.  Joslin  cut  marble  ; 
A.  W.  Latour  was  a  carriage  trimmer  and  Clark  Carpenter   a  wagon- 


i66  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

maker ;  Harry  Bushnell,  a  blacksmith  and  dealer  in  hardware,  but  best 
known  as  a  comical  temperance  lecturer ;  Lawrence  Morgan,  a  dyer; 
and  Dennis  Saumet,  a  barber  whose  visage  was  symbolized  week  after 
week  in  a  somber  looking  newspaper  wood-cut. 

The  Board  of  Trustees  created  by  the  election  of  1825  consisted  of 
Benjamin  Ballou,  Riley  Rogers,  William  H.  Maynard,  Charles  Morris, 
Nicholas  Smith,  and  John  R.  Ludlow.  Capt.  William  Clarke  remained 
the  president.  The  supervisor  was  E.  S.  Cozier  and  the  assessors  were 
Benjamin  Ballou,  John  Bradish,  and  David  P.  Hoyt.  The  officers  ap- 
pointed by  the  trustees  were  John  H.  Ostrom,  clerk  ;  Thomas  Walker, 
treasurer ;  Ara  Broadwell,  police  constable,  etc.  The  board  met  fre- 
quently in  the  course  of  the  year  and,  while  steadily  carrying  forward 
the  work  of  their  predecessors,  effected  a  few  additional  improvements. 
John  street  was  paved  from  the  canal  to  Bleecker  street  and  Bleecker 
from  John  to  Genesee.  Lafayette  street  was  also  paved  as  far  as  Mad- 
ison lane  and  a  sewer  laid  beneath  it  to  the  lot  of  A.  Cooper  and 
thence  to  the  canal.  Washington  street  was  provided  with  graveled 
sidewalks  from  the  canal  upward  and  Burnet  had  a  brick  walk  laid 
along  its  eastern  side.  The  only  new  street  of  the  year  was  Carnahan, 
now  known  as  a  part  of  Blandina.  A  stone  bridge  was  erected  across 
the  Starch  Factory  Creek  at  a  cost  of  $250,  and  a  like  sum  was  given 
for  an  acre  and  a  half  of  land  in  Deerfield  to  supply  the^  village  with 
paving  sand.  The  advantages  to  be  expected  from  a  public  market 
seem  to  have  taken  an  early  hold  upon  the  minds  of  the  board,  since  at 
their  second  session  they  resolved  to  erect  one  upon  such  place  as 
might  be  thereafter  agreed  on.  The  market  had  its  friends,  but  it  had 
also  its  enemies,  and  it  was  not  long  before  there  sprang  up  an  opposi- 
tion among  the  citizens  as  strong  as  that  which  had  been  experienced 
some  years  previously,  when  the  same  project  was  on  foot.  They 
were  pretty  generally  arrayed  on  one  side  or  the  other  as  remonstrants 
against  the  location  of  the  market  in  the  square  or  as  petitioners  for 
that  location.  For  the  present  the  market  remained  where  it  had  been 
placed. 

In  the  proceedings  of  this  year  we  find  the  first  notice  of  the  sum- 
moning of  a  physician  to  the  public  exercise  of  his  professional  calling. 
Dr.  John  McCall,  having  reported  to  the  board  that  a  person  had  come 


VISIT  OF  LA  FA  YF  TTF.  1 6  7 

into  the  village  with  the  small-pox,  was  at  once  made  health  officer 
and  village  physician,  and  it  was  ordered  that  the  person  so  infected 
be  forthwith  removed  to  some  safe  place  and  a  commitlee  of  three 
were  directed  to  carry  the  order  into  effect.  Two  days  later,  as  if 
questioning  their  own  authority  in  making  the  appointment,  a  com- 
mittee was  created  to  confer  with  the  poormaster  and  ascertain  to 
whom  the  right  of  appointment  belonged.  As  for  the  sick  man  he  was 
disposed  of  as  such  cases  have  since  then  almost  uniformly  be^n  :  he  was 
put  into  a  temporary  hovel  erected  for  the  purpose  and  there  was  at- 
tended in  seclusion. 

The  scholars  in  attendance  on  the  public  school  were  required  at  this 
time  to  pay  three  shillings  each  term,  which  fee  was  to  be  applied  to- 
ward defraying  the  expense  of  the  teachers.  The  village  tax  for  the 
year  amounted  to  one  shilling  on  every  $100.  Four  hundred  dollars 
were  raised  through  the  supervisors  for  the  support  of  the  poor. 

The  two  great  events  of  the  year  were  the  reception  of  General  La- 
fayette, the  nation's  guest,  then  passing  in  ovation  through  the  country, 
and  the  public  celebration  of  the  opening  of  the  Erie  Canal  just  com- 
pleted throughout  its  whole  extent.  Both  of  these  events  were  replete 
with  interest  to  the  generation  who  bore  a  part  in  them. 

"June  9,  1825,  the  deputations  from  the  general  committee  of  ar- 
rangements at  Utica,  of  which  his  honor  Judge  Williams  was  chairman, 
accompanied  by  Colonel  Lansing  and  his  honor  Judge  Storrs,  pro- 
ceeded to  Rome  to  meet  General  Lafayette.  After  fitting  honors  had 
been  paid  him  both  at  that  place  and  at  Whitesboro  the  committee  pr-o- 
ceeded  to  conduct  him  hither.  The  procession  was  formed  at  Whites- 
boro;  the  general  was  seated  in  the  barouche  accompanied  by  Judge 
Williams  and  preceded  by  an  escort  of  cavalry  commanded  by  Gen. 
John  J.  Knox.  The  general  was  followed  by  a  carriage  conveying  his 
son.  Colonel  Lafayette,  Colonel  Lansing,  Colonel  Mappa,  and  Richard 
R.  Lansing.  Next  succeeded  coaches  with  his  secretary,  M.  Le  Vas- ^ 
seur,  the  other  gentlemen  of  his  suite,  and  the  Utica  committee,  Judge 
Storrs,  Lieutenant  Simonson,  and  Captain  Wright,  of  Rome.  A  large 
cavalcade  of  citizens  on  horseback  riding  three  abreast  followed,  and 
were  succeeded  by  a  squadron  of  cavalry  under  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Cone.     The  procession  moved  rapidly  and  increased  as  it  passed 


1 68  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

from  the  accession  of  citizens.  All  the  way  the  fences  were  lined  and 
the  houses  thronged  with  people  manifesting  the  utmost  eagerness  to 
see  the  favorite  and  guest  of  the  nation.  When  the  general  arrived  at 
.the  boundary  of  the  village  a  salute  of  twenty-four  guns  was  fired.  The 
procession  entered  Lafayette  street,  where  the  troops  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ostrom  were  drawn  up  on  both  sides  of 
the  way  and  saluted  the  general  as  he  passed.  The  procession  entered 
Genesee  street,  the  crowd  of  eager  spectators  accumulating  at  every 
step,  and  passed  the  bridge  over  the  canal  where  a  triumphant  arch  was 
erected  surmounted  by  a  flag  labeled  '  Lafayette,  the  Apostle  of  Lib- 
erty, we  hail  thee — welcome  ! '  The  procession  moved  down  Genesee 
street  and  stopped  at  Shepard's  Hotel,  where  the  general  was  received 
on  the  steps  at  the  front  door  by  William  Clarke,  esq.,  president  of  the 
village  of  Utica,  and  a  speech  was  delivered  by  Mr.  Clarke  followed  by 
a  reply  from  Lafayette. 

"  The  general  breakfasted  and  dined  at  Shepard's,  and  in  the  interval 
the  ceremonies  of  introduction  and  the  review  of  the  troops  were  per- 
formed. Au  immense  number  of  gentlemen  of  the  county  of  Oneida 
and  the  vicinity  were  introduced  to  the  general,  and  at  12  o'clock  the 
ladies  were  introduced,  which  ceremony  occupied  nearly  an  hour,  so 
great  was  the  number  whom  patriotism,  respect,  and  affection  called  to 
the  interesting  scene.  The  troops  passed  in  review  before  the  general, 
who  received  their  salute  standing  with  head  uncovered  on  the  steps  of 
Mr.  Shepard's  front  door.  At  the  particular  request  of  Lafayette  the 
chiefs  of  the  Oneidas  were  invited  to  meet  him,  and  among  them  he 
recognized  two  whom  he  knew  during  the  Revolutionary  war.  But 
one  of  the  most  solemn  and  affecting  incidents  was  the  interview  be- 
tween the  general  and  the  old  soldiers  of  the  Revolutionary  army.  A 
large  number  were  assembled,  some  of  whom  were  with  him  at  the  at- 
tack on  the  redoubts  at  Yorktown.  The  deep  and  keen  feelings  mani- 
fested by  these  venerated  men  on  once  more  beholding  their  beloved 
general,  and  his  frequent  exclamations  '  Oh,  my  friend,  I  know  you  I' 
with  the  impassioned  salutations,  excited  the  liveliest  symyathies  of 
every  heart. 

"  Over  the  front  door  of  Mr.  Shepard's  hotel  was  placed  a  splendid 
transparent  painting  by  Mr.  Vanderlip,  on  which  was  inscribed  in  large 


I 


'Sn^  PbyFl  0  KBrvu>y<^^ 


VISIT  OF  LA  FA  YE  TTE.  1 69 

letters  'Welcome,  Lafayette.'  After  the  general  had  partaken  of  a  cold 
collation  (the  only  dinner  which  circumstances  would  permit),  at  which 
Rev.  Mr.  Wiley  craved  the  blessing  of  Providence,  the  general,  by  par- 
ticular request  of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  visited  the  family 
of  Alexander  B.  Johnson,  esq.,  (Mrs.  Johnson  being  a  niece  of  the  Presi 
dent,)  who  with  a  few  ladies  of  the  village  received  him  with  tlie  cordi- 
ality and  respect  which  all  feel.  On  his  return  he  called  for  a  moment 
at  the  house  of  Arthur  Breese,  esq  ,  where  the  Rev.  Mr.  Galusha  de- 
livered him  a  neat  poetical  address.  The  general  then  paid  his  respects 
to  the  family  of  President  Clarke  and  was  conducted  to  the  packet  boat 
Governor  Clinton,  named  for  the  occasion  Lafayette,  commanded  by 
Major  Swartwout,  and  which  had  been  fitted  in  tasteful  and  elegant 
style  for  his  accommodation  to  Schenectady.  It  was  drawn  by  three 
white  horses,  which  with  their  rider  had  appropriate  decorations.  At 
the  moment  of  embarkation  a  salute  of  twenty-four  guns  was  fired,  and 
when  the  boat  began  to  move  the  citizens  congregated  on  the  bridges 
and  banks  of  the  canal  rent  the  air  with  loud  and  long  continued  cheer- 
ing, which  was  repeated  at  intervals  until  the  general  had  passed  the 
compact  part  of  the  village.  At  the  last  bridge,  near  the  residence  of 
the  lamented  Judge  Miller,  little  boys  threw  baskets  of  flowers  into  the 
boat  as  it  passed.  The  general  all  the  time  presented  himself  to  the 
people  and  answered  \heir  congratulations  with  bows  and  expressiv  e 
gesticulations.  The  committee  attended  him  to  the  bounds  of  the 
county  and  a  deputation  proceeded  with  him." 

The  Erie  Canal  was  completed  on  the  26th  of  October,  1825,  water 
from  Lake  Erie  was  admitted  into  it  at  Black  Rock,  and  on  this  day 
the  first  boat  ascended  the  Lockport  locks,  passed  through  the  mount- 
ain ridge,  and  entered  the  lake.  The  opening  ceremonies  were  attended 
with  unbounded  joy  and  enthusiasm  ;  cannon  were  stationed  along  the 
banks  from  one  end  to  the  other  at  a  distance  of  four  or  five  miles 
apart,  and  a  series  of  reports  was  echoed  through  its  length  in  token  of 
the  mingling  of  the  waters;  music  and  all  the  festivities  that  a  grand 
national  success  can  invent  were  put  in  requisition  to  glorify  the  occa- 
sion. A  flotilla  of  boats,  having  on  board  Governor  Clinton  and  officers 
of  the  State  government,  a  committee  of  the  common  council  of  New 
York,  and  numerous  delegates  from  towns  along  the  line  of  the  canal, 
22 


lyo  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

made  the  passage  from  Lake  Erie  to  Sandy  Hook.  Leaving  Buffalo 
on  Wednesday  morning  it  was  their  intention  to  be  in  Utica  on  Satur- 
day night,  but  unforseen  delays  procrastinated  their  arrival  until  Sun- 
day noon.  In  the  afternoon  they  attended  divine  worship  at  the  Presby- 
terian Church.  Early  on  Monday  morning  these  distinguished  guests 
were  received  at  the  court-house,  where  an  address  was  delivered  by 
Judge  Ezekiel  Bacon  in  behalf  of  his  fellow  townsmen,  to  which  Gov- 
ernor Clinton  replied.  "  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  addresses  were 
delivered  it  was  observed  that  Judge  Bacon,  who  always  does  such 
things  well,  was  never  more  happy.  Governor  Clinton  was  sensibly 
affected  and  delivered  his  reply  with  much  feeling.  The  address  ex- 
pressed in  a  forcible  and  eloquent  manner  the  congratulations  of  the 
citizens  of  Utica,  and  paid  appropriate  and  merited  compliments  to  all 
those  who  had  planned  or  assisted  in  the  execution  of  the  stupendous 
work.  The  reply  of  the  governor  contained  a  well-turned  and  well- 
merited  eulogium  on  the  Hon.  Judge  Piatt,  who  by  his  exertions  in 
the  Senate  and  in  the  Council  of  Revision  afforded  powerful  and 
efficient  aid  to  the  cause  of  the  canals,  and  to  whom  also  we  were  first 
indebted  for  the  favorite  and  popular  expression  of  '  The  Young  Lion  of 
the  West.' "  They  then  re-embarked  and  continued  their  excursion. 
In  the  evening  the  canal  was  illuminated  along  its  course  through  the 
village  by  floating  tar  barrels  on  fire.  The  committee  from  Utica 
appointed  to  take  part  in  the  celebration  at  New  York  consisted  of  Will- 
iam Clarke,  president  of  the  corporation,  Jonas  Piatt,  Thomas  H.  Hub- 
bard, Charles  C.  Brodhead,  Richard  R.  Lansing,  and  Alexander  Cov- 
entry. Elsewhere  along  the  whole  line  and  to  the  city  of  New  York 
the  occasion  was  observed  with  similar  demonstrations  of  delight. 
Medals  were  struck,  sketches  of  canal  scenes  were  imprinted  on  earth- 
enware, on  hankerchiefs,  etc.,  in  commemoration  of  the  event. 

As  an  evidence  of  the  rapidity  with  which  the  canal  was  brought  into 
use  and  of  the  very  great  change  which  it  made  in  the  mode  of  trans- 
portation from  those  before  employed  it  may  be  stated  that  the  num- 
ber of  canal  boats  which  arrived  at  Albany  during  the  season  of  1823 
■was  1,329,  during  that  of  1824  2,687,  during  that  of  1825  3,336,  and 
up  to  September  6th  of  the  year  1826  4,380,  which  number  it  was 
presumed  would,  by  the  close  of  navigation,  be  increased  to  7,000.    The 


SPENCER  KELLOGG.  171 

rate  for  transportation  on  the  turnpike  in  1826  was  one  and  one  half 
cents  per  mile  ;  the  rate  by  the  Erie  Canal  was  five  mills.  The  impetus 
it  gave  to  the  city  of  New  York  is  shown  in  part  by  the  fact  that  its 
proximate  completion  caused  the  erection  there  in  1824  of  3,000  new 
houses. 

Lawyers  who  entered  on  practice  in  1825  and  who  held  a  prominent 
position  in  the  afifairs  of  Utica  were  William  J.  Bacon  and  Charles  A. 
Mann.  A  notice  of  Judge  Bacon  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  the 
Bench  and  Bar  and  of  Mr.  Mann  in  the  biographical  portion  of  this 
volume. 

Spencer  Kellogg,   a  leading   merchant,  was  born  at    Williamstown, 
Mass.,  the  son  of  a  Revolutionary  sire;  he  became  early  in  life  a  resident 
of  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  embarked  in  business,  and  was  prominent  in 
civil,  military,  and   religious  circles.      In  1824  he  removed  to  Utica  and 
conducted  a  large  dry  goods  trade  with  remarkable  energy  and  success. 
His  hrst  partner  was  S.  H.  Reynolds;  later  he  was  associated  with  his 
son,  Palmer  V.  Kellogg,  and  afterward  with  others.     He  took  an  active  - 
part  in  public  affairs  and  filled  various  public  offices,  among  others  that  of 
mayor.      He  was  largely  instrumental  in  inaugurating  steam  manufact- 
ures, and  thus  contributing  to  secure  the  city  from  the  decline  to  which 
it  was  tending  and  turning  it  to  the   thrift  it  has  since  been   pursuing. 
With  a  few  associates  he  afterward  started  the  Black  River  Railroad  and 
was  one  of  the  directors.      An  invaluable  member,  elder,  and  trustee  of 
the    First   Presbyterian    Church,  taking  part  also  in  its   Sunday  school 
and  Bible  class   as  long  as  his  age  and  health   permitted,  he  signally 
illustrated  Christian  public  spirit,  seeking  earnestly  the  correction  of  pre- 
vailing evils  and  the  redress  of  wrongs.      His  humanity  committed  him 
particularly  to  the  abolition  of  slavery,  and  while  deploring  the  intem- 
perance with  which  it  was  advocated  he  gave  it  his  best  powers.      Mr. 
Kellogg's  strength  of  mind,  boldness,  indomitability,  and  power  of  exe- 
cution presented  him  to  strangers  chiefly  as  the  embodiment  of  force. 
His  friends  recognized  him  as  personifying  delicacy  of  sensibility.      He 
was  a  child  in  his  affections,   more  tender  of  heart  than  irresistible  of 
hand.     During  the   epidemic  of  cholera  in  1832   he  devoted  his  time, 
energy,  and  sympathies  to  the  suffering  and   dying  and  to  the  comfort 
of  their  afflicted  families.     In  one  instance  he  took  bereaved  daughters. 


172  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  sisters  to  his  own  house  ;  in  another,  where  one  of  two  maiden 
sisters  in  humble  life  was  taken  away  by  the  fell  disease  and  the  grief 
of  the  survivor  was  intensified  at  the  thought  of  her  hasty  and  unat- 
tended burial,  Mr.  Kellogg  procured  suitable  conveyance  for  the  coffin 
and  sent  his  own  carriage  that  she  might  accompany  the  remains  to 
their  final  resting  place,  his  own  aged  father  volunteering  and  serving 
as  the  driver. 

Andrew  S.  Pond  at  this  time  became  associated  with  Ephraim  Hart 
in  the  casting  of  iron.  Subsequently  he  carried  on  the  same  business 
with  Robert  Higham  at  the  Vulcan  works  in  West  Utica,  and  was  also 
a  maker  of  steam  engines. 

J.  B.  (Jean  Baptiste)  Marchisi  had  a  youthful  experience  that  was 
unique  and  a  subsequent  one  that  for  its  duration  as  a  resident  of 
Utica  was  as  much  so.  Born  in  Piedmont,  Italy,  August  6,  1789,  he 
was  conscripted  at  the  age  of  eighteen  and  served  in  some  of  the  cam- 
paigns of  Napoleon,  not  as  a  bearer  of  arms,  but  in  the  departments  of 
adjutant  and  quartermaster.  Taken  prisoner  by  the  English  he  was 
sent  to  Gibraltar  and  thence  to  Canada,  where  he  was  three- years  in 
their  service.  He  married  and  in  18 15  came  to  Utica.  For  ten  years 
an  assistant  of  Dr.  Amos  G.  Hull  he  began  in  1825  the  selling  of  drugs. 
This  pursuit  he  followed  in  various  locations  almost  to  the  time  of  his 
death,  February  i,  i888,  at  the  age  of  ninety- five.  Quiet,  trustworthy, 
and  a  faithful  keeper  of  his  business  it  kept  him  and  a  large  family  and 
won  for  him  the  public  regard.  His  Catholicon,  patented  many  years 
since,  has  still  a  large  sale. 

Dr.  Meacham  had  as  a  partner  Dr.  Jonathan  Day,  who  a  little  later 
held  an  honorable  position  among  the  profession  of  Syracuse  and  died 
there  when  the  cholera  visited  that  place  in  1832. 

Stephen  Mather,  tinsmith,  was  for  many  years  an  elder  in  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church  and  the  head  of  a  large  family,  of  which  one  son, 
William  L.,  became  a  minister. 

Others  whose  names  are  now  first  met  with,  though  they  may  per- 
chance have  gained  an  earlier  foothold  in  the  place,  were  Dr.  Edward 
Aiken,  student  and  for  a  short  time  partner  of  Dr.  Theodore  Pomeroy; 
A.  &  S.  Lightbody,  leather  dealers  ;  Hastings  &  Company,  wholesale 
grocers,  the  company   being  at  this  time  Theodore  S.  Gold,  but  ex- 


THIRD  VILLAGE  CHARTER.  173 

changed  in  the  following  year  for  Milton  D.  Parker,  son  of  Jason 
Parker  ;  Matthew  Codd,  proprietor  of  the  Utica  brewery  ;  S.  A.  Sibley, 
tinsmith  and  stove  dealer;  James  Ingols,  dealer  in  fancy  articles; 
N.  F.  &  J.  Vedder  and  Peter  McDougal,  leather  dealers. 

Nicholas  F.  Vedder,  born  in  Schenectady  in  January,  1804,  for  some 
years  carried  on  the  shoe  trade  with  two  of  his  brothers.  He  was 
energetic  and  ambitious  and  attained  a  prominent  position  in  business 
circles;  was  a  stockholder  in  the  telegraph  company  and  the  Oneida 
Bank,  a  director  in  the  Gas  and  the  Water  Works  Companies  and  in  the 
Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad.  He  died  May  i,  1873,  leaving  one 
•daughter. 


CHAPTER  V. 
THE   THIRD   VILLAGE   CHARTER   CONTINUED. 

Village  Proceedings  and  incoming  Residents  to  the  Year  1832 —  A  Period  of  large 
Expectations  —  Application  for  a  City  Charter. 

THE  history  of  the  village  during  the  few  years  succeeding  the 
opening  of  the  canal  shows  that  a  spirit  of  enterprise  and  hopeful- 
ness was  abroad  in  the  community,  and  from  this  time  forward  for  sev- 
eral years  and  until  the  financial  panic  of  1837  progress  was  rapid  and 
encouraging.  The  following  are  the  officers  of  the  village  for  the  year 
1826:  President,  Ezra  S.  Cozier;  trustees,  John  E.  Hinman,  Riley 
Rogers,  Abraham  Culver,  Amos  Gay,  Nicholas  Smith,  John  R.  Lud- 
low; assessors,  Benjamin  Ballou,  John  Bradish,  David  P.  Hoyt;  treas- 
urer, Thomas  Walker;  constables,  Robert  Jones,  Nathan  Christian; 
police  constable,  Henry  W.  Osburn ;  surveyor,  William  Jones  (first 
term  of  this  office) ;  superintendent,  Nicholas  Smith  ;  clerk,  John  H. 
Ostrom. 

For  the  first  time  the  clerk  was  voted  a  salary  to  the  amount  of  $50. 
The  proceedings  of  the  year  consisted  of  the  paving  of  Liberty  street 
from  Hotel  to  Broadway  ;   of  Hotel,  Seneca,  and  Washington  from  Lib- 


174  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

erty  to  the  canal;  of  Elizabeth  from  Genesee  to  Charlotte;  of  Char- 
lotte from  Elizabeth  to  Bleecker ;  of  First  between  Broad  and  Main  ; 
the  putting  in  shape  with  graveled  sidewalks  of  Carnahan,  Union,  and 
Blandina  streets  and  the  extension  of  Broadway  to  Genesee  street;  the 
appointment  of  a  hook  and  ladder  company  and  eighteen  fire  wardens; 
and  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year  the  leveling  and  improvement  of 
Chancellor  Square.  The  sum  of  $125  was  appropriated  to  clean  the 
streets.  A  change  was  made  in  the  ordinances  providing  that  no  build- 
ing should  be  erected  till  "  the  range  of  said  building  with  the  street 
shall  have  been  laid  down  by  the  surveyor."  For  this  work  the  builder 
was  to  pay  $I. 

The  labor  of  keeping  the  village  orderly  occupied  considerable  atten- 
tion, and  the  place  was  probably  more  difficult  to  govern  according  to 
its  size  than  the  city  is  now.  The  number  of  watchmen  employed 
would  seem  to  indicate  this ;  from  six  to  eighteen  constituted  the  force 
for  a  number  of  years.  Early  in  the  year  it  was  resolved  by  the  board 
that  the  watch  should  be  continued,  "  provided  they  would  receive 
orders  on  the  treasurer  payable  when  there  are  funds."  It  is  little  wonder 
they  objected.  The  force  was  discharged  at  the  next  meeting  of  the 
board  in  March. 

On  the  20th  of  February  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  the  Court  for 
the  Trial  of  Impeachments  and  the  Correction  of  Errors  be  respectfully 
invited  to  hold  its  next  term  in  Utica.  A  special  meeting  of  the  United 
States  District  Court  was  held  here  in  the  court-house  in  the  same 
month.  The  Utica  Aqueduct  Company  was  chartered  this  year  to 
supply  the  village  with  wholesome  water  for  household  purposes.  Seven 
years  later  we  learn  from  a  directory  that  no  exertion  had  been  made 
to  carry  the  improvement  into  effect.  There  was  also  chartered  the 
Utica  Horticultural  Society,  of  which  Nathan  Williams  was  the  first 
president  and  Thomas  Colling  secretary.  It  accomplished  something 
more  than  the  preceding,  though  its  existence  was  brief  The  company 
purchased  and  filled  with  plants  four  and  one-half  acres  of  ground  on 
the  east  side  of  Garden  street  (doubtless  so  called  therefrom)  not  far 
from  Bristol  street.  It  was  cared  for  by  Richard  Despard,  but  was  ad- 
vertised to  be  sold  at  auction  in  January,  1829. 

The  Utica  Lyceum,  formed  in  1823,  was  at  this  time   incorporated. 


DR.  PECKHAM— TRUSTEES  OF  1827.  175 

Its  chief  object  was  declared  to  be  "  to  encourage  the  study  of  natural 
history  and  other  useful  sciences  by  means  of  public  discussions,  lect- 
ures, and  essays."  It  was  in  fact  a  debating  society  sustained  by  the 
intelligent  men  of  the  town,  and  was  a  profitable  and  entertaining  place 
of  weekly  resort  for  the  more  cultivated  of  both  sexes,  lasting  until  its 
place  was  taken  by  the  Young  Men's  Association. 

Among  the  new  comers  of  1826  were  the  subsequently  eminent 
legist,  Hiram  Denio,  and  the  busy  practitioner  of  medicine,  Dr.  Peleg 
R.  Peckham.  The  former  will  come  under  notice  hereafter  in  the  chap 
ter  on  the  Bench  and  Bar.  Before  coming  to  Utica  Dr.  Peckham  had 
already  made  a  beginning  of  practice  in  Otsego  County.  Here  he  was 
for  many  years  a  leading  physician.  He  did  little  surgery,  but  was  ex- 
clusively a  family  physician,  enjoying  the  full  confidence  of  many  of 
the  best  families  of  the  place  as  their  much  trusted  adviser  and  friend. 
He  was  constant  in  attendance,  cheerful  and  kind  in  manner,  intelligently 
observant  of  the  sick,  minute  and  positive  in  directions,  and  insistent  on 
the  observance  of  them.  Relying  strongly  on  his  own  judgment  he 
was  little  given  to  seek  the  aid  of  others,  though  ready  to  have  it  in 
severe  cases  or  when  urged  by  his  patrqns.  He  had  less  esprit  de  corps 
than  some  others  of  his  contemporaries,  had  no  desire  for  medical  or 
other  public  office,  and  cherished  few  interests  alien  to  his  legitimate 
duties.  He  was  prompt  as  a  collector,  shrewd  in  business  transactions, 
and  successful  in  acquiring  property.  In  his  church  he  was  warmly  in- 
terested and  was  one  of  the  foremost  in  the  organization  of  Grace 
Church.     He  removed  from  the  city  about  1853. 

The  following  officers  were  elected  for  1827  :  Trustees,  John  H.  Os- 
trom,  Augustine  G.  Dauby,  Abraham  Culver,  Thomas  Colling,  Amos 
Gay,  Chester  Griswold,  Augustus  Hurlburt,  Nicholas  Devereux  ;  asses- 
sors, Benjamin  Ballou,  Apollos  Cooper,  Joshua  M.  Church,  Comfort 
Butler;  constables,  Nathan  Christian,  A.  C.  Ellenwood,  Birdseye  Clark; 
clerk  and  surveyor,  William  Jones  ;  treasurer,  Thomas  Walker ;  police 
constable,  Henry  W.  Osburn.  The  president,  receiving  his  appoint- 
ment from  the  governor  of  the  State,  was  E.  Z.  Cozier. 

A  village  attorney  was  for  the  first  time  created,  the  incumbent  of 
the  office  being  Robert  Van  Rensselaer,  a  temporary  resident.  The 
union  of  the  offices  of  clerk  and  surveyor,  now  first  occurring,  was  con- 


176  ,       MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

titiued  for  several  years,  and  in  April  action  was  taken  which  resulted 
in  dividing  the  village  into  four  wards,  regulating  the  elections,  and 
empowering  the  trustees  to  raise  $3,000,  and  $1,000  in  each  of  the  suc- 
ceeding five  years  for  a  market.  This  question  of  establishing  a  market 
occupied  a  good  deal  of  public  attention  for  some  time.  The  action 
above  noticed  followed  upon  the  circulation  of  a  petition  which  T.  S. 
Mitchell  was  authorized  to  circulate  in  the  village  relative  to  raising 
money  for  the  market;  the  petition  was  signed  by  about  two-thirds  of 
the  freeholders.  A  committee  consisting  of  E.  Z.  Cozier,  A.  Culver, 
A.  Hurlburt,  Chester  Griswold,  and  J.  H.  Ostrom  were  appointed  to 
ascertain  where  and  on  what  terms  a  suitable  piece  of  ground  could  be 
obtained.  A  lot  was  selected  and  bought  of  John  R.  Bleecker  on  the 
corner  of  Bleecker  and  Back  streets  at  a  cost  of  $1,000.  On  the  26th 
of  September  the  committee  was  directed  to  proceed  with  the  erection 
of  a  building,  and  on  the  25th  of  January  of  the  next  year  it  was  re- 
solved that  the  market  committee  be  instructed  to  receive  proposals  for 
building  a  market  according  to  the  plans,  and  also  for  a  building  two 
stories  high  and  one  of  one  story.  On  February  i6th  a  special  meet- 
ing was  held  and  it  was  resolved  to  adopt  the  plans  of  Mr.  Colling  for 
the  market,  and  on  the  20th  of  that  month  the  committee  was  author- 
ized to  build  at  a  cost  of  $40,000. 

Steuben  Square  was  ordered  named,  laid  out,  leveled,  and  otherwise 
improved  with  fences,  trees,  and  walks.  Rutger  street  was  opened  to 
P'irst  street  and  South  street  extended  from  West  to  Steuben.  Other 
streets  improved  were  Lafayette,  Washington,  Genesee,  Seneca,  First, 
John,  and  Jay,  parts  of  which  were  paved  and  sidewalks  laid. 

An  ordinance  was  passed  defining  the  fire  limits,  which  were  as  fol- 
lows: Beginning  at  the  east  line  of  First  street  at  the  corner  of  Water 
street  and  running  thence  southerly  along  the  easterly  line  of  First  street 
to  the  southerly  line  of  Elizabeth  street;  thence  westerly  along  the 
southerly  line  of  Elizabeth  street  to  Genesee  street ;  thence  south- 
erly along  the  easterly  line  of  Genesee  street  to  a  point  opposite 
the  westerly  line  of  Washington,  street,  where  the  same  intersects  Gene- 
see street ;  thence  northerly  from  said  point  of  intersection  along  the 
westerly  line  of  Washington  street  to  the  northerly  line  of  Whitesboro 
street ;  thence  easterly  along  the  northerly  line  of  Whitesboro  street  to 


EVENTS  OF  1827.  177 

Division  street;  thence  northerly  along  the  westerly  line  of  Division 
street  to  Water  street ;  thence  easterly  along  the  southerly  line  of  Water 
street  to  the  easterly  line  of  First  street;  and  including  both  sides  of 
First,  Elizabeth,  Genesee,  Washington,  Whitesboro,  and  Division  streets 
and  the  southerly  side  of  Water  street.  In  August  the  ordinances  were 
changed,  making  more  stringent  regulations  for  caring  for  the  streets, 
to  suppress  gambling,  preventing  cattle  from  running  at  large,  prevent 
ing  bathing  in  the  canal,  and  other  matters.  A  public  meeting  was  held 
February  28th  at  which  a  committee  of  five  was  appointed  to  co  oper- 
ate with  the  authorities  in  raising  $2,000  for  the  purchase  of  a  fire  engine 
and  hose,  and  for  no  other  purpose.  Two  large  fires  which  destroyed 
Shumway's  coach  factory  and  Harden's  brewery,  and  which  occurred 
within  a  few  days  previously,  were  mentioned  as  the  cause  for  this  action 
by  the  people.  The  want  of  hose  was  much  felt.  Another  public 
meeting  was  called  to  express  sympathy  with  the  Greeks  then  suffering 
from  their  Turkish  oppressors  and  to  render  them  financial  aid,  for 
which  purpose  a  committee  was  appointed  to  solicit  funds. 

Nicholas  Devereux,  who  had  become  the  owner  of  the  Jeremiah  Van 
Rensselaer  propert}',  intersected  it  with  streets  and  laid  it  out  in  lots. 
Lots  sold  on  some  of  the  streets,  seventy-five  by  twenty  feet  in  dimen- 
sions, for  $1,200  to  $1,500  each.  Another  lot  on  Genesee  street  just  above 
the  canal,  having  a  frontage  of  eighteen  feet,  was  disposed  of  at  this  time 
for  $166  per  foot.  This  was  spoken  of  as  evidence  of  great  advance  in  the 
value  of  real  estate.  Considerable  stir  was  made  in  the  early  part  of  the 
year  toward  removing  the  State  capital  from  Albany  to  Utica.  A  pub 
lie  meeting  was  held  in  January  at  which  resolutions  favoring  the  scheme 
were  adopted,  and  it  was  assumed  that  the  inhabitants  would  subscribe 
liberally  toward  a  new  building.  A  committee  of  fifteen  leading  citi- 
zens were  deputed  to  endeavor  to  secure  the  object. 

Among  the  minor  occurrences  of  the  time  was  the  observance  of  Inde  - 
pendence  day  by  the  Sunday  schools  of  the  village,  a  procession  of  70a 
or  800  scholars  marching  to  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  and  after 
listening  to  an  address  by  Rev.  Mr.  Aiken  proceeding  to  the  warehouse 
of  James  Piatt,  on  Bleecker  slip,  where  they  partook  of  a  collation  pre- 
pared for  them.  The  Methodist  chapel  on  Bleecker  street  was  this  year 
dedicated.     A  theatrical  company  is  announced  as  having  returned  to 


178  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

give  entertainments,  as  a  circus  had  already  been  doing  for  a  year  or 
more  in  the  rear  of  tiie  Canal  Coffee  House.  The  artist,  Samuel  F".  B. 
Morse,  was  in  town  and  advertises  that  he  would  devote  a  week  or  two 
professionally.  Fifty  cadets  from  the  military  school  of  Captain  Part- 
ridge, of  Middletown,  Conn.,  marched  in  from  the  East  in  September, 
among  whom  was  Horatio  Seymour,  as  much  admired  then  as  he  was 
throughout  his  later  career.  In  sympathy  not  only  with  the  growing 
pride  of  its  people,  but  as  a  proof  also,  drawn  from  without,  that  the 
town  was  in  fact  experiencing  a  decided  impetus  from  the  increasing 
traffic  through  the  canal,  I  introduce  the  following  notice  of  Utica 
copied  into  one  of  the  papers  from  the  Hartford  Times: 

"  The  business  of  the  place  at  the  present  time  surpasses  all  expectation.  In  walk- 
ing through  Genesee  street  a  person  might  well  think  himself  in  one  of  our  largest 
cities.  The  rich  variety  of  goods  displayed  and  the  numerous  country  merchants  who 
come  here  to  supply  their  own  stores  would  tell  you  that  Utica  is  a  place  of  business 
and  wealth.  In  passing  around  this  village  we  find  the  appearance  of  permanent  pros- 
perity rarely  lo  be  witnessed  in  a  new  country.  The  public  buildings  have  an  impos- 
ing aspect.  A  Roman  Catholic,  an  Episcopalian,  a  Baptist,  a  Methodist,  and  two 
Presbyterian  Churches  are  beautifully  located  and  built  according  to  the  most  approved 
style  of  architecture.  There  are  also  many  private  dwellings  which  exhibit  fine  taste 
in  their  design  and  execution."^ 

A  lawyer  who  began  his  professional  career  at  this  time  was  John  G. 
Floyd.  He  was  the  son  of  Col.  NicoU  Floyd,  of  Mastic,  L.  I.,  and  grand- 
son of  Gen.  William  Floyd,  a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence. 
He  was  born  at  Mastic,  February  5,  1806,  was  graduated  at  Hamilton 
College  in  1824,  and  pursued  his  legal  studies  with  Joseph  Kirkland, 
-of  Utica.  He  was  clerk  and  attorney  of  the  village  from  1829  to  1833. 
He  represented  this  district  in  Congress  in  1839-41  and  1841-43. 
His  profession  he  practiced  at  first  in  company  with  Rutger  B.  Miller, 
next  with  William  Tracy,  then  alone  until  1840,  when  he  became  associ- 
ated with  Charles  H.  Doolittle  and  continued  thus  associated  during 
the  remainder  of  his  stay  in  Utica.  About  1842  he  returned  to  Mastic 
and  to  the  family  estate.  There  he  was  as  prominent  in  public  affairs 
as  he  had  been  here.  He  was  State  senator  from  Suffolk  County  in 
1848—49  and   subsequently  was    elected  to   Congress    from    the   First 

'  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  at  the  time  under  consideration  there  was  a  strong  rivalry  between 
the  villages  of  Utica  and  Rochester,  while  not  a  word  appears  as  to  the  prospects  of  Syracuse  ;  at 
the  present  time  the  latter  city  has  far  outstripped  Utica  and  has  become  in  some  sense  a  rival  of 
Rochester. 


DA VID   WA GER—R UTGER  B.  MILLER.  1 7 9 

Congressional  District,  serving  from  December,  1851,  to  March,  1853. 
He  was  a  Democrat  until  the  formation  of  the  Republican  party,  when 
he  joined  that  party  and  acted  with  it  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  His 
death  occurred  October  6,  1881.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Gen. 
Joseph  Kirkland.      He  left  a  family  of  three  sons  and  two  daughters. 

Those  who  remember  David  Wager  in  his  prime  recall  a  stalwart 
figure,  impelled  by  a  vigorous  brain,  quick  and  decided  in  action,  and 
exerting  a  marked  power  over  men.  Much  withdrawn  for  many  years 
by  reason  of  impaired  sight  from  free  participation  in  public  affairs  he  had 
stood  at  one  time  in  the  front  rank  in  Central  New  York  for  ability  and 
influence.  He  was  a  son  of  Henry  Wager,  of  Western,  and  was  born 
there  March  17,  1804.  He  was  educated  at  P'airfield  Academy  when 
that  institution  was  hardly  less  than  a  college  in  the  facilities  it  afforded. 
He  read  law  in  the  office  of  the  newly  associated  partners,  Samuel 
Beardsley  and  Greene  C.  Bronson,  and  at  their  feet  he  learned  the 
political  gospel  of  which  he  became  an  enthusiastic  disciple.  He  entered 
on  practice  with  Charles  A.  Marin,  who  had  been  his  schoolfellow  at 
Fairfield.  Subsequently  he  had  J.  Watson  Williams  as  a  partner.  He 
stood  well  as  a  lawyer,  although  his  practice  was  confined  to  a  com- 
paratively few  years.  It  was  as  a  public  man  that  he  was  chiefly  con- 
spicuous, for  he  was  a  striving  and  prevailing  power  among  the  Utica 
members  of  the  Albany  Regency  at  a  time  when  that  regency  was 
uppermost  in  the  political  control  of  the  State.  In  the  Assembly  of 
1833—35  '^nd  in  the  Senate  of  1836-40  Mr.  Wager  occupied  a  leading 
position.  He  was  a  director  in  the  Utica  and  Syracuse  Railroad  and  for 
a  time  its  treasurer,  and  after  the  consolidation  a  director  in  the  Central. 
He  was  a  man  of  strong  convictions,  usually  taking  the  extreme  posi- 
tions of  his  party  and  maintaining  them  with  rugged  persistence.  His 
counsels  were  highly  regarded  by  representative  Democrats  here  and 
elsewhere.  He  had  been  for  some  years  in  poor  health  and  lived  toward 
the  close  of  his  life  in  the  Colonel  Walker  mansion  on  the  eastern 
border  of  the  city.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Judge  Nathan  Williams, 
who,  with  an  only  daughter,  Mrs.  A.  T.  Goodwin,  still  survives. 

Rutger  B.  Miller  at  about  this  time  began  his  career  as  a  prominent 
and  active  citizen.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Judge  Morris  S.  Miller,. 
was  born  in  Lowville,  July  28,  1805,  and  was  brought  here  while  yet 


i8o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

an  infant.  His  education  was  obtained  in  part  at  Montreal  and-  in  part 
at  Yale  College  at  New  Haven.  He  was  trained  for  the  bar  at  the  law 
school  at  Litchfield  and  in  the  office  of  Hiram  Denio.  His  first  associ- 
ate in  practice  was  John  G.  Floyd  and  a  little  later  it  was  Chester  Hay- 
den.  In  1832  he  served  a  term  as  member  of  the  State  Assembly  and 
in  1833-34  was  clerk  of  the  United  States  District  Court.  In  the  latter 
year  he  was  elected  to  Congress  in  place  of  Samuel  Beardsley,  resigned. 
The  pursuit  of  the  law  did  not  accord  with  his  tastes  nor  with  the  cares 
required  of  him  in  the  management  of  the  estate  of  his  father  and  other 
relations.  About  1830  he  erected,  on  the  site  of  the  ground  where  his 
father  ere  his  death  had  been  preparing  to  build,  the  first  and  central 
building  of  the  Rutger  Place,  now  occupied  by  Mrs.  Roscoe  Conkling; 
also  the  block  of  brick  buildings  on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street 
next  south  of  Blandina  street.  The  block  which  forms  the  northern 
angle  of  Whitesboro  and  Genesee  streets  was  also  put  up  by  him.  He 
was  active  in  the  construction  of  the  canal  basin  known  by  his  name  and 
built  a  large  block  of  three-story  brick  houses  on  Bridge  street  near 
Broad,  a  large  warehouse  on  the  basin,  a  grist-mill  opposite,  and  a  dry  dock 
at  its  head.  He  was  active  in  pushing  the  construction  of  railroads,  espe- 
cially the  Utica  and  Schenectady.  Other  projects,  whether  of  a  public 
or  a  private  nature,  occupied  his  time  and  thought,  the  success  of  some 
of  which  did  not  always  accord  with  the  promise  of  his  too  sanguine 
expectations.  His  later  years  were  passed  in  part  upon  his  farm  in 
Eoonville  and  in  part  in  quiet  reading  and  study  at  home.  His  wife 
was  the  eldest  daughter  of  Henry  Seymour  and  sister  of  Horatio,  and 
his  domestic  life  was  engaging.  He  died  November  12,  1877,  leaving 
two  sons  and  four  daughters,  one  son  having  died. 

A  new  coming  hotel  keeper  was  Alfred  Churchill.  He  was  born  at 
Chatham,  Conn.,  August  29,  1790,  and  brought  when  a  child  with  his 
father's  family  to  Richfield,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.  Early  in  life  he  en- 
gaged in  mercantile  business  at  Monroe,  Mich.  He  had  had  few  advan- 
tages of  education  and  at  the  age  of  twenty- five  he  entered  Hartwick 
Academy,  supporting  himself  there  for  some  years  by  his  own  unas- 
sisted efforts.  He  came  to  Utica  in  1827,  at  first  as  an  assistant,  but 
soon  as  a  partner,  of  Moses  Bagg  in  the  hotel  then  and  since  known  by 
his  name.     He  remained  in  that  connection  until  the  year  1836  (except- 


ALFRED  CHURCHILL.  i8i 

ing  one  year  spent  as  proprietor  of  the  North  American  (located  on 
Genesee  street  nearly  opposite  Broad),  when  the  hotel  was  bought  of 
Mr.  Bagg  by  a  stock  company,  of  which  Mr.  Churchill  was  one.  This 
he  continued  to  carry  on  until  his  death  January  lo,  1865,  having  at 
intervals  purchased  the  interests  of  his  associates  as  well  as  the  Bleecker 
House  adjoining  on  the  north  and  uniting  the  latter  with  his  own.  By 
his  fellow  citizens  Mr.  Churchill  was  known  as  a  man  of  unsullied  integ- 
rity, kind  and  considerate  to  those  in  his  employ,  and  tender  and  affec- 
tionate in  his  family  relations.  In  politics  he  was  identified  with  the 
Democratic  party,  yet  was  not  in  any  sense  a  politician,  looking  as  well 
to  the  candidate  as  to  the  principle  involved  in  casting  the  vote.  Through 
the  suffrage  of  his  townsmen  he  held  the  office  of  alderman  for  several 
terms,  and  was  moreover  liberal  in  the  discharge  of  the  claims  of  society. 
Some  years  before  his  death  he  bought  a  large  tract  of  land  near  Daven- 
port, Iowa,  much  of  which  he  disposed  of  in  parcels,  and  which  by  its 
gradual  rise  in  value  realized  for  him  a  very  considerable  fortune.  He 
was  long  a  faithful  and  attentive  director  of  the  Utica  City  Bank.  His 
wife  was  Emma  Darbyshire,  of  Otsego  County,  and  sister  of  the  wife 
of  Mr.  Bagg.  His  eldest  son  was  lost  at  sea ;  another,  G.  Clarence,  is 
still  a  resident. 

Three  private  schools  were  in  operation  at  this  time,  that  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  C.  A.  Evarts  for  young  ladies,  which  received  the  patronage  of 
the  leading  families  of  the  place,  that  of  Charles  Bartlett  for  boys, 
known  as  the  High  School,  and  that  of  Lewis  Bailey. 

Thorn  &  Curtis,  forwarders,  now  bought  out  Charles  Morris  and  con- 
tinued a  business  on  Jay  street  and  the  canal  which  still  exists  and  is  in 
part  in  the  hands  of  a  member  of  one  of  these  families.  Simon  V. 
Oley,  an  apprenticed  shoemaker  from  Albany  who  had  been  three  or 
four  years  in  the  employ  of  Elisha  Wells,  now  opened  a  shop  of  his  own 
and  continued  it  until  his  death  June  i,  1857.  Modest,  honest,  and  ex- 
emplary he  was  better  known  in  successful  business  and  in  the  services 
of  Grace  Church  than  in  doings  more  public.  Otis  Manchester,  mer- 
chant tailor,  received  into  partnership  Abram  Williams  and  Robert  S. 
Latimore,  both  of  whom  remained  some  years  in  the  place.  So  also 
■did  William  B.  Gray,  saddler ;  J.  McElwaine,  livery  stable-keeper ; 
Ransom  Curtiss,  dealer  in  dry  goods  and  groceries ;  William  P.  Ballou, 


i82  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

keeper  of  Union  Hall.  More  temporary  ones  were  John  Mason  &  Co., 
painters;  George  F.  Wicker,  painter;  W.  Holcombe,  coachmaker; 
S.  C.  Brewster,  lottery  and  exchange  manager;  Joseph  E.  Bloomfield, 
miller  and  dealer  in  real  estate. 

The  officers  for  the  year  1828  were:  President,  William  Clarke  ;  trus- 
tees, John  H.  Ostrom,  James  Piatt,  Abraham  Culver,  Thomas  Colling. 
Chester  Griswold,  Augustus  Hurlburt,  Nicholas  Devereux,  R.  R.  Lan- 
sing; assessors,  Benjamin  Ballou,  Zenas  Wright,  Joshua  M.  Church, 
Thomas  Christian ;  clerk  and  surveyor,  John  Fish.;  treasurer,  Thomas 
Walker;   Ara  Broadwell,  superintendent. 

In  June  a  committee  was  appointed  to  formulate  a  code  of  laws  for 
the  government  of  the  market.  The  annual  rent  of  stalls  was  fixed  at 
$45  for  eight- feet  stalls,  $40  for  seven-feet  stalls;  and  $35  for  six-feet 
stalls;  cellars,  $10.  The  details  of  these  laws  need  not  be  given; 
they  regulated  the  sale  of  meat,  of  which  none  was  to  be  sold  elsewhere  ; 
how  it  should  be  dressed  and  cut;  no  private  slaughter- houses  were 
permitted  and  meat  was  not  to  be  bought  at  the  market  and  sold  again. 
Thomas  Broadway  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the  market  and  it 
was  opened  on  the  25th  of  June.  "The  display  of  meat  and  other 
provisions  on  that  morning  spoke  favorably  of  the  abundance  of  the 
country  and  evinced  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  butchers  to  keep 
the  market  supplied  with  provisions  of  the  best  quality."  The  market 
stood  where  is  now  the  armory  on  the  corner  of  Bleecker  and  Culver 
streets.  The  first  floor  was  devoted  to  the  display  and  sale  of  meats, 
the  basement  to  vegetables,  while  the  second  story  contained  the  coun- 
cil room  of  the  fathers.  After  a  time  the  vegetables  were  shown  in 
stalls  on  the  sides  while  the  basement  was  used  as  a  lock-up  for  crimi- 
nals.    The  market  continued  in  existence  until  about  1845. 

The  fire  department  was  re- organized  to  some  extent  and  William 
Williams  was  appointed  chief  engineer  (an  office  that  probably  had  not 
existed  before  that  time);  E.  Z.  Cozier,  first  assistant ;  Abraham  Culver, 
second  assistant;  Moses  Bagg,  T.  S.  Faxton,  B.  B.  Lansing,  John  E. 
Hinman,  James  Piatt,  Spencer  Kellogg,  R.  R.  Lansing,  and  Kellogg 
Hurlburt,  fire  wardens. 

Paving  was  continued  on  various  streets  and  Canal  street  was  opened. 
A  large  fire  occurring  in  April  swept  away  several  wooden   buildings 


JAMES  DEAN.  183 

on  the  south  corner  of  Broad  and  Genesee  streets.  At  a  public  meet- 
ing held  in  February  a  resolution  was  adopted  declaring  it  expedient 
to  change  the  law  so  as  to  admit  of  the  election  of  president  of  the  vil- 
lage instead  of  his  being  appointed  by  the  governor  as  had  been  done. 

In  December  of  the  previous  year  a  communication  appeared  signed 
by  M.  Hunt,  T.  H.  Hubbard,  and  R.  R.  Lansing  stating  that  the  search 
for  coal  here  had  long  been  a  topic  of  discussion.  Experiment  had 
been  put  off  on  account  of  expense,  but  now  it  could  be  done  cheaply. 
An  association  had  been  formed  to  raise  money  and  the  above  named 
signers  were  a  committee  to  receive  subscriptions.  In  this  year  boring 
was  effected  on  the  Hopper  farm  on  South  street ;  but  it  was  wholly 
unsuccessful  as  was  also  a  later  attempt  by  the  Water  Works  Company 
to  procure  water  by  extending  the  boring. 

The  Pioneer  line  of  stages,  running  two  stages  daily  through  from 
Albany  to  Buffalo,  was  inaugurated  this  year  and  attracted  consider- 
able attention  on  account  of  its  determination  to  cease  travel  on  Sun- 
day and  to  elevate  the  whole  tone  of  its  conduct  and  employees.  It  is 
further  alluded  to  in  a  later  chapter. 

The  lawyers  who  opened  offices  this  year  were  as  follows :  William 
Tracy  (see  chapter  on  Bench  and  Bar),  James  Dean,  Thomas  R.  Walker, 
H.  H.  Pease,  Elizur  Goodrich.  James  Dean  was  the  son  of  Judge 
James  Dean,  of  Westmoreland,  or  Dean's  Patent  as  it  was  once  called, 
and  was  born  there  in  1788.  He  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  male 
child  born  within  the  present  limits  of  Oneida  County.  It  was  while 
he  was  still  an  infant  that  occurred  the  rescue  of  his  father  by  three 
Indian  women,  wives  of  Oneida  chiefs,  from  the  judgment  of  the  coun- 
cil of  the  tribe  that  he  should  suffer  death  in  atonement  for  the  murder 
of  an  Oneida  by  some  one  without  the  tribe — an  incident  that  is  related 
by  William  Tracy  in  his  "  Men  and  Incidents  of  Oneida  County,"  and 
which  is  paralleled  only  by  the  romantic  story  of  Pocahontas  and  Cap- 
tain Smith.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Union  College  in  18 10,  receiv- 
ing the  highest  honors  of  his  class,  and  three  years  later  became  a  tutor 
at  Hamilton  College,  which  post  he  held  until  1819  In  1820  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Assembly  from  Oneida  and  Oswego.  When 
and  where  he  studied  law  is  not  known,  though  it  is  certain  that  he  was 
then  living  in  New  Hartford,  where  he  married  his  first  wife  and   built 


i84  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  Of  UTICA. 

the  story  and  a  half  cottage  the  first  story  of  which  lies  against  the  hill- 
side on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  road  leading  to  Clinton.  In  1825 
and  until  1828  he  was  treasurer  of  Hamilton  College.  About  1828  he 
removed  to  Utica  and  soon  formed  a  partnership  with  Walter  King, 
which  was  not,  however,  of  long  duration.  During  the  years  1834-37 
he  was  treasurer  of  the  city  and  in  1839-40  was  county  clerk.  He 
built  a  brick  house  that  stood  on  the  upper  part  of  the  site  now  occu- 
pied by  Grace  Church  and  afterward  the  house  on  Devereux  street 
subsequently  used  by  the  Utica  Club.  Here  he  died  May  23,  1841. 
Mr.  Dean  was  an  accurate  scholar  in  the  Greek  and  Latin  classics  and 
well  informed  in  English  and  French  literature.  It  seems  now  as  if  he 
should  have  given  his  life  to  teaching  and  to  literary  pursuits.  He 
loved  the  county  of  his  birth  with  enthusiastic  attachment,  and  inherited 
his  father's  friendly  interest  in  the  Oneidas,  manifesting  it  often  in  per- 
sonal benefactions  to  members  of  the  tribe.  He  was  a  Christian  gen- 
tleman, cultivated,  tasteful,  refined,  modest,  perhaps  too  modest  to  be 
successful  in  the  aggressive  work  of  his  profession,  yet  in  the  highest 
degree  trustworthy  in  all  his  professional  work.  Mr.  Dean  married, 
secondly,  Mrs.  Mary  Upson,  who  survived  him  many  years. 

Thomas  R.  Walker,  son  of  Thomas  Walker,  editor  and  banker  before 
noticed,  was  born  in  Utica  in  1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  in 
1824,  studied  law  with  his  brother  in-law,  John  H.  Ostrom,  and  began 
practice  with  him.  His  next  partner  was  Wallace  McCall  and  subse- 
quently he  was  the  head  of  the  firm  of  Walker  &  Conkling.  He  was 
much  interested  in  politics  and  of  influence  therein,  being  a  Whig  and 
afterward  a  Republican.  He  was  city  attorney  in  1840,  alderman  in 
1 846,  and  mayor  in  1 849-50.  He  was  long  in  the  Board  of  School  Com- 
missioners, was  the  first  United  States  collector  of  internal  revenue  for 
this  district,  and  held  the  office  except  for  a  brief  interval  down  to  1867. 
Mr.  Walker  was  interested  in  very  many  of  the  local  enterprises  of  the 
city,  being  one  of  the  originators  of  the  first  telegraph  company  and  its 
president  about  five  years.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  Gas  Company 
and  was  president  of  it  from  1850  until  his  death.  For  some  years  he 
was  likewise  president  of  the  Cemetery  Association,  of  whose  original 
Board  of  Trustees  he  formed  a  part,  and  may  justly  be  regarded  as  the 
prime  mover  in  the  undertaking.      Mr.  Walker  had  much  liberality  and 


THOMAS  R.  WALKER— C.  B.  COVENTRY.  185 

refinement  of  character.  Art  was  a  passion  with  him.  It  led  him  to 
practice  painting  in  his  younger  years,  and  at  a  later  day  to  the  dissem- 
ination and  encouragement  of  a  love  of  art  in  others.  It  was  through 
his  instrumentahty  that  the  genius  of  Palmer,  the  sculptor,  was  first 
brought  to  Hght,  and  that  he  and  other  incipient  artists  were  assisted  in 
their  efforts  to  gain  repute.  This  love  of  the  beautiful  was  conjoined 
with  a  strong  interest  in  his  native  home  and  occasioned  in  him  much 
earnest  effort  in  its  behalf  He  was,  moreover,  pure  in  character,  affa- 
ble, and  agreeable.  He  resided  in  New  Haven  during  a  few  of  the  later 
years  of  his  life  and  afterward  traveled  in  Europe.  He  died  at  Dres- 
den, January  10,  1880.  His  wife  was  Sarah  A.,  daughter  of  Arthur 
Breese.     They  had  three  daughters,  of  whom  two  are  living. 

John  Parsons  began  living  in  Utica  at  least  as  early  as  1828,  and  was 
a  justice  of  the  peace  during  nearly  the  whole  of  his  long  residence  in 
the  place.      He  was  intelligent  and  pleasant  and  much  respected. 

The  doctors  commencing  practice  this  year  were  John  P.  Batchelder, 
Charles  B.  Coventry,  Heman  Norton,  Patrick  McCraith,  A.  McAllister. 

A  physician  who  for  nearly  fifty  years  was  a  leading  practitioner  in 
Utica  was  Dr.  Charles  Brodhead  Coventry,  son  of  Dr  Alexander  Cov- 
entry. He  was  born  in  Deerfield,  April  20,  i8o[.  Occupied  upon  his 
father's  farm  during  the  summer  months  he  attended  school  during  the 
winter,  and  as  his  health  was  not  strong,  so  that  he  was  unfitted  for  farm 
labor,  he  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  in  the  office  with  his  father  and  Dr. 
John  McCall,  partner  of  the  latter.  With  them  he  studied  medicine, 
attending  lectures  at  the  Medical  College  of  the  Western  District  situated 
at  Fairfield,  and  there  he  was  graduated  in  1825.  In  1828  he  was  ap- 
pointed lecturer  on  materia  medica  at  Berkshire  Medical  College,  Pitts- 
field.  To  this  branch  was  subjoined  in  the  following  year  that  of  obstet- 
rics. This  lectureship  he  held  for  three  years,  when  by  reason  of  the 
infirm  state  of  his  health  and  having  suffered  from  a  severe  hemorrhage 
he  removed  to  New  York  to  establish  himself  in  j/ractice,  but  on  the 
death  of  his  father  he  came  back  to  Utica.  In  anticipation  of  an  invasion 
from  the  cholera  he  was  sent  by  the  council  early  in  1832  to  study  its 
nature  in  the  Eastern  cities,  making  a  report  thereon  upon  his  return.  In 
1839  he  took  part  in  the  organization  of  a  medical  institution  at  Geneva 
and  again  assumed  the  professorship  of  materia  medica  and  obstetrics, 

24 


1 86  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UIICA. 

lecturing  there  several  successive  seasons.  In  1846  he  became  likewise 
professor  of  physiology  and  jurisprudence  in  the  Buffalo  Medical  College. 
With  the  exception  of  the  temporary  absences  these  lectures  entailed, 
and  with  that  caused  by  a  trip  to  Europe  in  1868,  he  was  mostly  ab- 
sorbed in  practice.  Endowed  with  strong  sense,  well  informed  in  what 
has  been  acquired  and  taught  by  others,  prompt  to  know  what  was  dis- 
coverable in  every  case  he  met  with,  he  had  laid  up  a  large  store  of  use- 
ful experience  which  his  judicious  and  ready  mind  fitted  him  most 
wisely  to  apply.  At  home  in  the  teaching  of  his  profession  he  was  still 
more  at  ease  by  the  bedside,  and  notable  for  the  tenderness  he  mani- 
fested toward  those  submitted  to  his  skill.  If  he  loved  his  calling  for  its 
intellectual  pleasures  he  loved  it  still  more  as  a  means  of  good  to  others 
and  because  it  gave  exercise  to  the  feelings  of  a  kind  and  generous  heart. 
As  an  avenue  to  wealth  he  scarcely  seemed  to  think  of  it,  and  never 
was  the  proverb  "  Galenus  dat  opes  "  more  falsified  than  with  him.  He 
was  strongly  zealous  for  the  dignity  of  his  profession,  labored  in  his 
writings  and  in  his  daily  life  for  its  elevation  and  advancement,  and 
gave  no  countenance  to  empiricism  or  pretence.  Long  before  the  cre- 
ation of  the  State  Asylum  for  the  Insane  he  moved  both  State  and 
County  Medical  Societies  to  urge  the  legislature  to  take  action  in  be- 
half of  this  unfortunate  class,  nor  did  he  intermit  his  efforts  until  the 
asylum  was  established.  He  was  appointed  by  Governor  Seward  as 
one  of  the  original  Board  of  Managers  and  was  placed  by  them  on  a 
■committee  to  arrange  plans  for  its  organization.  Dr.  Coventry  was 
president  of  St.  Luke's  Hospital  and  Home,  president  of  the  Board  of 
Trustees  of  the  Utica  Female  Academy,  and  a  warden  of  Grace  Church. 
As  a  man  no  one  was  more  pure  minded  and  honorable,  more  kind  and 
benevolent,  more  consistent  as  a  Christian.  By  his  brothers  of  the  pro- 
fession he  was  honored,  by  his  patients  beloved ;  all  esteemed  him  as  a 
friend,  and  enemy  he  had  none.  Though  he  had  several  hemorrhages 
at  various  intervals  of  his  life  he  survived  until  nearly  seventy-four,  dy- 
ing February  23,  1875. 

In  an  advertisement  that  appeared  in  May,  1828,  of  a  partnership 
just  formed  between  Drs.  Theodore  Pomeroy  and  John  P.  Batchelder, 
it  is  stated  that  the  latter  "  has  had  twenty  years  of  experience,  has 
been  a  lecturer  on  anatomy  and  surgery  for  ten  years,  has  operated  for 


DRS.  BATCHELDER,  NORTON,  ETC.  187 

cataract  eighty  times,  is  prepared  with  instruments,  and  will  not  de- 
cline operating  in  any  case  of  surgery  in  which  prudence  may  dictate  it." 
Not  long  after  it  was  advertised  that  he  was  prepared  to  deliver  anatomical 
lectures  in  Peale's  (Utica)  Museum.  A  ticket  costing  $10  was  to  admit 
to  the  museum  for  three  months.  Some  time  later  there  was  a  proposal 
for  the  establishment  of  a  medical  college  in  the  place  if  thirty  pupils 
should  be  found  to  put  themselves  under  its  instruction.  The  professors 
were  to  be  Drs.  Alexander  Coventry,  Thomas  Goodsell,  and  John  P. 
Batchelder.  As  we  learn  no  more  of  it  it  is  probable  that  a  sufficiency 
of  students  was  not  found  to  justify  the  undertaking.  Doubtless  of  this 
school  Dr.  Batchelder  was  to  have  been  the  teacher  of  anatomy  and 
surgery.  Surgery  was  his  chosen  field,  and  while  he  lived  he  devoted 
himself  especially  although  not  exclusively  to  it,  being  for  years  the 
only  person  who  operated  so  often.  Yet  he  was  the  adviser  in  many 
families.  Dr.  Batchelder's  later  partners  were  successively  Drs.  L.  B. 
Wells  and  William  Kirkwood.  He  was  an  enterprising  and  pleasant 
man.  He  remained  until  1845,  when  he  repaired  to  New  York  and 
operated  some  years  longer. 

Dr.  Heman  Norton  moved  here  from  Litchfield  Hill,  where  he  had 
been  both  doctor  and  farmer,  and  while  here  was  still  interested  in  his 
farm.  His  professional  standing  was  fair,  his  business  not  large,  though 
he  was  an  agreeable  and  humorous  man.  Dr.  Patrick  McCraith  was 
busier,  his  practice  being  extensive  with  the  Irish,  and  continued  so 
until  about  1853. 

A  long  abiding  dentist  was  Alvin  Beardsley,  pupil  of  Dr.  Gedney, 
and  a  leader  of  his  craft.  Druggists  now  starting  were  David  Hunt,  jr., 
and  Bristol  &  Hunt.  The  former  died  quite  recently  in  his  native  town 
of  Northampton,  Mass.,  whither  he  went  from  New  York  city  several 
years  since  after  a  rather  enduring  trade  in  Utica.  William  Bristol's 
home  in  the  place  was  yet  longer,  continuing  until  April  18,  i866,  and 
the  public  side  of  his  life  more  memorable.  Interested  at  an  early  age 
in  the  Horticultural  Society  he  was  later  the  first  treasurer  of  the  Ceme- 
tery Association,  and  by  the  community  he  was  confided  in  for  his 
efficient  aid  in  matters  of  common  utility  as  well  as  by  reason  of  his  in- 
dividual worth. 

Gardiner  Tracy  came  to  Utica  from  Lansingburg,  where  he  had  con- 
ducted a  paper  and  was  prominent  as  a  politician.     Here  he  established 


1 88  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

himself  in  printing  and  bookselling.  He  had  a  vigorous  and  acquisitive 
mind,  and  was  an  extensive  reader,  being  especially  well  informed  in 
American  history.  Ardent  and  fearless  in  temperament  his  religious 
faith  was  strong,  and  as  a  citizen  he  maintained  the  character  of  a  highly 
respected  and  useful  one.  He  died  May  25,1 849,  at  the  age  of  seventy- 
two,  having  given  up  business  some  two  years  before  his  death.  He 
left  a  son,  George  Tracy,  who  succeeded  to  it,  besides  another  son,  who 
returned  to  Lansingburg,  and  three  daughters. 

A  printer  of  1828  was  Elisha  A.  Maynard,  a  partner  with  Mr.  Dauby 
in  the  Observer.  Merchants  were  Cooper  &  Ellis,  Cornelius  Swartout, 
William  W.  Backus  ;  the  latter  also  engaged  in  the  business  of  exchange 
and  as  an  auctioneer  and  dealer  in  dry  goods  ;  John  R.  Ludlow,  crockery ; 
F  K.  Boughton  &  Co.,  John  Latimore,  Alfred  Hunt  (Stocking  &  Hunt), 
hatters ;  Benedict  &  Roby,  Chauncey  Rowe,  William  J.  Buck  (Dana  & 
Buck),  hardware;  E.  S.  Comstock,  grocer;  Jonas  Fay,  lumber  dealer. 
The  new  come  mechanics  were  Philo  C.  Curtis,  machinist,  noticed  else- 
where; Joseph  D.  Daniels,  iron  founder;  Ebenezer  Leach,  H.  S.Brad- 
ley, Benjamin  F.  Brooks,  jewelers ;  Richard  Huntington,  silversmith ; 
Noah  White,  potter  ;  S.  H.  Addington,  stoneware  manufacturer  ;  C.  O. 
Nye,  carpenter;  Sylvester  Doolittle,  boat  builder ;  Walton  &  Hardaway, 
saddlers;  Morgan  James,  lastmaker;  J.  D.  Edwards,  painter;  Z.  &  P. 
Lyon,  E.  W.  Blake,  merchant  tailors  ;  John  Hale,  Isaac  Bond,  masons; 
John  Mairs,  tinner;  Mulford  R.  Bond,  shoemaker  and  afterward  grocer 
and  hosemaker;  Benjamin  Arnott,  shoemaker;  John  B.  Harrington, 
butcher  ;   George  L.  Brown,  hair-dresser. 

Nearly  all  of  the  above  had  a  residence  of  some  years  duration.  Since 
it  is  impossible  to  discourse  upon  them  individually  I  must  be  content 
to  introduce  a  word  or  two  of  some  of  them.  Of  Noah  White  it  may 
be  said  that  he  established  the  pottery  in  West  Utica  which  was  after- 
ward conducted  by  his  son  and  more  recently  by  his  grandson,  that  he 
lived  until  November,  1865,  and  that  he  was  twenty  years  an  elder  in 
the  First  Presbyterian  Church  ;  of  Ebenezer  Leach  that  his  fondness 
for  music  led  him  to  become  a  teacher  of  flute  playing  and  to  issue  mu- 
sical instructors  ;  that  at  a  later  day  his  visual  impairment  caused  him  to 
make  a  study  of  ophthalmia  and  its  treatment,  and  to  practice  this  treat- 
jnent  upon  others,  wherein   his  skill  brought  him  repute  and  a  follow- 


MILLER'S  BASIN.  189 

ing  from  all  over  the  country ;  of  Sylvester  Doolittle  that  he  had  a 
screw  dock  in  West  Utica  of  vi^hich  he  was  the  inventor,  where  he  was 
a  maker  and  repairer  of  boats,  and  that  afterward  in  Oswego  his  busi- 
ness was  still  more  widely  extended;  of  J.  D.  Edwards  that  he  was  one 
of  the  founders  of  the  Mechanics  Association  and  that  he  had  a  part  in 
the  creation  of-  the  oilcloth  manufactory  which,  through  his  failure, 
came  into  the  hands  of  Dr.  Theodore  Pomeroy  and  T.  R.  Walker;  of 
Hardaway  &  Chatfield  that  they  became  afterward  the  proprietors  of 
the  National  Hotel ;  of  the  Lyons,  continuous  partners  for  many  years, 
that  while  the  younger  one  was  zealous  as  a  Free  Mason  his  brother  was 
long  a  warden  of  Grace  Church  ;  of  Benjamin  Arnott,  soon  followed  by 
his  brother  Joseph,  his  Doppel-ganger  in  looks  and  tastes  (so  much 
alike  were  they  that  they  were  known  as  the  brothers  Cheeryble),  that 
in  musical  circles  their  accomplishments  were  often  in  request,  and  that 
Joseph  published  several  of  the  Utica  directories ;  of  George  Brown, 
though  a  mulatto,  that  he  was  as  proper  and  modest  a  gentleman  as 
any  citizen  Utica  ever  possessed  ;  instructing  the  younger  ones  in  the 
courtly  grace  of  the  dance  he  made  friends  of  the  older  by  his  respect- 
ful and  easy  demeanor  and  the  tasteful  trimming  he  gave  them  for  ap- 
pearance without. 

An  enterprise  of  considerable  magnitude  undertaken  in  182S  and 
completed  in  18^9  was  the  conversion  of  the  ravine  or  gulf  of  Ballou's 
Creek  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  village  into  a  canal  basin.  Before  the  days 
of  railroads  basins  were  regarded  next  to  harbors  as  cradles  for  business. 
This  undertaking  was  effected  chiefly  by  residents  of  Broad  street.  The 
land  to  be  submerged  was  donated  or  bought,  the  lower  end  of  the  ra- 
vine considerably  dug  out,  docked  up,  the  culvert  under  the  canal  for 
the  creek  stopped,  the  basin  bridged  on  Broad  street,  and,  the  consent 
of  the  State  authorities  having  been  obtained,  connection  was  made  with 
the  Erie  Canal,  and  the  basin,  extending  nearly  to  Rutger  street,  was 
filled.  It  was  styled  by  its  builders  the  Public  Basin,  but  was  popularly 
known  as  the  Big  Basin  or  Miller's.  It  wiped  out  several  nuisances, 
slaughter-houses,  etc.,  but  otherwise  was  not  a  success.  Instead  of  ex- 
tending the  growth  of  the  town  eastward  it  proved  as  effectual  a  barrier 
for  many  years  as  the  Mohawk  River  is  to  its  northward  extension.  Its 
large  warehouses  burned  down.     The  basin  became  as  an  asylum  for 


1 90  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

sinking  boats  and   gradually   filled   up   when  its  connection  with  the 
canal  navigation  was  shut  off. 

The  village  officers  for  1829  were  as  follows:.  President,  Capt.  Will- 
iam Clark;  trustees,  John  Williams,  R.  B.  Miller,  Abraham  Culver, 
Thomas  Colling,  Andrew  S.  Pond,  Sylvester  Doolittle,  Robert  McBride, 
Asahel  Seward ;  assessors,  Benjamin  Ballou,  Zenas  Wright,  Joshua  M. 
Church,  Thomas  Goodsell ;  clerk  and  attorney,  John  G.  Floyd  ;  treas- 
urer, Thomas  Walker ;  police  constables,  William  J.  Nichols,  T.  S. 
Mitchell. 

The  watchmen  of  the  village  were  reduced  in  June  to  six,  doubtless 
because  there  was  less  fear  of  fires.  On  the  22d  of  July  a  resolution 
was  adopted  that  a  sum  adequate  to  the  expense  "  be  and  the  same  is 
hereby  appropriated  for  the  construction  of  two  engine-houses  and  one 
hook  and  ladder-house,  the  same  to  be  constructed  so  as  to  be  capable 
of  being  removed  from  one  extremity  of  the  village  to  the  other  with- 
out injury  to  the  buildings.''  A  committee  was  appointed  to  seek  loca- 
tions and  the  resolution  may  have  been  carried  out,  but  there  is  no 
record  to  that  effect  except  as  will  be  found  in  the  next  year's  proceed- 
ings. The  principal  public  improvements  were:  Hamilton  street  laid 
out ;  Breese  street  opened  from  Whitesboro  to  Johnson  ;  Water  street 
continued;  Main  street  opened  from  the  "  old  Methodist  Church,"  op- 
posite the  corner  of  Third,  to  the  starch  factory  bridge  (or  at  least  this 
extension  was  ordered);  sidewalks  laid  on  John  street;  Chancellor 
Square  further  improved  by  trees  and  walks  ;  a  box  drain  in  John  street 
from  Rutger  to  Elizabeth  and  in  Center  street.  The  street  cleaning  of 
that  day  was  confined  to  Genesee  street.  Liberty  street  from  Genesee  to 
Hotel,  Catharine  from  Genesee  to  John,  and  Whitesboro  from  Genesee 
to  Division  once  a  week.     All  other  streets  were  cleaned  once  a  month. 

Among  the  large  additions  which  were  being  made  to  the  population 
at  this  time  were  the  following  lawyers  :  Joshua  A.  Spencer,  Ward 
Hunt,  Samuel  P.  Lyman,  and  Alexander  M.  Beebee.  The  first  two  of 
these  are  noticed  in  the  chapter  on  the  Bench  and  Bar.  Samuel  P.  Ly- 
man lived  twelve  or  fifteen  years  in  the  place,  was  a  short  time  editor  of 
the  Elucidator,  and  then  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  was  concerned 
in  various  literary  and  speculative  enterprises,  notably  the  promotion  of 
the  building  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  Railroad.      He  died   near  Gar- 


E.M.  GILBERT—  EDWARD  CURRAN.  191 

rison's  on  the  Hudson  and  was  interred  in  Forest  Hill.  Alexander  M. 
Beebee  devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  the  editorship  of  the  Bap- 
tist Register  and  gave  little  attention  to  the  law. 

Among  the  merchants  of  this  era  was  Elisha  M.  Gilbert,  who  began 
as  dealer  in  dry  goods.  About  1832  he  entered  on  the  sale  of  leather, 
at  first  in  company  with  John  Williams,  but  ere  long  prosecuting  it  alone, 
and  this  continued  to  be  his  employment  until  two  or  three  years  before 
his  death.  He  was  enterprising  and  prosperous  and  acquired  a  large 
fortune.  He  was  engaged  in  large  moneyed  transactions  elsewhere  as 
well  as  in  Utica  and  was  for  some  years  president  of  the  Michigan 
Southern  and  Northern  Indiana  Railroad.  He  was  a  director  in  the 
Bank  of  Utica,  a  trustee  of  the  Utica  Cemetery  Association,  and  at  one 
time  an  alderman.  To  Westminster  Church  he  gave  the  chapel  attached 
to  that  edifice.  His  wife,  a  daughter  of  John  C.  Hoyt,  and  other  mem- 
bers of  his  family  were  among  the  foremost  in  the  creation  and  organ- 
ization of  Bethany  Church,  and  to  the  building  of  its  edifice  he  also 
contributed.  For  his  own  use  he  built  the  large  brick  house  which  until 
recently  stood  on  Whitesboro  street  opposite  Seneca.  Mr.  Gilbert  died 
March  16,  1868.  His  children  now  resident  are  Frederick,  Miss  Sarah 
Gilbert,  and  Mrs.  Francis  G.  Wood. 

Another  leather  dealer  who  now  embarked  in  a  long  continued  busi- 
ness in  company  with  Alrick  Hubbell  was  Edward  Curran.  This  busi- 
ness he  followed  assiduously,  reaping  a  harvest  commensurate  with  his 
care  of  it  down  to  his  death,  June  27,  1858,  and  in  which  he  has  been 
followed  by  two  of  his  sons.  Singularly  retiring  and  diffident  he  held 
in  the  minds  of  those  who  knew  him  best  the  place  of  a  benevolent, 
upright,  and  valuable  citizen.  His  first  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Montgom- 
ery Bartlett ;  his  second  was  a  daughter  of  George  Langford.  One  of  his 
sons  was  killed  in  battle  and  another  was  so  much  injured  that  he  did  not 
long  survive.  Three  of  them  and  a  daughter,  as  well  as  his  widow,  are 
living. 

Other  merchants  now  in  business  were  Sylvester  Aylsworth,  soon 
having  as  an  associate  Sylvanus  Holmes,  dealers  in  hardware;  Haynes 
Lord,  not  long  afterward  Lord  &  Shapley,  dry  goods  ;  C.  Holgate, 
Ezra  Dean,  dry  goods  ;  Oliver  Obear,  forwarder  ;  Herring  &  Whiting, 
John  Baxter,"  Leonard  &  White,  grocers,  of  whom  Alvin  White  (the  last 


192  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

named)  was  the  one  who  had  the  most  protracted  residence.  Among 
the  most  notable  of  the  mechanics  was  Lewis  Lawrence,  who  will  be 
sketched  in  the  biographical  department. 

Chauncey  Palmer,  who  was  born  in  North  Bridgewater,  August  4, 
1807,  and  there  learned  his  trade  as  a  carpenter  and  joiner,  came  to 
Utica,  says  the  newspaper  notice  of  him,  in  1825.  If  so  he  must  have 
been  in  his  minority.  He  was  married  in  1829  and  probably  about  that 
time  began  to  do  business  on  his  own  account.  This  engaged  him  act- 
ively for  fifty-five  years.  Among  the  structures  whose  carpentry  was 
due  to  him  were  a  part  of  Bagg's  Hotel,  the  Herald  h\v\di\ng,  the  Dudley 
triangle,  the  Globe  mills,  a  portion  of  the  Utica  steam  cotton-mills,  the 
State  Hospital,  the  Remington  works  at  Ilion,  etc.  With  Lewis  Law- 
rence he  shared  in  running  the  planing- mill  that  had  first  been  set  at 
work  by  Philo  C.  Curtis,  and  for  thirty- five  years  he  had  a  foundry  in 
connection  with  his  carpenter  shop.  In  1844  he  was  burned  out  and 
lost  his  works,  but  struggled  on  and  paid  his  debts  in  full,  for  he  was 
emphatically  honest  and  trustworthy.  His  death  occurred  June  10, 
1884.      His  widow  with  two  sons  and  two  daughters  survive. 

Another  carpenter  much  esteemed  was  John  J.  Francis.  His  parents 
were  both  children  of  early  Welsh  dwellers  in  Utica,  and  here  he  was 
born  November  6,  1808.  He  received  a  good  academic  education, 
learned  the  trade  of  his  father,  and  became  prominent  among  the  builders 
of  the  city.  In  middle  life  it  was  as  a  dealer  in  real  estate  that  he  was 
principally  employed.  He  bought,  improved,  and  sold  much  property 
of  this  kind,  and  upon  present  or  future  valuations  of  it  his  judgment 
was  unsurpassed.  In  the  creation,  too,  of  various  companies  and  busi- 
nes  organizations  his  counsel  and  co-operation  were  relied  upon,  as  in 
the  screw  factory,  insurance,  etc.  In  1854,  together  with  E.  A.  Wet- 
more,  E.  A.  Graham,  Thomas  Hopper,  J.  Watson  Williams,  and  John 
Dagwell,  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  for  the  building  of  the  city 
hall.  He  was  placed  on  the  building  committee  during  the  construc- 
tion of  the  House  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  having  been  one  of  its  Board 
of  Trustees  from  its  inception.  He  was  active  in  the  making  and  the 
management  of  the  Utica  and  Mohawk  Street  Railroad.  He  was  an 
alderman  in  1840-42,  was  one  of  the  first  life  members  of  the  Mechanics 
Association,  and   was  a  vestryman  of  Trinity   Church.     Every  trust 


JULIUS  A.  SPENCER—  W.  D.  HAMLIN.  193 

referred  to  him  was  faithfully  performed,  and  his  life  as  a  citizen,  a 
churchman,  and  the  head  of  a  household  was  faultless  and  exemplary. 
His  wife,  daughter  of  John  A.  Russ,  remembered  with  favor,  is  living 
as  is  also  a  daughter.      He  died  May   5,  1877. 

Julius  A.  Spencer,  a  resident  of  Utica  for  fifty  years  and  a  jeweler  by 
trade,  was  born  in  Lenox,  Madison  County,  in  1802.  For  some  time 
he  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Rogers  &  Spencer,  machinists  at  Wil- 
lowvale,  having  previously  been  a  partner  with  Robert  Higham  in  the 
Vulcan  works.  He  was  actively  concerned  in  the  Utica  and  Schen- 
ectady Railroad,  and  after  its  consolidation  with  other  roads  into  the 
New  York  Central  he  became  assistant  superintendent.  He  removed 
to  Albany  and  had  charge  of  the  line  from  there  to  Schenectady.  Of 
later  years  he  was  adjuster  of  claims  against  the  company.  His  active 
and  useful  life  was  closed  November  3,  1874.  One  daughter  still  resides 
in  Utica. 

William  D.  Hamlin,  born  in  Connecticut  in  1805,  came  to  Utica  it 
is  said  in  1822,  but  as  his  name  was  not  publicly  registered  before  1829 
it  is  presumed  that  he  was  at  first  an  apprentice,  learning  his  trade  as 
a  blacksmith.  He  was  afterward  widely  known  as  a  wagonmaker  and 
a  man  of  wealth,  of  influence,  and  of  high  standing  in  the  community. 
He  was  a  director  and  second  vice-president  of  the  Second  National 
Bank  and   was  president  of  the  Utica  Water  Works  Company. 

Moses  T.  Meeker,  starting  as  a  coachsmith,  became  somewhat  later  a 
dealer  in  iron  and  coal,  acquired  property,  and  left  a  good  name  behind 
him.  He  died  September  19,  1874.  Another  blacksmith  whose  history 
is  somewhat  similar  was  David  Timmerman — first  a  worker  at  his  trade 
and  later  a  seller  of  coal,  an  unassuming  and  unimpeachable  man. 

The  officers  chosen  for  the  year  1830  were  :  President,  Ezra  S.  Cozier  ; 
trustees,  John  Williams,  Chester  Griswold,  Thomas  Colling,  Rudolph 
Snyder,  Sylvester  Doolittle,  A.  S.  Pond,  Robert  McBride,  R.  B.  Miller; 
assessors,  Benjamin  Ballou,  Zenas  Wright,  J.  M.  Church,  Kellogg  Hurl- 
burt;  clerk  and  attorney,  John  G.  Floyd;  treasurer,  Thomas  Walker; 
surveyor,  John  F'ish. 

The  legislation  needed  to  consummate  the  charter  amendment  pro- 
viding for  the  election  of  president  and  the  appointment  by  the  trustees 
of  the  treasurer  and  street  commissioner  was  enacted  early  in  they  ear. 


194  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  amendment  also  provided  for  better  protection  of  the  villagefrom  fire. 
On  the  30th  of  September  John  H.  Ostrom  was  appointed  chief  engi- 
neer and  the  number  of  watchmen  was  reduced  to  four.  PubHc  im- 
provements were  Hmited.  South  street  was  opened  and  worked  from 
Steuben  to  Third  ;  Rutger  street  from  First  to  Third  ;  Mohawk  it  was 
ordered  should  be  extended  from  Broad  to  the  river  bridge  and  Main 
street  to  the  starch  factory.  Sidewalks  were  laid  on  Devereux,  Broad- 
way, and  Whitesboro  streets.  A  census  of  the  population  was  taken 
in  July  with  the  following  result :  Males,  4, 135  ;  females,  3,968  ;  colored, 
183  ;   making  a  total  of  8,286. 

A  venerable  minister  who  had  passed  the  active  period  of  his  life  else- 
where and  who  removed  to  Utica  in  1830,  where  he  lived  upwards  of 
twenty  years  longer,  was  Oliver  Wetmore,  father  of  Edmund  A.  Wet- 
more  and  two  other  sons  whose  early  home  was  here.  Here  he  had  no 
settlement,  but  occasionally  suplied  a  vacant  pulpit.  He  was  a  stern 
Puritan  in  character,  of  intense  faith,  and  of  much  general  worth.  He 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  anti- slavery  convention  that  met  in  Utica  in 
1835.      He  lived  here  until  1852. 

Orsamus  B.  Matteson  was  born  in  Verona,  August  28,  1805,  being 
the  son  of  an  early  settler  of  Oneida  County.  When  about  nineteen 
years  of  age  he  came  to  Utica  and  entered  the  law  office  of  Bronson  & 
Beardsley.  He  remained  with  them  several  years  as  their  chief  clerk 
and  became  a  partner  of  Mr.  Beardsley  after  the  removal  of  Judge 
Bronson.  In  1830  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1834  he  was  attor- 
ney of  the  city  and  again  in  1836.  For  a  number  of  years  he  was 
Supreme  Court  commissioner.  It  was,  however,  in  the  arena  of  poli- 
tics that  Mr.  Matteson  chiefly  figured,  and  he  was  an  important  factor 
therein  from  1846  to  1856.  He  was  a  Whig,  but  not  of  the  then  con- 
servative party.  Imbibing  anti-slavery  ideas  and  forming  a  friendship 
with  William  A.  Seward  he  accepted  all  of  his  teachings,  and  was  bold 
and  positive  in  the  advocacy  of  them.  He  carried  into  politics  vast 
energy,  unwearying  attention  to  details,  rare  skill  in  organization,  and 
the  faculty  to  infuse  into  his  supporters  the  enthusiasm  of  his  own  char- 
acter. About  the  time  when  he  became  a  candidate  for  Congress  the 
use  of  money  at  elections  received  an  impetus  in  this  county.  For  this 
evil  he  was  only  in  part  responsible  ;  but  it   cannot  be  denied  that  he 


O.  B.  MATTESON.  195 

fell  in  with  it.  Many  of  the  conservative  Whigs,  or  Silver  Grays  as  they 
were  termed,  were  at  sword's  point  with  the  wing  that  Mr.  Matteson 
represented.  They  disliked  his  strong  personal  sway  and  tactics  that  are 
now  regarded  as  a  machine.  Yet  for  twelve  years  he  was  able  to  secure 
the  nomination  of  his  party  to  represent  them  in  Congress  and  four 
times  to  compass  his  election.  He  was  first  nominated  in  1846,, but  was 
defeated  by  Timothy  Jenkins,  of  Vernon.  His  first  election  was  in  1848 
to  the  Thirty- first  Congress;  faihngin  1850 he  was  chosen  to  the  Thirty- 
third,  Thirty-fourth,  and  Thirty-fifth  Congresses.  In  that  body  he 
formed  close  relations  with  the  Free  Soil  leaders  and  was  recognized  as  a 
shrewd  and  efficient  worker.  His  principal  speech  in  Congress  was  in 
advocacy  of  the  reduction  of  postage  and  of  the  measure  which  became 
a  law.  He  was  not  a  debater,  but  as  a  manager  on  the  floor  and  on 
committees  he  was  conspicuous  and  successful.  Upon  the  circumstances 
which  brought  about  his  expulsion,  or  forced  resignation,  from  Con- 
gress I  shall  not  enter.  Want  of  space  forbids  it,  besides  those  details 
pertain  rather  to  the  history  of  the  nation  than  to  that  of  Utica.  After 
his  retirement  he  was  interested  in  a  scheme  for  the  construction  of  the 
St.  Mary's  Ship  Canal,  in  a  Utica  Bullion  Mining  Company,  in  lumber- 
ing at  Forestport,  and  the  iron  works  near  Clinton.  He  acquired  title 
to  large  tracts  of  land  in  Iowa,  Texas,  and  the  Adirondack  region  iri 
this  State.  In  the  latter  his  Mountain  Home  became  famous.  Misfort- 
une, ill  health,  and  a  temporary  blindness  darkened  his  declining  years. 
His  leading  traits  of  character  were  energy,  enthusiasm,  and  hopeful- 
ness. His  impelling  power  gave  vigor  to  his  undertakings ;  his  enthu- 
siasm swept  away  obstacles  that  would  have  discouraged  other  men  ;  and 
his  great  hopefulness  led  him  to  expect  success  in  all  his  undertakings. 
His  fruition  in  politics  led  him  to  take  hazards  in  business  affairs,  but 
his  never  dying  hopefulness  did  not  permit  him  to  see  the  dark  side  whert 
it  was  apparent  to  others.  As  a  conversationalist  he  was  entertaining 
and  instructive,  and  from  his  tenacious  memory  he  was  full  of  reminis- 
cences and  anecdotes.  His  death  took  place  December  22,  1887.  He 
left  a  widow  and  a'daughter. 

Dr.  John  W.  Hitchcock,  son  of  Marcus,  opened  an  office  for  the  prac- 
tice of  medicine,  but  soon  removed  to  Mt. Vernon,  111.  A  gentlemanly 
man  who  lived  here  some  four  years  was  William  W.  Frazier,  cashier 
of  a  branch  of  the  United  States  Bank,  which  was  established  in  1830. 


ig6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Joseph  A.  Shearman,  a  nephew  of  Ebenezer  Shearman  before  noticed, 
and  who  came  to  live  with  him  when  he  was  fourteen  years  of  age,  now 
engaged  in  business  for  himself  He  was  born  at  Kingston,  Washing- 
ton County,  N.  Y.,  April  6,  1803,  finished  his  schooHng  in  the  Utica 
Academy,  and  became  a  clerk  with  his  uncle,  marrying  Jane  Shearman, 
his  cousin.  In  1830  he  advertised  dry  goods  under  his  own  name,  but 
soon  became  a  partner  with  Ebenezer.  They  remained  together  until 
1840,  when  both  sold  out  and  engaged  in  cotton  manufacture  at  New 
Hartford,  which  the  nephew  continued  until  1865,  retaining  his  residence 
in  Utica.  Mr.  Shearman  was  much  interested  in  politics  and  of  con- 
siderable influence  therein ;  he  was  an  ardent  Whig  and  Republican, 
conspicuous  in  support  of  war  measures,  and  was  instrumental  in  advanc- 
ing the  political  fortunes  of  Roscoe  Conkling,  though  he  was  subse- 
quently his  determined  enemy.  He  was  appointed  postmaster  in  1849 
and  held  the  office  four  years.  Before  this  he  had  been  chief  of  the  fire 
department  and  in  1864  he  was  police  commissioner.  He  was  a  warden 
in  Trinity  Church.      He  lived  here  until  July  21,  1886. 

A  popular  dry  goods  store,  and  perhaps  the  most  favored  resort  of  any 
of  them  for  ladies  intent  on  dresses  and  trimmings,  was  for  a  time  that 
of  the  enterprising  and  genial  Thomas  G.  Perkins.  About  1834  he  went 
to  Buffalo  and  into  the  employ  of  the  notorious  Rathbun.  Benedict  & 
Roby  now  disposed  of  their  stock  of  hardware  to  Rockwell  &  Sanger. 
Philo  Rockwell,  father  of  James  Rockwell  now  resident,  was  the  first 
victim  of  the  cholera  visitation  of  1832.  Gerry  Sanger,  whose  next 
partner  was  Lewis  Benedict,  after  living  here  many  years  and  rearing  a 
family  of  daughters  went  in  old  age  to  New  Haven,  where  he  still 
lives. 

Of  the  firm  of  Bidwell  &  Williams  the  former  is  the  only  one  who 
remained.  He  had  been  a  very  successful  man  in  Connecticut,  but  after 
having  failed  there  he  came  to  Utica  and  as  merchant  and  clerk  con- 
tinued until  he  was  able  to  say  that  "  for  sixty- four  years  he  had  been 
behind  the  counter."  Thomas  James  succeeded  to  the  last  factory  on 
Liberty  street  that  had  been  set  up  by  Morgan  James.  D.  J.  Morris, 
•draper  and  tailor,  another  descendant  of  an  early  Welsh  settler,  went 
ito  Syracuse  and  lived  there  until  recently.  Other  mechanics  were 
Carmi  Hart,  cabinetmaker ;  William  P.  Case,  joiner ;  Riley  Rogers, 
gunsmith;   E.  P.  Curry,  lastmaker. 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1831.  197 

The  first  temperance  house  in  Utica  was  opened  by  N.  Safford  next 
door  to  where  William  Clarke  had  kept  his  lottery  and  exchange.  He 
went  to  Albany,  where  he  kept  another  temperance  house.  A  bathing 
establishment  made  its  appearance  on  Whitesboro  street,  and  with  it  was 
a  public  garden.  It  was  kept  at  first  by  E.  S.  Comstock,  then  by  James 
Hinman,  and  afterward  by  Dr.Marchisi,  W.  H.  Green,  and  others. 

The  officers  of  the  village  for  1831  were  as  follows:  President,  Ezra 
S.  Cozier ;  trustees,  John  Williams,  E.  S.  Comstock,  Thomas  Colling, 
T.  S.  Faxton,  A.  S.  Pond,  Sylvester  Doolittle,  Robert  McBride,  R.  B. 
Miller ;  assessors,  Benjamin  Ballou,  Zenas  Wright,  Augustus  Hurlburt, 
Adam  Bowman  ;  treasurer,  Thomas  Walker  ;  clerk  and  attorney,  John 
G.  Floyd  ;  surveyor,  John  Fish. 

Under  act  of  legislature  of  February  3d  the  fire  department  was  re- 
organized and  made  to  consist  of  a  chief,  two  assistants,  and  eight  fire 
wardens,  with  four  engine  companies,  numbered  consecutively  from 
number  i,  and  a  hook  and  ladder  and  a  hose  company.  An  engine- 
house  was  built  during  the  year  in  the  rear  of  the  public  school-house. 
Fifty  dollars  were  appropriated  for  celebrating  the  4th  of  July,  which 
was  probably  the  first  action  of  that  character  in  the  village.  A  reso- 
lution was  adopted  on  the  i  ith  of  November  that  a  meeting  of  citizens 
be  called  on  the  following  Monday  evening  at  the  court-house  to  take 
into  consideration  the  subject  of  petitioning  the  legislature  for  city  priv- 
ileges and  such  other  amendments  to  the  charter  as  might  seem  expe- 
dient. This  was  the  first  step  toward  city  incorporation,  which  was 
consummated  in  the  following  year. 

On  the  30th  of  November  a  committee  was  authorized  to  buy  the  lot 
on  the  corner  of  John  and  Catharine  streets  at  $1,500  and  procure 
plans  for  an  engine-house  and  a  school-house,  and  contract  for  their 
erection,  to  be  finished  by  June  i,  1832.  Public  improvements  were 
Hmited  to  paving  on  Elizabeth,  Post,  Burnet,  Water,  Albany,  and  Main 
streets.  In  September  a  large  meeting  of  citizens  was  held  in  the  court- 
house in  behalf  the  Poles  then  engaged  in  their  last  struggle  for  liberty 
against  Russia.  A  committee  of  the  foremost  men  was  appointed  to 
raise  funds  and  transmit  them  to  General  Lafayette,  who  had  consented 
to  become  the  medium  of  transmission  between  the  Americans  and  that 
suffering  people.      His  reply,  dated  November  29,  1831,  acknowledges 


igS  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  receipt  of  $974-59,  together  with  the  accompanying  resolutions  and 
address  of  the  citizens,  coupHng  his  "  admiration,  pride,  and  gratitude 
with  the  remembranceof  the  situation  of  your  part  of  the  country  in  1777 
and  1794,  as  well  as  the  welcome  bestowed  upon  me  six  years  ago  in 
your  flourishing  and  beautiful  town."  In  May  of  this  year  the  first 
steps  were  taken  toward  the  formation  of  the  Utica  Mechanics  Associa- 
tion, which  was  not,  however,  incorporated  until  two  years  afterward. 

Of  those  whose  names  are  now  first  met  with  one  was  Chester  Hay- 
den,  who  was  born  in  Granville,  Washington  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  5th 
day  of  November,  1789,  and  came  with  his  parents  to  the  village  of 
Steuben,  Oneida  County,  about  the  beginning  of  this  century.  He  was 
educated  at  Fairfield  Academy  and  read  law  with  James  Shearman,  of 
Rome,  whose  sister  he  subsequently  married,  and  began  practice  with 
Wheeler  Barnes.  In  18 18  he  was  town  clerk  and  soon  after  removed 
to  Pulaski,  where  he  was  surrogate  of  Oswego  County  and  afterward  a 
representative  in  the  State  Assembly.  About  1827  he  returned  to  Rome 
and  practiced  with  Henry  A.  Foster.  January  5,  1830,  he  was  ap- 
pointed first  judge  of  Oneida  Common  Pleas  and  soon  afterward  made 
his  home  in  Utica.  This  office  he  held  about  ten  years,  becoming  in 
1843  one  of  the  side  judges  and  also  canal  appraiser.'  Not  far  from 
1848  he  removed  to  Albany,  starting  a  little  later  a  law  school  at  Ball- 
ston  Spa  and  continuing  it  at  Poughkeepsie.  In  Ohio  in  1856  he  opened 
another  school  of  the  same  kind  which  he  removed  to  Cleveland.  There 
he  died  February  6,  1863.  A  studious  man  of  gentle  and  unpretending 
mien  he  was  conversant  with  the  law,  of  special  repute  in  matters  of 
chancery,  and  a  just  and  prudent  judge.  As  a  church  officer  and  a 
teacher  of  the  Scriptures  he  rendered  service  both  at  Rome  and  in  Utica. 

J.  J.  French,  John  Egan,  and  Alexander  Cameron  were  auctioneers, 
the  latter  only  maintaining  a  considerable  stay,  at  first  with  Egan  and 
afterward  alone.  Lyons  &  Williams  were  coachmakers,  the  former  only 
living  some  time  in  the  place.  There  may  be  mentioned  here  James 
Benton,  who  is  still  living,  though  in  retirement,  but  who  in  times  past 
has  borne  an  active  and  important  part  as  a  master  mason  in  the  ma- 
terial growth  of  the  city,  and  who  as  mayor  has  presided  at  its  council. 


UTICA  AS  A  CITY.  199 

CHAPTER  V. 
FIRST   DECADE   UNDER   THE   CITY   CHARTER. 

Inauguration  of  the  City  Government  —  Cholera  Epidemic  —  Details  of  its  Rav- 
ages —  The  Anti-Slavery  Convention  —  Proceedings  of  the  successive  Councils  — 
New  comers  of  the  Era. 

'^T~'HE  act  to  incorporate  the  city  of  Utica  was  passed  by  the  legislat- 
i  ure  February  13,  1832.  The  first  section  prescribes  the  bounds 
of  what  shall  hereafter  be  known  as  the  city  of  Utica.  These  bounds  are 
as  follows :  Beginning  at  a  point  on  the  south  side  of  the  Mohawk  River 
where  the  division  line  between  lots  number  90  and  100  in  Cosby's 
Manor  strikes  the  said  river  ;  thence  running  southerly  in  the  said  divis- 
ion line  to  a  point  fifty  chains  southerly  of  the  great  road  leading  to 
Fort  Stanwix  ;  thence  south  53°  east  to  the  easterly  line  of  the  county 
of  Oneida;  thence  northerlyin  the  said  county  line  to  the  Mohawk  River; 
thence  westerly  up  the  middle  of  the  said  river  to  the  place  of  beginning. 
Subsequent  sections  of  the  act  incorporate  this  district  as  a  city;  divide 
it  into  four  wards  corresponding  to  the  heart  of  the  first  four  of  the  present 
time  ;  declare  that  its  officers  shall  be  a  mayor,  twelve  aldermen -(three  for 
each  ward),  four  justices  of  the  peace,  a  clerk,  a  supervisor,  a  treasurer, 
an  attorney,  one  or  more  collectors,  four  assessors,  three  constables,  and 
authorize  the  appointment  by  the  council  of  certain  other  officers  ;  name 
the  first  Tuesday  in  March  as  the  date  of  the  annual  election  ;  declare  that 
the  aldermen  shall  be  elected  by  the  people  and  prescribe  the  mode  of  elec- 
tion and  the  qualification  of  the  electors,  one  of  which  was  the  possession 
of  a  freehold  estate  of  the  value  of  $250  over  and  above  all  incumbrances; 
that  the  mayor  and  other  officers  were  to  be  elected  by  a  vote  of  the 
council,  who  were  to  fix  their  compensation,  excepting  only  that  of  the 
mayor,  which  was  to  be  $250.  Other  acts  related  to  the  levying  of 
taxes  for  the  expenses  of  the  city,  which  were  placed  at  $8,000,  but  if 
this  sum  was  found  insufficient  it  was  subject  to  increase  on  the  consent 
or  petition  in  writing  of  a  majority  of  the  taxpayers ;  to  the  powers  and 
duties  of  the  council  and  the  various  officers,  etc. 


200  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  new  common  council  met  March  13,  1832.  The  names  of  the 
aldermen  were  as  follows  :  Ephraim  Hart,  Rudolph  Snyder,  John  Will- 
iams, Charles  A.  Mann,  Ezra  S.  Barnum,  Augustus  Hurlburt,  Robert 
McBride,  Harvey  Barnard,  Chauncey  Rowe,  John  A.  Russ,  John  H. 
Ostrom,  and  Rutger  B.  Miller.  The  oath  of  office  was  taken  and  John 
H.  Ostrom  appointed  cX^xV. pro  tern.  A  mayor  was  then  elected  by  bal- 
lot, Joseph  Kirkland  being  chosen  the  first  mayor  of  Utica.  Aldermen 
Hurlburt  and  Rowe  were  appointed  a  committee  to  wait  on  the  mayor, 
who  came  in  and  took  the  official  oath.  Other  officers  were  then  bal- 
loted for  with  the  following  result :  Clerk,  Thomas  Colling ;  treasurer, 
Ezra  S.  Cozier ;  attorney,  David  Wager ;  street  commissioner,  John 
McElwaine ;  police  constables,  Samuel  Hall,  Thomas  Parmelee ;  sur- 
veyors, John  Fish  and  E.  O.  Baily.  Aldermen  Hart  and  Mann  were 
appointed  a  committee  to  procure  a  seal.  Aldermen  Mann,  Snyder,  and 
Ostrom  and  the  mayor  were  made  a  committee  to  report  a  code  of  by- 
laws, police  regulations,  and  rules  for  the  government  of  the  council. 
This  committee  reported  accordingly  and  the  report  was  accepted ;  the 
new  ordinances  were  read  before  the  board  at  intervals  during  the  en- 
suing few  weeks  and  were  finally  adopted  in  April.  Five  watchmen 
were  appointed,  and  in  March  Levi  Ballou  was  chosen  as  beadle  and  a 
scavenger  was  appointed  for  each  ward. 

On  the  9th  of  April  a  committee  was  appointed  to  sell  the  free  school 
lot  on  Catharine  street  and  buy  another  suitable  for  common  school  and 
fire  purposes  ;  the  lot  was  sold  to  John  R.  Bleecker  for  $300.  On  the 
15th  of  May  it  was  resolved  that  the  street  commissioner  be  authorized 
to  expend  not  to  exceed  $300  on  repairing  roads ;  Aldermen  Miller, 
Hart,  and  Hurlburt  were  made  a  committee  on  the  expediency  of  buy- 
ing a  town  clock.  June  1st  it  was  ordered  that  "  two  bells  be  rung  for 
the  accommodation  of  citizens" — Presbyterian  and  Episcopal. 

A  special  meeting  of  the  council  was  held  June  14th.  It  had  been 
reported  to  the  board  that  a  son  of  John  Adams  was  sick  with  small- 
pox. A  resolution  was  adopted  directing  Drs.  McCall  and  Peckham  to 
visit  the  person  and  ascertain  wliether  he  could  be  removed  to  the  pest- 
house  without  danger  ;  a  committee  was  also  appointed  to  put  the  house 
in  condition.  But  a  far  more  terrible  enemy  was  approaching  than  the 
small-pox,  that  was  to  create  consternation  throughout  the  country 


Allantir:  Pulilishing   SL  Enjravin^  C°J^Y 


CHOLERA  EPIDEMIC.  201 

and  carry  to  the  grave  many  dwellers  in  Utica — the  Asiatic  cholera.    At 
a  meeting  of  the  council  on  June  i6th  the  following  was  adopted: 

"  Whereas,  The  council  has  received  information  that  the  Asiatic  cholera  has 
recently  appeared  in  Canada,  and  there  being  just  grounds  to  fear  that  in  a  short  time 
it  may  reach  this  city,  and  the  common  council  deeming  it  incumbent  on  them  I0 
adopt  such  measures  as  may  be  best  adapted  to  prevent  the  introduction  and  spread  of 
such  disease,  therefore, 

'^Resolved,  That  Drs.  Goodsell,  McCall,  Coventry,  Peckham,  and  McCraith  be  and 
they  are  appointed  (with  the  council)  as  a  Board  of  Health.  That  said  board  are 
hereby  authorized  to  make  such  regulations  as  they  may  deem  expedient  to  prevent  the 
i)itroduction  and  spread  of  disease  and  to  preserve  the  health  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
city." 

The  council  took  active  steps  to  carry  into  effect  the  regulations  of 
the  Board  of  Health.  The  aldermen  of  each  ward  were  constituted  a 
committee  for  their  respective  wards  to  examine  houses,  streets,  lances, 
and  outhouses  for  the  removal  of  nuisances  and  "  cleaning  and  filling  up 
streets."     The  following  resolution  was  passed  : 

''Resolved^  That  this  board  will  provide  for  the  payment  of  all  expenses  incurred 
under  the  preceding  resolutions." 

On  June  20th  Dr.  Goodsell  was  made  president  of  the  Board  of 
Health  and  published  for  that  body  a  communication  recommending 
every  possible  sanitary  precaution.  A  resolution  was  adopted  that  a 
temporary  hospital  be  erected  at  some  point  east  of  Miller's  Basin  and 
near  the  old  weigh  lock,  to  receive  such  sick  persons  as  the  board  should 
direct  to  be  placed  therein.  Fifty  bushels  of  lime  were  purchased  for 
the  use  of  the  poor.  A  special  meeting  of  the  council  was  held  on  the 
23d  of  June  at  which  Dr.  John  McCall  was  appointed  health  officer  and 
Joseph  Kirkland,  Drs.  Goodsell,  Peckham,  Coventry,  and  McCraith,  and 
Aldermen  Mann  and  Ostrom  were  constituted  the  Board  of  Health. 
Early  in  July  the  religious  societies  petitioned  the  council  to  unite  in 
observing  a  day  of  fasting,  humiliation,  and  prayer  "in  consequence  of 
the  pestilence."  This  request  was  carried  out.  On  July  3d  it  was  re- 
solved that  the  police  constables  cause  the  body  of  John  Hilliard,  "now 
lying  dead  in  Ehzabeth  street,  to  be  interred  during  the  night."  This  is 
a  grim  and  suggestive  record,  characteristic  of  the  time. 

On  the  29th  of  June  $50  were  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Board  of 
Health  and  on  August  lOth  $100  were  thus  appropriated.     At  a  special 

26 


202  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

meeting  July  27th  Drs.  McCall  and  Coventry  were  authorized  to  visit 
New  York  and  Albany  to  collect  information  regarding  the  cholera. 
They  did  so  and  made  an  intelligent  report,  but  it  resulted  in  very  little 
good.     On  June  26th  the  following  was  adopted : 

"Resolved,  That  Joseph  P.  Newland  and  Lucien  B.  Wells  be  appointed  assistants  to 
Dr.  McCall,  health  officer. 

••  Resolved,  Thai  Drs.  Goodsell  and  Peckham  be  a  committee  to  procure  suitable 
places  for  the  accommodation  of  those  who  may  be  sick  with  the  cholera  or  small-pox, 
and  to  furnish  for  the  sick  such  medicine,  attendance,  nurses,  and  other  things  as  may 
be  proper  and  necessary  for  their  comfort. 

"Resolved,  That  General  Ostrom  and  Dr.  McCraith  be  a  committee  to  designate  the 
proper  place  where  boats  may  perform  quarantine  and  where  they  may  be  cleansed  and 
purified,  and  report.'' 

The  report  named  Johnson's  Basin  on  the  west  and  the  starch  factory 
and  Miller's  Basin  on  the  east.  Committees  of  two  in  each  ward  were 
appointed  on  nuisances,  and  Hon.  Joseph  Kirkland  and  Dr.  Coventry 
were  made  a  committee  to  publish  daily  the  state  of  health  of  the  city. 
The  committee  for  the  purpose  could  not  find  suitable  buildings  for  a 
hospital  and  recommended  as  a  site  for  the  erection  of  a  fitting  structure 
Huntington's  Common  and  a  spot  northeast  of  the  Sulphur  Spring. 
The  Sulphur  Spring,  it  should  be  remarked  for  the  present  genera- 
tion of  readers,  was  in  the  gulf,  the  channel  of  what  was  known  as  Bal- 
lou's  Creek,  more  recently  Grace  Creek — it  trickled  from  the  base  of 
its  east  bank  a  little  below  Rutger  street.  On  the  4th  of  July  the  com- 
mittee reported  that  they  had  agreed  with  a  Mr.  Clover  for  the  use  of, 
his  house,  if  needed,  for  a  temporary  hospital,  and  about  the  first  of  Au- 
gust a  building  was  erected  near  Miller's  Basin  for  the  same  purpose. 
About  the  middle  of  August  Samuel  Hall,  John  Dickey,  Chauncey 
Phelps,  John  Y.  Pierce,  John  Cooper,  and  William  Fay  were  appointed 
assistants  to  the  Board  of  Health,  and  it  was  made  their  duty  to  see  to 
the  care  and  removal  of  poor  persons  sick  with  the  cholera  and  the 
burial  of  the  dead. 

Most  of  the  foregoing  resolutions  and  proceedings  are  taken  from  the 
book  of  minutes  of  the  Board  of  Health,  and  convey  a  good  general 
idea  of  the  action  taken  to  mitigate  the  horrors  of  the  plague.  The  last 
record  in  the  book  is  under  date  of  August  13th.  The  council  proceed- 
ings show,  however,  that  on   the   isth  of  that   month   Drs.    Goodsell, 


CHOLERA  EPIDEMIC. 


203 


Coventry,  Peckham,  and  McCraith  resigned  from  the  Board  of  Health 
and  E.  S.  Cozier,  William  Williams,  Joseph  E.  Bloomfield,  Spencer 
Kellogg,  and  Alfred  Munson  were  appointed.  On  the  27th  Mr.  Bloom- 
field  resigned  and  Moses  Bagg  was  appointed.  On  the  14th  of  Septem- 
ber Dr.  F.  B.  Wales,  physician  in  the  hospital,  resigned  and  received 
resolutions  of  thankfulness  for  his  labors.  Dr.  McCall  resigned  on  the 
7th  of  December. 

At  one  time  in  the  height  of  the  disease  the  academy  was  used  as  a 
temporary  hospital.  The  alarm  felt  by  the  community  and  with  which 
it  was  seized  upon  the  first  appearance  of  the  disease  had  become  ex- 
treme, and  large  numbers  fled  from  the  city.  It  was  estimated  that 
3,000  persons  had  departed  to  various  parts  of  the  surrounding  countrj- 
in  search  of  a  securer  refuge  from  the  mysterious  scourge.  All  business 
was  suspended  ;  schools  and  churches  were  closed  ;  the  silence  of  death 
reigned  in  the  streets ;  few  other  vehicles  were  seen  but  hearses  for  the 
dead  and  carriages  for  the  sick,  or  in  provision  for  their  needs ;  minis- 
trants  in  like  services  were  the  only  persons  on  foot  that  ventured 
abroad.  Daily  bulletins  were  issued  by  the  Board  of  Health,  and  these 
were  continued  until  early  in  the  month  of  September.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  fear  added  greatly  to  the  malignity  of  the  disease  and  set 
almost  at  naught  the  prescriptions  of  the  physicians  and  the  solicitous- 
nursing  of  friends.  The  summary  of  deaths  from  August  12th  to  Au- 
gust 28th  was  announced  as  5 1  ;  the  number  of  cases,  1 72.  By  Septem- 
ber loth  the  number  of  deaths  had  reached  65  ;  of  cases,  206. 

The  hospital  which  had  been  established  in  the  academy  was  discon- 
tinued on  the  iith  of  September,  and  the  president  of  the  Board  of 
Health  published  a  statement  declaring  that  no  more  danger  existed  to 
persons  returning  to  the  city  if  reasonable  precautions  were  taken. 
The  papers  insisted  that  the  health  of  the  city  was  quite  good.  On  the 
25th  of  September  they  announced  that  the  "city  was  never  more 
healthy  and  not  a  case  of  cholera  had  occurred  since  the  last  issue." 

The  following  additional  particulars  relating  to  the  epidemic  have 
been  gathered  from  the  public  journals  and  other  sources.  Cholera 
broke  out  in  New  York  and  Albany  early  in  July.  All  through  the 
latter  month  and  down  to  August  13th  the  Utica  papers  insisted  that 
this  place  was  in  perfect  health  and  congratulations  appeared  that  no^ 


2  04  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

case  of  cholera  had  yet  occurred.  But  on  the  13th  of  August  the 
papers  printed  the  following:  "The  Board  of  Health  have  the  melan- 
choly duty  of  announcing  to  their  fellow  citizens  that  the  malignant 
cholera  has  at  length  appeared  in  our  city.  For  the  last  twenty- four 
hours  there  have  been  four  cases,  all  of  which  proved  fatal.  Physicians 
are  ordered  to  report  all  cases  at  or  before  noon  of  each  day."  The 
four  cases  mentioned  were  Philo  Rockwell  (who  was  the  first),  Miss  Os- 
trom,  Miss  Gainer,  and  a  Mr.  Martin.  The  first  three  lived  in  Wash- 
ington street,  which  was  characterized  as  one  of  the  cleanest  in  the  city. 
From  the  14th  to  the  i6th  there  were  four  cases.  On  the  17th  there 
were  twenty-eight  cases.  Two  hospitals  were  soon  provided — one  near 
Mr.  Plant's  on  upper  Genesee  street,  a  little  out  of  the  city,  and  the 
other  at  the  corner  of  Columbia  and  State  streets. 

The  public  improvements  of  the  year  consisted  of  the  laying  out  of 
Columbia  street  from  Broadway  to  Genesee  street  according  to  John 
Fish's  survey,  a  matter  that  had  been  often  discussed  before ;  paving  of 
parts  of  Whitesboro  and  Water  streets ;  a  sewer  in  Genesee  street  from 
J.  Singer's  store  to  the  sewer  in  Broad  street;  Steuben  Squre  enclosed, 
walks  laid,  etc.  In  spite  of  the  cholera  $50  were  appropriated 
for  celebrating  the  4th  of  July.  It  was  also  determined  to  erect  two 
new  school- houses,  one  in  the  Third  and  one  in  the  Fourth  ward.  There 
were  at  this  time  five  fire  companies  and  a  hook  and  ladder  company, 
and  the  number  of  men  reported  as  belonging  to  each  was  from  thirty- 
five  to  sixty,  an  average  of  a  fraction  over  fifty,  and  a  contract  was 
entered  into  for  erecting  an  engine-house  on  Hotel  street. 

It  will  be  of  interest  at  this  point — the  beginning  of  the  history  of 
IJtica  as  a  city — to  record  the  condition  of  business  on  the  main 
thoroughfares  of  Genesee  street,  and  the  names  of  all  occupants  of  build- 
ings on  both  sides  of  that  street.  This  has  been  carefully  compiled  from 
■existing  records  and  is  doubtless  correct. 

Genesee  Street,  east  side — Beginning  at  the  foot  of  the  street,  east  side, 
•was  No.  9,  William  Dobson,  grocer'.  11,  John  Mason  &  Co.,  paints, 
-oil,  and  glass,  also  3  Granite  building.  13,  Garnet  Jones  &  Son,  cabi- 
net warehouse.      15,  George  Martell,  grocer.      19,  Bagg's  Hotel,  corner 

1  Mr.  Dobson  resided  at  the  same  number,  and  this  was  the  case  with  a  large  number  of  the 
.business  men  at  that  time — they  lived  in  the  same  buildings  in  which  they  carried  on  trade 


BUSINESS  RECORD.  205 

Main,  Bagg  &  Churchill,  proprietors ;  J.  Parker  &  Co.,  Elisha  Backus, 
John  Butterfield,  stage  proprietor's  office.  (Main  street.)  21,  John 
Adams,  merchant.  21  yi,  Oilman  &  Fuller,  grocers.  23,  Hubbell  & 
Curran,  hides  and  leather.  25,  Joab  Stafiford,  hardware  merchant.  27, 
E.  B.  Shearman  &  Co.,  manufacturers  and  dealers  in  American  goods 
and  window  glass.  29,  Warner  &  Southmayd,  druggists.  31,  Jona- 
than R.  Warner,  hat  and  fur  store.  35,  Frederick  K.  Boughton,  hat 
and  fur  store.  39,  Stephen  Thorn,  saddler.  41,  Elias  Rose,  grocer; 
Joseph  Jones,  cabinet  warehouse;  John  Baird,  jr.,  hat  and  fur  store. 
43,  Walton  &  Hardaway,  saddle,  harness,  and  trunkmakers.  Corner 
Broad,  Dodge  &  Dickey,  grocers,  confectioners.  (Broad  street.)  53, 
William  Clarke,  lottery  and  exchange  office;  Oneida  Temperance  House, 
Jonathan  M.  Ropes,  proprietor.  55,  Elisha  M.  Gilbert,  dry  goods; 
Ephraim  Feltt,  dry  goods.  57,  Nathan  Davis,  dry  goods;  Joseph  Kirk- 
land,  mayor  and  attorney,  John  G.  Floyd,  attorney,  and  Dr.  William 
Van  Zandt,  upstairs ;  also  Joseph  Colwell,  publisher  of  the  Utica  In- 
telligencer. 59,  Wells  M.  Gaylord,  looking-glass  store  ;  John  Jay  Hin- 
man  and  William  A.  Hinman,  attorneys,  upstairs.  63,  Mrs.  Lemuel 
Snow,  millinery,  etc.  65,  Harvey  Barnard,  paper  hangings;  Mrs. 
Barnard,  millinery  store.  67,  Bidwell  &  Williams,  Utica  cash  store. 
69,  George  Dutton,  music  dealer;  Mrs.  Dutton,  millinery.  71,  Thomas 
&  Knowlson,  dry  goods.  73,  Robert  Jones,  grocer  and  confectioner. 
75,  Roderick  Matson,  lottery  and  exchange  office.  (Catharine  street.) 
79,  Ezra  S.  Barnum,  grocer,  justice,  and  commissioner  of  deeds ;  Jesse 
Newell,  paints,  paper  hangings,  etc.,  and  brush  factory;  Cornelius 
Swartout,  dry  goods.  81,  J.  Murdock  &  Co.,  watchmakers  and  silver- 
smiths; H.  &  E.  Phinney  &  Co.,  booksellers;  Isaiah  Tiffany  (of  H.  & 
E.  Phinney  &  Co.),  commissioner  of  deeds;  Elisha  A.  Maynard,  editor 
and  printer  of  the  Utica  Observer.  83,  Alfred  Hitchcock,  druggist. 
85,  Thomas  Harris  &  Co.,  crockery ;  Abraham  B.  Williams,  draper 
and  taitor ;  Robert  S.  Lattimore,  tailor ;  Thomas  F.  Field,  merchant. 
2>'j,  John  R.  Ludlow  &  Co.,  china,  glass,  and  earthenware;  William 
Jarrett.  89,  Sanger  &  Benedict,  hardware;  Thomas  J.  Newland,  cop- 
persmith; Peter  B.  Ballou,  livery  stable,  rear  of  National  Hotel.  91, 
National  Hotel,  John  Wells,  proprietor.  93,  James  Sayre,  hardware 
and  dry  goods  ;  John  F.  J.  Vedder,  boots  and  shoes  ;    Nicholas  F.  Ved- 


2o6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

der ;  Heman  Norton,  physician,  upstairs.  95,  James  Henry,  city 
boot  and  shoe  store  ;  Alexander  M.  Beebee,  attorney,  editor  of  New 
York  Baptist  Register,  upstairs ;  Pierre  O.  Beebee,  attorney,  upstairs  ; 
George  L.  Brown,  hair-dresser.  (Erie  Canal.)  Packet  office  below 
Genesee  street  bridge,  next  door  to  Coffee  House.  101-103,  Shepard's 
Coffee  House,  Abraham  Shepard,  proprietor;  Bachelder  &  Wells,  phy- 
sicians, under  the  stage  office,  Shepard's  Coffee  House.  105,  John  H. 
Swift  &  Co.,  hats  and  furs.  107,  Philip  and  Ira  Thurber,  grocers  and 
fruits.  109,  Hunt  &  Bristol,  grocers  and  druggists,  ill,  Edward 
Norris,  grocer  and  forwarder.  113,  Egan  &  Clarke,  auctioneers  and 
commission  merchants;  Circulating  Library.  115,  Franklin  House. 
117,  Louis  Green,  grocer  and  ironmonger.  119,  Samuel  A.  Sibley, 
stoves,  copper,  tin,  and  hardware.  121,  Tillman  &  Benjamin,  cabinet 
warehouse.  123,  United  States  Branch  Bank,  John  C.  Devereux, 
president.  129,  Aylesworth  &  Holmes,  importers  and  dealers  in  hard- 
ware ;  Isaac  B.  Everson,  fruit  store  ;  Tarous  &  Dufrainoit,  hair- dressers. 
(Bleecker  street.)  131,  William  G.  Allyn,  auctioneer  and  commission 
merchant;  Hallock  Thorne,  merchant;  Erastus  Cross  (C.  &  Joslin 
and  C.  &Sykes),  merchants,  corner  Bleecker.  133,  Rowe  &  Woodruff, 
hardware  and  fancy  goods ;  Arunah  Monroe,  tinner.  135,  John  Cun- 
ningham, millinery  and  fancy  goods.  137,  Edward  Vernon,  bookseller. 
139,  Frank  B.  Wall,  physician.  139^,  Utica  Museum,  upstairs  over 
141.  141,  John  P.  Bachelder,  physician.  143,  John  E.  Powell,  mer- 
chant tailor.  145,  Miss  M.  Stoddard,  millinery.  147,  John  Bradish, 
attorney,  office  upstairs.  149,  William  Clarke,  ladies' shoe  store.  151, 
Francis  T.  Lobridge,  tailor;  Farmers'  Tavern,  Moses  B.  Maxon,  pro- 
prietor. 157,  Richard  B.  Bloomfield,  grocer,  corner  Elizabeth  street. 
(Elizabeth  street.)  159,  Braman's  Hotel  (changed  from  Eagle  Tavern), 
David  M.  Braman,  proprietor.  161,  James  Dean,  attorney.  161-163, 
Carmi  Hart,  cabinet  warehouse,  dealer  in  mahogany.  (Devereux 
street.)  177,  David  L.  Mallison,  physician;  Hiram  Rogers,  physician. 
199,  City  Hotel,  Harvey  Mason,  proprietor,  corner  Carnahan  street. 

Genesee  Street,  -west  side — Owen  Quin,  blacksmith,  corner  Genesee 
and  Water.  6,  Hugh  Rooney,  grocer.  8,  Edward  Evans,  tinner  and 
brazier.  10,  Edward  Baldwin,  dry  goods  and  flour  dealer ;  Miss  Jane 
and   Catharine  Baldwin,   milliners   and   mantua  makers.      12,  Ezra  S. 


BUSINESS  RECORD.  207 

Comstock,  grocer  and  confectioner,  proprietor  of  city  garden  and 
baths;  Levi  Comstock,  inspector  of  leather.  14,  Levi  Barnuni,  hat 
store;  Samuel  Lightbody,  hide  and  leather  store;  Harvey  Hannahs, 
grocer, confectionery, and  fruits,  2  Granite  building;  John  Mason  &  Co., 
paint,  oil,  and  glass  store,  3  Granite  building.  20,  Henry  L.  Smith, 
grocery  store,  3  Granite  building.  22,  Hickcox  &  Brown,  hardware, 
merchants,  and  grocers.  Granite  building.  (Whitesboro  street.)  26, 
Lemuel  Snow,  shoe  store,  corner  Genesee  and  Whitesboro ;  Francis  D. 
Grosvenor,  general  agency  ofiSce,  corner  Genesee  and  Whitesboro ; 
William  Whiteley,  musical  instruments.  30,  Leach  &  Bradley,  military 
and  jewelry  store;  Thomas  Davies,  watch  repairer;  Patrick  McCraith, 
physician,  upstairs  over  30  Genesee  street.  32,  Curtis  &  Savage, 
crockery  merchants  and  grocers.  34,  Oren  Clark,  merchant.  36, 
Benjamin  Frankland,  city  hat  store.  38,  Blake  &  Smith,  drapers  and 
tailors;  Ostrom  &  Walker,  attorneys,  upstairs  over  38  Genesee  street; 
Ward  Hunt,  up  stairs,  over  40  Genesee  street.  42,  James  Ingols,  fancy 
goods  and  hair-dresser;  Jacob  Overacre,  lithograph  printer,  upstairs 
over  42  Genesee  street;  Samuel  P.  Lyman,  attorney,  upstairs  over  42 
Genesee  street.  44,  Spencer  Field,  clothing  store;  Matthew  Talcott, 
attorney,  upstairs  over  44  Genesee  street ;  Beriah  B.  Hotchkin,  editor 
of  the  Elucidator,  over  44 ;  George  W.  Herrick,  copperplate  printer, 
upstairs  over  44.  46,  Joseph  S.  Porter,  jewelry  and  military  store ; 
Richard  Huntington,  silversmith  and  jeweler ;  Otis  Childs,  spectacle 
maker.  52,  George  Bray  ton,  fancy  and  staple  goods  and  wholesale 
dealer  in  stoneware.  54,  Barton  &  Butler,  dry  goods  merchants.  56, 
Stocking  &  Hunt,  hats  and  furs.  58,  Daniel  B.  Lothrop,  druggist  and 
grocer.  60,  William  Williams,  bookseller  and  publisher  ;  Balch,  Styles 
&  Wright,  engravers  and  copperplate  printers.  62,  Robert  Shearman, 
dealer  in  carpetings  and  dry  goods.  64,  Theodore  S.  Gold,  dry  goods  l^ 
merchant.  66,  Oliver  A.  Newell,  dry  goods  merchant.  68,  Samuel 
Thomson,  dealer  in  carpetings  and  dry  goods.  70,  Ellis  &  Cooper,  dry 
goods  merchants  ;  Ontario  Branch  Bank,  A.  B.  Johnson,  president.V^ 
72,  Stacy  &  Allen,  dry  goods  merchants.  74,  Thomas  G.  Perkins,  dry 
goods;  Horatio.  Seymour,  attorney,  upstairs  over  74;  Samuel  D. 
Dakin,  attorney,  John  Fish,  city  surveyor,  both  over  74.  ^6,  Thomas 
Hopper,  dry  goods  merchant.  Marble  building;   Button  &  Hovey,  dry 


2o8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

goods  merchants,  Marble  building;  Kirkiand  &  Bacon,  attorneys,  I 
Marble  building;  William  Tracy,  attorney,  2  Marble  building;  J.  Wat- 
son Williams,  attorney  and  clerk  in  chancery,  4  Marble  building; 
Nathan  Williams,  circuit  judge,  5  Marble  building ;  Burton  D.  Hurl- 
burt,  attorney,  6  Marble  building;  Sidney  T.  Fairchild,  attorney,  6 
Marble  building.  78,  Daniel  J.  Morris,  draper  and  tailor.  80,  O'Neil 
&  Martin,  hardware  and  copper  manufactory  and  store.  82,  John  & 
William  Williams,  druggists  and  wholesale  and  retail  dealers  in  grocer- 
ies and  paints  and  dyes,  84,  Elisha  Wells,  boots  and  shoes.  Law 
building;  John  Parsons,  justice  of  the  peace.  Law  building;  Thomas 
Walker,  i  Law  building;  King  &  Wright,  attorneys,  2  Law  building; 
Wetmore  &  Denio,  attorneys,  4  Law  building.  88,  Daniel  Cleveland, 
dry  goods  merchant.  Law  building;  Stalham  Williams,  treasurer  of 
packet  boat  companies  ;  James  Dana,  importer  and  dealer  in  hardware 
and  saddlery.  90,  Parker  &  Hastings,  wholesale  grocers.  92,  Joseph 
A.  Sherman,  dry  goods  merchant;  Elhanan  W.  Williams,  attorney,  up- 
stairs ;  Asa  S.  Ruddock,  physician,  upstairs.  94,  Otis  Manchester, 
draper  and  tailor;  Grove  Penny,  tailor;  Hastings  &  Tracy,  booksell- 
ers, printers,  and  publishers  of  the  Western  Recorder ;  Western  Recorder 
office,  Thomas  Hastings,  editor.  96,  Lord  &  Shapley,  dry  goods; 
Beardsley  &  Matteson,  attorneys,  upstairs.  98,  John  Camp  &  Broth- 
ers, merchants.  100,  Spencer  Kellogg  &  Son,  dry  goods;  John  Os- 
born,  glover,  upstairs.  102,  Jesse  W.  &  Charles  R.  Doolittle,  dry 
goods.  104,  Alexander  Seymour,  dry  goods.  106,  Milton  Brayton, 
dry  goods.  1 08,  Hughes  &  Barry,  tailors;  Thompson  Bacon,  jr.,  boots 
and  shoes;  Jacob  Vanderheyden,  cordwainer.  iio,  Ziba  &  Phil- 
emon Lyon,  tailors;  Simon  V.  Oley,  boots  and  shoes  and  leather. 
112,  William  W.  Backus,  dry  goods,  corner  of  Liberty  street;  Al- 
bert Bacon,  boots  and  shoes,  corner  of  Genesee  and  Liberty  street. 
(Liberty  street.)  114,  Dennis  Nellis,  tailor,  corner  Liberty.  116, 
Charles  Brewster,  lottery  and  exchange  agent ;  Samuel  C.  Brewster,  lot- 
tery and  exchange  broker;  George  Parker,  silversmith;  Thomas  T. 
Rowe,  watch  repairer.  118,  Riley  Rogers,  gunsmith,  upstairs.  120, 
Benjamin  F.  Brooks,  music  and  jewelery ;  Norman  Tryon,  auctioneer; 
Joab  Griswold,  watchmaker ;  George  Thorp,  silverplater ;  Landais 
Wood,  silversmith  ;  John  P.  Merrill^  carver,    upstairs.      122,  Alexander 


BUSINESS  EECORD.  209 

Cameron,    auction   and   commission    merchant;    Rufus   Northway,  jr., 
printer    and  publisher  of  the  Utica  Sentinel  and  Gazette,  upstairs,  cor- 
ner Canal ;   Russell  Loomis,  innkeeper  and  grocer,  and  Lewis  C.  Loomi?, 
grocer,  corner  Genesee  and  Canal.      124,  Mairs   &   Dows,  grocers  and 
tinners,  corner   Genesee   and  Canal.      (Erie  Canal.)      126-128,  Butler, 
McDonough  &  Co.,  forwarders  and  commission  merchants  and  whole- 
sale dealers  in  merchandise  ;  John  B.  Pease,  justice  of  the  peace,  upstairs  >- 
over    126;   Henry  H.  Pease,  attorney,  and  Thomas  Goodselj,  upstairs. 
130,  George  Manchester,  draper  and  tailor;   McAllister  &  Grant,  phy- 
sicians,  upstairs.       132,    Dennis  Saumet,    hair-dresser.       134,  John  B. 
Marchisi,  druggist  and  grocer.      (Franklin  Square.)     Murray  &  Carroll, 
dry    goods  ;   Maynard  &  Spencer,  attorneys,  upstairs ;  White  &  Crafts, 
attorneys,   upstairs;  William  S.  Spear,  publisher  of  the  Lever ;  all    of 
these  were  in   the   Devereux  building.     John  Anson,   grocer,  head  of 
Hotel  street.     Thomas  Jenkins,  boots  and  shoes,  head  of  Hotel  street ; 
Mrs.  Midlam,  millinery,  head  of  Hotel  street ;  William  G.  Miller,  sad- 
dler and  harnessmaker,  head  of  Hotel  street ;  James   S.  Foster   &  Co., 
merchants,  corner  of  Fayette.     (Fayette  street.)     1 36,  Bennett  &  Bright, 
printers,  booksellers,  and  publishers  of  the  New    York  Baptist  Register 
and    Youth's   Miscellany ;    Theodore    Pomeroy,    physician,    upstairs; 
Quartus  Graves,  publisher  of  the  Record  of  Genius  and  the  Co- Opera- 
tor.     138,  Hurlburt  &  Brownell,   manufacturers   and  dealers  in   cotter* 
goods.      140,  Edward  Owens,   cutler  and   surgical   instrument   maker. 
142,  Stephen  M.  Ferine,  chair  warehouse;  William   C.  Rogers,  cabinet 
warehouse.      144,   Robert  Disney,  druggist;  John  P.  B.  Sloan,  physi- 
cian.     146,  John  Hale,  master  mason  and  merchant;   Harvey  N.  Smith, 
coroner.      148,  Charles  Easton,  hardware   and  paints  ;   George  North, 
merchant.      154,  Thomas  Bradwell,  boots  and  shoes.      156,  Henry  New- 
land,  boots  and  shoes.      158,  Robert  Higginbotham,  shoe  store ;   Isaac 
N.  Meacham,  physician.     (Columbia  street.)     162— 164,  William  B.  Gray, 
saddle,   harness,  and  trunkmaker.      178,   Milo  Arnold,    grocer,   corner 
Pearl  street.     (Pearl  street.)     Rev.    Samuel   Whittlesey,   young  ladies* 
seminary,  Genesee  and  Pearl. 

To  this  list  are  added  the  names  and  residences  of  a  few  additional 
persons  whose  places  of  business  were  outside  of  the  limits  included 
in  the  foregoing :   Parker  &   Swift,   grocers.   No.  i  Canal   buildings  (on 

27 


210  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  canal  between  Hotel,  Seneca,  and  Liberty  streets).  Jacob  C.  Space, 
No.  7  Canal  buildings.  John  Guild,  merchant,  Bleecker  east  of  Bridge. 
William  Cattell,  city  mill.  Nicholas  and  Nehemiah  HaJlock,  pork 
packers,  Elizabeth  street.  B.  S.  Merrill,  book- binder,  corner  of  Main 
and  Third.  Thomas  M.  Francis,  canal  collector.  Jacob  Wrattan,  car- 
penter and  joiner.  Steuben  Square:  Charles  Churchill,  lumber  dealer, 
residence  Seneca  above  Canal.  James  McGregor,  master  mason,  resi- 
dence Seneca  above  Liberty.  Stafford  Palmer,  carpenter  and  joiner, 
residence  Washington  above  Fayette.  J.  C.  Shippey,  master  mason, 
residence  Fayette  west  of  Cornelia.  Lyman  Scranton,  carpenter,  resi- 
dence Washington  above  Pearl.  Chester  D.  Clark,  auctioneer,  residence 
Cooper  west  of  Broadway.  George  Lawson,  currier,  residence  Whites- 
boro  west  of  Broadway.  Roberts  &  Sidebotham,  butchers,  14-16 
Clinton  market.  Tunis  Van  Syce,  though  he  was  temporarily  absent 
from  the  place  in  1832,  had  already  been  ten  years  a  grocer  here.  In 
1833  he  built  the  Oneida  brewery  and  conducted  it  until  his  failure,  but 
lived  here  some  time  longer. 

Resum.ing  our  narrative  I  proceed  to  notice  the  new  comers  of  the 
year  1832.  Of  the  aspirants  of  the  profession  of  law  three  had  de- 
parted by  1837,  viz.:  Sidney  T.  Fairchild,  Fortune  C.  White,  and  Fla- 
vel  W.  Bingham.  The  following  were  longer  connected  with  the  his- 
tory of  Utica,  viz.:  Horatio  Seymour,  Alvan  Stewart,  Burton  D. 
Hurlburt,  J.  Watson  Williams,  and  Willard  Crafts.  Sketches  of  Mr. 
Seymour  and  Mr.  Williams  will  be  found  in  the  Biographical  Department 
and  of  Mr.  Stewart  in  that  of  the  Bench  and  Bar. 

Willard  Crafts,  a  native  of  Pomfret,  Conn.,  was  born  in  1789  and 
came  the  following  year  with  his  parents  to  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.  He 
•was  graduated  at  Middlebury  College,  Vt.,  and  after  pursuing  a  course 
of  French  studies  in  Montreal  began  the  study  of  law  with  Robert 
Campbell,  of  Cooperstown,  finishing  his  course  with  George  Griffin,  of 
New  York  city.  In  181 5  he  opened  an  office  as  attorney  in  Bridge- 
water,  whence  he  removed  after  seventeen  years  of  practice  to  this  city 
in  the  spring  of  1832.  This  practice  he  continued  until  his  death,  De- 
cember 9,  1866.  Mr.  Crafts  was  never  ambitious  of  either  fame  or 
wealth.  He  acquired  a  sufficiency  for  an  unostentatious  life  and  never 
sacrificed  a  principle  for  advancement  or  gain.      His  tastes  were  simple; 


BURTON  D.  HURLBURT  AND  OTHERS.  211 

his  habits  temperate  and  frugal;  his  manners  affable  and  genial ;  and 
his  home  hospitable.  Equable  of  temper  he  pursued  the  even  tenor  of 
his  way  without  either  giving  or  taking  offence,  and  was  ever  ready  to- 
do  any  service  in  his  power. 

An  obituary  notice  of  Burton  D.  Hurlburt  informs  us  that  he  was 
born  in  Augusta,  Oneida  County,  May  30,  1807.  He  was  educated  in 
Hamilton  Academy  and  entered  Hamilton  College,  but  two  years  later 
went  to  Union,  where  he  was  graduated  with  valedictorian  honors  in 
1829.  He  studied  law  in  different  places  and  was  admitted  to  practice 
in  1832.  He  was  a  few  months  a  partner  of  Sidney  T.  Fairchild  and 
was  ambitious  to  rise,  but  ill  health  forced  him  to  retire  from  genera! 
practice  about  1845.  While  still  doing  law  business  he  devoted  him- 
self for  some  years  to  the  oversight  and  management  of  a  farm  in  New 
Hartford.  The  failure  of  Frederick  Hollister  caused  him  a  heavy  loss. 
as  his  endorser,  and  through  this  failure  he  was  engaged  as  attorney  by 
Brown  Brothers,  of  New  York,  in  important  suits  affecting  the  title  to 
the  Clayville  mills,  which  Mr.  Hollister  had  owned  from  1842  to  185  i. 
Mr.  Hurlburt  had  charge  of  the  steam  woolen- mills,  the  property 
of  A.  T.  Stewart,  of  New  York.  He  was  thereby  involved  in  much  liti- 
gation and  was  successful  in  seventeen  out  of  eighteen  of  their  suits; 
the  last  one,  involving  $50,000,  was  carried  before  the  Court  of  Appeals- 
and  was  won  by  Mr.  Hurlburt  after  six  years  of  prosecution.  Mr. 
Hurlburt  was  one  of  the  original  stockholders  of  the  Oneida  Bank.  He- 
died  September  25,  1887. 

Physicians  now  first  noted  as  resident  are  Lucien   B.  Wells,  Asahel 
Grant,  John  P.  Newland,  John   P.  B.  Sloan,   John  Budlong,  and' Row 
land  Sears.     Dr.  Wells  studied  with  Dr.  Theodore  Pomeroy  and  prac- 
ticed for  some  years  elsewhere,  but   returned  again  to  Utica  and   has 
lived  and  practiced  here  for  quite  a  number  of  years. 

Dr.  Asahel  Grant  soon  left  the  place  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the  Nes- 
torians  of  Persia.  His  labors  among  them  and  his  history  of  that  an- 
cient semi- Christian  people  are  well  known.  Dr.  Newland  practiced 
some  time  here. 

Palmer  V.  Kellogg,  son  of  Spencer  Kellogg,  the  merchant  of  1825, 
became  in  1832  a  partner  with  him  in  the  dry  goods  trade,  which  con- 
nection was  changed  in  1842  to  one  with  James  Rockwell.     This  lasted 


212  {MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

until  1847,  after  which  and  until  1853  he  had  as  a  partner  his  brother, 
Charles  C.  Kellogg.  About  this  time  he  entered  on  the  making  and 
sale  of  clothing,  at  first  in  company  with  Alexander  Rae,  but  shortly- 
after  with  John  H.  Prentiss  and  James  K.  Hitchcock,  under  the  firm 
name  of  P.  V.  Kellogg  &  Co.  They  made  a  large  quantity  of  goods 
-which  were  mostly  sent  for  sale  to  an  associate  house  in  Chicago.  To 
that  city  Messrs.  Kellogg  and  Prentiss  removed  in  1869.  There  the 
manufacture  was  continued  on  a  still  larger  scale,  and  there  Mr.  Kel- 
logg amassed  considerable  wealth.  In  addition  to  the  cares  of  his  busi- 
ness Mr.  Kellogg  was  while  here  much  busied  in  politics  and  exerted  a 
go.^d  deal  of  influence  in  the  Whig  party.  He  was  ambitious  for  office 
and  skilled  in  the  advanced  methods  of  politics.  He  was  supervisor  for 
the  city,  sheriff"  of  the  county,  and  United  States  marshal  for  the  North- 
ern District  of  New  York. 

James  Button,  a  native  of  Lebanon,  Conn.,  after  serving  as  a  clerk  in 
Richmond,  Va.,  came  to  Utica  in  1831  and  served  in  the  same  capacity 
with  Anson  Thomas.  In  1832  he  established  a  dry  goods  business  of 
his  own  and  continued  it  more  than  an  average  life-time,  always  com- 
manding the  entire  confidence  of  all  who  held  relations  with  hrm.  He 
was  naturally  retiring  and  modest  and  managed  his  affairs  as  became 
such  a  nature.  His  investments  were  carefully  made.  Fortune  smiled 
upon  his  industry  and  integrity  and  he  quietly  enjoyed  its  fruits.  His 
home  was  for  many  years  in  New  Hartford  while  he  carried  on  business 
here.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  that  village 
and  was  an  honor  to  his  Christian  profession.  His  first  wife  was  Eliz- 
abeth, daughter  of  Walter  King,  by  whom  he  had  four  children.  His 
second  was  Annie,  daughter  of  Adam  Traquard,  of  Philadelphia. 

Theodore  P.  Ballou  was  the  son  of  Jerathmel  Ballou  and  grandson 
of  Joseph  Ballou,  one  of  the  pioneer  settlers  of  Utica.  He  was  born 
March  18,  1808.  He  was  a  clerk  for  some  years  for  Ebenezer  B.  Shear- 
man, his  uncle,  and  in  1832  became  one  of  the  firm  of  E.  B.  Shearman 
&  Co.,  remaining  in  it  until  the  death  of  Mr.  Shearman.  Afterward  he 
engaged  in  the  lumber  business  and  in  insurance.  He  was  the  owner  of 
the  gang- mills  at  Prospect,  built  the  Ballou  block  on  the  site  of  his 
father's  store,  and  was  concerned  in  other  business.  He  died  February 
28,  1887,  leaving  a  widow  and  two  children. 


.^«»^«^ 

wt~^^ 

"^ 

i 

JOHN  CARTON  AND  OTHERS.  213 

Martin  Hart,  first  as  a  book-deeper  for  Alfred  Munson,  but  soon  hav- 
ing an  interest  with  Mr.  Munson  in  the  making  of  burr  millstones,  re- 
mained long  in  the  same  connection,  unassuming  and  retiring,  but 
reposing  in  the  full  confidence  of  his  fellow  townsmen. 

A  wholesale  grocery  establishment  was  this  year  inaugurated  by  Job 
Parker  and  William  P.  Swift  under  the  firm  name  of  Parker  &  Swift. 
The  latter  remained  some  years  in  Utica,  Mr.  Parker  very  much  longer, 
retaining  throughout  a  character  for  high  integrity  and  general  excell- 
ence. He  died  in  1872.  His  sons  succeeded  to  his  business  as  Job  Par- 
kers Sons. 

John  Carton,  a  native  of  Dublin,  came  to  this  country  and  to  Utica 
when  he  was  twelve  years  of  age,  learned  his  trade  as  a  coppersmith 
with  O'Neil  &  Martin,  and  having  served  an  apprenticeship  became  one 
of  the  partners,  which  partnership  he  retained  until  1845.  ^"^  that  date 
he  conducted  business  alone.  By  his  industry,  energy,  and  self-reliance 
he  became  one  of  the  most  successful  business  men  of  the  place,  gaining 
steadily  in  wealth  as  well  as  in  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  all  with  ~ 
whom  he  had  to  do.  He  was  a  manufacturer  of  tin,  copper,  and  sheet 
ironware,  the  inventor  of  hot-air  furnaces  known  by  his  name,  a  man- 
ufacturer of  headlights,  and  proprietor  of  a  cheese  vat.  Mr.  Carton 
was  for  some  years  a  director  of  the  Oneida  Bank,  a  trustee  of  the  Sav- 
ings Bank,  and  a  trustee  of  the  Female  Academy.  Brought  up  under 
the  discipline  of  the  Catholic  Church  he  was  warmly  attached  to  its  in- 
terests and  a  supporter  of  its  institutions.  He  left  five  sons  and  two 
daughters. 

Others  whom  it  must  suffice  to  mention  by  name  only  were  Grove 
Penny,  one  of  the  firm  of  Manchester  &  Co.,  tailors,  who  is  still  living; 
Orville  Olcott,  boat  builder ;  and  T.  J.  Newland,  coppersmith. 

1833. — ^The  city  officers  for  the  year  were:  Mayor,  Henry  Seymour  ; 
aldermen,  Charles  A.  Mann,  Rutger  B.  Miller,  Harvey  Barnard,  John 
Butterfield,  Robert  McBride,  Chauncey  Rowe,  Gardiner  Tracy,  Ches- 
ter Griswold,  Ezra  S.  Barnum,  Zenas  Wright,  Ephraim  Hart,  Nicholas 
Smith;  clerk,  Thomas  Colling;  treasurer,  Thomas  Walker ;  attorney, 
John  G.  Floyd ;   surveyor,  John  Fish. 

On  the  3d  of  January  a  committee  was  appointed  consisting  of  the 
mayor  and  Aldermen   Griswold,  Mann,  and  Tracy  to  present  a  memo- 


214  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

rial  to  the  legislature  praying  for  "  alteration  in  the  location  of  the 
Chenango  Canal  at  its  northern  termination."  On  the  loth  of  January, 
1834,  the  following  preamble  and  resolution  were  unanimously  adopted 
by  the  council  : 

Whereas,  Certain  individuals  now  in  our  city  are  disturbing  the  peace  of  the  good 
citizens  thereof,  by  circulating  sentiments  which  we  deem  demoralizing  in  themselves 
and  little  short  of  treason  toward  the  government  of  our  country, 

Resolved^  That  we,  the  common  council  of  the  city  of  Utica,  regard  the  agitation  of 
the  question  of  Negro  Slavery  as  it  exists  in  the  Southern  States  of  this  Republic  to 
be  highly  inexpedient  at  the  present  juncture  of  our  National  affairs  ;  and  that  it  can 
only  tend  to  keep  alive  the  dying  embers  of  internal  discord,  which  we  fondly  hope  and 
believe  will  soon  be  entirely  extinguished  if  not  disturbed  by  the  zeal  of  misguided 
philanthropists. 

This  preamble  and  resolution  were  ordered  to  be  sent  to  the  repre- 
sentative in  Congress. 

January  31st  an  ordinance  was  adopted  designed  to  effectually  close 
and  control  brothels,  gambling  places,  assignation  houses,  etc. 

The  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad  project  was  now  before  the  pub- 
lic and  the  subscription  books  were  opened  here  during  June  17,  18, 
and  19.  Utica  subscribed  for  about  $4,300,000  of  stock.  On  the  19th 
of  July  a  committee  was  appointed  to  report  at  what  point  in  the  city 
the  railroad  should  terminate.  The  report  stated  that  "  it  shall-termin- 
ate  on  the  square  (so  called.") 

The  question  of  procuring  a  town  clock  had  been  before  the  author- 
ities for  a  year  or  more  and  on  the  26th  of  April  Aldermen  Mann, 
Hart,  and  Tracy  were  made  a  committee  to  contract  for  a  clock  to  be 
placed  on  the  Bleecker  street  church.' 

August  9th  the  aldermen  of  the  Third  and  Fourth  wards  were  au- 
thorized to  contract  for  the  purchase  of  lots  selected  in  those  wards  for 
school  purposes,  and  report  plans  for  brick  school- houses  on  each  lot. 
A  lot  was  purchased  in  the  Third  ward  for  $1,250. 

The  principal  improvements  of  the  year  were  the  extension  of  State 
street  from  Fayette  to  Huntington's  basin ;  improvement  of  Chancellor 
Square  by  setting  trees  and  making  walks ;  paving  Broadway  from 
Pearl  to  the  canal;  building  a  two- foot  sewer  from  the  junction  of  the 
then  present  sewer  with  the  culvert  under  the  canal  near  James  Kip's 
residence  diagonally  across  land  owned  by  J.  M.  Church  to  Pine  street, 


LA  WYERS  OF  1833  —  J.  H.  EDMONDS.  215 

and  in  Pine  Street  across  Fayette  to  an  alley  and  through  the  alley  to 
Columbia  street.  Other  proceedings  of  the  council  were  the  appropri- 
ation of  $50  to  the  Mechanics  Association,  just  incorporated,  for  the 
purchase  of  medals,  and  the  appropriation  of  $350  for  a  new  engine 
for  company  No.  3  if  an  equal  sum  should  be  subscribed. 

From  the  Elucidator  is  gleaned  the  following:  Business  is  spoken  of 
as  prosperous.  The  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad  was  incorporated 
and  the  stock  sold  here  at  ten  per  cent,  advance.  After  the  opening 
of  the  canal  business  was  active;  but. the  first  influences  of  the  ap- 
proaching financial  stress  of  1836-37  were,  doubtless,  beginning  to  be 
felt.  There  was  a  need  of  banks  here  and  the  amount  of  currency  was 
insufficient.  In  1834  this  financial  stringency  was  more  marked  and 
there  was  bitter  opposition  to  the  removal  of  the  deposits  from  the  U.  S. 
Bank.  It  was  stated  that  "  money  was  never  more  scarce  and  local 
banks  were  discounting  no  paper." 

The  men  of  the  bar  now  first  met  with  were  P.  Sheldon  Root,  John 
H.  Edmonds,  John  Hogan,  James  Knox,  John  L.  Talcott,  and  John  C. 
Van  Rensselaer.  Of  these  the  first  three  were  the  only  ones  who  were 
fixed  in  Utica  for  any  considerable  period.  Mr.  Knox,  a  brother  of 
John  J.  Knox,  of  Augusta,  having  studied  law  with  Joshua  A.  Spencer, 
was  one  year  in  partnership  with  him,  when  he  removed  to  Illinois  and 
was  there  a  conspicuous  and  useful  man.  Mr.  Hogan  was  in  practice 
until  1840-42,  when  he  received  a  consular  appointment  to  Hayti  and 
left  the  city.  Mr.  Talcott,  son  of  Samuel  A.  Talcott,  made  his  reputa- 
tion as  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Erie  County.  For  sketch  of 
P.  Sheldon  Root  see  chapter  on  the  Bench  and  Bar. 

John  H.  Edmonds  was  a  native  of  Utica.  After  receiving  his  aca- 
demic education  he  studied  in  the  office  of  John  Bradish  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  practice  in  1833.  For  some  years  longer  he  remained  with 
Mr.  Bradish,  who  acted  as  agent  for  attorneys  throughout  the  State  in 
the  service  of  papers  in  the  Supreme  Court.  Assisting  him  in  these 
duties  the  assiduous  labors  of  Mr.  Edmonds  undermined  his  health.  It 
was  re-established  by  a  long  journey  taken  on  horseback.  In  1838  he 
became  a  partner  of  Charles  A.  Mann  and  so.  continued  until  the  death 
of  Mr.  Mann  in  i860.  During  this  period  he  was  several  years  master 
in   chancery,  the  only  official  position  he  ever  filled.     He  did  not  seek 


2i6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

office,  but  his  life  was  one  of  continuous  labor.  After  the  death  of  Mr. 
Mann  he  was  associated  with  his  son,  James  F.  Mann,  and  with  Addison 
C.  Miller  until  1871,  when  he  retired.  His  occupations  were  mostly 
attendance  on  reference  cases  and  the  management  of  private  estates. 
His  opinion,  especially  on  the  nature  and  management  of  property,  was 
given  with  careful  deliberation,  was  weighty,  and  was  much  confided  in. 
His  is  the  spotless  record  of  a  good  and  true  man.  Few  have  better 
deserved  the  tribute  of  respect  and  esteem  which  was  universally  ac- 
corded him.  He  died  on  April  i,  1881,  leaving  a  widow,  son,  and 
daughter. 

Physicians  who  first  advertised  in  1833  were  Josiah  Rathbun,  Will- 
iam Morris,  David  L.  Bradford,  Walton  H.  Peckham,  the  first  two  be- 
ing the  only  ones  who  were  persistent  in  Utica.  Josiah  Rathbun  was 
born  in  Brookfield,  Chenango  County,  N.  Y.,  on  January  12,  1795. 
He  spent  the  time  until  he  was  seventeen  years  of  age  at  home,  receiv- 
ing the  advantages  only  of  the  common  school.  His  father  being  in 
limited  circumstances  Josiah  resolved  to  leave  home  and  begin  a  busi- 
ness life  for  himself.  He  accordingly  went  to  Martinsburg,  N.  Y., 
where  he  worked  on  a  farm  for  two  years,  attending  school  during  the 
winter  seasons.  It  was  during  this  time,  on  account  of  a  feeble  consti- 
tution, that  he  became  impressed  with  the  idea  of  leading  a  professional 
life,  and  entered  Onondaga  Academy,  where  he  remained  for  nearly 
three  years  including  the  time  spent  in  teaching  in  winter.  In  the 
year  1820  he  began  the  study  of  medicine  at  Lowville,  Lewis  County, 
N.  Y.,  which  he  continued  for  some  three  years,  including  one  course 
of  lectures  at  Fairfield,  Herkimer  County,  and  two  courses  in  the  old 
Medical  College  of  New  York.  After  receiving  his  license  Dr.  Rath- 
bun practiced  some  eight  years  in  Martinsburg,  and  then  in  the  spring 
of  1833  settled  in  Utica,  where  he  remained  in  the  practice  of  his  pro- 
fession until  his  death.  He  lived  to  see  pass  away  most  of  his  associates 
of  the  medical  fraternity  who  were  here  when  he  came.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  and  a  liberal  supporter  of  all  kin- 
dred interests.  As  a  practitioner  he  was  careful  and  judicious,  honor- 
able in  his"  professional  intercourse,  and  quiet  and  unobtrusive  with  the 
sick.  Affable  and  courteous  a  large  and  influential  circle  called  for  his 
aid,  and  through  many  years  he  ministered  to  the  same  families. 


DRS.  WILLIAM  MORRIS  AND  G.  A.  FOSTER.  217 

Dr.  William  Morris  was  born  in  Chatham,  Columbia  County,  Decem- 
ber 29,  i8o6.  He  was  left  an  orphan  when  but  five  years  old  and  sub- 
sequently entered  a  family  related  to  him,  where  he  assisted  at  farm 
work.  In  later  years  he  followed  school  teaching,  in  which  he  was 
very  successful,  and  for  several  years  he  pursued  that  occupation  in  win- 
ters and  worked  on  a  farm  in  summers.  By  economy  he  was  enabled 
to  take  a  course  at  Hamilton  Academy  and  later  graduated  with  high 
honors  from  a  medical  college  in  Massachusetts.  He  came  to  Utica  in 
1832  and  soon  gained  friends  and  a  considerable  practice,  particularly 
in  the  rural  districts.  He  was  an  attentive  and  kind  adviser  and  a 
worthy  and  upright  member  of  society.  He  left  two  sons,  one  of  whom 
succeeded  him  in  practice, 

In  the  directory  of  the  previous  year  Dr.  Gilbert  A.  Foster  had  been 
chronicled  as  a  machinist ;  in  that  of  1833  he  appears  as  a  dentist.  As 
such  he  filled  a  leading  place  almost  to  the  time  of  his  death,  and  most 
of  the  time  in  connection  with  his  son,  Dr.  Charles  B.  Foster.  Resolu- 
tions passed  by  the  profession  after  his  decease  declare  that  he  was  a 
"power  among  them."  To  his  geniality  and  good  fellowship,  his  de- 
light in  sports,  in  music,  and  in  Masonry,  multitudes  of  his  cotempo- 
raries  can  attest. 

Beginning  at  this  time  as  a  dry  goods  merchant  Jarvis  M.  Hatch 
appears  some  three  years  later  as  a  lawyer,  in  which  profession  he  re- 
mained, having  by  turns  several  different  partners  until  1849,  when  he 
went  to  Rochester. 

Other  dealers  were  George  D.  Foster,  who  was  with  Alfred  Hitch- 
cock in  the  sale  of  drugs  and  groceries  and  afterward  of  the  firm  of 
Foster  &  Dickinson.      Another  was  Stephen  Comstock,  also  grocer. 

Jireh  Durkee  was  proprietor  of  the  Utica  Steam  Mills,  which  were 
set  in  motion  this- year  on  the  corner  of  Fayette  and  Cornelia  streets 
and  of  which  John  Dagwell  was  the  millwright.  Mr.  Durkee  afterward 
sold  flour,  but  did  not  stay  long.  Mr.  Dagwell  has  remained  to  the 
present,  having  succeeded  to  the  foundry  established  by  Ephraim  Hart 
and  conducted  by  him  and  his  son.  Mr.  Dagwell  became  the  associate 
of  the  latter  and  has  lived  an  industrious  and  respected  life.  Francis 
Ramsdell  was  a  clerk  in  the  mill.  Asaph  and  Bradford  Seymour 
started  the   City  Furnace  on  the  north  corner  of  Jay  street  and  First 

28 


2i8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

street.     The  former  did  casting  for  a  few  years  (till  1 847  at  least),  but 
eventually  went  back  to  Hecla,  whence  they  came. 

Two  sign  painters  who  for  many  years  pursued  their  useful  calling 
and  were  both  respected  men  were  John  Tunbridge  and  George  Bullock. 
Charles  Adams  for  a  long  series  of  yt::AV^  transported  the  United  States 
mails  between  the  postoffice  and  railroads.  Other  long  lasting  residents 
were  Peter  Brewer,  cooper,  and  Trumbull   Smith,  grocer. 

1834. — The  officers  for  the  year  were  as  follows:  Mayor,  Joseph 
Kirkland  ;  aldermen,.  Zc-na^  Wright,  Sylvanu.s  Holmes,  Comfort  Butler, 
Thomas  McQuade,  Robert  McBride,  James  Sayre,  John  Williams,  Au- 
gustus Huriburt,  Chauhcey  Rowe,  Daniel  Stafford,  Gardiner  Tracy, 
Edward  Curran  ;  treasurer,  Thomas  Walker;  attorney,  Orsamus  B. 
Matteson ;  clerk,  Jacob  D.  Edwards ;  surveyor,  John  Fish ;  street 
commissioner,  Morris  Wilcox. 

April  4th  tiie  aldermen  of  the  Fourth  ward  were  appointed  as  a 
committee  to  erect  a  school-house  in  that  ward  and  were  authorized  to 
contract  for  a  lot  and  report.  On  the  ist  of  August  $200  were  appro- 
priated in  addition  to  $1,250,  which  had  been  previously  appropriated, 
for  the  lot  and  school-house. 

At  a  special  meeting  of  the  council  held  April  5th  a  committee  prev- 
iously appointed  on  the  termination  of  the  Chenango  Canal  made  their 
report.  This  matter  was  before  the  people  and  the  authorities  a  long 
time  and  created  much  feeling,  but  it  was  finally  amicably  arranged  by 
locating  the  canal  where  it  was  constructed. 

April  ilth  one  alderman  from  each  ward  and  the  street  comtras- 
sioner  were  appointed  a  committee  to  superintend  the  laying  out  and 
fencing  of  "the  new  burial  ground  recently  purchased  of  W.  F.  Pot- 
ter."     This  was  an  additition  to  the'former  one. 

May  i6th  the  clerk  gave  notice  that  he  would  receive  separate 
proposals  for  cleaning  the  streets  for  the  year.  This  seems  to  have 
been  the  first  year  the  street  cleaning  was  done  in  this  manner.  Con- 
tracts were  awarded  at  $100  each  tn  various  persons  for  cleaning  each 
ward  In  June  the  name  of  Stc-uben  Square  was  officially  clian^tfij  to 
Steubeti  Park  The  .-jtreets  were  also  numbered  this  summer  at  a  cost 
of  $47.50,  under  direction  of  a  committee,  and  within  the  fire  limits 
only.  The  common  council  took  new  quarters  on  the  east  side  of  Ho- 
tel street  about  midway  betwicn  Liberty  and  Whitesboro. 


CYCLONE  OF  AUGUST,  \%^^.  219 

July  nth  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad  was  given  permission 
to  lay  tracks  in  Main,  or  Water,  or  Jay,  or  John  street,  "  provided  that 
no  steam  be  used  in  propelling  cars  after  they  pass  Third  street." 

The  success  of  the  Erie  Canal  led  to  a  prevailing  inclination  through- 
out the  State  to  project  new  canals,  and  Utica  felt  her  proper  degree  of 
interest  in  the  work.  At  this  tirtie  there  was  considerable  discussion 
over  a  ship  canal  to  Oswego,  and  the  authorities  actually  appropriated 
$350  toward  $1,000  proposedfor  a  survey  of  the  route.  The  project 
was  also  characterized  as  a  "steamboat  canal." 

Trere  was  very  little  street  improvement  this  year,  Hleecker  street 
was  graded  and  improved  from  Bridge  to  First  and  several  streets  re- 
ceived sidewalks. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  14th  of  August  there  sw(  pt  over  the  city  a 
violent  cyclone  which  was  quite  destructive  in  its  eft'ects,  unroofing 
bu''dings  and  demolishing  chimneys  and  trees.  Coming  from  the  west 
its  course  was  most  severely  marked  along  the  line  of  Court  street.  He- 
sides  the  unroofing  of  one  or  two  of  the  houses  on  this  street  and  adja- 
cent thereto  several  others  near  its  intersection  with  Genesee  and  one 
of  the  few  then  standing  on  Rutger  street  it  carried  awav  the  spire  of 
the  -Second  Presbyterian  Church  on  Bleecker  street,  bent  the  lightning 
rod  of  the  I'irst  Presb\'tericin,  and  capsized  a  few  wooden  houses. 
■  There  was  no  loss  of  life  or  injury  to  any  individual.  The  tnwn  clock, 
betVre  alluded  to,  had  been  placed  in  the  tower  of  the  Hleecker  street 
church  only  a  fortnight  previous.  » 

On  the  1 8th  of  November  the  flouring- mill  of  Parker  i\:  .Seymour, 
just  below  the  river  bridge  at  the  foot  of  Genesee  street,  was  destroyed 
by  fire.  The  dam  below  which  it  was  located,  and  which  had  been  the 
cause  of  much  litigation,  was  -uon  broken  up  and  was  never  rebuilt. 

The  Young  Men's  Association  of  the  City  of  Utica  was  founded  in 
F'ebruary,  1834.  Its  object  was  the  mutual  improvement  of  its  mem 
bers  bj'  establisliing  a  reading  room,  a  library,  a  society  for  public  de- 
bate'-\  and  courses  of  lectures.  James  Watson  Williams  was  the  first 
president;  Milton  D.  Parker  and  Henry  R.  Hart,  vice-presidents  ;  Will- 
iam Tracy,  corresponding  secretary  ;  James  Knox,  recording  secretary  ; 
Ward  Hunt,  treasurer.  For  a  few  j^ears  it  had  a  vigorous  life,  collected 
a  respectable  library,  and  had  delivered  before  it  some  able  addresses  by 


220  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  best  talent  of  the  city.  A  struggle  for  office  and  a  partisan  spirit 
killed  it.  The  Utica  Mechanics  Association  contributed  also  to  sup- 
plant it. 

The  Utica  Museum  was  founded  in  May,  1828,  and  in  1834  it  was 
located  at  173-175  Genesee  street.  Its  founder  was  Linnaeus  Peale,  of 
Philadelphia.  "  The  entire  collection  of  curiosities  is  quite  respectable." 
The  first  keeper  of  it  after  Mr.  Peale  was  Comfort  Butler. 

Prior  to  the  year  1827  a  wooden  building  for  a  circus  and  theater  had 
been  erected  and  used.  A  spacious  brick  building;  designed  for  a  the- 
ater, was  put  up  about  1827  on  the  corner  of  Genesee  and  Pearl  streets 
where  is  now  the  city  hall.  It  was  soon  occupied  for  a  tavern  and 
afterward  became  the  temporary  place  of  the  Female  Academy.  The 
tone  of  public  sentiment  was  such  in  early  years  as  to  discourage  per- 
sons of  talent  from  resorting  here  to  give  theatrical  exhibitions.  How- 
ever a  building  was  suitably  fitted  up  and  opened  in  February,  1834, 
and  a  company  embracing  some  of  the  best  histrionic  talent  of  the  large 
cities  played  several  weeks  to  good  audiences.  It  was  called  the  "  Utica 
Theater." 

The  most  notable  lawyer  who  now  first  made  his  home  in  Utica  was 
William  C.  Noyes,  of  whom  a  sketch  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  on 
the  Bench  and  Bar.  Others  of  his  profession  were  Aaron  Hackley  and 
Anson  Little,  who  were  some  time  quartered  here,  the  first  named  be- 
coming recorder  and  the  latter  clerk  of  the  United  States  District 
Court. 

A  merchant  whose  extraordinary  career  in  Utica  deserves  notice  was 
Frederick  Hollister.  He  had  been  for  some  years  a  clerk  in  the  drug 
and  grocery  store  of  John  Williams,  as  had  also  been  Abijah  Lobdell. 
Together  they  now  began  business  in  their  own  names.  Ere  long  Mr. 
Hollister  was  associated  with  Mr.  Williams  and  eventually  succeeded 
him.  Of  great  activity  of  mind  and  body,  with  broad  conceptions,  a 
sanguine  temper,  and  unrestrained  ambition,  possessed,  moreover,  of  a 
personal  magnetism  that  gave  him  power  over  others,  Mr.  Hollister 
embarked  in  projects  alien  to  his  legitimate  trade,  which,  succeeding  at 
first,  eventually  wrought  his  ruin,  entailing  therewith  damage  to  many 
who  had  confided  in  hini.  He  began  operating  at  Checkerville  in  1840, 
buying  up  the  mill  of  Isaac  Mason.     By  two  fires,  against  which  he  was 


FREDERICK  HOLLISTER  AND  OTHERS.  221 

not  insured,  he  lost  about  $40,000,  but  kept  his  loss  to  himself  so  as 
not  to  injure  his  credit,  and  rebuilt  with  improvements.  In  1842  he 
bought  property  at  Clayville  and  built  the  factory  known  as  the  Empire 
Mill.  At  these  two  points  he  expended  nearly  $500,000.  But  his  re- 
turns were  not  adequate  to  meet  the  investment.  In  1851  he  failed 
with  liabilities  not  far  from  $1,800,000.  His  endorsers  were  numerous, 
and  so,  too,  were  the  individuals  of  small  means  who  had  entrusted  their 
earnings  in  his  hands.  For  Mr.^Hollister  was  generally  popular,  and  il 
reckless  in  some  of  his  doings  he  was  believed  to  be  honest.  He  had, 
too,  considerable  public  spirit.  He  was  an  alderman  about  1838  and 
mayor  in  1843.  He  was  the  originator  of  the  Bridgewater  plank  road, 
the  first  of  the  kind  that  led  out  of  the  city.  After  his  failure  he  re- 
moved to  New  York  and  became  a  broker.  His  death  occurred  De- 
cember 18,  1863. 

One  or  two  clerks  may  here  be  sketched  who  had  already  lived  some 
years  in  Utica  and  who  afterward  rose  to  prominence.  One  of  them 
was  Charles  S.  Wilson.  Born  in  Scotland  in  1809  he  came  to  New 
York  in  1830  and  later  to  Utica.  From  1832  to  1848  he  acted  as  teller 
of  the  Bank  of  Utica.  Then  with  others  he  co-operated  in  the  organi- 
zation of  the  Utica  City  Bank  and  became  its  cashier.  As  a  banker  he 
stood  high.  As  a  Democrat  he  was  interested  in  city  politics.  He  was 
three  years  an  alderman  and  in  1859  was  nominated  for  mayor.  Though 
he  failed  of  election,  yet  when  Roscoe  Conkling  not  long  afterward  re- 
signed the  mayoralty  in  order  to  enter  Congress  Mr.  Wilson  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  council  to  fill  his  place.  In  1863  and  again  in  1867  he 
was  elected  by  the  popular  vote.  Mr.  Wilson  was  for  some  years  a 
vestryman  of  Trinity  Church.  He  was  proud  of  his  native  land  and 
versed  in  its  history  and  literature.     His  death  occurred  July  30,  1884. 

Another  was  James  V.  P.  Gardner,  who  from  1829  had  been  a  stage 
agent  in  the  employ  of  J.  Parker  &  Co.  As  agent,  book-keeper,  and 
partner  in  the  firm  of  J.  Butterfield  &  Co.  he  remained  as  long  as  stages 
were  run.  Through  this,  the  express  company,  and  similar  investments 
he  acquired  a  handsome  property  and  was  relied  on  as  a  safe  man  in 
business  undertakings,  but  took  no  especial  part  in  municipal  affairs. 
He  died  September  30,  1882,  leaving  a  widow,  but  no  children. 

John  S.  Peckham,  born  in  Rensselaer  County,  October  3,  1803,  was 


2  22  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

a  resident  of  this  county  and  of  Utica  frofii  bis  youth.  In  1828  he  suc- 
ceeded to  the  plow  factory  of  his  uncle,  Seth  Peckham.  In  1855  ^'s 
half-brother,  Msrritt,  took  part  in  it  and  the  firm  of  J.  S.  &  M.  Peckham 
was  formed  and  continued  until  the  death  of  the  senior  partner  May  2, 
1879.  In  business,  prompt,  energetic,  decided,  he  was  willing  to  work 
hard  and  accomplished  much  by  his  broad  views  and  his  industry. 
A  consistent  friend  of  temperance  he  carried  his  principles  to  the  point 
o{  a  crusad^  against  tobacco.  Originally  a  Whig  he  went  into  the  Free 
Soil  movement  in  1848,  and  became  a  Republican,  giving  to  that  party 
toil  and  counsel  and  believing  in  it  with  intense  faith.  His  zeal  was 
horn  of  patriotism  and  not  of  ambition,  for  he  sought  not  place,  but 
only  the  success  of  the  principles  which  he  espoused.  He  was  distin- 
guished for  his  public  spirit,  for  his  efforts  for  the  comm'bn  welfare,  and 
especially  for  the  advancement  of  those  who  labor  with  the  hands.  In 
tlie  Utica  iVlechanics  Association  he  found  a  means  to  that  end.  He 
entered  it  in  early  manhood  and  gave  to  it  of  his  means  and  his  labor. 
He  was  one  of  those  who  organized  the  lecture  system  on  a  paying 
basis  and  agreed  to  the  plan  of  including  in  every  course  some  scientific 
instruction.  He  was  active  in  maintaining  the  fairs  which  were  for 
years  so  useful  a  feature  of  that  society.  Out  of  the  same  aims  and 
purposes  ;4re\v  the  Art  Association,  of  which  Mr.  Peckham  was  one  ot 
the  founders.  He  had  enthusiasm  himself  and  was  able  to  impart  it  to 
others.  He  was  one  of  those  positive,  energetic  men  who  are  a  power 
in  a  community.  He  gave  an  impetus  to  the  city  in  many  directions 
'.vhicli  was  long  felt  for  good. 

1835.  —  Officers  for  the  year:  Mayor,  Joseph  Kirkland  ;  aldermen, 
Hdward  Curran,  Rufus  Peckham,  Sylvanus  Holmes,  Comfort  Butler, 
Samuel  .Sidebotham,  James  Dean,  John  Williams,  Gardiner  Tracy, 
James  C.  De  Long,  Spencer  Kellogg,  Robert  McBride,  George  W.  Hub- 
bard ;  clerk,  Jacob  D.  Edwards ;  attorney,  William  C.  Noyes  ;  treas- 
Mier,  Thomas  Walker;  surveyor,  John  Fish;  supervisor,  Joshua  M. 
Church. 

Early  in  April  a  street  marshal  was  appointed  to  enforce  the  ordi- 
narces,  restrain  animals  from  running  abroad  in  the  streets,  etc.  In  the 
same  month  a  committee  previously  appointed  to  inspect  the  schools 
reported   them   in  a  satisfactory  condition.     It  was   provided   that   no 


DJSCUSSION  ON  COLONIZATION.  223 

paying  scholar  was  to  be  admitted  to  school  privileges  to  the  exclusioLi 
of  those  too  poor  to  pay.  A  committee  of  four  (one  from  each  ward) 
was  appointed  to  liear  appeals  from  tlie  conclusions  of  teachers  on 
tuition.  Records  of  attendance  were  ordered  kept,  honorary  certificat- ■. 
provided  for,  and  vaccination  of  pupils  made  compulsory. 

May  22d  the  committee  on  fire  department  were  authorized  to  sell 
engine  No.  5  and  buy  a  n&-w  suction  engine  costing  not  to  exceed  $700. 
A  new  engine-house  was  ordered  erected  a  few  months  later  on  Union 
street  for  the  use  of  this  company  and  its  engine. 

September  I  ith  a  committee  I'eported  that  a  different  method  of  pay- 
ing for  pavements  should  be  adopted  and  recommended  heavier  assess- 
ments on  real  e.state.  About  this  time  the  practice  of  borrowing  money 
to  meet  current  expenses,  a  practice  that  sooner  or  later  seems  to  over- 
take all  cities,  began  in  Utica,  when  $3,000  were  borrowed  for  that 
purpose.  November  27th  it  was  resolved  that  the  city  will  furnish  a, 
jail  lot  if  the  supervisors  of  the  county  will  erect  a  building. 

The  principal  street  improvements  were :  Court  street  opened  from 
State  to  Varick,  sidewalks  laid  on  John,  Cornelia,  Blandina,  Mary,  and 
the  paving  on  Genesee  street  extended.  A  new  ordinance  was  adopted 
relative  to  not  selling  wood  in  the  streets  unless  measured  by  the  official 
wood  measurer  and  his  certificate  obtained;  providing,  also,  that  no 
load  should  stand  more  than  twenty  minutes  in  any  square  or  street  ex- 
cept the  Public  Square  "opposite  Bagg's  Tavern." 

In  the  year  1833  Rev.  J.  N.  Danforth,  agent  of  the  American  Col- 
onization Society,  came  to  Utica  and  invited  the  public  to  meet  him  in 
the  Dutch  Reformed  Church  on  Broad  street  on  the  evening  of  De- 
cember 2 1  St.  Several  meetings  were  held  between  this  date  and  the  loth 
of  January,  1834,  and  speeches  were  made  to  the  following  resolution: 

Resolved,  That  this  meeting  deeply  deplores  the- unfortunate  condition  of  the  colmil 
population  of  this  country  and  commends  to  the  zealous  support  of  the  ]ihilanthropis= 
and  the  Christian  the  American  Colonization  .Society,  as  the  instrument  under  Provi- 
dence which  is  best  calculated  to  alle\iate  the  condition  of  the  free  negro  and  secure 
the  ultimate  emancipation  of  the  slave. 

The  burden  of  the  discussion  fell  chiefly  upon  Mr.  Danforth  aind  Rev. 
Beriah  Green,  then  president  of  the  Oneida  Institute  at  W'hitesborc, 
though  it  was  participated  in  by  William  Tracy,  Benjamin  F.  Cooper, 
Rev.    George  W.  Bethune,   and   others.      It   continued  two  weeks,  th; 


2  24  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

meetings  being  chiefly  held  in  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  which  was 
crowded  to  its  utmost  capacity.  The  speeches  were  bitter  and  intense 
and  caused  much  excitement  in  the  community. 

The  years  1833,  '34,  and  '35  were  characterized  by  great  excitement 
throughout  the  country  on  the  subject  of  abolition.  The  efforts  of  the 
abolitionists  to  hold  public  meetings  in  advocacy  of  their  views  were 
everywhere  met  by  meetings  of  their  opponents  in  denunciation  of  them, 
and  tumults  and  riots  occurred  in  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Boston,  and 
•  numerous  other  cities  and  smaller  communities.  The  mischief  which 
agitation  of  this  topic  was  elsewhere  occasioning  had  been  a  matter 
that  was  introduced  into  the  Utica  council  of  1834,  when  resolutions, 
before  quoted,  were  passed  in  deprecation  thereof. 

On  September  3,  1835,  a  public  meeting  was  held  in  the  court-room 
of  "  the  citizens  of  Utica  who  are  opposed  to  the  proceedings  of  the 
abolitionists,"  at  which  resolutions  denouncing  such  proceedings  were 
adopted.  Soon  afterward  the  Utica  Anti- Slavery  Society  issued  a  call 
for  a  State  convention  to  be  held  at  Utica  on  the  21st  of  October  for  the 
purpose  of  forming  a  State  Anti -Slavery  Society.  On  the  8th  of  Octo- 
ber another  public  meeting  was  held  of  those  citizens  "  who  approve  of 
the  sentiments  expressed  at  the  meeting  held  September  3d''  and  "are 
opposed  to  the  assembling  of  a  State  convention  in  Utica  for  the  pur- 
pose set  forth  in  a  call  of  the  Anti-Slavery  Society  of  this  place."  The 
common  council  on  October  1 6th  did,  however,  grant  by  a  vote  of  seven 
to  four  the  request  of  the  society  to  hold  the  convention  in  the  court- 
room. The  next  day  a  large  meeting  of  citizens  convened  in  the  court- 
room and  denounced  this  action.  The  meeting  adjourned  to  the  2 1st 
of  October.  Another  meeting  in  behalf  of  free  speech  and  of  the  right 
of  the  people  peacefully  to  assemble,  while  disavowing  all  sympathy 
with  abolitionists,  was  held  in  the  court- room  on  the  .20th  of  October. 
The  meeting  was  a  large  one,  but  it  was  considerably  disturbed  by  in- 
truders, who  at  times  threatened  violence,  and  was  prematurely  ad- 
journed. Prominent  among  the  opponents  of  the  anti-slavery  men 
were  the  leading  inhabitants  of  the  place  without  distinction  of  party 
— mayors,  judges,  and  in  general  the  older  and  more  stable  of  the  citi- 
zens, desirous  to  preserve  the  laws  and  peace  of  the  country,  and 
anxious  that  Utica  should  not  become'the  theater  of  such  acts  of  violence 


o^^,:^ 


ANTI-SLA  VER  Y  CONVENTION. 


225 


as  had  been  witnessed  elsewhere.  The  adjourned  meeting  of  October 
17th  convened  at  the  court- room  at  9  o'clock  October  21st  for  the 
avowed  purpose  of  preventing  the  meeting  of  the  anti-slavery  conven- 
tion on  that  day  "in  a  building,"  as  one  of  the  resolutions  phrased  it, 
"  erected  by  the  voluntary  contributions  of  the  citizens  for  better  and 
different  purposes."  The  gist  of  the  preamble  and  resolutions  adopted 
by  the  meeting  was  that  public  agitation  of  the  slavery  question  was 
mischievous  to  all  concerned,  the  enslaved  and  the  free  alike ;  that  the 
delegates  to  the  proposed  anti-slavery  convention  could  be  regarded  in 
no  other  light  than  as  intruders  upon  the  quiet  of  a  well-ordered  com- 
munity, after  they  had  been  repeatedly  asked  to  stay  away  ;  and  that  if 
disorder  and  violence  should  come  of  their  persisting  in  holding  a  con- 
vention "upon  them  would  rest  the  whole  blame  and  responsibility." 

The  chairman  of  the  meeting  appointed  a  committee  of  twenty-five 
to  go  before  the  convention,  report  the  proceedings  of  this  meeting,  and 
respectfully  urge  the  convention  to  break  up  and  leave  the  city  forth- 
with. This  was  carried  out  and  the  committee  returned  in  about  an 
hour  and  reported  that  they  had  found  the  convention  assembled  in  the 
Bleecker  street  church,  had  read  the  resolutions  before  it,  and  that  after 
a  little  delay  the  convention  had  adjourned.  During  the  delay  thus 
alluded  to  there  were  undoubtedly  some  lively  scenes  inside  of  the 
church.  The  appearance  of  the  committee  was  an  incentive  to  what- 
ever rowdy  element  was  present  in  the  church,  as  well  as  on  the  outside, 
to  create  a  disturbance  ;  there  was  much  noise,  some  threats  of  violence, 
hymn  books  and  other  missiles  were  tossed  about,  and  some  personal 
assaults,  in  one  of  which  Spencer  Kellogg's  coat  was  torn  from  his  back. 
Meanwhile  an  immense  crowd  gathered  in  the  streets.  While  the  com- 
mittee were  still  in  the  church  a  sudden  disturbance  occurred  on  the 
borders  of  this  crowd,  and  there  was  a  swaying  of  the  multitude  toward 
Genesee  street.  This  was  caused  by  a  lot  of  roughs  who  broke  through 
the  crowd  with  the  ladder  of  one  of  the  hook  and  ladder  companies. 
The  ladder  was  raised  against  the  church  and  two  men  sprang  up  it. 
Then  some  one  started  hurriedly  into  the  church,  crowding  his  way  as 
best  he  could,  and  informed  the  assemblage  of  the  impending  danger, 
and  soon  Charles  A.  Mann,  then  agent  of  Charles  E.  Dudley,  of  Al- 
bany, the  owner  of  the  building,  came  upon  the  porch  of  the  church 

29 


226  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  asked  the  crowd  to  disperse,  telling  them  that  the  building  was 
private  property.  He  begged  of  them  to  respect  it  and  protect  it  from 
violence.  The  men  on  the  ladder  then  came  down.  The  excitement 
was  intense  and  it  was  remarkable  that  a  destructive  riot  did  not  follow. 
Strangers  were  denied  admittance  to  all  the  taverns  on  the  street  and  to 
many  of  the  stores,  or  were  indiscriminately  hustled  out  into  the  rain, 
which  had  begun  to  fall.  A  cannon  was  brought  out  and  fired  as  a 
signal  of  triumph,  the  abolition  convention  having  adjourned.  In  the 
assemblage  within  the  church  was  Gerrit  Smith  as  a  spectator.  When 
the  necessity  of  breaking  up  the  convention  became  apparent  he  in- 
vited the  people  to  go  home  with  him,  where  they  would  find  a  warm 
welcome.  About  400  accepted  the  invitation  and  the  work  of  the  con- 
vention was  finished  at  Peterboro. 

The  foregoing  is  a  cool  and  dispassionate  account  of  that  event  and  is 
based  upon  what  was  given  in  a  lecture  on  the  history  of  the  Bleecker 
street  church,  by  Thomas  W.  Seward,  an  eye-witness  of  the  proceed- 
ings at  the  church. 

In  183s  a  little  book  was  published  entitled  "The  Enemies  of  the 
Constitution  Discovered,"  in  which  is  given  the  other  side  of  the  story. 
In  that  work  the  conduct  of  the  committee  who  went  to  the  church  and 
of  the  mob  on  the  outside  is  characterized  in  the  bitterest  and  most 
denunciatory  terms  ;  and  it  is  stated,  inferentially  at  least,  that  the  mob 
waited  only  the  word  of  Mr.  Beardsley,  chairman  of  the  committee  of 
twenty-five,  or  some  other  prominent  citizen,  to  have  committed  untold 
violence  and  probably  murder.  Altogether  it  was  an  occurrence  the 
import  of  which  and  its  causes  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  appreciate  at 
this  day,  when  slavery,  the  odious  institution  which  occasioned  many 
such  scenes  as  well  as  a  subsequent  bloody  war,  has  disappeared  from 
the  country  forever. 

The  winter  of  1835—36  was  a  severe  one,  and  especially  marked  by 
the  great  amount  of  snow  that  fell.  A  special  meeting  of  the  council 
was  held  Sunday,  January  loth.  The  mayor  informed  the  council  that 
he  called  the  meeting  at  the  request  of  several  citizens  "  to  adopt  such 
means  as  might  be  deemed  expedient  in  consequence  of  the  long-contin- 
ued storm,"  which  was  still  prevailing,  and  thedistress  apprehended  among 
the  poor  from  the  unusual   depth  of  snow.     Resolutions  were  adopted 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1836.  227 

that  the  police  constables  and  the  street  commissioner  be  directed  to 
call  out  the  city  watch  and  to  organize  a  force  sufficient  to  patrol  the 
streets  and  ascertain  the  condition  of  the  poor,  afford  such  relief  as  may 
be  required,  and  that  they  act  in  concert  with  the  committee  recently 
appointed  by  the  citizens  for  the  same  purpose.  Other  resolutions 
adopted  on  the  15th  of  January  provided  for  the  payment  of  people  for 
cleaning  the  streets  of  snow  and  appropriated  $100  to  buy  wood  for 
the  poor. 

1836. — The  officers  of  the  year  were  as  follows:  Major,  John  H. 
Ostrom  ;  clerk,  J.  D.  Edwards  ;  aldermen,  Edward  Curran,  John  A.  Russ, 
Alvin  White,  Sylvanus  Holmes,  T.  S.  Faxton,  William  Burtch,  Joshua 
M.  Church,  A.  S.  Pond,  Willard  Crafts,  Robert  McBride,  E.  S.  Barnum, 
Harry  Mason;  treasurer,  James  Dean;  attorney,  O.  B.  Matteson ; 
street  commissioner,  John  Riley. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  the  mayor  addressed  the  council  and 
laid  especial  stress  upon  the  necessity  of  "  a  rigid  enforcement  of  the 
excise  laws  in  relation  to  tippling  shops,"  also  upon  the  importance  of 
adoping  some  measures  for  the  relief  of  the  poor. 

April  8th  the  following  streets,  or  the  nucleus  of  them,  increased  in 
some  instances  by  subsequent  extension,  were  declared  to  be  public 
highways:  Hamilton,  Bright,  Philip,  Saratoga,  Schuyler,  Erie,  Hope, 
Burnet,  Devereux,  Union,  Rebecca,  Meadow,  Lark ;  Charlotte  was 
extended  to  Steuben  Park.  Ballou  and  Grand  streets  were  opened  the 
same  month  and  Mandeville  and  Aiken  in  the  following  month.  It 
was  resolved  in  May  that  Columbia  street  should  be  graded  and  graveled 
from  Varick  to  Whitesboro  and  State  street  from  Columbia  to  Genesee. 
In  June  Main  street  was  directed  to  be  continued  to  the  east  line  of  the 
Bowman  farm ;  also  Jay,  Bleecker,  Mary,  Blandina,  Lansing,  Rutger, 
and  South  streets ;  and  Seward,  Ransom,  Backus,  and  Warren  streets 
were  extended  from  Bleecker  to  the  east  line  of  the  Bowman  farm 
New  streets  designated  were  Marshall  and  Webster  from  Broad  to  South 
and  Clay  streets  and  Jackson  from  Broad  to  the  railroad.  A  few  of  these 
streets  were  never  brought  into  use  and  some  are  now  known  by  other 
names.     Parts  of  Main  and  Columbia  streets  were  graded  and  paved. 

In  July  the  city  watch  was  suspended  as  to  its  duties  on  account  of 
some  alleged  shortcoming,  and   Bildad  Merrill,  Hugh  Williamson,  Bar- 


228  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ney  Keating,  and  James  Dempsey  were  appointed,  Mr.  Merrill  being 
chosen  captain.  In  the  same  month  is  found  the  first  mention  of  a 
watch-house,  which  was  repaired. 

On  the  24th  of  June  the  fire  department  was  asked  to  recommend  a 
suitable  person  for  the  position  of  chief  and  R.  B.  Miller  was  appointed 
on  the  1st  of  July.  In  the  same  month  the  engine  then  located  on  Di- 
vision street  was  removed  to  the  engine-house  on  Hotel  street. 

Other  proceedings  of  this  council  were  the  followingi:  On  the  15th 
of  April  are  noticed  movements  relating  to  the  location  of  the  insane 
asylum  here.  It  was  resolved  that  a  committee  of  one  member  from 
each  ward  confer  and  correspond  with  the  commissioners  of  the  asylum 
and  adopt  such  means  as  should  secure  its  location  in  this  city. 

September  23d  a  committee  was  appointed  to  report  on  the  expe- 
diency of  "  paving  Genesee  street  with  wooden  blocks." 

Cars  began  running  on  the  Uticaand  Schenectady  Railroad  and  were 
a  source  of  much  curious  interest.  In  August  the  Clinton  House,  which 
occupies  the  site  on  which  the  Mechanics  Hall  was  to  be  placed,  was 
torn  down.  A  contract  for  the  erection  of  the  new  building  was  given 
to  James  McGregor.  In  November  the  Oneida  Bank,  just  as  it  was 
ready  to  begin  business,  was  robbed  of  nearly  $110,000. 

It  is  noticeable  that  an  unusual  number  of  streets  were  opened  dur- 
ing the  present  year.  In  fact  a  speculative  spirit  was  rife  in  the  com- 
munity. Landholders  were  eager  to  have  laid  out  into  lots  and  inter- 
sected by  streets  property  which  they  flattered  themselves  would  soon 
be  in  request.  As  evidence  of  this  spirit  and  of  the  aspiring  views  of 
the  citizens  in  general  it  may  be  of  interest  to  here  insert  some  of  the 
doings  of  this  council  before  the  close  of  their  term. 

On  the  13th  of  January,  1837,  a  committee  of  five  was  appointed  to 
confer  with  a  committee  from  Deerfield  as  to  the  propriety  of  annexing 
a  part  of  that  town  to  the  city.  There  was  a  report  at  the  next 
meeting  in  favor  of  the  project  and  a  public  meeting  was  held  in  Febru- 
ary to  consider  the  matter.  The  question  of  annexing  part  of  New 
York  Mills  was  also  under  consideration.  On  the  3d  of  February  it 
was  resolved  that  the  council  "will  apply  to  the  legislature  for  charter 
amendments  providing  for  the  election  of  a  supervisor  from  each  ward." 
This  was  doubtless  a  measure  to  secure  more  influence  in  the  Board  of 


A  SLAVE  CAPTURE.  229 

Supervisors  for  the  interests  of  the  city  as  against  those  of  the  county. 
In  the  winter  of  1836-37  there  occurred  a  disturbance  and  mob  akin 
to  that  of  183s  and  arising  from  the  same  cause,  but  ending  in  defiance 
and  subversion  of  law.  This  incident,  now  generally  forgotten,  deserves 
mention  as  among  the  first  of  such  occurrences  which  less  than  a  score 
of  years  later  became  very  common,  and  ultimately  proved  too  much 
for  the  whole  strength  of  the  United  States  government. 

A  Virginian  presented  himself  one  morning  at  the  office  of  a  distin- 
guished advocate  of  the  city  with  the  proper  papers  for  the  return  of  a 
fugitive  slave  whom  he  had  traced  to  Utica,  and  engaged  the  services 
of  the  advocate.  The  fugitive  was  soon  discovered  by  a  constable  and 
taken  before  Judge  Hayden,  United  States  commissioner,  and  the  pa- 
pers together  with  the  law  of  the  United  States  were  duly  submitted  by 
the  claimant's  lawyer.  Alvan  Stewart  appeared  in  behalf  of  the  fugi- 
tive, and  presenting  to  the  court  a  Bible  quoted  therefrom  and  com- 
mented in  his  inimitable  manner  to  the  edification  and  amusement  of 
the  crowded  audience  until  dinner-time,  for  which  the  court  adjourned. 
In  the  afternoon  Mr.  Stewart  resumed  his  argument  and  continued  it 
till  dark  and  tea-time,  for  which  another  adjournment  was  made.  The 
fugitive  meanwhile  was  retained  in  the  office  in  the  custody  of  the  con- 
stable. Before  the  session  was  resumed  a  mob  suddenly  appeared  in 
the  street,  marched  up  the  stairway,  burst  into  the  office,  overcame  the 
officer,  and  carried  off  the  slave,  presumably  to  the  station  of  the  under- 
ground railway  for  Canada. 

1837. — Officers  for  the  year  were  as  follows:  Mayor,  Theodore  S. 
Gold ;  aldermen,  Harvey  Barnard,  Harry  Bushnell,  Benjamin  Cahoon, 
Apollos  Cooper,  Edward  Curran,  Thomas  Goodsell,  Ephraim  Hart, 
Frederick  HoUister,  "Sylvanus  Holmes,  Robert  McBride,  Henry  New- 
land,  James  C.  Belong ;  treasurer,  James  Dean  ;  attorney,  William  J. 
Bacon;  clerk,  John  S.  Ray  ;  surveyor,  John  Fish  ;  street  commissioner, 
John  Riley. 

January  I2th  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  a  new  engine  be  pur- 
chased, "  which  will  make  two  to  each  ward,"  and  each  ward  be  divided 
into  two  fire  districts.  On  the  26th  of  the  same  month  it  was  decided 
that  one  of  these  engines  should  be  purchased  at  a  cost  of  not  more 
than  $700,  while  on  the  5  th  of  January  a  committee  was  appointed  to 


230  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

form  a  "bucket  company"  and  fifty  buckets  were  purchased  in  Febru- 
ary. Fears  were  expressed  of  disastrous  fires,  as  the  water  was  drawn 
out  of  the  canal. 

April  7th  it  was  resolved  that  the  street  on  the  east  side  of  Chancel- 
lor Square  between  Bleecker  and  Elizabeth  be  named  Kent  street  and 
that  on  the  west  side  Academy  street. 

In  April  of  this  year  a  memorial  was  addressed  to  the  legislature  re- 
ferring to  a  recent  disastrous  fire,  and  on  that  account  in  part  asking  as 
a  means  of  relief  to  the  city  the  remission  of  the  tax  for  the  location 
of  the  terminus  of  the  canal ;  and  also  asking  for  the  location  of  either  the 
lunatic  asylum  or  State  capital  in  Utica.  The  fire  just  mentioned, 
which  occurred  March  31,  1837,  was  the  largest  one  the  city  had  as  yet 
experienced,  sweeping  away  a  large  portion  of  the  buildings  on  both  sides 
of  Genesee  street  below  Broad.  A  local  paper  said  of  it :  "  It  broke 
out  about  2  A.  M.  over  the  watch  and  jewelry  factory  of  C.  V.  Brooks, 
on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street  north  of  Broad  street.  It  destroyed 
the  whole  block  on  Genesee  street  down  to  the  square,  every  build- 
ing on  Broad  street  as  far  east  as  John,  and  all  the  buildings  on  the 
west  side  of  John  to  the  square  at  the  foot  of  Genesee  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  brick  store  of  Thomas  E.  Clark  on  the  corner  of  Main 
and  John,  John  E.  Hinman's  store  on  John  street,  and  the  fireproof 
building  of  E.  B.  Shearman  &  Co.  in  the  i^ear  of  their  Genesee  street 
store.  The  fire  crossed  to  the  west  side  of  Genesee,  to  the  store  of 
Stocking  &  Hunt,  and  entirely  destroyed  every  other  building  on  that 
side  down  to  Whitesboro  street,  with  all  of  the  shops  and  buildings  in 
the  rear.  From  that  point  the  fire  extended  up  Whitesboro  street  to 
the  house  of  H.  K.  Sanger,  on  the  corner  of  Burchard  street,  where  it 
was  finally  checked.  The  building  in  which  the  fire  originated  was  of 
wood  and  burned  with  great  rapidity.  A  stormy  wind  from  the  east 
drove  the  flames  across  the  street  and  the  flying  cinders  fell  in  a  con- 
tinuous shower  on  the  buildings,  so  that  within  an  hour  from  the  time 
the  fire  broke  out  the  whole  block  on  the  west  side  of  Genesee  street 
from  the  North  American  Hotel  to  the  store  of  Stocking  &  Hunt  was 
ignited  about  the  same  time,  thus  rendering  it  impossible  to  arrest  the 
fire  with  any  means  at  the  command  of  the  fire  department,  or  of  the 
citizens,  until  it  reached  a  less  compact  part  of  the  city." 


HARD  TIMES.  231 

May  26th  a  resolution  was  passed  prohibiting  profane  and  indecent 
language  by  porters  and  others  at  the  packet  dock  and  railroad  station  ; 
and  on  the  30th  of  June  an  ordinance  went  into  effect  prohibiting  the 
solicitation  of  passengers  for  canal  boats,  stages,  and  railroads,  and  the 
police  were  called  upon  to  enforce  it. 

The  mayors  had  for  several  years  previous  to  the  date  under  consid- 
eration given  their  salaries  of  $250  per  year  to  the  dispensary.  This 
institution  was  at  this  time  under  direction  of  one  alderman  from  each 
ward.  In  making  the  donation  this  year  Mayor  Gold  said  that  on 
"  account  of  the  great  distress  "  such  a  course  was  more  than  ever  desir- 
able. But  in  spite  of  the  hard  times  the  council  appropriated  $100  with 
which  to  celebrate  the  4th  of  July.  The  hard  times  continued  with  in- 
creasing severity  and  there  was  much  distress,  for  the  prices  of  all  the 
necessaries  of  life  were  higher  than  ever  before.  Flour  was  at  onetime 
$10.50  per  barrel,  with  none  in  the  city,  and  the  banks  soon  suspended 
specie  payment.  The  newspapers,  however,  made  the  most  of  the  fact 
that  Utica  escaped  the  effects  of  the  stringency  with  less  of  actual  suf- 
fering than  most  cities.  In  one  of  them  we  find  the  following:  "The 
merchants  in  this  city  are  proverbially  sound  in  their  circumstances,  and 
have  managed  their  business  through  the  whole  period  during  which 
the  speculative  mania  raged  in  different  sections  of  the  Union  with 
unusual  prudence  and  conservatism."  Their  credit  in  New  York  was 
reported  good  and  local  builders  were  actively  employed.  The  banks 
recommenced  discounts  to  some  extent  in  June.^ 

December  8th  public  gratification  was  expressed  that  the  military 
spirit  was  not  extinct,  and  the  following  was  published :  "A  few  young 
and  enterprising  men  of  the  city  have  organized  a  corps  which  they 
are  determined  shall  compare  for  appearance  and  discipline  with  any  in 
the  State."  This  was  the  Utica  Citizens  Corps,  now  beginning  its  long 
and  brilliant  career,  and  for  which  the  council  purchased  the  following 
year  fifty  stand  of  arms. 

The  Syracuse  and  Utica  Railroad  was  nearing  completion  and  in  the 
spring  the  Clinton  and  Utica  Macadam  Turnpike  Company  was  incor- 
porated, as  also  was  the  Young,  Men's  Association  ;  but  public  im- 
provements as  a  whole  were  confined  to  the  construction  of  a  few  side- 

1  See  chapter  on  the  banks  and  tinances. 


232  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

walks,  the  relaying  in  part  of  a  sewer  in  Genesee  street,  and  the  paving 
of  the  lower  end  of  First  street ;  the  only  other  improvement  was  the 
extension  of  Washington  street  to  the  river. 

The  city  watch  was  disbanded  on  the  2 2d  of  September  and  a  new 
one  appointed,  Moses  T.  Meeker  being  captain  ;  John  Wilson,  assistant. 
Mr.  Meeker  resigned  in  January,  1838,  and  Bildad  Merrill  was  appointed 
in  his  stead. 

On  the  3d  of  November  a  committee  of  one  from  each  ward  was 
appointed  to  superintend  "the  interest  of  the  city  in  relation  to  the  en- 
largement of  the  Erie  Canal." 

John  Savage,  a  most  distinguished  member  of  the  legal  profession 
who  now  first  appears  as  a  citizen  of  Utica,  will  be  noticed  in  the  chap- 
ter on  the  Bench  and  Bar. 

Among  those  succeeding  about  this  time  to  the  business  of  older 
members  of  their  respective  families  were  George  Tracy,  bookseller ; 
Henry  R.  Hart,  iron  founder  ;  George  S.  Dana,  hardware  ;  Norman  C. 
Newell,  paints  and  brushes;  all  of  whom  had  influence  in  public  mat- 
ters as  well  as  in  their  own.  Henry  R.  Hart,  son  of  Ephraim  H. 
and  for  some  years  a  partner  with  him  in  the  management  of  the  iron 
foundry,  was  well  known  for  his  geniality,  his  generosity,  his  ardent 
participation  in  all  undertakings,  local  or  general,  that  promised  to  be 
profitable  or  beneficent.  Modest  and  unobtrusive,  with  refined  tastes, 
he  was  bold  and  efficient  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty.  He  was  captain 
of  the  Citizens  Corps,  active  in  the  Mechanics  Association,  and  in  the 
fire  department.  He  died  in  1868  aged  fifty- seven.  George  S.  Dana, 
at  first  with  his  father,  James  Dana,  and  then  succeeding  him,  man- 
aged also  a  factory  for  the  making  of  locks  and  had  an  interest  in  one 
for  the  making  of  screws.  He,  too,  died  comparatively  young.  N.  C. 
Newell,  following  in  the  career  of  his  father,  survived  much  longer  than 
the  preceding,  transmitting  the  business  to  his  son. 

Among  the  newly  come  merchants  were  Thomas  H.  Wood  and 
George  W.  Wood,  hardware  ;  J.  L.  Pierce,  Thomas  F.  Tracy,  Rugene 
Swartwout,  dry  goods  ;  W.  C.  Butler,  crockery ;  Frederick  W.  Guiteau, 
forwarder  and  grocer.  Mechanics  were  Selden  Collins,  watchmaker  ;  John 
W.  Bates,  coachmaker;  Robert  Higham,  engineer;  Augustus  C.  Pal- 
mer, carpenter  ;  Burton  Hawley,  livery ;  George  Langford,  at  first  book- 
keeper and  soon  after  cashier  of  the  Oneida  Bank. 


GEORGE  W.   WOOD.  233 

George  W.  Wood,  who  was  born  in  Ashley,  Mass.,  August  29,  1809, 
had  been  engaged  for  a  short  time  before  coming  to  Utica  in  the  book 
publishing  business.  About  1837  he  settled  in  Utica  and  formed  a 
partnership  with  his  brother,  Thomas  H.  Wood,  for  the  purpose  of 
dealing  in  hardware.  This  partnership  was  dissolved,  when  he  took  the 
City  Furnace  with  John  F.  Seymour  and  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of 
stoves  and  castings.  At  the  time  of  Mr.  Wood's  death  Mr.  Seymour 
had  retired  from  the  business,  Thomas  H.  Wood  having  secured  his 
interest.  Very  soon  after  coming  to  Utica  Mr.  Wood  became  a  teacher 
in  the  Bible  class  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  a  noted  class  of 
eight  or  nine  sections  under  the  care  and  instruction  of  excellent  and 
capable  men.  They  met  once  a  week  to  examine  and  discuss  the 
lessons  and  make  out  a  set  of  questions  for  the  class.  These  were 
printed  and  put  into  the  hands  of  the  learners  and  made  the  theme  of 
the  teaching.  It  included  such  teachers  as  Walter  King,  Thomas  E. 
Clark,  William  and  Charles  Tracy,  Judge  Hayden,  Deacon  Mather, 
Spencer  Kellogg,  and  others.  Mr.  Wood  was  not  a  classical  scholar, 
but  like  some  of  the  above  named  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
Bible  and  was  an  interesting  teacher.  He  was  one  of  the  directors  of 
the  Bank  of  Utica  and  a  trustee  of  Westminster  Church,  of  which  he 
was  a  founder,  and  one  of  the  building  committee  of  the  present  edifice. 
His  fine,  manly  form  and  attractive  manners  added  to  his  superior  busi- 
ness traits  and  his  personal  worth  made  him  conspicuous.  Mr.  Wood 
died  in  New  York  city  September  21,  1854.  His  wife,  daughter  of 
Thomas  E.  Clark,  two  sons,  and  two  daughters  survive  him 

Thomas  Hosmer  Wood,  who  was  some  eleven  years  older  than  his 
brother,  was  born  February  18,  1798.  He  came  to  Utica  a  short  time  be- 
fore him  and  was  many  years  his  survivor.  On  the  death  of  George  he  be- 
came the  head  of  the  firm  of  Wood,  Roberip  &  Co.,  but  after  some  years  of 
prosperous  business  he  retired  from  active  pursuits  to  the  indulgence  of 
his  taste  in  cultivating  and  adorning  his  grounds,  and  to  the  exercise  of 
it  as  an  amateur  and  as  a  patron  of  the  fine  arts,  for  which  he  had  a  nat- 
ural apitude  and  a  marked  enthusiasm.  It  led  him  to  take  an  active 
part  in  the  forming  of  the  Art  Association  and  in  the  exhibition  it  gave 
to  the  community.  He  did  not  engage  in  them  simply  for  the  passing 
pleasure  they  afforded   his  towns-people,  but  more  particularly  for  the 

30 


234 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


cultivation  of  a  love  for  the  beautiful  in  the  neighborhood  around.  His 
earnest  efforts  in  this  direction  were  warmly  commended  at  his  death  by 
the  association  of  which  he  was  the  president,  and  their  obligations  to 
him  for  the  success  of  their  several  exhibitions  fully  acknowledged.  A 
sincere  lover  of  art  in  all  its  branches  his  especial  fondness  was  for  paint- 
ing, and  the  pictures  which  adorned  the  homes  of  many  citizens  in  the 
vicinity  are  testimonies  to  his  success.  His  connoisseurship  and  prac- 
tical knowledge  in  the  art  of  architectural  designs  were  beyond  that  of 
most  men  who  do  not  pursue  the  art  as  a  distinct  profession,  and  some 
of  our  public  buildings  are  standing  monuments  of  his  judgment  and  skill 
in  conception.  He  was  a  man  of  eminent  integrity  and  stainless  life, 
fulfilling  every  duty  devolved  upon  him,  and  moreover  a  sincere  Chris- 
tian whose  pathway  as  noiseless  as  the  sun  "  shone  more  and  more  unto 
the  perfect  day."  He  was  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  Savings  Bank  and 
an  elder  in  the  Reformed  Church.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  mak- 
ing a  tour  of  the  art  centers  of  Europe,  though  in  feeble  health,  and 
traveling  partly  for  the  benefit  of  it.  He  died  in  Paris,  January  14,  1874. 
His  widow  still  remains  here  as  likewise  an  adopted  daughter. 

1838. — Officers  of  this  year  were  as  follows :  Mayor,  Charles  P.  Kirk- 
land  ;  aldermen,  Samuel  Farwell,  E.  M.  Gilbert,  Henry  Newland,  Rufus 
Peckham,  Harry  Bushnell,  Frederick  HoUister,  James  Dean,  Benjamin 
Cahoon,  James  McGregor,  J.  C.  De  Long,  Lewis  Lawrence,  Edward 
Curran  ;  treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper;  attorney,  Hamilton  Spencer; 
clerk,  John  S.  Ray ;   street  commissioner,  John  Riley. 

On  the  1 8th  of  January  $200  were  appropriated  for  firemen  who 
might  be  injured  at  fires  while  on  duty.  On  the  25th  of  that  month  a 
resolution  was  adopted  that  "  it  is  expedient  to  establish  a  third  free 
school,"  and  requesting  the  committee  on  fire  department  to  ascertain 
whether  the  fire  engines  could  not  be  so  distributed  as  to  allow  such 
school  to  be  located  where  the  engines  then  were  on  Hotel  street.  In 
February  the  committee  on  fire  department  was  directed  to  carry  out 
this  plan,  and  it  was  done  in  March,  and  the  school  established. 

On  the  20th  of  June  the  corner-stone  of  the  Female  Academy  was 
laid  with  appropriate  ceremonies. 

On  the  2 1  St  of  December  a  resolution  again  passed  the  council  that 
application  be  made    to   the  legislature  for  a  charter  amendment  pro- 


GEORGE  R.  PERKINS.  235 

viding  for  one  supervisor  in  each  ward.  A  public  meeting  was  held  the 
same  month  to  provide  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  of  the  city.  Street 
improvements  were  limited  to  a  few  new  sidewalks  and  paving  part  of 
Hotel  street. 

The  most  notable  person  to  become  at  this  time  a  citizen  of  the  place 
was  Professor  Perkins  of  the  Utica  Academy.  From  Otsego  County, 
where  he  was  born  May  3,  18 12,  George  R.  Perkins  went  to  Clinton  in 
1 83 1  to  take  the  place  of  a  teacher  in  the  Liberal  Institute,  and  after 
remaining  there  seven  years  removed  to  this  city  in  1838  to  act  as 
principal  of  its  academy.  He  had  early  evinced  remarkable  aptitude  for 
mathematics,  studying  under  great  disadvantages  in  inadequate  schools. 
During  the  year  before  he  came  to  Clinton  he  was  engaged  as  a  surveyor 
on  the  Utica  and  Susquehanna  Railroad.  In  1840  he  began  the  publi- 
cation of  a  series  of  arithmetics,  which  have  been  much  used  in  schools. 
For  many  years  his  calculations,  for  almanacs  were  sought  for  by  many- 
publishers.  Subsequently  he  produced  text  books  on  algebra,  geome- 
try, trigonometry,  and  surveying,  which  met  with  the  favor  of  careful 
instructors.  When  the  State  Normal  School  was  opened  in  Albany  in 
1844  he  went  thither  as  professor  of  mathematics,  and  in  1848  was 
chosen  principal.  In  1852  he  assumed  the  superintendence  of  the  Dudley 
Observatory.  In  1862  he  was  made  a  Regent  of  the  University  and 
was  created  LL.D.  by  Hamilton  College.  Professor  Perkins  was  not 
simply  a  theorist  in  mathematics  ;  he  knew  how  to  apply  science  to 
practical  life.  la  the  great  consolidation  of  railroads  which  made  the 
New  York  Central  the  accountants  were  in  a  hopeless  maze  over  the  com- 
plicated calculations,  when  he  was  invited  to  bring  order  out  of 
the  confusion,  which  he  promptly  and  successfully  accomplished,  With 
reference  both  to  our  railroads  and  our  canals  he  was  thoroughly 
well  informed,  and  to  both  he  contributed  peculiar  service.  As  an  in- 
structor he  was  clear,  earnest,  and  thorough,  but  especially  considerate, 
and  he  won  the  esteem  and  gratitude  of  his  pupils.  As  an  author  he 
early  introduced  practical  methods,  and  as  he  saw  his  science  clearly 
tried  to  present  it  in  its  simple  grace  in  direct  and  clear  language.  In 
every  trust  he  was  conscientious  and  laborious,  and  as  true  to  integrity 
and  honor  as  the  right  line  of  his  own  problems.  He  was  one  of  the 
founders  of  Grace  Church  and  to  his  death  a  vestryman  and  its  treas- 


236  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

urer.  He  thought  much  on  religious  subjects  and  was  deep.ly  interested 
in  the  growth  of  his  church.  For  some  time  his  chief  occupation  in 
later  years  was  the  care  of  his  real  estate  investments  in  Utica,  which 
were  considerable.  He  was  esteemed  for  his  attainments  and  his  mod- 
esty.     He  died  August  22,  1876  ;  his  widow  still  is  a  resident, 

1839. — Officers  for  the  year :  Mayor,  John  C.  Devereux  :  aldermen, 
John  Butterfield,  H.  S.  Bradley,  Edward  Curran,  Ransom  Curtiss, 
Charles  H.  Doolittle,  Ephraim  Hart,  Spencer  Kellogg,  Lewis  Lawrence, 
Thomas  McQuade,  Rufus  Peckham,  Gerry  Sanger,  E.  A,  Wetmore ; 
treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper ;  attorney,  Joseph  Benedict ;  clerk,  John 
S.  Ray ;  street  commissioner,  Morris  G.  Dickinson. 

May  24th  a  company  was  organized  called  the  "  Utica  Fire  Bucket 
Company,  No.  i,"  with  sixty  members.  Each  member  was  required 
to  furnish  himself  with  two  buckets  to  be  kept  at  his  residence.  On 
the  25th  of  June  the  committee  on  fire  department  were  authorized  to 
sell  engine  No.  7  and  on  July  1 2th  were  authorized  to  buy  a  new  engine 
at  not  to  exceed  a  cost  of  more  than  $800. 

Gas  was  discovered  the  present  summer  while  excavating  near  Bagg's 
Hotel  and  the  mayor  was  authorized  by  the  council  to  pay  the  expense 
of  examination  into  the  subject.  Nothing  of  practical  value  was  de- 
veloped. Lafayette  street  was  paved  from  Varick  to  Whitesboro  street 
and  new  walks  were  laid  on  several  streets.  The  Utica  Savings  Bank 
went  into  operation  this  year.  Local  banks  reduced  their  circulation 
heavily  and  money  was  very  scarce.  The'  first  train  passed  over  the 
Utica  and  Syracuse  Railroad  on  the  27th  of  June. 

The  directory  of  1839  exhibits  a  somewhat  lengthy  array  of  lawyers 
not  previously  recorded.  Of  these  Fhilo  Gridley  and  Alexander  S. 
Johnson  will  be  noticed  in  the  chapter  devoted  to  the  legal  profession. 
Joseph  Benedict  is  still  in  practice  in  the  city  and  the  oldest  member  of 
its  legal  corps.  Luther  R.  Marsh,  after  a  stay  of  about  four  years,  re- 
paired to  New  York,  where  his  reputation  has  been  principally  gained. 
Hamilton  Spencer,  as  an  associate  with  his  father,  Joshua  A.  Spencer, 
remained  until  about  1854,  when  he  removed  to  Canastota  and  was  for 
a  short  time  engaged  with  Charles  S.  Spencer  in  the  manufacture  of  op- 
tical instruments,  and  thence  to  Chicago  and  Burlington,  111.,  there  re- 
suming his  profession  and  continuing  it  until  his  death  in  1891,  leaving 


JOHN  F.  SEYMOUR.  237 

behind  him  a  name  for  familiarity  with  the  principles  and  rules  of  the 
law  quite  equal  to  that  of  his  father  and  for  skill  little  short  of  his  in  their 
exposition  and  bearing.  Wallace  McCall,  son  of  Dr.  John  McCall  and  at 
first  a  partner  of  Ostrom  &  Walker,  a  young  man  of  brilliant  promise, 
died  about  1848  ere  his  laurels  were  attained.  William  M.  Allen  dis- 
appeared from  the  city  the  same  year.  Orchard  G.  Kellogg  lived  here 
until  1863.  Dexter  Gilmore,  who  finished  his  studies  in  1839,  lived 
until  March,  1882,  having  been  for  nearly  thirty  years  a  justice  of  the 
peace,  besides  acting  as  clerk  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors,  busying  him- 
self in  the  affairs  of  the  volunteer  firemen,  and  being  a  leading  member 
of  the  Odd  Fellows.  A  sketch  of  Edmund  A.  Graham  will  be  found 
in  the  Biographical  Department  of  this  work. 

John  F.  Seymour,  son  of  Henry  Seymour,  was  born  at  Pompey  Hill, 
Onondaga  County,  September  21,  18 14,  and  removed  with  his  father's 
family  to  Utica  in  1820.  He  was  educated  at  the  High  School  sf 
Charles  Bartlett  and  at  Yale  College,  from  which  he  was  graduated  in 
1835.  He  studied  law  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  in  the  office  of  Kirk- 
land  &  Bacon  in  Utica,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1839.  Becom- 
ing a  partner  of  his  brother  Horatio  he  for  fourteen  years  conducted  a 
large  practice.  Horatio  did  not  occupy  himself  much  with  law,  but 
was  engaged  in  politics  and  in  various  business  projects.  In  many  of 
these  projects  John,  much 'devoted  to  his  brother,  also  engaged,  and  was  . 
thus  by  degrees  led  away  for  a  time  from  the  close  following  of  his  pro- 
fession, though  he  resumed  it  later.  In  1853  he  was  instrumental  in 
obtaining  the  passage  of  an  act  of  legislature  organizing  a  company  to 
construct  a  Bhip  canal  at  St.  Mary's  Falls  in  Michigan.  This  company 
succeeded  in  opening  such  a  canal  between  Lake  Superior  and  Lake 
Huron  at  a  cost  of  $1,000,000.  In  1855  this  company,  consisting  of 
Horatio  Seymour,  Erastus  Corning,  Hiram  Barney,  and  others,  prose- 
cuted this  enterprise  still  further,  and  through  the  agency  of  John  F. 
Seymour  opened  the  canal  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  great  lakes  by 
the  way  of  Fox  and  Wisconsin  Rivers,  a  work  of  great  importance.  In 
1853  he  was  made  a  director  of  the  New  York  Central  Railroad.  Hora- 
tio Seymour  was  chosen  governor  for  the  second  time  in  1862,  and 
made  his  brother  his  private  secretary  and  entrusted  him  with  the  deli- 
cate mission  of  assuring  President  Lincoln  of  the  support  of  New  York 


2^8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

in  the  contest  with  the  South.  He  was  also  made  State  agent  for  the 
care  of  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers.  This  was  a  work  altogether  in 
harmony  with  his  benevolent  and  tender  nature.  Not  only  in  general 
oversight  of  military  operations,  and  especially  in  those  that  were  taken 
part  in  by  the  soldiers  of  New  York,  did  he  render  invaluable  service, 
but  he  visited  several  battlefields  and  the  hospitals  of  the  neighbor- 
hood, and  gave  his  personal  attention  to  the  sufferers.  No  task  was  too 
hard  or  too  repulsive  for  him,  and  he  gave  the  fullest  effect  to  the  lib- 
eral provisions  made  for  the  soldiers'  relief  The  same  humane  spirit 
led  him  to  make  weekly  visits  to  the  hospitals  and  the  sick  within  the 
limits  of  this  city.  The  experience  he  gained  made  him  a  most  impor- 
tant member  of  the  Board  of  Charities,  which  was  formed  in  1873, 
wherein  he  greatly  contributed  in  benefiting  the  hospital  and  improving 
the  system  adopted  for  the  support  of  the  poor.  A  little  later  he  was 
a  trustee  of  St.  Luke's  Hospital  and  became  the  president  of  the  board. 
Akin  to  these  pursuits  was  the  interest  he  felt  in  education,,  both  secu- 
lar and  religious,  as  manifested  in  his  service  as  a  school  commissioner 
and  as  teacher  and  superintendent  of  Sunday  schools.  His  tastes 
equally  with  his  heart  were  warmly  exercised  in  the  creation  and  adorn- 
ment of  that  beautiful  resting  place  of  the  dead.  Forest  Hill  Cemetery. 
He  partook  of  his  brother's  taste  for  local  higtory,  as  was  shown  in  his 
valuable  addresses  at  Trenton,  July  4,  1876,  on  Olden  Barneveldt,  and 
on  many  other  occasions.  He  was  the  most  active  and  efficient  pro- 
moter of  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  battle  of  Oriskany  as  well  as 
of  the  subsequent  monument  erected  on  its  field,  which  will  long  be 
identified  with  his  memory.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Oneida 
Historical  Society.  Mr.  Seymour's  first  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Arthur 
Tappan,  of  New  York.  He  subsequently  married  Miss  Ledyard,  of 
Cazenovia.  His  death  occurred  February  22,  1890.  Two  children,  a 
son  and  a  daughter,  survive  him. 

Hiram  Hurlburt,  a  native  of  Eaton,  Madison  County,  followed  his 
brother,  Burton  D.,  to  Utica,  studied  law  with  him,  and  for  five  years 
practiced  in  company  with  him.  He  afterward  continued  alone.  An 
unpretentious  man  he  filled  an  important  role.  Whatever  he  did  was 
always  well  done,  and  no  interest  entrusted  to  his  care  ever  suffered 
where  accuracy,  skill,  and  patience  could  protect  it.     For  a  dozen  years 


ISAAC  MAYNARD  AND  OTHERS.  239 

he  acted  as  attorney  for  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and  Western  Rail- 
road in  this  city  and  his  management  of  its  legal  interests  gave  the  most 
perfect  satisfaction.  As  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  First  'Presbyterian 
Church,  and  more  especially  as  its  clerk,  he  did  much  for  the  church, 
performing  voluntarily  works  of  the  kind  that  the  best  members  are  apt 
to  shirk,  but  which  never  suffered  at  his  hands.  He  died  on  his  sixty- 
first  birthday,  September  6,  1880.  His  widow  and  one  son,  Edward 
Hurlburt,  live  here. 

Physicians  now  first  met  with  were  Jonathan  Hurlburt  and  G.  Z.  Hav- 
ens, who  both  practiced  here  a  few  years. 

Continued  devotion  to  affairs  of  his  own,  united  with  an  active  in- 
terest in  more-  general  matters,  secured  for  Isaac  Maynard  an  ample 
fortune  for  himself  and  with  it  the  willing  confidence  and  esteem  of  his 
fellow  townsmen.  He  was  born  in  Somersetshire,  England,  June  10,1805, 
and  came  to  this  country  and  to  Utica  in  the  fall  of  1836.  He  formed 
a  partnership  with  his  brother-in-law,  John  Thorn,  in  the  manufacture 
of  soap  and  candles,  a  business  which  proved  very  profitable  to  both  of 
them.  In  1861  he  acquired  an  interest  in  the  firm  of  John  S.  Kirk  & 
Co.,  of  Chicago,  also  soap  dealers,  and  met  with  abundant  success. 
Mr.  Maynard  was  prominently  connected  with  the  Utica  and  Black 
River  Railroad,  he  and  Mr.  Thorn  being  its  principal  managers  after  the 
failure  of  the  first  company  and  the  re-organization.  He  was  elected  its 
treasurer  in  1 861.  He  was  likewise  a  director  in  the  Utica,  Clinton,  and 
Binghamton  Railroad  and  in  1880  became  its  president.  Others  of  his 
official  relations  were  with  the  Utica  Water  Works  Company  and  the 
Utica  Steam  Woolen-Mills.  Mr.  Maynard  was  a  close  business  man  and 
his  co-operation  in  public  enterprise  was  relied  on.  Personally  he  was 
affable,  amiable,  and  trustworthy.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Tabernacle 
Baptist  Church,  but  during  his  later  years  attended  the  First  Presby- 
terian. Mr.  Maynard  was  the  father  of  three  sons  and  four  daughters, 
all  of  them  residents  of  Utica  and  most  of  them  heads  of  families. 

Other  business  men  of  the  era  were  Heman  Ferry,  of  the  Bank  of 
Central  New  York,  started  in  1838;  George  Westcott  and  Ira  A.  Bu- 
ton,  hatters;  EH  Avery,  forwarder;  William  Hackett,  confectioner; 
Thomas  L.  Kingsley,  grocer  and  afterward  dealer  in  clothing;  John 
Best,  carpenter,  and  his  brother,  James,  painter  and  subsequently  music 


240  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

teacher ;  George  Pearson,  livery-keeper ;  Joseph  S.  Fuller,  builder ; 
John  O.  Jones,  still  in  the  trade  of  grocer  as  he  then  started. 

1840. — The  officers  for  the  year  were:  Mayor,  John  C.  Devereux 
(elected  by  the  people,  the  first  who,  in  accordance  with  a  recent  act 
of  the  legislature,  was  raised  to  the  office  by  popular  vote) ;  aldermen, 
Alrick  Hubbell,  Frederick  Hollister,  John  J.  Frances,  Horace  S.  Brad- 
ley, George  W.  Hubbard,  Gardiner  Tracy,  Harry  Bushnell,  Benjamin 
Gaboon,  Stephen  M.  Ferine,  Gerry  Sanger,  Anthony  W.  Latour,  Simon 
V.  Oley  ;  attorney,  Thomas  R.  Walker;  treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper; 
surveyor,  Lorenzo  M.  Taylor;   clerk,  Sylvanus  Holmes. 

The  most  important  of  the  transactions  of  the  council  related  to' the 
revision  and  improvement  of  the  system  of  common  schools,  it  being 
determined  that  there  should  be  eight  of  them.  An  appropriation 
also  was  made  for  the  creation  of  a  free  school  for  colored  children. 
Another  appropriation  of  $515  was  made  for  the  purchase  of  a  public 
library  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  the  State  directing  such  appro- 
priation. A  new  fire  engine  company  was  organized,  with  the  name 
of  Osceola  No.  9;  No.  7  was  removed  to  the  engine-house  in  West 
Utica. 

Alrick  Hubbell  was  made  chief  of  the  fire  department.  The  follow- 
ing companies  were  in  existence :  Clinton,  Hardenbrocke,  Fulton, 
Lafayette,  Neptune,  Mechanics,  Mohawk,  Eagle,  Osceola,  a  hook  and 
ladder  company,  and  a^  bucket  company.  Pine  street  was  declared  a 
public  highway.  The  number  of  notaries  was  limited  to  eight.  Eight 
thousand  dollars  was  voted  for  current  expenses.  The  Oneida  Whig 
and  the  Utica  Democrat  were  declared  to  be  the  papers  in  which  the 
proceedings  of  the  council  should  be  published. 

On  the  i6th  of  January  was  founded  the  Utica  Musical  Academy,  its 
object  being  the  promotion  of  skill  and  taste  in  both  sacred  and  secular 
music.  It  numbered  over  eighty  performing  members,  including  a 
superior  orchestra.  Its  rehearsals  were  private  and  it  gave  six  public 
concerts  a  year.  George  Button  was  its  conductor  and  Prof  J.  Finley 
Smith,  of  Hamilton  College,  its  vocal  leader.  It  lasted  several  years  and 
gave  a  marked  impulse  to  musical  art. 

1 84 1 . —  The  officers  elected  March  2d  were  :  Mayor,  Spencer  Kellogg ; 
aldermen,  Aldrick    Hubbell,    George   W.   Hubbard,    Jared  E.  Warner, 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1841.  241 

Isaiah  Tiffany,  Augustus  Hurlburt,  Andrew  S.  Pond,  Robert  Hallock, 
Alfred  Churchill,  Simon  V.  Oley,  Hugh  Crocker,  Gardiner  Tracy,  John 
J.  Francis ;  treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper  ;  attorney,  Jarvis  M.  Hatch  ; 
clerk,  Dexter  Gilmore  ;  surveyor,  Lorenzo  M.  Taylor. 

To  the  official  papers  of  the  preceding  year  was  added  the  Utica  Ob- 
server. It  was  resolved  April  23d  that  on  the  8th  of  May  the  coun  - 
cil  will  meet  as  a  Board  of  Excise.  Before  that  time  a  petition  was  pre- 
sented to  the  board  signed  by  Alvan  Stewart  and  900  others,  praying 
the  council  not  to  grant  any  licenses.  Permission  was,  however,  given 
to  applicants  to  make  their  appearance  ;  and  that  licenses  were  granted 
may  be  inferred  from  the  resolution  of  October  29th  to  the  effect  that 
$55,  the  amount  due  for  licenses,  be  given  to  the  Qtica  Orphan  Asylum. 
Whether  this  was  the  full  anount  received  from  this  source,  or  only  a 
balance  that  remained  unpaid,  I  am  unable  to  state. 

July  31st  at  a  joint  meeting  of  the  council  and  the  commissioners  of 
highways  of  the  town  of  Deerfield  it  was  determined  to  rebuild  the  lower 
bridge  over  the  Mohawk  River  at  the  joint  expense  of  the  town  of  Deer- 
field  and  Utica,  in  accordance  with  plans  submitted,  and  the  contracts 
were  let.  The  council  ordered  also  that  plans  be  procured  for  a  new 
bridge  over  the  basin  on  Broad  street.  The  stand  for  a  hay  market  was 
changed  from  Broad  street  to  Washington,  beween  the  canal  and 
Columbia  street,  and  again  changed  to  Broadway,  between  the  canal  and 
Fayette  street,  and  also  the  south  side  of  Whitesboro  street  between 
Burchard  and  Division  streets.  An  ordinance  was  passed  forbidding 
the  keeping  by  any  individual  of  more  than  twenty- five  pounds  of  gun- 
powder, or  for  a  longer  time  than  twelve  hours,  in  any  other  place  than 
in  the  public  powder  magazine.  Dr.  Newland,  who  had  been  acting  as 
city  physician,  was  allowed  $50  for  his  services  during  the  year,  although 
he  had  asked  the  privilege  of  doing  the  work  gratuitously.  The  time 
of  meeting  of  the  council  was  changed  from  a  weekly  to  a  fortnightly 
one.  A  public  meeting  was  called  in  view  of  the  decease  of  President 
William  Henry  Harrison. 

From  the  report  of  the  treasurer  for  the  year  1841-42,  published 
in  the  spring  of  the  latter  year,  it  would  appear  that  the  gross  ex- 
penses of  the  city  were  $11,734.96  and  that  the  gross  receipts  were 
$12,014.09. 

31 


242  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  trial  of  William  McLeod  was  the  principal  event  of  public  in- 
terest. Some  notice  of  it  will  be  found  in  the  biographical  sketch  of 
Joshua  A.  Spencer. 

One  who  entered  upon  the  dry  goods  business  in  1841,  was  emi- 
nently successful  therein,  and  was  known  for  many  years  as  one  of  the 
most  prominent  of  the  class  was  John  B.  Wells.  He  was  born  in  Col- 
chester, Conn.,  August  24,  1816.  After  serving  as  a  book-keeper  in 
Massachusetts  he  came  in  1839  to  Utica  and  entered  the  store  of  A.  L. 
&  H.  Wells,  his  cousins.  Two  years  later,  in  the  spring  of  1841,  he 
formed  a  partnership  with  Lewis  Bailey,  of  Utica,  for  five  years.  The 
business  was  commenced  and  conducted  in  Auburn  for  two  years  and 
the  remaining  three  years  in  Utica.  In  1846  the  partnership  expired 
and  Mr.  Wells  commenced  business  on  his  own  account  at  88  Genesee 
street,  remaining  there  ten  years.  In  1856  he  removed  to  the  Marble 
block,  then  newly  built,  and  in  1864  to  the  present  location,  79  Gene- 
see street.  A  year  later  the  firm  name  was  changed  to  J.  B.  Wells  & 
Co.  and  in  1874  to  J.  B.  Wells,  Son  &  Co.,  the  junior  members  being 
Edward  L.  Wells  and  John  S.  Capron.  When  he  first  occupied  his 
store  79  Genesee  street  it  was  but  eighty  feet  deep.  It  was  extended 
about  sixty  feet  in  1871  and  later  the  store  No.  yj,  formerly  occupied 
by  the  Boston  store,  and  the  store  No.  81,  formerly  occupied  by  Buck- 
ley &  Co.,  were  added,  making  the  establishment  one  of  the  largest  in 
the  city.  As  a  business  man  Mr.  Wells  was  noted  for  his  energy,  per- 
severance, strict  integrity,  and  close  application  to  affairs.  No  em- 
ployee in  his  establishment  worked  harder  than  he,  and  for  twenty-five 
years  at  least  he  did  the  work  of  three  men.  His  energy,  perseverance, 
and  capacity  for  work  were  wonderful.  There  was  no  kind  of  work 
about  his  establishment  which  he  would  not  do  and  his  example  exerted 
a  good  influence  over  all  his  employees.  Thrifty  as  he  was  no  one  was 
more  liberal  than  he  or  more  ready  to  part  with  his  hard  earned  wealth. 
Not  that  he  spent  it  on  himself,  but  he  gave  very  liberally  to  every  de- 
serving cause.  He  was  treasurer  of  the  Home  for  the  Homeless  since 
the  death  of  George  R.  Thomas,  and  gave  very  largely  to  that  charity 
as  well  as  to  very  many  others.  Mr.  Wells's  private  life  was  as  spot- 
less as  his  business  career  was  distinguished  and  successful.  Though  a 
lover  of  economy  he  was  a  generous  provider  for   his  devoted  family. 


OFFICERS  OF  1842.  243 

He  had  been  a  member  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  since  1843, 
was  deacon  about  ten  years,  and  for  about  thirty  years  past  one  of  the 
ruling  elders.  The  church  found  in  him  a  most  liberal  supporter  of  its 
organized  work  in  behalf  of  education,  home  and  foreign  missions,  and 
benevolence  for  many  years,  and  he  had  for  a  long  time  supported  a 
missionary  in  the  Western  field.  To  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Asso- 
ciation his  gifts  amounted  to  more  than  those  of  any  other  individual. 
Since  1887  he  had  been  president  of  its  Board  of  Trustees.  His  death 
occurred  November  17,  1891.  His  wife  had  died  before  him.  His 
surviving  children  are  one  son  and  three  daughters. 


CHAPTER  VH. 

SECOND  DECADE  OF  THE  CITY'S  HISTORY. 

The  Washingtonian  Temperance  Movement — Establishment  of  a  Recorder's 
Court — Inauguration  of  an  era  of  IVIanufactures  —  Incorporation  of  the  Utica  Water 
Works  —  Building  of  the  City  Hall. 

THE  following  officers  were  chosen  for  the  year  1842  :  Mayor, 
Horatio  Seymour;  aldermen,  Thomas  Lennebacker,  Hugh  Crocker, 
John  J.  Francis,  Hiram  Greenman,  Jared  E.  Warner,  Gardiner  Tracy, 
Robert  T.  Hallock,  Amos  Scranton,  T.  Parmelee,  David  Wager,  Com- 
fort Butler,  Hampton  Clark  ;  treasurer,  M.  M.  Jones  ;  attorney,  Wallace 
McCall ;  clerk,  Huet  R.  Root ;  surveyor,  Lorenzo  M.  Taylor ;  street 
commissioner,  Levi  Smith.  John  H.  Ostrom  was  made  chief  of  the  fire 
department.  A  State  law  was  enacted  on  the  7th  of  April  that  at  the 
next  charter  election  there  should  be  elected  six  school  commissioners 
and  that  two  be  elected  annually  thereafter. 

The  local  press  claim  that  in  spite  of  the  cry  of  "  hard  times  "  consid- 
erable building  was  going  on.  There  were  mentioned  a  block  on  the 
corner  of  Whitesboro  and  Genesee  streets  for  the  Charles  E.  Dudley 
estate  and  a  hotel  on  Whitesboro  street,  and  a  number  of  other  build- 
ings are  alluded  to  in  the  following  month.     The  fare  on  the  railroad  to 


244  MEMOHIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Syracuse  was  fixed  at  $i,  the  same  as  charged  by  the  boats.  A  new 
packet  line  was  inaugurated  in  April  and  was  announced  to  be  largely 
patronized.  The  competition  at  the  station  and  on  the  docks  for  pas- 
sengers was  soon  at  its  height  and  many  collisions  occurred  between 
runners. 

The  years  1841,  1842,  and  1843  were  signalized  by  a  comprehensive 
and  systematic  effort  in  the  cause  of  temperance  all  over  the  country. 
It  had  for  its  legend  "  Moral  Suasion  "  and  its  canonized  patroness  was 
Martha  Washington.  This  movement,  known  as  the  Washingtonian,  was 
more  generally  successful  than  anything  of  the  kind  had  been  or  possi- 
bly has  been  since.  In  Utica,  besides  numberless  week-day  meetings, 
there  were  meetings  every  Sunday  afternoon  during  the  temperate 
months  in  the  old  academy  yard  on  John  street.  The  general  meeting 
of  the  temperance  societies  was  always  held  in  the  Bleecker  street 
church. 

Lawyers  who  began  business  about  1840—42  were  Charles  H.  Doo- 
little  and  Samuel  B.  Garvin  (to  be  noticed  in  the  chapter  on  the  Bench 
and  Bar),  William  Baker,  John  G.  Crocker,  Morven  M.  Jones,  Alexan- 
der Seward,  Edward  S.  Bray  ton,  Jason  G.  Coye,  Huet  R.  Root,  Will- 
iam L.  Walradt,  George  Langford,  jr. 

William  Baker,  who  had  been  a  supervisor  and  was  later  the  first  re- 
corder of  the  city  (1844),  made  the  patent  laws  a  specialty.  In  that 
department  he  was  a  recognized  authority.  Courteous  in  manner  and 
upright  in  life  he  commanded  general  respect.  His  death  occurred 
November  6,  1871. 

John  G.  Crocker,  who  lived  here  from  an  early  age  and  who  was  in 
practice  from  1840,  did  not  die  until  July  8,  1888.  He  was  prominent 
in  legal  circles  during  early  and  middle  life,  although  for  twenty  years 
or  more  of  its  latter  part  his  work  was  mostly  in  the  direction  of  settling 
estates  and  similar  office  work.  He  was  of  a  retiring,  studious  habit, 
but  was  a  favorite  with  many,  especially  of  his  own  profession,  by  reason 
of  his  extensive  and  varied  acquirements,  his  readiness  to  impart  his  in- 
formation to  any  who  sought  it,  his  sound  sense  and  reliable  judgment, 
and  his  kindness  of  heart.  He  wrote  several  works  of  a  legal  character. 
He  was  a  Democrat  in  politics  and  an  intimate  friend  of  Governor  Sey- 
mour, but  never  asked  for  office. 


M.  M.  yONES  —  E.  S.  BRA  YTON.  245 

Morven  M.  Jones,  a  long  time  justice  of  the  peace  of  Utica,  was  born 
in  Lairdsville,  Westmoreland,  June  20,  18 14,  and  was  the  son  of  Hon. 
Pomeroy  Jones,  author  of  the  Annals  of  Oneida  County.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  the  common  schools  and  the  Clinton  Academy.  At  twenty 
years  of  age  he  came  to  Utica  and  entered  the  layif  office  of'Seymour  & 
Root,  with  whom  he  studied  about  seven  years.  He  was  admitted  to 
the  bar  and  began  practice,  a  practice  which  was,  however,  materially 
interfered  with  by  other  duties  and  engagements.  He  was  an  assistant 
of  his  father  in  the  preparation  of  his  Annals,  which  appeared  in  185 1, 
the  son  writing  the  whole  of  the  chapter  on  Utica.  In  1861  Mr.  Jones 
organized  a  company  of  the  Second  Heavy  Artillery,  went  into  the  war 
as  first  lieutenant,  ?nd  was  promoted  afterward  to  the  post  of  captain.  In 
1863  he  went  to  Washington  in  the  employ  of  the  New  York  State  agent 
in  the  care  of  wounded  soldiers.  While  there  he  was  arrested  and  confined 
five  months  in  the  Old  Capitol  prison  on  the  charge  of  illegally  procur- 
ing soldiers'  votes,  was  tried  by  a  court-martial,  and  was  acquitted. 
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  made  brevet- major  of  volunteers.  In 
politics  Mr.  Jones  was  a  Democrat  and  earnest  in  advocacy  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  his  party.  Early  in  his  career  he  was  overseer  of  the  poor  and 
treasurer  of  the  city.  He  was  justice  of  the  peace  nearly  thirty-three 
years.  In  January,  1868,  Governor  Fenton  appointed  him  chief  clerk 
in  the  office  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  which  position  he  held  four  years, 
and  on  his  return  to  Utica  he  resumed  his  office  of  justice.  He  was  a 
trustee  of  the  Odd  Fellows  Association  and  for  many  years  an  ardent 
Free  Mason,  being  at  the  time  of  his  death  chaplain  of  Utica  Lodge, 
No.  47,  and  likewise  commander  of  Bacon  Post,  G.  A.  R.  Major  Jones 
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Oneida  Historical  Society  and  was  its 
corresponding  secretary  and  librarian.  In  his  religion  he  was  a  Baptist 
and  a  prominent  member  of  the  Bleecker  street  and  afterward  of  the 
Tabernacle  Church.  In  his  private  career  he  was  esteemed  by  a  wide 
circle  of  friends. 

Edward  S.  Brayton,  son  of  George  Brayton,  of  Western,  and  brother 
of  Milton  Brayton,  the  Utica  merchant  of  1824,  was  born  early  in  18 17, 
was  educated  in  Utica,  at  Hamilton,  and  later  at  Union  College,  at  which 
latter  place  he  was  graduated  in  1836.  He  pursued  the  study  of  law 
with  Kirkland  &  Bacon  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.      His  mar- 


246  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

riage  a  few  years  later  to  Sarah,  the  only  daughter  of  Judge  Morris  S. 
Miller,  determined  to  a  great  degree  the  course  and  occupation  of  his 
life.  This  consisted  largely  in  managing  the  property  in  Utica  and 
elsewhere  of  the  numerous  non-resident  representatives  of  the  Bleecker, 
Miller,  and  Dudley  families.  Besides  his  occupation  by  these  cares,  and 
by  labor  among  the  fruits  and  flowers  of  his  garden,  much  of  his  time 
was  taken  up  by  the  various  employments  of  a  public  nature  that  were 
imposed  upon  him,  for  he  was  prompt  to  respond  to  every  call  and  in  the 
performance  of  every  duty  was  self-sacrificing,  helpful,  and  reliable.  Mr. 
Brayton's  life  was  so  full  and  rich,  so  identified  with  all  that  was  good 
and  true  in  the  social,  municipal,  and  religious  concerns  of  Utica,  that  it 
seemed  almost  selfish  for  any  corporation  to  claim  a  special  bereave- 
ment in  his  loss.  To  many  of  them  he  gave  the  benefit  of  his  strong 
practical  sense  and  great  executive  ability,  and  at  his  death  they  con- 
curred in  expressions  of  their  appreciation  of  his  services.  These  serv- 
ices were  rendered  to  the  Second  National  Bank,  both  in  its  organiza- 
tion and  during  its  subsequent  history  ;  to  the  Female  Academy  for 
twenty- five  years  of  its  career,  before  and  after  the  dark  hour  of  that  in- 
stitution, when  fire  had  destroyed  its  costly  buildings,  but  when  his 
hopeful  predictions  of  new  and  better  ones  and  his  active  eflbrt  to  supply 
them  gave  courage  and  confidence  to  all ;  to  the  Cemetery  Association 
by  the  exercise  of  his  wise  counsel,  his  keen  appreciation  of  all  that  is 
beautiful  in  nature,  his  skill  in  landscape  gardening,  and  his  years  of  de- 
votion. By  the  Reformed  Church  it  was  declared  that  his  services  were 
invaluable,  his  attendance  on  its  ordinances  unremitting,  his  care  for  its 
interests  watchful  and  unstinted,  and  that  his  name  and  character  for 
every  manly  virtue  were  indelibly  impressed  upon  the  hearts  of  its  peo- 
ple. Mr.  Brayton  married,  secondly.  Miss  Catharine,  daughter  of  John 
L.  Curtenius,  who  with  three  daughters  survive  him.  He  died  June  2, 
1887. 

Jason  G.  Coye  was  a  close  office  lawyer  who  by  industry,  judicious 
investments  of  his  gains,  and  economy  in  their  expenditure  acquired  the 
means  to  leave  at  his  death  a  valuable  legacy  to  the  Old  Ladies'  Home 
and  another  to  Calvary  Church.  His  death  occurred  March  9,  1872. 
Another  lawyer  of  unusual  gifts,  who  now  made  a  beginning,  was  Huet 
R.  Root,  brother  of  P.  Sheldon.  This  beginning  was  closed  by  an  early 
death. 


WILLIAM  WALCOTT.  247 

Physicians  of  1840-42  were  Theodore  Dimon,  who  practiced  here  for 
a  few  years  and  then  removed  to  Auburn ;  Daniel  James,  who  had  be- 
fore a  long  experience  in  Albany;  and  George  W.  Gardner,  of  much 
longer  residence. 

About  1840  there  came  to  reside  in  the  city  a  man  whose  occupa- 
tion was  chiefly  outside  of  it,  though  with  its  citizens  he  had  many  in- 
terests in  common.  This  was  William  Walcott,  long  associated  with 
his  brother  Benjamin  in  the  management  of  the  New  York  Mills.  Born 
in  Cumberland,  R.  I.,  August  9,  1794,  he  removed  to  Whitesboro  in 
181 1  and  soon  afterward  engaged  in  mercantile  business,  being  con- 
nected with  the  Oneida  Manufacturing  Society,  principally  as  agent  for 
the  sale  of  its  goods.  At  that  early  age  he  displayed  unusual  business 
talent  with  great  activity  a:nd  industry.  He  was  for  a  very  long  period  the 
general  agent  and  superintendent  of  this  factory.  He  was  closely  asso- 
ciated in  business  with  Benjamin  S.  Walcott  in  the  New  York  Mills 
and  the  two  brothers  worked  hand  in  hand  for  over  half  a  century  in 
promoting  the  industrial  and  moral  interests  of  that  widely  known  man- 
ufacturing center.  After  coming  to  Utica  he  superintended  the  erection 
of  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton- Mills,  which  were  pronounced  by  competent 
judges  to  be  one  of  the  best  constructed  establishments  in  the  United 
States.  He  was  one  of  its  first  Board  of  Directors.  For  a  few  years 
before  his  death  he  was  a  director  of  the  Chicago  and  Rock  Island  Rail- 
road. Later  he  was  treasurer  of  the  Michigan  Southern  and  Northern 
Indiana  Railroad,  and  performed  the  duties  of  that  arduous  and  respon- 
sible post  with  singular  industry  and  fidelity.  For  more  than  thirty 
years  he  was  a  director  of  the  Bank  of  Utica  and  was  also  a  director  of 
the  Savings  Bank.  For  many  years  he  was  a  member  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church  of  Whitesboro  ;  on  removing  to  Utica  he  united  with  the 
Reformed  Church  and  was  made  one  of  its  elders.  A  worthy  and  use- 
ful citizen  and  sincere  Christian  he  was  greatly  respected  and  beloved. 
He  died  November  8,  1859. 

Edward  H.  Broadhead,  nephew  of  Charles  C.  Broadhead,  was  a 
resident  engineer  on  the  Erie  Canal  about  four  years.  He  was  subse- 
quently a  prosperous  and  leading  citizen  of  Milwaukee. 

Rev.  Wesley  Bailey,  a  minister  of  Fayetteville,  came  here  in  1842  at 
the  instigation  of  Alvan  Stewart  and  others,  and  set  up  the  Liberty 


248  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Press  as  an  organ  of  the  Anti-Slavery  party,  which  succeeded  to  the 
Friend  of  Man,  its  previous  organ.  This  paper  Mr.  Bailey  edited  until 
1848.  He  afterward  united  with  the  Barnburner  Democrats  in  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Republican  party.  Finding  that  there  was  less  reason 
for  the  continued  advocacy  of  anti-slavery  doctrine  he  changed  the  char- 
acter of  his  paper,  making  it  a  supporter  of  temperance  and  calling  it  the 
Teetotaller.  As  such  he  conducted  it  until  about  i860,  with  the  excep- 
tion only  of  the  year  1857,  when  he  served  as  State  prison  inspector, 
having  been  elected  by  the  Republicans.  In  i860  he  removed  to  Ohio, 
where  he  had  charge  of  another  paper  until  near  his  death.  He  died  in 
February,  1 89 1.  He  had  two  sons,  of  whom  one,  E.  P.  Bailey,  is  now 
editor  of  the  Utica  Observer. 

Among  the  merchants  was  George  C.  Tallman,  who  was  born  at  Ta- 
berg  in  this  county,  where  his  father's  family  were  temporarily  resident, 
though  their  prior  and  subsequent  home  was  in  Brooklyn  upon  a  farm 
which,  from  the  natural  growth  of  that  city,  became  very  valuable.  At 
an  early  age  he  entered  a  dry  goods  store  in  New  York  and  soon  be- 
came head  of  the  firm.  Settling  afterward  in  Oneida  County  he  located 
first  in  Whitestown  and  then  in  Utica.  Here  he  began  the  wholesale 
dry  goods  trade,  but  was  soon  dealing  in  real  estate.  In  this  latter  his 
operations  were  successful  and  conducted  on  a  large  scale.  At  one 
time  he  owned  50,000  acres  of  land  in  Iroquois  County,  111.,  and  had 
property  in  sixty  counties  of  Western  States.  In  Utica  also  he  owned 
land,  especially  a  valuable  tract  in  the  eastern  part.  He  lived  here 
about  twenty  years  and  in  1866  returned  to  Brooklyn,  continuing  a  like 
pursuit  until  his  death  May  4,  1880.  He  was  a  shrewd  business  man 
and  acquired  a  large  property.  One  only  of  his  large  family,  Edward 
A.  Tallman,  is  left  in  Utica. 

Other  merchants  were  Alfred  A.  and  Richard  H.  Wells  (successors  of 
Thomas  G.  Perkins),  Doolittle  &  Norris,  Peter  Wellbon,  Owen  and 
Michael  Gaffney,  Kellogg  &  Rockwell,  all  in  the  dry  goods  trade ; 
Charles  C.  Backus  and  Horace  H.  Hawley,  booksellers  and  publishers ; 
George  Dickinson,  druggist;  Adrian  Kissam,  Nathan  B.  Wilcox,  for- 
warders ;  William  H.  Scranton,  grocer  and  afterward  clothing  mer- 
chant;  Horace  Whitman,  David  Donaldson,  Paul  Keiser,  grocers,  the 
latter  being  the  founder  of  the  German  paper,  the  Oneida  Demokrat. 


\^ 


Inij.tAiI.CWiUj'.msiBrM 


MECHANICS  OF  i?,^2.  2^^ 

Among  the  mechanics  beginning  now  to  Uve  in  Utica  was  Joel  C. 
Bailey,  the  son  of  an  early  settler  of  Whitestown.  After  working  in 
blast  furnaces  in  various  places  in  this  State  and  conducting  one  of  his 
own  at  Schenectady  he  came  in  1842  to  Utica  and  purchased  the  Eagle 
Furnace  on  Columbia  near  Cornelia  street.  There  alone  and  with  his  son  - 
in-law,  Russel  Wheeler,  he  carried  on  the  manufacture  of  stoves  until 
his  retirement  in  1856.  The  woolen-mill  known  as  the  Globe  Woolen- 
Mill  had  failed  not  long  after  it  had  started.  Mr.  Bailey  purchased  and 
re-organized  it  and  became  its  president,  continuing  as  such  until,  on 
his  resignation  by  reason  of  the  arduousness  of  other  cares,  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Mr.  Faxton,  when  he  was  made  vice-president.  He  was 
likewise  interested  in  the  Steam  Woolen  and  the  Steam  Cotton-Mills. 
Long  a  deacon  and  influential  in  the  Bleeker  Street  Baptist  Church  he 
left  behind  him  a  reputation  above  reproach  and  an  example  worthy  of 
imitation.  He  died  February  23,  1882,  when  upwards  of  ninety  years 
of  age.  A  notice  of  Abijah  J.  Williams  will  be  found  in  the  Biograph- 
ical Department. 

From  among  the  mechanics  entering  on  business  about  this  date  and 
who  are  now  deceased  it  may  be  permitted  to  select  one  or  two  to  briefly 
characterize.  William  Brady  was  a  master  mason  to  whom  was 
due  the  construction  of  the  stone  and  brickwork  of  several  public  and 
private  buildings  of  the  city,  and  Azel  J.  Lathrop  was  a  master  builder 
who  had  as  important  a  part  in  the  woodwork  of  these  structures.  Mr. 
Lathrop  had  been  bred  a  carpenter  and  he  continued  his  shop  and  his 
work,  but  while  thus  engaged  he  studied  the  science  of  architecture 
and  spared  no  pains  and  no  expense  in  perfecting  himself  in  that  pro- 
fession. The  buildings  erected  by  him  were  put  up  in  a  substantial 
and  workmanlike  manner.  His  architectural  success  is  best  attested  by 
the  many  handsome  buildings  of  his  design,  not  only  in  Utica,  but  in 
surrounding  places.  Among  those  now  standing  in  this  city  may  be 
mentioned  the  Marble  block,  the  county  clerk's  office,  the  Butterfield 
House,  the  Utica  Savings  Bank,  the  Gardner  block,  the  Globe  Woolen - 
Mills,  the  Faxton  Hospital,  Faxton  Hall,  the  Old  Ladies'  Home,  and 
several  private  residences.  His  long  residence  here  and  the  amount  of 
work  done  by  him  made  him  the  best  known  architect  in  this  part  of 
the   State.      Accurate  and   precise  in   his  plans  he  omitted  nothing  in 

32 


2SO  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

his  specifications.  His  death,  which  was  sudden,  occurred  March  i6, 
1880.  His  wife  was  Margaret  Arthur  and  he  was  the  father  of  eight 
children. 

Another  mechanic  conspicuous  for  the  public  positions  he  held  was 
Hugh  Crocker.  Born  in  New  York  in  1808  he  came  to  Utica  in  1819  and 
grew  with  its  growth.  His  original  vocation  was  that  of  a  butcher  and 
this  he  prosecuted  for  many  years.  He  was  afterward  engaged  in  more 
miscellaneous  business.  In  1861  he  was  chosen  sheriff  of  the  county 
on  the  Democratic  ticket,  and  ten  years  later  he  was  elected  to  the  same 
office  on  the  Union  ticket.  He  returned  to  the  Democratic  party  and 
was  active  and  influential  in  it.  About  1866  he  became  superintend- 
ent of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  and  it  was  in  the  faithful 
prosecution  of  the  duties  of  this  office  that  he  lost  his  life.  This  was  the 
result  of  a  landslide  that  occurred  in  the  spring  of  1869,  a  few  miles 
north  of  Lyons  Falls.  Having  started  on  a  locomotive  in  advance  of 
the  train  to  inspect  the  road,  then  in  a  dangerous  condition,  he  with  his 
engine  was  overtaken  and  crushed.  The  incidents  of  his  last  hours  are 
eloquent  in  eulogy  of  his  care  for  the  road  and  his  forgetfulness  of 
self 

Other  mechanics,  since  deceased,  were  John  F.  Kittle,  printer  and 
publisher  of  the  Observer ;  Lemuel  Pittman,  carpenter  ;  A.  J.  Bice,  John 
W.  Porter,  shoemakers ;  Gordon  &  Pond,  saddlers  (Theron  T.  Pond  being 
the  inventor  of  Pond's  extract);  Marvin  H.  Lines,  saddler;  Joseph  Har- 
ter,  tanner;  George  Ralph,  brewer ;  William  Ralph,  tinsmith ;  David 
Hull,  tinner ;  Isaac  Tapping,  maker  of  regalia  ;  Edward  Broadwell,  paper 
hanger;   R.  N.  Loucks,  leather  dealer;    Henry  Roberts,  butcher. 

Several  of  the  inhabitants  of  Utica  who  entered  on  business  about 
1840-42  are  still  alive.  As  the  history  advances  the  number  of  living 
ones  will  steadily  increase.  These,  it  is  evident,  cannot  all  be  discoursed 
upon  ;  lack  of  space  forbids  it.  To  select  a  few  of  them  only  might 
seem  invidious,  and  therefore  I  must  deny  myself  even  the  mention  of 
their  names  Names  to  many  would  be  but  "  non-conductors  and  void 
of  interest." 

1843  — Officers  for  the  year  1843  were  as  follows :  Mayor,  Frederick 
HoUister;  aldermen,  Hiram  Greenman,  Jared  PI  Warner,  Joseph  B. 
Hoyt,  N.  N.  Weaver,  William  Baker,  Ezra  S.  Barnum,  Abraham  Hig- 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1843.  251 

I. 
ham,  Charles  Tracy,  John  Butterfield,  Chauncey  Palmer,  Gerry  Sanger, 

C.  B.  Coventry  ;  treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper  ;  attorney,  William  Allen  ; 
clerk,  Richard  U.  Sherman  ;  surveyor,  Lorenzo  M.  Taylor;  street  com- 
missioner, L.  M.  Taylor ;  school  commissioners,  Spencer  Kellogg, 
Robert  T.  Hallock,  Rudolph  Snyder,  Hiram  Denio,  Francis  Kernan, 
James  Watson  Williams. 

During  the  year  1842-44  the  financial  indebtedness  of  the  city  oc- 
cupied much  of  the  attention  of  the  council  and  the  people.  The  Daily 
Gazette'wL  February,  1842,  discoursed  as,  follows  :  "  Our  city  affairs  are 
now  in  a  peculiar  condition.  Deeply  in  debt,  with  a  revenue  entirely 
inadequate  to  allow  of  a  hope  that  it  can  ever  be  met  from  ordinary 
means,  we  need  all  the  ingenuity  and  financial  knowledge  that  can  be 
possessed  by  one  Board  of  Aldermen  to  devise  some  means  of  relief" 
The  same  journal  calls  for  the  election  of  a  new  Board  of  Aldermen 
with  the  exception  of  two.  The  city  debt  at  that  time  was  less  than 
$5,000,  outside  of  bonds.  The  following  statement  was  published  of 
the  city  debt  for  the  ten  years  succeeding  its  incorporation  :  1833, 
$1,366.17;  1834,  $2,316.54;  1835,  $2,500;  1836,  $2,292.05;  1837, 
$3,492.86;  1838,  $3,500;  1839,  $3,600;  1840,  $3,590;  1841,  $1,592.- 
64;    1842,  $3,246.87;    1843,  $4,458-24- 

The  council  in  February  resolved  that  application  be  made  to  the 
legislature  to  amend  the  charter  so  as  to  authorize  the  council  to  raise 
either  an  annual  tax  of  $10,000  or  by  special  tax  a  sum  sufficient  to 
extinguish  the  present  indebtedness.  On  the  23d  of  the  same  month 
a  public  meeting  was  held  at  which  it  was  resolved  to  submit  the  mat- 
ter to  a  committee  of  citizens  who  should  report  at  a  subsequent  meet- 
ing. This  committee  was  composed  of  E.  A.  Wetmore,  Spencer  Kel- 
logg, Hiram  Denio,  Robert  T.  Hallock,  Thomas  Colling,  Martin  Hart, 
and  Horatio  Seymour.  The  report  of  the  committee  recommended 
application  to  the  legislature  for  authority  to  borrow  on  bonds  of  the 
city  $3,500  for  three  years  for  the  payment  of  liabihties  exclusively, 
and  an  equal  amount  of  which  one- third  should  be  raised  in  each  of  the 
next  three  years  by  special  tax.  (The  latter  clause  of  the  report  was 
left  out  upon  its  final  adoption.)  The  saine  committee  also  recom- 
mended that  future  work  on  roads,  streets,  and  bridges,  and  the  street 
hghting  be  let  on  contract  to  the  lowest  bidder;  that  the  number  of  the 


252  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

city  watch  be  reduced  ;  and  that  no  future  appropriation  be  made  ex- 
cept as  authorized  by  the  charter.  This  report  was  adopted  on  the  i  ith 
of  March  and  the  necessary  steps  were  taken  to  give  it  effect.  In  the 
treasurer's  report  for  the  year  ending  February,  1843,  the  entire  ex- 
penses of  the  city  from  the  ordinary  fund  are  given  as  $1 1,734.96.  The 
fund  raised  each  year  had  been  for  several  years  $8,000. 

November  24,  1843,  it  was  announced  in  the  council  that  application 
would  be  made  to  the  legislature  for  charter  amendments  authorizing 
the  division  of  the  Third  and  Fourth  wards,  the  establishment  of  a  Re- 
corder's Court,  and  the  election  of  one  supervisor  from  each  ward.  The 
Recorder's  Court  was  inaugurated  in  the  following  year.  On  the  ap- 
plication of  the  school  commissioners  the  council  ordered  the  raising  by 
tax  of  the  sum  of  $1,618.50  for  the  alteration,  repairing,  and  improving 
of  the  school- houses,  for  purchasing  apparatus,  and  for  fuel  and  contin- 
gent expenses  of  the  schools. 

In  September  Nicholas  Devereux  offered  to  build  a  hall  for  city  pur- 
poses and  give  to  the  corporation  a  perpetual  lease  of  it  free  of  charge 
on  condition  thathe  be  allowed  to  occupy  that  part  of  Hotel  street  be- 
tween Franklin  Square  and  the  canal  for  part  of  his  building.  This 
proposal  met  with  much  opposition  from  many  citizens  who  desired  a 
park  at  that  point.  Very  few  public  improvements  were  made  by  the 
council.  It  was  an  era  of  retrenchment,  with  much  talk  of  hard  times. 
In  July  there  was  held  the  first  large  military  encampment  here.  The 
four  Utica  companies  and  others  from  Rochester,  Schenectady,  New 
Haven,  and  New  York  took  part.  General  Wool  was  present  to  review 
the  troops  and  $50  was  appropriated  by  the  council  to  the  mihtary 
companies  to  aid  in  defraying  expenses.  The  encampment  occupied 
the  ground  enclosed  between  the  Chenango  Canal  and  Court  and  Var- 
ick  streets,  there  being  only  a  few  houses  along  the  line  of  these  two 
streets. 

The  Gazette  of  December  7th  began  an  editorial  as  follows  :  "  Pros- 
pects of  our  City. — Every  one  conversant  with  the  different  portions  of 
Utica  must  have  been  struck  with  surprise  at  the  great  amount  of  build- 
ing which  has  been  going  on  during  the  last  year  or  two."  The  editor 
then  proceeded  to  show  how  this  was  being  greatly  overdone  ;  that 
money  left  in  the  hands  of  real  estate  owners  by  the  general  interruption 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1844.  253 

of  business  was  being  used  by  them  to  put  up  stores  and  blocks  for 
which  there  was  not  and  could  not  soon  be  a  demand.  In  April  of  this 
year  the  two  railroads  began  running  two  trains  daily  each  way.  The 
packet  boats  were  still  continuing  an  active  opposition,  and  Captain 
Greenman  put  on  two  new  boats  this  year.  In  July  the  number  of 
daily  railroad  trains  was  increased  to  three. 

1844. — The  charter  election  of  1844  was  an  exciting  one.  The  Hol- 
lister  administration  had  given  satisfaction  by  its  economy  and  prudence 
and  he  was  renominated  for  mayor,  but  through  a  coalition  of  Hunkers, 
Barnburners,  and  Abolitionists  there  was  a  defeat  of  the  Whigs.  The 
following  officers  were  chosen  :  Mayor,  Ward  Hunt ;  aldermen,  B.  B. 
Lansing,  Charles  H.  Doolittle,  Abraham  Higham,  Stephen  Comstock, 
Jared  E.  Warner,  George  Tracy,  Joseph  B.  Hoyt,  Charles  Tracy,  George 
Curtiss,  Francis  Kernan,  Charles  S.  Wilson,  Jere  Mather;  treasurer,  Jar- 
vis  M.  Hatch;  attorney,  Huet  H.  Root;  clerk,  Joseph  B.  Cushman ; 
surveyor,  Francis  F.  Curry  ;  street  commissioner,  Thomas  Mclncrow. 

In  April  a  petition  came  into  the  council  for  the  location  of  a  public 
square  between  the  canal  and  Genesee  and  Hotel  streets,  which  was 
merely  referred,  and  to  Mr.  Devereux  was  given  a  portion  of  that  space 
for  his  block  as  already  alluded  to.  After  this  matter  was  settled  the 
local  press  began  agitating  the  subject  of  a  public  square  at  the  head  of 
Washington  street.  AppUcation  was  made  to  the  council  in  August 
for  the  necessary  action  to  divide  the  Fourth  ward  into  two  election 
districts — a  measure  that  was  adopted  at  a  later  date.  Public  improve- 
ments were  limited  :  an  appropriation  of  $100  was  made  for  the  repair 
of  the  starch  factory  road,  a  sewer  was  laid  in  Hopper  street,  and  Mo- 
hawk street  was  graded. 

This  was  the  year  of  the  Henry  Clay  campaign  and  politics  absorbed 
a  large  share  of  public  attention.  Mass  meetings  were  held,  clubs 
formed,  and  excitement  ran  high  in  Utica  as  well  as  elsewhere.  The 
Recorder's  Court  was  instituted  by  act  of  legislature.  Its  jurisdiction 
covered  both  civil  and  criminal  cases,  civil  cases  being  tried  by  the 
recorder  alone  and  criminal  cases  by  him  in  association  with  two 
aldermen.  Terms  began  on  the  fourth  Mondays  of  January,  March, 
May,  August,  and  November.  The  first  session  of  this  court  was  held 
on  the  27th  of  May,  1844,  and  a  little  later  it  was  given  two  rooms  in 


2S4  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Washington   Hall.     William    Baker    was    the   first  recorder  and   Dex- 
ter GiUmore  the  first  clerk  of  the  court. 

1845. — Officers  elected  in  March  were:  Mayor,  E.  A.  Wetmore ; 
aldermen,  Alfred  Churchill,  Stephen  Comstock,  Thomas  Hopper,  Jo- 
seph B.  Hoyt,  Otis  Manchester,  M.  T.  Meeker,  David  E.  Morris,  Or- 
ville  Olcott,  Gerry  Sanger,  William  Walcott,  Charles  S.  Wilson,  Charles 
H.  Doolittle;  treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper;  attorney,  Erastus  Clark; 
clerk,  Alexander  Coburn;  surveyor,  Lorenzo  M.  Taylor;  street  com- 
missioner, Charles  Downer. 

At  a  special  meeting  of  the  council  of  1844,  held  January  21st,  a 
communication  was  received  from  E.  H.  Broadhead  asking  the  council 
to  aid  him  in  a  petition  to  the  legislature  for  an  act  incorporating  a 
company  to  supply  the  city  with  water.  The  petition  was  ordered  for- 
warded to  Albany  and  on  the  2ist  of  March  a  resolution  was  adopted 
urging  the  passage  of  the  water  bill.  At  a  special  meeting  February 
4,  1844,  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  application  be  made  to  the  next 
legislature  for  authority  to  collect  a  tax,  with  the  next  general  tax,  of 
$1,200  for  a  culvert  over  Nail  Creek.  The  treasurer's  report  for  the 
preceding  fiscal  year  gave  total  receipts  as  $12,576.38  and  expenses  as 
$12,921.70.  On  the  i6thof  May  a  petition  was  presented  to  the  council 
which  led  a  little  later  to  the  formation  of  Oneida  Square. 

There  were  many  fires  during  the  summer,  but  no  very  destructive 
one  ;  they  were  believed  in  many  cases  to  have  been  of  incendiary  or- 
igin and  the  mayor  offered  $150  reward  for  the  apprehension  of  the 
culprits.  It  was  supposed  by  many  that  the  fires,  or  some  of  them  at 
least,  were  started  by  rivals  in  the  fire  companies,  which  had  been 
proven  the  case  in  some  other  cities.  Sidewalks  were  laid  on  Kemble, 
Genesee,  Varick,  South,  Union,  and  Lansing  streets  ;  drains  on  Colum- 
bia and  West  streets  ;  and  parts  of  Columbia  and  Jay  streets  were 
paved. 

A  published  list  of  the  manufactories  of  the  place  is  as  follows:  two 
grist-mills,  five  iron  works,  one  oilcloth  factory,  three  tanneries,  two 
breweries,  one  ashery,  two  saw-mills,  with  a  total  manufactured  output 
for  the  year  of  $236,81 1.  The  population  of  the  city  was  12,190.  This 
list  of  manufactories  is  a  limited  one  for  so  large  a  place,  a  fact  which 
doubtless  inspired  the  numerous  editorials  in  the  local  press  in   favor  of 


LAWYERS,  DOCTORS,  TEACHERS,  MERCHANTS.         255 

the  establishment  of  more  manufacturing  industries.  In  October  ap- 
peared a  notice  of  a  proposed  cotton  factory  and  about  $60,000  was 
subscribed  to  the  stock.  The  State  Fair  was  held  here  this  year  on  the 
ground  east  and  southeast  of  Oneida  Square;  it  began  on  the  i6th  of 
September. 

Lawyers  entering  on  practice  during  the  years  1843-45  were  Francis 
Kernan  (see  Biographical  Department),  Eaton  J.  Richardson,  Richard 
H.  Morehouse,  Arthur  M.  Beardsley,  Erastus  Clark,  Alexander  Coburn, 
still  resident;  George  H.  Congar,  Matthew  D.  Bagg  (most  of  whose 
professional  life  was  passed  in  New  York),  deceased ;  Bradley  B.  Burt, 
of  Oswego  ;  William  C.  Johnson,  of  Newburyport;  James  DaJhba,  of 
Marquette  ;  and  Delos  Lake,  late  of  San  Francisco. 

Physicians  now  first  presenting  themselves  for  favor  were  Erastus 
Humphrey,  soon  joined  by  Frederick  Humphrey,  the  first  representa- 
tives of  the  homoeopathic  school  of  medicine  in  Utica,  and  Thomas 
Scott,  whose  stay  was  not  protracted. 

Teachers  were  George  Spencer,  principal  of  the  Utica  Academy,  a 
skilled  instructor,firm  disciplinarian,  and  most  companionable  associate  ; 
John  G.  Webb,  employed  in  the  same  institution  who  afterward  was  a 
druggist ;  and  Henry  J.  Turner,  a  native  of  France  who  had  been  a  ship 
captain,  now  opened  a  boarding  school  where  elementary  instruction 
was  imparted  through  the  medium  of  his  own  vernacular.  Peter  Clog- 
her,  at  this  time  an  assistant  in  one  of  the  public  schools,  became  ere 
long  an  important  agent  in  the  conduct  of  the  Steam  Woolen- Mills. 

Of  the  dealers  in  dry  goods  the  one  I  shall  specially  notice  was 
D.  V.  W.  Golden.  He  had  already  served  a  clerkship  in  the  place,  but 
in  1844  set  up  for  himself  in  company  with  Rugene  Swartwout.  With 
him  and  afterward  with  other  partners,  or  else  alone,  he  continued  many 
years  in  business,  transferring  the  popular  seat  of  his  own  kind  of  trade 
from  the  west  to  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street,  and  by  his  energy  and 
sagacity,  his  pleasant  manners,  his  skill  in  providing,  and  his  honesty  in 
dealing  winning  a  large  share  of  the  female  preference  and  custom.  He 
died  July  13,  1873. 

Other  dry  goods  men  were  Samuel  B.  Gaston  &  Co.,  Samuel  Church- 
ill, James  and  Peter  Brady,  Harrison  &  Cone,  and  John  B.  Wells,  of  the 
firm  of  Bailey  &  Wells.      Other  merchants  were  Miller  &  Lansing,  drug- 


2s6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

gists  and  grocers  in  the  old  checkered  store,  of  whom  John  B.  Miller, 
a  lawyer  by  education,  became  afteward  an  editor  of  the  Observer  and 
U.  S.  consul  at  Hamburg ;  Benjamin  F.  Ray,  partner  of  J.  E.  Warner, 
Walker  &  Clark,  grocers  and  flour  dealers  ;  Richard  Lee,  grocer  ;  Abra- 
ham E.  Culver,  forwarder. 

Urbane  Dunning,  daguerreotypist,  was  probably  the  first  of  the  nu- 
merous makers  of  sun-pictures  who  have  since  succeeded  him  in  this 
profession,  Other  mechanics  were  George  R.  Sheldon  and  Le  Grand 
Moore,  Alexander  C.  Hart,  Homer  Townsend,  and  Isaac  Whiffen.  Of 
the  latter  it  may  be  said  that  his  interest  in  municipal  concerns,  his 
energy,  straightforwardness,  and  integrity  were  admitted  by  all.  So, 
too,  were  patent  his  fondness  for  manly  sports  and  the  pleasure  he  drew 
from  fellowship  with  his  brothers  of  St.  George.  Less  known  were  his 
rare  but  unostentatious  benevolence  and  the  social  enjoyment  which 
in  such  associations  he  was  better  fitted  to  impart  than  to  imbibe.  Ho- 
mer Townsend,  another  Englishman,  was  likewise  an  esteemed  citizen. 
A  foreman  in  his  younger  years  of  the  Osceola  Fire  Company  he  was 
afterward  one  of  the  most  influential  of  the  Exempt  Firemen  and  the 
Firemen's  Benevolent  Association  ;  an  earnest  and  honest  worker  in  his 
political  party;  an  active  member  of  the  Board  of  Charities;  a  trustee 
of  the  House  of  the  Good  Shepherd  ;  progressive  and  practical  in  doing 
every  possible  good  for  the  public ;  and  withal  a  wonted  resource  of  the 
needy  and  afflicted. 

1846. — Officers  chosen  were  as  follows:  Mayor,  E.  A.  Wetmore;  al- 
dermen, Richard  S.  Jones,  David  E.  Morris,  Gilbert  A.  Foster,  Orville 
Olcott,  Moses  T.  Meeker,  Stephen  Thorn,  Thomas  Hopper,  George  S. 
Dana,  John  Bryan,  Stephen  Comstock,  Thomas  R.  Walker,  Alfred 
Churchill;  treasurer,  George  J.  Hopper;  attorney,  Erastus  Clark; 
clerk,  George  Murphy ;  surveyor,  L.  M.  Taylor ;  street  commissioner, 
Thomas  Geary. 

The  treasurer's  report  for  the  fiscal  year  gave  the  total  receipts  as 
$16,383.35  ;  expenditures,  $15,571.79.  A  license  election  was  held  in 
May  and  a  majority  of  505  voted  against  license  ;  none  were  granted. 
The  Steam  Woolen- Mills,  said  to  be  the  first  in  the  United  States,  were 
started  in  November.  A  screw  factory  under  the  management  of 
Lewis  Lawrence,  John  J.  Francis,  and  Harvey  Barnard  was  put  in  opera- 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1847.  257 

tion  about  this  time  which  made  exqellent  screws.  It  was  continued  a 
dozen  or  more  years,  when  it  was  bought  out  by  a  rival  company  of 
Providence,  R.  I.,  which  closed  up  the  work  here. 

Wise,  the  aeronaut,  made  two  ascensions  from  the  City  Garden  on 
Whitesboro  street.  This  garden,  situated  on  the  south  side  of  Whites- 
boro  a  little  east  of  Burchard  lane,  was  now  a  popular  place  of  resort, 
where  shows  of  various  kinds  were  frequently  exhibited. 

1847. — Officers  chosen  for  the  year  were:  Mayor,  James  Watson 
Williams;  aldermen,  M.  McQuade,  R.  S.  Jones,  R.  H.  Shearman,  H.  T. 
Miller,  John  Dagwell,  Stephen  Thorn,  John  Reed,  Alfred  Churchill,  H. 
Barnard,  George  Curtiss,  Charles  S.  Wilson,  B.  F.  Brooks  ;  treasurer, 
George  Tracy;  attorney,  O.  G.  Kellogg;  clerk,  James  Mclver;  sur- 
veyor, L.  M.  Taylor;  street  commissioner,  A.  H.  Thomas;  recorder, 
Aaron  Hackley. 

The  retiring  mayor  delivered  an  address  in  which  he  congratulated 
the  city  on  its  financial  condition  and  general  prosperity.  He  said  that 
the  city  debt  was  very  small  when  compared  with  those  of  other  similar 
cities,  but  the  taxation  would  soon  have  to  be  increased  to  meet  current 
expenses.  The  treasurer's  report  gave  the  total  receipts  as  $15,850.82 ; 
expenses,  $15,250.62  ;  leaving  a  balance  of  $600.20.  The  preceding  ad- 
ministration had  been  conducted  on  economical  lines,  expenditures  be- 
ing limited  to  necessities.  The  funded  debt  now  reached  almost  $8,000  ; 
this  had  been  increased  by  the  fact  that  no  license  fees  had  been  re- 
ceived in  the  past  year,  while  there  had  been  some  unusual  demands  on 
the  treasury.  It  is  probable  that  the  loss  to  the  city  of  about  $1,100  in 
license  fees  operated  at  the  license  election  of  the  next  year  to  throw 
the  majority  in  favor  of  license.  In  March  the  mayor  was  asked  to  call  a 
public  meeting  to  consider  the  city  finances  and  how  to  pay  the  debt.  The 
meeting  was  held  March  23d  and  it  was  resolved  that  $10,000  be  raised 
annually  by  tax  thereafter  instead  of  $8,000 ;  and  that  besides  this  a 
sufficient  sum  be  raised  in  annual  installments  of  $2,000  to  liquidate  the 
city  debt;  that  thereafter  the  council  should  submit  all  expenditures  of 
an  extraordinary  character  to  a  vote  of  the  people  and  should  borrow 
no  money  except  in  anticipation  of  the  annual  tax  levy;  and  that  no  ob- 
ligation should  be  created  that  was  not  to  be  provided  for  and  paid 
within  the  same  year.  These  various  wise  provisions  were  embodied 
33 


2s8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

in   charter  amendments  and  a  law  passed  the  legislature  giving  them 
effect. 

A  part  of  the  Schuyler  farm  in  West  Utica  was  bought  in  Septem- 
ber, 1847,  by  Nicholas  Devereux  and  was  soon  laid  out  in  lots  and 
offered  for  sale.  This  tract,  extending  from  Court  street  to  Walnut 
and  limited  by  Hicks  street  on  the  east  and  City  street  on  the  west,  is 
now  pretty  thickly  covered  with  residences. 

In  a  local  paper  of  June  30th  it  was  said  that  "our  city  is  beginning 
to  feel  sensibly  the  influence  of  the  newly  awakened  spirit  of  enterprise 
which  has  induced  the  investment  of  a  portion  of  the  capital  of  her  citi- 
zens in  manufactures,  in  her  present  prosperity,  and  the  prospect  which 
is  opening  for  her  future  advancement  in  wealth  and  population." 
About  this  time  the  Steam  Woolen- Mills  declared  a  dividend  of  ten  per 
cent,  a  fact  which,  doubtless,  quickened  the  interest  in  manufactures. 

This  year  saw  the  beginning  of  what  may  be  called  the  plank  road 
era,  and  before  its  close  a  number  of  those  useful  highways  were  either 
in  process  of  construction  or  projected.  Among  them  were  one  between 
Rome  and  Utica ;  one  from  Utica  to  Bridgewater ;  one  from  Utica  to 
Clinton  ;  one  from  Rome  to  Oswego  ;  and  one  from  Utica  to  Boonville. 
The  building  of  these  roads  at  that  period,  when  most  country  roads 
were  bad,  exercised  a  very  beneficial  influence  upon  all  trade  centers. 
Some  of  the  roads  paid  good  profits  while  others  did  not ;  but  they 
served  to  tide  over  a  period  when  there  were  few  railroads  and  opened 
up  more  active  communication  between  important  points.  Richard  U. 
Shearman  in  company  with  E.  R.  Colston  and  R.  W.  Roberts  estab- 
lished this  year  the  Utica  Morning  Herald  in  opposition  to  the  Ut'ica 
Daily  Gazette. 

1848. — The  officers  of  the  year  were  as  follows:  Mayor,  Joshua  A. 
Spencer;  aldermen,  Egbert  Bagg,  Alfred  Churchill,  Michael  McQuade, 
Richard  S.  Jones,  Henry  T.  Miller,  Robert  H.  Shearman,  George  N. 
Beesley,  Abraham  Higham,  Orville  Olcott,  Francis  Kernan,  Richard 
Lee,  Henry  H.  Fish;  treasurer,  George  Tracy;  attorney,  R.  H.  More- 
house; clerk,  James  Mclver ;  surveyor,  L.  M.  Taylor  ;  street  commis- 
sioner, Horace  Halbert. 

March  3d  a  report  was  made  to  the  council  that  the  unencumbered 
property  of  the  city  was  valued  at  $29,901  ;  that  the  unusual  expenses 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  i?,^,?,  — FRESH  RESIDENTS.  259 

of  the  previous  year  were  $2,865,  one  considerable  item  of  which  was 
for  the  purchase  of  two  new  engines  and  the  erection  of  a  hose  tower. 
The  total  expenses  of  the  city  for  the  year  were  $17,883.20.  This  was 
the  first  year  in  which  the  sum  of  $10,000  was  raised  for  the  ordinary 
expenses  of  the  city.  March  3 1st  the  Utica  Water  Works  were  incorpo- 
rated. The  stock  was  to  be  not  less  than  $30,000  nor  more  than 
$100,000.  James  Watson  Williams,  Nicholas  Devereux,  Alfred  Mun- 
son,  Andrew  S.  Pond,  Charles  A.  Mann,  Horatio  Seymour,  Silas  D. 
Childs,  Willard  Crafts,  and  Thomas  Hopper  were  the  trustees.  A  gas 
company  was  organized  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year.  The  directors 
were  Nicholas  Devereux,  Silas  D.  Childs,  J.  F.  Seymour,  H.  Spencer, 
J.  W.  Williams,  George  S.  Dana,  and  T.  R.  Walker. 

The  improvements  of  the  year  consisted  of  a  drain  from  the  canal 
basin  on  Catharine  street  to  Genesee,  and  down  Genesee  to  Main  street, 
and  the  building  of  sidewalks  in  various  streets.  Sewers  were  laid  in 
Louisa  from  Steuben  to  Leah  street,  in  Leah  to  Miller,  and  in  Miller 
to  Ballou's  Creek,  and  in  Post  street. 

Candidates  for  the  bar  admitted  to  it  in  1846-48  who  are  now  de- 
ceased or  no  longer  resident  were  Jonas  P.  Harris,  Montgomery  H. 
Throop,  E.  J.  Stoddard,  James  W.  Bond,  Aras  G.  Williams,  Andrew  Mel- 
hinch.  Messrs.  Harris,  Stoddard,  and  Bond  had  the  longest  and  best 
known  careers  in  Utica.     Mr.  Throop  has  made  a  reputation  elsewhere. 

A  physician,  acknowledged  as  a  devoted  and  skillful  one,  was  Daniel 
P.  Bissell.  He  was  born  in  Randolph,  N.  Y.,  May  27,  1802,  and  taken 
by  his  parents  to  Ontario  County  when  a  child.  He  was  graduated 
from  the  Yale  Medical  College  in  1826  and  became  a  partner  of  his 
brother,  who  was  practicing  at  Moscow,  Livingston  County,  N.  Y.  In 
1842  he  was  made  canal  commissioner  by  the  legislature  and  in  1846' 
was  elected  to  the  same  office  by  the  Democratic  party,  holding  the 
office  until  January,  1848.  In  the  meantime  he  had  removed  to  Utica 
and  engaged  in  the  duties  of  his  profession,  being  for  some  years  ini 
company  with  Dr.  Thomas  Goodsell  and  afterward  alone.  In  i860' 
he  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  National  Convention  in 
South  Carolina.  He  was  a  manager  of  the  State  Hospital  for  the  In- 
sane, and  among  strictly  professional  holdings  was  successively  presi- 
dent of  the  Livingston  County,  the  Oneida  County,  and  the  State  Med- 


26o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ical  Societies.  His  life  was  an  active  one,  and  in  all  positions  of  trust 
and  honor  to  which  he  was  elevated  he  performed  his  duties  faithfully 
and  conscientiously.  He  was  a  public  spirited  citizen,  a  companionable 
neighbor,  and  a  kind  hearted  friend.  His  standing  in  his  profession 
was  high  and  its  honor  he  cherished  with  jealous  regard. 

Dr.  NicoU  H.  Bering,  who  had  for  twenty-five  years  carried  on  a 
successful  business  in  the  city  of  New  York,  removed  to  Rome  in  1842 
and  in  1847  came  to  this  city.  His  wide  experience  gave  him  at  once 
a  standing  with  the  profession  and  caused  him  to  be  often  summoned  in 
council.  His  courteous  manners,  his  upright  and  engaging  character, 
his  humanity  toward  the  suffering,  and  sympathy  with  every  enterprise 
for  the  amelioration  of  his  fellows  insured  him  the  confidence  of  the 
community.  For  many  years  a  ruling  elder  in  the  Brick  Church  of 
New  York  he  was  elected  to  the  same  office  in  the  First  Presbyterian 
Church  of  Utica.  In  this  ofSce  he  was  active  and  efficient  and  was  fre- 
quently chosen  to  represent  the  church  in  the  General  Assembly.  His 
first  wife  and  the  mother  of  his  children  was  a  daughter  of  Henry 
Huntington,  of  Rome  ;  his  second  of  Henry  D.  Strong,  of  New  York. 
He  left  one  son  and  four  daughters. 

A  dentist  of  some  years'  residence  was  A.  H.  Colling.  A  veterinary 
surgeon  fully  competent  for  his  work  was  Arthur  S.  Copeman.  He 
was  a  lecturer  in  the  Veterinary  College  at  Boston.  In  New  York  city, 
where  he  afterward  resided,  he  became  wealthy. 

A  long  continued  newspaper  editor  was  De  Witt  C.  Grove.  He  was 
born  in  Utica,  December  16,  1825.  He  never  attended  school  after  the 
age  of  ten,  and  in  his  thirteenth  year  was  apprenticed  to  the  printer's 
trade.  Subsequently  by  his  own  efforts  he  gained  a  sound  English  and 
a  fair  classical  education.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  months  spent  in 
the  study  of  law  he  was  devoted  to  his  trade  until  1846,  when  he  in 
company  with  Benjamin  Welch,  jr.,  became  one  of  the  editors  and  pro- 
prietors of  the  Utica  Democrat,  the  organ  of  the  "  Barnburners"  or  rad- 
ical faction  of  the  Democratic  party.  When  the  two  factions  came  to- 
gether in  1853  the  two  organs  of  this  city  did  the  same,  and  Mr.  Grove 
became  the  principal  owner  of  the  Observer,  the  leading  Democratic 
journal  of  Central  New  York.  The  firm  was  for  a  few  months  only 
Lyon  &  Grove,  when  Mr.  Grove  bought  out  his  partner  and  controlled 


DE  WITT  C.  GROVE—  T.  O.  GHANNJS.  261 

the  paper.  This  control  he  held  for  thirty  years,  covering  the  period 
of  the  Civil  war  and  the  growth  of  modern  newspapers.  In  January, 
1867,  he  formed  a  partnership  with  E.  Prentice  Bailey,  who  had  long 
been  his  associate,  and  some  eighteen  months  later  this  partnership  was 
merged  in  the  corporation  of  which  Mr.  Grove  was  president.  He  was 
an  intense  partisan  and  a  writer  of  force.  As  a  man  of  business  he  was 
thrifty  and  careful  and  his  prosperity  steady.  In  1 860,  after  four  years 
of  service  as  alderman,  Mr.  Grove  was  chosen  mayor  of  the  city,  was 
re-elected  in  1861,  and  again  in  1862  by  an  increased  majority,  retiring 
at  the  end  of  his  term  with  the  good  will  and  wishes  of  his  constituents. 
In  the  meantime  in  the  autumn  of  i860  he  was  nominated  for  Con- 
gress, but  was  defeated  by  the  candidate  of  the  opposition,  Roscoe 
Conkling,  at  a  time  when  this  opposition  was  largely  ascendant.  Mr. 
Grove  was  a  genial  and  pleasant  gentleman  who  attached  men  to  him 
generally  and  strongly,  kind  especially  to  young  men,  and  cordial  with 
all.  His  wife  was  Caroline  L.  Pratt ;  their  children  were  a  son  and  a 
daughter. 

Timothy  O.  Grannis  had  already  been  for  many  years  a  citizen  of 
Utica,  having  come  here  with  his  father,  Cyrus  Grannis.  After  a  two 
years'  essay  in  New  York  as  a  student  of  law  he  returned  to  this  place 
and  served  a  short  time  in  the  office  of  the  county  clerk.  About  1832 
he  entered  the  Bank  of  Utica  as  a  clerk  and  from  discount  clerk  became 
teller.  In  1838  the  Bank  of  Central  New  York  was  organized  and  Mr. 
Grannis  was  its  teller  and  shortly  its  cashier.  July  i,  1862,  the  T.  O. 
Grannis  &  Co.  Bank  was  opened  for  business.  At  first  under  the  State 
charter  it  soon  became  a  private  institution,  the  successive  partners 
with  Mr.  Grove  being  J.  Benedict,  George  Curtiss,  and  his  own  son, 
Charles  K.  By  the  latter  the  bank  was  continued  a  short  time  after  the 
death  of  his  father.  In  these  various  positions  Mr.  Grannis  had  a  long 
and  intimate  relation  with  the  business  of  the  city.  The  only  public 
office  he  ever  held  was  that  of  alderman  in  1849.  He  was  long  con- 
nected with  Trinity  Church  and,  upon  its  organization,  with  Grace 
Church.  He  was  a  good  citizen,  a  good  husband,  and  a  good  father. 
His  death  occurred  May  19,  1883.     Two  sons  are  living. 

Among  the  merchants  that  should  be  recorded  as  beginning  about 
this  time  are  William  Stacy,  William  Willard,  Jerome  B.  Tyler,  in  dry 
goods;  Uriel  H.  Kellogg,  in  drugs;  James  H.  Read,  in  groceries. 


262  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Samuel  W.  Chubbuck,  a  mechanic  who  came  here  from  Eaton,  Madi- 
son County,  was  born  at  Winchester,  Va.,  December  25,  1799.  With 
small  advantages  from  a  school  education  he  possessed  an  active  and 
acquisitive  mind,  and  studied  and  thought  deeply.  He  was  employed 
in  a  furnace,  but  occupied  his  leisure  in  the  indulgence  of  a  passion  for 
mechanical  invention,  in  the  practice  of  which  he  exhibited  rare  ingenu- 
ity. Throughout  the  vicinity  of  Eaton  he  was  known  as  one  who  was 
able  to  make  or  mend  anything  that  called  for  skill,  from  the  parts  of  a 
gun  to  a  philosophical  or  chemical  apparatus.  Among  the  contrivan- 
ces one,  which  is  said  to  have  been  devised  by  him,  is  now  universally 
used  and  so  simple  in  character  that  it  seems  strange  it  should  not  have 
been  invented  before.  This  was  the  binding  post  of  the  magnetic  bat- 
tery, which  is  a  projection  of  its  frame  work  perforated  near  its  extrem- 
ity for  the  passage  of  one  of  the  wires  connecting  the  poles  of  the  battery, 
being  fixed  in  its  place  or  loosened  therefrom  by  a  thumb- screw,  a 
similar  post  confining  the  wire  of  the  opposite  pole.  Before  this  time 
connection  had  been  made  through  the  medium  of  a  fluid  contained  in 
a  vessel  into  which  the  wires  were  introduced.  The  reputation  Mr. 
Chubbuck  had  obtained  led  Mr.  Faxton  and  others  concerned  in  the 
New  York,  Buffalo,  and  Albany  Telegraph  Company  to  bring  him  to 
Utica.  The  possibility  of  the  magnetic  telegraph  he  fully  believed  in, 
for  he  had  followed  the  experiments  of  Professor  Morse,  as  well  as  the 
earlier  ones  of  Professor  Henry,  with  the  deepest  interest.  Here  he 
manufactured  the  first  telegraph  instruments  ever  made.  The  "sounder," 
since  everywhere  used,  was  his  invention.  The  Montreal  line,  the 
Washington  and  Baltimore  line,  and  many  others  were  indebted  to  him 
for  their  instruments.  The  making  of  them  formed  his  chief  occupation, 
though  his  skill  in  similar  work  was  in  frequent  request,  it  being  well 
understood  that  no  one  surpassed  him  in  the  execution  of  difficult  or 
delicate  jobs.  He  made  half  a  dozen  inventions,  either  one  of  which 
was  worth  a  fortune  to  the  patentee ;  but  he  patented  nothing.  One 
of  these  was  for  a  lift-bridge,  the  design  of  which  was  freely  given  to  a 
builder  who  went  away  and  patented  the  invention.  He  was  prodi- 
gal of  his  talents.  It  was  so  easy  for  him  to  improve  on  any  instru- 
ment he  was  called  to  make  that  it  did  not  seem  to  have  occurred  to 
him  that  his   inventions    were  worth   securing   by  letters  patent.      In 


i'.  W.  CHUB  BUCK— EDMUND  MUNSON.  263 

numismatics  Mr.  Chubbuck  was  an  expert.  He  made  one  of  the  finest 
collections  of  coins  in  the  United  States,  one  which  was  estimated  to  be 
worth  at  least  $6,000.  He  was  an  excellent  mathematician,  and  the 
intricate  problems  of  exact  science  fitted  the  peculiar  cast  of  his  mind. 
In  the  discussion  of  topics  of  this  character  professors  and  scientists 
delighted  to  pass  their  leisure  hours  in  his  presence  and  always  came 
away  edified.  His  shop,  slovenly  enough  in  its  appearance,  was  strewn 
with  books  intermixed  with  all  sorts  of  miscellaneous  stuff,  but  whose 
use  and  whose  place  were  familiar  to  him,  and  which  in  his  hands  wrought 
results  that  were  perfect.      His  death  occurred  January  28,  1875. 

Edmund  Munson,  born  in  Litchfield  County,  Conn.,  May  2,  1805, 
was  brought  up  by  his  father  in  all  the  details  of  the  milling  business, 
and  in  1829  built  a  flouring-mill  with  four  pairs  of  French  burrstones 
which  were  made  by  himself  In  1835  ^^  came  to  Utica  and  engaged 
with  Alfred  Munson,  his  uncle,  as  superintendent  of  his  mill-furnishing 
business.  Between  the  spring  of  1842  and  that  of  1847  he  was  absent 
at  Brownville,  still  engaged  in  the  construction  and  management  of 
mills.  In  the  latter  year  he  returned  and  entered  into  partnership  in 
mill  furnishing  with  Alexander  C.  Hart  under  the  firm  name  of  Hart 
&  Munson.  This  partnership  was  continued  until  1869,  when  it  was 
exchanged  for  one  with  his  three  sons,  and  thus  continued  until  his 
death  March  14,  1872.  The  patents  obtained  by  Mr.  Munson  were 
for  a  turn-table  for  finishing  millstones,  an  improvement  for  hanging 
them,  and  a  portable  mill,  all  of  which  are  of  use  to  the  milling  interest. 
Mr.  Munson  stuck  closely  to  his  business  and  was  not  largely  known 
outside  of  it,  but  unquestionably  merited  the  respect  which  was  gener- 
ally accorded  him. 

Another  mechanic,  at  first  serving  as  patternmaker  for  the  casters  of 
stoves,  was  shortly  known  as  a  cutter  of  portraits  in  conchiglia.  He 
had  learned  that  he  had  a  talent  in  this  direction  which  brought  him 
repute.  It  led  him  into  training  for  cutting  marble,  which  has  since  re- 
sulted in  his  becoming  one  of  the  leading  sculptors  of  the  country. 
This  is  E.  D.  Palmer,  author  of  several  much  admired  pieces. 

A  miller  now  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  flour  was  for  many  years 
a  prominent  figure  in  the  politics  of  Oneida  County.  This  was  Charles 
H.  Hopkins,  son   of  Ira  D.  Hopkins,  first  conductor  of  the  City  Mill. 


264  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Mr.  Hopkins  had  strong  qualities  and  was  efficient  in  work  for  his- 
party.  He  was  the  devoted  friend  of  Senator  Conkling  and  his  fidelity 
and  zeal  were  of  great  value  to  that  gentleman.  Upon  his  recommend- 
ation, while  a  representative,  Mr.  Hopkins  was  put  into  the  Utica  post- 
office  and  held  it  for  some  years.  Private  business  he  sacrificed  to  pol- 
itics, was  unwearied  in  his  labors,  and  enlisted  every  influence  to  advance 
the  intense  convictions  which  he  cherished.  He  was  positive  in  his- 
views  and  aggressive  in  his  hostility  as  well  as  in  his  friendship,  and 
had  some  enemies  while  he  had  many  friends.  In  his  church,  too,  h& 
was  zealous  and  active.      He  died  May  15,  1885,  after  a  tedious  illness. 

A  new  comer  of  this  date  and  who  lived  some  dozen  years  in  Utica, 
partaking  of  its  social  and  civil  interests,  marrying  a  daughter  of  one  of 
its  older  citizens,  and  who  was  an  instructive  companion,  was  J.  Sidney 
Henshaw.  Born  in  Boston  in  181 1  he  had  been  twenty  years  a  lieu- 
tenant in  the  navy  of  the  United  States  and  during  the  latter  years  of 
this  connection  a  teacher  of  mathematics.  He  had  traveled  and  seen 
much  and  had  read  much  in  various  branches  of  learning,  his  chief  pleas- 
ure being  in  the  pursuit  of  mental  philosophy  and  other  abstruse  sub- 
jects. In  1847  he  went  to  Europe  on  the  frigate  Macedonian,  then  car- 
rying contributions  of  the  United  States  to  starving  Ireland,  and  on  his 
return  published  a  Life  of  Father  Mathew.  He  wrote  articles  for  the 
newspapers,  published  a  volume  on  the  duties  of  American  consuls,  and 
at  the  time  of  his  death  was  engaged  on  a  work  to  be  entitled  "  Bible 
Ethics."  His  death  occurred  April  29,  1859.  His  wife  was  Jane, 
daughter  of  John  H.  Handy.      He  had  a  son  and  a  daughter. 

One  of  the  earliest  of  the  now  numerous  florists  of  the  city  was  Fred- 
eric W.  Boyce,  whose  garden  was  on  Oneida  street ;  though  he  was 
not  actually  the  first,  William  Archer  having  preceded  him  and  Thomas 
Annon  soon  following.  William  Clark  and  Thomas  McQuade  dealt  in 
coal  and  William  P.  Battey  had  a  variety  of  pursuits. 

1849. — The  following  officers  were  elected  this  year  :  Mayor,  Thomas 
R.Walker;  aldermen,  M.  D.  Bagg,  H.  W.  Chittenden,  Michael  Mc- 
Quade, R.  H,  Shearman,  J.  W.  Stevens,  John  Whiting,  Timothy  O. 
Grannis,  A.  A.  Jones,  J.  S.  Kirk,  Alvin  White,  Richard  U.  Shearman,. 
A.  J.  Williams  ;  treasurer,  Lewis  Jones  ;  attorney,  A.  G.  Williams ;. 
street  commissioner,  Hugh  Williamson  ;  clerk,  James  Mclver  ;  surveyor,. 
L.  M.  Taylor. 


A  NEW  CITY  HALL—  OTHER  PUBLIC  WORKS.  265 

The  project  of  a  new  city  hall  was  actively  agitated  this  year  and  a 
special  election  to  decide  as  to  its  erection  was  ordered  by  the  council 
for  May  T4th,  but  it  was  postponed  to  December  17th  and  again  to 
February  26,  1850.  The  first  proposition  was  to  raise  $27,000  in  in- 
stallments during  three  years.  Before  the  final  election  it  had  been  ar- 
ranged that  the  city  pay  $24,000  and  the  county  $12,000,  and  the  Board 
of  Supervisors  took  action  accordingly.  A  ttill  finally  passed  Congress 
appropriating  $12,000  for  a  perpetual  lease  of  one-third  of  the  building 
for  the  United  States  Courts,  the  supervisors'  action  having  been  found 
illegal  or  unauthorized.  Out  of  506  votes  453  favored  the  measure 
Room  for  the  council  meetings  was  taken  in  the  spring  in  the  Mechan- 
ics Hall,  its  late  place  of  assembly  having  been  burned.  August  24th 
a  resolution  passed  the  council  that  the  committee  on  police  inquire 
into  the  workings  of  the  force,  learn  its  abuses  and  defects,  and  report 
a  remedy. 

The  city  water  works  were  completed  this  year  and  the  council  voted 
to  pay  the  company  $1,300  for  water  to  extinguish  fires,  and  also  voted 
$1,500  for  fifty  hydrants.  The  gas  company  was  organized  in  1848-49 
and  the  laying  of  pipes  in  the  city  was  prosecuted  through  the  summer. 
The  principal  public  improvements  were  an  iron  bridge  over  the  canal 
at  Breese  street  and  the  construction  of  various  sewers.;  Kirkland 
street  was  opened,  a  plank  road  laid  in  Hopper  street,  Philip  street  was 
graded,  and  sidewalks  were  laid  on  Spring  and  Eagle  streets. 

The  California  gold  fever  began  this  year  and  a  few  went  from  this 
vicinity,  and  during  the  following  year  the  number  of  gold  seekers  was 
greatly  increased.  The  number  of  wards  in  the  city  was  now  increased 
to  six,  the  Fifth  and  Sixth  being  formed  from  the  southern  portions  of 
the  Third  and  Fourth.  The  privilege,  more  than  once  asked,  of  electing 
one  supervisor  from  each  ward  was  now  granted.  The  population  of 
1840  was  reported  as  12,783;  that  of  1845,  12,190;  that  of  1850  was 
found  to  be  17,556  —  showing  a  marked  increase,  due  unquestionably  to 
new  manufacturing  enterprises  proposed  or  actually  begun,  two  large 
woolen  factories  having  been  put  in  operation  and  an  extensive  cotton 
factory  being  ready  to  receive  its  machinery. 

1850.  —  The  principal  officers  elected  were:  Mayor,  Thomas  R. 
Walker;  aldermen,  M.  McQuade,  H.  C.  Pond,  John  C.  Hoyt,  John  W. 

31 


266  MEMORIAL  H J  STORY  OF  UTICA. 

Stevens,  James  S.  Lynch,  Russel  Wheeler,  Alvin  White,  Richard  Lee, 
Egbert  Bagg,  William  Clark,  Benjamin  S.  Piatt,  Nicholas  A.  White; 
treasurer,  Uriel  H.  Kellogg  ;  clerk,  James  Mclver  ;  surveyor,  L.  M. 
Taylor;  street  commissioner,  Horace  Halbert ;  attorney,  Morris  M. 
Mitchell.  The  last  five  officers  had  up  to  this  time  been  appointed 
by  the  council.  The  amended  charter  now  went  into  operation.  The 
number  of  watchmen  was  increased  from  two  in  each  ward  to  three,  and 
the  street  names  were  placed  on  the  corners  where  they  intersect. 

Sewers  were  laid  in  Lafayette,  State,  Burchard,  Warren,  Carna- 
han,  Brids.i;e,  Whitesboro,  and  Washington  streets.  South  and  John- 
son streets  were  extended.  The  increase  of  new  buildings  on  Genesee 
street  was  noticed  in  the  newspapers.  April  8th  an  act  of  the  legislat- 
ure was  passed  to  provide  for  the  erection  of  a  city  hall.  By  its  terms 
the  city  was  authorized  to  borrow  $24,000  for  site  and  building.  The 
commissioners  were  J.  Watson  Williams,  E.  A.  Wetmore,  John  J.  Fran- 
cis, Thomas  Hopper,  E.  A.  Graham,  and  John  Dagwell. 

1851. — Officers  elected :  Mayor,  John  E.  Hinman  ;  aldermen,  Hub- 
bard C.  Pond,  Charles  H.  Sayre,  John  W.  Stevens,  John  C.  Hoyt, 
Russel  Wheeler,  Isaac  Tapping,  Richard  Lee,  Luke  Wilkins,  William 
Clark,  Charles  Millar,  Nicholas  A.  White,  Benjamin  S.  Piatt;  treasurer. 
U.  H.  Kellogg  ;  attorney,  William  A.  Spencer  ;  surveyor,  William  B. 
Taylor;  street  commissioner,  H.  Halbert;  clerk,  James  W.  Bond. 

There  was  at  this  time  complaint  of  insufficient  school  accommoda- 
tions. There  were  4,000  children  between  the  ages  of  five  and  sixteen 
years  and  accommodations  for  only  1,500.  In  the  charter  election  a 
-vote  was  taken  for  and  against  "  new  school-houses."  The  result  showed 
784  votes  for  and  146  against  the  measure.  This  led  to  the  prompt 
addition  to  the  school  facilities.  In  the  clerk's  report,  besides  the$io,- 
-000  ordinary  tax,  the  expenses  of  the  city  were  as  follows : 

Special  tax  for  water  for  1850,         .         .         .  $1,300.00 

"       "     for  two  school-houses,  1850,    ....  2,666.66 

"       "     for  one-third  of  $16,000  for  four  school-houses  and  lots,     5,333-33 

Last  year's  deficiency,  ,  .         ,         .  525.25 

Interest,  ...  .         .  147.78 

Common  school  purposes,         .  3,000.00 

Second  installment  city  hall,           .         .         ,                 ...        3,000.00 
Special  tax  for  hose  and  hydrants 1,600.00 

Total,  ;t;[7, 573.02 


INCENDIARIES—  SITE  OF  THE  CITY  HALL.  267 

The  First  Presbyterian  Church  was  destroyed  by  fire  on  the  13th  of 
January.  This  was  about  the  first  of  a  series  of  fires,  most  of  which 
were  incendiary,  which  led  to  the  disbandment  of  all  tlie  fire  companies 
early  in  April  and  a  re-organization  of  the  department.  Two  arrests 
were  made  and  convictions  followed,  and  both  persons  were  sentenced 
to  be  hanged;  one  was  executed  on  tiie  21st  of  November.  The  in- 
cendiary fires  grew  in  part  out  of  rivalry  and  bitterness  among  the  vol- 
unteer fire  companies,  but  still  more  from  an  eagerness  for  the  excite- 
ment of  a  fire  that  was  sought  chiefly  by  hangers-on  who  delighted  to 
run  with  the  engines,  but  were  not  firemen.  On  the  i6th  of  April, 
1851,  a  committee  which  had  been  appointed  to  submit  a  plan  of  re- 
organizing the  fire  department  made  their  report,  which  resulted  in  the 
prompt  re-organization  of  the  department,  as  related  in  a  later  chapter 
devoted  to  the  fire  and  police  departments. 

The  question  of  a  new  city  hall  was  settled  during  the  year  and  com- 
missioners were  appointed  by  the  legislature  to  report  a  site,  etc.  Two 
sites  were  discussed,  one  on  the  corner  of  Pearl  and  Genesee  streets  and 
one  called  the  Thorn  and  Maynard  lot  on  Genesee  street.  A  special  elec- 
tion was  held  October  2d,  when  417  votes  were  cast  for  the  Pearl  street 
corner  and  173  for  the  other,  resulting  in  the  selection  of  the  former.  The 
court-house  and  jail  were  also  built  this  year.  There  was  much  discus- 
sion over  the  location,  but  the  academy  lot  was  finally  selected  as  the 
place  for  the  court-house.  The  jail  was  erected  on  Mohawk  near  the 
corner  of  Eagle  street. 

Rutger  street  was  opened  from  Third  to  Webster,  South  street  from 
Third  to  the  Minden  turnpike  (now  Albany  street),  and  Bleecker  street 
was  paved  from  Genesee  to  John.  There  was  much  public  discussion 
of  the  project  of  building  a  railroad  to  Binghamton  and  a  public  meet- 
ing was  held  January  4th.  Jenny  Lind  sang  in  the  Bleecker  street 
church  and  1,033  tickets   were  sold  at  $5  each. 

About  1850  there  sprang  into  existence  four  or  five  local  insurance 
companies  conducted  on  the  stock  and  mutual  principle.  Four  of  them, 
the  Utica,  the  .^tna,  the  Globe,  and  the  American,  were  under  control 
of  Utica  directors  and  one,  the  Farmers,  chiefly  of  citizens  of  Deerfield. 
They  were  not  durable.  The  Central  City  Savings  Institution  was  now 
incorporated  and  opened  in  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank  building. 


268  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Of  the  eighteen  or  twenty  deceased  or  non-resident  lawyers  who  be- 
gan practice  during  the  era  of  1849-51  those  who  remained  the  longest 
were  Roscoe  Conkling,  William  A.  Spencer,  J.  Wyman  Jones,  N.  Curtiss 
White,  and  Grove  W.  Bagg.  Mr.  Conkling  will  be  noticed  in  the  chapter 
on  the  Bench  and  Bar.  Mr.  Spencer,  Mr.  Jones,  and  Mr.  White,  after 
living  here  a  few  years,  removed  the  one  to  St.  Paul  and  the  others  to 
New  York.  Mr.  White  has  more  recently  returned,  as  did  also  Mr. 
Bagg,  who  was  away  a  few  years. 

Among  the  doctors  the  longest  to  remain  here  were  Drs.  D.  G. 
Thomas,  William  Russell,  Isaac  J.  Hunt,  and  Herbert  Hastings.  Dr. 
Daniel  G.  Thomas,  who  removed  from  Whitesboro  in  1848  to  enter  into 
partnership  with  Dr.  Charles  B.  Coventry,  had  already  been  some  years 
in  practice.  A  native  of  Dutchess  County  he  removed  in  his  childhood 
to  Columbia,  Herkimer  County,  studied  medicine  with  Drs.  Peck  and 
Clark,  of  Whitesboro,  attending  lectures  at  Fairfield  and  subsequently 
in  Philadelphia,  and  began  his  professional  work  at  Norwich  in  this 
•county.  Thence  he  removed  to  New  Hartford  and  from  there  to  Whites- 
boro, where  he  was  quite  busily  engaged.  With  Dr.  Coventry  he  con- 
tinued until  i860,  taking  afterward  his  own  son  into  connection  with 
him.  As  a  physician  he  was  skillful  and  his  practice  was  large  both  in 
Utica  and  its  vicinity.  He  was  a  leading  member  of  the  Oneida  County 
Medical  Society  and  held  in  turn  every  office  of  honor  and  trust  in  that 
organization.  He  was  a  contributor  to  the  literature  of  his  profession, 
and  was  several  times  sent  as  a  delagate  of  the  society  to  the  American 
Medical  Association.  Brought  up  in  the  Society  of  Friends  he  remained 
in  that  connection  until  1848,  when  he  became  a  communicant  of  the 
Protesant  Episcopal  Church  and  was  both  vestryman  and  warden,  as 
well  as  delegate  to  the  diocesan  conventions.  His  death  occurred  March 
26,  1880,  in  his  seventy- fifth  year. 

A  sketch  of  Dr.  Russell  will  be  found  in  the  Biographical  Department 
of  this  work. 

A  successful  dentist,  but  recently  withdrawn  from  the  city  and  busi- 
ness, was  Dr.  L.  W.  Rogers.  D.  S.  Heffron  became  superintendent  of 
schools  and  so  remained  until  his  removal  to  Chicago.  Rev.  William 
A.  Matson  now  assumed  the  editorship  of  the  Gospel  Messenger,  previ- 
ously edited  by  Rev.  Dr.  W.  A.  Rudd,  and  Ellis  H.  Roberts  that  of  the 
■Oneida  Herald. 


CHARLES  E.  BARNARD  AND  BROTHERS.  269 

Among  the  dry  goods  dealers  were  Willard  &  Sheffield,  successors  of 
Alfred  Wells ;  Alexander  Rae,  who  came  here  from  Vienna  as  county- 
clerk  and  at  the  expiration  of  his  office  entered  into  trade,  an  active 
politician,  an  open-hearted,  companionable,  and  fair-minded  man,  cut  off 
by  an  early  and  sudden  death ;  Seward  &  Thurber  were  booksellers ; 
William  H.  Button  succeeded  his  father,  George  Button,  as  an  organist 
and  dealer  in  musical  instruments. 

Charles  E.Barnard,  son  of  Harvey  Barnard,  was  born  on  the  spot 
where  was  situated  the  store  of  his  father,  and  where  the  sale  of  paper 
hangings  was  conducted  by  him  and  his  brothers.  Remarkable  for  his 
energetic  devotion  to  his  own  affairs,  for  his  interest  in  those  of  a  public 
nature,  and  his  zealous  discharge  of  every  service  assigned  him  he  re- 
vealed himself  as  one  of  Utica's  most  respected  and  honored  citizens. 
He  occupied  a  seat  in  the  common  council  for  two  successive  seasons 
and  in  1876  was  mayor  of  the  city,  performing  its  duties  with  scrupu- 
lous and  fearless  fidelity.  Before  that  time,  in  the  days  of  the  volunteer 
fire  department,  he  was  one  of  its  most  stirring  members  and  after  its 
disbandment  was  as  much  valued  as  one  of  the  exempt  firemen.  He 
was  a  trustee  of  the  Cemetery  Association,  a  member  of  the  Citizens 
Corps,  and  a  participant  in  two  or  more  Masonic  bodies.  He  died  May 
4,  1888,  leaving  one  son  and  one  daughter,  whose  mother,  the  wife  of 
Mr.  Barnard,  was  the  daughter  of  Lewis  Lawrence. 

Associated  in  business  with  the  above  were  his  two  brothers,  Harvey 
and  Horace  Barnard.  Of  Harvey  it  may  justly  be  said  that  punctuality 
and  fidelity  were  the  rule  of  his  action.  He  was  an  active  member 
of  several  civic  associations  and  took  a  keen  interest  in  municipal  affairs. 
The  only  office  in  the  gift  of  the  city  which  he  ever  held  was  that  of  su- 
pervisor of  his  ward,  refusing  afterward  all  offers  of  public  station.  He 
was,  however,  a  member  of  the  old  Columbian  Artillery  and  then  of 
the  Citizens  Corps,  one  of  the  chartered  associates  of  the  Tiger  Hose, 
one  of  the  body  of  Free  Masons,  and  was  elected  eminent  commander. 
Less  active  in  temperament,  and  less  forward  than  either  of  his  brothers 
in  matters  of  general  concern,  Horace  was  light  hearted  and  genial,  of 
warm  impulses  and  generous  nature.  He,  too,  was  a  Mason.  His  death 
occurred  November  2,  1873;  he  left  a  wife  and  two  daughters.  Har- 
vey died  nearly  ten  years  later,  April  2,  1883.     His  young  wife  he  had 


270 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


laid  in  Forest  Hill  Cemetery  the  summer  before,  where  he  had  placed  a 
beautiful  monument  to  her  memory. 

Edward^Evans,  the  tinner  and  brazier  quartered  on  lower  Genesee 
street,  whose  former  associate  had  been  T.  J.  Newland,  now  received 
into  partnership  Thomas  W.  Chatfield,  a  new  comer  from  England.  Mr. 
Chatfield  was  the  inventor  of  hot  air  furnaces,  ventilators,  and  refriger- 
ators that  have  been  in  general  use.  He  died  November  9,  1881,  leav- 
ing a  family  behind  him. 

William  France,  plumber  and  gasfitter,  found  employment  from  the 
recent  introductjon  of  gas,  as  did  Dwight  E.  Ray,  superintendent  of  the 
gas  company. 

About  this  time  there  came  from  Paris  Hill  with  his  family  Jesse 
Thompson,  the  father  of  four  sons  who  have  since  been  stirring  partici- 
pants in  the  business  concerns  of  the  city.  Mr.  Thompson  opened  an 
office  and  dealt  chiefly  in  loans  and  exchanges.  He  did  not  long  sur- 
vive his  removal,  having  ere  this  already  passed  the  more  active  stage 
of  his  career. 

The  Utica  Museum,  so  long  under  the  charge  of  Comfort  Butler,  now 
fell  to  V.  W.  Roth.  Others  of  this  date  were  I.  J.  Knapp,  grocer  ;  Tim- 
othy Cronin,  carpenter;  John  R.  Jones,  wagonmaker,  sheriff  of  the 
county  in  1850;  Thomas  Lennebacher,  upholsterer. 


CHAPTER   Vni. 

THIRD  DECADE  OF    THE  CITY'S  HISTORY. 

The  Black  River  Railroad  Project  —  Extensive  charter  Amendments  —  A  Period 
of  severe  financial  Stringency — Failure  of  local  Banks  —  A  Citizens' political  Move- 
ment—  Beginning  of  the  War  Period. 

THE  principal  officers  for  the  year  1852  were:  Mayor,  John  E.  Hin- 
man ;  aldermen,  Charles  H.  Sayre,  M.  McQuade,  John  C.  Hoyt, 
Truman  K.  Church,  Isaac  Tapping,  William  H.  Ferry,  Luke  Wilkins, 
Richard    Lee,  Charles   Millar,  David    Perkins,    Benjamin    S.  Piatt,  Paul 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1852.  271 

Keiser ;  treasurer,  John  W.  Fuller;  attorney,  M.  M.  Mitchell;  sur- 
veyor, William  B.  Taylor ;  street  commissioner,  Christian  Costleman ; 
clerk,  James  W.  Bond.  On  the  9th  of  January  a  resolution  was  adopted 
ill  the  council  declaring  that  the  condition  of  the  poor  demanded  a  public 
work-house  and  a  hospital  without  delay.  Some  progress  was  reported 
in  the  matter,  but  nothing  was  really  accomplished  during  the  year.  On 
the  same  date  it  was  resolved  that  the  sum  of  $10,000  was  wholly  inade- 
quate for  city  expenses  and  that  a  petition  be  made  to  the  legislature 
for  an  amendment  to  section  ninety  of  the  charter  so  as  to  read  "  not 
exceeding  $15,000."  This  was  promptly  tabled;  but  it  is  an  indica- 
tion of  the  growth  and  financial  needs  of  the  city.  In  the  same  line  was 
an  attempt  on  March  12th  to  petition  the  legislature  for  a  charter 
amendment  providing  that  in  addition  to  the  $10,000  authorized  to  be 
raised  the  amount  necessary  for  street  lighting  be  raised  by  a  tax  on 
persona!  property.  This  was  not  carried  out.  On  the  23d  of  January  a 
resolution  was  adopted  that  a  special  election  be  held  on  the  iithof 
February  to  vote  upon  the  raising  of  $2,000  for  expenses  incident  upon 
holding  the  State  Fair  in  the  city. 

On  the  1 2th  of  May  a  petition  signed  by  ministers  and  others  was 
presented  to  the  council  requesting  them  to  stop  milk  selling  after  9  A.  M. 
on  Sundays.  A  long  and  facetious  reply  was  adopted,  one  sentence  of 
which  was  as  follows  ;  "  Consistence  would  seem  to  require  that  these 
reformers  should  have  extended  their  scheme  of  moral  reformation  so  as 
to  prohibit  smoking,  drinking,  riding,  walking  for  pleasure,  reading 
novels,  laughing,  sneezing,  snoozing,  sighing,  dreaming,  posting  books, 
absence  from  church  on  Sunday,  any  and  every  of  which  are  more 
tangible  violations  of  a  Christian  observance  of  Sunday  than  the  pur- 
chase of  an  article  of  diet  always  necessary  and  frequently  indispens- 
able." 

June  4th  a  report  was  made  by  the  paving  committee  stating  that  a 
part  of  Genesee,  Fayette,  and  Bleecker  streets  were  in  a  deplorable  con- 
dition, and  that  there  was  no  money  with  which  to  repave  them.  They 
recommended  a  petition  to  the  legislature  for  authority  to  raise  money 
for  this  purpose  by  special  tax. 

May  22d  a  public  meeting  was  held  in  relation  to  the  reception  of 
Louis  Kossuth.      He  came  on  the    ist  of  June  and  was  given  a  warm 


272  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

welcome.  In  the  evening  a  large  assemblage  gathered  at  the  museum 
and  W.  J.  Bacon  made  a  brief  address.  He  was  followed  in  an  elo- 
quent speech  by  the  Hungarian  patriot.  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  the  Whig 
presidential  candidate  of  the  year,  paid  the  city  a  visit  on  the  1 6th  of 
October.  On  the  i8th  of  August  a  fire  destroyed  the  Lewis  Lawrence 
planing-mill  on  Seneca  street;  loss  $30,000. 

The  Utica  Scientific  Association  was  inaugurated  in  August,  1850, 
under  the  name  of  the  Amicable  Library.  Its  plan  was  subsequently 
enlarged  and  a  more  suitable  name  adopted.  Its  object  was  stated  as 
"the  promotion  and  encouragement  of  scientific  knowledge."  Several 
prominent  physicians  and  others  were  in  the  list  of  officers  of  1852.  A 
small  scientific  library  and  a  small  collection  of  specimens,  mineralogical 
and  geological,  etc.,  were  gathered.     The  association  was  short  lived. 

The  business  of  glass-staining  was  first  introduced  about  this  time. 
Its  founder  was  Charles  P.  Davis,  an  Englishman. 

1853. — The  officers  of  the  year  were  as  follows  :  Mayor,  Charles  H. 
Doolittle ;  aldermen,  M.  McQuade,  H.  C.  Bond,  Truman  K.  Church, 
Franklin  J.  Clark,  William  H.  Ferry,  James  S.  Lynch,  Richard  Lee, 
Paul  Brentnall,  David  Perkins,  Griffiths  G.  Roberts,  Paul  Keiser,  Peter 
Clogher ;  treasurer,  John  W.  Fuller ;  attorney,  Samuel  J.  Barrows ; 
surveyor,  Egbert  Bagg;  street  commissioner,  Christian  Costleman  ; 
clerk,  Andrew  H.  Green. 

The  city  went  Democratic  strongly  at  the  charter  election.  Charles 
H.  Doolittle  was  elected  mayor,  and  the  Whigs  elected  only  one  super- 
visor, two  aldermen,  four  assessors,  one  constable,  and  one  collector. 
The  outgoing  mayor  congratulated  the  city  on  its  general  quiet' and 
freedom  from  rowdyism,  and  trusted  that  the  time  had  come  when  the 
people  elected  to  office  would  no  longer  lend  their  countenance  in  any 
sense  to  such  acts.  The  incoming  mayor  called  attention  among  other 
things  to  the  fire  department,  which  he  hoped  might  be  made  more 
efficient ;  reported  the  city  debt  at  the  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  as 
$4,323.34  and  other  outstanding  accounts  as  about  $500;  balance 
owing  on  the  court-house,  %6Q6.66;  $15,000  yet  to  be  raised  in  three 
annual  installments  for  the  court-house ;  amount  to  be  applied  to  school- 
houses  for  the  year,  $5,333.39  ;  contingent  expenses  of  schools,  $3,000; 
water,  $1,300;  lighting,  $2,500;  general  expenses,  $10,000.     The  whole 


^^^^U^  CJ^'^^  CJZ<jz/f 


AtldiitlG  Ptrhlisiino  atEnnrannn  C^KY 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1852.  273 

amount  collected  by  general  tax,  $29,337;  from  county  tax  for  schools, 
$5,500;  State  school  fund,  $5,000;  from  licenses,  $1,938.24;  carriage 
licenses,  $500 ;  left  over  from  fund  to  build  the  Miller  bridge,  $297,55  ; 
from  local  tax,  $12,000.  A  committee  was  appointed  to  inquire  into 
the  state  of  the  city  finances  and  their  report  was  chiefly  remarkable  for 
its  bitter  denunciation  of  the  "  street  commissioner  and  his  drunken 
satellites  "  who  had  squandered  a  good  deal  of  money  ;  it  demanded 
better  methods,  particularly  in  that  department. 

Brick  sewers  and  many  plank  drains  were  laid.  Bleecker  street  was 
extended  to  the  east  line  of  the  Bowman  farm  ;  Schuyler  street  from 
Warren  to  the  Chenango  Canal ;  Walker  street  from  Kimball  to  Gen- 
esee ;  and  Jay  and  Elizabeth  were  opened  from  Hubbell,  Mary  from 
Albany  street  eastward,  and  Blandina  from  Mohawk  to  Albany. 

There  were  two  incendiary  fires  in  March,  and  two  men  were  ar- 
rested and  committed  for  trial.  It  developed  through  the  evidence  that 
there  was  a  regular  gang  of  conspirators  who  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
setting  fires  at  such  intervals  and  such  places  as  would  enable  them  to 
escape  detection.  They  would  meet  in  saloons  and  on  street  corners 
and  coolly  discuss  where  and  when  the  next  fire  should  occur  and  the 
prospect  it  would  offer  for  fun.  A  remarkable  state  of  affairs  which 
attracted  attention  throughout  the  State!  Circumstances  like  these  con- 
curring with  similar  ones  some  two  years  previous  led  doubtless  to  the 
placing  of  the  firemen  on  a  paid  basis  as  before  noted. 

The  year  was  signalized  by  the  beginning  of  the  agitation  which 
finally  resulted  in  the  building  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad. 
A  large  meeting  was  held  at  Bagg's  Hotel  on  the  25th  of  January  and 
another  on  the  28th,  when  the  organization  was  effected.  Many  prom- 
inent citizens  were  in  the  Board  of  Directors,  and  the  city  by  consent  of 
the  legislature  took  $250,000  of  the  stock,  which  was  eventually  lost 
except  as  it  may  have  been  a  source  of  benefit  to  the  growth  and  pros- 
perity of  the  city.  An  act  of  the  legislature  passed  May  27th  gave  the 
council  the  power  to  make  this  appropriation. 

A  charter  amendment  of  this  year  authorized  the  raising  of  $12,000 

instead  of  $10,000,  as   theretofore,  for  general  expenses.     The  city  at 

this  time  was  mentioned  publicly  as  being  practically  free  from  debt. 

Under  the  head  of  improvements  the  following  is   from  a  paper  of  the 

35 


274  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

day:  "Any  one  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  note  the  different  improve- 
ments of  the  present  time  going  on  in  our  quiet  little  city  will,  we  ap- 
prehend, be  no  little  astonished  as  well  as  gratified  at  their  extent, 
variety,  and  importance." 

The  corner-stone  of  the  city  hall  was  laid  September  27th  with  proper 
ceremonies.  Buildings  in  process  of  erection  were  the  city  hall,  Kel- 
logg &  Ferry's  warehouse,  steam  planing-mill,  and  many  dwellings. 

1854. — The  officers  were :  Mayor,  John  E.  Hinman  ;  aldermen,  H.  C. 
Pond,  Franklin  J.  Clark,  James  S.  Lynch,  Paul  Brentnall,  G.  G  Roberts, 
Peter  Clogher,  M.  McQuade,  Truman  K.  Church,  Cordon  Hackett, 
Richard  H.  Francis,  John  B.  Owens,  William  White;  attorney,  Alex- 
ander Coburn  ;  treasurer,  Lansing  Thurber  ;  surveyor,  John  M.  Barnes; 
street  commissioner,  Jefferson  Allen;  clerk,  James  G.  French. 

The  city  went  Democratic,  John  E.  Hinman  being  elected  mayor. 
The  Whigs  elected  their  treasurer,  attorney,  surveyor,  and  overseer  of 
the  poor.  In  Mayor  Hinman's  inaugural  he  recommended  greater 
facilities  for  extinguishing  fires  and  a  better  water  supply;  also  the  ap- 
pointment of  a  secret  night  watch  by  the  mayor  when  deemed  neces- 
sary and  the  erection  of  a  city  hospital  and  work-iiouse.  On  the  21st 
of  July  a  committee  appointed  for  that  purpose  reported  in  favor  of 
building  a  city  hospital  and  work- house  near  the  corner  of  Mohawk  and 
South  streets;  by  a  special  election  on  August  17th  135  votes  were 
cast,  100  of  which  were  in  favor  of  the  plan. 

Several  brick  sewers  were  laid  in  the  course  of  the  year.  By  amend- 
ment of  the  charter  the  bounds  of  the  city  were  enlarged  on  the  west 
by  the  width  of  one  great  lot,  about  seventy  feet,  and  on  the  south  to 
the  extent  of  upwards  of  a  mile  ;  there  were  to  be  six  wards  ;  two  alder- 
men were  to  be  elected  annually  from  each  ward  ;  the  recorder  was  to 
be  elected  once  in  five  years  ;  a  Board  of  Excise  was  to  be  elected  an- 
nually, having  the  powers  before  exercised  by  the  council,  and  at  an 
election  previous  to  theirs  ;  two  daily  papers  were  to  be  designated  an- 
nually by  the  council  in  which  the  proceedings  should  be  punished. 

There  were  a  few  cases  of  cholera  in  the  city,  but  not  sufficient  to  ex- 
cite much  public  alarm.      In  December  the  completion  of  the  Utica  and 
];51ack  River  Railroad  as  far  as  Boonville  was  observed  by  a  public  cele- 
bration at  that  place,  to  which  and  the   excursion  thither  a  large  num 
ber  of  people  were  invited  and  many  attended. 


D£S.  S.  G.  WOLCOTT  AND  H.  B.  DAY.  275 

Not  more  than  two  of  the  seven  or  eight  lawyers  who  were  admitted 
during  the  era  embraced  in  the  years  1851-54  remained  long  enough 
to  identify  themselves  with  the  place.  William  B.  Dana  made  himself 
a  reputation  elsewhere,  less,  however,  as  a  lawyer  than  as  an  editor.  Of 
the  like  number  of  physicians  more  than  one-half  practiced  for  some 
time,  maintaining  a  position  of  credit.  The  first  of  the  profession  in 
Utica  who  made  of  surgery  his  nearly  whole  occupation  was  Dr.  Samuel 
G.  Wolcott,  who  was  born  at  Hanover,  Mass.,  in  1820.  Mr.  Wolcott's 
early  education  was  obtained  at  Phillips  Academy,  Andover.  He  after- 
ward entered  Trinity  College,  Hartford,  and  was  graduated  in  1847. 
He  began  the  study  of  medicine  with  Dr.  Winslow  Lewis,  of  Boston, 
and  at  the  same  time  was  a  student  in  the  Medical  Department  of  Har- 
vard, where  he  was  graduated  in  1850.  He  settled  in  Utica  in  the  fall 
of  1850,  directing  his  attention  to  surgery  and  afterward  making  it  a 
specialty,  and  doing  a  large  share  of  the  surgical  business  of  the  city  and 
county.  He  was  one  of  the  corps  of  auxiliary  surgeons  appointed  dur- 
ing the  Civil  war  and  rendered  valuable  aid  in  the  field  and  hospital. 
He  was  afterward  appointed  examining  surgeon  for  pensions.  He  was 
a  prominent  member  of  the  Oneida  County  Medical  Society  ;  also  a 
member  of  the  State  Medical  Society  and  one  of  the  censors  for  the 
middle  district  of  New  York;  a  permanent  member  of  the  American 
Medical  Society;  a  member  of  Grace  Church  and  for  years  a  member  of 
its  vestry  ;  a  director  of  the  Utica  Savings  Bank  and  interested  in  sev- 
eral of  our  manufacturing  associations.  He  showed  also  a  scientific 
taste  and  zeal  in  horticulture;  his  conservatory  contained  one  of  the 
best  collections  of  ferns  and  orchids  in  the  State.  He  was  a  man  of 
quiet  manners,  with  good  natural  capacities,  and  was  cultivated  in  many 
directions.  He  married,  in  1854,  a  daughter  of  Thomas  H.  Hubbard, 
of  Utica  ;  by  her  he  had  four  children,  all  of  whom  are  now  living.  His 
wife  died  in  1867  and  he  married  afterward  a  daughter  of  William  C. 
Pierrepont,  of  Pierrepont  Manor,  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y.,  who  survives 
him.     He  died  June  3,  1883. 

Dr.  Horace  B.  Day  was   born   in  West   Schuyler,  Herkimer  County, 
N.  Y.,  in  January,  1819.      He  graduated  at  the  Albany  Medical  College 
in  1844  and  soon  afterward  began  practice  in   Herkimer  County.     He' 
practiced  in  Utica  about  nineteen  years,  devoting  his  best  powers  to  his 


276  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

profession,  and  showing  qualities  that  warranted  a  fair  degree  of  success. 
He  was  an  influential  member  of  the  city  and  county  societies  and  an 
honored  member  of  the  Masonic  fraternity.  He  was  killed  August  24, 
1870,  while  entering  the  cars  at  Fitzwilliam  Station,  N.  H.  A  reso- 
lution of  the  Utica  Medical  Society  says  :  "  In  his  professional  inter- 
course he  was  governed  by  high  and  honorable  motives.  .  .  He 
was  an  unceasing  enemy  of  charlatanry."  He  was  thrice  married  and 
left  two  sons. 

Another  practitioner  of  medicine  coming  at  this  time  was  Dr.  Lauren 
F.  Rose,  who  was  born  in  Schuyler,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.,  was  grad- 
uated at  the  Albany  Medical  College  in  1851,  and  at  once  began  prac- 
tice in  this  city.  Naturally  benevolent  of  heart  the  appeal  of  suffering 
humanity  was  sure  to  meet  his  response.  When  on  the  i6th  of  July, 
1857,  the  alarm  of  fire  at  the  State  Hospital  thrilled  this  community  he 
repaired  to  the  burning  building  and  rendered  such  assistance  as  he 
could.  While  engaged  in  the  work  of  rescue  on  the  second  floor  the 
one  above  fell  and  caught  him  in  its  ruins.  He  lingered  a  few  days  in 
much  suffering  and  then  died.  He  was  about  thirty  years  of  age  and 
left  a  wife  and  one  son.  Short  as  was  his  residence  here  he  had  already 
gained  the  esteem  of  all  who  knew  him  and  a  creditable  rank  as  a  phy- 
sician of  attainments. 

Other  physicians  were  William  H.  Bailey,  now  of  Albany  ;  J.  C.  Ray- 
mond, now  of  Oakland,  Cal.;  Benjamin  F.  Flower,  deceased  ;  and  Will- 
iam H.  Watson,  noticed  elsewhere. 

The  starting  of  the  new  manufacturing  industries  brought  hither  from 
the  East  William  C.  and  Samuel  Churchill  to  act  as  agents,  the  former 
for  the  Steam  Woolen  and  the  latter  for  the  Globe  Woolen,  and  gave  a 
cashiership  to  Ephraim  Chamberlain  in  the  Steam  Cotton-Mills  as  no- 
ticed more  fully  hereafter. 

Edward  T.  Manning  was  a  dealer  in  dry  goods  conspicuous  among 
his  associates  in  the  trade.  Born  in  Wicklow  County,  Ireland,  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1 82 1,  he  came  to  this  country  in  1 850,  when  he  chose  Utica  for 
his  home.  He  began  as  peddler  of  dry  goods,  employed  for  awhile  by 
O.  &  M.  Gaffney,  but  soon  set  up  an  establishment  of  his  own  and  in 
time  expanded  it  to  one  of  the  largest  in  the  city.  He  built  the  block 
which  for  some  time  bore  his  name  to  accommodate  his  increased  busi- 


THE  BROTHERS  YATES.  277 

ness.  Hugh  Glenn  became  partner  with  him  April  i,  1879,  and  con- 
tributed a  large  capital  and  experience.  A  year  later  (November,  1880) 
Mr.  Manning  retired  from  the  firm  and  engaged  in  real  estate  and  in- 
surance with  Henry  Hopson.  Mr.  Manning  was  zealous  and  pro- 
nounced in  his  convictions  and  impulsive  in  his  nature,  though  amiable, 
generous,  and  courteous.  He  was  popular  as  a  citizen,  a  communicant 
of  the  Episcopal  Church,  and  a  Democrat  in  politics.  He  died  Febru- 
ary 23,  1883,  leaving  a  wife  and  an  adopted  daughter.  A  brother  of 
Mr.  Manning  was  interested  with  him  in  his  mercantile  concerns ;  an- 
other was  employed  by  him. 

Rynier  V.  and  Charles  A.  Yates  were  the  sons  of  Abraham  P.  Yates, 
who  came  here  in  his  declining  years  from  Johnstown,  Montgomery 
County.  The  sons  became  active  business  characters.  R.  V.,  the  eld- 
est, was  among  the  first  in  the  city  to  enter  upon  the  profitable  work  of 
selling  ready-made  clothing.  In  this  he  was  engaged  until  he  won  a 
competency,  when  he  removed  to  New  York.  He  afterward  returned, 
resumed  his  business,  and  continued  it  until  the  close  of  his  life,  adding 
to  his  wealth  and  performing  his  duties  with  fidelity  and  honor.  He  died 
February  8,  1879,  leaving  a  wife,  since  dead,  two  sons,  and  two  daugh- 
ters. Charles  A.  Yates,  who  was  some  nine  years  younger  than  his 
brother,  his  birth  dating  from  the  27th  of  October,  1820,  began 
business  later.  He,  too,  was  a  dealer  in  ready-made  clothing,  prose- 
cuting it  with  unflagging  devotion  and  securing  it  by  rich  pecuniary 
results.  He  occupied  the  middle  store  of  the  Marble  block  on  Genesee 
street  opposite  Broad,  and  for  his  residence  he  built  the  handsome  house 
now  occupied  by  I.  A.  Williams.  A  quiet,  unassuming  man,  of  refined 
tastes  and  feeling,  he  was  estimable  in  character  and  honest  in  dealing. 
His  death  occurred  July  5,  1872.  He  was  twice  married.  His  chil- 
dren no  longer  reside  here. 

About  1820  there  came  to  Oneida  County  from  Thetford,  Vt.,  Noah 
White  and  family  and  in  i828toUtica.  He  was  a  potter  by  trade.  Not 
long  after  his  settlement  he  and  his  son,  Nicholas  A.  White,  formed  a 
"business  connection  with  Samuel  H.  Addington,  who  owned  the  poitery 
where  the  present  West  Utica  pottery  now  stands.  Mr.  Addington 
furnished  the  real  estate,  machinery,  etc.,  and  the  Whites  conducted  the 
business.     Soon  afterward  Messrs.  White  &  Son  bought  out  Mr.  Add- 


278  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ington  and  for  nearly  fifty  years  N.  A.  White  had  important  connection 
with  those  works.  The  latter  in  185  i  represented  his  ward  in  the  com- 
mon council;  in  1858  his  town  in  the  Board  of  Supervisors  ;  and  in 
1873  his  district  in  the  Assembly.  He  took  great  interest  in  Uticaand 
its  prosperity ;  was  thoroughly  respected  and  showed  himself  to  be  kind 
and  friendly  with  all  whom  he  met.  He  was  a  member  of  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church  and  an  Odd  Fellow  ;  a  director  of  the  Utica  Me- 
chanics Association  ;  and  in  politics  first  a  Whig  and  later  a  Republican. 
His  death  occurred  August  9,  1886.  His  widow  and  five  children  sur- 
vive him. 

A  clergyman  who,  as  respects  our  history,  is  of  more  interest  for  his 
agricultural  successes  than  as  respects  his  faithful  exercise  of  the  minis- 
terial function  was  Rev.  Chauncey  Enoch  Goodrich.  He  was  born  in 
a  suburb  of  Troy,  N.  Y.,  September  19,  1801  ;  was  graduated  at  Union 
College  and  at  Princeton  Seminary;  spent  nearly  two  years  as  assistant 
in  the  Oneida  Institute  ;  and  was  set  over  a  church.  Five  successive 
pastorates  in  different  parts  of  Central  New  York  he  filled  before  he 
gave  up  the  charge  of  a  parish  and  betook  himself  to  Utica.  Here  he 
acted  for  nineteen  years  as  chaplain  of  the  State  Hospital.  This  did  not, 
however,  engage  his  whole  attention  ;  he  was  occupied  besides  in  trial 
methods  of  vegetable  and  fruit  raising  and  in  attempts  to  acclimate  the 
growths  of  milder  regions.  Many  of  these  attempts,  carefully  con- 
ducted and  with  the  utmost  nicety  of  science,  were  successful.  When 
the  potato  disease  first  threatened  that  priceless  crop  he  addressed  him- 
self to  its  cure,  and  getting  acquainted,  as  he  thought,  with  its  pathol- 
ogy he  sought  the  remedy; — conceiving  that  the  disease  was  the  re- 
sult of  exhaustion  of  the  energy  of  the  plant  consequent  on  the 
continual  propagation  from  the  tuber  without  fresh  reproduction  from 
the  seed,  or  from  newer  and  hardier  plants,  he  procured  a  few  potatoes 
from  Chile,  its  native  habitat,  and  with  these  he  commenced  experiments 
for  a  renewal  of  the  vegetable  from  the  seed,  and  also  sought  renewal 
of  the  seed  from  South  American  tubers.  Year  after  year  for  sixteen 
years  he  patiently  pursued  his  experiments  and  investigations.  His 
communications  to  agricultural  journals  and  societies  and  to  scientific 
magazines  exceed  130,  while  he  gathered  a  large  amount  of  material  on 
vegetable  physiology  and  pathology  which  he  had  not  strength  to  put 


REV.  C.  E.  GOODRICH— GEORGE  LAWSON.  279 

into  form  for  the  public.  He  perfected  several  varieties  of  the  esculent 
that  are  universally  known  as  good  eating.  The  Garnet  Chile  was 
estimated  many  years  ago  to  have  saved  $2,000,000  to  the  country,  and 
had  he  chosen  to  make  money  out  of  it  he  might  have  accumulated 
wealth.  His  motive,  however,  was  philanthropic,  not  mercenary.  His 
sales  did  not  cover  his  expenses,  and,  supplemented  as  they  were  by 
premiums  from  the  State  Agricultural  Society,  they  left  him,  as  shown  by 
a  careful  examination  of  his  accounts,  a  balance  of  but  $50.  While 
no  mercenary  motives  actuated  Mr.  Goodrich  in  his  efforts  to  save  the 
most  important  of  esculents,  neither  was  it  the  mere  love  of  science  that 
moved  him.  Paramount  to  his  affection  for  it  was  his  love  of  man  and 
through  him  his  love  of  God.  Clergymen  were  his  companions  and 
Christian  assemblies  his  resort.  He  never  left  home  except  on  secular 
or  ecclesiastical  business,  indulged  in  no  recreation  or  amusements,  and 
was  stern  in  maintaining  what  he  considered  the  proprieties  and  sepa- 
rateness  from  the  world  of  the  Christian  life.  His  death  occurred  May 
II,  1864.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  William  G.  Tracy,  of  Whites- 
boro.     Of  their  four  daughters  one  only  survives. 

George  Lawson,  a  native  of  Lancashire,  England,  had  settled  in  Utica 
as  early  as  1832,  gaining  his  livelihood  as  a  tanner.  After  remaining 
some  years  he  went  to  Rome  to  live.  Returning  about  1853  he  became 
superintendent  of  the  city  water  works  and  was  thus  employed  until  a 
short  time  before  his  death,  June  8,  1876.  "  Mr.  Lawson  was  a  man  of 
marked  mental  and  moral  characteristics.  He  was  eminently  honest, 
truthful,  and  pure,  and  always  had  the  courage  of  his  convictions.  He 
was  a  Puritan  of  the  strongest  type,  an  ardent  lover  of  free  institutions, 
a  stern  hater  of  all  tyranny  and  oppression,  and  a  strong  anti- slavery  man. 
The  ruggedness  which  some,  perhaps,  might  deem  the  sternness  of  be- 
lief never  affected  the  true  kindness  of  his  nature  and  the  benignity  of 
his  manners." 

Another  Englishman  whose  good  works  entitle  him  to  remembrance 
was  Thomas  Maynard,  brother  of  Isaac  Maynard,  before  noticed.  He 
had  a  residence  in  Utica  from  1S41  10  about  1859,  when  he  removtd  to 
Cleveland,  Ohio.  He  was  engaged  in  various  branches  of  business,  the 
most  extensive  one  being  in  connection  v\ith  the  Utica  Lock  Company. 
Mr.  Maynard  was  actively  associated  with  the  Sunday  schools  and  for 


28o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA, 

many  years  superintendent  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  Sunday 
School.  He  was  also  diligent  in  mission  Sunday  schools  in  the  remote 
parts  of  the  city  and  in  Deerfield  Corners.  He  delighted  to  address  a 
juvenile  audience,  and  his  hearty  good  nature,  his  direct  appeals  to  the 
feelings  of  his  little  parishioners,  made  his  voice  clear  and  eloquent. 
He  collected  and  had  printed  hymns  for  his  own  and  their  use,  calcu- 
lated to  encourage  the  young  heart  and  ear.  His  collection  reached  its 
fourth  edition  and  numbered  nearly  200  pages.  Mr.  Maynard's  death 
occurred  at  Cleveland,  January  31,  i860. 

John  Munn  had  been  a  clerk  in  the  branch  of  the  llnited  States  Bank 
which  had  a  brief  existence  in  the  place.  Afterward  moving  southward 
he  established  himself  in  Mississippi.  He  now  settled  here  anew  with 
a  southern  wife  and  a  growing  family.  He  soon  erected  the  house  that 
stands  on  the  east  of  the  line  of  Rutger  Place  and  lived  on  his  means 
without  ostensible  occupation.  Mingling  freely  with  all  classes  of  peo- 
ple he  identified  himself  with  them  and  with  such  concerns  as  they  had 
in  common,  and  from  his  engaging  and  friendly  manners,  his  intelli- 
gence, his  generosity  and  upright  life,  secured  their  esteem  and  regard. 
Ere  long  his  affection  was  tried  by  the  exciting  scenes  and  events  of  the 
war  with  the  South.  His  patriotism  stood  firm  and  he  was  as  ready 
as  were  others  to  encourage  our  departing  soldiers  on  their  way  to  the 
battlefield,  despite  the  fact  that  his  tears  revealed  the  bitterness  of  his 
heart,  and  how  moved  he  was  by  the  anticipation  of  the  woe  soon  ta 
come  upon  those  among  whom  he  had  so  lately  made  his  home.  Mr. 
Munn  died  in  the  city  of  New  York. 

Dr.  Joseph  Sieboth  for  thirty- six  years  was  a  teacher  of  vocal  and  in 
strumental  music,  and  thus  had  close  relations  with  many  families  and 
with  full  two  generations  of  pupils.  He  was  a  recognized  authority  and 
unquestioned  leader  in  the  science  and  art  of  music  and  did  much  for  its 
development  in  taste  and  practice.  In  1871  Hamilton  College  conferred 
upon  him  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Music.  He  was  a  thorough  student 
himself  and  aimed  at  a  sound  basis  and  close  discipline  in  his  pupils.  He 
was  the  composer  of  a  large  number  of  pieces,  mostly  of  church  service, 
with  organ  accompaniment.  He  was  organist  in  Trinity  Church  and 
served  there  twenty-one  years.  For  two  years  of  this  period  he  was 
also  organist  of  the   Reformed   Dutch  Church,    and    this  position    he 


ED  WARD  KUNKEL  Y—  J.  S.  L  YNCH.  281 

retained  with  great  acceptance  for  many  years  and  until  his  death.  He 
responded  to  every  call  of  charity  for  musical  aid  and  organized  and  sus- 
tained many  associations  for  musical  culture.  He  was  married  in  early 
manhood  in  Germany,  where  he  had  been  reared  and  educated,  and  left 
a  widow,  two  daughters,  and  one  son. 

In  the  directory  of  1854  there  first  appears  the  name  of  Edward  Kun- 
kely,  artist,  and  as  such  he  remained  until  his  death  September  14,  1878. 
As  an  artist  he  was  best  esteemed  for  his  skill  in  India  ink  work  upon 
photographs  and  for  the  decoration  of  porcelain  ware.  His  fondness 
for  music  and  his  zeal  in  behalf  of  associations  among  the  Germans  for 
musical  culture  and  other  purposes  were  more  widely  known  and  ren- 
dered him  popular  among  these  his  countrymen.  His  obsequies  were 
observed  by  the  Mendelssohn  Club,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  found- 
ers, the  Maennerchor,  the  Liederkranz,  the  Leseverein,  the  Germania 
Industrial  Association,  and  the  Oriental  Lodge  of  F.  A.  M.,  in  whose 
rites  he  was  buried. 

As  editors  of  this  date  there  should  be  mentioned  the  brilliant  Sam- 
uel Williams,  of  the  Morning  Herald  and  afterward  of  San  Francisco  ; 
the  enterprising  and  popular  James  Mclver,  of  the  Evening  Telegraph. 

James  S.  Lynch,  long  conversant  with  the  financial  affairs  of  the  city, 
was  a  native  of  New  York  and  was  born  April  3,  1823.  Coming  to 
Utica  in  1839  ^^  remained  here  with  the  exception  of  about  nine  years 
until  his  death  April  3,  1889.  Most  of  this  time,  he  found  employment 
in  the  Ontario  Bank  either  as  clerk  or  teller,  and  in  the  later  years  of 
the  bank's  existence  was  its  cashier.  On  the  organization  of  the  Utica 
and,  Black  River  Railroad  he  was  its  treasurer.  In  1850  and  again  in 
1853  he  was  a  member  of  the  council  and  in  1856  was  a  Fremont  pres- 
idential elector.  After  the  closing  up  of  the  affairs  of  the  bank  he  de- 
voted himself  to  search-making  and  the  examination  of  legal  titles,  as 
shown  by  the  records  of  the  county,  and  in  this  business  he  was  a  de- 
cided expert.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Alexander  B.  Johnson.  Mrs. 
Lynch,  one  son,  and  three  daughters  still  survive  him. 

Additional  merchants  and  mechanics  were  William  H.  Ferry,  some 
time  teller  in  the  Oneida  Bank  and  then  one  of  the  clothing  firm  of 
Rockwell  &  Ferry;  John  W.  Fuller,  the  brave  and  capable  general  of  the 
United  States  volunteers  from   Ohio;  and   Anthony  A.  Jones,  Lewis 

36 


282  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Jones,  Milo  Pratt,  Daniel  Mitchell,  Philip  Thomas,  John  B.  Wasmer,  and 
D.  &  T.  M.  Owens. 

1855. — The  officers  for  this  year  were:  Mayor,  Henry  H.  Fish;  treas- 
urer, Miles  C.  Comstock;  surveyor,  Henry  Baker;  street  commissioner, 
Jefferson  Allen;  attorney,  Charles  A.  Butler;  aldermen,  M.  McQuade, 
Solomon  McKennan,  Truman  K.  Church,  Henry  Fowler,  Cordon  Haclt- 
ett,  Ephraim  Chamberlain,  Richard  H.  F"rancis,  Philip  Thomas,  John  B. 
Owens,  Lansing  Thurber,  William  White,  John  B.  Wasmer;  clerk, 
James  G.  French;  supervisors,  James  McQuade,  Llewelyn  D.  Howell, 
John  Griffiths,  R.  U.  Shearman,  G.  G.  Roberts,  WiUiam  Harrington. 

The  population  in  1855  was  22,183.  The  city  was  growing  fast  and 
was  also  getting  into  debt  again.  The  debt  was  reported  on  the  13th 
of  March  as  $11,271.41,  and  a  resolution  passed  the  council  on  the  13th 
of  July  that  the  city  borrow  on  its  bonds  a  sum  sufficient  to  pay  the 
debt,  payable  in  three  equal  annual  installments  on  the  1st  of  Decem- 
ber, 1855,  1856,  and  1857.  The  ordinary  and  extraordinary  taxes  this 
year  amounted  to  $49,826  and  the  citizens  began  to  grumble,  leading 
a  little  later  to  much  excitement  over  what  was  to  be  done  to  reduce 
expenses  and  secure  a  more  prudent  administration.  A  resolution  was 
adopted  October  25th  to  the  effect  that  there  should  be  appropriated 
$4,000  for  highways  and  bridges,  chiefly  because  two  had  been  washed 
away,  and  $2,500  for  more  hose  and  equipments  for  the  fire  department, 
in  order  to  secure  reasonable  protection  during  the  coming  winter, 
"  making  $6,500  beyond  any  sums  now  authorized  to  be  expended  by 
the  common  council."  A  special  election  to  vote  on  this  proposition 
was  appointed  for  October  23d.  The  majority  against  the  proposition 
was  overwhelming,  only  forty-one  voting  for  it  and  400  against  it. 
This  indicates  the  uneasy  state  of  feeling  over  the  finances  of  the  city, 
the  result  of  which  soon  appeared.  At  about  the  same  time  a  commu- 
nication was  published,  signed  by  forty  citizens  of  the  Fifth  ward,  com- 
plaining of  their  lack  of  protection  from  fire  and  demanding  action  for 
their  benefit. 

In  council  on  the  9th  of  November  the  mayor  invited  the  taxpayers 
to  meet  at  the  court-house  on  the  13th  to  consider  the  state  of  the  city 
treasury  and  the  propriety  of  disbanding  the  present  fire  department. 
The  meeting  was  held   on   the   20th   after  one   postponement.      Hiram 


CITIZENS'  MEETING  OF  1885.  283 

Denio  presided.  Mayor  Fish  stated  the  objects  of  the  meeting  and  de- 
tailed at  length  his  views  of  the  situation — how  the  taxes  were  im- 
posed and  what  they  were  or  should  be  expended  for.  He  claimed 
that  the  opinion  had  generally  obtained  that  taxes  were  unreasonably 
high,  and  that  they  were  squandered  in  reckless  expenditures.  The 
taxes  for  all  purposes  amounted  to  about  $50,000,  but  without  consider- 
ation "the  seeming  conclusion  has  been  reached  that  the  whole  burden 
had  been  induced  by  the  weakness  orwickednessof  your  public  servants." 
He  then  alluded  to  the  unauthorized  debt  of  about  $18,000  contracted 
within  the  last  few  years  without  any  authority  of  law  and  in  violation  of 
the  charter.  The  then  present  condition  showed  an  excess  of  liability  over 
resources  of  $153,  and  he  stated  that  if  the  city  government  continued 
through  its  year  as  then  organized,  and  any  reasonable  provision  was 
made  for  extinguishing  fires,  they  must  provide  for  the  following  : 

Salaries,  fuel,  etc.,  fire  department,  .S  1,000 

2,000  feet  of  hose,        .            .            .  2,500 

Salaries  of  city  officers  to  end  of  year,  1,140 

Watch,              .  900 

Incidentals,  500 

Excess  of  liability,  1 53 

To  which  add  Genesee  street  improvement,  1,000 

Treasurer's  fees  |8oo  to                                    .  1,060 


Total,  $8,193 

And  there  was  nothing  in  that  list  for  two  bridges  recently  washed 
away  nor  for  roadways  damaged  by  the  same  agency.  A  long  dis- 
cussion followed.  Some  thought  the  charter  only  was  at  fault  for  the 
state  of  affairs,  and  various  suggestions  were  made  for  overcoming  the 
difficulty.  Finally  a  motion  was  made  that  the  mayor  and  council  make 
a  statement  of  the  amount  necessary  to  go  through  the  year  and  that 
an  election  be  ordered  to  vote  whether  the  amount  should  not  be  raised 
to  pay  the  shortage.  Another  motion  followed  that  a  committee  of  five 
be  appointed  to  consider  the  whole  matter  and  report  at  a  future  meet- 
ing. The  meeting  to  hear  the  report  was  n6t  held  until  January  16, 
1856,  but  it  may  as  well  be  disposed  of  here.  The  report  showed  the 
total  indebtedness  of  the  city,  including  the  Black  River  Railroad  bonds, 
to  be  $304,047.60.  The  city  had  paid  up  to  December  21st  out  of  the 
$12,000  general  tax  $1 1,275.83,  and  they  estimated  that  $6,328  would 


284  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

be  needed  to  take  the  city  through  the  fiscal  year.  The  report  con  - 
tinued  that  if  the  suggestions  of  the  committee  were  carried  out  in  the 
future  they  believed  the  annual  ordinary  expenses  would  not  be  more 
than  $16,000.  The  tax  levy  of  1855  was  $49,225.90,  and  the  great 
increase  in  the  few  preceding  years  was  caused  by  the  establishment 
and  support  of  free  schools  and  building  the  city  hall  and  the  Cily  Hos- 
pital. There  was  no  immediate  prospect  of  lower  taxes.  To  meet  the 
present  emergency  they  recommended  the  passage  of  a  law  authorizing 
the  city  to  borrow  not  more  than  $6,300  and  add  it  to  the  next  annual 
tax  levy.  The  committee  then  took  up  the  question  of  charter  amend- 
ments (thus,  as  it  was  afterward  charged,  exceeding  their  authority)  and 
made  a  number  of  radical  recommendations.  They  would  make  the 
mayor  the  chief  executive  officer  and  separate  his  duties  from  those  of 
the  council,  and  give  him  the  appointing  of  the  principal  subordinate 
ofificers  as  had  then  recently  been  done  in  neighboring  cities,  Syracuse 
being  mentioned  ;  they  would  have  but  one  official  paper,  thus  saving 
expense';  would  make  the  treasurer's  salary  $600  in  lieu  of  all  fees; 
the  charter  was  also  defective  in  power  to  open  and  lay  out  streets ;  they 
said  the  city  now  owns  four  fire  engines,  one  ladder  wagon,  ten  ladders, 
seven  carts,  a  little  over  3,000  feet  of  hose,  with  three  companies  of 
twenty  two  men  and  sixty-seven  men  with  the  hook  and  ladder  and 
hose  companies,  a  total  of  133  men  ;  recommended  the  establishment 
of  a  hose  depot  with  a  superintendent ;  the  city  was  then  in  one  great 
school  district,  and  therefore  drew  no  more  of  the  State  fund  than  would 
a  district  of  thirty  scholars,  and  recommended  its  division.  The  com- 
mittee were  Charles  A.  Mann,  T.  E.  Clark,  T.  S.  Faxton,  Joseph  Bene- 
dict, Thomas  Hopper. 

An  adjournment  was  taken  to  the  next  Monday,  January  21st,  when 
another  public  meeting  was  held  and  the  various  propositions  voted 
upon — and  nearly  all  of  them  favorably.  Thus:  To  raise  $6,300  and 
$1,000  for  a  hose  depot  at  once;  the  mayor  to  have  the  appointment 
of  the  street  commissioner,  surveyor,  watch,  and  police  constables ;  to 
abolish  the  office  of  marshal ;  to  have  only  one  official  paper ;  making 
the  treasurer's  salary  $600  ;  appropriating  $4,000  for  the  City  Hospital ; 
granting  more  power  in  the  opening  of  streets ;  and  dividing  the  city 
into  school  districts  of  100  scholars  each.  All  of  these  changes  and 
other  minor  ones  were  soon  embodied  in  charter  amendments. 


>^5:^Z3 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1856.  285 

The  pavement  on  Genesee  street  was  extended  to  Oneida  Square. 
Officers'  salaries  for  the  year  made:  Mayor,  $250;  clerk,  $600;  marshal, 
$500;  street  commissioner,  $500.  The  Maine  liquor  law  went  into 
operation  in  July  and  at  first  was  generally  observed,  but  after  a  little 
time  was  often  violated  and  many  arrests  followed.  Part  of  the  offenders 
were  convicted  and  part  discharged.  A  call  for  a  mass  meeting  signed 
by  about  150,  to  be  held  July  23d,  was  issued,  "  to  make  an  expression 
on  the  subject  of  the  thorough  execution  of  the  law."  The  meeting 
was  held  and  resolutions  adopted  to  the  end  in  view,  but  it  probably  re- 
sulted in  nothing,  as  such  meetings  commonly  do. 

1856. — Officers  were:  Mayor,  Alrick  Hubbell ;  treasurer,  Ira  A. 
Button  ;  surveyor,  Harvey  Park ;  clerk,  James  G.  French ;  street  com- 
missioner. Christian  Costleman  ;  attorney,  Charles  A.  Butler;  aldermen, 
M.  McQuade,  Truman  K.  Church,  Daniel  B.  Johnson,  Alvin  White, 
Peter  Cunningham,  De  Witt  C.  Grove  ;  supervisors,  James  McQuade, 
E.  E.  Roberts,  William  H.  Ferry,  R.  U.  Shearman,  William  Clark,  D.  Van 
Valkenburgh.  Alrick  Hubbell  was  elected  mayor  by  the  Whigs  and 
Republicans  as  were  also  a  majority  of  the  aldermen  and  one- half  of 
the  supervisors. 

On  the  14th  of  January  fire  destroyed  five  stores  on  Genesee  street, 
beginning  in  No.  56,  where  the  Marble  block  now  stands.  The  loss 
was  $77,000  with  $57,000  insurance.  Some  of  the  public  prints  were 
most  bitter  in  their  denunciation  of  the  inefficiency  of  the  fire  depart- 
ment. The  Gazette  said  the  trouble  arose  from  a  stopped  hydrant. 
On  the  25th  of  March  fire  in  the  Devereux  block  did  about  $10,000 
damage  and  on  the  28th,  in  the  council,  a  motion  was  adopted  that  a 
committee  of  three  examine  into  the  practicabihty  of  abaadoning  the 
present  organization  of  the  fire  department.  Early  in  the  year  exten- 
sive changes  were  made  in  the  ordinances,  especially  in  relation  to  fire 
apparatus  and  its  care,  street  begging,  sale  of  liquors  to  minors,  etc. 

April  4th  the  city  was  authorized  by  the  legislature  to  borrow  on  its 
bond  $6,500  to  pay  the  floating  debt  and  raise  the  amount  by  tax,  and 
amendments  to  the  charter  were  polled  in  compliance  with  a  suggestion 
made  by  a  citizens'  meeting  called  to  consider  the  debt.  The  most  im- 
portant of  these  amendments  was  a  provision  in  regard  to  the  treasurer 
and  the  city  funds.      His  salary  was  reduced  to  $600  and  he  was  re- 


286  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

quired  to  deposit  the  city  moneys  in  such  bank  as  would  pay  the  highest 
interest  to  the  city  and  give  security  approved  by  the  council.  The 
amount  of  the  general  fund  was  raised  from  $I2,000  to  $i6,000.  Au- 
gust 8th  a  special  committee  on  fire  matters  reported  in  favor  of  an  en- 
gine-house and  500  feet  of  hose  for  Corn  Hill  and  a  new  hook  and  lad- 
der truck  ;  these  were  purchased  and  in  September  2,000  feet  of  hose 
were  bought.  A  new  hook  and  ladder-house  was  built  the  latter 
part  of  the  year  out  of  the  old  vegetable  market  on  Bleecker  street. 
Improvements  effected  by  this  council  consisted  in  laying  down  a  few 
sewers  in  various  streets  and  in  the  extension  of  Hobart  street  from 
Kemble  to  Elm. 

There  was  more  complaint  of  the  acts  of  the  street  commissioner. 
An  inventory  of  property  in  his  hands  was  asked  by  the  council,  and  he 
was  peremptorily  ordered  to  contract  for  no  more  work  without  knowl- 
edge and  consent  of  the  council.  Ordinary  and  extraordinary  taxes 
for  the  year  were  $56,547.16,  including  street  lighting. 

1857, — Officers:  Mayor,  Alrick  Hubbell;  treasurer,  James  McDo- 
nough ;  clerk,  David  Perkins;  surveyor,  Harvey  Park,  jr.;  street  com- 
missioner, William  Stanford ;  attorney,  Edward  R.  Bates ;  aldermen, 
John  Cantwell,  Thomas  F.  Lynch,  John  H.  Prentiss,  jr.,  Lansing  Thur- 
ber,  John  Myers,  John  B.  Wasmer,  Henry  Ney,  and  William  B.  Taylor 
from  the  Seventh  ward  ;  supervisors,  Harvey  Barnard,  jr.,  Amos  H. 
Thomas,  Hawley  E.  Heath,  John  B.  Owens,  William  Clarke,  Roderick 
J.  Comstock,  Richard  U.  Sherman.  The  Whigs  and  Republicans  elected 
all  the  city  officers  except  the  marshal.  In  his  address  Mayor  Hubbell 
expressed  regret  that  the  council  had  been  forced  to  overrun  their  funds 
as  allowed  by  the  charter.  He  stated  that  the  salaries  of  the  fire  de- 
partment were  $2,725  and  thought  that  this  item  should  be  saved.  It 
was  said  that  the  fire  apparatus  was  out  of  order.  This  was  a  natural 
result  of  the  almost  entire  cessation  of  fires  and  alarms  after  the  adop- 
tion of  the  paying  system  and  the  consequent  diminution  of  vigilance 
and  practice. 

Whoever  has  watched  the  yearly  details  of  the  city  finances  has  no- 
ticed the  regularity  with  which  the  expenditures  exceeded  the  income. 
No  matter  how  much  the  latter  was  increased  from  time  to  time;  in 
hope  of  preventing  such  a  discreditable  result  it  occurred  all  the  same. 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1856.  287 

An  annual  deficit  seems  to  be  a  law  of  municipalities  as  much  beyond 
the  control  of  citizens  and  legislatures  as  the  laws  of  nature.  Time  and 
and  time  again  as  the  urgent  debt  appears  the  penitent  council  appeal 
for  relief;  the  citizens  scold,  but  wipe  out  the  debt  and  increase  the  gen- 
eral fund  beyond  the  utmost  limit  of  expenditure  yet  reached.  All  in 
vain.  In  the  earlier  days  remonstrances  alone  were  tried.  In  the  char- 
ter revision  of  1849  a  new  section  was  inserted  prohibiting  the  common 
council  from  incurring  any  debt  not  payable  within  their  year  and  out 
of  its  income,  and  this  section  remains  in  the  charter  to  this  day. 

In  1856,  as  we  have  just  seen,  on  the  occasion  of  funding  a  larger  debt 
than  usual  and  increasing  still  more  the  general  fund,  the  citizens'  meet- 
ing imposed  provisions  to  reduce  the  treasurer's  salary  and  save  the  in- 
terest on  the  city  funds  for  the  city,  which  were  incorporated  in  the 
charter  simultaneously  with  the  enactment  of  the  relief  measures,  but 
too  late  for  operation  in  that  fiscal  year.  At  the  first  meeting  of  the 
new  council  in  1857,  when  the  resolution  was  offered  for  ascertaining 
the  bank  entitled  to  the  city  deposits  under  the  charter  amendment  of 
1856,  it  was  on  motion  laid  on  the  table.  At  the  next  meeting,  when 
the  resolution  was  called  up,  it  was  announced  that  the  amendment  of 
1856  was  no  longer  in  force,  a  bill  repealing  it  and  restoring  the  old  law 
having  been  passed  and  signed  that  day.  This  restored  the  treasurer's 
salary  to  $8oo  and  left  the  city  deposits  entirely  to  the  discretion  of  the 
common  council  without  a  word  about  interest.  Of  course  there  was 
then  no  alternative  but  to  follow  the  existing  law. 

As  soon  as  the  transaction  became  known  it  created  intense  excite- 
ment. A  citizens'  meeting  opposed  to  these  proceedings  was  imme- 
diately called  at  the  city  hall.  Before  the  hour  specified — by  a  cheap 
device  which  had  of  late  become  familiar  in  political  caucuses — the  room 
was  packed  with  the  partisans  of  the  speedy  legislation  and  the  organi- 
zation of  the  meeting  captured.  A  general  row  ensued  until  the  lights 
were  extinguished,  after  the  historic  method  in  New  York  city.  A 
resolution  was  adopted  in  the  dark  for  an  adjourned  meeting,  which  was 
soon  after  held  in  Mechanics  Hall,  hired  for  the  purpose  and  guarded 
by  paid  policemen.  At  this  meeting  the  mayor  presided,  assisted  by 
every  living  resident  ex-mayor  as  vice-presidents.  It  was  forcibly  ad- 
dressed by  most'prominent  citizens  of  all  parties,  a  resolution  for  the 


288  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

restoration  of  the  repealed  section  unanimously  adopted,  and  a  com- 
mittee appointed  to  attend  to  it.  The  section  was  restored  by  the  legis- 
lature of  1858  and  still  remains  in  the  charter.  The  bank  which  had 
been  prominent  in  retaining  the  city  funds  under  the  old  system  failed 
in  the  summer  of  1857,  but  the  city  deposit  was  removed  before  the 
failure  was  made  known. 

James  street  was  extended  from  Steuben  to  Elm  ;  Leah  street  to 
Oneida  Square;  an  iron  bridge  built  at  John  street;  and  a  few  brick 
sewers  were  laid.  The  tax  levy  for  all  purposes  was  $55,241.55.  Cer- 
tain amendments  were  made  in  the  city  charter,  of  which  the  most 
notable  one  was  one  forming  a  Seventh  ward. 

This  was  the  year  of  hard  times,  the  worst  the  country  had  known 
since  the  crash  of  1837.  The  Ontario  Bank  and  the  Central  City  Sav- 
ings Institution  failed  through  the  crisis,  and  there  was  much  distress, 
though  Utica  seems  to  have  escaped  better  than  many  places  as  to 
business  failures.  The  common  council  appointed  a  committee  to  take 
measures  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  and  the  Association  for  the  Relief  of 
the  Poor  was  aided;  a  public  meeting  was  held  for  this  purpose  in  No- 
vember and  a  good  deal  was  done  to  minister  to  the  needy.  The 
Centra)  City  Savings  Institution  depositors  became  uneasy  and  it  was 
reported  that  the  bank  was  insolvent ;  but  the  books  were  examined 
and  in  October  it  was  declared  to  be  solvent,  and  it  went  on  for  a  short 
time. 

The  main  building  of  the  State  Asylum  burned  in  the  day  time  on 
July  14th,  causing  a  loss  of  near  $200,000.  Patients  were  all  successfully 
removed  to  groves  near  by  and  were  guarded  by  the  Citizens  Corps. 
There  were  470  in  the  building.  Most  of  them  returned  to  the  building 
before  night.  Dr.  L.  F.  Rose  was  so  badly  burned  that  he  died  and  a 
fireman,  William  Cessford,  was  killed.  On  the  i8th  of  the  same  month 
a  stone  barn  at  the  asylum  was  burned,  being  set  on  fire  by  a  patient  who 
was  allowed  liberty  about  the  place.  He  was  placed  under  arrest  and 
held  for  the  grand  jury,  and  ultimately  sent  to  State  prison  for  life. 

Citizens  freshly  arriving  during  the  years  1854—57,  or  newly  establish- 
ing themselves  in  business,  were  as  follows :  Of  two  physicians  who 
now  came  one  had  been  educated  here  and  practiced  elsewhere,  but 
now  returned  to  eke  out  many  further  years  of  an  active  and  useful  life. 


DUS.  I.  H.  DOUGLASS  AND  yACOB  HUNT.  289 

This  was  Dr.  Isaac  H.  Douglass.  Born  in  New  York  city,  November 
26,  1808,  he  passed  his  boyhood  in  New  Hartford  and  in  the  schools  of 
Utica,  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Pomeroy,  of  the  latter  place,  and  in 
the  medical  school  at  Fairfield,  and  then  went  to  Bucyrus,  Ohio,  to 
practice  it.  There  he  prosecuted  for  many  years  a  successful  career. 
About  1857,  after  a  short  stay  in  New  Hartford,  he  set  up  in  this  city. 
Here  his  success  was  equally  marked.  He  was  informed  in  his  art,  judi- 
cious, discreet,  and  faithful  in  its  exercise.  With  keen  and  tender  sym- 
pathies his  presence  at  the  bedside  was  ever  a  benediction  ;  of  so 
gentle  and  loving  a  nature  he  inspired  the  confidence  and  the  love  of 
others;  his  patients  were  his  friends  and  with  them  he  was  the  beloved 
physician.  His  tastes  were  refined  and  his  associations  the  best.  All 
things  beautiful  in  nature  and  in  art  attracted  him.  His  daily  life  was 
simple,  unobtrusive,  and  sincere.  A  Presbyterian  during  the  most  of 
his  career  he  returned  in  later  life  to  the  Episcopal  fold,  in  which  his 
infancy  had  been  nurtured.  He  died  March  13,  1884,  leaving  one 
daughter  now  resident. 

Dr.  Jacob  Hunt  was  born  in  Hillsdale,  Columbia  County,  in  1810, 
but  came  with  his  parents  to  Westmoreland,  N.  Y.,  four  years  after- 
ward. He  obtained  an  education  at  the  Clinton  Academy  and  at  Caz - 
enovia  Seminary.  When  he  reached  his  twenty- first  year  he  began 
the  study  of  medicine  and  was  graduated  at  the  Medical  College  of  Fair- 
field in  1836.  He  opened  practice  at  Lowell,  N.  Y.,  remaining  until 
1853,  when  he  settled  in  Utica.  In  the  treatment  of  fevers  he  achieved 
remarkable  success.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  as  well  as  the 
County  Medical  Society.  He  was  a  life-long  member  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church  and  was  deeply  interested  in  its  welfare,  having  been 
five  times  a  delegate  to  the  General  Conference ;  he  was  in  sympathy  like- 
wise with  the  cause  of  temperance  and  other  reforms.  Both  of  the  suc- 
cessive wives  of  Dr.  Hunt  were  of  Utica.  The  last,  a  daughter  of 
Henry  Snyder,  is  still  resident. 

Miss  Caroline  Brown  appeared  in  1857  as  the  first  female  physician 
of  the  place. 

Rev.  H.  N.  Dryer  filled  with  credit  for  thirty  years  a  responsible  po- 
sition in  the  service  of  the  State  Hospital  at  Utica,  and  as  a  citizen  of 
the  place  maintained  the  public  regard  as  well  for  the  excellence  of  his 
37 


290  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

private  character  as  for  the  useful  part  he  bore  in  its  charitable  and  re- 
ligious concerns.  Born  at  West  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  October  30,  1805, 
he  had  already  run  a  varied  career  and  filled  many  positions  before 
coming  to  the  city!  About  1856  he  found  employment  in  the  State 
Hospital  as  its  steward  and  until  his  death  performed  its  exacting 
duties.  Acting  under  the  control  of  the  superintendent  he  was  really 
in  many  respects  the  executive  officer  of  the  board ;  was  responsible 
for  the  purchase  of  supplies  as  well  as  for  their  safe  keeping  and  eco- 
nomical use ;  hired  all  employees  and  was  accountable  for  the  faithful 
discharge  of  their  duties  ;  spent  as  much  time  as  he  could  spare  with 
the  male  patients  and  looked  to  their  comfort  and  well  being.  Outside 
of  his  special  duties  he  preached  at  times  as  a  temporary  ministerial 
supply,  served  as  secretary  of  the  County  Bible  Society,  took  an  active 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  his  own  Christian  denomination,  and  was  much 
relied  on  in  religious  and  moral  undertakings.  At  his  death  in  1887 
he  left  a  widow  and  two  children. 

With  respect  to  Dr.  Charles  B.  Foster,  who  was  long  associated  with 
his  father,  Gilbert  A.  Foster,  in  the  practice  of  dentistry,  it  may  be  re- 
marked that  he  stood  high  in  his  profession,  showing  competence  in 
more  than  one  of  its  departments  ;  that  he  had  many  excellent  social 
and  personal  qualities;  and  that  he  was  prominent  in  Masonic,  musical, 
and  other  associations. 

John  T.  Clark,  who  had  a  brief  residence  here,  was  well  known 
throughout  this  and  other  States  as  an  able  engineer.  Of  New  York 
he  was  State  engineer  in  1854—55  and  was  long  connected  in  various 
capacities  with  many  of  its  public  works.  He  was  acknowledged  to  be 
a  man  of  ability  and  stubborn  integrity.  His  death  took  place  Novem- 
ber 10,  1862,  in  the  sixty- fifth  year  of  his  age. 

Another  short  term  resident  was  Col.  Edward  Jewett,  retired  half- 
pay  officer  of  the  U.  S.  army.  He  took  no  part  in  the  public  affairs  of 
the  town,  but  from  his  pleasant  social  qualities,  his  intelligence,  and  the 
enthusiasm  he  manifested  in  the  study  of  geology,  conchology,  and 
other  branches  of  natural  science,  in  which  he  had  made  large  collec- 
tions, he  drew  about  him  quite  a  circle  of  admiring  friends  and  did 
much  to  diffuse  a  taste  for  the  studies  with  which  he  was  himself  enam- 
ored.     He  removed  to  California  and  died  there. 


EDWARD  CHAPMAN  AND  J.  G.  MARKLOVE.  291 

Edward  Chapman,  born  in  Kettering,  England,  September  13,  1802, 
was  already  well  known  in  the  city  as  ati  expert  accountant.  When 
Butterfield,  Faxton,  and  others  formed  the  telegraph  company  Mr. 
Chapman  was  employed  by  them,  first  as  clerk  and  then  as  secretary 
and  treasurer  of  the  company.  He  opened  the  first  set  of  books  for  a 
telegraph  company  anywhere  in  the  world.  He  served  the  company 
here  until  the  combination  resulting  in  the  Western  Union  Telegraph 
Company,  whose  center  of  operations  was  at  Rochester,  when  he  re- 
moved thither.  Later,  when  the  headquarters  were  taken  to  New  York, 
he  followed,  living  in  Brooklyn  and  holding  an  important  position  in 
the  auditing  department  of  the  company.  His  death  took  place  in  Kal- 
amazoo, August  9,  1886.  He  lived  a  very  useful  and  honorable  life, 
was  a  very  religious  man,  and  was  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Broad  street 
(now  the  Tabernacle)  church. 

John  G.  Marklove  had  learned  the  art  of  organ  building  in  Glouces- 
ter, England,  his  native  city.  Immigrating  to  America  in  1850  he  first 
located  in  New  York  and  came  thence  to  this  city.  After  being  a  short 
time  in  the  service  of  Mr.  Andrews  he  opened  a  factory  for  himself  He 
thoroughly  understood  the  art  of  organ  making  in  every  detail  and 
made  improvements  in  the  delicate  mechanism  of  the  instrument  which 
were  immediately  recognized  as  standard  and  adopted  by  manufactur- 
ers. Specimens  of  his  skill  may  be  seen  and  heard  in  the  Reformed, 
Calvary,  and  St.  Francis  de  Sales  Churches  in  this  city  as  well  as  in 
many  other  places.  Devoted  to  music  he  never  lost  an  opportunity  to 
promote  it ;  he  was  a  charter  member  of  the  Utica  Academy  of  Music  and 
of  the  Mendelssohn  Club.  Rather  retiring  in  disposition  he  sought  not 
acquaintances,  but  was  deeply  attached  to  those  whom  he  made  friends. 
He  was  a  member  of  Oriental  Lodge  F.  and  A.  M.,  the  St.  George's 
Society,  and  Trinity  Church,  of  which  he  was  for  many  years  vestry- 
man. He  was  drowned  while  bathing  at  Scarboro,  Me.,  August  21, 
1891.      He  left  a  son  and  a  daughter. 

Hawley  E.  Heath,  who  since  1848  had  been  connected  with  the 
clothing  business  of  the  brothers  Rice,  carried  it  on  next  with  Nettle- 
ton,  Heath  &  Co.,  and  on  his  retirement  transmitted  it  to  his  sons. 
Somewhat  active  in  local  politics  he  was  for  three  years  supervisor  of 
his  ward.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  St.  George's  Church.  He 
died  October  22,  1844,  leaving  a  widow  and  two  sons. 


292  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

A.  L.  Woodruff,  who  had  been  a  denizen  of  the  place  since  the  chol- 
era season  of  1832  and  had  served  as  a  clerk  in  different  establishments, 
set  up  about  1854  as  a  commission  merchant  and  wool  dealer.  This 
after  a  few  years  he  exchanged  for  wholesale  dealing  in  wines  and 
liquors.  Affable  and  friendly  he  was  deemed  also  a  man  of  integrity. 
At  his  death,  September  25,  1888,  he  left  a  widow  and  one  son,  and 
four  married  daughters. 

1858. — Officers  for  this  year  were:  Mayor,  Roscoe  Conkling;  treas- 
urer, Ira  A.  Button  ;  surveyor,  Harvey  Park,  jr.;  street  commissioner, 
William  Stanford  ;  attorney,  Josiah  K.  Brown  ;  clerk,  David  Perkins  ;  al- 
dermen, Michael  McQuade,  Charles  H.  Hopkins,  William  H.  Ferry, 
Samuel  Y.  Lane,  Patrick  Devlin,  De  Witt  C.  Grove,  Henry  Ney  ;  super- 
visors, William  R.  Hopkins,  David  Wager,  Hawley  E.  Heath,  Daniel 
Morgan,  John  J.  Conaughty,  Nicholas  A.White,  Thomas  Lennebacker. 

There  was  great  interest  in  politics  at  large  with  heavy  Republican 
victories — the  precursor  of  the  storm  that  was  to  come  in  i860.  Ros 
coe  Conkling  was  elected  mayor  by  364  majority  and  nearly  all  the 
other  city  officers  were  Republican.  The  fire  ordinances  were  amended 
early  this  year,  the  principal  provisions  being  the  appointment  of  seven 
wardens,  one  from  each  ward,  to  hold  office  at  the  pleasure  of  the  coun- 
cil ;  the  appointment  of  firemen  after  their  approval  by  the  chief  engi- 
neer, and  the  appointment  of  foremen  and  their  assistants,  after  approval 
by  the  council  and  recommendation  by  the  chief  and  wardens.  Hose 
companies  Nos  2,  4,  5,  and  7  were  ordered  attached  to  the  engines  of 
the  same  numbers  and  all  compensation  to  firemen  abolished. 

The  local  tax  for  the  year  was  $70,646.20.  Public  improvements 
were  very  much  curtailed  and  the  administration  seems  to  have  been 
conducted  on  an  economical  plan.  Chenango  avenue  was  opened  to 
the  southerly  line  of  the  city.  About  $500  was  expended  for  fire  pur- 
poses on  Corn  Hill ;  paving  and  sewers  were  almost  wholly  neglected. 
The  first  Atlantic  cable  was  laid  this  year  and  the  event  was  properly 
celebrated  in  Utica. 

1859.  —  Officers:  Mayor,  Roscoe  Conkling;  treasurer,  Ira  A.  But- 
ton ;  clerk,  James  McDonough  ;  surveyor,  Harvey  Park,  jr.;  street  com- 
missioner, Jacob  Ehresman;  attorney,  Josiah  K.  Brown;  aldermen, 
John  Cantwell,  William  N.  Weaver,  George  H.  Wiley,  Burton  Hawley, 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1859.  293 

John  Myers,  John  B.  Wasmer,  Williana  B.  Taylor;  supervisors,  John 
H.  Douglass,  Silas  C.  Greenman,  Hawley  E.  Heath,  Daniel  Morgan, 
John  D.  Regan,  James  Merriman,  Thomas  Lennebacker.  Before  the 
completion  of  the  year  1859  IMr.  Conkling  resigned  the  office  of  mayor, 
and  on  the  2d  of  December  Charles  S.  Wilson  was  appointed  by  the 
council  to  fill  his  place.  Mr.  Wilson  found  an  unsatisfactory  state  of 
the  finances  with  a  floating  debt  of  several  thousand  dollars,  and  pub- 
lished a  communication  on  city  extravagance,  censuring  the  council  for 
its  action  leading  to  such  a  condition  of  affairs.  This  led  to  the  appoint- 
ment, January  14th,  of  a  committee  to  revise  the  charter,  which  was 
subsequently  reported  and  adopted  in  1862.  It  resulted  also  in  a  call 
for  a  public  meeting  "  with  a  view  to  reduction  in  taxation,  observance 
of  legal  restrictions  on  the  annual  expenditures,  the  separation  of  the 
charter  election  from  general  politics,  and  the  nomination  of  the  best 
men  for  office."  This  meeting  was  held  February  14,  i860,  and  Theo- 
dore Faxton  presided.  A  committee  of  seven  was  appointed  to  report 
the  names  of  committees  of  three  from  each  ward  whose  duty  it  should 
be  to  nominate  city  officers  to  be  supported  at  the  ensuing  election. 
The  committees  did  their  work  and  the  nominations  were  made  on  the 
simple  plan  of  selecting  suitable  men  for  ward  officers  from  citizens  of 
each  ward  who  belonged  to  the  political  party  prevailing  in  such  ward, 
thus  giving  Hobson's  choice  to  the  hide-bound  partisan,  that  or  noth- 
ing. These  nominations  did  not,  however,  prevent  the  Republicans  and 
Democrats  from  making  their  regular  nominations,  taking  necessarily  in 
the  wards  the  candidates  named  by  the  citizens'  committees,  who  were 
nearly,  if  not  all,  elected.  In  the  city  officers,  it  being  impossible  to 
divide  the  candidates  as  had  been  done  in  the  wards,  the  unconquerable 
party  distrust  prevailed,  and  notwithstanding  the  citizens'  nominee  for 
mayor  was  a  Republican,  eminently  adapted  in  character  and  by  public 
service  for  the  position,  the  Republicans  nominated  Calvin  Hall  and  a 
full  city  ticket,  and  the  Democrats  also  nominated  their  full  city  ticket. 
The  election  resulted  as  follows  : 

i860. — Officers:  Mayor,  Calvin  Hall ;  treasurer,  Charles  H.  Sprague; 
marshal,  J.  Augustus  Allen ;  attorney,  Lewis  H.  Babcock  ;  aldermen, 
William  M.  Everts,  Evan  E.  Roberts,  John  Griffiths,  Benjamin  F.  Shaw, 
Patrick  Devlin,  James  Merriman,  Homer  Townsend  ;  those  holding  over 


294  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

were  John  Cantwell,  William  N.  Weaver,  George  H.  Wiley,  Burton 
Hawley,  John  Myers,  John  B.  Wasmer,  William  B.  Taylor  (five  of 
the  elected  aldermen  were  also  on  the  Citizens'  ticket) ;  supervisors, 
A.  Churchill,  Silas  C.  Greenman,  W.  D.  Hamlin,  Luke  Wilkins,  John  D. 
Regan,  Paul  Keiser,  Thomas  Lennebacker ;  of  these  four  were  on  the 
Citizens'  ticket.  The  political  complexion  of  the  officers  was  five  Dem- 
ocratic aldermen  and  three  supervisors.  The  Citizens'  city  ticket  re- 
ceived only  ninety- four  votes. 

On  the  20th  of  March  the  council  took  the  necessary  steps  to  secure 
legislation  enabling  the  city  to  raise  money  to  pay  the  floating  debt. 
The  result  of  this  was  an  act  which  was  passed  by  the  legislature  pro- 
viding for  raising  $i2,ooo  with  which  to  wipe  out  the  debt,  payable  in 
three  installments  beginning  with  1862.  May  nth  the  resignation  of 
Mayor  Hall  was  presented  to  the  council  and  accepted.  De  Witt  C. 
Grove  and  Charles  S.  Wilson  were  named  as  candidates  for  the  office, 
but  the  vote  was  a  tie.  Mr.  Grove  was  placed  in  the  office  at  a  meeting 
of  the  council  held  a  few  days  later.  May  26th.  .  In  June  he  delivered 
his  inaugural  report  and  the  amount  of  the  tax  levy  was  stated  to  be 
$117,706. 

On  the  nth  of  May  a  resolution  was  adopted  to  open  Hobart  street 
from  its  then  termination  to  Genesee  street ;  the  expense  to  the  city  was 
estimated  at  $3, 000.  Commissioners  were  appointed  in  the  matter  and 
considerable  difficulty  seems  to  have  been  encountered.  At  least  the 
engineer  was  censured  for  negligence  in  not  making  a  map  of  the  pro- 
posed improvement  and  in  September  was  removed  from  office  for  that 
cause.  Harvey  J.  Park,  jr.,  was  placed  in  his  stead.  After  the  appoint- 
ment of  two  other  commissions  the  street  was  finally  opened  in  1861. 
In  May  a  resolution  was  adopted  accepting  land  from  the  Utica  Steam 
Woolen  Company  for  a  new  street  to  connect  Edward  with  the  inter- 
section of  Hamilton  and  Columbia  streets. 

On  the  7th  of  September  the  common  council  ordered  a  brick 
sewer  eighteen  inches  in  diameter  in  Charlotte  street  from  Elizabeth 
street  to  Steuben  Park  and  thence  to  Hopper  street.  The  census  of 
the  year  i860  resulted  as  follows:  First  ward,  1,421;  Second  ward, 
2;734;  Third  ward,  3,388;  Foiirth  ward,  3,719;  Fifth  ward,  3,101; 
Sixth  ward,  4,841  ;  Seventh  ward,  3,427  ;  showing  a  total  of  22,631, 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1S60  —  JVEW  COMERS.  295 

an  increase  of  462  over  the  year  1855.     Following  is  the  tax  hst  for 

the  year : 

Ordinary  tax,  .              $16,000.00 

Schools,  .                      16,500.00 

Water,  1,300.00 

City  hall  bonds,     .                         .  6,000.00 

On  bonds  and  interest  Black  River  Railroad,          .                            20,660.88 

Interest  city  hall  bonds,    .            .  .                                                 1,128.70 

Interest  on  city  bonds,  ordinary,  .            ,                                388.37 

Lighting,    .                                        .  5,500.00 

Total,  .  .       167,477.95 

In  May,  i860,  the  corner-stone  of  the  Orphan  Asylum  was  laid, 
ground  was  broken  for  a  school-house  on  Court  street,  and  Grace 
Church  was  opened  for  religious  services.  Among  the  new  coming  law- 
yers of  1858-60  was  one  whose  residence  was  short-lived,  for  he  passed 
away  on  the  1st  of  August,  1863.  This  was  George  E.  Quin,  brother- 
in-law  of  the  brothers  Kernan.  He  came  here  from  Chemung  County 
to  become  a  partner  with  the  latter,  the  firm  being  Kernan,  Quin  & 
Kernan.  He  was  an  excellent  man,  of  noble  impulses,  and  genial  and 
cheerful  temper.  He  died  in  his  forty-fifth  year  and  in  the  communion 
of  the  Catholic  Church,  leaving  a  widow  and  three  sons. 

Two  new  physicians  were  Walter  B.  Coventry  and  C.  Judson  Hill. 
Dr.  Coventry  was  a  son  of  Charles  B.  Coventry  and  a  grandson  of  Alex- 
ander Coventry.  Soon  after  beginning  his  practice  he  was  attached  as 
surgeon  to  the  Twenty-sixth  Regiment, 'and  in  the  performance  of  these 
duties  his  health  became  so  shattered  that  he  did  not  long  survive.  He 
acted  also  as  a  State  agent  for  the  relief  of  sick  and  wounded  soldiers. 
He  died  at  Marquette,  Mich.,  not  long  after  the  close  of  the  war.  His 
medical  associates  united  in  commending  his  professional  skill  and  his 
high  personal  worth. 

Dr.  Hill  had  likewise  experience  as  an  army  surgeon,  and  that  in  more 
than  one  regiment.  Returning  therefrom  he  resumed  practice  and  re- 
mained steadfastly  engaged  in  it,  and  with  much  acceptance  to  a  large 
clientage  and  maintaining  the  common  respect  until  near  the  close  of 
his  life,  interrupted  only  by  occasional  turns  of  ill  health.  Having  lost 
his  first  wife  he  had  but  recently  married  a  second  when  he  was  him- 
self taken  away  by  a  long-standing  infirmity.  His  death  occurred  in 
February,  1891.     He  left  one  son. 


296  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

A  leading  merchant  of  the  place  was  Daniel  Grouse.  He  was  of 
German  ancestry,  his  father  having  come  from  Palatine,  in  Saxony,  and 
was  born  in  Mindenville,  Montgomery  County,  April  29,  1805.  At  the 
age  of  twenty-two  he  started  in  mercantile  business  at  Canastota,  Madi- 
son County,  with  his  brother  John,  a  connection  which  lasted  until  1853, 
after  which  the  trade  was  his  own.  This  trade  was  extensive  and  his 
position  an  influential  one.  He  was  the  founder  and  president  of  the 
Canastota  Bank  and  at  one  time  a  candidate  for  Congress  from  the  Mad- 
ison and  Oswego  district.  In  i860  he  established  a  wholesale  grocery 
house  in  Utica,  of  which  his  son,  D.  N.  Crouse,  had  for  a  time  the  man- 
agement, and  removed  here  himself  about  two  years  later,  joining  with 
him  successively  two  others  of  his  sons.  With  great  industry,  great 
capacity  for  work,  and  abundant  capital  Mr.  Crouse  ere  long  built  up 
what  has  been  and  still  is  one  of  the  foremost  houses  of  the  kind  in  the 
city.  He  took  an  active  and  intelligent  interest  in  municipal  affairs, 
was  a  director  in  the  Second  National  Bank,  and  conspicuously  a  busi- 
ness man.  He  was  a  Democrat,  but  not  a  partisan,  and  without  desire 
for  office  or  public  station.  In  the  Civil  war  his  sympathies  and  his  en- 
ergies were  fully  enlisted  on  the  side  of  the  Union.  In  1871  Governor 
Hoffman  designated  him  with  General  McClellan  and  others  to  test  de- 
vices for  using  steam  on  the  canals.  Mr.  Crouse  was  a  member  of  the 
Reformed  Church  and  illustrated  his  faith  by  a  spotless  life  and  liberal 
charity.  His  death  occurred  September  28,  1877.  His  wife  and  three 
sons  survive  him. 

Edward  D.  Buckingham,  born  at  Saybrook,  Conn.,  February  22,  1818, 
was  early  apprenticed  to  the  trade  of  cabinetmaking.  His  trade  ac- 
quired he  spent  the  little  money  he  had  saved  in  an  effort  to  improve 
by  an  academical  training  the  education  which  he  realized  had  been 
defective,  and  afterward  by  private  study  rectified  in  a  measure  his  early 
deficiencies.  His  trade  he  practiced  in  different  places  in  Connecticut 
and  afterward  in  Waterville  in  this  county.  At  the  latter  village  he  put 
in  operation  a  manufactory  of  pianos,  and  had  already  gained  a  reputa- 
tion for  the  goodness  of  his  instruments  when  the  stringency  of  the  dis- 
astrous year  1857  brought  his  works  to  a  close,leaving  him  a  debt  which 
he  subsequently  cancelled.  He  removed  to  Utica,  soon  after  bought 
up  the  stock  of  William   H.  Dutton,  and  opened  a  store  for  the  sale  of 


E.  D.  B UCKINGHAM  —  HENR Y  LUX.  297 

musical  wares  and  objects  of  art.  This  store,  conducted  with  Andrew 
J.  Ketchum  and  later  with  other  partners,  went  on  with  increasing  at- 
tractiveness and  success  until  it  became  the  foremost  of  its  kind  in  the 
county.  By  the  liberal  manner  in  which  it  was  managed  much  has 
been  accomplished  to  improve  the  taste  of  our  people  both  in  music 
and  in  art.  It  was  a  gathering  place  of  musicians,  and  some  of  Utica's 
best  amateur  concerts  were  given  within  its  galleries — galleries  where 
choice  specimens  of  painting  and  engraving  were  on  exhibition,  free  to 
visitors  whether  coming  with  intention  to  purchase  or  from  motives  of 
curiosity  alone.  In  movements  affecting  the  welfare  of  the  city  Mr. 
Buckingham  took  an  active  interest  and  contributed  liberally.  It  was 
largely  through  his  efforts,  as  it  is  said,  that  when  he  was  a  member  of 
the  Board  of  Aldermen  fountains  were  provided  for  the  parks  of  the 
city.  Genial,  benevolent,  business-like,  and  thoroughly  honest  Mr. 
Buckingham  on  his  sudden  taking  off  in  May,  1891,  was  sincerely 
mourned.  He  left  a  family  of  five  daughters,  of  whom  three  are  mar- 
ried. 

In  the  career  of  Henry  Lux  we  have  a  noteworthy  illustration  of  the 
rise  of  an  humble  individual  through  his  own  efforts  to  a  position  of  im- 
portance and  usefulness.  Born  in  Alsace,  November  26,  1827,  he  came 
to  this  country  with  several  brothers  and  sisters  when  he  was  seventeen 
years  of  age.  He  was  successively  chore-boy  with  several  families  in 
the  city,  fireman  on  the  Central,  and  stationary  engineer  in  a  lumber 
factory,  when  he  entered  the  employment  of  W.  Hallock,  a  butcher. 
In  1855  '^^  began  business  for  himself  and  by  strict  devotion  to  its  re- 
quirements, wherein  he  was  aided  by  two  sons,  he  succeeded  in  build- 
ing up  the  largest  meat  trade  in  the  city,  having  the  greater  share  of 
the  custom  of  the  leading  hotels  and  the  prominent  families.  Of  jovial 
disposition  and  obliging  temper  he  had  always  a  pleasant  word  for 
every  one,  and  his  friends  were  many.  He  was  active  in  municipal 
affairs  and  attentive  to  the  city's  prosperity.  In  1867,  1869,  and  1871 
he  was  a  meiiber  of  the  common  council.  In  1874,  on  the  formation 
of  the  police  and  fire  commission,  he  was  appointed  commissioner  and 
did  much  toward  establishing  the  system  the  city  now  possesses.  In 
the  month  before  his  death  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  he  was  re- appointed 
on  this  commission.      Mr.  Lux  was  a  vestryman  of  St.  Luke's  Church,  a 

38 


298  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Mason,  an  Odd  Fellow,  and  a  member  of  several  German  societies.  He 
died  May  21,  1891. 

Calvin  Hall,  son  of  an  early  settler  of  Deerfield  of  the  same  name, 
had  lived  in  that  place  nearly  all  his  life.  In  1859  he  was  elected 
sherifif  of  the  county,  very  soon  afterward  moved  into  Utica,  and  in  the 
spring  of  i860  was  chosen  its  mayor.  By  reason  of  ill  health  he  re- 
signed on  the  20th  of  May  and  died  a  httle  later. 

John  Henry  Douglass  was  a  native  of  Utica,  though  he  passed  a  por- 
tion of  his  youth  in  Cincinnati,  where  his  parents  then  lived  Soon 
after  their  return  he  became  an  orphan.  Stephen  M.  Ferine,  an  early 
undertaker  of  Utica,  was  his  uncle,  and  Douglass  assisted  him  when  not 
in  school ;  was  a  clerk  under  Postmasters  Tiffany  and  Lyon  and  a  gen- 
eral favorite.  When  Mr.  Ferine  went  to  New  York  he  sold  his  business 
to  John  H.  Van  Ness  and  Mr.  Douglass,  and  the  firm  existed  thirteen 
years,  after  which  the  busine.ss  was  conducted  by  Mr.  Douglass  until  his 
death.  He  had  for  some  years  the  charge  of  the  burial  of  patients  who 
died  at  the  State  Hospital,  but  his  happy  adaptation  to  the  performance 
of  funeral  rites  brought  him  ere  long  the  favor  of  all  classes  of  our 
citizens,  and  he  was  greatly  esteemed  for  the  efficiency,  the  tenderness, 
and  delicacy  with  which  he  performed  his  tasks.  He  was  one  of  the 
charter  members  of  Tiger  Hose  and  was  foreman  several  years.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  Citizens  Corps  from  his  youth  and  commanded  it 
four  years.  He  represented  the  First  ward  twelve  years  in  the  Board  of 
Supervisors,  beginning  with  1859  ;  was  an  efficient  member  of  the  board 
as  well  as  of  the  Masoijiic  fraternity  and  several  civil  organizations.  His 
widow  survives.  They  had  three  children.  Mr.  Douglass  died  March 
13,  1884. 

William  Dunn  and  William  Lent  were  for  twenty-seven  years  associ- 
ated in  the  useful,  laborious,  though  comparatively  humble  employment 
of  carrying  baggage  to  and  from  the  railroads.  Both  had  lived  long  in 
the  city,  both  were  popular  and  respected,  and  from  their  personal 
characters  and  the  faithfulness  with  which  they  ministered  to  the  indis- 
pensable needs  of  the  community  they  together  constituted  one  of  its 
important  institutions. 

Thomas  B.  Devereux,  son  of  Nicholas,  was  a  coal  merchant ;  Peter 
Vidvard  an  importer  of  wines  and  liquors ;  Enos  Wood  a  machinist ; 
and  George  W.  Lewis  an  enterprising  dealer  in  shoes. 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1861.  299 

1861. — Aij  abolition  convention  was  advertised  for  January  14-15, 
1 86 1,  at  which  such  celebrities  as  Susan  B.  Anthony,  E.  Cady  Stanton, 
Samuel  J.  May,  Beriah  Green,  and  others  were  noticed  as  speakers.  A 
special  meeting  of  the  council  was  called  to  decide  upon  the  advisability 
of  allowing  the  convention  to  be  held.  It  was  resolved  not  to  allow  it 
and  the  meeting  was  not  held. 

At  the  charter  election  De  Witt  C.  Grove  was  elected  mayor  ;  treas- 
urer, William  P.  Carpenter;  marshal,  David  Hess;  attorney,  Arthur  B. 
Johnson  ;  aldermen,  John  Cantwell,  William  N.  Weaver,  John  Best, 
Adrian  Kissam,  Patrick  McGough,  John  M.  Hahn,  Elijah  J.  Herbage  ; 
supervisors,  John  H.  Douglass,  S  C.  Greenman,  Owen  Eynon,  George 
Pearson,  John  D.  Regan,  Paul  Keiser,  Thomas  Buchanan,  jr ;  clerk, 
Peter  Cunningham  ;  street  commissioner,  Jacob  Ehresman  ;  surveyor, 
Harvey  Park,  jr. 

In  his  inaugural  Mayor  Grove  expressed  himself  very  forcibly  upon 
the  importance  of  keeping  expenses  within  the  amount  authorized  and 
the  necessity  of  great  economy  in  order  to  do  so ;  said  a  new  watch- 
house  would  haveto  be  provided  ;  and  expressed  himself  as  pleased  with 
tjie  provisions  of  the  new  charter.  Salaries  were  left  the  same  as  the 
previous  year,  viz.:  Treasurer,  clerk,  and  marshal  each  $6go  ;  street 
commissioner  $500;  janitor  $325. 

Again  the  restriction  of  expenditure  to  income  by  the  act  of  1849 
was  unavailing,  and  a  debt  of  $i2,ooo,for  which  there  were  no  resources, 
must  be  paid  or  the  city  hall  and  other  city  property  might  be  sold  on 
execution,  to  say  nothing  of  the  distress  of  those  who  had  eagerly 
trusted  the  city.  This  time  the  iron-clad  proviso  which  still  remains  in 
the  charter  was  imposed  by  the  citizens.     It  is  as  follows : 

Sec.  3  of  Chapter  24,  Laws  of  i85i.  In  case  any  alderman  of  the  said  city  shall  vote 
for  any  appropriation  or  for  the  expenditure  of  any  moneys  not  authorized  by  the  char- 
ter of  said  city  or  by  some  law^  or  in  violation  of  any  of  the  provisions  of  law,  every 
such  alderman  shall  be  liable  to  a  penalty  of  f  100,  to  be  sued  for  and  recovered  in  any 
court  with  costs,  by  and  in  the  name  of  any  citizen  of  said  city.  And  in  case  the  com- 
mon council  of  said  city  shall  contract  any  debts  after  the  first  Tuesday  of  March  in 
any  year  and  before  the  first  Tuesday  of  March  thereafter,  which  shall  remain  unpaid 
for  one  month  after  the  last  mentioned  day  for  want  of  sufficient  funds  in  the  treasury 
to  pay  the  same,  or  in  case  the  common  council  shall  authorize  any  expenditure  for 
any  purpose  in  such  year,  exceeding  the  amount  which  the  said  council  are  authorized 
by  law  to  raise  for  such  purpose,  the  aldermen  voting  for  the  contracting  any  such 


300  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

debt  or  to  authorize  any  such  expenditure  shall  be  personally  liable  to  each  and  every 
party  entitled  to  payment ;  the  city  ot  Utica  shall  not  be  liable  to  pay  the  same,  nor 
shall  the  common  council  credit  or  pay  any  debt  so  contracted  or  expenditure  so  made. 

But  laws  are  of  little  value  so  long  as  there  are  any  who  choose  to 
disobey  them  and  none  who  have  the  principle  or  pluck  to  enforce 
them.  This  remarkably  strict  law,  though  often  referred  to  by  those 
about  to  violate  it,  remains  a  dead  letter  thus  far,  its  penalties  not  in- 
flicted either  on  the  actual  debtors  or  the  cognizant  creditors,  who  risk 
its  violation,  trusting  to  the  long  enduring  mercy  of  the  taxpayers  It 
deserves  a  place  in  this  history  as  a  striking  example  of  "  how  not  to  do 
it  "  in  thirty  years. 

The  council  adopted  a  resolution  July  1 2th  that  thereafter  all  petitions 
for  local  improvements  must  have  on  them  names  of  property  owners 
representing  a  majority  of  property  in  value.  Further  proceedings  of 
this  board  were  a  resolution  to  extend  Blandina  street  from  its  termina- 
tion to  Albany  street,  one  to  lay  down  an  1 8-inch  sewer  on  a  portion  of 
First  street,  and  one  to  appoint  a  committee  to  report  a  plan  for  a  watch- 
house. 

The  cloud  which  was  to  envelop  the  country  in  civil  war  could  now 
be  seen  "no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand."  A  meeting  was  called  for 
February  ist  of  all  "  who  believe  a  real  and  substantial  difficulty  exists 
ill  the  administration  of  the  Federal  government."  The  call  received 
400  or  500  signatures.  Lincoln  had  been  elected  after  one  of  the  most 
enthusiastic  campaigns  ever  known  in  America,  and  the  mutterings  of  se- 
cession came  up  from  the  South.  The  meeting  was  held  and  Ward 
Hunt  presided.  Speeches  were  made  upon  the  attitude  of  national  af 
fairs  by  John  F.  Seymour,  C.  H.  Doolittle,  Hiram  Denio,  Ward  Hunt, 
Roscoe  Conkling,  E.  H.  Roberts,  and  others,  and  a  series  of  resolutions 
in  support  of  the  government  was  adopted.  President  Lincoln  was  ex- 
pected to  arrive  in  Utica  on  the  i8th  of  February  and  a  meeting  was 
held  to  make  arrangements  for  his  reception.  Alrick  Hubbell  presided, 
and  thirty  four  persons  were  named  as  a  general  committee  of  reception. 
The  President  arrived  at  1 1:30,  and  standing  on  the  rear  platform  of  the 
train  made  a  very  few  remarks  and  was  addressed  by  Mr.  Hunt.  A 
great  crowd  was  in  attendance. 

With  the  firing  upon  Fort  Sumter  the  city  became  filled  with  martial 
enthusiasm,  and  when  the  President  issued  his  call  for  75,000  volunteers 


W^AH  PROCEEDINGS  OF  i86i.  301 

no  city  responded  more  promptly  or  enthusiastically  than  this.  Capt. 
William  Christian  at  once  began  the  organization  of  a  volunteer  battal- 
ion of  four  companies,  which  number  was  eventually  increased,  and  en- 
listments were  rapidly  made.  This  finally  became  the  Twenty- sixth 
Regiment.  On  the  17th  of  April  the  Citizens  Corps- tendered  its  serv- 
ices to  the  government  and  announced  its  readiness  to  march  at  forty- 
eight  hours'  notice.  The  armories  of  the  different  companies  in  the  city 
were  scenes  of  the  greatest  activity  ;  the  city  was  ablaze  with  flags, 
drums  beat,  and  everywhere  that  spirit  of  patriotism  which  was  soon  to 
be  tried  on  many  a  bloody  field  prevailed. 

Recruiting  was  active  under  the  July  call  of  the  President  during  the 
fall  months.  Fourteen  men  left  on  September  6th  and  seventeen  on 
the  9th,  part  going  to  each  of  the  Fourteenth  and  Twenty-sixth  Reg- 
iments. The  Herald  oi  September  17th  said  that  no  place  could  offer 
better  opportunities  for  enlistments,  "  and  the  streets  present  as  much 
of  a  military  appearance  as  they  did  when  the  fall  of  Sumter  ex- 
cited two  regiments  to  go  forth  almost  at  a  moment's  notice."  Lieut. 
L.  R.  Sherwood  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Regiment  opened  a  recruiting  of 
fice  in  the  armory  on  the  26th  of  July  for  three  years'  men  and  offered 
the  bounty  of  $100.  October  9th  a  local  paper  said  that  Utica  was 
doing  more  in  proportion  to  population  to  fill  the  ranks  of  the  army 
than  any  other  city  or  town  in  the  State.  Eighteen  recruiting  offices 
existed  and  nearly  400  men  were  enrolled  in  the  ten  days.  A  great 
Union  meeting  was  held  October  loth  with  Daniel  S.  Dickinson  as  ora- 
tor. On  the  15th  of  October  a  meeting  was  held  to  encourage  organ- 
ization and  enlistments  in  the  Fourth  Oneida  County  Regiment.  W.  J. 
Bacon  presided.  Nine  companies  of  the  Third  Oneida  Regiment  were 
mustered  at  Boonville  before  October  i8th.  Captain  Bates's  Empire 
Battery  left  for  Elmira  on  October  22d,  150  strong,  and  was  destined  ere 
long  to  see  hard  service. 

A  citizen  of  Utica  who  bore  a  somewhat  conspicuous  part  in  the  mili- 
tary and  other  relations  of  the  State  was  James  McQuade.  He  was  the 
eldest  son  of  Michael  McQuade  and  was  born  April  27,  1829.  After 
attending  the  public  schools  and  obtaining  a  classical  education  at 
Montreal  he  began  the  study  of  law.  The  law  not  being  congenial  to 
him  he  entered  the   Bank  of  Utica  as  clerk  and  then  as  an  ofificer.      In 


302  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

i8s  I  he  went  to  Albany  as  assistant  clerk  of  the  Assembly  under  Gen. 
R.  U.  Shearman.  Next  he  was  in  turn  engaged  in  the  coffee  and  spice 
business,  and  had  charge  of  the  books  of  the  Gulf  Brewery.  He  repre- 
sented the  First  ward  in  the  Board  of  Supervisors  in  1855-56.  He  was 
a  member  of  Fulton  Fire  Company,  No.  3,  and  also  of  the  Exempt 
Firemen's  Association.  He  was  chosen  president  of  the  Firemen's  Be- 
nevolent Association  in  1861  and  again  in  1866.  In  1859  he  was 
elected  member  of  Assembly  by  the  Republicans  and  served  his  con- 
stituents acceptably.  He  took  an  early  and  active  interest  in  military 
affairs  and  was  a  member  of  the  old  Columbian  Artillery.  About  the 
year  1847  he  joined  the  Citizens  Corps  and  became  one  of  its  foremost 
members ;  he  was  captain  of  the  corps  for  three  years  just  previous  to 
the  Civil  war,  and  on  the  day  following  the  firing  on  Fort  Sumter  he 
offered  his  own  services  and  those  of  his  entire  company  to  the  govern- 
ment for  two  years  ;  they  became  a  part  of  the  Fourteenth  Regiment, 
of  which  he  was  elected  colonel.  The  regiment  passed  the  winter  of 
that  year  near  Washington  and  in  the  spring  of  1862  it  was  ordered  to 
advance.  It  bore  an  honorable  part  in  the  seven  days'  fighting  from 
June  27th  to  July  3d,  and  when  at  Malvern  Hill  Colonel  McQuade  par- 
ticularly distinguished  himself,  acting  as  brigadier- commander  through 
nearly  the  whole  engagement.  For  gallantry  and  bravery  he  was 
recommended  for  promotion  to  brigadier- general.  He  was  taken  ill 
and  carried  in  an  ambulance  to  the  field  of  Chancellorsville,  and  there 
mounted  his  horse  and  commanded  his  regiment  through  the  fight. 
When  the  battle  was  over  he  fell  exhausted  and  was  confined  to  his 
tent  for  two  weeks.  The  regiment  returned  to  Utica,  May  21,  1863. 
Colonel  McQuade  was  not  a  rigid  disciplinarian,  but  was  gallant  and 
brave  on  all  occasions  and  greatly  endeared  to  his  men.  Soon  after 
the  close  of  the  war  he  was  breveted  brigadier- general  on  the  recom- 
mendation of  nearly  all  of  the  New  York  State  congressmen.  He  was 
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Loyal  Legion  and  one  of  the  earliest  mem- 
bers of  the  G.  A.  R.,  and  he  organized  the  George  Washington  Post  in 
New  York  city.  In  1879  he  was  elected  department  commander  of 
that  order.  His  military  duties  over  he  opened  a  pension  office  in  Utica. 
In  1866  he  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city  by  the  Republicans  and  in 
the  same  year  was  appointed  postmaster,  but  served  only  a  few  months. 


THOMAS  DA  VIES.  303 

In  1867  he  was  one  of  the  Democratic  presidential  electors  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  was  appointed  inspector- general  on  the  staff  of  Governor 
Hoffman.  In  1870  he  was  again  chosen  mayor  of  Utica,  this  time  by 
the  Democrats,  and  in  1882  was  a  prominent  candidate  for  lieutenant- 
governor.  Other  positions  which  he  filled  were  the  following :  Presi- 
dent of  the  Jefferson  Car  Company  ;  quarantine  commissioner  of  the 
port  of  New  York  ;  and  one  of  the  managers  of  the  State  Hospital,  be- 
ing chairman  of  the  auditing  committee  and  secretary  of  the  board.  In 
1882  he  was  a  prominent  candidate  for  lieutenant-governor.  Mr.  Mc- 
Quade  died  March  25,  1885,  leaving  a  son  and  two  daughters. 

Thomas  M.  Davies,  one  of  three  sons  of  the  veteran  jeweler,  Thomas 
Ddvies,  was  born  in  Utica  and  learned  his  father's  trade  with  him. 
Until  a  few  years  before  his  death  he  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of 
Davies  &  Sons,  afterward  B.  F.  &  T.  M.  Davies.  He  was  an  early 
member  of  the  Citizens  Corps  and  a  charter  member  of  Tiger  Hose 
Company.  Joining  the  Fourteenth  Regiment  with  Captain  McQuade's 
company  he  was  commissioned  first  lieutenant,  his  later  promotions  fol- 
lowing those  of  his  senior  officers  until  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel. 
He  was  a  faithful,  brave,  and  noble  soldier.  Returning  to  Utica  at  the 
close  of  the  war  he  was  chosen  captain  of  the  re-organized  corps  and 
labored  hard  to  establish  the  company  on  a  firm  basis.  A  few  years 
before  his  death  he  was  made  inspector  of  the  Old  Fort  Schuyler  distil- 
lery in  the  revenue  department  and  held  the  position  until  his  decease. 
In  1877  Colonel  Davies  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Police 
and  Fire  Commissioners  and  served  in  that  position  faithfully  ;  he  held 
the  office  until  a  few  weeks  before  his  death.  Early  in  life  he  married 
a  daughter  of  Colonel  Norton,  an  old|  resident  of  the  city.  He  was  a 
man  of  fixed,  firm  opinions  and  felt  contempt  for  mean,  small  men  and 
things.  He  was  generous  to  a  fault  and^^did  not  know  the  meaning  of 
fear.  He  was  devoted  to  his  friends,  who  were  numerous  in  the  city  of 
his  birth.  His  death  took  place  May  14,  1882,  at  the  age  of  forty- 
nine. 

Another  Utica  soldier  memorable  for  his  bravery  and  breveted  by 
the  United  States  government  was  Egbert  Bagg.  He  was  the  son  of 
Moses  Bagg  and  was  born  February  2,  1820.  His  academical  educa- 
tion was  obtained  here  and   his  collegiate  at  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  Col- 


304  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

lege.  Before  entering  college  and  after  leaving  it  he  gained  a  practical 
acquaintance  with  engineering  by  service  in  the  work  of  the  Erie  Canal 
enlargement.  He  completed  a  course  of  law  study,  but  never  engaged 
in  practice.  After  a  few  months'  service  in  the  machine  shops  of  the 
New  York  Cotton-Mills  to  learn  the  rudiments  of  the  business  he  en- 
tered into  partnership  with  William  Roberts,  the  foreman  of  the  shop, 
and  began  machine  making  in  Utica.  Bagg  &  Roberts  made  some 
needed  machinery  for  the  factories  then  finding  a  place  in  the  city. 
Ere  long  they  encountered  a  reverse  entailing  much  pecuniary  loss. 
Mr.  Bagg  now  gave  himself  to  surveying,  and  in  1853-54  he  was  the 
surveyor  of  the  city.  In  1855  he  went  to  Fort  Dodge,  Iowa,  and 
remained  until  1861.  In  1862  he  entered  the  military  service  as  quarter- 
master with  the  rank  of  first  lieutenant  in  the  One  Hundred  and  Seven- 
teenth Regiment  New  York  State  Volunteers,  which  was  then  organiz- 
ing. He  soon  displayed  such  admirable  soldierly  qualities  that  he  rose 
rapidly  from  grade  to  grade,  and  in  August,  1864,  was  made  major. 
As  an  officer  he  was  strict  in  discipline,  but  admired  by  his  men,  was 
enduring,  fearless,  and  even  reckless  in  his  exposure  of  himself  He 
was  engaged  in  thirteen  fights,  nine  of  which  were  pitched  battles,  and 
had  command  of  the  regiment  in  several  engagements.  It  was  at  the 
attack  on  Fort  Fisher  that  he  especially  distinguished  himself,  and  there 
he  received  a  wound  of  the  shoulder  from  which  he  was  permanently 
crippled.  For  gallant  and  meritorious  service  in  this  battle  he  received 
from  the  United  States  government  a  brevet  as  lieutenant- colonel. 
Slowly  rallying  from  his  wound  he  resumed  his  employment  as  a  sur- 
veyor, was  the  official  surveyor  of  the  city  during  the  years  1866  to 
1869,  also  in  1878,  and  was  both  surveyor  and  superintendent  of  Forest 
Hill  Cemetery.  He  did  it  good  work,  both  by  his  taste  and  care  in  the 
management  of  the  grounds,  but  still  more  by  the  plotting  of  a  large 
part  of  the  lots  then  in  demand  and  by  the  preparation  of  maps,  which 
were  at  that  time  greatly  needed.  His  death  took  place  November  18, 
1885,  while  on  a  voyage  to  Europe.  His  wife,  a  daughter  of  Mont- 
gomery Hunt,  still  survives,  as  does  also  one  son. 

When  the  war  broke  out  Joseph  S.  Lowery  was  working  for  his  brother 
in  a  store  at  Boonville;  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  respond  when  it  was 
proposed  to  raise   the   One   Hundred   and    Forty-sixth    Regiment    in 


COLONEL  LOWERY  —  LIEUT.-COL.  H.  H.  CURRAN.        305 

Oneida  County.  When  Mr.  Lowery  left  Rome  with  his  regiment  it  was 
with  the  rank  of  second  sergeant.  He  at  once  became  a  favorite,  and 
in  the  winter  of  1862  was  commissioned  second  Heutenant  of  Company 
E.  In  the  campaign  that  followed  Mr.  Lowery's  soldierly  qualities  were 
severely  tested,  but  he  never  failed  in  the  duty  assigned  him.  When 
the  proper  time  came  he  was  promoted  to  the  captaincy  of  Company  A, 
and  in  that  position  participated  in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg,  Chan- 
cellorsville,  Gettysburg,  the  Wilderness,  Spottsylvania,  Cold  Harbor, 
and  other  minor  engagements.  At  Spottsylvania,  while  in  command  of 
a  skirmish  line,  he  advanced  in  the  face  of  a  destructive  fire  and  took 
shelter  under  the  enemy's  breastworks,  where  his  men  were  forced  to 
remain  until  nightfall,  which  covered  their  retreat.  For  his  bravery  in 
this  event  he  was  publicly  complimented  in  general  orders  and  breveted 
major.  At  Cold  Harbor  Colonel  Lowery  was  severely  wounded  and 
borne  to  the  rear,  waving  his  hat  and  cheering  on  his  comrades.  His 
chance  of  recovery  from  the  wound  was  as  one  in  a  thousand,  and  he 
was  carried  many  miles  on  a  stretcher  to  White  House  Landing,  whence 
he  was  taken  to  Washington,  where  he  remained  in  the  hospital  three 
months.  He  finally  recovered  and  was  breveted  colonel  "for  gallant 
and  meritorious  services  during  the  war."  Returning  home  he  became 
associated  with  his  brothers  in  starting  a  knitting-mill  on  Pine  street. 
This  was  destroyed  by  fire  and  was  not  rebuilt.  He  subsequently 
united  with  James  A.  Lowery  in  the  cotton  commission  business,  which 
was  successful,  and  remained  so  until  his  death.  As  a  military  man 
Colonel  Lowery  left  an  enviable  record.  He  was  a  member  of  Post 
McQuade,  G.  A.  R.,  and  also  of  the  Veteran  Legion.  In  politics  a 
Democrat  he  was  twice  elected  school  commissioner  and  was  otherwise 
conspicuous  in  his  party.  He  was  a  director  of  the  City  National  Bank, 
a  trustee  of  the  Soldiers  Monument  Association,  and  of  the  Citizens 
Corps,  in  all  of  which  organizations  he  took  an  active  interest.  He  died 
on  the  19th  of  October,  1891,  leaving  a  widow  and  two  children. 

Henry  Hastings  Curran  was  the  son  of  Edward  Curran  and  was 
born  September  27,  1841.  He  entered  Hamilton  College  from  the 
Utica  Free  Academy  and.  signalized  his  undergraduate  course  by  ob- 
taining a  succession  of  college  laurels  in  classical  and  belles-lettres  studies. 
Besides  the  reputation  of  marked  ability  he  bore,  too,  the  respect  and 
39 


3o6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

affection  of  all  for  those  qualities  of  mind  and  heart  which  constitute  the 
true  man  and  the  gentleman.  The  war  for  the  Union  broke  out  in  the 
midst  of  his  junior  year.  Immediately  on  the  President's  call  for  75,000 
men  he  and  some  of  his  companions  began  by  daily  drill  in  arms  to  pre- 
pare themselves  for  their  country's  service.  They  went  further ;  they  en- 
listed and  organized  a  company  of  recruits  and  transferred  them  to  New 
York,  where  promises  had  been  made  them  of  their  incorporation  into  one 
or  other  of  certain  regiments  then  being  formed.  But  being  deceived  by 
false  promises,  and  kept  long  in  waiting  while  their  men  were  dropping 
off  or  being  decoyed  out  of  their  ranks,  and  incurring  heavy  expense,  they 
became  discouraged  and  separated.  Profiting  by  his  sad  experience, 
yet  not  chilled  in  patriotic  ardor,  Mr.  Curran  returned  to  college  and 
finished  his  course.  Immediately  on  its  completion  in  1862,  when  en- 
listments nearer  home  were  in  progress  and  under  auspices  more  favor- 
able, he  again  raised  a  company  and  was  made  its  captain.  It  formed 
a  part  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Forty- sixth  Regiment  of  New  York 
State  Volunteers,  which  was  commanded  by  Col.  Kennar  Garrard,  a 
West  Point  graduate  who  had  seen  some  years  of  service.  It  was  as- 
signed to  the  Third  Brigade  of  General  Sykes's  division  of  the  Fifth 
Army  Corps.  In  this  corps  Captain  Curran  served  with  such  fidelity 
and  persistent  endurance,  such  bravery  and  soldierly  sagacity,  that  he 
was  rapidly  promoted  to  higher  positions.  As  unassuming  and  gener- 
ous as  he  was  brave  his  soldiers  loved  him  like  a  brother,  while  his  su- 
periors accorded  him  unqualified  respect  and  trust.  He  was  in  the 
battles  of  Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  Gettysburg,  and  the  Wilder- 
ness. At  this  latter  contest,  while  he  was  at  the  head  of  his  men,  he  was 
shot  through  the  heart  and  instantly  killed  May  4,  1864.  He  was  then 
acting  as  lieutenant- colonel,  although  holding  the  commission  of  major. 
His  appointment  as  lieutenant-colonel,  dated  the  4th  of  the  preceding 
April,  reached  his  family  after  his  fall.  At  the  reception  given  his  regi- 
ment in  July  of  the  succeeding  year  on  their  return  from  the  war  no 
more  affecting  feature  was  witnessed  than  the  horse  of  Colonel  Curran, 
with  that  of  Colonel  Jenkins,  led  by  grooms  in  the  civic  and  military 
procession  which  marked  the  occasion.  A  more  lasting  and  appropriate 
honor  was  paid  to  his  memory  by  the  founding  of  a  prize  medal  to  be 
annually  awarded  to  the  best  classical  scholar  in  the  junior  class  of  Ham- 


LIE  UT.  C.  L.  B  UCKINGHAM  —  "  WILLIE  "  BA CON.         307 

ilton  College,  thus  linking  his  name  with  a  competition  in  which  he  had 
himself  gained  distinction. 

A  classmate  of  the  foregoing  was  Charles  L.  Buckingham,  eminent 
like  him  for  scholarship,  having  taken  more  prizes  than  any  other  mem- 
ber of  the  class,  including  the  Clark  prize,  and  who  became  a  part  of 
the  same  regiment.  He  was  the  son  of  Daniel  P.  Buckingham,  clerk 
of  the  county  and  a  recent  comer  to  Utica.  The  son  entered  the  One 
Hundred  and  Forty- sixth  as  second  lieutenant.  He  was  wounded  at  the 
Wilderness  and  while  at  home  recovering  from  his  injury  was  pro- 
moted to  first  lieutenant.  He  rejoined  his  comrades  and  was  only 
eight  days  in  their  midst  when  he  was  killed  while  on  picket  duty.  Be- 
loved by  a  large  circle  of  friends  his  loss  was  widely  mourned. 

"Willie"  Bacon  was  another  brave  youth  who  was  summoned  from 
his  college  studies  by  the  first  notes  of  war.  He  was  the  son  of  Hon. 
William  J.  Bacon  and  was  born  in  February,  1842.  He  entered  Ham- 
ilton College  in  1859  and  was  quietly  pursuing  his  alloted  tasks  when 
the  guns  of  Sumter  aroused  the  patriotism  slumbering  in  so  many 
hearts.  He  at, once  presented  to  his  parents  his  earnest  plea  to  be  per- 
mitted to  enroll  himself  in  any  capacity  among  the  defenders  of  his 
country.  This  leave  was  obtained  and  he  was  enlisted  as  a  private  in 
Company  A  of  the  Fourteenth  Regiment.  With  it  he  went  to  Wash- 
ington in  1 86 1.  A  month  later,  by  invitation  of  Colonel  Christian,  of 
the  Twenty-sixth,  he  was  transferred  to  that  regiment  and  in  August, 
in  consequent  of  the  retirement  of  some  of  its  officers,  he  was  commis- 
sioned its  adjutant.  Ere  long  he  was  engaged  in  the  trying  service 
which  fell  to  its  lot.  He  was  wounded  at  the  second  fight  at  Manassas 
and  was  over  a  month  at  home,  but  returned  before  his  convalescence 
was  complete.  In  the  meantime  he  had  passed  from  the  light  hearted 
and  impulsive  boy  to  the  maturity  of  early  manhood,  and  his  second 
return  to  duty  was  with  a  sober  and  thoughtful  view  of  the  condition 
of  the  country  and  of  his  own  responsibilities  and  risks.  Overtaking 
his  comrades  he  shared  with  them  the  exhausting  marches  thrdugh  Vir- 
ginia to  the  Rappahannock.  When,  on  the  13th  of  December,  1862, 
they  were  engaged  in  the  fierce  assault  upon  the  entrenched  position 
at  Fredericksburg  he  was  conspicuous  for  his  manly  bravery  and  an  ex- 
ample to   his  soldiers.     While  gallantly  leading  them  onward    he  fell 


3o8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

mortally  wounded  and  survived  but  three  days  longer.  Modest,  gen- 
erous, and  fearless  he  was  universally  admired  and  never  was  a  word 
lisped  to  his  discredit. 

Another  victim  of  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg  was  Lieut.  N.  Garrow 
Throop,  of  noble  and  generous  impulses  and  an  efficient  officer.  He 
raised  the  first  company  for  Colonel  Zook's  regiment  (the  One  Hundred 
and  Fifty-seventh),  saw  much  active  service,  was  badly  wounded  at  An- 
tietam,  but  returned  to  duty  to  meet  his  death-stroke  in  the  desperate 
assault  on  Fredericksburg.      He  was  a  nephew  of  Hon.  Ward  Hunt. 

Catharinus  B.  Mervine,  who  died  at  City  Point,  Va,,  August  17, 
1864,  was  the  son  of  Rear- Admiral  William  Mervine,  for  many  years 
a  sojourner  in  Utica.  Admiral  Mervine  entered  the  navy  in  1809  and 
was  nearly  sixty  years  in  service,  twenty-five  years  at  sea,  four  on  shore, 
and  thirty  unemployed.  From  the  War  of  1812  to  that  of  1861  he  had 
been  on  numerous  cruises  and  borne  a  part  in  many  naval  undertak- 
ings. Wounded  at  Black  Rock,  guarding  in  Charleston  Harbor  against 
the  nullification  disturbances  of  1832,  capturing  in  the  Mexican  War 
a  brig  which  had  two  American  vessels  under  her  guns,  planting  the 
American  flag  on  the  fort  at  Monterey  in  1848,  and  in  1861,  while  in 
command  of  the  Gulf  Blockading  Squadron,  planning  the  attack  which 
was  so  heroically  carried  out  by  his  subordinate — these  are  among  the 
events  of  his  more  active  life.  When  off  duty  his  home  was  here,  where 
his  untarnished  record,  his  social  attractiveness,  and  courtly,  old-school 
manners  secured  him  universal  regard.  He  lived  to  see  the  war  at  an 
end,  though  unfitted  by  his  age  to  take  a  conspicuous  part  in  it,  and 
died  September  25,  1868.  His  son  ("Cass"  as  he  was  familiarly 
called)  joined  the  army  in  1 86 1  as  a  private  in  the  Citizens  Corps 
(Company  A  of  the  Fourteenth  Regiment),  was  made  sergeant-major 
when  the  regiment  was  organized,  and  later  was  appointed  adjutant. 
He  served  on  the  staff  with  General  McQuade  while  he  was  brigade 
commander  in  General  Porter's  division.  After  the  seven  days'  battles 
before  Richmond  he  was  appointed  assistant  adjutant-general  to  Gen- 
eral Griffin  by  reason  of  his  good  conduct  in  those  battles,  and  at  the 
time  of  his  death  he  held  the  same  rank  in  the  First  Division  of  the 
Fifth  Corps.      He  possessed  sterling  qualities  as  a  man  and  a  soldier. 

The  above  are  but  a  few,  a  very  few,  of  the  brave  men  who  imperilled 


i^//u 


AilatTtii:    Puhlf-^tiing  1  Enrirrtvitig    Co,  N.Y 


BEGINNING  OF  THE  FOURTH  DECADE.  309 

their  lives  in  our  behalf.  The  whole  number  is  large  of  those  who  went 
from  Utica  and  were  enrolled  in  the  regiments  of  Oneida  County  and 
elsewhere.  To  catalogue  more  of  them,  to  tell  of  their  heroic  deeds 
and  of  the  hardships  they  encountered,  would  be  to  compile  a  military 
history  of  a  large  portion  of  the  State  rather  than  a  record  of  the  annals 
of  the  city.  It  would  be  to  give  to  the  career  of  the  soldiers  a  promi- 
nence disproportionate  to  those  of  many  worthy  civilians  whom  our 
limited  space  forbids  us  even  to  mention. 


CHAPTER  IX. 
FOURTH    DECADE   OF   THE   CITY'S   HISTORY. 

The  War  record  Continued  —  A  new  Armory  built  on  the  site  of  the  Market  — 
List  of  business  Houses  of  1863  —  The  Draft  in  Utica  —  Burning  of  the  Female 
Academy  and  the  Free  Academy  — Close  of  the  War — Growth  and  Prosperity  in  the 
dawn  of  Peace  —  Efforts  toward  the  Establishment  of  a  Police  and  Fire  Commission  — 
Building  of  the  new  County  Clerk's  Office. 

THE  officers  elected  at  the  charter  election  of  1862  were  as  follows: 
Mayor,  D.  C.  Grove;  clerk,  Thomas  Mclncrow;  treasurer,  Will- 
iam P.  Carpenter  ;  attorney,  William  J.  Stanford  ;  supervisors,  John  H. 
Douglass,  W.  Baker,  H.  H.  Roberts,  George  Pearson,  G.  G.  Roberts, 
Paul  Keiser,  T.  Buchanan,  jr.  ;  aldermen,  William  A.  Everts,  Thomas 
Van  Embergh,  John  Griffiths,  Benjamin  F.  Shaw,  Patrick  Devlin,  James 
Merriman,  Homer  Townsend  ;  surveyor,  Harvey  Park,  jr. ;  street  com- 
missioner, Jacob  Ehresman.  The  mayor  in  addressing  the  old  board 
complimented  them  on  their  harmony  and  measures  of  economy  during 
the  year.  In  his  inaugural  he  said  there  was  no  floating  debt  on  the 
city  and  the  treasury  was  free  from  every  embarrassment.  Balance  in 
the  treasury  was  $4,000  and  there  was  about  $1,000  yet  to  be  collected. 
He  spoke  of  the  new  police  force  provided  for  by  the  new  charter  and 
the  need  of  a  watch-house.  The  city  debt  he  said  was  $162,000,  in- 
cluding $250,000  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  bonds,  which  was 
$10,000  less  than  in  1858. 


3IO  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

In  the  council  on  March  2 1st  the  salaries  of  the  new  police  force  were 
fixed  at  $40  for  the  chief  and  assistants  per  month  and  $35  for  the 
members.  The  same  meeting  appointed  the  following  as  the  first  paid 
policemen  as  distinguished  from  "  watchmen  "  :  Lawrence  Sullivan,  H. 
Scholtes,  David  Hess,  John  Nenninger,  James  H.  Frear,  Patrick  Waldon, 
George  W.  Keating,  John  Johnson,  James  McVey,  W.  W.  Long, 
Thomas  Dolan,  Jacob  Seaman.  David  Hess  was  chosen  as  chief  and 
James  H.  Frear  assistant.  On  the  31st  of  March  the  council  adopted 
rules  and  regulations  for  the  new  police. 

A  brick  circular  sewer  was  ordered  in  May  in  Washington  street  from 
Fayette  to  the  seminary  buildings  ;  a  stone  sewer  was  ordered  in  Tibbits, 
Eagle,  Howard  avenue,  and  Leah  street  at  a  cost  of  about  $5,000. 
This  was  the  principal  improvement  for  several  years.  The  policy  of 
the  city  government  this  year  was  one  of  continued  economy  and  very 
little  improvement  was  made.  The  Herald sa\d  the  council  of  this  year 
was  earning  a  reputation  as  economists.  August  15th  the  council  was 
petitioned  for  privilege  to  build  a  horse  railroad  between  Utica  and 
New  Hartford  and  Utica  and  New  York  Mills.  The  petition  was  subse- 
quently granted  and  the  road  built  in  1863.  Late  in  1859  a  petition 
was  presented  to  the  council  signed  by  a  large  number  of  citizens  asking 
a  grant  to  the  State  of  the  Market  lot  and  land  on  Bleecker  street  for  a 
site  on  which  to  build  an  armory  for  the  Forty-fifth  Regiment,  on  con- 
dition that  the  basement  should  be  reserved  for  a  watch-house.  On 
the  3d  of  February,  i860,  a  resolution  was  adopted  to  execute  a  deed 
of  the  property  to  the  State  without  the  watch-house  provision,  the 
State  refusing  to  accept  it  with  that  provision.  The  necessary  steps 
were  taken  and  the  State  erected  the  building  at  a.  cost  of  $6,000.  The 
armory  was  finished  in  1862.  On  the  loth  of  February  the  Sixth 
ward  was  by  resolution  divided  into  two  election  districts.  The  com- 
mittee appointed  to  revise  the  charter  reported  their  work  as  embracing 
three  kinds  :  First,  the  consolidation  of  the  original  charter  and  its 
amendments  into  one  homogeneous  whole  ;  second,  the  supply  of  appar- 
ent deficiencies.  Of  these  changes  the  most  important,  and  all  that  call 
for  especial  mention  here,  were  an  entire  change  in  the  police  depart- 
ment by  abolishing  the  night  watch  and  marshal,  dispensing  with  the 
work  done  by  constables  as  far  as  it  related  to  the  city,  and  the  substi- 


fVAJi  MATTERS  OF  1863.  311 

tution  of  a  paid  police.  The  term  of  office  of  assessor  was  made  two 
years  instead  of  one,  and  the  selection  of  mayor  was  placed  in  the  hands 
of  the  council.  The  various  changes  made  by  this  committee,  and 
particularly  the  genera]  consolidation  and  simplifying  of  the  provisions, 
was  perhaps  the  most  important  work  done  on  the  charter  down  to  that 
time.     The  new  charter  was  adopted  in  February,  1862. 

After  a  period  of  comparative  quiet  in  relation  to  war  matters  the 
governors  of  loyal  States  recommended  to  the  President  the  call  for 
300,000  volunteers  (issued  July  6th)  and  news  of  McClellan's  bal  ties  be- 
fore Richmond  again  excited  the  public  pulse.  In  those  battles  a  large 
number  of  Uticans  were  killed  or  wounded,  among  them  Colonel  Mc- 
Quade,  Captain  Harrer  (who  died  from  loss  of  a  leg),  and  Lieut.  George 
W.  Griffiths  and  E.  H.  Lloyd.  The  total  loss  of  the  Fourteenth  and 
Twenty-sixth  Regiments  in  the  series  of  battles  was  226  killed,  wounded, 
and  missing.  No  sooner  was  the  call  for  more  volunteers  promulgated 
than  measures  were  adopted  here  to  fill  the  quota.  A  meeting  was 
held  "in  support  of  the  government"  on  July  14th  after  the  issue  of  a 
call  which  was  numerously  signed  by  leading  men.  The  meeting  was 
a  large  one  and  was  addressed  by  the  mayor,  Horatio  Seymour,  W.  J. 
Bacon,  Francis  Kernan,  E.  H.  Roberts,  H.  Denio,  and  C.  H.  Doolittle. 
A  subscription  list  was  circulated  to  raise  a  fund  to  pay  a  bounty  to 
volunteers  and  over  $7,000  were  subscribed,  which  amount  was  largely 
increased  within  a  few  days.  The  State  also  provided  for  the  payment 
of  $50  bounty,  which,  with  a  like  amount  offered  by  citizens  and  the 
national  bounty  of  $100,  made  $200  that  the  volunteers  were  offered. 
The  county  bounty  was  provided  for  at  a  supervisors'  meeting  of  Au- 
gust 15th.  The  city  was  again  filled  with  enthusiasm  and  by  July  isth 
four  companies  were  well  under  way.  On  the  24th  of  July  Colonel  Mc- 
Quade  came  home  after  fifteen  months'  service  and  was  given  a  royal 
reception,  and  in  the  same  month  Capt.  Thomas  H.  Bates,  of  the  Em- 
pire Battery,  which  had  been  almost  wiped  out  of  existence  at  the  front 
and  had  lost  its  guns,  came  home  to  recruit  for  it  so  as  to  again  place  it 
on  a  strong  footing.  The  quota  of  the  city  of  CJtica  on  each  call  for 
300,000  men  was  325.  Under  the  first  call  Oneida  County  enlisted  about 
1,300  more  men  than  her  quota  called  for.  Early  in  August  the  first 
company  of  the   Fourth   Oneida   Regiment  was   mustered  with  Alvin 


312  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTICA. 

White  as  captain  ;  George  W.  Brigham,  first  lieutenant ;  Isaac  H.  Dann, 
second  lieutenant ;  and  on  the  9th  of  that  month  Captain  Daggett  mus- 
tered a  company  as  B.  The  draft  that  was  anticipated  caused  no  ap- 
prehension in  Oneida  County.  By  the  15th  of  August  so  active  were 
the  efforts  made  to  recruit  that  the  fourth  regiment  from  the  county  was 
filled  and  left  for  Washington  on  the  22d  after  a  splendid  demonstration 
in  its  honor.  The  draft  was  ordered  for  September  ist,  and  prepara- 
tions were  carried  on  almost  to  the  last  day,  undoubtedly  stimulating 
enlistments,  but  the  enrollment  was  not  completed  in  time  and  the  draft 
was  necessarily  postponed.  As  the  enrollment  advanced  it  was  learned 
that  the  quota  for  the  county  under  the  two  calls  was  3,254,  of  which 
Utica  had  to  furnish  1,354. 

During  the  month  of  September  in  anticipation  of  the  draft  recruit- 
ing was  very  active  and  the  fifth  regiment  from  the  county  (afterward 
the  One  Hundred  and  Forty-sixth)  was  rapidly  filled  up.  It  encamped 
at  Rome  and  on  the  nth  of  October  left  for  the  front  under  command 
of  Col.  Kenner  Garrard.  On  the  22d  of  August  the  military  com- 
mittee asked  the  mayor  to  urge  merchants  to  close  their  stores  at  4 
o'clock  every  day  but  Saturdays  in  order  to  give  them  and  their  em- 
ployees opportunity  to  aid  in  recruiting.  The  mayor  complied  in  a  proc- 
lamation and  the  movement  began  on  the  25th  of  August.  The  war 
fever  was  at  its  greatest  height  and  meetings  were  held  almost  every 
night,  and  before  September  17th  the  First,  Fourth,  and  Seventh  wards 
had  filled  their  quotas.  On  the  8th  of  November  an  order  was  pro 
mulgated  from  Albany  to  hold  the  draft  until  further  orders,  and  the 
county  bounty  was  ordered  by  the  supervisors  to  be  paid  until  the  draft 
took  place  or  the  quota  was  full.  The  date  of  the  draft  had  already 
been  postponed  to  November  loth.  The  outcome  was  that  the  persist- 
ent work  of  citizens  filled  the  quota  and  the  draft  was  averted. 

In  September  and  October  the  need  of  more  small  currency  began  to 
be  seriously  felt,  and  on  the  20th  of  November  a  meeting  of  merchants 
was  called  to  devise  some  means  of  relief.  Many  business  men  had  al- 
ready issued  shinplasters  upon  their  own  credit,  but  it  was  felt  that  this 
was  a  doubtful  means  of  relief.  At  the  meeting  a  committee  was  ap- 
pointed to  report  a  plan  of  relief.  Their  report  was  that  it  was  advisa- 
ble to  ask  the  council  to  authorize  the  issue  by  the  city  of  fractional 


MEN  IN  BUSINESS  IN  1863.  313 

currency.  The  application  was  made  to  the  council  and  at  the  next 
meeting  the  matter  was  brought  up.  Mayor  Grove  opposed  such  ac- 
tion as  being  illegal  and  was  supported  by  a  few  of  the  aldermen  ;  but  a 
resolution  to  issue  $20,000  in  fractional  notes  was  adopted.  Better  coun- 
cils prevailed,  however,  before  the  succeeding  meeting  and  the  measure 
was  stifled  by  a  failure  of  the  council  to  appoint  a  committee  of  issue. 
The  increase  of  the  United  States  fractional  currency  soon  rendered 
such  a  course  on  the  part  of  the  city  unnecessary,  although  many  other 
cities  had  adopted  it.  On  the  5th  of  December  the  same  council  asked 
the  district  attorney  to  prosecute  all  persons  who  should  issue  shinplas- 
ters  after  Januar)'  i,  1863. 

Thomas  H.  Bates,  captain  of  the  Empire  Battery,  who  has  been  al- 
luded to  as  having  returned  home  to  recruit  his  depleted  battery,  left 
the  city  on  the  9th  of  October  with  volunteers  and  his  battery  became 
Company  A  in  the  First  New  York  Artillery  ;  but  his  old  battery  (what 
was  left  of  it)  was  held  by  the  War  Department  in  the  organizations  to 
which  they  had  been  assigned  in  June.  He  returned  again  in  Decem- 
ber to  fill  up  his  battery. 

The  history  of  this  decade  may  properly  be  closed  with  the  following 
list  of  men  who  were  in  business  in  Utica  in  1863 — thirty- one  years 
after  its  incorporation  as  a  city.  It  is  inserted  chiefly  for  its  value  as  a 
reference : 

Academies  and  schools,  James  Lumbard,  Utica  Academy,  Utica  Female  Academy, 
John  Williams.  Collecting  agents,  William  H.  Pratt  (insurance  and  real  estate),  T.  P. 
Ballou,  B.  G.  Brown,  William  P.  Carpenter,  M.  M.  Ellis,  Hoyt  &  Butler,  Hutchinson  & 
Brown,  John  J.  Francis,  George  S.  Porter,  L.  M.  &  W.  B.  Taylor,  Milton  H.  Thompson, 
Walker  &  Wood,  Charles  S.  Wilson  (passenger),  S.  G.  Burke,  8.  T.  Peckham.  Agri- 
cultural implements'  Peter  Auld,  Dana  &  Co.,  O'Neil  &  Co.,  James  H.  Read,  Wheeler 
&  Bailey.  Architects  and  builders,  M.  F.  Cummings,  A.  J.  Lathrop,  0.  Palmer.  Auc- 
tioneers, B.  F.  Brooks,  G.  B.  Gray. 

Bakers  and  confectioners,  Charles  Dupre,  C.  Hackett,  I.  Heidel,  Alexander  Horsburg, 
William  Humphreys,  William  B.  Lyman,  D.  Owens  &  Son,  Thomas  M.  Owens,  Freder- 
ick Reith,  Luke  Wilkins.  Banks,  Bank  of  Utica,  Oneida  Bank,  Oneida  County  Bank, 
Utica  City  Bank,  T.  0.  Grannis  &  Co.,  Central  City  Savings  Institution,  Savings  Bank 
of  Utica.  Billiards,  H.  Griffin,  Albert  Spencer.  Blacksmiths  and  wheelwrights,  Ben- 
jamin Bowen,  Clark  Carpenter,  Nathan  Christian,  Haley   &  Hughe.'!,  William  Haynes, 

Henry  Healy,  John  T.  Jones,  William  H.  Rose, Seisselmeir,  Griffiths  Thomas, 

William  Thomas,  Patrick  Walker,  Matthew  Welch.  Blank  book  manufacturers,  B.  8. 
Merrell,W.  J.  Roberts.  Boat  builders,  David  Schwab,  W.  &  L  Thomas.  Boiler  makers, 
40 


314  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Wood  &  Mann.  Bonnet  bleachers,  Daniel  Bradley,  James  P.  Gilmore.  Book-binders, 
B.  S.  Merrell,  Watkin  J.  Roberts.  Booksellers  and  stationers,  Davis  &  Gilbert,  Nathan 
Hollister,  Warren  0.  MoClure  &  Co.,  William  A.  McDonough,  A.  B.  Yale  &  Co.,  J. 
French,  Thomas  W.  Seward,  I.  Tiffany.  Boots  and  shoes,  Sylvester  Barringer,  A.  J. 
Bice  &  Son,  T.W.  Bolles,  Thomas  Breeze,  Hugh  Callanen,  John  Cantwell,  H.  D.  Coram, 
William  R.  Denison,  Jacob  Gottry,  Hamlin  &  Myer,  James  Henry,  C.  Hurley,  John  D. 
Jones,  William  W.  Jones,  P.  Laney,  Lewis  &  Co.,  Thomas  Nutt,  A.  S.  &  G.W.  Oatley, 
William  Owens,  John  G.  Phelps,  John  W.  Porter,  Christian  Sautter,  Michael  Shields, 
D.  L.  Vanderheyden,  Francis  Wiesmantel,  Samuel  Wilkins.  Boot-claspmaker,  L.  J. 
Worden.  Boot  crimper,  John  P.  Gibbs.  Boot-lastmaker,  Ebenezer  Jones.  Bowling 
saloon,  Peter  Agne.  Brass  founders,  S.  W.  Chubbuck,  William  Dent,  James  Garri- 
gan,  WilUam  Higgs,  George  Potter.  Brewers,  F.  Bauer,  Gulf  Brewery,  Charles  Bier- 
bauer,  Joseph  Denk,  Henry  H.  Haworth,  0.  Hutton,  John  Hutton,  Midlam  &  Co., 
George  Ralph  &  Son,  M.  Remmer.  Brokers,  Simeon  Loucks,  S.  T.  Peckham.  Brush- 
maker,  N.  C.  Newell.  Burr-millstones,  Hart  &  Munson.  Butchers  and  meat  markets, 
John  G.  Brand,  Frederick  Breitenstein,  William  H.  Clark,  Scholey  &  CoUins,  John  P. 
Grupp,  Otto  E.  C.  Guelioh,  J.  Hallock,  George  Hamlin,  Thomas  Horton,  John  L. 
Hughes,  William  S.  Jackson,  Edward  Jones,  Martin  Laetanmier,  Henry  Lux,  Edward 
Norton,  Westcott  &  Overocker,  John  Platter,  Williams  &  Roberts,  H.  Roberts  &  Son, 
John  Siegrist,  Jacob  Spath,  WiUiam  Stanford,  Isaac  Whiffen,  J.  U.  Whiflfen. 

Cabinetmakers  and  furniture  dealers,  Crawford  &  Co.,  J.  A.  Davies,  Matthias  Fritz, 
Theodore  E.  Hibbard,  Peter  Hensel,  John  B.  Hornung,  De  Long  &  Lennebacker,  Nel- 
bach,  Wiegand  &  Co.,  Christian  Weiss,  William  Weiser.  Capmaker,  Mrs.  Mary  Hesse. 
Carpenters  and  builders,  H.  T.  Bolles,  William  P.  Case,  Timothy  Cronin,  Walter 
Embley,  Joseph  James,  A.  J.  Lathrop,  William  Metcalf,  Winchenbach  &  Mentz,  Frank 
Miller,  Henry  F.  Millar,  Lemuel  Pitman,  Edmund  Richards,  John  A.  Russ,  John  Schwab, 
Richard  Weaver,  Jacob  Wratten.  Carpets,  oilcloths,  etc.,  D.  V.  W.  Golden,  P.  Wel- 
bon.  Carriage,  coach,  and  sleigh  builders,  John  W.  Bates,  Clark  Carpenter,  T.  Davis, 
William  D.  Hamlin,  John  J.  Holmes,  H.  McKay,  John  Paul,  Erastus  Pitts',  D.  L.  Rus- 
sell, H.  Thomas,  Turner  Brothers,  William  B.  Walling.  Carriage,  coach,  and  saddlery 
hardware,  Henry  Sanders.  Chain  pump  manufacturer,  W.  P.  Newton.  China,  glass, 
and  earthenware,  George  Dubois,  N.  Hopkins,  Sherwood  &  Hopson,  N.  White  &  Son. 
Cigar  dealers  and  tobacconists,  C.  A.  Davenport,  G.  A.  Embley,  Joseph  Joerrison, 
Mooney  &  Howe,  Zechariah  Morris,  Isaiah  C.  Parker,  Walter  B.  Pierce,  Stephen  Sher- 
wood, Warnick  &  Brown,  J.  D.  Waters.  Clothiers  and  tailors,  Mrs.  Joseph  Babcock, 
Bond  &  Scranton,  Edward  Briggs,  John  Crook,  Davies  &  Jones,  John  Evans,  Thomas 
James,  P.  V.  Kellogg  &  Co.,  T.  L.  Kingsley  &  Son,  Manchester  &  Penny,  Meacham  & 
Farwell,  Thomas  D.  Lewis,  Lyon  &  Williams,  Mary  Makepeace,  J.  M.  Rice  &  Co.,  Mat- 
thew J.  Shanly,  H.  J.  Wood  &  Co.,  Henry  I.  Woodhull,  C,  A.  Yates.  Clothing  (sec- 
ond-hand), Samuel  BHtz,  E.  Griffiths,  James  Mullen,  Patrick  Smith.  Coal  dealers,  T.B. 
Devereux,  Fowler  &  Gilmore,  Thomas  McQuade  &  Son,  Leonard  Moore,  J.  S.  &  M. 
Peckham,  William  Pittman,  D.  Timerman.  Coffee  roasters  and  spice  factors,  J.  Grif- 
fiths &  Co.  Commission  merchants,  B.  F.  Brooks,  I.  D.  Everson,  C.  W.  Hutchinson, 
James  Rockwell,  Thorn,  Shaw  &  Co.,  A.  L.  Woodruff.     Confectioners,  Charles  Dupre, 


BUSINESS  MEN  OF  1863.  315 

Cordon  Hackett,  I.  Heidel,  I.  Myers,  D.  Owens  &  Son,  T.  M.  Owens,  Luke  Wilkins. 
Coopeis,  Michael  Clark,  Patrick  Corbally..  Cotton  goods  manufacturers,  C.  Hurlburt, 
J.  A.  Shearman,  Steam  Cotton-MiUs.     Cutlers,  J.  Louis,  George  Shapland. 

Daguerreotypes,  photographs,  and  ambrotypes,  William  J.  Baker,  H.  J.  Harwood, 
"Walter  C.  North,  John  V.  Parker,  S.  S.  Rounds,  J.  B.  Smith.  Dentists,  Theodore  H. 
Bradish,  Alfred  A.  Colling,  G.  T.  De  Roe,  T.  D.  Evans,  G.  A.  Foster  &  Son,  B.  W. 
MoQuivey,  A.  N.  Priest,  L.  W.  Rogers,  Swartwout  &  Brockway.  Distiller  and  recti- 
fier, Isaac  J.  Knapp.  Druggists,  W.  E.  P.  Baylis,  William  Blaikie,  T.  K.  Butler,  Corn- 
stock,  Dickinson  &  Co.,  J.  A.  Hall  &  Co.,  T.  Manahan,  J.  D.  Kellner,  T.  C.  B.  Knowl- 
son,  Lalor  Brothers,  J.  B.  Matchisi,  Warner  &  Ray.  Dry  goods  dealers,  Owen  Baxter, 
J.  &  P.  S.  Brady,  Cohen,  Edloff,  Camitksky  &  Co.,  James  Dutton,  Falkner's,  Owen 
Gafifney,  D.  V.  W.  Golden,  B.  T.  Manning  &  Co.,  Lanigan,  McCall  &  MoMorrow,  John 
MuIhoUand,  Putnam  &  Kincaid,  Maria  Smith,  Stewart  &  Leo,  J.  B.  Wells,  Welbon  & 
Tyler,  Wilcox  &  Smith,  W.  Williams  &  Co.  Dyers  and  scourers,  John  Brown,  Jules 
Doux,  Andrew  McLean. 

Electro  plater,  C.  Proeligh.  Embrocation,  B.  Cline.  Engines  (portable),  Wood  & 
Mann.  Engineers  (civil),  Harvey  Park,  jr.,  William  B.  Taylor.  Engravers,  L.  F.  Han- 
nas,  Sereno  Woodhull.  Expresses,  American  Express  Company,  William  Dunn  (city 
(baggage),  Utica  and  Binghamton  Express  Company,  H.  yates  (American  Express  Com- 
pany). 

Fancy  goods,  T.  &  A.  Cash,  Owen  Gafifney,  Mrs.  A.  King,  William  M.  Storrs  &  Co. 
Fish  and  oyster  dealers,  John  Beston,  Edward  Leach,  Miller  &  Son,  Rowe  &  Son, 
Thomas  R.  Thomas.  Flour  and  grain  dealers,  A.  B.  Culver  &  Co.,  Dows  &  Adams, 
Everson  &  Hayes,  G  W.  Head,  Hopkins  &  Lane,  Hunt  &  White,  Hurd  &  Co.,  A.  Kis- 
sam  &  Son,  J.  W.  Mather  &  Co.,  W.  M.  Owen,  W.  H.  Royse,  W.  C.  Wilcox,  Thomas 
S.  Young.  Flour-mills,  Utica  city  mills,  Hopkins  &  Lane.  Forwarding  and  transpor- 
tation merchants,  A.  E.  Culver  &  Co.,  A.  Kissam  &  Son,  Thornshaw  &  Co.,  J.  N.  Swits- 
Fruit  dealers,  John  Beston,  Edward  Leach,  Miller  &  Son,  M.  M.  Northrup,  Rowe  & 
Son,  Nelson  M.  Shepard,  Charles  Spratt,  T.  R.  Thomas.  Fur  manufacturer,  Anton 
Albrecht. 

Gents'  furnishing  goods,  E.  H.  Fish,  Robinson  &  Ball,  William  Smith.  Glass  manu- 
facturers, E.  G.  Brown,  C.  P.  Davis.  Glove  manufacturer,  G.  A.  Clark.  Groceries  and 
provision  dealers,  S.  Abby,  Paul  Agne,  Lawrence  Bailey,  T.  G.  Beokworth,  William 
Blaikie,  WiUiam  Breen,  Benjamin  P.  Bullock,  D.  Burton,  M.  E.  Burrill,  T.  K.  Butler, 
William  Carey,  Edwin  D.  Clark,  Michael  Clark,  Lorenzo  Conrad,  Patrick  Corbally, 
Charles  Crippen,  Crook  &  Paradise,  Daniel  Grouse,  Son  &  Co.,  J.  C.  Curry,  Patrick 
Devlin,  Dickinson,  Comstock  &  Co.,  Alfred  B.  Dobson,  Miss  Eliza  A.  Dunwell,  J.  G.  & 
P.  Egert,  John  W.  Evans,  Robert  J.  Evans,  Charles  Fass,  Joseph  Faas,  Walter  E. 
Field,  M.  Freidman,  George  Fulmer,  Theodore  H.  Gordon,  George  Haenl,  John  M. 
Hahn,  J.  A.  Hall  &  Co.,  Joseph  J.  Hall,  William  Haworth,  George  W.  Head,  M.  W. 
Hull,  F.  W.  Hurlburt,  John  Keenan,  James  Kivlin,  T.  C.  B.  Knowlson,  Evan  Jones, 
Silas  W.  Jones,  Joseph  Leuthauser,  Thomas  Lumbard,  Mrs.  Rosina  Magee,  J.  W.  Mather 
&  Co.,  Asaph  D.  Mather,  Daniel  McCormick,  Patrick  McGough,  James  Merriman, 
Christopher  H.  Mooney,  William  O'Reily,  Thomas  Owens,  Owens  &  Griffiths,  J.  Parker 


3i6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

&  Sons,  David  Perry,  R.  "W.  Phillips,  Pierce  &  Howell,  Joseph  Raedeok,  James  H. 
Read,  D.E.  Richards,  J.  Richards,  Roberts  &  Owens,  A.  Rowley,  N,  M.  Shepard,  James 
K.  Smith,  Trumbull  Smith,  William  B.  Smith,  George  Soley,John  Soley,  John  Spanton, 
Anton  Sprattler,  A.  L.  Staring,  John  W.  Stevens,  William  C.  Swertfager,  Ira  Tallman, 
Horace  Whitman,  James  Wood.  Guns,  pistols,  etc.,  Morgan  James,  G.  H.  Ferris,  E. 
Remington  &  Sons. 

Hair-dressers,  Batchelor  &  Brothers,  Joseph  Carr,  G.  Cornelius,  John  Diefenbeoker, 
W.  W.  Denike,  Peter  Freeman,  George  Hartman,  Hiram  W.  Gilbert,  Jacob  Graff,  F.  C. 
Lippin,  Reuben  R.  Lippins,  Michael  O'Donnell.  Hardware  and  cutlery,  Dana  &  Co., 
Thomas  Foster,  M.  T.  Meeker,  Owen  O'Neil  &  Co.,  J.  E.  Roberts  &  Co.,  James  Sayre 
&  Son.  Harness,  saddles,  and  trunks,  John  Biederman,  W.  H.  Duval,  William  Joyce, 
Le  Grand  Moore,  F.  Pigeon,  L.  T.  Smith.  Hats,  caps,  and  furs,  Anton  Albrecht, 
Charles  Barnum,  I.  A.  Button,  J.  F.  Crump,  Hammond  &  Hill,  E.  W.  Jarrett,  John  Lati- 
more,  Vedder  &  Brower,  George  Westcott,  J.  D.  Williams.  Hide  and  leather  deal- 
ers, Edward  Curran's  ^Sons,  Joseph  Harter  &  Son.  Hosiery,  W.  H.  Stewart,  S.  S.  & 
J.  S.  Lowery.  Hotels,  American,  Burdiok  &  Martin ;  A.  Churchill,  Bagg's  ;  A.  Brendle, 
Central  Hotel ;  J.  L.  Davis,  Cottage ;  H.  T.  Rowe,  Clinton  ;  L.  Larcher,  Dudley  House  ; 
Mrs.  Huntington,  Fayette  House;  George  Bryant,  Fifth  Ward  House;  Franklin 
House,  J.  M.  Buell;  Fuller  House,  H.  W.  Fuller;  German  Hotel,  Charles  Wolff;  Lib- 
erty Street  House,  Mansion  House,  P.  F.  Martin  ;  Northern  Hotel,  H.  W.  McDonald; 
Oneida  House,  H.  A.  Pegg;  Plank  Road  House,  Thomas  Wiokens;  Potter  &  Cavana, 
Sherwood  House,  D.  L.  Keys ;  West  Utica,  C.  Nestle  &  Son. 

Ice  dealers,  Mumford  &  James,  Thomas  A.  Quin.  Iron  fences,  railings,  doors,  etc., 
L.  Dean  &  Co.,  C.  Palmer.  Iron  founders,  J.  H.  Chapman,  Hart  &  Dagwell,  G.  6. 
Miller,  Cyrus  Palmer,  J.  S.  &  M.  Peckham,  Wheeler  &  Bailey. 

Knitting-mill,  S.  S.  &  J.  S.  Lowery. 

Ladies'  furnishing  goods,  Mrs.  H.  Callanen,  G.  S.  Davis,  J.  S.  Fredericks,  Patrick 
Gaffney,  Mrs.  A.  King,  W.  H.  Stewart,  D.  Thomas.  Lager  beer  saloons,  Peter  Agne, 
Christian  Binder,  Anthony  Brendle,  Francis  Herbrand,  John  Hemmberger,  Herman  Korff, 
Jos.  Leuthauser,  Jos.  Meinong,  Michael  Remrner,  Geo.  Richard,  Anton  Siegenberger,  John 
Spindler,  John  Thelen,  Warner  Zimmerman.  Lamp  manufacturers,  John  Carton,  A. 
Leach,  I.  A.  Williams.  Lawyers,  G.  W.  Adams,  W.  R.  Anthony,  W.  J.  Bacon,  W.  &  R.  C. 
Baker,  Sam.  J.  Barrows,  Arthur  M.  Beardsley,  Ezra  M.  Birdseye,  J.  W.  Bond,  A.  A. 
Boyce,  Brayton  &  Seward,  Brastus  Clark,  A.  Coburn,  John  D.  Collins,  W.  H.  Oomatock, 
Geo.  H.  Conger,  Roscoe  Conkling,  Benj.  F.  Cooper,  Henry  Cooper,  J.  G.  Coye,  Crafts  & 
Brown,  J.  G.  Crocker,  Sylvester  Dering,  Peter  Davies,  Doolittle  &  Babcock,  Edmonds 
&  Miller,  James  G.  French,  N.  Floyd,  Dexter  Gillmore,  Edmund  A.  Graham,  H.  A. 
Grant,  jr.,  Henry  Green,  Philo  Gridley,  Hamilton  &  Melhinch,  Hoyt  &  Butler,  Hunt 
&  Waterman,  Hiram  Hurlburt,  Jay  Hyde,  Arthur  B.  Johnson,  0.  G.  Kellogg,  Kernan, 
Quin  &L  Kernan,  James  F.  Mann,  Matteson  &  Benedict,  A.  J.  &  I.  C.  Mcintosh,  J.  W. 
McQuade,  Morris  S.  Miller,  R.  H.  Morehouse,  Wallace  M.  Mott,  Eaton  J.  Richardson, 
P.  Sheldon  Root,  Richard  Sohroeppel,  Horatio  Seymour,  John  F.  Seymour,  George  J. 
Sicard,  George  W.  Smith,  Spriggs  &  Molncrow;  W.  J.  Stanford,  Eugene  Stearns,  David 
C.   Stoddard',   E.   J.  Stoddard,  John  R.  Timan,  Montgomery  H.  Throop,  Isaac  Trippe, 


BUSINESS  MEN  OF  1863.  317 

Thomas  R.  Walker,  Edmund  A.  Wetmore,  White  &  Lalor,  Joel  Willard,  E.  W.  Will- 
iams, J.  Watson  Williams.  Leather  and  findings,  Edward  Curran's  Sons,  J.  Harter  & 
Son,  Louoks  &  Searls.  Leather  beltings,  C.  W.  Hutchinson,  J.  A.  Williams  &  Co.  Lime 
and  cement,  William  Brady,  T.  B.  Devereux,  Hart  &  Munson.  Lithographer,  B.  S. 
Merrell.  Livery  stables,  Moses  Barney,  J.  Butterfield  &  Son,  William  Oodner,  David 
Cruikshanks,  Charles  Green,  B.  Hawley  &  Son,  George  S.  Makepeace,  J.  C.  &  "W.  H. 
Mapes,  George  Pearson,  Levi  Rich,  Charles  Rice.  Locksmiths  and  bell  hangers, 
G.  Eidepenz,  William  Hanusch,  William  Higgs,  Joseph  Louis,  George  Potter.  Look- 
ing glasses  and  picture  frames,  J.  A.  Davies,  N.  HoUiater,  Solomon  McQuivey,  Alfred 
Walker  &  Co.,  John  Wright.  Lumber  dealers,  T.  P.  Ballon,  George  Beckworth,  Downer 
&  Kellogg,  Owen  Eynon,  Jonathan  Goodier,  Hiram  P.  Huxford,  Lewis  Lawrence, 
James  H.  Read. 

Machine  cards,  C.  W.  Hutchinson,  A.  J.  Williams  &  Co.  Machinists,  Philo  S.  Cur- 
tis, William  Dent,  Hart  &  Munson,  George  Potter,  C.  T.  Smith.  Manufacturers'  sup- 
plies, C.  W.  Hutchinson,  A.  J.  Williams  &  Co.  Manure,  G.  T.  Hollingworth.  Marble 
workers,  Rufus  C.  Dodge,  Lewis  L.  Lewis,  Quick  &  Hughes.  Mattresses,  G.  A.  Clark, 
Lennebacher  &  Delong.  Milliners  and  millinery  goods,  H.  Barnard's  Sons,  Mrs.  S.  L. 
Brownell,  Mrs.  M..  J.  Cameron,  Miss  H.  Chapman,  Mrs.  M.  C.  Dieokow,  Miss  Sophronia 
Garripy,  Jones  &  Harrington,  Miss  R.  Lumbard,  John  Mulholland,  Mrs.  O'Hara,  Miss 
L.  W.  Parker,  Miss  J.  A.  Reynolds,  Miss  M.  A.  Reynolds,  Miss  A.  Sanford,  Spertzell 
&  Davis,  Mrs.  C.  Warmoll.  Music  and  musical  instruments,  George  A.  Andrews, 
Buckingham  &  Ketchum,  N.  Hollister,  William  A.  McDonough,  James  A.  Rich. 

Naturalist,  J.  P.  Davis.  News  and  periodical  depots,  George  N.  Beesley,  Nathan 
HoUister,  William  A.  McDonough,  J.  French.  Nurserymen,  seedsmen,  and  florists, 
William  Archer,  Frederick  W.  Boyce,  A.  G.  Howard. 

Oculist  and  aurist,  C.  J.  Fox.  Oil  refiners,  Stuber  Brothers.  Organ  builders,  George 
A.  Andrews,  John  G.  Marklove. 

Painters  (house  and  sign),  George  Bullock,  Thomas  Goult,  0.  P.  powers,  John  Tun- 
bridge,  R.  R.  Wiseman.  Painters  (portrait),  M.  E.  D.  Brown,  Charles  H.  Judson,  Ed- 
ward Kunkely,  A.  Walker  &  Co.  Paints,  oils,  and  glass,  W.  E.'  P.  Baylis,  T.  K.  But- 
ler, Comstock  Dickinson  &  Co.,  J.  A.  Hall  &  Co.,  N.  C.  Newell,  T.  C.  B.  Knowlson, 
Warner  &  Ray.  Paper  hangers,  H.  Barnard's  Sons,  N.  C.  Newell,  Wesley  J.  Segar. 
Physicians,  M.  M.  Bagg,  Daniel  P.  Bissell,  Caroline  Brown,  Burke  &  MoOwen,  C.  B. 
&  W.  B.  Coventry,  Horace  B.  Day,  J.  H.  Douglass,  B.  F.  Flower,  C.  J.  Fox,  G.  C. 
Fuller,  C.  J.  Hill,  Ira  D.  Hopkins,  jr.,  Isaac  J.  Hunt,  Jacob  Hunt,  F.  W.  Klages,  John 
McCall,  J.  C.  McKenzie,  P.  McCraith,  William  Morris,  H.  A.  Oaks,  J.  A.  Paine,  Charles 
F.  Powers,  J.  Rathbun,  J.  C.  Raymond,  James  Reese,  J.  Robinson,  William  Russell, 
Thomas  Spears,  A.  T.  Spencer,  D.  G.  Thomas,  J.  Ward,  George  Washburn,  William  H. 
Watson,  L.  B.  Wells,  H.  L.  Williams,  Mrs.  0.  C.  A.  Wood,  S.  G.  Wolcott.  Pianoforte 
dealers,  Buckingham  &  Ketchum,  Williams  &  Eaton.  Planemaker,  John  Reed.  Plan- 
ing-mills,  Downer  &  Kellogg,  Hiram  P.  Huxford,  Lewis  Lawrence.  Plumbers,  copper- 
smiths, and  gasfitters,  John  Carton,  P.  J.  Curley,  James  Garrigan,  Edward  Martin, 
Sherwood  &  Hopson,  Charles  Millar,  R.  P.  Williams,  Pottery,  N.  White  &  Son, 
Printers  (book  and  job),  Childs  &  Williams,  Curtis  &  White,  T,  J,  GriflSths,  DeWitt  C. 


3i8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Grove,  Paul  Keiser,  T.  R.  MoQuade,  Ellis  H.  Roberts,  Evan  E.  Roberts,  R.  W.  Roberts, 
J.  W.  Segar.     Pampmaker,  W.  P.  Newton. 

Restaurants,  P.  0.  Ballou,  Henry  Banker,  John  Beston,  P.  Cassidy,  E.  G-ebhardt, 
Hugh  Hamill,  Herman  Korff,  W.  W.  Long,  Edmund  Laughlin,  Patrick  Neegan,  John 
Montgomery,  M.  O'Brien,  Michael  Rabenstein,  J.  Siegrist,  John  Shott,  D.  Snyder,  E.  E. 
Williams. 

Sash,  blind,  and  doormaker.'J,  Downer  &  Kellogg,  Hiram  P.  Huxford,  Lewis  Law- 
rence. Saw  manufacturers,  B.  Partello,  Simpson  &  Lennebacker.  Sewing  machines, 
Buckingham  &  Ketchum,  W.  S.  Taylor.  Shirt  manufacturers,  E.  H.  Fish,  S.  F.  Merry, 
Robinson  &  Ball.  Silver  platers,  WiUiam  Dent,  Charles  Froehgh,  Henry  8ande^^', 
W.  D.  Smith.  Silverware  manufacturers,  Charles  C.  Shaver.  Skein  manufacturer, 
J.  H.  Chapman.  Soap  and  candle  factory,  Tavender,  Heath  &  Co.,  Thorn  &  Maynard. 
Stained  glass,  Charles  P.  Davis.  Starch  factory,  C.  W.  Hutchinson.  Stoves,  ranges, 
and  furnaces,  W.  W.  Bennett,  John  Carton,  T.  W.  Chatfield,  Owen  O'Neil  &  Co.,  J.  S. 
&  M.  Peckham,  Wheeler  &  Bailey,  J.  E.  Roberts  &  Co. 

Tailors,  G.  Laimbeer,  John  Weikert.  Tanners  and  curriers,  Harter,  David  Jones, 
Thorn  &  Maynard.  Taxidermist,  J.  P.  Davis.  Teachers  (music),  James  Best,  Joseph 
Sieboth,  Charles  Sutorious,  W.  Williams.  Telegraphic  instrument  maker,  S.  W.  Chub- 
buck.  Tinsmiths  and  stove  dealers,  Batohelor  &  Wicks,  Henry  Beokwith,  W.  W.  Ben- 
nett, Joseph  Briggs,  W.  A.  Cameron,  John  Carton,  T.  W.  Chatfield,  J.  Donahoe,  Henry 
Hastings,  WiUiam  B.  Henry,  N.  Hopkins,  Loak  '&  Osborne,  Charles  Millar,  Owen 
O'Neil  &  Co  ,  J.  S.  &  M.  Peckham,  J.  E.  Roberts  &  Co.,  Wheeler  &  Bailey,  George 
Willis.     Turners  (wood),  H.  C.  Beare,  E.  B.  Paine. 

Hmbrellamaker,  Philip  Gardner.  Undertakers,  W.  B.  Monroe,  Van  Ness  &  Douglass. 
Upholsterers,  G.  A.  Clark,  J.  A.  Davies,  John  H.  Keating,  Lennebacker  &  De  Long. 

Variety  stores,  G.  A.  Clark,  Eliza  Conway,  J.  Corbally,  H.  L.  Hurlburt,  Mrs.  A. 
King,  Charles  Kirkland,  Lyman  Mumford,  William  Storrs  &  Co.  Veterinary  surgeon, 
A.  S.  Copeman. 

Watches,  jewelry,  etc.,  Selden  Collins,  B.  F.  &  T.  M.  Davies,  F.  Darrigrand, 
A.  Leach,  Frank  W.  Marchisi,  Marsh  &  Son,  W.  8.  Taylor,  Charles  C.  Shaver. 
Wheelwrights,  John  M.  Dyme,  Joseph  Dixon,  Cadwell  Richards.  Wig  and  toupee 
makers,  Batohelor  Brothers,  Reuben  R.  Lippins.  Window  glass,  E.  G.  Brown,  N.  C. 
Newell.  Window  shades,  J.  W.  Segar,  A.  Walker  &  Co.  Wines  and  liquors,  Breen 
&  Co.,  John  Buswell,  Peter  Cunningham,  T.  H.  Gordon,  Isaac  J.  Knapp,  C.  M.  Mitch- 
ell, D.  Mitchell,  P.  Vidvard  &  Co.  Wood  moulding,  E.  B.  Paine  &  Son.  Wooden  and 
willowware,  G.  A.  Clark,  William  M.  Storrs  &  Co.  Wool  dealers,  James  Rockwell 
&  Co.  Woolen  goods  manufactures.  Globe  Woolen  Company,  Kernan  &  Helm,  Utica 
Steam  Woolen  Company. 

Yankee  notions,  T.  &  A.  Cash,  W.  Williams  &  Co. 

1863. — On  the  1st  of  March  a  finance  committee  previously  ap- 
pointed reported  on  the  condition  of  the  city  finances.  There  was  no 
floating  debt  and  every  claim  against  the  city  in  the  year  had  been 
promptly  paid.     There  was  a  balance  on  hand  from  the  $12,000  raised 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1863.  319 

to  pay  the  floating  debt  (before  mentioned)  of  $1,275.83.  All  the  tax 
of  1862  was  collected  except  $449.13,  a  result  that  had  never  before 
been  reached.  The  receipts  from  various  sources,  besides  the  $16,000 
■authorized  annually,  were  $7,183.94,  and  there  was  a  good  balance  on 
hand.  The  city  hall  debt  was  extinguished,  and  the  whole  city  debt 
was  $250,000  railroad  bonds  and  $4,000  of  the  bonds  for  the  money 
raised  to  pay  the  floating  debt. 

The  charter  election  went  strongly  Democratic,  owing  somewhat  to 
the  effect  of  the  war  and  the  repeated  calls  for  troops  and  threatened 
draft  on  the  lower  classes.  The  mayor  chosen  was  Charles  S.  Wilson ; 
treasurer,  Thomas  M.  McQuade ;  attorney,  Ichabod  C.  Mcintosh ; 
clerk,  Thomas  Mclncrow;  surveyor,  Harvey  Park,  jr.;  street  commis- 
sioner, Benjamin  F.  Woodworth ;  aldermen,  N.  Curtiss  White,  William 
N.  Weaver,  Theodore  S.  Sayre,  William  H.  Clark,  Patrick  McGough, 
John  M.  Hahn,  William  Howarth ;  supervisors,  John  H.  Douglass, 
William  Baker,  Sylvester  Dering,  George  Pearson,  Peter  Cunningham, 
Peter  Clogher,  Joseph  Benedict. 

In  his  inaugural  Mayor  Wilson  counseled  continued  economy,  the 
amount  authorized  being,  as  he  thought,  very  small  on  which  to  run 
the  city  government.  He  spoke  of  there  being  eleven  brick  school- 
houses,  forty-four  female  and  seven  male  teachers,  which  made  the  de- 
partment a  costly  one.  He  complimented  the  new  police  force.  In 
July  the  mayor  complained  to  the  council  of  their  extravagance  and  a 
resolution  was  adopted  asking  from  the  finance  committee  a  statement 
of  expenses  and  appropriations  to  that  time.  The  report  was  made  and 
showed  that  there  had  been  audited  $7,989.29,  an  increase  over  the 
preceding  year  of  $2,950.19.  Of  this  increase  $1,046.38  was  charged 
against  the  police  department  and  $1,134. 10  to  the  fire  department. 

On  August  14th  a  resolution  was  adopted  appropriating  $1,000  for 
paving  Genesee  street,  providing  the  citizens  raised  $2,000  more.  Noth- 
ing .appears  to  have  come  at  this  time  of  this  action.  City  matters  out- 
side of  military  affairs  were  still  neglected.  The  paving  of  Charlotte 
street  and  also  of  Rutger,  the  former  having  already  been  twice  ad- 
vertised, was  re-advertised  for  the  third  time  in  September  and  the 
work  was  finally  done.  The  first  track  of  the  street  railroad  was  laid 
in  the  summer  and  the  first  cars  began  running  September  14th.     The 


320  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTICA. 

Stare  Fair  opened  September  15th  and  brought  a  large  attendance.  On 
the  1st  of  February  all  recruiting  for  volunteers  in  State  organizations 
was  ordered  stopped,  the  quotas  being  filled. 

In  June,  1863,  an  extension  was- made  of  the  tract  bought  by  Nicho- 
las Devereux  in  1847  t>y  the  purchase  of  a  part  of  the- Hamilton  farm 
extending  southward  to  the  Thorn  farm.  It  was  laid  out  by  L.  M. 
Taylor  and  its  lots  were  offered  for  sale.  Reaching  from  Walnut  street 
on  the  north  to  Thorn  street  on  the  south,  and  frorti  the  Chenango 
Canal  on  the  east  to  York  street  on  the  west,  it  now  has  upon  it  a  large 
number  of  buildings,  chiefly  residences. 

On  the  Sth  of  May  a  meeting  was  held  at  the  city  hall  to  make  arrange- 
ments for  the  reception  of  the  Fourteenth  and  Twenty-sixth  Regiments. 
The  regiments  were  received  on  the  20th  with  an  ovation.  The  Four- 
teenth was  quartered  in  the  city  hall  and  the  Twenty-sixth  in  the  court- 
room, both  being  fed  at  the  armory. 

A  meeting  was  held  at  Bagg's  Hotel  on  the  19th  of  May  to  make 
arrangements  to  entertain  the  Loyal  League  Convention.  Theodore  S. 
Faxton  presided.  The  convention  met  here  May  26th  and  drew  an 
immense  crowd,  said  to  be  the  largest  political  gathering  ever  held  in 
Utica. 

Enrollment  for  a  conscription  was  made  in  Jurie  and  July\  In  the 
latter  part  of  June  recruiting  was  active,  six  offices  being  open,  under 
the  last  call  of  the  President  for  volunteers.  On  the  23d  of  June  the 
Forty-fifth  Militia  Regiment  in  Utica  was  ordered  to  prepare  immedi- 
ately for  active  service.  This  caused  a  good  deal  of  excitement.  A  later 
message  from  the  governor  explained  that  he  wanted  only  volunteers 
and  not  the  regiment  perforce ;  and  that  if  Colonel  Willard  could  not 
bring  his  regiment,  as  volunteers,  himself  would  be  taken  as  captain 
with  one  company.  At  an  assembly  of  the  regiment  June  23d  only 
forty  or  fifty  volunteered.  Jmig  30th  Provost- Marshal  Richardson  was 
ordered  to  rnake^J]_n_ecessaix,greparatiqns^  for^_dxaft  For  the  week 
ending  July  18th  there  were  forty- foiar^enlistnieivts  in  Utica  and  they 
continued  active  down  to  the  date  of  the  draft.  Trouble  was  antici- 
pated at  the  draft  and  extra  police  were  sworn  in  for  the  possible 
emergency.  The  city's  quota  was  594  and  the  county's  1,667^  Recruit:^ 
ing  was  further  stimulated  in  July  by  the  offer  by  the   general  govern- 


'V- 


DRAFTING  IN  1863.  321 

ment  to  soldiers  re-enlisting  $402,  which  made,  with  the  State  bounty- 
then  offered  of  $150,  $552,  of  which  $i72jwas  to  be  paid  upon  r^enlist- 
ment.  The  enrollment  in  the  countyjvas  cojipjeted  earjj^  in  July  and 
numbered  in  the  county  9,842  and  in  the  city  2,170.  These  figures 
were  subsequently  reduced  to_8^26o_and^jj^02_respectively. 

At  Gettysburg  on  July  i,  2,  and  3  the  troops  from  this  county  suf- 
fered severely,  but  the  victory  and  the  threatened  invasion  of  the  North 
gave  new  inspiration  and  stimulated  enlistments  ;  twenty- seven  enlisted 
in  Ut.ica  in  the  week  ending  July  4th. 

Under  the  last  call  of  the  President  for  300,000  volunteers  the  draft  was 
oj^deredJoLAjugust^ith.  August  20th  forty-two^soldiers  of  the^Inyalid 
Corpsarrived jtojjreservejDrder  during_the  draft,  and  on  the  21st  one 
hundred  members  of  the  Fourteenth  Heavy  Artillery  came  for  a  like  pur- 
pose. The  draft  began  at  Mechanics  Hall  on  the  morning  of  the  25th 
and  continued  several  days  until  completed,  the  draft  for  the  city  oc- 
curring on  the  28th.  A  blind  man,  Albert  West,  of  the  city,  was  depu- 
tized to  do  the  drawing  and  several  of  the  most  prominent  citizens,  in- 
cluding the  mayor,  were  present  to  see  that  the  drawing  was  honestly 
conducted.  Provost- Marshal  Richardson  presided.  The  box  was 
placed  in  an  open  window  where  it  could  be  seen  from  the  street,  and  in 
the  gloom  of  a  rainy  day  the  assembled  crowd  saw  the  first  ticket  taken 
from  the  box,  for  the  town  of  Annsville,  the  towns  being  taken  in  alpha- 
betical order.  John  Putnam  was  the  first  name  drawn.  When  the 
town  of  Deerfield  was  reached  the  crowd  was  greatly  augmented  and 
as  the  names  of  the  unfortunates  came  forth  there  were  wild  demon- 
strations of  joy,  ridicule,  hand-shaking,  etc.  About  one- fifth  of  the 
whole  number  were  drawn  the  first  day.  When  the  city  was  reached 
business  was  largely  suspended,  and  the  assemblage  outside  of  the 
building  was  the  merriest. of  all.  The  names  of  the  city  conscripts  were 
all  drawn  by  i  o'clock.  Rosettes  appeared  on  the  coats  of  the  unjucky 
ones  and  in  the  evening  a  parade  of  their  number  was  organized. 
There  was  general  quiet,  and  at  the  first  opportunity  substitutes  began 
to  be  furnished  in  some  cases,  but  in  more  the  commutation  of  $300 
was  paid.  Examinations  of  the  drafted  men  were  begun  within  a  few 
days  and  continued  through  September  and  a  part  of  October. 

On  the  3d  of  September  a  special  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Supervis- 


322  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ors  was  called  to  take  steps  to  raise  money  "  to  mitigate  the  severities 
of  the  draft."  Committees  were  appointed  and  re-ported;  but  the  dis- 
cussions need  not  be  followed,  as  nothing  was  done.  The  proposi- 
tion was  to  raise  money  to  pay  commutation  of  drafted  men.  A  fund 
was  also  raised  by  the  Democrats  of  the  Seventh  ward  with  which  to 
pay  the  commutation  of  residents  of  that  ward  who  were  drafted  and 
who  belonged  to  the  Democratic  party. 

Another  call  was  issued  for  300,000  volunteers  by  the  President  on 
October  17,  1863,  to  be  followed  by  a  draft  in  case  the  quotas  were  not 
filled,  and  an  increased  bounty  was  offered  to  stimulate  enlistments. 
The  State  election  went  strongly  Republican,  and  there  was  adertermi- 
nation  on  the  part  of  those  in  power  to  throw  into  the  field  an  army  so 
overwhelming  in  numbers  that  the  Rebellion  would  be  speedily  crushed. 
On  the  9th  of  November  there  were  four  recruiting  offices  in  the  city, 
and  on  the  i6th  recruiting  agents  appointed  by  the  governor  took  the 
field,  eight  of  them  being  located  in  Utica.  Under  active  proceedings 
by  the  Board  of  Supervisors  provision  was  made  for  the  payment  of 
$300  bounty  to  each  volunteer  (as  detailed  in  the  chapter  on  military 
affairs)  and  enlistments  again  were  active. 

1864. — A  call  was  made  for  500,000  men  on  the  1st  of  February, 
1864,  and  this  was  followed  by  another  for  200,000  on  the  14th  of 
March.  A  public  meeting  was  held  on  the  19th  of  February.  This 
was  occasioned  by  previous  discussion  of  the  necessity  of  more  than 
$16,000  for  city  expenses,  the  need  of  a  hose  depot,  and  a  new  bridge 
at  the  foot  of  Genesee  street.  Nothing  of  importance  was  done  except 
the  passage  of  a  resolution  to  purchase  two  engines  at  a  cost  of  about 
$8,000.  Another  public  meeting  occurred  March  i6th  to  consider 
application  to  the  legislature  for  authority  to  raise  money  for  improve 
ments  in  the  fire  department.  Two  engines  were  needed,  1,500  feet  of 
hose,  a  watch-house,  hydrants,  and  the  Charlotte  street  paving  (all  cost- 
ing $10,950).  There  was  about  $5,500  on  hand.  The  question  of  buy- 
ing a  steamer  was  also  discussed.  Mr.  Doolittle  offered  a  resolution 
that  application  to  the  legislature  be  made  for  authority  to  raise  $10,000 
for  the  purposes  named.  This  was  followed  by  the  offer  of  a  resolution 
by  Peter  Clogher  that  $12,000  be  added  to  Mr.  Doolittle's  resolution 
with  which  to  pay  city  bonds  issued  to  relieve  citizens  from  the  draft  of 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1864.  323 

1862.  The  warmest  kind  of  a  discussion  followed,  and  on  the  final  vote 
the  chairman  declared  both  resolutions  carried.  De  Witt  C.  Grove  was 
in  the  chair.  A  motion  to  adjourn  was  adopted;  and  then  Mr.  Doo- 
little  asked  the  taxpayers  to  remain,  and  a  large  number  did  so  and 
adopted  his  original  resolution,  and  a  committee  of  ten  was  appointed  to 
carry  out  its  provisions. 

Officers  :  Mayor,  Theodore  S.  Faxton  ;  treasurer,  Thomas  McQuade  ; 
attorney,  Ichabod  C.  Mcintosh ;  clerk,  David  Perkins  ;  surveyor,  Har- 
vey Park,  jr.;  street  commissioner,  David  Hughes;  aldermen,  Holland 
Yates  T.  F.  Butterfield,  C.  C.  Kellogg,  Thomas  B.  Howell,  Patrick  Dev- 
lin, James  Merriman,  Homer  Townsend;  supervisors,  John  H.  Doug- 
lass, William  Baker,  H.  H.  Roberts,  David  Donaldson,  George  Young, 
Peter  Clogher,  Thomas  Buchanan,  jr. 

A  special  election  on  the  question  of  the  soldier's  franchise  was  held 
on  March  8th;  the  majority  in  favor  of  granting  it  was  1,106  in  the 
city. 

A  committee  was  sent  to  New  York  in  April  to  investigate  regarding 
steam  fire  engines,  resulting  in  the  introduction  of  the  first  steamer  in 
May.  News  of  the  Wilderness  battles  excited  the  city  early  in  May  and 
it  was  reported  that  out  of  over  500  who  went  into  the  fight  of  May  7th 
in  the  One  Hundred  and  Forty-sixth  Regiment  only  about  200  were 
left  unhurt. 

May  20th  a  committee  was  appointed  in  the  council  to  procure  plans 
for  a  watch-house.  The  bloody  battle  of  Cold  Harbor  in  June  of  this 
year  showed  a  list  of  many  wounded  soldiers  from  Utica  and  vicinity, 
and  the  complaint  came  that  they  were  not  being  well  cared  for.  On 
the  1 8th  a  resolution  passed  the  council  that  the  City  Hospital  be  rented 
at  $600  for  the  care  of  the  Oneida  wounded  who  should  be  brought 
home.  It  was  rented  for  one  year.  On  the  28th  of  that  month  a  pop- 
ular festival  was  held  at  the  city  hall  as  a  means  of  raising  funds  for  sol- 
diers' families,  and  about  $1,000  were  realized.  On  the  i8th  of  July 
came  another  call  for  volunteers  of  500,000,  with  a  draft  for  all  defi- 
ciency on  the  5  th  of  September. 

September  24th  a  public  celebration  was  held  over  the  great  victories 
of  Sheridan  and  a  spirit  of  hopefulness  prevailed.  During  the  fall  the 
excitement  of  a  great  presidential  campaign  filled  the  public  mind  and 


324  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

very  little  work  of  a  public  nature  was  done  in  the  last  half  of  the  year. 
Charlotte  street  from  Elizabeth  to  Bleecker  was  ordered  paved,  and 
there  was  considerable  paving  and  sidewalk  construction  around  and 
near  Steuben  Park.  The  city  fund  of  the  year  for  all  purposes  was 
$72,087.92. 

'  On  the  i8th  of  December,  just  as  the  labor  of  filling  the  former  quota 
was  over,  call  for  another  300,000  volunteers  came  and  discouraged 
many  who  were  not  upheld  by  supreme  faith  in  the  Union  cause;  but 
the  task  of  recruiting  for  it  was  promptly  begun  and  with  the  eventual 
success  that  had  before  crowned  the  efforts  of  patriotic  Oneida  County. 

1865. — The  year  opened  with  military  matters  still  uppermost.  The 
two  calls  for  volunteers  made  during  the  two  preceding  six  months  were 
not  yet  wholly  filled,  and  the  possibilities  of  a  draft  with  the  energetic 
labor  necessary  to  avert  it  commanded  the  attention  of  the  public. 
The  quota  of  the  city  under  both  of  the  calls  alluded  to  was  filled  with- 
out a  draft,  and  early  in  the  year  it  was  clearly  comprehended  that  the 
Rebellion  was  in  its  last  throes.  In  February  the  city  was  the  scene  of 
the  greatest  snow  blockade  since  1835.  A  statement  of  city  finances 
made  February  25th  showed  a  reduction  in  the  expenses  of  most  of  the 
city  departments. 

April  3d  news  was  received  of  the  fall  of  Richmond,  and  on  the  9th,  at 
10:30  A.  M.,  news  of  Lee's  surrender  reached  the  city.  A  cannon  was 
brought  out  on  Bagg's  Square,  bells  were  rung,  bonfires  were  started,  the 
fire  department  came  out,  the  sleeping  people  were  aroused,  a  procession 
formed  and  marched  to  the  mayor's  residence,  and  general  excitement 
prevailed.  A  public  meeting  was  called  for  the  14th  to  consider  what 
action  should  be  taken  regarding  a  general  celebration  and  it  was  de- 
termined to  hold  one  on  the  20th.  But  before  that  date,  and  on  the 
15th,  news  was  received  of  the  assassination  of  President  Lincoln,  and 
the  celebration  was  abandoned.  The  remains  of  the  martyr  President 
passed  through  the  city  on  the  26th.  On  the  19th  the  funeral  was  ob- 
served here. 

By  an  amendment  of  the  charter,  passed  by  the  legislature  May  ist, 
the  county  tax  assessed  in  Utica  was  made  payable  at  option  to  the 
city  treasurer  for  thirty  days  after  completion  of  the  tax  lists,  without 
any  commission  for  collection,  thus  saving  the  taxpayers  much  money 
and  inconvenience. 


OCCURRENCES  OF  1865.  325 

At  the  charter  election  there  were  chosen  the  following  officers : 
Mayor,  John  Butterfield ;  aldermen,  William  A.  Everts,  William  N. 
Weaver,  John  Griffiths,  Julius  A.  Hall,  James  H.  Read,  J.  B.  Wasmer, 
Lewis  H.  Babcock ;  treasurer,  Thomas  M.  McQuade;  attorney,  E.  B. 
Hastings ;  street  commissioner,  Clark  Burnham ;  surveyor,  Harvey 
Park,  jr.;   clerk,  Thomas  Mclncrow. 

March  17th  the  greatest  freshet  known  occurred  and  continued  sev- 
eral days,  flooding  cellars,  destroying  bridges  and  other  property,  stop- 
ping railroads,  stages,  telegraphs,  etc.  Water  was  two  feet  deep  at  the 
corner  of  Whitesboro  and  Genesee.  March  24th  a  special  meeting  of  the 
council  was  held.  A  committee  was  appointed  to  take  necessary  steps 
to  secure  legal  authority  to  raise  $10,000  by  special  tax  for  city  pur- 
poses—  to  pay  debts  not  represented  by  bonds,  freshet  damages,  make 
repairs,  etc. 

June  19th  the  One  Hundred  and  Seventeenth  Regiment  returned  on 
Sunday.  Tables  were  erected  at  the  depot  for  refreshments,  cannon 
were  fired,  and  Home,  Sweet  Home,  was  played  by  the  city  band.  They 
were  formally  received  by  Roscoe  Conkling,  to  whose  address  reply 
was  made  by  General  Daggett ;  the  regiment  passed  on  to  Syracuse  to 
be  mustered  out.  The  Fourth  of  July  was  celebrated  with  unpreced- 
ented display.  There  were  fireworks  in  Chancellor  Square  and  a 
speech  by  Francis  Kernan.  July  22d  the  One  Hundred  and  Forty- 
sixth  Regiment  was  welcomed,  tables  were  spread  in  Chancellor  Square, 
and  an  address  was  spoken  by  Judge  Bacon.  August  ist  the  Ninety- 
seventh  Regiment  returned,  the  old  regiments  acting  as  escort ;  refresh- 
ments were  served  in  Chancellor  Square  and  an  address  was  delivered 
by  Rev.  S.  H.  Coxe,  D.D,  November  30th  a  citizens'  meeting  has  held 
to  hear  the  report  of  the  committee  previously  appointed  on  railroads. 
They  reported  in  favor  of  a  subscription  of  the  city  for  $500,000  of  the 
stock  of  the  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susquehanna  Valley  Railroad.  The 
police  took  possession  of  the  new  watch-house  on  December  2d. 

Many  incendiary  fires  had  occurred  during  the  past  twelve  months, 
destroying  important  buildings  as  the  Female  Academy  on  the  27th  of 
March  and  the  Free  Academy  on  the  13th  of  May.  A  reward  of  $1,000 
was  offered  for  the  conviction  of  the  offenders.  This  amount  was  paid, 
$800  to  Charles  Latham  and  $200  to  Mrs.  M.  A.  Everson. 


326  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

1866. — At  the  council  meeting  of  January  12th  a  report  was  offered 
by  a  committee  previously  appointed  to  examine  as  to  what  charter 
amendments  were  necessary  to  enable  the  council  to  carry  on  the  city 
government  and  to  appropriate  the  money  received  from  the  State  for 
reimbursement  of  bounties  paid.  Amendments  proposed  were  to  in- 
crease the  fund  for  general  expenses  from  $16,000  to  $25,000  ;  to  raise 
$15,000  for  the  fire  department,  of  which  $7,250  was  for  two  new 
steamers  and  $6,000  for  3,000  feet  of  hose.  Also  to  appropriate  the 
$68,400  received  from  the  State,  first,  to  pay  outstanding  bonds  of  the 
city  ($48,500  and  interest)  and  to  pay  commutation  or  relief  bonds 
outstanding  ($11,700  and  interest),  and  balance  to  be  used  as  the  coun- 
cil might  direct.  These  amendments  and  appropriations  were  adopted 
and  the  legislature  was  requested  to  enact  them. 

A  special  election  was  held  March  7th  on  the  question  of  bonding  in 
aid  of  the  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susquehanna  Valley  Railroad,  result- 
ing 1,055  iri  favor  and  339  against.  The  city  was  accordingly  bonded 
for  $500,000  and  about  $200,000  was  subscribed  to  the  stock  by  citi- 
zens.    Work  was  begun  in  June. 

Officers  elected  at  the  charter  election:  Mayor,  James  McQuade; 
clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrow  ;  aldermen,  Holland  Yates,  Joseph  Faas, 
T.  S.  Sayre,  Thomas  B.  Howell,  John  Johnson,  James  Merriman,  Homer 
Townsend  ;  surveyor,  Egbert  Bagg. 

The  new  mayor  said  in  the  past  year  the  receipts  were  $34,022.12 
and  the  expenditures  $33,878.45,  while  the  average  for  the  preceding 
three  years  was  $28,807.32.  This  state  of  things  presented  a  great 
financial  problem.  A  part  of  Cooper  street  was  closed  in  September 
in  order  to  give  the  Steam  Cotton-Mills  a  site  for  their  new  mill. 

On  the  31st  of  August  President  Andrew  Johnson,  his  cabinet,  and 
General  Grant  passed  through  Utica.  They  were  given  a  reception  on 
Bagg's  Square  and  an  address  was  delivered  by  Charles  H.  Doolittle,  to 
which  the  President  replied.  On  the  17th  of  September  a  company  of 
Southern  Unionists  visited  the  city  and  were  given  a  generous  welcome 
by  a  large  committee  and  citizens  generally,  which  took  the  form  of  a 
meeting  at  the  city  hall.  The  city  received  a  strong  impetus  in  growth 
and  activity  in  building  at  this  time,  probably  on  account  of  the  pleni- 
tude of  money  disbursed  for  the  war  and  the  general  feeling  of  pros- 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1867.  327 

perity  engendered  by  the  reign  of  peace.  The  Butterfield  House  and 
the  new  Free  Academy  building  were  begun.  (See  1868.)  Railroad 
operations  were  also  active  ;  the  extension  of  the  Black  River  road,  the 
opening  of  the  Utica  and  Whitesboro  street  school  in  June,  and  the 
Utica  and  Clinton  road  in  September  being  features  of  this  era  of  ad- 
vancement. There  was  some  fear  of  cholera  which  worked  for  the  good 
of  the  community  through  careful  sanitary  precautions.  Incendiary 
fires  prevailed  and  led  during  this  and  the  succeeding  year  to  the  re- 
organization and  strengthening  of  the  fire  department. 

1867. — In  January  a  bill  was  pending  in  the  legislature  providing  for 
the  organization  of  a  police  commission  to  have  control  of  the  police  of 
Utica  and  Rome.  The  act  creating  the  Utica  Police  Commission  was 
passed  April  17,  1866,  and  on  the  23d  of  April,  1867,  a  special  elec- 
tion was  held  for  police  commissioners,  resulting  in  the  selection  of 
Hawley  E.  Heath  and  Joseph  Shearman,  who  received  the  highest  num- 
ber of  votes,  and  William  N.  Weaver  and  William  W.  Long,  who  re- 
ceived the  next  highest  number.  These  two  highest  of  each  party  were 
to  constitute  the  board  by  the  law.  There  was  some  political  feeling 
engendered  over  this  election,  and  a  meeting  of  "  those  who  will  not  be 
made  subservient  to  any  such  interest  as  that  which  has  controlled  the 
nominations  so  far  "  was  held  just  before  the  election ;  but  the  feeling 
soon  disappeared.  This  re- organization  of  the  police  force  was  the  out- 
come of  agitation  which  had  been  continued  through  most  of  the  year  ; 
but  it  was  a  movement  for  the  better  undoubtedly.  Commissions  were 
devised  originally  to  save  important  interests  from  the.  absolute  control 
of  political  parties  in  common  councils  and  for  a  time  worked  fairly 
well,  but  as  soon  as  they  naturally  became  composed  of  or  adopted  the 
methods  of  graduated  aldermen,  as  in  the  Tweed  era,  the  remedy 
proved  worse  than  the  evil. 

As  a  result  of  the  charter  election  there  were  chosen  :  Mayor,  Charles 
S.  Wilson;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrow;  treasurer,  Le  Roy  Midlam  ; 
attorney,  Thomas  E.  Kinney;  aldermen,  W.  A.  Evarts,  Jacob  Ehres- 
man,  Charles  C.  Kellogg,  Isaac  J.  Hunt,  John  Myers,  Henry  Lux,  John 
Howarth.  The  mayor  said  in  his  inaugural  that  he  could  not  congrat- 
ulate the  council  on  the  state  of  the  finances.  The  total  receipts  for  the 
year  were  $129,783.14  ;  total  expenditures,  $127,887.92. 


328  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

On  the  14th  of  June  a  contract  was  made  with  James  Benton  for  the 
erection  of  a  hose  depot  for  $5,725.  In  the  same  month  appeared  the 
subject  of  a  better  paving  of  Genesee  street,  a  subject  that  was  not  to 
be  finally  disposed  of  for  several  years.  On  the  i8th  of  July  the  coun- 
cil empowered  a  committee  to  contract  for  the  Nicholson  pavement  in 
front  of  the  city  hall  and  the  clerk's  office.  This  pavement  was  put 
down,  but  was  serviceable  for  only  a  few  years. 

A  public  meeting  was  held  on  February  5th  to  take  action  for  the 
relief  of  the  South  through  the  Southern  Relief  Commission  of  New 
York.  Committees  were  appointed,  and  during  the  spring  a  consider- 
able sum  was  raised  in  the  city  and  county  and  forwarded.  This  year 
Theodore  S.  Faxton  built  Faxton  Hall  in  West  Utica  (Union  Hall), 
chiefly  for  the  use  of  the  workingmen  of  that  district.  It  cost  $15,000. 
It  was  dedicated  December  31st.  The  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susque- 
hanna Valley  road  was  opened  to  Waterville  on  the  14th  of  November 
with  an  excursion  there  and  a  dinner  from  the  Watervillians. 

1 868. — On  the  iith  of  January  a  petition  to  the  legislature  was  pre- 
sented to  the  council  by  the  committee  on  charter  amendments,  accom- 
panied by  an  act  for  the  repeal  of  the  recently  passed  police  act.  The 
petition  set  forth  that  the  force  under  the  new  regulations  cost  much 
more  than  under  the  old,  and  that  after  paying  the  force  out  of  the  reg- 
ular fund  of  $25,000  other  departments  of  the  city  government  must 
suffer;  that  the  city  was  uniformly  peaceable  and  quiet  and  did  not 
need  a  large  and  costly  force  under  control  of  a  police  commission. 
The  petition  was  signed  by  all  of  the  aldermen  but  one,  and  by  the 
mayor.  But  nothing  was  done  further  in  the  matter  during  the  year. 
A  communication  from  the  commissioners  was  published  denying  that 
the  force  was  very  much  more  costly  than  before,  etc.  A  resolution  to 
divide  the  Fifth  and  Seventh  wards  was  carried  in  the  council  pending 
the  requisite  legislation.  As  an  evidence  of  the  growth  and  prosperity 
of  the  city  a  statement  was  published  of  the  money  that  had  been  ex- 
pended in  the  several  wards  during  the  year  1867  for  building,  as  follows: 
First  ward,  $134,500;  Second,  $52,300;  Third,  $795,600;  Fourth, 
$538,300;  Fifth,  $147,500;  Sixth,  $65,400;  Seventh,  $222,450.  To- 
tal, $1,956,050.  This  led  to  a  large  increase  in  the  assessed  valuation 
of  the  city  by  the  county  supervisors. 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1868-69.  329 

Officers  for  1868:  Mayor,  J.  Thomas  Spriggs;  clerk,  Thomas  Mcln- 
crow ;  aldermen,  Holland  Yates,  William  N.  Weaver,  T.  S.  Sayre, 
George  Pearson,  John  Johnson,  James  Merriman,  Philip  Edmunds,  John 
Howarth ;  treasurer,  Samuel  Y.  Lane ;  attorney,  Thomas  E.  Kinney. 
The  city  finances  were  stated  by  the  incoming  mayor  as  in  about  the 
same  condition  that  they  had  been,  some  $15,000  behind.  Steps  were 
taken  to  remedy  this  trouble  in  the  usual  manner,  and  an  act  to  borrow 
$25,000  was  obtained  from  the  legislature. 

The  need  of  better  water  supply  had  become  a  pressing  one  and  in 
April  an  agreement  was  reached  between  the  city  and  the  company  by 
which  the  latter  was  to  lay  twelve  miles  of  new  mains  and  build  a  reser- 
voir of  about  50,000,000  gallons  capacity,  and  the  city  should  pay  the 
company  $I0,000  annually  for  an  adequate  supply.  The  new  reservoir 
was  commenced  in  June.  In  July  action  was  taken  by  which  parts  of 
Water,  First,  and  Second  streets  were  abandoned  for  the  use  of  the 
Central  Railroad  as  a  depot  site.  Eagle  street  was  extended  to  East 
street.     The  sewer  systems  were  considerably  extended. 

The  entirely  unexpected  nomination  of  Horatio  Seymour  for  Presi- 
dent by  the  Democratic  National  Convention  in  New  York  city,  over 
which  he  had  been  presiding  for  many  days,  caused  the  greatest  excite- 
ment throughout  the  city.  In  addition  to  the  customary  salute  of  can- 
non the  city  hall  bell  rang  a  joyous  and  protracted  pea!  and  many  vol 
unteers  pulled  the  rope.  It  was  the  first  time  that  the  distinguished 
honor  of  candidacy  for  the  highest  office  had  fallen  upon  a  citizen  of 
Utica. 

1869. — The  new  Free  Academy  was  dedicated  on  the  31st  of  Janu- 
ary, President  Brown,  of  Hamilton  College,  and  James  Watson  Will- 
iams delivering  the  addresses.  The  Butterfield  House  was  finished  and 
opened  with  considerable  ceremony  on  the  loth  of  June.  The  principal 
fire  of  this  year  was  the  burning  of  two  stores  at  44  Genesee  street  on 
February  loth,  with  a  loss  of  about  $40,000.  On  the  19th  of  August 
the  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susquehanna  Valley  Railroad  was  opened  to 
Sherburne  and  the  event  was  properly  celebrated.  The  several  exten- 
sions of  the  Black  River  road  were  also  rapidly  pushed  during  the  year. 

It  was  an  era  of  rapid  growth  and  extensive  public  improvements  in 
the  line  of  paving,  sewers,  etc.      In  the  Herald  of  January  was  given  a 

42 


330  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

list  of  buildings  just  completed  or  in  course  of  erection,  and  the  total 
value  of  those  begun  and  not  yet  finished  was  stated  as  $754,100. 
Whitesboro,  Broad,  and  Fayette  streets  were  among  the  prominent  ones 
that  were  extensively  improved  ;  but  in  the  council  there  was  much 
quarreling,  and  charges  of  mismanagement  of  the  city's  financial  affairs 
were  frequent.  The  Utica  Driving  Park  Association  was  incorporated 
on  the  1st  of  February  with  James  P.  Brown,  president ;  G.  G.  Williams, 
vice-president;  Mortimer  G.  Thomson,  treasurer;  and  L.  H.  Babcock, 
secretary.  The  salary  of  the  recorder  was  increased  in  February  to 
$1,800.  The  Mohawk  Street  Railroad  was  opened  September  i6th. 
Among  the  prominent  blocks  erected  were  the  Crouse  block  and  the 
Yates  block.     The  census  of  the  year  was  given  at  28,845. 

The  council  had  much  trouble  with  the  street  railroad  company  on 
account  of  the  banks  of  snow  which  the  company  persisted  in  piling  up 
on  each  side  of  its  tracks  on  Genesee  street,  rendering  the  street  almost 
impassable.  It  was  even  threatened  at  one  time  that  if  the  company  did 
not  at  once  remedy  the  difficulty  the  authorities  would  fill  up  the  ravine 
oa  the  tracks  with  snow.  The  chief  public  work  of  the  year  was  the  pro- 
jected pavement  of  Genesee  street.  The  discussion  began  early  in  May, 
when  a  number  of  leading  citizens  who  were  interested  in  the  subject 
appeared  before  the  council  and  advocated  the  work.  After  some  dis- 
cussion in  council  a  resolution  was  passed  on  the  14th  of  May  that  the 
customary  regular  notice  be  given  that  bids  would  be  received  for  pav- 
ing the  street  with  Nicholson  (wooden)  pavement  for  fifteen  feet  on  each 
side  of  the  car  tracks,  and  with  cobblestone  from  that  point  to  the  gut- 
ters. Ttiis  action  raised  a  storm  of  discussion  in  and  out  of  the  council. 
It  had  at  that  time  become  apparent  to  men  of  good  judgment  that  the 
Nicholson  pavement  as  then  laid  in  various  cities  was  practically  worth- 
less, and  after  a  committee  of  the  council  had  been  sent  to  New  York  to 
examine  the  pavements  there,  and  reported  strongly  in  favor  of  a  wooden 
pavement  of  some  kind,  the  owners  of  property  on  the  street  with  few 
exceptions  objected  to  laying  such  pavement,  which  was  to  cost  almost 
twice  as  much  as  stone.  A  public  meeting  was  called  for  July  20th 
which  was  numerously  attended,  and  there  the  wooden  pavement 
received  the  strongest  condemnation  ;  and  the  idea  that  the  council 
could  with   impunity  order  a  pavement  which  those  who  must  pay  for 


GENESEE  STREET  PA  VEMENT.  331 

it  did  not  want  was  strongly  denounced.  A  period  of  delay  was 
secured  and  meanwhile  a  committee  was  sent  to  Rochester  and  Buffalo 
and  other  western  cities  to  examine  the  Nicholson  pavements  there. 
The  committee  learned  very  little  in  its  favor  and  reported  at  a  public 
meeting  held  July  29th  in  favor  of  a  Medina  sandstone  pavement.  It 
was  followed  by  the  publication  of  a  petition  signed  by  nearly  all  of  the 
property  owners  on  the  street  asking  that  the  council  order  the  sand- 
stone pavement.  Nevertheless  the  council  ordered  the  Nicholson  pave- 
ment. An  injunction  was  obtained  against  the  council  on  the  ground 
that  the  Nicholson  pavement  was  patented  and  thus  shut  off  competi- 
tion. This  injunction  was  dissolved  by  the  court  after  argument,  and  the 
contract  for  the  pavement  was  awarded  to  the  Nicholson  Pavement  Com- 
pany. By  a  provision  of  the  city  charter  any  one  liable  to  be  assessed  for 
pavement  and  other  work  might  offer  to  do  it  for  fifteen  per  cent,  less 
than  it  had  been  contracted  for,  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  council  after 
that  which  awarded  it.  A  few  persons  thus  liable  prepared  to  make 
such  an  offer.  To  avoid  this  the  council  for  several  weeks  would  not 
hold  any  meeting.  When  at  length  it  met  the  proposal  of  those  liable 
to  be  assessed  was  offered  and  summarily  rejected  on  the  ground  that  it 
was  "unreasonable."  Soon  after  work  was  begun  on  the  upper  end  of 
the  section  to  be  paved  by  plowing  up.  the  old  pavement.  Before  it 
had  proceeded  far  another  injunction  stopped  the  work  and  a  writ  of 
mandamus  was  applied  for  against  the  council  to  compel  it  to  accept  the 
bid  made  by  persons  liable  to  be  assessed.  The  mandamus  was  ordered 
by  the  court  after  much  and  costly  opposition  from  the  council,  which 
paid  for  it  out  of  the  general  fund.  The  Nicholson  Company  then  bought 
out  the  right  to  the  contract,  which  the  court  had  adjudged  to  the  few 
property  owners  who  had  offered  to  take  it.  Meanwhile,  however,  the 
council  had  concluded  to  let  the  property  owners  have  the  pavement 
they  desired,  the  Medina  stone.  The  contract  for  it  was  let  to  James 
Finnegan,  of  Syracuse.  The  last  that  was  heard  of  the  Nicholson  Com- 
pany in  Utica  it  was  trying  to  buy  out  Finnegan.  They  failed  to  come  to 
terms  and  the  Medina  pavement  was  begun  and  completed  in  1870,  the 
memorable  year  of  culmination  of  the  gigantic  frauds  in  the  New  York 
city  government,  which  brought  the  participants  unenviable  renown, 
prison,  and  exile. 


332  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  district  west  of  the  Chenango  Canal  and  south  of  the  asylum  was 
made  more  accessible  from  the  center  of  the  city  by  the  building  of  a 
bridge  on  Hickory  street.  Building  was  active,  the  principal  structures 
now  commenced  being  the  old  Savings  Bank  of  Utica  building  and  the 
Opera  House,  undertaken  by  the  Mechanics  Association.  Early  in 
the  year  an  editorial  in  a  local  paper,  headed  "  Utica  Enterprise,"  said 
that  those  words  a  few  years  earlier  were  seldom  used  either  by  citizens 
of  the  place  or  others  abroad  ;  that  the  city  then  seemed  to  have  set- 
tled into  a  "  slough  of  despond."  The  article  then  drew  a  strong  con- 
trast between  conditions  of  that  stagnant  period  and  those  of  the  present 
and  attributed  the  improvement  to  the  northern  and  southern  railroads 
which  the  city  had  aided. 

The  Utica,  Clinton,  and  Binghamton  Railroad  was  opened  to  Oris- 
kany  Falls  in  February  with  becoming  ceremonies,  and  a  special  tax- 
payers' election  was  held  on  the  29th  of  June  upon  the  question  of  an 
appropriation  in  aid  of  the  Utica  and  Mohawk  Railroad.  But  the  ma- 
jority against  the  proposition  was  over  500.  Early  in  the  year  the  sub- 
ject of  the  proper  observance  of  the  Sabbath  commanded  the  attention 
of  many  good  citizens,  who  believed  that  the  police  force  was  not  doing 
its  duty  in  this  direction.  A  resolution  was  adopted  upon  the  report 
of  a  committee  that  the  council  had  no  power  to  enforce  the  ordinances, 
that  the  police  commissioners  be  called  upon  to  do  their  duty  and  en- 
force the  legal  observance  of  the  Sabbath. 

The  velocipede  mania  attacked  the  city  this  year  and  for  a  few  months 
schools  of  riding  and  racing  exhibitions  were  given  in  Concert  Hall  and 
the  city  hall,  which  attracted  crowds  of  young  men  and  some  older 
ones.  Three  months  later  the  excitement  declined  as  rapidly  as  it 
sprang  up. 

Officers  chosen  this  year :  Mayor,  Ephraim  Chamberlain ;  clerk, 
Thomas  Mclncrow  ;  aldermen,  William  A.  Evarts,  Joseph  Faas,  John 
Ross,  Henry  Ney,  John  Platter,  Henry  Lux,  Luke  Hill;  treasurer, 
Charles  K.  Grannis  ;  attorney,  Thomas  E.  Kinney  ;  surveyor,  Egbert 
Bagg  ;  street  commissioner,  Lawrence  Conrad.  In  his  inaugural  ad- 
dress the  new  mayor  strongly  disapproved  of  the  existing  organization 
of  the  police  force  aad  hoped  it  would  soon  be  changed.  He  also  com- 
mented   upon    the    unsatisfactory  condition   of  the   city  finances  and 


/^-^^t^/ri^,^  (^C^.^ 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1870.  333 

showed  how  utterly  inadequate  the  sum  of  $25,000  was  for  the  annual 
expenses,  expressing  himself  strongly  in  favor  of  increasing  the  amount 
to  $40,000,  and  advised  the  most  rigid  economy  in  the  city  govern- 
ment. 

On  the  5th  of  March  a  report  of  a  committee  on  charter  amendment 
reported  in  favor  of  increasing  the  city  fund  to  $40,000  and  giving  the 
council  power  to  raise  the  salary  of  the  city  attorney  to  $1,000  and  that 
of  the  treasurer  to  $1,200.  The  report  was  agreed  to  in  the  council, 
but  five  members  opposed  it. 

1870. — The  officers  of  the  city  for  this  year  were  :  Mayor,  James  Mc- 
Quade  ;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrow  ;  aldermen,  Holland  Yates,  W.  N. 
Weaver,  Theodore  S.  Sayre,  George  Pearson,  Joseph  E.  West,  George 
T.  Hollingsworth,  Peter  Clogher,  John  Johnson  ;  treasurer,  Charles  K. 
Grannis  ;  attorney,  H.  D.  Talcott ;  street  commissioner,  Patrick  Mc- 
Gough ;  surveyor,  John  R.  Baxter. 

The  council  on  the  15th  of  January  reported,  through  a  committee 
previously  appointed,  in  favor  of  forming  the  Eighth  ward  from  those 
parts  of  the  Fifth  and  Seventh  lying  east  of  the  gulf;  and  on  the  28th 
of  the  same  month  the  Sixth  ward  was  divided  on  the  line  of  the  division 
into  election  districts,  thus  creating  two  new  wards  which  were  numbered 
Eighth  and  Ninth.  The  year  was  a  somewhat  memorable  one  on  account 
of  the  increase  in  the  number  of  wards,  active  efforts  to  re-organize  the 
fire  department  on  a  paid  basis,  important  charter  amendments,  and  a 
continuous  and  bitter  struggle  among  the  aldermen.  Proceedings  be- 
gan in  the  council  on  the  7th  of  January,  when  a  resolution  was  offered 
that  the  mayor  request  the  taxpayers  to  name  a  committee  of  seven 
(one  from  each  ward)  to  confer  with  a  committee  of  the  council  to 
recommend  such  amendments  to  the  charter  as  should  be  thought  best 
for  the  good  of  the  city.  This  was  temporarily  laid  on  the  table.  On 
the  2 1  St  of  January  a  committee  was  appointed  to  inspect  the  proposed 
charter  amendments  before  their  submission  to  the  council,  consisting 
of  Francis  Kernan,  A.  S.  Johnson,  P.  V.  Kellogg,  De  Witt  C.  Grove, 
E.  H.  Roberts,  T.  J.  Spriggs,  William  J.  Bacon,  and  D.  P.  White.  The 
proposed  amendments  were  reported  at  a  special  meeting  held  Febru- 
ary 1st,  of  which  the  following  is  a  brief  digest :  To  give  the  recorder 
power   to  try  violations  of  the  city  ordinances;  providing   that  only  a 


334  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

synopsis  of  the  reports  of  city  treasurers  be  published  in  the  news- 
papers ;  giving  the  council  power  to  appoint  the  city  attorney  and  the 
overseer  of  the  poor,  and  making  the  term  of  the  city  clerk  three  years; 
(only  the  last  of  these  provisions  was  adopted  ;)  organizing  a  new  Board 
of  Health  with  the  mayor  as  president ;  raising  the  amount  of  the  city 
fund  to  $40,000;  providing  for  more  prompt  payments  of  funds  by  the 
collectors  to  the  treasurer;  giving  the  council  power  to  appoint  police- 
men, making  the  strength  of  the  force  twenty,  and  giving  the  mayor 
power  to  dismiss  members  for  cause  ;  compelling  the  street  railroad 
companies  to  do  certain  paving  along  their  lines ;  giving  the  council 
power  to  open  new  streets  without  reference  to  the  location  of  buildings 
on  the  line ;  giving  the  council  power  to  enforce  the  proper  connection 
to  be  made  with  sewers  and  gas  and  water  pipes  ;  divesting  the  council  of 
power  to  order  a  pavement  to  which  two-thirds  of  the  property  owners 
along  its  line  object  (which  is  still  the  law) ;  ordering  the  council  to 
raise  annually  not  less  than  $15,000  nor  more  than  $25,000  with  which 
to  redeem  the  bonds  in  aid  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad 
Company ;  and  a  few  other  minor  changes.  These  were,  in  many  re- 
spects, radical  alterations,  and  generally  served  a  good  purpose  in  the 
government  of  the  city. 

Another  effort  was  made  to  get  rid  of  the  police  commission  in  Janu- 
ary by  the  offer  of  a  resolution  providing  that  the  council  should  peti- 
tion the  legislature  for  an  act  repealing  the  existing  police  law  in  that 
respect,  and  expressing  the  opinion  that  such  action  would  please  a 
large  majority  of  the  taxpayers.  This  raised  a  storm  in  the  Board 
of  Aldermen,  and  at  the  next  meeting,  March  23d  (a  special  meeting), 
twenty  policemen  were  appointed,  with  John  Baxter  as  chief,  John  R. 
Healey  as  assistant,  and  their  salaries  fixed.  The  date  of  the  succeed- 
ing regular  meeting  was  March  25th  and  no  quorum  was  present.  The 
mayor  and  the  city  attorney  decided  that  the  proceedings  of  the  late 
special  meeting  were  illegal,  it  having  been  called  without  giving  the 
requisite  notice  to  members  of  the  board ;  and  that  therefore  the  police 
appointments  were  void.  While  this  action  was  being  taken  a  major- 
ity of  the  aldermen  had  gathered  in  a  room  in  the  Mansion  House. 
The  mayor  and  the  minority,  learning  where  the  delinquents  were,  sent 
first   messengers  and  then  officers  after  them  and  commanded  them  to 


THE  POLICE  AND  FIRE  DEPARTMENTS.  335 

attend  the  meeting.  This  command  was  not  heeded.  The  chief  of 
police  was  then  ordered  to  station  himself  in  the  Mansion  House  and 
place  the  room  containing  the  aldermen  in  a  state  of  siege.  At  1 1 
o'clock  the  proprietor  of  the  house  sent  for  the  sheriff  to  aid  in  the  pro- 
tection of  his  guests  in  the  room.  The  recorder  soon  appeared  on  the 
scene  and  ordered  the  besiegers  to  disperse.  The  mayor  and  others 
were  then  in  the  hotel  and  they  refused  to  obey  the  command  of  the 
recorder,  who  thereupon  left  to  procure  a  warrant  for  their  arrest.  At 
half  past  twelve  the  sheriff  arrested  the  chief  of  police,  Messenger  Sup- 
ple, and  Officers  G.  W.  Miller,  G.  W.  Keating,  and  Thomas  Higginson, 
and  the  party  proceeded  to  the  recorder's  office.  The  ground  was  taken 
by  the  majority  of  the  aldermen  who  refused  to  meet  with  the  minority 
that  the  latter  could  compel  the  majority  to  act,  and  this  opinion  was 
shared  by  the  recorder.  As  a  sequel  to  that  night's  operations  the 
majority  did  go  over  to  the  council  room,  where  they  promptly  put  a 
motion  to  adjourn,  and  of  course  carried  it.  At  the  next  meeting  on 
the  1st  of  April,  when  all  of  the  aldermen  but  one  were  present,  the 
records  of  the  proceedings  of  the  minority  meeting  were  expunged. 
The  former  action  making  the  police  appointments  was  then  re- affirmed 
and  the  number  of  the  force  raised  to  twenty-four. 

A  similar  contest  soon  sprang  up  in  regard  to  the  fire  department, 
growing  out  of  efforts  on  the  part  of  Mayor  McQuade  and  his  friends 
to  establish  the  department  on  a  paid  basis.  Early  in  May  nearly  the 
whole  fire  department  disbanded  and  made  a  pretentious  farewell  pa- 
rade, because  of  the  previous  action  depriving  them  of  the  election  of 
the  chief  of  the  department.  At  the  meeting  of  May  20th  a  special 
committee  was  appointed  to  report  on  a  new  organization  of  the  de- 
partment ;  the  report  was  made,  but  was  not  acted  upon  nor  made  pub- 
lic until  later  in  the  year.  In  June  another  committee  reported  in  favor 
of  reducing  the  number  of  firemen  with  each  steamer  to  ten  men  and 
that  No.  4  Company  be  disbanded,  fixed  the  salaries  of  the  engi- 
neers and  firemen,  and  recommended  the  provision  of  an  office  for  the 
chief.  This  report  was  tabled  and  the  committee  charged  with  shirk- 
ing their  duty  in  re-organizing  the  department.  Meanwhile  the  depart- 
ment existed  in  a  peculiar  condition  that  did  not  inspire  much  confi- 
dence in  its  efficiency.     A  special  meeting  on  re- organization  gathered 


336  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

at  the  clerk's  office  on  the  15th  of  July.  The  pohcy  of  establishing  a 
paid  department  was  discussed  and  the  discussion  continued  at  the  next 
regular  meeting  of  the  council  July  22d.  On  the  5th  of  August  noth- 
ing had  been  accomplished  and  the  mayor  published  a  communication 
recommending  the  immediate  organization  of  a  paid  department.  On 
the  i6th  of  September  another  special  committee  was  appointed  to  re- 
port plans  for  a  paid  department ;  but  on  the  21st  of  October  a  report 
on  organization  previously  made,  and  substantially  on  a  volunteer  basis, 
was  adopted. 

The  May  report  before  alluded  to  was  at  this  time  made  public  by 
the  mayor.  It  provided  in  brief  that  the  department  be  continued  with 
a  chief  at  a  salary  of  $850,  one  assistant  at  $150,  one  at  $100,  a  fore- 
man at  $150,  an  assistant  at  $100,  an  engineer  at  $400,  and  a  fire- 
man at  $150,  with  eight  hosemen  at  $60  each.  Speakers  who  were 
present  when  this  report  was  read  in  October  discussed  the  project  on 
all  sides.  Friends  of  a  paid  department  argued  that  the  figures  above 
given  did  not  cover  a  tithe  of  the  cost  of  a  department,  and  gave  esti- 
mates running  as  high  as  $30,000,  while  others  thought  a  good  depart- 
ment might  be  operated  for  $7,000.  With  the  reading  of  this  old 
report  were  offered  two  resolutions,  the  first  of  which  favored  re- organiz- 
ing the  department  and  giving  back  to  the  companies  the  election  of 
their  chief  This  resolution  was  adopted;  but  the  second  one, detailing 
how  the  department  should  be  re-organized,  was  not  adopted,  leaving 
matters  still  unsettled.  On  the  2d  of  December  the  harrassing  subject 
again  came  to  the  surface  in  an  estimate  offered  by  Mr.  Sayre  giving 
the  cost  of  a  good  paid  department  as  $11,650.  But  the  consummation 
of  the  plan  was  still  further  delayed. 

The  building  of  the  new  county  clerk's  office  was  commenced  this 
year  by  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  the  county.  In  1867  a  petition  of 
the  judges,  county  officers,  and  leading  lawyers  had  been  presented  to 
the  board,  stating  the  necessity  of  a  safer  and  more  commodious  build- 
ing, and  recommending  a  site  adjoining  the  court-house  on  the  corner 
of  Bleecker  and  John  streets,  then  obtainable  for  $6,000,  having  streets 
on  two  sides  and  open  public  grounds  promised  on  the  other  two,  thus 
securing  safety  from  fire  and  ample  light.  The  proposition  did  not  find 
favor  with  the  board.      In  1869  the  county  clerk  reported  that  his  office 


COUNTY  CLERK'S  OFFICE— NEW  COMERS.  337 

was  actually  tumbling  down  and  the  supervisors  were  compelled  to  do 
something.  Rome  offered  gratis  a  site  in  its  public  square  and  there 
was  a  lively  competition  from  Utica  real  estate  holders.  Between  them 
and  timidity  lest  the  sale  of  the  old  site  on  Genesee  street  might  not 
quite  cover  the  cost  of  the  new,  now  doubled,  the  proposition  of  1867  fell 
to  the  ground  and  the  old  site  was  retained  to  the  detriment  of  the  eyes 
and  patience  of  all  those  compelled  to  use  the  office  and  the  increased 
cost  of  a  fireproof  building.  The  cost  of  the  building  exclusive  of  fur- 
nishing was  $42,000.  At  the  same  time  all  the  indices  of  deeds  and 
mortgages  were  copied,  under  authority  of  an  act  of  the  State  legis- 
lature, at  nearly  the  same  cost  without  request  or  murmur  from  any 
quarter. 

Among  those  who  began  living  in  Utica  during  the  period  covered 
by  the  years  1864—70  were-the  following:  Alexander  S.  Johnson  will 
be  found  sketched  in  the  chapter  on  the  Bench  and  Bar.  T.  Scott  Lord, 
of  Geneseo,  who  had  been  county  judge  of  Livingston,  came  to  Utica 
to  engage  in  practice  in  1871,  and  formed  a  partnership  with  Roscoe 
Conkling  and  Alfred  Coxe.  He  was  elected  to  Congress  in  1874  and 
served  a  single  term,  but  was  defeated  in  running  for  the  second  term. 
Not  long  afterward  he  removed  to  New  York  city,  where  he  filled  a 
highly  creditable  position.  He  showed  great  aptitude  and  diligence  at 
the  bar,  was  of  courtly  and  dignified  manner,  and  gracious  and  winning 
speech.  His  tastes  were  scholarly  and  his  habits  refined,  and  his  read- 
ing and  attainments  outside  of  his  profession  were  broad.  He  died  Sep- 
tember 13,  1885.  His  wife  died  a  few  years  before  him.  They  had 
two  sons  and  two  daughters. 

Enoch  B.  Talcott  lived  only  two  years  in  Utica  and  died  June  21, 
1868.  He  had  already  been  a  successful  lawyer  at  Oswego,  had  been 
a  State  senator,  and  while  sitting  in  the  Court  of  Appeals  had  read  opin- 
ions that  were  deemed  equal  to  those  of  any  of  his  colleagues,  and  had 
been  collector  of  customs  at  Oswego.  His  widow,  a  sister  of  Hon. 
Charles  H.  Doolittle,  a  son,  and  two  daughters  are  still  living. 

Hiram  T.  Jenkins  was  the  son  of  Timothy  Jenkins,  of  Oneida  Castle, 

well  known  in  the  annals  of  the  county  as  district  attorney  and  member 

of  Congress.     On  the  death  of  his   father  he  succeeded  him  as  district 

attorney,  and  so  well  did  he  perform  the  duties  of  the  office  that  he  was 

43 


338  MEMORIAL  BISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

re-elected  almost  by  acclamation.  He  was  a  graduate  of  Hamilton 
College  of  more  than  ordinary  scholarly  attainments  and  decided  legal 
ability.  He  died  July  29,  1868,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-four.  His 
wife  was  a  daughter  of  Augustine  G.  Dauby. 

Joel  Willard,  a  native  of  Schuyler,  after  a  few  years  of  residence  in 
Utica  was  in  1866  elected  county  judge.  He  achieved  fair  distinction 
as  an  able  and  impartial  jurist.  Failing  health  prevented  his  seeking  a 
renomination.      He  died  January  12,  1880. 

A  surgeon  foremost  in  the  ranks  of  his  profession  was  Dr.  Edwin 
Hutchinson.  He  was  born  in  Utica  in  1840  and  was  the  son  of  Holmes 
Hutchinson.  After  graduating  at  the  Free  Academy  he  entered  the 
Yale  Scientific  School  and  was  graduated  in  i860.  He  studied  medi- 
cine with  Dr.  John  McCall  and  at  the  College  of  Physicians  and  Sur- 
geons in  New  York.  In  August,  1861,  he  was  commissioned  medical 
cadet  of  the  regular  army  and  afterward  joined  the  Fourteenth  Regi- 
ment of  Volunteers.  In  September,  1862,  he  was  commissioned  assist- 
ant surgeon  of  the  Third  Regiment  of  Maryland  Volunteers  and  went 
to  the  front-  In  the  next  year  he  was  assigned  as  surgeon  of  the  One 
Hundred  and  Thirty- seventh  New  York  Volunteers  and  remained  on 
duty  to  the  close  of  the  war.  He  next  resumed  his  college  studies 
and  received  his  degree.  Beginning  in  Utica  he  soon  had  a  large 
practice.  It  consisted  mostly  of  general  surgery,  becoming  more  and 
more  exclusively  such,  and  in  the  end  was  still  more  narrowed  by  his 
special  devotion  to  the  treatment  of  the  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear.  He 
was  active  in  the  establishment  of  St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital,  took  charge 
of  the  medical  department,  and  kept  it  until  his  last  sickness.  He  took 
a  deep  interest  in  his  profession  and  was  a  member  of  various  medical 
societies,  county.  State,  and  national.  Here  his  voice  was  always  heard 
with  pleasure,  and  the  Opthalmological  Society  regarded  him  as  one  of 
its  best  specialists.  He  was  the  author  of  a  valuable  treatise  on  hos- 
pital construction.  In  1872  he  was  breveted  colonel  by  Governor  Hoff- 
inan  for  his  distinguished  service  to  the  State,  and  shortly  afterward  was 
appointed  surgeon  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Brigade  of  the  National  Guard 
of  the  State  of  New  York.  He  died  at  St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital,  Octo- 
ber 19,  1887. 

George  R.  Thomas  was  the  son  of  Daniel  Thomas,  of  Utica,  and  was 


STEPHEN  SICARD—  J.  C.  DEVEREUX.  339 

born  January  8,  1822.  Receiving  a  good  education  he  took  to  banking 
and  was  employed  in  two  or  three  banks  in  different  parts  of  the  State, 
the  longest  in  the  Rome  Bank,  where  he  was  teller  and  cashier  until  the 
expiration  of  its  charter.  In  1864  he  came  to  Utica  and  with  E.  S. 
Brayton  and  others  he  organized  the  Second  National  Bank,  and  was  its 
cashier  until  his  death.  By  reason  of  the  confidence  reposed  in  him  for 
his  fidelity  and  self-denying  care  he  held  many  positions  of  financial 
trust.  He  was  treasurer  of  St.  Luke's  Home  and  Hospital  and  of  Grace 
Church.  Few  men  were  more  intelligent,  sincere,  and  practical  in  re- 
ligious belief  Mr.  Thomas  died  July  25,  1887.  His  wife,  who  was  a 
daughter  of  Hervej^  Brayton,  brother  of  E.  S.  Brayton,  and  four  daugh- 
ters are  still  residents. 

Stephen  Sicard  had  had  a  long  experience  in  banking,  and  was  the 
grandson  of  Montgomery  Hunt,  Utica's  earliest  banker.  Born  in  New 
York  in  1835  he  was  reared  in  Utica,  and  was  educated  at  New  Hart- 
ford and  at  Mr.  Turner's  French  school  in  Utica.  From  1854  to  1865 
he  was  employed  in  the  Oneida  Bank,  first  as  clerk  and  then  as  teller. 
In  the  latter  year  he  became  a  member  of  the  firm  of  H.  H.  Hurd  & 
Co.,  in  the  wholesale  grain  business,  and  this  was  his  position  at  the 
time  of  his  death.  He  was  secretary  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Fe- 
male Academy,  was  a  member  and  at  one  time  captain  of  the  Citizens 
Corps,  and  for  many  years  was  a  director  of  the  Oneida  Bank.  Mr. 
Sicard  was  of  a  warm,  impulsive  nature  and  was  frank  and  open  in  his 
dealings.  He  died  suddenly  on  November  5,  1890.  His  wife  was  a 
daughter  of  Judge  Philo  Gridley.  Besides  his  widow  he  left  three  sons 
and  a  daughter. 

About  1868  there  returned  to  take  up  his  residence  in  the  city 
John  C.  Devereux,  son  of  Nicholas  Devereux,  who  had  spent  a  large 
part  of  his  life  in  the  management  of  an  extensive  landed  estate  acquired 
by  his  father  in  Cattaraugus  and  Allegany  Counties.  Again  in  his 
natal  home  he  was  for  some  years  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  Rem- 
ington Agricultural  Works.  Ere  long  his  time  and  his  sympathies  were 
fully  engrossed  with  the  responsible  duties  of  the  State  Board  of  Health, 
of  which  he  was  a  valued  commissioner.  He  was  also  a  director  of  the 
Utica  Savings  Bank.  His  death  occurred  December  24,  1884,  his  wife 
having  died  a  few  years  before  him.     They  left  nine  children. 


340  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

William  B.  Jackson,  a  native  of  Westport,  Conn.,  began  business  life 
in  New  York  city  and  later  was  concerned  in  banking  in  Newburg. 
Ill  health  led  him  to  settle  in  1852  in  Forestport,  where  he  was  in  the 
lumber  trade  and  looked  after  the  estate  of  his  father-in  law,  Anson 
Blake,  in  that  place.  About  1864  he  removed  to  Utica  and  became  a 
partner  with  Theodore  Pomeroy  in  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  oil- 
cloths. Soon  after  the  death  of  his  wife,  in  1874,  he  retired  from  active 
business,  though  continuing  to  serve  in  some  important  public  trusts, 
such  as  the  directorship  of  the  Second  National  Bank,  trusteeship  of  the 
Episcopal  fund  of  the  diocese  of  Central  New  York,  and  of  St.  Luke's 
and  of  Faxton  Hospital,  being  also  vestryman  and  warden  of  Grace 
Church.  He  died  December  28,  1890.  His  second  wife,  Cornelia  F. 
Mumford,  still  survives,  as  do  also  two  sons  and  three  daughters.  His 
oldest  son,  a  young  man  of  deserved  esteem,  was  drowned  near  Min- 
neapolis, whither  he  had  removed,  leaving  a  wife  and  young  family. 

In  1869  there  was  started  by  James  Eaton  a  factory  for  the  manufact- 
ure of  matches.  Its  founder  had  previously  managed  factories  of  the 
same  kind  in  one  or  two  other  places  in  the  State,  including  one  near 
Richfield  Springs,  which  was  the  second  of  the  kind  in  the  United 
States.  The  one  established  here  was  in  the  gulf,  and  was  carried  on 
by  him  and  his  son  until  1 88 1,  when  it  was  sold  to  the  Diamond  Match 
Factory  Company,  which  monopolized  the  match  business  of  the  coun- 
try. Mr.  Eaton  remained  here  until  his  death,  November  18,  1890. 
He  was  intelligent  and  possessed  of  strong  inventive  power,  independent 
and  firm  in  principle,  kind,  and  charitable. 

David  P.  White  was  born  in  Edmeston,  Otsego  County,  April  9, 
1822.  Beginning  the  printer's  trade  at  an  early  age  he  followed  it  fn 
other  places  as  well  as  a  long  time  in  Utica,  working  here  on  the  Lib- 
erty Press,  the  Gazette,  and  elsewhere.  He  next  commenced  job  print- 
ing, at  first  with  H.  H  Curtiss  and  from  1869  with  T.  H.  Floyd,  which 
latter  connection  lasted  until  his  death.  Public  spirited  and  popular  he 
was  active  as  a  fireman,  a  Mason,  and  an  Odd  Fellow,  but  was  especially 
conspicuous  in  the  affairs  of  the  city  and  was  among  the  foremost  in 
working  for  its  improvement.  Long  an  alderman  he  was  for  eighteen 
years  a  commissioner  of  public  schools,  and  was  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  that  board,  evincing  in  his  various  offices  faithfulness  to  the  duties 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1871.  341 

which  pertained  to  them.  His  death  took  place  June  19,  1881.  He 
left  a  wife  and  six  children. 

1 87 1. — The  officers  chosen  at  the  election  in  March  of  this  year  were 
as  follows :  IVIayor,  Miles  C.  Comstock  ;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrow ; 
treasurer,  Charles  K.  Grannis ;  attorney,  Harvey  D.  Talcott ;  aldermen, 
William  A.  Everts,  Thomas  R.  Thomas,  James  H.  Williams,  William  R. 
Holden,  J.  Johnson,  Charles  Faas,  William  Metcalf,  Philip  Edmunds, 
Henry  Lux  ;  street  commissioner,  E.  Lee  ;  surveyor,  J.  R.  Baxter. 

It  was  decided  that  the  election  in  the  Fifth  ward  was  a  tie  on  the 
vote  for  alderman  and  a  special  election  was  held  on  the  15th  of  April, 
resulting  in  the  choice  of  John  Johnson.  April  8th  the  charter  was 
amended  so  as  to  give  the  mayor  the  veto  power.  August  1 2th  permis- 
sion was  granted  to  the  Utica,  Clinton,  and  Binghamton  Railroad  to  lay 
tracks  through  the  city.  The  great  Chicago  fire  occurred  this  year  and 
on  the  loth  of  October  a  special  meeting  was  held  by  the  council,  when 
a  city  bond  was  ordered  for  $1,000,  which  was  never  sent,  being  illegal, 
but  liberal  private  subscYiptions  were  sent  on  to  the  sufferers.  The  Utica 
Opera  House  was  opened  on  the  17th  of  October  and  the  Globe  Woolen- 
Mills  were  destroyed  by  fire' September  6th  ;  total  loss  $335,000.  The 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  rooms  were  formally  opened  on  the 
2 1st  of  March  on  the  third  floor  of  the  Manning  block. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  CITY'S  HISTORY:   1872-1880. 

Important    charter    Amendment  —  Enlargement    of    the   city   boundary   on    the 
West  —  Formation  of  the  Utica  Manufacturing  and  Mercantile  Association. 

IN  January,  1872,  a  bill  was  proposed  for  legislative  action  providing 
for  opening  a  boulevard  around  the  city.  This  was  the  last  that  was 
heard  of  it.  There  was  also  considerable  discussion  over  the  project  of 
building  a  public  market.  A  bill  passed  both  Houses  in  Albany  in  Jan- 
uary raising  the  salary  of  the  recorder  to  $2,500,  but  it  awaited  the  sig- 


342  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

nature  of  the  governor.  A  resolution  was  adopted  by  the  council  fav- 
oring the  act  and  it  was  signed.  In  council  February  23d  a  resolution 
was  adopted  urging  the  speedy  erection  of  a  swing  bridge  on  Hotel 
street :  the  first  step  to  the  lift-bridge. 

The  question  of  better  water  supply  was  discussed  at  a  public  meet- 
ing held  February  24th.  Mr.  Faxton  presided.  Three  propositions 
were  submitted  by  the  company,  by  one  of  which  the  city  was  to  pay 
the  company  $ioo,000  as  it  might  be  needed  for  their  expenditure,  and 
the  company  would  then  build  a  new  reservoir  which  would  be  ample 
for  the  need  of  the  city  and  reduce  the  existing  charge  for  water  from 
$10,000  annually  to  $5,000.  This  proposition  was  accepted  by  the  city, 
and  Francis  Kernan,  Ward  Hunt,  and  E.  Chamberlain  were  made  a  com- 
mittee to  draw  a  statute  to  carry  out  the  proposition. 

The  officers  chosen  in  1872  were  as  follows:  Mayor,  Theodore  F. 
Butterfield;  aldermen,  H.  C.  Case,  Frank  Sang,  John  W.  Hirt,  D.  Don- 
aldson, C.  D.  Faulkner  (to  fill  vacancy),  M.  W.  Quinn,  N.  A.  White, 
A.  H.  Sheldon,  W.  Wilsey,  Peter  Clogher,  D.  P.  White,  and  F.  B.  Mc- 
Call  (Tenth  ward)  ;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrow  ;  treasurer,  Thomas  F. 
Clarke;  attorney,  S.  M.  Lindsley ;  street  commissioner,  John  Adrian; 
surveyor,  W.  H.  Christian.  The  new  council  appointed  a  new  police 
force,  retaining  many  of  the  old  officers,  and  made  A.  Charles  Luce, 
chief;  Robert  Mcllwaine,  assistant.  Before  the  year  ended  the  chief 
was  removed  for  cause  and  Mr.  Mcllwaine  appointed.  In  his  inaugural 
the  new  mayor  recommended  a  paid  fire  department  and  economy  in 
city  management.  It  was  the  first  time  in  several  years  that  a  Repub- 
lican mayor  had  been  elected.  The  committee  appointed  to  investigate 
the  floating  debt  next  year  found  nothing  to  warrant  eulogy.  On  the 
24th  of  May  Daniel  Batchelor  was  appoiated  superintendent  of  public 
parks  without  pay. 

On  January  15  th  the  Midland  Railroad  Company  took  control  of  the 
Utica,  Clinton,  and  Binghamton  and  the  Rome  and  Clinton  roads,  and 
the  completion  of  the  road  to  Norwich  was  celebrated  by  a  free  trip  to 
that  place  and  dinner.  The  Rome,  Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg  road 
was  also  opened  to  connect  with  Watertown,  over  which  there  was  pub- 
lic rejoicing.  On  the  30th  of  July  President  Grant  and  members  of  his 
family  visited  the  city  as  the  guests  of  Senator  Conkling.      He  had  a 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  1873.  343 

public  reception  at  the  opera  house  and  was  welcomed  in  a  short  address 
by  the  mayor.  Events  and  acts  of  some  note  that  occurred  during  the 
year  were  the  renumbering  of  the  streets;  the  first  steps  toward  the 
location  of  the  government  building  here ;  the  paving  of  Rutger  street 
with  the  Ballard  wooden  pavement ;  the  burning  of  the  Reynolds  shoe 
manufactory  on  the  23d  of  November,  causing  a  loss  of  $120,000;  the 
failure  of  the  People's  Savings  Bank  and  its  branch  at  Syracuse  in  Octo- 
ber, and  of  Burke's  Savings  Bank  about  the  same  time ;  the  disband- 
ment  of  the  Monitor  Hose  Company  and  the  Active  Company  on 
account  of  insubordination  and  insulting  language  to  aldermen  and  the 
mayor  at  the  Reynolds  fire. 

1873. — On  the  26th  of  January  a  lot  was  purchased  by  the  city,  136 
feet  front  on  Elizabeth  street,  for  $18,000,  for  a  city  library.  February 
28th  a  law  was  passed  providing  for  six  commissioners  of  charity  to  per- 
form the  duties  before  delegated  to  the  overseer  of  the  poor,  the  latter 
office  being  abolished,  by  which  a  saving  of  about  one-half  of  the  yearly 
expense  was  effected.  A  report  made  by  the  surveyor  in  February  shows 
that  the  city  had  224  streets  with  a  total  length  of  497,700  feet  (ninety- 
four  and  one-fifth  miles) ;  also  that  the  cost  of  pavement  laid  in  1870  was 
$370,500  and  in  1872  $88,265.  The  officers  of  1873  were:  Mayor, 
Charles  K.  Grannis;  aldermen,  I.  C.  Mcintosh,  Frank  Sang,  Thomas 
R.  Thomas,  W.  W.  Long,  Victor  B.  Stewart,  John  M.  Hahn,  John 
Howarth,  John  J.  Cahill,  Adam  Bach,  Francis  B.  McCall,  John  John  - 
son  ;  treasurer,  Thomas  F.  Clarke ;  attorney,  Smith  M.  Lindsley  ;  clerk, 
Thomas  S.  Mclncrow ;  surveyor,  W.  H.  Christian. 

The  council  passed  the  usual  ordinance  at  the  beginning  of  the  winter 
prohibiting  the  street  railroad  companies  from  piling  snow  beside  their 
tracks,  and  this  year  the  ordinance  was  enforced.  This  resulted  in  the 
company  placing  upon  their  cars  standing  idle  in  Bagg's  Square  pla- 
cards reading  "  stopped  by  order  of  the  mayor,"  while  they  ran  only  one 
sleigh  to  the  toll-gate  and  to  Whitestown.  The  Mohawk  Street  Rail- 
road Company  carried  their  passengers  on  runners  An  act  was  passed 
April  19,  1873,  authorizing  the  borrowing  of  $32,000  on  city  bonds  to 
pay  the  city  debt,  if  the  taxpayers  voted  it,  which  they  refused  to  do  on 
May  7th.  A  meeting  of  citizens  to  consider  the  matter  was  held  May 
2 1  St  and  a  committee  was  appointed  to  investigate  and  report  through 


344  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  papers,  which  was  done  June  2 1st,  and  the  matter  dropped  for  the 
year. 

In  May  the  site  of  the  U.  S.  government  building  for  postoffice,  U.  S. 
Court,  etc.,  was  selected  on  Broad  street,  where  it  was  afterward  erected. 
On  the  13th  of  June  the  council  turned  the  City  Hospital  over  to  the 
Board  of  Public  Charities.  A  new  county  jail  was  provided  for  in  the 
latter  part  of  the  year,  subsequently  erected  on  Bleecker  street,  and  the 
supervisors  added  $500,000  to  the  assessed  valuation  of  the  city.  Febru- 
ary 5th  a  citizens'  meeting  was  held  which  resolved  that  elevated  bridges 
were  necessary  on  John  and  Seneca  streets  and  a  committee  of  seven 
was  appointed  to  urge  the  matter.  A  bill  was  introduced  in  the  legis- 
lature incorporating  Faxton  Hospital.  Mr.  Faxton  built  the  hospital  at 
a  cost  of  $50,000  and  endowed  the  institution  with  $25,000  by  his  will. 
September  30th  the  Clayton  branch  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Rail- 
road was  opened  and  a  large  excursion  went  to  Clayton,  where  they 
were  warmly  welcomed. 

1874. — A  public  meeting  was  held  January  19th  and  a  resolution 
adopted  that  application  be  made  to  the  legislature  for  authority  to  bor- 
row on  bonds  of  the  city  such  sum  as  might  be  necessary  to  pay  the 
floating  debt,  not  to  exceed  $30,000,  to  be  paid  in  three  annual  install- 
ments, and  raised  by  ordinary  city  tax.  At  the  council  meeting  Jan- 
uary 27th  a  remarkable  measure  was  adopted  to  coerce  the  taxpayers 
into  paying  the  debts  for  which  the  aldermen  contracting  them  were 
liable  by  law.  After  approving  the  election  of  Wesley  Dimblebee  as 
chief  engineer  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  at  its  next  meeting  "  this 
council  will  discharge  all  persons  in  the  employ  of  the  city,  including 
firemen  and  policemen,  unless  strong  assurances  be  given  or  means  pro- 
vided for  the  proper  running  of  the  city  government.  Two  days  later, 
January  29th,  a  special  session  of  the  council  was  held  to  consider  the 
resolution  of  the  previous  week  relative  to  the  payment  of  the  floating 
debt,  that  measure  having  become  a  law.  The  act  provided  for  the 
submission  of  the  matter  to  the  taxpayers,  as  last  year's  special  election 
was  held  February  9th,  when  the  measure,  having  been  approved  by  a 
number  of  distinguished  and  clever  judges  and  lawyers,  was  adopted, 
and  $24,000  fixed  as  the  sum  to  be  raised.  The  majority  in  favor  of 
bonding  the  city  was  461. 


^^ff  f'>y  r  aKeTK-v%wy^ 


^-*^— ^^-z_-C. 


•    PROCEEDINGS  OF  1874.  345 

Chief  Engineer  Dimblebee  was  removed  from  office  in  February, 
whereupon  four  of  the  fire  companies  refused  to  serve  longer.  This  ac- 
tion resulted  in  the  disbandment  on  March  i6th  of  Rescue,  Tiger, 
Friendship,  Neptune,  Washington,  Franklin,  and  Rough  and  Ready 
Fire  Companies,  which  made  another  farewell  parade.  New  companies 
reported  for  organization,  but  the  council  took  up  the  consideration  of 
establishing  a  paid  department,  and  on  the  28th  of  March  the  res- 
ignations of  the  above  named  companies  were  officially  accepted  and 
new  companies  organized  for  temporary  service.  On  the  7th  of  May 
the  Board  of  Fire  and  Police  Commissioners  met  and  re-appointed  Wes- 
ley Dimblebee  as  chief  engineer,  and  on  the  28th  of  May  a  paid  depart- 
ment was  organized  which  has  continued  in  existence  to  the  present. 
(See  history  of  the  fire  department.) 

Officers  for  the  ensuing  year  were  :  Mayor,  Theodore  S.  Sayre ;  clerk, 
Thomas  S.  Mclncrow  ;  aldermen,  Jonathan  D.  Moshier,  William  N. 
Weaver,  William  Ralph,  Robert  S.  Williams,  M.  W.  Quinn,  Benjamin 
A.  Clark,  Robert  B.  Poole,  Patrick  J.  Coakley,  Charles  M.  Butcher, 
David  P.  White  ;  treasurer,  John  Kohler  ;  attorney,  Patrick  F.  Bulger  ; 
surveyor,  John  R.  Baxter. 

On  April  loth  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  $10,000  be  borrowed 
on  bonds  of  the  city  to  erect  a  school  building  on  Steuben  street  and 
Bagg's  Square  was  ordered  paved.  On  the  2d  of  June  the  new  police 
force  was  organized,  and  in  the  same  month  a  new  bridge  was  ordered 
over  the  Mohawk  at  the  foot  of  Park  avenue  by  a  joint  committee  of  high- 
way commissioners  of  Deerfield  and  Utica ;  the  cost  was  $5,550. 
Bleecker  street  was  planked  this  year  at  an  expense  of  $6,954.  A  public 
meeting  of  citizens  in  favor  of  the  unconditional  repeal  of  the  U.  S. 
bankrupt  law  was  called  for  January  7th,  the  call  being  signed  by  more 
than  500  citizens.  On  the  night  of  the  5th  of  January  the  entire  roof 
of  the  new  Arcade  building,  then  unfinished,  fell  in,  causing  a  loss  of 
$10,000  February  15th  a  meeting  of  citizens  was  held  to  discuss  pro- 
posed amendments  to  the  charter.  On  September  3d  a  great  charity 
carnival  was  held  at  Utica  Park.  The  city  bell  was  rung  for  half  an 
hour  in  the  morning,  dinner  was  served  to  the  orphans,  and  6,000 
people  were  present,  despite  a  rain  storm.  The  proceeds  were  di- 
vided between  the  orphan  asylums  and  St.  Luke's  and  St.  Elizabeth's 
Hospitals  ;  profits,  $2,000.  ** 


346  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

October  Qth  the  Central  New  York  Fair  began  and  continued  nine 
days  with  great  success.  Governor  Dix  was  present  on  the  fourth  day. 
In  this  month  the  mayor  announced  that  as  there  was  no  money  in  the 
treasury  no  more  business  would  be  transacted,  and  adjourned  the 
council  for  four  weeks. 

1875. — January  8th  a  resolution  was  adopted  in  council  that  a  peti- 
tion be  sent  to  the  legislature  to  repeal  the  act  establishing  the  Boards 
of  Fire  and  Police  Commissioners.  If  the  petition  was  sent  it  failed  of 
its  purpose. 

As  a  sequel  to  this  action  the  council  prepared  a  bill  for  the  legislat- 
ure in  the  latter  part  of  January  by  the  provisions  of  which  the 
whole  control  of  the  fire  and  police  departments  was  given  to  the  coun- 
cil. This  bill  was  submitted  to  a  public  meeting  of  taxpa3'ers  Febru- 
ary 3d.  The  mayor  and  clerk  did  not  give  notice  of  this  meeting  and 
it  was  meagerly  attended  by  a  few  prominent  citizens  and  non-taxpay- 
ers, who  voted  to  approve  the  bill,  striking  out  a  clause  which  authorized 
the  council  to  raise  $10,000  if  necessary  to  pay  the  expense  of  the  paid 
fire  department. 

Resolved,  also,  that  the  clerk  report  monthly  to  the  council  the  number  of  marriages, 
births,  and  deaths. 

This  was  probably  the  beginning  of  the  registry  of  vital  statistics. 

Officers  of  1875  were  as  follows:  Mayor,  Charles  W.  Hutchinson; 
aldermen,  Henry  C.  Case,  Joseph  J.  Illingworth,  Edward  D.  Bucking- 
ham, John  Johnson,  Paul  Keiser,  jr.,  Michael  Bannigan,  Andrew  Hoover, 
William  E.  Henry,  William  B.  Monroe,  David  P.  White  ;  treasurer, 
Thomas  S.  Geary  ;  attorney,  O.  Arthur  White  ;  surveyor,  John  R.  Bax- 
ter ;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrow.  At  the  charter  election  the  proposal 
to  enlarge  the  advanced  school  building  was  voted  on  and  approved, 
and  the  work  was  consummated  in  the  summer.  The  old  school  build- 
ing on  Steuben  street  was  sold,  it  being  unoccupied.  The  annual  re- 
port of  the  chief  of  police  shows  the  number  of  arrests  to  have  been 
1,333  for  the  year. 

November  iSth  charges  had  been  brought  and  were  heard  on  this 
date  against  the  police  and  fire  commissioners ;  the  charges  were 
brought  by  private  citizens  and  heard  before  the  mayor,  and  embraced 
misappropriation  of  funds  obtained    by  selling  city  property,   influenc- 


OCCURRENCES  OF  1875.  347 

ing  voters,  unfitness  for  office,  abusive  conduct,  and  appointing  detect- 
ives contrary  to  law.  This  went  into  history  as  "  the  famous  investi- 
gation." The  winter  was  a  memorable  one  on  account  of  deep  snows 
and  intensely  cold  weather.  This  occasioned  considerable  trouble 
between  the  city  authorities  and  the  railroads.  No  trains  came  through 
from  Watertown  for  six  days  ending  February  15th,  and  other  roads 
were  seriously  obstructed. 

On  the  15th  of  January  the  Gardner  block  was  partially  burned,  with 
a  loss  on  building  and  of  tenants  of  $50,000.  This  was  an  incendiary 
fire.  In  February  the  Utica  and  Binghamton  Railroad  leased  to  the 
Midland  road,  and  the  lease  guaranteed  by  the  Delaware  and  Hudson 
Company  was  partially  abandoned  and  its  property  seized  for  taxes  and 
indebtedness.  The  Delaware  and  Hudson  Canal  Company  provided 
for  operating  the  road,  but  it  has  since  been  run  by  the  Delaware, 
Lackawanna,  and  Western  Company.  On  the  5th  of  March  proposed 
amendments  to  the  city  charter  were  approved  as  follows :  Confining 
the  sitting  of  the  Board  of  Registry  to  one  day;  giving  the  appointments 
of  the  city  council  to  the  common  council.  The  bounds  of  the  city  were 
enlarged  on  the  west  by  the  addition  of  a  strip  included  between  the 
Whitesboro  road  and  the  Central  Railroad  and  extending  to  the  west 
line  of  lot  No.  104,  and  this  was  made  a  part  of  the  Second  ward. 

The  House  of  the  Good  Shepherd  was  opened  on  the  8th  of  June  ; 
a  history  of  the  institution  will  be  given  in  a  later  chapter.  On  the 
17th  of  June  very  impressive  ceremonies  were  held  in  connection  with 
the  removal  from  the  old  Water  street  cemetery  to  Forest  Hill  of  the 
bodies  of  two  Revolutionary  notables.  Col.  Benjamin  Walker  and  Sur- 
geon-General James  Cochrane.  This  was  done  by  the  Forest  Hill 
Cemetery  Association. 

September  15th  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  was  received  in  the 
city  with  a  great  display.  An  oration  was  delivered  by  Colonel  Water- 
man.    General  Sherman  and  Governor  Tilden  were  among  the  guests. 

1876. — Officers:  Mayor,  Charles  E.  Barnard;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mc- 
Incrow ;  aldermen,  Henry  C.  Case,  H.  Ray  Barnes,  W.  N.  Weaver, 
Owen  Eynon,  Robert  S.  Williams,  Matthew  Quinn,  Aloise  Linck,  John 
N.  Siegrist,  P.  J.  Coakley,  Charles  M.  Butcher,  D.  P.White  ;  surveyor, 
John  R.  Baxter;  treasurer,  Thomas  S.  Geary;  attorney,  O.  Arthur 
White. 


348  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA.     ■ 

The  report  of  the  city  treasurer  shows  a  deficit  of  $2,331.66.  The 
council  was  authorized  to  levy  $12,000  to  pay  deficiency  bonds;  only 
$6,000  was,  however,  levied,  the  remainder  being  paid  from  the  ordinary 
fund.  This  latter  fact  accounts  for  the  above  deficit.  March  nth  a 
committee  previously  appointed  on  charter  amendments  reported,  em- 
bodying the  proposed  amendments  of  the  preceding  year,  and  the  fol- 
lowing additional :  making  the  mayor  presiding  officer  of  the  council, 
but  without  a  vote  ;  providing  for  one  alderman  only  in  each  ward; 
protecting  the  city  against  suits  for  damages  for  sidewalk  accidents. 
Prior  to  1849  nothing  was  said  in  charter  or  ordinances  about  snow  and 
ice.  Then  a  new  section  of  six  lines  was  inserted,  requiring  lot  owners 
to  remove  snow  and  ice  from  their  sidewalks.  When,  about  1870,  this 
little  section  first  showed  its  evil  fruit  in  an  action  for  damages  for  slipping 
down  the  obvious  remedy  was  to  cut  it  out  entirely  at  once.  Instead, 
after  nearly  $50,000  damages  had  been  harvested  from  the  city,  the  bane- 
ful section  was  cultivated  into  this  statute  of  a  page  and  a  half,  requiring 
the  snow  and  ice  not  only  to  be  removed,  but  "  cleaned  away,"  and 
shifts  the  risk  of  an  action  against  the  city  to  the  individual  citizen. 
April  29th  "  resolved  that  the  salary  of  the  street  commissioner  be 
$r,000  for  the  next  year." 

In  October  the  mayor  called  attention  to  the  police  station-house  and 
recommended  a  new  building  on  land  owned  by  the  city,  corner  of 
Pearl  and  Washington  streets,  and  the  Board  of  Police  and  fire  depart- 
ment heartily  concurred  in  the  plan.  At  its  meeting  December  3d  the 
council  concluded  that  it  was  short  of  funds  and  would  do  no  more  im- 
portant business  during  the  remainder  of  the  year.  The  school  report 
of  the  year  shows  that  the  city  now  owns  eighteen  school- houses  ; 
school  property  valued  at  $417,971.73  ;  that  4,711  pupils  were  enrolled 
during  the  year. 

November  30th  a  meeting  was  held  in  the  interest  of  a  narrow  gauge 
railroad  from  Utica  to  Ilion.  A  company  was  organized  for  this  pur- 
pose in  December,  but  the  project  was  soon  abandoned. 

1877. — This  year  opened  in  Utica  in  the  midst  of  a  great  snow  storm, 
which  continued  until  January  loth;  trains  were  blockaded  on  the  rail- 
roads, and  few  strangers  came  into  the  place.  Superintendent  McMillan 
in  his  annual  school  report  (February  5th)  gave  attendance  of  pupils  for 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  jSyj.  349 

the  year  as  4,776;  teachers  employed,  91.  The  report  showed  the 
necessity  of  increased  accommodations  in  West  Utica  and  advised  the 
enlargement  of  the  Court  street  school  at  a  cost  of  $6,000.  The  coun- 
cil on  the  1st  of  March  resolved  to  submit  the  Court  street  school 
enlargement  to  a  vote  of  taxpayers  at  the  charter  election. 

Officers  :  Mayor,  David  H.  Gaffin  ;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mclncrovif ;  alder- 
men, H.  Ray  Barnes,  William  N.  Weaver,  Owen  Eynon,  R.  S.  Will- 
iams, Matthew  Quinn,  Aloise  Linck,  John  N.  Siegrist,  Patrick  J.  Coak- 
ley,  Charles  M.  Butcher,  David  P.  White  (these  aldermen  held  over  from 
the  previous  year  ;  none  were  elected  this  year,  a  recent  charter  amend- 
ment providing  for  one  alderman  only  in  each  ward) ;  treasurer,  Martin 
S.  Gottry ;  attorney,  Arthur  M.  Beardsley ;  surveyor,  Patrick  J.  Kin- 
ney. Mr.  Beardsley  resigned  as  attorney  on  the  i6th  of  March  and 
Johnson  L.  Lynch  was  appointed. 

The  plans  for  a  new  station-house  were  agreed  upon  by  the  council 
June  1st,  a  three- story  and  attic  building  with  slate  roof,  corner  of 
Washington  and  Pearl  streets.  The  school  commissioners  announced 
their  purpose  in  June  to  erect  the  library  building  during  the  summer. 
The  act  authorizing  this  building  was  passed  in  1873,  but  owing  to  other 
demands  on  the  commissioners  it  had  been  left  in  abeyance.  The 
building  was  to  cost  not  more  than  $20,000,  which  should  be  raised  on 
city  bonds,  of  which  $5,000  should  be  redeemed  annually  for-four  years. 

Utica  participated  largely  in  a  celebration  of  the  centennial  of  the 
battle  of  Oriskany  on  the  5  th  of  August.  It  was  conducted  under  the 
direction  of  the  Oneida  Historical  Society,  and  addresses  were  made  by 
Lieutenant-Governor  Dorsheimer,  Douglass  Campbell,  and  others. 

1878. — Officers:  Mayor,  James  Benton;  clerk,  Thomas  S.  Mcln- 
crow ;  aldermen,  H.  Ray  Barnes,  William  N.  Weaver,  Thomas  A. 
Lowery,  William  H.  Price,  John  Johnson,  E.  J.  Callahan,  Eli  Cone, 
Gottleib  Zitzner,  John  Carney,  George  Shotthafer;  treasurer,  Martin  S. 
Gottry;  attorney,  J.Thomas  Spriggs  ;  surveyor,  Egbert  Bagg.  The 
election  this  year  was  remarkable  from  the  fact  that  three  of  the  alder- 
men and  the  mayor  were  candidates  of  the  workingmen  and  were  elected 
on  that  basis  They  had  the  balance  of  power  in  the  council,  there  be- 
ing three  Republicans  and  five  Democrats  in  that  body. 

January  19th,  the  council  having   previously  resolved  to  remodel  the 


350  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

city  hall,  a  committee  was  appointed  to  confer  with  the  United  States 
government  to  release  its  rights  therein  and  allow  the  fitting  up  of  the 
United  States  court-room  for  a  council  chamber.  This  measure  was 
carried  out.  March  1st  the  council  resolved  to  lower  the  Columbia 
street  bridge  over  the  Chenango  Canal,  and  to  lower  and  widen  the 
pavement.  Application  was  made  to  the  legislature  for  authority  to 
carry  out  the  measure.  June  8th  Oneida  street  was  ordered  macadam- 
ized its  whole  length.  Resolutions  were  passed  in  April  and  May  or- 
dering wholesale  paving  in  various  streets,  but  these  were  afterward 
rescinded,  and  on  the  21st  of  June  the  council  decided  that  they  would 
do  no  paving  at  all ;  they  spent  about  $800  on  surveys  and  advertising 
for  contracts,  and  arrived  at  the  same  conclusions  with  those  of  previ- 
ous councils.  The  council  appears  to  have  been  one  that  was  deter- 
mined on  efforts  to  economize.  In  August  they  voted  $28,000  for 
street  lighting — a  reduction  of  $10,000  from  the  previous  year.  On 
the  14th  of  October  the  mayor  vetoed  the  street  lighting  contract,  there 
having  been  no  competition  in  bids,  and  most  of  the  prominent  ordin- 
ances of  the  year  were  vetoed  by  him  ;  in  one  case  he  offered  afterward 
to  withdraw  his  veto,  but  learning  that  he  could  not  legally  do  so  it 
was  left  to  stand.  Whatever  public  work  was  accomplished  was  effected 
chiefly  over  the  opposition  of  the  workingmen  and  the  mayor's  veto. 
As  far  as  lighting  the  streets  was  concerned  an  ordinance  was  adopted 
ordering  it  again  in  October.  There  was  much  conflict  between  mayor 
and  council. 

An  important  public  work  was  contracted  on  the  12th  of  October — 
a  trunk  sewer  from  the  outlet  of  the  Third  and  Seventh  wards  sewer  to 
the  outlet  of  Nail  Creek  at  Columbia  street.  This  had  been  under  dis- 
cussion some  time  by  the  council  and  cost  $15,808.  In  December  it 
was  discovered  that  the  plans  for  the  sewer  above  mentioned  were  in- 
correctly drawn  and  the  sewer  could  not  be  laid  from  them.  The  coun- 
cil resolved  to  suspend  the  city  surveyor,  which  was  done.  At  the 
next  meeting  he  was  reinstated. 

On  the  25th  of  January  it  was  resolved  by  the  council  to  ask  legis- 
lation authorizing  the  council  to  borrow  on  bonds  to  pay  judgment 
against  the  city  for  injuries  received  by  a  fall,  together  with  authority 
to  raise  $4,250  on  city  bonds  for  the  additional  expense  of  building  the 
police  station  and  repairing  the  city  hall. 


OCCURRENCES  OF  1879,  351 

Officers  :  Mayor,  John  Buckley ;  clerk,  P.  J.  McQuade  elected  for 
three  years  for  the  first  time) ;  aldermen,  H.  Ray  Barnes,  Thomas  A. 
Lowery,  John  Johnson,  Eli  Cone,  John  Carney,  Joseph  J.  Richards, 
William  H.  Price,  E.  W.  Callahan,  Gottlieb  Zitzner,  George  Shotthafer; 
treasurer,  Jacob  Schwab ;  attorney,  S.  J.  Barrows  ;  surveyor,  William 
B.  Taylor.  The  charity  commissioners  reported  $15,963  expended  and 
1,986  persons  relieved. 

July  26th  Alderman  Johnson  was  removed  from  the  council  room  by 
force  for  disorderly  conduct;  he  was  drunk  and  had  frequently  come  to 
the  council  in  that  condition.  July  nth  the  Utica  Manufacturing 
and  Mercantile  Association,  for  the  promotion  of  those  interests  in  the 
city,  held  its  first  meeting.  At  a  second  meeting,  July  24th,  it  was  an- 
nounced that  the  William  A.  Wood  Mower  and  Reaper  Company,  of 
Utica,  was  organized.  It  never  began  operations.  The  Eureka  Mower 
Company  did  build  and  commenced  working.  In  December  a  large 
knitting-mill  was  started  in  East  Utica  by  Wild  &  Devereux,  chiefly 
through  the  efforts  of  the  Merchants  and  Manufacturers  Association, 
which  gave  the  fTrm  a  lot  worth  $1,200,  for  which  they  agreed  to  double 
the  number  of  hands  employed  and  the  capacity  of  the  mill.  Septem- 
ber 9-1 2  the  StateFair  was  held  here;  aggregate  receipts  about  $13,000 
and  over  50,000  people  in  attendance  during  the  week. 


CHAPTER  XI. 
THE   LAST   DECADE   OF   THE   CITY'S    HISTORY. 

Summary  of  recent  History —  Extensive  and  new  methods  of  Paving  —  Street  light- 
ing Improvement  —  Development  of  the  Street  Railway  System  —  Mohawk  Valley  and 
Skenandoa  factories  Built —Government  Building  and  new  Churches  Erected  — 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  and  Soldiers'  Monument. 

OF  the  proceedings  and  events  in  the  city's  history  of  the  ten  years  in  - 
eluded  between  1880  and  1890  I  give  a  summary  only.  For  al- 
though much  that  is  important  occurred  during  the  period  the  particulars 
are  so  well  known  to  most  of  my  readers  as  to  make  it  unneccessary  and 


352  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

scarcely  compatible  with  the  space  at  command  to  detail  them  in  full. 
Near  the  beginning  of  the  period,  the  politics  of  the  city  having  become 
degraded  with  much  mismanagement  of  public  affairs  and  disregard  of 
the  laws,  especially  with  respect  to  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  and 
the  sale  of  intoxicating  liquors  on  that  day,  the  indignation  of  the 
community  was  aroused.  A  public  meeting  was  held  and  a  Citizens' 
ticket  was  adopted  for  use  at  the  approaching  election.  The  efforts  of 
the  citizens  toward  the  enforcement  of  the  laws  relating  to  the  sale  of 
liqiior  were  met  by  organization  on  the  part  of  the  liquor  dealers.  At 
the  charter  election  which  followed  the  ticket  proposed  was  in  part 
elected.  The  new  mayor  entered  upon  his  duties  with  vigor  and  a 
spirit  of  reform,  but  for  various  reasons  his  efforts  were  attended  with 
only  partial  success.  During  this  and  the  succeeding  years  there  were 
various  attempts  to  amend  the  charter,  or  to  pass  ordinances  bearing 
upon  the  welfare  of  the  city,  a  part  only  of  which  resulted  in  actual  leg- 
islation. Upon  the  attempts,  which  were  fruitless,  I  cannot  enter. 
Some  of  the  charter  amendments  were  the  following:  An  amendment 
of  1883  authorized  the  Police  Board  to  appoint  twenty- five  policemen 
and  extra  ones  when  necessary.  In  lieu  of  the  Recorder's  Court  there 
was  established,  in  accordance  with  an  amendment  of  1882,  a  local  court 
of  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction,  entitled  the  City  Court.  Its  officers 
were  a  judge  and  a  special  city  judge,  the  former  holding  office  for  four 
years  and  the  latter  for  three  years,  chosen  at  the  annual  election,  and 
a  clerk  appointed  by  the  judge.  It  was  to  sit  daily,  have  a  seal  of  its 
own,  to  preserve  records,  and  to  exercise  within  the  city  all  the  powers  of 
justices  of  the  peace  and  recorder.  The  latter  office  was  abolished  and 
the  number  of  justices  of  the  peace  was  restricted  to  two.  Another 
amendment  made  the  term  of  the  treasurer  two  years  and  required  him 
to  have  an  office  in  the  city  hall,  keeping  it  open  during  certain  fixed 
hours.  By  another  amendment  it  was  directed  that  the  mayor  and  the 
council's  committee  on  assessments  should  meet  at  a  specified  time  to 
receive  complaints  from  taxpayers  who  deemed  themselves  unjustly 
assessed.  In  1886  the  fund  for  the  support  of  the  police  and  fire  depart- 
ments was  increased  to  an  amount  not  exceeding  $60,000,  and  a  little 
later  this  fund  was  directed  to  be  separated  from  the  general  city  fund. 
In  1889  the  paving  fund,  which  at  first  was  placed  at  $20,000  and  after- 


OFFICIAL  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  LAST  DECADE.       353 

ward  increased  to  $35,000,  was  raised  to  $50,000.  From  this  fund  was 
to  be  paid  one- third  of  the  cost  of  paving  the  streets,  the  remaining 
two- thirds  being  paid  by  the  lot  holders  on  the  street  paved,  and  from 
it  came  likewise  all  the  subsequent  repairs  of  the  same  A  change  in 
the  charter  enacted  in  1890  made  the  term  of  office  of  the  mayor  two 
years  instead  of  one,  fixed  his  salary  at  $1,600  annually,  required. him 
to  keep  his  office  in  the  city  hall,  maintaining  there  a  clerk,  to  sign  all 
deeds  and  contracts  made  by  the  city,  certify  his  approval  or  disapproval 
of  every  act  or  ordinance,  gave  him  supervision  over  subordinate  officers 
with  power  of  suspension  for  official  misconduct,  free  access  to  books  of 
other  officers,  and  other  increased  authority.  His  duties  as  presiding 
officer  of  the  Board  of  Aldermen  were,  however,  taken  from  him  and  con- 
ferred upon  one  of  their  own  number,  whom  they  were  to  elect  10  the 
place  at  the  beginning  of  each  fiscal  year,  which  president  of  the  board 
was,  in  the  absence  of  the  mayor  from  the  city,  to  perform  his  duties. 
A  still  later  legislative  act  conferred  on  each  alderman  a  salary  of  $300 
per  annum.  Other  legislative  acts  authorized  the  construction  of  a  new 
jail  on  Bleecker  street  east  of  Mohawk;  of  an  engine  bouse  on  Wash- 
ington street  for  the  use  of  the  chemical  engine;  of  a  lift- bridge  over 
the  canal  on  John  street ;  of  an  outlet  under  the  canal  for  a  new  sewer 
that  was  laid  along  Ballou's  Creek;  the  borrowing  of  $30,000,  subse- 
quently increased  to  $36,000,  for  the  construction  of  an  iron  viaduct 
over  Ballou's  Creek  at  Rutger  street;  the  granting  of  permission  to  the 
Baxter  Telegraph  and  Telephone  Company  to  string  its  wires  in  certain 
streets.  This  company,  it  may  be  observed,  was  ere  long  supplanted 
by  the  Central  New  York  Telephone  Company,  as  is  noticed  on  a  sub- 
sequent page  of  this  volume. 

Yet  another  charter  amendment  enlarged  the  northern  bounds  of 
the  city  by  taking  in  a  strip  of  land  from  Deerfield  of  nearly  half  a 
mile  in  width,  extending  from  opposite  the  western  point  of  the  original 
city  line  to  a  point  some  distance  north  of  the  northern  point  of  Hub- 
bell's  Bend  in  the  river.  This  latter  act  grew  out  of  a  proposition  to 
straighten  the  channel  of  the  Mohawk  along  the  northern  boundaries  of 
the  city — a  proposition  which  was  much  discussed  during  the  year  1890. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  improvements  made  under  direction  of 
the  council  related  to  the  paving  and  lighting  of  the  streets.  Early  in 
45 


3S4  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

1882  it  was  ordered  that  Fayette  street  should  be  paved  with  sandstone, 
and  the  contract  was  let.  In  the  following  year,  after  three  extensions 
of  time  had  been  granted  to  the  contractor,  the  work  was  finished, 
though  not  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  lot  holders  of  the  street,  and  they 
obtained  an  injunction  restraining  from  payment.  The  injunction  was 
after  a  time  dismissed  and  the  money  collected.  The  affair  created  much 
delay  and  ill  feeling  before  it  was  finally  settled.  In  March,  1 883,  it  was 
resolved  to  pave  Bleecker  street  from  Genesee  as  far  as  Albany  with 
sandstone,  and  thence  to  Culver  avenue  with  McAdam  pavement,  and 
to  transfer  the  track  of  the  Utica  and  Mohawk  Street  Railroad  to  the 
middle  of  the  street,  this  track  having,  in  compliance  with  the  wishes 
of  its  residents,  been  previously  placed  on  the  north  side.  The  resolu- 
tion was  vetoed  by  the  mayor,  but  was  passed  over  his  veto.  The  work 
was  entered  upon,  but  soon  afterward,  May  25th,  a  portion  of  the  track 
was  torn  up  by  the  lot  holders.  It  was  relaid,  but  was  again  twice  torn 
up  in  the  course  of  the  following  year.  A  suit  was  brought  by  the  com- 
pany against  the  city  ;  there  were  conferences  between  the  company, 
committees  of  the  council,  and  the  dwellers  on  the  street,  and  the  mat- 
ter formed  a  subject  of  much  controversy  and  excitement  throughout 
the  year  1884.  It  was  finally  disposed  of  by  an  agreement  to  place  the 
track  in  the  center  along  that  part  of  the  street  which  lies  between  the 
intersecting  streets  of  Mohawk  and  Jefferson,  and  to  leave  the  remainder 
on  the  north  side.  In  July,  1883,  it  was  determined  that  Lansing  street 
should  be  paved  with  Hammond  stone  and  Eagle  street  with  Telford 
pavement,  and  the  work  was  effected.  The  report  of  the  city  surveyor 
showed  that  in  the  year  1883  there  were  ninety- four  miles  of  streets 
within  the  city,  of  which  between  fourteen  and  fifteen  were  paved,  a 
large  portion  being  cobble.  But  a  new  era  was  beginning,  when  a  bet- 
ter kind  of  pavement  was  in  demand.  In  1885  preliminary  steps  were 
taken  toward  paving  Rutger  street  with  asphalt  and  this  was  laid  down 
the  following  year.  In  1887  John  street  from  Bagg's  Square  to 
Bleecker  street  was  paved  with  granite  and  Steuben  street  with  sand- 
stone;  in  1888  Genesee  from  Eagle  street  to  the  city  line.  Garden  and 
West  to  South  were  laid  in  asphalt,  and  the  lower  block  of  Howard  avenue 
with  sandstone  ;  in  1889  Hopper,  the  lower  section  of  Miller,  Cornelia, 
Elizabeth,  Albany,  and  the  upper  sections  of  John  and  Miller  were  pro- 


PAVING  AND  LIGHTING  OF  THE  LAST  DECADE.       355 

vided  with  pavement,  nearly  all  with  asphalt.  The  next  year  Kemble, 
Mary,  Saratoga,  Brinkerhoff,  and  Seymour  avenues,  Dudley  and  Broad- 
way were  paved  with  asphalt  and  Burchard  with  granite.  In  1891  Rome 
street  was  paved  with  sandstone,  Whitesboro  from  Genesee  to  Potter's 
bridge  was  paved  with  asphalt,  as  likewise  Columbia  from  Genesee  to 
Whitesboro,  and  the  upper  end  of  Whitesboro  as  far  as  the  old  city  line 
with  silica  baryta.  In  the  case  of  Genesee  street  opposition  to  payment 
arose  among  a  portion  of  the  lot  holders,  from  the  fact  that  the  con- 
tractor did  not  pave  between  the  two  tracks  of  the  street  railroad  and  along 
two  feet  on  each  side  of  them.  Legal  proceedings  were  instituted  and 
it  was  decided  that  these  parties  should  pay  their  proportion  of  the  as- 
sessment. From  this  decision  they  appealed  to  a  higher  court  and  pay- 
ment has  not  yet  been  made.  Difficulty  from  a  similar  cause  occurred 
in  the  laying  of  Columbia  street,  but  which  was  sooner  settled.  Nor  was 
the  paving  of  Steuben  wholly  unattended  with  obstacles.  The  desire 
for  better  pavement  is  strongly  felt  throughout  the  city  arid  will  no  doubt 
continue  with  further  advantage  to  the  community. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  decade  a  contract  was  in  existence  for  light- 
ing with  naphtha  such  parts  of  the  city  as  were  not  furnished  with  gas. 
It  was  annulled  June  15,  1882,  and  soon  afterward  one  was  made  with 
another  company  for  a  term  of  five  years.  This,  too,  being  unsatisfac- 
tory for  proper  illumination  the  board  entered  into  an  arrangement  with 
the  Utica  Gaslight  Company,  the  latter  having  the  right  of  lighting  with 
electricity.  They  did  light  with  electricity  a  few  lamps  in  the  business 
part  of  the  city.  In  December,  1887,  the  Utica  Electric  Light  Com- 
pany, using  the  Ft.  Wayne  and  Jenne  system,  undertook  to  do  the 
lighting,  and  in  1890  their  contract  was  renewed.  They  are  paid  $35 
per  light  for  365  nights.  The  367  lamps  which  they  engaged  to  light 
not  proving  enough  to  illuminate  sufficiently  the  council  has  directed 
that  thirty -three  more  should  be  put  in  use.  The  newer  ones  are  the 
Brown  lamp,  the  Slattery  lamp  being  discarded. 

In  1883  the  Utica  Water  Works  sued  the  city  for  repudiation  of  its 
indebtedness  to  the  company  incurred  in  the  previous  year,  which  re- 
pudiation was  based  on  an  alleged  insufficiency  in  the  supply  of  water, 
the  company  also  claiming  the  failure  of  the  payment  agreed  upon  by 
the  city  of  six  per  cent,  on  the  cost  of  the  street  mains.     Pending  the 


356  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

controversy  a  project  was  discussed  of  establishing  by  the  city  a  plant 
of  its  own  to  supply  it  with  water.  But,  though  talked  of,  nothing  was 
effected  and  the  city  was  forced  to  cancel  its  indebtedness.  The  water 
company,  however,  set  about  enlarging  its  reservoirs  and  increasing  the 
number  and  capacity  of  its  pipes,  and  at  a  cost  of  about  $150,000  was 
enabled  to  furnish  water  at  a  lower  rate  than  that  which  had  been  prev- 
iously charged. 

Among  the  most  important  improvements  of  the  decade  is  the  de- 
velopment of  the  street  railway  system.  In  1886  the  Utica  Belt  Line 
Railroad  Company  was  organized  and  immediately  began  the  construc- 
tion of  a  new  system  of  surface  roads  extending  through  all  parts  of  the 
city.  In  December  of  the  same  year  the  company  leased  from  the 
Utica,  Clinton,  and  Binghamton  Railroad  Company  its  line  running  to 
New  Hartford  and  the  New  Hartford  and  Whitesboro  line  running  to 
Whitesboro.  This  was  followed  by  the  extension  of  the  latter  by  means 
of  a  branch  line  to  New  York  Mills.  In  the  same  year  the  company 
obtained  permission  to  lay  the  South  street  and  the  Blandina  street 
lines,  and  also  the  West  Belt  line.  These  several  lines  were  made 
up  of  twenty- three  miles  of  track.  A  very  complete  and  satisfactory 
horse  car  service  was  then  established,  which  was  liberally  patronized. 
This  enlarged  street  railway  service  contributed  very  materially  to  the 
growth  and  prosperity  of  Utica. 

In  August,  1889,  it  was  determined  by  the  management  to  abandon 
the  use  of  horses  in  the  propulsion  of  the  cars,  and  in  their  stead  to 
operate  the  entire  system  by  electricity.  The  well-known  banking 
house  of  A.  D.  Mather  &  Co.  had  up  to  this  time  owned  a  controlling 
interest  in  the  Belt  Line  Railroad,  and  in  connection  with  John  W. 
Boyle  managed  successfully  and  profitably  this  grbwing  property. 
The  Thomson- Houston  system  of  electric  traction  was  adopted,  and 
the  Belt  Line  Railroad,  together  with  the  Utica  and  Mohawk  Street 
Railroad,  a  line  about  two  miles  long  running  easterly  to  the  Masonic 
Home,  were  in  1889  and  1890  electrically  constructed  and  equipped 
and  are  operated  as  electric  roads,  giving  excellent  service  and  doing 
much  to  extend  the  city's  bounds. 

Among  the  events  of  general  interest  that  have  transpired  during  the 
decade  were  the  following:  In  March,  1880,  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cot- 


^:^^'-i^^^^TC<...<--.c^-^^^tii.'e--^C^-<i. — 


OCCURRENCES  OF  THE  LAST  DECADE.  357 

ton  Manufacturing  Company  was  organized.  The  company  erected  a 
factory  near  the  eastern  end  of  Broad  street  and  in  September,  1882, 
its  first  piece  of  goods  was  on  sale.  In  February  of  this  latter  year 
was  formed  the  Skenandoa  Company  for  the  making  of  cotton  yarn. 
The  company  started  with  a  capital  of  $200,000,  which  was  afterward 
increased,  as  was  also  the  capacity  of  the  mill,  which  they  built  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  one  just  mentioned.  These,  together  with  the  iron  pipe 
factory  of  Charles  Millar,  which  was  a  little  later  in  its  origin  and  placed 
somewhat  farther  east,  have  by  reason  of  the  need  of  homes  for  the 
operatives  contributed  materially  to  the  growth  of  the  eastern  part  of 
the  city. 

In  July,  1880,  the  appeal  from  Utica  and  New  Hartford  to  the  State 
assessors  against  the  supervisors  of  Oneida  County  for  raising  the  valu- 
ation of  the  assessors  on  the  appellants  was  heard,  and  after  much  evi- 
dence and  argument  the  appeal  was  sustained.  It  was  proved  that 
values  and  rents  had  decreased  instead  of  increasing.  In  this  connec- 
tion it  may  be  stated  that  a  statement  of  the  rents  of  some  twenty  stores 
on  Genesee  street  for  eight  years  from  1875  to  1882  showed  a  steady 
decrease  in  their  rents  from  $20,700  to  $11,775.  It  is  proper  to  add 
that  they  subsequently  picked  up. 

In  February,  1882,  the  Reformed  Church,  situated  on  the  corner  of 
Genesee  and  Cornelia  streets,  was  destroyed  by  fire  with  a  loss  of  $25,- 
000.  It  was  handsomely  rebuilt  and  its  interior  tastefully  decorated. 
Other  churches  newly  erected  or  rebuilt  during  this  period  are  Plymouth, 
by  the  Congregationalists,  on  Plant  street ;  Olivet,  by  the  Presbyterians, 
on  Howard  avenue  (1890);  the  Holy  Cross,  by  the  Episcopalians,  in 
East  Utica,  and  St.  Andrew's  Mission,  on  Faxton  street  (1891);  St. 
Francis  de  Sales,  by  the  Roman  Catholics,  corner  of  High  and  Eagle 
streets  (1888) ;  the  Church  of  Our  Father,  by  the  Universalists,  in  East 
Utica  (1891);  of  the  Moravians,  corner  of  Cooper  and  Cornelia  streets; 
the  Century,  by  the  Methodists;  and  the  Highland,  by  the  Presbyte- 
rians (189 1 ).  Grace  Church  also  received  in  1890  an  addition  to  its  length 
and  extensive  improvements  within.  The  West  Shore  Railroad  was  in 
process  of  construction  and  was  opened  for  travel  in  1884. 

Relatives  of  Baron  von  Steuben,  who  as  guests  of  the  nation  had 
been  present  at  the  centennial  celebration   of  the   surrender  of  York- 


358  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

town,  came  here  soon  after  to  visit  the  grave  of  the  baron  at  Remsen 
in  this  county.  They  were  received  by  delegates  from  the  Oneida  His- 
torical Society,  who  accompanied  them  in  their  visit,  and  were  addressed 
by  John  F.  Seymour.  In  April,  1882,  the  postoffice  was  removed  to 
the  still  unfinished  government  building.  The  building  was  completed 
in  the  fall  at  a  cost  of  upwards  of  $484,000  and  received  the  court-room 
and  the  chambers  ot  the  judge  and  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  District  Court.  In 
September,  1882,  the  State  Fair  was  again  held  in  Utica  ;  its  success  was 
considerable,  the  receipts  amounting  to  $15,540.  In  December,  1883,  the 
match  factory  in  the  gulf  was  burned  with  a  loss  of  $25,000,  and  not 
long  afterward  the  Empire  Brewery,  whose  loss  was  $35,000,  A  much 
more  disastrous  fire  occurred  on  the  2d  of  the  following  March. 
Though  not  so  extensive  in  reach  as  the  fire  of  1837  the  loss  incurred 
was  probably  twice  as  great.  It  extended  from  the  store  of  Edward 
Martin,  No.  123  Genesee  street,  as  far  along  Genesee  and  Catharine  as 
Peckham's  furnace  opposite  Franklin  street,  sweeping  away  every  build- 
ing on  the  southern  side  of  both  these  streets  and  doing  damage  to  the 
upper  part  of  the  First  National  Bank  on  the  northern  side.  The  loss 
to  individuals  has  proved  a  fortunate  gain  to  the  community,  inasmuch 
as  the  finer  structures  that  replaced  the  former  ones  have  added  much  to 
the  beauty  of  the  streets.  The  American  District  Telegraph  and  Tele- 
phone Company  was  organized  in  December,  1877,  and  in  May,  1879, 
began  using  the  Edison  apparatus.  In  May,  1882,  the  Central  New 
York  Telegraph  Company  was  organized  with  a  capital  of  $500,000  and 
its  center  of  operation  was  located  here.  It  soon  absorbed  the  rights 
and  the  property  of  preceding  companies,  the  District  Telephone,  the 
Baxter,  etc.,  and  greatly  increased  the  facilities  and  the  circuit  of  this 
business. 

Another  important  enterprise  of  this  era  was  the  building  of  the  hand- 
some and  costly  edifice  for  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.,  a  brief  account  of  which  is 
given  in  another  place  in  these  pages.  The  destruction  by  fire  of  the 
Oneida  National  Bank  on  the  loth  of  June,  1886,  caused  its  replace- 
ment by  a  finer  and  more  desirable  structure,  which  was  finished  in 
September  of  the  following  year.  A  home  for  the  indigent  and  disa- 
bled Masons  of  the  State,  with  their  families,  was  in  contemplation  by  the 
members  of  this  organization  as  early  as   1884.      After  deliberate  ex- 


CONSTRUCTION  IN  THE  LAST  DECADE.  359 

atnination  of  numerous  sites  that  had  been  offered  them  in  different  parts 
of  the  State  it  was  determined  to  place  this  home  on  the  eastern  border 
of  Utica.  The  ceremony  of  laying  the  corner-stone  in  the  spring  of 
1891  was  made  the  occasion  of  a  very  large  gathering  of  the  members 
of  the  order  and  a  public  procession  which  has  never  been  exceeded  in 
this  city  in  the  magnitude  and  the  imposing  nature  of  its  display.  The 
presence  of  this  institution,  when  completed  and  occupied,  must  tend 
materially  to  add  to  the  prosperity  of  the  city. 

Another  ceremony  attended  the  unveiling  of  the  soldiers'  monument 
in  the  fall  of  1891.  The  building  of  this  monument  to  the  memory  of 
the  Oneida  County  soldiers  who  had  been  killed  in  the  war  of  the  Re- 
bellion had  been  for  a  long  time  under  consideration,  and  the  raising  of 
the  necessary  funds  was  the  earnest  work  of  a  few  persons.  These  funds 
were  obtained  through  gifts,  through  public  entertainments  managed 
largely  by  the  ladies,  and  finally  by  means  of  a  direct  tax  authorized 
by  public  vote. 

A  home  for  old  men,  in  connection  with  Faxton  Hospital,  was  built 
in  1890,  and  in  1891  extensive  additions  were  made  to  the  State  Hos- 
pital and  to  the  Utica  Orphan  Asylum. 

Another  event  of  the  latter  part  of  the  decade  should  here  be  re- 
corded. Edward  D.  Matthews  came  in  possession  of  the  Ballou 
farm,  a  tract  of  land  lying  west  of  the  State  Hospital,  which  had  long 
been  in  litigation.  It  is  elevated,  healthful,  and  commands  a  wide  and 
beautiful  prospect.  Most  of  it  runs  south  from  the  Whitesboro  road 
and  alongside  of  the  Hospital  farm  several  thousand  feet.  It  has 
been  graded,  laid  out  in  three  extended  avenues  and  numerous  cross 
streets,  and  is  offered  for  sale  for  building  purposes.  A  street  through 
the  upper  part  of  the  tract  continuous  with  Hickory  street  and  reaching 
westward  to  Louis  street,  cutting  the  Hospital  farm  some  1,540  feet  to 
the  rear  of  the  hospital  buildings,  will  probably  soon  be  opened,  and 
thus  offer  the  shortest  road  to  New  York  Mills.  The  lots  are  sold  under 
desirable  restrictions  as  to  size  and  character  of  buildings,  sale  of  liquor, 
gambling,  etc.,  upon  easy  terms  of  payment.  These  highlands,  so  called, 
are  in  demand  as  future  homes,  while  they  present  greatly  needed 
facilities  for  the  westward  growth  of  the  city.  A  new  church  and  a 
few  houses  have  already  been  erected  thereon. 


360  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Following  are  the  principal  officers  of  the  city  during  the  last  decade: 
Mayors:  1880,  Thomas  J.  Spriggs  ;  1 881,  James  Miller  ;  1 882,  Francis 
M.  Burdick ;  1883,  Charles  A.  Doolittle ;  1884,  James  S.  Sherman; 
1885-87,  Thomas  E.  Kinney;  1888,  Henry  Martin;  1889,5.  J.  Bar- 
rows; 1890,  Alexander  T.  Goodwin.  Clerks:  1879-84,  Patrick  J.  Mc- 
Quade;  1885-87,  Thomas  S.  Geary  ;  1888  to  the  present  time,  Patrick 
J.  McQuade.  Treasurers:  1879-80,  Jacob  Schwab;  1881-82,  James 
T.  McLaughlin;  1883-88,  William  F.  Hoerlein  ;  1889,  Edmund  A. 
O'Brien  ;  1890,  Patrick  Griffin.  Corporation  counsel :  1879-83,  Samuel 
J.  Barrows;  1884,  Edward  D.  Matthews  ;  1885,  Myron  W.  Van  Auken  ; 
1886,  Charles  A.  Talcott ;  1887,  Myron  W.  Van  Auken;  1888-90, 
Frederick  B.  Spriggs.  Recorders:  1875  to  1884,  Patrick  F.  Bulger. 
City  judges  ;  1884,  Patrick  F.  Bulger;  1888-90,  Samuel  A.  Beardsley. 
Aldermen;  1880,  William  P.  Carpenter,  John  D.  Jones,  Patrick  F. 
Quinlan,  Luke  Hill,  John  Carney,  William  Reichert,  John  N.  Siegrist ; 
1881,  Fred  Haak,  William  H.  Price,  Joseph  Tessey,  Michael  J.  Dulan, 
James  Hayes,  John  M.  Siegrist ;  1882,  H.  Ray  Barnes,  John  D.  Jones, 
Patrick  F.  Quinlan,  Horatio  S.  Van  Valkenberg,  George  C.  Helfert, 
William  Reichert;  1883,  Fred  Haak,  Moses  Barney,  Joseph  Tessey, 
Gottlieb  Zitzner,  James  Hayes,  Michael  Doll;  1884,  H.  Ray  Barnes, 
George  J.  Buchanan,  William  McTiernan,  Edward  M.  Brown,  John  F 
Geerer,  Joseph  P.  Davis;  1885,  Henry  Kinzinger,  Charles  I  Williams, 
John  S  Bach,  John  P.  Murphy,  James  Hayes,  David  T.  Jones;  1886, 
H.  Ray  Barnes,  Edward  J.  Dillon,  James  Hackett,  Edward  M.  Brown, 
Horatio  S.  Van  Valkenberg,  William  Reichert;  1887,  Henry  Kin- 
zinger, Daniel  McGucken,  Joseph  Tessey,  John  P.  Murphy,  Willard  D. 
Ball,  Michael  Doll  ;  1888,  H.  Ray  Barnes,  John  D.  Jones,  James  Hack- 
ett, Thomas  Heslan,  Enoch  Jones,  Joseph  P.  Davis;  1889,  John  L. 
Dowd,  William  G.  McNall  (to  fill  vacancy),  Daniel  McGucken,  Joseph 
Tessey,  John  P.  Day,  Willard  D.  Ball,  Michael  Doll;  1890,  H.  Ray 
Barnes,  Hudson  Bidwell,  James  Hackett,  John  Redmond,  James  Mul- 
ligan, Joseph  Hollingworth,  jr.  (to  fill  vacancy),  Charles  F.  Clark. 

Thus  far  an  outline  of  the  municipal  and  civil  history  of  Utica  has 
been  presented,  together  with  notices  of  many  of  its  past  innabitants, 
from  the  earliest  settlement  of  the  place  down  to  the  year  1891.  It  re- 
mains to  consider  the  institutions  and  co-operating  enterprises  in  which 


TRAVEL  ON  THE  MOHAWK.  361 

its  people  have  been  and  are  now  enlisted.  In  the  chapters  which  fol- 
low these  will  be  briefly  treated  and  in  a  manner  that  must  needs  be 
succinct  and  statistical.  Other  biographies  will  be  found  in  these  vari^ 
ous  chapters  and  in  the  Biographical  Department  of  the  work. 


CHAPTER   XII. 

MODES  OF  TRAVEL  AND  TRANSPORTATION. 

The  Mohawk  River  as  a  Public  Waterway  —  The  Genesee  Turnpike  —  Early  Stages 
• — Construction  and  Opening  of  the  Erie  Canal  —  Early  Railroads  East  and  West  — 
The  Plank  Road  Era  —  Northern  and  Southern  Railroads. 

SETTLERS  in  a  wilderness  country  are  never  long  located  before  they 
feel  the  pressing  necessity  of  roads  of  some  description,  and  this  is 
true  even  in  those  favored  localities  where  nature  herself  has  supplied 
waterways  over  which  may  be  transported  the  meager  belongings  of 
the  pioneer.  As  far  as  relates  to  the  early  settlements  on  the  site  of 
the  city  of  Utica  the  Mohawk  River,  then  a  stream  of  much  larger  vol- 
ume than  at  the  present  time,  was  a  natural  highway,  and  the  first  one 
over  which  the  pioneers  of  this  locality  transported  their  little  stores 
with  comparative  ease  and  later  their  surplus  produce  to  the  markets 
of  the  East.  This  river  was  used  for  those  purposes  before  as  well  as 
long  after  there  were  any  roads  in  the  vicinity  of  its  upper  waters  that 
deserved  the  name  of  highways.  There  were  of  course  Indian,  trails 
extending  the  entire  length  of  the  immediate  territory  over  which 
ruled  the  powerful  nations  of  the  Iroquois,  but  probably  few  of  them 
were  used  as  roadways  in  this  vicinity,  either  in  their  primitive  condi- 
tion or  after  subsequent  improvement.  Indian  trails  were  as  a  rule 
tortuous  in  their  courses  to  an  extent  that  would  make  the  white  pio- 
neer shun  them.  The  Indian  would  make  a  detour  of  miles  around  a 
swampy  locality  where  the  white  man  would  build  a  corduroy  road 
across  it ;   the  red  man  would  go  around  a  hill  rather  than  climb  it. 

46 


362  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  earlier  boats  in  use  upon  the  Mohawk  were  Canadian  batteaux, 
clinker  built,  and  capable  of  carrying  one  and  a  half  to  two  tons  up  the 
stream  and  five  tons  downward.  They  were  known  as  three-handed 
or  four-handed  boats,  according  as  they  required  three  or  four  men  to 
propel  them,  or,  with  reference  to  their  capacity,  two  or  three  hogshead 
batteaux.  They  were  forced  over  the  rapids  with  poles  and  ropes,  the 
latter  drawn  by  men  on  the  shore.  Such  was  the  mode  of  transporting 
merchandise  and  Indian  commodities  to  and  from  the  West  until  some 
time  after  the  Revolution. 

The  early  navigation  of  the  Mohawk  and  contiguous  waters  was 
greatly  facilitated  in  1796  by  the  improvements  of  the  Western  Inland 
Lock  Navigation  Company,  which  was  incorporated  under  an  act  passed 
March  30,  1792.  The  project  of  connecting  the  Hudson  River  with 
Lake  Champlain  and  Western  waters  by  means  of  canals  was  discussed 
before  the  Revolutionary  war ;  but  that  struggle  in  which  the  whole 
energies  of  the  new  country  were  involved  put  an  end  to  the  matter  for 
a  time.  When  the  company  was  finally  organized  a  list  of  nearly  thirty 
directors  pushed  ahead  the  work.  The  plan  contemplated  a  canal  and 
locks  around  the  Little  Falls  on  the  Mohawk,  a  canal  across  the  portage 
at  Rome,  and  the  improvement  of  Wood  Creek  and  the  Oneida,  Sen- 
eca, and  Oswego  Rivers.  The  work  was  completed,  as  stated,  and 
proved  a  very  useful  improvement  in  developing  the  western  part  of  the 
State.  About  the  year  1812  it  was  estimated  that  300  boats  with  1,500 
tons  of  merchandise  went  through  the  canal  across  the  Rome  portage  in 
a  single  year.  With  the  completion  of  the  Erie  Canal  this  waterway 
was  abandoned. 

After  the  enlargement  of  the  locks  by  this  company  the  boats  carried 
twenty  tons  or  more  in  high  water  and  eight  to  ten  in  what  was  called 
"  full  channel  "  water,  which  meant  twenty  inches  over  the  rifts.  These 
latter  boats  were  known  as  Durham  boats,  and  were  in  shape  not  unlike 
a  canal  scow,  being  low  and  open,  fitted  with  a  walking-board  along  the 
gunwale,  and  with  a  mast  that  could  be  raised  when  required.  They 
were  propelled  by  means  of  long  poles  thrust  into  the  river  and  pushed 
from  the  shoulders  of 'men,  who  walked  from  end'  to  end  of  the  boat, 
bowed  almost  to  the  face  in  their  efforts  to  move  it  forward.  The  poles  had 
heads  that  rested  against  the  shoulder,  which  was  often  galled  like  that 


EXTRACT  FROM  SCHULTZ'S  TRAVELS.  363 

of  a  collar-worn  horse.  Down  the  stream  advantage  was  taken  of  the 
current,  and  along  the  straight  reaches  of  the  channel  and  when  the 
wind  was  favorable  a  sail  was  hoisted.  The  crew  consisted  of  five  or 
six  hands,  who  considered  themselves  fortunate  when  they  made  ten 
miles  in  one  day.  The  delay  of  unloading  at  Little  Fails  had  been 
obviated,  but  it  was  found  more  difficult  to  force  large  than  small  craft 
over  the  rapids.  Several  boats  usually  went  in  company,  and  if  any 
arrived  first  at  a  rift  they  awaited  the  approach  of  the  others  that  the 
united  strength  of  many  might  aid  in  the  labor  before  them.^  From  a 
Schenectady  paper  of  1803  we  get  an  idea  of  the  dimensions  of  one  of 
these  Durham  boats  then  on  her  first  trip:  "She  is  sixty-three  feet 
keel,  eleven  feet  wide,  and  two  feet  three  inches  deep.  When  loaded 
she  draws  two  feet  of  water  and  will  carry  twenty- four  tons.  She  now 
brought  down  250  bushels  of  wheat  and  will  next  trip  bring  800."  In 
1791  it  cost  from  $75  to  $100  per  ton  for  transportation  from  Seneca 
Lake  to  Albany;  in  1796  the  cost  was  reduced  to  $32  per  tpn  and  to 
$16  on  returned  cargoes. 

In  further  illustration  of  boat  traveling  on  the  Mohawk  in  former 
times  is  inserted  the  following  from  the  journal  of  travels  made  through 
several  of  the  inland  States  in  1807-08  by  Christian  Schultz,  jr.:  ^ 

"  I  have  noticed  but  three  different  kinds  of  boats  used  in  navigating 
the  river.  Those  called  Schenectady  boats  are  generally  preferred 
and  will  carry  about  ten  tons  burthen  when  the  river  is  high  ;  but  when 
it  is  low,  as  at  this  time,  they  will  not  take  more  than  from  three  to  four ; 
they  generally  advance  against  the  stream  at  the  rate  of  from  eighteen 
to  twenty  or  twenty- five  miles  a  day.  These  boats  are  built  very  much 
after  the  model  of  our  Long  Island  round  bottom  skiffs,  but  proportion 
ately  larger,  being  from  forty  to  fifty  feet  in  length,  and  steered  by  a 
large  swing  oar  of  the  same  length.  They  have  likewise  a  movable 
mast  in  the  middle.  When  the  wind  serves  they  set  a  square  sail  and 
top  sail,  which,  at  a  few  miles  distance,  give  them  all  the  appearance  of 
small  square  rigged  vessels  coming  down  before  the  wind.  Our  galley, 
which  I  am  just  now  informed  is  called  the  Mohawk  Regulator,  has 
gone  at  the  rate  of  six  miles  an  hour  against  the  stream;  and  during 

1  Simnas's  History  of  Schoharie  County. 

^  See  illustration  on  another  page  of  this  work. 


364  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

this  time,  believe  me,  nothing  can  be  more  charming  than  sailing  on  the 
Mohawlv. 

"It  is  not  often,  however,  that  a  fair  wind  will  serve  for  more  than  three 
or  four  miles  together,  as  the  irregular  course  of  the  river  renders  its  aid 
very  precarious ;  their  chief  dependence,  therefore,  is  upon  their  pike 
poles.  These  are  generally  from  eighteen  to  twenty-two  feet  in  length, 
having  a  sharp  pointed  iron,  with  a  socket  weighing  ten  or  twelve 
pounds,  affixed  to  the  lower  end;  the  upper  has  a  large  knob,  called  a 
button,  mounted  upon  it  so  that  the  poleman  may  press  upon  it  his  whole 
weight  without  endangering  his  person.  This  manner  of  impelling  the 
boat  forward  is  extremely  laborious,  and  none  but  those  who  have  been 
for  some  time  accustomed  to  it  can  manage  these  poles  with  any  kind  of 
advantage.  Within  the  boat  on  each  side  is  fixed  a  plank  running  fore 
and  aft,  with  a  number  of  cross  cleats  nailed  upon  it  for  the  purpose  of 
giving  the  poleman  a  sure  footing  in  hard  poling.  The  men  after  set- 
ting their  poles  against  a  rock,  bank,  or  bottom  of  the  river,  declining 
their  heads  very  low,  place  the  upper  end  or  button  against  the  back 
(front  ?)  part  of  their  right  or  left  shoulders  (according  to  the  side  on 
which  they  may  be  poling);  then  falling  down  on  their  hands  and  toes 
creep  the  whole  length  of  the  gang-boards  and  send  the  boat  forward 
with  considerable  speed.  The  first  sight  of  four  men  on  each  side  of  a 
boat  creeping  along  on  their  hands  and  toes  apparently  transfixed  by  a 
large  pole  is  no  small  curiosity,  nor  was  it  until  I  had  observed  their 
perseverance  for  200  or  300  yards  that  I  became  satisfied  they  were  not 
playing  some  pranks.  From  the  general  practice  of  this  method  as 
likewise  from  my  own  trials  and  observations  I  am  convinced  that  they 
have  fallen  upon  the  most  powerful  way  possible  to  exert  their  bodily 
strength  for  the  purpose  required.  The  position,  however,  was  so  ex- 
tremely awkward  to  me  that  I  doubt  whether  the  description  I  have  at- 
tempted will  give  you  an  adequate  idea  of  the  procedure.  I  have  met 
with  another  kind  of  boat  on  this  river  which  is  called  a  dorm  or  dorem; 
how  it  is  spelt  I  know  not  [Durham].  The  only  difference  I  could  ob- 
serve in  this  from  the  former  one  is  that  it  is  built  sharp  at  both  ends, 
and  generally  much  larger  and  stouter.  They  have  likewise  flats  simi- 
lar to  those  you  have  seen  on  the  Susquehanna,  but  much  lighter  built 
and  longer.  On  all  these  they  occasionally  carry  the  sails  before  men- 
tioned. 


<! 

o 

> 
£ 

c 

c 
z 

>^ 
a 

IS 


o 

a 
> 


366  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

"The  Mohawk  is  by  no  means  dangerous  to  ascend  on  account  of  the 
slowness  of  the  boat's  progress;  but  as  it  is  full  of  rocks,  stones,  and 
shallows  there  is  some  risk  in  descending  it  of  staving  the  boat,  and  at 
this  season  is  so  low  as  to  require  it  to  be  dragged  by  hand  over  many 
places.  The  channel  in  some  instances  is  not  more  than  eight  feet  in 
width,  which  will  barely  permit  a  boat  to  pass  by  rubbing  on  both  sides. 
This  is  sortietimes  caused  by  natural  or  accid-ental  obstructions  of  rocks 
in  the  channel,  but  oftener  by  artificial  means.  This  which  at  first  view 
would  appear  to  be  an  inconvenience  is  produced  by  two  lines  or  ridges 
of  stone  generally  constructed  on  sandy,  gravelly,  or  stony  shallows,  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  form  an  acute  angle  were  they  to  meet,  the  extrem- 
ities of  which  widen  as  they  extend  up  the  river,  whikt  at  the  lower  end 
there  is  just  space  enough  left  to  admit  the  passage  of  a  boat.  The 
water  being  thus  collected  at  the  widest  part  of  these  ridges,  and  contin- 
ually pent  up  within  narrower  limits  as  it  descends,  causes  a  rise  at  the 
passage,  so  that  where  the  depth  was  no  more  than  eight  inches  before 
a  contrivance  of  this  kind  will  raise  it  to  twelve  ;  and  strange  as  it  may 
appear  a  boat  drawing  fifteen  inches  will  pass  through  it  with  ease  and 
safety.  The  cause  is  simply  this  :  the  boat,  being  somewhat  below  the 
passage,  is  brought  forward  with  considerable  velocity,  and  the  moment 
it  dashes  into  the  passage  its  resistance  to  the  current  is  such  as  to  cause 
a  swell  of  four  or  five  inches  more,  which  affords  it  an  easy  passage  over 
the  shoal." 

Mr.  Post  had  several  boats  employed  in  conveying  produce  and  ran 
three  stage  boats  for  passengers.  In  1812  Eri  Lusher  &  Co.  were  run  ■ 
ning  during  the  season  a  weekly  line  of  boats  from  Schenectady  for 
Cayuga,  Seneca  Falls,  and  Oswego,  and  by  means  of  wagons  also,  which 
were  kept  in  constant  readiness,  they  were  enabled  to  "transport  from 
Albany  to  any  part  of  the  western  country  either  by  land  or  water  what- 
ever property  might  be  directed  to  their  care."  Parties  living  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  water  communication  were  assured  that  their  goods 
would  be  delivered  at  any  place  they  might  designate.  They  adver- 
tised also  stage  boats  to  run  between  Utica  and  Schenectady  for  the 
accommodation  of  passengers,  which,  leaving  Utica  twice  a  week  at  5 
A.  M.,  were  to  arrive  in  Schenectady  the  following  morning  in  time  for 
breakfast,  and  thence  the  passengers  were  to  be  conveyed  in  carriages 
to  Albany. 


EARL  Y  HIGHWA  YS.  367 

Turning  our  attention  to  tiie  early  overland  roadways  we  find  that  in 
1794  legislative  action  was  taken  and  three  commissioners  were  ap- 
pointed to  lay  out  a  road  from  Utica  via  Cayuga  Ferry  and  Canandai- 
gua  to  the  Genesee  River  at  Avon,  and  in  that  and  the  following  years 
appropriations  were  made  to  aid  in  its  construction.  The  portion  of  the 
road  from  Albany  to  Utica  was  doubtless  constructed  first  and  was  gen- 
erally known  as  the  "  State  Road,"  while  that  section  from  Utica  to  the 
Genesee  River  was  called  the  "  Genesee  Road."  The  road  was  not  im- 
mediately constructed,  and  in  1797  Colonel  Williamson,  who  traveled 
through  the  country  as  agent  for  English  landowners,  characterized  it 
as  little  better  than  an  Indian  trail.  But  early  in  1797  the  legislature 
passed  an  act  authorizing  the  raising  of  $45,000  by  a  lottery  for  the 
benefit  of  the  various  roads  in  the  State,  $13,900  of  which  sum  was  to  be 
appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  Genesee  road.  This  action  resulted  in 
the  rapid  completion  of  the  road,  which  was  so  far  advanced  by  the  30th 
of  September,  1797,  that  a  coach  of  four  passengers  left  Old  Fort  Schuy- 
ler (Utica)  and  arrived  at  Geneva,  Ontario  County,  a  distance  of  100 
miles,  on  the  2d  of  October.  This  section  was  the  first  opened  west  of 
Utica,  the  inhabitants  along  the  line  subscribing  4,000  days'  work  to 
aid  in  its  construction.  The  road  was  sixty- four  feet  wide  and  built  of 
earth  and  gravel,  with  numerous  sections  of  "corduroy"  over  swampy 
places,  and  bridges  over  ravines  and  streams.  Imperfect  as  this  early 
road  undoubtedly  was  in  many  respects  it  was  still  a  wonderful  im- 
provement, and  the  inhabitants  of  the  western  part  of  the  State  rejoiced 
greatly  over  its  completion. 

But  in  a  short  time  it  was  seen  that  a  more  perfect  highway  than 
this  was  a  necessity,  and  in  1800  the  Seneca  Turnpike  Company,  with 
a  capital  of  $110,000,  was  chartered  by  the  legislature.  The  shares 
were  $50  each.  The  commissioners  were  Jedediah  Sanger,  of  New 
Hartford,  and  Benjamin  Walker,  of  Utica,  for  Oneida  County,  Charles 
Williamson  and  Israel  Chapin,  of  Ontario  County.  According  to  the 
journal  of  John  Maude,  an  EngHsh  traveler  who  passed  through  Utica 
on  his  way  to  Niagara  Falls,  one  mile  of  it  only  was  completed  in  July, 
1800.  This  road  passed  through  the  villages  of  New  Hartford,  Kirk- 
land,  Lairdsville,  Vernon,  and  Oneida  Castle.  The  road  leading  into 
Utica  from  the  East  seems  to  have  been  still  unfinished  at  this  time,  as 


368  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

would  appear  from  an  advertisement  of  the  Mohawk  Turnpike  and 
Bridge  Company,  published  in  the  village  paper  of  October  2i,  1800, 
in  which  the  said  company  solicited  proposals  for  a  bridge  over  the 
Mohawk,  at  Schenectady,  for  completing  the  road  for  the  ten  miles 
lying  immediately  east  of  Utica,  and  for  finishing  other  portions  farther 
east. 

Up  to  the  date  of  the  organization  of  the  Seneca  Turnpike  Company 
the  road  leading  across  the  Mohawk  bottom  between  Utica  and  Deer- 
field  had  been  very  tortuous  and  at  times  nearly  impassable.  About 
this  time  it  was  straightened  across  this  intervale  and  otherwise  im- 
proved, but  it  was  several  years  before  it  became  a'tolerable  road.  The 
building  of  the  great  western  thoroughfare  was  the  first  important  fac- 
tor in  the  growth  and  advancement  of  Utica,  for  it  virtually  made  it  the 
head  of  navigation  and  the  principal  landing  place  on  the  Mohawk  River 
for  the  emigration  then  just  beginning  to  seek  the  fertile  regions  in  West- 
ern New  York,  and  the  embryo  commerce  destined  to  expand  in  the 
swift-coming  years  to  fabulous  proportions.  The  opening  of  this  road 
ten  miles  to  the  south  forced  Rome  to  take  the  second  place  in  the 
county  in  commercial  importance  and  give  Utica  the  preponderance 
which  she  still  retains.  Over  this  thoroughfare  ran  the  early  stages, 
some  of  whose  owners,  managers,  and  drivers  became  in  later  years 
leading  citizens  of  this  and  other  cities.  Prominent  among  them  was 
Jason  Parker,  who  came  here  in  1794  from  Adams,  Mass.,  of  which 
place  he  was  a  native.  His  first  employment  was  as  post-rider  between 
Canajoharie  and  Whitestown.  These  journeys  were  made  on  horseback 
and  sometimes  on  foot,  and  his  wife  now  and  then  assisted  him,  eking 
out  the  trip  between  Utica  and  Whitesboro.  The  contract  from  the 
government  for  carrying  the  mails,  which  had  been  given  the  year  prev- 
ious to  one  Simeon  Pool,  soon  passed  into  his  hands.  It  is  related 
that  on  one  occasion  when  Mr.  Parker  arrived  with  the  mail  from  Albany 
it  contained  six  letters  for  the  inhabitants  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler.  This 
remarkable  fact  was  heralded  from  one  end  of  the  settlement  to  the 
other,  and  some  were  incredulous  until  assured  of  its  truth  by  the  post- 
master, John  Post.  In  August,  179s,  Mr.  Parker  began  running  a  stage 
between  the  above  mentioned  places,  and  thus  announced  his  under- 
taking : 


'yASON  PARKER  PETITIONS  THE  LEGISLATURE.       369 

"  The  mail  leaves  Whitestown  every  Monday  and  Thursday  at  2 
o'clock  P.  M.  and  proceeds  to  Old  Fort  Schuyler  the  same  evening; 
next  morning  starts  at  4  o'clock,  and  arrives  in  Canajoharie  in  the  even- 
ing, exchanges  passengers  with  the  Albany  and  Cooperstown  stages, 
and  the  next  day  returns  to  Old  Fort  Schuyler.  Fare  for  passengers 
$2.00  ;  way  passengers  four  cents  per  mile,  fourteen  pounds  of  baggage 
gratis;  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  weight  rated  the  same  as  a  pas- 
senger. Seats  may  be  had  by  applying  at  the  postoffice,  Whitestown, 
at  the  house  of  the  subscriber,  Old  Fort  Schuyler,  or  at  Captain  Roof's, 
Canajoharie." 

That  his  experiment  was  a  difficult  and  doubtful  one  when  left  un- 
aided by  the  fostering  care  of  the  government  we  may  justly  infer,  and 
we  are  not  surprised  to  find  him  joining  with  eastern  proprietors  in  a  call 
for  legislative  help.  Their  petition,  which  is  dated  January  18,  1797, 
sets  forth  that  "  at  an  early  day,  and  when  no  other  persons  could  be 
prevailed  on  to  hazard  so  precarious  an  undertaking,  they  set  up  a  line 
of  stages  from  Albany  to  Lansingburg  and  another  from  Albany  to 
Whitestown,  and  for  several  years  ran  them  at  great  loss  to  themselves, 
in  anxious  hope  and  expectation  that,  by  persevering  in  so  laudable  an 
undertaking,  they  should  at  some  future  time  receive  a  compensation, 
when  the  population  of  this  new  and  growing  country  would  admit." 
Then  adverting  to  the  embarrassing  and  destructive  consequences  of 
opposition  which  had  been  set  up  on  some  of  the  eastern  lines  the  peti- 
tioners continue  as  follows  :  "  The  western  line  must  inevitably  share  the 
same  fate  unless  your  petitioners  can  obtain  the  interference  of  the  hon- 
orable the  legislature.  And  although  they  are  desirous  of  continuing 
to  prosecute  their  present  concerns  in  the  stages,  particularly  on  the 
western  routes,  they  dare  not  flatter  themselves  in  being  able  to  do  it 
unless  they  can  obtain  an  act  of  exclusive  privilege  for  a  certain  num- 
ber of  years."  Whether  their  petition  achieved  them  any  good  we  are 
unable  to  say,  but  in  November,  1799,  we  find  that  the  mail  stage  be- 
tween Schenectady  and  Utica  is  still  run  twice  a  week  by  "  the  public's 
most  humble  servants,"  Moses  Beal  and  Jason  Parker.  In  1802  the 
public  are  further  informed  that,  in  addition  to  the  above  arrangements, 
"  a  stage  for  the  conveyance  of  the  mail,  and  those  who  wish  to  travel 
by  stage,  will  start  from  Utica  for  Onondaga  twice  a  week." 

47 


370  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

In  March,  1803,  Mr.  Parker  is  again  before  the  legislature,  in  com- 
pany with  Levi  Stephens  and  other  associates,  suing  for  the  exclusive 
right  of  running  stages  from  the  village  of  Utica  to  the  village  of  Can- 
andaigua  for  the  term  of  ten  years,  and  averring  that  "the  present 
emoluments  are  inadequate  to  reimburse  the  expenses  by  the  proprie- 
tors." Accordingly  an  act  was  passed  the  following  year  granting  to 
Jason  Parker  and  Levi  Stephens  the  exclusive  right  for  seven  years  of 
running  a  line  of  stages, .for  the  conveyance  of  passengers,  at  least  twice 
a  week,  along  the  (jenesee  road,  or  Seneca  turnpike,  between  the  above 
mentioned  villages.  They  were  bound  to  furnish  four  good  and  sub- 
stantial, covered  wagons  or  sleighs,  and  sufficient  horses  to  run  the 
same.  The  fare  was  not  to  exceed  five  cents  per  mile,  and  they  were 
to  run  through  in  forty-eight  hours,  accidents  excepted.  They  were 
forbidden  to  carry  more  than  seven  passengers  in  any  one  carriage,  ex- 
cept by  the  unanimous  consent  of  said  passengers.  If  four  passengers 
above  the  seven  applied  for  passage  they  were  obliged  to  fit  out  and 
start  an  extra  carriage  for  their  accommodation  ;  any  number  less  than 
four  might  be  accommodated  by  paying  the  rate  of  four. 

By  September,  18 10,  a  greater  degree  of  expedition  was  attained  on 
the  eastern  route,  so  that  we  read  of  a  daily  line  of  stages  between  Al- 
bany and  Utica,  and  in  September,  181 1,  of  another  line  three  times  a 
week  in  addition  to  the  daily  one.  In  January  of  the  latter  year  the 
route  westward  had  been  extended  to  Buffalo  and  Niagara  Falls.  Thus 
he  commenced  by  such  humble  beginnings  a  business  which,  partly 
alone  and  partly  in  association,  he  prosecuted  throughout  his  life  time, 
and  which  within  that  time  increased  so  as  to  become  one  of  the  largest 
business  organizations  ever  formed  in  the  place.  At  the  time  of  his  de- 
cease there  were  eight  daily  lines  of  stages  running  through  Utica,  east 
and  west,  besides  twelve  daily,  semi-weekly,  or  weekly  lines  running 
north  and  south,  in  most  of  which  he  was  or  had  been  interested. 

But  Mr.  Parker's  activity  was  not  wholly  expended  in  the  running  of 
stages.  Besides  serving  as  a  trustee  of  the  village,  and  besides  bearing 
a  share  in  the  public  undertakings  of  the  day  that  concerned  him  equally 
with  his  fellow  citizens,  he  also  carried  on  milling  and  flouring.  He 
also  at  an  early  period  had  an  interest  with  Stalham  Williams  in  mer- 
cantile business. 


-&"J  hziKlmm,  t/BrvlfT 


'>/?/  OU-J 


RIVALRY  OF  STAGE  PROPRIETORS.  371 

T.  S.  Faxton,  S.  D.  Childs,  and  John  Butterfield,  all  of  whom  be- 
came prominent  in  the  travel  and  transportation  business,  as  we  shall  see, 
were  greatly  indebted  to  Mr.  Parker  for  the  impetus  which  started  them 
on  successful  careers;  the  former  joined  him  as  his  outside  assistant  in 
1813,  Mr.  Childs  as  his  book-keeper  in  1816,  and  the  latter  in  1822,  at 
first  as  a  runner  and  eventually  as  his  successor  in  the  stage  and  trans- 
portation business,  though  he  was  never,  as  Messrs.  Faxton  and  Childs 
were,  one  of  the  firm  of  J.  Parker  &  Co.  Mr.  Parker  died  in  1830  in 
the  full  enjoyment  of  the  respect  of  all  who  knew  him. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  some  of  the  legislative  regulations  imposed 
upon  those  early  stage  proprietors.  The  more  important  of  these  en- 
actments are  recorded  on  the  preceding  page.  Stage  proprietors  were 
regarded  then  the  same  as  railroad  companies  are  regarded  now.  They 
possessed  certain  responsibilities  as  public  servants  and  in  most  cases 
complied  with  every  requirement  of  the  law.  It  is  interesting  as  well 
to  notice  the  comparison  between  legislative  regulations  governing 
transportation  companies  of  that  time  and  similar  rules  applying  to  like 
bodies  of  to-day. 

Joshua  Ostrom,  son  of  Judge  David  Ostrom,  began  running  stages 
at  an  early  date,  and  in  1810— 1 1  he  and  his  partners  were  in  close  com- 
petition with  Jason  Parker  &  Co.  A  glance  at  their  respective  adver- 
tisements will  be  of  interest  as  illustrating  not  only  the  gradual  advance 
in  the  business  of  staging,  but  showing  also  the  rivalry  and  strife  which 
then  prevailed  between  the  opposing  companies.  On  the  20th  of  Sep- 
tember, 1810,  Joshua  Ostrom,  Baker  &  Swan,  and  J.  Wetmore  &  Co. 
announced  a  new  steamboat  line  of  stages  which  will  leave  Albany 
Monday  and  Friday  ;  Utica,  Monday  and  Thursday.  The  competing 
companies,  Powell  &  Parker,  Campbell  &  Co.,  "  in  order  to  prevent  the 
delay  at  Utica  "  in  their  western  line,  determined  to  run  their  stages 
every  day.  Next  Ostrom  &  Co.  ran  theirs  three  times  a  week,  but 
"without  the  encumbrance  of  postoffice  regulations."  Then  on  the  21st 
of  January,  181 1,  we  find  the  following  announcement  from  Parker  & 
Powell :  "  Eight  changes  of  horses.  The  mail  stage  now  leaves  Bagg's, 
Utica,  every  morning  at  4  o'clock.  Passengers  will  breakfast  at  May- 
nard's,  Herkimer,  dine  at  Josiah  Shepard's,  Palatine,  and  sup  (on  oys- 
ters) at  Thomas  Powell's  Tontine  Coffee  House,  Schenectady.     Those 


372  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ladies  and  gentlemen  who  will  favor  this  line  with  their  patronage  may 
be  assured  of  having  good  horses,  attentive  drivers,  warm  carriages,  and 
that  there  shall  not  be  any  running  or  racing  of  horses  on  the  line." 
The  rival  proprietors,  still  unencumbered  by  postoffice  regulations,  were 
ready  a  week  later  to  "  go  through  in  one  day,  unless  the  extreme  bad- 
ness of  the  traveling  rendered  it  utterly  impossible."  Passengers  were 
to  "  have  the  liberty  of  breakfasting,  dining,  and  supping  where,  when, 
and  on  what  they  please.  No  more  than  eight  passengers  unless  by 
unanimous  consent."  Only  one  further  advertisement  of  Mr.  Ostrom 
and  his  associates  appears,  and  this  is  dated  April,  1811,  for  he  failed 
and  wound  up  his  affairs. 

Under  date  of  May,  181 1,  appeared  the  following  announcement: 
"  Powell,  Parker,  Baker  &  Co.,  Parker  Sz;  Powell,  Hosmer  &  Co.,  and 
Landon  &  Co.  ran  a  line  of  stages  from  Albany  to  Niagara  Falls. 
N.  B. — The  public  will  observe  that  this  is  the  only  line  which  reaches 
the  Falls  and  that  the  stages  of  the  speculative  oppositionists  who  im- 
pose on  travelers  by  assuring  them  that  their  stages  extend  to  Canan  ■ 
daigua  or  the  Niagara  Falls  go  no  farther  than  Utica ;  but  that  the 
present  line  of  stages  will  afford  them  a  safe  and  direct  passage  either 
to  Utica,  Canandaigua,  Buffalo,  or  the  Falls,  without  subjecting  the  pas- 
sengers to  the  trouble  of  applying  to  another  stage  for  conveyance. 
Fare  from  Albany  to  Utica,  $5.50  ;  from  Utica  to  Geneva,  $5  ;  Utica 
to  Canandaigua,  $5.75  ;  from  Canandaigua  to  Buffalo,  six  cents  per 
mile."  In  September,  1816,  Jason  Parker  St  Co.,  with  half  a  dozen 
confederates,  in  addition  to  their  stages  which  left  Utica  and  Canandai- 
gua six  times  a  week  and  ran  through  in  a  day  and  a  half,  were  running 
a  line  three  times  a  week  between  Albany  and  Canandaigua,  going  by 
the  way  of  Auburn,  Skaneateles,  Onondaga,  ManliuF,  Cazenovia,  Madi- 
son, and  Cherry  Valley,  and  these  stages  went  through  in  two  days. 

The  English  traveler  from  whom  we  have  already  quoted  gave  a  list 
of  the  principal  taverns  and  stopping  places  on  the  road  from  Albany 
to  Geneva.  Those  between  Fort  Schuyler  and  Geneva  were  as  follows, 
with  their  distances  from  each  other  :  "  From  Fort  Schuyler  to  Laird's 
on  the  Great  Genesee  road,  10;  Van  Epp's,  near  the  Oneida  Reserva- 
tion, 6  ;  Sill's,  at  the  Deep  Spring,  11;  Keeler's,  junior,  12;  Tyler's, 
Onondaga  Hollow,  10;  Rice's,  Nine  Mile  Creek,  10;  Cayuga  Ferry, 
20;   Powell's  Hotel,  Geneva,  13." 


THE  WEEK-DAY  LINE  OF  STAGES.  373 

The  monopoly  of  staging  enjoyed  by  Parker  &  Co.  after  the  failure 
of  Joshua  Ostrom  &  Co.,  in  18 12,  continued  until  about  1821,  when  a 
new  line  was  started  by  Peter  Cole,  aided  at  Utica  by  a  plausable,  super- 
politic  runner  named  Henry  S.  Storms.  This  line  was,  however,  soon 
overpowered,  and  the  influence  of  Mr.  Storms  effectively  met  by  intro- 
ducing from  Albany  the  energetic,  driving  John  Butterfield,  the  services 
of  the  other  runner  being  transferred  to  the  packets.  About  1828  the 
old  line  encountered  more  serious  opposition  when  Josiah  Bissell,  of 
Rochester,  set  on  foot  a  week-day  line  to  traverse  the  State,  and  enlisted 
in  its  behalf  the  sympathies  and  the  money  of  church  members  along 
the  route.  The  project  caused  an  intense  degree  of  excitement ;  the 
sin  of  traveling  on  Sunday  was  freely  discussed  and  a  fierce  war  raged 
within  and  without  the  church.  It  was  no  long  time  after  the  preach- 
ing of  Mr.  Finney  in  the  larger  towns  on  the  way,  and  when  men's 
minds  were  alive  to  questions  of  religion.  Dissensions  in  the  Presby- 
terian Church  of  Utica  were  especially  rife,  because  it  was  there  that 
Messrs.  Parker,  Faxton,  and  Childs  all  attended,  and  the  pastor,  peace- 
able as  he  was  and  perhaps  a  little  irresolute  withal,  found  it  hard  to 
conduct  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of  every  one.  But  the  week-day 
line  lapked  both  capital  and  skill  in  its  managers,  and  besides  had  not 
the  privilege  enjoyed  by  the  other  of  carrying  the  mail,  and  so  after  a 
contest  which  impoverished  itself,  and  greatly  straitened  the  resources 
of  its  rival,  it  finally  yielded  the  field.  Until  1836  this  field  continued 
free ;  but  when  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  road  was  opened  the  east- 
ward route  was  blocked,  and  afterward,  as  the  railway  was  gradually 
extended,  other  routes  were  more  and  more  curtailed,  and  Parker's  with 
the  associate  line  of  stages  was  brought  to  a  close. 

Mr.  Butterfield  proved  equal  to  his  duties  and  thoroughly  identified 
himself  with  the  success  of  the  line  of  J.  Parker  &  Co.  After  a  time  he 
met  at  the  Canal  Coffee  House  a  traveler  who  wished  to  part  with  his 
horse  and  conveyance.  These  he  bought  and  thus  inaugurated  a  liv- 
ery. To  this  he  added  as  his  means  admitted,  and  after  his  marriage 
he  also  kept  a  boarding-house.  Such  were  the  beginnings  of  a  life  of 
great  activity  and  enterprise,  and  which  was  bound  up  with  most  of 
the  different  kinds  of  transportation  now  practiced.  For  in  every 
means  undertaken  to  increase  the  facilities  of  travel  and  intercommuni- 


374  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

cation  John  Butterfield  was  for  a  generation  one  of  the  foremost  of  the 
citizens  of  Utica.  His  livery  grew  until  it  became  the  leading  one  of 
the  place.  The  connection  with  Parker  &  Co.  lasted  so  long  as  they 
were  still  in  business  and  was  succeeded  by  important  lines  of  his  own, 
wherein  he  was  a  leading  manager  in  the  State  until  staging  was  super- 
ceded by  railroads.  He  had  his  share,  too,  in  the  packet  boats  and  then 
in  the  steamboats  on  Lake  Ontario.  He  gave  his  earnest  personal  ef- 
forts to  create  the  companies  and  raise  the  funds  required  for  the  con- 
struction of  some  of  the  plank  roads  leading  out  of  the  city,  and  was 
the  originator  of  its  street  railroads. 

His  labors  were  arduous  in  stirring  up  the  citizens  to  the  im- 
portance of  roads  to  the  north  and  to  the  south,  and  to  him  is  Utica 
largely  if  not  principally  indebted  for  the  Black  River  and  both  of  the 
southern  railways.  He  was  among  the  first  who  realized  how  a  lucra- 
tive business  could  be  formed  by  the  rapid  transportation  of  such  arti- 
cles as  could  afford  to  pay  express  charges,  and  he  became  an  early 
director  in  the  express  company.  To  him  as  much  as  to  any  other  in- 
dividual, say  the  resolutions  of  the  board,  was  due  the  high  reputation 
which  this  company  obtained  in  commercial  circles  throughout  the 
country  as  well  as  the  success  that  has  attended  it.  In  that  organiza- 
tion he  remained  a  directing  power  until  the  close  of  his  life,  and  reaped 
from  it  a  large  pecuniary  profit.  He  was  also  among  the  first  to  appre- 
ciate the  capacities  of  the  electric  telegraph,  and  immediately  upon  the 
practical  adaptation  of  the  invention  he  joined  with  Messrs.  Faxton, 
Wells,  Livingston,  and  others  in  the  establishment  of  the  New  York, 
Albany,  and  Buffalo  Telegraph  Company.  His  faith  followed  upon  his 
sagacity,  and  he  steadily  urged  and  aided  in  the  extension  of  lines  and 
companies.  He  assisted  likewise  in  putting  in  operation  the  Overland 
Mail  Route,  the  precursor  of  the  Pacific  railroads,  and  which  did  much 
to  demonstrate  the  importance  of  a  continuous  connection  between  the 
Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  States.  Having  long  been  a  mail  contractor 
he  had  the  experience  and  practical  knowledge  essential  for  the  execu- 
tion of  the  work.  Besides  his  part  in  the  various  operations  above  re- 
ferred to  Mr.  Butterfield  was  a  director  in  the  Utica  City  National 
Bank,  and  was  interested  in  other  stock  companies  and  business  under- 
takings.    At  the  same  time  he  invested  largely  in  city  property,  while 


BEGINNING  OF  THE  ERIE  CANAL.  375 

his  cultivated  land  in  the  vicinity  covers  no  inconsiderable  space.  The 
Butterfield  House  and  the  Gardner  block  are  among  the  handsome  edi- 
fices which  he  planned  and  built,  and  which  have  added  materially  to 
the  city  of  his  residence.  On  taking  possession  of  the  land  on  the  New 
Hartford  road,  on  a  portion  of  which  his  late  residence  now  stands,  he 
extended  his  operations  in  farming,  already  carried  on  to  a  limited  ex- 
tent on  Pleasant  street. 

However  enterprising  the  men  who  had  the  management  of  those 
•early  stage  routes,  and  however  perfect  their  systems  of  transportation 
of  passengers  and  freight,  it  soon  became  apparent  that  such  primitive 
methods  could  not  long  endure  through  a  section  of  country  so  rich  in 
natural  resources  and  growing  so  rapidly  in  population  as  the  State  of 
New  York.  For  several  years  before  the  War  of  1812  the  subject  of 
connecting  the  Hudson  River  with  Lake  Erie  by  an  artificial  waterway 
received  a  good  deal  of  attention  throughout  the  State.  Three  routes 
were  in  discussion,  and  as  the  committee  were  disposed  to  favor  the  one 
by  way  of  Oswego  all  three  were  finally  surveyed. 

The  War  of  1812  caused  a  suspension  of  the  whole  project  until  the 
legislative  session  of  1816,  when  a  memorial  was  presented  to  the  legis- 
lature signed  by  more  than  100,000  persons,  calling  on  members  to 
prosecute  and  complete  the  work  without  delay.  Excavation  began 
wiih  appropriate  ceremonies  at  Rome  on  the  4th  of  July,  1817.  The 
eastern  portion  of  the  middle  section,  or  so  much  of  it  as  is  included 
between  Rome  and  Utica,  was  fit  for  navigation  by  the  fall  of  18 19,  and 
on  the  22d  of  October  the  first  boat  sailed  on  the  canal  from  Rome 
to  Utica,  the  channel  having  been  filled  from  Oriskaiiy  Creek  on  the 
previous  day.  It  was  a  beautiful  boat  and  was  called  the  Chief  Engi- 
neer in  compliment  to  Benjamin  Wright.  It  was  fitted  up  to  carry  pas- 
sengers and  on  the  ensuing  day  the  governor  of  the  State  and  the  Board 
of  Commissioners,  attended  by  about  seventy  ladies  and  gentlemen  of 
Utica  and  vicinity,  embarked  upon  it  to  return  to  Rome.  The  embark- 
ation took  place  amid  the  ringing  of  bells,  the  roaring  of  cannon,  and 
the  loud  acclamations  of  thousands  of  spectators. 

From  one  of  the  papers  of  Utica  of  that  date  we  borrow  a  few  par- 
ticulars of  the  event,  as  follows:  "Seldom  has  there  been  seen  more 
heart-felt  joy  than  was  manifested  on  this  occasion ;  and  the  feelings  of 


376  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

those  who  viewed  the  departure  from  Utica  of  this  the  first  boat  which 
the  waters  of  the  canal  had  ever  borne  bordered  on  enthusiasm.  All 
the  way  to  the  embankment  across  the  Sauquoit  Creek  many  hundreds 
of  spectators  followed  the  boat,  and  frequently  filled  the  air  with  their 
animated  cheers.  At  Whitesboro  the  arrival  was  announced  by  a 
national  salute  and  by  the  cheers  of  people  assembled  to  witness  the  • 
scene.  After  a  sail  of  a  little  more  than  four  hours  the  boat  arrived  at 
Rome.  It  remained  at  that  place  until  a  quarter  past  three,  when  it  set 
out  on  its  return,  and  arrived  at  Utica  ten  minutes  before  eight.'  This 
first  trial  of  the  canal  was  highly  gratifying,  not  only  to  the  commis- 
sioners, but  to  all  who  beheld  it;  and  if  ever  deep-felt  gladness  was 
exhibited  it  was  in  universal  and  full  display  throughout  this  excur- 
sion." 

Nathan  Williams,  as  president  of  the  Board  of  Village  Trustees,  on 
the  same  day  addressed  a  congratulatory  letter  to  the  Board  of  Canal 
Commissioners  :  "  From  Erie  to  the  Atlantic,  a  distance  of  500  miles, 
more  than  300  is  to  be  traversed  by  this  canal.  Considering  the  infancy 
of  the  settlements  through  which  it  is  to  pass,  and  that  it  is  commenced 
by  the  efforts  and  patriotism  of  a  single  State,  it  will  be  viewed  by  future 
generations  as  a  wonderful  work.  The  experience  of  this  day's  excursion 
must  do  away  with  all  doubt,  if  any  remain,  of  the  practicability  of  con- 
structing this  '  stupendous  artificial  river  of  the  west'  It  appears  now 
indeed  to  be  rendered  certain  that  they  who  projected  the  plan,  and  they 
who  so  faithfully  persevere  to  execute  it  under  the  wise  sanction  of  our 
laws  and  the  patriotic  co-operation  of  our  citizens,  will  be  ranked  among 
the  greatest  benefactors  of  our  country." 

In  Governor  Clinton's  message  of  1820  he  reported  ninety- four  miles 
of  the  canal  finished  on  the  middle  section,  with  a  lateral  branch  from 
Syracuse  to  Salina.  In  April  of  that  year  a  trip  was  made  between 
Utica  and  Montezuma,  in  which  a  large  company  joined.  On  the  20th 
of  May  Governor  Clinton  and  the  canal  commissioners,  accompanied  by 
as  many  gentlemen  from  Utica  and  Whitesboro  as  could  be  accommo- 
dated, went  on  the  boats  Montezuma  and  Chief  Engineer  from  Utica 
to  the  Seneca  River.  On  the  first  of  June,  we  are  informed  by 
advertisement,  that  "  boats  for  the  accommodation  of  passengers 
lOO    miles    on    the    canal    are    now   in    operation   by    the  'The  Erie 


ERIE  CANAL  NAVIGATION.  377 

Canal  Navigation  Company.'  They  sail  every  Monday  and  Thursday 
morning  from  Utica  at  9  o'clock  and  arrive  at  Canastota  (Lenox)  at 
7  P.  M.;  proceed  next  day  at  2  A.  M.  and  arrive  at  Montezuma  at  7 
P.  M.  Price  of  passage  including  provisions,  $4.  A  small  advance  to 
be  made  when  the  toll  and  lockage  are  established  For  passage  apply 
to  Doolittie  &  Gold,  or  at  the  stage  office."  In  the  weekly  chronicle  of 
arrivals  and  departures  on  the  canal,  which  began  at  this  time  to  be 
pubHshed  in  the  papers,  we  find  that  five  boats  departed  and  two  ar- 
rived on  the  1st  of  July,  one  each  on  the  2d,  and  four  departed  and  one 
arrived  on  the  3d;  between  July  31st  and  August  7th  there  were 
twelve  arrivals  and  nineteen  clearances;  between  August  14th  and 
August  25th  there  were  twenty-two  arrivals  and  seventeen  clearances. 
Most  of  these  boats  were  loaded  with  merchandise,  two  only  car- 
rying passengers.  The  Fourth  of  July  was  celebrated  on  the  canal  by 
a  large  concourse  of  people  from  various  parts  of  the  Western  District. 
The  Oneida  Chief  irota  Utica  and  the  Montezuma  from  Cayuga  Lake, 
accompanied  by  a  number  of  other  boats  filled  with  passengers  from 
the  intermediate  country,  met  at  Syracuse.  His  excellency  the  gover- 
nor with  his  secretaries  and  other  gentlemen  from  New  York  were  of 
the  passengers  from  Utica. 

The  interest  felt  by  Governor  Clinton  in  this  his  favorite  project 
brought  him  as  we  have  seen  often  to  the  interior  and  western  parts  of 
the  State.  It  was  in  the  summer  of  1820,  while  traveling  up  and  down 
the  course  of  the  future  canal,  that  he  wrote  his  well  known  letters  of 
Hibernicus.  From  the  mansion  at  Mr.  Greig  at  Canandajgua,  from  Au- 
burn, from  Utica,  and  from  other  places  he  penned  those  classic  letters 
to  the  Statesman — letters  abounding  in  instruction  upon  the  natural 
history  and  resources  of  the  country  through  which  he  journeyed,  and 
prophetic  of  the  good  to  be  expected  from  the  completed  canal.  At  the 
York  House  in  Utica  he  held  a  conference  with  Dr.  Barto,  of  Newport, 
and  learned  much  of  the  composition  and  qualities  of  water- lime,  which 
had  been  recently  discovered  and  put  in  use  on  the  canal  by  Canvass 
White,  one  of  the  engineers. 

With  the  opening  of  the  season  of  1822  the  packet  boats  Montezuma 
and  Oneida  Chief  renewed  their  trips  and  there  was  also  started  by  Bil- 
dad  and  Isaac  Merrell  a  new  boat  called  the  Utica  Packet.    It -had  already 

48 


378  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

done  service  on  the  river  as  the  Commodore  Perry,  and  was  dragged 
thence  to  its  new  channel.  The  canal  had  now  become  so  great  a  curi- 
osity that  by  midsummer  the  public  houses  were  crowded  with  strang- 
ers from  the  East  on  their  way  to  see  it  and  to  ride  upon  its  waters.  A 
new  line  of  post  coaches  running  from  Albany  to  Ulica  was  likewise 
announced. 

The  progress  of  the  canal  from  the  time  of  its  begintiing  until  it  was 
nearly  or  quite  completed  gave  a  great  impetus  to  the  growth  of  Utica. 
At  the  date  under  consideration  (1822-23)  the  village  was  growing  rap- 
idly, its  population  in  the  latter  year  being  computed  by  its  citizens  at 
4,000.  The  Erie  Canal  Navigation  Company  announced  in  April, 
1823,  that  in  addition  to  their  last  year's  establishment  they  had  incor- 
porated into  their  line  four  new,  spacious,  and  beautiful  boats,  and  that 
they  had  commenced  running  regular  trips  between  Utica  and  Roch- 
ester. 

"The  whole  course  of  the  great  work  from  Utica  to  Rochester  ex- 
hibits," says  the  Albany  Argus,  "  the  bustle  and  stir  of  business.  The 
amount  and  variety  of  the  productions  which  are  constantly  passing  and 
repassing  upon  it  fill  the  mind  with  astonishment.  It  is  the  flux  and 
reflux  of  the  great  tide  of  Western  wealth  and  Western  enterprise."  At 
a  late  period  in  the  previous  season  water  had  been  let  into  the  channel 
of  the  eastern  district.  And  now  on  the  loth  of  June,  1823,  we  read 
that  "a  line  of  elegant  packet  boats  is  preparing  and  will  be  ready  to 
run  between  this  village  and  Schenectady  on  the  opening  of  the  canal, 
which  it  is  expected  will  take  place  about  the  20th  inst."  This  com- 
pany, of  which  the  trustees  were  E.  Bacon,  Ephraim  Hart,  and  E.  B. 
Shearman,  started  a  boat  at  8  o'clock  every  morning  which  it  was  ex- 
pected would  arrive  at  Schenectady  at  the  same  hour  the  following 
morning.  And  on  the  8th  of  October  was  celebrated  at  Albany  with 
imposing  ceremony  the  completion  of  the  whole  eastern  section  and  the 
ingress  of  waters  to  the  Hudson.  Thus  in  little  more  than  six  years 
280  miles  of  this  great  artery  of  commerce  were  opened  and  its  healthful 
influences  already  widely  felt. 

An  influence  that  was  at  once  produced  to  diminish  former  more  in- 
convenient modes  of  transportation  deserves  our  notice.  The  Seneca 
Turnpike  Company  in  addition  to  its  usual   semi-annual   dividend  de- 


COMPLETION  OF  THE  CANAL. 


379 


dared  in  April,  1823,  a  surplus  dividend  of  like  amount.  The  reasons 
for  so  doing  they  thus  state :  Previous  to  the  completion  of  the  middle 
section  of  the  canal  the  proprietors  of  the  road  apprehended  a  great 
diminution  in  the  value  of  their  stock  by  the  effect  the  canal  would  have 
upon  the  travel  of  this  road — which  runs  its  whole  length  of  112  miles 
parallel  with  the  canal.  The  experiment  has  proved  the  canal  to  be 
very  beneficial  to  the  interest  of  the  road  company.  The  heavy  teams 
with  six  to  eight  horses  are  now  mostly  removed  from  the  road  in  con- 
sequence of  the  reduced  price  of  transportation,  and  the  light  travel  in- 
creased by  the  natural  increase  of  business  produced  by  the  facility  of 
intercourse  with  New  York. 

The  canal  was  completed  on  the  26th  day  of  October,  1825,  water 
was  admitted  into  it  at  Black  Rock,  and  on  this  day  the  first  boat  as- 
cended the  Lockport  locks,  passed  through  the  mountain  ridge,  and 
entered  the  lake.  The  opening  ceremonies  were  attended  with  un- 
bounded joy  and  enthusiasm.  A  flotilla  of  boats,  having  on  board  Gov- 
ernor Clinton  and  officers  of  the  State  government,  a  committee  of  the 
common  council  of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  numerous  delegates  from 
towns  along -the  line  of  the  canal,  made  the  passage  from  Lake  Erie  to 
Sandy  Hook.  Leaving  Buffalo  on  Wednesday  morning  it  was  their  in- 
tention to  be  in  Utica  on  Saturday  night ;  but  unforeseen  delays  hindered 
their  arrival  until  Sunday  noon.  In  the  afternoon  they  attended  divine 
worship  at  the  Presbyterian  Church.  Early  on  Monday  morning  these 
distinguished  guests  were  received  at  the  court-house,  where  an  address 
was  delivered  by  Judge  Ezekiel  Bacon  in  behalf  of  his  fellow  towns- 
men, to  which  Governor  Clinton  replied.  They  then  re-embarked  and 
continued  their  excursion.  In  the  evening  the  canal  was  illuminated 
along  its  course  through  the  village  by  floating  tar  barrels  on  fire.  The 
committee  from  Utica  appointed  to  take  part  in  the  celebration  at  New 
York  consisted  of  William  Clarke,  president  of  the  corporation,  Jonas 
Piatt,  Thomas  H.  Hubbard,  Charles  C.  Broadhead,  Richard  R.  Lansing, 
and  Alexander  Coventry.  Elsewhere,  along  the  whole  line  and  to  the 
city  of  New  York,  the  occasion  was  observed  with  .similar  demonstra- 
tions of  delight.  Medals  were  struck,  sketches  of  canal  scenes  were  im- 
printed on  earthenware,  on  handkerchiefs,  etc.,  in  commemoration  of  the 
event. 


38o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

As  an  evidence  of  the  rapidity  with  which  the  canal  was  brought 
into  use,  and  of  the  very  great  change  which  it  made  in  the  mode  of 
transportation,  particularly  as  regards  freight,  it  may  be  stated  that  the 
number  of  canal  boats  which  arrived  at  Albany  during  the  season  of 
1823  was  1,329;  during  that  of  l824it  was  2,687  !  duringthat  of  1825 
it  was  3,336;  and  in  1826  it  was  about  7,000.  The  rate  for  transpor- 
tation on  the  turnpike  in  1826  was  one  and  one-half  cents  per  mile;  the 
rate  by  the  canal  was  five  mills.  But  it  should  not,  therefore,  be  in- 
ferred that  all  passengers  deserted  the  stages  for  the  packet  boats.  The 
canal  passage  was  still  tedious  beside  land  travel,  and  was  chosen  chiefly 
by  those  who  desired  to  lessen  the  fatigue  of  a  journey ;  it  was  avoided 
where  time  was  of  account.  Merchants,  bankers,  and  tradesmen  bound 
to  or  from  the  metropolis,  lawyers  in  their  progress  to  the  courts,  and 
all  fulfilling  engagements  or  intent  only  on  business  and  who  must 
needs  go  in  haste  made  use  of  the  stages.  And  though  the  number  of 
those  who  then  traveled  by  stage  cannot  be  justly  estimated  by  the 
multitudes  who  now  daily  sweep  past  on  the  rail,  and  though  journeying 
by  one's  own  conveyance,  was  formerly  much  more  customary  than  at 
present,  yet  it  is  not  difficult  to  conceive  that  stage  travelers  were 
numerous,  and  that  the  business  which  consisted  in  finding  and  regu- 
lating the  means  to  carry  them  onward  was  a  large  and  important  one. 
At  the  date  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Parker,  in  1828,  there  were  eight  daily 
lines  of  stages  running  through  Utica  east  and  west,  besides  four  lines 
running  north  and  south,  with  the  departure  and  arrival  of  eighty-four 
stages  weekly.  And  the  old  stages  held  their  own  to  a  considerable  ex- 
tent even  after  the  railroad  had  been  in  operation  several  years  ;  and  the 
rivalry  between  the  runners  for  the  packet  boats,  the  stages,  and  the 
railroad  trains  was  intense,  and  often  developed  into  riotous  proceed- 
ings which  the  police  of  the  village  and  city  were  called  upon  to  quell. 

The  revised  estimates  of  the  cost  of  the  canal  placed  it  at  nearly 
$S,000,000.  By  an  act  of  May  11,  1835,  an  enlargement  was  ordered, 
which  was  begun  in  August,  1836,  and  completed  in  September,  1862, 
at  a  cost  of  $36,495,535.  This  of  course  greatly  increased  the  capacity 
and  usefulness  of  the  canal  and  rendered  it  one  of  the  finest  artificial 
waterways  in  the  world. 

The  Chenango  Canal  was  opened  to  connect  the  Erie  Canal  at  Utica 


CHENANGO  CANAL  — PLANK  ROADS.  381 

with  the  Susquehanna  River  at  Binghamton ;  it  is  one  of  the  many 
projects  (most  of  which  were  never  carried  out)  which  sprang  from  the 
completion  and  success  of  the  Erie  Canal.  Legislation  for  these  artificial 
waterways  in  all  parts  of  the  country  became  very  popular,  and  vision- 
ary people  saw  the  State  covered  with  a  network  of  canals.  The  act 
authorizing  the  Chenango  Canal  was  passed  February  23,  1833,  and  the 
work  of  construction  began  in  July,  1834.  Several  points  of  connec- 
tion with  the  Erie  Canal  were  discussed,  and  it  was  only  by  the  most 
persistent  and  unremitting  efforts  that  Utica  was  finally  selected.  To 
pay  the  expenses  of  securing  the  termination  for  this  city  a  tax  was 
imposed  and  in  later  years  unavailing  efforts  were  made  to  secure  its 
payment  by  the  State. 

The  canal  was  finished  in  October,  1836,  at  a  cost  of  $2,782,124.  It 
was  ninety- seven  miles  long  exclusive  of  feeders,  forty  feet  wide  at 
the  surface,  twenty-four  at  the  bottom,  and  four  feet  deep,  and  calcu- 
lated for  boats  from  fifty  to  seventy  tons.  The  canal  was  for  a  number 
of  years  of  considerable  importance  to  the  city  of  Utica,  especially  for 
the  conveyance  thither  of  coal  from  the  mines  of  Pennsylvania,  but  the 
construction  of  the  railroad  through  the  same  section  of  country  soon 
reduced  its  traffic,  and  after  a  good  deal  of  discussion  it  was  finally 
abandoned. 

What  may  be  properly  termed  a  plank  road  era  began  about  1845—46, 
and  within  a  few  years  thereafter  the  construction  of  those  then  neces- 
sary and  useful  roadways  extended  throughout  the  State.  They  were 
commonly  built  by  stock  companies  organized  under  the  "Act  to  pro- 
vide for  the  incorporation  of  companies  to  construct  plank  roads  and 
of  companies  to  construct  turnpike  roads,"  which  act  was  passed' by  the 
legislature  on  the  7th  of  May,  1847. 

Becoming  fully  convinced  of  the  value  and  importance  of  the  new 
roadways  the  citizens  of  Utica  held  a  meeting  in  January,  1847,  at 
which  resolutions  were  adopted  setting  forth  the  merits  of  plank  roads, 
the  desirability  of  building  them  between  Utica  and  surrounding  vil- 
lages, and  entreating  the  authorities  for  a  general  law  endowing  con- 
structing companies  and  pledging  $50,000  from  the  people  of  the  city 
for  the  building  of  such  roads  as  were  then  had  in  view.  On  the  last 
day  of  June,  1847,  ^'^  association  was  formed  to  construct  a  plank  road 


382  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

to  the  nothward.  Its  proposition  was  to  start  from  the  corners  at  Deer- 
field  and  extend  to  a  tavern  known  as  Hicks's,  five  miles  north  of  the 
village  of  Remsen,  whence  other  companies  were  to  carry  it  onward. 
Its  capital  was  $50,000,  of  which  nearly  four- fifths  were  taken  in  Utica. 
Seven  of  the  nine  directors  were  of  Utica,  as  follows  :  John  Butterfield, 
Ward  Hunt,  James  Rockwell,  Horatio  Seymour,  John  B.  Miller,  Elisha 
W.  Teackle,  Jonathan  R.  Warner,  John  Billings,  and  Mather  Beecher. 
Mr.  Butterfield  was  its  president  and  Benjamin  F.  Ray  treasurer.  Of 
this  road  the  last  plank  was  laid  in  the  fall  of  1848.  The  new  highway 
was  a  source  of  great  benefit  for  a  number  of  years,  was  extensively 
traveled,  and  brought  a  reasonable  profit  to  its  owners;  but  with  the 
increasing  cost  of  plank,  and  still  more  with  the  opening  of  the  Black 
River  Railroad,  its  necessity  was  greatly  lessened  and  its  income  re- 
duced.     When  its  charter  expired  in  1877  it  was  not  renewed. 

The  northern  was  only  one  of  these  highways  that  were  now  taken 
in  hand.  The  moneyed  men  of  the  town  joined  in  league  with  those 
from  without,  and  in  meetings  everywhere  held  unfolded  their  projects ; 
funds  were  secured  and  companies  formed,  and  ere  long  these  roadways 
extended  toward  nearly  every  point  of  the  compass.  With  Rome, 
with  New  Hartford  and  Clinton,  with  Bridgewater,  Waterville,  Burling- 
toti,  Mohawk,  and  Schuyler  our  connections  were  vastly  bettered. 

The  ultimate  fate  of  these  roads  was  in  general  similar  to  that  depicted 
of  the  northern.  While  new  and  promotive  of  business  and  travel  they 
seemed  to  be  paying  investments,  and  were  kept  in  good  condition  so 
long  as  it  cost  but  little  to  do  so.  But  as  they  became  worn  and  cost 
of  repairs  was  enhanced  the  incomes  were  reduced,  and  many  of  them 
finally  ruined  their  owners.  A  few  exchanged  their  old  planks  for  a 
basis  of  stone,  but  most  were  outrivaled  by  the  railroads. 

Prior  to  the  year  1826  (only  sixty- five  years  ago)  there  was  not  a  rail- 
road in  America.  In  that  year  a  road  four  miles  in  length,  called  the 
"  Quincy  Railroad,"  was  built  in  Massachusetts  for  the  transportation 
of  granite  from  the  celebrated  quarries.  The  motive  power  was  horses; 
the  use  of  steam  was  hardly  thought  of  at  that  time.  In  April  of  the 
year  in  which  the  Quincy  Railroad  was  built  the  legislature  of  the  State 
of  New  York  chartered  the  "  Mohawk  and  Hudson  River  Railroad 
Company  "  to  construct  a  railroad  between  Albany  and  Schenectady. 


MOHA  WK  AND  HUDSON  RAILROAD.  383 

This  was  the  first  chartered  railroad  company  in  the  Union  authorized 
to  carry  on  a  general  transportation  business  of  freight  and  passengers. 
It  was  the  year  the  Erie  Canal  was  brought  fully  into  use,  and  it  had 
already  become  a  general  conviction  that  at  an  early  day  a  railroad 
would  run  along  its  course  as  a  competitor  for  a'  share  of  the  traffic. 
As  business  in  all  of  its  various  channels  rapidly  increased,  demanding 
increased  activity  on  the  part  of  merchants  and  manufacturers,  the  ele- 
ment of  time  became  a  larger  factor  in  every  man's  business  and  had  a 
distinct  effect  upon  his  profits  and  losses.  Shrewd  and  far-seeing  men 
realized  that  this  line  across  the  Emire  State  was  the  natural  course  for 
through  trade,  as  it  is  now  termed,  and  busy  brains  were  speculating 
upon  ways  and  means  and  possible  results  of  building  railways  that 
would,  at  least,  divide  the  traffic  of  the  canal  and  the  stages  and  prove 
a  profitable  investment.  The  capital  of  the  Mohawk  and  Hudson 
River  Company  was  $300,000  with  the  privilege  of  increasing  it  to 
$500,000. 

In  the  meantime,  and  before  work  on  this  road  was  begun,  railroads 
in  other  States  were  commenced,  finished,  and  brought  into  use,  with 
locomotives  propelled  by  steam.  Among  these  was  the  Auburn  and 
Syracuse  Railroad,  which  was  chartered  in  May,  1834,  and  was  first 
operated  by  steam  in  1839.  In  August,  1830,  and  about  twenty 
months  before  the  expiration  of  the  six  years  in  which  the  road  was  to 
be  built,  the  work  of  construction  was  begun  and  it  was  pushed  forward 
with  so  much  energy  that  in  October,  1831,  it  was  fully  completed  and 
carrying  about  400  passengers  daily  on  the  average.  This  road,  the 
first  in  the  State,  was  of  course  crude  in  its  plan,  imperfect  in  construc- 
tion, and  expensive  in  operation.  The  road-bed  was  mostly  of  solid 
stone,  and  with  such  an  unyielding  foundation  it  acted  as  an  anvil  and 
the  rolling  stock  as  hammers  to  batter  and  wear  out  the  timbers,  cross- 
ties,  and  rails.     Its  cost  was  $68,000  per  mile. 

During  the  ten  years  subsequent  to  the  charter  of  the  first  railroad  in 
this  State,  the  legislature  granted  many  charters  for  the  building  of  rail- 
roads in  various  parts  of  the  State.  The  success,  such  as  it  was,  of  the 
road  from  Albany  to  Schene'ctady  served  to  inspire  confidence  in  more 
extensive  and  better  railroads  and  taught  many  valuable  lessons  that 
later  builders  were  not  slow  to  turn  to  their  own  account.     The  charter 


384  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

for   the  Utica  and   Schenectady    Railroad  was  granted  in  1833.     The 
road    was    to    run    between  those    two    places,  on  the  north   bank   of. 
the    Mohawk   River,  and   its    western    terminus   to  be   at    such    point 
as   should   be   determined     by   the    common    council   of    the    city    of 
Utica. 

The  capital  stock  of  this  railroad  was  placed  at  $2,000,000,  and  the 
work  of  construction  was  to  be  begun  and  $100,000  expended  within 
two  years,  and  the  road  to  be  completed  within  ten  years  after  the  pas- 
sage of  the  act,  or  the  charter  of  the  company  would  be  forfeited. 
Property  (freight)  was  not  to  be  transported  over  the  road  except  the 
ordinary  baggage  of  passengers,  and  the  company  was  limited  to  four 
cents  a  mile  for  carrying  passengers,  and  before  beginning  passenger 
transportation  the  company  was  required  to  pay  or  tender  to  the  Mo- 
hawk Turnpike  Company  $22. 50  on  each  share  of  the  stock  of  said  Turn- 
pike Company.  That  turnpike  was  chartered  in  1800,  as  noted  on  an 
earlier  page. 

The  State  reserved  the  right  to  become  the  owner  of  the  railroad 
within  ten  years  after  its  completion.  Work  was  begun  in  the  fall  of 
the  year  1834  and  the  road  was  fully  finished  at  a  cost  of  $20,000  per  mile 
in  the  summer  of  1836,  so  that  it  was  in  running  order  and  regular  trips 
were  begun  on  the  2d  of  August  of  that  year.  The  opening  of  the  road 
was  a  great  event,  not  only  in  Utica,  but  all  along  its  line,  and  it  was 
celebrated  with  enthusiasm.  The  newspapers  throughout  the  State 
announced  the  opening  with  a  grand  flourish  and  boasted  that  the  com- 
pany had  six  locomotives,  fifty  cars,  and  fifty  emigrant  wagons,  and 
that  each  car  "would  carry  twenty- four  passengers." 

The  business  of  the  railroad  appears  to  have  been  excellent  from  the 
outset,  notwithstanding  the  various  imperfections  of  the  line  and  the 
rivalry  between  the  runners  for  the  packet  boats  on  the  canal,  the  stages, 
and  the  railroad,  which  became  intense  and  continued  for  several 
years. 

The  next  year  after  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad  Company 
was  chartered  the  Auburn  and  Syracuse  {lailroad  Company  was  organ- 
ized, as  before  stated,  and  this  fact  —  that  there  were  to  be  railroad  con- 
nections between  Albany  and  Utica  and  Auburn  and  Syracuse  —  very 
naturally  awakened  the  people  along  the  line  to  the  desirability  of  sup- 


UTICA  AND  SYRACUSE  RAILROAD.  385 

plying  the  necessary  links  to  complete  the  chain  from  the  Hudson  River 
to  the  lakes.  The  railroads  already  built  were  well  paying  investments 
and  would  clearly  be  of  great  benefit  in  developing  the  country  through 
which  they  passed. 

These  considerations  led  to  the  nomination  for  the  legislature  of 
the  year  1836  of  men  whose  power  and  influence  would  be  potent 
and  reliable  for  the  introduction  and  passage  of  charters  for  other  roads. 
In  the  fall  of  1835  David  Wager,  of  Utica,  was  chosen  State  senator 
from  this  county  and  in  the  Assembly  were  John  Stryker,'of  Rome; 
Henry  Graves,  of  Boonville  ;  John  W.  Hale,  of  Clinton  ;  William  Knight, 
of  Paris;  and  Jared'  C.  Pettibone,  of  Lee.  In  the  Assembly  from  Madi- 
son County  were  William  J.  Hough,  df  Cazenovia ;  John  B.  Yates,  of 
Chittenango  ;  and  Ephraim  Gray,  of  Lebanon.  These  three  Madison. 
County  members  were  strong  and  influential  men,  and  from  their  geo- 
graphical location  would  naturally  favor  a  route  running  farther  south 
than  the  one  finally  selected.  In  the  Assembly  from  Onondaga  County 
were  John  Wilkinson,  of  Syracuse,  a  man  wlio  had  already  taken  a  deep 
and  active  interest  in  the  new  railroads;  David,  Munro,  of  Camillus; 
Sanford  C.  Parker,  of  Marcellus;  and  Daniel  Dennison,  of  Manlius.  As 
was  expected  the  legislature  of  1836  was  besieged  with  petitions  for 
railroad  charters  in  all  parts  of  the  State,  and  among  them  was  one  for 
a  railroad  from  Utica  to  Syracuse  as  well  as  one. for  a  road  from 
Auburn  to  Rochester. 

At  the  opening  of  the  session  the  friends  of  this  road  and  of  the  two 
routes  advocated  were  on  hand  in  force.  One  party  insisted  that  the 
road  should  be  built  wholly  on  the  south  side  of  the  Erie  Canal,  start- 
ing al  a  point  in  Utica  near  the  site  of  the  present  city  hall,  thence  through 
New  Hartford,  Westmoreland,  Vernon,  and  as  near  Oneida  Castle  and 
the  Madison  County  hills  as  the  grades  would  permit.  This  was  the 
shorter  distance  and  brought  the  road  nearer  the  more  cultivated  por- 
tions of  Madison  County,  and  hence  was  strenuously  urged  by  the 
assemblymen  from  that  section  as  well  as  by  a  large  part  of  the  popu- 
lation of  that  county.  Most  of  the  Utica  influence  also  favored  that 
route,  as  it  would  insure  a  break  in  the  line  at  this  point  and  make  the 
city  a  "carrying-place."  It  was  argued  by  many  Uticans  that  if  the 
railroad  were  continuous  this  city  would  in  time  become  little  better 
49 


386  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

than  a  way  station  on  the  great  thoroughfare,  and  its  growth  and  busi- 
ness facilities  would  be  crippled.  The  more  northern  route  was  favored 
by  the  people  of  Rome  and  the  northern  portion  of  the  county,  because 
of  its  favorable  grades,  consequent  cheapness  of  construction,  and  the 
small  amount  that  would  have  to  be  paid  for  land  damages.  In  the 
selection  of  the  railroad  commissioners,  who  at  that  time  were  named  by 
the  legislature,  and  whose  duty  it  was  to  open  the  subscription  books  for 
the  sale  of  the  stock  and  to  distribute  it  among  the  subscribers,  a  consid- 
erable majority  were  in  favor  of  the  Rome  route,  as  it  was  termed,  and  in 
this  majority  were  a  number  of  very  strong  men.  John  B.  Yates. was 
chairman  of  the  railroad  committee'  in  the  Assembly,  and  in  that  fact 
the  advocates  of  the  southern  route  had  a  decided  advantage  ;  but  after 
a  prolonged  and  intensely  earnest  discussion  and  a  great  deal  of  wire- 
pulling Orville  Robinson,  of  Oswego,  struck  a  popular  chord  when  he 
moved  that  the  majority  of  the  directors  should  locate  the  road  "  on  the 
most  direct  and  eligible  route."  This  was  carried  and  the  contest  in 
the  Assembly  was  ended.  On  the  iith  of  May  the  bill  became  a  law 
and  the  following  were  named  as  commissioners:  Julius  A.  Spencer, 
Henry  A.  Foster,  David  Moulton,  Timothy  Jenkins,  Pomeroy  Jones, 
Israel  S.  Parker,  Riley  Shepard,  of  Oneida  County ;  John  Knowles, 
Ichabod  S.  Spencer,  John  Williams,  Benjamin  Enos,  of  Madison  County ; 
and  Vivus  W.  Smith,  Miles  W.  Bennett,  Horace  Wheaton,  Thomas  J. 
Gilbert,  E.  L.  Phillips,  Aaron  Burt,  and  James  Beardslee,  of  Onon- 
daga County.  The  capital  stock  of  the  company  was  $800,000,  and 
if  the  road  was  not  commenced  in  two  years  and  at  least  $25,000 
expended,  and  was  not  finished  in  four  years  after  the  passage  of  the 
act,  the  charter  was  forfeit.  Subscription  books  were  opened  on  the 
19th,  20th,  and  2ist  of  July,  1836.  Although  the  capital  stock  was 
only  $800,000  nearly  $2,500,000  were  subscribed  outside  of  the  city  of 
New  York,  of  which  Utica  took  $1,066,000.  There  was  some  complaint 
over  the  distribution  of  the  stock  under  these  conditions  and  charges 
of  political  preferment  were  made ;  but  it  is  claimed  by  good  authority 
that  there  was  very  little  ground  for  such  charges. 

The  first  election  of  directors  was  held  on  the  22d  of  September, 
1836,  at  the  Syracuse  House  in  Syracuse,  and  the  following  were 
chosen  :    Henry    Seymour,    David    Wager,    Henry   A.    Foster,    David 


UTICA  AND  SYRACUSE  RAILROAD.  387 

Moulton,  Samuel  French,  John  Wilkinson,  Oliver  Teall,  James  Beards- 
lee,  James  Hooker,  Isaiah  Townsend,  Miles  W.  Bennett,  and  Charles 
Stebbins.  Henry  Seymour  was  elected  president  of  the  road  ;  Vivus 
W.  Smith,  secretary;  M.  S.  Marsh,  treasurer;  and  Aaron  Burt,  super- 
intendent. Oliver  H.  Lee,  formerly  engineer  on  the  Utica  and  Schenec- 
tady road,  was  made  chief  engineer,  with  J.  P.  Monro  and  C.  B.  Stuart 
as  assistants. 

Surveys  of  the  different  routes  were  at  once  begun.  In  August, 
1837,  Mr.  Seymour  died  and  Mr.  Wilkinson -was  made  president  of 
the  road,  and  held  the  position  until  the  consolidation  into  the  New 
York  Central  Company  in  1853. 

Within  fourteen  months  after  the  road  was  put  under  contract  it  was 
fully  completed.  Much  of  the  way  it  was  built  upon  piles,  a  system 
which  was  mainly  the  invention  of  E.  P.  Williams,  of  Utica.  The  road 
was  fully  completed  in  June,  1839.  Its  cost  was  $700,000,  which  was 
$100,000  less  than  its  capital  stock. 

The  first  engines  on  this  as  well  as  on  the  Utica  and  Schenectady 
road  wei;e  single- drivers  with  small  trail  wheels  under  the  cab,  which 
consisted  of  a  roof  hung  around  with  oilcloth  during  the  winter.  The 
weight  of  the  locomotive  was  from  four  to  six  tons.  The  first  cars  had 
four  wheels.  The  conductor  passed  along  on  the  outside  of  the  compart- 
ments, which  had  four  seats  each,  and  collected  the  fares.  In  1843 
the  cars  had  no  projections  over  the  platforms  and  were  low  and  illy 
ventilated.  It  was  quite  a  step  in  advance  when  locomotives  with  four 
drivers  were  placed  in  use,  and  even  they  had  no  pilots  ;  some 
had  two  splint  brooms  set  in  front  just  in  position  to.  clear  the  track, 
and  others  flat  iron  bars  bent  forward  and  sharpened  at  the  ends.  This 
was  the  "cow-catcher."  In  winter  a  large  wooden  plow  was  placed  in 
front  of  the  engine. 

The  first  railroad  track  was  soon  superseded  by  an  eight- by- eight 
wooden  rail,  along  the  center  of  which  was  placed  strap- iron  of  the 
same  width  and  thickness  as  that  at  first  used.  In  1849  '^  second  track 
was  laid  and  heavier  iron  put  oh  both  roads.  The  council  of  Utica 
granted  privileges  to  the  railroad  company,  as  had  already  been  done 
to  the  Utica  and  Schenectady  Company,  for  laying  tracks,  building 
depots,  etc.     On  Thursday,  June   27,  1839,  the  first   train  of  cars  ran 


388  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

between  Utica  and  Rome,  and  an  editor  of  that  place  boasted  in  his 
journal  that  he  bad  shaken  hands  on  the  day  mentioned  with  persons  in 
Rome  who  had  left  Utica  only  forty-five  minutes  before.  In  the  after- 
noon the  train  proceeded  to  Syracuse,  and  there  was  great  rejoicing 
along  the  whole  line.  During  the  first  week  the  cars  were  run  free, 
but  on  Wednesday,  July  3d,  the  company  began  taking  pay,  and  the 
average  receipts  for  a  number  of  days  were  over  $600  per  day.  On 
the  4th  of  July  there  was  a  great  excursion  over  the  road  and  the  day 
and  the  scene  were  not  soon  forgotten  by  those  who  participated  in  it. 
The  road  ran  most  of  the  way  through  a  dense  forest ;  the  tracks  were  laid 
upon  piles  without  filling  between  so  that  the  train  seemed  to  run  in 
the  air.  Everything  was  new  and  rural.  On  Wednesday,  July  10, 
1839,  the  completion  of  the  road  was  celebrated  with  ampler  state  and 
ceremony,  marked  at  Syracuse  with  a  military  escort,  the  ringing  of 
bells  and  the  firing  of  cannon,  the  tumultuous  rejoicing  of  the  people, 
and  a  dinner  at  which  were  seated  400  or  500  prominent  citizens  of  Al- 
bany, Utica,  and  Syracuse. 

The  railroad  was  a  great  success  for  that  time  in  every  sense.  In  the 
same  week  that  it  was  finished  its  stock  sold  at  ten  per  cent,  advance. 
Both  of  these  lines  thus  far  described  were  merged  in  the  New  York 
Central  Railwa}'  in  1853,  the  charter  of  that  company  being  dated  April 
3d.  The  consolidation  included  the  following  companies:  The  Albany 
and  Schenectady,  the  Schenectady  and  Troy,  the  Utica  and  Schenec- 
tady, the  Mohawk  Valley,  Syracuse,  and  Utica,  the  Rochester  and 
Syracuse,  the  Rochester,  Lockport,  and  Niagara  Falls,  the  Rochester 
and  Buffalo,  and  the  Buffalo  and  Lockport,  of  which  the  Mohawk  Val- 
ley and  the  Syracuse  and  Utica  direct  railroad  (as  it  was  termed)  were 
not  built.  In  the  year  1869  this  company  was  merged  in  the  New 
York  Central  and  Hudson  River  Railroad  Company,  acquiring  control 
of  the  line  along  the  river  to  New  York  city.  Subsequently  the  road 
was  equipped  from  Albany  to  Buffalo  with  four  tracks  —  the  only 
line  of  that  character  in  the  country.  In  1885  the  New  York,  West 
Shore,  and  Buffalo  Railroad  was  absorbed  by  the  Central,  thus  giving 
the  latter  control  of  six  tracks;  and  on  the  14th  of  March,  1891,  the 
Central  assumed  under  a  lease  the  entire  system  of  the  Rome,  Water- 
town,  and  Ogdensburg  Company,  making  it  at  the  present  time  one  of 
the  most  powerful  railroad  corporations  in  the  country. 


UTICA  AND  BLACK  RIVER  RAILROAD.  389 

The  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  was  first  formed  under  the  name 
of  the  Black  River  and  Utica  Railroad  Company  on  the  29th  of  Janu- 
ary, 1853.  The  original  company  contained  many  prominent  citizens 
of  Utica,  of  whom  Theodore  S.  Faxton  was  president,  and  the  project 
awakened  unusual  interest,  not  only  in  the  city,  but  along  its  entire  pro- 
posed line.  Public  meetings  were  held  here  and  elsewhere  and  it  was 
not  long  before  the  enterprise  assumed  tangible  shape.  Some  idea  of 
the  interest  in  this  city  may  be  inferred  by  the  fact  that  its  promotors 
were  able  to  induce  the  city  corporation  to  take  $250,000  in  the  stock 
— a  very  large  amount  of  money  at  that  time,  and  which  was  eventually 
a  loss. 

Work  was  begun  late  in  the  same  year  and  prosecuted  throughout 
tlie  following  one.  The  road  was  opened  to  Boonville  on  the  13th  of 
December,  1854,  and  to  Trenton  on  the  ist  of  January,  1855.  From 
the  report  made  at  the  meeting  of  stockholders  held  in  January,  1856, 
it  appeared  that  the  first  thirty-five  miles  with  finished  parts  beyond 
had  consumed  the  whole  of  the  capital  and  involved  its  friends  and  the 
city  in  loss.  The  work  had  proceeded  too  fast  for  the  means  at  com- 
mand ;  especially  had  the  company  erred  in  encouraging  engineer's 
costs  and  in  distributing  labor  along  the  whole  line  in  lieu  of  complet- 
ing a  little  at  the  nearer  extreme.  Of  other  graver  mistakes  it  is  need- 
less to  speak.  It  only  remained  to  issue  fresh  bonds,  and  these  were 
now  put  freely  in  market  at  seventy,  at  sixty,  and  then  at  fifty  cents  on 
the  dollar.  They  were  increased  by  degrees  until  they  reached  the 
sum  of  $800,000.  When  these  failed  of  interest  their  holders  commit- 
ted the  road  to  John  Thorn  and  Isaac  Maynard  to  operate  as  trustees. 
That  the-  road  was  a  failure  was  not  due  to  the  location  or  business, 
which  from  the  first  had  exceeded  all  expectations;  nor  was  it,  moreover, 
deficient  in  good  in  enlarging  the  bounds  and  augmenting  the  value  of 
Utica. 

To  put  its  concerns  on  a  more  economical  basis  on  the  9th  of  May, 
1 861,  a  re-organization  took  place.  The  holders  of  bonds  exchanged 
them  for  a  new  issue  of  stock,  and  the  corporate  name  was  changed  to 
Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  and  new  directors  were  elected.  The 
first  Board  of  Directors  were :  John  Thorn,  president;  James  Sayre, 
A.  J.  Williams,  Martin  Hart,  Charles  Millar,  Edmund  A.  Graham,  John 


390  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Butterfield,  Isaac  Maynard,  Thomas  Foster,  Dan  P.  Cadwell,  Russel 
Wheeler,  and  two  others  from  outside  the  city.  The  capital  of  the  new 
company  was  $8i  1,500,  of  which  $535,000  was  owned  by  Utica  people. 

In  this  unsatisfactory  condition  of  the  road  John  Thorn  ^  and  his  asso- 
ciates immediately  inaugurated  a  system  of  economy  in  management, 
improvement  of  the  road-bed  and  rolling  stock,  and  soon  changed  the 
whole  aspect  of  the  affairs  of  the  company.  He  held  the  office  of  presi- 
dent until  the  present  time  excepting  the  period  from  1 873  to  1 879,  when 
David  C.  West  was  president.  A  plan  of  extension  was  adopted  which 
soon  became  a  powerful  factor  in  the  prosperity  of  the  road.  On  the 
iith  of  November,  1863,  the  stockholders  were  surprised  with  a  two 
per  cent,  dividend,  the  first  that  the  road  had  ever  paid.  In  1867  the 
road  was  continued  to  Lyons  Falls,  ten  miles;  in  1868-69  to  Lowville, 
seventeen  miles;  in  1869— 70  to  Carthage;  and  from  there  to  Philadel- 
phia in  1871-72,  connecting  with  the  Black  River  and  Morristown  road, 
which  then  had  about  seven  miles  of  road  completed.  That  line  was 
at  once  finished  and  absorbed,  and  in  1872  the  company  leased  the 
road  from  Carthage  to  Watertown.  Two  years  later  the  line  was  com- 
pleted to  Sacket's  Harbor,  involving  under  that  lease  about  thirty  miles 
of  road.  In  1874  a  conection  was  made  with  the  Clayton  and  Theresa 
road  at  Theresa  Junction,  and  that  line  was  also  taken  under  a  lease.  In 
1878  the  road  was  extended  to  Ogdensburg,  eleven  miles.  In  1883  a 
consolidation  was  effected  with  the  Black  River  and  Morristown  road, 
and  in  1886  all  of  these  various  branches  excepting  the  Carthage, 
Watertown,  and  Sacket's  Harbor  road  (which  continued  under  lease) 
were  consolidated  under  the  name  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Rail- 
road Company,  comprising  about  150  miles  of  road.  On  the  14th  of 
April,  1886,  this  entire  system  was  leased  to  the  Rome,  Watertown,  and 
Ogdensburg  Company  for  seven  per  cent,  on  its  capital  stock.  On  the 
14th  of  March,  1 89 1,  the  road  passed  with  all  of  the  lines  of  the  Rome, 
Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg  Company  under  control  of  the  New  York 
Central  and  Hudson  River  Railroad   Company. 

In  the  spring  of  1853,  just  after  the  Black  River  Railroad  was  pro- 
jected, a  movement  was  made  toward  a  road  to  the  south.  Meetings 
were  held  in  various  towns  and  a  company  was  organized  with  Alfred 

1  See  biography  in  anot'ner  department  of  this  work. 


U.,  C,  AND  S.  V.  RAILROAD. 


39' 


Munson  as  president.  His  death,  the  failure  of  the  Black  River  road,  and 
other  causes  occasioned  suspension  and  delay.  The  matter  continued, 
however,  to  be  talked  of,  and  more  earnestly  as  the  northern  road 
emerged  from  its  pressure  and  was  again  prepared  for  extension.  In  the 
winter  of  1863  the  excitement  ran  high  when  two  definite  plans  were 
found  to  exist ;  with  Sherburne  as  the  objective  point  to  be  reached 
one  party  chose  a  line  by  way  of  Clinton  and  Hamilton  along  the 
course  of  the  Chenango  Canal,  while  the  other  would  follow  the  Sau- 
quoit  to  its  source,  thence  down  the  Chenango  to  Waterville,  and 
through  the  Long  Swamp  to  Sherburne.  As  a  consequence  of  the  di- 
vergence of  interests,  as  soon  as  the  energies  of  both  parties  were  con- 
centered each  on  its  own,  steps  were  taken  to  open  up  both.  A  road 
was  now  built  from  New  Hartford  to  Clinton  and  connected  by  horse 
car  with  Utica.  Having  constructed  this  much  its  company  waited 
some  years  ere  they  built  any  farther.  Meantime  the  other  proposal 
was  zealously  forwarded.  A  committee  appointed  September  2$,  1865, 
to  make  a  survey  of  the  district  involved,  in  November  following  ad- 
vised that  a  road  should  be  built  to  course  along  the  Sauquoit,  a  valley 
abounding  in  manufactures  and  people,  to  a  point  beyond  Clayville, 
whence  a  branch  should  extend  to  the  village  of  Waterville,  and  pass- 
ing near  Hamilton  should  reach  down  to  Sherburne,  and  so  command 
the  rich  trade  of  the  Chenango  ;  while  another,  going  through  Bridge- 
water,  Winfield,  and  Richfield,  should  move  on  to  Colliersville  on  the 
line  of  the  Susquehanna.  Each  branch  would  in  time  be  extended. 
The  road  now  proposed  was  to  be  something  over  eighty  miles  long, 
was  to  cost  $30,000  per  mile,  and  so  needed  a  capital  of  $2,400,000. 
Of  this  amount  Utica's  share  was  $700,000,  whereof  $200,000  was  to 
be  raised  by  subscription  and  the  remaining  $500,000  was  to  come 
from  the  bonds  of  the  city.  Other  towns  on  the  line  were  disposed  to 
contribute  according  to  their  numbers  and  wealth. 

With  the  fate  of  the  Black  River  in  mind  it  was  recommended  besides 
that  the  road  should  be  paid  for  as  built,  and  go  forward  no  faster  than 
funds  were  on  hand,  so  that  when  finished  it  would  be  left  without  debt. 
After  sufficient  discussion  the  resolves  of  the  committee  were  passed 
and  the  company  organized  with  the  directors  they  named,  and  the  cor- 
porate  title   "  Utica,   Chenango,    and    Susquehanna  Valley   Railway." 


392  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  directors  were  Lewis  Lawrence,  Daniel  Crouse,  A.  J.  Williams, 
James  F.  Mann,  James  K.  Hitchcock,  John  Butterfield",  Thomas  Foster, 
and  John  Thorn,  of  Utica ;  George  W.  Chadwick,  of  New  Hartford; 
N.  W.  Moore,  of  Sauquoit ;  D.  B.  Goodwin,  of  Waterville  ;  and  Devillo 
White,  of  Sherhurne.  Mr.  Lawrence  was  made  the  executive  head  and 
gave  to  the  wqrk  the  same  earnest  purpose  and  vigilant  care,  the  same 
surrender  of  self  and  control  over  others,  which  had  marked  his  conduct 
in  private  affairs.  Other  directors  rendered  useful  assistance  by  their 
money  and  labors.  Mr.  Lawrence  assumed  most  of  the  load  and  was 
unremitted  in  his  duty  through  storm  and  through  cold.  The  $200,000 
required  by  private  subscription  was  raised  in  our  midst,  and  $17,000 
besides.  Opposition  was  fruitless,  and  when  in  March,  1866,  on  days 
determined  by  law,  the  question  of  bonding  came  up  at  the  polls,  it  re- 
ceived the  assent  of  above  two  out  of  three  of  the  voters.  Our  bond- 
ing accomplished  other  towns  followed  suit.  Ere  long  enough  was  se- 
cured to  warrant  commencement  and  ground  was  broken  on  the  1st  of 
July.  Thenceforward  work  never  flagged  and  the  enterprise  fast  as- 
sumed a  tangible  form.  On  the  14th  of  November  its  coaches  con- 
veyed a  large  and  joyous  assembly  to  Waterville.  Like  diligent  energy 
on  the  part  of  the  company,  like  credit  from  the  towns  on  the  line,  to 
that  which  had  conducted  the  road  thus  far,  conducted  it  later  to  Sher- 
burne. Four  additional  miles  were  constructed  the  next  spring,  and 
there  at  Sherburne  Four  Corners  the  work  for  the  present  was  stayed ; 
for  now  by  the  aid  of  the  Midland  passage  was  accomplished  to  Nor- 
wich. The  branch  that  turned  eastward  from  Cassvilte  was  taken  in 
hand  in  October,  1868.  Traversing  Bridgewater,  Plainfield,  and  Win- 
field  this  work,  of  something  harder  construction,  was  successfully  car- 
ried to  Richfield,  which  it  reached  near  the  close  of  1870.  Of  the  road 
as  projected  sixty-seven  miles  were  finished,  with  about  seven  of  siding 
at  a  cost  to  the  owners  of  about  $28,000  per  mile.  It  was  pretty  well 
stocked  with  rolling  material  and  equipped  with  the  requisite  buildings. 
On  both  of  its  branches  two  or  more  trains  ran  daily  forward  and  back. 
Its  receipts  for  passage  and  freights  contented  the  most  sanguine  ex- 
pectants. 

And  now,  just  before  its  completion  to  Richfield,  the  whole  of  the 
road,  including  this  part  yet  unfinished,  was  leased  for  the  remaining 


UTICA,  CLINTON,  AND  BINGHAMTON  RAILROAD.      393 

term  of  its  charter  to  another  more  opulent  company  owning  $15,000,- 
000  of  capital,  having  control  of  the  coal  mines  at  Scranton,  and 
enormous  producers  and  consumers  of  the  fuel.  By  the  terms  of  agree- 
ment with  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and  Western  Railway  the  lessors 
were  to  finish  to  Richfield,  to  increase  the  amount  of  their  cars  and  loco- 
motives, and  to  make  th'eir  issue  of  stock  not  to  exceed  $1,800,000.  In 
return  the  lessees  would  extend  the  first  branch  thirty-seven  miles 
farther,  and  thus  by  means  of  roads  of  their  own  would  reach  down  to 
the  mines  ;  besides  they  would  pay  a  six  per  cent,  annual  dividend  to 
all  holders  of  stock  in  the  road  they  now  leased.  The  arrangement 
took  effect  on  the  first  day  of  May,  but  by  a  later  arrangement  the  ex- 
tension was  really  made  by  the  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Syracuse.  Their 
stock  was  augmented  from  $2,500,000  to  $4,000,000,  and  with  this  en- 
largement of  capital  the  company  carried  its  road  to  Greene  on  the 
borders  of  Broome.  Here  it  touched  the  Binghamton  and  Syracuse 
and  established  the  wished-for  relations  with  Scranton. 

Let  us  now  notice  another  road  to  the  south  which  was  projected  and 
partly  constructed  in  advance  of  the  preceding,  then  enlarged  in  de- 
sign, made  to  run  a  somewhat  parallel  course,  and  like  the  preceding 
leased  when  completed  to  a  long  established  and  opulent  company  well 
known  as  importers  of  coal.  The  Utica,Clinton,  and  Binghamton  Com- 
pany was  organized  in  August,  1862,  to  construct  a  horse  or  steam  road 
"  from  the  village  of  Clinton  through  the  town  of  New  Hartford  and  city 
of  Utica  into  the  town  of  Whitestown,  to  the  village  of  Whitesboro,  or 
New  York  Mills,  or  both."  Its  capital  stock  was  $23,000,  and  of  its 
thirteen  directors  these  six  were  of  Utica,  viz.:  John  Butterfield,  Alrick 
Hubbell,  John  Thorn,  Lewis  Lawrence,  Hugh  Crocker,  O.  B.  Matteson. 
With  them  were  joined  Daniel  C.  Mason,  of  New  Hartford,  and  six 
others  from  the  east,  Mr.  Butterfield  being  the  prime  mover  and  head. 
By  the  fall  of  1863  the  rails  were  in  place  and  carriage  by  horse  was 
accomplished  from  New  Hartford  to  Utica.  Conceiving  designs  more 
ambitious  the  company  changed  its  name  the  next  year  by  legislat- 
ive permission,  and  planned  an  extension  to  Waterville.  Pushing  for- 
ward the  work  first  undertaken  they  had  built  by  the  summer  of  1866 
a  horse  road  to  Whitesboro  and  a  road  for  steam-power  from  New  Hart- 
ford to  Clinton,  which  was  worked  by  a  dummy  that  ran  in  connection 

50 


394  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

with  the  hprse  cars  from  Utica.  In  December,  1867,  being  now  opened 
to  Deansv^Se^they  organized  anew  with  a  capital  raised  to  $1,000,000. 
Of  its  board  the  Utica  members  nearly  all  retained  their  places  in  di- 
rection. Their  aim  was  now  directed  to  Sherburne.  Difference  of 
sentiment  as  to  the  best  route  to  this  spot  was  now  prevailing,  and  so 
strong  was  the  strife  that  the  movers  in  behalf  of  both  routes  were 
hampered  in  getting  the  means  they  required  to  effect  their  respective 
designs.  With  an  increase  of  resources  derived  from  the  bonding  of 
Hamilton  for  $60,000,  of  Madison  for  $100,000,  and  of  Augusta  and 
Kirkland  for  $40,000  each  the  company  continued  to  move  forward 
their  road.  Henceforth  they  were  known  as  the  Utica,  Clinton,  and 
Binghamton.  Their  track,  which  was  laid  to  Oriskany  Falls  in  1868, 
they  carried  to  Hamilton  in  1870,  and  by  a  three  miles  farther  exten- 
sion they  joined,  at  Smith's  Valley,  the  line  of  the  Midland,  and  thus 
were  assured  of  the  terminus  sought. 

But  though  the  road  was  opened  thus  far,  and  was  much  in  use  by  the 
public,  the  line  to  New  Hartford  was  still  unfittedforsteam,  and  for  luggage 
and  freight  as  well  as  for  passengers  the  horse  road  was  the  only  means 
of  conveyance.  The  delay  and  inconvenience  of  transfer,  the  obstruc- 
tion of  the  street  by  the  passage  of  lumbering  cars,  and  their  unsightly 
presence  in  our  principal  avenue  were  felt  as  an  evil  by  townsmen  and 
traveler  and  yet  more  by  the  company.  Room  must  be  found  for  an 
additional  road  and  likewise  the  funds  essential  to  build  it.  Failing  in 
efforts  to  obtain  from  their  rival  permission  to  use  this  end  of  its  line 
by  means  of  connection  made  at  New  Hartford  they  next  appealed  to 
the  city  for  aid.  The  city  furnished  its  bond  for  $200,000.  At  a  cost 
of  nearly  $400,000  the  new  road  was  built  in  1871.  The  steam  road 
w  IS  leased  the  year  after  its  completion  to  the  New  York  and  Oswego 
Midland.  In  September,  1873,  this  company  went  into  the  hands  of 
receivers,  who  continued  to  operate  the  part  that  was  leased  until  No- 
vember, 187s,  when  they  failed  in  their  rent  and  abandoned  the  charge. 
A  new  lease  was  effected  with  a  corporation  more  free  of  embarrass- 
ment and  which  has  stood  as  a  guarantee  of  the  former.  This  was  the 
Delaware  and  Hudson  Canal  Company,  widely  known  for  its  wealth  and 
connections  as  one  of  the  great  purveyors  of  coal. 

The  constructions  we  have   had  under  survey — these  roads  to  the 


NE  W  YORK,  WEST  SHORE,  AND  B  UFFALO  RAILROAD.    395 

south  and  the  one  to  the  north,  thus  intersecting  the  Central — have 
made  an  important  center  of  Utica  and  immensely  increased  its  con- 
venience for  transportation  and  trade.  Its  compass  of  business  is  again 
what  it  was  when  the  country  was  new  and  there  were  few  towns  about 
us  to  compete  for  a  share.  And  as  the  outlying  population  is  denser 
by  far  than  it  was  then,  and  its  wants  in  proportion  augmented,  we  make 
up  in  absolute  increase  for  all  that  is  lost  of  the  trade  to  rivals  more  re- 
cently started. 

The  New  York,  West  Shore,  and  Buffalo  Railroad  Company  was 
chartered  on  the  14th  of  June,  1881,  and  the  New  York,  Buffalo,  and 
West  Shore  Railway  Company  was  afterward  formed  under  the  laws  of 
New  York  and  New  Jersey  by  consolidation  of  the  original  company 
with  the  North  River  Construction  Company.  The  original  capital 
stock  was  $40,000,000,  and  the  first  officers  were  Horace  Porter,  pres- 
ident; Charles  Hurd,  vice-president ;  Theodore  Houston,  second  vice- 
president  ;  Alexander  Taylor,  secretary  and  treasurer  ;  Charles  Paine, 
general  manager.  The  road  was  opened  from  Weehawken  to  Syracuse 
on  the  1st  of  October,  1883,  and  to  Bufifalo  on  January  i,  1884.  On 
the  2d  of  October,  1885,  judgment  of  foreclosure  and  sale  of  the  road 
was  entered  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of  New  York.  The 
property  was  sold  at  auction,  and  on  the  5th  of  December  was  trans- 
ferred to  the  purchasers,  J.  Pierpont  Morgan,  Chauncey  M.  Depew,  and 
Ashbel  Green,  as  joint  tenants.  The  road  was  then  at  once  leased  to 
the  New  York  Central  Company. 

In  July,  1884,  D.  B.  McCoy  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the 
Buffalo  division  of  the  line,  relieving  Superintendent  Merrill.  This  di- 
vision then  extended  from  Bufifalo  to  Syracuse,  with  headquarters  at  the 
former  city.  H.  W.  Gardner  was  superintendent  of  the  Mohawk  di- 
vision, from  Syracuse  to  Coeyman's  Junction  on  the  Hudson  River, 
from  1884  to  April,  1885,  when  the  Mohawk  division  was  absorbed  in 
the  Hudson  River  and  Bufifalo  division,  which  terminated  at  Frankfort, 
with  Superintendent  McCoy's  6fifice  at  Newark.  In  April,  1888,  his 
ofifice  was  removed  to  Syracuse  and  his  authority  extended  to  Coey- 
man's. J.  P.  Bradfield  was  made  superintendent  from  there  to  Wee- 
hawken. This  road  has  never  exerted  a  great  influence  on  the  city  of 
Utica,  as  it  passes  nearly  two  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  central  part 
of  the  city. 


396  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

CHAPTER   XIII. 
CHURCHES    OF   THE   SEVERAL   DENOMINATIONS. 

Presbyterian  Societies  —  Congregational  Organizations  —  The  Reformed  Church  -^s- 
The  Episcopal  Denomination  —  The  Methodists  — The  Baptists  —  The  Lutherans  — 
The  Moravian  Church  —  Roman  Catholics  —  The  Hebrews  and  their  Synagogues  — 
Welsh  Churches  —  Sketches  of  some, of  the  Clergymen  who  have  preached  in  Utica. 

IT  is  a  conspicuous  fact,  and  one  pleasant  to  contemplate  in  the  civiliza- 
tion that  progressed  westward  with  the  settlement  of  America,  that 
very  few  if  any  communities  located  and  remained  for  any  considerable 
time  in  the  wilderness  without  founding  there  an  altar,  however  humble 
and  however  few  the  number  that  could  be  gathered  around  it  for  the 
w  orship  of  the  Creator.  His  presence  and  His  power  were  needed  and 
felt  in  the  wilderness  as  much  and  more,  perhaps,  than  in  the  busy 
scenes  of  later  and  larger  communities. 

Up  to  the  year  1801  the  only  existing  and  continuous  religious  soci- 
ety here  was  that  which  had  been  organized  at  Whitesboro  in  1793 
under  the  title  of  the  "  United  Society  of  Whitestown  and  Old  Fort 
Schuyler,"  Of  this  church  and  its  first  pastor  a  brief  account  has  been 
given  on  pages  55  and  56. 

Trinity  Church  dates  its  origin  from  the  year  1798.  Its  actual  be- 
ginning we  have  in  the  words  of  its  founder.  Rev.  Philander  Chase,  af- 
terward bishop  of  Illinois.  In  1798  Mr.  Chase  was  occupied  in  mis- 
sionary labors  in  this  State,  and  while  thus  engaged  arrived  in  Utica, 
"  This  now  flourishing  city  was  then,"  he  says,  "  but  a  small  hamlet. 
The  stumps  of  the  forest  trees  were  yet  standing  thick  and  sturdy  in 
the  streets,  if  streets  they  may  be  termed,  where  scarcely  two  of  them 
were  fenced  out.  Even  Colonel  Walker's  house,  for  some  time  the  best 
in  the  place,  was  not  then  built.  That  worthy  Christian  gentleman  re- 
ceived the  writer  in  a  small  tenement  which  he  then  occupied,  and  it 
was  by  his  encouragement  that  the  writer  succeeded  in  organizing  a 
parish  according  to  an  act  of  the  legislature  passed  two  or  three  winters 
before.     The  parish  was   named    '  The   Rector,  Wardens,  and  Vestry- 


THE  PRESBYTERIAN  CHURCH.  397 

men  of  Trinity  Church,  Utica.'  "  Mr.  Chase,  having  thus  formed  the 
few  Episcopalians  of  the  place  into  a  society,  persuaded  them  to  meet 
together  every  Sabbath  and  read  the  prayers  of  the  church  and  ser- 
mons. This  the  records  inform  us  was  for  some  time  done.  "  But  the 
people  of  other  persuasions  increasing  fast,  and  having  engaged  the 
Presbyterian  minister  of  Whitesboro  to  attend  regularly,  the  meetings 
of  the  Episcopalians  was  discontinued."  Thus  the  society  appears  to 
have  slumbered  until  1803,  when  a  re-organization  was  effected  and 
measures  were  taken  to  erect  a  church  building  as  will  be  described  a 
little  further  on. 

Of  the  United  Society  of  Whitestown  and  Old  Fort  Schuyler,  which 
was  the  first  Presbyterian  society  of  Oneida  County,  I  here  resume  the 
narrative.  In  1803  the  number  of  members  of  the  united  church  living  in 
Utica  had  increased  to  twenty,  that  of  the  congregation  being  probably 
still  greater.  It  was  therefore  recommended  by  the  session  that  one 
deacon  and  two  elders  be  chosen  from  that  part  of  the  congregation 
living  in  Utica.  On  the  2d  of  the  following  month,  at  a  meeting 
held  in  the  School-house,  Capt.  Stephen  Potter  was  elected  deacon  and 
Capt.  Stephen  Potter  and  Ebenezer  Dodd  were  elected  elders.  The 
congregation  was  incorporated  as  a  distinct  society  on  the  15th  of  No- 
vember, 1805,  and  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  Erastus  Clark,  Talcott 
Camp,  Apollos  Cooper,  Benjamin  Ballou,  jr.,  Benjamin  Plant,  John  C. 
Hoyt,  Nathaniel  Butler,  and  Solomon  P.  Goodrich  were  chosen  the 
first  trustees.  In  October  of  the  year  of  Rev.  Mr.  Dodd's  death  (^8o4) 
Rev.  James  Carnahan  came  to  take  the  charge,  though  it  was  not  until 
the  following  January  that  he  was  ordained  and  installed.  'If  the  former 
is  remembered  with  gratitude  for  his  earnest  piety  and  his  faithful  dis- 
charge of  the  pastoral  office  the  latter  is  held  in  deeper  and  more  gen- 
eral respect,  because  to  these  high  merits  he  added  also  a  natural  vigor 
of  intellect  and  a  ripeness  of  scholarship  which  gave  him  rank  among 
the  foremost  of  his  calling,  and  in  after  years  gained  him  distinction  as 
president  of  Princeton  College. 

James  Carnahan  was  born  in  Cumberland  County,  Pa.,  November  15, 
1 775, and  having  been  trained  by  one  who  was  an  exceptionally  fine  class- 
icaj  scholar  he  entered  the  College  of  New  Jersey  and  was  graduated 
therefrom  in  1800,  serving  it  next  as  tutor.     He  was  licensed  in  1804, 


398  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  after  brief  periods  of  service  in  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  he 
accepted  a  call  from  the  United  Society  with  a  salary  of  $700,  at  the 
same  time  declining  a  salary  of  $1,500  from  the  Dutch  Church  of 
Albany.  On  the  5th  of  January,  1805,  he  was  ordained  and  installed 
pastor  of  the  United  Churches.  Preaching  alternately  in  Whitesboro 
and  in  Utica  his  place  of  worship  in  the  latter  village  was  at  first  in  the 
school-house  on  Main  street,  then  in  the  new  edifice  of  Trinity  until  the 
congregation  provided  a  building  of  their  own.  Measures  for  this  pur- 
pose were  taken  early  in  his  pastorate,  a  lot  being  given  by  John  Bel- 
linger on  the  sole  condition  that  he  should  have  a  pew  in  the  church. 
This  lot  was  situated  on  the  corner  of  Washington  and  Liberty  streets. 
The  building  was  begun  at  once  and  finished  in  the  summer  of  1807. 
Up  to  the  year  1807  the  whole  number  of  persons  received  into  com- 
munion with  the  church  was  one  hundred  and  twenty-one,  of  whom 
only  eighty-eight  were  then  in  actual  fellowship,  and  of  these  not  more 
than  one- half,  and  probably  not  more  than  one-third,  were  residents 
of  Utica.  It  is  not  forgotten  that  Dr.  Carnahan  was  foremost  in  the 
organization  of  the  Oneida  Bible  Society,  that  powerful  agent  for  the 
spiritual  good  of  this  newly- settled  region.  In  1821,  two  years  before 
he  was  chosen  president  of  Princeton,  he  received  from  Hamilton  Col- 
lege, of  which  he  was  already  a  trustee,  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Divin- 
ity.     His  dismission  from  this  charge  took  place  November  4,  18 12. 

On  the  3d  of  February,  1813,  the  United  Church  was  divided;  fifty- 
seven  of  its  members,  with  two  elders,  were  by  act  of  the  Presbytery 
constituted  a  church,  which  took  the  title  of  the  First  Utica  Presbyterian 
Society.  On  the  following  day,  February  4th,  Rev.  Henry  Dwight, 
who  had  temporarily  supplied  the  two  pulpits,  was  ordained  and  in- 
stalled their  minister.  Mr.  Dwight — by  turns  merchant,  minister,  and 
banker,  a  devout,  humble,  and  most  useful  man,  and  a  prince  of  pastors 
— served  the  church  about  as  long  as  Mr.  Carnahan  and  was  then  dis- 
abled from  the  same  cause.  He  was  born  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  June 
25,  1783.  He  graduated  from  Yale  in  1801  and  began  his  professional 
studies  in  New  Haven  with  Rev.  Dr.  Dwight,  finishing  at  Princeton 
Theological  Seminary.  About  six  weeks  after  the  settlement  of  Mr. 
Dwight  Rev.  John  Frost  was  ordained  over  the  church  at  Whitesboro, 
and  thus  the  independence  of  the  two  societies  was  established,  though 


FIRST  PRESBYTERIAN  CHURCH.  399 

by  vote  of  their  respective  trustees  the  ministers  continued  to  exchange 
pulpits  for  a  considerable  period.  Almost  immediately  Mr.  Dwight 
began  to  reap  from  the  sowing  of  his  predecessor,  and  ere  long  his  own 
faithful  labors  were  crowned  with  yet  happier  results.  No  communion 
season  passed  without  some  accessions,  and  in  one  year  more  than  100 
were  added  to  the  previously  small  number  of  communicants  under  his 
care.  It  was  not  long  before  the  modest  church  edifice  was  insufificient 
for  the  congregation  and  in  1815  it  was  elongated  by  the  addition  of 
about  one-quarter  to  its  length,  and  this,  with  a  porch  at  the  end,  some- 
what marred  its  architectural  proportions.  Within  it  was  still  more 
unique,  for  its  sentry  box  of  a  pulpit  was  perched  against  the  wall  in 
the  middle  of  the  north  side  and  had  a  canopy  or  sounding-board  above, 
while  the  pews  were  for  the  most  part  so  placed  as  to  look  one- half 
westward  and  one-half  eastward,  a  few  square  ones  being  immediately 
in  front  of  the  pulpit  and  a  few  long  ones  under  the  chorister's  gallery 
on  the  south  side. 

The  ministry  was  Dr.  Dwight's  delight,  but  after  less  than  five  years 
exercise  of  it,  and  when  the  number  of  his  church  members  had  in- 
creased from  57  to  222,  the  failure  of  his  voice  compelled  his  reluct- 
ant return  to  secular  pursuits.  Upon  the  departure  of  Mr.  Dwight 
the  congregation  extended  a  call  to  Rev.  Samuel  C.  Aikin.  He 
was  born  in  Windham,  Vt.,  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  College, 
and  entering  Andover  Seminary  completed  his  theological  course  in 
1 8 17.  After  his  graduation  he  was  employed  a  few  months  in  mission- 
ary work  in  the  city  of  New  York  and  came  thence  to  Utica.  His  or- 
dination and  installation  took  place  on  the  4th  of  February,  1818.  As 
a  preacher  Mr.  Aikin  at  once  became  popular.  He  was  in  person  com- 
manding and  dignified,  his  voice  was  sonorous  and  pleasing,  and,  like 
his  gesticulation,  had  been  skillfully  cultivated  ;  to  these  qualities  he 
added  clearness  and  finish  of  diction,  an  engaging  address,  and  an 
earnestness  which  arose  at  times  to  eloquence.  That  his  ministrations 
were  fraught  with  good  we  may  judge  by  the  fact  that  within  a  little 
more  than  a  year  after  they  were  begun  the  church  was  blessed  with  a 
fruitful  revival  and  113  persons  were  added  to  its  communion.  In 
1 82 1  a  session  or  conference  room  for  the  use  of  the  society  was 
erected   on   Hotel  street,  which   was   also  used  by  the   Sunday  school. 


400  ■    MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

It  was  enlarged  four  years  later  by  the  addition  of  a  second  story  at  the 
expense  of  the  Sunday  school.  The  church  was  not  supplied  with  an 
organ  until  1824,  when  one  was  placed  in  the  south  gallery.  In  the 
latter  part  of  the  year  1823,  the  congregation  having  become  so  large 
that  all  the  seats  below  and  many  in  the  gallery  were  taken  up,  and  the 
cares  of  the  minister  being  deemed  too  onerous  for  him  to  bear  alone, 
it  was  determined  to  appoint  him  an  assistant,  who,  if  thought  advisable, 
should  organize  a  new  society.  Rev.  S.  W.  Brace,  then  settled  in 
Phelps,  Ontario  County,  was  called  and  arrived  in  February,  1824. 
For  a  time  he  preached  alternately  with  the  regular  pastor  and  next  in 
the  session  room  of  the  church  on  Hotel  street.  Here  a  new  society 
was  formed  May  6,  1824,  as  related  further  on.  A  few  months  later  it 
was  proposed  by  Mr.  Aikin's  congregation  that  a  new  edifice  be  erected. 
The  proposal  to  build,  and  to  build  a  large  and  handsome  church,  re- 
ceived general  concurrence.  Liberal  subscriptions  were  made  and  a 
large  number  of  pews  were  sold  while  the  building  was  yet  in  contem- 
plation, the  amount  of  $2,000  being  assessed  on  these  pews.  In  the 
summer  of  1826  the  plans  of  Philip  Hooker,  of  Albany,  were  accepted 
and  the  foundations  of  the  new  edifice  laid  twelve  feet  north  of  the  old 
one.  On  the  8th  of  November,  1827,  the  new  building  was  formally 
dedicated.  It  was  a  substantial  brick  structure  surmounting  a  basement 
of  stone;  it  was  72  feet  by  106  with  a  steeple  208  feet  high.  The 
basement  contained  a  session  room  and  two  large  rooms  for  the  male 
and  female  departments  of  the  Sunday  school.  The  auditorium  was 
roomy  and  well  lighted,  and  over  the  pulpit  was  an  organ  fifteen  by  ten 
feet  in  dimensions  and  having  twelve  stops.  For  many  years  this  fine 
Ionic  edifice  surpassed  in  magnitude  and  convenience  any  church 
structure  in  Central  and  Western  New  York.  The  old  church  was 
neither  torn  down  nor  burned  up  ;  it  was  dismembered  and  some  of  its 
parts  still  stand. 

The  most  notable  event  in  this  era  of  the  history  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church  was  a  great  revival  which  occurred  in  the  year  1826, 
chiefly  through  the  evangelical  labors  of  the  Rev.  Charles  G.  Finney. 
Crowds  attended  his  administrations  and  the  effects  of  his  work  were 
felt  throughout  the  county.  The  probable  number  of  converts  in  Utica 
was  about  500  ;   in  the  county  at  large  they  were  reckoned  at  more  than 


FIRST  PRESBYTERIAN  CHURCH.  401 

3,000.  Differences  of  opinion  respecting  the  character  of  Mr.  Finney 
and  the  influences  of  his  labor  tended  to  mar  the  harmony  of  the  con- 
gregation, and  to  this  source  of  disagreement  between  the  pastor  and 
his  people  were  added  the  questions  of  Sunday  mails  and  anti-slavery, 
on  both  of  which  Mr.  Aikin  was  in  advance  of  the  sentiment  then  gen- 
erally prevailing;  but  none  of  these  questions  caused  anything  like  an 
open  rupture,  and  when,  therefore,  he  decided  to  accept  a  call  to  the 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Cleveland,  O.,  his  decision  was  received  with 
profound  regret  by  his  congregation.  He  left  them  in  May,  1835. 
Mr.  Aikin  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  John  W.  Fowler,  May  9,  1836,  who 
came  from  Binghamton  ;  he  was  deposed  from  his  oflSce  and  retired 
June  15,  1841.  Rev.  Charles  S.  Porter,  previously  of  New  York,  be- 
came pastor  March  23,  1842.  He  remained  only  till  November  18, 
1844.  His  call  had  been  unacceptable  to  many  and  a  considerable 
number  of  families  withdrew  from  the  congregation.  He  was  succeeded 
by  Rev.  William  H.  Spencer,  then  a  licentiate,  January  13,  1846.  He 
removed  to  Milwaukee,  September  24,  1850,  and  afterward  accepted 
the  secretaryship  of  the  Presbyterian  Committee  of  Publication  and  died 
while  pastor  of  the  Westminster  Church,  Chicago.  Rev.  Philemon  H. 
Fowler,  D.D.,  previously  of  the  Second  Church,  Washington,  D.  C, 
and  next  of  the  First  Church  of  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  began  his  labors  here  on 
the  1st  of  January,  185  i.  As  a  scholar,  as  a  gentleman,  as  a  Christian,  ;is 
a  pastor,  as  a  philanthropist,  as  a  man  of  affairs  he  possessed  qualities 
of  a  high  order,  and  wherever  he  moved  he  won  recognition  as  a  leader 
of  men.  Dr.  Fowler  was  born  in  Albany,  February  9,  1814,  and  grad- 
uated from  Hobart  College,  Geneva,  in  1832,  and  from  the  Theological 
Seminary  at  Princeton,  N.  J.,  in  1836.  After  a  pastorate  in  Washing- 
ton and  one  in  Elmira  he  came  here  and  was  installed  February  loth. 
For  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century  he  served  this  church  admirably  and 
so  as  to  bear  his  sheaves  with  him  in  any  reckoning  of  fidelity  and 
efificiency.  His  scholarship  was  broad  ;  he  was  naturally  a  student  ; 
but  he  deemed  nothing  pertaining  to  humanity  alien  to  himself;  he  ex- 
emplified in  many  respects  the  ideal  Christian  pastor.  He  was  a  tower 
of  strength  and  a  beacon  light  to  Presbyterianism  here  in  Central  New 
York,  and  he  did  a  strong  man's  share  in  behalf  of  morality,  education, 
and   true   progress.      Among  the    most   distinguished   men   who   ha\e 

51 


402  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

brought  honor  to  the  pulpit  of  Utica  not  one  in  any  denomination  has 
lived  a  purer  hfe,  has  been  a  broader  type  of  manhood,  has  had  higher 
aims,  has  left  behind  him  better  fruit  of  his  ministry  or  the  perfume  of 
a  more  saintly  influence.  He  was  also  an  active  and  influential  mem- 
ber of  the  committee  which  led  the  way  in  the  reunion  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  he  was  the  last  moderator  of  the  new  school 
assembly  which  adopted  the  plan  ;  in  1870  he  preached  before  the  first 
assembly  of  the  United  Church.  His  long  and  useful  service  he  closed 
on  the  4th  of  February,  1874.  He  died  December  9,  1879.  Of  his 
two  sons  and  two  daughters  the  latter  alone  remain. 

On  the  26th  of  June,  1872,  Rev.  Samuel  P.  Sprecher  was  installed 
as  CO -pastor  with  Dr.  Fowler,  having  been  called  from  the  First  Luth- 
eran Church  of  Albany.  He  was  remarkable  for  his  fluent  and  seem- 
ingly extemporaneous  delivery  of  thoughtful  and  well  arranged  dis- 
courses. Receiving  a  call  from  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  of 
Oakland,  Cal.,he  resigned  the  pastorate  of  this  church  October  6,  1879. 
On  the  9th  of  April,  1880,  the  church  called  as  its  pastor  the  Rev.  Rob- 
ert O.  Bachman,  D.D.,  o.f  Fayetteville,  N.  Y.,  who  is  in  charge  of  the 
field  at  the  present  time. 

The  beautiful  brick  church  which  has  been  described  stood  until  the 
13th  of  January,  1 85  I,  when  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  of  incendiary  ori- 
gin. Measures  were  promptly  adopted  to  rebuild,  and  a  still  more  beau- 
tiful structure  was  erected  on  the  corner  of  Washington  and  Columbia 
streets.  In  its  dimensions  it  is  104  feet  long,  72  feet  wide,  with  a  spire 
225  feet  in  height.  Attached  to  the  rear  is  a  chapel  which  was 
originally  fifty-two  feet  long  and  forty-six  feet  wide,  with  a  Sunday 
school  room  above  of  the  same  dimensions.  This  building  was  dedi- 
cated October  19,  1852.  In  1868  the  chapel  was  lengthened  to  sixty- 
four  feet,  and  there  was  added  a  church  parlor  thirty-six  feet  long  and 
twenty-nine  feet  wide,  a  large  kitchen,  and  a  pastor's  study.  The  Sun- 
day school  room  was  lengthened  to  1 19  feet. 

Three  churches  in  Utica  are  offshoots  from  this  one  and  four  others, 
now  extinct,  sprang  from  it,  and  15  missionaries  and  31  ministers 
have  been  sent  out  from  it.  Among  the  missionaries  were  H.  G.  0. 
Dwight,  D.D.,  of  Constantinople;  Asahel  Grant,  M.D.,  of  Persia;  Henry 
R.  Hoisington,  of  India;  W.  F.  Williams,  of  Mozul  ;  and  S.  Wells  Will- 


REV.  S.  W.  BRACE.  403 

iams,  LL.D.,  of  China.  The  first  Sunday-school  west  of  Albany  was 
organized  by  five  young  ladies  of  this  church.  There  are  at  present  7 
officers,  51  teachers,  and  350  scholars  in  the  Sabbath  school.  From 
the  time  of  its  organization  the  church  has  continued  steadily  to  grow 
and  the  membership  is  650,  while  since  its  organization  over  3,300 
members  have  been  received  into  the  society. 

On  December  21,  1890,  the  session  established  a  mission  Sabbath 
school  in  the  western  part  of  the  city,  which  is  known  as  Highland  Mis- 
sion. A  chapel  has  been  erected  on  a  piece  of  ground  Sox  1 16  feet  on 
the  west  side  of  Matthews  avenue.  The  membership  of  the  school  on 
April  I,  1891,  was  thr.ee  officers,  12  teachers,  and  140  scholars. 

In  this  account  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  allusion  has  been 
made  to  the  services  of  Rev.  S.  W.  Brace  and  to  the  formation  of  an- 
other church  of  this  denomination  which  must  have  its  proper  phice 
here.  Rev.  Samuel  W.  Brace  removed  in  his  }'Outh  from  Rutland,  Vt., 
to  Lysander,  Onondaga  County,  N.  Y.  Zealous  of  obtaining  a  college 
education  he  walked  from  Oswego,  where  the  family  were  then  living, 
in  the  winter  of  1809  to  Hamilton  Oneida  Academy  at  Clinton.  Here 
his  progress  was  so  creditable  that  he  was  soon  appointed  an  assistant, 
and  by  diligent  study  and  occasional  engagements  as  teacher  in  other 
schools  he  was  enabled  to  enter  the  sophomore  class  at  Hamilton  Col- 
lege and  graduate  with  the  class  of  1815.  One  of  the  engagements 
he  filled  as  a  teacher  was  at  Onondaga  Valley  and  another  in  the  vil- 
lage of  Utica,  where  in  181 5  he  for  a  time  supplied  the  place  of  Henry 
White,  disqualified  by  sickness.  Having  determined  to  become  a  min- 
ister he  entered  the  Theological  Seminary  at  Andover,  was  graduated 
from  there  in  1818,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  the  gospel.  After  a  few 
engagements  elsewhere  he  was  invited  to  come  to  Utica,  where  he 
preached  alternately  with  Mr.  Aikin,  as  previously,  stated,  until  the 
formation  of  another  church  on  the  6th  of  May,  1824,  which  took  the 
name  of  the  Second  Presbyterian  Church.  Twenty-seven  persons  were 
at  first  enrolled  as  its  members.  They  worshipped  for  a  time  in  the 
session  room  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  on  Hotel  street,  and  near  the 
close  of  the  year  1824  Mr.  Brace  was  by  the  Presbytery  of  Oneida  duly 
installed  over  them.  In  the  spring  of  1825,  their  number  being  aug- 
mented, thev  took  measures  for  the  erection  of  a  church  edifice.     Be- 


404  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

sides  the  funds  they  could  raise  among  themselves  they  were  promised 
assistance  by  several  members  of  the  older  congregation,  and  they  de- 
termined on  the  lot  corner  of  Charlotte  and  Bleecker  streets  as  a  site  for 
their  building.  The  trustees  now  in  charge  were  Dr.  Thomas  Goodsell, 
Greene  C.  Bronson,  Jason  Parker,  D.  G.  Bates,  and  Lyman  Hotchkiss. 
The  contract  for  erecting  the  building  was  taken  by  Samuel  Farwell. 
This  building,  at  first  called  the  Bleecker  Street  Presbyterian,  the  same 
which  was  at  a  later  period  known  as  the  Bleecker  Street  Baptist  Church, 
was  56x80  feet  in  dimensions.  It  was  completed  in  the  summer  of  1826 
and  dedicated  on  the  24th  of  August  of  that  year.  The  building  with 
the  lot  cost  about  $15,000.  The  ministry  of  Mr.  Brace  was  a  very  suc- 
cessful one  and  lasted  about  four  years.  During  this  time  250  persons 
were  added  to  the  church,  of  whom  130  came  from  other  churches  and 
80  were  the  fruits  of  the  revival  in  1826.  The  debt  contracted  in  build- 
ing proved  a  source  of  continued  embarrassment.  The  aid  promised 
by  members  of  the.  First  Presbyterian  congregation  was  by  no  means  as 
valuable  as  the  new  society  had  been  given  reason  to  expect,  for  the 
latter  congregation  proceeded  to  build  a  new  house  for  themselves  and 
were  taxed  to  accomplish  it.  The  salary  due  to  Mr.  Brace  fell  behind 
to  the  amount  of  over  $1,100.  His  brother-in-law,  Judge  Bronson,  who 
was  one  of  the  trustees,  was  often  called  on  to  contribute  toward  the  pe- 
cuniary necessities  of  the  congregation.  In  this  state  of  affairs  Rev. 
D.  C.  Lansing,  D.D.,  of  Auburn,  had  become  unsettled  there,  and  over- 
tures had  been  made  him  by  certain  members  of  the  First  Presbyterian 
Church  to  come  to  Utica  and  be  settled  over  the  congregation  of  Mr. 
Brace.  Judge  Bronson  and  the  other  trustees  now  suggested  to  Mr. 
Brace  that  if  a  favorable  opportunity  presented  itself  of  locating  else- 
where he  should  do  so.  Receiving  an  invitation  to  East  Hartford,  Conn., 
he  accordingly  resigned  his  pastorate  in  July,  1828,  and  went  to  that 
place.  After  a  brief  ministry  there  he  was  settled  some  time  longer  in 
Skeneateles  and  next  at  Binghamton.  Having  resolved  to  retire  from 
the  active  duties  of  the  pastoral  office  and  to  preach  in  vacant  churches, 
as  opportunity  might  offer,  he  returned  to  Utica  in  August,  1845.  ■^'^'^ 
here  he  continued  to  live  a  number  of  years,  acting  as  stated  supply  of 
various  churches  in  the  vicinity.^ 

1  The  further  history  of  this  church  is  taken  from  an  address  on  the  Bleecker  street  church  by 
Thoinas  W'.  Seward,  esq.,  read  before  the  Oneida  Historical  Society. 


REVS.  D.  C.  LANSING  AND  A.  T.  HOPKINS.  405 

Mr.  Brace  was  succeeded  in  his  pastorate  in  the  year  1829  by  Rev. 
Dirck  C.  Lansing,  D.D.,  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  Auburn. 
Dr.  Lansing  was  among  the  foremost  of  American  Presbyterians,  and 
held  a  long  pastorate  at  Auburn,  during  which  he  had  been  mainly  in- 
strumental in  founding  and  building  up  Auburn  Theological  Seminary. 
He  was  a  man  of  commanding  presence,  of  wonderfully  ingratiating 
manners,  of  great  force  of  character,  allied  to  a  temperament  warmly 
sympathetic.  As  a  preacher  he  was  without  hyperbole  the  Henry  Clay 
of  the  Presbyterian  pulpit.  The  Second  Church  felt  assured  of  a  re- 
trieval of  all  disaster  and  a  prosperous  future  when  Dr.  Lansing  was  in- 
stalled. But  somehow  their  anticipations  were  not  realized.  There  re- 
mained a  heavy  debt  so  that  men  of  substance  who  would  have  been 
glad  to  sit  under  Dr.  Lansing's  preaching  cautiously  avoided  identifica- 
tion with  his  church.  Moreover  he  had  lately  become  addicted  to  the- 
ological controversy,  whereby  it  was  thought  his  usefulness  at  Auburn 
had  been  seriously  impaired.  He  preached  a  series  of  vigorous  sermons 
against  Universalism,  but  he  met  an  adroit  and  wary  antagonist  in  Rev. 
Dolphas  Skinner,  pastor  of  the  Universalist  Church,  who  fought  Dr. 
Lansing,  not  from  his  pulpit,  but  from  the  columns  of  a  denominational 
paper,  which  he  owned  and  edited,  and  which  for  the  time  being  was 
distributed  broadcast  through  the  village. 

In  the  year  1833  Dr.  Lansing  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  Asa  T.  Hop- 
kins, a  young  man  of  twenty- eight  years  of  age,  a  graduate  of  Yale  who 
had  acquired  his  theological  education  in  a  clergyman's  family.  Mr. 
Hopkins  was  shy  in  manners,  of  a  shyness,  however,  that  vanished  when 
antagonism  was  aroused,  was  something  of  a  recluse,  and  was  devoted 
to  and  absorbed  by  his  profession.  His  pulpit  ability  was  of  the  high- 
est. His  sermons  were  strong  in  original  thought-,  phrased  in  compact 
diction,  and  were  spoken  with  all  the  vehemence  of  his  enthusiastic  nat- 
ure. During  his  pastorate  the  church  prospered  in  everything  except 
its  finances.  Its  meetings  were  always  full,  and  especially  were  young 
men  drawn  to  them  by  the  oratory  of  the  preacher.  Resigning  his  pas- 
torate Mr.  Hopkins  went  to  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Buffalo 
and  was  succeeded  in  1838  by  Rev.  Amos  Savage  It  was  during  the 
ministry  of  the  latter  that  Elder  Jacob  Knapp,  a  noted  Baptist  revivalist, 
began  his  work  in  the  Bethel  Chapel  on  State  street.    The  house  proving 


4o6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

too  small  for  the  numbers  that  flocked  to  hear  him  he  came  down  to  the 
Bleecker  street  church,  where  he  preached  three  weeks  to  a  house  uni- 
formly filled  to  its  utmost  capacity,  the  night  meetings  seldom  breaking 
up  before  ii  o'clock.  At  last  the  meeting  overflowed  into  the  First 
Presbyterian  Church,  where  the  revival  scenes  ended.  Nothing  like  this 
religious  awakening  has  been  known  since  the  great  Finney  revival  of 
1826,  which  it  surpassed. 

Mr.  Savage  was  followed  in  the  year  1839  by  Rev.  C.  Edward  Lester, 
who  acted  as  pastor  of  the  church  down  to  the  time  of  its  breaking  up 
as  a  Presbyterian  organization  in  1840.  Mr.  Lester  is  best  known  as 
the  author  of  the  "  Glory  and  Shame  of  England,"  which  he  wrote  during 
his  residence  here.  He  was  also  joint  editor  with  Jarvis  M.  Hatch  in 
1841  of  the  first  daily  newspaper  of  Utica.  He  has  since  written  other 
works,  served  as  consul  at  Genoa,  Italy,  and  held  other  positions  of  note. 

After  the  Bleecker  street  edifice  ceased  to  be  occupied  by  the  Pres- 
byterians it  was  for  a  very  brief  period  hired  and  used  by  a  Congrega- 
tional society  of  which  some  notice  will  be  given  shortly.  The  edifice, 
which  had  become  the  property  of  Hon.  Charles  E.  Dudley,  of  Albany, 
and  was  now  standing  vacant,  was  in  September,  1843,  hired  by  Rev. 
Joshua  H.  Mcllvaine,  of  Little  Falls.  Through  the  aid  of  Rev.  Dr. 
Cuyler,  of  Philadelphia,  he  obtained  the  sum  of  $200  with  which  to  pay 
the  rent  for  the  first  six  months.  The  further  sum  of  $200  was  raised 
by  collections  taken  in  the  church  for  the  rent  of  the  rest  of  the  year. 
The  whole  pecuniary  responsibility  of  the  transaction  was  assumed  by 
Rev.  Mr.  Mcllvaine.  As  soon  as  a  congregation  was  gathered  a  Sab 
bath  school  was  started,  which  in  less  than  two  months  numbered  250 
children  and  thirty  teachers,  which  was  superintended  by  Mr.  Mcllvaine. 
The  Board  of  Missions  contributed  $400  to  the  support  of  Mr.  Mcll- 
vaine in  the  first  year  of  his  labors  in  this  new  field  ;  at  its  close  and 
three  months  after  its  organization  the  church  was  self-sustaining.  The 
services  thus  begun  were  regularly  continued  with  increasing  success 
until  July  23,  1844,  when  the  Westminster  Presbyterian  Society  of  Utica 
was  formally  organized  with  sixty- one  persons  for  its  membership,  and 
with  the  installation  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mcllvaine  as  its  pastor.  Soon 
after  this  the  church  building  owned  by  the  Universalist  Society  on 
Devereux  street  was  purchased  and  immediately  occupied.     On  Sep- 


WESTMINSTER  CHURCH. 


407 


tember  3,  1847,  the  connection  between  pastor  and  people  was  termi- 
nated by  the  resignation  of  Rev.  Mr.  Mcllvaine.  Rev.  Mr.  Mcllvaine 
was  a  young  preacher  of  great  personal  energy  and  independence  of 
character,  possessing  to  a  marked  degree  orignality  of  thought  and  an 
accurate  and  logical  method,  joined  with  an  earnestness  and  enthusi- 
asm well  fitted  to  win  all  classes  of  hearers.  The  Rev.  Hugh  S.  Dick- 
son, of  Philadelphia,  was  chosen  the  second  pastor  of  this  church  and 
was  installed  October  31,  1848.  The  membership  at  this  time  was 
about  100.  The  period  of  his  pastorate  was  an  eventful  one.  The 
church  building  on  Devereux  street  was  materially  improved  and  en- 
larged ;  a  few  years  later  it  was  totally  destroyed  by  fire.  During  the 
temporary  occupation  of  the  court-house  for  Sabbath  and  other  servi- 
ces the  active  business  qualifications  of  Rev.  Mr.  Dickson  "were  em- 
ployed in  devising  and  executing  plans  for  the  erection  of  its  present 
beautiful  church  building  at  the  head  of  Washington  street,  which  was 
completed  and  occupied  early  in  1855.  By  the  persistence  and  enthu- 
siasm of  bdth  pastor  and  people  all  difficulties  were  overcome  and  the 
sum  of  nearly  $35,000  was  provided  with  which  to  purchase  the  site  and 
erect  the  church  building.  During  the  pastorate  of  Mr.  Dickson  the 
membership  of  the  church  was  more  than  doubled,  and  those  great 
material  advantages  acquired  which  enabled  it  to  fill  an  important 
and  influential  position  as  one  of  the  leading  religious  organizations  of 
this  city.  After  a  pastorate  of  about  ten  years  of  active  and  practical 
labor,  in  which  period  Dr.  Dickson  had  endeared  himself  to  all  by  his 
kindly,  social,  and  Christian  graces,  he  offered  his  resignation,  which  was 
most  reluctantly  accepted. 

In  June,  1858,  the  Rev.  Samuel  M.  Campbell  was  elected  the  third 
pastor  and  duly  installed  over  a  church  having  a  membership  of  about 
230.  In  many  respects  totally  unlike  either  of  his  predecessors  he  was 
inferior  to  neither  in  personal  character  or  mental  ability.  A  man  of 
independent,  earnest,  and  intense  convictions,  with  courage  to  follow 
wherever  they  should  lead  him,  he  did  not  fail  to  take  an  advanced  po- 
sition on  all  the  great  questions  of  reform.  It  is  given  to  few  men  to 
concentrate  thought  with  such  logical  precision  and  conciseness  of  state- 
ment. Dr.  Campbell's  ministrations  quite  largely  increased  the  mem- 
bership of  the  church;  they  gained  for  it  a  reputation  for  conspicuous 


4o8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

pulpit  ability  and  attracted  the  attention  and  respect  of  many  of  the 
most  cultivated  minds  in  the  community.  Under  this  pastorate  Briggs 
W.  Thomas,  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  respected  members  of  this 
church,  generously  provided  a  convenient  and  commodious  building  on 
Francis  street  for  the  Olivet  Mission  School.  This  school  was  for  many 
years  a  flourishing  and  important  auxiliary  to  the  church.  The  Rev. 
Dr.  Campbell  resigned  his  pastorate  to  accept  a  call  to  the  Central 
Church  of  Rochester,  N.  Y. 

The  Rev.  Dr.  Fisher,  president  of  Hamilton  College,  accepted  the  invi- 
tation of  the  session  to  supply  its  pulpit  upon  the  Sabbath,  and  for  some 
months  regularly  preached  to  this  people,  which  was  soon  followed  by  a 
call  to  the  pastorate.  The  only  obstacle  that  seemed  in  the  way  of  its 
acceptance  was  the  change  required  by  the  transfer  of  the  connection  of 
this  church  from  the  old  to  the  new  school  general  assembly,  it  having 
thus  far  affiliated  with  the  former.  The  consent  of  the  church  and  con- 
gregation having  been  given  to  the  proposed  change  in  church  rela- 
tions, and  Dr.  Fisher  having  resigned  the  presidency  of  Hamilton  Col- 
lege for  this  purpose,  he  was  elected  pastor  on  the  8th  of  May,  1866,  and 
was  installed  on  the  iSth  of  November  of  the  same  year.  Dr.  Fisher 
was  now  at  the  very  maturity  of  his  physical  and  mental  powers,  and 
he  entered  upon  this  new  field  of  labor  with  great  vigor  and  enthusiasm. 
Into  every  department  of  the  church  he  at  once  began  to  infuse  his  own 
personal  energy  and  activity.  The  early  part  of  his  ministry  was  sig- 
nalized by  the  accomplishment  of  two  important  results.  The  personal 
attachment  of  his  people  led  them  to  purchase  for  a  parsonage  a  valua- 
ble and  finely  located  residence  on  Rutger  street ;  the  beautiful  chapel 
building  which  had  been  erected  by  E.  M.  Gilbert  was  now  by  him 
deeded  to  the  church ;  and  the  mission  enterprise  in  East  Utica  (which 
in  former  years  had  its  origin  in  the  generosity  of  Mrs.  H.  C.  Wood), 
having  grown  into  a  mission  church,  now  became  an  independent  or- 
ganization under  the  name  of  the  Bethany  Church.  To  aid  this  new 
organization  the  home  church  gave  up  fifty-one  of  its  own  members. 
Under  Dr.  Fisher's  administration  the  Sabbath  school  of  the  church 
and  its  two  mission  schools  numbered  nearly  600  scholars,  and  the 
church  membership  subsequent  to  the  organization  of  Bethany  Church 
leached  about  365.     On  the  evening  of  May  11,  1870,  Dr.  Fisher  was 


WESTMINSTER  AND  BETHANY  CHURCHES.  409 

stricken  with  paralysis,  which,  after  holding  him  within  its  grasp  for 
nearly  four  years,  at  length  caused  his  death  at  Cincinnati.  The  hope- 
lessness of  his  case  induced  him  on  the  13th  of  January,  1871,  to  offer 
his  resignation.  For  nearly  a  year  and  a  half  the  church  was  deprived 
of  the  services  of  a  regular  pastor,  when  a  call  was  made  to  the  Rev. 
Thomas  J.  Brown,  of  Philadelphia,  who  is  the  present  pastor.  He  en- 
tered upon  his  duties  on  the  30th  of  April,  1871,  and  was  installed  on 
the  iith  of  October,  1871,  the  church  then  having  about  365  members. 
Under  his  pastorate  the  church  has  prospered  in  all  its  various  depart- 
ments of  religious  work,  and  has  never  been  in  a  more  flourishing  con- 
dition than  at  the  present  time.  The  Sabbath  school  now  numbers  some 
550  scholars.     The  church  membership  is  about  750. 

The  disbursements  of  the  church  for  the  past  twenty  years  amount  to 
$392,633,  of  which  $143,637  were  given  for  benevolent  purposes.  The 
average  congregational  expenses  of  the  church  are  about  $12,000.  It 
is  the  parent  of  two  of  the  other  Presbyterian  Churches  of  Utica, — 
Bethany  and  Olivet, — both  of  which  are  large  and  flourishing  churches 
and  entirely  independent  of  the  mother  church,  though  to  the  support 
of  the  latter  Westminster  is  still  a  large  contributor. 

In  the  year  1858  the  first  Sunday  scliool  was  organized  in  East  Utica 
in  an  old  school-house  near  the  toll-gate,  then  standing  on  what  is  now 
Albany  street.  Afterward  Mrs.  Harriet  C.  Wood  converted  a  small 
dwelling  into  a  chapel.  In  1865  a  lady  missionary  visited  the  locality 
and  preached  from  house  to  house,  and  in  November  public  serv- 
ices were  established  in  the  chapel.  In  1868  the  school  was  given  the 
name  of  the  Bethany  Sabbath  School.  In  October,  1867,  an  assistant 
pastor,  Rev.  P.  W.  Emens,  of  Westminster  Church,  began  work  iji  the  field 
and  continued  until  the  spring  of  1 869.  He  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  C.  M. 
Whittlesey,  who  acted  as  stated  supply  from  October,  1869,  to  October, 
1870.  A  triangular  lot  120x150  feet  on  the  corner  of  Albany  and 
Lansing  streets  was  donated  to  the  people  by  Mrs.  Harriet  C.  Wood, 
and  there  in  1869  a  frame  church  was  erected  by  Mrs.  Sarah  A.  Gilbert, 
of  Utica,  and  her  daughters.  Miss  Sarah  E.  Gilbert,  Mrs.  Anna  G. 
Cowan,  and  Mrs.  F.  G.  Wood.  It  was  dedicated  December  29,  1869, 
and  cost  $21,000;  its  seating  capacity  is  400.  The  Bethany  Presby- 
terian Church  as  organized  about  this  time  was  composed  of  fifty-one 

52 


4IO  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

members  of  Westminster  Church  and  nine  members  of  other  evangehcal 
bodies.  Rev.  G.  T.  Le  Boutillier  succeeded  Rev.  Mr.  Whittlesey  as 
pastor  April  2,  1871,  and  was  in  turn  succeeded  by  Rev.  George  Van 
Deurs  on  November  28, 1872.  Rev.  James  Lamb  became  pastor  April  i, 
1874,  and  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  Charles  F.  Goss  in  June,  1881.  He 
was  followed  by  Rev.  George  O.  Phelps  on  July  i,  1885,  and  the  latter 
resigned  October  26,  1890.  Rev.  Stanley  B.  Roberts  was  called  to  the 
pastorate  in  October,  1891,  and  is  the  -present  pastor.  The  present 
membership  of  the  church  is  274,  and  of  the  Sunday  school  375  scholars 
and  38  teachers.  The  elders  of  the  church  are  F.  G.  Wood,  David 
Everest,  Joseph  Beggs,  R.  McGregor,  Joseph  Hollingsworth,  and  John 
Nelson. 

The  Olivet  Sunday  School  was  established  February  27,  1876,  by 
workers  from  the  Westminster  Society.  They  met  regularly  in  a  room 
of  the  Benedict  House  until  spring  opened,  when  it  was  deemed  neces- 
sary to  provide  more  commodious  accommodations.  A  chapel  was 
accordingly  erected  near  the  corner  of  Square  and  Miller  streets  and 
opened  on  June  11,  1876.  George  E.  Allen  was  the  first  superintend- 
ent. In  June,  1882,  his  son,  Theodore  H.  Allen,  was  engaged  by  West- 
minster session  to  hold  regular  Sunday  evening  services  at  the  mission 
and  to  work  in  the  field.  In  1886  Arthur  C.  McMillan  had  charge  of 
the  Sunday  school.  In  March,  1887,  Rev.  F  W.  Townsend  came  in 
response  to  a  call  of  the  session  of  Westminster  Church  and  presided  in 
the  chapel  as  the  coming  pastor  of  the  new  church.  On  April  26th  the 
church  was  duly  constituted  with  Rev.  Mr.  Townsend  as  pastor,  and  the 
following  were  made  elders  :  George  E.  Allen,  Marcus  S.  Willard,  Tim- 
othy Parker,  and  James  Shetler.  Two  days  later  the  trustees  were 
elected  and  the  Olivet  Presbyterian  Society  incorporated.  In  August 
a  lot  at  103-105  Howard  avenue  was  bought  and  on  September  15, 
1889,  the  corner-stone  was  laid.  On  the  I2th  of  April,  1 891,  the  church 
was  dedicated.  It  is  a  handsome  Gothic  structure  built  of  stone  at  a 
cost  of  $20,000.  Its  seating  capacity  is  500.  There  are  at  present  225 
members  in  the  church  and  250  scholars  in  the  Sunday  school.  The 
present  elders  are  M.  S.  Willard,  Timothy  Parker,  James  Shetler, 
George    N.  Mitchell,  Griffith   H.  Humphrey,  and  Griffiths  E.  Williams. 

The   Memorial    Presbyterian   Church   of  West   Utica  was  organized 


MEMORIAL  CHURCH— HOPE  CHAPEL.  411 

February  10,  1868.  It  was  the  outgrowth  of  a  Sabbath  school  that  had 
been  maintained  there  since  1848.  A  chapel  was  erected  on  Court 
street  near  Garden  and  dedicated  December  15,  1867.  A  congrega- 
tion quickly  gathered  here  and  two  months  later,  with  thirty  persons 
from  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  an  organization  was  effected.  Rev. 
J.  W.  Whitfield,  before  acting  as  missionary  in  connection  with  the 
school,  now  became  pastor  of  the  church  and  continued  the  work  until 
April,  1874.  He  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  A.  F.  Kyle,  who  remained 
until  October,  1876.  The  present  pastor,  Rev.  Dana  W.  Bigelow,  was 
installed  April  17,  1878,  having  at  the  date  acted  as  pastor  for  a  yenr. 
On  September  4,  1882,  the  nanie  was  changed  to  the  Memorial  Pres- 
byterian Church,  and  in  the  following  year  a  lot  50x120  feet  and 
adjoining  the  chapel  was  purchased  for  $4,700.  The  change  in  the 
name  was  in  honor  of  the  gift  to  the  society  of  a  beautiful  church  edi- 
fice by  Hon.  Theodore  S.  Sayre  as  a  memorial  to  his  father.  On  the 
lot  mentioned  Mr.  Sayre  erected  the  present  church  at  a  cost  of  $30,000. 
Mr.  Sayre  has  been  an  elder  in  the  church  and  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday 
school  almost  from  its  origin.  The  new  church  was  dedicated  January 
25,  1884;  its  seating  capacity  is  400.  The  present  member.ship  of  the 
church  is  225,  with  360  scholars  and  41  teachers  in  the  Sund?y  school. 
The  present  elders  are :  Theodore  S.  Sayre,  George  C.  Curran,  Martin 
V.  Gorton,  and  Solomon  Boyd. 

The  Elizabeth  Street  Presbyterian  Church  (colored)  was  organized 
under  the  auspices  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church.  In  r862  a  Sunday 
school  was  started  and  regularly  conducted  in  Elizabeth  street.  In  1869 
a  commodious  chapel  was  erected  at  No.  23  Elizabeth  street  and  dedi- 
cated in  the  same  year.  It  is  built  of  wood  and  will  seat  about  350. 
The  following  year  W.  H.  Morris  was  settled  as  a  supply  at  an  annual 
salary  of  $750.  The  first  regular  pastor  was  W.  H.  Thomas.  In  1873 
Moses  Hopkins,  who  was  a  student  at  Auburn  Theological  Seminary, 
supplied  the  pulpit,  coming  to  Utica  for  that  purpose  every  week.  For 
several  years  the  mission,  which  had  thus  far  been  called  Hope  Chapel, 
was  conducted  as  a  church,  the  colored  people  having  entire  control  of 
it.  Owing  to  their  inability  to  successfully  manage  the  affairs  of  the 
church  its  oversight  has  again  been  assumed  by  the  First  Church. 
Services  are  regularly  held  and  a  Sabbath  school  is  maintained,  though 
there  is  no  settled  pastor  in  charge. 


412  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  Bethesda  Congregational  Church  was  organized  on  the  1st  of 
January,  1802,  as  a  congregational  or  independent  church  by  the  Welsh 
people  of  the  vicinity.  This  was  the  second  religious  society  formed  in 
Utica  which  has  continued  in  uninterrupted  existence  to  the  present 
time.  It  consisted  at  first  of  some  twenty- five  persons,  of  whom  ten 
had  the  year  previous  joined  the  church  at  Whitesboro,  but  now  de- 
tached themselves  from  it  in  order  to  become  members  of  this.  The 
first  minister  was  Rev.  Daniel  Morris,  who  arrived  early  in  1803  from 
Philadelphia.  Worshipping  for  a  time  in  private  houses  the  congrega- 
tion erected  in  1804  a  small  frame  house  on  the  corner  of  Washington 
and  Whitesboro  streets,  and  this  was  the  first  church  that  was  completed 
in  the  village,  though  Trinity  was  previously  begun.  In  1817  a  Sab- 
bath school  was  organized.  In  1823  Rev.  Robert  Everett  came  from 
Denbigh,  Wales,  and  was  settled  as  pastor  over  the  church,  which  was 
known  as  the  the  Welsh  Congregational  Church.  His  standing  in  the 
community  was  elevated  and  his  labors  fruitful  of  good.  In  harmony 
with  the  other  evangelical  clergy  he  took  full  part  in  public  reforms 
and  in  general  schemes  of  benevolence.  He  was  called  to  Winfield  in 
1836  and  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  James  Griffiths,  of  South  Wales,  who 
devoted  fifteen  years  to  this  field  of  labor.  His  successor  was  Rev. 
Evan  Griffiths,  who  remained  six  years  and  was  followed  by  Rev. 
David  Price,  also  from  Denbigh,  Wales.  After  six  years  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Rev.  Griffith  Griffiths,  who  two  years  later  removed  to  Cin- 
cinnati. His  successor  was  Rev.  R.  G.  Jones,  a  native  of  Brecknoch- 
shire,  Wales,  and  a  graduate  of  Brecon  College,  who  was  called  in  May, 
1867.  In  1865  a  portion  of  the  congregation  withdrew  from  the  church 
and  established  a  service  of  their  own.  They  purchased  the  old  Grace 
Church  (Episcopalian)  on  Columbia  street  and  called  Rev.  James  Grif- 
fi.ths  from  Cattaraugus  to  the  pastorate.  This  church  was  known  as  the 
Second  Congregational.  Rev.  Mr.  Griffiths  served  the  church  for  about 
five  years.  In  1871  this  society  returned  to  the  old  church  and  the  two 
congregations  united  in  the  erection  of  a  new  brick  edifice.  It  is  located 
at  108  Washington  street  and  was  built  at  a  cost  of  $22,000.  The  seat- 
ing capacity  is  580.  When  united  in  1871  the  name  Bethesda  was  taken 
at  the  suggestion  of  the  pastor,  who  had  been  called  from  Bethesda, 
Merthyr  Tydvil,  in   Wales.      Mr.   Jones  still   serves   as   pastor   of  the 


CONGREGATIONAL  CHURCHES.  413 

church.  At  present  the  membership  of  the  church  is  298  ;  of  the  Sun- 
school  150  pupils  and  18  teachers.  The  deacons  are  William  O.  Will- 
iams, William  W.  Williams,  William  E.  Jones,  Edward  H.  Jones, 
Thomas  G.  Jones,  David  Anthony,  David  D.  Griffiths. 

Some  time  in  the  year  1841  a  Congregational  society,  which  had  been 
organized  the  year  before  by  Rev.  Theodore  Spencer,  and  which  had  wor- 
shipped in  a  room  fitted  up  for  the  purpose  in  the  Museum  building,  hired 
the  Bleecker  street  church,  then  vacant,  and  occupied  it  for  about  three 
years.  Mr.  Spencer  was  endowed  with  a  vigorous  intellect,  trained  by 
the  study  and  practice  of  the  law  before  he  entered  upon  the  Christian 
ministry,  and  his  character  was  marked  by  corresponding  force  and 
persistence.  He  was  entitled  by  inheritance  to  these  gifts  of  mind  and 
character,  for  his  father  was  New  York's  great  chief  justice,  Ambrose 
Spencer,  and  he  was  a  brother  of  Hon.  John  C.  Spencer,  of  Canandaigua, 
U.  S.  secretary.  After  losing  his  voice  Mr.  Spencer  had  to  give  up 
his  pulpit  and  all  public  speaking,  whereupon  his  society  was  disbanded. 
He  substituted  conversation  for  sermons  and  reached  a  larger  number 
than  most  preachers.  Many  of  the  most  intelligent  people  of  the  city 
and  from  all  denominations  sought  instruction  from  him.  He  had  con- 
ceived a  theory  of  conversion  containing  some  peculiarities  which  he 
applied  with  great  power  and  effect.  He  afterward  accepted  the  secre- 
taryship of  the  Home  Missionary  Society  and  filled  it  with  distinction, 
acting  as  a  bishop  of  the  feeble  churches  as  well  as  gathering  funds  for 
the  society.  For  twelve  or  fourteen  years  he  was  disqualified  for  labor 
by  exhausting'  illness  and  died  in  Utica,  July  14,  1870.  He  was  twice 
married  and  the  father  of  three  sons. 

Under  the  auspices  of  the  New  York  Home  Missionary  Society  on 
the  13th  day  of  May,  1883,  Rev.  Edward  Taylor,  D.D.,  of  Binghamton, 
began  Congregational  religious  services  in  the  common  council  chamber, 
the  Bible,  organ,  and  hymn  books  all  being  borrowed.  These  services 
were  continued  morning  and  evening  for  four  Sabbaths,  the  congrega- 
tion numbering  from  forty  to  seventy.  About  thirty  persons  tarried 
after  the  morning  service  on  the  fourth  Sabbath  and  voted  that  the 
meetings  should  be  continued  with  reference  to  the  organization  of  a 
Congregational  Church,  and  that  the  vicinity  of  Oneida  Square  called 
for  an  enterprise  of  this  character.     The  only  place  which  could  be  ob- 


414  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

tained  there  was  a  small  room  known  as  Dobson's  Hall.  This  was 
secured,  seats  furnished  for  a  little  more  than  lOO  persons,  a  preach- 
ing desk  extemporized,  and  the  hall  was  well  filled  each  Sunday 
morning  and  crowded  in  the  evening.  The  Plymouth  Congregational 
Church  organization  was  effected  September  i8,  1883.  On  August  26th 
a  Sunday  school  of  thirty- three  scholars  was  organized.  In  the  follow- 
ing year  the  society  purchased  property  at  the  corner  of  Plant  and  State 
streets  for  $14,000,  having  one  frame  cottage  and  a  brick  dwelling 
standing  upon  it.  On  the  vacant  piece  of  land  adjoining  the  cottage, 
on  Plant  street,  a  chapel  has  been  erected  at  a  cost  of  $6,560.  It  is  a 
wooden  structure  and  was  first  occupied  January  25,  1885.  A  building 
fund  has  been  started  and  the  church  will  eventually  build  anew  upon 
their  site.  Dr.  Taylor  closed  his  labors  in  this  church  March  30,  1884. 
Rev.  D wight  E.  Marvin  succeeded  him  October  i,  1884,  and  continued 
until  December  i,  1888.  Rev.  M.  E.  Dunham,  D.D.,  the  present  pas- 
tor, began  his  labors  March  i,  1889.  The  present  membership  of  the 
church  is  225.  The  deacons  are  Owen  Baxter,  Owen  Griffith,  and 
Chauncey  B.  Moore. 

The  Reformed  Protestant  (Dutch)  Church  in  Utica  grew  out  of  the 
evangelical  labors  of  Rev.  John  P.  Spinner,  pastor  of  the  Reformed 
Church  at  F"ort  Herkimer,  in  1801,  and  of  Rev.  Mr.  Labagh,  who  visited 
this  field  as  early  as  1820.  Mr.  Spinner  preached  about  1823  in 
private  rooms  and  occasionally  in  the  Baptist  Church  when  not  used 
by  that  congregation.  He  appointed  George  M.  Weaver  and  Adam 
Bowman  as  elders  to  assist  in  this  evangelizing  work.  In  the  years 
1824-25  services  were  held  every  alternate  Sunday  in  the  old  Metho- 
dist Church  on  Main  street,  Utica,  by  Rev.  Mr.  Spinner.  In  1826-27 
services  were  held  by  Mr.  Labagh  in  Washington  Hall.  In  1828  Rev. 
John  F.  Schermerhorn  assumed  charge  of  the  field,  and  in  June,  1830, 
the  Broad  street  church  was  completed.  It  was  a  brick  building, 
75  X  54  feet  in  dimensions, and  cost  $20,000,  and  was  located  at  the  cor- 
ner of  John  and  Broad  streets.  On  October  26,  1830,  the  Reformed 
Protestant  Dutch  Church  was  organized  with  forty-six  members  and 
the  following  officers:  Elders,  Abraham  Varick  and  George  M. 
Weaver,  jr.;  deacons,  Nicholas  G.  Weaver  and  Richard  Vaughan.  In 
November,  1830,  Rev.  George  W.  Bethune,  then  at  Rhinebeck,  became 


PROTESTANT  REFORMED  CHURCH.  415 

pastor  and  continued  until  June  18,  1834.  His  reputation  for  eloquence, 
scholarship,  and  graceful  poetry  was  known  throughout  the  country. 
Upwards  of  130  were  added  to  the  communion  during  his  pastorate. 
The  Rev.  Henry  Mandeville,  D.D.,  was  installed  on  the  12th  of  October, 
1834.  A  logically  clear  and  instructive  preacher,  with  strong,  natural 
powers  and  much  proof  of  various  reading,  he  was  afterward  eminently 
successful  as  a  teacher  and  author  in  rhetorical  studies.  He  resigned 
January  20,  1841,  in  order  to  become  a  professor  in  Hamilton  College. 
During  his  ministry  there  were  1 12  additions  to  the  church.  Rev.  John 
P.  Knox  was  installed  on  the  6th  of  October,  1841,  and  resigned  Feb- 
ruary 16,  1844.  At  the  close  of  his  ministry  the  membership  numbered 
197.  The  Rev.  Charles  Wiley,  D.D.,  was  installed  June  27,  1845,  ^""^ 
resigned  May  i,  1854.  Dr.  Wiley  was  a  learned  and  finished  writer. 
Rev.  George  H.  Fisher,  D.D.,  was  installed  January  i,  1855,  and  re- 
signed July  13,  1859, — an  earnest  and  faithful  preacher,  zealous  for  the 
interests  of  the  denomination  as  well  as  for  his  own  individual  church, 
broad  in  his  sympathies,  and  a  son  of  consolation  among  the  afflicted. 
The  next  preacher  was  Rev.  Charles  E.  Knox,  who  began  his  labors 
July  29,  i860,  but  deferred  his  installation.  He  resigned  August  4, 
1862.  Rev.  Ashbel  G.  Vermilye,  D.D.,  was  installed  May  14,  1863, 
and  resigned  July  31,  1871.  During  his  incumbency  a  new  church  was 
built  on  the  corner  of  Genesee  and  Cornelia  streets.  He  was  followed 
by  Rev.  Isaac  S.  Hartley,  D.D.,  whose  installation  took  place  Novem- 
ber 16,  1871,  and  his  resignation  September  i,  1889.  It  was  while  he 
was  pastor  that  the  church  was  destroyed  by  fire  and  handsomely  re- 
built. Rev.  Oren  Root,  of  Hamilton  College,  became  the  supply  in  the 
fall  of  1889  and  assumed  charge  of  the  church  as  pastor  in  the  follow- 
ing spring.  The  present  church  is  of  brick  with  stone  trimmings,  and 
of  the  Queen  Anne  style  of  architecture.  It  has  a  seating  capacity  of 
700.  The  present  membership  is  about  125  and  of  the  Sunday  school 
160. 

Trinity  Church  (Episcopal),  as  we  have  already  learned,  was  organ- 
ized in  the  year  1798  by  the  Rev.  Philander  Chase,  afterward  bishop 
of  Illinois.  For  a  period  of  five  years  services  were  imperfectly  main- 
tained by  lay- reading,  and  it  was  not  until  the  year  1803  that  measures 
were  taken   toward   the  building  of  a  church  edifice.      In   that  year 


4i6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

John  R.  Bleecker,  of  Albany,  gave  a  lot  on  the  corner  of  Broad  and  First 
streets,  lOO  feet  front  and  127  feet  deep,  in  fulfillment  of  a  promise  that 
such  a  gift  would  be  made  to  that  religious  society  which  should  first 
undertake  the  erection  of  a  church  edifice.  On  the  basis  of  a  subscrip- 
tion of  a  little  more  than  $2,000  the  building  was  commenced,  but  it 
was  not  until  the  year  1806  that  it  was  so  far  completed  that  Bishop 
Moore  was  induced  to  consecrate  it.  In  December,  18 10,  it  was  fin- 
ished, having  cost  $7,140.  Of  this  sum  $2,000  was~  contributed  by 
Trinity  Church,  New  York.  The  building,  an  unpretentious  yet  taste- 
ful structure,  was  designed  by  Philip  Hooker,  of  Albany,  an  architect 
who  did  some  good  work  in  his  day,  as  witness  in  his.  own  city  old  St. 
Peter's  Church,  the  old  State  capitol,  and  the  academy.  The  first 
chosen  officers  of  the  church  were  Abraham  Walton  and  Nathan  Will- 
iams, wardens ;  William  Inman,  Charles  Walton,  John  Smith,  Benjamin 
Walker,  Samuel  Hooker,  Aylmer  Johnson,  James  Hopper,  and  Edward 
Smith,  vestrymen.  The  first  minister  in  charge  was  the  Rev.  Jonathan 
Judd,  who  officiated  from  1804  to  1806  alternately  here  and  at  Paris 
Hill,  though  not  continuously  in  either  place.  The  first  rector  was  the 
Rev.  Amos  G.  Baldwin,  who  held  that  position  from  1806  to  18 18.  He 
constructed  with  his  own  hands  the  first  organ  in  the  church  having  a 
manual  or  key-board.  This  organ  did  good  service  for  many  years  in 
Christ  Church,  Sherburne,  and  can  now  be  seen,  with  some  enlarge- 
ments and  improvements,  in  the  Presbyterian  Church  at  New  York 
Mills.     Mr.  Baldwin  died  at  Auburn  in  1844. 

Through  the  influence  of  Col.  Benjamin  Walker,  who  may  be  regarded 
as  the  lay  founder  of  Trinity  Church,  the  Countess  of  Bath  (England) 
was  induced  in  1808  to  give  to  the  church  265  acres  of  land  in  the 
town  of  Eaton,  Madison  County.  This  gift  was  of  no  great  benefit  to 
the  church.  The  income  from  it  was  small  and  hard  to  colkct,  and 
finally,  in  the  year  1815,  the  land  was  sold  for  a  sum  of  money  barely 
nominal.  Nearly  contemporaneous  with  the  donation  from  the  Countess 
of  Bath  was  one  from  the  corporation  of  Trinity  Church,  New  York,  of 
three  lots  in  Reade  street  and  one  in  Clark  street  in  that  city.  Two  of 
the  Reade  street  lots  and  the  one  in  Clark  street  are  still  the  property 
of  the  church  in  Utica.  The  income  from  the  whole  property,  though 
comparatively  small,  has  been  of  essential  service. 


TEINITY  CHUR  CH.  417 

In  the  year  1819  Mr.  Baldwin  was  succeeded  in  tlie  rectorship  by 
the  Rev.  Henry  M.  Shaw,  who  remained  about  two  years.  Rev.  Henry 
Anthon  was  rector  from  1821  to  1829,  in  which  year  he  accepted  a  call 
to  St.  Stephen's  Church  in  New  York,  afterward  becoming  assistant 
minister  in  Trinity  Church,  and  finally  spending  the  last  twenty  -years 
of  his  life  as  rector  of  St.  Mark's  in  the  Bowery.  Rev.  Mr.  Anthon's 
pastorate  was  most  gratifying  and  successful.  His  sermons  were  marked 
by  purity,  beauty,  and  finish  of  style,  and  in  both  them  and  his  conver- 
sation there  was  a  racy  flavor  of  strength  that  betokened  ability  of  a 
high  order.  He  was  an  attentive  and  indefatigable  pastor  and  a  genial 
and  faithful  friend.  It  was  during  Mr.  Anthon's  pastorate  that  the  first 
rectory  was  built  in  rear  of  the  church.  The  next  rector  was  the  Rev. 
Benjamin  Dorr,  whose^ministry  extended  from  1829  to  1831,  when  he 
resigned  the  charge.  He  was  afterward  rector  of  Christ  Church,  Phil- 
adelphia. Dr.  Dorr  was  succeeded  in  1836  by  the  Rev.  Pierre  Ale.xis 
Proal,  who  came  from  St.  George's  Church,  Schenectady.  His  pastor- 
ate was  much  longer  than  that  of  either  of  his  predecessors,  terminating 
with  his  death  in  September,  1857.  He  was  one  of  the  most  scholarly 
and  oratorical  of  the  preachers  of  the  city.  For  a  long  ptriod  he  was 
annually  elected  secretary  of  the  Diocesan  Convention  of  Central  New 
York.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  College,  and  \\as  frequently 
called  upon  to  fill  other  posts  of  educational  and  religious  importance. 
He  was  succeeded  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Hanson  Coxe,  whose  ministry 
continued  to  November,  1877.  He  was  followed  in  f^ebruary,  1878, 
by  the  Rev.  Charles  H.  Gardner,  who  resigned  in  Octol  er,  1886.  The 
present  rector,  the  Rev.  William  D.  Maxon,  took  charj^e  of  the  church 
in  April,  1887. 

The  present  wardens  of  the  church  are  Miles  C.  Comstock  and 
William  M.  Storrs.  The  membership  of  the  society  is  270  and  of  the 
Sunday  school  105.  The  present  valuation  of  the  church  property  is  : 
church,  $15,000;   rectory,  $4,500;   chapel  and  lot,  $5,000. 

The  dimensions  of  the  church  edifice  were  originally  45  x  60  feet,  be- 
sides a  recessed  chancel  and  contiguous  robing- rooms.  In  1833  it  was 
lenghtened  twenty  feet  by  extending  the  front  to  the  .Mdewafk,  and  the 
steeple  and  entire  front  were  rebuilt  on  new  foundations  In  1857  ""e- 
pairs  to  the  amount  of  $6,000  were  made.  The  present  bell  was  pur- 
chased and  hung  during  the  winter  of  1818,  and  for  nearly  seventy- 
53 


4i8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

five  years  its  iron  tongue  has  called  worshipers  to  the  shrine.  The 
structure  is  cherished,  not  only  because  it  is  a  comfortable  and  pleasant 
house  of  worship,  but  also  because  it  has  great  historic  interest,  and  is 
a  landmaric  and  monument  of  the  early  growth  of  the  city. 

There  is  a  mission  at  Deerfield  in  connection  with  this  church  known 
as  St.  Paul's.  It  was  established  by  Rev.  Mr.  Gardner  and  has  services 
once  each  month.    The  members  are  considered  a  part  of  Trinity  Church. 

Grace  Church  (Episcopal)  was  originally  a  portion  of  Trinity  parish. 
The  church  was  incorporated  May  21,  1838,  and  services  were  held  at 
first  in  a  small  room  at  No.  215  Genesee  street.  The  Rev.  Albert  C. 
Patterson  was  chosen  rector  April  19,  1839.  The  first  wardens  were 
Dr.  P.  B.  Peckham  and  Ziba  Lyon.  A  lot  was  leased  on  the  corner  of 
Broadway  and  Columbia  streets  for  a  period  of  ten  years,  and  the  first 
church  edifice  was  erected  there  and  opened  for  divine  service  in  Au- 
gust, 1839.  The  building  was  enlarged  in  1841  at  an  expense  of  $1,500. 
On  November  4,  1847,  plans  were  prepared  for  a  new  church  edifice. 
Ihe  rector  having  at  this  time  resigned  Rev.  George  Leeds  was  called 
as  his  successor.  He  resigned  in  July,  1853,  to  accept  a  call  to  Salem, 
Mass.  The  Rev.  John  J.  Brandegee  came  to  the  parish  early  in  1854. 
The  work  of  building  a  new  church  now  rapidly  progressed.  The  pres- 
ent site,  corner  of  Elizabeth  and  Genesee  streets,  was  selected  and  pur- 
chased with  the  aid  of  the  late  Alfred  Munson,  who  gave  $I0,000 
toward  that  object,  to  which  he  added  $5,000  toward  the  erection  of 
the  church.  Mr.  Upjohn,  of  New  York,  was  the  architect.  The  build- 
ing committee  consisted  of  the  rector  and  J.  W.  Williams,  David  Wa- 
ger, G.  R.  Perkins,  E.  A.  Graham,  and  George  H.Wiley.  The  church 
proper  was  finished  in  i860,  the  tower  in  1870,  and  the  spire  in  1875  ; 
the  latter  was  erected  by  Mrs.  James  Watson  Williams  as  a  memorial  to 
her  father  and  her  husband.  There  is  an  excellent  chime  of  ten  memo- 
rial bells  in  the  tower.  The  entire  cost  of  the  edifice  was  $120,000. 
Its  seating  capacity  is  800. 

Beginning  in  1884  a  series  of  parish  rooms  was  erected  adjoining  the 
church,  consisting  of  vestry,  choir,  and  Bible-class  rooms  and  a  study 
for  the  rector.  These  were  finished  in  1888.  In  1890  the  old  chancel 
was  removed  and  a  new  one,  larger  and  more  elaborate,  was  put  up  in  its 
place.      All  of  these  were  the  gifts  of  Mrs.  James  Watson  Williams.    In 


GRA  CE  AND  CALVARY  CHUR  CHES.  4 1 9 

the  same  year  the  congregation  purchased  a  new  organ  at  a  cost  of 
$10,000.  At  the  death  of  Dr.  Brandegee  in  1864  the  Rev.  Edward  M. 
Van  Deusen,  who  came  from  St.  Peter's  Church,  Tiitsburgh,  Pa.,  be- 
came rector  of  the  church.  On  account  of  ill  health  he  resigned  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1884,  and  was  succeeded  by  the  present  pastor,  Rev.  Charles  T. 
Olmsted.  The  wardens  at  the  present  time  are:  Willinm  H.  Watscn, 
M.D.,  and  L.  C.  Childs.  The  church  membership  is  500 ;  Sabbath 
school  210. 

Of  the  foregoing  rectors,  while  all  are  remembered  ■with  respect  and 
affection,  it  is  with  especial  tenderness  that  are  recalled  the  finished  ser- 
monizer,  the  courteous,  gentle,  and  loving  Leeds;  the  self-denying  la- 
bors of  his  successor.  Dr.  Brandegee,  who  superintended  the  erection  of 
the  present  edifice  ;  and  the  dignified  and  courtly  Dr.  Van  Deusen,  effi- 
cient in  zeal  for  the  prosperity  of  his  church  and  its  charities,  and 
through  whom  much  was  accomplished  toward  its  usefulness  and  suc- 
cess. It  was  during  his  rectorship  that  St.  Luke's  Hospital  and  Home, 
the  House  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  St.  Luke's  Memorial  Church  all 
had  their  origin  and  largely  his  aid. 

In  January,  1850,  the  Rev.  Beardsley  Northrup,  at  the  suggestion  of 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Proal,  then  rector  of  Trinity  Church,  and  with  the  approval 
of  the  bishop  of  the  diocese,  began  holding  services  in  a  small  school- 
house  on  the  corner  of  West  and  Eagle  streets.  Three  months  later  a 
larger  room  on  Chatham  street  was  obtained  and  used  for  about  a  year 
and  a  half  The  parish  began  its  corporate  existence  under  the  name 
of  Calvary  Church  on  the  15th  of  December,  1850.  A  lot  on  South 
street,  where  the  old  church  now  stands,  was  secured  by  L.  M.  Taylor 
from  the  Bleecker  and  Tibbitts  estate,  and  a  church  capable  of  seating 
300  persons  and  costing:  $2,700  was  erected.  It  was  afterward  twice 
enlarged  to  meet  the  growing  congregation.  In  1859  a  house  on  the 
corner  of  South  and  Neilson  streets  was  purchased  for  a  rectory  site  at 
a  cost  of  $1,600.  Later  a  lot  on  South  street  of  posite  the  old  church 
was  purchased  for  $1,500  as  a  site  for  a  new  church.  In  1869  the  lot 
and  rectory  on  South  street  were  sold  for  $6,000,  and  a  better  site  on 
the  corner  of  Howard  avenue  and  South  street  was  purchased  with  a 
commodious  house  for  a  parsonage,  the  whole  costing  $10,000.  The 
new  church,  which  was  designed  by   Henry  M.  Congdon,  was  begun  on 


420  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  14th  of  June,  1869,  and  finished  in  the  fall  of  1872.  The  congre- 
gation was  greatly  aided  in  the  work  by  the  liberal  gifts  of  Jason  G. 
Coye  and  George  J.  Hopper,  now  deceased.  The  wnw  church  cost  $50,- 
000.  In  1880  the  chapel  was  thoroughly  repaired  at  an  expense  of 
$500.  The  church  was  consecrated  by  the  Rev.  F.  D.  Huntington, 
S.T.D.,  bishop  of  the  diocese,  January  18,  1884.  The  Rev.  William  A. 
Matson  was  the  first  rector  of  the  parish,  assuming  the  duties  on  the  ist 
of  May,  185 1,  and  was  assisted  by  Mr.  Northrup  above  mentioned. 
Rev.  Mr.  Matson  resigned  March  16,  1854,  and  Rev.  Henry  A.  Neely, 
who  had  served  as  assistant  about  a  year,  succeeded  him.  He  left  the 
parish  in  August,  1855,  at  the  request  of  the  bishop  to  undertake  a  sim- 
ilar work  in  Rochester,  where  he  was  subsequently  rector  of  Christ 
Church.  Later  he  was  chaplain  of  Hobart  College,  Geneva,  assistant 
minister  in  Trinity  Church,  New  York,  and  bishop  of  the  diocese  of 
Maine. 

The  Rev.  N.  Barrows  became  rector  in  August,  1855.  Receiving  a 
call  to  Zion  Church,  Rome,  he  tendered  his  resignation  April  28,  1857. 
During  the  following  two  years  Rev.  Mr.  Matson  was  the  pastor  and 
went  from  here  to  the  De  Lancey  Memorial  Church,  Geneva,  N.  Y. , 
where  he  received  the  title  of  D.D.  from  Hobart  College.  The  present 
rector,  Alfred  B.  Goodrich,  D.D.,  entered  upon  the  charge  August  21, 
1859.  He  has  repeatedly  refused  calls  to  other  fields  of  labor.  For 
his  long  continued  faithfulness  not  the  church  alone  but  the  town  feels 
a  debt  of  gratitude.  At  present  the  number  of  communicants  in  the 
church  13446;  Sunday  school  scholars  335.  The  present  wardens  are 
Alonzo  Churchill,  M.D.,  and  Irvin  A.  Williams. 

St.  George's  Protestant  Church  (Episcopal)  was  authorized  by  Bishop 
De  Lancey  and  the  standing  committee  of  the  diocese  in  January,  1862,  to 
replace  the  former  parish  of  St.  Paul's,  organized  in  1 849  and  afterward 
allowed  to  die  out.  At  that  time  (1862)  all  existing  churches  of  the 
Protestant  Episcopal  communion  were  located  on  the  east  side  of  Gen- 
esee street.  The  corner-stone  of  St.  George's  was  laid  May  S,  1862. 
The  first  election  of  wardens  and  vestry  took  place  May  19,  1862,  and 
the  church  was  ready  for  occupation  in  the  fall.  It  stands  on  State 
street  near  its  intersection  with  Cottage  street.  It  is  of  wood  and  will 
seat  400  persons.     The  church  with  its  furnishing  cost  about   $5,000. 


Sr.  GEORGES  AND  ST.  LUKE'S  CHURCHES.  421 

The  furnishings  are  the  gift  of  Horatio  Seymour  ;  the  stained  glass  win- 
dows of  C.  P.  Davis,  of  Utica.  The  church  was  consecrated  by  Bishop 
De  Lancey  on  June  7,  1864.  In  the  rear  of  the  church  is  a  wooden 
building  22x40  feet,  erected  in  1873,  and  named  the  "mission  room," 
it  having  been  opened  witli  mission  services  by  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Bonham 
of  the  Church  of  the  Evangelist.  It  is  now  used  for  Sunday  school, 
week-  day  services,  and  parochial  festivals.  The  first  rector  of  the  church 
was  Rev.  W.  J.  Gibson,  D.D.,  then  editor  of  the  Gospel  Messenger. 
He  was  succeeded  in  1866  by  Rev.  S.  F.  Jarvis,  of  Connecticut,  who 
was  soon  followed  by  Rev.  E.  W.  Hager.  The  latter  resigned  in  1873, 
having  received  the  appointment  of  chaplain  in  the  United  States  navy, 
and  the  duties  of  the  parish  were  then  resumed  by  Rev.  W.  J.  Gibson, 
D.D.  He  was  succeeded  in  1883  by  Rev.  W.  B.  Coleman,  jr.,  the 
present  rector.  The  present  wardens  are  W.  M.  Gibson,  M.D.,  and 
Edward  Trevett.  The  present  communicant  list  of  the  church  is  160 
members  ;   of  the  Sunday  school  90  with  eight  teachers. 

St.  Luke's  Memorial  Church  (Episcopal)  began  as  a  mission  of  Grace 
Church  in  1869  in  a  room  of  St.  Luke's  Home  for  Aged  Women  on 
Columbia  street.  The  following  year  a  lot  adjoining  the  Home  was 
given  by  Truman  K.  Butler  for  future  church  building  purposes,  and  a 
handsome  stone  church  was  soon  erected.  It  was  consecrated  on  Oc- 
tober 18,  1876,  and  cost  with  its  contents  about  $22,000.  It  has  a  seat- 
ing capacity  of  about  400.  From  1869  to  1876  the  parish  was  served 
by  the  assistants  of  Grace  Church,  Dr.  E.  M.  Van  Deusen  being  pastor 
of  the  parish.  In  June,  1876,  Rev.  Barnard  Schulte  was  called  to  the 
charge  with  the  title  of  associate  rector  of  St.  Luke's  Memorial 
Church.  This  relation  of  associate  rector  was  dissolved  in  June,  1880, 
and  the  clergyman  in  charge  now  bears  the  title  of  rector  according  to 
the  order  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  of  America.  Mr.  Schulte 
is  still  in  charge  of  this  parish.  The  rectory  of  the  church,  192  Colum- 
bia street,  was  purchased  by  the  congregation  in  1886  and  with  the  ad- 
joining house  is  valued  at  about  $8,000.  The  church  membership  is 
600;  Sabbath  school  scholars  583.  The  present  wardens  are  Jonathan 
Aucock  and  Henry  Hopson. 

In  1871  the  late  Evan  R.  Goodwin  and  the  late  Philip  Herbert  in- 
augurated a  movement  tending  to  the  establishment  of  Episcopal  serv- 


42  2  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ices  in  East  Utica.  An  upper  room  on  Elizabeth  street  was  soon  ob- 
tained and  services  of  the  Memorial  Church  of  the  Holy  Cross  (Episco- 
pal) were  regularly  held,  being  conducted  at  times  by  Rev.  Samuel  H 
Coxe,  of  Trinity  Church,  or  Rev.  Alfred  B.  Goodrich,  of  Calvary 
Church,  or  some  other  of  the  clergy.  The  worshipers  were  then 
known  as  the  Mission  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  Rev.  Edward  Z.  Lewis 
was  the  first  pastor  and  continued  as  such  until  his  death  in  1874.  He 
secured  the  erection  of  a  frame  building  on  Mohawk  street,  which  was 
afterward  moved  to  the  lot  purchased  on  Bleecker  street  and  enlarged. 
It  is  still  being  used  for  worship.  The  first  Sunday  school  superintend- 
ent was  Edward  Peckham.  In  January,  1889,  the  Rev.  James  J.  Burd 
became  and  still  is  the  resident  pastor.  On  October  9,  1890,  the  corner- 
stone of  a  new  stone  church  on  Bleecker  street  was  laid  by  the  Rt.  Rev. 
F.  D.  Huntington,  bishop  of  the  diocese  of  Central  New  York.  The 
building  is  in  the  English  style  of  architecture,  was  designed  by  James 
Constable,  jr.,  of  Utica,  and  cost  about  $25,000.  There  are  ninety 
families  represented  in  the  church  and  a  Sunday  school  of  about  180 
members. 

Wherever  there  is  a  pioneer  settlement  there  will  be  found  earnest 
Christians  of  the  Methodist  denomination,  often  meeting  together  and 
exhorting  one  another  to  good  works.  Such  was  the  case  in  Utica  for 
some  years  before  they  had  a  place  of  worship  in  the  little  village.  The 
first  Methodist  sermon  in  Utica  was  preached  by  Freeborn  Garrettson 
in  1792  In  that  year,  in  the  capacity  of  presiding  elder  of  the  Albany 
district,  he  made  a  journey  as  far  west  as  Whitestown  and  prepared  the 
way  for  the  establishment  of  regular  appointments,  and  for  embracing 
this  region  within  the  bounds  of  a  circuit  on  the  Mohawk  River.  At 
first  the  members  of  this  faith  residing  here  were  attached  to  a  class 
that  met  in  a  small  church  on  the  road  to  New  Hartford.  The  relic  of 
that  church  still  remains  and  may  be  identified  as  a  part  of  the  small 
white  dwelling  house  directly  opposite  the  west  end  of  Pleasant  street. 
In  1808  Solomon  Bronson,  a  man  of  means  and  influence  living  near 
this  church,  was  converted,  and  being  earnest  and  zealous,  a  good  singer 
and  exhorter,  he  used  to  come  down  to  Utica  and  hold  meetings  in  a 
building  back  of  the  line  of  Genesee  street  .ind  in  the  rear  of  where  the 
store  of  Newel!   &  Co.  now  stands,  which  building  was  designed   and 


FIRST  METHODIST  CHURCH.  423 

used  as  a  school-house.  This,  then,  was  the  first  place  of  meeting  and 
here  the  society  had  occasional  preaching.  J.  Huestes,  Benjamin  G. 
Paddock,  and  Charles  Giles  preached  in  that  school-house  while  they 
traveled  the  circuit  which  included  Utica,  and  which  was  known  as  the 
Westmoreland  circuit.  But  very  soon — probably  in  1808 — Rudolph 
Snyder  built  for  the  society  a  house  of  worship  on  ground  situated 
where  the  southern  end  of  the  Bradish  block  now  stands,  beside  the 
shop  of  his  brother  Jacob,  which  occupied  the  corner  of  Elizabeth 
street.  It  was  a  small  wooden  building  of  a  single  story,  and  was  in- 
tended for  a  school-house  as  well  as  a  church.  It  was  occupied  by  the 
society  about  six  years.  Through  the  influence  of  Solomon  Bronson 
quite  a  number  were  converted,  and  the  influence  of  Methodism  in  Utica 
began  to  be  strongly  felt.  Preaching  in  this  place  was  for  several  years 
only  occasional,  for  the  little  house  near  the  gate  on  the  New  Hartford 
road  was  also  maintained  by  them  as  a  place  of  assemblage.  In  18 15 
Utica  was  erected  into  a  station  of  the  recently  formed  Oneida  district 
of  the  Genesee  Conference.  Rev.  Benjamin  G.  Paddock  was  appointed 
preacher  in  charge  and  a  powerful  revival  was  the  result  of  his  labors. 
The  society  now  centered  in  the  village  and  was  legally  incorporated 
under  the  title  of  the  First  Society  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
in  Utica.  Some  of  the  first  trustees  were  Rudolph  Snyder,  Robert  Mc- 
Bride,  J.  C.  De  Long,  Erastus  Cross,  and  Ara  Broadwell.  The  build- 
ing on  the  New  Hartford  road  was  sold  to  Levi  Thomas  for  70,000 
brick,  and  with  these  and  additional  ones  a  new  house  was  built  under 
the  supervision  of  Mr.  Paddock,  who  raised  the  necessary  funds.  It 
stood  on  the  north  side  of  Main  street,  at  its  extreme  eastern  end,  a  little 
west  of  Ballou's  Creek  and  nearly  opposite  the  extremity  of  Third  street, 
and  was  a  small,  plain  chapel  without  spire  or  cupola.  It  was  dedicated 
August  16,  1816,  by  Rev.  Daniel  Hitt,  then  general  book  steward  in 
New  York,  Charles  Giles  being  presiding  elder.  The  pastors  who  were 
successively  placed  in  charge  during  the  years  that  this  chapel  was  in 
use  were  as  follows:  18 16,  B.  G.  Paddock;  1817,  George  Gary;  18 18, 
W.  Barlow;  1821,  B.  G.  Paddock;  1822-23,  George  Peck;  1824, 
George  Harmon;  in  1825  Paris  and  Utica  were  united  under  the  charge 
of  Z.  Paddock  and  Ephraim  Hall.  It  was  during  this  year  that  the 
chapel  on   Bleecker  street  was  built.      It  was  dedicated    February  22, 


424  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

1827.  Later  in  1827  Fitch  Reed  was  appointed  pastor.  Subsequently 
the  church  was  served  by  the  following  pastors  :  Elias  Bowen,  George 
Peck,  Daniel  Barnes,  Joseph  Castle,  Schuyler  Hoes,  William  N.  Pearne, 
Bostwick'  Hawley,  H.  R.  Clark,  William  Wyant,  A.  J.  Dana,  David 
Holmes,  A.  S,  Graves,  L.  D.  Davis,  J.  F.  Wright,  A.  J.  Grover,  John 
C.  Crippen,  Fitch  Reed,  W.  C.  Steele,  A.  D.  Whedon,  and  O.  H. 
Warren. 

In  1832,  a  class  having  existed  in  West  Utica  for  some  time,  a  church 
was  erected.  This  class  was  considered  as  a  part  of  the  Bleecker  Street 
Society  and  the  property  was  held  by  the  trustees  of  that  society.  Sub- 
sequently, owing  to  the  embarrassment  of  the  society,  the  property  in 
West  Utica  was  sold. 

In  1847  ^  "sw  society  was  formed  in  West  Utica,  embracing  seven- 
teen members  of  the  Bleecker  Street  Society.  This  society  was  organ- 
ized as  the  State  Street  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  Joseph  Hartwell 
was  the  first  pastor.  The  succeeding  pastors  were,  as  far  as  known, 
Isaac  Foster,  E.  Williams,  D.  W,  Thurston,  Charles  Blakeslee,  J.  T. 
Wright,  L.  D.  Davis,  M.  L.  Kirn,  W.  C.  Steele,  D.  W.  Bristol,  A.  B. 
Gregg.  By  the  burning  of  the  State  street  church  on  February  3,1867, 
the  consolidation  of  the  Bleecker  Street  and  State  Street  Societies,  which 
union  had  been  for  some  time  under  consideration,  was  effected  and  the 
new  organization  was  named  the  "  First  Methodist  Episcopal  Church 
of  Utica."  The  first  pastor  was  William  Reddy.  The  present  edifice 
of  the  society,  corner  of  Court  street  and  Broadway,  was  built  during 
the  pastorate  of  William  Reddy,  to  whose  untiring  zeal  the  society  owed 
much  of  its  success.  The  first  Board  of  Trustees  was  composed  of  H.  N, 
Dryer,  Dr.  Jacob  Hunt,  Charles  Barnum,  Isaac  Estes,  E.  M-  Harter, 
H.  Beckwith,  A.  J.  Bice,  Edward  Rowell,  and  Harrison  Gilmore.  The 
corner-stone  of  the  new  church  was  laid  July  30,  1868,  Rev.  J.  P.New- 
man, D.D.  (now  bishop),  making  the  address.  The  chapel  was  finished 
and  dedicated  February  28,  1869  ;  the  church  was  dedicated  February  2, 
1 87 1,  Bishop  Matthew  Simpson  preaching  in  the  morning  and  the  Rev- 
Jesse  T.  Peck,  D.D.  (since  bishop),  delivering  the  sermon  in  the  even- 
ing. The  property  cost  $80,000  and  is  free  from  debt.  The  following 
named  pastors  have  since  served  the  church  :  1870-72,  Ross  C.  Hough- 
ton ;  1873-74,  E.  C.  Bruce  ;  1S75-77,  L.  D.  White  ;  1878,  Thomas  Kelly ; 


SOUTH  STREET  METHODIST  CHURCH.  425 

1879-80,  J.  L.  Humphrey;  1881-83,  Samuel  Call;  1884-85,  J.  D.  Phelps; 
1885-87,  F  H.  Beck;  1888-89,  Gordon  Moore  ;  1890,  Addis  Albro,  the 
present  incumbent.  The  church  has  a  membership  of  upwards  of  500 
and  is  in  a  flourishing  condition.  It  is  thoroughly  organized  and 
aggressive. 

In  the  summer  of  1852  Thomas  J.  Francis  of  the  Bleecker  street 
church,  aided  by  W.  D.  Frederick,  Charles  B.  Manning,  and  William 
R.  Denison,  started  church  services  on  Corn  Hill.  During  the  session 
of  conference  which  convened  in  the  city  hall  that  fall  meetings  were 
held  every  evening  in  a  partially  completed  building  on  Chatham  street. 
The  conference  gave  them  Rev.  B.  I.  Ives  for  a  pastor,  and  an  organization 
of  the  South  Street  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  was  effected  in  Sep- 
tember with  eighty  members  from  the  Bleecker  street  church.  The 
first  trustees  were  Thomas  J.  Francis,  Spencer  B.  Alden,  Mordecai 
Wing,  E.  W.  Roberts,  and  William  Goodenow.  A  lot  Nos.  31-33 
South  street  was  bought  of  Thomas  Hopper  for  $450,  and  a  church 
40  X  70  feet  in  dimensions  and  two  stories  high  was  erected.  It  was  ded- 
icated in  the  spring  of  1853  and  cost  $4,500.  During  the  years  1856— 
58  there  were  two  Sunday  schools  having  400  pupils  and  40  teachers.  In 
1863  thirty-eight  members  withdrew  and  organized  the  Free  Methodist 
Church.  In  1869  a  parsonage  was  built  on  a  lot  adjoining  the  church 
at  a  cost  of  $9,000.  In  1886  extensive  repairs  were  made  upon  the 
church  at  an  expense  of  about  $2,000.  The  present  membership  of  the 
church  is  260  ;  of  the  Sunday  school  240.  The  list  of  pastors  is  as  fol- 
lows :    Revs.    B.  I.  Ives,    1852-54;    E.  Hoag,    1855;    James   L.  Wells, 

1856-57;  William  H.  Olin,  1858-59;   Simon  Peter,  i860;  Gray, 

1861  ;  Thomas  Harroun,  1862;  E.  C.  Curtis,  1863-65  ;  L.  Hartsough, 
1866-67;  Theron  Cooper,  1868-70;  W.  F.  Markham.  1871-73;  A.J. 
Cowles,  1874-76;  W.  D.  Chase,  1877-79;  W.  F.  Hemenway,  1880- 
81;  A.  Bramley,  1881-83;  W.  E.  Reynolds,  1884;  H.W.Bennett, 
1885-87;  H.  E.  Waugh,  1888  to  the  present.  The  stewards  of  the 
church  are  Henry  Beckwith,  George  C.  Hazard,  E.  H.  Bice,  George  O. 
Pennock,  Joseph  Joyce,  C.  W.  Fuess,  H.  C.  Matteson,  S.  R.  Lewis,  B.  E. 
Foster,  R.  B.  Poole,   S.  D.  Latcher,  C.  A.  Enquest,  C.  E.  Bigelow. 

The  Free  Methodist  Church  was  organized  August  7,  1863,  by  Rev. 
D.  W.  Thurston,  with  forty-eight  members  who  came  from  the  South 
54 


426         ■  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

street  church.  The  society  worshiped  in  Morgan  Hall,  corner  of 
South  and  West  streets,  until  1865,  when,  under  the  labors  of  Rev. 
D.  M.  Sinclair,  a  church  edifice  was  erected.  It  was  a  wooden  structure 
on  the  corner  of  South  and  Miller  streets,  and  cost  $3,000.  It  will  seat 
250  persons.  As  the  congregation  continued  to  increase  in  numbers 
more  commodious  accommodations  were  sought,  and  in  1880—81  a  neat 
brick  church  was  erected  at  No.  30  Chatham  street.  It  is  two  stories 
high,  with  an  audience  room  capable  of  seating  350  persons,  and  cost 
$11,000  The  present  trustees  of  the  church  are  Selden  Beckwith, 
George  W.  Gurley,  and  George  H.  Garrett;  class-leaders,  Olney  Ladd, 
George  W.  Gurley,  and  George  H.  Garrett.  The  present  membership 
of  the  church  is  eighty  ;  of  the  Sunday  school  sixty.  The  list  of  its 
regular  pastors  is  as  follows:  Rev.  J.  Mathews,  1864;  D.  M.  Sinclair, 
1865;  J.  W.Selby,  1866-67;  Z.Osborne,  1868-69;  E.Owen,  1870; 
G.  W.  Anderson,  1871-72;  A.  F,  Curry,  1873;  J.  B.  Freeland,  1874; 
B.Winget,i87S  ;  A.  N.  More,  1876;  James  Odell,  1877;  O.W.Young, 
1878-79;  E.  Owen,  1880;  O.  M.  Owen,  1881-83  ;  M.  D.  McDougall, 
1884-86;  Thomas  Whiffin,  1887-88;  Zenas  Osborne,  1888-89; 
Almiron  Smith,  1890. 

For  some  time  previous  to  1867  a  Sunday  school  had  been  held 
in  West  Utica  under  the  direction  of  the  members  from  the  First 
M.  E  Church.  Immediately  after  the  burning  of  the  State  street 
church  a  chapel  was  built  at  the  corner  of  Court  and  Stark  streets 
at  a  cost  of  about  $2,600.  Here  Sunday  school  and  evening  serv- 
ices were  held.  In  jMay,  1886,  the  Dryer  Memorial  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church  was  organized,  about  forty  members  coming 
from  the  First  Church.  Rev.  F.  W.  Merrick  was  appointed  to 
the  charge.  Rev.  F.  D.  Leete  succeeded  him  September  22,  1887. 
Rev.  F.  D.  Torrey  came  to  the  charge  April  15,  1891.  The  first  trus- 
tees were  James  W.  Rowe,  Alfred  Broadbent,  Thomas  Drew,  M.  H. 
Hubbard,  and  Isaac  Estes.  This  board  is  still  serving.  The  name 
of  this  church  was  taken  in  memory  of  the  late  Rev.  H.  N.  Dryer,  an 
efficient  worker  in  the  Sunday  school,,  to  whom^  in  great  part  the  suc- 
cess of  the  school  was  due.  The  church  membership  is  130  and  there 
are  160  pupils  in  the  Sunday  school.  In  1890  an  addition  was  built 
on  the  west  side  of  the  church  at  a  cost  of  $855,  to  be  used  for  Sunday 
school  and  evening  services. 


CENTENARY  METHODIST  EPISCOPAL  CHURCH.         427 

July  I,  1879,  a  prayer  meeting  was  held  at  the  residence  of  Tracy  H. 
Wade,  on  Kossuth  avenue,  and  it  was  there  determined  to  continue  these 
meetings  regularly,  which  was  done  for  about  a  ye;ir.  At  this  time 
Rev.  W.  F.  Hemenway  organized  a  class  there,  and  preaching  was  con- 
tinued with  some  regularity.  In  1882  a  hall  was  hired  at  the  corner 
of  South  and  Albany  streets.  A  Sunday  school  was  then  begun  under 
charge  of  William  Hughes.  In  1883  a  frame  church  was  erected  on 
the  corner  of  Nichols  and  Lansing  streets  on  a  lot  given  by  Francis 
Kernan.  The  church  cost  $5,000  and  will  seat  325.  In  1884  it  be- 
came a  regular  charge,  the  congregation  being  organized  as  the  Cen- 
tenary Methodist  Episcopal  Church  on  March  31,  1884.  During  the 
present  year  (1891)  a  parsonage  is  being  built  on  a  lot  adjoining  the 
church,  and  will  cost  about  $2,000.  The  pastors  have  been  :  Revs.  L.  D. 
White,  1884-86;  Samuel  Call,  1887;  J.  G.  Benson,  1888-89;  George 
W.  Adams,  1890—91.  The  present  trustees  are  J.  W.  Morris,  George 
E.  Davis,  John  W.  Wilkinson,  J.  M.  Grouse,  Richard  Hill.  The  present 
membership  of  the  church  is  100;  of  the  Sunday  school  150. 

On  February  20,  1830,  a  few  Calvinistic  Methodists  took  their  let- 
ters of  dismissal  from  the  Congregational  Church  in  Remsen,  and  Da- 
vid Stephens  was  authorized  to  organize  these  members  into  a  Welsh 
Calvanistic  Church  in  Utica.  This  was  done  in  March,  1831,  under  the 
title  of  the  Moriah  Welsh  Calvinistic  Methodist  Church,  the  following 
being  the  members  :  Robert  J.  Jones,  Richard  H.  Hughes,  Evan  Roberts, 
David  I.  Jones,  Evan  Ellis,  David  Williams,  and  their  wives.  Services 
were  first  held  in  a  school-house  that  stood  on  Bleecker  street.  In  183 1 
a  church  was  built  on  Seneca  street  between  Liberty  and  Whitesboro 
streets.  By  1847  the  membership  had  increased  to  190  and  it  was  de- 
cided to  build  a  larger  church.  The  old  one  was  taken  down  and  a 
new  edifice  60  x  90  feet,  with  seating  capacity  of  630,  was  erected.  In 
1882  the  church  property  was  sold  for  $5,200  and  the  present  church 
built  on  Park  avenue  corner  of  Dakin  street.  The  church  cost  $21, 
000  and  seats  850.  During  the  first  two  years  of  its  existence  the 
church  was  supplied  by  Revs.  David  Stephens,  William  T.  Roberts,  and 
Benjamin  Davies.  Near  the  close  of  183  i  Rev.  Morris  Roberts  came 
here  from  Wales  and  remained  until  1833,  when  he  removed  to  Rem- 
sen, but  he  and  Rev.  Morris  Davies  preached  here  most  of  the  time  un- 


428  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

til  1837.  From  that  year  until  1841  Revs.  Mr.  Davies  and  David 
Davies  were  the  principal  supplies.  During  the  latter  year  the  church 
■extended  a  call  to  Rev.  Williana  Rowlands,  who  remained  until  the 
•close  of  1844,  when  he  removed  to  New  York  city.  Rev.  Thomas 
Foulkes  was  pastor  during  the  years  1847—48  and  again  from  1852  to 
1855.  In  1859  Rev.  William  Hughes  came  from  Wales  and  remained 
three  years.  In  1863  Rev.  Mr.  Rowlands  was  again  pastor  and  re- 
tnained  until  his  death  in  1866.  Rev.  Ebenezer  T.  Jones  was  pastor 
for  one  year,  and  in  1870  Rev.  James  Jarrett  assumed  the  charge  and 
remained  until  August,  1875.  He  was  succeeded  by  the  Rev.  William 
Roberts,  D.D.,  who  came  from  Bellevue,  Pa.,  and  remained  until 
his  death  in  the  year  1887.  The  present  pastor.  Rev.  Robert  Will- 
iams, M.A.,  came  from  Coowen,  Wales,  in  May,  1889.  The  present 
membership  of  the  church  is  443  ;  of  the  Sunday  school  200.  The 
deacons  are  T.  Solomon  Griffiths,  William  C.  Jones,  William  R.  Morris, 
John  R.  Jones,  David  P.  Salisbury,  Elias  Ellis.  The  church  has  a 
mission  Sunday  school  in  the  old  Olivet  Chapel  on  Miller  street,  called 
the  Penvel  Sunday  School.  The  property  was  bought  in  1889  from  the 
Presbyterians.  There  are  130  pupils  in  this  school,  which  also  has  an 
English  branch  of  about  thirty  pupils  under  the  care  of  Mrs.  R.  D. 
Williams. 

The  Coke  Memorial  (Welsh  Methodist  Episcopal)  Church  was  formed 
about  the  istofjuly,  1849,  with  twenty- seven  members.  For  the  first 
eight  months  they  occupied  the  old  Cambrian  Hall  on  the  lower  side  of 
Liberty  street  between  Hotel  and  Seneca.  Its  first  trustees  were  John 
Parry,  Thomas  Morris,  John  H.  Jones,  William  W.  Jones,  Evan  E. 
Jones,  and  Thomas  Hughes.  May  i,  1850,  the  society  purchased  the 
building  on  Washington  street  known  as  the  "  Commercial  Lyceum  " 
and  fitted  it  up  as  a  house  of  worship.  Rev.  Rees  Davies  and  Rev. 
Thomas  Hughes  were  pastors  until  May  1,  1850,  when  Revs.  Davies 
Hughes,  and  John  Jones  preached  alternately  until  September  15,  1852. 
John  Jones  then  took,  charge  and  continued  alone  until  January  I,  1854. 
In  December,  1853,  Rev.  R.  L.  Herbert  came  from  Liverpool  and  began 
his  labors  January  i,  1854.  He  remained  until  April,  i860.  At  the 
time  he  commenced  the  church  membership  numbered  forty-seven,  the 
.average  attendance  in  the  Sunday  school  was  sixty,  and  the  church  was 


COKE  MEMORIAL  CHURCH.  429 

free  from  debt  ;  at  the  close  of  his  pastorate  he  made  the  following  re- 
port: "  Number  of  persons  received  on  probation  thirty-three,  received 
by  letters  forty- three,  bacl<slided  seven,  died  seven."  In  March,  i860, 
Rev.  Thomas  Thomas  came  from  Ironton,  Ohio,  and  at  the  annual  con- 
ference in  April  was  appointed  pastor  of  the  church.  He  served  for 
three  years  and  was  followed  by  Rev.  H.  Humphreys  as  pastor,  who 
■commenced  in  the  spring  of  1863  and  continued  until  the  spring  of 
1867,  when  he  moved  away  and  the  church  for  one  year  was  in  charge 
of  D.  T.  Davies,  who  in  turn  with  Rees  Davies  and  others  occasionally 
supplied  the  pulpit.  In  the  fall  of  1867  Rev.  Isaac  Thomas  came  from 
Witton  Park,  North  of  England,  and  preached  for  the  church  until  the 
following  spring,  when  he  was  appointed  regular  pastor  by  the  annual 
conference.  He  continued  in  charge  until  the  spring  of  1871.  The 
number  of  church  members  at  this  time  is  reported  sixty;  average  at- 
tendance in  Sunday  school  eighty.  At  the  annual  conference  in  1871 
D.  T.  Davies  was  appointed  to  the  charge  and  continued  until  the  spring 
of  1873,  the  church  membership  being  seventy- two  and  the  Sunday 
school  average  attendance  eighty- five.  In  1873  Rev.  H.  Humphreys, 
who  had  had  the  care  of  a  church  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  returned  to  Utica 
and  by  request  of  the  church  was  appointed  pastor.  His  pastorate  this 
time  .continued  until  the  spring  of  1878,  when  he  resigned,  and  the 
church  for  the  following  year  was  in  charge  of  the  presiding  elder  of 
the  district.  Rev.  L.  D.  White,  the  preaching  being  done  by  three  or 
four  different  ministers  who  understood  the  Welsh  language,  which  Mr. 
White  did  not.  In  the  fall  of  this  year  Rev.  David  Williams,  who  was 
residing  at  Pottsville,  Pa.,  came  and  supplied  the  pulpit  until  the  follow- 
ing spring,  when  he  was  appointed  pastor.  He  served  faithfully  until 
the  spring  of  1881.  Rev.  W.  R.  Griffith,  a  young  minister,  came  from 
Wales  and  served  the  church  on  trial  for  one  year,  and  at  the  annual 
-session  of  the  conference  in  April,  1882,  was  appointed  pastor,  remain- 
ing until  July,  1889.  In  May,  1885,  the  society  sold  the  old  church 
property  on  Washington  street  and  bought  a  lot  on  the  corner  of  Hop- 
per and  Union  streets.  In  the  spring  of  1886  the  building  of  the  new 
church  was  commenced.  The  corner-stone  was  laid  the  following  Au- 
gust by  Bishop  Hurst.  The  new  edifice  was  dedicated  in  August,  1 887, 
±he  entire  cost,  including  the  lot,  being  about  $16,000.     In  October, 


430  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

1889,  Rev.  Isaac  Thomas,  a  former  pastor  of  the  church,  became  its 
minister  and  served  until  April,  1890.  The  church  was. without  a  reg- 
ular pastor  from  that  time  until  the  following  October,  when  Rev.  J.  L. 
Davies,  a  professor  in  Genesee  Wesleyan  Seminary  at  Lima,  N.  Y.,  was 
requested  to  take  charge.  He  is  now  ministering  to  the  church:  faith- 
fully and  acceptably.  The  society  numbers  eighty-two  members.  The 
official  members  are  D.  J.  Davies,  Rees  R.Williams, William  Foulks,  Evan 
O.  Williams,  and  Richard  Morris,  trustees  ;  John  I.  Morris,  Rees  R. 
Williams,  D.  J.  Davies,  Evan  Jones,  and  Sylvanus  E.  Jones,  stewards ; 
D.  J.  Davies,  recording  steward.  At  the  dedication  of  the  new  church 
the  name  was  changed  to  Coke  Memorial  in  honor  of  Bishop  Coke,  the 
first  Methodist  bishop  sent  to  this  country  who  was  a  Welshman. 

In  185  I  the  Rev.  F.  Herlan,  then  preaching  in  Deerfield,  expressed 
a  desire  to  transfer  his  labors  to  Utica.  J.  Kratzenberg  offered  his  house 
on  Saratoga  street  as  a  place  for  worship.  In  the  same  year  an  old 
school- house  on  Sunset  avenue  (Garden  street)  was  bought  and  used  as 
a  house  of  worship  up  to  the  year  1858,  when  the  present  church  edifice 
was  erected  on  Sunset  avenue  south  of  Court  street.  It  will  seat  250 
persons.  From  1849  to  1854  the  First  Church  of  the  Evangelical  As- 
sociation (German  Methodist)  belonged  to  the  Mohawk  circuit  and  was 
served  by  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Bosch,  F.  Herlan,  J.  Yenni,  J.  Dereisch,  A.  Z. 
Gottwals,  F.  Scharfe,  and  J.  Grenzebach.  In  1855  Theobald  Schneider 
served  Utica  as  a  mission.  The  following  ministers  have  served  the  so- 
ciety :  1856-57,  J.  Grenzebach  ;  1858-59,  L.  Hermann  ;  i860,  S.  Weber; 
1861,  J.  Umbach;  1863,  A.  Klein;  1864-65,  A.  Miller;  1866-68, 
A.  Holzwarth  ;  1868-69,  G.  Eckhardt ;  1870,  E.  A.  Weier;  1871-73, 
J.  Schafif;  1874,  J.  Siegriest;  1875-77,  M.  Yauch ;  1878-79,.  J.  F. 
Buesch;  1880,  P.  Glanz  ;  i88i,Ph,  E.  Bahn  ;  1882,  J.  G.  Held;  1883- 
85,  F.  Lohmeyer  ;  1886-88,  J.  Eberhng,  1889-90,  L.  HeinmiUer.  The 
present  trustees  of  the  church  are  as  follows:  G.  Herthum,  presi- 
dent ;  J.  Sittig,  secretary ;  G.  Keidel,  treasurer ;  C.  Schad,  W.  Gucke- 
mus.  The  present  membership  of  the  church  is  103.  The  German 
language  has  been  used  altogether  in  the  services  until  about  one  year 
ago,  when  the  services  on  the  first  and  third  Sunday  evenings  of  the 
month  were  designated  for  the  English  language. 

The  Welsh  Baptist  Church,  one  of  the  oldest  in  Central  New  York, 


FiaST  WELSH  BAPTIST  CHURCH.  431 

owes  its  early  origin  to  the  sturdy  emigrants  from  Wales  to  Utica.  It 
isi  said  to  be  due  to  Colonel  Walker  that  individuals  of  this  people  were 
first  led  to  make  their  homes  in  this  region.  Appreciating  their  industry, 
thrift,  and  many  moral  virtues  he  persuaded  them  to  come  and  occupy 
his  extensive  wild  lands  in  Steuben  and  its  vicinity.  Among  these  pio- 
neers those  who  had  trades  lingered  in  the  villages  and  were  credited 
with  being  thebest  builders  and  mechanics  of  the  town.  Nor  could 
these  latter  long  deny  themselves  the  enjoyment  of  their  cherished  in- 
stitutions and  the  ministry  of  the  pastors  who  accompanied  them.  On 
the  I2th  of  September,  1801,  twenty-two  persons  of  this  people,  who 
were  Baptists,  met  at  the  log  house  of  John'  Williams,  upon  the  road 
opposite  the  State  Hospital,  and  formed  a  church.  Some  of  them  lived 
probably  without  the  village,  or  if  resident  in  it  were  so  for  a  short  time 
only.  The  church  they  formed  is  the  first,  exclusively  of  Utica,  whose 
organization  has  been  continuous  and  services  unbroken  to  the  present 
time.  It  is  known  as  the  First  (Welsh)  Baptist  and  is  the  parent  of  the 
Broad  street  (now  Tabernacle)  church.  This  congregation  erected  in 
1 806  a  church  edifice  near  where  the  canal  now  intersects  Hotel  street. 
It  was  moved  when  the  canal  was  opened  to  the  site  of  the  present 
church  on  Broadway  a  little  north  of  Liberty.  Among  the  twenty- two 
who  united  in  its  organization  were  Elder  John  Stevens  and  Elder  James 
Harris,  who  ofiiciated  as  ministers,  Elder  Abraham  Williams,  Joseph 
Harris,  David  Reed,  Simon  Johns,  Nathaniel  Davis,  Samuel  George, 
James  Phillips,  Daniel  Richards,  David  Thomas,  etc.  The  first  deacons 
were  Joseph  Haines  and  David  Reed. 

Elder  John  Stevens  was  the  first  minister.  He  preached  alternately 
in  English  and  in  Welsh.  In  five  or  six  years  he  removed  to  New  York, 
but  returned  about  1814,  and  a  second  time  became  the  head  of  the 
church.  Elder  Abraham  Williams  was  their  second  pastor.  He  after- 
ward removed  to  Rome  and  died  October  25,  1839.  On  the  23d  of 
September,  18 19,  seventeen  members  were  dismissed  from  the  Welsh 
Church  to  form  the  Broad  street  (P^ngjish)  church,  now  the  Tabernacle. 
On  June  23,  1806,  the  first  trustees  were  elected;  they  were  Daniel 
James  and  John  Adams.  Four  men  acted  as  pastors  alternately  and 
for  irregular  periods  until  1837.  They  were  Rev.  Richard  Roberts, 
Elders  D.  Griffiths,  Richards,  and  Stephens.      Rev.  William  H.  Thomas 


432  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

became  pastor  July  i,  1837.  The  membership  was  then  135.  Rev. 
William  F.  Phillips  succeeded  Mr.  Thomas  in  the  fall  of  1840.  David 
J.  Phillips  succeeded  to  the  pastorate  in  1846.  Rev.  David  Jenkins  be- 
came pastor  in  1851  and  Rev.  Morris  J.  Williams  followed  him  in  1854. 
During  this  period  the  church  was  at  the  height  of  its  prosperity.  The 
church  records  show  a  membership  of  283.  Rev.  John  Edred  Jones 
became  pastor  in  1858.  Rev.  Joshua  T.  Morgans  succeeded  him  in 
January,  1869.  Eight  years  later  Rev.  Owen  Griffiths  became  pastor 
for  one  year.  In  1878  Rev.  John  Edred  Jones  again  assumed  the 
charge.  Rev.  William  M.  Evans  became  pastor  in  1883  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Rev.  John  D.  Roberts  in  1885.  Rev.  Thomas  Morris  became 
pastor  in  1887  and  continued  as  such  until  April  i,  1890.  Since  that 
time  the  pulpit  has  been  supplied  by  licentiates.  The  present  member- 
ship is  seventy-eight.  The  Sabbath  school  numbers  about  fifty.  The 
present  deacons  are  John  M.  Williams,  Evan  Roberts,  and  William 
Roberts.  The  church  has  decreased  in  membership  because  the  Ameri- 
can born  Welsh  cannot  understand  the  Welsh  language,  in  which  the  ser- 
mons are  preached,  and  Welsh  emigration  toUtica  has  practically  ceased. 
In  18 19  seventeen  members  of  the  Welsh  Baptist  Church  were  at 
their  own  request  dismissed  and  united  themselves  in  covenant  for  the 
purpose  of  forming  an  English  church,  calling  it  the  Second  Baptist. 
Rev.  Elijah  F.  Willey,  of  Lansingburg,  N.  Y.,  was  called  and  assumed 
the  pastorate  in  November,  18(9.  A  frame  church  capable  of  seating 
400  people  was  soon  erected  on  Broad  street.  After  Mr.  Willey  came 
in  succession  Revs.  John  C.  Harrison,  William  Hague,  D.D.,  Elon 
Galusha,  Edward  Kingsford,  Thomas  Wilkes,  Daniel  Eldridge,  Dudley 
C.  Haynes,  and  Horatio  N.  Loring.,  A  new  brick  church  was  erected 
on  the  same  site  at  a  cost  of  $10,000,  with  a  seating  capacity  of  500, 
and  on  September  28,  1848,  was  formally  dedicated.  Rev.  Edward 
Turney  was  pastor  from  July,  1848,  to  June,  1850.  Rev.  Thomas  O. 
Lincoln,  D.D.,  then  became  pastor  and  served  until  1861.  In  1861 
Rev.  Nehemiah  M.  Perkins  became  pastor;  he  died  at  Monroe,  Conn., 
August  20,  1863.  In  June,  1864,  the  church  and  society  voted  to 
vacate  their  house  and  move  to  a  more  central  location.  In  October, 
1864,  a  lot  was  bought  on  the  corner  of  Hopper  and  King  streets  and 
a   fine   stone   edifice  erected.     The   architect   was   G.   S.   Meacham,  of 


TABERNACLE  BAPTIST  CHURCH.  433 

Boston.  The  church  cost  $30,000  and  will  seat  600  persons.  The 
corner-stone  was  laid  August  3,  1865,  with  appropriate  services,  and  in 
September  of  the  following  year  the  church  was  dedicated.  The  con- 
gregation worshiped  in  the  U.  S.  Court- room  in  the  city  hall  until  their 
new  edifice  was  dedicated.  Rev.  Alfred  S.  Patton,  D.D.,  of  Watertown, 
Mass.,  became  pastor  in  July,  1864,  and  continued  until  June  30,  1873. 
At  a  regular  meeting  of  the  society  held  October  11,  1864,  the  name 
"  Tabernacle  Baptist  Church  "  was  unanimously  adopted.  Rev.  Noah 
R.  Everts,  of  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  succeeded  Mr.  Patton  as  pastor  in 
January,  1873.  He  resigned  in  October,  1878,  and  was  succeeded  in 
Feburary,  1879,  by  Rev.  John  W.  Curtis,  D.D.,  of  Chicago.  After  five 
years  Rev.  Mr.  Curtis's  health  failed  and  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the 
pastorate.  Prof.  Sylvester  Burnham,  D.D.,  supplied  the  pulpit  then 
for  a  few  months.  In  June,  1885,  Rev.  Albert  P.  Brigham,  of  Still- 
water, N.  Y.,  was  called  to  the  pastorate.  His  successor  has  signified 
his  acceptance  of  a  call,  but  is  not  yet  installed.  A  new  chapel  was 
built  upon  property  adjoining  the  church  on  King  street  and  dedicated 
October  4,  1889.  The  building,  with  the  ground,  cost  about  $4,000, 
which  was  supplied  by  voluntary  ofiferings.  It  is  used  for  the  Sunday 
school,  the  membership  of  which  is  320,  and  for  evening  services.  It 
has  a  seating  capacity  of  about  400.  The  present  membership  of  the 
church  is  360.  The  deacons  are  I.  D.  Hopkins,  M.D.,  Clark  Wood, 
George  C.  Hortoii,  William  Fisher,  and  W.  Henry  Start. 

To  descant  uporfthe  individual  characteristics  of  the  several  ministers 
of  this  church  is  evidently  impossible.  Let  it  suffice  to  note  with  com 
mendation  a  few  of  the  earlier  ones  whose  influence  for  good  was  marked, 
not  solely  upon  their  own  people,  but  to  a  large  extent  upon  the  com- 
munity in  general.  Such  were  Revs.  Willey,  Galusha,  and  Hague,  who 
ministered  to  the  church  while  on  Broad  street,  and  Revs.  Lincoln  and 
Patton,  who  served  it  after  its  removal. 

In  1837  (December  3d)  the  Second  Baptist  Church  on  Broad  street 
(now  the  Tabernacle  Baptist  on  Hopper  street)  appointed  a  committee 
to  superintend  religious  worship  in  West  Utica  until  the  following  May. 
On  the  2ist  of  March,  1838,  eleven  persons  met  at  the  home  of  Edward 
Wright  and  organized  a  society  to  be  called  the  "  Bethel  Baptist  Church 
in  Utica."  They  prosecuted  this  work  for  some  time  in  the  old  build- 
55 


434  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ing  known  as  "  Old  Bethel,"  formerly  occupied  by  the  Presbyterians. 
During  the  first  year  of  their  existence  they  erected  a  church  on  State 
street,  in  size  35  x  50  feet,  and  dedicated  it  to  the  service  of  God  on 
August  7,  1839.  January  I,  1845,  't  was  decided  to  rent  the  Bleecker 
street  church,  which  had  been  erected  and  used  by  the  Second  Presbyte- 
rian Society.  The  old  building  was  soon  afterward  rented  to  the  Metho- 
dists. The  first  pastor  was  Rev.  J.  O.  Lowell,  who  labored  in  the  church 
from  October  i,  1838,  to  January  27,  1840.  Rev.  Edward  Bright,  who  was 
licensed  by  the  church  January  3,  1841,  succeeded  Mr.  Lowell  and  re- 
signed November  12,  1841.  The  church  then  called  Rev.  D.  G.  Corey, 
D.D.,  to  the  pastorate.  He  became  pastor  January  2,  1842.  The 
membership  of  the  church  was  then  141.  In  February,  1847,  it  was 
•decided  to  purchase  the  Bleecker  street  church.  In  August  of  that 
year  the  membership  had  reached  249.  In  April,  1862,  steps  were 
taken  for  the  enlargement  of  the  church,  the  membership  then  being 
407.  Property  was  accordingly  bought  in  the  rear  of  the  church  for 
Sunday  school  and  prayer  meeting  purposes.  September  14,  1886,  a 
meeting  was  held  to  consider  the  matter  of  changing  location  and  soon 
afterward  the  church  property  was  sold,  to  be  used  as  a  site  for  the 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association.  A  lot  was  then  purchased  on  the 
corner  of  Rutger  and  West  streets  and  on  June  29,  1887,  the  corner- 
stone of  a  new  brick  church  was  laid.  The  name  Park  Baptist  was  as- 
sumed on  March  22,  1888,  this  being  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  its 
founding.  The  edifice  is  no  feet  front,  105  feet  deep,  cost  $70,000, 
and  will  seat  900  persons.  Dr.  Corey  preached  his  last  sermon  in  the 
church  July  14,  1889.  He  died  February  20,  i8§0,  having  been  pas- 
tor of  the  church  over  forty- eight  years.  Nearly  a  generation  and  a 
half  had  listened  to  his  words  of  admonition,  of  hope,  and  sympathy. 
Those  who  first  heard  him  as  little  children  grew  to  manhood  under 
his  ministry,  and  their  children  in  turn  advanced  to  see  the  same  familiar 
figure  in  the  pulpit.  He  loved  the  truth  and  always  felt  it  to  be  his 
duty  to  preach  it  without  abatement  or  modification.  He  was  an  ear- 
nest, forceful,  fearless  man  who  commanded  the  respect  of  those  even 
who  did  not  think  as  he  did.  As  a  pastor  he  was  greatly  beloved. 
The  social  and  business  interests  of  his  people  were  of  as  much  concern 
to  him  as  their  spiritual  welfare.      His  relations  with  them  were  those 


EBENEZER  AMD  IMMANUEL  BAPTIS2  CHURCHES.     435 

of  a  close  friend  rather  than  of  a  religious  teacher.  In  the  pulpit  and  out 
of  it,  in  efforts  to  reform  and  uplift  his  fellowmen,  he  labored  patiently 
and  persistently,  content  to  do  his  duty,  and  confident  in  the  power  and 
purpose  of  his  Lord.  The  impress  he  made  upon  the  religious  thought, 
social  culture,  and  moral  progress  of  the  city  is  beyond  estimate.  Rev. 
C.  A.  Taylor  assumed  the  pastorate  June  5,  1890.  The  present  mem- 
bership of  the  church  is  485  ;  of  the  Sunday  school  275.  The  present 
deacons  are  John  Ryalls,  Isaac  D.  Ryalls,  F.  P.  Ashley,  S.  U.  Cook- 
inham,  and  John  Rowlands. 

The  Ebenezer  Baptist  Church  was  incorporated  in  August,  1836, 
with  the  following  trustees  :  Deacon  Joseph  Goodliffe,  Garrett  Jones, 
jr.,  James  Stone,  William  Towers,  William  Jarrett,  and  Jacob  Loak. 
During  a  pastorate  of  forty  years  Elder  Thomas  Hill  officiated.  He 
was  called  in  March,  1835,  and  was  the  only  pastor  the  church  ever 
had.  The  record  shows  that  he  received  no  salary  while  he  could  work 
at  his  trade,  which  was  wood-turning.  He  died  August  9,  1874.  A 
lot  on  Columbia  street  was  purchased  in  1836  of  Appollos  Cooper  for 
$450,  and  it  was  agreed  to  erect  a  building  at  a  cost  of  $350  or  $400. 
The  church  is  a  frame  building  and  at  the  present  time  is  offered  for 
sale,  there  being  only  about  fifteen  members  to  support  it.  No  Sunday 
school  has  ever  been  held  in  connection  with  the  church.  The  society 
will  purchase  where  land  is  cheaper  or  rent  rooms.  Since  the  death  of 
the  pastor  the  pulpit  has  been  supplied  by  Elder  S.  H.  Durant  and 
Elder  Baylis  Bundy.     The  present  trustee  is  John  Brimson. 

The  Immanuel  Baptist  Church  was  organized  January  29,  1890,  with 
a  membership  of  forty-two.  The  first  house  of  worship  was  erected  at 
the  corner  of  Eagle  and  Dudley  streets  at  a  cost  of  $6,000.  This 
church  was  dedicated,  free  from  debt,  March  12,  1890,  Rev.  R.  G.  Sey- 
mour, D.D.,  of  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  preaching  the  sermon.  It  has  a  seating 
capacity  of  450.  Rev.  James  M.  Hutchinson  is  the  pastor.  The  dea- 
cons are  William  B.  Walling,  Thomas  H.  Peters,  William  R.  Rowlands, 
and  Thomas  E.  Morris.  The  Sunday  school  from  which  this  church  is 
an  outgrowth  was  organized  December  26,  1888,  at  75  Seymour  avenue, 
with  an  attendance  of  187.  The  present  membership  of  the  church 
is  143. 

The  Zion  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  (German)  was  organized  May 


436  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

15,  1842,  at  its  place  of  meeting — the  "  Old  Bethel,"  on  Fayette  street 
in  West  Utica.  There  were  fifty-six  charter  members,  all  natives  of 
Germany,  in  which  language  the  services  have  always  been  conducted. 
The  first  elders  of  the  church  were  Charles  A.  Wolf,  sr.,  and  Michael 
Breitenstein.  The  first  house  of  worship  was  erected  upon  the  south 
side  of  Columbia  street  near  St.  Patrick's  Church  at  a  cost  of  about 
$2,000,  and  was  dedicated  September  28,  1844.  It  was  destroyed  by 
fire  February  28,  1851.  The  site  was  then  sold  to  the  Catholics  and 
the  present  church  building  was  erected  on  the  corner  of  Cooper 
and  Fay  streets  at  a  cost  $4,000;  its  seating  capacity  is  550.  In  1868 
-the  edifice  was  lengthened  by  an  addition  of  twenty  feet.  The  first 
pastor  of  the  church  was  Rev.  A.  Wetzel,  who  continued  as  such  until 
1879.  He  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  John  P.  Lichtenberg,  who  labored 
in  the  pastorate  until  May,  1889,  when  Rev.  A.  Oscar  Gallenkamp,  the 
present  pastor,  came  to  the  charge.  A  day-school  building  was  erected 
in  1870  on  Columbia  street  near  Varick  at  a  cost  of  $8,000.  It  is  of 
brick,  three  stories  high,  and  over  150  pupils  are  in  attendance.  It  is 
Icnown  as  Zion's  Day  School.  Over  200  families  are  in  attendance  at 
this  church  and  there  are  475  pupils  in  the  Sunday  school.  The  present 
deacons  are  Gaius  Bach,  Michael  Agne,  and  Martin  Schwartz. 

On  the  25th  of  March,  i860,  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Zion's  Church 
of  Utica,  Rev.  A.  Wetzel,  pastor,  resolved  to  establish  a  German  Mis- 
sion in  the  southeastern  part  of  the  city  (Corn  Hill).  A  lot  was  given 
and  a  suitable  small  building  secured,  which  was  consecrated  in  August 
■of  the  same  year  as  St.  Paul's  Lutheran  Church  (German).  Pastor 
Wetzel  and  his  son-in-law,  Pastor  Schmidt,  served  the  congregation  for 
eight  years,  when  it  united  with  the  New  York  Ministerium  and  called 
the  Rev.  C.  Fischer,  under  whom  a  new  building  was  begun.  Scarcely 
was  the  corner-stone  laid  when  Mr.  Fischer  died.  During  the  pastor- 
ate of  his  successor  the  building  was  completed.  Rev.  D.  W.  Petersen 
served  the  congregation  from  1875  to  1880,  when  he  removed  to  Mid- 
dleville,  N.  Y.  He  was  succeeded  by  Pastor  O.  Kaselitz,  under  whom 
the  congregation  met  with  the  most  severe  trial  that  had  yet  befallen  it. 
During  the  night  of  the  6th  of  November  the  roof  of  the  church  was 
torn  off"  by  a  storm  and  the  building  was  so  much  injured  that  it  be- 
came necessary  to  raze  it  to  the  ground.     Without  a  house  of  worship, 


LUTHERAN  CHURCH  OF  THE  REDEEMER.  437 

and  with  a  debt  of  $4,000  on  the  building  just  destrojed,  the  members 
though  greatly  discouraged  took  heart  and  began  the  erection  of  the 
present  building,  thus  increasing  the  debt  to  $13,000.  Under  Rev. 
A.  J.  Heisler,  who  became  pastor  in  1885,  the  condition  of  the  congre- 
gation improved.  It  numbered  400  from  Utica,  had  two  Sunday 
schools,  one  English  the  other  German,  and  English  services  were  held 
once  a  month.  The  debt  was  materially  reduced.  After  his  resigna- 
tion and  a  season  of  irregular  services  Rev.  G.  A.  Bruegel,  of  Syracuse, 
entered  upon  his  work  October  i,  1890.  At  present  there  are  two 
Sunday  schools  and  English  services  are  held  twice  a  month.  Much 
is  due  to  those  members  who,  though  one  pastor  died  in  office  and  sev- 
eral others  resigned  on  account  of  ill  health,  though  the  storm  increased 
their  debt  and  other  misfortunes  befell  them,  have  steadily  persevered, 
•clinging  to  the  congregation  of  their  choice,  and  gradually  reducing 
their  indebtedness  until  they  freed  themselves  from  all  obligations. 

In  the  month  of  June,  1877,  seven  members  of  the  Evangelical 
Lutheran  Zion's  Church  started  a  movement  which  resulted  in  a  meet- 
ing at  the  dwelling  of  John  C.  Hieber,  corner  of  Cottage  and  Hart 
-streets,  July  loth,  and  the  form  of  an  organization  that  should  be 
known  as  the  "  English  Lutheran  Church  Association  of  Utica,"  the 
object  being  to  establish  a  church  of  that  faith.  A  method  of  system- 
atic giving  for  church  expenses  was  inaugurated  October  16,  1878,  a 
•call  was  extended  to  Rev.  Theodore  B.  Roth,  of  Philadelphia,  and  he 
began  his  labors  November  24th.  The  M.  E.  Chapel,  corner  of  Court  and 
Stark  streets,  was  rented  for  one  year  and  services  were  held  regularly, 
morning  and  evening.  The  following  Sunday  a  Sabbath  school  was 
organized.  December  27,  1878,  a  church  organization  was  effected 
under  the  name  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  of  the  Redeemer. 
March  30,  1879,  the  constitution  was  adopted  and  the  following  deacons 
elected :  Henry  Martin,  John  C.  Hieber,  Louis  F.  Leo,  Adam  Martin, 
John  Reichart,  John  G.  Hoerlein,  Anton  Dougne,  and  John  R.  Bucher. 
During  the  summer  of  1881  a  building  lot  known  as  the  "  old  malt- 
house,"  fronting  1 19  feet  on  Columbia  street,  was  purchased  for  $6,850, 
and  thereon  a  stone  chapel  was  erected ;  it  was  occupied  on  December 
25,  1883,  and  the  church  proper  on  May  17,  1885,  the  buildings  having 
■cost  upwards  of  $30,000.     This  church  called  Rev.  G.  A.  Bierdemann 


438  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

to  mission  work  in  the  city  and  through  his  efforts  the  Church  of  the 
Holy  Communion  was  organized.  Rev.  Mr.  Roth  has  had  repeated' 
calls  to  other  fields,  but  still  holds  to  the  church  of  his  own  building. 
The  membership  of  the  church  is  500  and  of  the  Sunday  school  350. 
The  present  deacons  are  Henry  Martin,  John  C.  Hieber,  John  Kohler, 
John  R.  Bucher,  Christian  Sautter,  John  George,  Henry  Scheehl,  and 
Louis  F.  Leo. 

Trinity  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  (German)  was  organized  Au- 
gust 21,  1 88 1,  in  the  house  of  Lewis  Guckemus  on  Stark  street.  At 
this  meeting  it  was  also  decided  to  form  a  Sunday  school  and  a  day 
school.  St.  Patrick's  school  building  on  Columbia  street  was  hired  and 
a  day  school  begun.  Rev.  C.  J.  Oelschlager  was  called  to  the  pastorate 
and  in  December  the  first  trustees  were  elected.  March  12,  1882,  the 
Beriah  Green  property  on  Hamilton  street  was  purchased  and  the  house 
remodeled  for  church  purposes.  Rev.  C.  A.  Germann  was  called  to 
succeed  Mr.  Oelschlager,  September  30,  1883.  Two  years  later  the 
present  brick  church  was  erected  at  a  cost  of  $13,000,  and  was  dedi- 
cated December  12,  1886;  its  seating  capacity  is  500.  A  frame  build- 
ing was  also  built  in  the  rear  of  the  church  for  a  day  school.  There  are 
about  eighty  children  in  attendance  here  and  the  Sunday  school  has 
160  pupils.  The  church  has  100  families  in  its  fold.  The  present 
elders  are  George  Edinger,  L.  Fehrmann,  and  Peter  Peterson.  A  par- 
sonage was  erected  on  a  lot  adjoining  the  church  in  1884.  The  value  of 
the  church  property  is  about  $25,000. 

The  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  of  the  Holy  Communion  is  a  frame 
structure  in  the  Gothic  style  of  architecture  located  at  tlie  corner  of  Sun- 
set avenue  and  Mulberry  street.  It  was  built  in  the  winter  of  1887-88 
at  a  cost  of  $6,3000,  including  cost  of  the  lot.  It  seats  400  persons. 
The  pastor  of  the  church  is  Rev.  Gustavus  A.  Bierdemann,  who  began 
his  labors  as  missionary  in  southwest  Utica  by  a  house-to-house  can- 
vass of  the  district,  in  the  fall  of  1887,  having  been  , called  to  the  work 
by  the  Church  Council  of  the  Church  of  the  Redeemer  from  a  well  es- 
tablished church  at  Boylestown,  Ohio.  The  society  was  organized  after 
the  church  was  built  and  numbers  167  persons;  the  Sunday  school  has 
150  pupils.  A  new  organ  has  just  been  placed  in  the  church  at  a  cost 
of  $1,600. 


MORAVIAN  CHURCH.  439 

In  1854  several  families  made  application-  to  the  authorities  at 
Bethlehem,  Pa.,  for  admission  into  the  Moravian  Church,  and  at  the 
same  ti-me  requested  an  appointment.  In  response  Rev.  Valentine 
Miller  was  given  the  pastorate.  Services  were  held  For  a  time  in  private 
houses.  After  an  official  visit  by  Rt.  Rev.  H.  A.  Shultz,  from  Bethle- 
hem, a  small  frame  church,  corner  Cornelia  and  Cooper  streets  (formerly- 
Lutheran),  was  purchased  and  the  congregation  was  formally  organ- 
ized as  the  Moravian  Church  on  July  2,  1856.  Rev.  Valentine  Batterer 
succeeded  Mr.  Miller  in  1856  and  remained  until  1862.  His  successor 
was  Rev.  John  Praeger,  who  had  charge  of  the  parish  until  1876.  Rev. 
J.  Wuensche  was  pastor  from  1876  until  1882  and  was  succeeded  by 
Rev.  P.  F.  Rommel,  who  remained  until  1889.  His  successor  was  Rev. 
L.  P.  Clewell,  the  present  pastor.  During  the  administration  of  Rev. 
Mr.  Miller  a  parsonage  was  built.  At  length  the  old  church  became 
too  dilapidated  for  use  and  it  was  decided  to  build  a  new  one,  together 
Avith  a  parsonage.  This  was  done  during  the  administration  of  Rev. 
Mr.  Clewell  in  the  summer  of  1891.  The  new  edifice  (which  is  built 
•on  the  old  site)  is  of  brick  and  of  good  dimensions.  Its  cost  was  $1 1,- 
000,  and  it  has  a  seating  capacity  of  500.  There  are  300  members  in 
the  church  and  175  in  the  Sunday  school.  The  present  elders  are 
John  Beisiegel,  Frantz  Weber,  and  Vitus  Frank. 

The  Moravian  Mission  on  South  street  is  a  branch  of  the  Moravian 
Church  above  described  and  was  organized  in  April,  1 882.  The  services 
and  Sunday  school  were  first  held  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Kehle,  301  South 
street.  The  room  soon  became  inadequate  on  account  of  the  continual 
growth  of  the  school  and  it  was  found  necessary  to  obtain  a  larger 
apartment.  Hence  in  February,  1883,  it  was  decided  to  build  a  chapel. 
A  lot  was  purchased  on  South  street  at  the  foot  of  Leeds  street  and  the 
present  wooden  edifice  erected  thereon.  The  pastor  was  Rev.  P.  F. 
Rommel.  This  mission  is  under  the  care  of  the  pastor  of  the  Moravian 
Church. 

A  published  notice  in  the  papers  of  the  day  announced  to  the  people 
of  Utica  that  Mr.  Thompson  was  to  preach  in  the  court-house  on  Sun- 
day the  20th  of  November,  1825,  and  the  Universalists  of  the  village 
and  neighborhood  were  requested  to  meet  at  the  same  place  on  Monday 
evening  the  2ist  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  a  society.     Accordingly 


440  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

"  a  number  of  persons  believing  in  the  doctrine  of  God's  impartial  and 
universal  love  "  met  at  the  time  and  place  appointed  and  organized  the 
"  First  Universalist  Society  of  Utica."  The  following  persons  were  ap- 
pointed trustees  :  Andrew  S.  Pond,  Daniel  James,  John  R.  Ludlow, 
John  H.  Hickox,  Roswell  Woodruff;  and  the  following  were  appointed 
deacons  :  Ezra  S.  Barnum  and  William  Stevens.  Forty-two  persons 
signed  the  constitution.  Rev.  John  S.  Thompson,  the  chairman  of  the 
meeting,  remained  only  a  short  time  as  the  pastor,  and  the  society  was 
supplied  with  occasional  preachers,  among  whom  was  the  father  of  the 
late  T.  Starr  King.  A  church  was  erected  in  1828-30  on  Devereux 
street,  and  in  the  latter  year  Rev.  Dolphas  Skinner,  D.D.,  became  the 
first  settled  pastor.  The  church  became  involved  in  financial  difficult- 
ies and  was  subsequently  sold.  In  1848  services  were  re-commenced 
in  Mechanics  Hall  and  a  new  society  was  organized  under  the  name  of 
the  Central  Universalist  Society,  commonly  known  as  the  Church  of 
the  Reconciliation:  A  brick  church  was  erected  on  Seneca  street  near 
Genesee  and  completed  in  1851.  It  cost  $12,500  and  has  a  seating 
capacity  of  480.  Rev.  Mr.  Francis  was  the  pastor.  He  resigned  his 
charge  in  1853  and  was  succeeded  in  October  by  Rev.  Theophilus  Fisk. 
Rev.  C.  C.  Gordon  became  pastor  in  1857  and  resigned  his  charge  in 
August,  1859.  Rev.  T.  D.  Cook,  who  had  been  one  of  the  earlier 
pastors  of  the  old  church,  began  a  new  pastorate  in  i860  and  spent 
four  years  in  the  work  here.  He  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  D.  Ballou  in 
October,  1864,  who  remained  five  years.  In  August,  1870,  Rev.  A.  J. 
Canfield  was  called  and  continued  his  labors  until  May,  1873.  In  De- 
cember of  that  year  Rev.  Charles  F.  Lee  became  pastor  and  continued 
until  January  i,  1879.  Rev.  Marion  Crosley  was  the  next  pastor, 
officiating  from  January,  1880,  to  July,  1882.  He  was  succeeded  by 
Rev.  O.  A.  Rounds,  who  came  in  the  following  September  and  con- 
tinued as  pastor  until  September,  1887.  Rev.  Clarence  E.  Rice,  the 
present  pastor,  came  to  the  work  December  i,  1887.  In  1877  the 
church  was  extensively  repaired  and  a  new  chapel  was  built.  The 
present  membership  is  200  and  the  Sunday  school  has  an  average  at- 
tendance of  150. 

The  services  of  the  Second  Universalist  or  Church  of  our  Father  were 
first  held  in  May,  1888,  in  the  Mary  street  school-house  and  a  Sun- 


ST.  yOHN'S  CHURCH.  441 

day  school  of  nine  scholers  was  gathered.  This  continued  until  Oc- 
tober, when  a  chapel  was  built  on  Bacon  street.  Rev.  C.  E.  Rice,  of 
the  First  Universalist  Church,  supplied  the  preaching,  the  services  being 
held  in  the  afternoon  until  July,  1889.  At  this  time  Rev.  George  A. 
Sahlin  came  to  the  work.  After  one  year  he  was  succeeded  by  Rev, 
H.  W.  Smith,  the  present  pastor.  In  1890-91  a  lot  was  purchased  on 
Bleecker  btreet  between  Nichols  street  and  Kossuth  avenue,  and  a  brick 
church  was  erected,  the  house  and  lot  costing  $12,000.  The  church 
will  seat  400  persons.  The  membership  of  the  church  is  nearly  eighty 
and  of  the  Sunday  school  about  100. 

The  first  priest  whose  name  is  found  mentioned  in  connection  with 
the  Roman  Catholics  of  Utica  was  Rev.  M.  McQuade.  He  was  pastor 
of  St.  Mary's  Church  in  Albany.  He  took  charge  of  the  scattered 
Catholics  in  this  district  and  said  mass  for  them  occasionally  from  18 13 
to  1 8 16.  When  he  first  began  his  labors  here  the  diocese  of  New  York, 
to  which  Utica  belonged,  was  without  a  bishop.  On  the  24th  of  April, 
1808,  Father  Luke  Concanen  was  consecrated  as  bishop  of  New  York. 
He  died  before  leaving  Naples,  and  was  succeeded  by  Father  John  Con- 
nolly, who  was  appointed  in  the  fall  of  18 14.  Arriving  in  New  York 
he  remained  there,  and  in  the  year  1818  dispatched  Rev.  Michael 
O'Gorman  to  Albany  and  the  northern  part  of  the  State,  where  a 
church  was  soon  erected.  The  first  notice  found  of  Catholic  services 
being  held  in  Utica  is  in  18 19. 

Agreeably  to  a  notice  previously  published  Rev.  Mr.  O'Gorman, 
from  Albany,  met  the  adherents  of  this  faith  on  the  loth  of  January  in 
the  academy  for  public  worship.  Mass  was  celebrated,  six  or  seven 
females  and  two  males  received  the  consecrated  water,  and  eight  or  ten 
children  were  baptized.  In  the  evening  Mr.  O'Gorman  preached.  On 
the  15th  of  March  the  Catholics  of  Utica  and  its  vicinity  were  invited  to 
attend  divine  service  on  the  following  Sunday,  which  was  to  be  per- 
formed by  Rev.  Mr.  Farnon  ;  and  on  the  24th  of  May  it  was  announced 
that  "  Rev.  Mr.  Farnon,  who  is  now  established  rector  of  the  Western 
District,  has  returned  from  a  circuit  through  said  district,  and  will  per- 
form divine  service  afthe  academy  on  the  30th  inst." 

The  foregoing  were  the  first  steps  taken  toward  assembling  and  or- 
ganizing the  now  numerous  body  of  Christians  of  this  faith,  who  were 

56 


442  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

still  so  few  and  sparsely  scattered  that  the  vvhoIe'Western  District  was 
included  in  one  religious  society.  The  first  trustees  of  this  church,  St. 
John's,  were  John  C.  and  N.  Devereux,  of  Utica ;  James  Lynch,  until 
then  a  resident  of  Rome,  but  who  about  this  time  removed  to  Utica; 
Francis  O'Toole,  of  Augusta;  and  another  from  Johnstown.  Measures 
were  at  once  taken  to  erect  a  church  edifice.  The  resident  congrega- 
tion did  not  exceed  twenty- five  or  thirty  and  these  few  contributed 
freely  to  defray  the  expense.  Much  generous  assistance  was  also  ac- 
corded by  Protestants  generally.  Moreover  the  construction  of  the  Erie 
Canal,  now  in  progress,  had  caused  a  large  immigration  of  Irish  laborers, 
who,  though  poor  and  without  homes,  could  not  be  denied  the  privileges 
of  their  own  form  of  worship.  From  their  scanty  wages  they  each  gave 
$1  a  month  toward  the  building  of  the  church.  A  lot  was  presented  by 
Judge  Morris  S.  Miller  and  wife  on  condition  that  it  should  revert  to 
the  owners  or  their  heirs  whenever  it  ceased  to  be  used  for  the  pur- 
pose for  which  it  was  given.  This  lot,  on  the  corner  of  John  and 
Bleecker  streets,  is  the  same  that  is  now  occupied  by  St.  John's  Church, 
though  the  building  first  placed  thereon  was  afterward  moved  across 
Bleecker  street  to  its  lower  side,  where  with  some  alterations  it  still 
stands.  An  Englishman  named  Crane  took  the  contract  for  the  erection 
of  the  building,  and  it  went  rapidly  forward.  The  congregation  in  the 
meantime  worshiped  in  the  parlors  of  one  or  other  of  the  Messrs.  Dev- 
€reux,  or  on  saints'  days,  and  when  unusual  services  were  held,  in  the 
court-room  of  the  academy  building.  When  completed  the  church  was 
a  pretty  Gothic  structure  of  wood  45  x  60  feet,  surmounted  by  a  low 
spire,  and  painted  white.  It  was  consecrated  on  the  19th  of  August, 
1 82 1,  by  Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  Connolly,  assisted  by  Revs.  O'Gorman, 
O'Connor,  and  Farnon.  But  though  fit  for  use  it  was  about  two  years 
before  it  was  finished  and  only  about  ten  pews  were  let  at  this  time.  Rev. 
Mr.  Farnon's  position  was  by  no  means  a  sinecure,  since  in  addition  to 
the  superintendence  of  the  erection  of  the  church  he  was  much  occu- 
pied in  ministering  to  the  parishioners  of  his  widely  extended  district, 
and  in  visiting  the  sick  and  destitute  up  and  down  the  line  of  the  canal. 
As  a  preacher  he  was  plain  and  practical,  and  spoke  without  notes. 
The  rectory,  adjoining  the  church  on  the  west  side,  and  which  has  given 
way  to  the  present  one,  was  built  in  1824.      Mr.  Farnon  remained  until 


ST.  JOHN'S  CHURCH.  443 

1825  and  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  Richard  Bulger,  a  talented  young 
Irishman  who  remained  two  years.  Rev.  Charles  Brennan  succeeded 
Father  Bulger,  but  on  account  of  ill  health  he  remained  only  nine 
months  and  removed  to  Paterson,  N.  J.  Rev.  John  Shanahan  was  the 
next  pastor,  and  probably  came  to  Utica  toward  the  end  of  August,  1825. 
There  were  then  only  sixteen  Catholic  families  in  Utica.  Rev.  Luke 
Berry  was  an  assistant  pastor  under  Father  Shanahan  from  September 
1,  1827,  and  when  the  latter  left  he  acted  as  pastor  until  December 
19,  1828.  The  congregation  of  St.  John's  now  numbered  600  with 
a  Sunday  school  of  85  scholars.  Rev.  Hatton  Walsh  was  pastor  from 
December  19,  1828,  to  November  24,  1829.  He  was  succeeded  by 
Rev.  P.  J.  M.  O'Reilly,  who  arrived  August  14,  1829,  and  continued 
until  November,  1830.  Rev.  Michael  Cummings  became  pastor  on 
December  i,  1830.  He  was  first  assisted  by  Rev.  James  B.  Cahill,. 
who  came  early  in  183 1  and  became  pastor  March  6,  1832.  During 
the  prevalence  of  the  epidemic  of  that  year  his  labors  were  indefatigable. 
He  remained  until  May  8,  1833,  and  on  the  8th  of  June  of  the  same 
year  was  succeeded  by  Rev'.  Walter  Joseph  Quarter  as  assistant. 
Through  the  generosity  of  John  C.  Devereux  he  brought  hither  the 
Sisters  of  Charity,  who  have  cared  for  and  instructed  the  children  of  the 
flock  for  more  than  half  a  century.  Early  in  1834  steps  were  taken  for 
the  erection  of  a  larger  and  more  commodious  church.  The  corner- 
stone was  laid  in  June,  1836,  and  it  was  completed  before  the  end  of  the 
year.  It  was  not  as  large  as  the  present  church,  extending  west  only 
as  far  as  the  present  galleries. 

Rev.  Walter  J.  Quarter  took  charge  of  the  parish  January  i,  1835, 
and  the  first  assistant  pastor,  Rev.  William  Beecham,  began  his  labors 
December  23,  1836.  Rev.  Father  P.  Bradley  also  assisted  the  pastor. 
Rev.  P.  McCloskey  became  assistant  pastor  January  27,  1838,  and  was 
succeeded  by  Rev.  D.  W.  Bacon,  January  13,  1839,  Rev.  Francis 
Farrell  took  charge  of  the  parish  as  pastor  November  i,  1839,  and  re- 
mained until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  December  of  the  following 
year.  He  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  John  Loughlin,  afterward  bishop  of 
Brooklyn,  who  remained  until  January  10,  1841,  and  was  followed  by 
Rev.  Thomas  Martin.  He  organized  a  temperance  society  and  labored 
to  suppress  the  evils  of  drunkenness.     Rev.  Joseph  Stokes  succeeded  hini 


444  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

May  12,  1845,  and  remained  six  years,  leaving  the  Albany  diocese  on 
account  of  ill  health  in  F"ebruary,  1851.  He  was  succeeded  in  the  fol- 
lowing month  by  Rev.  Francis  P.  McF;irland,  who  was  pastor  until 
March,  1858,  at  which  time  he  was  appointed  third  bishop  of  Hartford, 
in  which  see  he  was  consecrated  bishop  March  14,  1858.  Remembered 
as  well  for  his  sweet  and  kindly  disposition  as  for  his  zealous  labors  for 
the  church,  it  was  during  his  pastorate  that  the  Brothers  of  the  Christian 
schools  came  to  Utica.  The  Assumption  Academy  was  opened  Sep- 
tember I,  1854.  His  assistants  were  Michael  Clarke,  who  removed  to 
Carthage  in  February,  1854;  William  Coghlan,  afterward  the  first  resi- 
dent pastor  of  Clinton;  Eugene  Carroll,  who  went  to  Port  Leyden  ; 
James  Smith,  afterward  pastor  at  Fulton,  N.  Y.;  John  U.  Herbst;  Dan- 
iel P.  Falvey,  who  died  while  pastor  in  Schenectady;  John  McDermott, 
afterward  pastor  at  Oneida,  was  assistant  under  F.  P.  McFarland  from 
August,  1855,  to  mid-lent  in  i856,and  was  succeeded  by  William  J.  H. 
Maeyer,  who  remained  until  Father  Daly  took  charge  after  Easter,  1858. 
Thomas  Daly  was  appointed  by  the  then  Bishop  McCloskey  in  April, 
1858.  His  assistants  were  Rev.  P.  J.  McGlynn,  Eugene  Carroll,  Will- 
iam F.  Sheahan,  Francis  J.  Purcell,  John  McDonald,  P.  F.  Smith,  B.  B. 
Grattan,  William  F  Smith,  James  M.  Ludden,  Aloysius  Murphy,  Luke 
G.  O'Reilly,  and  Edward  A.  Terry,  who  remained  until  September  21, 
1880.  Under  Father  Daly's  administration  St.  John's  Church  was 
greatly  developed,  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  a  larger  church  and 
accommodations  must  be  provided.  The  St.  John's  Building  Associa- 
tion was  organized  with  the  object  of  aiding  the  pastor  and  securing  the 
necessary  funds  for  building  the  new  church,  and  the  work  went  rapidly 
forward.  The  corner-stone  was  laid  on  the  27th  of  June,  1869,  and  the 
edifice  was  finished  in  1871. 

It  was  under  his  administration,  too,  that  the  Christian  Brothers 
opened  an  orphan  asylum  for  boys  in  a  portion  of  the  School  building 
of  the  Assumption  Academy,  March  25,  1862.  These  accommodations 
were  soon  found  inadequate,  and  in  1869  a  large  building  Was  erected 
on  the  corner  of  Rutger  street  and  Taylor  avenue,  which  is  now  known 
as  St.  Vincent's  Male  Orphan  Asylum.  This  asylum  is  desfcribfed  a  little 
further  on. 

Father  Daly's  health  failed  and  Father  Terry  became  acting  pastor  in 


ST.  JOSEPH'S  CHURCH.  445 

1879.  As  soon  as  it  became  evident  tliat  Father  Daly's  health  would 
not  be  restored  Rev.  James  M.  Ludden,  pastor  of  St.  Mary's  Church, 
Little  Falls,  was  called  to  the  position  of  acting  pastor.  Considerable 
trouble  arose  in  the  congregation  during  Father  Ludden's  administra- 
tion over  the  fact  that  a  large  number  of  the  parishioners  ardently  de- 
sired that  Father  Terry  should  remain  in  charge.  A  petition  was  drawn 
up  setting  forth  the  grievances  of  the  people  and  sent  to  Rome.  Mean- 
while Father  Ludden  continued  faithfully  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties 
in  the  parish.  In  January  and  February,  1882,  a  correspondence  oc- 
curred between  members  of  the  church  and  Bishop  McNierney,  which 
resulted  in  the  transfer  of  Father  Ludden  to  St.  John's  Church,  Albany, 
and  the  appointment  as  acting  pastor  of  Rev.  J.  S.  M.  Lynch,  who  en- 
tered upon  his  duties  February  18,  1882.  Father  Lynch  remained  with 
the  church,  conducting  its  affairs  with  success  and  to  the  satisfaction  of 
its  large  congregation,  until  the  beginnmg  of  1887,  when  he  was  trans- 
ferred to  Syracuse  and  was  succeeded  by  Father  Moriarity.  His  term  of 
service  was,  however,  very  brief,  for  he  died  in  November,  1887.  Father 
T.  F.  Cullen  was  then  called  to  the  pastorate,  but  he,  too,  was  called  by 
his  Master  on  the  gth  of  May,  1891.  Father  Lynch  was  then  re- 
transferred  from  Syracuse  and  is  the  present  pastor. 

St.  Joseph's  Roman  Catholic  Church  (German)  was  organized  in  1842 
by  Rev.  Joseph  Prost.  The  first  house  of  worship  was  a  frame  building 
purchased  from  one  of  the  Methodist  congregations  of  the  city,  and 
located  on  Fayette  street.  The  congregation  grew  rapidly  and  in  1855 
a  fine  two- story  brick  building  was  erected  and  used  as  a  school.  In 
1874  the  old  frame  church  on  Fayette  street  was  torn  down  and  the 
handsome  new  brick  church  edifice  erected  on  Columbia  street.  It  is 
built  in  the  Romanesque  style,  has  two  towers,  and  is  200  feet  long. 
Its  erection  extended  from  1869  to  1873,  under  the  pastorate  of  the 
late  Father  Alpheus  Zoller,  of  the  Fathers  Minor  Conventual  of  St. 
Francis,  who  took  charge  of  the  congregation  in  1858  ;  the  church  will 
seat  2,000  persons.  In  1878  a  new  convent  was  built  on  the  east  side 
of  the  church  and  in  1885  a  spacious  brick  school- house  was  erected. 
The  latter  has  eight  school  rooms,  with  an  attendance  of  500  children 
under  the  charge  of  one  male  teacher  and  six  sisters  of  the  Order  of 
St.  Francis.     There  is  now  in  course  of  erection  a  commodious  convent 


446  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

for  the  school  sisters  on  Fayette  street.  In  the  Sabbath  school  are  240 
scholars.  The  present  pastor  is  Rev.  Clement  Luitz,  who  is  assisted  by 
the  fathers  of  the  order.  The  congregation  owns  a  fine  cemetery. 
There  are  600  families  connected  with  the  church. 

St.  Patrick's  Catholic  Church  was  organized  on  the  natal  day  of  its 
patron  saint,  March  17,  1850.  Services  were  held  at  first  in  a  building 
(now  a  part  of  St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital)  erected  for  the  purpose  on  Col- 
umbia street  west  of  Varick.  The  first  pastor  was  Rev.  Patrick  Car- 
raher.  When  he  first  came  to  the  parish  he  inaugurated  a  movement 
to  secure  a  new  church.  A  lot  was  purchased  on  the  corner  of  Colum- 
bia and  Huntington  streets,  and  on  July  30,  185  r,  the  corner-stone  of 
an  edifice  120x64  feet  was  laid.  The  building  was  of  brick  and  cost 
$30,000.  Rev.  John  McDonald,  the  present  pastor,  succeeded  to  the 
charge  in  October,  1888,  Father  Carraher  having  resigned  after  a  pas- 
torate of  over  forty  years.  He  died  in  October,  1890.  In  November, 
1890,  fire  destroyed  the  church  building  and  services  have  since  been 
held  in  the  old  school -house  near  the  church  site  on  Columbia  street, 
which  has  been  the  property  of  St.  Patrick's  Church  for  many  years. 
In  March,  1886,  the  church  property  was  sold  on  a  mortgage  foreclos- 
ure. Father  Carraher  being  the  purchaser,  and  its  affairs  are  still  in  liti- 
gation. The  congregation  numbers  1,500  and  there  are  225  children 
in  the  Sunday  school. 

The  present  edifice  of  St.  Mary's  Catholic  Church  (German)  was  pur- 
chased in  1870  by  the  first  pastor  of  the  congregation.  Rev.  G.  Veith, 
from  the  German  Lutheran  Church  on  South  street.  It  is  located  at 
the  corner  of  South  street  and  Taylor  avenue.  Two  years  after  the  pur- 
chase Father  Veith  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  J.  B.  Eis,  who  remained  only 
six  months,  and  was  followed  by  Rev.  H.  Fehlings,  who  was  appointed 
by  the  bishop  of  the  diocese  in  1873.  During  his  ministration  a  rectory 
was  added  to  the  church  on  a  lot  adjoining  on  South  street.  The 
church  building  has  been  enlarged  and  with  its  various  additions  now 
assumes  the  form  of  a  cross.  Connected  with  this  society  is  a  parochial 
school  numbering  over  100  children,  and  three  benevolent  societies — 
the  Society  of  St.  Boniface,  the  Society  of  St.  Aloysius,  and  the  Society 
of  St.  Stanilaus.  A  cemetery  is  owned  by  the  congregation.  Two 
hundred  German  families  are  connected  with  the  church  and  the  pres- 
ent pastor  is  Rev.  Andrew  Lindenfeld. 


ST.  FRANCIS  DE  SALES  AND  ST.  AGNES  CHURCHES.  447 

In  April,  1877,  Rev.  Father  McNierney,  bishop  of  the  diocese,  gave 
letters  of  instruction  to  Rev.  Luke  G.  O'Reilly,  then  assistant  of  St. 
John's  parish,  authorizing  him  to  organize  a  new  parish  of  all  that  sec- 
tion east  of  Genesee  street  and  south  of  South  street,  to  be  known  as  the 
Church  of  St.  Francis  de  Sales  (Roman  Catholic).  About  300  members 
of  St.  John's  parish  who  lived  in  this  district  met  at  first  in  a  school- 
house,  which  was  placed  at  their  disposal  by  the  city  authorities.  Within 
a  year  after  the  establishment  of  the  parish  the  building  located  on  Steu- 
ben street  near  South  street,  which  had  been  one  of  the  public  school  edi- 
fices, was  purchased,  entirely  remodeled  and  beautified,  and  by  the  liber- 
ality of  the  members  of  the  parish  paid  for.  Father  O'Reilly  has  been  in 
charge  of  this  parish  from  the  beginning  and  is  still  the  pastor.  Persist- 
ent efforts  were  made  from  the  first  to  get  a  good  church  edifice  and  a 
suitable  site  was  finally  secured  at  the  corner  of  Eagle  street  and  Summit 
avenue  (lately  High  street).  Ten  years  from  its  organization  the  church 
had  completed  the  erection  of  a  beautiful  brick  building  and  parochial 
residence.  The  property  is  valued  at  $75,000.  The  church  is  in  the 
Romanesque  style  of  architecture,  with  one  tower,  and  will  seat  1,000 
persons.  Father  O'Reilly  is  assisted  by  Rev.  Bartholomew  Stack.  The 
congregation  numbers  1,000  communicants  and  there  are  300  scholars 
in  the  Sunday  school. 

In  1886  a  Sunday  school  was  established  by  members  from  St.  John's 
Church  in  the  old  public  school  building  in  Mary  street,  which  was  soon 
afterward  turned  into  a  Catholic  school.  In  May,  1887,  a  new  Roman 
Catholic  parish  was  formed  of  all  that  section  east  of  Mohawk  street  and 
called  St.  Agnes.  Rev.  John  J.  Toomey,  who  had  been  assistant  at  St. 
John's  for  five  years,  was  appointed  pastor  over  this  district,  services  were 
begun,  and  steps  were  taken  toward  the  erection  of  a  church  building. 
A  lot  was  secured  at  the  corner  of  Blandina  street  and  Kossuth  avenue 
and  the  corner-stone  of  the  church  was  laid  in  July,  1887,  the  services 
being  conducted  by  Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  Ludden,  while  Father  Lynch  of 
St.  John's  preached  the  historical  sermon.  Father  Toomey  died  June  13, 
iSgr,  and  Rev.  Michael  O'Reilly,  of  Pompey,  N.  Y.,  was  appointed  his 
successor.  The  church  services  have  been  held  in  the  basement  thus 
far,  but  the  completion  of  the  building  will  be  rapidly  pushed  forward. 
There  are  about  2,000  persons  in  the  congregation. 


448  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  first  Hebrew  congregation  in  Utica  was  organized  in  1848  with 
Rabbi  EUsner  as  leader.  They  worshiped  in  rooms  hired  for  the  pur- 
pose on  Hotel  street.  In  1852-53  the  congregation  was  re-organized 
with  Rabbi  Rosenthal  as  pastor.  They  built  a  small  frame  edifice  on 
Bleecker  street  for  a  synagogue.  These  services  did  not  continue  long, 
the  records  showing  that  from  1855  to  1870  the  congregation  had  no 
place  of  worship.  In  1870  a  synagogue  was  built  on  Whitesboro  street 
and  chartered  in  the  name  of  the  House  of  Jacob.  It  was  a  frame  build- 
ing seating  300  persons.  Rabbi  Sapero  then  oflSciated  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Revs.  Jacob  Hess,  L.  Eisenberg,  A.  Sinai,  H.  Lavine,  N. 
Ticken,  D.  Lavine,  L.  Sher,  and  H.  Friedlander,  the  present  rabbi,  who 
came  in  May,  1891.  In  1882,  during  the  pastorate  of  Rabbi  Sinai,  the 
synagogue  was  sold  to  Solomon  Griffiths,  and  July  22d  a  church  standing 
at  No.  1 1  Seneca  street  was  bought  from  the  Moriah  Welsh  Church  for 
$7,000.  The  present  attendance  is  about  200.  The  president  is  P.  Ga- 
linski  ;   trustees,  Joseph  Lipstein,  B.  Jacobson,  and  N.  Levi. 

On  December  7,  1888,  Levi  Lyons,  Elias  Marulsky,  and  David  Roth- 
stein  purchased  from  the  city  a  school-house  at  the  corner  of  Whites- 
boro and  Washington  streets  for  $2,715.  These  men  formerly  wor- 
shiped with  the  House  of  Jacob.  A  congregation  was  soon  gathered 
at  the  school-house  and  January  5,  1889,  an  organization  was  effected 
and  a  charter  obtained.  They  took  the  name  House  of  Israel.  The  first 
president  was  Levi  Lyons;  vice-president,  Elias  Marulsky;  and  these 
officers  are  acting  at  present.  During  the  'year  1S89  repairs  to  the 
amount  of  $3,000  were  made  upon  the  building,  which  seats  375  persons. 
Rev.  Morris  Coplin  was  the  first  rabbi ;  his  successor  was  Rev.  Birnie 
Lavine,  the  present  rabbi,  who  came  to  the  synagogue  August  15,  1890. 
The  membership  is  about  fifty.  A  small  Sunday  school  is  held  in  the 
basement  in  connection  with  the  synagogue. 


EARLIEST  SCHOOLS.  449 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
THE  SCHOOLS  AND  THE  PUBLIC  SCHOOL  LIBRARY. 

THE  first  school  in  Utica  (then  Old  Fort  Schuyler)  of  which  we  have 
any  account  was  kept  in  a  building  on  the  south  side  of  Main 
street  about  midway  between  First  and  Second.  This  old  school- house, 
once  the  sanctuary  of  the  fathers  and  the  seat  of  learning  for  their  sons, 
as  well  as  the  ordinary  place  of  assembly  for  secular  as  well  as  sacred 
purposes,  still  exists,  now  degraded  to  a  shed.  Its  longer  side  was 
once  parallel  with  the  street.  It  has  since  been  wheeled  around  so  that 
it  now  stands  endwise  with  the  street.  The  seats  were  in  part  slabs  of 
rough  boards  without  backs,  ^.nd  resting  on  logs  inserted  in  auger  holes. 
The  teacher  was  ensconced  in  a  seat  to  the  left  of  the  entrance.  As  a 
place  of  worship  the  building  was  used  until  the  completion  of  Trinity 
Church  in  1806,  when  for  a  brief  period  the  Episcopalians  and  the 
Presbyterians  worshiped  there  alternately.  As  a  school-house  and  for 
town  meetings  it  held  out  a  little  longer,  but  after  the  inauguration  of 
two  grammar  schools  farther  up  town,  and  after  its  stove  and  lamp  had 
been  sold  at  auction  in  1808,  its  usefulness  had  departed.  The  teacher 
in  charge  in  1797  was  Joseph  Dana,  who  is  well  spoken  of  as  a  good  in- 
structor, remarkable  for  the  order  and  discipline  he  maintained.  He 
was  succeeded  by  one  Clark,  and  he  by  Roswell  Holcomb  about  1804, 
the  same  who  twenty  years  later  was  in  charge  of  the  free  school  that 
sprang  up  afterward.  In  1805  we  hear  of  another  teacher,  Gideon  Wil- 
coxson,  but  he  soon  took  to  the  law  and  became  elsewhere  prominent 
therein.  In  1807  Jonathan  Child  presided  over  a  school  that  was  kept 
in  the  Welsh  Church  on  the  corner  of  Washington  and  Whitesboro 
streets,  but  his  stay  was  short. 

In  1808  Eliasaph  Dorchester  was  teaching  in  the  Welsh  Church 
while  his  rival,  David  R.  Dixon,  occupied  a  building  which  stood  where 
Grace  Church  now  is,  and  which,  besides  serving  as  a  school-house, 
became  now  the  place  of  assemblage  for  the  trustees  of  the  village. 
Mr.  Dixon  had  graduated  at  Yale  College  in  1807,  only  a  short  time 
57 


450  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

before  he  began  his  school.  In  February,  i8i  i,  he  opened  an  evening 
school  for  instruction  in  singing  while  continuing  his  grammar  school 
through  the  day.  At  the  same  time  he  was  privately  carrying  on  a 
course  of  study  in  divinity.  This  he  prosecuted  under  the  direction  of 
Rev.  Mr.  Carnahan.  In  1813  he  left  the  place.  As  a  teaclier  Mr. 
Dixon  was  capable  and  good  tempered.  His  school  was  the  Federal  one 
in  contrast  with  that  of  Mr.  Dorchester,  whose  patrons  were  found 
among  the  Democratic  families.  Among  his  pupils  he  had  two  who 
were  subsequently  admirals  in  the  navy,  two  State  senators,  an  eminent 
portrait  and  genre  painter,  and  others  scarcely  less  celebrated. 

Thomas  Colling  during  the  years  1810-11  kept  a  night  school.  In 
the  year  1813  a  private  school  was  in  operation  which  was  known  as  the 
Juvenile  Academy.  It  was  kept  in  the  third  story  of  Ihe  building 
situated  on  the  north  corner  of  Broad  and  Genesee  streets.  The  room 
had  been  constructed  for  a  Masonic  hall  and  consisted  of  a  tolerably 
sized  hall  and  two  small  rooms  in  the  rear.  It  was  attended  by  many 
of  the  children  of  the  principal  families  of  the  village,  male  and  female, 
instruction  being  given  in  all  the  branches  of  a  classical  education  as 
well  as  in  the  elements  of  English  learning.  The  first  teacher  was 
Henry  White,  a  gentle,  fair-haired  man  who  afterward  became  a  minis- 
ter. Being  taken  with  a  fever  and  afterward  going  away  to  recruit  the 
remainder  of  one  of  his  years  of  teaching  was  completed  by  S.  W. 
Brace,  then  a  pupil  of  Hamilton  College.  The  teacher  in  theyear  1816 
was  Oded  Eddy,  son  of  the  first  Baptist  preacher  of  Deerfield. 

In  the  year  18 13  nineteen  citizens  of  Utica  asked  the  Regents  of  the 
University  to  incorporate  an  academy  to  be  located  in  their  village.  A 
charter  was  granted  on  the  28th  of  March  in  the  next  year,  in  which  charter 
the  following  persons  were  named  as  trustees  :  Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer, 
Arthur  Breese,  Talcott  Camp,  David  W.  Childs,  Francis  A.  Bloodgood, 
Bryan  Johnson,  A.  B.  Johnson,  Thomas  Skinner,  Thomas  Walker,  Apol- 
los  Cooper,  Solomon  Wolcott,  Anson  Thomas,  Ebenezer  B.  Shearman. 
They  elected  Mr.  Van  Rensselaer  their  president ;  Mr.  Walker,  treasurer; 
and  Mr.  Shearman,  secretary.  They  also  started  a  subscription  to  raise 
the  means  with  which  to  erect  a  building  and  create  a  fund  that  should 
yield  an  annual  income  of  $200,  for  these  were  the  preliminaries  on 
which  depended  the  validity  of  their  charter.     After  a  little  fruitless  ex- 


UTICA  ACADEMY.  45, 

periment  in  favor  of  their  design  it  was  found  necessary,  as  it  would  seem, 
to  modify  the  terms  of  their  subscription  in  order  to  give  it  success  ;  and 
a  marginal  after-thought  was  appended,  enlarging  the  original  purpose 
of  a  mere  academic  building  into  that  of  a  building  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  courts  of  justice  and  public  meetings.  Though  the  circulation  of 
the  subscription  ceased  after  only  about  $1,600  had  been  subscribed 
the  trustees  formally  accepted  their  trust,  and,  as  we  have  said,  requested 
Rev.  Jesse  Townshend  in  June,  1815,  to  take  charge  of  their  "infant 
seminary."  This  Mr.  Townshend  was  born  in  1766  at  Andover,  Conn., 
was  graduated  at  Yale  College  in  1790,  after  which  he  prepared  himselt 
for  the  ministry  and  took  charge  of  a  church  in  his  native  State.  More 
recently  he  was  a  teacher  at  Madison,'  Madison  County.  The  repute  of 
his  school  at  the  latter  place  had  drawn  thither  several  boys  from  Utica 
and  its  vicinity,  and  gained  him  a  patronage  which  induced  him  to  settle 
there.  At  the  time  of  his  appointment  by  the  trustees  he  was  teaching 
a  grammar  school  in  the  village.  Mr.  Townshend  remained  instructor 
about  two  years  and  then  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  at 
Palmyra,  N.  Y.  With  respect  to  his  personal  character  it  is  said  that 
"few  men  have  lived  of  more  uniform  and  undissembled  piety." 

In  the  meantime  a  committee  of  citizens  proposed  to  the  trustees,  in 
the  year  18 16,  to  aid  them  in  erecting  a  building  which  should  subserve 
the  joint  purposes  of  "an  academy,  town- house,  and  court-house,"  and 
fresh  subscriptions  were  started.  At  once  there  sprung  up  a  famous 
controversy  about  a  sice  for  the  proposed  structure;  and  Genesee  road. 
Miller  road,  and  Whitesboro  road  had  a  street  fight  to  settle  that  mat- 
ter. The  Van  Rensselaers,  the  Bleeckers,  Dudleys,  and  Millers,  the 
Coopers,  Potters,  and  Bellingers  contested  it  so  hotly  that  it  became 
necessary,  as  expressed  in  the  new  subscription  paper,  in  order  to 
"secure  harmony  in  the  village,"  that  the  subscriptions  should  be  so 
made  as  that  every  subscriber  to  the  amount  of  $5  should  have  a  vote 
for  either  of  two  sites  designated,  one  of  which  was  the  site  finally 
adopted  and  the  other  a  lot  on  Genesee  street  then  adjoining  the  old 
Van  Rensselaer  homestead.  On  polling  the  votes  for  a  site,  as  pro- 
vided in  the  do'cument,  tQ']  votes  were  found  in  favor  of  the  site  on 
Chancellor  Square  and  445  in  favor  of  that  on  Genesee  street,  being  a  ma- 
jority of  222.     The  choice  was  strongly  stimulated  by  an  auxiliary  sub- 


452  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

scription  containing  the  significant  signatures  of  John  R.  Bleecker  and 
Charles  E.  Dudley,  who  offered  two  village  lots  valued  at  $500  contingent 
on  the  selection  of  their  favorite  site.  The  subscription  amounted  to 
$5, 000,  but  was  inadequate  to  finish  the  building  and  yield  the  requisite 
income  of  $100  a  year.  To  this  sum  the  village  authorities  at  length 
voted  an  addition  of  $300  more,  and  this  was  followed  in  the  summer 
of  1 8 18  by  a  fresh  subscription  on  which  was  raised  $500  and  by  a 
pledge  of  the  Dudley  and  Miller  lots  to  secure  the  annual  income. 
The  building  was  finally  completed  in  the  summer  of  1818.  It  occu- 
pied the  site  of  its  imposing  successor.  It  was  an  unpretending  brick 
edifice  of  two  stories,  about  fifty  by  sixty  ieet  with  a  wide  hall,  one 
large  room  on  the  north  and  two  smaller  on  the  south  on  the  first  floor, 
and  the  whole  upper  floor  was  the  court- room.  The  external  appear- 
ance of  the  structure  was  not  such  as  would  now  suit  favorably,  al- 
though it  was  a  well  proportioned  and  symmetrical  building.  But  it 
was  never  commodious  for  its  purpose  and  was  ill  calculated  to  serve 
the  double  use  it  was  destined  to.  Constables  were  required  to  stand 
guard  during  play  hours  to  stifle  urchin  shouts,  while  the  sacred  silence 
of  study  hours  was  interrupted  by  the  tread  and  turmoil  of  throngs  of 
jurymen,  witnesses,  attorneys,  and  judges,  to  say  nothing  of  the  pleas- 
ant grievance  of  being  routed  out  of  this  and  that  recitation  room  to  make 
way  for  jurymen  about  to  cast  lots  or  toss  coppers  for  verdicts.  -And 
thus  with  all  its  inconveniences  and  its  hinderances  it  stpod  for  over 
forty  years  without  change  of  purpose  or  of  plan,  never  lacking  of  a 
teacher  or  pupils,  yet  harboring  from  term  to  term  the  followers  of 
the  Supreme,  the  National,  and  the  County  Courts,  and  serving  likewise 
the  ends  of  citizens  intent  on  matters  of  local  or  of  general  interest — a 
nursery  for  generations  of  youth,  a  hall  of  judgment  for  the  wrong-doer, 
and  a  town  hall  for  a  public  spirited  and  intelligent  people. 

In  August,  18 18,  the  Rev.  Samuel  T.  Mills,  a  Presbyterian  clergy- 
man, was  appointed  the  first  preceptor  of  the  academy  at  a  salary  of 
$800  a  year,  and  in  October  a  Mr.  Whiteside  was  chosen  assistant  for 
six  months  with  a  compensation  at  the  rate  of  $300>  In  January,  1819, 
William  Hayes  was  appointed  to  teach  writing  and  arithmetic  at  $50  a 
quarter,  this  quarter  consisting  of  eleven  and  one-half  weeks.  It  \\as 
now  determined  that  there  should  be  a  public  examination  and  exhibi- 


Evf,.h,ELWM,„.,.!,a.,m' 


UTICA  ACADEMY.  453 

tion  every  year,  that  the  trustees  should  visit  the  school  once  a  month 
in  classes,  and  that  it  should  be  examined  by  the  teachers  at  the  close  of 
each  quarter.  There  were  three  classes  of  pupils,  one  of  whom  paid 
$5,  one  $4,  and  one  $3  a  quarter  for  tuition.  Mr.  Whiteside  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Ambrose  Kasson  as  teacher  in  the  English  department.  Mr. 
Mills,  though  an  earnest  and  worthy  man,  was  infirm  of  constitution 
and  soon  resigned.  His  place  was  temporarily  filled  by  William  Spar- 
row, a  graduate  of  an  English  or  Irish  university,  who  was  a  student  of 
theology  and  a  candidate  for  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church, 
to  which  he  was  soon  ordained.  However  skilled  for  a  professor  he  was 
not  well  adapted  for  popularity  with  boys  in  consequence  of  a  certain 
distance  and  air  of  haughtiness  which  forbade  familiarity.  For  a  short 
time  in  1822  the  principal  teacher  was  Edward  Aikin,  brother  of  Rev. 
Samuel  Aikin,  who  was  afterward  a  physician.  There  is  a  gap  in  the 
records  and  nothing  to  indicate  the  situation  of  the  academy  until  April, 
1824.  During  that  interval,  or  the  most  of  it,  the  school  was  in  charge 
of  Capt.  Charles  Stuart  as  principal.  He  was  a  half-pay  officer  in  the 
British  East  India  service  and  had  been  many  years  in  the  East.  He 
was  a  peculiar  mixture  of  the  severe  and  the  plaj'ful ;  tremendous  in 
his  wrath  and  hilarious  in  his  relaxed  moods ;  with  a  most  attractive 
smile  and  a  thunderous  volcanic  frown  in  which  there  seemed  to  be  a 
struggle  to  put  down  some  violent  passion  ;  withal  of  the  most  humane 
and  tender  feelings;  fond  of  children  and  youth  and  of  joining  boyishly 
in  their  sports,  but  strict  with  them  and  often  bitter  in  his  reproofs,  and 
terrible  in  his  punishments  of  casual  offences  of  which  they  did  not  always 
know  the  exact  enormity;  particularly  of  those  against  religion,  purity, 
and  good  manners.  He  was  an  earnest,  energetic,  enthusiastic  man ; 
every  way  uncompromising;  conscientious  to  morbidness;  and  alto- 
gether one  of  the  most  eccentric  and  mystical  of  men.  His  system  of 
instruction  was  eminently  rehgious  and  it  was  so  spontaneously  and 
naturally.  It  is  believed  that  he  was  the  first  teacher  in  this  country  to 
introduce  the  practice  of  singing  a  hymn  in  school  worship. 

Succeeding  Mr.  Stuart  was  Alexander  Dwyer,  a  graduate  of  Trinity 
College,  Dublin,  accomplished  both  in  the  classics  and  in  mathematics. 
His  discipline  was  somewhat  of  the  Busby  sort,  but  he  did  not  suc- 
ceed in  administering  it  satisfactorily  either  to  the  recipients  or  their 


454  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

natural  guardians.  It  was  probably  this  circumstance  and  his  cold, 
ungenial  manners  that  shortened  his  connection  with  the  school.  A 
brother  of  his,  also  a  Trinity  College  man,  was  his  assistant. 

In  January,  1825,  David  Prentice,  then  principal  of  the  academy 
at  Oxford,  Chenango  County,  to  which  he  had  given  such  a  good  name 
for  thoroughness  of  teaching  and  discipline  that  scholars  flocked  to  it 
from  considerable  distances,  was  appointed  principal.  He  was  a  single- 
minded  devotee  of  Latin  and  Greek,  and  spent  his  life  in  teaching  them 
with  diligence  and  enthusiasm.  He  imparted  a  more  vigorous  spirit 
into  the  management  of  the  school,  the  Regents  of  the  University  now 
pronouncing  their  testimony  in  favor  of  it  by  saying  that  "  it  has 
established  a  public  character."  In  November,  1828,  military  drill  was 
established  as  an  experimental  regular  exercise.  In  1832  the  school 
was  broken  up  by  the  prevalence  of  the  cholera  and  the  academy  build- 
ing, on  account  of  its  isolation,  was  devoted  to  the  purposes  of  a  hos- 
pital. In  December,  1836,  Mr.  Prentice  announced  his  intention  of 
removing  to  Geneva  to  accept  a  professorship  of  languages  in  the  col- 
lege there.  He  was  an  unobtrusive,  faithful,  indefatigable  teacher,  and 
was  for  several  years  a  professor  in  Hobart  College.  He  died  in  Geneva 
in  1859. 

In  December,  1836,  Rev.  Thomas  Towel  was  appointed  his  successor 
in  the  academy.  About  this  time  a  proposition  was  made  by  the  trus- 
tees to  annex  the  Utica  Female  Academy,  under  the  charge  of  Miss 
Urania  E.  Sheldon,  as  the  female  department,  in  case  she  should  consent- 
To  this  Miss  Sheldon  wisely  declined.  It  is  a  suitable  place  to  say  here 
that  female  pupils  had  from  time  to  time  been  taught  in  the  academy  as 
well  in  the  languages  as  in  other  branches  of  instruction.  Mr.  Towel 
found  it  necessary  to  suggest  that  some  new  rules  might  be  devised  for  the 
government  of  the  institution,  probably  for  the  purpose  of  defining  the 
relative  positions  of  the  principal  and  assistant  teacher.  The  committee 
to  which  these  were  referred  for  consideration  concluded  that  a  new 
organization  was  necessary,  and  to  make  a  clear  field  both  the  princi- 
pal and  the  assistant  resigned  their  places.  Mr.  Towel  wanted  the 
pluck  to  maintain  his  superiority  as  the  principal  against  a  spirited  and 
antagonistic  asssistant  and  the  tact  requisite  to  manage  boys. 

In  April,  1838,  Mancer  M.  Backus,  a  former  pupil  of  Mr.   Prentice, 


UTICA  ACADEMY.  455 

who  was  just  graduated  from  Columbia  at  the  age  of  twenty,  was  made 
principal.  He  had  two  assistants,  one  of  whom  remained  only  until 
August.  The  following  year  George  R.  Perkins  was  appointed  mathe- 
matical professor  and  William  A.  Barber  teacher  of  English,  and  an  ap- 
propriation was  made  for  the  purchase  of  books  and  apparatus.  There 
was  now  a  call  for  more  room  and  in  1840  the  unprecedented  force  of 
five  teachers.  In  1841  Henry  J.  Turner  was  engaged  to  teach  French 
and  Theodore  W.  Dwight  became  an  assistant  classical  teacher. 
Such  an  appointment  became  necessary  in  consequence  of  the  failing 
health  of  the  principal.  It  was  insufficient  to  respond  to  his  energies. 
Under  his  auspices,  assisted  as  he  was  by  Professor  Perkins,  the  school  had 
taken  a  forward  spring  and  reached  the  highest  state  of  prosperity  it  had 
yet  attained.  The  same  day  Mr.  Backus  resigned  George  R.  Perkins,  his 
associate,  was  appointed  principal — the  first  instance  of  the  appointment 
to  that  post  of  any  person  who  did  not  claim  to  be  qualified  in  classical 
studies.  In  July,  1842,  George  Spencer  was  appointed  classical  teacher 
at  a  time  when  th«  academy  seemed  to  be  falling  off  in  consequence  of 
that  department  not  being  adequately  filled. 

Other  causes  were  at  work  tending  to  undermine  the  academy  as  an 
independent  school.  About  this  period  the  state  of  the  common  schools 
of  the  city  began  to  excite  a  degree  of  attention  that  resulted  in  a  com- 
plete reformation  of  the  whole  local  system,  and  it  was  not  long  before 
the  common  schools  gained  a  repute  that  commended  them  to  general 
favor.  In  proportion  as  the  new  system  advanced  and  ripened  the 
academy  seemed  to  languish.  The  ordinary  branches  of  an  English  edu- 
cation could  now  be  taught  with  such  order,  gradation,  and  efficiency, 
and  so  entirely  without  individual  expense,  that  the  academy  had  little 
to  depend  on  but  its  Greek  and  Latin  and  the  higher  mathematics.  It 
could  still  train  pupils  for  a  collegiate  course,  and  that  was  all  that  it 
could  do  better  than  the  city  schools ;  and  as  its  pupils  diminished  its 
resources  diminished,  too,  until  it  became  a  struggle  for  bare  existence. 

In  November,  1844,  Mr.  Perkins  resigned  as  principal  in  order  to 
accept  an  appointment  in  the  State  Normal  School,  when  Mr.  Spencer 
was  made  principal.  Oren  Root  (now  professor  in  Hamilton  College) 
was  selected  as  the  teacher  of  mathematics,  a  place  which  he  retained 
only  a  few  months,  when  he  was  followed  by  John  G.  Webb.      In  1848 


4s6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Edwin  B.  Russ  was  appointed  a  teacher  in  the  English  department. 
In  June,  1849,  Mr.  Spencer  was  allowed  to  employ  a  substitute  for  a 
period,  when  the  number  of  pupils  seems  to  have  run  down  to  about 
thirty- five.  In  September,  1850,  partly  from  discouragement  and  prin- 
cipally from  ill  health,  he  resigned  his  place  as  principal  and  Ellis  H. 
Roberts,  a  graduate  of  Yale  College,  was  chosen  to  succeed  him.  Under 
Mr.  Spencer  the  academy  had  the  reputation  of  a  thorough  classical 
school.  He  was  devoted  to  it  and  possessed  the  requisite  ambition,  per- 
severance, and  energy  for  a  valuable  teacher  had  his  health  seconded 
and  sustained  him.  He  was  an  enthusiast  on  the  subject  of  education, 
to  which  he  had  designed  to  devote  his  life.  Mr.  Roberts  had  not  in- 
tended to  be  a  teacher  professionally,  and  within  a  year  he  entered  upon 
more  congenial  employment.  It  was  in  185  i  that  the  trustees  determined 
to  sell  to  the  county  for  a  court  house  the  John  street  front  of  the  academy, 
about  100  feet  by  115,  on  condition,  in  addition  to  a  pecuniary  consid- 
eration, that  the  release  of  the  remainder  should  be  obtained  from  the 
original  grantors  and  from  the  city,  so  that  it  might  be  free  of  all  ease- 
ments for  courts  and  public  meetings,  which  was  finally  consummated. 
Mr.  Roberts's  place  was  for  a  short  time  occupied  in  turn  by  a  Mr. 
Newcomb  and  a  Mr.  Kenget. 

In  April,  1852,  a  committee  of  the  trustees  was  appointed  to  confer 
with  the  school  commissioners — a  board  now  in  charge  of  the  common 
schools — respecting  some  arrangement  by  which  the  office  of  superin- 
tendent of  schools  and  of  principal  of  the  academy  might  be  united  ; 
and  in  August  a  plan  for  a  connection  was  suggested  by  the  school  com- 
missioners, to  which  the  trustees  responded  by  the  appointment  of  a 
committee  with  full  power  to  complete  the  union.  And  this  was  the 
last  act  of  the  trustees  under  the  old  charter.  In  May,  1853,  an  act  of 
the  legislature  provided  for  an  arrangement  by  which  the  school  com- 
missioners became  the  trustees  of  the  academy, preserving  the  venerable 
charter  and  binding  its  vitality  to  that  of  the  city  itself,  and  converting 
an  old  close  corporation  into  one  controllable  by  a  popular  vote.  The 
new  organization  was  accomplished  in  February,  1854,  by  the  choice  of 
Edmund  A.  Wetmore,  chairman  of  the  school  commissioners,  as  presi- 
dent, and  Daniel  S.  Hefifron,  superintendent  of  the  schools,  as  secretary. 

A  few  more  words  will  suffice  for  the  history  of  the  Utica  Academy, 


FIRST  FREE  SCHOOL. 


457 


for  though  it  has  continued  and  for  the  most  part  in  a  highly  prosper- 
ous state  to  the  present  time  it  is  no  longer  a  wholly  independent  in- 
stitution, but  is  hnked  with  the  other  public  schools  of  the  city  in  one 
graded  system  of  which  the  academy  is  the  head.  Under  this  new 
regime  Mr.  Weld,  a  graduate  of  Brown  tJniversity,  was  selected  for  prin- 
cipal with  three  female  teachers  for  assistants.  By  subscriptions  and 
by  appropriations  made  by  the  Regents  of  the  University  the  school 
apparatus  was  increased  to  the  value  of  nearly  $800.  The  standard  of 
education  was  high,  and  pupils  went  to  college  with  qualifiations  ex- 
ceeding the  collegiate  standard.  In  December,  1857, Mr.  Weld  resigned 
and  the  present  principal,  George  C.  Sawyer,  a  graduate  of  Harvard, 
succeeded  him.  For  now  thirty-four  years  he  has  been  at  the  head  of 
the  crowning  school  of  our  system. 

We  come  next  to  consider  the  first  free  school  of  the  place.  The 
first  act  of  the  legislature  in  relation  to  the  schools  of  Utica  was  passed 
April  7,  1817.  That  act  applied  "ail  school  moneys  coming  to  the 
said  village  under  the  school  laws  to  the  support  of  a  free  school  for  the 
education  of  such  poor  children  as  were  entitled  to  a  gratuitous  educa- 
tion." And  by  section  28  "all  the  property  of  the  twelfth  district  of 
Whitestown  [which  then  included  Utica]  was  vested  in  the  trustees 
of  the  village  of  Utica  for  said  free  schools."  The  proceedings  of  the 
trustees  for  the  year  1817  relate  that  in  pursuance  of  their  intention  to 
establish  a  free  public  school  they  erected  a  building  and  engaged  Igna- 
tius Thompson,  "  a  teacher  in  Utica,"  to  keep  the  school  for  three 
months,  from  the  .first  Monday  in  December,  at  $40  per  month.  Fifty 
dollars  were  appropriated  for  the  repair  and  fuel  of  the  school  Public 
notice  was  given,  and  children  were  admitted  on  the  presentation  of  a 
ticket  signed  by  one  of  the  trustees.  Shortly  after  the  expiration  of 
this  engagement  it  was  resolved,  at  a  special  meeting,  that  Mr.  Thomp- 
son have  the  use  of  the  school-house  for  two  quarters,  free  of  rent,  pro- 
vided he  teach  the  scholars  for  $2  per  quarter  each.  But  two  days 
later,  at  a  regular  and  fuller  meeting  of  the  board,  it  was  determined, 
without  any  cause  that  appears  on  the  record,  that  the  school-house  be 
shut  up,  and  hot  opened,  either  for  school-keeping  or  religious  meet- 
ings, until  further  order  of  the  board.  This  two- story  building  after- 
ward  known  as   the  Lancaster  school   stood    upon  the  south  side   of 

58 


4s8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Catharine  street  nearly  opposite  Franklin,  its  upper  story  being  used 
by  the  Masons.  During  the  following  year  it  was  still  continued  under 
the  direction  of  Mr.  Thompson.  But  in  1819  it  was  to  be  conducted  on 
the  Lancaster  system  agreeably  to  a  proposition  made  the  trustees  by 
Mr.  I'Amoureux.  In  September  he  published  a  report  of  his  school 
for  the  first  term.  He  reports  213  as  having  been  admitted  and  203 
now  remaining  in  the  school.  Of  these  26  read  in  the  New  Testament, 
28  are  learning  to  read  simple  stories  on  cards,  130  are  making  rapid 
improvement  in  spelling  and  reading  words  of  two  to  eight  syllables,  and 
19  are  learning  to  make  the  alphabet  in  sand  ;  60  have  learned  to  write 
a  tolerable  hand  and  80  are  learning  to  write  words  of  from  one  to  three 
letters  ;  32  are  learning  to  cypher,  seven  of  whom  are  nearly  masters  of 
the  first  four  rules  of  arithmetic ;  and  a  class  in  geography  is  now  com- 
mitting the  first  principles. 

In  1822  Andrew  I'Amoureux  was  still  the  teacher,  but  in  1824  his 
place  is  occupied  by  Roswell  Holcomb,  one  of  the  early  teachers  of  the 
Main  street  school-house,  his  salary  being  equivalent  to  $350  a  year 
and  $65  being  allowed  for  fuel  and  repairs.  We  next  read  that  in  1825 
the  scholars  were  obliged  to  pay  three  shillings  each  term,  which  sum 
was  to  be  applied  toward  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  teachers,  the  sum 
received  from  the  school  fund  not  being  adequate  for  the  purpose.  Rev. 
Joseph  Carter  became  principal  in  1828  and  the  school  was  re- organ- 
ized. The  appropriations  made  to  it  amounted  to  about  $600.  There 
were  then  about  150  pupils  and  the  school  was  represented  as  flourish- 
ing. Mr.  Carter  was  succeeded  by  Eliasaph  Dorchester,  assisted  by 
Miss  Susan  Wright  in  the  female  department;  he  presided  for  some 
years.  A  legislative  act  was  passed  in  1830  giving  to  the  trustees  of 
the  village  power  to  establish  schools  at  their  pleasure  and  distribute 
the  public  money  as  to  them  shall  seem  proper,  and  in  April  of  the  fol- 
lowing year  a  committee  of  the  trustees  was  appointed  to  sell  the  free 
school  lot  on  Catharine  street  and  buy  another  suitable  for  common 
school  and  fire  purposes.  The  school  was  next  kept  in  the  session- room 
of  the  Second  Presbyterian  Church  on  the  corner  of  Charlotte  and  Eliz- 
abeth streets.  The  same  year  (1831)  a  school  district  was  established 
in  the  eastern  part  of  the  village  and  a  school  located  oh  the  corner  of 
East  and  Minden  streets.  A  third  public  school  was  added  in  1834 
with  Abraham  Yates  as  principal. 


INFANT  SCHOOLS— PRIVATE  ONES.         '  459 

The  foregoing  is  a  very  brief  and  inadequate  description  of  the  free 
schools  of  an  early  date.  No  statistics  exist  showing  their  actual  con- 
dition, nor  are  there  any  records  prior  to  the  time  when  they  came  un- 
der the  control  of  the  Board  of  School  Commissioners  in  1842.  A 
further  consideration  is  therefore  deferred. 

Two  other  schools  of  a  public  nature  may  be  mentioned  here.  In 
April,  1828,  an  infant  society  was  organized  with  four  directors  and 
twenty- four  managers,  whose  object  was  to  give  care  and  instruction  to 
the  infant  poor  of  the  place  of  eighteen  months  to  two  years  of  age,  to 
relieve  their  parents  during  the  day,  and  to  screen  their  children  from 
such  evil  influences  as  they  might  encounter  from  without.  In  fact  the 
institution  resembled  what  has  been  known  in  more  recent  times  as  a 
creche.  It  relied  upon  public  liberality  for  its  support.  Mrs.  Moses 
Bagg  was  the  first  directress  and  Mrs.  Emma  R.  Crowley  the  precept- 
ress. In  1829  a  similar  school,  termed  the  Pattern  Infant  School,  was 
started  in  another  locality  under  the  patronage  of  Jesse  W.  Doolittle. 
Both  of  them  received  in  1832  an  appropriation  of  $92  each  from  the 
council. 

While  thus  treating  of  public  schools  it  must  not  be  presumed  that 
there  were  no  private  ones  at  this  era.  The  latter  were  in  fact  the  most 
numerous.  The  directory  of  1829  gives  a  list  of  thirty-three  teachers 
who  were  then  ministering  to  educational  wants.  Indeed,  when  regard 
is  had  to  the  respective  populations  of  that  time  and  the  present,  they 
were  more  abundant  than  they  now  are.  The  excellence  of  our  public 
schools  of  the  present  day  has  much  diminished  the  need  of  private 
ones.  Let  us  briefly  notice  a  few  of  these  latter,  omitting  for  the  pres- 
ent those  designed  for  ladies  only.  Ambrose  Kasson,  who  in  1819  was 
an  assistant  in  the  academy,  opened  shortly  after  a  school  of  his  own 
on  Whitesboro  street  corner  of  Division.  He  ranked  high  as  an- in- 
structor and  received  large  patronage.  During  a  part  of  his  career  he 
had  as  a  colleague  Mrs.  S.  Gridley.  Cotemporaneously  with  him  as  a 
teacher  was  Royal  West,  with  whom  the  trustees  arranged  for  the  pub- 
He  building  next  to  Trinity.  William  Sparrow  opened  a  classical  school 
of  his  own,  but  soon  entered  the  academy  as  its  principal.  In  1824 
Elisha  Harrington,  compiler  of  the  earlier  directories,  gave  himself  to 
teaching  and  was  aided  therein  by  his  sister. 


,460 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


The  next  in  order  was  the  Utica  High  School,  known  afterward 
as  the  Utica  Gymnasium.  This  was  a  school  of  considerable  note 
throughout  the  State,  and  the  only  boarding  school  for  boys  that 
ever  continued  for  much  length  of  time  in  Utica.  It  was  founded 
in  1827  and  flourished  about  eight  years.  Its  founder  and  princi- 
pal was  Charles  Bartlett,  who  was  a  native  of  Charlton,  Saratoga 
County,  a  graduate  of  Union  College,  and  a  Presbyterian.  He  had 
previously  for  a  short  time  conducted  a  select  school  on  Wash- 
ington street  a  little  above  Fayette.  This  school  he  gave  up  to  Isaac 
Wilmarth  before  starting  the  high  school.  For  the  latter  purpo  e  he 
leased  the  house  and  farm  at  the  lower  end  of  Broad  street  which  had 
belonged  to  Dr.  Solomon  Wolcott.  The  farm  comprised  from  sixty  to 
eighty  acres  and  was  taken  in  charge  by  Joseph  Bartlett,  brother  of 
Charles,  and  as  the  latter  remained  some  years  unmarried  he  was  aided 
in  the  domestic  part  of  the  school  by  the  family  of  his  brother-in-law, 
Jeremiah  Waring,  and  next  by  his  own  brother,  Dudley.  While  these 
families  occupied  a  part  of  the  building  the  rest  of  it  was  given  up  to 
dormitories,  dining  hall,  recitation -rooms,  etc.  Here  the  session  was 
begun  in  the  autumn  of  1827.  The  annual  expense  to  each  pupil  was 
$200  (afterward  reduced  to  $150).  Mr.  Bartlett  did  not  confine  him- 
self to  any  special  branch  of  study,  teaching  several  English  ones  as  well 
as  the  rudiments  of  Latin  and  Greek.  Though  not  a  profound  scholar 
he  taught  earnestly  and  was  a  strict  disciplinarian.  The  pupils  were 
also  taught  horseback  riding,  swimming,  gardening,  were  exercised  in 
gymnastics,  and  listened  to  lectures  in  chemistry,  botany,  mineralogy, 
etc.,  from  the  teachers  in  this  department,  and  made  frequent  excursions 
into  the  surrounding  country  in  pursuit  of  knowledge  in  some  of  these 
branches.  Careful  attention  was  given  to  morals  and  deportment ;  the 
pupils  were  required  to  attend  church  on  Sunday  and  were  instructed 
in  the  Scriptures  on  Sunday  evening.  Among  the  teachers  who  were 
prominent  in  this  school  besides  the  principal  were  Fay  Edgerton,  a 
graduate  of  the  Polytechnic  School  at  Troy;  Dr.  Asa  Gray,  the  distin- 
guished botanist ;  Rev.  John  P.  Spinner,  a  native  of  Germany,  father 
of  the  late  Francis  E.  Spinner,  United  States  treasurer,  who  taught  lan- 
guages ;  Uridge  Whififen ;  Silas  Kingsley ;  and  George  F.  Comstock, 
late  judge  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  of  New  York  and  still  living  in  Syra- 


UTICA  HIGH  SCHOOL.  461 

cuse.  A  new  school-house  was  erected  on  the  further  side  of  the  play- 
ground, three  stories  in  height,  with  entrances  on  each  side  to  the  lower 
rooms  and  stairways  leading  to  those  above.  The  lower  rooms  were 
used  by  the  boys  when  not  on  duty  in  school  and  for  shelter  in  bad 
weather.  The  story  above  contained  the  school-room  and  four  recita- 
tion-rooms, while  the  third  story  was  one  large  dormitory.  The  later 
built  school- house  was  still  more  unique  in  character  and  stood  farther 
eastward  than  the  former  ones.  It  was  of  brick,  two  stories  high,  but  with 
only  one  room  and  semi-circular  in  form,  with  its  flat  side  and  entrances 
toward  the  street.  Around  the  inside  of  the  whole  half  circle  were 
ranged  two  series  of  stalls,  one  above  the  other,  and  wide  enough  for  a 
single  desk  in  each.  Thus  each  pupil  was  unable  to  communicate  with 
his  neighbor  and  was  in  plain  view  of  his  teacher,  who  sat  opposite  in 
the  center  of  the  circle.  There  was  an  annual  attendance  at  the  school 
of  upwards  of  forty,  the  largernumber  of  whom  were  from  Utica.  Among 
those  who  were  more  or  less  distinguished  were  the  two  eminent 
professors  of  Yale  College,  James  D.  Dana,  the  naturalist,  arid  S.  Wells 
Williams,  the  Chinese  scholar  ;  the  late  Alexander  S.  Johnson,  judge  of 
the  Court  of  Appeals  of  this  State  and  afterward  circuit  judge  of  the 
United  States;  the  late  Morris  S.  Miller,  brevet  brigadier- general 
U.  S.  A.,  and  his  brother,  the  late  John  B.  Miller;  and  others.  John 
F.  Seymour,  Edward  S.  Brayton,  besides  others  now  living  were  like- 
wise pupils. 

A  fire  which  in  the  year  1835  destroyed  the  second  of  the  school- 
houses  caused  the  disruption  of  the  establishment,  and  so  far  embar- 
rassed the  principal  that  he  abandoned  the  field.  He  removed  to 
Poughkeepsie  and  there  kept  a  successful  school  until  his  death. 

Another  much  prized  school,  established  two  years  later  than  Mr. 
Bartlett's,  was  the  Classical  and  Commercial  Lyceum  of  Messrs.  Philips 
&  Kingsley.  But  as  Mr.  Philips  was  soon  succeeded  by  Lewis  Bailey, 
and  as  the  latter  was  ere  long  left  alone  in  charge,  it  is  best  known  as 
his  school,  he  continuing  it  until  about  1 840.  Mr.  Kingsley,  who  taught 
the  English  branches,  was  the  same  who  taught  for  Mr.  Bartlett.  He 
removed  to  Buffalo  and  there  followed  with  success  the  same  vocation. 
Lewis  Bailey  was  a  graduate  of  a  New  England  college  and  was 
skilled  as  a  teacher.    The  school  was  situated  on  the  east  side  of  Wash- 


462  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ington  street  between  Whitesboro  and  Liberty.  It  enjoyed  the  pat- 
ronage of  many  of  our  best  citizens  and  trained  many  of  their  sons.  It 
ceased  about  1839-40,  and  Mr.  Bailey,  after  a  temporary  absence, 
came  back  and  in  company  with  the  late  John  B.  Wells  had  a  part  in 
the  founding  of  the  well  known  mercantile  house  of  the  latter.  After- 
ward alone  he  remained  in  the  dry  goods  trade  until  near  his  death, 
September  20,  1852.  Another  classical  and  commercial  school  was  begun 
in  1832  by  John  Williams,  who  conducted  it  for  a  period  of  forty-one 
years,  terminating  with  his  death  m  1873.  Its  location  was  on  Carnahan 
street  (now  Blandina).  The  same  year  the  Catholics  had  a  school  on 
John  street  above  Bleecker,  which  was  mostly  maintained  by  private 
subscription.  A  little  later,  about  1835-38,  William  Barrett  presided 
over  a  school  on  Genesee  street  a  few  doors  below  Carnahan.  He  stud- 
ied law  and  located  in  Little  Falls.  Two  of  the  best  remembered 
dames'  schools  of  those  days  were  those  of  Miss  Dickens  and  Miss 
Bowen,  where  were  upwardly  inclined  many  of  the  twigs  which  began 
their  sprouting  from  1820  to  1830  or  thereabouts,  the  former  having 
in  care  the  shoots  of  Whitesboro  street  and  vicinity,  the  latter  those 
of  John,  Broad,  etc. 

In  thus  glancing  at  some  of  the  private  educational  enterprises  of  that 
time,  which  were  either  designed  wholly  for  boys  or  were  mixed  in  their 
character,  I  have  not  noted  the  institutions  intended  for  young  ladies  ex- 
clusively. The  very  earliest  of  the  latter  kind  was  doubtless  that  of  Solo- 
mon P.  Goodrich,  a  dealer  in  books,  a  trustee  and  a  man  of  influence  in 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  Of  his  school  nothing  is  now  remembered  ex- 
cept that  one  day  in  1806  he  kindly  dismissed  his  scholars  that  they 
might  witness  the  progress  of  the  sun's  eclipse  of  that  year.  About  1818 
a  young  ladies'  school  was  opened  by  Montgomery  R.  Bartlett,  which 
at  once  met  with  favor  among  the  best  families  of  the  town.  Mr.  Bart- 
lett, who  was  a  native  of  New  Hampshire,  was  in  some  departments  an 
accomplished  scholar,  being  the  author  of  an  astronomy,  a  map  of  the 
heavens,  and  an  edition  of  Murray's  English  Reader  with  definitions  of 
inflection  and  emphasis  and  rules  for  reading  verse.  He  was  rather 
severe  in  discipline  and  did  not  teach  long,  but  lived  in  Utica  until 
about  1830. 

A  school  of  1822  was  memorable   for  the  mannered  rules  of  fashion 


THE  WOODBRIDGE  AND  EVERTS  SCHOOLS.  463 

which  were  there  imparted.  It  was  kept  by  Madam  Despard  on  Broad 
street  near  Genesee.  Not  so  skilled  in  grounding  her  pupils  in  the  ele- 
ments of  English  scholarship  she  could  teach  them  French  and  music 
as  well  as  how  to  enter  a  parlor,  how  to  receive,  and  how  to  deport 
themselves  au  salon.  But  the  time  was  not  yet  propitious  for  a  fashion- 
able boarding  school  and  so  its  mistress  went  elsewhere. 

A  veteran  teacher,  one  who  was  a  pioneer  in  the  business  of  conduct- 
ing young  ladies'  schools,  and  who  established  one  in  Utica  in  1824, 
was  Rev.  William  Woodbridge,  who  was  born  September  14,  1755,  and 
was  consequently  now  in  his  seventieth  year.  In  the  winter  of  1779— 
80,  being  then  in  his  senior  year,  he  taught  a  young  ladies'  school  in 
New  Haven  County.  It  was  then  quite  a  novel  experiment,  but  it  suc- 
ceeded and  was  soon  followed  by  others.  He  afterward  taught  in 
Phillips  Academy  and  elsewhere  before  coming  to  this  place  as  well 
as  afterward;  in  all  about  fifty-six  years.  He  wrote  for  the  An- 
nals of  Education,  conducted  by  his  son,  Rev.  William  C.  Woodbridge, 
and  for  other  periodicals.  In  1799  he  was  president  of  an  association 
formed  at  Middletown,  Conn.,  for  the  improvement  of  common 
schools,  which  is  believed  to  have  been  the  first  of  the  kind  that  was 
ever  formed  in  the  United  States.  In  Utica  Mr.  Woodbridge  was  well 
received,  his  school  containing  many  of  the  daughters  of  the  leading 
families  of  the  place.  It  was  situated  on  the  northwest  corner  of  John 
and  Catharine  streets,  on  the  site  of  Reynolds's  shoe  factory. 

A  school  wherein  the  English  branches  were  not  neglected  while  the 
ornamental  ones  received  also  a  due  share  of  attention  was  that  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Charles  C.  Everts,  which  was  begun  in  1826.  It  was  on 
Whitesboro  street  opposite  the  first  site  of  the  Bank  of  Utica,  and  was 
generally  favored  by- those  who  had  daughters  to  be  educated.  Music 
and  perhaps  some  other  accomplishments  were  imparted  by  Mrs.  Everts, 
the  remainder  by  her  husband  and  their  three  assistants.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Everts  remained  here  until  1840,  though  it  does  not  appear  that  the 
school  was  continued  so  long.  In  the  York  House,  nearly  opposite, 
there  established  themselves  in  1828  Rev.  Samuel  Whittlesee  and  wife. 
They  had  ha:d  experience  elsewhere  and  were  now  prepared  to  accom- 
modate fifty  boarders.  Their  terms  were  $25  per  year  for  the  English 
studies  with  extra  payment  for  Latin,  French,  music,  drawing,  or  paint- 


464  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ing,  etc.,  and  $2  per  week  for  board.  They  had  four  assistants.  In 
1833  their  school  was  on  the  corner  of  Genesee  and  Pearl,  and  there 
they  were  busy  in  editing  the  Mother's  Magazine.  Their  successor  in 
the  York  House  was  Samuel  H.  McLauren,  who  termed  his  venture  the 
Female  Institute.  He  kept  the  institute  but  a  single  year  and  yielded 
it  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  H.  Johnson.  The  terms  and  methods  of  the  latter 
were  nearly  the  same  as  those  of  the  former,  except  that  no  additional 
cost  was  asked  for  the  study  of  French,  which  was  to  be  the  language 
of  the  family. 

But  the  people  of  Utica  felt  at  this  time  the  need  of  a  place  for  the 
training  of  their  daughters  which  should  be  as  good  as  the  academy 
had  been  for  their  sons,  which  should  do  away  with  the  necessity  of 
sending  their  daughters  away  to  be  educated  as  many  had  been,  and 
should  at  a  more  moderate  cost  offer  advantages  for  instruction,  not  only 
to  residents  of  the  city,  but  to  those  of  the  country  around.  Men  of  in- 
fluence were  enlisted  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  object.  By  them 
the  public  were  aroused  to  its  importance,  a  stock  company  was  formed, 
without'expectation,  however,  of  pecuniary  gain,  and  the  means  were  se- 
cured. This  institution  was  chartered  April  28,  1837.  The  first  trus- 
tees named  in  the  charter  were  John  H.  Ostrom,  Nicholas  Devereux, 
Horatio  Seymour,  C.  A.  Mann,  Joshua  A.  Spencer,  S.  D.  Childs,  T.  S. 
Faxton,  John  C.  Devereux,  Alrick  Hubbell,  T.  E.  Clark,  T.  H.  Hub- 
bard, Theodore  Pomeroy,  A.  Munson,  B.  F.  Cooper,  Chester  Griswold, 
John  Williams,  Horace  Butler,  Charles  P.  Kirkland,  S.  P.  Lyman, 
Holmes  Hutchinson,  and  Henry  White.  The  same  year  four  lots  lying 
between  Washington  street  and  Broadway,  with  the  buildings  upon 
them,  were  purchased  at  a  cost  of  $6,300.  The  school  was  first  opened 
in  the  building  known  as  the  United  States  Hotel,  corner  of  Genesee 
and  Pearl  streets,  where  it  was  continued  until  the  new  building  was 
finished.  Tlie  number  of  students  in  December,  1838,  was  168.  In 
1838-39  an  academy  building  of  brick,  three  stories,  50  by  150  feet  in 
dimensions,  was  greeted,  the  corner-stone  having  been  laid  with  proper 
ceremonies  June  20,  1838.  The  first  principal  was  Miss  Urania  E. 
Sheldon,  who  continued  until  August,  1842,  when  Rev.  James  Nichols 
and  wife  succeeded  her  and  remained  until  June,  1844,  when  they  retired 
and  were  succeeded  by  Miss  Jane  E.  Kelly,  who  continued  to  fill  the 
position  until  1865. 


UTICA  FEMALE  ACADEMY.  465 

The  fitness  of  Miss  Sheldon  to  conduct  a  seminary  had  been  shown 
as  the  head  of  one  in  Schenectady.  To  this  of  Utica  she  at  once  gave 
as  great  success.  In  the  household  department  she  was  aided  by  her 
sister  Cynthia,  and  in  that  of  instruction,  besides  others,  by  two  pupils 
she  brought  with  her,  who  became  afterward  her  earliest  successors. 
She  was  herself  drawn  away  from  teaching  by  her  marriage  to  Rev.  Dr. 
Eliphalett  Nott,  president  of  Union  College.  Her  first  brief  successor 
has  been  known  to  her  credit  in  similar  service  in  Rochester.  On  the 
more  lasting  and  meritorious  work  of  Miss  Kelly  it  seems  needless  to 
enlarge.  Her  capacity  as  a  moral  as  well  as  intellectual  Mentor,  her 
skill  and  tact  in  the  management  of  this  numerously  attended  institu- 
tion, the  able  corps  of  teachers  she  from  time  to  time  collected  to  her 
assistance,  are  familiar  not  solely  to  this  community,  but  are  lauded  by 
her  scattered  pupils  the  whole  country  over.  After  her  retirement  she 
continued  to  live  in  the  city  until  her  death.  One  of  her  sisters,  chief 
dependence  of  the  house  and  its  inmates,  still  survives. 

The  building  was  burned  on  the  27th  of  March,  1865.  The  present 
elegant  and  substantial  building  was  erected  on  the  same  ground  about 
1869-70  at  a  cost  of  $75,000.  It  is  60  by  150  feet  in  dimensions,  three 
stories  and  basement,  and  constructed  of  brick  with  roof  laid  in  varie- 
gated slates.  It  is  one  of  the  finest  structures  in  the  State,  and  justly 
a  source  of  pride  to  the  citizens  of  Utica,  even  among  the  many  noble 
educational  and  charitable  institutions  which  ornament  the  city.  More 
ground  has  since  been  added  on  the  north  and  on  the  south  of  its  rear. 
The  school  was  interrupted  from  1865  to  1871,  in  which  latter  year  Mrs. 
E.  F.  Hammill,  of  Brooklyn,  leased  the  building  for  three  years  and 
opened  school.  At  the  end  of  the  three  years  she  leased  it  again  for  one 
year  and  continued  to  the  summer  of  1875,  when  she  was  succeeded  by 
the  present  principal,  Mrs.  J.  G.  C.  Piatt.  At  the  present  time  the  school 
employs  about  fifteen  teachers  in  the  various  departments,  and  has  from 
thirty  to  forty  regular  boarders  and  from  eighty  to  ninety  day  scholars. 
Formerly  known  as  the  seminary,  or  by  its  official  title  as  the  Utica 
Female  Academy,  it  is  now  "  Mrs.  Piatt's  School,"  though  still  owned 
by  the  stockholders  and  controlled  by  the  trustees  whom  they  annually 
elect.  Reports  of  its  condition  are  required  by  the  Regents,  though 
Regents'  examinations  are  no  longer  made  and  no  funds  are  obtained 
from  the  literature  fund.  ^^ 


466  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  narrative  of  the  public  schools  and  consider 
them  from  the  time  of  the  appointment  of  a  school  board,  which  board 
united  the  academy  with  the  other  public  schools,  incorporating  them 
into  one  common  system  and  effected  important  improvements  in  their 
modes  of  disciphne  and  management.  About  the  year  1843  the  state  of 
the  common  schools  of  the  city  began  to  excite  public  attention.  By 
virtue  of  a  legislative  act  of  that  year  demanded  by  strong  popular  feel- 
ing they  were  put  under  the  charge  of  six  commissioners,  eligible  from 
year  to  year  in  successions  of  two  each  year.  As  it  was  conceded  from 
the  first  that  the  schools  should  not  be  under  any  partisan  domination 
the  two  leading  political  parties  concurred  in  establishing  a  precedent 
that  each  of  them  should  name  one  candidate  every  year,  and  the  two 
thus  nominated  should  be  indiscriminately  voted  for.  This  precedent, 
which  has  no  legeal  sanction  to  enforce  it,  has  in  no  case  been  positively 
disturbed.  The  commissioners  elected  at  the  charter  election  in  1843 
were  Rudolph  Snyder,  Hiram  Denio,  Spencer  Kellogg,  RobertT.  Hallock; 
Francis  Kernan,  and  James  Watson  Williams.  To  an  address  delivered 
by  Mr.  Williams  before  the  friends  of  the  academy  in  1868  I  am  indebted 
for  the  particulars  of  the  foregoing  history  of  the  institution.  Their  first 
act  was  to  institute  a  thorough  and  faithful  examination  of  the  existing 
schools,  which  resulted  in  showing  a  great  lack  of  system,  a  looseness 
of  discipline,  a  sad  deficiency  of  teaching  power  and  talent,  a  miserable 
niggardliness  of  compensation,  and  a  perversion  and  misapplication  of 
funds  that  proved  the  necessity  of  some  radical  change,  or  a  complete 
abandonment  of  common  education  to  private  enterprise  and  liberality. 
The  city  owned  but  three  indifferent  school  buildings  and  hired  three 
or  four,  more  indifferent  still,  and  there  were  about  i,iOO  children  at- 
tending them.  The  commissioners  immediately  commenced  a  thor- 
ough re- organization;  they  repaired  and  improved  the  old  school  build- 
ings and  soon  commenced  the  erection  of  larger  and  more  convenient 
ones ;  they  adopted  a  graded  system  extending  from  the  primary  depart- 
ment up  through  the  ward  schools  and  the  advanced  school  to  the  acad- 
emy; and  they  put  in  use  a  uniformity  of  text  books.  In  1850  the  board 
appointed  Daniel  S.  Hefifron  superintendent  of  schools.  Mr.  Heff- 
ron  possessed  in  an  eminent  degree  a  knowledge  of  school  organization 
and  discipline,  and  for  over  seventeen  years  he  labored  earnestly  and 


THE  ADVANCED  SCHOOL.  467 

faithfully  in  conjunction  with  the  commissioners  in  their  efforts  to  elevate 
the  common  schools  of  the  city.  These  efforts  have  always  been  cheer- 
fully seconded  by  the  citizens.  When  called  upon  for  the  funds  needed 
for  building  school- houses  and  the  support  of  the  schools  they  have 
responded  cheerfully  and  almost  unanimously.  At  the  date  of  the  be- 
ginning of  their  labors  the  buildings  owned  by  the  city  were  a  brick 
school-house  on  the  corner  of  Bleecker  and  Bridge  streets  (now  Park 
avenue)  and  one  on  Columbia  street,  and  a  wooden  one  on  the  Minden 
turnpike  (now  Albany  street) ;  schools  belonging  to  the  city  were  like- 
wise conducted  in  the  basement  of  the  Welsh  Church  on  Whitesboro 
street  corner  of  Washington,  on  Franklin  street,  and  on  Bleecker  street. 
Some  of  these  were  infant  schools,  some  for  older  scholars.  The  aggre- 
gate amount  of  real  and  personal  property  pertaining  to  the  schools 
then  owned  by  the  city  was  $3,169.50  and  the  amount  of  the  school 
fund  was  $3,167.25.  In  1868,  the  date  of  the  first  published  report  of 
the  commissioners,  which  covers  very  nearly  the  period  of  service  of 
Mr.  Heffron,  there  were  twelve  school-houses  of  various  grades  under 
their  control  besides  the  academy.     These  were  as  follows: 

The  advanced  school  edifice.  This  is  located  on  the  corner  of  Eliza- 
beth and  Charlotte  on  a  lot  presented  to  the  city  for  school  purposes  by 
John  R.  Bleecker,  of  Albany,  in  May,  1846,  and  was  completed  the  fol- 
lowing year.  It  is  a  central  school  where  pupils  transferred  from  the 
intermediate  schools  receive  a  good  common  school  education  and  a 
preparatory  course  for  entrance  into  the  academy.  It  is  a  three- story 
brick  building,  well  warmed,  ventilated,  and  lighted,  and  will  accommo- 
date 468  pupils.  It  has  three  departments  with  a  principal  over  each 
and  six  assistants.  This  building  is  still  occupied  by  the  advanced 
school,  although  it  has  been  considerably  enlarged  and  improved  since 
it  was  first  built.  Next  followed  the  Hamilton  street  and  the  Steuben 
street  schools,  built  in  185  i.  The  Blandina,  Aikin,  and  Catharine  were 
begun  in  1852,  though  the  latter  was  not  occupied  until  1856;  the  Whites- 
boro street  school  erected  in  1853;  the  Albany  street  and  the  Lansing 
street  in  1858  ;  the  Court  street  in  i860;  the  South  street  and  the  Fran- 
cis street  in  1867.  These  are  all  brick  buildings,  two  stories  in  height 
and  of  similar  style,  are  designed  for  the  instruction  of  primary  and  in- 
termediate pupils,  and  have  each  a  principal  and  two  or  three  assistants. 


468  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

To  these  must  be  added  Faxton  Hall,  a  two-story,  substantial  brick 
building  erected  by  the  late  Theodore  S.  Faxton  near  the  Globe  Woolen 
and  Steam  Cotton- Mills,  of  which  the  first  story  is  designed  for  school 
purposes,  the  second  story  containing  an  assembly-room,  library-room, 
and  reading-room,  which  hall  Mr.  Faxton  in  1868  generously  donated 
to  the  city  on  the  conditions  that  the  commissioners  assume  its  mainte- 
nance and  control ;  that  the  city  keep  it  in  repairs,  pay  all  taxes  and  as- 
sessments, and  rebuild  it  if  destroyed.  The  commissioners  were,  more- 
over, expected  to  act  in  co-operation  with  trustees  from  the  above 
named  factories. 

On  the  morning  of  May  13,  1865,  the  Utica  Academy,  with  its  fur- 
niture, apparatus,  and  library,  was  destroyed  by  fire.  By  permission  of 
the  Board  of  Supervisors  the  school  was  opened  and  continued  in  the 
court-house  until  the  completion  of  a  new  building.  The  commissioners 
took  immediate  steps  for  enlarging  the  academy  grounds  and  obtained 
possession  of  the  lot  on  the  corner  of  Academy  and  Bleecker  streets. 
In  March,  1866,  the  plans  for  the  new  building  were  adopted  and  the 
erection  commenced,  although  it  was  not  completed  until  the  autumn 
of  1867.  This  building,  in  the  Renaissance  style  of  architecture,  is  located 
on  the  site  of  the  former  one,  that  is  to  say  a  little  back  from  the  corner 
of  Academy  and  Bleecker  streets,  and  near  the  center  of  a  lot  contain- 
ing about  32,000  square  feet.  It  is  built  of  selected  brick,  two  stories 
high,  and  covered  with  a  Mansard  roof.  A  tower  fourteen  feet  square 
projects  from  the  east  fa9ade  and  is  ninety-eight  feet  high.  The  stories 
are  respectively  thirteen  and  twenty- one  feet  in  height.  The  first  con- 
tains recitation- rooms,  laboratory,  and  reception-room;  the  second, 
besides  wardrobe  and  library,  has  a  study-room  of  magnificent  propor- 
tions. In  architectural  design,  convenience  of  arrangement,  and  com- 
pleteness of  finish  this  building  compares  favorably  with  any  similar 
institution  in  the  State.  Besides  the  principal,  who  teaches  the  ancient 
languages  and  mental  philosophy,  it  has  another  teacher  in  the  ancient 
languages,  a  teacher  of  the  natural  sciences,  a  teacher  of  mathematics, 
one  of  French  language  and  literature,  one  of  German,  and  one  of  the 
higher  English.  The  course  of  study  is  comprehensive  and  embraces, 
four  years  in  the  classical  and  English  department ;  the  classical,  giving 
thorough  preparation  for  admission  to  college,  may  be   completed  in 


THE  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS.  469 

three  years.  The  number  of  pupils  in  the  academy  in  the  year  1868 
was  143  and  in  all  the  schools  under  the  control  of  the  school  commis- 
sioners 3,836,  and  the  expenses  for  the  year,  not  including  the  cost  for 
the  new  academy  building  and  its  equipment,  was  $36,667.25. 

On  the  13th  of  July,  1867,  Mr.  Hefifron  resigned  his  position  as  su- 
perintendent of  schools,  his  labors  extending  over  a  period  of  seventeen 
years.  Courteous  in  manner,  clear  in  judgment,  deliberate  in  opinion, 
with  the  best  interests  of  the  schools  at  heart,  the  teachers  at  all  times 
found  him  a  firm  friend  and  a  judicious  counselor,  the  patrons  of  the 
school  a  careful  guardian  of  their  rights,  and  popular  education  a  con- 
scientious advocate  and  supporter. 

Mr.  Heffron  was  succeeded  by  Andrew  McMillan,  who  for  the  past 
twenty-four  and  one-half  years  has  had,  in  conjunction  with  the  suc- 
cessively appointed  commissioners,  the  control  and  management  of  the 
schools.  He  prepared  the  first  school  report,  that  of  1868,  since  which 
time  these  reports  have  been  made  and  published  annually,  and  to  him 
more  than  to  any  other  person  are  the  schools  indebted  for  the  perfect- 
ing of  their  present  system. 

Having  thus  briefly  noticed  the  public  schools  that  were  in  existence 
in  1868  I  proceed  to  summarize  the  later  additions.  In  January,  1869, 
an  evening  school  was  commenced  in  the  Faxton  school  building,  and 
in  May  of  the  same  year  St.  Patrick's  Parochial  School,  which  occupied  a 
brick  building  on  Columbia  street,  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  school 
commissioners  and  organized  as  one  of  the  public  schools  of  the  city. 
This  building,  the  same  which  had  been  built  and  used  by  the  city,  and 
which  was  subsequently  sold  to  the  Roman  Catholics,  was  now  volun- 
tarily tendered  to  the  school  commissioners  free  of  rent  for  seven  years. 
In  1870  they  purchased  the  Welsh  Congregational  Church  on  Wash- 
ington street  and  remodeled  it  for  a  school,  the  lower  story  being 
divided  into  recitation- rooms  and  the  upper  converted  into  a  study- 
room.  The  large  and  commodious  school-house  corner  of  Miller  and 
Leah  streets  was  constructed  in  1870-71  ;  it  accommodates  more  than 
twice  as  many  pupils  as  either  of  the  other  ward  school-houses. 

The  Court  street  school-house  was  in  1878  enlarged  to  twice  its  orig- 
inal capacity  and  much  improved  in  its  general  arrangement,  having 
now  two  stairways  leading  to  the  second  story,  one  at  each  end  of  the 


470  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

building,  one  for  the  boys  and  one  fpr  the  girls.  It  will  now  seat  366 
pupils.  In  1879  the  Lansing  street  school- house  was  enlarged  and  im- 
proved on  the  same  general  plan  and  thus  provides  seats  for  130  more 
scholars  from  that  district.  In  1880  a  new  and  commodious  building 
was  erected  on  the  corner  of  James  and  Kemble  streets.  It  is  72  x  102 
feet  in  dimensions  and  furnishes  accommodations  for  500  pupils.  It  is 
of  a  more  modern  style  of  architecture,  and  is  more  appropriately  con- 
trived with  respect  to  lighting  than  either  of  its  predecessors,  the  area  of 
glass  being  equal  to  one-quarter  of  the  area  of  the  room  lighted. 

Owing  to  the  rapid  increase  of  population  in  the  eastern  part  of  the 
city  a  new  school  building  was  imperatively  demanded.  A  site  for  the 
purpose  was  bought  in  1879.  This  site  extended  from  Blandina  to 
Mary  near  Jefferson  avenue.  Upon  it  was  placed  for  temporary  use  a 
small  wooden  building,  which  was  removed  from  the  Lansing  street  lot, 
where  it  had  been  used  for  a  primary  school.  During  the  year  1881  a 
large  and  conveniently  arranged  brick  structure  took  the  place  of  this 
temporary  one;  it  is  one  of  the  most  fitly  arranged  school  buildings  in 
Central  New  York. 

In  1888  the  old  landmark,  first  a  church,  then  a  school-house,  known 
as  the  Washington  street  school,  was  sold  and  the  proceeds  devoted  to 
the  erection  of  a  new  and  spacious  structure  in  the  same  district,  located 
on  Whitesboro  street.  In  respect  to  architecture,  beauty,  ventilation, 
heat,  and  light  it  is  unsurpassed.  It  is  of  brick,  with  brown  stone  and 
moulded  trimmings,  modern  in  style  and  pleasing  in  effect,  and  so  at- 
tractive within  as  to  make  school-room  duties  a  pleasure  rather  than  a 
task. 

The  report  of  Mr.  McMillan,  school  superintendent,  made  to  the 
board  December  3,  1 891,  presents  the  following  summary  of  the  schools 
for  the  year  then  expired  :  The  school  property  owned  by  the  city,  ex- 
clusively of  the  library  building,  consists  of  eighteen  buildings,  all  of 
which  are  substantially  built  of  brick  and  in  general  presenting  a  neat 
appearance,  while  some  may  be  considered  as  models  of  school  archi- 
tecture. Their  estimated  value,  independent  of  furniture,  apparatus, 
etc.,  is  $354,464.  The  whole  number  of  teachers  employed  during  the 
year  was  1 78,  viz.:  Nine  in  the  academy,  eighteen  in  the  advanced  school, 
sixty- five   in    the    primary    schools,    sixty- three   in    the   intermediate, 


THE  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS.  471 

nine  in  the  evening  schools,  and  eleven  substitute  teachers  for  general 
work.  The  amount  paid  for  teachers'  salaries  was  $73,826.19.  The 
number  of  pupils  enrolled  during  the  year  was :  in  the  primary  depart- 
ment 1,407  boys,  1,832  girls,  making  a  total  of  3,239  ;  in  the  intermed- 
iate department  1,177  boys,  1,037  girlS)  total  2,214;  in  the  advanced 
school,  boys  376,  girls  488,  total  864;  in  the  academy,  boys  106, 
girls  154,  total  260 ;  evening  schools,  boys  341,  girls  376.  Thus 
the  total  enrollment  was  6,953.  The  expenditures  for  the  year  amounted 
to  $21,480.31,  the  receipts  for  the  same  period  being  $114,989,  of  which 
latter  amount  $79,000  was  raised  by  city  tax,  $25,875  came  from  the 
State  appropriation,  and  $1,513.60  from  the  literature  fund  dispensed  by 
the  Regents  of  the  University. 

At  the  close  of  every  spring  term  of  the  schools  oral  examinations, 
followed  by  exhibitions,  musical,  declamatory,  etc.,  are  held  in  all  of  the 
lower  departments,  and  these  are  largely  attended  by  the  parents  and 
friends  of  the  children.  At  the  end  of  the  year  there  are  written  exam- 
inations in  all  of  the  departments  but  the  primary,  by  which  are  tested 
the  capacity  of  the  scholars  to  enter  upon  a  higher  grade,  and  only  in 
case  such  examination  is  satisfactorily  sustained  are  the  candidates  ad- 
mitted to  such  advance..  The  questions  submitted  for  the  examination 
of  the  academic  pupils  are  prepared  by  the  State  Board  of  Regents, 
being  the  same  intended  for  all  the  academies  of  the  State.  Those  de- 
signed for  the  advanced  and  the  intermediate  scholars  are  prepared  by 
the  school  superintendent,  and  as  trials  of  the  degree  of  attainment  of 
these  classes  of  scholars  these  papers  are  equally  exacting.  The  thor- 
oughness of  teaching  and  of  scholarship  which  is  expected,  and  which 
in  fact  does  characterize  the  various  departments  of  the  system  of  Utica 
public  schools,  is  worthy  of  the  highest  praise ;  it  is  said  by  competent 
judges  to  have  no  superior  in  the  State.  Most  of  the  middle-aged  and 
younger  men  brought  up  in  this  city  have  been  pupils  in  these  schools, 
and  the  number  of  its  eminent  graduates  is  considerable. 

A  few  others  of  the  present  schools  of  the  city  must  be  briefly  noticed. 
One  of  these  is  the  Business  College,  another  the  Assumption  Academy 
under  Catholic  direction,  besides  which  there  are  a  few  parochial  schools 
connected  with  the  churches  and  two  or  three  private  schools. 

The  Utica  Business  College  was  opened  in  1863  by  C.  A.  Walworth, 


472  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

who  conducted  it  under  the  firm  ndme  of  Bryant,  Stratton  &  Walworth. 
It  was  then  known  as  the  Bryant  &  Stratton  Utica  Business  College. 
Mr.  Walworth  retained  his  interest  till  July  i,  1867,  when  the  school 
was  purchased  by  H.  B.  McCreary  and  Thomas  H.  Shields,  and  the 
business  continued  under  the  name  of  McCreary  &  Shields.  After  the 
death  of  Mr.  McCreary  in  1887  the  school  was  continued  under  the 
same  firm  name  till  July,  1889,  when  the  McCreary  interest  was  pur- 
chased by  G.  F.  Hendrick,  who  in  company  with  Mr.  Shields  has  since 
conducted  the  business  under  the  firm  name  of  Shields  &  Hendrick. 
The  aim  of  the  institution  is  to  fit  young  men  and  women  for  the  duties 
of  a  business  life.  It  makes  a  specialty  of  the  practical  branches,  such 
as  book-keeping,  penmanship,  commercial  arithmetic,  commercial  law, 
stenography,  typewriting,  telegraphy,  etc.,  and  has  a  large  and  steadily 
increasing  patronage  from  this  and  adjoining  States. 

The  Assumption  Academy  was  opened  August  15,  1854,  under  the 
direction  of  Father  McFarland,  then  pastor  of  St.  John's  Catholic 
Church.  The  school  building  had  been  erected  during  the  summer 
preceding  the  opening  of  the  school  and  was  originally  built  exactly  as 
it  now  stands;  the  interior  only  has  suffered  any  change,  and  this  con- 
sists in  the  removal  of  the  stairway  to  the  center  of  the  building  and 
the  re- arrangement  of  the  school- rooms.  It  stands  at  the  corner  of  John 
and  Elizabeth  streets,  is  built  of  brick,  three  stories  high,  and  eighty 
feet  square.  When  first  erected  it  was  the  only  Catholic  school  in  the 
city  and  had  an  attendance  of  700  pupils.  But  when  St.  Vincent's  Or- 
phanage was  taken  by  the  Brothers  a  part  of  the  pupils  were  taken  there  ; 
and  when  St.  Agnes's  parish  was  established  the  school  was  again  re- 
duced. Father  McFarland's  plan  was  to  have  this  school  the  central 
one  of  several  located  throughout  the  city,  and  he  intended  that  pupils 
should  finish  here  what  had  been  begun  in  the  lower  schools,  but  his  re- 
call and  appointment  to  a  charge  in  the  East  caused  these  plans  to  be 
somewhat  altered.  The  school,  however,  furnishes  primary  instuction 
and  fits  pupils  for  college.  There  are  at  present  six  Brothers  teaching 
in  the  school,  one  secular  teacher  being  also  employed.  The  Brothers 
have  been  in  charge  of  the  school  from  its  inception.  It  is  free  to  all  in 
St.  John's  parish,  by  which  society  it  is  supported;  others  pay  $10 
yearly  for  tuition.     There   are  no  pupils  living  in  the  school  building 


UTICA  LIBRARY— PUBLIC  SCHOOL  LIBRARY.  473 

and  but  few  pupils  live  outside  the  city.     There  are  two  terms  of  five 
months  each,  and  310  scholars.     Brother  Alpheus  is  the  principal. 

^  public  library  was  incorporated  on  the  5th  of  March,  1825,  under 
the  title  of  the  Utica  Library,  and  was  opened  in  July  following  with 
1,100  books.  It  was  owned  by  shareholders  and  controlled  by  a  board 
of  twelve  trustees.  The  number  of  shares  was  fixed  at  400,  their  value 
being  $3  each  ;  and  these  were  nearly  all  of  them  soon  sold  and  were 
held  at  an  advance  from  the  original  price.  The  books  were  well 
selected  and  of  standard  authority,  and  among  them  were  sets  of  the 
best  English  and  American  periodicals.  Within  a  few  years  this  num- 
ber was  increased  to  2,500.  The  faithful  librarian  was  Justus  H.  Rath- 
bone,  who  attended  for  the  drawing  of  books  once  in  each  week.  In  the 
course  of  a  few  years  the  books,  which  had  at  first  been  kept  in  the 
office  of  Mr.  Rathbone  on  Broad  street,  were  removed  to  rooms  in  the 
building  of  the  Mechanics  Association,  and  the  library  was  opened  six 
days  in  the  week.     Nothing  of  this  library  is  known  later  than  1837. 

The  origin  of  school  district  libraries  in  the  State  of  New  York  dates 
from  the  year  1838.  In  that  year  $55,000  of  the  $260,000  belonging 
to  the  income  of  the  United  States  deposit  fund  was  directed  to  be  dis- 
tributed to  the  several  school  districts  of  the  State  for  the  purchase  of 
books  for  the  district  libraries.  Utica  received  her  share  in  the  distri- 
bution and  appropriated  it  as  directed  by  law,  thus  establishing  the  free 
library  of  the  city.  By  legislative  act  of  1842  the  library  of  Utica  was 
placed  under  the  control  of  the  school  commissioners.  In  their  first  re- 
port these  commissioners  state  that  "the  annual  apportionment  of 
school  moneys  gives  at  present  the  sum  of  $583.86  for  the  purchase  of 
books,  and  furthermore  the  library  is  thought  to  be  well  selected  and 
contains  about  1,700  volumes  ;  that  the  drawings  are  well  attended, 
from  one- half  to  two- thirds  of  the  volumes  being  in  constant  circulation 
among  all  classes."  It  is  probable  that  a  large  part  of  these  1,700  vol- 
umes was  secured  either  by  donation  or  purchase  from  the  library 
association  above  mentioned,  or  from  the  collection  of  the  Young  Men's 
Association  disbanded  about  this  time.  The  presumption  is  based  on 
the  fact  that  many  of  the  books  now  in  the  library  were  printed  twenty 
or  thirty  years  before  its  establishment,  and  some  as  long  as  fifty  to  one 
hundred  years  before  that  time.     The  school  library  was  located  over 

60 


474  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  Central  New  York  Bank  on  Franklin  Square,  and  Francis  D.  Gros- 
venor  was  the  first  librarian  appointed  by  the  commissioners,  continuing 
to  act  until  1851.  The  growth  of  the  collection  was  slow  ;  in  1865  it 
amounted  to  but  4,000  volumes,  in  1868  to  5, 000,  in  1873  to  6,028,  and 
in  1876  to  6,146.  It  was,  however,  a  well  chosen  one,  its  largest  part 
consisting  of  standard  works  in  history  and  biography,  besides  which 
there  were  a  goodly  number  of  voyages  and  travels,  of  literary,  poetic, 
and  scientific  productions,  while  of  novels,  adventures,  etc.,  the  most 
were  selected  from  leading  and  approved  authors,  and  of  books  of  ref- 
erence there  were  580  volumes.  In  1856  the  library  was  removed,  with 
the  office  of  superintendent  of  schools,  to  the  new  city  hall  building, 
where  it  remained  until  the  completion  of  the  present  library  building  in 
1878.  This  building  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  Elizabeth  street 
between  Genesee  and  Charlotte,  and  has  a  frontage  of  sixty-four  feet 
by  a  depth  of  eighty-eight  feet.  It  is  of  the  Victoria  Gothic  style.  Its 
front  and  sides  are  faced  with  Croton  pressed  brick,  with  black  brick  to 
mark  lines  and  arches,  and  is  trimmed  with  brownstone  and  Prospect 
limestone.  The  main  building  has  two  stories  and  an  attic  and  the  fa9ade 
is  surmounted  by  a  tower.  The  library  proper — 40x60  feet  and  47 
feet  to  apex  of  roof — is  situated  at  the  rear  end  of  the  main  hall 
and  is  lighted  by  side  and  clere- story  windows.  It  contains  a  gallery 
supported  on  iron  brackets  and  is  reached  by  an  iron  stairway.  This 
part  of  the  building  is  fireproof,  the  roofs  being  of  slate,  the  clere-story 
of  galvanized  iron,  the  windows  furnished  with  iron  shutters,  while 
double  iron  doors  shut  it  off  from  the  remainder  of  the  building.  Ad- 
joining this  room  is  a  reference  library  and  reading-room.  Other 
rooms  on  the  first  floor  are  the  superintendent's  office,  a  room  for  the 
Board  of  Education,  etc.,  while  the  second  floor  contains  a  lecture- room 
with  a  seating  capacity  of  400.  For  completeness  of  arrangement, 
elegance  in  finish,  and  beauty  of  architecture  the  building  is  excelled 
by  few  similar  institutions. 

Through  the  bequest  of  Theodore  S.  Faxton  the  library  in  1881  came 
into  possession  of  $2,500  to  be  used  for  the  purchase  of  additional 
books.  The  money  could  not  have  been  more  worthily  bestowed.  The 
amount  annually  received  from  the  State  and  city  (at  that  time  about 
$600)  had  always  been  insufficient  to  keep  the  library  in  repair  and  to 


PUBLIC  SCHOOL  LIBRARY.  475 

buy  the  new  books  which  were  considered  necessary.  The  increased 
number  of  patrons  found  it  impossible  to  obtain  the  books  wanted  and 
those  in  the  collection  were  being  worn  out  through  constant  use.  In 
the  course  of  three  years  after  the  receipt  of  the  legacy  about  four- fifths 
of  it  were  used  and  over  1,200  standard  books,  including  many  duplicates 
of  the  former  possessions,  were  placed  in  the  "  Faxton  alcove."  From 
a  full  report  made  in  1885  by  Benjamin  N.  Lewis,  then  librarian,  we 
learn  that  there  were  then  on  the  shelves  10,020  volumes,  of  which  num- 
ber 8,460  were  for  circulation  and  1,560  for  reference.  The  library  was 
about  that  time  designated  as  a  depository  for  public  documents  issued 
by  the  general  government.  While  the  value  of  some  of  these  docu- 
ments may  be  questioned  it  is  certain  that  a  part  of  them  are  well 
worth  preserving.  The  State  legislative  documents  are  also  regularly 
received  and  are  available  for  reference.  During  the  year  32,497  books 
were  taken  from  the  library,  being  an  mcrease  of  7,202  over  the  num- 
ber drawn  during  the  previous  year.  Fifty- six  per  cent,  of  the  drawers 
were  adults,  the  remainder  being  chiefly  school  children.  In  additiori 
to  the  patrons  of  the  circulating  library  several  hundred  persons  con- 
sulted the  books  of  reference  of  whoTi  no  record  was  kept.  The  32,- 
497  books  drawn  during  the  year  were  classified  as  follows:  Novels, in- 
cluding not  only  light  fiction,  but  those  of  Scott,  Thackeray,  Dickens, 
Cooper,  Hawthorne,  etc.,  14,880;  juvenile  books,  comprising  besides 
children's  stories  all  histories  of  a  juvenile  nature,  12,409;  historical, 
scientific,  and  other  works,  5,568.  The  hours  during  which  the  library 
is  open  for  drawing  are  10  A.  M.  to  12:30  P.  M.  and  2:30  to  8  P.  M.,  ex- 
cept during  the  school  vacations,  when  the  number  of  hours  in  each 
day  is  lessened.  The  librarian's  report  for  1890  shows  that  there  are 
now  in  the  library  12,840  volumes;  the  total  number  of  patrons  wha 
have  drawn  books  3,840;  that  there  have  been  added  within  the  year  by 
purchase  548,  by  donations  198,  by  periodicals  bound  for  the  library 
18;  total  764.  Of  the  52,500  books  given  out  23,926  were  juvenile, 
26,669  were  novels,  and  7,905  historical,  literary,  and  scientific. 

By  the  more  cultivated  portion  of  the  community  it  is  commonly  felt 
that  the  School  Library  of  Utica — or  the  City  Library  as  it  is  more  fre- 
quently called — is  inadequate  to  the  needs  of  a  city  of  40,000  inhab- 
itants.    When  it  is  recollected,  however,  that  several  book  clubs  are  in 


476  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

existence  which  supply  themselves,  not  only  with  the  leading  periodicals, 
but  with  the  bulk  of  the  more  approved  recent  publications ;  that  there 
is  here  a  historical  society  with  a  fast  growing  collection  ;  and  that  the 
books  of  reference  on  the  shelves  of  the  school  library  are  numerous 
and  valuable  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  facihties  for  reading  are  very 
considerable,  and  for  popular  use  quite  adequate  to  the  popular  demand. 
By  scholars  in  quest  of  rarer  and  more  recondite  works,  and  by  those 
pursuing  special  lines  of  inquiry,  a  deficiency  is  chiefly  felt.  And  here 
it  must  be  admitted  that  Utica  is  behind  many  other  cities  of  equal  size. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


THE   PRESS. 


BEGINNING  with  the  earliest  newspaper^  issue  of  Utica,  and  trac- 
ing its  history  down  to  the  paper  into  which  it  has  been  absorbed, 
I  shall  next  notice  the  contemporaries  of  the  latter  and  afterward  more 
briefly  a  few  journals  and  magazines  that  are  now  extinct.  The  first 
newspaper  printed  west  of  Albany  in  this  State  was  the  Whitestown 
Gazette  at  the  village  of  New  Hartford,  then  a  part  of  Whitestown.  It 
was  commenced  July  1 1,  1793,  as  is  shown  by  a  copy  of  its  first  number 
in  the  possession  of  the  Oneida  Historical  Society.  The  publication 
was  suspended  the  following  winter,  but  was  resumed  in  May,  1796, 
William  McLean  being  printer  and  shortly  after  becoming  proprietor. 
In  July,  1798,  the  year  in  which  Oneida  County  was  organized,  Mr. 
McLean  moved  to  Utica  and  issued  his  paper  under  the  name  of  the 
Whitestown  Gazette  and  Cato's  Patrol,  the  additional  title  referring  to 
the  defender  of  ancient  Utica.  This  was  the  first  paper  printed  in  Utica 
or  in  Oneida  County.  The  second  in  the  county  was  the  Western  Cen- 
tinel  in  Whitesboro,  begun  in  January,  1794,  and  discontinued  after  a 
few  years.     In   February,  1803,  Mr.  McLean  disposed  of  his  paper  to 

'  The  genealogy  of  the  earliest  newspaper  in  the  list  was  prepared  by  Alexander  Seward,  esq. 
The  sketches  o£  the  remaining  ones,  that  is  to  say,  of  those  now  published,  were  mostly  furnished 
by  their  respective  editors. 


THE  EARLIEST  NE  WSPAPER.  ^•j'j 

John  H.  Lothrop,  who  changed  its  name  to  the  Patriot,  Merrell  &  Sew- 
ard becoming  the  printers. 

In  1804  the  title  of  the  Patriot  was  changed  to  the  Utica  Patriot, 
under  which  name  it  continued  until  1816,  being  printed  "for  the  ed- 
itor" after  1803  by  Ira  Merrell  and  after  18 13  by  Merrell  &  Camp.  Wm; 
H.  Maynard  succeeded  Mr.  Lothrop  as  editor  and  proprietor  in  181 1. 

The  Patrol  was  commenced  by  Seward  &  Williams  at  Utica  on  Janu- 
ary I,  181 5,  and  was  united  with  the  Utica  Patriot  on  January  2,  1816, 
under  the  name  of  the  Utica  Patriot  and  Patrol.  It  was  printed  for  the 
proprietors  by  Ira  Merrell  and  was  issued  semi- weekly,  Tuesday  and 
Friday,  for  about  one  year,  then  weekly,  on  Tuesdays,  till  1821.  The 
proprietors,  according  to  its  prospectus,  were  Asahel  Seward,  William 
H.  Maynard,  and  William  Williams.  The  name  of  the  editor  did  not 
appear  in  those  days  on  the  paper  itself  Examination  of  these  old 
newspapers  shows  that  the  part  of  the  editor  then  was  very  different 
from  what  it  is  now.  What  is  termed  editorial  matter  seldom  appears. 
The  paper  was  chiefly  made  up  of  news  selected  from  other  newspa- 
pers, with  the  briefest  editorial  headings  and  communications  and 
advertisements.  In  fact  the  editorliterally  fulfilled  the  dictionary  defini- 
tion of  the  word — one  who  arranges,  prepares,  and  superintends  the 
publication  of  the  work  of  others — a  much, humbler  part  than  that  of 
the  newspaper  editor  of  the  present  time. 

The  Utica  Sentinel  appeared  in  the  place  of  the  Patriot  and  Patrol  on 
March  13,  1821.  The  cause  of  this  change  of  name  was  somewhat  pe- 
culiar. The  Patriot  and  Patrol  was  Clintonian  in  its  politics,  represent- 
ing the  sentiments  of  a  large  majority  of  voters  in  this  district.  The 
politics  of  the  editor  changed  and  the  tone  of  the  paper  also.  An 
alarming  loss  of  patronage  naturally  followed.  No  arrangement  being 
practicable  between  the  parties  in  interest  the  Patriot  and  Patrol,  under 
the  advice  of  prominent  Clintonian  lawyers,  was  dropped  by  its  pub- 
lisher and  the  Utica  Sentinel,  "  printed  by  Ira  Merrell  for  William  Will- 
iams, editor  and  proprietor,"  appeared  in  its  stead.  The  Utica  Sentinel 
was  sold  to  Samuel  D.  Dakin  and  William  J.  Bacon,  and  by  them  united 
with  the  Columbian  Gazette  and  issued  May  6,  1825,  under  the  name  of 
the  Utica  Sentinel  and  Gazette,  "  printed  by  Northway  &  Bennett  "  till 
April  I,  1828,  then  by  Northway  &  Porter.     Messrs.  Dakin  and  Bacon, 


478  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTICA. 

were  joint  editors  and  proprietors  from  1825  till  1828,  when  S.  D.  Da- 
kin  became  sole  editor  and  owner,  and  in  1829  he  sold  it  to  its  printers, 
Northway  &  Porter.  It  was  published  semi- weekly  till  January,  1829. 
In  1 83 1  Rufus  Northway  became  the  sole  proprietor.  Theodore  S. 
Gold  became  editor  after  Mr.  Dakin  and  continued  so  till  the  establish- 
ment of  the  daily  paper  in  1842. 

The  Columbian  Gazette,  which  was  united  with  the  Utica  Sentinel, 
was  first  published  at  Rome,  August  17,  1799,  by  Thomas  Walker  and 
Ebenezer  Eaton  by  the  name  of  the  Columbian  Patriotic  Gazette,  and 
was  removed  to  Utica  and  issued  March  21,  1803,  as  the  Columbian 
Gazette  by  T.  Walker,  and  continued  to  be  so  published' until  its  union 
with  the  Sentinel  in  1825.  Eliasaph  Dorchester  was  associated  with 
Mr.  Walker  in  its  publication  in  181 5  and  18 16. 

In  January,  1830,  the  Am.erican  Citizen  and  August  7,  1832,  the 
Utica  Intelligeticer  were  united  with  tlie  Sentinel  and  Gazette. 

The  Utica  Intelligencer  was  commenced  February  2,  1826,  by  Will- 
iam Tracy  as  editor  and  proprietor,  and  was  printed  by  Ira  Merrell  for 
one  year  and  afterward  by  Joseph  Colwell  till  its  termination.  E.  S. 
Ely  succeeded  Mr.  Tracy  as  editor  May  9,  1828,  for  two  years,  and  he 
by  Joseph  H.  Buckingham  from  January  ist  to  October  5,  1830. 

The  first  number  of  the  American  Citizen  appeared  June  8,1830. 
George  S.  Wilson  was  the  editor  and  proprietor.  The  paper  was  con- 
tinued about  half  a  year. 

The  Elucidator,  the  organ  of  the  anti- Masonic  party,  was  commenced 
January  i,  1829,  by  Beriah  B.  Hotchkin  as  editor  and  proprietor  and 
was  published  from  January  i,  1830,  to  May,  1834,  by  William  Will- 
iams as  proprietor.  Samuel  P.  Lyman  became  the  editor  after  the  re- 
tirement of  Mr.  Hotchkin,  January  i,  1833.  It  was  united  with  the  Sen- 
tinel and  Gazette  and  the  combined  paper  issued  May  20,  1834,  under  the 
name  of  the  Oneida  Whig,  "  R.  Northway,  printer  and  publisher."  This 
paper,  in  which  so  many  previous  ones  were  merged,  continued  to  be 
published  weekly  by  R.  Northway  and  his  associates  for  nearly  twent\- 
years  till  October  12,  1853,  when  it  was  sold  to  Lyon  &  Arthur  and 
the  name  changed  to  the  Weekly  Gazette,  J.  M.  Lyon,  editor;  and  July 
25,  1856,  it  was  transferred  to  N.  D.  Jewell,  C.  J.  Radford,  editor,  and 
the  name  became  Weekly  Gazette  and  Courier,  by  whom  it  was  contin- 


^^1/-^^-r^ 


THE  EARLIEST  NEWSPAPER.  479 

ued  to  January  29,  1857,  when  its  subscription  list  passed  into  the  hands 
of  Ellis  H.  Roberts,  the  purchaser  of  the  Utica  Daily  Gazette,  with 
which  it  had  been  associated  from  1842. 

Tiie  Utica  Daily  Gazette  was  the  first  daily  paper  published  in  Utica 
with  the  exception  of  the  Morning  News,  published  for  one  month  im- 
mediately preceding  and  two  subsequently  by  Lyon  &  Arthur,  and  ed- 
ited by  Jarvis  M.  Hatch  and  C.  Edwards  Lester.  The  Daily  Gazette  was 
commenced  by  Rufus  Northway,  the  publisher  and  proprietor  of  the 
Oneida  Whig,  February  4,  1842.  Richard  U.  Shearman  was  its  editor 
and  Erastus  Clark  and  William  Allen  were  associates  for  the  first  year. 
Ezekiel  Bacon  was  editor  for  two  months  following.  Alexander  Sew- 
ard became  the  editor  and  joint  proprietor  May  i,  1843,  and  under  the 
firm  name  of  R.  Northway  &  Co.  it  was  published  till  the  fall  of  1853. 
Dr.  H.  C.  Potter  was  associate  editor  from  November  i,  1847,  ^"d  the 
sole  editor  from  May  1st  to  September  23,  1850,  when  he  became  part 
proprietor  with  Northway  &  Seward.  Erastus  Clark  was  Dr.  Potter's 
associate  editor  till  November  i,  185  i,  when  Mr.  Seward  resumed  the 
editorship  with  Dr.  Potter.  The  establishment  was  sold  to  Lyon  &  Ar- 
thur on  October  12, 1853,  and  J.  M.  Lyon  became  editor.  It  was  bought 
by  N.  D.  Jewell,  July  25,  1856,  who  published  the  paper  till  January  29, 
1857,  C.  J.  Radford  being  editor,  when  the  name  and  good  will  were 
purchased  by  Ellis  H.  Roberts  and  united  with  the  Morning  Herald. 

The  pecuniary  value  of  these  newspapers  appears  to  have  fluctuated 
widely.  When  the  Sentinel  was  substituted  for  the  Patriot  and  Patrol 
by  William  Williams,  in  1 821,  he  was  adjudged  by  arbitrators  to  pay  to 
William  H.  Maynard  $7,500  for  the  latter's  interest  in  the  old  paper,  a 
weekly  in  a  village  of  3,000  inhabitants.  The  Sentinel,  thus  dearly  paid 
for,  was  sold  to  Dakin  &  Bacon  four  years  later,  1825,  for  $3,500,  which 
included  $500  for  the  printing  materials.  Of  this  sum  $3,000  was  sub- 
sequently recovered  of  the  seller  for  printing  a  ppecimen  number  of  the 
American  Citizen,  a  paper  projected  and  subsequently  published  a  short 
time  by  G.  S.  Wilson. 

In  1843,  when  the  population  of  Utica  had  become  18,000,  R.  North- 
way  sold  to  A.  Seward  one-half  of  the  Daily  Gazette  and  the  Oneida 
WAig  and  of  the  printing  office  for  $2,250.  The  Gazette  was  then  the 
only  daily  paper  in  Utica  and  had  120  subscribers,  not  one  of  whom 
lived  outside  of  the  city. 


48o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

In  1853  R.  Northway  &  Co.  sold  their  paper  and  office  to  Lyon  & 
Arthur  for  $12,000,  the  circulation  of  the  daily  paper  being  then  about 
1,200,  notwithstanding  the  existence  of  three  other  dailies,  the  Observer^ 
Herald,  and  Telegraph. 

Meantime  in  November,  1847,  publication  of  the  Oneida  Morning 
Hetald  had  been  begun  by  Robert  W.  Roberts,  Richard  U.  Shear- 
man, and  Edwin  R.  Colston.  The  last  named  withdrew  from  the 
firm  in  1848  and  Mr.  Shearman  in  1851,  when  Ellis  H.  Roberts  be- 
came editor  and  proprietor.  The  Gazette  was  merged  with  the  Her- 
ald in  1857,  the  consolidated  paper  taking  the  name  of  Utica  Morning 
Herald  and  Daily  Gazette.  At  the  same  time  the  Oneida  Whig  dis- 
appeared in  its  weekly, — the  same  paper  which  had  come  down  through 
the  Sentinel  and  Gazette,  the  Setitinel,  the  Patriot  and  Patrol,  and  the 
Utica  Patriot  from  the  original  Whitestown  Gazette  of  1796.  From 
1851  to  1872  Ellis  H.  Roberts  continued  editor  and  sole  proprietor  of 
the  Herald.     His  brother,  Robert  W.,  had  charge  of  the  job  office. 

In  the  editorial  work  of  the  Herald  there  were  associated  with  him  at 
different  times  brainy  men,  among  others  Samuel  Williams,  later  of  the 
San  Francisco  Bulletin ;  Henry  L.  Lamb,  later  superintendent  of  the 
bank  department  of  New  York  ;  Charles  M.  Davis,  who  dropped  the 
editorial  pen  to  take  to  his  death  bed.  In  1872  Mr.  Roberts  asso- 
ciated with  himself  in  the  publication  of  the  Herald  his  nephew,  George 
L.  Roberts,  and  S.  N.  D.  North,  under  the  firm  name  of  Ellis  H.  Rob- 
erts &  Co.  Mr.  North  withdrew  from  the  firm  in  1885  and  was  for  a 
few  years  editor  of  the  Albany  (N.  Y.)  Express,  from  which  he  retired 
to  accept  the  secretaryship  of  the  National  Wool  Growers  Association, 
main  office  at  Boston.  Financial  difficulties,  growing  through  a  series 
of  years,  culminated  in  June,  1890,  in  the  appointment  of  a  receiver  for 
Ellis  H.  Roberts  &  Co.,  publishers  of  the  Herald,  Ellis  H.  Roberts,  who 
had  been  appointed  by  President  Harrison  assistant  United  States 
treasurer  at  New  York,  being  agreed  upon  for  that  office.  The  af- 
fairs of  the  old  firm  were  adjusted  in  a  few  months  and  in  October,  1890, 
the  Utica  Morning  Herald  plant  was  sold  by  the  receiver  to  the  Ulica 
Herald  Publishing  Company,  a  corporation  including  among  its  mem- 
bers Warner  Miller,  of  Herkimer  ;  George  West,  of  Ballston  Spa  ;  Jo- 
seph  R.  Swan,  Charles  W.  Hackett,  J.  Fred  Maynard,  A.  D.  Barber, 


f 

^'-     -t>*'^SMB 

A     "     'ii               '  1^ ' '' '  J^ 

i^ 

M 

^^^^B^^"^'- 

t^jgg^Sgf^.  • 

I  '»^5 

^^^^     jir^  '  "^ 

^^^^» 

UTICA  MORNING  HERALD.  481 

and  Ellis  H.  Roberts,  of  Utica  ;  Titus  Sheard,  of  Little  Falls  ;  Clinton 
L.  Merriam,  of  Locust  Grove  ;  and  R.  S.  Campbell,  of  New  York  Mills. 
This  company  organized  by  electing  Joseph  R.  Swan,  president ;  Titus 
Sheard,  vice-president;  Fred  H.  Wienke,  secretary;  and  Joseph  R. 
Swan,  Charles  W.  Hackett,  Titus  Sheard,  Ellis  H.  Roberts,  and  J.  Fred 
Maynard,  trustees.  The  trustees  in  turn  constituted  Mr.  Hackett,  Mr. 
Swan,  and  Mr.Maynard  an  executive  committee.  Fred  H.  Wienke  was 
made  business  manager  and  John  H.  Cunningham  editor.  Both  had 
been  with  the  Herald  several  years. 

Under  its  embarrassments  and  changes  the  Hera/d  retained  its  hold 
upon  the  large  constituency  it  had  served  so  many  years.  Its  new 
management  has  maintained  its  high  standard  as  a  Republican  news- 
paper and  has  added  new  features  of  interest.  It  has  a  strong  editorial 
and  reportorial  corps,  maintains  two  correspondents  at  Albany,  one  at 
Washington,  and  two  in  New  York,  a  "  regular"  and  "  special."  It  has 
regular  correspondents  in  each  of  sixteen  counties  throughout  Central 
and  Northern  New  York.  The  Herald  was  one  of  the  charter  members 
of  the  New  York  State  Associated  Press,  whose  service  it  has  daily  by 
special  wire  in  its  editorial  rooms  The  Herald  is  the  official  organ  of 
the  dairy  interest  in  Central  New  York  and  gives  special  attention  to  hops 
and  other  agricultural  matters.  Its  managers  report  that  the  year  1891 
was  one  of  constant  progress,  the  subscription  lists  of  the  Morning  Her- 
ald and  the  Weekly  Herald  showing  large  increase. 

The  first  number  of  the  Utica  Observer,  which  is  now  quoted  every 
day  in  the  year  in  every  part  of  the  Union  for  its  opinions  and  its  char- 
acteristic method  of  expressing  them,  was  issued  on  the  7th  of  Janu- 
ary, 1817.  It  was  launched  by  Eliasaph  Dorchester,  who  was  probably 
not  even  dimly  conscious  of  expectation  that  his  venture  would  carry 
his  name  down  to  the  end  of  the  century  in  which  it  was  early  begun. 
The  Observer  has  experienced  nearly  all  the  vicissitudes  of  newspapers 
of  its  times  and  came  slowly  to  solid  and  permanent  prosperity.  Within 
two  years  after  its  birth  the  publication  of  the  Observer  was  transferred 
to  Rome  and  its  name  changed  to  the  Oneida  Observer,  but  a  return  to 
Utica  and  a  restoration  of  its  first  name,  the  Utica  Observer,  soon  fol- 
lowed. The  destruction  of  nearly  all  the  files  of  this  paper  in  the  dis- 
astrous fire  in  1884  makes  it  impossible  to  give  an  accurate   history  of 

61 


482  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTICA. 

its  early  years.  But  it  is  recalled  that  Augustine  G.  Dauby,  C.  C. 
Griffiths,  E.  A.  Maynard,  John  P.  Bush,  John  F.  Kittle,  Arthur  M. 
Beardsley,  Joseph  M.  Lyon,  and  ,De  Witt  C.  Grove  were  successively 
connected  with  its  management  between  1820  and  i860.  Of  these  only 
Mr.  Beardsley  is  living.  Two  of  the  gentlemen  named  were  prominent 
in  the  affairs  of  Utica.  Mr.  Dauby  was  postmaster  of  Utica  for  twenty 
years — from  1829  to  1849 — ^^^^  under  four  different  Presidents.  At 
the  same  time  he  was  editor  of  the  Observer  and  his  utterances,  stately 
and  thoughtful  and  graceful,  were  giving  a  marked  character  to  the 
paper  and  were  only  second  in  strength  and  significance  to  the  promul- 
gations of  the  famous  Albany  Regency  in  the  Albany  Argus.  Mr. 
Grove,  who  was  the  sole  owner  of  the  Observer  from  1853  to  1867, 
was  a  prominent  factor  in  city  affairs,  and  was  mayor  of  Utica  at  the 
time  of  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  of  the  Rebellion.  In  this  crisis  his 
patriotic  services  at  the  head  of  the  city  government  and  as  the  conduc- 
tor of  the  Observer  were  of  great  value  to  the  community. 

Mr.  Grove  came  to  the  Observer  through  the  consolidation  of  the 
Utica  Democrat  with  the  former.  The  Democrat  was  commenced  by 
John  G.  Floyd  in  1836  and  was  successively  edited  and  published  by 
Edward  Morrin,  Jarvis  M.  Hatch,  Benjamin  Welch,  jr.,  Welch  &  Grove, 
and  DeWitt  C.  Grove.  In  1852  party  expediency  pointed  to  the  union 
of  the  papers  as  desirable  and  Joseph  M.  Lyon  and  DeWitt  C.  Grove 
came  together  under  the  firm  name  of  Lyon  &  Grove  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  Observer.  This  partnership  was  of  short  duration,  how- 
ever, for  it  came  to  an  end  early  in  1853.  The  Daily  Observer  via.^ 
started  in  1848.  Kittle  &  Beardsley  and  Beardsley  &  Lyon  were  its 
conductprs  until  Mr.  Grove's  connection  with  it  began.  After  Mr. 
Lyon's  separation  John  B.  Miller  was  employed  as  editor  for  several 
years  and  until  he  was  appointed  consul  at  Hamburg  about  1857.  ^^• 
Grove  then  became  the  recognized  editor  and  so  remained  until  1883. 
His  connection  with  the  Observer  covered  a  period  of  thirty  years. 
During  all  these  years,  save  a  part  of  the  first  one,  there  was  associated 
with  him  in  the  editorial  department  E.  Prentiss  Bailey,  who  became  his 
business  partner  in  1867  under  the  firm  name  of  Grove  &  Bailey.  To 
this  partnership  several  years  later  succeeded  a  corporation  of  the  same 
name,  with  a  capital  stock  of  $84,000.      The  ownership,  except  for  the 


THE  UTICA   OBSERVER.  483 

admission  of  Col.  Theodore  P.  Cook  as  a  stockholder  and  trustee,  was 
unchanged.  So  it  remained  until  ill  health  compelled  the  retirement 
of  Mr.  Grove.  His  shares  were  purchased  by  Mr.  Bailey  and  the  name 
of  the  corporation  became  E.  P.  Bailey  &  Co.  Coincident  with  this 
important  change  was  the  introduction  of  Thomas  P.  Clarke  as  one  of 
the  owners,  and  the  officers  of  the  corporation  thereafter  were  E.  Pren- 
tiss Bailey,  president,  and  Thomas  F.  Clark,  vice-iiresident  and  treas- 
urer.    Lansing  C.  Bailey  is  the  present  secretary  of  the  corporation. 

The  fire  which  has  been  mentioned  occurred  on  the  morning  of  March 
2,  1884.  The  flames  in  a  few  hours  devoured  the  Observer  office  and 
nearly  $1,000,000  in  neighboring  property.  The  loss  of  E.  P.  Bailey 
&  Co.  largely  outran  their  insurance  and  was  a  most  serious  blow.  But 
it  enabled  them  to  adopt  new  and  broader  plans  and  to  obtain  a  plant 
of  the  most  modern  description,  and  thus  make  their  facilities  such  as 
belonged  to  newspapers  of  the  first  rank  in  circulation  and  influence. 
A  site  was  purchased  for  a  building  which  was  to  be  devoted  exclu- 
sively to  the  business  of  the  Observer.  This  site  was  on  the  south  side 
of  the  lot  of  the  government  building  on  Franklin  street,  and  this  fort- 
unate location  promised  to  provide  always  an  unobstructed  light  to 
the  building  which  should  be  erected  upun  it — a  consideration  of  no 
little  importance  in  the  business  of  an  afternoon  newspaper.  The  new 
structure  was  at  once  recognized  when  finished,  by  publishers  and  the 
public,  as  complete  in  its  adaptation  to  its  purposes.  The  Hoe  perfect 
ing  press  and  the  stereotyping  machinery  are  on  the  same  floor  as  the 
counting-room,  and  visitors  from  city  and  country  are  welcomed  daily 
to  witness  with  delight  the  production  of  eight  -  page  newspapers, 
printed  on  both  sides,  folded  and  pasted  at  a  speed  of  10,000  copieii 
per  hour,  and  to  occasionally  also  see  four  page  supplements  for  the 
daily  or  the  weekly  printed  at  twice  this  rate.  Intricate  as  is  this  won- 
derful machine,  and  fine  as  are  its  necessary  adjustments,  it  has  never 
failed  to  supply  the  daily  editions  of  the  paper.  The  editorial  and  mail- 
ing-rooms are  on  the  second  floor;  the  stock- room  (which  sometimes 
holds  from  ten  to  twenty  tons  of  waiting  rolls  of  white  paper)  is  on  the 
third  floor ;  while  the  fourth  story  is  devoted  to  the  use  of  foreman, 
proof-readers,  and  compositors.  The  editor  is  Mr.  Bailey,  who  is  as- 
sisted in  the  daily   preparation  of  the  paper   by  editorial  writers,  local 


484  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

reporters,  a  telegraph  operator,  and  a  staff  of  correspondents  numbering 
in  all  some  thirty  persons.  The  steadiest  and  greatest  advance  of  the 
Observer  in  circulation>and  popular  favor  has  been  in  these  later  years, 
and  its  strides  have  lengthened  as  its  independence  in  politics  and  its 
faithfulness  to  the  moral  and  social  interests  of  Utica  and  Central  New 
York  have  been  made  increasingly  manifest.  Today  the  daily  circula- 
tion is  fully  twenty  times  as  large  as  it  was  when  Mr.  Bailey's  connec- 
tion with  it  began. 

Early  in  1882  the  printers  employed  on  the  UticaHera/d  expressed 
dissatisfaction  with  their  wages  and  sent  in  a  petition  for  an  increase, 
which  was  not  granted.  Negotiations  of  this  character  were  unsuccess- 
ful, and  finally  a  week's  notice  was  served  on  the  proprietors  that  if  an 
advance  was  not  given  the  men  would  quit  work  the  following  Saturday 
morning.  The  week  passed  and  the  office  declined  to  accede  to  the 
terms  proposed,  and  refused  to  compromise  at  any  figure.  The  men 
'  left  Saturday  and  that  night  the  wage- workers  of  the  city  had  a  meet- 
ing and  decided  to  start  a  daily  in  opposition  to  the  Herald.  A  job 
printing  office  on  Columbia  street,  owned  by  H.  M.  Greene,  was  secured, 
a  stock  company  with  shares  at  $25  organized,  and  the  union  printers 
issued  the  first  copy  of  the  Press  on  the  morning  of  Monday,  March  13, 
1882.  It  may  be  interesting  to  note  how  the  paper  came  to  be  called 
the  Press.  No  thought  had  been  given  to  the  choice  of  a  title  until  the 
work  of  making  the  paper  was  well  under  way.  The  resources  of  the 
job  room  were  limited  and  there  was  no  font  suitable  for  a  head-letter. 
The  proprietor  had  once  been  connected  with  The  Rensselaer  County 
Press  and  had  an  old  electrotype  head- line  among  the  rubbish  and 
refuse.  Some  one  found  it  and  with  a  saw  cut  out  the  two  middle  words 
leaving  The  Press,  and  that  became  the  name  of  the  paper.  It  was  a 
matter  of  convenience  rather  than  choice.  The  first  issue  was  a  typo- 
graphical crazy  quilt,  made  up  of  innumerable  styles  of  type.  In  a  few 
days  the  paper  moved  to  an  office  of  its  own,  upstairs  on  Seneca  street, 
where  it  remained  till  the  following  May,  when  it  went  down  town  to 
No,  7  Broad  street,  whence  it  went  to  its  new  building.  No.  17  Main 
street,  in  November,  1891.  At  first  the  stock  of  the  company  was  all 
owned  by  the  printers.  There  were  various  changes  of  stockholders 
from  the.  start  till  February,  1883,  when  a  new  company  was  organized 


THE  PRESS.  485 

which  included  some  of  the  leading  business  and  professional  men  in  the 
city.  Shortly  after  its  re-organization  Col.  F.  A.  Eastman,  ex- post- 
master of  Chicago,  was  made  editor  and  continued  in  that  capacity  two 
years.  In  February,  1885,  a  majority  of  the  stock  came  into  the  hands 
of  Otto  A.  Meyer  and  George  E.  Dunham,  and  the  latter  was  made  presi- 
dent and  the  former  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  company.  Colonel 
Eastman  resigned  as  editor  and  Mr.  Dunham,  who  had  been  with  the 
paper  since  July,  1882,  and  lastly  as  city  editor,  became  the  editor,  and 
Mr.  Meyer  continued  as  business  manager,  a  position  he  had  efficiently 
filled  for  two  years  previous  to  the  transfer  of  the  controlling  interest. 
F.  W.  Bensberg  has  been  associated  with  Messrs.  Dunham  and  Meyer, 
and  besides  being  a  large  stockholder  has  charge  of  the  mechanical  de- 
partment, the  three  constituting  the  executive  committee  of  the 
directors. 

The  Press  circulation  started  with  a  boom  occasioned  by  general 
sympathy  in  the  city  with  the  printers.  Since  1885  its  growth  in  every 
way  has  been  both  rapid  and  substantial,  so  much  so  as  to  be  widely 
commented  on  by  newspaper  people  throughout  the  State.  The  Press 
is  independent  in  politics  and  in  a  great  measure  owes  its  success  to  its 
uniform  promptness  in  getting  the  news  and  accuracy  in  its  publication. 
It  seeks  to  be  emphatically  a  newspaper.  The  Press  purchased  a  lot 
near  the  New  York  Central  station  and  in  the  spring  of  1891  com- 
menced the  erection  of  a  building  especially  designed  for  its  own  use  and 
sole  occupancy.  The  structure  is  110x22  feet,  four  stories  above  the 
basement,  of  brick  with  brownstone  trimmings.  When  finished  it  was 
■equipped  with  the  most  modern  machinery  and  appliances,  including  a 
Scott  perfecting  press  capable  of  printing  from  12,000  to  15,000  com- 
plete papers  an  hour.  The  building  and  its  fixtures  are  counted  almost 
a  model  and  have  been  visited  by  newspaper  men  from  all  sections. 
A  weekly  edition  is  published  every  Friday  morning.  The  Press  is  a 
four-page  paper  five  days  in  the  week  and  eight-paged  on  Saturday. 
The  weekly  is  eight  pages. 

The  Sunday  Tribune  was  founded  in  May,  1877,  by  Dennis  T.  Kelly 
and  T.  F.  Baker.  It  was  successful  from  the  start,  and  its  first  office  was 
located  at  the  corner  of  Broad  and  Genesee  streets.  The  present  pro- 
prietor, H.  E.  Devendorf,  became  interested  in  the  fall  of  1877  and  sole 


486  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

owner  in  1883.  The  office  was  removed  in  1878  to  the  corner  of  Broad 
and  John  streets,  where  the  paper,  then  an  infant,  expanded  and  grew 
until  it  became  entirely  too  large  for  those  quarters.  For  nearly  two 
years  the  machinery  of  the  old  office  was  entirely  inadequate  to  meet 
the  demands  made  upon  it  and  it  was  only  by  means  of  the  most  inces- 
sant labor  that  the  entire  edition  could  be  handled  on  Sunday.  Then, 
too,  for  some  years  Sunday  trains  were  few  and  far  between.  None 
were  run  on  the  Rome  and  Watertown  or  Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and 
Western  Railroads.  To  offset  this  the  Tribune  tried  some  interesting 
experiments  which  have  never  been  met  in  the  way  of  enterprise  by 
any  newspaper  in  this  section.  For  years  it  maintained  a  pony  express 
Sunday  mornings  from  Utica  to  Waterville.  At  the  time  of  the  strike 
on  the  Central  road  pony  expresses  carrying  the  Tribune  were  run  as 
far  west  as  Rome  and  as  far  east  as  Little  Falls,  and  the  readers  had 
their  papers  on  time,  though  not  a  wheel  moved  on  the  railroad.  For 
three  months  in  the  summer  of  189 1  a  special  edition  of  the  paper  was 
made  ready  at  1:30  A.  M.  for  the  St.  Lawrence  River  and  northern 
points,  and  it  found  its  way  into  Philadelphia,  Gouverneur,  Canton, 
Potsdam,  and  Norwood,  where  here'tofore  it  had  been  a  stranger.  The 
Tribune  reached  Clayton  with  this  edition  at  6  A.  M.  and  Alexandria 
Bay  at  8,  and  the  number  of  papers  printed  for  this  route  in  the  height 
of  the  season  reached  1,000.  From  June  15th  to  October  1st  in  each 
year  the  Tribune  is  sold  in  Richfield, Springs  and  the  towns  between 
that  popular  resort  and  Cassville  Junction.  The  Tribune  \s  cosmopoli- 
tan in  its  circulation.  It  is  read  by  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  high  and 
the  low.      Its  circulation  is  between  7,000  and  8,000. 

The  Utica  Saturday  Globe  was  founded  May  21,  1 881,  by  William  T. 
and  Thomas  F.  Baker.  The  circulation  grew  so  rapidly  that  enlarged 
quarters  were  obtained  three  times  before  its  permanent  home  in 
Whitesboro  street  was  built  in  1886.  Two  enlargements  were  neces- 
sary here,  and  since  the  completion  of  the  last  the  Globe  doubtless  occu- 
pies more  room  than  that  devoted  exclasively  to  the  publication  of  any 
newspaper  in  the  State.  The  circulation  during  1891  averaged  165,354 
copies  and  on  occasions  has  risen  to  2691175  and  268,536.  A.  M. 
Dickinson  is  editor-in-chief;  associate  editors,  Timothy  H.  Sweeney, 
Hugh  P.  McCabe,  Frederick  G.  Reusswig,  Ward  Hunt  Johnson,  Byron 
B.  Merrill,  John  Aloysius  Cogley,  and  William  R.  Merrell. 


DEUTSCHE  ZEITUNG.  487 

In  the  year  1853,  after  there  had  been  started  in  Albany  and  Syra- 
cuse German  newspapers,  a  movement  was  set  on  foot  in  Utica  to  found 
a  paper  for  the  German  population  of  the  city  and  vicinity.  About  a 
dozen  of  the  then  well  known  citizens  of  German  descent,  among  whom 
were  Charles  Bierbauer,  Frank  Sang,  John  M.  Hahn,  J.  W.  Wasmer, 
Capt.  A.  Brendle,  Joseph  Leuthaeuser,  Joseph  Faass,  Paul  Keiser,  Fred 
Koelbel,  and  others,  formed  a  stock  company  and  founded  a  paper,  the 
name  of  which  was  Central  New  York  Demokrat.  Messrs.  Timm  and 
Brand,  two  efficient  printers  from  New  York,  were  the  first  printers  and 
Dr.  H.  Soden  its  first  editor.  About  two  years  after  the  twice- a- week 
sheet  passed  into  the  hands  of  Paul  Keiser,  alderman  of  the  Sixth  ward, 
and  he  changed  the  name  of  the  paper  to  the  Oneida  Demokrat.  In 
1858  the  paper  was  published  by  Paul  Keiser  &  Co.  (Paul  Keiser, 
Henry  Jost,  and  J.  C.  Schreiber).  In  i860  Paul  Keiser  resumed  the 
publication  of  the  paper  again  alone  with  J.  C.  Schreiber  as  its  editor. 
In  1865  the  latter  bought  the  then  weekly  published  paper  of  Paul  Keiser 
and  he  returned  it  to  a  semi- weekly  publication.  In  1872  the  paper 
was  made  one  of  the  official  papers  of  the  city  of  Utica.  Its  proprietor 
and  editor,  J.  C.  Schreiber,  changed  the  name  of  Oneida  Demokrat  to 
its  present  title,  the  Utica  Deutsche  Zeitung  (Utica  German  Gazette), 
and  issued  it  three  times  a  week.  The  Utica  Deutsche  Zeitung  gained 
tinder  the  management  of  its  editor  and  proprietor,  J.  C.  Schreiber, 
great  influence  among  the  German  population  of  Utica  and  Central  New 
York  and  has  a  large  circulation.  Since  April  i,  1891,  the  Zeitung  is 
published  by  a  stock  company,  with  J.  C.  Schreiber  as  president  and 
editor  and  John  C.  Fulmer  as  secretary  and  treasurer.  The  com- 
pany has  been  incorporated  under  the  name  of  the  Utica  Detitsche  Zei- 
tung Company.  The  paper  is  in  a  flourishing  condition,  its  circulation 
is  very  large,  and  it  is  gaining  steadily  in  public  favor.  Independent  in 
politics  it  has  gained  entrance  into  almost  every  German  family  in  our 
city  and  vicinity.  The  present  proprietors  are  enterprising  men  who 
are  looking  forward  to  make  of  the  Utica  Deutsche  Zeitung  a  daily 
paper. 

On  January  2,  185  i,  John  M.  Jones,  of  New  York  city,  published  the 
first  number  of  Y Drych  (The  Mirror),  the  first  weekly  Welsh  news- 
paper printed  in  America.      In  December,  1854,  he  sold  it  to  a  stock 


488  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

company.  In  a  couple  of  years  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  J.  W.  Jones, 
then  to  J.  Mather  Jones,  and  is  now  owned  by  Thomas  J.  Griffith, 
who  has  printed  it  in  Utica  for  nearly  twenty  years.  J.  W.  Jones  be- 
came one  of  its  editors  in  its  second  or  third  year  and  has  been  its  chief 
editor  (except  for  a  short  time)  ever  since.  J.  C.  Roberts  has  been  as- 
sociated with  him  for  about  twelve  years.  In  the  beginning  of  1854  a 
stock  company  in  Utica  started  F  Gwyliedydd  Americanaidd  (The 
American  Watchman).  It  was  printed  at  the  office  of  the  Utica  Herald 
until  1855,  when  it  was  bought  by  V  Drych  Company.  In  1868 
another  stock  company  established  the  Baner  American  in  Scranlon, 
Pa.,  and  published  it  for  several  years.  It  was  sold  in  1877  to  T.  J.  Grif- 
fith, proprietor  of  Y  Drych,  with  which  paper  it  was  merged.  Y Drych  is 
the  oldes^Welsh  newspaper  in  the  world.  One  was  established  before  it  in 
Liverpool,  but  was  afterward  merged  in  a  later  one.  Both  directly  and 
indirectly  it  has  been  of  incalculable  benefit  to  the  Welsh  people.  Its 
literary  standard  has  always  been  high,  and  under  its  present  editors 
will  compare  favorably  with  any  newspaper  in  the  same  language  pub- 
lished anywhere.  It  has  a  circulation  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  In 
addition  to  the  above  described  weekly  newspaper  two  Welsh  monthly 
magazines  are  issued  in  Utica. 

The  Church  Eclectic,  a  monthly  magazine  of  church  literature  and 
ecclesiastical  miscellany,  is  the  title  of  a  new  enterprise  by  Rev.  W.  T. 
Gibson,  D.D.,  then  rector  of  St.  George's  Church,  Utica.  The  first 
number  was  issued  March  i,  1873,  in  a  thin  pamphlet  of  thirty-two- 
pages,  and  the  publication  has  continued  to  the  present  time  (Vol.  xix.. 
No.  10),  enlarged  to  100  pages  octavo.  Its  object  was  announced 
as  intended  to  do  for  church  literature  what  the  Living  Age  and  similar 
publications  are  doing  for  secular  literature,  without  infringing  on  the 
functions  of  the  weekly  religious  press.  It  has,  however,  in  addition  to 
its  choice  selections  from  foreign  periodicals,  published  many  editorial 
and  other  original  contributions  by  some  of  the  oldest  writers  in  the 
church,  besides  having  a  department  for  correspondence,  book  notices, 
and  notes  and  comments  on  current  events.  It  has  already  had  a  longer- 
existence  than  any  other  monthy  of  the  Episcopal  Church  except  the 
Spirit  of  Missions. 

A  monthly  paper  known  as  the   Christian,  Worker  is  issued  by  the 


JOURNAL  OF  INSANITY-^  EVENING  TELEGRAPH.     489 

Woman's  Christian  Association  in  the  interests  of  Christian  and  chari- 
table work.  It  contains  hsts  of  the  officers  of  the  charitable  societies  of 
the  city  and  is  otherwise  made  up  of  original  and  selected  matter.  Its. 
editor  is  Mrs.  S.  W.  Crittenden. 

The  American  Journal  of  Insanity  is  a  quarterly  journal  devoted  ta 
the  consideration  of  mental  disease  and  its  treatment,  which  had  its 
origin  with  Dr.  Amariah  Brigham,  the  first  superintendent  of  the  State 
Hospital  in  1844.  It  is  conducted  by  the  superintendent  of  this  insti- 
tution and  his  assistants,  receiving  aid  also  from  other  alienist  physicians, 
and  has  been  issued  continuously  by  the  successive  officers  of  the  hos-, 
pital  from  its  beginning  to  the  present  time. 

The  papers  thus  far  sketched  are  now  in  existence.  Those  which  fol- 
low are  no  longer  issued. 

The  Evening  Telegraph,  an  independent  daily  paper,  was  started  on 
May  I,  1851,  by  T.  R.  McQuade  &  Co.,  the  Co.  representing  James 
Mclver,  who  was  the  responsible  editor.  It  was  aided  by  several  cor- 
respondents, among  whom  were  James  and  John  McQuade,  brothers  of 
Thomas  R.,  Judge  Smith,  R.  B.  Miller,  J.  S.  Henshaw,  Erastus  Clark, 
Dr.  Edwin  Hutchinson,  H.  H.  Fish,  etc.  Mr.  Mclver  left  the  city  in 
1856,  when  James  McQuade  became  the  editor  and  continued  as  such 
until  1 86 1,  when  he  entered  the  army.  Next  Henry  W.  Chase  had 
charge  of  it.  In  the  fall  of  the  year  1863  it  was  sold 'to  F.  A.  CrandalJ 
and  continued  for  a  long  time,  when  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  D.  T. 
Ritchie,  who  like  the  former  had  been  one  of  the  staff  of  the  Utica 
Herald.  The  paper  came  to  its  end  in  the  summer  of  the  year  1865. 
It  was  a  sprightly  and  enterprising  journal,  was  ably  edited,  and  en- 
joyed a  good  circulation. 

The  Gospel  Messenger,  the  organ  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church 
in  Western  New  York,  was  founded  by  Dr.  John  Churchill  Rudd  in 
1827,  less  than  a  year  after  he  came  to  Auburn  from  New  York  to  take 
charge  of  St.  Peter's  Church  in  that  village.  The  first  number  of  the 
paper  is  dated  Auburn,  Saturday,  January  20,  1827.  It  was  a  sheet  of 
four  pages  (9^  x  13^  inches)  with  four  columns  (2^  inches)  to  each 
page.  It  was  started  with  the  strong  approval  and  support  of  Bishop 
Hobart,  whose  death  took  place  while  on  a  subsequent  visit  to  Auburn 
at  Dr.  Rudd's  parsonage,  September ,  12,  1830.     About  the  year  1846 

C2 


490  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Dr.  Rudd  removed  with  the  paper  to  Utica,  where  he  died  November 
15,  1848,  after  which  for  a  short  interval  the  paper  was  cared  for  by  Rev, 
Dr.  Leeds,  then  rector  of  Grace  Church,  Utica.  Bishop  De  Lancey, 
then  succeeding  to  the  ownership  of  the  paper  by  arrangement  with  the 
heirs  of  Dr.  Rudd,  "  assigned  "  it  over  to  Rev.  Dr.  WiUiam  A.  Matson 
as  "editor  and  proprietor,"  who  conducted  it  down  to  the  year  i860, 
when  he  resigned  the  position  and  removed  from  the  city.  Bishop  De 
Lancey  then  made  the  same  arrangement  with  Rev.  Wilh'am  T.  Gibson, 
D.D.  (1862),  who  then  becanae  editor  and  proprietor  from  January,  1861, 
and. continued  as  such  until  January,  1872,  Bishop  De  Lancey  having 
died  April  5,  1865,  and  the  new  diocese  of  Central  New  York  having 
been  set  off  in  1868.  In  January,  1872,  the  Gospel  Messenger  was  re- 
moved t^  Syracuse  and  conducted  by  the  recently  elected  bishop  of 
Central  New  York,  the  Rt.  Rev.  F.  D.  Huntington,  until  November  of 
that  year,  when  it  was  merged  into  the  Church  Journal  of  New  York, 
which  in  its  turn  was  a  few  years  after  merged  into  the  present  Church- 
man. This  paper  was  once  extensively  circulated,  not  only  in  Central 
and  Western  New  York,  but  throughout  many  of  the  newer  States  of 
the  West. 

It  remains  to  note  by  name  only  a  few  of  the  earlier  issues,  chiefly  de- 
nominational, of  Utica.  , 

There  were  the  Utica  Christian  Magazine,  published  by  a  com- 
mittee composed  of  Congregational  and  Presbyterian  ministers  and 
printed  by  Merrell  &  Camp,  18 14— 15  ;  the  Christian  Repository,  a 
monthly  printed  by  William  Williams,  1822-28  ;  the  Western  Recorder, 
1823-28,  a  weekly  published'  by  Jlerrell  &  Hastings  and  having  two 
or  three  different  editors ;  the  Baptist  Register,  a  weekly  started  by  Rev. 
E.  F.  Willey  and  Elon  Galusha,  and  continued  for  several  years  by  Rev. 
A.  M.  Beebee;  in  1855  't  was  removed  to  New  York  and  consolidated 
with  the  Examiner  and  Chronicle  ;  the  Utica  Evangelical  Magazine  and 
in  a  new  series  termed  the  Magazine  and  Advocate,  owned  and  edited  by 
Rev.  Dolphas  Skinner  in  behalf  of  Universalism,  1827—31  ;  the  Western 
Sunday  School  Visitant,  1826-28  ;  the  Friend  of  Man  ;  the  Teetotaller  ; 
the  Mechanics  Press;  the  Uticaniau ;  the  Mothers  Magazine,  1833; 
and  the  Club,  by  Henry  Goodfellow,  esq.,  1814-15. 


SEATS  OF  THE  EARLY  COURTS.  491 

CHAPTER    XVI. 
THE  BENCH    AND  BAR  OF  UTICA. 

THE  earliest  courts  of  the  county  of  Oneida  were  held  at  various 
places,  as  at  New  Hartford,  Rome,  and  Whitesboro,  and  after 
1803  more  especially  at  the  two  latter  places,  since  in  that  year  these 
were  made  half-shire  towns  of  the  county.  Utica  had  no  building  suit- 
ably adapted  for  their  sessions  until  after  the  academy  was  completed 
in  1 8 18.  This  building  it  has  been  seen  was  intended  for  the  joint  pur- 
poses of  a  school,  a  court-house,  and  a  town  hall,  and  was  taken  in 
charge  by  the  trustees  of  the  village,  who  soon  presented  a  request  that 
the  sessions  of  the  Supreme  and  of  the  United  States  Courts  should 
be  held  within  it.  By  a  legislative  act  of  April  21,  181 8,  the  justices  of 
the  Supreme  Court  were  authorized  to  hold  terms  of  the  Circuit  Court 
and  Court  of  Oyer  and  Terminer,  between  the  regular  terms  of  August 
and  January,  at  such  places  in  the  county  as  they  should  deem  proper,, 
and  it  appears  that  they  were  held  at  Rome,  Whitestown,  and  Utica. 
About  this  time  it  was  ordered  that  a  session  of  the  United  States  Dis- 
trict and  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State  should  be  held  in  the  acad- 
emy at  Utica. 

A  visitor  who  attended  the  October  term  of  the  latter  held  in  Utica 
in  the  year  1820  saw  there  a  full  bench,  Chief  Justice  Spencer  pre- 
siding, flanked  by  Judges  Van  Ness  and  Piatt  on  his  right  and  Judges 
Yates  and  Woodworth  on  the  left.  The  bar  was  filled  with  lawyers  of 
the  first  ability  and  reputation,  including  Aaron  Burr,  Thomas  J.  Oak- 
ley, Martin  Van  Buren,  Elisha  Williams,  etc.,  the  last  two  named  being 
opposed  in  a  trial. 

Another  old-time  resident  has  not  forgotten  the  forming  of  the  pro- 
cession in  the  vicinity  of  Bagg's  Square  which  was  to  escort  the  United 
States  district  judge  to  the  court-house.  The  constabulary  with  the 
marshal  and  his  deputies  preceded  the  lawyers,  who  were  followed  by  the 
judge  in  his  robes. 

On  the  4th  of  February,  1836,  "an  act  relative  to  the  county  jails. 


492  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

County  Courts,  and  Courts  of  Oyer  and  Terminer  in  the  county  of 
Oneida  "  was  passed  by  the  legislature.  One  of  the  provisions  declared 
that  "  in  case  one  of  the  new  jails  shall  be  located  in  Utica  the  County 
Courts,  now  required  by  law  to  be  held  at  Whitestown,  shall  be  held  in 
the  court-room  of  the  building  called  the  academy  in  Utica.  Under 
this  act  the  academy  served  as  a  court-house  until  the  erection  of  the 
present  court-house  in  1850-51. 

The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Oneida  County  have  from  an  early  period  been 
highly  estimated  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  in  this  estimate  the  law- 
yers and  the  judges  of  Utica  have  held  a  full  share.  Such  of  the  law- 
yers as  have  been  chiefly  conspicuous  in  public  stations  or  in  the  affairs 
of  city  and  county,  and  have  been  noteworthy  rather  as  politicians  or  else 
as  men  of  affairs,  active  promoters  of  the  enterprise  of  the  place  than  as 
advocates  or  presiders  in  the  courts,  have  been  already  noticed.  In  this 
chapter  it  is  proposed  to  sketch  those  chiefly  who,  restricting  themselves 
more  closely  to  the  line  of  professional  duty,  have  obtained  notoriety 
as  jurists,  advocates,  and  judges.  While  others  that  have  preceded  in 
our  narrative  have  shared  with  them  in  their  legal  and  forensic  engage- 
ments these  have  been  mostly  typical  of  our  former  bench  and  bar. 

Nathan  Williams  was  without  doubt  the  first  lawyer  to  permanently 
locate  in  Utica,  where  he  afterward  became  eminent  in  his  profession. 
He  was  born  in  Williamstown,  Mass.,  December  19,  1773,  and  although 
it  is  not  positively  known  when  he  first  came  to  Utica  it  is  believed  to 
have  been  not  later  than  1797.  At  the  first  term  of  the  Common  Pleas, 
held  in  Oneida  County  in  1798,  he  was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  court; 
he  had  already  been  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Herkimer  County.  In  the 
same  year  he  was  admitted  to  the  courts  of  Chenango  County  and  was 
appointed  district  attorney  of  that  county  in  1802.  He  soon  com- 
manded a  large  practice,  although  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  habitually 
aided  his  clients  to  avoid  law  suits  rather  than  undertake  them.  His 
biographer  says  of  him  :  "  Prompt  and  exemplary  in  all  that  related  to 
local  or  general  benevolence  his  contributions  of  time,  influence,  and 
property  entered  largely  into  nearly  every  measure  that  elevated  the 
town  of  his  adoption.  At  an  early  period  of  his  residence  he  assisted 
in  the  establishment  of  a  well  selected  public  library.  Of  this  he  was 
for  many  years  librarian."     He  was  active  in  religious  affairs  and  zeal- 


NATHAN  WILLIAMS  —  ERASTUS  CLARK.  493 

ously  co-operated  in  the  organization  of  Trinity  Churcli,  of  which  he 
was  warden.  He  was  president  of  the  village  corporation  and  president 
of  the  Manhattan  Bank.  In  the  War  of  18 12  he  gave  freely  of  his  in- 
fluence and  energies  to  uphold  the  cause  of  the  government,  and  even 
left  his  business  to  march  with  the  volunteers  to  Sacket's  Harbor,  then 
under  command  of  his  brother-in-law.  Gen.  Jacob  Brown.  He  was 
district  attorney  of  the  Sixth  District  in  1801-03  ^nd  again  of  Oneida 
County  in  1818— 21  ;  was  representative  in  Congress  in  1805-07;  and 
member  of  Assembly  in  18 16,  1818,  and  18 19.  He  was  also  a  member 
of  the  Constitutional  Convention  of  1821.  He  was  appointed  in  April, 
1823,  to  the  responsible  office  of  Circuit  judge  and  held  the  position  for 
many  years.  "  As  a  judge,"  says  his  biographer,  "  his  addresses  were 
fervently  moral.  Few  men  could  attend  his  court  in  any  capacity  and 
not  obtain  instruction  in  the  duties  of  life  and  encouragement  for  their 
•cultivation."  Every  part  of  his  life  was  filled  up  with  something  to 
render  his  memory  dear  to  his  kindred  and  honored  by  his  country. 
At  the  age  of  sixty  years  he  resigned  his  office  of  Circuit  judge  and  a 
few  months  before  his  death  he  removed  to  Geneva  upon  receiving  the 
appointment  of  clerk  of  the  Supreme  Court.  His  death  occurred  Sep- 
tember 25,  1835.  Of  his  family,  which  was  a  large  one,  nearly  all  are 
now  deceased.     Three  daughters  are  still  residents. 

Erastus  Clark,  son  of  Dr.  John  Clark,  was  born  in  Lebanon,  Conn., 
on  the  nth  of  May,  1763.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  attorneys  of 
Oneida  County  and  located  in  Utica  in  1797.  He  was  a  graduate  of 
Dartmouth  College,  and  after  diligent  study  of  the  law  and  admission 
to  the  bar  he  removed  to  Clinton  in  1791  and  there  began  practice. 
His  learning,  his  industry,  and  above  all  his  character  for  probity  grad- 
ually raised  him  to  a  high  rank  in  his  profession.  In  the  early  village 
•of  Utica  he  was  called  to  various  offices  of  public  trust ;  was  elected  a 
village  trustee  under  the  charter  of  1805,  held  the  office  many  years, 
and  was  also  among  the  earlier  local  presidents.  In  18 17,  when  a  new 
and  enlarged  charter  was  accorded  the  village,  he  was  again  called  to 
guide  in  its  administration.  In  the  meantime  he  had  twice  represented 
his  district  in  the  State  Assembly.  Associated  with  Alexander  Hamil- 
ton, Egbert  Benson,  Jonas  Piatt,  Thomas  R.  Gold,  and  others  he  was 
named  a  trustee  in  the  original  charter  of  Hamilton  College.     And  yet 


494  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

so  long  as  he  lived  few  of  his  profession  were  more  diligent  at  the  court 
or  more  relied  on  for  the  wisdom  and  soundness  of  their  legal  counsel. 
For,  although  he  was  not  endowed  with  the  fascination  of  popular  elo- 
quence, in  the  learning  of  the  law  he  was  unsurpassed.  The  following 
estimate  of  the  character  of  Mr.  Clark  was  written  by  Judge  Jonas  Piatt : 

"  For  originality  and  decision  of  character  his  name  was  proverbiaL 
An  enlightened  conscience  was  his  habitual  guide  ;  and  if  from  precip- 
itancy or  irritation  his  head  sometimes  erred  there  was  a  redeeming 
principle  in  his  heart  which  reclaimed  and  regulated  his  erring  judgment 
and  passions  with  magnetic  influence.  His  frankness  was  sometimes  ill- 
timed  and  excessive.  What  others  thought  he  spoke,  and  this  naked  and 
unreserved  habit  of  mind  and  expression  frequently  gave  offence  when 
he  was  not  conscious  of  it,  and  sometimes  betrayed  apparent  vanity.  But 
of  no  other  man  can  it  be  more  truly  said  that  those  who  knew  him  best 
esteemed  him  most.  His  liberal  charity  and  his  generous  spirit  in  pro- 
moting benevolent  objects  and  public  institutions  were  ever  leading  and 
conspicuous,  while  no  man  was  less  indulgent  to  his  own  appetites  or 
more  self-denying  in  his  pleasures  and  personal  gratifications.  His- 
habit  of  living  was  simple,  plain,  and  frugal ;  and  yet  his  house  was  the 
abode  of  cheerful,  cordial,  and  familiar  hospitality.  In  the  more  inti- 
mate and  tender  relations  of  domestic  life  the  virtues  of  this  excellent 
man  shone  with  peculiar  luster.  His  religious  character  was  free  from 
ostentation,  but  uniform,  consistent,  sincere,  and  ardent"  Mr.  Clark 
died  November  7,  1825.  His  daughters  are  deceased.  His  son  and. 
namesake  is  living. 

Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  admitted  as  an  attorney  of  the  Supreme  Court 
on  August  5,  1790,  made  his  debut  before  a  Fort  Schuyler  audience  on 
the  anniversary  of  our  nation's  independence,  1797.  He  was  a  native  of 
Albany  and  a  graduate  of  Union  College.  Two  years  later  he  was  ap- 
pointed county  clerk,  and  in  that  office  he  accomplished  what  was  almost 
his  life-work.  He  was  a  village  trustee  in  1805  and  on  the  organization 
of  the  Bank  of  Utica  became  one  of  its  trustees.  In  1810,  as  senator, 
he  represented  the  district  at  Albany,  where  he  was  a  zealous  follower  of 
De  Witt  Clinton.      He  died  in  Ithaca,  whither  he  removed  about  1823. 

Judge  Morris  S.  Miller,  born  in  1780,  was  a  son  of  Dr.  Matthias  Bur- 
nett Miller,  of  Long  Island.      He  graduated  from   Union  College  with. 


MORRIS  S.   MILLER. 


495 


valedictorian  honors  in  1798,  arid  studied  law  with  Cornelius  Wendell, 
of  Cambridge,  Washington  County;  and-then  became  private  secretary 
to  Governor  Jay.  Upon  his  arrival  in  Utica  in  1806  Mr.  Miller  began 
the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  being  a  man  of  decided  ability,  Well 
versed  in  the  law,  and  conciliating  in  manner  he  soon  established  him- 
self in  the  public  confidence.;  Within  two  years  he  was  made  president 
of  the  village  and  within  four  years  he  received  the  appointment  of 
first  judge  of  the  county.  The  latter  office  he  continued'  to  hold  by 
successive  re- appointments  until  his  decease,  discharging  its  duties  with 
credit  and  public  approval.  In  1813-15  he  represented'  his  district  in 
the  thirteenth  Congress.  His  first  speech  received  the  Varm  commend- 
ation of  John  Randolph. .  By  it  and  by  others  directed  likewisfe  against 
the  war  measures  of  the  administration  he  gained  some  reputation.  He 
was  then  a  Federalist,  but  some  years  later  he'i  deserted  his  former  po- 
litical friends  and  became  a  Bucktail  Democrat,  bein^  one' of  the  so- 
called."  high  .minded  gentlemen"  who  opposed  the  nomination  of  De 
Witt  Clinton.  In  July,  18 19,  Judge  Miller  was  serit  by  Mr.  Calhoun 
to  Buffalo  to  represent  the  United  States  government  at  the  negotiation 
of  a  treaty  between  the  Seneca  Indians  and  the  proprietors  of  the  Sen- 
eca Reservation.  Besides  the  offices  we  have  mentioned  and  a  trustee- 
ship in  Hamilton  College  he  held  ^other  places  of  triist  and  honor. 
For  his  public  spirit  and  liberality  were  active  and  his  merit  acknowl- 
edged; capable  and  conscientious,  intelligent  and  refined,  courteous  to 
all,  and  hospitable  almost  to  excess  he  was  deservedly  esteemed  and 
his  standing  was  one  of  mark  and  influence.  A  striking  trait  in  his 
character  was  his  attachment  to  the  Episcopal  Church,  an  attachment 
not  hastily  formed,  but  the  result  of  a  rational,  diligent,  and  well  ma- 
tured inquiry ;  yet  whilst  he  valued  his  church  before  every  other  he 
freely  conceded  to  all  that  liberty  of  conscience  which  he  required  for 
himself,  and  willingly  co-operated  with  those  of  a  different  faith  in  ef- 
forts to  promote  good  morals  and  extend  evangelical  religion.  An  el- 
derly person  lately  deceased  relates  the  following  incident :  "  I  happened 
to  be  at  Rome  in  the  winter  of  1815-16  where  the  judge  was  holding 
the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  A  trial  was  going  on  which  excited  much 
interest,  and  in  which  two  important  witnesses  had  been  examined  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  case,  whose  testimony  was  so  directly  opposed  to 


496  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

each  other's  that  either  one  or  the  other  must  have  been  perjured- 
Judge  Miller,  in  his  eloquent  charge  to  the  jury,  said  they  must  recon- 
cile the  lamentable  conflict  of  testimony  the  best  way  they  could  to  se- 
cure the  ends  of  justice,  and  so  warmly  expressed  his  feelings  in  wit- 
nessing such  an  unfortunate  scene  of  human  frailty  as  to  draw  tears,  not 
from  himself  alone,  but  from  the  whole  audience."  It  may  be  added 
that  he  was  prompt  in  his  affairs,  neat  to  fastidiousness  in  his  person 
and  his  grounds,  and  though  neither  tall  nor  spare,  being  rather  mid- 
way of  extremes,  his  frame  was  both  delicately  and  firmly  knit  and  his 
features  regular  and  pleasing.  Throughout  his  residence  he  managed 
the  interests  of  the  Bleecker  family  in  Utica,  an  estate  which  was 
thought  to  be  worth  $4oa,ooo,  and  of  this  Mrs.  Miller  owned  one-quar- 
ter. They  occupned  the  house  at  the  lower  end  of  Main  street,  already 
spoken  of  as  the  earlier  residence  of  Peter  Smith  and  also  of  James  S. 
Kip.  It  was  a  two-story  house  of  wood,  painted  yellow,  and  having  a 
piazza  on  the  front  or  north  end.  The  grounds  about  it  were  ample 
and  the  garden  well  stocked  with  fruit  trees,  especially  the  Bleecker  or 
orange  plum,  which  the  judge  first  introduced  here  from  Albany.  Free 
as  he  was  in  dispensing  this  choice  plum  among  the  gardens  of  his  neigh- 
bors he  was  equally  free  in  disseminating  the  products  of  his  extensive 
orchard  of  grafted  apples.  This  orchard  filled  the  space  now  bounded 
by  West,  Rutger,  Steuben,  and  South  streets,  and  from  it  any  farmer 
who  would  be  at  the  trouble  to  plant  them  might  take  fifty  young  trees.. 
Before  his  death  Judge  Miller  had  made  preparations  to  build  at  the 
head  of  John  street,  had  put  out  the  shrubbery  and  shade  trees,  and 
had  erected  a  wall  in  front  of  the  site  where  his  son,  Rutger  B.  Miller, 
erected  in  1 830  the  fine  stone  mansion  which  now  forms  the  central 
building  of  the  Rutger  place.  His  death  occurred  while  he  was  still  in 
the  prime  of  his  years,  November  19,  1824. 

Thomas  Emmons  Clark  was  born  February  11,  1788,  at  Colchester, 
Conn.,  and  began  practice  in  Utica  in  181 1.  He  was  a  graduate  of 
Union  College,  studied  law  with  Judge  Jonas  Piatt,  of  Whitesboro,  and 
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  the  fall  of  18 11.  As  a  lawyer  the  merits  of 
Mr.  Clark  surpassed  his  reputation.  If  he  was  less  conspicuous  as  a 
speaker  than  some  of  his  illustrious  peers  of  the  Oneida  bar  he  made 
up  in   solid  acquirements  and   strong  native  sense  what  he  lacked  of 


THOMAS  E.  CLARK—  JOSEPH  KIRKLAND.  497 

more  showy  qualities.  He  was  rather  learned  than  brilliant,  rather 
given  to  convincing  the  understanding  than  exciting  the  imagination. 
He  was  a  large  reader,  a  laborious  and  profound  scholar,  a  man  with 
whom  it  was  impossible  to  come  in  contact  without  feeling  the  impress 
of  his  learning  and  his  worth.  His  knowledge  of  the  classics  as  of 
the  law  was  thorough,  while  he  was  largely  versed  in  metaphysics,  the- 
ology, and  the  Bible.  He  was  singularly  unambitious  and  unaffected. 
Earnest  for  his  client  he  never  thought  of  himself  or  uttered  anything 
merely  for  effect.  Without  the  least  assumption  of  dignity  there  was  ' 
in  him  a  dash  and  a  directness  of  purpose  that  were  equally  evident  in 
his  brusque,  noisy  talk  and  wholesome  laugh,  his  headlong  gait,  and  his 
swift  and  all  but  unreadable  writing.  He  was  a  member  of  the  As- 
sembly in  1828  and  of  the  Senate  in  1848-49;  of  the  Presbyterian  and 
afterward  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  Church  he  was  long  an  elder  and 
a  Bible-class  teacher.  He  died  April  14,  1857.  His  daughter,  Mrs. 
George  W.  Wood,  is  the  only  survivor  of  his  family. 

While  Oneida  was  still  a  part  of  Herkimer  there  settled  within  its 
borders  a  young  lawyer  who  was  acknowledged  at  once  as  an  equal 
among  the  best  of  his  associates  at  the  bar,  and  who  since  then,  not 
more  by  rare  e.xcellence  in  his  calling  than  by  weighty  sense  and  energy' 
in  action,  uprightness,  purity,  and  benevolence  of  conduct,  and  much 
effective  and  unselfish  official  service,  has  made  the  name  of  Joseph 
Kirkland  suggestive  to  all  of  virtue,  usefulness,  power,  and  honor.  At 
the  first  term  of  Common  Pleas  held  in  the  county  after  its  organiza- 
tion, in  company  with  Thomas  R.  Gold,  Jonas  Piatt,  Erastus  Clark,  Na- 
than Williams,  Arthur  Breese,  and  others,  all  of  whom  had  practiced  in 
the  courts  of  Herkimer,  he  was  admitted  to  the  same  privilege  in 
Oneida  and  together  with  those  enumerated  he  was  appointed  to  report 
a  system  of  rules  for  the  court.  Mr.  Kirkland,  by  his  unremitting  ap- 
plication, tenacity  of  purpose,  and  an  integrity  that  amid  the  fierce 
collisions  of  legal  competition  was  never  called  in  question,  soon  rose  to 
an  eminent  rank.  In  1801  he  ran  as  a  candidate  for  delegate  to  the 
State  Constitutional  Convention  and  received  as  many  votes  as  his  op- 
ponent, Henry  Huntington,  of  Rome,  though  the  seat  was  accorded  to 
the  latter.  In  1803  he  was  chosen  by  the  Federal  party  to  represent 
them  in  the  State  Assembly.     Of  his  career  while  here  it  may  be  said, 

63 


498  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

as  of  his  like  experience  in  later  years,  that  no  man  ever  gent  from  the 
county  carried  with  him  and  preserved  more  completely  the  confidence 
of  his  constituents.  From  February,  1813,  to  February,  1816,  he  dis- 
charged with  ability  and  faithfulness  the  duties  of  district  attorney  for 
the  Sixth  District.  That  these  duties  involved  much  labor  and  care,  in 
addition  to  no  small  amount  of  professional  skill  and  acquirement,  we 
are  assured  when  we  consider  that  this  district  then  comprised  Herki- 
mer, Otsego,  Chenango,  Madison,  Lewis,  and  Jefferson  as  well  as  Oneida 
Counties. 

It  was  in  1813  that  Mr.  Kirkland  transferred  his  residence  from  New 
Hartford  to  Utica,  and  thenceforth  for  thirty  years  he  was  identified  with 
its  prosperity  and  enterprises,  with  its  charities,  hospitalities,  and  its 
municipal  administration.  Sent  again  to  the  legislature  during  the  ses- 
sions 18 18-2 1  he  vacated  his  seat  in  the  latter  year  to  fill  a  higher  one 
in  the  seventeenth  Congress,  where  he  succeeded  that  eminent  speaker, 
Henry  R.  Storrs.  After  serving  a  single  term  with  great  acceptance  to 
members  of  all  parties  he  was  again  elected  to  the  Assembly  of  1825. 
Mr.  Kirkland  was  the  first  mayor  under  the  city  charter  of  Utica  and  * 
was  re-elected  in  1834,  two  years  afterward.  Without  disparagement 
to  his  successors  it  may  be  affirmed  that  no  administration  is  remem- 
bered with  a  livelier  gratification  than  the  one  of  which  he  was  the  head. 
It  was  while  he  presided  over  the  public  councils  that  the  city  was 
visited  by  that  desolating  calamity,  the  cholera,  which  in  no  part  of  the 
State  broke  out  in  a  more  sudden  or  fearful  manner  or  swept  into  eter- 
nity, in  proportion  to  the  population,  such  a  crowd  of  victims.  A  large 
number  of  citizens  left  the  place.  Men  much  younger  and  better  able 
to  contend  against  the  ravages  of  disease  fled  their  homes,  Mr.  Kirk- 
land, although  then  sixty  years  of  age,  remained  at  his  post  and  con- 
tinued during  the  entire  period  of  this  frightful  visitation  to  perform  the 
duties  which  devolved  upon  him.  He  was  ever  devising  measures  to  re- 
lieve those  who  were  smitten  or  to  check  the  violence  of  the  pestilence 
and  prevent  its  spread.  He  manifested  during  this  crisis  the  real  boldness 
and  energy  of  his  character,  and  showed  that  there  was  in  him  a  spirit 
which,  in  more  auspicious  circumstances  and  on  a  larger  field,  would 
have_  secured  to  him  no  ordinary  amount  of  reputation.  In  the  upbuild- 
ing of  Hamihon  College,  the  Utica  Academy,  the  Presbyterian  Church, 


WILLIAM  H.  MA  YNARD.  499 

the  Ontario  Branch  Bank,  the  Oneida  Glass  Factory,  the  New  Hartford 
Manufacturing  Society,  the  Farmers  Factory,  the  Paris  Furnace  Com- 
pany, and  other  early  institutions  of  the  county  Mr.  Kirkland  bore  a 
part  from  their  inception.  If  not  one  of  the  originators  he  was  at  a 
very  early  stage  of  the  enterprise  a  coadjutor  in  opening  and  construct- 
ing the  Seneca  turnpike,  the  great  internal  highway  of  commerce 
through  Central  New  York,  and  was  for  many  years  and  until  his  death 
the  president  and  treasurer  of  its  corporation.  And  in  schemes  after- 
ward projected  to  advance  the  educational,  commercial,  or  manufactur- 
ing interests  of  town  or  county  there  was  scarcely  one  in  which  this 
public  hearted  man  was  not  called  to  participate.  To  a  large  circle  of 
individuals  also,  of  various  classes,  he  was  the  valued  counselor  or  com- 
passionate friend.  He  died  January  2,  1844.  He  had  a  large  family, 
of  whom  scarcely  one  survives. 

William  Hale  Maynard  was  one  of  the  ablest  lawyers  and  acutest  and 
best  furnished  intellects  of  any  that  has  ever  made  his  home  in  Utica. 
He  was  the  son  of  Malachi  and  Anna  Hale  Maynard,  of  Conway,  Mass. 
Soon  after  his  graduation  he  removed  to  New  Hartford  in  Oneida 
County  and  entered  himself  as  a  student  of  law  in  the  office  of  Gen. 
Joseph  Kirkland.  To  some  extent  he  continued  his  employment  of 
teaching,  and  was  at  the  same  time  diligent  and  laborious  in  the  study 
of  his  profession.  In  the  year  1811  he  purchased  of  John  H.  Lothrop 
his  interest  in  the  Utica  Patriot  and  at  once  assumed  its  editorship. 
With  this  paper  he  retained  a  connection  and  was  its  chief  contributor 
down  to  the  year  1824.  In  January  following  he  was  made  attor- 
ney of  the  village.  His  first  associate  in  practice  was  Samuel  A.  Tal- 
cott.  Their  office  in  18 16  was  at  No.  4  Broad  street.  Another  attor- 
neyship which  he  received  about  this  time  was  of  more  importance  to 
him  pecuniarily  than  that  of  prosecutor  of  the  village.  He  was  ap- 
pointed law  officer  of  the  Utica  Insurance  Company,  which  was  a  bank- 
ing company  also,  and  here  he  laid  the  foundation  of  his  property. 
In  1818  he  was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  Supreme  Court.  "But," 
says  Judge  Bacon,  "  he  rose  rapidly  after  he  had  made  his  first  mark,  and 
was  soon  employed  on  one  side  or  the  other  in  most  of  the  heavy  litiga- 
tion that  engaged  the  attention  of  the  courts  of  the  county."  ^     It  was  in 

^  Bacon's  Early  Bar  of  Oneida  County. 


5°o 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


the  Supreme  Court  and  that  for  the  Correction  of  Errors  that  his  talents 
found  the  best  field  for  their  exercise ;  the  preparation  of  a  cause  for 
trial  in  the  inferior  courts,  the  presentation  of  the  evidence,  and  the  art- 
ful moulding  of  the  jury  to  an  opinion  favorable  to  one's  own  client 
were  done  as  well  by  many  others.  But  in  logical  acumen  and  in  wealth 
and  profundity  of  learning,  in  exact  perception  of  the  points  at  issue, 
and  in  thorough  elucidation  of  them  by  all  of  law  and  of  precedent  that 
were  citable  and  apposite,  and  that,  too,  in  the  presence  of  his  com- 
peers, and  where  reason  and  not  prejudice  or  feeling  was  to  judge, — 
it  was  here  that  Mr.  Maynard  most  excelled  and  where  his  principal 
laurels  were  obtained.  For  these  were  his  distinguishing  traits,  and 
which  characterized  him  both  as  a  speaker  and  a  writer.  He  had  little 
imagination  ;  he  was  not  graceful  in  manner  nor  finished  in  elocution, 
though  the  language  he  used  was  always  the  purest  and  plainest  Saxon. 
But  his  mental  vision  was  clear  and  his  reasoning  cogent,  and,  in  addi- 
tion, he  was  possessed  of  a  mem'ory  wonderfully  retentive  and  whose 
stores  were  ever  at  command.  He  would  try  a  cause  for  days  without 
touching  pen  to  paper  and  yet  in  the  end  retain  all  the  evidence  adduced. 

A  mind  thus  copiously  furnished  and  so  clear  in  its  convictions  could 
not  be  otherwise  than  instructive,  and  its  possessor  was  much  sought 
both  as  a  companion  in  private  and  as  a  speaker  in  publfc.  His  public 
addresses  were  spontaneous  and  free,  and  though  often  abounding  in 
facts  and  statistics  were  delivered  without  notes  and  apparently  with- 
out purposed  preparation.  To  the  confidence  reposed  in  him  as  a  wise 
adviser  and  a  skillful  manager  of  the  concerns  of  individuals  he  added 
also  much  influence  in  matters  of  general  and  political  interest.  He 
was  among  the  early  trustees  of  the  Utica  Academy ;  and  we  are  in- 
formed by  the  historian  of  that  institution  that  from  his  entrance  to  the 
board  the  marks  of  his  vigor  and  activity  are  traceable  in  various  sug- 
gestions and  reports  in  writing,  which,  although  not  signed  by  him,  are 
cognizable  by  his  peculiar  handwriting;  and  also  that  he  was  one  of  a 
committee  appointed  to  make  arrangements  for  the  opening  of  the 
school,  to  procure  a  teacher,  and  to  devise  a  system  of  instruction. 

In  politics  Mr.  Maynard  was  the  leading  spirit  of  the  Adams  admin- 
istration in  this  county,  his  most  formidable  opponent  being  Samuel 
Beardsley.     In  1819,  when  De  Witt  Clinton  was  nominated  as  governor 


WILLIAM  H.  MAYNARD. 


501 


in  opposition  to  Daniel  D.  Tompkins,  he  left  the  Federal  party,  which 
had  now  almost  ceased  to  exist  as  an  organized  faction,  and  took  sides 
with  the  fifty-one  "  high-minded  "  gentlemen  who  befriended  Governor 
Tompkins.  Naturally  he  soon  began  to  manifest  his  change  of  senti- 
ment by  a  change  in  the  tone  and  conduct  of  the  paper  which  he  man- 
aged. Messrs.  Seward  &  Williams,  the  publishers  and  chief  owners  of 
the  Patriot,  were  startled  at  this  sudden  revolution  in  the  character  of 
their  paper  and  alarmed  by  the  falling  off  of  its  subscribers.  Legal  ad- 
visers whom  they  consulted  recommended  the  setting  up  of  a  new  one 
as  their  only  mode  of  relief  and  accordingly  they  started  the  Utica 
Sentinel.  Mr.  Maynard  had  been  a  member  of  a  Masonic  lodge,  yet 
when,  in  consequence  of  an  atrocious  crime  committed  in  Western  New 
York  by  some  individuals  among  the  Masons,  there  arose  a  strong  op- 
position to  the  whole  order,  which,  spreading  through  the  State,  resulted 
in  the  formation  of  the  anti-  Masonic  party,  he  took  sides  with  that  party. 
In  1828  he  was  by  them  elected  senator  from  his  district  and  continued 
to  serve  during  the  years  1829,  '30,  '31,  and  '32.  By  his  election  the 
Senate  received  a  great  accession  of  talent,  and  though  he  was  one  of  a 
small  political  minority  he  exercised  a  high  and  commanding  influence 
and  became  in  the  latter  portion  of  his  career  the  acknowledged  leader 
of  that  body.  "  He  was,"  says  Proctor,  "  the  great  intellectual  light  of 
the  Senate — the  Halifax  of  his  party."  In  the  different  branches  of  the 
legislature  of  1832,  to  quote  further  from  this  author,  "two  future  gov- 
ernors of  the  State  occupied  seats,  one  of  whom  was  William  H.  Seward 
and  the  other  John  Young.  The  former  was  elevated  from  the  guber- 
natorial chair  to  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  and  thence  to  be 
prime  minister  of  two  presidential  administrations.  Both  of  these 
gentlemen  in  1832  were  overshadowed  by  the  talents,  position,  and  in- 
fluence of  Maynard  and  Granger.  The  early  death  of  the  former 
opened  a  field  for  the  splendid  abilities  of  Mr.  Seward,  while  the  mental 
resources  of  John  Young  gradually  removed  all  opposition  in  his  way 
and  he  grasped  the  highest  honors  of  the  Empire  State."  Among  the 
projects  advocated  by  Mr.  Maynard  while  in  the  Senate,  and  one  which 
was  mainly  effected  through  his  advocacy,  was  the  act  for  the  creation 
of  the  Chenango  Canal.  In  its  favor  he  delivered  a  long  and  able 
speech,  statesmanlike  in  its  pohcy,  and  marked  by  careful  research,  un- 


502  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

erring  figures,  and  wise  deduction.  During  this  period  he  continued  to- 
be  actively  engaged  in  the  duties  of  his  profession  and  was  so  up  to  the 
time  of  his  death.  From  the  year  1822  his  law  partner  had  been  Eb- 
enezer  Griffin.  After  1828  this  connection  was  exchanged  for  a  part- 
nership with  Joshua  A.  Spencer.  A  brief  editorial  notice  of  Mr.  May- 
nard  appeared  in  the  Albany  Armies  immediately  after  his  death.  After 
adverting  to  his  vigor  of  mind,  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  learning  of 
the  day,  professional  and  political,  his  exactness  of  logic,  and  his  remark- 
able facility  of  bringing  out  and  applying  his  resources,  Mr.  CrosweH' 
continues  as  follows  :  "As  a  lawyer,  as  a  debater  in  the  Senate,  and  as  a 
capable  writer  he  has  left  few  superiors  among  his  cotemporaries. 
Although  of  opposite  politics  with  ourselves  we  knew  and  estimated  the 
power  of  his  intellect,  and  along  with  our  friends  have  felt  the  sharpness- 
and  force  of  an  encounter  with  it.  To  his  personal  friends  his  death  is 
a  severe  deprivation.  In  the  political  party  to  which  he  was  attached 
he  has  left  no  equal  and  none  that  can  supply  his  place." 

First  among  the  persons  admitted  to  a  residence  in  the  year  i8i6  comes- 
one  who  was  confessedly  primus  inter  pares,  eminent  not  here  alone, 
but  throughout  the  country,  whose  transcendent  abilities  gave  him  a 
repute  that  was  national  and  a  celebrity  that  is  enduring.  Samuel 
Austin  Talcott  was  the  son  of  Samuel  Talcott,  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  and 
Abigail,  daughter  of  John  Ledyard,  of  Bristol,  England,  and  sister  of 
Colonel  Ledyard,  who  so  gallantly  defended  Fort  Groton  in  the  war  of 
the  Revolution.  This  Samuel  Talcott  was  son  of  Col.  Samuel  Talcott,. 
who  was  sheriff,  colonel,  etc.,  and  grandson  of  Gov.  Joseph  Talcott,  the 
first  governor  of  Connecticut  born  within  its  limits,  and  who  occupied 
the  chair  seventeen  years.  Samuel  Austin,  who  was  born  at  Hartford,- 
December  31,  1789,  lost  his  father  while  yet  a  boy.  At  the  age  of  four 
years  he  was  sent  to  a  school  kept  by  a  Mrs.  Peterson,  where  he  re- 
mained three  years,  and  was  then  put  under  the  care  of  Dr.  McClure,, 
of  East  Windsor.  He  continued  with  him  until  he  was  fourteen,  when  he 
went  to  Colchester  Academy,  and  after  a  residence  of  two  years  entered 
the  sophomore  class  of  Williams  College  in  1806  and  was  graduated 
in  1809,  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen.  Shortly  afterward  he  married  Miss 
Rachel  Skinner,  daughter  of  Dea.  Benjamin  Skinner,  of  Williamstown^ 
and  immediately   began   the   study   of  law   with   Thomas  R.  Gold,  of 


SAMUEL  A.   TALCOTT.  503 

Whitesboro.  His  course  of  study  ended  he  practiced  in  Lowville, 
Lewis  County,  at  first  in  partnership  with  Isaac  W.  Bostwick.  About 
18 16  he  removed  to  Utica  and  entered  into  a  like  connection  with  Will- 
iam H.  Maynard,  the  contemporary  of  his  college  days.  A  vacancy 
having  been  created  at  New  Hartford  by  the  removal  from  that  place  to 
Utica  of  Gen.  Joseph  Kirkland  Mr.  Talcott  took  up  his  residence  in 
the  former  village,  and  by  the  aid  of  his  associate  in  Utica  maintained 
an  office  in  both  places.  On  the  12th  of  February,  1821,  he  received 
the  appointment  of  attorney- general  of  the  State,  when  he  made  his 
home  in  Albany,  and  continued  to  live  there  during  his  administration 
■of  this  office.  From  Albany  he  repaired  to  New  York  and  carried  on 
practice  until  his  death,  March  19,  1836,  in  his  forty-seventh  year. 

Such  in  brief  terms  are  the  main  incidents  in  the  life  of  one  of  the 
marked  men  of  the  county  and  of  the  State.  Indeed  a  friend  of  his 
youth,  and  one  who  was  competent  to  judge,  has  pronounced  him  one 
of  the  most  extraordinary  men  of  the  age.  The  characteristics  of  Mr. 
Talcott  as  they  were  seen  in  college  this  writer^  thus  describes:  "At 
this  early  age  all  those  extraordinary  qualities  were  developed  which 
marked  his  career  and  so  greatly  distinguished  him  in  after  life, — tow- 
ering genius  and  profound  investigation ;  astonishing  facility  in  acquir- 
ing knowledge  and  a  memory  which  never  lost  what  it  had  once  ac- 
quired ;  surpassing  eloquence  as  a  writer  and  speaker  ;  a  mind  which 
could  grasp  and  master  whatever  was  most  difficult  in  the  abstruse  sci- 
ences, and  at  the  same  time  exhibiting  powers  of  the  imagination,  wit, 
humor,  raillery  and  sarcasm  which  have  rarely  been  equaled.  To  all 
these  were  added  the  advantages  of  a  commanding  person,  unrivalled 
address,  a  head,  eye,  and  countenance  'the  pattern  of  a  man.'  He  was 
in  all  respects  most  truly  one  of  nature's  noblemen.  His  heart  was  gen- 
erous to  a  fault  and  he  had  a  soul  which  knew  not  fear."  Eulogium  so 
lavish  one  might  impute  to  the  partiality  of  a  friend  did  it  not  accord 
with  the  written  testimony  of  a  few  cotemporaries  of  his  m.anhood  as 
well  as  with  the  traditionary  report  of  all  his  generation.  As  a  lawyer 
all  admit  that  he  was  born  to  the  calling ;  they  join  in  praising  the 
acuteness  of  his  intellect  and  the  cogency  of  his  logic,  his  abundant 
learning  and  close  and  critical  research,  to  which  they  add  an  eloquence 

•  Hon.  William  H,  Dillingham  in  Durfee's  Biograpliical  Annals  of  Williams  College. 


S04  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

of  oratory  seldom  witnessed.  Though  from  an  early  period  in  his  pro- 
fessional life  Mr.  Talcott  was  engaged  in  nearly  every  important  case 
that  was  tried  at  the  Circuit,  and  often  argued  at  the  bar  of  the  Su- 
preme Court,  yet  scarce  an  impress  of  his  commanding  power  is  now  to 
be  traced.  A  few  skeletons  of  arguments  are  preserved  in  the  reports 
of  the  court,  but  this  is  all.  In  his  day  there  was  no  reporting  of  the 
particular  character  that  we  now  have,  and  the  public  efforts  of  this 
great  lawyer  have  perished  with  the  occasion.  In  respect  to  his  style 
of  oratory  his  sentences',  we  are  told,  were  for  the  most  part  short  and 
pithy;  he  did  not  practice  high-wrought  illustration  or  nicely  balanced 
periods,  nor  call  on  Shakespeare  or  some  other  poet  to  assist  him  in  his 
flight  and  make  good  his  own  deficiencies;  graced'with  a  fancy  all  his 
own,  spoken  in  a  deep-toned,  resounding  voice,  and  in  a  manner  that 
was  most  impressive  his  utterances  were  forceful  and  direct ;  weighty 
with  reason  they  captivated  the  understanding  while  they  charmed  the 
sense;  or  changing  with  magical  transition  from  the  subtlest  argument 
they  melted  the  hearer  to  the  deepest  pathos.  "  He  produced  in  the 
minds  of  his  audience,"  says  Proctor, '^  "all  the  sympathy  and  emotion  of 
which  the  mind  is  capable — all  which  the  argumentative  can  produce — 
all  which  solidity,  pathos,  or  splendor,  whether  derived  from  original  or 
assisted  powers,  can  convey  of  pleasure  or  conviction."  "  But  with  all  his 
ability  he  had  striking  weaknesses  and  some  lamentable  vices.  Among 
the  former  was  a  foolish  vanity  of  having  it  thought  that  all  his  gifts  and 
resources  came  by  inspiration  and  were  not  the  fruit  of  careful  study 
and  laborious  preparation."  2  This  led  him  to  conceal  every  evidence 
of  toil  and  to  pass  his  da}-s  in  idleness  or  worse,  while  his  nights  were 
often  consumed  in  diligent  reading  and  laborious  thought.  He  spurned 
the  labor  of  others  and  refused  to  appear  in  court  with  a  brief  that  had 
been  wholly  or  in  part  prepared  by  an  associate.  No  cause  was  worthy 
of  his  handling  that  had  not  been  subjected  to  his  midnight  crucible 
and  worked  up  to  the  standard  of  his  own  conception.  He  never 
sought  business,  was  not  anxious  for  the  pecuniary  gains  he  might  so- 
easily  have  grasped,  but  solicitous  only  for  professional  fame  he  strove 
in  what  he  did  do  therein  without  seeming  effort  and  as  it  were  by  sheer 
force  of  genius  to  excel. 

1  Bench  and  Bar  of  New  York. 

2  Bacon's  Early  Bar  of  Oneida  County. 


SAMUEL  A.   TALCOTT. 


505 


In  proof  of  some  of  these  traits,  and  more  especially  of  his  simulated 
idleness,  his  accurate  learning  and  its  covert  acquisition,  is  the  narra- 
tive of  the  venerable  Charles  Dayan,  of  Lowville,  who,  at  the  same  time 
with  the  late  Russel  Parrish,  was  a  student  in  the  office  of  Messrs.  Bost- 
wich  &  Talcott.  He  says  :  "  Mr.  Talcott  was,  I  think,  the  laziest  man 
I  ever  knew.  He  would  lie  in  bed  till  10  o'clock  and  would  lounge  for 
hours.  In  fact  I  seldom  or  ever  saw  him  read  a  book ;  and  we  began 
to  set  him  down  as  an  ignorant,  clownish  fellow.  So  Parrish  and  I  one 
day  laid  a  plan  to  trap  and  expose  him  by  asking  about  some  principle 
of  law  on  which  we  had  been  posting  ourselves  from  the  books.  Mr. 
Talcott  replied  that  the  principle  had  been  discussed  some  years  ago, 
and  referred  us  to  a  case  in  the  English  term  reports,  mentioning  the 
judge,  the  year,  volume,  and  page.  Turning  to  the  authority  we  found 
the  matter  fully  stated  and  decision  given.  '  Now,'  said  he,  "  are  you 
satisfied?'  'Yes,  of  course;  it  is  quite  plain.'  'But,'  said  he,  'in  a 
case  reported  some  years  later  this  same  principle  arose  and  was  set- 
tled in  a  different  way.'  Having  recourse  to  the  volume,  page,  and 
name  of  parties  indicated  we  found  the  decision  (this  time  by  Lord 
Mansfield)  as  he  had  informed  us.  We  again  declared  ourselves  fully 
satisfied.  But,  remarking  that  the  law  was  very  uncertain,  he  cited 
another  case  some  years  later,  in  which  a  third  decision  had  been  ren- 
dered, differing  from  either  of  the  former  ones.  We  never  again  un- 
dertook to  cross  examine  Mr.  Talcott  upon  principles  of  law,  but  found 
him  always  ready  to  cite  from  memory  upon  any  point  on  which  we 
needed  information."  "In  trying  causes,"  said  Judge  Pomroy  Jones, 
"  he  seemed  to  take  pride  in  making  it  appear  that  he  was  paying  no  at- 
tention to  the  testimony  or  the  summing  up  of  opposing  counsel.  I 
have  seen  him  during  the  progress  of  a  trial  making  pictures  and  pass- 
ing them  to  members  of  the  bar ;  but  when  he  came  to  sum  up  all  of 
the  testimony,  even  the  very  words  of  the  witnesses  as  well  as  of  the  law- 
yer in  opposition,  seemed  to  have  been  photographed  on  his  memory." 
His  appointment  by  the  Council  to  the  high  po.sition  of  attorney-gen- 
eral, in  place  of  Thomas  J.  Oakley,  when  he  was  but  thirty- one  years 
of  age  is  evidence  of  the  estimate  that  was  placed  upon  his  talents. 
This  appointment,  remarks  Mr.  Hammond,'  was  considered  peculiarly 

64 
'  Hammond's  Political  History  of  New  York. 


5o6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Mr.  Van  Buren's.  "  Mr.  Talcott  had  been  a  Federalist,  but  with  many 
others  of  that  party  had  opposed  the  election  of  Mr.  CUnton  ;  and  Mr. 
Van  Buren  no  doubt  felt  that  good  policy  required  that  some  distin- 
guished mark  of  attention  and  respect  should  be  bestowed  on  some  of 
the  individuals  who  had  been  ranked  among  the  Federalists.  Mr.  Tal- 
cott, too,  was  a  young  man,  and  it  was  said  to  be  a  part  of  Mr.  Van 
Buren's  policy  to  appear  as  the  patron  of  young  men  whose  abilities 
and  position  in  life  afforded  a  promise  that  they  would  become  influential 
in  society."  But  though  the  acuteness  of  this  "sage"  leader  may  have 
led  to  the  selection  of  Mr.  Talcott  for  this  honor  it  is  also  true  that  he 
was  twice  re-elected  to  the  office, — once  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the 
legislature, — that  he  held  it  during  the  greater  part  of  nine  years,  and 
that  he  has  been  adjudged  by  competent  authority  as  second  in  talent 
and  ability  to  no  former  incumbent,  unless  it  be  Alexander  Hamilton. 
Deeply  pitiable  it  is  to  record  that  his  own  vices  required  his  resig- 
nation :  that  habits  of  intemperance  which  had  fixed  themselves  in  his 
youth  became  so  strengthened  by  long  years  of  indulgence,  and  were  so 
gross  in  their  manifestations,  as  to  disgrace  him  in  the  eyes  of  the  public 
and  disqualify  him  to  retain  so  responsible  an  office.  For  a  time  he  con- 
tinued to  practice  in  New  York,  and  "  such  was  his  elasticity  of  body 
and  mind  that  when  he  came  out  of  his  revels  he  would  stand  up  and 
measure  his  strength  with  the  ablest  and  best  in  the  land."  Its  last  and 
most  memorable  display  we  relate  in  the  language  of  Judge  Bacon:  ^ 
"  One  of  the  last  occasions  on  which  he  appeared  was  before  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States  in  what  was  known  as  the  '  Sailor's  Snug 
Harbor '  case.  This  had  been  preceded  by  a  week  of  indulgence,  so 
that  his  friends  began  to  fear  that  he  would  be  utterly  unfit  to  stand  in 
the  presence  of  that  high  tribunal.  But  on  the  day  assigned  for  the 
argument  he  strode  into  the  court  room  attired  with  scrupulous  neat- 
ness, fresh  as  a  bridegroom,  and  his  imperial  intellect  untouched  and  un- 
obscured.  Beginning  in  a  low  and  measured  tone  he  gathered  strength 
and  power  as  he  proceeded  in  his  masterly  discourse,  and  for  five  hours 
or  more  he  held  the  breathless  attention  of  bench  and  bar  and  audience 
in  an  argument  which  the  illustrious  Marshall  declared  had  not  been 
equalled  in  that  court  since  the  days  of  the  renowned  lawyer,  William 

'  Bacon's  Early  Bar  of  Oneida  County. 


SAMUEL  A.   TALCOTT.  507 

Pinckney.  It  was  an  argument  that  Daniel  Webster,  bis  great  antag- 
onist, found  it  impossible  with  his  profound  learning  and  colossal  intel- 
lect to  overcome  or  even  successfully  to  meet."  Mr.  Dayan,  who  was 
present  and  heard  this  speech,  tells  us,  in  reference  to  its  effect  on  the 
chief  justice,  that,  forgetting  the  staid  dignity  which  he  usualy  carried, 
his  head  from  bolt  upright  began  to  lean  forward  as  the  argument  ad- 
vanced, until  it  bent  quite  down  to  the  desk  as  he  earnestly  gazed  and 
listened.  The  impassioned  fervor  of  Robert  Hall  brought  men,  it  is 
said,  from  their  seats  to  their  feet;  the  splendidly  flowing  logic  of  Tal- 
cott  bowed  the  chief  court  of  the  nation  in  rapt  and  passive  deference. 
"This,"  continues  Judge  Bacon,  "  was  his  last  great  effort,  and  from  that 
altitude  he  rapidly  sank  ;  like  the  sun  even  at  high  noon,  in  the  meridian 
of  a  day  that  should  have  been  flooded  with  light,  his  orb  went  out  in 
dismal  darkness." 

Immediately  on  the  opening  of  the  Supreme  Court,  which  was  in 
session  in  the  city  of  New  York  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Tal- 
cott,  his  decease  was  announced  by  Henry  R.  Storrs,  whereupon  the  court, 
after  a  feeling  and  eloquent  address  by  Chief  Justice  Jones,  at  once  ad- 
journed. And  at  a  meeting  of  the  members  of  the  New  York  bar,  held 
on  the  same  day,  it  was 

"Resolved,  That  this  meeting  have  heard  with  deep  regret  and  sympathy  of  the 
death  of  Samuel  A.  Talcott,  late  attorney-general  of  the  State ;  that  in  the  brilliant 
course  of  his  professional  life  they  find  much  to  shed  honor,  not  only  upon  his  own 
name,  but  upon  the  State  to  which  he  belonged  and  the  bar  whose  reputation  he  ele- 
vated ;  that  his  distinguished  talent,  profound  learning,  and  finished  scholarship  have 
rarely  been  equaled  and  never  been  surpassed  at  the  bar  of  this  State." 

To  their  opinion  thus  expressed  may  be  joined  the  verdict  of  Daniel 
Webster  given  in  1838,  and  which  was  concurred  in  by  Martin  Van 
Buren,  that  Mr.  Talcott  was  the  ablest  living  lawyer  of  America.  By 
his  first  wife,  who  died  in  18 19,  Mr.  Talcott  had  one  son,  John  Led- 
yard,  late  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Eighth  District  and  re- 
siding at  Buffalo,  and  one  daughter  who  died  in  infancy.  By  his  sec- 
ond wife,  Miss  Mary  Eliza  Stanley,  of  New  Hartford,  he  had  one  son, 
Thomas  Grosvenor,  a  lawyer  of  much  native  capacity  who  settled  in 
Hartford,  Conn.,  but  died  in  1870. 

James  Lynch  had  already  for  several  years  maintained  a  creditable 
place  at   the  bar   of  Oneida.      He  was  a  son   of  Dominick  Lynch,  of 


5o8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Rome,  and  was  born  about  1786.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  Col- 
lege in  1799,  studied  law  at  Rome,  and  began  practice  in  that  place. 
During  the  sessions  of  1814-16  he  represented  his  town  in  the  State 
legislature.  About  18 19  he  changed  his  residence  for  one  in  Utica,  con- 
tinuing in  the  exercise  of  his  profession  and  having  as  his  partner  Abra- 
ham Varick,  who  had  been  his  classmate  at  Columbia.  He  lived  at  his 
coming  on -the  north  side  of  Broad  street  between  Genesee  and  John, 
butabout  1823  he  built  for  himself  the  fine  house  on  Chancellor  Square, 
afterward  occupied  by  Thomas  H.  Hubbard  and  by  Dr.  S.  G.  Wolcott. 
In  1825  he  moved  to  New  York  city,  where  he  was  appointed  ajudge^of 
the  Marine  Court.  In  this  office  he  remained  until  his  death,  October 
3,  1853,  at  the  age  of  sixty- seven.  Mr.  Lynch  was  one  of  the  founders  of 
St.  John's  Church  and  after  removing  to  New  York  he  was  an  early 
and  active  member  of  the  American  Institute.  Judge  Bacon,  in  his 
"  Early  Bar  of  Oneida,"  speaks  of  him  as  "  of  princely  bearing  and  com- 
manding presence."  As  a  lawyer  he  was  creditable  and  above  medio- 
crity, though  in  the  opinion  of  the  judge  he  was  "capable  when  roused, 
of  efforts  little  inferior  to  those  of  Storrs  and  Talcott."  Judge  Lynch's 
wife  was  Miss  Janette  Tillotson,  of  an  aristocratic  family  of  Rhinebeck, 
N.  Y.,  and  was  a  member  of  Trinity  Church  in  Utica,  though  her  hus- 
band was  foremost  among  the  Catholics.  They  had  three  sons  and  four 
daughters. 

Foremost  among  the  new  comers  for  the  year  1820  I  introduce  Eb- 
enezer  Griffin,  a  gifted  lawyer  who  for  a  few  years  adorned  the  bar  of 
Oneida,  but  removed  so  long  since  that  not  many  of  the  present  gener- 
ation have  any  knowledge  of  him.  The  account  I  present  is  drawn 
almost  wholly  from  the  "  Bench  and  Bar  "  of  Proctor.  He  was  born  in 
Cherry  Valley,  July  29,  1789.  While  quite  young  he  removed  with 
his  father  to  Clinton  in  this  county  and  there  he  was  prepared  for  col- 
lege. He  entered  Union  and  soon  gained  the  reputation  of  a  close  and 
thorough  student.  Desiring,  however,  to  enter  his  chosen  profession 
with  as  little  delay  as  possible  he  left  college  two  years  and  a  half  after 
entering  and  immediately  commenced  his  legal  studies  with  Mr.  Hotch- 
kiss,  of  Clinton.  The  degree  of  A.M.  was  subsequently  conferred  on 
him  by  the  authorities  of  Hamilton  College.  In  due  time  he  was  pre- 
pared for  the   bar   and  was  admitted  at  the  July  term  of  the  Supreme 


EBENEZER  GRIFFIN.  509 

Court  in  181 1.      He  began  practice  at  Clinton  ;  but  his  growing  repu- 
tation demanded  a  more  extensive  field   and  in  June,  1820,  he  opened 
an  office  in  Utica.     In  1821  he  was  appointed  examiner  and  master  in 
chancery.     In  April  of  the  following  year  he  formed  a  business  connec- 
tion with  William  H.  Maynard,  succeeding  therein  to  Mr.  Talcott,  just 
appointed  attorney-general.     While  here,  and  still   more   after  his  re- 
moval to  New  York  city  in  1825,  he  was  engaged  in  a  large  and  exten- 
sive practice.      His  reputation  extended   throughout  the  State,  and  his 
practice   in  the  Court   for   the   Correction   of  Errors,  in  the  Supreme 
Court,  and  in   the   various   Circuits  in   the  State  was   equaled  by  few 
lawyers  then  at  the  bar.      He  seemed,  says  Proctor,  almost  ubiquitous : 
now   in  Buffalo,   then   at   Bath,  then   at  Albany,  then   at   New   York. 
Among  the  many  important  cases  in  which  he  was  retained  that  of  the 
Bank  of  Utica  vs.  Wager  tended   most,  as  Mr.  Proctor  tells  us,  to  in- 
crease and  extend  his  reputation.     It  was  tried  at  Utica  in  November, 
1 82 1,  before   Hon.  Jonas   Piatt,  Circuit  judge.     Judge  Piatt   ordered  a 
verdict  for  the  bank  subject  to  the  opinion  of  the  Supreme  Court.     It 
was  argued    before    that  tribunal    in    May,    1824.      Henry    R.    Storrs 
opened  the  argument  for  the  plaintiff"  and  Joshua  A.  Spencer  for  the  de- 
fence.    Mr.  Griffin  made  the  closing  argument  for  the  defence.     When 
he  arose  to  address  the  court  many  supposed  that  the  subject  had  been 
exhausted  by  Mr.  Spencer,  that  whatever  else  might  be  said  would  be  but 
the  work  of  supererogation.     A  few  moments,  however,  sufficed  to  con- 
vince all  present  that,  as  by  intuition,  Mr.  Griffin  had  penetrated  deeper 
into  the  subject,  had  more  fully  and  logically  grasped  the  great  questions 
of  the  case,  than  either  of  the  other  counsel.      His  argument  was  one  of 
the  most  able,  profound,  and  elaborate  ever  heard   at   the  bar  of  this 
State.     Every  authority  bearing   on   the   matter,   whether  American, 
English,  or  French,  was  fully  considered,  examined,  and   digested.      It 
was  lengthy,  yet  did  not  touch  upon  anything  which  could  excite  the 
fancy  or  please  the  imagination.     It  contained  nothing  but  logic   and 
learning  ;  yet  the  court  and  bar  listened  with  deep  and  unwearied  atten- 
tion.    The  court  sustained  him  in  his  view  of  the  case,  the  judgment 
being  pronounced  by  Chief  Justice  Savage.     An  appeal  was   taken   to 
the  Court  of  Errors  and  the  case  was  argued  in  December,  1826.     The 
argument  of  Mr.  Griffin  was  superior  even  to  that  which  he  had  made 


510  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

before  the  Supreme  Court.  He  seemed  to  rise  with  the  occasion  and* 
to  gain  mental  power  as  it  was  demanded,  and  he  was  again  victorious. 
But  his  victory  was  purchased  at  a  fearful  expense.  So  great  were  his- 
labors  in  the  preparation  and  trial  that  a  cerebral  agitation  soon  fol- 
lowed, which  at  times  through  life  quite  unsettled  his  splendid  mind. 
Mr.  Griffin  continued  to  live  in  New  York  until  1842,  when  he  removed 
to  Rochester  and  resided  there  until  his  death.  This  occurred  on  the 
22d  of  January,  1861,  in  his  seventy-third  year.  Mr.  Griffin  was  quite 
agreeable  in  his  intercourse,  was  tall  and  heavy  in  person,  weighing  at 
least  220  pounds,  and  yet  quite  prepossessing.  Politically  he  belonged 
to  the  famous  high-minded  gentlemen. 

A  lawyer  admitted  to  practice  in  1820  was  Charles  Pinckney  Kirk- 
land,  son  of  Joseph  Kirkland.  He  was  born  in  New  Hartford  in  1797, 
graduated  at  Hamilton  College  in  18 16,  and  entered  upon  legal  study 
in  the  office  of  his  father.  Admitted  to  the  bar  he  was  received  into 
partnership  with  the  latter  and  remained  with  him  until  the  year  1830,. 
soon  after  which  time  he  united  in  practice  with  William  J.  Bacon. 
About  185  I  he  removed  to  the  city  of  New  York.  During  the  whole 
of  his  residence  in  Utica  and  for  some  time  longer  he  was  engaged  un- 
ceasingly in  his  professional  duties,  was  a  diligent  worker,  an  honest 
business  man,  and  took  high  rank  throughout  the  State  as  a  skillful  ad- 
vocate and  a  wise  and  trusty  counselor.  As  a  politician  he  was  fair  and 
unprejudiced.  In  1838  he  was  mayor  of  Utica  and  in  1846  was  a 
member  of  the  convention  to  revise  the  constitution.  For  many  years 
he  was  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  College  and  received  from  that  institution,, 
as  he  did  likewise  from  Columbia,  the  degree  of  LL.D.  A  trustee  alsa 
of  other  educational,  manufacturing,  and  commercial  corporations  he 
was  actively  concerned  in  every  means  devised  for  the  good  of  the 
place  in  which  he  lived.  Afterward  in  New  York  his  influence  and 
his  usefulness  were  not  less  than  they  had  been  in  Utica.  One  daugh- 
ter alone  survives  of  several  children.  His  wife,  a  daughter  of  Maj. 
James  Kip,  died  quite  recently. 

Thomas  Hunt  Flandrau  was  the  son  of  Elias  F.  Flandrau,  of  New 
Rochelle,  Westchester  County,  N.  Y.,  whose  ancestors  had  been  living 
in  that  place  since  the  immigration  of  Jacques  Flandrau,  a  Huguenot  from 
Rochelle  in   France,  in    1686.     Elias  F.  died  within  a   year  after  his- 


THOMAS  H.  FLANDRAU.  511 

removal  to  Oneida  County,  when  his  widow  and  children  took  up  their 
residence  in  Utica.  His  son,  who  was  born  in  New  Rochelle,  Sep- 
tember 8,  1801,  was  fitted  for  college  in  the  juvenile  academy  of  Mr. 
White  and  entered  Hamilton  in  the  sophomore  year.  His  collegiate 
course  was  chiefly  distinguished  by  his  attainments  in  mathematics, 
though  his  standing  as  a  classical  scholar  and  a  writer  was  more  than 
ordinary,  while  among  his  companions  he  was  noted  also  for  his  re- 
markable powers  as  a  talker.  After  leaving  the  institution  with  one 
■of  its  highest  honors  he  bent  himself  to  the  law  in  the  office  of  Nathan 
Williams.  These  studies  completed  he  united  in  its  practice  with  Rod- 
erick Morrison,  in  the  second  story  of  a  building  on  the  east  side  of 
Genesee  street  nearly  opposite  the  postoffice.  They  were  not  there 
over  two  years  when  Col.  Aaron  Burr,  who  in  the  course  of  his  attend- 
ance on  the  courts  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Flandrau,  and 
being  impressed  with  his  superior  gifts  invited  him  to  join  him  in  busi- 
ness in  New  York.  He  at  once  entered  upon  this  new  connection  and 
reaped  a  few  years  of  valuable  discipline,  in  which  his  mental  and  in- 
dustrial capacities  were  thoroughly  tasked,  wherein  he  was  often  placed 
in  opposition  with  such  men  as  David  B.  Ogden  and  Chancellor  Jones, 
and  where  his  intellectual  and  professional  accomplishments  procured' 
him  a  high  reputation.  In  1825  he  was  married  and  not  long  afterward 
came  back  to  Utica.  But  about  the  time  its  city  charter  took  effect  he 
withdrew  from  the  place  and  made  his  home  in  Waterville,  for  he  dis- 
trusted a  city  government  and  was  wary  of  holding  property  that  was 
subject  to  the  taxation  of  a  council  of  aldermen.  After  years  of  absence, 
clouded  by  turns  of  sickness,  and  wanting  in  the  displays  of  genius  he 
had  before  and  which  he  subsequently  manifested  he  returned  in  1845 
to  his  earlier  residence  ;  and  then,  having  passed  three  busy  years  in 
practice,  he  fixed  himself  at  Whitesboro.  There  he  died  rather  suddenly 
on  January  2,  1855.  From  the  estimate  of  his  professional  character- 
istics prepared  by  the  late  Benjamin  F.  Cooper  we  extract  the  fol- 
lowing : 

"  As  a  writer  Mr.  Flandrau  was  distinguished  for  his  method,  for  his 
singularly  precise,  felicitous,  and  appropriate  language.  Whatever  fell 
from  his  pen  was  classical  and  finished.  He  was  rarely  under  the  neces- 
sity of  correcting  an    expression ;  his   ideas   fell  unconsciously,  as   it 


SI2  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

were,  into  line,  and  when  committed  to  paper  were  ready  for  the  press. 
He  had,  too,  the  rare  capacity  of  writing  a  short  article  at  the  moment,, 
and  needed  not  the  labor  of  curtailment  and  condensation.  These 
characteristics  of  his  miscellaneous  writings  are  to  be  seen  also  in  his- 
legal  papers.  In  the  preparation  of  them  he  had  few  equals.  His  bills 
in  chancery  and  his  pleadings,  and  even  his  drafts  of  affidavits,  were  so 
impressed  with  the  above  mentioned  qualities  that  they  might  be  studied,, 
not  only  as  specimens  of  legal  skill,  but  even  as  models  of  composition. 
As  a  speaker,  also,  Mr.  Flandrau  was  noted  for  his  rapid  analysis,  acute 
discrimination,  uncommon  method,  and  clear  and  happy  expression.  In 
fact  so  simple  was  he  in  his  clearness,  so  orderly,  so  accurate,  and  yet  so 
strong  that  most  men  might  be  deceived  and  think  that  in  his  forensic 
displays  there  was  nothing  extraordinary.  It  was  left  to  the  circle  of 
his  professional  brethren  to  judge  of  him  with  a  more  just  appreciation. 
It  was  these  traits  which  made  him  eminently  successful  with  juries,  while 
at  the  same  time  his  correct  taste,  well-balanced  mind,  and  high  cultiva- 
tion prevented  his  obtaining  that  degree  of  popularity  with  the  multitude 
which  was  sometimes  ^accorded  to  men  who  were  greatly  his  inferiors. 
Methodical  as  he  was  mentally  he  was  so  in  few  other  respects.  In  refer- 
ence to  most  matters  of  life  he  had  all  the  want  of  order  that  has  too 
often  been  the  attendant  of  exalted  genius.  In  his  earlier  years  it  seemed 
as  If  he  never  ate  nor  slept  wheti  others  did.  "  Often,''  says  Mr.  Cooper, 
"  have  I  known  him  to  keep  his  companions  awake  to  the  small  hours  of 
the  night  with  his  extraordinary  colloquial  powers  ;  and  when  at  length 
they  began  to  think  of  their  pillows  he  would  rise  from  his  seat  with  the 
remark  that  he  thought  he  would  go  and  visit  some  one  of  his  associates,, 
deeming  them  apparently  as  sleepless  in  their  nature  as  he  was  himself 
When  and  where  he  read  it  was  difficult  to  ascertain,  yet  he  never 
seemed  to  be  wanting  in  a  knowledge  of  facts.  How  he  studied  it  was 
not  so  difficult  to  understand,  for  that  was  done  by  thinking,  and  much 
of  it,  too,  when  he  lay  in  bed.  Yet  his  acquirements  were  by  no  means 
small,  even  outside  of  the  range  of  his  legal  ones.  He  was  a  mathema- 
tician, a  mechanician,  a  classical  scholar,  and  a  poet." 

At  his  death  the  lawyers  residing  at  Utica  declared  in  a  resolution 
that,  in  gentlemanly  deportment  in  his  profession,  in  rigid  and  accurate 
investigation  of  legal  questions,  in  logical  reasoning,  in  precision  and 


SAMUEL  BEARDSLEY. 


513 


force  of  language,  and  in  the  zealous  performance  of  his  professional 
duties,  he  left  no  superior  at  the  bar  of  Oneida  County. 

Samuel  Beardsley  was  born  at  Hoosick  in  Rensselaer  County,  Febru- 
ary 6,  1790,  but  while  an  infant  his  parents  moved  to  Monticello  in 
Otsego  County.  Samuel  attended  a  common  school  in  winter  and  in 
summer  he  worked  on  a  farm.  But  his  love  of  knowledge  was  strong 
and  he  sought  every  opportunity  of  acquiring  it.  For  a  time  he  en- 
gaged in  teaching,  but  at  length  decided  to  enter  the  medical  profession 
and  began  his  studies  with  Dr.  Joseph  White,  of  Cherry  Valley,  While 
thus  employed  it  was  his  fortune  to  be  present  at  soine  important  trials 
at  Cooperstown.  He  watched  them  with  the  deepest  interest  and  was 
so  fascinated  as  to  lose  all  love  for  medicine,  and  to  direct  his  hopes 
and  ambition  toward  the  bar.  At  one  of  these  trials  he  made  the  ac- 
qu.aintance  of  Judge  Hathaway,  of  Rome,  signified  to  him  his  desire  to 
study  law,  and  was  invited  to  enter  his  office.  He  was  then  eighteen. 
Fortunate  in  the  choice  of  a  preceptor  of  learning  and  skill,  and  who 
became  deeply  interested  in  him,  the  young  student  made  rapid  pro- 
ficiency, supporting  himself  meanwhile  by  teaching  a  select  school. 
Having  been  admitted  to  practice  in  181 5  he  located  at  Watertown, 
but  only  remained  there  one  year,  when  he  returned  to  Rome  to  pursue 
his  profession.  For  a  time  he  was  the  partner  of  James  Lynch  and 
was  afterward  alone.  The  industry  and  energy  of  the  student  he  kept 
up  when  he  became  a  lawyer.  From  the  commencement  he  was  dis- 
tinguished for  unusual  vigor  of  intellect,  constant  labor,  and  untiring 
perseverance.  In  the  language  of  one  of  his  eulogists :  he  began  with 
study,  he  continued  with  study,  he  ended  with  stud3^  These  qualities 
at  once  placed  him  in  the  highest  rank  of  the  profession  and  this  posi- 
tion he  steadily  maintained  to  the  time  of  his  death.  Method  and  order 
marked  the  preparation  of  his  causes  ;  hence  his  labor  was  effective, 
and  each  step  was  the  firm  foundation  for  another.  He  never  addressed 
the  fancy  of  his  audience.  Clear  argumentation  and  a  bold,  indignant 
denunciation  of  wrong  were  his  chief  weapons  and  in  his  hands  they 
were  almost  uniformly  fatal  to  an  undeserving  adversary.  In  February, 
1821,  Mr.  Beardsley  was  appointed  district  attorney  of  Oneida  County, 
succeeding  Nathan  Williams,  and  he  continued  to  discharge  the  du- 
ties until  October,  1825,  when  his  term  of  office   expired.     As  an  evi- 

05 


514 


MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


dence  of  his  familiarity  with  all  the  forms  and  technicalities  which  then 
formed  a  part  of  the  system  of  law  and  of  the  modes  of  procedure  in 
criminal  cases  Mr.  Proctor  relates  the  following :  On  one  occasion,  in 
draughting  an  indictment  for  arson  in  the  first  degree,  the  district  attorney 
omitted  an  allegation  which  the  lawyer  defending  believed  to  be  fatal; 
but  having  some  doubt  he  consulted  Joshua  A.  Spencer  on  the  point. 
That  sagacious  man,  after  examining  it  some  time,  replied :  '  Well,  I 
think,  though  Archbold  and  Chitty  may  both  sustain  you,  yet  if  Beards- 
ley  insists  that  he  is  correct  I  should  prefer  his  opinion  to  theirs.'  The 
lawyer,  however,  made  his  motion  to  quash  the  indictment.  A  long 
and  interesting  argument  followed  ;  but  Mr.  Beardsley's  knowledge  of 
the  criminal  law  gave  him  a  decided  advantage.  The  authorities  were 
as  familiar  to  him  as  the  schoolboy's  every  day  lesson  and  he  sustained 
the  indictment. 

At  the  first  election  held  under  the  constitution  of  1822  Mr.  Beards- 
ley  was  chosen  senator  for  the  Fifth  District  and  took  his  seat  on  the  1st 
of  the  ensuing  January,  but  in  the  arrangement  of  classes  by  lot  he  fell 
into  that  class  whose  term  of  service  was  limited  to  a  single  year.  It  was 
this  year  (1823)  that  he  transferred  his  residence  to  Utica,  taking  as  his 
partner  Thomas  S.  Williams.  On  the  death  of  Morris  S.  Miller  in  No- 
vember, 1824,  the  position  of  first  judge  of  the  county  was  tendered 
him,  but  he  preferred  to  retain  the  more  active  labors  of  prosecuting  at- 
torney. In  March,  1823,  he  was  appointed  by  President  Adams  United 
States  attorney  for  the  Northern  District  of  New  York.  He  held  the 
post  until  November,  1830,  when  he  was  elected  by  the  Democrats  to 
represent  them  in  Congress.  As  representative  he  was  four  times 
elected — in  1830,  1832,  1834,  and  1842.  In  all  of  the  exciting  ques- 
tions that  were  agitated  during  the  administration  of  General  Jackson 
he  was  the  uncompromising  friend  of  the  President  and  enjoyed  his  in- 
timate confidence.  He  believed  that  the  existence  of  a  moneyed  insti- 
tution like  the  United  States  Bank  in  a  government  such  as  ours  was  at 
■war  with  the  principles  upon  which  the  government  was  founded.  In 
April,  1834,  he  delivered  a  speech  on  the  currency  which  attracted 
great  attention  throughout  the  country  for  its  vehemence  and  fiery  de- 
nunciation. In  the  course  of  it  he  said:  "Sooner  than  extend  the  ex- 
istence of  the  bank  of  the  United  States  let  it  perish,  and  in  its  fall  carry 


SAMUEL   BEARDSLEY.  515 

down  every  bank  in  the  Union.  I  say  for  one  perish  credit,  perish 
commerce,  perish  the  State  institutions ;  give  us  a  broken,  decayed, 
worthless  currency  rather  than  the  ignoble  and  corrupt  tyranny  of  an 
irresponsible  corporation."  His  opponents  seized  on  the  striking  alter- 
native he  presented  and  were  long  and  bitter  in  their  denunciations. 
Niles's  Register,  while  commending  the  ability  displayed  in  the  speech, 
laments  the  expression  by  a  man  of  Mr.  Beardsley's  poise,  ability,  and 
moderation  of  sentiments,  such  as  those  above  quoted,  as  dangerous  in 
their  influence.  It  was  in  truth  bold  language,  yet  characteristic  of  its 
author,  and  uttered  in  the  spirit  of  a  Spartan  virtue,  which  preferred 
liberty  with  poverty  to  the  grandest  luxury  of  despotism  and  corrup- 
tion. In  January  previous  in  a  speech  of  great  liberality  he  opposed  a 
measure  to  restrain  freedom  of  speech  by  the  reporters  of  Congress. 
He  stood  by  the  right  of  petition  in  the  face  of  the  power  which  then 
controlled  party  politics,  and  even  against  some  of  his  colleagues  from 
this  State ;  he  maintained  the  combat  with  all  the  ardor  and  energy  of 
which  he  was  master,  and  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  his 
efforts  were  of  service  in  preserving  this  sacred  right  unimpaired. 

In  January,  1834,  Nathan  WiUiams,  judge  of  the  Fifth  Circuit, 
became  disqualified  by  reason  of  age,  and  he  therefore  resigned.  Gov- 
ernor Marcy  immediately  nominated  Mr.  Beardsley  as  his  successor  and 
the  Senate  promptly  confirmed  the  nomination.  As  soon  as  the  intel- 
ligence reached  Washington  Mr.  Beardsley  signified  his  intention  tore- 
sign  his  seat  in  Congress.  He  was  sent  for  by  General  Jackson,  and  ia 
the  presence  of  his  Cabinet  and  some  of  the  most  eminent  members  of 
both  Houses  was  urged  to  remain.  He  at  length  consented.  No  cir- 
cumstance in  his  congressional  life  more  strongly  exhibits  his  standing- 
as  a  statesman  and  his  importance  to  the  administration  and  the  party. 
Early  in  January,  1 836,  a  vacancy  occurred  on  the  bench  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  New  York,  which  was  filled  by  the  appointment  of  Greene  C. 
Bronson,  who  was  at  that  time  attorney- general.  Mr.  Beardsley  was  at 
once  appointed  to  succeed  Mr.  Bronson.  The  office  of  attorney-general 
was  at  that  time  one  of  great  labor  and  responsibility.  Nothing  en- 
trusted to  Mr.  Beardsley  was  left  undone  ;  all  things  proceeded  sure  and 
certain  and  with  rapidity,  yet  according  to  law.  His  official  term  ex- 
pired on  the  last  day  of  December,  1838,  when  he  resumed  practice. 


Si6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Having  been  once  more  chosen  to  Congress  in  1842  he  withdrew  in 
February,  1844,  to  accept  the  appointment  at  the  hands  of  Governor 
Bouck  of  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  a  seat  made  vacant  by  the  death 
of  Eseck  Cowan.  For  a  judicial  position  he  was  remarkably  adapted. 
His  habits  of  patient  and  impartial  investigation,  his  quick  preception 
and  accurate  judgment,  seemed  to  have  formed  him  by  naturefor  a  judge. 
On  the  bench  he  was  dignified  and  courteous  ;  his  manner  of  listening 
to  an  argument  elicited  the  confidence  of  the  speaker  and  drew  from 
him  all  that  he  desired  the  court  to  understand.  He  rose  with  great 
rapidity  in  public  opinion  and  in  the  estimation  of  both  bench  and  bar. 
On  the  retirement  of  Chief  Justice  Bronson  in  June,  1847,  Judge 
Beardsley  succeeded  him,  and  was  the  last  chief  justice  of  the  old 
Supreme  Court,  as  he  was  also  the  chief  of  the  judges  under  the  organ- 
ization created  to  close  up  the  business  of  the  earlier  tribunal.  After 
retiring  from  the  bench  he  pursued  his  profession  for  a  year  or  two  in 
New  York,  though  his  domicile  was  still  in  Utica,  and  to  it  he  shortly 
returned.  His  efforts  were  now  limited  for  the  most  part  to  arguments  in 
important  cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeals.  Here  he  maintained  the  very 
foremost  rank,  being  second  to  none  in  compactness,  vigor,  and  com- 
prehensiveness. 

Though  from  this  time  forward  Judge  Beardsley  held  no  public  office 
he  remained  prominent  in  politics  and  impressed  an  influence  on  his 
party  such  as  more  pretentious  and  noisy  men  could  never  have  exerted. 
As  to  the  ability  of  Judge  Beardsley,  his  learning  in  the  law,  the  pains- 
taking faithfulness  of  his  judicial  functions,  and  the  able  decisions  he 
uttered,  all  those  most  competent  to  speak  united  in  declaring.  "  I  think 
it  could  be  safely  said,"  remarks  Judge  Bacon,  "there  was  not  at  the 
close  of  his  life  a  more  thoroughly  read  and  firmly  grounded  lawyer  in 
this  State,  nor  one  whose  opinion  carried  greater  weight  with  the  courts." 
"  I  think,"  says  Governor  Seymour,  "that  he  evinced  his  highest  quali- 
ties in  statesmanship.  In  public  life  he  was  bold,  invasive,  and  self-reli- 
ant, and  showed  that  he  had  resources  and  infventive  genius  to  meet  the 
varying  exigencies  of  passing  events.  Here  he  sought  no  authorities, 
nor  did  he  lean  upon  the  assertions  or  opinions  of  others.  I  have  known 
many  of  the  prominent  men  of  our  land,  and  none  of  them  excelled  him 
in  power  of  acting  upon  the  public  mind  or  in  the  high  qualities  de- 


SAMUEL  BEARD  SLE  Y—  JONA  S  PL  ATT.  517 

manded  for  leadership.  His  correct  views  of  life,  business,  and  public 
morals  kept  him  from  falling  into  questionable  positions.  His  bearing, 
person,  and  mind  fitted  him  to  comrpand  and  he  always  had  a  strong 
power  over  those  with  whom  he  acted  ;  those  who  may  have  differed 
from  him  felt  the  force  and  strength  of  his  antagonism."  As  a  private 
■citizen  he  was  exemplary  in  all  the  charities  and  amenities  of  society, 
both  civil  and  religious.  "I  know  of  no  one,"  remarked  Governor  Sey- 
mour, "  who  contributed  more,  by  speech  and  example,  to  form  and  en- 
force the  unwritten  laws  of  just  moral  rectitude.  No  one  did  more  to 
elevate  the  tone  of  morals  in  this  city  or  to  keep  up  the  standard  of 
good  conduct  and  just  dealings."  Judge  Denio  did  not  hesitate  to  as- 
sert that  he  never  knew  a  man  having  so  many  qualities  worthy  of  imi- 
tation. And  yet  though  so  dear  to  his,  intimates,  so  kind  and  tender  to 
his  family,  and  although  so  neighborly  in  his  general  intercourse,  and 
grateful  for  the  confidence  of  private  friendship — to  his  enemies,  to 
those  who  crossed  his  path  in  hatred,  he  was  stern  in  his  wrath  and 
■sometimes  aggressive  in  his  resentments.  The  agony  of  his  short  but 
distressing  sickness  was  endured  with  the  fortitude  of  a  martyr,  and  he 
•expired  on  the  6th  of  May,  i860.  The  news  of  his  death  caused  a  pro- 
found sensation  with  the  members  of  the  bar  in  New  York  city,  and  all 
the  courts  that  were  then  in  session  were  suspended,  and  judges  and  law- 
yers concurred  in  praise  of  the  deceased  and  in  grief  at  their  loss.  A 
meeting  for  a  similar  purpose  was  held  by  the  bar  of  Utica  and  its  vicin- 
ity soon  after.  Arthur  M.  Beardsley,  of  Utica,  is  his  only  surviving 
child. 

Jonas  Piatt,  son  of  Zephaniah  Piatt,  of  Poughkeepsie,  was  born  in  that 
place  June  30,  1769.  He  studied  law  with  Col.  Richard  Varick,  of 
New  York,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1790.  The  same  year  he 
married  Helen,  daughter  of  Henry  Livingston,  of  Poughkeepsie,  and 
sister  of  the  wife  of  Arthur  Breese,  with  whom  he  was  soon  to  beasso- 
■ciated  in  business  Early  in  1791  he  located  in  Whitesboro,  seven  years 
after  its  first  settler,  Hugh  White,  had  planted  his  log  cabin.  On  the 
17th  of  February  in  that  year  he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  county  of 
Herkimer  and  held  the  office  until  Oneida  was  set  off  from  it  in  1798, 
and  was  also  the  first  clerk  of  the  new  county.  At  the  first  Court  of 
Record  held   within  the  present  Hmits  of  Oneida,  which  was  a  term  of 


5i8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  Herkimer  Common  Pleas,  held  in  January,  1794,  he  was  clerk  of  the 
court,  and  at  the  first  term  of  the  Oneida  Common  Pleas  held  in  May,^ 
1798,  he  was  placed  on  a  committee  to  prepare  rules  for  its  guidance. 
In  1796  he  represented  the  counties  of  Oneida  and  Onondaga  in  the 
State  Assembly.  In  the  Sixth  National  Congress,  that  of  1799-1801,, 
he  represented  the  Ninth  District  of  New  York.  During  the  years 
1 8 10,  '11,  '12,  and  '13  he  was  State  senator  from  the  Western  District. 
His  success  as  a  candidate  for  senator  and  the  proof  it  afforded  of  his 
personal  popularity  in  the  old  Western  District,  which,  until  the  previous- 
election,  had  been  considered  the  stronghold  of  Democracy,  or  Repub- 
licanism as  it  was  then  termed,  led  to  his  being  selected  as  a  candidate 
for  governor  in  18 10.  This  election  was  sharply  contested  and  Mr. 
Piatt  was  defeated  by  his  rival,  Daniel  D.  Tompkins.  His  career  in 
the  Senate  is  memorable  for  the  part  he  took  in  the  first  legislative  ac- 
tion on  the  subject  of  the  Erie  Canal.  The  facts  as  given  in  Renwick's 
Life  of  De  Witt  Clinton  are  as  follows  :  Thomas  Eddy,  on  behalf  of  the 
Western  Inland  Lock  Navigation  Company,  visited  Albany  in  1809  for 
the  purpose  of  procuring  the  passage  of  a  law  authorizing  the  appoint- 
ment of  commissioners  to  explore  a  route  for  a  canal  from  Oneida 
Lake  to  Seneca  River,  with  a  view  to  the  execution  of  the  canal  by 
that  company.  To  Mr.  Piatt  as  the  acknowledged  leader  of  the  Fed- 
eral party  and  its  nominated  candidate  for  the  office  of  governor  he 
applied  for  his  influence.  Mr.  Piatt,  who  knew  the  wants  and  wishes 
of  the  western  part  of  the  State  better,  perhaps,  than  any  other  person, 
and  who  had  long  considered  the  policy  which  the  State  ought  to- 
pursue  in  the  premises,  replied  at  once  that  "  the  company  had  dis- 
appointed public  expectations,  and  that  it  would  be  inauspicious  to  pre- 
sent any  project  which  should  be  subject  to  that  corporation."  As  a 
substitute  he  proposed  a  plan  for  instituting  a  Board  of  Commissioners 
to  examine  and  survey  the  whole  route  from  the  Hudson  to  Lake 
Ontario  and  to  Lake  Erie  also.  Mr.  Eddy  having  been  satisfied  that 
this  plan  was  to  be  preferred  it  was  agreed  on  the  suggestion  of  Mr. 
Piatt  to  call  into  their  councils  De  Witt  Clinton,  who,  at  that  moment, 
held  a  preponderating  influence  with  the  Democratic  party.  The  result 
of  the  interview  with  the  latter  was  that  Piatt  forthwith  presented  in 
the  Senate  a  resolution  for  the  appointment  of  commissioners  and  the 


JONAS  PLATT.  519 

resolution  was  seconded  by  Clinton.  By  the  aid  of  their  joint  efforts 
the  .resolution  passed  both  Houses  and  the  commissioners  were  named 
alternately  from  the  two  opposing  parties.  "  We  cannot  but  con- 
sider," remarks  Renwick,  "  that  the  public  mind  would  have  been  more 
easily  satisfied  of  the  feasibility  of  the  project  had  Mr.  Piatt  permitted 
himself  to  be  named  on  the  commission.  With  his  sound  and  steady 
judgment  it  would  have  been  impossible  that  any  plan  bearing  imprac- 
ticability on  its  face,"  as  was  true  of  the  scheme  entertained  by  one  of 
the  commissioners  appointed,  "  should  have  been  laid  before  the  public. 
Piatt,  however,  seems  to  have  shrunk  with  innate  modesty  from  assum- 
ing place  on  a  commission  established  by  a  resolution  which  he  himself 
had  drawn.  Here,  therefore,  all  direct  agency  on  his  part  in  the  canal 
policy  of  the  State  seems  to  have  ceased  ;  yet  he  is  well  entitled  to  the 
merit  of  having  made  the  first  efficacious  step  toward  the  attainment 
of  the  great  object  of  uniting  the  lakes  with  the  Atlantic." 

In  the  year  1814  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  was  to  be  appointed 
in  place  of  Smith  Thompson,  appointed  chief  justice.  Mr.  Piatt  re- 
ceived the  appointment.  "  He  had  at  this  time,"  says  Hammond, ^ 
^'been  in  extensive  practice,  and  though  his  talents  were  not  brilliant  they 
were  of  a  character  highly  respectable  ;  his  morals  were  perfectly  pure  ; 
though  he  possessed  a  deep  and  intense  tone  of  feeling  and  a  high  sense 
of  personal  honor  he  had  acquired,  apparently,  an  entire  control  over 
his  passions  ;  his  quiet  and  calm  deportment  indicated  a  contemplative 
and  considerate  mind,  not  liable  to  be  hurried  into  the  adoption  of  ill  • 
adjusted  plans  or  to  determinations  which  might  lead  to  actions  indis- 
creet or  ill-advised.  His  address  was  unobtrusive,  modest,  and  con- 
ciliatory. He  had  a  high  regard  to  courtesy  and  propriety,  as  well  in 
respect  to  political  conduct  as  in  the  private  and  social  concerns  of  life." 
The  opinions  he  delivered  on  the  bench  are  represented  as  respectable, 
but  never  brilliant  nor  distinguished  for  any  depth  of  learning  He  re- 
tained the  seat  until  January  29,  1823,  and  was  "  constitutionalized  out 
of  office"  by  the  constitution  of  1821.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con- 
vention that  framed  this  constitution  and  had  opposed  some  of  its 
features,  by  reason  of  which  he  was  obnoxious  to  the  party  then  in  the 
ascendancy,  and  was  rejected  by  the  Senate  when  nominated  by  Gov- 

'  Political  History. 


520  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ernor  Yates  on  the  re-organization  of  the  court.  Upon  his  retirement 
from  the  bench  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Uticaand  resumed  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession  in  company  with  his  son,  Zephaniah ;  but  within 
three  or  four  years  he  removed  to  New  York.  There  he  prosecuted  his- 
profession  with  all  the  industry  of  youth,  and  by  his  coolness  and  his. 
candor  was  often  able  to  bear  away  the  palm  from  abler  and  more  ardent 
competitors.  He  died  at  Peru,  Clinton  County,  February  22,  1834. 
Judge  Piatt  was  a  finished  gentleman.  "  He  carried  his  courtesy  at 
times,"  says  Judge  Bacon,  "  almost  beyond  the  bounds  required  by  the 
conventionalities  of  ordinary  life,  and  a  retort  or  a  rebuke  from  his  lips 
was  conveyed  in  terms  that  had  the  similitude  of  and  might  almost  have 
been  mistaken  for  a  compliment.'' 

A  lawyer  whose  professional  life  was  closed  ere  he  settled  ia 
Utica  was  Thomas  H.  Hubbard,  though  he  lived  many  years  longer- 
one  of  its  most  prominent  and  respected  citizens.  He  was  born  at  New 
Haven,  Conn.,  December  8,  1781.  Soon  after  receiving  his  degree  he 
commenced  the  study  of  the  law  in  the  office  of  John  Woodw'orth,  of 
Troy,  N.  Y.,  afterward  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court.  As  soon  as  he 
was  admitted  to  the  bar  he  settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  at 
Hamilton  in  Madison  County.  His  native  talents  and  his  thorough 
training  won  for  him  ere  long  an  extensive  business  in  that  and  the- 
adjoining  county  of  Chenango.  On  the  organization  of  Madison 
County  in  1806  he  was  appointed  surrogate  and  discharged  its  duties 
for  about  ten  years.  In  18 16  he  was  made  prosecuting  attorney,  next 
after  Joseph  Kirkland,  for  a  district  comprising  several  counties,  and  in 
this  capacity  conducted  some  important  criminal  trials.  As  an  accurate- 
and  intelligent  business  man  he  was  unsurpassed,  and  as  an  advocate 
those  who  knew  him  at  that  period  represent  him  as  able  and  effective. 
The  same  year  he  was  elected  to  represent  the  then  congressional  dis- 
trict of  Madison  and  Herkimer  in  the  fifteenth  Congress,  and  at  a 
somewhat  later  period  he  was  elected  to  serve  the  same  district  in  the 
session  of  1821-23.  Hamilton  is  justly  proud  to  claim  him  as  one  of 
her  early  law- givers  as  well  as  efficient  and  honored  pioneers.  The- 
period  of  Mr.  Hubbard's  removal  to  this  county  coincided  with  the  or- 
ganization of  the  courts  under  the  constitution  of  1822,  and  he  was  in, 
June,  1823,  appointed  the  first  clerk  of  the  Court  of  Chancery  for  this- 


THOMAS  H.  HUBBARD—  GREENE  C.  BRONSON.        521 

judicial  district.  This  office  he  held  but  a  short  time  and  was  then 
selected  for  the  office  of  clerk  of  the  Supreme  Court,  which  had  become 
vacant  by  the  death  of  Arthur  Breese.  The  duties  of  this  office  he  dis- 
charged with  faithfulness  until  the  year  1835.  After  his  retirement 
from  it  he  did  not  again  engage  in  public  employment,  but  devoted 
himself  to  the  management  of  his  now  ample  fortune.  "  It  would  seem 
as  if  the  rude  encounters  of  the  legal  forum  could  have  been  little  con- 
genial to  the  temperament  of  Mr.  Hubbard.  His  gentleness  of  disposi- 
tion and  his  liberal  and  charitable  habit  of  mind  must  have  rendered 
him  averse  to  the  scenes  of  strife  and  contention  inseparable  from  a  life 
spent  in  the  courts.  No  kinder  or  gentler  spirit  ever  animated  a  mortal 
man.  Governed  by  the  most  pure  and  virtuous  intentions  himself  he 
was  unwilling  to  believe  evil  of  others,  and  always  construed  their  mo- 
tives in  the  most  charitable  sense.  He  was  greatly  respected  by  all 
and  tho.se  who  knew  him  well  were  his  warm  and  devoted  friends.  A 
marked  feature  in  his  character  was  his  liberality  toward  religious  and 
charitable  objects.  No  reasonable  appeal  for  such  purposes  was  ever 
rejected  by  him  and  his  contributions  were  constant  and  large.  He  was 
made  a  vestryman  of  Trinity  at  the  first  Easter  after  his  arrival,  and  he 
continued  from  that  day  forward  to  be  a  conspicuous  and  shining  pillar 
in  the  spiritual  edifice."  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  Utica  Academy  as 
he  had  been  one  of  the  founders  of  that  of  Hamilton  as  well  as  of  the 
college  of  that  name.  While  residing  in  the  latter  place  he  was  one  of 
the  electors  who  cast  their  vote  for  James  Madison  in  1812.  He  was 
twice  chosen  to  the  same  office  from  this  county,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
elections  of  Mr.  Polk  and  General  Pierce. 

Judge  Bronson,  the  distinguished  jurist  now  to  be  noticed,  offers  a 
striking  example  of  one  who,  without  the  aid  of  wealth  or  family  con- 
nections, or  even  of  such  advantages  of  education  as  are  furnished  by 
our  academies  and  colleges,  was  enabled  by  manly  self-reliance  and 
resolute  energy  to  attain  the  highest  positions  and  to  fill  them  with  em- 
inent success.  Greene  Carrier  Bronson  was  born  in  Simsbury,  Conn.,  in 
November,  1 789,  and,  was  the  son  of  Oliver  Brownson,  a  teacher  of  vocal 
music,  who  published  one  of  the  earliest  singing  books  that  were  used 
in  the  country.  He  had  only  a  limited  school  education  ;  all  that  he 
acquired  besides  was  the  result  of  solitary  appHcation,  and  by  persever- 

66 


522  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ing  industry  he  made  himself  a  good  scholar  as  well  as  a  good  lawyer. 
After  leaving  school  he  was  for  a  time  a  clerk  at  Simsbury,  until  with 
his  father's  family  he  removed  to  Peterboro,  N.  Y.  While  there  he 
procured  a  Latin  grammar  from  Rev.  Calvin  Bushnell,  the  Presbyterian 
minister  in  charge  at  Vernon,  and  used  to  go  to  Vernon  to  Mr,  Bushnell, 
twelve  miles  through  the  woods,  to  recite  his  lessons.  For  a  short  time 
he  taught  school  also,  one  of  his  pupils  being  Hon.  Henry  A.  Foster. 
He  afterward  studied  law  in  the  same  place  with  John  P.  Sherwood, 
maintaining  himself  during  his  pupilage  by  practice  in  the  inferior  courts, 
and  when  his  term  of  study  was  complete  he  became  a  partner  with 
his  preceptor.  He  was  endowed  with  unusually  quick  and  clear  per- 
ceptions and  acquired  knowledge  with  facility.  And  having  also  a  keen 
desire  to  obtain  it,  and  a  noble  ambition  which  looked  for  no  outside 
support,  his  time  as  a  student  was  well  spent.  He  early  made  himself 
acquainted  with  the  principles  of  the  common  law  and  with  the  system 
of  equity  jurisprudence  as  administered  in  this  State  and  in  England. 
Once  admitted  to  practice  his  standing  was  assured.  And  though  a 
compeer  with  Storrs,  Talcott,  Maynard,  Beardsley,  Spencer,  and  other 
prominent  members  of  the  bar  of  Oneida  he  was  their  fitting  associate. 
In  April,  1819,  he  was  appointed  surrogate  of  the  county  and  filled  the 
office  two  years.  Then  he  was  elected  a  member  of  Assembly  from 
Oneida  and  Oswego.  In  the  legislature  he  proved  an  able  debater. 
He  distinguished  himself  more  especially  by  his  opposition  to  a  bill  in- 
tended to  deprive  the  inmates  of  the  State  prisons  of  the  use  of  the 
Bible  and  other  religious  reading.  The  bill  was  defeated  effectually. 
At  this  time  he  was  a  Clintonian  in  politics,  but  turned  before  Clinton 
died  to  the  opposing  side  and  became  a  Bucktail,  siding  ever  afterward 
with  the  hard  section  of  the  Democratic  party.  He  had  agreed  to  join 
Thomas  H.  Hubbard,  of  Hamilton,  and  settle  and  practice  at  Utica  in 
1823.  But  when  the  time  came  for  moving  he  was  detained  by  his  con- 
nection with  the  glass  works  at  Vernon  and  unable  to  leave.  Mr.  Hub- 
bard came  without  him  and  Mr.  Bronson  followed  the  next  year.  He 
soon  formed  a  partnership  with  Samuel  Beardsley,  which  continued  so 
long  as  he  remained  in  Utica,  and  together  they  conducted  a  large 
share  of  the  legal  business  of  the  neighborhood.  "  As  a  lawyer  his 
reputation  rested  on  a  solid  basis.     There  was  nothing  meretricious  in 


GREENE  C.  BRONSON.  523 

his  mode  of  handling  a  subject.  He  did  not  strike  for  effect,  but  to  do 
execution.  His  learning,  comprehensive  and  profound,  was  available 
to  sustain.  If  an  authority  was  to  be  questioned,  or  a  case  doubted,  it 
was  not  mutilated  and  misrepresented,  but  fairly  and  openly  attacked. 
No  timidity  prevented  him  from  meeting  an  objection  wherever  it  might 
present  itself  As  a  speaker  he  was  not  gifted  with  an  impressive  ad- 
dress. His  remarks  were  pointed  and  to  the  purpose  ;  but  a  natural 
hesitancy  of  manner  and  the  want  of  warmth  of  imagination  deprived 
him  of  much  of  the  power  that  was  due  to  the  strength  of  his  intellect." 
He  was  apt  to  discourage  litigation  and  dissuaded  many  who  applied  to 
him  from  entering  on  a  suit.  Nor  would  he  undertake  one  unless  he 
was  satisfied  that  the  right  was  on  the  side  of  his  client. 

On  the  27th  of  February,  1829,  Mr.  Bronson  was  elected  by  the  legis- 
lature attorney-general  of  the  State  in  place  of  Samuel  A.  Talcott. 
The  rival  candidate  of  his  party  was  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  of  New 
York,  who  was  a  protege  of  Mr.  Van  Buren,  and  the  preference  given  to 
the  former  was  a  triumph  of  the  Utica  Regency  over  the  arbitrary  rul- 
ers of  the  Democracy  whose  headquarters  were  at  Albany.  To  Albany 
he  now  removed  and  continued  to  fill  the  office,  by  re-election  in  1832 
and  again  in  1835,  until  January  of  the  ensuing  year.  Of  the  character 
of  its  administration  it  is  enough  to  say  that  he  was  the  successor  of 
Talcott  and  the  dignity  of  the  office  was  never  known  to  depreciate  in 
his  charge.  In  January,  1836,  he  was  elevated  to  the  bench  of  the 
Supreme  Court,  a  vacancy  having  been  occasioned  by  the  resignation  of 
John  Savage,  and  was  himself  succeeded  in  the  attorney-generalship  by 
his  late  partner,  Mr.  Beardsley.  On  the  5th  of  March,  1845,  he  became 
the  presiding  judge  of  the  court.  Two  years  subsequently,  at  the  first 
election  of  judges  under  the  new  constitution,  he  was  made  one  of  the 
judges  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  and  continued  such  until  his  resignation 
in  185  I.  Thus  for  fifteen  years  he  was  a  member  of  our  highest  judicial 
tribunals,  the  Supreme  Court,  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of  Errors, 
and  the  Court  of  Appeals,  and  in  all  of  these  public  trusts  he  aquitted 
himself  with  signal  ability.  "  In  the  department  of  judicial  duty  he  was 
justly  pre-eminent  and  his  opinions  are  modelsof  judicial  excellence.  In 
conciseness  and  perspicuity  of  ebcpression,  in  terseness  and  directness  of 
style,  in  compactness  and  force  of  logic,  in  sturdy  vigor  of  intellect,  and 


524  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

in  their  stern  sense  of  right  and  justice"  these  opinions  have  by  com- 
petent judges  been  declared  to  be  unsurpassed,  and  as  constituting  "a 
valuable  and  enduring  contribution  to  American  jurisprudence."  No 
man,  says  Judge  Sutherland,  ever  discharged  the  duties  of  judge  with 
stricter  integrity.  There  never  was  a  judge  who,  in  construing  the 
statutes  and  written  constitutions  of  government  and  administering  the 
law,  was  less  influenced  by  arguments  and  considerations  addressed  to 
judicial  discretion,  or  by  considerations  even  of  public  policy,  not  de- 
clared by  the  law.  His  prompt  answer  to  all  such  arguments  and 
considerations  was  ita  lex  scripta. 

After  leaving  the  bench  Judge  Bronson  removed  to  New  York  city 
and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  But  having  become  in- 
volved in  some  unfortunate  enterprises  he  lost  much  of  his  property. 
In  1853  he  was  appointed  by  President  Pierce  as  collector  of  the  port, 
but  held  the  office  only  a  short  time,  his  removal  having  been  effected 
by  Secretary  Guthrie  because  he  persisted  in  retaining  in  office  men  of 
opposite  party.  Declining  to  displace  an  official  whose  removal  was 
desired  by  the  secretary  he  accompanied  the  act  with  a  published  letter 
setting  forth  his  reasons  for  the  refusal.  A  public  correspondence  ensued 
between  him  and  the  secretary,  which  was  marked  on  the  part  of  Judge 
Bronson  by  his  usual  clearness  and  force  ;  but  though  he  had  the  better 
in  argument  it  was  closed  by  his  dismissal  from  the  collectorship.  His 
course  on  this  occasion  was  a  subject  of  much  comment  by  the  public 
and  gained  him  greater  notoriety  than  before  and  the  strong  approval 
of  many.  For  Judge  Bronson  was  emphatically  an  honest  man.  The 
popularity  he  acquired  in  the  transaction  above  mentioned  procured  for 
him,  in  1854,  the  nomination  for  governor.  In  the  meantime,  however, 
new  issues  arose  that  were  paramount  in  interest  with  the  public  and  he 
was  beaten  in  the  canvass.  In  December,  1859,  he  was  elected  to  the 
office  of  counsel  for  the  corporation  of  the  city  of  New  York  and  con- 
tinued to  discharge  the  duties  until  January,  1863,  the  term  for  which  he 
was  elected.  Smitten  with  paralysis  no  long  time  afterward  he  endured 
for  several  months  much  physical  pain.  But  throughout  his  sufferings 
he  was  sustained  by  the  consolations  and  the  hopes  of  that  Christian 
faith  of  which  he  had  for  many  years  been  a  consistent  professor.  His 
departure  occurred,  after  a  renewed  attack  at  Saratoga,  on  the  3d  of 
September,  1863. 


GREENE  C.  BRONSON.  525 

On  the  opening  of  the  next  General  term  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
New  York  a  request  was  presented  that  a  tribute  of  respect  to  the  mem- 
ory of  Judge  Bronson  should  be  entered  on  the  minutes,  and  this  request 
was  signed  in  behalf  of  themselves  and  their  brethren  of  the  New  York 
bar,  by  James  J.  Roosevelt,  Daniel  Lord,  Charles  P.  Kirkland,  Marshall 
S.  Bidwell,  Charles  O'Connor,  and  William  Curtis  Noyes.  A  similar 
tribute  was  in  January  following  placed  on  the  minutes  of  the  Court  of 
Appeals.  Quotations  from  both  of  these  records,  heretofore  freely  made 
in  this  article,  exhibit  the  appreciation  in  which  he  was  held  by  his  as- 
sociates at  these  courts.  To  these  might  be  added  the  testimony  of  the 
bar  of  Saratoga,  recorded  at  a  meeting  held  shortly  after  his  death,  and 
especially  that  of  Chancellor  Walworth,  their  presiding  officer,  who  de- 
clared the  deceased  to  have  been  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  upright 
judges  that  ever  occupied  a  seat  upon  the  bench  of  this  State.  As  an 
evidence  of  the  high  estimation  in  which  he  was  held  in  this  vicinity  it 
may  be  mentioned  that  in  1845,  sixteen  years  after  his  removal  from 
Utica,  when,  in  view  of  the  approaching  State  Constitutional  Conven- 
tion, his  party  determined  to  send  thither  the  strongest  men  they  could 
select,  they  nominated  Judges  Beardsley,  Denio,  and  Foster  and  m  ith 
them  Judge  Bronson. 

Yet  though  a  man  of  such  singular  power  and  strongly  marked 
individuality  Judge  Bronson  was  at  the  same  time  genial  and  gentle 
in  all  the  relations  of  friendship  and  private  life.  Bold  and  determined 
as  he  was  in  the  denunciation  of  fraud  he  was  notwithstanding  a  lover 
of  peace  and  disliked  contention  and  the  acrimony  of  party.  He  was 
generous  in  disposition,  kind  and  sympathizing,  firm  in  his  attachments, 
devoted  as  a  friend,  husband,  and  father.  In  his  address  he  was  cour- 
teous and  affable  ;  in  his  manners  pleasing.  There  was  neither  affecta- 
tion nor  stiffness,  but  an  easy  dignity  enlivened  by  an  agreeable  pleas- 
antry. For  the  old  Court  of  Errors  he  had  a  very  low  estimate  and 
made  free  to  manifest  it;  for  on  one  occasion  when  a  cause  came  before 
him  for  adjudication  on  the  bench,  which  involved  a  principle  that  had 
once  been  determined  by  this  court,  he  overrode  this  decision  by  an 
opinion  wholly  adverse.  Judge  Bronson's  father's  family  were  Bap- 
tists, but  when  he  united  with  the  church  at  Vernon  it  was  with  a  Pres- 
byterian  one.     After   removing  to    Utica  he   took   an   active  part  in 


526  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

sustaining  the  infant  organization  that  was  ministered  over  by  his 
brother-in-law,  Rev.  S.  W.  Brace,  and  was  a  trustee  in  this  church. 

Benjamin  Franklin  Cooper  was  the  son  of  Apollos  Cooper  and  was 
born  in  Utica  in  1801.  He  entered  Hamilton  College  in  1816,  but 
left  that  institution  for  Union,  where  he  graduated.  He  began  the  study 
of  law  in  the  office  of  General  Kirkland  and  spent  a  year  in  the  law 
school  at  Litchfield,  Conn;  Returning  to  Utica  in  the  fall  of  1824  he 
entered  upon  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  connection  with  Roderick 
N.  Morrison.  Subsequent  to  the  fall  of  1827,  on  account  of  delicate 
health,  he  spent  a  few  years  in  southern  travel,  but  returned  to  Utica  in 
1832,  and  with  the  exception  of  a  year  or  two  in  Detroit,  commencing 
in  1840,  continued  to  reside  here  until  his  death.  In  1846  he  was  a 
member  of  the  legislature,  and  was  one  of  its  most  active,  intelligent, 
and  laborious  members. 

Some  of  his  early  legal  efforts  were  distinguished  by  earnest  and  able 
argument,  by  keen  analysis  and  penetration,  and  by  forcible  and  cour- 
ageous assertion  of  what  he  believed  to  be  the  right  of  his  clients.  In 
the  suits  brought  with  reference  to  the  'distribution  of  the  stock  of  the 
Oneida  Bank  and  that  of  the  partition  of  the  stock  of  the  Utica  and 
Schenectady  Railroad,  in  both  of  which  cases  subscribers  who  failed  of 
receiving  stock  they  had  subscribed  for  brought  suits  to  compel  a  re- 
distribution, he  took  a  leading  part  in  the  arguments  and  attracted  to 
himself  a  large  share  of  public  attention.  For  some  years  before  his 
death  he  had  withdrawn  from  professional  avocations.  He  died  May  4, 
1864.     A  son  and  a  daughter  survive  him.     They  are  non-residents. 

In  one  respect  it  is  an  easy  task  to  fashion  a  memorial  of  Judge  Will- 
iam J.  Bacon,  for  no  exaggeration  need  restrain  its  language,  and  so 
numerous  were  the  testimonials  to  his  worth  that  were  put  on  record 
when  he  died.  The  only  embarrassment  is  from  the  profusion  of  topics 
which  his  life  and  varied  qualities  suggest.  Of  all  the  citizens  of  Utica 
none  bore  a  larger  and  at  the  same  time  a  more  honored  part  in  its  his- 
tory. For  two  full  generations  he  was  a  prominent  actor  in  the  affairs 
of  city  and  county.  With  graces  of  mind  and  body  possessed  by  few, 
and  accomplishments  due  to  broad  and  generous  study,  with  a  readiness 
to  do  for  the  general  good  all  that  could  be  prompted  by  a  loving  heart 
and  an  enlightened  conscience,  he  won  both  admiration  and  affection  by 


WILLIAM  y.  BACON.  527 

a  character  which  combined  spotless  purity  with  rare  attractiveness  and 
amiability.  For  a  life- time  and  more  he  was  deemed  both  here  and 
abroad  as  among  the  chief  ornaments  of  the  place. 

WilHam  Johnson  Bacon  was  born  in  Williamstown,  Mass.,  February 
18,  1803.  He  was  a  son  of  Ezekiel  Bacon  and  grandson  of  John.  The 
latter,  of  Stockbridge,  Mass  ,  was  pastor  of  the  Old  South  Church,  Bos- 
ton, at  the  breaking  out  of  the  Revolutionary  war ;  he  represented 
Berkshire  County  in  the  Massachusetts  Senate  and  was  president  of  that 
body  in  1800.  He  also  represented  that  county  in  Congress  from  1801 
to  1803,  and  was  subsequently  presiding  judge  of  the  Berkshire  Com- 
mon Pleas.  The  father,  Ezekiel  Bacon,  has  been  already  noticed  as  a 
leading  citizen  of  Massachusetts,  who  afterward  did  honor  to  Utica  as 
the  place  of  his  later  sojourn.  His  son  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  New 
England  training,  receiving  preliminary  instruction  in  part  at  school,  in 
part  from  private  teachers,  and  in  part  at  Lenox  Academy.  Removing 
with  the  family  to  Utica  in  18 15  he  entered  Hamilton  College  at  the 
age  of  fifteen  and  was  graduated  at  nineteen  in  the  class  of  1822.  He 
was  an  earnest  scholar,  and  his  subsequent  habits  and  acquirements 
proved  that  he  carried  away  the  full  benefit  of  his  course.  He  never 
lost  his  love  for  the  ancient  classics,  and  he  kept  up  his  study  of  English 
literature,  especially  its  poetry.  Immediately  after  graduation  he  entered 
on  the  study  of  law  with  Gen.  Joseph  Kirkland  and  his  son,  Charles  P. 
Kirkland,  remaining  with  them  three  years,  with  the  exception  only  of 
the  second  one,  which  he  spent  in  the  law  school  of  Judge  Gould,  of 
Litchfield,  Conn.  This  he  has  said  was  a  most  profitable  year  to  him, 
in  which  by  hard  study  he  mastered  not  merely  the  elementary  but 
many  of  the  deeper  problems  of  the  law.  Admitted  to  practice  in  1824 
he  offered  his  services  to  waiting  clients,  but  was  soon  in  part  diverted 
from  his  chosen  path  by  engaging  with  Samuel  D.  Dakin  in  the  pro- 
prietorship and  editing  of  the  Sentinel  and  Gazette.  This  employment 
occupied  his  attention  about  two  years,  when  he  disposed  of  his  interest 
and  resuming  his  previous  functions  was  soon  able  to  command  a  fair 
share  of  practice.  In  the  year  1832  he  became  a  partner  with  his 
brother-in-law,  Charles  P.  Kirkland,  a  partnership  which  proved  a  highly 
successful  one,  and  which  lasted  until  the  removal  of  Mr.  Kirkland  to 
New  York  in  185 1.     Mr.  Bacon  continued  in  practice  about  three  years. 


528  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

when  in  the  fall  of  1853  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  in 
the  Fifth  District.  By  re-election  at  the  end  of  his  term  he  remained 
on  the  bench  sixteen  years,  retiring  in  1870,  Subsequent  to  that  time 
he  did  not  resume  practice  in  the  courts,  but  contented  himself  with 
giving  counsel  and  serving  as  a  referee. 

Of  the  legal  and  judicial  career  of  Judge  Bacon  I  prefer  to  speak  in 
the  words  of  his  colleagues  who  were  best  qualified  to  estimate  him 
aright.  Hon.  A.  M.  Beardsley  says  of  him  that  "  while  he  was  one  of  the 
firm  of  'Kirkland  &  Bacon  to  him  was  entrusted  in  a  great  degree 
the  first  steps  in  legal  proceedings  and  the  drafting  of  pleadings,  upon 
the  accuracy,  learning,  and  sound  judgment  of  which  depend  most 
largely  the  triumphs  achieved.  In  these  departments  he  gained  an  en- 
viable reputation,  one  richly  deserved  and  generally  acknowledged." 
Both  Mr.  Kirkland  and  Judge  Foster  concurred  in  the  remark  that  as 
a  framer  of  pleadings  he  excelled  any  lawyer  they  ever  knew.  "  His 
tastes,"  continued  Mr.  Beardsley,  "  did  not  lead  him  to  the  contests  of 
jury  trials,  but  rather  to  those  requiring  argument,  exacting  thought, 
investigation,  clearness,  and  force  in  written  composition.  He  was  by 
nature  and  education  more  at  home  in  the  broad  fields  of  equity  than 
in  the  restricted  bounds  of  common  law.  On  the  bench  as  judge  dis- 
pensing law  and  equity  in  decisions  abounding  in  strong  thought  and 
deep  learning,  and  in  language  and  forms  of  expression  the  most  forci- 
ble and  elegant.  Judge  Bacon  deserves  the  high  reputation  he  won 
among  the  members  of  his  calling  as  well  as  /rom  all  those  who  were 
acquainted  with  his  work.  He  was  more  interested  in  the  principles  of 
law  and  equity  than  in  the  mere  recollection  of  cases,  and  hence  when 
facts  of  an  unusual  character  were  laid  before  him  his  mind  at  once  re- 
verted to  these  principles,  and  by  their  agency  he  rapidly  worked  out 
conclusions  that  were  correct,  logical,  and  conclusive."  As  a  judge  he 
manifested  his  integrity  on  all  occasions.  "If  ever  there  was  a  just- 
minded  judge,"  says  Senator  Kernan,  "  I  think  he  was  one.  I  have  seen 
him  tried  where  he  might  naturally  have  had  a  prepossession,  but  I 
have  never  seen  him  yield  to  it  knowingly."  To  his  patience  in  listening 
to  every  fact  or  argument  presented  on  either  side,  to  his  encouraging 
kindness  to  the  younger  men  who  appeared  before  him,  to  his  urbanity 
and  dignity  as  well  as  to  his  impartiality,  his  intelligent  and  able  rul- 


WILLIAM  J.  BACON.  529 

ings,  the  generation  of  lawyers  with  whom  he  was  associated  and  over 
whom  he  presided  unite  in  their  testimony.  Under  the  system  which 
formerly  prevailed  he  took  his  turn  as  a  member  of  the  Court  of  Ap- 
peals, sitting  two  years  on  that  bench,  and  when  he  left  it  the  opinions 
given  by  him  in  his  private  practice  as  a  referee  were  invariably  sus- 
tained by  that  court. 

Judge  Bacon  was  always  interested  in  politics,  but  was  neVer  an  office 
seeker.  He  accepted  public  office  as  he  did  so  many  of  the  local  trusts 
that  were  laid  upon  him,  and  discharged  its  functions  with  fidelity.  He 
was  city  attorney  in  1837  and  was  elected  to  the  Assembly  in  1850, 
taking  high  rank  with  his  associates.  In  1876  he  was  elected  as  a  Re- 
publican to  represent  the  Oneida  district  in  Congress;  and  the  honor 
was  the  more  grateful  to  him  as  he  followed  his  grandfather  and  his 
father  in  the  experience  of  service  in  the  State  legislature,  in  Congress, 
and  on  the  bench.  In  Congress  he  sat  with  the  minority,  but  in  debate 
and  in  committee  as  well  as  in  personal  influence  he  served  well.  Dur- 
ing his  life-time  Judge  Bacon  was  officially  connected  with  many  liter- 
ary, business,  and  charitable  institutions,  for  Utica  never  had  a  more 
public  spirited  inhabitant  who  was  both  more  ready  and  more  compe- 
tent to  supervise  and  manage  its  concerns  and  those  of  the  neighbor- 
hood. Indeed  he  was  so  long  identified  with  the  best  interests  of  the 
community  that  it  is  difficult  to  think  of  the  city  without  a  recognition 
of  his  genial  and  earnest  personality.  Some  of  the  positions  he  filled 
are  here  igiven  :  Member  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  Hamilton  College 
for  many  years  and  senior  member  at  the  time  of  his  death  ;  a  director 
for  upwards  of  twenty  years  of  the  Oneida  County  Bible  Society ;  direc- 
tor of  the  Second  National  Bank  and  trustee  as  well  as  president  of  the 
Utica  Savings  Bank;  director  and  vice-president  of  the  Utica  Gaslight 
Company;  director  and  president  of  the  Forest  Hill  Cemetery  Associ- 
ation; director  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad,  of  the  Utica 
Water  Works  Company,  and  of  the  Utica  Cotton- Mills ;  trustee  of  the 
Home  for  the  Homeless  and  consulting  manager  of  the  Utica  Orphan 
Asylum;  councillor  and  vice -president  of  the  Oneida  Historical  Soci- 
ety and  trustee  of  the  Saratoga  Monument  Association  ;  president  of 
the  Utica  Philharmonic  Association,  etc.  These  were  not  empty  sine- 
cures, honorary  posts  without  a  duty  attached  ;  he  was  punctual  in  re- 

67 


S3° 


MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 


spondiiig  to  the  summons  of  these  assembh'es,  where  his  counsel  wa3  as 
trustworthy  as  it  was  free  and  courteous  in  the  giving. 

Judge  Bacon  was  also  a  inan  of  marked  literary  attainments  and  cult- 
ure. His  knowledge  was  wide,  his  taste  refined  ;  he  loved  the  best 
things  and  charged  his  mind  with  the  most  precious  of  scholarly  lore. 
Shakespeare  was  a  never-ending  delight,  but  above  Shakespeare  he 
ranked  the  Bible,  not  alone  as  a  treasury  of  the  highest  morals  and  for 
the  wisdom  and  intellectual  strength  it  imparted,  but  for  the  majestic 
imagery  of  its  poetry,  the  logic  of  the  Pauline  and  other  epistles,  and  the 
beauty  of  the  life  and  teachings  of  Jesus.  As  a  writer  and  speaker  he 
was  facile,  elegant,  and  forceful,  a  favorite  orator  at  public  celebrations, 
and  happy  with  voice  and  pen  to  promote  municipal,  social,  religious, 
and  patriotic  advancement.  His  contributions  to  this  class  of  literature 
were  varied  and  numerous;  not  a  few  of  them  will  long  endure  in  local 
chronicles.  Especially  may  be  mentioned  his  masterly  address  upon 
the  Continental  Congress  read  before  the  Oneida  Historical  Society ; 
his  discourse  upon  the  Early  Bar  of  Oneida  County  delivered  to  a  gath- 
ering of  his  colleagues  of  the  bar,  an  instructive  and  valuable  contribu- 
tion to  the  history  of  the  county;  his  touching  tribute  to  the  late  Presi- 
dent Fisher  spoken  in  the  chapel  of  Hamilton  College;  and  his  welcome 
to  Kossuth  on  his  visit  to  Utica  in  1852,  which  was  one  of  the  most  ele- 
gant of  his  platform  addresses.  His  newspaper  articles,  recognizable  by 
their  justness,  their  finish,  and  the  appropriateness  of  their  illustration, 
were  called  out  on  occasions  of  great  public  importance  or  when  some 
person  of  unusual  merit  had  recently  ended  his  career. 

The  public  life  of  Judge  Bacon  was  spent  during  the  most  stirring 
period  of  our  nation's  existence.  He  was  intensely  and  aggressively 
right  on  all  the  momentous  questions  that  were  agitated  before  and 
during  the  war  of  the  Rebellion.  He  could  and  did  take  part  in  meet- 
ings for  the  Union  cause,  for  he  had  laid  his  only  son  as  an  offering  on 
the  altar  of  his  country.  What  that  sacrifice  cost  him  few  but  his  in- 
timates ever  knew,  yet  through  it  all  he  never  murmured.  At  the  re 
unions  of  the  soldier  boys  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Regiment,  to  which  his 
son  belonged,  nearly  every  year  since  the  war  the  judge  was  present  to 
express  his  appreciation  of  their  success,  and  while  he  bestowed  his 
praise  upon  the  living  and  dead  heroes   but  few  knew  how  his  heart 


WILLIAM  y.  BACON.  531 

bled  for  the  light  of  a  life  so  soon  gone  out.  Geniality  and  benevo- 
lence, honesty  and  purity,  attachment  to  his  country  and  to  his  home, 
these  were  his  most  obvious  traits,  and  it  was  these  which  made  him 
universally  trusted  and  beloved.  Yet  it  was  easy  to  see  that  beneath 
these  more  salient  features  Christian  truth  leavened  his  entire  character 
and  made  his  as  one  of  old  "  in  whose  heart  there  was  no  guile."  Em- 
inently a  religious  man,  long  active  as  a  teacher  and  superintendent  in 
Sunday  schools,  a  pillar  in  the  church,  he  illustrated  in  every  relation 
the  vitality  of  his  faith  and  his  principles.  He  loved  men  because  they 
were  children  of  a  common  father  and  the  inheritors  of  a  common  des- 
tiny. His  hand  was  an  open  hand ;  he  helped  the  poor  and  lifted  up 
the  fallen;  he  was  kind  to  the  erring,  more  ready  to  pity  than  to  con- 
demn ;  he  hated  the  sin,  but  not  the  sinner.  It  would  be  difficult  to 
name  a  cause  having  as  its  object  the  amelioration  of  mankind  in  which 
he  had  not  an  interest.  Rank  or  position  no  more  affected  his  courtesy 
than  though  no  such  social  distinction  had  being.  His  knowledge  of 
the  Bible,  as  I  have  said,  was  phenomenal.  He  honored  and  loved  the 
sacred  volume  for  what  it  had  plainly  revealed,  and  his  reading  of  it 
was'  devotional.  Its  history,  its  eloquence,  its  literary  beauties  pos- 
sessed for  him  a  charm  ;  but  far  more  sweet  were  its  spiritual  truths — 
their  tenderness  and  their  purposes,  as  they  gave  an  inward  joy  which 
all  else  failed  to  impart.  During  the  earlier  years  of  his  residence  in 
the  city  he  was  connected  with  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  but  for 
more  than  half  a  century  he  was  a  member  and  for  forty- nine  years  an 
officer  of  the  Reformed  Church.  "  Exemplary  and  consistent,"  say  the 
resolutions  of  the  officers  of  that  church,  "  fervent  in  the  cause  of  relig- 
ion and  the  prosperity  of  our  own  church,  calm,  judicious,  and  unpreju- 
diced, we  regarded  him  as  our  pattern  and  guide.  No  one  accepted 
more  willingly  the  responsibilities  in  which  he  was  called  to  engage,  or 
discharged  them  with  more  faithful  exactitude.  Absent  by  necessity 
only  from  the  meetings  of  consistory  and  the  services  of  the  Sabbath 
and  the  week-day,  no  one  held  more  naturally  the  leadership  among  us, 
voiced  more  acceptably  the  feelings  of  the  worshipers,  both  in  prayer 
and  in  praise,  aided  more  helpfully  the  pastor  in  his  duties,  or  suc- 
ceeded more  fittingly  to  these  duties  in  his  absence.  Esteemed  as  he 
was  in  his  public  and  official  positions  and  widely  admired  by  those  of 


532  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

like  standing  with  himself,  admired  not  less  in  social  life  for  the  exhibi- 
tion of  gifts  which  win  attraction  to  the  foremost  in  those  walks,  he 
never  lacked  in  a  word  of  friendliness  and  sympathy  toward  the  low- 
est among  his  fellow  members  of  the  church.  Both  his  counsel  and  his 
purse  were  freely  opened  to  the  needy,  and  numerous  were  the  objects 
of  his  beneficence."  A  mere  catalogue  of  single  words  and  phrases, 
whose  appropriateness  will  be  questioned  by  none  who  knew  him,  may 
serve  somewhat  to  delineate  the  character  of  the  subject  of  my  sketch. 
An  honorable  lawyer,  an  upright  judge,  an  honest  politician,  a  pure 
legislator,  a  ready  co  adjutor,  a  scholar,  a  patriot,  a  gentleman,  a  good 
citizen,  and  a  consistent  Christian,  unostentatious,  unaffected,  social, 
courteous,  affable,  cheerful,  frank,  sincere,  charitable,  kind,  sympathetic, 
and  humane, — together  these  qualities  present  a  rare  summary.  His 
wife  and  the  mother  of  his  children  was  Eliza,  daughter  of  Gen.  Joseph 
Kirkland,  who  died  many  years  before  him.  At  an  advanced  age  he 
was  again  married  to  Mrs.  Susan  Sloane  Gillett.  His  only  surviving 
child  is  Mrs.  Seth  W.  Crittenden.  The  judge  himself  passed  away  July 
3,  1889,  when  he  had  reached  the  age  of  eighty-six. 

Oneida  County  has  produced  few  jurists  who,  in  broad  views,  in 
sound  judgment,  in  legal  learning,  stand  above  Hiram  Denio.i  With 
the  cast  of  mind  eminently  judicial,  with  studious  habits  that  never 
wearied,  with  conversance  with  the  principles  as  well  as  the  letter  of 
the  law  seldom  surpassed,  and  with  integrity  neve'r  questioned,  he  de- 
serves to  rank  with  the  magnates  of  the  bar  of  the  county  and  the 
State  ;  as  a  judge  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  his  decisions  are  accepted  as 
standards  and  as  models.  He  was  not  a  man  to  startle  observers  by 
brilliance  and  eccentricity.  His  prudence,  his  common  sense,  his  thor 
ough  conscientiousness  were  his  marked  characteristics.  He  was  trained 
in  the  best  school  of  the  law,  for  he  studied  with  Henry  R.  Storrs, 
whom  Henry  Clay  pronounced  the  most  eloquent  man  he  ever  listened 
to.  Young  Denio  learned  early  the  need  of  thorough  preparation  of 
his  cases,  and  this  was  always  a  rule  with  him.  He  was  a  student 
throughout  his  life,  and  his  culture  was  broad  and  varied,  reaching  be- 
yond his  profession  into   the  rich   fields  of  literature   and   of  history. 

1  This  obituary  notice  of  Judge  Denio  was  prepared  for  the  Utica  Mornins  Herald  by  its  editor, 
Ellis  H.  Roberta. 


HIRAM  DENIO. 


533 


"Conspicuous  for  his  discretion  and  tiis  integrity  he  was  burdened  with 
trusts  as  executor  and  trustee,  and  at  his  death  was  president  of  the 
Savings  Bank  of  Utica.  .As  a  citizen  he  was  above  reproach.  His  re- 
ligious connections  had  been  for  years  with  Grace  Church.  In  politics 
he  was  a  Democrat,  but  he  was  still  more  a  patriot.  He  gave  all  his 
sympathies  to  the  Republic  during  the  war,  and  voted  for  Lincoln  for 
President  and  sustained  the  measures  necessary  for  the  nation's  life. 
His  fame  will  rest  upon  the  services  which  he  rendered  as  judge  of 
the  Court  of  Appeals.  His  decision  on  the  metropolitan  police  law 
offended  extreme  Democrats  at  the  time,  but  it  illustrated  his  independ- 
ent and  non-partisan  character,  and  the  party  was  compelled  to  recog- 
nize his  fairness  and  his  integrity  by  a  renomination.  The  ermine  was 
honored  by  him.  As  he  was  without  dogmatism  he  could  admit  and 
•correct  errors.  In  every  sense  he  was  a  good  judge,  and  in  some  re- 
spects his  associates  have  pronounced  him  among  the  best  and  fore- 
most that  ever  sat  upon  the  bench  of  our  highest  tribunal. 

Judge  Denio  died  at  his  residence  on  Broad  street  Sunday,  Novem- 
iber  5,  1871,  aged  seventy-two  years.  He  was  born  at  Rome  on  the 
2 1  St  of  May,  1799.  He  was  two  years  a  student  in  the  academy  at 
Fairfield,  Herkimer  County,  with  Albert  Barnes  for  his  classmate. 
He  came  to  the  bar  in  the  light  of  some  of  the  greatest  names  which 
have  adorned  our  local  history,  and  he  did  no  discredit  to  their  tutelage. 
After  commencing  the  study  of  the  law  with  Judge  Hathaway  at  Rome 
in  1816  he  came  to  Whitesboro  and  entered  the  office  of  Storrs  &  White, 
where  he  remained  until  1821.  In  that  year  he  became  a  partner  of 
Wheeler  Barnes,  a  lawyer  in  established  practice  at  Rome.  October  30, 
1825,  he  was  appointed  by  the  Court  of  General  Sessions  district  at- 
torney to  succeed  Samuel  Beardsley,  and  he  served  worthily  in  that 
capacity  for  nine  years.  In  the  meantime,  in  July,  1826,  he  became  a 
resident  of  Utica  and  a  partner  with  his  Hfe-long  friend,  E.  A.  Wet- 
more,  esq.,  in  the  law  firm  of  Wetmore  &  Denio.  May  7,  1834,  Mr. 
Denio  was  appointed  a  Circuit  judge  for  the  Fifth  Circuit,  and  then  began 
the  judicial  career  in  which  he  won  eminence,  serving  about  four  years. 
About  1836  Judge  Denio  formed  a  partnership  with  Hon.  Ward  Hunt, 
and  for  some  time  the  firm  of  Denio  &  Hunt  stood  in  the  fore-front  of 
the  profession  here.     On  the  23d  of  June,  1853,  he  was  appointed  to 


S34  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

fill  a  vacancy  on  the  bench  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  and  twice  afterwarcP 
elected  to  the  same  position,  closing  his  career  in  1866.  Other  honor- 
able positions  he  also  held,  such  as  bank  commissioner  and  clerk  of  the 
Supreme  Court,  and  he  was  from  1835  a  useful  and  efificient  trustee  of 
Hamilton  College.  Judge  Denio  married,  in  May,  1829,  Miss  Anne  H. 
Pitkin,  of  Farmington,  Conn.  Three  children  were  born  to  them  :  one 
died  an  infant ;  the  eldest  daughter  died  in  Madeira,  where  she  had 
gone  in  search  of  health  ;  the  third  is  the  wife  of  Dr.  L  A.  Tourtellot, 
of  this  city.  A  paralytic  stroke  befell  Judge  Denio  on  the  17th  of  Oc- 
tober, 1868.  He  partially  recovered  from  the  effects  of  it,  but  was 
neveragain  fully  himself.  For  some  time  he  had  been  failing.  For  a  fort- 
night his  friends  knew  that  death  was  nigh.  He  has  passed  away,  a 
high  type  of  the  Christian  jurist  of  whose  memory  eulogy  may  speak 
without  reservation.  His  life  proves  that  eminence  involves  no  sacrifice 
of  worth,  that  purity  of  personal  character  is  consonant  with  personal,, 
professional,  and  political  success. 

William  Tracy  was  the  son  of  William  G.  Tracy,  an  early  merchant 
of  Whitesboro,  where  he  was  born  June  16,  1805.  He  was  educated  at 
the  school  of  Rev.  Mr.  Halsey,  a  somewhat  noted  teacher  of  that  vil- 
lage, and  at  Union  College,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1824.  He 
studied  law  with  Henry  R.  Storrs,  came  to  Utica  in  1827,  and  opened 
an  office  in  the  following  year.  In  1833  he  was  associated  in  practice 
with  John  G.  Floyd  and  the  following  year  with  William  C.  Noyes,  the 
husband  of  his  sister.  In  1837  his  own  brother,  Charles,  became  his 
partner  and  they  remained  some  years  together.  In  1854  he  removed 
to  New  York  city  and  resumed  his  partnership  with  Mr.  Noyes,  Charles 
having  preceded  him  by  a  few  years.  In  the  metropolis  Messrs.  Noyes 
and  the  brothers  Tracy  all  took  high  rank.  So  long  as  he  was  a  resi- 
dent here  Mr.  Tracy  was  awake  to  municipal  affairs  and  assisted  materi- 
ally in  the  conduct  of  them.  He  was  one  of  the  early  Board  of  School 
Commissioners,  a  trustee  of  the  Utica  Academy  and  of  the  Female  Acad- 
emy, and  of  the  Cemetery  Association.  In  the  First  Presbyterian  Church 
and  afterward  in  the  Reformed  Church  he  was  an  officer  and  a  teacher 
in  a  Bible  class.  He  took  much  deeper  interest  in  the  Society  for  the 
Colonization  of  the  Negroes  of  Liberia  than  he  did  in  that  which  agitated 
the  country  for  the  immediate  abolition  of  slavery.      He  was  almost  the 


WILLIAM  TRACY. 


535 


earliest  person  to  enlist  the  community  in  its  own  local  history,  having 
delivered  an  address  before  the  Mechanics  Association  upon  men  and 
events  of  Oneida  County  in  1838,  an  address  which  has  furnished  im- 
portant material  for  subsequent  workers  in  this  field.  He  was  a  pro- 
moter of  horticulture,  a  lover  of  art  and  science,  getting  up  annual  ex- 
hibitions of  the  products  of  his  own  and  his  neighbors'  gardens,  attach- 
ing himself  to  a  scientific  association  and  an  art  association.  He  had 
an  inquiring  mind  and  clear  judgment,  was  possessed  of  much  general 
intelligence,  and  was  often  called  on  both  as  a  speaker  and  a  writer. 
He  delivered  a  Phi  Beta  Kappa  address  at  Union  College  in  1862,  and 
before  that  an  address  before  the  alumni  of  Madison  University.  He 
founded  a  weekly  paper  known  as  the  Intelligencer  and  conducted  it 
for  a  number  of  years.  With  all  this  outside  activity  he  was  never 
neglectful  of  professional  business,  which  was  large  and  important.  He 
was  well  informed  in  the  law,  diligent  in  the  study  of  his  cases,  and 
earnest  in  their  advocacy.  With  Hiram  Denio  he  published  the  fourth 
edition  (1852)  of  the  Revised  Statutes  of  New  York,  Judge  Denio  aiding 
him,  but  Mr.  Tracy  being  principally  responsible  for  the  work.  He 
published  also  an  edition  of  Cowan's  Treatise  on  Justices'  Courts  and  a 
legal  hand-book  for  commercial  men. 

Mr.  Tracy  had  a  keen  sense  of  justice  and  could  never  refrain  from 
denunciation  of  whatever  seemed  in  conflict  with  it.  Be  the  sufferer 
rich  or  poor  his  sympathies  were  stirred  in  equal  measure  and  his 
efforts  in  defence  outspoken  and  earnest.  These  sympathies  found 
active  exercise  during  the  invasion  of  the  cholera,  when  he  allowed  him- 
self little  rest  from  his  labors  among  the  sick.  Thus  upright,  generous, 
and  kind  Mr.  Tracy  was  impulsive  in  manner,  and  at  times  gave  offence 
from  the  very  ardor  and  quickness  of  his  temperament.  He  had  like- 
wise a  strong  love  of  humor,  which,  conjoined  with  his  extensive  ac-^ 
quirements  and  readiness  to  talk,  made  him  delightful  as  a  companion, 
yet  betrayed  him  occasionally  into  speeches  that  were  damaging  to  him- 
self more  than  to  the  subject  of  them.  Mr.  Tracy  received  from  Union 
College  the  degree  of  LL.D.  in  1862  and  was  a  trustee  of  that  institu- 
tion from  1868  to  his  death,  never  missing  his  attendance  at  commence- 
ment.    He  died  in  December,  188 1. 

In  the  list  of  noble  names  which  have  shed  luster  upon  the  bar  of  New 


S36  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

York  State  must  be  placed  that  of  Joshua  Austin  Spencer.  ^  Born  at 
Great  Barrington,  Mass.,  May  13,  1790,  removing  to  Lenox,  Madisor* 
County,  N.  Y.,  when  but  eighteen  years  of  age  and  to  Utica  at  the  age 
of  thirty- nine,  the  most  important  part  of  his  life  was  spent  in  this  city, 
and  while  residing  here  he  rose  to  be  one  of  the  leading  members  of  the  bar 
of  Oneida  County  when  that  bar  was  celebrated  for  its  ability  throughout 
the  State.  In  many  respects  he  stood  pre-eminent  among  them.  "  Mr. 
Spencer,"  said  the  Hon.  Ward  Hunt,  in  generous  tribute  to  his  com- 
manding talents,  "is  like  Saul  among  his  brethren,  head  and  shoulders- 
above  us  all."  "  He  had  become  one  of  the  foremost  men  of  his  pro- 
fession," said  Judge  Denio,  "  and  he  maintained  that  rank  until  the  day 
of  his  death.  No  man  within  my  knowledge  has  acquitted  himself  for  a 
life-time  with  such  universally  distinguished  ability."  "  He  was  a  law- 
yer of  great  learning  and  ability,"  said  the  Hon.  D.  Wager.  "  His  legal 
skill  in  the  trial  of  causes,  and  his  commanding  eloquence,  made  him  one 
of  the  brightest  ornaments  of  the  profession."  When  on  one  occasion 
he  stood  before  the  Court  of  Errors,  convened  in  the  city  hall  of  New 
York,  opposed  to  Daniel  Webster  in  a  cause  of  far-reaching  importance,. 
it  was  not  wholly  because  Mr.  Spencer  had  the  better  case  that  the 
great  expounder  of  the  constitution  in  spite  of  his  "  powerful  argument," 
and  practiced  skill,  and  solemn  eloquence,  was  not  able  to  save  his  client 
from  defeat.  "  He  battled  with  giants,"  said  one  of  him,  "  and  achieved 
greatness  among  the  great,  because  he  was  strong." 

The  influences  which  early  disciplined  the  mind  of  Mr.  Spencer  and 
moulded  his  character,  added  to  his  own  indomitable  energy  and  industry, 
carried  him  to  this  commanding  position.  Some  preparation  for  hi& 
subsequent  successes  he  received  by  heredity,  and  much  by  wise  training 
and  instruction,  but  to  these  he  added  an  earnest  and  persistent  diligence 
in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  and  a  patient  thoroughness  of  preparation 
for  whatever  duty  was  assigned  him ;  and  these  he  faithfully  continued 
to  the  end  of  his  career.  His  successes  were  well  earned.  From  an  ad- 
mirable sketch  of  his  life  written  by  his  eldest  son,  the  late  Hamilton 
Spencer,  who  inherited  in  large  degree  his  father's  intellectual  power 
and  acquired  much  of  his  legal  ability,  we  learn  that  Samuel  Spencer,  the 

1  Begun  by  Hamilton  Spencer,  son  of  Joshua  A.,  this  article  was  |iinished  after  his  sudden  death 
by  Rev.  George  A.  Howard,  D.D,,  son-in-law  of  the  distinguished  advocate. 


JOSHUA  A.  SPENCER.  537 

first  American  ancestor  of  Joshua  A.  Spencer,  emigrated  from  Sheffield, 
England,  and  landed  at  Salem,  Mass.,  on  the  20th  of  July,  1633,  and 
shortly  after  removed  to  Suffield,  Conn.,  where  he  married  and  contin- 
ued to  live  until  his  death.  Joshua  Austin  Spencer  was  the  fifth  in 
descent  from  him,  and,  as  we  have  stated,  was  born  at  Great  Barrington 
in  1790.  He  received  only  the  public  education  then  aff"orded  by  the 
common  schools  of  Massachusetts.  But  he  was  the  child  of  exception- 
ally intelligent  parents.  His  father,  who  was  a  millwright  and  a  skilled 
mechanic,  was  an  omnivorous  reader,  and  continued  to  be  so,  with  a 
true  scholar's  hunger  for  knowledge,  down  to  the  very  close  of  a  long 
life.  His  mother,  who  was  the  daughter  of  Joshua  Austin,  esq.,  was  a 
woman  of  remarkable  intellectual  power,  and  her  features,  mental  and 
physical,  were  stamped  on  her  son.  Born  and  educated  in  Puritan  Con- 
necticut she  was  a  dissenter  from  what  then  was  virtually  the  established 
church — the  Congregational.  As  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church  she 
had,  according  to  their  custom,  the  liberty  of  public  speech,  and  was 
recognized  as  a  preacher  of  unusual  knowledge  and  discernment  and 
fervid  eloquence.  In  addition  to  the  instruction  received  in  the  schools 
of  the  day  Mr.  Spencer  with  his  brothers  and  sisters  attended  an  even- 
ing school  at  home,  in  which  these  well-informed  parents  were  the  teach- 
ers, and  there  they  received  a  moral,  religious,  and  intellectual  education 
which  distinguished  them  from  their  associates  and  helped  to  shape  their 
future  lives.  All  the  sons  of  the  family  became  members  of  learned 
professions.  Two  were  lawyers,  one  a  clergyman,  and  one  a  physician  ; 
each  of  them  achieved  considerable  local  reputation  and  two  of  them 
became  widely  known. 

In  his  boyhood  Joshua  reihoved  to  Greenville,  Greene  County,  N.  Y., 
and  for  a  .short  time  was  a  clerk  in  "  a  country  store"  there.  About  the 
year  1808  he  rejoined  his  father's  family,  which  had  removed  to  Lenox, 
Madison  County,  N.  Y.  Here,  not  finding  as  yet  his  true  vocation, 
he  was  apprenticed  to  Waters  Clark,  a  carpenter.  In  this  employment 
he  developed  that  unusual  physical  strength  for  which  he  was  noted  in 
subsequent  years,  and  which  now,  young  as  he  was,  enabled  him  to  do 
"the  work  of  two  men,"  as  his  employer  said  he  often  did;  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  trade  which  he  obtained  in  these  cheerfully  toilsome, 
years  was  more  than  once  in  later  life  of  use  to  him  in  the  practice  of  his 

68 


538  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

profession.  This  apprenticeship  was  short,  extending  only  from  some 
time  in  his  eighteenth  year  to  his  majority  ;  and  when  it  ceased  he  en- 
tered the  office  of  his  elder  brother,  Gen.  Ichabod  S.  Spencer,  as  a  stu- 
dent of  law.  He  had,  however,  hardly  settled  himself  to  his  studies 
when  the  war  with  Great  Britain  in  i8i2  broke  out,  and  catching  the 
patriotic  enthusiasm  which  swept  over  the  land  he  enlisted  and  was  ap- 
pointed orderly- sergeant  of  a  company  of  horse  artillery  which  was  or- 
ganized in  Madison  County  and  commanded  by  one  Captain  Jennings. 
Repairing  to  the  northern  frontier  he  remained  on  duty  at  Sacket's 
Harbor  until  his  term  of  service  had  expired.  The  performance  of  this 
duty  cost  him  something  more  than  the  time  which  he  gave  to  it,  for 
when  the  company  -was  mustered  out,  and  its  members  scattered  to  their 
homes,  young  Spencer  was  left  behind,  fatally  ill  as  was  thought  with 
"  camp  fever."  But  youthful  vigor  and  a  good  constitution  drew  him 
back  to  life,  and  after  his  recovery  he  returned  with  new  zest  to  his  legal 
studies. 

In  1814,  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-four,  he  married,  at  Lenox,  Miss 
Clarissa  Phelps,  by  whom  he  had  two  children,  Hamilton,  late  of  Bloom - 
ington,  111.,  and  Clarissa,  afterward  the  wife  of  the  Rev.  Duncan  Ken- 
nedy, D.D.  While  both  these  children  were  very  young  their  mother 
died  ;  and  Mr.  Spencer  subsequently  married  Miss  Electa  Dean,  daugh- 
ter of  the  elder  Judge  James  Dean,  a  graduate  of  Dartmouth  College 
and  a  gentleman  of  high  character  and  influential  position. 

Upon  his  admission  to  the  bar  Mr.  Spencer  entered  into  partnership 
with  his  brother  and  at  once  took  a  high  rank  in  his  profession.  After 
a  few  years  of  growing  practice  and  steadily  increasing  reputation,  in 
1829  he  formed  a  partnership  with  the  distinguished  William  H.  May- 
nard  and  removed  to  Utica.  This  partnership,  so  important  to  his  in- 
terests, continued  for  less  than  three  years  and  was  then  dissolved  by 
death.  Mr.  Maynard  was  elected  senator  from  the  Fifth  Senatorial  Dis- 
trict of  New  York,  and  while  attending  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of 
Errors  in  the  summer  of  1832  died  from  an  attack  of  Asiatic  cholera. 
But  the  whole  burden  of  an  extended  business  thus  thrown  upon 
Mr.  Spencer  found  him  prepared  to  sustain  it.  He  was  now  in  the  full 
maturity  of  his  great  powers  and  familiar  with  the  work  he  had  to  do. 
He  had  a  strong  and  healthy  body.      His  habits  were  temperate.     His 


JOSHUA  A.  SPENCER.  535^ 

position  was  assured  ;  and  it  aided  him  not  a  little  that  he  had  the  most 
friendly  relations  with  other  members  of  his  profession,  for  he  cordially 
rejoiced  in  their  successes  and  his  dignified  but  ever  kindly  courtesy 
made  him  popular  with  them.  In  court  a  truthful,  upright,  honorable 
character  gave  weight  to  his  statements,  and  his  legal  attainments  and 
direct,  logical  clearness  commanded  close  attention  to  his  arguments. 
He  never  wearied  court  or  jury  by  tediously  saying  all  that  could  be 
said  ;  his  habit  was  to  select  a  few  strong  points  of  the  view  he  took  of 
the  case  he  had  in  hand  and,  making  them  indisputably  evident,  to 
press  them  home  with  earnest  and  generally  irresistible  force.  In  ad- 
dressing a  jury  he  was  distinguished,  says  Hamilton  Spencer,  for 
the  clearness  and  fairness  with  which  he  stated  and  commented  upon 
the  evidence,  and  for  the  simplicity  yet  elegance  of  the  language  he  em- 
ployed. His  gestures  were  few  and  simple,  his  voice  was  clear  and 
powerful,  and  his  articulation  singularly  distinct.  His  illustrations 
were  always  apt  and  often  were  beautiful,  and  when  the  subject  called 
for  passion  in  the  denunciation  of  crime  and  falsehood,  or  for  pathos  in 
the  description  of  suffering,  the  power  of  his  appeals  was  overwhelm- 
ing. 

He  was  chiefly  distinguished  before  the  public  as  a  jury  lawyer,  but 
to  those  who  knew  him  intimately  and  were  associated  with  him  in  the 
intercourse  of  professional  life  his  profound  knowledge  of  law  and  his 
entire  mastery  of  the  great  underlying  principles  of  jurisprudence  ga\c 
him  a  rarer  excellence  and  one  of  greater  dignity  and  worth.  For 
more  than  twenty  years  he  attended  every  term  of  the  Supreme  Court 
and  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of  Errors,  and  listened  to  or  took  part 
in  almost  every  case  discussed  before  these  tribunals. 

Mr.  Spencer,  says  one  who  knew  him  well,  had  a  wonderful  quick- 
ness of  apprehension,  and  when  called  upon  even  unexpectedly  to  as- 
sume the  management  of  a  cause,  he  was  soon  able  to  master  it  in  all  its 
details,  however  complex  or  multifarious  they  might  be.  Gifted  with 
quick  perceptive  faculties  he  was  apt  also  in  detecting  the  vulnerable 
points  in  the  arguments  of  an  opposing  counsel.  He  excelled  in  the 
trial  of  criminal  causes  and  his  services  were  in  demand  from  every 
part  of  the  State.  His  thorough  acquaintance  with  our  penal 
statutes,   the    great  facility   of    his    mental   resources,   and,   when    re- 


540  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

quired,  his  marvelous  eloquence  placed  him  in  the  front  rank  as  a 
criminal  lawyer.  As  a  cross-examiner  he  had  no  superior.  A  hostile 
or  corrupt  witness  could  not  endure  his  terrible  scrutiny.  His  com- 
manding presence,  his  piercing  eye,  his  resonant  voice  overwhelmed 
a  witness  who  was  conscious  of  falsehood.  Hamilton  Spencer  was 
once  associated  with  the  Hon.  W.  H.  Seward  in  the  trial  of  a 
strongly  contested  case  at  Oswego,  and  in  a  walk  with  him  expressed 
his  admiration  of  the  subtle  skill  with  which  the  ex-governor  had  suc- 
cessfully examined  an  untruthful  witness  and  spoke  of  the  difference 
between  his  manner  and  that  of  Mr.  Spencer:  the  one  so  smooth,  gen- 
tle, friendly,  and  seductive,  leading  the  witness  into  all  manner  of  traps 
and  contradictions  ;  the  other  direct,  fierce,  and  overwhelming. 
"  Yes,"  replied  Mr.  Seward,  "  your  father  is  as  tall  as  a  giant,  and  has 
an  eye  like  a  hawk,  and  a  voice  like  a  lion,  and  he  seizes  hold  upon  a 
witness  and  tears  him  in  pieces  ;  but  if  I,  with  my  slight  frame  and 
light  hair  and  dim  eyes,  should  rush  upon  a  witness  in  that  way  prob- 
ably I  should  be  the  one  to  suffer." 

Not  infrequently  a  witness  endeavoring  to  bolster  up  a  bad  cause  by 
his  perjuries,  and  showing  at  first  a  security  bordering  upon  insolence, 
would  gradually  quail  before  Mr.  Spencer's  piercing  eyes  and  searching 
questions,  and  fall  into  utter  confusion  and  shame  under  the  exposure 
which  he  felt  powerless  to  escape.  "  Why  did  you  not  stick  to  your 
story?"  asked  a  discomfited  and  angry  plaintiff  of  such  a  witness 
on  whom  he  had  relied.  "  I  'd  like  to  have  you  stick  to  your  story," 
cried  the  crest-fallen  man,  "with  Joshua  Spencer's  black  eyes  looking 
through  and  through  you  I  " 

The  world-known  novelist,  J.  Fenimore  Cooper,  when  rising  to  ad- 
dress the  jury  in  one  of  his  famous  libel  suits  in  reply  to  Mr.  Spencer, 
showed  how  his  personality  impressed  a  cultivated  and  observant 
listener.  "  The  opposing  counsel,"  he  said,  "  is  a  man  whose  presence 
is  of  great  dignity,  whose  voice  is  majestic,  and  whose  very  stature  gives 
force  to  the  words  he  utters."  Mr.  Spencer,  however,  did  not  rely  too 
much  on  these  natural  advantages,  nor  upon  his  great  fluency  and  the 
fervor  of  his  appeals.  He  laid  solid  foundations  for  his  work,  and  to 
this  his  successes  were  mainly  due.  Every  cause  which  he  undertook 
he  prepared  with  conscientious  and  painstaking  thoroughness  before  he 


JOSHUA  A.  SPENCER.  541 

carried  it  into  court.  He  made  himself  familiar  with  the  facts  connected 
with  it  by  frequent  consultation  with  his  client,  and  he  carefully  exam- 
ined the  legal  questions  involved  and  was  not  careless  in  regard  to 
seemingly  unimportant  details.  He  went  into  battle  fully  armed.  Of 
course,  though  faithful  in  all,  he  was  not  roused  to  equal  effort  by  every 
cause  in  which  he  was  engaged  ;  but  often,  and  especially  in  causes 
which  involved  great  principles,  and  in  which  important  interests  were  at 
stake,  he  was  not  only  thorough  in  preparation,  but  seemed  in  advocat- 
ing them  to  acquire  new  power  and  inspiration  as  he  spoke,  and  rose  to 
his  most  commanding  eloquence. 

In  1841  he  was  appointed  attorney  of  the  United  States  for  the 
Northern  District  of  New  York,  then  including  the  whole  State  except 
the  city  of  New  York  and  four  or  five  counties  adjacent  to  it.  This 
office  he  held  until  the  spring  of  1845.  I"  this  latter  year  he  was 
chosen  senator  for  the  Fifth  Senatorial  District  of  New  York.  During 
his  official  term  the  new  constitution  of  the  State  went  into  effect,  radi- 
cally changing  the  judicial  system  and  relieving  him  of  two  years  of 
service  in  the  Senate.  As  a  member  of  the  judiciary  committee  the 
arduous  labor  of  preparing  the  legislation  to  put  the  new  courts  at  work 
■devolved  upon  Mr.  Spencer.  In  1848  the  favor  with  which  he  was  re- 
garded by  his  fellow  townsmen  was  manifested  by  his  election  as  mayor 
of  Utica.  Notwithstanding  the  duties  which  these  offices  involved  he 
enjoyed  not  even  a  temporary  respite  from  his  professional  work.  In 
this  he  continued  actively  employed  until  arrested  by  his  last  illness. 
Hamilton  Spencer  remembers  that  once  on  his  father's  return  from 
a  Circuit  Court  in  one  of  the  northeastern  counties  of  New  York  he 
said  "  I  have  now  tried  cases  in  every  county  of  the  State."  This  could 
probably  have  been  said  by  no  other  lawyer  of  his  day  or  since.  But 
it  shows  the  versatile  vigor  of  the  man  that  while  pressed  by  his  many 
duties  he  accepted  an  invitation  to  deliver  the  oration  at  the  great  Berk- 
shire jubilee.  Through  life  he  cherished  a  warm  attachment  to  the 
county  of  his  birth — that  mother  of  great  men.  "  It  is  a  part  of  my 
religion,"  he  said  with  quiet  enthusiasm  to  a  friend,  "  to  go  back  there 
once  a  year."  And  often  he  fondly  dwelt  on  his  many  strolls  in  his 
boyish  days  along  the  beautiful  banks  of  the  Housatonic  and  amidst  the 
picturesque  scenery  which  surrounds  Great  Barrington.      And  so  step- 


542  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ping  out  for  the  time  from  his  wonted  sphere  of  thought  and  action, 
where  President  Hopkins  of  Williams  preached  the  opening  sermon,  and 
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  read  one  of  his  wittiest  poems,  and  men  of 
world-wide  fame  were  gathered,  and  a  great  multitude  was  assembled, 
he  delivered  an  oration  which  Dr.  Roof  characterized  as  one  "  of  sur- 
passing beauty  and  eloquence." 

In  regard  to  his  professional_  work  it  would  far  exceed  the  limits  of  this 
sketch  to  even  enumerate  the  many  important  causes  argued  by  him  in 
the  Circuit  Courts  and  before  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  Court  of  Errors. 
The  one  case  in  which  he  was  prominent,  and  which  attracted  most  at- 
tention in  this  country,  and  excited  no  little  interest  in  England,  was 
that  of  the  People  vs.  Alexander  McLeod,  which  is  reported  in  the 
Twenty-fourth  Volume  of  Wendell's  Reports.  In  the  summer  and  fall 
of  1837  a  rebellion  broke  out  in  Canada,  and  a  body  of  insurgents  and 
of  sympathizers  from  the  American  side  of  the  Niagara  River  had  en- 
trenched themselves  upon  a  small  island  belonging  to  Great  Britain,  called 
Navy  Island,  which  lies  near  the  village  of  Chippewa  and  four  or  five 
miles  above  the  great  cataract.  A  small  steamer  known  as  the  Caro- 
line had  been  cut  out  of  the  ice  in  Buffalo  harbor  and  brought  around 
into  the  Niagara  River,  where  she  was  engaged  in  transporting  sup- 
plies, munitions  of  war,  and  volunteers  from  the  New  York  side  at  Fort 
Schlosser  to  the  entrenched  camp  on  Navy  Island.  On  the  night  of  the 
30th  of  December,  1837,  a  boating  expedition  under  the  command  of 
Lieutenant  (afterward  Captain)  Drew  R.  N.,  conveying;  a  body  of  soldiers 
under  Colonel  (afterward  Sir)  Allen  McNab,  crossed  the  river  at  mid- 
night and  attacked  the  Caroline  as  she  was  moored  at  the  dock  at  Fort 
Schlosser.  Boarding  her  they  cut  her  loose,  set  fire  to  her,  and  let  her 
drift  down  the  rapids  and  over  the  falls,  and  then  returned  to  Chippewa. 
During  the  affray  while  those  on  board  were  escaping,  Amos  Durfree 
was  killed  by  a  pistol  shot  and  his  body  was  found  on  the  wharf  where 
the  boat  had  been  moored.  For  this  violation  of  its  territory  the  United 
States  demanded  reparation.  The  British  government,  through  Lord 
Palmerston,  then  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  Henry  S.  Fox, 
British  minister  at  Washington,  avowed  the  attack  to  have  been  made 
by  its  authority  and  justified  it  as  an  act  of  war,  apologizing  afterward, 
however,  for  the  invasion  of  the  American  territory.      In  February,  1 841, 


JOSHUA  A.  SPENCER.  543 

McLeod  was  indicted  in  the  Court  of  General  Sessions  of  Niagara 
County  for  the  murder  of  Durfree,  arrested,  and  imprisoned.  The 
British  government  demanded  his  release,  on  the  ground  that  if  he  were 
one  of  the  party  which  destroyed  the  Caroline  he  was  acting  as  a  British 
subject  under  the  orders  of  the  officers  of  his  own  government,  and  was 
under  no  individual  responsibility  for  his  acts,  that  government  dis- 
tinctly assuming  all  responsibility  for  the  destruction  of  the  boat.  Mr. 
Spencer  was  retained  to  defend  McLeod,  who  was  brought  before  the 
Supreme  Court  of  New  York  on  habeas  corpus  at  the  May  term,  1841. 
His  discharge  was  claimed  on  the  ground  above  stated.  After  the  argu- 
ment was  closed  and  while  Mr.  Spencer  yet  remained  in  the  city  of  New 
York  Daniel  Webster,  then  Secretary  of  State,  passed  through  the  city 
on  his  way  from  Marshfield  to  Washington.  "He  sought  an  interview 
with  Mr.  Spencer  and  inquired  with  great  anxiety  as  to  the  probable 
outcome  of  the  argument.  When  told  that  it  was  doubtful  whether  the 
court  would  discharge  the  prisoner  upon  the  writ  for  certain  technical 
reasons,  which  were  mentioned,  he  urged  that  the  record  should  be  so 
prepared  that  in  case  of  an  adverse  decision  a  writ  of  error  might  take 
the  case  to  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of  Errors,  and  from  there,  should 
need  be,  to  the  Supreme  Court  at  Washington,  saying  it  was  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  McLeod's  life  should  not  be  put  in  jeopardy  by 
a  trial.  To  this  Mr.  Spencer  replied  that  it  was  McLeod's  preference  to 
be  tried  before  a  jury  in  order  that  he  might  avoid  the  long  imprison- 
ment which  he  would  be  compelled  to  suffer  while  waiting  the  slow 
process  of  the  case  through  the  higher  courts,  and  to  this  McLeod 
added  that  he  was  a  resident  of  that  part  of  Canada  which  bordered  on 
the  Niagara  River  and  should  have  frequent  occasion  to  visit  the 
American  side,  and  on  this  accountalso  preferred  to  be  tried  and  acquitted 
by  a  jury — for  he  was  confident  of  acquittal — that  he  might  be  free 
from  any  further  suspicion  and  annoyance. 

A  few  days  after  this  interview  a  letter  was  received  from  Mr.  Web- 
ster asking  if  McLeod  remained  of  the  same  mind,  and  Mr.  Spencer 
requested  McLeod  to  write  him  a  letter  stating  at  length  his  reasons  for 
wishing  to  be  tried  by  a  jury.  This  McLeod  did,  and  the  letter  was 
forwarded  to  Mr.  Webster.  In  October  following  McLeod  was  tried  at 
Utica,  to   which  city  the  case  had  been  transferred    by  the  Supreme 


544  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Court,  and  McLeod  was  acquitted.  The  trial  excited  great  interest,  but 
the  public  knew  little  of  the  momentous  issues  involved.  The  British 
Parliament  had  voted  ^20,000  to  pay  the  expense  of  McLeod's  defence,, 
and  when  soon  after  a  change  of  ministry  occurred,  Lord  Palmerston 
attacked  with  characteristic  vigor  the  ministry  which  had  displaced  his 
own,  charging  them  with  cowardice  in  yielding  to  the  arrogance  of  the 
American  government  and  suffering  a  loyal  subject  of  Great  Britain  to- 
be  put  in  peril  of  his  life  for  obeying  her  command,  and  saying  that 
when  he  was  in  power  he  had  notified  the  United  States  that  if  McLeod 
was  put  upon  his  trial  it  would  be  the  occasion  of  war  between  the  two- 
countries.  His  successor.  Lord  Aberdeen,  replied  that  they  had  taken 
the  same  ground  and  prepared  to  abide  by  it,  but  they  had  been  met  by 
McLeod's  own  written  election  to  be  thus  tried,  and  could  do  no  more 
than  to  see  that  he  was  properly  defended. 

For  this  statement  of  the  case  we  are  indebted  to  Hamilton  Spencer, 
who  adds  that  going  immediately  after  this  trial  to  the  West  Indies,  he 
found  there  a  large  fleet  which  had  been  hastily  completed  and  armed 
and  sent  out  to  meet  the  issues  of  this  affair.  The  wise  and  successful 
management  of  the  case  was  of  national  importance.  Mr.  Spencer's 
speech  in  defence  of  McLeod  was  one  of  his  ablest  forensic  efforts,  and 
the  service  which  by  his  management  of  this  cause  he  had  rendered  to 
the  country,  served,  among  things  of  more  moment,  to  cement  more 
closely  the  warm  personal  friendship  which  existed  between  him- 
self and  Mr.  Webster  and  which  terminated  only  with  Mr.  Spencer's 
life.  Mr.  Spencer  was  a  man  to  make  and  to  hold  such  friendships. 
His  genius,  his  generosity,  and  his  warmth  of  heart  won  for  him  a  host 
of  friends.  The  students  in  his  office,  among  whom  were  men  who  rose 
to  national  distinction,  became  strongly  attached  to  him ;  his  interest  in 
them,  his  sympathy,  his  prompt  and  cordial  encouragements  bound 
them  to  him  with  bonds  that  never  grew  weak.  "  I  cannot  express  my 
indebtedness  to  him,"  said  Roscoe  Conkling  ;  "  whatever  success  I  may 
have  had  in  life  I  owe  in  a  great  measure  to  Mr.  Spencer."  '"A  tide 
of  personal  recollections  comes  over  me,"  said  his  friend  and  neighbor, 
the  Hon.  W.  J.  Bacon,  at  the  meeting  of  the  members  of  the  Oneida 
County  bar  after  Mr.  Spencer's  death,  "  which  renders  me  incompetent  to 
pay  a  suitable  tribute  to  an  uncommon  man.     He  was  a  friend  tender  and 


JOSHUA  A.  SPENCER.  545 

faithful,  just  and  kind,  and  magnanimous  in  all  the  relations  of  life." 
"  Those  who  were  young  in  his  time,"  writes  Hamilton  Spencer,  "  and 
especially  young  men  in  his  profession,  will  remember  his  cordial 
readiness  by  word  or  deed  to  assist  them  in  their  early  professional 
struggles  and  hisquickness  to  applaud  and  encourage  their  youthful 
efforts.  He  was  eminently  an  unselfish  man."  It  will  illustrate  this  to 
add  that  when  on  one  occasion  the  son  was  the  opposing  counsel  to  his 
father  and  secured  a  verdict  for  his  client,  his  father  instantly  came  up 
to  him,  his  face  aglow  with  pleasure,  and  congratulated  him  upon  his 
management  of  the  cause  and  his  success. 

Mr.  Spencer,  though  crowded  for  time  by  his  professional  duties,  was 
a  man  of  great  public  spirit  and  prompt  to  take  his  part  in  defending  or 
advancing  public  interests.  The  cause  of  education  also  had  his  advo 
cacy  and  support.  For  many  years  he  was  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  Col- 
lege, active  to  make  it  known,  and  to  enlarge  the  grand  work  that  it  was 
doing.  He  was  a  trustee  for  many  years  also  of  the  Utica  Female 
Academy,  and  by  his  counsel  and  frequent  presence  largely  aided  its 
success.  "  He  was  a  princely  man  ! "  said  an  enthusiastic  woman  whose 
spirit  was  akin  to  his  own.  Mr.  Spencer,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  was 
not  a  lover  of  money.  In  the  judgment  of  some  he  was  too  careless 
in  regard  to  it.  He  appears  to  have  been  governed  by  the  enthusiam 
of  his  profession  and  by  a  love  of  truth  and  justice,  and  to  have  cherished 
not  the  least  desire  to  accumulate  "a  fortune"  and  to  command  tlie 
power  and  displays  and  luxuries  of  wealth.  The  Hon.  Francis  Kernan, 
his  partner  from  1840,  publicly  said  of  him  :  "He  would  never  put  forth 
his  talents  unless  firmly  persuaded  that  he  was  exerting  them  in  the 
cause  of  truth  and  for  the  ends  of  justice." 

We  may  find  a  reason  for  this  in  the  fact  that  Mr.  Spencer  was  a 
Christian.  "  He  sincerely  believed  in  the  Christian  religion,"  says  his 
son,  and  when  the  occasion  permitted  he  avowed  his  belief  reverently, 
earnestly,  and  with  impressive  decision.  The  Rev.  Dr.  Fowler,  then 
president  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  Hamilton  College  and  speaking  of 
him  as  a  co-trustee,  said  :  "  His  distinction  rose  not  alone  from  his  intel- 
lectual energy.  It  was  higher  than  that  won  by  forensic  triumphs. 
His  unselfish  spirit  prompted  him  to  act  for  others,  while  religion  con- 
secrated all  that   was  natural  and  superadded  its  own  peculiar  excel- 

69 


546  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

lence."  Mr.  Spencer,  often  seemingly  so  stern,  had  an  unusually  kind 
and  tender  heart  and  his  humane  spirit  pervaded  his  life.  Many  dis- 
putes and  angry  differences  which  might  have  been  nursed  into  a 
remunerative  ligitation  were  settled  by  him  in  his  office,  and  without 
cost,  except  that  of  a  little  shame  to  the  dispikants.  He  gladly  did 
much  professional  work  for  the  poor  gratuitously.  His  contributions  in 
times  of  general  distress  were  generously  out  of  proportion  to  his  means, 
and  a  private  appeal  which  touched  his  heart,  easily  touched,  often 
emptied  his  pocket-book  when  it  had  just  been  filled  by  his  fees.  After 
his  death  large  numbers  of  people  to  whom  he  had  been  secretly  a 
benefactor  and  who  were  unknown  to  his  family  came  to  look  with 
tears  upon  his  face  ;  and  some  of  the  members  of  the  bar  of  Oneida 
County  at  the  meeting  which  has  been  mentioned,  when  they  rose  to 
speak  of  him,  stood  in  painful  silence  for  a  time  unable  to  begin. 

Imperfect  as  this  sketch  of  the  man  must  be  it  were  more  imperfect 
if  we  did  not  speak,  though  but  suggestively,  of  what  Mr.  Spencer  was 
in  his  home.  There  his  warm  and  generous  heart  had  free  sway.  He 
was  a  most  devoted  and  affectionate  husband  and  father,  and  always 
happiest  when  in  the  midst  of  his  family.  The  Hon.  James  Knox,  of 
Knoxville,  III,  who  was  a  law  student  with  Mr.  Spencer  and  subse- 
quently for  a  time  his  partner,  and  who  was  for  life  his  admiring  and 
grateful  friend,  in  a  letter  which  was  written  a  year  or  two  before  his 
own  death  lifts  for  us  the  curtain  which  secluded  this  home.  He  had 
gone  to  Mr.  Spencer's  house  upon  some  important  business,  and  being 
ushered  into  the  parlor  entered  it  unperceived  and  stood  in  the  door- way 
arrested  by  a  scene  which  he  was  unwilling  to  disturb.  The  stately 
lawyer  sat  on  the  sofa  covered  by  his  children.  They  were  crowding 
on  his  knees ;  two  were  standing  on  the  sofa,  one  on  each  side  close  to 
him  braiding  his  hair;  his  arms  were  around  as  many  of  them  as  he 
could  clasp,  and  his  happy  heart  given  to  them  all.  "  It  is  a  picture," 
wrote  Mr.  Knox,  "  which  I  have  never  forgotten  and  never  shall 
forget." 

For  many  years  Mr.  Spencer  was  a  member  of  the  First  Presbyterian 
Church  and  then  of  the  Reformed  Church  in  Utica,  and  when  dying 
of  the  disease  from  which  he  had.  patiently  suffered  much  and  long  he 
was  comforted  and  sustained  by  the  faith  which  had  made  him  the  friend 


WAJiB  HUNT.  547 

of  man  by  making  him  a  follower  of  Christ.  The  life-like  and  full  length 
portrait  of  him  now  in  the  court-  room  at  Utica,  of  necessity  presents  but 
one  aspect  of  the  man,  showing  him  to  us  as  he  stood  before  a  jury. 
The  truthful  and  comprehensive  epitaph  composed  by  his  son-in-law, 
the  Rev.  Duncan  Kennedy,  D.D.,  and  inscribed  upon  the  granite  shaft 
which  rises  beside  his  grave  in  the  cemetery  at  Utica,  tells  us  more. 
"Joshua  A.  Spencer  died  April  25,  1857,  ^g^d  Qj  years.  Majestic  in 
presence,  strong  in  intellect,  simple  in  manners,  sincere  in  faith,  active 
and  benevolent  in  life,  fearless  and  hopeful  in  death."  Of  his  large 
family  there  remain  two  sons  and  three  daughters,  neither  of  whom  live 
in  Utica. 

Ward  Hunt  was  the  son  of  Montgomery  Hunt,  of  Utica,  and  was 
born  here  June  14,  1810.  His  education  was  pursued  chiefly  at  the 
Academy  in  Oxford,  Chenango  Count}',  where  he  was  a  schoolmate  of 
Horatio  Seymour,  with  whom  he  was  afterward  associated  in  his  law 
studies.  His  collegiate  course  he  began  at  Hamilton,  but  changed  it 
afterward  to  Union  in  order  to  profit  by  the  teaching  of  President  Nott, 
and  was  graduated  in  1828.  He  attended  the  law  lectures  of  Judge 
Gould  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  continued  to  study  with  Hiram  Denio, 
whose  partner  he  became.  His  political  career  was  begun  in  1839, 
when  he  served  one  term  in  the  Assembly.  In  1844  he  was  mayor 
of  Utica.  In  1848  he  cast  his  energy  into  the  free-soil  movement 
for  Van  Buren  and  Adams,  risking  hope  of  preferment  for  the  sake  of 
his  principles.  In  1853  he  was  nominated  by  the  Democrats  for  the 
justiceship  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  this  district  against  William  J. 
Bacon,  who  was  elected.  With  others  he  was  an  architect  of  the  Re- 
publican party,  was  a  delegate  to  its  conventions,  and  was  often  heard 
as  an  advocate  on  the  rostrum.  So  prominent  was  he  that  in  1857  he 
was  named  as  a  candidate  for  United  States  Senator.  He  was  beaten 
by  Preston  King,  though  the  caucus  recognized  by  a  resolution  the  fit- 
ness and  the  claims  of  Mr.  Hunt.  In  the  meantime  he  continued  to 
carry  on  a  large  and  lucrative  practice.  If  other  men  excelled  him  in 
oratorical  display  before  a  jury,  our  bar  has  seldom  had  at  its  head  one 
more  esteemed  by  his  brothers  of  the  profession  or  more  influential 
with  the  court.  He  adorned  his  calling  by  his  research  and  his  sound 
sense  and  by  an  integrity  that  all  men  honored.     In  1865   he  became  a 


S48  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

candidate  for  the  Court  of  Appeals  and  was  elected.  Entering  on  duty 
in  1866  he  was  raised  by  the  resignation  of  John  K.  Porter  and  the 
death  of  William  B.  Wright  to  the  headship  of  the  court.  After  the 
reconstruction  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  Judge  Hunt  was  still  retained 
as  a  member  until  his  resignation  January  7,  1873,  preparatory  to  his 
entrance  on  the  duties  of  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States.  To  this  position  he  had  been  nominated  by  General 
Grant  on  the  nth  of  September  previous.  Welcomed  by  his  associates 
on  the  bench  he  had  now  attained  the  fruition  of  his  desires  as  a  law- 
yer, though  it  exacted  from  him  severe  labor  which  he  willingly  be- 
stowed, for  in  study  he  was  patient  and  zealous.  His  summers  he  spent 
in  Utica,  his  winters  in  Washington.  Failing  health  prevented  him  af- 
ter a  time  from  continuing  in  active  duty  upon  the  bench,  though  he  re- 
tained nominal  connection  with  the  court  until  1883,  when  he  resigned. 
Judge  Hunt  excelled  in  judgment  and  in  solidity  of  acquirements  rather 
than  in  brilliancy  of  intellect,  nor  were  these  acquirements  limited  to 
the  law,  but  extended  to  the  world  of  letters  and  affairs.  His  decisions 
were  simple  in  diction,  forcible  in  statement,  and  exhaustive  in  treat- 
ment. Both  from  Union  and  from  Rutgers  College  he  received  the 
honorary  degree  of  LL.D.  His  death  occurred  March  24,  1886.  Mr- 
Hunt  was  twice  married,  his  first  wife  and  the  mother  of  his  children 
was  the  daughter  of  Judge  John  Savage,  of  Salem  and  later  of  Utica; 
his  second,  Miss  Taylor,  of  Albany,  who  still  survives.  One  son  was 
lost  in  the  war  of  the  Rebellion,  another  son  and  one  daughter  are  still 
living. 

Alvan  Stewart  was  born  in  South  Granville,  Washington  County, 
N.  Y.,  September  i,  1790.  In  1795  his  father,  Uriel  Stewart,  removed 
to  Chittenden  County,  Vt.  There  the  son  attended  district  school  and 
at  seventeen  was  qualified  to  teach.  In  1808  he  began  teaching,  de- 
voting his  leisure  to  the  study  of  anatomy  and  medicine.  In  the  spring 
of  1809  he  closed  his  school,  determined  to  acquire  a  liberal  education. 
He  was  admitted  to  the  University  of  Burlington  and  soon  became  one 
of  the  most  thorough  and  methodical  students  in  the  college,  shining 
especially  in  the  languages  and  in  rhetoric  and  eloquence.  Procuring 
a  professorship  in  a  school  at  Montreal  he  studied  the  French  language 
and   remained   there   until  June,    181 2.      He  became   principal   of  the 


ALVAN  STEWART.  549 

Academy  at  Cherry  Valley  and  began  studying  law.  ,In  May,  1813, 
he  returned  home  and  in  June  went  to  Plattsburg  and  entered  the  office 
of  Palmer  &  Walworth.  Steady  adherence  to  the  study  of  law  was  in- 
terrupted by  the  want  of  funds  and  by  two  journeys  he  made  to  the 
South,  during  parts  of  which  he  was  employed  as  a  teacher.  They 
were,  however,  completed  in  1816  in  the  office  of  Judge  James  O. 
Morse,  of  Cherry  Valley.  Being  admitted  to  the  bar  he  became  a  part- 
ner of  the  judge  and  soon  acquired  a  high  reputation  for  his  eloquence 
and  talents  and  gained  a  prosperous  practice.  For  sixteen  years  he 
devoted  himself  to  it  with  great  pecuniary  success.  His  health  becom- 
ing impaired  he  went  abroad  in  1 83 1  and  returned  improved.  Early 
in  1833  he  disposed  of  his  interests  in  Cherry  Valle)-  and  removed  to 
Utica  where  he  resumed  his  practice,  but  confined  himself  wholly  to 
business  in  the  courts.  In  his  capacity  as  counsel  his  business  extended 
■over  a  large  part  of  Central  New  York  and  even  into  distant  counties, 
meeting  in  antagonism  the  ablest  lawyers  of  the  State.  Luther  R. 
Marsh,  son-in-law  of  Mr.  Stewart,  thus  speaks  of  him  :  "  He  was  one 
of  the  most  formidable  adversaries  that  ever  stood  before  a  jury.  You 
could  do  nothing  with  him  nor  make  any  calculations  upon  him.  It 
was  impossible  to  tell  where  the  blows  would  fall,  or  where  the  point  of 
attack  would  be,  or  what  scheme  of  defense  he  would  adopt.  His  pe- 
culiar and  overflowing  humor,  strange  conceptions  and  original  man- 
ner, united  with  sturdy  common  sense,  seemed  to  carry  the  jury  irre- 
irresistibly  with  him  and  submerge  the  sober  arguments  of  his  opponent 
in  a  sea  of  laughter."  During  his  active  practice  at  the  bar  Mr.  Stew- 
art, though  he  took  a  deep  interest  in  public  affairs,  devoted  but  little 
time  to  politics  as  a  mere  partisan.  He  had  no  ambition  for  office,  but 
on  great  nationalquestions  he  had  pronounced  convictions  and  expressed 
them  wherever  he  felt  that  his  influence  would  tend  to  the  public 
good.  He  was  a  pronounced  protectionist  and  a  series  of  articles  writ- 
ten by  him  on  the  tariff  attracted  public  attention  and  greatly  enhanced 
his  popularity.  He  was  chosen  delegate  to  the  National  Convention- 
at  Harrisburg  in  September,  1827,  where  he  took  a  prominent  part  in 
its  proceedings. 

For  several  years  prior  to  1830,  the  era  of  the  establishment  of  the 
Liberator  by  William  Lloyd   Garrison,  the    anti-slavery  agitation  at- 


Sso  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

tracted  Mr.  Stewart's  attention  and  he  at  length  came  to  consider  what 
he  called  the  mighty  question  of  human  liberty  as  paramount  to  all  oth- 
ers, and  enteredthe  crusade  against  slavery  with  all  his  mind  and  ability. 
Whatever  were  his  faults,  extravagances  or  fanaticism,  the  heroic  self- 
denial  with  which  he  gave  himself  to  the  cause,  the  splendid  and  lofty 
eloquence  with  which  he  maintained  his  position,  won  the  warmest  sym- 
pathy and  commendation. 

The  quaint,  often  grotesque  oratory  of  Mr.  Stewart  as  displayed  on 
the  platform  it  is  difficult  to  picture.  His  large,  ungainly  figure,  his- 
drawling  speech,  his  solemn  countenance,  not  once  relieved  by  a  smile^ 
and  maintained  even  while  uttering  conceits  the  most  extravagant,  com- 
parisons striking  in  their  force  though  outre  beyond  the  common  con- 
ception, ridicule  the  severest,  or  humor  provocative  of  the  broadest  up- 
roar, these  displays  varied  at  times  by  touching  pathos  or  by  bursts  of 
eloquence  rising  to  the  sublime,  these  varying  elements  all  kept  in  hand 
and  made  to  aid  him  in  his  argument,  were  captivating  to  auditors  of 
every  class.  If  they  failed  at  times  to  secure  the  full  sympathy  of  his 
hearers,  for  his  theme  was  not  for  the  most  part  a  popular  one,  they  at 
least  betokened  the  power  of  a  genius  that  was  unique,  one  whose  de- 
liverances it  was  a  rare  pleasure  to  listen  to.  Mr.  Stewart  died  on  the 
1st  of  May,  1849.  The  esteem  with  which  he  was  held  was  attested  by 
the  general  regret  and  sorrow  which  was  manifested.  The  public  jour- 
nals and  the  bar,  in  appropriate  language  eulogized  him,  while  letters  of 
condolence  from  the  most  distinguished  persons  in  the  country  were 
received  by  his  family. 

P.  Sheldon  Root  was  born  in  Vernon,  Oneida  County,  April  17,. 
1 809.  He  graduated  from  Madison  University,  and  came  to  Utica  about 
1 83  I,  entering  the  law  office  of  Maynard  &  Spencer.  He  subsequently 
studied  with  Graham  &  Sandford  in  New  York  city.  Upon  his  admis- 
sion to  the  bar  he  returned  to  Utica  (about  1833)  and  began  practice  in 
association  with  J.  H.  Rathbone,  and  in  the  following  year  with  Horatio 
Seymour.  He  was  examiner  and  master  in  Chancery  during  one  period 
of  his  career.  His  partnership  with  Mr.  Seymour  continued  three  years 
and  at  a  later  date  he  was  a  partner  of  O.  B.  Matteson.  In  1841  he  was 
elected  county  clerk,  holding  the  office  one  term;  In  1841  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  governor  first  judge  of  Oneida  County,  which  office  he- 


WILLIAM  C.  NO  YES.  551 

held  until  the  adoption  of  the  new  constitution  of  1847,  when  he  was 
elected  to  the  office  of  county  judge.  He  held  the  office  by  repeated 
elections  until  1859.  From  that  time  until  his  retirement  he  was  en- 
gaged in  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was  much  esteemed  as  a 
judge,  possessed  good  ability  as  a  lawyer,  and  enjoyed  the  respect  of  the 
community  as  a  citizen.  He  was  married  in  1836  to  Elizabeth  Middle - 
ton,  daughter  of  Lynott  Bloodgood.  They  had  three  children  :  Louisa 
B.,  who  married  Rev.  Samuel  B.  Sherrill  ;  Ruth  D.,  who  married  Rev. 
Dr.  C.  C.  Kimball ;  and  Lynott  B.  Root.  Judge  Root  died  January 
13,  i8;o. 

An  eminent  jurist  who,  although  he  lived  only  a  few  years  in  Utica, 
deserves  an  ample  notice,  was  William  Curtis  Noyes.  He  was  born  at 
Castleton,  Rensselaer  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  19th  of  August,  1805. 
His  means  of  acquiring  an  education  were  limited  to  the  common 
schools  and  academy,  and  with  a  fair  knowledge  of  Latin  he  entered 
the  law  office  of  Welcome  Esleeck,  in  Albany,  at  the  early  age  of 
fourteen.  Continuing  his  studies  until  he  was  nineteen,  he  came 
with  his  family  to  Oneida  County  and  entered  the  office  of  Storrs 
■&  White,  at  Whitesboro.  He  was  admitted  as  an  attorney  of  the 
Supreme  Court  in  February,  1827,  and  as  counselor  in  1830.  He 
began  practice  with  Wheeler  Barnes,  at  the  close  of  which  he  formed  a 
partnership  with  Henry  A.  Foster  and  Charles  Tracy,  at  Rome,  and 
practiced  there  three  or  four  years.  He  then  removed  to  Utica  and 
practiced  in  partnership  with  William  Tracy  until  1838,  when  he  re- 
moved to  New  York  city.  There  he  rapidly  won  distinction  in  his  pro- 
fession and  at  the  time  of  his  death  he  stood,  if  not  at  the  head,  cer- 
tainly in  the  front  rank  of  the  bar.  In  legal  lore  he  was  the  peer  of 
any  of  his  contemporaries.  In  1856  the  honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of 
Laws  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Hamilton  College.  In  1861  his 
friends  presented  his  name  as  candidate  for  United  States  senatorship, 
but  political  combinations  prevented  it  from  becoming  very  prominent. 
Again  in  1863  he  was  mentioned  conspicuously  in  connection  with  that 
office,  but  commercial  influences  predominated  and  a  selection  was 
made  from  the  mercantile  class.  During  the  last  eight  years  of  his 
life  he  was  associated  with  David  Dudley  Field  and  Alexander  W. 
Bradford  in  the  great  work  of  preparing  the  Civil  Code.      Mr.  Noyes 


552  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

never  sought  public  office,  giving  his  whole  energies  to  his  profession. 
The  only  political  offices  he  ever  held  were  those  of  city  attorney  of  Uticai 
(1835)  and  district  attorney  of  Oneida  County.  He  was  nominated  in 
1857  for  the  office  of  Attorney- General,  but  shared  in  the  defeat  of  his 
party.  He  had  a  decided  taste  for  literature  and  was  fond  of  general 
reading,  especially  poetry.  He  possessed  a  fine  miscellaneous  library,, 
and  gathered  at  great  cost  one  of  the  largest  and  most  valuable  private 
law  libraries  in  the  country  ;  this  he  bequeathed  to  Hamilton  College. 
To  his  brethren  at  the  bar  Mr.  Noyes  was  ever  considerate  and  court- 
eous. His  demeanor  in  court  was  respectful  and  decorous.  Though 
free  from  anything  like  assumption,  he  had  a  dignity  of  manner  which 
always  commanded  respect.  In  social  life  he  was  deservedly  held  in 
high  esteem,  and  it  was  said  of  him  that  "  his  private  life  was  as  pure 
as  his  public  record  was  spotless."  Mr.  Noyes  was  twice  married  ;  first 
to  the  daughter  of  the  late  William  G.  Tracy,  of  Whitesboro,  and  second, 
to  the  daughter  of  Hon.  F.  A.  Tallmadge,  of  New  York.  He  left  two 
daughters,  one  by  each  wife. 

Charles  Tracy,  long  known  as  one  of  the  ablest  lawyers  in  New  York 
city,  began  his  career  in  Utica.  He  was  the  son  of  William  G.  Tracy,, 
of  Whitesboro,  where  he  was  born.  He  prepared  for  college  at  Middle- 
town  and  went  to  Yale  College  from  Utica,  where  the  family  were  then- 
residing.  He  was  graduated  in  1832,  pursued  legal  studies  at  first  with 
Noyes  &  Tracy  and  afterward  with  Henry  R.  Storrs,  of  Whitestown, 
and  Henry  A.  Foster  of  Rome,  having  been  admitted  as  an  attorney  in 
1835  3^nd  as  a  counselor  in  1837.  Returning  to  Utica  he  became  as- 
sociated with  his  brother  William,  remaining  thus  until  1848,  when  he 
removed  to  New  York.  He  had  an  acute,  broad  and  inquisitive  mind,, 
with  habits  of  extreme  industry,  pains-taking  and  thoroughness;  was 
well  grounded  in  the  law  and  possessed  of  wide  general  intelligence. 
The  firm  enjoyed  a  high  reputation  and  had  a  large  business.  Mr. 
Tracy  participated  heartily  in  all  that  was  conducive  to  the  best  inter- 
ests of  our  city.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  academy,  a  bible  class  teacher 
in  his  church  and  a  member  of  the  board  of  aldermen.  He  took  a  deep 
interest  in  local  politics  and  used  his  best  endeavors  to  have  only  good 
men  elected  to  offices.  After  his  removal  to  the  metropolis,  where  he 
entered   into  several  successive  partnerships,   Mr.  Tracy  was  the  legal 


JOHN  SAVAGE.  553 

counsel  for  many  railroad  corporations  and  by  his  unremitting  devo- 
tion won  a  name  among  the  foremost  lawyers  of  the  city.  He  suc- 
ceeded Charles  O'Connor  as  president  of  the  New  York  Law  Institute 
and  was  vice-president  of  the  New  York  Bar  Association.  He  was  a 
benefactor  of  many  institutions  of  learning  and  of  art,  an  officer  of  the 
American  Bible  Society  and  senior  warden  of  St.  George's  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church.  Mr.  Tracy  had  a  love  for  historical  research  and 
writing,  and  his  address  delivered  at  Whitestown  at  the  celebration  of 
its  centennial  in  1884,  is  a  fit  companion  to  the  lectures  on  the  earl);^ 
history  of  Oneida  County  delivered  by  his  brother  nearly  fifty  years 
ago.  Mr.  Tracy  married,  in  1837,  Louisa,  daughter  of  Gen.  Joseph 
Kirkland,  and  they  had  seven  children  of  whom  five  are  living.  His 
death  occurred  in  March,  1885,  and  that  of  Mrs.  Tracy  only  a  little 
while  afterward.  It  was  in  reverence  for  their  memory  that  their  son- 
in-law,  J.  Pierpont  Morgan,  erected  a  magnificent  building  for  the  use 
of  St.  George's  Church. 

John  Savage  was  born  in  Salem,  Washington  County,  N.  Y.,  Febru- 
ary 22,  1779.  He  was  of  Scotch  descent,  his  ancestors  having  emi- 
grated to  this  country  from  the  north  of  Ireland.  He  took  his  degree 
of  B.A.  at  Union  College  in  1799,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  after  the 
usual  probation,  beginning  practice  in  his  native  town.  At  that  time 
the  State  was  divided  into  large  districts  for  the  administration  of  crim- 
inal justice,  and  Mr.  Savage  was  appointed  district  attorney  for  the 
northern  district.  His  health  becoming  impaired  he  made  a  voyage  to 
Europe,  and  returning  was  re-appointed  to  his  former  position.  In 
1812  he  was  elected  Member  of  Assembly  from  his  native  county  and 
was  active  in  support  of  the  government  in  the  war  with  England.  He 
subsequently  served  two  terms  as  a  representative  in  Congress  in  1814, 
being  re-elected  in  18 16.  After  the  expiration  of  his  last  term  he  was 
appointed  comptroller  of  the  State.  While  it  is  impossible  here  to  men- 
tion all  the  various  public  measures  in  which  Mr.  Savage  participated 
or  which  were  originated  by  him,  it  may  be  noted  that  the  system  of 
taxing  corporations,  as  such,  was  originated  by  him  while  acting  as 
comptroller.  The  new  system  was  adopted  in  consequence  of  an  elabo- 
rate repor|  from  the  comptroller,  and  has  ever  since  been  the  established 
policy  of  the  State.  While  Mr.  Savage  occupied  the  office  of  comptrol- 
70 


554  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ler,  the  constitution  of  1822  was  adopted  and  went  into  operation. 
The  changes  effected  by  that  instrument  necessitated  a  complete  reor- 
ganization of  the  judiciary,  and  Mr.  Savage  was  called  to  and  reluctantly 
accepted  the  office  of  chief  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  to  which  he 
was  appointed  January  29,  1823  ;  he  continued  in  that  high  office  until 
the  latter  part  of  the  year  1836.  It  was  in  this  office  that  the  greatest 
distinction  of  his  life  was  earned.  Having  served  a  long  time  in  other 
walks  of  the  public  service,  he  did  not  consider  that  he  possessed  any 
especial  qualifications  as  a  judge;  but  those  who  controlled  the  matter 
thought  otherwise.  His  labors  were  now  to  be  performed  in  the  face 
of  a  learned  bar  and  under  the  disadvantage  of  succeeding  to  the  seat 
of  a  race  of  judges  of  high  reputation,  of  whom  the  State  liad  justly 
been  proud.  But,  with  a  good  legal  education,  unusually  strong  com- 
mon sense,  and  good  judgment,  with  high  powers  of  discrimination,  and 
patient  study,  added  to  perfect  uprightness  and  integrity,  he  immedi- 
ately overcame  the  slight  embarrassments  of  his  situation  and  by  the 
unanimous  verdict  of  bar  and  community,  he  was  one  of  the  best  judges 
who  ever  presided  in  our  highest  tribunals.  The  character  of  his  mind 
was  that  of  directness  and  simplicity.  This  quality  enabled  him  at  once 
to  see  the  controlling  point  in  a  cause  and  to  divest  it  of  all  extrinsic 
and  superfluous  considerations.  His  judgments,  though  generally  the 
result  of  much  reflection,  appeared  so  obvious  when  matured,  as  to  com- 
mand ready  acquiescence.  The  nine  volumes  of  Cowen's  reports  and 
the  first  fifteen  volumes  of  the  reports  of  Mr.  Wendell,  contain  the  evi- 
dences of  his  judicial  labors,  and  form  a  lasting  monument  to  his  mem- 
ory. The  resign  ition  of  Judge  Savage  was  occasioned  by  the  illlnessof 
his  wife.  The  only  public  employment  in  which  he  afterward  engaged 
was  a  short  term  of  service  as  clerk  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  this  city. 
He  afterward  removed  to  his  farm  at  Salem,  and  again  within  a  few 
years  returned  to  Utica  where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life. 
Judge  Savage  had  some  marked  peculiarities  of  character.  Reserved 
and  diffident  to  a  degree  quite  unusual  in  one  who  had  mixed  so  much 
with  his  fellow  men,  to  common  acquaintance  he  seemed  cold  and  re- 
served. The  contrary  of  all  this  was  certainly  the  fact.  Among  inti- 
mate friends  no  man  was  more  genial  and  interesting.  Scarcely  any 
person  had   greater  tenacity  of  purpose  where  questions  of  principle 


PHILO   GRID  LEY.  555 

were  concerned  and  opinion  had  been  formed,  In  common  with  all 
good  men  he  was  deeply  afifected  by  the  condition  of  the  nation  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  and  saw  no  safety  for  the  Union  except  in  the  vigor- 
ous prosecution  of  the  war.  He  died  October  19,  1863,  in  the  full 
Christian  faith.  His  wife  was  Esther,  daughter  of  Gen.  Timothy  Newel, 
of  Sturbridge,  Mass.  One  of  his  daughters  became  the  wife  of  the  Hon. 
Ward  Hunt.  The  other,  Miss  Laura  Savage,  is  still  a  resident  in  Utica. 
Philo  Gridley  was  born  at  Paris,  on  September  ]6,  1796.  Having 
completed  his  preparatory  studies  he  entered  Hamilton  College  at  the 
opening  of  that  institution  in  1812  and  was  graduated  in  1816.  While 
teaching  a  classical  school  he  began  law  with  Thaddeus  M.  Wood  of 
Onondaga,  and  continued  it  at  Waterville  with  Othniel  Williams,  father 
of  the  late  Judge  Othniel  Williams  of  Clinton.  Admitted  to  its  prac- 
tice in  1820,  he  began  in  Waterville  and  after  a  few  years  removed  to 
Hamilton,  Madison  County,  where  he  remained  until  he  was  raised  to 
the  bench.  It  was  here  that  he  developed  those  traits  of  character 
which  gave  him  such  deserved  eminence  in  the  profession.  These  were 
strength,  industry,  and  indefatigable  perseverance.  His  temperament 
was  ardent,  intense,  vehement,  and  he  was  capable  of  sustaining  labor 
in  the  preparation  of  cases  beyond  that  of  most  men.  No  case  of  im- 
portance came  into  his  hands  which  he  did  not  investigate,  both  as  to 
the  law  and  the  facts,  to  its  utmost  depth.  His  persistence  was  not  less 
marked;  and  these  enabled  him  with  his  elocution,  his  ardent,  impetu- 
ous manner,  to  take  the  judge  and  jury  by  storm.  Having  by  his  prac- 
tice laid  the  foundation  for  an  ample  fortune,  and  having  held  for  several 
years  the  office  of  district  attorney,  he  accepted  in  1838  the  appoint- 
ment of  circuit  judge  of  the  fifth  judicial  district,  made  vacant  by  the 
resignation  of  Hiram  Denio.  ^The  following  year  he' removed  to  Utica, 
where  he  afterward  continued  to  reside.  Under  the  constitution  of 
1846  Judge  Gridley  was  elected  one  of  thirty-two  judges  comprising  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  State.  He  served  six  years  and  next  as  one  of 
the  judges  of  the  Court  of  Appeals,  when  he  resumed  the  practice  ofhis 
profession,  though  prolonged  ill  health  obliged  him  ere  long  to  discon- 
tinue it.  As  a  judge  his  quickness  of  apprehension,  his  thorough  knowl- 
edge of  the  law  made  it  a  pleasure  to  address  him.  His  energy  and 
endurance  now  and  then   wore  out  the  strength  of  lawyers  attending 


556  MEMORJAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

upon  the  sessions  of  his  court,  while  his  promptitude  and  dispatch 
gained  for  him  the  sobriquet  of  "the  steamboat  judge.''  He  was  the 
judge  who  presided  at  the  trial  of  Alexander  McLeod,  upon  the  issue 
of  which  was  believed  to  depend  the  question  of  a  war  with  England. 
The  progress  of  the  trial  was  watched  with  the  utmost  attention  both  at 
home  and  abroad.  His  firm  and  impartial  demeanor,  and  his  able  dis^ 
charge  of  his  arduous  and  delicate  duties  on  this  occasion,  received  from 
all  quarters  the  highest  encc^miums.  It  will  strikingly  illustrate  the 
character  of  his  mind  and  how  completely  he  had  abstracted  himself  from 
all  extraneous  considerations,  to  state  that  as  soon  as  the  jury  had  re- 
tired, the  judge  calmly  took  up  the  calendar  and  called  a  civil  cause 
for  trial.  Many  of  his  decisions  are  in  the  published  reports  and  are 
characterized  by  discrimination  and  marked  general  ability.  Judge 
Gridley's  acquaintance  with  books  was  extensive  for  one  so  exclusively 
devoted  to  a  single  pursuit,  and  his  relish  was  decided  for  literary  criti- 
cism and  for  historic  and  scientific  research.  He  died  August  i6,  1864, 
leaving  a  widow,  since  deceased,  and  four  daughters. 

Alexander  Smith  Johnson  was  born  in  Utica  on  July  30,  1817.  He 
was  the  oldest  son  of  Alexander  B.  Johnson  and  grandson  of  Bryan 
Johnson,  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Old  Fort  Schuyler.  He  was  graduated 
from  Yale  College  in  1835  with  the  highest  honors,  and  irnmediately 
began  the  study  of  law  ;  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  when  twenty- one 
years  old.  In  the  following  January  the  late  Judge  Beardsley,  recog- 
nizing his  bright  prospects,  offered  him  a  partnership,  but  the  connection 
lasted  only  a  few  months.  A  field  of  larger  usefulness  opened  to  Judge 
Johnson  in  New  York  city,  whither  he  removed  in  1839.  He  practiced 
in  that  city  until  1851,  when  he  was  named  by  the  Democrats  for  judge 
of  the  Court  of  Appeals.  He  was  then  only  thirty-four  years  old,  and 
was  triumphantly  elected.  Retiring  from  the  bench  in  i860  he  returned 
to  Utica  and  resumed  his  practice.  In  1864  he  was  made  a  Regent  of 
the  University,  and  in  the  same  year  was  chosen  by  President  Lincoln 
as  a  United  States  Commissioner  to  settle  the  claims  of  the  Hudson  Bay 
and  Puget  Sound  Companies.  In  1873,  when  Judge  Ward  Hunt  was 
elevated  to  the  Supreme  bench  of  the  United  States,  Judge  Johnson 
succeeded  him  in  the  commission  of  Appeals.  A  year  later,  when 
Judge  Peckham  was  lost  at  sea.  Judge  Johnson  was  transferred  to  that 


A.  S.  JOHNSON—  C.  H.  DOOLITTLE.  557 

court.  He  was  the  candidate  of  the  Republicans  for  the  full  term  in 
1874,  but  was  defeated  with  the  rest  of  his  ticket.  In  1875,  however, 
Governor  Tilden  recognized  his  high  qualifications  by  naming  him  as 
one  of  the  commissioners  to  revise  the  statutes.  In  October  of  the 
same  year  he  was  appointed  by  the  President  to  the  judgeship  of  the 
United  States  Court  for  the  Second  Circuit,  embracing  the  States  of 
New  York  and  Vermont.  It  was  written  of  Judge  Johnson  at  the  time 
of  his  death  (January  26,  1878)  as  follows  :  "Nature  fitted  him  for  the 
•duties  of  a  judge.  He  was  calm,  self-poised,  and  singularly  impartial. 
No  wave  of  passion  ever  obscured  his  vision  or  swept  his  judgment 
from  its  moorings.  He  could  hear  and  determine  without  prejudice. 
To  these  natural  qualifications  he  added  a  comprehensive  knowledge  of 
the  law  and  a  vigorous  grasp  of  its  underlying  principles.  He  was  a 
student  from  choice,  not  from  necessity.  Learning  to  him  was  not  a 
weapon  wherewith  to  conquer  success,  but  a  key  opening  the  vast  store- 
houses of  a  high  and  enduring  pleasure."  Aside  from  his  professional 
training  he  was  cultured  in  science,  in  letters,  and  in  art.  His  widow, 
a  son  and  three  daughters  survive  him. 

Charles  H.  Doolittle,  son  of  Dr.  Harvey  Doolittle,  of  Herkimer,  a  phy- 
sician of  reputation  and  skill,  was  born  at  Herkimer  on  February  ig, 
1816.  He  received  early  training  at  Fairfield  Academy,  and  went 
thence  to  Amherst  College,  and  was  graduated  with  distinction  in  1836. 
The  successful  man  was  already  foreshadowed  in  the  industrious  and  in- 
quiring boy,  fully  appreciative  of  his  good  opportunities  and  determined 
to  make  the  most  of  all  that  God  had  given  him.  Beginning  immedi- 
ately the  study  of  law  he  was  some  little  time  in  the  office  of  Simeon 
Ford,  at  Little  Falls,  and  then  came  to  Utica  to  continue  these  studies 
in  the  office  of  Denio  &  Hunt.  He  was  admitted  in  1839,  and  shortly 
afterward  formed  a  partnership  with  John  G.  Floyd,  which  continued 
until  Mr.  Floyd's  election  to  Congress.  Subsequent  partnerships  were 
formed,  the  most  recent  of  which  was  Doolittle,  Talcott  &  Swan.  His 
standing  in  his  profession  was  quickly  established.  The  key  to  his 
quick  success  is  found  in  the  habits  of  his  professional  work  and  in  some 
of  the  characteristics  of  his  mind.  He  was  a  most  untiring  worker. 
He  never  undertook  a  case  which  he  did  not  thoroughly  master  before 
appearing  with  it  in  court.     Ere  other  men  were  up  in  the  morning, 


5s8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

after  others  had  sought  their  bed  at  night,  Mr.  D.  was  at  his  desk 
preparing  and  re-preparing  his  cases,  studying  the  facts  from  every 
point  of  view  and  bringing  under  command  every  detail  of  the  law. 
He  tried  his  cases  on  both  sides  and  over  and  over  again.  No  lawyer 
in  the  city  so  rarely  met  with  defeat,  and  the  best  of  them  dreaded  to 
cope  with  him  ;  they  found  him  invulnerable  in  every  point  of  law  and 
fact.  His  mind  operated  rapidly,  running  from  point  to  point,  con- 
necting each  detail  with  every  other,  and  graspmg  the  whole  with  a 
swiftness  that  was  electrical,  and  yet  he  never  committed  himself  to  a 
conclusion  that  thus  flashed  upon  him  until  he  had  carefully  sifted, 
weighed,  contrasted,  and  matured  it.  These  qualities  made  him  invalu- 
able as  a  counselor,  and  during  the  years  previous  to  his  elevation  to 
the  bench  a  large  portion  of  his  time  was,  thus  engrossed. 

In  the  fall  of  1869  Mr.  Doolittle  was  made  the  candidate  of  the  Re- 
publican party  for  the  office  of  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Fifth 
Judicial  District  and  received  the  endorsement  of  both  parties.  He 
brought  to  the  bench  a  splendid  training  for  the  duties  it  involved,  with 
habits  of  industry  so  firmly  fixed  as  to  become  a  second  nature,  with  a 
mind  broadened  and  liberalized  by  study,  with  a  profound  appreciation  of 
the  dignity  and  sacredness  of  the  law.  In  all  his  practice  he  had  shown 
how  keenly  he  felt  the  difference  between  mere  law  and  absolute  equity ; 
the  theory  of  his  practice  had  been  to  maintain  and  establish  abstract  jus- 
tice. He  had  no  patience  with  men  who  seek  to  rob  justice  of  its  due 
by  a  resort  to  a  technicality  of  the  law,  the  courts  or  the  code.  This  was 
the  spirit  with  which  Judge  Doolittle  attained  the  ermine  ;  with  which  he 
heard  cases,  gave  rulings,  charged  juries  and  rendered  decisions.  His 
anxiety  to  sustai'n  the  right  and  just,  his  constant  fear  lest  on  account  of 
some  lack  of  consideration  he  should  unwittingly  do  wrong,  led  him  to 
study  laboriously,  following  out  every  detail  in  all  its  bearings,. sifting 
and  analyzing  every  argument  with  all  the  acumen  he  possessed.  His 
labors  on  the  bench  were  even  more  protracted  and  unbroken  than  those 
connected  with  his  practice.  He  was  conscientious  to  a  degree  that 
frequently  brought  him  embarrassment  and  anxiety.  In  all  these  par- 
ticulars he  was  an  ideal  judge  ;  forgetful  of  self,  bound  only  to  discover 
the  right  way  and  to  do  the  right  thing  if  unwearied  investigation  could 
attain  it.     Judge  Doolittle  was  always  considerate  toward  the  younger 


SAMUEL  B.  GARVIN.  559 

members  of  the  bar  ;  full  of  encouragement  where  he  detected  earnest 
and  honest  endeavors.  His  opinions  were  written  with  singular  clear- 
ness and  force  and  stand  upon  the  records  in  the  highest  estimation.  In 
appeal  cases  they  have  frequently  been  adopted  by  the  higher  courts  as 
embodying  all  that  could  be  said  upon  the  case,  and  as  saying  it  in  the 
best  way  that  it  could  be  said ;  very  few  of  tliem  were  ever  overruled. 
Personally  he  was  a  good  neighbor,  an  active  citizen  and  a  courteous 
gentleman.  His  personal  friends  were  warmly  attached  to  him  and  he 
was  high  in  the  estimation  of  the  community. 

Judge  Doolittle  was  a  member  of  the  City  Council  in  1839  and  again 
in  1844-45,  ^"d  was  mayor  in  1853.  He  held  the  position  of  president 
of  the  Oneida  County  National  Bank,  was  one  of  the  managers  of  the 
New  York  State  Inebriate  Asylum,  and  for  some  years  a  vestryman  of 
Grace  Church.  He  died  May  21,  1874,  leaving  a  wife,  three  sons  and 
two  daughters. 

Samuel  B.  Garvin  was  born  at  Butternuts,  Otsego  County.  In  that 
retired  village  he  lived  until  he  was  seventeen  or  eighteen  years  old, 
when  he  went  to  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  and  engaged  in  the  study  of  the  law. 
Here,  after  being  admitted  to  the  bar,  he  married  a  daughter  of  Dr. 
Henry  Mitchell,  a  well  known  Congressman  during  Jackson's  adminis- 
tration. About  1840  he  removed  to  Utica.  Here  he  established  an 
enviable  reputation  as  a  lawyer  and  a  citizen.  In  1850  he  was  elected 
district  attorney  of  Oneida  County,  and  during  his  term  he  successfully 
conducted  several  important  criminal  trials.  By  President  Pierce  in 
1856  he  was  appointed  United  States  district  attorney  for  the  Northern 
District  of  New  York.  After  serving  in  this  capacity  for  two  years  he 
resigned  his  office,  went  to  New  York  city  and  engaged  in  the  practice 
of  law.  He  was  a  member  of  the  law  firm  of  Schaefer,  Garvin  &  Dodge. 
About  1862  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  Inferior  Court.  Resigning  this 
office  he  was  appointed  district  attorney  by  Governor  Hoffman  to  fill 
the  vacancy  by  the  election  of  A.  Oakey  Hall  to  the  mayoralty.  Upon 
the  expiration  of  the  partial  term  he  was  elected  and  filled  the  term  pre- 
ceding that  of  Mr.  Phelps.  After  his  retirement  from  that  post  he  was 
actively  engaged  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  and  was  unusually 
successful.  He  died  suddenly  in  New  York  in  June,  1891,  leaving  a 
wife,  three  daughters  and  one  son',  Henry  M.  Garvin. 


56o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  distinguished  lawyer,  orator,  poHtical  leader,  and  statesman, 
Roscoe  Conkling,  was  born  in  the  city  of  Albany  on  the  3d  of  October, 
1829.  He  was  the  youngest  son  of  Judge  Alfred  Conkling,  who  was 
United  States  judge  for  the  Northern  District  of  the  State  of  New 
York  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century,  or  from  1825  to  1852. 
Judge  Conkling  was  afterward  minister  to  Mexico,  and  died  in  Utica  at 
an  advanced  age  in  1874.  The  son  received  an  academic  education 
and  had  the  advantage  of  excellent  training.  In  1846,  at  the  age  of 
seventeen,  he  entered  as  a  student  the  law  office  of  Spencer  &  Kernan. 
It  is  not  remarked  of  him  that  he  was  a  plodder  in  his  legal  studies, 
although  he  gave  to  them  as  much  attention  as  might  be  expected  of 
one  so  young  in  years.  Of  rhetoric,  oratory,  and  politics  he  was  pas- 
sionately fond,  and  to  them  he  devoted  himself  with  keen  assiduity. 
About  the  time  of  his  admission  to  the  bar,  and  when  he  was  scarcely 
twenty-one  years  of  age,  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Hamilton  Fish  to 
fill  a  vacancy  in  the  office  of  district  attorney  of  Oneida  County.  This 
office  he  is  said  to  have  filled  with  exceptional  ability.  For  the  regular 
succeeding  term  he  received  the  nomination  of  the  Whigs,  but  failed  of 
election.  Then  for  a  number  of  years  he  devoted  himself  to  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession,  displaying  a  vigor  and  attaining  an  eminence 
rarely  reached  by  one  of  his  years.  In  the  conduct  of  trials,  especially 
in  the  examination  of  witnesses  and  as  an  advocate  before  the  jury,  he 
developed  powers  which  promised  a  brilliant  professional  career.  Dur- 
ing this  period  of  his  life  he  closely  applied  himself  to  the  study  of  the 
principles  of  law  bearing  on  his  cases,  and  those  who  met  him  in  con- 
sultation in  later  years  realized  how  much  of  the  learning  he  then  ac- 
quired his  tenacious  memory  held  in  store  to  the  last.  His  ability  to 
recall  the  names  of  cases  and  state  the  points  decided  was  remarkable. 
In  the  spring  of  1858  he  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city,  a  post  he  held 
for  two  years.  His  administration  was  a  model  of  efficiency  and  econ- 
omy. But  his  dominant  desires  and  aspirations  not  unnaturally  sought 
a  wider  plane  of  action.  In  November,  1839,  he  was  elected  to  repre- 
sent the  district  in  Congress,  succeeding  to  O.  B.  Matteson.  From  that 
day  forward  till  1881,  a  period  of  twenty-two  years,  he  was  mainly  en- 
grossed with  public  affairs.  In  1867,  while  still  a  member  of  the  lower 
House,  he  was  chosen  senator  from   New  York  to  succeed  Ira   Harris. 


ROSCOE   CONKLING.  561 

He  was  re-elected  in  1873  and  again  in  1879.  During  the  two  terms 
of  President  Grant  Mr.  Conkling  was  his  trusted  adviser  and  friend. 
He  was  an  earnest  supporter  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  adiiinistration  during  the 
war  of  the  Rebellion,  and  of  that  of  General  Grant  during  the  recon- 
struction period  that  followed.  His  voice  was  always  raised  and  his 
votes  were  always  given  upon  the  side  of  freedom  and  in  behalf  of  Re- 
publican principles.  In  the  legislation  necessary  for  the  preservation 
and  reconstruction  of  the  Union  his  is  one  of  the  most  distinguished 
figures  in  our  political  history.  He  opposed  the  restoration  of  secession 
leaders  to  power  in  national  affairs,  was  among  the  foremost  advocates 
of  the  civil  rights  bill,  and  an  unwavering  champion  of  specie  resump- 
tion. Perhaps  the  most  important  service  he  rendered  his  country  dur- 
ing his  public  career  was  in  the  framing  and  the  passage  of  the  electoral 
commission  bill  under  which  the  disputed  presidential  election  of  1876 
was  determined,  and  but  for  which  the  nation  would  most  certainly 
have  been  plunged  into  civil  war.  In  the  advocacy  of  this  bill  Mr. 
Conkling  made  a  speech  of  two  days'  duration,  and  the  array  of  facts  and 
details  it  contained  regarding  the  practice  and  precedents  of  the  nation 
in  the  counting  of  electoral  votes  affords  a  fair  insight  into  the  thor- 
oughness and  completeness  of  all  his  work.  Still  it  cannot  be  said  that 
he  was  a  constructive  statesman  in  the  larger  sense.  His  skill  was  dis- 
played in  the  correct  and  judicious  management  of  current  affairs.  As 
a  political  chieftain  Mr.  Conkling  was  the  embodied  supremacy  of  or- 
ganization in  politics.  He  understood  it  thoroughly  and  he  realized  its 
full  capacity  as  an  agent  for  control.  But  his  were  not  the  methods 
that  seek  a  following  through  familiarity  or  sacrifice  of  dignity.  His 
recognized  genius  commanded  confidence  and  admiration  without  re- 
sort to  the  acts  of  smaller-minded  politicians,  and  he  disdained  victories 
that  could  be  won  only  at  the  sacrifice  of  dignity  and  self-  respect. 
There  was  an  imperialism  about  his  nature  which  forbade  him  to  parley. 
He  compelled  obedience  and  swept  to  his  purpose  with  an  impetuosity 
that  brooked  no  restraint.  A  man  was  either  for  him  or  against  him, 
and  it  apparently  made  little  difference  which  ;  but  there  was  no  n'iiddle 
ground.  To  his  friends  he  was  ever  generous  and  loyal ;  to  his  enemy 
he  was  either  indifferent  or  implacable.  More  than  any  other  man  he 
possessed  the  quality  of  leadership.      He  had  the  gift  of  choosing  able 


562  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

lieutenants,  and  he  infused  among  his  followers  an  intensity  of  personal 
devotion  that  bound  them  to  him  through  good  report  and  evil  report. 
But  Mr.  Conkling  could  not  conciliate  ;  concession  was  repugnant  to  his 
reason.  This  weakness,  while  it  made  him  many  enemies,  was  in  the 
estimation  of  his  adherents  more  than  counterbalanced  by  his  consum- 
mate ability,  his  matchless  courage,  his  sublime  faith  in  the  justice  of 
the  cause  he  espoused,  his  spotless  integrity,  and  his  unswerving  loyalty 
to  country  and  friends. 

Mr.  Conkling  made  very  few  speeches  which  will  live  in  literature  as 
models  of  the  oratorical  presentation  of  general  principles,  or  be  read 
by  coming  generations  as  the  speeches  of  Burke  are  read.  And  yet 
there  is  no  living  American  with  capacity  for  so  powerfully  impressing 
and  influencing  an  audience  as  he  possessed,  and  there  has  been  none 
to  compare  with  him  in  his  day  and  generation.  There  was  a  master- 
ful eloquence  in  his  simple  appearance  on  the  rostrum,  and  when  to 
that  was  added  his  voice,  his  intonation,  his  gesture,  and  his  rugged, 
plain  and  penetrating  Saxon,  the  sense  of  power  was  complete.  It  was 
so  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,  on  the  floor  of  Congress,  in  his  plat- 
form addresses,  and  in  his  individual  contact  with  men.  Always  there 
was  a  sense  of  mastery  present  in  his  presence  and  radiating  in  his  ut- 
terance. He  was  a  graceful  orator,  a  finished  rhetorician,  and  a  keenly 
logical,  if  not  always  a  profound  debater. 

The  last  few  years  of  Mr.  Conkling's  life  were  spent  in  the  practice 
of  his  profession  in  the  city  of  New  York.  Going  there  in  1881,  broken 
in  health  and  struggling  under  a  load  of  debt  contracted  through  the 
demands  of  friendship,  he  advanced  almost  at  a  single  bound  to  the  first 
rank  at  a  bar  perhaps  the  able^st  in  the  world.  When  it  is  remembered 
that  during  his  long  and  exacting  Senatorial  service  he  had  practically 
abandoned  the  law,  that  when  he  opened  his  office  anew  he  was  alone, 
without  business  connection  or  clientage,  and  that  he  had  to  compete 
with  a  host  of  able  practitioners  entrenched  in  popular  favor  and  jealous 
of  any  new  aspirant  for  the  emoluments  and  honors  they  had  so  long 
enjoyed,  his  success  at  the  bar  may  be  said  to  be  almost  unparalleled. 
As  the  result  of  six  years  incessant  toil  he  not  only  discharged  every 
obligation  but  amassed  a  princely  fortune.  He  was  employed  in  many 
difficult  and  important  causes  and  received  a  larger  professional  income 


ROSCOE   CONKLING.  .  563 

than  was  ever  paid  in  the  same  length  of  time  to  any  lawyer  of  this 
country.  Something,  doubtless,  is  to  be  credited  to  personal  admira- 
tion and  devotion,  but  in  the  main  his  unprecedented  success  was  due 
to  the  fact  that  he  was  deemed  by  those  having  great  interests  at  stake 
to  be  as  much  a  power  at  the  bar  as  he  had  been  in  public  life.  Not- 
withstanding Mr.  Conkling's  long  career  in  Congress,  during  which  he 
was  in  the  midst  of  the  Pacific  road  and  Credit  Mobilier  scandal,  no 
suspicion  ever  attached  to  his  name.  The  tone  of  public  morality  was 
undoubtedly  lowered  in  consequence  of  the  enormous  expenditure  made 
necessary  by  the  Civil  war,  but  our  Senator's  standard  of  virtue  never 
fell.      Mean  and  petty  things  he  despised  ;   dishonesty  he  abhorred. 

He  was  a  man  of  great  application  and  he  gave  nights  as  well  as  days 
to  his  labors.  He  had  the  capacity  to  master  almost  any  subject  how- 
ever abstruse  or  complicated,  and  it  was  his  delight  to  conquer  knotty 
problems  in  law  or  in  politics.  He  read  much  and  his  power  of  mem- 
ory was  phenomenal.  He  could  recite  long  poems  and  passages  from 
the  writers  in  whom  he  delighted.  His  capacity  to  recall  on  the  mo- 
ment historical  facts  and  reminiscences,  both  political  and  literary,  for 
argument  and  illustration,  was  a  gift  which  afforded  equipment  for  fo- 
rensic effort  that  few  of  any  time  have  possessed.  He  enjoyed  the 
society  of  his  friends,  and  while  at  Washington  his  dinners  were  fre- 
quent and  his  hospitality  lavish.  He  appeared  well  as  a  host,  and  as  a 
guest  was  a  favorite  wherever  society  was  congregated.  To  those  he 
liked  he  was  as  gentle  and  winning  as  a  child.  His  likes  and  dislikes 
were  not  confined  to  party  or  faction.  Among  his  most  sincere  friends 
in  the  United  States  Senate,  among  his  warmest  admirers  of  the 
denizens  of  Oneida  County  were  many  of  the  most  ardent  Democrats. 
General  Grant  admired  Mr.  Conkling  for  sterling  qualities  manifested 
by  the  young  senator  during  a  time  when  duplicity  and  dishonesty  were 
the  rule  and  not  the  exception  in  public  life.  Mr.  Conkling  on  his  side 
was  attracted  to  the  simple  and  rugged  character  of  Grant.  The  latter 
offered  him  in  1873  the  chief  justiceship  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States,  and  also  the  mission  to  the  Court  of  St,  James.  In  1882 
he  was  appointed  associate  justice  of  the  same  Court  by  President 
Arthur.  These  positions  he  declined.  In  nearly  all  of  the  numerous 
articles  of  the  press  evoked   by  his  death  he  was  recognized   as  one   of 


564  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  great  figures  which  have  appeared  on  our  political  stage.  Nor  was 
he  unknown  or  unnoticed  abroad ;  even  the  Continental  press,  as  far 
remote  as  Austria,  treated  his  death  as  an  important  event.  Utica  and 
Central  New  York  took  a  large  degree  of  pride  in  Senator  Conkling. 
In  spite  of  partisan  and  factional  warfare  his  distinction  was  regarded 
as  a  possession  in  which  the  community  had  a  share.  So  it  was  that 
when  in  the  summer  of  1877  his  ill-health  led  him  to  seek  recovery 
abroad  a  public  reception  was,  on  his  return,  accorded  him  by  the  cit- 
izens generally.  A  committee  met  him  on  the  train  which  was  bearing 
him  homeward,  and  a  procession  of  military  and  civic  organizations 
formed  an  escort  to  his  residence,  while  decorations  were  displayed  from 
private  houses  and  places  of  business.  The  address  of  welcome  was 
pronounced  by  Senator  Kernan,  professionally  and  politically  the  fre- 
quent rival  of  the  guest.  Speaking  for  neighbors  and  friends  of  all  par- 
ties he  testified  their  respect  and  regard  and  bade  him  welcome  home. 
The  response  of  Mr.  Conkling  was  felicitous  and  graceful.  His  rare 
intellectual  gifts,  his  imposing  figure,  his  stately  air  and  manner  were 
familiar  to  all.  Yet  it  is  not  easy  to  accurately  describe  him.  He  was 
what  we  may  call  a  unique  and  formidable  personality.  He  had  great 
but  ill- regulated  powers,  made  some  grave  mistakes,  and  was  not  with- 
out peculiar  weaknesses.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  with  a  sterner 
and  more  rigorous  self-control  he  would  have  wielded  his  great  abilities 
with  more  uniform  and  happier  effect.  He  died  in  the  city  of  New 
York  on  the  i8th  of  April,  1888.  He  was  many  years  united  with  the 
youngest  sister  of  the  late  Gov.  Horatio  Seymour,  who,  with  their  only 
child,  Mrs.  Oakman,  survive  him. 

John  Thomas  Spriggs,  a  prominent  criminal  lawyer,  was  born  in 
Northamptonshire,  England,  May  5,  1820,  and  came  with  his  parents 
to  this  country  in  1836,  locating  at  Whitestown.  After  a  period  in 
school  he  spent  two  years  in  Hamilton  College,  following  with  a  term 
of  study  of  the  law  at  Holland  Patent,  after  which  he  entered  Union 
College  and  graduated  from^  it  in  1848.  He  then  resumed  the  study 
of  the  law  and  soon  after  graduation  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He 
practiced  first  with  Thomas  Flandrau  in  Utica ;  removed  to  Rome 
where  he  joined  with  Thomas  G.  Frost,  a  connection  which  continued 
until  1859,  when  Mr.  Spriggs  took  up  his  residence  in  Utica.     In  1862 


J.  THOMAS  SPRIGGS.  565 

he  was  a  partner  of  Richard  W.  Mclncrow,  continuing  thus  until  1870. 
Still  later  he  was  associated  with  E.  D.  Matthews,  and  lastly  with  his 
son,  Fred.  B.  Spriggs.  While  still  quite  young  Mr.  Spriggs  showed 
evidence  of  that  ability  which  afterwards  distinguished  him  in  his  pro- 
fession. I^een  and  quick  in  examining  into  a  case  and  ready  with  an 
opinion,  he  was  much  sought  and  trusted  as  a  legal  adviser.  Though 
never  reaching  the  heights  occupied  by  profound  expounders  of  consti- 
tutional law,  he  had  a  strong  grasp  of  the  intent  and  meaning  of  the 
penal  statutes  of  New  York  State  and  his  interpretation  of  them 
was  rarely  wrong.  It  was  this  faculty  that  helped  to  place  him  among 
the  foremost  criminal  lawyers  of  the  State.  Back  of  this  was  his  advan- 
tageous gift  of  power  as  a  pleader.  There  were  not  many  who  were 
superior  to  him  in  those  qualities  which  go  so  far  toward  persuasion  of 
a  jury.  His  style  was  direct  and  earnest  and  full  of  convincing  ex- 
pression, and  he  could  hold  for  hours  the  close  attention  of  a  crowded 
audience  without  the  aid  of  notes.  He  was  identified  with  many  of  the 
most  important  criminal  trials  in  this  part  of  the  State,  and  for  twenty- 
five  years  his  reputation  as  a  criminal  lawyer  was  very  high.  In  poli- 
tics Mr.  Spriggs  was  an  ardent  Democrat.  His  first  public  office  was 
that  of  district  attorney,  to  which  he  was  appointed  by  Governor  Sey- 
mour in  1853,  to  fill  a  vacancy.  In  1854  he  carried  the  county  for  the 
office  of  county  treasurer,  and  in  1868  was  elected  mayor  of  Utica.  In 
the  fall  of  that  year  he  was  induced  to  accept  the  nomination  for  Con- 
gress and  was  defeated.  In  1878  he  was  again  a  candidate  and  although 
he  ran  ahead  of  his  ticket  he  was  again  defeated.  Three  other  times 
he  ran  for  this  office  and  was  elected  in  1882  and  1884;  in  1886  he 
was  defeated.  In  Congress  he  occupied  a  high  position  and  was  placed 
on  important  committees.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Conven- 
tion at  Baltimore  in  i860,  also  to  the  convention  which  nomin- 
ated Greely  in  1872,  and  to  Cincinnati  in  1880.  He  was  re- 
peatedly sent  to  State  Conventions  as  delegate,  and  was  a  power  in 
Democratic  politics.  Mr.  Spriggs  was  married  in  1852  to  Helen, 
daughter  of  Dr.  Henderson,  of  Whitestown.  They  had  four  children, 
of  whom  two  are  living  :  Fred  B.,  and  the  wife  of  Dr.  Blumer,  of  Utica. 
In  the  year  1870  there  came  to  live  in  Utica  a  most  worthy  repre- 
sentative of  our  judiciary,  who  had  already  in   another  county  filled  a 


S66  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA.  , 

large  measure  of  usefulness.  This  was  Judge  Charles  Mason  of  Ham- 
ilton. Born  in  Plattsburgh  on  July  i8,  i8lO,  a  law  student  and  then  a 
partner  at  Watertown  with  the  late  Judge  William  Ruger,  he  succeeded 
at  Hamilton  to  the  business  and  the  offices  of  Philo  Gridley,  on  the  re- 
moval of  the  latter  to  this  city.  Like  him  he  was  a  successful  prac- 
tioner,  district  attorney  of  Madison  County  and  long  a  justice  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  State.  As  an  advocate  he  is  described  as  a  for- 
cible and  effective  speaker,  clear  and  logical  in  argument  and  often 
brilliant  in  illustration.  His  legal  ability  and  personal  worth  were  so 
well  recognized  that  before  he  had  reached  his  thirty-seventh  year  he 
was  nominated  by  the  Democrats  and  was  elected  a  justice  of  the  Su- 
preme Court  for  the  Sixth  District.  Lot  gave  him  the  term  of  six 
years  ;  at  its  close  he  was  re-elected  for  eight  years,  and  again  in  1861 
for  a  like  period.  In  January,  1868,  a  vacancy  was  created  on  the 
bench  of  Appeals,  and  Governor  Fenton  naturally  chose  Judge 
Mason  who  had  been  the  unsuccessful  candidate  of  the  preceding  elec- 
tion. \n  1870,  under  the  amended  judiciary  article  of  the  constitution. 
Judge  Mason  was  one  of  the  Republican  candidates  for  judge  of  the 
Court  of  Appeals,  but  was  not  successful.  The  same  year  the  appoint- 
ment of  clerk  of  the  United  States  Circuit  Court  was  conferred  upon 
him,  and  he  took  up  his  abode  in  Utica  to  attend  to  the  duties  of  that 
office.  As  a  judge  he  was  careful  and  conscientious,  with  perceptions 
sure  and  grappling  rather  than  rapid,  and  with  wide  knowledge,  un- 
wearying application  and  great  precision  in  stating  and  deciding  the 
exact  points.  His  mind  was  singularly  free  from  prejudice  or  from 
caprice.  He  could  hear  and  decide  with  perfect  impartiality.  His 
memory  was  remarkable.  He  could  recite  off-hand  volume  and  page 
of  the  reports  where  decisions  could  be  found  bearing  on  the  case  in 
point.  Yet  he  was  no  blind  worshiper  of  precedents.  His  strong 
sense,  his  intuitive  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong  were  his  ultimate 
guide,  and  these  strengthened  by  his  knowledge  enabled  him  to  reach 
decisions  which  are  remembered  as  among  the  best  that  were  rendered 
in  the  high  Court  of  Appeals.  Judge  Mason  was  a  member  of  the 
Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  was  prominent  in  its  councils  and  faith- 
ful to  his  religious  obligations.  Through  and  through  he  was  a  man  of 
sterling  excellence.     Modest  in  his  estimate  of  himself,  not  demonstra- 


OBSTACLES  TO  BUSINESS  SUCCESS.  567 

tive,  but  in  every  relation  fulfilling  his  obligations  manfully,  cheerfully, 
and  with  exemplary  fidelity.  He  was  twice  married.  His  last  wife 
with  two  daughters  still  survive  him.      His  death  occurred  in  1879. 


CHAPTER  XVn. 

FINANCIAL    INSTITUTIONS. 

IT  is  an  acknowledged  fact  that  the  city  of  Utica  of  today  rests  upon  a 
financial  foundation  more  stable  and  sound  than  those  of  the  major- 
ity of  the  large  communities  of  the  country.  This  position  has  not  been 
reached,  however,  without  bitter  lessons  of  experience,  struggles  to 
avert  disaster,  and  periods  of  monetary  stringency  that  threatened  to 
overwhelm  the  business  of  the  place.  From  the  consequences  of  the 
well  known  financial  "  panics,"  as  they  are  called,  which  have  afflicted  the 
country,  Utica  has  suffered  more  than  many  of  her  sister  cities.  There 
are  good  reasons  for  this,  and  they  lie  chiefly  in  the  facts  that  apart  from 
her  location  in  the  midst  of  a  rich  agricultural  region,  she  possesses  no 
natural  sources  of  wealth,  and  that  she  has  no  large  water  power, 
from  which  in  early  years  might  have  been  cheaply  developed  a  large 
manufacturing  industry.  While  Syracuse,  for  example,  could  pass 
through  a  financial  revulsion  supported  by  her  wealth- creating  salt 
production,  Rochester  by  the  great  manufacturing  establishments  made 
possible  and  profitable  by  her  immense  water  power,  and  other  cities 
by  distinct  advantages,  Utica  and  places  similarly  situated  have  had,  at 
least  down  to  the  era  of  the  extensive  adoption  of  steam  as  a  motive 
power  and  the  concentration  of  many  railroads  at  large  commercial  cen- 
ters, little  else  than  the  ordinary  gains  of  trade  and  the  energy  and 
determination  of  their  citizens  to  carry  them  through  a  period  of  finan- 
cial stringency.!     Undoubtedly  well   situated  for  a  commercial  center 

1  Note. —  Until  after  about  1845  there  were  almost  no  manufacturing  operations  in  Utica,  while 
Whitestown,  New  Hartford,  Clinton,  Paris,  Oriskany,  and  Waterville  were  the  sites  of  flourish- 
ing establishments. 


S68  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

thus  making  a  good  market  for  products  of  the  land,  which  are  in  one 
sense  the  creator  of  wealth,  yet  mere  commercial  activity — the  ex- 
change of  necessaries  or  luxuries  for  money — does  not  serve  as  a  secure 
anchor  in  time  of  great  shrinkage  and  scarcity  of  money,  as  does  a  heavy 
manufacturing  element;  this  approaches  nearer  to  the  creation  of 
wealth,  or  of  something  that  can  be  exchanged  for  wealth,  and  has  ex- 
tensively employed  labor  in  its  production. 

In  consequence  of  these  facts  Utica  has  suffered  deeply  in  the  sev- 
eral periods  of  financial  distress  which  have  prevailed  throughout  the 
country.  ■  But  she  has  grown  (possibly,  through  the  lessons  of  those 
troubled  times)  to  a  present  condition  of  financial  soundness  and  good 
repute,  not  so  rapidly  perhaps  as  many  cities,  but  no  less  surely,  and 
has  outstripped  most  cities  in  the  character  of  her  business  citizens,  as 
far  as  relates  to  their  business  standing,  conservatism,  prudence,  and 
average  wealth.  This  conservatism  and  prudence  may  at  times  have 
operated  as  a  check  upon  public  enterprise  and  to  delay  or  wholly  pre- 
vent the  consummation  of  undertakings  that  might  have  conserved  the 
public  welfare  and  given  additional  impetus  to  the  growth  and  prosperity 
of  the  community  ;  but  it  may  be  safely  argued  that  it  is  better  to 
draw  the  line  in  all  business  operations  far  on  the  safe  side  of  rashness, 
than  to  overstep  that  line  ever  so  little.  It  is,  generally  understood 
that  the  business  men  of  Utica  have,  as  a  rule,  pursued  this  conservative, 
prudent  course,  have  conducted  their  various  operations  with  good 
judgment  and  foresight,  and  thus  gained  them  the  reputation  for  finan- 
cial soundness  to  which  we  have  referred.  Unfortunately  it  has  not 
always  been  so,  and  in  years  long  past  when  financial  upheavals  have 
swept  over  the  country  leaving  ruin  in  their  tracks,  the  fever  of  specu- 
lation and  false  theories  as  to  the  principles  of  wealth- making  and  the 
values  of  various  kinds  of  property,  found  proportionately  as  many 
credulous  victims  in  Utica  as  elsewhere.  It  may  be  astonishing,  but  it 
is  nevertheless  doubtless  true,  that  lots  of  land  in  what  are  now  the  sub- 
urbs of  the  city,  were  sold  fifty  years  ago  or  more  for  higher  prices 
than  they  would  command  today.  When  the  fever  of  speculation  runs 
high  true  values  are  lost  sight  of;  and  when  reason  asserts  itself  on  the 
subject,  ruin  must  follow. 

Down  to  about  the  year  1810  the  money  in  use  was  chiefly  silver, 


THE  MANHATTAN  BANK—H.  B.  GIBSON.  569 

and  for  the  most  part  the  Spanish  milled  coinage.  Bank  bills  were  few 
and  consisted  of  notes  of  eastern  banks.  For  loans  Utica  business  men 
were  dependent  on  Albany.  The  beginning  of  banking  operations  in 
Utica  dates  from  the  arrival  of  Montgomery  Hunt  in  1809,  he  having 
been  sent  hither  by  the  Manhattan  Bank  of  New  York  to  organize  a 
branch  of  that  institution.  Mr.  Hunt  was  well  qualified  for  the  task, 
and  he  located  his  institution  in  a  small  building  that  stood  back  frorn 
the  west  line  of  Hotel  street,  a  little  south  of  Whitesboro.  In  July, 
1809,  the  lot  on  the  corner  of  these  streets  was  bought  and  a  brick 
building  erected  thereon  for  the  bank.  Mr.  Hunt's  only  associate  was 
Henry  B.  Gibson,  who  acted  as  teller  and  bookkeeper.  The  directors 
for  the  year  1810  were  as  follows:  William  Floyd,  of  Westernville, 
James  S.  Kip,  Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  Solomon  Wolcott,  John  Bellin- 
ger, Thomas  Walker,  Apollos  Cooper,  Marcus  Hitchcock,  Henry  Hunt- 
ington, of  Rome,  Nathan  Smith,  Ephraim  Hart,  as  yet  of  Clinton,  and 
Nathan  Williams,  who  was  the  president.  With  one  exception  all  of  these 
gentlemen  seem  to  have  left  the  Manhattan  in  18 12  and  taken  part  in 
the'Utica  Bank.  The  institution  continued  in  existence  until  1818  and 
appears  to  have  prospered.  Among  those  who  were  on  its  board  of 
directors  were  Morris  S.  Miller  (who  was  president  in  1816),  Nathan 
Williams,  James  Van  Rensselaer,  jr.,  John  C.  Devereux,  John  C.  Hoyt, 
John  H.  Handy,  James  Dana,  James  S.  Kissam  (who  was  for  a  short 
time  its  manager  after  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Hunt),  Mr.  Gibson  and 
James  Nazro. 

Henry  B.  Gibson  was  born  in  Reading,  Pa.,  April  13,  1783,  and  when 
nine  years  old  went  with  his  father  to  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re- 
peived  his  principal  education.  Determining  to  become  a  merchant  he 
began  as  a  clerk  at  Cooperstown,  and  from  there  located  in  Utica  as 
clerk  for  Hugh  Cunningham.  He  was  afterward  employed  as  writer 
in  the  clerk's  office  under  Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  and  in  1812  was  made 
teller  in  the  Bank  of  Utica.  Owing  to  disagreement  with  Mr.  Hunt  as 
to  loaning  money  from  his  private  purse,  Mr.  Gibson  resigned  his  posi- 
tion and  went  with  Watts  Sherman  to  New  York  in  the  spring  of  181 3. 
There  as  merchants  they  carried  on  a  successful  business,  having  Alex- 
ander Seymour  as  their  associate  and  representative  at  Utica.  In  this 
firm,  and  after  the  death  of  Mr.  Sherman,  in  other  connections,  he  re- 

72 


570  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

mained  in  the  city  until  1820,  when  he  was  called  to  the  position  of 
cashier  of  the  Ontario  Bank  at  Canandaigua.  That  position  he  filled 
until  the  expiration  of  the  charter  of  the  bank  in  1856,  retrieving  its 
affairs  and  gaining  the  reputation  of  being  a  uniformly  successful 
banker.  In  February,  181 1,  a  newspaper  call  was  published  asking  all 
who  were  interested  in  the  establishment  of  a  bank  in  Utica  to  meet  at 
the  hotel.  The  result  was  the  incorporation  of  the  Bank  of  Utica  on 
the  1st  of  June,  1812,  and  it  began  business  on  the  8th  of  December 
following.  The  capital  stock  was  placed  at  $1,000,000,  but  it  did  not 
really  exceed  $600,000,  and  on  the  renewal  of  its  charter  in  1832  it  was 
fixed  at  the  latter  sum.  The  second  charter  extended  to  1850,  since 
which  time  the  business  has  been  carried  on  by  an  association  under 
the  general  banking  law  of  the  State.  For  a  short  time  after  its  estab- 
lishment the  business  was  conducted  on  the  west  side  of  Genesee  street 
not  far  from  Bleecker,  and  in  18 13  was  removed  to  the  brick  building 
on  the  north  side  of  Whitesboro  street  next  east  of  the  hotel.  Here  it 
remained  until  February,  1854,  when  it  was  removed  to  its  present  loca- 
tion on  Genesee  street.  The  directors  named  in  the  charter  of  the 
bank  were  James  S.  Kip,  Thomas  Walker,  Samuel  Stocking,  David  W. 
Childs,  Marcus  Hitchcock,  ApoUos  Cooper,  Henry  Huntington,  Nathan 
Smith,  Solomon  Wolcott,  Jedediah  Sanger,  John  Bellinger,  Francis  A. 
Bloodgood,  and  John  Stewart,  jr.  Its  first  president  was  James  S.  Kip  ; 
Montgomery  Hunt,  cashier;  Henry  B,  Gibson,  teller;  and  Thomas  Coll- 
ing, book-keeper.  Mr.  Kip  held  his  office  only  to  the  first  annual  elec- 
tion, when  he  retired  and  was  succeeded  by  Abraham  Van  Santvoord 
as  director,  and  by  Henry  Huntington  of  Rome,  as  president.  The  lat- 
ter held  the  office  of  president  by  repeated  elections  until  1845,  when 
he  declined  a  re  election  and  was  succeeded  by  Thomas  Walker.  In 
June,  1863,  Benjamin  N.  Huntington  was  elected  president  in  place  of 
Mr.  Walker,  deceased.  In  1876  P.  V.  Rogers,  then  cashier,  was  elected 
president  and  still  holds  that  office.  William  B.  Welles  succeeded  Mont- 
gomery Hunt  as  cashier  at  the  beginning  of  1835,  ^"f^  continued  in  the 
office  until  July,  1863,  a  period  of  nearly  thirty  years,  and  was  then  suc- 
ceeded by  P.  V.  Rogers.  When  Mr.  Rogers  was  elected  president  John 
A.  Goodale  was  made  cashier  and  still  holds  the  office. 

The  directorship  of  this  old  and  stable  institution  has  included  many 


UTICA  BANK— MONTGOMERY  HUNT.  571 

of  the  leading  business  men  of  Utica,  and  the  bank  has  from  the  first 
been  managed  with  prudence  and  good  judgment.  In  times  of  embar- 
rassment the  directors  first  cut  down  the  measure  of  their  own  per- 
sonal discounts  before  reducing  those  of  the  other  stockholders.  The 
bank  liberally  supplied  funds  to  the  government  for  the  payment  of 
troops  in  the  war  of  18 12.  Less  than  a  year  after  this  bank  began  bus- 
iness application  was  made  to  the  directors  for  a  branch  at  Canandai- 
gua,  and  after  it  was  several  times  repeated  the  directors  decided  to 
concur  with  the  petitioners  in  an  application  to  the  legislature  for  a 
charter  which  was  granted  in  181  5,  and  in  Januar)'  of  the  following  year 
the  branch  was  opened.  It  continued  in  existence  until  1850,  the  direc- 
tors and  officers  being  chosen  by  the  parent  bank  from  which  it  re- 
ceived its  working  capital. 

The  early  years  of  the  existence  of  the  bank  brought  it  great  pros- 
perity. Not  more  than  twelve  and  one- half  percent,  of  the  stock  was 
called  in  before  a  semi-annual  dividend  was  declared,  and  down  to  1825 
only  25  per  cent,  of  the  subscriptions  had  been  asked  for,  while  the  semi- 
annual dividends  of  four  and  one  half  percent,  were  regular  for  the  first 
sixteen  years.  In  1832  the  capital  stock  was  certified  as  $600,000,  the 
same  as  at  the  present  time.  On  the  1st  of  September,  1865,  the  Bank 
of  Utica  was  organized  under  the  national  system  and  became  the  First 
National  Bank  of  Utica  as  at  present.  The  present  officers  of  this  bank 
are  as  follows:  President,  P.  V.  Rogers;'  vice-president,  Edward  Cur- 
ran  ;  cashier,  John  A.  Goodale  ;  teller,  H.  R.  Williams. 

Montgomery  Hunt  was  the  son  of  Ward  Hunt,  of  Westchester  Count)-, 
New  York.  He  graduated  from  Columbia  College  in  1792,  and  was 
then  placed  as  a  clerk  in  the  Bank  of  America.  He  came  to  Utica  in 
1809,  in  the  employ  of  the  Manhattan  Bank,  as  the  cashier  of  its  branch, 
and  was  afterward  transferred  to  the  Utica  Bank.  He  became  known 
throughout  the  State  as  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  skillful  financiers. 
During  all  of  the  fluctuations  of  trade  and  the  shocks  and  reverses  to 
which  every  country  is  exposed,  he  displayed  judgment  and  sagacity 
that  are  rarely  surpassed.  During  the  war  period  of  18 12  and  a  few 
years  threafter,  when  so  many  of  the  banks  succumbed,  he  maintained 
the  credit  of  his  and  pushed  its  notes  into  circulation  as  far  distant  as 

1  See  biography  in  another  department  of  this  work. 


572  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  tlTJCA. 

New  Orleans.  The  deposits  of  the  Bank  of  Utica  rarely  exceeded 
$200,000,  while  the  circulation  was  three  times  as  largfe.  Mr.  Hunt  was 
conspicuous  as  a  Mason,  and  in  1816  was  one  of  the  presidential  elec- 
tors. After  his  resignation  in  the  bank  he  lived  about  two  years  in  New 
York,  but  died  in  St.  Cruz,  whither  he  had  gone  to  improve  his  health, 
February  24,  1837. 

Thomas  Colling,  so  long  in  the  service  of  the  Bank  of  Utica,  was  of 
English  birth  and  came  to  America  while  still  a  minor  and  engaged  in 
teaching.  In  1810-11  he  taught  a  night  school  in  Utica,  at  the  same 
time  being  a  writer  in  the  office  of  the  county  clerk.  He  had  a  good 
mathematical  education  and  was  an  expert  accountant;  besides  he  was 
a  man  of  steady  industry  and  punctual  habits,  which  rendered  his  serv- 
ices invaluable  to  the  bank.  He  was  retained  in  its  employ  until  his 
death,  February  25,  1859,  at  the  age  of  seventy.  He  was  the  first  clerk 
of  Utica  after  it  became  a  city. 

William  B.  Welles  had  a  long  and  honorable  connection  with  the  Bank 
of  Utica,  and  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  the  place.  He  joined  Asahel 
Seward  as  clerk  about  181 1,  and  remained  with  him  three  years.  He 
then  served  Jesse  Doolittle  in  the  same  capacity  for  about  a  year.  In  18 14 
he  was  made  teller  of  the  Bank  of  Utica,  at  which  time  he  was  regarded 
as  the  best  judge  of  paper  money  in  the  village,  a  qualification  which  at 
that  time  was  of  great  importance.  In  1824  he  succeeded  Orson  Sey- 
mour as  cashier  of  the  branch  of  the  bank  at  Canandaigua,  and  in  1835 
was  recalled  to  take  the  place  of  Montgomery  Hunt,  as  cashier  of  the 
parent  institution,  and  as  before  noted  filled  that  station  with  honor  for 
about  thirty  years,  and  until  1863.  The  later  years  of  his  life  were 
spent  in   Brooklyn. 

Alexander  B.  Johnson  was  intimately  connected  with  the  financial 
history  of  Utica  for  many  years,  and  was  also  associated  with  the  man- 
agement of  the  Bank  of  Utica.  He  was  born  in  Gosport,  England, 
May  27,  1786,  and  came  to  New  York  with  the  family  in  April,  1801. 
His  father  became  a  merchant  in  Utica,  and  his  son  began  keeping  his 
books  soon  after  his  arrival  in  this  country.  With  the  foundation  of 
education  obtained  in  London,  and  later  earnest  and  sustained  endeavors, 
he  acquired  a  large  stock  of  information,  and  became  a  vigorous  and 
original  thinker,  and  a  terse  and  forcible  writer.     In  the  year  1810,  soon 


ALEXANDER  B.  JOHNSON.  s73 

after  he  had  attained  his  majority,  he  estabUshed  a  large  glass  factory 
near  the  village  of  Geneva,  N.  Y.  In  i8 12  he  wrote  and  published  a 
book  entitled  "An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Value  and  of  Capital,  and 
into  the  Operation  of  Government  Loans,  Banking  Institutions,  and 
Private  Credit,  with  an  Appendix  containing  an  Inquiry  into  the  Laws 
which  Regulate  the  Rate  of  Interest  and  the  Price  of  Stocks."  This 
work  brought  him  into  notice  as  a  thoughtful  speculator  on  the  subject 
of  finance.  It  was  not  long  before  his  energies  were  enlisted  in  a  scheme 
for  a  bank  of  his  own,  and  these  resulted  in  the  creation  of  an  institu- 
tion now  almost  forgotten.  About  the  year  1798  Aaron  Burr  had 
secured  banking  privileges  for  the  Manhattan  Company  of  New  Ydrk, 
under  the  plea  of  furnishing  "  pure  and  wholesome  water,"  and  for  his 
management  in  getting  such  a  charter  through  the  legislature  he  was 
greatly  applauded.  His  adroitness  was  not  without  influence  on  Mr. 
Johnson.  Ambitious  of  securing  a  charter  for  another  bank  in  Utica  he 
yet  feared  opposition  from  the  law-makers  at  Albany,  as  well  as  hostil- 
ity from  the  banks  already  in  existence.  Deluded  by  the  successful  ex- 
ploit of  Mr.  Burr,  he  resorted  to  similar  means  to  compass  his  purpose. 
He  drew  a  charter  for  the  Utica  Insurance  Company,  which  was  so  cun- 
ningly worded  that,  while  it  seemed  to  convey  only  permission  to  in- 
sure property,  it  in  reality  granted  the  privilege  of  banking  also.  This 
charter  he  skillfully  maneuvered  through  the  legislature  during  the 
winter  of  1815— 16.  On  coming  home  he  called  together  Messrs.  Kip, 
Bloodgood  and  others,  who  all  agreed  that  the  charter  by  its  terms  con- 
ferred the  right  of  banking,  and  in  this  opinion  concurred  also  Thomas 
Addis  Emmet  and  Richard  Harison  of  New  York.  A  company  was 
soon  formed  and  the  $500,000  of  capital  was  taken  up.  The  directors 
were  James  S.  Kip,  president ;  Francis  A.  Bloodgood,  Nathan  Williams 
{who  soon,  however,  gave  place  to  Nicholas  Devereux),  Bryan  and 
Alexander  B.  Johnson,  Charles  C.  Broadhead,  Killian  Winne,  Hugh  ■ 
Cunningham,  and  Richard  R.  Lansing.  Mr.  Johnson  was  made  secre- 
tary and  treasurer  as  well  as  cashier,  and  A.  D.  Smith  served  as  teller. 
Operations  were  begun  in  July  about  where  is  now  the  Second  National 
Bank,  though  the  company  afterward  bought  of  the  Johnsons  a  part  of 
the  property  on  the  corner  of  Division  and  Whitesboro  streets,  where 
their  store  had  previously  been,  and  erected  thereon  a  suitable  building. 


574  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

They  made  banking  their  principal  business,  and  soon  had  in  circulation 
$190,000  of  their  notes  of  one  dollar  and  upwards,  with  about  $3,500 
of  small  fractional  change.  The  loans  ran  up  to  nearly  $300,000. 
They  met  with  much  opposition  from  the  Utica  and  Ontario  banks, 
which  endeavored  in  every  possible  way  to  embarrass  them.  These 
banks  collected  with  avidity  the  notes  of  the  Insurance  Company  and 
returned  them  speedily.  Mr.  Johnson  conducted  the  war  with  vigor  and 
skill,  sending  out  agents  with  the  notes  of  the  company,  who  exchanged 
them  for  other  bank  notes.  He  insured  also  to  the  extent  of  $1,000,000 
and  fortunately  met  with  no  losses  by  fire.  Martin  Van  Buren  had  in 
the  mean  time  become  attorney- general  of  the  State.  He  applied  to 
the  chancellor  for  an  injunction  against  the  company.  The  legislature 
of  1818  amended  the  restraining  law,  as  it  was  termed,  which  prevented 
individuals  from  banking,  and  made  it  apply  to  corporations  also,  affix- 
ing severe  penalties  for  its  infraction.  On  this  account  the  company  de- 
termined to  suspend  business  on  the  3d  of  August,  18 18,  theday before 
the  act  was  to  take  effect.  Both  deposits  and  notes  were  paid  in  full, 
and  the  outstanding  policies  of  insurance  were  transferred  to  a  New  York 
insurance  company.  The  court  gave  judgment  against  the  Utica  com- 
pany, when  a  majority  of  the  stockholders,  through  their  proxies 
obtained  by  Mr.  Johnson,  dissolved  the  company  on  the  6th,of  July, 
,  18 19,  and  he,  by  his  unaided  efforts  wound  up  its  affairs  with  trifling  loss 
to  the  stockholders.  Though  Mr.  Johnson  was  commended  by  many 
for  his  acuteness  in  securing  the  charter  for  the  above  described  institu- 
tion, the  matter  was  a  source  of  regret  to  him  in  later  years. 

In  June,  18 19,  he  was  made  a  director  of  the  Ontario  Branch  Bank, 
and  in  September  following  was  elevated  to  the  presidency.  That  bank 
emanated  from  Canandaigua,  where  its  parent  had  been  established 
about  a  year  after  the  organization  of  the  Bank  of  Utica,  and  it  began 
business  here  in  December,  1815.  During  a  number  of  years  the  capi- 
tal was  divided  equally  between  the  parent  bank  and  its  branch,  but 
subsequent  to  1843,  $300,000  were  located  in  the  branch,  and  the  re- 
maining $200,000  in  the  parent  institution.  The  existence  of  the  cor- 
poration was  limited  to  June,  1843,  but  in  1829  it  was  extended  by 
legislative  act  to  January  i,  1856.  A  general  supervisory  and  directing 
power  remained   of  course   with   the  board  at   Canandaigua,  who  ap- 


ONTARIO  BANK.  575 

pointed  the  principal  officers  of  the  branch,  advised  as  to  the  selection 
of  its  directors,  as  well  as  with  respect  to  the  administration  of  its  affairs, 
and  to  this  board  weekly  returns  were  made  of  its  condition  and  its  do-- 
ings.  The  first  directors  at  Utica  were  as  follows  :  Benjamin  Walker, 
Jeremiah  Van  Rensselaer,  Arthur  Breese,  Joseph  Kirkland,  William  G. 
Tracy,  Charles  C.  Broadhead,  James  Piatt,  Kellogg  Hurlburt,  Jesse  W. 
Doolittle,  Abraham  Varick,  Moses  Bagg,  Jason  Parker,  and  James 
Lynch.  Colonel  Walker  was  the  first  president,  and  was  succeeded 
after  his  decease  by  Arthur  Breese. 

Mr  Breese  resigned  in  his  favor  and  Mr.  Johnson  succeeded  him, 
though  under  the  title  and  guise  of  president  he  became  de  facto  cashier 
also.  With  him  rested  all  the  management  of  the  bank,  the  care  in 
selecting  directors,  attending  to  the  sufficiency  of  notes  and  the  security 
of  those  already  in  the  bank,  all  the  responsibility  in  the  eyes  of  the 
public  and  the  Canandaigua  board  for  its  general  safety  and  prosperity, 
all  the  care  of  preserving  harmony  between  the  bank  and  its  dealers, 
and  among  the  members  of  its  own  board  of  directors.  And  he  was 
daily  present  at  the  bank  from  its  opening  till  its  close.  Its  affairs  when 
he  assumed  control  were  greatly  depressed ;  its  notes  were  not  taken  at 
all  in  Utica,  and  were  sold  in  New  York  at  twelve  and  a  half  per  cent, 
discount.  In  fact  the  bank  was  closed  from  the  middle  of  July  to  the 
fore  part  of  November.  Such,  however,  was  the  public  confidence  in 
his  integrity  and  financial  ability  that  the  notes  very  soon  rose  to  par 
and  obtained  an  extensive  circulation.  From  that  day  forward  the  On- 
tario Branch  Bank  was  one  of  the  most  prosperous  banks  in  this  or  any 
other  State.  It  was  conducted  on  sound  principles,  and  experienced 
almost  no  loses. 

In  1852,  by  reason  of  severe  domestic  affliction  and  consequent  in- 
capacity for  business,  Mr.  Johnson  was  obliged  to  take  a  voyage  to 
Europe.  During  his  absence  he  could  not  of  course  exercise  a  per- 
sonal supervision  of  the  affairs  of  the  bank,  nor  did  he  afterward  assume 
as  direct  a  management  of  its  concerns  as  he  had  previously  done. 
Upon  the  expiration  of  its  charter  in  December,  1855.  'ts  connection 
was  severed  with  the  parent  bank,  and  its  capital  and  interests  were 
merged  in  a  new  one  formed  under  the  general  banking  law,  with  the 
name  of  the   Ontario  Bank.     Mr.  Johnson  took  part  in  organizing  it. 


576  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  when,  as  he  supposed,  it  was  placed  nn  a  sure  foundation,  he  ceased 
ip  part  from  his  labors  and  left  the  details  to  others.  Within  eighteen 
months  after  its  organization  the  bank  was  insolvent.  The  occurrence 
in  all  of  its  painful  aspects,  the  ruin  produced,  the  brief  period  of  its  ac- 
complishment, constitute  a  case  almost  without  parallel  in  banking,  and 
which  is  exceeded  by  nothing  but  the  elaborateness  of  the  means  em- 
ployed to  conceal  the  progress  of  the  ruin  from  the  president  who  was 
constantly  in  the  bank,  and  from  the  scrutiny  of  directors  of  experience 
and  caution  who  met  weekly  as  a  board.  Mr.  Johnson  devoted  himself 
to  the  utmost  to  save  those  who  had  placed  confidence  in  him  from  loss, 
and  the  bill  holders  were  all  paid  off  and  a  trifle  restored  to  the  stock- 
holders. 

Mr.  Johnson  died  September  9,  1867,  at  the  age  of  eighty-one. 
Prominent  and  distinguished  as  he  was  as  a  banker,  Mr.  Johnson  re- 
garded his  reputation  and  success  in  that  character  as  of  secondary  im- 
portance to  himself  He  adopted  that  profession  in  order,  as  he  himself 
has  said,  that  he  "might  have  time  and  opportunity  to  write."  "The 
labors  of  the  counting  room  and  the  study  were  constantly  intermingled, 
and  often  the  sheet  of  a  treatise  in  hand  and  a  current  balance  sheet 
might  be  seen  on  his  table  together ;  but  the  business  of  the  day  was 
never  for  a  moment  sacrificed  to  its  relaxations,  and  the  balance  sheet  al- 
ways had  the  preference."  He  wrote  treatises  upon  the  subject  of  bank- 
ing and  finance  which  received  high  commendation  from  those  who 
were  best  qualified  to  judge  of  their  merits  ;  for  few  men  in  our  country 
understood  better  than  he  the  principles  which  should  govern  all  finan- 
cial affairs,  or  were  more  practical  in  applying  them.  Yet  though  he 
devoted  so  much  time  and  study  to  such  subjects,  "  the  great  and  promi- 
nent study  of  his  life  was  language  with  reference  to  its  meaning  in 
something  other  than  words." 

With  the  exception  of  the  general  unsettled  financial  condition  of  the 
country  during  and  succeeding  the  war  oi  18 12-14,  the  first  period  of 
severe  monetary  stringency  occurred  in  1835-37.  The  causes  of  this 
panic  had  their  beginning  in  the  very  financial  foundation  of  the  govern- 
ment as  developed  by  the  policy  of  General  Jackson  and  in  antagonism  to 
that  policy  by  the  United  States  Bank  and  its  coninections.  While  the  tide 
was  rising,  banks  multipliec^  in  various  parts  of  the  country  and  their 


SPECULATIVE   EXCITEMENT.  s77 

managers,  who  had  thus  become  able  to  control  large  resources  in  depre- 
ciated currency,  engaged  heavily  in  real  estate  and  other  speculations, 
indulged  extravagantly  in  the  purchase  of  luxuries,  and  thus  aided  in 
turning  the  heads  of  their  more  conservative  neighbors.  Prices  of  lands 
and  all  other  kinds  of  goods  were  greatly  inflated,  money  was  plenty,  eas- 
ily got  and  as  readily  spent.  Usurious  rates  of  interest  prevailed,  money 
commanding  from  three  to  five  per  cent,  a  month,  with  an  unusual  de- 
mand at  even  those  rates.  This  apparent  anomaly  is  explained  by  the 
fact  that  many  persons  were  led  into  borrowing  money  at  enormous 
rates  of  interest,  in  the  hope  that  by  its  use  they  could  realize  the  same 
large  profits  that  were  being  made  by  their  neighbors  ;  thus  almost  the 
entire  community  was  drawn  into  the  whirlpool  and  an  era  of  general 
speculation  followed  such  as 'the  country  has  never  since  experienced. 
Upon  the  subject  of  actual  gains  by  the  mere  transfer  of  land  from  hand 
to  hand,  and  always  at  enhanced  prices,  men  otherwise  apparently  sane 
seemed  to  have  gone  mad.  Tracts  of  land  which,  even  at  this  late  day, 
are  not  looked  upon  as  very  desirable  residence  or  business  property, 
were  laid  out  and  mapped  and  sold  over  and  over  at  constantly  advanc- 
ing prices,  until  the  crash  came,  with  ruin  in  its  wake.  This  was  the  case 
in  Utica  as  well  as  in  most  other  cities  of  the  country  ;  and  it  is  doubt- 
less true  that  tracts  of  land  here  changed  hands  between  the  years  1836 
and  1839  at  higher  prices  than  they  would  bring  today.  For  months 
after  the  excitement  had  subsided  letters  were  frequently  received  from 
persons  at  a  distance  making  inquiries  about  the  value  of  city  lots  they 
had  bought  here  when  the  fever  was  at  its  height.  They  learned  in 
reply  that  these  lots  were  located  quite  outside  of  the  inhabited  portions 
of  the  city  and  were  of  value  simply  for  farming  purposes,  The  record 
of  mortgages  in  the  office  of  the  county  clerk  reveals  a  long  list  of  mort- 
gages given  by  one  man  as  securities  for  the  purchase  of  "  lots  "  which  in 
fact  lie  within  the  confines  of  New  Hartford  or  beyond  the  boundaries  of 
Utica  on  the  east.  The  fever  of  speculation  invaded  all  classes  of  the 
community.  Some  persons  saw  the  approach  of  coming  disaster  and  es- 
caped in  time;  but  large  numbers  became  bereft  of  ordinary  judgment 
and  clung  to  the  impossible  theory  that  money  could  be  actually  created 
by  such  operations,  until  they  were  finally  overwhelmed.  The  general 
crash  was  finally  precipitated  by  President  Jackson's  "  specie  circular," 

73 


578  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

which  required  all  payments  for  public  lands  that  had  been  eagerly 
located  and  absorbed  in  the  west,  to  be  made  in  specie,  and  the  with- 
drawal of  deposits  from  the  United  States  Bank.  In  Utica  the  general 
demand  for  a  greater  volume  of  circulating  medium,  and  particularly  for 
more  extensive  banking  facilities,  began  several  years  before  the  period 
of  active  speculation,  and  manifested  itself  in  one  direction  by  repeated 
efforts  for  the  establishment  of  the  Oneida  Bank.  This  was,  however,  in 
1836,  as  related  further  on.  In  September,  1838,  the  Bank  of  Central 
New  York  was  established  with  a  capital  of  $100,000.  This,  as  well  as 
the  Ontario  Bank,  failed  in  the  panic  of  1857. 

When  the  day  of  general  disaster  approached,  a  meeting  was  called 
in  Utica  at  which  a  resolution  was  adopted  that  a  public  meeting  should 
be  called  at  once  to  consider  the  question  of  the  suspension  of  specie 
payments  by  the  local  banks.  This  call  was  made,  and  the  second 
meeting  held  on  the  i6th  of  May,  1837,  and  the  call  was  signed  by 
Theodore  S.  Gold,  Horace  Butler,  Bradford  Seymour,  George  Tracy, 
G  W.  Hubbard,  and  I.  Tiffany.  A  resolution  was  adopted  at  the 
meeting  expressive  of  confidence  in  the  banks  and  in  the  belief  that  their 
notes  would  be  paid.  The  suspension  followed  as  it  had  almost  univer- 
sally elsewhere.  There  was  much  ruin  and  distress,  and  many,  especi- 
ally among  the  j'ounger  business  men,  were  financially  stranded.  Flour 
sold  at  one  period  here  at  $10.50  per  barrel  (higher  by  about  a  dollar  a 
barrel  than  the  New  York  quotation),  and  for  a  few  days  there  was  not 
a  barrel  of  that  necessary  in  the  Utica  market. 

A  resolution  was  adopted  on  the  19th  of  May  in  the  common  council 
that  a  plate  be  struck  promising  to  pay  one  dollar  in  specie  to  the  holder 
of  the  scrip  one  day  after  the  banks  should  resume  specie  payments,  or 
in  Safety  Fund  bills  whenever  five  dollars'  worth  of  the  notes  should  be 
presented  to  the  treasurer.  A  protracted  discussion  followed,  and  the 
matter  was  finally  referred  to  the  committee  on  public  improvements  ; 
but  we  do  not  learn  that  anything  was  accomplished  in  that  direction. 
The  force  of  the  storm  finally  passed,  and  early  in  1838  the  banks  began 
the  resumption,  this  action  having  been  preceded  a  few  months  earher 
by  similar  action  by  the  New  York  banks.  A  local  paper  said  on  the 
8th  of  May  :  "  The  banks  of  the  city  have  for  some  time  paid  specie  on 
all  demands,  and  they  issue  their  own  notes  without  reserve."     In  1838 


SPECULATIVE  PERIOD.  579 

the  general  banking  law  was  passed,  which  exerted  a  powerful  influence 
in  restoring  public  confidence. 

From  the  financial  wreck  just  described  Utica  did  not  recover  as 
rapidly  as  many  other  places.  But  the  reaction  throughout  the  country 
brought  an  era  of  general  prosperity  in  which  this  city  shared.  Mer- 
cantile operations  became  active,  building  progressed,  and  some  new 
manufactures  were  projected.  A  short  period  of  stringency  occurred  in 
1847,  the  evil  results  were  confined  largely  to  the  channels  of  mercantile 
business.  Prices  of  all  kinds  of  goods  were  greatly  advanced,  flour 
selling  here  at  one  time  for  $13  a  barrel,  and  there  were  a  few  failures. 
This  was  followed  by  ten  years  of  encouraging  prosperity  when  the 
great  panic  of  1857  overwhelmed  the  country.  Utica  had  by  this  time 
grown  to  a  prosperous  and  thriving  city,  and  her  citizens  shared  in  the 
feeling  of  independence  and  over- confidence  in  the  future  which  was 
universal.  The  surrounding  country  had  reached  a  position  of  tolerable 
independence;  the  farming  community  had  in  most  cases  wholly  or  in 
part  paid  for  their  lands;  plank-roads  had  been  built  and  extended 
from  the  city  directly  to  the  doors  of  the  farms,  and  over  them  were 
easily  drawn  the  products  which  were  turned  into  money  in  the 
city.  But  as  has  often  been  the  case,  the  tide  of  prosperity  brought  its 
own  destruction  ;  business  of  all  kinds  became  excessively  overdone  ; 
railroads  and  other  great  undertakings  were  recklessly  projected  in  all 
parts  of  the  country ;  the  banks  in  many  of  the  States  inflated  the  cur- 
rency beyond  necessity  or  prudence,  and  a  great  crash  followed.  It 
was  precipitated  in  the  fall  of  1857  by  the  suspension  of  specie  pay- 
ments in  the  city  of  New  York,  which  was  followed  by  similar  action  on 
the  part  of  the  local  banks.  Money  had  never  before  been  so  scarce, 
and  no  paper  was  so  good  as  to  secure  a  discount.  It  is  said  that  in  Utica 
a  business  man  pinned  a  five  dollar  bank  bill  to  his  own  note  for  the  same 
amount,  and  offered  it  for  discount  at  one  of  the  banks  and  was  refused. 
The  great  and  immutable  laws  of  finance  were  not  so  well  understood 
then  as  now,  particularly  by  the  general  public,  and  ignorance  usually 
leads  to  suffering.  One  of  the  directors  of  a  local  bank  asked  a  clerk  if 
the  bank  did  not  have  a  great  amount  on  hand  in  their  own  notes.  He 
was  answered  in  the  affirmative.  He  replied  that  it  was  just  as  he 
thought,  and  he  would  see  that  they  had  less  of  them.     He  accordingly 


s8o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

made  his  own  note  for  $I0,000,  and  offered  it  for  discount  and  was  re- 
fused. He  was  deeply  incensed  and  could  not  understand  it.  In  this 
crisis  the  Ontario  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  Central  New  York  failed.  The 
hard  times  following  this  event  continued  through  1858-59,  when  the 
country  began  to  recover  from  its  effects,  only  to  be  plunged  into  the 
horrors  of  a  great  civil  war. 

The  incorporation  of  the  Oneida  National  Bank  was  effected  on  the 
13th  of  May,  1836,  but  it  did  not  begin  business  until  late  in  November 
in  that  year.  Strenuous  efforts  had  been  made  for  two  or  three  years 
to  secure  better  banking  facilities  in  Utica  which  were  not  successful 
until  the  date  mentioned.  The  first  board  of  directors  were  Charles  A. 
Mann,  Horatio  Seymour,  John  H.  Ostrom,  John  D.  Leland,  Van  Vech- 
ten  Livingston,  A.  G.  Dauby,  Ezra  S.  Barnum,  Henry  Wager,  Jesse  W. 
Doolittle,  Israel  Stoddard,  Charlemagne  Tower,  Hiram  Shays,  and 
Jonathan  R.  Warner.  Augustine  G.  Dauby  was  its  first  president  and 
Kellogg  Hurlburt  the  first  cashier.  The  stock  of  thd  new  bank  was  in 
great  demand  and  its  distribution  caused  much  excited  feeling  and  even 
litigation,  so  great  was  the  disappointment  of  those  who  could  not  secure 
shares  in  its  stock.  About  a  million  of  dollars  was  subscribed  while  the 
capital  was  but  $400,000.  A  sad  mishap  befell  the  bank  ere  its  start. 
On  Sunday  night,  November  20,  1836,  the  night  just  preceding  the 
proposed  opening  of  the  bank  for  business,  it  was  robbed  of  $108,000 
in  cash  besides  $8,500  in  drafts.  This  money  had  just  been  paid  in  for 
stock.  A  watchman  was  provided  for  the  bank  and  he  seems  to 
have  performed  his  duty  faithfully  until  an  early  hour  in  the  morn- 
ing, when  he  supposed  there  was  no  further  danger  and  went  home.  It 
was  subsequently  learned  that  the  thieves  had  been  on  the  watch  for  a 
considerable  period  waiting  for  the  money  to  be  paid  in  and  placed  in 
the  vaults,  and  were  in  the  end  enabled  to  carry  out  the  crime  with  less 
trouble  and  risk  than  they  perhaps  anticipated.  This  robbery  created 
great  excitement.  Persistent  efforts  were  made  to  trace  the  robbers 
and  these  were  in  a  measure  finally  successful.  By  means  of  marked 
bills  one  of  the  thieves  was  at  last  located  in  the  western  part  of  the 
State  and  another  near  Hamilton,  Canada.  Both  had  purchased  farms 
and  had  apparently  settled  down  to  enjoy  the  proceeds  of  their  crime. 
They  were  arrested  and  property  to  the  value  of  nearly  $50,000  was 


ONEIDA   BANK.  581 

recovered.  Only  one  of  the  robbers  was  convicted.  The  loss  was  a 
severe  one,  but  the  bank  began  business  through  a  re-distribution  of 
the  stock  and  soon  became  a  strong  institution.  On  the  istof  July, 
1865,  the  bank  went  into  the  national  system,  taking  the  name  of  the 
Oneida  National  Bank. 

Mr.  Dauby  held  the  office  of  president  only  about  three  months  when 
he  was  succeeded  in  December,  1836,  by  Alfred  Munson,  who  contin- 
ued in  the  office  until  his  death,  May  6,  1854.  In  June  of  that  year 
Charles  A.  l\Iann  was  elected  to  the  office,  which  he  filled  untilhis  death 
January  20,  i860,  and  was  succeeded  by  James  Sayre,  whose  election 
occurred  in  June,  i860.  He  died  April  24,  1877,  and  on  the  6th  of  July 
of  that  year  A.  J.  Williams  was  elected  president  and  continued  in  the 
office  until  his.  death  in  August,  1886.  In  November  of  that  year  the 
present  incumbent,  R.  S.  Williams,  was  elected. 

Succeeding  Kellogg  Hurlburt  as  cashier,  who  held  that  office  only  a 
short  time,  came  B.  B.  Lansing,  who  continued  until  1854,  when  he  was 
succeeded  by  James  Watson  Williams ;  he  resigned  in  October  of  the 
same  year  and  was  succeeded  by  George  Langford,  who  held  the  office 
until  January  13,  1863.  On  that  date  R.  S.  Williams  ^  was  placed  in 
the  office  and  administered  its  duties  until  his  elevation  to  the  presi- 
dency. The  present  officers  of  the  bank  are  as  follows:  R.  S.  Williams, 
president;  E.  Chamberlain,  vice-president;  George  L.  Bradford,  cash- 
ier; H.  K.  Van  Size,  teller;  George  D.  Dimon,  discount  clerk;  William 
Wright,  book-keeper.  The  capital  of  this  bank  has  always  remained 
at  the  original  amount,  $400,000.  Its  present  handsome  building  was 
erected  in  1886-87  °^  ^^  site  always  occupied  by  the  bank.  ' 

The  legislative  act  under  which  the  Utica  City  Bank  commenced  is 
dated  April  8,  1838,  but  it  did  not  begin  business  until  September  i, 
1848,  when  the  organization  was  effected  at  a  meeting  held  at  Bagg's 
Hotel  and  the  following  directors  were  elected  :  Hiram  Denio,  Charles 
H.  Doolittle,  William  Bristol,  Isaiah  Tiffany,  Cyrus  Clarke,  Jared  E. 
Warner,  Edward  Curran,  S.  V.  Oley,  Samuel  A.  Munson,  George  S. 
Dana,  Charles  S.  Wilson,  James  M.  Kimball,  and  James  A.  Mott. 
Hiram  Denio  was  elected  the  first  president  and  held  the  office  until 
September  5,  1859,  when  he  was   succeeded  by  Jared  E.  Warner.     On 

■  See  sketch  of  R.  S.  Williams  in  the  biographical  department  of  this  work. 


S82  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  lOth  of  January,  1878,  Mr.  Warner  resigned  the  office  and  Isaac 
Maynard  succeeded.  He  died  on  the  23d  of  February,  1885,  and  on 
April  7,  1885,  Charles  S,  Symonds  assumed  the  office  and  has  held  it 
to  the  present.  The  first  vice-president  was  Jared  E.  Warner,  and  upon 
his  elevation  to  the  presidency,  as  noted,  he  was  succeeded  by  Daniel 
P.  Cadwell.  The  latter  died  November  4,  1863,  and  the  office  was  un- 
filled until  September  6,  1864,  when  Charles  McLean  was  elected  who 
held  the  office  until  the  lOth  of  January,  1878.  He  was  succeeded  by 
R.  V.  Yates,  who  died  February  8,  1879,  and  Russell  Wheeler  was 
elected  and  still  fills  the  office.  The  first  cashier  of  the  bank  was  Charles 
S.  Wilson,  who  served  in  that  capacity  until  March  6,  1868,  vvhen 
Charles  S.  Symonds  took  the  office  and  continued  until  April  17,  1885, 
when  he  was  elected  to  the  presidency.  Melville  C.  Brown  succeeded 
and  is  the  present  incumbent.  Francis  H.  Thomas  was  the  first  teller 
and  was  succeeded  by  John  S.  Hunt,  and  he  in  February,  1861,  by  Mr. 
Symonds.  On  November  29,  1881,  he  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Brown. 
The  original  capital  of  this  bank  was  $125,000,  but  on  the  nth  of  May, 
1849,  it  was  increased  $75,000.  It  remained  at  this  amount  until  Jan- 
uary, 1888,  when  it  was  raised  to  $400,000.  Business  was  first  opened 
at  No.  37  Genesee  street.  In  1862  the  property  on  the  corner  of  Gen- 
esee and  Catherine  streets  was  purchased,  and  in  the  next  year  a  sub- 
stantial building  was  erected  at  that  point.  This  was  occupied  until 
March  2,  1884,  when  a  destructive  fire  swept  over  nearly  the  whole  of 
that  square,  and  the  property  and  books  of  the  bank  were  destroyed 
except  the  books  in  current  use.  The  bank  continued  business  in  rooms 
furnished  by  Roberts,  Butler  &  Co.  until  the  20th  of  March,  when  it 
removed  to  the  Exchange  building,  where  it  remained  until  May  5, 
1885.  On  that  date  it  occupied  its  present  handsome  and  convenient 
banking  house  situated  on  the  former  site.  In  May,  1865,  the  bank 
was  re-organized  under  the  national  system.  The  institution  has  been 
a  prosperous  one  from  the  beginning,  and  its  prudent  management  has 
carried  it  through  the  various  periods  of  stringency  and  panics  without 
very  material  suffering.  Its  capital  was  impaired  in  1868  by  about 
$24,000  through  failures  of  some  of  its  customers.  Its  present  gross 
resources  are  $1,169,296.88,  and  its  deposits  are  about  $600,000. 

Following  are  the  names  of  the   present  Board  of  Directors  :  John 


EmbySCWdlmmESBruHr 


lA^t 


ONEIDA  COUNTY  BANK.  583 

Thorn,  Thomas  Foster,  Charles  S.  Symonds,  J.  Stuart  Lowery,  William 
Heath,  E.  A.  Tallman,  George  Young,  Isaac  N.  Maynard,  Thomas  F. 
Baker,  Dr.  Alonzo  Churchill,  Samuel  R.  Campbell,  John  W.  MacLean, 
Henry  W.  Miller. 

The  financial  institution  known  as  the  Oneida  County  Bank  was  organ- 
ized in  the  year  1853,  with  a  capital  of  $125,000,  and  the  following  Board 
of  Directors:  Chauncey  S.  Butler,  Ira  B.  Cary,  Charles  H.  Doolittle, 
Samuel  Morgan,  J.  R.  Noyes,  Elias  Root,  David  Dows,  Benjamin  Carver, 
Owen  O'Neil,  Samuel  Cary,  Richard  S.  Jones,  George  Thomas,  John  Car- 
ton, Francis  Kernan,  John  F.  Seymour,  R.  V.  Yates.  Its  capital  has  al- 
ways remained  the  same,  and  it  has  always  occupied  its  present  quarters 
at  No.  73  Genesee  street.  The  first  president  of  the  bank  was  Ira  B.  Cary, 
who  died  in  1855,  ^"^d  was  succeeded  by  Judge  Charles  H.  Doolittle, 
who  was  elected  in  June  of  that  year  and  served  to  the  tim.e  of  his  death 
in  1874.  In  June,  1874,  Francis  Kernan  was  made  president  and  con- 
tinued in  the  office  until  August  2,  1 887,  when  the  present  president,  John 
Milton  Butler,  was  elected.  Mr.  Butler  came  to  Utica  in  1853  to  enter 
this  bank,  of  which  he  was  made  cashier  in  1855,  succeeding  J.  R.  Noyes. 
He  held  that  office  until  August,  1887,  when  he  was  elevated  to  the 
presidency.  During  his  connection  with  the  bank  his  wise  and  prudent 
counsel'  and  his  conservative  course  have  given  the  institution  an  excel- 
lent reputation.  The  first  vice-president  of  this  bank  was  Judge  Charles 
H.  Doolittle,  and  when  he  was  elevated  to  the  presidency  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  the  present  incumbent  of  that  office,  Chauncey  S  Butler. 
When  John  M.  Butler  was  promoted  from  the  cashiership,  in  1887,'  he 
was  succeeded  by  the  present  cashier,  F.  A.  Bosworth.  The  institution 
has  always  maintained  its  credit  and  has  passed  through  the  several  pan- 
ics -almost  unscathed.  At  the  present  time  it  shows  profits  amounting  to 
more  than  $250,000. 

The  Second  National  Bank  is  located  at  No.  75  Genesee  street,  where 
it  first  began  business.  It  was  incorporated  December  10,  1863,  and 
was  authorized  by  the  Comptroller  to  do  a  banking  business  in  January, 
1864;  its  doors  were  opened  in  the  following  month.  The  first  officers 
were  as  follows:  William  J.  Bacon,  president;  Theodore  S.  Faxton, 
-vice-president ;  William   D.  Hamlin,  cashier.     Mr.  Bacon  declined  the 

'  See  biography  o£  J.  Milton  Butler  in  the  biographical  department. 


584  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

presidency  of  the  bank  very  soon  after  its  organization,  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Theodore  S.  Faxton.  The  first  Board  of  Directors  were 
William  J.  Bacon,  William  D.  Walcott,  Robert  Middleton,  Daniel  Grouse, 
William  D.  Hamlin,  G.  Clarence  Churchill,  Edward   S.  Brayton,  Zenas 

C.  Priest,  and  John  Butterfield.  The  original  capital  stock  was  $300,- 
000,  which  remains  the  same,  and  the  institution  now  has  a  surplus  of 
about  $100  000.  The  affairs  of  this  bank  have  always  been  judiciously 
and  prudently  managed,  and  its  deposits  now  amount  to  more  than 
$250,000,  with  over  $500,000  of  loans  and  discounts.  Mr.  Faxton  held 
the  office  of  president  of  the  bank  until  his  death  in  1881,  when  he  was 
succeeded  by  Edward  S.  Brayton,  who  continued  in  the  office  until  his 
death  in  1887,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  the  present  president,  Will- 
iam M.  White. 

George  R.  Thomas  filled  the  office  of  cashier  until  1887,  and  in  the 
fall  of  that  year  was  succeeded  by  the  present  cashier,  D.  A.  Avery. 
Mr.  Avery  is  a  native  of  Otsego  County,  and  had  an  experience  of 
twelve  years  as  cashier  of  the  Second  National  Bank  of  Cooperstown  be- 
fore accepting  his  present  position,  to  which  he  was  called  by  the  Board 
of  Trustees  without  solicitation  on  his  part.  The  present  officers  of  the 
bank  are  as  follows:  William  M.  White,  president;  Henry  Roberts, 
vice  president ;  D.  A.  Avery,  cashier  ;  Willard  Conkey,  assistant  cash- 
ier ;  Frank  R.  Winant,  book-keeper  ;  Henry  Harmon,  clerk.  The  Board 
of  Directors  are  William  M.White,  Henry  Roberts,  G.  Clarence  Church- 
ill, Robert  Middleton,  Benjamin  Allen,  T.  R.  Proctor,  M.  H.  Thomson, 
Henry  Martin,  D.  C.    Murray,  N.    E.    Devereux,    N.    E.    Kernan,   and 

D.  A.  Avery. 

The  charter  of  the  Utica  Savings  Bank  ^  was  granted  by  the  legisla- 
ture in  the  year  1821,  incorporating  "A  Bank  for  Savings  in  the  City 
of  Utica."  The  incorporators  and  trustees  named  in  the  act  were  John 
C.  Devereux,  Ezekiel  Bacon,  Nathan  Williams,  Morris  S.  Miller,  Sam- 
uel Stocking,  Erastus  Clark,  Moses.  Bagg,  David  P.  Hoyt,  Montgomery 
Hunt,  John  H.  Lothrop,  Apollos  Cooper,  Thomas  Walker,  Rudolph 
Snyder,  William  H.  Maynard,  and  Ezra  Cozier.  For  some  reason  now 
unknown  no  further  action  was  taken  in  the  matter  until  1839,  at  which 
time  there  were  eleven  savings   banks  chartered  in  this  State,  all  of 

'  Condensed  from  a  history  of  the  bank  by  Addison  C.  Miller. 


UTICA  SA  VINGS  BANK.  58; 

which  with  one  exception,  are  still  in  operation.  On  the  26th  of  July 
1839,  a  charter  was  granted  to  the  Savings  Bank  of  Utica,  and  the  in- 
stitution was  at  once  organized  and  began  business  on  May  18,  of  tha' 
year,  in  the  office  of  Nicholas  Devereux,  on  Bleecker  street.  Great  credil 
must  be  given  to  the  gentlemen  who  organized  and  promoted  the 
establishment  of  this  bank,  without  the  least  pecuniary  compensation 
with  no  possible  benefit  to  come  to  them.  They  were  directly  prohib- 
ited from  receiving  any  compensation  for  their  services,  or  from  borrow- 
ing or  using  a  dollar  of  the  funds  of  the  bank,  and  denied  the  privilege 
allowed  to  all  others  of  being  depositors  in  the  bank.  They  voluntarily 
assumed  the  responsibility  of  receiving,  caring  for  and  investing  the 
money  of  the  poorer  and  laboring  classes.  The  system  of  savings  bank; 
was  still  in  its  infancy,  its  success  was  by  no  means  assured.  If  they 
failed  in  giving  due  attention  to  its  business  ;'  if  they  were  wanting  ir 
proper  skill ;  or  if  the  system  itself  should  prove  a  failure,  they  woulc 
be  held  responsible,  not  only  by  the  depositors,  but  by  the  whole  com- 
munity of  Central  New  York. 

By  the  provisions  of  the  original  charter  the  deposits  which  the  ban! 
could  receive  in  the  aggregate  were  limited  to  $500,000.  The  invest- 
ments were  required  to  be  made  in  United  States  or  State  stocks,  or  ir 
the  bonds  of  the  city  of  Utica,  or  on  bond  and  mortgage  on  real  estat( 
worth  double  the  sum  loaned,  exclusive  of  buildings,  except  that  th( 
trustees  were  authorized  to  loan  $3,000  of  the  funds  of  the  bank  upoi 
approved  notes.  The  directors  were  prohibited  from  borrowing  o 
using  the  funds  of  the  bank.  The  board  was  to  regulate  the  rate  o 
Interest  to  depositors,  so  that  they  should  receive  a  ratable  proportion  o 
all  the  profits  of  the  bank,  after  deducting  the  exp,enses.  The  bank  wai 
required  to  report  annually  to  the  legislature  and  to  the  common  coun 
cil  of  the  city.  The  trustees  were  authorized  to  accumulate  graduallj 
a  surplus  fund,  not  exceeding  ten  per  cent,  of  the  deposits,  for  the  bet 
ter  security  of  the  depositors.  The  amount  to  be  deposited  by  any  on< 
person  could  not  exceed  $2,000,  and  the  trustees  could  not  become 
depositors.  The  charter  was  the  model  for  many  subsequent  charter: 
of  savings  banks  in  this  county.  The  first  meeting  of  the  board  wai 
held  at  the  office  of  Nicholas  Devereux,  on  the  second  day  of  May,  1839 
when   John  C.  Devereux  was  elected  president,  Thomas  Walker  vice- 

74 


586  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

president,  and  Stalham  Williams  secretary.  The  second  meeting  was 
held  at  No.  12  Bleecker  street,  on  the  eighth  day  of  May,  1839,  at  which 
a  code  of' by-laws  was  adopted,  and  Stalham  Williams  was  appointed 
the  treasurer  of  the  bank,  which  office  Mr.  Williams  held  for  thirty  four 
years,  and  until  his  death  in  1873,  at  the  age  of  ninety  nine  and  a  half 
years.  The  board  was  at  first  divided  into  committees  of  three,  and  it 
was  the  duty  of  those  committees  in  turn  each  month  to  attend  at  the 
bank  and  direct  as  to  its  transactions. 

On  the  1 8th  day  of  May,  1839,  the  first  deposit  was  made  in  the  sum 
of  $100  by  John  Hurley,  of  whom  nothing  is  known  beyond  the  fact 
stated  in  the  signature  book,  that  he  was  an  Irishman,  twenty-four  years 
of  age,  and  lived  at  Boonville,  and  could  not  write  his  name.  The  growth 
of  the  bank  was  exceedingly  slow.  The  number  of  accounts  opened 
for  the  first  eight  years  averaged  about  200  each  year.  The  number  of 
open  accounts  on  the  first  day  of  January,  1844,  when  the  bank  was 
five  years  old,  was  209,  and  the  amount  of  deposits  was  $27,173.72,  an 
average  of  $130  to  each  depositor.  At  the  end  of  twenty  years,  on  the 
first  day  of  January,  1859,  the  number  of  depositors  was  2,041,  and  the 
amount  due  depositors  was  $412,079.98,  an  average  of  $201.  Ten 
years  later,  on  January  i,  1869,  the  number  of  depositors  was  6,037, 
and  the  amount  due  depositors  was  $1,907,256  65,  an  average  of  $310. 
January  I,  1879,  the  number  of  depositors  was  11,100,  and  the  amount 
due  depositors  was  $3,674,724.07,  an  average  of  $331.  January  i, 
1889,  the  number  of  depositors  was  16,994,  and  the  amount  due  depos- 
itors was  $4,418,339.13,  an  average  of  $209  for  each  account. 

In  1842  an  act  was  passed  authorizing  the  bank  to  loan  on  personal 
security  to  the  amount  of  $5,000,  instead  of  $3,000,  as  provided  in  the 
original  charter,  but  providing  that  no  such  loans  should  be  made  with- 
out the;  consent  of  a  majority  of  the  board  of  trustees.  In  i860  an  act 
was  passed  limiting  the  deposits  to  $1,000,000,  instead  of  $500,000.  In 
1864  the  limit  was  increased  to  $2,000,000,  and  in  1869  to  $3,000,000. 
In  1870  the  charter  was  amended  as  to  the  manner  of  the  investments 
upon  bond  and  mortgage.  Prior  to  that  date  the  loans  upon  bond  and 
mortgage  were  limited  to  one- half  of  the  value  of  the  mortgaged  prem- 
ises, exclusive  of  the  value  of  the  buildings.  This  provision, prevented 
the  bank  to  a  large  extent  from  making  loans  on  property  in  Utica,  as 


UTICA  SA  VINGS  BANK.  587 

the  value  of  the  buildings  in  most  cases  exceeded  many  times  the  value 
of  the  land  on  which  they  vsrere  located.  Thus  if  a  borrower  had  a  lot 
of  the  value  of  $500,  upon  which  he  erected  a  house  costing  $1,500, 
making  the  total  value  $2,000,  the  bank  could  not  loan  him  to  exceed 
one-half  the  value  of  the  land,  which  would  be  $250,  on  property  worth 
$2,000.  Thus  the  mortgage  loans  of  the  bank  were  mostly  upon  farm 
lands.  After  considerable  discussion  in  the  board,  it  was  finally  agreed 
to  apply  to  the  legislature  for  permission  to  loan  on  productive  un- 
incumbered real  estate  situate  in  Utica,  to  the  extent  of  one-third  the 
value,  including  buildings,  but  providing  that  no  loan  should  exceed 
the  sum  of  $10, DOG,  and  such  permission  was  granted  by  the  legislature. 
A  further  amendment  was  made  limiting  the  amount  of  any  single  de- 
positor to  $5,000.  In  187 1  the  charter  was  again  amended  limiting  the 
amount  of  deposits  to  $5,000,000,  instead  of  $3,000,000. 

On  the  20th  of  June,  185 1,  the  legislature  passed  an  act  incorporating 
the  Central  City  Savings  Institution  of  Utica,  which  continued  in  exist- 
ence until  1873,  when  it  failed,  and  its  affairs  were  wound  up  by  John 
A.  Goodale,  who  was  appointed  receiver  for  that  purpose.  On  the  22d 
of  March,  1865,  the  legislature  passed  an  act  incorporating  the  National 
Savings  Bank  of  Utica.  On  the  14th  of  May,  1868,  the  legislature  granted 
a  charter  incorporating  the  People's  Safe  Deposit  and  Savings  Institution 
of  the  State  of  New  York.  A  branch  of  the  same  was  opened  at  Utica 
and  also  at  Syracuse.  The  affairs  of  the  National  Savings  Bank  soon 
after  became  merged  in  the  People's  Safe  Deposit  and  Savings  Institution. 
The  provisions  of  the  charter  of  the  latter  bank  have  been  justly  criti- 
cised, and  the  bank  was  overtaken  by  bankruptcy  early  in  the  year 
1872. 

The  failure  of  these  two  institutions  caused  some  distrust  among  the 
deposhors  of  the  savings  bank  of  Utica,  which  finally  culminated  in  a 
run  upon  the  bank  in  the  latter  part  of  December,  1872. 

On  Saturday,  the  21st  of  December,  there  were  thirty-four  accounts 
closed,  which  was  an  unusually  large  number,  but  at  no  time  was  the  bank 
crowded.  A  full  house  was  expected  Monday  morning.  Monday 
forenoon  was  unusually  quiet.  On  opening  the  bank  after  dinner,  how- 
ever, more  depositors  desiring  to  draw  their  money  were  found  than  could 
be  promptly  attended  to.     It  was  determined,  if  possible,  to  clear  the 


588  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

bank,  which  was  held  open  until  7  o'clock  in  the  evening  for  that  purpose, 
but  finally  closed  without  materially  lessening  the  crowd  waiting  for  their 
money.  They  were  dismissed  pleasantly,  and  invited  to  come  at  9 
o'clock  the  next  morning,  when  their  money  would  be  given  them  as  fast 
as  they  could  get  to  the  counter.  The  run  continued  until  the  following 
Saturday  noon,  at  which  time  the  officers  succeeded  in  keeping  the  bank 
clear  of  a  crowd,  but  the  draft  upon  the  bank  caused  by  fright  continued 
until  about  the  lOth  of  January,  1873. 

Many  improvident  charters  were  granted  to  savings  banks  by  the 
legislature  of  this  State  between  1865  and  1873.  Many  of  these  banks 
were  continually  in  trouble,  which  brought  great  discredit  upon  the 
whole  system.  In  1873  a  commission  was  created  in  this  State  for  the 
purpose  of  revising  and  amending  the  constitution,  A  general  law 
had  been  many  times  proposed  for  the  government  of  savings  banks, 
but  a  general  law  would  not  prevent  the  legislature  from  granting 
special  charters.  Our  respected  townsman,  Hon.  Francis  Kernan,  was 
a  member  of  the  constitutional  commission  from  this  county.  He  had 
witnessed  the  trouble  following  the  granting  of  special  charters  in  the 
case  of  the  two  savings  banks  which  had  failed  in  Utica.  He  had  a 
strong  desire  to  make  the  savings  banks  in  the  State. safe  and  secure  in- 
stitutions, and  it  was  upon  the  suggestion  of  the  ofificers  of  this  bank 
that  Mr.  Kernan  secured  the  adoption  of  an  amendment  to  article  VIH. 
of  the  constitution,  making  it  the  duty  of  the  legislature  to  conform  all 
charters  of  savings  banks,  or  institutions  for  savings,  to  uniformity  of 
powers,  rights  and  liabilities,  and  prohibiting  the  granting  of  any  more 
special  jcharters.  This  amendment  was  subsequently  ratified  by  the 
people,  and  in  1875  the  legislature  passed  a  general  act  in  conformity 
to  the  requirements  of  the  amended  constitution,  since  which  no  special 
charters  have  been  granted,  and  to  this  general  act  all  former  charters 
were  made  to  conform. 

When  the  run  on  the  bank  in  December,  1872,  and  January,  1873, 
had  ceased,  the  trustees  found  that  the  bank  had  on  hand  in  its  vault 
about  $500,000  of  currency.  They  had  sold  and  converted  into  money  a 
portion  of  the  securities  of  the  bank,  in  order  to  be  able  to  meet  promptly 
the  demands  of  the  depositors.  How  and  in  what  way  this  money  was 
to  be  disposed  of  was  a  question  for  the  board  to  determine.     The  run 


UTICA  SA  VINGS  BANK.  589 

had  demonstrated  the  fact  that  the  bank  possessed  deposits  belonging 
to  persons  possessed  of  larger  means  than  those  for  whose  benefit  the 
bank  was  designed.  The  fact  that  the  People's  Bank  had  been  bidding 
for  the  business  had  doubtless  stimulated  the  officers  to  allow  deposits 
to  increase,  so  as  to  make  as  good  a  showing  of  business  as  the  active 
rival,  but,  fortunately,  the  bank,  in  its  desire  to  secure  business,  had  in 
no  way  lost  sight  of  the  absolute  security  of  its  investments. 

After  much  discussion  the  board  concluded  that  money  held  for  busi- 
ness or  commercial  use  should  not  be  deposited  in  the  Savings  bank; 
that  the  business  of  the  bank  should  be  confined  to  persons  who  could 
not  care  for  and  invest  their  funds,  but  would  be  likely  to  lose  their 
money  if  they  did  not  have  a  safe  place  to  deposit  it.  In  accordance 
with  the  policies  thus  declared,  notice  was  given  to  depositors  (who  were 
supposed  to  be  able  to  take  care  of  their  funds)  to  the  amount  of  $300,- 
000  that  they  must  withdraw  their  deposits,  and  that  no  more  interest 
or  dividends  would  be  allowed  on  their  accounts.  In  this  way  the  bank 
had  no  difficulty  in  making  a  safe  investment  of  the  currency  on  hand 
at  the  end  of  the  run,  by  paying  it  back  to  the  designated  depositors. 
Such  has  been  and  is  still  the  policy  of  the  bank.  The  board  has  re- 
peatedly given  a  like  notice  to  depositors  who  they  thought  did  not 
come  within  the  class  for  whom  the  bank  was  created,  and  for  whom  it 
should  be  continued. 

In  1851  the  store  on  the  east  side  of  Genesee  street,  near  the  corner 
of  Bleecker,  which  is  now  occupied  by  John  H.  Shehan,  was  put  in  use 
by  the  bank  and  was  thus  used  for  many  years.  This  was  sold  in  1869, 
and  the  lot  purchased  on  the  corner  of  Genesee  and  Fayette  streets, 
where  was  soon  erected  the  handsome  iron  building  in  which  the  in- 
stitution is  now  tenanted.  Following  is  a  complete  list  of  the  trustees 
and  officers  of  the  bank  from  its  organization  to  the  present  time  : 

JVusiees.— Thomas  Walker,  1839-63,  died ;  John  C.  Devereux,  1839-49,  died ;  Sam- 
uel Stocking,  1839-58,  died;  Joseph  Kirkland,  1839-44,  died;  Silas  D.  Ohilds,  1839-66, 
died;  Stalham  Williams,  1839-73,  died;  John  Savage,  1839-41,  resigned;  Thomas  H. 
Hubbard,  1839-57,  died;  John  H.  Ostrom,  1839-45,  died;  Hiram  Denio,  1839-71, 
died;  Charles  P.  Kirkland,  1839-50,  resigned;  James  McGregor,  1839-54,  resigned; 
Joshua M.  Church,  1839-61,  died;  William  Francis,  1839-49,  died  ;  Nicholas  Devereux, 
1839-56,  died;  Owen  O'Neil,  1841-75,  died;  William  Waloott,  1844-59,  died;  Francis 
Kernan,  1845-64,  rt-signed ;  E.  A.  Wetmore,  1849-73,  died;  Thomas  R.  Wallier, 
1849-75,  resigned  ;  Jame.s  Sayrc,  1854-77,  died  ;  John  C.  Dovereux,  2d,  1856-84,  died^ 


S90  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Samuel  G.  Wolcott,  1857-83,  died  ;  Charles  A.  Mann,  1858-60,  died  ;  Thomas  H.  Wood, 
1860-74,  resigned;  Truman  K.  Butler,  1860-88,  died;  Thomas  Buchanan,  1861-66, 
resigned;  Ward  Hunt,  1863-73,  resigned;  Alexander  S.Johnson,  1872-76,  resigned; 
Francis  G.  Wood,  1874-88,  resigned;  John  Carton,  1874-88,  died;  S.  S.  Lowery, 
1877-78,  resigned.  The  present  trustees  with  the  dates  of  their  election  are:  WilUiam 
J.  Bacon,  1850 ;  William  D.  Walcott,  1864 ;  Bphraim  Chamberlain,  1866 ;  Addison  C. 
ililler,  1867 ;  William  Kernan,  1873  ;  G.  Clarence  Churchill,  1875;  Alexander  T.  Good- 
win, 1876;  William  Blaikie,  1878;  Robert  Middleton,  1881;.  Edward  Curran,  1883; 
Philo  S.  Curtis,  1885  ;  Eufus  P.  Birdseye,  1888;  James  H.  Williams,  1888. 

Presidents. — John  C  Devereux,  Thomas  Walker,  ,  Hiram  Denio,  Edmund  A.  Wet- 
more,  William  J.  Bacon. 

Vice-presidents. — Thomas  Walker,  Hiram  Denio,  Silas  D.  Ohilds,  Thomas  R.  Walker, 
Truman  K.  Butler,  Ephraim  Chamberlain,  William  D.  Walcott. 

Treasurers. — 1839,  Stalham  Williams,   died  1873  ;  1878,  Addison  0.  Miller,  in  service. 

The  present  officers  of  this  bank  are  as  follows :  Ephraim  Chamber- 
lain, president;  Addison  C.  Miller,  first  vice-president;  Edward  Cur- 
ran, second  vice-president;  A.  C.  Miller,  treasurer  ;  Rufus  P.  Birdseye, 
secretary ;  R.  H.  Thompson,  teller ;  John  Welbon  and  M.  J.  Kernan, 
book-keepers.  The  report  of  January  i,  1891,  gives  the  assets  of  the 
bank  as  $5,484,799.29;  liabilities,  $5,000,091.76;  surplus  on  par  val- 
ues, $484,707.53. 

A.  D.  Mather  &  Co.  (Asaph  D.  Mather  and  Joshua  Mather)  estab- 
lished a  private  banking  house  in  Utica  in  March,  1866.  The  business 
was  thus  continued  until  the  death  of  A.  D.  Mather  on  the  8th  of  April, 
1880,  when  the  firm  of  Joshua  and  Charles  W.  Mather  was  constituted. 
The  business  continued  as  a  private  bank  until  November,  1890,  when 
the  institution  was  organized  as  a  State  bank,  with  a  capital  of  $200,- 
000.  Joshua  Mather  was  made  president ;  Charles  W.  Mather,  vice- 
president;  Edward  Bushinger,  cashier.  These  men  still  hold  their  re- 
spective offices.  For  two  years  a  building  which  stood  on  the  site  of 
the  present  bank,  corner  of  Genesee  and  Bleecker  streets,  was  occupied. 
In  1868  the  present  structure  was  erected. 


ONEIDA  GLASS  COMPANY.  591 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
MANUFACTURES. 

UTICA  during  much  of  its  history  has  not  been  noted  for  its  man- 
ufactures. Its  situation  near  the  head  of  Mohawk  navigation  and 
its  consequent  convenience  as  a  place  for  the  receipt  and  distribution  of 
goods  from  the  east,  and  the  return  of  the  products  of  agriculture  from  a 
rich  and  wide  reach  of  country  gave  it  a  start  as  a  fit  place  for  com- 
merce. And  in  commerce  its  people  were  largely  employed.  But  the 
lack  of  water  power  suitable  for  the  driving  of  factories  and  mills,  at  a 
period  when  such  power  was  wholly  relied  on,  forbade  that  its  industry 
and  its  capital  should  be  directed  to  manufacturing.  There  were  of 
course  the  usual  complement  of  shoe  shops,  tin  shops,  chair,  cabinet  and 
wagon- makers.  There  were  tanners,  iron  founders,  and  nail  makers. 
To  wider  and  more  aspiring  methods  of  gain,  and  pending  the  period 
of  the  more  developed  uses  of  steam,  Utica  was  by  its  site  wholly  denied. 
Among  its  business  men  there  has  never  been  a  lack  of  enterprise,  but 
its  manifestations  were  seen  in  the  conduct  of  each  one's  private  affairs. 
As  wealth  increased  other  fields  were  sought  wherein  to  invest  the  sur- 
plus products  of  industry  ;  and  with  thought  and  hands  busy  at  home, 
capitalists  have  added  to  their  store  while  helping  to  build  up  towns  at 
a  distance  in  which  they  had  small  cause  for  personal  concern.  Nearer 
home  they  shared  in  the  stock  of  some  of  the  mills  of  the  Sauquoit,  and 
when  in  i8lO  a  factory  was  projected  at  Oriskany,  over  one- third  of  its 
subscribers,  representing  one  fifth  of  the  capital,  were  dwellers  in  Utica, 
the  bulk  of  the  capital  having  been  obtained  at  the  east. 

The  earliest  instance  known  of  a  union  of  capital  to  further  a  manu- 
facturing enterprise  of  their  own,  was  one  formed  for  the  making  of 
glass,  which  was  incorporated  in  February,  1809.  It  was  known  as  the 
Oneida  Glass  Company,  and  had  a  capital  of  $100,000,  Its  establish- 
ment was  brought  about  through  the  stimulus  of  an  offer  of  co-opera- 
tion and  assistance  from  Lawrence  Schoolcraft,  then  superintendent  of 
a  company  near   Albany.     The  prominent   men  of  this  county  sub- 


592  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

scribed  liberally  to  tiie  stock,  and  the  factory  was  soon  in  operation  in 
Vernon.  The  first  directors  were  :  Watts  Sherman,  Abraham  Varick, 
John  Steward,  jr.,  Alex.  B.  Johnson,  and  Richard  Sanger.  The  works 
were  carried  on  with  moderate  success  until  August,  1836,  when  the 
company  closed  up  its  affairs. 

Encouraged  by  the  temporary  success  of  the  Oneida  Glass  Factory, 
Peter  Bours  now  took  the  lead  in  getting  up,  in  18 10,  a  company  to 
manufacture  crown  glass,  which  it  was  proposed  should  be  superior  to 
any  made  in  the  country.  With  him  were  associated  Benjamin  Walker, 
John  Steward,  jr.,  Hugh  Cunningham,  John  Hooker,  Seth  Dwight,  and 
others.  A  special  charter  was  obtained  from  the  legislature  of  1809-10, 
and  a  capital  stock  was  raised  of  $250,000.  A  tract  of  land  was  bought 
some  three  miles  north  of  Utica,  in  the  part  of  Deerfield  now  known  as 
Marcy.  In  the  course  of  the  ensuing  season  suitable  buildings  were 
put  up,  workmen  were  obtained  from  Boston  (the  only  place  where 
crown  glass  was  then  made),  and  the  manufacture  was  begun.  Within 
a  year  the  stock  had  been  called  in.  Bours  seemed  to  carry  all  he 
undertook.  By  continuous  boasting  the  new  stock  became  a  kind  of 
South  Sea  bubble  and  sales  were  reported  at  a  hundred  per  cent.,  though 
such  sales  were  probably  fictitious.  A  gentleman  who  visited  the 
works  in  18 13  was  informed  that  the  expenses  were  $30,000  annually, 
the  value  of  glass  made  $50,000;  amount  of  stock  $100,000.  That 
the  works  of  the  company  were  not  in  reality  very  productive,  and 
were,  in  fact,  for  a  time  suspended,  we  infer  from  the  announcement  of 
Mr.  Bours,  the  superintendent,  made  in  February,  1814,  a  few  months 
after  the  purchase  of  790  additional  acres  of  land,  to  the  effect  that  the 
factory  was  again  in  operation  and  that  orders  are  received  on  the  prem- 
ises, or  at  the  store  of  Luke  Devereux.  The  company  struggled  on  a 
few  years  longer,  but  the  renewed  efforts  proved  futile  ;  it  was  found 
impossible  to  manufacture  crown  glass  which  would  compete  with  that 
of  English  workmanship.  Finally,  on  the  22d  of  March,  1822,  the  com- 
pany leased  their  factory  for  four  years  to  their  predecessors,  the  Oneida 
Glass  Company.  A  good  deal  of  money  was  sunk  in  the  enterprise 
and  the  losers  were  numerous. 

The  few  early  manufactures  managed  by  individual  skill  I  proceed  to 
notice  somewhat  in   the.  order  of  their   establishment.     In  1820  Seth 


EARL  V  FO  UNDRIES—  POTTER  Y.  593 

Peckham,  from  Troy,  started  the  making  of  plows  and  other  implements. 
He  was  located  on  Catherine  street,  where,  soon  after,  Amos  Peckham 
was  his  partner.  Seven  years  later  he  sold  his  factory  to  his  enter- 
prising nephew,  John  S.  Peckham,  who  continued  it  until  1835.  Up  to 
this  date  the  business  had  been  confined  to  the  manufacture  of  plows. 
In  that  year  J.  S.  and  Merritt  began  the  casting  of  stoves.  The  establish- 
ment which  is  a  large  and  important  one  is  now  in  the  hands  of 
Merritt  and  S.  Townshend  Peckham,  son  of  John.  The  casting  is  done 
on  the  block  bounded  by  Broad,  Catherine  and  Third  streets,  and  the 
canal  basin,  covering  an  area  of  2,400  square  feet.  The  products  are 
stoves,  ranges,  and  agricultural  implements. 

Another  foundry  was  started  in  1822  by  Ephraim  Hart,  who  soon 
had  as  a  partner  Andrew  S.  Pond,  and  next  his  son  Henry  R.  Hart. 
With  the  latter  was  John  Dagwell.  It  is  still  perpetuated,  being  now 
managed  by  H.  Gilbert  Hart,  grandson  of  Ephraim.  Beside  other  cast- 
ings, he  aow  makes  hot  air  furnaces,  and  has  an  output  of  about  $120,- 

000. 

Mention  has  heretofore  been  made  of  the  attempted  use  of  the  Mo- 
hawk River  as  a  source  of  power,  and  the  construction  of  a  mill  thereon 
in  1823.  The  second  grist-mill,  known  as  the  city  mill,  which  was  to 
be  supplied  with  force  from  the  waste  water  of  the  canal,  was  built  not 
long  afterward  by  Rutger  B.  Miller,  and  was  run  by  William  Cattell, 
and  later  by  Ira  D.  Hopkins  and  his  son  Charles  H.  A  stone  mill  for 
grinding  wheat  was  erected  in  1833. 

The  premises  where  the  pottery  stands  were  originally  occupied  by 
two  firms,  both  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  pottery,  Justin  Campbell 
beginning  in  1826,  and  Messrs.  Brayton,  Kellogg  &  Doolittle  who  be 
ganthe  following  year,but  were  soon  succeeded  bySamuel  H.Addington. 
Noah  White,  at  first  employed  by  the  latter,  soon  leased  it,  and  ere  long 
got  possession  of  the  plant.  By  him,  his  son  Nicholas  A.,  and  the  son 
of  the  latter,  it  has  been  continued  to  the  present  time.  It  is  now 
known  as  the  Central  New  York  Pottery,  Charles  N.  White  being  the 
general  manager.  The  building  was  quite  small  at  first,  but  building 
after  building  has  been  added,  until  now  there  are  several,  occupying 
an  area  of  400  feet  front  on  Whitesboro  street,  and  extending  back  to 
the  Erie  Canal.     The  goods  manufactured  up  to   1840  were  common 

75 


594  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

stoneware  ;  then  fire  brick  were  added,  and  later  sewer  pipe.  At  pres- 
ent there  are  also  made  the  Flemish  goods  in  stoneware.  There  are 
sixty  employees. 

The  manufacture  of  buhr- millstones  was  commenced  by  Alfred  Mun- 
son  in  1823,  on  the  corner  of  Hotel  and  Liberty  streets,  in  the  base- 
ment of  the  Kirkland  block.  He  soon  removed  to  the  east  side  of 
Washington  street,  where  it  is  crossed  by  the  canal.  Martin  Hart  be- 
came associated  with  Mr.  Munson  in  1830,  under  the  firm  name  of 
Munson  &  Hart.  This  continued  for  a  number  of  years,  when  the  firm 
dissolved,  and  Alexander  B.  Hart  (a  son  of  Martin)  and  Edmund 
Munson  (a  nephew  of  Alfred)  became  associated  under  the  name  of 
Hart  &  Munson.  Edmund  Munson  has  already  been  noticed  as  an  ex- 
cellent mechanic  and  inventor,  and  under  his  direction  the  business  rap- 
idly increased.  The  firm  of  Hart  &  Munson  did  an  extensive  business, 
employing  at  times  as  many  as  100  hands.  In  1868  this  firm  dissolved 
and  a  new  one  was  formed,  under  the  title  of  Munson  Brothers.  Sim- 
ilar manufactures  have  since  been  established  in  Buffalo,  Indianapolis, 
Richmond,  and  other  localities,  creating  competition.  The  raw  mater- 
ial (French  buhr-stone)  comes  from  a  locality  near  Paris,  France,  and 
is  imported  through  New  York  houses.  The  trade  covers  all  parts  of 
the  United  States  and  Canada.  In  1888  a  foundry  was  added  to  the 
plant,  an  unused  portion  of  the  west  building  being  utilized  for  this  pur- 
pose. The  firm  employ  at  present  fifty  hands,  and  manufacture  porta 
ble  grain  mills,  roller  mills,  water  wheels,  and  all  kind  of  corn  and  flour 
mill  machinery.  Also  dealers  in  German,  English,  and  domestic 
cements,  plaster,  etc. 

Another  long  continued  foundry  and  machine  shop  known  for  many 
years  as  the  Vulcan  Works,  and  now  as  the  Utica  Steam  Engine  and 
iJoiler  Works,  was  erected  in  1832  by  Philo  C.  Curtiss,  father  of  the  pres 
ent  proprietor.  Asa  machine  shop  it  was  run  for  about  three  years  by 
Mr.  Curtiss  when  he  failed  and  the  property  passed  out  of  his  hands. 
Its  successive  occupants  since  that  time  have  been  numerous;  those  of 
longest  duration  having  been  Pond,  Higham  &  Co.  Here  were  cast 
the  wheels  for  the  first  passenger- car  placed  on  the  Utica  and  Schenec- 
tady Railroad,  D.  A.  Lyons,  a  Utica  carriage  maker,  having  the  contract 
for  its  woodwork.     The  establishment  came  again  into  the  hands  of  Mr. 


LUMBER  DEALERS.  595 

Curtiss  in  1 86 1.  A  year  later  Philo  S.  Curtiss  bought  out  his  father  and 
has  since  conducted  the  works.  The  plant  covers  an  area  of  350  x  260 
feet  between  Whitesboro  street  and  the  Erie  Canal.  From  its  outset  it 
has  been  devoted  to  the  making  of  machinery  in  general,  to  the  furnish- 
ing of  boilers  and  other  wrought  iron  work,  and  to  the  casting  of  a 
wide  range  of  foundry  work.  It  has  always  been  operated  on  these 
lines,  and  today  with  largely  increased  facilities. 

Not  far  from  the  Vulcan  works  there  was  running  in  1828  what  was 
known  as  the  "  dog  nail"  factory.  The  bellows  were  operated  by  a  dog 
moving  on  a  wheel,  and  by  this  aid  Mr.  Masseth,  the  German  proprie- 
tor, turned  out  a  good  article  of  wrought  nails.  Though  it  was  but  a 
small  affair,  it  excited  curiosity  at  a  time  when  the  service  of  dogs  in 
mechanical  purposes  was  by  no  means  so  common  as  among  the  farm- 
ers of  the  present  day,  especially  in  dairy  districts. 

It  is  natural  to  presume  that  in  a  new  and  growing  community  the 
need  of  lumber  for  the  construction  of  houses,  furniture,  etc  ,  should 
call  for  persons  prepared  to  minister  to  this  necessity,  yet  it  is  not  be- 
fore about  1830  that  we  know  assuredly  of  any  one  who  made  a  dis- 
tinct business  of  dealing  in  lumber.  It  was  begun  about  this  time  by 
Dr.  Jonas  Fay,  who  had  previously  been  a  practicing  physician,  on 
ground  adjoining  the  Erie  Canal  near  the  place  of  its  subsequent  inter- 
section with  the  Chenango.  A  rival  dealer  soon  appeared  in  the  person 
of  Joshua  M.  Church,  who  had  small  yards  on  Pine  street.  Charles 
Downer  was  also  among  the  early  dealers  in  lumber.  Beginning  at  the 
corner  of  the  Chenango  Canal  and  Cooper  street  his  yard  was  next  on 
Fayette  street,  and  later  on  the  corner  of  Court  and  the  Chenango. 
At  one  time  or  other  Mr.  Downer  is  said  to  have  owned  and  operated 
every  lumber  establishment  in  Utica.  In  1844,  while  he  was  located 
on  Fayette  street,  he  took  into  partnership  Charles  C.  Kellogg.  At  a 
subsequent  date  his  partner  was  his  son,  Edward  F.  Downer,  to  whom 
he  gave  up  the  business  in  1877. 

But  it  is  not  solely  in  the  selling  of  lumber  in  its  raw  state  that  these 
and  other  dealers  have  been  engaged ;  they  planed  it  and  likewise  con- 
verted it  into  various  objects  of  utility.  It  has  been  already  mentioned 
in  our  notice  of  Chauncey  Palmer  that  he  shared  with  Lewis  Lawrence 
in  the  running  of  the  planing-mill  that  had  been  put  in  operation  by 


596  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Philo  C.  Curtiss.  In  1834  they  began  the  making  of  window  sash,  doors, 
blinds,  etc.,  by  the  aid  of  steam.  These  articles  had  already  been  pro- 
duced, by  the  assistance  of  a  horse  to  drive  his  machinery,  by  Truman  B. 
Dixon,  son-in-law  of  J.  M.  Church.  About  1849  Mr.  Lawrence  bought 
out  his  partner,  and  in  1857  sold  the  business  to  Downer  &  Kellogg. 
They  remained  together  until  1877  when  Mr.  Downer  withdrew.  It  has 
been  continued  by  Mr.  Kellogg,  who  has  had  in  turn  two  different  part- 
ners. The  plant,  which  was  smaller  at  first,  now  consists  of  a  large 
manufactory  with  work  shop,  engine-house,  and  sheds,  133  feet  on  Sen- 
eca street,  and  extending  through  to  Washington  street,  where  there  is 
a  frontage  of  206  feet  and  adjacent  to  the  Erie  Canal.  They  have  also 
piling  ground  near  the  gas  works  and  four  acres  for  the  same  purpose 
in  West  Utica.  They  employ  140  hands,  sell  1,000,000  feet  per  month, 
besides  what  is  used  in  the  mill,  and  their  products  go  to  all  parts  of  the 
country. 

Edward  F.  Downer,  in  partnership  with  his  son,  has  a  plant  at  32-34 
Canal  street,  occupying  five  acres  of  land,  and  they  make  the  same  arti- 
cles as  the  above. 

A  planing-mill  started  in  1861  by  Metcalf  &  Daring  is  now  in  the 
hands  of  a  company  with  a  capital  of  $40,000.  The  premises  cover  the 
block  bounded  by  Culver,  Franklin,  Fulton  streets  and  the  Erie  Canal. 
The  articles  they  manufacture  are  like  those  of  the  preceding,  and  their 
annual  sales  amount  to  5 ,000,000  feet  of  lumber.  They  are  known  as 
the  Utica  Planing  Mills  Company. 

Besides  the  above  there  are  at  present  the  lumber  yards  of  R.  J. 
Knox,  Jonathan  Goodier  and  Joseph  Hollingworth. 

While  sketching  the  career  of  Dr.  Theodore  Pomeroy  I  made  men- 
tion of  the  manufacture  of  oil  cloth  begun  by  J.  D.  Edwards,  but  soon 
falling  into  the  hands  of  Dr.  Pomeroy  and  Thomas  R.  Walker.  This 
manufacture  started  in  1832,  has  for  sixty  years  been  steadily  contin- 
ued almost  on  its  original  site,  and  it  still  remains  the  only  factory  of 
its  kind  west  of  Lansingburgh.  Its  management  has  to  some  extent 
been  changed,  and  the  machinery  in  use  greatly  improved,  much  of 
what  was  once  done  by  hand  being  now  effected  by  power  ;  but  the  fac- 
tory is  still  in  motion  under  the  direction  of  Theodore  and  George  D. 
Pomeroy,  son  and  grandson  of  the  original  proprietors.     They  occupy 


TOBACCO  MANUFACTURE  —  SOAP  FACTOR  Y.  597 

extensive  buildings  and  grounds  on  the  west  side  of  Cornelia  street  and 
reaching  through  from  Columbia  to  Cooper. 

The  manufacture  of  tobacco  and  cigars  in  Utica  began  about  the  year 
1835,  first  in  Pine  street  and  next  at  35  Liberty  street,  and  was  started 
by  a  man  named  Tomlinson.  He  continued  in  the  business  only  a 
short  time,  selling  out  to  Messrs.  Leslie  A.  Warnick  and  John  Bryan. 
This  was  in  1839.  Several  men  started  small  concerns  soon  after  this, 
but  none  of  them  had  permanency,  so  that  Warnick  &  Bryan  may  be 
said  to  have  been  the  pioneers  in  cutting  tobacco.  Messrs.  Warnick  & 
Bryan  removed  to  112  Genesee  street  from  Liberty  street  about  1845, 
and  occupied  that  location  for  several  years,  when  the  firm  came  to  86 
Genesee  street.  In  1852  Mr.  Bryan  was  succeeded  by  John  G.  Brown, 
who  has  been  in  partnership  with  Mr.  Warnick  since  that  time.  Dur- 
ing its  early  years  the  firm  employed  few  hands,  but  recently  about  fifty 
hands  are  employed.  They  manufacture  all  grades  and  styles  of  to- 
bacco and  cigars,  their  trade  extending  beyond  the  limits  of  the  State. 

Over  thirty  other  establishments  within  the  bounds  of  the  city  are 
now  engaged  in  this  line  of  business.  To  notice  a  few  only  might  be 
deemed  invidious,  to  enumerate  all  would  be  impossible. 

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  making  of  soap  and  candles  as  a  sep- 
arate industry  of  Utica  had  its  origin  in  the  old  market  house  which 
had  been  the  cause  of  much  serious  disagreement  between  the  near  and 
remoter  dwellers  about  Bagg's  Square  in  18 12  and  18 14.  In  compli- 
ance with  a  resolution  passed  by  the  trustees  of  18 14  declaring  in  its 
preamble  that  this  market  was  "  situate  in  a  very  improper  place,"  and 
determining  that  the  "removal  of  the  same  would  be  of  public  utility," 
it  was  removed  to  the  north  side  of  Water  street  near  Division.  In  this 
market  house  the  manufacture  was  begun  about  1830  by  two  men 
named  Boyd  and  Chamberlain.  Mr.  Chamberlain  having  died  in  the 
fall  of  1832,  the  fixtures  and  rights  of  the  surviving  partner  were  bought 
by  John  and  Stephen  Thorn  who  resumed  and  continued  the  business. 
Together  they  remained  until  July,  1835,  ^nd  M""-  John  Thorn  two  years 
longer.  Taking  Isaac  Maynard  into  partnership  Mr.  Thorn  removed 
in  September,  1837,  to  a  new  building  across  on  the  south  side  of 
Water  street,  and  here  they  carried  on  the  business  until  about  1875, 
when  they  gave  it  up  to  William  Heath  and  Joshua  Tavender.     Mean- 


598  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

time  Benjamin  Cahoon  had  in  1839  set  up  a  similar  factory  in  West 
Utica,  and  was  succeeded  in  1845  by  a  firm  of  which  John  S.  Kirk,  late 
of  Chicago,  was  the  leading  party,  Both  Thorn  and  Maynard  were  with 
him-in  the  partnership  until  i860,  while  Mr.  Kirk  remained  here,  and 
twenty  years  after  he  went  to  Chicago.  The  factory  on  Division  street 
has  of  late  been  conducted  by  J.  Tavender  &  Son,  who  have  a  melting 
house  on  Kiel's  Creek  in  Deerfield.  As  the  lessened  use  of  candles  has 
narrowed  their  business  their  attention  has  been  principally  given  to  the 
making  of  soap. 

In  the  former  part  of  this  book  it  has  been  stated  that  the  manufac- 
ture and  sale  of  ready-made  clothing  was  the  business  of  a  few  of  our 
early  merchants,  a  business  which  was  then  and  has  for  the  most  part 
since  been  highly  profitable.  It  was  begun  by  James  B.  Martin  about 
1836,  and  continued  by  the  brothers  Yates,  whose  sister  Martin  married. 
The  establishment  of  R.  V.  Yates,  Nos.  100  and  102  Genesee  street,  was 
sold  in  185  s  to  Henry  J.  Wood.  The  latter  after  continuing  it  about  two 
years  sold  it  back  to  Mr.  Yates.  From  him  it  descended  to  his  sons, 
and  thence,  after  various  changes  of  proprietorship,  it  passed  to  the  pres- 
ent firm  of  William  Taylor  &  Co.  They  employ  300  hands  besides 
cutters  and  spongers. 

Henry  J.  Wood,  after  the  purchase  of  the  stock  of  his  employers, 
conducted  manufacture  alone  for  twenty  years.  In  1875  he  sold  to 
James  Rockwell  and  H.  L.  White.  The  latter  having  withdrawn,  it  has 
since  been  carried  on  by  Rockwell  and  his  later  partners  Rhodes  &  Mil- 
ler, and  has  been  removed  from  its  former  place  on  Catherine  street 
to  25  and  27  John  street.  The  firm  employs  450  hands,  has  a  capital 
of  $100,000,  and  sells  annually  $300,000  worth  of  goods. 

A  house  which  has  succeeded  to  that  of  Charles  A.  Yates  is  that  of 
Roberts,  Butler  &  Co.  Mr.  Yates's  first  partner  was  Matthew  Griffith, 
who  after  the  death  of  Mr.  Yates  united  with  himself  James  Roberts 
and  J.  Milton  Butler.  Both  Mr.  Griffith  and  Mr.  Roberts  are  now 
deceased.  Of  the  latter  a  notice  will  be  found  in  the  biographical  de- 
partment. The  personnel  of  the  firm  has  changed  from  time  to  time, 
though  the  house  continues  to  exist  as  a  large  and  prosperous  one,  em- 
ploying 800  makers  of  men's  and  children's  clothing,  besides  cutters  and 
trimmers. 


.^- 


o-^-o^-t^ 


CLOTHING  MANUFACTURES.  599 

The  founder  of  another  house  in  this  line  was  Matthew  Griffith,  who 
withdrew  from  that  of  Roberts  &  Butler  in  1881,  erected  a  large  four 
story  brick  building  on  Main  street  and  soon  took  in  a  partner.  He 
died  April  16,  1883,  when  a  new  firm  was  created  which  continued 
manufacturing  clothing  until  1888.  After  it  closed  the  fixtures  were 
bought  by  H.  P.  Grouse  and  Edward  Brandegee.  These  have  entered 
upon  an  extensive  and  rapidly  growing  business,  employing  220  hands 
within  the  building  and  very  many  outside. 

A  clothing  manufacture  was  begun  in  1844  by  Thomas  L.  Kingsley, 
which  is  still  continued  by  his  son,  Gharles  G.  Kingsley. 

The  beginning  of  another  clothing  house  dates  from  the  departure 
from  the  city  of  P.  V.  Kellogg  &  Go.,  already  noted  as  manufacturers 
here,  and  afterwards  in  Ghicago.  Owen,  Pixley  &  Go.,  then  just  organ- 
ized, purchased  the  fixtures  of  the  retiring  firm,  engaged  their  workmen 
and  began  in  Franklin  Square  where  Kellogg  &  Go.  had  been  estab- 
lished. In  1885  the  firm  dissolved,  and  Mr.  Pixley  started  a  business 
of  his  own.  .  They  were  then  located  in  the  Ballou  Block  at  the  lower  end 
of  John  street.  Here  the  Messrs.  Owen  employ  nearly  900  hands,  have 
a  capital  of  $800,000,  and  an  annual  output  which  approximates 
$900,000. 

Two  years  after  Pixley  began  independently,  his  son  was  admitted  to 
partnership,  and  the  firm  became  H.  D.  Pixley  &  Son.  They  occupy  a 
five  story  building  in  the  Ballou  Block,  and  as  annex  a  portion  of  the 
old  Washington  Hall,  the  power  being  supplied  by  cable  from  the  main 
building.     They  employ  600  hands. 

The  next  year  after  the  starting  of  Owen  &  Pixley,  was  begun  another 
large  clothing  house  that  is  now  known  as  H.  H.  Gooper  &  Qo.  At  first 
on  the  corner  of  Broad  and  Genesee,  it  was  three  years  later  removed  to 
John  street,  corner  of  Gatherine.  Mr.  Gooper  has  had  various  associ- 
ates, Henry  R.  Judson  and  John  Gummings,  Jr.,  being  still  of  the  firm. 
It  calls  into  requisition  the  labor  of  700  to  800  men  and  women,  and 
makes  sales  amounting  to  upwards  of  $300,000,  its  market  being  in  the 
northern  and  western  States. 

Other  firms  making  like  the  preceding  men's,  boys'  and  children's 
clothing  are  those  of  McGall  &  Go.,  Galder  &  Co.,  and  I.  H.  Howe  & 
Co.,  established    successively    in   1881,    1888    and    1889.     The    num- 


6oo  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ber  of  hands  they  employ  ranges  from  150  to  350.  Nearly  all  of 
the  above  are  prosperous  houses.  They  are  furnished  with  engines 
driven  by  steam,  have  in  use  the  most  improved  machines,  and  disperse 
their  goods  all  over  the  United  States. 

Before  proceeding  to  consider  the  results  of  the  awakened  zeal  for 
manufactures  which  began  to  show  itself  about  the  year  1845,  and  induced 
the  people  of  Utica  to  unite  in  large  undertakings  to  further  them,  it  re- 
mains to  note  a  few  more  private  establishments  which  were  doubtless 
wholly  independent  of  such  extraneous  influence.  One  of  these  was  the 
stove  and  machine  foundry  of  Joel  C.  Bailey  who  bought  out  Chester 
Dexter  and  began  in  1842.  Another  was  the  foundry  for  the  casting 
of  hot  air  furnaces  by  John  Carton.  These.have  been  alluded  to  in  the 
notices  of  Mr.  Bailey  and  of  Mr.  Carton.  Of  the  former  a  further  account 
will  be  given  in  the  biography  of  Russell  Wheeler,  partner  and  succes- 
sor of  Mr.  Bailey.  The  invention  and  making  of  furnaces  was  estabhshed 
by  John  Carton  in  1847,  ^'^^  continued  until  his  death  in  188 1.  It  has 
since  been  conducted  by  a  stock  company,  incorporated-  in  1883,  with 
working  capital  estimated  at  $125,000,  whose  works  are  on  Rome  street, 
extending  through  to  the  canal.  They  busy  125  hands  in  making  the 
Carton  furnace,  of  which  there  are  several  varieties.  The  company 
consists  of  V.  B.  Stewart  and  two  sons  of  Mr.  Carton.  Yet  another 
concern  was  that  of  A.  J.  Williams  for  making  shuttles,  heddles  and 
other  manufacturers'  necessities,  which  was  removed  here  from  Oriskany 
in  1841,  and  carried  on  by  Mr.  Williams  until  near  the  close  of  his  life. 
Now  much  increased  in  the  superiority  as  well  as  number  of  articles 
made,  as  well  as  in  those  produced  elsewhere  but  kept  for  supply,  it  is 
carried  on.  by  James  H.  Williams,  his  son. 

Abutting  on  the  rear  of  the  foregoing  is  the  house  of  I.  A.  Williams 
&  Co.,  I  Blandina  street.  This  house  was  founded  in  1851,  by  Irvin 
A.  Williams,  who  invented  the  locomotive  headlight  which  has  come 
into  general  use,  his  first  patent  being  granted  him  in  1854.  The  pres- 
ent firm  name  was  taken  in  1881,  when  Charles  I.  Williams,  son  of 
I.  A  ,  became  a  partner.  The  plant  of  the  firm  comprises  a  five 
story  brick  building  at  the  above  location.  The  firm  has  a  branch 
house,  PhcEnix  building,  Chicago.  It  employs  twenty- five  men,  and 
manufactures  exclusively    locomotive   head-lights,  i,6oo  being  turned 


ORGAN  BUILDING,  ETC.  6oi 

out  annually.     The  sales    extend  throughout  the  world  wherever  the 
American  type  of  locomotives  is  used. 

Organ  making  was  begun  in  1852  by  A.  Andrews  in  the  rear  of  the 
Exchange  building,  the  entrance  being  on  Charlotte  street.  Continued 
by  him  and  his  son  George,  it  was  subsequently  carried  on  in  a  factory 
erected  for  the  purpose  on  Seymour  avenue.  In  1854  J.  G.  Marklove, 
who  had  served  an  apprenticeship  to  organ  building  in  London,  was 
employed  by  Mr.  Andrews  to  voice  his  instruments,  and  he  soon  be- 
came one  of  the  firm.  On  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Andrews  he  engaged 
in  the  business  for  himself,  which  he  continued,  at  first  on  the  corner  of 
Bleecker  and  Academy  streets,  and  afterward  at  60  John  street,  until 
his  death.     There  it  is  still  continued  by  his  son,  C.  F.  Marklove. 

The  effect  of  the  canal  on  the  growth  and  business  of  Utica  was 
marked.  It  quickened  the  impulse  and  doubled  the  population  in  ten 
years  from  its  completion.  Something  later  the  popular  spirit  of  enter- 
prise again  broke  forth  in  the  prospect  of  a  railroad  to  Albany.  This 
would  connect  them  more  closely  with  the  seaboard  and  metropolis 
and  vastly  increase  their  commercial  facilities  ;  would  make  their  city 
the  last  reach  of  easy  transit  westward  and  an  emporium  for  the  whole 
outlying  trade.  It  was  a  prospect  which  might  well  awaken  to  exer- 
tion. Subscriptions  to  the  stock  of  the  company  flowed  in  so  freely 
that  only  a  part  of  them  could  be  taken,  and  the  road  was  com- 
pleted in  1836.  For  a  time  the  people  of  Utica  realized  all  they  had 
hoped  for;  reaching  down  to  the  great  mart  of  commerce,  they  grasped 
with  one  hand  its  riches,  and  with  the  other  exacted  a  toll  from  seekers 
less  favored  who  were  living  beyond  them.  But  such  exclusive  gains 
were  of  short  duration ;  the  gates  were  opened  anew,  and  barely  three 
years  elapsed  when  the  railroad  was  finished  to  Syracuse.  Thence  it 
went  on  extending  and  three  years  later  was  opened  to  Buffalo.  Utica 
was  now  a  mere  point  on  the  line.  Though  its  westward  connections 
were  greatly  increased,  its  hold  on  their  custom  was  lost  and  its  trade 
restricted  to  a  narrow  circle  about  it,  or  at  most  extended  northward  and 
southward.  Still,  with  the  rich  farming  lands  of  Oneida  and  contigu- 
ous counties  and  the  multiplied  industry  upon  them ;  with  the  busy 
mill  wheels  on  the  streams  of  the  neighborhood,  and  the  diligent,  eco- 
nomical habits  of  its  home  population,  the  city  was  steadily  growing. 
76 


6o2  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Between  1842  and  1845  ^ve  hundred  houses  were  built;  rents  were  re- 
duced, and  provisions  were  cheap  and  abundant.  But  against  this  was 
the  fact  that  the  trades  and  professions  were  all  full,  the  profits  of  the 
nierchants  were  not  what  they  had  been,  and  occasional  forced  sales  of 
bankrupts  among  them  made  those  of  their  rivals  still  less.  To  men  of 
sagacity  it  soon  became  apparent  that  this  town,  without  seaport  and 
shipping,  without  mines  or  minerals,  and  which  relied  on  its  internal 
trade  with  that  which  was  drawn  from  a  fertile  but  limited  district,, could 
never  attain  a  high  degree  of  importance.  This  consideration  impelled 
the  leading  minds  of  the  town  toward  movements  which,  concurring 
with  incidents  that  happened  near  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking, 
drew  attention  to  the  needs  of  the  place  and  to  efforts  to  promote  its 
advancement.  These  movements  had  in  view  the  organization  of  com- 
panies for  establishing  factories.  From  such  signs  as  appear  on  the 
surface,  the  first  who  essayed  to  awaken  the  town  to  the  need  of  a 
change  in  the  current  of  business,  and  to  plead  for  home  manufactures 
as  a  field  in  which  all  should  take  a  part,  was  the  the  late  B.  F.  Cooper. 
But  though  his  pen  gave  early  impulse  to  the  work,  he  was  not  alone 
in  conceiving  it,  nor  acted  without  counsel  with  those  who  concurred  in 
promoting  its  further  advance.  As  mouth-piece  of  other  prominent 
men  he  wrote  in  1845  a  series  of  papers  for  the  Daily  Gazette,  which 
appeared  every  week  in  July  and  continued  at  intervals  afterward.  In 
these  he  set  forth  the  present  condition  of  Utica  and  its  probable  fate  if 
left  to  go  on  without  an  effort  to  revive  it ;  discussed  the  fitness  of  the 
place  as  a  site  for  manufactures,  the  kinds  of  manufactures  which  would 
probably  succeed  ;  the  power  that  would  be  the  most  available,  com- 
paring water  with  the  then  little  used  steam,  and  all  the  other  features 
of  the  subject.  The  last  of  his  articles  appeared  in  October.  In  this  he 
urged  his  townsmen  to  subscribe  to  a  paper  which  it  seems  was  already 
in  progress,  seeking  the  means  wherewith  to  build  and  conduct  a  large 
cotton  mill.  For  this  object  enough  had  been  subscribed  before  the 
winter  closed  in  to  render  the  project  a  probable  success. 

In  this  connection  we  must  refer  to  a  circumstance  which  doubtless 
had  an  influence  in  giving  force  to  the  arguments  used.  By  the  returns 
of  the  census  of  1845,  the  people  °f  Utica  were  startled  to  find  that 
they  had  already  gone  backward  in  numbers,  that   the  population  was 


UTICA  STEAM  WOOLEN  MILLS.  603 

nearly  six  hundred  short  of  what  it  had  been  five  years  earlier  ;  and  al- 
though it  was  shortly  discovered  that  there  had  been  an  error  in  the 
census  report  which  indicated  this  unwelcome  condition,  and  that  there 
had  in  reality  been  no  actual  decline,  yet  the  importance  attached  to 
the  pubHshed  returns,  the  fear  of  some  possible  truth  in  their  evidence, 
and  the  mortification  of  having  the  decline  of  Utica  published  abroad, 
awoke  a  home  spirit  and  assisted  to  further  the  projects  for  factories, 
both  woolen  and  cotton,  which  now  busied  the  town.  This  led  to  a 
willingness  on  the  part  of  those  who  had  money  to  spare,  to  invest  it 
in  manufactures.  Meetings  were  held  and  their  practicability  freely 
discussed.  To  be  assured  of  their  benefit,  and  above  all,  to  learn 
whether  water  or  steam  was  the  most  advisable  agent  to  use,  a  com- 
mittee of  three  prominent  men  was  selected  to  visit  mills  in  the  east 
and  obtain  the  information  desired.  The  committee  comprised  Spen- 
cer Kellogg,  A.  S.  Pond  and  E.  A.  Graham.  Their  report  was  briefly 
to  the  elfect  that  such  mills  were  largely  profitable  and  that  steam  was 
the  most  desirable  source  of  power.  This  report  settled  all  doubts  and 
increased  the  desire  to  invest.  Within  a  few  months,  beside  the  com- 
pany first  in  the  field,  two  others  were  formed  and  the  capital  raised  to 
enter  on  the  manufacture  of  woolens,  while  at  the  same  time  the  pre- 
paratory steps  were  taken  which  led  to  the  extensive  manufacture  of 
cotton  goods,  as  hereafter  described. 

There  was  organized  at  this  time  a  company  with  a  nominal  capital 
of  $100,000,  for  the  manufacture  of  woolen  goods;  its  tijle  was  the 
Utica  Steam  Woolen -Mills.  Sufficient  of  the  amount  was  subscribed 
to  enable  the  company  to  be  incorporated  February  27,  1846.  The 
first  directors  were :  Andrew  S.  Pond,  president ;  Samuel  Churchill, 
secretary;  Thomas  Colling,  treasurer;  Dolphas  Skinner,  Nicholas 
Devereux,  George  F.  Taylor,  Benjamin  Cahoon,  Hamilton  Spencer, 
and  C.  Goodrich.  William  C.  Churchill,  was  the  agent.  The  buildings 
were  erected  in  1847,  o"  Columbia  street  and  Nail  Creek,  where  they 
are  still  standing.  The  machinery  consisted  of  twenty- seven  carding 
machines,  forty-four  looms,  264  spindles,  and  an  engine  of  fifty  horse- 
power. About  100  hands  were  employed,  and  300,000  pounds  of  wool 
were  consumed  annually,  making  150,000  yards  of  broadcloths.  Dur- 
ing a  long  course  of  years  the  company  reaped  a  full  share  of  success. 


6o4  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  mill  became  the  property  of  A.  T.  Stewart,  of  New  York  city,  in 
1869,  under  a  judgment  sale.  Mr.  Stewart  made  improvements  and  ad- 
ditions and  operated  the  mill  until  his  death.  His  partners  continued 
the  business  until  December,  1877,  since  which  date  the  mill  has  been 
closed. 

The  company  known  as  the  Utica  Globe  Mill,  with  like  ample  equip- 
ments, followed  a  year  after  the  former,  its  buildings  being  up  and  its  ma- 
chinery in  motion  near  the  close  of  1847.  Pond,  Higham  &  Co. 
constructed  the  engine.  Puffer  &  Co.  the  looms  and  three  sets  of  cards, 
Bagg  &  Roberts  completing  the  rest  of  them.  Messrs.  Munson,  Faxton, 
William  J.  Bacon,  Martin  Hart,  Horatio  Seymour,  Hamilton  and  Julius  A. 
Spencer,  Andrew  S.  Pond,  and  Palmer  V.  Kellogg  were  its  first  board  of 
directors,  and  Samuel  Churchill,  its  agent.  Its  first  eight  years  of  ex- 
periment were  not  years  of  success.  The  company  failed,  lost  the  whole 
of  its  capital,  and  was  compelled  to  assess  dollar  on  dollar  upon  each 
holder's  stock.  A  new  one  was  formed  which  bought  up  the  assets  for 
the  sum  of  $40,000,  and  as  the  Utica  Woolen  Mills  started  afresh  on 
the  first  day  of  August,  1855.  T.  S.  Faxton,  the  former  vice-president 
and  a  large  owner  of  stock,  was  prominent  in  organizing  the  new  com- 
pany. He  was  elected  its  president  and  had  as  associates  Joel  C.  Bailey, 
William D.  Hamlin,  Alrick  Hubbell, Palmer  V.  Kellogg, Benjamin  F.Ray, 
John  Thorn,  and  John  M.  Rice.  The  panic  of  1857  having  been  safely 
passed  through  a  prosperous  season  began,  and  under  the  able  manage- 
ment of  its.president  and  Robert  Middlefon  as  agent,  aided  by  the  advice 
of  its  trustees,  the  mill  gained  large  profits  for  its  shareholders,  and  a  re- 
pute for  its  fabrics  that  is  second  to  none  in  the  country.  The  capital 
which  had  been  $70,000  in  the  beginning,  was  in  1868  increased  from  its 
earnings  to  $300,000.  New  buildings  were  erected  and  the  old  machinery 
wholly  replaced.  The  name  was  changed  to  The  Globe  Woolen  Mills — a 
title  borrowed  from  each  of  the  former — was  the  one  now  assumed  by  the 
company.  While  at  the  height  of  success  a  disastrous  fire  which 
occurred  in  September,  1871,  laid  in  ashes  the  mill  and  its  contents. 
But  it  did  not  dishearten  the  owners.  Their  own  interests,  those  of  the 
city,  and  of  the  numerous  workmen  thrown  out  of  employment,  required 
its  rebuilding;  and  before  the  debris  had  cooled,  gangs  of  men  were  at 
work  and  plans  in  preparation  to  put  up  two  new  ones.      Early  in  1873 


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  FACTORIES.  605 

these  mills  were  completed,  234  and  150  x  50  feet.  In  1886  a  worsted 
mill  50x210  feet  in  size  and  four  stories  high  was  added  to  the  plant. 
The  motive  power  is  furnished  by  two  engines  of  300  horse-power  each. 
The  mills  contain  twenty- one  sets  of  Piatt's  English  cards,  thirty  self- 
acting  mules,  166  broad  6x4  Crompton  looms,  and  the  most  approved 
finishing  machinery  of  French,  German  and  English  manufacture.  The 
mills  and  other  buildings  practically  cover  nine  acres  on  the  corner  of 
Stark  and  Court  streets,  and  furnish  employment  to  nearly  1,000 
operatives.  The  company  manufactures  the  finest  fancy  woolen  and 
worsted  goods,  their  sales  extending  throughout  the  United  States. 
The  present  directors  are,  Robert  Middleton,  president;  A.  C.  Miller, 
vice-president;  John  Thorn,  Russell  Wheeler,  John  W.  McLean,  James 
G.  Hunt,  and  Walter  D.  Middleton.  The  company  has  an  office  in 
New  York  where  they  sell  their  own  goods.  W.  W.  Coffin,  treasurer, 
has  charge  of  the  office. 

Returning  to  the  year  1847  we  find  that  the  influence  caused  by  these 
undertakings  was  soon  palpably  felt  in  the  quickening  of  business  and 
awakened  spirit  of  enterprise.  New  streets  were  opened,  old  ones  re- 
graded;  old  tenements  were  undergoing  renovation  and  change,  while 
neat  dwellings  in  numbers  were  taking  the  place  of  what  had  before 
been  but  commons.  The  spirit  aroused  gave  birth  to  new  projects  and 
strengthened  the  force  of  some  already  in  being.  A  screw  factor}',  east 
of  the  market  and  between  Bleecker  and  Jay  streets,  erected  by  Messrs. 
Barnard,  Francis  and  Lawrence,  and  at  work  since  the  winter  before, 
was  increased  in  its  stock  and  its  company,  and  was  making  1,000  gross 
of  wood  screws  per  day.  The  old  City  Mill  was  possessed  of  every  con- 
venience for  flouring,  but  depended  for  water  on  the  waste  from  the 
weigh  lock.  It  received  at  this  time  an  engine  of  eighty  horse- power, 
which  insured  its  ability  to  turn  out  a  grist  of  300  barrels  each  working 
day.  By  machinists  and  the  makers  of  manufacturers'  findings,  in  the 
preparations  of  snuff  and  tobacco — a  business  now  fast  gaining  a  foot- 
hold— in  the  sawing  and  polishing  of  marble  for  monuments,  and  in 
other  employments  where  steam  was  of  aid,  this  agent  was  coming  more 
and  more  into  use ;  and  at  least  twenty  engines,  large  and  small,  were 
then  doing  work  in  the  place. 

The  manufacture  of  cotton  in   Utica  seemed  from  the  start  to  hold 

/ 


6o6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

out  special  hopes  of  success  ;  and  by  the  winter  of  1845-46  funds  enough 
had  been  promised  to  engage  in  the  work  ;  but  the  wish  to  augment 
the  investment  occasioned  delay.  Those  interested  were  waiting  till 
a  general  law  should  be  passed  to  incorporate  companies  with  a  capi- 
tal of  $200,000  or  more,  and  freed  from  the  clause  which  made  the 
owners  of  the  stock  liable,  in  case  of  loss,  to  even  twice  the  amount  of 
their  holding.  To  secure  the  enactment  of  this  law  some  of  the  num- 
ber went  to  Albany  and  urged  forward  the  bill  at  each  session  ;  and 
pending  its  passage  they  drew  up  a  paper  which  was  to  be  in  force  when 
it  passed,  and  to  hold  its  subscribers  when  $120,000  were  pledged.  It 
bore  the  date  of  January  1 1,  1847,  ''"d  by  its  terms  of  agreement  named 
as  trustees,  Theodore  S.  Faxton,  Silas  D.  Childs,  Alfred  Munson, 
Charles  A.  Mann,  Edmund  A.  Graham,  Andrew  S.  Pond,  and  Horatio 
Seymour.  In  the  meantime  the  land  was  secured  and  the  foundations 
begun.  On  the  17th  of  February,  1848,  the  act  took  effect,  and  the 
next  season  there  was  started  the  first  of  the  large  structures  now  in 
use  by  the  company.  It  was  300  x  65  feet  in  size,  with  wings,  and  an 
engine-house  attached.  A  Corliss  engine  was  purchased,  while  the 
shafting  was  made  by  Puffer  &  Co.,  the  looms  by  A.  J.  Williams,  and 
the  frames  and  some  of  the  cards  by  Rogers  &  Spencer.  William  Wal- 
cott  became  the  next  year  the  general  agent  and  treasurer,  and  when, 
in  the  fall,  these  duties  were  severed,  Mr.  Childs  took  charge  of  the 
finances  and  Rufus  Stafford  was  made  superintendent.  In  1850  the 
mill  with  its  8,000  spindles,  180  looms  and  165  hands,  began  the  man- 
ufacture of  wide  cotton  goods.  The  production  of  this  mill  was  1,200,- 
000  square  yards  of  cloth  annually,  and  double  that  number  when  the 
whole  mill  was  put  in  operation  about  five  years  later.  The  lower  mill 
was  erected  and  put  in  operation  in  1870.  Its  dimensions  are  similar 
to  those  of  the  No.  i  mill,  except  that  it  is  four  stories  high.  No.  3 
mill  is  an  addition  to,  and  connected  with,  No.  i  mill ;  it  was  erected  in 
1880-81  and  immediately  began  operations.  It  is  also  four  stories  high. 
During  the  present  year  (1891)  extensive  improvements  are  in  progress, 
mainly  for  the  purpose  of  consolidating  the  steam  and  motive  power, 
with  additional  buildings  for  a  prospective  increase  of  productive  capac- 
ity of  about  15,000  spindles.  The  entire  establishment  occupies  the 
oblong  block  bounded  by  State,  Columbia  and  Court  streets,  and  the 


^^ff?'^F.&.KBTria'a2^y 


V^^ 


WORKERS  IN  IRON.  607 

Chenango  Canal,  covering  about  four  acres.  The  chartered  capital  is 
at  the  present  time  $690,000,  but  the  actual  amount  invested  exceeds 
$1,000,000.  The  number  of  operatives  employed  is  about  800,  and  the 
number  of  spindles  is  over  40,000.  The  annual  output  of  the  mills  is 
about  9,000,000  square  yards  of  sheetings  and  shirtings,  of  various 
widths.  The  following  are  the  present  officers  of  the  corporation: 
Ephraim  Chamberlain,  president  and  treasurer ;  George  H.  Wiley, 
vice  president  and  superintendent;  F.  G.  Chamberlain,  secretary  and 
assistant  treasurer.  Mr.  Chamberlain,  the  president,  has  been  connected 
with  the  corporation  since  1849,  ^nd  Mr.  Wiley  since  1852.  (See 
biography  of  these  men  in  later  pages.) 

The  success  which  attended  the  working  of  these  factories  just  de- 
scribed, the  proof  they  gave  of  the  capabilities  of  steam  in  lieu  of  falling 
water  for  the  propulsion  of  machines,  stimulated  other  undertakings 
both  individual  and  associate  for  the  making  of  wares  in  iron,  wood, 
cloth,  leather,  etc.  How  far  this  influence  was  felt  in  each  individual 
case  it  is  impossible  to  say.  Some  may  have  arisen  from  the  growth  of 
the  town  and  the  increased  needs  of  its  people, — needs  brought  about, 
it  may  be,  or  enhanced  by  the  very  existence  of  the  machines  and  con- 
structions which  had  already  preceded  them ;  some  from  an  inventive 
search  for  employment  and  the  investment  of  money  in  unoccupied 
fields ;  some  from  the  improved  ease  in  dispersing  abroad,  the  fruits  of 
home  labor  through  the  multiplied  railways  that  were  now  centered  in 
Utica.  No  other  course,  therefore,  is  left  in  our  notice  of  such  as  are  to 
follow  than-to  keep  on  in  the  arrangement  somewhat  chronological  thus 
far  attempted. 

Other  workers  in  iron,  beginning  between  1850  and  i860,  were  the 
following :  The  Phoenix  Iron  Works  of  Chauncey  Palmer,  started  in 
1852,  destroyed  by  fire  in  1857  but  rebuilt  the  year  after,  have  been 
since  in  the  hands  of  his  son  Cyrus  F.  Palmer.  Additions  have  been 
made  until  now  the  plant  covers  200  x  140  feet  and  consists  of  several 
buildings.  The  products  are  hot-air  and  hot-water  heaters,  architect- 
ural and  ornamental  work,  settees  and  lawn  adornments  and  all  kinds 
of  iron  work. 

Another  maker  of  ornamental  work  is  Linus  Dean,  who  began  in 
1858,  and  from  a  small   business  has  made  additions  as  occasion  de- 


6o8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

manded.  His  lot  and  buildings,  with  a  front  of  125  feet  on  Whitesboro 
street,  extend  back  to  the  canal.  Iron  fence  in  every  style,  urns,  fire 
escapes,  and  lawn  furniture  are  made. 

In  a  small  way  and  alone,  E.  A.  Wood  undertook  in  1861  the  fabri- 
cation of  steam  guages.  Six  years  later  Francis  G.  Wood  became  a 
partner  and  the  firm  name  of  Utica  Steam  Gauge  Company  was  adopted. 
In  1882  Francis  G.  having  withdrawn,  his  place  was  supplied  by  William 
E.  Wood,  son  of  the  founder.  Their  premises,  fronting  on  Fayette 
street,  consist,  besides  their  office  and  foundry,  of  some  smaller  build- 
ing and  yard.  They  manufacture  gauges  for  steam  engines  and  other 
engine-room  fixtures.  To  this  they  have  added  the  branch  industry  of 
steam  heating.  Wood's  patent  pedal  valve  for  radiators  is  one  of  the 
articles  made. 

In  a  building  on  Broad  and  Mohawk  streets,  built  for  Dana's  lock 
factory,  Chapman  &  Co.  started  a  foundry  which  ere  long  became  that 
of  Le  Roy,  Shattuck  &  Head.  In  consequence  of  deaths  and  other 
changes  it  is  now  known  as  Heads',  George  W.  Head  being  president 
and  Francis  T.  Giblin  secretary  of  an  incorporated  company.  Fifty 
men  are  employed  in  the  making  of  hot-air  furnaces  and  hot  water 
boilers,  wagon  hardware  and  plumbers'  materials. 

Justus  Child  started  at  Willow  Vale,  in  i860,  the  manufacture  of  mow- 
ing machines,  his  office  and  headquarters  being^in  Utica.  The  proprie- 
tors have  since  been  in  turn,  J.  M.,  Wallace  B.,  Orlando  J.,  and  Charles  H. 
Childs,  and  Everett  B.  Crumb.  Their  storehouse  and  salesroom  is 
located  at  the  corner  of  Fayette  and  Seneca  streets.  They  manufacture 
and  sell  a  large  assortment  of  agricultural  implements,  wagons,  etc. 
Since  1879  one  of  this  house  has  been  interested  in  another  factory  for 
the  making  of  articles  in  agriculture  which  was  set  on  foot  by  Jones  & 
Falkner  in  1865.  It  is  now  Childs  &  Jones.  They  make  dairy  and 
agricultural  implements,  and  deal  besides  in  stoves,  tinware,  bicycle.=, 
etc.     Their  headquarters  are  at  84  Genesee  street. 

Charles  Millar,  a  man  of  unusual  stir  and  enterprise,  who  had  been 
for  years  a  successful  carpenter  and  builder,  took  to  dealing  in  hard- 
ware. This  business  was  established  in  1861,  and  five  years  later  his 
son,  Henry  W.  Millar,  joined  his  father  therein.  In  1867  the  firm  oc- 
cupied the  Millar  building,  which  was  just  completed  on  Genesee  street. 


BAKERY— SHOE  MANUFACTURE.  609 

They  manufactured  cheese  and  butter-making  apparatus,  and  were 
wholesale  dealers  in  plumber's  and  farmer's  supplies.  In  1883  the  man- 
ufacture of  lead  pipe  was  begun,  and  two  years  later  a  warehouse  and 
factory  were  erected  on  Main  street,  on  the  line  of  the  New  York  Cen- 
tral Railroad.  In  1885  John  L.  Murray,  son-in-law  of  Charles  Millar, 
was  admitted  to  the  firm,  and  he,  with  Henry  W.  Millar,  make  the  pres- 
ent firm.  In  1889  the  firm,  with  the  assistance  of  Nicholas  E.  Kernan, 
Irvin  A.  Williams  and  William  M.  White,  organized  the  Utica  Pipe 
Foundry  Company,  and  Mr.  Millar  became  its  first  president.  The  firm 
employs  120  men.  They  manufacture  cast  iron  water  pipe  and  specials 
for  gas  and  water  works.  (See  biography  of  Charles  Millar  in  the  part 
of  the  volume  devoted  to  biography.) 

George  Young,  who  had  been  brought  up  in  Germany  to  the  trade 
of  baker  and  was  engaged  in  it  for  some  time  after  his  settlement 
in  Utica,  bought,  in  1864,  the  bake  shop  of  Luke  Wilkins  and  entered 
on  a  business  which  has  by  degrees  grown  to  be  one  of  large  extent  and 
importance.  He  occupies  three  adjoining  stores  on  Bleecker  street, 
and  has  numerous  hands  in  his  service  in  the  baking  and  sale  of  crack- 
ers and  bread,  besides  teams  to  distribute  these  products  abroad. 
Crackers  and  Vienna  bread  are  his  specialties. 

An  important  addition  to  the  manufactures  of  Utica  has  been  that  of 
ladies'  and  misses'  shoes.  This  branch  of  industry  was  commenced 
about  1862—63,  by  James  M.  Wiswell,  who  subsequently  became  asso- 
ciated with  James  H.  Thompson.  In  1866  J.  Newton  Cloyes  purchased 
Wiswell's  interest,  and  the  firm  became  Thompson  &  Cloyes.  From 
1872  Mr.  Cloyes  has  been  sole  proprietor.  When  the  business  was  be- 
gun it  was  on  a  limited  scale,  in  the  attic  of  No.  12  John  street.  Mr. 
Thompson  employed  from  five  to  ten  hands,  and  put  in  operation  the 
first  McKay  machine  ever  brought  here.  In  1880  Mr.  Cloyes,  after  sev- 
eral preceding  changes  of  location,  moved  to  his  present  quarters  on 
Meadow  street,  and  has  at  work  175  men. 

R.  S.  and  William  H.  Reynolds  began  the  same  industry  in  1865, 
their  brother,  George  A  ,  being  admitted  to  partnership  the  following 
year.  In  1873  fire  partially  destroyed  their  building,  and  they  erected 
a  large  one  on  the  corner  of  John  and  Catherine.  It  is  occupied  by 
George  A.,  one  of  his  brothers  having  died  and  the  other  withdrawn. 
The  business  has  increased  to  large  proportions,  employing  500  hands. 
77 


6io  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

A  third  firm  to  engage  in  the  same  business  was  that  of  Holbrook  & 
Ludlow,  who  began  in  1872  on  lower  John  street.  In  1880,  Mr.  Lud- 
low having  withdrawn,  Lewis  H.  Lawrence  became  a  partner.  The 
business  was  transferred  to  its  present  site  on  Catherine.  It  was  de- 
stroyed in  the  large  fire  of  March,  1884,  but  has  been  handsomely  re- 
built.    About  300  hands  are  busied. 

Next  door  to  the  preceding  there  has  been  quartered  till  recently  the 
shoe  firm  of  Tallman  &  Hurd.  This  firm  has  been  recently  dissolved, 
with  the  probability  of  the  setting  up  of  two  new  ones  in  its  stead. 

Cabinetware  has  of  course  been  produced  in  Utica  from  an  early  pe- 
riod of  its  history,  and  its  producers  have  been  numerous.  It  is  un- 
necessary to  notice  more  than  two  or  three  of  their  establishments. 
The  Union  Cabinet  Association,  made  up  of  sixteen  members,  chiefly 
from  the  shop  of  Perrine  &  Fowler  who  had  just  failed,  was  formed 
in  1855.  At  the  end  of  the  year  eight  of  them  had  dropped  out. 
They  had  two  workshops  and  employed  twenty-five  men.  To  increase 
their  capital  others  were  taken  in  while  some  withdrew.  After  various 
changes  of  membership  and  of  location  the  property  was  bought  by 
Joseph  B.  Nelbach,  one  of  the  company.  It  then  stood  on  Fayette 
street  near  State.  Adding  to  it  a  double  store  adjoining,  Mr.  Nelbach 
has  continued  the  sale  of  cabinetware  and  furniture.  But  little  manu- 
facturing is  now  done. 

A  factory  established  some  years  afterward,  that  is  to  say,  in  1878 
on  the  corner  of  Broad  and  Hubbell,  by  George  E.  Lord  and  William 
E.  Latimer,  employs  100  hands  and  manufactures  parlor  suits,  rockers 
chairs,  etc.     The  annual  output  is  about  $150,000. 

The  Utica  Furniture  Company  erected  buildings  in  1887,  on  the  cor 
ner  of  Broad  and  Gilbert  streets,  having  had  an  origin  some  time  before 
They  failed  in  1889  and  the  plant  was  idle  for  a  year.  Early  in  1891 
the  company  was  incorporated  with  a  paid  up  capital  stock  of  $10 
000.  They  manufacture  roller- top  and  flat- top  desks.  Of  this  com 
pany  George  F.  Ballard  is  president. 

The  making  of  spring  beds  was  begun  in  1871  by  Segar  &  Co 
The  parties  engaged- in  it  have  subsequently  been  Segar  &  Mallory 
Segar  &  Foster,  and  are  now  Foster  &  Brothers.  Begun  on  Cathe- 
rine street,  the  factory  is  now  on  Broad  street,  corner  of  Clay,  where 


KNITTING  FACTORIES.  6ii 

are  manufactured  spiral  springs  and  spring  beds  of  variojus  styles,  and 
sixty  hands  are  at  work.  There  is  a  branch  in  St.  Louis  and  another 
in  Baltimore. 

The  making  of  knit  goods  by  machine  process  was  commenced  by  S.  S. 
Lowery  and  J.  L.  Lowery  in  1863,  with  an  investment  of  about  $10,000. 
The  plant  was  located  on  Pine  street,  and  was  operated  until  1866  in 
the  manufacture  of  knit  goods,  chiefly  stockings  for  the  use  of  the  army. 
In  1867  a  new  firm  was  organized,  consisting  of  S.  S.  Lowery  and  J.  L. 
Williams,  and  the  mill  fixtures  were  removed  to  the  corner  of  Fulton 
and  Franklin  streets,  where  a  large  brick  building  was  occupied.  The 
mill  had  four  sets  of  cards,  with  spinning  and  weaving  machinery  to 
correspond,  and  consumed  annually  about  200,000  pounds  of  cotton 
and  wool  in  about  equal  quantities.  The  annual  output  was  $150,000 
value  in  ladies'  and  children's  fine  underwear.  In  1886  this  company 
closed  up  the  business  and  the  plant  was  idle  for  a  time.  In  1889  a 
stock  company  was  formed  and  operated  the  factory  for  a  year  and  a 
half.  This  company  was  not  successful,  and  in  May,  1890,  a  firm,  con- 
sisting of  Quentin  McAdam,  Erwin  B.  Kenyon,  Charles  Rathbun,  John 
W.  AUis  and  James  McGuire,  was  organized  and  took  possession  of  the 
property.  This  company  manufactures  exclusively  children's  knit  un  ■ 
derwear,  and  employs  125  hands.  They  do  a  large  jobbing  trade  in 
this  city  through  the  wholesale  house  of  Quentin  McAdam  &  Co., 
which  is  connected  with  this  manufactory,  and  in  New  York,  Boston, 
Philadelphia  and  Baltimore,  their  output  being  60,000  dozens  for  the 
past  year.  Reorganized  in  December,  1891,  the  company  is  now  known 
as  the  Utica  Knitting  Company.  It  has  a  capital  of  $20,000,  fully 
■paid  in. 

In  the  mean  time  another  establishment  of  like  character  was  started 
by  Charles  Stewart,  who  was  joined  in  1870  by  John  Wild,  a  man  prac- 
ticed in  this  business,  who  came  here  from  Oswego.  Their  factory  was 
on  Jay  street.  The  business  was  carried  on  in  a  comparatively  small 
way  until  1873,  when  Mr.  Stewart  died.  Mr.  Wild  then  acquired  his 
partner's  interest  and  conducted  the  industry  alone  until  1874,  when 
N.  E.  Devereux  joined  him  and  the  establishment  was  enlarged.  At 
the  time  of  the  formation  of  the  firm  of  Wild  &  Devereux  the  entire 
working  force,  including  the  proprietors,  numbered  twenty-nine  hands, 


6i2  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  the  annual  production  had  a  value  of  only  about  $30,000.  A  few 
years  later  they  purchased  land  on  Broad  street,  facing  Kossuth  avenue, 
where  they  erected  a  large  three- story  factory.  The  new  mill  was  oc- 
cupied in  1880.  The  firm  now  employs  440  hands,  and  the  annual  prod- 
uct has  a  value  of  $400,000,  and  consists  of  knit  underwear  of  cotton. 

The  manufacture  of  Scotch  caps  is  an  industry  that  was  begun  in 
a  small  way  at  New  Hartford,  in  1868,  by  Thomas  Hanford,  and  con- 
tinued by  him  at  that  place  until  1881.  While  there  he  sold  the  shells 
of  such  caps  to  D.  W.  Northrup,  who  put  in  the  linings  and  placed 
them  on  the  market.  This  was  about  1875.  Mr.  Northrup  has  since 
conducted  the  manufacture  on  a  larger  scale  down  to  the  present  time, 
his  plant  being  on  Liberty  street.  In  the  spring  of  1884  the  factory  of 
Mr.  Hanford  and  his  partner,  John  E.  McLoughlin,  was  removed  to  the 
lower  end  of  Park  avenue  in  this  city.  Hiram  E.  Brewster  was  admit- 
ted as  a  partner,  and  the  name  of  Mohawk  Valley  Cap  Factory. Com- 
pany was  adopted.  The  place  of  Mr.  Hanford,  who  has  withdrawn,  is 
filled  by  William  F.  Allen.  They  employ  about  250  hands,  and  the 
annual  capacity  of  production  is  60,060  dozen  caps,  which  are  disposed 
of  in  this  country  and  abroad.  Another  company  engaged  in  the  same 
business  is  that  of  the  Empire  Scotch  Cap  Factory,  Nos.  123-129  Broad 
street,  started  in  1883,  but  organized  in  1887.  It  consists  of  Alfred 
Bayliss  and  C.  F.  Crandall.  The  premises  are  like  those  of  the  pre- 
ceding, and  their  equipment  includes  two  sets  of  cards  and  twenty- 
€ight  knitting  machines.  About  125  operatives  are  employed,  $75,000 
of  capital  '  is   invested,  and  the   trade  is   widely   diffused. 

The  Lynch  Scotch  Cap  Company  began  operations  in  1885.  It  is 
located  on  Culver  street  in  a  four- story  brick  building,  employs  about 
fifty  hands  and  makes  20,000  dozen  caps.  Its  market  is  in  the  United 
States  and  Canada.  The  Lenox  factory,  an  incorporated  company,  be- 
gan on  upper  Genesee  street  in  1888.  - 

The  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton  Mills,  Broad  street,  foot  of  Nichols,  has 
the  same  executive  management  as  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton  Mills  with 
which  it  is  affiliated.  The  company  was  organized  in  1880  for  the  pur- 
pose of  meeting  the  demand  for  sheetings  of  a  little  different  texture, 
but  of  same  widths  as  those  manufactured  by  the  last  named  mills. 
The   capital  stock  is  $500,000.     The  buildings  of  this  company  are  a 


SKENANDOA  COTTON  CO.  — EUREKA  MOWER  CO.       613 

main  building  100  x  200  feet  in  dimensions,  four  stories  high  ;  one  wing 
100  feet  square,  three  stories  high  ;  one  wing  40  x  loO  feet,  two  stories 
high  ;  engine  and  boiler  houses,  and  a  large  store  house,  the  latter  on 
the  north  side  of  the  canal.  There  are  in  operation  21,000  spindles, 
and  equal  to  600  4-4  looms  (from  4-4  to  10-4),  with  a  motive  power  of 
400  horse-power.  About  350  hands  are  employed,  and  the  annual  out- 
put is  .ibout  4,500,000  square  yards. 

The  Skenandoa  Cotton  Company,  Broad  street,  foot  of  Milgate. — 
This  enterprise  was  started  in  1882,  with  a  capital  stock  of  $200,000, 
which  has  since  been  increased  to  $300,000,  and  with  J.  B.  Wells  as 
president.  The  manufacturing  plant  comprises  atrick  mill  at  the  above 
location,  two  floors  in  height,  537  x  100  feet  in  size.  It  is  equipped 
with  22,000  spindles  and  other  necessary  machinery,  and  run  by  two 
engines,  one  condensing  and  one  compound,  of  600  horse-power.  There 
are  480  male  and  female  operatives  employed.  The  products  of  the 
company  are  fine  hosiery  yarns,  furnished  on  cops,  skeins,  and  cones 
ready  for  use  by  manufacturers  ;  also  yarns  of  common  American  cot- 
ton, Egyptian  and  Peeler  cotton.  The  present  directors  are  :  President, 
George  H.  Wiley;  J.  K.  Chamberlayne,  M.D.,  J.  H.  Williams,  P.  V. 
Rogers,  N.  E.  Kernan,  D.  N.  Crouse,  John  B.  Wild.  The  products  from 
this  mill  are  sold  direct  to  manufacturers  of  underware  and  hosiery. 

The  Eureka  Mower  Company  had  been  located  in  Towanda,  Pa. 
The  company,  after  determining  to  change  its  location,  was  per- 
suaded to  come  to  Utica  by  the  offer  of  eight  acres  of  land  from  the 
Hamilton  farm,  and  the  consent  of  several  Utica  capitalists  to  take  a 
portion  of  stock.  The  land  was  bought  with  money  raised  for  that 
purpose  by  subscription  of  the  citizens  of  Utica.  The  secretary  of  the 
company,  S.  Rendell,  being  unable  to  leave  other  interests  at  Towanda, 
was  succeeded  by  Edward  Norris,  of  Utica.  The  property  is  bounded 
by  Hickory,  Schuyler,  Linden  and  Hicks  streets,  upon  which  are  erec- 
ted several  buildings,  at  a  cost  of  $40,000.  There  are  thirteen  directors; 
James  H.  Williams  is  president.  Their  machines  meet  with  a  ready 
sale. 

A  flouring  mill  was  established  in  1887,  by  Messrs.  Graff,  Young  & 
McElroy,  ?t  the  corner  of  Main  and  Second  streets.  The  plant  con- 
sists of  a  brick  mill,  equipped  upon  what  is  known  as  the  full  roller  and 


6i4  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

centrifugal  system,  by  which  system  all  the  nutritious  gluten  and  albu- 
men contained  in  the  wheat  is  saved.  January  13,  1891,  the  firm  be- 
came Young,  McElroy  &  White. 

As  yet  no  mention  has  been  made  of  the  brewing  of  malt,  which  was 
one  of  the  earliest  industries  established  in  U.tica.  Not  to  speak  of  the 
place  where  Matthew  Codd  "brewed  his  peck  of  maut "  for  the  use  of 
Utica's  early  villagers,  the  breweries  known  as  the  Gulf  and  the 
Oneida  were  put  in  operation  as  early  as  1830-32.  For  ten  years  at 
least  they  sufficed  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  community.  About  1840 
one  was  started  for  the  making  of  lager  beer,  the  delight  of  the  German 
population.  Breweries  have  since  become  numerous,  so  that  eight  of 
them  have  now  a  place  in  the  city.  To  recount  the  history  of  each 
with  an  enumeration  of  their  various  proprietors,  to  describe  the  build- 
ings in  use  or  relate  the  amount  of  their  products,  would  far  transcend 
the  limits  at  our  command.  Those  latest  established  were  begun  in 
1888  and  1890. 

The  Utica  Burial  Case  Company  was  incorporated  in  April,  1890, 
with  a  capital  stock  of  $90,000,  and  with  the  following  trustees :  Nich- 
olas E.  Kernan,  president;  Henry  Martin,  vice-president;  Joseph  B. 
Nelbach,  secretary  and  treasurer ;  Joseph  Faass,  Matthew  Turnock, 
Peter  J.  Nelbach,  Patrick  F.  Bulger,  George  Windheim,  and  Jacob 
Agne,  jr.  A  building  was  completed  and  occupied  in  June,  1890,  front- 
ing on  Hickory  street,  corner  of  Wheeler  avenue,  the  property  extend- 
ing to  Chenango  and  Sunset  avenues.  The  company  employs  sixty  men 
in  the  manufacture  of  all  kinds  of  burial  cases.  The  trade  extends 
throughout  the  Eastern  and  Middle  States. 

The  foundation  of  the  city  gas  making  was  laid  in  1848  by  the  Utica 
Gas  Light  Company.  As  manufacturers  of  gas  they  lighted  the  city 
for  forty  years.  The  present  company  succeeded  to  the  ownership  of 
the  plant  in  1888,  organizing  under  the  name  of  the  Equitable  Gas  and 
Electric  Company,  with  the  following  officers :  R.  M.  C.  Graham,  pres- 
ident ;  H.  Keene,  vice-president  and  treasurer;  Harold  Graham,  secre- 
tary and  manager.  The  capital  stock  with  bonds  outstanding  is  $600,- 
000.  An  electric  light  plant,  added  to  the  works  just  previous  to  its 
transfer  to  the  present  company,  operates  six  dynamos  which  are  sup- 
plied with  power  from  three  engines  of  225  horse-power.     The  plant  of 


EQUITABLE  GAS  AND  ELECTRIC  COMPANY.  615 

the  company  is  located  on  Water  street,  at  the  foot  of  Seneca,  and  cov- 
ers about  two  acres  of  land,  upon  which  are  erected  various  brick  build- 
ings and  two  holders.  The  company  also  owns  a  block  bounded  by 
Noyes,  Francis,  Mulberry  streets  and  Sunset^avenue,  upon  which  an- 
other large  holder  has  been  erected  for  regulating  gas  pressure  in  that 
section.  The  company  makes  gas  by  three  processes,  coal  gas,  water 
gas  by  the  Granger  process,  and  water  gas  by  the  celebrated  Jerzman 
owski  process,  the  latter  yielding  light  of  high  candle  power.  The  com- 
pany furnishes  75,000,000  cubic  feet  of  gas  yearly,  and  100  electric  lights 
of  sixty-five  candle  power,  besides  electricity  and  gas  for  power.  The 
present  officers  are:  Casimir  Tag,  president;  H.  Keene,  vice-president; 
and  E.  A.  Pinkney,  superintendent.  The  construction  of  the  plant 
shows  on  the  part  of  its  builders  expectation  of  a  large  city,  either  one 
of  the  three  processes  being  equipped  and  of  sufficient  capacity  to  fur- 
nish all  the  gas  consumed  at  the  present  time.  The  capacity  of  the 
plant  is  800,000  cubic  feet  per  day. 

As  new  fields  have  been  disclosed  for  the  employment  of  capital,  and 
our  people  have  seen  the  good  which  its  earnings  have  brought  to  the 
city,  a  home  feeling  has  arisen  in  lieu  of  the  languid  interest  in  the  place 
of  their  residence  so  many  had  heretofore  shown.  This  home  feeling, 
this  pride  in  the  ventures  which  have  proved  a  success,  and  the  desire 
to  do  more  to  enlarge  and  build  up  the  city,  has  had  no  small  share  in 
the  creation  of  some  of  the  establishments  recently  started.  Especially 
have  its  effects  been  manifest  in  the  formation  of  a  society  purposely 
designed  to  promote  such  advancement.  It  is  known  as  the  Merchants' 
and  Manufacturers'  Association.  By  its  aid  parties  proposing  to  found 
some  branch  of  industry  that  requires  peculiar  facilities,  or  ready  for 
the  sake  of  a  better  location  to  relinquish  the  one  where  they  were  pre- 
viously settled,  have  been  sought  out  and  their  aims  and  resources 
made  the  subject  of  careful  inquiry;  if  approved,  such  projectors  have 
been  encouraged  to  locate  in  Utica  and  have  been  aided  by  the  proffer 
of  money  or  of  land.  The  fostering  care  of  this  association  has  already 
accomplished  much,  and  it  is  hoped  will  accomplish  yet  more  in  the 
future. 


6i6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

t 

CHARITIES. 

SO  abounding  are  the  charities  of  Utica  as  to  have  given  it  an  hon- 
ored reputation  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  To  fail  of  describ- 
ing the  most  conspicuous  of  these  institutions  would  be  to  omit  one  of  the 
chief  characteristics  of  the  place.  Leaving  out  of  notice  such  as  pertain 
to  the  county  at  large,  and  in  which  the  people  of  Utica  have  borne 
only  a  share,  as  likewise  those  within  its  limits  which  enlist  the  sympa- 
thies and  form  a  part  of  the  work  of  each  religious  society  or  benevolent 
order,  I  propose  to  describe  such  as  are  sustained  by  the  efforts  of  our 
people  in  common.  Of  the  benevolent  operations  of  wider  embrace 
that  have  existed  in  the  past,  bare  mention  must  suffice.  Such  was 
the  Female  Charitable  Society  of  Whitestown  created  in  1806,  and 
known  after  1814  as  the  Female  Missionary  Society  of  Oneida.  Such 
too  was  the  Bible  Society  of  Oneida  which  has  received  support  from 
all  over  its  bounds ;  founded  six  years  before  the  American  Bible  So- 
ciety it  has  now  observed  its  eightieth  anniversary  ;  it  has  many  times 
canvassed  the  county  and  furnished  with  Bibles  every  person  in  want  of 
them.  Such  were  the  similar  society  for  supplying  Welsh- speaking 
readers,  and  the  Bible  and  Prayer- Book  Society  cared  for  by  a  special 
denomination.  Originating  in  Utica  these  latter  have  had  their  head- 
quarters and  most  of  their  officers  here. 

Let  us  turn  to  review  the  history  and  work  of  the  institutions  wholly 
local,  tlie  asylums,  the  homes,  the  hospitals  that  are  maintained  by  the 
city's  united  benevolence. 

The  history  of  the  Utica  Orphan  Asylum  begins  properly  with  the 
establishment  of  the  Female  Society  of  Industry  in  October,  1826.  This 
society  was  composed  of  seventy  members  who  paid  in  $6  each  annu- 
ally, either  in  cash  or  needle- work,  and  in  January,  1828,  began  to  raise 
a  fund  for  the  founding  of  an  orphan  asylum.  The  officers  were  Mrs. 
Sophia  Bagg,  president  and  treasurer,  and  Mrs.  Ann  Breese,  secretary. 
By  the  end  of  the  following  year  the  investments  of  the  society  reached 


UTICA  ORPHAN  ASYLUM.  617 

$600,  and  by  the  fall  of  1833  had  increased  to  $3,000.  The  circum- 
stance which  gave  direction  to  the  purposes  of  the  society,  and  opened 
a  channel  for  the  flow  of  its  charity,  was  briefly  this:  Three  children  of 
Thomas  Arthur  and  wife  were  suddenly  left  by  the  death  of  their  par- 
ents, without  means  of  support.  One  of  the  managers  of  the  affairs  of 
the  society  was  well  acquainted  with  the  parents  of  these  children  and 
knew  of  their  bereavement.  After  making  the  matter  known  to  her 
associates  it  was  determined  at  her  suggestion,  that  their  first  object 
should  be  the  maintenance  of  these  destitute  orphans,  and  not  only  so, 
but  that  an  asylum  should  be  founded  which,  in  the  words  of  the  sub- 
sequent act  of  incorporation,  "  Shall  be  for  the  support  and  education 
of  orphans."  A  charter  was  drawn  and  a  public  meeting  held  in  Wash- 
ington Hall,  January  7,  1830.  A  constitution  was  adopted  and  officers 
were  chosen,  all  of  them  being  ladies,  with  the  exception  of  three  gen- 
tlemen who  were  to  act  as  an  advisory  committee.  A  meeting  of  sub- 
scribers was  held  in  September,  when  a  few  changes  were  made  in  the 
Board  of  Managers,  and  from  this  time  forward  the  meetings  were  fre- 
quent. Committees  were  appointed  to  obtain  subscriptions,  and  others 
to  ascertain  what  orphans  there  were  in  the  village  who  were  proper 
subjects  for  charity.  At  first  such  were  boarded  in  the  houses  of  others, 
and  Mrs.  Philomela  A.  Brown,  of  Litchfield,  Oneida  County,  was  en- 
gaged to  care  for  them  and  direct  their  education.  Housekeeping  was 
begun  in  November  of  this  year,  in  a  building  that  stood  on  the  north- 
east corner  of  John  and  Catharine  streets.  In  May,  1833,  the  family 
was  removed  to  a  house  near  the  southeast  corner  of  Chancellor  Square. 
The  financial  panic  of  1837,  ''"'^  the  stringency  of  the  few  succeeding 
years,  had  a  marked  efiect  on  the  asylum  and  came  very  near  to  closing 
its  doors.  During  the  year  1840  there  is  no  record  of  any  meeting,  but 
the  annual  meeting  and  election  of  officers  occurred  in  September.  In 
December,  1842,  another  general  assemblage  occurred  of  the  members 
and  of  those  who  were  interested  in  the  asylum,  to  take  measures  to  re- 
commence the  institution.  The  old  constitution  was  approved,  and  it 
was  determined  to  apply  for  an  extension  of  the  charter  and  for  such  an 
alteration  of  it  as  would  admit,  without  charge,  half  orphans,  as  well 
as  those  deprived  of  both  parents;  also  conferring  the  privilege  of  hold- 
ing a  larger  amount  of  property  than   $10,000.     Six  additional  niana- 

78 


6i8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

gers  were  created.  Deferring  the  question  of  a  building  which  had 
been  discussed,  the  asylum  was  reopened  on  Broadway,  east  side,  a  few 
doors  above  the  canal,  in  May,  1845,  with  Mrs.  Cooley  as  matron.  In 
1846  lot  No.  312  Genesee  street,  was  purchased  with  the  proceeds  of 
two  fairs,  and  in  June,  1847,  gi'ound  was  broken  for  a  new  building 
which  was  finished  in  May,  1848.  Its  cost  was  $5,550,  the  society 
having  at  interest  $7,611.31  when  it  was  begun.  In  this  commodious 
structure,  and  with  increasing  revenue,  the  means  of  good  were  greatly 
enhanced.  Among  the  important  accessions  to  the  funds  were  the  re- 
ceipt from  the  Comptroller  of  the  State,  of  the  apportioned  share  of  the 
appropriation  of  $5,000  made  by  the  legislature  to  the  orphan  asylums 
of  the  State  ;  another  gift  of  $800  from  the  State,  being  a  part  of  an 
estate  that  had  come  into  the  treasury  ;  the  donation  by  T.  S.  Faxton, 
of  100  shares  of  water  stock  of  Utica  ($2,500) ;  the  legacy  of  a  like 
amount  from  Dr.  Healey,  of  Syracuse ;  $485  from  the  Fulton  Fire  En- 
gine Company,  the  avails  of  an  engine  sold  by  them ;  besides  various 
smaller  donations.  But  the  most  munificent  gift  of  that  epoch,  and  the 
one  which  prepared  the  way  for  the  erection  of  the  present  commodious 
home,  was  the  legacy  of  $34,000  left  them  by  the  will  of  Alfred  Mun- 
son.  To  this  gift  were  attached  certain  conditions;  the  citizens  must 
raise,  within  five  years  after  his  decease,  $io,000  for  the  purchase  of 
suitable  grounds  not  less  than  three  acres  in  extent,  and  any  balance  re- 
maining after  the  purchase  of  the  grounds  must  be  applied  toward  the 
erection  of  a  building.  This  provision  was  accomplished  in  the  year 
1855.  While  these  matters  were  in  progress,  Benjamin  F.  Jewett 
tendered  the  society  a  gift  of  three  acres  of  land  on  the  corner  of  Gene- 
see and  Pleasant  streets,  a  beautiful  and  convenient  site.  The  offer  was 
accepted  and  an  additional  acre  was  purchased  of  him. 

It  was  not  until  i860  that  the  details  of  payment  of  the  legacy  of  Mr. 
Munson  were  arranged  so  that  the  erection  of  the  building  could  pro- 
gress ;  but  they  were  finally  adjusted,  a  subscription  of  $5,000  additional 
to  the  $10,000  already  pledged  was  raised,  and  on  the  30th  of  May  the 
corner-stone  of  the  new  building  was  laid.  An  able  address  was  de- 
livered by  Prof.  Anson  J.  Upson,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day 
Mrs.  Macready  gave  a  dramatic  reading  in  the  city  and  donated  the 
proceeds  ($175)  to  the  asylum.     By  the  middle  of  the  summer  of  1861 


UTICA  ORPHAN  ASYLUM.  619 

the  structure  was  completed  and  furnished,  $25,628  having  then  been  ex- 
pended upon  it.  There  was  considerable  indebtedness  left,  but  a  legacy 
of  $9,000  left  by  Augustus  White,  and  the  funds  received  from  the  sale  of 
the  abandoned  house,  materially  reduced  the  obligation,  and  by  the  fall 
•  of  1863  the  cost  of  the  building  was  paid  and  the  receipts  made  ade- 
quate for  the  current  expenses.  Since  that  time  the  career  of  the  soci- 
ety has  been  one  of  continuous  prosperity  and  increasing  usefulness. 
Conspicuous  among  the  endowments  of  subsequent  years  was  the  munifi- 
cent bequest  of  $25,000  from  Silas  D.  Childs.  This  was  followed  a  few 
years  later  by  a  similar  gift  from  his  widow,  and  which  was  increased 
by  a  residuary  interest  in  her  estate  to  the  generous  amount  of  $5  1,000. 
Francis  Ramsdell  left  the  asylum  $17,000  and  B.  F.  Shaw,  $4,850. 
Mrs.  Alfred  Churchill  gave  it  $5,000  for  the  construction  of  a  laundry, 
and  Jonathan  R.  Warner  $10,000,  the  income  of  which  must  be  used 
for  the  payment  of  insurance  and  repairs  and  improvements  on  the 
premises.  Nicholas  F.  Vedder  gave  $5,000,  and  smaller  sums  were 
given  by  others. 

The  successive  matrons  of  the  asylum  since  the  departure  of  Mrs. 
Brown,  have  been  Miss  Thomas,  Mrs.  Cooley,  Mrs.  Sarah  Beard,  Mrs. 
Harriet  W.  Jones,  Miss  M.  J.  Foster,  Mrs.  Catharine  Pease,  Mrs.  Tuffts, 
Miss  Hinsdale,  Mrs.  Jane  M.  Talcott,  and  Mrs.  Julia  E.  Stevens. 

Some  idea  of  the  great  usefulness  of  this  institution  may  be  gained 
from  a  few  figures.  The  number  of  children  housed  and  cared  for  pre- 
vious to  1880,  was  1,578  ;  and  since  that  date,  880,  making  a  total  of 
2,458.  None  but  orphans  are  taken  absolutely  free  of  charge  ;  half- 
orphans  being  charged  for  at  a  low  rate,  according  to  the  circumstances 
of  the  parent.  Children  are  admitted  from  the  age  of  two  years,  are 
enabled  to  acquire  a  good  English  education,  and  are  kept,  boys  until 
twelve,  girls  until  they  are  fourteen,  when  they  are  put  out  at  service, 
the  person  taking  them  giving  bonds  for  their  care  and  maintenance. 
The  system  of  internal  management  has  not  been  changed  from  the  be- 
ginning, the  constitution  being  the  guide  which  is  strictly  followed.  It 
is  Protestant,  Evangelical  and  Catholic.  It  is  governed  by  women 
elected  from  all  the  churches  of  faith  thus  described,  and  governed  in  a 
spirit  of  harmony  that  has  never  been  broken.  They  visit  the  asylum 
frequently  and  in  turn,  and  through  their  committees  perform  all  the 
service  that  is  required. 


620  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

In  1834  the  late  John  C.  and  Nicholas  Devereux  made  application  to 
the  Sisters  of  Charity  to  conduct  a  Catholic  asylum  and  day  school  in 
Utica.  Accordingly,  three  Sisters  were  sent  from  the  Mother  House  at 
Emmettsburg,  Md.  The  asylum  was  opened  in  December,  with  three 
children,  in  a  small  frame  dwelling-house  a  story  and  a  half  in  height,  in 
the  center  of  the  lot  now  occupied.  A  day  school  was  opened  after  a 
time  in  an  adjoining  building  on  Burnet  street.  The  institution,  St.  John's 
Female  Orphan  Asylum,  was  incorporated  March  18,  1848.  The 
grounds  and  early  buildings  were  the  gift  of  the  Messrs.  Devereux,  who 
were  the  chief  support  of  the  institution  until  its  incorporation.  The 
number  of  children  increased  rapidly,  and  the  building  used  for  the  asy- 
lum became  crowded.  The  work  of  the  Sisters,  aided  by  their  friends, 
has  made  trie  building  what  it  now  is.  The  area  of  land  now  occupied 
is  29,000  square  feet,  the  asylum  fronting  140  feet  on  John  street  and 
200  feet  deep,  and  the  entire  building  is  four  stories  high.  The  origi- 
nal building  was  the  central  part  of  the  present  building,  which  was  two 
stories  high  It  was  increased  to  three  when  the  addition  was  put  on 
the  north  side,  and  afterward  to  four  when  the  south  addition  was  put 
on.  These  enlargements  were  made  as  money  was  obtained  by  the 
Sisters  to  do  the  work.  There  are  at  present  140  children  in  the  asy- 
lum, and  they  are  cared  for  by  seven  Sisters.  The  support  comes 
mainly  from  the  county,  which  pays  $200  a  week  for  those  it  sends 
there.  Half  orphans  are  partially  supported  by  the  remaining  parent, 
and  all  attend  the  day  school,  but  in  a  separate  room  from  the  day 
scholars.  The  asylum  has  room  for  about  200  children.  The  day 
school  is  open  forty  weeks  each  year,  has  250  scholars  in  attendance, 
and  five  Sisters  are  occupied  as  teachers.  This  building  is  in  the 
rear  of  the  asylum  building  and  fronts  on  Burnet  street.  It  was  re 
modeled  in  1886,  and  made  one-third  larger  to  provide  for  the  in- 
creased number  of  pupils.  It  has  five  grades  of  study,  extending 
through  the  academic  course.  It  is  supported  by  St.  John's  parish  and 
is  free  to  all  children  from  this  church.  Sister  Stanislaus  is  Superioress 
of  the  combined  institutions. 

A  Catholic  Asylum  for  boys  was  founded  March  25,  1862,  by  Rev. 
Thomas  Daley,  of  St.  John's  Church,  and  was  called  St.  Vincent  Male 
Orphan  Asylum.     It  was  incorporated  April  21  of  the  same  year.     It 


ST.  VINCENT  INDUSTRIAL  SCHOOL.  621 

had  its  beginning  in  the  rooms  of  the  Assumption  Academy,  but  soon 
enough  children  were  gathered  to  warrant  the  erection  of  a  building  for 
its  purpose.  During  this  period  the  institution  was  mainly  supported 
by  St.  Vincent  De  Paul  Society  and  the  congregation  of  St.  John's 
Church.  Its  affairs  were  directed  by  the  Brothers  of  the  Christian 
Schools,  and  its  finances  were  controlled  by  a  board  of  managers.  The 
Brothers  resigned  April  12,  1876,  and  the  board  then  assumed  entire 
charge  of  the  school.  It  was  at  this  period  that  the  institution  was  in- 
corporated under  the  title  of  "St.  Vincent  Protectorate  and  Reforma 
tory  for  destitute  children  in  Oneida  and  adjacent  counties."  At  the 
end  of  the  year  the  property  was  sold  at  public  auction.  Rt.  Rev. 
Bishop  McNierny  purchased  it  and  recalled  the  Christian  Brothers  Jan- 
uary 19,  1877.  In  this  way  the  school  was  continued  until  August, 
1885,  when  the  Christian  Brothers  purchased  the  property  of  Bishop 
McNierny,  and  re  incorporated  it  under  the  name  of  "  St.  Vincent  In- 
dustrial School."  Improvements  to  the  amount  of  $8,000  were  now 
made  upon  the  building  which  is  built  of  brick,  three  stories  and  base- 
ment, and  140  X  70  feet  in  size,  located  in  the  center  of  seven  acres  of 
land,  on  Rutger  street  between  Taylor  avenue  and  Third  street.  Ma- 
chinery consisting  of  thirty-six  small  knitting  machines,  four  ripping 
machines,  a  steam  press,  a  tailor  shop  (where  the  children  make  and  re- 
pair their  own  clothing),  and  a  wood  carving  shop  had  been  put  in  at  a 
co.stof  $6,000.  There  are  at  present  160  boys  in  the  institution,  which 
is  conducted  by  nine  Brothers  under  the  management  of  Brother  Adel- 
berian.  Not  all  of  these  come  from  Central  New  York;  some  are  from 
the  metropolis,  by  whose  funds  they  are  supported.  Boys  are  taken 
ordinarily  between  the  ages  of  six  and  fourteen,  and  instructed  in  the 
ordinary  branches  of  study  and  in  religion,  and  spend  three  hours  each 
day  in  some  one  of  the  workshops. 

The  first  steps  towards  the  founding  of  an  institution  for  infirm  and 
destitute  children  under  the  direction  of  the  Episcopal  denomination 
were  taken  in  the  winter  of  1872-73.  A  meeting  was  called  at  Trinity 
Rectory,  at  which  Bishop  F.  D.  Huntington  presided,  where  ways  and 
means  were  fully  discussed  and  decided  upon.  Soon  after,  in  May, 
1873,  a  small  tenement  on  Blandina  street  was  rented,  through  the  gen- 
erosity of  the  late  Mrs  Charlotte  B.  Crouse,  and  the  House  of  the  Good 


62  2  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTTCA. 

Shepherd  went  into  practical  operation.  It  openejfl  with  two  children 
as  innnates,  but  before  the  week  closed  this  number  was  increased  to 
twelve,  filling  the  little  house  to  its  utmost  capacity  and  proving  imme- 
diately the  great  need  of  the  charity.  Eleven  trustees  and  six  mana- 
gers were  given  the  control  of  it. 

Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  small  house  subscription  papers  were 
put  in  active  circulation,  and  as  a  gratifying  result  there  occurred  on  the 
8th  of  June,  1875,  the  formal  opening  of  the  present  commodious  house 
on  the  corner  of  Bleecker  and  East  streets.  Interesting  addresses  were 
made  on  this  occasion  by  Bishop  Huntington,  the  city  clergy,  and  by 
several  distinguished  laymen.  The  house  was  thusffully  launched  on  its 
career  of  usefulness.  Its  articles  of  associations  set  forth  that  "  the  par- 
ticular business  and  objects  of  this  society  shall  be  the  care,  mainte- 
nance, and  instruction  of  friendless,  neglected,  or  destitute  children  of 
the  Diocese  of  Central  New  York,  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church, 
and  shall  be  carried  on  in  Utica,  Oneida  County."  The  constitution 
says  with  equal  brevity,  but  with  great  comprehensiveness,  that  "  the 
business  of  the  society  shall  be  the  permanent  care  of  infirm  children, 
and  the  temporary  care  of  friendless,  neglected,  and  destitute  children, 
without  requiring  their  surrender."  The  children  in  charge  are  not  or- 
phans (except  in  exceptional  cases).  Very  few  of  the  parents,  however, 
owing  to  illness  or  other  disabilities,  are  able  to  pay  anything  toward 
the  support  of  their  children,  who  would  be  homeless  and  destitute  but 
for  this  kindly  home.  There  are  always  many  more  applications  for 
admission  than  can  be  granted,  and  many  and  heart-rending  are  the 
tales  of  sorrow  and  destitution  wliich  reach  the  ears  of  the  managers. 

This  is  the  only  institution  in  the  city  where  children  under  two  years 
of  age  are  admitted,  but  here  the  nursery  has  always  fourteen  or  fifteen 
inmates,  requiring  great  care  and  entailing  much  expense  for  nurses  and 
attendants.  But  two  deaths  (both  infants)  have  occurred  in  more  than 
three  years. 

The  house,  as  has  been  seen  from  its  articles  of  association,  is  under 
the  care  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  and  the  religious  instruc- 
tion of  the  children  is  guided  by  that  church  ;  but  in  this  connection  it 
should  be  stated  that  the  question  of  the  special  creed,  or  absence  of 
creed,  of  any  child  asking  for  admission  is  never  taken  into  account,  and 


HOME  FOR  THE  HOMELESS.  623 

children  of  every  Protestant  denomination,  and  many  Roman  Catholics, 
have  from  time  to  time  found  shelter  in  the  house.  Prayers  are  read 
once  every  day  in  the  chapel,  and  on  Sundays  the  children  attend  morn- 
ing service  and  Sunday-school  at  the  church  of  the  Holy  Cross,  on 
Bleecker  street;  but  Roman  Catholic  children  are  allowed  to  attend 
their  own  church. 

Since  the  present  house  was  built  it  has  been  enlarged  and  improved 
by  the  building  of  an  infirmary,  school- room  and  chapel,  and  several  lots 
have  been  added  to  the  grounds,  three  by  gift,  the  rest  by  purchase.  It 
is  hoped  that  in  the  future  a  house  for  boys  can  be  built  on  a  part  of 
this  land.  The  present  capacity  of  the  house  is  about  forty- five,  and  it 
is  always  filled  to  overflowing.  The  names  of  nearly  600  children  are 
to  be  found  upon  its  bool<s  since  they  were  opened.  The  house  main- 
tains a  regular  day  school  for  the  older  inmates  and  they  are  well  and 
carefully  taught.  The  girls  are  also  thoroughly  instructed  in  sewing. 
Great  care  is  taken  of  their  religious  training,  manners  and  general  be- 
havior, and  in  these  respects  they  compare  most  favorably  with  children 
blessed  by  a  home  atmosphere. 

The  total  value  of  the  present  house  and  grounds  is  about  $17,000. 
The  institution  is  supported  mainly  by  the  charity  of  its  many  kind 
friends,  though  it  has  received  since  its  incorporation  several  legacies 
which  have  been  invested  and  yield  a  moderate  income.  To  this  is 
added  annually  a  considerable  sum  received  from  the  supervisors  of  sev- 
eral counties  who  have  committed  children  to  the  house.  Over  and 
above  these  sources  of  revenue  it  is  dependent  upon  the  gifts  of  its 
friends,  and  as  its  annual  expenses  amount  to  nearly  $5,000,  it  is  appa- 
rent that  these  are  constant  and  generous.  Following  are  the  officers 
of  the  institution  as  shown  by  the  report  of  1890:  President  ex- officio, 
Rt.  Rev.  F.  D.  Huntington,  S.  T.  D.;  Chaplain,  Rev.  J.  J  Burd ;  house- 
mother, Mrs.  Mary  F.  J.  Frisbie.  Of  the  board  of  managers.  Miss  L.  C. 
Watson,  is  president.  Of  the  board  of  trustees  Thomas  R.  Proctor  is 
president. 

November  19,  1866,  a  charter  was  granted  to  an  association  under 
the  name  of  "  Home  for  the  Homeless  in  the  City  of  Utica,"  the  object 
of  which  was  and  is  the  protection,  assistance,  and  support,  wholly  or 
in  part,  of  respectable,  aged,   indigent  or  infirm    women,  who   are   un- 


624  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

able  to  support  themselves  without  assistance.  The  Home  was  opened 
in  a  building  on  Whitesboro  street,  opposite  the  State  Asylum  grounds, 
in  May,  1867,  and  during  the  first  year  received  seven  aged  women. 
But  it  was  clear  that  a  suitable  building  must  be  erected  in  order  to  make 
the  institution  a  permanent  success.  Mr.  T.  S.  Faxton  offered  to  give 
$20,000  toward  the  erection  of  a  home,  provided  a  like  sum  should 
be  subscribed  by  January  i,  1869.  Success  so  far  attended  the  efforts 
of  the  ladies  that  $26,000  was  subscribed  by  that  time,  and  the  founda- 
tion of  an  appropriate  structure  was  laid  upon  the  two  acres  of  land  do- 
nated by  Mr.  Faxton  on  Faxton  street,  where  the  Home  now  stands. 
In  December,  1870,  Mr.  B.  F.  Jewett,  aided  by  his  sisters,  donated  four 
lots,  each  40  feet  front  and  126  feet  deep,  adjoining  the  lots  donated  by 
Mr.  Faxton.  The  Home  was  built  of  brick,  three  stories  in  height,  at  a 
cost  of  $30,000,  and  was  opened  to  the  public  December  26,  1870. 
There  were  twenty- six  inmates  who  occupied  the  new  home  during  this 
first  year  of  its  existence.  The  Home  at  that  time  contained  two  front 
parlors,  sixteen  double  and  twenty  single  lodging-rooms,  and  dining- 
room,  with  closets  and  bath-rooms  and  kitchen.  In  December,  1872,  an 
exhibition  of  allegorical  tableaux  was  given  for  the  benefit  of  the  house 
the  proceeds  of  which  amounted  to  $703.42,  and  were  applied  to  the 
purchase  of  a  lot  in  the  cemetery.  In  1879  a  new  building  was  added 
to  the  old  one  at  a  cost  of  $6,000,  this  having  been  found  necessary  ow- 
ing to  the  increased  number  of  applications  for  admission.  During  the 
following  year  a  public  announcement  was  made  of  the  bequest  of 
$35,000  by  Jason  G.  Coye  to  the  Home,  and,  at  the  present  writing 
another  extensive  addition  is  being  made  to  the  institution  to  accommo- 
date the  increasing  number  who  have  applied  for  admission.  When  the 
Home  was  first  organized  it  was  placed  under  a  board  of  thirty-seven 
•lady  managers,  and  from  this  number  its  officers  were  chosen.  The 
first  officers  were :  Mrs.  S.  W.  Fisher,  president ;  Mrs.  P.  V.  Rogers 
treasurer;  Mrs.  A.  Seward,  corresponding  secretary;  Mrs.  James  H. 
Williams,  recording  secretary;  and  ten  vice-presidents.  Mrs.  Daniel 
Grouse  became  president  in  1870,  and  has  since  held  that  office.  Mrs. 
Rogers  was  treasurer  until  October,  1882,  since  which  time  Mrs.  Ed- 
ward Curran  has  held  that  office.  The  Home  is  still  managed  as  it  was 
at  first,  and  has  given  refuge  during  its  twenty- five  years  of  existence  to 


FAXTON  HOSPITAL  AND  HOME.  625 

over  200  women.  The  matrons  who  have  successively  managed  the 
affairs  of  the  home  are  :  Mrs.  Sarah  Judson,  Miss  Ellen  Jones,  Miss 
Lucretia  Spurr,  Mrs.  Mary  E.  Sharpe. 

The  Faxton  Hospital  was  erected  in  1874  and  1875  by  Hon.  Theo- 
dore S.  Faxton,  who  not  only  gave  the  means  for  its  entire  construc- 
tion, but  carefully  supervised  the  execution  of  his  plans.  In  June,  1875, 
he  placed  the  institution  in  the  hands  of  a  Board  of  Trustees,  created  at 
his  instance  by  act  of  the  legislature  two  years  previously.  With  these 
trustees  its  management  vested  until  1878.  By  them  a  medical  and 
surgical  staff  was  appointed,  nurses  were  engaged,  and  the  sick  were 
received.  The  demands  upon  the  Hospital  for  the  accommodation  of 
patients  did  not,  however,  meet  the  anticipations  of  its  generous  founder. 
A  study  of  the  reasons  for  this  led  the  trustees,  in  1878,  to  place  the  insti- 
tution under  the  care  of  a  board  of  forty  lady  managers,  with  powers  and 
duties  similar  to  those  given  the  lady  managers  of  the  Home  for  the 
Homeless.  By  them  the  second  and  third  floors  of  the  building  were 
set  apart  for  the  shelter  of  aged  men,  the  lower  one  being  devoted  to 
the  care  of  the  sick.  The  Faxton  Hospital  thus  became  not  only  a 
hospital,  but  a  home — a  shelter  and  permanent  resting  place  for  re- 
spectable men,  who,  at  an  advanced  age,  are  left  helpless  and  alone. 
Three  were  admitted  that  year,  four  the  year  following,  and  six  in 
1880. 

In  February,  1882,  articles  of  incorporation  of  the  Home  for  Aged 
Men  were  duly  filed,  the  gifts  at  that  time  being  $1,000  from  the  late 
A.  J.  Williams,  $500  from  Miss  Jane  E.  Kelly,  and  $1,000  from  the 
estate  of  Mrs.  George  S.  Green.  It  has  recently  been  decided,  on  ac- 
count of  numerous  applications,  to  admit  aged  men,  together  with  their 
wives,  and  three  such  have  been  received.  In  the  early  part  of  the 
year  1890  efforts  were  put  forth  toward  the  erection  of  a  building  for  this 
purpose.  A  lot  on  Sunset  avenue  was  secured  and  a  large  and  commo- 
dious structure  has  been  placed  thereon  at  a  cost  of  $35,000.  It  was 
opened  with  appropriate  ceremonies  July  15,  1891.  Since  its  incep- 
tion in  1878  the  home  has  received  and  sheltered  sixty-five  inmates. 
As  a  hospital  for  the  treatment  of  the  sick,  the  building  first  erected  is 
still  maintained,  there  being  two  physicians  in  charge,  one  from  both 
of  the  two  principal  schools  of  practice,  and   the  patients   having  the 

79 


626  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

choice  of  their  medical  attendant.     From   thirty  to   forty  patients   are 
annually  received.      At  present  it  is  being  remodeled. 

St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital  and  Home  was  organized  December  I2, 
1866,  by  Mother  Bernardine,  a  member  of  the  charitable  Order  of  St. 
Francis.  The  firgt  patient  was  received  in  a  small  wooden  building  on 
Columbia  street,  which  was  kindly  given  by  the  Franciscan  Fathers, 
rent  free,  for  the  purpose.  Through  the  generosity  of  Thomas  B.  Dev- 
ereux  another  building  was  added  to  the  institution,  and  soon  after- 
ward still  another,  all  within  two  years.  As  the  number  of  patients  in- 
creased new  nurses  were  obtained.  The  funds  necessary  to  carry  on 
the  work  at  that  time  came  entirely  from  the  contributions  of  charitable 
citizens.  In  1868  the  old  buildings  were  removed  to  make  room  for 
the  new  St.  Joseph's  Church,  and  a  purchase  was  made  of  a  house  a 
few  doors  west  of  the  former  location.  This  building  was  repaired  and 
put  in  order  for  the  comfort  of  the  sick,  and  was  finally  opened  for  pa- 
tients October  15,  1869.  It  was  built  of  wood,  two  stories  high,  and 
would  accommodate  about  thirty  patients.  A  lying-in  department  was 
at  once  opened,  and  in  1871  a  dispensary  for  the  out-door  poor.  Med- 
icine is  furnished  free  to  those  needing  it.  The  design  of  the  institution 
is  to  provide  for  the  medical  and  surgical  care  of  all  persons  who  may 
apply  for  relief,  without  regard  to  age,  sex,  color,  nativity,  creed  or 
ability  to  pay  ;  and  to  furnish  a  home  for  the  aged  and  infirm  of  both 
sexes.  Those  who  are  able  are  expected  to  pay  the  cost  of  their  sup- 
port ;  and  others  what  they  can  afford.  By  this  plan  the  money  of  the 
charitable  is  applied  directly  to  the  benefit  of  the  destitute  poor.  The 
hospital  is  under  the  supervision  of  the  Sisters  of  the  Order  of  St.  Fran- 
cis, and  is  not  connected  with  any  parish  or  church.  Several  physi- 
cians and  surgeons  are  on  the  staff  of  the  hospital,  and  daily  minister  to 
its  inmates.     Dr.  Hamilton  S.  Quin  is  the  chief  of  staft". 

St.  Luke's  Home  was  incorporated  December  23,  1869.  It  grew  out 
of  the  personal  labors  of  Rev.  E.  M.  Van  Deusen,  D.D.,  who  preached 
a  sermon  in  October,  1867,  suggesting  such  a  church  home.  Truman 
K.  Butler,  in  the  fall  of  1869,  offered  the  use  of  an  unfurnished  build- 
ing in  course  of  erection  for  a  factory  boarding-house  for  eighteen 
months  free  of  rent,  with  the  condition  that,  if  the  establishment  of 
such  an  institution  could  be  proven  practicable,  after  he  had  completed 


ST.  LUKE'S  HOSPITAL  AND  HOME.  627 

it  he  would,  at  the  expiration  of  that  period,  give  a  deed  of  the  prop- 
erty. An  informal  service  was  held  on  St.  Luke's  day,  October  18, 
1869,  and  the  home  was  called  St.  Luke's.  The  object  of  the  institu- 
tion was,  and  is,  "The  establishing  and  maintaining  in  the  cityof  Utica 
a  refuge  for  the  poor  and  friendless  members  of  Gra.ce  Church  parish 
in  Utica,  and  such  others  as  the  Board  of  Managers  may  think  entitled 
to  its  benefits."  The  corporators  and  managers  for  the  first  year  were 
the  rector,  wardens  and  vestrymen  of  Grace  Church.  Its  board  of 
twelve  almoners  had  as  officers:  Mrs.  Van  Deusen,  president;  Mrs. 
James  S  Lynch,  treasurer;  and  Mrs.  James  F.  Mann,  secretary.  Miss 
Mary  Northrup  was  the  first  matron.  On  the  3d  of  January,  1870,  a 
school  was  opened  in  the  Home  building,  but  was  discontinued  after 
about  two  years.  It  was  now  found  that  a  hospital  was  necessary,  and 
accordingly,  September  i,  1870,  a  double  two-story  brick  dwelling  ad- 
joining the  home  was  bought  of  Mr.  Butler  for  $6,000,  he  contributing 
$1,000.  In  this  the  hospital  was  opened  July  9,  1872,  with  Mrs.  Sarah 
J.  Brown,  president,  and  Mrs.  Louise  G.  Schantz,  secretary  and  treas- 
urer. The  first  matron  was  Mrs.  Butterworth,  who  was  succeeded  by 
a  Mrs.  Mallick  for  a  short  time.  Miss  De  Lancey  was  the  third  matron. 
The  present  one  is  Mrs.  Anna  Stewart.  On  September. 7,  1874,  Grace 
Church,  in  consideration  of  the  request  of  Mr.  Butler,  quit  claimed  to 
the  corporation  the  hospital  premises  subject  to  the  mortgage  which  was 
paid  one-half  by  subscription,  the  rest,  $1,500,  by  Mr.  Butler.  In  1875 
a  lot  owned  by  the  city  west  of  the  hospital  was  purchased  for  $1,500. 
On  November  i,  1876,  Mr.  Butler  purchased  alotin  Forest  Hill  Ceme- 
tery and  gave  it  to  the  Home.  In  1880  a  medical  director  was  chosen 
for  the  hospital,  and  the  custom  has  since  continued.  Dr.  Willis  E. 
Ford  is  the  present  medical  director,  and  with  him  are  associated  a  num- 
ber of  other  physicians  and  surgeons.  The  Helen  Ledyard  Seymour 
memorial  fountain,  which  adorns  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house,  was 
given  September  6,  i88i,and  February  10,  1883,  Mr.  Butler  conveyed 
to  the  corporation  the  vacant  lot  used  as  a  lawn.  In  1886  a  new  brick 
building  was  erected  at  a  cost  of  $13,890.  In  June.  1887,  the  Board 
of  Managers  purchased  the  dwelling,  No.  305  Whitesboro  street,  for 
$2,300,  and  all  the  indebtedness  on  the  above  property  is  at  the  present 
time  cancelled.     January  21,  1888,  the  name  became  St.  Luke's  Home 


628  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  Hospital  in  the  city  of  Utica.  During  the  same  year  the  board 
fitted  up  the  "  Lancaster  House  "  for  the  use  of  nurses  and  other  hos- 
pital purposes.  A  school  for  nurses  was  established  in  1889,  and  is 
proving  a  very  successful  feature  of  the  work.  Plans  have  already  been 
drawn  for  another  building,  to  be  used  for  general  hospital  purposes. 
Three  hundred  and  eighteen  patients  have  been  cared  for  during  the 
year  closing  October  1,  1891.  The  Hospital  and  Home  has  eight  male 
managers  and  twenty- four  lady  almoners. 

The  City  Hospital  was  erected  by  commission  in  1856  at  the  expense 
of  the  city,  and  was  intended  to  be  used  as  a  w»rk-house.  Two  years 
later  it  became  a  hospital  under  the  superintendence  of  the  poor- master, 
and  when  the  Board  of  Charities  superseded  him  it  came  under  the  care 
of  the  latter.  Its  cost  was  $12,000.  The  building  was  built  of  brick, 
three  stories  high.  Two  wings,  before  incomplete,  have  since  been  re- 
modeled and  put  in  use,  one  designed  to  lodge  court  witnesses,  and  boys 
awaiting  trial  oa  criminal  charges,  the  other  for  those  sick  with  conta- 
gious diseases.  There  is  room  for  about  fifty  patients,  and  the  recoid 
shows  that  3,300  patients  have  been  treated  during  the  past  ten  years. 
A  physician  appointed  by  the  Board  of  Charities  is  in  daily  attendance. 
The  successive,  keepers  have  been  Frederick  Sehn,  Henry  G.  Neejer, 
Frederick  Saul,  David  Dimbleby,  and  Richard  R.  Pritchard.  The  hos- 
pital is  located  at  the  corner  of  South  and  Mohawk  streets,  and  has  ex- 
tensive grounds  about  it.  While  under  the  direction  of  the  Board  of 
Charities  it  may  be  taken  into  control  by  the  city  at  any  time. 

By  act  of  the  legislature  there  was  created,  in  1873,  a  Board  of  Char- 
ities of  the  city  of  Utica,  the  object  of  its  creation  being  to  sever  the 
administration  of  these  charities  as  much  as  possible  from  political  in- 
fluence. This  board  consists  of  six  commissioners,  one- half  of  whom 
are  elected  by  popular  vote,  and  one-half  appointed  by  the  town  auditors, 
one  commissioner  being  thus  elected  and  one  appointed  every  year,  and 
each  holding  his  office  for  three  years.  To  this  board  are  entrusted  the  pow- 
ers and  duties  of  a  poor-master,  but  v/ithout  pecuniary  compensation. 
By  it  is  appointed  a  clerk,  who  not  only  keeps  a  full  record  of  all  official 
proceedings,  but  acts  as  the  paid  and  authorized  agent  of  the  board  in 
administering  the  charities  of  the  city,  which  include  the  care  of  the 
hospital  and  relieving  the  wants  of  the  necessitous  outside  of  it.     By  it 


THE  BOARD  OF  CHARITIES.  629 

are  appointed  the  keeper  and  the  physician  of  the  hospital,  and  a  phy- 
sician for  each  of  the  wards  of  the  city.  While  the  clerk  is  thus  made 
the  chief  agent  for  carrying  out  the  duties  pertaining  to  their  office,  the 
board  are  themselves  distributed  into  committees,  who  supervise  and 
direct  in  such  matters  as  the  furnishing  of  supplies  for  the  hospital,  the 
care  of  its  building  and  grounds,  the  examination  of  bills  and  accounts, 
the  proper  performance  of  their  duties  by  the  physicians,  the  keeper, 
etc.;  and  they  meet  once  a  month  to  examine  and  decide  upon  all  af- 
fairs that  relate  to  the  public  charities.  Besides  the  foregoing  functions 
they  have  the  powerto  committothe  County  House  at  Rome,  to  the  State 
Hospital  for  the  Insane,  to  the  Idiot  Asylum  at  Syracuse,  and  to  the 
various  orphan  asylums  of  Utica,  such  members  of  the  indigent  por- 
tion of  the  community  as  are  shown  to  be  subjects  suitable  for  these 
respective  institutions.  These  services  are  of  necessity  mostly  per- 
formed by  the  clerk,  their  executive  officer,  who  is  in  daily  attendance 
at  his  office  to  respond  to  numerous  demands  on  his  attention,  and  he 
is  required  to  have  personal  knowledge  of  every  applicant  for  relief, 
and  to  examine  into  the  character,  habits,  condition  and  necessities  of 
each.  He  may  grant  relief  to  any  indigent  person  needing  only  tem- 
porary assistance,  may  furnish  plain  single  meals  to  such  deserving 
transient  persons  as  may  apply  for  them,  and  likewise  transportation, 
not  exceeding  twenty  miles,  to  such  deserving  transients  as  are  found  in 
the  city  ;  and  he  is,  moreover,  authorized  to  bury  any  deceased  person 
whose  friends  are  unable  to  bury  him.  Through  the  clerk  the  board 
reports  annually  to  the  public  the  number  of  persons  assisted  and  the 
kind  of  such  assistance  rendered,  together  with  the  amount  of  expense 
incurred  in  each  case.  He  is  aided  by  a  secretary  on  whom  are  largely 
devolved  the  registry  of  his  multipHed  acts  The  total  expenses  of  the 
board  during  the  year  ending  March  i,  1891,  were  $15,750.19.  The 
average  per  year  since  the  institution  of  the  board  has  been  $16,318.47, 
while  the  average  of  the  seven  years  that  preceded  its  institution  was 
$32,895.13;  which  plainly  shows  the  superiority  of  the  present  plan  of 
administering  the  city's  charities  over  that  by  a  poor- master.  The 
present  Board  of  Commissioners  are  Joseph  Faass  and  John  Evans, 
three  years;  Joseph  Joerissen  and  Edmund  Richards,  two  years; 
Charles  N.  White  and  Timothy  Coakley,  one  year.  The  clerk  has  been 
for  several  years  Lawrence  Conrad. 


630  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

July  1 1,  1870,  a  number  of  Christian  women,  incited  to  do  something 
toward  bettering  the  condition  of  their  own  sex  who  were  less  favored 
than  themselves,  organized  a  Woman's  Christian  Association.  Mrs. 
P.  H.  Fowler  was  the  president,  and  there  were  six  vice-presidents. 
The  eighty- two  original  members  had  increased  by  the  end  of  the  year 
to  223.  The  object  of  the  Association  was,  and  is,  to  improve  the  phys 
ical,  intellectual,  moral,  and  religious  condition  of  women  dependent 
upon  their  own  exertions  for  support.  It  was  at  once  placed  under  a 
board  of  managers  consisting  of  two  ladies  from  each  evangelical 
church,  together  with  the  officers  of  the  association.  One  of  the  firt>t 
considerations  was  the  establishment  of  a  boarding-house  where  young 
women,  away  from  home  and  friends,  could  secure  room  and  board  at 
reasonable  rates.  The  opportunity  came  in  the  spring  of  1871,  and  the 
property  at  the  corner  of  Court  and  Cornelia  streets  was  purchased  for 
$12,160.  Two  houses  stood  upon  the  property,  and  the  one  facing 
Cornelia  was  soon  afterward  sold.  The  other  is  the  present  "  Industrial 
Home,"  built  of  brick  and  three  stories  high.  A  number  of  benevolent 
gentlemen  made  the  first  payment  of  $3,000,  and  the  ladies  have  raised 
the  rest.  The  "Home"  was  opened  in  April,  1871,  equipped  and 
ready  for  boarders,  and  was  chartered  May  6,  1871.  June  8,  1891,  the 
corner-stone  of  a  new  building,  on  ground  just  east  of  the  old  "Home," 
was  laid,  to  be  known  as  the  "  Georgia  Porter  Memorial  "  Building. 
It  was  given  to  the  association  by  Mrs.  E.  M.  Pike,  in  memory  of  her 
daughter,  Mrs,  Porter.  It  is  of  brick,  three  stories  high,  and  cost 
$10,000.  This  building  will  be  used  for  the  work  of  the  association. 
In  the  spring  of  1886  an  act  of  legislature  allowed  married  women  to 
hold  property.  The  association  was  accordingly  incorporated  April  15, 
1886,  and  the  property  transferred  to  them.  The  first  trustees  were : 
Mrs.  M.  W.  Bussey,  president ;  Mrs.  S.  W.  Crittenden,  treasurer  ;  Mrs. 
C.  C.  Shaver,  secretary  ;  Mrs.  M.  H.  Merwin,  Mrs.  J.  G.  Brown,  Mrs. 
C.  C.  Kellogg.  The  association  is  supported  by  voluntary  contribu- 
tions from  churches  and  private  individuals,  no  benefit  entertainments 
having  been  held  since  the  first  year  of  its  organization.  It  has  one 
source  of  revenue,  The  Christian  Worker,  a  monthly  edited  by  Mrs. 
S.  W.  Crittenden,  which  was  started  in  1875.  Beyond  that  of  publish- 
ing and  distributing,  there  is  no  expense  attending  it.     This  paper  is 


EXCHANGE  FOR  WOMEN'S  WORK.  631 

run  by  the  association,  and  has  netted  to  the  treasury  for  general  work 
over  $2,500.  There  are  numerous  branches  of  work  carried  on,  two  of 
which  we  mention,  (i).  A  young  woman's  class  and  reading-room  was 
started  some  years  ago  by  the  association,  and  is  now  under  a  depart- 
ment by  itself,  and  solicits  for  its  own  support.  Rooms  in  the  new 
building  will  be  fitted  up  for  this  purpose.  (2).  Two  visitors  are  ap- 
pointed for  each  ward  who  report  to  the  association  meetings  each  week 
for  relief,  and  all  relief  given  must  be  by  a  vote  of  the  association.  The 
present  officers  are  :  President,  Mrs.  M.  W.  Bussey  ;  vice-presidents. 
Miss  S.  E.  Gilbert,  Mrs.  Jacob  Hunt,  Mrs.  C.  M.  Green,  Mrs.  Clark 
Wood,  Mrs.  S.  W.  Crittenden,  Mrs.  Dr.  W.  E  Ford  ;  recording  secre- 
tary, Mrs.  C.  C.  Shaver;  corresponding  secretary,  Mrs.  R.  H.  Wicks; 
assistant  secretary,  Mrs.  Dr.  Glass  ;  treasurer,  Mrs.  George  R.  Thomas. 
These,  with  ladies  from  seventeen  churches,  make  the  present  board  of 
managers.  The  total  money  expenditure  for  the  past  year  is  $2,460, 
besides  large  contributions  of  clothing  and  other  gifts.  There  were 
1,150  visits  made. 

In  the  spring  of  1889  there  was  incorporated  a  society  known  as  the 
Utica  Exchange  for  Women's  Work.  Its  object  is  "  to  provide  a  depot 
for  the  reception  and  sale  of  any  marketable  article  made  by  a  woman, 
or  any  valuable  article  which  her  necessity  may  oblige  her  to  dispose  of, 
and  to  assist  a  needy  woman  to  turn  to  personal  profit  whatever  useful 
talent  she  may  possess."  It  is  controlled  by  a  board  of  twelve  direc- 
tors elected  annually  from  its  body  of  upward  of  lOO  managers,  consti- 
tuted such  by  the  payment  of  $5  a  year.  Besides  its  president,  three 
vice-presidents,  a  corresponding  and  recording  secretary,  and  a  treas 
urer,  it  has  the  following  committees,  viz. :  Executive,  fancy  and  needle 
work,  culinary,  employment  and  entertainment.  Each  manager  is  en- 
titled to  three  tickets,  which  she  may  donate  to  persons  willing  to  enter 
their  handiwork  at  the  depot  of  the  Exchange.  Work  so  entered  is  in- 
spected by  the  committees  of  the  respective  kinds  of  work,  and  if  ac- 
cepted is  placed  on  sale,  the  maker  paying  ten  per  cent,  on  the  price 
that  is  realized,  which  she  herself  affixes.  During  the  jear  1890,  3,188 
articles  were  received,  thirty  three  being  rejected.  Moreover,  there  is 
reported  a  steady  improvement  in  the  taste  and  skill  of  the  consignors, 
as  these  artificers  are  called.     Besides  the  sales  daily  made  at  the  depot, 


632  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

several  other  sales  have  been  made  in  other  and  often  distant  parts  of  the 
country.  Orders  have  been  taken  in  during  the  year  to  the  value  of 
$590.  Some  kinds  of  cake  are  regarded  as  specialties  of  this  exchange, 
being  of  a  delicious  quality  and  cheaper  than  can  be  made  at  home. 
The  profits  realized  during  the  year  from  all  sources,  including  the  an- 
nual subscriptions,  amount  to  over  $7,000.  Another  feature  of  the 
work  is  the  registering  the  names  of  women  and  girls  seeking  employ- 
ment and  procuring  their  testimonials  of  character,  etc.  The  president 
of  the  exchange  is  Miss  A.  Louise  Lynch. 


PART  II. 

BIOGRAPHICAL. 


PART  II. 

BIOGRAPHICAL. 


SEYMOUR,  HORATIO,  came  of  an  honored  and  patriotic  ancestry.  The  family 
was  among  the  earlier  settlers  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  contributed  not  a  little  to 
the  glory  and  development  of  that  State.  In  the  war  of  the  Revolution  his  grandfather 
was  captain  of  a  troop  of  horse,  in  which  capacity  he  served  in  some  of  its  more  im- 
portant struggles.  Of  his  five  sons  one  became  distinguished  as  a  financier  and  presi- 
dent ;  two  became  high  sherifls  of  the  county  of  Litchfield;  one  was  a  representative, 
senator,  and  canal  commissioner  in  the  State  of  New  York;  and  one  represented  the 
State  of  Vermont  for  twelve  years  in  the  United  States  Senate.  His  maternal  ancestry 
was  none  the  less  noted.  His  mother's  father,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Forman,  served  in 
the  Revolution  with  the  New  Jersey  troops.  In  the  early  part  of  the  century  the 
father  of  Mr.  Seymour  removed  from  Connecticut  and  made  his  home  in  Pompey,  On- 
ondaga County,  N.  Y.  Though  now  living  among  strangers  he  soon  won  tlieir  affec- 
tions, and  but  a  few  years  passed  before  he  received  from  them  a  practical  expression 
of  tlieir  confidence  in  selecting  him  to  represent  the  Western  District  in  the  State  Senate 
for  the  years  1816-19.  At  this  period,  as  the  project  of  the  Erie  Canal  was  receiving 
considerable  attention,  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  for  the  same,  which  he  re- 
tained until  1831,  when  he  resigned.  On  his  removal  to  L'tioa  in  1820  he  was  imme- 
diately elected  to  the  Assembly  and  two  years  later  was  returned  again  to  the  Senate. 
In  1833  he  was  elected  mayor  of  his  adopted  city  and  subsequently  discharged  the  duties 
of  president  of  the  Farmers  Loan  and  Trust  Company  till  1837,  when  he  died. 

Horatio  Seymour  was  born  in  Pompey,  May  31,  1810.  Though  he  had  seen  but  ten 
summers  when  his  father  removed  to  Utica  these  early  years  were  improved  by  attend- 
ing the  academy  of  his  native  village.  When  Utica  became  his  home  he  was  sent  to 
the  Oxford  Academy  ;  from  there  he  entered  what  is  now  known  as  Hobart  College, 
where,  however,  he  remained  only  two  years.  He  was  neither  rugged  nor  strong  in 
youth  and  early  manhood.  His  parents,  believing,  therefore,  that  an  institution  which 
had  connected  with  it  enforced  drill  and  exercise  might  contribute  to  his  strength,  sent 
him  to  a  military  school  at  Middletown,  Conn.  This  change  proved  highly  beneficial, 
and  led  also  to  the  door  through  which  he  was  subsequently  to  pass  to  his  many  honors.. 


4  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

The  pi-incipal  in  this  school,  an  officer  in  the  army,  was  accustomed  to  take  some  of  his 
pupils  occasionally  on  a  visit  to  Washington,  and  as  young  Seymour  availed  himself  of 
this  opportunity  before  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age  he  became  thus  early  acquainted 
with  the  capital  and  its  historic  associations.  The  academical  curriculum  completed  he 
returned  to  Utica  and  after  a  little  delay  entered  the  law  office  of  Greene  C.  Bronson 
and  Samuel  Beardsley,  with  whom  he  remained  until  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1832,  It 
is  questionable  whether  hd  ever  possessed  a  natural  fondness  for  the  law  or  for  that 
close  apjihcation  which  success  in  the  more  learned  professions  plainly  requires.  Dur- 
ing the  following  year  he  was  invited  and  became  the  private  secretary  of  Governor 
Marcy,  serving  in  that  capacity  seven  years,  Albany  was  then  the  resort  of  the  more 
influential  in  politics  and  many  families  of  the  officials  made  the  city  their  temporary 
home.  Mr,  Seymour  was  not  long  in  imbibing  the  atmosphere  of  his  surroundings 
and  receiving  impulses  which  throughout  his  life  never  forsook  him.  From  the  strong 
personal  friendship  of  Martm  Van  Buren  and  other  Democratic  leaders  he  became  im- 
bued with  those  broad  and  patriotic  sentiments  which  he  subsequently  illustrated.  It 
was  at  this  early  period  thai  he  acqaired  his  love  for  the  constitution  and  Republican 
institutions.  The  more  clearly  he  discovered  their  necessity  and  became  acquainted 
with  their  benevolent  purport  the  more  firmly  was  he  convinced  that  they  should  not 
only  be  maintained,  but  wisely  developed  and  yield  their  legtimate  and  desired  fruit. 

In  1841  he  received  his  first  office,  being  selected  by  the  Democrats  of  Oneida  County 
to  represent  them  in  the  Assembly,  His  fellow  assemblymen  included  the  historic 
names  of  Sanford  E,  Church,  Levi  I.  Chatfield,  John  A.  Dix,  David  R.  Floyd  Jones, 
Michael  Hoffman,  and  others  who  a  few  years  later  received  the  highest  political  honors 
in  the  gift  of  the  State,  The  attitude  of  Governor  Bouck  had  somewhat  divided  the 
Democratic  party,  resulting  in  crimination  and  recrimination,  nor  did  the  sharp  discus- 
sions concerning  the  canal  policy  which  now  occurred  tend  to  heal  the  increasing  diffi- 
culties. On  the  contrary  the  Democratic  party  found  itself  divided,  one  wing  being 
represented  by  Mr,  Hoffman,  the  other  by  Mr,  Seymour.  As  the  counsels  of  Mr.  Sey- 
mour finally  prevailed  from  this  hour  many  looked  upon  him  as  rapidly  advancing 
toward  political  leadership.  Returning  to  Utica  the  next  year  he  became  its  mayor 
and  in  the  years  18'i3-4J:  was  returned  to  the  Assembly.  In  entering  anew  upon  State 
legislation  he  found  that  none  of  the  previous  poUtico-personal  frictions  which  had  so 
recently  revealed  themselves  had  disppeared ;  still  the  party  which  he  represented  on 
so  many  issues  was  strongly  united.  One  thing  was  manifest;  within  the  past  few 
years  the  gulf  between  the  Whigs  and  the  Democrats  had  widened,  and  both  were 
bent  on  obtaining  the  mastery.  Combinations  brought  upon  the  Whig  party  perhaps 
the  most  inglorious  disaster  in  its  entire  history.  The  triumphs  of  the  Democratic  party 
in  this  heated  canvass  brought  Mr.  Seymour  once  more  into  prominence.  He  became 
speaker  of  the  Assembly  and,  by  virtue  of  his  influence,  did  much  to  heal  the  differences 
existing  among  his  political  associates  and  secure  the  advance  of  Democratic  principles. 
In  1850  he  became  the  nominee  of  his  party  for  governor,  but  owing  to  the  popularity 
of  his  opponent  and  a  division  among  the  Democrats  he  was  defeated.  When  renom- 
inated in  1852  he  was  elected.  Later,  in  the  years  1854,  1862,  and  1864,  the  guber- 
natorial chair  was  offered  to  him,  but  he  was  successful  only  in  the  year  1862.     Party 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  5 

differences  and  the  influence  of  the  Know-Nothings  contributed  largely  to  his  defeat  in 
1854.  Perhaps  the  most  important  question  that  arose  during  the  magistracy  of  gov- 
ernor was  what  was  known  as  the  Maine  law.  Contrary  to  the  expectation  of  many 
when  the  law  came  before  him  from  the  legislature  he  attached  to  it  his  veto.  His 
postion  in  the  main  was  that  intemperance  was  a  sore  evil,  but  depriving  citizens  of 
their  rights  and  personal  liberties  was  a  greater  wrong.  Men  are^not  reformed  by  law- 
making, nor  does  severity  conquer  the  lawless.  Laws  are  wise  only  as  they  have  edu- 
cation, morality,  and  religion  for  their  basis,  and  not  coercion — an  opinion  the  Supreme 
Court  a  little  later  fully  sustained.  It  is  doubtful  whether  any  of  the  previous  ofScial 
acts  of  Governor  Seymour  received  more  severe  and  unkind  criticism.  In  the  storm 
however,  he  remained  true  to  his  convictions,  both  as  to  the  mission  of  the  law  and  to 
the  great  principle  which  he  considered  as  underlying  democratic  government. 

During  the  intermitting  years  of  Horatio  Seymour's  public  trusts  the  State  and 
nation  passed  through  extraordinary  trials.  While  the  State  was  divided  and  sub-divided 
into  many  political  factions  and  the  nation  was  rapidly  realizing  that  a  moral  cancer 
was  threatening  its  very  life,  and  differences  existed  concerning  the  politics  in  the  new 
States  and  Territories,  a  new  party  appeared  whose  mission  was  to  right,  if  possible, 
existing  wrongs  and  free  the  country  from  the  troubles  investing  it.  It  called  itself  the 
Republican  party.  As  its  purposes  became  understood  many  of  previously  conflicting 
opinions  identified  themselves  with  it.  Quite  contemporaneous  with  the  birth  of  this 
party  the  clouds  which  had  been  gradually  gathering  thickened  and  darkened.  At 
last  the  nation  found  itself  engaged  in  fratricidal  war.  Though  not  occupying  any 
official  position  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  when,  however,  it  had  been  formally  de- 
clared and  means  for  defence  had  been  entered  upon  Mr.  Seymour  was  convinced  it 
should  be  prosecuted.  His  popularity  at  this  time  is  seen  in  his  succeeding  Governor 
Morgan  in  the  governorship.  Never  since  New  York  became  a  State  had  one  of  its 
magistrates  been  summoned  to  a  position  more  difficult  to  fill  than  the  one  on  which  he 
now  entered.  While  believing  that  the  rupture  might  have  been  avoided,  and  the  life 
and  property  which  it  threatened  and  finally  consumed  could  have  been  spared,  and  at- 
tributing its  origin  as  much  to  the  intemperated  speech  of  the  North  as  to  the  error 
and  obliquity  of  the  South,  he  deplored  the  struggle  and  denounced  the  Rebellion  as  most 
wicked.  Governor  Seymour  was  a  war  Democrat  of  the  purest  luster.  At  the  open- 
ing of  the  conflict,  when  the  general  government  appealed  to  New  York  for  assistance, 
he  was  made  chairman  of  a  committee  of  hi.'^  own  county  to  raise  needed  troops,  and 
by  purse,  influence,  and  word  did  much  to  preserve  the  dignity  and  integrity  of  the 
Union.  Having  been  inaugurated  governor  in  1863  his  message  contained  expressions 
of  the  strongest  character  in  support  of  the  government  in  its  struggle  and  deprecation 
of  any  division  of  the  Union.  Necessarily  omitting  reference  to  those  numerous  meas- 
ures which  Governor  Seymour  at  this  crucial  period  in  the  nation's  hfe  proposed  for  its 
integrity,  as  well  as  all  consideration  of  the  addresses  which  he  so  frequently  delivered 
bearing  upon  the  issues  of  that  time,  including  his  special  messages  to  the  legislature, 
and  the  firmness  with  which  he  declared  that  at  all  risks  the  public  faith  and  the  credit 
of  the  State  should  never  be  impaired,  the  appearance,  however,  of  the  "riots  "  caused 
him  and  others  of  every  political  complexion  great  alarm.     But  the  roots  of  these  dis- 


6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

turbances  existed  anterior  to  his  administration.  The  thistles,  and  the  thistles  only, 
were  his.  At  this  period  in  the  estimation  of  not  a  few  the  conflict  had  become  nothing 
but  an  abolition  war.  This  opinion  begat  not  only  new  differences,  but  gave  new  force 
to  the  inquiry  whether  the  general  government  was  not  violating  by  its  acts  the  con- 
stitution and  trampling  upon  the  rights  which  its  very  genius  conferred.  While  these 
convictions  were  spreading  the  North  was  fairly  appalled  at  its  misfortune  in  the  field. 
Volunteers  were  slow  in  enlistment.  To  remedy  the  strain  to  which  the  government 
was  rapidly  being  subjected  an  act  providing  for  the  enrollment  of  the  national  forces 
was  adopted.  Attempting  to  enforce  this  act  precipitated  the  riots.  No  sooner,  how- 
ever, did  this  spirit  exhibit  itself  than  Grovernor  Seymour  sought  to  arrest  it  by  force 
and  by  words.  The  latter,  owing  to  the  disturbed  condition  of  the  public  mind,  re- 
ceived from  many  unkindly  criticism.  G-overnor  Seymour  never  denied  the  abused 
phrase;  on  the  contrary  he  acknowledged  it  would  have  been  wiser  perhaps  to  have 
chgsen  language  less  exposed  to  twist  and  misinterpretation.  In  brief  his  relations  to  the 
war  were  quite  as  pronounced  as  those  of  many  sitting  in  the  halls  of  legislation  or  active 
in  the  field.  Yet  measures  were  proposed  and  in  some  instances  enforced  that  he  did 
not  approve.  When,  however,  the  great  question  came,  "Shall  the  Union  be  pre- 
served? "  no  one  displayed  a  more  determined  purpose.  Amid  the  excitement  of  those 
war  hours  the  problem  which  came  home  to  him  with  seriousness  was  not,  as  some 
have  conjectured,  whether  the  national  unity  shall  be  broken,  but  now,  that  it  is  in 
jeopardy,  what  were  the  wisest  and  the  legitimate  methods  by  which  it  could  be  con- 
served and  its  perpetuity  forever  secured  ? 

At  the  expiration  of  Governor  Seymour's  war  term  he  resolved  to  return  to  his  rural 
home  and  devote  himself  to  study  and  rest.  He  did  so.  But  he  was  often  solicited  to 
express  his  opinions  upon  prominent  political  measures  then  in  process  of  formation- 
and  he  was  presently  selected  as  a  candidate  for  governor  in  opposition  to  Reuben  B. 
Fenton.  In  this  canvas-s  he  was  defeated  by  a  small  majority.  When  in  1868  the 
national  convention  assembled  to  select  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  Horatio  Seymour 
attended  as  a  delagate  and  was  chosen  its  presiding  officer.  On  the  third  day  of  the 
session,  after  the  names  of  several  candidates  had  been  before  the  convention,  the  name 
of  Horatio  Seymour  was  introduced;  and  notwithstanding  his  earnest  opposition  it 
was  unanimously  resolved  that  he  be  the  candidate.  With  General  Grant,  then  wear- 
ing his  many  laurels  as  the  victorious  military  commander,  as  his  opponent  it  was  a 
forgone  conclusion  that  the  Democratic  candidate  would  be  defeated.  With  the  close 
of  this  campaign  Governor  Seymour's  political  life  may  be  said  to  have  come  to  an  end. 
Contrary,  however,  to  his  oft  expressed  wishes  he  was  renominated  in  1876  for  gov- 
ernor ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  resolve  to  pass  his  remaining  years  in  retirement  he 
would  have  been  sent  the  same  year  to  the  United  States  Senate.  The  other  official 
positions  proffered  to  Horatio  Seymour  were  State  senator  and  congressman.  He  held 
likewise  at  various  times  the  following  offices :  In  1868  he  was  chosen  one  of  the  first 
of  the  commissioners  of  State  fisheries,  in  1876  member  of  State  survey,  and  in  1878 
president  of  the  Board  of  Commissioners  of  State  survey.  For  many  years  he  occupied 
the  presidency  of  the  National  Dairyman's  Association,  of  the  American  Prison  Asso- 
ciation, and  was  the  presiding  officer  of  the  Oneida  County  Historical  Society  from  its 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  7 

inception  until  his  death.  It  is  worthy  of  note  here  that  the  many  positions  which  had 
been  offered  to  Mr.  Seymour  by  his  neighbors,  his  district,  his  State,  and  the  nation 
came  wholly  unsolicited.     He  never  asked  for  office. 

A  subject  very  near  the  heart  of  Mr.  Seymour  was  the  waterways  of  the  State.  He 
early  appreciated  their  usefulness  and  in  1844,  when  member  of  the  Assembly,  he  made 
a  report  to  that  body  covering  seventy-two  octavo  pages  in  which  he  outlined  what 
should  be  the  policy  of  the  State  in  reference  to  its  canals,  a  report  which  still  bears 
fruit.  During  this  period  of  his  busy  career  he  wrote  for  and  addressed  the  public,  not 
only  on  political  questions,  but  on  themes  purely  philanthropic  and  unpartisan.  His 
contributions  to  the  State  library  and  to  the  topography  and  history  of  the  State  and 
its  natural  resources  were  extensive  and  valuable.  Few  were  better  acquainted  with 
the  early  history  of  the  State.  He  studied  with  care  the  habits,  travels,  and  character- 
istics of  the  Indians  and  his  articles  on  the  Iroquois  are  numerous  and  authoritative. 

Few  men  in  public  life  have  revealed  such  an  even  and  rounded  character.  There 
was  a  charm  about  him  that  was  irresistible.  All  who  came  to  him  received  prompt 
recognition.  His  love  for  our  common  humanity  was  intense.  He  loved  men  because 
they  were  men  ;  friendliness  permeated  his  whole  being.  His  beneficiaries  were  almost 
innumerable  and  unlimited  by  creed  or  nationality.  Even  his  political  opponents  en- 
rolled themselves  among  his  friends  and  he  harbored  enmity  against  none.  His  humor 
was  always  pleasant,  never  coarse.  In  his  manner  he  was  gentle,  courteous,  and  digni- 
fied, and  free  from  even  the  appearance  of  affectation.  In  his  religious  views  he  was 
as  clear  and  definite  as  he  was  in  those  that  pertained  to  the  welfare  of  the  State.  His 
presence  was  often  seen  in  the  higher  councils  of  the  Episcopal  Church  and  for  many 
years  he  was  warden  of  old  Trinity  Church  of  Utica.  All  the  years  of  his  public  life 
fail  to  disclose  an  act  that  aflfects  either  his  honesty,  purity,  or  uprightness,  or  that  mars 
his  escutcheon  with  a  single  blot. 

Horatio  Seymour  married.  May  31,  1835,  Mary,  the  youngest  daughter  of  John  Rut- 
ger  Bleecker,  of  Albany.  They  had  no  children.  He  died  February  12,  1886.  and  his 
widow  followed  him  within  a  few  weeks. 


GRAHAM,  EDMUND  A.,  born  in  October,  1802,  in  New  York  city,  of  mingled 
Scotch  and  Huguenot  descent,  past  the  first  five  or  six  years  of  his  life  in  the 
metropohs.  Then.his  family  removed  to  Newburgh,  where  he  had  the  benefit  of 
instruction  in  the  village  academy  until  he  was  twelve,  afterv/ard  for  about  two  years 
mingling  farm  work  with  attendance  at  school.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  years  he  went  to 
Ogdensburg  to  be  under  the  care  of  his  uncle,  Louis  Hasbrouck,  a  lawyer  who  was  also 
postmaster.  The  nephew  was  put  to  work  with  the  mails  and  soon  took  full  charge  of 
them,  reading  law  as  his  leisure  would  permit,  and  by  his  industry  in  due  season  he  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  and  entered  upon  practice.  He  found  no  difficulty  in  building  up  a 
profitable  practice  from  clients  in  New  York,  Albany,  and  Troy  as  well  as  at  home.  He 
was  made  the  attorney  of  the  Bank  of  Ogdensburg,  of  which  he  was  a  director,  and  also 
agent  for  David  B.  Ogden  to  manage  and  sell  tracts  of  land  in  the  town  of  Oswegatchie. 
For  four  years  he  was  clerk  for  the  village  of  Ogdensburg.     In  1830  Mr.  Graham  was 


8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

one  of  the  projectors  and  a  director  of  the  company  which  ran  the  first  line  of  American 
steamers  on  the  St.  Lawrence  and  the  lakes,  that  was  for  a  long  time  maintained  after- 
ward in  no  small  part  by  Utioa  capitalists  like  Alfred  Munson,  Samuel  Farwell,  John 
Butterfield,  and  Henry  Barnard,  whom  he  enlisted  with  himself.  It  is  a  tradition  that 
the  first  steamer  of  the  line  was  built  from  his  designs. 

In  1835  he  married  Miss  Cornelia  Cooper,  only  daughter  of  Judge  Apollos  Cooper,  of 
Utica,  and  on  the  death  of  the  judge  in  1839  he  removed  here  to  manage  the  large 
estate  to  which  local  growth  was  adding  value — an  estate  which  extended  from  the 
Mohawk  to  Cornelia  street  and  from  G-enesee  street  quite  a  distance  westward,  and 
which  he  laid  out  in  streets  and  lots.  This  task  he  combined  with  his  law  practice,  and 
for  half  a  century  Mr.  Graham  was  an  active  factor  in  the  community. 

The  present  generation  can  hardly  appreciate  the  services  rendered  by  Mr.  Graham 
and  his  associates,  who,  in  1845,  entered  upon  an  investigation  of  the  feasibility  of  intro- 
ducing manufactures  by  steam  mto  the  city.  The  lack  of  water-power  was  recognized 
and  the  statutes  then  forbade  corporations  with  a  larger  capital  than  |100,000  while  the 
use  of  steam  required  larger  mvestments.  The  population  of  the  city  had  fallen  from 
12,000  to  10,000  and  the  increase  of  manufactures  was  relied  upon  to  turn  the  tide. 
At  a  public  meeting  Spencer  Kellogg,  Andrew  S.  Pond,  and  Mr.  Graham  were  appointed 
a  committee  to  visit  New  England  and  report  upon  the  relative  cost  and  advantages  of 
steam  and  water  for  manufactures.  Their  report  started  both  the  cotton  and  woolen 
factories  within  the  city.  Mr.  Pond  favored  the  organization  of  a  company  for  woolen 
manufacture,  and  the  steam  woolen- mills  were  built.  Mr.  Graham,  and  Mr.  Kellogg 
recommended  investments  in  cotton  manufacture  in  preference,  and  the  Ulioa  steam 
cotton-mills  have  for  more  than  forty  years  confirmed  the  wisdom  of  their  choice.  In 
order  to  permit  the  use  of  capital  to  the  amount  necessary,  and  to  get  rid  of  full  personal 
liabihty  on  the  part  of  the  stockholders,  Mr.  Graham  drafted  what  became  the  general 
manufacturing  law  of  1848,  but  hard  labor  at  Albany  during  two  sessions  was  necessary 
to  secure  its  nassage.  The  chief  work  of  raising  the  capital,  for  the  cotton-mills  was 
done  by  Alfred  Munson,  T.  S.  Faxton,  S.  D.  Childs,  and  Mr.  Graham,  and  they  met  with 
many  difficulties  before  success  was  assured.  When  the  company  was  organized  Mr. 
Munson  was  chosen  president  and  Mr.  Graham  secretary  as  well  as  director.  Upon  the 
latter  fell  the  task  of  drawing  the  contracts  and  making  many  of  the  purchases.  He 
continued  to  give  close  attention  to  the  mills,  became  one  of  the  largest  stockholders, 
and  for  many  years  and  down  to  his  death  was  president  of  the  company. 

Of  the  original  movement  in  behalf  of  the  Black  River  and  Utica  ilailroad  he  was  one 
of  the  most  zealous  and  influential  promoters.  His  acquaintance  with  Northern  New 
York  enabled  him  to  see  the  need  for  the  road  and  to  render  important  services  in  its 
behalf.  The  struggle  between  Rome  and  Utioa  for  the  northern  alliance  constitutes  an 
interesting  chapter  of  local  history,  in  which  a  compromise  was  offered  by  our  neighbor 
that  the  railroad  project  be  abandoned  by  both  parties.  Mr.  Graham  devoted  much  time 
to  the  enterprise  and  subscribed  $5,000  to  the  stock,  which  was  lost.  He  was  attorney 
and  counsel  for  the  original  company  up  to  the  foreclosure  of  the  mortgage,  as  he  was 
also  a  director  in  that,  and  he  held  the  same  positions  until  1884  in  the  corporation 
which  bought  in  the  property.     For  a  considerable  period  he  was  vice-president  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  9 

Utioa  and  Black  River  Railroad  Company  and  acted  as  president  for  three  or  four  seasons 
while  Mr.  Thorn  was  abroad.  For  a  number  o£  years  Mr.  Graham  owned  and  con- 
ducted in  Sauquoit  the  mill  for  the  manufacture  of  white  paper  previously  belonging- 
to  Savage  k,  Moore,  but  the  introduction  of  wood  pulp  brought  changes  which  closed 
that  establishment. 

The  number  of  positions  of  trust  to  which  he  was  called  was  many,  and  he  was  faith- 
ful in  them  all.  He  was  one  of  a  committee  to  prepare  amendments  to  the  city  charter 
and  at  his  instance  a  provision  to  make  aldermen  personally  liable  for  excessive  expend- 
iture was  enacted.  As  one  of  the  commissioners  to  acquire  the  site  and  build  the  city 
hall  he  served  with  three  other  citizens.  In  1847  he  was  chosen  a  director  of  the  Oneida 
Bank  and  survived  every  one  of  his  associates  of  that  time.  From  1853  to  1872  he  was 
one  of  the  managers  of  the  State  Lunatic  Asylum  in  this  city  and  gave  to  the  institu- 
tion a  great  deal  of  care  and  attention.  In  the  Utica  Gaslight  Company  he  was  long  a 
director  and  for  some  time  its  vice-president.  He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  Grace 
Church,  a  vestryman,  and  a  church  warden.  As  chairman  of  the  committee  appointed 
for  the  purpose  he  superintended  the  enlargement  of  the  older  edifice  and  w  as  one  of 
the  building  committee  for  the  erection  of  the  present  building.  At  a  later  period  he 
was  one  of  the  vestry  of  the  mother  church.  Trinity.  He  was  often  a  delegate  to  the 
diocesan  convention. 

As  a  lawyer  he  exhibited  the  quilities  which  marked  him  as  a  man.  Well  grounded 
in  the  principles  of  his  profession  he  was  careful  in  his  preparation,  carelul,  accurate, 
aud  persistent  in  his  work.  He  was  concerned  in  some  great  litigations.  In  the  long 
contested  Bradstreet  cases,  which  involved  a  large  amount  of  property,  Mr.  Graham  was 
the  attorney  who  studied  out  the  law  and  dug  out  the  facts,  and  was  instrumental  in 
carrying  the  cases  to  a  successful  termination.  His  business  was  largely  in  chanoerj, 
in  the  equity  side  of  the  Supreme  Courts,  at  general  term  and  the  Court  of  Appeals, 
more  than  at  the  circuit  and  before  juries,  and  his  railroad  cases  were  important  and 
numerous.  Politically  he  started  as  a  Democrat  and  had  clear  and  strong  convictions, 
but  since  his  clerical  service  in  early  manhood  he  was  but  once  only  a  candidate  for 
office.  After  the  Charleston  convention  of  1860  he  left  the  party  and  became  an  ardent 
supporter  of  Mr.  Lincoln  and  of  the  war  for  the  Union. 

The  record  of  such  a  life  is  its  own  best  commentary.  Of  unquestioned  integrity,  an 
excellent  neighbor,  a  faithful  friend,  a  useful  and  enterprising  citizen,  diligent  in  busi- 
ness, honoring  all  the  obligations  of  religion,  unostentatious  and  patriotic,  he  needs  no 
eulogy  in  a  community  where  for  half  a  century  he  lived  a  quiet  and  exemplary  life. 


rAXTON,  THEODORE  S.,  a  native  of  Conway,  Mass.,  was  born  about  1793,  on 
the  lOlh  of  January.  His  educational  advantages  were  limited  and  concluded 
with  six  months  in  school  at  Clinton  soon  after  his  taking  up  his  residence  in  Utica  in 
1812.  In  1813  he  obtained  a  position  as  driver  on  the  stage  and  from  that  time  until 
1817  he  held  the  reins  of  four-in-hand  every  day  with  the  exception  of  the  six  months 
in  school  alluded  to  above.  After  1817  he  only  occasionally  mounted  the  box ;  yet  such 
was  his  acknowledged  skill  as  a  reinsman  that  on  occasions  of  ceremony,  or  where  some- 


lo  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

thing  extraordinary  was  required,  he  was  the  person  usually  selected  to  do  honor  to  the 
service.  For  example,  when  Lafayette  visited  the  place  in  1825  Mr.  Faxton  secured  six 
dashing  gray  horses,  put  silverplated  harness  on  them,  borrowed  the  old  Van  Rensselaer 
carriage,  and  drove  to  Whitesboro,  where  the  distinguished  guest  was  to  be  received. 
After  (3-eneral  Lafayette  left  the  boat  and  entered  the  carriage  Mr.  Faxton  felt,  as  he  him- 
self said,  grander  than  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  After  the  year  1817  Mr.  Faxton  for  a 
consider.ible  period  had  charge  of  a  portion  of  the  stage  business  of  Jason  Parker,  and 
a  little  later  was  offered  an  interest  in  the  concern,  the  sole  condition  being  that  he 
should  pay  for  his  share  as  fast  as  the  profits  would  permit.  It  was  in  1822  that  he 
thus  became  a  partner,  together  wilh  Mr.  Ohilds,  in  the  firm  of  Jason  Parker  &  Co.  In 
spite  of  the  competition  of  the  new  Erie  Canal  the  stage  business  through  Central  New 
York  continued  very  large  for  a  number  of  years,  and  at  the  death  of  Mr.  Parker  in 
1828  there  were  eight  daily  lines  running  through  Utica  east  and  west  besides  four 
hnes  north  and  south.  This  vast  and  intricate  business  the  firm  continued  to  success- 
fully manage  for  ten  years  after  the  death  of  the  senior  member,  and  they  continued  in 
partnership  some  time  longer.  Together  they  erected  the  Exchange  building  on  the 
site  of  the  old  Canal  Coffee  House  and  occupied  themselves  with  collecting  the  rents  of 
this,  the  Eagle  Tavern,  and  other  real  estate  which  they  held  in  common.  Before  the 
conclusion  of  the  partnership  Mr.  Faxton  joined  with  John  Butterfield,  Hiram  Green- 
man,  and  others  in  running  a  line  of  packet  boats  on  the  canal.  In  connection  with 
Alfred  Munson  and  associates  he  organized  the  first  American  line  of  steamers  that  ran 
on  the  St.  Lawrence  and  Lake  Ontario,  and  for  a  number  of  years  was  one  of  the  man- 
aging directors.  He  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad, 
paid  in  a  larger  subscription  than  any  other  man,  and  for  a  long  time  held  the  office  of 
president  of  the  company.  He  gave  the  first  $100  that  was  subscribed  to  found  the 
"Utica  Mechanics  Association  and  held  the  presidency  several  terms.  Together  with 
Willett  H.  Shearman  and  Anson  Dart  he  was  one  of  the  commissioners  who,  in  1843, 
•completed  the  erection  of  the  State  Lunatic  Asylum  in  Utica.  In  1852  he  was  chair- 
man of  the  able  commitcee  who  superintended  the  erection  of  the  First  Presbyterian 
Church  in  this  city.  Mr.  Faxton  was  also  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Utica  Water 
Works  Company,  the  Utica  steam  cotton-mills,  of  which  he  was  president  for  a  time, 
and  the  Second  National  Bank,  of  which  he  was  also  president.  He  also  deserves  par- 
ticular credit  for  the  conspicuous  part  he  took  in  1845  in  developing  and  adapting  to 
wider  use  the  then  greatest  invention  of  the  century,  the  telegraph.  He  was  attracted 
to  the  possibilities  of  the  wonderful  invention  at  the  first,  and  soon  after  the  success  of 
the  first  line  from  Baltimore  to  Washington  he  went  to  the  latter  city  to  investigate  for 
himself  and  the  few  others  who  shared  his  confidence.  He  had  learned  from  his  expe- 
rience in  his  Telegraph  line  of  stages — a  line  his  company  fitted  out  to  carry  »  small 
number  of  passengers  at  the  greatest  possible  speed,  and  which  had  been  so  popular 
that  every  seat  was  spoken  for  days  in  advance  of  departure — that  men  loved  speed  and 
would  encourage  the  fastest  stages,  the  fastest  boats,  and  the  fastest  means  of  trans- 
mitting intelligence.  While  absent  he  obtained  the  right  to  establish  a  telegraph  line 
between  New  York  and  Buffalo,  the  owners  of  the  patent  to  have  one-half  of  the  stock 
of  the  company  when  the  hne  was  complete.     Returning  home  he  united  with  John 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  i , 

Butterfield,  Hiram  Greenman,  Messr?.  Livingston,  Wells,  and  others  and  formed  a  com- 
pany with  a  capital  of  $200,000,  which  laid  the  first  wire  between  the  cities  above 
mentioned.  He  was  chosen  president  of  the  company  and  superintendent  of  the  line, 
and  continued  to  act  in  that  capacity  seven  years,  laboring  hard  against  much  opposi- 
tion to  make  the  enterprise  the  great  success  which  it  proved  to  be.  The  first  wire  used 
was  copper,  costing  about  $60  per  mile.  Professor  Morse  believed  that  iron  wires 
would  rust  and  could  not  be  used  unless  they  were  perfectly  insulated.  Mr.  Faxton's 
attention  was  called  to  the  wire  fence  which  had  been  in  use  twenty-five  yeais  on 
Colonel  Walker's  grounds,  and  he  concluded  that  if  iron  wire  was  good  for  fences  for 
such  a  length  of  time  it  would  also  do  for  telegraphing.  The  copper  wires  were  taken 
down  and  sold  for  enough  to  put  up  two  iron  wires,  the  latter  kind  costing  only  $18  per 
mile. 

Mr.  Faxton  never  took  a  very  active  part  in  politics,  but  was  often  called  to  positions 
of  honor  and  trust.  In  1831  he  was  a  trustee  of  the  village  of  Utica,  and  was  an  alder- 
man in  18.36  and  mayor  in  1864.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Whig  National  Convention 
which  nominated  Zachary  Taylor  in  1848,  and  was  also  sheriff  of  the  county  in  1842- 
but  he  held  the  office  for  only  a  few  weeks,  when  he  was  displaced  by  the  governor 
solely  for  political  reasons.  In  addition  to  the  stage,  packet,  steamboat,  railroad,  and 
telegraph  lines,  banks,  manufactories,  and  other  enterprises  that  have  added  wealth  and 
prosperity  to  Utica  Mr.  Faxton  left  three  other  monuments  which  will  perpetuate  his 
name  and  add  honor  and  blessings  to  his  memory — the  Old  Ladies'  Home  on  Faxton 
street,  Faxton  Hall  at  the  junction  of  Varick  and  Court  streets  for  the  education  of  the 
children  of  factory  operatives  by  day  and  night,  and  Faxton  Hospital. 

Mr.  Faxton  was  a  man  of  marked  sociability,  great  kindness  of  heart,  of  strict  integ- 
rity, and  possessed  unusual  executive  and  business  ability.  He  died  on  the  30th  day 
of  November,  1881. 


CHILDS,  SILAS  D.,  was  prominent  among  the  early  public  spirited  and  active  citi- 
zens of  TJtica.  He  was  born  at  Conway,  Mass.,  in  1794  and  came  to  Utica  in 
1816.  He  had  received  »  good  common  school  education,  had  already  served  as  a  clerk 
in  his  native  town,  and  arriving  in  Utica  he  at  once  found  kindred  employment  with 
his  former  fellow-townsman,  Stalham  Williams,  who  was  then  connected  with  Jason- 
Parker  in  his  staging  business.  It  was  not  long  before  the  young  clerk  became  Mr. 
Parker's  book-keeper  and  was  installed  in  the  stage  office  situated  at  the  southwest, 
corner  of  the  basement  of  Bagg's  Hotel.  Uis  muiteous  manners,  his  dihgent  and  ac- 
curate habits,  and  his  conscientious  discharge  of  all  his  duties  soon  won  upon  this  ap- 
preciative and  wisely  judging  proprietor.  In  1820  he  took  him  into  partnership  and 
subsequently  gave  him  his  daughter  in  marriage.  The  monopoly  in  staging  enjoyed 
by  Parker  &  Co.,  ever  since  the  failure  of  Joshua  Ostrom  &  Co.  in  1812,  continued 
until  about  1821,  when  a  new  line  was  started  by  Peter  Cole,  aided  in  Utica  by  a  run- 
ner named  Henry  S.  Storms.  This  line  was,  however,  soon  overpowered,  and  the  in- 
fluence of  Mr.  Storms  effectively  met  by  introducing  from  Albany  the  energetic  John 
Butterfield.     About  1828  the  old  line  encountered  more  serious  opposition  when  Josiah 


12  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Bissell,  of  Rochester,  set  on  foot  a  week-day  line  to  traverse  the  State,  and  enlisted  in 
its'behalf  the  sympathies  and  the  money  of  church  members  along  the  route.  The  pro- 
ject caused  much  excitement,  coming  as  it  did  at  a  time  when  men's  minds  were  pecul- 
iarly alive  to  religious  questions.  Dissensions  in  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Utica 
were  especially  rife  because  it  was  there  that  Messrs.  Parker,  Faxton,  and  Childs  all 
attended.  But  the  week-day  hne  lacked  both  capital  and  skill  in  its  management  and 
besides  had  not  the  privilege  enjoyed  by  the  other  of  carrying  the  mails,  and  so  after  a 
contest  which  impoverished  itself  and  greatly  straightened  the  resources  of  its  rival  it 
finally  yielded  the  field.  Until  1836  this  field  continued  free,  but  when  the  Utica  and 
Schenectady  Railroad  was  opened  the  eastward  route  was  blocked,  and  afterward  as 
the  railway  was  gradually  extended  other  routes  were  more  and  more  curtailed  and 
Parker's  with  the  associate  line  of  stages  was  brought  to  a  close.  Messrs.  Faxton  and 
Ohilds  still  remained  a  while  together  closing  up  the  concern  and  caring  for  the  real 
estate  they  owned  in  common. 

Detached  at  length  from  his  near  forty  years'  connection  with  his  partner  Mr.  Childs 
did  not  engage  in  any  new  business  of  a  merely  personal  nature.  So  much  of  his  time 
as  was  not  spent  in  do.ng  for  the  community  was  occupied  with  his  own  private  affairs 
and  the  care  of  his  now  ample  estate.  The  chief  solace  of  his  later  life  he  found  in  the 
pursuit  of  horticulture.  He  had  a  passion  for  flowers  and  the  raising  of  fruits  and  espe- 
cially grapes.  In  the  exercise  of  these  pleasures  he  evinced  remarkable  taste  and  skill 
and  met  with  a  high  degree  of  success.  The  products  of  his  garden  delighted  all  be- 
holders and  were  the  comfort  of  many  a  chamber  of  the  sick,  while  his  annual  grape 
parties  were  among  the  expected  and  most  agreeable  events  of  the  winter.  In  other 
particulars  also  his  benevolence  was  genuine  and  his  giving  profuse.  A  good  object  or 
a  needy  one  he  never  turned  away  empty.  Abounding  in  public  spirit,  and  deeply  in- 
terested in  every  project  devised  for  the  benefit  of  the  town,  he  could  not  be  an  idle  or 
a  useless  spectator.  Trusted  by  his  townsmen  for  his  liberahty,  his  integrity,  his  good 
sense,  his  fidelity,  his  prudence,  and  his  wisdom  in  -affairs  he  was  relied  on  as  an  im- 
portant actor  in  every  public  undertaking  whether  social,  charitable,  commercial,  or 
manufacturing.  He  was  a  director  in  the  Utica  Savings  Bank  and  in  the  Oneida  Na- 
tional; a  director  in  the  steam  cotton  and  the  Globe  woolen-mills;  a  director  in  the 
Black  River  Railroad  and  a  manager  of  the  State  Lunatic  Asylum ;  a  trustee  in  the 
Female  Academy  and  in  the  Cemetery  Association;  a  counselor  of  the  Utica  Orphan 
Asylum  and  a  trustee  of  the  Reformed  Church.  By  him  these  various  positions  were 
never  regarded  as  empty  honors,  tributes  to  his  wealth  and  standing  which  made  no 
exactions  on  his  time  and  efforts.  He  was  prompt  at  every  meeting,  faithful  to  every 
trust,  and  cheerfully  aided  with  his  judicious  but  unobtrusive  counsel. 

Mr.  Ohilds  was  by  instinct  and  in  the  highest  sense  a  gentleman.  He  had  not  only 
the  suave  courtesy  of  manner  and  of  tongue  and  the  modest  unpretention  of  the  well- 
bred  man ;  he  had  also  the  refinement  of  feeling,  the  justness  of  sentiment,  the  kind- 
ness and  generosity  of  heart,  the  evenness  of  temper,  and  the  purity  of  motive  which 
are  the  basis  of  the  true  born  gentleman.  He  was  sensitive  to  opposition  and  to  wrong 
but  he  had  the  rare  ability  to  keep  silent  when  disturbed  or  to  retire  if  unduly  excited. 
His  death  occurred  suddenly  while  he  was  in  the  directors'  room  of  the  Oneida  Na- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  13 

tional  Bank  on  the  11th  of  July,  1866.  The  munificent  legacies  left  by  Mr.  Childs  for 
educational  and  elemosynary  purposes  were  in  harmony  with  the  many  charitable 
deeds  of  his  life.  They  amounted  in  all  to  $90,000  and  were  as  follows :  To  Hamilton 
College  for  the  founding  of  a  professorship  of  agricultural  chemistry,  $30,000 ;  to  the 
Utioa  Orphan  Asylum,  $25,000;  and  to  the  following  $5,000  each,  viz.:  Forest  Hill 
Cemetery,  the  Reformed  Church  of  Utica,  the  Board  of  Foreign  Missions  of  the  Re- 
formed Church,  its  Board  of  Domestic  Missions,  its  Board  of  Publication,  the  Anjeri- 
can  Bible  Society,  and  the  American  Tract  Society. 

His  wife,  Roxana  (Parker),  with  deep  veneration  for  his  memory,  purchased  the 
chapel  then  recently  erected  at  Forest  Hill  Cemetery  and  presented  it  to  the  association 
to  be  maintained  in  memory  of  her  husband  as  a  place  for  funeral  services  and  for  tem- 
porary sepulture,  in  free  and  common  use  forever.  In  her  will  she  supplemented  his 
bequests,  selecting  for  the  most  part  the  same  objects  that  had  profited  by  his  benefac- 
tions. And  these  were  her  bequests,  increased  as  they  were  by  a  residuary  portion  of 
her  estate:  To  Hamilton  College  for  the  agricultural  professorship,  $58,101.64;  to  the 
Utica  Orphan  Asylum,  $48,417.04;  to  the  Utica  Female  Academy,  $16,367.04;  and  to 
the  following  each  $9,683.04,  viz.:  Forest  Hill  Cemetery,  the  Board  of  Foreign  Mis- 
sions of  the  Reformed  Church,  its  Board  of  Domestic  Missions,  the  American  Bible  So- 
ciety, and  the  American  Tract  Society. 


/V\  ANN,  CHARLES  ADDISON,  a  native  of  Fairfield,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y., 
/  \  came  to  Utica  at  the  age  of  nineteen  and  entered  upon  the  study  of  law  with 
Lynch  &  Varick.  In  1825  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  became  a  partner  with  Mr. 
Varick,  Mr.  Lynch  removing  at  this  time  from  the  place.  This  partnership  had  a  great 
influence  upon  the  course  of  his  life.  Mr.  Varick  was  largely  interested  in  real  estate 
and  before  he  too  removed  to  New  York  Mr.  Mann  purchased  through  him  the  re- 
maining interests  of  the  Holland  Company  in  the  northern  part  of  Oneida  which  he 
had  conducted.  This  property  absorbed  a  large  share  of  the  time  of  the  purchaser  and 
led  him  away  from  his  profession.  Still  although  he  frequented  the  courts  very  little 
he  gradually  came  to  be  one  of  the  best  real  estate  lawyers  in  the  county,  and  his  opin- 
ion in  legal  matters  was  highly  prized.  The  property  he  bought  was  disposed  of  on 
easy  terms  to  settlers  in  plots  and  farms  and  sold  largely  on  contracts.  It  laid  the 
basis  of  his  fortune.  From  about  1829  Mr.  Mann  was  associated  with  David  Wager 
and  in  later  years  with  John  H.  Edmunds.  As  the  city  grew  Mr.  Mann's  attention 
was  directed  to  many  new  enterprises.  Public  spirited  and  energetic,  with  a  sound 
judgment  and  far-sightedness  above  the  average,  his  aid  was  sought  and  freely  given 
to  many  of  the  undertakings  of  the  time.  He  was  active  among  the  projectors  of  the 
Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad.  He  was  a  leading  spirit  in  the  Oneida  Bank,  and 
after  its  disastrous  robbery  was  successfully  employed  with  others  in  detecting  and 
bringing  the  robbers  to  justice,  and  was  for  many  years  vice-president  of  the  bank  and 
subsequently  was  president.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  and  for  some  years  president 
of  the  Utica  steam  cotton-mills.     In  1856  after  a  long  term  as  director  he  was  elected 


14  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

president  of  the  New  York  and  Buffalo  Telegraph  Company,  and  remained  as  such 
until  ill  health  compelled  bim  to  give  up  the  position  in  1859. 

Besides  his  business  connections  Mr.  Mann  took  an  active  interest  in  educational  and 
charitable  enterprises.  He  was  one  of  the  original  managers  of  the  State  Lunatic  Asy- 
lum and  for  a  long  time  chairman  of  the  board.  He  devoted  much  time  to  this  insti- 
tute and  was  particularly  busied  in  perfecting  its  system  of  ventilating  and  heatmg. 
As  a  counselor  of  the  Utica  Orphan  Asylum  he  did  good  but  humble  service.  The 
financial  management  of  its  affairs  was  largely  in  his  hands,  his  mother-in-law,  wife, 
and  daughter  having  in  turn  held  the  position  of  treasurer  from  its  foundation  to  the 
present  time.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Utica  Female  Academy  as  well  as  a 
trustee  of  the  Utica  Free  Academy  before  it  was  absorbed  in  the  common  school  sys- 
tem. He  also  rendered  excellent  service  as  school  commissioner  for  the  five  years  pre- 
vious to  his  death. 

He  drafted  the  charter  under  which  Utica  was  incorporated  as  a  city  in  1832,  and 
was  for  several  ensuing  years  a  member  of  the  common  council.  In  1840  he  was 
elected  to  the  Assembly  by  the  Democratic  party.  The  clearness  and  soundness  of  his 
views  especially  on  questions  of  finance  attracted  attention  and  his  speeches  on  these 
topics  were  widely  published.  In  1848  he  became  a  member  of  the  Free  Soil  Party 
and  was  nominated  for  Congress,  but  failed  of  election.  He  returned  to  the  Democratic 
party,  but  never  hesitated  to  denounce  the  aggressions  of  the  slave  power  and  to  de- 
clare the  necessity  of  opposition  to  them.  In  1850  he  was  elected  to  the  State  Senate 
and  at  once  assumed  a  leading  position. 

On  the  impending  passage  of  a  bill  relating  to  the  canal  known  as  "  the  nine  million 
bill "  his  sense  of  right  and  justice  was  so  shocked  that  he  advised  the  resignation  of 
the  Democratic  senators  rather  than  permit  the  consummation  of  what  he  deemed  an 
outrage,  and  his  advice  was  followed.  This  act  was  not  approved  by  the  directors  and 
a  new  Senate  was  chosen  which  passed  the  bill ;  but  the  courts  eventually  affirmed  its 
unconstitutionality,  thus  vindicating  his  judgment.  Even  those  who  condemned  the 
resignation. were  forced  to  admit  the  unbending  integrity  and  sacred  regard  for  the 
constitutional  prohibition  which  impelled  Mr.  Mann  as  the  leading  adviser.  This  act 
ended  his  political  life.  Business  and  local  affairs  engrossed  his  time  and  he  never  had 
any  heart  again  for  politics,  though  repeatedly  urged  to  accept  of  subsequent  nomina- 
tions, particularly  that  of  comptroller. 

He  died  January  9,  1860,  his  loss  being  fully  appreciated  by  the  people  of  Utica,  and 
the  large  att3ndance  at  his  funeral  showing  how  closely  he  had  linked  himself  with  the 
affections  of  his  fellow  citizens.  Simple  in  his  habits,  calm  and  unperturbed  in  man- 
ners, quick  and  penetrative  in  his  judgment,  and  though  uncompromising  in  the  deliv- 
ery of  his  opinions  and  inflexible  in  his  integrity,  yet  easy  of  adaptation  to  others  and 
prompt  to  enlist  for  the  common  good,  he  secured  a  leading  place  in  the  community. 


rARWELL,  SAMUEL.— The  professional  life  of  Mr.  Farwell  made  him  conspicuously 
a  benefactor.  Born  on  May  19,  1795,  amid  the  hills  and  the  bracing  air  of  Litch- 
field, Herkimer  County,  and  trained  on  a  farm  by  his  father,  a  practicing  physician  he 
commenced  active  life  with  a.  stalwart  frame  and  active  limbs,  and  to  the  last  was  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  15 

picture  of  health  and  strength.  Joining  his  brother  Eli,  a  master  mason  at  Herkimer,  in 
1812  he  soon  learned  the  trade  and  carried  it  on  during  his  minority  for  his  brother, 
when  his  health  failed  and  then  he  conducted  it  on  his  own  account.  This  prepared  him 
for  the  public  works  in  which  he  engaged  and  on  which  he  entered  soon  after  his  mar- 
riage in  1820.  The  number  and  magnitude  of  these  have  been  rarely  surpassed  by  in- 
dividual contractors.  The  first  was  performed  under  Canal  Commissioner  Henry  Sey- 
mour and  consisted  in  the  building  of  the  aqueduct,  culverts,  and  all  the  other  masonry, 
except  locks,  of  the  portion  of  the  Erie  Canal  extending  between  Steele's  Creek  and 
Little  Falls.  Early  in  1821  he  made  an  additional  contract  to  build  the  mason  work 
between  Tankee  Hdl  and  Schenectady,  and  this  was  afterward  extended  to  Alexan- 
der's Bridge  in  the  town  of  Watervleit,  where  the  canal  crosses  the  Mohawk.  This 
work  was  finished  in  1823,  and  he  returned  to  the  neighborhood  of  his  father's  and 
bought  a  farm.  Hiring  a  man  to  manage  it  his  own  time  was  principally  occupied  in 
building.  Among  other  structures  erected  by  him  at  this  time  was  that  of  the  Second 
Presbyterian  Church  of  this  city,  the  same  which  is  now  known  as  the  Bleecker  Street 
Baptist  Church. 

In  1824  or  1825,  in  company  with  three  or  four  associates,  he  began  to  construct  a 
portion  of  the  Oswego  Canal  below  the  falls  on  the  Oswego  River.  During  the  first 
season  at  Oswego  he  and  his  partners  took  a  contract  on  the  Delaware  and  Hudson 
Canal  to  build  the  locks  and  other  masonry  at  Rondout  from  tide-water  to  the  High 
Falls.  They  completed  their  work  and  spttlpil  in  1826.  The  following  spring  they 
entered  into  an  engagement  for  the  building  ol  nine  lockis,  aqueduct,  and  dam  across  the 
Mongaup  River  from  Port  Jervis  to  opposite  the  mouth  of  the  Lackawaxen,  twenty- 
five  miles.  While  this  was  in  progress  they  contracted  to  build  up  the  Lackawaxen 
River  Valley  to  Honesdale,  the  end  of  the  canal,  whence  a  railroad  extended  to  the 
Carbondale  coal  mines.  Before  this  was  finished  they  engaged  to  construct  locks  and 
dams  across  the  Lehigh  River,  and  also  other  structures  of  masonry  pertaining  to  the 
Lehigh  Canal  from  Mauch  Chunk  to  Baston.     They  finished  in  1829. 

During  all  this  time  while  Mr.  Farwell  was  personally  engaged  in  the  above  mentioned 
works  his  associates  were  occupied  on  the  Chemung  Canal,  the  Crooked  Lake  Canal, 
and  the  Chenango  Canal,  he  holding  an  interest  with  them,  but,  with  the  exception  of 
the  former  canal,  only  giving  a  partial  superintendence  to  the  operations.  In  the 
meantime  two  of  his  earlier  partners  began  making  lumber  at  Fulton,  and  opened 
a  yard  for  its  sale  in  Utica,  of  which  Mr.  Farwell  on  his  return  took  charge.  This 
yard  occupied  nearly  the  whole  space  embraced  between  Bleecker  street  and  the  canal 
and  between  John  street  and  the  rear  of  the  stores  on  Genesee.  At  this  time  (1830) 
he  built  a  house  for  himself  on  the  corner  of  G-enesee  and  Court  streets,  and  for  the 
firm  of  Farwell,  Case  &  Co.  he  put  up  a  dwelling-house  and  a  block  of  stores  on  the 
site  of  the  Butterfield  House.-  During  1831-34  his  time  was  employed  on  a  portion  of 
the  Delaware  and  Raritan  Canal.  It  extended  from  Bordentown  to  New  Brunswick 
and  included  two  tide  locks  in  the  harbor  of  the  latter  city.  This  canal  opened  a  chan- 
nel for  vessels  between  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  and  now  does  most  of  the  coast- 
ing trade  between  the  two  cities.  In  the  prosecution  of  his  portion  of  the  work  Mr. 
Farwell  was  associated  with  his  brother  Eli  and  others.     In  the  fall  of  1835  he  bought 


1 6  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  interest  of  James  Piatt  &  Oo.  in  the  forwarding  and  commission  business.  This, 
which  they  had  transacted  on  the  shp  that  then  extended  from  the  canal  to  Catharine 
street,  he  removed  to  the  site  of  the  Empire  block  on  Franklin  Square.  His  first  part- 
ner in  this  employment  was  Horace  Butler;  his  later  ones  were  J.  S.  Harrington  and 
H.  H.  Pish.  They  owned  the  New  York,  Utica,  and  Oswego  line  of  canal  boats  and  were 
part  owners  of  propellors  plying  between  Oswego  and  Chicago  and  a  hne  of  canal  boats 
on  the  Waliash.  Meanwhile,  entrusting  the  forwarding  largely  to  his  partners,  Mr. 
Farwell  was  busy  with  public  works.  He  supplied  ties  and  lumber  to  the  Mohawk  and 
Hudson,  Hudson  and  Berkshire,  Utica  and  Schenectady,  and  Syracuse  and  Auburn 
Railroads,  and  completed  a  contract  on  the  Erie  Canal  enlargement.  In  1838  he  en- 
gaged with  Moreau  Delano,  Charles  G-.  Case,  J.  W.  Baker,  and  Thomas  E.  Brayton  in 
a  large  contract  on  the  Croton  aqueduct,  and  spent  most  of  his  time  in  carrying  it  for- 
ward. It  embraced  the  archway  for  the  passage  of  the  Saw-Mill  River,  the  roadway, 
the  foundation  for  conduit  over  the  valley  of  this  river,  some  sixty  feet  high,  and 
piercing  the  mountain  on  the  south  side  by  means  of  a  tunnel  eighty  or  ninety  feet  be- 
low the  surface  three-fourths  of  a  mile  in  length.  From  this  point  (Yonkers)  his  work 
extended  south  to  King's  Bridge.  It  was  closed  in  1840.  During  the  last  year  of  its 
progress  a  contract  to  build  the  New  York  and  Albany  Railroad  was  made  by  Messrs. 
Farwell,  Case,  Baker,  Daniel  Oarmichael,  J.  S.  T.  Stranahan,  and  Alva  P.  Downer. 
Progress  was  made  at  Troy,  at  Q-reenbush,  and  in  Columbia,  Dutchess,  Putnam,  and 
Westchester  Counties.  Funds  were  limited  and  the  work  slow,  and  eventually  the 
company,  proving  unable  to  pay  the  estimates  of  the  contractors,  sold  out  their  line 
to  the  Hudson  River  Company.  While  engaged  on  the  New  York  and  Albany  the 
associates  entered  into  terms  with  the  New  York  and  Erie  Company  to  build  from  fifty 
to  seventy  miles  of  their  road  through  Sullivan  County  and  a  large  section  in  Orange 
County.  Operations  on  the  former  were  stopped  by  a  bill  in  chancery,  procured  by  the 
Delaware  and  Hudson  Canal  Company,  which  ran  alongside  the  proposed  route.  But 
in  Orange  County  the  work  progressed  until  the  company  failed,  owing  the  contractors 
from  $50,000  to  $70,000.  For  this  amount  they  obtained  judgment  and  levied  on  the 
locomotives  running  over  twelve  miles  of  the  completed  road  nearest  New  York.  Feel- 
ing friendly  to  the  company  they  took  a  receipt  and  allowed  the  latter  the  use  of  these 
locomotives;  and  thus  for  five  years,  and  until  State  aid  was  obtained,  Messrs.  Strana- 
han, Carmichael  &  Farwell  carried  the  Brie  on  their  shoulders.  Mr.  Farwell  also  took 
another  contract  on  this  road  from  Port  Deposit  to  Binghamton,  which,  however,  he 
was  not  allowed  to  build,  and  out  of  this  grew  a  protracted  lawsuit.  About  this  time 
he  was  also  interested  in  work  on  the  Brie  road  in  Allegany  and  Cattaraugus  Counties 
and  took  personal  charge  of  it.  About  1840-41  he  bore  a  part  in  the  organization  of 
the  Ontario  and  St.  Lawrence  Steamboat  and  Canal  Packet  Boat  Company  and  was 
one  of  the  first  directors.  After  its  re-organization  in  1857  he  was  made  president  and 
continued -to  hold  this  position  during  the  remaining  eleven  years  of  the  existence  of  the 
company. 

In  the  spring  of  1847  he  spent  some  time  at  Clayton  supervising  the  building  and 
fitting  out  of  the  Ontario,  one  of  the  boats  of  his  hne,  and  so  soon  as  the  machinery  was 
in  place  and  the  vessel  launched  he  set  out  for  Boston  to  fulfill  a  contract  he  and  others 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


17 


had  made  to  build  the  Beacon  Hill  reservoir  in  that  city.  His  associates  were  Messrs. 
Carmichael,  Case,  Stranahan,  Joseph  Gonder,  and  John  Duff,  but  the  execution  of  the 
work  fell  to  Mr.  Case  and  himself.  This  reservoir,  which  fills  a  square  in  the  rear  of 
the  dwellings  on  Beacon  street,  is  sixty-three  feet  above  the  flagging  on  its  highest  side 
and  contains  27,000  cubic  yards  of  granite  masonry.  It  was  completed  in  November, 
1849.  Almost  cotemporaneously  Mr.  Farwell  perfected  the  channel  for  the  supply  of 
the  city  of  Brooklyn  with  water.  In  October,  1850,  he  began  the  construction  of  105 
miles  of  the  Great  Western  Railway  in  Canada,  a  portion  of  which  embraced  some  of 
the  heaviest  work  on  the  road.  This,  with  the  branch  running  to  Gait,  occupied  him 
about  four  years.  Samuel  Zimmerman  and  Messrs.  Stranahan  &  Farwell  were  the 
partners  in  this  enterprise,  they  having  purchased  the  interests  of  numerous  other  con- 
tractors. Mr.  Farwell's  next  contract  was  for  the  construction  of  a  section  of  the 
Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad.  It  occupied  him  during  the  years  1854-56.  His  old 
associates.  Baker,  Case,  and  Stranahan,  and  also  James  G.  Lund,  co-operated  with  him 
in  this  work.  Though  the  contract  comprised  the  whole  of  the  road  they  completed 
work  only  as  far  as  Boonville,  doing,  however,  considerable  grading  beyond.  He  was 
afterward  one  of  the  directors.  He  entered  upon  the  Flint  and  Pere  Marquette  road 
in  1854,  and  was  at  his  death  still  concerned  in  it.  His  associates  were  T.  D.  Estabrook, 
A.  M.  Farwell,  his  nephew,  and  Dr.  H.  C.  Potter,  his  son-in-law.  Mr.  Farwell  and  Dr. 
Potter  bought  up  the  interests  of  the  others  and  have  the  chief  management  of  the 
road.  It  extends  from  Lake  Erie  to  Lake  Michigan,  253  miles,  has  thirty  miles  of 
branch  roads,  and  cost  nearly  $7,000,000.  In  view  of  its  magnitude  and  that  he  was 
the  leading  person  in  its  construction,  besides  aiding  largely  in  procuring  the  necessary 
funds,  it  may  be  considered  his  greatest  undertaking. 

What  an  immense  amount  of  labor  is  sketched  in  this  epitome!  It  seems  incredible 
that  human  powers  should  be  equal  to  it;  and  there  was  involved  in  it  the  severest 
mental  strain.  Yet  Mr.  Farwell  passed  his  fourth-score  year  without  a  sign  of  having 
been  overtaxed.  No  man  stood  higher  in  the  respect,  confidence,  and  favor  of  the 
community.  With  the  instincts  of  a  thorough  gentleman  his  fine  person  and  courteous 
manners  made  him  noticeable  on  the  streets,  in  business  circles,  and  in  society,  while 
his  face  beamed  with  intelligence  and  kindness.  Exceedingly  trying  tests  weie  appUed 
to  him,  and  they  notably  proved  to  the  satisfaction  and  admiration  of  all  his  absolutely 
perfect  integrity-  and  honor.  For  fifty  years  he  conducted  colossal  enterprises  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  United  States  and  Canada,  but  without  the  shghtest  abatement  of  his 
geniality.  With  a  warm,  tender,  generous  heart  for  all  men,  and  a  loving  and  devoted 
friend,  his  conspicuous  charm  was  in  the  household  of  which  he  was  the  center  and  idol. 
The  halo  of  religion  suffused  his  character  and  the  spirit  of  religion  pervaded  his  being. 
His  pubhc  works  are  the  monuments  of  his  usefulness,  and  fond  memories  will  ever 
cherish  his  integrity,  his  nobility,  and  his  loveliness. 


rISH,  HENRY  HOPKINS,  born  in  the  village  of  Herkimer,  October  22, 1813,  was 
the  youngest  son  of  Walter  and  Jane  (Whitney)  Fish,  who  came  from  Bozrah, 
Conn.,  in  1793.     He  started  with  the  education  derived  from  the  common  schools  of  two 
generations  ago,  which  later  on  he  extended  by  broad  and  varied  reading  and  study  in 
C 


1 8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

many  directions,  so  that  he  impressed  those  with  whom  he  came  in  contact  with  the 
scope  and  value  of  his  Icnowledge.  His  ambition  was  to  become  a  lawyer,  but  his 
father  meeting  with  business  reverses  the  son  was  obliged  to  begin  his  career  at  six- 
teen as  teacher  in  a  country  school,  a  position  that  was  very  distasteful  to  him.  In 
1837  he  came  to  Utica  and  was  engaged  by  Butler  &  Livingston,  who  placed  him  in 
entire  charge  of  their  forwarding  business  at  Albany.  He  married,  in  1841,  Cornelia 
Phelon,  daughter  of  Dr.  Thomas  Phelon,  of  Litchfield,  Herkimer  County,  and  two 
years  later  returned  to  Utica  and  engaged  in  forwarding  with  Samuel  Farwell.  The 
firm  name  was  Farwell  &  Fish,  and  their  stand  was  on  the  site  of  the  one  now  occupied 
by  George  W.  Head  k.  Co.  Some  years  later  he  was  associated  with  A.  E.  Culver  in 
the  same  business,  the  title  of  the  firm  being  Culver,  Harrington  &  Fish.  In  1851  Mr. 
Fish  abandoned  the  forwarding  business  and  took  a  fortunate  step  in  helping  to  organ- 
ize the  Utica  G-aslight  Company.  He  was  made  superintendent  and  treasurer  of  this 
organization.  The  latter, position  he  occupied  until  the  day  of  bis  death.  It  was  in  this 
responsible  post  that  he  displayed  his  native  energy  of  character  and  his  intelligent  con- 
ception of  true  business  methods.  At  the  time  he  took  charge  the  company's  finances 
were  in  such  condition  that  he  was  unable  to  borrow  on  the  credit  of  the  company  alone 
such  moneys  as  were  needed,  and  he  lent  it  his  own  credit.  He  developed  its  resources 
and  its  facilities  by  adopting  new  methods  and  machinery  so  as  to  keep  them  apace  with 
the  requirements  of  the  city.  From  a  very  modest  beginning  the  company  came  into 
possession  of  an  extensive  plant  and  held  high  rank  among  the  city's  enterprises. 

Tlie  main  details  of  Mr.  Fish's  business  career  are  easily  given  ;  but  it  is  quite  another 
task  to  indicate  what  manner  of  man  he  was,  to  measure  his  natural  ability  or  the  ex- 
tent of  his  acquired  knowledge  of  numerous  matters  of  current  interest,  and  to  estimate 
his  influence  therein.  In  the  welfare  of  the  city.  State,  and  country  he  displayed  an 
active  and  vigilant  concern.  He  was  elected  alderman  in  1848  and  in  1855  was  chosen 
mayor,  conducting  a  successful  administration.  For  sixyears  following  March,  1857,  he 
was  one  of  the  most  valued  and  efficient  members  of  the  Board  of  School  Commis- 
sioners. A  Whig  and  afterward  a  Republican  in  politics  his  methods  of  political 
thought  were  conservative  and  often  decidedly  independent.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the 
convention  at  Chicago  which  nominated  Abraham  Lincoln  for  President,  and  prided  him- 
self in  the  issue  of  that  assembly.  He  was  for  a  time  collector  of  internal  revenue 
under  the  administration  of  President  Johnson.  Pie  was  familiar  with  traffic  on  the 
canal,  and  once  delivered  an  able  address  on  that  subject  before  the  Canal  Committee  of 
the  legislature;  and  he  bore  part  with  Samuel  Farwell  and  Dr.  H.  C.  Potter  in  the 
preparation  for  the  building  of  the  Pere  Marquette  Railroad,  as  he  did  subsequently  in 
the  adjustment  of  its  embarrassed  affairs.  To  every  movement  in  which  he  enlisted  him- 
self he  brought  a  proper  degree  of  enthusiasm  backed  by  persuasive  powers  of  speech. 
He  possessed  rare  gifts  as  a  conversationalist,  and  he  frequently  demonstrated  his 
ability  to  make  a  sustained  address  of  telling  force  and  symmetrical  construction.  On 
subjects  of  even  commonplace  interest  his  discursiveness  often  revealed  a  vein  of  thought 
that  was  philosophic  and  instructive.  For  that  reason  he  was  always  an  agreeable  man 
to  meet.  While  advancing  his  convictions  with  earnestness  he  was  never  offensive  in 
his  mode  of  expressing  them.     He  could  write  as  gracefully  and  effectively  as  he  could 


!    \ 


^''•y.  .'v  E  Q  ]¥ilh:ov  ;■  fiBro  Vf 


^^c^   iflS-<.,yut^ 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  19 

talk,  and  the  columns  of  the  local  press  frequently  bore  testimony  to  his  vigorous 
mastery  of  good  English  as  well  as  to  the  soundness  of  his  opinions. 

A  man  possessing  the  fine  judicial  mind  and  the  happy  temperament  of  Mr.  Fish — 
a  man  given,  as  he  vsras,  to  the  studious  examination  of  all  contemporaneous  topics  and 
an  earnest  promulgation  of  the  principles  he  formed  after  careful  research — is  always  a 
valuable  factor  in  the  life  of  a  commuuity  ;  and  he  will  long  be  remembered  for  the  ex- 
cellent influence  he  exerted  upon  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  our  leading  citizens.  If 
to  this  is  added  his  responsiveness  of  action,  his  tact  in  dealing  with  men,  and  his  skill 
in  managing  large  affairs  we  are  not  surprised  that  his  co-operation  in  the  conduct  of 
them  was  deemed  of  importance  and  was  often  sought.  His  home  life  was  affectionate 
and  exemplary.  By  his  many  subordinates  he  was  ever  esteemed  and  beloved.  His 
death  took  place  on  April  1,  1887.  His  widow,  two  sons,  Winslow  P.  and  William  A. 
and  a  daughter,  Grace,  survive  him. 


CURTIS,  PHILO  C— The  father  of  Philo  0.  Curtis  was  Asahel  Curtis,  a  native  of 
Old  Canaan,  Conn.,  who  had  seen  service  on  our  Northern  frontier  during  the  war 
of  the  Revolution,  and  who  after  two  or  three  different  residences  in  the  eastern  part  of 
this  State  finally  settled  in  1803  in  Bast  Sauquoit,  Oneida  County,  N.  T.  He  was  rec- 
ognized as  a  man  of  integrity  and  worth,  was  a  justice  of  the  peace,  commissioner  of 
deeds,  and  for  several  years  superintendent  of  the  Stockbridge  and  Brothertown  In- 
dians. The  historian  of  Paris,  in  speaking  of  him,  remarks  that  "  Philo  C,  the  second 
son,  was  a  mechanic  of  rare  skill  and  great  inventive  genius,  perfecting  an  improvement 
of  the  power  loom  at  an  early  period  of  its  introduction  into  the  factories  of  the  Sau- 
quoit Valley." 

This  Philo  C.  Curtis  was  born  at  Hoosick,  Rensselaer  County,  N.  Y.,  June  21,  1789. 
His  mechanical  ingenuity  was  displayed  at  an  early  age.  He  took  great  interest  in 
textile  machinery  and  the  first  three  patents  taken  out  by  him  were  of  that  nature. 
The  first  one  he  obtained  in  1810,  the  year  when  he  became  of  age,  and  was  for  an  im- 
provement of  the  loom.  In  1828  Mr.  Curtis  removed  to  Utica  and  started  a  machine 
shop  on  the  west  side  of  Cornelia  street  opposite  what  was  at  that  time  the  foundry  of 
Bphraim  Hart.  He  there  built  the  first  steam  engines  that  were  made  in  Utica.  Ir» 
1831  he  took  out  a  patent  for  an  apparatus  for  heating  the  supply  water  of  boilers  after 
the  water  had  passed  the  pump  and  was  under  boiler  pressure.  To  accomplish  this 
purpose  he  utilized  the  heat  of  the  exhaust  steam  from  the  engine.  This  patent  was 
of  great  intrinsic  value  and  is  today  in  almost  universal  use,  especially  with  non- 
condensing  engines.  It  is,  therefore,  deserving  of  high  consideration.  In  1832  he 
built  and  changed  his  place  of  business  to  the  shop  in  West  Utica  known  for  many  years 
as  the  Vulcan  works.  Here  he  continued  the  making  of  steam  engines  and  of  machinery 
in  general.  According  to  the  City  Directory  of  1832  there  were  then  twenty-one  steam 
engines  at  work  in  the  county,  ten  of  which  were  in  Utica ;  eighteen  of  them  were 
made  by  Mr.  Curtis.  Like  most  mechanics  who  are  given  to  invention  he  gave  more 
time  to  carrying  out  mechanical  ideas  than  he  did  to  matters  of  finance,  and  so  it  fol- 
lowed that  the  building  of  the  West  Utica  shop,  in  connection  with  other  matters  he 
had  under  way,  caused  his  failure,  resulting  in  the  loss  of  all  of  his  property  and  obliging- 
him  to  retire  from  busirress  for  a  season. 


20  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

In  1837  he  entered  into  an  arrangement  with  J.  M.  Church,  a  lumber  dealer,  by  which 
was  procured  a  Woodworth  planer  and  matcher  and  a  few  auxiliary  tools,  as  well  as  an 
engine  and  boiler  for  running  the  same.  This  machinery  was  set  up  in  a  large  frame 
building  then  standing  on  Pine  street  near  the  canal  and  it  was  started  by  Mr.  Curtis, 
and  the  first  planing  and  matching  of  flooring  and  dressing  of  lumber  by  power  that  was 
done  in  Utica  was  done  under  bis  direction  and  supervision.  After  carrying  on  the 
work  for  a  while  Mr.  Curtis  sold  his  interest  therein  to  Chauncey  Palmer  and  Mr. 
Church  disposed  of  his  to  Lewis  Lawrence.  After  this  episode  Mr.  Curtis  moved  away 
from  the  city  and  for  some  years  lived  in  New  Hartford.  In  the  fall  of  1845  he  returned 
to  Utica  and  started  a  machine  shop  on  Jay  street  near  the  old  city  furnace.  Although 
his  facilities  were  limited  his  acquired  reputation  as  a  mechanic  gave  him  employment. 
After  two  or  three  changes  of  location  he  moved  in  1849  into  a  building  on  Pine  street, 
where  he  remained  for  twelve  years,  and  from  which  he  again  moved  to  the  West  Utica 
shop  he  had  erected  in  1832,  and  where  he  had  met  with  his  financial  reverse.  He  sold 
his  works  in  1862  to  his  son  and  retired  wholly  from  active  business  pursuits.  Besides 
being  an  industrious  and  skillful  mechanic  Mr.  Curtis  was  a  man  of  thought,  and  one 
whose  thoughts  led  in  the  main  to  sound  practical  results,  results  that  benefited- the 
entire  community  in  which  he  lived.  He  had,  perhaps,  too  much  of  a  spirit  of  inven- 
tion for  his  own  pecuniary  good.  He  loved  invention  better  than  he  loved  wealth  and 
disregarded  the  essentials  needed  to  secure  it.  Among  others  of  his  devices  not  already 
mentioned  above  was  a  pump  for  raising  water  and  other  liquids.  This  was  a  very 
valuable  invention  and  had  it  been  well  followed  up  would  have  made  his  fortune.  This 
was  patented  in  1835. 

In  resolutions  passed  after  the  death  of  Mr.  Curtis,  which  occurred  September  23, 
1864,  by  the  Oneida  R.  N.  Chapter  it  was  said  that,  in  the  inventive  talents  of  the  de- 
ceased, man  has  been  benefited  by  the  ingenious  application  of  machinery  to  various 
implements  of  industry,  making  latent  power  subservient  to  his  will,  overcoming  ob- 
stacles heretofore  considered  impracticable,  and  conferring  a  boon  upon  the  "man  of  toil." 
It  was  added  in  the  same  resolutions  that  in  his  life  we  have  an  example  of  the  upright 
citizen,  a  kind  and  affectionate  parent,  and  one  who  by  strict  integrity  in  all  the  rela- 
tions of  life  has  left  behind  him  a  name  both  honored  and  respected.  His  family  con- 
sisted of  his  wife,  a  son,  and  a  daughter.  The  daughter  died  in  1852.  His  wife  and  son 
survive  him. 


GRAY,  JOHN  PERDUE,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  died  at  Utica,  N.  Y.,  on  the  the  29th  day 
of  November,  1886,  at.  the  age  of  sixty-one  years.  The  initiatory  cause  of  his 
final  illness  wag  the  result  of  an  attempt  made  by  an  insane  man  to  assassinate  hinl,  in 
March,  1882,  immediately  upon  his  return  from  Washington  at  the  conclusion  of  the 
trial  of  Gruiteau  for  the  murder  of  President  Garfield.  This  injury,  with  the  nervous 
strain  and  responsibility  of  the  protracted  trial,  combined  with  the  continued  perform- 
ance of  the  duties  of  his  position  in  the  asylum,  perceptibly  impaired  his  health  and 
were  powerful  factors  in  producing  the  fatal  results.  In  January,  1886,  the  Board  of 
Managers  of  the  asylum  gave  him  a  leave  of  absence  for  six  months.  A  portion  of  this 
period  was  passed  in  the  South  and  the  remainder  in  a  foreign  tour,  undertaken  in  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


21 


h'ope  of  improving  his  health.  He  returned  m  October,  seemingly  benefited  by  the 
change,  and  again  resumed  his  labors,  but  under- peculiarly  trying  circumstances.  Early 
in  November  business  called  him  to  Baltimore,  whence  he  returned  much  prostrated  and 
suffering  from  a  recurrence  of  the  disease  which  was  so  soon  to  prove  fatal.  Prom  this 
time  it  was  evident  that  little  hope  could  be  entertained  of  his  recovery.  He  slowly 
failed  from  blood  poisoning  induced  by  disease  of  the  kidneys,  and  died  in  urcemic  coma. 

Dr.  Gray  was  one  of  nine  children,  and  was  born  on  the  6th  of  August,  1825,  at 
Half  Moon,  Center  County,  Pa.  He  was  educated  m  the  common  school,  in  Bellefonte 
Academy  and  Dickinson  College,  and  received  his  medical  degree  from  the  University 
of  Pennsylvania  in  the  class  of  1848.  After  a  period  of  two  years'  service  in  the  Phil- 
adelphia Hospital  he  was  chosen  on  account  of  his  qualifications  and  ability  the  junior  as- 
sistant in  the  State  Lunatic  Asylum  at  Utica.  He  passed  through  the  higher  grades  of 
second  and  first  assistant  and  in  July,  1854,  was  elected  the  superintendent  of  the  asylum. 
At  the  early  age  of  twenty-nine  years  he  was  thus  placed  in  a  most  responsible  position 
at  the  head  of  what  was  then  the  largest  asylum  for  the  insane  in  the  country.  He  be- 
came the  successor  of  Drs.  Brigham  and  Benedict,  whose  skill  and  ability  had  given  the 
Utica  Asylum  an  enviable  reputation.  This  Dr.  Gray  not  only  sustained,  but  widely 
extended,  by  improving  the  old  and  originating  new  measures  of  administration.  Ac- 
cepting unreservedly  the  view  that  insanity  was  a  physical  disease  the  medical  care  of 
patients  assumed  the  highest  importance  and  the  institution  was  made  more  completely 
than  ever  before  a  hospital  for  the  nursing  and  care  of  patients  as  sick  people.  The 
influence  of  the  predominant  idea  was  felt  in  every  part  of  the  asylum.  To  the  strictly 
medical  treatment  of  insanity  he  gave  special  consideration ;  the  medical  history  of 
patients  was  more  fully  sought  out  and  recorded  and  the  resources  of  the  pharmaco- 
poeia were  employed  with  a  belief  in  their  efficacy  in  this  as  in  other  forms  of  disease. 
The  moral  treatment  by  employment,  amusement,  and  mental  occupation  was  early  given 
a  prominent  place.  One  of  the  methods  introduced  by  Dr.  Gray  was  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Opal,  a  paper  contributed  to  and  published  by  the  patients  in  the  asylum. 
This  was  continued  until  the  third  issue  of  the  tenth  volume  and  proved  of  great  in- 
terest and  value  to  the  patients,  and  was  also  a  source  of  revenue.  Its  exchanges 
reached  as  high  as  300  newspapers  and  periodicals  annually  ;  it  added  several  hundred 
volumes  to  the  library  and  hundreds  of  dollars  to  the  amusement  fund  for  patients.  His 
labors  were  always  in  the  direction  of  progress,  both  in  material  improvement  and 
administration,  as  well  as  in  the  treatment  of  patients.  The  organization,  making  subor- 
dinates individually  responsible  to  heads  of  departments,  and  these  in  turn  to  the  super- 
intendent as  the  highest  authority,  resulted  in  improved  order  and  discipline  and  in- 
creased efficiency.  The  Utica  Asylum  under  his  control  became  the  model  for  many 
of  the  institutions  subsequently  erected,  and  later  a  school  of  instruction  which  has 
furnished  a  larger  number  of  men  equipped  for  the  specialty  than  any  other  asylum  in 
the  country. 

Early  in  his  career  as  superintendent,  and  while  most  men  would  have  been  fully  oc- 
cupied with  the  details  of  management,  he  enunciated  the  principles  which  have  since 
largely  guided  the  State  in  the  care  of  the  insane.  In  the  resolutions  passed  by  the 
superintendents  of  the  poor  in  1856  we  recognize  his  hand.     These  were  that  the  State 


22  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

should  make  ample  provision  for  all  of  its  insane  who  were  not  in  condition  to  reside  in 
private  families;  that  none  should  be  cared  for  in  any  county  poor  and  almshouse;  that 
the  proper  classification  demanded  for  the  care  of  the  insane  could  only  be  secured  in 
establishments  constructed  with  special  view  to  their  treatment;  and  finally,  that  the 
curable  and  incurable  should  not  be  cared  for  in  separate  institutions.  In  accordance 
with  these  views  he  urged  the  erection  of  two  State  hospitals  for  the  insane  so  located 
that  in  conjunction  with  the  Utioa  Asylum  they  would  most  fully  meet  the  needs  of 
the  people  of  the  State.  In  the  discussion  of  the  question  of  separate  institutions  for 
the  acute  and  chronic  classes  of  the  insane,  which  excited  deep  interest  in  the  pro- 
fession. Dr.  Q-ray  bore  a  notable  part  and  one  which  gave  him  great  prominence.  He 
maintained  then,  as  always,  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  State  to  provide  for  all  of  the 
insane  the  best  medical  care,  and  to  remove  them  from  the  county  poor-houses  to  asy- 
lums properly  equipped  with  every  means  to  promote  recovery.  Although  overruled 
by  the  estabhshment  of  asylums  for  the  chronic  insane  he  lived  to  see  his  plans  carried 
out  in  the  erection  of  the  Hudson  Eiver  Hospital  at  Poughkeepsie  and  the  Buffalo 
State  Asylum  at  BuiFalo  to  accommodate  the  patients  in  the  eastern  and  western 
divisions  of  the  State  respectively.  Another  movement  in  which  Dr.  Gray  was  identi- 
fied as  the  originator,  and  which  he  carried  to  a  successful  issue,  was  the  removal  of 
children  from  the  poor-houses  to  the  various  orphan  asylums  and  their  support  at  pub- 
lic expense.  This  reform,  first  inaugurated  in  Oneida  County,  has  been  adopted  in  the 
other  countiee  of  the  State,  and  has  been  of  inestimable  benefit  in  rescuing  children 
from  the  association  and  degredation  of  life  in  the  poor-bouses  and  giving  them  the  ad- 
vantage of  training  and  education.  This  philanthropic  work  entitles  him  to  rank  as  a 
public  benefactor. 

The  separation  of  the  convict  and  criminal  insane  from  other  patients,  and  treatment 
in  an  institution  constructed  with  special  reference  to  their  isolation  and  safe-keeping, 
was  largely  if  not  entirely  due  to  the  efforts  of  Dr.  Gray.  The  wisdom  of  this  action 
has  been  fully  sustained,  and  the  example  has  been  followed  by  other  States  ■nthere  the 
numbers  of  this  class  warranted  the  expense  of  their  separate  maintenance.  Subse- 
quently he  was  made  one  of  the  commission  to  locate  both  the  Willard  and  Buffalo 
Asylums,  for  the  latter  of  which  he  furnished  the  plans  and  was  one  of  its  Board  of 
Managers  until  it  was  in  full  operation.  The  subject  of  the  causation  of  insanity  has 
always  received  the  careful  consideration  of  alienists.  In  the  asylum  under  Dr.  Brig- 
ham,  and  for  some  years  under  Dr.  Gray,  the  two  classes  of  causes,  moral  and  physical, 
were  recognized  as  productive  of  the  disease.  The  moral  causes  were  given  a  largely 
predominating  position  and  included  all  of  the  cases  in  which  there  had  been  a  history 
of  any  emotional  excitement  or  disturbance,  while  to  physical  causes  were  attributed 
only  the  small  number  of  cases  which  were  the  result  of  injuries  or  deformities  of  the 
head  and  like  material  influences.  Upon  more  prolonged  observation  and  reflection 
Dr.  Gray  became  convinced  of  the  incorrectness  of  this  theory  and  practice,  and  satis- 
fied that  moral  causes  alone  were  not  sufficient  to  produce  disease.  He  believed  that  it 
was  only  when  the  physical  health  was  affected  that  insanity  resulted,  and  that  this 
change  was  really  the  cause  of  the  emotional  disturbance.  From  this  time  forward  he 
regarded  physical  causes  only  as  producing  insanity  and  recorded  none  but  them  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  23 

the  tables  of  causation.  This  was  deemed  a  most  important  step,  as  it  gave  the  first 
place  in  treatment  to  therapeutic  measures,  and  divorced  the  subject  more  fully  from 
the  influence  of  the  metaphysical  theory  that  insanity  was  a  disease  of  the  mind. 
"Rest,  nutrition,  medication —could  then  be  presented  in  truth  as  the  relief  of  sorrow.'' 
Insanity,  a  physical  disease  due  strictly  to  physical  causes,  was  one  of  the  distinctive 
features  of  his  belief  and  teachings. 

Dr.  Gray  was  the  first  in  this  country  to  recognize  the  importance  of  and  to  intro- 
duce special  investigation  into  pathological  conditions  existing  in  insanity,  and  to  the 
TJtica  Asylum  belongs  the  credit  of  having  the  first  special  pathologist  appointed  on  its 
official  staff.  This  course  has  been  fully  endorsed  by  the  specialty  and  the  profession. 
However  great  the  success  and  credit  Dr.  Gray  deservedly  gained  for  his  labor  in  the 
directions  already  mentioned  it  was  in  the  field  of  medical  jurisprudence,  as  an  expert 
in  insanity,  that  he  attained  the  greatest  triumphs  of  his  life.  Beginning  with  the 
Parish  will  case  and  the  trial  of  Fyler  for  murder,  one  of  the  first  in  which  epilepsy 
was  pleaded  as  a  defence,  his  course  is  fairly  marked  out  by  recalling  the  list  of  promi- 
nent trials  throughout  the  State.  A  few  of  these  are  the  trials  of  Heggie,  of  Buckhout, 
of  Euloff,  of  Walworth,  of  Montgomery,  of  Dillon,  of  Gaffney,  of  Waltz,  of  Mancke 
for  murder,  and  the  Vanderbilt  and  Fillmore  will  cases.  In  behalf  of  the  general  gov- 
ernment during  the  war  he  presided  at  the  trial  of  Dr.  Wright,  of  Norfolk,  Va.,  for 
the  murder  of  a  lieutenant  of  colored  troops,  and  was  a  witness  in  the  case  of  Stewart, 
tried  for  poisoning  a  fellow  soldier  in  the  recruiting  camp  at  Elmira,  and  of  Payne,  one 
of  the  assassins  of  President  Lincoln.  He  was  many  times  appointed  a  commissioner 
by  the  various  governors  of  the  State  to  whom  a  final  appeal  had  been  made  for  execu- 
tive clemency.  His  aid  was  often  sought  by  prosecuting  officers  and  by  the  friends  of 
the  accused  when  there  was  a  suspicion  of  the  existence  of  insanity.  On  whatever  side 
his  services  were  employed  his  testimony  was  true  to  his  convictions  of  right,  and 
always  carried  with  it  the  force  of  bemg  truthfully  and  honestly  given.  No  imputation 
of  being  influenced  by  any  unworthy  motive  was  ever  cast  upon  his  evidence.  He  re- 
sorted to  no  subterfuges,  clothed  no  mere  theories  in  the  garb  of  science  to  excuse 
crime,  yielded  to  no  clamor,  but  always  took  his  position  and  sustained  himself  upon 
the  principles  deduced  from  his  broad  krtowledge  and  vast  experience,  and  consequently 
his  opinions  had  the  utmost  weight  with  the  judge,  the  jury,  and  the  people.  He  bore 
successfully  the  most  searching  questions  of  the  best  legal  talent,  at  times  lasting  sev- 
eral days,  and  no  exceptions  to  his  testimony  were  ever  made  a  ground  of  appeal  to  a 
higher  court.  The  amount  of  labor  he  was  called  upon  and  often  compelled  to  perform 
against  his  most  earnest  desire  furnishes  the  best  evidence  of  the  value  placed  upon  his 
services.  Upon  his  conduct  of  the  Guiteau  case,  in  which  he  was  the  principal  medical 
witness  for  the  prosecution,  may  rest  his  reputation  as  the  leading  expert  in  insanity  in 
the  country.  His  testimony  is  a  model  of  terse  logic,  of  strong  statement,  of  clear  expo- 
sition of  principles  and  facts  of  science,  incontrovertible  and  convincing  in  its~  conclu- 
sions, a  fit  culmination  of  his  labors. 

Dr.  Gray  also  achieved  success  as  a  lecturer  on  insanity.  For  some  years  he  occupied 
the  chair  of  psychological  medicine  and  medical  jurisprudence  in  the  Albany  and  Belle- 
vue  Medical  Colleges.     These  lectures  were  undertaken  not  so  much  for  his  own  honor 


24  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  emolument  as  for  the  advancement  of  the  medical  profession.  His  lectures  were 
noted  for  their  clearness  and  deflniteness  of  statement,  and  for  an  eloquence  and  grace 
of  style  which  attracted  many  hearers  besides  the  students  of  his  own  department.  More 
than  any  other  person  Dr.  Gray  shaped  the  lunacy  legislation  of  the  State  of  TSTew  York 
and  it  is  largely  to  his  influence  with  the  commission  appointed  to  codify  and  revise  the 
law  that  we  owe  the  present  lunacy  statutes.  In  matters  pertaming  to  other  de- 
pendent classes  his  influence  was  also  felt,  as  his  advice  was  often  sought  by  the  Boards 
of  Managers  having  charge  of  the  various  charities,  reformatories,  and  prisons,  by  legis- 
lators, judges,  and  officials. 

As  a  writer  Dr.  Gray  was  widely  known  to  the  profession,  though  he  never  pub- 
lished, as  he  was  often  importuned  to  do,  any  consecutive  work  upon  the  subject  of 
insanity.  He  wrote  many  articles  for  the  Journal  of  Insanity  and  addresses  before  so- 
cieties which  attracted  attention  and  showed  his  ability  as  an  author.  The  annual 
reports  of  the  asylum  were  often  important  contributions  to  the  specialty,  as  they  con- 
tained, not  only  his  views  and  ideas  upon  subjects  of  interest  in  the  study  and  treat- 
ment of  disease,  but  also  details  of  construction,  organization,  and  administration  of 
great  value  to  those  in  charge  of  like  institutions. 

In  the  death  of  Dr.  Gray  the  medical  profession  lost  one  of  its  strong,  great  men,  and 
one  whom  it  has  honored  by  the  many  offices  and  preferments  conferred  upon  him.  He 
was  successively  chosen  president  of  the  Oneida  County  Medical  Society,  of  the  State 
Medical  Society,  of  the  State  Medical  Association,  of  the  Association  of  Superintendents 
of  American  Institutions  for  the  Insane,  and  of  the  Association  of  Medical  Editors.  He 
was  an  honorary  member  of  the  Psychological  Association  of  Great  Britain,  of  the  Medico- 
Psychologique  of  Paris,  of  the  Society  de  Freniatrioa  of  Italy,  and  of  various  other 
scientific  bodies.  He  was  president  of  the  Psychological  Section  of  the  Centennial 
Medical  Congress  of  1876  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  held  a  similar  position  in  the 
Ninth  International  Medical  Congress,  held  in  Washington  in  September,  1887. 
He  also  had  conferred  upon  him  the  title  of  LL.D.  from  Hamilton  College.  As  a  phy- 
sician he  held  a  high  place  in  the  regard  of  the  profession  and  the  public.  He  was 
readily  approached,  gave  freely  and  willingly  of  his  time  to  all,  but  especially  to  the 
younger  members  of  the  profession  who  appealed  to  him  for  assistance.  In  his  prac- 
tice he  exhibited  the  same  characteristics  as  in  his  conduct  of  public  affairs.  He  pos- 
sessed a  comprehensive  knowledge  of  medicine  which,  combined  with  ripe  judgment, 
the  power  to  note  the  salient  points  of  a  case,  and  to  apprehend  the  relation  between 
cause  and  effect,  made  him  a  safe  counselor,  inspired  confidence  m  his  decisions,  and 
caused  him  to  be  consulted  in  the  most  important  cases,  both  by  physicians  and  those 
occupying  the  highest  official  and  social  positions.  No  better  evidence  could  be  given 
than  the  confidence  thus  reposed  in  him  by  those  most  competent  to  judge  of  his  at- 
tainments in  his  profession. 

Though  fully  occupied  with  the  labors  of  his  position  Dr.  Gray  found  time  for  the 
exercise  of  the  duties  of  a  citizen,  and  as  such  was  most  highly  respected.  His  patriot- 
ism was  unquestioned  and  unbounded.  Unable  to  enter  the  army  from  the  position 
he  held  as  superintendent  of  the  asylum  he  gave  freely  of  his  means  and  time  in  col- 
lecting money  and  obtaining  recruits  to  fill  the  quota  of  the  city.     He  was  generous. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  25: 

liberal  minded,  and  active  in  every  charitable  and  public  work  vphich  would  relieve  suf- 
fering or  promote  the  interests  of  the  community.  Among  charities  which  had  their 
origin  with  him  was  one  designed  to  provide  nurses  for  lying-in  women  in  needy  cir- 
cumstances. A  suggestion  of  the  want  of  such  aid  made  in  a  lecture  delivered  in  Utica 
gave  rise  to  the  Maternity  Society  of  this  and  other  places.  He  was  domestic  in  his 
feelings  and  tastes,  and  loved  to  spend  the  time  not  urgently  demanded  by  his  duties  in 
his  home  surrounded  by  his  family  and  intimate  friends.  He  was  an  aflfectionate  hus- 
band and  an  indulgent  father,  a  sympathizing  friend  in  sickness,  and  an  admirable  nurse. 
Among  the  most  notable  characteristics  of  Dr.  Grray  were  his  readiness  to  appreciate- 
and  ability  to  state  in  a  clear,  forcible  manner  the  fundamental  principles  of  any  ques- 
tion, his  rare  power  of  observation,  his  calm  and  independent  judgment,  and  his  strong 
convictions.  These  qualities,  combined  with  an  indomitable  will,  fully  explain  his  influ- 
ence over  others  and  were  elements  of  his  success.  He  had  a  wonderfully  retentive 
memory  both  of  persons  and  things,  great  affability  of  manner  and  kindness  of  heart, 
and  a  strong  love  for  children,  by  whom  he  was  always  beloved. 

In  conversation  he  was  brilliant  and  instructive.  From  every  place  he  visited  and 
from  every  person  he  met  he  gathered  information  which  it  was  his  pleasure  to  impart 
to  others.  To  all  he  was  a  cheerful  and  agreeable  companion.  Though  like  all  men 
with  true  independence  of  character  he  met  with  opposition  and  criticism  of  his  ad- 
ministration ;  they  rarely  provoked  him  into  controversy  or  changed  his  course  of  ac- 
tion, but  if  attacked  upon  charges  reflecting  upon  the  probity  o£  his  official  acts  he  never 
failed  to  defend  himself  successfully.  Dr.  Gray  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  Christian 
religion  and  a  member  of  the  Reformed  Church  in  Utica.  His  religious  views,  formed 
early  in  life,  were  settled  convictions  and  never  a  subject  of  question  or  doubt.  They 
controlled  his  life  and  conduct. 

In  looking  over  his  life  work  there  is  a  richness  of  labor  and  a  fullness  of  success  that 
rarely  falls  to  the  lot  of  man.  In  all  the  fields  of  action  in  which  he  bore  a  part,  as  the 
head  of  a  great  charity,  a  medical  jurist,  a  lecturer,  as  toe  editor  of  the  Journal  of  Insanity, 
as  a  physician,  a  citizen,  and  a  friend,  there  were  the  evidences  of  great  power,  of 
strength  of  character,  and  generosity  o£  disposition,  which  were  the  elements  of  his- 
success,  which  made  him  beloved,  and  which  made  his  death  a  serious  calamity  to  the 
community,  to  the  profession,  and  to  his  friends.  What  higher  tribute  could  be  given 
to  his  memory  ? 

Dr.  Gray  married  Mary,  eldest  daughter  of  the  late  B.  A.  Wetmore.  Of  their  several 
children  two  sons  and  one  daughter  are  living. 


n OFFER,  THOMAS,  was  born  on  the  site  of  his  present  residence  in  the  city  of 
Utica,  January  31,  1807.  His  father  was  Capt.  James  Hopper,  a  native  of  Eng- 
land. For  many  years  he  was  in  command  of  BngUsh  vessels  in  the  merchant  service 
and  owned  shares  in  them  and  their  cargoes.  During  the  war  between  France  and 
England  he  commanded  an  armed  vessel  of  sixteen  guns,  and  furnished  with  letters  of 
marque  from  the  British  admiralty  he  cruised  in  the  South  Seas.  Attacked  on  one 
occasion  by  a  superior  vessel  his  ship  was  taken  after  a  brave  defence  and  he  was  car-- 
D 


26  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

ried  a  prisoner  to  France.  His  release  and  that  of  another  captain  were  effected  by 
■exchange  for  the  celebrated  Marshal  Junot,  who  had  been  captured  in  Egypt.  A  short 
time  subsequently  to  this  he  came  to  America,  his  principal  object  being  to  secure  in- 
demnity for  the  loss  of  another  vessel  that  had  fallen  into  the  hands, of  the  French 
through  information  furnished  them  by  an  American,  and  which  vessel  had  been  sold 
afterward  to  persons  from  America.  He  engaged  General  Hamilton  in  New  York  as 
his  counsel,  but  failed  in  accomplishing  the  object  of  his  visit.  By  General  Hamilton 
he  was  prevailed  upon  to  come  to  Utica  and  see  the  country.  This  visit  was  made  in 
the  year  1801,  and  shortly  after  his  arrival  he  bought  considerable  land  on  the  southern 
borders  of  the  village  and  never  returned  to  his  native  country.  Forty-nine  acres  of 
the  tract  purchased  comprised  the  cleared  farm  of  Benjamin  Hammond  in  great  lot  No. 
95,  which  the  latter  had  obtained  from  John  Bellinger.  In  part  it  was  a  portion  of  the 
Holland  Purchase,  and  other  smaller  parts  were  parchased  of  John  Post,  Richard  Kim- 
ball, and  Jonathan  Evans.  On  his  purchase  Captain  Hopper  built  a  house,  which  he 
enlarged  on  the  arrival  of  his  family,  and  engaged  in  farming  and  in  tanning,  to  neither 
of  which  pursuits  had  he  been  accustomed.  He  brought  tanners  from  the  East,  paying 
tliem  high  wages,  and  in  order  to  improve  his  land  he  expended  his  means  freely  in 
having  the  stumps  grubbed  out  of  the  ground.  Hence  his  projects  were  to  some  ex- 
tent a  failure;  he  also  lost  considerably  in  the  Utica  Glass  Company.  The  land  which 
he  purchased,  however,  increased  in  value  and  later  in  the  skillful  hands  of  his  sons  be- 
came a  handsome  estate.  Captain  Hopper  left  a  reputation  for  integrity  and  respecta- 
bility, but  living  a  little  apart  from  most  of  the  other  residents  of  the  village  he  was 
not  especially  concerned  in  public  affairs  of  his  time.  He  died  May  16.  1816.  His 
widow  married  Joshua  Wyman  and  died  December  11,  1843.  Their  children  were 
George  J.  (born  in  England),  Ehzabeth  Ann,  Thomas,  and  Mary  (Mrs.  Bradley  and 
afterward  Mrs.  McOlure).     All  of  these  excepting  Thomas  are  deceased. 

Thomas  Hopper  passed  his  boyhood  days  at  home  and  obtained  a  good  English  edu- 
cation at  the  common  schools  and  the  Utica  Academy.  Early  in  life  he  determined  to 
follow  mercantile  pursuits  and  at  the  age  of  twenty-six  years  began  business  in  Utica 
as  a  merchant,  but  after  about  four  years  he  gave  up  that  occupation  and  turned  his 
attention  to  improving  and  dealing  in  real  estate,  which  he  has  followed  the  greater 
part  of  his  life.  From  1835  to  1844  he  resided  in  New  York  city,  where  he  also  oper- 
ated in  real  estate.  The  property  purchased  by  his  father  was  greatly  improved  by 
him  and  many  residences  erected  on  it,  and  ^  it  now  constitutes  one  of  the  finest  resi- 
dence sections  of  the  city.  Soon  after  his  return  from  New  York  Mr.  Hopper  pro- 
jected and  against  much  opposition  established  and  himself  constructed  the  splendid 
system  of  water  works  for  the  city  of  Utica.  He  was  one  of  the  first  board  of  nine 
directors  and  has  filled  the  office  of  president  for  about  twenty  years.  During  that 
period  he  has  refused  all  remuneration  for  his  services  in  the  company  and  is  given  the 
credit  in  the  community  of  conferring  an  inestimable  boon  upon  the  inhabitants.  Mr. 
Hopper  was  also  one  of  the  first  to  instigate  the  organization  of  the  Cemetery  Associa- 
tion, which  resulted  in  giving  the  city  its  beautiful  burial  place.  Here  partially  at  his 
own  expense  he  erected  a  splendid  chapel  for  the  comfort  and  convenience  of  those 
gathered  on  burial  occasions  in  stormy  weather. 


^^i> 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  27 

Following  in  the  footsteps  of  his  father,  who  was  one  of  the  first  members  of  Trinity 
Church,  Mr.  Hopper  has  always  identified  himself  with  religious  and  kindred  interests 
that  tend  to  the  benefit  of  the  community.  He  was  treasurer  of  the  Bishop's  Fund  for 
the  diocese  of  Western  New  York  for  fourteen  years,  and  is  a  director  in  the  Utica 
National  Bank  and  has  been  for  many  years.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republican,  but  has 
never  taken  a  very  active  part  in  that  field  and  has  declined  political  preferment.  Mr. 
Hopper  now  looks  back  upon  a  well-spent  life  and  is  among  the  very  few  persons  who 
were  born  in  Utica  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  present  .century  and  still  live  here. 


nILLAR,  CHARLES. — Among  the  many  of  her  adopted  citizens  to  whom  Utica  is- 
under  lasting  obligations  for  his  business  thrift  and  standing  none  left  a  more 
honorable  record  or  one  more  worthy  of  emulation  than  Charles  Millar.  The  enter- 
prises which  he  started  and  with  which  he  was  connected  were  among  the  most  im- 
portant in  the  city,, and  will  continue  to  grow  and  add  to  her  wealth  and  standing.  His- 
steady  and  persistent  application  to  business  brought  him  success.  Scrupulously 
upright  in  his  dealings,  farsighted  and  comprehensive  in  commercial  and  financial  condi- 
tions, he  not  only  conquered  fortune,  but  received  and  held  the  confidence  of  the  com- 
munity and  the  sincere  regard  of  all  who  knew  him.  He  was  born  in  Greenwich,  Eng- 
land, March  9,  1808 ;  received  a  good  education  in  the  parochial  schools  of  London  ; 
married  in  1833  Miss  Jane  Quait,  who  survives  him ;  and  came  to  this  country  two 
years  later  and  to  Utica  in  1838.  Here  for  more  than  half  a  century  he  was  an  active 
force  in  the  business,  social,  and  public  hfe  of  Utica;  a  thorough  believer  in  her  he  had 
pride  in  her  growth  and  beauty,  and  assisted  to  his  utmost  to  increase  and  secure  the 
importance  she  has  now  attained. 

On  arriving  in  Utica  Mr.  Millar  at  once  commenced  business  in  the  line  in  which  be 
had  been  educated,  that  of  master  builder.  He  secured  large  and  important  contracts, 
erecting  many  of  the  most  prominent  of  the  older  buildings  in  Utica,  among  which  may 
be  mentioned  the  court-house,  Mohawk  street  jail,  Tibbitts  block,  several  public  schools, 
and  John  Thorn's  residence.  From  IS;')?  to  1860  he  was  the  agent  and  manager  of  the- 
Utica  Screw  Company.  At  the  time  he  assumed  charge  the  company  was  suffering 
from  the  financial  depression  and  was  virtually  bankrupt,  but  through  his  efibrts  it . 
rapidly  recovered  and  became  such  an  important  competitor  that  the  American  Screw 
Company,  of  Providence,  olTered  to  buy  the  stock  at  par,  which  offer,  contrary  to  Mr. 
Millar's  advice,  was  accepted  by  the  directors.  The  correctness  of  his  views  was  after- 
ward confirmed  by  the  advance  of  the  Providence  company's  stock  many  hundred- 
fold. In  1861  he  became  superintendent  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad,  which 
office  he  held  for  six  years,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  the  future  prosperity  of  that 
important  road;  he  made  many  improvements  in  the  property,  among  the  most  notable- 
of  which  was  the  filling  of  the  immense  trestle  work  at  Trenton.  N.  T.  This  was  a  work 
of  great  magnitude,  taking  several  years  and  requiring  several  million  yards  of  sand  and 
gravel.  His  management  of  the  afi'airs  of  the  railroad  company  was  so  energetic  and 
characterized  by  such  good  judgment  that  the  road  was  enabled  to  earn  and  pay  its  first 
dividend.     He  resigned  his  position  on  the  railroad  in  1867  to  erect  the  Millar  building; 


28  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

on  G-enesee  street  in  Utica.  He  had  purchased  in  1861  the  wholesale  tin,  plumbing,  and 
steamfitting  business  which  he  continued  to  conduct  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  and 
which  is  one  of  the  most  extensive  of  its  kind  in  the  United  States.  He  admitted  his 
son,  Henry  W.  Millar,  to  full  partnership  in  1866,  forming  the  firm  of  Charles  Millar  & 
Son,  and  as  the  business  had  grown  rapidly,  requiring  better  facilities  and  more  room,  he 
erected  the  above  building  for  its  use.  His  firm  became  extensive  manufacturers  of 
cheese  and  butlermaking  apparatus  and  many  of  the  appliances  were  of  Mr.  Millar's 
invention.  This  machinery  was  sold  all  over  the  United  States,  and  large  quantities 
were  shipped  to  Europe,  Australia,  Canada,  and  South  America. 

September  15,  1883,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Millar  celebrated  their  golden  wedding,  and  the 
same  year  the  manufacture  of  lead  pipe  was  commenced  by  his  firm  in  Utica  and  was  a 
success  from  the  start.  In  1885  the  large  factory  and  warehouse  on  Main  street  was 
erected  for  the  purpose  of  extending  this  branch  of  the  business.  Soon  afterward  his 
son-in-law,  John  L.  Murray,  was  admitted  a  member  of  the  firm,  the  firm  name  remain- 
ing the  same.  In  1889  the  firm,  with  the  assistance  of  Nicholas  K.  Kernan,  Irvm  A. 
Williams,  and  William  M.  White,  organized  the  Utica  Pipe  Foundry  Company  and  Mr. 
Millar  was  elected  its  first  president.  Under  his  direction  the  extensive  buildings  were 
•erected,  and  the  company  was  about  to  cast  its  first  pipe  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He 
always  took  a  deep  interest  in  political  matters.  He  was  a  strong  anti-slavery  man  and 
a  Free  Soil  Democrat,  identifying  himself  with  the  Republican  party  from  its  start;  he 
was  always  an  earnest  advocate  and  staunch  supporter  of  its  principles.  He  repre- 
sented the  Fourth  ward  in  the  common  council  at  the  time  of  the  incendiary  fires,  and 
was  himself  a  sufferer  from  the  burning  of  his  carpenter  shop  on  Division  street.  "  Dad ' ' 
Orcutt,  one  of  the  gang  of  incendiaries  who  was  convicted,  afterward  confessed  the 
■crime.  He  was  president  for  one  term  of  the  Utica  Mechanics  Association  and  chair- 
man and  manager  of  one  of  their  most  successful  fairs,  which  for  many  years  were  so 
popular. 

He  lived  to  a  good  old  age,  and  was  active  and  busy  up  to  the  last.  On  Saturday, 
February  22,  1890,  he  was  apparently  enjoying  his  usual  health  j  he  spent  the  greater 
part  of  the  day  visiting  his  different  places  of  business,  his  store,  the  lead  pipe  works, 
and  the  new  pipe  foundry  building,  at  all  of  which  he  directed  various  matters ;  return- 
ing home  at  the  usual  hour  he  spent  the  evening  with  his  family.  He  died  in  his  bed 
suddenly  the  next  morning  at  8  o'clock  of  heart  failure. 

Mr.  Millar  was  a  pleasant,  agreeable,  and  courteous  companion,  loyal  and  devoted  to 
his  friends,  and  loving  and  kind  to  his  family.  His  enterprises  were  uniformly  success- 
ful ;  he  never  failed,  but  left  a  record  of  which  his  descendants  may  always  be  proud. 


LAWRENCE,  LEWIS,  was  born  in  the  town  of  Otego,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y.,  De- 
cember 21,  1806,  and  died  on  Fourth  Lake,  Fulton  Chain,  N.  Y.,  September  8, 1886. 
Fifty-eight  of  the  nearly  eighty  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  identifying 
him  in 'many  ways  with  the  growth  and  prosperity  of  the  city  and  securing  for  him  an 
honorable  place  among  its  distinguished  citizens.  He  was  of  New  England  descent,  his 
parents,  Daniel  and  Penelope  Lawrence,  having  settled  in  this  State  some  years  previous 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


29 


to  his  birth.  He  was  their  only  son,  standing  midway  in  a  group  of  five  children,  two 
of  his  sisters  being  older  and  two  younger  than  himself.  All  these  died  while  Mr.  Law- 
rence was  yet  a  lad,  leaving  him  to  fight  alone  life's  battle  and  to  carve  out  his  own  fort- 
une and  destiny.  His  early  years,  like  those  of  most  successful  Americans,  were  spent  in 
the  country  upon  a  farm  owned  by  his  father.  But  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he  left  Otego 
and  went  to  live  in  the  town  of  Franklin,  Delaware  County.  There  he  spent  the  next 
seven  years  living  m  the  family  of  his  employer  and  learning  the  trade  of  a  carpenter. 
On  reaching  his  majority  he  determined  to  find  a  larger  sphere  for  his  activity,  and 
chose  Utica,  N.  Y.,  for  his  future  home.  He  came  to  this  city  in  April,  1828,  without 
acquaintance  and  with  only  $3  in  his  pocket.  He  found  himself  in  the  midst  of  a 
rapidly  growing  community,  recognized  his  opportunity,  and  seized  upon  it.  He  at 
once  began  business  upon  his  own  account,  and  though  without  money  he  pushed  for- 
ward with  the  confidence  of  a  capitalist.  His  enterprises  were  successful.  Friends 
gathered  about  him  and  within  two  or  three  years  of  his  coming  here  he  was  an  ac- 
knowledged leader  among  the  builders  of  Utica. 

About  the  year  1834  he  became  a  manufacturer  of  and  dealer  in  lumber,  and  from  that 
time  until  1865  his  mills  and  business  were  extensive,  requiring  and  bringing  out  the 
indomitable  energy  and  good  judgment  which  characterized  his  life.  In  the  year  1865 
he  gave  his  attention  to  the  construction  of  the  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susquehanna  Val- 
ley Railroad,  organized  the  company,  became  its  president  and  treasurer,  and  in  1870 
leased  it  to  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and  Western  Railroad  Company,  and  then 
sought  rest  and  recreation  for  the  first  time  in  his  life.  With  his  son  and  his  son's  wife 
he  spent  nearly  three  years  in  travel  in  this  country  and  in  Europe.  Returning  here  in 
1874  he  gave  his  time  to  various  enterprises  of  business  and  benevolence  in  which  he 
was  interested,  spending  his  winters  in  Florida,  to  which  State  he  became  much  at- 
tached. In  politics  Mr.  Lawrence  was  a  Republican  and  from  the  beginning  an  Abo- 
litionist and  a  temperance  man.  He  was  a  staunch  supporter  of  Senator  Oonklin,  his 
neighbor  and  life-long  friend,  in  whose  interest  he,  in  1877,  founded  the  Utica  BaUy  Re- 
publican. He  was  a  man  of  large  benevolence  and  a  friend  always  to  be  relied  upon. 
He  was  a  member  of  Westminster  Church  and  its  strong  friend.  There  survive  him  his 
only  son,  Lewis  H.  Lawrence,  and  Charles  B.  Barnard  and  Miss  A.  G-.  L.  Barnard,  chil- 
dren of  his  only  daughter,  Mrs.  Charlotte  A.  Barnard,  wife  of  ex-Mayor  Charles  B.  Bar- 
nard, who  died  April  15,  1886. 

The  wife  of  Mr.  Lawrence  was  Miss  Anna  G.  Skinner,  daughter  of  Samuel  and  Ruth 
B.  Skinner,  of  Colchester,  Conn.,  to  whom  he  was  married  January  18,  1828,  and  who 
died  November  30,  1868. 

WILLIAMS,  ABIJAH  J.,  was  born  near  Oriskany,  N.  Y.,  on  the  13th  of  July, 
1806.  After  a  period  of  school  study  he  engaged  early  in  life  at  his  native  place, 
and  about  1845  came  to  Utica,  beginning  business  on  the  site  where  his  sons  have  con- 
tinuf  d  since  on  Genesee  and  Blandina  streets.  There  he  manufactured  bobbins,  shut- 
tles, etc.,  for  cotton  and  woolen-mills,  and  gradually  built  up  the  large  trade  afterward 
transferred  to  his  sons.  This  business  brought  him  into  association  with  large  manu- 
facturers throughout  this  region  and  he  became  a  stockholder  in  almost  all  of  the  lead- 


30  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

in^  manufacturing  corporations  in  the  cotton  and  woolen  business.  Some  years  previ- 
ous to  his  death  he  became  connected  with  the  Empire  mills  at  Clayville  and  at  his 
death  owned  the  property  in  connection  with  his  sons.  He  was  president  of  the 
Oneida  National  Bank  at  his  death  and  also  of  the  Skenandoa  Cotton  Company.  He 
was  the  largest  owner  of  the  stock  of  the  Utica  steam  cotton-mill,  and  a  director  of 
the  company,  and  also  a  director  in  the  Mohawk  Valley  mill.  Never  taking  a  very 
active  interest  in  politics,  in  which  he  was  a  Republican,  he  still  felt  a  deep  concern  for 
the  well-being  of  the  city.  He  was  elected  alderman  in  1849.  Late  in  life  he  made 
several  notable  donations  to  charitable  institutions.  He  gaVe  $1,000  toward  founding 
the  department  for  old  men  in  the  Faxton  Hospital  and  $2,000  toward  the  Y.  M.  C.  A. 
building.  Mr.  Williams  was  a  man  of  great  industry  and  close  application  to  his  business, 
of  unquestioned  integrity  and  uprightness,  and  fully  capable  of  grasping  and  executing 
large  plans  and  usually  with  success.  In  financial  and  business  matters  of  importance 
he  was  universally  trusted  in  this  community  and  his  counsel  was  often  sought. 

Mr.  Williams  was  married  in  1825  to  Mary  Billington.  His  sons  who  survived  him 
are  Irvin  A.  and  James  H.  A  son,  Norman  A.,  died  in  1879.  Aras  Q-.,  another  son, 
was  a  resident  of  Brooklyn,  where  he  was  prominent  in  politics,  and  died  there  several 
years  since.     Mr.  Williams  died  August  5,  1886. 


THORN,  JOHN,  president  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  Company, 
was  born  in  Ruishton,  near  Taunton,  Somersetshire,  England,  December  6,  1811. 
Robert  Thorn,  his  father,  was  a  shoemaker,  and  died  in  that  place  in  1844.  His  mother, 
Betty  Palmer,  also  died  at  Ruishton  in  1867.  John  Thorn's  young  boyhood  was  spent 
at  his  home,  where  he  attended  the  primary  school  until  he  was  nine  years  old.  These- 
were  the  meager  educational  opportunities  that  were  offered  him  ;  but  he  made  the  most 
of  them  and  acquired  the  foundation  of  an  education.  After  his  school  days  he  worked 
for  about  six  years  on  a  farm  and  learned  the  soap  and  candle  business.  At  fifteen 
years  of  age  he  attended  a  higher  school  for  about  eight  weeks,  and  then  returned  to- 
'the  soap  and  candle  business,  which  he  continued  until  the  summer  of  1832,  when  on 
the  12th  of  July  he  sailed  for  America,  the  Mecca  of  so  many  ambitious  young  men 
from  the  mother  country.  After  a  voyage  of  seven  weeks  and  three  days  he  landed  in 
New  York  city  with  about  £25  in  EngUsh  money  and  a  letter  to  a  resident  of  the  me- 
tropolis. It  was  not  a  fortunate  time  for  a  young  man  to  arrive  in  America  with  no 
friends  and  little  pecuniary  means,  for  that  dreaded  pestilence,  the  Asiatic  cholera,  had 
just  made  its  terrible  march  over  the  Northern  States  and  the  country  was  still  suffer- 
ing from  its  effects.  Mr.  Thorn's  friend,  therefore,  advised  him  to  not  linger  in  New 
York,  but  to  push  on  westward.  He  accordingly  started  for  Zanesville,  0.,  traveling 
from  Albany  to  Buffalo  on  a  canal  boat,  from  Buffalo  to  Cleveland  by  steamboat,  and 
from  Cleveland  to  Zanesville  by  canal  boat,  making  a  journey  of  about  two  weeks.  In 
Zanesville  he  met  the  first  person  he  had  seen  in  this  country  whom  he  had  ever  before 
seen.  He  remained  there  only  a  few  weeks  and  then  returned  as  far  as  Utica,  reaching 
this  place  on  the  first  of  October.  When  passing  through  Utica  on  his  way  westward 
he  had  been  favorably  impressed  with  the  village,  then  just  being  transformed  into  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  31 

«ity,  and  he  concluded  to  remain  here;  to  that  end  he  engaged  his  services  at  once  to 
Boyd  &  Chamberlain,  who  were  carrying  on  a  small  soap  and  candle  business  on  Water 
street.  Three  months  later,  in  company  with  Stephen  Thorn  (not  a  relative),  he  bought 
the  establishment.  They  continued  together  one  and  a  half  years,  when  John  Thorn 
purchased  his  partner's  interest  and  conducted  the  manufactory  until  September  1,  1837, 
the  business  in  the  meantime  having  been  considerably  extended  and  the  product  im- 
proved. He  then  took  as  a  partner  the  late  Isaac  Maynard,  thus  inaugurating  a  har- 
monious business  connection  which  continued  for  many  years  and  to  the  death  of  the 
latter  on  the  23d  of  February,  1885.  Mr.  Maynard  was  Mr.  Thorn's  brother-in-law 
through  the  marriage  of  the  latter  to  Miss  Mary  Maynard  on  the  17th  of  September,  1833. 
She  died  April  23,  1891.  The  Maynard  family  were  from  Mr.  Thorn's  native  place  in 
England.  The  business  of  the  two  men,  as  far  as  it  related  to  the  soap  and  candle  man- 
ulacture,  was  given  up  about  the  year  1880,  having  grown  to  large  proportions  and 
giving  profitable  returns.  In  the  year  1840  the  firm  purchased  of  James  C.  Belong  his 
wool  and  pelt  business  located  on  Whitesboro  and  Water  streets,  which  they  success- 
fully continued  until  1870,  at  which  time  it  had  grown  to  a  large  and  profitable  traffic. 
In  the  year  1860  they  associated  with  James  S.  Kirk,  formerly  of  Utica  and  then  of 
Chicago,  in  the  establishment  of  a  large  soap  and  candle  manufactory  in  the  latter  city. 
This  was  continued  to  1880,  when  it  was  sold  out  to  Mr.  Kirk  at  a  time  when  it  was 
largely  profitable  and  was  doing  a  business  of  about  |2,000,000  a  year.  These  several 
undertakings  constitute  the  actual  business  life  of  Mr.  Thorn,  and  their  uniform  success 
and  comprehensive  character  testify  to  his  capacity  and  good  judgment,  which  have  also 
served  him  equally  well  in  still  larger  fields. 

In  1859  Mr.  Thorn  was  elected  a  director  in  the  old  Black  River  and  Utica  Railroad 
Company,  whose  line  then  extended  only  from  Utica  to  Boonville.  The  affairs  of  the 
company  were  then  in  a  complicated,  unprofitable,  and  unsatisfactory  condition,  and 
under  direction  of  the  court  it  was  closed  up  and  sold  in  1860,  Mr.  Thorn  buying  it 
for  the  bondholders.  In  the  following  year  he  was  elected  president  of  the  company, 
an  office  which  he  has  held  almost  continually  since.  He  immediately  re-organized  the 
company,  the  name  being  changed  to  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  Company, 
with  capital  to  the  amount  of  the  bonds,  about  $860,000.  In  the  failure  of  the  first 
company  the  city  of  Utica  lost  about  $250,000.  Mr.  Thorn  continued  as  president  until 
1873,  when  he  made  one  of  his  periodical  visits  to  England  for  the  benefit  of  his  wife's 
health  as  well  as  his  own,  and  was  succeeded  by  Hon.  De  Witt  C.  West,  who  had  been 
vice-president.  In  1879,  while  Mr.  Thorn  was  again  visiting  England,  lie  was  recalled 
on  account  of  the  illness  of  Mr.  West,  and  again  assumed  the  office,  which  he  did  not 
again  relinquish.  The  railroad  work  of  both  a  practical  and  diplomatic  character  which 
was  accomplished  under  Mr.  Thorn's  administration  and  largely  through  his  efforts  has 
been  astonishing.  When  he  first  took  the  road  in  charge  he  began  radical  improvements 
both  in  the  roadbed  and  the  equipment.  He  accepted  only  $250  salary  for  himself, 
cut  down  all  expenses  to  the  utmost  limit,  and  devoted  the  entire  income  of  the  road  to 
its  betterment.  The  nine  trestles  between  Utica  and  Boonville  were  .Irst  filled,  one  of 
them  requiring  700,000  yards  of  earth,  and  with  other  equally  important  changes  the 
business  of  the  road  began  to  improve  at  once  and  to  such  an  extent  that  on  the  11th 


32  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

of  November,  1863,  the  stockholders  were  almost  overwhelmed  by  the  receipt  of  a  two- 
per  cent,  dividend — an  event  that  had  never  occurred  before  in  the  history  of  the  road. 
An  annual  dividend  of  from  four  to  six  per  cent,  has  never  since  been  missed,  and  the 
stock  has  steadily  advanced  in  value  until  it  was  leased  to  the  Rome,  Watertown,  and 
Ogdensburg  Company  in  1886,  when  it  commanded  $1.20.  In  1867  Mr.  Thorn  inaugu- 
rated a  series  of  extensions  by  continuing  the  road  to  Lyons  Falls,  a  distance  of  ten 
miles,  still  adhering  to  the  economical  and  prudent  measures  first  adopted.  In  1868-G9 
the  line  was  continued  to  Lowville,  seventeen  miles;  in  1869-70  to  Carthage;  and 
from  there  to  Philadelphia  in  1871-72,  connecting  there  with  the  Black  River  andMor- 
ristown  road,  which  had  about  seven  miles  constructed.  That  road  was  at  once  com- 
pleted to  Morristown  and  leased  by  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  Company,  and 
in  1872  the  company  leased  the  road  from  Carthage  to  Watertown  (then  known  as  the 
Carthage,  Watertown,  and  Saekets  Harbor  Company).  Two  years  later  the  line  was 
completed  to  Saekets  Harbor,  involving  under  this  lease  about  thirty  miles  of  road.  In 
1874  a  connection  was  made  with  the  Clayton  and  Theresa  road  at  Theresa  Junction, 
sixteen  miles,  and  that  line  was  taken  under  a  lease.  In  1878  the  system  of  extension 
was  still  further  advanced  by  building  from  Morristown  to  Ogdensburg,  eleven  miles. 
In  1883  a  consolidation  was  effected  with  the  Black  River  and  Morristown  road  and  in 
1886  all  of  these  various  branches,  excepting  the  Carthage,  Watertown,  and  Saekets 
Harbor  (which  continued  under  lease),  were  consohdated  under  the  name  of  the  Ulica 
and  Black  River  Railroad  Company,  comprising  about  150  miles  of  road.  On  the  14th 
of  April,  1886,  this  entire  system  was  leased  to  the  Rome,  Watertown.  and  Ogdens- 
burg Company  for  seven  per  cent,  on  its  capital  stock,  that  company  assuming  all  of  its 
liabilities,  the  bonded  indebtedness— about  f2,000,000.  On  the  14th  of  March,  1891, 
the  road  passed  with  all  of  the  lines  of  the  Rome,  Watertown,  and  Odgensburg  Com- 
pany into  control  of  the  New  York  Central  and  Hudson  River  Railroad  Company. 

Assuming  that  this  development  of  railroad  property  from  an  insignificant,  non-pro- 
ductive short  line  to  a  large,  comprehensive,  and  profitable  system  is  largely  due  to  Mr. 
Thorn's  energy,  capacity,  and  labor  (which  none  will  dispute  who  is  conversant  with  the 
facts)  it  is  no  more  than  just  to  place  it  among  the  remarkable  executive  achievements  of 
the  time.  Mr.  Thorn  as  well  as  his  friends  look  upon  this  work  as  the  crowning  success  of 
his  long  and  active  life.  His  business  qualifications  are  fully  recognized  by  his  fellow 
citizens.  He  has  been  a  director  in  the  Utica  City  Bank  almost  from  the  time  of  its 
organization  ;  a  director  in  the  Globe  Woolen  Company  since  its  organization ;  a  di- 
rector for  a  term  of  years  in  the  Utica  woolen-mills;  a  director  at  present  and  one  of 
the  organizers  of  the  Utica,  CUnton,  and  Binghamton  Railroad  Company ;  a  director  in 
the  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susquehanna  Valley  Railroad  Company  and  in  the  Rome, 
Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg  Railroad  Company ;  a  member  of  the  Utica  Mechanics 
Association ;  a  trustee  of  the  Faxton  Hospital,  etc. 

Mr.  Thorn  has  been  a  member  of  the  Tabernacle  Baptist  Church  since  1833  and  a 
trustee  for  about  fifty  years.  In  politics  he  is  a  RepuMican,  but  takes  only  the  interest 
of  a  public  spirited  citizen  in  that  field. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  33 

ROGERS,  PTJBLIUS  VIRGILIUS,  was  born  at  Antwerp,  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y., 
December  30,  1824.  He  was  the  eldest  child  of  Ralph  Rogers,  M.D.,  a  native  of 
Acworth,  N.  H.,  who  removed  in  early  life  to  Litchfield,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.,  and 
soon  afterward  to  Watertown,  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y.  Dr.  Rogers  received  his  i^edi- 
cal  education  in  the  medical  college  at  Fairfield,  N.  Y.,  and  practiced  medicine  at  Ant- 
werp until  1833,  when  he  removed  to  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  a  leading  mem- 
ber of  his  profession  up  to  the  time  of  his  decease,  February  21,  1872,  in  the  eightieth 
year  of  his  age.  Mr.  Rogers's  mother,  Sarah  Corse,  was  a  native  of  Duxbury,Vt.  She 
died  at  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  September  19,  1875,  in  the  seventy-third  year  of  her  age. 

Publius  V.  Rogers  received  his  early  education  in  the  district  schools  of  Antwerp  and 
Watertown.  One  of  the  teachers  of  his  boyhood  at  Watertown  was  the  late  Judge 
Charles  Mason.  He  was  afterward  a  student  m  the  Watertown  Academy  while  the  late 
Judge  Joseph  MuUin  was  its  principal.  He  began  his  preparation  for  college  in  the 
"Black  River  Literary  and  Religious  Institute"  of  Watertown  under  the  instruction  of 
the  late  Rev.  Dr.  James  R.  Boyd.  He  entered  the  sophomore  class  of  Hamilton  Col- 
lege in  1843  and  was  graduated  in  1846.  In  scholarship  Mr.  Rogers  ranked  with  the 
best  men  in  his  class.  One  of  his  collegiate  instructors  writes  with  discrimination  and 
emphasis  of  his  college  course :  "  While  Mr.  Rogers  was  one  of  the  youngest  of  his 
class,  his  manliness  and  maturity  of  character  were  beyond  his  years.  He  was  prompt 
and  faithful  at  the  post  of  duty.  His  mind  and  attainments  were  well  balanced,  so  that 
the  outcome  of  his  undergraduate  studies  was  a  well-rounded,  generous  culture." 

Soon  after  his  graduation  Mr.  Rogers  began  the  study  of  the  law  in  the  office  of 
Skinner  &  Brown  at  Adams,  N.  Y.,  spending  one  hour  each  day  at  book-keeping  at  the 
Hungerford  Bank ;  afterward  he  continued  his  studies  in  the  office  of  Judge  George  C. 
Sherman  at  Watertown.  During  the  summer  of  1848  he  took  part  in  the  survey  of 
the  Rome,  Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg  Railroad.  On  the  organization  of  the  Water- 
town  Bank  and  Loan  Company  by  Judge  Sherman  in  1849  Mr.  Rogers  was  placed  at 
the  head  of  its  management  as  cashier.  In  September,  1850,  he  was  appointed  cashier 
of  the  Fort  Stanwix  Bank  at  Rome,  N.  Y.,  and  on  September  1,  1853,  cashier  of  the 
Bank  of  Utica.  This  appointment  was  due  largely  to  the  influence  of  the  late  Hon. 
Hiram  Denio.  In  the  litigation  of  certain  cases  in  which  the  Fort  Stanwix  Bank  was  a 
party  Judge  Denio  had  observed  the  thorough  knowledge  of  banking  and  of  the 
laws  appertaining  thereto  which  Mr.  Rogers  possessed.  When  the  directors  of  the 
Bank  of  Utica  had  decided  to  appoint  a  new  cashier  on  his  recommendation  Mr.  Rogers 
was  elected.  The  appointment  of  so  young  a  man  to  be  the  principal  manager  of  so  old 
and  influential  a  bank,  having  so  large  a  capital  and  so  many  stockholders  and  custo- 
mers, was  a  very  high  compliment  to  the  ability,  integrity,  and  trustworthiness  of  Mr. 
Rogers.  Soon  after  entering  upon  his  official  duties  the  new  cashier  discovered  that  the 
capital  of  the  bank  had  been  impaired  to  the  extent  of  one-sixth  of  its  amount — $100,- 
000.  With  the  concurrence  of  the  directors  he  had  the  courage  to  suspend  the  payment 
of  dividends  until  this  loss  should  be  made  good.  Under  his  administration  the 
capital  was  restored  gradually  to  its  full  amount ;  and  since  its  restoration  the  bank  has 
paid  semi-annual  dividends  with  the  regularity  of  the  periods  and  has  accumulated  a 


34  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

sarplus  of  $400,000.  That  Cashier  Rogers  has  fully  met  the  expectations  of  the  directors 
was  shown  by  his  election  as  president  of  the  bank  in  1876. 

His  reputation  for  financial  ability,  integrity,  and  public  spirit  has  been  further  shown 
in  his  annual  election  as  a  director  of  the  Utica  Water  Works  Company  since  1872. 
He  is  also  a  director  of  the  Utica  Cotton- Mills,  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills,  of 
the  Sknandoa  Cotton  Company,  and  of  the  Utica  and  Willowvale  Bleaching  Company. 
As  a  faithful  trustee  of  Hamilton  College  since  1869,  and  as  the  treasurer  of  the  college 
from  1880  to  1887,  Mr.  Rogers  has  manifested  his  grateful  affection  for  his  alma  mater, 
his  faith  in  collegiate  education,  and  his  salf-sacrificing  spirit.  As  a  financial  adviser  his 
judgment  has  been  of  the  highest  value  to  the  Board  of  Trustees,  and  has  greatly 
strengthened  the  confidence  of  the  alumni  and  friends  of  the  college  in  the  wisdom  of 
its  management.  Mr.  Rogers  has  served  the  State  as  a  manager  of  the  Utica  State  Hos- 
pital, having  been  appointed  by  the  governor  and  Senate  of  New  York  in  1881,  and 
elected  president  of  the  board  in  1886.  He  has  been  president  of  the  Home  for  the 
Homeless  since  1889  and  the  president  of  the  Fort  Schuyler  Club  since  1888.  He  has 
been  a  faithful  and  useful  trustee  of  the  Reformed  Church,  Utica,  for  many  years. 

Throughout  his  long  residence  in  Utica  Mr.  Rogers  has  been  proverbially  modest,  un- 
aggressive, and  unostentatious.  He  has  gained  the  confidence  of  the  community  by  his 
unswerving  fidelity  in  the  performance  of  official  duties,  while  his  frequent  acts  of  self- 
sacrificing  kindness  have  strengthened  and  deepened  the  sincere  regard  of  his  many 
friends. 

On  September  11,  1861,  Mr.  Rogers  married  Bh?abeth  Butler,  daughter  of  Chaunoey 
S.  Butler,  of  Sauquoit,  N.  Y. 


nEAD,  GEORGE  WASHINGTON,  a  native  of  Paris  Hill,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y., 
was  born  on  the  21st  of  May,  1815.  The  remote  ancestors  of  this  family  came 
from  Ireland  and  settled  in  New  England.  The  father  of  George  W.  was  Jonathan 
Head,  of  Rhode  Island,  who  came  to  Oneida  County  very  early  in  its  history.  He 
Wivs  a  successful  farmer,  an  ardent  temperance  worker,  and  was  very  prominent  in  the 
organization  and  upbuilding  of  the  church  at  Paris  Hill.  He  died  there  on  the  10th  of 
February,  1866,  at  the  age  of  ninety-one  years,  having  accumulated  property  and 
gained  the  esteem  of  his  tovs^nsmen.  His  wife  was  Hepzibah  Livermore,  who  died  in 
March,  1862.  The  family  of  children  numbered  eleven,  of  whom  nine  were  sons, 
George  W.  being  next  to  thy  youngest. 

George  W.  Head  passed  his  boyhood  at  home  and  in  attendance  at  the  district  school, 
where  he  acquired  the  foundation  of  an  education  which  was  afterward  extended  in  a 
practical  way  by  reading  and  his  natural '  habits  of  observation  and  thought.  While 
still  young  he  went  to  live  with  his  elder  brother,  Ralph,  at  Paris.  Jesse  Thompson 
then  kept  a  tavern  at  that  place.  It  was  one  of  the  old  stage-houses  which  in  early 
days  were  thickly  scattered  along  the  turnpikes,  receiving  a  large  patronage  from  trav- 
elers and  furnishing  welcome  accommodations.  There  the  young  man  acted  as  clerk 
and  made  himself  generally  useful,  and  broadened  his  knowledge  of  human  nature  and 
of  business  methods.     He  remained  there  until  1837,  when  he  was  twenty-two  years 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  35 

old,  and  then  established  himself  in  a  country  store  on  his  own  account  at  Paris  Hill. 
He  at  once  gained  the  good  will  and  confidence  of  a  large  business  constituency  and 
was  very  successful.  He  conducted  his  store  on  the  same  basis  of  integrity  and  fair- 
nfess  that  has  characterized  his  whole  life,  and  put  forth  his  best  energies  with  the  usual 
results  of  such  a  course.  He  carried  on  the  store  for  ten  years,  and  in  1857,  feeling 
an  ambition  for  larger  fields,  he  went  to  New  York  city,  where  he  was  engaged  for  a 
number  of  years  with  Hurlburt,  Sweetzer  &  Co.  in  the  dry  goods  trade.  During  this 
time  his  capital  was  invested  with  the  firm  of  Head,  Campbell  &  Head,  foundrymen 
and  stove  manufacturers  in  Kenosha,  Wis.,  but  he  gave  no  personal  attention  to  this 
business.  This  connection  continued  ten  years.  After  his  return  from  New  York  Mr. 
Head  joined  with  WiUiam  S.  Bartlett  in  the  lumber  trade,  buying  in  the  West  and  sell- 
ing in  the  South,  an  enterprise  that  met  with  success.  Still  later  he  traveled  for  Theo- 
dore Pomeroy  in  the  interest  of  the  oilcloth  manufactory  until  the  year  1861,  when  he 
founded  the  business  with  which  he  has  ever  smce  been  identified,  the  firm  of  G.  W. 
Head  &  Co.,  dealers  in  flour,  feed,  grain,  and  kindred  products.  His  partner  was  D.  D. 
Winston,  and  their  place  of  business  was  in  the  "checkered  store"  across  the  canal 
from  the  present  location.  For  twenty-eight  years  those  two  men  carried  on  their 
large  and  rapidly  growing  enterprise,  which  was  successful  in  the  broadest  sense  of  the 
word,  for  it  not  only  brought  to  its  owners  the  material  benefits  which  are  sought  by 
all,  but  also  the  more  desirable  returns  that  grow  out  of  the  respect  and  esteem  of  one's 
fellow  citizens.  At  the  end  of  the  term  mentioned  Daniel  Head  purchased  Mr.  Win- 
ston's interest  in  the  business  and  the  new  firm  continued  it  one  year,  when  the  pres- 
ent stock  company  was  organized  in  1890  with  George  W.  Head  as  president,  although 
he  has  not  for  some  time  taken  part  in  the  active  labors  of  the  business. 

Mr.  Head's  prominent  personal  characteristics  are  benevolence,  indulgent  kindness  to 
family  and  friends,  and  a  disposition  essentially  retiring  and  modest  in  its  nature. 
Though  an  active  worker  in  and  supporter  of  the  temperance  cause,  and  a  faithful  ad- 
herent to  the  Republican  party  in  politics,  he  has  never  held  office  though  often  solic- 
ited to  do  so.  He  is  the  president  of  Head's  iron  foundry,  which  came. to  a  large  ex- 
tent under  his  direction  through  the  death  of  his  son.  While  it  is  true  that  Mr.  Head 
has  not  united  with  a  church  he  has  always  been  a  regular  attendant  at  divine  worship 
and  has  liberally  supported  the  cause.  For  twenty  years  he  attended  the  Bethany 
Presbyterian  Church,  but  in  later  years  has  attended  the  Westminster  Presbyterian. 

Mr.  Head  married,  June  15,  1843,  Sarah  0.,  eldest  daughter  of  Horace  Bartlett,  of 
Paris  Hill.  She  was  a  woman  of  strong  character  and  possessed  deep-rooted  ideas  of 
right  and  wrong.  Her  good  common  sense  and  clear-sighted  views  were  of  great 
value  to  her  husband.  She  died  May  22,  1890,  aged  sixty-seven  years.  Their  children 
were  five  daughters  and  one  son :  the  oldest  is  Helen  F.,  who  resides  at  the  family 
home  ;  Sarah  Elizabeth  also  lives  at  home;  Florence  Amelia  married  Rev.  H.  M.  Sim- 
mons, of  Minneapolis;  and  John  Q.  (deceased),  Emma  Grace  (deceased),  and  Alice 
Augusta  (deceased). 


36  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

KBRNA.N,  FRANCIS. — Among  the  immigrants  to  this  country  from  Ireland  in  the 
early  years  of  the  century  was  Gen.  William  Kernan.  He  landed  in  New  York 
city,  where  he  remained  about  two  years,  and  then  went  to  Steuben  County  in  that  part 
of  it  now  included  in  Schuyler  County,  and  purchased  a  tract  of  wildland  in  what  is 
now  the  town  of  Tyrone.  Settling  on  this  he  took  up  the  life  of  a  farmer  and  there 
married  Rose  Stubbs,  also  a  native  of  Ireland,  who  had  with  her  parents  come  to  that 
locality  in  1808.  William  Kernan  and  his  wife  remained  on  the  farm  where  they  first 
settled  until  they  were  far  advanced  in  years,  when  they  came  to  Dtica  and  died  here. 
Francis  Kernan,  son  of  William  and  Rose  Kernan,  was  born  on  the  homestead  farm  Jan- 
uary 14,  1816.  He  remained  at  home  until  he  was  seventeen  years  of  age,  laying  the 
foundation  of  an  education  in  the  district  school  when  he  could  be  spared  from  the 
farm  labor.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  years  he  went  to  Georgetown  College,  an  excel- 
lent educational  institution  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  remained  there  until  1830. 
In  the  fall  of  that  year  he  began  the  study  of  his  chosen  profession,  the  law,  in  the  office 
of  his  brother-in-law,  Edward  Quin,  at  Watkins,  N.  Y.  In  1839  he  removed  to  Utica 
and  finished  his  study  in  the  office  of  Hon.  Joshua  Spencer,  and  was  admitted  to  prac- 
tice in  July,  1840.  Mr.  Spencer's  confidence  in  and  respect  for  the  character  and 
talents  of  Mr.  Kernan  are  clearly  indicated  in  the  fact  that  as  soon  as  Mr.  Kernan  was 
admitted  he  was  taken  as  a  partner  by  Mr.  Spencer.  From  that  time  until  1857  he  was 
in  constant  practice  and  soon  exhibited  in  strong  light  the  remarkable  legal  insight,  the 
comprehensive  grasp  of  every  salient  point  in  the  many  important  oases  that  came  into 
his  hands,  and  the  ability  to  turn  to  the  benefit  of  his  client  every  possible  advantage, 
which  for  many  years  characterized  his  work  at  the  bar.  In  1854  he  was  appointed 
reporter  of  the  Court  of  Appeals,  which  office  he  held  until  1857.  Politics  early  at- 
tracted the  attention  of  Mr.  Kernan,  and  in  that  field  he  found  work  that  was  congenial 
to  him  and  in  which  he  was  successful.  It  was  about  the  year  1860  that  he  entered  the 
political  arena  with  all  his  native  ardor,  and  where  he  soon  attained  an  eminent  station. 
It  was  a  stirring  time.  The  very  foundations  of  the  Union  were  threatened  and  Mr. 
Kernan  threw  himself  into  the  ranks  of  the  staunchest  supporters  of  the  government 
with  the  utmost  zeal.  In  1860  he  was  nominated  by  the  Democrats  for  the  Assembly 
in  the  first  district  of  Oneida  County.  That  disirict  had  been  a  Republican  stronghold, 
Gen.  James  MoQuade  having  carried  it  by  1,500  majority  at  the  previous  election;  but 
such  was  Mr.  Kernan's  popularity  and  strength  that  he  was  elected  over  his  opponents 
by  about  200  majority.  In  the  Assembly  he  at  once  took  high  rank  as  a  legislator,  and 
at  the  same  time  continued  active  in  his  support  of  the  government  in  its  great  trial. 
Utica  had  few  more  powerful  and  gifted  defenders  of  the  Union  and  his  war  speeches 
were  frequeni.  and  intensely  loyal  and  eloquent. 

In  1862  Mr.  Kernan  was  elected  to  Congress,  his  Republican  opponent  being  Roscoe 
Conkling.  Two  years  previous  to  that  time  Mr.  Conlding  ran  against  De  Witt  C.  Grove 
for  the  same  office  and  was  elected  by  a  majority  of  3,500.  After  a  very  spirited  can- 
vass Mr.  Kernan  was  elected  over  his  powerful  opponent  by  about  ninety  majority.  In 
his  early  congressional  career  Mr.  Kernan  was  particularly  active  in  all  measures  for  the 
support  of  the  government  and  was  often  called  in  consultation  by  President  Lincoln. 
In  1864  he  was  renominated  and  Mr.  Conklmg  was  again  his  opponent  and  succeeded 


^«:'<-VA 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  37 

in  defeating  him.  Mr.  Kernan  then  took  up  his  law  practice  with  new  vigor  and  rapidly 
won  distinction  in  the  foremost  rank  of  the  bar  of  this  State.  In  1867  he  was  elected 
a  delegate  at  large  to  the  Constitutional  Convention  of  1867-68  and  performed  a  prom- 
inent part  in  that  body.  In  1872  he  was  honored  by  the  Democratic  and  Liberal  parties 
with  the  nomination  for  governor  of  the  State,  but  -was  defeated  by  Governor  Dix.  In 
1875  the  Democrats  gained  control  of  the  State  legislature  and  Mr.  Kernan  was  chosen 
State  senator  to  succeed  E.  E.  Fenton.  His  services  in  that  high  office  were  such  as  to 
fully  sustain  his  previously  acquired  reputation  as  a  wise  and  an  able  statesman.  All  meas- 
ures affecting  the  State  of  New  York  received  his  special  attention,  while  those  of  a 
more  general  character  were  not  neglected.     His  term  expired  in  1881. 

Mr.  Kernan  married  in  1843  Miss  Hannah  Devereux,  daughter  of  Nicholas  Devereux, 
a  prominent  early  resident  of  Utica.     They  have  had  ten  children. 


BUTLER,  TRUMAN  KELLOGG,  was  born  in  New  Hartford,  Oneida  County, 
October  31,  1810.  His  grandfather  came  to  New  Hartford  from  Middletown, 
Conn.,  in  1789,  bnnging  with  him  four  sons,  Ashbel,  John,  Sylvester,  and  Eli,  jr.;  the 
latter  was  the  father  of  Truman  K.  Eli,  sr.,  settled  on  a  farm  which  was  said  to  have 
once  been  the  property  of  Gen.  George  Washington.  Eli,  jr.,  married  a  daughter  of 
Truman  Kellogg  and  they  had  eight  children,  and  the  family  was  one  of  character  and 
respectability. 

Truman  K.  Butler  left  New  Hartford  and  located  in  Utica  when  he  was  fourteen 
years  of  age,  in  the  year  1824,  and  lived  out  his  long  life  in  this  place.  He  saw  its 
growth  from  a  humble  village  to  a  city  of  more  than  40,000  population,  and  was  closely 
identified  with  its  advancement  in  many  directions.  During  the  first  years  of  his  resi- 
dence in  Utica  he  attended  a  school  in  what  was  known  as  the  Kirkland  block,  on  the 
corner  of  Liberty  and  Genesee  streets,  and  then  entered  the  store  ol  Devereux  &  Co. 
That  firm  was  composed  of  John  C.  and  Nicholas  Devereux  and  Horace  Butler,  the  lat- 
ter being  a  cousin  of  Truman  K.  Their  business  was  at  that  time  on  the  site  of  the 
Devereux  block  with  a  warehouse  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  canal,  and  they  carried 
on  a  large  wholesale  grocery  trade  and  forwarding  and  commission  business.  In  1826 
the  firm  dissolved,  the  Messrs.  Devereux  withdrawing,  and  it  was  continued  as  Butler, 
O'Connor  &  Co.,  the  firm  being  represented  by  James  McDonough.  A  few  years  later 
Mr.  O'Connor  died  and  the  business  was  continued  by  Butler,  McDonough  &  Co.,  rep- 
resented by  Van  Vechten  Livingston.  The  latter  soon  afterward  entered  the  firm, 
which  was  then  succeeded  by  the  firm  of  Livingston  &  Butler,  the  subject  of  this  sketch 
being  one  of  its  members.  The  business  was  at  that  liime  on  Catharine  street  with  a 
retail  store  on  the  corner  of  Broad  and  Genesee  streets.  Mr.  Butler  remained  in  this 
firm  but  a  short  time,  when  he  sold  out  and  purchased  the  drug  and  grocery  business  of 
Dr.  Peleg  Peckham,  then  located  in  a  store  now  occupied  by  Charles  &  H,  H.  Ham- 
ilton. After  several  years  of  successful  business  alone  Mr.  Butler  took  as  a  partner 
Miles  C.  Comstock.  The  latter  retired  about  the  year  1858,  and  the  firm  became  But- 
ler &  Hamilton  with  Charles  Hamilton  as  the  partner.  The  business  was  carried  on 
with  flattering  success  by  this  firm  until  the  year  1887,  giving  Mr.  Butler  a  period  of 
activity  in  the  trade  interests  of  Utica  extending  over  more  than  sixty  years. 


38  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Mr.  Butler  was  largely  interested  in  the  manufacturing  industries  of  Utioa  as  well  as 
in  its  benevolent  and  charitable  institutions.  He  was  made  a  trustee  in  the  Utica  Ootton- 
Mills  Company  in  1861  and  continued  in  that  capacity  until  his  death.  He  was  chosen 
president  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills  at  the  organization  of  the  company  and 
continued  in  the  office  until  1887.  He  was  for  forty  years  a  trustee  of  the  Utica  Sav- 
ings Bank  and  one  of  its  most  faithful  and  conservative  officers.  He  was  a  trustee  of 
Forest  Hill  Cemetery  many  years.  But  the  work  for  which  he  will  be  most  gratefully 
remembered  by  the  people  of  Utioa,  and  which  displays  the  benevolent  tendencies  of 
his  nature,  was  that  in  connection  with  the  founding  of  St.  Luke's  Home  and  Hospital. 
In  1869  he  was  the  owner  of  a  house  on  the  corner  of  Columbia  and  Hamilton  streets, 
which  had  been  erected  as  a  boarding-house  for  factory  operatives.  At  the  suggestion 
of  Dr.  Van  Deusen  and  others,  of  G-race  Church,  he  leased  it  for  one-  year  to  the  corpo- 
ration of  St.  Luke's  Home,  for  the  reception  of  aged  and  indigent  persons  in  that  church. 
The  great  need  of  such  an  institution  was  apparent  through  the  number  of  inmates  that 
came  to  its  doors  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  Mr.  Butler  presented  the  building  to  the 
corporation.  He  soon  afterward  sold  to  them  the  wooden  house  adjacent  for  mission 
purposes.  This  was  the  foundation  of  St.  Luke's  Hospital.  He  subsequently  sold  to  the 
corporation  the  house  on  the  corner  of  Whitesboro  and  Wiley  streets,  contributing  lib- 
erally from  the  purchase  price,  and  gave  to  the  institution  the  lot  on  which  St.  Luke's 
Memorial  Church  stands.  At  a  still  later  date,  when  more  ground  was  desired  by  the 
hospital,  Mr.  Butler  and  Charles  Downer  purchased  the  vacant  lot  belonging  then  to  the 
city,  on  Columbia  street  west  of  the  Home  property,  and  presented  it  to  the  hospital  au- 
thorities. He  also  presented  to  the  Home  and  hospital  the  handsome  park  on  Whitesboro 
street  on  condition  that  it  should  remain  for  the  benefit  of  the  sick  and  aged,  and  that 
no  buildings  should  be  erected  on  it.  He  also  purchased  a  piece  of  ground  in  Forest  Hill 
Cemetery  opposite  his  own  vault,  erected  upon  it  a  monument,  and  enclosed  the  whole 
for  the  benefit  and  use  of  the  hospital.  Mr.  Butler's  benefactions  to  this  most  worthy 
institution  probably  exceeded  $20,000,  and  it  was  to  him  a  source  of  great  satisfaction 
that  it  became  the  noble  and  useful  charity  that  is  now  the  pride  of  Utica.  In  Mr.  But- 
ler's long  life  in  Utica  he  developed  a  character  which  commanded  the  respect  of  all 
with  whom  he  came  in  contact;  his  integrity  was  unyielding,  his  friendships  strong  and 
lasting,  and  his  public  spirit  active.  Upon  his  death  the  Board  of  Managers  of  the  hospital 
and  the  trustees  of  the  Savings  Bank  adopted  resolutions  appreciative  of  his  good  works 
and  character. 


RUSSELL,  WILLIAM. '  — Thirty-five  years  ago, when  the  writer's  acquaintance  with 
the  physicians  of  Oneida  County  began,  the  city  of  Utioa  was  widely  known  for 
the  high  character  and  distinguished  ability  of  its  medical  practitioners.  A  majority  of 
them  had  reached  middle  age  and  a  large  proportion 'were  well  advanced  in  years.  It 
was,  perhaps,  the  custom  of  that  time  to  set  a  high  value  upon  age  and  experience  in 
the  practice  of  medicine.  At  any  rate  nothing  but  death  or  positive  disability  was  per- 
mitted to  deprive  the  public  of  the  services  of  these  nestors  of  our  profession.     Three 

1  See  Transactions  of  the  Medical  Society  of  the  State  of  New  York,  iSgi. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  39 

of  their  number  survived  at  the  beginning  o£  the  year  1890  and  still  retained  their 
place  as  leaders  of  their  brethren.  Since  that  time  one  of  them,  and  the  youngest, 
although  on  the  verge  of  three  score  years  and  ten,  has  gone  over  to  the  majority. 

"  Happy  is  the  man  who  is  without  a  history,"  says  the  proverb,  and  the  happy  and 
fully  rounded  term  of  our  brother's  life  presents  few  salient  points  for  his  biographer. 
But  it  is  none  the  less  due  to  the  profession  which  he  loved  so  well  and  to  the  com- 
munity he  so  long  and  faithfully  served  that  the  archives  of  this  society  should  embalm 
his  memory. 

William  Russell  was  born  in  the  city  of  Glasgow,  Scotland,  on  the  5th  of  June,  1821. 
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Robert  Russell,  a  coal  factor  in  that  city  who  came  to  this 
country  with  his  family  in  18^2  and  settled  in  Oneida  County.  William  received  his 
education  in  the  common  schools  and  in  Whitestown  Seminary.  A  special  taste  for  the 
physical  sciences  led  him  to  the  choice  of  medicine  as  his|  profession,  and  he  began  its 
study  in  the  office  of  Dr.  Whiting  Smith,  of  Whitesboro,  in'  1845.  His  studies  were 
continued  in  the  Berkshire  Medical  College  at  Pitlsfield,  Mass.,  whence  he  was  gradu- 
ated in  the  autumn  of  1848.  During  the  following  winter  be  took  a  post-graduate 
course  in  the  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  in  New  York,  where  he  also  attended 
the  lectures  of  the  famous  surgeon,  Dr.  Valentine  Mott.  The  next  year  he  entered 
upon  practice  in  Utica,  where  he  soon  became  prominent  and  gradually  won  a  place  in 
the  front  rank  of  his  profession.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Oneida  County  Med- 
ical Society  and  was  its  secretary  for  ten  consecutive  years.  After  serving  as  vice- 
president  of  the  society  he  was  elected  its  president  in  1871.  In  the  following  year  he 
delivered  an  able  address  to  the  society  upon  the  question :  "  Is  Woman  Ad"apted  by 
Nature  and  Social  Position  for  the  Arduous  Duties  of  the  Medical  Profession  ?  "  Sub- 
sequently he  read  before  the  same  body  a  series  of  papers  on  '"  Diseases  Peculiar  to 
Women."  In  1868  Dr.  Russell  was  elected  a  permanent  member  of  the  State  Medical 
Society  and  a  member  of  the  American  Medical  Association.  He  was  appointed  con- 
sulting surgeon  to  the  Provost-Marshal's  Board  for  the  examination  of  drafted  and  en- 
listed men  during  the  Civil  war.  Upon  the  organization  of  the  Faxton  Hospital  in 
1875  he  was  elected  a  member  of  its  medical  staff,  and  served  this  important  charity 
faithfully  for  several  years.  He  was  also  for  a  time  on  the  consulting  staff  of  St.  Luke's 
Hospital  in  Utica.  The  local  organizations  to  which  he  belonged  were  Utica  Lodge 
P.  and  A.  M.   the  Utica  Mechanics  Association,  and  the  Oneida  Historical  Society. 

Dr.  Russell  was  a  member  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  from  his  youth  and  was 
very  regular  in  attendance  upon  its  services.  Strictly  temperate  in  all  thmgs  he  was  a 
model  of  sobriety,  industry,  and  devotion  in  his  duties,  public  and  private.  His  disposi- 
tion was  kind  and  benevolent,  his  bearing  modest,  and  wholly  free  from  pride  and  self- 
assertion.  During  a  life  which  nearly  filled  the  allotted  term  of  human  existence  he 
preserved  a  character  without  reproach  and  gained  the  love  and  esteem  of  all  who 
knew  him.  Although  never  seeking  in  name  or  in  fact  the  position  of  specialist  Dr. 
Russell's  practice  was  for  many  yeai's  largely  that  of  the  gynecologist  and  obstetrician. 
He  had  performed  every  operation  in  the  obstetrical  field  except  that  of  Cesarean  sec- 
tion, and  he  was  in  later  years  frequently  called  to  the  assistance  of  his  brethren  in  this 
department.     During  thirty  years  of  active  practice  his  obstetrical  cases  amounted  to 


40  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

about  2,500,  and  he  never  shrank  from  night  work  in  this  or  any  branch  of  his  profes- 
sion until  after  its  effects  upon  his  health  had  become  too  plain  to  be  mistaken.  He 
would  not  deny  that  upon  this  point  his  life  should  be  taken  as  a  warning  and  not  as  an 
example  to  others.  It  is  proper  to  say,  however,  that  he  was  not  led  into  this  serious 
error  by  the  love  of  money  or  by  any  selfish  ambition.  A  very  large  part  of  his  prac- 
tice was  unremunerative.  His  charges  were  uniformly  moderate  and  their  collection  was 
made  with  due  consideration  for  the  circumstances  of  his  patrons.  The  modest  compe- 
tence which  he  acquired  was  wholly  the  result  of  prudent  living  and  careful  manage- 
ment. But  he  was  fond  of  his  work,  and  his  constitution  was  so  perfect  that  it  gave 
him  uo  warning  of  the  strain  to  which  he  was  subjected  until  too  late.  Insomnia,  the 
consequence  of  his  excessive  night  work,  came  first  in  the  train  of  morbid  symptoms. 
The  automatic  activity  of  the  brain  and  its  period  of  rest  are  as  cyclical  in  their  nature 
as  the  systole  and  diastole  of  the  heart,  and  it  is  impossible  to  violate  this  law  with  im- 
punity. Nor  could  the  effect  of  this  violation  be  limited  to  the  cerebral  hemispheres. 
It  was  extended  everywhere  into  the  nervous  system  and  thence  to  the  muscular  and 
glandular  tissues.  Muscular  rheumatism  and  prostatitis  were  added  to  the  insomnia, 
which  was  made  much  worse  by  these  complications.  As  his  disorders  were  unfavor- 
ably affected  by  the  length  and  severity  of  our  cold  season  Dr.  Russell  sought  and  found 
rehef  by  a  stay  in  Florida  during  the  winters  of  1883,  1884,  1885,  and  1886.  But  it 
was  plain  that  the  rapid  progress  of  decay  which  was  certainly  premature  in  his  case 
could  not  be  arrested.  A  third  trip  to  Florida  in  the  winter  of  1889-90  no  doubt  had 
the  effect  of  hastening  the  inevitable  end.  The  season  was  cold  almost  beyond  prece- 
dent throughout  the  South  and  the  proper  means  for  protecting  invalids  from  its  sever- 
ity were  almost  wholly  lacking.  Symptoms  of  organic  lesion  of  the  heart  and  lungs 
were  manifested,  and  the  invalid  was  forced  to  return  home  early  in  the  spring.  He 
died  of  emphysema  and  pneumonia  on  the  27th  of  June,  1890. 

In  how  great  a  degree  the  nature  of  the  morbid  processes  which  destroy  human  life 
determines  the  mental  states  of  the  dying  is  well  known  to  our  profession?  It  is  no 
leas  certain  that  the  rapid  and  premature  decay  which  proceeds  from  external  causes 
and  takes  some  specific  form  of  disease  is  attended  with  far  more  suffering,  mental  and 
bodily,  than  the  slow  decay  of  age,  in  which  life  is  not  seldom 

"  Mellowed  and  softened  as  with  sunset  glow, 
A  golden  day's  decline." 

This  euthanasia,  so  much  to  be  desired,  was  not  vouchsafed  to  our  brother,  and  his 
was  the  common  fate  of  medical  men  who  find  little  comfort  in  those  hopes  of  improve- 
ment and  relief  with  which  he  had  so  often  soothed  the  decline  of  others.  Nor  was  he 
wont  to  call 

"  His  brother  doctor  of  the  soul. 

To  canvass  with  official  breath 

The  future  and  its  viewless  things — 

That  undiscovered  mystery 

Which  one  who  feels  death's  winnowing  wings 

Must  needs  read  clearer,  sure,  than  he." 

But  our  dying  friend  had  in  full  measure  the  philosophy  which  common  sense  and 
clear  conscience  bring  to  the  support  of  every  man  who  cometh  into  the  world,  if  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  41 

will  but  heed  them.  In  that  intuitive  reason,  and  that  conscience  whose  dictates  had 
been  the  rule  of  his  life,  he  found  a  clear  revelation  of  Qod  and  a  sure  ground  of  hope 
in  Him  which  neither  science  nor  theology  has  given  or  can  take  away. 

Dr.  Russell,  was  married  in  December,  1851,  to  Agnes,  daughter  of  Alexander  Pat- 
terson, of  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.  In  her  strong  character  and  high  ambition  he  found  a 
stimulus  and  support  which  gave  hfe  its  purpose  and  made  its  labors  easy.  Her  sudden 
death  in  January,  1887,  while  it  removed  a  prop  which  was  sorely  needed  in  his  declin- 
ing days,  served  at  the  same  time  to  reconcile  him  to  the  swiftly  approaching  end.  He 
left  two  children.  Dr.  Charles  P.  Russell,  of  Utica,  and  William  G.  Russell,  attorney  and 
real  estate  dealer  at  Denver,  Col. 


WHEELER,  RUSSEL,  manufacturer,  was  born  in  Rome,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y., 
Angust  7,  1820.  His  father,  George  Wheeler,  born  in  February,  1791,  came 
from  Glastonbury,  Conn.,  to  live  with  his  father  upon  the  farm  which  the  latter  had 
purchased  in  Oneida  County.  This  farm,  situated  three  and  one-half  miles  from  the 
city  of  Rome,  is  still  owned  by  Russel  Wheeler.  George  Wheeler  belonged  to  one  of 
those  old  New  England  families  so  many  of  whom  moved  at  tlie  beguming  of  this  cent- 
ury into  Central  New  York,  stamping  its  localities  with  their  New  England  names  and 
invigorating  the  new-born  business  interests  of  the  country  with  their  New  England 
virtues.  He  died  at  the  homestead  September  9,  1882,  in  the  ninety-second  year  of 
his  age.    He  had  one  daughter  and  seven  sons,  of  whom  the  third  was  Russel. 

Russel  Wheeler,  after  acquiring  a  good  English  education  in  the  district  schools,  came 
to  Utica  at  the  age  of  eighteen  and  entered  the  hardware  store  of  John  Mairs,  where  lie 
remained  four  years.  In  1842  he  became  book-keeper  and  manager  for  Joel  C.  Bailey, 
who  had  just  purchased  the  Chester  Dexter  foundry  on  Columbia  street.  Two  years 
later  he  became  a  partner,  and  the  new  firm  of  Bailey,  Wheeler  &  Co.  was  then  estab- 
lished and  continued  the  previous  business  of  the  foundry,  increasing  the  amount  and 
nnproving  the  quality  of  its  products  until  they  had  won  a  deserved  reputation  for 
excellent  wares.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  first  coal  cooking  stove  manufactured 
west  of  Albany  was  made  in  this  factory  on  Columbia  street.  During  the  twenty-one 
years  of  the  firm's  continuance  they  secured  many  patents  for  improvements  in  the 
construction  of  stoves,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  a  business  of  unusual  stability.  In 
1855  Mr.  Wheeler  bought  his  senior  partner's  share  in  the  business  and  ten  years  later 
he  secured  that  of  S.  Alonzo  Bailey.  After  twelve  years  of  sole  ownership  Mr.  Wheeler 
admitted  his  son.  Prank  E.  Wheeler,  to  partnership,  and  two  years  later  a  share  in  the 
business  was  acquired  by  Francis  Kernan,  jr.  This  partnership  continued  until  January 
1,  1890,  when  Mr.  Wheeler  and  his  son  purchased  the  interest  of  Mr.  Kernan  and 
established  the  business  under  its  present  name.  The  firm  of  Russel  Wheeler  &  Son 
employs  from  150  to  200  men,  and  is  well  known  throughout  the  country  as  one  of  the 
leading  manufacturers  of  stoves,  ranges,  and  heaters.  Some  of  their  greatest  improve- 
ments iu  recent  years  have  been  in  their  furnaces  for  heating  residences,  on  which  they 
hold  many  valuable  patents. 


42  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  VTJCA. 

Mr.  Wheeler  was  married  August  5,  1845,  to  Miss  Amanda  Bailey,  the  daughter  of 
his  senior  partner.  She  died  at  Saratoga  Springs,  August  29,  1884,  and  was  buried  in 
Forest  Hill  Cemetery.  They  had  one  son,  Frank  E.  Wheeler,  who  is  still  living  and  is 
the  junior  member  of  the  firm.  On  November  10,  1887,  Russel  Wheeler  was  married 
to  Mrs.  Katharine  Iv.  Anderson,  of  New  York. 

Outside  of  his  regular  and  personal  business  life  Mr.  Wheeler  has  been  identified 
with  numerous  interests  of  the  city  and  its  vicinity.  His  only  tenure  of  a  city  office 
was  in  1849-50,  when  -he  was  alderman,  but  many  business  enterprises  of  the  town 
have  had  the  advantage  of  his  judgment  and  experience.  He  is  a  director  of  the 
Oneida  National  Bank  and  the  Savings  Bank  of  Utica,  and  was  for  many  years  vice- 
president  in  the  Utica  City  National  Bank,  resigning  recently  in  view  of  an  extended 
absence  in  Europe.  The  manufacturing  establishments  in  which  he  holds  the  position 
of  director  are  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton-Mills,  the  Globe  Woolen-Mills,  and  the  Willow- 
vale  Bleaching  Works.  He  was  also  a  director  of  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad 
up  to  the  time  of  its  passing  under  control  of  the  Rome,  Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg 
Railroad  Company.  He  has  thus  been  connected  with  a  large  number  of  the  most  im- 
portant business  interests  of  Utica,  and  is  one  of  those  to  whose  good  judgment  and 
sound  principles  the  city  owes  much  of  its  present  prosperity.  In  educational  matters 
he  has  long  taken  an  active  interest  and  has  for  many  years  been  a  trustee  of  Colgate 
(formerly  Madison)  University. 

Mr.  Wheeler  has  been  an  extensive  traveler  in  this  country  as  well  as  abroad.  He 
has  made  many  trips  through  the  West,  where  he  has  real  estate  interests,  and  he  has 
also  vibited  for  pleasure  Europe,  Egypt,  and  parts  of  Asia,  thus  gaining  personal  knowl- 
edge of  many  places  not  familiar  to  the  ordinary  traveler.  His  son,  Frank  E.  Wheeler, 
was  born  in  Utica  in  1853.  After  passing  through  the  public  schools  and  the  academy 
he  entered  Yale  University,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1876.  During  the  past  few 
years  the  business  of  the  firm  has  been  left  largely  in  his  hands  and  he  has  successfully 
maintained  its  high  reputation.  He  was  married  in  1878  to  Miss  Louise  Vanette  Ames, 
the  daughter  of  Senator  Cheney  Ames,  of  Oswego,  N.  Y. 


CHAMBERLAIN,  EPHRAIM,  was  born  in  the  town  of  Burlington,  Otsego  County, 
N.  Y.,  January  2,  1825.  His  remote  ancestors  emigrated  from  England  to  America 
about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  and  settled  at  Biddeford,  Me.,  and  through 
at  least  six  generations  of  the  family  there  has  been  an  Ephraim  among  them.  The 
subject  of  this  memoir  has  now  in  his  possession  a  small  souvenir  that  has  passed  down 
to  him  through  one  of  that  name  through  six  generations.  When  about  four  years  of 
age  his  father,  Clark  Chamberlain,  with  his  family  moved  to  the  adjoining  town  of  Pitts- 
field,  where  Ephraim  lived  until  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  in  the  meantime  attend- 
ing a  common  school,  receiving  some  private  tuition,  and  ending  with  an  academic  course 
of  two  terms.  He  then  entered  a  country  store  belonging  to  his  uncle  of  the  same 
name,  in  West  Edmeston,  Otsego  County,  as  a  clerk,  where  he  remained  until  he  was 
twenty  years  old.  At  that  age  in  the  year  1845  he  came  to  Utica  as  a  clerk  in  the 
canal  collector's  office  and  remained  there  until  1849,  with  the  exception  of  one  year  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


43 


which  he  was  employed  in  a  Utica  dry  goods  store.  "While  employed  in  the  canal  col- 
lector's office  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton-Mills,  a  corporation  for  manufacturing  cotton  cloth, 
was  organized  with  the  late  Alfred  Muiison  as  the  first  president.  In  the  latter  part  of 
1818,  when  the  walls  of  the  first  factory  of  that  corporation  were  up,  but  the  buildmg 
incomplete,  Mr.  Chamberlain  applied  in  person  to  President  Munson  for  the  situation  of 
book-keeper,  although  he  was  then  personally  unknown  to  Mr.  Munson.  After  giving 
his  references  and  answering  a  few  questions  asked  by  Mr.  Munson  Mr.  Chamberlain 
left  with  the  impression  that  his  chances  for  obtaining  the  situation  were  very  slight 
from  the  fact  that  there  were  many  other  applicants  for  it.  A  few  weeks  later,  how- 
ever, Mr.  Munson  sent  for  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  engaged  him  to  take  charge  of  the  com- 
pany's books,  wliich  he  did  in  February,  1849,  thus  connecting  himself  with  a  corpora- 
tion with  the  success  of  which  he  has  ever  since  been  intimately  associated.  In  1854 
Mr.  Chamberlain  was  appointed  trea.surer  of  the  company,  thereby  becoming  financial 
and  chief  business  officer  of  the  corporation.  In  1859  he  was  elected  secretary  in  addi- 
tion to  the  office  of  treasurer.  In  1882  he  was  elected  a  trustee,  in  1889  vice-president, 
and  in  January,  1890,  president.  These  several  responsible  stations  connected  with  the 
immediate  management  of  the  financial  affairs  of  this  successful  company  have  de- 
manded Mr.  Chamberlain's  energies  through  a  large  part  of  his  business  life  and  were 
tendered  to  him  because  of  his  acknowledged  ability  to  administer  their  duties  with  the 
highest  eflciency. 

Mr.  Chamberlain  was  one  of  the  incorporators  and  also  one  of  the  first  trustees  of  the 
Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills  and  of  the  Willowvale  Bleaching  Company,  and  was 
elected  secretary  and  treasurer  of  both  corporations.  In  1866  he  was  elected  a  trustee 
of  the  Savings  Bank  of  Utica  and  is  now  the  oldest  living  member  of  the  board.  In 
1875  he  was  elected  second  vice-president,  in  1888  was  elected  first  vice-president,  and 
in  1889  succeeded  the  late  Judge  Bacon  as  president.  For  many  years  he  has  been  a 
director  and  vice-president  of  the  Oneida  National  Bank.  The  tender  of  these  high 
positions  in  Utica's  largest  financial  institutions  are  eloqent  tributes  to  Mr.  Chamber- 
lain's financial  skill  and  his  integrity  from  his  fellow  citizens.  At  the  present  time  Mr. 
Chamberlain  is  president,  treasurer,  and  director  of  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton-Mills  ;  sec- 
retary, treasurer,  and  director  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills 'and  the  Utica  Wil- 
lowvale Bleaching  Company;  president  and  trustee  of  the  Savings  Bank  of  Utica; 
and  vice-president  and  director  of  the  Oneida  National  Bank. 

In  politics  Mr.  Chamberlam  has  been  a  life-long  Democrat,  but  has  never  been  an 
active  worker  in  that  field  further  than  is  demanded  of  all  public  spirited  citizens.  In 
1856-57  he  represented  the  then  Third  ward  in  the  common  council  as  alderman,  and  in 
1869  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city  and  is  now  the  oldest  living  ex-mayor. 

Mr.  Chamberlain  has  been  twice  married  and  has  had  two  children:  Frank  C,  who 
died  in  1885,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  engaged  in  business  in  New  York  city ; 
and  Frederick  G.,  now  secretary  and  assistant  treasurer  of  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton-Mills, 
and  assistant  treasurer  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills. 


44  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

WATSON,  WILLIAM  H.,  A.M.,  M.D.,  was  born  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  November 
8,  1829.  He  is  the  only  son  of  the  late  Hon.  William  Robinson  Watson.  On 
the  paternal  side  he  is  descended  from  the  oldest,  most  respectable,  and  most  distin- 
guished families  in  the  State  of  Rhode  Island,  among  whom  may  be  named  the  Wan- 
tons, Hazards,  Robinsons,  and  Browns,  who  at  a  period  anterior  to  the  Revolutionary 
war  were  the  largest  landed  proprietors  in  the  southern  portion  of  that  State.  These 
families  were  noted  for  dispensing  an  elegant  and  prmcely  hospitality,  and  for  furnish- 
ing a  genial  and  polished  society  when  the  cii,y  of  Providence  was  yet  but  a  small  and 
inconsiderable  village.  Dr.  Watson  on  the  paternal  side  is  the  lineal  descendant  of  the 
fifth  generation  of  G-ideon  Wanton,  the  colonial  governor  of  Rhode  Island  in  1745  and 
1747.  Five  of  Dr.  Watson's  ancestors  had  filled  the  gubernatorial  chair  of  that  State 
previous  to  the  Revolution  of  1776.  The  original  ancestor  of  the  Watson  family,  John 
Watson,  came  from  England  about  1680  and  settled  in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.  Dr.  Wat- 
son's father,  son  of  John  J.  and  Sarah  (Brown)  Watson,  was  born  at  South  Kingston, 
December  14,  1799.  He  pursued  his  early  preparatory  studies  at  the  Plamfield  Acad- 
emy at  Plainfield,  Conn.,  and  was  graduated  from  Brown  University,  class  of  1823. 
Among  his  classmates  were  Chief  Justice  Ames,  of  Rhode  Island,  Rev.  Dr.  Crane, 
George  D.  Prentice,  the  distinguished  editor  of  the  Louisville  Journal,  and  Judge  Mel- 
len,  of  Massachusetts.  Professor  G-ammell,  in  an  article  on  the  necrology  of  Brown 
University,  1863-64,  states  that  Mr.  Watson  "was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  engaged  to 
only  a  very  limited  extent  in  the  practice  of  his  profession.  His  life  was  devoted  pre- 
eminently and  almost  exclusively  to  politics.  For  nearly  forty  years  he  was  one  of  the 
most  active  and  prominent  politicians  in  Rhode  Island.  Very  probably  no  individual 
ever  exerted  a  greater  influence  in  its  local  politics.  Mr.  Watson  was  also,  during  a 
greater  part  of  his  life,  a  writer  for  the  political  press.  In  several  instances,  usually 
for  brief  periods  prior  to  important  elections,  he  conducted  editorially  certain  papers 
with  which  he  was  politically  connected,  his  influence  and  support  being  invariably  ex- 
erted in  the  interests  of  the  Whig  party,  of  which  he  was  a  devoted  champion  in  Rhode 
Island.  The  most  elaborate  of  these  were  a  series  of  papers  first  published  in  the  Jour- 
nal in  1844  under  the  signature  of  'Hamilton.'  These  papers  were  afterward  collected 
and  reprinted  in  pamphlet  form.  The  political  doctrines  then  held  by  the  Whig  party 
were  therein  explained  and  vindicated  with  unusual  force  and  clearness." 

Mr.  Watson  was  distinguished  alike  for  the  integrity  and  ability  with  which  he  dis- 
charged the  duties  of  the  many  and  varied  public  offices  which  he  filled;  for  grace, 
elegance,  and  force  of  diction;  and  for  kindness  of  heart  and  dignified  urbanity  of  man- 
ner. These  traits  of  character  secured  the  attachment  of  many  of  the  warmest  of 
friends,  by  whom  his  agreeable  qualities  were  fully  appreciated.  Dr.  Watson's  mother, 
Mary  Ann  Earle  Watson,  was  the  daughter  of  Hon.  Caleb  Earle,  a  former  governor  of 
Rhode  Island.  Dr.  Watson  pursued  his  preparatory  studies  for  college  at  the  high 
school  and  the  University  Grammar  School  in  Providence.  He  entered  Brown  Uni- 
versity in  1848  and  was  graduated  therefrom  in  1852.  On  admittance  to  college  in 
1848  he  received  the  first  entrance  prize  in  Latin  and  the  second  entrance  prize  for  pro- 
ficiency in  Greek  studies.  During  his  collegiate  course  he  was  particularly  noted  for 
fondness  of  and  high  standing  in  the  classic  languages  of  antiquity.     He  obtained  prizes 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


45 


for  compositions  in  Latin  in  1849,  '50,  and  '51  and  in  Greek  in  1849-50,  and  at  the 
Junior  Exhibition  in  1851  he  was  awarded  the  high  distinction  of  delivering  the 
Oratio  Latina.  He  was  one  of  the  "commencement  orators"  on  graduating  in  1852. 
While  in  college  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  United  Brothers,  Psi  Upsilon,  and 
Phi  Beta  Kappa  Societies.  He  received  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  from  Brown 
University  in  1855.  From  his  earliest  youth  he  had  shown  a  love  of  and  an  aptitude 
for  the  profession  of  medicine.  He  entered  upon  its  study  immediately  after  gradu- 
ation from  college  in  the  oface  of  the  late  Dr.  A.  H.  Okie,  of  Providence.  After  attend- 
ing medical  lectures  at  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  College  of  Pennsylvania,  the  Uni- 
versity of  Pennsylvania,  and  the  Pennsylvania  Hospital  at  Philadelphia  in  the  spring  of 
1854  he  received  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  iledicine.  On  his  graduation  in  medicine  he 
was  chosen  to  deliver  the  address  before  the  Hahnemann  Medical  Institute  of  Philadel- 
phia, February  28,  1854.  Having  decided  to  select  an  inland  location  he  removed  in 
the  spring  of  1854  to  the  city  of  Utica,  N.  Y.,  where  he  still  enjoys  an  extensive  and 
influential  practice. 

Dr.  Watson  has  held  many  responsible  offices  and  appointments,  among  them  several 
of  the  highest  that  can  be  conferred  by  any  association  or  local  or  State  authority. 
The  more  important  of  these  are  named  in  the  following  paragraphs  : 

Dr.  Watson  began  practice  when  an  espousal  of  the  homoeopathic  system  aroused  in- 
tense opposition  and  involved  entire  social  ostracism  from  old-school  association  and 
fellowship.  The  homoeopathic  system  had  acquired  a  distinctive  sectarian  name,  an  inex- 
cusable offence  in  the  eyes  of  the  dominant  school,  one  to  whioli  even  to  the  present 
time  it  has  not  become  reconciled.  At  that  early  period  nearly  all  the  homoeopathic 
practitioners  had  seceded  from  the  old  school.  A  few  informal  homoeopathic  medical 
associations,  composed  of  these  often  widely  separated  physicians,  had  been  formed  and 
were  feebly  maintained.  The  homoeopathic  school  was  then  in  its  formative  stage.  No 
concerted  action  had  been  taken  toward  securing  for  it  distinct  and  influential  organi- 
zations. Dr.  Watson  at  once  perceived  the  necessity  for  a  removal  of  the  legal  disa- 
bilities to  which  homoeopathists  were  subjected,  and  the  acquirement  on  their  part  of  a 
legal  status  equal  in  every  respect  with  that  of  the  old  school.  He  entered  with  alacrity 
and  zeal  upon  the  work  of  securing  these  desirable  results.  He  gave  to  the  cause  freely 
of  his  time  and  means.  To  his  wise  counsels,  his  indefatigable  energy,  his  steadfast- 
ness of  purpose,  and  his  controlling  influence  is  largely  due  the  advanced  standing, 
the  thorough  organization,  and  the  scholarly  position  of  the  homoeopathic  school  of  the 
present  day.  While  he  maintains  that  a  distmctive  name  seems  requisite  m  order  to 
represent  a  particular  system  of  therapeutics  he  holds  that  the  medical  profession  should 
not  be  classified  thereby.  He  is  an  uncompromising  opponent  of  sectarianism  in 
medicine.  He  would  have  the  terms  of  admission  to  membership  in  all  homoeopathic 
medical  societies  so  broad  as  not  to  exclude  any  educated  physicians  on  account  of  ther- 
apeutic belief. 

Dr.  Watson  was  one  of  the  original  members  and  founders  of  the  Oneida  County 
Homoeopathic  Medical  Society,  having  united  with  the  society  at  its  first  meeting  in 
1857.  He  was  elected  its  president  in  1860.  He  became  a  member  of  the  Homoeo- 
pathic Medical  Society  of  the  State  of  New  York  in  1855.     At  the  re-organization  of 


46  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  society  in  February,  1861,  he  delivered  an  inaugural  address  entitled  ''  The  Past  and 
Present  Position  of  Homceopathy  and  the  Duties  of  its  Practitioners."  He  was  elected 
a  permanent  member  of  the  society  in  1866.  He  was  elected  its  president  in  1868  and 
at  the  following  annual  meeting  delivered  an  address  entitled  "  The  Medical  Profession: 
Its  Duties  and  Responsibilities,  and  the  Relation  of  the  Homoeopathic  to  the  Old-School 
Branch  of  the  Medical  Profession."  In  February,  1872,  he  delivered  another  adtJress 
before  the  New  York  State  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  entitled  "  The  Homoeopathic 
School,  the  Modern  School  of  Rational  and  Liberal  Medicine."  This  address,  while  it 
aroused  decided  hostile  criticism,  by  its  reasonableness  and  Catholicity  gained  for  him  the 
cordial  approval  of  the  liberal  minded  members  of  both  the  new  and  old  schools  of  med- 
icine. He  became  a  member  of  the  American  Institute  of  Homoeopathy  in  1854,  and 
having  completed  twenty-five  years  of  continuous  membership  therein  in  1879  he  be- 
came a  senior  member  thereof.  At  the  session  of  the  institute  held  in  1873  he  intro- 
duced and  in  an  elaborate  speech  supported  the  following  resolutions: 

"  Resolved,,  That  homceopathists  should  strenuously  insist  upon  the  non-violation  of 
the  great  fundamental  American  principle  of  '  no  taxation  without  representation '  by 
sectarian  monopoly  of  either  national.  State,  county,  or  city  institutions  that  are  sup- 
ported by  legal  assessments,  or  of  those  private  eleemosynary  institutions  which  derive 
their  support  from  individual  contributions. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  recognition  of  this  principle  by  the  legislature  of  Michigan,  by 
its  recent  action  in  creating  two  professorships  of  homoeopathy  in  the  University  of 
that  State,  meets  the  most  hearty  approval  of  this  body." 

These  resolutions,  indicating  the  liberal  policy  of  the  homoeopathic  profession,  were 
unanimously  adopted. 

He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  State  Homoeopathic  Asylum  for  the 
Insane  at  Middletown,  N.  Y.  In  his  "Introductory  Address"  before  the  New  York 
State  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  in  1869  he  recommended  the  appointment  of  a 
committee  to  urge  upon  the  legislature  the  necessity  of  taking  appropriate  action  for  the 
erection  of  a  State  asylum  for  the  insane,  to  be  located  in  one  of  the  southern  tier  of 
counties  of  the  State,  and  to  be  placed  under  the  control  of  a  physician  of  good  stand- 
ing in  the  homoeopathic  school.  Four  years  after,  in  1873,  when  the  Middletown  asy- 
lum had  been  created  by  legislative  enactment,  secured  largely  through  his  persistent 
efforts  and  influence,  Dr.  Watson  was  appointed  by  Gov.  John  A.  Dix  a  member  of  its 
first  Board  of  Trustees.  He  resigned  this  office  after  a  service  of  three  years  on  ac- 
count of  inability,  by  reason  of  other  professional  duties,  to  attend  the  meetings  of  the 
board.  He  was  appointed  in  March,  1875,  to  the  office  of  United  States  pension  exam- 
ining surgeon  and  served  in  that  capacity  six  years.  He  resigned  the  office  in  1881  on 
account  of  an  intended  visit  to  Europe.  The  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine,  honoris 
causa,  was  conferred  on  him  by  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  University  of  the  State  of 
New  York  on  the  nommation  of  the  State  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  in  1878. 

Dr.  Watson  was  appointed  surgeon-general  of  the  State  of  New  York,  with  the  rank 
of  brigadier-general,  by  Gov.  A.  B.  Cornell  in  January,  1880.  He  was  elected  to  the 
office  of  Regent  of  the  University  of  the  State  of  New  York  by  the  legislature  of  the 
State,  February  2,  1881,  and  holds  that  position  at  the  present  time.  He  was  nomi- 
nated in  1888  without  any  solicitation  or  knowledge  on  his  part,  by  Gov.  David  B.  Hill, 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  ~  47 

to  tfte  office  of  commissioner  of  the  State  Reservation  at  Niagara,  and  his  nomination 
was  unanimously  confirmed  by  the  State  Senate.  He,  however,  felt  impelled  to  decline 
the  honor  so  gracefully  conferred  on  account  of  the  pressing  nature  of  private  and  pro- 
fessional engagements.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Medico- Chirurgical  Society  of  New 
York  city,  a  member  of  the  staff  of  Faxton  Hospital  at  Utica,  a  trustee  of  the  New 
York  State  Library  and  State  Museum  of  Natural  History  at  Albany,  a  member  of  the 
Fort  Schuyler  Club  of  TJtioa,  a  member  of  the  University  Club  of  New  York  city,  a 
member  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research  of  Boston,  a  member  of  the 
Oneida  County  Historical  Society,  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Rhode  Island  His- 
torical Society,  a  member  of  the  American  Historical  Society,  and  senior  warden  of 
Grace  Episcopal  Church  at  Utica.  He  has  not  infrequently  represented  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  in  its  diocesan  conventions,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  general  con- 
vention of  the  church  held  in  New  York  in  October,  1889.  In  1887  he  visited  Califor- 
nia. Having  had  ample  opportunity  for  personal  observation,  and  for  mstituting  a  just 
comparison  between  the  famous  watering  places  of  the  Old  World  and  the  health  re- 
sorts of  the  United  States,  he  published  several  monographs  presenting  valuable  infor- 
mation upon  these  subjects.  In  the  spring  of  1888  he  visited  Florida  in  order  to  become 
acquainted  with  its  advantages  as  a  desirable  health  resort. 

Dr.  Watson  took  a  very  active  part  in  the  controversy  of  1870  and  1871  regarding  the 
unjust  and  illiberal  action  of  Dr.  H.  Van  Aernam,  United  States  commissioner  of  pen- 
sions. Dr.  Van  Aernam  had  removed  from  the  office  of  pension  surgeon  Dr.  Stillman 
Spooner,  of  Oneida,  Madison  County,  N.  Y.,  and  also  a  number  of  other  homoeopathic 
pension  surgeons  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  giving  as  a  reason  that  "  they  did  not 
belong  to  the  school  of  medicine  recognized  by  the  government."  Dr.  Van  Aernam  by 
this  impolitic  action  sought  to  commit  the  government  of  the  United  States  to  the  direct 
endorsement  of  the  old  school  to  the  exclusion  of  the  homoeopathic  school,  thereby  prac- 
tically establishing  sectarianism  im,  medicine.  Dr.  Watson  entered  with  earnestness  and 
zeal  into  the  contest  carried  forward  on  the  part  of  homoeopathic  physicians  in  several 
Northern  States.  He  instituted  a  very  extensive  correspondence,  formulated  pointed 
and  forcible  resolutions,  and  published  stirring  and  vigorous  appeals  to  his  associates 
throughout  the  country.  By  means  of  these  well-directed  efforts  the  author  of  these 
discourtesies  and  acts  of  intolerance  toward  the  homoeopathic  medical  profession  was 
summarily  removed  and  the  ejected  homoeopathic  pension  surgeons  were  restored  to  their 
former  positions.  Dr.  Watson  in  the  early  part  of  his  medical  life  warmly  espoused  the 
cause  of  higher  medical  education.  As  early  as  1868,  during  the  sessions  of  the  Consti- 
tutional Convention  of  that  year,  he  and  Dr.  H.  M.  Paine,  of  Albany,  devised  the  form  of 
an  amendmentfor  securing  higher  and  more  uniform  standards  of  medical  attainment  by 
the  establishment  of  State  supervision  of  medical  licensure  through  the  instrumentality  of 
State  boards  of  medical  examiners.' 

This  amendment  provided  :  (1st)  For  the  appointment  of  a  5taie  i/erfjcaZ^oar-d;  (2d) 
that  in  the  construction  of  such  board  none  of  the  schools  of  medicine  should  have  major 
representation;  and  (3d)  that  after  the  establisliment  of  such  boards  it  should  be  made  a 

'  Transactions  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  of  the  State  of  New  York,  Vol.  X.,  1872  ;  p. 412. 


48  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

criminal  offince,  to  practice  medicine  without  a  license  therefrom.  Subsequently  the  form  of  a 
bill  for  creating  a  higher  degree  in  medicine  under  State  supervision  was  devised  by  Dr. 
Searle,  and  closely  following  that  came  the  proposed  law  of  1872'  for  creating  State  boards 
of  medical  examiners,  under  which  the  licensing  franchise  was  tentatively  transferred,  as 
far  as  was  then  permissible,  from  the  medical  colleges  to  State  control.  Dr.  Watson  was 
very  active  in  his  efforts  in  behalf  of  this  law.  His  wise  counsels  and  sagacious  sug- 
gestions were  followed  in  its  construction,  and  his  personal  influence  greatly  promoted 
its  passage  through  the  legislature  of  that  year.  He  became  a  member  of  the  First 
Board  of  Examiners  appointed  by  the  Regents  under  that  law,  at  its  organization  in  1872, 
and  remained  in  office  until  his  election  in  1881  by  the  legislature  to  membership  in  the 
Board  of  Regents.  While  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Examiners  he  held  the  appoint- 
ment of  Examiner  in  Diagnosis  and  Pathology. 

Dr.  Watson  passed  several  years  (1881-83)  in  visiting  the  hospitals  in  the  principal 
cities  and  the  most  noted  health  and  pleasure  resorts  of  Europe,  making  also,  at  the 
same  time,  a  critical  examination  of  the  different  systems  of  medical  education  in  the 
various  countries.  Upon  his  return  he  delivered  an  address  on  "  Medical  Education  and 
Medical  Licensure  "  at  the  twenty-third  convocation  of  the  University  of  the  State  of 
New  Yorlt  held  at  Albany  in  July,  1885.  In  this  address  he  showed  that  the  scope  and 
relation  of  the  medical  profession  demanded  a  high  standard  of  education  in  its  candi- 
dates in  order  to  insure  the  greatest  efficiency  in  its  practitioners.  He  demonstrated 
that  the  present  standard  is  so  low  as  to  have  given  rise  to  an  urgent  demand  for  its 
elevation.  He  strenuously  insisted  that  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  State  to  determine  the 
educational  qualifications  of  those  who  are  to  care  for  the  lives  and  health  of  its  citizens,  and 
that  there  must  be  an  entire  separation  of  the  teaching  from  the  licensing  interests.  He 
outUned  the  proper  condition  of  licensure  as  follows:  (1)  A  fairly  liberal  preliminary 
education ;  (2)  Four  years  of  professional  study  ;  and  (3)  Examination  and  licensure  by 
an  impartial  court  appointed  by  the  State.  This  address  received  the  unanimous  ap- 
proval of  the  convocation  and,  widely  attracting  public  attention,  was  most  highly  com- 
mended by  gentlemen  of  prominence  in  educational  matters  in  different  portions  of  the 
country.  The  law  of  1872  proved  the  forerunner  of  that  of  1890,"  by  the  provisions  of 
which  the  right  of  medical  licensure  is  effectively  transferred  from  the  medical  colleges 
to  Stale  Boards  of  Medical  Examiners.  In  the  contest  which  preceded  the  passage 
of  the  law  of  1890  Dr.  Watson  took  a  deep  personal  interest,  the  principles  involved 
therein  being  consonant  with  the  lines  of  progress  which  he  had  held  and  endeavored 
to  promote  during  a  life-long  adherence  thereto. 

Dr.  Watson,  in  his  place  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Regents  as  also  on  all  other 
suitable  occasions,  has  endeavored  to  promote  the  general  welfare  of  the  medical  pro- 
fession, and  also  more  particularly  to  elevate  the  standards  of  medical  education.  His 
influence  in  behalf  of  the  latter  is  shown  by  the  following  extract  from  the  record  of 
the  minutes  of  the  Board  of  Regents  for  1889,  page  532  : 

1  Session  law  of  1872,  Chap.  746. 

2  ''To  Establish  Boards  of  Medical  Examiners  of  the  State  of  New  York  for  the  Examination  and 
Licensing  of  Practitioners  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  and  to  Further  Regulate  the  Practice  of  Med- 
icine and  Surgery."— Session  laws,  Chap.  507. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  49 

"  Dr.  Watson  asked  the  Regents  to  approve  and  request  of  the  legislature  favorable 
action  on  the  bill  for  giving  to  medicine  the  same  statutory  safeguard  against  illiterate 
practitioners  now  given  to  law  by  the  law  student's  examination.  After  reading  it 
was  voted  that  the  committee  on  legislation  be  directed  to  support  the  passage  of  the 

bill.      '  1  i  r  D 

Dr.  Watson  during  his  whole  professional  life  has  held  sound  medical  tenets  and  prin- 
ciples. While  his  position  has  been  in  advance  of  that  of  his  associates  the  profession 
has  in  every  instance  finally  adopted  the  propositions  which,  as  a  wi.-se  and  prudent 
leader,  he  originated,  described,  and  earnestly  advocated.  As  early  as  the  year  1861  in 
an  inaugural  address'  Dr.  Watson  urged  the  lengthening  of  the  term  of  medical  studies 
from  three  to  four  years  in  the  following  words  : 

"Let  us  seek  to  introduce  and  maintain  a  higher  standard  of  professional  require- 
ments. .  .  I  would  myself  desire  that  the  time  required  for  the  study  of  medicine 
should  be  extended  to  Jour  years  instead  of  three." 

This  standard,  suggested  by  Dr.  Watson  twenty-nine  years  ago,  was  adopted  by  the 
American  Institute  of  Homoeopathy  at  its  last  annual  meeting  as  none  too  long  for  ac- 
quiring a  practical  knowledge  of  medicine.  After  a  lapse  of  twenty-three  years,  by  the 
law  of  1890,  the  State  has  assumed  legal  control  of  the  right  of  medical  licensure,  a  prin- 
ciple which  Drs.  Watson  and  Paine  advocated  and  endeavored  to  have  approved  by 
the  Constitutional  Convention  of  1867.  In  his  inaugural  address,  to  which  reference 
has  been  made,  Dr.  Watson  advocated  as  early  1861  substantially  the  same  preliminary 
educational  quahficationsas  are  now  required  by  the  law  of  1889,  which  law  was  framed 
in  compliance  with  his  suggestions  and  earnest  advocacy. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  Dr.  Watson  has  the  satisfaction  of  having  witnessed  the 
complete  adoption,  into  the  form  of  law  and  into  the  tenets  of  the  medical  profession, 
of  three  great  reformatory  measures  to  which  he  has  given  special  thought,  and  for  the 
success  of  which  he  has  labored  with  undiminished  energy  and  zeal.  In  the  frequent 
contests  waged  by  the  homoeopathic  school  during  the  past  thirty  years  in  defence  of 
civil  lights,  of  which  that  school  has  often  been  deprived  by  allopathic  leaders,  notably 

*  The  law  (chapter  468,  laws  o£  1889)  as  given  below  was  drawn  up  by  a  lawyer  at  Dr.  Watson's 
suggestion.  It  was  subsequently  passed  by  the  legislature  and  was  signed  by  the  governor  June 
13, 1889,  and  is  now  the  law  of  the  State  : 

An  Act  to  Provide  for  the  Preliminary  Education  of  Medical  Students. 

Section  i.  Before  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  the  State  of  New  York  or  trubtees  of  any  medi- 
cal school  or  college  within  this  State  shall  confer  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine  on  any  person 
"who  has  not  received  a  baccalaurate  degree  in  co^urse  from  a  college  or  university  duly  authorized 
to  confer  the  same,  they  shall  require  him  to  file  with  the  secretary  or  recording  officer  of  their  uni- 
versity or  college  a  certificate  showing  that,  prior  to  entering  upon  the  prescribed  three  years* 
study  of  medicine,  he  passed  an  examination  conducted  under  the  authority  and  in  accordance  with 
the  rules  of  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  the  State  of^New  York,  in  arithmetic,  grammar,  geog- 
raphy, orthography,  American  history,  English  composition,  and  the  elements  of  natural  philoso- 
phy, and  such  certificate  shall  be  signed  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Regents  and  countersigned  by  the 
principal  or  commissioner  conducting  said  examination. 

Section  2.  This  act  shall  not  apply  to  persons  who  have  already  entered  upon  the  three  years' 
study  of  medicine,  nor  shall  it  alter  the  time  of  study  or  the  courses  of  medical  instruction  required 
to  be  pursued  in  the  medical  colleges  of  this  State  by  existing  statutes. 

Section  3.    This  act  shall  take  eifect  immediately. 

2  Inaugural  address,  entitled  "  The  Past  and  Present  Position  of  Homoeopathy  and  the  Duties  of 
its  Practitioners,"  before  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  of  the  State  of  New  York,  February 
28,  1861.    Transactions  of  the  Society,  Vol.  i,  1863  ;  page  39, 


50  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  introduction  of  homoeopatliy  into  tlie  Michigan  University,  the  Van  Aernam  episode, 
the  expulsion  of  homojopathic  physicians  from  the  Massachusetts  (allopathic)  State  Medi- 
cal Society,  and  many  others,  Dr.  Watson  has  always  urged  the  largest  liberty  of  opin- 
ion and  action  in  the  exercise  of  all  civil  rights  on  the  broad  American  principle  of  "  no 
taxation  without  representation."  And  he  has  embodied  the  sentiments  of  this  sound 
proposition  in  many  of  the  large  numbers  of  resolutions  and  declarations  of  rights 
which  he  has  so  often  formulated  and  presented  at  medical  meetings. 

Dr.  Watson  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  medical  literature.  In  addition  to  the 
essays  and  addresses  previously  referred  to  the  following  articles  are  the  more  promi- 
nent among  his  pubhshed  papers:  " Cerebro-Spinal  Meningitis";  Transactions  of  the 
New  York  State  Homceopathio  Medical  Society,  1864;  "  Nosological  Classification  of 
Diseases,"  ihid.,  1864;  "  Allopathic  Bigotry,"  1869;  "  Old-School  Intolerance,"  iWd, 
1872,  p.  657;  ihid.,  1873,  p.  117;  "The  Advanced  Medical  Act,"  fiid,  1872,  p.  425 ; 
"  No  Sectarian  Tests  as  a  Qualification  for  Office,  and  no  Sectarian  Monopoly  of  Na- 
tional Institulious,"  iUd.,  1872,  p.  G84 ;  and  ''  Homoeopathy,"  Zell's  Popular  Bncyclo- 
paidia,  1870. 

In  the  early  part  of  his  medical  career  Dr.  Watson  aspired  to  the  attainment  of  the 
highest  standing  in  the  medical  profession.  That  these  laudable  aspirations  have  been 
fully  realized  is  attested  by  the  quality  and  thoroughness  of  his  medical  accomplish- 
ments. As  a  sound  and  reliable  practitioner  he  has,  these  many  years,  stood  at  the 
forefront  of  the  profession.  He  has  endeavored  to  represent  that  which  is  truly  con- 
servative and  rational  in  the  homoeopathic  school  in  contradistinction  to  that  which, 
through  Hahnemann's  errors,  is  visionary,  unphilosophical,  and  irrational  therein.  He 
has  been  eminently  successful  in,  carrying  out  this  line  of  practice,  as  is  evidenced  by  the 
high  standing  that  he  has  attained  in  the  community  where  he  has  so  long  resided,  as 
well  as  by  the  frequency  with  which  his  advice  is  eagerly  sought  as  a  wise  consultant 
in  the  management  of  difiicult  cases,  both  in  the  city  of  his  adoption  and,  in  fact,  in  all 
the  central  counties  of  this  State.  By  wisely  endeavoring  to  adhere  to  homoeopathic 
principles  when  applicable,  and  at  the  same  time  appropriating  all  that  is  of  essential 
value  m  other  systems  of  treatment,  he  has  fairly  attained  the  enviable  reputation  of 
being  a  practitioner  of  recognized  ability  and  of  great  practical  sagacity.  He  has  been 
an  earnest  and  constant  student,  not  only  in  the  field  of  his  chosen  profession,  but  also 
in  other  departments  of  science  and  general  literature.  Having  oratorical  powers  of  a 
high  order  his  impressive  and  graceful  presentation  of  any  cause  that  he  may  espouse 
renders  that  object  or  association,  be  it  medical,  political,  or  literary,  exceedingly  fortun- 
ate in  securing  his  interest  and  influence  in  its  behalf.  Dr.  Watson  was  an  intimate 
personal  friend  and  political  adherent  of  the  late  Hon.  Eoscoe  Conkling,  and  for  more 
than  thirty  years  his  attending  physician.  He  delivered  several  poHtical  addresses  in 
Mr.  Oonkling's  interest  before  the  Conkling  Club,  of  Utica,  when  the  possibility  of  the 
nomination  of  Roscoe  Conkling  for  the  Presidency  seemed  so  promising  in  the  year 
1876. 

Dr.  Watson  married  Miss  Sarah  T.  Carlile  at  Providence,  E.  I.,  May  1,  1854.  Mrs. 
Watson  died  at  Utica,  July  27,  1881.  On  December,  1891,  he  married  Mrs.  Julia  M. 
Williams,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.     He  has  one  son,  William  Livingston  Watson,  who  was  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  51 

member  of  the  class  of  1879  at  Harvard  College,  and  one  daughter,  Lucy  Carlile  Wat- 
son, both  of  whom  reside  with  their  father  at  Utica,  N.  Y.  William  Livingston  Watson 
was  married  to  Miss  Alice  G.  Parkinson   of  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.,  October  12,  1887. 


ADAMS,  CHARLES  D.,  born  November  3u,  1828,  atLowville,  Lewis  County,  N.Y., 
is  a  son  of  Dr.  Seth  Adams,  who  came  from  New  Hampshire,  where  his  family 
had  been  settled  since  an  early  day.  His  mother  was  a  daughter  of  Gen.  Oliver  Col- 
lins, of  New  Hartford,  who  came  from  Meriden,  Conn.,  at  the  close  of  the  Revolution- 
ary war.  After  completing  his  education  Charles  D.  studied  law  with  Hon.  Bla  Col- 
lins, at  Lowville,  and  was  admitted  at  Utica  in  January,  1852.  He  practiced  his 
profession  at  Lowville  until  January,  1870.  While  at  Lowville  he  ran  on  the  Demo- 
cratic ticket  for  district  attorney,  as  delegate  to  the  Constitutional  Convention, 
and  for  county  judge.  As  his  county  and  d'strict  were  hopelessly  Republican  he 
was  elected  to  neither  of  these  positions.  He  came  to  Utica  in  1870,  taking  the 
place  of  Charles  H.  Doolittle,  who  had  been  elected  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court.  The 
large  business  to  which  he  came,  and  which  continued  till  the  war  business  of  the 
country  was  closed  up,  threw  upon  him  a  large  practice,  which  he  conducted  success- 
fully and  with  dispatch.  His  practice  has  been  from  the  first  in  large  and  important 
cases  and  in  the  higher  courts.  His  cases  which  have  been  reported  have  contributed 
as  much  as  those  of  any  lawyer  in  Northern  or  Central  New  York  to  the  legal  litera- 
ture of  his  time. 

Among  his  cases  which  have  attracted  public  attention  were  the  Budge  case,  the  case 
of  Smith  vs.  Pease,  Nicholson  vs.  Wilson,  the  capital  case  of  Powers,  the  North. Lake 
Reservoir  cases  before  the  canal  appraisers,  and  the  cases  of  the  estate  of  L.  R.  Lyon, 
arrising  in  Northern  New  York,  and  the  Mallon  homicide  case,  the  Joseph  B.  Taylor 
estate  cases,  the  Utica  Water  Works  case,  the  Clinton  Water  Works  case,  and  the  Piper- 
Hoard  cases,  arising  in  Oneida  and  Hei-kimer  Counties.  In  his  professional  work  Mr. 
Adams  is  most  thorough  and  industrious  in  his  preparation  of  his  oases,  profoundly 
learned  in  the  law,  clear,  forcible,  and  logical  in  the  presentation  of  his  views,  and  most 
ingenious  in  meeting  the  difficulties  of  his  case. 

Mr.  Adams  ran  on  the  Democratic  ticket  in  the  Fifth  Judicial  District  for  justice  of 
the  Supreme  Court  in  1880  and  1882,  each  time  running  much  ahead  of  his  ticket,  but 
not  enough  to  overcome  the  heavy  Republican  majorities.  He  has  always  been  a  Dem- 
ocrat and  during  the  war  of  the  Rebelhon  was  a  war  Democrat.  Since  his  residence 
in  Utica  he  has  taken  little  part  in  politics. 


ROBERTS,  JAMBS,  was  born  in  the  town  of  Steuben,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  Au- 
gust 26,  1837. .  His  father  was  John  0.  Roberts  ;  his  mother  was  a  daughter  of 
James  Owen.  His  early  life  was  spent  upon  a  farm,  but  preferring  a  commercial  life 
he  soon  made  an  exchange,  his  subsequent  successes  abundantly  proving  the  wisdom  of 
his   choice.     A  copartnership  was  formed  between  himself  and  a  friend,  carrying  on 


52  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

business  in  Remsen  under  the  firm  name  of  Jones  &  Roberts.  Mr.  Roberts  was  well 
known  and  very  popular  in  the  northern  tier  of  towns  in  the  county.  In  politics  he  was 
throughout  his  life  a  staunch  Republican  and  stood  high  in  the  councils  of  his  party. 

In  1869  he  disposed  of  his  interest  in  the  store  at  Remsen  and  went  to  New  York 
city  for  a  visit.  While  absent  his  friends  and  neighbors,  without  his  knowledge,  nomi- 
nated him  as  a  candidate  for  member  of  the  Assembly  for  what  was  then  the  Fourth 
District.  He  accepted  the  nomination,  was  elected,  and  served  his  constituents  well  at 
Albany.  With  the  exception  of  a  short  service  as  town  clerk  this  was  his  only  experi- 
ence in  public  office.  In  the  fall  of  1870  he  came  to  Utica  and  became  a  member  of  the 
firm  of  Griflfiths,  Roberts  &  Butler,  successors  of  the  firm  of  Charles  H.  Yates  &  Co.,  in 
the  manufacture  and  sale  of  clothing.  This  firm  carried  on  the  business  very  success- 
fully for  about  ten  years  at  No.  54  G-enesee  street.  In  1881  its  personnel  was  changed 
by  the  introduction  of  Russell  H.  Wicks  and  John  Peattie  as  partners.  The  following 
year  Mr.  Griffiths,  the  senior  member,  withdrew  and  the  firm  of  Roberts,  Butler  &  Co. 
was  formed.  Mr.  Roberts  applied  himself  with  unusual  assiduity,  and  in  the  face  of 
sharp  competition  built  up  the  largest  business  in  clothing  in  the  city.  He  was  system- 
atic, methodical,  and  attentive  to  detail.  His  judgment  in  matters  of  business  as  well 
as  of  men  and  their  actions  was  accurate  and  trustworthy,  was  freely  sought,  and  as 
freely  given.  Sharp  in  trade,  and  quick  to  see  where  an  advantage  was  to  be  gained, 
he  was  nevertheless  open  and  generous,  not  easily  offended,  and  as  averse  to  giving  of- 
fence, for  his  social  qualities  were  as  marked  as  his  business  traits,  and  in  this  respect 
he  was  one  of  the  most  companionable  of  men.  Loyalty  to  the  friendships  of  his  early 
days  was  characteristic  of  the  man.  He  manifested  signal  power  in  his  relations  with 
his  employees,  whom  he  treated  always  with  extreme  courtesy,  and  whose  respect  he 
uniformly  commanded.  "  If  he  had  a  failing  as  a  business  man,"  said  one  of  his  partners, 
"  it  was  that  he  would  not  or  could  not  throw  upon  others  responsibilities  and  cares 
which  he  had  no  right  to  carry.''  Thus  intent  on  his  own  affairs  Mr.  Roberts  did  not 
fail  of  care  for  those  of  a  more  public  character.  He  was  interested  in  political  matters 
and  in  current  events  was  thoroughly  posted.  He  was  ever  ready  to  lend  a  hand  in 
inaiigurating  any  enterprise  which  promised  to  be  a  public  benefit.  One  of  the  last  oc- 
casions on  which  he  appeared  in  public  was  the  inauguration  of  the  movement  to 
establish  the  Conservatory  of  Music.  He  was  a  director  in  the  Skenandoah  Yarn-Mill 
and  ft  stockholder  in  the  Eureka  Mower  Company  and  the  Mohawk  Valley  Mills. 

In  1875  Mr.  Roberts  married  Delia,  youngest  daughter  of  Hon.  Samuel  Campbell,  of 
New  York  Mills,  a  lady  to  whom  he  was  most  tenderly  attached  and  who  accorded 
fully  with  his  natural  instinct,  for  he  was  strongly  domestic  in  his  tastes,  and  when  not 
at  his  business  he  devoted  himself  to  his  wife  and  his  home. 

In  the  winter  of  1888,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  members  of  her  family,  he  visited 
Europe,  where  he  passed  most  of  the  season  in  the  delightful  atmosphere  of  Italy  and 
Southern  France.  During  his  stay  in  Rome  and  Florence  he  purchased  several  choice 
works  of  art  to  adorn  the  home  to  which  he  was  so  devotedly  attached,  and  the  artistic 
decorations  of  which  bespoke  the  cultured  taste  of  its  owner.  In  the  spring  he  went  to 
Great  Britain,  paying  while  there  a  visit  to  the  home  of  his  ancestors  in  Wales.  An 
American  by  birth  and  education  his  Welsh  ancestry  was  to  him  a  source  of  pride  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  53 

pleasure.  He  was  proud  of  the  industry,  thrift,  and  integrity  which  characterize  that 
people.  His  charities  he  kept  to  himself ;  his  modest,  engaging  demeanor  was  not  so 
easy  of  concealment,  and  this,  with  his  cheerfulness,  frankness,  and  straightforward 
integrity,  caused  the  regret  that  was  felt  at  his  death  to  be  widespread  and  sincere. 

While  yet  comparatively  young  the  career  of  this  robust,  healthy,  handsome  man, 
popular  and  respected,  and  by  his  intimates  warmly  beloved,  was  brought  to  an  early 
close.  Hia  death  occurred  July  4,  1889.  He  left  to  his  friends  the  memory  of  a  most 
genial  companion  and  a  generous  helper  in  times  of  need  and  to  the  rising  generation 
of  our  young  men  a  noble  example  of  energetic,  independent  American  manhood. 


lyi  IDDLETON,  ROBERT,  president  of  the  Globe  Woolen  Company,  of  ITtica,  was 
[  \  born  in  the  city  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  May  25,  1825.  He  is  the  third  son  in  a 
family  of  eight  children  born  to  Robert  and  Marjory  (Burnett)  Middleton,  both  of  whom 
were  natives  of  Aberdeen.  His  father  was  a  manufacturer  by  occupation  while  in 
Scotland,  and  emigrated  to  America  with  his  family  in  1839.  He  settled  at  Middle 
Granville,  Washington  County,  N.  T  ,  and  during  the  remainder  of  his  life  followed 
farming.  He  was  a  man  of  probity  and  respectability  in  a  broad  sense  and  died  where 
he  first  located  in  the  year  1876,  at  the  age  of  eighty-six  years.  His  wife  died  in  the 
year  1856  aged  fifty-two  years. 

Robert  Middleton's  educational  advantages  were  confined  to  the  common  schools  of 
Granville,  N.  Y.,  but  he  made  the  best  of  his  opportunities  in  this  direction  until  he 
was  eighteen  years  of  age,  when  he  went  to  Lowell,  Mass.,  and  engaged  his  services  for 
six  years  to  the  Lowell  Carpet  Company.  The  succeeding  seven  years  he  spent  with 
the  Merrimac  Woolen  Company,  acting  as  assistant  superintendent  of  the  company's 
mills.  In  these  capacities  he  found  an  occupation  which  he  liked  and  which  was  the 
foundation  of  the  life-work  in  which  he  has  been  more  than  ordinarily  successful.  In 
the  latter  part  of  April,  1857,  Mr.  Middleton  was  invited  to  visit  the  Utica  Woolen-Mills 
with  a  view  of  accepting  the  agency  of  the  same,  and  after  a  personal  interview  with  the 
late  Theodore  S.  Faxton,  then  president  of  the  company,  and  an  examination  of  the  mill 
property  he  was  engaged  as  agent  and  superintendent  and  entered  upon  his  duties  as 
such  on  the  10th  of  May,  1857.  The  Globe  Mills,  as  they  were  then  called  (later  the  Utica 
Woolen-Mills),  had  then  been  in  existence  a  number  of  years,  as  related  in  an  earher  chap- 
ter of  this  work,  but  as  a  business  enterprise  they  had  been  unsuccessful.  In  the  year 
1854,  just  before  the  approach  of  the  severest  financial  struggle  the  country  has  ever 
passed  through,  the  company  failed  and  the  stockholders  were  assessed  ninety-eight  per 
cent,  to  pay  outstanding  debts,  and  the  mill  was  sold  at  auction.  In  1855  the  new  com- 
pany was  organized  under  the  name  of  the  Utica  Woolen-Mills,  and  though  severely  tried 
by  the  panic  of  1857  the  establishment  passed  safely  through  the  crisis  and  a  few  years 
later  paid  the  first  dividend  it  had  ever  made.  Mr.  Middleton's  excellent  practical  quaU- 
fications  and  his  natural  executive  ability  found  ample  scope  for  exercise  and  he  gave  his 
best  energies  to  the  upbuilding  of  the  affairs  of  the  company ;  the  product  was  greatly 
improved  in  quaUty  under  his  skillful  direction  and  other  reforms  were  inaugurated 
which  soon  placed  the  company  on  a  firm  and  permanent  foundation.'     The  product  of 


54  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

the  mills  was  formerly  sold  by  commission  houses,  but  on  the  1st  of  January,  1864,  a 
salesroom  of  their  own  was  established  in  New  York  city,  which  is  now  in  charge  of 
W.  W.  Coffin,  and  the  entire  product  amounting  to  about  $1,200,000  annually  is  sold 
from  there.  When  Mr.  Middleton  assumed  charge  of  the  mills  the  product  was  not 
more  than  one-fifth  the  present  quantity,  while  the  quality  of  the  goods  manufactured 
has  advanced  still  more  rapidly,  and  at  the  present  time  cloths  are  made  that  are  not 
excelled  in  the  country. 

On  the  6th  of  September,  1871,  the  entire  property  of  the  company  was  burned,  but 
the  mills  were  immediately  rebuilt,  and  in  1886  a  worsted-mill  was  added  to  the  plant. 
It  is  eminently  .proper  to  state  that  the  stockholders  of  the  company  attribute  a  large 
share  of  the  credit  for  the  success  of  their  mills  to  Mr.  Middleton.  In  1868  his  son, 
Walter  D.,  entered  the  offices  of  the  company  in  a  subordinate  position  and  has  risen 
regularly  by  various  promotions  to  the  superintendenoy,  which  position  he  now  holds. 
On  the  19th  of  January,  1882,  Mr.  Middleton  succeeded  Theodore  S.  Faxton  as  presi- 
dent of  the  company,  and  during  the  remainder  of  the  life-time  of  Mr.  Faxton  he  was 
Mr.  Middleton's  faithful  and  trusted  adviser.  Outside  of  his  regular  business  connec- 
tions Mr.  Middleton  is  a  public  spirited  citizen,  possesses  a  large  fund  of  general  infor- 
mation, and  willingly  lends  his  aid  to  any  movement  for  the  good  of  the  community. 
He  is  prominently  connected  with  the  local  banking  interests  and  with  various  private 
business  undertakings,  all  of  which  are  gainers  through  his  counsel  and  material  par- 
ticipation. In  politics  he  is  a  Republican,  but  throughout  his  life  he  has  held  himself 
aloof  from  active  work  in  that  field. 

'In  1849  Mr.  Middleton  was  married  to  Miss  Lucy  Ann  Cummings,  daughter  of  Ira 
Oummings,  of  Greenfield,  N.  H.,  and  they  have  four  children:  Walter  D.;  Ella,  wife  of 
James  G.  Hunt,  of  Utica;  Mary,  wife  of  Fred  Gebhard,  of  Jersey  City;  and  Florence, 
wife  of  Dr.  Charles  Pilgrim,  superintendent  of  the  Willard  Asylum. 


WILBY,  GEORGE  H.,  vice-president  and  superintendent  of  the  Utica  Steam 
Cotton-Mills  and  superintendent  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills,  was  born  in 
East  Douglass,  Mass.,  January  12,  1826.  His  education  was  obtained  in  the  common 
schools  in  the  several  villages  where  he  lived  in  the  States  of  Massachusetts  and  Rhode 
Island,  supp.emented  by  a  few  terms  at  a  select  school  in  Lonsdale,  R.  I.,  which  was 
kept  by  an  Episcopal  clergyman.  His  father  was  a  machine  builder  and  a  skillful  me- 
chanic, and  in  his  early  life  was  connected  with  some  of  the  first  cotton-mills  built  in 
New  England.  His  ancestors  came  to  America  from  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  and 
settled  in  Massachusetts  about  1770,  and  many  members  of  the  family  have  developed 
and  made  their  lives  successful  upon  the  natural  Scottish  traits  of  industry,  integrity, 
sturdy  preseverance,  and  good  common  sense.  When  Mr.  Wiley  reached  his  seven- 
teenth year  he  began  work  in  the  Providence  steam-mill  and  soon  afterward  entered 
the  employ  of  the  Lonsdale  Company.  His  father  was  at  that  time  engaged  in  building 
machinery  at  that  place,  which  gave  his  son  superior  advantages  for  obtaining  practical 
knowledge  that  soon  enabled  him  to  assume  charge  of  the  different  departments  of 
cotton-mills.     About  1846  his  father  removed  to  Pawtucket,  R.  I.,  and  the  son  found 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


SS 


employment  in  some  of  the  mills  of  that  city  and  assisted  in  putting  up  and  starting 
the  machinery  of  two  new  mills  there.  A  little  later  he  put  up  and  started  machinery 
in  a  new  mill  at  Warren,  R.  T.,  and  immediately  afterward  performed  a  like  service  in 
the  first  Wamsutta  mills.  These  various  mills  were  new  and  modern  in  all  of  their 
features,  and  his  experience  with  them  gave  Mr.  Wiley  practical  advantages  which  few 
young  men  possessed  at  that  time  and  rendered  him  thoroughly  competent  for  the  con- 
struction and  management  of  a  cotton-mill. 

In  the  spring  of  1852  the  trustees  of  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton-Mills  prevailed  upon  Mr. 
Wiley  to  come  here  and  superintend  their  mills,  which  at  that  time  contained  about 
7,000  spindles.  This  number  was  gradually  increased  to  15,000  in  1856,  and  as  the 
mills  under  Mr.  Wiley's  management  were  proving  successful  it  was  decided  in  1868 
to  build  mill  number  two  and  equip  it  with  15,000  spindles.  This  mill  was  planned  and 
built  by  Mr.  Wiley  and  began  operations  in  1869.  The  thorough,  intelligent,  and  effi- 
cient management  of  Mr.  Wiley  and  the  care  and  skill  of  the  trustees  and  managers 
had  now  changed  the  former  unprofitable  conditions  of  the  manufacture  to  a  larger  and 
better  product  with  comparatively  less  expense,  and  the  reputation  of  the  goods  was 
established  as  first-class,  commanding  a  ready  sale  and  profitable  returns.  In  1880-81 
the  number  one  mill  was  remodeled  and  enlarged  to  contain  25,000  spindles,  the  plans 
for  which  changes  were  made  by  Mr.  Wiley.  The  success  of  these  mills  led  to  the  con- 
struction of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills  (under  substantially  the  same  direction), 
which  were  planned  by  A.  D.  Lockwood  associated  with  Mr.  Wiley  and  erected  wholly 
under  supervision  of  the  latter.  These  mills  began  work  in  1882.  In  1881-82  the  plans 
of  the  Skenandoa  Yarn-Mill  were  prepared  under  Mr.  Wiley's  direction  and  Isaac  R. 
Scott  was  engaged  to  take  charge  of  its  construction  and  management.  Under  his  ju- 
dicious and  efficient  administration  the  mill  has  been  doubled  in  its  capacity.  In  addi- 
tion to  all  these  responsible  undertakings  Mr.  Wiley  was  associated  with  the  late  Hon. 
G-eorge  W.  Chadwick  in  arranging  and  constructing  the  Willowvale  Bleachery  in  New 
Hartford,  which  is  well  known  for  the  excellence  of  its  productions. 

The  foregoing  record  covers  a  period  of  forty  years  of  practical  work  in  his  line  in 
the  city  of  Utica,  which  has  been  one  of  uninterrupted  success,  and  it  may  be  said  here 
with  entire  propriety  that  very  few  men  in  the  country,  and  none  in  this  vicinity,  stand 
higher  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  manufacture  of  cotton  cloth  than  Mr.  Wiley.  He 
is  at  the  present  time  vice-president  and  superintendent  of  the  Utica  Steam  Cotton- Mills ; 
superintendent  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills  ;  a  director  in  the  Skenandoa  Yarn- 
Mill  ;  president  of  the  Willowvale  Bleachery ;  was  a  member  of  Grace  Church  vestry 
twenty  years  and  one  of  the  building  committee  in  charge  of  the  erection  of  the  present 
church  edifice ;  was  chairman  of  the  building  committee  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  con- 
stuction  of  the  Utica  Opera  House  and  of  the  St.  Luke's  Home  and  Hospital ;  and  has  been 
trustee  of  the  latter  institution  from  ivs  beginning.  Mr.  Wiley  is  now  engaged  in  remod- 
eling the  Utica  Steam  Cotton-Mills  and  when  finished  they  will  contain  55,000  spindles. 
He  is  trustee  ol  the  Masonic  Home  and  Asylum  fund  to  be  devoted  to  the  erection  of 
a  fine  building  for  a  Masonic  Home  and  School  in  Utica.  He  is  a  Democrat  in  politics, 
but  has  never  given  more  attention  to  that  interest  than  is  demanded  of  every  pubUc 
spirited  citizen. 


56  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

In  1857  Mr.  Wiley  was  married  to  Miss  Anna  E.  Thorn,  daughter  of  Stephen  Thorn,  of 
Utica.  They  had  one  daughter,  Sarah  T.  Wiley,  now  the  wife  of  William  B.  Lane,  M.D., 
of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  Anna  E.  Wiley  died  November  16,  1877.  In  1880  Mr.  Wiley 
married  Helen  A.  Taft,  of  Worcester,  Mass.,  who  died  August  2,  1891. 


WHITE,  WILLIAM  MANSFIELD,  president  of  the  Second  National  Bank  of 
Utica,  is  a  direct  descendant  of  Hugh  White,  the  pioneer  of  Whitestown  who 
traced  his  lineage  to  Elder  John  White,  who  landed  from  the  good  ship  Lyon,  at  Bos- 
ton, on  the  16th  of  September,  1632,  coming  from  Clemsford,  the  county  seat  of  Essex 
County,  England.  His  father  was  the  Hon.  Hugh  White,  who  represented  the  Saratoga 
district  in  Congress  from  1846  to  1852,  a  graduate  of  Hamilton  in  1823,  and  a  law  stu- 
dent with  Gov.  John  A.  Dix  in  New  York  in  the  office  of  Col.  Charles  G.  Haines. 
Being  a  practical  man  his  knowledge  of  geology  enabled  him  to  discover  a  mine  of  hy- 
draulic cement  at  Chittenango,  Madison  County,  and  he  at  once  began  the  manufacture. 
Prior  to  this  time  all  water-lime  had  been  imported.  He  afterward  discovered  larger 
deposits  near  Kingston  and  developed  the  Rosendale  cement  works,  furnishing  large 
quantities  for  the  Croton  aqueduct.  His  brother,  Canvass  White,  was  one  of  the  earliest 
and  ablest  engineers  of  the  Erie  Canal,  and  afterward  was  employed  by  the  State  of 
Pennsylvania  on  the  construction  of  the  Union,  the  Lehigh,  and  the  Delaware  and  Rar- 
Jtan  Canals.  He  was  a  man  of  whom  Henry  Clay  said,  when  an  engineer  was  being 
sought  for  the  construction  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal :  "  Get  Canvass  White  ; 
no  man  is  more  competent,  no  man  more  capable ;  and  while  your  faith  in  his  ability 
and  fidehty  increases  your  friendship  will  grow  into  afi'ection.''  Mr.  White's  mother 
was  Maria  Mills  Mansfield,  of  Kent,  Conn.  On  the  mother's  side  of  the  Mills  family 
the  Rev.  Samuel  J.  Mills,  the  first  missionary,  is  the  best  known  representative. 

William  M.  White  was  born  in  Waterford,  Saratoga  County,  N.  Y.,  July  8,  1833. 
At  the  age  of  twelve  years  he  was  sent  to  the  Galway  Academy,  then  under  the  charge 
of  Prof.  Charles  Durkee.  In  the  fall  of  1846  he  was  sent  to  the  military  school  of 
Professor  Kinsley,  at  West  Point,  where  the  drill  of  body  and  mind  was  most  thorough 
and  the  morale  of  the  school  high  toned  and  religious.  Here  he  spent  three  years, 
and  some  time  after  he  entered  the  sophomore  class  of  Hamilton  College,  graduating  in 
1854.  During  his  college  course  his  vacations  were  spent  on  Sweet  Briar  Farm  in  the 
town  of  Ossian,  Livingston  County,  N.  Y.,  belonging  to  his  father  and  which  afterward 
became  his  own,  and  where  he  resided  for  thirty  years.  An  enthusiast  in  agriculture 
he  was  active  in  local  societies  and  in  the  State  Agricultural  Society,  and  was  its  presi- 
dent in  1884.  In  politics  Mr.  White  is  a  Republican,  having  cast  his  first  vote  for  Fremont. 
He  has  always  been  active  and  loyal  to  the  party  of  freedom  and  progress.  In  the 
world  of  finance  he  believes  in  the  wisdom  of  one  measure  of  value,  the  recognized 
standard  of  the  world,  gold.  In  religion  he  is  a  member  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  and 
has  been  honored  by  that  body  as  warden,  member  of  the  standing  committee  of  the 
diocese,  and  delegate  to  the  triennial  convention  of  the  church  and  to  the?  general 
council.  He  has  also  acted  as  a  lay-reader  by  appointment  of  the  bishop  and  is  the 
president  of  St.  Luke's  Home  and  Hospital. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  57 

On  the  22d  day  of  January,  1863,  he  was  married  to  Miss  Anna  Maria  Pierrepont, 
daughter  of  Hon.  WiUiam  0.  Pierrepont,  of  Pierrepont  Manor,  N.  Y.,  by  the  Rt. 
Rev,  Bishop  De  Lancey.  Eleven  children  blessed  this  union,  of  whom  six  were  sons  : 
Hugh,  a  business  man  in  Utica;  William  Pierrepont,  a  graduate  of  Columbia  Law 
School,  admitted  to  the  bar  ;  Hubert  Lawrence,  a  student  of  law  at  Cornell  University  ; 
and  De  Lancy  Pierrepont,  Charles  Carroll,  and  John  Dolbeare,  who  are  attending  the 
public  schools.  Mrs.  White  died  in  Utica  on  the  22d  day  of  September,  1884,  and  was 
hurried  at  Pierrepont  Manor.  Mr.  White  removed  to  Utica  on  the  1st  of  September, 
1882,  and  resided  for  three  years  in  the  old  Johnson  mansion  at  234  Genesee  street.  In 
the  spring  of  1885  he  purchased  of  0.  B.  Matdson  his  present  residence  opposite  Bakin 
street. 

Mr.  White  was  elected  a  director  in  the  Second  National  Bank  in  January,  1889,  with- 
out his  knowledge.  The  sudden  and  unlooked-for  death  of  his  friend,  its  president, 
Edward  S.  Brayton,  and  the  death  of  the  cashier,  George  R,  Thomas,  together  with  the 
illness  of  the  vice-president,  William  B,  Jackson,  necessitated  immediate  action  and  the 
Board  of  Directors  unanimously  elected  Mr.  White  president  and  Henry  Roberts  vice- 
president.  The  looked-for  cashier  was  found  in  David  A.  Avery,  of  Cooperstown,  and 
since  July  1,  1887,  the  bank  has  recovered  the  losses  of  the  past  and  has  been  uniformly 
successful  and  prosperous.  Dividends  have  been  resumed  and  confidence  fully  re- 
stored, so  that  its  stock  is  eagerly  sought  as  a  safe  and  permanent  investment. 

Mr.  White  is  a  director  in  the  JeiFerson  County  National  Bank  and  has  been  a  di- 
rector in  the  Rome,  Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg  Railroad  Company  since  1871.  He 
is  vice-president  of  the  Utica  Pipe  Foundry  Company,  organized  in  1889,  and  a  di- 
rector in  the  Bleecker  Street  Railroad  Company,  and  for  a  number  of  years  has  had  the 
care  of  the  large  estate  of  his  father-in-law,  the  late  William  C.  Pierrepont. 


WOOD,  HENRY  J.,  was  born  in  Clinton,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  July  19,  1829.  His 
father  was  Clark  Wood,  who  came  from  Washington  County,  N.  Y.,  and  was  one 
of  the  very  early  settlers  of  the  town  of  Kirkland,  where  he  was  a  respected  farmer. 
He  died  there  on  the  6th  of  June,  1869.  His  wife  was  Amanda  Jones,  daughter  of 
Nehemiah  Jones,  of  Westmoreland,  who  died  April  30,  1855.  Of  the  large  family  of 
children  there  are  now  living,  besides  Henry  J.,  Clark  and  Charles  Wood,  both  residents 
of  Utica,  and  Mrs.  Mary  E  Myrick,  of  Clinton,  N.  Y.  Henry  J.  Wood  obtained  his 
education  at  the  Clinton  district  schools  and  the  grammar  school,  supplemented  by  one 
year  of  study  in  the  Clinton  Liberal  Institute.  In  the  year  1845,  when  he  was  sixteen 
years  old,  he  began  his  business  career  by  taking  a  clerkship  with  Beardsley  &  Rossiter, 
grocers,  of  Little  Palls.  After  two  years  of  faithful  service  there  he  spent  one  year  in 
a  country  store  in  Frankfort,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1848  accepted  a  similar  position  at  New 
York  Mills,  where  he  remained  until  1850.  At  this  time,  having  had  five  years  of  mer- 
cantile experience,  in  which  he  had  become  conversant  with  nearly  all  kinds  of  goods 
and  learned  what  constituted  good  business  methods,  Mr.  Wood  came  to  Utica  as  a 
clerk  in  the  old  and  well  known  dry  goods  house  of  James  Button.  Here  he  spent  three 
years  acquiring  valuable  knowledge  in  that  particular  line  of  trade,  and  at  the  end  of 

H 


S8  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

that  time  entered  the  estabUshment  of  R.  V.  Yates,  manufacturer  and  jobber  of  clothing, 
a  business  in  which  he  was  to  find  his  future  occupation  and  attain  remarltable  success. 
Two  years  later,  in  1855,  Mr.  Wood  began  business  on  his  own  account  by  the  purchase 
of  his  emplo3'er's  establishment.  Into  the  conduct  of  the  concern  he  immediately  put 
new  vigor  and  inaugurated  advanced  methods  of  business,  which  rendered  it  more  pop- 
ular and  consequently  more  profitable  than  it  had  previously  been.  For  twenty  years 
Mr.  Wood  conducted  the  establishment,  constantly  increasing  its  output  and  the  repu- 
tation of  its  goods,  and  winning  the  good  will  and  esteem  of  all  with  whom  he  came  in 
contact,  from  his  humblest  employee  to  his  largest  customer.  In  1874  preparations  were 
made  to  receive  his  son,  Charles  H.  Wood,  as  a  partner  in  this  business.  In  August  of 
that  year,  however,  his  son  died  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-two  years.  The  death  of 
his  son  and  only  child  alienated  his  taste  from  further  mercantile  pursuits.  In  1875  Mr. 
Wood  sold  his  business  to  Rockwell  &  White  at  a  time  when  his  annual  sales  had  reached 
about  $400,000,  and  retired  wholly  from  active  pursuits  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the 
respect  of  the  community. 

Such  is  a  brief  record  of  the  active  life  of  one  of  the  foremost  business  men  of  Utica. 
Naturally  of  a  retiring  and  reserved  temperament  Mr.  Wood  has  found  his  greatest 
pleasure  in  his  home  and  among  his  intimate  friends,  and  in  the  natural  satisfaction  that 
follows  devotion  to  business  wherein  he  found  unusual  material  success,  while  at  the 
same  time  these  characteristics  and  the  habits  thus  formed  drew  hirr.  away  from  public 
life  and  prevented  his  acceptance  of  public  station  which  he  might  have  had  and  which 
he  would  have  honored.  In  politics  he  is  a  Republican,  but  never  sought  preferment  in 
that  field  ;  he  haSj  however,  been  called  to  other  positions  of  trust  of  a  more  private 
character.  He  acted  as  trustee  of  the  Faxton  Hospital  for  several  years  and  down  to 
two  years  ago ;  has  been  prominently  connected  with  the  administration  of  the  alFairs 
of  the  Forest  Hill  Cemetery  as  one  of  its  Board  of  Trustees  and  its  vice-president  for 
the  last  three  years.  In  1888  Mr.  Wood  assumed  active  control  of  the  finances  of  the 
Cemetery  Association  and  has  conducted  them  on  the  same  successful  basis  that  has 
characterized  his  private  concerns.  At  that  time  he  found  the  association  laboring  un- 
der a  floating  indebtedness  of  $20,000  and  a  bonded  indebtedness  of  $7,000.  In  thirty 
days  the  entire  floating  indebtedness  was  extinguished  by  subscriptions  secured  by  his 
personal  solicitation,  and  before  the  close  of  the  following  year  the  revenues  of  the  asso- 
ciation had  been  so  well  managed  that  the  bonded  indebtedness  was  paid  and  it  became 
iree  from  debt.  Not  content  with  this  achievement  he  continued  with  untiring  energy 
to  create  a  surplus  fund,  which  now  amounts  to  $7,000.  Another  monument  to  the  dis- 
interested and  restless  activity  of  Mr.  Wood's  character  is  found  in  the  improvement  of 
Highland  avenue  leading  from  G-enesee  street  to  the  Forest  Hill  Cemetery.  This 
avenue  was  formerly  almost  impassably  in  the  rainy  seasons.  He  solicited  funds  by 
means  of  which  the  entire  roadway  was  regraded  and  macadamized,  and  it  now  offers  a 
smooth,  handsome  drive  at  all  times.  He  is  also  a  director  of  the  Utica  Water  Works 
■Company,  and  in  that  capacity  has  recently  introduced  an  improvement  which  is  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  consumers  of  the  water.  This  is  what  is  styled  an  aerating  foun- 
tain and  was  devised  by  Mr.  Wood,  who  had  noticed  the  improved  quality  of  artesian 
-well  water  in  Florida  by  its  fall  of  several  feet  in  the  open  air.     It  consists  of  a  number 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  59 

of  pipes  laid  in  the  bottom  of  the  reservoir  from  which  a  large  number  of  smaller  pipes 
extend  several  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  water  coming  into  the  reser- 
voir is  forced  through  these  fountain  pipes  in  small  columns  forty  feet  into  the  air  and 
falls  back  in  spray,  thus  thoroughly  oxygenizing  it.  This  is  believed  to  be  the  only 
arrangement  of  the  kind  in  this  country,  and  is  considered  a,  valuable  hygienic  im- 
provement. 

Mr.  Wood  was  married  in  the  year  1850  to  Susan  Homer,  who  died  on  the  3d  day 
of  May,  1891. 

SEYMOUR,  GEORGE,  M.D.,  was  born  in  De  Ruyter,  Madison  County,  N.  Y.,  on 
the  5th  of  October,  1839,  during  the  temporary  residence  of  his  parents  at  that 
place.  The  ancestors  of  Dr.  Seymour  on  his  father's  side  were  from  Normandy  and 
settled  in  New  England.  His  grandfather  was  Silas  Seymour,  who  was  born  in  the 
State  of  Connectieut  and  died  in  West  Winfield,  N.  Y.;  he  was  a  farmer  by  occupation. 
His  grandmother  was  Hannah  (Tompkins)  Seymour,  also  a  native  of  Connecticut.  She 
was  a  woman  of  strong  character  and  useful  life. 

The  father  of  Dr.  Seymour,  David  Tompkins  Seymour,  was  the  fourth  child  of  Silas 
and  Hannah  (Tompkins)  Seymour  and  was  born  in  West  Winfield,  N.  Y.,  on  March  11, 
1813.  Just  before  the  birth  of  George  the  family  removed  to  De  Ruyter  and  remained 
there  about  two  years,  during  which  the  son  was  born,  as  above  stated.  David  T.  Sey- 
mour married  Hannah  Dodge,  daughter  of  Amasa  Dodge,  of  West  Winfield,  on  the  15th 
of  November,  1836.  She  is  still  living  at  Pulaski,  Oswego  County,  N.  Y.  The  family 
returned  to  West  Winfield  from  De  Ruyter  and  remained  there  seven  years,  when 
they  removed  to  Oswego  County,  where  Mr.  Seymour  died  October  5,  1888.  He  was 
a  farmer,  a  carpenter  and  joiner,  and  an  excellent  mechanic.  He  followed  the  latter 
occupation  for  many  years  and  was  a  leader  in  the  business  in  the  section  where  he 
lived.  George  Seymour  attended  the  district  school  of  his  neighborhood  until  he  was 
fifteen  years  old.  He  was  born  with  a  natural  desire  for  the  acquirement  of  knowledge, 
and  so  assiduously  did  he  exercise  that  desire  that  at  the  age  of  seventeen  years  he  was 
competent  to  teach.  He  accordingly  spent  five  years  in  alternate  attendance  at  the 
academies  in  Pulaski  and  Mexico,  in  the  same  county,  and  in  teaching.  He  closed  his 
academic  studies  at  Mexico  in  1859,  when  he  was  twenty  years  old.  After  about  a  year 
of  ill  health  he  began  the  study  of  medicine  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  F.  S.  Low,  of  Pu- 
laski, but  taught  every  month  of  one  of  the  years  of  his  study  (1863-64)  in  the  State  of 
Ohio,  at  the  same  time  pursuing  his  studies  evenings  and  during  his  leisure  hours.  In  1862 
he  began  attending  lectures  at  the  Medical  College  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New 
York,  and  followed  them  until  his  graduation  from  that  institution  in  March,  1865,  fully 
imbued  with  a  love  for  his  profession  and  a  determination  to  advance  in  its  ranks  as  far 
as  his  natural  and  acquired  powers  would  permit.  The  war  of  the  Rebellion  was  then 
nearing  its  close  and,  hke  many  other  young  physicians.  Dr.  Seymour  turned  his  atten- 
tion at  once  toward  the  battlefields,  where  none  ever  waited  for  practice.  (He  went 
out  as  acting  assistant  surgeon  and  was  assigned  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  ;  but,  as 
is  well  known,  the  war  ended  soon  after  he  reached  the  scene  of  his  expected  duties 
and  he  returned  to  Pulaski  after  three  months  of  service.     There  he  began  practice  at 


6o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

first  with  Dr.  Low  and  afterward  alone  for  the  remainder  of  four  years.  At  the  end 
of  that  period  he  succeeded  Dr.  J.  N.  Lyman,  at  Mannsville,  Jefiferson  County,  and 
practiced  there  six  years.  He  then  went  to  New  York  city  and  spent  one  and  a  half 
years,  during  which  he  took  a  post-graduate  course  in  the  institution  from  which  he  had 
graduated.  In  February,  1877,  Dr.  Seymour  came  to  Utica  and  has  since  that  time  been 
in  constant  practice  of  his  profession.  In  the  city  of  Utica  his  success  has  been  pro- 
nounced and  steadily  increasing,  and  he  now  enjoys  a  practice  which  commands  his  en- 
tire time  and  energies.  This  success  must,  in  his  case,  be  largely  attributed  to  persistent 
hard  work  which  he  has  for  twenty-seven  years  given  to  his  profession,  combined  with 
an  unusual  degree  of  self-reliance  and  natural  qualifications  for  the  treatment  of  the 
sick.  To  enlightened  judgment  he  adds  watchfulness  and  care,  kindness  of  demeanor,  and 
a  spirit  of  sympathy  which  wins  the  confidence  of  his  employers  and  fixes  his  hold  upon 
them  as  their  family  friend  and  adviser.  In  the  ordinary  walks  of  Hfe  and  outside  of 
his  profession  Dr.  Seymour  has  gained  the  unqualified  respect  and  esteem  of  his  fellow 
citizens. 

Dr.  Seymour  has  been  honored  by  his  professional  brethren  in  various  ways  which 
indicate  their  appreciation  of  his  attainments.  He  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  State 
Medical  Society  in  1881  and  made  a  permanent  member  in  1884  ;  was  made  a  member 
of  the  Oneida  County  Medical  Society  in  1877 ;  was  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the 
Utica  Medical  Library  Association  and  has  always  been  an  active  member ;  served  two 
years  soon  after  his  arrival  in  Utica  in  the  Maternity  Department  of  St.  Elizabeth's 
Hospital ;  was  for  five  years  regular  visiting  physican  in  the  Faxton  Hospital,  and  re- 
signed in  1890  on  account  of  his  private  practice ;  has  been  for  twelve  years  one  of  the 
physicans  of  St.  Luke's  Hospital,  sustaining  an  active  relation  as  visiting  and  consulting 
physician  and  lecturer  on  obstetrics  to  the  school  for  nurses  connected  therewith ;  has 
contributed  largely  to  the  literature  of  his  profession  in  valuable  papers  to  the  State  and 
oouiity  societies  and  to  medical  publications.  At  the  alumni  dinner  of  the  University 
of  the  city  of  New  York,  held  in  1891,  he  was  called  upon  to  respond  to  the  toast 
"  The  Alumni,"  when  he  made  a  capital  address  that  was  warmly  received  by  all  who 
heard  it.  Dr.  Seymour  has  no  specialty  in  his  profession,  but  has  given  a  large  share  of  his 
time  and  attention  to  gynecology,  in  which  branch  he  has  achieved  flattering  success. 

Dr.  Seymour  was  first  married  on  the  21st  of  June,  1866,  to  Lydia  Winegar,  of  Cent- 
ral Square,  Oswego  County,  and  they  had  one  daughter,  Anna.  His  wife  died  Janu- 
ary 11,  1870.  He  subsequently  married  (second)  Mrs.  Sarah  B.  Kinney,  daughter  of 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  B.  Shepherd,  of  Mannsville,  Jefferson  County,  N.  Y. 


BUTLER,  JOHN  MILTON,  was  born  in  Sauquoit,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the 
9th  of  July,  1827.  John  Milton's  father  is  Chauncey  S.  Butler,  who  was  also 
born  in  Sauquoit  and  has  passed  his  long  life  as  a  farmer  and  a  civil  engineer.  He  is  a 
man  of  excellent  character  and  m  early  days  was  prominent  in  military  aff'airs,  being  a 
■colonel  of  a  regiment  of  horse  which  had  a  high  reputation.  He  still  lives  at  his  native 
place  at  the  age  of  eighty-nine  years.  His  wife,  the  mother  of  John  Milton,  was 
3etsey  Mosher,  of  Willowvale,  and  is  deceased. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  6i 

John  M.  Butler  had  the  advantages  of  a  collegiate  education,  and  after  spending  his 
youth  in  the  district  schools  entered  Hamilton  College  in  1844  and  graduated  with  credit 
in  the  class  of  '48.  His  first  business  experience  was  as  a  partner  of  S.  A.  Millard,  at 
Clayville,  N.  T.,  in  the  manufacture  of  farmers'  tools.  This  connection  began  in  1850 
and  continued  only  two  years,  when  the  precarious  condition  of  Mr.  Butler's  health 
compelled  him  to  abandon  the  undertaking  and  seek  restoration  in  travel,  and  he  accord- 
ingly passed  the  following  year  in  the  South.  Eeturning  with  restored  health  he  was 
solicited  to  come  to  Utica  as  book-keeper  in  the  Oneida  County  Bank,  which  he  did  in 
1853.  In  the  following  year  he  was  made  teller  and  in  the  succeeding  year  cashier, 
which  position  he  filled  for  thirty-two  years  until  1887,  when  he  was  elected  president 
of  the  institution  and  still  holds  that  of&ce.  The  year  1853,  the  date  of  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Oneida  County  Bank,  was  not  a  very  auspicious  time  for  the  launching  of  a 
financial  institution,  for  three  years  later  saw  a  panic  such  as  has  not  since  been  expe- 
rienced, and  many  banks  which  were  accounted  strong  went  down  in  the  crisis.  But 
under  the  prudent  management  of  Mr.  Butler  and  his  associates  this  institution  weath- 
ered the  storm  safely,  and  most  of  the  detail  and  a  large  share  of  the  general  manage- 
ment of  the  bank  have  since  that  time  fallen  directly  upon  Mr.  Butler's  shoulders.  The 
dissension  that  early  arose  among  the  directors  soon  disappeared  and  Mr.  Butler  applied 
a  firm,  conservative  hand  to  the  conduct  of  the  institution,  which  has  enabled  it  since 
the  beginning  of  his  administration  to  accumulate  a  surplus  of  $250,000  on  a  capital 
of  }!125,000,  and  has  always  made  larger  dividends  than  most  banks. 

The  Oneida  County  Bank  did  not  pass  into  the  national  system  with  the  many  others 
that  did  adopt  that  course,  chiefly  because  it  had  been  uniformly  successful  as  it  was, 
leading  a  number  of  the  directors  to  favor  its  remaining  a  State  bank,  although  Mr.  But- 
ler favored  the  change.  Few  financial  institutions  in  the  interior  of  the  State  have  a 
better  standing  at  the  present  time  than  this  one. 

In  politics  Mr.  Butler  is  a  Republican,  but  he  has  always  persistently  declined  any 
active  labor  in  that  field  and  refused  all  offers  of  official  position;  it  has  been  his  policy 
and  belief  that  a  man  in  his  position  should  give  his  whole  time  and  energies  to  the  bank 
of  which  he  is  manager  and  carefully  watch  over  its  interests.  Mr.  Butler's  life  is  an 
excellent  example  of  faithfulness  to  his  duty,  and  he  has  met  with  a  degree  of  success 
that  gives  himself  and  his  friends  the  right  to  look  upon  his  record  with  complacent  sat- 
isfaction.    Mr.  Butler  has  never  married. 


PIXLEY,  HENRY  DAVID,  was  born  at  Kirkland,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  Septem- 
ber 5,  1831.  His  ancestors  came  from  England  in  1661,  and  an  old  map  of  Had- 
ley,  Mass.,'  bears  the  name  of  William  Pixley.  Two  of  the  family,  David  Pixley,  a 
colonel,  and  Benjamin,  a  private,  were  in  the  Revolutionary  army.  Noah  Pixley,  one 
of  the  family  who  settled  in  Southampton,  Mass.,  was  scalped  by  the  Indians  in  1748. 
Mr.  Pixley's  grandfather  was  David  Pixley,  who  left  Stratford,  now  Bridgeport,  Conn., 
where  his  father  owned  a  mill,  and  came  to  Oneida  County,  settling  on  a  farm  in  Kirk- 
land in  1798.  He  was  a  man  of  broad  views  and  enterprising  and  bold  in  business 
operations.     He  built  at  Kirkland  the  first  stage-house  west  of  Bagg's  Hotel  in  about 


62  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

1805-06,  and  in  1811  organized  the  Manchester  Manufacturing  Company  for  making 
cotton  goods,  the  mill  being  established  on  his  farm.  He  died  at  Kirkland  in  May,  1840. 
His  sons  were  William,  David,  Isaac,  and  Charles  Pixley.  David,  the  father  of  Henry  D., 
inherited  the  stage-house,  which  he  continued  to  keep  until  its  day  of  usefulness  was 
passed  with  the  building  of  the  railroad.  He  also  acquired  the  factory  property  and 
acted  as  its  president  and  manager,  and  carried  on  a  mercantile  business  at  the  same 
time.     He  died  at  Kirkland,  July  5,  1885. 

Henry  David  Pixley  was  educated  at  the  Chnton  Liberal  Institute  and  was  in  classes 
with  Leland  Stanford.  Leaving  the  school  in  1850  he  began  work  as  clerk  in  his  father's 
store  and  cotton  factory.  His  father  gave  him  a  one-half  interest  in  the  mercantile 
business  on  his  twenty-first  birthday  in  1852,  under  the  firm  name  of  D.  Pixley  &  Son, 
which  was  dissolved  in  1858.  From  that  time  until  1860  he  lived  on  the  homestead. 
In  the  year  last  named  he  went  to  New  York  city  and  was  occupied  two  and  a  half  years 
in  a  jobbing  house,  dealing  in  hats,  caps,  and  furnishing  goods,  and  the  same  length  of 
time  with  another  firm  which  dealt  in  cloths  also.  There  he  learned  the  details  of  the 
trade  and  the  excellent  business  methods  which  have  so  well  served  him  since.  In  1864 
he  came  to  Utica  and  traveled  for  the  large  clothing  manufacturing  establishment  of  C.  A. 
Yates  &  Co.  He  had  in  earlier  years  well  fitted  himself  for  this  work  by  more  or  less 
traveling  with  the  cotton  goods  manufactured  at  Kirkland,  and  his  success  was  marked. 
In  1870  he  organized  the  firm  of  Owen,  Pixley  &  Co.,  consisting  of  Philip  Owen,  John 
Owen,  and  himself,  for  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  ready-made  clothing,  succeeding  P.  V. 
Kellogg  &  Co.  on  Franklin  Square.  The  firm  soon  had  the  largest  business  in  that 
line  in  Utica,  and  also  established  branches  in  Western  cities.  One  year  later  they  re- 
moved to  the  Ballou  block,  where  Mr.  Pixley  has  remained  ever  since.  The  firm  of 
Owen,  Pixley  &  Co.  continued  about  thirteen  years,  when  it  was  dissolved,  Mr.  Pixley 
continuing  alone.  He  removed  the  establishment  to  the  other  end  of  the  same  block 
(its  present  location)  in  1884  and  in,  1887  took  his  son  as  partner.  The  career  of  this 
manufacturing  and  jobbing  house  has  been  one  of  uninterrupted  and  gratifying  success, 
very  much  of  which  is  due  to  Mr.  Pixley's  personal  labors  and  business  skill.  Since 
1887  the  firm  name  has  been  H.  D.  Pixley  &  Son,  and  they  have  branches  with  which 
they  are  directly  connected  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.;  Terre  Haute,  Ind.;  Bloomington,  Dan- 
ville, and  Rockford,  111.;  Kansas  City,  Mo.;  Sioux  City  and  Cedar  Rapids,  la.;  Sioux 
Falls,  Dak.;  Janesville  and  Oshkosh,  Wis.;  and  a  New  York  oifice  at  338  Broadway. 
Mr.  Pixley  has  also  given  much  attention  to  other  enterprises  of  importance.  When 
the  cotton  factory  above  mentioned  was  burned  he  purchased  the  site  and  still  retains 
his  interest  in  the  estate  of  his  father,  consisting  of  a  homestead  farm  and  store.  That 
locality  is  underlaid  with  great  quantities  of  valuable  iron  ore,  in  which  he  has  firm 
faith.  In  1872-73  he  organized  a  stock  company  for  the  erection  of  a  blast  furnace,  in 
which  several  very  prominent  men  took  an  interest.  The  details  of  the  working  cf 
this  enterpri.'ie  need  not  be  followed  here,  though  its  success  has  been  sufficient  to  indi- 
cate the  good  judgment  of  its  founder.  Mr.  Pixley  is  not  now  and  has  not  been  for 
several  years  connected  with  the  furnace.  The  past  season  he  organized  a  creamery 
company  for  the  manufacture  of  fine  butter.  The  buildings  are  nearly  complete,  and 
the  capacity  is  1,'200  cows. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  63 

It  is  a  source  of  especial  pride  with  Mr.  Pixley  that  he  is  so  prominently  connected 
with  the  Commercial  Travelers  Mutual  Accident  Association,  which  has  its  headquarters 
in  this  city.  This  association  was  organized  and  incorporated  in  March,  1883.  It  is  an 
offshoot  of  the  Commercial  Travelers  Life  Associations  of  the  United  States.  When 
the  organization  of  the  association  in  question  was  agitated  Mr.  Pixley  was  called  upon 
and  requested  to  accept  its  presidency,  which  he  finally  did.  His  administration  of  the 
responsible  ofSce  has  been  prudent,  sagacious,  and  successful  in  the  broadest  sense.  The 
association  now  has  10,000  members,  and  they  get  insurance  at  less  than  one-half  the 
cost  of  most  other  companies  organized  for  a  like  purpose.  Mr.  Pixley's  valuable  serv- 
ices are  recognized  by  the  members  of  the  association  in  the  fact  that  he  has  not  been 
allowed  to  retire  from  the  office  to  the  present  time.  In  the  business  community  of 
Utica  Mr.  Pixley  occupies  an  honorable  position,  and  in  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of 
the  city  he  takes  a  proper  interest. 


nUNT,  Dr.  jambs  G. — The  ancestry  of  Dr.  James  G-.  Hunt  is  traced  backward 
throusjh  several  generations  to  the  Rev.  Robert  Hunt,  who  was  one  of  four 
brothers  who  emigrated  from  England  to  this  country  about  the  beginning  of  the  seven- 
teenth century,  and  settled  in  the  township  of  New  London,  Cot?n.  Among  his  sons 
was  Timothy  Hunt,  who  afterward  located  in  Tryon  County  (now  Florida,  Montgom- 
ery County),  N.  T.,  and  died  there.  During  the  days  of  the  Revolution  Timothy  Hunt 
and  his  family  were  among  the  sufferers  by  the  Tories  and  Indians,  under  the  leader- 
ship of  William  Butler  and  Joseph  Brant,  a,  Mohawk  sachem.  On  the  morning  of 
November  12,  1778,  after  they  had  accomplished  the  destruction  of  Cherry  Valley  and 
the  surrounding  country,  they  did  not  stop  until  they  had  reached  the  settlement  of 
Chuctenunde  Creek  in  the  town  of  Florida.  His  buildmgs  were  burned  and  most  of 
his  stock  was  killed,  while  the  balance  escaped  to  the  forest.  Timothy  Hunt  and  his 
family  were  saved  by  conceahng  themselves  in  a  ravine  near  by,  closely  filled  with 
elders  willows  and  thick  underbrush.  His  wife  was  Susana  Vermilia,  who  was  of 
French  descent.  Timothy  Hunt  had  a  son  Isaac,  who  was  born  in  Florida,  Montgomery 
County.  He  was  one  of  ten  children,  five  sons  and  five  daughters,  and  married  Polly 
Kinney,  of  Florida,  Montgomery  County,  N.  Y. 

Rev'  Robert  Hunt,  '.id,  was  a  son  of  this  Isaac  and  the  grandfather  of  Dr.  James  G. 
He  was  born  in  Florida,  Montgomery  County,  November  25,  1792,  was  one  of  twelve 
children,  and  married  Margaret  Johnson,  of  Columbia,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.  He 
began  preachhig  in  the  Freewill  Baptist  denomination  as  soon  as  he  reached  manhood, 
first  in  Warren,  Herkimer  County,  and  afterward  at  Columbia,  Schuyler  Lake,  Whit- 
mantown,  and  Southville,  and  in  1852  removed  to  Troy,  Ohio,  where  he  remained  one 
year.  The  next  twelve  years  were  passed  at  China,  Wyoming  County,  N.  Y.,  where 
his  health  failed  and  he  thereafter  made  his  home  at  Hudson,  Mich.  In  1871  he  came 
with  his  son^  Dr.  Isaac  J.  Hunt,  to  Utica,  where  he  died  December?,  1872,  at  the  age  of 
eighty.  The  Rev.  Robert  Hunt  had  ten  children,  five  of  whom  were  sons,  and  all  of 
them  became  physicians.  One  of  these,  Isaac  J.,  the  father  of  James  G.,  was  born  in 
Warren    Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.,  March    27,   1820.      He   married   Mary   IngersoU, 


64  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

daughter  of  John  IngersoU,  a  farmer  and  manufacturer  of  Ilion,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y. 
He  was  a  successful  physician  and  practiced  his  profession  for  nearly  thirty  years  in  the 
city  of  Utioa.  He  was  a  graduate  of  the  Castleton  Medical  College  in  Vermont.  His 
death  occurred  January  25,  1875. 

James  Gr.  Hunt  was  born  in  Litchfield,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.,  on  the  21st  of  June, 
1845.  His  boyhood  experience  was  not  materially  different  from  that  of  a  large  major- 
ity of  American  youths,  though  he  was  fortunate  in  being  able  to  devote  nearly  the 
whole  of  his  early  years  to  study.  Beginning  with  the  district  school  he  continued  on 
until  he  graduated  at  the  Utica  Free  Academy  at  a  comparatively  early  age  and  began 
preparation  in  his  father's  office  for  the  profession  which  was  to  be  his  life  work,  and  he 
maybe  said  to  have  grown  up  surrounded  by  the  atmosphere  of  the  medical  profession. 
After  about  four  years  of  industrious  study  under  the  careful  instruction  of  his  father  he 
entered  the  Medical  Department  of  the  University  of  Michigan,  where  he  took  two 
courses  of  lectures  and  a  course  in  the  laboratory  of  analytical  and  applied  chemistry. 
These  were  followed  by  a  third  course  in  the  Jefferson  Medical  College  in  Philadelphia, 
from  which  he  graduated  on  the  1.3th  of  March,  1871.  Returning  to  Utica  he  entered 
immediately  into  practice  in  association  with  his  father.  This  partnership  continued 
until  1874,  since  which  time  Dr.  Hunt  has  conducted  his  large  practice  alone,  and  he  has 
met  with  an  unusual  degree  of  success.  In  attempting  to  note  the  elements  of  this  success 
it  may,  perhaps,  be  justly  said  that  they  consist  chiefly  in  his  thorough  knowledge  of  his 
profession,  gained  by  persistent  and  judicious  study,  supplemented  by  constant  reading 
of  the  later  developments  that  have  been  recorded  throughout  the  range  of  medical 
literature,  coupled  with  a  temperament  and  manner  which  happily  fit  him  for  his  work. 
His  capacity  for  professional  labor  is  almost  unbounded  and  he  never  spares  his  energies 
in  his  devotion  to  his  duties. 

Dr.  Hunt's  professional  standing,  as  well  as  the  position  he  occupies  in  the  com- 
munity, may  be  judged  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  various  calls  that  have  been  made 
upon  him  to  stations  of  honor  and  responsibility.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Delta  Phi 
Society,  Iota  Chapter,  of  the  University  of  Michigan,  1869,  and  of  the  Jefferson  Medical 
College  Alumni  Association,  1871;  was  made  a  member  of  the  Oneida  County  Medical 
Society  on  October  7,  1872 ;  is  a  member  of  the  Utica  Medical  Library  Association  and 
was  its  president  in  1886;  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Oneida  County  Microscopical 
Society  on  June  19,1881;  is  a  member  of  the  American  Medical  Association,  the  NewYork 
State  Medical  Association,  and  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  American  Public  Health  As- 
sociation on  December  7, 1880  ;  was  appointed  by  Gov.  A.  B.  Cornell  »  member  of  the 
State  Board  of  Health  from  1880  to  1885  ;  is  physician  to  and  one  of  the  incorporators  of 
the  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Children,  organized  February  1,  1881;  is  a  life 
member  and  a  trustee  of  the  Utica  Mechanics  Association ;  was  appointed  surgeon  of 
the  Board  of  United  States  Pension  Examiners  on  March  30, 1889  ;  was  made  a  trustee 
of  the  Utica  Female  Academy  on  February  6,  1888;  and  is  a  director  of  the  Globe 
Woolen- Mills.  Dr.  Hunt  has  also  taken  a  deep  interest  in  fraternal  organizations  and 
is  prominent  as  a  Mason,  having  taken  the  32°,  and  is  an  Odd  Fellow.  It  is  much  to  his 
professional  credit  that  he  was  chosen  a  surgeon  for  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and 
Western  Railroad  Company  in  1885,  and  is  acting  in  that  capacity  at  the  present  time ; 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  .    65 

also  the  New  York,  Ontario,  and  Western  Eailroad  and  of  the  New  York,  West  Shore,  and 
Buffalo  Eailroad  from  1886  to  1889.  He  has  also  filled  the  post  of  surgeon  in  the  Fax- 
ton  Hospital  (1880-86),  St.  Luke's  Hospital  (1883  to  the  present  time),  and  St.  Eliza- 
beth's Hospital  (1888  to  the  present  date).  He  holds  the  rank  of  first  lieutenant  in  the 
Forty-fourth  Separate  Company  National  Guard  and  is  assistant  surgeon  in  that  military 
organization,  and  was  president  of  the  Utica  Citizens  Corps  in  1886,  '87,  and  '88.  It  is 
just  to  say  that  in  all  of  these  various  positions  Dr.  Hunt  has  shown  his  fitness  and  capacity 
for  the  capable  discharge  of  their  duties  and  earned  the  respect  and  esteem  of  those  with 
whom  he  had  been  associated. 

In  politics  Dr.  Hunt  is  a  Republican,  and  was  appointed  coroner  by  Gov.  John  A. 
Dix  to  fill  vacancy  in  November,  1873,  and  continued  in  the  office  nearly  ten  years. 
On  the  12th  of  June,  1874,  he  was  appointed  health  officer  of  the  city  and  still  holds  the 
office.  In  1887  he' was  strongly  urged  for  the  mayoralty  of  the  city  and  received  the 
unanimous  nomination  at  the  convention,  but  for  personal  reasons  he  was  compelled  to 
decline  the  honor. 

On  the  28th.  of  January,  1874,  Dr.  Hunt  was  married  to  Ella  R.  Middleton,  daughter 
of  Robert  Middleton,  of  Utica.  They  have  four  children,  Gertrude  May,  Mabel  Lillian, 
Robert  Middleton,  and  Ella  Louisa. 


nATHER,  JOSHUA,  was  born  at  Schuyler,  Herkimer  County,  N.  Y.,  February  21, 
1825,  where  his  boyhood  and  youth  were  passed  on  his  father's  farm  and  at  the 
local  school.  The  Mathers  are  one  of  the  pioneer  families  of  the  Mohawk  Valley  and 
a  branch  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  families  of  the  sturdy  early  settlers  of  New 
England.  Rev.  Richard  Mather,  the  father  of  Dr.  Increase  Mather,  one  of  the  early 
presidents  of  Harvard  College,  came  from  Lewton,  Winwick  Parish,  Toxteth  Park, 
England,  and  settled  at  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1635.  No  brighter  names  stand  in  Massa- 
.  chusetts's  early  history  than  those  of  his  immediate  descendants.  Dr.  Increase  Mather, 
Cotton  Mather,  Dr.  Samuel  Mather,  and  others  of  the  family  who  were  instrumental 
not  only  in  shaping  the  institutions  and  character  of  the  Commonwealth,  but  in  giving 
tone  to  the  liberal  sentiments  that  finally  culminated  in  the  adoption  of  the  principle  of 
self-government. 

Asaph  Mather,  of  the  fifth  generation  of  Rev.  Richard  Mather's  descendants,  born 
at  East  Lyme,  Conn.,  in  1753,  emigrated  first  to  Rockingham,  Vt.,  and  afterward  became 
one  of  the  pioneers  of  the  Mohawk  Valley,  settling  at  a  point  afterward  known  as 
Schuyler  in  Herkimer  County  in  1792.  Joshua,  his  son,  there  grew  up  to  manhood  and 
became  a  most  respected  and  influential  member  of  the  community,  which  for  over  fifty 
consecutive  years  elected  him  its  justice  of  the  peace  and  supervisor.  In  1810  he  mar- 
ried Miss  Cornelia  Willis,  daughter  of  Rev.  Joseph  Willis,  an  earnest  and  influential 
minister  in  the  Methodist  Church.  The  children  of  this  marriage  were  Luoinda,  Wes- 
ley, Asaph  D.,  and  Joshua,  the  youngest.  In  1847  the  latter  came  to  live  in  Utica,  en- 
gaging in  partnership  with  his  older  brother,  Asaph  D.  Mather,  in  a  grocery  business 
at  the  corner  of  Genesee  and  Bleecker  streets.  The  two  brothers  were  possessed  of 
unusual  business  and  financial  tact  and  foresight.     Success  and  wealth  came  to  them 


66  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

rapidly.  During  the  war  of  the  Rebellion  they  were  prominent  among  the  compara- 
tively few  business  men  who  placed  unbounded  faith  in  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the 
Union  cause,  in  its  permanency  and  the  stability  of  its  credit,  subscribing  liberally  to 
the  discredited  securities  which  the  nation  was  obliged  to  issue,  and  unflinchingly  hold- 
ing them  and  buying  more  when  in  the  darkest  hours  of  the  nation's  peril  frightened 
investors,  discouraged  speculators,  and  weak-kneed  patriots  were  throwing  them  over 
at  any  price  they  could  get.  At  the  successful  termination  of  the  war  the  brothers 
found  themselves  rich  men. 

In  1866  the  grocery  business  was  given  up  and  in  the  same  location  they  opened  a 
private  bank  under  the  name  of  A.  D.  Mather  &  Co.  The  firm  soon  became  the  cor- 
respondents of  and  engaged  in  large  financial  enterprises  with  some  of  the  great  bank- 
ing concerns  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  and  were  known  as  one  of  the  most  reli- 
able and  enterprising  private  banking  houses  in  rural  New  York.  On  the  death  of  A.  D. 
Mather  in  April,  1880,  Joshua  Mather  associated  in  the  banking  business  with  him- 
self Charles  W.  Mather,  a 'nephew  who  had  for  several  years  previous  to  that  time 
been  connected  with  the  firm  ;  the  partnership  still  retained  the  old  firm  name  of  A.  D. 
Mather  &  Co. 

Among  the  many  local  enterprises  with  which  Mr.  Mather  has  been  connected,  and 
upon  which  he  has  left  the  imprint  of  his  strong  and  energetic  individuality,  is  the 
street  railroad  system  of  Utica.  In  1887,  when  that  system  was  almost  useless  tci  the 
city,  made  up  as  it  was  of  a  few  dilapidated,  slow-moving  horse  cars  traversing  our 
principal  streets  once  each  half  hour,  its  finances  in  a  hopeless  state  of  bankruptcy, 
A.  D.  Mather  &  Co.  obtained  control  of  the  stock  of  the  Utica  Belt  Line  Eailroad  and 
Joshua  Mather  became  its  president.  Under  his  administration  the  old  City  Street 
Railroad  was  leased  and  consolidated,  the  main  track  on  Genesee  street  doubled, 
branches  built  to  the  new  and  growing  parts  of  the  city  and  to  important  suburban 
districts,  an  equipment  furnished  worthy  of  so  large  and  important  a  road,  broken 
down  horses  exchanged  for  electricity  as  a  motive  powter,  and  cars  run  at  frequent  in- 
tervals. The  finances  of  the  company  were  rehabilitated  and  the  road  placed  on  a  pay- 
ing basis.  After  the  road  had  been  made  one  of  the  most  perfect  and  useful  street 
railroad  systems  in  this  country  in  January,  1890,  the  control  of  the  stock  having  been 
sold  to  a  syndicate  of  New  York  capitalists,  Mr.  Mather  resigned  his  position  as  presi- 
dent. Mr.  Mather  has  ever  been  most  loyal  toward  the  city  of  Utica  and  enthusiastic 
and  liberal  in  everything  that  concerned  its  growth  and  progress,  and  has  given  of  his 
money,  his  time,  and  his  energies  to  the  building  up  of  its  industries  and  its  charities 
and  to  the  improvement  of  its  physical  condition.  He  pays  a  larger  amount  of  city 
taxes  than  any  other  citizen ;  while  others  were  seeking  more  attractive  fields  in  the 
West  and  elsewhere  for  rapid  increase  of  their  capital  his  unlimited  faith  in  the  growth 
and  future  of  Utica  and  his  loyalty  to  her  interests  have  led  him  to  invest  his  surplus 
from  time  to  time  in  Utica  real  estate,  until  he  is  now  the  large'st  holder  of  real  estate 
in  the  city. 

In  November,  1890,  the  private  banking  firm  of  A.  D.  Mather  &  Co.  was  merged 
into  A.  D.  Mather  &  Co.'s  Bank,  a  corporate  concern  under  the  banking  laws  of  the 
State  of  New  York  with  a  capital  stock  of  ^200, 000,  of  which  Joshua  Mather  is  pres- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  67 

ident  and  Charles  W.  Mather  vice-president.  The  banking  house  of  this  concern  is 
still  located  at  the  corner  of  Genesee  and  Bleecker  streets,  where  the  two  brothers 
Mather  began  their  grocery  business  in  1847. 


LINDSLEY,  SMITH  M.— The  family  of  which  Smith  M.  Lindsley  is  a  member,  and 
its  ancestors  and  various  branches,  have  always  been  identified  with  the  history  of 
Sullivan  County,  N.  Y.  Mr.  Lindsley's  grandfather,  Bliud  Lindsley,  was  one  of  the 
pioneer  settlers  of  that  region  and  was  a  man  of  marked  characteristics.  The  local  his- 
tories contain  detailed  accounts  of  his  sturdy  and  honorable  character  and  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  he  impressed  his  views  and  the  example  of  his  staunch  integrity  and 
upright  life  upon  the  people  who  settled  in  that  county.  It  is  also  a  branch  of  this  fam- 
ily from  which  sprang  the  several  noted  college  presidents  and  professors  who  have 
been  so  conspicuous  in  the  educational  history  of  the  State  of  Tennesee.  His  father  is 
Rufus  B.  Lindsley,  of  Monticello,  N.  Y.,  where  he  still  resides.  He  lives,  as  he  always 
has,  a  modest,  quiet  life  as  a  farmer  and  general  stock  dealer,  enjoying  the  respect  of 
his  townsmen.  His  mother  was  the  daughter  of  Smith  Weed,  who  was  also  an  early 
and  prominent  resident  of  Sullivan  County,  and  a  member  of  the  Weed  family  of  which 
the  famous  Smith  M.  Weed,  of  Clinton  County,  is  a  member. 

Smith  M.  Lindsley  was  born  in  Monticello,  N,  Y.,  in  1847.  He  received  an  excellent 
English  and  classical  education  at  the  then  noted  academy  of  his  native  place,  and  grad- 
uated therefrom  as  valedictorian  of  his  class.  He  afterward  continued  his  studies  at 
the  Wyoming  Seminary  and  College  in  Pennsylvania,  and  was  a  member  of  the  faculty 
of  that  institution  for  one  year.  He  had  long  before  determined  upon  the  profession  of 
law  as  his  life  work,  and  previous  to  his  leaving  the  college  had  begun  its  study.  From 
Wyoming  he  went  to  Wilkesbarre  in  the  same  State,  where  he  continued  the  study  of 
the  law  through  one  year  and  down  to  1869,  when  he  removed  to  Utica  and  entered 
the  office  of  ex-Senator  Francis  Kernan.  There  he  finished  his  legal  studies  and  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1870.  He  immediately  entered  upon  practice  in  this  city,  where 
his  natural  and  acquired  qualifications  for  his  profession  soon  gave  him  a  large  measure 
of  success.  He  had,  too,  at  the  same  time  so  early  gained  the  confidence  of  the  citizens 
of  Utica  in  both  his  ability  and  his  integrity  that  in  1872  he  was  elected  to  the  office 
of  city  attorney  by  the  Democrats,  with  which  party  he  has  always  been  identified.  In 
that  campaign  every  other  candidate  on  the  Democratic  ticket,  with  one  exception,  was 
defeated.  His  service  in  that  office  was  so  entirely  satisfactory  to  the  community  that 
he  was  re-elected  by  a  largely  increased  majority.  Meanwhile  his  private  practice  had 
greatly  advanced  and  it  now  made  such  demands  upon  his  time  and  energies  that  he 
declined  a  third  nomination.  He  had  now  won  the  broad  confidence  of  many  of  the 
leading  business  men  of  the  city  and  his  business  became  correspondingly  lucrative  and 
extensive,  while  at  the  same  time  his  rapidly  extending  reputation  as  a  brilliant  and 
successful  court  lawyer  and  pleader  brought  him  into  connection  with  many  prominent 
cases  where  large  interests  and  intricate  legal  questions  were  involved. 

In  1884  Mr.  Lindsley  was  unanimously  nominated  by  a  joint  convention  of  citizens 
representing  both  political  parties  for  the  office  of  mayor  of  Utica;  but  long  before  this 


68  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

he  had  become  fixed  in  his  determination  to  give  all  his  energies  and  time  to  the  prac- 
tice of  his  chosen  profession,  and  with  that  end  in  view  to  accept  no  offer  of  political 
preferment  however  flattering  it  might  be ;  he  therefore  declined  this  high  and  excep- 
tional honor.  He  has  since  that  time  had  many  flattering  inducements  to  enter  the 
political  field  as  a  candidate  for  important  positions,  but  he  has  uniformly  and  persist- 
ently refused.  In  his  later  practice  Mr.  Lindsley  has  achieved  conspicuous  success  and 
counts  a  large  number  of  the  best  and  most  substantial  business  men  of  Utica  and  its 
vicinity  among  his  clients.  He  has  also  a  large  consulting  clientage ;  but  it  is  as  a  law- 
yer at  trials  and  in  the  argument  of  appeals  that  he  has  attained  his  greatest  promi- 
nence. His  success  is  reflected  in  a  continually  increasing  business.  He  is  the  stand- 
ing counsel  and  attorney  of  a  number  of  insurance  companies  and  has  had  especial 
success  in  that  branch  of  legal  effort.  It  is  not  out  of  place  to  mention  his  successful 
defence  of  the  Utica  Observer,  which  he  conducted  in  the  noted  Van  Auken  libel  case 
in  1891,  which  attracted  attention  throughout  the  country,  and  for  which  he  was  highly 
complimented  by  the  legal  profession,  the  press,  and  others  throughout  the  State.  Mr. 
Lindsley  is  continually  retained  by  other  attorneys  as  advisory  counsel  and  for  the  trial 
of  cases  and  the  argument  of  appeals ;  and  he  has  been  selected  by  the  attorney-general 
to  act  for  the  State  in  important  affairs. 

It  has  been  said  of  Mr.  Lindsley  by  one  who  has  known  him  intimately  from  the 
beginning  of  his  career  that  "  he  has  acquired  his  present  conspicuous  position  at  the 
bar  by  being  an  almost  tireless  worker.  He  sharpened  his  natural  abilities  by  fearless 
contests  with  the  ablest  among  those  older  in  the  profession  when  he  began.  When  he 
enters  court  with  a  case  not  one  atom  or  item  of  preparation  is  wanting.  Every  fact  is 
marshaled  and  weighed,  and  in  his  mind  is  placed  where  it  belongs  and  where  it  will  be 
most  effective.''  In  another  and  a  different  direction  it  is  flattering  to  Mr.  Lind- 
sley's  capacity  for  practical  business  and  financial  undertakings  that  he  was  in  1885 
■chosen  president  of  the  First  National  Bank  of  Ohittenango,  an  office  which  he  still  suc- 
cessfully administers. 

Mr.  Lindsley  is  a  Mason,  an  Odd  Fellow,  and  an  active  and  prominent  member  of 
other  well  known  organizations  of  a  social  and  benevolent  character.  In  1887  and  the 
two  years  next  succeeding  he  served  as  supreme  regent  or  chief  executive  officer  of  the 
Eoyal  Arcanum,  one  of  the  principal  fraternal  benefit  or  insurance  societies  of  the 
country.  He  managed  its  business  of  collecting  and  disbursing  several  millions  of  dol- 
lars, and  in  the  line  of  his  profession  successfully  solved  many  intricate  legal  problems 
involved  in  the  adjustment  and  payment  of  death  claims  and  losses.  He  infused  vigor 
into  every  department  of  the  organization,  so  that  its  later  growth  has  been  almost  phe- 
nomenal, numbering  now  about  130,000  members.  As  the  official  head  of  this  organiz- 
ation he  was  called  to  many  parts  of  the  country,  and  thereby  he  acquired  a  very  wide 
and  extended  acquaintance  in  many  States.  Socially  and  in  the  every-day  affairs  of  life 
Mr.  Lindsley  is  a  popular  and  respected  gentleman,  admired  for  his  manly  independence 
and  adherence  to  the  principles  of  living  which  he  believes  right,  and  holding  the  warm 
regard  of  many  friends  for  his  excellent  qualities. 

In  1873  Mr.  Lindsley  married  Dorlissa,  ■  daughter  of  John  W.  Johnston,  a,  well 
known  and  prominent  lawyer  of  Sullivan  County.     They  have  one  daughter. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  eg 

^AYRB,  THEODORE  SHELDON,  was  born  in  the  oity  of  Utioa,  at  the  same  place 
-J  where  he  now  hves,  on  the  25th  of  April,  1837.  His  father  was  James  Sayre,  a 
native  of  Milton,  Saratoga  County,  N.  Y.,  born  in  1799,  and  came  to  Utica  in  1817. 
James  Sayre  was  a  man  of  upright  character,  good  business  qualifications,  and  in  early 
years  was  quite  conspicuous  among  the  public  spirited  citizens  of  the  place.  He  was 
at  first  employed  in  the  store  of  John  H.  Handy,  afterward  became  a  partner,  and  on 
the  death  of  Mr.  Handy  assumed  the  whole  business.  Down  to  the  year  1852  he  had 
several  partners,  and  also  in  1837  joined  in  the  firm  of  Townsend,  Sayre  &  Clark  for 
carrying  on  trade  in  New  York  oity ;  this  continued  until  1852.  Prom  that  time  on- 
ward to  his  retirement  he  conducted  his  business  with  his  sons,  Charles  and  Theodore. 
He  took  a  deep  interest  in  public  affairs,  but  sought  no  office  and  held  none  but  that 
of  alderman  in  1834.  He  was  director  in  the  United  States  Branch  Bank  and  for  a 
short  time  in  the  Ontario  Branch  and  for  many  years  in  the  Oneida  National,  of  which 
he  was  president  at  his  decease.  He  was  director  of  the  Black  River  Railroad  from 
its  re-organization  and  for  many  years  was  a  trustee  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church. 
He  was  also  for  a  time  the  prudent  and  judicious  head  of  the  Cemetery  Association. 

In  1824  Mr.  Sayre  was  married  to  Miss  Amelia  Van  Ranst,  of  New  York  city  and 
they  had  five  children,  three  sons  and  two  daughters,  viz.:  Charles,  Anna  (Mrs.  Byxbe) 
James,  Caroline,-  and  Theodore.  Mr.  Sayre  died  April  22,  1877.  Mrs.  Sayre  is  still  living. 
Theodore  S.  Sayre  enjoyed  only  ordinary  advantages  for  securing  an  education  ;  he 
attended  the  city  schools  and  boarding  school  at  Westmoreland  until  he  was  seventeen 
years  old,  when  he  entered  his  father's  store  as  a  clerk.  Three  years  later  in  1857  he 
was  taken  as  a  partner  in  the  business  and  occupied  that  station  until  the  death  of  his 
father;  the  firm  name  was  James  Sayre  &  Son.  The  location  was  at  119-121  Genesee 
street,  and  after  the  death  of  James  Sayre  the  business  was  carried  on  for  two  years  by 
the  two  brothers,  Theodore  and  Charles.  In  1879  Theodore  retired  and  Charles  con- 
tinued until  the  great  fire  on  that  square  in  1884,  which  burned  him  out  and  he  did 
not  resume.  Although  Mr.  Sayre's  business  life  of  twenty  years  in  Utica  was  alike 
honorable  and  successful  it  is  in  public  life  that  he  has  been  most  prominently  before 
the  community.  He  is  a  consistent  Republican  in  politics,  and  as  early  as  1863,  when 
he  was  twenty-six  years  old,  was  elected  alderman  of  the  Third  ward  and  held  the 
office  eight  years.  In  1874  he  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city  and  dechned  a  renomina- 
tion,  but  his  friends  insisted  upon  his  candidacy,  and  without  his  knowledge  put  him  in 
the  field  and  he  was  defeated.  While  serving  as  mayor  in  1874  the  Board  of  Fire  and 
Police  Commissioners  was  first  established,  an  important  act  for  which  Mayor  Sayre 
was  largely  responsible.  In  the  fall  of  the  same  year  (1875)  he  was  elected  State  sen- 
ator for  this  district  and  had  the  satisfaction  of  carrying  the  city  by  a  considerable  ma- 
jority which  he  had  lost  in  the  previous  local  election.  In  the  Senate  Mr.  Sayre  proved 
himself  a  prudent,  conservative,  and  useful  legislator,  if  not  a  brilliant  speaker;  he 
served  on  the  Cotnmittee  on  Internal  Affairs,  was  chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Roads 
and  Bridges,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Committee  on  Salt.  The  interest  of  the  local 
bills  which  came  before  the  Senate  was  carefully  and  efficiently  supported  by  him. 
Mr,  Sayre  was  appointed  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  Board  of  Police  and  Fire  Commissioners 
and  re-appointed  for  the  full  term  in  1886 ;  he  has  also  been  one  of  the  Civil  Service 


70  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Commissioners.  He  is  a  director  in  the  City  Water  Works  Company  and  held  a  similar 
station  in  the  Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad  Company  until  the  lease  of  the  road  to  the 
Rome,  Watertown,  and  Ogdensburg  Railroad  Company.  He  is  one  of  the  advisory  com- 
mittee of  the  Orphan  Asylum  and  has  faithfully  watched  over  its  affairs.  He  was  formerly 
identified  with  the  First  Presbyterian  Church,  but  now  with  the  Memorial  Presbyte- 
rian. To  this  latter  church  Mr.  Sayre  has  been  a  most  liberal  and  judicious  benefactor. 
For  many  years  there  was  a  mission  and  Sabbath  school  in  West  Utica  dating  back  to 
about  1848.  It  finally  outgrew  its  surroundings  and  a  building  was  erected  on  Court 
street,  which  was  dedicated  December  15,  1867,  and  the  Presbyterian  Church  of  West 
Utica  was  organized  February  10,  186S.  The  church  building  sufllced  for  its  purpose 
until  about  the  year  1880,  when  a  more  commodious  edifice  became  a  necessity.  A  lot 
was  secured  on  the  corner  of  Court  street  and  Sunset  avenue,  and  Mr.  Sayre  erected 
and  presented  to  the  society  the  beautiful  and  substantial  edifice  now  standing  on  that 
site  at  a  cost  of  $30,000.  It  was  dedicated  in  1884  on  the  anniversary  of  his  father's 
birth,  and  in  commemoration  of  Mr.  Sayre  the  name  of  the  church  was  changed  to  the 
Memorial  Presbyterian  Church  of  Utica.  This  is  one  of  the  notable  individual  benefac- 
tions of  the  city  and  endears  Mr.  Sayre  to  a  large  circle  of  friends. 

Mr.  Sayre  is  in  his  nature  essentially  modest  and  retiring,  but  among  his  friends  is 
genial  and  courteous  always.  He  has  never  married  and  lives  at  the  homestead  with 
his  sister. 


LAIRD,'  FRANK  FOSTER,  A.M.,  M.D.— On  the  direct  road  from  Rome  to  Trenton 
Falls  and  at  the  dividing  line  between  the  towns  of  Trenton  and  Floyd,  Oneida 
County,  N.  Y.,  stands  the  "  old  Townsend  homestead,"  the  residence  of  William  0.  and 
Sarah  A.  Laird.  Here  on  April  15,  1856,  was  born  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  the 
youngest  of  three  children.  The  eldest,  Mary,  died  in  infancy  ;  the  brother,  William  T. 
is  now  a  prominent  physician  in  Watertown,  N.  Y.  On  the  paternal  side  he  is  a  de- 
scendant of  Samuel  Laird,  for  whom  Lairdsville,  N.  Y.,  was  named,  and  whose  father 
came  from  Scotland  in  the  early  history  of  this  country.  Samuel  Laird  was  a  native 
of  New  Marlboro,  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,  but  moved  to  Lairdsville  in  1788  with  his 
son,  Salmon  Laird,  the  paternal  grandfather  who  was  then  seven  years  of  age.  Sam- 
uel Laird  died  May  21,  1820,  leaving  as  a  legacy  to  his  son  not  only  a  valuable  prop- 
erty, but  also  the  priceless  treasure  of  an  unsullied  name  and  a  noble  life.  William  C, 
father  of  Frank  F.,  became  a  dentist.  He  married  Sarah  A.  Townsend,  of  Floyd, 
N.  Y.,  and  now  at  the  ripe  old  age  of  seventy-four  is  still  actively  engaged  in  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession.  On  the  maternal  side  the  original  ancestors  resided  in  Rainham 
Castle,  County  Norfolk,  England.  The  great-grandfather,  Nathan  Town.send,  came  to 
this  county  from  Hancock,  Mass.,  in  1801,  and  was  one  of  the  original  settlers  of  the 
town  of  Floyd.  The  grandfather,  William  Townsend,  was  for  twenty-four  years  a 
justice  of  the  peace  who  was  renowned  for  his  "  having  peaceably  settled  more  quarrels 
than  he  made." 

Dr.  Laird's  preliminary  and  preparatory  studies  were  pursued  at  Whitestown  Semi- 
nary, where,  having  entered  its  primary  department  in  1868,  he  was  graduated  in  1873. 
During  these  five  years  he  was  under  almost  constant  tuition  in  elocution,  his  instruct- 


En-j  t,jF;;i</'/,,,-,_-  Ijfnlff 


^    y  c>^^:z-^^^Jc::^ 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  71 

ors  being  H.  Sam  Dyer  and  Rev.  John  R.  Lewis,  two  of  nature's  gifted  orators.  A 
prize  in  declamation  and  one  in  oratory  attested  the  high  standing  he  attained  at  that 
institution.  He  entered  the  freshman  class  at  Hamilton  College  in  the  fall  of  1873, 
and  during  his  connection  therewith  received  the  following  honors :  He  was  appointed 
prize  speaker  the  first  year  and  won  the  first  prize  in  essay  writing ;  secured  the  first 
honorable  mention  in  essay  writing  during  the  sophomore  year;  won  the  Hawley 
medal  for  excellence  in  classical  studies  in  the  junior  year;  and  during  his  senior  year 
was  appointed  to  represent  Hamilton  College  at  the  Intercollegiate  Oratorical  Contest 
at  the  Academy  of  Music,  New  York  city,  in  January,  1876,  and  on  that  occasion  won  the 
second  consecutive  victory  for  his  college.  He  was  appointed  prize  debater,  but  declined 
the  honor.  He  was  graduated  from  Hamilton  College  in  June,  1877,  being  the  third  in 
his  class  and  dehvering  the  class-day  oration  in  connection  therewith.  His  high  standing 
gave  him  membership  in  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  Society  of  "  honor  men."  He  received  the 
degree  of  A.M.  in  course  in  1880.  He  pursued  the  study  of  medicine  under  the  super- 
vision of  his  brother.  Dr.  W.  T.  Laird,  of  Watertown,  N,  Y.,  and  was  graduated  from 
the  Hahnemann  Medical  College  of  Philadelphia  in  the  sprmg  of  1880,  taking  the  high- 
est general  average  save  one  (that  of  Prof.  W.  B.  Van  Lennep)  ever  obtained  at  that 
institution,  and  winning  the  position  of  valedictorian  of  his  class.  He  began  practice 
at  Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.,  removing,  however,  in  the  fall  of  1880  to  Augusta,  Me.  The 
climate  proving  too  severe  he  returned  in  the  spring  of  1881  to  New  York  State,  mak- 
ing Utica,  where  he  still  resides,  his  permanent  home,  and  where  he  is  actively  engaged 
in  the  duties  of  general  practice. 

Dr.  Laird  has  held  the  office  of  president  of  the  Oneida  County  Homoeopathic  Medical 
Society.  He  was  elected  first  vice-president  of  the  Homoeopathic  Medical  Society  of 
the  State  of  New  York  in  1889.  He  was  appointed  chairman  of  the  Bureau  of  Materia 
Medica  of  the  State  Society  and  held  that  office  three  years.  He  became  a  member  of 
the  American  Institute  of  Homoeopathy  in  1887.  He  holds  the  office  of  medical  director 
of  the  Commercial  Travelers  Mutual  Accident  Association  of  America.  Dr.  Laird  has 
been  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  medical  literature  of  the  day,  his  articles  published 
in  current  medical  journals  and  in  the  transactions  of  the  State  Society  being  among 
those  embodying  in  an  eminent  degree  highly  practical  suggestions,  the  following  spec- 
ifying the  more  important : 

1.  Contributions  to  the  department  of  materia  medica:  Analytical  Studies  of  Hy- 
irastis-  Lycopus  Virginicus;  Guaiacum  ;  Ammonium  Muriatioum ;  Naphthalin;  and  the 
■'  Physiological  Action  of  Belladonna  in  its  Relations  to  Homoeopathic  Therapeutics." 

2.  Contributions  to  the  department  of  clinical  medicine:  "The  Reflex  Symtoras  of 
Phymosis;"  "Lithoemia:  Its  ^Etiological  and  Pathological  Relations;"  "  The  .^tiol- 
3gy,  Pathology,  and  Treatment  of  Diabetes  Insipidus ;  "  "  The  Therapeutics  of  Spinal 
Irritation ; "  "  Obscure  Reflex  Symptoms  in  Chronic  Diseases." 

Dr.  Laird  possesses  rare  mental  qualities  which  qualify  him  for  attaining  the  highest 
Dositions  in  his  chosen  profession.  His  breadth  of  culture,  quickness  of  perception, 
inusual  powers  of  analytical  study  and  research  have  already,  although  still  at  the  be- 
'inning  of  a  brilliant  professional  career,  secured  for  him  an  advanced  standing  in  the 
nedical  profession  of  Oneida  County.     In  practice  he  is  a  prescriber  of  singular  ability 


72  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

and  precision,  his  analytical  powers  of  mind  enabling  him  in  the  differentiation  of  rem- 
edies to  attain  success  in  many  difl&cult  and  unpromising  cases.  Without  having  de- 
signed to  become  proficient  as  a  specialist  in  one  department  more  than  another  Dr. 
Laird  has  attained  an  acknowledged  reputation  as  a  successful  obstetrician,  and  as  par- 
ticularly skillful  in  the  treatment  of  the  diseases  of  children.  In  the  application  of 
homoeopathic  remedies  he  rejects  as  untenable  Hahnemann's  peculiar  theories  of  im- 
material dosage,  believing  that  while  the  doctrine  of  similars  involves  small  and  even 
infinitesimal  doses  its  curative  efficacy  is  circumscribed  by  the  limit  of  materiality,  and 
should  always  be  applied  in  accordance  with  sound  and  well  recognized  principles  of 
therapeutic  action.  Dr.  Laird,  as  an  earne.«!t  advocate  of  liberty  of  medical  opinion  and 
action,  became  deeply  interested  in  the  great  legislative  contest  waged  during  the  win- 
ter and  spring  of  1890  by  the  allopathic  and  homoeopathic  schools,  the  latter  making  an 
effort  by  means  of  a  bill  for  creating  a  single  State  board  of  medical  examiners  to  ob- 
tain legal  control  of,  and  in  fact  monopolize,  the  civil  right  of  medical  licensure. 

By  acquiring  this  povver  and  control  the  representatives  of  the  allopathic  school 
could,  and  unquestionably  would,  make  use  of  it  as  an  intimidating  force  by  which  it 
could  promote  its  own  growth  and  prosperity,  and  also  be  able  to  exert  powerful  intimi- 
dating influences  which  would  greatly  retard  the  development  of,  and  ultimately  bring 
about  the  disintegration  of,  the  homoeopathic  school.  The  homoeopathic  representa- 
tives on  the  other  hand  introduced  a  bill  for  providing  separate  examining  and  licensing 
boards  for  each  school,  the  construction  being  such  as  to  make  its  executive  functions 
binding  upon  all  schools  alike  ;  that  is,  embodying  provisions  for  permitting  the  repre- 
sentatives of  each  school  the  free  exercise  of  the  civil  right  to  examine  and  license  the 
graduates  from  their  own  medical  colleges.  While  Dr.  Laird  may  not  have  participated 
as  actively  in  this  important  canvass  as  some  of  his  medical  associates  he  exerted  a  very 
powerful  personal  influence  in  behalf  of  the  homoeopathic  bill  as  embodying  sound,  safe, 
and  conservative  principles,  so  constructed  in  the  form  of  law  as  to  promote  the  inter- 
ests of  the  several  schools  equally. 

Dr.  Laird  is  a  fluent  and  forcible  speaker,  ever  ready  in  debate  and  witty  repartee. 
He  was  elected  as  the  orator  on  the  occasion  of  the  Masonic  jubilee  commemorating 
the  freedom  of  the  craft  from  debt,  held  in  the  city  of  Utica  in  April,  1890.  ■  In  1883 
Dr.  Laird  married  Miss  Annie  C.  Taylor,  daughter  of  ex-State  Engineer  the  Hon.  W.  B. 
Taylor,  of  Utica.     He  has  two  children,  a  son  and  a  daughter. 


SWAN,  JOSEPH  ROCKWELL,  was  born  September  10,  1842,  in  Columbus,  0. 
He  is  the  second  son  of  the  late  Joseph  Rockwell  Swan,  for  many  years  the  chief 
justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  the  court  of  final  resort  of  the  State  of  Ohio.  His  mother 
was  Hannah  Ann  Andrews,  of  Rochester,  N.  Y.  He  received  his  education  in  the 
schools  of  Columbus  and  at  Kenyon  College.  Coming  to  Utica  in  1862  he  began  the 
study  of  law  in  the  office  of  Hon.  Charles  H.  Doolittle  and  in  1 863  was  admitted  to  the 
bar.  By  his  ability  and  industry  he  soon  gained  the  confidence  of  Mr.  Doolittle,  who 
in  1864  made  him  a  member  of  his  law  firm.  This  partnership  continued  until  1870, 
when  Judge  Doolittle  was  elected  a  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State.     Mr. 


j^tlaQUcPuiliBliriig  ^^Engravirrrf  C°NY 


©vnStvt^vcj. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  73 


m 


,wan  has  continued  to  practice  law  i„  Utica,  where  he  has  obtained  a  high  standing  .„ 
us  profession,  and  has  the  confidence  and  respect  of  the  community.  No  lawyer  of  his 
■ears  is  more  often  consulted  in  the  organization  and  management  of  large  business 
orporations.  Mr.  Swan  has  carefully  revised  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  bar,  the  county 
■fficers,  and  the  business  men  of  that  State  the  twelfth,  thirteenth,  and  fourteenth  edi- 
ions  of  that  most  useful  book,  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  relating  to  the  Powers  of  Justices 
f  the  Peace  of  the  State  of  Ohio,"  by  his  father,  Judge  Swan.  He  was  one  of  the  orig- 
lal  incorporators  and  the  first  president  of  the  People's  Eailroad  Company  of  Syra- 
use,  in  which  he  still  has  a  large  interest  and  is  its  legal  adviser.  "For  a'number  of 
ears  he  was  one  of  the  most  influential  managers  of  the  New  York  State  Lunatic 
Lsylum  and  is  now  vice-president  of  the  Fort  Schuyler  Club.  In  October,  1890,  Mr. 
iwan  was  influential  in  organizing  the  Utica  Etrald  Publishing  Company,  of  which  he 
ras  elected  and  still  remains  the  president.  His  prominent  characteristics  are  his 
lodesty,  courage,  loyalty  to  his  friends,  and  his  personal  kindness  to  those  in  whom 
e  is  interested. 

Mr.  Swan  married,  April  27,  1 870,  Miss  Emma  Mann,  daughter  of  Hon.  Charles  A. 
lann  and  Emma  Bagg,  of  the  city  of  Utica. 


3ARLINa,  Gen.  CHARLES  W.,  was  born  in  Nev/  Haven,  Conn.  His  family  is 
of  New  England  origin,  having  intermarried  with  the  families  of  Pierpont,  Noyes, 
Ihanncey,  Eli,  Davis,  and  Dana.  His  great-grandfather,  a  graduate  of  Yale,  was  Hon. 
'homas  Darling,  an  eminent  jurist  who  resided  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  who  married 
Lbigail  Noyes,  granddaughter  of  Rev.  James  Pierpont,  of  New  Haven.  The  paternal 
randfather  of  Gen.  Charles  W.  was  Dr.  Samuel  Darling,  of  the  same  city,  a  graduate 
f  Yale  who  married  Clarinda,  daughter  of  Rev.  Richard  Ely,  of  Saybrook,  Conn.  His 
oungest  son,  the  father  of  General  Darling,  was  Rev.  Charles  Chauncey  Darling,  who 
■as  graduated  at  Yale  College  and  at  Princeton  Theological  Seminary,  and  having  en- 
ired  the  ministry  subsequently  made  his  residence  in  New  York.  He  married  Ade- 
ae  E.,  daughter  of  William  Dana,  of  Boston,  and  granddaughter  of  Gen.  Robert  Davis, 
1  oSicer  of  artillery  in  the  war  of  the  Revolution. 

The  boyhood  years  of  General  Darling  were  devoted  largely  to  study  under  the 
aidance  of  a  private  tutor.  After  matriculating  at  the  classical  and  mathematical  de- 
irtment  of  the  New  York  University  he  passed  through  its  regular  curriculum,  and  at 
le  end  of  the  course  entered  as  clerk  a  mercantile  house  in  New  York.  Several 
sars  later  he  became  connected  as  secretary  of  an  incorporated  company  under  the 
•esidency  of  Commodore  C.  K.  Garrison.  Shortly  afterward  he  resigned  his  position 
•  accept  the  presidency  of  a  manufacturing  company,  with  which  he  was  associated 
veral  years.  When  he  ceased  his  immediate  relations  with  business  he  made  his  first 
ip  to  Europe  to  gratify  those  literary  and  artistic  tastes  which  his  active  life  had  for- 
dden.  Returning  froni  his  Continental  trip  when  the  questioaof  the  possible  seces- 
Dn  of  the  South  from  the  Federal  Union  was  receiving  much  public  discussion  he 
•nnected  himself  with  the  National  Guard  of  New  York,  and  when  Hon.  Edwin  D. 
organ  was  elected  governor  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  his  staff'  with  rank  of 

J 


74  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

colonel.  He  also  identified  himself  with  political  matters  and  was  president  of  one  of 
the  Republican  organizations  of  his  district.  By  his  decision  of  character  he  united 
many  discordant  elements  in  the  party,  subdued  the  passions  of  some,  deepened  the 
love  of  country  in  the  hearts  of  others,  and  preserved  order  frequently  under  difficult 
circumstances.  When  in  the  summer  of  1863  New  York  became  the  scene  of  riots 
Q-eneral  Darling  was  called  upon  to  perform  difficult  and  dangerous  duties,  and  his  firm 
stand  on  that  memorable  occasion  received  the  most  cordial  approbation  of  the  military 
as  well  as  the  civil  authorities.  As  the  following  letters  have  a  historical  as  well  as  a 
personal  signification  for  the  first  time  they  are  given  publication  : 

"  Headquarters  First  Division  N.  Y.  S.  N.  G.,  \ 
New  York,  July  21,  1863.  ( 

''Col.  C.   W.  Darling, 

"  Colonel  : — Having  a  vacancy  on  my  staflf  I  shall  be  happy  to  receive  you  as  a  mem- 
ber of  my  military  family  as  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  you  to  retain  your  rank  of  colo- 
nel. At  the  same  time  I  take  occasion  to  express  my  thanks  for  your  services  during 
the  late  riot.     I  am,  very  respectfully, 

"  Your  obedient  servant, 

"  Charles  W.  Sandford,  Major-  General." 

"New  York,  August  17,  1863. 
"  Col.  C.  W.  Darling, 

,  "Colonel: — It  always  gives  me  pleasure  to  do  justice  to  those  who  are  prompt  in 
discharging  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  their  fellow  citizens  in  resisting  violence,  let 
it  come  from  what  source  it  may.  Your  gallant  and  efficient  efforts  to  put  down  the 
riot  in  New  York,  so  disgraceful  to  the  city,  on  the  13th,  14th,  and  15th  of  July  last, 
entitle  you  to  the  thanks  of  a  grateful  people.     I  am, 

''Very  respectfully  yours, 

''John  E.  Wool,  Major- General  U.  S.  A." 

"  State  or  New  York, 
"Dept.  of  the  Commissary- G-eneral  of  Ordnance, 
New  York,  August  22,  1863. 
"  Col:  C.   W.  Darling, 

"Colonel: — I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication 
informing  me  of  your  instructions  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Eighth  Regiment 
to  withdraw  his  command  from  the  State  Arsenal,  and  to  thank  you  for  so  doing.  Per- 
mit me  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  energy  displayed  during  the  scenes  of  disorder  that 
occurred  in  our  city  in  the  month  of  July,  and  to  assure  you  that  we  will  recall  with 
pleasure  the  names  of  yourself  and  fellow  officers  with  whom  the  occasion  brouo-ht  us  in 
close  connection,  and  to  whose  effiarts  the  State  and  this  Department  are  much  indebted. 

"  Very  respectfully  yours, 
"  W.  R.  Fabrell,  Commissary -General  of  Ordnance." 

"  Mayor's  Office,  New  York,  August  24,  1863. 
"  Col.  C.   W.  Darling,  ^ 

"  Dear  Sir  : — Accept  my  thanks  for  your  energetic  and  efficient  service  on  the  occa- 
sion of  the  disloyal  outbreak  in  this  city  on  the  13th,  Uth,  and  15th  of  last  month.  The 
help  of  the  military  in  subduing  the  riot  was  invaluable,  and  among  them  I  was  pleased 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  75 

to  recognize  yourself  as  prominent  for  gallantry  and  good  conduct  in  the  performance 
of  the  duty  devolvmg  upon  you.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  find  that  General  Woo]  in 
command  of  the  United  States  troops  called  on  duty,  General  Sandford,  commanding  the 
First  Division  N.  Y.  S.  N.  G.,  and  the  Commissary-General  of  Ordnance  have  accorded 
to  you  so  much  credit  for  the  part  you  took  on  that  occasion.  I  trust  that  our  city 
may  never  again  undergo  a  similar  trial,  but  if  it  should  I  hope  that  we  may  find  in  the 
hour  of  need  many  such  as  yourself  coming  forward  equally  prompt,  earnest,  and  effi- 
cient to  perform  the  patriotic  duty  of  defending  government  and  order  against  treason 
and  anarchy.     With  high  regard, 

"  Very  truly  yours, 

"  Geokge  Opdtke,  Mayor." 

Early  in  1864  Colonel  Darling  received  the  appointment  of  additional  volunteer  aid- 
de-camp  on  the  staff  of  Maj.-Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  then  in  command  of  the  Army 
of  the  James,  and  was  assigned  special  duties  at  his  temporary  headquarters  in  New 
York.  At  this  time  the  draft  was  to  be  enforced,  when  it  was  anticipated  that  new 
disturbances  might  occur,  threatening  the  peace  of  the  State.  As  it  was  known  that 
the  authorities  had  made  every  preparation,  and  16,000  men  under  arms  were  afloat  on 
the  harbor,  no  attempt  was  made  to  resist  the  enforcement  of  the  law.  When  Hon. 
Reuben  E.  Fenton  was  elected  governor  of  the  State  of  New  York  in  1865  Colonel 
Darling  was  recommended  for  the  position  of  head  of  one  of  the  military  departments. 
His  qualifications  for  the  important  trust  were  supported  by  recommendations  from 
Major-Generals  Butler,  Doubleday,  and  Warren  ;  Brigadier-Generals  Van  Vliet,  Webb, 
Davies,  Morris,  Gordon,  and  Granger;  and  twenty-one  commandants  of  regiments  and 
batteries  in  the  field.  A  large  number  of  influential  politicians  also  joined  in  the  request, 
among  whom  were  the  mayor  of  New  York,  the  collector  and  surveyor  of  the  port,  the 
postmaster,  the  chairman  of  the  Union  Central  Committee,  and  several  members  of 
Congress.  This  powerful  influence  thus  brought  to  bear  upon  the  administration  had 
its  effect  and  Colonel  Darling,  in  view  of  his  past  business  training  and  his  reputation 
for  order  and  integrity,  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the  paymaster-general's  department, 
which  at  this  critical  period  was  of  the  first  importance.  As  many  of  the  soldiers  were 
being  mustered  out  through  the  expiration  of  their  terms  of  enlistment  no  little  watch- 
fulness and  executive  ability  were  required  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  brave  defend- 
ers of  their  country  as  well  as  those  of  the  government.  Nearly  every  New  York  reg- 
iment had  unsettled  accounts  with  the  Federal  and  State  governments,  and  many 
unprincipled  claim  agents  were  following  the  soldiers  hke  sleuth  hounds.  The  pressure 
to  which  the  occupant  of  this  responsible  office  was  subjected  at  this  period  is  well 
illustrated  by  the  following  brief  quotation  from  one  of  the  New  York  daily  papers : 

"  The  number  of  claimants  at  the  ofBce  of  Colonel  Darhng  averages  about  200  daily. 
He  is  beset  with  land-sharks,  bounty-brokers,  middlemen,  etc.,  who  are  trying  all  sorts 
of  ways  to  grab  a  portion  of  the  money  being  disbursed,  but  the  colonel  thwarts  all 
their  contrivances  in  the  shape  of  offered  presents,  commissions,  percentage,  etc.,  and 
will  manage  affairs  so  that  every  man  who  is  justly  entitled  to  pay  shall  receive  the 
same  without  drawbacks  or  deductions." 

The  drafted  men  m  the  city  who  furnished  substitutes  and  who  were  reimbursed  by 
the  State  were  also  notified  to  file  their  claims  at  this  office,  where  they  were  examined 
and  passed  over  to  the  supervisors  at  New  York  for  final  adjustment.     The  vouchers 


76  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

were  sent  by  the  supervisors  to  the  paymaster-general  at  Albany  and  the  funds  were 
transmitted  from  headquarters  for  payment  to  individuals.  At  the  Union  State  Con- 
vention of  the  Republican  party  held  in  Syracuse,  September,  1866,  among  the  dele- 
gates from  the  city  of  New  York  was  General  Darling.  When  the  roll  of  delegates 
was  called  it  was  claimed  that  the  delegates  sent  from  the  Seventh  Asserablj'  District 
represented  the  conservative  element  and  were  hostile  to  the  radicals  who  called  the 
convention.  It  caused  some  excitement ;  a  recess  was  called,  and  during  this  recess 
General  Darling  with  wise  diplomacy  reconciled  opposing  factions  by  resigning  his  seat 
in  favor  of  Sinclair  Tousey  upon  condition  that  his  two  associates  should  compose  with 
him  the  delegation.  This  arrangement  wag  acceptable  to  the  convention  and  the  re- 
nomination  of  Governor  Fenton  was  thus  secured  beyond  a  doubt  and  made  unanimous. 
Had  this  course  not  been  adopted  it  hae  been  gravely  doubted  whether  Governor  Fen- 
ton would  have  been  elected  for  a  second  term.  In  1866  Colonel  Darling  was  commis- 
sioned as  commissary-general  of  subsistence,  which  brought  him  into  still  closer  rela- 
tions with  Governor  Fenton  as  a  member  of  his  military  cabinet.  This  office  he  held 
until  January  1,  1867,  when,  on  the  re-election  of  the  governor.  General  Darling  received 
the  appointment  of  military  engineer-in-chief  of  the  State  of  New  York  with  the  rank 
of  brigadier-general.  When  the  administration  of  Governor  Fenton  was  nearing  its 
close  General  Darling  applied  for  and  obtained  leave  of  absence  to  visit  Europe  again  on 
a  tour  of  instruction  and  pleasure. 

While  in  England  he  received  many  courtesies;  among  the  various  invitations  ex- 
tended to  him  was  one  from  Lord  Elcho  to  meet  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  the  Duke  of 
Cambridge,  and  be  present  with  them  on  a  review  of  troops  at  Aldersholt.  In  a  sub- 
sequent trip  abroad  with  his  wife  he  traveled  extensively  through  Europe,  Asia,  and 
Africa,  making  the  trip  up  the  Nile,  through  Ethiopia  and  Nubia,  as  far  as  the  river  is 
navigable.  During  this  time  many  articles  from  his  pen  appeared  in  our  journals  of  a 
historical  and  political  as  well  as  of  a  social  character.  Having  means  at  his  command, 
which  renders  him  independent  of  business  cares.  General  Darling  has  been  able  to 
gratify  to  the  utmost  his  literary  and  scientific  tastes.  Ten  years  of  his  life  have  been 
devoled  to  foreign  travel  in  nearly  every  country  on  the  globe,  and  from  this  broad  ex- 
perience he  has  returned  with  a  knowledge  of  national  manners  and  customs  and  a 
fund  of  general  information  which  has  been  of  great  value  in  his  writings.  Intensely 
fond  of  historical  studies  he  has  prosecuted  his  investigations  in'  this  department  of 
learning  with  unusual  diligence  and  with  excellent  results.  His  writings  cover  a  wide 
range  of  themes,  which  he  handles  with  skill,  and  in  a  way  to  interest  both  the  special- 
ist and  the  general  reader.  His  high  character,  scholarly  attainments,  and  distinguished 
public  services  have  given  him  a  large  acquaintance  with  many  of  the  public  men  of 
the  day  and  earned  for  him  many  scientific  and  literary  honors. 

His  active  interest  in  public  affairs  and  his  prominent  connection  with  some  of  the 
most  stirring  events  happening  in  his  time  have  necessarily  made  him  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent a  conspicuous  figure  among  his  fellow  citizens,  by  whom  he  is  held  in  universal 
esteem.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  has  persistently  held  aloof  from  politics, 
preferring  the  more  congenial  pursuits  of  literature  and  historical  research,  he  has  sev- 
eral times  been  asked  to  become  a  candidate  for  municipal  positions,  but  while  ap- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  77 

predating  the  honor  he  has  dedined  all  political  preferment.  His  work  is  performed 
quietly  among  his  books,  from  which  he  feels  that  nothing  save  the  gravest  condition  of 
public  affairs  can  separate  him.  For  several  years  he  held  the  office  of  president  of  the 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  of  Utioa,  his  present  adopted  home,  and  he  is  now  one 
of  its  directors.  Those  ^\-ho  are  familiar  with  the  past  struggles  of  that  association  for 
life  concede  that  he  carried  it  through  the  most  critical  period  of  its  history.  As  a  re- 
sult of  those  arduous  undertakings  an  elegant  structure  has  been  erected  for  the  Utica 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  by  its  friends,  and  the  building  is  considered  one  of 
the  most  conspicuous  ornaments  of  the  city.  General  Darling  was  also  a  member  of 
the  State  Executive  Committee  of  Young  Men's  Christian  Associations  and  on  the  ex- 
piration of  his  term  of  office  in  1888  he  was  elected  one  of  its  trustees.  His  interest  in 
religious  matters,  however,  is  not  confined  to  affairs  connected  with  this  department  of 
Christian  work.  He  is  a  ruling  elder  in  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  of  Utica,  and  in 
the  private  hfe  to  which  he  has  retired  he  is  the  object  of  the  warm  regard  of  a  large  circle 
of  friends.  Through  his  connection  with  the  Oneida  Historical  Society  he  has  culti- 
vated his  taste  for  historical  studies  and  his  literary  productions  are  numerous.  He 
never  writes  for  pecuniary  compensation,  and  the  monographs,  brochures,  essays,  ex- 
cerpta,  etc.,  which  he  frequently  sends  out  are  printed  for  private  distribution. 

On  the  21st  of  December,  1857,  G-eneral  Darling  married  AngelineB.,  second  daugh- 
ter of  Jacob  A.  Robertson,  a  wealthy  and  highly  respected  citizen  of  New  York.  His 
father  was  Archibald  Robertson,  the  Scotch  artist  who  painted  from  life  the  celebrated 
miniatures  on  ivory  of  General  and  Martha  Washington,  during  the  time  when  he  was 
sojourning  as  a  guest  in  the  family  of  the  "First  President."  His  brothers  were  An- 
drew J.,  Alexander  H.  (who  at  the  time  of  his  decease  was  grand  master  of  the  Grand 
Lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  the  State  of  New  York),  and  Anthony  L.,  sur- 
rogate of  New  York  in  1848  and  chief  justice  of  the  Superior  Court  m  1860-69.  A  sister 
of  these  brothers  married  Henry  Winslow,  founder  of  the  banking  house  bearing  his 
name.  Another  sister  married  Robert  N.  Tinson,  of  England  and  well  known  as  a 
resident  of  New  York  city.  General  Darling  has  no  children  to  inherit  the  honor  of  a 
good  name,  but  his  fondness  for  the  little  ones  makes  him  always  a  favorite  with  them. 

In  1891  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Uplands  Park  Investment  Company,  of  Pu- 
eblo, Col.,  and  when  this  company  merged  its  interests  in  the  South  Side  Land  Syndi- 
cate Company,  of  the  same  place,  he  became  its  president.  This  organization  has  a 
capital  paid  in  of  $518,000 ;  it  was  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  Colorado  and  its 
home  office  is  in  Denver.  W.  H.  Chamberlin,  of  the  Chamberlin  Investment  Company, 
is  associated  with  him  as  first  vice-president  and  A.  W.  Chamberlin,  of  the  same  com- 
pany, is  treasurer.  With  such  strong  influence  as  this  company  can  command  it  bids 
fair  to  become  an  important  factor  in  building  up  the  young  city  of  Pueblo,  which  is 
already  becoming  a  formidable  rival  of  Denver,  150  miles  distant.  General  Darling  has 
also  recently  been  selected  as  a  member  of  the  advisory  council  of  the  World's  Con- 
gress Auxiliary  of  the  World's  Columbian  Exposition  on  historical  literature.  This 
congress  is  authorized  and  supported  by  the  Exposition  corporation  for  the  purpose  of 
bringing  about  a  series  of  conventions  of  the  leaders,  at  home  and  abroad,  in  the  vari- 
ous departments  of  human  progress  during  the  Exposition  season  of  1893.     It  has  been 


78  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

approved  and  recognized  by  the  government  of  the  United  States,  and  its  general  an- 
nouncement has  been  sent  to  foreign  governments  by  the  Department  of  State.  An 
appropriation  on  account  of  its  expenses  has  been  made  by  an  act  of  Congress. 

G-eneral  DarUng  is  a  ''  Son  of  the  Revolution  "  by  reason  of  his  being  a  great-grand- 
son of  Gen.  Robert  Davis,  of  the  artillery  under  G-eneral  Washington.  He  is  also  a 
member  of  the  American  Historical  Association  and  of  the  New  York  Genealogical 
and  Biographical  Society ;  Fellow  of  the  Society  of  Science,  Letters,  and  Art,  Lon- 
don, England,  and  associate  member  of  the  Victoria  Institute ;  honorary  member  of 
the  Chautauqua  Society  of  History  and  Natural  Science,  Neve  York ;  Waterloo  His- 
torical Society,  New  York ;  New  Jersey  Historical  Society,  Alabama  Historical  Society, 
Mississippi  Historical  Society,  Iowa  Historical  Society,  and  Alaska  Historical  Society ; 
and  corresponding  member  of  the  American  Ethnological  Society,  Academy  of  Anthro- 
pology, American  Numismatic  and  Arohseological  Society,  Buffalo  Historical  Society, 
and  the  Cayuga  County  Historical  Society,  all  of  New  York.  In  the  State  of  Maine 
he  is  in  the  same  manner  connected  with  the  Bangor  Historical  Society ;  in  New  Hamp- 
shire with  the  Historical  Society  of  Concord ;  in  Vermont  with  the  Middlebury 
Historical  Society ;  in  Massachusetts  with  the  New  England  Historic-Genealogical  So- 
ciety, the  Dedham  Historical  Society,  the  Old  Colony  Historical  Society,  and  the  Ips- 
wich Historical  Society  ;  in  Rhode  Island  with  the  Newport  Historical  Society ;  in 
Connecticut  with  the  Connecticut  Historical  Society,  the  New  Haven  Colony  Histor- 
ical Society,  the  Fairfield  County  Historical  Society,  and  the  Saugatuck  Historical  So- 
ciety ;  in  Ohio  with  the  State  Archreological  and  Historical  Society  and  the  Western 
Reserve  Historical  Society  ;  in  Pennsylvania  with  the  Numismatic  and  Antiquarian  So- 
ciety, the  Linnean  Historical  and  Scientific  Society,  and  the  Wyoming  Geological  and 
Historical  Society  ;  in  New  Jersey  with  the  Burlington  County  Lyceum  of  History  and 
Natural  Science ;  in  North  Carolina  with  the  Historical  Society  of  Chapel  Hill ;  in  In- 
diana with  the  Geological  and  Historical  Society  at  Indianapolis ;  in  Maryland  with  the 
Historical  Society  of  Baltimore;  in  Virginia  with  the  Historical  Society  at  Richmond; 
in  Georgia  with  the  Historical  Society  at  Savannah;  in  Tennessee  with  the  Historical 
Society  at  Nashville;  in  Wisconsin  with  the  Historical  Society  at  Madison;  in  Minne- 
sota with  the  Historical  Society  of  St.  Paul ;  in  Kansas  with  the  Historical  Society  at 
Topeka;  in  Nebraska  with  the  Historical  Society  at  Lincoln;  in  California  with  the 
Historical  Society  at  San  Francisco  and  Los  Angeles;  and  in  Canada  with  the  Quebec 
Historical  Society.  He  is  a  life  member  of  the  Oneida  Historical  Society  at  TJtica, 
N.  Y.|  and  its  corresponding  secretary. 


WILLIAMS,  ROBERT  STANTON,  the  youngest  surviving  child  of  William  and 
Sophia  WilUams,  was  born  in  Utica,  September  10,  1828.  His  father,  being  at 
this  time  in  rather  straightened  circumstances  the  boy  learned  in  early  youth  to  un- 
derstand the  restrictions  and  trials  inseparable  from  poverty.  After  the  sale  of  his 
book  store  Colonel  Williams  removed  in  1836  with  his  family  to  Tonawanda  to  take 
charge  of  an  estate  of  which  he  was  part  owner  in  connection  with  Henry  Huntington, 
of  Rome.     Life  on  an  Erie  County  farm  in  the  earlier  years  of  the  century  meant  hard 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  79 

work  and  little  recreation,  exterior  conditions  not  likely  to  teach  a  child  much  un- 
less it  were  the  art  of  goiag  deep,  of  tracing  to  their  sources  the  ways  of  nature,  and 
obtaining  those  sound  and  thorough  habits  which  spring  from  intinaacy  with  country 
living.  Whatever  childhood  in  a  Western  village  may  be  to  the  imagination  its  reality 
in  the  case  of  Robert  Williams  was  not  sufficiently  attractive  to  have  crowded  his 
memory  in  after  years  with  many  recollections  of  the  place.  Having  passed  his  tenth 
birthday  lie  was  placed  with  Henry  Ivison  (his  father's  former  apprentice  in  the  Utica 
book-bindery),  at  that  time  a  prosperous  bookseller  in  Auburn.  An  agreement  was 
made  under  which  the  boy  was  received  in  the  family  of  his  employer  and  allowed  to 
pay  for  the  cost  of  board  and  schooling  by  doing  odd  jobs  in  the  store  and  learning  the 
book-binder's  trade.  But  Mr.  Ivison,  though  a  just  man,  was  a  Scotchman,  and  as  the 
lad  became  increasingly  useful  his  duties  developed  to  the  detriment  of  his  lessons  until 
hardly  any  time  at  all  remained  for  study.  Under  these  circumstances  he  served  in  some 
respects  a  rather  painful  apprenticeship  in  Auburn,  the  reminiscence  of  which  has  occasion- 
ally returned  to  him  as  a  fitful  cause  of  dejection.  Eager  and  industrious  as  he  normally 
was  he  naturally  failed  of  success  in  his  classes  when  continually  kept  away  from  them 
to  assist  in  the  bindery  or  at  the  book  store.  Of  his  education  he  has  been  heard  to  speak 
with  disparagement,  asserting  that  he  got  Httle  by  the  brief  and  irregular  periods  of  his 
schooling.  To  a  mind,  nevertheless,  accustomed  from  the  first  to  self-instruction  with 
its  subjective  development,  mere  presence  in  a  class-room  is  of  secondary  importance 
His  training  was  one  which  fits  men  to  deal  with  real  persons  and  things,  though  it 
never  became  simply  an  outgrowth  of  worldly  wisdom.  He  did  not  neglect  the  duty 
every  mind  owes  to  itself  of  making  steps  forward  in  culture,  and  even  as  a  hard- 
worked  boy  he  often  renounced  the  pleasures  dear  to  children  of  his  age  in  order  to  sat- 
isfy an  appetite  for  literature,  whetted,  probably,  by  his  environment  in  the  book  store. 
Cultivation  which  comes  in  this  way  is  never  a  thing  to  be  afterward  forgotten  or  set 
aside  in  a  busy  career ;  it  is  a  matter  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the  intellect  and  estab- 
lishes that  balance  and  unity  with  oneself  which  is,  next  to  spiritual  peace,  the  highest 
service  of  mind  to  material  happiness. 

If  at  this  time  Mr.  Williams's  contention  was  true  in  the  conventional  sense  that  he 
learned  nothing  he  at  least  became  something.  But  the  strain  of  over-many  duties 
presently  told  on  his  health,  and  by  the  summer  of  1842  he  was  compelled  to  seek  the 
rest  and  change  of  country  life.  During  the  two  following  years  he  hved  on  the  farm 
of  his  uncle,  James  Wells,  at  New  Hartford,  where  with  his  brother  Edward  he  became 
acquainted  with  the  approved  methods  of  Oneida  County  farming.  In  1844  he  went 
to  Brooklyn,  where  his  brother  Dwight,  now  of  Utica,  was  living,  and  there  attended 
school  for  a  term.  Returning  in  the  winter  to  Auburn  he  re-entered  Mr.  Ivison's  em- 
ploy, remaining  with  him  until  September,  1846.  The  appetite  for  learning  was  not 
yet  appeased  in  spite  of  this  hopeful  opening  in  a  business  career.  Broken  in  health 
his  father  was  quite  unable  to  aid  his  younger  children  in  their  education,  but  by  some 
additional  exertion,  furthered  doubtless  by  the  interest  of  older  brothers,  the  young  man 
was  able  to  resume  his  schooling.  This  time,  with  better  success  in  his  selection  than 
before,  he  entered  the  Cortland  Academy  at  Homer,  then  under  the  management  of 
Samuel  B.  Woolworth,  afterward  secretary  of  the  Regents  of  the  University  of  the 


8o  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

State  of  New  York,  and  in  this  institution  he  remained  until  March,  1848,  nearly  com- 
pleting his  preparation  for  college. 

The  slender  accumulation  of  means  seems  to  have  been  at  length  exhausted.  Those 
were  the  days  when  universities,  by  an  all  but  absolute  custom,  were  closed  to  poor 
boys  who  had  no  distinct  aims  toward  professional  careers,  the  knowledge  which  is  in- 
bibed  from  contact  with  great  seats  of  learning  being  supposed  to  benefit  only  the  not- 
ably rich  or  clever  lads  in  a  community.  Though  for  this  reason  ''  defrauded,"  as 
Charles  Lamb  somewhere  says  of  himself,  "of  the  sweet  food  of  academic  instruction  '' 
he  did  not,  while  earning  a  livihg,  suffer  his  mind  to  starve  for  want  of  such  nourish- 
ment as  good  and  plentiful  reading  could  supply.  After  a  year  spent  in  Utica  he  re- 
ceived an  appointment  (July,  1849)  in  the  railway  mail  service  as  route  agent  between 
Albany  and  Buffalo.  The  work  was  fatiguing  in  the  extreme,  and  railway  travel  in 
that  day  was  not  only  tiresome,  but  rendered  dangerous  by  frequent  accidents.  An 
incident  is  related  which  illustrates  his  broad  conception  of  duty  in  this  position,  charac- 
terizing a  man  who  is  more  than  his  words,  whose  moral  size  is  measured  by  disinter- 
ested fidelity  to  others.  He  soon  discovered  that  an  immense  amount  of  petty  pur- 
loinings  was  practiced  by  government  servants.  Doubtless  the  checks  upon  dishonesty 
were  not  as  systematic  and  effective  then  as  now,  but  operations  of  this  sort  when- 
ever he  met  them  outraged  that  irrefragable  rectitude  which  is  a  part  of  his  Puritan 
heredity  and  prompted  him  to  especial  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  service.  On  one  occa- 
sion, when  the  unaccountable  consumption  of  canvas  mail-bags  along  his  route  was  suf- 
ficient to  palpably  cripple  the  distribution  of  the  newspaper  mails,  he  got  permission  to 
employ  a  holiday  in  investigating  the  deficit.  He  observed  in  a  certain  village  where 
the  postmaster  was  a  miller  that  the  flour  sacks  appeared  to  be  of  an  unusually  stout 
make,  and  following  up  the  clue  found  at  the  mill  a  heap  of  canvas  mail-bags  which 
the  thrifty  operator  had  accumulated  and  made  fit  for  his  private  purposes  by  turning 
inside  out  to  conceal  the  government  mark.  Such  disclosures  of  fraud  were  not  unat- 
tended with  discomfort  to  the  agent  who  made  them,  for  officials  with  a  political  "  pull  " 
did  not  scruple  to  revenge  their  disgrace  if  they  could ;  but  Mr.  Williams  has  always 
believed  that  real  evils  were  to  be  combated  and  overthrown  at  every  hazard,  and  the 
peril  of  pursuing  them  probably  never  occupied  his  thoughts. 

Early.in  the  year  1852  he  resigned  his  position  to  attend  his  brother  James  during  a 
fatal  illness,  which  terminated  in  March  of  that  year,  and  with  his  return  to  his  native 
town  begins  Mr.  Williams's  permanent  and  intimate  association  with  its  progress  and 
interests.  Without  marked  predilection  for  any  particular  occupation  it  was  perhaps 
an  accident  at  first  that  secured  him  a  place  as  book-keeper  in  the  City  Bank,  but  the 
choice  once  made  was  most  fortunate  for  the  exercise  of  his  abilities  to  their  best  ad- 
vantage. Emphatically  masculine,  robust,  and  sane,  accomplishing  his  ends  by  shere  force 
of  honesty,  of  being  in  the  right  rather  than  by  mere  cleverness,  he  soon  won  from 
those  who  could  best  judge  his  course  that  confidence  and  respect  which  constitute  the 
necessary  moral  capital  of  every  successful  banker.  To  a  man  of  his  singleness  and 
intensity  there  could  be  no  question  of  the  indispensable  nature  of  this  kind  of  credit. 
Since  to  the  great  majority  actual  genius  is  denied  to  some  a  compensating  gift  of  in- 
dustry is  given,  the  value  of  which  is  often  higher  in  correlation  to  the  conditions  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  8i 

modern  life,  and  it  was  the  development  of  this  quality  which  earned  the  young  clerk 
the  precious  reputation  in  the  community  of  being  "  prompt,  accurate,  and  reliable." 
While  in  his  subordinate  position  he  lost  no  opportunity  of  improving  his  technical 
knowledge.  To  this  end,  when  one  of  his  senior  fellow  clerks  became  restless  by  being 
kept  long  after  banking  hours,  he  induced  him  as  a  favor  to  teach  him  the  method  used 
in  his  department,  and  was  soon  able  to  take  care  of  part  of  jhis  and  all  of  his  own 
books,  while  his  friend  prolonged  his  restful  sessions  in  the  pursuit  of  literary  fame. 
This  sort  of  devoted  diligence  earns  its  reward  even  outside  of  the  region  of  moral  fic- 
tion ;  the  directors  of  the  Oneida  Bank  had,  it  may  be  inferred,  a  pretty  definite  con- 
ception of  his  working  capacity  when  they  induced  him  to  enter  their  eniploy  in  Octo- 
ber, 1854,  the  same  month  in  which  he  was  married.  During  his  term  of  nearly  forty 
years,  the  longest  service  of  any  individual  in  this  bank,  Mr.  Williams  has  passed 
successively  through  all  its  grades  and  concerned  himself  heartily  in  its  welfare.  As 
one  of  Utioa's  business  institutions  its  history  belongs  elsewhere  and  we  need  not  lin- 
ger in  this  place  to  repeat  his  share  in  the  story.  After  a  few  months  in  the  position 
of  book-keeper  he  was  made  teller  in  February,  1855 ;  from  this,  in  1863,  he  was  pro- 
moted to  the  chair  of  managing  cashier  and  at  the  same  time  elected  a  director.  As 
cashier  he  conducted  for  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century  the  affairs  and  policy  of  the  bank, 
which  he  has  retained  in  his  control  during  his  term  as  president,  an  office  given  him 
upon  the  death  of  A.  J.  Williams  in  1886. 

With  increasing  years  have  come  multiplying  opportunities  for  good  and  faithful  serv- 
ice in  many  fields,  while  the  essential  characteristics  of  the  man  remain  unchanged.  His 
performances  in  the  business  and  industrial  community  have  latterly  been  on  a  larger 
scale  but  they  are  of  a  piece  with  his  early  work  and  have  fitly  crowned  it  with  success. 
To  examine  these  m  detail  would  carry  us  into  almost  every  important  industrial  concern 
that  titica  has  known  during  a  generation.  Before  them  all  in  his  own  estimation 
would  come  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  and  Sunday  school,  the  church  of  his  father, 
whose  successor  he  has  been,  both  as  ruling  elder  and  Sunday  school  superintendent. 
In  the  work  of  establishing  mission  branches  in  Deerfield  and  Bast  and  West  Utica  he 
has  displayed  the  same  practical  zeal  which  characterized  both  his  parents  as  Christian 
laborers  among  their  fellow  citizens.  His  interest  in  educational  matters  has  engaged 
him  actively  in  behalf  of  both  pubhc  and  private  schools.  Soon  after  the  destruction  by 
fire  of  the  Utica  Female  Academy,  in  1865,  he  was  elected  a  trustee  and  placed  upon 
the  executive  committee  in  charge  of  erecting  the  new  building.  As  an  expression  of 
the  committee's  foresight  and  faithful  stewardship  the  building  is  more  successful,  per- 
haps, than  as  an  sesthetio  ornament  to  the  town.  In  the  progress  and  success  of  the 
school  itself,  with  which  Mr.  Williams  has  ever  since  been  closely  associated,  he  takes 
the  liveliest  satisfaction,  a  good  part  of  which  comes  from  his  personal  share  in  calling 
Mrs.  Piatt  to  her  felicitous  and  effective  career  as  its  principal.  He  was  elected  in 
1870  a  public  school  commissioner,  serving  three  years,  at  a  time  when  the  board  ex- 
ercised its  discretion  in  deciding  upon  text-books  and  studies  within  its  jurisdiction,  and 
there  was  rather  more  room  than  exists  now  for  individual  initiative.  Among  other  in- 
novations he  advocated  teaching  music  in  the  public  schools,  and  secured  for  this  end 
the  permanent  employment  of  a  qualified  teacher. 

K 


82  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

Though  with  no  greater  relish  than  most  refined  and  domestic  natures  for  public  life 
Mr.  Williams  has  not  been  disposed  to  keep  adriotly  away  from  the  real  contest  when 
asked  to  use  his  influence  or  his  energies  in  political  affairs.  During  two  terms  as  alder- 
man from  1874  to  1878  he  labored  for  economy  in  the  management  of  municipal  mat- 
ters, and,  though  on  the  minority  side  of  the  council,  succeeded  simply  by  strength  of 
integrity  in  carrying  out  some  reforms  o£  lasting  benefit.  His  measures  as  chairman  of 
the  finance  committee  dealt  with  the  things  of  a  technical  rather  than  of  a  general  inter- 
est, but  in  his  resolute  effort  to  raise  the  City  Library  from  a  mere  assortment  of  juvenile 
literature  to  be  a  medium  of  substantial  benefit  to  the  whole  community  he  won  the  thanks 
of  every  citizen.  He  also  strongly  advocated  and  assisted  in  the  change  from  a  volunteer 
to  a  paid  fire  department.  Flis  active  connection  with  local  politics  terminated  in  1878, 
when  he  became  a  candidate  for  the  mayoralty.  He  accepted  the  nomination,  as  he 
declares  in  a  card  announcing  his  determination,  ''  with  considerable  reluctance  andiSt 
some  personal  sacrifice,  solely  in  behalf  of  strict  economy  and  honesty  in  every  branch 
of  city  government."  Aspirants  for  suffrages  in  this  country  who  confine  their  efforts 
during  election  to  announcing  a  platform  of  plain  truth  and  honesty  are  not  generally 
successful,  nor  was  Mr.  Williams  in  this  instance,  though  well  supported  by  the  tax- 
payers. His  defeat  was  almost  wholly  due  to  his  unwillingness  to  bind  himself  by 
pledges  of  any  sort  to  political  managers,  "who  were  so  impressed  with  his  fearlessness 
and  independence  as  to  prefer  to  see  a  candidate  of  the  opposite  party  elected.  Mr. 
Williams  has  also  served  as  one  of  the  railroad  commissioners  for  the  city  of  Utica,  being 
appointed  in  1871  under  the  law  of  1869  providing  for  the  municipal  aid  of  railroads. 
In  this  capacity  he  assisted  in  the  issue  of  $200,000  in  bonds  of  the  city  of  Utica,  in  aid 
of  the  Utica,  Clinton,  and  Binghamton  Railroad,  and  was  elected  in  1872  a  director  of 
this  road  to  represent  the  city's  interest.  In  1881  he  was  made  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  the  company  and  has,  since  its  re-organization,  been  prominent  in  its  management. 

The  list  of  business  organizations  in  which  Mr.  Williams  has  been  more  or  less  directly 
concerned  is  much  too  long  for  comprehensive  notice;  there  remains  space  to  indicate 
only  a  few,  to  the  success  of  which  his  judgment  and  energy  have  largely  contributed. 
Since  1879  he  has  been  on  the  executive  committee  of  the  Utica  Cemetery  Associa- 
tion, which  induced  the  association  to  buy  the  tract  of  150  acres  adjoining  Forest  Hill 
Cemetery  when  it  could  be  procured  at  a  reasonable  figure,  thus  adding  to  its  beauty 
and  insuring  room  for  its  enlargement  for  many  years.  Upon  the  first  introduction  of 
the  Edison  telephone,  in  1879,  Mr.  Williams,  with  others,  organized  a  company,  for  pro- 
viding telephone  service  within  a  fifteen-mile  circuit  about  Utica.  The  license  for  five 
years  obtained  by  this  company  was  in  1882,  in  connection  with  similar  licenses  held  by 
four  other  companies,  voluntarily  surrendered,  in  exchange  for  a  perpetual  license  from 
the  Bell  Telephone  Company  covering  a  territory  of  twelve  counties  in  Central  New  York, 
and  a  new  company  was  formed  known  as  the  Central  New  York  Telephone  and 
Telegraph  Company  with  a  capital  of  $500,000,  of  which  Mr.  Williams  was  made  presi- 
dent. Another  project  which  originated  at  about  this  time  (1880),  when  after  the  re- 
sumption of  specie  payment  money  was  comparatively  plenty  and  capital  sought  em- 
ployment, was  the  "  Mohawk  Valley  Cotton-Mills,''  a  company  for  the  manufacture  of 
cotton  cloth.    In  association  with  Messrs.  T.  K.  Butler,  Ephraim  Chamberlain,  Addison  C. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  83 

Miller,  P.  V.  Rogers,  Nicholas  E.  Kernan,  and  others  the  scheme  was  promptly  started 
and  Mr.  Williams  elected  vice-president.  The  call  for  such  legitimate  and  promising 
investments  being  still  greater  than  the  supply  the  "  Skenandoa  Cotton  Company  "  was 
organized  in  1881  by  nearly  the  same  gentlemen  to  manufacture  yarn.  Its  success  has 
been  due  principally  to  its  reputation  for  making  the  best  possible  quality  of  goods,  and 
in  the  second  place  to  its  practice  of  selling  directly  to  consumers,  avoiding  in  this  way 
the  middlemen  with  their  commissions.  Still  a  third  venture  of  this  sort,  the  "Utica 
Willowvale  Bleaching  Company,"  originated  under  the  same  auspices  in  1881  and  like- 
wise numbers  Mr.  Williams  among  it  directors. 

This  is  but  the  bare  enumeration,  indeed,  of  some  of  the  chief  lines  of  his  activity, 
omitting  from  the  list  many  other  movements,  like  those  of  the  street  railways,  the  gas 
and  water  works,  the  Oneida  Historical  Society,  etc.,  in  which  he  has  at  one  time  or 
another  borne  his  share  of  risk  or  effort.  Of  his  social  and  intellectual  qualities  it  is 
hardly  fitting  to  speak  while  he  continues  to  hold  his  cherished  place  in  the  hearts  and 
homes  of  many  Uticans.  His  private  library,  one  of  the  largest  collections  in  the  city, 
is  the  accumulation  of  many  years  and  represents  pretty  accurately  the  subjects  of  gen- 
eral and  particular  interest  with  which  he  has  stored  his  mind;  in  the  association  of 
such  companions  he  has  acquired  an  intelligent  comprehension  of  extraordinarily  wide 
range,  fulfilling  in  his  intellectual  life  the  high  mission  to  which  sound  culture  calls  each 
of  us.  It  is  due  to  the  dignity  and  simplicity  of  such  a  career  that  its  history  should  be 
told  briefly,  if  at  all.  In  lives  like  these  there  is  a  freedom  from  tumult,  an  absence  of 
strong  color,  that  makes  it  easy  and  natural  for  the  world  to  forget  when  they  are  gone. 
Labor  and  frugality,  with  no  adventure  or  excitement  except  that  which  comes  from 
strict  and  invariable  adherence  to  the  line  of  duty,  are  not  attributes  in  themselves  suit- 
able for  picturesque  treatment.  Yet  there  is  a  genuine  satisfaction  in  beholding  and 
considering  each  example  of  such  triumph  of  sober  and  right  conduct  over  temptation 
achieved  in  the  station  of  life  where  the  great  majority  are  placed.  It  is  not  the  special 
situation,  but  the  type,  which  is  all-important  and  interesting. 


rORD,  Dr.  WILLIS  ELLARD,  was  born  at  Belfast,  N.  Y.,  and  was  educated  in  the 
Genesee  Valley  Seminary  at  that  place.  He  was  fitted  for  college  at  the  age  of 
seventeen,  but  did  not  enter,  pursuing  his  studies  at  the  seminary  for  two  years  and 
then  beginning  his  course  in  medicine.  Grraduating  in  medicine  in  1872,  from  the  Med- 
ical Department  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,  he  was  employed  a  short 
time  in  demonstrating  anatomy  there,  and  then  by  competitive  examination  won  a  place 
on  the  medical  staff  of  Charity  Hospital,  New  York,  and  served  the  regular  time  as 
interne.  Just  before  the  completion  of  his  term  of  service  in  Charity  Hospital  he  was 
asked  to  go  to  Utica  to  see  Dr.  Gray,  then  the  distinguished  superintendent  of  the  New 
York  State  Lunatic  Asylum  at  that  place.  Dr.  Gray's  attention  had  been  called  to  his 
services  in  Charity  Hospital,  and  liking  the  young  man  he  appointed  Dr.  Ford  to  fill  the 
vacancy  on  his  staff.  Thus  began  a  warm  friendship  which  was  terminated  only  by  the 
untimely  death  of  Dr.  Gray.  After  five  years  and  more  of  service  at  the  asylum  Dr. 
Ford  began  private  practice  in  the  city  of  Utica.     At  the  time  he  left  the  service  at  the 


84  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

asylum,  December  26,  1878,  he  married  Miss  Mary  Ledyard  Seymour,  daughter  of  the 
late  John  P.  Seymour,  of  Utica.  In  private  practice  his  success  was  more  imme- 
diate than  is  commonly  the  case,  because  he  was  favorably  known  to  many  if  not  all 
of  the  physicians  in  this  part  of  the  State.  He  was  at  once  sought  for,  not  only  by  sick 
people,  but  by  physicians  who  desired  counsel. 

In  1882  he  was  made  medical  director  of  St.  Luke's  Hospital,  a  place  he  still  holds. 
After  four  years  of  service  there  the  institution  had  so  grown  in  importance  that  a  new 
hospital  building  was  needed.  Dr.  Ford  was  active  in  securing  necessary  subscriptions 
and  in  the  building  of  the  hospital,  which,  as  it  now  stands,  is  a  source  of  pride  to  the 
city.  He  instituted  in  1888  the  St.  Luke's  School  of  Instruction  for  Nurses,  which  is 
one  of  the  most  popular  institutions  in  the  city  today.  For  some  years  he  has  given 
much  attention  to  gynecology,  and  his  success  in  using  electricity  in  this  field  caused 
his  appointment  in  1889  as  professor  of  eleotro-therapeutins  in  the  Medical  Department 
of  the  University  of  Buffalo  and  next  year  as  lecturer  on  the  same  topic  in  the  Medical 
Department  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  ;New  York.  He  holds  both  positions  now 
and  gives  annually  a  course  of  lectures  to  the  medical  students  in  these  colleges.  In 
1884  the  degree  of  M.A.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Madison  University.  He  has  been 
a  liberal  contributor  to  current  medical  literature.  Dr.  Ford,  besides  being  a  member  of 
various  local  medical  organizations,  is  a  Fellow  of  the  American  Gynecological  Society, 
a  member  and  this  year  president  of  the  American  Climalogical  Society,  a  Fellow  of  the 
New  York  Academy  of  Medicine,  a  permanent  member  of  the  Medical  Society  of  the 
State  of  New  York,  and  a  member  of  and  this  year  president  of  the  Alumni  Associa- 
tion of  the  Medical  Department  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York. 


GREEN,  WALTER  JEROME,  late  a  prominent  citizen  and  business  man  of  Utica, 
member  of  the  banking  house  of  Charles  Q-reen  &  Son,  of  this  city,  and  president 
and  owner  of  the  Jacksonville,  St.  Augustine,  and  Halifax  River  Railroad  of  Florida, 
was  born  in  Hubbardsville,  Madison  County,  N.  Y.,  October  10,  1842,  and  died  in  Utica 
on  January  27,  1885.  His  widow  and  an  only  child  (a  son)  survive  him.  His  father, 
Charles  Grreen  (who  still  resides  at  the  family  homestead  in  Hubbardsville),  was  bom  in 
Sangerfield,  Oneida  County,  N.  Y.,  May  28, 1811.  He  has  been  in  business  in  Utica  for 
a  number  of  years,  and  is  probably  one  of  the  oldest  and  best  known  bankers  and  busi- 
ness men  in  this  part  of  the  State.  The  father  of  Charles  Green  was  David  Green,  who  was 
born  at  South  East,  Putnam  County,  N.  Y.  His  ancestors  came  Over  in  the  Mayflower. 
He  was  related  to  Gen.  Nathaniel  Green,  of  Revolutionary  fame.  His  mother's  name  was 
Deliverance  Hatch,  who  was  born  at  Cape  Cod,  Mass.  Her  mother's  name  was  Sears. 
David  Green  was  also  related  to  the  Sears  family.  The  mother  of  Walter  Jerome 
Green  was  Mary  Jane  Hubbard,  of  Hubbardsville,  Madison  County,  N.  Y.  Her  father 
was  Oliver  Kellogg  Hubbard,  born  at  Windsor,  Conn.  Her  mother,  Mary  Meaohem, 
was  born  at -Simsbury,  Conn.  Mr.  Green  , married,  June  26,  1867,  Miss  Sarah  L., 
daughter  of  Henry  Swartwout,  of  Troy,  N.  Y.  The  mother  of  Mrs.  Green  was  Maria 
Lester  Kittlehuyn,  whose  great-grandfather  was  William  Kittlehuyn,  of  Saratoga,  N.  Y., 
who  in  1734  was  the  owner  of  land  ten  miles  square  in  what  is  now  the  village  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  85 

Saratoga.  Mrs.  Green's  father  is  descended  from  the  family  of  Swartwouts  who 
came  from  Kirkoven  in  Holland  to  this  country  and  settled  in  New  Netherlands,  now 
New  York.  A  large  grant  of  land  upon  the  Mohawk  Eiver  was  made  by  the  Dutch 
government  to  Johannes  von  Swartwout.  The  family  have  held  the  rank  of  barons  in 
the  United  Netherlands  for  more  than  three  centuries.  The  head  of  the  family  is  now 
the  Baron  von  Swartwout,  of  Kirkoven. 

"  It  is  related  of  Capt.  Abraham  Swartwout  that  probably  the  first  display  of  the 
American  flag  at  a  military  post  was  at  Fort  Schuyler,  on  the  site  of  Rome,  N.  T.  The 
fort  was  besieged  early  in  the  month  of  August,  1777,  and  the  garrison  were  without  a 
flag,  so  they  made  one  according  to  the  prescription  of  Congress  by  cutting  up  sheets  to 
form  white  stripes,  bits  of  scarlet  cloth  for  the  red  stripes,  and  the  blue  ground  for  the 
stars  was  composed  of  portions  of  a  cloth  cloak  belonging  to  Capt.  Abraham  Swart- 
wout, of  Dutchess  County,,N.  T.,  and  the  flag  was  unfurled  August  3,  1777."  , 

Walter  Jerome  Green  received  a  liberal  education  in  his  youth,  having  attended  Caz- 
enovia  Seminary  and  Madison  University.  Deciding  to. enter  the  legal  profession  he 
was  properly  qualified  for  it  by  an  extensive  course  of  study,  which  was  closed  at  the 
Albany  University,  whence  he  was  graduated  in  1864  and  admitted  to  the  bar.  Having 
practiced  his  profession  two  years  the  increasing  importance  of  his  father's  business 
made  it  desirable  for  him  to  come  to  his  assistance,  and  he  abandoned  the  legal  profes- 
sion and  entered  the  bank.  In  a  short  time  he  was  admitted  to  partnership,  the  firm 
becoming  Charles  Green  &  Son.  Young  though  he  was  his  enterprising  spirit  soon 
made  itself  felt  in  the  afi'airs  of  his  father's  business,  which  gradually  broadened  its 
field  of  operations  and  took  a  leading  part  among  the  similar  enterprises  in  the  central 
part  of  the  State.  An  important  department  in  the  business  of  the  house  was  the  trade 
in  hops,  which  became  so  extensive  as  to  place  the  firm  among  the  largest  dealers  in 
this  country.  To  meet  the  demand  for  reliable  intelligence  bearing  on  the  hop  trade 
the  firm  published  a  journal  known  as  Charles  Green  <h  Son's  Hop  Paper,  a  large, 
handsomely  printed,  four-page  folio  of  twenty-eight  columns,  of  which  an  edition  of 
about  5,000  was  issued,  gratuitously,  quarterly.  Mr.  Green  became  interested  in  a  rail- 
road project  in  Florida,  which  promised  the  happiest  results.  Seeking  a  new  field  for 
investment  of  his  capital  his  attention  was  drawn  to  the  lack  of  modern  transporta- 
tion facilities  in  the  fruit  growing  section  of  that  State  ;  and  guided  by  the  promptings 
of  his  judgment,  which  on  many  previous  occasions  had  been  exercised  with  the  most 
fortunate  results,  he  threvsr  both  energy  and  money  into  the  scheme.  The  outcome  of 
this  efi'ort  was  the  Jacksonville,  St.  Augustine,  and  Halifax  Eiver  Railroad,  of  which 
Mr.  Green  was  president  and  the  entire  owner.  This  began  at  Jacksonville  on  the  St. 
John's  River  in  the  northeastern  corner  of  the  State  and  extended  southwardly  and  east- 
wardly  to  St.  Augustine  on  the  Atlantic  Coast,  and  was  thirty -seven  miles  in  length. 
The  road  connected  with  the  Atlantic  Coast  Steamship  Company,  running  outside  to 
New  Smyrna  on  the  Halifax  Coast.  Mr.  Green's  intentions  were  to  extend  the  road 
a  distance  of  106  miles  to  New  Smyrna.  This  would  have  afforded  quick  and  cheap 
transportation  between  Jacksonville  and  the  Halifax  and  Indian  River  country.  Al- 
though recently  constructed  the  road  received  an  extensive  patronage,  and  its  energetic 
president  and  his  assistants  gave  ample  proof  of  their  ability  to  meet  every  demand  that 


86  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

should  be  made  upon  them.  It  ran  through  a  fertile  and  rapidly  developing  region,  and 
shortened  the  time  of  transport  between  the  orange  country  of  the  east  coast  of  Florida 
and  New  York  by  some  eight  days — a  most  important  consideration  under  any  circum- 
stances, but  more  especially  in  view  of  the  perishable  nature  of  the  delicate  fruit  tranf- 
ported.  While  the  possibilities  of  this  section  of  Florida  as  a  fruit-growing  country  and 
health  resort  had  long  been  known,  and  to  some  extent  developed,  progress  had  been 
slow  and  uncertain  owing  to  the  lack  of  railroad  facilities.  Mr.  Green's  enterprise  bid 
fair  to  remedy  this  completely,  and  the  beneficent  effects  were  perceptible  in  a  great 
variety  of  ways  in  the  fertile,  beautiful,  and  salubrious  peninsula  traversed  by  his  road. 
Among  the  most  notable  results  is  the  laying  out  of  new  towns  between  St.  Augustine 
and  Jacksonville.  Here  the  balmy  breezes  from  the  Atlantic,  softened  and  toned  by  their 
passage  through  miles  of  health-giving  pine  forests,  impart  a  recuperative  property  to 
the  air  which  cannot  fail  to  make  the  locality  a  favorite  resort  for  invalids,  while  its  easy 
accessibility  must  also  contribute  greatly  to  its  popularity.  The  impetus  given  to  the 
whole  peninsula  by  the  building  of  the  Jacksonville,  St.  Augustine,  and  Halifax  River 
Railroad  rapidly  attracted  northern  capital,  and  it  is  probably  no  more  than  just  to  say 
that  this  project,  so  successfully  inaugurated  and  carried  through  by  Mr.  Grreen,  has  had 
more  to  do  with  the  upbuilding  of  this  part  of  the  State  of  Florida  than  any  other  in- 
fluence. The  railroad  rapidly  enlarged  its  terminal  facilities  and  was  supplied  by  its 
active  president  with  additional  freight  and  passenger  cars,  including  two  new  parlor 
cars  and  a  magnificent  new  ferry  boat.  The  Mechanic,  140  feet  in  length,  and  said  to  be 
the  finest  looking  craft  of  its  kind  in  any  waters  south  of  New  York  city,  capable  of 
carrying  1,800  people  and  15  large  teams.  The  arrival  of  The  Mechanic  recorded  an- 
other step  taken  by  Mr.  G-reen  to  secure  for  Jacksonville  the  immense  trade  that  was 
developing  along  the  South  Atlantic  Coast,  and  the  railroad  being  now  equipped  with 
two  steamers  was  better  than  ever  prepared  to  command  it. 

Speaking  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Green  the  Florida  IKmes-  Union  says : 

"A  host  of  friends  in  Jacksonville  were  shocked  this  morning  by  the  announcement 
of  the  death  W.  Jerome  Green,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.  At  once  the  flags  on  the  steam  ferry 
line  were  displayed  at  half-mast  and  the  ofiSce  in  this  city  draped  in  mourning.  In  the 
death  of  Mr.  Green  Jacksonville  loses  one  of  her  best  friends,  for  he  realized  that  the 
interests  of  his  road  and  that  of  the  city  were  identified,  and  shaped  the  management 
and  policy  of  the  road  accordingly.  Our  business  men  feel  deeply  his  death,  for  it  was 
well  known  that  it  was  his  policy  to  push  the  road  to  Daytona  and  points  farther  south 
with  all  possible  speed.  While  it  is  true  that  Jacksonville,  in  the  death  of  Mr.  Green, 
has  lost  a  friend  it  is  still  more  true  if  possible  that  the  whole  Halifax  Coast  has  suf- 
fered a  much  more  serious  loss.  Mr.  Green's  wife  and  son  and  friends  have  the  deep- 
est sympathies  of  our  entire  community  in  their  sad  bereavement." 

On  the  death  of  Mr.  Green  the  property  was  left  to  trustees  for  his  son.  It  was  sold 
six  years  ago  to  H.  M.  Flagler,  of  New  York,  who  has  carried  out  the  plans  and  ideas 
of  its  late  owner.  The  road  brought  $350,000,  which  is  invested  in  government  bonds 
for  his  son  and  in  that  shape  will  await  his  maturity. 

In  the  varied  enterprises  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  Mr.  Green  showed  himself 
possessed  of  superior  intelligence  and  judgment  and  a  rare  degree  of  push  and  energy. 
He  seldom  entered  upon  a  project  as  a  mere  speculation  and  what,  to  less  far-sighted 
and  sagacious  persons  might  seem  fraught  with  disaster,  proved  in  his  competent  hands 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


87 


prolific  of  success.  Not  alone  in  Utioa,  but  throughout  the  central  part  of  the  State, 
where  his  business  relations  have  been  numerous,  important,  and  in  active  operation  for 
»,  score  of  years,  he  was  highly  respected  as  an  honorable  and  successful  banker  and 
merchant  and  an  upright  man.  In  the  South,  where  his  capital,  intelligence,  and  en- 
ergy had  of  late  provided  congenial  and  profitable  employment,  the  results  of  his  labors 
have  already  been  recognized  as  alike  beneficent  and  progressive.  Returning  from  active 
labors  in  Florida  in  the  winter  of  1884-85  he  was  passing  some  time  at  his  home  in 
Utica,  when  he  was  stricken  with  apoplexy,  and  died  January  27,  1885. 

Exceptionally  far-seeing,  and  possessing  rare  judgment  in  business  matters,  Mr.  Green 
had  accumulated  a  handsome  property.  He  spared  no  pains  to  render  his  home  beauti- 
ful and  attractive  within  and  without,  and  the  residence  on  Rutger  Place  is  one  of  the 
handsomest  in  this  city.  Bright,  genial,  hospitable,  well  informed,  and  entertaining  he 
had  a  large  number  of  friends  to  whom  his  sudden  and  unexpected  death  was  the  occa- 
sion of  profound  sorrow. 


HUTCHINSON,  Hon.  CHARLES  WEBSTER,  was  born  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  on 
July  4,  1826,  in  which  city  his  parents  were  then  temporarily  residing.  His  birth 
took  place  at  the  residence  of  Maj.  Samuel  McClellan,  who  occupied  the  dwelling  on 
the  corner  of  School  and  Benefit  streets  in  that  city.  Mr.  Hutchinson  has  been  a  resi- 
dent of  the  city  of  Utica  from  the  year  following  his  birth,  and  here  received  his  early 
education  under  such  prominent  instructors  as  Thomas  Towell,  William  Backus,  Will- 
iam Williams,  William  0.  Barrett,  David  Prentice,  LL.D.,  Gleorge  R.  Perkins,  LL.D., 
and  others.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  entered  the  Scientific  Department  at  Q-eneva  Col- 
lege, devoting  himself  principally  to  these  studies  and  the  modern  languages.  He  was 
then  appointed  to  a  position  as  clerk  in  the  office  of  the  Syracuse  and  Utica  Railroad 
Company  at  Utica.  He  resigned  this  position  in  1847,  having  been  appointed  teller  of 
the  Fort  Plain  Bank,  and  acted  for  the  three  subsequent  years  in  that  capacity. 

Returning  to  Utica  he  assumed  charge  of  the  combined  interests  of  his  father  and 
Hon.  Horatio  Seymour  in  the  manufacturing  firm  of  E.  K.  Browning  &  Co.,  but  after  a 
few  months  he  took  charge  under  his  own  name  and  devoted  himself  to  its  interests 
until  the  autumn  of  the  year  1865,  when  he  disposed  of  the  business  and  went  to 
Europe  with  his  wife,  passing  between  two  and  three  years  in  travel  upon  the  Conti- 
nent and  a  winter  in  Africa  and  Egypt,  returning  to  Italy  by  the  Mediterranean  and 
Sicily.  Upon  his  return  home  to  Utica  he  took  an  active  interest  in  matters  of  a  pub- 
lic character,  and  for  several  years  was  a  director  of  the  Utica  Mechanics  Association. 
He  was  vice-president  and  presiding  officer  of  the  New  York  State  Sportsmen's  Asso- 
ciation for  several  years  from  its  organization,  and  was  a  member  of  the  first  committee 
who  presented  a  revision  of  the  game  laws  to  the  legislature  of  this  State,  which  were 
adopted,  and  in  1871  he  was  elected  its  president.  He  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city  of 
Utica  in  1875,  and  during  his  term  of  office  a  number  of  important  local  measures  were 
successfully  inaugurated  and  completed.  Several  artistic  fountains  were  erected  in  the 
public  parks,  and  the  latter  beautified  and  reclaimed  from  their  former  neglected  con- 
dition ;  several  culverts  were  built,  and  the  work  of  filling  the  streets  over  them  was 


88  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

rapidly  pushed  forward,  the  benefits  of  which  were  soon  proved  by  the  rapid  improve- 
ments and  growth  of  the  easterly  part  of  the  city.  His  administration  was  marked  by 
a  judicious  economy  in  public  expenditures,  and  many  improvements  were  inaugurated 
to  the  ultimate  advancement  of  the  interests  of  the  city.  The  year  of  his  mayoralty, 
being  notable  as  the  centennial  year,  was  a  period  which  brought  into  more  than  or- 
dinary prominence  the  local  executive  officials  throughout  the  country.  During  that 
year  the  citizens  of  Utica  extended  the  hospitalities  of  the  city  for  the  ninth  annual  re- 
union of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  which  invitation  was  accepted  for  the  dates  of 
September  15th  and  16th.  Mayor  Hutchinson,  in  his  official  capacity  as  chief  magis- 
trate, made  the  address  of  welcome  in  the  opera  house,  and  addresses  were  also  delivered 
by  Hon.  Horatio  Seymour,  Hon.  Roscoe  Oonkling,  and  other  citizens.  Among  those 
present  were  President  Grant,  Vioe-Pres.  Henry  Wilson,  several  members  of  the  na- 
tional cabinet,  and  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  while  the  army 
was  represented  by  General  Sherman  and  his  staff,  and  Generals  Joseph  Hooker,  H.  W. 
Slocum,  H.  A.  Barnum,  J.  G.  Parkhurst,  Henry  M.  Cist,  Daniel  Butterfield,  J.  S.  Ffil- 
lerton,  David  S.  Stanley,  A.  G.  McCook,  James  McQuade,  J.  B.  Kiddoo,  Frank  Wheaton, 
James  G.  Grindlay,  W.  H.  Christian,  and  many  other  distinguished  Union  commanders. 
His  Excellency  Governor  Samuel  J.  Tilden  was  the  guest  of  Mr.  Hutchinson,  and  with 
him  were  many  other  prominent  State  officials,  constituting  altogether  one  of  the  most 
distmguished  gatherings  of  national  and  State  dignitaries  ever  assembled  outside  of  the 
capital  of  the  nation.  The  re-union  was  a  grand  success  and  was  fully  appreciated  by 
all  the  delegates  and  guests  who  were  in  attendance,  and  they  expressed  the  highest 
gratification  at  the  attention  shown  them  by  the  citizens  and  their  liberality  of  enter- 
tainment and  generous  hospitality.  Railroad  trains  and  other  modes  of  conveyance 
were  kept  at  the  free  disposal  of  the  visitors,  and  Trenton  Falls,  the  armory  at  Ilion, 
the  cotton  factories,  and  other  industries  of  the  city  and  New  York  Mills  and  adjoining 
villages  were  visited.  The  re-union  closed  with  a  reception  and  ball  at  the  opera  house. 
President  Grant  and  Governor  Tilden  receiving  in  the  proscenium  boxes.  One  of  the 
guests  wrote  of  it  as  follows: 

"  No  notice  of  this  event,  written  at  the  late  hour  required  by  the  circumstances,  can 
do  justice  to  its  elegance  and  success  in  every  particular.  Each  succeedmg  moment 
seemed  to  be  more  and  more  enjoyable,  and  the  culmination  was  a  grand  triumph. 
Nothing  of  the  kind  ever  before  attempted  in  this  city  or  vicinity  equalled  it;  it  re- 
flected the  greatest  credit  upon  the  city  and  the  good  people  who  tendered  it  with  the 
most  perfect  cordiality  to  their  honored  guests,  the  brave  men  of  the  Society  of  the 
Army  of  the  Cumberland.  It  will  be  a  long  time  ere  the  bright  dream  will  be  for- 
gotten." 

Mr.  Hutchinson  was  prominent  in  organizing  the  Utica  Park  Association,  and  was 
its  president  from  its  incorporation  from  1872  until  1889,  excepting  three  terms,  when, 
other  matters  engrossing  his  attention,  he  decHned  an  election.  This  park  property 
was  estimated  to  have  cost  over  $150,000,  but  it  was  sold  by  him  to  the  State  Masonic 
Home  in  1889  for  the  sum  of  $75,000.  To  this  noble  charity,  in  which  as  a  Mason 
Mr.  Hutchinson  was  deeply  interested,  he  donated  toward  this  purchase  price  the  sum 
of  $25,000.  As  a  Mason  he  is  a  member  of  Utica  Lodge,  Oneida  Chapter,  Utica  Com- 
mandery  of  Knights  Templar,  and  Yah-nun-dah-sis  Lodge  of  Perfection,  and  has  taken 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  89 

the  32d  degree  of  Jthe  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish  Rite  in  Cosmopolitan  Consistory 
of  New  York.  He  is  also  prominent  in  the  order  of  Odd  Fellows  and  now  holds  the 
position  of  colonel  and  chief  of  equipment  of  the  Patriarchs  Militant  Independent  Order 
of  Odd  Fellows  in  the  Department  of  the  Atlantic,  was  for  several  years  president  of 
the  Utica  Club,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Democratic  and  Manhattan  Clubs,  both  of  New 
York  city.  Mr.  Hutchinson  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Oneida  Historical  Society, 
associated  with  Alexander  Seward,  S.  N.  D.  North,  John  F.  Seymour,  and  Morven  M. 
Jones,  of  which  the  late  Pon.  Horatio  Seymour  was  president  from  its  founding  in 
the  year  1876  until  his  death.  During  this  period  he  was  first  vice-president  and  acting 
president,  is  one  of  the  Board  of  Councillors,  and  is  now  its  president,  being  elected  in 
1891.  He  has  delivered  several  addresses  before  the  society  upon  subjects  relating  to 
the|  early  history  of  the  Mohawk  Valley,  and  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  five 
who  selected  the  design  and  erected  the  monument  commemorating  the  battle  of  Oris- 
kany,  August  6,  1777.  He  is  also  a  corresponding  member  of  a  number  of  historical 
societies.  For  many  years  he  has  devoted  a  portion  of  his  leisure  to  the  studies  of  eth- 
nology, history,  and  allied  subjects,  and  his  library  is  large  and  valuable  in  rare  books, 
in  both  English  and  foreign  languages.  One  of  his  favorite  subjects  of  study  is  In- 
dianology,  particularly  relating  to  the  Iroquois  or  tribes  of  the  Six  Nations.  His  cabi- 
net of  Indian  curios  and  relics  is  one  of  the  most  noted  in  the  State,  and  v/as  exhibited 
at  the  Bartholdi  Exhibition  in  New  York,  at  the  Albany  Bi-Centennial,  and  at  the  In- 
ternational Fair  in  1888  held  at  Bufifalo.  Mr.  Hutchinson,  in  appreciation  of  the  warm 
interest  he  has  taken  in  matters  relating  to  the  condition  and  welfare  of  the  Iroquois, 
was  adopted  by  them  and  given  the  name  of  "Gy-ant-wa-ka"  (The  Cornplanter)  by  a 
council  of  the  Senecas  on  their  reservation,  June  15,  1885. 

Among  the  corporate  positions  held  by  him  was  that  of  president  of  the  Utica  and 
Mohawk  Raihoad  Company,  and  he  ultimately  became  the  owner  of  that  road.  He  is 
also  president  of  the  Central  New  York  Agricultural  Association  and  is  a  trustee  of  the 
Holland  Trust  Company  of  New  York  city.  He  was  elected  a  vestryman  of  Trinity 
Church  Utica,  in  1861  and  warden  in  1887.  This  church  is  one  of  the  oldest  Episco- 
pal churches  in  the  western  part  of  this  State,  having  been  organized  May  24,  1803 
and  incorporated  August  14,  1804.  He  is  largely  interested  in  real  estate  and  the  man- 
ufacturing interests  of  the  city  of  his  residence,  and  is  sanguine  of  a  rapid  and  prosper- 
ous development  of  its  great  natural  resources  in  the  near  future.  „  ^,    ,      , 

Mr  Hutchinson  was  married  October  9,  1851,  by  the  Rt.  Rev.  Thomas  M.  Clark,  the 
present  bishop  of  Rhode  Island,  to  Miss  Laura  Clark  Beckwith,  the  eldest  daughter  of 
the  late  Alonzo  S.  Beckwith,  a  prominent  citizen  of  Hartford,  Conn.  She  died  April 
11  1883  leaving  no  children.  Mrs.  Hutchinson  was  active  and  generous  m  all  chari- 
table works,  and  her  sister  and  herself  were  the  "  two  founders  "  of  that  benevolent 
institution  the  "  House  of  the  Good  Shepherd,"  whose  mission  is  the  care  of  httle 
children  Mr.  Hutchinson's  father.  Holmes  Hutchinson,  was  an  eminent  civil  engineer 
and  was  a  son  of  Amaziah  Hutchinson  and  Elizabeth  Mack  He  was  born  at  Genoa 
Cayu<.a  County,  N.  Y.,  January  5,  1794,  and  removed  to  Utica  in  819,  and  was  almost 
constantly  employed  as  an  engineer  upon  the  Erie  Canal  and  its  enlargement  and  other 
ca^a  s  of  the  State  from  that  date  until  1835,  when  he  was  appointed  chief  engineer  of 


90  MEMORIAL  HISTOR  Y  OF  UTICA. 

the  middle  division,  which  position  he  held  until  1841.     During  this  period  he  made  the 
maps  and  surveys  of  the  Brie  Canal  from  Canastota  to  the  Hudson  River,  the  Black  River, 
Cayuga,  Crooked  Lake,  Chemung,  and  Seneca  Canals,  the  G-lens  Falls  feeder  and  the 
Rochester  aqueduct,  and  of  a  proposed  canal  on  Long  Island  uniting  Jamaica  Bay  with 
Rockaway  Inlet.    His  report  to  the  legislature,  dated  March,  1826,  says  "  that  construct- 
ing nine  miles  of  canal  through  the  inland  bays  form  a  continuous  navigation  from  Sag 
Harbor  to  the  city  of  New  York,  a  distance  of  115  miles,''  and   he   recommended   its 
construction.     In  1889,  after  a  lapse  of  sixty-three  years,  this  project  was  again  brought 
into  prominence.     In   1825  he  was  engaged    as   chief   engineer   by   the  Connecticut 
River  Company  upon  the  recommendation  of  Gov.  De  Witt  Clinton,  of  New  York, 
to  survey  a  route  of  water  communication  from  Barnet,  in  the  State  of  Vermont,  to  the 
city  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  a  distance  of  219  miles.  Upon  receiving  his  report  the  directors 
of  the  company  by  resolution  said  "that  Mr.  Hutchinson  has  fully  justified  their  high- 
wrought  anticipations."     In  1826  he  was  appointed  by  the  authorities  of  the  State  of 
Rhode  Island  chief  engineer  of  the  construction  of  the  Blackstone  Canal  from  the  city 
of  Providence  to  Worcester,  Mass.     In  1828  he  was  chief  engineer  of  the  constrution 
of  the  Oxford  and  Cumberland  Canal  in  the  State  of  Maine.     He  married  February  15, 
1824,  Maria  Abeel  Webster,  the  second  daughter  of  Joshua  Webster,  M.D.,  of  Fort 
Plain,  N.  Y.,  who  was  one  of  the   most  prominent  among  the  early  physicians  of  the 
Mohayvk  Valley.     Dr.  Webster  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  Thomas  Webster,  of  Ipswich, 
England,  and  was  a  son  of  John  Webster,  of  Scarboro,  Me.     He  was  surgeon  of  the 
One  Hundred  and  Thirty-eighth  Regiment  New  York  State  Volunteers  during  the 
War  of  1812  and  was  a  member  of  the  State  legislature  in   1822.     Dr.  Webster  mar- 
ried Catharine  Wagner,  whose  mother  was  the  daughter  of  John  Abeel,  the  Indian 
trader,  whose  father,  Johannes  Abeel,  resided  in  Albany,  and  was  recorder  and  mayor 
of  that  city  during  the  years  1C94  and  1695  and  also  during  1709  and  1710.     He  was 
also  one  of  the  commissioners  of  Indian  affairs  from  1706  to  1710.     Mrs.  Webster's 
grandfather  was  Col.  Johan  Peter  Wagner,  who  with  William  Fox  had  the  distinction 
of  being  the  first  two  of  the  Palatinates  who  settled  in  the  Mohawk  Valley,   easterly  of 
Garoga  Creek,  in  the  town  of  Palatine  in  1723.     The  colonel's   oldest  son,  also  Johan 
Peter,  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  safety  during  the  Revolution,  and  was  lieu- 
tenant-colonel in  the  regiment  of  Colonel  Cox  at  the  battle  of  Oriskany,  August  6, 1777, 
in  which  battle  two  of  his  sons,  Johan  Georg  and  Johan  Jost,  and  five,  members  of  the 
Wagner  family  were  also  engaged.     After  General  Herkimer  was  wounded  and  Col. 
iEbenezer  Cox   was  killed   tradition  says  that  Colonel  Wagner  took  command  of  the 
brigade,  which  resulted  in  the  victory  so  decisive  for  the  American  forces.     Mr.  Hutch- 
inson was  prominent  in  many  of  the  early  enterprises  in  the  State ;  was  one  of  the 
•original  directors  of  the   Syracuse  and  Utica  Railroad,  of  the  Lake  Ontario  Steamboat 
Company,  of  the  Bank  of  Utica,   and  other  corporations;  and   was  for  some  years 
the  president  of  the  Syracuse  and  Oswego  Railroad.     He  was  quiet  in  his  demeanor 
and  courteous  in  speech  and  manner,  and  all  who  were  brought  into  Contact  with  him 
accorded  him  their  respect  and  esteem,  and  acknowledged  his  high  sense  of-  honor  and 
scrupulous  integrity.     He  died  suddenly  at  his  residence  in  the  city  of  Utica,  February 
21,  1865,  aged  seventy-one  years. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  91 

The  records  and  traditions  of  the  Hutchinson  family  are  that  the  founder  of  this  old 
family  is  traced  back  to  the  tenth  century  and  came  from  Cranborg,  in  the  Danish 
island  of  Zealand,  with  Harold  Harefoot,  and  he  was  then  designated  in  Latin  Kfeinensis, 
meaning  a  native  of  Witton.  The  family  settled  in  England  at  or  near  Middleham,  in 
the  bishopric  of  Durham,  and  they  were  free  tenants  of  the  Prince  Bishops  of  that 
manor,  particularly  Cornforth  and  Humber  Knowles,  after  the  Conquest.  Bleazer 
Hutchinson,  the  ancestor  of  this  branch  of  the  family,  came  to  America  in  1633  and 
afterward  settled  at  Lebanon,  now  Andover,  Conn.  There  were  four  of  this  name  in 
direct  descent.  Eleazer  the  second  married  Ruth  Long.  They  had  seven  children, 
Amaziah,  the  father  of  Holmes  Hutchinson,  being  the  third  son,  who  was  born  Decem- 
ber 14,  1762.  He  married  Elizabeth  Mack,  March  30,  1791.  They  had  ten  children, 
Holmes  being  the  second  son.  His  mother's  grandmother  was  Sybella  Browne,  the 
only  daughter  of  Sir  John  Browne,  Viscount  Montague,  of  Londonderry,  Ireland,  who 
married  John  Mack,  who  with  his  wife  and  William,  his  son,  came  from  the  town  of  Ar- 
magh to  America  in  1732  and  settled  at  Londonderry,  N.  H.  Tradition  records  that 
Isabella  Browne,  the  cousin  of  Sybella,  was  married  to  the  grandfather  of  Gov. 
George  Clinton,  of  New  York. 


WILLIAMS,  JAMES  WATSON,  was  the  son  of  Nathan  Williams,  for  many 
years  circuit  judge,  and  was  born  in  Utica,  May  18,  1810.  In  his  youth  he 
held  the  first  positions  in  the  schools  and  in  the  College  where  he  was  educated. 
He  studied  law  with  his  father  and  was  at  first  a  clerk  in  the  court  of  the  vice- 
chancellor.  Then  in  association  for  some  years  with  David  Wager,  his  brother-in-law, 
and  still  longer  alone,  he  was  more  or  lass  occupied  with  the  duties  of  his  profession. 
It  was  an  occupation,  however,  in  which  he  found  little  that  was  congenial,  so  that  his 
time  and  attention  were  largely  engrossed  with  other  employments.  About  1835  he  be- 
came editor  of  the  WttUy  Ohstrver  and  was  connected  with  it  over  two  years,  giving 
brilliant  proof  of  strength  as  a  logician,  high  culture,  and  patience  in  study  and  research. 
In  all  matters  of  hfe  and  business  Mr.  Williams  was  remarkable  for  the  neatness  and 
the  accuracy  of  his  transactions.  His  clear-headed  insight,  his  conscientious  fidelity,  his 
fine  penmanship,  and  the  nice  care  with  which  everything  was  executed  that  fell  to  his 
lot  to  do  were  so  universally  felt  that  demands  upon  him  were  frequently  made  to  per- 
form public  and  official  duty  which  no  one  else  could  so  well  do.  In  1847  he  was  made 
mayor  of  the  city  and  in  1848  was  placed  in  nomination  for  Congress.  He  was  a  most 
serviceable  commissioner  of  the  public  schools  and  as  such  a  judicious  guardian  of  the 
interests  of  the  Public  Library,  and  an  active  trustee  of  the  Female  Academy ;  one  of  the 
original  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Utica  Cemetery  Association  on  whose  unerring  taste 
hislssociates  largely  relied ;  president  of  the  Board  of  the  Utica  Water  Works  Company, 
and  secretary  as  well  as  manager  of  the  Managing  Board  of  the  State  Hospital  for  the 

Insane.  ,■  1,  -o 

He  was  in  fact  noted  for  his  taste  and  skill  in  a  wide  range  of  accomplishments.  He 
was  well  read  in  English  literature  and  had  a  refined  appreciation  of  all  that  related  to 
the  arts      He  spoke  and  wrote  with  ease  and  with  a  choiceness  of  phraseology  which 


92  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

showed  that  he  had  given  days  and  nights  to  the  best  of  models.  He  was  well  fitted  to 
deliver  addresses  on  public  occasions  on  a  great  variety  of  topics,  and  was  ever  ready 
to  pay  a  public  tribute  to  those  of  his  acquaintance  who  passed  to  their  final  rest  before 
him.  At  the  lime  of  his  own  death  he  was  busied  in  preparing  a  discourse  to  be  shortly 
spoken  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  of  Hamilton  College. 

Mr.  Williams  had  the  abilities  which  qualified  him  for  eminence  and  usefulness  in 
public  relations.  Yet  his  critical  taste  and  habits  of  minute  and  careful  elaboration  held 
him  back  in  some  degree  from  reaching  that  prominence  in  the  public  mind  to  which  by 
his  talents  he  was  entitled.  His  very  fastidiousness  and  nicety  were  apt  to  make  him 
dissatisfied  with  his  own  productions,  and  prevent  his  coming  forward  as  freqently  and 
as  boldly  as  he  should  have  done  in  justice  to  himself.  Added  to  this  his  scholarly 
habits  and  inclinations  led  him  to  follow,  in  preference,  the  more  peaceful  and  retired 
walks  of  private  life.  All  those  who  knew  him,  however,  from  his  earliest  youth  felt 
that  if  he  had  seen  fit  to  throw  himself  into  the  struggle  for  public  distinction  he  had  the 
■  qualities  and  attainments  that  would  have  enabled  him  to  reach  any  point  at  which  his 
ambition  might  have  aimed. 

Beyond  respect  inspired  by  his  abilities  Mr  Williams  was  also  held  in  high  regard  by 
the  community  for  his  unbending  integrity.  From  earliest  youth,  his  career  was 
marked  by  the  blamelessness  of  his  character,  and  in  all  his  dealings  since  he  was  up- 
right, honorable,  and  courteous.  In  his  disposition  he  was  mild,  amiable,  and  genial, 
while  his  intercourse  with  his  fellowmen  was  marked  with  kindly  charity  and  benevo- 
lent interest.  His  rehgious  convictions  were  strong  and  clear,  his  "devotion  to  the 
church  of  his  fathers  constant  and  invaluable.  He  was  a  considerate  husband  and 
a  tender  father.  His  wife  was  Helen,  daughter  of  Alfred  Munson,  who  together  with 
two  daughters  is  still  living.     Another  daughter  died  in  childhood. 


ROBKRTS,  ELLIS  H.,  was  the  son  of  Watkins  Roberts,  and  was  born  in  Utica, 
September  30,  1827.  His  preliminary  education  he  obtained  in  the  Whitestown 
Seminary,  and  thence  he  went  to  Yale  College,  whfere  he  was  graduated  in  1850,  taking 
the  second  honor.  During  his  college  vacations  he  spent  his  time  in  the  printing 
office  of  his  brother,  and  by  his  diligence  in  type-setting  he  became  a  practical  printer. 
After  graduation  he  was  for  a  short  time  principal  of  the  academy,  and  then  joined 
Messrs.  Sherman,  Colston  &  Roberts  in  the  conduct  of  the  Utica  Morning  Herald,  which 
had  been  recently  started  by  them.  Of  this  paper  he  soon  became  sole  editor  and  pro- 
prietor, and  continued  to  conduct  it  with  the  help  of  able  assistants  down  to  October, 
1890,  when  it  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  company.  Mr.  Roberts  was  a  terse  and  forci- 
ble writer,  firm  and  consistent  in  support  of  the  principles  of  the  Republican  party,  yet 
too  independent  to  be  led  into  the  advocacy  of  men  or  measures  which  his  judgment 
did  not  approve.  He  gave  to  the  paper  a  character  for  enterprise,  intelligence,  and 
uprightness  which  secured  it  a  wide  circulation  in  Central  and  Northern  New  York 
and  an  enviable  repute  the  whole  country  over.  He  left  it  to  become  assistant  treasu- 
rer of  the  United  States  at  New  York  city,  where  he  now  resides. 

Mr.  Roberts  sat  as  a  member  of  the  New  York  Assembly  in  1867,  and  was  afterward 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  93 

•a  representative  of  his  district  in  the  Forty-second  and  Forty-third  terms  of  the  United 
States  Congress,  where  he  served  in  the  Committee  of  Ways  and  Means.  At  the  close 
•of  these  official  duties  he  made  an  extensive  tour  in  Europe,  returning  to  the  manage- 
ment of  the  HeraU.  His  interest  in  the  civic,  educational,  and  other  affairs  of  Utica 
that  concerned  its  general  welfare  were  shown  not  only  by  the  support  he  gave  them 
in  his  paper,  but  his  concession  to  the  frequent  demands  made  upon  him  for  addresses 
on  pubKc  occasions.  He  was  and  is  still  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  College,  from  which  he 
received  the  degree  of  LL.D.,  and  of  the  Utica  Female  Academy.  The  same  honor  was 
likewise  conferred  on  him  by  Yale  College.  He  succeeded  Governor  Seymour  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Oneida  Historical  Society,  and  was  president  of  the  Fort  Schuyler  Club,  as 
well  as  of  the  Beehive  Bank,  so-called.  He  was  author  of  a  history  of  New  York,  pub- 
lished as  one  of  the  Commonwealth  series,  and  of  a  work  on  Government  Revenue,  which 
was  made  up  of  six  lectures  he  delivered  before  the  students  and  faculty  of  Cornell 
University. 

COMSTOCK,  MILES  CHESTER,  was  born  in  Hartwick,  Otsego  County,  N.  Y., 
May  7,  1823,  and  was  the  oldest  of  ten  children.  Nine  years  later  his  father, 
Sheldon  Comstock,  a  respected,  well-to-do  farmer,  moved  with  his  family  to  Westford, 
in  the  same  county,  and  here  the  boy  received  such  an  education  as  the  district  school 
of  the  day  afforded.  During  the  summer  months  life  in  the  country  was  all  work  for 
the  industrious  youth,  and  the  winter  found  him  busy  in  school,  especially  in  the  study 
•of  mathematics,  of  which  he  was  naturally  fond.  At  the  age  of  seventeen,  having  lost 
his  mother  to  whom  he  was  devotedly  attached,  he  decided  to  leave  the  farm  and  to 
accept  a  position  offered  him  in  a  grocery  store  in  Utica,  on  Genesee  street,  just  below 
Fayette.  On  arriving  in  Utica  he  found  himself  with  a  capital  of  one  shilling,  a  new 
■suit  of  clothes,  willing  hands  and  a  determination  to  succeed.  Before  the  expiration  of 
the  year,  however,  the  firm  by  whom  he  was  employed  failed  and  he  returned  to  West- 
ford,  rich  in  a  pi'oportion  of  his  year's  salary,  which  was  to  have  been  eighty  dollars. 
After  another  winter  in  school  he  came  back  to  Utica  and  entered  the  store  of  Elijah 
G.  Peckham,  who  sold  out  a  little  later  to  T.  K.  Butler.  In  Mr.  Butler's  employment 
Mr.  Comstock,  by  industry,  good  management  and  economy,  laid  the  foundation  for  a 
.successful  business  career.  After  five  years'  clerkship  he  was  admitted  to  partnership 
the  firm  becoming  T.  K.  Butler  &  Co.  In  1855  Mr.  Comstock  organized  the  firm  of 
Dickinson,  Comstock  &  Co.,  which  was  changed  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Dickinson  to 
■Comstock  Bros.  Since  this  time  he  has  extended  his  business  interests  in  various 
ways,  giving  employment  to  a  large  number  of  workingmen.  The  manufacturing  firm 
of  Comstock  Bros.  &  Co.  began  in  1868,  and  some  years  later  Mr.  Comstock  purchased 
the  factories  of  the  Segar  Manufacturing  Co.,  of  Utica,  and  Hard  Bros.  &  Co.,  of 
Oneida,  and  incorporated  them  as  the  Comstock  Manufacturing  Co.  From  time  to 
time  he  hasinvested  in  city  property,  always  with  the  idea  of  its  ultimate  improvement, 
and  the  several  handsome  edifices  which  he  has  built  add  materially  to  the  city  of  his 
TBsidence. 

In  politics  Mr.  Comstock  belongs  to  the  party  which  Jefferson  established  and  in 
1855  was  nominated  by  the  Democrats  for  city  treasurer  and  was  elected  by  100  ma- 


94  MEMORIAL  HISTORY  OF  UTICA. 

jority;  the  nominee  for  mayor  on  the  Whig  ticket  that  year  receiving  a  majority  of 
600.  In  the  spring  of  1871  he  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city  and  four  years  later  was 
appointed  fire  and  police  commissioner.  Many  of  our  citizens  remember  the  terror 
caused  in  the  community  about  this  time  by  a  series  of  well-planned  burglaries.  No 
efforts  on  the  part  of  the  proper  authorities  seemed  to  avail  in  discovering  the  perpe- 
trators. Mr.  Comstock  with  all  the  enthusiasm  of  his  nature  threw  himself  into  the 
work  of  detection,  and  by  almost  single-handed  efforts  succeeded  in  arresting  and  con- 
victing several  desperate  criminals.  As  an  office  holder  he  faithfully  fulfilled  the  trust 
reposed  in  him,  being  heartily  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  people  and  never  permit- 
ting private  interests  to  interfere  with  the  higher  duties  of  citizenship.  In  the  old  days 
of  the  volunteer  fire  department,  when  for  a  season  fires  were  raarvelously  frequent 
and  buckets  took  the  place  of  hose,  he  was  an  indefatigable  worker  and  member  of  In- 
dependent Engine  and  Hose  Company  No.  3. 

Many  positions  of  trust  and  honor  have  been  held  by  Mr.  Comstock  For  five  years 
he  devoted  much  time  and  attention  to  the  interests  of  the  Utioa State  Hospital,  having 
been  appointed  manager  in  1885.  He  took  a  prominent  part  m  the  building  of  the 
Utioa  and  Susquehanna  Valley  Railroad,  and  its  subsequent  leasing  to  the  Delaware,. 
Lackawanna  and  Western.  As  a  member  of  the  Mechanics'  Association,  the  Mendels- 
sohn Club,  the  old  Oneita  and  present  Fort  Schuyler  Clubs,  and  charter  member  and 
treasurer  of  Faxton  Lodge,  he  has  shown  a  lively  interest  in  the  social  and  fraternal  in- 
tercourse of  his  fellowmen.  For  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century  he  has  been  a  director  in 
the  First  National  Bank,  faithfully  aiding  with  his  unobtrusive  counsel. 

Before  leaving  the  home  of  his  boyhood.  Miles  C.  Comstock  was  baptized  and  con- 
firmed by  Bishop  Onderdonk  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church.  Upon  arriving  at 
Utica  he  at  once  allied  himself  with  Trinity  Churck,  and  has  ever  since  been  a  devoted 
member  of  this  parish.  Since  1844  he  has  been  connected  with  its  Sunday-school 
either  as  teacher  or  superintendent,  having  held  the  latter  office  twenty-five  years.  In 
1856  he  was  elected  vestryman  of  the  church,  in  1886  warden,  and  for  several  years 
has  served  on  the  finance  committee  of  the  diocese.  To  the  charitable  and  educational 
institutions  of  the  city  he  has  been  a  cheerful  giver.  A  trustee  of  the  House  of  the 
G-ood  Shepherd,  and  for  some  time  president,  he  has  devoted  much  time  and  attention 
to  its  welfare. 

No  one  has  done  more  to  advance  the  interests  of  the  city  of  his  adoption  than  Mr. 
Comstock.  Whatever  he  undertakes  he  loves  to  push  to  success.  In  all  public  enter- 
prises looking  to  the  interests  of  the  community  he  has  stood  with  the  foremost.  In 
mercantile  circles  he  is  distinguished  for  honesty,  hberal  dealings,  executive  talents  of 
no  mean  order  and  a  kindly  consideration  towards  others.  His  private  life  is  without, 
blemish,  and  his  modest  unpretension,  refinement  of  feeling  and  generosity  of  heart 
mark  the  true  gentleman. 

Mr.  Comstock  has  been  twice  married.     His  first  wife  was  Miss  Emily  M.  Eoseboom 
of  Otsego  County,  and  their  children  are  Mrs.  Frederick  '&..  Peckham  and  Arthur  Com- 
stock.    His  second  wife  was  Mrs.  Helen  Mar  North,  of  Middlefield   N.  Y. 


INDEX. 


Academy,  Assumption,  472. 
Utica  Free,  450-457. 
burned,  325. 
dedicated,  329. 
Female,  325. 
Abolition  Convention  forbidden  by  trust- 
ees, 299. 
Adams,  Charles  D.,  biography  of.  Part  II, 
51. 

portrait  of,  facing  212. 
Advanced  School,  the,  467. 
American  Citizen,  478. 

District     Telegraph     and    Telephone 

Company,  organization  of,  358. 
Jourtj.al  of  Insanity,  489. 
Anti- Slavery  Convention,  225. 
Armory,  erection  of,  310. 
Army  of  the  Cumberland,  meeting  of,  347. 
Assumption  Academy,  472. 
Asylum,  State  Lunatic  burned,  288. 

Utica  Orphan,  corner-stone  laid,  295. 

Bacon,  Ezekiel,  123. 
Bacon,  William  J.,  527. 

portrait  of,  facing  526. 
Bacon,  "  Willie,"  307. 
Bagg,  Egbert,  303. 
Bagg,  Moses,  jr.,  93. 
Bagg,  Moses,  sr.,  35. 
Bagg's  Hotel,  1815  (out).  94. 
Bailey,  Joel  C,  249. 
Bailey,  Rev.  Wesley,  247. 
Baker,  William,  244. 
Ballou,  Joseph,  29. 
Ballon,  Theodore  P.,  212. 
Bank  of  Utica,  570. 

Oneida  County,  583. 

Oneida  National,  581. 

Ontario,  575. 

Manhattan,  569. 

Second  National,  583. 

Utica,  581. 

Savings,  584. 


Baptist  churches,  430-435. 
Barnard,  Charles  B.,  Harvey,  jr.,  and  Hor- 
ace, 269. 
Barnard,   Harvey,  168. 
Barnum,  Ezra  S.,  117. 
Basin,  Miller's,  189. 
Batchelder,  Dr.  John  P.,  186. 
Battle  of    Oriskany,    its    Centennial   ob- 
served, 349. 
B-^ardsley,  Samuel,  513. 
Beardsley,  Dr.  Alvin,  187. 
Beebe,  Alexander  M.,  191. 
Belt  Line  street  railroads,  1886-90,  356. 
Bellinger,  John,  21. 
Bench  and  Bar  of  LTtica,  491. 
Bethel  Park  Baptist  Church,  433. 
Bethany  Church,  409. 
Bethesda  Congregational  Church,  412. 
Bible  Society  of  Oneida,  616. 
Biography  of.  Part  II. 

Adams,  Charles  D.,  51. 

Butler,  John  M.,  60. 

Butler,  Truman  K.,  37. 

Chamberlain,  Ephraim,  42. 

Childs,  Silas  D.,  11. 

Curtis,  Philo  C,  19. 

Darlmg,  Charles  W.,  73. 

Farwell,  Samuel,  14. 

Faxton,  Theodore  S.,  9. 

Fish,  Henry,  17. 

Ford,  Willis  E.,  83. 

Graham,  Edmund  A.,  7. 

G-ray,  John  Pe-due,  20. 

G-reen,  Waiter  Jerome,  84. 

Head,  George  W.,  34. 

Hopper,  Thomas,  25. 

Hunt,  James  G.,  63. 

Hutchinson,  Charles  W.,  87. 

Kernan,  Francis,  36. 

Laird,  Frank  P.,  70. 

Lawrence,  Lewis,  28. 

Lindsley,  Smith  M.,  67. 

Mason,  Charles  A.,  13. 


96 


INDEX. 


Biography  of,  Part  II. 

Mather,  Joshua,  65. 

Middleton,  Robert,  53. 

Millar,  Charles,  27. 

Pixley,  Henry  D.,  61. 

Roberts,  Ellis  H.,  92. 

Roberts,  James,  51. 

Rogers,  Publius  V.,  33. 

Russell,  William,  38. 

Sayre,  Theodore  S.,  69. 

Seymour,  George,  59. 

Seymour,  Horatio,  3. 

Swan,  Joseph  R.,  72. 

Thorn,  John,  30. 

Watson,  William  H.,  44. 

Wheeler,  Eussel,  41. 

White,  William  M.,  56. 

Wiley,  George  H.,  54. 

Williamson,  Abijah  J.,  29. 

Williams,  James  Watson,  91. 

WiUharas,  Robert  S.,  78. 

Wood,  Henry  J.,  57. 
Bissell,  Dr.  Daniel  P.,  259. 
Bloodgood,  Francis  A.,  494. 
Board  of  Charities,  628. 

to  take  possession  of  City  Hospital, 
344. 
Bonding  the  city  for  railroads,  326. 
Bounds  of  the  city  enlarged,  353. 
Bours,  Peter,  97. 
Bradish,  John,  115. 
Bradstreet,  Martha,  65. 
Brayton,  Edward  S.,  245. 
Brayton,  Milton,  162. 
Breese,  Arthur,  101. 
Breweries,  614. 

Bridge,  first,  across  Mohawk,  29. 
Bristol,  William,  187. 
Brodhead,  Charles  C,  61. 
Bronson,  Greene  C,  521. 
Buckingham,  Charles  L.,  307. 
Buckingham,  Edgar  D.,  296. 
Business  College,  471. 
Business  men  in  1863,  313-318. 
Butler,  Horace,  160. 
Butler,  John  M.,  biography  of.  Part  II., 60. 

portrait  of,  facing  582. 
Butler,  Truman  K.,  biography  of.  Part  II., 
37. 

portrait  of,  facing  136. 
Butterfleld,  John,  157,  375. 

Calvary  Church,  419. 
Camp,  Harry,  99. 
Camp,  John,  98. 


Camp,  Talcott,  40. 

Canal,  Brie,  opened  from  Rome  to  Utica, 
142. 
completed,  ceremonies,  169. 
Capital  execution,  first  in  the  county,  61. 

of  John  Tuhi,  1'36. 
Carter,  John,  213. 
Catholic  churches,  441-447. 
Central  New  York  Demohrat,  487. 
Central  New  York  Telephone  Company,. 

organization  of,  358. 
Centenary  Methodist  Episcopal   Church, 

427. 
Central  New  York  Pottery,  593. 
Chamberlain,  Bphraim,  biography  of.  Part 
II.,  42. 

portrait  of,  facing  332. 
Chapman,  Edward,  291. 
Charities,  616. 

Charity  carnival  held  at  Utica  Park,  345. 
Charter  of  1805,  89. 
1817,  131. 
city,  197. 
Chenango  Canal,  opening  of,  381. 
Childs,  David  W.,  78. 
Childs,  Silas  D.,  biography  of.  Part  II.,  11_ 

portrait  of,  facing  370.  ■ 
Cholera  epidemic,  201-204. 
Christian  Worker,  the,  488. 
Chubbuck,  Samuel  W.,  262. 
Church  Eclectic,  the,  488. 
Churches  built  in  years  1888-91,  357. 
Presbyterian,  397-411. 
Bethany,  409. 

Elizabeth  Street  (colored),  411. 
Memorial,  411. 
Olivet,  410. 
Old    Fort    Schuyler   and    Utica. 

(First  Presb.),  55,  397. 
Second  Presbyterian,  403. 
Westminister,  406. 
Congregational,  412-414. 
Bethesda,  412. 
Plymouth,  413. 
Protestant  Reformed  (Dutch),  414. 
Protestant  Episcopal,  415-422. 
Calvary,  419. 
Grace,  418. 
•St.  George's,  420. 
St.  Luke's  Memorial,  421. 
Trinity,  415. 
Methodist  Episcopal,  422-430. 
Centenary  Methodist,  427, 
Coke  Memorial,  428. 
Dryer  Memorial,  426. 


INDEX. 


97 


Churches,  Methodist  Episcopal. 

Evangelical,  430, 

First  Methodist,  423. 

Moriah,  427, 

South  Street  Methodist,  425. 
Baptist,  430-435. 

Bethel  (Park)  Baptist,  433. 

Ebenezer,  435. 

First  (Welsh)  431. 

Immanuel,  435. 

Tabernacle,  432. 
Lutheran,  435-438. 

Church  of  the  Holy  Communion, 
438. 

Church  of  the  Redeemer,  437. 

St.  Paul's,  436. 

Trinity  Evangelical,  438. 

Zion  Evangelical,  435. 
Moravian,  439. 
Universalist, 

First  (Reconcihation),  440. 

8econd  (of  Our  Father),  440. 
Roman  Catholic,  441-447. 

St.  Agnes,  447. 

St.  Francis  de  Sales,  447. 

St.  Jphn's,  441. 

St.  Joseph's,  445. 

St.  Mary's,  446. 

St.  Patrick's,  446. 
Hebrew. 

House  of  Israel,  448. 

House  of  Jacob,  448. 
Churchill,  Alfred,  180. 
Citizens  Corps,  organization  of,  231. 
City  Court,  establishing  of,  352. 
City  Hall,  laying  of  corner-stone,  274. 

site  selected,  265. 
City  Hospital,  the,  628. 

in  use  for  vsrounded  of  the  county, 
323. 
City  Officers,  last  decade,  360. 
Clark,  Brastus,  493. 
Clark,  John  T.,  290. 
Clark,  Oren,  142. 
Clark,  Thomas  E.,  496. 
Clark,  WiUiam,  125. 
Classical  and  Commercial  Lyceum,  461. 
Clothing  manufacture,  598. 
Cochran,  James  and  Walter  L.,  137. 
Coe,  Isaac,  81. 

Coke  Memorial  (Welsh  M.  E.)  Church,  428. 
Colling,  Thomas,  572. 
Colonization,  discussion  on,  223. 
Columlian  Gazette,  478. 
Common  Council,  first  meeting  of,  200. 

M 


Oomstock,   M.  C,  portrait  of,  facing  192 
Congregational  Churches,  412-414. 
Conkling,  Roscoe,  560. 

portrait  of,  facing  560. 
Convention,  Anti-  Slavery,  224-226. 
Cooper,  Apollos,  35. 
Cooper,  Benjamin  F.,  526. 
Corporation  currency,  issuing  of,  120. 
Cosby's  Manor,  grant  and  survey  of,  20. 
Cotton  manufacture,  606,  612. 
County  Clerk's  office,  building  of,  336. 
Court-house,  (second)  erection  of,  267 
Courts,  491. 

Recorder's,  253. 
City,  352. 
Coventry,  Dr.  Alexander,  39,  40. 
Coventry,  Dr.  Charles  B.,  185. 
Coventry,  Dr.  Walter  B.,  295. 
Coye,  Jason  &.,  246. 
Cozier,  Ezra  S.,  115. 
Crafts,'  Willard,  210. 
Crocker,  Hugh,  250. 
Crocker,  John  C,  244. 
Grouse,  Daniel,  296. 
Cunningham,  Hugh,  81. 
Curtis,  Philo  C,  biography  of.  Part  II.,fl9. 

portrait  of,  facing  18,  Part  II. 
Curran,  Henry  H.,  305. 
Curran  Edward,  191. 
Cyclone  of  1834,  219. 

Dagwell,  John,  217. 

Dam  and  mill  iu  Mohawk,  159. 

Dana,  George  S.,  232. 

Darling,  Charles  W.,   biography   of,  Part 
II.,  73. 

portrait  of,  facing  72,  Part  II. 

Dauby,  Augustine  G-.,  150. 

Davies,  Thomas,  303. 

Day,  Dr.  Horace  B.,  275. 

Dean,  James,  183. 

Bering,  Dr.  NiooU  H.,  260. 
Democrat,  the,  482. 
Denio,  Hiram,  532. 
Devereux,  John  C,  68-70. 
Devereux,  John  C.  2d,  339. 
Devereux,  Nicholas,  121. 
Doolittle,  Charles  H.,  557. 
Doolittle,  Jesse,  93. 
Douglass,  Dr.  Isaac  H.,  289. 
Douglass,  John  H.,  298. 
Drafting  averted  in  1862,  312. 

in  1863,  321. 
Driving  Park  Association  organized,  330. 
Dryer  Memorial  M.  E.  Church,  426. 


98 


INDEX. 


Dryer,  Rev.  H.  N.,  289. 
Dunn  &  Lent,  298. 
Dutton,  George,  147., 
Duttou,  James,  212. 

Early  editors  and  printers,  74-77. 
highways,  367. 
merchants,  38  46. 
religious  services,  55,  56. 
settlers,  21-48. 
stage  lines,  368-374. 
tavern-keepers,  35. 
Eaton,  James,  340. 
Ebenezer  Baptist  Church,  435. 
Edmonds,  John  H.,  215. 
Edwards,  John  D.,  139. 
Elizabeth  Street  Presbyterian  Church,-41 1. 
JEluddator,  the,  478. 
Embargo,  public  meeting  for  suspension  of 

101. 
Empire  Scotch  Cap  Factory,  612. 
Episcopal  churches,  415-422. 
Equitable  Gas  and  Electric  Company,  614. 
Erie  Canal,  beginning  of,  375. 

-completion  of  with    ceremonies, 

379. 
first  packet  boat  thereon,  376. 
opened  from  Rome  to  Utica,  142. 
Eureka  Mower  Company,  613. 
EvangeHcal  Lutheran  Church  of  the  Holy 

Communion,  438. 
Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  of  the  Re- 
deemer, 437. 
Evans,  Edward,  270. 
jEvening  Telegraph,  the,  489. 
Exchange  for  Women's  Work,  631. 

Harwell,  Samuel,  biography  of,   Part  II., 
14. 

portrait  of,  facing  388. 
Paxton  Hospital  incorporated,  344. 
Faxton  Hospital  and  Home,  625. 
Paxton,  Theodore  S.,    biography  of,  Part 
IL,  9. 

portrait  of,  facing  624. 
Female  Academy,  464. 

Charitable    Society  of    Whitestown, 

616. 
Missionary  Society  of  Oneida,  616. 
Society  of  Industry,  61G. 
Ferry,  William  H.,  281 
Financial  Institutions,  567. 

stringency  of  1816-18,  136. 
183.5-37,  576. 
1855-57,  288. 


Pire  Departrnent,  attempts  to  establish  on 
paid  basis,  335. 

reorganized,  1831,  197. 

description  of,  1837,  230. 

limits  established,  1827,  176. 
First  Bridge  across  the  Mohawk,  29. 

Church  of   the  Evangelical  Associa- 
tion, 430. 

execution  in  the  county,  61. 

free  school,  457. 

hotel  and  its  landlords,  54-55. 

Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  423. 

newspaper,  51. 

Presbyterian  Church,  397-402. 

settlers  and  settlements,  21. 

Universalist  Church,  440. 

Welsh  Baptist  Church,  431. 
Pish,  Henry  H.,  biography  of.  Part  II.,  17. 

portrait  of,  facing  88. 
Plandrau,  Thomas  H.,  511. 
Floyd,  John  G.,  178. 
Ford,  Willis  E.,  biography  of.  Part  IL,  83. 

portrait  of,  facing  320. 
Foster,  Dr.  Charles  B.,  290. 
Foster,  Gilbert  A.,  217. 
Foundries,  593,  600. 
Francis,  John  J.,  192. 
Free  Academy,  burning  of,  325. 

new,  dedication  of,  329. 
Free  School,  the  first,  457. 
Freshet  of  1865,  325. 
Fuller,  John  W.,  281. 
Furnace  manufacture,  600. 

Gardner,  James  V.  P.,  221. 
Garrow,  Lieut.  N.,  308. 
Garvin,  Samuel  B.,  559. 
Gas  Company  organized,  259. 
Geuesee  Road.  59-60,  367. 
Genesee  street  in  1832,  204-210. 

paving  of,  330. 
Gibson,  Henry  B.,  509. 
Gilbert,  Ehsha  M.,  191. 
Olobe,  the  Saturday,  486. 
Gold,  Theodore  Sedgwick,  141. 
Golden,  D.  V.  W.,  255. 
Goodrich,  Rev.  Chauncy  E.,  278 
Goodsell,  Dr.  Thomas,  125. 
Gospel  Messenger,  the,  489. 
Government  Building,  site  selected,  344. 

completed,  358. 
Grace  Church,  418. 

Graham,  Edmund  A.,  biography  of,   Part 
II.,  7. 

portrait  of,  facing  56. 


INDEX. 


99 


Grant,  Dr.  Asahel,  211. 

Grrannis,  Timothy  0.,  261. 

Gray,  Dr.  John  P.,  biography  of,  Part  II., 

20. 

portrait  of,  facing  152. 
Green,  Henry,  124. 
Green,  Walter  Jerome,  biography  of,  Part 

II.,  84.  or./., 

portrait  of,  facing  308. 
Greenman,  Hiram,  152. 
Gridley,  Philo,  555. 
Griffin,  Ebenezer,  508. 
Grove,  DeWitt  0.,  260. 
Guiteau,  Dr.  Francis,  jr.,  64. 

Hackett,  James  Henry,  144. 
Hall,  Calvin,  298. 
Hamlin,  William  D.,  193. 
Hammond,  Rev.  John,  46. 
Handy,  John  H.,  127. 
Hart,  Ephraim,  126. 
Hart,  Henry  R.,  232. 
Hart,  Martin,  213. 
Hasbrouck,  Dr.  David,  80. 
Hastings  &  Co.,  172. 
Hastings,  Charles,  139. 
Hastings,  Thomas,  137. 
Hayden,  Chester,   198. 
Head,  George  W.,  biography  of.  Part  II., 
34. 

portrait  of,  facing  168. 
Headhght  manufacture,  600. 
Heath,  Havyley  E.,  291. 
Hebrew  congregations,  448. 
Henshav7,  J.  Sidney,  264. 
Herald,  480. 
High  School,  460. 
Highland  addition,  359. 
Hill,  Dr.  C.  Judson,  295. 
Hinman,  Johji  B.,  110. 
Hinman,  Maj.  Benjamin,  46. 
Hitchcock,  Dr.  John  W.,  195. 
Hitchcock,  Marcus,  72. 
HoUister,  Frederick,  220. 
Home  for  Aged  Men,  625. 
erected,  359. 

for  the  Homeless,  623. 

Masonic,  corner-stone  laid,  368. 
Hooker,  Samuel,  47. 
Hopkins,  Charles  H.,  263. 
Hopper,  Capt.  James,  67. 
Hopper,  Thomas,  biography  of.  Part  11,25. 

portrait  of,  facing  120. 
Horticultural  Society,  chartering  of,  174. 
Hospital,  City  (see  City  Hospital). 


Hotel,  the  first,  54. 

House  of  the  Good  Shepard,  621. 

opened,  347. 
of  Israel,  448. 
of  Jacob,  448. 
Hoyt  David  P.,  78, 
Hubbard,  Thomas  H.,  520. 
Hubbell,  Alrick,  162. 
Hubbell,  Mathew,  settlement  of,  27. 
Hull,  Dr.  Amos  G.,  109. 
Hunt,  David,  187. 
Hunt,  Dr.  Jacob,  289. 
Hunt,  James  G.,  biography  of.  Part  II.,  63. 

portrait  of,  facing  62,  Part  II. 
Hunt,  Montgomery,  571. 
Hunt,  Ward,  547. 
Hurlburt,  Augustus,  152. 
Hurlburt,  Burton  D.,  211. 
Hurlburt,  Hiram,  238. 
Hutchinson,    Charles   W.,   biography    of, 
Part  II.,  87. 

portrait  of,  facing  272. 
Hutchinson,  Dr.  Edwin,  338. 
Hutchinson,  Holmes,  158. 

Immanuel  Baptist  Church,  485. 
Incendiary  fires  of  1851,  267.  . 

1853,  273. 
Independence  Day  observed  by  the  Sun- 
day Schools,  177. 
Infant  schools,  459. 
Inman,  William,  36-87. 

Jackson,  WiUiam  B.,  340. 
Jail  on  Bleeoker  street  built,  344. 
Jenkins,  Hiram  T.,  837. 
Jewett,  Col.  Edward,  290. 
Johnson,  Alexander  13.,  113,  572. 
Johnson,  Alexander  S.,  556. 
Johnson,  Andrew,  visit  of,  326. 
Johnson,  Bryan,  44-46. 
Jpnes,  Marvin  M.,  245. 

Kane  &  Van  Rensselaer,  62. 
Kellogg,  Palmer  V.,  211. 
Kellogg,  Spencer,  172. 
Kernan,   Francis,  biography  of.  Part  II., 
36. 

portrait  of,  facing  36,  Part  II. 
King,  Walter,  101, 
Kip,  James  S.,  settlement  of,  32. 
Kirkland,  Charles  P.,  510. 
Kirkland,  Jeseph,  497. 
Knitting  factories,  611. 
Kossuth,  Louis,  visit  of,  271. 


INDEX. 


Kunkely,  Edward,  281. 
Kellogg,  Spencer,  171. 

Lafayette's  visit  in  1825,  167. 

Laird,  Frank  F.,  biography  of,  Part  IL,  70. 

portrait  of,  facinff  70,  Part  IL 
Lathrop,  Azel  J.,  249. 
Lansing,  Barent  Bleeoker,  116. 
Lawson,  George,  279. 
Lawrence,  Lewis,   biograpbv  of,  Part  IL, 

28. 

portrait  of,  facing  392. 
Leach,  Ebenezer,  189. 
Lee's  surrender,  reception  of  news  of,  324. 
Libraries,  473. 

Library  building,  erection  of,  349. 
Lighting  of  streets,  action  of  years  1882- 

90,  355. 
Limits,  fire  (see  fire  limits). 
Lindsley,  Smith  M.,  biography  of,  PartlL, 

67. 

portrait  of,  facing  66,  Part  II. 
Lord,  T.  Kcott,  337. 
Lothrop,  John  H.,  73. 
Lottery  for  benefit  of  roads,  367. 
Lowery,  Joseph  S.,  304. 
Loyal  League  Convention,  320. 
Lumber  dealers,  595. 
Lutheran  churches,  435-438. 
Lux,  Henry,  297. 
Lyceum,  TJtica,  174. 
Lyman,  Samuel  P.,  190. 
Lynch,  James,  507. 
Lynch,  James  S.,  281,  507. 

McOall,  Dr.  John,  140. 
McLeod,  William,  trial  of,  242. 
Macomber,  Capt,  George,  47. 
McQuade,  James,  301. 
MoQuade,  Michael,  160. 
Malcom,  Richard  M.,  108. 
Malcom,  William,  102. 
Manhattan  Bank,  104,  569. 
Mann,  Charles  A.,  biography  of.  Part  IL, 
13.  ■ 

portrait  of,  facing  72. 
Manning,  Edward  T.,  276. 
Manufactures,  591-616. 
Marohisi,  Jean  Baptiste,  172. 
Market  house,  opposition  to,  115. 
prices  in  1811,  108. 

1822,  149. 
Marklove,  John  G.,  291. 
Mason,  Charles,  566. 
Masonic  Home,  corner-stone  laid,  358. 


Mather,  A.  D.  &  Co.,  590. 

Mattesoh,  Orsamus  B.,  194. 

Mather,  Joshua,  biography  of,  Part  IL,  65. 
portrait  of,  facing  356. 

Mather,  Stephen,  172. 

Maynard,  Elisha  A.,  188. 

Maynard,  Isaac,  239. 

Maynard,  Thomas,  279. 

Maynard,  William  H.,  499. 

Meacham  Dr.  L  N.,  151. 

Meeker,  Moses  T.,  193. 

Meetings,  public  (see  Public  meetings). 

Memorial  Presbyterian  Church  of  West 
Utica,  411. 

Merchants'  and  Manufacturers' Association, 
615. 

Merrell  &  Hastings,  139. 

Merrill,  Andrew,  139. 

Merrill,  Bildad,  100. 

Mervine,  Catharinus  B.,  309. 

Mervine,  William,  308. 

Methodist  Episcopal  Churches,  422-430. 

Middleton,  Robert,  biograpbv  of.  Part  IL, 
53. 

portrait  of,  facing  248. 

Military  company  drafted,  1808,  101. 

Millar,  Charles,  biography  of,  Part  IL,  27. 
portrait  of,  facing  26,  Part  II. 

Miller,  Morris  S.,  494. 

Miller,  Rutger  B.,  179. 

Mohawk  and  Hudson  River  Railroad,  382. 

Mohawk,  dam  and  mill  thereon,  159. 

Mohawk  river,  as  a  public  waterway,  361- 
366. 

Mohawk  street  railroad,  opening  of,  330. 

Mohawk  Valley  Cotton  Company,  organ- 
ization of,  357,  612. 

Monument,  soldiers  (see   Soldiers'  monu- 
ment). 

Moravia  Church,  439. 

Moriah     Welsh      Calvinistic     Methodist 
Church,  427. 

Morris,  Dr.  William,  217. 

Munn,  John,  280. 

Munson,  Alfred,  154. 

Munson,  Edmund,  263. 

Museum,  Utica,  founded,  220. 

Nathan,  Williams,  492. 

National  Bank,  Oneida  (see  OneidaBank). 

First  (see  Utica  Bank), 

Second,  583. 
New  Churches  built  in  years  1888-91, 357. 
Newcomers  in  1798,  51. 
Newspaper,  the  first,  476. 


INDEX. 


New  York,  "West  Shore  and  Buffalo  Rail- 
road, 395. 
Northway,  Rufus,  164. 
Norton,  Dr.  Heman,  187. 
Noyes,  William  0.,  551. 

Observer,  the,  481. 

Occupants  of  Genesee  street  in  1832,  in 

the  order  oE  their. occupancy,  204-209. 
Old  Fort  Schuvler,  17-48. 
Oley,  Simon  V.,  181. 
Ohvet  Church,  410. 
Oneida  County  Bank,  583. 
Oneida  County  erected,  49. 
Oneida  Glass  Company,  591. 
Oneida  Morning  Herald,  480. 
On'eida  National  Bank,  580. 

burned,  358. 
Oneida  Whig,  4:7%. 
O'Neil,  Owen,  152. 
Ontario  Bank,  575. 
Ordinances  of  1817,  183-137. 
Organ  manufacture,  601. 
Oriskany,  centennial  of  battle  of,  349. 
Orphan  Asylum,  laying  of  corner-stone, 

295. 
Ostrom,  David,  72. 
Ostrom,  John  H.,  120. 
Owen  Brothers,  599. 

Packet  boat,  the  first,  375. 
Palmer,  Chauncey,  192. 
Palmer,  E.  D.,  263. 
Parker  &  Swift,  213. 
Parker,  Jason,  368. 

petitions  the  legislature,  369. 
Parker,  Job,  213. 
Parmelee,  Truman,  162. 
Parsons,  John,  185. 
Patriot  and  Patrol,  the,  477. 
Paving  of  Genesee  street  with  sandstone, 
331. 

of  years  1882-91,  354. 
Peckham,  Dr.  Peleg  B.,  175. 
Peckliam,  John  8.,  221. 
Perkins,  George  E.,  235. 
Phoenix  Iron  Works,  607. 
Pioneers,  21-28. 

Pixley,  Henry  D.,  biography  of.  Part  II., 
61. 

portrait  of,  facing  296. 
Pixley,  H.  D.  &  Son,  599. 
Plank  roads,  381. 
Piatt,  James,  116. 
Piatt,  Jonas,  517. 


Police  Commission,  organization  of,  327. 
Pomeroy,  Dr.  Theodore,  145. 
Pond,  Andrew  S.,  172. 
Population,  1830,  194. 
Post,  John,  pioneership  of,  25. 
Potter,  Capt.  Stephen,  26. 
Presbyterian  churches,  397-411. 
Press,  the,  476-490. 
Press,  the  484. 
Printers  of  1824,  165. 
Private  schools,  459. 

Protestant  Reformed  (Dutch)  Church,  414. 
Public  basin,  building  of,  189. 
Public  meeting  for  suspension  of  embargo^ 
101. 

in  behalf  of  suffering  Poles,  197. 

in  support  of  government  in  1862, 
311. 
Public  reception  to  General  Lafayette,  167. 

Louis  Kossuth,  271. 

of  14th  and  26th  Eegts.,  320. 

Andrew  Johnson  and  Gen.  Grant, 
326. 

Winfield  Scott,  272. 
Public  School  Library,  473. 
Public  Schools,  466-471. 

Quin,  George  E.,  295. 

Railroads. 

Belt  Line,  organized,  356. 
Mohawk  and  Hudson,  382. 
N.  T.,  West  Shore  and  Buffalo,  395. 
Rome,  Watertown  and  Ogdensburgh, 

opening  of,  342. 
Utica  and  Black  River,  389. 
Utica,    Chenango   and   Susquehanna, 

391. 
Utica,  Clinton  and  Binghamton,  393.. 
Utica  and  Schenectady,  384. 
Utica  and  Syracuse,  385. 
Rathbone,  Justus  H.,  143. 
Rathbun,  Dr.  Josiah,  216. 
Rebellion,  war  of,  300-325. 
Reception,  Public,  of  Andrew  Johnson  and 
Gen.  Grant,  326. 
Q-en.  LafayetCB,  167. 
Louis  Kossuth,  271. 
Winfield  Scott,  272. 
14th  and  26th  Regts.,  320. 
Recorder's  Court,  estabhshment  of,  253. 
Religious  services  of  an  early  period,  55. 
Reformed  Church,  414. 

burned,  357. 
Roberts,  Butler  &  Co.,  598. 


INDEX. 


Eoberts,  Ellis  H.,  biographv  of,  Part  II., 
51. 

portrait  of,  facing  478. 
Eoberts,  James,  biography  of,  Part  II.,  51. 

portrait  of,  facing  598. 
Eockwell,  Thomas,  117. 
Eogers,  Dr.  L.  W.,  268. 
Eogers,  Publius  V.,  biography  of,  Part  II., 
33. 

portrait  of,  facing  570. 
Eoman  Catholic  churches,  441-447. 
Eome,  Watertown  and  Ogdensburg  Eail- 

road,  opening  of,  342. 
Eoot.  P.  Sheldon,  550. 
Eosej  Dr.  Lauren  F..  276. 
Eussell,  William,  biography  of,  Part  II., 
38. 

portrait  of,  facing  236. 

St.  Agnes  Church,  447. 
St.  Elizabeth  Hospital  and' Home,  626. 
St.  Francis  Le  Sales  Church, -447. 
St.  George's  Protestant  Church,  420. 
.  St.  John's  Church,  441. 
St.  Joseph's  Church,  445. 
St.  John's  Female  Orphan  Asylum,  620. 
St.  Luke's  Home  and  Hospital,  627. 
St.  Luke's  Memorial  Church,  421. 
St.  Mary's  Church,  446. 
St.  Patrick's  Church,  446. 
St.  Paul's  Lutheran  Church,  436. 
St.  Vincent  Industrial  School,  621. 
Savage,  John,  553, 
Savings  Bank,  584. 
Sayre,  James,  146. 
Sayre,  Theodore  S.,  biography  of.  Part  II., 

69. 

portrait  of,  facing  344. 
Schools,  infant,  459. 
in  Utica,  449-473. 
private,  459. 
Schultz,  Christian,  jr.,  notes  of  travel  of, 

363-366. 
Scotch  cap  manufacture,  612. 
Scott,  General  Winfield,  visit  of,  272. 
Second  National  Bank,  583. 
Second  Presbyterian  Clmrch,  403. 
Second  Universalist  Church  of  our  Father, 

440. 
Seneca  Turnpike  Company,  60. 

chartering  of,  367. 
Seward,  Asahel,  75. 
Seymour,  Alexander,  116. 
Seymour,  George,  biography  of,  Part  II., 

59. 


Seymour,  George,  portrait  of,  facing  58, 

Part  II. 
Seymour,  Henry,  143. 
Seymour,  Horatio,  biography  of.  Part  II.,3. 

portrait  of,  facing  40. 
Seymour,  John  F.,  237. 
Shearman,  Ebenezer  B.,  67. 
Shearman,  Joseph  A.,  196. 
Sherman,  Watts,  37. 
Stove  manufacture,  609. 
Sicard,  Stephen,  339. 
Sieboth,  Dr.  Joseph,  280. 
Skenandoa  Company,  357,  613. 
Skinner,  Thomas,  51. 
Slave  capture,  229. 
Small-pox  in  the  village,  167. 
Smith,  Nicholas,  109. 
Snyder,  Jacob,  99. 
Snyder,  Eandolph,  94. 
Soldiers'  monument,  unveiling  of,  359. 
South  Street  Methdist  Episcopal  Church, 

425. 
Speculative  excitement,  577. 
Spencer,  Hamilton,  236. 
Spencer,  Joshua  A.,  536. 

portrait  of,  facing  536. 
Spencer,  Julius  A.,  193. 
Spriggs,  J.  Thomas,  564. 
Stage  Imes,  368-374. 
State  Asylum,  burned,  288. 
Stewart,  Alvan,  548. 
Stewart,  John,  jr.,  93. 
Stocking,  Samuel,  77. 
Stockman,  Dr.  Christian,  80. 
Sunday  Tribune,  the,  485. 
Swan,  Joseph  B.,  biography  of,  PartII.,72. 

portrait  of,  facing  480. 

Tabernacle  Second  Baptist  Church,  432. 

Talcott,  Enoch  B.,  337. 

Talcott,  Samuel  A.,  502. 

Tallman,  George  C,  248. 

Tax  list  for  1800,  58. 

Taylor,  William  &  Co.,  598. 

Temperance  efforts  of  1841-43,  244. 

Thomas,  Abijah,  Anson  and  B.jW.,  81. 

Thomas,  Briggs  W.,  122. 

Thomas,  Daniel  G.,  268. 

Thomas,  Di'.  Daniel  G.,  268. 

Thomas,  George  E.,  339. 

Thompson  Je.^se,  270. 

Thompson,  Samuel,  152. 

Thorn,  John,  biogi.nphy  of.  Part  II.,  30, 

portrait  of,  facing  390. 
Thorn  &  Curtis,  181. 


INDEX. 


103 


Throop,  N.  Garrow,  308. 

TiflFany,  Isaiah,  163. 

Timmerman,  David,  193. 

Tobacco  manufacture,  597. 

Townshend,  Homer,- 256. 

Tracy,  Charles,  552. 

Tracy,  Gardiner,  187. 

Tracy,  Wilham,  534. 

Tribune,  the,  485. 

Trinity  Church  (Episcopal),  -396,  41S. 

Trinity  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church,  438. 

Trustees,  meetings  of,  90. 

Turner,  Duncan,  82. 

Union  Cabinet  Association,  610. 

United  Society  of  Whitestown  and  OW 

Fort  Schuyler,  55-56. 
United  States  government  building,  site 
of  selected,  344. 

completion  of,  358. 
Universalist  churches,  440. 
Utica,  naming  of,  48. 
incorporation  of,  49. 
of  1798,    as  seen   by  Rev.  Timothy 

D  wight,  52. 
of  1802,  as  seen  by  Rev.  John  Tay- 
lor, 70. 
of  1805,  description  of,  84. 
of  1806,  map  of,  88. 
of  1807,  as  seen  by  Christian  Schultz, 

97. 
of  1813,  as  noticed  in  Spaflfbrds'  Gaz- 
etteer, 116. 
of  1816,  description  of,  128. 
of  1827,  as  noticed  by  a  Hartford  pa- 
per, 178. 
Utica  Academy,  450-457. 
Utica  and  Black  River  Railroad,  389. 
Utica  and  Schenectady  Railroad,  384. 
Utica  and  Syracuse  Railroad,  385-388. 
Utica  Belt  Line  Railroad  Company,  organ- 
ization of,  356. 
Utica  Burial  Case  Company,  614:. 
Utica  Business  College,  471. 
Utica,  Chenango  and  Susquehanna  Valley 

Railroad,  391. 
Utica  City  Bank,  581. 
Utica  City,  incorporation  of  in  1832,  199. 
proceedings    and    occurrences    from 
1832  to  1842,  199-243. 
from  1842  to  1852,  243-270. 
from  1852  to  1862,  270-309. 
from  1862  to  1872,  309-341. 
from  1872  to  1880,  341-357. 
from  1880  to  1891,  351-361. 


Utica,  Clinton  and  Bmghamton  Railroad 

393. 
Utica  Daily  Gazette,  479. 
Utica  Democrat,  the,  482. 
Utica  Driving  .Park  Association,  incorpo- 
ration of,  330. 
Utica  Deutsche  Zeitmng,  487. 
Utica  Exchange 'for  Women's  Work,  631. 
Utica  Female  Academy,  464. 
Utica  Furniture  Company,  610. 
Utica  Gas  Light  Company  614 
Utica  Globe  Mills,  604. 
Utica  High  School,  460. 
Utica  Intelligencer,  478. 
Utica  Knitting  Company,  611. 
Utica  Library,  473. 
Utica  Lyceum,  incorporation  of,  174. 
Utica  Manufacturing  and  Mercantile  Asso- 
ciation, first  meeting  of,  351. 
Utica  Morning  Herald  and  Daihi  Gazette 

480. 
Utica  Observer,  the,  481. 
Utica  Orphan  Asylum,  616. 
Utica  Patriot  and  Patrol,  477. 
Utica  Planing  Mills  Co.,  596. 
Utica  Saturday  Glohe,  the,  486. 
Utica  Savings  Bank,  584,  590. 
Utica  Sentinel.  477. 
Utica  Sentinel  and  Gazette,  477. 
Utica  Steam  Cotton  Mill=,  606. 
Dtica  Steam  Engine  and  Boiler  Works,594. 
Utica  Steam  Woolen  Mills,  603-. 
Utica  village,  description  of,  1816, 128-130. 
division  into  virards,  131. 
early  records  of  lost,  50. 
incorporation  of,  49. 
map  of,  1806,  88. 
petition  for  new  charter,  1805,  83. 
proceedings  and  occurrences  un- 
der first  charter,  49-89. 
under  second  charter,  89-131. 
under  third  charter,  131-198. 
third  charter,  provisions  of,  131- 
132. 

Van  Santvoort,  Abraham,  95. 
Variok,  Abraham,  jr.,  79. 
Vedder,  Nicholas  F.,  173. 
Village  attorney,  office  created,  175. 
Village  lots  valued  in  1827,  177. 
Voyaging  on  the  Mohavck,  365. 

Wager,  David,  179. 
Walcott,  William,  247. 
Walker,  Benjamin,  42-44. 


104 


INDEX. 


Walker,  Thomas,  74. 

Walker,  Thomas  E.,  184 

Warner,  Jared  E.,  139. 

Warner,  Jonathan  E.,  160. 

War  of  1812,  volunteers  for,  112-113. 

War  period,  beginning  of,  300. 

Waterways  and  roads,  19. 

Water  Works,  incorporated,  259. 

completion  of,  265. 
Watson,  William  H.,  Isiography  of,  Part 
II.,  44. 

portrait  of,  facing  200. 
Welles,  WiUiam  B.,  572. 
Wells,  John  B.,  242. 
WesUrn  Centinel,  476. 
Western  Inland   Look  Navigation   Com- 
pany, organization  of,  862. 
Westminster  Church,  406. 
Wetmore,  Edmund  A.,  149. 
Wetmore,  Oliver,  194. 
Wheeler,  Eussel,  biography  of.  Part  II.,  41. 

portrait  of,  facing  184. 
Whiffler,  Isaac,  256. 
White,  David  P.,  340. 
White,  Noah,  277. 
Whitesboro  road,  57. 
Whitestown  'Gazelte,  51. 
Whiiestown  GazsUe  and  Caio's  Patrol,  476. 
White,  William  M.,  biography  of,  Part  II., 
56. 

portrait  of,  facing  260. 
Wild  &  Devereux,  611. 
Wiley,  Q-eo.  H.,  biography  of,  Part  II.,  54. 

portrait  of,  facing  606. 
Willard,  Joel,  338. 


Williams,  Abijah  J.,  biography  of,  Part  II., 
29. 

portrait  of,  facing  104. 
Williams,  Blhanan,  163. 
Williams,  I.  A.  &  Co.,  600. 
Williams,    James  Watson,  biography  of, 
Part  II.,  91. 

portrait  of,  facing  452. 
Williams,  John,  108. 

Williams,  Eobert  S.,  biography   of.    Part 
II.,  78. 

portrait  of,  facing  224. 
Williams,  Stalham,  98. 
Williams,  William,  76. 
Wilson,  Charles  S.,  221. 
■  Wilson,  George  8.,  164. 
Wolcott,  Dr.  Samuel  G.,  275. 
Wolcott,  Dr.  Solomon,  72. 
Wood,  George  W.,  233. 
Wood,  Henry  J.,  biography  of.  Part  II.,  57. 

portrait  of,  facing  284. 
Woodruflf,  A.  L.,  292, 
Wood,  Thomas  Hosmer,  233. 
Woolen  manufacture,  603. 
Woman's  Christian  Association,  630. 

Yates,  Eynier  V.  and  Charles  A.,  277. 

V  Drych,  487. 

Y  Owyleidydd  Americanaedd,  488. 
Young,  McBlroy  &  White,  613. 

Young  Men's  Association,  founding  of,  613 

incorporation  of,  231. 
Y.  M.  C.  A.  building,  erection  of,  358. 

Zion  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church,  435. 
Zeitung,  the,  487. 


