Qass     / 

^  iar 

Book../ 

''g5-/5<S 

wm'^nm'^v^^ 


HISTORY 


OF 


A 
CORTLAND       COUNTY 


W/TH  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCHES    OF 
SOME  OF  ITS  PROMINENT  MEN  AND  PIONEERS 


EDITED  BV 

H .     P .     SMITH 


SYRACUSE,  N.  Y. 
D.   MASON  &  CO.,  PUBLISHERS 


D.  MASON    &    CO., 

PDBLISHEKS    ANB    PRINTERS, 

63  WEST  WATER  ST., 

SYRACUSE,  N.  Y. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


WHILE  it  may  seem  to  the  uninitiated  a  task  involving  but  little  difficulty  to  prepare 
for  publication  a  work  no  more  comprehensive  in  character  than  this  volume,  and 
containing  merely  a  history  of  a  single  county,  still  it  is  not  out  of  place  here  to  assure 
all  such  readers  that  the  task  is  one  involving  a  vast  amount  of  labor  and  research, 
watchful  care,  untiring  patience,  and  fair  discrimination.  This  need  not  be  said  to  any 
person  who  has  had  experience  in  similar  work.  In  attempting  the  production  of  a 
creditable  history  of  Cortland  county  the  publishers  and  the  editor  did  not  underestimate 
the  difficulties  of  this  task,  and  came  to  it  fully  imbued  with  both  a  clear  idea  of  its 
magnitude  and  determination  to  execute  it  in  such  a  manner  that  it  should  receive  the 
general  commendations  of  all  into  whose  hands  it  should  fall.  It  is  believed  that  this 
purpose  has  been  substantially  carried  out,  and  that,  while  a  perfect  historical  work  has 
never  yet  been  published,  this  one  will  be  found  to  contain  so  few  imperfections  that  the 
most  critical  readers  will  be  satisfied. 

It  is  the  general  plan  of  the  publishers  in  the  production  of  county  histories  to  secure, 
as  far  as  possible,  local  assistance  in  preparing  the  work,  either  as  writers,  or  for  the 
purpose  of  revising  all  manuscripts;  the  consequence  being  that  the  work  bears  a  local 
character  that  could  not  otherwise  be  secured,  and,  moreover,  comes  from  the  press  far 
more  complete  and  perfect  than  could  possibly  be  the  case  were  it  entrusted  entirely  to 
the  hands  of  a  comparative  stranger  to  the  locality  treated  of  In  carrying  out  this  plan 
in  this  county  the  editor  has  found  such  generous  co-operation  and  assistance  that  to 
merely  mention  all  those  who  have  liberally  aided  in  the  work  is  impossible ;  the 
satisfaction  of  having  contributed  to  a  desirable  public  work  must  be  their  reward.  But 
we  cannot  pass  unnoticed  tlic  names  of  a  few  who  have  given  most  generously  of  their 
labor  and  time  towards  the  consummation  of  the  work :  To  Hon.  R.  Holland  Duell,  Hon. 
A.  P.  Smith  and  David  E.  Smith  for  aid  in  preparing  the  chapter  on  the  bench  and  bar 


Introductory. 


of  the  county,  most  of  the  writing  of  which  was  done  by  the  last  named  gentleman  ;  to 
Dr.  Caleb  Green  and  Dr.  Frederick  Hyde,  the  former  for  writing;  and  the  latter  for  revising 
much  of  the  chapter  on  the  medical  profession;  to  George  L.  Warren,  II.  W.  Blashfield 
and  others  for  assistance  in  preparing  the  history  of  the  Masonic  order;  to  Hon.  Wm.  H. 
Clark,  B.  H.  Jones,  V.  G.  Kinney,  Wm,  O.  Bunn,  Ed.  L.  Adams,  W.  O.  Greene  and  E.  P. 
Fancher,  <>f  the  county  press,  for  generous  aid  and  the  use  of  their  valuable  newspaper 
files;  to  Mrs.  Dr.  Frederick  Hyde  for  valuable  documents;  to  Alonzo  Blodgett  for 
use  of  valuable  scrap-book  ;  to  Charles  Kingsbury  and  T.  Mason  Loring  for  valuable 
historic  materials ;  and  many  others  in  the  different  towns  whom  we  cannot  mention  for 
want  of  .space.  In  this  connection  we  should  be  greatly  neglectful  of  courtesy  if  we  did 
not  acknowledge  our  great  obligation  to  the  work  of  the  late  Hon.  Horatio  Ballard,  whose 
published  reminiscences  contain  so  much  that  is  of  the  greatest  value  to  the  historian  of 
the  towns  of  Cortland  and  Homer  ;  and  the  same  meed  of  credit  is  due  to  the  indefatigable 
work  of  the  late  Hon.  Nathan  Bouton,  whose  published  pamphlet  embraces  almost  the 
entire  history  of  the  town  of  Virgil.  With  these  brief  and  inadequate  acknowledgments, 
the  work  is  commended  to  its  readers  by  the  publishers  and 

The  Editor. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  \.  —  .\„/!ira/  Cliaractcyistics  — 
Boundaries  and  Topography  of  the 
Territory  now  Embraced  in  Cortland 
County—  Its  Rivers,  Creelis  and  Lakes 

—  Geologic  Forn'iat ions  — Climatic  Fea- 
tures—  General  Character  of  the  Soil 

—  Timber 9 

CHAPTER  II.  — i%V/<;; J   of  the   Aborigines 

—  The  Iroquois  and  their  Great  Con- 
federacy -  The  Different  Tribes  and 
their  Limitations  —  Traditionary  Origin 
of  the  Confederation  —  Legend  of  Ta- 
oun-ya-\vat-ha  —  Tribal  Relations  — 
The  "Clan"  System  —  Social  Rela- 
tions and  Personal  Peculiarities  of  the 
Iroquois  —  Their  Amusements  —  The 
Councils  —  Origin  of  the  Warlike  Ten- 
dency of  the  Iroquois  —  The  French 
Colonists  and  their  Struggles  with  the 
Indians  —  Defeat  of  the  Adirondacks 

—  Military  Organization  and  Charac- 
teristics—  Treatment  of  Prisoners  — 
Physical  Traits  — Their  Downfall  Fore- 
shadowed        13 

CHAPTER  III.  —Indian  Relations  in  Cen- 
tral New  York  —  The  Territory  of 
Cortland  County  with  Reference  to  the 
Indian  Tribes — The  Leni  Lenape  — 
Their  Traditionary  Origin  —  Their  Re- 
lations with  the  Iroquois  —  The  Pecu- 
liar Office  Assigned  Them  —  Final  Su- 
premacy of  the  Iroquois —  Indian  Vil- 
lages—  Their  Personal  Habits  and 
Social  Customs  —  Religious  Beliefs, 
Marriages,  Festivals,  etc 26 

CHAPTER  IV.  —  Eiiropeaft  Discoveries  and 
Settlements  —  Jacob  Cabot  at  New- 
foundland —  The  Brothers  Cortreal  — 
Discover)-  of  the  St.   Lawrence  River 


I'Af;  K. 

—  Ponce  de  Leon's  Discovery  of  Flor- 
ida—  Spanish  Discoveries  and  Con- 
quests—  French  Acquisitions  to  the 
Northward  —  Settlement  of  Quebec  — 
English  Settlement  at  Jamestown  — 
Establishment  of  Dutch  Settlements 
on  the  Hudson  River -r  Claims  of 
Rival  Nations  —  Arrival  of  the  Jesuits 

—  Champlain's  First  Meeting  with  the 
Indians  —  The  Expedition  —  Indian 
Wars  —  E.xtension  of  the  Fur  Trade  — 
Jesuit  Missionary  Work  —  French  and 
English  Rivalr)-  and  their  Negotiations 
with  the  Indians  —  Attack  on  Montreal 

—  Expedition    Planned  by  Frontenac 

—  Burning  of  Schenectady — Treaty  of 
Utrecht  —  The  Iroquois  in  the  Caro- 
linas 35 

CH.APTER  V.  —  Previous  to  County  Organi- 
zation —  An  Indian  "  Summer  Resort " 

—  Early  Records  and  State  Divisions 

—  Genealogy  of  Cortland  County  — 
The  Military  Tract — Its  Origin  and 
History — Land  Bounties  to   Soldiers 

—  Proportions  of  Bounties  —  Action 
of  Congress  in  Relation  Thereto  —  The 
Tract  Ordered  Surveyed,  Mapped  and 
Divided — Conditions  Imposed  upon 
Grantees  —  The  "State's  Hundreds" 
School  and  Gospel  Lots  —  Division 
into  Townships  —  Fraudulent  Land 
Titles  —  Vexatious  Litigation  —  For- 
mation of  the  Present  Towns  of  the 
County 46 

CHAPTER  VI.  —  Formation  of  the  County  — 
A  Division  of  Onondaga  County  De- 
manded—  The  Petition  of  Southern 
Residents  for  that  Object  —  Important 
Provisions  of  the  Law  Organizing  Cort- 

5 


Contents. 


PAGE. 

land  County  — Origin  of  Name  — 
Changes  in  the  Townships  — Organi- 
zation of  the  Courts  —  First  County 
Officers  —  Early  Political  Parties- 
Pioneers  of  the  County  —  Delays  in 
Early  Settlement  —  Comparative  Dates 
of  Other  Settlements— Routes  of  In- 
coming Pioneers  —  Privations  of  Early 
Settlers  — Winter  Travel  in  OUkn 
Xinies  — The  First  Settlers  in  Cort- 
land County  — Mrs.  Beebc's  Lonely 
Life  in  the  Wilderness  —  Settlements 
in  the  Different  Towns  Previous  to 
,  8  lo  —  Population  at  ibat  Date  — 
Opening  of  Early  Roads  — Turnpike 
Road  Companies  —  Necessity  for 
Grist-mills  — Tht-  First  Churches  — 
Early  Schools 5-V 

CHAPTER  VII.—  T'//^'  Second  Decade  — 
Dwellings  and  Surroundings  of  Early 
Settlers  —  Household  Conveniences  — 
House  Raising— The  Pioneer's  First 
Agricultural  Work  —  "  Logging  Bees" 

—  The  Settler's  Diet  —  Scarcity  of 
Money  —  Advantages  of  Asheries  — 
The  Tioughnioga  River  as  a  Highway 
to  Market  — The  Head  of  Navigation 

—  Port  Watson  Village  —  The  First 
Newspaper  in  the  County— Its  Chief 
Characteristics  —  Old  Advertisements 

—  The  First  Court  House  — An  Old 
Building  Document  — Village  Rivalry 

Further  Organizations  of  Turnpike 

Companies  — Change  of  Boundary  — 
The  First  Newspaper  in  Cortland  Vil- 
lage—An Early  Celebration —  Strug- 
gle over  the  Site  of  the  Gaol  — Its 
Final  Location  in  Cortland  —  News- 
paper Recrimination  —  The  First  Ag- 
ricultural Society  — The  Old  County 
Clerk's  Office ■•      63 

CHAPTER  VIII.—  T/ie  Third  Decade  — 
Condition  of  the  Community  —  Aban- 
donment of  the  Tioughnioga  as  a 
Freight  Highway  —  The  Erie  Canal 
Project  and  Its  Influence  in  the  County 
—  The  Constitutional  Convention  of 
1821  and  the  Changes  Wrought  there- 
by in  the  County  —  The  First  Railroad 
Charter  — Salina  and  Port  Watson  the 
Terminal  Points  —  More  Turnpike 
Companies  Incorporated  —  The  Canal 
Mania  —  Ths  Syracuse  and  Port  Wat- 


son   Canal    Project  — Other    Internal 

Im|)rovenients  —  Statistics 75 

CHAPTER  \X.  —  Froin  1830  lo  /he  present 
time  —  Beginning  of  the  Third  Decade 
—  Condition  of  the  County  at  Large  — 
New  Road  Companies  Organized  — 
The  County  Poor  House —  Building 
of  the  New  Court  House  — Railroad 
Agitation  —  Incorporation  of  Two 
Companies  for  Lines  Through  Cort- 
land —  Organization  of  the  Second 
Agricultural  Society  —  Political  Remi- 
niscences—The Leaders  of  Other 
Days  —  The  Campaign  of  1 844  — 
Changes  in  Congressional  and  Sena- 
torial Districts  —  Town  Boundaries 
Altered  —  Town  Genealogy  —  Devel- 
opment of  Dairying  Interests  —Public 
Ecfucation- The  Old  Stage  Routes  — 
The  Railroad  Again  — A  New  Char- 
ter Obtained— The  Road  Finished  — 
Public  Demonstrations  of  Satisfaction 

—  Effects  on  Villages  —  The  First 
Death  Penalty  —  Political  Events  — 
Building  of  a  New  Jail  — New  Rail- 
road  Connections  — .Statistics 79 

CH.A  PTER  X.—  Military  History  —  The  ybth 
Regiment  —  "General  Training  "  Days 

—  Military  Dignitaries  in  the  Old  Mi- 
litia —  Cortland  County  in  the  War  of 
the  Rebellion  —  The  News  from  Bull 
Run  —  Its  Effects  at  the  North  —  The 
County     .Aroused  —  An     Important 
jyieeting  —  Suggestions    for    the    Or- 
ganization of  a  Regiment  —  Meetings 
Held    Throughout  the  County— Re- 
cruiting—The    76th     Regiment    Or- 
ganized—Camp  Established    on  the 
Fair    Grounds  — The    Green-McNett 
Trouble  —  Departure  of  the  Regiment 
—  Reorganization  —  Line    and    Staff 
Officers  — Off   for    New    York- Or- 
dered to  Washington  —  Camp  Life  at 
Meridian   Hill  — Ordered    to    Freder- 
icksburg—  Colonel    Wainwright    As- 
sio-ned  to  the  Command  of  the   Regi- 
,nent  — The  First  Battle  — Examples 
of  Heroism—  The  Second  Bull  Run  — 
South    Mountain  and   the  Conflict  — 
,At     Fredericksburg  —  The     Bloody 
Field  of  Gettysburg  — .'\n  Execution 
—  In  the  Wilderness  — At  Spottsylva- 
nia  —  In  Petersbnrg  —  "  Expended  in 
the  Service  "  —  Home 92 


Contents. 


C  H  A  PTE  R  XL—  Military  History  —  The 
157M  Rfi^inii'iit  —  Recruitinj^  the 
157th  Regiment  —  Sources  of  the  Dif- 
ferent Companies  —  Staff  and  Line  Of- 
ficers —  Camp  Mitchell  —  Ordered  to 
the  Front  —  In  Camp  at  Arlington 
Heights  —  The  Regiment  Assigned  — 
The  First  Death  —  At  Centreville  — 
Christmas  in  Front  of  Fredericksljurg 

—  In    Burnside's    "Mud    Campaign" 

—  Battle  of  Chancellorsville  —  Severe 
Marching  —  Gettysburg  —  The  Roll 
Call  after  the  Battle—  Recruiting  and 
Reorganization  —  Engagement  at  Hil- 
ton Head  —  An  Incident  —  Major 
Place  as  Provost  Marshal  —  Mustered 
Out 107 

CHAPTER  y.\\.  —  Military  History^—  The 
185//;  Regiment  and  Other  Organisa- 
lions — Organization  of  the  Regiment 

—  The  Cortland  County  Companies  — 
Their  Officers  —  In  Camp  at  Syracuse 

—  Ordered  to  the  Front  —  Assignment 
to  the  First  Brigade,  Fifth  Corps  —  A 
Spy  Captured  —  A  Winter  Camp  — 
Demonstration  on  the  Weldon  Rail- 
road —  Winter  Quarters  Again  — 
Marching  Orders  —  Hatcher's  Run  — 
Lender  a  Terrific  Fire  —  Capture  of 
Major  Bush  and  His  Detail  —  Colonel 
Jenny's  Situation  and  Resignation  — 
At  Fort  Steedman —  At  Quaker  Farm 

—  Colonel  Sniper's  Bravery  —  Heavy 
Losses  —  The  Fate  of  the  Colors  — 
Five  Forks  —  The  End  Approaching 

—  At  Appomattox  —  Other  Organiza- 
tions —  Summary 112 

CHAPTER  WW.  — Official  Action  in  the 
War  of  the  Rebellion  —  The  First  Act 

—  An  Important  Resolution — Action 
of  the  Board  of  Super\'isors  Relative 
to  Payment  of  Bounties  —  The  Com- 
mittee of  1864 — Money  Borrowed  for 
the  County  —  The  Bountv  Committee 

—  Further  Sums  Raised  —  A  County 
Bounty  Offered  —  The  Call  for  500.000 
Men  —  Bounties  Increased  —  Issue  of 
Bonds — Loans  by  the  County  to  the 
Towns  —  Statistics 117 

CHAPTER  XIV.  —  The  Cortland  County 
Press — The  First  Newspaper — The 
Pioneer  Journalist  —  Description  of 
the    Cortland  Courier  —  Changes  in 


rAi;K. 
Proprietorship  and  Names  —  Dr.  Jesse 
Searl's  Career  as  a  Publisher — An- 
other Change  —  A  Sheet  of  1 830  —  A 
Glimpse  at  Its  Contents — Rufus  A. 
Reed  and  His  Connection  with  Cort- 
land Journalism  —  The  Predecessors 
of  the  Cortland  Cozcnty  Republican  — 
The  Oldest  Paper  in  Cortland  Village 

—  Ancestors  of  iht  Standard — The 
Western  Courier  —  Establishment  of 
the  Democrat — Seth  Haight's  Ad- 
ministration—  H.  G.  Crouch  Enters 
the  Arena  —  The  Cortland  American 

—  C.  P.  Cole  and  the  Gazette —  '\\\^ 
Republican  Banner  —  The  Cortland 

Journal —  First  Issue  of  the  Cortland 
Standard  —  The  Cortland  County 
Democrat  !iT\A  Its  Predecessors —  The 
AfcGrawville  Sentinel —  The  Otsclic 

Valley  Register  —  The  Newspaper 
Death  Roll , 119 

CHAPTER  XX.—  The  Bench  and  Bar  of 
Cortland  County  —  The  Old  English 
Courts  —  Establishment  of  Courts  in 
America  —  Creation  of  ihe  Court  of 
Appeals  —  The  Supreme  Court — Its 
Judges  and  Their  Duties  —  The  Court 
of  Common  Pleas  and  the  County 
Court — Justice's  Courts  and  Courts 
of  Special  Sessions  —  Judicial  Offices 

—  The  Bar  of  Cortland  County  -  Its 
Early  Eminent  Members  —  Roll  of 
Attorneys'  Oaths  —  The  Present  Bar 

—  Biographical  Notes 1 33 

CHAPTER    y.\\.—  The    Cortland    County 

Medical  Society 1 50 

CHAPTER  y^VW.  — Secret  Societies,  etc.— 
The  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of 
Cortland  County  —  The  First  Lodge 
in  the  County— Its  Old  Records  — 
Other  Lodges  Instituted  —  The  Inde- 
pendent Order  of  Odd  Fellows  — 
Lodges  and  Officers  —  Other  Societies  177 

C H A PTE R  X V 1 1 1.  —  County  Societies.  Build- 
ings, etc.  —  The  Cortland  County  Ag- 
ricultural Society — Its  First  Fairs  — 
List  of  its  Presidents  —  The  Cortland 
County  Farmers'  Club  —  Its  Organiza- 
tion and  First  Officers  —  \'alue  of  Its 
Work  —  List  of  Officers  —  The  Cort- 
land County  Bible  Society  —  The 
Young  Men's  Christian  .Association  — 
County  Buildings iSo 


Contents. 


CHAPTER  XIX.— Histor>-  of  the  Town  of 

Homer 183 

CH.M'TER  XX.  —  Histor)'  of  the   Town   of 

Cortlandville 236 

CHAPTER  XXI.  — Histor)'  of  the  Town   of 

Virgil 3'9 

CHAPTER  XXH.  —  History-  of  the  Town  of 

Marathon   345 

CHAPTER  XXH  1.—  History  of  the  Town  of 

Cincinnatus 3*^^ 

CHAPTER  XXIV.  — History  of  the  Town  of 

Truxton   377 

CHAPTER  XXV.  — History  of  the  Town  of 

Cuyler 387 

CHAPTER  XXVI.  — History  of  the  Town  of 


CHAPTER  XXVII.  —  History  of  the  Town  of 

Scott 405 

CHAPTER  XXVIII.  — History  of  the  Town 

of  Solon 412 

CHAPTER  XXIX.  —  Histor)-  of  the  Town  of 

Freetown 4'7 

CHAPTER  XXX.  — History  of  the  Town  of 

Taylor 423 

CHAPTER  XXXI.  —  History  of  the  Town  of 

Willet 428 

CHAPTER  XXXII.  —  History  of  the  Town  of 

Harford 433 

CHAPTER  XXXIII.  -  History  of  the  Town 

of  Lapeer 44' 


Preble 


395   I   CHAPTER  XXXIV.  — Biographical   445 


PORTRAITS. 


Blanchard,  Silas,  portrait    facing  232 

Blodgett,  Alonzo  I).,  portrait f;icing  474 

Chamberlain.  A.  L.,  portrait facing  194 

Cole.  A.  Leroy,  portrait facing  238 

Duell,  R.  H.,  portrait facing   134 

Freer.  Anthony,   portrait facing  4S2 

Freer,  Stephen  D.,  portrait facing  242 

Gage.  C.  W.,  portrait lacing  214 

Gates,  Alonzo  W.,  portrait facing  456 

Hathew-ay,  Samuel  Gilbert,  portrait facing     48 

Hitchcock,  C.  B.,  portrait facing  472 

Hitchcock,  Manufacturing  Company's  Works, 

the,  View  of. facing  293 


Hobart,  Manley,  portrait facing  206 

Hoose,  James  Harmon,  portrait facing  276 

Hyde,  Frederick,  portrait facing  t68 

McGraw,  Perrin  H.,  portrait facing  312 

Messenger,  H.  J.,  portrait facing  298 

Mudge,  Ebenezer,   portrait facing     92 

Salisbury,  Nathan,  jr.,  portrait facing  450 

Salisbury,  J.  H.,  M.  D.,  portrait facing  460 

Squires  Building,  the.  View  of. 47° 

Squires.  James  S.,  portrait facing  467 

Squires,  James  S."  View  of  residence  of. 47 1 

Sturtevant,  James  W.,  portrait facing  304 

Tripp,  James  H.,  portrait facing  360 


BIOGRAPHICAL. 


Blanchard,  Silas 453 

Blodgett,  Alonzo  D 473 

Chamberlain,  Alfred  L 452 

Cole,  Azor  Leroy 486 

Freer,  John  A 482 

Freer,  Anthony 483 

Freer,  Joseph  De  Puy 484 

Freer,  Stephen  Decatur 485 

Gage,  Charles  W 457 

Gates,  A.  W 455 

Green,  Dr.  Caleb 487 

Hatheway,  Maj.-Gen.  Samuel  G 489 


Hitchcock,  Caleb  Bardano 472 

Hobart,  Deacon  Manley 500 

Hoose,  James  Harmon 477 

Hyde,  Dr.^^Frederick 49S 

Messenger,  Hiram  J 445 

Mudgp,  Ebenezer 45' 

Salisbury.  James  Henry,  B.N.S.,  A.M.,  M.D. . .  459 

Salisbury,  Nathan 449 

Squires,  James  S 467 

Sturtevant,  James  Watts 447 

Tripp,  James  H 475 


HISTORY 


OF 


CORTLAND    COUNTY. 


CHAPTER  I. 


XATIKAI.  CHARACTERISTICS. 

Boundaries  and  Topography  of  the  Territory  now  Embraced  in  Cortland  County — Its  Rivers,  Creeks  and  Lakes 
-Geologic  Formations  —  Climatic  Features  —  Oeneral  Character  of  the  Soil — Timher. 


THE  county  of  which  this  work  gives  a 
history  lies  nearly  in  the  center  of  the 
State  of  New  York,  from  east  to  west,  and 
but  a  little  south  of  the  center,  from  north 
to  south.  It  is  about  twent}'-six  miles  in 
extent  from  north  to  south,  and  about  twen- 
ty miles  from  east  to  west,  containing  four 
hundred  and  eighty- five  square  miles.  Its 
eastern  and  western  boundaries  are  parallel 
with  each  other,  and  its  northern  and  south- 
ern boundaries  nearly  so;  the  towns  of 
Truxton  and  Cu}'ler,  in  the  northeast  cor- 
ner of  the  county,  extend  a  fraction  of  a 
mile  farther  north  than  the  other  two  towns 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  county,  and  the 
same  is  true  of  \\'illet  and  a  portion  of 
Marathon,  in  the  southeastern  corner  of  the 
count)-.  Cortland  county  is  bounded  on  the 
north  by  Onondaga  county,  on  the  east  bj- 
Chenango  and  Madison  counties,  on  the 
south  by  Broome  and  Tioga  counties,  and 
on  the  west  by  Tompkins  and  Cayuga 
counties. 


The  territory  now  embraced  within   the 
limits   of   Cortland    county    formerly   com- 
prised four  whole  and  two  half  townships  in 
the  southeastern  corner  of  what  was  known 
as  the  "  Military  Tract "  (which  will  be  de- 
scribed a  little  farther  on).     The  county  was 
named  in  honor  of  Pierre  Van   Cortlandt, 
the  first  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  State 
of  New  York,  and  an  extensive  owner  of 
and  dealer  in  lands  in  the  Military  Tract. 
It  lies  upon  the  northern  spurs  of  the  Alle- 
ghan\-  mountains,  and  embraces  several  of 
the  more  elevated  points  in  the  central  por- 
tion of  the  State.     The  dividing  ridge,  or 
"water  shed,"  from  which  flow  southward 
the  clear  waters  of  the  Tioughnioga  and  its 
tributaries  to  unite  with  the  Susqtiehanna 
river,  and  northward  the  streams  that  help 
to  swell  the  tide  of  Lake  Ontario,  lies  in  the 
northern   portion   of  the   county;    streams 
flowing  eastward  to  the  Tioughnioga,  and 
others  flowing  westward  to   Cayuga   lake, 
are  also  divided  at  a  point  near  Virgil  \-il- 

9 


lO 


HiSTURV    OK    CORTI.AND    COUNTV. 


lage.  The  surface  of  the  county  is  made 
up  of  liilly  ranges,  wliich  are  separated  by 
valleys  narrowed  down  at  some  j^oints  to 
mere  ravines,  and  at  others  widening  out 
into  broad,  level  and  productive  plains.  The 
highlands  are  divided  into  three  general 
ridges,  which  cxtcnil  across  the  county  in  a 
northerly  and  southerly  direction.  The  first 
of  these  occupies  the  extreme  eastern  bor- 
der of  the  county,  and  is  drained  u[)on  its 
western  slopes  by  the  Otselic  river ;  the 
second  ridge  lies  between  the  Otselic  and 
the  Tioughnioga  rivers,  being  drained  by 
both  ;  and  the  third  comprises  the  highlands 
to  the  westward  of  the  Tioughnioga.  The 
southern  portion  of  the  county  is  made  up 
of  a  succession  of  high  hills,  the  most  ex- 
tensive of  which  are  the  Ovvego  hills,  run- 
ning in  a  northeasterly  and  southwesterl>' 
direction  across  the  towns  of  Virgil  and 
Harford,  and  near  the  foot  of  which  is  the 
water-shed  above  mentioned  ;  they  are  di- 
vided generally  by  narrow  valleys,  and  are, 
in  common  with  the  three  ranges  before 
alluded  to,  cut  through  by  the  ravines  and 
valleys  of  the  small  tributaries  of  the  Otselic 
and  Tioughnioga,  running  lateral  to  the 
three  principal  ranges  of  hills. 

The  northern  portion  of  the  county  spreads 
out  into  a  high  plateau,  somewhat  broken 
by  hills.  This  plateau  has  an  average  ele- 
vation of  about  1,200  feet  above  tide- water, 
while  the  ridges  are  from  two  hundred  to 
five  hundred  feet  higher.  A  broad  plain 
occupies  the  center  of  the  western  portion  of 
the  county,  into  which  most  of  the  valleys 
of  the  tributaries  of  the  Tioughnioga  open. 
The  highest  points  in  the  county  are 
Mount  Topping  in  Preble,  the  Truxton  hills 
in  the  northeastern  portion,  and  the  Ouego 
liills  in  Virgil  and  Harford.  These  attain 
an  elevation  of  from  1,600  to  2,000  feet. 
The  configuration  of  the  surface  of  the  coun- 
ty thus  described  gives  it  a  varied  and,  in 
many  localities,  a  picturesque  aspect. 


The  Tioughnioga    river    constitutes    the 
principal    drainage   of  the  county,    flowing 
southward  nearl)-  through  its  center.      It  en- 
ters the  county  in  two  branches,  the  eastern 
branch   flowing  from   Madison  county  into 
the  town  of  Cuyler,  near  the   northeastern 
corner  of  the  county,  and  continuing  south- 
westerly through  the  towns  of  Cuyler,  Tru.x- 
ton  and   Homer.     The  western  branch  has 
its  source  in  a  number  of  small  lakes  in  the 
northern  part  of  the  town  of  Preble.     This 
branch  flows  southward  thrt)ugh  the  towns 
of  Preble,   Homer,  and  a  portion  of  Cort- 
land, when  it  bends  to  the  eastward,  uniting 
with  the  east  branch  near  the  boundaries  of 
Cortland  village,  and  thence  flows  in  a  south- 
w^esterly  direction  through  Cortland\ille,  the 
eastern   portion  of  Virgil,  the  northeastern 
corner   of   Lapeer,    and    Marathon,  uniting 
with  the  Chenango  river  at  Chenango  Forks, 
in    Broome    county.      The    principal    tribu- 
taries are  the  Otselic  river,  which  enters  this 
county    from     Chenango    county,    flowing 
through  a  deep  valley  in  the  town  of  Cin- 
cinnatus  and  continuing  in  a  southwesterly 
direction,  uniting  with  the  Tioughnioga  in 
the  northern  part  of  Broome  county,  after 
flowing  through  the  central   portion   of  the 
town  of  Willet.     Trout  brook  rises  in  the 
eastern  part  of  Solon,  and  flows  nearly  west 
through  that  town   and   Cortlandville,  until 
it  unites  with  the  Tioughnioga  about  a  mile 
southeast   of   Cortland    village.      Cheningo 
creek  rises  in  the  town  of  Taylor  and  flows 
northwestward  through  a  portion  of  Trux- 
ton, in  the  southwestern  corner  of  which  it 
unites    with    the   Tioughnioga.      Labrador 
creek  has  its  source  in  Labrador  lake,  a  small 
body  of  water  in  the  extreme  northern  part 
of  the  town  of  Truxton,  flows  nearh- south, 
and  unites  with  the   river  in  about  the  cen- 
ter of  the  town.      Cold   brook   rises   in   the 
eastern   part   of   the   town    of  Scott,    flows 
.southeasterly    and    empties    into    the  west 
branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  in  the  northern 


Natural  Characteristics. 


II 


part  of  Homer.  Factory  brook  rises  in  the 
western  part  of  Scott,  flows  southeasterly, 
and  unites  with  tlie  Tioughnioga  in  Homer 
village.  Otter  creek  has  its  rise  in  the  ex- 
treme western  part  of  the  county,  flows 
easterly  and  empties  into  the  Tioughnioga 
near  Cortland  \  illage.  The  town  of  Virgil 
is  drained  b}"  \"irgil  creek,  which  flows  west- 
wardly,  and  Cunningham  (or  Gridley)  creek, 
flowing  eastward  to  the  Tioughnioga.  Har- 
ford is  drained  by  the  Owego  creek,  and 
Marathon  by  Merrill's  creek,  which  empties 
into  the  Otselic  river  in  Broome  count}'. 

Besides  all  these  streams,  there  are  nu- 
merous others  of  lesser  importance,  which 
are  not  known  by  distinctive  names ;  the 
greater  part  of  the  count}'  is  well  watered 
by  numerous  springs  of  excellent  water. 
Skaneateles  lake  borders  the  extreme  north- 
western corner  of  the  county  (town  of  Scott), 
the  inlet  to  which  drains  that  portion  of  the 
county. 

The  largest  bodies  of  water  in  the  county 
are  a  series  of  small  lakes  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  town  of  Homer  and  extending 
into  Preble,  and  two  lakes  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  latter  named  town.  In  the 
southwestern  portion  of  the  town  of  Cort- 
landville,  about  three  miles  from  Cortland 
village,  are  three  small  ponds,  fed  by  springs, 
and  furnishing  at  their  bottoms  an  almost 
inexhaustible  supply  of  marl  of  an  excellent 
quality.  These  deposits  have  been  worked 
and  a  vast  amount  of  superior  quick-lime 
manufactured,  since  the  localit}'  was  first 
settled.  Marl  is  also  found  in  smaller  quan- 
tities and  of  an  inferior  quality  in  the  town 
of  Preble  and  the  northern  part  of  Homer. 

Cortland  county  is  in  the  third  geological 
district  of  the  State,  the  remainder  of  the 
district  being  composed  of  the  counties  of 
Montgomery,  Fulton,  Otsego,  Herkimer, 
Oneida,  Lewis,  Oswego,  Madison,  Ononda- 
ga, Cayuga,  Chenango,  Broome,  Tioga  and 
the  eastern  half  of  Tompkins.     Slate  is  the 


basis  rock  of  this  count}-.  The  Hamilton 
group,  extending  from  Onondaga  county, 
enters  the  northern  part  of  the  town  of 
Truxton.  In  Preble,  Truxton  and  portions 
of  Homer  are  found  quantities  of  the  Gen- 
esee slate.  It  usuall}-  projects  from  the  hills 
which  bound  the  valle}s  in  those  localities. 
The  Portage  and  Ithaca  groups  extend  over 
the  towns  of  Cortlandville  and  Solon,  the 
larger  portion  of  Homer  and  Scott,  and  the 
"  terrace "  between  Truxton  and  Solon. 
They  are  found  on  either  side  of  the  Tiough- 
nioga, but  become  narrower  as  they  increase 
in  thickness  going  southward.  Specimens 
are  also  found  along  the  borders  of  the  Otse- 
lic river  in  Willet  and  Cincinnatus.  These 
groups  form  a  number  of  important  quar- 
ries, which  have  been  of  great  value  to  the 
county  at  large.  The  more  prominent  of 
these  are  located  a  short  distance  above 
Port  Watson  ;  a  second  one  is  about  a  mile 
below  Port  Watson,  and  a  third  between 
Homer  and  Cortland.  These  quarries  have 
supplied  a  large  portion  of  the  flat  building 
stone  used  in  the  two  villages  of  Homer  and 
Cortland,  and  most  of  the  flag-stones  for 
walks,  etc.  Above  the  layers  of  stone  in 
these  quarries  there  is  a  line  of  concretion, 
with  shale,  of  a  foot  or  more  in  thickness. 
Above  this  are  layers  of  slaty,  broken  and 
decomposed  shale  and  sandstone,  forming 
the  refuse  of  the  quarry.  Some  of  the  lower 
layers  of  sandstone  contain  vegetable  im- 
pressions and,  owing  to  the  alteration  which 
the  material  of  the  plants  has  undergone, 
show  small  accumulations  of  coal.  The 
lower  parts  of  these  quarries  consist  of  large 
flag-stones,  the  surface  of  which  is  often 
waved,  as  the  sand}-  bottom  of  a  stream  is 
sometimes  impressed  by  genth-  flowing  wa- 
ters. These  ripple  marks  carr}-  the  imag- 
ination back  to  the  remote  period  when 
these  same  rocks  formed  the  soft  floors  of 
shallow  Silurian  seas. 

The  Chemung  group  extends  over  the 


12 


HiSTORV  OF  Cortland  County. 


southwestern  part  of  the  town  of  Virgil,  and 
is  the  hi<j;hcst  elevation  in  the  county.  The 
same  group  is  discernible  near  the  bound- 
ary lines  of  the  towns  of  Freetown,  Cincin- 
natus,  Willet  and  Marathon. 

Bog  ore  has  been  found  in  .■^mall  speci- 
mens in  some  of  the  swamps  of  the  county, 
but  is  not  believed  to  exist  to  any  great  ex- 
tent. Albite,  or  white  feldspar,  is  found  in 
small  quantities  in  Scott,  Truxton  and  Solon. 
Specimens  of  basaltic  hornblende  have  been 
found  in  the  northern  part  of  the  county. 
Calcareous  tufa  is  common  in  some  of  the 
eastern  portions  of  the  county. 

On  the  west  branch  of  the  Otselic  river  is 
a  calcareo-sulphurous  spring,  the  water  of 
which  is  quite  strongly  impregnated  with 
the  mi.xed  ingredients  of  sulphur  and  lime. 
There  are  several  other  sulphurous  springs 
in  the  county,  and  the  Little  York  lakes,  a 
few  miles  north  of  Homer,  are  slightly  im- 
pregnated with  sulphur. 

The  climate  of  Cortland  county  is  char- 
acterized, in  common  with  that  of  southern 
central  New  York,  by  great  variability. 
The  region  south  and  southwest  of  the  Mo- 
hawk river  valley  exhibits  a  lower  temper- 
ature, by  from  four  to  eleven  degrees,  than 
the  average  of  the  State,  and  autumnal 
frosts  occur  from  one  to  two  weeks  earlier. 
The  physical  features  of  the  county  would 
indicate  a  climate  somewhat  colder  than 
that  of  the  western  portion  of  the  State  in 
the  same  latitude,  chiefly  on  account  of  its 
greater  average  elevation.  The  valley  in 
which  is  located  the  village  of  Homer  is 
1,096  feet  above  tide-water;  this  against 
417  feet  for  the  valley  in  which  is  built  the 
village  of  Ithaca.  The  mean  temperature 
of  Homer  is  fort}'- four  degrees  and  se\en- 
teen  hundredths,  while  that  of  Ithaca  (with  a 
difference  in  latitude  of  only  eleven  minutes) 
is  forty-seven  degrees  and  eighty-eight  hun- 
dredths, showing  a  difference  in  mean  tem- 
perature of  three  degrees  and  seventy-eight 


hundredths.  The  daily  range  of  temperature 
is  a  marked  feature  of  the  climate  of  the 
county,  especially  as  experienced  in  the  late 
summer  and  early  autumnal  months,  when 
the  mercury  often  shows  a  rapid  depression 
towards  nightfall ;  this,  with  wide  range  of 
temperature  and  the  sudden  changes  during 
the  different  seasons,  exerts  a  strong  influ- 
ence upon  the  health  of  residents. 

The  soil  of  the  county  may  be  generally 
characterized  as  chiefly  a  sandy  or  gravelly 
loam  on  the  hilly  portions,  while  in  the  val- 
leys it  is  of  a  similar  character,  with  a  large 
admixture  of  disintegrated  shale,  slate  and 
limestone.  It  is  generally  better  adapted 
to  grazing  than  to  the  raising  of  grains, 
though  many  portions  are  very  productive 
in  this  respect.  Agriculture  and  dairying 
form  the  chief  occupations  of  the  inhab- 
itants, outside  of  the  villages.  The  cultiva- 
tion of  fruits  has  been  carried  on  to  a  con- 
siderable extent,  but  the  cold  winters  and 
early  frosts  render  it  inipracticable  to  suc- 
cessfully grow  an\'  but  the  hardy  kinds. 

The  county  was  originally  heavih'  tim- 
bered, chiefly  with  maple,  beech,  elm,  bass- 
wood,  pine,  hemlock  and  cherry.  On  some 
of  the  higher  hills  is  considerable  chestnut 
and  oak,  and  interspersed  throughout  the 
whole  is  some  white  ash  and  birch.  Less 
than  a  century  ago  the  hills  and  valleys  of  the 
county  were  covered  with  a  grand  old  forest 
of  these  various  kinds  of  trees,  beneath 
whose  silent  shade,  as  far  as  we  may  know, 
only  the  copper-hued  hunter  and  warrior 
had  followed  his  narrow  trail,  and  through 
which  flowed  the  beautiful  river  with  its 
romantic  Indian  name ;  a  stream  gradually 
but  surely  diminishing  under  the  influence 
created  by  the  advance  of  ci\-ilization. 
Here  in  the  forest  depths  then  roamed  the 
timid  deer,  the  stolid  black  bear,  and  among 
the  thick  branches  hid  the  stealthy  wild-cat 
and  panther.  The  gray  wolf  in  vast  num- 
bers   made    the    night    air   echo  with    his 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


13 


discordant  howl,  and  smaller  animals,  the 
raccoon,  the  hedgehog,  and  squirrels  with- 
out number,  peopled  the  wilderness.  The 
wild  turkey  and  partridge  often  furnished 
food    for   the    red    hunter   and    his   family; 


pigeons,  innumerable  as  the  leaves,  made 
their  summer  homes  in  the  forest  branches, 
while  the  majestic  eagle  often  took  his 
lofty  flight  abo\e  the  tallest  monarchs  of 
the  wood. 


CHAPTER  n. 

history  of  the  ABORKilXES. 

Their  Origin  —  Physical  Peculiarities  —  The  Iroquois  and  their  Great  Confederacy  —  The  Different  Tribes  and 
their  Limitations  —  Traditionary  Origin  of  the  Confederation  —  Legend  of  Ta-oun-ya-wat-ha  —  Tribal  Relations  — 
The  "Clan"  System — Social  Relations  and  Personal  Peculiarities  of  the  Iroquois  —  Their  .Amusements  —  The 
Councils  —  Origin  of  the  Warlike  Tendency  of  the  Iroquois  —  The  French  Colonists  and  their  Struggles  with  the 
Indians —  Defeat  of  the  Adirond<icks  —  Military  Organization  and  Charcteristics  —  Treatment  of  Prisoners  —  Physical 
Traits  —  Their  Downfall  Foreshadowed. 


ALTHOUGH  the  history  of  Cortland 
county,  as  a  section  of  the  Empire 
State  embraced  within  certain  defined 
boundaries,  dates  back  onh'  to  the  year 
1808,  yet  its  historic  records  may  be  traced 
far  into  the  remote  past,  through  a  period 
when  it  was  either  an  undefined  section  of 
larger  definite  tracts  with  boundaries  and 
names,  or  merely  a  comparatively  small  and 

• 

unknown  portion  of  the  great  wilderness  of 
the  western  continent ;  through  a  period 
when  it  and  its  surrounding  vicinity  was 
peopled  only  by  that  barbaric  race  who  are 
everywhere  known  and  recognized  by  the 
generic  name  of  Indians.  W'hile  the  his- 
tory of  this  peculiar  people,  after  they  be- 
came intimately  associated  with  the  white 
race,  ma\'  be  intelligently  written,  there  is 
very  little  known  of  them  previous  to  that 
time  that  is  not  based  upon  tradition  and 
fragmentary  legend.  Their  remote  past  is 
shrouded  in  obscurity. 

This  absence  of  connected  written  history 
is,  however,  partially  compensated  b}'  nu- 
merous relics  in  the  form  of  implements  of 
rude  husbandr}-,  warfare  and  the  chase, 
which  have  been  found  in  different  parts  of 
the  country,  upon  the  sites  of  their  former 


villages,  their  burial  places,  and  elsewhere. 
It  is  quite  generally  believed  by  those  who 
have  studied  the  subject,  that  this  country 
was  once  occupied  by  a  race  of  people  more 
numerous  and  of  much  higher  mental  ca- 
pacit\^  and  culture  than  the  Indians.  While 
there  are  evidences  in  support  of  this  theory, 
apparentl)'  quite  conclusive  in  character,  it 
is  still  a  theor\-,  and  such  it  must  ever  re- 
main. But  while  we  ma\-  safely  conclude 
that  it  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  some 
race  altogether  different  from  the  Indians 
existed  here  before  them,  there  are  strong 
probabilities  that,  if  such  was  the  case,  the 
race  was  inferior  rather  than  superior  to  the 
people  discovered  here  by  the  Europeans. 

The  origin  of  the  Indians  is,  perhaps,  even 
more  obscure  than  that  of  the  possible  ab- 
origines of  this  continent ;  there  is  little 
regarding  it  that  is  not  traditional.  Able 
writers  have  advocated  the  theory  that  they 
are  identical  with  the  ]\Iound  Builders,  who 
have  left  behind  them  those  remarkable 
monuments  of  their  existence,  while  others 
equally  able  claim  that  there  is  a  wide 
chasm  between  the  two  that  cannot  be 
spanned  in  a  rational  manner.  Of  the  lat- 
ter the  most  eminent  is,  perhaps,  Bancroft, 


14 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


who  says :  "  It  has  been  asked  if  our  Indians 
are  not  the  ureclcs  of  more  civilized  nations." 
His  answer  is:  "Their  language  refutes 
the  h}'pothesis ;  every  one  of  its  forms  is 
a  witness  that  their  ancestors  were  like 
themselves,  not  yet  disenthralled  from  nat- 
ure." ^ 

Many  elaborate  disquisitions  have  been 
written  upon  this  branch  of  our  subject;  a 
number  of  modern  writers  give  credence  to 
the  theory  of  a  northwestern  immigration 
by  the  barbarous  hordes  of  Asia.  John  de 
Laet,  a  Flemish  author,  was  an  advocate  of 
this  thcor)-,  and  one  of  the  first  to  note  a 
resemblance  in  the  features,  complexion  and 
manners  of  the  Sc\-thians,  Tartars  and  Sa- 
moeides  and  those  of  the  American  Indians. 
Bancroft  supports  the  theory  as  follows : 
"The  American  and  Mongolian  races  of 
men,  on  the  two  sides  of  the  Pacific,  have  a  ' 
near  resemblance.  Both  are  alike  strongly 
and  definitely  marked  by  the  more  capa- 
cious palatine  fossa,  of  which  the  dimen- 
sions are  so  much  larger  that  a  careful  ob- 
server could,  out  of  a  heap  of  skulls,  readily 
separate  the  Mongolian  and  American  from 
the  Caucasian,  but  could  not  distinguish 
them  from  each  other.  Both  liave  the  orbit 
of  the  eye  quadrangular,  rather  than  oval ; 
both,  especiall}-  the  American,  have  com- 
paratively a  narrowness  of  the  forehead ; 
the  facial  angle  in  both,  but  especially  in  the 
American,  is  comparatively  small ;  in  both, 
the  bones  of  the  nose  are  flatter  and  broader 
than  in  the  Caucasian,  and  in  so  equal  a 
degree,  and  with  apertures  so  similar  that, 
on  indiscriminate  selections  from  the  two, 
an  observer  could  not,  from  this  feature, 
discriminate  which  of  them  belonged  to  the 
old  continent ;  both,  but  especially  the 
American,  are  characterized  by  a  promi- 
nence of  the  jaws.  Between  the  Mongolian 
of  southern  Asia  and  of  northern  Asia,  there 
is  a  greater   difference    than    between  the 

1  Bancroft's  History  of  the  U.  S.,  II,  417. 


Mongolian  Tartar  and  the  North  American. 
The  Iroquois  is  more  unlike  the  Peruvian 
than  he  is  unlike  the  wanderer  on  the  steppes 
of  Siberia.  Physiology  has  not  succeeded 
in  defining  the  qualities  which  belong  to 
every  well-formed  Mongolian,  and  which 
never  belong  to  an  indigenous  American  ; 
still  less  can  geographical  science  draw  a 
boundary  line  between  the  races."  ^ 

Priest,  in  his  American  Antiquities,  ex- 
presses the  conclusion  that  "Asia  and  Amer- 
ica were  peopled  by  similar  races  of  men." 

These  e\'idences  bear  the  appearance  of 
conclusiveness,  and  it  is  almost  certain  that 
no  stronger  proof  as  to  the  origin  of  the 
Indians  will  ever  be  adduced.  It  is  the 
most  reasonable  theory  that  has  been  ad- 
vanced to  account  for  the  remarkable  race 
of  men  that  peopled  this  country  when  it 
was  first  visited  b\'  the  white  race. 

The  territory  under  consideration  in  this 
work  was  a  part  of  the  vast  domain  of  the 
Iroquois  Confederacy,-  which  extended,  in 
general  terms,  from  the  Hudson  river  to  the 
Genesee,  and  from  the  north  to  the  south 
boundary  of  this  State.  The  Confederacj- 
was  composed  of  the  following  nations,  lo- 
cated in  the  following  order  from  east  to 
west :  The  Mohawks,  (Ganeagaonos),  on 
the  river  bearing  their  name ;  the  Oneidas, 
(Onayotekaonos) ;  the  Onondagas,  (Onun- 
dagaonos) ;  the  Cayugas,  (Gwengwehonos) ; 
and  the  Senecas.  (Nundawaonos),  mostly 
located  adjacent  to  the  several  lakes  bearing 

"^History  of  tlu-  U.  S.,   II,  460-61. 

2  Iroquois  was  not  a  name  applied  by  the  Indians  to 
themselves,  but  was  given  them  by  the  French,  and  is 
said  to  have  been  formed  from  two  Indian  words;  but 
its  meaning  is  vailed  in  obscurity.  By  the  Dutch  the 
five  confederated  nations  were  called  "Maquas."  They 
distinguished  themselves  as  "Mingoes,"  meaning 
"United  People."  Parkman  says,  "their  true  name  is 
'  Hodenosaunee,'  or  '  People  of  the  Long  House,'"  be- 
cause the  five  nations  were  ranged  in  a  long  line  through 
Central  New  York,  and  likened  to  one  of  their  long 
bark  houses.  Kuttenber  says  they  bore  the  title  of 
"  Aquinosbione, "  or  "  Konosbioni,"  ha\ing  the  same 
meaning. 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


IS 


their  respective  names.'  The  origin  of  this 
Confederac)-  is,  at  least  to  a  great  extent, 
merely  traditional.  The  Iroquois  them- 
selves ascribe  it,  as  they  also  do  the  origin 
of  the  individual  nations,  to  a  supernatural 
source.  The\-,  like  the  Athenians,  sprang 
from  the  earth  itself.  "In  remote  ages 
they  had  been  confined  under  a  mountain 
near  the  falls  of  the  Osh-wah-kee,-  or  Os- 
wego river,  whence  they  were  released  by 
Tharonhyjagon,  the  Holder  of  the  Heavens." 
Schoolcraft  inclines  to  the  opinion  that  the 
Confederation  is  to  be  referred  to  a  com- 
paratively recent  date  —  early  in  the  fif- 
teenth century.  Mr.  Webster,  the  Onon- 
daga Indian  interpreter,  who  should  be 
excellent  authority,  ascribes  it  to  about  two 
generations  before  the  white  people  came 
to  trade  with  the  Indians.  PjTlaeus,  a  mis- 
sionary among  the  Mohawks,  to  "one  age, 
or  the  length  of  a  man's  life,"  before  the 
white  people  came  into  the  country.  Oth- 
ers have  accredited  its  origin  to  the  severity 
of  their  wars  with  other  nations,  but  with- 
out date;  while  Clark,  "from  the  perma- 
nency of  their  institutions,  the  peculiar 
structure  of  their  government,  the  intricacy 
of  their  civil  affairs,  the  stability  of  their 
religious  beliefs,  and  the  uniformity  of  their 
pagan  ceremonies,  differing  from  other  In- 
dian nations  in  important  particulars,"  thinks 
it  must  have  had  a  longer  duration  than  is 
given  it  by  the  others  mentioned.  Most  of 
their  traditions  agree  that  the  Confederation 
was  formed  on  the  banks  of  Onondaga  lake, 

1  Gallatin  classes  the  Iroquois  in  three  divisions  :  the 
eastern,  consisling  of  the  confederation  known  as  the  five 
nations  ;  the  western,  of  the  Wyandots,  or  Hurons,  and 
the  Attionandrons,  or  neutral  nation,  north,  and  Erigas 
and  Andastes,  or  Guandastogues,  (Guyandots),  south  of 
Lake  Erie ;  and  the  southern,  of  the  Tuscaroras,  the  Tute- 
los,  and  the  Nottowas,  of  North  Carolina.  The  Tusca- 
roras and  Tutelos  removed  to  the  north  and  were  incor- 
porated into  the  Confederacy,  the  former  in  1 715  becom- 
ing its  sixth  member,  and  the  latter  in  1758. — Indian 
Tribes  of  Hudson' s  River,  Rl'TTKNliER. 

-Signifying,  says  Clark's  Onondaga.  "I  see  every- 
where and  see  nothing." 


near  where  the  village  of  Liverpool  is  situ- 
ated. 

Long  years  ago,  says  the  Iroquois  tradi- 
dition,  Ta-oun-ya-wat-ha,  the  deity  who 
presides  over  the  forests  and  streams,  left 
his  abode  in  the  clouds  to  come  and  re- 
move obstructions  from  their  streams,  to 
teach  them  how  to  cultivate  the  soil  and 
become  a  united  and  prosperous  people. 
In  the  vicinity  of  the  site  of  Oswego  he  dis- 
closed his  mission  to  two  Onondaga  hunters, 
whom  he  prevailed  upon  to  accompany  him 
in  his  beneficent  work ;  having  accom- 
plished which,  he  divested  himself  of  his  di- 
vine character,  and  took  up  his  abode  among 
the  men  of  earth.  He  located  his  habita- 
tion in  a  beautiful  spot  on  the  shore  of  Te- 
onto  (Cross)  lake,  on  the  present  boundary 
between  Onondaga  and  Cayuga  counties, 
where  he  built  his  cabin,  and  afterwards 
t»ok  a  wife  from  the  Onondagas,  by  whom 
he  had  an  only  and  beautiful  daughter,  who 
was  tenderly  loved  b\'  him.  His  excellent 
counsels,  wisdom  and  sagacity  won  the 
warmest  esteem  of  the  people,  who  gave 
him  the  name  of  Hiawatha,  signifying  "very 
wise  man."  Under  his  direction  the  On- 
ondagas soon  advanced  to  pre-eminent  dis- 
tinction as  the  wisest  counselors,  the  most 
eloquent  orators,  the  most  successful  hunters 
and  the  bravest  warriors. 

While  Hiawatha  was  dwelling  peacefully 
among  "the  people  of  the  hills,"  they  were 
attacked  by  a  powerful  enemy  from  the 
north  of  the  great  lakes,  who  laid  waste 
their  villages,  and  slew  inen,  women  and 
children  indiscriminately  ;  utter  destruction 
seemed  inevitable.  In  their  dire  extremity 
they  appealed  to  Hiawatha.  After  thought- 
ful contemplation  he  advised  a  council  of 
all  the  tribes  that  could  be  gathered  together, 
saying,  "I  shall  sit  in  council  with  j'oii. 
Our  safety  is  in  good  counsel  and  speedy, 
energetic    action."  ^       The    council    is    be- 

'  Other  writers  give  this  as,   "Our  safety  is  not  alone 


i6 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


lieved  to  have  been  held  on  the  banks  of 
Onondaga  (Oh-nen-ta-ha)  lake. 

A  vast  assemblage  of  chiefs,  warriors, 
men,  women  and  chiKlrcn  gathered  and 
kept  the  council  fires  burning  for  three  days, 
awaiting  the  presence  of  the  venerable  Hia- 
watha, without  whom  they  resolved  to  not 
proceed.  Messengers  were  at  length  dis- 
patched for  him  ;  they  found  him  troubled 
in  mind  and  filled  with  gloomy  forebodings, 
which  had  caused  him  to  resolve  that  he 
would  not  attend  the  council.  But  he  was 
at  length  prevailed  upon  to  go,  and  taking 
his  beloved  daughter  they  embarked  in  the 
venerated  white  canoe  and  glided  down  the 
placid  Seneca  and  into  the  beautiful  Onon- 
daga lake.  When  the}-  were  recognized  by 
the  multitude  a  great  shout  of  welcome  rose 
on  the  air.  As  they  ascended  the  steep 
bank  of  the  lake  and  approached  the  coun- 
cil ground,  suddenly  a  loud  sound  was 
heard  as  of  rushing  winds.  All  eyes  were 
turned  upward,  when  a  dark  cloud  was  be- 
held rapidly  closing  down  upon  them,  in- 
creasing in  size  as  it  came  nearer.  The 
entire  council,  with  the  exception  of  Hia- 
watha and  his  daughter,  sought  safety  in 
flight.  The  old  man  uncovered  his  silvered 
head  and  enjoined  his  daughter  to  await  the 
impending  calamity  with  fortitude  and  resig- 
nation. Sudden!)-,  with  a  mighty  swoop, 
a  huge  bird,  with  long  and  distended  wings 
and  a  pointed  beak,  came  down  and  crushed 
the  beautiful  girl  to  the  earth,  destroying 
her  semblance  of  humanity,  and  itself  dying 
in  the  collision.  The  frightened  warriors 
cautiously  returned,  only  to  behold  the  ter- 
rible scene.  The  great  bird  was  covered 
with  a  beautiful  white  plumage,  from  which 
each  warrior  plucked  a  plume  for  his  crown. 
From  that  time  and  incident  the  Iroquois 
braves  have  alwa\-s  worn  the  plumes  of  the 
white  heron  as  their  martial  decoration. 

in  the  chil:)  ami  d.irl,  l)ut  in  wise  counsels  ;  "  or,  "  Be- 
come a  united  people  anil  you  will  conquer  your  ene- 
mies." 


Despairing  and  desolate,  Hiawatha  re- 
mained for  three  days  prostrate  upon  his 
face  on  the  ground.  Every  one  present 
shared  the  old  man's  grief;  he  at  lengtli 
gained  sufficient  composure  to  enable  him 
to  take  part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  coun- 
cil. Various  plans  were  discussed,  to  which 
Hiawatha  listened  in  silence.  When  all  had 
concluded,  he  addressed  the  council.  After 
briefly  alluding  to  his  own  bereavement,  he 
referred  to  the  threatened  invasion,  and  sug- 
gested that  they  should  reflect  for  one  day 
upon  the  speeches  that  had  been  made. 
The  following  day  the  council  again  assem- 
bled and  amid  breathless  silence  listened  to 
the  following  words  from  the  sage  coun- 
selor:— 

"  Friends  and  Brothers:  You  have  come  many 
of  you  a  great  dist.mce  from  your  homes;  you 
have  convened  for  one  common  purpose,  to  jiro- 
mote  one  common  interest,  and  that  is  to  provide 
for  our  common  safety.  To  oppose  these  hordes 
of  northern  foes  by  tribes,  singly  and  alone,  would 
prove  our  certain  destruction.  We  can  make  no 
progress  in  that  way;  we  must  unite  ourselves 
into  one  common  band  of  brothers.  Our  war- 
riors united  would  surely  repel  these  rude  invad- 
ers and  drive  them  from  our  borders.  Let  this 
be  done  and  we  are  safe. 

"You,  the  Mohawks, sitting  under  the  shadow 
of  the  '  Gnat  Tree,'  whose  roots  sink  deep  into 
the  earth,  and  whose  branches  spread  over  a  vast 
country,  shall  be  the  first  nation,  because  you  are 
warlike  and  mighty. 

"You,  Oneidas,  a  people  who  recline  your 
bodies  against  the  ^Everlasting  Stone,'  tliat  can- 
not be  moved,  shall  be  the  second  nation,  be- 
cause you  give  wise  counsel. 

"You,  Onondagas,  who  have  your  habitation 
at  the  '  Great  Mountain,'  and  are  overshadowed 
by  its  crags,  shall  be  the  third  nation,  because 
you  are  greatly  gifted  in  speech  and  mighty  in 
war. 

"  You,  Cayugas,  a  people  whose  habitation  is 
the  '  Dark  Forest,'  and  whose  home  is  every- 
where, shall  be  the  fourth  nation,  because  of  your 
superior  cunning  in  hunting. 

"  And  you,  Senecas,  a  people  who  live  in  the 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


17 


open  country  and  possess  much  wisdom,  shall  be 
the  fifth  nation,  because  you  understand  better 
the  art  of  raising  corn  and  beans,  and  making 
cabins. 

"  You  five  great  and  powerful  nations  must 
unite  and  have  but  one  common  interest,  and  no 
foe  shall  be  able  to  disturb  or  subdue  you. 

"And  you.  Manhattans,  Nyacks,  Metoacks 
and  others,  who  are  as  the  feeble  bushes;  and 
you,  Narragansetts,  Mohegans,  Wampanoags  and 
your  neighbors,  who  are  a  fishing  people,  may 
place  yourselves  under  our  protection.  Be  with 
us  and  we  will  defend  you.  You  of  the  south 
and  you  of  the  west  may  do  the  same,  and  we 
will  protect  you.  We  earnestly  desire  your  friend- 
ship and  alliance. 

"  Brothers,  if  we  unite  in  this  bond,  the  Great 
Spirit  will  smile  upon  us  and  we  shall  be  free, 
prosperous  and  happy.  But  if  we  remain  as  we 
are  we  shall  be  subject  to  his  frown  ;  we  shall  be 
enslaved,  ruined,  perhaps  annihilated  forever. 
We  shall  perish  and  our  names  be  blotted  out 
from  among  the  nations  of  men. 

"Brothers,  these  are  the  words  of  Hiawatha. 
Let  them  sink  deep  into  your  hearts.  I  have 
said  it." 

The  council  adjourned  one  da\'  to  give 
time  for  due  consideration  of  this  address 
and  its  recommendations.  Upon  assem- 
bling the  next  day  the  wisdom  of  the  prop- 
ositions of  Hiawatha  was  unanimously  con- 
ceded; and  thus,  according  to  tradition,  was 
formed  that  remarkable  league  of  the  five 
Indian  nations  which  no  outward  power  has 
been  able  to  break.  Whatever  may  have 
been  the  actual  circumstances  surroundine 
its  origin,  its  wonderful  effectiveness,  its 
permanency  and  its  adaptability  to  its  pur- 
poses cannot  be  questioned  and  stamp  the 
mind  that  conceived  it  as  a  genius  of  the 
highest  order. 

Having  accomplished  his  work  on  earth 
and  admonished  b}-  the  death  of  his  daugh- 
ter that  his  mission  was  ended,  Hiawatha 
prepared  to  take  his  departure.  As  the  as- 
sembled council  was  about  to  separate,  he 
arose  in  a  dignified  manner  and  said: — 


"  Friends  and  Brothers :  I  have  now  fulfilled 
my  mission  on  the  earth.  I  have  done  every- 
thing that  can  be  done  at  present  for  the  good 
of  this  great  people.  Age,  infirmity  and  distress 
set  heavily  upon  me.  During  my  sojourn  among 
you,  I  have  removed  all  obstructions  from  the 
streams.  Canoes  can  now  pass  safely  every- 
where. I  have  given  you  good  fishing  waters 
and  good  hunting  grounds.  I  have  taught  you 
the  manner  of  cultivating  corn  and  beans,  and 
learned  you  the  art  of  making  cabins.  Many 
other  blessings  I  have  liberally  bestowed  upon 
you. 

"  Lastly,  I  have  now  assisted  you  to  form  an 
everlasting  league  and  covenant  of  strength  and 
friendship  for  your  future  safety  and  protection. 
If  you  preserve  it,  without  the  admission  of  other 
people,  you  will  always  be  free,  numerous  and 
mighty.  If 'other  nations  are  admitted  to  your 
councils  they  will  sow  jealousies  among  you,  and 
}'ou  will  become  enslaved,  few  and  feeble.  Re- 
member these  words ;  they  are  the  last  )ou  will 
hear  from  the  lips  of  Hiawatha.  Listen,  my 
friends ;  the  Great  Master  of  Breath  calls  me  to 
go.  I  have  patiently  waited  his  summons.  I 
am  ready.     Farewell." 

As  his  voice  died  away,  sweet  sounds 
were  heard  in  the  air  ;  and,  while  all  atten- 
tion was  directed  to  the  celestial  melody, 
Hiawatha,  seated  in  the  white  canoe,  arose 
in  mid  air,  and  the  clouds  shut  him  out  from 
earthly  sight ;  the  while  the  melody  gradu- 
ally died  away  and  ceased. 

Parkman  considered  that  "both  reason 
and  tradition  point  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  Iroquois  fi;rmed  originally  one  people. 
Sundered,  like  countless  other  tribes,  by 
dissension,  caprice,  or  the  necessities  of  a 
hunter's  life,  they  separated  into  five  distinct 
nations."  ^ 

Clark,  the  able  historian  of  Onondaga 
county,  says  :  "  By  the  early  French  writers, 
the  Mohawks  and  Oneidas  were  styled  the 
lower  or  inferior  Iroquois  ;  while  the  Onon- 
dagas,  Cayugas  and  Senecas  were  denom- 
inated the  upper  or  superior  Iroquois,  be- 

iParkman's  ycsiiits. 


i8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


cause  they  were  located  near  the  sources  of 
tlie  St.  Lawrence  river.  Tlie  Mohawks, 
wlio  arc  cominnnly  supi)<>sed  to  be  the  first 
nation  in  tlic  Confederacy,  and  were  con- 
sidered the  most  warlike  people  in  the  land, 
were  also  styled  elder  brothers  of  the  other 
nations,  and  so  esteemed  themselves.  .  .  . 
To  (them)  was  always  accorded  the  high 
consideration  of  furnishing  the  war  captain, 
or  'Tckarahogea,'  of  the  Confederacy,  which 
distinguished  title  was  retained  with  them 
till  the  year  1 8 14,  when  the  celebrated 
Hoa-ho-a-quah,  an  Onondaga,  was  chosen 
in  general  council  at  Btiffiilo,  to  fill  that  im- 
portant station." 

The  central  and  unique  characteristic  of 
the  Iroquois  league  was  not  the  mere  fact 
of  five  separate  tribes  being  confederated 
together ;  such  unions  have  been  frequent 
between  different  civilized  and  half-civilized 
peoples,  though  little  practiced  among  the 
savages  of  North  America.  The  peculiar 
feature  that  distinguished  the  "  People  of 
the  Long  House"  from,  probabl}-,  all  the 
world  beside,  and  which  bound  together 
this  great  band  of  ferocious  warriors  as  with 
a  living  chain,  was  their  system  of  clans, 
which  extended  through  all  the  different 
tribes.  The  word  "clan"  is  used  as  best 
representing  the  peculiar  artificial  families 
established  by  the  Iroquois,  and  not  because 
their  clan  system  resembled  any  other.  No 
light  tie  could  hold  in  harmonious  devotion 
to  a  common  interest  such  a  fierce  and  bar- 
barous people  as  these.  The  problem  was 
eminently  worthy  of  the  mind  that  solved 
it ;  as  solved,  it  held  them  inflexibly,  yet 
unrestrainedly,  to  all  matters  relating  to 
their  federated  existence,  and  at  the  same 
time  secured  the  utmost  freedom  and  elas- 
ticity in  their  tribal  and  national  relations  — 
a  most  important  consideration  with  a  peo- 
ple entertaining  the  highest  possible  regard 
for  personal  liberty. 

The    Iroquois   Confederacy   was   divided 


into  nine  of  these  clans,  or  families,  the 
names  of  which  were  as  follows  :  Wolf  Rear, 
Beaver,  Turtle,  Deer,  Snipe,  Heron,  Hawk 
and  Potatoe.  When  the  union  was  effected 
each  of  the  original  five  tribes  into  which 
each  of  the  five  nations  was  divided,  trans- 
ferred one-fifth  of  its  numbers  to  every 
other  nation. •  These  tribes,  or  clans,  formed 
two  divisions,  the  second  subordinate  to  the 
first,  which  was  composed  of  the  four  first 
named.  The  members  of  each  division 
were  regarded  as  brothers  to  those  in  that 
division  to  which  they  belonged,  while  they 
were  only  cousins  to  those  in  the  other  di- 
visions. Each  clan  constituted  a  family, 
and  while  all  of  its  members  were  accounted 
brothers  and  sisters,  they  were  also  brothers 
and  sisters  of  the  members  of  all  the  other 
clans  ha\'ing  the  same  device,  or  name. 
The  indissoluble  and  powerful  bond  thus 
formed  b_\'  the  ties  of  consanguinity,  was 
still  further  strengthened  through  the  mar- 
riage relation.  Marriage  was  originally 
prohibited  between  members  of  the  same 
division,  but  in  time  the  restriction  was  lim- 
ited to  those  of  the  same  clan.  It  was  held 
to  be  an  abomination  for  two  persons  of  the 
same  clan  to  intermarr\-,  and  the  prohibi- 
tion was  strictly  enforced ;  hence  every  in- 
dividual family  must  contain  members  from 
at  least  two  of  the  clans  or  tribes.  The 
child  belonged  to  the  clan  of  the  mother, 
not  the  father,  from  whom  it  inherited 
nothing.  All  rank,  titles  and  possessions 
passed  through  the  female. 

E\ery  member  of  each  clan  being  thus 
taught  from  infancy  that  they  belonged  to 
the  same  family,  a  bond  of  the  strongest 
possible   kind   was  created   throughout  the 

1  Accounts  differ,  some  declaring  that  every  clan  (or 
tribe)  extended  through  all  the  tribes,  and  others  that 
only  the  Wolf,  Hear  and  Turtle  clans  did  so.  It  is  cer- 
tain, however,  that  each  tribe,  Mohawks,  Oneidas,  On- 
ondagas,  Cayugas  or  Senecas,  contained  a  part  of  the 
three  clans  named,  and  of  several  of  the  others. — John- 
son's History  of  lirie  Coiinly, 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


19 


Confederacy.  The  Oneida  of  the  Wolf  clan 
no  sooner  appeared  among  the  Cayugas, 
for  example,  than  those  of  the  same  clan 
took  him  in  charge  as  their  special  guest, 
and  admitted  him  to  the  most  confidential 
intimac)'.  The  Seneca  of  the  Turtle  clan 
miglit  wander  into  the  country  of  the  Mo- 
hawk.s,  at  the  farthest  extremity  of  the 
"Long  House;"  but  there  he  had  a  claim 
upon  his  brother  Turtles  which  they  would 
not  think  of  repudiating.  If  at  any  time  an 
inclination  was  felt  toward  conflict  between 
different  tribes,  it  was  instantly  checked  by 
the  knowledge  that  if  persisted  in,  the  hand 
of  the  Heron  might  be  lifted  against  his 
brother  Heron  in  another  clan  ;  the  hatchet 
of  the  Bear  might  be  hurled  at  the  head  of 
his  kinsman  Bear.  And  so  powerful  was 
this  influence  that  for  two  centuries,  or 
more,  and  until  the  league  was  disintegrated 
by  overwhelming  outside  forces,  there  were 
no  serious  dissensions  between  the  tribes  of 
the  Iroquois.  Surely  it  was  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  confederacies  in  the  historj-  of 
the  world. 

"This  system  of  clanship,"  says  Park- 
man,  "was  of  very  wide  prevalence.  In- 
deed, it  is  more  than  probable  that  close 
observation  would  have  detected  it  in  every 
tribe  east  of  the  Mississippi ;  while  there  is 
positive  evidence  of  its  existence  in  by  far 
the  greater  number." 

The  son  of  a  chief  could  ne\'er  be  a  chief 
by  hereditary  title,  though  he  might  become 
one  through  personal  merit ;  but  a  grand- 
son, great-grandson  or  nephew  might  suc- 
ceed him.i 

This  rule,  though  binding,  was  quite 
elastic,  and  capable  of  reaching  to  the  far- 

iChamplain  noticed  this  law  of  descent  among  the  Hu- 
10ns  in  1615,  and  probably  referred  it  to  its  true  origin, 
namely,  a  child  must  be  the  son  of  his  mother,  while  he 
might  not  be  of  his  putative  father;  "a  consideration," 
says  ParUinan,  "of  more  than  ordinary  force  in  an  In- 
dian community."  The  same  observation  had  been  made 
some  years  before,  by  Capt.  John  .Smith,  with  reference 
to  the  tribes  in  Virginia. 


thest  limits  of  the  clan  —  each  of  which 
was  allowed  to  select  its  chief  from  among 
its  own  members.  Almost  invariably  the 
chief  was  succeeded  by  a  near  relative,  and 
always  on  the  female  side  ;  but  if  such  were 
manifestly  unfit,  his  successor  was  chosen 
at  a  council  of  the  tribe  from  among  re- 
moter kindred,  in  which  case  he  was  pro- 
posed by  the  matron  of  the  late  chief's 
household.  1  In  any  event  the  choice  was 
never  adverse  to  the  popular  decision.  The 
new  chief  was  inducted  into  office  by  a 
formal  council  of  the  sachems  of  the  league; 
on  assuming  his  office  he  dropped  his  own 
name  and  substituted  that  which,  since  the 
formation  of  the  Confederacy,  had  belonged 
to  his  especial  chieftainship.  He  ^\■as  re- 
quired to  be  a  skillful  hunter,  and  liberal 
with  his  game.  He  must  also  be  a  good 
physician,  able  to  advise  and  assist  the  sick 
under  every  combination  of  circumstances. 
It  was  his  duty  to  care  for  orphans,  to  har- 
bor strangers,  and  to  keep  order  in  his  town. 
But  he,  like  the  sachem,  had  no  power  of 
compulsion  ;  he  must  keep  up  his  reputa- 
tion and  control  by  a  courteous,  prudent 
and  winning  behavior.^ 

The  tribes  were  by  no  means  equal  in 
numbers,  distinction  and  power.  So  marked 
were  the  differences  that,  according  to  Col- 
den  and  other  writers,  onl}-  the  three  most 
prominent  were  recognized  by  some  early 
observers — those  of  the  Turtle,  the  Bear 
and  the  Wolf;  and  yet,  with  no  other  law 
than  common  usage  under  this  league,  and 
no  means  of  enforcing  justice,  these  uncult- 
ured savages  dwelt  together  in  communities 
aggregating  thousands,  with  a  harmoin-  that 
civilization  might  envy. 

In  reference  to  social  matters,  Parkman 
says  that,  "though  \-ain,  arrogant,  boastful 
and  vindictive,  these  Indians  bore  abuse 
and  sarcasm  with  an  astonishing  patience. 

1  Lafitau. 

2  Loskiel. 


20 


HiSToRV    OF   C0RT1.AN1>    CoUNTV. 


Though  greedy  and  grasping,  he  was  lavish 
without  stint,  and  would  give  away  his  all 
to  soothe  the  moans  of  a  departed  relative, 
gain  influence  and  applause,  or  ingratiate 
himself  with  his  neighbors.  In  his  dread 
of  public  opinion,  he  rivaled  some  of  his 
civilized  successors.  All  Indians,  and  espe- 
cially these  populous  and  stationary  tribes, 
had  their  code  of  courtesy  whose  require- 
ments were  rigid  and  exact;  nor  might  any 
infringe  it  without  the  ban  of  public  censure. 
Indian  nature,  inflexible  and  unmalleable, 
was  peculiarly  under  the  control  of  custom. 
Established  usage  took  the  place  of  law  — 
was,  in  fact,  a  sort  of  common  law,  with  no 
tribunal  to  expound  or  enforce  it.  .  .  .  All 
were  prompt  to  aid  each  other  in  distress, 
and  neighborly  spirit  was  often  exhibited 
among  them.  When  a  young  woman  was 
permanentl)'  married,  the  other  women  of 
the  village  supplied  her  with  firewood  for 
the  year,  each  contributing  an  armful. 
When  one  or  more  families  were  without 
shelter,  the  men  of  the  village  joined  in 
building  them  a  house.  In  return  the  re- 
cipients of  the  favor  gave  a  feast,  if  they 
could  ;  if  not,  their  thanks  were  sufficient,^ 
Among  the  Iroquois  and  Hurons,  and, 
doubtless,  among  the  kindred  tribes,  there 
were  marked  distinctions  of  noble  and  base, 
prosperous  and  poor ;  yet,  while  there  was 
food  in  the  village,  the  meanest  and  poorest 
need  not  suffer  want.  He  had  but  to  enter 
the  nearest  house  and  seat  himself  by  the 
fire,  when,  without  a  word  on  either  side, 
food  was  placed  before  him  by  the  women. 
"Contrary  to  the  received  opinion,  these 
Indians,  like  others  of  their  race,  when  liv- 
ing in  communities,  were  of  a  very  social 

1  In  referring  to  the  charity  of  the  Indians,  K.igueneau 
wrote  in  hi.s  Relation:  "As  often  as  we  have  seen  tribes 
broken  u]),  towns  destroyed,  and  the  people  driven  to 
flight,  we  have  seen  them  to  the  numberof  seven  or 
eiglit  hundred  jiersons  received  witli  open  arms  by  char- 
itable hosts,  who  gladly  gave  them  aid,  and  even  distrib- 
uted among  them  a  part  of  the  lands  already  ]ilanted, 
that  they  might  have  the  means  of  living." 


disposition.  Besides  their  incessant  dances 
and  feasts,  great  and  small,  they  were  con- 
tinuall)-  visiting,  spending  most  of  tlicir  time 
in  neighbors'  houses,  chatting,  joking,  ban- 
tering one  another  with  witticisms,  sharp, 
broad,  and  in  no  sense  delicate,  yet  always 
taken  in  good  part.  Every  village  had  its 
adepts  in  these  wordy  tournaments,  while 
the  shrill  laugh  of  young  squaws,  untaught 
to  blush,  echoed  each  hardy  jest  and  rough 
sarcasm." 

According  to  the  same  writer,  there  was 
another  cotincil  besides  the  general  council, 
between  which  antl  that  of  the  subordinate 
chiefs  the  line  seems  not  to  have  been  very 
clearly  defined.  It  appears  to  have  been 
essentialU'  popular,  and  poptilar  in  the  best 
sense.  Any  man  took  part  in  it  whose  age 
and  qualifications  fitted  him  to  do  so.  It 
was  merely  the  gathered  wisdom  of  the  na- 
tion. Lafitati,  the  Jesuit,  who  was  familiar 
with  the  Iroqtiois  at  the  height  of  their 
prosperity,  compared  it  to  the  Roman  Sen- 
ate, and  defines  it  as  the  central  and  con- 
trolling power,  so  far,  at  least,  as  the  sepa- 
rate nations  were  concerned.  He  describes 
it  as  "a  greasy  assemblage,  sitting  stir  Icnr 
dcrricrc,  crouched  like  apes,  their  knees  as 
high  as  their  ears,  or  lying,  some  on  their 
bellies,  some  on  their  backs,  each  with  a  pipe 
in  his  mouth,  discussing  affairs  of  state  with 
as  much  coolness  and  gravity  as  the  Span- 
ish Junta  or  the  Grand  Council  of  Venice." 

The  warriors  also  had  their  councils,  and 
the  women,  too;  and  the  opinions  and 
wishes  of  both  were  represented  by  deputies 
in  the  councils  of  the  old  men,  as  well  as  in 
those  of  the  sachems.  Indeed,  the  govern- 
ment of  this  unique  republic  rested  wholly 
in  councils;  therein  all  questions  —  of  so- 
cial, political,  military  and  religious  mat- 
ters—  were  settled.  In  this  blending  of 
individual,  family,  tribal,  national  and  fed- 
eral interests,  lay  the  secret  of  the  marvel- 
ous power  of  the  Iroquois  —  a  power  which 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


21 


for  a  century  and  a  half  successfully  opposed 
the  hostilities  of  the  French  ;  which  made 
them,  during-  the  century  from  1664  to 
1763,  an  unconquerable  niass  between  the 
contending  French  and  Fnylish  colonists  in 
America,  alike  feared  and  courted  by  both; 
which  enabled  them  to  exterminate  or  sub- 
due the  neighboring  tribes  with  whom  they 
had  long  waged  wars. 

The  Iroquois  were  not  always  the  fierce 
and  blood-thirsty  people  which  they  were 
found  to  be  when  the  French  made  their 
first  settlements  in  Canada.  The  circum- 
stances which  led  them  to  measurably  for- 
sake their  former  occupations  of  peaceful 
husbandry  and  the  chase,  and  involved  them 
in  a  war  with  the  Adirondacks,  are  thus 
graphically  narrated  by  Colden  :  "  The 
Adirondacks  formerly  lived  three  hundred 
miles  above  Trois  Rivieres,  where  now  the 
Utowawas  are  situated  ;  at  that  time  the\- 
employed  themselves  wholly  in  hunting, 
and  the  Five  Nations  made  the  planting  of 
corn  their  business.  By  this  means  they 
became  useful  to  each  other,  by  exchanging 
corn  for  venison.  The  Adirondacks,  how- 
ever, valued  themselves  as  delighting  in  a 
more  manly  employment,  and  despised  the 
F"ive  Nations,  in  following  business  which 
the\'  thought  only  fit  for  women.  Rut  it 
once  happened  that  the  game  failed  the 
Adirondacks,  which  made  them  desire  some 
of  the  young  men  of  the  Five  Nations  to 
assist  them  in  hunting.  These  young  men 
soon  became  more  expert  in  hunting,  and 
more  able  to  endure  fatigue,  than  the  Adi- 
rondacks expected  or  desired ;  in  short, 
they  became  jealous  of  them,  and  one  night 
murdered  all  the  young  men  they  had  with 
them.  The  Five  Nations  complained  to 
the  chiefs  of  the  Adirondacks  of  the  in- 
humanity of  this  action ;  but  they  con- 
tented themselves  with  blaming  the  murder- 
ers, and  ordered  them  to  make  some  small 
presents  to  the  relatives  of  the  murdered 


persons,!  without  being  apprehensive  of  the 
resentment  of  the  Five  Nations ;  for  they 
looked  upon  them  as  men  not  capable  of 
taking  any  revenge. 

"This,  however,  provoked  the  Five  Nations 
to  that  degree  that  they  soon  resolved  by 
some  means  to  be  revenged ;  and  the  Adi- 
rondacks, being  informed  of  these  designs, 
thought  to  prevent  them  by  reducing  them 
with  force  to  their  obedience. 

"The  Five  Nations  then  lived  where 
Mont  Real  now  stands ;  they  defended 
themselves  at  first  but  faintly  against  the 
vigorous  attacks  of  the  Adirondacks,  and 
were  forced  to  leave  their  own  country  and 
fly  to  the  banks  of  the  lakes,  where  they 
now  live.  As  they  were  hitherto  losers  by 
the  war,  it  obliged  them  to  apply  them- 
selves to  the  exercise  of  arms,  in  which  they 
became  daily  more  and  more  expert.    Their 

III  was  customary  with  the  Iroquois,  as  with  other 
Indian  nations,  to  eNpiate  murder  by  means  of  presents 
given  to  the  friends  of  the  deceased.  It  is  a  most  pecul- 
iar reflection  that  the  efforts  were  directed  not  to  li)ring- 
ing  the  murderers  to  a  just  punishment,  but  to  satisfying 
those  who  had  a  right  to  feel  aggrieved.  Murder  was 
the  most  heinous  crime  e.\ce])t  witchcraft,  and  was  rare. 
If  the  slayer  and  the  slain  were  of  the  same  household  or 
tribe,  the  aflair  was  regarded  as  a  family  quarrel,  to  be 
settled  by  the  immediate  kin  on  Ijoth  sides.  This,  under 
the  pressure  of  public  opinion,  was  commonly  effected 
without  bloodshed.  But  if  the  murderer  and  his  victim 
were  of  different  clans  or  nations,  still  more  if  the  slain 
was  a  foreigner,  the  whole  community  became  interested 
to  prevent  the  discord  or  the  war  which  might  arise.  To 
this  end,  contributions  were  made  and  presents  collected. 
Their  number  and  value  were  determined  by  established 
usage,  and  differed  with  different  nations.  The  Iroquois 
demanded  100  yards  of  wampum  for  the  murder  of  a  man 
and  200  for  that  of  a  woman.  If  the  victim  was  of  a  for- 
eign tribe,  a  higher  compensation  was  demanded,  as  it 
involved  the  danger  of  war.  Authors  differ  as  to  the  re- 
sult which  followed  in  case  of  refusal  on  the  part  of  rela- 
tives of  the  deceased  to  accept  the  proper  atonement, 
which  they  might  do  if  they  chose.  Some  have  held  that 
the  murderer  was  given  the  relatives  as  a  slave,  but  they 
might  by  no  means  kill  him.  Colden  says  they  "have 
such  absolute  notions  of  liberty  that  they  allow  no  kind 
of  superiority  of  one  over  another,  and  banish  all  servi- 
tude from  their  territories."  I.oskiel  intimates  that  the 
punishment  of  death  may  be  intlicted.  Under  these 
regulations,  capital  crimes  were  rare. 


22 


History  of  Cortland  Couxty. 


sachems,  in  order  to  raise  their  people's 
spirits,  turned  tliem  against  the  Satanas,  a 
less  warlike  nation,  who  then  lived  on  the 
banks  of  the  lakes  ;  for  they  found  it  was 
difficult  to  remove  the  dread  their  people 
had  of  the  valor  of  the  Adirondacks.  The 
Five  Nations  soon  subdued  the  Satanas,  and 
drove  them  out  of  their  country ;  and  their 
people's  courage  being  thus  elevated,  they 
from  this  time  not  only  defended  themselves 
bravely  against  the  whole  force  of  the  Adi- 
rondacks, but  often  carried  the  war  into  the 
heart  of  the  Adirondacks'  countrj',  and  at 
last  forced  them  to  leave  it,  and  to  fly  into 
that  part  of  the  country  where  Quebec  is 
now  built." 

While  the  war  was  waging  between  the 
Adirondacks  and  the  Iroquois,  the  French 
colonists,  having  already  shown  their  en- 
mity to  the  latter,  drew  most  of  the  other 
nations  to  Quebec,  tlirough  the  influence 
of  the  fur  trade,  and  supplied  them  with  fire- 
arms. These  nations  then  joined  in  the  war 
against  the  Iroquois,  and  the  Adirondacks 
resolved  upon  the  utter  destruction  of  the 
Five  Nations ;  but  their  discipline  had  be- 
come weakened  by  the  restlessness  of  the 
younger  warriors,  a  fact  that  the  Iroquois 
were  not  slow  to  discover  and  take  advan- 
tage of.  They  became  more  than  ever  obe- 
dient to  the  counsels  of  their  chiefs,  and 
more  active  in  the  execution  of  every  un- 
dertaking. They  opposed  strategy  against 
the  superiorit}-  in  numbers  and  arms  of  the 
enemy,  fighting  them  from  ambuscades  and 
causing  them  severe  losses.  The  Iroquois 
finally  obtained  arms  from  the  Dutch,  who 
had  begun  a  settlement  on  the  site  of  Al- 
bany, and  the  war  was  vigorously  continued 
until  it  culminated  in  the  almost  utter  an- 
nihilation of  the  Adirondacks.  Governor 
Champlain  and  his  French  forces  learned 
too  late  that,  in  allying  to  themselves  the 
Adirondacks  and  other  nations  not  in  union 
with  the  Confederacy,  they  had  united  their 


fortunes  with  the  conquered  instead  of  with 
the  conqueror.  The  Quatoghies,  or  Hu- 
rons,  who  were  allied  with  the  Adirondacks, 
suffered  the  same  disastrous  defeat  in  a 
fierce  battle  fought  within  sight  of  the 
French  settlement  at  Quebec. 

With  the  same  terrible,  implacable  and 
deadly  vengeance  the  Iroquois  pursued  and 
fought  other  enemies  ;  the  Neutrals  and  the 
Fries  to  the  westward,  and  the  Andastes  in 
the  south,  were  subsequently  almost  wiped 
out  of  existence  as  nations,  and  they  became 
the  savage  lords  of  the  Continent,  their  sway 
extending  over  the  vast  territory  estimated 
to  be  twelve  hundred  miles  long  and  eight 
hundred  broad,  embracing  a  large  part  of 
New  England,  and  reaching  to  the  Missis- 
sippi. The  French  settlers  in  Canada,  and 
the  Cherokees  and  Catawbas  in  the  far  South 
were  all  humbled  by  their  power. 

"At  one  period,"  says  Schoolcraft,  "we 
hear  the  sound  of  their  war  crj'  along  the 
shores  of  St.  Mary's,  and  at  the  foot  of  Lake 
Superior ;  at  another  under  the  walls  of 
Quebec,  where  they  finally  defeated  the 
Hurons  under  the  eyes  of  the  French.  They 
put  out  the  fires  of  the  Gahkas  and  Fries. 
They  eradicated  the  Susquehannocks.  They 
placed  the  Lanappes,  the  Nanticokes  and 
Muncees  under  the  yoke  of  subjection. 
They  put  the  Metoacks  and  Manhattans 
under  tribute.  They  spread  the  terror  of 
their  name  all  over  New  England.  They 
traveled  the  whole  length  of  the  Appalachi- 
an Chain,  and  descended  like  the  enraged 
Yagisho  and  Megalonyx  on  the  Cherokees 
and  Catawbas.  Smith  encountered  their 
warriors  in  the  settlement  of  Virginia,  and 
La  Salle  on  the  discovery  of  the  Illinois." 

From  these  conquered  nations  the  Iro- 
quois exacted  tribute,  and  drew  con- 
scripts for  their  armies.  The  Tuscaroras, 
of  the  Carolinas,  were  incorporated  into  the 
Confederacy  in  1713,  after  which  it  was 
known    as    the    Six    Nations.      From   their 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


23 


great  valor  and  success  in  war,  and  the  ex- 
tent of  territory  conquered  by  them,  they 
have  been  aptly  termed,  "the  Romans  of 
the  New  World."  When  it  is  remembered 
that  probably  at  no  time  could  they  bring 
into  the  field  more  than  two  thousand  of 
their  own  warriors,  and  yet  subjugated  na- 
tions twice  as  large  in  numbers,  and  spread 
terror  among  the  French  settlements  in 
Canada,  threatening  their  utter  destruction-, 
the  wonder  of  their  achievements  is  almost 
overwhelming. 

Yet  their  military  organization  was  scarce- 
ly worth  the  name,  though  it  was,  doubt- 
less, better  than  that  of  some  of  the  other 
nations.  They  rarely  acted  in  perfect  con- 
cert as  a  great  Confederacy  ;  their  warfare 
being  commonly  carried  on  by  detached 
parties.  Thej'  were  in  a  chronic  state  of 
war.  The  inveterate  pursuit  of  the  Hurons, 
Eries  and  Andastes,  for  example,  all  of 
whom  were  valorous  and  mighty  nations, 
forms  an  unexplained  passage  in  their  his- 
tory. Any  one  of  their  warriors  who  might 
desire  to  avenge  even  a  personal  affront,  or 
desired  to  distinguish  himself  in  battle, 
might  take  the  war  path,  followed  by  whom- 
soever he  could  attract  to  his  cause.  He 
first  communicated  his  design  to  two  inti- 
mate friends ;  if  they  approved  it,  an  invita- 
tion was  extended  in  their  names  to  the 
warriors  of  the  village  to  attend  a  feast  of 
dog's  flesh,  which  was  always  partaken  of 
at  such  times.  There  the  purpose  was  pub- 
licly proclaimed  ;  the  war  dance  and  war 
songs  were  indulged  in,  and  the  leader 
hurled  his  hatchet  into  the  war  post.  Any 
who  chose  joined  him  ;  and,  after  a  night 
of  gluttonous  debauchery,  the  war  party  set 
out,  decked  in  their  finest  apparel,  and  their 
faces  hideously  painted.  The)-  were  ac- 
companied on  such  occasions  b}'  the  women, 
who  took  with  them  the  old  clothing  of  the 
warriors,  and  brought  back  the  finery  in 
which  they  marched  forth.     These  expedi- 


tions generally  provoked  retaliation,  when 
vengeance  was  wreaked  on  any  of  the  of- 
fending nation  with  whom  they  came  in  con- 
tact. Consequently  thfe  history  of  Indian 
warfare  is  largely  a  record  of  daring  deeds 
performed  by  individuals  and  small  bands 
of  warriors,  who,  ambushed  and  otherwise, 
constantly  harassed  their  enemies,  tortured 
their  captives,  and  kept  them  in  continual 
fear.  This  mode  of  warfare  was  what  so 
distressed  and  decimated  the  American  col- 
onies in  their  early  settlements. 

The  discipline  and  personal  bravery  of 
the  Iroquois  were  adapted  to  the  forests  in 
which  their  warfare  was  most  effective.  In 
an  open  country,  against  a  drilled  and  dis- 
ciplined force  of  white  soldiers,  they  were 
less  to  be  dreaded.  "Their  true  superiority 
was  a  moral  one.  They  were  in  one  of 
those  transports  of  pride,  self-confidence, 
and  rage  for  ascendency  which,  in  a  savage 
people,  marks  an  era  of  conquest.^  They 
were  proud,  arrogant,  vindictive,  sagacious 
and  subtle,  esteeming  themselves  by  nature 
as  superior  to  other  mankind."  They  styled 
themselves,  "Onguehonwe,"  signifying, 
"men  surpassing  all  others;"  and  great 
care  was  taken  to  instill  this  idea  into  the 
minds  of  their  children. 

The  military  status  of  the  Iroquois  is  dif- 
ferently estimated  by  different  authors ; 
while  it  would  scarcely  be  just  to  compare 
them  with  civilized  armies,  they  would  not, 
in  many  respects,  suffer  by  such  a  compar- 
ison. De  Witt  Clinton  awards  them  the 
following  words  of  high  praise  :  "They  re- 
duced war  to  a  science,  and  all  their  move- 
ments were  directed  by  system  and  policy. 
They  never  attacked  a  hostile  country  till 
they  had  sent  out  spies  to  explore  and  des- 
ignate its  vulnerable  points,  and  when  they 
encamped  they  observed  the  greatest  cir- 
cumspection to  guard  against  surprise. 
Whatever  superiority   of  force  they  might 

1  Paikman's  yc'siiits. 


24 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


have,  they  never  neglected  the  use  of  strat- 
agem, employing  all  the  craft}'  wiles  of  the 
Carthaginians.  To  produce  death  by  the 
most  protracted  suffering  was  sanctioned 
among  them  by  general  immemorial 
usages." 

The  cruel  and  remorseless  tortures  in- 
flicted h^'  the  Iroquois  upon  their  captives 
forms  a  dark  page  in  their  history,  while  the 
fortitude  and  heroism  with  which  they  them- 
selves endured  such  tortures  is  the  marvel 
of  civilization.  Even  women  were  not  ex- 
empt from  them  ;  but  let  it  be  said  to  their 
credit  that  they  never  violated  the  persons 
of  their  female  prisoners,  however  shame- 
less were  their  practices  among  themselves.^ 
Bancroft  significantly  says:  "We  call  them 
cruel ;  but  they  never  invented  the  thumb- 
screw, or  the  boot,  or  the  rack,  or  broke  on 
the  .wheel,  or  e.xiled  bands  of  their  nations 
for  opinion's  sake,  and  never  protected  the 
monopoly  of  a  medicine  man  by  the  gal- 
lows, or  the  block,  or  by  fire." 

That  the  Iroquois  were  superior  to  other 
nations  of  their  race  in  the  western  hemi- 
sphere, and  even  to  the  civilized  races  of 
Mexico  and  Peru,  is  proved  by  the  average 
size  of  their  brain,  which,  as  found  by  Mr. 
Morton,  averaged  eighty-eight  inches  in  five 
crania  ;  this  is  within  two  inches  of  the  Cau- 
casian mean.  Among  this  remarkable  fam- 
ily were  found  the  fullest  development  of 
Indian  character  and  intelligence.  "They 
unified  and  systematized  the  elements  which, 
among  other  nations,  were  digressixe  and 
chaotic." 

There  were,  also,  strongly  marked  phys- 
ical differences  between  the  Indian  tribes. 
The  Iroquois  were  erect,  commanding  and 

'This  forbearance  tovvartl.s  female  captives  was  ]irob- 
ably  the  result  of  superstition,  rather  than  an  inherent 
heroic  virtue,  to  which  some  writers  ascribe  it.  Karly 
writers  bear  abundant  testimony  of  their  unchastity.  .  .  . 
Morgan,  one  of  their  most  earnest  advocates  of  the  pres- 
ent day,  admits  that  the  passion  of  love  among  them  had 
no  other  than  an  animal  existence. — COLUE.v,  P.vrkman, 
and  Documentary  History. 


dignified  ;  they  were  reserved  and  haughty, 
cool,  deliberate  and  cunning.  Other  na- 
tions, with  different  habits,  were  more  nerv- 
ous, social  and  excitable,  and  less  com- 
manding in  figure.  The  causes  of  these 
differences  are  thus  pointed  out  by  Charles 
T.  Hoffman,  esq. :  "The  Pawnees,  following 
the  buffalo  in  his  migrations,  and  having 
alwa}'s  plenty  of  animal  food  to  subsist  upon, 
are  a  much  better  fed  and  a  larger  race  than 
those  who  find  a  precarious  subsistence  in 
the  forest  chase,  while  the  woodland  tribes, 
who,  though  not  so  plump  in  form,  are  of 
a  more  wiry  and,  perhaps,  muscular  make, 
have  again  a -decided  advantage  in  figure 
and  gait  over  the  fishing  and  trapping  tribes 
of  the  northwest  that  pass  most  of  their  time 
in  canoes.  This  difference  in  character  and 
physical  appearance  between  the  different 
Indian  tribes,  or  rather  between  those  which 
have  such  different  methods  of  gaining  a 
livelihood,  has  not  been  sufficiently  attended 
to  by  modern  authors,  though  it  did  not 
escape  the  early  French  writers  on  this 
country.  And  yet,  if  habit  have  any  ef- 
fect in  forming  the  character  and  temper  of 
a  rude  people,  it  must  of  course  follow  that 
the  savage  who  lives  in  eternal  sunshine 
upon  flowery  plains,  and  hunts  on  horse- 
back with  a  troop  of  tribesmen  around  him, 
must  be  a  different  being  from  the  solitary 
deer-stalker  who  wanders  through  the  dim 
forest,  depending  upon  his  single  arm  for 
subsistence  for  his  wife  and  children." 

The  settlement  of  this  continent  by  rep- 
resentatives of  European  nations,  as  here- 
after further  referred  to,  was  alike  the  pre- 
curser  of  the  downfall  of  the  great  Iroquois 
Confederacy  and  the  ultimate  entire  ex- 
tinction of  the  American  Indian  ;  a  result 
due  more  to  the  indi\'idual  character  and 
mental  structure  of  the  conquered,  than  to 
any  special  defects  in  the  organization  of 
the  Confederacy.  They  lacked  the  mental 
capacity  and  tractability  to  enable  them  to 


History  of  the  Aborigines. 


25 


adapt  themselves  to  the  conditions  essential 
to  their  permanence  among  or  adjacent  to 
the  new  race.  What  might  have  been  the 
result  had  the  Inilians  been  brought  more, 
or  even  as  much,  in  contact  with  the  virt- 
ues of  the  Europeans,  as  with  their  vices, 
it  profits  nothing  to  inquire.  As  it  was, 
their  savage  nature  seems  to  have  been  in- 
tensified, rather  than  subdued  or  modified. 
While  the  labors  of  the  early  missionaries, 
heroic  and  unselfish  as  they  were,  undoubt- 
edly had  a  good  influence,  their  own  rec- 
ords give  ample  evidence  of  the  difficulties 
attending  the  conversion  of  the  savages ; 
instances  of  genuine  and  permanent  con- 
version have  been  extremely  rare.  Father 
Gabriel  Marest,  a  missionary  of  17 12,  said  : 
"It  is  necessary  first  to  transform  them  into 
men,  and  afterwards  to  labor  to  make  them 
Christians;"  which  epitomizes  the  whole 
problem ;  and  it  appears  to  have  been 
easier  to  make  a  Christian  of  a  man  than  a 
man  of  an  Indian,  in  the  sense  intended  by 
the  missionary,  Marest. 

The  large  liberties  granted  by  the  pecul- 
iar Confederacy  was  an  element  of  danger 
to  a  people  given,  as  they  were,  to  the 
gratification  of  their  appetites  and  passions. 
Thus  licensed  and  then  brought  in  contact 
with  the  questionable  policy  of  the  Europe- 
ans towards  them,  the  consequences  could 
not  well  have  been  otherwise  than  what 
they  were.  Their  decline  may  be  said  to 
have  begun  when  their  conquests  ended. 
They  soon  fell  into  a  hopeless  dependency, 
without  the  means,  and  probably  without 
the  ambition  or  the  desire,  to  oppose  the 
rapid  encroachments  of  the  whites  upon 
their  domain.  As  early  as  1753  their  dis- 
solution was  foreshadowed,  though  it  did 
not  actually  occur  until  about  a  quarter  of 
a  century  later.     At  a  conference  with  the 


Six  Nations  at  Onondaga,  September  8th, 
1753,  Colonel  William  Johnson  thus  ad- 
dressed them  :  — 

"Brethren  of  the  Six  Nations  —  It  Grieves 
me  sorely  to  find  the  road  hither  so  grown  up 
with  weeds  for  want  of  being  used,  and  your  fire 
almost  expiring  at  Onondaga,  w'here  it  was 
agreed  by  the  wisdom  of  our  ancestors  that  it 
should  never  be  extinguished.  You  know  it  was 
a  saying  among  them  that  when  the  fire  was  out 
here  you  would  be  no  longer  a  people.  I  am 
now  Sent  by  Your  Brother,  the  Governor,  to 
clear  the  road,  and  make  up  the  Fire  with  such 
wood  as  will  never  burn  out,  and  I  earnestly 
desire  You  would  take  care  to  keep  it  up,  so  as 
to  be  found  always  the  same  when  he  shall  send 
among  you.     A  belt. 

"  Brethren  of  the  Six  Nations  —  I  have  now 
renewed  the  Fire,  swept  and  cleaned  all  your 
Rooms  with  a  new  White  Wing,  and  leave  it 
hanging  near  the  fireplace,  that  you  may  use  it 
for  cleaning  all  dust,  dirt,  &c.,  which  may  have 
been  brought  in  by  strangers,  no  friends  to  You, 
or  Us.     A  string  of  wampum. 

"  Brethren  of  the  Six  Nations —  I  am  sorry  to 
find  on  my  arrivall  among  You  that  the  fine 
Shady  Tree  which  was  planted  by  your  fore- 
fathers for  your  ease  and  Shelter  should  be  now 
leaning,  almost  blown  down  by  northerly  winds. 
I  shall  now  endeavor  to  set  it  upright,  that  it  may 
flourish  as  formerly  while  the  roots  spread  abroad, 
so  that  when  we  sit  or  stand  upon  them  You 
will  not  feel  them  shake,  should  any  storm  blow, 
then  should  You  be  ready  to  secure  it.     A  belt. 

"Brethren  of  the  Six  Nations  —  Your  Fire 
now  burns  clearly  at  the  old  place.  The  Tree 
of  shelter  is  set  up  and  flourishes;  I  must  now 
insist  upon  your  quenching  the  Fire  made  with 
Brambles  at  Swegachey,  and  recall  those  to  their 
proper  home  who  have  deserted  thither ;  I  can- 
not leave  disswading  you  froin  goeing  to  Canada ; 
the  French  are  a  delusive  People,  always  en- 
deavoring to  divide  you  as  much  as  they  can, 
nor  will  they  let  slip  any  opportunity  of  makeing 

advantage  of  it A  large  belt."  — 

Dm.  Histor}<,  Vol.  II.,  653. 


26 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


CHAPTER  III. 


INDI.\N  REUVriONS  IN  CEMKAI.  NEW  YORK. 

The  Territory  of  Cortland  County  with  Reference  to  the  Indian  Tribes  —  The  I.cni  Lenape  —  Their  Traditionary 
Origin  —  Their  Relations  with  the  Iroquois  —  The  Peculiar  Office  Assigned  Them  —  Final  .Supremacy  of  the  Iroquois 
—  Indian  \'illages  —  Their  Personal  Habits  and  Social  Customs —  Religious  Beliefs,  Marriages,  Festivals,  etc. 


WHILE  the  territory  with  which  we  are 
chiefly  interested  in  this  work  was, 
during  its  Indian  occupation,  a  portion  of 
the  broad  domain  of  the  great  Confederacy 
described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  it  is  also 
true  that,  as  far  as  history  can  inform  us, 
no  considerable  Indian  village  was  ever  lo- 
cated within  the  present  limits  of  Cortland 
county,  and  little  of  the  bloody  warfare 
which  so  long  formed  the  principal  occupa- 
tion of  the  Five  Nations  occurred  within 
its   borders.!     q^^   unbroken   forests,    um- 

1  The  Wyoming  Indians  occasionally  visited  the  valley, 
(Otselic)  during  the  few  first  years  after  the  settlement 
commenced.  The  Onondagas  and  Oneidas,  also,  made 
periodical  visits.  In  1796  forty  of  the  Oneidas  camped 
on  the  ground  occupied  by  the  Brick  store  (Cincinna- 
tus) ;  and  during  the  fall  and  winter  they  killed  forty- 
two  bears. 

They  (Dr.  Japheth  Hunt  and  family,  pioneers  of  Mar- 
athon) entered  the  valley  of  the  Tioughnioga  from  the 
south,  in  canoes,  in  the  year  1794,  and  located  on  a  piece 
of  land  on  the  east  side  of  the  river,  about  a  mile  south 
of  the  village  of  Marathon.  Upon  this  rismg  ground 
were  discovered  a  great  number  of  excavations  or  depres- 
sions, of  a  circular  form  in  close  pro.ximity,  rendering  the 
surface  of  the  ground  uneven.  Each  of  these  depressions 
upon  examination  was  found  to  contain  human  bones, 
which  had  apparently  been  deposited  here  for  several  pre- 
ceding centuries.  Upon  removing  the  road  a  few  years 
since  from  the  top  to  the  base  of  this  hill,  some  of  these 
depressions  were  opened  by  the  plow,  and  were  found  to 
contain  not  only  human  bones,  but  several  curiouslv 
carved  vessels  or  pots,  of  a  substance  resembling  clay, 
probably  wrought  by  the  Indians.  —  GooDWi.v. 

About  one  mile  south  of  the  \-illage  (of  Marathon),  on 
the  ea.st  bank  of  the  river,  is  the  site  of  an  old  Indian  vil- 
lage and  burial  ground.  Tradition  says  that  this  was 
once  the  seat  of  a  powerful  tribe  of  Indians.  — French's 
Gazetteer. 

We  are  informed  by  old  residents  of  Cincinnatus  that 
bands  of  Onondagas  visited  that  town  every  summer  for 
many  years,  and  as  late  as  1820 ;  that  they  tilled  small 
pieces  of  ground,  hunted  and  exchanged  venison  vrith  the 
settlers  for  bread  ;  and  that  there  was  a  burial  ground  not 
far  from  the  present  village  of  Cincinnatus. 


brageous  with  lu.xuriant  foliage  in  summer, 
and  stretching  their  barren  arms  to  the  win- 
try blast  on  hillside  and  valley  ;  the  beauti- 
ful river  that  winds  its  way  southward,  and 
its  many  clear,  spring-fed  tributaries,  once 
undoubtedly  formed  a  favorite  hunting  and 
fishing  ground  of  the  Onondagas,  while  they 
escaped  the  bloody  scenes  "in  which  the  once 
powerful  nation  were  often  so  prominent ; 
the  reason  for  this  was  almost  wholly  one 
of  location.  It  is  not  improbable,  more- 
over, that  the  hunters  of  the  Leni  Lenape, 
or  Delawares,  at  one  period  in  their  history, 
followed  the  Tioughnioga  as  far  northward 
as  this.  This  nation,  according  to  tradition, 
came  from  the  far  western  part  of  the  Amer- 
ican* continent,  whence  the)-  migrated  east- 
ward to  the  Mississippi,  where  they  fell  in 
with  the  Iroquois,  likewise  proceeding  east- 
ward. On  this  side  of  the  Mississippi  the 
country  was  occupied  by  the  Alligewi,  a 
powerful  nation  who  had  many  large  towns, 
with  fortifications  of  earth  on  the  rivers 
flowing  through  their  lands.  They  refused 
to  allow  the  Lenape  to  settle  in  their 
country,  but  gave  them  permission  to  pass 
on  eastward.  Upon  seeing  the  great  num- 
bers of  the  Lenape,  however,  they  became 
alarmed  and  treacherously  attacked  those 
who  had  crossed  the  riverand  threatened  with 
destruction  all  who  attempted  to  cross.  The 
Lenape,  being  to  weak  to  force  their  passage 
against  so  powerful  an  enemy,  made  common 
cause  with  the  Iroquois,  and,  after  a  number 
of  sanguinary  battles,  the  Alligewi,  to  avoid 
destruction,  fled  down  the  Mississippi  and 
never  returned  to  their  abandoned  country. 
This  tradition  was  entertained  also  by  the 
Mahicans  (or  Mohegans)  who  inhabited  the 


Indian  Relations  in  Central  New  York. 


country  immediately  east  of  the  Hudson  i 
river,  and  were,  according  to  Heclcvvelder's 
Historical  Account  of  tlu  Five  Xations,  a 
branch  of  the  Lenape  family.  The  tradition 
continues  that  the  Iroquois  and  the  Lenape 
dwelt  together  for  a  long  period  in  their 
conquered  territory,  rapidly  increasing  in 
numbers.  Finally  some  of  the  Lenape 
hunters  and  warriors  crossed  the  mountains 
to  the  Atlantic,  discovering  on  their  way 
the  Delaware  and  the  Susquehanna  rivers. 
L^pon  their  return  thej'  gave  so  favorable  an 
account  of  the  new  countrj-,  that  it  led  to 
the  belief  among  the  nation  that  it  was  des- 
tined by  the  Great  Spirit  for  their  occupa- 
tion. They  accordingly  migrated  thither, 
making  their  central  possessions  on  tlie  Del- 
aware. There  they  divided  themselves  into 
three  tribes — the  Turtle,  the  Turkej"  and 
the  Wolf —  named  in  their  language  the 
Unamis,  the  Unalachtgos  and  the  Minsis. 
The  first  t\vo  chose  the  countrj'  nearest  the 
sea,  for  settlement,  while  the  latter  located 
to  the  northward  between  them  and  the 
Iroquois,  their  territory  originalh"  extend- 
ing from  the  headwaters  of  the  Delaware 
and  Susquehanna  southward  to  the  moun- 
tainous regions  of  New  Jersey  and  Penn- 
sylvania, and  from  the  Hudson  river  west 
and  southwest  beyond  the  Susquehanna. 

Whatever  may  or  may  not  be  true  of 
this  tradition,  the  territory  just  alluded  to 
was  formerly  occupied  by  a  branch  of  this 
nation,  who  e%'entually  became  parties  to 
the  treaty  made  by  William  Penn.  The 
Delawares  dwelt  at  peace  with  the  Iroquois 
for  many  years  ;  but  at  length  the  Iroquois, 
growing  more  numerous  and  powerful,  be- 
came distrustful  of  their  neighbors,  whose 
numbers  were  also  rapidly  increasing,  and 
endeavored  to  involve  them  in  difficulties, 
especially  with  the  Cherokees,  then  occu- 
pying the  banks  of  the  Ohio  river  and  its 
branches.  Between  these  and  the  Dela- 
wares a  bloody  war  ensued.     The  treachery 


of  the  Iroquois  was  finally  discovered  by 
the  Delawares  and  they  resolved  to  seek 
revenge  by  tlie  extermination  of  the  Iro- 
quois nation.  So  strong  were  their  pros- 
pects of  success  that  the  Iroquois  were  im- 
pelled to  resort  to  strategy  as  a  means  of 
terminating  tlie  conflict ;  otherwise  the\- 
were  fearful  that  "their  extirpation  would  be 
inevitable."!  Heckwelder  even  attributes  to 
the  severit}-  of  these  wars  tlie  formation  of 
the  great  Iroquois  league. 

The  plans  of  the  Iroquois  were  to  pacify 
the  Delawares  (characterized  by  ^Marryat, 
in  his  Diary  of  America  as  their  most  for- 
midable enemy)  by  urging  upon  them  the 
novel  proposition  that  they  should  as- 
sume the  office  of  zvomen'}  in  which  they 
should  act  as  mediators  and  judges  among 
their  warlike  neighbors,  leaving  the  Iroquois 
to  devote  their  entire  energies  to  conquer- 
ing their  enemies,  the  French.  They,  tliere- 
fore,  sent  tlie  following  message  "to  tlie  Del- 
awares: "It  is  not  profitable  that  all  na- 
tions should  be  at  war  with  each  other ;  for 
this  will  at  length  be  the  ruin  of  the  whole 
Indian  race.  We  have,  therefore,  considered 
of  a  remedy  by  which  the  evil  will  be  pre- 
vented. One  nation  shall  be  tlie  zcotiian. 
We  will  place  her  in  the  midst,  and  the 
other  nations  who  make  war  shall  be  the 
man  and  live  around  the  woman ;  no  one 
shall  touch  or  hurt  the  woman,  and  if  any 
one  does  it,  we  will  immediately  say  to  him, 
why  do  >ou  beat  the  woman?  Then  all  the 
men  shall  fall  upon  him  who  has  beaten  her. 
The  woman  shall  not  go  to  war,  but  en- 
deavor to  keep  peace  with  all.  Therefore, 
if  tlie  men  who  surround  her  beat  each 
other,  and  the  war  be  carried  on  with  vio- 

1  Loskiel,  part  I,  cli.  X,  p.  124. 

2  Wars  between  these  savage  nations  were  never  ter- 
minated except  through  the  interposition  of  women, 
whose  prerogative  it  was  to  demand  a  cessation  of  hos- 
tilities. The  men,  however,  tired  of  war,  maintained  a 
persistent  hostile  attitude  ;  they  considered  it  an  evidence 
of  cowardice  to  intimate  a  desire  for  peace.  —  Heck- 
welder. 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


lence,  the  woman  shall  have  the  right  of 
addressing  them.  'Ye  men,  what  are  ye 
about?  Why  do  ye  beat  each  other?  We 
arc  almost  afraid.  Consider  that  your  wives 
and  children  must  perish,  unless  ye  desist. 
Do  yc  mean  to  destroy  yourscKes  from  the 
face  of  the  earth?'  The  men  shall  then  hear 
and  obey  the  woman. "' 

This  appeal  to  the  magnanimity  of  the 
Delawares  \\as  a  high  tribute  to  their  char- 
acter for  valor  and  integrity,  as  well  as  a 
skillful  and  ingenious  one  on  the  part  of  the 
Iroquois.  A  weak  or  vacillating  nation 
could  not  have  undertaken  such  a  work. 
Unhappily  they  accepted  the  proposal,  that 
was  to  rob  them  of  their  power  in  war, 
"which  had,"  according  to  Heckwelder, 
"e.xalted  them  above  all  the  other  Indian 
nations." 

Upon  the  assent  of  the  Delawares  to  the 
proposition  of  the  Iroquois,  the  latter  or- 
dered a  bounteous  feast  at  which  their  dupes 
were  solemnly  installed  into  their  novel  of- 
fice as  women,  with  an  exhortation  counsel- 
ing them  among  other  things,  to  henceforth 
make  agriculture  their  employment  and 
means  of  subsistence.  This  singular  treaty 
is  supposed  to  have  taken  place  near  the  site 
of  Albany,  between  the  }'ears  1609  and  1620. 
The  treaty  was  participated  in  bj-  the  Dutch, 
and  "bj'it,"  say-s  Moulton,  "the  Dutch  se- 
cured for  themselves  the  quiet  possession  of 
the  Indian  trade,  and  the  Five  Nations  ob- 
tained the  means  to  assert  that  ascendency 
which  they  ever  after  maintained  over  the 
other  native  tribes,  and  to  inspire  terror  far 
and  near  among  the  other  savages  of  North 
America." 

Whether  or  not  these  traditions  are  wor- 
thy of  full  credence,  it  is  certain  that  the 
relative  positions  of  the  Delawares  and  the 
Iroquois  were  reversed,  as  to  their  military 
stains,  the  former  being  looked  to  for  the 
preservation  of  peace.     W'hile   these   pro- 

itxjskiel,  part  I,  ch.  X,  p.  124. 


ceedings,  resulting  in  the  Delawares  being 
forced  to  submit  to  the  humiliation  of  being 
made  "  women,"  have  been  generally  as- 
sumed by  writers  to  be  true,  several  have 
labored  to  refute  what  they  believed  to  be  a 
gross  error;  notable  among  these  are  Rut- 
tenber,  in  \\\s  Liciian  Tribes  of  the  Hudson's 
River  and  Heckwelder,  p.  44,  45. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary 
war  the  Delawares,  who  in  1763  had  num- 
bered six  hundred  warriors,  were  divided  ; 
the  greater  portion  of  them  having  migrated 
across  the  mountains  to  the  Ohio  river, 
where  they  located  at  Muskingham.  They 
were  drawn  into  that  war  and  their  numbers 
so  reduced  that  "  they  lost  all  desire  of  be- 
coming a  civilized  people,"  although  the 
Moravian  missionaries  labored  long  and 
faithfulh'  among  them.  They  participated  in 
numerous  attacks  upon  the  western  frontier 
posts,  having  joined  Pontiac ;  but  a  peace 
was  established  with  them  in  1 765  and  they 
were  gradually  followed  across  the  moun- 
tains by  their  brethren,  so  that  by  the  year 
1786,  according  to  Lossing,  there  was  not  a 
Delaware  east  of  the  Alleghanies.  In  181 8 
they  ceded  all  their  lands  to  the  United 
States.  The  vestiges  of  the  Delawares  are 
now  in  the  Indian  Territory,  whence  they 
furnished  one  hundred  and  seventy  soldiers 
to  the  Union  cause  during  the  war  of  the 
rebellion  ;  let  that  fact  stand  to  their  lasting 
credit,  whether  or  not  they  ever  visited  the 
valley  of  the  Tioughnioga  to  any  consider- 
able extent.  ^ 

1  Goodwin,  in  his  History  of  Cortland  Coiintv,  relates  a 
"  legend  of  the  Tioughnioga,"  for  which  he  claimed  "au- 
thority and  corroborating  facts  sufficient  to  entitle  it  to  a 
place  in  history,"  to  the  effect  that  a  small  settlement  of 
the  Lenape  Indians  was  once  made  near  the  mouth  of 
Cold  brook,  in  the  present  town  of  Homer ;  this  was 
early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  they  came  to  this  val- 
ley in  quest  of  quiet  repose  where  they  might  peacefully 
pursue  the  chase.  Here  they  suffered  from  the  incursions 
of  the  "  Mingoes,"  until  finally  they  were  impelled  to  cry 
out  for  revenge.  Their  old  chief  was  disabled  and  in- 
firm, and  he  therefore,  called  young  "Ke-no-tah,"  whom 
he  counseled  in  a  speech  to  talce  his  place  at  the  head  of 


Indian  Relations  in  Central  New  York. 


29 


Before  passing  on  to  events  that  followed 
upon  European  settlement,  it  will  be  inter- 
esting to  refer  briefly  to  some  of  the  social 

the  warriors  and  attack  their  enemies.  The  choice  was 
ratified  by  a  council  of  the  braves.  The  aged  sachem  had 
a  beautiful  daughter  named  "Allahalah,"  who  had  been 
promised  in  marriage  to  Kenotah.  One  day  before  the 
departure  of  the  war  party,  three  savages  from  among  their 
enemies  appeared  at  the  old  chief's  cabin  and  demanded 
the  surrender  of  their  village.  Hearing  this  Altahalah 
bounded  away  to  Kenotah  and  informed  him  of  tlie  event. 
He  met  the  three  ambassadors,  and  such  was  the  power 
of  his  eloquence  before  them  that  they  quailed,  and  left 
the  village  muttering  curses  of  vengeance.  The  follow- 
ing night  the  Mingoes  came  and  attacked  the  village.  A 
fierce  and  bloody  contest  ensued,  resulting  in  the  suc- 
cess of  the  Lenape ;  but  the  old  chieftain  was  found  by 
his  daughter  dead  upon  the  field.  AVhile  she  was  bend- 
ing over  his  cold  form,  a  powerful  savage  stealthily  crept 
to  her  side,  seized  her  in  his  arms  and  quickly  disap- 
peared in  the  thick  forest.  The  shriek  of  the  maiden 
aroused  the  warriors  and  pursuit  was  immediately  made 
and  continued  through  the  night,  when  all  traces  of  the 
trail  were  lost.  When  the  last  rites  were  paid  to  the 
dead,  Kenotah  gathered  the  remainder  of  his  warriors 
about  him,  took  their  lead  and  again  started  in  pursuit 
of  the  captors  of  his  bride.  For  weeks  and  months  their 
weary  search  was  pursued,  but  without  avail.  At  last 
one  evening,  during  a  violent  thunder  storm,  the  pursu- 
ers saw  their  enemies,  by  a  flash  of  lightning,  sleeping  at 
the  bottom  of  a  ravine ;  but  the  maiden  was  not  with 
them.  .Awaiting  another  vivid  flash  of  lightning,  Keno- 
tah and  his  braves  fell  upon  their  enemies  and  left  them 
all  dead  upon  the  ground.  Kenotah  called  in  vain  for 
Altahalah,  and  the  thought  that  she  was  wandering  alone 
in  the  forest  drove  him  to  the  verge  of  madness  and  de- 
spair. The  valley  of  the  Tioughnioga  was  deserted.  The 
Lenape  had  abandoned  their  homes  made  desolate  by  the 
Mingoes  and  joined  the  "  Moncey.s,"  whose  council  fires 
burned  at  Minisink,  on  the  Delaware  river.  One  even- 
ing at  some  undefined  subsequent  date,  a  beautiful  In- 
dian maiden  might  have  been  seen  sitting  on  the  bank  of 
"  her  native  river  "  (according  to  the  legend),  her  loos- 
ened hair  hanging  in  long  braids  over  her  unclad  shoul- 
ders, while*she  sweetly  sang  her  lover's  favorite  song. 
Anon  she  gazed  down  the  river  and  presently  heard  the 
light  sound  of  dipping  oars.  A  moment  more  and  she 
beheld  the  white  plume  of  her  affianced.  Kenotah  had 
found  his  bride. 

This  is  a  pretty  enough  legend;  but  if  the  author  had 
"  various  corroborating  facts  derived  from  the  traditions 
of  the  early  Indian  occupants  of  the  Wyoming  valley,  to 
clothe  it  with  a  garb  of  undoubted  reality,"  it  is  much  to 
be  regretted  that  such  facts  and  other  details  as  to  its 
source  were  not  given  with  the  story;  if  absolutely  true, 
it  would  stand  as,  perhajjs,  the  only  real  evidence  that  a 
permanent  Indian  village  was  ever  located  in  the  Tiough- 
nioga valley  within  the  limits  of  Cortland  county. 


customs,  domestic  habits,  religious  and  su- 
perstitious beliefs,  festivals,  games,  etc.,  of 
this  people  who  were  once  the  sole  human 
occupants  of  this  soil  that  now  blossoms  un- 
der the  hand  of  civilization.  It  has  been 
written  that,  "while  hopelessly  unchanging 
in  respect  to  individual  ^nd  social  develop- 
ment, the  Indian  was,  as  regarded  tribal  re- 
lations and  social  haunts,  mutable  as  the 
wind."  1  Their  villages  and  habitations  were 
constantly  subject  to  changes  made  desira- 
ble on  account  of  the  results  of  their  wars, 
or  to  remove  beyond  the  reach  of  possibly 
dangerous  neighbors,  or  to  occupy  more  de- 
sirable lands  for  their  primitive  agriculture. 
The  extermination  of  game,  too,  had  its  in- 
fluence in  this  respect.  Some  of  the  Iro- 
quois nations,  however,  had  villages  which 
had  more  the  appearance  and  character  of 
permanency.  Of  these  the  Senecas,  who  oc- 
cupied the  most  fertile  portion  of  the  State, 
were  most  conspicuous  and  carried  their  ag- 
riculture to  the  greatest  perfection.  General 
Sullivan  reported  that,  in  1779,  the  "In- 
dian town  of  Genesee  contained  128  houses, 
mostly  large  and  elegant.  It  was  beautifully 
situated,  encircled  by  a  clear  flat  extending 
a  number  of  miles,  over  which  fields  of  corn 
were  waving,  together  with  every  kind  of 
vegetable  that  could  be  conceived  of."  In 
Stone's  Life  of  Brant,  the  author  says  "they 
had  many  towns  and  large  villages  laid  out 
with  considerable  regularity.  They  had 
framed  houses,  some  of  them  well  finished, 
having  chimneys  and  painted ;  they  had 
broad  and  productive  fields."  This  is  con- 
trary to  the  often  entertained  opinion.  Their 
ordinary  dwellings  difiered  in  shape  and 
size,  but  were  generally  about  thirty  feet 
square  and  nearly  as  high.  The  sides  were 
formed  of  hickory  saplings  set  in  two  par- 
allel rows  and  bent  inward,  thus  forming  an 
arch.  To  these,  transverse  poles  were  bound 
and  the  whole  covered  with  bark  held  in 
I       1  Parkman. 


3° 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


place  by  smaller  poles  fastened  to  the  frame- 
work b\-  strips  of  linden  bark.  An  open 
space  a  foot  wide  extending  along  the  peak- 
served  as  both  window  and  chimney.  Scaf- 
folds or  bunks  were  arranged  along  the  sides 
and  covered  with  skins,  for  sleeping  places, 
beneath  which  was  stored  firewood,  etc.  In 
cold  weather  the  inmates  slept  huddled  to- 
gether about  the  fires,  rangetl  through  the 
center  of  the  house.  In  some  of  the  larger 
structures  the  sides  were  formed  of  upright 
posts,  and  the  roofs  of  separate  poles.  The 
Iroquois  followed  this  general  mode  of 
building  until  comparatively  recent  times. 

The  Indian  towns  were  commonly  but  a 
confused  mass  of  houses  arranged  with  little 
regard  to  order  and  covering  from  one  to 
ten  acres  ;  they  were  often  fortified  and  sit- 
uations favorable  to  defense  were  always 
chosen.  The  fortifications  were  constructed 
of  timber  palisades,  against  which  earth  em- 
bankments were  thrown  up.  The  large 
quantities  of  timber  used  in  the  fortifications 
left  the  many  clearings  which  were  after- 
wards devoted  to  agriculture. 

The  staple  article  of  food  with  the  Iro- 
quois was  corn,  "cooked  without  salt  in  a\'a- 
riety  of  different  ways,"  each,  says  Parkman, 
"more  odious  than  the  last."  Corn  thus 
cooked  with  beans  was  one  of  their  dainties. 
Their  bread,  an  article  of  daily  consumption, 
was  of  inferior  quality  and  made  of  corn. 
Dog  flesh  was  held  in  high  esteem  ;  venison 
a  luxury  for  feasts,  for  which  captive  bears 
were  also  sometimes  fattened.  The  cook- 
ing previous  to  the  advent  of  the  French 
fur-traders,  who  supplied  them  with  copper 
kettles,  was  done  in  earthen  pots  which  were 
made  by  the  women.  The  women  spun  twine, 
also,  from  native  hemp,  by  rolling  it  on  their 
thighs,  from  which  to  make  their  fishing 
nets;  and  they  pounded  the  corn  in  huge 
mortars  of  wood  hollowed  out  by  alternate 
burnings  and  scrapings.  The  women  per- 
formed the  household  drudgery  and  worked 


in  the  fields.  To  the  men  belonged  the  work 
of  making  imjilemcnts  of  war  and  the  chase, 
building  canoes  of  bark  or  b)-  hollowing  out 
logs. 

The  dress  of  both  women  and  men  con- 
sisted of  skins  of  various  kinds,  worn  in  the 
shape  of  kilts,  or  in  doublets  thrown  over 
the  shoulders.  These  were  subsequently 
superseded  by  a  kind  of  coarse  cloth  pro- 
cured of  the  whites.  The  rich  wore  a  piece 
of  black,  blue  or  red  cloth,  about  two  yards 
long,  fastened  around  their  waists  and  orna- 
mented \»ith  ribbons  and  wampum.  The 
poor  were  content  with  a  bear  skin ;  these 
were  also  worn  by  all  classes  in  the  winter, 
or,  instead,  a  kind  of  pelisse,  made  of  beaver 
skins.  Stockings  and  shoes  were  made  of 
deer  and  elk  skins  ;  some  wore  shoes  made 
of  corn  husks.  The  garment  which  was 
most  worn  b}-  the  women  was  a  sort  of  pet- 
ticoat of  cloth  about  two  yards  long  wound 
about  the  hips  and  tightly  fastened,  falling 
a  little  below  the  knee;  this  was  worn  day 
and  night.  Women  of  rank  wore  fine  un- 
der-garments  with  red  collars. 

All  Indians  were  fond  of  ornamentation, 
the  women  especially  so  ;  in  their  decora- 
tions consisted  their  wealth  and  they  also 
designated  their  rank.  The  men  paid  par- 
ticular attention  to  their  wives'  ornamenta- 
tion and  thought  it  scandalous  to  appear  the 
better  dressed. 

Much  pains  was  taken  in  painting  their 
faces  and  in  some  cases  in  tattooing  almost 
their  entire  bodies.  Each  day  their  faces 
received  a  fresh  coating,  of  which  vermilion 
was  the  favorite  color.  A  piece  of  gold,  sil- 
ver or  wampum  was  sometimes  worn  in  a 
hole  pierced  through  the  cartilage  of  the 
nose,  while  from  their  ears,  stretched  and 
distended  bj'  heavy  ornaments,  depended 
rings,  sparkling  stones,  feathers,  corals  or 
crosses.  The  hair  was  also  often  thus  deco- 
rated, and  was  worn  by  the  women  at  full 
length,   often    reaching    below   their    hips. 


Indian  Relations  in  Central  New  York. 


31 


They  anointed  it  with  bear's  grease  to  make 
it  shine.  The  women  of  tlie  Delawares,  ac- 
cording to  Loskiel,  never  braided  or  plaited 
their  hair  ;  it  was  folded  and  tied  round  with 
a  piece  of  cloth,  and  sometimes  rolled  up  and 
a  serpent's  skin  wrapped  around  it.  The 
men  did  not  wear  their  hair  long,  and  some- 
times pulled  it  out  except  a  little  on  the 
crown  of  the  head.  This  was  often  orna- 
mented with  plumes.  The  Iroquois  studied 
and  practiced  ornamentation  and  dress  more 
than  any  other  Indian  nation. 

Marriage  among  the  Iroquois  was  in- 
dulged in  early  in  life  ;  often  at  eighteen  by 
the  men  and  fourteen  b)-  the  women.  The 
ceremony  was  of  the  simplest  character, 
usually  consisting  of  a  present  from  the 
suitor  and  its  acceptance  b\'  the  bride  ;  she 
returned  a  dish  of  boiled  maize  and  an  arm 
ful  of  fuel.  Divorces  were  attended  by 
even  less  ceremony  ;  the  most  trivial  causes 
were  sufficient  for  a  separation.  While  mo- 
nogamy was  the  rule,  poI)'gam\-  was  tole- 
rated, especially  among  the  chiefs.  Pro- 
visional, or  experimental,  marriages  were 
common  and  usually  of  short  duration  ;  the)- 
were  entered  into  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
permanent  marriage,  through  the  presenta- 
tion and  acceptance  of  gifts.  A  woman  thus 
sometimes  accumulated  a  handsome  fortune 
in  wampum  and  the  like,  before  she  was  re- 
ally settled  in  life.  This  sort  of  matrimony 
was  no  bar  to  a  license,  boundless  and  appa- 
rently universal,  unattended  \\-ith  loss  of 
reputation  on  either  side. ' 

Although  the  Indians  were  taciturn,  mo- 
rose and  cruel  in  their  warlike  expeditions, 
in  their  own  homes  they  were  extremely 
social,  patient  and  forbearing,  engaging  in 
their  festal  seasons  in  a  continuous  round 
of  dancing,  feasting  and  gambling.  The 
latter  pastime  was  constantly  indulged  in, 
the  stakes  often  involving  all  the  worldly 
property  of  the  players.      One   of  the   de- 

l  Parkman's  ycsiiils. 


vices  used  was  a  number  of  plum-stones, 
the  sides  of  which  were  flattened  and  one 
side  of  each  painted  black ;  these  were 
thrown  up  from  a  wooden  bowl,  and  the 
betting  w^as  upon  the  number  of  black  or 
white  sides  that  would  fall  uppermost.  This 
game  possessed  for  them  a  wonderful  fas- 
cination, two  entire  villages  sometimes  en- 
tering the  contest.  Their  dances  were  to 
the  sole  music  of  a  sort  of  drum  made  by 
stretching  a  deer  skin  over  one  end  of  a 
hollow  log.  The  common  dance  was  held 
in  a  large  house  or  in  an  open  field  around 
a  fire.  The  men  shouted  in  this  and  leaped 
and  stamped  violently,  showing  their  won- 
derful agility  ;  but  the  women  observed  the 
utmost  decorum,  never  speaking  a  word  to 
the  men ;  they  kept  their  bodies  upright 
and  straight  and  their  arms  hanging  loosely 
at  their  sides.  This  kind  of  dancing  is  still 
indulged  in  by  the  Onondagas.  Other 
dances  were  participated  in  by  the  men 
only ;  and  others  still  were  adapted  to  spe- 
cial occasions.  Chief  among  these  was  the 
dance  of  peace,  or  dance  of  the  calumet, 
in  which  the  pipe  was  handed  around.  A 
song,  devoted  especially  to  this  ceremony, 
was  sung  by  all.  The  war-dance  was  also 
a  prominent  ceremony,  following  the  return 
of  a  war  party.  It  was  often  thrilling  in 
the  extreme  ;  but  its  details  need  not  be 
given  here. 

Feasting  was  often  indulged  and  some- 
times participated  in  by  whole  villages, 
upon  the  in\-itation  of  some  especially  prod- 
igal host.  To  refuse  an  invitation  to  such 
a  feast  was  considered  a  grave  offense,  and 
the  debauchery  sometimes  continued 
throughout  the  entire  day,  being  inter- 
spersed with  singing,  jesting,  laughing  and 
smoking.  If  the  feast  partook  of  a  medical 
character,  as  was  sometimes  the  case,  it  was 
incumbent  upon  the  guest  to  eat  all  that 
was  placed  before  him,  even  if  he  died  in 
the  effort.      Should  he  fail,  the  host  would 


32 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


be  outraged,  the  community  shocked  and 
the  spirits  rise  in  vengeance  ;  disaster  would 
befall  the  nation.  If  the  guest,  however, 
found  himself  utterly  unable  to  swallow  his 
portion,  there  was  one  way  out  of  the  di- 
lemma ;  another  of  the  compan}',  upon 
being  rewarded  with  a  present,  might  finish 
the  meal. 

The  God  of  the  Iroquois  was  called 
"  Hawenniio,"  meaning,  "he  rules  —  he  is 
master;"  and  their  belief  in  immortality 
was  almost  universal.  Animals,  even,  were 
immortal  and  were  worshiped.  The  Iro- 
quois had,  also,  another  God,  with  equal 
claims  to  supremacy  with  the  one  men- 
tioned. He  was  called  "Areskoui,"  the 
god  of  war.  A  third  deity  was  "  Taren- 
yowagon,"  whose  place  and  character  is  not 
well  defined.  He  has  by  some  been  iden- 
tified with  "  Hiawatha,"  to  whom  the  Iro- 
quois ascribe  their  great  Confederation. 
They  also  had  numerous  objects,  animate 
and  inanimate,  to  which  were  attributed 
supernatural  powers  and  were  supplicated. 
These  were  called  by  the  Iroquois  "Okies," 
and  by  the  Algonquins,  "  Manitous."  They 
existed  throughout  the  world  and  controlled 
the  destinies  of  the  Indians.  For  the  most 
part  they  took  the  form  of  animals.  Each 
Indian  had  his  guardian  "  Manitou,"  to 
whom  he  looked  for  counsel,  guidance  and 
protection.  The  points  of  the  compass 
were  also  looked  upon  as  "Manitous;" 
there  was  a  Summer-Maker  and  a  Winter- 
Maker,  the  latter  being  kept  at  bay  by 
throwing  brands  of  fire  into  the  air.  The 
hunter  endeavored  to  propitiate  the  game 
he  pursued,  and  was  often  known  to  address 
a  wounded  bear  in  a  long  harangue  before 
dispatching  him.  This  was  also  true  of 
fish.  Sa\-s  Parkman  :  "The  fish  were  ad- 
dressed (by  the  fishing  party)  every  even- 
ing, by  one  chosen  for  that  duty,  who  ex- 
horted them  to  take  courage  and  be  caught, 
assuring  them  that  the  utmost  respect  should 


be  paid  to  their  bones."  The  fishing-nets 
were  also  objects  of  solicitude,  and  that  they 
might  the  better  do  their  work,  they  were 
married  every  year  to  two  young  girls,  with 
a  ceremony  far  more  formal  than  that  ob- 
served in  human  wedlock. 

The  Iroquois  had  five  difierent  festivals 
annually.  The  first  was  held  in  the  spring, 
after  the  close  of  sugar-making,  and  was  in 
gratitude  for  the  abundance  of  the  sap. 
The  aged  chiefs  exhorted  the  young  men 
to  lives  of  virtue  as  a  road  to  a  continuance 
of  the  favor.  It  closed  with  dancing,  sing- 
ing and  games. 

The  second  festival  occurred  immediately 
after  corn-planting,  when  thanks  were  given 
for  the  favorable  seed-time  and  the  Great 
Spirit  invoked  to  grant  a  good  crop. 

The  third  was  the  well-known  green  corn 
feast,  when  thanks  were  rendered  for  the 
valuable  gift,  and  immense  quantities  of  the 
young  corn  was  cooked  in  \'arious  ways 
and  eaten.  Songs  and  dances  formed  a 
large  portion  of  the  accompanying  ceremo- 
nies, closing  with  the  famous  succotash 
dance. 

The  fourth  festival  was  held  at  the  close 
of  the  corn  harvest,  and  was  one  of  thank- 
fulness for  the  crop,  followed  by  festivities. 
To  these  festivals  three  days  were  formerly 
set  apart  for  each ;  latterly,  one  day  only 
has  been  given  to  each. 

The  fifth  and  crowning  festival  of  the 
year  was  held  late  in  Januarj'  or  early  in 
February,  immediately  after  the  return  of 
the  hunters  from  the  chase;  it  was  cele- 
brated with  great  pomp  and  ceremony. 
When  the  preliminary  preparations  had 
been  made,  runners  were  dispatched  to 
every  cabin  in  the  nation  to  give  notice  of 
the  event.  The  fires  were  put  out  in  all 
the  cabins,  each  of  which  was  then  visited 
and  purified  by  persons  appointed  for  that 
purpose,  who  scattered  the  ashes,  swept  the 
hearth  and  rekindled  the  fire.      On  the  sec- 


Indian  Relations  in  Central  New  York. 


33 


ond  day  the  managers  of  the  festival  visited 
each  house  to  receive  the  gifts  of  the  peo- 
ple, consisting  of  articles  of  food,  incense  or 
sacrifice.  This  was  continued  for  several 
da)-s,  during  which  time  the  assemblage  at 
the  council-house  engaged  in  sports.  On 
the  day  preceding  the  last,  preparations 
were  made  for  the  great  sacrifice.  The 
gifts  which  had  been  collected  were  pre- 
sented separately  by  the  giver  to  the  mas- 
ter of  ceremonies,  and  hung  around  the 
council-room.  The  sins  of  the  people,  sup- 
posed to  have  been  conveniently  transferred 
to  the  managers,  were  in  turn  transferred 
to  two  persons  dressed  in  white,  and  from 
them  to  two  white  dogs,  which  had  been 
previously  fantastically  painted  with  red 
figures,  and  decorated  with  wampum,  rib- 
bons and  feathers,  and  killed  by  strangula- 
tion. The  dogs  were  taken  to  the  council- 
house,  laid  upon  a  platform  amid  the  most 
devout  solemnity,  and  afterwards  taken  to 
the  fire  and  each  in  turn  thrown  into  it. 
This  act  was  preceded  by  praj-er  and  song. 
The  multitude  around  the  fire  threw  bas- 
kets of  herbs,  tobacco,  etc.,  upon  the  burn- 
ing carcasses,  which  were  entirely  consumed. 
A  convenient  and  enjoyable  method  of  dis- 
posing of  the  year's  sins  of  the  tribe. 

The  prevailing  readiness  of  the  Indian  to 
believe  in  the  supernatural  led  to  the  ex- 
istence in  every  community  of  numbers  of 
medicine- men,  sorcerers  and  the  like,  who 
professed  to  control  the  spirits,  cure  disease 
and  protect  their  patrons  from  various  other 
ills.  They  thus  obtained  a  powerful  influ- 
ence over  the  minds  of  their  fellows.  The 
Indian  doctors  could  cure  wounds  and  had 
methods  not  devoid  of  virtue  for  the  relief 
of  simple  diseases.  One  of  these  was  the 
sweating  oven,  an  earthen  arch  into  which 
the  patient  crawled  to  undergo  perspiration 
from  the  heat  of  stones  piled  about  the 
oven.  From  this  he  was  plunged  into  a 
bath  of  cold  water.     Beaver's  oil  was  much 


used,  also  ;  but  their  principal  reliance  for 
the  cure  of  disease  was  magic  and  mysti- 
cism. Disease  was  supposed  to  arise  from 
supernatural  causes ;  so  the  patient  was 
pinched,  beaten,  surrounded  bj-  deafening 
noises  and  incantations,  to  drive  out  the 
evil  spirits.  These,  together  with  dancing, 
singing,  feasting  and  the  accompanying 
din  in  the  cabin  of  the  patient,  were  be- 
lieved to  be  sufficient  for  a  cure,  if  he  were 
not  beyond  hope.  It  would  seem  that  such 
a  process  would  either  cure  a  patient  or 
place  him  beyond  the  reach  of  mortal  cares. 

Divination  and  sorcery  prevailed  to  a 
wonderful  e.xtent  and  was  implicitly  trusted 
by  all.  The  sorcerers  professed  to  be  able 
to  penetrate  the  future,  and  many  moment- 
ous measures  were  inaugurated  upon  their 
predictions.  The\-  made  sacrifices  to  the 
ruling  spirits  whom  they  wished  to  propi- 
tiate. Dreams,  too,  were  the  guiding  ora- 
cles with  many  of  the  Indians  and  caused 
a  great  deal  of  their  misery  and  misfortune. 
Their  duty,  their  destiny,  war  and  peace, 
rain  and  drought,  all  were  revealed  by  a 
class  of  professional  dreamers  and  inter- 
preters. But  witchcraft  (purely)  was  held 
in  the  utmost  abhorrence  and  was  punisha- 
ble with  death  in  all  cases.  A  witch  might 
be  killed  by  any  one  on  sight,  with  impunity. 
As  late  as  1805,  two  witches  (so-called) 
were  tomahawked  by  Hon  Yost,  at  Oneida. 

The  most  ancient  method  of  burial  among 
the  Iroquois  was  to  first  place  the  corpse 
upon  a  scaffold  about  eight  feet  high  and 
allow  it  to  lie  there  until  the  flesh  decom- 
posed and  fell  awa\'  from  the  bones,  which 
were  then  interred.  Latterly  and  after  their 
contact  with  the  whites,  the  corpse  has  been 
clad,  a  grave  dug  about  three  feet  deep  and 
lined  with  bark  and  the  body  laid  therein. 
Beside  it  were  placed  a  kettle  of  provisions, 
deer-skin  and  sinews  with  which  to  replace 
the  moccasins  which,  it  was  believed,  would 
be  worn  out  in  the  long  journey  to  the  spirit 


34 


History  of  Coktj.am)  County. 


land,  bows  and  arrows,  a  tomahawk,  knife  and 
sometimes  a  gun.  The  i];ravc  was  then  filled 
with  earth  upon  which  the  women  knelt  and 
wept.  After  a  little  time  the  men  began  a 
doleful  cry  and  solemnly  returned  homeward. 

"With  the  Delawares,"  says  Loskiel,  "the 
first  degree  of  mourning  in  a  widow  con- 
sists in  her  sitting  down  in  the  ashes  near 
the  fire  and  weeping  most  bitterlj-;  she  then 
rises  and  runs  to  the  grave,  where  she  makes 
loud  lamentations,  returning  again  to  her 
seat  in  the  'ashes.  She  will  neither  eat, 
drink,  nor  sleep  and  refuses  all  consolation. 
But  after  some  time  she  suffers  herself  to  be 
persuaded  to  arise,  drink  some  rum  and  re- 
ceive some  comfort.  However,  she  must 
attend  to  the  second  degree  of  mourning 
for  a  whole  }'ear;  that  is,  to  dress  without  an\- 
ornaments  and  wash  herself  but  seldom. 
As  soon  as  she  appears  decent,  combs  and 
anoints  her  hair,  and  washes  herself  clean, 
it  is  considered  a  sign  that  she  wishes  to 
marry  again."  Funeral  and  burial  cere- 
monies differed  considerably  with  different 
Indian  nations. 

The  wampum  of  the  Indians  not  only 
served  as  a  currenc}',  but  was  used  as  an 
ornament  and  as  the  public  archives.  This 
fact  rendered  it  of  great  importance  to  them. 
It  was  of  two  kinds  —  purple  or  black,  and 
white,  the  black  being  estimated  at  twice 
the  value  of  the  white.  The  purple  was 
made  from  the  inner  portions  of  the  conch, 
and  the  white  from  the  pillar  of  the  peri- 
winkle; both  kinds  were  fashioned  into 
round  or  oval  beads  about  a  quarter  of  an 
inch  long  and  perforated;  they  were  then 
strung  on  a  fibre  of  deer  sinew,  and  latterlj- 
on  a  linen  thread.  As  a  substitute  for  gold 
and  silver  its  value  was  fixed  bj-  law,  but 
its  valuation  was  subject  to  variation,  at 
different  times  and  in  different  places.  Three 
purple  beads  were  equal  to  a  stiver  in  Dutch, 
or  an  English  penny,  each  equal  to  two 
cents  of  United  States  currency.     The  price 


of  a  string  six  feet  long,  called  a  fathom  of 
wampum,  was  held  at  fi\'c  shillings  in  New 
England.  Previous  to  the  advent  of  the 
whites  wampum  was  largely  made  of  small 
bits  of  wood  of  equal  size  and  stained  black 
or  white;  its  manufacture  from  shells  was 
difficult  for  the  Indians;  but  the  Dutch  in- 
troduced the  lathe  in  its  manufacture,  and 
by  supplying  a  far  superior  article,  soon 
practically  controlled  the  trade.  It  was 
made  principally  at  Hackensack,  N.  J.  Por- 
celain and  glass  imitations  soon  became 
abundant,  which  may  have  been  the  first 
example  of  counterfeiting  in  America. 

The  most  important  use  to  which  wam- 
pum was  applied  was  in  the  confirmation 
of  ctimpacts  and  treaties  between  nations, 
both  Indian  and  European;  feathers  had 
been  used  in  early  days.  Every  speech, 
and  its  principal  parts,  were  made  valid  by 
a  string  or  belt  of  wampum.  A  black  belt 
signified  a  warning  against  evil,  and  if  it 
was  marked  in  red  and  had  a  hatchet  of 
white  wampum  in  the  center,  it  meant  war. 
Black  or  purple  always  signified  some  mat- 
ter of  grave  importance,  while  white  was 
the  symbol  of  peace. 

Hospitality  among  the  Iroquois  was  the 
most  generous,  not  onl)^  among  their  own 
kindred,  but  was  extended  towards  the 
stranger  with  equal  freedom  ;  it  was  regarded 
as  a  sacred  duty  from  which  none  were  ex- 
empt. Whoever  refused  relief  to  any  one 
was  guilty  of  a  grave  offense  and  made  him- 
self liable  to  revenge  from  the  offended.  An 
instance  is  related  by  Loskiel  in  which  a 
party  of  two  hundred  warriors  of  the  Huron 
nation,  who  had  taken  the  war  path  against 
the  Delawares,  were  led  to  give  up  their 
purpose  by  the  generous  hospitality  ten- 
dered them  b\-  the  latter.  No  evidence  is 
wanting  to  show  that  this  trait  in  the  breast 
of  the  savage  Indian  was  at  least  as  prom- 
inent as  among  those  who  now  occup)-  his 
once  wild  home. 


European  Discoveries  axd  Settlements. 


35 


CHAPTER  IV. 


KUROPKAN    DISCOVERIliS  AND  SETTl.EMKN  TS. 

Jacob  Calwt  at  Newfouiullaiul — The  Brolheis  Cortreal  —  Discovery  of  the  St.  Lawrence  River — Ponce  de 
Leon's  Discovery  of  Florida  —  Spanish  Discoveries  and  Conquests  —  Frencli  .\cquisitions  to  the  Northward  — 
Settlement  at  Quebec  —  P^nglish  Settlement  at  Jamestown  —  Establishment  of  Dutch  Settlements  on  the  Hudson 
River  —  Claims  of  Rival  Nations — .\rrival  of  the  Jesuits  —  Champlain's  First  Meeting  with  the  Indians  —  The 
Expedition  — Indian  Wars  —  Extension  of  the  Fur  I'rade — Jesuit  .Missionary  Work —  French  and  English  Rivalry 
and  their  Negotiations  with  the  Indians  —  .\ttack  on  Montreal  —  Expedition  Planned  by  P'rontenac  —  Burning  of 
.Schenectady  —  Treaty  of  Utrecht  —  The   Iiof|uois  in  the  Carolinas. 


THE  history  of  the  locahty  of  which  the 
territor}'  uiuier  consideration  in  this 
work  forms  one  of  the  prominent  divisions 
extends  back  to  a  remote  period  of  the  past, 
and  is  intimatel)'  associated  with  the  early 
discoveries  and  settlements  of  civilized  peo- 
ple on  this  continent.  While  there  are  evi- 
dences that  the  surrounding  region  was 
visited  by  ci\ilized  races  a  century  before 
the  landing  of  the  Pilgrims  and  almost  as 
long  before  the  first  permanent  Dutch  set- 
tlements on  the  Hudson  River,  it  is  not 
deemed  essential  to  more  than  refer  to  the 
faint  historical  landmarks  from  so  remote  a 
period.  Let  us,  rather,  follow  the  course 
of  discovery,  settlement  and  claim  on  this 
side  of  the  Atlantic,  from  the  time  when 
the  resolute  little  band  of  Puritans  disem- 
barked from  the  Mayflou'cr.  The  relations 
of  this  region  to  the  I-Luropean  powers  were 
at  that  time  of  a  very  indefinite  character. 
James  I  was  on  the  throne  of  England  and 
Louis  XIII  on  that  of  France,  with  Riche- 
lieu as  his  prime  minister.  A  century  and 
a  quarter  previous,  and  fi\'e  years  after  the 
bold  voyage  of  Columbus,  in  1497,  John 
Cabot  discovered  Newfoundland  and  por- 
tions of  the  adjacent  country.  Three  years 
later  the  coast  of  Labrador  and  the  entrance 
to  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  were  explored 
by  two  brothers  from  Portugal,  named  Cor- 
treal. In  1508  the  St.  Lawrence  river  was 
discovered  by  Aubert,  and  four  years  later, 
in  I  5  12,  Ponce  de  Leon  discovered  Florida. 
In  1534  the  St.  Lawrence  was  explored  by 


the  F"renchman,  Jacques  Cartier,  as  far  as 
Montreal.  In  1539  Florida  was  explored 
by  Ferdinand  de  Soto.  These  discoveries 
opened  up  the  new  country  for  active  com- 
petition b\-  the  different  maritime  powers 
of  the  Old  World.  Spain  conquered  Mexico 
in  1 52 1  and  in  1540  carried  her  conquests 
into  Peru.  Stimulated  by  her  success  and 
her  greed,  she  took  possession  of  Florida 
and  the  Gulf  territory,  and  in  i  565  planted 
the  first  Spanish  colony  in  North  America, 
at  St.  Augustine,  Florida. 

In  the  mean  time  the  French  were  gain- 
ing a  foothold  far  to  the  northward.  In 
1540  Cartier,  having  sailed  up  the  broad 
river  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  the  illus- 
trious saint,  had  returned  to  France  and 
was  again  sent  over  with  Jean  Francis  de 
Robarval,  who  was  appointed  by  the  king 
as  lieutenant-general  over  the  new  countries. 
In  1543  Robarval  came  the  second  time 
from  France,  with  the  pilot,  Jean  Alphonse 
of  Saintougc,  and  they  took  possession  of 
Cape  Breton  ;  settlement  was  also  begun  at 
Quebec.  In  1608  Quebec  was  founded  and 
placed  under  the  governorship  of  Cham- 
plain,  the  original  discoverer  of  the  Iroquois 
Indians.  In  the  previous  year,  1607,  the 
English  made  their  first  permanent  settle- 
ment at  Jamestown,  under  Capt.  John  Smith. 
In  1609  Henry  Hudson,  a  bold  English 
na\igator,  but  then  in  the  employ  of  the 
Dutch  East  India  Company,  sailed  into  the 
noble  river  which  now  bears  his  name,  lead-  ' 
ing    to    the    permanent    settlement   of  the 


36 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Dutch  in  that  region  in  1623,  in  a  colony 
which  they  named  New  Netherlands.  Thus 
three  European  nations  laid  claims  to  por- 
tions of  the  territory  now  embraced  in  the 
State  of  New  York  and  formed  the  ad- 
vance guard  of  the  present  dominant  inhab- 
itants of  the  continent. 

England,  by  virtue  of  the  discovery  of 
Cabot,  who  sailed  under  letters  patent  from 
Henrj'  VII,  and  that  of  his  son  Sebastian 
made  the  following  j'ear,  exploring  the  coast 
from  Newfoundland  to  Florida,  claimed  a 
territory  eleven  degrees  in  width  and  ex- 
tending westward  indefinitely.  Had  the 
powers  of  England  known  what  a  boundless 
expanse  of  rich  and  undiscovered  country 
lay  to  the  westward  of  her  explorations,  it 
is  possible  that  even  she  would  have  been 
prompted  by  modesty  from  claiming  so  wide 
a  water-front  "extending  indefinitely  west- 
ward." 

France  claimed  a  portion  of  the  Atlantic 
coast;  while  Holland,  by  virtue  of  Hudson's 
discover}^  claimed  the  country  from  Cape 
Cod  to  the  southern  shore  of  Delaware  bay. 
In  1 614  the  Dutch  established  a  fort  on 
Manhattan  island  and  one  at  Albany  in  the 
following  year,  becoming  the  actual  posses- 
sors of  the  soil.  In  162 1  the  Dutch  East 
India  Company  was  formed  and  took  pos- 
session of  New  Amsterdam.  In  1625  a  few 
of  that  remarkable  order  known  as  Jesuits 
arrived  on  the  banks  of  the  St.  Lawrence, 
and  in  time  crowded  most  other  Catholic 
missionaries  out  of  Canada  and  the  lake 
region,  substantially  monopolizing  the  ter- 
ritory. In  1627  Cardinal  Richelieu  organ- 
ized the  company  of  New  France,  or  the 
compan)'  of  a  Hundred  Partners,  the  objects 
of  which  were  proclaimed  to  be  the  exten- 
sion of  the  fur  trade,  the  discovery  of  a  new 
route  to  China,  and  the  conversion  of  the 
Indians.  "The  Comjiany  actually  succeeded 
in  extending  the  fur  trade,  but  not  in  going 
to  China  by  way  of  Lake  Erie,  and  not  to 


any  great  extent  in  converting  the  Indians.^ 
By  the  terms  of  their  charter  they  were  to 
transport  six  thousand  emigrants  to  Canada 
and  to  furnish  thcni  with  an  ample  supply' 
of  both  priests  and  artisans.  Champlain  was 
made  Governor.  His  early  experience  was 
not  the  most  pleasant  or  gratifying.  When 
the  French  first  assumed  prominence  in 
Canada  they  found  the  Iroquois  and  the 
Adirondacks  at  war,  as  before  stated,  and 
they  espoused  the  cause  of  the  latter,  sup- 
plying them  with  fire-arms.  Champlain 
and  his. allies  met,  on  the  lake  which  now 
bears  his  name,  a  party  of  two  hundred  Iro- 
quois; both  parties  landed  and  a  battle 
began;  but  the  murderous  and  mysterious 
effect  of  the  new  weapons  filled  the  Iroquois 
with  consternation  and  the\-  retreated  to  the 
wilderness.  This  was  the  first  meeting  of 
the  famed  Iroquois  with  the  whites;  and, 
while  it  was  an  impressive  and  thrilling  re- 
ception, it  was  scarcely  calculated  to  inspire 
in  the  savage  breast  a  very  exalted  opinion 
of  the  invaders,  except  as  to  their  ability  to 
kill  at  long  range. 

Emboldened  by  success,  Champlain  with 
a  few  Frenchmen  and  a  force  of  four  hun- 
dred Hurons,  renewed  hostilities  against 
the  Iroquois  in  1615,  resulting  in  that  re- 
markable expedition  directed  against  the 
stronghold  of  the  Onondagas.  The  expe- 
i  dition  proceeded  to  the  upper  waters  of  the 
Ottawa  ri\er,  thence  crossed  over  to  Lake 
j  Nipissing,  and,  having  discovered  Lake  Hu- 
i  ron,  were  joined  by  the  nation  of  that  name. 
They  came  down  through  the  lakes  and  across 
the  country  until  they  reached  the  Iroquois 
fort,  which  was  attacked.  The  assaulting 
party  were  defeated  and  compelled  to  re- 
treat from  the  localit)'.  The  location  of 
this  fort  has  long  been  in  dispute  ;  some  have 
placed  it  u])on  the  banks  of  Onondaga  lake, 
but  the  generally  accepted  opinion  now  is 
that  it  stood  on  the  shore  of  Oneida  lake. 

^  Johnson's  History  of  Erii:  Couti/y, 


European  Discoveries  and  Settlements. 


37 


A  dreary  winter  was  passed  by  Cham- 
plain,  who  had  been  wounded  by  two  Onon- 
daga arrows,  "one  in  the  leg  and  the  other 
in  the  knee,"  before  he  was  able  to  leave 
the  Hurons  and  go  back  to  Quebec.  These 
attacks  upon  the  Iroquois  provoked  a  war 
which  ended  only  with  the  extinction  of 
French  dominion  in  North  America.  The 
Iroquois,  now  also  armed  with  guns, 
made  their  power  felt  on  cver\-  battle-field. 
Bancroft  says  upon  this  subject:  "Thrice 
did  Champlain  in\ade  their  countr\-,  until 
he  was  driven  with  disgrace  from  the  wilder- 
ness. The  Five  Xations  in  return  attempted 
the  destruction  of  New  France.  Though  '■ 
repulsed  they  continued  to  defy  the  prov-  I 
ince  and  its  allies,  and  under  the  eyes  of 
its  go\'ernor  openh'  intercejjted  convoys 
destined  for  Quebec  The  P'rench  authori- 
ty was  not  confirmed  b)-  the  founding  of  a 
feeble  outpost  at  Montreal,  and  Fort  Rich- 
elieu at  the  mouth  of  Sorrel  river  scarcely 
protected  its  immediate  environs.  The  Iro- 
quois scoured  e\-ery  wilderness  to  la\-  it 
more  waste.  Depopulating  the  whole  coun- 
try on  the  Ontario,  they  attained  an  ac- 
knowledged superiority  over  New  France. 
The  colony  was  in  perpetual  danger  and 
Quebec  itself  was  besieged." 

In  the  year  1653  each  of  the  Five  Na- 
tions entered  into  peace  treaties,  which  left 
the  colonists  for  a  time  at  rest;  but  the  Iro- 
quois meanwhile  invaded  the  territory  of 
the  Fries  and,  after  a  severe  contest,  as- 
saulted that  nation  in  a  fort  and  wiped  them 
from  the  face  of  the  earth.  This  was  fol- 
lowed by  a  long  war  upon  the  Andastes,  or 
Guyan,dots,  lasting  until  1675,  in  which  the 
Iroquois  were  finally  victorious. 

Of  the  three  rival  bands  of  colonists  the 
French  and  Dutch  developed  a  thriving  fur 
trade  with  the  Indians,  spreading  rapidly 
among  them  at  the  same  time  both  kinds 
of  fire-arms — rum  and  guns;  while  the 
English   devoted   themselves  more  to  agri- 


culture. In  1664  the  English  conquered 
New  Amsterdam,  aod  their  conquest  was 
made  permanent  in  1670,  its  name  being 
changed  to  New  York.  With  few  excep- 
tions, the  Iroquois  remained  the  firm  allies 
of  the  English  until  the  latter  were  defeated 
in  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  But  from 
the  time  of  the  English  supremacy  over  the 
Dutch,  a  spirited  rivalry  was  kept  up  be- 
tween the  French  and  English.  The  former 
were  indefatigable  in  extending  the  fur  trade, 
and  their  missionaries  hesitated  at  no  ob- 
stacle, opposition  or  hardship  in  carrying 
the  cross  among  the  Indians.  In  1642 
Father  Jogues,  commissioned  as  an  env'oy, 
was  hospitably  received  by  the  Mohawks 
and  he  offered  the  friendship  of  France  to 
the  Onondagas.  During  the  temporary 
peace  with  the  French,  Father  Simon  Le 
Moyne  appeared  as  a  missionarj"  among  the 
Onondagas,  which  became  one  of  the  most 
important  mission  fields  on  the  continent. 
It  was  the  policy  of  the  Jesuits  to  not  alone 
convert  the  savages  to  Christianity;  indeed, 
it  may  be  doubted  if  that  was  their  chief 
motive  in  coming  among  them.  They  came 
not  alone  to  extend  the  church,  but  also  to 
conciliate  the  Indians  towards  the  French 
through  the  medium  of  the  church,  enabling  _ 
the  latter  to  extend  the  power  and  domin- 
ion of  that  country.  While  they  found  it 
comparatively  easy  to  make  friends  and  some 
converts  among  the  less  biased  tribes  in 
other  sections  of  the  country,  they  found  in 
the  Onondagas  a  nation  shrewd,  wily  and 
strong,  more  so,  perhaps,  than  their  brethren 
of  the  Confederacy,  who  felt  no  inclination 
to  favor  the  French  and  little  towards  Chris- 
tianity through  the  medium  of  French 
priests. 

Onondaga  was  the  center  of  the  great 
Confederacy,  the  place  of  meeting  of  all 
their  great  councils;  where  gathered  the 
sachems  and  chiefs  and  warriors  of  the  Five 
Nations  to  discuss  and  settle  the  most  ini- 


38 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


portant  questions  and  public  measures. 
Hence  it  was  viewed  by  the  Jesuits  as  the 
field  above  all  others  for  their  work;  and 
they  labored  faithfully  in  that  locality.  If 
the)-  were  not  signally  successful,  it  must  be 
credited  more  to  the  capacity  and  condition 
of  those  whom  they  sought  to  influence, 
than  to  their  own  want  of  persistence,  en- 
ergy and  heroism. 

By  1665  French  trading  posts  were  es- 
tablished at  Michillimacinac,  Green  Bay, 
Chicago  and  St.  Joseph,  and  the  French 
resolved  to  put  an  end  to  the  frequent  in- 
cursions of  the  Iroquois.  In  June  of  that 
year  M.  de  Trac)'  was  appointed  Vicero}- 
of  the  French  possessions  in  America  and 
landed  at  Quebec  with  four  regiments  of 
infantr}'.  In  September  Daniel  de  Runy, 
Knight,  Lord  de  Courcelles,  who  had  re- 
ceived the  appointment  of  Governor  of 
Canada  six  months  previousl}',  arrived  with 
a  regiment,  some  families  and  the  necessary 
means  for  the  establishment  of  a  colony. 
Courcelles,  with  a  force  of  five  hundred 
men,  started  on  an  e.xpedition  into  the  Mo- 
hawk country  on  the  9th  of  January,  1666. 
After  a  dangerous  march  of  thirty-five  days 
on  snow-shoes,  in  which  his  men  suffered 
severely  by  freezing,  he  arri\ed  w ithin  twen- 
ty leagues  of  the  Mohawk  villages,  only  to 
learn  that  most  of  the  Mohawks  and  Onei- 
das  were  absent  on  a  war  expedition.  On 
the  22d  of  May,  1666,  the  Senecas  sent  ten 
ambassadors  to  Quebec  to  sue  for  peace, 
with  a  request  that  they  be  considered  as 
faithful  subjects  of  the  French  king,  and 
that  Frenchmen  be  sent  to  settle  among 
them  and  "  Blackgowns"  to  preach  to  them. 
A  treat)-  to  this  effect  was  concluded  on  the 
25th  of  May,  which  was  ratified  b)'  the 
Mohawks  and  Oneidas  on  the  I2th  of  July. 
During  these  negotiations  a  party  of  Mo- 
hawks made  an  assault  upon  the  garrison 
at  Fort  St.  Anne,  which  was  retaliated  by 
M.  de  Tracv  through  another  incursion  into 


the  Mohawk  countr)- :  but  his  wily  foe  fled, 
leaving  only  their  empty  villages  to  be 
burned  bv-  the  French  soldiers. 

On  the  13th  of  October,  1666,  the  Iro- 
(]uois  ambassadors  of  the  Onondagas,  Ca- 
\ugas,  Senecas  and  Oneidas  visited  Quebec 
and  requested  a  confirmation  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  king's  protection,  under  a 
treaty  involving  several  conditions ;  in  the 
consequent  treaty  the  Mohawks  afterwards 
acquiesced.  In  1667  (July  31)  the  peace 
of  Breda  was  established  between  Holland, 
I  Flngland  and  France,  and  in  the  following 
)-ear  a  treat)-  was  signed  between  France 
and  Spain.  Hut  the  general  peace  thus  in- 
augurated was  of  short  duration;  the  Iro- 
quois were  soon  again  in  conflict  with  the 
French,  causing  them  much  suffering,  loss 
of  harvests  and  constant  dread.  But  after 
the  appointment  of  Count  de  Frontenac  as 
(iovernor  and  Lieutenant-General  of  Can- 
ada in  April,  1672,  confidence  was  restored 
through  his  conservative  management,  and 
another  peace  treaty  was  ratified  in  1673. 

In  1684  the  Senecas  again  began  hostil- 
ities against  the  French,  b)-  the  capture  of 
seven  hundred  traders'  canoes  and  an  attack 
upon  Fort  St.  Louis.  For  this  outrage  M. 
de  la  Barre,  then  Governor  of  New  France, 
planned  an  expedition  against  the  Senecas. 
Upon  learning,  however,  that  Col.  Dongait, 
Governor  of  New  York,  had  promised  the 
Senecas  a  reinforcement  of  four  hundred 
horse  and  an  equal  number  of  foot  sol- 
diery, the  expedition  was  suddenl)'  aban- 
doned and  a  treaty  made  "  with  indecent 
haste"  with  the  Onondagas,  Oneidas  and 
Cayugas.  This  event  caused  the  deposal 
of  M.  de  la  Barre,  who  was  superseded  by 
the  Marquis  de  Nonville,  with  instructions 
to  observe  strict  neutrality.  After  a  thorough 
examination  of  the  situation  De  Nonville 
communicated  to  his  king  that  the  only  wa)- 
to  protect  their  fur  trade  and  retain  their 
possessions  was  through   a  successful    war. 


European  Discoveries  and  Settlements. 


39 


This  counsel  was  acted  upon  and  reinforce- 
ments sent  out.  In  the  summer  of  1687 
he  arrived  on  an  expedition,  with  nearly  two 
thousand  PVench  and  five  hundred  Indian 
allies,  at  Irondequoit  Hay,  near  the  site  of 
Rochester,  whence  he  marched  against  the 
Seneca  villages.  Defeated  in  an  attack  upon 
the  French  force  on  the  march,  the  Senecas 
burned  their  \'illages  and  fled  to  the  Ca- 
yugas.  De  Nonville  destroyed  their  stores 
of  corn;  but  these  being  immediately  re- 
placed by  the  other  Confederate  nations,  little 
was  really  accomplislied  b)-  the  expedition, 
except  to  further  enrage  the  Iroquois.  After 
building  a  fort  at  the  mouth  of  the  Niagara 
river,  the  Go\'ernor  witii  most  of  his  forces 
returned  to  Montreal.  Alarmed  at  this  bold 
incursion  into  the  strongest  portion  of  their 
country  b)'  so  superior  a  force,  the  Iroquois 
appealed  to  Go\'.  Dongan  for  protection. 
He  advised  them  to  not  make  peace  with 
the  French  and  promised  them  reinforce- 
ments. De  Non\ille,  however,  called  a 
meeting  of  the  chiefs  of  the  P^ive  Nations  at 
Montreal,  for  peace  negotiations,  and  the 
Indians  decided  to  send  representatives 
thither. 

In  1687,  while  the  French  and  English 
were  at  peace,  the  New  York  colonists  de- 
termined to  participate  in  the  valuable  fur 
trade  of  the  northwest.  To  carr\'  out  this 
project  they  induced  the  Iroquois  to  liber- 
ate several  Huron  captives  to  act  as  guides. 
The  party  was  led  b)'  Major  McGregory  and 
was  intercepted  by  a  body  of  French,  cap- 
tured and  their  goods  given  over  to  the 
Indians.  The  lake  Indians  had  favored  the 
project  of  the  English  colonists;  but  after 
this  disaster  were  anxious  to  disabuse  the 
minds  of  the  French  of  that  fact.  To  that 
end  Adario,  a  celebrated  Wyandot  chief, 
with  a  party  of  one  hundred  warriors, 
marched  against  the  Iroquois.  On  the  way 
the)-  were  informed  of  the  peace  negotia- 
tions before  alluded  to  and  were  advised  by 


the  commander  of  Fort  Cadaraqui  (Ontario, 
or  Niagara)  to  give  up  their  mission.  As 
such  action  and  the  establishment  of  the 
proposed  peace  would  leave  the  Iroquois 
free  to  invade  the  Wyandot  country, 
Adario  resolved  to  prevent  it;  he  succeeded 
effectually  by  waylaying  and  capturing  the 
entire  Iroquois  embassy  on  its  way  to 
Montreal,  with  the  forty  young  warriors 
who  acted  as  a  guard  to  the  embassy,  many 
of  whom  were  killed.  Among  the  captives 
was  the  head  chief  of  the  Onondagas,  upon 
whom  the  wily  Wyandot  fully  impressed 
the  belief  that  this  act  was  instigated  by  the 
F'rench  Governor.  He  then  dismissed  the 
capti\'es,  loaded  with  presents. 

Fully  believing  in  the  base  treachery  of 
De  Nonville  and  refusing  to  accept  his  asser- 
tions that  he  was  not  a  party  to  the  Wyan- 
dot chief's  deed,  the  Iroquois  were  filled 
with  rage  and  the  most  intense  desire  for 
revenge.  Twelve  hundred  warriors,  there- 
fore, landed,  on  the  26th  of  July,  1688,  on 
the  Island  of  Montreal  at  its  upper  end,  and 
before  any  opposition  could  be  made,  swept 
that  portion  of  the  island  as  with  the  besom 
of  destruction ;  burning,  pillaging,  and 
slaughtering  without  mercy.  In  the  follow- 
ing October  this  terrible  work  was  repeated 
on  the  lower  portion  of  the  island.  This 
was  followed  by  the  forced  abandonment  of 
the  fort  at  Niagara  and  Fort  Frontenac,  and 
the  power  of  the  revengeful  Iroquois  seemed 
almost  equal  to  the  overthrow  of  the  French 
dominion  in  Canada.  Many  of  the  Indian 
allies  of  the  French  left  them  and  joined  the 
English,  enabling  them  to  open  a  trade,  and 
the  French  colony  was  left  in  a  pitiable  con- 
dition. 

But  this  deplorable  condition  of  affairs 
with  the  French  was  soon  to  meet  with  a 
favorable  change,  through  the  re\olution  in 
England  which  drove  James  II  from  the 
throne  and  opened  a  war  with  France. 
Count  de  P'rontenac,  whose  former  admin- 


40 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


istration  in  the  colony  had  given  satisfaction, 
was  again  sent  out  as  Governor  of  New 
France.  He  arrived  October  2d,  1689,  and 
immediatcl)-  attempted  peace  negotiations 
with  the  Iroquois.  This  attempt  failing,  he 
planned  and  fitted  out  three  expeditions  in 
the  winter  of  that  year,  one  against  New 
York,  one  against  Connecticut  and  a  third 
against  New  England.  The  first  attack  by 
number  one  of  these  expeditions  was  upon 
the  village  of  Schenectady,  on  the  night  of 
February  9th,  1690,  when  the  entire  village, 
with  the  exception  of  two  houses,  was  burfi- 
ed,  the  people  slaughtered  or  taken  prisoners 
and  their  property  carried  away.  There 
were  before  the  burning,  "upwards  of  eighty 
well-built  houses  in  the  town."  This  disas- 
ter so  discouraged  the  dwellers  at  Albany 
that  they  resolved  to  abandon  their  homes 
and  remove  to  New  York;  they  went  so 
far  as  to  pack  many  of  their  effects  for  re- 
moval, but  were  dissuaded  from  their  pur- 
pose by  the  reproaches  and  encouragement 
offered  by  a  party  of  the  defeated  Mohawks 
who  had  come  to  mourn  with  them  o-ver 
their  losses.  Great  blame  is  attached  to  the 
English  colonists  for  their  want  of  energy 
and  activity  during  this  period,  when  com- 
pared with  the  vigilance  and  valor  of  the 
French  under  the  admirable  direction  of 
Frontenac;  but  through  it  all  the  Iroquois, 
with  rare  heroism  and  loyalty,  adhered  to 
their  allegiance  with  the  English,  who 
seemed  more  willing  to  sacrifice  them  than 
to  serve  their  own  cause. 

In  the  summer  of  1691  the  New  York 
and  New  England  forces  united  in  a  com- 
bined attack  upon  the  French  by  both  land 
and  water  ;  the  former,  under  command  of 
Major  Peter  Schuyler,  was  directed  against 
Montreal,  and  the  latter,  comprising  thirty 
sail,  was  commanded  by  Sir  William  Phips, 
and  made  Quebec  its  object  of  attack.  Al- 
though Schuyler  inflicted  quite  a  heav}'  loss 
upon  the  enemj',  both  the  expeditions  failed 


of  their  expected  success.  But  the  Iroquois 
gave  the  French  colony  no  peace ;  they 
forced  a  cessation  of  the  fur  trade,  prevented 
the  tillage  of  their  lantls,  causing  a  famine, 
and  drove  the  old  French  Governor  to  des- 
peration over  his  inability  to  prevent  the 
continued  incursions  and  assaults  of  the  In- 
dians; to  revenge  them  he  finall_\-  burned 
two  Iroquois  prisoners  at  the  stake. 

On  the  6th  of  June,  1692,  the  Iroquois 
formed  a  treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship 
with  Major  Richard  Ingoldesby,  then  Gov- 
ernor of  New  York  ;  and  on  the  i  5th  of  Jan- 
uary, 1693.  Count  de  Frontenac,  impelled 
by  the  dissatisfaction  and  despondence  of  the 
French  colonists  at  having  so  long  been  held 
upon  the  defensive,  organized  an  expedition 
into  the  Mohawk  country,  in  which  si.x 
hundred  French  and  Indians  participated. 
Three  of  the  Mohawk  castles  were  captured 
and  three  hundred  prisoners  taken.  The  re- 
mainder of  that  year  and  the  \-ear  1694 
were  spent  in  attempts  to  negotiate  a  peace 
between  the  Iroquois,  who  were  again  dis- 
heartened by  the  French  and  the  raid  into 
the  Mohawk  country,  but  without  avail. 
Seeing  no  immediate  prospects  of  peace, 
Count  de  Frontenac  determined  upon  strik- 
ing a  final  and  eft'ective  blow  at  the  Iroquois. 
He  accordingly  gathered  all  the  French  mi- 
litia, and  their  Indian  allies,  with  all  of  the 
western  Indians  he  could  control,  and  em- 
barked from  the  southern  end  of  the  Island 
of  Montreal  on  the  4th  of  July,  1696.  The 
expedition  was  designed  to  strike  a  terrible 
blow  at  the  center  of  the  Five  Nations  —  the 
Onondagas  ;  but  its  effect  was  lost  in  a  great 
measure  through  information  carried  to  them 
by  an  escaped  Seneca.  The  Onondagas  fled 
from  their  village,  with  the  exception  of  one 
old  chief,  said  to  have  been  a  centenarian, 
who  remained  in  his  cabin,  as  a  heroic 
method  of  ending  his  da\-s ;  he  was  tortured 
to  death,  enduring  the  ordeal  with  charac- 
teristic fortitude. 


European  Discoveries  and  Settlements. 


41 


This  incursion  by  the  French,  while  it  cost 
the  Onondagas  only  the  loss  of  one  old  man 
and  the  destruction  of  their  corn,   left  the 
French  in  a  worse   condition  than   before ; 
the  absence  of  the  agricultural   portion  of 
the  colonists  left  their  crops  to  ruin  and  a 
famine   ensued,  which   was   rendered   more 
unendurable  through  frequent  raids  by  the 
restless  Iroquois.     Affairs  mended  only  with 
the  treaty  of  Ryswick,  concluded  September 
1 2th,  1697.     This  treaty  left  unsettled  some 
points  relative  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Iro- 
quois from  its  provisions,  leaving  them  open 
to  attack  by  the    French,   and  to   the   ex- 
change of  prisoners.    But  the  English  firmly 
maintained  their  ground   on   both,  and  the 
French  were  obliged  to  yield.      French  and 
English  rivalry  continued,  however,  and  was 
greatly  augmented   by  the  influence  of  the 
Jesuits  among  the  Iroquois,  large  numbers  of 
whom  were  induced  to  go  to  Canada  to  live, 
where  they  were  taught  by  the  missionaries 
and  fed  and  clothed  by  the  colony.     This 
alienation   caused  the  English  to  hold   re- 
peated councils  with    the   Iroquois  for  the 
purpose  of  regaining  whatever  of  their  form- 
er influence  that  had  been  lost.     The  Eng- 
lish made  the  most  liberal  promises  of  pro- 
tection  through   the  erection   of  forts    and 
supplies  of  arms  and  ammunition.      At  one 
of  these  councils  held  August   nth,   1701, 
representatives  of  each  of  the  Five  Nations 
promised  that  "they  would  discredit  the  idle 
tales  of  the    French,   continue   firm  to   the 
Crown  of  England,   if  it  will  protect  them 
from  its  enemies,  and  were  thankful  for  the 
promise  of  Protestant  ministers."     At  a  suc- 
ceeding conference  they  were  advised  by  the 
English  to  seize  all  Jesuits  and  send  them 
to  Albany,  where  they  would   receive  one 
I'.undred    pieces  of  silver,    eight    for   each 
capti\e.     To  this  the  Indians  agreed.     To 
continue  the  peaceful  relations  thus  brought 
about,  the  Colonial  Assembly  of  New  York 
enacted  a  stringent  law  in  1700,   imposing 


the  penahy  of  death  by  hanging  upon  ev- 
ery Jesuit  who  voluntarily  came  into  the 
province.  Liberal  presents  were  made  to 
the  Iroquois  chiefs,  and  five  of  their  number 
were  taken  to  England  to  hold  up  before 
their  uncivilized  gaze  the  magnificence  of 
the  great  government  that  was  offering  them 
protection.  But  all  of  these  efforts  on  the 
part  of  the  English  were  not  sufficient  to 
prevent  the  ratification  of  a  treaty  of  peace 
between  the  Iroquois  and  the  French  in 
August,  1 70 1,  in  which  negotiations  they 
are  believed  to  have  been  largely  influenced 
by  the  great  losses  they  had  continually  sus- 
tained. 

Although  the  eighteenth  century  opened 
upon  a  scene  of  peace  in  the  New  World, 
it  was  not  of  long  duration.  Queen  Anne 
succeeded  to  the  English  throne  in  1702, 
and  then  followed  what  is  known  as  "  Queen 
Anne's  War,"  between  the  rival  nations, 
which  was  not  concluded  until  the  treaty  of 
Utrecht,  April  nth,  1713.  New-  England 
was  ravaged  during  this  struggle  ;  but  New 
York  was  almost  exempted  from  its  touch, 
while  the  F"ive  Nations  maintained  their 
neutralit)-  with  commendable  success.  By 
the  treaty  of  Utrecht  the  French  were  en- 
joined from  attacking  the  Five  Nations,  who 
were  acknowledged  as  subjects  of  Great 
Britain,  while  free  trade  with  them  was  guar- 
anteed to  both  France  and  FLngland. 

In  1713  the  Iroquois,  with  no  fighting  on 
their  hands  at  the  north,  took  a  hand  in  a 
contest  that  was  going  on  in  Carolina  be- 
tween the  whites  of  that  territory  and  the 
Tuscaroras,  a  powerful  nation  of  North  Car- 
olina. The  latter  were  defeated,  many  were 
killed  and  many  captives  were  sold  as  slaves 
to  the  allies  of  the  English.  The  remainder 
were  adopted  by  the  Five  Nations,  were  as- 
signed territory  just  west  of  the  Oneidas, 
and  became  known  as  the  Sixth  Nation. 

The  period  from  1744  to  1748  witnessed 
another  war  between  France  and  England, 


42 


IIisToKV  OF  Cortland  County. 


which  was  concluded  by  the  treaty  of  Aix- 
la-Chapellc,  made  April  30th,  1748.  This 
struggle  was  chiefly  for  the  possession  of  the 
Mississippi  valley,  but  it  also  opened  the  old 
question  of  Iroquois  supremacy.  The  treaty 
which  caused  a  cessation  of  hostilities  was 
imperfect  and  left  unsettled  so  nian\-  impor- 
tant questions  that  the  contest  was  again  be- 
gun in  1755.  The  earh-  French  successes 
which  followed  caused  the  Iroquois,  now 
about  cquall)-  divided  between  Canada  and 
New  York,  to  weaken  in  their  alliance  to  the 
English,  and  the  di\-isions  among  them  in- 
creased as  the  war  progressed.  In  April, 
1757,  the  Senecas,  Onondagas  and  Cayugas 
made  open  peace  with  Canada ;  but  they 
were,  chiefly  through  the  influence  of  Sir 
William  Johnson,'  made  to  observe  a  fair 
degree  of  neutralit}-.  This  war  was  for  the 
most  part  a  bloody  contest  with  the  savage 
allies  of  the  French,  producing  desolation 
and  devastation  on  the  colonial  borders, 
especially  in  Pennsylvania.  In  1756  forts 
were  built  at  Oneida  Castle  and  Onondaga, 
and  a  block  house  at  Canaseraga,  and  at  a 
council  held  at  Onondaga  June  19th,  1756, 
permission  was  gi\-en  Colonel  Johnson  to 
erect  a  fort  or  magazine  at  Oswego  Falls. 

The  war,  at  first  a  succession  of  PVench 
victories,  was  finally  turned  in  favor  of  the 
English,  and  was  concluded  by  the  treaty 
of  Paris  in  1763,  leaving  lingland  in  posses- 
sion of  Canada  and  the  country  west  of  the 
Mississippi.  Territorial  disputes  followed, 
however,  between  the  Indians  and  the.  col- 
onists, which  finally  led  to  the  making  of  a 
treat)-,  ratified  by  Sir  William  Johnson  in 
July,  1770,  establishing  what  was  called  the 
"Property  Line."     This  treaty  recognized 

iSir  William  Johnson  \va.s  sent  to  America  in  1734  as 
the  agent  of  his  uncle,  a  great  lanflholcler  in  the  .Mohawk 
vallev.  He  gained  an  almost  unbounded  influence  over 
the  Mohawk  nation,  chiefly  by  hi»  ready  affiliation  with 
them  and  his  integrity  in  dealing.  He  subsequently  made 
his  power  conspicuous  throughout  the  Six  Nations  and 
was  entrusted  l)y  the  British  government  with  the  man- 
agement of  its  affairs  in  that  connection. 


as  Indian  lands  all  the  territory  lying  north 
and  west  of  the  Ohio  and  Alleghany  rivers 
to  Kittaning;  thence  in  a  direct  line  to 
the  nearest  fork  of  the  west  branch  of  the 
Susquehanna  river;  thence  following  that 
stream  through  the  Alleghanies,  b\-  the  way 
of  Htirnctt's  Hills  and  the  eastern  branch  of 
the  Susquehanna  and  the  Delaware  into 
New  York,  to  a  line  parallel  with  the  Una- 
dilla,  and  thence  north  to  Wood  Creek  east 
of  Oneida  lake.  But  this  polic\-  was  not 
potent  to  appease  the  complaints  of  the 
Indians  at  the  encroachments  of  the  settlers, 
which  paved  the  way  for  the  hostilities  of 
the  Iroquois  and  the  western  Indians  against 
the  colonists  during  the  war  of  the  Revolu- 
tion, then  near  at  hand. 

In  1775  the  great  struggle  for  American 
independence  began.  Sir  William  Johnson 
had  died  suddenly  in  the  previous  year,  and 
his  office  of  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs 
devolved  upon  his  nephew,  Gu\'  Johnson, 
who  retained  much  of  the  influence  over  the 
Indians  enjoyed  by  his  uncle.  The  Si.x 
Nations  were  at  first  disposed  towards  neu- 
trality, but  the  efforts  of  the  English,  chiefly 
through  Johnson,  Brant  (Thajendanegea) 
and  John  Butler,  soon  overcame  such  dis- 
position. Brant  was  sent  to  England,  where 
he  was  honored  and  feasted;  returning  in 
the  winter  of  1776,  he  at  once  began  the 
work  of  organizing  a  force  of  Iroquois  war- 
riors. In  the  spring  of  1777  he  appeared 
at  Oquaga  (now  Windsor,  Broome  count}) 
with  a  force  of  Indians  and  tories;  in  June 
he  ascended  the  Susquehanna  to  Unadilla, 
whence  he  drove  oft'  cattle  and  sheep,  and 
frightened  the  inhabitants  of  that  section  so 
I  that  they  retired  to  Cherr\-  Valle}-  and  other 
less  exposed  places.  Soon  afterward  Brant 
withdrew  his  forces  from  the  Susquehanna 
and  joined  Sir  John  Johnson  and  John  But- 
ler at  Oswego,  where  preparations  were 
made  for  a  descent  upon  the  Mohawk  settle- 
ments.     In    August,    1777,    Fort    Schuyler 


European  Discoveries  and  Settlements. 


43 


was  attacked  and  the  bloody  battle  of  Oris- 
kaiiy  was  fought.  The  Oneidas  remained 
neutral  during  these  events,  for  which  course 
their  crops,  castles  and  wigwams  were  after- 
wards destroyed  by  Brant. 

Following  these  events  was  perpetrated 
a  long  list  of  Indian  and  Tory  atrocities  upon 
the  unprotected  frontier  settlements  in  New 
York  and  Pennsylvania,  among  which  were 
the  massacres  of  Wyoming  and  Cherry  Val- 
ley in  1778,  with  man\-  others,  at  later  dates, 
the  record  of  which  is  filled  with  deeds  of 
bloodshed,  \'indicti\'e  torture,  heroic  defense 
and  marvelous  fortitude,  and  is  printed 
upon  thousands  of  historic  pages.  Intt)  the 
details  of  these  events  it  is  not  the  province 
of  this  work  to  enter;  it  was  their  perpetra- 
tion, howe\^er,  that  led  Congress  and  Gen- 
eral Washington  to  inaugurate  an  expedition 
in  the  spring  of  1779  which  exerted  a  pow- 
erful influence  upon  the  closing  scenes  of 
the  drama  in  which  the  Iroquois  had  played 
so  conspicuous  a  part.  General  Sullivan 
was  given  command  of  this  expedition  and 
his  force  comprised  three  divisions:  one 
from  New  Jersey,  under  General  Ma.xwell; 
one  from  New  England,  under  General 
Hand,  and  a  third  from  New  \'ork,  under 
General  James  Clinton  (father  of  Gov.  De 
Witt  Clinton).  The  first  two  divisions  men- 
tioned, numbering  thirty-five  hundred  men, 
under  command  of  General  Sullivan,  left 
Wyoming,  Jul}-  31st,  1779,  and  moved  up 
the  east  side  of  the  ri\er.  The\-  were 
joined  at  Tioga  Point  by  Clinton's  force, 
which  swelled  the  command  to  more  than 
four  thousand.  Near  the  site  of  P.lmira 
they  encountered  Butler  with  a  small  force 
of  Indians  and  tories  ;  a  battle  was  fought, 
Butler  was  defeated  and  the  expedition 
met  with  little  subsequent  opposition, 
marching  into  the  Genesee  country  de- 
stroying the  Seneca  villages,  burning  dwell- 
ings, felling  orchards,  cutting  and  burning 
corn    and   other  corps,  and    leaving  a  track 


of  utter  desolation.  "  The  Indians  shall 
see,"  said  the  commander  of  the  expe- 
dition, "that  we  have  malice  enough  in  our 
hearts  to  destroy  everything  that  contributes 
to  their  support,"  and  this  expressed  intent 
governed  the  actions  of  the  expedition. 
F"orty  Indian  towns  were  burned,  among 
j  them  Genesee  Castle,  the  capital  of  the 
Onondagas,  with  its  "  one  hundred  and 
j  twenty-eight  houses,  mostly  large  and  ele- 
'  gant,"  while  Kanadaseagea,  the  capital  of 
the  Senecas,  and  Kanandaigua  shared  the 
same  fate.  The  terror-stricken  Iroquois 
fled  to  Niagara,  where  many  perished  dur- 
ing the  ensuing  hard  winter  from  lack  of 
habitual  food  and  diseases  engendered  there- 
by—  a  state  of  affairs  for  which  the  British 
were  largely  responsible,  as  the  Indians 
looked  to  them  for  the  means  of  subsistence 
in  their  emergency. 

In  partial  conjunction  with  the  Sullivan 
campaign,  though  it  occurred  a  little  earlier, 
was  the  expedition  into  the  Onondaga 
country  b}'  Col.  Van  Schaick,  assisted  by 
Lieutenant  Willet  and  Major  Cochran,  of 
the  garrison  at  Fort  Schuyler.  A  plan  for 
this  movement  ha\'ing  been  formed  by  Gen- 
eral Schu)'ler  and  approved  by  the  com- 
mander-in-chief, the  three  officers  named 
started  from  P'ort  Schuyler  at  the  head  of 
between  five  and  six  hundred  men,  on  the 
19th  of  April,  1779.  Great  secrec)'  was 
maintained  even  as  to  the  destination  of  the 
expedition,  and  all  Indians  were  detained  at 
the  fort.  On  the  third  day  of  his  march 
Col.  Van  Schaick  reached  his  destination. 
The  place  where  they  first  reached  Onon- 
daga lake  was  at  Green  Point,  whence  they 
proceeded  to  the  mouth  of  Onondaga  creek, 
and  passed  across  it  on  a  large  sycamore 
log.  Here  Capt.  Graham  captured  an 
Onondaga  warrior,  the  first  that  had  been 
seen;  scouts  also  came  upon  the  expedition 
at  this  point  and  the  alarm  was  quickly 
spread   among  the   nation,  resulting  in  the 


44 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


immediate  retreat  of  the  Indians.  A  si<ir- 
mish  was  fought,  but  resulted  in  only  a 
trifling  loss  to  the  Indians.  Their  villages 
and  property  were  completely  destroyed  by 
burning.  Twelve  Indians  were  killed  and 
thirty-four  made  prisoners.  After  the  de- 
struction of  the  villages,  the  expedition  re- 
turned, reaching  Fort  Schuyler  on  the  24th, 
after  an  absence  of  five  and  a  half  days. 

The  e.xpedition  of  Sullivan  substantially 
destroyed  the  Iroquois  League.  While  its 
form  remained  to  a  certain  extent,  the  forces 
that  bound  it  together  were  rendered  prac- 
tically powerless;  but  they  were  not  yet 
conquered  as  far  as  predatory  warfare  was 
concerned.  A  reorganization  was  effected 
in  the  winter  and,  under  the  leadership  of 
Corn-Planter,  fell  upon  the  Oneidas  and 
Tuscaroras,  burned  their  castle,  church  and 
village  and  sent  them  defeated  to  the  white 
settlements  near  Schenectady  ;  there  they 
remained,  devoted  to  the  cause  of  the  colo- 
nists, until  the  close  of  the  war.  In  the 
mean  time  Sir  John  Johnson  collected  five 
hundred  Indians  and  refugees,  and  passed 
through  the  woods  from  Crown  Point  to 
Johnson  Hall,  for  the  double  purpose  of  se- 
curing some  buried  treasure  left  by  him, 
and  to  punish  his  old  neighbors.  Both  ob- 
jects were  accomplished  ;  the  village  which 
then  occupied  the  site  of  Fonda  was  burned, 
and  many  isolated  dwellings  for  several 
miles  along  the  Mohawk,  always  excepting 
those  of  Tories,  were  also  laid  in  ashes.  In 
the  succeeding  autumn  Johnson,  with  a 
larger  force  and  accompanied  by  Brant  and 
Corn- Planter  with  five  hundred  warriors, 
entered  the  Schoharie  valley,  leaving  devas- 
tation in  their  track;  they  also  paid  another 
visit  of  destruction  upon  the  Mohawk  valley, 
destroying  dwellings  as  far  up  as  Fort  Plain. 
There  they  were  met  by  Gov.  George  Clin- 
ton at  the  head  of  a  force  of  militia,  wliich 
was  joined  on  the  way  by  a  strong  party  of 
Oneidas,  led  by  their  chief,  "  Atyatarongh- 


ta."  The  forces  of  Brant  and  Johnson  were 
defeated  and  fled,  the  latter  retreating  to 
his  boats  on  Onondaga  lake  and  escaping  to 
Canada  by  way  of  Oswego.  Other  similar 
iricursions  were  made  in  the  lower  counties 
of  the  Hudson  and  in  the  Mohawk  valley  in 
1 78 1,  in  one  of  which  the  notorious  Butler 
was  killed  by  an  Oneida  Indian.  Thus 
ended  the  border  incursions  in  New  York. 

In  retaliation  for  the  bloodshed  and  dev- 
astation by  the  Iroquois  throughout  her  bor- 
ders the  New  York  Legislature  was  inclined 
to  drive  them  all  from  her  limits  ;  but,  chiefly 
through  the  influence  of  Washington  and 
Schuyler,  more  humane  counsels  prevailed. 
At  the  conclusion  of  the  Revolutionary  War, 
Oliver  Wolcott,  Richard  Butler  and  Arthur 
Lee  were  appointed  by  the  Federal  govern- 
ment as  commissioners  to  adjust  the  claims 
of  the  Si.x  Nations.  A  council  for  the  pur- 
pose was  held  at  Fort  Stanwi.x  in  1784, 
where  reservations  were  assigned  to  each  of 
the  Six  Nations,  except  the  Mohawks.  The 
Oneidas  and  Tuscaroras  had  already  been 
provided  for  through  special  legislation.  In 
1788  the  Indian  title  to  the  lands  embraced 
in  the  Military  Tract  was  extinguished. 

We  will  close  this  chapter  with  a  brief 
reference  to  the  work  of  the  missionaries 
among  the  Onondagas,  which  has  already 
been  mentioned.  Taking  advantage  of  the 
temporary  peace  between  the  Iroquois  and 
the  French  in  1654,  Father  Simon  Le  Moyne 
appeared  among  the  Onondagas  as  a  mis- 
sionary. He  left  Montreal  on  the  17th  of 
July,  "accompanied  by  a  j-oung  man  of 
piety  and  fortitude  who  had  long  been  a 
resident  of  that  country."  On  the  5th  of 
August  he  had  nearly  reached  the  end  of 
his  journey  and  wrote  in  his  Relation  : 
"We  traveled  four  leagues  before  reaching 
the  principal  Onondaga  village.  I  passed 
many  persons  on  the  way,  who  kindly  sa- 
luted me,  one  calling  me  brother,  another 
uncle,  and  another  cousin.  I  never  had  so 
many  relations.      At  a  quarter  of  a  league 


European  Discoveries  and  Settlements. 


45 


from  the  village  I  began  a  harangue  in  a  sol- 
emn and  commanding  tone,  which  gained 
me  great  credit.  I  named  all  their  chiefs, 
families  and  distinguished  persons.  I  told 
them  that  peace  and  joy  were  my  compan- 
ions and  that  I  shattered  war  among  the  dis- 
tant nations.  Two  chiefs  addressed  me  as  I 
entered  the  village  with  a  welcome,  the  like 
of  which  I  had  never  before  experienced 
among  savages." 

It  was  on  the  i6th  of  August  that  Father 
Le  Moyne  discovered  the  salt  springs  and 
made  the  first  salt  ever  produced  there  by  a 
European,  "as  natural,"  he  wrote,  "as  from 
the  sea."  He  made  the  first  baptism  of  a 
young  captive  of  the  Neuter  nation,  who 
had  been  instructed  in  the  faith  by  a  Huron 
convert.  Father  Le  Moyne's  visit  to  the 
Onondagas  was  made  at  the  special  request 
of  Ondessonk,  the  then  great  chief  of  the 
nation,  who  asked  him  to  select  "  on  the 
banks  of  our  great  lake  a  convenient  place 
for  a  French  habitation."  In  the  following 
year  (1655)  he  was  followed  by  Fathers  Jo- 
seph Chaumonot  and  Claude  Dablon,  who 
"were  received  with  the  strongest  proofs  of 
friendship."  They  founded  the  mission  of 
St.  John  the  Baptist,  which  is  supposed  by 
the  best  authorities  to  have  been  located  on 
"Indian  Hill,"  two  miles  south  of  the  village 
of  Manlius.  The  first  sacrament  of  holy 
mass  was  celebrat(?d  by  these  Fathers  in  the 
in  the  cabin  of  "Teotonharason,"  one  of  the 
women  who  came  from  Quebec  with  the 
missionaries,  on  Sunday,  November  14th, 
1655.  She  became  a  woman  of  wealth  and 
high  character  and  made  a  public  profession 
of  religion,  teaching  the  faith  among  the 
people.  The  location  of  St.  Mary's  of 
Ganentaha  was  also  fixed  in  that  year  by 
Fathers  Chaumonot  and  Dablon.  The  Re- 
lation says  of  it:  "This  day  for  the  first 
time  we  visited  the  salt  spring,  which  is  only 
tw^o  leagues  from  here,  near  the  lake  Ganen- 
taha, and  the  place  chosen   for  the  French 


settlement,  because  it  is  in  the  center  of  the 
Iroquois  nation,  and  because  w'e  can  from 
thence  visit  in  canoes  various  localities  upon 
the  rivers  and  lakes." 

Early  in  the  spring  of  1656  Father  Da- 
blon returned  to  Quebec  for  reinforcements 
to  strengthen  the  hearts  of  the  missionaries. 
He,  with  his  guides,  crossed  Oneida  lake  on 
the  ice  and  proceeded  by  the  usual  northern 
trail  to  the  mouth  of  the  Salmon  river,  reach- 
ing Montreal  on  the  30th  of  March.  Fa- 
ther Chaumonot  remained  at  Onondaga,  and 
the  following  summer  was  joined  by  Fathers 
Dablon,  Le  Mercier,  Rene  Mesnard,  Jacques 
Fremin,  and  Brothers  Ambrose  Broar  and 
Bourgier,  to  found  the  mission  of  St.  Mary's 
of  Ganentaha.  They  arrived  on  the  shore 
of  Onondaga  lake  at  3  o'clock  of  the  iith 
of  Jul}-,  where  many  of  the  old  men  and 
chiefs  of  the  Onondagas  awaited  them.  On 
the  17th  they  began  the  erection  of  their 
dwellings  and  a  fort  on  the  east  shore  of  the 
lake,  in  the  town  of  Salina,  where  the  out- 
lines of  the  fort  were  found  by  earl\-  settlers. 

This  mission  was  for  a  time  quite  prosper- 
ous, but  was  finally  broken  up  through  the 
rivalries  engendered  by  the  European  gov- 
ernments. In  1665  a  number  of  French 
families  returned,  under  the  guidance  of  mis- 
sionaries, and  settled  near  the  Indian  fort  and 
village  located  in  the  vicinity  of  the  present 
village  of  Jamesville.  Here  was  established 
the  mission  of  St.  Jean  Baptiste,  and  in  the 
following  year  a  chapel  was  built.  Three 
years  later  (1669)  the  French  were  again 
at  war  with  the  Iroquois;  but  Father  Le 
Moyne,  full  of  religious  zeal,  again  appeared 
among  the  Onondagas,  having  been  driven 
from  among  the  Mohawks,  and  was  received 
with  affection.  The  missionaries  would,  un- 
doubtedly, at  all  times  have  been  safe  among 
the  Indians,  even  if  their  efforts  were  not  the 
most  successful,  had  it  not  bfcen  for  the  con- 
stant warring  of  the  whites.  About  the  \-ear 
1700  the  Jesuit  missions  began  to  decline, 


46 


History  of  Cortland  County, 


partly  owing  to  the  efforts  of  the  Enghsh  to 
plant  the  Protestant  faith  among  the  Indians. 
The  Earl  of  Belmont,  then  Go\ernor  of  New 
York,  proposed  to  erect  a  fort  and  a  chapel 
at  Onondaga,  and  King  William  sent  over  a 
set  of  communion  plate  and  turnitiirc  for  tiic 
chapel.  These  plans  were  interrupted  in 
1 702  by  the  king's  death  ;  but  they  were  re- 
newed by  Queen  Anne,  who  became  a  zeal- 
ous patron  of  the  missions  among  the  Five 
Nations. 

Missions  were  established  by  the  Mora\'i- 
ans  among  the  Onondagas  in  1750,  when 
Bishop  Cammerhoff  and  Brother  David  Zeis- 
berger,  journeyed  to  Onondaga  from  Beth- 
lehem, Pennsylvania.  The\-  were  kindly 
received  by  the  Indians  and  given  permis- 
sion to  remain  with  them  one  or  two  years 
to  learn  their  language.  This  mission  was 
continued  at  intervals  for  several  years  ;  but 
it  was  never  very  influential. 

The  Rev.  Samuel  Kirkland  began  his 
work  among  the  Oneidas  in  August,  1766, 
remaining  among  the  Indians  for  over  forty 
years,  and  gaining  a  wide-spread  influence 
through  the  entire  Iroquois  Confederacy. 
His  counsel  to  the  Oneidas  was  potent  to 
secure  their  neutrality  and  often  their  friend- 
ship to  the  colonists  during  the  war  of  the 
Revolution.    He  was  in  all  respects  one  of  the 


most  useful  and  successful  of  the  devoted 
men  who  sought  to  plant  good  seed  in  the 
benighted  minds  of  the  Iroquois.  He  died  in 
1808.  Since  that  time  numerous  and  per- 
sistent efforts  have  been  made  by  represent- 
atives of  tile  different  Protestant  churches 
to  convert  and  christianize  the  Onondagas 
and  their  brethren.  Prominent  among  them 
were  Eleazer  Williams,  who  visited  the  On- 
ondagas in  1 8 16;  afterwaril  he  was  joined 
by  Revs.  Wm.  A.  Clark  and  Ezekiel  G.  Gear. 
It  was  at  the  suggestion  of  the  latter  that  a 
school  was  opened  at  Onondaga  by  one  of 
their  own  people  —  Mary  Do.xtater,  who  had 
been  educated  by  the  Philadelphia  Quakers 
and  had  taught  among  the  Oneidas ;  the 
school  was  begun  in  1S20,  but  she  died  a  few 
years  later.  Re\-.  Rosman  Ingals  began  re- 
ligious work  among  the  Onondagas  in  1841, 
after  the  Methodist  faith,  and  after  August 
I  st,  I S42,  preaching  was  kept  up  every  third 
Sunday.  In  that  j'ear  a  building  was  pro- 
cured and  fitted  up  for  a  church  ;  it  was  used 
until  1846,  when  a  new  school- house  was 
built  and  used  for  a  church.  Here  Rev. 
Daniel  Fancher  preached  with  considerable 
success.  In  1848  a  new  and  commodious 
church  was  erected,  and  religious  work 
among  the  Onondagas  has  been  unweary- 
ingly  continued  since. 


CHAPTER  V. 


I'RKVIOUS  T(.)  COUNTY  OR(,;.\N[Z.\  ITOX. 

An  Indian  ".Summer  Resort  "  — Early  Records  anil  Stale  Divisions  —  Genealogy  of  Cortland  County  —  The 
Military  Tract  —  Its  Origin  and  History —  Land  Bounties  to  Soldiers  —  Proportions  of  Bounties  —  .Vction  of  Congress 
in  Relation  Thereto  —  The  Tract  Ordered  Surveyed,  Mapped  and  Divided  —  Conditions  Imposed  upon  (Irantees  — 
The  "Slate's  Hundreds"  —  School  and  (lospel  Lots  —  Division  into  Townships — Fraudulent  Land  Titles  — 
Vexatious  Litigation  —  Formation  of  the   Present  Towns  of  tlie  County. 


IN  the  foregoing  chapters  it  has  been  our 
purpose  to  give  a  record  of  the  conspic- 
uous events  in  the  history  of  the  nation  of 
Indians   who    were    most   nearly   identified 


with  the  territory  now  embraced  in  Cort- 
land county,  and  their  relations  with  their 
confederates  in  the  mightiest  savage  organ- 
ization  ever   known,   and    with    the   whites 


Previous  to  County  Organization. 


4;^. 


after  tlicir  advent.  While  it  is  true  that  few 
of  these  events  occurred  in  what  is  now  this 
county,  yet  every  person  now  dwelHng  here 
must  feel  an  interest  in  the  people  who 
roamed  through  our  productive  valleys  be- 
fore the  sound  of  the  white  man's  axe 
echoed  in  the  unbroken  forest,  and  who, 
after  early  ci\'ilized  settlement  had  begun,' 
frequently  visited  their  old  camping  grounds 
in  this  vicinity,  planted  the  little  clearings, 
and  mingled  freely  vvith  the  pioneers  and 
their  families,  as  will  be  noted  farther  on 
in  this  work.  Such  is  the  reason  (if  any 
is  needed)  for  de\-oting  the  opening  chap- 
ters of  the  history  of  the  county  to  the 
predecessors  of  civilization  around  and 
within  its  borders. 

Cortland  count)-,  as  defined  since  the  )'ear 
1808,  was,  perhaps,  more  fortunate  than 
any  other  in  the  Empire  State  in  escaping 
the  terrors  of  border  wars  and  devastating 
incursions  by  Indians  and  Tories.  While  it 
was  somewhat  central  in  the  broad  domain 
of  the  Six  Nations,  it  seems  to  have  been 
surrounded  by  the  thrilling  scenes  and 
deeds  of  early  times,  while  they  penetrated 
very  little  within  its  borders.  The  Iro- 
quois and  their  enemies  fought  all  around 
the  county,  if  we  may  use  the  expression, 
but  left  it  comparatively  unscathed.  As 
far  as  the  Indians  were  concerned,  we  must 
believe  that  the  territory  of  Cortland  coun- 
ty was  a  peaceful  Arcadia  where  the  red 
brother  of  tlie  Onondagas  and,  perhaps, 
some  of  his  brethren  of  other  nations,  came 
to  enjoy  the  chase,  to  till  their  little  open- 
ings, and  to  roam  through  the  valleys  or 
drift  down  the  winding  Tioughnioga;  but 
not  to  fight.  It  was  to  him  a  sort  of  sum- 
mer resort. 

Before  referring  directly  to  the  formation 
and  subsequent  history  of  Cortland  county, 
we  may  profitably  note  briefly  some  of  the 
interesting  early  records  and  events  of  this 
locality.      At  the   close  of  the  Revolution 


Central  Xew  Yovk  Avas  still  a  wilderness; 
but  the  march  of  armies  and  the  incursions 
of  small  parties  had  made  known  to  man_\' 
its  desirable  characteristics  for  permanent 
civilized  settlement.  After  the  Duke  uf 
York  had  superseded  the  Dutch,  in  1683, 
the  province  of  New  York  was  divided  into 
I  twelve  counties,  viz.  :  Albany,  Duchess, 
Kings.  New  York,  Orange,  Queens,  Rich- 
mond, Suffolk,  Ulster,  Westchester,  Dukes 
and  Cornwall.  In  1693  the  latter  two  were 
surrendered  to  Massachusetts.  In  1768 
Cumberland  county  was  added,  and  Glouces- 
ter in  1770;  these  were  subsequently  yielded 
to  New  Hampshire  and  afterward  became 
;  a  part  of  Vermont.  In  1772  the  count)'  of 
I  Tryon  was  formed  from  Alban)-,  and  its 
name  changed  in  1784  to  Montgomery. 
In  1789  Ontario  count)'  was  formed  of  all 
that  part  of  Montgomery  county  lying 
west  of  a  north  and  south  line  across  the 
State  through  Seneca  lake,  two  miles  east  of 
Geneva.  Herkimer  county  was  taken  from 
Montgomery  and  organized  in  1791,  em- 
bracing all  the  territory  west  of  Montgom- 
cr)',  north  of  Otsego  and  Tioga  counties, 
and  east  of  Ontario  county.  In  1794  Onon- 
daga county  was  erected  from  the  western 
part  of  Herkimer,  and  included  all  of  the 
"Military  Tract,"  which  embraced  the  pres- 
ent counties  of  Cayuga,  Seneca,  Onondaga 
and  Cortland,  with  that  part  of  Tompkins 
lying  north  of  a  line  drawn  east  from  the 
head  of  Seneca  lake  to  the  southwest  corner 
of  Cortland  county,  and  all  that  part  of  Os- 
wego county  lying  west  of  the  Oswego_ 
river.  Hence  the  territor)'  of  Cortland 
count)-  was,  from  1772  to  1794,  included  in 
Montgomery  and  Herkimer  counties.  In 
1788  all  that  part  of  the  State  of  New  York 
lying  west  of  a  north  and  south  line  across 
the  State,  crossing  the  Mohawk  river  at 
"Old  Fort  Schuyler"  (Utica),  was  erected 
into  a  town  called  Whitestown,  in  lionor  of 
Judge  White,    who  had  settled  at   what  is 


48 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


now  Whitcsboro,  in  1784.  In  1786  settle- 
ment had  only  so  far  progressed  that  Mont- 
gomery county  contained  a  population  of 
15,057,  and  the  great  town  of  Whitestown 
contained  only  about  two  hundred;  that  was 
less  than  a  century  ago,  and  the  same  ter- 
ritory now  contains  several  millions.  It 
does  not  require  a  graphic  pen  to  cause  one 
to  marvel  at  the  transformation  which  has 
fallen  upon  the  then  wilderness  of  Central 
New  York,  changing  it  to  a  fruitful,  blossom- 
ing garden,  spread  with  thickly  populated 
cities  and  villages  and  laced  with  innumer- 
able railroads.  It  is  an  exhibition  of  growth 
never  equaled  in  any  other  country. 

Whitestown  was  afterwards  divided  into 
three  towns,  the  original  town  extending 
from  its  former  eastern  limits  to  the  present 
western  line  of  ]\Iadison  county.  The  town 
of  Mexico  included  the  eastern  half  of  the 
"Military  Tract,"  and  the  town  of  Peru  the 
western  half 

The  genealogy  of  Cortland  county  may, 
therefore,  be  traced  as  follows  :  — 

Albany  county  formed 1683 

Try  on  county  formed 1772 

Changed  to  Montgomery 1784 

Herkimer  county  formed 1791 

Onondaga  county  formed 1794 

Cortland  county  formed  from  On- 
ondaga  1808 

The  boundaries  of  the  new  county  were 
as  follows  :  Beginning  at  the  southeast  cor- 
ner of  the  township  of  Cincinnatus  (one  of 
the  townships  in  the  tract  commonly  known 
as  the  "Military  Tract"),  and  running'thence 
north  along  the  east  bounds  thereof  and  of 
the  townships  of  Solon  and  Fabius ;  thence 
westerly  to  the  northwest  corner  of  lot  No. 
51  in  the  township  of  TuUy;  thence  south 
along  the  east  bounds  of  the  townships  of 
Sempronius,  Locke  and  Dryden,  to  the 
southwest  corner  of  the  township  of  Virgil; 
thence  easterly  along  the  south  bounds  of 
the  townships  of  Virgil  and  Cincinnatus  to 
the  place  of  beginning. 


THE  MILITARY  TRACT, 
It  has  already  been  stated  herein  that  the 
territory  now  embraced  within  the  bound- 
aries of  Cortland  county  formerly  com- 
prised four  whole  and  two  half  townshijxs  in 
the  southeastern  corner  of  what  was  known 
as  the  "Military  Tract."  This  famous  tract 
had  its  origin  in  congressional  and  legis- 
lative action  whereby  land  bounties  were 
offered  to  soldiers.  On  the  1 6th  of  Sep- 
tember, 1776,  Congress  "resolved  itself  in- 
to a  Committee  of  the  Whole,  to  take  into 
consideration  the  report  of  the  Board  of 
War,  and  after  some  time  the  President  re- 
sumed the  Chair  and  Mr.  Nelson  reported 
that  the  Committee  have  had  under  con- 
sideration the  report  from  the  Board  of  \\'ar, 
and  ha\e  made  sundry  amendments,  which 
they  ordered  him  to  lay  before  Congress. 
Congress  then  took  into  consideration  the 
report  of  the  Board  of  War  and  the  amend- 
ments offered  by  the  Committee  of  the 
Whole,  and  thereupon  came  to  the  following 
resolutions :  — 

"  That  eighty-eight  battalions  be  enlisted  as 
soon  as  possible,  to  serve  during  the  present  war ; 
and  that  each  State  furnish  their  respective  quotas 
in  the  following  proportions  :  — 

New  Hampshire 3  battalions. 

Massachusetts  Bay 15         " 

Rhode  Island 2         " 

Connecticut —    8         " 

New  York 4 

Pennsylvania _.  12         " 

Delaware -  _ -     i  " 

Maryland .-     8 

Virginia 15  " 

North  Carolina 9         " 

South  Carolina -..     6         " 

Georgia —     i  " 

That  twenty  dollars  be  given  as  a  bounty  to  each 
non-commissioned  officer  and  private  soldier  who 
shall  enlist  to  serve  during  the  present  war,  unless 
sooner  discharged  by  Congress. 

•'  That  Congress  make  provision  for  granting 
lands  in  the  following  proportions  to  the  officers 
and  soldiers  who  shall  so  engage  in  the  service 


Previous  to  County  Organization. 


49 


and  continue  therein  till  the  close  of  the  war,  or 
until  discharged  by  Congress,  and  to  the  repre- 
sentatives of  such  officers  and  soldiers  as  shall  be 
slain  by  the  enemy. 

"  Such  lands  to  be  provided  by  the  United 
States ;  and  whatever  expenses  shall  be  neces- 
sary to  ])rocure  such  lands,  the  said  expenses 
shall  be  paid  and  borne  by  the  States,  in  the 
same  proportion  as  the  other  expenses  of  the 
war,  viz. :  — 

To  a  Colonel 500  acres. 

"     Lieutenant -Colonel 450      •' 

"     Major 400 

"     Captain 300      " 

"     Lieutenant 300      " 

"     Ensign 150      " 

"     each  non-commissioned  of- 
ficer and  soldier 100      "     "' 

In  addition  to  the  above,  Congress  passed 
an  act  on  the  12th  of  August,  1780,  provid- 
ing for  tand  bounties  as  fWlows  :  — 

To  a  Major-General 1,100  acres. 

"     Brigadier-General 850      " 

The  bloody  depredations  by  the  Indians 
and  Tories  on  the  frontier  during  the  revo- 
lutionary period,  and  especially  during  the 
years  1779  and  1780,  and  the  neglect  of 
several  States  other  than  New  York  to  fur- 
nish their  proper  quota  of  troops  for  the 
protection  of  the  lives  and  property  of  set- 
tlers, caused  the  Legislature  of  New  York 
to  enact  a  law  in  1781,  requiring  the  enlist- 
ment of  "two  regiments  for  the  defense  of 
the  frontier  of  New  York."  The  term  of 
service  was  to  be  three  years,  unless  sooner 
discharged,  and  the  good  faith  of  the  State 
was  pledged  to  the  fulfillment  of  promises 
and  payment  of  such  services.  "The  Coun- 
cil of  Appointment  of  the  State  of  New- 
York  was  empowered  to  commission  the 
field  officers,  and  the  Governor  of  the  State, 
the  captains  and  subalterns." 

At  the  close  of  the  war,  in  1783,  the  Leg- 
islature of  New  York  State  took  action  upon 
the  bounties  promised  by  the  United  States 
Congress  for  military  service,  and   relative 

1  Extract  from  proceedings  of  Congress, 


to  the  granting  of  land  gratuities  by  the 
State,  through  a  resolution  dated  March 
27th,  1783,  and  introduced  by  Mr.  Duane, 
which  read  as  follows  :  — 

'■'■Resolved,  therefore  (if  the  honorable,  the 
House  of  Assembly  concur  herein),  That,  besides 
the  bounty  of  land  so  promised  as  aforesaid,  the 
Legislature  will  by  law  provide  that  the  Major- 
Generals  and  Brigadier-Generals  now  serving  in 
the  line  of  the  army  of  the  United  States,  and 
being  citizens  of  this  State,  and  the  officers,  non- 
commissioned officers  and  privates  of  the  two 
regiments  commanded  by  Colonels  Van  Schaick 
and  Van  Cortlandt ;  such  officers  of  the  regiment 
of  artillery  commanded  by  Colonel  Lamb  and 
of  the  corps  of  sappers  and  miners  as  were,  when 
they  entered  the  service,  inhabitants  of  this 
State ;  such  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and 
privates  of  the  said  last-mentioned  two  corps  as 
are  credited  to  this  State  as  part  of  the  troops 
thereof;  all  officers  designated  by  any  act  of 
Congress  subsequent  to  the  i6th  of  September, 
1776;  all  officers  recommended  by  Congress  as 
persons  whose  depreciation  on  pay  ought  to  be 
made  good  by  this  State  and  who  may  hold  mil- 
itary commissions  in  the  line  of  the  army  at  the 
close  of  the  war ;  and  the  Rev.  John  Gano  and 
Rev.  John  Mason  .shall  severally  have  granted 
to  them  the  following  quantities  of  land,  to-wit :  — 
Non-commissioned  officers  and 

privates,  each 500  acres. 

Major-General S-5o°      " 

Brigadier -General _.  4,500      " 

Colonel 2,500      " 

Lieutenant -Colonel 2,000      " 

Major . 2,000      " 

Captain 1,5°°      " 

Regimental  Surgeon. 1,5°°      " 

Chaplain 2,000      " 

Subaltern 1,000      " 

Surgeon's  Mate 1,000      " 

"  That  the  lands  so  to  be  granted  as  bounty 
from  the  United  States,  and  as  gratuity  from  the 
State,  shall  be  laid  out  in  townships  of  six  miles 
square  ;  that  each  township  shall  be  divided  into 
156  lots  of  150  acres  each,  two  lots  whereof  shall 
be  reserved  for  the  use  of  a  minister  or  ministers 
of  the  Gospel,  and  two  lots  for  the  use  of  a  school 
or  schools;  that  each   person   above  described 


50 


History  oi'  Cortland  County. 


shall  be  entitled  to  as  many  such  lots  as  his 
bounty  and  gratuity  land  as  aforesaid  will  admit 
of;  that  one-half  the  lots  each  person  shall  be 
entitled  to  shall  be  improved  at  the  rate  of  five 
acres  for  each  hundred  acres,  within  five  years 
after  tiie  grant,  if  the  grantee  shall  retain  pos- 
session of  such  lots  ;  and  that  the  said  bounty 
and  gratuity  lands  be  located  in  the  district  of 
this  State  reserved  for  the  use  of  the  troops  by 
an  act  entitled,  'An  Act  to  pre\ent  grants  or 
locations  of  the  lands  therein  mentioned,  passed 
the  2Sth  day  of  July,  1772.' 

"Resohrd,  That  His  Excellency,  the  Governor, 
be  reijuested  to  communicate  these  resolutions  in 
such  manner  as  he  shall  conceive  most  proper. 

"  Rcsohai,  That  this  House  do  concur  with 
the  Honorable,  the  Senate,  in  the  last  preceding 
resolutions. 

"  Ordered,  That  Mr.  John  Laurence  and  Mr. 
Humphrey  carry  a  cojjy  of  the  preceding  reso- 
lution of  concurrence  to  the  Honorable,  the 
Senate." 

After  several  amcndnient.s  and  minor 
modifications  of  this  legislative  action  an 
act  was  passed  on  the  28th  day  of  February, 
1789,  in  which  it  was  provided,  "That  the 
Commissioners  of  the  Land  Office  shall, 
and  they  are  hereby  authorized  to,  direct 
the  Surveyor- General  to  lay  out  as  many 
townships  in  tracts  of  land  set  apart  for 
such  purposes  as  will  contain  land  sufficient 
to  satisfy  the  claims  of  all  such  persons  who 
are,  or  shall  be  entitled  to  grants  of  land  by 
certain  concurrent  resolutions  and  by  the 
eleventh  clause  of  the  Act  entitled  'An  act 
for  granting  certain  lands  promised  to  be 
given  as  bounty  lands  by  the  laws  of  the 
State,'  and  for  other  purposes  therein  men- 
tioned, pas.sed  the  nth  day  of  May,  1784; 
which  townships  shall  respectively  contain 
60,000  acres  of  land  and  be  laid  out  as 
nearly-  in  squares  as  local  circumstances  will 
permit,  and  be  numbered  from  one  pro- 
gressively to  the  last,  inclusive;  and  the 
Commissioners  of  the  Land  Office  shall  like- 
wise designate  every  township  by  such  name 
as  they  shall  deem  proper." 


The  s"ame  act  also  provided,  "that  the 
Surveyor-General,  as  soon  as  may  be,  shall 
make  a  map  of  each  of  said  townships,  and 
each  township  shall  be  subdi\'ided  on  such 
map  into  one  hundred  lots,  as  nearly  square 
as  may  be,  each  lot  to  contain  si.\  hundred 
acres,  or  as  near  that  quantity  as  may  be; 
and  the  lots  in  every  township  shall  be  num- 
bered from  one  to  the  last,  inclusive,  in 
numerical  order."  Under  this  law  General 
Simeon  Dewitt,  assisted  b)-  Moses  Dewitt 
and  Abram  Hardenburgh,  laid  out  the  entire 
tract,  the  former  "  plotting  and  mapping 
the  boundaries,  and  calculating  its  area." 

After  the  survey,  the  making  of  the  maps 
and  their  deposit  in  the  offices  of  the  Sur- 
veyor-General and  the  Secretary  of  State, 
the  Land  Commissioners  were  directed  to 
"advertise  for  six  successive  weeks  in  one  or 
more  newspapers  printed  in  each  of  the  cities 
of  New  York  and  Albany  (whereof  the  news- 
paper published  by  the  printer  to  this  State, 
if  any  such  there  be,  shall  be  one),  requiring 
all  persons  entitled  to  grants  of  bounty  or 
gratuity  lands,  who  had  not  already  exhib- 
ited their  claims,  to  exhibit  the  same  to  the 
Commissioners  on  or  before  the  first  day 
of  Januarv',  1791." 

The  same  act  ordered  that  "  All  persons 
to  whom  land  shall  be  granted  by  virtue  of 
this  act,  and  who  are  entitled  thereto  by  any 
act  or  resolution  of  Congress,  shall  make  an 
assignment  of  his  or  her  proportion  and 
claim  of  bounty  or  gratuity  lands  under  any 
act  or  acts  of  Congress,  to  the  Surveyor- 
General,  for  the  use  of  the  people  of  this 
State." 

Following  this  action  on  the  part  of  the 
grantees  referred  to  in  the  last  paragraph, 
it  was  provided  that  for  all  lands  thus  as- 
signed to  the  State,  an  equal  number  of 
acres  should  be  given  them  by  the  State, 
and  so  far  as  possible  in  one  tract  and  under 
one  patent,  "provided  the  same  does  not 
e.xceed  one- fourth  of  the  quantity  of  a  town- 


Previous  to  County  Organization'. 


51 


ship."  This  arrangement  was  made  for  the 
benefit  of  those  holding  claims  to  land  in 
the  State  of  Ohio,  in  a  tract  set  apart  by 
Congress  for  the  satisfying  of  claims  by  per- 
sons who  had  served  in  the  Re\olutionary 
War,  entitling  them  to  one  hundred  acres 
each.  They  were  thus  enabled  to  secure 
their  entire  claim  of  si.\-  hundred  acres  in 
one  tract.  But  if  a  person  neglected  to  re- 
linquish his  claim  to  the  one  hunclred  acres 
in  Ohio,  the  sixth  part  of  what  his  patent 
called  for  reverted  to  the  State,  giving  rise 
to  the  term,  "State's  Hundred."  Eight 
dollars  (48  shillings)  were  taxed  each  pat- 
entee as  a  survey  fee,  in  case  of  the  non- 
payment of  which  fifty  acres  of  his  land  re- 
verted to  the  State  ;  hence  arose  the  term 
"Survey  Fifty." 

A  further  provision  obligated  the  grantees 
of  such  lands  to  make  actual  settlement 
upon  each  si.x  hundred  acres  "that  may  be 
granted  to  any  person  or  persons,  within 
seven  years  from  the  first  of  January  next 
after  the  date  of  the  patent  b}-  which  such 
lands  shall  be  granted  ;  and  on  failure  of 
such  settlement,  the  unsettled  lands  shall 
re\-ert  to  the  people  of  the  State." 

An  exception  and  reservation  was  made 
to  the  people  of  the  State  of  all  the  "  gold 
and  silver  mines"  in  the  lands  granted. 

The  Indian  title  to  the  lands  embraced 
in  the  Military  Tract  was  extinguished  at 
the  treaty  of  Fort  Stanwix,  on  the  12th  of 
September,  1788. 

The  act  of  February,  1789,  provided  that 
six  lots  in  each  township  should  be  reserved 
and  assigned,  one  for  promoting  the  spirit 
of  the  Gospel  and  for  public  schools  ;  one 
for  promoting  the  spread  of  literature  in  the 
State,  and  the  other  four  to  satisfy  the  sur- 
plus share  of  commissioned  officers  not  cor- 
responding with  the  divisions  of  six  hun- 
dred acres  and  to  compensate  such  persons 
as  might  draw  any  lot  or  lots  parts  of  which 
were  under  water. 


At  the  time  under  consideration  the  Land 
Commissioners  consisted  of  the  Governor 
(or  the  person  administering  the  State  gov- 
ernment for  the  time  being),  the  Lieutenant- 
Governor,  the  Speaker  of  the  Assembly, 
Secretary  of  State,  Attorney  General,  the 
Treasurer  and  Auditor,  the  presence  of  three 
being  necessary  for  the  transaction  of  busi- 
ness. These  Commissioners  held  a  meeting 
in  the  office  of  the  Secretary  of  State  on 
the  3d  of  July,  1790;  there  were  present 
His  Excellency  George  Clinton,  Governor; 
Lewis  A.  Scott,  Secretary;  Gerard  Banker, 
Treasurer;  Peter  T.  Curtenius,  Auditor. 
Maps  of  the  surveys  of  twenty-six  townships, 
as  made  by  the  Surveyor- General,  were  laid 
before  the  Commissioners.  The  townships 
were  respectively  subdivided  into  one  hun- 
dred lots  as  nearly  square  as  possible,  each 
lot  containing  si.x  hundred  acres.  The  Com- 
missioners then  caused  the  townships  and 
the  lots  to  be  numbered  according  to  law, 
as  we  have  indicated  it,  and  designated  them 
by  the  names  of  famous  men  as  follows:  — 

1.  Lysander.  14.  Tully. 

2.  Hannibal.  15.  Fabius. 

3.  Cato.  16.  Ovid. 

4.  Brutus.  17.  Milton. 

5.  Camillus.  18.  Locke. 

6.  Cicero.  19.  Homer. 
■    7.  Manlius.                  20.  Solon. 

8.  Aurelius.  21.  Hector. 

9.  Marcellus.  22.  Ulysses. 

10.  Pompey.  23.  Dryden. 

11.  Romulus.  24.  Virgil. 

12.  Scipio.  25.  Cincinnatus. 

13.  Sempronius.  26.  Junius. 

This  tract  contained  600,000  acres  and 
embraced  within  its  limits  the  present 
counties  of  Onondaga,  Cortland,  Cayuga, 
Tompkins  and  Seneca,  with  portions  of 
Oswego  and  Wayne.  Cortland,  as  at  pres- 
ent bounded,  was  situated  in  the  southeast- 
ern corner  of  the  tract.  The  townships,  as 
surveyed,    should   not  be  confounded  with 


52 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


what  is  now  known  as  a  town.  In  early 
years  a  township  often  embraced  several 
towns.  I  lomer  township  included  the  pres- 
ent towns  of  Homer  and  Cortland  ;  Virgil 
embraced  the  towns  of  Virgil,  Harford  and 
Lapeer;  Cincinnatus  included  the  present 
towns  of  Cincinnatus,  Marathon,  Freetown  j 
and  Willet ;  Solon  included  the  present 
towns  of  Solon  and  Taylor ;  and  Preble 
contained  the  towns  of  Preble  and  Scott. 
As  settlement  advanced  the  extensive  towns 
of  pioneer  times  were  divided  and  subdi- 
vided, for  the  more  convenient  transaction 
of  the  increasing  public  business. 

On  the  first  of  January,  1791,  the  com- 
missioners met  and  proceeded  under  the 
laws  to  determine  by  ballot  who  were  en- 
titled to  claim  the  lands.  Ninety-four  per- 
sons drew  lots  in  each  township,  and  lots 
were  also  drawn  for  the  Gospel,  for  litera- 
ture, etc.,  as  before  indicated. 

In  August,  1792,  the  Commissioners, 
acting  under  a  provision  for  grants  of  lands 
to  the  hospital  department  and  others, 
caused  the  survey  and  numbering  of  town- 
ship 27,  which  was  given  the  name  of 
Galen. 

In  January,  1795,  there  being  several 
unsatisfied  claims  for  military  bounty  or 
gratuity  lands,  and  the  twenty-seven  town- 
ships being  disposed  of,  the  Commissioners 
resolved  that  the  Sur\'e}-or-General  should 
lay  out  still  another  township,  as  number 
28.  This  was  afterwards  named  Sterling, 
and  sufficed  to  satisfy  all  remaining  claims. 

Many  frauds  were  perpetrated  in  con- 
nection with  the  titles  to  these  military 
claims,  to  prevent  which  an  act  was  passed 
in  January,  1794,  requiring  all  deeds  and 
conveyances  made  and  executed  prior  to 
that  time  to  be  deposited  with  the  Clerk  of 
Albany  county  for  examination,  and  all 
such  as  were  not  so  deposited  should  be 
considered  as  fraudulent.  Claimants'  names 
were   posted   in   alphabetical  order   in    the 


clerks'  offices  at  Albany  and  Herkimer,  for 
the  full  inspection  of  all  who  were  inter- 
ested. 

The  numerous  contested  claims  filled  the 
courts  with  \exatious  litigation,  almost 
every  lot  causing  trouble  of  this  nature. 
Squatters  settled  on  the  soldiers'  honest 
claims  and  it  was  found  difficult  and  ex- 
pensive to  eject  them  by  process  of  law. 
Land  sharks  possessed  themselves  of  con- 
veyances bearing  anterior  dates  to  those 
held  by  honest  purchasers,  who  were  sub- 
jected to  threats  of  violence  or  long  perse- 
cution in  the  courts,  if  they  did  not  abandon 
their  justly  acquired  property.  Not  seldom 
these  land  pirates  were  successful  in  their 
schemes ;  but  on  some  occasions  they  en- 
countered old  soldiers  who  showed  a  dispo- 
sition to  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands 
for  the  protection  of  their  rights ;  men  who 
had  faced  the  foe  on  many  a  bloody  field, 
and  were  not  to  be  easily  driven  from  the 
lands  they  had  thus  earned.  Goodwin,  the 
author  of  the  Pioneer  History  of  Cortland 
County,  is  authorit)'  for  the  statement  that 
in  the  eastern  part  of  Cortland  dwelt  one 
of  these  veterans  whose  occupancy  of  a 
bounty  claim  did  not  accord  with  the 
notions  of  justice  entertained  by  a  land 
pirate.  The  old  soldier  "was  an  associate 
with  the  chivalrous  sons  who  marched  to 
Quebec  when  winter's  awful  tempest  op- 
posed their  progress,  and  who  crossed  the 
ice-choked  Delaware,  regardless  of  chilling 
winds  and  angry  waves ;  again  defying  the 
rage  of  battle  beneath  the  burning  sun  at 
Monmouth  —  kindred  spirits  to  those  who 
fought  at  Lexington,  Concord  and   Bunker 

Hill After  locating  on  his  lot,  and 

at  a  time  when  hope  painted  to  his  eager 
vision  long  years  of  future  happiness,  he 
was  called  upon  by  one  of  these  gentlemen 
Shylocks,  who  informed  him  that  he  held  a 
conveyance  of  his  lot,  and  that  he  was  the 
only  legal  owner,  and  gave  him  a  very  po- 


Previous  to  County  Organization. 


S3 


lite  invitation  to  evacuate  his  possessions. 
But  the  stern  old  patriot  —  the  hero  of 
many  battles,  and  who  carried  on  his  per- 
son the  certificates  of  his  valor  —  was  not 
thus  hastily  to  be  ejected  from  his  revolu- 
tionary inheritance.  The  fire  that  once 
glowed  so  brightly  in  the  old  man's  eyes 
on  the  field  of  battle  was  rekindled,  and  he 
would  sooner  have  fallen  a  martyr  to  justice 
and  right,  than  have  obsequiously  acqui- 
esced in  the  mandate  of  his  ungallant  op- 
pressor. The  conveyance  was  at  length 
laid  open  and  examined  and  found  to  bear 
a  date  prior  to  his  own.  In  short,  it  was 
a  forgery.  When  the  defrauder  found  that 
the  stern,  heroic  warrior  would  not  j'ield  to 
his  demand,  he  threatened  him  with  the 
terrors  of  law  and  the  cost  of  an  ejectment 
suit.  This,  however,  only  caused  a  smile 
to  play  over  the  face  of  the  worthy  pioneer 

of  civilization He  knew   that   his 

possessions  were  legally  bequeathed  to  him, 
as  a  comparatively  small  gift  for  the  sacri- 
fices he  had  made  in  the  cause  of  human 
emancipation  ;  and  to  be  thus  deprived  of 
a  home  which  he  had  purchased  with  sac- 
rifices and  blood,  would  not  comport  with 
the  principle  for  which  he  had  contended, 
and  he  spurned  the  intruder  from  his  pres- 
ence." 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  historian 
did  not  give  us  the  name  of  this  successful 
veteran.  The  act  of  1794,  before  alluded 
to,  while  undoubtedly  checking  the  frauds 
and  greatly  facilitating  the  settlement  of 
claims,  did  not  entirely  dispose  of  the  liti- 
gated disputes  and  contentions.  Finally, 
in  the  year  1797,  the  dwellers  on  the  great 
Military  Tract  wearied  of  the  continued 
struggle  for  their  rights  and  unanimousl}- 
united  in  petitioning  the  State  Legislature 
to  pass  a  law  authorizing  measures  for  the 
speedy  and  equitable  adjustment  of  all  dis- 
putes relating  to  their  land  titles.  An  act 
was  accordingly  passed,  appointing  Robert 


Yates,  James  Kent  and  Vincent  Mathews 
a  Board  of  Commissioners,  with  full  powers 
"to  hear,  examine,  award  and  determine 
all  disputes  respecting  the  titles  to  any  and 
all  the  military  bounty  lands."  The  Gov- 
ernor was  authorized  to  fill  all  vacancies  in 
this  Board. 

The  Commissioners  vigorously  began 
and  prosecuted  their  task.  Most  of  the 
awards  of  1798-99  are  signed  by  Vincent 
Mathews  and  James  Emmott ;  later  ones 
by  Vincent  Mathews  and  Robert  Yates, 
and  some  in  iSoi-02  by  Vincent  Mathews, 
James  Emmott  and  Sanders  Livijigston. 
After  a  long  period  of  vexatious  labor,  all 
the  disputed  claims  were  passed  upon  and 
the  inhabitaats  of  the  Military  Tract  have 
since  rested  in  security  and  peace. 

Following  is  a  complete  list  of  all  the 
original  townships  of  the  Military  Tract, 
the  different  present  towns  which  have  been 
formed  from  them  and  the  counties  in  which 
they  are  situated  :  — 

No.  Township.  Present  Towns.  County. 

..  I.   Lysander.         Lysander  and  part  of  Granby,  Onondaga 

Oswego 

2.  Hannibal.         Town  and  west  part  of  the  city  of  Os- 

wego, Hannibal,  and  north  part  of 

Granby,  Oswego 

3.  Cato.  Victory  and  Ira,  north  part  of  Con- 

quest and  Cato,  CajTiga 

4-   Brutus.  Mentz  and  Brutus,  and  parts  of  Con- 

quest, Cato,  Montezuma,  Throop 
and  Sennet,  Cayuga 

5.  Camilhis.  Van  Buren  and  Elbridge,  and  p.art  of 

Camillus,  Onondaga 

6.  Cicero.  Clay  and  Cicero,  Onondaga 
.    7.   ManHus.           De   Witt  and  Manlius,   and    part  of 

SaHna,  Onondaga 

8.  .'Vurelius.  Fleming,  Auburn   city  and   Owasco, 

most  of  Throop  and  Sennet,  part  of 

.Aurelius,  and  one  lot  in  Montezuma,  Cayuga 

9.  Marcellus.         Skatieateles  and   .MarceHus,  parts  of 

Spaffbrd  and  Otisco,  Onondaga 

10.  Pompey.  Pompey,  most  of  Lafayette,  three  lots 

in  Otisco,  Onondaga 

11.  RomuUis  Romulus,  west  part  of  Fayette  and 

Varick,   and   four    lots    in    Seneca 

Falls,  Seneca 

12.  Scipio.  Scipio  and  Venice,  south  part  of  Led- 

y.trd,  5ve  lots  in  Niles,  and  a  small 
point  of  the  northwest  comer  of 
Moravia,  Cayug.a 

13.  Sempronius.     Moravia,    Sempronius    and    most  of 

Niles,  and  part  of  Spafford,  Onondaga 

14.  TuUy.  Tully,    south    part    of  Spafford,    and 

Otisco.  Scott  and  Preble,  Cortland 

M5.   Fabius.  .\nd  north  part  of  Tnixton  and  Cuylcr,      Onondaga 

Cortland 


54 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


No 

.  Township. 

Prf.sknt  Towns. 

COUNTY. 

No 

.  TowNSHir. 

Present  Towns. 

County. 

16. 

Ovid. 

Ovid,  Lodi  and  Covert, 

Seneca 

24. 

Virgil. 

Virgil,  most  of  Harford  and  Lapeer, 

■7- 

Milton. 

Genoa, 

and  Lansing, 

Cayuga 
Tompkins 

and  two  and  one-quarter  lots  in  Corl- 
landville,  and  one  lot  {20)  in  Free- 

18. 

Locke. 

Locke  and  Summer  Hill, 

Cayuga 

Utwn, 

Cortland 

and  (Iroton, 

Tompkins 

25- 

Cincinnatus. 

Freetown,  Cincinnatus,   and   most  of 

4-, J. 

Homer. 

Homer  and  most  of  Cortlandville, 

Cortland 

Marathon, 

Cortland 

20- 

Solon. 

Solon,  Taylor,  and  south  part 

.f  Tru.v- 

26. 

Junius, 

Jimius,    Tyre,    Waterloo,    and    north 

V 

ton  and  Cuyler, 

Cortland 

part  of  Seneca  Falls, 

Seneca 

21. 

Hector. 

Hector, 

Schuyler 

'-'7- 

(lalen. 

(Jalen  and  Savannah, 

Wayne 

22. 

Ulysses. 

Ulysses,  Enfield  and  Ithaca, 

Tompkins 

28. 

Sterling. 

Sterling,  and  east  part  of  Wolcott  and 

23- 

Dry  den. 

Nearly  the  whole  of  Dryden, 

Tompkins 

Hutler, 

Cayuga 

CHAPTER  VI. 


FORMATION  OF  THE  COUNTY. 

A  Division  of  Onondaga  County  Demanded  —  The  Petition  of  Southern  Residents  for  that  Object* —  Important 
Provisions  of  the  Law  Organizing  Cortland  County  —  Origin  of  Name  —  Changes  in  the  Townships  —  Organiz.ation 
of  the  Courts  —  First  County  Officers  —  Early  Political  Parties  —  Pioneers  of  the  County — Delays  in  Early  Settle- 
ment—  Comparative  D,ates  of  Other  Settlements  —  Routes  of  Incoming  Pioneers — Privations  of  Early  Settlers  — 
Winter  Travel  in  Olden  Times  —  The  First  Settlers  in  Cortland  County — Mrs.  Beebe's  Lonely  Life  in  the  Wilder- 
ness—  Settlements  in  the  Different  Towns  Previous  to  iSlo —  Population  at  that  Date  —  Opening  of  Early  Roads  - 
Turnpike  Road  Companies  —  Necessity  for  (Irist-Mills  —  'I'he  First  Churches  —  Early  Schools. 


AS  miglit  be  apprehended,  there  were  in- 
ternal causes,  originating  in  the  neces- 
sities of  the  inhabitants,  the  growth  of  set- 
tlements, the  con\-enicnt  transaction  of  busi- 
ness of  a  public  nature,  etc.,  which  led  to 
the  formation  of  Cortland  county  as  a  sep- 
arate civil  organization.  Some  of  the  prin- 
cipal of  these  causes  were  enumerated  in 
the  original  petition  to  the  Legislature  for 
the  division  of  Onondaga  county,  which 
read  as  follows  :  — 

"To  the  Honorable,  the  Legislature  of  the  State 
of  New  York  in  Senate  and  Assembly  con- 
vened :  The  Petition  of  the  Subscribers,  inhab- 
itants of  the  towns  of  Fabius,  Tully,  Solon, 
Homer,  Virgil,  and  Cincinnatu.s,  humbly  shew- 
eth  :  — 

"  Tliat  the  county  of  Onondaga  is  ninety-si.x 
miles  in  length,  and  at  an  average  breadth  of 
about  twenty-five  miles  ;  that  from  the  extreme 
of  the  southern  boundary  of  the  said  county  to 
tlie  court  house  is  sixty  miles,  —  which  operates 
greatly  to  the  inconvenience  of  many  of  your  pe- 
titioners in  giving  their  attendance  at  court.  That 
the  population  of  said  county  is  now  very  great,' 

1  The  population  of  Onondaga  county  in  1810  was  25,- 
987- 


and  is  daily  increasing,  which  renders  it  impossi- 
ble for  our  Court  of  Common  Pleas  and  (ieneral 
Sessions  of  the  Peace  to  transact  with  due  expedi- 
ency the  legal  business  of  said  county  ;  whereby 
the  suitors  of  said  courts  e.xperience  great  delay 
of  justice,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  your  petition- 
ers, is  equivalent  to  a  denial  of  justice.  That 
your  petitioners  humbly  conceive  that  a  division 
of  the  said  county  will  be  of  signal  advantage  to 
the  inhabitants  of  the  said  towns  of  Solon,  Fa- 
bius, Tully,  Homer,  Virgil,  and  Cincinnatus,  and 
also  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  part  of  said 
county. 

"  Your  petitioners,  tlierefore,  humbly  pray  tliat 
the  before-mentioned  towns  be  erected  into  a 
new  county  by  the  name  of  Courtlandt,  and  that 
there  be  three  Courts  of  Cotnmon  Pleas  and  Gen- 
eral Sessions  of  the  Peace  held  in  the  said  county 
as  follows,  viz. :  on  the  second  Tuesday  of  April, 
and  the  first  Tuesday  of  September  and  Decem- 
ber, in  every  year,  after  the  due  organization  of 
the  said  county. 

"And  your  petitioners  as  in  duty  bound  will 
ever  pray." 

This  petition  was  signed  by  seven  hun- 
dred and  forty-seven  of  the  prominent  resi- 
dents of  the  fi\e  towns  desiring  the  separa- 
tion.     On  the  4th   day  of  February,    i8o8, 


Formation  of  the  County. 


55 


the  petition  was  introduced  in  the  Senate  by 
the  Hon.  John  Ballard,  a  resident  of  Homer 
and  a  member  from  the  western  district.  It 
was  referred  to  a  committee  composed  of 
Messrs.  Ballard,  Buel  and  Yates.  On  the 
following  day  Mr.  Ballard  made  a  report  in 
favor  of  the  prayer  of  the  petitioners,  pre- 
senting at  the  same  time  a  bill  to  that  effect, 
which  was  thereupon  read  the  first  and  sec- 
ond times  and  referred  to  the  Committee  of 
the  Whole.  In  this  Committee  it  was  called 
up  on  the  8th,  when  it  was  ordered  to  be 
engrossed.  On  the  loth  it  was  read  for  the 
third  time  and  passed. 

It  was  sent  on  the  same  day  to  the  Assem- 
bly, read  and  referred  to  the  Committee  of 
the  Whole.  Here  it  met  with  considerable 
opposition,  as  important  measures  usually  do. 
The  northern  towns  of  Onondaga  count)' 
remonstrated  against  the  proposed  division 
of  the  county,  and  opposition  was  fostered 
among  the  people  to  such  an  extent  that  the 
Hon.  Joshua  Forman,  the  founder  of  Syra- 
cuse and  then  in  the  Assembl}-,  made  a  char- 
acteristically eloquent  and  forcible  speech 
against  the  measure.  But  it  was  all  without 
avail ;  Cortland  County  was  to  be,  and  it  was 
—  and  is.  The  bill  became  a  law  on  the  8th 
day  of  April,  1 8o8.  Following  are  the  more 
important  sections  of  the  law  which  gave 
this  count}-  a  place  among  the  civil  organ- 
izations of  the  State  : — 
"An    Act   to   Divide  the  County  of  Onondaga, 

passed  April  8th,  i8o8. 

"  I.  Be  it  enacted  by  the  people  of  the  State 
of  New  York,  represented  in  Senate  and  Assem- 
bly, that  all  that  part  of  the  county  of  Onondaga, 
to  wit :  Beginning  at  the  south  corner  of  the  town 
of  Cincinnatus,  and  thence  running  north  along 
the  east  line  of  the  towns  of  Cincinnatus,  Solon 
and  Fabius,  to  the  northeast  corner  of  lot  num- 
ber sixty,  in  said  town  of  Fabius  ;  thence  run- 
ning west  along  the  north  line  of  that  tier  of  lots, 
through  the  towns  of  Fabius  and  Tully,  to  the 
northwest  corner  of  lot  number  fifty-one,  in  said 
town  of  'I'ully ;  thence  south  along  the  east  line 
of  the  county  of  Cayuga,  to  the  southeast  corner 


of  the  towns  of  Virgil  and  Cincinnatus,  to  the 
place  of  beginning,  shall  be  one  separate  and  dis- 
tinct county,  and  shall  be  called  and  known  by 
the  name  of  Cortland. 

"II.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  the 
Courts  in  and  for  the  said  county  shall  be  held  at 
the  school  house  on  lot  number  forty-five  in  the 
town  of  Homer. 

"III.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  that  all  that 
part  of  the  town  of  Fabius  situated  in  the  county 
of  Cortland  shall  be  called  Truxton  ;  and  all  that 
part  of  the  town  of  Tully  in  said  county  of  Cort- 
land shall  be  called  Preble." 

Other  sections  of  the  Act  provided  that 
Cortland  county  should  have  one  Member 
of  Assembly ;  that  it  should  form  a  part  of 
the  Western  Senatorial  District  and  part  of 
the  Thirteenth  Congressional  District. 

The  passage  of  this  Act,  forming  as  it  did 
the  town  of  Preble  from  Tully,  and  Trux- 
ton from  Fabius,  gave  the  new  county  six 
townships  —  Virgil,  formed  from  Homer  in 
1804;  Cincinnatus,  formed  the  same  year 
from  Solon ;  Homer,  Solon,  Preble  and 
Truxton.  No  changes  were  made  in  the 
towns  during  the  first  decade  of  the  centurj'. 

The  Act  of  the  Legislature  erecting  the 
I  county  provided  for  the  holding  of  three 
courts  of  Common  Pleas  and  General  Ses- 
sions of  the  Peace  ;  they  were  to  be  held  on 
the  second  Tuesday  of  April,  and  the  first 
Tuesdays  of  September  and  December,  in 
every  year  after  the  due  organization  of  the 
county.  These  courts  were  to  have  "the 
same  jurisdiction,  powers  and  authorities  as 
the  courts  of  Common  Pleas  and  General 
\  Sessions  of  the  Peace  in  the  other  counties 
of  the  State  ha\-c  in  their  respective  coun- 
ties." Suits  previously  commenced,  how- 
ever, were  not  to  be  affected  so  as  to  work 
a  wrong  or  prejudice  to  any  of  the  parties ; 
nor  were  any  criminal  or  other  proceedings 
on  the  part  of  the  State  to  be  in  the  least 
affected  by  the  change  ;  on  the  contrary,  all 
such  civil  and  criminal  proceedings  were  to 
be  prosecuted  to  trial,  judgment  and  e.xecu- 


56 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


tion.  It  was  also  provided  that  the  courts 
of  the  new  county  should  "be  held  at  the 
school- house  on  lot  45,  in  the  town  of  Ho- 
mer." John  Keep  was  the  first  County 
Judge,  receiving  his  appointment  on  the  3d 
day  of  April,  18 10. 

As  before  stated,  Cortland  county  was 
made  a  part  of  the  Western  Senatorial  Dis- 
trict and  of  the  Thirteenth  Congressional 
District,  and  was  entided  to  one  Member 
of  Assembly  ;  this  latter  fact  continued  until 
1823,  when  two  Members,  Daniel  Sherwood 
and  John  Gillett  were  elected.  Ephraim 
Fish  was  the  first  Member,  elected  in  18 10, 
taking  his  seat  at  the  opening  of  the  33d 
session.  Further  first  officers  of  the  county 
were  John  Ballard,  County  Clerk,  appointed 
April  Sth,  1808;  succeeded  by  Reuben 
Washburn,  April  3d,  18 10.  Asahel  Minor, 
Sheriff,  April  Sth,  1808  ;  succeeded  by  Wm. 
Mallory  June  9th,  180S,  (by  appointment), 
and  Joshua  Ballard  April  3d,  18 10.  John 
McWhorter,  Surrogate,  appointed  April 
8th,  1808;  succeeded  by  Mead  Merrill, 
April  3d,   1810.1 

The  polidcal  parties  of  the  country  at  the 
time  under  consideration  were  the  Demo- 
cratic and  Federal ;  but  the  era  was  not  yet 
inaugurated  when  the  political  field  was  an- 
nually filled  with  the  hotly  engaged  con- 
testants of  later  days,  determined  to  show 
that  the  fate  of  the  country  depends  upon 
the  success  of  their  respective  parties. 

In  order  to  place  clearly  before  the  reader 
the  events  leading  to  the  formation  of  the 
county,  its  boundaries,  its  condition  at  the 
time  of  its  formation,  etc.,  necessary  to  a 
proper  understanding  of  its  detailed  history, 
we  have  anticipated  by  about  seventeen  years 
the  first  settlements  within  its  borders.  Let 
us  now  revert  to  the  history  of  that  period. 

The  pioneers  of  this  county  came,  in  the 
main,  from  New  England  —  brave,  hardy, 

1  For  county  officials  ,-ifter  1810,  see  civil  list  in  subse- 
quent pages. 


energetic,  persevering  Yankees.  While  it 
was  not  for  them  to  perform  great  and 
heroic  deeds,  in  the  common  understanding 
of  the  term,  they  nevertheless  participated 
in  events  about  their  own  hearthstones  and 
in  the  thick  forests  that  surrounded  their 
primitive  dwellings,  which  should  record 
their  names  on  the  imperishable  rolls  of 
honor  beside  those  of  men  who  have  mar- 
shaled armies  to  drench  with  blood  a  hun- 
dred battle-fields.  They  were  men  who 
must  have  lived  not  so  much  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  living,  as  for  the  future  good  that 
might  accrue  from  their  earthly  work. 
Many  of  them  had  taken  active  part  in  the 
stern  events  of  the  Revolution,  while  all  had 
felt  the  inspiring  influences  born  of  the 
knowledge  that  henceforth  they  and  their 
country  would  be  free;  and  they  came  into 
the  wilderness  full  of  rugged  enthusiasm 
and  an  unflinching  determination  to  create 
peaceful  and  permanent  homes  for  them- 
selves and  their  posterity. 

Settlement  in  Cortland  county  was  de- 
layed beyond  that  of  most  other  sections  of 
this  State.  The  Indian  title  to  the  rich 
garden  of  the  Genesee  country  was  extin- 
guished before  the  Military  Tract  was  ceded 
to  the  State,  and  it  lay  on  the  great  thor- 
oughfare from  the  populated  country  farther 
east.  The  Phelps  and  Gorham  purchase, 
through  the  energy  of  its  owners  and  east- 
ern agents,  was  rapidly  settled  at  an  early 
date,  about  fifty  townships  having  been  sold 
by  the  year  1790;  while  the  central  por- 
tions of  the  State,  hilly  and  covered  with  a 
heavy  growth  of  timber,  was  looked  upon 
with  little  favor  by  prospective  pioneers. 
Hence,  it  was  not  until  the  fall  of  1791  that 
a  permanent  white  settler  began  his  home 
in  this  county,  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiough- 
nioga  river.  At  that  date  the  valleys  of  the 
Susquehanna  and  Chenango  rivers  had  been 
settled  to  some  e.xtent  for  more  than  five 
years.     The  site  of  Binghamton  had  been 


Formation  of  the  County. 


57 


occupied  two  years.  Onondaga  valley  had 
been  settled  about  five  years.  Salt  had 
been  manufactured  at  Salina  for  three  years. 
Norwich  had  been  settled  three  years  ;  Ith- 
aca two  years.  Oxford,  Chenango  county, 
was  settled  in  1790,  and  mills  had  been 
erected  at  Rochester  in  17S8. 

The  pioneers  of  this  count}-,  or  a  large 
majority  of  them,  came  in  either  by  way  of 
the  Susquehanna,  the  Chenango,  and  the 
Tioughnioga,  from  the  south  and  east;  or 
southward  from  Manlius  through  Truxton, 
and  later  from  Onondaga  Vallc)-.  The  In- 
dian trails  were  followed,  where  practicable, 
until  State  roads  were  opened,  and  many 
of  the  limited  domestic  outfits  of  the  early 
settlers  were  brought  up  the  Tioughnioga 
in  canoes.  Journeys  of  hundreds  of  miles, 
from  Massachusetts  and  other  Eastern 
States,  were  made  in  what  were  then  called 
"  Connecticut  covered  wagons,"  which  toiled 
onward  through  the  wilderness  day  after 
day,  the  pioneer  and  his  family  sleeping  in 
or  beside  them  at  night.  The  forests  were 
peopled  with  innumerable  deer,  so  that  the 
pioneer  seldom  wanted  for  excellent  meat ; 
but  often  when  the  journey  was  unexpect- 
edly prolonged,  the  little  store  of  supplies 
was  exhausted,  and  the  travelers  were  forced 
to  depend  upon  roots  to  keep  away  the 
wolf  of  hunger.^  Many  of  the  pioneers  had 
never  seen  an  Indian ;  but  the  greater  part 
of  them  had  read  or  heard  of  their  bloody 
deeds  on  the  border,  and  met  them  for  the 
first  time  with  much  trepidation.  In  almost 
every  instance,  however,  the  settlers  were 
kindly  received,  and  were  often  placed 
under  obligations  almost  for  life   itself,  to 

1  An  old  lady  relating  to  us  the  hardships  through 
which  they  had  passed,  remarked  that,  "had  it  not  been 
for  the  deer  that  roamed  at  large,  they  should  have  suf- 
fered still  more  severely,  and  perhaps  unto  death,  as  roots 
and  venison  were  their  only  food  for  many  a  long  and 
gloomy  day;"  and  the  tears  came  in  the  eyes  of  this 
sainted  mother  of  Israel  as  she  told  her  tale  of  privation, 
suffering  and  sorrow.  —  Goodwin's  Pioneer  History  of 
Cortland  County. 


the  generous  and  faithful -deeds  of  the  red 
men. 

Many  of  the  early  settlers  came  into  the 
county  in  the  winter  season,  and  often  suf- 
fered severe  hardships.  Deep  snows  buried 
the  indefinite  trails  from  sight,  and  made 
progress  throiigh  the  forests  exceedingly 
slow.  But  three  miles  a  day  were  traveled 
at  times  for  days  together  ;  and  when  these 
unusual  delays  caused  a  scarcity  of  food,  as 
just  alluded  to,  the  situation  of  the  pioneer, 
in  the  midst  of  a  snow-covered  forest,  with 
wife  and  children  looking  to  him  for  care 
and  sustenance,  was  not  an  enviable  one. 

In  the  }'ear  1789  Amos  Todd  and  Joseph 
Beebe  left  their  homes  in  New  Haven, 
Conn.,  and  journeyed  through  the  wilder- 
ness to  Windsor,  in  Broome  county.  Thej' 
were  brothers-in-law,  Mr.  Beebe  having 
married  the  sister  of  Mr.  Todd,  and  she 
shared  the  fortune  of  her  husband  and 
brother  in  their  new  and  primitive  home. 
Two  years  after  their  settlement  in  Wind- 
sor they  became  convinced  that  the  valley 
of  the  Tioughnioga  held  out  greater  induce- 
ments for  them  than  were  offered  in  their 
present  locality ;  they  accordingly  deter- 
mined to  penetrate  still  further  into  the  wil- 
derness. After  a  tedious  journey,  accom- 
panied by  the  usual  toil  and  hardship,  they 
reached  a  point  on  or  near  the  site  of  Ho- 
mer village,  where  they  erected  the  first 
rude  dwelling  constructed  by  white  men 
within  the  limits  of  this  county.  These 
three  pioneers  reached  their  destination  in 
the  fall,  and  immediately  built  their  house, 
which  stood  near  the  bridge  on  Main  street, 
just  north  of  Homer  village.  The  dwell- 
ing was  built  mainly  "of  poles,  twelve  by 
fifteen  feet."  During  the  following  winter 
the  two  men  returned  to  Windsor  for  the 
remainder  of  their  household  goods  which 
had  been  left  behind.  Instead  of  making 
the  journey  as  anticipated,  the)-  were  snow 
bound  for  six  weeks,   leaving  Mrs.   Beebe 


58 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


alone  in  the  wilderness,  her  only  compan- 
ions the  howling  wolves  and  other  beasts 
of  the  forest.  But  her  remarkable  bra\er\- 
and  hopeful  patience  sustained  her  through 
the  long  period  of  loneliness  and  anxiety  as 
to  the  fate  of  all  that  was  dearest  to  her. 
It  was  an  example  of  womanly  heroism  of 
which  there  are  few  parallels.' 

The  two  men  packed  their  goods  in  a 
canoe,  and  at  the  earliest  possible  moment 
started  towards  the  waiting  wife  and  sister. 
At  Binghamton  they  were  joined  by  John 
Miller,  a  native  of  New  Jersey,  and  in  due 
time  reached  the  loneh-  woman.  Mr.  Mil- 
ler explored  the  East  river  section,  and 
then  returned  southward.  In  the  spring  he 
came  into  the  county  accompanied  by  John 
House,  James  Matthews,  James  Moore, 
Silas  and  Daniel  Miller.  All  of  the.se  men 
located  near  the  site  of  Homer  village,  Mr. 
Miller  on  lot  56,  (now  in  Cortlandville) ; 
Messrs.  Beebe  and  Todd  subsequently  set- 
tled on  lot  42.  Darius  Kinney  came  to 
Homer  in  1793,  and  other  settlers  in  that 
vicinity  rapidly  followed,  more  particular 
records  of  which  will  be  found  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  town  of  Homer.  In  1797  Ho- 
mer contained  but  ninety-two  inhabitants. 

In  the  year  1792  Joseph  Chaplin  came 
into  the  town  of  Virgil  and  made  the  first 
permanent  settlement  ;  he  located  on  lot 
50  and  two  years  later  moved  on  his  family. 
He  explored  and  surveyed  the  State  Road 
from  Oxford,  Chenango  county  to  the  Cay- 
uga lake  during  the  first  season,  afterw.ard 
employing  assistants  and  fulfilling  his  con- 
tract for  the  construction  of  the  road.  It 
was  completed  in  1793-94;  after  which  he 
brought  in  his  family.  About  the  same 
time  a  road  was  surveyed  and  partially  cut 
through  the  wilderness  from  the  south,  near 
the  river,  until  near  the  present  site  of  Mar- 

'  A  more  detailed  account  of  this  event,  and  one  that 
sheds  some  new  light  upon  it,  will  be  fmind  in  the  hi-- 
lory  of  the  town  of  Homer. 


athon  village,  when,  diverging  from  the 
stream,  it  crossed  the  south  line  of  lot  nimi- 
ber  72,  about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  east  of 
the  village  of  Marathon,  and,  continuing  in 
a  northerly  direction,  intersected  the  State 
road  on  lot  42  in  Freetown  and  so  passed 
on  northward  through  the  county  to  the 
Salina  salt  works,  gi\'ing  it  the  name  of  "the 
Salt  Road."  These  two  roads  were  the 
first  in  the  county  that  were  worthy  of 
being  called  roads. 

The  next  settlers  came  into  \'irgil  in 
1795,  after  which  time,  as  will  be  learned 
in  the  history  of  that  town,  settlement  was 
made  from  year  to  year,  though  not  so 
rapidly  as  in  some  other  portions  of  the 
county. 

Ezra  Rockwell  and  his  sons,  Thomas  and 
Ezra,  jr.,  came  into  the  present  town  of 
Taylor  in  1793;  they  were  from  Leno.x, 
Mass.,  and  settled  on  lot  78,  a  bounty  for 
the  father's  services  in  the  Revolution. 
Two  years  later  (1795)  Thomas  Rockwell 
removed  to  Cincinnatus,  occupying  lots  9 
and  19,  the  latter  including  the  site  of  Cin- 
cinnatus village.  Settlements  in  Taylor 
were  few  until  after  i8io. 

The  first  actual  settlers  of  the  town  of 
Marathon  were  Dr.  Japheth  Hunt  and  wife, 
then  aged  people,  two  sons,  James  and  Wil- 
liam, and  three  daughters,  Betsey,  Nancy 
and  Hannah.  The  family  came  up  the 
Tioughnioga  in  canoes  in  the  year  1794, 
and  located  about  a  mile  south  of  the  site 
of  the  village.  Settlements  had  progressed 
but  to  a  limited  extent  by  1 8 10.  In  the 
same  year  (1794)  Nathaniel  Potter,  Jonah 
Stiles,  Christopher  Whitney,  David  Morse 
and  Benjamin  Brown  located  in  the  town 
of  Truxton,  and  a  large  number  of  settlers 
had  located  in  the  town  by  18 10.  Settle- 
ment within  the  present  limits  of  Cincinna- 
tus was  begun  in  1795,  about  which  time 
John  Kingman,  Thaddeus  Rockwell  Zurial 
Raymond,  Dr.  John  McWhorter,  and  Sam- 


Formation  of  the  County. 


59 


uel  Vining  came  in.  By  the  year  iSiO  set-  | 
tlement  in  this  town  had  ad\anced  so  that 
the  population  was  about  1,500.  Solon  was 
first  settled  in  1 794,  by  Roderick  Beebe  and 
Johnson  Bingham,  the  former  locating  on 
lot  75,  a  portion  of  which  has  since  been 
called  Mt.  Roderick  ;.  he  was  from  Massa- 
chusetts and  Mr.  Bingham  from  Connecti- 
cut. During  the  succeeding  five  or  six 
years  settlement  in  this  town  progressed 
slowly. 

In  1794  the  first  of  those  energetic  men 
—  men  of  brain  as  well  as  muscle  —  who 
laid  the  foundation  for  the  present  prosper- 
ity of   the   town   of  Cortlandville,    made   a 

1 
settlement  near  the  site  of  the  present  thriv-  j 

ing  village.  Jonathan  Hubbard  and  Moses 
Hopkins  both  came  that  year,  the  former  | 
becoming  the  owner  of  the  greater  part  of 
the  land  on  which  the  village  now  stands,  1 
and  the  latter  locating  on  lot  64,  just  west 
of  the  village.  They  came  in  by  way  of 
Cazenovia  and  Truxton.  Several  accessions 
were  made  in  the  settlement  during  the 
years  1796  and  '97,  and  from  that  time  to 
1810  pioneers  came  in  rapid!)-,  attracted  by 
the  natural  features  of  the  spot  and  in  a 
greater  degree,  doubtless,  by  the  influence 
of  their  predecessors.  By  the  year  18 10 
the  nucleus  of  a  village  was  established, 
while  a  settlement  of  still  greater  activity 
existed  at  Port  Watson.  The  lands  in  that 
vicinity  had  passed  into  possession  of  a  few 
eastern  men,  the  principal  one  of  whom 
seems  to  have  been  Elkanah  Watson,  whose 
name  appears  in  the  records  of  the  County 
Clerk's  office  with  wonderful  frequency  from 
the  year  1800  through  the  succeeding  twelve 
or  fifteen  years,  as  the  seller  of  lots  in  the 
\illage  of  Port  \\'atson.  Watson's  home  is 
given  as  in  "Albany  county  (now  Pittsfield), 
Massachusetts."  Many  of  his  sales  were 
made  by  attorney,  and  will  be  more  partic- 
ularly referred  to  in  the  history  of  the  town, 
in  a  subsequent  chapter. 


Settlement  was  begun  in  Freetown  in 
1795  and  in  Preble  in  the  next  year;  the 
former  town  by  Ensign  Rice,  who  settled 
on  lot  No  2,  which  was  drawn  by  Robert 
Smith,  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  Rice 
was  a  son-in-law  of  Smith  and  the  latter 
also  settled  on  the  lot  in  1800.  James 
Cravath  and  John  Gill  were  the  first  settlers 
in  Preble,  the  former  removing  from  Pompey 
Hill,  whither  he  had  migrated  from  Con- 
necticut; he  located  on  lot  68  and  Gill  on 
lot  -jQ. 

In  the  \ear  1797^  Ebenezer  Crittenden 
settled  within  the  present  town  of  Willet. 
He  came  from  Barrington,  Mass.,  married 
a  wife  in  Binghamton,  and,  with  their  child, 
he  pushed  a  canoe  containing  his  family  and 
household  goods  up  the  river  to  the  chosen 
spot  for  their  pioneer  home.  About  twenty 
families  had   located   in  the  town  b\-  18 10. 

The  town  of  Scott  was  settled  in  1799; 
Lapeer  in  1802  and  Harford  in  1803.  In 
the  latter  but  few   families  had    arrived   b}' 

1  Our  authority  for  the  date  given  above  is  Goodwin's 
History.  French's  Gazetteer  gives  tlie  date  of  Critten- 
den's arrival  as  1793;  but  it  is  probable  that  this  is  in- 
correct. In  this  connection  the  following  statement  from 
Elder  S.  G.  Jones,  of  Virgil,  who  formerly  lived  there,  is 
important.  He  says :  "  Do  not  make  the  mistake  of 
crediting  Ebenezer  Crittenden  with  being  the  first  settler 
of  the  old  town  of  Cincinnatus  (including  Freetown,  Mar- 
athon and  Willet. )  Elnathan  Baker  was  the  first  settler 
and  located  on  the  east  side  of  the  Otselic,  a  mile  and  a 
half  north  of  Dyer  Hill.  I  .saw  his  son  fifty  years  ago 
—  the  Rev.  Elnathan  Baker.  We  visited  thesite  of  his 
father's  log  hut ;  it  was  then  grow  n  up  with  trees  six  to 
ten  inches  through.  He  said  that  the  only  white  man  he 
saw  while  they  lived  there  was  Dr.  McWhorter.  A 
young  Irishman  came  to  their  cabin  one  day  and  reported 
that  his  father  had  been  shot  by  an  Indian  ;  the  bullet 
being  lodged  in  his  thigh.  Dr.  McWhorter  extracted  the 
ball,  and  after  the  wounded  man's  recovery  he  and  his 
son  went  down  the  Otselic  and  the  Susquehanna  to  their 
home.  It  was  reported  that  he  was  shot  in  after  years 
by  the  same  Indian.  North  of  the  cabin  of  Mr.  Baker 
was  what  was  known  fifty-eight  years  ago,  as  the  "  Indian 
orchard,"  comprising  some  fifty  trees.  The  younger 
Baker  says  his  father  planted  the  seeds  from  which  this 
orchard  grew,  and  he  saw  the  work  done;  the  trees  were 
growing  when  they  left  the  locality,  which  was  «  hen  he 
was  ten  years  old.     He  died  in  Luzerne  county,  I'a. 


6o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1810.  Peter  Gray,  a  native  of  Fishkill, 
Duchess  county,  was  the  first  white  settler 
in  Lapeer,'  locating  on  lot  70.  Peleg  Bab- 
cock,  with  his  brothers,  Solomon  and  Asa 
Howard,  came  into  the  town  of  Scott  in 
'799.  from  Leyden,  Mass.  The  former  lo- 
cated on  lot  82,  with  Solomon  and  Asa  H. 
beside  him  on  the  same  lot.  Settlement 
in  this  town  was  slow,  until  later  than  18 10. 
"The  population  of  the  towns  that  had 
come  into  existence  by  the  year  18 10  as 
shown  b\-  the  census  report  was  as  follows : 

Homer, 2,975 

Solon, 1 ,263 

Virgil, 906 

Cincinnatus, 1,525 

Preble 1 , 1 79 

Tru.xton, i  ,03  i 

In  the  portion  of  this  work  which  is  to  be 
devoted  to  a  general  review  of  the  history 
of  the  county,  it  is  unnecessary  to  follow 
farther  the  course  of  settlement  in  the  differ- 
ent towns,  as  those  matters  will  be  treated 
in  full  detail  in  subsequent  chapters  The 
reader  has  learned  in  the  foregoing  few- 
pages  that,  during  the  first  decade  of  the 
present  century,  settlement  by  white  people 
had  become  firmly  established  in  nearly  all 
sections  of  the  county,  while  in  the  more 
favored  Iccalities  it  had  progressed  rapidly, 
with  assurances  of  still  faster  growth  in  the 
immediate  future.  Lots  in  many  sections 
had  already  been  cut  into  smaller  farms  and 
were  changing  hands  at  gradually  advanc- 
ing prices.  While  the  primeval  forest  still 
covered  a  large  portion  of  the  county,  still 
the  settlers,  who  had  occupied  their  farms 
for  periods  ranging  from  ten  to  fifteen  years, 
cleared  acre  after  acre  and,  hampered  as 
the}'  were  by  numerous  obstacles  and  trying 
circumstances  which  would  in  these  days 
appear  insurmountable,  were  rapidly  plac- 

1  Primus  Grant,  a  colored  man,  purchased  lot  594  and 
settled  thereon  in  1799.  He  died  on  his  farm  and  was 
buried  l)y  the  side  of  the  "  liig  brook." 


ing  their  cleared  lands  luidcr  a  state  of  cul- 
tivation. 

The  principal  difficulty  with  which  the 
pioneer  had  to  contend  was  the  absence  of 
roads,  mills  and  markets.  The  first  author- 
ized road  in  the  county  was  the  old  State 
Road  before  alluded  to  as  having  been 
opened  by  Joseph  Chaplin  '  and  finished  as 
far  as  his  contract  went,  in  1794.  This  road 
extended  from  Oxford,  Chenango  county, 
to  Ludlowville,  on  the  eastern  shore  of  Ca- 
yuga lake,  a  distance  of  about  sixty  miles. 
Coming  into  this  county  in  the  southeastern 
part,  it  passed  through  Willet,  thence  along 
the  north  line  of  the  present  tow  n  of  Mar- 
athon and  through  Virgil. 

At  this  time  several  roads  had  been 
opened  through  the  northern  part  of  what 
is  now  Onondaga  county,  and,  in  1796,  $500 
was  appropriated  from  the  first  money  com- 
ing into  the  hands  of  the  Surveyor-General 
for  the  improvement  of  the  roads  of  the 
country.  What  the  final  result  of  this  ap- 
propriation was,  we  have  been  unable  to  de- 
termine. 

Within  a  few  years  after  the  opening  of 
the  State  Road,  and  before  1 800,  a  road  from 
Port  Watson  to  Solon  was  opened,  and 
about  the  same  time  numerous  short  inter- 
secting roads  were  laid  out  in  different  parts 
of  the  county.  The  main  road  from  Cort- 
land village  to  Virgil  was  opened   in  1806.- 

In  the  year  1 807  the  Salina  and  Che- 
nango Turnpike  Company  was  incorporated 
by  the   Legislature.     The    company  com- 

'  Mr.  Chaplin  was  drowned  a  few  years  later  in  the 
Hudson  river  at  Co.\sackie.   See  history  of  town  of  Virgil. 

-  "  At  this  period  (1800)  a  road  had  been  cut  through 
to  X'irgil  Corners,  to  intersect  the  State  Road.  Another 
had  l5een  cut  through  to  Locke  —  now  Groton  ;  a  third 
to  McGrawville  ;  a  fourth  to  Truxton,  and  a  fifth  to  Ho- 
mer."—  Goodwin.  It  is  probable  that  Mr.  Goodwin's 
statement  refers  merely  to  the  "  cutting  out  "  of  these 
roads,  or  a  portion  of  them  at  least,  and  not  to  their  being 
opened  and  worked.  The  late  Nathan  Bouton  gives  the 
date  of  the  o|)ening  of  the  road  from  Virgil  to  Cortland 
as  1806,  and  his  authority  on  the  subject  can  scarcely  be 
questioned. 


Formation  of  the  County. 


6i 


prised  Samuel  Coe,  Reuben  Cross,  Chaun- 
cey  Hyde,  Daniel  Hudson,  Elisha  Alvord, 
Joseph  Smith,  Samuel  Trowbridge,  Levi 
Bowen  and  John  Ballard.  Sev-eral  of  these 
men  were  residents  of  this  county.  The 
road  was  to  run  from  Salina,  through  On- 
ondaga Hollow  to  the  north  line  of  Tully ; 
thence  southerly  through  the  towns  of  Tully, 
Homer,  Virgil  and  Cincinnatus  to  Lisle,  and 
thence  to  Chenango  Point  (Binghamton.) 
There  were  6,000  shares  of  stock  put  in 
market,  at  $20  per  share. 

On  the  4th  of  April,  1 8  1 1 ,  a  road  was  au- 
thorized from  Manlius  to  intersect  the  turn- 
pike in  the  northeast  corner  of  lot  87,  in  the 
town  of  Truxton. 

June  2d,  18 1 2,  the  Cortland  and  Seneca 
Turnpike  Company  was  incorporated,  with 
Jonathan  Hubbard,  David  Jones  and  Parley 
Whitmore  as  corporators.  The  road  began 
at  the  house  of  Daniel  Miller  in  the  town  of 
Homer,  and  ran  thence  to  Ithaca.  The  cap- 
ital of  the  company  was  $25,000  divided 
into  shares  of  $20  each.  The  company  were 
authorized  to  erect  a  toll  gate  as  soon  as 
twelve  miles  of  the  road  were  finished.  This 
road  was  not  built,  probabl\%  until  after 
1 8 16,  as  in  that  year  the  charter  of  the  com- 
pany was  revived  by  the  Legislature. 

Much  of  the  business  of  the  Legislature 
from  1800  to  1820  was  in  connection  with 
the  incorporation  of  turnpike  companies  and 
other  road  matters  ;  and  in  1804  <i  Board  of 
Turnpike  Commissioners  was  appointed  by 
the  State,  whose  duty  it  was  to  inspect  the 
State  roads,  hear  complaints  relative  to  the 
highways,  and  kindred  duties.  Their  com- 
pensation was  two  dollars  per  day. 

During  the  period  under  consideration 
grist-mills  were  exceedingly  scarce  in  Cort- 
land county,  and,  indeed,  throughout  Central 
New  York  ;  the  nearest  to  most  of  the  set- 
tlers were  thirty  or  forty  miles  distant,  and 
several  of  the  earliest  years  of  settlement 
had  elapsed  before  there  were  any  even  at 


that  distance.  The  prevailing  substitute  for 
mill-stones  was  an  enormous  mortar  made 
by  digging  and  burning  a  hollow  in  the  top 
of  a  hickory  or  other  hard  wood  stump,  after 
the  manner  of  the  Indians.  Into  this  the 
corn  was  put  and  pounded  into  coarse  meal 
by  the  action  of  a  heavy  pestle  attached  to 
a  sweep  or  spring-pole.  This  primitive 
method  was  followed  even  after  mills  were 
built  at  Onondaga  Hollow,  Manlius,  Che- 
nango Forks  and  Ludlowville  ;  for  it  was  not 
always  that  a  journey  could  be  made  by  in- 
habitants of  Cortland  county  to  either  of 
those  distant  points  with  a  small  grist ;  they 
were  all  nearly  or  quite  forty  miles  distant 
for  most  of  the  settlers  of  the  county,  and 
more  than  that  for  many.  As  there  were 
no  roads,  the  trail  being  followed  by  marked 
trees,  with  often  considerable  streams  to 
ford,  the  grists  being  mostly  transported 
upon  "dra}-s,"i  or  carried  in  a  single  bag 
on  horseback,  it  will  be  readily  imagined 
that  "  going  to  mill"  was  not  the  light  task 
that  it  soon  afterward  became.'-  It  was, 
therefore,  a  source  of  great  relief  to  the  early 
settlers  of  this  county  when  Asa  White  and 
John  Keep,  of  Homer,  built  the  first  grist- 
mill   in  the  county,  at    Homer    village,  in 

1  The  "dray"  was  simply  a  large  crotched  limb  or 
tree,  across  which  were  nailed  a  few  boards ;  to  this  the 
horse  was  attached. 

2  Mr.  Orellana  Beebe,  of  Taylor,  informed  Mr.  Good- 
win that  he  was  compelled,  one  spring,  in  order  not  to 
neglect  other  necessary  work,  to  send  his  ten-year  old 
son  to  Genoa,  after  either  grain  or  flour.  The  boy 
mounted  the  horse  and  started  with  three  bags,  each  con- 
taining eight  pounds  of  maple  sugar,  which  would  pay 
for  three  bushels  of  wheat.  The  distance  was  forty 
miles,  and  the  road  a  line  of  blazed  trees.  Reaching  his 
destination  after  a  long  and  fatiguing  day,  the  httle  fel- 
low was  filled  with  grief  when  informed  by  'Squire  Brad- 
ley that  he  could  not  have  the  grain.  He  was  much  re- 
lieved, however,  when  the  kind  man  agreed  to  open  a 
barrel  of  flour  in  the  morning  and  give  him  the  value  of 
the  sugar  in  that.  With  his  precious  load  the  boy  reached 
the  residence  of  Judge  Bingham,  on  the  Salt  Road,  at 
nightfall,  where  he  was  kept  over  night,  and  at  ten  o'clock 
the  next  day  he  turned  the  flour  over  to  the  admiring 
father  and  mother.  Of  such  determined  character  were 
the  boys  of  that  day. 


62 


HiSTOUY    OF   CuRTI.ANI)    CuUNTV. 


1798,  which  was  followed  within  the  suc- 
ceeding two  or  three  years  by  that  of  Jona 
than  Hubbard,  on  the  west  branch  of  the 
river  and  now  within  the  corporation  of 
Cortland  \'illage.'  While  these  mills  were 
not  comparable  in  any  sense  to  what  is  con- 
sidered in  this  day  as  necessary  in  a  good 
flouring  mill,  they  were,  nevertheless,  a 
blessing  to  the  pioneers,  the  magnitude  of 
which  can  scarcely  be  appreciated.  Other 
mills,  both  grist  and  saw-mills, .succeeded 
each  other  in  diflerent  parts  of  the  count}', 
as  the  needs  of  the  inhabitants  demanded  — 
in  Virgil  in  1805  ;  in  Truxton  in  1809,  etc., 
as  hereafter  noted. 

Previous  to  the  beginning  of  the  century 
most  of  the  limited  supplies  of  groceries 
used  b}'  the  inhabitants  of  the  county  were 
procured  in  Manlius,  or  at  other  distant 
points  whither  it  was  necessary  to  go  to  get 
milling  done ;  but  it  must  not  be  supposed 
that"  groceries"  were  then  considered  the 
necessity  that  they  soon  became,  under  the 
advance  of  civilization.-  Maple  sugar  in 
any  quantity  the  settlers  could  make  on 
their  own  farms,  and  tea  and  coffee  were 
not  by  any  means  a  daily  beverage  with 
many  of  them  until  long  after  the  period 
under  consideration.  By  the  )'ear  18 10, 
however,  there  were  stores  in  the   little  vil- 

1  Jonathan  Huljbaid  must  have  had  an  interest  in 
the  Homer  (village)  mill  as  early  as  1800,  as  Mrs.  Hub- 
bard, of  Cortland,  possesses  an  article  of  agreement  dated 
June  23d,  iSoo,  made  between  Jonathan  Hubbard  (senior) 
and  Asa  White  of  the  first  part,  and  James  Turner  of  the 
second  part,  whereby  the  first  parties  lease  to  Turner  for 
the  sum  of  fifty  dollars,  "a  privilege  of  water  to  carry  a 
fulling  mill  at  their  mills  on  lot  number  45  in  Homer,  at 
all  times  when  it  does  not  damage  their  mills  now 
erected,"  etc. 

2  "The  early  pioneers  located  in  these  dense  forests 
erected  their  rude  unadorned  cabins,  hoping  for  the  sure 
rewards  of  industry,  perseverance  and  economy.  But 
they  were  often  subjected  to  great  inconvenience  and 
sufferipg,  for  the  want  of  the  necessary  articles  of  hus- 
bandry, and  also  those  of  subsistence.  We  have  been 
told  of  instances  of  whole  families  living  for  successive 
weeks  upon  turnips  and  salt ;  of  others  wlio  boiled  roots 
gathered  in  the  forest  and  ate  them  with  a  relish  thai  is  un- 


lages  of  Homer,  Cortland,  Port  Watson  and 
a  few  other  points  in  the  county,  which 
were  a  great  convenience  to  the  inhabitants 
and  will  be  found  further  noticed  in  the  sub- 
sequent town  histories. 

Religious  and  educational  matters  early 
commanded  the  attention  of  the  people  of 
this  county.  The  first  church  was  organ- 
ized in  the  town  of  Homer  as  early  as  180 1, 
and  religious  services  had  been  observed 
since  1793.'  In  June,  1807,  a  commodious 
house  of  worship  was  dedicated,  with  a  ser- 
mon, by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Darrow.  The  edifice 
stood  upon  the  site  now  occupied  by  the 
haudsome  brick  church  in  rear  of  the  "green  " 
in  Homer  village.  The  organization  of  a 
Baptist  church  was  effected'  through  the 
joint  labors  of  the  inhabitants  of  Cortland, 
Port  Watson,  on  the  East  river  and  in 
Homer,  in  the  same  year  (1801)  and  a  build- 
ing erected  in  181 1,  about  "  one- half  mile 
north  of  the  old  court-house."  A  Conere- 
gational  church  society  was  formed  in  Tully 
(now  Preble)  in  1804,  and  in  Virgil  in  the 
succeeding  year.  A  Methodist  meeting 
was  held  in  the  house  of  Jonathan  Hubbard 
in  Cortland  in  1804,  and  a  class  was  soon 
after  formed,  and  other  religious  organiza- 
tions rapidly  followed  the  march  of  settle- 
ment in  other  and  more  remote  portions  of 

known  to  the  epicurean  lords  of  the  present  day.  To  them 
a  mess  of  parsley  presented  by  a  neighboring  hand  was 
regarded  as  an  act  of  marked  and  generous  attention. 
Grain  and  potatoes  were  not  to  be  had  in  the  country. 
David  Merrick  (of  Cortland)  sent  his  team  through  the 
woods  to  Geneva  by  a  neighbor,  to  whom  he  gave  five 
dollars,  just  enough  to  purchase  two  bushels  of  wheat. 
It  was  procured  and  ground  ;  but  on  the  return  one  of 
the  bags  was  torn  open  by  coming  in  contact  with  a  tree, 
and  the  flour  of  one  bushel  was  lost ;  the  remainder  was 
emptied  on  its  arrival  by  .Mrs.  .Merrick  into  a  four  quart 
pan."  —  Goodwin. 

1  The  records  in  the  County  Clerk's  oflice  bear  evidence 
that  on  the  20th  day  of  April,  1805,  the  I'irst  Religious 
Society  of  Homer,  represented  by  Thomas  L.  Bishop, 
.\dmatha  Blodgett  and  Eliphalet  Price,  trustees,  pur- 
chased for  $1.00  sl.\  acres  on  lot  45,  Homer  village,  "for 
the  purpose  of  erecting  a  meeting  house  and  all  necessary 
outbuildings,  and  a  burying  ground." 


The  Second  Decade. 


63 


the  county,  extended  reference  to  which 
will  be  found  in  the  proper  course  of  the 
town  histories  herein. 

Contemporaneous  with  the  organization 
of  religious  societies  and  the  building  of 
churches,  the  establishment  of  schools  was 
effected,  the  first  of  which  was  opened  in 
Homer  in  the  year  1798  ;  the  building  stood 
near  the  railroad  crossing  just  north  of  Ho- 
mer village.  A  second  one  was  built  a 
little  later  on  the  northeast  corner  of  the 
"green."  A  school  was  taught  in  Cincin- 
natus  in  1797;  in  Marathon  in  1 803  ;  in 
Preble  in  1801  ;  in  Scott  in  1803  ;  in  Solon 
in  1804;  in  Truxton  in  1799;  in  Taylor  in 
1 8 10;  in  Harford  in  1806,  etc.  Indeed,  in 
every  neighborhood  where  there  were  fam- 
ilies of  children  (and  that  was  the  rule  in 
almost  every  neighborhood  in  early  times) 
it  was  considered  one  of  the  first  duties  of 
the  settlers  to  provide,  by  the  most  availa- 
ble means,  for  their  education.  It  mattered 
little  what  were  the  conditions  —  how  far 
the  little  ones  must  trudge  through  the 
woods,  or  how  hard  the  seats  they  were 
compelled  to  occupy  through  each  day  —  to 
school  they  were  sent  at  the  earliest  possible 
time  ;  thus  assuring  the  intelligent  commun- 
ities that  grew  up  throughout  the  county. 


The  information  that  we  have  been  able 
to  obtain  as  to  the  first  birth  in  the  county 
has  not  been  very  satisfactory ;  but  it  was 
probably  that  of  Stephen  Potter,  of  Trux- 
ton, in  1794.  Mr.  Potter's  father  was  killed 
in  the  year  1798,  by  a  falling  tree.  The 
first  death  in  the  county  of  which  we  find 
reliable  record  was  that  of  Mrs.  Thomas 
Gould  Alvord,  of  Homer,  in  1795. 

It  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  close  this 
chapter  (which  carries  the  general  county 
histor\'  through  the  first  decade  of  the  cen- 
tury) with  a  brief  reference  to  a  few  of  the 
quaint  names  found  among  those  of  the 
early  settlers.  The  gradual  change  in  the 
character  of  names  given  to  children  has 
often  been  remarked  ;  very  few  of  the  old 
bible,  classical  and  heroic  names  are  now 
inflicted  upon  offspring.  This  change  will 
be  a  desirable  one,  or  otherwise,  according 
to  the  tastes  of  different  persons.  We  find 
among  the  names  of  early  Cortland  county 
residents,  numerous  examples  of  the  Asaphs, 
Zerahs,  Keziahs,  Zadocs,  etc.,  of  olden 
times ;  but  perhaps  the  most  astonishing 
of  the  entire  list  were  those  of  Increase 
Hooker,  Remembrance  Curtiss,  and,  to  cap 
the  climax,  Preserved  Fish.  Yet,  after  all, 
"  What's  in  a  name?  " 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  SECOND  DEC.VDE. 

Dwellings  and  Surroundings  of  Early  Settlers  —  Household  Conveniences  —  House  Raising  —  The  Pioneer's 
First  .\gricultural  Work  —  "  Logging  Bees"  —  The  .Settler's  Diet  —  Scarcity  of  Money — .Advantages  of  Asheries  — 
The  Tioughnioga  River  as  a  Highway  to  Market  —  The  Head  of  Navigation  —  Port  Watson  Village  —  The  First 
Newspaper  in  the  County — Its  Chief  Characteristics  —  Old  Advertisements  —  The  First  Court-House  —  An  Old 
Building  Document  —  Village  Rivalry  —  Further  Organization  of  Turnpike  Companies  —  Change  of  Boundary — 
The  First  Newspaper  in  Cortland  Village  —  .\n  Early  Celebration  —  Struggle  Over  the  Site  of  the  Gaol  —  Its  Final 
Location  in  Cortland  —  Newspaper  Recrimination  —  The  First  Agricultural  Society — The  Old  County  Clerk's  Office. 


THE  progress  of  settlement  and  improve- 
ment in  Cortland  county  during  the 
second  decade  of  the  century  was  not  very 
rapid,  although  in  the  vicinity  of  the  villages 


of  Cortland  and  Homer  the  prospects  were 
most  encouraging.  The  war  of  1812-15 
retarded  settlement  here,  as  it  did  in  all 
parts  of  the  country  not  yet  thickly  popu- 


64 


HlbTUKV    OF    COKTI.AND    COUNTV. 


lated,  and  Central  New  York,  as  we  have 
previously  hinted  (and  we  believe  the  state- 
ment will  apply  with  equal  force  to  the 
comparatively  small  extent  of  territory  with- 
in the  present  bounds  of  Cortland  county), 
was  for  quite  a  period  looked  ii[)on  as  about 
the  least  desirable  point  in  the  State  for 
settlement ;  large  tracts  of  it  were  hilly,  and 
nearly  the  whole  was  covered  with  an  ex- 
ceptionally heavy  growth  of  timber,  much 
of  which  was  of  the  hardest  species  of 
wood  ;  moreover,  the  territory  was  remote 
from  what  promised  to  be  the  main  thor- 
oughfares of  travel  and  commerce,  making 
it  inconvenient  of  access.  But  in  spite  of 
these  objectionable  features,  many  resolute 
and  determined  men,  with  little  but  their 
own  brawny  muscles  to  depend  upon  for 
their  living  and  the  improvement  of  their 
farms,  had  made  long  journeys  across  the 
wilderness  country,  or  had  pushed  their 
frail  barks,  containing  their  earthly  all,  down 
the  Otselic  and  up  the  Chenango  orTiough- 
nioga,  built  their  rude  dwellings  and  begun 
a  warfare  upon  the  forest  that  would  not 
cease  until  it  was  transformed  into  pleasant 
and  profitable  homes.  These  pioneers  were, 
as  a  rule,  poor  in  the  world's- goods  ;  if  they 
owned -a  yoke  of  o.xen,  a  few  very  primitive 
household  utensils,  and  a  small  stock  of 
provisions,  they  were  accounted  in  pretty 
good  circumstances.  The  houses  they  first 
erected  were  scarcely  worthy  the  name ; 
yet  who  will  say  that  there  was  not  more 
of  happiness  and  its  twin,  contentment,  in 
many  of  them  than  is  often  found  in  the 
modern  palaces  of  the  wealthy  ?  The  dwell- 
ing of  that  period  was  frequently  a  mere 
cabin  of  small  logs,  such  as  could  be  handled 
by  one  man,  covered  with  bark.  It  was 
not  always  that  it  contained  a  floor,  and  if 
so,  it  was  made  of  split  logs,  or  "punch- 
eons," which  did  not  always  lie  upon  the 
precise  level  that  was  desirable.  The  set- 
tler who  had  neighbors  within  a  reasonable 


distance  in  numbers  sufficient  to  aid  him  in 
putting  up  a  log  house,  of  even  small  di- 
mensions, was  very  fortunate ;  while  the 
dweller  in  a  house,  say  sixteen  feet  square, 
roofed  with  shingles,  with  a  floor  of  boards 
and  a  glass  window,  was  almost  reverenced 
for  his  exalted  worldly  thrift. 

The  furniture  in  these  early  dwellings 
was  of  a  character  to  correspond  with  the 
houses.  A  feather  bed  was  a  luxury  occa- 
sionally, but  not  often,  brought  from  the 
haunts  of  civilization.  Bedsteads,  other 
than  such  as  the  pioneer  could  construct  of 
poles  and  strips  of  bark,  were  still  rarer, 
while  a  real  chair,  as  differing  from  a  bit  of 
slab  split  from  a  log,  with  holes  bored  in 
the  corners  and  rough  legs  inserted,  was 
seldom  seen.  The  settler's  clothing  for  the 
first  few  years  after  his  arrival  was  eked  out 
of  what  he  brought  with  him  ;  and  this  soon 
became  patched  out  of  all  semblance  of  its 
former  appearance.  If  a  man  came  upon 
his  lot  alone,  as  was  frequently  the  case,  he 
put  up  his  little  cabin,  sometimes  miles  from 
his  nearest  neighbor,  and  there  lived  as  best 
he  could,  with  the  occasional  kind  service 
of  a  neighboring  matron  to  bake  his  bread. 

And  new-comers  were  always  sure  of  a 
warm  welcome  in  any  and  every  locality  ; 
their  arrival  meant  so  much  more  improve- 
ment, so  many  more  dwellings,  so  many 
more  acres  cleared,  so  much  nearer  neigh- 
bors, so  much  more  civilization.  If  a  new 
house  was  to  be  raised  for  one  of  them, 
notice  was  given  to  all  within  a  circuit  of, 
perhaps,  a  dozen  miles,  resulting  m  the 
gathering  of  as  many  men,  but  men  who 
were  adepts  at  the  business ;  and  before 
night,  under  the  blows  of  their  skillful  axes, 
and  often  the  inspiriting  influence  of  the 
nimble  whisky  jug  (then  considered  a  prime 
necessity  in  the  work-field),  the  new-com- 
er's dwelling  was  ready  for  his  occupancy, 
and  could  be  given  its  last  touches  by  its 
owner  at  his  leisure. 


The  Second  Decade. 


65 


If  he  came  very  early  in  the  season,  he 
might  get  a  Httlc  corn  planted  among  the 
stumps  of  the  little  clearing,  to  the  making 
of  which  his  first  and  most  energetic  efforts 
were  devoted.  If  he  could  not  effect  this, 
he  labored  early  and  late  to  prepare  a  piece 
of  ground  for  the  sowing  of  a  little  winter 
wheat  in  the  fall.  In  this  work  the  "log- 
ging bee"  was  a  powerful  factoi"  in  those 
days.  Like  the  house-building,  it  often 
called  together  the  settlers  over  a  wide  ex- 
tent of  territory,  as  neighborhoods  are  now 
viewed,  with  their  teams,  if  the_\-  possessed 
them.  A  "boss"  was  appointed  who  su- 
perintended the  work ;  the  trees  had  been 
felled  and  the  ground  burned  over,  and  the 
blackened  logs  were  "snaked"  with  marvel- 
ous energy  and  rapidity  jnto  pro.ximity 
with  each  other,  when  the\-  were  rolled  into 
huge  heaps  and  consigned  to  the  flames. 
The  workmen  were  sometimes  divided  into 
gangs,  among  whom  a  spirit  of  riwilr}' 
would  spring  up,  and  the  work  would  be 
rushed  on  with  redoubled  energ\-,  a  liberal 
share  of  which  was  the  indirect  result  of 
the  circulating  jug.  So  was  prepared  the 
land  for  the  pioneer's  corn  and  wheat.  The 
winters  were  given  up  largely  to  the  split- 
ting of  rails  with  which  to  lay  the  "worm" 
fence  in  the  spring,  and  to  providing  plenty 
of  wood  for  the  great  household  fire-place. 

The  daily  food  of  the  early  settler  was 
necessarily  of  tlie  plainest  character.  Corn 
bread,  made  of  the  coarse  pounded  meal, 
with  occasionally  a  change  to  wheat,  with 
pod^a^  a  standard  meat,  except  when  it 
gax'^^va)-  to  venison  procured  of  the  In- 
dians, was  the  usual  order.  Many  of  the 
settlers  brought  with  them  into  the  wilder- 
ness a  cow,  and  sometimes  a  few  sheep. 
But  the  keeping  of  the  latter  was  attended 
with  nightly  risk  from  the  prowling,  sneak- 
ing wolves  ;  while  the  bears  made  frequent 
raids  upon  the  pens  of  the  porkers.  When 
the  sheep  were  successfully  wintered,  their 


wool  furnished  the  stock  for  the  household 
clothing.  Tea  and  coffee  were  rare  lux- 
uries for  a  time ;  but  the  great  maples, 
which  were  found  in  all  parts  of  the  county, 
furnished  maple  sugar  of  the  best  kind  ;  the 
big  kettle  and  some  buckets,  or,  much  more 
often,  the  hand-hewn  sap  troughs,  were  an 
essential  part  of  every  farmer's  utensils. 
Old  residents  of  the  country  districts  (now 
fast  pa.ssing  away)  will  recall  many  a  hilar- 
ious evening  in  the  midst  of  the  "sap-bush," 
beside  the  glowing,  crackling  fire,  over 
which  steamed  and  bubbled  the  sweet  ex- 
tract. 

Money  was  scarce  —  very  scarce.  If  the 
early  farmer  fortunately  raised  more  pro- 
duce than  he  needed  for  his  famih',  he 
might  exchange  it  for  tea  or  coffee,  or  lin- 
sey-woolsey, or  a  farming  tool ;  but  to  get 
mone\'  for  it  was  not  so  easily  accomplished  ; 
there  soon,  however,  arose  a  source  from 
which  the  settlers  of  the  county  derived  in- 
finite benefit  —  that  was  the  numerous  ash- 
eries  that  were  put  in  operation  on  all  sides. 
F"or  the  product  of  these  —  the  "black  salts," 
or  potash  —  there  was  always  a  good  mar- 
ket. The  land  had  to  be  cleared  of  the 
forest,  and  the  wood  could  as  well  be  burned 
in  the  arches  of  the  asheries,  except  that  it 
must  be  cut  and  drawn  to  them,  as  to  burn 
it  to  waste  upon  the  land  ;  while  the  uncon- 
verted ashes,  made  to  quite  an  extent  in 
every  household,  were  in  good  demand 
everywhere,  or  they  were  leached  and  boiled 
down  to  the  black  salts  in  the  asheries,  and 
then  converted  into  potash. 

For  the  marketing  of  potash,  maple  su- 
gar, whisky,  pottery  (which  pretty  nearl)- 
covered  the  early  productions  of  the  county 
that  could  be  profitabl)^  shipped  away),  the 
Tioughnioga  was  the  great  highway.  In 
the  spring,  fall,  and  usually  in  June,  when 
there  was  generally  a  freshet,  the  river  was 
a  rushing,  turbid  torrent  on  which  scores  of 
a  species  of  craft  called  arks  were  floated 


66 


History  of  Ccjrtland  County. 


down  to  the  Sus(|tR-haniia,  and  on  that 
stream  to  1  larrisburg,  Northumbcrlaiul, 
Siinbur)-,  aiul  points  on  tlie  Chesapeake 
ba)-.  These  arks  were  built,  in  some  in- 
stances, ninety  feet  long,  and  with  a  depth 
of  six  or  seven  feet,  carrying  an  enormous 
tonnage.  After  the  building  of  dams  was 
commenced  in  the  ri\er,  the  arks  gave  way 
to  scows  or  flat  boats,  which,  singly  or  in 
pairs,  lashed  together,  could  pass  through 
the  sluices,  which  the  laws  provided  should 
be  left  in  the  dams,  with  a  greater  degree 
of  safety  than  the  ungainly  arks. 

Port  Watson  was  the  head  of  navigation,' 
which  fact  was  influential  in  giving  the  vil- 
lage that  sprang  up  in  that  vicinity  a  pres- 
tige which  made  it  for  a  number  of  years  a 
powerful  rival  of  Cortland,  and  even  of  Ho- 
mer. It  had  been  surveyed  and  mapped 
in  the  year  1800,  by  Harvey  I.  Stewart, 
laid  out  into  streets  and  put  in  the  market 
by  Elkanah  Watson,  whose  residence  is 
given  in  the  records  of  the  county  as  "late 
of  Albany  (Pittsfield),  Mass. ; "  he  after- 
wards lived  at  Port  Watson,  which  received 
his  name.  Many  of  the  sales  of  Watson's 
lands  were  made  by  attorney,  as  will  ap- 
pear in  the  town  history  of  Cortlandville, 
and  were  made  to  Jonathan  Hubbard,  Na- 
than Blodget,  Moses  Hopkins,  and  later 
well  known  early  settlers. 

In  the  year  18 10  an  event  occurred  that 
must  be  looked  upon  as  one  of  importance 
in  any  new  community  ;  this  was  the  estab- 
lisliment  in  Homer  village  of  the  first  news- 
paper published  in  the  count)-.  It  was 
called  the   Cortland  Courier,  and  was  pub- 

1  .\ii  Act  of  the  Legislature  passed  .Vpril  I5lli,  1814, 
provided  that  the  "  Western  branch  of  liie  Chenango 
river,  commonly  called  the  Onondaga  branch,  from  the 
Forks  on  lot  66,  in  the  town  of  limner,  in  the  county  of 
Cortland,  to  the  upper  bridge,  on  lot  45,  in  said  town,  be 
and  the  same  is  hereby  declared  to  be  a  public  highway." 
The  same  act  authorized  the  Judges  of  the  Supreme 
Court  to  appoint  commissioners  to  examine  dams  and 
direct  alterations  in  them  whei'e  necessary  to  make  them 
conform  to  the  Laws. 


lished  by  James  and  Samuel  Percival.  Our 
utmost  efforts  have  been  unavailing  to  se- 
cure a  copy  of  this  paper,  before  its  name 
and  proiirietorshij)  were  changed  ;  but 
James  Percival  afterward  (in  i8i  5)  started 
the  Cortland  Rtptiblicaii,  in  the  village  of 
Cortland,  aiul,  judging  by  that  journal,  the 
pioneer  newspaper  of  the  county  was  a 
creditable  production.  In  the  year  1S12  it 
seems  to  ha\'c  passed  into  the  hands  of  H. 
R.  Bender  and  R.  Washbtirne,  who  changed 
its  name  to  The  Farmers  Jounial.  In  the 
following  year  (18 13)  Dr.  Jesse  Searl  be- 
came its  proprietor,  changing  its  name  to 
the  Repository,  and  published  it  for  about 
twelve  years.  Of  this  paper  we  have  se- 
cured some  stra\'  numbers,  to  which  a  brief 
reference  will  be  made,  leaving  the  details 
of  its  experience,  with  that  of  other  county 
journals,  until  further  on.      The  Repository 

\  was,  like  all  newspapers  of  that  period, 
printed  on  )-ellowish-hued  paper,  coarse  and 
rough  in  te.xture.  There  were  four  wide 
columns  on  each  page,  the  type  used  being 

!  the  size  known  as  pica  ;  there  were  no  rules 
used  between  the  columns.  The  distin- 
guishing features  of  all  early  newspapers 
was  the  entire  absence  of  all  local   news  in 

I  their   columns,    while  page  after  page  was 

I  given  up  to  detailing  foreign  events,  which 
would  seem  to  have  possessed  but  little  in- 

I  terest  to  the  pioneers  of  a  new  countr\-.     If 

!  we  look  in  their  columns  for  local  informa- 
tion, it  must  all  be  gleaned  from  the  adver- 
tisements.      From  this  source,  in  a  number 

I  of  the  Repository  of  J  tine,  1 8 14,  we  learn 
that  Robert  Lewis  had  commenced  stock- 
ing-weaving in  "the  town  of  \'irgil,  on  lot 
13,  about  2  1-2  miles  sotith  from  Mr.  Gard- 
ner's tavern  in  Homer.  " 

Thomas  L.  Bishoji  offered  for  sale  "that 
well-known  tavern  stand  at  the  lower  end  of 
this  village  (Homer)  near  where  the  East  and 
West  Turnpike  crosses  the  North  and  South 
road  leading  from  Onondaga  to  Owego." 


The  Second  Decade. 


67 


Jacob  Wheeler,  of  Cortland  village,  of- 
fered generous  wages  to  a  good  journeyman 
blacksmith. 

C.  Burroughs,  of  Port  Watson,  "  wishes 
to  inform  his  friends  that  he  has  repurchased 
the  Carding  Machine  lately  occupied  by  L. 
B.  &  A.  Rice,  which  he  purposes  to  keep 
rimning  the  remainder  of  the  season.  He 
has  also  a  new  machine  for  carding  Merino 
Wool  —  has  employed  E.  W.  Edgecomb  to 
attend  to  carding,  and  flatters  himself  that 
those  who  favor  him  with  custom  will  meet 
with  entire  satisfaction." 

Rice  &  Jenks  gave  notice  that  "  they  have 
four  machines  now  ready  for  carding  wool 
at  the  upper  and  lower  ends  of  this  village. 
Terms  —  Six  cents  in  cash  down,  or  every 
tenth  pound  of  wool ;  or  ten  cents  per 
pound  paj'able  on  the  first  of  January  next." 

The  "  Homer  W'oUen  Manufacturing 
Company"  informed  the  i)ublic  that  "  their 
Factory  is  now  in  operation,  with  a  full  com- 
plement of  hands.  They  ofier  to  take  good 
clean  wool  and  manufacture  it  at  the  halves, 
(that  is  deliver  one-half  of  the  cloth  from 
the  press  in  a  workmanlike  manner.)"  This 
advertisement  is  signed  by  Jabez  N.  Cush- 
man,  Agent. 

But  perhaps  the  most  unique  advertise- 
ment in  the  paper  is  that  of  Joseph  S.  Mer- 
ris,  of  Homer.  It  is  headed,  verbatim,  with 
the  words,  "Blue  Dying."  There  has  been 
a  vast  amount  of  "blue  dying"  by  distressed 
humanity  since  this  little  yellow  newspaper 
was  printed. 

The  list  of  letters,  as  printed,  remaining 
in  the  Homer  post-office  comprises  nearlj- 
one  hundred  names,  scattered  in  all  parts  of 
the  county.  President  Madison  publishes 
his  proclamation  raising  the  blockade  of 
American  ports,  and  the  details  of  the  de- 
thronement of  Bonaparte  are  given,  with 
other  foreign  intelligence;  but  not  a  line  of 
news  that  might  be  termed  local.  During 
the  year  1S14  the  Repository  was  published 


by  Searl  &  Osborn.  Further  details  of  the 
press  of  the  count)'  will  be  given  in  a  sub- 
sequent chapter. 

An  act  of  the  Legislature  passed  April 
5th,  1810,  appointed  Joseph  L.  Richardson, 
of  Auburn,  Nathan  Smith,  of  Herkimer,  and 
Nathaniel  Locke,  of  Chenango,  as  a  Board  of 
Commissioners  to  select  a  site  for  a  county 
court-house.  The  courts  were  then  being, 
and  had  previoush-  been,  held  since  the 
county  was  organized  in  the  school-house 
in  Homer.  Then  began  a  strife  between  Ho- 
mer, Cortland  and  Port  Watson,  each  pre- 
senting, with  all  possible  urgency,  its  claims 
as  the  most  eligible  point  for  the  public 
buildings.  The  citizens  of  each  village 
seemed  to  intuitively  foresee  that  the  county 
seat  would  some  day  become  the  center  for 
a  thriving  village,  and  they  labored  accord- 
ingly. The  hamlet  at  McGrawville  also 
ad\-anced  its  claims  as  the  most  eligible  site 
for  the  court-house. 

Jonathan  Hubbard,  of  Cortland,  was  then 
in  the  \igor  of  his  years  and  actixe  on  all 
occasions  for  the  advancement  of  the  vil- 
lage. In  the  public  building  matter  he  found 
his  opportunity  ;  he  quietly  visited  all  of  the 
commissioners  at  their  homes  and  it  may  be 
assumed  that  whatever  of  argument  there 
was  in  favor  of  locating  the  buildings  in 
Cortland,  was  energetically  advanced.  His 
argument  embraced  an  offer  of  a  free  con- 
veyance of  land  on  "  court-house  hill," 
which  offer  was,  undoubtedly,  a  strong  in- 
ducement with  the  commissioners;  for  the 
county  was  poor.  Mr.  Hubbard  had  made 
an  arrangement  with  Samuel  Ingalls,  who 
owned  the  land,  by  which  it  was  to  be  con- 
veyed to  the  county,  Mr.  Ingalls  probably 
assisting  in  the  matter.  Mr.  Hubbard  also 
paid  $1 ,000  out  of  his  private  purse  towards 
the  subsequent  building  of  the  court-house. 

After  a  careful  consideration  of  the  dif- 
ferent proposed  locations,  the  commissioners 
finally  settled   upon   the  commanding  emi- 


68 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


nonce  just  west  of  the  village  of  Cortland, 
as  it  then  existed  (now  known  as  Monroe 
Heights).  As  is  common  in  similar  cases, 
the  decision  pro\oked  groans  and  com- 
plaints of  dissatisfaction  from  the  disap- 
pointed residents  of  the  other  localities  men- 
tioned.' But  there  was  no  appeal  from  the 
decision  of  the  commissioners,  and  the  first 
county  court-house  was  erected  in  1812— 13 
on  what  was  long  known  as  "Court- House 
Hill." 

The  court-house  was  a  wooden  structure, 
with  a  steeple  and  spire,  its  front  facing  the 
village ;  standing  upon  such  an  eminence, 
it  presented  a  not  insignificant  appearance  ; 
while  the  view  from  its  windows  was  a  masf- 
nificent  one.  After  the  frame  of  the  build- 
ing was  erected,  it  was  finished  by  Josiah 
Cushman,  who  entered  into  contract  with 
John  Keep,  Jonathan    Hubbard  and  Mead 

'A  ludicrous  representation  of  the  commanding  struct- 
ure, and  of  some  of  the  op]josing  interests,  was  ])repared 
by  a  wag,  which  was  rendered  from  existing  circumstances, 
somcwliat  amusing.  The  "was-to-lie"  elegant  and 
dignified  edifice  appeared  quite  accurately  drawn  on  old- 
fashioned  foolscap,  rearing  aloft  its  hold  outlines  of  pine 
and  liemlock,  and  looking  down  with  defiant  scorn  on 
the  outraged  citizens  of  Homer  and  Port  Watson.  Two 
lines  of  lieavy  cordage  were  attached  to  it ;  one  leading 
to  Homer,  the  other  to  Port  Watson,  and  t<)  each  of  these 
were  clinched  the  firm  hands,  as  with  a  tiger's  grasp,  of 
several  of  the  prominent  and  most  influential  leaders 
of  the  aggrieved  ])arties.  There  they  stood,  pulling  as 
if  for  life,  resolved  upon  at  least  bringing  the  stupend- 
ous fabric  to  their  notions  of  right,  inasnmch  as  they  had 
failed  in  securing  the  good  will  and  approbating  judg- 
ment of  the  self-willed  commissioners.  If  thev  could 
not  bring  them  to  a  correct  judgment  they  could  at  least 
pull  the  magnificent  structure  down.  Hut  look  again. 
On  the  other  side  of  the  "legal  pile"  stands  William 
Mallory,  grasping  a  still  heavier  piece  of  cordage,  deter- 
mined on  contesting  the  skill  and  strength  of  the  oppos- 
ing forces.  His  heels  are  imbedded  in  the  earth  as  he 
braces  himself  to  the  work  of  j>reservation.  But  the  scene 
was  suddenly  changed  on  turning  the  paper  over,  though 
the  ludicrous  picture  was  measurably  the  same.  There 
it  stood  an  unyielding  mass  of  timber.  There  stood  the 
venerable  Mallory  holding  on  to  his  rope,  while  a  smile, 
peculiar  to  him  alone,  played  over  his  flushed  counte- 
nance. But  where  were  his  hitherto  unyielding  oppo- 
nents ?  Their  cords  had  parted  and  forced  them  into  the 
unpleasant  attitude  of  turning  double  semi-circles  down 
the  steep  pathway.  — GooiiwiN. 


Merrill,  tlie  regularh-  appointed  Building 
Commissioners,  on  the  4th  day  of  March, 
181 2.  The  original  contract  is  now  in  pos- 
session of  Mrs.  Jonathan  Hubbard,  of  Cort- 
land, and  has  been  kindly  loaned  us  for  in- 
sertion in  this  work.  It  will  be  read  with 
interest,  and  contains,  perhaps,  the  only  at- 
tempt at  a  desciiption  of  the  building  now 
extant :  — 

"  Menioranduni  of  an  agreement  made  this  4th 
(lay  of  March,  in  the  year  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  twelve  between  Josiah  Cushman, 
of  the  town  of  Homer,  in  the  county  of  Cortland, 
and  State  ol  New  York,  of  the  first  part,  and 
John  Keep,  Jonathan  Hubbard  ami  Mead  Mer- 
rill, of  town,  county  and  Stale  aforesaid,  of  the 
second  ])an.  as  Commissioners  for  building  the 
court  house  in  said  county.  a[)pointed  in  con- 
formity to  an  Act  entitled,  'An  .\ct  to  fix  the 
site  of  a  court  house  and  gaol  in  the  county  of 
Cortland,'  dated  April  5,  iSio. 

"Witnesseth  —  That  the  party  of  the  first  part 
has  contracted  and  agreetl  with  the  parties  of  the 
second  part  to  complete  the  house  now  erected 
for  the  court  house  in  said  county  all  above  the 
underpining,  except  the  two  lower  rooms  in  the 
south  end,  and  the  painting  of  the  house;  said 
house  is  to  be  finished  as  to  the  view  of  the  out- 
side, doors  and  windows,  and  the  division  of  the 
house  into  rooms,  above  and  below,  as  near  as 
may  be  agreeable  to  the  plan  hereunto  attached 

!  and  signed  by  the  |)arties  ;  the  outside  to  be  cov- 

i  ered  with  1st  rate  [line  stuff  clapboards  suitable 
thickness,  from  six  to  eight  inches  wide  ;  fals  sills 
to  be  cased  ;  water-tables,  corner  boards,  cor- 
nices, front  door  ami  side-lights  similar  to  Mead 
Merrill's  new  dwelling  house;  windows  to  con- 

'  tain  twenty-four  lights  of  glass,  eight  by  ten 
inches,  and  cased  with  single  archatri\es  —  the 
first    deck   of  the  step  is   to  be   made  with    two 

■'  thicknesses  of  inch  pine  boards  jointed,  corked, 
pitched  and  well  nailed  ;  ballistrades  with  ])osts 
and  urns,  plain,  souare  banisters  on    said   deck  . 

I  the  second  story  to  be  finished  with  selling,  ])ilas- 
ters  and  doric  capitals,  witli  cornices  to  both 
stories,  similar  to  the  other  part  of  the  house; 
with  a  decent  t'ircular  roof  coveted  with  tin,  ami 
a  suitable  iron  s[)ire,  schrolls  and  vane.  .All  below 
the  first  deck  of  the  stept  to  be  comenced  by  the 


The  Second  Decade. 


69 


first  day  of  July  next,  except  the  outside  doors, 
which,  together  with  the  uper  part  of  the  stejU 
are  to  be  compleated  by  the  first  day  of  Septem- 
ber next.  The  lower  floors  to  be  laid  with  white 
ash  stuff  1  and  i-4th  inches  thick,  ]jlaincd,  jointed 
and  matched,  and  well  nailed.  The  floors  in  the 
rooms  above  to  be  laid  with  pine  stuff  i  and 
I -4th  inches  thick,  plained,  matched  and  well 
nailed.  The  floors  in  the  court  room  to  be  laid 
with  second  rate  pine  board,  inch  thick,  plained, 
jointed,  lined  with  1-2  incii  boards  and  well 
nailed.  The  court  room  to  be  finished  in  the 
form  of  Seneca  court  room  ;  all  the  rooms  and 
hall  are  to  be  seiled  up  to  the  bottoms  of  the 
windows  with  second-rate  pine  stuff  suitable  for 
the  purpose,  anrl  the  sides  of  the  room  and  over- 
head are  to  be  lathed,  plastered  and  white- 
washed. A  Barr  in  sriuare  form  and  suitable  size 
to  be  in  the  northeast  room  below,  and  a  butery 
in  the  northwest  room  of  suitable  size  and  con- 
venient shelves.  A  circular  staircase  in  the  porch, 
twist  rail;  said  rail  and  banisters  to  be  made  of 
cherry  timber.  Outside  doors  to  be  made  of 
two- inch  stuff";  two  hall  doors  to  be  six-panel, 
and  one  of  four  panel ;  ten  inside  doors  five  of 
them  to  be  made  of  i  and  :-2  inch  plank,  and 
five  doors  made  of  2  and  i-4th  inch  plank  ;  the 
side  door  to  be  cased  with  single  architrave ;  is 
to  be  five  chimney  pieces,  one  to  be  worth  four 
dollars  in  court  room  ;  tw^o  in  the  jury  rooms 
worth  three  dollars ;  two  in  kitchen  and  ban- 
room  worth  two  dollars  and  fifty  cents;  is  to 
l)uild  a  good  and  sufficient  chimney  with  two 
fire  places  below  and  ditto  above  in  the  court 
room  ;  and  the  other  chimney  to  be  finished, 
together  with  hearths,  etc.  ;  and  to  find  all  the 
materials  for  said  house,  and  the  labour,  board- 
ing the  hands,  etc.,  are  to  be  provided  at  the 
expence  of  the  said  Cushman  ;  all  the  materials 
are  to  be  of  suitable  quality,  well  seasoned  and 
proportionable  to  the  ])urposes  for  which  they  are 
designed,  as  herein  mentioned.  The  whole  work 
is  to  be  done  in  a  neat,  plain,  substantial,  work- 
manlike manner,  and  to  be  completed  -by  the 
15th  day  of  April,  in  the  year  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  thirteen.  In  consideration  of  the 
same  being  done  agreeable  to  the  true  intent  and 
meaning  of  this  article,  the  parties  of  the  second 
part  agree  and  bind  themselves  to  pay  the  party 
of  the  first  part,  his  heirs  or  assigns,  the  sum  of 


sixteen  hundred  dollars,  payable  as  follows : 
Two  hundred  dollars  within  two  days  from  the 
date  hereof;  one  hundred  dollars  by  the  first  day 
of  May  next ;  one  hundred  dollars  by  the  first 
day  of  July  next ;  seven  hundred  dollars  in  ma- 
terials for  building  when  called  for  by  the  party 
of  the  first  part,  or  in  good  merchantable  neat 
stock  by  the  first  day  of  October  next ;  one  hun- 
dred dollars  by  the  first  day  of  March,  1814,  and 
two  hundred  dollars  by  the  first  day  of  March, 
181 5;  the  two  last  payments  to  bear  interest 
from  the  com[)letion  of  the  said  house. 

"  In  witness  whereof,  the  parties  to  these  pres- 
ents have  hereunto  set  their  hands  and  aflixed 
their  seals,  the  day  and  year  first  above  written." 
This  old  document  is  signed  by  the  par- 
ties and  witnessed  by  John  Morse  and  Ira 
Brown. 

The  Board  of  Supervisors  for  the  year 
1 8 14  directed  by  resolution  that  the  court- 
house be  "  painted  a  spruce  yellow,  trimmed 
with  white,  or  the  whole  white,  as  the  com- 
missioners for  building  the  court-house  shall 
direct."  Also,  "  that  the  commissioners  be 
requested  to  undcrijin  the  same  with  stone;" 
and  "  that  the  public  ground  around  the 
court-house  may  be  leased  out  for  the  term 
of  three  years  from  the  first  Tuesday  of 
October  inst.,  to  be  well  stocked  to  grass  at 
the  expiration  of  the  term  of  time."  Another 
1  resolution  directed  tiiat  "  the  court-house  be 
rented  to  Stephen  B.  Loundsbury,  for  the 
sum  of  twenty-five  dollars  for  one  year  from 
the  first  Tuesday  in  October  inst." 
'  The  privilege  of  occupying  the  court- 
I  house  at  a  small  rental,  the  occupant  to  keep 
the  rooms  clean,  was  e.xtended  to  different 
persons  for  a  number  of  years,  as  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  e.xtract  from  the 
proceedings  of  the  lioard  of  Supervisors  of 
1819:  — 

"  It  is  agreed  between  the  board  of  supervisors 
of  the  county  of  Cortland  and  Peleg  Babcock 
and  Moses  Hopkins  as  follows,  to  wit, :  The  said 
Hopkins  agrees  to  pay  the  county  eight  dollars 
for  the  use  that  the  said  Babcock  has  made  of 
the  court-hou.se  previous  to  this  date,  and  the 


70 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


supervisors  agree  to  let   the  said  Babcock   have 

the  use  of  said  house,  except   when  wanted  for 

puhhc  business,  one  year  at  twenty-five  dollars, 

he  keeping  the  same  clean.     The  said  Ho])kins 

and  Babcock  agree  to  jjay  the  said  sum  for  the 

use  of  the  same. 

"Oct.  8,  1810.  ,,  ,, 

'  ■•  Pei-kc.  Babcock. 

"  Moses  Hopkixs. 
"\\'.  Adams." 

Similar    leases  were    made  for  the   grounds 

belonging  to  the  count)-. 

On  the  5th  of  April,  1813,  an  act  was 
passed  b\-  the  State  Legislature,  directing 
that  the  courts  be  held  at  the  court  house  in 
the  village  of  Cortland  on  the  2d  Tuesday 
in  Ma\'  and  September,  and  the  last  Tues- 
da)'  in  December.  But  the  settlement  of 
these  questions  did  not,  unfortunately,  end 
the  rivalry  between  the  villages,  which  will 
be  again  referred  to  a  little  farther  on. 

At  this  period  much  of  the  State  legis- 
lation was  directed  to  the  opening  and  im- 
provement of  roads,  many  of  which  origi- 
nated in,  or  passed  through  Cortland  coun- 
ty. As  railroad  companies  are  organized 
in  these  latter  days,  so  turnpike  road  stock 
companies  were  then  organized  as  specu- 
lati\^e  enterprises,  the  companies  building 
and  improving  the  highways,  and  getting 
their  recompense  from  the  collection  of 
tolls.  On  the  25th  of  March,  18 14,  was 
organized  and  incorporated  what  was  called 
the  Fifth  Great  Western  Turnpike  Road 
Company.  The  road  was  to  begin  at  the 
termination  of  the  Fourth  Great  Western 
Turnpike  Road  Company's  road,  in  Homer 
(coming  through  Truxton  from  the  north- 
west), and  continue  through  Locke  into  Ca- 
yuga county.  There  were  a  thousand  shares 
of  stock  provided  for,  at  $20  per  share. 
Jabez  Bradley,  David  Ogden,  John  Tillot- 
son,  Elbert  Palmer,  Amos  Todd,  Enos 
Stimpson  and  Hezekiah  Roberts  were  the 
incorporators. 

On  the  15th  of  April,  of  the  same  year, 
the    Homer  and    Cayuga   Turnpike    Road 


Company  was  incorporated.  Its  road  was 
to  begin  at  Daniel  Miller's  house,  in  Homer 
(probably  on  lot  56,  now  adjoining  the 
northeastern  corner  of  the  corporation  of 
Cditland  \illage),  running  thence  to  Cort- 
land village  near  the  court-house;  thence 
to  intersect  the  Fifth  Great  Western  Turn- 
pike Compan\-'s  road,  and  so  on  westward. 
In  this  company  there  were  1,000  shares 
of  stock  at  $20  per  share.  Henry  Bloom, 
Wait  Ball  and  John  Kingman  were  desig- 
nated as  the  persons  who  were  to  lav  out 
this  road. 

On  the  12th  of  April,  18  16,  the  Homer 
and  Geneva  Turnpike  Road  Company  was 
incorporated,  whose  road  was  to  run  from 
ftear  the  house  of  Daniel  Miller,  Homer, 
by  the  most  eligible  route  to  the  house  of 
John  I'^Ilis,  in  Dr_\-den;  thence  along  the 
State  road  to  Cayuga  lake  in  the  town  of 
Genoa;  1,500  shares  of  stock  were  in  mar- 
ket at  $20. 

On  the  28th  of  March,  1817,  the  Homer 
and  Elbridge  Turnpike  Road  Company  was 
incorporated.  The  road  was  to  begin  on 
lot  45,  in  Homer,  and  run  through  the 
towns  of  Scott,  Spafiford,  and  the  village  of 
Skaneateles  to  Elbridge.  The  shares  in  this 
company  were  placed  at  $25,  and  1,500 
were  in  market.  Other  similar  companies 
were  organized  and  incorporated,  some  of 
which,  undoubtedly,  did  not  accomplish  the 
object  for  which  they  were  started;  but 
man}-  of  them  did,  thus  opening  up  better 
communication  between  this  inland  section 
and  the  settlements  of  more  thickly  popu- 
lated regions,  attracting  more  rapid  settle- 
ment and  generally  benefitting  the  county. 

On  the  14th  of  April,  181 5,  the  State 
Legislature  passed  an  act  which  slightly 
changed  the  southern  boundary  of  the  coun- 
ty. One  of  its  sections  provided  that  "all 
that  part  of  the  line  between  the  counties 
of  Broome  and  Cortland,  l,\-ing  west  of  the 
Onondaga  branch    of  the  Chenango  river, 


The  Second  Decade. 


;i 


shall  be  as  follows:  Beginning  at  the  south- 
east corner  of  lot  600  (one  of  the  lots  of 
the  Boston  Ten  Townships,  so  called),  thence 
westerly  on  the  south  line  of  the  north  tier 
of  the  short  or  square  lots,  so  called,  to  the 
west  line  of  the  count)'  of  Cortland;  and 
the  tier  of  lots  called  the  long  lots  and  the 
north  tier  of  the  short  or  square  lots,  so 
called,  shall  hereafter  belong  to  the  count)' 
of  Cortland,  and  hereafter  be  the  boundary 
line."  Another  provision  of  the  same  act 
related  to  the  equalization  of  the  taxes  and 
the  establishment  of  title  on  the  lands  affect- 
ed by  the  change. 

On  the  30th  day  of  June,  181  5,  an  event 
of  great  importance  to  Cortland  village, 
and,  indeed,  to  the  whole  count)',  occurred 
in  the  establishment  of  a  newspaper  in  Cort- 
land village,  b)'  James  Percival.  This  jour- 
nal contained  four  wide  columns  on  each 
page,  was  strongly  Republican  in  politics, 
and  appears  to  have  been  ably  conducted, 
as  compared  with  other  papers  of  that 
period.  But  what  was  of  still  greater  im- 
portance, probably,  it  gave  the  residents  of 
this  town  and  village  a  weapon  with  which 
to  fight  its  bloodless  battles  with  the  rival 
villages.  For  a  short  time  its  utterances 
were  of  a  peaceful  nature,  its  very  first 
number  containing  the  following  extended 
notice  of  the  approaching  celebration  of 
the  Fourth  of  July  at  Homer  :  — 

"  At  a  meeting  of  the  young  gentlemen  of 
this  village,  held  for  the  purpose  of  making  ar- 
rangements relative  to  carrying  this  important 
resolution  into  effect,  it  was  thought  to  be  ex- 
pedient and  proper  that  a  suitable  respect  be 
paid  to  an  event  so  great,  so  noble  and  so  joy- 
ous as  that  period  of  time  when  our  national  in- 
pependence  was  declared  and  our  rights  secured. 
In  a  Republic  which  yet  enjoys  the  fruits  of  our 
hard-earned  liberty,  who  can  forbear  to  honor 
this  day  and  render  a  proper  tribute  to  the 
memory  of  the  patriot  band  who  left  us  the  long 
to  be  remembered  inheritance  at  the  e.xpense  of 
their  blood  I 


"  Under  these  impressions  the  Committee  of 
Arrangements  respectfully  request  the  citizens  of 
Cortland  county,  independent  of  political  dis- 
tinctions, to  attend. 

"  Order. 

"  The  day  will  commence  with  the  discharge 
of  cannon.  The  procession  will  form  at  the 
house  of  Major  Enos  Stimpson  at  10  o'clock 
a.  m.,  and  will  march  from  there  to  tlie  meeting 
house  in  the  following  order :  — 

"  The  guard  in  front  with  martial  music. 

"  Spectators  from  different  parts. 

"  Elder  citizens  of  the  town  and  vicinity. 

"  Young  gentlemen  in  general. 

"  Band  of  music. 

""  National  flag  borne  by  the  son  of  a  Revo- 
lutionary patriot. 

"  Singers. 

"  Ladies. 

"  Committee  of  arrangements. 

"  Marshals,  mounted. 

"  Reverend  clergy. 

"  Vice-president  and  orator. 

"  President  and  chaplain." 

The  exercises  at  the  "meeting-house" 
consisted  of  pra)'er,  vocal  music,  reading  of 
the  declaration  of  independence,  instru- 
mental music,  oration,  etc.  The  assemblage 
was  entertained,  after  tiie  public  proceed- 
ings, at  the  house  of  Enos  Stimpson,  where 
"  toasts  were  drank  under  the  discharge  of 
cannon." 

While  all  this  seems  to  the  rising  genera- 
tion of  to-da)',  accustomed  as  they  are  to 
displays  of  magnificence  and  grandeur  on 
such  occasions,  like  the  puny  eflbrts  of  chil- 
dren, it  was  in  those  days  an  event  of  great 
importance  and  was  carried  out  with  the 
greatest  satisfaction  to  all  the  participants. 

We  have  already  referred  to  the  acti\'e 
rivalry  between  the  villages  of  Cortland, 
Homer  and  Port  Watson.  At  this  period, 
say  from  18 15  to  1820,  their  relatixe  im- 
portance and  prospects  may  be  stated  thus  : 
Homer  was  the  largest  of  the  three  places, 
and  was  growing  faster  than  the  others ;  its 
business  was  larger,  at  least  at  the   begin- 


72 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


nin<;j  of  the  period  mentioned.  Port  Wat- 
son was  the  liead  of  navigation  on  the  river 
—  a  matter  of  no  small  importance  at  that 
time;  what  little  manufactiu"ini,' and  milling 
had  developed  was  principall}'  in  that  direc- 
tion, and  the  sales  of  lots  into  which  the 
land  had  been  divided,  on  both  sides  of  the 
stream  and  its  branches,  was  pushed  with 
vigor;  it  will  be  acknowledged,  even  at 
this  late  day,  that,  as  a  site  for  a  village, 
Port  Watson  was  admirably  chosen.  But 
Cortland  had  the  court-house ;  it  was  irre- 
vocably settled  that  this  village  would  be  the 
county  seat,  the  importance  of  which  fact 
was  not  underestimated  by  settlers.  More- 
over, among  its  business  men  were  some  of 
bold  enterprise  and  indomitable  energy. 
Asahel  Lyman  had  established  a  store,  and 
had  come  to  stay.  William  and  Roswell 
Randall,  two  men  who  were  to  exercise  a 
powerful  influence  upon  the  growth  of  the 
village,  had  decided  in  its  favor,  as  against 
Port  Watson,  and  were  well  established  in 
mercantile  business,  in  distilling  and  the 
manufacture  of  potash.  This  situation  of 
affairs  in  the  ri\'al  \'illages,  coupled  with  the 
establishment  of  a  newspaper  in  1815,  as 
alluded  to  above,  were  sufficient  to  indicate 
to  the  sagacious  observer,  that  sooner  or 
later  Cortland  village  would  take  the  lead  ; 
but  the  others  were  not  disposed  to  ac- 
knowledge that  fact,  nor  to  permit  its  con- 
summation without  a  struggle.  Hence  the 
bitter  rivalry,  the  recrimination  by  the  ed- 
itors of  the  opposing  newspapers,  and  the 
efforts  on  the  part  of  communities  and  in- 
dividuals to  promote  the  growth  and  ad- 
vancement of  their  own  localities  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  others.  Out  of  this  feeling 
grew  the  struggle  over  the  location  of  the 
county  gaol  and  the  attempt  to  secure  the 
removal  of  the  court-house  to  Homer  vil- 
lage. 

On  the  15  th  of  April,    18 17,  the   Super- 
visors were  authorized  to  raise   a   sum    not 


exceeding  $5,000,  by  tax,  for  tlic  purchase 
of  a  site  and  the  erection  of  the  jail  build- 
ing. Moses  Hopkins,  the  enterprising  pio- 
neer, J^illy  Trowbridge  and  George  Rice 
were  made  commissioners  to  superintend 
the  building  of  the  structure.  A  meeting 
of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  was  ordered 
for  the  second  Tuesday  of  May,  succeeding, 
"  and  if  in  their  opinion  the  gaol  should  be 
located  on  the  flat  in  Cortland  village,  they 
are  empowered  to  purchase  a  lot  and  erect 
the  building  thereon  ;  "  otherwise  they  were 
to  occupy  the  lot  now  owned  by  the  county 
(on  the  hill).  The  latter  site  was  decided 
upon  ;  but  it  appears,  naturally  enough, 
that  there  were  men  in  the  Board  of  Super- 
visors, as  well  as  out  of  it,  who  would  let 
no  opportunity  slip  b}-  which  they  might 
benefit  Homer  village  as  against  Cortland, 
and  a  bold  attempt  was  made  to  secure  the 
location  of  even  this  unimportant  county 
building  at  that  point.  The  development 
of  the  scheme  may  undoubtedly  be  traced 
in  the  following  action  of  the  Board  of 
Supervisors,  in  October,  18 16:  — 

"  Resolved,  That  the  minds  of  the  board  be 
known  whether  it  be  lawful  to  build  the  gaol  on 
the  public  grounds  separate  from  the  court  house. 

"Ayes —  Messrs.  Holland,  Sherwood,  Hedges, 
Rice,  Lucas  and  Babcock. 

"  Nays  —  Phelps. 

•'■Resolved,  That  there  be  three  commissioners 
appointed  to  superintend  the  building  of  a  gaol. 

''Resolved,  That  Obadiah  Boies,  Wm.  Lucas 
and  George  Rice  be  commissioners  to  superin- 
tend the  building  of  said  gaol.' 

''Resolved,  That  the  site  of  gaol  be  altered 
from  where  it  now  stands. 

"  Ayes  —  Phelps,  Lucas,  Babcock  and  Hedges. 

"  Nays  —  Holland,  Sherwood  and  Rice. 

"Resolved,  That  there  be  a  petition  presented 
to  the  honorable  the  Legislature  of  this  State 
])raying  the  appointment  of  three  disinterested 
men  to  alter  the  site  of  the  gaol. 

"Ayes  —  Phelps,  Lucas,  Babcock  and  Hedges. 

1  These  names  would  indicate  a  change  in  the  Building 

Cummibsion  since  first  appointed. 


The  Second  Decade. 


73 


"  Nays  —  Holland,  Sherwood  and  Rice. 

"  Motion  made  to  reconsider  the  vote  taken 
to  petition  the  Legislature  to  ap|)oint  three  com- 
missioners to  alter  the  site  of  the  gaol. 

"  Motion  lost. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  vote  taken  to  enter  the 
protest  of  Messrs.  Rice,  Sherwood  and  Holland 
be  reconsidered. 

'•  Unanimous. 

''■Resolved,  That  instead  of  entering  said  pro- 
test on  the  clerk's  book  it  be  kept  on  file  in  his 
office. 

''Resolved,  That  the  clerk  shall,  at  the  rec|uest 
of  any  individual,  give  a  certified  copy  to  any 
individual  of  any  proceedings  or  writings  of  the 
Board  of  Supervisors,  then  in  his  hands,  at  the 
expense  of  said  individual 

^'■Resolved,  That  the  treasurer  redeem  all 
county  orders  presented  to  him  with  the  first 
money  that  comes  into  his  hands. 

^^  Resolved,  That  the  treasurer  ])ay  five  hun- 
dred dollars  to  Obediah  Boies.  William  Lucas 
and  George  Rice,  the  Commissioners  appointed 
to  superintend  in  building  a  gaol  in  the  countv 
of  Cortland,  of  the  first  money  that  comes  in  his 
hands  not  otherwise  appro])riated. 

"■^ Resolved,  That  there  be  a  committee  of  five 
chosen  to  form  or  procure  a  draft  of  a  gaol  for 
this  county  by  December  term. 

"Resolved,  That  John  Keep,  John  Miller,  John 
Ballard,  William  Mallory  and  .Samuel  G.  Hatha- 
way be  the  above  committee." 

The  Republican  newspaper,  to  which  ref- 
erence has  already  been  made,  passed  out 
of  the  control  of  Mr.  Percival  at  the  end  of 
September,  1815,  with  the  following  an- 
nouncement :  "  The  public  are  informed 
that  from  this  day  I  shall  relinquish  my 
concern  in  the  office  of  the  Cortland  Repub- 
lican, published  by  Osborn  &  Campbell, 
whose  talents  are  ample  and  whose  political 
tenets  are  orthodox." 

In  the  issue  of  this  paper  of  November 
1st,  1 8 16,  a  long  letter  appeared  signed  "C. 
v.,"  in  which  the  correspondent  speaks  of 
the  unscrupulous  eflbrt  of  the  Supervisors 
to  fi.K  the  site  for  the  gaol  in  Homer,  when 
the  court-house  was  in  Cortland  ;   the  writer 


then  proceeds  to  show  how  entirely  out  of 
place  the  jail  would  be  in  Homer,  although 
that  village  would  pay  the  most  money  to 
have  it  in  their  midst.  It  appears  that  a 
meeting  had  been  held  two  evenings  pre- 
vious to  the  issue  of  the  paper  containing 
this  letter,  at  the  house  of  Moses  Hopkins, 
of  which  Colonel  Obadiah  Boies  was  chair- 
man and  Roswell  Randall  secretary.  The 
following  resolutions  were  passed  ;  — 

"Resolved,  That  we  view  with  deep  detestation 
and  abhorrence  the  late  conduct  of  a  majority  of 
the  Board  of  Supervisors,  in  surreptitiously  and 
under  false  and  deceitful  pretenses,  endeavoring 
to  remove  the  site  of  the  public  buildings,  estab- 
lished by  Legislature. 

"  Resolved,  That  we  regard  with  equal  abhor- 
rence tine  conduct  of  a  junto  of  ambitious  and  cor- 
rupt demagogues,  aided  by  an  upstart  and  hol- 
low-hearted office-seeker,  whose  tergiversations 
are  as  notorious  as  his  apostasy,  in  endeavoring 
to  change  the  site  aforesaid,  heedless  of  the  con- 
tentions and  bitter  animosities  which  will  rankle 
in  the  bosoms  of  the  two  contending  interests  in 
the  county." 

Other  newspaper  letters  of  a  ver)-  bitter 
character  followed,  but  ne\'er  a  word  of  edi- 
torial on  the  subject.  It  was  charged  that 
a  committee  traveled  over  the  county  ob- 
taining signatures  to  a  petition  for  the  re- 
moval of  the  site  to  Homer,  at  the  same  time 
representing  that  their  efforts  were  directed 
towards  fi.xing  it  "on  the  flat"  in  Cortland  ; 
and  that  signatures  were  obtainedof  men  who 
were  not  present,  etc.  Meetings  were  held  at 
James  Chatterton's  house  in  Virgil,  in  Solon, 
in  Cincinnatus,  and  perhaps  other  southern 
towns,  to  protest  vehementh'  against  locat 
ing  the  site  in  Homer. 

The  result  of  the  matter  appears  in  an 
editorial  in  the  Republican  of  March  7th, 
1 8 17,  as  follows  :  — 

"  We  have  the  pleasure  of  informing  the  friends 
of  justice,  that  the  attempt  of  a  few  designing 
men  to  rob  the  citizens  of  the  county  of  their 
rights,  has  completely  failed  —  that  the  intrigue 
and  deception  has  been  exposed  and  that  they 


74 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


have  been  defeated ;  not  because  they  have  not 
made  every  exertion  which  could  be  resorted  to 
in  a  desperate  cause;  but  justice  was  not  on 
their  side.     The  liill  was  lost  in  the  .\ssembly." 

The  editor  closes  his  remarks  with  a  brief 
reference  to  the  "deep-rooted  and  deadly 
hostilit}'  of  the  Homer  \illage  people  to  the 
(growing  prosperity  and  respectability  of  our 
village  ;  "  which  was  certainly  strong  enough 
language  for  the  most  ardent  Cortland  ad- 
vocates. 

The  first  jail  was  accordingly  erected  in 
1 817-18  on  "Court-House  Hill,"  a  little 
north  of  the  court-house  ;  it  was  a  square 
brick  structure,  two  stories  in  height;  the 
cells  being  made  of  heavy  maple  planking. 
It  appears  to  have  occupied  several  years  in 
building,  as  the  Board  of  Supervisors  in  the 
)'ear  1825  resolved  to  "  receive  the  jail  as  it 
now  is  and  discharge  the  commissioners 
from  any  further  service  respecting  said 
jail."  The  commissioners  were  Obadiah 
Boies,  Wm.  Lucas,  Geo.  Rice. 

This  controversy  was  only  one  feature  of 
the  strong  feeling  that  lasted  for  years  be- 
tween the  ri\-al  villages,  and  served  as  an 
unfailing  text  for  scathing  editorials  in  the 
newspapers  of  the  different  localities  for 
years. 

On  the  4th  of  November,  181 5,  Elnathan 
Andrews,  Luther  Geere,  David  Woodcock, 
Parley  Whitmore,  Wm.  Mallorj'  and  Oliver 
Wiswell  gave  notice  in  the  newspaper  that 
they  would  appl)-  to  the  next  Legislature  for 
a  grant  to  establish  a  road  from  Daniel  Mil- 
ler's house  in  Homer,  to  Cortland  ;  thence 
to  Dryden  and  thence  to  Ithaca.  Previous 
to  this  date  there  was  no  road  running  from 
Cortland  toward  East  river,  except  as  trav- 
elers went  by  Homer  village  and  then  over 
the  hills. 

A  similar  publication  was  made  in  the 
following  year  (18 16)  that  the  Legislature 
would  be  petitioned  for  authority  to  open  a 
road  through   Cincinnatus,  Solon,  Truxton, 


Fabius  and  Pompey  to  the  Salt  Springs. 
This  highway  became  known  as  the  "Salt 
Road  ;  "  it  was  probably  constructed  in  1819 
or  1820,  as  we  find  notice  of  a  meeting  to 
be  held  in  Tru.xton  on  the  i  2th  of  March, 
1 8 19,  to  organize  the  Onondaga  and  Che- 
nango Turnpike  Company.  In  this  latter 
year  the  Legislature  was  also  petitioned  for 
a  turnpike  road  from  Cortland  to  Virgil  Four 
Corners  ;  thence  to  the  Susquehanna  and 
Bath  Turnpike  and  on  to  Owego. 

On  the  30th  day  of  March,  1818,  a  meet- 
ing was  held  at  Hopkins's  Hotel,  in  Cortland, 
for  the  purpose  of  organizing  an  agricultu- 
ral society.  After  discussing  the  subject,  the 
following  resolution  was  adopted:  "AV- 
solvcd.  That  if  our  neighbors  and  the  sur- 
rounding towns  will  concur  therein,  we  will 
form  ourselves  into  an  association  to  be 
known  by  the  name  and  style  of  'The  Agri- 
cultural Society  of  the  County  of  Cortland.'  " 
This  meeting  resulted  in  the  organization  of 
the  first  society  of  the  kind  in  the  county, 
which  will  be  further  described  in  its  proper 
place. 

Previous  to  the  year  18 19  the  county 
records  had  been  kept  in  different  places  in 
the  care  of  the  clerks,  or  in  the  court-house 
after  1813,  and,  of  course,  exposed  to  dan- 
ger from  fire  and  loss.  On  the  12th  of 
March  an  act  was  passed  by  the  Legislature 
authorizing  the  Board  of  Supervisors  to 
raise  the  sum  of  $1,200  by  general  tax,  with 
which  to  purchase  a  site  and  build  a  fire- 
proof building  for  the  safe  deposit  of  all 
public  records.  The  second  section  of  the 
act  reads  as  follows  :  — 

"  James  Chatterton,  Samuel  G.  Hathaway  and 
Grove  Gillett  shall  be  a  Board  of  Commissioners 
to  purchase  a  suitable  lot  to  erect  said  building 
on,  which  lot  shall  front  the  main  street  in  Cort- 
land \illai,'e,  and  also  to  superintend  the  erection 
of  said  building;  and  the  said  Commissioners, 
or  a  majority  of  them,  may  draw  their  order  on 
the  treasurer  of  said  county  for  the  said  sum  of 
.$1,200  whenever  it  may  come  into  his  hands." 


The  Third  Decade. 


75 


This  action  resulted  in  the  well  known 
building  which  sufficed  as  a  County  Clerk's 
office  for  nearly  sixty  years  (until  1876), 
occupying  the  site  of  the  present  handsome 
and  substantial  structure.  It  became  a  well 
known  landmark  to  every  resident  of  the 
county ;  and  although  it  was  often,  in  late 
years,  the  subject  of  ridicule,  and  constantly 
menaced  with  danger  the  \aluable  records 
kept  in  it,  it  withstood  both  for  the  long 
period  mentioned. 

The  equalized  valuation  for  the  different 
towns  of  the  county,  as  fixed  b)-  the  Board 
of  Supervisors,  for  the  }-ear  1820,  was  as 
follows :  — 


Re.\i.. 

I'K.KSllNAI.. 

TnlAI,. 

Preble, 

$109,322 

$    3.2SO 

$II2,6oS 

Homer, 

578.236 

27,606 

605,842 

Virgil. 

180,519 

7.381 

187.900 

.Solon, 

158.924 

1.434 

160,358 

Truxton, 

322.213 

8,662 

330.875 

Scott, 

84.579 

844 

85.423 

Cincinnatus, 

92,280 

9,287 

101,567 

Freetown, 

64.339 

6.309 

70.648 

Harrison, 

75.552 

4,064 

79.616 

Willet, 

62,236 

2,057 
$70,930 

04.293 

$1,728,200 

$1,799,130 

The  same  Board  of  Supervisors  resolved 
that  the  bounty  for  killing  wolves   in   the 


county  should  be  twenty  dollars,  and  seven 
dollars  and  fifty  cents  on  whelps.  And 
that  was  only  sixty- four  years  ago.  They 
also  resolved  that  the  count)'  should  pay  to 
William  Lucas  forty-five  dollars  for  the  use 
of  a  certain  house  near  Homer  village  for 
the  term  of  two  years,  for  the  purpose  of 
keeping  paupers.  Peleg  Babcock  was  at 
that  time  occupying  the  court-house,  and 
caring  for  it  at  a  certain  rental,  and  the  Su- 
pervisors resolved  to  retain  him  in  the  posi- 
tion for  another  year,  for  twenty-five  dol- 
lars, "by  his  giving  suret)\"  He  was  also 
authorized  to  "make  a  good  picket  fence 
from  the  northeast  corner  of  the  court-house 
to  the  southeast  corner  of  the  gaol,  with  a 
gate  through  the  same,"  and  present  his  bill 
for  the  same. 

During  this  decade  (from  18 10  to  1820) 
changes  were  made  in  the  towns  of  the 
county  b}'  the  formation  of  Scott  from 
Preble,  April  14th,  1815;  of  Freetown  from 
Cincinnatus,  April  21st,  1818;  of  Marathon 
from  Cincinnatus  (as  "Harrison")  on  the 
same  date,  and  of  Willet  from  the  same 
town  on  the  same  date. 


CHAPTER  Vni. 


TIIK  THIRn  DECAHK. 

Condition  of  the  Community  —  Abandonment  of  the  'rioughnioga  as  a  P'reight  Highway  —  The  Erie  Canal 
Project  and  its  Influence  on  the  County  —  The  Constitutional  Convention  of  1S21  and  the  Changes  Wrought  thereby 
in  the  County  —  The  First  Railroad  Charter  —  .S.alina  and  Port  Watson  the  Terminal  Points  —  More  Turnpike 
Companies  Incorporated  —  The  Canal  Mania  —  The  Syracuse  and  Port  Watson  Canal  Project  —  Other  Internal 
Improvements  —  Statistics. 


THE  opening  of  the  third  decade  of  the 
century  found  the  inhabitants  of  the 
several  small  villages  in  Cortland  county 
still  striving  under  somewhat  adverse  cir- 
cumstances and  surroundings  to  supply  the 
community  at  large  with  their  household 
necessities  and  the  few  luxuries  then  in  de- 
mand, at  the  same  time  gradually  building  up 


for  themselves  mercantile  and  manufactur- 
ing interests  which  they  hoped  would  in 
future  years  remunerate  them  for  their  early 
labors.  The  farming  communities  were 
still  engaged  during  liberal  portions  of  each 
year  in  divesting  their  lands  of  the  original 
forest  and  putting  them  under  culti\ation  ; 
for  them  it  was  still  a  period  of  severe  toil 


76 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


and  privation,  witli  the  satisfaction  at  the 
close  of  each  year,  if  no  ill  fortune  had 
overtaken  them,  that  they  were  in  no  worse 
circumstances  than  they  were  at  the  begin- 
ning, while  their  farms  were  slowly  but 
surely  appreciating  in  value,  productive- 
ness and  consequent  revenue.  Much  of  the 
land  in  the  countw  particularly  in  the  out- 
l)-ing  districts,  was  still  either  forest- covered 
or  thickly  studded  with  stumps  of  all  sizes,' 
while  the  inhabitants  were  yet,  to  a  large 
extent,  dwelling  in  log  houses.  Markets 
for  the  limited  surplus  produce  were  distant 
and  not  easih-  accessible;'  the  eight  to  ten 
days'  journey  to  Chenango  Forks;  six  to 
eight  to  Ludlowville  or  Manlius  Square,  of 
the  earlier  days,  were  things  of  the  past,  to 
be  sure;  but  Homer  and  Cortland  were 
still  a  long  distance  from  some  portions  of 
the  county,  when  the  character  of  the  roads 
was  considered,  and  their  markets  were  not 
very  favorable  to  producers,  chiefly  on  ac- 
count of  the  long  distances  all  household 
goods  had  to  be  hauled  by  team;  and 
money,  as  used  for  a  medium  of  exchange 
with  the  farmingpopulation,  was  very  scarce. 
While  the  roads  had  been  opened  with 
distant  and  populous  places,  most  of  them 
were  still  anything  but  well  kept  highways. 
Goods  and  farming  implements  came  into 
the  county  chiefly  from  Albany,  by  way  of 
Schenectady,  thence  through  the  canal  to 
Little  Falls,  then  through  W'ood's  Creek, 
Oneida  lake,  the  Onondaga  river  (as  it  was 
called)  and  the  Tioughnioga;  or,  by  land 
from  Albany  and  Utica  direct;  these  were 
long  and  expensive  routes,  and  necessarily- 
caused  high  prices,  which  were  onerous  to 
the  farmers  and  mechanics.  The  surplus 
produce,  and  the  whisky,  potash,  pottery 
ware,  maple  sugar,  etc.,  which  were  ex- 
ported from  the  county,  still  found  their 
way  largely  down  the  Tioughnioga  and 
Susquehanna  rivers  in  arks  and  scows,  or 
\\'ere   transported    to  distant   markets  with 


teams;  but  within  a  few  years  after  the  be- 
ginning of  the  decade,  the  waterways,  as 
routes  for  the  transportation  of  freight  were 
abandoned,  and  the  intermittent  occupation 
of  the  old  pilots  and  captains  in  the  county, 
who  plumed  themselves  considerably  upon 
their  reputations  as  successful  navigators  of 
the  freshet  tides  of  these  capricious  streams, 
was  gone  forever. 

It  will  be  understood,  therefore,  that  the 
inhabitants  of  Cortland  count)',  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest  and  from  the  remotest 
boundaries  to  the  busiest  centers,  felt  the 
deepest  interest  in  the  great  project  of  a 
canal  from  Lake  Erie  to  the  Hudson  river, 
which  promised  to  bring  ample  and  eco- 
nomical transportation  facilities  even  so  near 
as  thirty-three  miles  from  their  doors. 

This  was  a  period,  also,  of  great  political 
activity;  the  great  struggle  of  i8i6,i  which 
which  had  placed  DeWitt  Clinton  in  the 
Governor's  chair  was  still  fresh  in  the  pub- 
lic mind,  and  that  statesman  was  preparing 

l"Here  (in  this  county)  the  parties  were  arrayed  un- 
der the  respective  banners  of  Republican  and  Federal. 
John  Miller,  of  Truxton,  was  the  Republican  candidate 
for  Member  of  Assembly.  In  the  bitterness  of  the  cam- 
paign Mead  Merrill  accused  him  of  stealint;  meal  from  a 
building  occupied  by  one  Scott,  a  tenant  of  Miller's. 
Miller  sued  Merrill  for  slander  and  the  defense  inter- 
posed was  a  justification  of  the  charge.  The  action  was 
brought  on  for  trial  at  the  Cortland  circuit.  The  public 
mind  of  the  county  was  deeply  agitated.  Counsel  of  the 
highest  standing  in  the  State  were  retained.  The  cele- 
brated and  peerless  Elisha  Williams,  of  Hudson,  and 
Thomas  J.  Oakley,  of  Poughkeepsie,  conducted  the  case 
for  the  plaintiff;  and  John  W.  Hulbert,  of  Auburn,  then 
the  most  eloc|uent  advocate  of  Central  New  York,  was 
the  leading  counsel  for  the  defense.  The  court-room 
was  filled  to  its  utmost  capacity  during  the  several  days 
of  the  trial.  The  severe  and  exciting  cross-examination 
of  John  Scott  by  Williams  is  still  remembered  by  those 
who  heard  it.  The  witness  suffered  himself  to  be  over- 
whelmed in  contradictions,  became  hopelessly  confused 
and  lost  his  balance  of  mind.  Notwithstanding,  at  the 
the  close  of  the  evidence  the  defense  claimed  that  the 
circumstances  proved  had  established  a  justification  of 
the  charge,  while  the  plaintiff  claimed  that  the  defense 
had  failed.  And  then  ensued  a  forensic  disjjlay  before 
the  jury,  not  since  surpassed,  or  perhaps  etjualed,  in  the 
courts  of  this  county.  The  jury  rendered  a  verdict  for 
the  plaintiff." — Hon.  Horatio  Ilallard's  Kcminisccnccs. 


The  Third  Decahe. 


71 


for  his  work  in  the  interest  of  the  canal 
enterprise.  The  period  of  poHtical  activity 
continued  until  1820,  which  campaign  was, 
perhaps,  the  most  exciting  since  that  of 
18 16.  In  those  days  the  house  of  Moses 
Hopkins,  in  Cortland  village,  appears  to 
have  been  a  sort  of  political  headquarters, 
where  the  prospects  of  prominent  can- 
didates were  discussed,  "slates"  made  (if 
such  political  accessories  were  then  known), 
and  the  omnipresent  cheap  whisk}'  of  that 
period  absorbed  in  unknown  quantities. 

The  Erie  canal  was  completed  and  opened 
in  1825,  which  auspicious  event  was  hailed 
with  the  utmost  satisfaction  in  this  county, 
as  well  as  in  all  other  parts  of  the  State.' 
The  farmers  realized  that  now  they  could 
find  shipment,  either  by  their  own  efforts 
or  through  the  leading  merchants  of  Cort- 
land and  Homer  villages,  for  all  of  their  sur- 
plus  produce,  as  near  as  Syracuse  or  Man- 
lius,  while  merchants  and  manufacturers 
accepted  with  pleasure  the  fact  that  trans- 
porting their  wares  into  the  count)-  would 
be  both  greatly  facilitated  and  reduced  in 
cost. 

In  the  spring  of  1817  Samuel  Nelson  be- 
came a  resident  of  Cortland — a  man'who 
subsequently  attained  to  the  highest  judicial 
honors  in  the  gift  of  his  country.  He  was 
a  delegate  from  this  county  to  the  Consti- 
tutional Convention  of  182 1,  and  the  young- 

1  The  enthusiastic  editor  of  the  Cortland  Republican  in 
commenting  upon  a  report  of  the  Canal  Commissioners 
in  1818  (De  Witt  Clinton,  S.  Van  Rensselaer  and  Myron 
HoUey),  said:  "  Remote  as  we  are  (it  was  thirty-three 
long  miles  from  the  canal)  it  is  not  probable  we  shall  ex- 
perience any  immediate  l)enefit  from  it."  But  along  the 
line  of  the  canal  the  editor  foresaw  great  possibilities. 
*'The  yelling  of  savages  and  the  howling  of  woh'es,"  he 
predicted,  "  will  be  succeeded  by  the  sounds  of  the  axe- 
man's blows  and  the  bleating  of  the  flocks  ;  "  and 

"' Where  the  hooting  owl  doth  to  the  moon  complain,' 
anthems  will  be  chanted  to  the  IJod  of  Nations  in  those 
churches  which  a  pious  and  thankful  people  will  con- 
secrate to  his  service.  Schools  and  academies  will  rise 
where  now  the  savage  huts,  scattered  promiscuously 
through  the  dreary  wilderness,  are  the  only  human  habi- 
tations." 


est  member  of  that  body.  Under  the  con- 
stitution passed  by  that  convention,  the 
judiciary  of  the  State  was  reorganized.  In 
the  legislative  session  of  1823  the  State 
was  divided  into  eight  circuits,  correspond- 
ing with  the  eight  Senatorial  Districts,  for 
which  eight  circuit  judges  were  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  the  governor  and  the  Senate. 
Cortland  county  became  part  of  the  Sixth 
Circuit.  James  Clapp,  of  Oxford,  Da\id 
Woodcock,  of  Ithaca,  and  Samuel  Nelson 
were  candidates  for  the  appointment  of 
judge  in  the  Sixth  Circuit.  All  of  them 
were  strongly  supported,  but  Nelson  won 
the  prize. 

Previous  to  the  Constitutional  con\-ention 
alluded  to,  sheriffs  and  county  clerks  were 
appointed  by  a  tribunal  located  in  Albany, 
known  as  the  "Council  of  Appointment." 
This  tribunal  was  abolished  b\'  the  conven- 
tion, and  those  offices  made  elective  by  the 
people.  In  1823  Samuel  Hotchkiss,  who 
had  been  deputy  county  clerk  in  this  coun- 
t}'  since  181 5,  was  elected  clerk,  and  held 
the  office  for  twelve  successive  j'ears,  be- 
ing an  efficient  and  popular  officer.  In  the 
same  year  Moses  Hopkins  was  elected 
sheriff. 

In  the  year  1 829  the  Salina  and  Port  Wat- 
son Railroad  Company  was  incorporated. 
Jedediah  Barber  and  Andrew  Dickson,  of 
this  county,  were  members  of  the  original 
company.  The  road  was  to  start  at  Salina, 
run  through  Syracuse  and  Onondaga  Hol- 
low to  the  "headwaters  of  the  Tioughnioga  ; 
through  Hotner  to  Cortland,  and  thence  to 
Port  Watson."  Cars  on  this  road  could  be 
run,  under  the  law,  by  either  steam  or  an- 
imal power.  The  capital  stock  was  fi.xed  at 
$350,000,  and  seven  years  were  allowed  for 
the  completion  of  the  road  ;  if  not  finished 
in  that  time  the  law  became  inoperative. 
This  road  never  went  any  farther,  that  we 
can  learn,  than  the  application  to  the  Leg- 
islature. 


78 


History  of  Coktlaxu  Countv. 


This  mo\'cnicnt  indicates  tliat  tlierc  were 
prominent  men  in  the  county  who  still  be- 
lieved in  the  future  importance  of  Tort 
Watson  ;  it  was  acceding  considerable  to 
project  a  railroad  through  the  v^illages  of 
Homer  and  Cortland,  and  make  its  proposed 
terminus  at  that  point;  and  that  was  but 
fifty-five  years  ago. 

Up  to  this  period  of  the  county's  history 
there  had  been  three  terms  of  court  held  ; 
but  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  1824,  with 
an  eye  to  econoni)',  passed  the  following 
resolution :  — 

"Resolved,  That  we  petition  to  the  next  Leg- 
islature to  abolish  the  September  term  and  alter 
the  May  term  from  the  second  Tuesday  to  the 
last  Tuesday." 

It  ma\-  not,  moreover,  be  uninteresting  to 
know  that  the  same  Board  passed  the  fol- 
lowing prudential  and  humane  measure:  — 

"■Resolved,  That  Jabe/  B.  Phelps  and  Martin 
Keep  be  a  committee  to  see  to  the  prisoners' 
fare,  and  procure  a  lightning  rod  and  one  stove 
for  the  court-house." 

We  find  no  record  of  any  such  change  as 
that  contemplated  by  the  first  of  these  two 
resolutions.  Three  years  later,  however,  (in 
1827)  the  time  of  holding  the  terms  of  courts 
of  Common  Pleas  and  General  Sessions  of 
the  Peace  was  changed  to  the  third  Tuesday 
in  April,  the  second  Tuesda\'  in  September, 
and  the  second  Tuesday  in  December. 

The  opening  of  roads,  the  improvement 
of  those  already  open,  and  the  organization 
uf  turnpike  companies,  continued  to  occupy 
the  attention  of  the  people  during  this  dec- 
ade. In  1824  the  Onondaga  and  Cortland 
Turnpike  Company  was  incorpgrated,  with 
Barak  Niles,  John  Miller,  Elijah  Miles  and 
Joshua  Forman  as  corporators.  The  act  of 
incorporation  provided  that  the  company 
should  make  a  good  ami  sufficient  turnpike 
road,  to  begin  at  Sjracuse  and  running 
thence  "until  it  intersects  the  Onondaga 
river,  in  the  town  of  Truxton,"  and  thence  by 
the  mast  eligible  route  to  thedwellingof  John 


McWhortcr,  in  Cincinnatus."  There  were 
1 ,250  shares  of  stock  at  $20  per  share,  with 
the  usual  provision  for  toll-gates,  tolls,  etc. 

In  the  same  year  Beach  Ufford,  Jeremiah 
Whipple  and  Ichabod  S.  Spencer  were  ap- 
pointed by  the  State  as  Commissioners  to 
lay  out  a  road  from  Canastota,  by  the  most 
eligible  route,  to  intersect  the  Geneganselet 
turnpike  in  the  town  of  Cincinnatus. 

In  1825  Bildad  Beach,  Samuel  Tj'ler  and 
Barber  Kinion  were  appointed  Commission- 
ers to  lay  out  a  road  from  the  canal  at  Ca- 
millus,  Onondaga  county,  by  way  of  Mar- 
cellus  and  Otisco  to  Port  Watson. 

By  way  of  further  internal  impro\-ements 
it  was  undoubtedly  encouraging  to  the  res- 
idents of  the  county  in  1825,  as  it  certainly 
is  amusing  to  the  present  reader,  to  learn 
that  it  was  seriously  contemplated  in  that 
year  to  construct  a  canal  from  Syracuse  to 
Port  Watson,  and  that  the  Canal  Commis- 
sioners were  instructed  to  make  the  neces- 
sary examinations  as  to  the  feasibility  of 
the  project.  Two  years  later  (in  1827)  we 
find  the  following  on  a  kindred  topic  in  the 
Cortland  Journal :  — 

"Upon  the  subject  of  the  canal  from  Manlius 
to  Chenango  Point,  little  has  been  said.  It  is 
of  so  much  importance  to  the  commercial  and 
agricultural  interests  of  this  .section  of  the  State, 
that  we  hope  spirited  efforts  will  be  made  to  have 
an  act  passed  in  relation  to  it.  More  on  this 
subject  hereafter." 

But,  contrary  to  the  last  editorial  sen- 
tence, little  or  nothing  was  heard  on  the 
subject  thereafter.  About  that  period  it 
was  looked  upon  as  a  remarkably  poor 
season  for  canals  when  two  or  three  new 
ones  were  not  projected  and  discussed. 

In  April,  1826,  an  act  of  Legislature  was 
passed  making  Cortland  county  a  part  of  the 
Sixth  Senatorial  District,  and  giving  it  two 
Members  of  Assembly.  John  Lynde  and 
Augustus  A.  Donnelly  were  elected  to  the 
Assembly  in  that  year. 

Down   to  the  year    1829,    although    the 


P'KOM     1830    TO    Till-:    PkKSENT    TlME. 


79 


village  of  Cortland  had  become  a  thriving 
little  place  of  several  huiidrctl  inhabitants, 
and  settlement  in  the  \icinit\'  had  progressed 
considerably,  these  places  were  still  a  part 
of  the  town  of  Homer;  but  on  the  i  ith  of 
April,  1829,  an  act  was  passed  b\-  the  Leg- 
islature dividing  Homer  in  halves,  and 
designating  the  southern  half  as  the  town 
of  Cortlandvillc.  The  boundaries  of  this 
town  were  changed  in  1845  by  the  addition 
of  lot  No.   10,  and  that  part  of  lot  9  of  the 


town  of  Virgil  lying  east  of  the  Tioughni- 
oga  river,  and  the  following  year  that  por- 
tion of  lot  No.  8  lying  east  of  the  ri\er  in 
Virgil  was  also  annexed. 

At  the  close  of  the  third  decade  the  jiop- 
ulation  of  the  towns  then  in  existence  was 
as  follows:  Homer,  3,307;  Solon,  2,033; 
Virgil,  3,912  ;  Cincinnatus,  1,308;  Preble, 
1,435  ;  Truxton,  3,885  ;  Scott,  1,452  ;  Free- 
town, 1,051  ;  Marathon,  895  ;  Willet,  804; 
Cortlandvillc,  2,fiji. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

I'ROM    1S30  TO  Till-;   PRESENT  TIME. 

lieginnini;  of  tile  Third  Decade  —  Condition  of  the  County  at  Large — New  Road  Companies  Organi/.ed  —  The 
County  Poor-IIouse  —  liuilding  of  the  New  Court-House —  Raih-oad  Agitation  —  Incorporation  of  Two  Companies 
for  Lines  through  Cortland  —  Organization  of  the  Second  Agricultural  Society  —  Political  Reminiscences — The 
Leaders  of  Other  Days  —  The  Campaign  of  1844 — Changes  in  Congressional  and  Senatorial  Districts  —  Town 
Boundaries  Altered — Town  Genealogy  —  Development  of  Dairying  Interests  —  Public  Education  —  The  Old  Stage 
Routes  —  The  Railroad  Again  —  A  New  Charter  Obtained  —  The  Road  Finished  —  Public  Demonstrations  of  Satis- 
faction —  Effects  on  Villages  —  The  First  Death  Penalty  —  Political  E\ents  —  Building  of  a  New  Jail  — New  Railroad 
Connections  —  Statistics. 


BETWEEN  the  events  recorded  in  the 
last  chapter  and  the  middle  of  the  cent- 
ury, the  histor\-  of  Cortland  county  may 
be  briefly  summarized  ;  it  was  a  period  of 
slow  but  sure  growth  in  all  directions;  the 
establishment  of  new  business  enterprises 
to  meet  the  wants  of  the  increasing  popula- 
tion ;  the  multiplication  of  churches  and 
schools;  the  beginning  of  manufacturing  in 
a  small  way ;  the  clearing  of  lands  in  the 
country  districts,  with  improvement  in  the 
methods  of  farming  and  the  development 
in  the  later  years  of  the  dair\-ing  interest. 
All  this  was  interspersed  and  \-arieci  with 
projects  and  rumors  of  projects  for  opening 
railroad  communication  with  the  outside 
world. 

There  was  some  legislation  during  this 
period  which  had  a  bearing  upon  this  count}-. 
In  June,  1832,  Cortland,  Tioga  and  Tomp- 
kins counties  were  made  to  constitute  tlie 


2 2d  Congressional  District,  by  act  of  Legis- 
lature ;  the  district  was  entitled  to  two  mem- 
bers. Samuel  G.  Hathaway,  of  Solon,  was 
elected  in  that  year.  The  Oxford  and  Cort- 
landvillc Turnpike  Company  was  incorpor- 
ated in  1835,  for  the  purpose  of  building  a 
road  from  Oxford  across  the  "  new  bridge 
in  Cincinnatus,"  on  lot  No.  19,  running 
through  Solon  to  Cortland  village.  Austin 
Hyde,  Benjamin  Butler,  Chas.  Kingman, 
Roswell  Randall,  John  F.  Hill  and  Harry 
McGraw  were  made  commissioners  to  re- 
ceiv-e  subscriptions  to  the  stock  of  the  com- 
pany. 

It  was  in  this  year  also  that  the  village 
of  Homer  was  incorporated.  Its  population 
was  then  considerably  less  than  a  thousand ; 
but  it  was  still  the  leading  business  center 
'  of  the  county  and  continued  such  for  more 
than  twenty  j'ears,  in  spite  of  the  feet  that 
Cortland  was  the  county  seat. 


So 


Hjstorv  of  Cortland  Cointy 


In  Mard».  1S36,  the  poor-house,  with 
iS{>  acres  of  land,  was  purchased  by  the 
county  for  $5,000,  The  house  was  origi- 
nally enacted  by  John  Keep,  near  thebegin- 
ninsj  of  the  centxiry.  $6,000  were  raised. 
$3,000  of  which  were  borrowet.1  of  the  Srate 
and  the  remainder  raised  by  tax  in  the  j-ears 
1S37,  1838  and   1^39-     The  purdiasc  was 

made  from  Mr. Munson.  who  bought 

of  Mathew  S.  Bennett,  the  purchaser  from 
Mr.  Keep.  Munson  was  the  fin?t  poor-mas- 
ter ;  he  was  foUowe^^l  b\-  ^[r. Se\nnour, 

Al\-ali  Harmon.  Sanford  Bouton,  Morgan 
L.  Hopkins,  Nathaniel  IV^ynton,  Al\-ah  Ben- 
jamin, Clinton  Rindge, Saw\-er,  A.  W. 

Gates  cmd  Jerome  \\"heeler,  the  present  in- 
cumbent. The  brick  structure  was  erected 
under  Mr.  Gates's  administration,  and  the 
new  building  for  the  insane  in  i  SS:;. 

In  the  \-ear  1S36  the  new  court-house 
was  erected,  the  act*  being  passed  in  April. 
William  Bartlit,J  Elejtxer  \V.  Edgcomb  and 
Anthony  Freer  were  the  commissioners. 
Although  the  site  of  the  old  building  was  a 
most  commanding  one,  it  was  found,  as  the 
business  of  the  courts  incie;i5ed,  that  the 
steep  hill  which  had  to  be  ascended  sev~eral 
times  each  court  day  by  all  who  w~ere  in- 
terested in  the  proceedingSs  was  a  serious 
incv>n\-enience ;  the  changing  of  the  site  was 
therefore  left  to  the  Super\-isors,  a  majoritj- 
of  whom  decided  in  fe\-or  of  the  remo\-al. 
A  sum  not  exceeding  $6,000  was  to  be 
taken  from  the  treasur\\  .wd  $1,000  more 
\\-,is  authoriied  to  be  niised  by  lax-  tor  the 
purpose ;  the  selection  of  die  new  site  was 
left  to  the  Supervisors  at  their  next  annual 
meeting.  After  considerable  deliberation 
the  present  location  on  the  comer  of  Court 
and  Church  streets  was  selected  and  the 
structure  V  -  .ndence 

of  the  bef  ,, 

In  I  $37  an  act  Wsts  passed  authorizing 
the  incorponuion  of  a  jail  in  the  new  build- 
ing, at  a  cwst  not  tv>  exceexi  $^,000.     In  pur- 


suance of  this  provision  a  jail  was  constructed 
in  the  rear  basement  of  the  court-house, 
which  aftervvard  gave  place  to  the  present 
substantial  stone  structure  built  above  the 
ground.  Additional  sums  of  $3,000  were 
borrowed  in  the  years  1S3S  and  1S39.  with 
whicli  to  complete  these  public  buildings. 

The  continued  agitation  of  railroad  proj- 
ects resulted,  in  the  spring  of  i  S36.  in  the 
in  the  inc\>ryK>nition  of  the  Sjracuse.  Cort- 
land and    Binghamton  railroad   company. 

Shut  in.  as  the  inhabinmts  of  this  countj' 
had  been,  from  easy  and  rapid  communica- 
tion with  the  rest  of  the  State,  which  was 
more  fortunate  in  this  respect,  the  exultant 
anticipations  of  the  farmers  along  the  rich 
\-alleys  of  the  Tioughnioga  and  the  trades- 
men of  the  prominent  villages  in  the  countj- 
o\-er  this  prospect  of  a  railroad,  may  be  left 
K»  the  imagination  of  the  reader.  But  rail- 
road building  was  not  then  so  well  under- 
stood as  it  became  within  the  succeeding 
few  years,  and  this  project  was  doomed  to 
aband- -nment.  This  organiiation  was  gi\-en 
tour  \-ears  only  in  which  to  construct  their 
road.  Ae  route  of  which  is  indicated  by  its 
name.  Among  the  commissioners  who 
were  authorized  by  the  act  K>  recei\-e  sub- 
scriptions for  stock  we  find  the  names  of 
Henrx'  Stephens  (afterwards  president  of  the 
Sxxacuse  and  Binghantton  rulroad),  E,  \V. 
Edgcv>mb.  Augustus  Donnelly.  Samuel  G. 
Hathaway.  E.  C~  Reed.  Roswell  Randall 
and  WlUiani  Randall.  These  names  of 
Cortland  countj-  men.  or  many  of  them,  are 
found  in  connection  with  all  measures  of 
importance:  to  them  is  undoubtedly  due 
much  of  the  credit  for  the  early  growth  of 
die  material  interests  of  the  counlj-.  An- 
other railroad  company  incorporated  that 
\-ear    w;»s   the  Ow .  ■  ±     Its 

road  was  to  run  fix-  ^.^  -..1  Dr>-- 

den  and  th<aice  to  Cortland  and  Homer. 
Xdther  of  these  projects,  as  is  well  known, 
was  consummated :  but  their  incorporation 


From   1830  to  the  Present  Time. 


81 


shows  that  the  idea  of  railroad  communica- 
tion with  the  other  portions  of  tlie  State  was 
not  allowed  to  sleep,  imbued  the  inhabitants 
with  faith  in  their  ultimatel\-  standing  on  a 
level  with  other  localities  in  this  respect, 
and  gave  assurance  that  it  was  a  question 
of  only  a  short  period  before  the  locomotive 
and  its  train  would  dash  through  the  fertile 
valleys  of  the  county. 

On  the  1st  of  October,  1838,  the  exist- 
ing County  Agricultural  Society  was  organ- 
ized, with  a  board  of  officers  comprising 
many  of  the  more  prominent  men  in  the 
county.  The  first  fair  was  held  that  }"ear, 
continuing  with  increasing  interest  from 
year  to  year,  until  a  spirit  of  emulation  was 
aroused  in  the  farming  and  mechanical 
classes  which  resulted  in  great  and  perma- 
nent benefit.  The  history  of  this  society 
will  be  found  in  its  appropriate  place  in  these 
pages. 

During  the  period  from  1840  to  1845,  or 
a  little  later,  politics  were  uppermost  in 
Cortland  count}',  as  well  as-  in  other  parts 
of  the  countr\-.  Here  the  Whigs  were  a 
little  in  the  majority,  and  they  were  quite 
abl\-  marshaled  by  the  prominent  local 
leaders,  among  whom  may  be  mentioned 
William  Andrews,  David  Mathews,  Harry 
McGraw,  Cephas  Comstock,  John  J.  Adams, 
Tercius  Eels,  Alanson  Carley,  Isaac  A. 
Gates,  Gideon  Babcock,  Joel  B.  Hibbard, 
Danforth  Merrick,  Jedediah  Barber,  James 
C.  Pomero}-,  Daniel  Hawks,  and  otliers. 
The  Democrats,  if  inferior  in  numbers,  were 
not  so  in  political  prominence  and  ability. 
Their  hosts  were  under  the  leadership  of 
such  men  as  Joseph  Re\nolds,  Samuel  G. 
Hathawa\-,  Henry  Stephens,  Roswell  Ran- 
dall, William  Bartlit,  Edward  C.  Reed, 
Townsend  Ross,  George  Ross,  J.  De  Puy 
Freer,  Anthony  F"reer,  John  Gillet,  Alanson 
Coats  and  others  among  the  older  heads ; 
with  Horatio  Ballard,  Henry  S.  Randall, 
Frederick    Hyde,    Henry   Brewer,  William 


H.  Shankland,  James  S.  Leach,  William  P. 
Lyndes,  Andrew  Dickson,  William  B.  Al- 
len, S.  G.  Hathaway,  jr.,  and  Oliver  Glo\er 
as  the  ycninger  element. 

The  //'///>  and  the  recently  established 
Danocrat  were  the  organs  of  the  respective 
parties,  and  their  editors  and  contributors 
made  the  local  campaign  a  lively  and  in- 
teresting one.  The  Whig  made  the  most 
of  Ogle's  storj-  of  Mr.  Van  Buren's  "gold 
spoons"  and  extravagance  in  the  White 
House  —  all  amounting  to  the  remarkable 
sum  of  five  or  ten  thousand  dollars  —  while 
the  Dciiwcrat  showed  up  the  terrors  of  Nick 
Biddle's  United  States  bank — then  ex- 
ploded and  bejond  the  power  of  mischief 
—  the  sinfulness  of  hard  cider  and  coon- 
skins  nailed  up  on  a  log-cabin  to  dry  ;  and 
the  general  weaknessess  of  "old  granny 
Harrison,"  The  Whigs  had  the  best  of  the 
performance  during  the  campaign.  The 
September  and  October  elections  were  a 
cjxlone.  The  November  elections  finished 
the  work. 

Again,  in  1844,  the  political  legions  of 
the  county  went  forth  to  battle  for  the  wel- 
fare of  their  country,  and  a  repetition  of  the 
scenes  of  four  years  previous  was  enacted. 
Mass  meetings,  processions,  the  glory  of 
banners  without  number  prevailed,  and  a 
general  political  jubilee  was  held,  which 
many  now  living  will  easily  call  to  mind.* 

1  The  boys  and  young  men  in  each  party  entered  into 
the  prerailing  rivalry.  The  glee  clubs,  or  some  of  them, 
were  the  most  grotesque  organizations,  considered  in  a 
musical  sense,  but  for  making  noise  the  Cortland  Polk  and 
Dallas  glee  club  was  simply  huge.  They  could  "  Hur- 
rah for  Polk  !  "  much  more  harmoniously  than  ihcy  could 
sing  their  songs.  Sinclair  was  the  foreman  in  the  Demo- 
cral  office,  and  a  zealous  Democrat  in  politics.  He  han- 
dled the  pyramid  of  bells  in  the  glee  club,  and  fairly  howl- 
ed when  he  sang  I  His  voice  was  sonorous,  and  by  way 
of  diverting  the  Whigs  along  .Main  street,  every  hour  or 
two  he  would  thrust  his  head  out  of  the  office  window 
and  shout,  "  H-u-r-r-a-h  f-o-r  P-o-l-kl"  until  the  sound 
would  reach  the  ears  of  Conger,  in  his  law  office  in  the 
William  Randall  building,  on  the  corner  of  Main  and 
Court  streets,  grate  harshly  uix)n  those  of  James  C.  Pom- 
eroy,  stir  up  the  quiet  'Squire  Adams  and  staid   Hiram 

6 


82 


History  of  Cortland  Countv. 


In  the  year  1842  an  act  of  Legislature 
made  tlic  counties  of  Cortland  and  Cayuga 
to  comprise  the  Twenty-fifth  Congressional 
District,  which  remained  in  force  until  the 
change  which  constituted  the  district  of  the 
counties  of  Cortland  and  Onondaga.  In 
1846  Cortland  was  placed  in  the  Twent}-- 
third  Senatorial  District,  with  Broome  and 
Tioga  counties.  It  now,  in  connection  with 
Onondaga  county,  comprises  the  Twenty- 
fifth  Senatorial  District.  By  the  constitu- 
tion of  1846  Cortland  count}-  lost  one 
Member  of  Assembly,  having  previously 
elected  two.  The  Courts  of  Common  Pleas 
and  General  Sessions  of  the  Peace  were  also 
abolished,  and  the  County  Court,  with  one 
county  judge,  substituted. 

Several  changes  were  made  in  the  town 
boundaries  during  this  decade  (1840  to 
1850).  An  act  was  passed  in  May,  1845, 
erecting  the  towns  of  Lapeer  and  Harford 
from  the  southern  half  of  Virgil.'  In  De- 
Hopkins,  usually  found  at  Oren  Stimpson's  store,  and  so 
up  to  the  Whig  headquarters  at  the  Cortland  House, 
where  the  portly  Danforth  Merrick  would  utter   an   e.N- 

pletivein    disgust   at    "that Polk    machine   in    the 

Democrat  off\ce'."  The  U'/iii;,  unluckily,  adopted  the 
phrase  editorially,  and  from  thenceforward  that  "  Polk 
machine "  was  in  operation  when  Conger  was  within 
ear-shot.  It  was  "  Hurrah  for  Polk  1  "  at  five  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  at  midnight,  and  nearly  all  the  hours  be- 
tween, until  the  Whigs  gave  up  in  despair.  The  laugh 
was  agamst  them.  .Another  incident  of  this  canvass  was 
the  roorback  forgery  and  its  circulation  by  the  Whigs  ; 
and  still  another,  the  printing  of  a  private  letter  involv- 
ing Joel  B.  Hibbard,  who  was  inclined  to  the  anti-slaverv 
side,  and  the  .■\bolitionists,  of  whom  there  were  three  or 
four  hundred  in  the  county,  under  the  lead  of  (ohn 
Thomas,  on  purpose  to  cast  that  vote  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Democrats  and  adversely  to  Mr.  Clay,  whose  position 
on  the  <|uestion  of  Texas  annexation  was  not  satisfactory 
to  the  Abolitionists.  —  H.  C.  Crouch's  Reminiscences  of 
the  Corlland  County  Press. 

1  ".\fter  the  tide  of  revolution  had  rolled  away  and  the 
people  were  becoming  comparatively  happy,  conflicting 
claims  and  unpleasant  controversies  were  renewed,  hav- 
ing a  strong  tendency  to  create  bitter  recriminations  be- 
tween inhabitants  of  adjoining  States,  and  especially  those 
of  New  Hampshire,  Connecticut,  Massachusetts  and 
New  \m\..  The  controversy  pending  the  conflicting 
claims  of  the  two  latter  States  grew  out  of  an  anli(|uated 
and  pretended  right  on  the  part   of  Massachusetts   to  a 


cember,  1849,  Taylor  was  erected  from  the 
eastern  half  of  Solon;  and  in  i85olotNo.  20 
in  Virgil  was  annexed  to  Freetown.  This 
was  the  last  change  of  boundaries  made  in 
the  county,  with  the  exception  of  the  forma- 
tion of  the  town  ofCuyler  from  Tru.xton  in 
the  fall  of  1858,  which  may  properh^  be 
noted  here,  arid  followed  with  the  geneal- 
ogy of  all  of  the  towns  in  the  coimt)-, 
thus: — 

Homer  was  formed  in  Onondaga  county 
March  5th,  1794,  and  embraced  the  pres- 
ent town  of  that  name  and  the  present 
towns  of  Solon,  Virgil,  Taylor,  Cincinnatus, 
Marathon,  Freetown,  Willet,  Lapeer,  Har- 
ford and  Cortland. 

Solon  was  formed  from  Homer  March 
9th,  1798,  and  embraced  the  present  towns 
of  Solon,  Cincinnatus,  Marathon,  Freetown, 
Taylor  and  Willet. 

certain  portion  of  land  lying  within  the  boundaries  of 
!  New  York.  In  1786  the  question  at  issue  was  finally 
settled  Ijy  an  amicalile  adjustment  of  the  differences  of 
opinion,  tiirough  the  united  exertions  of  commissoners, 
duly  apponited  and  clothed  with  the  confederative  power 
to  arrange  the  matter  in  controversy,  and  thus  silence  the 
clamor  which  had  for  a  long  time  tended  to  create  un- 
pleasant remarks  as  well  as  to  weaken  the  bonds  of  fra- 
ternal fellowship.  The  commissioners  granted  to  Massa- 
chusetts 6, 144,000  acres  of  lan-d,  known  as  the  Genesee 
country.  This  tract  comprised  all  the  land  of  the  State 
west  of  a  line  beginning  at  the  mouth  of  the  great  .Sodus 
Bay  on  Lake  Ontario,  and  running  due  south  through 
the  middle  of  Seneca  lake  to  the  north  line  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, excepting  one  mile  in  width  the  whole  length  of 
Niagara  river,  which  was  ceded  to  New  York,  .\nother 
tract,  afterward  known  as  the  '  .Massachusetts  ten  town- 
ships,' embracing  230,400  acres,  lying  between  the 
Owego  and  Chenango  rivers,  was  also  ceded  without  the 
least  equivalent  to  Massachusetts,  reserving  to  New  York 
barely  the  right  of  sovereignty.  The  former  was  sold  to 
Oliver  Phelps  anil  Nathaniel  Oorham,  and  the  latter  was 
purchased  by  |ohn  lirown  &  Co.,  for  a  fraction  over 
.$3,300.  It  ^^■ill  be  observed  that  we  have  heretofore 
spoken  of  Virgil  as  township  No.  24  of  military  lands. 
It  should,  howe\'er,  be  noted  that  the  whole  of  the  town 
of  Virgil  did  not  originally  belong  to  the  military  grant. 
A  strip  of  about  one  and  a  half  miles  wide  running  across 
its  southern  side  from  east  to  west  was  taken  from  the 
ten  townships  grant  to  Massachusetts."  —  Goodwin. 

This  strip  is  now  in  the  towns  of  Harford  and  Lapeer, 
with  a  small  tract  in  Marathon,  as  will  be  seen  on  the 
map  herein. 


From   1850  to   iiie  Present  Ti.mk. 


Cincinnatus  was  formed  from  Solon  April 
3d,  1804,  and  embraced  the  present  towns 
of  Cincinnatus,  Marathon,  Freetown  and 
Willet. 

Virgil  was  formed  from  Homer  April  3d, 
1804,  and  embraced  the  present  towns  of 
Virgil,  Harford  and  Lapeer. 

Preble  was  formed  from  Tully  (Onondaga 
county)  April  8th,  i  808,  embracing  the  pres- 
ent towns  of  Preble  and  Scott. 

Truxton  was  formed  from  Fabius  (Onon- 
daga county)  April  8th,  1808,  and  embraced 
the  present  towns  of  Truxton  and  Cuyler. 

Scott  was  formed  from  Preble  April  14th, 
1815. 

Marathon,  Freetown  and  Willet  were 
formed  from  Cincinnatus  April  2  1st,  1818. 

Cortlandville  was  formed  from  Homer 
April  iith,  1829,  with  its  present  bounda- 
ries, except  that  lot  No.  10  and  a  portion  of 
lot  9  were  added  to  it  in  1845-46. 

Lapeer  and  Harford  were  taken  from 
Virgil  May  2d,    1845. 

Ta}-lor  was  formed  from  Solon  December 
5  th,  1849. 

Cuyler  was  formed  from  Tru.xton  No- 
vember 1 8th,  1858. 

By  the  middle  of  the  centur\'  Cortland 
county  had  taken  her  place  in  most  partic- 
ulars beside  the  older  and  larger  divisions 
of  the  State  ;  an  exception  should,  perhaps, 
be  noted  regarding  her  manufacturing  in- 
terests, which  were  still  small.  The  farmers 
had  brought  their  domains  generally  into  a 
good  state  of  cultivation,  especially  in  the 
valleys  and  near  to  the  business  centers, 
while  those  living  farther  back  upon  the 
hills  were  rapidly  clearing  their  lands  of 
the  remaining  forests  and  stumps. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  the  dairying 
interest  of  the  county  began  to  receive  that 
degree  of  attention  from  the  farmers  to 
which  it  was  entitled  ;  and  from  that  date 
down  to  i860,  the  product  was  largely  in- 
creased and  the  quality  so  much  improved 


that  its  reputation  in  the  great  markets  was 
soon  enhanced  to  within  one  or  two  coun- 
ties of  the  highest  in  tlie  State  —  a  rejiuta- 
tion  that  has  steadily  advanced  during  the 
succeeding  years. 

Meanwhile  the  inhabitants  of  the  county 
were  not  at  all  backward  in  the  matter  of 
education.  The  Cortland  Academy  (in  Ho- 
mer) was  at  the  height  of  its  long  career  of 
prosperity  ;  the  Cortlandville  Academy,  in- 
corporated in  1842,  started  out  under  the 
most  favorable  auspices  upon  a  course  of 
many  years  of  usefulness  and  success  ;  the 
Cincinnatus  Academy  was  incorporated  in 
1855  and  soon  became  a  popular  and  suc- 
cessful institution  ;  and  churches  and  excel- 
lent district  schools  were  rapidly  multiplied 
on  ever}'  hand. 

But  the  greatest  obstacle  to  material  ad- 
vancement was  still  the  difficulty  of  reach- 
ing markets  and  of  tra\'eling  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  the  county,  except  by  meth- 
ods that  had  begun  to  be  looked  upon  as 
somewhat  primitive.  The  plank  road  con- 
structed between  Cortland  village  and  Syr- 
acuse in  the  years  1849-51  afforded  a  de- 
gree of  relief,  enabling  passengers  to  take 
either  of  two  lines  of  stages  each  way  per 
day,  which  made  the  trip  in  about  six  hours, 
while  freight  was  transported  in  heavier 
loads  and  in  much  shorter  time  than  over 
the  former  turnpikes;  the  plank  road  was 
wood  in  its  way,  but  it  was  not  what  was 
needed.  The  old-fashioned  coaches,  d'rawn 
by  four  horses,  guided  by  skillful  dri\-ers, 
who  swung  them  up  with  a  grand  flourish 
at  the  doors  of  the  famous  hostelries  —  Van 
Anden's  and  Harrop's  in  Homer  ;  the  Ea- 
gle and  the  Cortland  House  in  Cortland  and 
scores  of  lesser  establishments  along  the  va- 
rious turnpikes  leading  to  Syracuse,  Owego, 
Binshamton,  Truxton  and  Cazenovia  and 
other  points  —  were  often  overloaded  with 
passengers.  Old  residents  still  recount  many 
amusing  and  interesting  incidents  connected 


84 


History  of  Cortland  County, 


with  tlio  former  coaching  dnjs  ;  but,  \\  liilc 
tliat  method  of  travel  was  untioiibtedly  pict- 
uresque in  fa\orable  seasons  and  conducive 
to  iieahh  and  plcasui'c,  it  was  decided!)-  slow 
when  compared  with  the  locomotive.  It 
was  doomed.  The  turnpikes,  and  later  the 
plank  road  from  Cortland  to  Syracuse,  were 
necessaril)'  thronged  with  heavily-laden 
wagons  during  the  greater  portion  of  each 
year,  transporting  the  products  of  the  county 
to  the  canal  and  railroads,  and  returning 
with  goods  for  the  merchants  and  stock  for 
the  young  manufacturing  interests  of  the  vil- 
lages ;  but  this  mode  of  freighting  scotched 
the  wheels  of  progress  and  growth,  and  the 
leading  minds  of  this  county  and  vicinity 
felt  the  force  of  that  fact  and  deplored  it. 
The  Tioughnioga,  and  the  Susquehanna,  as 
far  as  it  applied  to  this  section,  had  long  been 
given  up  as  permanent  and  useful  channels 
of  transportation  ;  the  waters  of  the  Tiough- 
nioga, once  a  broad  a!id  rapid  stream,  were 
gradually  but  surely  diminishing,  and  the 
last  freighting  of  much  importance  on  its 
freshet  tides  was  done  as  late  as  about  1 840. 

In  this  condition  of  affairs  and  for  all  these 
reasons,  it  is  litde  wonder  that  one  of  the 
unfailing  themes  of  discussion  and  the  con- 
stant hope  and  dream  of  the  inhabitants,  in 
their  semi-isolated  situation,  was  a  railroad. 
It  had  been  discussed  in  all  its  bearings 
ever  since  the  first  charter  was  granted,  by 
men  who  fully  appreciated  its  importance 
and  ,were  ready  and  willing  to  contribute 
largely  to  its  success,  and  by  others  all  the 
way  down  in  the  scale  of  brain,  energy  and 
wealth  to  those  who  could  not  have  bought 
a  single  spike  and  could  scarcely  summon 
the  energy  to  drive  one.  Everybody  wanted 
a  railroad. 

Syracuse  was  pushing  forward  under  the 
impulse  of  her  salt  interests  and  canal  and 
railroad  connections,  while  farther  north 
Oswego  sat  at  the  foot  of  the  great  lake 
system  of  the  country,   thriving  upon  her 


comniLrcial  marine.  To  the  southwartl 
15inghamton,  with  a  population  of  10,000, 
contiguous  to  the  opening  coal  fields  of 
Penns\-lvania,  with  the  consequent  extensive 
railroad  connections,  gave  promise  of  being 
the  bustling  city  of  to-day.  These  were 
some  of  the  outside  business  centers  toward 
which  Cortland  stretched  her  burilcned 
hands,  but  which  could  be  reached  only  by 
the  slow  means  of  horse-power;  her  inhab- 
itants saw  the  tide  of  commercial  and  man- 
ufacturing prosperit}-  swelling  around  them 
in  all  directions,  but  were  helpless —  with- 
out a  railroad. 

Hence,  the  renewed  agitation  of  the  sub- 
ject of  a  road  from  Syracuse  to  Bingham- 
ton,  running  through  the  central  portion  of 
this  county,  in  1848-49,  found  hundreds  of 
earnest  men  ready  to  favor  it  to  the  utmost 
of  their  ability  ;  among  them  were  several 
of  the  original  charter  petitioners.  Again 
the  Legislature  was  petitioned  and  a  char- 
ter obtained.  Meetings  were  held  in  the 
towns  of  the  count}',  and  along  the  entire 
line,  at  which  the  proposed  road  was  ex- 
plained and  its  advantages  advocated.  Sub- 
scription books  were  opened,  and,  early  in 
the  year  1850,  such  progress  was  made  in 
this  direction  that  steps  were  taken  for  pre- 
liminar)'  surveys.  W.  B.  Gilbert,  a  thor- 
oughly competent  engineer,  was  engaged 
for  the  surve\\  But  it  must  not  be  pre- 
sumed that  this  line  of  road  was  to  be  fin- 
ished without  meeting  with  obstacles.  Dif- 
ficulties in  the  way  of  organizing  the  corn- 
pan}-,  growing,  to  some  extent,  out  of  per- 
sonal feeling,  were  encountered,  and  just  as 
the  work  of  construction  was  begun,  the 
country  began  to  feel  the  effects  of  one  of 
those  periodical  financial  revulsions  to  which 
it  has  on  several  occasions  been  subjected. 
Those  persons  who  had  money  became  wary 
about  letting  it  leave  their  possession  for 
even  such  a  boon  as  a  railroad  ;  those  who 
had  little  or  none,  saw  the  apparent  neces- 


.  From  i8so  to  the  Present  Time. 


8S 


sity  of  hoarding  all  they  could  get  for  future 
needs ;  many  who  had  subscribed  in  good 
faith  for  stock  in  the  road,  found  themselves 
unable  to  fulfill  their  obligations. 

Yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,  and  through  the 
persevering  efforts  and  the  indomitable  en- 
ergy of  those  who  were  at  the  head  of  the 
enterprise,  many  of  whom  were  residents  of 
this  county,  with  the  liberal  subscriptions 
of  all  classes  throughout  the  counties  tra\'- 
ersed  by  the  line,  the  work  was  finished  in 
1854. 

A  formal  opening  of  the  road  occurred  on 
the  1 8th  and  19th  of  October,  of  that  year. 
An  excursion  train  of  twenty-seven  cars 
ran  over  the  road  from  Syracuse  to  Bing- 
hamton  and  return,  which  was  so  loaded 
with  enthusiastic  passengers  that  many  were 
compelled  to  stand.  The  gratification  felt 
in  this  county  over  the  auspicious  event  was 
exhibited  in  the  ringing  of  bells,  firing  of 
cannon  and  display  of  banners  at  every  sta- 
tion, while  immense  crowds  congregated  to 
witness  the  fruition  of  their  long-deferred 
hopes. 

The  original  plans  of  the  projectors  of 
this  road  included  connections  with  the  Syr- 
acuse and  Oswego  road  to  Lake  Ontario, 
and,  of  course,  direct  connection  with  the 
Erie  canal  in  Syracuse.  The  feasibility  of 
making  these  connections  was  used  as 
among  the  strongest  arguments  in  favor  of 
the  construction  of  the  road.  But  the  com- 
pany were  unable  to  secure  the  coveted  con- 
nection to  Oswego,  or  even  to  run  their 
tracks  through  to  the  canal  for  the  rapid  and 
economical  transfer  of  freight  to  the  great 
waterway.  Another  company  was,  there- 
fore, organized  under  the  general  act  to 
construct  a  broad  gauge  line  to  Oswego 
from  Syracuse,  on  the  east  side  of  Ononda- 
ga lake  and  the  Oswego  ri\'er.  But  no 
satisfactory  arrangement  for  this  purpose 
could  be  made  with  the  holders  of  the 
mortgage   bonds   of  the    existing   road    to 


Binghamton,  and  operations  had  to  be  sus- 
pended. 

These  untoward  circumstances  crippled 
the  road  and  so  restricted  its  operations  and 
profits  that  in  1856  the  bondholders  were 
forced  to  foreclose  and  sell  it.  It  was  bought 
by  J.  M.  Schermerhorn,  then  of  Homer, 
and  the  company  subsequently  reorgan- 
ized. The  road  was  finished  to  the  canal, 
and  arrangements  were  perfected  whereby 
the  Erie  railroad  would  accommodate  the 
cars  of  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna  and 
Western  road  for  the  transportation  of  coal 
and  freight,  making  the  Syracuse,  Bingham- 
ton and  New  York  road  (as  it  was  re- 
named) the  proper  and  most  available  chan- 
nel for  carr}-ing  their  coal  to  the  canal  at 
Syracuse  and  to  Oswego,  Canada  and  the 
great  West.  This  road  passed  into  the 
hands  of  the  great  corporation,  the  Dela- 
ware, Lackawanna  and  Western  Railroad 
Company,  a  double  track  was  laid,  and  it 
is  now  one  of  the  best  equipped  and  most 
successful  branches  in  the  State 

While  the  sale  of  this  first  railroad  in  this 
county  under  the  mortgage  was  disastrous 
to  the  original  stockholders,  none  of  whom 
realized  anything  directly  from  their  invest- 
ments, it  is  doubtless  true  that  not  one  of 
them  failed  to  see  in  the  near  future  that 
their  money  had  thus  been  wisely  expended. 
Every  acre  of  land  in  the  county  was  in- 
creased in  value,  while  the  annual  benefits 
to  farmers,  tradesmen  and  manufacturers, 
after  the  road  went  into  operation,  could 
scared}-  be  over-estimated. 

The  construction  of  railroads  in  this  coun- 
ty produced  the  common  effect  of  building 
up  some  of  the  villages  at  the  expense  of 
others.  It  was  about  the  period  under  con- 
sideration, or  a  little  later,  that  Cortland 
began  to  show  unmistakable  indications  of 
rivaling  and  outstripping  her  sister  \-illage 
on  the  north  ;  though  the  almost  phenom- 
enal growth  of  the  former  i)lace  did  not  be- 


86 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


gin  until  some  years  later.  Preble  and 
Little  York,  which  were  (especially  the 
former)  busy  and  thriving  villages  previous 
to  the  ad\'ent  of  the  railroad,  soon  came  to 
a  stand-still,  if  they  did  not  actually  retro- 
grade, in  favor  of  Homer  and  Cortland  ;  the 
same  may  be  said  of  Virgil  and  Blodget's 
Mills,  the  former  once  thriving  and  grow- 
ing village  suffering  materially  from  its  per- 
manent isolation  from  railroad  communica- 
tion. Marathon  is  situated  far  enough  south 
of  Cortland  to  prevent  the  loss  of  much  of 
its  business  in  that  direction,  while  it  has 
profited  by  the  contiguity  of  Lisle  (Broome 
count)")  on  the  south,  and  the  hamlet  of 
State  Bridge  and  East  Virgil  on  the  north. 
It  is,  moreover,  in  the  midst  of  an  excel- 
lent grazing  and  agricultural  district,  and 
became  a  market  of  importance  for  butter 
and  other  products,  so  that  its  advancement 
has  been  continuous.  Cincinnatus,  Taylor, 
WiUet,  Scott,  and  most  of  the  hamlets  of 
the  county  have  not  directly  gained  in 
business  importance  through  the  construc- 
tion of  the  railroad. 

On  the  2d  day  of  September,  1853,  the 
first  and  only  death  penalty  ever  inflicted  in 
Cortland  county  was  paid  by  Patrick  O'Don- 
ohue,  for  the  murder  of  Mrs.  Jane  Ann 
Kinney,  of  Truxton,  on  the  3d  of  Septem- 
ber, 1852.  The  following  account  of  the 
traged)'  is  condensed  from  Goodwin's  his- 
tory :  — 

"O'Donohue's  daughter,  Elizabeth,  a  girl  of 
ten  years,  had  been  forbidden  to  visit  ti.e  house 
of  Mrs.  Kinney.  This  command  she  disobeyed, 
and  to  escape  the  vengeance  of  her  father's  fiend- 
like temper,  her  two  elder  sisters  secreted  her  in 
a  ledge  of  jagged  rocks,  and  then  informed  their 
father  that  she  had  been  stolen.  O'Donohue 
hastened  from  his  work  in  the  woods,  accom- 
panied by  his  wife  and  two  or  three  children,  all 
in  a  high  state  of  e-xcitement.  He  was  falsely 
made  to  believe  that  the  abductor  was  no  other 
than  the  husband  of  Mrs.  Kinney,  whom  he  pre- 
sumed to  be  his  enemv. 


"A  search  for  the  little  girl  was  instituted  by 
the  father  and  his  son,  the  former  carrying  a 
loaded  gun.  The  search  was  given  up  about  the 
middle  of  the  forenoon ;  at  about  this  time  Mrs. 
Kinney  and  her  daughter  were  on  their  way  to 
the  residence  of  a  neighbor,  and  of  necessity  had 
to  pass  by  the  house  of  O'Donohue.  Just  as 
they  drew  near  it  they  were  met  by  the  murderer, 
who  angrily  asked  Mrs.  Kinney  if  she  had  seen 
Elizabeth.  Receiving  a  negative  answer,  he  flew 
into  a  terrible  passion,  leveled  his  gun  and  fired 
at  Mrs.  Kinney ;  the  contents  of  the  weapon 
grazed  her  side,  causing  her  to  stagger  forward. 
O'Donohue  was  now  more  enraged  than  before. 
Reversing  his  gun  he  struck  the  defenseless  wo- 
man several  blows,  the  second  of  which  dislo- 
cated her  neck.  Not  yet  satisfied  he  flew  at  the 
daughter,  who  had  fallen  from  fright,  and  plunged 
the  bayonet  of  the  gun  into  her  body;  although 
she  seized  the  weapon,  the  demon  wrenched  it 
from  her  grasp  and  thrust  it  again  and  again  into 
her  body.  The  tragedy  was  discovered,  soon 
after  it  was  committed,  by  Charles  McKnight. 
As  he  approached  the  spot  his  hfe  was  threat- 
ened by  O'Donohue,  but  he  gained  a  full  view 
of  the  victims.  He  advised  the  murderer  to  go 
to  the  village  and  give  himself  up  to  the  author- 
ities, presuming  him  to  be  crazy.  He  told  him 
that  men  suffering  from  a  diseased  mind  were 
not  always  responsible  for  their  acts ;  perhaps  he 
would  not  be  punished.  The  murderer  seemed 
to  accept  the  counsel,  for  he,  with  his  wife  and 
son,  started  toward  the  village,  where  he  was 
afterward  arrested.  His  indictment  followed  at 
the  October  term  of  the  County  Court,  and  he 
was  tried  at  the  following  July  Oyer  and  Ter- 
miner. Hon.  Schuyler  Crippen  was  the  presid- 
ing judge,  associated  with  John  S.  Dyer  and 
Noah  H.  Osborne.  R.  Holland  Duell,  then 
district  attorney,  and  General  Nye,  appeared 
in  behalf  of  the  people;  Horatio  Ballard  and 
Daniel  Gott,  counsel.  The  prisoner  was  found 
guilty  of  murder  in  the  first  degree,  on  the  3d 
of  August,  1853.  O'Donoliue  w-as  hung  in  the 
court-house  on  the  date  before  mentioned." 

We  now  approach  the  period  in  the  his- 
tory of  Cortland  count}'  when  the  great 
political  movement  began  which  resulted  in 
the   formation  of  the   Republican   party  in 


From  1830  to  the  Present  Time. 


87 


the  year  1855,  and  led  thence  rapidly  down 
to  the  beginning  of  a  foiirj-ears'  war,  which 
drenched  the  country  in  the  blood  of  her 
own  sons  —  a  war  born  of  the  insatiate  pur- 
pose of  a  section  of  the  Republic  to  perpet- 
uate in  a  civilized  country  an  uncivilized  and 
uncivilizing  institution,  the  keystone  of 
which  was,  property  in  the  bodies  and  souls 
of  men,  women  and  children.  The  organ- 
ization of  the  new  party  in  this  county  was 
effected  pursuant  to  the  following  call :  — 

"Republican  County  Convention.  Those 
electors  of  the  County  of  Cortland  who  are  op- 
posed to  the  extension  of  .slavery  over  the  Ter- 
ritories of  the  United  States,  and  to  the  reception 
into  the  Union  or  annexation  of  States,  Territories 
or  Countries,  where  slavery  already  exists  and  are 
in  favor  of  forming  a  new  party  for  the  defense 
of  freedom  against  the  encroachments  of  the  slave 
power,  are  requested  to  meet  in  Convention  at 
the  Court  House  in  Cortland  Village,  on  Wed- 
nesday, the  15th  day  of  August,  at  one  o'clock, 
P.  M.,  for  the  purpose  of  choosing  delegates  to 
the  State  Republican  Convention  at  Syracuse, 
on  the  26th  day  of  September  next,  and  for  tran- 
sacting such  other  business  as  may  be  necessary. 
Dated  Cortlandville,  July  20th,  1855. 

"C.  Green,  Samuel  Babcock,  Chas.  H.  Whea- 
don,  J.  M.  Schermerhorn,  Jos.  R.  Dixon,  Joseph 
Conger,  G.  W.  Phillips,  Geo.  W.  Samson,  E.  F. 
Thomas,  H.  F.  Lyman,  S.  Brewer,  F.  Goodyear, 
Michael  Spencer,  Wm.  R.  Stone,  Wm.  Elder, 
L.  D.  Davis,  Josiah  Stone,  W.  H.  Harrington, 
N.  Jones,  jr.,  Samuel  Plumb,  Geo.  P.  I^ann,  An- 
drew Hutchings,  Lora  Gross,  O.  H.  Smith,  John 
J.  Adams,  E.  Mudge,  C .  W.  Copeland,  Israel 
Palmer,  J.  B.  Gates,  H.  T.  Townley,  A.  Mudge, 
Edwin  Norton,  R.  P.  Babcock,  A.  \V.  Clark,  A- 
D.  C.  Barber,  Joseph  .\twater,  A.  Salisbury, 
Isaac  W.  Brown,  Manly  Hobart,  Newell  Jones, 
Jabez  Briggs,  Geo.  K.  Stiles,  G.  N.  Woodward, 
H.  Bowen,  H.  A.  Jarvis,  J.  W.  Strowbridge, 
Horace  Buel,  James  Freeman,  L.  H.  Utley,  M. 
Woodruff,  Thos.  G.  Copeland,  A.  G.  Tuttle,  R. 
Lambert,  E.  W.  Edgcomb,  Z.  B.  Mason,  R. 
Palmer,  James  T.  Hawley,  William  McGraw, 
Deloss  C.  McGraw,  T.  Boland,  Judah  Cowles, 
L.  G.  Calkins,  Russel  Cowles,  A.  Caldwell,  Wm. 
C.  -Angel,  M.  R.  Smith,  Nelson  L.  Brooks,   Na- 


than Bouton,  N.  Haight,  Theodore  Hooker, 
John  Hillsinger,  S.  Conger,  F.  M.  Buell,  John 
R.  Earl,  J.  T.  Bostwick,  T.  G.  Jones,  Edwin 
Darby,  S.  Lucas,  M.  G.  Lee,  Israel  Gee,  Edward 
Gee,  Arthur  Holmes,  D.  Corey,  Wm.  W.  Brown, 
L.  W.  Holmes,  H.  D.  Corey,  Miner  Webster, 
Emory  Potter,  Elijah  Jipson,  Shuball  Carver, 
Jacob  Hutchings,  J.  H.  Parker,  G.  L.  Oakley,  G. 
W.  Crocker,  Eben.  Perkins,  Jesse  Rogers,  Wm. 
Squires,  Nathaniel  Bouton,  C.  S.  Hyatt,  E.  F. 
Phillips,  J.  Taggart,  David  Scofield,  Mose.s-Van 
Buren,  J.  L.  Gillett,  H.  Orcutt.  J.  Van  Orsdale." 

This  call  was  first  published  on  the  29th 
of  July,  1855.  The  convention  was  iield 
and  delegates  appointed  to  attend  the  State 
Republican  convention  in  Syracuse,  on 
the  26th  of  September.  The  new  party 
started  out  under  what  appeared  favorable 
prospects  as  far  as  related  to  this  county. 
The  W^iig,  of  Homer,  changed  its  name  to 
the  Republican,  which  title  it  has  since  re- 
tained. H.  G.  Crouch,  who  had  for  several 
years  published  an  excellent  Democratic 
organ  in  Cortland,  left  the  Democrat,  which 
passed  into  the  hands  of  Edwin  F.  Gould 
and  soon  became  the  Cortland  American, 
the  organ  of  the  Know-Nothing  party.  The 
new  Republican  party  received  the  expected 
ridicule  and  predictions  of  disaster  from  the 
organs  of  the  opposite  faction  ;  but  it  was 
destined  for  a  great  future,  which  has  passed 
into  histor)-.  The  resolutions  of  the  new 
organization,  passed  at  the  first  county  con- 
vention, were  as  follows  :  — 

"  Whereas,  The  system  of  human  bondage  is 
radically  antagonistic  to  the  principles  of  religion 
and  the  dictates  of  morality  —  a  curse  to  any 
country  that  cherishes  or  sustains  it ;  and  espe- 
cially opposed  to  the  genius  of  our  free  institu- 
tions; and  at  war  with  their  welfare  and  per- 
petuity. 

"  And,  whereas.  The  South,  in  conjunction  with 
dough-face  abettors,  for  years  has  evinced  a  deter- 
mination by  all  means,  and  at  ail  hazards,  to 
strengthen  and  extend  this  system,  which  design 
has  been  strikingly  manifested  in  the  passage  of 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Law  —  in  the  repeal  of  the 
Missouri    Coni[)romise.    and    more   recently    in 


88 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


tyrannizing  by  a  ruffian  mob  over  the  citizens  of 
Kansas — suppressing  the  freedom  of  speech  — 
corrupting  the  ballot  box  —  sporting  with  their 
lives  —  and  tram])ling  under  foot  their  property; 
therefore  — 

"  Resolved,  That  we  will  consent  to  no  further 
compromise  with  slavery,  that  we  demand  the 
immediate  and  unconditional  repeal  of  the  Fugi- 
tive Slave  Law  —  that  we  will  resist  to  the  last 
extremity  the  admission  into  the  Union  of  another 
Slave  State,  and  the  spread  of  slavery  over  another 
foot  of  American  soil. 

'^Resolved,  That  the  freemen  of  the  north, 
whether  Whigs,  Democrats,  Know  Nothings, 
Know  Somethings,  or  Abolitionists,  are  now  called 
upon  for  the  vindication  of  their  insulted  man- 
hood as  well  as  the  defense  of  their  country's 
freedom,  to  break  loose  from  party  ties,  to  lay 
aside  old  political  predilections,  and  unite  in  one 
common  cause  —  resistance  to  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  Slave  Power. 

"Resolved,  That  slavery  is  sectional — but  that 
Freedom  is  national ;  and  that  those  who  rally 
for  its  defense  are  not  sectionalists  or  disunionists; 
but  guard  the  corner  stone  upon  which  are  pil- 
lared the  prosperity  and  very  existence  of  our 
whole  country. 

"Resolved,  That  while  we  are  laboring  to  re- 
strain and  banish  from  our  land  the  system  of 
physical  bondage,  we  would  not  be  unmindful  of 
that  vile  and  degrading  servitude  to  the  intoxi- 
cating cup  that  oppresses  so  many  thousands ; 
but  we  bid  God  speed  to  every  effort  calculated 
to  deliver  and  restore  them,  and  especially  to 
those  at  the  ballot-box ;  and  that  we  have  full 
confidence  in  our  present  Prohibitory  Liquor 
Law." 

The  local  political  field  continued  to  be 
occupied  by  quite  active  spirits  until  the 
memorable  campaign  of  1859-60,  when 
Abraham  Lincoln  was  made  president  of 
the  United  States,  taking  upon  himself  one 
of  the  greatest  burdens  ever  borne  by  man. 
Cortland  was  then  in  the  23d  Senatorial  Dis- 
trict, with  Madison  and  Chenango ;  P.  H. 
McGraw  was  elected  Senator.  R.  Holland 
Duell  was  elected  to  Congress,  Geo.  B.  Jones, 
district  attorney,  and  J.  A.  McVean  Mem- 


ber of  Assembly,  and  the  Republican  ticket 
generally  triumphed.  The  contest  between 
A.  P.  Smith  and  Hiram  Crandall  for  county 
judge  was  especially  spirited,  daily  editions 
of  both  Republican  and  Democratic  organs 
being  issued  in  support  of  the  respective 
candidates,  who  were,  as  usual  in  such 
cases,  made  to  appear  by  the  opposite  or- 
gans as  most  decidedly  unfit  for  the  office. 
Mr.  Crandall  was  elected.  The  Civil  War 
was  ushered  in  with  the  attack  on  Fort 
Sumter  on  the  9th  day  of  April,  1861,  the 
history  of  which,  as  it  relates  to  this  county, 
is  given  in  another  chapter. 

It  had  for  several  years,  prior  to  i860, 
been  apparent  to  the  Supervisors  of  the 
county  that  something  must  be  done  to 
provide  better  jail  accommodations.  The 
old  jail  under  the  court-house  had  been 
frequently  enlarged  and  repaired,  and  in 
1859  the  Supervisors  authorized  Abram 
Mudge  to  associate  himself  with  another 
competent  person  to  estimate  the  cost  and 
propose  plans  for  a  new  jail  suitable  for  the 
county  and  report  at  the  meeting  of  i860. 
In  November,  i860,  the  board  authorized 
the  raising  of  $8,000  for  the  purpose  of 
building  a  jail  substantially  on  the  plans 
suggested  b}-  Mr.  Mudge,  who,  with  W'm. 
E.  Tallman,  was  made  the  building  com- 
mittee. The  present  excellent  jail  was  the 
result  of  this  action.  ^ 

1  It  was  in  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  1865  that 
Erving  Taintor,  the  "Bard  of  Harford,"  offered  a  reso- 
lution providing,  in  substance,  for  application  to  the 
Legislature  for  such  alteration  of  the  laws  as  would  al- 
low the  dog  ta.x  to  be  applied  to  the  school  fund.  .Ap- 
pended to  the  resolution  in  the  old  record  liook  appears 
the  following  poetical  argument  in  favor  of  the  resolu- 
tion : — 

Now,  in  the  Scriptures  it  is  said 

Vou  shall  not  take  the  children's  bread 

.\nd  give  it  to  the  dogs  ; 
Neither  shall  men,  or  boys,  or  girls. 
Or  lovely  women  take  their  pearls 

.\nd  cast  them  to  the  hogs. 

But  e'er  intent  on  doing  good, 
C'live  hogs  and  dogs  their  proper  food, 
\n<\  knowledge  to  the  fools; 


A.  L.  CHAMBERl.AIX 


From  1830  to  the  Present  Time. 


89 


Between  the  years  1865  and  1870  the 
people  of  the  count)',  and  especially  of 
Cortlandville,  became  very  enthusiastic  over 
the  subject  of  further  railroad  construction, 
which  would  give  them  better  connections 
with  other  portions  of  the  State.  The  vil- 
lage of  Cortland  had  fully  entered  upon  the 
period  of  growth  which  has  since  given  it 
justly  earned  fame  from  Lake  Erie  to  the 
Hudson  river  ;  manufacturing  interests  were 
springing  up  or  being  earnestly  discussed 
in  Cortland,  Homer,  Marathon,  McGraw- 
ville  and  other  localities;  the  farming  com- 
munities were  prosperous,  the  dairying  in- 
terest having  shown  a  wonderful  increase 
since  i860  and  become  an  important  source 
of  revenue;  cheese  factories  had  been  es- 
tablished in  all  parts  of  the  county,  and  the 
quality  of  their  product,  with  that  of  the 
county  butter,  ranked  second  to  those  of 
only  one  or  two  other  counties  in  the  State. 
This  state  of  affairs  found  the  towns  through 
which  it  was  proposed  to  run  new  railroad 
lines  ready  to  lend  them  their  aid  through 
the  liberal  issue  of  bonds,  or  in  other  ways. 

In  1869  the  Ithaca  and  Cortland  Railroad 
Company  was  formed,  for  the  construction 
of  a  line  terminating  at  these  two  villages. 
In  aid  of  this  project  the  town  of  Cortland 
voted  to  bond  itself  for  $100,000.  The 
road  was  completed  and  opened,  and  finally 
extended    to    Elmira,    making    a    valuable 

So,   'tis  the  fashion  now  to  raise 
By  various  means  and  various  ways, 
Money  for  our  schools. 

Now,  if  a  thieving  dog  you  keeji. 
Or  one  that  never  killed  a  sheep. 

Or  dog  of  any  kind, 
Let  him  be  taxed  to  raise  a  store 
Of  several  hundreds,  if  no  more, 
To  cultivate  the  mind. 

Then,  every  dog  of  every  breed 
Will  teach  the  children  how  to  read. 

Or  help  their  education; 
.\nd  thus  a  useless  race  be  made. 
That  never  learned  a  trade, 

To  benefit  the  nation. 


connecting  link  with  the  D.,  L.  &  W.,  and 

e\'entually  proving  of  much   benefit  to  the 
county  at  large. 

Immediately  following  the  agitation  of 
this  railroad  enterprise,  the  Auburn  branch 
of  the  great  Midland  line,  which  might  or 
might  not  come  through  Cortland,  became 
a  topic  of  earnest  and  widespread  discus- 
sion. Cortlandville  and  other  towns  were 
willing  to  bond  themselves  in  large  amounts 
to  attract  the  road  in  this  direction.  When 
it  subsequently  appeared  improbable  that 
this  object  could  be  accomplished,  and  in 
response  to  the  generally  existing  feeling  in 
the  county  in  favor  of  railroad  building  to 
almost  any  point,  the  Utica,  Chenango  and 
Cortland  Railroad  Company  was  formed  ; 
prominent  men  became  interested  in  this 
organization,  one  of  the  foremost  of  whom 
and  one  whose  interests  would  be  large!}- 
subserved  by  the  proposed  road,  being  Hon. 
Perrin  H.  McGraw,  of  McGrawville.  The 
charter  of  the  company  is  dated  April  9, 
1 870.  Preliminary  surveys  had  been  made 
under  direction  of  Fred.  E.  Knight,  of  Cort- 
land village,  as  chief  engineer,  and  after  the 
company  was  fully  organized  the  work  of 
construction  was  begun.  In  aid  of  this 
road  the  town  of  Cortlandville  voted  to 
bond  for  $150,000;  Solon  for  $44,000; 
Cincinnatus  for  $45,500;  Taylor  for  $20,- 
000 ;  Mr.  McGraw  was  made  president  of 
the  company  and  the  work  of  grading  was 
rapidly  pushed  forward  for  a  time.  But 
difficulties  of  a  serious  character  arose,  into 
the  details  of  which  we  need  not  enter,  and 
the  work  was  suspended  after  about  eighteen 
miles  were  graded,  bridges  and  culverts 
built  and  more  than  $300,000  expended. 
The  suspension  was  due  chiefly  to  trouble 
with  contractors,  underestimates  of  cost,  the 
later  failure  of  negotiations  for  consolida- 
tion with  the  Midland  Company  and  the 
financial  panic  of  1873—74.  Almost  the 
whole  sum,  for  which  the  towns  named  issued 


90 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


their  bonds,  has  been  expended  on  this  line. 
Whether  all  of  the  towns  will  finall)-  pay 
these  bonds  entire,  is  a  question  for  the 
future  to  decide;  although  some  of  them 
will  do  so,  the  town  of  Cortlandville  among 
the  number;  her  bonds  having  been  re- 
funded at  five  per  cent,  interest. 

The  line  of  this  road  passed  through 
McGrawville,  Solon,  down  the  valley  of  the 
Gee  brook,  Taylor  to  the  Otselic  valley  to 
an  intersection  with  what  was  known  as  the 
De  Ruyter  branch  of  the  Midland  ;  it  is 
generally  conceded  to  be  a  natural  and  de- 
sirable route  for  a  railroad.  Since  the  sus- 
pension of  work  on  the  line  various  plans 
have  been  suggested  and  discussed  and 
efforts  made  to  finish  the  road,  but  as  yet 
(1884)  nothing  has  been  accomplished.  It 
is  believed,  however,  by  those  competent  to 
judge,  that  it  will  be  put  in  operation  at  a 
not  distant  day.  The  first  of  Board  of 
Directors  were  David  R.  Pierce,  of  Otselic; 
Addison  Taylor  and  John  S.  Blackman,  of 
Cincinnatus;  Calvin  L.  Hathaway,  of  Solon; 
P.  H.  McGraw,  O.  S.  Kinney,  H.  P.  Good- 
rich, Allen  B.  Smith,  Chauncey  Keator, 
Charles  C.  Taylor  and  James  S.  Squires. 
The  board  met  at  the  Messenger  House  in 
Cortland,  March  14th,  1870,  and  elected  P. 
H.  McGraw,  president;  B.  F.  Tillinghast, 
vice-president;  J.  S.  Squires,  treasurer; 
Frank  Place,  secretary. 

The  branch  of  the  Midland  Railroad  did 
finally  come  through  Cortland  county,  and 
was  subsequently  leased  by  the  Utica,  Ithaca 
and  Elmira  road  and  is  now  operated  bj-  it. 
These  lines  that  are  now  in  successful  opera- 
tion give  ample  railroad  connections  east, 
west,  north  and  south,  and  have  done  much 
to  aid  in  the  development  of  the  resources 
of  the  county.  This  process  of  develop- 
ment and  the  growth  of  the  county  in  vari- 
ous respects  during  the  past  twent)-  years 
will  be  better  understood  bj-  reference  to  a 
few  statistics  from  the  census  reports,  with 


which  and  the  civil  list  this  chapter  will  be 
closed  :  — 

The  aggregate  population  of  Cortland 
county  in  1855  was  24,575.  I"  l^So  it  had 
increased  to  25,825.  Cortland  village  had 
a  population  in  1855  of  2,1 17,  which  in- 
creased to  4,050,  in  1880.  Homer  village 
increased  her  population  during  the  same 
period  from  1,625  to  2,331;  and  Marathon 
from  500  to  1,006.  At  the  former  date  the 
acreage  of  improved  land  was  194,736, 
against  218,736  in  1875.  In  1855  the 
amount  of  butter  made  in  the  county  was 
2,379,257  pounds,  against  2,995,101  twenty 
years  later ;  while  the  cheese  production 
increased  in  the  same  period  in  a  similar 
ratio.  In  manufactures  the  growth,  espe- 
cially during  the  past  ten  or  twelve  years,  has 
been  even  more  marked.  That  this  ad- 
vancement will  continue  in  the  future  there 
is  little  doubt. 

CORTI,.\XD   county   CIVIL    LIST. 

County  Judges.i  —  John  Keep,  appointed- 
April  3d,  1810;  William  Mallory,  January 
31st,  1823;  Joseph  Reynolds,  March  9th, 
1833;  Henry  Stephens,  May  17th,  1838; 
Daniel  Hawks,  elected  June,  1847;  Lewis 
Kingsley,  November  7th,  1851;  R.  Holland 
Duell,  November  6th,  1855;  Stephen  Brew- 
er, November  14th,  1859;  Hiram  Crandall, 
November,  1859;  Abram  P.  Smith,  Novem- 
ber, 1867;   S.  S.  Knox,  November,  1882. 

County  Clerks.'- — John  Ballard,  appoint- 
ed April  8th,  1808;  Reuben  Washburn, 
April  3d,  1810;  John  Ballard,  March  4th, 
1811  ;  Mead  Merrill,  April  2d,  181 3  ;  Will- 
iam Mallory,  March  2d,  1815  ;  Joshua  Bal- 
lard, July  7th,  1819  ;  Matthias  Cook,  Feb- 
ruary 14th,  1S21 ;  Samuel  Hotchkiss, elected 
1822;  Orin  Stimpson,  1834;  Gideon  C.  Bab- 

1  Previous  to  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  of  1846 
this  office  was  filled  by  the  "Council  of  .\ppointnient " 
at  Abany. 

-  This  office  was  made  elective  by  the  Constitution  of 
1821. 


From  1830  to  the  Present  Time. 


91 


cock,  1840;  Samuel  Hotchkiss,  jr.,  1843; 
Rufus  A.  Reed,  1849;  Allis  W.  Ogdcn, 
1858  ;  De  Witt  C.  McGraw,  1861  :  Frank 
Place,  1867;  W.  S.  Maycumber,  187C; 
Howard  J.  Harrington,  1879;  R.  W.  Bourne, 
1882. 

District  Attorneys.  —  Augustus  Donncll}', 
1 8 19;  Edward  C.  Reed,  1827  ;  William  H. 
Shankland,  1836;  Horatio  Ballard,  1844; 
Augustus  S.  Ballard,  1847;  R.  Holland 
Duell,  1850;  Edward  C.  Reed,  appointed 
1856  ;  Abram  P.  Smith,  elected  1856  ;  Geo. 
B.Jones,  1859;  Alvah  D.  Waters,  1865; 
Riley  Champlin,  1870;  Lewis  Bouton,  No- 
vember, 1870;  Benjamin  T.  Wright,  1873; 
Byron  A.  Benedict,  1876;  Irving  H.  Pal- 
mer, 1882. 

Sheriffs.'  —  Asahcl  Minor,  April  8th, 
1808;  Wm.  Mallor\-,  appointed  June  9th, 
1808;  Joshua  Ballard,  April  3d,  18 10;  Billy 
Trowbridge,  March  25  th,  18 14;  Wm.  Stew- 
art, March  2d,  1815  ;  Noah  R.  Smith,  Feb- 
ruary 13th,  1819;  Moses  Hopkins,  Febru- 
ary 1 2th,  1821  ;  David  Cove,  elected  1822; 
Adin  Webb,  1828;  Wm.  Andrews,  1831  ; 
Gilmore  Kinney,  1834;  E.  W.  Edgcomb, 
1837;  Alanson  Carley,  1840  ;  Christian  Etz, 
1843;  George  Ross,  1846;  J.  C.  Pomeroy, 
1849;  Frederick  Ives,  1852  ;  John  S.  Sam- 
son, 1855  ;  Silas  Baldwin,  1858;  Frederick 
Ives,  1861  ;  N.  H.  Haynes,  1864  ;  Isaac  W. 
Brown,  1867;  John  D.  Benton,  1870;  N. 
H.  Haynes,  1873;  Harlow  G.  Borthwick, 
1876;  Gerret  S.  Van  Hoe.sen,  1879;  H.  G. 
Borthwick,  1882. 

Treasurers.-  —  Justin  M.  Pierce,  1848; 
Edwin  F.  Gould,  185  i  ;  Isaac  M.  Seaman, 
1854  ;  Horace  L.  Green,  1857  ;  Lora  Gross, 
i860;  Daniel  H.  Burr,  1863;  George  W. 
Webster,  1866  ;  John  S.  Cornue,  1869  ;  A. 

•  This  office  was  made  elective  in  1821. 

-  In  all  of  the  civil  lists  availalile  this  office  is  dated 
from  1848.  Obadiah  Boies  was  treasurer  of  this  county 
from  its  organization  and  held  the  office  until  1822,  when 
he  was  succeeded  by  Kdmond  .Mallory,  who  was  followed 
in  1825  by  William  Mallory. 


S.   Waters,    1872;  Robert   Bu.shby,  1875; 

the  present  incumbent. 

Surrogates.' — John  McWhorter,  ap- 
pointed April  8th,  1808;  Mead  Merrill, 
1810;  Luther  F.  Stevens,  1811;  Adin 
Webb,  1816;  Jabez  B.  Phelps,  1823  ;  Chas. 
W.  Lynde,  1828;  Townsend  Ross,  1832; 
Anthony  Freer,  1836;  Adin  Webb,  1840; 
Anthony  Freer,  1844. 

Members  of  Assembh'.  —  Ephraim  Fish, 
1 8 10;  Billy  Trowbridge,  181 1;  Wm.  Mal- 
lory, 1814;  S.  G.  Hathaway,  1815  ;  Joseph 
Reynolds,  1816;  John  Miller,  1817;  S.  G. 
Hathaway,  1818;  Joseph  Reynolds,  18 19; 
John  Miller,  1820;  John  Osborn,  1821  ; 
Daniel  Sherwood,  1822  ;  John  Gillett,  1823; 
Matthias  Cook  and  Wm.  Barto,  jr.,  1824; 
Josiah  Hart  and  J.  Chatterton,  1825  ;  John 
Lynde  and  Augustus  A.  Donnelly,  1826; 
Nathan  Dayton  and  Cephas  Comstock, 
1827;  Nathan  Dayton  and  John  L.  Boyd, 
1828;  Gideon  Curtis  and  Alanson  Carley, 
I  829  ;  Henry  Stephens  and  Chauncey  Keep, 
1830;  Fredus  Howard  and  Chas.  Richard- 
son, 183 1  ;  Andrew  Dickson  and  J.  L. 
Woods,  1832  ;  David  Mathews  and  Enos  S. 
Halbert,  1833  ;  Oliver  Kingman  and  S.  Bo- 
gardus,  1834;  Barak  Niles  and  Aaron 
Brown,  1835  ;  Chauncey  Keep  and  Cephas 
Comstock,  1  >i^6 ;  Josiah  Hine  and  John 
Thomas,  1837;  John  Osgood  and  David 
Mathews,  183S;  G.  S.  Green  and  George 
Isaacs,  1839;  Jabez  B.  Phelps  and  Wm. 
Barnes,  1 840 ;  Nathan  Heaton  and  Lovel 
G.  Mickels,  1841  ;  Orin  Stimpson  and  Jesse 
Ives,  1842  ;  H.  McGraw  and  George  N. 
Niles,  1843  ;  J.  Kingman,  jr.,  and  Piatt  F. 
Grow,  1844;  John  Pierce,  2d,  and  Geo.  J. 
J.  Barber,  1845  ;  Amos  Graves  and  John 
Miller,  1846  ;  Timothy  Green,  1847  ;  James 
Comstock,  1848;  Ira  Skeel,  1849;  Lewis 
Kingsley,  1850;  Alvan  Kellogg,  1851; 
Geo.  W.  Bradford,  1852  ;  Ashbel  Patterson, 

1  After  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  of  1846  this 
office  has  been  merged  with  that  of  county  judge. 


92 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1853;  Jolm  11.  Knapp,  1854;  Georj^e  J. 
Kingman,  1855;  Joseph  Atwater,  1856; 
Nathan  Bouton,  1857  !  Artlnir  Holmes, 
1858;  John  A.  McVcan,  i860;  Loammi 
Kinney,  1861 ;  Thomas  Barry,  1862;  Henry 

B.  Van  Hoesen,  1863;  B.  F.  TilHnghast, 
1864;  Dann  C.  Squires,  1865;  Stephen 
Patrick,  1866  ;  Horatio  Ballard,  1867  ;  Ray- 
mond P.  Babcock,  1868  ;  Hiram  Whitmarsh, 
1869;  Charles  I'oster,  1870;  Henry  S. 
Randall,  1871;  Dann  C.  Squires,  1872; 
Geo.  W.  Phillips,  1873;  Geo.  W.  Phillips, 
1874;   Daniel  E.  VVhitmorc,  1875  ;  Judson 

C.  Nelson,  1876;  Deloss  McGraw,  1877; 
Orris  U.  Kellogg,  1878;  Geo.  H.Arnold, 
1879;   Samuel   A.   Childs,     1880;   Alburtis 


A.  Carley,  1881  ;  Alburtis  A.  Carley, 
1882. 

Members  of  Congress  from  Cortland 
County. —  John  Miller,  1824;  Edward  C. 
Reed,  1830;  S.  G.  Hathaway,  1832;  Jo- 
seph Reynolds,  1834;  Lewis  Riggs,  1840; 
Harmon  S.  Conger,  1846;  R.  Holland 
Duel),  1858,  1871  and   1873. 

State  Senators  from  Cortland  County.  — 
William  Mallory,  1818;  S.  G.  Hathaway, 
1822;  Chas.  W.  Lynde,  1S30;  \Vm.  Bart- 
lit,  1841  ;  Geo.  W.  Bradford,  1853,  1855; 
Perrin  H.  McGraw,  i860. 

Secretaries  of  State  from  Cortland  Count)-. 
—  Henry  S.  Randall,  185  i  ;  Horatio  Bal- 
lard, 1 86 1. 


CHAPTER  X. 

MII.nWKV   history.  — the  76TII   RICOIMENT. 

Early  Organizations  —  Military  Spirit  in  Early  Days  —  "General  Training"  Days  —  Military  Dignitaries  in  the 
Old  Militia  —  Cortland  County  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  —  The  News  from  Bull  Run  —  Its  Effects  at  the  North 
—  The  County  Aroused — .An  Imiiortant  Meeting  —  Suggestions  for  the  Organization  of  a  Regiment  —  Meetings 
Held  Throughout  the  County — Recruiting  —  The  76th  Regiment  Organized  —  Camp  Established  on  the  Fair 
Grounds  —  The  Green-McNett  Trouble  —  Departure  of  the  Regiment  —  Reorganization  —  Line  and  Staff  Officers  — 
Off  for  New  York  —  Ordered  to  \Yashington  —  Camp  Life  at  Meridian  Hill  —  Ordered  to  Fredericksburg  —  Colonel 
Wainwright  Assigned  to  the  Command  of  the  Regiment  —  The  First  Battle  —  Ex.amples  of  Heroism  —  The 
Second  Bull  Run  —  .South  Mountain  and  the  Conflict  —  .At  Fredericksburg  —  The  Bloody  Field  of  Gettysburg  —  An 
Execution —  In  the  Wilderness  —  M  Spottsylvania  —  In  Petersburg  —  "Expended  in  the  Service"  —  Home. 


ALTHOUGH  Cortland  county  is  one  of 
the  smallest  in  the  State,  she  has  every 
reason  to  be  proud  of  her  military  record. 
Many  of  the  early  residents,  or  their  imme- 
diate relatives,  took  part  in  the  war  of  1 8 1 2, 
and  it  is  stated  tliat  sixteen  soldiers  of  the 
Revolution  drew  lots  and  located  in  this 
county.  The  sad  story  told  by  many  hun- 
dreds of  graves,  marked  and  unmarked,  re- 
veals what  a  host  went  out  from  here  to 
fight  for  the  preservation  of  the  Union  in 
the  last  terrible  conflict. 

The  first  military  organization  directly 
affecting  the  territory  embraced  within  the 
coiuit)',   dates  back   to    1796.       In   March, 


1794,  after  the  erection  of  Onondaga  county 
from  Herkimer,  various  appointments  were 
made  for  the  new  count)-,  particularl)'  for 
the  battalions  of  Major  John  L.  Harden- 
burgh,  Moses  Dewitt  and  Asa  Danforth, 
the  latter  of  Onondaga  count)'.  In  1796  his 
battalion  was  made  a  regiment,  its  material 
to  come  from  the  townships  of  Hannibal, 
Lysander,  Cicero,  Manlius,  Pompey,  Fabius, 
Solon,  Cincinnatus,  Ttilly,  Virgil,  Camillus, 
Sempronius,  Locke,  Dr)-den,  and  the  Onon- 
daga Reservation.  Mr.  Danforth  was  made 
Lieutenant-  Colonel  coinmandant. 

In  tliose  days  the  military  spirit  was  more 
active  than  at  the  present  time.     The  war  of 


KISKNEZER    MUUGK. 


MiLiTARV  History.  —  The  76x11  Regiment. 


93 


the  Revolution  had  terminated  but  a  few 
years  before,  and  the  Federal  constitution  had 
recently  gone  into  effect.  The  new  govern- 
ment was  looked  upon  as  to  a  certain  extent 
experimental,  doubts  being  felt  of  its  perma- 
nenc)-.  Foreign  complications  were  threat- 
ening the  peace,  while  the  borders  were  still 
menaced  by  the  Indians.  Therefore  the 
wisdom  of  kecing  up  efficient  military  or- 
ganizations in  every  county  was  generally 
acknowledged.  Military  honors  and  office 
implied  much  more  distinction  than  in  later 
years,  and  were  sought  with  corresponding 
avidity.  Seekers  after  political  preferment 
were  prompt  to  join  the  military  ranks  as  a 
step  thereto,  while  the  wearing  of  a  uniform 
and  the  pleasure  and  excitement  of  "train- 
ing days"  attracted  the  masses  of  those  lia- 
ble to  military  duty.  Wherever  they  were 
held,  thousands  flocked  to  the  scene,  filling 
the  adjacent  highways,  perching  on  the 
fences  and  climbing  trees.  The  farmers  came 
in  with  barrels  of  new  cider  in  their  wagons, 
which  fluid  was  supplemented  by  the  pop- 
ular golden  ginger  bread,  and  general  hilar- 
ity ensued  on  all  such  occasions. 

The  old  militia  organization  continued  in 
this  State  until  the  year  1862,  when  it  gave 
way  to  the  "National  Guard  of  the  State  of 
New  York,"  and  this  was,  in  turn,  swallowed 
up  by  the  organization  of  the  vast  northern 
armies  for  the  suppression  of  rebellion.  Go- 
ing back  to  the  year  1818  (and  probably 
even  earliei'),  we  find  indications  of  an  act- 
ive martial  spirit  in  Cortland  county.  At 
that  time  it  appears  that  the  Thirty- sixth 
Brigade  embraced  the  county,  of  which 
Martin  Keep  was  brigadier-general,  Enos 
Stimson,  brigade-major  and  inspector,  and 
Augustus  Donnelly,  aid-de-camp.  The  lat- 
ter officer  was  appointed  on  the  ist  of  June 
of  that  year,  under  brigade  order,  dated  at 
headquarters  in  Homer.  The  same  order  ap- 
pointed Lieut.  S.  G.  Hathaway,  Capt.  Sam- 
uel Bull,  Capt.  John  J.Adams,  Capt. 


Hemenway  and  Lieut.   Chauncey  Keep,  a 

coiul  martial.  Another  brigade  order  of  that 
year  commanded  all  non-commissioned  offi- 
cers and  musicians  to  meet  September  ist 
at  9  o'clock,  at  the  public  square.  Homer, 
for  military  exercise.  "Col.  Elijah  Wheeler 
will  issue  similar  orders  to  his  regiment  of 
artillery  and  riflemen."  The  58th  Regiment, 
under  comfnand  of  Col.  Martin  Phelps,  was 
ordered  to  parade  on  the  15th  of  Septem- 
ber, on  the  public  square  at  Homer ;  and 
the  4th  Regiment,  Col.  Wheeler,  on  the  i6th 
of  September,  in  Solon. 

A  brigade  order  of  August,  1819,  was 
signed  by  Martin  Phelps  as  brigadier-gen- 
eral, and  appointed  Andrew  Dickson,  pres- 
ident, Capts.  Washington  Parker,  Wm.  H. 
Warner,  and  Solomon  Baker,  jr.,  and  Ad- 
jutant Azariel  Blanchard,  a  court  martial. 
In  that  )-ear  the  regiments  of  Cols.  Dickson, 
Hathaway  and  Reynolds  were  ordered  to 
parade.  In  1820  S.  G.  Hathaway  became 
commander  of  the  36th  Brigade.  In  1833  we 
find  notice  published  by  Col.  Judah  Pierce, 
jr.,  commanding  the  67th  Regiment,  of  a 
court  martial  to  be  held  in  Truxton  in  May 
of  that  year.  In  1853  this  count}-  was  em- 
braced in  the  5  2d  Regiment,  commanded 
by  Col.  O.  M.  Welch,  which,  with  the  51st 
Regiment  of  Onondaga  county,  formed  the 
24th  Brigade.  A  four  days  encampment  of 
the  brigade  was  held  in  Syracuse,  in  Au- 
gust of  that  year. 

But  we  need  not  follow  through  the  many 
succeeding  years  the  almost  innumerable 
changes  and  promotions  that  occurred  in 
the  officers  of  the  old  militia  organization 
of  the  county  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  mil- 
itary spirit  of  those  days,  coupled,  as  it  often 
was,  with  political  distinction,  developed 
many  officers  \\ho  would  undoubtedly  have 
pro\en  their  heroism  and  bravery  on  a  hard 
fought  field,  if  such  had  been  their  destiny  ; 
but,  hapijil)-,  they  li\-ed  ihrough  an  era  of 
peace,  closely  following   upon    the  bloody 


94 


History  of  Cortland  Cuuntv. 


heels  of  war.  The  annual  reviews  of  the 
several  regiments  of  the  county  were  for 
many  years  held  cither  in  Homer,  Virgil, 
Cincinnatus  or  Solon  ;  in  later  years  some 
of  the  "trainings"  were  held  in  Cortland 
village,  in  the  fields  then  vacant  south  of 
Tompkins  and  west  of  South  Main  street. 
In  the  Reminiscences  published  a  few  years 
since  by  Hon.  Horatio  Ballard,  he  gave  the 
following  account  of  military  affairs  here- 
abouts in  early  times,  which  will  recall  vivid 
recollections  of  their  martial  experience  in 
the  minds  of  the  few  who  are  left  of  the  elder 
organizations :  — 

"The  regiment  embracing  the  undivided  town 
of  Homer,  Preble  and  Scott  was  a  noble  one.  It 
was  composed  of  a  company  of  cavalry,  grena- 
diers, artillery,  rifle  and  infantry.  Military  pride 
was  then  cultivated  and  upheld  throughout  the 
ranks  of  society.  I  hope  there  are  some  yet  liv- 
ing who  will  remember  the  splendid  'troop  of 
cavalry '  as  it  paraded  on  the  '  green'  in  Homer, 
commanded  by  Joshua  Ballard,  and  officered  by 
the  cherished  names  of  David  Coye,  Isaac  Rindge, 
Stephen  Knapp,  Henry  De  Voe,  and  others,  with 
Roswell  Lee  as  trumpeter,  and  '  Hi.'  Herrick  as 
color-bearer;  or  the  brilliant  company  of  gren- 
adiers, dressed  in  beautiful  uniforms  and  com- 
manded by  Hezekiah  Roberts,  with  Jeremiah 
Day  on  the  fife,  and  Jerry  Selkreg  on  the  drum, 
as  his  chief  musicians ;  or  the  heavy  artillery, 
with  its  brass  ordnance,  marching  with  stately 
tread  through  the  streets  of  Homer,  and  com- 
manded by  Benajah  Tubbs ;  or  the  rifle  com- 
pany, in  uniform  of  green  tunics  and  feathers  in 
caps,  moving  on  the  double-quick,  and  com- 
manded by  John  Etz. 

"0,  who  that  shared  them  ever  shall  forget 

The  emotions  of  that  spirit-rousing  time," 

when  the  old-fashioned    "general    training  day' 

occurred  in  the  village  of  Homer,  and  General 

Daniel  Miller,'  in   full   military  dress,  including 

1  General  Miller,  whose  name  has  often  occurred  in 
these  pages,  was  for  a  time  on  the  Niagara  frontier  in  the 
War  of  i8i2.  It  is  said  of  him  (hat  he  gained  his  knowl- 
edge of  how  to  handle  men  by  military  tactics  through 
practice  with  kernels  of  corn,  before  he  left  his  home ;  but 
he  acknowledged  after  his  return,  that  when  it  came  to 
commanding  men  in  the  field,  he  found  a  vast  difference, 
which  made  it  difficult  to  apply  his  hard-earned  knowledge. 


a  tall,  straight  yellow  jjlume  and  chapeau  and 
buff  pants,  bestriding  his  caparisoned  horse,  with 
erect  and  stately  mein  and  commanding  look, 
took  his  station  with  his  staff"  to  receive  the 
marching  salute  of  the  regiment.  A  jjicket  guard 
had  to  be  stationed  to  withstand  the  jjress  of  the 
multitude. 

"  It  was  a  marked  era  in  the  history  of  the  old 
brigade  when  Roswell  Randall  became  its  com- 
mandant. He  was  a  model  military  officer, 
possessed  of  faultless  taste  in  the  matters  of  mil- 
itary dress,  and  was  fond  of  the  splendors  of  mil- 
itary parades.  The  brigade  staff  was  composed 
of  Enos  Stimson,  brigade  inspector;  J.  De  Puy 
Freer,  judge  advocate;  John  D.  Matthews,  sur- 
geon ;  Henry  S.  Randall,  aid ;  Hiram  C.  Mc- 
Kay, quartermaster,  and  George  Barber,  pay- 
master. On  the  resignation  of  Major  Stimson, 
the  writer  of  this  number  was  appointed  by  the 
governor  as  brigade  inspector. 

"  In  the  uniform  of  the  general  and  staff",  and 
the  trappings  of  the  horses,  the  military  regula- 
tions were  fully  carried  out.  Nothing  was  want- 
ing. The  county  was  laid  under  contribution 
for  the  best  horses  for  annual  parades.  These 
were  palmy  days  in  the  military  annals  of  the 
county. 

"  General  Randall  possessed  manly  beauty  and 
a  graceful  horsemanship,  combined  with  a  thor- 
ough knowledge  of  inilitary  evolutions.  He  was 
ambitious  to  sustain  the  organization  of  the  mili- 
tia, and  to  have  the  reviews  command  not  only 
the  respect  but  the  admiration  of  the  people. 
His  words  and  his  example  were  felt  throughout 
the  military  ranks  of  the  county,  and  were  effect- 
ual in  improving  discipline  and  exciting  admira- 
tion for  the  parades  and  maneuvers  of  the  regi- 
ments. 

"This  was  the  period  when  Eleazer  May  was 
the  colonel  of  the  regiment  which  met  at  Homer; 
William  Squires,  colonel  of  the  regiment  which 
met  at  Virgil;  Eli  C.  Dickinson,  colonel  of  the 
regiment  which  met  at  Cincinnatus;  and  Judah 
Pierce,  colonel  of  the  battalion  which  met  at 
Truxton. 

"The  general  and  staff'  were  accustomed  to 
ride  in  carnages  until  within  a  short  distance  of 
the  hotel  quarters,  and  then  to  mount  the  led 
horses  and  ride  into  town  under  the  animating 
blasts  of  the  bugle,  and  with   quickened  pace, 


MiLiTARV  History.  —  The  76111  Regiment. 


95 


forming  in  platoon  before  tlie  hotel,  when  every 
rider  Vould  deliver  at  command  a  ])istol  shot. 
This  was  a  sort  of  prelude  for  the  awakening 
scenes  of  the  day.  .\fter  the  review  was  a  state- 
ly march  of  tlie  regiment  from  the  jiarade  ground 
along  the  streets  of  the  town,  escorting  the  gen- 
eral and  staff,  with  banners  flying,  and  the  mul- 
titude electrified  with  scores  of  'ear- piercing 
fifes,'  and  scores  of  'spirit-stirring  drums,'  em- 
phasized with  the  roar  of  cannon.  Then  came 
the  halt  and  the  official  dismissal,  and  thus  'gen- 
eral training  day'  was  closed. 

"The  only  surviving  regimental  commandant 
of  that  period  is  Colonel  William  Squires,  now 
(1878)  a  resident  of  Marathon.  In  the  vigor  of 
his  years  he  had  a  passion  for  the  military.  He 
soon  rose  to  the  command  of  a  regiment,  and 
then  it  was  that  he  began  to  display  that  re- 
markable magnetic  power  over  a  corps  of  men 
in  the  field  which  gave  him  renown.  He  would 
maneuver  a  regiment  so  that  they  would  go 
through  successive  evolutions  with  the  regularity 
of  the  pieces  in  a  game  of  chess.  It  was  a  no- 
ble military  spectacle,  and  gave  delight  to  the 
encircling  field  of  beholders.  But  the  general 
and  most  of  his  staft",  and  the  field  officers  of  the 
several  regiments,  have  been  dismissed  from 
duty  in  life's  campaign." 

CORTLAND  COUNTY  IX  THE  WAR  OF  THE 
REBELLION. 
When  the  startling  news  of  the  defeat  of 
the  northern  army  at  Bull  Run  in  1861 
came  flashing  from  the  telegraph,  the  peo- 
ple from  among  whom  had  marched  that 
army  —  a  host  great  in  numbers  and  be- 
lie\'ed  to  be  invincible  against  the  boasting 
enemies  of  the  government — could  scarce- 
ly believe  the  appalling  intelligence.  The 
great  army  beaten  by  a  lot  of  rioters  I  Fly- 
ing in  defeat  to  the  defenses  of  Washing- 
ton !  It  could  not  be  true.  The  sequel  is 
well  known  history.  The  North,  for  a  mo- 
ment paralyzed,  quickly  recovered,  and 
united  in  one  grand  military  eftbrt  to  put 
down  the  unholy  attempt  to  sever  the  Union 
and  perpetuate  an  institution  founded  and 
fostered  in   human  oppression  and   wrong. 


One  of  the  minor  features,  yet  one  which 
was  momentous  in  its  consequences,  of  this 
great  effort,  was  the  meeting  of  a  few  ear- 
nest men  in  a  law  office  in  Cortland  village, 
to  consider  what  could  be  done  here  to- 
wards aiding  the  government  in  its  wrestle 
with  the  rebels.  At  this  meeting  there  was 
much  diversity  of  opinion.  One  full  com- 
pany, that  of  Captain  Clark,  had  already 
left  the  county  in  the  23d  Regiment  N.  Y. 
v.,  many  had  gone  in  the  old  12th  Regi- 
ment and  other  organizations,  and  it  was 
feared  b\-  some  that  another  company  could 
not  be  organized  in  the  county,  and  if  it 
could  that  it  would  not  be  wise  to  thus  drain 
the  community  of  its  young  and  able-bodied 
men.  Others  held  different  views.  In  at- 
tendance at  the  meeting  was  Nelson  W. 
Green,  a  man  of  sanguine,  nervous  temper- 
ament, who  had  been  partially  educated  at 
West  Point,  whence  he  was  discharged  on 
account  of  a  wound.  It  was, Mr.  Green 
who  advanced  and  supported  the  sugges- 
tion that  an  entire  regiment  could  be  easily 
raised  in  Cortland  count}'.  After  proper 
consideration  it  was  decided  to  make  the 
attempt,  and  Colonel  Green  was  accordingly 
authorized  by  the  State  to  proceed  with  the 
work.  A  circular  was  prepared  setting 
forth  the  object  in  view,  and  giving  instruc- 
tions to  recruits  as  to  what  course  to  pur- 
sue, and  signed  by  about  thirty  of  the  lead- 
ing citizens  of  Cortland  village  ;  these  were 
distributed  throughout  the  county.  Meet- 
ings were  held  in  every  town,  and  enlist- 
ments went  forward  so  rapidly  that  an  order 
was  soon  obtained  for  the  formation  of  a 
military  camp  at  Cortland.  The  grounds 
of  the  County  Agricultural  Society  were 
leased  for  this  purpose,  and  on  the  26th  of 
September,  1S61,  the  enlisted  men  were 
as.sembled  in  camp.  Recruiting  continued 
in  every  school  district,  and  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  regiment  under  the  inspiring 
number,  Seventy-Si.x,  seemed  to  be  near  at 


96  HiSTORV  OF  CORTLAXD  COCSTY. 

band,  wbco,  oc                         Z'eceniber.  art  »mi  t5ak>gae 

event  C'Ccnrred  ■% :teii~e  ex'rite- 

ment.  and  threatened  to  end  the  carmoay  ^^^  Grt^-  —  "Hje  {XEoaer  ^itxiii  mx  ka¥« 

and  peace  of  the  reganent     Amoag  th  ^"^ 

as  Andrew.  .  7"  ,       ^'      . 

-       .  A  Oreen  —  I>o  woa  recse  B>  ooer   hit 

-  :y,  woo   na  . ::  '  '       ' 

joiied  the  regiment  in  October  with  abG_  Mc>»en:— I  <to.sadiocdasw 

ie«i-enty  men.     To  these  were  ac:  i  ^       '^CtA.   Gieai    (tfemoondng:  and  ckawiBg  a 

or  t-  :  r'nt  from  \ates  c :_    ,r     ssaJl  Sauh  &:  Wesson  petnl) — W3I  Toa  re- 

H.  -    -  -O  was  mae^r-  s.  IiCEienanc     rire  lO  tost  ijaart^rs  ? 

in  Company  A.     In  the  Latter  part  of  No-         -Cape  McXetr  —  I  w51  boc  sk. 

ins  rmnnr-m    and  to  Allegfianir  cocnt^-  to      'J^s^rter^ 

pFOcnre  more  nien.      We  will  grre  the  de-         "'-  -^  -      ::— as-sir. 

soc  ar:  ^loot  me  ityna  dare. 
Smrth : —  ^_ 

-  Og  t&e  ttimu  of  Carcain  McXai.  Colonel  ^  .  -    t-;_  _,,,_l-      \r<-v— -  i.,,,^^^--,-^^ 

■   -::-   -"-"-rT"   — :  ^■"'"  "- !-t3;j  nsed  tEs;    leave  -     -   ,    y,   - 

TO  ?irr  tiD  scrnfe  is.  ._  .„.^  ., 

i : ^  _  _ ; _     _    :  T-.c_  Wjir  '1:1 -_ 

-    .-    J    -    -.    — c  paj'Sr  as  _— -_  

-ed.     Heis  Car'taEa   McNett 

aica:!--— 1-     .         :i„   _ 

'^'^^^^^^^^  ■                                                                    "     Ms  pacrajtsc  cxntzse.  endeared  Mmsrif  to  n..:.: 
xahsLWzz ,: -VetxDT  _,: .-.„-.      __--     -       ^     _       _      ^^^^^^ 

McXecr  made  a  fcrnial  resstartce.  btcr  nnhcn:-      .  Ttrhe^t^ 

in  die  fectc^sn  cfsar  cblLowed  eMs  a^^.  ^Bctte- 

_         -  _         -a— LijT  was  mBbnEe-i  ;  c 

ordered  Cac'Csni  McSes  m.  cfiose  sefesc  m  dse  faines  W.jod  bo  i~  .-- 

laid  BO  sscectam  die  fects-  aad  m  demean  it*"^ 

pamEsaoQ  som  dse  ccnunandanc  of  die  ^asc  -.-t=catvr 

~     xbsz  day  merdie  oEcecs  ot  die  resanjaii:.  wsert 

'^  *^°*P-  .    ^  dte  ir~ 

-  provai  of  tae  coarse  '^g''"  by  Coiciiei  Or:: 

bete  -_----  .     .  - -^  --:  --    ..-_,.3,^; --^_,.:-^      Teener-  - 

some  drtnimlrv.  and  on  his  retnm.  wtsea  riifing  -qs^^ss.^ 

diaE'^Iie  capcan  was  oa^ds  the  door  sftfffciffg     csHfaer  Genaal  W.doc  aCTn  aiec    die  oc:  - 

'       3Z   &-  ■ 

dsooaa  near  el  wtiere  ke  had  rsoned  ej  get      Cofcuid    Greai    was    arrested^   on   a  err-  - : 

:  ^^     :5-     As  CapQiQ  ^     _ '  - . 

2ear  die  doer.  --.^ 


Military  History.  —  The  76TI1  Regiment. 


97 


Oyer  and  Terminer  to  be  held  in  January  fol- 
lowing, to  answer  an  indictment  to  be  found 
against  him  for  assault  with  intent  to  kill." ' 

Orders  were  received  on  the  i6th  of  De- 
cember to  proceed  to  Albany  and  on  the 
1 8th  the  regiment  left  home  and  friends  for 
the  dangers  and  hardships  of  the  battle- 
field. They  arrived  at  Albany  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  same  day  and  were  placed  in 
barracks,  where  many  suffered  severely  from 
the  cold. 

A  court  of  inquiry  had  been  ordered  in 
Colonel  Green's  case  and,  after  an  investi- 
gation of  three  days,  he  was  placed  in  com- 
mand of  the  regiment  by  the  governor,  on 
the  28th. 

While  the  76th  had  been  recruiting  in 
Cortland  county,  similar  work  had  been  in 
progress  in  Otsego  county,  resulting,  early 
in  January,  in  the  departure  for  Albany 
from  Cherry  Valley  of  six  companies  (con- 
solidated into  five)  of  the  39th  regiment  of 
National  Guard,  under  command  of  Col. 
John  D.  Shaul,  who  had  tendered  the  sen,'- 
ices  of  his  regiment  to  the  government. 
These  five  companies  were  captained  by  A. 
L.  Swan,  J.  E.  Cook,  J.  W.  Young,  E.  N. 
Hanson  and  N.  Bowdish.  The.  Cortland 
branch  of  the  76th  numbered  about  800 
men  ;  the  governor  wisely  concluding  that 
it  would  not  be  politic  to  send  Col.  Green 
and  Capt.  McNett  to  the  front  in  the  same 
regiment,  transferred  the  latter  and  his  com- 
pany to  the  93  d  New  York,  then  stationed  j 
at  Albany.  At  the  same  time,  Capt.  J.  V. 
White,  who  had  joined  the  76th  with  about 
forty-five  men,  was  transferred  by  his  re-  ! 
quest  to  the  3d  New  York  Artillery.  The 
remaining  companies  of  the  76th  were  con- 
soUdated  into  seven  —  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F, 
and  G.  Three  companies  were  then  trans- 
ferred  from    the    Otsego   regiment   to  the 

1  Colonel  Green  was  subsequently  tried,  the  jury  failed 
to  agree  and  a  nolU  prosequi  was  entered  npon  the  in-   ] 
dictmenL  | 


76th,  Captain  Swan's  company  becoming 
Co.  H  ;  Captain  Cook's  Co.  I,  and  Captain 
Young's  Co.  K.  Each  of  these  companies, 
so  far  as  possible,  retained  its  own  officers. 
The  field  and  staff  officers  were  appointed 
as  follows :  — 

Colonel — N.  W.  Green,  of  Cortland. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  —  John  D.  Shaul,  of 
Springfield. 

Major — Charles  E.  Livingston,  of  New 
York  city. 

Surgeon — J.  C.  Nelson,  of  Truxton. 

Assistant-Surgeon  —  Geo.  W.  Metcalfe, 
of  Otsego  county. 

Chaplain  —  H.  Stone  Richardson,  of  New 
York  Mills. 

Adjutant — Heman  F.  Robinson,  of  Cort- 
land. 

Quartermaster — A.  P.  Smith,  of  Cort- 
land. 

Quartermaster-Sergeant — Albert  J.  Jar- 
vis,  of  Cortland. 

Commissary-Sergeant — William  Storrs, 
of  Allegany. 

The  line  officers  of  the  regiment  were 
as  follows :  — 

Company  A — Captain,  Andrew  J.  Gro- 
ver ;  First  Lieutenant,  Charles  H.  George  ; 
Second  Lieutenant,  H.  W.  Pierce. 

Company  B — Captain,  Oscar  C.  F"ox  ; 
First  Lieutenant,  C.  D.  Crandall;  Second 
Lieutenant,  W.  Stuart  Walcott. 

Company  C  —  Captain,  Gilman  J.  Crit- 
tenden ;  First  Lieutenant,  E.  R.  Weaver; 
Second  Lieutenant,  M.  P.  Marsh. 

Company  D  —  Captain,  Charles  L.  Wat- 
rous;  First  Lieutenant,  E.  D.  Van  Slyck  ; 
Second  Lieutenant, • 

Company  E  —  Captain,  Wm.  H.  Powell; 
First  Lieutenant,  John  H.  Ballard;  Second 
Lieutenant,  S.  M.  Powell. 

Company  F  —  Captain,  John  F.  Barnard; 
First  Lieutenant,  E.  A.  Mead ;  Second 
Lieutenant,  Wm.  W.  Green. 

Company  G — Captain,    Wm.    Lansing; 


98 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


First    Lieutenant,    Aaron    Saj^cr;     Second 
Lieutenant,  James  L.  Goddard. 

Company  H  —  Captain,  Amos  L.  Swan; 
First  Lieutenant,  M.  B.  Cleveland;  Second 
Lieutenant,   Robert  Story. 

Company  I  —  Captain,  John  E.  Cook; 
First  Lieutenant,  H.  A.  Hiodyett;  Second 
Lieutenant,  Riciiard  Williams. 

Company  K  —  Captain,  John  W.  Young; 
First  Lieutenant,  C.  A.  Watkins;  Second 
Lieutenant,  C.  M.  Gaylord. 

On  the  1 6th  day  of  January  the  76th 
received  orders  to  march  to  New  York  on 
the  following  day.  On  the  17th  they 
marched  to  the  capitol,  where  a  beautiful 
stand  of  colors  was  presented  to  the  regi- 
ment by  S.  R.  Campbell,  esq.,  in  behalf  of 
his  mother,  Mrs.  Samuel  Campbell,  of  New 
York  Mills.  Mr.  Samuel  Campbell  had 
been  a  sort  of  a  godfather  to  the  regiment, 
as  he  had  presented  the  colonel  and  chap- 
lain each  with  a  fine  black  steed,  fully 
equipped,  and  in  man\-  other  ways  had 
shown  his  devotion  and  liberality.  The 
beautiful  banner  was  accepted  by  Colonel 
Green  in  an  appropriate  speech. 

After  these  ceremonies  the  regiment  em- 
barked for  New.  York  where  they  arrived 
the  following  day  at  noon.  They  went  into 
quarters  at  the  City  Hall  Park  Barracks, 
where  they  remained  until  January  21st, 
when  the  regiment  was  transferred  to  Riker's 
Island,  about  ten  miles  up  East  river.  Leav- 
ing New  York,  the  regiment  reached  Phila- 
delphia on  the  30th,  and  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  31st  was  in  Baltimore.  At  midnight 
the  following  night  they  reached  Washing- 
ton, going  into  camp  at  Meridian  Hill. 
Here  occurred  the  first  death  in  the  regi- 
ment, that  of  William  B.  Potter,  a  private 
in  Company  A.  He  died  on  the  19th  of 
February,  1862.  His  body  was  sent  home 
to  his  friends  in  the  town  of  Taylor. 

On  the  24th  day  of  Februarj'  the  76th, 
which  was  not  yet   assigned   to  a   brigade, 


was  moved  from  Meridian  11  ill  to  occup)' 
Forts  De  Russey,  Massachusetts,  Totten  and 
Slemmer.  About  this  time  it  was  decided 
by  the  authorities  that  the  regiment  was 
not  in  fit  condition  to  take  the  field,  on  ac- 
count of  internal  dissensions  which  had 
arisen.  Most  of  the  officers  had  united  in 
preferring  charges  against  Col.  Green,  which 
charges  were  then  in  course  of  investigation 
in  Washington.  This  placed  Lieut.-Colonel 
Shaul  in  command  of  the  regiment.  Colo- 
nel Green  was  final!}-  sent  home  and  dis- 
missed the  service.  This  unfortunate  con- 
troversy for  a  time  almost  destroyed  the 
prospective  usefulness  of  the  regiment  and 
it  was  generally  agreed  that  nothing  would 
thoroughly  harmonize  the  existing  dififcr- 
ences  but  an  active  campaign. 

On  the  2 1st  of  Ma\'  the  regiment  was 
ordered  to  Fredericksburg,  producing  a 
gratifying  change  in  the  feelings  of  men  and 
officers,  and  on  the  following  morning,  after 
marching  five  miles  to  Washington,  took 
a  steamer  down  the  Potomac  to  Aquia 
creek,  where  they  disembarked  about  mid- 
night and  bivouacked.  In  the  afternoon 
of  the  ne.xt  day  the  march  was  continued 
towards  Fredericksburg,  eighteen  miles  dis- 
tant. At  10  o'clock  in  the  night  of  the 
following  da\',  weary  and  saturated  with  the 
falling  rain,  the  76th  came  in  sight  of  Fred- 
ericksburg. It  had  been  assigned  to  Brig- 
adier-General Abner  Doubleday's  Brigade, 
and  remained  in  camp  near  F"redericksburg, 
with  little  to  vary  the  monotony  and  routine 
of  camp  life,  until  August  9th.  Foraging 
expeditions,  in  which  the  76th  was  notori- 
ously successful,  were  often  organized, ^  and 

1  It  was  customary  to  settle  with  the  owners  of  live 
stock  carried  off  on  these  expeditions  with  what  were 
termed  "  slow  notes,"  which  the  reluctant  denizen  of  the 
Confederacy  was  compelled  to  accept  for  want  of  anything 
more  satisfactory.  KoUowing  is  a  verbatim  copy  of  one 
of  these  notes,  given  by  the  76th  :  — 

"The  undersigned  freely  acknowledges  to  have  re- 
ceived, on  the  1st  day  of  July,  1S62,  from Wal- 
lace, of  King  George  county,  \'a.,  for  the  use  and  service 


Milharv  lIisTORV. — The  76111  Regiment. 


99 


served  to  relieve  tlie  monotony  of  both  diet 
and  camp  life. 

After  remaining  on  the  north  bank  of 
the  Rappahannock  about  a  week,  the  regi- 
ment was  sent  across  the  river  to  guard  the 
city,  depot,  bridge,  etc.  Major  Livingston 
of  the  76th  was  made  Militar}-  Governor,  a 
position  which  he  filled  with  the  most  thor- 
ough efficiency. 

On  the  2d  of  Jul)-,  Colonel  William  P. 
Wainwright  having  been  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  regiment,  he  assumed  the 
position  and  at  once  instituted  regular  and 
persistent  drill,  which  had  thus  far  been 
much  neglected.  This  constant  drill,  though 
soon  looked  upon  with  some  disfavor  by  the 
rank  and  file,  was  afterward  estimated  at  its 
true  value  ;  for  it  was  but  a  short  time  before 
the  regiment  was  engaged  in  one  of  the 
severest  battles  of  the  war. 

That  the  reader  may  more  clearly  under- 
stand the  part  which  the  76th  took  in  this 
battle  it  may  be  well  to  state  the  different 
organizations  composing  King's  Division, 
the  First  Division  of  the  First  Corps.  The 
First  Brigade  of  this  division  was  under  com- 
mand of  General  Hatch,  and  comprised  the 
2d  regiment  of  U.  S.  Sharpshooters  and  four 
regiments  of  New  York  troops.  The  Sec- 
ond Brigade  was  under  command  of  Gen- 
eral Doubleday,  and  comprised  the  76th  and 
the  9Sth  New  York  Regiments  and  the  56th 
Pennsylvania,  to  which  was  afterwards  added 
the  7th  Indiana.  The  Third  Brigade  was 
untler  General  Gibbon  and  comprised  one 
Indiana  and  three  Wisconsin  regiments. 

On  the  9th  of  August  orders  were  re- 
ceived for  this  division  to  leave  Fredericks- 

of  the  U.  S.  of  America,  one  pony,  eight  mules,  six  fat 
cattle,  ten  good  sheep,  one  wagon  load  of  potatoes,  one 
wagon  load  of  vegetables,  which  I  have  valued  at  one 
thousand  dollars.  This  voucher  will  be  payable  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  war,  upon  sufficient  testimony  being 
presented  that  the  said  Wallace  has  been  a  loyal  citizen 
of  the  U.  S.  from  the  date  hereof. 

"Cn.iRi.Es  H.  Watkins,  a.  Q.  M.,  U.  S.  A. 
"By  order  of  Brig.-Gen.  Abner  Doubi.edav." 


burg  and  join  the  First  Corps  at  Culpepper. 
At  ten  o'clock  of  the  loth  the  76th  reached 
Chancellorsville,  where  information  was  re- 
ceived that  General  Banks  was  then  en- 
gaged with  Stonewall  Jackson,  and  the 
troops  must  be  hurried  up  to  reinforce  him. 
The  inarch  was  kept  up  through  that  and 
the  following  days,  and  the  next  morning 
intelligence  was  received  that  a  bloody  bat- 
tle had  been  fought  at  Cedar  Mountain  on 
the  9th,  and  Jackson  had  withdrawn  his 
forces.  The  brigade  of  General  Doubleday 
camped  between  Culpepper  Court  House 
and  Cedar  Mountain,  and  on  the  i6th 
marching  orders  were  received ;  from  that 
date  until  the  21st  the  brigade  was  in  mo- 
tion most  of  the  time,  but  to  little  purpose. 
In  the  mean  time  the  army  had  withdrawn 
to  the  north  bank  of  the  Rappahannock, 
while  Jackson,  heavih'  reinforced  from  Rich- 
mond, confronted  us  on  the  opposite  bank. 
On  the  21st  artillery  firing  was  begun  by 
both  armies,  and  the  76th  was  marched 
about  a  mile  to  take  a  position  in  rear  of  a 
battery,  passing  in  plain  view  of  a  rebel 
battery,  by  which  it  was  shelled.  This  was 
the  first  time  the  regiment  was  under  fire. 
The  next  morning  vigorous  cannonading 
was  reopened  and  kept  up  for  three  days, 
during  which  several  men  in  the  76th  were 
wounded,  but  none  killed.  On  the  24th 
the  regiment  was  marched  to  Warrenton, 
and  on  the  26th  to  Sulphur  Springs,  where 
an  artillery  engagement  was  in  progress. 
Remaining  here  through  one  night  they 
joined  with  the  remainder  of  General  Pope's 
army,  which  had  waited  in  vain  since  the 
22d  for  reinforcements,  and  turned  in  re- 
treat towards  Washington. 

The  28th  of  August,  1862,  will  long  be 
remembered  by  survivors  and  friends  of  the 
76th  as  the  day  on  which  the  regiment  was 
first  brought  into  actual  battle.  The  event 
is  thus  described  by  the  historian  before 
quoted  :  — 


LOfC 


lOO 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


"As  the  brigade  again  took  up  its  line  of 
march,  evidences  were  multiplied  that  things 
were  coming  to  a  crisis.  Constant  cannonading 
was  heard  in  different  directions ;  squads  of  cav- 
alry rode  furiously  through  the  cross-roads  and 
fields,  while  the  smoke  of  battle  could  be  seen 
rising  in  ominous  clouds  in  the  distance.  After 
passing  ("lainesville  a  mile  or  two,  as  the  brigade, 
and  more  particularly  that  portion  of  it  formed 
by  the  76th,  was  moving  over  a  level  tract  of 
half  a  mile  in  extent,  with  a  wood  in  their  front 
and  a  hill  at  their  left,  they  were  nearly  paralyzed 
for  a  moment  by  a  terrible  discharge  of  artillery 
from  the  hill,  and  so  near  that  the  flash  from  the 
guns  dazzled  their  eyes.  .  .  .  Some  dropjjcd 
down ;  others  rushed  forward  upon  those  in  ad- 
vance, while  others  still  were  inclined  to  turn 
back.  Never  was  the  example  of  a  cool  and 
courageous  man  more  opportunely  set  than  by 
Colonel  Wainwright  at  this  critical  juncture. 
Riding  at  the  head  of  his  regiment,  he  instantly 
turned  his  horse,  and  coolly  riding  back  toward 
the  rear  of  the  column,  between  it  and  the  rebel 
battery,  as  well  by  his  easy  and  unconcerned 
manner  as  by  his  words,  allayed  the  excitement 
and  brought  every  man  to  his  place. 

"  'O,  my  boys,  don't  run.  don't  run.  Think  a 
moment  how  it  would  sound  to  say,  "the  76th 
ran."  ' 

"  No  pen  can  describe  the  magic  effect  of  those 
words,  and  that  collected  self-possession.  Quiet- 
ly turning  his  horse  he  allowed  him  to  almost 
walk  toward  the  head  of  the  column  ;  and,  al- 
though the  shells  came  thicker  and  faster,  and 
with  a  more  dangerous  and  destructive  aim,  the 
men  kept  steadily  on  until  the  wood  was  reached. 
But  a  few  moments  elapsed  after  entering  the 
wood  before  sharp  and  continuous  musketry 
firing  was  heard  very  near  and  up  the  hill  hid- 
den by  the  woods.  A  strange  officer  came  rid- 
ing down  through  the  wood  shouting  :  — 

"  '  Come  on  !     Come  on,  quick  ! ' 

"The  76th  was  immediately  in  motion,  over 
fences,  through  bushes,  around  the  trees,  over 
logs,  the  bullets  and  shells  tearing  through  the 
woods  like  a  hail  storm.  Several  of  the  men 
were  killed  and  wounded  before  leaving  the  wood. 
After  going  about  twenty  rods  the  regiment 
emerged  into  an  open  field.  Here  was  battle  in 
real  earnest.     Just  in  front  and  a  litde  to  the  left 


were  the  gallant  boys  of  the  'Iron  Brigade' 
(three  Wisconsin  and  one  Michigan  regiments), 
fighting  and  falling  in  a  manner  terrible  to  be- 
hold. Just  at  this  juncture,  as  the  rebels  were 
])reparing  in  great  numbers,  in  the  woods  be- 
yond, for  a  charge  u])on  our  lines,  the  76th  and 
the  s6th  Pennsylvania  were  ordered  into  line  to 
fill  a  gap  between  the  6th  and  7th  Wisconsin 
Regiments.  By  this  timely  movement  the  noble 
'Iron  Brigade'  was  saved  from  total  annihilation. 

"  On  coming  near  the  enemy  Colonel  Wain- 
wright thought  it  prudent  to  deploy  a  few  files 
as  skirmishers.  He  called  up  Captain  Crover, 
Company  A,  and  told  him  what  he  wanted. 
How  well  and  nobly  it  was  jjerformed  was  evi- 
denced by  several  wounds  received  on  that  oc- 
casion. 

"  During  a  lull  in  the  action  a  body  of  men 
was  seen  moving  on  the  extreme  left  flank.  As 
they  came  foi  ward  they  shouted  : 

"  '  Don't  shoot  your  own  men.' 

"  .-Vt  that  distance  it  seemed  doubtful  whether 
they  were  friends  or  enemies,  and  it  w'as  not 
without  hesitation  that  the  Colonel  gave  the  or- 
der, 'By  the  left  oblique.  Aim!  Fire!'  No 
rebel  of  that  column  who  escaped  death,  will 
forget  that  volley.  It  seemed  like  one  gun.  .  .  . 
When  the  smoke  cleared  away  a  little,  the  few 
left  of  that  mass  of  human  beings,  who  had  so 
rapidly  left  the  woods  a  few  moments  before,  had 
disappeared,  but  the  ground  was  literally  covered 
with  their  dead  and  wounded.  The  76th  went 
into  this  fight  with  224  men,  of  which,  in  the 
hour's  struggle,  ten  were  killed,  seventy- two 
wounded,  and  eighteen  missing.  Five  officers, 
four  of  whom  w  ere  captured,  were  wounded,  and 
many  of  the  wounded  were  unable  ever  to  take 
the  field. 

"Among  the  many  examples  of  rare  heroism 
performed  in  this  engagement  it  will  be  just  to 
mention  the  following :  William  H.  Miller  was 
early  wounded  in  the  foot,  but  refused  to  be  car- 
ried from  the  field,  and  remained  on  the  ground 
loading  and  firing.  John  L.  Wood  continued 
firing  after  his  thumb  was  shot  off,  until  he  re- 
ceived a  mortal  wound.  Daniel  McGregor  re- 
ceived a  wound  in  his  thigh  from  which  he  after- 
wards died,  yet  he  rested  on  his  other  knee  and 
continued  firing  until  too  weak  from  loss  of  blood. 
Sergeant  Lawrence  Banker,  dying  on  the  field, 


Military  History.  —  The  76TH  Regiment. 


lOI 


sent  his  brother  from  his  side  with  tlie  words  : 
'Leave  me  and  rush  to  the  front!'  Albert  OHn, 
wounded  in  the  arm,  continued  firing  until  dis- 
abled by  another  shot  in  the  shoulder.  James 
J.  Card,  although  covered  with  blood  from  a 
wound  m  the  head,  continued  firing  until  he  was 
shot  in  the  arm.  Captain  Fox  received  a  ball 
in  his  lungs,  and  Captain  Sager,  while  bra\ely 
leading  his  men,  was  terribly  wounded,  a  bullet 
passing  entirely  through  his  body.  All  the  offi- 
cers displayed  great  bravery  and  coolness,  call- 
ing out  in  Colonel  Wainwright's  report  the  ex- 
pression :  'I  cannot  too  much  praise  the  men 
who  supplied  want  of  previous  military  prepara- 
tion by  their  own  nerve  and  resolution.' " 

Similar  conduct  characterized  this  noble 
organization  all  through  its  terrible  and 
destructive  campaign,  and  the  above  ex- 
amples of  special  acts  of  bravery  are  not 
intended  to  reflect  in  any  way  upon  other 
members  of  the  regiment,  many  of  whom 
afterwards  displayed  equal  heroism  ;  but 
which  cannot  manifestly  all  be  noted  in 
detail. 

On  the  29th  of  August  the  76th  sus- 
tained an  honorable  part  in  the  second  bat- 
tle of  Bull  Run,  losing  in  the  three  days  of 
fighting,  skirmishing  and  marching,  nine 
officers  and  eighty-eight  men  killed  and 
wounded,  and  one  officer  and  forty- eight 
men  missing.  The  general  retreat  was  con- 
tinued until  the  night  of  September  1st, 
when  the  76th  reached  Upton  Hill,  ending 
the  short  but  severe  campaign.  Following 
is  a  summary  of  the  report  of  Colonel 
Wainwright :  — 

"  Beginning  with  the  retreat  from  Cellar 
Mountain  and,  in  the  case  of  the  76th,  with  the 
march  from  Fredericksburg,  it  is  seldom  that  an 
army  is  required  to  undergo  more  than  our  men 
performed.  With  scarcely  a  day's  intermission, 
the  Third  Corps  to  which  this  regiment  belonged 
was  either  making  forced  marclies,  often  in  the 
night,  and  through  the  hottest  days  of  August, 
frequently  without  proper  water,  much  of  the 
time  without  food,  or  engaged  in  battles  as  se- 
vere and  destructive  as  had  taken   ])lace   during 


this  war.  The  regiment  had  already  been  under 
fire  at  five  different  battles.  It  had  left  New 
York  with  nearly  one  thousand  men.  The  ex- 
])osures  of  camp  and  those  diseases  incident  to 
acclimation,  had  so  reduced  it  that  when  it  left 
Fredericksburg  it  contained  about  four  hundred 
and  fifty  officers  and  men,  and  now,  after  the 
struggles  of  this  campaign,  though  several  had 
rejoined  it  from  Fredericksburg  and  elsewhere, 
it  only  numbered  about  two  hundred  and  twenty- 
five.  Of  the  thirty  line  officers,  only  six  re- 
mained —  a  fearful  reduction  in  both  officers 
and  men." 

Colonel  Wainwright's  report  was  accom- 
panied by  a  request  that  the  regiment  be 
recruited,  supplied  with  officers  and  a  little 
rest  be  given  to  put  it  in  condition  to  take 
the  field.  The  only  answer  to  this  request 
was  an  order  to  march,  half- equipped,  to 
South  Mountain,  Antietam  and  elsewhere. 
On  the  6th  of  September  the  division 
was  ordered  to  march  through  Washington, 
across  the  Potomac  and  into  Maryland.  On 
the  14th  they  passed  through  Frederick 
City,  Md.,  and  the  next  day  played  a  con- 
spicuous and  honorable  part  in  the  terrible 
battle  of  South  Mountain.  Up  the  side  of 
that  steep  and  rugged  eminence,  in  the 
calm  quiet  of  a  beautiful  Sabbath  afternoon, 
the  troops  toiled  toward  the  scene  of  ap- 
proaching carnage.  As  the  brigade  neared 
the  summit,  firing  in  front  became  more 
distinct  and  they  soon  entered  the  last  line 
of  forest  skirting  the  crown  of  the  moun- 
tain. Here  a  halt  was  made  and  bayonets 
fixed.  The  brigade  occupied  the  left  of 
the  division,  and  the  76th  the  extreme  left 
of  the  brigade  ;  so  that  the  left  flank  of  the 
regiment  was  uncovered.  On  the  right 
of  the  76th  was  the  56th  Pennsylvania. 
Through  the  woods  came  the  rebel  bullets, 
tearing  the  trees  and  shrieking  overhead, 
whije  just  ahead  came  the  cheers  and  yells 
of  the  opposing  troops.  Hatch's  Brigade 
had  preceded  Doubleday's  Brigade  and  was 
now  hcavih-  engaged.      While  thus  bravely 


102 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


holding  the  ground,  Doubleday's  Brigade 
rushed  with  a  shout  to  their  reUef.  Hatch's 
Brigade  retired,  while  tlie  76th  and  other 
regiments  poured  the  deadly  hail  upon  the 
enemy.  Charge  after  charge  was  made  by 
the  rebels  to  break  our  lines,  but  each  was 
repulsed,  and  thus  for  half  an  hour  this 
brigade  stood  its  ground  against  vastly 
superior  numbers.^ 

Through  the  remainder  of  this  destruc- 
tiv-e  battle  the  76th  bore  itself  with  the 
most  heroic  braver)-,  suffering  several  direct 
attacks  from  the  enemy,  about  twenty  men 
of  the  little  band,  including  Colonel  Wain- 
wright,  falling  killed  or  wounded  from  the 
effects  of  one  single  volley.  It  was,  per- 
haps, the  severest  fighting  the  regiment 
took  part  in  during  the  war. 

The  next  morning  the  fragment  of  a 
brigade  was  given  opportunity  to  light  fires, 
after  the  decisive  victor}',  but  their  coffee 
and  hard  tack  was  scarcely  disposed  of  before 
they  were  to  march  towards  Boonesborough. 
The  wounded  were  sent  back  to  Fredericks- 
burg, while  the  troops  went  forivard  after  a 
retreating  enemy.  The  76th  took  part  in 
the  battle  of  Antietam,  in  which  several 
were  wounded,  but  its  action  was  chiefly  in 
support  of  artiller)'. 

The  2Sth  of  October  found  the  76th 
again  across  the  Potomac  and  ten  miles  into 
the  State  of  Virginia,  where  they  remained 
two  days.  On  the  ist  of  November  the 
brigade  was  sent  to   Snicker's  Gap  to  pre- 

1  Charles  E.  Stamp,  of  Company  A,  who  was  promoted 
to  color-bearer  for  gallantrj-  in  5a\ing  the  colors  at  Gaines- 
\-ille,  was  carrjing  the  colors  in  this  occasion.  As  the 
regiment  was  ordered  to  ad^'ance,  not  obeying  quite  as 
promptly  as  this  hero  desired,  he  rushed  forward  about  a 
rod  in  advance  of  the  regiment,  while  the  bullets  were 
falling  thickly  around  him,  and  planting  the  flag  staff  in 
the  ground,  shouted:  "There!  come  up  to  that."  But 
he  made  too  good  a  mark,  and  before  the  regiment  had 
time  to  obey  the  order,  a  fatal  ball  pierced  his  forehead 
and  Charley  Stamp,  one  of  the  truest  and  best  men  in 
the  regiment,  was  mustered  out  of  the  army  militant  and 
mustered  into  the  army  triumphant.  —  Smith's  Ilistetry 
o/tlu  "jbth  Regiment. 


vent  an  attack  from  that  direction,  in  sup- 
port of  a  cav^alrj'  force  under  Gen.  Pleasan- 
ton.  The  brigade  was  at  this  time  under 
command  of  Lieut. -Colonel  Hoffman,  of 
the  56th  Pennsylvania.  During  the  suc- 
ceeding three  days  the  76th  was  under  fire 
most  of  the  time.  On  the  6th  of  Novem- 
ber, after  hard  marching,  they  reached 
Warrenton  and  camped  four  days  within 
two  miles  ,of  the  town.  Here  Col.  Wain- 
wright  rejoined  the  regiment.  Ten  days 
later  the  regiment  went  into  camp  at  Brooks's 
Station,  on  the  railroad  from  Aquia  Creek 
to  Fredericksburg,  where  it  halted  just  six 
months  before,  after  its  first  day's  march  in 
Virginia.  On  the  I2th  of  December  the 
regiment  crossed  the  Rappahannock  near 
Fredericksburg  and  assumed  guard  of  the 
lower  pontoon  bridge  at  that  point.  In 
the  battle  which  opened  the  next  day 
Doubleday's  division  formed  the, extreme 
left  of  the  army  and  the  brigade  in  which  was 
the  76th  was  on  the  right  of  that  division. 
The  battle  raged  from  nine  in  the  morning 
until  eight  in  the  evening,  and  our  men 
suffered  terribly.  The  principal  feature  of 
the  battle,  as  far  as  Doubleday's  Di\ision 
was  concerned,  was  its  brilliant  charge  over 
a  broad  plain,  facing  a  destructive  fire  of 
shot  and  shell,  while  from  the  right  swept 
down  the  death-dealing  missiles  from  rebel 
batteries.  In  this  charge  the  76th  partici- 
pated with  its  accustomed  gallantry-.  The 
regiment  went  into  the  battle  with  1 1 2  pri- 
vates ;  of  this  handful,  eleven  were  killed 
and  wounded. 

While  stationed  near  Fredericksburg  the 
division  was  compelled  to  lose  its  brave 
commander.  General  Doubleday  was  trans- 
ferred to  another  division  of  the  same  corps, 
and  was  succeeded  by  General  Wadsworth. 
General  Doubleday  was  the  man  who  fired 
the  first  gun  in  Fort  Sumter;  he  was  a 
soldier  from  principle,  a  man  of  great 
bravery   and  the   oflicers  and  men  of  the 


Military  History.  —  The  76TH  Regiment. 


103 


76th  parted  with  him  with  the  most  sincere 
regret. 

January  20th,  1863,  Gen.  Burnside  issued 
an  order  announcing  to  the  .Vrmy  of  the 
Potomac  that  they  were  soon  to  move,  as 
he  had  decided  upon  a  winter  campaign. 
E^verything  was  put  in  readiness  and  the 
grand  army  ad\-anced.  Tliree  days  of 
marching  through  swollen  streams,  caused 
by  heavy  rains,  while  the  mud  was  of  that 
depth  that  rendered  progress  nearly  im- 
possible, and  the  76th  found  themselves 
again  in  their  old  winter  quarters,  Burnside 
having  abandoned  the  proposed  campaign. 

On  the  28th  of  April  the  regiment  broke 
camp  and  marched  to  the  Rappahannock, 
which  they  reached  four  miles  below  Fred- 
ericksburg, where  they  aided  in  laying  a 
pontoon  bridge,  and  the  following  night 
made  preparations  for  the  expected  battle 
of  the  ne.xt  day.  Captain  Swan,  of  Co.  H, 
was  wounded  by  a  piece  of  shell  during 
that  night.  The  following  day  was  occupied 
by  vigorous  artillery  firing  and  the  next 
morning,  in  a  dense  fog,  the  76th  was  or- 
dered on  picket  duty  part  way  across  the 
open  plain  in  front.  The  position  was 
reached,  but  when  the  fog  lifted,  the  regi- 
ment found  itself  within  a  few  rods  of  the 
rebel  arm}-.  A  fearful  volley  was  fired  by 
the  latter,  but  the  76th  fell  flat  on  their 
faces  and  the  bullets  passed  over  their  heads. 
All  that  day  the  regiment  lay  there  close  to 
the  enemy,  not  daring  to  lift  a  hand.  At 
length  under  the  cover  of  darkness  a  hast\' 
retreat  was  made  from  the  undesirable  situ- 
ation. Several  were  wounded  during  the 
day. 

On  the  2d  of  May  the  whole  F"irst  Corps 
crossed  to  the  north  side  of  the  Rappahan- 
nock and  were  hurried  on  towards  United 
States  Ford,  twenty  miles  up  the  river, 
where  they  bivouacked  for  the  night.  At 
daylight  next  morning  the  stream  was 
crossed  and  at  si.x  o'clock  the  76th  reached 


the  battle-field,  where  the  fight  soon  opened 
with  great  fury.  During  the  first  day's 
fighting  the  regiment  supported  a  battery 
of  thirty-six  guns,  which  repeatedly  re- 
pulsed charges  by  Stonewall  Jackson's  forces, 
and  on  the  3d  retreated  with  the  army 
across  the  river,  arriving  in  the  afternoon  at 
Falmouth,  tired  and  discouraged  with  re- 
peated failures  to  accomplish  anything  de- 
cisive. 

On  the  13th  the  first  addition  of  men 
was  made  to  the  76th,  about  fifty  being  as- 
signed to  it  from  the  24th  New  York,  and 
two  hundred  more,  with  five  officers,  were 
added  on  the  24th  from  the  30th  New  York. 
The  succeeding  month  was  spent  in  camp 
in  Falmouth. 

It  having  become  apparent  towards  the 
last  of  May  that  General  Lee's  army  was 
contemplating  some  general  movement, 
General  Hooker  submitted  to  President  Lin- 
coln a  suggestion  that  all  the  troops  whose 
operations  could  have  an\-  influence  on  Lee's 
army  should  be  placed  under  one  command. 
This  was  not  done  ;  but  certain  other  orders 
relating  to  prospective  operations  were 
transmitted  instead  ;  and  for  two  weeks  the 
army  of  the  Potomac  was  in  that  state  of 
unrest  which  usually  preceded  some  mo- 
mentous movement. 

After  a  campaign  of  marching,  some  of 
which  was  the  most  severe  the  regiment  was 
ever  compelled  to  undergo,  the  76th  left  the 
soil  of  Virginia  on  the  25th  of  June,  and, 
crossing  the  Potomac  at  Edwards's  Ferry, 
marched  past  Sugar-Loaf  Mountain  on  the 
26th  and  went  into  camp  at  Jefferson,  Mary- 
land. The  next  day  their  camp  was  not  far 
from  the  battle-field  of  South  Mountain  ;  the 
following  day  they  marched  to  Frederick 
City,  and  on  the  29th,  w  hile  acting  as  wagon- 
guard,  they  marched  a  distance  of  thirty 
miles  to  Emmettsburg,  where  they  went  into 
camp.  Here  the  regiment  was  mustered  for 
I  pay  by  Major  Grover,  then  in  command ;  but, 


104 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


it  being  late  in  the  day,  a  portion  of  the  regi- 
ment went  on  picket  duty,  and  the  certifi- 
cates of  muster  could  not  be  signed  b}-  the 
Major  that  night ;  indeed,  they  were  never 
signed  by  him,  for  before  another  day  had 
passed,  Major  Grover  and  nearly  one  third 
of  the  brave  men  who  answered  to  that 
muster,  were  called  into  that  grand  army 
from  the  roll-call  of  which  none  will  be 
absent. 

The  first  gun  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Get- 
t\sburg  was  fired  by  the  76th ;  and  all 
through  that  period  of  carnage,  too  terrible 
almost  for  narration,  the  noble  regiment  was 
in  the  thickest  of  the  fight.  In  General 
Cutler's  report  of  this  battle  he  says:  "Ma- 
jor Grover,  commanding  the  76th  N.  Y. 
Volunteers,  a  brave  and  efficient  officer,  was 
killed  early  in  the  action,  and  the  command 
devolved  upon  Captain  John  E.  Cook,  and 
most  ably  and  faithfully  did  he  perform  his 
duty." 

The  summing  up  of  that  field  of  death, 
as  it  relates  to  the  76th,  is  thus  given  by  the 
historian  of  the  regiment,  as  follows  :  — 

"  The  regiment  went  into  the  fight  with  three 
hundred  and  forty-eight  men  and  twenty-seven 
officers,  and  in  half  an  hour  it  lost  two  officers 
killed  and  sixteen  wounded;  twenty-seven  men 
killed  and  one  hundred  and  twenty-four  wounded; 
making  a  total  of  killed  and  wounded,  in  the  half 
hour,  of  eighteen  officers  and  one  hundred  and 
fifty-one  men,  or  over  half  the  officers  and  nearly 
half  the  men  expended  in  that  brief  period." 

The  first  of  August  found  the  76th  under 
orders  to  march  to  Beverly  Ford  on  the 
Rappahannock,  near  the  place  where  it  was 
first  under  fire  in  1862,  with  Captain  B}-ram 
in  command. 

On  the  12th  of  September  about  two 
hundred  and  fifty  conscripts  were  added  to 
the  thinned  ranks  of  the  regiment,  and  be- 
fore daylight  of  the  1 6th  they  were  on  their 
way  to  Culpepper,  where  they  were  paid 
off  Here  the  time  until  October  12th  was 
spent  in  drilling  recruits,  which  had  swelled 


the  ranks  of  the  regiment  to  about  one 
thousand.  From  this  time  until  near  the 
last  of  the  year  the  76th  was  undergoing 
hard  service,  in  long  marches  during  inclem- 
ent weather,  on  picket  duty,  in  support  of 
batteries,  and  in  skirmishes,  principally  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  Rappahannock,  w'here 
Meade's  army  was  then  operating. 

On  the  1 8th  of  December  an  event  oc- 
curred in  the  regiment  which  it  would  be  a 
pleasure  to  overlook  ;  this  was  the  execu- 
tion of  Winslow  N.  Allen,  a  private  in  Com- 
pany H,  for  desertion.  Others  who  had  re- 
ceived the  death  sentence  for  desertion  had 
been  pardoned,  and  almost  to  the  hour  of 
execution,  the  unfortunate  man  entertained 
the  hope  that  the  death  penalty  would  be 
revoked.  As  the  hour  for  the  execution 
drew  near  Captain  Swan  visited  the  unfort- 
unate soldier  and  assured  him  that  he  must 
no  longer  indulge  in  hope,  as  it  was  all  in 
vain,  and  he  should  prepare  for  his  awful 
doom.  As  the  ominous  sound  of  the  drum 
was  heard,  which  was  the  signal  to  march  to 
the  place  of  execution,  he  said:  "Captain, 
you  have  been  kind  to  me,  which  I  can  only 
return  by  my  prayers  for  your  welfare." 
Handing  the  captain  his  pocket  book  he 
said:  "Take  this;  it  is  all  I  have,  and  when 
I  am  gone,  please  lay  this  (a  fervent  prayer 
for  one  in  his  situation  printed  on  a  card) 
on  my  breast." 

As  the  solemn  procession  moved  to  the 
place  of  execution,  Allen  marched  with  a 
steady  tread,  but  the  sight  of  the  open  coffin 
and  the  yawning  grave  quite  unmanned 
him.  As  the  officer  closed  the  reading  of 
the  charges,  specifications,  findings  and  or- 
der for  his  execution,  the  captain  whispered: 
"Winslow,  I  can  go  no  further  with  you; 
the  rest  of  your  dark  journey  is  alone.  Have 
you  any  last  words  for  your  wife  and  child  ?" 
"No;  only  tell  them  I  love  them  all." 
These  were  his  last  words.  The  captain 
stepped  back ;   the   officer  gave  the  signal  ; 


Military  History. — The  76TH  Regiment. 


105 


the  report  as  of  a  single  gun  rang  out  and 
Winslow  N.  Allen  fell  lifeless  upon  his  coffin. 

On  the  2d  of  February  the  76th  was  pre- 
sented with  a  new  stand  of  colors  by  the 
ladies  of  Cherry  Valley.  The  old  flag  was 
now  torn  with  the  shots  of  at  least  eleven 
battles,  in  the  front  ranks  of  which  it  had 
been  carried,  and  it  was  sent  to  Albany. 
Fourteen  bullets,  one  shell  and  three  frag- 
ments of  shell  had  passed  through  the  hon- 
orable banner. 

On  the  4th  of  May,  1864,  the  Second 
Brigade  broke  camp  at  Culpepper  and 
moved  on  the  Rapidan  river.  This  brigade 
was  composed  of  the  76th,  under  command 
of  Lieut.-Col.  Cook ;  the  14th  Brooklyn, 
Col.  Fowler;  the  147th  N.  Y.,  Col.  Miller; 
the  95th  N.  v..  Col.  Pye,  and  the  s6th  Pa., 
Col.  Hoffman.  The  brigade  was  under  com- 
mand of  General  J.  C.  Rice.  It  crossed  the 
Rapidan  at  Germania  Ford  and  encamped 
near  the  Wilderness  Tavern.  On  the  skir- 
mish line,  the  first  day  of  the  battle  of  the 
Wilderness,  the  following  officers  of  the  76th 
were  captured:  Capt.  J.  D.  CK'de,  First 
Lieut.  Wm.  Cahill,  and  Second  Lieut.  James 
Casler,  of  Company  B.  First  Lieut.  Wm. 
Buchanan,  and  Second  Lieut.  Wm.  H. 
Myers,  of  Company  F.  Capt.  E.  J.  Swan, 
First  Lieut.  Homer  D.  Call,  and  Second 
Lieut.  Job  K.  Norwood,  of  Company  K. 
Major  Young  was  also  captured  the  same 
day,  and  spent  a  year  in  rebel  prisons. 

The  part  taken  in  the  battles  of  the  Wilder- 
ness by  the  Second  Brigade  (including  the 
76th)  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  when  it 
was  reformed  by  Gen  Rice,  at  4  o'clock  of 
the  last  day's  fighting,  it  comprised  detach- 
ments of  eight  regiments,  the  whole  embrac- 
ing but  four  hundred  and  eight  men  —  less 
than  half  of  one  regiment. 

On  the  9th  of  May,  and  the  two  or  three 
days  following,  the  regiment  was  engaged  in 
the  battle  of  Spottsylvania.  Here  the  brave 
General   Rice   was  mortally  wounded,   and 


after  his  leg  had  been  amputated  he  told  the 
surgeon,  when  asked  which  way  he  would 
be  turned  to  rest  the  most  comfortably,  to 
"turn  my  face  to  the  enemy."  General 
Rice  was  the  third  general  who  had  been 
killed  in  less  than  a  year  while  leading  the 
76th  and  its  companion  regiments. 

On  the  23d  came  the  battle  of  North 
Anna,  in  which  the  76th  was  honorably  en- 
gaged. In  his  report  of  this  action  Col. 
Hoffman  said  :  "  In  this  action  the  officers 
and  men  behaved  splendidly.  I  think  to 
them  is  due  the  credit  of  saving  the  artil- 
lery from  being  cut  off,  and  in  all  probabil- 
ity saving  the  army  from  a  terrible  disaster." 
The  76th  was  then  under  command  of  Capt. 
S.  M.  Byram. 

On  the  13th  of  June  the  regiment  crossed 
the  Chickahoniiny,  and  on  the  i6th  the 
James  river  was  crossed  and  the  march 
towards  Petersburg  begun.  On  the  17th 
the  brigade  was  moved  up  to  the  front, 
where  breastw-orks  were  thrown  up  before 
the  strongly  posted  enemy,  who  were  at- 
tacked on  the  morning  of  the  iSth.  In  the 
fighting  that  followed,  Capt.  Byram,  in  com- 
mand of  the  regiment,  fell  severely  wounded 
and  never  returned  to  the  field.  The  brig- 
ade suffered  severely,  its  casualties  being 
eighty-four  officers  and  fifteen  hundred  and 
fourteen  men  killed  and  wounded.  Col. 
Hoffman's  report  said:  "During  the  cam- 
paign the  officers  and  men  of  the  brigade 
have  evinced  great  bravery,  patriotism  and 
fortitude.  From  May  3d  to  July  31st,  a 
period  of  nearly  ninety  days,  not  more  than 
five  days  passed  that  they  were  not  under 
fire  of  the  enemy." 

In  the  operations  in  front  of  Petersburg; 
the  destruction  of  the  Weldon  railroad  ;  the 
sharp  engagements  at  Hatcher's  Run  in  the 
latter  part  of  October ;  on  the  Hicksford 
raid,  etc.,  the  76th  bore  honorable  part. 

Under  date  of  December  7th,  1864,  we 
,  find  the  following  statement  in  the  history 


io6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  the  regiment  from  which  we  have  so  lib- 
erally drawn  in  preparing  this  sketch :  — 

"The  original  term  of  enlistment  of  all  the 
members  of  the  76th  Regiment  expired  before  this 
date,  and  had  there  been  no  re-enlistments,  this 
history  had  terminated  at  this  point.  But  so 
many  had  re-enlisted  the  preceding  winter  and 
spring,  that  two  companies  yet  remained.  These 
were  under  command  of  W.  Earle  Evans,  now 
lieutenant,  originally  a  private  in  Company  F. 
The  patriotism  of  these  men  will  continue  this 
narrative  to  the  end  of  the  war,  and  the  triumph 
of  the  Union  arms." ' 

In  the  expedition  resulting  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Southside  railroad,  in  February, 
1865,  the  76th  was  engaged  and  lost  from 
the  handful  of  men  who  formerly  belonged 
to  the  regiment,  one  killed  and  two  wounded. 
The  only  officers  of  the  old  regiment  en- 
eased  were  Lieuts.  Martin  Edgcomb  and 
Geo.  B.  Hill.  And  so  through  that  won- 
derful race  after  Lee's  army,  which  evacu- 
ated Richmond  under  the  pressure  of  Grant's 
tireless  army,  until,  baffled,  disheartened 
and  conquered,  the  rebel  general  offered 
capitulations  at  Appomattox  on  the  9th  of 
April,  the  little  remnant  of  the  magnificent 
organization  that  left  Cortland  to  aid  the 
government  in  its  terrible  struggle  with 
treason,  pressed  on  to  the  front,  as  it  had 
always  done,  adding  to  its  long  list  of  he- 
roic deeds. 

After  the  grand  review  in  Washington, 
"  most  of  the  volunteer  forces,"  says  the 
historian  of  the  regiment,  "were  mustered 
out,  the  veteran  regiments  being  retained 
until  the  last.    As  the  organizations  reached 

1  The  last  report  of  the  olJ  S<rz'enty-SixtA  was  made  on 
the  15th  of  January,  wh3e  under  the  command  of  Cap- 
tain E.  B.  Cochrane. 


their  homes  they  met  with  such  receptions 
as  returning  heroes  deserve  —  processions, 
banquets,  speeches  and  all  the  outward 
tokens  of  welcome.  Alas!  no  such  recep- 
tion awaited  the  76th.  Its  time  having  ex- 
pired in  1S64.  but  few  of  the  men  remained 
in  the  ser\'ice,  and  they  had  been  absorbed 
in  another  organization.  It  had  lost  its 
identity,  and  its  few  remaining  members 
came  home  singly  and  alone.  But  each 
member  will  ever  point  with  just  pride  to 
those  four  words  which  sum  up  its  glorious 
history :  — 

" '  Expended  in  the  service.' " 
The  following  is  a  chronological  list  of 
the  battles  participated  in  by  the  Sevent}"- 
SLxth  Regiment:    Rappahannock   Station, 
Va.,   August   21st,  1862;  Warrenton,  Sul- 
phur Springs,  Va.,  August   26th ;   Gaines- 
ville, Va.,  August  28th ;  Second  Bull  Run, 
Va.,  August  29th,  30th  ;  South  Mountain, 
Md.,  September  14th ;  Antietam,  Md.,  Sep- 
tember 17th  ;  Snicker's  Gap,  Va.,  Xov^em- 
ber  i-3d ;  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  December 
1 2th,    13th;   Chancellors\'ilIe,  Va.,   May  i- 
5th,    1S63;    Gett>'sburg,  Pa.,  July   i-4th ; 
Mine  Run,  Va.,  November  27th ;  Wilder- 
ness, Va.,  May  5th,  6th,  1864;  Laurel  Hill, 
Va.,    May  8th ;    SpottsyK'ania,   Va.,    May 
I2tfi;  North  Aima,  Va.,  May  24th;  Tolo- 
potomy  Creek,  Va.,  June  1st;  Coal  Harbor, 
Va.,June3-5th;  Petersburg,  Va.,  June  i8th 
Weldon    Railroad,  Va.,    August     iS-2ist 
Poplar  Grove  Church,  Va.,  September  30th 
First  Hatcher's   Run,  Va.,  October  28th 
Hicksford    Raid,  Va.,    December   6-1 2th 
Second  Hatcher's   Run,  Va.,  February-  6th, 
1865;    Five  Forks,  Va.,  April    ist;   Lee's 
Surrender  at  Appomattox,  Va.,  April  9th. 


Military  History.  —  The  is/tii  Regiment. 


107 


CHAPTER  XL 

military   history.  — the  157TII  REGIMENT. 

Recruiting  the  157th  Regiment  —  Sources  of  the  Different  Companies  —  SatlTand  Line  Officers  —  Camp  Mitchell 
—  Ordered  to  the  Front  —  In  Camp  at  Arlington  Heights  —  The  Regiment  Assigned  —  The  First  Death  —  At 
Centerville  —  Christmas  in  Front  of  Fredericksburg  —  In  Burnside's  "Mud  Campaign"  —  Battle  of  Chancellors- 
ville  —  Severe  Marching  —  Gettysburg — The  Roll  Call  After  the  Battle —  Recruiting  and  Reorganization  —  Engage- 
ment at  Hilton  Head  —  An  Incident  —  Major  Place  as  Provost  Marshal  —  Mustered  Out. 


THIS  regiment  was  raised  chiefly  in 
Cortland  and  Madison  counties.  Com- 
pany C  came  from  the  towns  of  Cincinnatus, 
Taylor,  Cuyler  and  Willet.  Company  D 
from  Marathon,  Freetown,  Preble  and  Scott. 
Company  E  from  Cortland,  Virgil  and  Har- 
ford. Company  H  from  Homer  and  Trux- 
ton ;  and  Company  K  from  McGrawville, 
Marathon,  Solon  and  Truxton.  The  re- 
mainder of  the  regiment  was  made  up  of 
Madison  county  men,  except  about  thirty, 
who  came  from  Chenango  county.  The 
regiment  was  ordered  to  rendezvous  at 
Hamilton,  Madison  county,  and  while  here 
on  the  19th  of  September,  1862,  was  mus- 
tered into  the  United  States  service  for  a 
term  of  three  years  unless  sooner  discharged. 
The  following  were  the  regimental  and  line 
officers : — 

Colonel  — P.  P.  Brown,  Jr. 

Lieutenant  -  Colonel  —  George  Arrow- 
smith. 

Major  —  J.  C.  Carmichael. 

Quartermaster  —  P.  H.  McGraw. 

Surgeon  —  H.  C.  Hendrick. 

Assistant- Surgeons  —  J.  M.  Crawe,  F. 
D.  Beebe. 

Adjutant  —  O.  E.  Messinger. 

Company  A  —  Captain,  J.  H.  Smith; 
First  Lieutenant,  George  R.  Seaton ;  Sec- 
ond Lieutenant,  J.  L.  Palmer. 

Company  B  —  Captain,  T.  J.  Randall; 
First  Lieutenant,  J.  C.  Ware  ;  Second  Lieu- 
tenant, C.  H.  Van  Slyke. 

Company    C  —  Captain,     Frank     Place  ; 


First  Lieutenant,  J.  A.  Coffin  ;  Second  Lieu- 
tenant, Job  D.  Potter. 

Company  D  —  Captain,  W.  O.  Dunbar; 
First  Lieutenant,  S.  Z.  Miner  ;  Second  Lieu- 
tenant, Luther  L.  Stillman. 

Company  E — Captain,  B.  B.  Andrews; 
First  Lieutenant,  J.  K.  Backus ;  Second 
Lieutenant,  B.  F".  Jones. 

Company  F —  Captain,  J.  R.  Stone;  First 
Lieutenant,  W.  A.  Stone  ;  Second  Lieuten- 
ant, Samuel  Wickwire. 

Company  G  —  Captain,  Abram  Tuttle  ; 
First  Lieutenant,  W.  D.  Bailey ;  Second 
Lieutenant,  H.  Frank. 

Company  H  —  Captain,  William  Beck  ; 
First  Lieutenant, Buck;  Second  Lieu- 
tenant, George  Adams. 

Company  I  —  Captain,  William  Bellin- 
ger ;  First  Lieutenant,  T.  W.  Priest ;  Sec- 
ond Lieutenant,  William  Snider. 

Company  K  —  Captain,  N.  M.  Daniels; 
First  Lieutenant,  William  Barnum  ;  Second 
Lieutenant,  L.  V.  Kinney. 

The  following  constituted  the  non-com- 
missioned staff:  — 

S^geant-Major — 15.  S.  Fitch. 

Quartermaster-Sergeant  —  C.  O.  New- 
ton. 

Commissary-Sergeant  —  A.  W.  Kings- 
bury. 

Hospital  Steward Paige. 

Drum-Major  —  Alexander  Bates. 

On  the  25th  of  December  the  regiment 
left  Camp  Mitchell  for  the  front.  They  ar- 
rived at  Albany  on  the  morning  of  tiie  fol- 


io8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


lowing  day,  where  a  stand  of  colors  was 
presented  them,  and  soon  afterward  the 
regiment  was  en  route  for  New  York  cit\ , 
where  they  arrived  in  the  evening,  and 
passed  the  night  in  City  Hall  Barracks.  In 
a  few  days  they  were  ordered  to  Washing- 
ton, and  went  into  camp  temporarily  on 
Arlington  Heights.  On  Tuesday,  the  30th 
of  September,  the  first  march  of  the  regi- 
ment was  ordered  to  Camp  Chase.  On  the 
I  ith  of  October  marching  orders  were  re- 
ceived, and  when  reveille  was  sounded,  long 
before  daybreak  on  the  following  morning, 
the  tents  were  quickly  struck,  and  the  reg- 
iment was  soon  ready  for  the  advance.  Af- 
ter a  weary  march  they  arrived  at  Fairfax 
Court  House,  where  the  regiment  was  as- 
signed to  the  First  Brigade,  Third  Division 
of  the  Eleventh  Corps,  under  General  Franz 
Sigel.  The  division  was  under  command 
of  General  Carl  Schurz. 

While  at  Fairfax  Henry  Richardson,  of 
Company  G,  being  employed  on  a  detail  to 
prepare  a  place  for  hospital  tents,  was  struck 
by  a  stray  bullet  and  instantly  killed.  Had 
Richardson  moved  his  head  but  slightly, 
the  fatal  missile  would  have  struck  Major 
Carmichael,  who  was  standing  very  near 
him.  The  death  of  Richardson  cast  a  gloom 
over  the  entire  regiment,  and  the  scene 
when  his  lifeless  body  was  taken  away  was 
one  of  the  deepest  sadness. 

The  regiment  remained  here  about  three 
weeks,  when  they  were  ordered  to  Center- 
ville.  After  a  few  weeks  here  marching 
orders  were  received,  and  on  the  I5tl»  the 
regiment  joined  Burnside's  army  ;  here  the 
organization  was  ordered  to  prepare  for  in- 
spection, in  prospect  of  their  taking  part  in 
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  which  was  then 
in  progress.  Christmas  was  passed  in  front 
of  Fredericksburg.  On  the  19th  of  Janu- 
ary the  regiment  was  ordered  to  prepare 
for  march  at  an  hour's  notice,  with  three 
days'  rations.      On  the  morning  of  the  20th 


camp  was  struck,  and  the  columns  started 
on  the  advance.  One  of  the  characteristic 
Virginia  rain  storms  soon  afterward  began, 
and  within  two  hours  the  movement  of  ar- 
tillery and  the  pontoon  trucks  was  impossi- 
ble. On  the  morning  of  the  2 1  st  the  enemy, 
with  full  kuDwledge  of  the  movement,  had 
posted  near  the  river  at  Kelly's  Ford,  "Burn- 
side  stuck  in  the  mud,"  a  legend  in  which 
there  was,  unfortunately,  too  much  of  truth. 

The  regiment  was  ordered  into  winter 
quarters  in  a  fine  oak  forest,  known  as 
Oakland  Farm,  where  the  erection  of  quar- 
ters was  begun.  These  were  scarcely  fin- 
ished when  orders  were  received,  on  the  5th 
of  February,  before  daylight,  from  Colonel 
Brown  in  person,  to  be  ready  to  move  at 
dawn. 

The  ne.xt  day's  march  was  through  mud 
and  rain,  and  on  the  afternoon  of  the  6th 
the  column  halted  and  went  into  camp 
about  two  miles  from  Burke's  Station.  The 
157th  participated  in  the  battle  of  Chancel- 
lorsville  on  the  2d  of  May,  where  the  loss 
in  killed  and  wounded  was  quite  heavy. 
The  regiment  was  forced  to  leave  their 
killed  and  wounded  on  the  field  in  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  Colonel  Brown,  in 
speaking  of  the  part  taken  by  the  regiment 
in  this  engagement,  says:  "The  157th  did 
its  duty  well.  My  officers  proved  them- 
selves brave  and  efficient  men,  and  the  be- 
havior of  the  regiment  was  such  as  to  give 
full  confidence  to  the  future."  The  colonel 
placed  the  number  of  killed,  wounded  and 
missing  in  this  engagement  at  one  hundred 
and  three  ;  the  list,  however,  was  imperfect, 
as  the  number  greatly  exceeded  Colonel 
Brown's  estimate. 

On  the  morning  of  May  5th  the  regiment 
returned  to  their  camp,  where  they  remained 
until  the  12th  of  June,  when  marching 
orders  were  recei\ed,  and  they  advanced  a 
distance  of  nine  miles,  camping  near  the 
old    grounds  at    Hentwood  Church.     The 


Military  History.  —  The  157TH  Regiment. 


109 


march  of  the  next  day  was  one  of  great 
severity.  A  tramp  of  twenty-five  miles  in 
tlie  month  of  June,  on  a  dusty  thorough- 
fare, under  the  scorching  rays  of  a  southern 
sun,  is  not  a  pleasure  jaunt  by  any  means, 
and  members  of  the  157th  who  read  these 
lines  will  remember  that  welcome  bivouac 
in  the  green  woods  at  the  close  of  this  day's 
fatiguing  march. 

After  many  days  of  severe  marching,  of 
which  the  reader  has  already  gained  an  idea 
in  the  history  of  the  76th  regiment,  the 
157th  reached  the  bloody  field  of  Gettys- 
burg, in  which  it  performed  honorable  serv- 
ice and  lost  many  of  its  brave  men  and 
officers.  At  the  close  of  the  great  struggle 
it  was  a  sad  sight  to  look  upon  the  thinned 
ranks  of  the  157th;  of  the  five  hundred 
men  who  two  days  before  marched  up  to 
meet  the  enemy,  less  than  three  hundred 
now  remained.  A  relic  of  those  bloody 
hours  remains  in  the  roll  call  taken  on  an 
envelope  with  a  pencil,  by  Major  Car- 
michael.      It  reads  as  follows  :  — 

"  First  roll-call  after  first  day'.s  battle  at  Get- 
tysburg, evening  of  July  i,  1863.  Co.  A,  six 
privates,  one  corporal,  one  sergeant ;  Co.  B,  five 
privates,  one  corporal ;  Co.  C,  six  privates,  one 
corporal,  one  sergeant ;  Co.  D,  six  privates,  one 
corporal,  one  sergeant;  Co.  E,  two  privates;  Co. 
F,  five  privates,  two  corporals,  one  sergeant ; 
Co.  G,  seven  privates,  two  corporals  ;  Co.  I,  two 
corporals.  Total,  thirty-nine  privates,  eight  cor- 
porals, four  sergeants.     Total  fifty -one." 

Many  prisoners  were  taken  from  the 
regiment  and  were  hur'ried  off  to  those  so- 
called  prisons,  life  in  which  was  far  more  to 
be  dreaded  than  death  on  the  battle-field. 

Colonel  Brown  being  ordered  north,  the 
command  of  the  regiment  devolved  upon 
Major  Carmichael.  On  the  25th  of  July 
the  march  was  taken  up  for  Warrenton 
Junction,  a  distance  of  thirteen  miles,  where 
they  remained  until  the  1st  of  August, 
when  they  marched  to  Greenwich  and  went 
into  camp.      On  ^Monday,  the  3d  of  August, 


the  troops  marched  to  near  Catlett  Station, 
and  on  the  6th  at  midnight  orders  came  to 
the  division  to  proceed  to  the  depot,  pack- 
ing everything  for  a  passage  to  Alexandria. 
Taking  the  cars  they  arrived  at  that  city  on 
the  morning  of  the  8th.  At  noon  they 
boarded  a  steamer,  which  transported  them 
down  the  Potomac  to  Hampton  Roads, 
and  thence  to  Newport  News,  where 
they  arrived  the  following  day.  On  the 
morning  of  the  lOth  the  regiment  boarded 
a  steamer  for  passage  to  Charleston,  S.  C, 
and  on  the  afternoon  of  the  12th  they 
crossed  the  bar  at  Stony  Inlet  and  disem- 
barked on  Folly  Island.  Here  they  re- 
mained until  the  i6th,  when  they  were 
marched  up  the  beach  to  the  Rope  Ferry 
where  they  crossed  to  Morris  Island  and 
proceeded  to  the  front  on  three  days'  picket 
duty.  The  regiment  remained  in  camp  at 
Folly  Island  until  February  7th,  when 
marching  orders  were  received.  In  a  con- 
test with  the  enemy  soon  after  the  157th 
lost  one  man  from  Co.  I  and  one  wounded. 

Near  the  close  of  April,  1864,  '^  recruit- 
ing party  returned  to  the  regiment.  Colonel 
Carmichael  bringing  with  him  a  stand  of 
colors  presented  to  the  regiment  by  the 
citizens  of  Cortland  county.  Soon  after 
the  regiment  proceeded  to  Jacksonville, 
Florida,  where  the  brigade  was  dissolved. 
An  order  dividing  the  regiment  into  two 
commands  was  received  on  the  20th  of 
April.  The  larger,  of  six  companies,  to- 
wit.  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  and  F,  under  Colonel 
Brown,  was  to  be  stationed  at  Fernandina, 
while  the  remaining  companies,  G,  H,  I, 
and  K,  under  Lieiit.-Colonel  Carmichael, 
where  to  proceed  to  Picolata,  about  forty- 
five  miles  above  Jacksonville,  on  the  St. 
John's. 

On  the  2 1  St  of  April  the  regiment  broke 
camp  and  moved  to  boats,  the  band  and 
regimental  colors  of  blue  going  with  Col. 
Brown,  while  the  Cortland  banner  remained 


I!0 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


with  Lieut.-Col.  Carmichael.  On  the  15th 
of  June  the  157th  was  at  Hilton  Head, 
with  Col.  Brown  again  in  command.  Here 
a  new  brigade  was  formed,  consisting  of  the 
157th.  144th.  41st  New  York  Vols.,  and  the 
104th  Pennsylvania,  under  command  of 
Col.  Davis,  of  the  latter  regiment  The 
157th  was  in  the  engagement  which  took 
place  near  Charleston  the  5th  of  July,  and 
lost  one  man  taken  prisoner.  On  the  2Sth 
of  November  companies  A,  B,  C,  G,  and 
H.  under  command  of  the  lieutenant-colonel, 
left  Fort  Pulaski  for  Hilton  Head.  The 
regiment  was  in  the  engagement  at  Honey 
Hill,  where  thirtj-  men  were  wounded.  Cap- 
tains McWilliams  and  Lieutenants  Grant 
and  Forbes  among  the  number.  The  battle 
of  Honey  Hill  was  a  sharp  contest,  and  the 
157th  added  new  laurels  to  those  already 
honorably  won.  In  the  engagement  the 
157th  and  the  56th  were  fighting  side  by 
side,  when  the  former  fell  back  for  ammuni- 
tion. The  enemy,  observing  this  move- 
ment, increased  their  forces  at  that  point 
and  drove  back  the  56th.  At  this  juncture 
Col.  Carmichael  ordered  up  the  157th,  com- 
manded them  to  charge  and  they  dashed 
in  upon  the  enemy,  checked  their  onslaught 
and,  dri\nngthem  back,  re-established  the 
line.     Loss,  fortj"  men. 

On  the  5  th  of  December  a  reconnaissance 
in  force  was  made  on  the  Coosahatchie 
Road,  where  Col.  Carmichael  came  near 
losing  his  life.  The  incident  is  related  as 
follows  by  a  private  of  the  regiment : 
"Reaching  a  clearing  on  the  right  of  the 
road,  the  line  was  wheeled  to  the  right,  to 
face  an  earthwork  or  redoubt  on  a  knoll  be- 
yond, having  an  embrasure  for  one  gun. 
Two  or  three  rebel  ca\-alr)Tnen  were  dis- 
covered near  the  work,  who  disappeared, 
lea\-ing  the  scene  apparently  rebelless.  CoL 
Carmichael,  e\adently  disliking  the  appear- 
ance of  the  place,  halted  his  line  when  with- 
in easy  musket  range,  and,  with  two  ca\-al- 


rjmen,  proceed  to  reconnoitre  the  position. 
The  colonel  had  passed  one-third  of  the 
distance  round  when  a  volley  was  poured 
from  a  force  of  -the  enemy  secreted  in  the 
redoubt;  the  cavalr}-men  wheeled  and  with- 
drew, but  the  horse  of  the  colonel  was  struck 
by  a  ball  and  threw  its  rider.  The  colonel 
arose  from  the  tall  grass,  when  another  vol- 
ley was  fired  at  him.  By  that  time  the 
I57th's  skirmishers  were  excited,  and,  with- 
out orders,  commenced  a  rapid  fire.  The 
colonel  ordered  the  men  to  cease  firing,  and 
crawling  through  the  grass  and  bushes, 
succeded  in  getting  to  the  rear  without  a 
bullet  wound,  yet  severely  injured  by  the 
fall  from  his  horse." 

On  the  9th  of  December  the  regiment 
participated  in  an  engagement,  losing  fifteen 
wounded,  one  mortally.  February-  27th, 
1S64,  five  companies  of  the  157th,  D,  E, 
I,  H,  and  K,  embarked  for  Georgetown.  S. 
C.  About  a  week  afterward  the  remainder 
of  the  regiment  followed.  The  quarters  of 
the  157th  at  this  place  were  in  stores  on 
Main  street  The  town  was  guarded  by  a 
provost-guard  under  Major  Frank  Place,  as 
provost  -  marshal.  Lieut-Col.  Carmichael 
commanded  the  regiment  and  CoL  Brown 
the  post  The  Georgeto«"n  post  was  made 
a  center  for  recruiting  negro  soldiers,  and  in 
consequence  of  orders  fi-om  headquarters, 
promulgated  to  that  effect  the  countr\-  in 
that  Nncinitj-  was  neariy  depopulated  of 
blacks,  who  hurried  within  the  L^nion  lines. 
Among  these  uncultured  f>eople  Major 
Place  was  a  magnate  of  superlative  great- 
ness. He  gave  a  patient  ear  to  their  many 
grie\-ances  and  even  solemnized  marriages 
and  granted  divorces  for  them. 

The  garrison  of  Georgetown  consisted  of 
the  157th  and  four  companies  of  the  107th 
Ohio.  On  the  first  of  April  they  were  re- 
inforced by  the  25  th  Ohio,  four,  companies 
of  the  56th  New  York,  six  companies  of  the 
107th  Ohio,  54th  (colored)  Massachusetts, 


Military  IIistukv.  —  The  157x11  Regiment. 


1 1 1 


32d  U.  S.  C.  T.,  two  companies  of  the  4th 
Massachusetts  Ca\-alr\-,  and  a  section  of  ar- 
tillery for  the  purpose  of  forming  an  expe- 
dition into  the  interior  of  the  State.  April 
5  th  the  column  moved  off.  Gen.  E.  E.  Pot- 
ter, commanded  the  expedition  ;  Col.  P.  P. 
Brown,  the  Second  Brigade  ;  and  Lieut-Col. 
Carmichael,  the  157th  Regiment.  The  night 
of  the  5th  was  passed  in  the  vicinity  of  Po- 
tato Ferry,  on  Black  River.  At  six  o'clock 
on  the  following  morning  the  march  was 
resumed,  and  after  a  severe  tramp  they 
encamped  near  Kingstree.  The  following 
night  they  went  into  camp  at  Montgomery's 
plantation,  and  the  night  of  the  8th  was 
passed  at  Brewerton.  April  9th  the  march 
was  again  taken  up,  and,  when  within  two 
miles  of  Dingle's  Mills,  they  were  informed 
that  a  battery  of  three  guns  commanded  the 
approach  to  Sumpterville,  and  that  the  bat- 
tery was  located  on  the  opposite  side  of  a 
swamp  one  mile  wide,  and  covering  the 
road  leading  through  it.  Preparations  were 
immediately  made  to  capture  the  battery, 
and  after  the  several  positions  had  been 
taken  up  by  the  various  commands,  the 
157th  was  ordered  to  the  front,  and  Com- 
pany I  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers,  under 
command  of  Col.  Carmichael. 

When  nearly  through  the  swamp  the  men 
were  fired  upon  by  the  enemy's  skirmish- 
ers, and  one  man  wounded.  Company  I 
immediately  returned  the  fire,  when  the  col- 
onel ordered  the  firing  to  cease,  and  halted 
his  men.  At  this  juncture  the  firing  of  the 
enemy  also  ceased,  and  they  hailed  to  learn 
who  the  advancing  party  were.  The  an- 
swer, "The  157th  New  York  Volunteers" 
had  hardly  ceased  to  reverberate  through 


the  tangled  wildwood,  ere  the  enemy  again 
opened  a  sweeping  fire.  PLmerging  from  the 
swamp,  the  colonel  halted  his  command 
behind  a  fence  in  front  of  the  rebel  position, 
and  awaited  the  arrival  of  his  regiment, 
which  had  become  scattered.  While  wait- 
ing for  his  men  to  collect,  an  aid  of  Gen. 
Potter  came  through  the  swamp  to  ascer- 
tain the  position,  and  the  colonel's  reply 
was,  "Wait  ten  minutes,  captain,  and  you 
can  return  to  the  general  by  way  of  the 
road."  During  this  time  the  enemy  directed 
a  brisk  fire  with  grape  and  canister,  and 
scarcely  had  one-half  of  the  regiment  formed 
in  line,  when  Col.  Carmichael  gave  the  or- 
der to  charge.  With  a  yell  the  men  leaped 
the  fence,  and  with  a  double-quick  charged 
the  battery,  from  which  the  enemy  fled, 
leaving  their  guns  and  colors,  together  with 
their  dead  and  wounded  on  the  field.  It 
was  a  dashing  exploit,  reflecting  great  credit 
upon  the  men  of  the  157th  and  their  gallant 
commander.  Colonel  Carmichael's  loss  was 
twenty-two  killed  and  wounded,  and  that 
of  the  enemy  much  greater. 

Succeding  the  engagement  at  Dingle's 
Mills,  the  157th  participated  in  a  spirited 
contest  at  Lampter  and  Rafting  Creeks. 
On  the  lOth  of  July,  1865,  the  rolls  were 
finished  and  the  regiment  mustered  out 
of  service,  the  work  being  completed  Au- 
gust 1st. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  battles  partici- 
pated in  by  this  regiment ;  Chancellorsville, 
Gettysburg,  Hagerstown,  Fort  Wagner, 
siege  of  Charlestown,  first  and  second  John's 
Island,  Camp  Milton,  Honey  Mill,  Partridge 
Hill,  Deveaux  Neck,  Statesburg,  Dingle's 
Mills,  Lampter  Creek,  Rafting  Creek. 


itz 


ElDaToay  OF  CoaxT..^. 


CEAPTEB.  XEL 

MILrT\HY  SISTfjaY.— THE  i*rm  HBTHtKYT 


_  "icrrtT" '_  'nrr:iir;c^  - 


T^irrrnc  F^r     — 
— Tie  Eac 


-it  A^pmaiDx — 'Dt&e-  Or 


TKK  tSftn.  Regimiesn:  was  argsnized  tn 
Onondags.  ani  Cardswi  cnnntfeg.  and 

1  tire  zzd  of 

~_. ^ _  -     -  E,  F  3ad  G 

wse  Wata.  Cardamf  catattr.  tiieir  <.iiTF«:t:rT 
beniT  3S  5:ilow~:  Company-  E — Lantsin. 
Race—  -    "^      -      "-'-^  liesOEaam:.  Heiierr 

brake  PiecEu     ConrDarprF — Cantain.  Toim 


Givens  Camnany  G — Cay  lain.  Ajhem  HI 
Barae-:  First  Lienisianc  EEram  CIsrk; 
Secc  -     '-       —  ■ —   "    "  ;:  MZnie-. 

A.  ^  :  was  in  die  trHd 

Le^  than  a.  year,  it  gefemed  (^adive  and 

ng- iecfmared 
_ui  --  „  i.  ,1-  .  --.^^__^_ii5.  Erevicus 
tn  its  d^arture  ir  '^^as  encamped  Sir  a  tew 
<fev5  rn.  Svracnse;  sad.  k&  fiur  Gcr  PitfiiC. 


here  s  rebel  ^y  w<&  captnredasCiEe^ckE^ 

line  at  tiie  rijtfr.     Hs  peswed  tn  be- a.  pcs- 

'       ~  ;3r- 

ii:^  _  ;ies 

and  defeases  ium.  Gts-  Point  tn  t&e  ec- 
treme  1^:     Otfes  af  —    -  -ase 

were  of  oaurse  rCTise_  i-i-  _v.  .  ^-  iiii^-- 
'*ardit  tried,  tound  guilts"  and  shot 

Ott  r<»^  rdttL  rfw-  cfiviaan  was  nHTwed  ap 
ScuinTr  Tcer 

:._    was    esT ^^  _  .  _  :  .  '"-:    a 

movemeit  was  mTurt^  against  rfte  Sautfiscie 
Satlroad.  in  wiiicii  an  engagement  accnrred. 
die  ri^tn.  aenr—  r  -  —  —  -  -  -.rr:  tnreeaf 
iis  men  were  3me  >~TmT7 

was  artETwards  again  accnpied  and  noTfring 
iismroed  -         -        .-  .  -fj^ 

Eegtmenr.  _-._.    __     ^    _      ^    iJier. 

wtien  a  dencnscraiicn  was  made  agsins: 
±  n  Railrnad.  wiiicit  was  an  impar- 


meit  W35  iTTmrrpffTgnF4^  nrrffrfff    !u\n    tile  esiiecStion  consSEd  of  Warrei  s  (tiie  5^) 
S^ant  line  rt  brsa.-  '  ■ 

near  WatraiStan>-ii  .n  _i.-  --^^ i-    ^--  i— -    — -.,,  =  -^    ^,:___  _      -.   ^.      ---     — 

road-  mad  was  descmyed.  die  rasHs  heng  hfrttPff 

On.  the  irir  i3t  Ocmbei-  the  rS^th:  w^  ^i-  in  iiies  iuade  by-  the  ties,  and  beit  si  as  tn 


man 


„       iixoL     The  (fivison  was  com-     and  a  "-■'*•»•   anmrnit  at  e^i^  sapniies  can— 
^  -  and  die     tnred.     In  the  gsgerfrtfcm  the  iS^th  bore 

-  -  —  ~ -.  innsnicnoHS  part. 

The  regiment  resnmsed  and  w^at  nnn 
was  in  camp  nesr  Paniar  Gkave  t~h 1 1 ir h  .-snrp  near  Parke  bCECon.  whee  cunnnEt- 
■aimi  Lhae  t6th.  of  OcniQ^     WMe  rn  mmp     jhie  \»iiim'  qnamrrr  wee  sooii.  hrriTt   tram 


Military  History.  —  The  185TH  Regiment. 


113 


the  pine  forest  wherein  the  camp  was  lo- 
cated. A  commodious  log  church  was  built 
and  roofed  with  tent  cloth  furnished  by  the 
benevolent  Christian  Commission.  Here 
the  regiment  remained  until  the  5th  of 
February-,  1865. 

On  the  4th  of  February  orders  were  re- 
ceived to  be  in  readiness  to  march  at  a 
moment's  notice,  and  the  ne.xt  morning,  a 
Sabbath,  before  daylight,  the  division  was 
ordered  to  march  towards  Hatcher's  Run. 
In  the  afternoon  of  that  day  occurred  what 
is  called  the  second  battle  of  Hatcher's  Run, 
in  which  the  185th  did  noble  service  and 
suffered  considerably.  During  the  early 
part  of  the  engagement  the  185th  was  held 
in  reserve  ;  but  about  the  middle  of  the 
afternoon  the  brigade  was  ordered  forward 
to  relieve  the  Second  Division  of  the  Fifth 
Corps.  This  division  occupied  a  position 
in  front  of  a  piece  of  woods.  Beyond  it 
was  an  open  field  upon  the  opposite  side  of 
which  were  some  buildings  and  a  sudden 
declivitj',  which  was  occupied  by  the  enemy, 
ser\-ing  as  an  intrenchment.  Gen.  Ayres's 
Division  had  here  suffered  terribly. 

As  the  first  brigade  marched  for  nearly 
half  a  mile  along  the  road  through  the 
woods,  it  was  met  by  the  wounded,  fresh 
from  the  bloody  carnage,  some  with  wounds 
hastily  bandaged,  and  others  yet  untouched 
by  the  surgeon,  or  in  the  jaws  of  death. 
This  experience  was  a  trying  one  to  the 
men  of  the  regiment — more  so,  perhaps, 
than  the  shock  of  battle  itself;  but  the 
brave  men.  many  of  them  with  blanched 
cheek  and  tight-closed  lips,  pressed  for- 
ward. The  regiment  had  scarcely  formed 
a  line  when  a  terrific  fire  was  opened  by 
the  enemy.  Colonel  Sickel  was  one  of  the 
first  woundad  and  turned  the  command 
over  to  Colonel  Jenney.  He,  realizing  the 
hazard  of  attempting  to  hold  his  exposed 
position  against  the  enemy  in  his  covered 
attitude,  ordered  the  brigade  forward.     The 


order  was  obeyed  in  excellent  form,  through 
a  galling  fire.  The  field  was  won,  though 
at  considerable  sacrifice.  Among  the 
wounded  was  Captain  John  Listman, 
whose  leg  was  afterwards  amputated  at 
the  hip.  Adjutant  Mudge  was  also  wound- 
ed here,  and  never  returned  to  the  field. 

The  advanced  position  was  held  until 
darkness  when  the  brigade  retired  to  the 
main  line.  After  the  engagement  Colonel 
Jenney  sent  Major  Bush  to  establish  a  line 
of  pickets  on  the  right  flank.  While  per- 
forming this  dutj%  and  when  scarcely  out 
of  speaking  distance  of  his  regiment,  the 
major  and  a  squad  of  men  were  captured. 
Major  Bush  was  sent  to  Libby  Prison,  and 
the  regiment  lost  his  valuable  services. 
The  brigade  was  warmly  commended  by 
General  Griffin  for  its  gallant  service ;  and 
the  praise  was  fairly  earned. 

The  regiment  again  went  into  camp,  and 
the  second  day  after  the  battle  Colonel  Jen- 
ney left  the  organization,  on  account  of  the 
following  circumstances :  When  he  was 
commissioned  as  colonel  of  the  185th  he 
was  major  of  the  Third  New  York  Artillery 
and  acting  as  provost-judge  of  North  Caro- 
lina, stationed  at  Newbern  ;  after  receiving 
notice  of  his  promotion,  he  had  been  taken 
prisoner  by  the  enemy  and  paroled ;  with 
this  status  he  was  mustered  as  colonel  and 
took  the  185th  to  the  front,  expecting  to 
obtain  an  immediate  exchange.  But  while 
he  regarded  himself  as  bound  by  his  parole, 
the  War  Department  held  the  opinion  that 
the  officer  who  captured  him  had  no  au- 
thority to  parole  him,  and  that  Colonel 
Jenney  was  therefore  to  be  regarded  as  an 
"  escaped,"  and  not  a  "paroled"  prisoner. 
In  this  situation  he  remained  during  his 
period  of  service  with  the  regiment  After 
endeavoring  in  vain  to  induce  the  secretary 
of  war  to  relieve  him  from  the  responsibility 
of  his  unfortunate  position  by  an  order  de- 
claring that  he  was  not  properly  paroled 


114 


History  of  Cortland  CoUiNTV. 


and  sending  him  on  duty,  he  was  forced  to 
seek  relief  by  resignation.  This  resignation, 
sent  in  about  the  middle  of  January,  had 
been  accepted  and  an  order  honorably  dis- 
charging him  had  been  received  by  General 
Griffin  just  previous  to  the  Hatcher's  Run 
engagement  ;  but  at  Colonel  Jenney's  re- 
quest it  was  retained  by  the  general  until 
after  the  advance  was  made,  when  it  was 
turned  over  to  him.  Lieut.-Col.  Gustavus 
Sniper  was  at  once  promoted  and  bra\-ely 
commanded  the  regiment  during  the  re- 
mainder of  its  term  of  service. 

On  the  25th  of  March  the  division  was 
ordered  out  before  daylight  to  oppose  an 
attack  of  the  rebels  on  Fort  Steedman,  then 
occupied  b\-  the  14th  New  York  Artillery, 
and  forming  a  portion  of  the  lines  encircling 
Petersburg.  The  enemj-  made  a  deter- 
mined assault,  with  the  intention  of  .sever- 
ing the  lines  at  that  point ;  but  the  attempt 
failed  totally  and  the  rebels  were  driven 
back  with  heavy  losses  in  killed,  wounded 
and  about  2,000  prisoners.  About  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  an  attack  was  made 
on  the  extreme  left,  involving  the  185th, 
in  which  the  Union  arms  were  victorious. 

The  regiment  returned  to  camp  at 
Hatcher's  Run  and  remained  until  the 
29th,  at  which  date  Giant  had  determined 
upon  an  advance  of  the  left  wing  of  his 
army.  Orders  to  march  were  received  on 
the  28th,  the  movement  to  begin  at  three 
o'clock  the  ne.xt  morning.  The  Fifth  and 
Second  Corps  moved  out  southward  until 
they  crossed  the  run,  then  turned  north- 
ward towards  the  enemy's  right.  The  Sec- 
ond Corps  crossed  the  run  at  the  Vaughn 
Road,  while  Warren  cro.ssed  four  miles  be- 
low, where  the  stream  by  its  junction  with 
GravelK'  run  became  Rowant\-  creek,  and 
then  moved  up  towards  the  Boydtown 
Plank  Road.  At  two  o'clock  \Varren's 
Corps,  including  the  iS5th,  reached  Quaker 
Farm,  where  they  met  the  enemy,  and  an 


engagement  followed.  The  Union  forces 
were  retreating  in  disorder,  especially  the 
Second  Division,  when  General  Chamber- 
lain, commanding  the  First  Division,  rode 
up  to  Colonel  Sniper,  exclaiming:  "  l""or 
God's  sake,  colonel,  can  you  save  the  day 
with  your  regiment?"  The  colonel  replied: 
"General,  I  will  try."  The  185th  was  im- 
mediateh'  formed  in  line  uf  battle,  standing 
alone,  as  the  198th  PennsyK'ania  had  shared 
in  the  retxeat,  and  was  ordered  to  charge 
the  eneni)-.  Forward  the)-  went  over  a 
rise  of  ground,  beyond  which  they  were 
met  by  the  advancing  lines  of  the  rebels 
in  hot  pursuit  of  the  retreating  division. 
Against  the  oncoming  forces  the  gallant 
regiment  threw  itself,  hurled  back  the  en- 
emy and  turned  the  tide  of  the  day;  but  it 
was  at  fearful  cost.  The  killed  and  wounded 
in  the  regiment  numbered  one  hundred  and 
eight}-.  In  some  of  the  companies  all  of 
the  officers  were  either  killed  or  wounded. 
This  heroic  charge  was  the  work  of  but 
less  than  half  an  hour,  but  it  has  been  char- 
acterized as  one  of  the  most  desperate,  as 
well  as  important  in  its  results  of  any  in 
the  war. 

The  fate  of  the  colors  of  the  185th  during 
this  charge  was  most  thrilling.  B.  B.  Wil- 
ton was  color-bearer  at  that  time  ;  he  soon 
fell  wounded.  A  private  then  seized  the 
flag,  and  was  immediately  killed.  Another 
private  of  Company  D  then  grasped  the 
banner  and  instantly  fell  wounded.  Pri\'ate 
Herman  Rice,  of  Coinpan)^  B,  next  seized 
the  colors,  but  his  arm  was  pierced  by  a 
bullet,  and  they  again  fell.  At  this  juncture 
Colonel  Sniper,  who  was  dismounted  and 
in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  seized  the  fallen 
flag,  waved  it  on  high  and  shouted,  "Men 
of  the  185th  —  forward!"  A  wild  cheer 
went  up,  the  regiment  rushed  forward  and 
the  field  was  won.  For  his  personal  brav- 
ery Colonel  Sniper  was  warmly  compli- 
mented b)-   the   general   officers,  while  the 


MiiJTARV  History,  —  The   185x11  Reciment. 


1 1 


brave  regiment  was  also  showered  witli  con- 
gratulations. 

During  the  30th  and  31st  important 
events  transpired,  resulting  in  severe  fight- 
ing for  the  possession  of  the  White  Oak 
Road,  during  which  the  enemy  was  repulsed, 
losing  hea\'ily  in  prisoners,  and  Sheridan's 
forward  movement  to  Fi\e  l-'orks,  after 
much  hard  fighting.  The  battle  of  Five 
Forks,  one  of  the  most  prominent  of  the 
engagements  that  were  instrumental  in  ter- 
minating the  rebellion,  was  fought  on  Sat- 
turday,  April  1st,  beginning  in  the  after- 
noon and  continuing  until  da)-light  the  next 
morning.  In  this  engagement  the  Fifth 
Corps  was  on  the  right  and  in  the  hottest 
of  the  contest.  Several  officers  and  many 
privates  of  the  185th  were  killed  or  wound- 
ed, and  the  regiment  added  to  its  already 
exalted  reputation  for  bravery  and  heroism. 
The  victor)'  won  in  this  battle  was  a  most 
decisive  one,  and  told  clearly  that  the  re- 
bellion, as  far  as  it  was  represented  by  Lee's 
army,  was  substantially  crushed. 

As  darkness  approached,  on  the  1st,  the 
batteries  along  the  entire  line  in  front  of 
Petersburg  opened  a  bombardment  that 
filled  the  heavens  with  its  thunder,  and 
lighted  up  the  night  with  its  glare.  The 
rebel  works  were  vigorously  assaulted  on 
Sunday  morning,  the  2d,  and  the  outer 
lines  carried,  while  the  Sixth  Corps,  with 
two  divisions  of  Ord's,  dro\'e  ever\'thing 
before  them  up  the  Boydtown  road  at  dawn; 
then  wheeled  to  the  left  and  swept  down  in 
rear  of  the  rebel  works,  capturing  guns  and 
thousands  of  prisoners.  Other  equally  im- 
portant successes  were  achieved  at  other 
points  along  the  lines  that  were  rapidly 
drawing  in  towards  Petersburg  and  Rich- 
mond, and  admonishing  General  Lee  that 
his  doom  was  at  hand.  So  evident  had 
this  fact  become  to  him  that  he  telegraphed 
Jefferson  Davis  in  Richmond,  at  10  o'clock 
a.  m.  of  Sunday  :  — 


"  My  lines  are  broken  in  three  places.  Rich- 
mond must  be  evacuated  this  evening." 

Richmond  was  evacuated  that  night.  Be- 
fore noon  of  the  next  day  the  fall  of  the  capi- 
tal of  the  Confederac)',  that  had  cost  so  man\- 
lives,  was  flashed  to  all  parts  of  the  world. 

The  concluding  operations  of  the  cam- 
paign, ending  at  Appomattox  on  the  9th  of 
April,  need  not  be  detailed  here.  Griffin 
and  Ord,  with  the  Fifth,  Twenty-fourth  and 
one  division  of  the  Twenty- fifth  Corps, 
by  extraordinary  marching,  reached  Appo- 
mattox about  daylight  on  the  morning  of 
the  8th.  Since  the  evacuation  of  Richmond 
and  Petersburg  the  185th  had  performed 
some  of  the  severest  marching  of  the  war, 
interspersed  with  skirmishing  and  fighting, 
often  without  food  and  with  very  little  rest. 

A  correspondence  had  begun  between 
Generate  Grant  and  Lee  on  the  7th,  and 
the  capitulation  was  completed  at  Appo- 
mattox on  the  9th.  The  position  of  the 
two  confronting  armies  on  the  morning  of 
surrender  is  thus  graphically  described  in 
Greeley's  history  of  the  rebellion  :  — 

■•  Sheridan  was  with  his  cavalry  near  the  Court- 
House,  when  the  Army  of  \'irginia  made  its  last 
charge.  By  his  order  his  trooi)ers,  who  were  in 
line  of  battle,  dismounted,  giving  ground  gradu- 
ally, while  showing  a  steady  front,  so  as  to  allow 
our  weary  infantry  time  to  form  and  take  posi- 
tion. This  eft'ected,  the  horsemen  moved  swift- 
ly to  the  right  and  mounted,  revealing  lines  of 
solid  infantry  in  battle  array,  before  whose  wall 
of  gleaming  bayonets  the  astonished  enemy  re- 
coiled in  blank  despair,  as  Sheridan  and  his 
troopers,  passing  briskly  round  the  rebel  left, 
prepared  to  charge  the  confused,  reeling  mass. 
A  white  flag  was  now  waved  by  the  enemy,  be- 
fore General  Custer,  who  held  our  cavalry  ad- 
vance, with  the  information  that  they  had  con- 
cluded to  surrender.  Riding  over  to  Appomat- 
tox Court-House,  General  Sheridan  was  met  by 
General  Gordon,  who  re([uested  a  suspension  of 
hostilides,  with  the  assurance  that  negotiations 
were  then  pending  between  Generals  Grant  and 
Lee  for  a  capitulation." 


ii6 


HiSroRV    OI'-    Cl)[<TI.A\D    COUNTV. 


Lieutenant  Hiram  Clark,  of  Company  G, 

in  the  185th,  was  tlie  last  man  killed  in  the 
Army  of  Virginia.'  He  was  in  command 
of  the  skirmish  line  at  Appomattox,  and 
while  the  flag  of  truce  was  being  shown, 
was  struck  by  a  rebel  shell,  which  nearly 
cut  him  in  twain.  He  was  buried  under  a 
tree  near  the  Court- House. 

After  the  surrender  the  185th  was  de- 
tailed, with  some  other  regiments,  to  take 
charge  of  the  rebel  prisoners,  and  look  after 
the  captured  arms  and  munitions  ;  this  duty 
occupied  several  days.  The  arms  and  am- 
munition were  sent  to  Burkesvillc. 

The  185th  remained  three  days  in  camp, 
and  were  then  ordered  to  Wilson's  Station, 
on  the  Southside  railroad,  where  they  re- 
mained until  May  ist,  marching  thence  to 
Manchester,  across  the  James  river  from 
Richmond.  On  the  5th  of  May  orders 
were  received  to  march  to  Alexandria ; 
starting  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  they 
crossed  the  Pamunkey  river  on  pontoons, 
marched  through  Bowling  Green,  crossing 
the  Rappahannock  at  Fredericksburg,  and 
arrived  at  Arlington  Heights  on  the  13th, 
after  marching  all  night.  After  partaking 
in  the  grand  review  of  the  army  by  the 
president,  in  Washington,  on  the  23d  of 
May,  the  regiment  returned  to  camp,  and 
was  mustered  out  of  service  on  the  30tli. 
On  the  following  day,  at  3  o'clock  p.  m., 
they  left  Arlington  for  home,  arriving  in 
Syracuse  on  the  3d  da}'  of  June,  where  they 
received  a  generous  welcome.  The  regi- 
ment was  paid  off  at  Camp  White  on  the 
lOth  of  June,  by  Major  Littlefield. 

OTHER    ORCJAXIZATIOXS. 

Besides  the  large   bodies  of  x-olunteers, 

1  It  has  been  often  stated  and  printed  that  Lieutenant 
Clark  was  the  last  man  killed  in  the  war  of  the  rebellion. 
This  cannot,  of  course,  lie  true,  as  fighting  in  the  south- 
west was  continued  for  sonic  time  after  Lee's  surrentler. 
The  killing  of  the  last  man  in  the  war  occurred  in  Texas. 


whose  movements  have  been  described, 
man}-  of  the  _\'oung  men  of  this  county  en- 
listed in  other  organizations,  either  in  bod- 
ies or  singly.  A  company  was  raised  early 
in  the  year  1861,  which  joined  the  23d 
Regiment,  anil  was  mustered  in  at  I'llmira 
on  the  1 6th  of  May.  Its  officers  were 
Martin  C.  Clark,  captain  ;  Alvah  D.  Wa- 
ters, lieutenant;  B.  B.  Andrews,  ensign; 
Stephen  V.  Larabee,  first  sergeant ;  Cor- 
nelius Lansing,  Leonard  Hathaway  and 
Alvin  F.  Bailey,  sergeants.  The  regiment 
served  two  \'ears,  and  was  commanded  at 
the  time  of  its  mtister  b}'  Colonel  H  C. 
H  oft  man. 

A  company  was  raised,  principally  in 
Homer,  which  joined  the  "Old  Twelfth" 
Regiment,  from  Onondaga  county,  which 
was  mtistered  at  Elmira  on  the  23d  of  April, 
1 86 1,  for  three  months.  A  large  majority 
of  its  members  re-enlisted  at  the  expiration 
of  that  term  of  service.  The  officers  of  this 
company  w  ere  George  W.  Stone,  captain  ; 
Lucius  C.  Storrs,  lieutenant ;  George  Sny- 
der, ensign. 

SL"M.\I.\RV. 

In    the    war    of  the    rebellion,    Cortland 
county,   according  to  the  census  of   1865, 
lost  by  death  in  the  field,  two  hundred  and 
thirty-three    volunteers,    belonging    to    the 
following  regiments:    loth    New   York    In- 
fantry, 7  ;    I2th,  7;    15th,    i;    23d,   3;   32d, 
1  ;    44th,    3;    50th,   6;    51st,    i;    57th,    i 
64th,    1;     76th,    51;     8ist,    i;     105th,    I 
109th,    4;    iiith,    i;    114th,    5;    117th,    I 
I2lst,    i;     I22d,    1;     129th,    1;     137th,  2 
138th,   I  ;     146th,    I  ;     147th,   I  ;     149th,  I 
157th,  55;    i6ist,  i;    i68th,   i  ;    185th,    18 
loth  New  York  Cavalry,  8;    12th,  i  ;    19th 
2.      1st  Battery,  2.      2d  New  York  Regular 
Artillery,  2;    3d,  I  ;    5th,  3  ;   9th,  10;    l6th, 
4;   other  States,  8;    United    States    Regu- 
lars, 2;   unknown,  11.      Total,  233. 


Official  Action  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion. 


117 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

OFI-rCI  \L  ACTIOX   IX  THE  WAR  OF  THE   REBELLION. 

The  First  Public  .'Vet  —  .\ii  Impcirtaiu  Resolution  —  Action  of  the  Board  of  .Supervisors  Relative  to  Payment  of 
Bounties  —  The  Committee  of  1864— Money  Borrowed  for  the  County  —  The  Bounty  Committee  —  Further  Sums 
Raised  —  A  County  Bounty  Offered  —  The  C.1II  fur  500,000  Men  —  Bounties  Increased  —  Issue  of  Bonds  —  Loans 
by  the  County  to  the  Towns  —  .Statistics. 


THK  first  public  act  on  the  part  of  tlie 
officials  of  Cortland  count}-,  in  aid  of 
the  Union  armies  for  the  putting  down  of 
the  rebellion,  was  done  on  the  12th  day  of 
November,  1 862,  by  the  Board  of  Super- 
visors. It  consisted  of  a  resolution  offered 
by  Mr.  S.  A.  Childs,  of  Scott,  as  follows:  — 

"  Reso/veii,  That  this  Board  request  Hon. 
Henry  S.  Randall  to  proceed  to  .-Vlbany  to  make 
the  necessary  proofs  to  the  governor  and  adju- 
tant-general, in  respect  to  the  number  of  volun- 
teers who  shall  be  credited  to  this  county,  and 
to  confer  with  those  officers  in  respect  to  the 
draft  to  be  made  from  this  county." 

This  resolution  was  the  precurser  of  the 
long  series  of  public  measures,  embracing 
the  most  prompt  and  vigorous  action  in  aid 
of  the  go\ernment,  embracing  a  liberal  ap- 
propriation of  money  and  the  enlistment  of 
hundreds  of  brave  men,  which  followed 
during  the  period  of  the  war. 

Mr.  Randall  made  the  visit  as  requested. 
The  next  measure  was  the  passage  of  the 
following  resolution  on  the  21st  of  Novem- 
ber, 1862,  which  is  self-explanatory:  — 

"  Rcso/vc-if,  'I'hat  the  Board  of  Suijer\isors  of 
Cortland  county  do  approve  of  and  recommend 
the  passage  of  an  act  by  the  Legislature,  direct- 
ing that  in  each  of  the  towns  of  said  county  in 
which  money  has  been  raised,  in  pursuance  of  a 
vote  in  town  meeting,  or  by  the  action  of  prop- 
erly authorized  persons,  to  pay  bounties  to  or  for 
raising  volunteers  who  have  enlisted  from  said 
towns  into  the  service  of  the  United  States  since 
July  2d,  1862,  a  tax  shall  be  levied  to  repay  the 
monies  so  raised  and  actually  expended  for  said 
objects." 

The  committee  of  the  Board  of  Super- 
visors on  military  aftairs  for  1 864  comprised 


Messrs.  M.  Van  Hoesen,  George  W.  Phil- 
lips and  Solomon  Goddard ;  they  found 
plenty  of  work.  Petitions  began  to  come 
in  from  a  majority  of  the  towns  of  the 
county,  asking  the  board  to  offer  an  addi- 
tional bounty  of  $300  to  all  volunteers  un- 
der the  recent  call  of  the  president  for  300,- 
000  men.  Upon  these  petitions  a  majority 
report  was  made  to  the  effect,  in  brief,  that 
owing  to  the  comparatively  small  number  of 
the  petitioners,  and  that  such  action  was 
contrary  to  a  recent  act  of  the  Legislature, 
the  board  would  decline  to  act.  This  re- 
port was  adopted,  and  the  committee  were 
directed  to  go  to  Syracuse  for  conference 
with  a  like  committee  of  that  county.  The 
several  towns  were  instructed  by  the  board 
to  hold  special  town  meetings  on  the  15  th 
of  December,  for  the  purpose  of  getting  the 
voice  of  the  tax  payers  upon  the  proposition 
to  raise  money  to  pay  a  bounty  of  three 
hundred  dolors  to  all  volunteers.  The 
town  meetings  were  held  and  the  board  au- 
thorized to  pay  the  bounty.  The  county 
treasurer  was  accordingly  empowered  to 
borrow  a  sum  not  to  exceed  $103,800,  for 
which  county  bonds  should  be  issued,  to 
pay  the  proposed  bounty  to  all  volunteers 
enlisting  after  January  ist.  A  committee 
consisting  of  Messrs.  S.  K.  Welch,  George 
W.  Phillips  and  M.  \'an  Hoesen  was  ap- 
pointed to  supervise  the  payment  of  boun- 
ties and  kindred  matters. 

A  special  meeting  of  the  board  was  called 
for  February  loth,  1864,  at  which  action 
was  taken  to  raise  $70,000,  or  as  much  as 
should   be   necessary,    to  pay  bounties  for 


ii8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


volunteers  under  the  calls  of  October  i/tli, 
1863,  and  I-'ebruary  1st,  1864.  This  action 
was  not  intcntlcil  to  conflict  with  previous 
measures.  At  the  same  time  recruitint;' 
agents  were  instructed  to  push  their  work- 
as  fast  as  possible. 

The  ne.xt  special  meeting  was  held  on  the 
6th  of  July,  and  a  committee  was  appointed 
consisting  of  five  members — Messrs.  Geo. 
W.  Phillips,  D.  McGraw,  M.  Van  Hoesen, 
P.  Mallory  and  Silas  Blanchard  —  to  take 
into  consideration  the  propriety  of  offering 
a  county  bounty  for  volunteers  under  the 
recent  call  for  500,000  men.  Town  meet- 
ings were  again  recommended,  and  the 
offering  of  $150  for  one  year  men,  $250 
for  t\\'o  year  men,  or  greater  sums,  if  deemed 
expedient.  In  this  the  towns  concurred, 
and  the  treasurer  was  authorized  to  borrow 
the  necessary  amount  for  the  proposed 
bounties ;  each  town  was  made  liable  for 
its  proper  proportion  of  the  amount  raised. 
Messrs.  George  W.  Phillips,  M.  Van  Hoe- 
sen, D.  McGraw,  S.  E.  Welch  and  Hiram 
Crandall  were  appointed  a  committee  to 
supervise  the  payment  of  bounties  under 
this  measure. 

At  the  annual  meeting  of  this  \-ear  (1864) 
the  county  treasurer  was  empowered  to 
issue  bonds  payable  in  Maft:h,  1873,  for  a 
sum  sufficient  to  pay  all  outstanding  indebt- 
edness on  account  of  bounties. 

The  report  of  the  committee  upon  filling 
the  quota  under  the  call  for  500,000  men 
stated,  in  effect,  that  in  order  to  obtain  vol- 
unteers, they  were  compelled  from  time  to 
time  to  increase  the  amount  of  bounty 
offered  until  it  reached  the  sum  of  $1,000; 
competition  in  other  counties  was  also  in- 
strumental in  necessitating  this  increase. 
To  pa\'  the  bounties  under  this  call,  the 
treasurer  issued  bonds  as  follows  :  — 

$31,700,  payalile  March  1st,  1865,  with  interest. 

40,300,         "  "  1866,  with  annual  interest. 

40,000,         "  "  1867,         "  " 

40,000,         "  "  1868, 


32,500,  payalile  March  1st,  1869,  with  annual  interest. 

20,700,         "  "  1870,         " 

57.300,         "  "  1871, 

59,770.         ••  1872, 

44.000,         "  "  '873,  with  semi-annual  int. 

7.000,         "  "  1875. 

Tdtal,  $373,270. 

A  special  meeting  of  the  Supervisors  was 
called  for  December  30th,  1864,  at  which 
a  committee  of  five  was  appointed  to  take 
into  consideration  the  payment  of  bounties 
for  volunteers  under  the  final  call  for  300,- 
000  men,  made  December  19th,  1864.  The 
commitfee  was  composed  of  Messrs.  Phillips, 
Goddard,  O.  V.  Forbes,  M.  Van  Hoesen  and 
D.  O.  Surdam.  Special  town  meetings  were 
recommended,  with  the  offer  of  $400  for 
one  year  men,  $500  for  two  year  men,  and 
$600  for  three  year  men.  The  sum  of  $15 
brokerage  was  also  proposed  for  each  en- 
listment procured.  The  treasurer  was  au- 
thorized to  make  another  loan  of  the  neces- 
sary amount  for  this  purpose. 

At  the  annual  meeting  of  1865  a  report 
of  the  committee  acting  on  the  last  call  was 
made.  The  resolutions  passed  by  the  board 
upon  that  call  were  adopted  in  all  of  the 
towns,  except  Marathon,  Solon  and  Trux- 
ton.  The  committee  also  reported  that 
they  deemed  it  inexpedient  or  impossible 
to  pa\'  for  filling  the  quotas  in  the  several 
towns  of  the  county  by  the  sale  of  bonds  by 
the  treasurer ;  they,  therefore,  resolved  to 
loan  to  the  Supervisors  of  the  respective 
towns  the  county  bonds  in  sufficient  sums 
to  pay  for  the  same.  Most  of  the  towns 
accepted  this  proposal. 

At  the  annual  meeting  in  November, 
1865,  proceedings  were  had  relative  to 
reimbursements  by  the  State  for  bounty 
moneys. 

The  following  table  exhibits  the  amount 
paid  in  filling  the  quotas  of  the  several  towns 
of  the  county,  under  the  various  calls  for 
volunteers  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  and 
tha  total  amount  paid  for  each,  and  the 
amount  paid  on  the  principal  in  1 864  :  — 


The  Cortland  County  Press. 


119 


TOWNS. 


Cincinnatus 
Cortlandville. 

Cuyler 

Freetown. . .. 

Harford 

Homer 

Lapeer 

Marathon    . . 

Preble 

Scott 

Solon    

Taylor 

Truxton 

Virgil 

Willet 

Total.... 


$  6,600 
27,600 
9,000 

3,900 

6,900 
15.000 
2,100 
7,200 
6,600 

9,300 

2,700 
6,000 
13,800 
12,600 

3,900 


E  o 
< 


$23,050 
80,050 
19.050 
14,050 
•4,575 
53,675! 
11,825 

31,775 

22,175 

6,150 


$  5,235 
=6,  «4S 
3,720 
2,215 
5.435 
15,890 


23,675 
13,900 
47,175 
22,550 


7.905 
2,604 


5,61; 


165 
■,815 


$133,200  $383,675  $  78,090  $594,965  $55,850  00 


$  34,885 
' 34.105 
31.770 
20.165 
26,910 
84,565 
13,925 
38,975 
36,680 
18,090 
2,700 
36,290 
27,700 

59,940 
28,265 


< 


i  3,2 [8  88 
11,684  04 
3.077  75 
1,948  70 
2.33'  38 
7,346  97 
i.S'i  74 
4,231  23 
3,091  32 
1,678  29 
293  12 
3,221  59 
3,007  18 
6,380  76 
2,828  05 


The  whole  amount  of  bonds  issued  in 
the  county  for  bounties  was  $610,070,  fall- 
ing due  as  follows  :  — 

On  or  before  March  i,  1865 ....  $  57,600 

On  or  before  March  i,  1866 126,300 

On  or  before  March  i,  1867 86,200 

On  or  before  March  1,  1868 77. 7°° 

On  or  before  March  i,  1869 62,100 

On  or  before  March  j,  1870 67,200 

On  or  before  March  i,  1871 64,200 

On  or  before  March  i,  1872 59.77° 

On  or  before  March  i,  1875 9,000 

Total $610,070 

The  enlistments  and  bounties  paid  in 
each  town  will  be  found  in  the  town  his- 
tories in  later  pages. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


THE  CORTL.WD  COUNTY   PRESS. 


The  First  Newspaper  —  The  Pioneer  JouinaHst  —  De'icriptioii  of  the  "Cortland  Courier"'  —  Changes  in  Pro- 
prietorship and  N.imes  —  Dr.  Jesse  Searl's  Career  as  a  Publisher  —  .Vnother  Change  —  .-V  Sheet  of  1830  —  A  Glimpse 
at  its  Contents  —  Rufus  A.  Reed  and  His  Connection  with  Cortland  Journalism — The  Predeces.sors  of  the  "Cortland 
County  Republican"  —  The  Oldest  Paper  in  Cortland  Village  —  .\ncestors  of  the  "Standard"  —  The  "Western 
Courier" — Establishment  of  the  "  Democr.-it  "  —  Seth  H.aight's  .Administration  —  H.  G.  Crouch  Enters  the  .\rena 
—  The  "Cortland  American"  —  C.  P.  Cole  and  the  "Gazette"  —  The  "Republican  Banner" — The  "Cortland 
Journal  "  —  First  Issue  of  the  "  Cortland  Standard  "  —  The  "  Cortland  County  Democrat  "  and  its  Predecessors  — 
The  "  Cortland  News  "  —  The  "  M.arathon  Independent"  and  its  Predecessors  —  The  "  McCJrawville  Sentinel"  — 
The  "  Otselic  \'alley  Register"  —  The  Newspaper  Death   Roll. 


ALTHOUGH  the  territoiy  of  Cortland 
county  was  more  backward  in  point  of 
settlement  than  many  other  portions  of  this 
State,  it  is  an  indication  of  the  general  in- 
telligence of  the  pioneers  that  a  newspaper 
was  demanded  and  supported  here  earlier 
than  in  many  localities  where  settlement 
was  much  farther  advanced. 

James  Percival  was  the  pioneer  journalist 
of  Cortland  county.  He  issued  the  first 
nuinber  of  the  Cortland  Courier  in  Homer 
village  in  the  year  18 10;  the  exact  date  we 
have  been  unable  to  obtain,  nor  have  we 
succeeded  in  finding  a  copy  of  the  paper 
while  it  bore  the  name  above  given.     The 


Courier  made  its  appearance  one  \-ear  be- 
fore there  was  a  newspaper  at  Onondaga 
Hollow  ;  two  years  before  there  was  one  at 
Buffalo,  and  nineteen  years  before  there  was 
one  at  Syracuse.  Previous  to  its  issue  the 
few  inhabitants  of  Cortland  county  must 
have  depended  for  their  local  news  (and  it 
was  very  little  they  got  at  the  best)  on  news- 
papers printed  in  Onondaga  county,  of 
wdiich  Cortland  county  was  a  part  until 
1808.  There  were  the  Gazette,  started  at 
Manlius  in  1 806,  b\-  Abraham  Romeyn  ; 
the  Herald  of  the  Times,  at  the  same  place 
in  1808,  beyond  which  the  early  settlers  of 
this  county  who  felt  the  need  of  newspapers 


120 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


were  compelled  to  resort  to  those  of  New 
York  or  otiicr  large  cities. 

Like  all  of  the  early  newspapers,  the 
Cortland  Courier  \\'?\.?,  an  insiLjnificant  affiiir, 
when  compared  with  the  handsome  sheets 
of  the  present  day.  It  was  not  more  than 
one-third  as  large  as  the  present  Cortland 
Standard  ;  was  printed  on  dingy,  yellowish 
paper,  in  large  type  and  without  column 
rules  ;  but  judging  from  later  editorial  work 
by  Mr.  I'ercival,  its  editor,  the  Courier  was 
a  paper  the  utterances  of  which  commanded 
respect.  Mr.  Percival  continued  to  publish 
it  until  some  time  in  the  year  1812,  when  it 
passed  into  the  hands  of  H.  R.  Bender  and 
R.  Washburne,  who  changed  its  name  to  the 
Farmer  s  Journal ;  this  firm  paid  more  par- 
ticular attention  to  the  agricultural  interests 
of  the  county,  but  e\-idently  without  attain- 
ing such  a  measure  of  success  as  to  justify 
their  continuance  in  the  profession  ;  so  they 
sold  to  Dr.  Jesse  Scarl,  in  the  year  181 3. 

Again  the  name  was  changed,  as  well  as 
the  general  character  of  the  paper.  Dr.  Searl 
calling  it  the  Cortland  Repository.  Of  this 
paper  a  few  numbers  are  extant,  the  more 
prominent  features  of  which  have  already 
been  referred  to.  It  was  still  printed  on  paper 
of  rough  te.xture  and  dingy  hue  and  com- 
prised four  pages  of  four  \\ide  columns  to 
the  page.  Ample  room  is  given  in  its  col- 
umns to  foreign  news,  but  for  many  consec- 
utive numbers  not  a  line  of  what  might,  by 
the  most  liberal  construction,  be  termed  lo- 
cal news  is  found  in  its  columns.  Yet,  as 
newspapers  averaged  at  that  period,  the  Re- 
pository appears  to  have  been  a  very  cred- 
itable publication.  The  proprietor,  as  was 
then  customary,  kept  books  for  sale,  and 
advertised  juvenile  spelling  books,  Colum- 
bian readers,  Starkweather's  arithmetic, 
History  of  Charles  the  XII,  Spafiford's  Gaz- 
etteer of  the  State  of  New  York,  A  Life 
of  Bonaparte,  Testaments,  etc.  He  also 
published  and  offered  for  sale  two  sermons  on 


the  Origin  of  Oral  Evil,  delivered  at  Pom- 
pey  in  1814,  by  the  Rev.  Jabez  Chadwick. 
Dr.  Searl  continued  the  publication  of  tiie 
Repository  until  the  }-ear  1825,  during  which 
period  (or  a  portion  of  it)  he  made  himself 
a  worthy  antagonist  in  political  discussions, 
and  personal  wordy  conflicts  with  rival  edit- 
ors in  Cortland  village  which  would  scarcely 
be  admitted  to  the  cokimns  of  even  the  most 
radical  and  \indictive  newspaper  of  to-day. 

Milton  A.  Kinney  was  the  purchaser  of 
the  paper  from  Dr.  Searl,  and  he,  following 
in  the  wake  of  his  illustrious  predecessors, 
rechristened  his  sheet  as  the  Cortland  Ob- 
server. Under  his  management  the  journal 
was  greatly  impro\'cd.  Copies  of  it  pub- 
lished along  in  1830  show  it  to  have  been 
somewhat  enlarged,  printed  on  vastly  better 
paper,  column  rules  used,  smaller  type  and 
a  general  better  style.  -  Local  news,  how- 
ever, except  an  occasional  stray  item,  seems 
to  have  been  beyond  the  ideas  of  the  editor 
as  to  the  needs  of  his  readers. 

In  the  issue  of  August  13th,  1830,  we  find 
the  announcement  of  the  breaking  out  of  a 
virulent  disease  in  the  towns  of  Spaffbrd, 
Scott,  Preble  and  Truxton,  which,  in  the 
opinion  of  Drs.  Porter  of  Marcellus,  Mil- 
ler, of  Truxton,  and  Owen,  Bradford  and 
Wakely,  of  Homer,  was  small-po.x  ;  several 
persons  had  already  died  of  it.  In  the  same 
number  the  editor  goes  to  the  Ithaca  Chron- 
iele  for  a  report  of  an  Anti-Masonic  meet- 
ing held  a  week  earlier  in  P"reetown  in  this 
county.  At  that  meeting  Samuel  S.  Whit- 
man and  Charles  W.  Lynde  were  chosen 
delegates  to  the  senatorial  convention,  to 
be  held  in  Cortland  village  on  the  second 
Wednesday  in  September. 

Among  the  prominent  advertisers  of  that 
period  were  James  McNeil,  general  store ; 
the  Homer  furnace,  "constantly  in  blast," 
by  J.  Sanders,  jr.,  &  Co.  ;  A.  Burr,  harness 
shop  ;  tailoring,  by  Wm.  and  John  L.  Brown ; 
S.  B.    Hitchcock,   boots  and  shoes,  and  H. 


The  Cortland  County  Press. 


121 


S.  Babcock,  tailoring.  William  Sherman's 
"  Homer  Exchange"  is  also  liberallj-  adver- 
tised. 

The  Observer  favored  the  nomination  of 
Henry  Clay,  and  was  Anti-Masonic  in  its 
State  politics.  Mr.  Kinney  continued  the 
publication  of  the  paper  until  1833,  when  it 
passed  into  the  hands  of  Simon  S.  Bradford, 
who  conducted  it  for  three  years.  Strange 
to  say  he  did  not  change  its  name.  The 
next  owner  was  a  Mr.  Holmes,  but  he  does 
not  appear  to  have  kept  it  long,  as  he  took 
it  about  the  year  1836,  and  sold  it  to  Rufus 
A.  Reed  in  1837;  but  Mr.  Holmes  had  the 
paper  long  enough  to  change  its  name  to 
the  Homer  Eagle.  In  the  year  1828  Mr. 
Reed,  with  a  man  named  Osborn,  had 
started  the  Cortland  Cfuvnic/e  in  the  village 
of  Cortland;  this  paper  was  conducted  solely 
by  Mr.  Reed  in  1832,  and  in  1837,  as  above 
stated,  he  purchased  the  Homer  Eagle  and 
consolidated  the  two  under  the  name  of  the 
Republican  and  Eagle.  Mr.  Reed  was  a 
man  of  unusual  intelligence  and  a  good 
writer  ;  he  made  his  paper  a  Whig  and  later 
a  Republican  organ  of  influence  and  good 
character.  Mr.  Reed  was  elected  county 
clerk  in  1849,  and  held  the  office  until  1855. 
He  continued  the  publication  of  his  paper 
until  1852,  when  E.  F.  &  C.  B.  Gould  be- 
came its  owners  and  again  changed  its  name 
to  the  Cortland  County  Wliig.  Two  years 
later,  in  the  latter  part  of  1854,  it  passed  into 
the  hands  of  Joseph  R.  Dixon,  who  gave  it 
the  name  of  the  Cortland  County  Republi- 
can, for  which  change  there  was  ample  rea- 
son in  the  altered  name  of  the  Whig  party. 
Mr.  Di.xon  was  for  a  short  time  in  compan\' 
with  one  of  the  Gould  brothers,  and  after- 
ward, during  the  year  1855  with  W.  H. 
Case,  but  he  soon  assumed  the  entire  con- 
trol of  the  concern.  He  was  a  man  of  ex- 
cellent abilities,  thoroughl}-  educated  and 
had  acted  as  professor  of  mathematics  in 
the  academ\-   at   Homer   for  a  number  of 


years.  He  always  bore  a  high  reputation  as 
a  man  of  unimpeachable  integrity  and  noble 
Christian  character.  In  assuming  the  edi- 
torial chair  he  wrote  as  follows  ;  — 

"  At  the  suggestion  of  a  few  jiersonal  and 
political  friends  the  undersigned  has  made  ar- 
rangements to  become  the  editor  and  joint  pro- 
prietor of  this  paper.  He  has  assumed  this 
responsibility,  it  is  true,  without  the  benefit  of 
long  experience  ;  but  he  believes  that  his  com- 
mon sense,  his  general  knowledge  of  the  world, 
his  integrity  of  purpose,  and  his  attachment  to 
the  fundamental  princi]jles  of  the  Whig  party, 
will  enable  him  to  discharge  the  duties  of  the 
station  he  proposes  to  occupy  in  a  such  a  manner 
as  to  satisfy  the  reasonable  expectations  of  those 
who  read  the  JVlii:^.  .  .  .  We  shall  labor  to 
promote  the  interests  of  education,  morality, 
temperance  and  freedom  ;  to  diffuse  useful  in- 
formation among  our  readers,  and  to  secure  the 
return  of  Wm.  H.  Seward  to  the  Senate  of  our 
nation.  With  these  intentions  we  enter  upon 
our  work,  looking  to  our  friends  for  a  cordial  and 
hearty  support." 

No  one  who  is  familiar  with  the  Whig 
and  the  Republican  during  the  long  period 
while  they  were  edited  and  owned  by  Mr. 
Dixon,  will  deny  that  he  ever  knowingly- 
departed  from  these  clearly  expressed  in- 
tentions, or  failed  in  any  way  to  do  the  best 
that  in  him  lay  to  promote  the  welfare  of 
his  political  party  as  well  as  of  the  com- 
munity at  large.  He  continued  the  publi- 
cation of  the  paper  until  1876,  ^  when  it  was 
purchased  by  Wm.  O.  Bunn,  the  preseiTt 
publisher.  In  order  to  give  the  name  of 
the  paper  more  of  a  local  signifiance,  he 
changed  its  title,  in  1877,  to  the  Homer  Re- 
publican. Upon  Mr.  Bunn's  accession  he 
at  once  improved  the  paper  and  the  print- 
ing establishment  connected  with  it,  mak- 
ing it  one  of  the  best  country  weeklies  and 
job  printing  concerns  in  the  State.      He  is 

1  Mr.  Dixon  was  killed  on  the  track  of  the  Syracu.se 
and  Binghamton  Railroad,  while  engaged  in  surveying. 
His  widow,  who  was  a  sister  of  K.  V.  and  C.  B.  Clould, 
stil.l  resides  in  Homer  village. 


122 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


thoroughly  versed  in  politics  and  soon  gave 
the  Republican  a  reputation  in  this  direction 
very  flattering  to  him,  and  at  the  same  time 
making  it  bright  and  newsy.  Its  patronage 
was,  of  course,  largely  increased.  In  Janu- 
ar)-,  1882,  he  associated  George  Fisher  in 
the  editorial  management  of  the  paper,  in 
which  connection  he  is  still  retained.  Mr. 
Hunn  is  now  internal  revenue  collector  for 
the  district,  with  headquarters  in  Syracuse; 
but  he  still  exercises  an  oversight  of  his 
f)ffice.  The  Republican  is  a  credit  to  Ho- 
mer and  a  welcome  visitor  in  man\'  house- 
holds. 

There  are  at  the  present  time  three  news- 
papers published  in  Cortland  village,  the 
oldest  of  which,  going  backward  through 
its  lineal  ancestors,  is  the  Cortland  Standard. 
On  the  30th  day  of  June,  181  5,  was  issued 
the  first  number  of  the  Cortland  Republican, 
by  James  Percival.  He  was  a  fluent  and 
rather  forcible  writer  and  had,  presumably, 
gained  a  little  valuable  editorial  experience 
during  his  career  in  Homer,  to  which  allu- 
sion has  already  been  made.  The  Repub- 
lican, true  to  its  name,  was  strictlj-  Repub- 
lican in  politics.  It  was  a  small  paper,  with 
four  columns  of  "small  pica"  on  a  page 
and  printed  on  paper  of  the  usual  yellow- 
white  color,  the  best  that  could  be  obtained 
at  that  time.  There  were  few  editorials  in 
its  columns  and  the  customary  dearth  of 
local  news.  In  the  issue  of  September  30th, 
1815,  just  three  months  after  its  birth,  the 
editor  printed  the  following  announcement : 
"The  public  are  informed  that  from  this 
day,  I  shall  relinquish  m\-  concern  in  the 
office  of  the  Cortland  Republican,  published 
by  Osborne  &  Campbell,  \\hose  talents  are 
ample  and  whose  political  tenets  are  or- 
thodox." 

In  August,  1 8  16,  it  was  announced  that 
Mr.  Campbell  had  retired  from  the  Repub- 
lican establisliment,  Mr.  Obadiah  Boies 
taking    his    place;   but  it  was  onlj- for  a  few- 


months  ;  in  December  of  that  year  Mr. 
Campbell  was  back  in  the  establishment, 
and  in  the  following  year  the  firm  became 
B.  S.  &  D.  Campbell.  These  gentlemen 
published  the  paper  until  May,  1821,  giving 
it  a  life  of  almost  six  years  —  a  period  of 
existence  much  longer  than  the  average  of 
newspapers  at  that  time.  The  ri\alry  be- 
tween the  villages  of  Homer  and  Cortland, 
to  which  allusion  has  already  been  made, 
reached  its  height  during  this  period,  and 
out  of  that  and  their  opposite  political 
creeds,  with  the  usual  business  opposition, 
grew  a  prolonged  and  bitter  newspaper  war- 
fare between  the  Republican  and  the  Re- 
pository, printed  in  Homer  b\-  Ur.  Jesse 
Searl.  This  frequentl}'  descended  into  per- 
.sonalities  of  the  most  vindictive  character 
which,  while  the}-  established  the  fact  that 
the  Campbell  Brothers  were  vigorous  writers, 
could  not  have  failed  to  lower  the  dignity 
of  their  journal. 

In  the  month  of  April  the  firm  of  B.  S. 
&  D.  Campbell  was  dissolved,  the  latter 
continuing  the  business.  At  about  this 
time  serious  dissension  arose  in  the  ranks 
of  the  Republican  part)'  and  the  campaign 
of  1820  was  especially  exciting.  This  or 
other  causes,  or  both,  led  to  the  establish- 
ment in  Homer  village  in  1821,  of  the 
Western  Courier,  b}-  two  young  men  named 
Roberts  and  Hull.  After  a  very  short  time 
this  establishment  was  removed  to  Cort- 
land, and  then  began  a  wordy  battle  more 
bitter  and  persistent  than  the  former  one  to 
which  we  ha\e  referred,  between  the  new- 
candidate  for  political  fa\'or  and  the  Repub- 
lican. But  it  appears  that  the  new-comers, 
with  the  Courier,  were  on  the  rising  tide  of 
politics,  and  on  the  i6th  of  May  the  per- 
plexed editors  of  the  Republican  announced 
that  as  there  were  then  three  newspapers 
in  the  county,  where  the  patronage  was 
scarely  sufficient  for  one,  they  had  resolved, 
after  six  years  of  labor,  to    reduce  the  size 


The  Cortland  County  Press. 


123 


of  their  paper ;  and  that  for  the  present  a 
small  sheet  only  would  be  issued,  at  half 
the  former  price. 

As  near  as  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain, 
this  movement  was  made  merely  to  fulfill 
advertising  contracts  and  the  Republican, 
as  a  newspaper,  ceased  to  exist  at  that  time, 
until  revived  by  Rufus  A.  Reed,  in  1832, 
to  be  consolidated  with  the  Homer  Eagle, 
as  before  detailed.  The  Campbell  brothers 
subsequently  went  to  Sandusk)%  Ohio, 
where  they  engaged  in  the  newspaper  bus- 
iness. Mr.  Reed  conducted  the  Republican 
for  about  five  years,  before  its  consolida- 
tion. During  a  portion  of  this  period  his 
office  was  in  the  second  storj'  of  what  was 
long  known  as  Elder's  store,  when  Webb  & 
Edgcomb  having,  in  1836,  erected  the  three 
story  brick  structure  on  the  corner  of  Main 
and  Port  Watson  streets,  since  transformed 
into  the  Keator  Block,  the  office  was  re- 
moved to  the  corner  rooms  in  the  third 
story.  In  writing  of  Mr.  Reed's  editorial 
career,  Mr.  H.  G.  Crouch  (again  alluded  to 
a  little  further  on)  said  :  "The  shifting  polit- 
ical elements  in  opposition  to  Gen.  Jackson 
had  doubtless  left  to  the  two  papers,  the 
{Republican  and  the  Hoinei-  Eaglt)  an  un- 
certain tenure,  and  upon  the  crystallization 
of  those  elements  into  the  \\  hig  part)-,  un- 
der the  leadership  of  Hcnr}'  Cla\%  Mr.  Reed, 
then  a  young  man  and  an  excellent  printer, 
'read  his  title  clear'  to  the  organization  of 
a  strong  majority  party  in  the  county,  with 
such  advantages  as  accrue  to  that  special 
relationship,  consisting  in  a  large  measure 
in  rendering  x'aluable  assistance  to  aspiring 
politicians,  with  the  least  possible  return  of 
either  favors  or  thanks ;  more  often  than 
otherwise  the  blackest  ingratitude.  Mr. 
Reed  prospered  moderately,  but  whether  in 
prosperity  or  adversit)-,  his  was  the  same 
cheerful  temperament,  which  made  the  bad 
seem  to  him  to  be  ver\-  much  the  same  as 
good  fortune." 


The  Western  Courier  was  continued  as 
such  until  1824,  when  its  name  was  changed 
to  the  Cortland  Journal.  It  was  published  bj' 
D.  Smith  in  1824,  but  for  how  long  a  period 
we  have  been  unable  to  learn.  Chas.  W. 
Gill  then  took  it  and  transferred  it  some 
time  before  1S27  to  J.  J.  Cantine,  in  whose 
hands  it  was  during  the  latter  year  and 
probabl>-  until  the  year  1832,  when  the  name 
of  the  paper  was  again  changed  to  The  Cort- 
land Advocate.  Henr\-  S.  Randall,  soon 
after  his  entrance  into  political  life,  became 
its  editor  ;  he  was  possessed  of  literary  abil- 
ity of  a  high  order,  but  was  not  a  practical 
printer  and  soon  wearied  of  the  annoyance 
and  detail  connected  with  the  regular  pub- 
lication of  a  newspaper;  he  accordingly 
sold  the  establishment  to  David  Fairchild, 
who,  as  early  as  1838,  removed  it  to  Ovid, 
N.  v.,  where  he  started  the  Ovid  Bee.  This 
again  left  Cortland  without  a  second  news- 
paper. During  at  least  a  part  of  its  exist- 
ence (1833)  the  Advocate  was  published  by 
C.  \\.  Mason. 

At  this  period  the  leaders  of  the  Democ- 
racy throughout  the  count)'  embraced  a 
large  majorit)-  of  the  prominent  legal  gen- 
tlemen and  other  personages  conspicuous 
in  the  political  arena,  although  there  was 
a  small  Whig  majorit)-  in  the  voting  popu- 
lation. The  State  administrations  and  the 
Senatorial  and  Congressional  districts,  were 
almost  uniformly  Democratic  ;  hence  there 
were  numerous  men  of  that  political  com- 
plexion who  aspired  to  prominence. 
Among  them  were  such  as  Joseph  Reynolds, 
S.  G.  Hathawav',  Henr)'  Stephens,  Roswell 
Randall,  Wm.  Bartlit,  Edward  C.  Reed, 
Townsend    Ross,    George  Ross,    J.  De  Pu)- 

I  Freer,  Anthony  Freer,  John  Gillet,  Alanson 
Coats,  and  others  of  the  older  men  ;  and 
Horatio  Ballard,  Henr)-  S.  Randall,  Fred- 
erick Hyde,  Henry  Brewer,  Wm.  H.  Shank- 
land,  James  S.  Leach,    Wm.    L)-ndes,    An- 

,  drew  Dickson,  VV^m.  B.  Allen,  Oliver  Glover, 


124 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  the  younger  generation.  It  was  the 
prominence  and  ncti\'it)'  of  such  men, 
coupled  with  the  exciting  pohtical  campaign 
of  1840,  that  led  to  the  establishment  of  a 
Democratic  "organ  "  in  Cortland  village. 
A  stock  subscription  of  about  $800  was 
raised  and  an  arrangement  made  for  the 
publication  of  the  Coi'tlaud  Democrat  with 
Seth  Haight  and  Henrj-  W.  De  Puy,  the 
latter  a  young  man  from  Fayetteville,  On- 
ondaga county,  and  a  recent  graduate  from 
college.  Haight  was  a  practical  printer, 
having  learned  his  trade  in  the  Advocate 
office,  under  Mr.  Randall's  proprietorship  ; 
he  was  a  genial,  convivial  sort  of  man  of 
fiir  abilities.  The  Democrat  was  started  in 
the  spring  of  1 840,  the  office  being  located 
over  a  hat  store  then  kept  by  Canfield 
Marsh,  on  or  near  the  site  of  the  Union  Hail 
Block. 

Meantime  the  Republican  and  Eagle  had 
become  the  Cortland  County  Wliig,  which 
guided  the  party  of  that  name  through  the 
excitiiig  campaigns  of  that  and  the  following 
years.  Prominent  in  that  party  then  were 
such  men  as  William  Andrews,  David 
Mathews,  Harry  McGraw,  Dr.  John  Miller, 
Cephas  Comstock,  John  J.  Adams,  Tercius 
Eels,  Alanson  Carley,  Isaac  A.  Gates,  Gid- 
eon Babcock,  Joel  B.  Hibbard,  Danforth 
Merrick,  Jedediah  Barber,  James  C.  Pome- 
roy,  Daniel  Hawks,  and  many  others  who 
were  uncommon  and  influential  men,  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  county.  The  political 
campaign  of  1840  will  not  soon  be  forgotten 
by  any  who  witnessed  or  took  part  in  it  ; 
but  the  Whigs  carried  oft'  the  spoils.  In 
the  spring  of  1841,  Mr.  De  Pu\-  retired  from 
the  Democrat,  Mr.  Haight  continuing  its 
publication  alone.  In  April  the  office  was 
removed  into  what  is  now  the  Keator  Block. 
The  Democrat  was  a  creditable  looking 
journal  for  that  period ;  had  six  columns  to 
the  page  and  was  made  up  of  a  little  news, 
considerable  politics  and  more  selections  of 


a  literary  character.  Mr.  Haight  was  little 
of  a  writer,  and  employed  Henry  S.  Randall 
to  assist  in  his  editorial  work.  In  the  spring 
of  1840  Henry  G.  Crouch  entered  the  office 
to,  as  he  puts  it,  take  the  leadership  of  the 
sweeping  and  roller  brigade,  and  it  was  a 
portion  of  his  duty  to  trudge  a  mile  and  re- 
turn out  to  Mr.  Randall's  farm  on  the  Virgil 
road,  for  that  careful  writer  to  revise  his 
proof  sheets.  For  a  few  years  at  this  time 
Harmon  S.  Conger  was  the  editor  of  the 
Whig,  though  Mr.  Reed  kept  his  interest 
in  the  establishment.  Mr.  Conger  was  then 
a  young  and  ambitious  law\-er,  and  he  soon 
attained  a  position  of  distinction  in  the 
'county  as  a  political  leader.  In  1846  and 
1 848  he  was  elected  to  Congress  in  this  dis- 
trict, the  first  term  over  Wm.  H.  Shankland. 
The  campaign  of  1844  was  similar  to  its 
predecessor  in  everything  except  the  bitter 
asperities  of  rival  newspapers  and  individu- 
als. Not  long  subsequent  to  the  close  of 
this  campaign  Mr.  Reed  removed  the  WJiig 
to  Homer,  where  he  continued  to  publish  it 
until  he  was  elected  county  clerk  in  1849, 
as  before  stated.  The  division  of  the  Dem- 
ocratic party  in  1848  was  disastrous  to  Mr. 
Haight  and  the  Democrat ;  ^  the  paper  sup- 
ported Cass,  and  the  publisher's  lack  of  ed- 
itorial training  was  a  serious  embarrassment; 
the  Democrat  lost  much  of  its  influence  and 
prosperity  and     Haight    finally   sold    it  to 

1  In  the  supplement  of  the  Corllaiid  Standard,  to  which 
allu.sion  has  been  made,  we  find  tlic  following  reminis- 
cence from  James  H.  Sinclair,  who  was  working  in  the 
/),n/ihia/ office  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  :  "  In  the 
summer  of  1845  we  advertised  for  an  apprentice  —  '  one 
from  the  country  preferred.'  One  afternoon  a  little  white- 
haired  chap,  with  uncommonly  large,  intelligent-looking 
eyes,  came  to  the  door  and  said  he  had  called  in  response 
to  the  advertisement,  and  wished  to  learn  the  trade.  We 
doubted  whether  he  would  fill  the  bill,  as  he  was  not 
more  than  twelve  years  of  age,  and  slight  in  his  make-up; 
but  he  was  anxious  —  he  had  walked  up  from  Marathon, 
and  wanted  to  try  it.  lie  did;  and  little  did  I  think, 
while  initiating  that  mile  of  a  lad,  perched  upon  a  box  to 
bring  his  head  above  the  frame,  in  the  mysteries  of  the 
printer's  case,  that  later  he  would  develop  into  a  '  Petro- 
leum \'.  N'asby;'  but  he  did." 


The  Cortland  County  Press. 


125 


James  S.  Leach,  a  representative  Cortland 
county  Free  Soiler  of  that  period  and  a 
lawyer  of  considerable  pniniinL-ncc,  now  a 
resident  of  Syracuse.  He  kept  the  paper 
about  a  year ;  but  the  Free  Soil  movement 
was  already  doomed,  and  Mr.  Leach  sold 
the  establishment  to  two  young  men  named 
Quimby  and  Hyatt,  from  Ithaca.  Their  am- 
bition in  the  newspaper  line  was  apparently 
soon  satiated,  for,  in  185  i,  Mr.  Crouch,  now 
an  accomplished  printer  and  able  writer, 
bought  the  concern,  which  he  conducted 
with  ability  and  success  until  August,  1855, 
when  he  sold  to  lulwin  V.  Gould.  Under 
Mr.  Crouch's  direction  the  Democrat  be- 
came one  of  the  leading  country  weeklies 
of  that  political  creed  in  the  State.  He  is 
now  the  editor  and  publisher  of  the  Kings- 
ton Arg/ts,  which  is  also  an  excellent  jour- 
nal. At  about  the  time  when  Mr.  Crouch 
sold  the  Dcnwcrat  the  Know-Nothing  ex- 
citement was  at  its  height,  and  Mr.  Gould 
soon  changed  the  name  of  the  paper  to  the 
Cortland  American,  and  devoted  it  to  the 
interests  of  the  new  party.  Mr.  Gould  pub- 
lished the  paper  for  about  two  years;  but 
it  was  finally  throttled  by  the  death  of  the 
Know-Nothing  organization,  and  the  Dem- 
ocrats were  for  a  brief  time  without  an  or- 
gan in  the  county. 

Soon  after  the  American  ceased  to  exist 
a  young  man  named  J.  D.  Robinson  estab- 
lished the  Cortland  Gazette,  purchasing  the 
material  of  the  defunct  paper  ;  this  was  in 
1857  ;  he  continued  its  publication  until  the 
spring  of  1858,  when  he  sold  out  to  John  R. 
Bedcn.  A  few  months  later  it  passed  into 
the  hands  of  C.  P.  Cole.  The  Gazette  was, 
of  course.  Democratic  in  politics ;  was  a 
four-page  paper,  seven  columns  to  the  page 
and  $1  a  year;  its  circulation  within  the 
first  few  years  of  its  existence  was  about 
500.  The  office  was  in  the  third  story  of  the 
Dickson  (now  Keator)  Block,  which  building 
seems  always  to  have  possessed  an  attrac- 


tion for  printing  establishments.  Mr.  Cole 
was  a  practical  printer,  a  writer  of  consid- 
erable abilit)'  and  had  gainetl  a  little  edito- 
rial experience  on  the  Syracuse  Courier. 
He  improved  his  paper,  added  to  his  job 
printing  material,  increased  the  circulation 
of  the  Gazette  to  about  1,000  copies  and  for 
a  time  had  a  good  paying  business. 

We  must  now  note  the  founding  of  a  new 
paper  which  was  eventually  consolidated 
with  the  Gazette.  In  the  year  1858  Messrs. 
E.  D.  Van  Slyke,  now  publisher  of  the 
Hamilton  Democratic  Republican,  and  P.  H. 
Bateson  started  the  Rcpithlican  Banner  in 
Cortland  village.  Their  expressed  object 
was  to  give  the  people  a  journal  which 
should  be  free  from  the  dictation  of  the 
politicians  of  the  county  and  the  columns 
of  which  should  always  be  open  to  the 
respectable  discussion  of  any  topic  of  in- 
terest, even  though  the  publishers  did  not 
agree  with  the  sentiments  of  the  writers. 
Mr.  Van  Sl)'ke  was,  at  the  time  the  Banner 
was  started,  a  law  student  in  the  office  of 
R.  Holland  Duell.  Mr.  Bateson  was  a 
graduate  of  Cortland  Academy  in  Homer, 
and  also  came  to  Mr.  Duell's  office  to  com- 
mence the  stud\^  of  the  law.  The  two 
young  men  became  intimately  acquainted 
and  their  newspaper  enterprise  was  the 
sequel.  The  capital  of  the  firm  was,  by 
dint  of  considerable  exertion,  raised  to  ex- 
actly five  dollars,  and  the  office  was  estab- 
lished in  some  unfinished  rooms  in  Mr  Van 
Shke's  dwelling  on  the  corner  of  Green- 
bush  and  what  was  then  called  Venettc 
street.  The  two  prospective  publishers 
walked  to  McGrawville  and  bought  of 
Abram  Pr}-nc  the  material  of  the  Central 
Reformer,  which  had  just  departed  its  news- 
paper existence,  paying  for  it  mainly  with 
properly  secured  notes  ;  the  price  paid  was 
$500.  The  first  number  of  the  paper  ap- 
peared on  the  1st  of  September,  1858,  and 
was   successfully  brought   to    the  notice  of 


126 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  Cortland  public  (or  the  publishers,  at 
least,  were)  by  the  issue  of  an  extra  an- 
nouncing the  laying  of  the  Atlantic  Cable, 
the  news  of  which  had  to  be  brought  from 
Syracuse  on  the  cars,  something  like  half 
an  hour  before  the  Gazette  issued  its  extra. 

On  account  of  ill  health  Mr.  Bateson 
remained  with  his  partner  but  about  six 
months ;  he  subsequently  became  a  Uni- 
versalist  preacher.  After  about  five  months 
the  Banner  office  was  removed  to  the  sec- 
ond stor\-  of  Barnard's  Block,  where  the 
Dexter  House  now  stands.  The  Banner 
was  a  success,  as  such  ventures  are  com- 
monly considered,  and  shortly  after  its  re- 
moval, S.  G.  Hitchcock,  an  excellent  prac- 
tical printer,  now  living  in  Syracuse,  bought 
a  half  interest  with  Mr.  Van  Slyke,  and  in 
the  course  of  a  year  a  power  press  was 
added.  Mr.  Hitchcock,  desiring  to  make  a 
western  tour,  sold  his  interest  to  his  part- 
ner in  i860  or  1 86 1.  This  interest  was 
transferred  within  a  few  weeks  to  A.  M. 
Ford,  now  publisher  of  the  Dryden  Herald. 

When  the  76th  Regiment  was  organized 
in  Cortland,  in  the  autumn  of  1861,  Mr. 
Van  Slyke's  patriotism  prompted  him  to 
join  it;  he  accordingly  made  an  arrange- 
ment with  Mr.  Cole,  by  which  tlie  latter 
was  to  buy  the  Banner  establishment,  con- 
solidate it  with  the  Gazette,  and  change  the 
politics  to  Republican  and  the  name  of  the 
paper  to  the  Gazette  and  Banner.  Mr. 
Cole  conducted  the  paper  with  varying  suc- 
cess until  his  death  in  April,  1869.  After 
passing  through  the  hands  of  his  uncle,  J. 
V.  P.  Gardner,  of  Utica,  the  establishment 
was  purchased  by  Wm.  H.  Livermore,  who 
changed  the  name  of  the  paper  to  the 
Cortland  Weekly  Jonrnal,  issuing  the  first 
number  under  the  new  title  on  the  20th  of 
May,  1 869.  The  paper  was  then  an  eight- 
column  sheet,  but  was  enlarged  to  nine 
columns  on  the  I  8th  of  August,  1870.  On 
the  7th  of  July,  1870,  Mr.  Livermore  began 


tlu:  i)ublication  of  the  Homer  Herald,  sim- 
ilar in  size  and  appearance  to  the  Journal ; 
it  was  printed  in  the  Cortland  office,  but 
devoted  to  the  interests  of  the  town  of 
Homer  and  largely  circulated  in  that  part 
of  the  county.  Mr.  Livermore  made  a  good 
newspaper  and  built  up  a  successful  busi- 
ness, which  he  carried  on  until  January  I  ith, 
1872,  when  he  sold  the  establishment  to 
Edward  and  Emma  Molloy,  of  South  Bend, 
Ind.  ;  they  stopped  the  publication  of  the 
Herald,  continuing  the  Journal  until  May 
1 8th  following,  when  it  was  sold  to  Wesley 
Hooker,  consolidated  with  the  Cortland 
Standard,  purchased  by  him  of  F.  G.  Kin- 
ney, and  named  the  Cortland  Standard  and 
Journal.  Mr.  Livermore  is  now  in  Wash- 
ington in  the  employ  of  the  government. 

The  first  number  of  the  Cortland  Stand- 
ard was  issued  by  F.  G.  Kinney  on  the 
29th  of  June,  1867.  Mr.  Kinney  is  a  prac- 
tical printer  of  long  experience  and  an  able 
writer.  In  his  salutatory  he  assumed  it  as 
a  matter  of  general  expression  that  there 
should  be  published  in  the  shire  town  a 
paper  which  should  more  exactly  meet 
the  views  and  reflect  the  sentiments  of 
the  people  of  the  count)' ;  he  expressed 
his  determination  to  make  a  family  paper 
the  character  of  which  should  be  unexcep- 
tionable, at  the  same  time  that  it  was  out- 
1  spoken  and  manly  on  all  the  political  and 
moral  cjuestions  of  the  da}-.  On  account 
of  delay  in  getting  his  power  press,  the  first 
few  numbers  of  the  paper  were  taken  to 
Homer  and  printed  ;  the  first  number  was 
sent  out  free,  and  two  weeks  then  inter- 
vened before  the  regular  publication  began. 
Mr.  Kinney  made  an  excellent  paper  and 
continued  its  publication  until  the  1st  of 
May,  1 872,  when  he  sold  to  Weslej-  Hooker, 
as  above  stated,  he  having  at  the  same  time 
purchased  the  establishment  of  the  Cortland 
Journal  and  the  defunct  Homer  Herald. 
The  whole  was  consolidated  in  one  concern. 


The  Cortland  County  Press. 


127 


making  one  of  the  most  complete  country 
printing    establishments    in    Central    New 
York.      Mr.  Hooker  stated  in  his  introduc- 
tory editorial   that  in  his  opinion  Cortland 
village  needed  just  two  papers  and  no  more 
—  one    for   each    political   party;   said    he: 
"  More  than  two  are  an  unnecessary  tax  on 
the  community,  and  an  imposition  and  bur- 
den it  is  very  likely  to  resent  and   refuse  to 
carr)-."     Mr.   Hooker  had   profited    by   an 
experience   of  twenty   years   as  a   printer, 
business  manager  and  editor,  and  he  quick- 
ly made  his  influence  felt   for   the   good   of 
the  paper.      He  said  that  while  it  would  be 
Republican    in   politics,   it   should  be  inde- 
pendent and  fearless  in  its  course,  not  hesi- 
tating   to    criticise   and    admonish    when    it 
seemed  neces.sary  ;   and  above  all,  it  would 
not    be    the    organ    of  any    faction.     This 
course  he  consistentl}'  followed  until,  on  the 
1st  of  April,  1876,  when  he  sold  his  estab- 
lishment to  the  Hon.  William  H.  Clark,  of 
Wayne  county,  who  is  the  present  proprie- 
tor and  editor.      Mr.  Clark  assumed  his  im- 
portant position   while   )'ct   a   young   man. 
He  was  a  graduate  of  Union   College,  and 
had    studied   law   and    was  admitted  to  the 
bar  six  years  before  he  came    to   Cortkmd, 
which  period  he  had  spent  in    the   practice 
of  his  profession   in   Wayne   county.      His 
introductory  editorial  was  a  brief,  pertinent 
and  graceful  statement  of  what   he  should 
labor  to  accomplish  —  the  perpetuation  of 
the  high  position  and    excellent    reputation 
then  enjoyed  by  the  Standard  and  Journal, 
and  the  advancement  of  the  interests  of  the 
Republican    party.      Since    his    proprietor- 
ship began  Mr.  Clark  has  greatly  improved 
his  paper  and  his  establishment  generally  ; 
among  the  changes  made  are  the  curtailing 
of  the  name  of  the  paper   to    the    Cortland 
Standard  and  its  enlargement  to  nine   col- 
umns  to  the  page,    making   it  one  of  the 
largest  and  most  attractive  country  weeklies 
in  the  State.      Up  to  the  time  of  Mr.  Hook- 


er's withdrawal  the  office  was  located  in  the 

third  story  of  the  block  un  the  corner  of 
Main  and  Orchard  streets.  But  the  quar- 
ters there,  although  better  than  had  ever 
before  been  enjoyed  by  a  Cortland  news- 
paper, were  too  crowded  for  the  fully 
equipped  establishment,  and  Mr.  Clark  re- 
moved to  A.  Mahan's  building  on  Court 
street,  on  the  i.st  of  January,  1879,  occupy- 
ing the  first  floor  and  a  portion  of  the  base- 
ment. This  gave  much  more  commodious 
accommodations ;  but  the  immediate  ad- 
dition of  new  presses  and  a  large  quantity 
of  other  new  material  soon  filled  the  new 
quarters  to  such  an  extent  that  more  room 
became  almost  an  imperative  necessity. 
This  state  of  affairs  led  Mr.  Clark  to  embark 
with  others  in  the  erection  of  the  splendid 
new  brick  "Standard  Block"  on  the  corner 
of  Main  and  Tompkins  streets,  into  which 
the  office  was  removed  on  the  1st  of  May, 
1883,  where  the  amplest  accommodations 
had  been  especially  prepared  for  it.  At 
the  time  of  his  removal  to  the  new  build- 
ing Mr.  Clark  published  a  valuable  supple- 
ment to  the  Standard,  from  which  much 
of  the  data  for  this  chapter  is  derived.  In 
it  we  find  the  following  description  of  the 
establishment,  the  importance  and  com- 
pleteness of  which  entitles  it  to  a  place  in 
these  pages :  — 

"  The  practical  experience  gained  in  managing 
a  printing  office  had  taught  us  what  its  needs 
were,  and  it  was  the  intention  to  meet  them  in 
the  most  thorough  and  satisfactory  manner.  It 
is  with  pleasure  that  we  are  able  to  say  that  two 
months  of  work  in  the  new  office  have  not  called 
attention  to  a  single  material  point  in  which  the 
arrangement  could  be  improved. 

"  The  new  quarters  of  the  Standard  are  located 
on  the  first  floor  and  basement  of  the  southwest 
store  in  the  Standard  Building.  In  front  is 
,  Tompkins  street,  and  at  the  side  a  wide  alley  be- 
longing to  the  building,  which  can  ne\er  be  ob- 
structed, and  the  space  beyond,  which  is  still 
;   oiien.     The  frontage  on  Tompkins  street  is  twen- 


128 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ty-seven  and  a  half  feet,  and  the  depth  is  about 
sixty-three  feet.  The  business  office  is  on  Tomp- 
kins street,  and  is  a  room  tlijrteen  feet  deep  by 
nineteen  feet  long.  It  has  a  glass  front  reaching 
from  the  floor  to  the  ceiling,  and  is  handsomely 
finished  on  the  other  three  sides  in  western  chest- 
nut, with  a  pauL-lcd  ceiling,  painted  in  parti- 
colors.  The  floor  is  of  cherry  and  maple ;  the 
furniture  of  ash,  with  the  tops  of  the  desks  and 
counter  of  polished  cherry.  A  [lortion  of  the 
furniture,  though  ordered,  is  not  yet  coniiileted, 
but  we  e.xpect  will  be  in  place  very  soon.  From 
the  walls,  the  faces  of  Emerson,  Bryant,  Lowell, 
Longfellow,  Whittier  and  Holmes,  look  down, 
in  the  handsome  Atlaiitk  portraits,  approjiriately 
framed,  and  a  fine  steel  engraving  of  Garfield 
bears  them  worthy  company.  In  addition  to  the 
door  communicating  with  the  composing  room, 
tlie  office  is  connected  with  this  room  by  a  sliding 
window  at  the  end  of  the  main  desk,  and  is  in 
communication  with  the  press  room  on  the  floor 
below  by  means  of  a  speaking  tube  and  call  bell. 
It  is  also  connected  with  the  Cortland  and  Ho- 
mer Telephone  Exchange.  As  a  business  office, 
we  believe  it  is  uneciualed  for  beauty  and  con- 
venience in  any  other  printing  establishment  in 
the  country,  outside  of  the  cities. 

"  Opening  out  of  this  ofiice,  and  lighted  by  a 
long  and  large  window,  is  the  private  editorial 
room,  occupying  the  remainder  of  the  Tompkins 
street  front,  and  finished  like  the  business  office, 
in  western  chestnut.  Both  of  these  rooms  are 
heated  and  ventilated  by  steam,  the  direct  and 
indirect  systems  of  radiation  being  combined, 
and  the  entrance  of  fresh,  warm  air,  and  the  es- 
cape of  bad  air  are  so  arranged  that  the  atmos- 
phere of  the  rooms  may  be  changed  entirely  every 
fifteen  minutes.  This  work,  as  well  as  the  steam 
heating  in  the  composing  and  press  rooms,  and 
in  other  parts  of  the  building,  was  done  by 
Messrs.  Bates  &  Johnson,  who  have  establish- 
ments in  New  York,  .Albany  and  Syracuse,  and 
enjoy  the  reputation  of  being  among  the  most 
thorough,  intelligent  and  trustworthy  of  steam 
engineers.  In  the  rear  of  the  business  and  edi- 
torial rooms  is  the  comjKJsing  and  job  room, 
where  all  the  newspaper  and  job  work  is  set  uj), 
and  all  the  Hghter  job  work  printed  on  the  Gor- 
don presses.  The  room  is  about  fifty  feet  long, 
well  ventilated,  and  filled  with  light  from  five 


large  west  windows,  reaching  from  the  ceiling 
nearly  to  the  floor,  and  double  glass  doors  with 
glass  transom.  Under  the  care  of  the  efficient 
foreman,  Mr.  H.  (i.  Joy,  the  room  is  a  model  of 
neatnesss  and  good  order,  as  well  as  a  most 
cheerful  and  healthful  place  for  labor.  Under- 
neath the  business,  editorial,  composing  and  job 
rooms,  and  running  back  the  full  sixty-three 
feet  from  Tompkins  street,  is  the  pre.ss  room, 
where  the  cylindar  newspajjer  and  job  presses 
are  located,  together  with  the  'Otto  Silent  Gas 
Engine,'  which  furnishes  power  to  run  the  entire 
machinery  of  the  office.  The  presses  are  set 
upon  heavy  frames  of  cedar,  fastened  down  by 
bolts  running  to  the  base  of  stone  walls,  which 
are  sunk  into  the  earth  trom  two  to  two  and  a 
half  feet,  giving  foundations  which  are  as  solid  as 
rock. 

"  This  room,  like  the  comijosing  room,  is 
floored  with  Georgia  pine,  and  is  ceiled  both 
above  and  on  the  sides.  It  is  high,  excellently 
lighted  by  eight  large  windows,  and  l)y  double 
glass  doors,  with  glass  transom,  and  is  also  well 
ventilated. 

"  In  the  rear  portion  of  the  room  are  located 
large  stock  closets,  with  sliding  shelves  for  book- 
paper,  etc.,  and  beside  them  stands  a  large  case 
of  twenty-eight  drawers,  twenty-three  by  thirty 
inches  each,  in  which  are  kept  the  cardboard, 
and  flat  papers  used  in  the  job  department. 
Facing  these  is  the  paper-cutter,  and  the  table 
on  which  rests  the  card-cutter.  The  ruled  pa- 
pers, note  heads,  bill  heads,  etc.,  etc.,  and  cut 
cards  are  kept  in  the  composing  and  job  room 
above,  ready  at  hand  for  printing  on  the  Gordon 

j  presses. 

I  "  All  of  the  shafting  and  pulleys  for  the  various 
presses  is  suspended  from  the  ceiling  of  the  base- 
ment, belts  running  through  the  ceiling  and  the 
floor  above,  and  connecting  with  the  presses  in 

'  the  composing  room.  All  of  the  presses  are 
connected  with  cone  pulleys,  giving  any  rate  of 

!  speed  desired. 

"  The  store  room,  opening  out  of  the  Staiidani 
press  room,  is  a  large  cellar,  extending  under 
about  half  of  the  post-office,  in  which  is  located 
the  low-pressure  boiler  which  furnishes  steam  for 
heating.  A  considerable  portion  of  this  cellar 
is  floored,  and  the  room  is  so  light  and  dry  that 
it  furnishes  a  most  convenient  store  room  for 


The  Coktlaxd  County  Press. 


129 


news  and  other  papers  in  bundles,  and  for  the 
various  articles  about  a  printing  office  which  it 
is  desirable  to  have  on  hand,  and  not  desirable 
to  have  in  the  way. 

"The  space  afforded  b)  tins  room,  cumLiined 
w  ith  the  other  rooms  above  described,  is  about 
three  times  that  of  the  old  office  in  the  third 
story  of  the  Moore  block,  which  the  Standard 
occupied  on  the  first  of  May,  1876,  while  the 
facilities  of  the  office  for  turning  out  work  have 
increased  in  nearly  the  same  proportion." 

The  direct  predecessor  of  the  Cortland 
County  Democrat  was  the  Cortland  Demo- 
crat, which  was  started  in  the  year  1864, 
b)-  II.  G.  Crouch,  of  whom  particular  men- 
tion has  already  been  made,  and  M.  P.  Cal- 
lendcr ;  this  sheet  may,  perhaps,  be  called 
a  revival  of  the  Democrat  which  Mr.  Crouch 
had  prexiously  published,  and  which  had 
passed  into  the  hands  of  C.  P.  Cole,  to  be- 
come transformed  into  a  Republican  jour- 
nal. The  Democrat  was  purchased  in  1866 
by  C.  A.  Kohler,  a  native  Swede,  who  was 
possessed  of  a  t^ood  deal  of  natiu-al  ability 
and  a  sterling  Democrat.  It  was  while  Mr. 
Kohler  was  conducting  the  paper  that  Ben- 
ton B.  Jones  took  the  first  steps  in  the  edi- 
torial profession,  which  has  since  that  time 
almost  entire!)'  engrossed  his  attention.  He 
was  then  a  young  law)-er  in  the  village  of 
Cortland,  who  was  gradual!)-  acquiring  an 
excellent  practice,  when  Mr.  Kohler  called 
on  him  to  assist  in  the  promulgation  of 
Democratic  doctrine  through  the  columns 
of  the  Democrat.  So  well  did  Mr.  Jones 
fulfill  the  mission  that  a  large  share  of  the 
editorial  work  thereafter  fell  upon  his  shoul- 
ders. L.  S.  Crandall  bought  Mr.  Kohler's 
interest  in  1866,  or  '67,  Mr.  Jones  still  con- 
tinuing to  do  a  share  of  the  editorial  labor 
until  1868,  when  he  bought  out  Mr.  Cran- 
dall. In  assuming  the  responsibility  of 
conducting  the  organ  of  the  Democratic 
party  in  the  county,  Mr.  Jones  wrote  as 
follows :  — 

"  In   accepting   the   duties    consequent   upon 


such  assumption,  we  feel  constrained  to  ask  the 
co-operation  and  assistance  of  all  Democrats  in 
our  efforts  to  make  the  Democrat  &f\xs,i  class  family 
newspaper.  Our  political  affinities  being  so  well 
known  throughout  the  county,  it  is,  perhajjs,  un- 
necessary for  us  to  assert  that  we  have  always 
sujjported  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  in  pros|)erity 
and  adversitv  alike,  those  grand  old  Democratic 
principles  whicli  lie  at  the  very  foundation  of  our 
government,  and  that,  as  the  editor  of  this  paper, 
we  shall  continue  to  support  those  principles. 
We  promise  to  do  our  level  best  to  sow  the  seeds 
of  discord  and  dissatisfaction  in  the  ranks  of  the 
dominant  party,  while  at  the  same  time  we  do 
everything  in  our  jjower  to  strengthen  the  Dem- 
ocratic ])arty." 

These  outspoken  promises  Mr.  Jones  has 
fulfilled,  as  far  as  he  has  been  able,  for  the 
past  sixteen  years.'  He  enlarged  his  paper 
from  the  first,  at  the  same  time  advancing 
the  subscription  price  to  $2,  and  he  so  con- 
ducted the  Democrat  that  it  was  given  a 
cordial  support.  The  political  situation  in 
the  comity  during  the  most  of  the  period 
of  Mr.  Jones's  pro})rietorship  of  the  paper 
has  been  such  that  he  could  expect  very 
little  support  of  a  public  character,  and  he 
has  received  about  what  he  expected ;  but 
he  has  kept  on  in  the  path  marked  out  in 
his  introductory  editorial  and  has  won  the 
respect  even  of  those  who  do  not  agree  with 
the  political  sentiments  of  his  journal.  He 
has  from  time  to  time  added  to  his  office 
outfit,  in  the  way  of  new  and  improved  ma- 
chinery, types,  etc.,  until  it  is  second  to  none 
in  its  capacity  to  turn  out  excellent  work 
of  all  kinds.  Mr.  Jones  moved  the  office 
(which  had  been  previously  located  in  the 
Squires  Block,  and  over  the  present  store  of 
Wm.  Riley,  on  Main  street,)  to  the  Keator 
Block,  and  in  1871  to  the  old  Eagle  Block, 
which  has  given  way  to  the  new  Squires 
Building.      In    1877   he   fitted   up   commo- 

1  From  May  1st,  1874,  until  .\ugiisl,  1875,  xhe  Bviiiofrat 
was  in  tlie  hands  of  Roberts  &  Lamont  and  David  Tall- 
madge;  but  it  came  ijack  into  Mr.  Jones's  ownership  al 
the  latter  date. 

9 


I30 


HlSTDRV    OF    CoRTI.ANU    COUNTV. 


dioiis  quarters  in  the  building  since  occu- 
pied by  him  on  West  Court  street. 

The  third  ne\vs])a])er  published  at  the 
present  time  in  Cortland  village,  the  Cort- 
land Nc^vs,  was  first  issued  on  the  25th  of 
June,  1880,  by  C.  H.  HucU  and  E.  M.  Lans- 
ing. The  former  was  a  native  of  Tru.xton, 
but  resided  for  some  time  in  New  York  city, 
where  he  had  been  in  different  waj's  con- 
nected with  newspapers.  Mr.  Lansing 
remained  in  the  establishment  but  a  short 
time.  Mr.  Buell.  labored  under  many  em- 
barrassments, as  is  often  the  case  in  similar 
undertakings,  but  his  energy  and  perse- 
verance made  his  paper  a  success.  In 
the  celebrated  Normal  School  controversy 
he  supported  with  ability  the  views  of  the 
Local  Board  and  Dr.  Hoose,  which  finallj' 
prevailed. 

In  January,  1882,  the  Nctvs  establish- 
ment was  taken  by  F.  G.  Kinney,  who  has 
conducted  it  since  that  date.  The  causes 
leading  to  the  establishment  of  this  paper 
are  given  as  the  opposition  offered  by  the 
other  Republican  paper  (the  Standard)  to 
the  policy  of  the  Republican  leaders,  and  its 
opposition  to  the  action  of  the  Local  Board 
of  the  Normal  School  in  its  adherence  to  the 
employment  of  Professor  J.  H.  Hoose  as 
principal,  against  the  efforts  of  the  superin- 
tendent of  public  instruction,  who  desired 
Prof  Hoose's  removal.  With  these  contro- 
vesies  this  work  need  not  be  concerned.  The 
Nczvs,  as  stated,  took  strong  ground  in  favor 
of  the  retention  of  Dr.  Hoose  as  principal 
of  the  school,  and  a  long  controversy  ensued 
between  the  two  Republican  journals ;  at 
the  same  time  the  dissensions  in  the  ranks 
of  the  Republican  part}' in  the  county,  with 
the  aggressi\'c  action  of  the  prohibition  fac- 
tion, opened  the  way  to  a  Democratic  suc- 
cess in  the  fall  of  1882,  when  that  party 
elected  its  county  judge  and  surrogate,  dis- 
trict attorney  and  county  clerk  —  a  very 
unusual    occurrence    in    Cortland    count)'. 


The  office  of  the  Nczvs  has  always  been 
located  over  No.  13  Main  street. 

The  MaratlioH  Independent  was  estab- 
lished in  Marathon  in  1870,  by  Wallace 
Kelley,  acting  for  B.  B.  Jones,  of  the  Cort- 
land Dcnwerat.  A  paper  called  the  Mara- 
thon Mirror  had  previously,  in  1862,  been 
started  in  that  village  by  G.  A.  Dodge,  who 
transferred  it  in  the  following  year  to  P.  D. 
&  C.  A.  Van  Vredenburg;  they  abandoned 
it  after  a  few  years.  In  1868  C.  D.  Smith 
revived  it  as  the  Marathon  Neivs ;  he  con- 
ducted it  about  a  year  when  it  was  sus- 
pended. The  material  of  this  establishment 
was  bought  by  Mr.  Kelley,  and  on  the  19th 
of  July,  1870,  he  issued  the  first  number 
of  the  Independent.  The  paper  was  con- 
ducted one  year  by  Kelley,  who,  during 
that  period,  was  acting  as  the  agent  of  Mr. 
Jones  ;  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  purchased 
the  establishment  and  conducted  it  success- 
fully until  1876.  He  was  a  man  of  great 
industr)'  and  a  good  printer,  qualifications 
which  enabled  him  in  a  comparativelj-  con- 
tracted field  to  build  up  a  successful  and 
profitable  business,  where  many  others 
would  have  filled. 

In  the  fall  of  1875  Mr.  Kelley  was  at- 
tacked by  consumption  which  so  impaired 
his  strength  that  in  June,  1876,  he  was 
forced  to  betake  himself  to  the  Adirondack's. 
He  placed  his  business  in  the  care  of  Ed. 
L.  Adams,  who  had  just  completed  his  ap- 
prenticeship in  the  office.  Returning  in 
the  fall,  Mr.  Kelley  gave  up  hope  of  recov- 
ery and  offered  his  ofifice  for  sale.  It  was 
purchased  on  the  first  of  December  of  that 
year  by  Charles  A.  Brooks,  an  employee 
of  Mr.  Kelle\',  and  A.  H.  Da}-,  a  business 
man  of  Marathon.  This  firm  employed 
Mr.  Adams  as  editor  of  their  paper  and 
conducted  it  successfully  until  May  ist, 
1878.  At  this  date  Mr.  Adams  had  only 
just  reached  man's  estate,  and  he  purchased 
the  interest  of  Mr.  Day,  the  firm  becoming 


The  Cortland  County  Press. 


Ill 


Brooks  &  Adams.  This  continued  until 
January  1st,  1880,  at  which  time  Mr.  Adams 
bought  his  partner's  interest  and  has  since 
owned  the  estabUshment  alone. 

When  Mr.  Kelley  issued  the  first  number 
of  the  Independent  the  office  was  equipped 
with  a  hand  press  and  an  old-fashioned  job 
press.  Under  Mr.  Adams's  efficient  man- 
agement it  has  become  a  first-class  estab- 
lishment ;  has  a  Campbell  cylinder  press, 
two  power  job  presses,  a  power  paper  cut- 
ter, steam-engine,  with  an  excellent  outfit 
of  other  material.  More  than  two  hundred 
new  subscribers  have  been  added  to  the  list 
in  the  year  1883.  The  first  issue  was  a  six- 
column  folio;  it  was  enlarged  in  1871  to 
seven  columns,  and  again  enlarged  in  1881 
to  eight  columns;  in  June,  1883,  it  was 
changed  into  a  five-column  quarto  and 
otherwise  improved.  Mr.  Adams  has  won 
an  extended  reputation  as  a  humorist,  based 
upon  the  establishment  of  a  column  devoted 
to  that  class  of  writing  in  1879,  and  has  in 
many  ways  shown  himself  to  be  an  enter- 
prising journalist. 

Early  in  June,  1878,  the  McGi-azvville 
Scntiiiel  issued  its  first  number,  a  youth  of 
eighteen  years,  named  Wm.  A.  Huntington, 
being  the  proprietor.  The  office  was  located 
on  the  first  floor  above  the  ground  floor  of 
what  is  now  known  as  the  Empire  House, 
but  at  that  time  was  commonl\-  called  the 
Empire  Block.  The  paper  was  then  a  five 
column  folio  and  its  subscription  list  was  not 
very  large.  The  motto  adopted  and  since 
retained  was,  "For  the  public  good."  The 
industry  and  diligence  of  the  young  pro- 
prietor soon  increased  the  circulation  of  his 
paper  and  it  was  changed  to  a  si.x-column 
folio.  The  first  copy  was  printed  on  a  small 
army  press ;  but  this  was  soon  changed  for 
a  Washington  hand  press  and  in  December, 
1882,  a  Guernsey  cylinder  press  was  sub- 
stituted and  is  still  in  use.  In  the  following 
year  the  office  was  removed  to  the  Frieson 


Block,  and  at  the  expiration  of  its  second 
year  to  the  Graves  Building,  where  it  now 
is.  Mr.  Huntington  conducted  the  paper 
for  five  years,  when  he  disposed  of  the 
property  to  the  Sentinel  Publishing  Com- 
pany, consisting  of  E.  P.  and  J.  R.  Fancher. 
For  the  last  three  years  the  paper  has  been 
a  seven  column  folio.  Its  circulation  is 
increasing,  its  list  now  exceeding  300. 
Terms,  $1.00. 

The  Otselic  Valley  Register. — This  paper 
was  established  at  Pitcher,  Chenango  coun- 
ty, on  the  8th  of  April,  1874,  by  J.  E.  Ly- 
ons, who,  after  publishing  it  about  four 
months,  suddenly  disappeared  and  has  never 
since  been  heard  from.  The  paper  was 
then  taken  in  hand  by  a  stock  company  and 
was  conducted  by  Eneas  Fenton  for  a  period 
of  about  four  months,  and  then  disposed  of 
to  John  Henry  Graves;  he  continued  its 
publication  for  about  two  years  and  then 
removed  the  establishment  to  Cincinnatus, 
where  he  shortly  afterward  sold  it  to  D.  V. 
Joyner.  He  enlarged  the  sheet  to  a  seven 
column  folio,  and  on  the  3d  day  of  Novem- 
ber, 1879,  sold  out  to  Will  O.  Greene,  who 
immediately  began  making  improvements 
both  in  the  paper  and  the  methods  of  car- 
rying on  the  business.  The  paper  soon  as- 
sumed a  position  with  the  other  local  jour- 
nals of  the  county  and  vicinit)'.  Mr.  Greene 
still  conducts  the  establishment  with  satis- 
faction to  his  readers  and  profit  to  himself 
The  Register  is  still  a  se\en  column  paper 
and  is  independent  in  politics. 

The  history  of  the  newspapers  now  liv- 
ing in  Cortland  county  being  concluded,  it 
remains  for  us  to  devote  a  few  words  to 
those  ventures  in  journalism  that  have  gone 
before.  Among  these  was  the  True  Anier- 
iean  and  Religious  Examiner,  which  was 
started  in  Cortland  village  in  1845,  by  C.  B. 
Gould.  The  following  year  it  passed  into 
the  hands  of  S.  R.  Ward,  a  negro  of  much 
natural  talent,  who  changed  its  name  to  the 


13^ 


History  of  Corti.an'd  County. 


True  Atncrican.     Ward  published   it  about 
two  years,  wlicn  it  was  suspended. 

The  Liberty  Herald  wn'-,  put  forth  in  1845, 
or  about  that  date,  by  James  W.  Eels  and 
Nathaniel  Goodwin.  The  former  was  a 
])rinter  in  R.  A.  Reed's  office  and  the  latter 
a  member  of  the  floating  population  who 
li\-ed  at  Little  York,  near  the  residence  of 
Orrin  Cravath,  a  prominent  abolitionist  and 
master  of  one  of  the  stations  on  the  "Un- 
derground Railroad,"  to  which  mystic  thor- 
oughfare many  of  the  slaves  who  escaped 
to  Canada  were  indebted  for  their  freedom. 
The  Liberty  Hei-ald  a.x\d  other  anti-slavery 
publications  were  sent  to  Mr.  Cravath,  who 
placed  them  in  the  hands  of  Goodwin  ;  he 
traveled  about  the  county  selling  and  giving 
them  away.  There  were  then  several  hun- 
dred abolitionists  in  the  county;  among 
them  a  kw  hundred  dollars  were  raised,  a 
second-hand  outfit  purchased  and  the  Her- 
ald went  forth  on  its  mission.  The  office 
was  in  the  "  ILlder"  store  building  and  John 
Thomas,  one  of  the  staunchest  and  most  un- 
compromising abolitionists,  was  the  editorial 
writer.  His  effusions  have  been  character- 
ized, by  one  who  read  them,  as  "red  hot." 
But  the  cause  was  not  then  a  popular  one, 
and  it  requires  money  to  print  newspapers. 
Eels  soon  retired  from  the  concern  and  his 
place  was  taken  for  a  time  b)-  a  Dr.  Sted- 
man,  from  Tioga  county.  But  this  journal, 
like  the  other  abolition  organ  before  alluded 
to,  passed  into  the  hands  of  Samuel  R. 
Ward,  the  black  orator  and  preacher.  It  was 
finally  suspended  and  the  material  taken  to 
De  Ruyter.  Such  were  the  earnest  and  un- 
selfish efforts  of  the  men  of  Cortland  county 
who  strove  in  the  cause  of  human  freedom 
—  a  cause  wliich  in  later  years  triumphed 
and  brought  honor  to  all  who  labored  in  it. 
The  Moruiiig  Star  was  published  in  Mc- 
Grawvilie   in    1850  and   was   probably   the 


successor  (whether  immediate  or  not,  we  are 
not  inf)rincd)  of  the  ALeGrau'-i'ille  Ji.vpress, 
which  was  started  by  A.  H.  Benedict,  who 
afteward  became  a  well-known  teacher  of 
penmanshi[)  in  tiiis  section.  But  the  Star 
ceased  to  shine  after  a  comparatively  brief 
existence,  being  followed  by  the  Central 
Reformer,  which  was  published  in  1858,  in 
connection  with  the  Central  College  at  Mc- 
Grawville. 

The  South  Cortland  Lniniiiary  had  a 
brief  existence  about  the  year  1839,  and  was 
published  by  M.  Reynolds.  It  was  removed 
to  Eayette\'ille,  Onondaga  county,  by  Hon. 
Wesley  Bailey,  and  its  name  changed  to  the 
Fayettei 'ille  L 11  miliary. 

A  very  small  candidate  for  public  favor 
was  started  in  Cortland  on  the  9th  of  Octo- 
ber, 1820,  by  T.  J.  Sutherland  and  D.  Hills. 
The  subscription  price  was  onl)'  50  cents, 
but  that  was  probably  enough,  as  there  were 
only  two  columns  on  each  of  the  four  pages 
of  the  paper.  It  was  called  the  Village 
Museum.  The  salutatory  was  as  ponderous 
as  the  paper  was  insignificant ;  it  began:  "In 
viewing  the  present  advancements  which 
have  been  made  in  the  progress  of  science 
and  literature  in  this  place,  we  have  ven- 
tured to  introduce  this  little  miscellaneous 
stranger,"  etc.  Readers  were  assured  that 
political  discord  would  be  excluded  from  its 
columns;  "neither  will  we  disgrace  our 
pages  with  slanderous  productions  of  mis- 
creants." Then  followed  an  apology  for 
the  \iiuth  of  the  publishers.  The  Museum 
failed  to  entertain  after  a  few  months. 

The  Neiv  York  Confederacy  was  a  suc- 
cessor of  the  Llryden  Nczus  and  was 
published  in  both  Dryden  and  Cortland  in 
1857,  and  a  few  succeeding  years  by  G.  Z. 
House.' 

'(Jllier  short-lived  journals  are  referred  to  in  the  his- 
tory of  llii;  towns. 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  County. 


133 


CHAPTER  XV. 

THE  liKXCH  AXI)  BAR  OF  CORTLAND  COUNTY. 

•  Tlie  Old  English  Couvts  —  Eslahlishiiieiu  of  Couits  in  America  —  Creation  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  —  The 
Supreme  Court  —  Its  Judges  and  their  Duties  —  The  Court  of  Common  Pleas  and  the  County  Court  —  fustice's 
Courts  and  Courts  of  Special  Sessions — Judicial  Offices  —  The  Bar  of  Cortland  County  —  Its  Early  Eniinonl 
Mcnilicr-.  —  Roll  of  Attorneys'  Oaths  —  The   Present   Bar  —  Biographical  Notes. 


ALTHOUGH  as  a  distinct  count)-  our 
records  are  recent,  the  early  history 
of  otir  bench  and  bar  takes  us  back  to  jtidi- 
cial  sj'stems  \'er\'  different  from  tliose  with 
which  we  are  now  familiar,  and  very  similar 
to  those  of  England.  For  the  British  gov- 
ernors, after  the  peace  of  Westminster,  in- 
troduced such  of  the  courts  of  the  mother 
country  from  time  to  time  as  seemed 
adapted  to  the  new  colonies  ;  and  although 
our  constitution  of  1777  abolished  such  as 
were  hostile  to  the  democratic  sentiments 
of  the  new  era,  it  preserved  with  consider- 
able entirety  the  legal  fictions  and  the  judi- 
cial systems  of  its  inheritance.  It  was  thus 
that  our  new  country  found  in  existence 
stich  courts  as  the  Common  Pleas,  Chan- 
cery, Court  of  Probate,  Court  for  the  Trial 
of  Impeachments  and  the  Correction  of 
Errors,  and  others  long  since  abolished,  or 
merged  in  those  of  the  present  day.  The 
old  Court  of  Assizes,  and  Court  of  Oyer 
and  Terminer  had  already  passed  away, 
and  the  federal  constitution  had  taken  from 
the  State  the  Court  of  Admiralty;  but  most 
of  those  mentioned  above  still  attested  our 
early  relations  with  the  complex  systems 
of  England. 

*The  following  brief  history  of  the  courts 
of  our  State,  at  the  time  when  Cortland 
county  was  formed,  is  made  necessary  by 
the  relations  which  some  of  the  leading 
members  of  our  bar  have  sustained  to  those 
tribunals. 

During  the  exciting  times  succeeding  the 
administration-  of  the  tyrannical  Governor 
Andros,    and  just    after    the   execution   of 


Leisler  and  the  arrival  of  Governor  Slough- 
tcr,  and  while  the  new  charter  of  liberties 
was  agitating  our  colony,  the  Court  for  the 
Correction  of  Errors  and  Appeals  v\'as  es- 
tablished. It  consisted  of  the  governor  and 
council,  its  powers  resembling  our  present 
court  of  final  resort..  The  revolution  neces- 
sitated a  change,  which  gave  rise  to  the 
Court  for  the  Trial  of  Impeachments  and 
the  Correction  of  Errors,  which  was  still  in 
e-xistencc  when  our  county  was  organized. 
The  constitution  of  1846,  which  made  so 
many  changes  in  our  jtidicial  systems,  en- 
tirely remodeled  this  court.  It  divided  it, 
in  fact,  creating  the  Court  of  Appeals  in 
place  of  the  Court  for  the  Correction  of 
Errors,  and  leaving  the  Court  for  the  Trial 
of  Impeachments  still  composed  of  the  Sen- 
ate and  its  president,  together  with  the 
judges  of  the  new  court.  The  convention 
of  1867-68  reorganized  the  Court  of  Ap- 
peals, and  in  1869  the  people  ratified  the 
change,  which  resulted  in  the  present  court 
of  final  resort. 

On  account  of  the  great  mass  of  accumu- 
lated business,  a  Commission  of  Appeals 
was  created  in  1870,  continuing  until  1875, 
possessing  powers  very  similar  to  those  of 
its  sister  court,  and  designed  to  relieve  the 
latter.  With  it,  one  of  our  early  bar,  Judge 
Gray,  was  connected  as  a  prominent  mem- 
ber. 

The, Supreme  Court,  as  it  now  exists,  is 
a  combination  of  ver}'  diverse  elements. 
The  Court  of  Chancery,  the  Court  of  Ex- 
chequer, the  Court  of  Oyer  and  Terminer, 
the  Probate  Court,   the  Circuit  Court   and 


134 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  Supreme  Court  proper,  have  all  com- 
bined to  make  up  this  important  branch  of 
our  system.  But  during  our  early  county 
history  several  of  these  courts  existed  inde- 
pendently of  each  other,  some  of  our  early 
lawyers  being  amongst  their  leading  mem- 
bers. The  Court  of  Chancery,  which  had 
been  organized  when  the  Court  of  Assizes 
was  abolished  in  1683,  was  the  beginning 
of  the  equity  branch  of  our  present  Su- 
preme Court.  It  was  reorganized  shortly 
after  the  Revolution  and,  with  some  slight 
modifications  by  our  constitution  of  1821, 
and  by  subsequent  enactments,  it  continued 
until  1846,  when  it  merged  into  the  new 
Supreme  Court.  Its  descendant  is  our 
Special  Term,  the  presiding  judge  repre- 
senting the  vice-chancellor,  the  duties  of 
chancellor  being  filled  by  the  General  Term 
bench.  The  Court  of  Exchequer,  having 
been  erected  in  1685,  was  made  a  branch 
of  the  old  Supreme  Court  just  after  the 
Revolution,  and  so  continued  until  finally 
abolished  in  1830.  In  our  earliest  colonial 
history  there  had  been  a  Court  of  Oyer  and 
Terminer,  but  it  was  discontinued  durine 
the  time  of  King  William,  its  name,  how- 
ever, surviving  to  designate  the  criminal 
part  of  the  Circuit.  This  brings  us  to  the 
old  Supreme  and  Circuit  Courts  with  which 
the  Court  of  Chancer)'  united  under  the 
constitution  of  1846  to  complete  the  prin- 
cipal branch  of  our  present  system.  At  the 
time  the  history  of  Cortland  county  began 
the  Supreme  Court  of  this  State  consisted 
of  five  justices.  It  had  been  the  practice 
to  hold  four  terms  a  year,  two  in  Albany 
and  two  in  New  York.  But  towards  the 
close  of  the  last  century  the  Circuit  system 
was  established,  somewhat  on  the  plan  of 
that  of  I'Lngland.  It  was  enacted  tliat  the 
judges  should,  during  their  vacations,  hold 
courts  in  the  various  counties  of  the  State, 
and  return  the  proceedings  to  the  Supreme 
Court  when  it  convened  again,  when  they 


should  be  recorded  and  judgment  rendered. 
Just  before  the  separation  of  Cortland  coun- 
ty from  Onondaga  this  system  was  simpli- 
fied by  the  division  of  the  State  into  four 
districts.  To  each  of  these  districts  was 
assigned  a  judge,  whose  duty  it  was  to  hold 
Circuits  in  each  of  the  counties  therein,  at 
least  once  in  each  year.  It  had  already 
been  enacted  that  the  Courts  of  Oyer  and 
Terminer  (the  criminal  part  of  the  present 
Supreme  Court)  should  be  held  at  the  same 
time  and  place  as  the  Circuit,  and  should 
consist  of  the  Circuit  judge,  assisted  by  two 
or  more  of  the  judges  of  the  Court  of  Com- 
mon Pleas  of  the  coimty.  This  Circuit  sys- 
tem was  very  similar  to  the  present,  except 
that  our  Special  Terms  are  substituted  in 
place  of  the  Court  of  Chancery.  After  the 
constitution  of  1821  the  State  was  divided, 
as  at  present,  into  eight  judicial  districts, 
each  being  pro\'ided  with  a  Circuit  judge, 
in  whom  were  vested  certain  equity  powers, 
subject  to  appeal  to  the  Chancery ;  while 
the  Supreme  Court  proper  held  much  the 
same  position  as  our  present  General  Term. 
In  1846  the  new  constitution  abolished  the 
Court  of  Chancery,  giving  the  powers  there- 
tofore held  b}-  it  to  the  Supreme  Court, 
which  it  reorganized  substantially  as  it  ex- 
ists to-day.  Such  is  the  history  of  the 
higher  courts  of  this  county  and  State. 

The  s\-stem  of  local  judicature  has  also 
changed  to  correspond  with  that  of  the 
State  at  large.  The  Court  of  Common 
Pleas,  organized  contemporaneously  with 
the  colonial  Court  for  the  Correction  of 
Errors  and  Appeals,  has  given  way  to  the 
County  Court  ;  while  the  offices  of  county 
judge  and  surrogate  have  been  combined 
where  the  county  population  does  not  ex- 
ceed forty  thousand.  During  the  eight- 
eenth centur}-  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas 
consisted  of  a  first  judge  assisted  by  two  or 
more  associates,  all  of  whom  were  ap- 
pointed by  the  governor.      Its  powers  were 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  County. 


135 


very  similar  to  those  of  the  present  County 
Court,  the  associate  judges  corresponding 
to  the  justices  of  sessions  on  our  present 
criminal  bencli.  The  constitution  of  1846 
aboHshed  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  and 
created  the  County  Court  and  Court  of 
Sessions  as  they  exist  to-day.  A  list  of 
the  first  judges  of  the  Court  of  Common 
Pleas  and  of  the  County  Court  appears  in 
another  place  in  this  work,  together  with 
those  of  the  surrogates  and  district  attor- 
neys of  this  county. 

The  Surrogate's  Court  has  changed  less 
than  an}^  of  the  others  during  the  period 
covered  by  the  history  of  this  count}-.  In 
the  earliest  times,  even  before  the  Dutch 
supremacy  gave  way  to  the  Knglish,  there 
had  been  a  short-lived  Orphan  Court.  Then 
the  P2nglish  go\ernment  introduced  the 
Prerogative  Court,  which,  in  turn,  gave  way 
to  the  Court  of  Probates  after  the  Revolu- 
tion. Surrogates  were  then  appointed  in 
each  county,  having  much  the  same  powers 
as  at  present,  from  whose  judgments  appeals 
to  the  Court  of  Probates  lay.  This  was  the 
system  in  operation  during  the  first  fifteen 
years  of  our  county  histor)-.  In  1823  the 
Court  of  Chancer)-  took  the  place  of  the 
Court  of  Probates,  as  to  appeals,  but  the 
office  of  surrogate  remained  as  before.  This 
continued  until  the  constitution  of  1846, 
when,  in  this  count)-,  amongst  others,  the 
powers  and  duties  of  the  surrogate  were 
vested  in  the  county  judge,  as  at  present. 

Our  Justice's  Courts  and  Courts  of  Spe- 
cial Sessions  have  remained  substantially 
unchanged  since  the  colonial  period,  and 
require  no  extended  history. 

As  of  interest  in  connection  with  our 
judicial  system,  the  office  of  district  attorney 
may  be  mentioned  as  one  which  has  under- 
gone considerable  modification.  Before  our 
county  was  organized,  the  State  had  been 
divided  into  seven  districts  for  each  of  which 
was   an   assistant  attorney-general,    whose 


duties  were  very  similar  to  those  of  our 
public  prosecutors  to-day.  Indeed,  the 
name  now  given  to  that  officer  arises  from 
the  fact  that  he  was  formerly  the  district 
attorney- general.  The  present  office,  as 
distinct  from  the  attorney- generalship,  was 
created  just  before  our  county  organization, 
the  number  of  districts  being  finally  in- 
creased to  thirteen.  At  first  Cortland  county 
was  in  the  ninth  district  with  Cayuga, 
Chenango,  Madison  and  Onondaga,  until 
1817,  when,  for  a  year,  it  was  in  the  thir- 
teenth, with  Broome,  Seneca  and  Tompkins 
counties.  Since  1818  each  county  has  had 
its  own  district  attorney,  the  name  still  be- 
ing preserved  in  its  original  form.  The  list 
herein  of  those  who  have  held  this  office 
dates  from  that  year. 

The  offices  of  county  judge,  district  at- 
torney and  first  judge  of  the  Court  of  Com- 
mon Pleas  have,  with  t)ne  or  two  excep- 
tions, been  filled  by  attorneys  at  law.  Not 
so  with  that  of  surrogate,  however,  for  in 
the  early  history  of  the  county,  and  until 
the  great  changes  of  1846,  it  was  the  rule 
that  laymen  should  fill  that  office,  as  well  as 
those  of  county  clerk,  sheriff  and  others  of 
lesser  rank  ;  it  should  also  be  mentioned 
that  for  some  time  after  the  constitution  of 
1846,  so  great  was  the  amount  of  law  busi- 
ness in  this  vicinit)^  that  general  terms  of 
the  Supreme  Court  were  held  at  Cortland; 
an  honor  which  has  not  been  ours,  however, 
since  the  last  war.  Such  has  been  the  his- 
tory of  the  courts,  of  Cortland  count)-;  a 
development  of  a  practical,  complete  system 
from  the  unnecessary,  antiquated  methods 
inherited  from  Great  Britain. 

Our  county  organization  was  scarcely 
complete  until  the  year  18 10,  when,  against 
much  opposition,  the  county  seat  was  lo- 
cated at  Cortland.  Homer  and  Port  Wat- 
son, the  latter  being  then  the  chief  com- 
mercial point  in  this  section,  had  both  as- 
pired to  that  honor,  as  elsewhere  detailed  in 


1^6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


these  pages.     But  the  energy  of  Jonathan 

lliihb.irtl  ;iiul  a  few  others  decided  the 
matter,  and  what  was  thereafter  known  as 
(."inirt-IIuuse  Hill  was  selected  as  the  site 
for  the  count}-  buildings.  The  conrt-house 
was  completed  three  years  thereafter,  and, 
with  the  jail  adjoining,  was  used  for  a  quar- 
ter of  a  century,  a  period  of  great  legal  in- 
terest, as  will  he  seen  as  we  |)roceed.  In 
1838  the  Su[)ervisors,  unwisely  enough, 
selected  the  present  site,  and  erected  the 
edifices  now  in  use.  It  ma)-  be  interesting 
to  know  that  when  lliey  took  the  warranty 
deed  of  the  present  court-house  lot  from 
John  J.  Speed,  in  1837,  Speed  deeded  to 
them  twice  as  much  land  as  lie  hail  title  to, 
and  described  it  in  such  a  way  that  by 
no  possibilit)-  can  the  boundaries  be  ascer- 
tained, even  were  the  title  perfect. 

The  history  of  the  bar  of  Cortland  coun- 
t)'  presents  the  names  of  men  whose  repu- 
tation has  not  been  confined  to  this  section, 
nor  to  this  State  alone;  names,  however, 
mingled  with  the  naturally  large  number  of 
those  whose  only  records  are  their  scrawl- 
ing signatures  in  the  count\-  archives. 
There  is,  in  the  clerk's  office,  a  ver\-  inter- 
esting document  which  acts  as  an  admirable 
guide  in  research  relati\e  to  the  early  bar 
of  the  county.  It  consists  of  a  must)-  roll 
of  yellow,  ragged  paper,  much  the  worse 
for  dust  and  vermin,  the  sheets  being 
fastened  together  by  wafers,  like  some  an- 
cient chronicle.  It  has  a  veritabl)-  antiiiue 
appearance,  despite  the  fact  that  it  is  only 
three-quarters  of  a  century  old.  It  is  in- 
teresting because  it  contains  the  official 
oaths  of  all  of  the  attorneys  of  our  Court 
of  Common  Pleas  from  the  spring  of  1808, 
down  through  the  next  forty  }'ears.  Some 
thirt)--five  feet  of  this  roll  contain  in  the 
neighborhood  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  names, 
all  but  about  a  dozen  long  ago  forgotten. 
Among  the  first  eighteen  signatures  is  that 
of  Townsend   Ross,  a   man  of  considerable 


prominence  in  his  time,  both  in  Jegal  affairs 
and  in  the  other  walks  of  ci\il  life  lie 
was  one  of  the  assistant  judges  of  Common 
Pleas  for  a  time,  as  w-ell  as  surrogate  for 
some  )-ears,  besides  which  his  name  appears 
in  many  other  capacities  in  the  early  records. 
The  name  of  the  afterwards  prominent  Vic- 
tory Birdseye  also  appears  among  the  early 
ones,  lie,  although  a  resident  of  PomiJC)', 
was  for  some  time  intimately  connected 
with  our  courts  as  a  prominent  practitioner, 
and  his  eminent  success  in  later  life  is  well 
known  b)-  man\-  now  living  in  the  county, 
his  record  as  a  member  of  the  Constitu- 
tional Convention  in  1821,  of  two  Con- 
gresses, of  .several  sessions  of  the  Assembly 
and  of  the  Senate,  being  of  the  highest 
character. 

In  old  fashioned  English  scrij)!,  opposite 
the  date,  "October  18,  1809,"  '^  t'^c  name 
of  Glen  Cuyler,  the  same  who  had  already 
been  surrogate  of  Cayuga  several  years,  and 
was  to  be  several  years  to  come.  His  de- 
scendants are  still  well  known  in  this  vicin- 
ity, among  his  grandchildren  being  the  late 
Mrs.  R.  H.  Duell. 

jMthough  he  was  not  an  acti\-e  practi- 
tioner, we  finil  the  name  of  Roswell  Ran- 
dall in  the  list,  signed  in  a  style  the  exact 
model  of  the  penmanship  of  his  son,  sworn 
to  in  1 8 14,  before  Mead  Merrill,  a  rnaii 
likewise  widely  known  in  his  day.  Mr. 
Randall  was  a  very  active  man,  and  one  of 
the  most  public  spirited  citizens  of  that 
time.  There  is  still  preserved  in  the  clerk's 
office,  in  a  tattered  condition,  an  old  roll  of 
official  oaths,  covering  a  period  of  ten  )-ears 
(1808-1818),  very  similar  in  appearance  to 
the  one  heretofore  described.  Supplement- 
ing this  is  an  ancient  -  appearing  record 
book,  with  cover  most!)-  gone,  containing 
oaths  of  judges  of  the  Common  Pleas,  jus- 
tices, surrogates,  officers  of  the  militia,  and 
numerous  others,  covering  our  first  half 
century.      And  as  an  evidence  of  his  popu- 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  County. 


137 


larity  and  public  spirit,  the  name  of  Gen- 
eral Randall  (as  he  was  always  called  in 
later  life)  appears  more  frequently  than  any 
other  in  the  long  list. 

Subscribed  to  the  same  oath  as  that  of 
Roswell  Randall  is  the  well  known  signa- 
ture of  Henry  Stephens,  for  many  years 
one  of  the  most  prominent  lawyers  of  Cort- 
land county.  Mr.  Stephens  had  studied 
law  with  Eleazer  Burnham,  of  Aurora,  a 
man  of  wide  reputation,  both  as  an  attorney 
and  a  publicist,  and  also  with  Glen  Cuyler, 
of  the  same  place,  and  consequently  could 
boast  of  the  best  of  legal  training.  He  was 
a  man  of  commanding  presence,  a  strong 
man  physically,  as  he  was  mentally  and 
morall}'.  Besides  being  for  many  years  the 
first  judge  of  Common  Pleas  in  the  county, 
and  the  great  rival  at  the  bar  of  Judge  Nel- 
son, he  was  a  man  of  great  public  spirit,  as 
was  attested  by  his  brilliant  record  in  the 
Assembly,  as  president  of  the  S.  B.  and  N. 
Y.  R.  R.  Company,  as  prime  mover  in 
founding  the  Agricultural  Society,  and  in 
other  important  enterprises.  Judge  Ste- 
phens lived  to  a  good  old  age,  it  being  but  a 
few  years  ago  that  he  was  seen  on  our 
streets.  He  was  honored  by  the  entire 
community,  not  only  as  among  the  best  in 
his  profession,  but  also  because  of  his  ex- 
emplary private  life. 

At  this  early  period,  the  leading  counsel- 
or of  the  county,  and  one  whose  opinions 
were  also  sought  from  distant  parts  of  the 
State,  was  Oliver  Wiswell.  Although  not 
widely  known  as  a  trial  lawyer,  he  was  a 
man  of  great  energy  and  prominence  in 
public  matters,  an  able  assistant  judge  of 
Common  Pleas,  and  one  whose  legal  opin- 
ions were  highly  esteemed.  For  some  years 
he  was  a  partner  of  Judge  Stephens,  and 
their  names  figure  largely  in  the  calendars 
of  that  time.  They  constituted  the  earliest, 
and,  for  a  long  time,  the  leading  law  firm 
in  Cortland. 


The  old  (then  new)  court-house  on  the 
hill  witnessed  one  of  the  most  celebrated 
trials  in  the  history  of  the  county,  in  1817. 
There  had  been  a  severe  political  struggle 
between  the  Republicans  and  the  Federals 
the  fall  previous,  during  which  Dr.  John 
Miller,  of  Truxton,  then  the  leading  physi- 
cian of  the  county,  had  been  the  candidate 
of  the  former  party  for  Member  of  Assem- 
bly. Among  the  leaders  of  the  Federals 
was  Mead  Merrill,  one  of  the  most  prom- 
inent men  in  the  county,  one  who  had  held 
the  office  of  surrogate  and  of  county  clerk 
for  many  years,  and  whose  opinion,  even  in 
political  strifes,  was  of  no  little  weight.  In 
the  excitement  of  the  campaign  he  had 
charged  Miller  with  stealing,  a  political  ac- 
cusation which,  like  many  since,  was 
prompted  far  more  by  malice  than  by  truth. 
The  result  was  a  slander  suit,  the  defendant 
pleading  the  truth  in  justification.  The 
cause  came  on  for  trial  at  the  Cortland 
Circuit  amidst  the  greatest  excitement. 
P'or  the  plaintiff  appeared  lili^ha  Williams, 
then  and  thereafter  the  leader  in  the  As- 
sembly chamber,  and  the  celebrated  Thom- 
as J.  Oakley,  soon  after  attorney-general 
and  prominent  Member  of  Congress  ;  while 
the  defendant,  besides  having  the  best  local 
counsel,  had  secured  the  services  of  John 
W.  Hurlbert,  of  Auburn,  who  at  that  time 
stood  peerless  as  a  trial  lawyer  in  this  part 
of  the  State.  The  hearing  lasted  several 
days,  and  has  never  since  been  equaled  in 
Cortland  in  interest,  nor  in  the  display  of 
legal  and  forensic  talent.  The  result  for 
the  plaintiff  was  received  by  the  Republi- 
cans as  a  great  victory,  and  slander  was  not 
so  popular  for  the  ne.xt  half  century  or 
more. 

On  the  roll  of  attorneys'  oaths,  before 
mentioned,  with  the  date  January  i,  18 16 
(written,  by  the  common  January  error, 
for  1817),  appears  the  name  of  Samuel  Nel- 
son.     B\-  curious  mistake,  no  jurat  appears, 


138 


History  of  Cortlaxd  County. 


so  that  the  greatest  light  of  onr  bar  wa~ 
oev€x  admitted  vith  proper  formalities. 
Mr.  Nelson  opened  his  office  in  what  is  now 
called  the  Sam?  -  ^  r -:,  which  had  been 
erected  but  a  }  = .  r.  and  began  prac- 

tice. He  was,  more  than  any  of  oar  bar 
since  his  tirr  :  lover  of  the 

law.     L"-^  ^.     _-    -_i.  Kent.  Storj- 

and     G-  coniemporaries    and 

-  he  was  thorough- 


pretation-  Add  to  this  a  stability'  of  char- 
acter that  was  the  .3 
knew   h'~     --•'■-  '^- 

-.   the  rival  of   Henr^- 

-  -  ,  j 

Avr  r  oadis  there  stiU  re: 

of  Samuci  Nrfson  dated  July  13th.  idio,  as 


appear 


aasociateo  wrm 
eje   ^       ■    -  .- 


;.-  to  very  little     In   1820 


il  ConventicHi, 
lames  Kent.  Victorv  Birds- 


Xd- 


as 


r  Kent,  cniei  jusace  spencer. 


-.-ears  later. 


still  rerr 


da: 


clerks  oSice 


courts  a  year  in  diis  count}-,  a  ; : .  - 

ing  his  agnatnrcL  In  1831  Judge  Neison 
-A-as  ad\-anced  to  the  Supreme  Court  bench 
as  associate,  succeeding  Hon.  WHIiam  L. 
Marcy.  who  had  jnst  been  dec^d  to  the 
United  States  Senate.  After  -serving  for 
six  years  in  that  capacit>-,  he  w^  made 
chief  jostice,  in  place  of  Judge  Savage,  his 
former  legal  instmctor,  wlio  had  resigned. 
Se\-en  years  later  he  recei*-ed  the  highest 
legal  appointment  widiin  the  gift  of  die 
government,  that  of  justice  <^  the  Snpreme 
Conrt  of  the  United  States.  This  position 
be  held  until  advanced  age  and  ill  health 
compelled  him  to  resign  in  1872.  He  was 
also  a  member  of  the  Constitntional  Con- 
vent' ?46,  when  so  many  changes 
~:rr  -  onr  judicial  s\-stem,  in  which 
his  extewsrve  experience  and  dear 
were  of  the  greatest  service. 
.  -^elson  died  not  long  after  his  resig- 
-  3,  leaving  the  record  of  an  exeanfiary 
life, — his  Ids  mourned  by  the  bar  of  the 


rtivdy  August  31st,  1824,  and 


_^    -— "ing  the  5-ears   1816  to  1820 
diat  die  great  outer)'  against  dueling  went 
The  pulpit  had  warred  against  it 
and  so  scandalons  had  it  become 
^  ^lative  enactments  were  renewed, 
omcers  of  the  law  were  warned  to  vigilaiice, 
one  was  compdied  under  penalty' 
_.  -  it:     Thottsands  of  diese  old  anti- 
ng oaths  exist  tfaroogfaoat  die  State  in 
the  official  ardiives,  mosdy  &ded  and  moth- 
eaten,  curious  relics  of  a  comparativdy  re- 
cent barbarism.    Every  attorney  was  oUiged 
to  3gn  one  before  be  coold  be  admitted,  or 
"  -e  he  could  hold  any  office.     The  kA- 
-g  copy  illustrates  die  rigfateoos  preju- 
dice and  strict  legislation,  as  wdl  as  tlie  an- 
cient orthography,  of  diat  day :  — 

- 1  do  soienmly  swear  that  I  have  not  been 

engaged  m  a  dewd  by  spnding  or  acsepdng  a 

~ '- a  Dwd  or  br  fiting  a  Dvd  or  in 

ner  in  violatioo  of  die  act  entided 


The  Bkncii  and  Bar  of  Cortlaxu  County. 


139 


an  act  to  surpress  Dweling  since  the  first  day  of 
July  in  the  year  of  our  lord  one  thousand  F-ight 
hundred  and  sixteen.  Nor  will  I  be  so  Con- 
seamed  directly  or  indirectly  in  any  Uwel  Dur- 
ing the  continuance  of  the  said  act  and  whit  an 
Inhabitant  of  this  state." 

Such  was  the  anti-diieling  oath  of  1817, 
this  particular  one  having  been  signed  by 
Townsend  Ross  and  others  of  his  contem- 
poraries. 

Among  those  first  admitted  to  practice  at 
our  Court  of  Common  Pleas  was  Daniel 
Gott,  then  of  Pompey,  whose  application 
was  sworn  to  before  "S.  Nelson,  comr."  in 
1819.  Although  not  a  member  of  our  bar, 
Mr.  Gott  was  an  extensive  practitioner  in 
our  courts,  and  was  one  of  the  leaders  in 
Syracuse,  where  most  of  his  life  was  passed. 

Although  it  was  the  rule  that  the  "first 
judge"  of  Common  Pleas  should  be  an  at- 
torney, it  seems  to  have  been  broken  in  the 
case  of  John  Keep,  who  held  office  for  thir- 
teen years,  beginning  in  18 10,  and  continu- 
ing until  the  appointment  of  Wm.  Mallory. 
He  had  been  justice  of  the  peace  years  be- 
fore the  organization  of  our  county,  and  for 
that  reason  was  considered  best  fitted  for 
the  new  position.  He  was  a  man  whom 
every  one  respected  for  his  upright  charac- 
ter and  his  unaffected  concern  for  the  public 
good. 

The  first  attorney's  oath  in  the  handwrit- 
ing of  Samuel  Hotchkiss,  so  long  thereafter 
the  clerk  of  the  county,  is  subscribed,  with 
an  awkward  attempt  at  a  flourish,  "H. 
Gray,''  and  dated  the  last  day  of  December, 
1823.  Next  to  Judge  Nelson,  Judge  Gray 
has  attained  the  highest  eminence  as  a  jurist 
of  any  member  of  the  Cortland  bar,  having 
spent  a  large  portion  of  his  life  upon  the 
bench,  and  having  been  engaged  in  many 
of  the  most  important  cases  of  the  last  half 
century.  He  was  born  in  1802  in  Washing- 
ton county,  and  was  graduated  at  Union 
College  with  the  class  of  1 821.  He  had 
already  studied  law  with  Chief  Justice  Sav- 


age (with  whom  Nelson  had  studied  before 
him),  but  soon  after  his  graduation  he  came 
to  Cortland  and  completed  his  preparatory- 
work  with  Nelson  &  Dayton.  Immediately 
following  his  admission  to  the  bar  Mr. 
Gray  spent  a  few  months  in  Dryden,  Tomp- 
kins county,  after  which  he  returned  to  be- 
come a  partner  of  Judge  Ross  in  Homer. 
Subsequently  his  associations  with  our  bar 
were  severed  in  a  great  degree  by  his  re- 
moval to  Elmira,  where  he  has  since  resided. 
In  1836  he  was  Member  of  Congress  during 
one  session,  and  five  years  later  was  district 
attorney  of  Chemung  county.  In  1846  he 
was  made  circuit  judge  of  the  Sixth  Judicial 
District,  which  position  he  held  until  the 
Supreme  Court  was  reorganized,  when  he 
continued  on  the  bench  for  many  years  as 
one  of  its  justices.  When  the  Commission 
of  Appeals,  heretofore  mentioned,  was  or- 
ganized in  1 870  he  was  one  of  its  members, 
and  so  continued  until  the  completion  of  its 
labors  five  years  later.  Judge  Gray  is  a 
man  of  great  judicial  power,  and  is  still  one 
of  the  oldest  and  most  honored  of  his  pro- 
fession in  the  State. 

Prominent  in  our  earlier  annals  was  Major 
Adin  Webb,  who,  though  not  a  lawyer  bred, 
was  surrogate  of  the  county  for  many  years, 
and  whose  name  has  often  appeared  in  this 
work.  He  was  born  in  Connecticut  in  1780, 
and  as  a  young  man  came  to  Cazenovia,  and 
later  to  Homer.  In  early  life  a  teacher, 
later  a  merchant,  he  passed  most  of  his  ma- 
turer  years  in  public  service.  He  was  sur- 
rogate from  1816  to  1823,  and  from  1840  to 
1844,  besides  holding  many  other  positions 
of  responsibility.  He  is  always  spoken  of 
as  a  man  of  the  highest  morality,  whose  ex- 
emplary life  made  him  esteemed  by  all  who 
knew  him,  as  well  in  the  strife  of  politics 
as  in  the  more  peaceful  walks  of  life. 

Mention  should  be  made  of  Judge  Ira 
Harris,  late  of  Albany,  now  deceased,  who, 
when  a  boy,  was  a  law  student  in  the  office 


140 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  Judge  Donnelly.  When  he  was  six  years 
of  age  (in  1808)  his  family  muNcd  to  Preble, 
where  his  boyhood  was  passed.  At  the  age 
of  twent)'-two  he  was  graduated  from  Un- 
ion, three  years  after  Judge  Gray.  After 
luuing  studied  in  Cortland  a  short  time,  he 
went  to  Albany,  and,  like  his  distinguished 
companions.  Judges  Nelson  and  Gray,  en- 
tered the  office  of  Chief  Justice  Savage. 
From  that  time  his  residence  continued  to 
be  at  Albany  until  his  death,  a  few  years 
since.  He  was  twice  elected  Member  of 
Assembh',  was  a  member  of  the  Constitu- 
tional Convention  of  1846,  and  was  once 
State  Senator.  His  course  as  justice  of  the 
Supreme  Court  from  1847  until  1859  was 
marked  by  many  of  the  ablest  opinions  to 
be  found  in  our  reports.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  war  he  succeeded  Mr.  Seward  in  the 
United  States  Senate,  where  he  proved  him- 
self the  careful  statesman  as  well  as  the  pro- 
found jurist.  His  later  years  were  devoted 
to  the  Albany  Law  School,  of  which  he  was 
for  a  long  time  dean,  and  the  excellent  rep- 
utation of  which  is  largely  due  to  his  eftbrts. 
Among  the  early  lawyers  and  judges  not 
heretofore  mentioned,  h^dward  C.  Reed, 
Nathan  Dayton  and  Joseph  Reynolds  were 
so  prominent  as  to  deserve  mention.  Mr. 
Reynolds,  as  a  young  man  of  twenty-four, 
came  to  Cortland  count}-  in  1809,  his  sole 
possessions  consisting  of  two  cows  which  he 
drove  through  the  woods  from  Saratoga 
county.  Purchasing  a  small  farm  in  Virgil, 
on  credit,  he  soon  paid  for  it  through  his 
indomitable  perseverance,  and  thereupon 
began  one  of  the  most  successful  careers 
which  we  have  to  record.  As  his  relation 
to  the  bar  was  only  through  his  judgeship,  it  j 
is  improper  in  this  place  to  follow  his  course  [ 
minutely;  it  is  brieflj-  outlined  by  saying 
that  he  held  most  of  the  important  county 
offices  in  succession ;  that  he  was  many  , 
)'ears  a  judge  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  for 
fi\e    )'ears    first    judge    (corresponding    to 


county  judge  at  this  time).  As  presidential 
elector,  congressman,  and  Member  of  As- 
sembly he  left  a  brilliant  record,  and  at  his 
death  his  large  fortune  and  the  high  esteem 
in  which  he  was  held,  stood  as  monuments 
to  his  ability  and  character. 

Dajton  was  born  in  the  same  county  as 
Reynolds  (Washington)  and  was  nine  j-ears 
his  junior.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in 
1819,  settling  in  Tru.xton,  whence  he  re- 
moved to  Cortland  to  enter  into  partnership 
with  Samuel  Nelson.  He  was  afterwards 
district  attorne}'  in  our  count}-,  but  in  1831 
his  connection  with  our  bar  was  broken  by 
his  removal  to  Lockport.  There  he  was 
soon  elected  first  judge  of  the  Court  of 
Common  Pleas,  and  in  1834  he  became  cir- 
cuit judge.  He  died  in  1859,  one  of  the 
most  respected  citizens  of  Niagara  county. 

Edward  C.  Reed  came  from  New  Hamp- 
shire in  1 8 16,  and  became  a  partner  of 
Judge  Ross  in  Homer.  Although  not  an 
advocate  of  prominence,  he  twice  filled  the 
office  of  district  attorne}-,  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Twent}'-Second  Congress,  and 
was  esteemed  a  wise  and  careful  counselor. 

Under  the  date  of  December  i  ith,  1827, 
on  the  roll  of  attorneys'  oaths,  appears  the 
name  of  William  Henr}-  Shankland,  and 
immediately  following  it,  that  of  Horatio 
Ballard,  each  looking  as  if  written  but  ten 
years  since,  so  like  are  the}-  to  those  of  half 
a  century  later.  Judge  Shankland  was  born 
in  Cherry  Valley,  Otsego  county,  in  1804. 
Four  years  later  his  parents,  who  were 
farmers  of  the  well-to-do  kind,  moved  to 
Onondaga  county,  where  the  bo}hood  and 
early  manhood  of  the  future  judge  was 
passed.  Like  so  many  other  leading  citizens 
of  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  this 
century,  he  received  his  academic  education 
at  Pompey.  This  being  completed,  he  en- 
tered the  law  office  of  Sanders  Ya.i\  Rens- 
selaer, in  the  same  county  ;  but  with  a  nat- 
ural desire  to  re\-isit  his  nati\-e  place  he  re- 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  Countv. 


141 


turned  to  Otsego,  and  entered  the  office 
of  Robert  Campbell,  a  man  of  considerable 
prominence  at  that  time  at  Cooperstown. 
His  legal  studies  were  completed  at  Pompey 
Hill,  in  the  office  of  Daniel  Gott,  where  he 
remained  until  his  admission  to  the  bar  in 
1827.  He  immediately  opened  an  office  in 
Cortland,  where  he  soon  secured  an  exten- 
sive practice,  and  where,  five  years  later, 
he  was  appointed  district  attorney  of  the 
county.  This  office  he  filled  longer  than 
any  other  incumbent  either  before  or  since 
him,  holding  it  for  ten  )-ears  (according  to 
private  records  ;  six  according  to  the  State 
records).  When  the  constitution  of  1846 
took  effect,  Mr.  Shankland  was  appointed 
a  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  this  dis- 
trict, and  at  the  expiration  of  his  short  term, 
was  re-elected,  in  1849.  While  a  member 
of  this  court.  Judge  Shankland  was  one  of 
those  who,  under  the  constitution,  formed 
part  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  bench,  a  posi- 
tion which  he  filled  with  the  highest  credit. 
His  opinions,  which  are  frequently  met  in 
the  reports,  are  marked  by  great  clearness, 
and  are  prized  by  the  bar  for  their  brex'ity 
and  decision.  From  1852  until  1866  Judge 
Shankland  resided  in  Syracuse,  but  the 
later  j'ears  of  his  life  were  passed  in  Cort- 
land. Here  he  was  engaged  in  extensive 
practice,  with  his  son  as  partner,  until  old 
age  compelled  him  to  relinquish  business  a 
year  or  two  before  his  death.  At  the  age 
of  seventy-nine,  respected  by  all  of  the 
State  bar  and  by  all  who  knew  liim,  in  Jan- 
uary, 1883,  Judge  Shankland's  life  closed  ; 
a  life  characterized  by  justice,  integrity  and 
all  of  the  virtues  of  a  Christian  man. 

Horatio  Ballard  was  born  in  Homer  in 
August,  1803,  thus  being  the  senior,  by 
several  months,  of  his  confrere,  Judge 
Shankland.  He  received  his  early  educa- 
tion in  the  Pompey  and  Cortland  Academies, 
both  being  well  known  in  those  days  as  very 
excellent    schools.      He    studied    law    with 


Judge   Stephens  at  Cortland,  and  with   the 
Hon.  Freeborn  G.   Jewett,    at    Skaneateles, 
the  latter  one  of  the  most  prominent  of  the 
lawyers,  jurists  and    publicists   of  his  time. 
It  was  while  here  that  he  met  and  con\'ersed 
with  Daniel  Webster  and  Joseph  Story,  who 
were  coaching  through  the  State,  a  remin- 
iscence which  he  delighted  to  recall  in  later 
life.      Mr.  Ballard  w^as  admitted  to   practice 
at  the   age  of  twenty-four,   and  for   many 
\-cars   thereafter  was  the  partner   of  Judge 
Stephens  in  Cortland.      He  very  soon  arose 
to  prominence  at  the   bar,  and  the  firm   of 
Stephens  &  Ballard  became  one  of  the  best 
known  in  this  part  of  the  State.      In    1842 
Mr.    Ballard    succeeded   Mr.  Shankland    as 
district  attorney,  and  thereafter  was  delegate 
to  the    national  convention    that  nominated 
Polk,  and    to  the  one   that    nominated  Bu- 
chanan.     In  1 86 1  he  was  elected  secretary 
of  state,  and  in  1 866  represented  this  county 
in  the  Assembly.     The  succeeding  year  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional   Con- 
vention, in   which  body  he  was  one   of  the 
most  active  workers.      Mr.  Ballard  died   in 
1 879,  the  most  widely  known  and  respected 
man  in  our  county  ;   "  A  man  of  worth  ;   a 
man    of  letters  and   of  manners,   too;"   an 
honor  to  the  bar,  the  county  and  the  State. 
In  our  list  of  county  judges  appears  the 
name  of  Lewis  Kingsley.      He  was  born  in 
Cincinnatus   in    1823,  where   he   afterwards 
studied  law  with  Barak  Niles,  and  later  with 
Benjamin  F.  Rexford  in  Norwich.      He  was 
admitted  to  practice  at  Utica  in    1846,  and 
five  years  later  was  elected  to  the  bench  of 
the  county.      Before   the   war   his   relations 
with   our   bar  were   broken  by  his   removal 
to  Norwich,  where  he  continued  the  prac- 
tice of  the  law  until  his   death,  some   years 
since. 

Henry  S.  Randall's  name  is  one  of  the 
most  prominent  in  the  catalogue  of  Cortland 
county  attorneys.  He  was  born  in  Madi- 
son county  in  181 1,  and  after  preparation  in 


142 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


the  Cortland  and  Geneva  Academies,  en- 
tered Union  College,  graduating  with  the 
class  of  1830.  He  studied  law  with  Judges 
Stephens  and  Shankiand,  and  was  admitted 
to  the  bar  in  1834.  We  might  end  our 
sketch  at  this  point,  so  far  as  relates  to  his 
history  as  a  lawyer,  since  he  never  devoted 
any  time  to  practice.  But  on  account  of 
his  prominence  as  a  citizen,  we  add  the  fol- 
lowing brief  summary.  The  year  after  his 
admission  to  the  bar  Mr.  Randall  was  a 
member  of  the  national  convention  which 
nominated  Van  Buren.  It  had  been  his  in- 
tention to  be  a  farmer  in  the  highest  and 
most  scientific  sense,  and  in  this  he  suc- 
ceeded, writing  and  editing  several  books 
and  papers  on  the  subject,  and  being  among 
the  foremost  movers  of  great  agricultural 
enterprises.  In  1851  he  was  elected  sec- 
retary of  state,  and  in  1871  Member  of  As- 
sembly, both  times  on  the  Democratic  ticket. 
In  1853  Mr.  Randall  began  the  great  work 
of  his  life,  the  biography  of  Thomas  Jeffer- 
son. This  was  completed  several  years 
later,  in  three  volumes,  and  ranks  as  one  of 
the  most  carefully  prepared  and  exhaustive 
biographies  by  an)-  American  author.  For 
a  long  time  he  was  president  of  the  State  and 
the  National  Wool  Growers'  Associations, 
and  was  the  author  of  several  important  laws 
and  works  on  the  subject.  He  also  devoted  a 
large  portion  of  his  time  to  educational 
matters  both  in  this  county,  and,  while  sec- 
retary of  state,  in  the  various  other  counties 
of  New  York.  As  a  result  of  his  zeal  in 
this  respect  he  was  made  president  of  the 
State  Normal  School  at  Cortland,  and  so 
continued  until  his  death.  He  also  occu- 
pied many  other  positions  of  trust,  all  of 
which  he  filled  with  eminent  ability.  More 
than  any  other  man  who  has  made  Cortland 
his  permanent  home,  Mr.  Randall  was  char- 
acterized by  the  broadness  of  his  views,  and 
his  energy  in  laboring  for  the  public  good. 
The  friend  of  scholars  and  the  companion  of 


statesmen,  he  died  in  1877,  his  loss  mourned 
by  the  communit)'  that  knew  him,  and  the 
State  and  nation  as  well. 

The  most  brilliant  orator  of  thirty- five 
years  ago,  in  Cortland,  was  Robert  O.  Reyn- 
olds. He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1 839, 
and  soon  thereafter  removed  to  Chenango 
county,  where  he  was  extensively  engaged 
in  the  practice  of  the  law  both  in  Norwich 
and  in  Greene.  In  1 843  he  was  elected 
district  attorney  of  that  county  ;  but  four 
years  later  he  returned  to  Cortland,  where 
the  remainder  of  his  life  was  spent.  He 
was  a  fine  trial  lawyer,  a  fluent  and  witty 
speaker,  but  in  later  life  a  \ictim  of  intem- 
perance, which  ended  in  misery  a  brilliant 
and  promising  career. 

Roswell  K.  Bourne  was  among  the  ener- 
getic lawyers  of  his  time,  and  one  of  the 
comparatively  small  number  whose  descend- 
ants are  still  among  us.  He  was  born  in 
Otselic,  in  181 3,  and,  indeed,  spent  most  of 
his  life  in  Chenango  county.  After  com- 
pleting his  academic  education  at  Cazenovia 
Seminary,  he  began  the  study  of  law  with 
Barak  Niles,  in  Cincinnatus.  W'hile  study- 
ing for  the  bar  he  taught  school  in  Pitcher 
Springs,  and,  on  being  admitted,  opened  an 
office  there,  where  he  remained  until  1857 
as  an  active  practitioner.  In  that  }'ear  he 
removed  to  Cincinnatus,  where  the  remain- 
der of  his  life  was  passed.  Mr.  Bourne  is 
described  by  those  who  knew  him  as  a  very 
positive,  energetic  man,  and  a  thoroughly 
public  spirited  citizen. 

Augustus  L.  Ballard,  a  younger  brother 
of  Hon.  Horatio  Ballard,  was  a  student  in 
the  office  of  the  latter,  and  was  admitted  to 
the  bar  in  1844.  His  son  entered  into 
partnership  with  his  brother,  and  for  a 
number  of  years  the  firm  of  H.  &  A.  L. 
Ballard  was  the  leading  one  of  the  county. 
He  was  district  attorney  in  1847,  a  position 
to  which  his  great  abilities  as  a  trial  lawyer 
especiall)'    adapted    him.      He   was  a  very 


The  Bench  and  Bar  op'  Cortland  Countv. 


■43 


active,  energetic  man,  a  characteristic  which 
probably  hastened  his  death.  He  went 
west  before  the  war,  for  the  benefit  of  liis 
healtli,  and  died  while  there. 

Among  the  best  criminal  lawyers  of  the 
State  was  the  late  Hon.  Milo  Goodrich  who, 
though  not  a  member  of  our  bar,  had  a 
large  practice  in  our  courts.  He  was  ad- 
mitted in  1845,  '"  •^''"^  same  class  with  Judge 
Duell,  at  our  present  court-house.  For 
many  years  thereafter  he  resided  in  Dryden, 
during  which  time  he  represented  his  dis- 
trict in  Congress  one  term,  and  in  the  Con- 
stitutional Convention  of  1867.  He  after- 
wards removed  to  Auburn  where  he  died  a 
few  years  since. 

In  1847  James  A.  Schermerhorn  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  at  Cortland,  where  he 
opened  an  office  on  the  site  of  the  present 
edifice  which  bears  his  name.  He  did  not 
enter  e.xtensix'ely  into  the  practice  of  the 
law,  howe\er,  and  subsequently  spent  but 
a  small  portion  of  his  time  in  Cortland.  Be- 
ing a  gentleman  of  wealth,  he  lived  in  re- 
tirement, in  his  early  years  traveling  ex- 
tensively both  in  Europe  and  America,  and 
latterly  residing  in  his  beautiful  home  at 
Glen  Haven. 

Among  the  oaths  and  certificates  of 
study,  signed  by  applicants  for  admission, 
is  one  subscribed  in  a  very  correct,  neatly 
shaded  hand,  in  marked  contrast  to  his 
well  known  signature  of  later  years,  by 
Hiram  Crandall.  Mr.  Crandall  was  from 
Chenango  count}',  but  he  received  his  early 
education  in  the  Homer  Academy,  going 
thence  into  the  office  of  Judge  Shankland, 
where  his  legal  studies  were  pursued  until  his 
admission  to  the  bar  in  1846.  He  then  entered 
into  partnership  with  his  former  legal  in- 
structor, with  whom  he  remained  until  the  lat- 
ter was  made  member  of  the  Supreme  Court. 
He  then  entered  into  partnership  with  Rob- 
ert O.  Reynolds,  with  whom  he  remained 
nine    years.       He    was   for  a   time,    before 


the  war,  the  postmaster  at  Cortland  village. 
Thereafter,  in  1859,  he  was  elected  county 
judge  and  surrogate,  which  office  he  held 
for  eight  years  until  succeeded  by  Judge 
Smith.  He  was  for  many  years,  and  until 
his  death  in  1881,  attorney  for  the  Fjrst 
National  Bank  in  Cortland,  and  as  si|ch 
did  a  large  office  business,  which  was  mc^ire 
to  his  taste  than  the  labors  of  the  court- 
room. He  was  one  of  the  most  genial, 
good  natured  of  men,  an  ornament  to  the 
community  as  well  as  to  the  bar  of  the 
county. 

Charles  F"oster  was  a  native  of  Rens- 
selaer county,  and,  like  many  others  whose 
names  appear  herein,  received  his  early 
education  in  Pompey  Academy.  He  then 
entered  Yale  College,  where  he  was  gradu- 
ated in  1844.  After  his  graduation  he  en- 
tered the  office  of  the  Hon.  Victory  Birds- 
eye,  at  Pompey.  He  also  attended  the 
New  Haven  Law  School  for  a  time,  studied 
in  Syracuse  with  B.  D.  &  G.  Noxon,  and 
was  finally  admitted  at  Catskill  General 
Term  in  1847.  He  then  returned  to  Pom- 
pey and  entered  the  office  of  Daniel  Gott, 
where  he  remained  five  years,  removing 
thence  to  Cortland.  Here  he  continued  the 
practice  of  the  law  until  his  death  some 
years  since.  During  the  latter  part  of  his 
life  he  was  a  member  of  the  prominent  law 
firm  of  Duell  &  Foster.  In  i86g  he  was 
elected  to  the  Assembly,  where  he  re- 
mained one  winter.  Mr.  Foster  was  a  very 
careful  counselor,  and  a  highly  respected 
citizen. 

The  present  bar  of  our  county  consists 
of  between  thirty-five  and  forty  active 
practitioners.  As  has  always  been  the 
case,  however,  the  business  is  monoplizcd 
by  a  comparatively  small  number,  say  one- 
fourth  of  those  whose  names  appear  upon 
the  rolls.  It  is  judged  impracticable  at  this 
time  to  give  more  than  a  passing  glance  at 
those  who  are  still  actively  engaged  in  busi- 


144 


History  ok  Corti.anu  County. 


ness.  While  custom  has  decreed  dc  mortitis 
nil  nisi  boiiinii  concerning  the  Hving,  it  is 
impossible  to  write  so  uniformly,  or  to 
totally  lay  aside  the  bias  which  is  necessary 
to  personal  acquaintance.  The  limits  of 
this  chapter,  moreover,  will  not  allow  more 
than  is  here  attempted,  lest  it  encroach  too 
mucii  upon  other  portions  of  the  work. 

The  senior  member  of  the  present  bar  is 
Hon.  R.  H.  Duell,  who  was  admitted  in  the 
same  class  with  the  late  Milo  Goodrich,  in 
1845.  J'^'c^gs  Duell  is  a  native  of  Herkimer 
county,  having  been  born  in  the  town  of 
Warren  in  1823.  His  academic  education 
was  completed  at  Syracuse,  where,  at  the 
age  of  nineteen,  he  began  the  stud)-  of  law 
in  the  office  of  Hon.  Charles  B.  Sedgwick. 
Two  years  later,  in  July,  1845,  he  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  and  began  practice  in  the 
town  of  Fabius,  Onondaga  county.  He 
moved  thence  to  Cortland  in  1847,  '^0  ac- 
cept a  partnership  with  Judge  Stephens, 
and  has  since  resided  here.  Judge  Duell's 
political  career  has  been  remarkably  suc- 
cessful from  the  first.  In  1850  he  was 
elected  district  attorney,  and  in  1855  coun- 
ty judge  and  surrogate.  This  office  he  re- 
signed just  before  the  close  of  his  term,  on 
account  of  his  election  as  a  member  of  the 
Thirty-sixth  Congress.  In  1870  he  was 
a  member  of  the  national  legislature,  and 
and  at  the  close  of  his  term  was  appointed 
commissioner  of  patents.  After  serving  in 
that  capacity  until  1877,  he  returned  to 
Cortland,  where  he  resumed  the  practice  of 
the  law. 

Next  in  seniority  at  our  bar  stand  Geo. 
B.  Jones  and  Amos  L.  Kenney,  both  ad- 
mitted at  the  Cortland  General  Term,  in 
1848.  Mr.  Jones  was  born  in  Columbia 
county,  but  a  greater  portion  of  his  life  has 
been  spent  in  this  part  of  the  State.  He 
was  educated  in  Homer  and  in  Cazenovia, 
and  received  his  early  legal  training  in  the 
office  of  Hon.  Horatio  Ballard.      Soon  after 


his  admission  he  opened  an  office   in   Mc- 

(ira\\\ille,  where  he  remained  several  years. 
Just  before  the  war  he  removed  to  Cortland, 
where,  in  i860,  he  succeeded  Judge  Smith 
as  district  attorne\'.  This  office  he  held 
two  consecutive  terms,  a  distinction  not 
customar)'  in  this  county.  He  was  for  a 
long  time  one  of  the  justices  of  the  peace 
of  Cortlandville,  and  has  enjoyed  a  good 
practice  at  the  bar. 

Amos  L.  Kenney  was  born  in  Truxton 
and  was  a  member  of  the  graduating  class 
of  1843  'it  Hamilton  College.  After  study- 
ing five  years  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar 
and  has  since  been  an  active  practitioner  in 
his  native  town,  making  a  specialty  of  sur- 
rogate proceedings  and  conveyancing. 

In  1855  Oliver  Porter  came  to  Cortland 
from  Delaware  county,  where  he  had  been 
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in 
Homer,  where  he  has  continued  to  reside. 
He  was  born  in  Sullivan  county  in  1824, 
receiving  an  academic  education  at  Monti- 
cello,  and  pursuing  his  law  studies  there. 
He  has  been  one  of  the  most  active  practi- 
tioners in  our  courts  for  many  j-ears. 

Of  the  legal  class  admitted  at  the  Januar\- 
General  Term  of  1856,  held  at  Cortland, 
three  names  are  especially  prominent  — 
those  of  Nathaniel  C.  Moak,  Merton  M. 
Waters  and  Abram  P.  Smith.  Mr.  Moak 
was  from  Cherry  Valley  and  was  never  con- 
nected with  our  bar.  He  has  resided  of 
late  in  Alban\',  where  he  has  attained  a 
wide  reputation  as  editor  of  various  legal 
text-books  and  reports,  and  as  one  of  the 
leading  Court  of  Appeals  practitioners  of 
the  State. 

Hon.  A.  P.  Smith  was  born  in  East  Vir- 
gil, April  9th,  1 83  I.  He  was  educated  for 
the  profession  of  teaching,  attending  the 
Homer  Academy  and  graduating  from  the 
State  Normal  School  at  Albany  in  1853. 
After  teaching  about  a  year  in  Marathon 
he  came  to  Cortland  and  began   the  study 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  County. 


145 


of  law  with  Hon.  Horatio  Ballard,  with 
whom  he  remained  until  his  admission  to 
the  bar.  In  the  fall  of  that  year  he  was 
elected  district  attorney  of  the  count}',  hav- 
ing been  in  the  profession  but  eight  months. 
During  the  war  Mr.  Smith  was  connected 
with  the  76th  New  York  Volunteers  and 
subsequently  wrote  a  history  of  that  regi- 
ment, which  has  attained  a  wide  circulation 
among  the  soldiers  of  the  State.  In  the 
fall  of  1867  he  was  elected  county  judge 
and  surrogate,  being  re-elected  in  1871  and 
again  in  1877.  He  thus  held  that  office 
for  sixteen  consecutive  years,  having  been 
at  the  time  of  his  retirement  longer  on  the 
county  bench  than  any  one  in  the  State. 
Judge  Smith  has  had  a  very  extensive  law 
practice,  and  has  now  in  partnership  with 
him  his  son,  the  firm  being  A.  P.  &  D.  E. 
Smith. 

Mr.  Waters  was  born  in  Truxton,  receiv- 
ing his  academic  education  in  De  Ruyter. 
He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Reynolds  & 
Crandall,  in  Cortland,  and  immediately 
after  his  admission  began  practice  in  the 
same  village.  His  brother,  Alvah  D. 
Waters,  admitted  shortly  after,  entered 
into  a  partnership  with  him,  which  con- 
tinued until  1870.  In  1865  Alvah  D. 
Waters  was  elected  district  attorney  and 
held  that  office  at  the  time  of  his  death. 
In  1875  Mr.  Waters  took  into  partnership 
with  him  his  son-in-law,  Stratton  S.  Knox, 
who  had  studied  in  his  office  and  who  had 
been  admitted  to  the  bar  in  September  of 
that  year.  The  firm  continued  doing  an 
extensive  business  until  December,  1881, 
when  Mr.  Waters  removed  to  Syracuse. 
Mr.  Knox  continued  in  business  until  tiic 
fall  of  1883,  when  he  was  elected  county 
judge  and  surrogate  on  the  Democratic 
ticket,  which  office  he  still  holds. 

Ira  L.  Little,  of  Marathon,  is  also  among 
the  older  members  of  the  bar  at  present. 
He  was  born  in  Wallkill,    N.    V.,    in    1830, 


and  was  graduated  at  Harford  University, 
Pennsylvania.  He  studied  law  and  was 
admitted  in  Pennsylvania  in  1853,  but  re- 
moved to  Binghamton  two  years  later  and 
in  1855  was  admitted  to  practice  in  this 
State.  Soon  after  he  came  to  Marathon, 
where  he  has  since  resided.  Mr.  Little  has 
devoted  a  large  portion  of  his  time  to  liter- 
ary work,  although  keeping  up  considera- 
ble business  as  counselor  in  our  courts. 

In  the  same  town  of  Marathon  resides 
another  of  the  earlier  bar.  George  A. 
Hulbert  is  a  native  of  Truxton,  where  he 
was  born  in  1829.  His  early  education  at 
the  Cortlandville  Academy  was  followed 
by  legal  studies  in  Hamilton  and  in  Ballston, 
until  his  admission  in  1851.  He  spent  a 
short  time  in  the  west,  where  he  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  Chicago  bar  in  1853.  For 
the  last  twenty  years  Mr.  Hulbert  has  re- 
sided in  Marathon,  being  extensively  en- 
gaged in  the  produce  trade,  as  a  member 
of  the  old  New  York  firm  of  Wm.  Hulbert 
&  Brothers,  He  has  not  been  engaged  in 
law  practice  for  some  years. 

In  1858  there  were  admitted  at  the  Cort- 
land and  Binghamton  General  Terms  John 
S.  Barber  and  William  H.  Warren.  Mr. 
Barber  was  a  native  of  Broome  county, 
having  been  born  in  Colesville,  November 
1st,  1824.  His  academic  course  was  com- 
pleted at  Ithaca,  and  his  legal  studies  with 
M.  M.  Waters  in  Cortland.  In  the  January 
term  of  1858  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at 
Binghamton,  and  has  since  been  in  business 
in  Cortland.  Mr.  Barber's  health  for  some 
time  made  active  practice  impossible,  but 
he  has  devoted  a  large  amount  of  time  to 
real  estate  business,  and  has  become  one 
of  the  most  careful  and  successful  financiers 
of  our  county. 

William  H.  Warren  was  born  in  Exeter, 
Chenango  county,  N.  Y.,  and  was  one  of 
those  whose  names  have  added  to  the  roll 
of  Pompey  Academy.      He  studied  law  with 


146 


MlSTURV    UK    CoRTl.AN'I)    CoUNTY. 


Hon.  Huralio  l^allard,  and  for  a  long  time 
was  his  partner.  He  was  admitted  in  No- 
vember, 1858,  and  inimediateiy  arose  to 
the  first  rank  as  a  trial  lawyer.  He  was 
also  for  a  time  in  partnership  with  his 
brother,  L.  E.  Warren,  now  of  Auburn ; 
and  later  with  Hon.  O.  U.  Kellogg.  He 
has  been  one  of  the  most  successful  advo- 
cates at  our  bar. 

Benjamin  T.  Wright  studied  law  in  the 
office  of  McDowell  &  Edwards,  in  Lisle, 
and  was  admitted  in  1864.  He  served  in 
the  Union  ranks  during  a  portion  of  the 
war,  and  on  his  return  settled  in  Marathon. 
In  1873  he  was  elected  district  attorney  of 
the  county,  and  has  since  resided  iu  Cort- 
land, doing  a  very  flattering  law  business. 

Frank  M.  Benjamin  came  to  this  county 
from  Herkimer  in  1840,  when  eight  years 
of  age.  He  studied  law  with  R.  K.  Bourne, 
at  Cincinnatus,  and  was  admitted  in  1859. 
In  1863  he  went  to  Chenango  county,  but 
returned  in  1867  and  began  practice  in 
Cincinnatus,  where  he  has  since  remained. 

William  J,  Mantanye  was  born  at  Free- 
town in  1843,  and  after  graduation  at  the 
Homer  Academy,  studied  law  with  Hon.  A. 
Holmes,  and  with  Hon.  A.  P.  Smith,  of 
Cortland.  He  was  among  the  first  to  en- 
list at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  and  served 
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  until  dis- 
charged, after  the  surrender  of  Lee.  He 
was  in  all  of  tiie  principal  battles  in  which 
the  76th  N.  Y.  Vols,  were  engaged,  and 
was  taken  prisoner  at  Gettysburg.  In  1 867 
he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  opened  an 
office  in  Marathon,  where  he  has  been 
favored  with  an  e.vtensive  practice. 

Admitted  in  the  same  year  as  Mr.  Man- 
tanye, at  the  November  General  Term,  was 
Irving  H.  Palmer.  He  was  born  in  Virgil 
in  1841,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Cortland 
Academy.  His  law  studies  were  pursued 
in  the  office  of  Duell  &  Benedict,  after 
which  he  began  practice  in   Cortland.      In 


1882  lie  was  elected  district  attorney,  which 
office  he  still  retains. 

Mr.  Palmer's  predecessor  in  office  was 
Byron  A.  Benedict,  who  was  elected  in  the 
presidential  year  of  1876,  and  re-elected 
three  years  after.  Mr.  Benedict  is  a  native 
of  this  county,  and  a  graduate  of  the  Ho- 
mer Academy.  He  was  admitted  to  the 
bar  in  1869,  and  soon  after,  on  the  death 
of  Mr.  Foster,  entered  into  partnership  with 
Judge  Duell,  with  whom  he  still  remains. 
The  firm  has  been  one  of  the  most  prom- 
inent ever  in  the  county. 

The  oldest  law  firm  in  the  county  at  pres- 
ent is  that  of  Bouton  &  Champlin,  the 
partnership  having  been  formed  in  1869. 
Lewis  Bouton  was  born  in  Virgil  in  May, 
1838,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1867. 
In  November,  1870,  he  was  elected  to  the 
office  of  district  attorney,  which  position  he 
held  three  years.  He  was  elected  one  of 
the  justices  of  the  peace  in  1883,  and  is  still 
in  office.  His  partner,  Riley  Champlin, 
was  born  in  Solon  in  1838,  and  studied  law 
in  the  office  of  Ballard  &  Warren,  in  Cort- 
land. He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  No- 
vember, 1868,  at  Binghamton,  and  within 
a  few  months  entered  into  partnership  with 
Mr.  Bouton.  In  April,  1870,  he  was  ap- 
pointed district  attorney  of  the  county  in 
place  of  Alvah  D.  Waters,  deceased.  The 
firm  has  been  very  successful  in  business, 
and  has  attained  a  very  satisfactory  position 
at  the  bar  of  this  section  of  the  State. 

Proniiiicnt  among  the  younger  members 
of  the  bar  is  Hon.  O.  U.  Kellogg,  a  native 
of  the  town  of  Cincinnatus.  Mr.  Kellogg 
was  graduated  at  the  Albany  Law  School 
in  1869.  In  the  same  year  he  came  to 
Cortland,  and  entered  the  office  of  Hon.  A. 
P.  Smith,  where  he  remained  until  1874. 
In  1875  he  was  one  of  the  leading  counsel 
for  the  contestants  in  the  celebrated  Shaw 
will  case,  the  most  important  action  of  the 
kind  ever  tried  in  the  count)'.      In  1877  he 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  County. 


147 


was  elected  Member  of  Assembly  on  the 
Democratic  ticket.  Mr.  Kellogg,  in  addi- 
tion to  his  extensive  law  practice,  is  largely 
engaged  in  stock  raising,  having  one  of  the 
finest  stock  farms  in  New  York,  besides 
several  others  in  the  west. 

George  S.  Sands  was  born  in  Delaware 
county,  August  19th,  1849,  but  came  to 
Cortland  when  quite  young.  Here  he  re- 
ceived his  preparatory  education  in  the 
Academy  and  Normal  School,  afterwards 
attending  the  Andes  Collegiate  Institute. 
After  a  three  years'  course  in  the  law  office 
of  M.  M.  Waters,  he  was  admitted  to  the 
bar  in  1873.  Mr.  Sands  has  served  as  town 
clerk  two  terms  and  as  justice  of  the  peace 
for  six  years,  and  is  now  in  active  practice. 

Among  the  graduates  of  the  Alban\'  Law 
School  of  the  class  of  1875  was  Horace  L. 
Bronson,  born  in  Virgil  in  1853.  Mr. 
Bronson  received  his  education  in  the  Ho- 
mer Academy  and  Cazenovia  Seminary, 
after  which  he  entered  the  office  of  Hon.  A. 
P.  Smith,  where  he  remained  until  he  en- 
tered the  Law  School.  He  has  since  re- 
sided in  Cortland,  where  he  has  an  extensive 
and  successful  practice. 

Among  the  leading  firms  of  the  county 
is  that  of  Eggleston  &  Smith,  composed  of 
Joseph  E.  Eggleston  and  Dorr  C.  Smith. 
Mr.  Eggleston  is  a  native  of  Cortland,  and  a 
graduate  of  the  Normal  School.  He  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  in  September,  1875, 
and  immediately  opened  an  office  in  Cort- 
land, where  he  has  met  with  flattering  suc- 
cess. His  partner,  Mr.  Smith,  was  born  in 
Moravia,  in  185 1.  He  was  graduated  at 
Genoa  Academy,  after  which  he  entered 
the  office  of  Hon.  A.  P.  Smith  in  Cortland. 
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  the  Albany 
General  Term  in  January,  1875,  and  began 
practice  immediately  in  Cortland.  The 
firm  was  established  in  1880,  and  has  had  a 
very  large  calendar  of  cases  at  each  term 
since  that  time. 


Miles  E.  Burlingame  was  born  in  W'illet, 
N.  Y.,  November  8th,  1838,  and  received 
his  education  in  the  common  schools  of  the 
county.  He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  A. 
McDowell,  at  Lisle,  Broome  county,  N.  Y., 
and  at  the  Albany  Law  School.  He  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  at  Albany  in  1872,  and 
receix'ed  a  diploma  from  the  law  school  soon 
after.  He  has  continued  his  residence  in 
Willet,  where  he  is  now  practicing. 

Lucius  P.  Hollenbeck  was  born  in  Tully, 
N.  Y.,  in  1837.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar 
in  1873.  He  has  made  a  specialty  of  the 
pension  business,  since  that  time,  in  Cort- 
land. 

Although  not  now  an  active  member  of 
the  bar,  mention  should  be  made  of  William 
H.  Shankland,  jr.,  son  of  the  late  Judge 
Shankland,  For  several  years  the  firm  of 
Shankland  &  Shankland  did  a  large  busi- 
ness in  Cortland,  but  the  death  of  the  senior 
member,  and  the  removal  of  his  son  to  Al- 
bany to  accept  the  deputy  clerkship  of  the 
Court  of  Appeals,  deprived  the  county  bar 
of  two  of  its  most  valued  members.  Mr. 
Shankland  intends  to  remain  permanently 
in  Albany. 

Among  the  older  and  retired  members  of 
the  bar  should  be  mentioned  Hon.  A.  Jud- 
son  Kneeland,  the  present  Member  of  As- 
sembly from  this  county.  Mr.  Kneeland 
was  born  in  Spaflbrd  in  1821,  and  was  grad- 
uated at  the  Cortland  Academy  in  1843. 
He  studied  law  with  Hon.  Ira  Harris  in  Al- 
bany and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848. 
He  has  held  a  number  of  offices  of  trust  in 
this  and  Yates  counties,  but  has  not  actively 
engaged  in  practice  in  some  years.  Since 
1875  he  has  been  justice  of  the  peace  in  Ho- 
mer, and  in  the  fall  of  1883  was  elected  to 
the  Assembly  on  the  Republican  ticket. 

John  W.  Suggett,  a  native  of  this  county, 
and  a  graduate  of  the  Cortland  Normal 
School,  completed  his  scholastic  work  at 
Cornell  Universit}'.    He  studied  law  with  the 


148 


History  of  Cortland  Countv. 


late  Judge  Crandall,  and  opened  an  office  in 
Cortland  immediately  on  his  admission  to 
the  bar.  He  has  devoted  much  of  his  atten- 
tion to  patent  law,  and  has  a  large  practice 
in  the  Federal  court,  as  well  as  in  those  of 
our  own  State  and  county. 

Henry  D.  Waters,  of  Cuyler,  brother  of 
M.  M.  Waters,  of  whom  a  sketch  has  already 
been  given,  and  of  A.  D.  and  George  L.  Wa- 
ters, also  members  of  the  bar,  is  a  member 
of  a  legal  famih-.  He  is  a  native  of  the 
county,  and  during  the  rebellion  was  among 
the  most  active  in  the  army,  where  he  re- 
ceived wounds,  the  effect  of  which  he  still 
bears.  He  is  now  engaged  in  practice  in 
Cuyler  and  is  the  present  clerk  of  the  Board 
of  Supervisors. 

William  P.  Robinson  was  born  in  Cort- 
land in  1848,  and  received  his  education  in 
the  Cortland  Academy  and  Normal  School. 
His  law  studies  were  pursued  with  Hon.  H. 
Crandall,  and  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in 
1876.  He  has  since  devoted  his  attention 
to  other  pursuits,  and  is  now  one  of  the  lead- 
ing merchants  of  the  county. 

James  T.  Steel  was  born  in  Solon  in  1840, 
and  after  studying  with  Ballard  &  Warren 
in  Cortland,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1871. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  185th  X.  V.  Vol- 
unteers during  the  rebellion. 

William  D.  Tuttle  was  born  in  Salisbury, 
Herkimer  county,  in  1849.  He  was  a  stu- 
dent in  the  McGrawville  Academy  and  the 
Cortland  Normal  School.  His  legal  studies 
were  pursued  with  Judge  Crandall.  From 
1878  to  1 88 1  Mr.  Tuttle  served  as  one  of 
the  school  commissioners  of  the  county, 
since  which  he  has  practiced  law  in  Cort- 
land. 

Franklin  Pierce  was  born  in  Marathon  in 
1853,  and  received  his  preparatory  educa- 
tion in  Cortland  Normal  School  and  Caze- 
novia  Seminary.  For  a  time  he  was  a  stu- 
dent at  Amherst,  but  completed  his  college 
course  at  Syracuse  in  1879.     He  studied  law 


with  Waters  &  Knox  and  was  admitted  to 
the  bar  in  September,  1S79.  He  has  since 
removed  to  Homer,  where  he  is  practicing 
in  his  profession. 

John  O'Donnel,  after  pursuing  his  legal 
studies  with  H.  C.  Miner  at  De  Ruyter,  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  in  May,  1881.  He 
immediately  opened  an  office  in  Truxton, 
where  he  has  since  remained.  He  has  held 
the  office  of  town  clerk  several  terms,  and 
has  had  a  fair  share  of  the  legal  business  of 
his  vicinity. 

Willard  J.  Van  Auken  was  born  in  Al- 
bany county  in  1862,  and  attended  common 
schools  and  Union  Classical  Institute  at 
Schenectady  until  1881,  when  he  was  grad- 
uated at  the  latter.  He  studied  law  with 
Hon.  J.  H.  Clutes  at  Albany,  and  was  grad- 
ated at  the  Albany  Law  School  in  1883. 
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Binghamton 
in  May,  1 883,  and  in  the  fall  of  that  year 
began  the  practice  of  the  law  at  McGraw- 
ville, where  he  now  resides. 

Jerome  Squires  was  born  in  Lapeer, 
March  10,  1845.  He  was  a  student  at  the 
Marathon  Academy,  and  studied  law  with 
Judge  Smith  and  with  John  Courtney,  jr., 
until  1 880,  when  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar. 
He  has  since  resided  and  practiced  law  in 
Cortland. 

Arthur  L.  Knight  is  a  nativ'e  of  Scott,  and 
was  born  in  1S52.  He  was  graduated  at  the 
Homer  Academy  in  1871  and  at  S>'racuse 
University  in  1878.  He  studied  law  with 
Uuell  &  Benedict  until  1882,  when  he  was 
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  is  now  engaged  in 
the  pratice  of  law  at  Canastota. 

Eliot  F.  Stone  was  born  in  Homer,  April 
1st,  1857,  and  was  graduated  at  the  academy 
at  that  village  in  1877.  He  studied  law  with 
Waters  &  Knox,  and  was  admitted  to  the 
bar  in  1882.  He  is  now  one  of  the  justices 
of  the  peace  in  Homer. 

Rufas  T.  Peck,  was  born  December  24th, 
1836.     His  father,  Lyman  Peck,  was  a  res- 


The  Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  County. 


149 


ident  of  Solon,  in  which  town  his  grand- 
father, Stephen  N.  Peck,  was  one  of  its  first 
settlers  in  1805.  His  paternal  ancestors 
were  of  English  stock,  and  the  progenitor 
of  the  family  in  this  country,  Deacon  Wil- 
liam Peck,  was  one  of  the  charter  members 
of  the  New  Haven  Colony  in  1638.  His 
mother,  Almira  Thompson,  daughter  of 
Zenas  Thompson,  is  of  Scotch  descent,  and 
her  ancestors  were  among  the  early  families 
of  New  England.  His  early  education  was 
obtained  in  the  common  school  and  at  New 
York  Central  College,  and  for  fourteen  years 
he  was  a  successful  teacher,  followed  by 
three  years  as  a  merchant  in  his  native  town. 
In  the  fall  of  1874  he  was  elected,  on  the 
Republican  ticket,  school  commissioner  of 
the  northern  district  of  Cortland  county,  by 
re-election  served  two  terms,  and  received 
the  nomination  for  a  third  term,  which  he 
declined.  He  read  law  with  Hon.  R.  Hol- 
land Duell,  of  Cortland,  and  was  admitted 
to  the  bar  at  the  January  term  of  the  Su- 
preme Court  held  at  Albanj'  in  1876,  but 
has  only  practiced  law  in  connection  with 
his  private  business  affairs.  In  P"ebruary, 
1876,  he  became  identified  with  the  publish- 
ing house  of  Maj.  L.  H.  Evarts,  of  Phila- 
delphia, and  since  that  date,  the  firm  of 
Evarts  &  Peck  have  published  the  history 
of  many  of  the  largest  cities  and  counties  in 
the  United  States.  Their  published  works 
are  popular  and  will  go  down  to  future 
generations  as  the  authentic  record  of  these 
localities. 

Henry  L.  Gleason  studied  law  with 
Holmes  &  Palmer  at  Cortland,  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  in  1872.  Soon  after  he 
entered  into  partnership  with  Mr.  Palmer, 
and  so  remained  for  some  time.  For  the 
last  few  years  he  has  not  been  in  active 
practice,  but  is  now  secretary  of  the  Hitch- 
cock Manufacturing  Company. 

E.  D.  Crosley  was  admitted  to  the  bar 
in    1879,    having   studied    law    with   Judge 


Duell  at  Cortland.  He  is  now  located  in 
Scott. 

Gage  E.  Tarbell  was  born  in  Chenango 
county,  in  1856.  He  was  educated  in  the 
Clinton  Liberal  Institute  at  Clinton,  N.  Y. 
He  began  the  study  of  law  in  the  office  of 
E.  J.  Arnold  in  Greene  in  1877,  and  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  three  years  later.  He 
moved  to  Marathon  the  same  year,  where 
he  is  still  engaged  in  the  practice  of  law. 

One  of  the  most  enterprising  of  the 
younger  firms  of  the  county  is  that  of  J.  & 
T.  E.  Courtney.  The  senior  member  stud- 
ied law  in  Marathon,  in  the  office  of  \Vm. 
J.  Mantan\-e,  and  began  practice  there,  but 
soon  removed  to  Cortland  where  he  has  been 
located  some  six  or  seven  years.  His  brother, 
Thomas  E.  Courtney,  studied  in  Cazenovia 
Seminary,  and  pursued  his  legal  work  in  the 
law  department  of  Hamilton  College.  He 
began  practice  in  Cortland,  and  in  i88i  en- 
tered into  partnership  with  his  brother.  The 
firm  has  been  verj'  energetic  and  successful, 
and  is  now  doing  a  large  business. 

John  E.  Winslow  is  a  native  of  Virgil. 
He  studied  law  at  home  and  in  the  ofl^ce  of 
Hon.  O.  U.  Kellogg  at  Cortland.  After  his 
admission  to  the  bar  he  was  elected  justice 
of  the  peace  of  the  town  of  Virgil,  although 
he  still  keeps  his  office  in  Cortland  with  Mr. 
Kellogg,  where  he  has  a  very  successful 
practice. 

Another  of  the  younger  members  of  the 
bar  is  Fred  Hatch,  the  present  clerk  of 
the  village  of  Cortland.  Mr.  Hatch  studied 
law  in  the  oflice  of  Judge  Shankland,  after 
which  he  opened  an  office  in  Cortland,  where 
he  still  remains.  His  practice  is  flattering 
to  his  efforts,  and  his  success  is  assured. 

M.  Stanley  Bierce,  one  of  the  justices  of 
the  peace  of  the  town  of  Cortlandville,  is 
also  a  member  of  the  bar,  although  he  has 
not  devoted  his  attention  to  the  practice  of 
the  law. 

Benton  B.  Jones  and  Hon.  \Vm.  II.  Clark, 


ISO 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


editors  of  two  of  the  village  papers,  are  also 
members  of  the  bar,  but  have  not  followed 
their  profession. 

James  Dougherty,  for  several  years  super- 
visor from  Solon,  has  recently  removed  to 
Cortland,  and  opened  a  law  office  with  I.  II. 
Palmer.  Mr.  Dougherty  has  all  of  the  qual- 
ifications of  a  good  lawyer. 

The  youngest  member  of  the  present 
Cortland  bar  is  D.  E.  Smith.  Mr.  Smith 
was  born  in  Cortland  in  i860,  and  completed 
his  collegiate  studies  at  Syracuse  University. 
He  studied  law  with  his  father,  Hon.  A.  P. 
Smith,  and  is  now  in  partnership  with  him. 
Mr.  Smith  is  the  compiler  and  author  of 
the  first  part  of  this  article,  down  to  the  his- 
tory of  the  living  members  of  the  bar. 

FIR.ST  JUDGES  OF  THE  COURT  OF   COMMON    PLEAS 
AND   JUDGES   OF   THE    COUNTY    COURT. 

Name.  Date  of  Election  or  Appointment. 

John  Keep 18 10 

William  Mallory .  -  1823 

Joseph  Reynolds 1833 

Henry  Stephens x  838 

Daniel   Hawks 1847 

Lewis  Kingsley 185 1 

R.   Holland   Duell 1855 

Stephen   Brewer _ 1^59 

Hiram  Crandall 1859 

Ahram  P.  Smith 1867 

Stratton  S.  Kno.x 1883 


SURROGATES. 
Name.  Dale  of  Election  or  Appointment. 

John  McWhorter 1808 

Mead    Merrill : 1810 

Lutlier  F.  Stephens 1811 

John   McWhorter 1815 

.\(lin  Webb 1816 

Jabez  B.  Phelps  _  _ 1823 

Charles  W.  Lynde._ 1828 

Townsend  Ross _ .  1832 

.Anthony  Freer _  1 836 

Adin  Webb 1 840 

Anthony  Freer 1 844 

County  jfi/i/i^e  since  1847, 

DISTRICT    ATTORNEYS. 

[Since   18 19.) 

Augustus  A.  Donnelly .  1819 

F.hvard  C.  Reed 1827 

William   H.  Shankland 1836 

Horatio  Ballard 1842 

.\ugustus  S.  Ballard 1847 

R.   Holland   Duell 1850 

Edward  C.  Reed 1856 

.\bram  P.  Smith 1856 

George  B.  Jones 1859 

A.  D.  Waters _ 1865 

Riley  Champlin 1870 

Lewis  Bouton 1870 

B.  T.  Wright -.- 1873 

B.  A.  Benedict 1876 

L   H.   Palmer 1882 


CHAPTER  XVL 


THE  CORTL.Wn  COUNTY  MEDIC.-\L  SOCIETY. i 


THE  Cortland  County  Medical  Society 
was  organized  in  1808  in  accordance 
with  a  law,  enacted  by  the  Legislature  in 
1806,  incorporating  the  New  York  State 
Medical  Society,  and  which  law  also  re- 
quired medical  societies  to  be  formed  in 
every  county  of  the  State.  This  enactment 
was  approved  by  Gov.  Morgan  Lewis,  April 
4th,  1806. 


Cortland  county  was  organized  in  the 
spring  of  1808,  having  until  that  time  con- 
stituted a  part  of  Onondaga.  As  soon 
after  the  organization  of  the  county  as 
practicable,  namely,  on  the  lOth  day  of 
August,  1808,  the  following  gentlemen, 
legally  cpialified  to  practice  medicine  and 
surgery,  convened  at  the  house  of  Captain 

1  Prepared  by  Dr.  Caleb  Green,  of  Homer. 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


151 


Enos  Stimson  (now  "The  Windsor")  in 
Homer  village  :  Drs.  Lewis  S.  Owen,  Luther 
Rice,  John  Miller,  l-Llijah  G.  Wheeler,  Rob- 
ert D.  Taggart,  Ezra  I'annel,  Allen  Barney 
and  Jesse  Searl. 

These  pioneers  in  the  nictlical  profession 
of  the  count)-  then  and  there  formed  a 
medical  association  under  the  name  of  the 
"  Cortland  County  Medical  Society,"  which 
has  continued  in  active  operation  since  that 
date  to  the  present  time. 

The  organization  was  effected  b}-  the 
election  of  the  following  members  as  officers 
of  the  societ\' :  Dr.  Lewis  S.  Owen,  presi- 
den  ;  Dr.  John  Miller,  \ice-president  ;  Dr. 
Jesse  Searl,  secretary  ;  Dr.  Robert  D.  Tag- 
gart, treasurer. 

Drs.  Miller,  Barney  and  Taggart  were 
appointed  a  committee  to  draft  a  code  of 
by-laws  for  the  government  and  regulation 
of  the  society. 

At  the  time  of  the  semi-centennial  anni- 
versary of  the  society,  August  lOth,  1858, 
the  honored  and  venerable  Dr.  John  Miller, 
of  Truxton  —  then  our  president  —  was  the 
only  one  of  the  founders  of  the  society  still 
living  in  the  county. 

So  far  as  the  records  show,  the  societ}- 
was  not  represented  in  the  State  Medical  So- 
ciety until  1 8 14,  when  Dr.  John  Miller  was 
sent  as  delegate. 

The  opportunities  for  a  thorough  medical 
education  at  the  time  of  the  formation  of 
this  society  were  limited,  and  only  those  of 
wealth  or  who  resided  in  convenient  prox- 
imity to  the  few  medical  colleges  then  exist- 
ing in  the  country  could  have  the  advantage 
of  systematic  instruction.  Not  one  of  the 
founders  of  the  society  had  graduated  in 
medicine.  Dr.  Miller,  while  a  private  pupil 
of  Dr.  Rush,  in  Philadelphia,  had  attended 
the  lectures  of  Rush  and  Shippen,  two  of  the 
founders  of  the  medical  department  of  the 
University  of  Pennsylvania,  but  did  not 
complete  his  university  course,      l^ut  these 


men  had  been  sufficiently  instructed  to  know 
the  value  of  education,  and  most  of  them 
sought  to  supplement  it  by  the  diligent  study 
of  such  works  as  were  then  to  be  had.  As 
early  as  18 14  or  181 5  measures  were  taken 
to  found  a  library  for  the  use  of  the  society, 
and  Drs.  Owen  and  Miller  were  appointed  a 
committee  to  select  such  books  as  they  had 
the  means  of  purchasing.  PVom  time  to  time 
most  of  the  surplus  funds  in  the  treasury 
were  expended  in  the  purchase  of  books, 
until  a  choice  library  of  standard  books  and 
periodicals  accumulated  to  the  amount  of 
about  200  volumes.  After  1845  this  co-op- 
erative plan  of  keeping  up  a  central  library, 
by  additions  to  it,  was  discontinued,  and 
each  member  urged  and  encouraged  to  sup- 
ply himself  with  and  study  the  latest  and 
best  works  and  periodicals,  and  thus  to  keep 
abreast  of  the  advances  in  medical  knowl- 
edge. 

From  the  early  records  of  the  Onondaga 
County  Medical  Society  we  learn  that  the 
first  meeting  of  that  society  was  held  July 
1st,  1806,  three  months  after  the  passage  of 
the  act  establishing  the  State  Society.  At 
that  meeting  Dr.  Jesse  Searl,  of  Homer,  be- 
came a  member  of  the  society.  At  the  next 
meeting  of  the  society,  held  October  7th, 
1806,  among  the  persons  proposed  for  mem- 
bership were  Dr.  Robert  D.  Taggart,  of 
Preble,  and  Dr.  John  Miller,  of  Truxton. 
These  three  gentlemen  were  among  the  or- 
ganic members  of  the  Cortland  County  So- 
ciety, and  afterwards  so  prominent  in  its  his- 
tory, and  were  the  only  Cortland  county 
physicians,  so  far  as  the  records  show,  who 
were  also  members  of  the  original  Onon- 
daga Society. 

The  following  gentlemen  were  the  organic 
members  of  the  Onondaga  County  Medical 
Society :  Drs.  William  Adams,  Deodatus 
Clark,  John  W.  Frisbie,  Gordon  Needham, 
Smith  Weed,  Jesse  Searl,  James  Jackson, 
Daniel    Tibbals,    Isaac     Benedict,    Salmon 


152 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Thayer  and  Walter  Colton.  At  the  next 
meetinfj  of  the  Society  in  October,  1806,  the 
following  were  proposed  for  membership, 
viz.  :  l^rs.  Jesse  Munger,  Robert  D.  Tag- 
gart,  John  C.  Merwin,  Silas  Park,  David 
Holbrook,  John  Miller,  Calvin  Wright, 
George  Eagur,  Joseph  l^^ly,  Samuel  Porter, 
Bildad  Beach  and  Samuel  Furniss. 

At  the  organization  of  the  Onondaga  So- 
ciety, Dr.  F"risbie  was  elected  president,  Dr. 
Needham  vice-president.  Dr.  Tibbals  treas- 
urer and  Dr.  Walter  Colton  secretary. 

We  shall  give  brief  sketches  of  the  pio- 
neers of  tliis  society,  as  well  as  of  some  of  its 
more  active  members  during  the  first  half 
century  of  its  existence.' 

Dr.  Lewis  S.  Owen,  the  first  president  of 
the  society,  was  born  in  the  town  of  New 
Lebanon,  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1772. 
His  earl)-  education  was  obtained  in  the 
common  schools  of  his  native  town.  For 
a  short  time  he  attended  the  academic 
department  of  Williams  College,  prepar- 
atory to  commencing  the  study  of  med- 
icine, which  was  in  1795  or  '96,  with  Dr. 
Stringer,  of  Albany,  then  a  very  prominent 
practitioner  of  that  city.  He  concluded  his 
medical  pupilage  with  Dr.  McClellan,  also 
of  Albany,  and  was  licensed  by  the  courts 
of  Albany  county  in  1798,  and  came  to  the 
town  of  Homer  in  1799,  in  which  town  he 
continued  to  li\etill  his  death  in  1849,  lack- 
ing but  one  month  of  fifty  years'  residence 
there.  It  is  believed  that  Dr.  Owen  was  the 
first  physician  who  permanently  located  in 
what  is  now  the  county  of  Cortland.  The 
country  was  new,  the  roads  were  bad,  and 
often  mere  cattle  paths  through  the  woods. 
This  state  of  affairs  rendered  his  labors  severe 
and  fatiguing,  but  he  pursued  the  practice 
of  his  profession  steadily  for  nearly  twenty- 
five  years.  He  was  said  to  have  been  a  man 
of  discriminating  judgment  and  was  reputed 
a  sound  and  successful  practitioner. 

Dr.  Owen  was  one  of  the  original  found- 


ers of  the  society  in  1808,  was  elected  its 
first  president  and  held  that  office  by  an- 
nual election  till  1820. 

Dr.  Owen  was  one  of  the  founders  of 
Cortland  Academy,  in  18 18,  and  one  of  its 
trustees  during  the  remainder  of  his  life, 
and  was  for  several  years  president  of  the 
board  of  trustees.  The  last  twenty  or  more 
years  of  his  life  were  mainly  devoted  to 
agricultural  pursuits. 

Dr.  Jesse  Searl,  one  of  the  best  known 
and  most  influential  for  good  in  e\'er\-  word 
and  work,  was  a  native  of  Southampton, 
Mass.  He  was  born  in  i  767,  educated  in 
the  common  schools  of  his  native  town,  and 
pursued  his  medical  studies  with  Dr.  Wood- 
bridge,  of  Southampton.  He  commenced 
practice  in  the  \-icinit)-  of  his  native  town, 
but  came  to  this  State  not  far  from  i8oo, 
fixing  his  first  residence  in  Fabius,  Onon- 
daga count}'.  He  came  to  Homer  in  1803 
or  '04  and  diligently  pursued  the  practice 
of  his  profession  until  the  year  1812,  when 
he  purchased  and  assumed  the  editorship 
of  the  Cortland  Repository,  at  that  time  the 
only  newspaper  published  in  the  county. 
From  that  time  he  attended  but  little  to 
professional  calls  —  at  least,  devoted  him- 
self mainly  to  editorial  work,  printing  and 
publishing.  Being  a  frail  man  physically, 
he  could  not  endure  the  hardships  incident 
to  a  physician's  life  in  a  new  country,  and 
hence  his  motive  for  renouncing  medical 
practice  for  a  less  laborious  occupation.  It 
is  related  that  while  he  devoted  himself  to 
medical  service  he  was  faithful  to  the  trusts 
imposed  upon  him,  and  by  his  s}'mpathy 
with  the  sick  and  kindness  of  heart  won  the 
confidence  and  esteem  of  his  employers. 
Dr.  Searl's  education,  general  and  profes- 
sional, was  somewhat  in  advance  of  most  of 
his  cotemporaries,  and  he  continued  to  im- 
prove it  b}-  diligent  study  and  observation. 
He  had  the  best  private  medical  library  in 
the    county.      He    was   a   subscriber   and 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


153 


reader  of  the  only  medical  periodical  then 
published  in  this  country  —  the  Medical 
Repository,  published  in  New  York.  He 
was  a  regular  attendant  upon  all  the  meet- 
ings of  the  County  Society  —  was  its  first 
secretary,  and  held  that  position  by  annual 
election  until  the  year  1820. 

He  was  eminently  a  religious  man  and 
a  worthy  member  of  the  Congregational 
Church  from  1806  to  the  time  of  his  death 
in  1834,  at  the  age  of  sixty-eight  years. 
"  In  all  of  the  affairs  of  life,  as  a  man,  a 
Christian,  a  conductor  of  a  public  news- 
paper, and  as  a  physician.  Dr.  Sear!  was 
consistent  and  faithful  in  their  varied  duties, 
and  the  poor  always  found  in  him  a  friend 
in  time  of  need." 

Dr.  Robert  D.  Taggart  was  the  son  of 
the  Rev.  Samuel  Taggart,  of  Colerain, 
Mass.,  and  a  twin  brother  of  Dr.  Samuel 
Taggart,  jr.,  formerly  of  Byron,  Genesee 
county,  N.  Y.,  and  also  a  brother  of  the 
Hon.  Moses  Taggart,  formerly  one  of  the 
judges  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  this  State. 
Dr.  Taggart  was  born,  reared  and  obtained 
his  general  and  medical  education  in  Cole- 
rain.  He  came  to  this  State  in  1804.  He 
first  resided  for  a  short  time  in  Pompey, 
Onondaga  county.  He  came  to  Preble  in 
1 805  and  for  a  few  months  was  a  teacher  of 
common  schools,  but  was  solicited  by  some 
of  the  people  to  establish  himself  as  a  phy- 
sician, which  he  soon  did.  He  was  the  first 
physician  who  settled  in  that  town,  if  we 
except  Doctor,  afterwards  Judge,  Jabez  B. 
Phelps,  who,  on  account  of  some  physical 
disability,  never  entered  into  general  prac- 
tice. His  medical  education  was  rather  im- 
perfect, even  for  that  day,  but  he  was  a  man 
of  good  sense,  not  rash,  and  acquired  the 
confidence  of  the  people  and  was  popular 
as  an  accoucheur.  He  was  a  man  of  "  good 
humor,"  having  a  good  fund  of  anecdote 
and  quick  at  repartee.  In  183  i  he  removed 
to  Byron,  Genesee  county,  and  entered  into 


partnership  with  his  brother.      He  died   in 

1843- 

Dr.  Ezra  Pannel  was  also  a  native  of 
Colerain,  Mass.,  and  was  a  part  of  the  time 
of  his  pupilage  a  fellow-student  with  Dr. 
Taggart  in  the  office  of  Dr.  Ross  of  his  na- 
tive town.  Little  is  known  of  his  early 
history.  He  came  into  this  county  and 
settled  in  the  town  of  Truxton  in  1807, 
where  he  combined  farming  with  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession  until  about  1822,  when 
he  removed  to  Monroe  county. 

Dr.  Elijah  G.  Wheeler  came  into  this 
county  from  New  Jersey  in  1804  or  '05 
and  settled  in  the  town  of  Solon.  He  was 
well  educated,  a  man  of  good  abilities,  and 
had  the  reputation  of  being  a  good  practi- 
tioner of  medicine,  "  but  unfortunately  was 
addicted  to  habits  of  intemperance,  which 
rendered  him  an  unsafe  person  to  take 
charge  of  the  sick.  That  very  much  in- 
jured his  business  and  usefulness."  He 
died  about  1825. 

Dr.  Luther  Rice  was  a  son  of  Deacon 
Rice,  one  of  the  pioneers  in  the  settlement 
of  this  county,  who  came  into  Homer  — 
now  Cortlandville  —  in  1796.  It  is  not 
known  where  this  son  was  educated,  but  he 
established  himself  in  practice  in  Homer 
about  the  year  1800.  He  was  one  of  the 
original  members  of  the  County  Society. 
He  removed  to  Alleghany  county,  but  the 
date  is  not  known. 

Dr.  Allen  Barney  settled  in  the  town  of 
Homer  in  1807.  After  a  few  years  he  re- 
moved to  Cortland.  He  was  a  man  of  pe- 
culiar characteristics  ;  obstinate  in  opinion, 
impatient  of  contradiction,  receiving  much 
credit  for  sense  and  ability  by  his  roughness 
and  crispness  of  speech.  He  removed  to 
the  State  of  Ohio  in  181 2,  and  died  there 
soon  afterwards. 

The  last,  but  by  no  means  the  least,  of 
the  original  founders  of  the  Cortland  Coun- 
ty  Medical   Society  to   be   noticed    is   Dr. 


154 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


John  Miller.  We  avail  ourselves  of  the 
highly  interesting  memorial  sketch  given  of 
him  by  the  late  Dr.  George  W.  Bradford, 
in  the  Transactions  of  the  Nczv  York  State 
Medical  Society  for  1862. 

Dr.  Miller  was  born  in  the  town  of 
Amenia,  Duchess  count}',  N.  Y.,  on  the 
lOth  of  November,  1774.  His  early  op- 
portunities for  education  were  very  limited, 
he  having  attended  a  common  school  but 
one  \-ear  and  a  classical  school  in  Connecti- 
cut for  about  the  same  length  of  time. 
With  these  meager  advantages  he  com- 
menced the  study  of  medicine  in  1793  with 
Dr.  Miller,  an  uncle  of  his,  in  his  native 
county.  After  little  more  than  a  year  he 
went  to  Easton,  Washington  county,  and 
entered  the  office  of  Dr.  Moshier.  While 
pursuing  his  studies  with  Dr.  Moshier  he 
received  a  severe  injury  by  being  thrown 
from  a  horse.  Owing  to  the  severity  of 
this  injur)'  he  was  obliged  to  suspend  his 
studies  for  more  than  two  years,  during 
which  time  he  was  at  his  home  in  Duchess 
county.  After  several  months  of  this  en- 
forced idleness  he  was  advised  by  Dr.  Baird, 
of  New  York,  to  seek  a  position  in  the  then 
small  navy  of  the  United  States.  With  this 
purpose  in  view,  but  much  against  the 
wishes  of  his  family,  he  went  to  New  York, 
where  he  was  presented,  by  Dr.  Baird  and 
others,  with  letters  of  recommendation  to 
Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  of  Philadelphia,  whith- 
er he  repaired  and  presented  his  credentials. 
At  that  time  young  Miller  was  in  bad 
health,  very  thin  in  bod\',  and  more  than 
si.x  feet  in  height.  The  venerable  signer 
of  the  Declaration,  not  a  little  amused  that 
so  ghostly  looking  a  young  man  should 
think  of  entering  the  navy,  said  to  him  : 
"Young  man,  you  look  much  better  fitted 
for  a  skeleton  in  my  office  than  for  a  post 
in  the  navy."  But  as  he  had  somewhat 
recovered  from  the  fatigue  of  his  journey. 
Dr.  Rush  went  with  him  to  visit  the  presi- 


dent of  the  United  States,  the  venerable 
John  Adams,  residing  in  Philadelphia,  then 
the  seat  of  the  general  government,  antl 
!  through  the  influence  of  Dr.  Rush  obtained 
the  place  he  sought.  He  was  directed  to 
report  himself  to  the  surgeon  of  the  United 
States  brig  Ncu'  York,  then  soon  to  sail  for 
Tripoli.  At  this  interview  with  President 
Adams,  Dr.  Rush  and  young  Miller  were 
invited  to  dine  with  the  president  the  next 
da}'.  The  in\itation  was  accepted,  and  at  the 
president's  table  they  met  General  Wash- 
ington, Fisher  Ames,  and  several  other 
distinguished  characters  of  that  day. 

On  farther  acquaintance  Dr.  Rush  ad- 
\ised  Miller  to  resign  his  post  in  the  navy, 
and  at  the  same  time  offered  him  a  place 
in  his  famil)'  and  a  position  in  his  office  as 
a  private  pupil.  This  most  advantageous 
offer  he  gladl\-  embraced,  and  remained 
with  him  nearly  two  years,  accompanying 
the  doctor  in  his  rides  into  the  country  and 
attending  his  lectures  in  the  Universit)'  of 
PennsN'lvania,  and  those  of  Dr.  Shippen. 
P'rom  Philadelphia  he  returned  to  Wash- 
ington county  in  1798,  and  entered  into  a 
partnership  with  his  former  instructor,  Dr. 
Moshier,  where  he  remained  until  1801. 
He  was  licensed  to  practice  medicine  and 
surger\'  by  the  Vermont  Medical  Society 
in  1800.  P^rom  Washington  county  he  re- 
moved, in  1801,  to  what  is  now  Tru.xton, 
Cortland  county,  and  established  liimself  in 
the  practice  of  his  profession,  which  he  pur- 
sued unremittingi}'  for  more  than  twenty- 
five  years,  and  occasionally  for  some  years 
longer. 

P"ew  men  had  the  capacity  for  physical 
endurance  and  unwearied  perseverance  like 
him.  The  countrj'  being  new,  the  roads 
were  always  bad,  and  sometimes  almost  im- 
passable, yet  he  performed  an  amount  of 
labor  almost  incredible,  frequent!)'  riding 
thirty,  forty,  and  even  more  than  fifty  miles 
a  day  —  at  all   times,   b)'  night  as  well  as 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Societv. 


155 


day,  in  storm  as  well  as  sunshine,  with  an 
energy  that  no  obstacle  could  resist.  Many 
are  the  anecdotes  related  of  his  adventures 
in  the  forests  and  by-paths  of  Truxton, 
often  by  torch-light,  to  attend  on  some  fam- 
ily perchance  too  poor  to  pay  the  doctor 
for  his  services. 

As  a  practitioner  Dr.  Miller  possessed  in 
an  eminent  degree  the  confidence  of  his 
employers.  His  strong  mind  and  retentive 
memory  enabled  him  readily  to  seize  on  the 
phases  of  disease  and  to  recall  the  measures 
of  treatment  indicated,  and  his  promptitude 
and  readiness  in  the  administration  of  relief  ' 
to  the  sufferer  at  once  secured  the  confidence 
of  the  sick.  His  strict  attendance  to  those 
entrusted  to  his  care,  as  well  as  his  kindness 
of  heart,  which  led  him  to  sympathize  deep- 
ly in  all  their  sufferings,  all  convinced  those 
who  employed  him  that  his  whole  energies 
were  enlisted  in  their  welfare.  Amidst  all 
his  incessant  labors  he  found  time  to  culti- 
vate his  mind  b)'  reading  much  of  the  cur- 
rent medical  literature,  and  his  well  balanced 
mind  and  retentive  memory  enabled  him  to 
make  the  best  use  of  what  he  read. 

He  was  elected  an  honorary  member  of 
the  New  York  State  Medical  Society  in 
1808,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  the 
oldest  member  of  the  society  by  nine  years. 
At  the  semi-centennial  anniversary  of  the 
society  in  February,  1857,  Dr.  Miller 
was  present  by  special  invitation.  He 
entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  meeting  with 
all  the  ardor  of  his  nature,  and  many  of 
the  members  present,  who,  for  the  first  time, 
there  saw  him  will  long  remember  ''the  old 
man  eloquent"  and  their  pleasant  and 
profitable  acquaintance  with  their  venerable 
fellow-member.  Such  was  his  character  and 
standing  in  his  profession,  and  his  gentle- 
manly intercourse  with  each  member  of  the 
society,  that  all  loved  to  meet  him  and  to 
confer  honor  and  their  kindest  favors  upon 
one  so  much  esteemed  and  highly  venerated. 


Dr.  Miller,  while  yet  in  the  vigor  of  his 
days,  left  the  practice  of  his  profession  and 
turned  his  attention  to  agriculture.  Not- 
withstanding this,  he  still  manifested  an  in- 
terest in  his  profession,  always  greeting  its 
members  with  warm  cordiality.  He  pur- 
sued agriculture  with  the  same  character- 
istic earnestness,  both  on  the  farm  and  in 
the  agricultural  society,  that  he  had  ahva}-s 
shown  in  the  practice  of  medicine. 

The  intelligence  and  energy  with  which 
he  entered  into  all  the  affairs  of  state  was 
such  that  he  early  became  prominent  in 
public  life.  His  first  public  office  was  that 
of  coroner,  to  which  he  was  appointed  b}- 
Gov.  George  Clinton  in  1802.  He  was  ap- 
pointed postmaster  in  1805,  and  retained 
the  office  for  twenty  years.  He  received 
the  appointment  of  justice  of  the  peace  in 
181 2  and  discharged  its  duties  until  1821. 
He  was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  county 
courts  from  1817  to  1820.  He  was  elected 
as  a  Member  of  the  Assembly  from  this 
county  in  18 16,  and  re-elected  in  1820  and 
again  in  1846.  This  same  year  he  repre- 
sented his  county  in  the  convention  for  re- 
vising the  constitution  of  the  State.  In 
1826  and  1827  he  represented  the  Twenty- 
second  Congressional  District  in  the  Con- 
gress  of  the    United  States.      In   all  these 

o 

positions  of  public  trust  he  e\'inced  the 
same  energy  and  determined  will  and 
prompt  action  that  he  had  shown  in  his 
professional  career.  His  readiness  to  sacri- 
fice personal  interest  and  ease  to  the  public 
good,  and  his  experience  in  public  life  with 
the  honesty  of  purpose  manifested  in  his 
intercourse  with  his  associates  enabled  him 
to  exert  a  commanding  influence  over  any 
deliberative  body.  These,  with  his  usual 
energy,  his  eminent  personal  vivacity,  ren- 
dered him  a  welcome  guest  in  all  social 
gatherings. 

In  person  Dr.  Miller  was  tall   in   stature, 
and  even   in  his  last  years  still  retained  his 


iS6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


firm  step  and  erect  position  and  never  ex- 
hibited the  decrepid  old  man  in  appearance 
or  in  loss  of  intellect,  but  entered  into  con- 
versation with  all  the  energy  and  fire  of  his 
youthful  days. 

During  the  epidemic  pneumonia  which 
prevailed  in  1812-13  his  labors  were  her- 
culean and  very  successful. 

In  the  temperance  cause  he  spent  much 
time  and  large  sums  of  money  in  the  dif- 
fusion of  temperance  publications  among 
the  inhabitants  of  his  town,  holding  meet- 
ings in  the  se\'eral  school-houses,  and  urg- 
ing with  earnest  eloquence  the  adoption  of 
the  practice  of  total  abstinence.  He  was 
firm  in  the  belief  of  the  beneficial  effect  of 
a  wise  prohibitorj'  law  to  prevent  the  traffic 
in  into.xicating  liquors.  In  this  cause  Dr. 
Miller  took  an  early  and  active  part.  Dur- 
ing his  pupilage  he  once  saw  a  beautiful 
child  sacrificed  in  consequence  of  the  in- 
toxication of  the  physician  when  called  to 
its  relief  in  an  hour  of  suffering.  This 
made  a  deep  and  lasting  impression  on  his 
mind  and  led  him  at  the  very  beginning  of 
his  professional  career  to  firmly  resolve  to 
abstain  from  all  intoxicating  drinks.  In 
this  determination  he  persevered  to  the  end 
of  his  life.  He  was  long  an  officer  in  the 
New  York  State  Temperance  Society  and 
often  attended  its  meetings  at  Albany. 

At  an  early  day  the  doctor  gave  to  the 
Presbyterian  Church  and  society  two  valu- 
able lots  of  land  in  the  center  of  the  village 
for  a  church  and  parsonage,  and  also  one 
other  lot  as  a  site  for  a  public  school-house, 
besides  contributing  liberall)-  to  the  expense 
of  erecting  and  furnishing  these  public  build- 
ings. His  seat  in  church  was  always  occu- 
pied by  himself  or  family. 

In  the  support  of  the  varied  objects  of 
benevolence  of  the  age  and  of  the  institu- 
tions of  the  Gospel  in  his  own  vicinitj'  Dr. 
Miller  was  a  firm   friend  and  a  contributor. 

The  legend  of  his  romantic  courtship  and 


marriage  would  occupy  more  space  than  we 
have  to  give  to  it.  Suffice  it  to  say  that, 
before  coming  to  this  county  in  1801,  he 
had  formed  an  attachment  to  and  an  engage- 
ment with  a  young  lady  living  in  Troy,  N. 
Y.,  whom  he  expected  to  become  his  part- 
ner and  help-meet  through  the  journey  of 
life.  After  his  settlement  in  Tru.xton  the 
correspondence  was  for  some  months  kept 
up  constantly  and  matters  went  on  smoothly. 
After  some  time  letters  were  not  received 
by  either  party  as  formerly  and  at  last  ceased 
altogether.  They  each  came  to  the  conclu- 
sion reluctantly,  and  in  bewilderment,  that 
the  other  had  become  false  to  the  engage- 
ment promi.se.  At  last  the  doctor  received 
a  letter  from  a  friend  in  Troy,  saying  that 
the  young  lady  was  to  be  married  to  a  per- 
son there  in  a  few  days  from  the  date  of  his 
letter,  and,  knowing  that  John  Miller  could 
never  do  a  dishonorable  thing,  suspected 
something  wrong.  There  were  no  tele- 
graphs or  swift  mail  trains  in  those  days. 
The  letter  of  his  friend  was  received  only 
twenty- four  hours  before  the  expected  wed- 
ding. This  was  late  in  March  when  the 
winter  roads  were  breaking  up  and  were 
consequently  at  their  worst.  What  should 
be  done  ?  With  a  promptness  inspired  by 
desperation  he  instantly  resolved  to  retrieve 
what  he  supposed  had  been  lost.  He 
mounted  his  faithful  horse  Gcrshoiii,  who 
possessed  a  physical  endurance  and  deter- 
mined energy  equal  to  that  of  his  master 
and,  turning  his  head  toward  Troy,  one  hun- 
dred and  thirt}-  miles  distant,  started.  In 
less  than  twent)'-four  hours  the  journey 
must  be  accomplished  and  with  Gcrshom 
alone.  And  splendidly  did  the  noble  ani- 
mal accomplish  his  task,  reaching  the  west 
bank  of  the  Hudson  just  in  time'to  plunge 
aboard  the  last  boat  that  was  to  cross  that 
night,  and  was  in  a  few  minutes  standing, 
with  foaming  flanks  and  distended  nostrils, 
before  the  door  of  his  future  mistress.     The 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


157 


wedding  guests  were  assembling  No  time 
was  to  be  lost.  He  knocked  at  the  door. 
The  father  of  the  girl  opened  it.  There 
stood  the  young  doctor  bespattered  with 
mud  and  riding-stick  in  hand.  No  time 
for  apologies.  "Is  Phebe  at  home  ?"  "Yes." 
"Can  I  see  her?"  "Walk  in;  I  will  in- 
form her  that  you  are  here."  In  a  few 
minutes  Phebe  made  her  appearance,  ex- 
planations followed  and  a  speedy  reconcilia- 
tion was  the  result.  Their  letters  had  been 
intercepted  by  the  rascally  fellow  who  went 
home  that  night  wifeless. 

They  were  married  in  1805  and  a  happy 
union  it  proved  to  be.  Mrs.  Miller  was  a 
lady  of  rare  accomplishments,  of  ardent  piety 
and  in  all  respects  a  fit  companion  for  her 
worth)-  husband.  They  had  eight  children 
—  five  sons  and  three  daughters.  Mrs. 
Miller  died  in  1834,  much  lamented,  aged 
59  years. 

Dr.  Miller  retained  his  wonted  faculties 
almost  to  the  last  hour  of  his  long  life  ; 
was  perfectly  sensible  of  the  steady  and 
sure  approach  of  death,  yet  with  calmness 
and  systematic  carefulness  made  every  prep- 
paration  for  the  end. 

Thus  he  actively  and  usefully  lived,  thus 
he  quietly  and  calmly  died  on  the  30th  day 
of  March,  1862,  leaving  abundant  evidence 
of  his  preparation  for  an  entrance,  through 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  and  Savior,  into  the 
rest  prepared  for  the  just. 

A  large  concourse  of  his  friends  and  fel- 
low-citizens attended  his  funeral  and  among 
them  a  large  number  of  the  members  of  the 
County  Medical  Society.  An  impressive 
sermon  was  delivered  by  the  Rev.  Caleb 
Clark,  who  for  more  than  forty  years  had 
been  the  confidential  friend  and  the  spiritual 
adviser  of  himself  and  family.  The  Medical 
Society,  through  their  committee  consisting 
of  Drs.  F.  Hyde,  G.  \V.  Bradford  and  C. 
Green,  presented  memorial  resolutions  ex- 
pressive of  love,  veneration  and  esteem  for 


their  deceased  brother  and  sympathy  for  his 
family  and  friends. 

We  iiave  devoted  perhaps  too  much  of 
our  limited  space  to  the  biographical  sketches 
of  the  pioneers  —  the  founders  of  the  soci- 
ety—  but  the  extended  notice  of  Dr.  ]\Iiller 
seemed  to  be  demanded  by  his  place  in  the 
history  of  the  society  and  that  of  the  county 
and  State.  The  history  of  the  county  re- 
quired more  than  a  passing  notice  of  his 
worth  and  deeds. 

But  there  have  been  other  worthies  in  the 
first  half  century  of  the  society's  history 
who  were  so  much  identified  with  its  interest 
and  progress,  as  well  as  that  of  the  county 
and  State  that,  at  least,  a  brief  notice  of  them 
should  be  recorded. 

Dr.  Levi  Boies,  of  Cortland  village,  was 
the  first  licentiate  of  the  society,  becoming 
a  member  in  18 12,  and  was  long  a  respect- 
able practitioner  and  valuable  citizen. 

Dr.  John  Lynde  was  the  first  member  of 
the  society  who  ever  attended  a  full  course 
of  lectures  in  a  chartered  medical  college, 
he  having  attended  the  course  in  the  College 
of  Physicians  and  Surgeons,  New  York,  in 
1 812.  He  was  a  prominent  practitioner  in 
Homer  for  many  years,  when  he  removed  to 
Ogden,  Monroe  county,  where  he  died  some 
years  ago. 

Dr.  Miles  Goodjear,  of  Cortland,  was  the 
first  member  of  the  society  who  ever  re- 
ceived the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine, 
and  which  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale 
College  in  18 16. 

Dr.  Goodj'ear  was  born  at  Hamden,  New 
Haven  county,  Conn.,  November  14th,  1793 
—  Thanksgiving  Day.  His  father  died 
when  he  was  four  years  of  age.  His  mother 
lived  to  the  ripe  age  of  eighty-six  years. 
At  about  the  age  of  fifteen  he  entered  a 
mercantile  establishment,  thinking  that 
trade  might  be  his  vocation,  but  soon  per- 
ceived that  "it  would  not  do,  as  he  was 
I  likely  to  give  away  all  the  goods  and  so  con- 


1S8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


eluded  to  get  a  profession."  As  prepara- 
tory to  professional  study  he  took  lessons 
in  Latin  and  chemistry  under  the  tutelage 
of  the  Re\-.  l^Iiphalet  Coleman.  As  his 
guardian  refused  to  furnish  him  the  means 
of  education,  he  had  to  borrow  money  in 
order  to  complete  his  studies.  It  was  early 
in  the  war  of  1812-14  that  he  matriculated 
in  the  medical  department  of  Yale  College. 
A  brother  who  had  a  family  was  drafted  to 
serve  in  the  war,  but  Miles  took  his  place, 
serving  at  New  London  a  few  weeks  until 
the  college  term  opened,  when  he  was  re- 
leased, as  students  were  exempt  by  law.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  first  class  that  gradu- 
ated in  the  medical  department  of  the  col- 
lege. After  his  graduation  he  made  a  jour- 
ney to  Niagara  Falls  on  horseback,  accom- 
panied by  his  friend  and  class-mate,  Dr. 
Smith.  Rochester  at  that  time  had  but  few 
houses  and  l^uffalo  was  a  mass  of  blackened 
ruins,  having  been  burned  b\-  the  British 
during  the  then  recent  war.  This  journey 
was  full  of  interest  to  the  ardent  young  bot- 
anists soon  to  enter  on  medical  practice.  He 
practiced  a  few  months  in  Genoa,  N.  Y.,  and 
then  came  to  Cordand,  but  finding  the  field, 
as  he  thought,  fully  occupied,  removed  to 
Danby,  Tompkins  count)-,  where  he  re- 
mained a  year,  and  was  then  induced  to  re- 
turn to  Cortland,  which  ever  afterwards  was 
his  permanent  residence.  In  18 18  he  joined 
the  County  Medical  Society,  and  soon  be- 
came one  of  its  most  active  and  reliable 
members — always  attending  its  stated  meet- 
ings when  not  absent  from  town  or  other- 
wise inevitably  detained.  "He  loved  his 
profession  and  pursued  it  as  such  and  not  as 
a  trade.  He  respected  the  claims  of  his  call- 
ing and  was  keenly  sensitive  to  its  honor, 
and  observed  its  ethical  usages  in  letter  and 
spirit.  He  sought  in  his  professional  inter- 
course first  to  confer  the  greatest  good  on 
the  patient ;  next,  to  observe  the  kindliest  and 
most  sacred  regard  for  the  good  navie  of  the 


attending  physician."  He  was  eminently 
the  friend  of  young  medical  men  and 
always  ready  to  give  them  encouraging 
words  and  to  overlook  their  mistakes  and 
deficiencies. 

He  was  president  of  the  society  in  1824 
and  1 83 1,  and  from  1834  to  1840  inclusive, 
and  again  in  i  847.  The  society  commemo- 
rated the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  his  member- 
ship by  reading  a  poem  written  by  Miss  E. 
Hathawa)-  and  dedicated  to  him,  entitled  the 
"  Good  Physician." 

Such  was  the  pre-eminent  confidence  of 
his  fellow-citizens  in  his  courage,  skill  and 
judgment  that,  on  the  outbreak  of  the  first 
epidemic  of  Asiatic  cholera  in  1832,  they 
sent  him  to  Albany  and  New  York  to  in- 
vestigate the  nature,  prophylaxis  and  treat- 
ment of  the  dread  disease.  Many  years  after- 
ward, being  in  New  Haven  during  the  very 
fatal  epidemic  of  j-ellow  fever  in  Norfolk, 
Va.,  he  offered  himself  to  the  common  coun- 
cil to  be  sent  professionally  to  the  help  of 
the  stricken  city,  "but  word  being  received 
of  the  abatement  of  the  pestilence,  he  was 
allowed  to  come  home  to  other  self-denials." 
In  1 85 1  he  represented  the  Medical  Asso- 
ciation of  Southern  Central  New  York  in  the 
American  Medical  Association  at  Charles- 
ton, S.  C.  In  his  various  journeyings  dur- 
ing his  professional  vacations,  which  he  took 
for  the  benefit  of  invalid  members  of  his 
famil)-,  he  visited  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  Louis- 
ville and  New  Orleans,  alwa\-s  making  pleas- 
ant and  profitable  acquaintances  among  the 
distinguished  members  of  the  profession  in 
those  places. 

During  the  war  of  the  rebellion  he  visited 
the  hospitals  of  Washington,  intending  to 
stay  as  long  as  his  funds  should  hold  out. 
Here  his  cheerful  service  among  "our  boys" 
proved  a  great  blessing,  and  when  his  purse 
became  exhausted,  instead  of  coming  home, 
he  enlisted  as  an  assistant  surgeon  in  a  reg- 
iment, and  was  sent  to  the  front  at  Freder- 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Sociktv. 


159 


icksburg,  where  for  some  time  he  did  the 
duties  of  regimental  surgeon.  But  the 
fatigue  and  wearing  nature  of  his  labors 
were  too  much  for  a  system  already  begin- 
ning to  feel  the  infirmities  of  age,  and  he 
was  allowed  to  return,  but  on  the  way  en- 
countered perils  near!)'  as  great  as  those  in 
active  service  in  the  enemy's  front,  having 
been  left  at  a  poor  Virginia  cabin,  sick  with 
fever,  and  with  a  family  so  poor  that  the 
cow  and  pig  shared  the  hut  with  the  bipeds 
of  the  place,  and  the  dietary  consisting  of 
corn  meal  alone.  But  he  survived  these 
perils,  and,  after  resting  awhile,  returned  to 
his  home  quite  fresh  and  well. 

He  occasionally  visited  New  Haven, 
Conn.,  and  the  scenes  of  his  childhood  and 
youth,  in  his  native  town  and  county,  nearly 
alwa)-s  taking  some  member  of  his  family 
with  him.  During  one  of  these  sojourns  at 
this  place  occurred  the  opening  of  the  new 
Medical  College.  On  this  occasion  he  met 
on  the  platform  three  of  the  professors  to 
whose  lectures  he  listened  about  forty  years 
before,  and  he  was  the  onl\-  matriculant  of 
the  first  class  present. 

Like  many  other  medical  men  of  his 
early  day,  the  principal  branch  of  natural 
history  specially  cultivated  b)-  him  was 
botany.  In  this  Dr.  Goodyear  was  an  ex- 
pert. He  taught  it  to  his  children  and  his 
students,  who,  under  the  inspiration  im- 
parted to  them  by  their  teacher,  became 
enthusiastic  in  its  pursuit.  And  this  en- 
thusiasm was  not  limited  to  his  home  and 
office,  for  many  a  one,  in  his  extensive  inter- 
course with  the  people,  was  influenced  by 
it  to  pursue  this  fascinating  department  of 
inquiry.  Much  of  the  tcdiousness  and  even 
fatigue  of  his  long  rides  over  the  hills, 
through  the  forests,  by  the  swamps  and 
river  borders  was  relieved  by  the  delight 
yielded  on  every  hand  by  the  sight  of  some 
new  or  rare,  or  even  familiar  flower  or  plant, 
and  those  at  home  were  rarely  disappointed, 


on  his  return,  in  the  receipt  of  a  rich  botan- 
ical contribution.  His  neighbors  were  often 
surprised  in  looking  over  his  flower  borders 
to  find  some  new  beauties  that  their  un- 
trained eyes  had  never  seen  before,  and 
could  have  been  easily  persuaded  that  they 
were  rare  and  expensive  exotics.  But  when 
told  that  they  grew  in  abundance  in  the 
neighboring  woods,  or  yonder  swamp,  or 
by  Otter  creek,  or  on  the  banks  of  the 
Tioughnioga,  their  surprise  was  not  dimin- 
ished. 

His  botanical  studies  kept  him  ever 
young,  as  an  intelligent  pursuit  of  any 
branch  of  natural  history  will  do  to  its  ar- 
dent votary.  It  is  rest  and  vacation  to  the 
weary  doctor,  and  nianj-fold  enhances  the 
pleasure  of  his  periods  of  vacation  travel 
when  they  are  taken.  F.very  where,  in 
every  plant,  shrub  or  tree,  under  every 
stone  or  old  log,  in  the  very  ooze  or  mud 
beds  of  pond  or  river  nature  reveals  herself 
in  an  endless  series  of  pleasure-giving  sur- 
prises, and  when  the  microscope  is  added 
to  the  means  of  observation  and  study,  the 
pleasure  of  the  student  is  almost  unlimited. 
Dr.  Goodyear  was  by  no  means  indifferent 
to  other  departments  of  natural  science 
than  botany,  but  regarded  every  revelation 
of  it  as  but  a  thought  of  the  Creator,  and, 
as  such,  worthy  of  interested  attention.  It 
is  said  that  he  was  much  interested  as  well 
as  proficient  in  chemistry  and  physics. 

Like  too  many  physicians,  especially  of 
his  time,  he  was  careless  in  the  collection  of 
his  dues  —  even  in  charging  for  his  services. 
Very  often  his  charges  were  wholly  inade- 
quate, and  in  the  matter  of  collection,  he 
allowed  his  patient  to  fix  the  amount  he 
would  pay,  and  thus  between  charging  and 
collection  his  income  was  small.  Besides 
this,  there  was  a  large  list  of  those  who 
never  paid  an)'  thing,  but  freely  and  unhes- 
itatingly called  on  him  for  service  and  sac- 
rifice.     "Keenly  se;isitive  to  a  kindness,  he 


i6o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


endeavored  to  repay  the  same  ;  as  sensitive 
to  neglect,  he  still  continued  to  feel  kindly 
toward  all.  Ever  unwilling  to  owe  any 
man  anything,  and  often  doing  without 
comforts  until  he  had  the  money  in  hand  to 
pay  for  them,  it  was  strange  to  him  that 
people  could  ask  for  his  services  for  a  gen- 
eration without  seeking  to  recompense  him 
for  the  same.  Yet  when  real  inability  ex- 
isted he  considered  it  a  privilege  to  minis- 
ter, and  that  not  grudgingly."  He  once 
told  the  writer  that  one  of  the  greatest  sins 
for  which  he  had  to  repent  was  not  that  he 
had  given  the  poor  so  little,  but  the  rich  so 
viiich, —  alluding  to  the  easy  manner  in 
which  he  had  often  allowed  a  long  account, 
severely  earned,  to  be  balanced  by  those 
able  to  pay  in  full  the  customary  and  legit- 
imate fees. 

Dr.  Goodyear's  interest  in  his  old  class- 
mates was  manifested  hy  his  correspondence 
—  his  and  their  letters  passing  from  one  to 
another  in  the  manner  of  circulars.  One 
of  his  classmates  was  Professor  Jared  Kirt- 
land,  of  Cleveland,  the  distinguished  natur- 
alist of  Ohio,  with  whom  he  kept  up  a  very 
pleasant  correspondence. 

Three  years  before  his  death  a  daughter 
died  at  Portage,  Wis.  She  was  the  fourth 
child  whom  he  had  buried  —  the  last  but 
one.  An  invalid  most  of  her  life,  he  had 
undertaken  the  journey,  extending  to  the 
Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  for  the  benefit  of  her 
health.  After  marked  impro\ement,  she 
suddenly  declined  in  health,  and  died  away 
from  home.  This  was  a  great  source  of 
depression  to  him  at  the  time. 

On  the  29th  of  January,  181 7,  he  was 
married  to  Miss  Polly  Goodyear,  a  distant 
relative  of  his,  and  living  in  his  native  town. 
Much  as  we  desire  time  and  space  for  re- 
counting the  many  virtues  of  this  most  ex- 
cellent woman  and  most  worthy  helpmeet 
of  such  a  man,  we  are  obliged  barely  to  re- 
fer to  her  long  and  happy  association  as  the 


wife  of  the  "Good  Physician,"  and  as  an 
affectionate  mother,  devoted  friend  and 
neighbor.  She  survived  her  husband  more 
than  six  years  —  kept  fresh  and  fragrant 
his  memory  in  the  annual  meetings  of  the 
County  Society  by  the  decoration  of  its 
tables  with  the  choicest  flowers  of  "the 
month  of  roses,"  which  the  good  doctoral- 
ways  loved  so  well  —  a  custom  which  has 
been  in  a  good  measure  perpetuated  by  his 
only  surviving  child. 

Their  Golden  Wedding  was  duly  cele- 
brated on  the  29th  of  January,  1867  —  the 
doctor  entering  into  its  festivities  with  his 
usual  zest.  He  was  gratified  beyond  meas- 
ure by  the  great  pains  his  friends  had  taken 
to  make  it  an  occasion  of  joy,  and  appeared 
to  good  advantage  in  his  in\'ariable  dress 
coat  and  ruffles.  He  spent  the  following 
summer  with  his  family  in  New  Haven,  re- 
visiting every  spot  dear  to  his  childhood. 
In  February,  1869,  he  visited  Philadelphia, 
remained  some  time,  and  returned  home 
greatly  invigorated.  More  cheerful  than 
usual  during  the  next  summer  and  the  fol 
lowing  winter  months,  his  steps  grew  slower. 
But  he  abated  not  a  whit  his  interest  in 
every  thing,  he  buffeted  any  storm,  an- 
swered any  call,  and  every  day  but  his  last 
w^as  dressed  with  the  usual  neatness  and 
care,  which  those  who  knew  him  will  re- 
member so  well.  He  died  on  the  morning 
of  March  1st,  1870,  aged  seventy-six  years. 

Dr.  Lewis  Riggs  was  born  in  Norfolk, 
Conn.,  on  the  i6th  of  January,  1789.  His 
father  was  of  English,  his  mother,  of  Scotch 
descent.  They  were  good  examples  of  the 
early  inhabitants  of  New  England,  and 
both  are  said  to  have  been  persons  of  re- 
markable force  and  energy  of  character. 
Their  family  consisted  of  seven  sons  and 
two  daughters,  and  were  trained  to  habits 
of  industry  and  frugality.  Lewis  was  the 
youngest  son,  and  although  brought  up  to 
the  labor  of  the  farm,  displayed  much  me- 


The  Cortland  Colwtv  Medical  Society. 


i6i 


chanical  talent  as  well  as  aptness  for  the 
acquirement  of  a  knowledge  of  books. 
While  at  home  he  had  the  advantages  of  a 
common  school  education,  and  also  of  sev- 
eral terms  at  an  academy  in  his  native 
town,  thus  acquiring  what  was  considered 
a  good  English  education.  But  the  lack 
of  means  prevented  his  pursuit  of  a  college 
course,  to  which  he  aspired.  His  taste  and 
talent  for  mechanical  employment  led  to  his 
apprenticeship  to  the  carpenter's  trade  to 
Mr.  Samuel  N.  Gaylord,  with  whom  he 
came  to  Cortland  in  the  spring  of  1805. 
In  after  years,  when  riding  over  the  coun- 
try as  a  practitioner  of  medicine,  he  was 
able  to  point  to  not  a  few  houses  and  barns 
which  he  helped  to  build.  After  working 
at  his  trade  for  about  two  years  he  returned 
to  Connecticut,  where  a  part  of  the  time  he 
plied  his  trade,  and  a  portion  of  the  time 
attended  school.  In  the  spring  of  1809  he 
decided  on  the  profession  of  medicine,  and 
commenced  his  student  life  in  the  office  of 
Dr.  Samuel  Woodward,  of  Torringford, 
Conn.,  a  practitioner  of  high  repute,  and  the 
father  of  the  afterwards  distinguished  alien- 
ist of  the  Worcester  As\'lum,  and  who  was 
his  fellow  student.  In  the  office  of  Dr. 
Woodward  his  opportunities  for  medical  ob- 
servation were  superior  for  the  times.  In 
May,  1812,  he  received  a  county  license  to 
practice,  but  continued  in  the  office  of  his 
preceptor  during  the  summer,  but  in  Octo- 
ber of  that  year  he  went  to  Philadelphia  to 
attend  a  course  of  medical  lectures  in  the 
Uni\'ersity  of  Pennsylvania.  Here  he  sat 
under  the  instruction  of  Drs.  Rush,  Philip 
Syng  Physic,  Dorsey  and  Wistar  —  the 
leaders  in  medical  thought  at  that  period. 
This  was  the  last  course  of  lectures  deliv- 
ered by  the  venerable  Rush  at  the  close  of 
a  long  and  active  life  as  civilian,  medical 
practitioner,  author  and  medical  professor. 
He  died  April  19th,  181 3.  Dr.  Physic  has 
been  called  the  father  of  American  surgery, 


as  Dr.  Rush  was  confessedly  the  father  of 
American  medicine.  To  listen  to  the  in- 
struction of  these  men  was  a  rare  oppor- 
tunit\-  for  \oung  Riggs,  and  was  not  allowed 
to  pass  without  being  improved,  and  the 
lessons  made  impressions  which  lasted  for  a 
life  time.  l-'rom  C()n\'ersations  which  the 
writer  had  with  Dr.  Riggs  in  the  latter  years 
of  his  life,  it  is  certain  that  Dr.  Physic, 
equally  with  Dr.  Rush,  was  impressed  by 
the  diligence  and  acuteness  of  perception  of 
the  young  student  from  Connecticut,  and  as 
the  testimonials  which  he  bore  away  from 
these  men,  and  now  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  H. 
O.  Jewett,  of  Cortland  —  having  the  "sign 
manual"  of  one  of  the  signers  of  the  Declar- 
ation, and  of  the  father  of  American  sur- 
gery—  abundantl)'  show. 

From  Philadelphia  he  returned  to  his 
native  State,  when,  after  looking  about  for 
a  few  weeks,  concluded  to  "go  west,"  and 
so  in  the  spring  of  1813  came  to  the  State 
of  New  York  and  located  at  \'ernon,  Onei- 
da count}-.  Here  he  soon  acquired  a  fair 
amount  of  business,  but  after  a  while  he 
became  ambitious  of  the  wider  field  of  a 
more  populous  town  and,  in  1818,  removed 
to  Homer  and  opened  a  drug  store,  intend- 
ing to  associate  trade  with  practice  as  less 
laborious  than  an  entire  devotion  to  general 
work  in  the  professional  field.  But  he  soon 
found  himself  engaged  in  large  practice. 
The  same  year  he  became  a  member  of  the 
County  Society.  For  about  ten  vears  he 
continued  the  practice  of  his  profession  in 
Homer,  but  in  the  summer  of  1828  sold  his 
property  and  "practice"  to  Dr.  Metcalf  and 
removed  to  Trumansburg,  engaging  as  a 
partner  in  a  dr\-  goods  store.  We  have  no 
explanation  of  this  strange  movement  for  a 
physician  well  prepared  for  professional 
work,  but  find  it  pleasant  to  make  a  record 
of  the  fact  he  did  not  long  remain  in  a  busi- 
ness which  ill-befitted  him  and  with  which 
he  naturally  became  dissatisfied.      Dr.  Met- 


l62 


History  ok  Cok,tlanu  County. 


calf,  for  some  reason,  did  not  remain  in 
Homer  long  and  Ur.  Riggs  was  persuaded 
by  his  former  patrons  in  that  town  to  re- 
turn to  his  legitimate  calling.  Theic  he 
applied  himself  with  his  characteristic  ener-  j 
gy  to  professional  work  and  soon  became 
one  of  the  leading  practitioners,  and  for 
several  )-ears  performed  a  large  share  of  the 
medical  and  surgical  practice  of  the  town. 
In  1834  Dr.  Riggs  formed  a  copartner- 
ship with  Dr.  Ashbel  Patterson,  formerly 
of  Danby,  Tompkins  county,  and  continued 
the  association  for  about  seven  years.  After 
the  dissolution  of  this  business  relation  he 
was  nominated  in  the  fall  of  1840  b\-  his 
political  party  to  represent  the  district  in 
Congress.  He  was  elected  and  served  his 
constituents  as  the  representative  of  the 
Twenty-second  District  in  the  Twenty- 
seventh  Congress,  1841-42.  This  led  to 
his  retirement  from  practice  and  to  his  en- 
gagement in  other  enterprises  which  would 
relieve  him  from  the  labors  of  professional 
work.  He  purchased  the  flouring  mill 
south  of  the  village  and  erected  a  new  stone 
building  on  its  site,  superintending  its  con- 
struction and  planning  man}-  of  the  details 
of  its  machinery.  But  this  did  not  distract 
his  attention  entirely  from  his  interest  in 
medicine,  and  he  frequently  responded  to 
professional  calls  from  his  old  friends  and 
patrons. 

In  the  spring  of  1847  'i'-'  'i^d  an  attack 
of  hemiplegia,  which  confined  him  to  his 
bed  for  several  weeks  and  threatened  the 
termination  of  his  life.  From  this  attack 
he  gradually  recovered  and  in  a  few  months 
was  able  to  resume  his  accustomed  employ- 
ments. But  he  never  recovered  his  former 
strength  and  activity.  Still  his  memory, 
.  except  for  certain  words  and  names,  and 
his  mental  faculties  generally  seemed  but 
slightly,  if  at  all,  impaired. 

He  attended  to  some  calls  about  the  vil- 
lage bv  those  who  still    insisted   on    ha\ing 


the  opinion  and  advice  of  "the  old  doctor," 
and  also  attended  at  times  to  consultation 
visits  in  the  countr}-. 

But  his  infirmities  from  year  to  year  crept 
gradually  on  him,  of  which  he  had  the  clear 
perception  and  the  good  sense  to  acknowl- 
edge. And  yet  he  was  able  to  perform 
some  work  and  rarely  suffered  e.xcepting 
temporarily  until  the  fall  of  1869,  when  he 
was  prostrated  by  a  slow  fever  which  con- 
fined him  to  his  room,  and  much  of  the 
time  to  his  bed,  during  the  following  win- 
ter and  spring.  At  the  approach  of  warm 
weather  he  began  to  rally  and  was  so  far 
impro\-ed  as  to  be  able  to  walk  about  the 
village,  although  his  steps  were  slow,  neces- 
sitated by  those  heart  degenerations  pecul- 
iar to  advanced  life  and  which  caused 
paroxysms  of  difficult  respiration.  But  as 
the  months  wore  on,  at  the  approach  of 
autumn,  it  became  evident  that  the  end 
was  near.  His  ])arox\-sms  of  dyspncea  be- 
came more  frequent.  His  last  days  were 
those  of  a  very  gradual  failure,  and  the  last 
hours  were  a  quiet  sinking  to  rest,  appar- 
ently conscious  to  the  last.  He  died  about 
midnight  of  the  7th  of  November,  1870,  in 
the  eighty- second  \'ear  of  his  age. 

Dr.  Riggs  was  twice  married.  P"irst  to 
Miss  F"anny  Olmstead,  a  lady  of  quiet  and 
amiable  disposition  and  purely  domestic 
habits.  B\-  her  he  had  five  children,  four 
daughters  and  a  son  Mrs.  Riggs,  after 
several  years  of  feeble  health,  died  of  acute 
pneumonia,  on  the  31st  of  January,  1862. 
He  afterwards  married  Mrs.  Sarah  Lilly, 
with  whoni  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his 
days. 

Dr.  Riggs  possessed  a  good  phj'sique 
with  a  large  amount  of  \'ital  stamina  and 
great  physical  and  moral  courage.  His 
countenance  was  strongly  marked,  his  eyes 
were  dark,  his  brow  prominent,  his  mouth 
firm  and  compressed,  bordering  on  the  se- 
vere.     His  personal    appearance   conveyed 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


163 


at  once  the  impression  of  unusual  force  of 
character.  He  possessed  a  mind  naturally 
vigorous  and  well  poised  ;  was  thorough, 
bold  and  independent  in  his  thoughts  and 
actions  and  firm  in  his  convictions. 

For  these  notes  of  the  life  of  Dr.  Riggs 
we  are  indebted  to  the  very  able  and  in- 
teresting biographical  sketch  read  at  the 
annual  meeting  of  the  County  Societ\-  in 
December,  1870,  by  Dr.  H.  O.  Jewctt,  of 
Cortland.  We  regret  that  we  ha\e  not 
room  for  a  more  extended  notice. 

Dr.  George  W.  Bradford  was  born  in  the 
town  of  Otsego,  near  Cooperstown,  N.  Y., 
May  9th,  1796,  and  died  at  Syracuse,  Oc- 
tober 31st,  1883.  He  was  of  the  seventh 
generation  in  direct  descent  from  the  famous 
William  Bradford,  the  second  go\ernor  of 
Plymouth  colony.  His  father,  Esek  Brad- 
ford, a  native  of  Providence,  R.  I.,  removed 
from  Woodstock,  Conn.,  about  1793,  to 
that  portion  of  the  town  of  Otsego  now 
called  Hartwick.  George  was  the  third 
child  and  oldest  son  of  a  family  of  ten  chil- 
dren. 

The  opportunities  for  education  at  that 
early  day  in  a  new  country  were  extremely 
limited  —  the  nearest  school-house  being 
two  miles  awa)-  and  his  school  term  being 
limited  to  the  few  months  between  late  fall 
and  early  spring ;  but  this  short  time  was 
compensated  b)-  its  most  energetic  and  dili- 
gent use.  He  early  acquired  a  taste  for 
books  and  became  a  devoted  reader  of  the 
best  literature  accessible.  In  i8i2and  1813 
he  was  sent  to  an  academ\-  at  Woodstock, 
Conn.,  where  among  his  school-mates  was 
the  afterwards  celebrated  surgeon  and  clin- 
ical teacher,  Dr.  George  McClelian,  the  father 
of  Gen.  George  B.  McClelian.  In  18 14  he 
was  sent  to  a  classical  school  at  Clinton,  N. 
Y.  In  the  fall  of  18 16  he  entered  as  a 
student  the  office  of  Dr.  Thomas  Fuller,  of 
Cooperstown,  the  leading  physician  of  that 
vicinit)'.      Here  he  alternated  severe  study 


with  horse- back  rides  in  company  with  his 
preceptor,  receiving  the  double  benefit  of 
health  and  the  acquisition  of  professional 
knowledge  in  the  form  of  clinical  instruc- 
tion and  observation  —  an  educational  ad- 
vantage not  lighth^  to  be  estimated.  He 
never  had  the  benefit  of  systematic  lectures 
in  college,  a  fact  which  he  always  lamented. 
In  1 8 19  he  removed  to  Preble  in  this  coun- 
t\-  where  he  duly  commenced  the  practice 
of  medicine.  In  I'ebruary,  1820,  he  re- 
t'lrned  to  Cooperstown  and  was  licensed  to 
practice  medicine  by  the  Otsego  County 
Medical  Society.  About  1821  or  1822  he 
removed  to  Homer,  where,  for  about  si.xty 
years,  he  continued  the  practice  of  his  pro- 
fession. In  October,  1820,  he  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  Cortland  County  Medical 
Society.  Si.x  years  afterward  he  was  chosen 
secretar}^  of  that  society,  an  office  which  he 
held  for  forty-fi\'e  )'ears  consecutively, 
when,  from  increasing  disabilit}'  from  deaf- 
ness, he  resigned,  but  was  still  continued  in 
the  ofiice  of  treasurer  until  1 88 1,  when  he 
declined  a  re-election,  having  permanently 
removed  to  Syracuse.  At  the  time  of 
his  resignation  as  secretar}-  the  society 
passed  resolutions  expressive  of  its  high 
estimate  of  the  faithful  and  intelligent  man- 
ner in  which  he  had  performed  the  duties 
of  secretar}-  and  treasurer  and  of  how  much 
of  the  prosperity  of  the  societ}-  was  due  to  his 
vigilant  administration.  In  1841  Dr.  Brad- 
ford was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  State 
Medical  Society  for  four  years  and  in  1847 
was  elected  a  permanent  member  of  that 
society,  and  the  same  year  was  elected  one 
of  the  delegates  to  the  American  Medical 
Association,  which  then  met  in  Philadelphia 
and  where  he  became  a  permanent  member 
of  that  body  at  the  time  of  its  permanent 
organization.  In  1858  he  was  elected  vice- 
president  of  the  State  Medical  Societ\-  with 
his  associate,  the  accomplished  Brinsmade, 
in    the    president's    chair — declining   the 


164 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


solicitation  of  the  nomin^itiiiL;"  committee  to 
accept  tlic  nomination  for  the  presidency. 

Besides  tliose  that  strictly  related  to  his 
profession,  he  was  the  recipient  of  various 
honors  military,  civil  and  literary.  In  185  i 
he  was  elected  as  Member  of  Assembly  of 
the  State  Le.yislature,  where  he  proved  him- 
self to  be  an  iiulustrious  and  capable  mem- 
ber of  several  committees  and  especially  of 
the  one  on  medical  colleges  and  societies. 
In  November,  1863,  he  was  elected  to  the 
State  Senate,  and  in  1855  was  re- elected  to 
the  same  position.  An  interesting  chapter 
might  be  written  of  his  perseverance  and 
tact  in  securing  the  passage  of  the  bill  pro- 
viding for  anatomical  materiel  for  medical 

o 

colleges  (his  celebrated  "Bone  Bill")  and 
for  the  establishment  and  maintenance 
of  various  educational  and  benevolent  in- 
stitutions. In  1 856  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  American  Association  for  the 
Advancement  of  Science,  and  in  the  same 
year  was  elected  to  membership  in  the  Wis- 
consin Historical  Society,  to  the  library  of 
which  he  in  after  years  contributed  several 
valuable  historical  \\-orks.  In  1858  Genesee 
College  conferred  on  him  the  honorary  dc 
"ree  of  Master  of  Arts.  Some  of  the  most 
important  services  of  his  long  and  busy 
life  were  those  given  to  Cortland  Academy, 
at  Homer,  to  the  trusteeship  of  which  he 
was  elected  in  1832,  a  position  which  he 
held  for  thirtj'-eight  years.  In  conjunction 
with  the  late  Dr.  Woolworth,  for  many  years 
its  principal,  he  rendered  most  efficient 
service  in  the  cause  of  education  as  well  as 
in  every  work  of  benevolent  enterprise  and 
Christian  endeavor.  In  1864  as  a  member 
of  the  electoral  college  he  cast  his  vote  for 
Abraham  Lincoln,  Dr.  Bradford  was  often 
called  upon  to  act  as  secretary  of  various 
societies  and  kept  the  records  of  the  County 
Bible  Society  for  about  forty  years. 

At  the   request  of  the  Cortland  County 
Medical    Society    in     1880  —  it   being    the 


si.xtieth  anniversary  of  his  connection  with 
the  society  —  he  gave  a  summary  of  the 
changes  which  had  occurred  during  that 
period  in  the  practice  of  medicine. 

From  the  first  years  of  his  professional 
life  Dr.  Bradford  became  a  generous  patron 
of  medical  literature.  About  1820  he  be- 
came the  constant  reader  of  Tlie  Pliila- 
delphia  Jotinial  of  the  Medieal  c'V  Pliysieal 
Scicnees  until  the  change  of  its  title  to  that 
of  lite  Aiiieriean  Journal  of  the  Medieal 
Scienees  in  1827,  which  he  continued  to 
read,  as  well  as  many  other  journals,  up  to 
1 88 1,  the  time  of  his  removal  from  Homer. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  perceive  that  one  who 
thus  furnishes  his  mind  with  the  best 
thoughts  and  a  record  of  the  most  recent 
discoveries  and  observations  of  the  leading 
minds  in  the  profession,  must  be  well 
grounded  in  the  principles  which  should 
guide  him.  .As  a  writer  said  of  him  in  a 
local  journal  in  1876:  "  He  is  wo/  of  the 
'old  school'  for  his  school  is  like  the  Lord's 
mercies,  '  neiv  every  morning.'"  In  gen- 
eral literature  ho  was  the  reader  of  the  best 
books  and  journals.  In  common  with 
many  of  our  profession  he  was  much  inter- 
ested in  all  departments  of  natural  science, 
but  made  a  specialty  of  botany,  and  many 
years  ago  made  a  report  to  the  Regents  of  the 
University  on  the  plants  of  Cortland  county. 

It  will  be  seen  from  Dr.  Bradford's  habits 
of  reading  and  study  that  his  librar\-  must 
have  grown  with  his  \-ears  and  as  he  chose 
well  his  collection,  must  have  been  not  onl)- 
large  but  \aluable.  It  was  one  of  the  larg- 
est medical  libraries  in  Central  New  York, 
if,  indeed,  it  did  not  e.xcel  any  other.  He 
had  a  plan,  which  rapidly  growing  infirmity 
allowed  him  to  carr)'  out  onl_\'  in  part,  viz.: 
the  distribution  of  his  books  among  his 
medical  friends,  knowing  full  well  that, 
however  rare  and  valuable,  when  on  the 
auctioneer's  counter  they  would  count  for 
little  more  than  the  coarsest  paper  stock. 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


165 


On  the  17th  of  March,  1S18,  Dr.  Brad- 
ford was  united  in  marriage  to  Miss  Mary 
Ann  Walker,  of  Middlefield,  Otsego  county, 
N.  Y.  The\' had  three  cliikh'cn.  The  eldest, 
a  son  who  died  in  infancy  at  Cooperstown. 
The  next,  Emeline  M.,  the  accomplished  wife 
of  Wm.  W.  Northrop,  esq.,  of  New  York 
cit}',  and  Helen  Sabina,  who  died  in  March, 
1 84 1,  aged  17  }'ears.  On  the  17th  of 
March,  1868,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Bradford  cele- 
brated their  Golden  Wedding,  "  upon  which 
occasion  a  large  number  of  their  neighbors 
and  friends  honored  themselves  and  their 
esteemed  hosts  by  their  presence,  congrat- 
ulations and  gifts."  Mrs.  Bradford  survived 
this  joyous  event  but  six  years.  On  the 
26th  of  November,  1874,  at  7  o'clock  in 
the  morning  "  the  golden  bowl  was  broken." 

In  middle  life  Dr.  Bradford  was  what  is 
denominated  tough,  wirj-,  enduring.  In 
early  life  he  was  delicate,  but  by  horse- back 
riding,  most  rigid  temperance  in  eating  and 
drinking  and  great  regularity  of  habits  — 
or  habits  as  regular  as  a  busy  medical  prac- 
titioner could  observe  in  all  hours,  times  and 
seasons  —  he  acquired  great  powers  of  re- 
sistance against  the  adverse  influences  of 
exposure  and  fatigue.  But  to  us  he  seemed 
reckless  as  to  personal  protection,  for  not 
until  1864  would  he  wear,  e\'en  in  the  cold- 
est weather  of  winter,  either  overcoat  or 
gloves.  In  Jul}-,  1863,  while  treating  the 
gangrenous  wound  of  a  soldier  just  returned 
from  the  field  of  Gettysburg,  he  suffered 
septic  poisoning  through  an  abrasion  on  his 
right  hand,  which  resulted  in  long  continued 
and  fearful  inflammation  with  thecal  ab- 
scesses of  the  palm  and  fingers,  loss  of 
tendons,  contractures  and  ankylosis  and  the 
consequently  dangerous  prostration,  render- 
ing the  prognosis  for  a  long  time  doubtful 
and  the  public  mind  full  of  anxious  inquiry 
as  to  his  condition  and  prospects.  We  can- 
not better  describe  Dr.  Bradford  as  he  ap- 
peared   in    his    prime    than    to    quote    an 


account  given  by  his  former  pastor,  the 
Rev.  T.  K.  Fessenden,  who  was  intimately 
associated  with  him  in  every  good  word  and 
work  for  several  years.  He  says  :  "When 
I  first  knew  him  in  1842  he  was,  I  think, 
between  forty  and  fifty  years  of  age,  dimin- 
utive in  stature,  not  over  nice  in  his  dress 
and  appearance,  often  blunt  and  even  curt 
in  his  manner  of  speaking,  but  always  truth- 
ful. There  was  a  rare  common  sense  in 
his  views  and  mode  of  speaking.  There 
was  a  pleasant  smile  on  his  countenance, 
a  quiet  humor  in  his  remarks  and  in  his 
social  intercourse  which  made  him  a  most 
genial  companion,  while  his  honesty,  ten- 
derness and  manifest  deep  interest  in  his 
intercourse  with  the  sick  gained  for  him  the 
confidence  and  love  of  those  who  employed 
him.  He  had  a  great  abhorrence  of  quack- 
ery and  trickery,  and  this  often  led  him  to 
speak  of  it  in  not  very  complimentary  terms 
—  sometimes  so  as  needlessly  to  offend. 
But  I  think  the  largest  portion  of  the  best 
people  of  Homer  then  employed  him  and 
regarded  him  as  a  wise,  skillful,  entirely 
trustworthy  and  successful  physician.  I 
had  occasion  to  know  much  of  his  religious 
character.  No  one  could  be  an  inmate  of  his 
family  and  not  see  that  the  one  great  aim 
of  his  life  was  to  do  the  will  of  God.  He 
was  a  generous  supporter  of  charitable  and 
religious  objects  and  institutions.  There 
was  not  a  more  liberal  and  public  spirited 
donor  to  benevolent  objects,  in  proportion 
to  his  means,  in  the  congregation  or  com- 
munity. He  was  a  friend  to  whom  all 
classes  could  go  with  the  assurance  of  kind- 
ness and  sympathy  in  their  troubles.  He 
did  not  reap  a  harvest  of  wealth  ;  men  of 
the  world  might  feel  that  his  life  work  was 
not  conspicuous  or  eminently  successful,  but 
when  tested  by  the  true  standard,  — by  per- 
sonal worth,  by  professional  fidelity,  by  the 
confidence  and  love  of  the  good  in  the  com- 
munity in  which  he  lived  and  by  the  bless- 


1 66 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ings  wliich  lia\'e  flowed  frmn  his  character 
and  sacrifices  for  tlie  good  of  others,  I  be- 
lieve he  will  receive  the  approval  'well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant ;  enter  thou  into 
the  joy  of  thy  Lord.'  " 

The  last  two  years  and  a  half  of  his  life 
were  spent  in  Syracuse  at  the  home  of  his 
granddaughter,  Mrs.  Dow,  who,  with  her 
mother,  Mrs.  Northrop,  ministered  lovingly 
to  his  comfort  during  the  declining  months 
of  his  life.  The  choicest  portions  of  his 
librar\-,  medical  and  miscellaneous,  were  ar- 
ranged in  cases  about  the  walls  of  his  room, 
so  that  he  might  still  feel  that  he  was  at 
home  with  his  friends  about  him  and  with  his 
books  and  journals,  and  although  memory 
was  mostly  gone,  he  daily  enjoyed  brief 
and  pleasant  converse.  And  thus  life  ebbed 
away.  Late  in  the  night  of  October. 30th, 
1883,  he  was  resting  as  quietly  as  an  infiint 
on  its  mother's  breast.  When  light  broke 
on  the  earth  on  the  morning  of  the  31st,  it 
was  found  tliat  the  wheels  had  ceased  to 
move,  —  he  was  at  rest. 

The  funeral  services  were  held  in  the  Con- 
gregational Church  in  Homer  in  the  after- 
noon of  November  2d,  and  which  were  con- 
ducted bj'  the  pastor,  the  Rev.  W.  A.  Rob- 
inson, assisted  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Edward 
Hitchcock,  who  pronounced  a  brief  but  ap- 
propriate discourse  on  the  occasion  from 
Heb.  iv:  9.  In  speaking  of  Dr.  Bradford  he 
said  :  — 

"Few  lives  furnish  richer  material  for 
stimulating  biography.  On  its  title-page 
could  be  fairly  written  ;  '  The  upright  citi- 
zen ;  the  skillful  physician  ;  the  conscientious 
representative;  the  wise  legislator;  the  pure 
patriot ;  the  zealous  reformer  ;  the  conserv- 
ative thinker;  the  patient  investigator;  the 
progressive  scholar;  the  judicious  adviser ; 
the  faithful  friend  ;  the  sympathetic  helper  ; 
the  large-hearted  philanthropist ;  the  con- 
scientious, consistent  Christian  man.'" 

His  medical  brethren  bore  his  remains  to 


their  final  rest  in  the  beautiful  Glen  wood 
Cemetery,  and  then  assembled  to  pass  me- 
morial resolutions. 

Dr.  I'hineas  H.  Burdick,  of  Preble,  was 
born  in  De  Ruyter,  Madison  county,  N.  Y., 
June  3d,  1800. 

His  father  was  a  farmer  of  moderate 
means  and  was  able  to  give  his  son  only 
the  advantages  which  the  common  school 
could  aftbrd  him,  and  that  mainly  during 
the  winter  months,  working  on  the  farm 
during  the  summer.  But  his  ambition  to 
become  a  tcaclicr  stimulated  him  to  push 
his  studies  with  such  vigor  that  he  was  early 
qualified  to  assume  the  duties  of  that  call- 
ing. His  wages,  whether  earned  on  the 
neighbors'  farms  or  in  the  school-room, 
during  his  minority,  were  always  returned 
to  his  father,  so  that  at  his  majority,  "with 
weakened  physical  powers,  penniless,  un- 
aided and  alone,  he  set  forth  to  the  acquire- 
ment of  a  noble  profession,"  determined  to 
succeed,  "which,  with  alternate  study  and 
teaching,  together  with  tiie  strictest  econo- 
my, he  accomplished  in  due  time,  with  no 
mean  acquirements,  as  attested  b}-  his  life- 
work." 

His  medical  studies  were  had  in  the  of- 
fice of  Dr.  Hubbard  Smith,  of  De  Ru}-ter, 
and  Dr.  Jehiel  Stearns,  of  Pompey, —  the 
latter  for  many  years  the  leading  surgical 
authorit)-  in  Central  New  York.  He  at- 
tended medical  lectures  in  the  college  at 
Castleton,  Vt.,  but  did  not  complete  the 
course  requisite  for  graduation.  He  was 
licensed  to  practice  medicine  b\'  the  Onon- 
daga County  Medical  Society  in  1828,  and 
commenced  the  duties  of  his  profession  in 
Scott  in  this  county  during  the  same  year  ; 
also  in  1 828  becoming  a  member  of  the 
Cortland  County  Medical  Society.  "  He 
was  twice  married  ;  first  to  Miss  Sally  Dyer, 
of  Homer,  who,  not  long  after,  died  of 
small-pox,  contracted  from  the  messenger 
who  came  to  obtain  the  services  of  the  doc- 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Soctetv. 


167 


tor.  Two  years  later  he  was  married  to 
Miss  Laura  J.  Phelps,  daughter  of  Judge 
Jabez  B.  Phelps,  who  was  also  a  ph\sician, 
but  never  engaged  in  the  practice  of  med- 
icine. " 

In  1833  Dr.  Burdick  renio\ed  to  Preble, 
where  he  lived  and  labored  up  to  the  time 
of  his  sickness  and  death  —  a  period  of 
thirty-seven  years.  His  earl\-  professional 
life,  as  that  of  many  other  j'oung  physi- 
cians, witnessed  severe  struggles  with  pov- 
erty. "  During  several  of  the  earlier  years 
of  professional  life  he  rode  wholly  on  horse- 
back, being  unable  to  purchase  a  vehicle  to 
ride  in.  The  first  carriage  he  ever  owned 
he  bought  for  five  dolliirs  —  a  rattling, 
ricket}'  thing,  but  he  said  he  felt  proud  of 
it  —  it  was  his." 

"  By  assiduit}^  in  business  he  was  crown- 
ed with  success  and  at  length  acquired  a 
competence  quite  equal  to  that  attained  b\- 
country  ph)-sicians  ;  though,  through  man- 
ifold charities,  he  had  unquestionabl}-  given 
away  much  more  than  his  accumulated 
property.  He  was  a  cheerful  giver,  often 
bestowing  more  liberalh'  than  his  means 
would  warrant." 

Though  suffering  from  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing and  other  infirmities,  he  continued  to 
attend  diligentl}-  to  the  duties  of  his  pro- 
fession until  a  few  weeks  before  his  death, 
giving  himself  little  relaxation  from  work, 
rarely  taking  a  vacation. 

Amid  all  his  labors  he  took  great  inter- 
est in  public  affairs  and  especially  in  the 
condition  of  the  common  schools  of  the 
town,  making  his  early  experience  as  a 
teacher  available  in  the  interest  of  a  higher 
standard  of  education.  For  several  years 
he  was  superintendent  of  public  schools. 
For  several  years  during  the  administrations 
of  Jackson  and  Van  Buren  he  served  as  post- 
master. Aside  from  these  instances  he 
steadih-  refused  any  political  preferment. 

He  was  for  forty-two  )-ears  a  member  of 


the  County  Medical  Society  and  always 
very  punctual  in  attendance  at  its  meetings, 
contributing  to  its  proceedings  and  serving 
it  as  delegate  to  the  New  York  State  Med- 
ical Society  for  four  years,  and  of  which  he 
was  elected  a  permanent  member  in  1853. 
He  was  also  sent  as  delegate  to  the  Amer- 
ican Medical  Association,  of  which  he  be- 
came a  permanent  member.  In  1851  the 
Regents  of  the  University  conferred  on  him 
the  honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of  Medicine. 

Strict  integrity  was  among  his  character- 
istics. He  was  eminently  a  religious  man. 
"  For  the  last  thirty  years  of  his  life  he  was 
a  most  e.xemplary  professing  Christian,  and 
for  the  last  decade  a  ruling  elder  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church." 

For  the  last  eight  years  of  his  life  he  was 
able  to  leave  much  of  the  burden  of  his 
work  to  his  son.  Dr.  Daniel  W.  Burdick, 
who  had  graduated  at  Geneva  Medical 
College  in  1862. 

"Yet  he  maintained  his  interest  in  his 
profession,  read  his  medical  journals  and 
continued  business  to  some  extent  until 
September,  1869,  which,  and  the  following 
month  of  October,  he  spent  in  traveling  in 
the  western  part  of  the  country.  It  was 
by  exposures  during  this  journey  that  he 
added  to  his  previous  trouble  of  shortness 
of  breath  on  taking  active  exercise,  and  a 
troublesome  cough  which  continued  to -in- 
crease after  his  arrival  home ;  and  by  the 
first  of  February,  1870,  he  was  confined  to 
his  house,  most  of  the  time  unable  to  lie 
down, —  sleeping  in  the  erect  posture  and 
suffering  terribly  at  times  from  paroxysms 
of  dyspncea.  He  had  all  the  signs  of 
hypertrophy  of  the  heart  and  valvular  le- 
sions, with  pulmonary  congestion,  h\'dro- 
thorax  and  general  anasarca. 

"After  about  eight  weeks  of  the  most  in- 
tense suffering,  which  was  borne  through- 
out with  the  same  evenness  of  temper  and 
Christian  fortitude  that  had  e\-er  character- 


1 68 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ized  him,  in  the  triumph  of  living  faith,  he 
died  March  28th,  1870.  At  his  funeral,  on 
the  30th,  the  whole  community  seemed  to 
turn  out,  and  especiall\-  the  old  men  and 
women  of  the  town,  to  whom  for  so  many 
years  he  had  been  a  devoted  and  sympa- 
thizins^  friend  —  in  a  sense,  a  confessor,  and 
a  judicious  adviser  in  times  of  trouble." 

At  a  meetin<^  of  the  members  of  the 
County  Medical  Society,  present  on  the  oc- 
casion of  the  funeral,  suitable  resolutions 
were  passed,  commemorative  of  the  services 
and  virtues  of  their  deceased  brother,  and 
Dr.  H.  C.  Hendrick,  of  McGraw\'ille,  was 
requested  to  prepare  a  memorial  sketch  of 
Dr.  Rurdick,  to  be  presented  at  a  subse-  1 
quent  meeting  of  the  societ)'.  At  the 
meeting  of  the  society,  December  14th, 
1870,  Dr.  Hendrick  read  a  highl_\-  interest- 
ing memorial  record,  which  was  communi- 
cated to  the  State  Medical  Society  and 
published  in  its  Transactions  for  1871. 

Dr.    Horace    Hronson,  of  Virgil,   was  of 
Scotch  descent. 

He  was  born  at  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  Septem- 
ber 8th,  1796.  When  four  or  five  years  of 
age  the  family  removed  to  Vernon,  Oneida 
county,  N.  Y.  Here  he  had  his  early  ed- 
ucation in  the  common  schools  of  the  place  | 
and  was  an  apt  scholar,  developing  when 
quite  young  a  taste  for  natural  history 
studies.  It  appears  that  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  Hamilton  College,  but  did  not  com- 
plete the  curriculum  of  college  studies  by- 
graduation.  During  his  college  course  he 
devoted  much  attention  to  chemistry  and 
became  much  attached  to  Dr.  Noyes,  the 
professor  in  that  department.  We  are  not 
able  to  give  the  date  of  his  commencing  the 
study  of  medicine,  but  it  was  in  the  office 
of  Dr.  Lewis  Riggs,  then  of  Vernon,  and 
probably  completed  in  the  office  of  Dr. 
Hastings,  of  Clinton  ;  nor  the  date  of  his 
first  connection  with  the  Medical  College 
at  Fairfield,  N.  Y.,  where  it  is    said   he   at- 


tended four  full  courses  of  lectures  and 
graduated  in  18 19.  He  spent  much  time 
with  Dr.  Hadley,  the  professor  of  chemistry 
and  materia  mcdica,  working  in  the  college 
laboratory  and  pushing  his  inquiries  into 
chemistry  and  pharmacy,  as  well  as  botany, 
geology,  and  mineralogy.  His  love  for  the 
natural  sciences  continued  through  his  whole 
professional  life.  He  made  extensive  col- 
lections and  his  cabinet  was  rich  in  the  de- 
partments of  mincralog}-  and  paleontology. 
One  of  his  red-letter  periods  was  a  visit 
from  Professor  Emmons,  of  .Alban}-,  one  of 
the  distinguished  geologists  of  the  State 
Natural  History  Survey,  and  who  was  in- 
debted to  Dr.  Bronson  for  the  determina- 
tion of  important  scientific  facts  relating  to 
his  specialt)-. 

Sometime,  probabK'  in  1S20,  he  visited 
his  former  friend  and  instructor.  Dr.  Lewis 
Riggs,  of  Homer,  who  ad\ised  him  to  settle 
in  Virgil,  which  he  did  soon  after.  He  be- 
came a  member  of  the  County  Medical 
Society  on  the  17th  of  October,  1821.  At 
that  time  there  was  only  one  other  member 
of  the  society  who  had  received  the  degree 
of  Doctor  of  Medicine,  and  that,  as  before 
mentioned,  was  Dr.  Miles  Goodyear,  of 
Cortland. 

Dr.  Bronson  had  but  few  professional 
neighbors  when  he  began  the  practice  of 
medicine,  and  those  often  inaccessible  in  an 
emergency.  He  was  thus  thrown  on  his 
own  resources,  which  a  sound  mind  and 
thorough  professional  training  enabled  him 
to  marshal  eftectivel)-.  In  the  departments 
of  surgery  and  obstetrics,  especially  the 
latter,  he  was  eminently  successful. 

He  held  the  obligations  required  b_\'  the 
principles  of  medical  ethics  in  \'ery  high 
regard. 

"  He  was  very  forbearing  to  those  whom 
he  had  aided,  and  lost  much  in  the  delin- 
quency of  his  patients.  He  was  a  good 
citizen,  hospitable  to  his  acquaintances  and 


-^      ^J\j<i,C>0- 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


169 


generous  to  the  needy.  He  was  a  friend 
to  the  cause  of  education  and  also  a  strong 
friend  of  temperance  and  kindred  reforma- 
tory causes.  He  sustained  a  h'gli  reputa- 
tion as  a  man  of  integrity."  He  was  for 
many  years  a  consistent  member  of  the 
Presbyterian  Church. 

For  several  j'ears  he  was  conscious  of  a 
steadily  advancing  cardiac  trouble,  which 
grew  worse  in  the  latter  half  of  1873  and 
terminated  his  useful  life  on  the  30th  of 
January,  1874.  At  the  next  meeting  of 
the  County  Medical  Society,  in  June,  1874, 
his  distinguished  pupil.  Dr.  Frederick  Hyde,' 
read  a  high!)'  interesting  biographical  sketch 
of  him. 

One  of  the  most  astute  and  popular 
practitioners  among  the  early  physicians 
of  this  county  was  Dr.  Azariah  Blanchard, 
of  Truxton.  He  became  a  member  of  the 
County  Societ}'  in  1821  and  continued  the 
practice  of  medicine  in  Truxton  for  about 
twenty-five  years,  when  he  removed  in 
1846  to  Milwaukee,  Wis.,  where  he  con- 
tinued his  professional  work  for  several 
years  and  until  the  infirmities  of  age  com- 
pelled him  to  desist.  He  died  in  1S68,  full 
of  years  and  honors  and  rich  in  the  esteem 
and  affection  of  his  numerous  acquaintances. 
A  Milwaukee  journal  in  noticing  his  de- 
cease said :  "  Dr.  Blanchard  has  been  a 
resident  of  Milwaukee  twenty-two  years, 
and  we  can  say  without  exaggeration  that 
no  man  ever  lived  in  this  communit}-  who 
had  fewer  enemies  —  we  might  say  he  had 
none,  for  his  daily  life  was  marked  by  such 
a  guileless  simplicity  and  Christian  conduct 
in  all  his  relations,  which  justly  rendered 
him  a  most  estimable  and  beloved  citizen. 
His  heart  was  warm,  not  merely  toward  his 
fellow-men,  but  toward  his  countr)-.  Dur- 
ing the  war  his  patriotic  sympathies  were 
always  alive,  and  like  a  good  man  he  prayed 

1  Sketches  of  the  lives  of  Dr?..  Frederick  Hyde  and  C. 
Green  will  be  found  in  another  portion  of  this  work. 


to  live  to  witness  the  crowning  triumph  of 
the  nation." 

Dr.  Lyman  Fldredge,  of  Cincinnatus, 
became  a  member  of  the  County  Society 
in  1829,  having  been  licensed  by  the  Her- 
kimer County  Society.  For  many  years  he 
was  an  extensive  practitioner  and  kept  him- 
self well  posted  in  the  literature  of  his  pro- 
fession. 

Dr.  Eleazer  H.  Barnes,  of  Marathon,  be- 
came a  member  of  the  County  Society  in 
1840,  and  pursued  his  profession  for  many 
years  with  diligence  and  success.  For  the 
last  few  years,  owing  to  increasing  physical 
disabilities,  he  has  mainly  retired  from  prac- 
tice. 

Dr.  Homer  O.  Jewett  was  born  in  Leb- 
anon, Madison  county,  N.  V.,  and  when  he 
was  twelve  years  of  age  his  father  removed 
to  Homer  in  this  count)-.  His  father  was 
a  native  of  Lanesboro,  Mass.,  being  the  son 
of  one  of  the  Revolutionar\-  heroes  who 
faithful!}-  served  his  country  throughout 
that  war. 

Dr.  Jewett  had  the  usual  experiences  of 
the  farmer's  boy  of  his  period — constant 
work  and  rigid  economy.  The  farm  which 
his  father  purchased  is  now  the  site  of  Glen- 
wood  Cemetery. 

Besides  the  limited  opportunities  of  the 
common  schools  he  enjoyed  the  advantages 
of  the  academy  at  Homer  under  the  ad- 
niinistration  of  Prof  Samuel  B.  Woolworth, 
to  whose  counsel  and  encouragement  he 
attributes  much  of  the  success  that  maj- 
have  resulted  from  his  educational  course. 

When,  in  his  eighteenth  year,  his  father 
sold  his  farm  and  retired  from  business, 
leaving  to  his  son  the  wide  world  for  a  por- 
tion, the  son  turned  his  attention  to  teach- 
ing, and  while  pursuing  the  business  of  the 
pedagogue  he  began  the  study  of  medicine, 
but  before  going  on  with  his  medical  course 
he  still  further  extended  and  established  his 
school    education    by   two    more  terms   in 


170 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Cortland  Acadcm\-.  After  this  he  entered 
tlie  office  of  Dr.  A.  B.  Sliipman,  alternating 
medical  stud}'  with  teaching  in  order  to  be 
able  to  ilcfray  the  expenses  of  the  lecture 
courses,  much  of  the  time  devoting  sixteen 
of  the  twenty- four  hours  to  the  business  of 
teaching  and  study. 

In  the  winter  of  1841-42  he  attended 
the  first  course  of  lectures  ever  delivered  in 
the  medical  department  of  the  University 
of  the  City  of  New  York.  He  also  at- 
tended the  second  course  given  there  and 
graduated  in  March,  1843.  The  faculty 
of  the  medical  department  of  the  university 
at  that  time  consisted  of  Drs.  Valentine 
Mott,  Mart)'n  Paine,  Granville  Sharpe  Pat- 
tison,  John  Re\ere,  John  \V.  Draper  and 
(iunning  S.  Bedford,  one  of  the  most  bril- 
liant and  successful  bodies  of  teachers  that 
ever  graced  the  halls  of  medical  learning 
in  this  country.       Dr.  Payne  was  his  oracle 

—  an  oracle  well  chosen — and  in  him  he 
saw  only  what  was  wise  and  noble  and 
generous.  He  showed  his  pupil  many  kind 
attentions,  proffering  him  the  freedom  of 
his  private  office,  giving  him  several  valu- 
able works  together  with   much  safe  advice 

—  altogether  and  reasonably  giving  him 
the  impression  that  he  was  a  favorite  jnipil, 
all  of  which  proved  a  healthful  stimulus  to 
his  ambition. 

After  practicing  a  few  weeks  with  his 
preceptor  in  the  summer  of  1843,  he  estab- 
lished himself  at  Summer  Hill,  Cayuga 
count)-,  where  he  remained  six  years.  Here 
he  had  a  wide  field  and  unobstructed  and 
which  he  thoroughly  and  successfull)-  cul- 
tivated, acquiring  much  valuable  experience 
in  the  way  of  diagnostic  skill  and  thera- 
peutic tact. 

In  the  summer  of  1849  he  removed  to 
Cortland  where  he  still  pursues  the  duties 
of  his  calling. 

For  more  than  thirty  years,  and  until 
within    the  last   five   or   six,  it  was  his  rule 


never  to  refuse  a  call  that  he  could  attend, 
regardless  of  the  condition  of  the  patient, 
the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  the  con- 
dition of  the  roads,  the  time  of  the  day  or 
night,  or  the  distance  from  home — a  state- 
i  nient  which  will  apply  to  a  vast  majority  of 
medical  practitioners  who  conscientiously 
and  industriously  devote  themselves  to  the 
duties  of  their  profession  as  the  medical 
advisers  and  friends  of  the  families  in  their 
respective  neighborhoods. 

Dr.  Henry  T.  Dana  was  born  in  Fenner, 
Madison  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1836,  and  was 
the  youngest  son  of  Judge  Sardis  Dana. 

He  received  "his  early  education  at  home 
and  in  the  local  schools,  and  later  in  the 
Cazenovia  Seminary. 

He  became  a  private  pupil  of  Dr.  James 
H.  Armsby,  the  distinguished  professor  of 
anatomy  in  the  Albany  Medical  College,  in 
which  college  he  graduated  in  1863.  The 
same  \'ear  he  located  in  Tully,  Onondaga 
county,  where  he  practiced  his  profession 
until  1869  when,  his  health  becoming  im- 
paired, he  removed  to  Chicago,  111.,  and 
resided  in  that  city  about  three  years.  In 
1872  he  removed  from  Chicago  to  Cortland 
and  resumed  the  practice  of  medicine  which 
he  still  continues  with  increasing  success. 

In  1874  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  examin- 
ing surgeon  for  pensions  and  held  that 
position  until  the  fall  of  1883,  when  a  board 
of  examining  surgeons  was  appointed  and 
on  its  organization  he  was  elected  its  presi- 
dent. In  1877  he  was  elected  president  of 
the  County  Medical  Society. 

The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society  was 
ably  represented  in  the  medical  branch  of 
the  army  service  during  the  War  of  the  Re- 
bellion. 

Dr.  Judson  C.  Nelson,  of  Truxton  ranks 
his  fellow  surgeons  of  this  count}-  in  point  of 
time  of  enlistment. 

Dr.  Nelson  was  born  in  Danby,  Tomp- 
kins  county,    N.  Y.,    June  3d,    1824.      His 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


171 


father,  the  Rev.  Caleb  Nelson,  was,  for  many 
jears,  the  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church  in 
Danb)',  afterwards  living  in  Spencer  and 
Candor,  Tioga  county. 

Dr.  Nelson  was  educated  in  the  common 
schools  of  Tioga  county. 

In  medicine  he  was  educated  in  Geneva, 
where  he  was  the  private  pupil,  for  three 
years,  of  Dr.  Thomas  Spencer,  then  the 
distinguished  professor  of  the  institutes  and 
practice  of  medicine  in  Geneva  Medical 
College,  in  which  institution  he  attended 
three  courses  of  lectures,  graduating  in  Jan- 
uar\-,  1848.  On  the  20th  of  the  ensuing 
No\'ember  he  was  married  to  Miss  Henrietta 
S.  Walter,  of  Newark,  Tioga  count}-. 

In  March,  1848,  he  commenced  the  prac- 
tice of  medicine  in  Truxton,  where  he  has 
since  pursued  his  professional  work  with 
unusual  success  and  popularity. 

He  was  elected  a  permanent  member  of 
the  State  Medical  Societj-  in  1875.  He  is 
also  a  member  of  the  Central  New  York 
Medical  Association,  as  well  as  of  the  Cort- 
land Medical  Societ\-. 

"At  the  breaking  out  of  the  Rebellion,  in 
1 86 1,  he  began  enlisting  men  in  his  own 
and  adjoining  towns,  first  for  the  23d  Regt. 
N.  Y.  S.  Vols.,  and  then  for  the  76th  Regt. 
N.  Y.  S.  Vols.,  to  which  he  was  commis- 
sioned as  surgeon  Dec.  nth,  1861."  He 
served  his  regiment  faithfully  when,  owing 
to  failing  health,  from  a  severe  illness  due 
in  part  to  severe  work  and  also  to  the  effect 
of  the  climate,  he  was  obliged,  on  the  i  ith 
of  Jul}-,  1862,  at  Fredericksburg,  V^a.,  to 
resign  his  position  in  the  regiment  altogether 
and  return  to  his  home,  as  the  medical  offi- 
cers of  his  division  and  himself  believed,  a 
confirmed  invalid.  After  spending  some 
time,  however,  at  Avon  Springs,  he  so  far 
recovered  that  earl}-  in  Januar}',  1863,  and 
b}-  special  contract  with  the  surgeon -general, 
he  entered  upon  the  duties  of  a  medical  | 
officer  in  the  U.  S.   General   Hospital,  De-  j 


partment  of  Washington,  in  which  capacity 
he  occupied  several  positions  of  trust  and 
responsibility.  He  first  served  as  ward 
physician  in  Trinity  General  Hospital  until 
its  discontinuance  in  April,  1863,  then  in 
Mount  Pleasant  General  Hospital  until 
December,  1863,  when  he  was  put  in  charge 
of  the  Regular  Army  Post  Hospital  on  the 
Potomac,  opposite  Mt.  Vernon,  where  he 
remained  until  the  following  April,  when  he 
was  relieved  by  the  regular  surgeon  of  the 
post.  "  He  was  then  ordered  to  Finley 
General  Hospital  and  put  in  charge  of  three 
surgical  wards,  where  a  large  amount  of 
operative  surgery  devolved  upon  him  and 
where  he  remained  (with  the  exception  of 
two  weeks  on  duty  with  Surgeon  Antisell 
in  attending  the  sick  and  wounded  officers 
who  reported  there  from  the  front  during 
the  great  battles  of  the  Wilderness,  Cold  . 
Harbor  and  Petersburg)  until  the  expira- 
tion of  his  term  of  ser\-ice  in  November, 
1864. 

"  On  retiring  from  the  hospital  Dr.  Nel- 
son received  the  public  thanks  of  the  sur- 
geon in  charge  for  his  faithful  attendance 
to  duty  and  from  the  inmates  of  his  wards 
a  very  \aluable  case  of  amputating  and 
general  operating  instruments  as  a  testi- 
monial of  their  appreciation  of  his  services 
in  their  severe  trials  and  afflictions. 

"  He  was  in  the  battle  of  Fort  Stevens, 
one  of  the  defenses  of  Washington,  July 
1 2th,  1 864,  when  Generals  Early  and  Breck- 
enridge  made  their  famous  assault  on  that 
city." 

Dr.  Nelson  has  alwa}-s  been  a  Democrat, 
though  during  a  portion  of  the  war  period 
he  voted  with  the  Republicans.  He  has 
held  the  office  of  supervisor  of  his  town  since 
1872  —  now  on  the  thirteenth  }'ear  of  con- 
tinued service. 

In  the  fall  of  1875  he  was  elected  as 
Member  of  Assembly  in  its  99th  session, 
1876;  and  again  in  the  fall  of  1882   to  its 


172 


History  of  Cortland  CoUiVTY. 


io6th  session,  1883.  At  the  session  of '83 
he  ser\ed  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on 
the  pubhc  health  and  also  on  the  committee 
on  charitable  institutions. 

On  the  20th  of  June,  1883,  he  was  mar- • 
ricd  the  second  time  to  Miss  Florence  Irwin 
Snyder,  of  MiddleburLj,   Schoharie  count}-, 
N.  Y. 

Dr.  Henry  C.  Hendrick,  of  McGraw\ille, 
is  of  English  Puritan  stock,  whose  charac- 
teristics modified  and  softened  in  the  course 
of  their  history,  have  been  fairly  preserved 
to  the  present  generation.  His  grandfather, 
Joel  Hendrick  —  born  in  1772  —  remo\'ed 
from  Southington,  Conn.,  to  Guilford,  Che- 
nango county,  N.  Y.,  when  a  young  man  — 
was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  that  town  and 
reared  his  family  there.  His  son,  Leontes, 
the  father  of  the  doctor,  was  born  there  in 
1796;  removed  to  Coventry  in  the  same 
count)'  in  1832  when  tiie  subject  of  this 
sketch  was  between  four  and  fi\'e  years  old. 
Dr.  Hendrick  was  born  in  Guilford,  Sep- 
tember nth,  1827.  He  attended  the  vil- 
lage district  school  and  sometimes  what  was 
called  a  "select  school,"  and  several  terms 
at  the  Oxford  Acadcmj-.  He  became  a 
teacher  and  taught  in  the  district  and  select 
schools  some  twehe  terms.  This  has  given 
him  an  interest  in  schools  and  he  has  ever 
fince  been  more  or  less  connected  with 
school  boards 

He  studied  medicine  with  his  brother,  the 
late  Dr.  E.  F.  Hendrick,  of  Danbury,  Conn., 
who  was  a  prominent  surgeon  in  the  war  of 
1 86 1,  serving  as  surgeon  of  the  15th  Conn. 
Vols. 

Dr.  Hendrick  attended  a  course  of  lect- 
ures in  Geneva  Medical  College  in  1852  and 
graduated  in  the  medical  department  of  the 
University  of  Michigan  in  1853;  practiced 
medicine  in  Willet  four  years ;  removed  to 
McGrawville  in  December,  1857,  where  he 
still   resides. 

He  entered  the  niilitar\-  service  in  the  War 


of  the  Rebellion  in  the  summer  of  1862,  re- 
ceiving his  commission  from  Gov.  Morgan 
as  surgeon  of  the  157th  Regt.  N.  Y.  Vols., 
August  15th  1862  ;  served  in  that  capacity 
nearly  three  years  and  was  mustered  out 
July  31st,  1865. 

lie  served  in  extra  service  as  follows: 
On  staff  of  Gen.  Carl  Schurz  in  charge  of 
3d  Division  i  ith  Corps  Hospital  at  Brooks's 
Station,  Va.,  from  March,  1863,  to  the  23d 
of  June  following.  Was  assigned  by  Med- 
ical Director  Suckley  in  general  charge  of 
the  dressing  department  of  1  ith  Corps  Hos- 
pital, third  and  fourth  days  of  the  battle  of 
Gettysburg.  Assigned  as  one  of  the  med- 
ical examining  board.  Folly  Island,  S.  C, 
Sept.  2ist,  1863.  October  2 1  St,  1863,  was 
made  chairman  of  special  examining  board 
to  inquire  into  the  sanitary  condition  of 
certain  regiments  on  Foil)-  Island.  On  the 
1 6th  of  Januar)',  1864  appointed  chief  med- 
ical officer  2d  Brig.,  Folly  Island.  In  March, 
1864,  was  post  surgeon  at  Jacksonville,  Fla., 
and  in  April,  1864,  post  surgeon  at  Fernan- 
dina.  On  the  13th  of  July,  1864,  appointed 
member  of  medical  examining  board  at  Hil- 
ton Head,  S.  C,  and  at  the  same  place  July 
19th,  1864,  was  appointed  chief  medical  offi- 
cer of  Provisional  Brigade.  August  24th, 
1864,  appointed  post  surgeon,  Hilton  Head, 
chief  medical  officer  of  "  District  of  Hilton 
Head,  Fort  Pulaski,  Beaufort,  St.  Helena 
and  T\-bee  Island."  October  24,  1864,  ap- 
pointed post  surgeon  in  charge  of  troops  and 
Confederate  prisoners  (600  officers)  at  P"t. 
Pulaski,  Ga.  January  1  ith,  1865,  was  placed 
in  charge  of  P"icld  Hospital  \o.  1,  Coast  Di- 
vision, S.  C. 

At  the  close  of  the  service  he  was  com- 
missioned "  Lieutenant-Colonel  by  Brevet 
for  meritorious  service  during  the  war"  — 
his  rank  as  surgeon  being  "  Major  of  Cav- 
alry." 

On  calling  to  say  good-bye  to  his  friend, 
the  medical  director  of  the  department,  he 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


173 


handed  him  the  subjoined  document,  which 
was  certainly  a  handsome  recognition  of  the 
doctor's  faithful  and  efficient  services  during 
the  war : — 

"Office  of  Medical  Director. 

"  Dep.artment  of  the  Solth. 
"  Hilton  Head,  S.  C,  July  12,  1865. 
"To  Surgeon  Henry  C.  Hendrick, 

••  157th  Regt,  N.  Y.  Vols. 
"  Sir, 

"  On  your  bfing  mustered  out  of  the  service 
of  the  U.  S. — the  term  of  enlistment  of  your 
regiment  having  expired,  it  gives  me  great  pleas- 
ure to  testify  to  your  imiform  excellent  conduct 
as  an  officer  and  gentlemen  since  vou  have  been 
on  duty  in  this  department,  and  to  the  able  man- 
ner in  which  you  have  discharged  your  official 
duties. 

••  Very   Respectfully, 

"  Your  Obedient   Servant, 

••  Meredith  Clvmer. 
"Lieut.  Col.   U.  S.  Vols.,  and 

"  Med.   Director.  D.  S." 

On  being  mustered  out  of  service  the 
doctor  returned  to  the  peaceful  duties  of 
his  profession  which  he  had  patriotically  left 
three  years  before. 

Dr.  Hendrick  has  been  twice  married  — 
first  to  Miss  Eliza  J.  Moonc}',  of  AVillet,  who 
died  June  12th,  1858;  and  again  Septem- 
ber 5th,  i860,  to  Miss  Marinda  McGraw, 
daughter  of  the  late  Harry  McGraw,  of  Mc- 
Grawville. 

Dr.  Hendrick  is  a  member  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church,  and  for  the  past  fifteen  years 
has  been  an  elder  in  that  church. 

Dr.  James  W.  Hughes  was  born  in  Men- 
don,  Monroe  county,  N.  Y.,  May  23d,  1832. 
He  pursued  his  preparatory  studies  in  Cort- 
landville  Academ\%  teaching  a  portion  of 
the  time  in  the  village  schools,  and  a  year 
and  a  half  in  northern  Mississippi,  and  en- 
tered Williams  College  in  1856.  He  sub- 
sequently was  professor  of  mathematics  in 
Cortlandville  Academy,  devoting  his  spare 
hours  to  the  stud}'  of  medicine  with  Dr. 
Miles  Goodyear,   and,  after  attending  two 


courses  of  lectures  in  the  University  of  the 
City  of  New  York,  he  graduated  in  1863. 
In  September  of  the  same  year  he  was 
commissioned  assistant  surgeon  of  the  59th 
Regiment  N.  Y.  Vet.  Vols.,  and  entered  on 
his  duties  at  once.  In  May,  1864,  'le  "'^s 
detailed  for  duty  in  the  di\-ision  field  hos- 
pital, and  had  charge  of  two  of  its  wards 
until  August,  when  he  was  proinoted  to  the 
more  important  and  responsible  position  of 
one  of  the  division  operating  staff  On  the 
4th  of  March  following  he  was  commissioned 
surgeon  of  the  I52d  Regiment  N.  Y.  Vols., 
and  on  the  25th  of  the  same  month  was,  by- 
order  of  Major- General  Francis  C.  Barlow, 
made  division  surgeon,  and  put  in  charge 
of  the  division  field  hospital,  in  which  posi- 
tion he  ser\ed  until  the  close  of  the  war. 

On  being  mustered  out  he  returned  to 
his  home  in  Cortland  and  commenced  the 
practice  of  medicine,  and  still  continues  his 
professional  work  in  that  place. 

In  natural  history  Dr.  Hughes  "follows 
in  the  footsteps  of  his  illustrious  predeces- 
sor," the  venerated  Goodyear,  in  his  taste 
for  botany  and  horticulture.  His  familiar- 
it}-  with  the  flora  of  Cortland  county  ren- 
ders him  an  authority  in  that  department. 

He  keeps  his  library  well  supplied  with 
the  latest  and  best  professional  books  and 
journals. 

As  a  physician  he  is  faithful  in  his  devo- 
tion to  the  interests  of  his  patients. 

Dr.  Hughes  is  an  elder  in  the  Presby- 
terian Church. 

Dr.  John  H.  Knapp  was  born  in  18 19. 
Studied  medicine  in  the  office  of  Drs.  White 
&  Lyman,  of  Sherburne,  and  was  licensed 
to  practice  in  the  spring  of  1843.  Having 
practiced  in  Marathon  and  Etna,  he  finally 
fi.Ked  his  residence  at  Harford,  where  he 
has  largely  enjoyed  the  confidence  and  re- 
spect of  the  communit}-  as  a  ]jh\sician  and 
citizen. 

He  united  with  the  County  Medical  So- 


i;4 


History  of  Cortland  Couni  v. 


cict)-  ill  1858,  and  was  its  president  in  1861 
and  again  in  1867. 

In  1855  Dr.  Knapp  represented  his  coun- 
ty in  the  Legislature  as  Member  of  the  As- 
sembl}',  and  has  also  served  his  town  in  the 
Board  of  Supervisors. 

In  Ma)',  1863,  lie  was  appointed  b\-  Pres- 
ident Lincoln  as  surgeon  of  the  board  of 
enrollment  for  the  23d  New  York  Congres- 
sional district,  and  remained  as  such  to  the 
close  of  the  war,— having  examined  in  that 
time  probably  over  6,000  men. 

Dr.  John  D.  Tripp,  of  Virgil,  was  born 
in  Dryden,  N.  Y.,  August  isth,  1843.  His 
preparatory  education  was  received  in  the 
common  school  and   in    Dryden  Academy. 

He  enlisted  in  the  army  in  September, 
1 861,  was  injured  in  Fort  Totten,  and  dis- 
charged in  1862;  returned  to  Dryden  and 
commenced  the  study  of  medicine  under 
the  instruction  of  Dr.  Isaac  S.  Briggs ;  at- 
tended medical  lectures  at  Geneva,  and  in 
the  spring  of  1864  was  examined  and  ap- 
pointed medical  cadet.  During  the  winter 
of  1864-65,  was  assigned  to  the  department 
of  the  east,  with  headquarters  at  New  York 
city,  and,  by  doing  night  duty,  was  per- 
mitted to  attend  the  spring  session  of  lect- 
ures at  Long  Island  College  Hospital,  and 
graduated  from  that  institution  in  June, 
1865.  He  then  did  duty  for  a  time  as  as- 
sistant surgeon. 

In  October,  1865,  he  settled  in  Virgil, 
where  he  continues  the  practice  of  his  pro- 
fession. He  became  a  member  of  the  Coun- 
ty Medical  Society,  June,  1866,  and  in 
1878  was  elected  its  president.  He  has 
read  before  the  society  several  interesting 
papers,  more  especially  on  the  recent  dis- 
coveries in  the  functions  of  the  nervous 
system. 

The  County  Society  has  always  main- 
tained a  representation  in  the  State  Med- 
ical Society  as  well  as  in  the  American 
Medical    Association,    and    in    the    District 


Medical  Associations  of  Central  New  York, 
also  in  the  neighboring  county  medical  so- 
cieties. 

The  society  adopted  the  code  of  ethics 
of  the  American  Medical  Association  after 
the  organization  of  the  latter  in  1847,  which 
had  also  been  adopted  b)'  the  State  Socie- 
ty, so  that  it  was,  in  the  matter  of  ethics, 
in  conformit)'  with  the  State  and  national 
societies. 

But  when,  in  1S82,  the  State  Society,  at 
a  thinl)'  attended  meeting,  but  packed  for 
a  purpose,  adopted  what  is  called  the  "new 
code,"  against  the  most  serious  and  earnest 
protests  and  warnings  of  the  minority  pres- 
ent, as  well  as  against  a  large  majority  of 
the  constituent  county  societies, —  refusing 
to  postpone  the  consideration  of  the  subject 
for  even  one  night,  —  the  Cortland  County 
Medical  Societ)'  refused  to  comply  with  the 
demand  of  the  State  Society  to  revise  its 
code  of  ethics  so  that  it  should  conform  to 
that  of  the  State  Societ)'.  B\-  a  large  ma- 
jorit}-  —  twenty-three  to  four  —  the  Coun- 
ty Society  stands  by  the  national  code,  and 
is  largely  represented  in  the  new  State 
Medical  Association. 

The  society  in  its  meetings,  annual  or 
semi-annual,  has,  with  few  exceptions,  held 
its  proceedings  and  discussions  in  a  most 
harmonious  spirit.  It  has  been  the  aim  of 
its  members  at  such  times  to  elicit  and  im- 
part practical  information, —  to  draw  out 
the  valuable  results  of  individual  experi- 
ence, observation  and  study,  while  a  healthy 
esprit  dc  corps  has  been  maintained. 

CHRONOLOGICAL  LIST  OF  MEMBERS. 
Name.  Dale  of  Election. 

Lewis  S.  Owen 1808 

I ohn   Miller 1808 

Luther  Rice 1808 

Elijah  C.  Wheeler 1808 

Rohert  D.  Taggart 1808 

Ezra  Pannel ... 1808 

.Mien  Barney      1808 

Jesse  Searl _    i8o8 


The  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


i;5 


Mordecai  Lowe 

Joseph  Sawtell 

Levi  Boies 

John  Lynde 

Marcius  Simmons 

Joel  R.  Carpenter 

Peleg   B.  Peckham 

Miles  Goodyear 

Lewis  Riggs 

Alvan  Ryan ... 

Oliver  P.  Raymond  — 

Geo.  W.  Bradford 

Azariah  Blanchard 

Horace  Bronson 

Elias  P.  Metcalf 

Joseph  H.  Ellis 

Eleazer  W.  Grain 

Joseph    Ballard 

Hiram  N.  Eastman  _ . 
Phineas  H.  Burdick . . 
Alanson  Burroughs .  _ . 

Turnis  Turner 

Sylvester  F.  Pelton  _ .  _ 

Harvey   Houghton 

Archelaus  Green 

Daniel  M.  Wakely..- 

Hubbel  Fox . .  _ 

Corrington  Babcock__ 

Robert  C.  Owen 

Isaac  Noyes 

Arabert  B.  Smith 

Alanson  Owen 

Lyman  Eldredge 

Constantine  P.  Weaver 

Isaac  S.  Briggs 

Daniel    Havens 

Hiram  Brock  way . 

Henry  Williams 

Marsena  Terry 

Ira  L.  Babcock 

John  Jeffrey 

brvil  P.  Laird 

Frederick  Hyde . . 

Azariah  B.  Shipman  . . 

George  W.  Maxson 

Melvin  A.  Webster 

Francis  A.  Decker 

William  M.  Freeman   . 
Christopher  L.  Main  .  _ 


809 
812 
812 

8'5 
817 
818 
818 
818 
819 
820 
820 
821 
821 
822 
823 
824 
826 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
828 
829 
829 
830 
830 
830 
831 
83' 
831 
832 
833 
833 
833 
833 
833 
834 
834 
834 
836 


Ashbel  Patterson 1836 

Edwin  P.  Healy 1838 

Jonathan  W.  Jones 1839 

Eleazer  H.  Barnes 1840 

David  W.  Houghtaling 1840 

Hiram  \Viggins 1840 

Joseph  Shipman 1841 

Leander  Green  . 1841 

William  J.  Wilson 1842 

Franklin  T.  May  berry -1842 

Lysander  B.  White 1842 

Anson  B.  Caul - 1843 

Henry   P.  Eells . .  1844 

Lyman  H.  Davis 1844 

Caleb  Green __ 1 845 

James  Finn 1845^ 

George  N.  Woodward  .  _ 1846 

W.  B.  Sturtevant -  - 1846 

Charles  N.  Kingman 1846 

Titus  B.  Davidson 1847 

Charles  Thomas 1848 

William  Fitch 1849 

Lorenzo  J.  Keen .  1850 

Daniel  E.  Foot 1852 

Marcellus  R.  Smith 1853 

Charles  H.  Swain 1853 

Dix  A.  Shevalier 1853 

Franklin  Goodyear 1854 

Henry  C.  Hendrick 1855 

William  H.  Niles 1855 

Charles  S.  Richardson 1858 

A.  D.  Read 1858 

J.  H.  Knapp 1858 

Jerome  Angel _  _ _  1858 

T.  C.  Pomeroy 1859 

G.  L.  Newcomb 1862 

D.  W.  Burdick 1863 

WilHam  Galagher _  1863 

I.  D.  Warner 1865 

A.  L.  Head .1865 

H.  O.  Jewett 1865 

James  W.  Hughes 1866 

J.   D.  Tripp 1866 

William  Witherell 1866 

L.  C.  Warner .1867 

N.  R.  Barnes 1867 

J .  C.  Nelson 1867 

De  Forest  Hunt 1867 

S.  C.  Webb .1867 


176 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


M.  G.  Hyde 

O.  G.  Dibble - 

D.  C.  Waters 

William  B.  Niles .... 
George  G.  Bosworth  . . . 
Marcellus  L.  Halbert.. 

Henry  T.  Dana 

George  D.  Bradford 

Owen  C.  Hall    - 

Amasa  Quivey 

J.  B.  McClellan 

Francis  G.  Wheelock . . 
Kdward  W.  McBirney. 

Dewitt  C.   Clark 

Herman  D.  Hunt 

Francis  W.  Higgins  — 

Charles  E.  Bennett 

Frank  H.  Green 


CHRONOLOGICAL    LIST    OF    PRESIDENT 

Lewis  S.  Owen 1808, 

John  Miller 1820, 

John  Lynde 

Lewis  S.  Owen 

Miles  Goodyear 

Lewis  Riggs._ .-1825, 

Jesse  Searl 

A.    Blanchard .  _  _ 1828, 

Levi  Boies 

Miles  Goodyear 

Horace   Bronson _ 


Lewis  Riggs . 

Miles  Goodyear 1 834  to 

A.  B.  Shipman 

Miles  Goodyear 

A.   B.  Smith 1843, 

Horace   Bronson 

Lyman  Eldredge 

Miles  Goodyear 

P.  H.  Burdick 

Frederick  Hyde 1849, 

P.  H.  Burdick 

Caleb  Green .    

C.  ^L  Kingman - . 

Geo.  W.  Maxson 

L.J.  Keen 

(ieo.  W.  Bradford 

William    Fitch 

John  Miller 

F.  Hyde.. 


868 
869 
869 

871 

87, 

872 

872 

87s 

875 

875 
876 

877 

877 
880 
880 
881 
882 


820 
821 

822 

823 
824 
826 
827 
829 
830 
831 
832 
833 
840 

841 
842 

844 

845 
846 
847 
848 
850 
85J 
85-' 
853 
854 

855 
856 

857 
858 

859 


C.  ^L  Kingman 1 860 

J.  H.  Knapp._ 1861 

Caleb    Green 1862 

Horace    Bronson 1863 

S.   Beebe.. 1864.    1865 

L  D.  Warner 1866 

J.  H.   Knapp ...1867 

J.  C.  Nelson.. i868 

S.  C.  Webb 1869 

H.  C.  Hendrick 1870 

Isaac  S.  Briggs _ .  1871 

E.  H.  Barnes .1872 

H.  O.  Jewett -1873.   '874 

M.  G.  Hyde 1875,   1876 

H.  T.  Dana. 1877 

J.   D.  Tripp 1878 

D.  W.  Burdick. 1876 

A.  (Quivey ..1880,   1881 

Marcellus   R.  Smith  .  _ 1882,   1883 

Charles  E.  Bennett 1 884 

CHRONOLOGICAL    LIST  OF  SECREI  ARIES. 

Jesse  Searl 1808  to  1820 

Lewis  Riggs - 1820  to  1823 

Jesse  Searl 1823  to  1825 

Geo.  W.    Bradford 182510  1870 

Caleb    Green 1870  to  1884 

PRESENT    MEMBERS    OF     THE    SOCIETY. 

Jerome  Angel, - Union  Valley 

E.  H.  Barnes,  .  - - -  Marathon 

Charles  E.  Bennett, Cortland 

Isaac  S.  Briggs, . .  Dryden,  'I'omp.  Co. 

Daniel  W.  Burdick, Homer 

George  D.  Bradford, Homer 

Dewitt  C.  Clark, Marathon 

Henry  T.  Dana, Cortland 

William  Fitch, .Dryden,  'I'omp.  Co. 

Caleb  Green, Homer 

Frank  H.  Green, Homer 

M.  L.  Halbert, Cincinnatus 

A.  L.  Head, Homer 

H.  C.  Hendrick, McGrawvilie 

F.  W.  Higgins, Truxton 

James  W.  Hughes, Cortland 

Herman  D.  Hunt, Preble 

Frederick  Hyde, Cortland 

Miles  G.  Hyde, - Cortland 

Homer  O.  Jewett, .  _ Cortland 

John  H.  Knapp, Harford 

(George  W.  Maxson, Scott 


Secret  Societies,  etc. 


177 


Edward  W.  McBirney, \\'\\\et 

Judson  C.  Nelson, .  _ Truxton 

A.  D.  Read,. - -  -  -  Marathon 


Marcellus  R.  Smith,. Cincinnatus 

J.  D.  Tripp -  .Virgil 

Sumner  C.  Webb, Homer 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


secret  societies,  etc. 


The  Free  .ind  Accepted   Masons  of  Cortland  County 
Other  Lodges  Instituted  —  The  Independent  Order  of  Odil 

THE  orders  of  Odd  Fellows,  Masons, 
and  others  somewhat  similar  in  char- 
acter, have  always  been  well  represented  in 
this  county,  and  the  different  lodges  now 
embrace  many  of  the  leading  citizens;  this 
is  especially  true  of  those  ancient  and  hon- 
orable orders,  the  Free  and  Accepted  Ma- 
sons and  the  Independent  Order  of  Odd 
Fellows. 

The  first  Masonic  Lodge  in  Cortland 
county  (then  Onondaga)  was  known  as 
Homer  Lodge  No.  137,  which  was  char- 
tered by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of 
New  York  to  brethren  residing  in  the 
county  and  vicinity  on  the  9th  day  of  May, 
I  806.  Under  this  charter  the  lodge  worked 
until  June  6th,  1833,  when  the  warrant  was 
forfeited. 

The  old  records  of  this  lodge  are  still 
preserved  by  the  present  lodge  in  Homer 
and  the  charter  was  deposited  in  the  ar- 
chives of  the  Grand  Lodge  but  a  few  years 
ago,  by  L.  E.  Barker,^  of  Homer  village. 
Hung  in  the  lodge  rooms  at  Homer  are  also 
the  old  warrant  of  Washington  Chapter 
No.  29  Royal  Arch  Masons;  also  the  war- 
rant of  the  old  Preble  Lodge. 

The  next  lodge  in  the  county  was  insti- 
tuted at  Preble,  its  charter  bearing  the  date 
of  Nov.  lOth,  1814;   it   was   called    Hesper 

1  We  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Barker  for  important  assis- 
tance in  this  connection,  and  also  to  Geo.  I^.  Warren, 
of  Cortland  village.  Mr.  Barker  was  Master  of  Homer 
Lodge  from  1865  to  1871,  and  District  Deputy  Grand 
Master  m  1S70-71. 


—  The  First  Lodge  in   tlie  County — Its  Old  Records  — 
Fellows  —  Lodges  ami  OITicers  —  Other  Societies. 

Lodge  No.  237  and  was  suspended  June 
5th,  1834. 

On  the  8th  of  January,  1 821,  a  warrant 
was  issued  to  Miles  Dunbar,  as  master; 
Alanson  Coats,  senior  warden;  Arnold 
Hicock,  junior  warden,  and  other  brethren, 
to  hold  a  lodge  in  Tru.xton,  to  be  called 
Truxton  Lodge  No.  ^^^.  The  warrant 
was  surrendered  June  8th  1832. 

A  warrant  was  issued  to  Benjamin  S. 
Campbell,  master;  Jabez  B.  Phelps,  senior 
warden;  Nathan  Dayton,  junior  warden, 
and  other  brethren,  on  the  6th  of  June, 
1823,  to  hold  a  lodge  at  Cortland  (then  in 
the  town  of  Homer)  by  the  name  of  Cort- 
land Lodge  No.  371.  This  lodge  held  its 
meetings  at  Port  Watson,  and  the  warrant 
was  surrendered  June  8th,  1832. 

In  June,  1825,  a  warrant  was  issued  to 
Jacob  Hemingway,  master;  Caleb  Sher- 
man, senior  warden;  Wm.  Lincoln,  junior 
warden,  and  other  brethren,  to  hold  a  lodge 
in  Virgil,  to  be  called  La  Fayette  Lodge 
No.  409.  This  lodge  forfeited  its  charter 
June  8th,  1832. 

A  tt'arrant  was  issued  to  Malicah  Church, 
master;  John  Davis,  senior  warden;  Bar- 
nabas Hastings,  junior  warden,  and  others, 
June  1st,  1825,  to  hold  a  lodge  at  Harrison 
(now  Marathon)  by  the  name  of  Western 
Union  Lodge  No.  417.  The  warrant  was 
surrendered  and  work  discontinued  June 
5th,  1835. 

During  the   Anti-Masonic   political  cru- 


178 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


sadc  the  orilcr  in  this  cuiint}',  as  in  most 
other  sections,  rcniainecl  dormant  and  so 
continued  from  about  the  date  last  men- 
tioned durinj4  a  period  of  more  tlian  twenty 
years.  But  in  June,  1X59,  CorthiiuK'ilie 
Lodge  No.  470  was  chartered.  The  follow- 
ing brethren  were  charter  members:  Joseph 
Reynolds,  Horace  Dibble,  C.  S.  Mattison, 
R.  H.  Duell,  S.  R.  Hunter,  Franklin  Good- 
year, Horace  L.  Green,  C.  B.  Chittenden, 
A.  1'.  .Smith,  J.  A.  Schermcrhorn,  S.  L. 
Thompson,  ( ).  V,  Eldredge,  B.  Bulman  and 
Josiah  Hart,  jr.  This  lodge  has  had  a 
membership  of  over  four  hundred.  The 
present  officers  are:  S.  S.  Kno.x,  W.  i\I. ; 
Fitz  Boynton,  S.  W. ;  C.  T..  Kinney,  J.  W. ; 
F.  M.  Keator,  treasurer;  VVm.  F.  Bnrdick, 
secretary;  H.  J,  Harrington,  S.  D. ;  H.  T. 
Hollister,  J.  D. ;  P.  Van  Bergen,  tiler;  J.  J. 
Taggart,  organist. 

On  the  20th  of  Sepetmber,  1854,  Homer 
Lodge  No.  352  was  instituted  under  a  dis- 
pensation from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the 
State  of  New  York,  Joseph  D.  Evans,  grand 
master,  with  the  following  charter  members: 
Ashbel  Patterson,  M.  D. ;  Cornelius  B. 
Gould,  Lj'man  Reynolds,  E.  C.  Reed, 
Stephen  Knapp,  H.  D.  Patterson,  Wm.  R. 
Smith,  Elijah  Button,  I'".lijah  Baker,  Josiah 
Patterson,  FVank  Richardson,  M.  E.  Wal- 
pole,  Elnathan  W.  Vanderlyn.  On  the  3  1st 
day  of  August,  1855,  the  lodge  was  duly 
constituted  under  a  warrant  and  the  follow- 
ing officers  were  installed  by  Geo.  N. 
Williams,  deputy  grand  master:  Ashbel 
Patterson,  master;  Ella  R.  Stephens,  senior 
warden;  Hammil  Thompson,  junior,  war- 
den ;Wm.  L.  Sherman,  treasurer;  Josiah 
Patterson,  secretary;  A.  W.  Kingsbury, 
senior  deacon;  E.  \V.  \'anderl\'n,  junior 
deacon;  Jas.  McNiel,  tiler. 

The  present  officers  of  the  lodge  are: 
Chas.  E.  Wills,  W.  ma.ster;  R.  A.  Goodell, 
senior  warden;  Philo  Jones,  junior  warden; 
John  J.  Murray,  treasurer;   Robert  J.  Wat- 


son, secretary;  F.  D.  Carpenter,  senior 
deacon;  L.  L.  Rood,  junior  deacon;  Isaac 
Smith,  tiler.  Geo.  Murra}-,  jr.,  C.  H.  Gil- 
lett  and  B.  H.  Griffin  are  the  trustees. 
This  lodge  is  incorporated. 

Royal  Arch  Masonry. — The  first  Royal 
Arch  Masonry  of  which  we  have  any  record 
in  this  county  was  in  1809,  when  a  dispen- 
sation was  granted  to  comps.  George  Rice, 
Hooker  l^allard,  Samuel  Hoar,  jr.,  and 
others  to  hold  a  lodge  at  Homer,  by  the 
name  of  Centre  Mark  Lodge  No.  50.  On 
the  7th  of  February,  18 10,  a  warrant  was 
issued  to  Geo.  Rice,  high  priest;  Asahel 
Minor,  king;  Reuben  Washburn,  scribe, 
and  others,  to  hold  a  chapter  of  Royal 
Arch  Masons  in  Homer  by  the  name  of 
Washington  Chapter  No.  29.  This  chap- 
ter was  represented  in  the  Grand  Chapter 
by  companion  George  Rice,  Joshua  Ballard, 
Joseph  Crofoot,  Jabez  B.  Phelps,  Nathan 
Gillett,  Luther  Nicols,  Benjamin  Enos,  F^d- 
ward  C.  Reed,  William  Andrews,  Benjamin 
Chamberlain  and  Orin  Stimpson.  The 
chapter  could  not  withstand  the  Anti-Ma- 
sonic prejudice  and  forfeited  its  charter, 
until  tile  year  1865,  when  a  dispensation  was 
granted  and  the  chapter  revived. 

On  the  8th  of  F""ebruary,  1866,  a  charter 
was  granted  to  Roswell  K.  Bourne,  high 
priest;  S.  Adams,  king;  Geo.  L.  Warren, 
scribe,  and  companions  John  W.  Osgood, 
W.  H.  Crane,  G.  W.  Davenport,  R.  W. 
Bourne  and  Horace  Dibble,  to  hold  a  chap- 
ter of  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  Cortland,  to 
be  called  Cortland  Chapter  No.  194.  There 
have  been  on  the  rolls  of  this  chapter  102 
members  and  the  chapter  is  now  in  a  flour- 
ishing condition.  Following  are  the  present 
officers:  Geo.  L.  Warren,  H.  P.;  A.  Sager, 
K. ;  O.  Hitchcock,  S. ;  Fitz  Boynton,  treas.; 
W.  F.  Burdick,  sec'y;  C.  E.  Selover,  C.  of 
H. ;  W.  D.  Tisdale,  R.  A.  C. ;  H.  T.  Dana, 
P.  S.;  Fitz  Boynton,  M.  3d  V.;  C.  E. 
Ingalls,    M.    2d  v.;    T.    T.    Bates,   M.    1st 


Secret  Societies,  etc. 


'79 


v.;    P.    Van  Bergen,  tiler;     J.   J.   Taggart, 
organist. 

Knights  Templar. — The  first  and  only 
Comrnandery  of  Knights  Templar  ever  or- 
ganized in  the  county  is  Cortland  Com- 
rnandery No.  50,  Knights  Templar,  which 
was  chartered  in  October,  1871,  to  the  fol- 
lowing named  Sir  Knights:  W.  H.  Crane, 
Geo.  L.  Warren,  A.  Sager,  J.  D.  Benton, 
Wm.  F.  Burdick,  M.  A.  Rice,  R.  E.  Hill, 
E.  M.  Seacord,  A.  B.  Wooster,  P.  Van  Ber- 
gen, Wm.  S.  Copeland,  C.  W.  Kinne,  M.  J. 
Robinson,  Seth  Hobart.  All  these  Sir 
Knights  except  two  received  the  order  of 
knighthood  in  St.  Augustin  Comrnandery 
38,  at  Ithaca.  The  present  officers  are: 
Wm.  F.  Burdick,  E.  C  . ;  R.  C.  Shattuck, 
general;  Geo.  L.  Warren,  capt.  general;  A. 
Sager,  treas. ;  E.  M.  Seacord,  sec'y  ;  H.  T. 
Dana,  prel. ;  M.  A.  Rice,  senior  warden  ;  D. 
C.  Smith,  junior  warden  ;  C.  F.  Thompson, 
St.  br. ;  O.  Hitchcock,  sw.  br. ;  Fitz  Boyn- 
ton,  warder;  C.  F.  Baldwin,  C.  E.  Ingalls 
and  Geo.  W.  Loomis,  guards ;  P.  Van  Ber- 
gen, captain  of  the  guard. 

independent  order  of  odd  fellows. 

The  first  lodge  of  this  order  in  Cortland 
county  was  instituted  F"ebruar\-  i6th,  1847. 
The  charter  was  granted  by  the  Grand 
Lodge  of  the  State  of  New  York  on  Janu- 
ary 19th,  1847,  to  Tioughnioga  Lodge,  No. 
263.  The  charter  members  were  Lyman 
Reynolds,  Isaac  Fairchild,  Horace  P.  Good- 
rich, John  H.  Ferguson  and  Wm.  P.  Ran- 
dall. When  the  State  was  subsequently 
divided  into  the  Northern  and  Southern 
Jurisdiction,  .or  Grand  Lodges,  the  number 
of  this  old  lodge  was  changed  to  50  of  North- 
ern New  York.  This  is  all  the  information 
we  have  been  able  to  obtain  relative  to  the 
first  lodge  of  Odd  Fellows  in  this  county. 

Homer  Lodge  No.  280  I.  O.  O.  F.,  was 
instituted  on  the  30th  of  March,  1847,  by 
R.    F.    Russell,   D.    D.    G.    M.    of   Cayuga 


District.  The  petitioners  for  the  charter 
were  D.  H.  Strickland,  German  Thompson, 
Wm.  Dalrymple,  Samuel  Wallace  and  H. 
L.  Bowen.  The  lodge  proved  very  pros- 
perous, increasing  largely  in  numbers  and 
in  wealth,  under  the  Jurisdiction  of  the 
Grand  Lodge  of  Northern  New  York.  In 
August,  1866,  the  union  of  Northern  and 
Southern  New  York  was  made  ;  P.  G.  H. 
W.  Blashfield  was  representative  of  Homer 
Lodge  at  that  session,  held  in  New  York 
city.  Subsequently  it  became  necessary  to 
renumber  the  lodges,  which  was  done.  Ho- 
mer being  changed  to  No.  99.  On  the  1st 
of  March,  1875, lodge  rooms  were  destroyed 
by  fire  with  all  their  contents,  causing  a 
loss  of  one  thousand  dollars  to  the  lodge, 
yet  not  one  meeting  was  lost,  for  at  the 
regular  night  of  meeting  the  lodge  took 
rooms  in  the  Masonic  Hall  and  continued 
to  occupy  them  while  the  block  was  being 
rebuilt  and  a  new  hall  fitted.  Fortunately 
the  lodge  had  a  surplus  fund  to  meet  the 
emergency,  so  the  new  hall  was  furnished, 
and  a  balance  of  several  hundred  dollars 
left  in  the  treasury. 

The  lodge  still  continues  in  a  healths- 
condition.  The  present  elective  officers 
are  C.  F.  Williams,  N.  G.  ;  E.  E.  Warfield, 
V.  G. :  George  S.  Gilbert,  secretary  ;  S.  P. 
Miller,  treasurer. 

Marathon  Lodge  No.  415  I.  O.  O.  F., 
under  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge 
of  Northern  New  York,  was  instituted 
January  2d,  1852,  and  its  first  officers  were: 
Nelson  Roe,  N.  G.  ;  Israel  W.  Taft,  V.  G. ; 
Henry  W.  Burlingame,  secretary.  The 
lodge  was  run  with  uniform  success  until 
August  7th,  1877,  when  its  lodge  room  and 
property  were  destroyed  by  fire,  entailing  a 
loss  upon  the  institution  of  several  hundred 
dollars.  It  was  reorganized  under  a  dupli- 
cate charter  November  14th  of  the  same 
year,  but  has  never  entireh-  regained  its 
former  prosperity. 


I  So 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


When  the  Graiul  Lodges  of  Northern 
and  Southern  New  York  were  consoHdated, 
the  number  of  the  lotlgc  was  changed  to 
167,  which  it  retains. 

The  jjresent  officers  of  tiie  lodge  are  : 
Fred.  S.  Dellow,  N.  G.  ;  Isaac  Stevens,  V. 
G.  ;   Lewis  A.  Burgess,  secretary. 

Vesta  Lodge  No.  555,  was  instituted  in 
Cortland,  December  15th,  1870.  The  lodge 
meets  Monday  evenings  in  Odd  Fellows' 
Hall.  The  present  officers  are  :  Charles  B. 
Roethig.  N.  G. ;  L  Whiteson,  V.  G. ;  A.  M. 
Delavan,  secretar\-;  D.  C.  Johnson,  treasurer. 


Lion  luicanipment  meets  also  in  Odd 
Fellows'  Hall  on  the  first  and  third  Wednes- 
days of  each  month.  Its  officers  are:  H. 
W.  Blashfield,  C.  P.  ;  Arthur  Nelson,  H. 
P.;  S.  N.  Gooding,  S.  W.  ;  F.  G.  Kinney, 
scribe  ;  C.  E.  Ingalls,  treasurer.  The  Fln- 
campment  was  instituted  in  1871. 

There  are  lodges  of  Odd  Fellows  now  in 
existence  in  Cortland  village,  Marathon, 
Homer  and  Preble.  There  have  also  been 
several  other  lodges  of  the  order,  which 
ha\e  also  since  been  suspended,  of  which 
we  ha\'e  no  definite  data. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


COUNTY  SOCIETIES,   lU'ILI  IIXG.S,   ETC. 

The  Cortland  County  Agricullur.il  Society  —  Its  First  Fairs  —  List  of  its  Presidents  —  The  Cortland  County 
Farmers'  Club  —  Its  Organization  and  First  Officers  —  Value  of  its  Work—  List  of  Officers  — The  Cortland  County 
Bible  Society  —  The  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  —  County  Buildings. 


THE  County  Agricultural  Society. —  The 
formation  of  the  first  agricultural  so- 
ciety in  Cortland  county  in  1818  has  been 
described  in  the  general  history,  with  the 
details  of  the  first  fair  held.  It  is  not  known 
just  when  this  first  organization  closed  its 
career  of  usefulness,  but  it  is  probable  that 
there  was  not  a  long  interval  between  that 
event  and  the  organization  of  the  second 
society  in  1838.  It  is  conceded  that  to 
Henry  Stephens,  more  than  to  any  other 
person,  is  due  the  credit  of  making  the  first 
organization  a  success. 

On  the  first  day  of  October,  1838,  a 
meeting  was  held  at  the  court-house  for  the 
purpose  of  organizing  the  second  and  pres- 
ent agricultural  society.  W'm.  Berrj'  was 
chairman  of  this  meeting  and  Henry  S.  Ran- 
dall secretary.  The  first  officers  chosen 
were  John  Miller,  president ;  Joseph  Reyn- 
olds and  Peter  Walrad,  vice-presidents ; 
Rufus  Boies,  treasurer ;  Paris  Barber,  sec- 
retary.    The  first  fair  was  held  at  the  Eagle 


Ta\ern  in  Cortland  \illage  and  was  consid- 
ered a  success  for  that  period,  although  it 
was  considered  necessary  in  I  840  to  reduce 
the  liighest  premium  from  $3  to  $2.  Jesse 
Ives  was  chosen  president  in  1841,  and  in 
the  following  year  an  appropriation  was  se- 
cured from  the  State,  for  the  advancement 
of  agricultural  interests,  through  the  medium 
of  the  socict)-.  The  fairs  were  held  at  the 
court-house,  in  the  Eagle  Tavern,  and  per- 
haps elsewhere  until  the  grounds  in  Homer 
village  were  secured.  These  were  occupied 
until  1857,  when  the  present  tract  of  land 
between  the  villages  was  secured.  Im- 
provements have  been  made  and  buildings 
erected  from  time  to  time  on  these  grounds, 
until  now  the)- -are  admirably  adapted  to 
their  purposes  and  among  the  most  com- 
modious and  convenient  fair  grounds  in  the 
State. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  presidents  of 
the  society  who  have  been  elected  annually, 
beginning  with  the  )-ear  1S41  :  Jesse  Ives, 


County  Societies,  Buildings,  etc. 


i»i 


Dan  Hibbard,  Wm.  Randall,  Jedediah  Bar- 
ber, Rufus  Boies,  H.  S.  Randall,  Amos 
Rice,  James  S.  Leach,  Peter  Walrad,  Hiram 
Hopkins,  Noah  Hitchcock,  Antlion\-  Freer, 
Paris  Barber,  Israel  Boies,  Alfred  L.  Cham- 
berlain, Joshua  Ballard,  S.  D.  Freer,  Manly 
Hobart,  W.  P.  Randall,  VV.  E.  Tallman,  S. 
D.  Freer,   Geo.  Murray,  Wm.  A.  Boies,  H. 

B.  Van  Hoesen,  C.  C.  Taylor,  A.  L.  Cham- 
berlain, F.  H.  Hibbard,  A.  D.  Blodyett,  H. 
Dennison,  J.  C.  Carmichael,  S.  D.  P'reer,  A. 
L.  Merrill,  James  M.  Smith  (four  successive 
years),  James  H.  Clark,  A.  D.  Blodgett, 
James  M.  Smith,  L.  J.  Fitzgerald  (1882-83), 

C.  W.  Gage,  1884. 

The  Cortland  County  P'armers'  Club.  — 
This  organization  was  formed  in  the  year 
1878,  through  the  call  of  a  meeting  at  the 
ofiRce  of  John  S.  Barber,  esq.,  for  Wednes- 
day, February  13th.  Allen  B.  Benham  was 
chosen  temporary  chairman  of  the  meeting 
and  T.  Mason  Loring  temporary  secretary. 
A.  P.  Rowley  stated  the  object  of  the  meet- 
ing, and  on  his  motion  the  following  officers 
were  appointed:  president,  A.  D.  Blodgett; 
vice-president,  Dwight  H.  Hitchcock  ;  sec- 
retary, T.  Mason  Loring.  On  motion  of 
James  M.  Smith,  A.  P.  Rowley,  was  chosen 
treasurer.  A.  P.  Rowley,  A.  B.  Benham, 
Charles  Copeland  and  T.  Mason  Loring 
were  made  a  committee  to  prepare  a  code 
of  by-laws.  Chas.  H.  Price,  one  of  the  mem- 
bers, offered  the  gratuitous  use  of  a  room  in 
Taylor  Hall  Block,  for  the  temporary  con  - 
venience  of  the  club,  and  the  first  regular 
meeting  was  held  there  on  the  23d  day  of 
February,  1878.  At  this  meeting  the  fol- 
lowing question  was  discussed  :  "  Plaster, 
its  uses  and  the  time  of  appl)ing  it." 

The  club  received  numerous  acquisitions 
to  its  membership  during  the  first  year  of 
its  existence,  and  its  intelligent  discussions 
of  questions  of  importance  to  the  farmers  of 
the  county  awakened  a  good  degree  of  in- 
terest.    During  its  life  of  about  si.x  years  the 


club  have  invited  and  been  addressed  by 
many  able  men,  among  whom  may  be 
named  Prof  Roberts  and  Prof  Law,  of 
Cornell  University,  Hon.  Harris  Lewis, 
president  of  the  State  Dairymen's  Associa- 
tion, Mr.  Powell,  of  Syracuse,  James  Root, 
of  Skaneateles,  and  others. 

In  the  membership  of  the  club  are  many 
men  who  are  both  practical  and  theoretical 
farmers  of  distinction,  who  have  given  their 
best  thoughts  to  the  consideration  of  vari- 
ous important  topics,  either  in  carefully 
prepared  papers,  or  in  extemporaneous  dis- 
cussion. Among  the  more  prominent  of 
these  we  may  mention  Hon.  B.  F.  Tilling- 
hast,  Hon.  Stephen  Patrick,  A.  D.  Blodgett 
(president  of  the  club  since  its  formation), 
H.  P.  Goodrich,  D.  E.  Whitmore,  Dr.  King- 
man (veterinary  surgeon),  A.  B.  Benham,  Le 
Roy  Gillett,  A.  P.  Rowley, T.  Mason  Loring, 
Charles  Taylor,  Dr.  Jewett,  Prof  J.  H.  Hoose, 
A.  Sager,  Prof.  Milne,  Robert  Purvis,  Martin 
Sanders,  George  Conable,  Dr.  Gazlay,  B.  S. 
Conger,  M.  F.  Cleary,  and  many  others. 

The  club  has  met  every  two  weeks  since 
its  organization,  except  during  the  summer 
work  season,  and  has  accomplished  an 
amount  of  good  that  is  inestimable. 

The  efficiency  displayed  and  the  satisfac- 
tion given  by  the  first  officers  of  the  club, 
as  given  above,  is  testified  to  by  the  fact 
that  the  president  and  treasurer  have  held 
their  offices  ever  since  their  first  election  ; 
H.  P.  Goodrich  was  vice-president  for  five 
years  ;  while  the  secretary's  office  has  been 
filled  by  C.  M.  Bean  and  W.  A.  Bean  since 
the  first  election.  Hon.  B.  I".  Tillinghast  is 
now  the  vice-president. 

The  Cortland  County  Sportsmen's  Club. 
—  This  club  was  organized  and  incorporated 
in  April,  1866,  by  J.  A.  Schermerhorn,  J. 

C.  Carmichael,  J.  S.  Ormsby,  F.  E.  Knight, 
M.  H.  Mills,  W.  R.  Randall,  D.  C.  McGraw, 

D.  H.  Burr,  J.  B.  Fairchild,  F.  O.  Hj-att,  V. 
Carpenter  and  M.  Coats. 


I»2 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


The  princij)nl  objects  of  the  chib  were  the 
preservation  of  game  and  fish  in  the  coun- 
ty, the  proper  enforcement  of  the  laws 
bearing  upon  tliat  subject,  and  the  general 
elevation  of  manly  sports.  In  these  direc- 
tions the  club  accomplished  excellent  re- 
sults, but  it  was  dissolved  about  two  years 


CORTLAND    COUNTY    BIBLE    SOCIETY. 

This  socict)'  was  organized  in  Cortlaml 
village  on  the  27th  of  August,  1816.  Its 
first  officers  were  :  Rev.  Elnathan  Walker, 
president ;  Elder  Alfred  Bennett,  vice-pres- 
ident ;  William  Sears,  corresponding  secre- 
tary ;  Jesse  Searl,  recording  secretary ; 
John  Keep,  treasurer.  The  society  has  ac- 
complished much  good,  more  than  twenty 
thousand  dollars  having  been  contributed 
to  the  spread  of  the  Bible. 

In  the  Cortland  Observer,  printed  at  Ho- 
mer village,  of  the  date  of  September  24th, 
1830,  we  find  the  following,  which  is  of  in- 
terest in  this  connection  :  — 

"Anniversary.  —  The  annual  meeting  of  the 
Cortland  Auxiliary  Bible  Society  was  holden  at 
Cortland  village  on  the  21st  inst.  An  apjiropri- 
ate  discourse  was  delivered  by  Rev.  Alfred  Ben- 
net.  The  report  of  the  directors  was  read  by 
the  Rev.  Luke  Lyons,  by  which  it  ap[)ears  that 
fifty-seven  destitute  families  in  the  county  have 
been  supplied  by  the  society  since  the  last  an- 
nual meeting,  besides  fifty  bibles  which  have 
been  given  to  the  poor  by  a  generous  individual; 
that  the  county  has  been  nearly  supplied;  that 
a  debt  due  the  parent  society  has  been  paid ; 
that  $133  remain  in  the  treasury,  and  that  $422 
have  been  transmitted  to  the  American  Society 
on  the  extra  supjjly.  .  .  .  The  officers  chosen  for 
the  ensuing  year  are  as  follows  :  Rev.  Luke  Ly- 
ons, president;  John  Osborn,  vice-president; 
Franklin  Sherrill,  corresponding  secretary  ;  Jesse 
Searl,  recording  secretary  and  treasurer. 

"  Directors  —  Rev.  John  Keep,  Rev.  Alfred 
Bennet,  John  Keep,  esq.,  John  Hubbard,  Dan- 
iel Miller,  Lemuel  Dady,  Rufus  Boies,  Gideon 
Hoar,  Augustus  Donnelly,  Nathan  Dayton,  Sam- 


uel B.  Hitchcock,  Charles  Chamberlain,  F.lisha 
Grow,  Jared  Babcock,  Asa  G.  Atwater,  Joseph 
L.  Clapp." 

The  Young  Men's  Christian  Association. 
—  This  association  was  organized  March 
1 7th,  1 868,  with  the  following  charter  mem- 
bers :  A.  F.  Tanner,  C.  W.  Collins,  H.  C. 
Smith,  H.  F.  Benton,  R.  A.  Smith,  L.  D. 
Garrison,  J.  A.  Todd,  J.  D.  Fredericks,  W. 
H.  Myers,  T.  F:.  Pomeroy,  A.  N.  Rouns- 
vcll,  Lewis  Bouton. 

F'ollowing  were  the  first  board  of  officers 
of  the  association  :  — 

President  —  A.  F.  Tanner. 

Vice-president  —  H.  C.  Smith. 

Recording  secretary  —  J.  D.  Fredericks. 

Corresponding  secretary — C.  W.  Collins. 

Treasurer  —  R.  A.  Smith. 

Directors  —  H.  F.  Benton,  W.  H.  Myers, 
A.  N.  Rounsvell. 

The  first  business  meetings  of  the  asso- 
ciation were  held  in  Fireman's  Hall,  and 
the  first  devotional  meetings  in  the  Squires 
block.  Early  in  1 869  the  association  moved 
into  rooms  in  Taylor  Hall  block,  where  they 
remained  until  F\^bruary,  1882,  when  they 
again  moved  into  the  Schermerhorn  block, 
and  now  occupy  the  entire  third  floor  of 
that  block.  Four  large  rooms  are  used, 
including  a  parlor,  gymnasium,  reading 
room  and  prayer  room. 

The  present  membership,  consisting  of 
males  onl\-,  is  130.  The  rooms  contain 
about  $200  worth  of  furniture,  and  furnish 
about  the  only  attractive  place  for  young 
men  to  spend  their  leisure  to  their  profit. 
The  rooms  are  open  every  day  (e.xcept  Sun- 
day) from  8  a.  m.  to  10  p.  m.  Bible  classes, 
gospel  and  young  men's  meetings  are  held. 

The  present  officers  of  the  association  are 
as  follows :  — 

President  —  Elmer  Bangs. 

Vice-president  —  Dr.  E.  B.  Nash. 

Recording  secretary^  —  E.  G.  Gould. 
General  secretary  —  W.  N.  P.  Dailey. 


Town  of  Homer. 


183 


Directors  —  C.  F.  Brown,  E.  Jennings, 
C.  E.  Selover,  W,  D.  Tuttle,  B.  L.  Webb.' 

THE  county  clerk's  office. 

Tlic  memory  of  the  old  and  insignificant 
structure,  which  served  as  a  place  of  deposit 
for  the  valuable  county  records  during  a 
period  of  nearly  sixty  years,  has  not  yet 
faded  away ;  indeed,  it  is  perpetuated  by 
numerous  lithographic  prints  which  have 
been  scattered  through  the  county  —  an 
honor  that  probably  woukl  not  have  been 
paid  the  old  building  had  its  use  not  been 
prolonged  until  it  actual])'  became  the 
laughing  stock  of  citizens  and  strangers. 
But  the  imperative  necessity  for  a  new 
building  became  at  length  so  pressing  that 
in  1873  the  Board  of  Supervisors  appointed 
a  committee  to  examine  into  the  subject 
and  report.  With  these  initiatory  steps  Su- 
pervisor Matthias  Van  Iloesen,  of  Preble, 
was,  perhaps,  more  prominent!}'  identified 
than  other  member  of  the  board. 

A  preliminary  report  was  made  to  the 
effect  that  a  new  clerk's  office  was  needed 
(a  self-evident  fact),  and  that  one  of  proper 
size  and  character  could  be  built  for  from 
$15,000  to  $18,000.  The  subject  rested  in 
abej'ance  until  the  next  year  (1874),  when 
another  committee  was  appointed  with 
broader    powers.       Mr.    Ilicok,    of   Homer, 


made  a  proposition  that,  as  the  town  of 
Homer  would  build  and  present  to  the 
county  a  suitable  office,  it  was  the  duty  of 
the  board  to  accept  the  offer  and  locate  it 
in  that  village.  This  proposition  (which 
was  the  last  flickering  attempt  to  locate  a 
portion  of  the  county  buildings  in  Homer) 
was  rejected. 

The  last  mentioned  conmiittee  reported, 
in  1875,  in  favor  of  the  erection  of  a  two- 
story  brick  structure,  fire-proof  and  to  be 
located  either  on  the  old  site,  or  on  land 
owned  by  the  county  just  west  of  the  court- 
house; the  building  to  cost  about  $17,000. 
In  December,  1875,  the  location  was  defi- 
nitely fixed  on  the  old  site  and  proposals  for 
the  building  were  solicited.  The  bid  of  L. 
G.  Viele  was  accepted  by  the  building  com- 
mittee of  the  supervisors  (composed  of  M. 
'Van  Hoesen,  W.  A.  Bentlcy  and  D.  Mc- 
Graw)  and  the  present  handsome  and  con- 
venient structure  was  erected.  It  was  ready 
for  occupancy  in  February,  1877,  and  the 
contents  of  the  old  building  (which  had 
been  temporarily  deposited  elsewhere),  were 
rearranged  under  the  supervision  of  Deputy 
Howard  J.  Harrington  and  placed  on  file 
in  excellent  order.  R.  W.  Bourne  is  the 
present  county  clerk,  and  Howard  J.  Har- 
rington, who  has  been  in  the  office  for  about 
sixteen  years,  is  deputy. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  TOWN  OF  HOMER. 


THE  town  of  Homer  embraces  a  part  of 
the  original  township  No.  19  of  the  Mil- 
itary Tract  (Homer)  and  lies  on  the  western 
border  and  just  north  of  the  center  of  the 
county.     It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the 

1  This  account  of  the  Y.  M.  C.  .V.  was  UiiuUy  fuinished 
by  the  general  secretary. 


towns  of  Preble  and  Scott ;  on  the  east  by 
Truxton  and  Solon  ;  on  the  south  by  Cort- 
landville,  and  on  the  west  by  Cayuga  county. 
The  siu'face  of  the  town  is  broken  by  the 
east  and  west  branches  of  the  Tioughnioga 
river  and  its  two  tributaries.  Cold  brook  and 
Factory  brook.  The  western  part  of  the  town 


1 84 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


consists  of  an  elevated  upland,  rising  to  the 
lieight  of  fifteen  hundred  to  sixteen  hun- 
dred feet  above  tlic  tide.  The  valley  of  the 
western  branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  in  the 
town  is  of  nearh'  an  a\erage  width  of  a  mile, 
and  is  elevated  one  thousand  and  ninety-six 
feet  above  tide.  The  eastern  valley  is  much 
narrower.  A  ridge  of  hills  lies  between  these 
two  valleys,  ranging  from  two  to  five  hun- 
dred feet  in  height  above  the  Tioughnioga, 
and  a  similar  ridge  occupies  the  southwest 
corner  of  the  town. 

The  soil  of  the  river  valleys  is  a  deep,  rich 
alluvial  and  dark  loam,  which  is  well  adapted 
to  tillage.  On  the  hills  it  is  a  sandy  or  grav- 
elly loam,  better  adapted  for  pasturage. 

The  township  of  Homer,  when  erected  in 
1794,  and  down  to  the  year  1829,  embraced 
the  present  town  of  Cortlandville.  Prior  to 
the  year  1791,  when  Amos  Todd  and  Jo- 
seph Beebe  explored  this  beautiful  valley,  the 
territory  now  comprised  within  the  bounda- 
ries of  the  town  of  Homer,  as  well  as  the  sur- 
rounding vicinity,  was  known  to  the  whites 
only  on  maps  and  charts,  and  though  con- 
stituting a  part  of  the  State  of  New  York, 
was  considered,  chiefly  on  account  of  its  lo- 
cation, of  but  minor  importance  to  settlers. 
Previous  to  its  settlement  by  Todd  and 
Beebe  there  was  but  a  legendar}-  history 
of  the  localit}',  consisting  of  reminiscences 
treasured  in  the  mcmor}'  of  the  scattered 
remnants  of  the  Indian  tribes  who  had  oc- 
cupied the  banks  of  the  Chenango  and  the 
Tioughnioga^  rivers.  The  natural  beauty 
of  hill,  dale  and  valley  in  this  region,  with 
the  material  advantages  surrounding,  soon, 
however,  attracted  other  eyes  than  those  of 
the  red  man,  which  led  to  the  beginning  of 
settlement  on  the  site  of  the  present  quiet, 
rural  village  of  Homer,^  whose  spires  and 

1  The  name  of  the  Tioughnioga,  in  the  Indian  lan- 
guage, was  O-nan-no-gi-is-ka,  signifying  "  .shagbark, "  or 
hickory. 

^llonicr  was  called  liy  the  Indians,  "  Te-wis-ta-no- 
ont-sa-ne-ha,"  signifying,  "  the  place  of  tlie  silversmith." 


domes  lend  additional  attractiveness  to  the 
valley. 

To  record  the  events  in  the  lives  and  early 
settlements  of  those  hardy  adventurers  who 
first  located  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiough- 
nioga, or  reared  their  cabins  on  the  hill- 
sides, is  in  part  the  task  before  us.  Fortu- 
nately some  records  were  kept  of  early 
events  in  this  region,  at  a  time  w'hen  they 
were  available  and  could  receive  verification. 
There  also  remain  here  and  there  the  aged 
resident,  whose  memory  reaches  back  to 
early  days  and  whose  co-operation  has  en- 
abled us  to  give  the  principal  facts  connected 
with  the  history  of  this  and  other  towns.^ 

The  first  settlers  in  the  town  of  Homer, 
as  they  were  also  of  the  county,  were  Amos 
Todd  and  Joseph  Beebe,  the  latter's  wife 
Rhoda,  and  John  Miller,  whose  experiences 
will  be  given  a  little  farther  on.  In  the 
spring  of  1792  Mr.  Miller,  after  a  visit 
home,  rcttirncd  with  John  House,  James 
Matthews,  James  Moore  and  Daniel  Miller. 

In  1793  Darius  Kinney,  Roderick  Owen, 
John  Ballard  and  Captain  David  Russell 
came  into  the  town.  In  1794  Jonathan 
Hubbard  and  Moses  Hopkins  (who  located 
in  the  present  town  of  Cortland)  came  in, 
and  were  followed  in  1795  by  Thomas  L. 
and  Jacob  Bishop,  Thomas  Wilcox,  Zebu- 
Ion  Keene,  John  Stone,  Joshua  Atwater, 
Libeus  Andrews,  John  Keep,  Solomon  and 
John  Hubbard,  Thomas  G.,  Ebenezer  and 
Charles  Alvord. 

In  1797  Joshua  Ballard,  John  Albright, 
Asa  White  and  Caleb  Keep  came  into  the 
town,  and  in  1798  considerable  accession 
was  made  to  the  population,  by  persons  set- 

1  It  is  worthy  of  mention  that  the  people  of  Homer 
have  always  been  noted  for  their  patriotism  to  their  coun- 
try, their  religious  character  and  their  longevity;  there 
still  reside  here  a  number  of  early  settlers  who  have 
passed  through  the  different  stages  of  the  history  of  the 
town,  to  its  present  conditiim  of  growth  and  prosperity  ; 
to  them  we  are  indebtecrfor  valuable  assistance,  and  espe- 
cially to  Charles  Kingsbury,  Hosea  Sprague,  Thomas  U. 
Chollar,  and  others. 


Town  of  Homer. 


185 


tling  in  various  parts  of  the  territory,  but 
more  especially  along  the  borders  of  the 
cast  and  west  branches  of  the  river.  While 
the  names  of  all  who  came  in  after  this  date 
cannot  probably  be  given,  we  can  mention 
the  following :  Stephen  Knapp,  Daniel, 
Samuel  and  Gideon  Hobart,  Titus  Stcbbins, 
Samuel  Hotchkiss,  Dr.  Lewis  S.  Owen,  Dea- 
con Noah  Hitchcock,  Zenas  Lilly,  Timothy 
Treat,  Enos  Stimson,  William  Lucas,  Asahel 
Miner,  Col.  Benajah  Tubbs,  John  and  Rich- 
ard Bishop. 1  These  pioneers  all  came  into 
the  town  prior  to  1800,  and  constituted  the 
beginning  of  the  new  settlement.  They 
were  the  men  who  suffered  many  and  great 
hardships,  privations  and  inconveniences 
while  subduing  the  wilderness,  all  the  de- 
tails of  which  it  is  impossible  at  this  late 
day  to  obtain.  Those  who  followed  during 
the  first  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century 
also  endured  privations  and  made  sacrifices 
that  are  little  realized  at  the  present  day. 
They  all  possessed  aggressive  spirits  and 
labored  not  for  themselves  alone,  but  for 
their  children  and  future  generations  as  well. 
For  this  life  and  purpose  they  abandoned 
the  hearthstones  of  their  boyhood  days,  the 
endearments  of  social  ties,  cultivated  asso- 
ciations and  the  many  luxuries  common  to 
older  settlements. 

The  forefathers  of  Homer  could  have  been 
none  other  than  men  of  enterprise,  with  pos- 
itive characters  and  unfaltering  determina- 
tion, to  have  attained  so  high  a  degree  of 
success  in  their  eflbrts  for  the  extension  of 
civilization  into  what  was  then  an  unknown 
wilderness. 

Amos  Todd  and  Joseph  Beebe,  whose 
advent  into  the  old  town  of  Homer  has  been 
already  alluded  to,  migrated  from  New 
Haven,  Conn.,  and  located  at  Windsor, 
Broome   county,    N.    Y.,    during   the    year 

*  Several  of  these  i)ioneers  settled  within  tlie  |ii'eseiit 
limits  of  Coitl.aiulville  and  becime  identilied  with  tl\.it  lo- 
cility.     See  history  of  thai  town. 


1789.  They  explored  the  valley  of  the 
Tioughnioga  in  the  summer  of  1790  and  in 
1 791  left  Windsor  to  become  the  first  settlers 
in  Cortland  county  and,  probably,  in  the 
town  of  Homer.  They  were  accompanied 
by  Mr.  Beebe's  wife,  Rhoda,  who  was 
Todd's  sister.  The  current  narrative  of 
the  early  experiences  of  these  pioneers,  as 
it  has  often  been  told  and  written,  is  as  fol- 
lows :  — 

Coming  up  the  valley  from  the  southward 
they  selected  the  site  for  their  primitive 
home  just  north  of  the  present  village  of 
Homer,  within  a  few  rods  of  the  bridge 
across  the  Tioughnioga,  and  nearly  opposite 
the  residence  occupied  in  later  years  by 
Erastus  Goodell.  Their  rude  dwelling  was 
composed  mainly  of  poles  and  was,  perhaps, 
twelve  by  fifteen  feet  in  its  dimensions. 
Before  this  temporary  abode  was  finished 
their  team  strayed  away  into  the  forest. 
Leaving  Mrs.  Beebe  alone,  the  two  men  set 
out  in  pursuit  of  the  animals.  Without  any 
protection  other  than  the  four  walls  of  her 
unsubstantial  cabin,  which  was  yet  without 
roof  or  floor,  and  with  no  door  save  simply 
a  blanket  hung  upon  the  poles  to  cover  the 
opening,  the  brave  woman  remained  alone 
three  davs  and  nights.  Durinsj  these  lone:, 
lonely  hours  she  is  said  to  have  retained  a 
tranquil  mind  and  received  no  annoyance 
save  such  as  was  caused  by  the  howling 
wolves  and  occasional  screaming  panther, 
which  at  that  time  often  made  the  nights 
hideous.  She  received  but  one  call  during 
the  time  the  men  were  absent,  and  that  was 
by  a  wolf  which,  being  rather  timid,  only 
displaced  the  blanket  door  sufficiently  to  in- 
troduce his  nose  and  take  a  survej'  of  the 
apartment  and  the  shrinking  woman. 

A  severer  trial,  however,  awaited  this 
pioneer  woman.  During  the  following 
winter  her  brother  and  husband  were  com- 
pelled to  return  to  Wintlsor  for  their  house- 
hold effects,  etc.      At  the  end  of  their  jour- 


1 86 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ney  they  were  snow  bound  for  a  period  of 
six  weeks,  during  which  time  Mrs.  ]?eebe 
remained  in  her  lonely  wilderness  home,  the 
sole  occupant  of  the  forest  and  her  "palace 
of  poles."  She  must  have  been  blessed 
with  far  more  tlian  ordinary  courage  and 
fortitude  or  she  could  never  have  lain  calmly 
down  in  a  dense  forest,  night  after  night, 
many  miles  distant  from  any  human  habi- 
tation, to  rest  by  the  lullabys  of  the  wolves 
and  jianthcrs.  Mrs.  Becbe  is  said  to  luu'e 
been  tluis  situated,  and  it  was  not  until  the 
middle  of  the  winter  that  her  husband  and 
brother  pushed  their  frail  craft  to  Bingham- 
ton,  where  they  were  joined  b)-  John  Mil- 
ler, father  of  the  afterward  well  known  dea- 
con Daniel  Miller.  The  little  canoe  was 
again  pushed  from  shore  and  on  their  way 
homeward  up  the  river  "the  men  took 
turns  in  directing  its  course  and  removing 
obstacles,  or  following  on  foot  and  driviu"- 
the  cattle."  Sometimes  the  stream  was 
found  too  shallow  and  the  boat  was  drawn 
across  the  rift  by  o.xen  and  then  again  set 
afloat.  Time,  which  is  the  author  of  all 
changes  in  human  aftains,  at  last  brought 
the  pioneers  near  to  their  wilderness  home. 
The  imagination  of  the  reader  can  best  de- 
pict the  meeting  of  the  two  men  with  the 
brave  and  lonely  wife  and  sister.  So  runs, 
in  substance,  the  narrative  of  the  first  set- 
tlement of  this  town. 

Unfortunately  for  the  authors  and  cir- 
culators of  this  interesting  story,  there  is  a 
somewhat  different  version  of  it  given  upon 
undoubted  authority  (that  of  Mr.  Charles 
Kingsbury,  of  Homer)  which  it  is  our  duty 
to  reproduce.  Mr.  Kingsbury  has  written 
and  published  many  reminiscences  of  earlj' 
times,  and  of  the  account  of  the  winter  jour- 
ney of  the  three  men  from  ]5roonie  county, 
says:  "Now,  it  strikes  me  as  being  singu 
lar  that  those  first  settlers  should  pull  from 
shore  in  midwinter  and  be  able  to  propel 
their  frail  craft,  not  only  against  the  current 


of  the  stream  ;   but    the   winter   must   have 
been  of  a  much  milder   type  than    modern 
winters,   or  the   stream    would    have    been 
filled  with  hea\'y  ice  which,  of  course,  would 
have    seriously   obstructed   the   navigation. 
It  appears  that  this  story  lacks  confirma- 
tion."     These    are    Mr.    Kingsbury's    own 
words,  aiul   the    narrati\e  as  best   substan- 
tiated to  him  is  to  the  effect  that  "  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bcebe  and  Mr.  Todd,  a  brother-in-law 
of  Beebe,  and  at  that  time  unmarried,  came 
up  the  river  in    a   boat    from  Windsor  and 
landed  on  the  west  bank  about  midway  be- 
tween the  present  Port  Watson  bridge  and 
the   point  where   the   two  branches  of  the 
river    unite.i      There    they    constructed    a 
temporary  cabin  of  a  few  logs,  but  mostly 
of  poles,  and  the  men   returned  to  W'indsor 
for  provisions  and  such  articles  as  they  could 
bring  back,  and  which   their  circumstances 
imperatively  demanded.      It    has   been   as- 
serted  almost  times   without    number,  that 
Mrs.  Beebe  remained  alone  during  their  ab- 
sence ;   but  it  now   appears  upon  good   au- 
thority  that    she    had    a    daughter    named 
Clara,  who  remained   with  her.      For  some 
cause,  at  present  unknown,   the  men  were 
detained  much  longer  than   they  expected 
to  be  ;   even  more  than  twice  the  length  of 
time    they  had    marked    out    had    already 
passed.      Mrs.  Beebe's  small    stock  of  pro- 
visions was  exhausted,  and  she  was  reduced 
to  the  necessity  of  resorting   to   roots   and 
the  barks  of  trees  to  appease  their   hunger 
and   sustain   life.      At  length   she   came  to 
the  conclusion  that  some  serious  misfortune 
had  befallen  her  husband  and  brother,  and 
that   some   decided  effort  was   necessary  on 
her  part ;  the   only  alternative  which    pre- 
sented itself,  which  appeared  at  all  feasible, 
was   to  make  the  journey  down   the  river 
through  the  forest  on  foot.     This  bold  res- 
olution  she   finally  adopted,   although    well 

'This   would  locate  their  first   settlement  within  the 

present  boundaries  uf  Cortlandville. 


Town  of  Homer. 


187 


aware  that  the  woods  were  inhabited  by 
wild  animals,  many  of  which  were  fierce 
and  dangerous.  She  hoped  by  keeping  near 
to  the  stream,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  being 
lost  in  the  woods,  and  thus  by  patient  and 
persevering  effort,  she  would  at  length  suc- 
ceed in  emerging  from  the  forest  and  dis- 
covering a  settlement.  The  day  for  begin- 
ning the  journey  was  fixed,  the  small  means 
she  possessed  were  in  readiness,  when,  some- 
time in  the  night  preceding  her  start,  upon 
looking  out  of  her  cabin,  she  discovered  a 
light  some  distance  down  the  river.  This  was 
something  so  unusual  that  it  created  much 
interest  in  her  mind,  and,  watching  it  closely, 
she  saw  it  was  approaching.  In  a  little 
time  it  drew  near  and  with  it  her  iiusband 
and  brother,  with  a  stock  of  provisions  and 
other  goods  which  they  so  much  needed." 

This  cabin  was  their  temporary  residence 
during  the  time  the  men  were  engaged  in 
building  a  log  house,  on  the  farm  upon 
which  Mr.  Beebe  located,  west  of  Homer 
village,  on  lot  43,  on  the  south  side  of  the 
road  formerly  known  as  "the  turnpike." 
Here  the  Beebes  spent  the  remainder  of 
their  lives,  Mrs.  Beebe  dying  in  1830  and 
her  husband  in  1802.  An  old-fashioned 
headstone  marks  their  graves,  in  what  is 
now  Glenwood  Cemetery.  Like  a  majority 
of  the  early  settlers,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beebe 
were  very  worthy  people.  We  find  their 
names  among  the  earliest  members  of  the 
first  Baptist  Church  society  of  Homer. 

Mr.  Todd  subsequently  settled  on  the 
form  adjoining  Mr.  Beebe's  on  the  east, 
where  himself  and  his  wife  passed  their  lives. 
They  were  also  worthy  and  respected  mem- 
bers of  the  community.  Both  of  these  fam- 
ilies reared  a  number  of  children,  all  of 
whom  removed  from  the  town.  Harry  S. 
Beebe,  son  of  Joseph,  succeeded  his  father 
on  the  farm,  but  subsequently  removed  to 
the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  died 
several  years  ago. 


This  last  account  of  the  first  settlement 
in  this  count}'  is  undoubtedly  reliable  and 
correct,  in  the  main,  as  we  have  it  directly 
from  one  who  is,  probably,  the  oldest  na- 
tive citizen  now  living  in  the  old  town  of 
Homer,  to  whom  Mrs.  Beebe  herself  related 
the  circumstances;  going  with  him  to  the 
spot  upon  which  their  first  cabin  was  built, 
which  she  was  enabled  to  recognize  by  a 
spring  of  water  issuing  from  the  ground  near 
to  and  in  a  certain  direction  from  the  loca- 
tion of  the  cabin.  The  land  on  which  the 
dwelling  was  built  was  owned  and  occupied 
in  later  years  by  Samuel  Hotchkiss. 

This  last  account  of  the  first  setdement 
in  the  county  by  white  persons  becomes  of 
considerable  importance  when  we  consider 
its  authenticit)-,  its  bearing  upon  the  most 
prominent  of  the  early  experiences  of  the 
pioneers,  and  the  fact  that  it  removes  the 
first  settlement  from  the  town  of  Homer  to 
a  point  within  the  present  boundaries  of 
the  town  of  Cortlandville. 

As  we  have  before  stated,  John  Miller 
accompanied  Todd  and  Beebe  on  their  sec- 
ond journey  up  the  Tioughnioga  river  and 
in  the  spring  of  the  year,  1792,  brought  to 
the  town  of  Homer  his  wife  and  two  sons  ; 
they  came  from  the  State  of  New  Jersey  and 
constituted  the  third  family  in  the  town  ; 
although  John  House,  James  Mathews  and 
James  Moore  accompanied  him  on  his  re- 
turn from  his  former  home  in  the  spring  of 
the  year  last  named.  It  appears  by  an  old 
record  that  the  Miller  family  formerly  re- 
sided in  the  State  of  Maryland,  about  fifty 
miles  west  of  Baltimore  ;  but  at  what  time 
is  not  known  ;  nor  is  the  place  in  New  Jer- 
sey, from  which  he  is  said  to  have  migrated 
to  this  county,  known  at  this  time,  as  far  as 
we  have  been  able  to  learn.  He  settled  on 
lot  56,  now  embraced  in  the  town  of  Cort- 
landville, and  further  reference  to  the  family 
will  be  found  in  the  history  of  that  town. 

John  House,  James  Mathews  and  James 


i88 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Moore,  wlio  came  into  the  town  witli  the 
Millers,  were  from  Binghamton ;  they 
camped  at  the  forks  of  the  river,  where  their 
wives  reniainetl  while  the  pioneers  went 
forward  and  erected  cabins  for  their  tempo- 
rary homes.  "  Mr.  Mathews  built  on  the 
upper  end  of  Mr.  Miller's  lot  (56).  Mr. 
House  about  eight  rods  west  of  where  Eb- 
enczer  Cole  afterward  lived.  Mr.  Moore 
near  the  bridge  just  south  of  the  cotton  fac- 
tory."' 

Darius  Kinney  came  into  the  town  from 
Brimfield  (from  which  Massachusetts  town 
very  many  of  the  early  settlers  in  this  sec- 
tion migrated),  and  located  in  1793  on  the 
East  river.  Mrs.  Kinney  was  a  sister  of 
the  wife  of  Judge  Keep.  Mr.  Kinney  re- 
sided on  that  farm  about  four  years,  and 
near  the  dwelling  of  Judge  Keep  on  the 
site  of  the  present  county  poor-house.  Mr. 
Kinney  then  disposed  of  his  farm  and  pur- 
chased another  in  tlie  valley  of  the  west 
branch  of  the  river,  since  owned  by  Abel 
Kinney  (now  owned  by  a  Mr.  Gallup), 
where  he  died  in  1S16.  Mrs.  Kinney  sur- 
vived her  husband  something  more  than 
twenty- five  years  and  was  one  of  the  little 
band  that  constituted  the  first  Congrega- 
tional Church  in  Homer,  in  October,  1801  ; 
at  the  time  of  her  death  she  was  the  last  of 
the  little  company. 

The  Ballard  family  came  from  Holland, 
Mass.  John  located  on  the  east  side  of  the 
Tioughnioga,  and  three  years  later  settled 
on  the  farm  subsequently  owned  by  Paris 
Barber.  It  was  owned  at  that  time  by 
Capt.  David  Russell,  who  had  erected  a 
double  log  house  near  the  northwest  corner 
of  Mr.  Barber's  orchard. 

During  the  year  1795  several  small  com- 
panies came  in  by  way  of  Manlius  and 
Truxton.  Thomas  L.  and  Jacob  Bishop, 
from  Brimfield,  located  on  lot  25,  on  lands 
afterward  owned  by  Noah  Hitchcock,  now 

KiooiUvin's  I/istoiy. 


occupied  by  his  son,  Dwight  Hitchcock. 
The  farm  was  known  in  early  days  as  the 
Vanderlyn  farm.  Thomas  Wilco.x  came 
from  Whitestown,  N.  Y.,  and  located  on 
lot  64,  where  Joshua  IkiUard  afterwards 
lived.     Zebulon  Keene  located  on  the  farm 

afterward    owned    by    Mr.    Sheffield. 

John  Stone,  from  Brimfield,  settled  on  lot 
25,  on  what  was  subsequently  known  as  the 
Albert  Baker  farm.  Joshua  Atwater  located 
on  lot  13,  northwest  of  the  village;  Ezra 
and  Joseph  Atwater  were  his  sons. 

Solomon  and  John  Hubbard,  brothers, 
came  from  Massachusetts  in  1795  or  '96; 
the  former  settled  on  lot  25  and  the  latter 
on  lot  26,  a  little  north  from  the  present 
village.  These  men  were  active,  intelligent 
citizens  and  their  eftorts  in  \arious  direc- 
tions for  the  good  of  the  community  became 
in  after  j'ears  important  and  influential. 
Solomon  Hubbard's  residence,  when  origi- 
nally erected,  was  looked  upon  as  one  of 
the  largest  and  most  pretentious  in  the 
county. 

Thomas  G.,  Ebenezer  and  Charles  Al- 
vord  came  in  from  Farmington,  Conn.,  in 
1795  or  '96,  and  settled  in  the  northwest 
part  of  the  town  on  lot  No.  13.  The  form- 
er, however,  drew  lot  56.  When  he  reached 
Manlius  on  his  journey  into  the  county  he 
was  met  by  two  "land-sharks,"  who,  on 
learning  the  number  of  the  lot  on  which  the 
old  hero  was  intending  to  settle,  coolly  in- 
formed him  that  they  had  been  to  Homer 
and  that  they  were  well  acquainted  with 
'■•  the  position  of  his  land,  and  would  assure 
him  that  it  was  of  very  little  value,  was  wet, 
the  greater  part  of  it  being  covered  with 
water.  By  virtue  of  plausible  lies  of  this 
character  they  induced  him  to  part  with 
six  luindi-ed  acres  of  most  \'aluable  land  for 
a  few  dollars. 

In  1795  luion  Phelps  emigrated  from 
Morristown,  N.  J.,  and  settled  on  the  north- 
east corner  of  lot  50  in   the  extreme  south- 


Town  of  Homer. 


189 


east  corner  of  the  present  town  of  Homer  ; 
there,  on  the  hill  adjoining  the  town  of 
Solon,  he  located  on  a  hundred  acres  of 
land  which  he  had  bought  of  George  Clin- 
ton. It  is  believed  that  Mr.  Cilnton  drew 
this  lot  as  bountj'  land  for  services  rendered 
in  the  army.  The  location  of  Mr.  Phelps 
was  about  three  miles  from  the  valley,  be- 
tween which  points  there  was  at  that  time, 
of  course,  no  road.  Mr.  Miller,  on  lot  56, 
(where  T.  Mason  Loring  now  resides)  was 
desirous  of  opening  better  means  of  com- 
munication with  his  neighbor  Phelps  ;  he 
accordingly  started  for  the  purpose  of  locat- 
ing a  road  by  "blazing"  trees — making 
what  was  early  called  a  bridle-path.  Leav- 
ing the  valley,  he  proceeded,  as  he  sup 
posed,  in  the  direction  of  Mr.  Phelps's 
house ;  he  made  good  progress,  finding  the 
route  a  very  feasible  one.  Pushing  on  as 
fast  as  the  bru.sh  and  his  labor  marking  the 
trees  would  admit,  he  finally  emerged  from 
the  forest  into  a  clearing.  His  astonish- 
ment may  be  imagined  on  finding  himself 
not  more  than  half  a  mile  in  a  southeasterly 
direction  from  the  place  where  he  left  the 
valley,  and  but  a  short  distance  from  the 
ground  now  occupied  as  a  burying-ground. 
He  made  a  second  attempt,  but  again  failed 
utterly.  Procuring  a  compass,  his  third  ef- 
fort at  road  making  was  successful. ^ 

William  W.  Phelps  was  a  son  of  Enon 
Phelps  and  a  printer  by  trade.  He  was  at 
one  time  connected  with  one  of  the  county 
Democratic  papers,  but  subsequently  re- 
moved  to   the    western   part   of  the  State, 

1  This  is  by  no  means  an  isolaled  instance  of  the  kind. 
Most  old  settlers  will  remember  similar  experiences  on 
either  their  own  part  or  that  of  their  neighliors.  It  has 
been  often  proved  that  it  is  an  absolute  impossibility  for 
a  person  unacquainted  with  woodcraft  to  follow  any  point 
of  the  compass  through  a  thick  forest ;  he  may  do  it  liy 
chance,  but  as  an  intention  the  probabilities  are  all  against 
his  success.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Indian,  by  some 
power  that  is  difficult  of  comprehension  l.iy  civilized  man, 
finds  no  trouble  in  going  miles  through  an  impenetrable 
forest  direct  to  a  distant  point,  and  seldom  or  never  err- 
ing.    Instinct,  as  it  is  called,  often  seems  to  baffle  reason. 


where  he  became  a  leader  among  the 
Mormons,  then  located  in  that  section,  and 
printed  their  bible.  Later  still  he  returned 
to  Homer  and  baptized  his  father,  mother 
and  brother.  Enon  Phelps  cleared  up  his 
land  and  planted  the  first  apple  orchard  in 
the  town. 

Joshua  Ballard  came  from  Holland,  Mass., 
in  1797,  and  selected  a  location  on  lot  45. 
He  was  twenty-one  years  old  at  that  time. 
During  the  next  year  he  returned  to  his 
native  State  and  brought  back  with  him  his 
young  and  interesting  wife.  They  came 
by  the  way  of  Cazcnovia  into  the  town  of 
Homer  on  horseback.  Mr.  Ballard  taught 
the  first  school  in  the  old  town  and  gave 
valuable  aid  to  the  Cortland  Academy,  be- 
ing one  of  its  founders  and  most  prominent 
supporters.  He  was  appointed  sheriff  on 
the  lOth  of  April,  18 10;  was  a  member  of 
the  Legislature  of  1816;  was  appointed 
county  clerk  in  July,  18 19,  soon  after  which 
he  removed  into  the  boundaries  of  the  pres- 
ent town  of  Cortlandville. 

In  1798  Daniel  Crandall  came  to  Homer 
and  worked  for  Judge  Keep,  chopping  the 
timber  and  clearing  ten  acres  of  land  on 
the  site  of  the  county  poor-house  farm. 
He  was  a  native  of  Voluntown,  Windham 
county.  Conn.  He  came  in  alone  and  it  is 
believed  he  made  the  entire  journey  on 
foot.  Late  in  the  season  after  his  arrival 
he  was  seriously  wounded  by  an  axe  cut  in 
his  foot,  which  made  it  impossible  to  con- 
tinue his  labor  in  the  woods.  Under  these 
circumstances  he  collected  a  few  tools  and 
began  the  business  of  "cobbling"  in  Judge 
Keep's  house.  Here  he  was  permitted  to 
occupy  a  small  space  in  one  corner  of  the 
family  room,  which  was  not  a  large  one, 
and  contained  a  bed,  a  loom  and  other  do- 
mestic furniture,  for  the  use  of  which  and 
his  board  he  ga\'e  the  judge  one  day's  work 
in  each  week.  He  soon  became  sufficiently 
expert  in  his  new  avocation  to  begin  mak- 


190 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ing  boots  and  shoes,  and  so  spent  tlie  win- 
ter in  industry.  It  is  quite  probable  that 
this  was  the  first  nmnufacturing  of  any 
kind,  other  tlian  spinnint^  and  weaving,  car- 
ried on  in  the  county.  Mr.  Crandall  sub- 
sequently returned  to  Connecticut,  and  in 
the  winter  of  1 799-1 800  was  married  and 
rcmoxed  with  his  wife  back  to  Homer;  the)' 
made  the  journey  with  an  ox  team,  crossed 
the  Hudson  river  on  the  ice,  opening  and 
breaking  his  own  road  a  ])ortion  of  the  dis- 
tance, and  being  twenty-one  days  on  the 
way.  He  afterwards  helped  to  chop  the 
trees  from  the  ground  now  occupied  by  the 
"  green "  in  Homer  village,  and  also  to 
build  the  structure  there  for  school  and  re- 
ligious purposes.  He  purchased  fifty  acres 
of  land  on  lot  38,  which  included  the  site 
of  the  East  River  Mills,  where  he  built  a 
log-house;  he  moved  into  it  when  it  was 
without  a  door  and  the  gables  were  open, 
and  kept  his  oxen,  a  cow  and  a  calf  through 
the  first  winter  on  "browse."  The  wolves 
attempted  to  kill  the  calf,  but,  strange  to 
relate,  the  cow  and  oxen  fought  desperately 
in  the  feeble  animal's  defense  and  came  off 
victorious.  Captain  Crandall  built  the  first 
saw-mill  at  East  River,  and  subsequently, 
in  compan)-  with  Samuel  Griggs,  erected 
the  first  grist-mill  at  that  point.  He  was 
one  of  the  sixteen  persons  who  constituted 
the  first  Baptist  Church  society  in  Homer. 
In  the  pioneer  days  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cran- 
dall were  in  the  habit  of  walking  to  the 
house  of  Judge  Keep  'for  the  purpose  of 
attending  meeting,  that  being  the  place 
where,  for  some  years,  religious  and  other 
public  gatherings  were  held,  Mr.  Crandall 
carrying  their  first-born  child  in  his  arms. 
On  one  of  these  occasions  the)'  had  pro- 
ceeded about  half  a  mile,  when  they  came 
into  a  small  opening  in  the  forest  where  the 
water  bubbled  in  several  springs  from  the 
ground  and  formed  a  little  rivulet.  Here 
they   suddenly  encountered   a   large    bear, 


deeply  engaged  in  digging  roots  from  the 
soft  ground  for  her  cubs ;  the  bear,  being 
a  mother  and  suddenly  surprised,  instantly 
reared  on  her  haunches  and  for  a  few  mo- 
ments intently  surveyed  her  enemies.  It 
was  a  critical  time ;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Crandall 
confidently  expected  an  attack,  and  that  at 
the  next  moment  they  might  be  clasped  in 
the  too  ardent  embrace  of  the  animal  and 
their  flesh  be  torn  by  her  teeth.  But  after 
a  few  moments,  when  her  curiosity  was 
apparently  satisfied,  the  bear  turned  and 
disappeared  in  the  forest,  to  the  great  relief 
of  the  church-goers. 

In  1797  John  Albright  located  on  lot  29. 
He  was  an  excellent  citizen,  respected  by 
his  friends,  and  his  experience  was  of  a  very 
interesting  character.  He  passed  through 
much  of  the  severest  service  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary War,  faithfully  and  honorably  serv- 
ing his  country.  He  was  of  Swiss  parent- 
age and  early  in  life  followed  the  tailoring 
business ;  but  he  did  not  like  the  work  to 
which  he  was  apprenticed,  and  the  son  of 
his  foster-parent  having  been  drafted,  young 
Albright  saw  an  opportunity  of  escape  from 
his  irksome  position  by  taking  the  place  of 
the  drafted  son  in  the  colonial  service,  sur- 
rendering his  indentures  to  the  tailor's  trade. 
After  his  enlistment  he  was  ordered  to  Fort 
Montgomery,  Orange  county,  where  he  was 
stationed  during  the  siege.  He  was  after- 
wards engaged  in  the  defense  of  Fort  Stan- 
wix,  and  was  subsequenth'  captured  by  To- 
ries and  Indians  and  taken  as  a  prisoner  to 
Canada.  Afterwards  he  was  a  participant 
in  the  terrible  march  of  the  Continental 
army  from  Philadelphia  to  Valle)'  Forge, 
where  they  could  have  been  tracked  upon 
the  frozen  ground  b)-  their  bleeding  feet. 
Finally  he  was  in  the  siege  of  Yorktown, 
which  ended  in  the  capitulation  of  Corn- 
wallis.  For  his  services  to  his  countr)-  he 
drew  the  military  bount)-  lot  on  which  he 
located. 


Town  of  Homer. 


191 


Daniel  Todd,  brother  of  Amos  Todd,  lo- 
cated on  a  farm  lying  directly  south  of  Mr. 
Beebc's.  It  is  now  known  as  the  Bedell 
farm.  Titus  Stebbins  settled  immediately 
south  of  Amos  Todd  prior  to  the  year  1800, 
and  Chester  Boies  located  to  the  north  of 
Stebbins,  where  he  was  succeeded  by  Bildad 
Hotchkiss.  The  latter  was  succeeded  on 
this  farm  by  Samuel  Bunn  ;  it  is  at  present 
owned  b}-  his  widow  and  children.  Mr.  Bunn 
gained  the  reputation  of  being  an  honest, 
upright  and  respected  member  of  the  com- 
munity. A  short  distance  to  the  east  and 
adjoining  his  farm  was  that  of  Pliny  Polly, 
the  first  settler  on  that  farm.  One  of  his 
daughters  became  the  wife  of  Charles  Todd, 
son  of  Daniel  Todd  ;  another  the  wife  of  A. 
Harris,  of  Little  York,  and  another  married 
a  son  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  of  East  River  ;  he 
removed  to  the  west. 

Asa  White  and  Caleb  Keep  came  from 
Monson,  Mass.,  before  1798.  The  former 
located  on  lot  45,  within  the  present  limits 
of  the  village,  and  built  his  house  on  the 
grounds  so  long  occupied  in  subsequent 
years  by  the  residence  of  Jedediah  Barber. 
He  was  the  father  of  Horace  and  Hamilton 
White,  afterwards  bankers  in  Syracuse.  He, 
in  company  with  John  Keep  and  Solomon 
Hubbard,  built  the  first  grist-mill  in  the 
county,  in  1798,  on  the  site  of  the  present 
mill  near  the  northern  end  of  the  village. 

Other  considerable  accessions  were  made 
to  the  population  during  the  year  1798, 
many  of  whom  settled  along  the  two 
branches  of  the  river.  Stephen  Knapp  came 
in  with  his  brother-in-law  from  Goshen, 
Orange  Co.,  N.  Y.,  to  make  explorations. 
Knapp's  father  had  been  killed  in  the  War 
of  the  Revolution,  leaving  him  to  make  his 
own  way  in  the  world  ;  for  this  laudable 
purpose  he  sought  the  wilderness  country 
and  purchased  a  large  tract  of  land.  Re- 
turning to  Goshen  he  made  preparations  to 
permanently  remove  to  his  new  possessions  ; 


but  he  was  delayed  until  the  year  1798.  He 
came  in  by  the  way  of  Poughkeepsie,  Kings- 
ton, the  head  waters  of  Schoharie  county; 
followed  down  the  river  to  Prattsville ; 
thence  to  Harpersfield,  crossing  at  Wattles's 
ferry ;  thence  to  Oxford  ;  thence  to  Solon, 
w  here  he  took  the  Salt  Road  about  two  miles 
to  'Squire  Bingham's  ;  thence  over  the  hills 
to  Judge  Keep's  and  thence  to  the  house  of 
John  Ballard,  where  he  remained  some  time. 
One  hundred  acres  of  the  land  bought  by 
Mr.  Knapp,  which  afterward  constituted  the 
homestead,  was  a  portion  of  what  is  now 
the  cemetery  grounds.  His  house,  a  simple 
log  cabin,  stood  where  the  "tool  house" 
of  the  cemeter}'  is  now  located.  Two  hun- 
dred acres  were  below  the  village  and  within 
the  present  boundaries  of  Cortlandville  (on 
lot  55)  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  and  two 
hundred  acres  on  lot  85,  also  in  the  town  of 
Cortlandville.  During  the  following  winter 
after  Mr.  Knapp's  location  his  mother,  Hes- 
ter Knapp,  with  her  family  consisting  of  Ste- 
phen, Daniel,  James,  Nathaniel  and  two 
daughters,  Polly  and  Sally,  came  in  over  the 
route  as  above  given.  Stephen  Knapp  be- 
came a  man  of  prominence  and  energy  ;  one 
whose  influence  in  bringing  the  wilderness 
under  civilizing  influence  was  permanent  and 
important.  During  the  earlier  years  of  his 
life  in  Homer  the  broad  valley  of  the  Ti- 
oughnioga  was  covered  with  a  dense  forest, 
and  it  was  easier  for  him  to  reach  the  lands 
on  his  lower  tracts  by  following  down  the 
bed  of  the  stream,  than  by  making  a  jour- 
ney through  the  wood.  Mr.  Knapp  mar- 
ried Abigail  Treat,  and  was  the  grandfather 
of  William  O.  Bunn,  late  editor  of  the  Ho- 
mer Republican,  and  deputy  U.  S.  Internal 
Revenue  collector,  with  headquarters  at 
Syracuse.  Mr.  Knapp  lived  to  the  vener- 
able age  of  eighty-four  years,  sixty-six  of 
which  were  passed  in  the  town  of  Homer. 

Daniel  Knapp,  older  brother  of  Stephen, 
erected  a  dwelling  house  on  the  north  part 


192 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  the  farm  aiul  iiL-ar  tlic  four  corners  of  the 
road  at  the  cemetery,  which  he  opened  af- 
terward as  a  tavern  and  kept  it  as  such  for 
several  years.  The  succeeding  residents  of 
this  farm  were  Chauncey  Keep,  Mr.  Dick- 
son, and  General  Martin  Keep,  who  bought 
the  property  about  1824  and  resided  there 
ten  years,  removing  to  Tompkins  county. 
The  farm  has  since  been  owned  by  Walter 
Jewett,  and  by  Paris  Barber,  who  sold  the 
grounds  of  the  cemetery  to  the  association. 
With  the  exception  of  twenty  acres  on  the 
east  side  of  the  road,  the  farm  is  now  and 
has  been  for  some  time  owned  by  Henry 
Dennison. 

A  short  distance  up  the  river  on  the  op- 
posite side  of  the  stream  and  near  the  foot 
of  the  hill  is  the  location  where  Stephen 
Knapp  resided  for  some  years,  now  owned 
by  Andrew  Kingsbury.  Aaron  Knapp 
settled  south  of  his  brother  Daniel,  on  the 
farm  now  owned  by  Allen  Smith. 

Enos  Stimson  was  from  Monson,  Mass., 
and  settled  on  the  site  of  the  well  known 
Schermerhorn  residence  in  Homer  village. 
He  built  a  small  house  and  hung  out  a  tav- 
ern sign  ;  but  he  was  compelled  to  send  his 
wife  and  children  away  the  following  spring, 
on  account  of  the  ravages  of  the  small-pox. 
They  sojourned  at  the  house  of  Aaron 
Knapp,  where  they  were  vaccinated.  An 
incident  occurred  during  the  absence  of 
Mrs.  Stimson,  which  shows  what  a  strong 
appetite  the  Indian  had  acquired  for  the 
white  man's  "fire-water."  Twelve  Onon- 
daga Indians  called  one  evening  at  Mr. 
Stimson 's  inn,  where  they  drank  freely,  and 
became  exceedingly  hilarious.  Demanding 
more  liquor,  it  was  refused  by  the  landlord  ; 
but  they  were  not  at  all  disposed  to  depart 
until  their  now  raging  desires  were  grat- 
ified. They  became  threatening  in  their  at- 
titude, and  prepared  to  attack  Mr.  Stimson, 
who  was  compelled  to  seek  safety  up  the 
the    stairs,    pulling   the   ladder    after    him. 


The  field  was  now  clear,  and  it  was  but  a 
few  moments  before  the  bottles  and  decant- 
ers were  emptied  of  their  contents  down 
the  capacious  throats  of  the  red  drunkards. 
A  bacchanalian  revel  followed.  In  the 
midst  of  it,  and  after  vainly  searching  for 
more  jugs  to  empty,  an  old  sachem  found 
a  bottle  half  filled  with  "  picra,"  from  which 
he  took  a  liberal  drink  ;  passing  it  on  to  a 
young  chief,  he  swallowed  the  whole  of  its 
contents.  The  effect  was  pitiful  and  at  the 
same  time  decidedly  comical.  The  two 
sickened  Indians  felt  sure  they  were  pois- 
oned to  death  ;  and,  indeed,  there  was  dan- 
ger of  such  a  result.  At  this  juncture,  while 
some  of  the  party  were  guarding  the  hole 
through  which  Mr.  Stimson  had  disappeared 
into  the  upper  regions,  and  others  were 
bending  over  the  supposed  dying  Indians, 
another  one,  who  was  in  that  glorious  con- 
dition of  uncertainty  which  might  be  ex- 
pected under  the  circumstances,  rushed 
hurriedly  out  of  the  door,  and,  mistaking 
the  side  of  the  well  curb  for  a  yard  fence, 
gave  a  leap,  and  the  next  instant  was  at  the 
bottom  of  the  well.  This  method  of  dilut- 
ing the  spirits  he  had  swallowed  did  not 
please  the  old  warrior,  and  he  yelled  and 
cursed  with  all  the  ardor  and  variations  of 
which  the  language  was  capable ;  but  there 
was  too  much  of  similar  amusement  going 
on  in-doors  to  make  it  possible  for  his  com- 
panions to  hear  him  for  some  time.  When 
assistance  finally  came  he  was  drawn  out  of 
the  well  with  blankets,  a  wetter  and  a 
wiser  savage.  With  the  coming  of  morn- 
ing, and  the  disappearance  of  the  entire 
stock  of  liquor,  the  Indians  regained  their 
reason,  and  the  besieged  landlord  was  per- 
mitted to  descend  to  his  proper  sphere. 

The  Hobart  family,  consisting  of  the  two 
brothers,  Daniel  and  Samuel,  were  from 
Monson,  Mass.;  Daniel  located  on  lot  43, 
west  of  the  village ;  Samuel  on  lots  1 5  and 
16,   between   the  village  and    Little  York. 


Town  of  Homer. 


193 


Gideon  settled  witli  his  father,  and  remained 
on  the  same  farm  until  his  death  in  1857. 

Titus  Stebbins  came  from  the  same  town 
and  settled  on  lot  43.  It  is  now  occupied 
by  his  son-in-law.  Lyman  Hubbard. 

Samuel  Hotchkiss  came  from  New  Haven, 
Conn.,  in  ijyS  ;  located  on  lot  44.  He  be 
came  a  prominent  citizen,  attainintj  a  most 
enviable  position  in  the  community.  He 
was  county  clerk  several  terms  between 
1822  and  1843,  and  was  given  other  posi- 
tions of  trust.  George  Eldridge  now  occu- 
pies this  farm. 

Noah  Hitchcock,  before  mentioned,  came 
in  from  Brimfield,  and  located  on  lot  25, 
north  of  the  \-illage.  He  became  one  of 
the  leading  farmers  of  the  count}',  and  a 
respected  citizen. 

Zenas  Lilly  was  an  early  resident  whose 
life  was  closely  identified  with  the  growth 
of  the  town.  He  was  also  from  Brimfield, 
and  first  located  on  lot  33,  where  he  re- 
mained about  twelve  years,  when  he  sold 
out  and  settled  on  "Factory  Hill."  Some 
years  later  he  disposed  of  his  property  and 
settled  in  Lenox,  but  he  subsequently  re- 
turned to  Homer  and  located  on  lots  34—5. 

Timothy  Treat  was  from  Berkshire,  Mass., 
and  settled  about  eighty  rods  north  of  the 
later  residence  of  John  Barker,  subsequent- 
ly owned  by  Mr.  Bowen.  He  had  a  family 
of  eight  children,  one  daughter  becoming 
the  wife  of  Stephen  Knapp. 

William  Lucas  and  Asahel  Miner  were 
from  Woodbury,  Conn.  The  former  locat- 
ed on  lot  35,  and  became  a  prominent  and 
valuable  citizen.  His  children  removed  to 
the  State  of  Ohio.  Mr.  Miner  settled  on 
the  farm  afterward  occupied  by  Lucas 
Welch,  and  was  the  first  sheriff  of  the  coun- 
ty. His  son,  Martin  Miner,  was  long  a 
prominent  citizen  of  Cortland  village. 

Colonel  Benajah  Tubbs  came  from  Wash- 
ington county,  and  located  on  the  site  where 
George  W.  Phillips's  store  afterward  stood. 


He  was  one  of  the  early  merchants,  and 
continued  in  business  for  many  years. 

Dr.  Lewis  S.  Owen  came  from  Alban\-, 
and  located  on  lot  66.  After  remaining 
there  three  years  he  removed  to  Homer 
village,  and  erecteil  a  house  on  tlie  site 
of  the  present  residence  of  George  Murra\', 
where  Dr.  Robert  Owen  li\'cd  for  some 
years. 

After  the  year  1800  the  town  began  to 
fill  up  with  settlers  at  a  more  rapid  rate. 
Those  who  had  already  made  homes  for 
themselves  were  gradually  clearing  their 
farms  and  homesteads,  and  surrounding 
themselves  with  such  evidences  of  civiliza- 
tion and  comfort  as  were  available,  making 
it  more  attractive  to  future  prospectors. 
It  is  manifestly  impossible,  even  if  it  were 
desirable,  to  name  and  locate  all  the  set- 
tlers of  the  town  from  the  beginning  of  the 
century  down  ;  a  few  of  the  more  prom- 
inent may,  however,  be  briefly  referred  to. 

E]3hraim  P.  Sumner  came  in  from  Con- 
necticut in  1800,  and  located  on  lot  47, 
where  his  son  of  the  same  name  now  lives. 
He  purchased  two  hundred  acres,  and  died 
in  1843.      His  wife  died  in  1840. 

Noah  Carpenter  came  in  from  Pomfret, 
Windham  county,  Connecticut,  and  located 
on  lot  16,  north  of  the  village.  His  son, 
Asaph  H.  Carpenter,  was  born  during  the 
journey  of  his  parents  from  the  East.  He 
lived  on  the  parental  homestead  until  his 
death  recently.  Francis  B.  Carpenter,  one 
of  the  eminent  artists  of  the  country,  and  a 
resident  of  New  York  city,  is  a  son  of  A. 
H.  Carpenter. 

Thomas,  Nathan  and  Samuel  Stone  were 
from  Brimfield,  and  located  on  lot  46. 

Levi  Phillips  came  in  with  his  brother 
Waterman  (who  settled  in  the  town  of  Cort- 
landvillc),  and  located  on  lot  16;  he  came 
with  an  ox  team  from  Connecticut,  bought 
fifty  acres,  and  subsequently  added  ninety- 
seven    more.      He    died    in    1845    and    his 

13 


194 


History  of  Cortj.and  County. 


witidw  in  1850;  Iiis  son,  Orcii,  long  occu- 
pied tile  homestead. 

In  the  \xar  1801  several  additional  set- 
tlements were  made.  Among  them  was 
that  of  Seth  Keep,  who  came  from  Massa- 
chusetts originalh',  but  migrated  to  Homer 
from  Vermont,  locating  on  the  northeast 
corner  of  lot  ^^. 

Gad  Hitchcock  was  from  Monson,  Mass.; 
his  son,  Horace  Hitchcock,  was  for  many 
years  a  respected  citizen  of  the  village. 

John  Coats  located  near  the  site  of  the 
Congregational  Church  in  1802. 

In  the  same  year  Thomas  ChoUar  came 
frcjm  Windham,  Conn.,  and  remained  in  the 
town  about  three  years,  during  which  time 
he  made  explorations  in  various  parts  of  the 
surrounding  country,  informing  himself 
thoroughh-  upon  the  soil  and  other  pecul- 
iarities of  the  region.  In  the  latter  part  of 
1804  he  selected  a  location  on  lot  17,  upon 
which  he  settled  in  1809.  Mr.  Chollar  was 
a  prominent  citizen;  he  was  the  father  of 
Thomas  D.  Chollar,  who  now  lives  in  Ho- 
mer village. 

Rev.  Alfred  Bennett  came  into  the  town 
in  1803,  and  settled  on  the  farm  now  owned 
by  Nicholas  Starr ;  he  soon  after  entered 
the  ministr\',  and  became  a  noted  and  suc- 
cessful divine.  His  church  work  will  be 
referred  to  hereafter. 

In  this  )'ear,  also,  Jacob  Sanders,  Levi 
Howen  and  Klijah  Pierce  settled  in  the  town. 
Mr.  Sanders  was  from  Swansey,  Mass., 
and  located  on  lot  56  (now  Cortlandville). 
Levi  Bowen  settled  on  lot  7,  near  Little 
York,  coming  here  from  Wiiodstock,  Conn. 
He  died  in  1832,  lea\'ing  eight  chiklren. 
Mr.  Pierce  was  from  Brimfield. 

Moses  Butterfield  came  from  Canterbury, 
Conn.,  in  1803,  and  located  about  a  half  mile 
in  a  northeasterly  direction  from  the  Miller 
farm  at  East  River,  and  on  the  same  side  of 
the  stream ;  it  was  on  lot  47,  and  where 
Charles    Kingsbury    now    resides.      In   the 


s])ring  of  that  \-ear  he  built  a  house  on  the 
lot,  and  planted  a  small  piece  of  corn  on  a 
s])ot  which  was  supposed  to  have  been  cut 
and  cleared  of  timber  by  the  Indians.  Mr. 
Butterfield  returned  to  Connecticut,  and  in 
October  of  the  same  \-ear  returned  again  to 
Homer,  bringing  his  family.  They  passed 
their  first  night  at  Deacon  Miller's,  and  he 
accompanied  them  to  their  home  the  next 
morning.  On  going  to  the  doorway  (the 
door  itself  was  not  yet  in  existence,  and  the 
gables  were  open)  Mrs.  Butterfield  looked 
in,  turned  around,  and  with  a  look  of  home- 
sickness and  despair,  said  to  her  hus- 
band :  — 

"Mr.  Butterfield,  is  this  my  home?" 

By  dint  of  hard  labor,  however,  Mr.  But- 
terfield soon  had  a  respectable  floor  antl 
roof  for  his  house,  splitting  the  "puncheons" 
out  of  logs,  and  smoothing  them  down  with 
his  axe. 

Adjoining  the  farm  of  Mr.  Butterfield  on 
the  east  is  the  one  on  which  his  brother, 
Parker  Butterfield,  first  located  in  1806;  he 
resided  there  until  1822,  when  he  sold  to 
Ward  Woodward,  who  came  here  from  New 
Hampshire.  Mr.  Woodward  became  a  re- 
spected citizen  of  the  highest  moral  charac- 
ter, and  was  long  a  consistent  member  of 
the  Congregational  Church. 

About  a  mile  from  Mr.  Butterfield  John 
Frazier  settled  on  a  small  farm  on  lot  36, 
in  1803.  He  was  born  in  i  749  in  I-^ngland, 
entered  the  country's  service,  or,  rather, 
was  dragged  from  his  bed  and  forced  to  en- 
list under  the  banner  of  King  George,  and 
served  in  the  arni\-  of  General  Burgoyne ; 
he  remained  in  the  same  division  until  the 
battle  of  Stillwater,  and  the  surrender  of 
his  army  to  General  Gates,  in  October, 
1777.  At  that  time  he  escaped  from  the 
service,  and  subsequently  reached  Pomfret, 
Connecticut,  where  he  was  employed  by 
General  Putnam.  There  he  was  married 
in  1799,  and  removed  to  Homer,  as  stated. 


Town  of  Homer. 


195 


Mc  thought  to  make  sure  of  a  valid  title  to 
his  land  by  paying  for  it ;  but  he  failed  in 
this,  and  paid  for  it  a  second  time,  and  his 
title  being  disputed,  he  actually  paid  for  a 
portion  of  it  the  third  time,  and  exen  then 
was  forced  to  abandon  it  altogether  ;  he 
died  in  the  alms  house  in  .1839.  This  inci- 
dent will  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the 
trouble  arising  out  of  earh'  land  titles  on 
the  military  tract,  as  narrated  in  the  pre- 
ceding history  of  that  tract. 

When  Mr.  Frazier  came  in  from  Fomfret 
he  drove  seven  cows  for  Samuel  Griggs, 
who  came  at  the  same  time  and  located  on 
lot  38.  He  was  a  prominent  farmer;  was 
president  of  the  first  agricultural  society  in 
1822,  and  very  active  in  the  construction 
of  the  Alban\-  turnpike  through  Cortland 
count}^  He  removed  to  Cayuga  count}' 
in  1829  or  1830,  where  he  died. 

Zebadiah  Abbott  migrated  from  Brim- 
field  in  1803  and  settled  on  the  eastern 
.  part  of  lot  42,  one-half  of  which  he  pur- 
chased, and  resided  there  until  1820,  when 
he  died.  His  wife  survived  him  about  twenty 
years,  and  though  she  was  totalh-  blind  and 
partially  deaf,  manifested  the  patience  and 
resignation  born  of  a  Christian  character. 
Their  sons  were  Asa,  Joseph  and  Nathan, 
who  became  valuable  citizens. 

Adjoining  Mr.  Abbott's  farm  on  the  east 
is  the  one  on  which  EH  Sherman  located ; 
he  also  came  from  Brimfield,  Mass.,  in  1804, 
and  lived  on  this  farm  and  greatly  improved 
it,  until  1866,  when  he  died  at  the  age  of 
87  years.  The  farm  is  now  occupied  by 
Philander  Manchester. 

Adjoining  the  farm  of  Mr.  Sherman  is 
that  where  Frederick  Partridge  settled  in 
1803,  or  '04;  he  purchased  land  of  Mr. 
^  Abbott,  on  lot  47.  He  lived  here  about 
ten  years,  and  was  noted  for  his  strict  so- 
briety and  temperance  principles — some- 
thing of  an  exception  in  those  days.  He 
was  succeeded  on  the  farm  by  Samuel  Sher- 


man, who  also  came  from  Brimfield,  and 
settled  on  the  Partridge  farm  in  18 14.  He 
became  pecuniarily  involved,  and  for  the 
purpose  of  meeting  his  obligations,  hauled 
cherr\-  lumber  from  Homer  to  Boston,  Mass. 
He  also  drew  wheat  to  Albany,  where,  after 
discharging  his  load,  would  return  with  a 
cargo  of  merchant's  goods,  or  stock  for  me- 
chanics. 

James  Horton  also  lived  on  a  lot  that 
was  taken  from  Mr.  Abbott's  farm  ;  but  at 
preciseh-  what  period  is  not  now  known. 
He  engaged  in  the  tanning  and  currying 
business  and  was  a  skillful  mechanic. 

Benjamin  Knight,  a  native  of  Monson, 
Mass.,  first  came  to  Homer  in  1801,  in  the 
month  of  February,  having  probably  made 
the  journey  on  foot  in  ten  days,  and  at  an 
inclement  season  of  the  )-ear.  In  January, 
1802,  he  returned  to  Massachusetts,  accom- 
plishing the  journey  in  twelve  days.  The 
next  month  he  returned  to  Homer,  again 
being  twelve  days  on  the  road.  He  located 
on  the  southern  part  of  the  lot  originally 
purchased  by  Judge  Keep  and  subsequently 
again  returned  to  Connecticut  where,  on 
the  I  ith  day  of  September,  1803,  he  mar- 
ried Susan  Goodell,  of  Pomfret ;  she  was  a 
sister  of  the  wife  of  Judge  Keep  and  also  of 
the  wife  of  Darius  Kinney.  Thus  the  three 
sisters  came  from  Connecticut  and  settled 
within  the  radius  of  a  mile.  On  this  farm 
Mr.  Knight  resided  during  the  remainder  of 
his  life.  He  united  with  the  Congregational 
Church  in  1806  and  died  in  1843,  at  the  age 
of  66  years. 

Capt.  Zephaniah  Hicks,  originally  of 
Rhode  Island,  migrated  from  Connecticut 
in  1805,  and  located  on  the  southeast  corner 
of  the  State's  hundred,  on  lot  17.  He  has 
been  described  as  an  active,  energetic,  high- 
minded  man  ;  generous,  humane  and  cour- 
teous. His  prompt  and  manly  greeting 
gained  him  the  good-will  of  his  neighbors 
and  gave  him  much  influence  in  all  pioneer 


196 


History  of  Coktiand  County. 


gatherings.  He  removed  in  1835  to  Ing- 
ham, Michigan.  Jacob  Hicks  was  his  son, 
who  was  two  years  old  when  he  came  to 
I  lomer.  He  afterward  settled  on  lot  27,  and 
is  now  deatl.  Capt.  Hicks's  da\iL;IitLr  mar- 
ried Silas  l{Ibridge  Mann,  afterward  a  [)rom- 
inent  merchant  in  Jordan,  N.  V. 

In  1806  Col.  Da\'id  Cove,  from  Ri))al- 
ton,  X'ermont,  and  Lemuel  I?ates,  from  Cin- 
cinnati, came  into  tiie  town.  The  former 
located  on  lot  45,  where  he  lived  many  years. 
He  purchased  the  first  acre  sold  as  a  vil- 
lage lot,  and  followed  his  trade  as  a  joiner. 
In  181 5  he  bought  one  hundred  acres  on 
lot  44.  His  shop  stood  on  the  site  after- 
ward occupied  by  C.  O.  Newton's  store,  on 
IVIain  street,  now  occupied  by  Higbce's 
store.  Mr.  Coye  filled  several  county  offices, 
among  which  was  that  of  sheritT  in  1825. 
He  was  the  father  of  eleven  children.  Mr. 
Bates  settled  on  lot  26 ;  his  sons  were  Joseph 
and  Ransford  Bates. 

William  Shearer  came  from  Washington 
county  in  1807  and  located  on  lot  ^6. 
Stephen  and  Joel  R.  Briggs,  Arial  Tickner 
and  Erastus  Hayes  were  from  Otsego  county 
and  also  came  into  the  town  in  1807,  locat- 
ing on  lot  50,  in  the  southeast  corner  of 
the  town.  Joel  R.  Briggs  afterward  lived 
on  lot  38. 

Deacon  Ira  Brown  came  from  Brimfield 
in  1808  and  located  on  lot  34,  but  subse- 
quently removed  to  Cortland. 

Joseph  Bean  settled  in  the  town  in  1809; 
his  sons  were  Jeremiah,  who  lived  in  Cin- 
cinnatus,  and  Samuel,  of  Homer.  In  the 
same  year  Noah  R.  Smith  and  Matthias 
Cook  came  in.  The  former  located  on  lot 
45,  in  the  village  ;  he  was  from  Middletown, 
and  became  a  prominent  and  useful  citizen; 
he  was  sheriff  of  the  county  in  18 19.  Mr. 
Cook  was  from  Albany  and  engaged  in  the 
hatting  business,  which  he  continued  for 
many  years;  his  partner  at  one  time  was 
Col,  Benajah  Tubbs.      Mr,  Cook  was  hon- 


ored with  the  appointment  of  county  clerk 
in  1 82 1  ;  was  elected  to  the  LegislaUiic  in 
1824,  and  was  also  justice  of  the  ]3eace. 

Deacon  Jesse  Ives  and  Andrew  Burr 
came  in  in  the  }car  1810.  Mr.  I\'es  was 
from  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  located  on  lot 
16,  where  he  originally  purchased  ninety 
acres.  He  was  an  industrious  and  enter- 
prising farmer  and  uni\ersally  respected. 
He  died  November  27th,  1857,  at  the  age  of 
81  years.  He  was  the  father  of  Frederick 
Ives,  one  of  the  prominent  citizens  of  Cort- 
land village.  Mr.  Burr  was  from  Sharon, 
Conn.  He  located  on  the  lands  afterward 
owned  and  occupied  by  William  Kingsbury, 
and  now  by  Augustus  Kingsbury.  He 
was  early  engaged  in  the  tanning  business, 
but  subsequently  sold  out  to  Mr.  Kings- 
bury, and  engaged  in  the  saddlery  and  har- 
ness business,  which  he  followed  for  thirty 
years.  He  made  his  influence  felt  on  the 
growth  of  the  village,  erected  several  dwell- 
ings and  otherwise  labored  for  the  good 
of  the  community. 

Richard  Graham  and  Henry  Corl  came 
in  and  located,  the  former  on  lot  28,  in 
181  I  ;  he  was  from  Herkimer  county.  Mr. 
Corl  came  from  Schenectady  originally,  but 
came  here  from  Locke,  Cayuga  county,  and 
settletl  on  lot  8.  A  few  years  afterward  he 
settled  on  his  farm  on  "the  hill,"  which  was 
given  his  name. 

During  the  progress  of  the  war,  from 
1812  to  181  5,  settlement  was  greatly  inter- 
rupted in  all  parts  of  the  county.  Down  to 
this  period  we  have  noted  most  of  the  more 
prominent  persons  who  came  into  the  town 
—  making  a  list  that  is  much  more  com- 
plete than  can  now  be  given  in  any  other 
town  in  the  count}'. 

A  noteworthy  arri\al  in  18  I  2  was  that  of 
George  W.   Samson, 1  who  came  here  from 

'  Mr.  Samson  was  originally  a  seafaring  man.  His 
first  voyage  was  to  Charleston,  S.  C,  at  the  time  of  the 
great  fire  in  1796.     In  1800  he  sailed  for  England,  at  the 


Town  of  Homer. 


197 


Plympton,  Mass.,  and  settled  first  on  lot  19, 
near  the  place  since  occupied  by  Joshua  Pratt 
and  his  son  David  and  still  later  by  Harry 
Lathrop.  Mr.  Samson  removed  to  lot  29, 
where  close  to  the  Tru.xtLHi  turnpike  he  ex- 
pended much  labor  in  excavating  the  hill- 
side for  tiie  purpose  of  making  the  founda- 
tions of  a  building.  He  erected  his  house 
in  1 8 14,  moved  into  it  and  the  following 
year  opened  it  as  a  hotel,  giving  the  place 
the  name  of  Mt.  Etam.'  This  was  for  many 
years  a  popular  and  well  known  stopping 
place  on  the  turnpike.  At  this  time  there 
were  but  four  families  in  the  East  Homer 
school  district.  Mr.  Samson  sold  his  tavern 
to  Peter  Westerman  and  engaged  in  the 
same  business  in  Preble,  and  later  in  Homer 
village,  where  his  son  long  kept  the  "Tem- 
perance House." 

William  Wood,  a  nati\'e  of  Hinsdale,  Ver- 
mont, migrated  to  Herkimer,  N.  Y.,  and  in 
1814  came  to  Homer,  at  first  locating  on 
the  road  leading  from  the  valley  on  the  east 
branch  of  the  river  to  Enon  Phelps's,  on  lot 
48.  He  lived  there  two  years  and  removed 
southward  on  lot  58,  and  in  1 8 19  to  lot  39, 
on  the  hill  and  adjoining  the  farm  of  Capt. 
Crandall.  After  planting  an  orchard  and 
otherwise  extensively  improving  the  place, 
he  was  forced  to  leave  it  for  want  of  a  valid 
title.  He  removed  into  the  valley  and  sub- 
sequently to  the  hill  on  the  northwestern 
side  of  the  river,  where  he  died  in  1 850.  His 
farm  on  lot  58  is  now  embraced  in  the  town 
of  Cortlandville. 

John  Burnham  purchased  of  Mr.  Hilliiud 
300  acres  of  land  on  lot  30,  adjoining  the 

time  of  the  war  between  that  country  and  France ;  the 
vessel  was  captured  by  a  French  cruiser  in  the  channel 
and  the  crew  taken  into  the  port  of  Brest.  Mr.  Samson 
was  taken  from  there  under  an  escort  and  afterward  saw 
the  inside  of  thirteen  different  prisons.  Upon  his  arrival 
at  Nantes  the  American  Consul  procured  his  release.  In 
1803  he  sailed  as  mate  of  the  brig  Apollo  and  visited 
m.any  of  the  southern  ports.  His  death  occurred  in  Ho- 
mer in  February,  iS68,  at  the  age  of  86  years, 
t  Named  from  the  llible  history  of  Samson. 


town  of  Tru.xton,  cleared  it  of  the  forest  and 
in  1S18  erected  a  saw-mill;  he  afterward 
bought  land  on  lot  20,  adjoining  his  first 
purchase  on  the  north  and  annexed  it  to  his 
farm,  where  he  li\ed  until  1864  and  died. 
A  portion  of  his  first  purchase  was  made 
of  John  B.  Henry,  who  settled  on  lot  30  in 
1804. 

Erastus  Goodell,  father  of  C.  B.  and  Eras- 
tus,  jr.,  located  on  the  State's  hundred,  lot 
7,  in  1816;  they  were  from  Sturbridge, 
Mass.      He  became  a  prominent  farmer. 

William  Andrews  came  in  from  Fabius, 
Onondaga  county,  in  1817.  He  secured 
the  confidence  of  his  fellow-citizens  to  such 
a  degree  that  he  was  honored  with  several 
offices  ;  he  was  constable  and  under-sherifif 
from  1820  to  1843  and  in  1831  was  elected 
sheriff  on  a  Union  ticket.  He  was  one  of 
the  well  known  men  of  the  county  for  many 
3'ears. 

Daniel  Josling  located  in  1818  on  lot  17; 
he  was  from  Windham,  Conn.  Kenneth 
Scudder,  from  Monmouth,  N.  J.,  settled  in 
Herkimer  county  in  181 3,  but  subsequently 
came  to  Homer,  locating  on  lot  18;  he  died 
in  1843. 

From  this  date  on  to  the  year  1825,  the 
progress  of  settlement  in  the  town  of  Homer 
was  uninterrupted.  What  was  almost  an 
unbroken  wilderness  a  quarter  of  a  century 
before  was  rapidly  becoming  a  rich  and 
prosperous  farming  country,  while  the  \-il- 
lage  was  already  the  leading  place  of  busi- 
ness in  the  county  —  a  prestige  it  retained 
for  many  years.  The  town  suffered  long,  in 
common  with  other  parts  of  the  county,  for 
want  of  railroad  communication;  the  busi- 
ness of  teaming  for  the  transportation  of  the 
products  of  the  town  to  Syracuse,  while  an 
important  industry  in  itself,  was  at  the  same 
time  a  discouraging  sign  of  the  helplessness 
of  the  community  in  this  respect.  When 
the  charter  of  the  first  proposed  railroad 
was   obtained    in    1836    the    hearts    of  the 


198 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


residents  of  tlic  town  beat  high  witli  antici- 
pation of  speedy  reHef  from  their  isolation  ; 
but  they  wore  doomed  to  disappointment, 
and  two  more  decades  passed  before  the 
consummation  of  tlicir  liopes  was  reached 
in  the  construction  and  opening  of  the  Syr- 
acuse and  J-iingliamton  railroad.  In  this 
important  enterprise  the  people  of  the  town 
of  Homer  took  a  prominent  and  active  in- 
terest, realizing  that  much  of  the  future 
prosperity  of  the  town  depended  upon  it. 
It  would  be  invidious  at  this  time  to  single 
out  those  men  who  devoted  their  means  and 
energies  directly  to  the  work,  while  all  did 
whatever  they  were  able  towards  the  com- 
pletion of  the  road  ;  and  when  it  was  finally 
opened,  there  was  an  era  of  rejoicing  on 
every  hand.  The  disappointments  and  ap- 
parent losses  which  subsequentl)'  fell  upon 
the  town  through  the  sale  of  the  road, 
although  grievous  at  the  time,  are  now  all 
forgotten  in  the  general  prosperity  of  the 
community  —  a  prosperity  that  could  never 
have  been  attained  without  railroad  com- 
munication with  distant  points. 

From  about  the  )-ear  1850,  the  dairying- 
interest  of  this  town  has  kept  pace,  at  least, 
with  that  of  other  portions  of  the  county 
and  vicinity ;  the  quantity  and  quality  of 
the  product  has  increased  and  ad\anced  ; 
cheese  factories  have  been  erected  and  the 
housewives  of  Homer  have  gained  a  repu- 
tation for  their  work  in  the  dairj'  of  which 
they  may  well  feel  "proud.  The  Homer 
cheese  factory,  so-called,  is  situated  a  mile- 
and  a  half  north  of  Homer  village,  on  the 
farm  of  Frederick  G.  Williams.  It  was 
erected  in  1864,  is  two  stories  high  and  32 
by  175  feet  in  extent.  A  large  business  is 
done  there,  which  is  now  controlled  by  a 
stock  company. 

TOWN    organization. 

Having  given  the  early  settlements  of  the 
town   to  as  recent  a  date  as  is  practicable, 


we  will  now  revert  to  the  first  organization 
of  the  town  of  Homer.  This  event  oc- 
curred on  the  5th  of  March,  1794,  when 
the  county  of  Onondaga  was  erected,  of 
which  Homer  was  then  a  part.  The  town 
officers  were  not,  however,  drawn  entirely 
from  within  the  present  town  limits ;  Virgil 
and  Solon,  then  a  part  of  Homer,  and  each 
embracing  towns  since  formed,  as  detailed 
in  the  general  history,  were  permitted  to 
share  in  the  political  honors  and  emolu- 
ments of  that  earl}'  da\-.  Political  ambition 
and  activity  was  then  at  a  low  ebb,  if  we 
may  judge  by  the  following  record  from  the 
town  book :  — 

"  State  of  New  York,  | 

/  ss 
Onondaga  County,    ) 

'•]]7ieiras,  The  town  of  Homer,  in  said  coun- 
ty, on  the  5th  day  of  April,  did  neglect  to  ap- 
point the  necessary  town  officers  for  the  year 
one  tliousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety-five, 
and, 

"  W/irrcas,  By  a  law  passed  on  the  ylh  day 
of  March,  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
eighty-eight,  directing  three  justices  of  the  peace 
of  said  county  to  nominate,  and  under  their 
hand  and  seals,  appoint  such  officers  as  under 
said  act  is  necessary  —  therefore,  we,  Asa  Dan- 
forth,  Hezekiah  Scott  and  Daniel  Keeler,  three 
of  the  justices  of  the  peace,  appointed  in  and  for 
said  county,  nominate,  and  by  these  presents  do 
appoint :  — 

"  For  Supervisor  —  John  Miller. 

■'Town  Clerk  —  Peter  IngersoU. 

"  Assessors  —  Thomas  L.  Bishop,  Moses  Hop- 
kins, Joseph  Beebe,  Daniel  Miner,  Roderick 
Beebe. 

"  Commissioners  of  Highways  —  Samuel  Ben- 
edict, David  Russell,  Moses  Hopkins. 

"Overseers  of  the  Poor  —  Joseph  Beebe, 
Christopher  \Vhitney. 

"Constable  and  Collector  —  John  House. 
"  Signed,  "  Asa.  D.\nforth, 

"  Hezekiah  Scott, 
"  Daniel  Keeler." 

The  meeting  at  which  these  appointments 
were  made  was  held  at  the  house  of 
"  'Squire "    Miller,    on    the    9th    of   April, 


Town  of  Homer. 


199 


1795.  The  first  annual  town  meeting  for 
the  election  of  officers  was  held  at  Mr.  Mil- 
ler's house,  on  the  8th  of  April,  1796,  when 
the  following  were  elected  :  — 

Supervisor  —  John  Miller. 

Town  clerk  —  Peter  Ingersoll. 

Assessors — Ezra  Rockwell,  l^illy  Trow- 
bridge, Daniel  Miner,  Francis  Strong,  Da\id 
Russell,  Jacob  Bishop. 

Collectors  —  Roderick  Beebe,  Barzilla 
Russell. 

Overseers  of  the  poor  —  Zera  Beebe, 
Thomas  L.  Bishop,  Oliver  Tuthill. 

Constables  —  Barzilla  Russell,  Roderick 
Beebe. 

Overseers  yf  highwaj's  —  William  Tut- 
hill, Ebcnezer  Jones,  Zera  Beebe,  Samuel 
C.  Benedict,  Joseph  Beebe,  Solomon  Hub- 
bard, John  Morse. 

Fence  viewers —  Elnathan  Baker,  George 
Trowbridge,  John  Bingham,  David  Jack- 
son, John  House,  Moses  Hopkins. 

These  early  elections  were  carried  on  in 
a  different  spirit  from  that  which  character- 
izes the  political  contests  of  the  present 
time.  There  was  seldom  much  rivalry,  and 
none  of  the  bitterness  of  later  days.  In  the 
year  1800,  however,  there  was  quite  a 
spirited  contest. 

At  the  town  meeting  in  1796  it  was 
agreed  by  vote,  "That  e\'ery  man  should 
make  his  own  pound  ;  and  that  hogs  run 
at  large  without  yokes  or  rings  ;  that  fences 
be  made  four  and  a  half  feet  high,  and  not 
to  e.xceed  four  inches  between  logs  or 
poles." 

In  the  following  year  (1797)  it  was  agreed 
by  a  unanimous  vote,  "That  every  man  in 
the  town  may  provide  his  own  pound  for 
every  creature  that  does  him  damage,  and 
yet  be  entitled  to  damage  the  same  as  at 
the  town  pound ;  that  hogs  be  free  com- 
moners; that  three  feet  of  sound  fence 
shall  not  be  more  than  fi\e  inches  between 
earth,  logs  or  erass." 


The  special  meeting  that  year  was  held 
at  the  house  of  Daniel  Knapp,  at  which  the 
following  were  a  portion  of  the  proceedings, 
c|uoted  verbatim  :  — 

"  Voted,  ist,  That  the  inhabitants  of  the  town 
build  a  bridge  across  the  river  at  the  nulls. 

'•  2(1,  That  the  Ijridge  be  built  by  a  lax  on 
tlie  inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Homer,  as  filed  in 
the  secretary's  office  of  this  State. 

"  3d,  That  Martin  Keep,  Aaron  Knapp  and 
Solomon  Hubbard  be  a  committee  to  report 
what  plan  said  bridge  he  built  upon." 

Such  were  the  problems  that  engrossed 
the  chief  portion  of  the  official  attention  of 
our  forefathers. 

The  town  was  divided  into  highway  dis- 
tricts in  1797.  In  1798  a  wolf  scalp  com- 
manded a  premium  of  from  five  to  ten  dol- 
lars, according  to  size  ;  bear's,  five  dollars  ; 
panther's,  ten  dollars,  and  fo.x's,  fifty  cents. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  of  the  town  of  Homer,  the  su- 
pervisor's name  being  given  first  in  each 
instance :  — 

1795,  John  Miller,  Peter  Ingersoll;  1796, 
John  Miller,  John  Keep;  1797-98,  Joshua 
Atwater,  Thomas  L.  Bishop;  1799,  James 
Knapp,  Thomas  L.  Bishop;  1800,  Caleb 
Keep,  Joshua  Ballard;  1801,  John  Ballard, 
Joshua  Ballard;  1 802-03,  Joshua  Ballard, 
Joshua  Atwater;  1804  to  1806  inclusive, 
John  Ballard,  Joshua  Ballard;  1807-08, 
Asahel  Miner,  Joshua  Ballard;  1809,  Mead 
Merrill,  Adin  Webb;  1 8 lO-i  i,  Daniel  Mil- 
ler, Adin  Webb;  181 2-13,  William  Lucas, 
Adin  W'ebb;  18 14,  Moses  Kinney,  Adin 
Webb;  1815  to  181 8  inclusive,  Wm.  Lucas, 
Adin  Webb;  1819-20,  Levi  Bowen,  Adin 
Webb;  1821  to  1829  inclusive,  Martin 
Keep,  Adin  Webb;  1 830-3  i,  Martin  Keep, 
Orin  Stimpson;  1832-33,  Noah  R.  Smith, 
Orin  Stimpson;  1834,  Chauncey  Keep, 
John  Sherman;  1835,  Horace  White,  John 
Sherman;  1836,  Wm.  Walter,  John  Sher- 
man; 1837-38,  Wm.  Weaker,  G.  J.  J.  Bar- 
ber;   1839,   John    Keep,    Erasmus   Bowen; 


200 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1840  to  1S42  inclusive,  Cliaunccy  Keep, 
Erasmus  Bowen;  1843,  Lemuel  D.  New- 
ton, Erasmus  Bowen;  1844,  Noah  Hitch- 
cock, jr.,  Loammi  Kinney;  1845,  Joseph 
L.  Clapp,  Loaniini  Kinney;  1846,  Lemuel 
D.  Newton,  Loammi  Kinney;  1847,  Geo. 
J.  J.  Barber,  Horace  Pierce;  1848,  Fred- 
erick Ives,  Horace  Pierce;  1849,  Frederick 
Ives,  Rufus  A.  Reed;  1850,  Samuel  Sher- 
man, Horace  S.  Babcock;  1851,  Giles 
Chittenden,  Horace  S.  Babcock;  1852-53, 
Manly  Hobart,  Horace  S.  Babcock;  1854, 
Jacob  M.  Schcrmerhorn,  Nathaniel  Jones; 
1855,  Peter  Walrad,  B.  D.  Benedict;  1856, 
Peter  Walrad,  Uri  H.  Patterson;  1857, 
Peter  Walrad,  Edwin  Miles;  1858,  Giles 
Chittenden,  Edwin  Miles;  1859-60,  Giles 
Chittenden,  C.  O.  Newton;  1861-62,  Geo. 
W.  Phillips,  Wm.  H.  Burnham;  1863,  Geo. 
W.  Phillips,  John  H.  Munger;  1864-65, 
Geo.  W.  Phillips,  Martin  Miner;  1866-67, 
Alphonzo  Stone,  Martin  Miner;  1868  to 
1870  inclusive,  Geo.  W.  Phillips,  Martin 
Miner;  1 87 1,  Manly  Hobart,  Martin  Miner; 
1872-73,  Vernon  T.  Stone,  Martin  Miner; 
1874-75,  John  H.  Hicok,  Martin  Miner; 
1876-77,  S.  McClellan  Barber,  William  A. 
Kellogg;  1878,  S.  McC.  Barber,  J.  Clayton 
Atwater;  1879-80,  Wm.  O,  Bunn,  J.  Clay- 
ton Atwater;  1881,  John  J.  Murray,  J. 
Clayton  Atwater;  1882,  H.  Wilson  Blash- 
field,  J.  Clayton  Atwater;  1S83,  Wm.  H. 
Crane,  J.  Clayton  Atwater. 

At  the  annual  town  meeting  held  in  the 
town  hall  in  Homer,  on  the  20th  of  Feb- 
ruary, 1883,  the  following  officers  were 
elected :  — 

Supervisor — Wm.  H.  Crane. 

Town  Clerk  —  J.  Clayton  Atwater. 

Justices  of  the  Peace  —  Melvin  J.  Pratt,  A. 
J.  Kneeland,  Stephen  Klock,  Elliot  L.  Stone. 

Assessors — A.  Dwight  Kingsbury,  C. 
H.  Sherman,  James  H.  Clark. 

Commissioner  of  Highways — Harrison 
W.  Southwick. 


Collector — John  York. 

Inspectors  of  Election,  District  No.  i  — 
Irving  Alexander,  Abram  Griffith;  ap- 
pointed, PLllis  Briggs. 

District  No.  2  —  Frank  Galluss,  Ossian 
B.  Andrews;   appointed,  Wm.  A.  Coon. 

District  No.  3  —  Harlan  P.  Hull,  Vernon 
T.  Stone;  appointed,  Andrew  P.  Hender- 
son. 

Town  Auditors — A.  W.  Hobart,  Chas. 
B.  Goodell ;  appointed,  Frank  D.  Carpenter. 
'  E.xcise  Commissioners — Warren  Salis- 
bury, H.  W.  Southwick,  W.  B.  Beach. 

Overseers  of  the  Poor — Augustus  W. 
Kingsbury,  Stephen  P.  Hoag. 

Constables — Wm.  A.  Shirley,  Alfred  B. 
Raymond,  Elisha  W'iUiams,  John  Bennett, 
Wm.  T.  Sanders. 

Game  Constable — Henr>'   L.   Carpenter. 

HOMER  TN  THE  WAR  OF  THE   REBELLION. 

No  town  came  forward  with  more  readi- 
ness to  aid  in  putting  down  the  gigantic  re- 
bellion which  threatened  the  life  of  the  gov- 
ernment than  did  old  Homer.  Enlistments 
were  made  from  the  town  at  the  very  first 
call  for  soldiers,  which  were  followed  as  long 
as  there  was  opportunity,  by  the  most  pa- 
triotic offers  of  service  and  life,  and  gener- 
ous outlay  of  money,  in  aid  of  the  govern- 
ment. A  special  meeting  of  the  town  offi- 
cers was  held  at  the  town  hall  on  the  6th 
of  July,  1 862,  pursuant  to  a  call  of  the  free- 
holders, for  the  purpose  of  taking  into  con- 
sideration the  propriety  of  raising  mone)' 
for  soldiers'  bounties,  to  encourage  enlist- 
ments to  meet  the  call  of  the  government 
for  troops.  The  names  of  the  freeholders 
signed  to  the  call  for  the  meeting  were : 
George  Murray,  S.  S.  Day,  Charles  Tower, 
G.  S.  Simmons,  D.  S.  Totman,  S.  Plumb, 
B.  W.  Payne,  Thomas  Holbrook,  E.  Stim- 
son,  M.  C.  Darby,  R.  F.  Smith,  W.  T. 
Hicok,  Joseph  R.  Di.xon,  G.  W.  Bradford, 
D.  D.  R.  Ormsb}-,  Josiah  Stone,  J.  Sanders, 


Town  of  Homer. 


20 1 


C.  O.  Newton,  Samuel  Babcock,  L.  Darb\', 
Ira  Green  and  H.  S.  Babcock.  The  meet- 
ing passed  the  following  :  — 

"  Resolved,  That  the  electors  proceed  to  vote 
upon  the  question  of  raising  hy  tax  fifty  dollars 
to  be  paid  to  each  person  who  shall  volunteer 
from  the  town  of  Homer,  from  July  2d,  1862, 
until  the  whole  number  of  the  quota  shall  be 
raised." 

The  limit  of  the  period  during  which  en- 
listments might  be  made  under  this  resolu- 
tion was  from  July  2d  to  the  3d  day  of  the 
following  September,  or  until  the  time  of  a 
draft  which  might  be  ordered  by  the  author- 
ities ;  the  number  of  such  volunteers  not  to 
exceed  that  of  the  quota  for  the  town  under 
the  two  previous  calls  for  soldiers. 

Under  this  resolution  three  hundred  and 
sixty-three  persons  voted,  three  hundred  and 
sixty  of  whom  were  in  favor  of  it.  The 
finance  committee,  whose  duty  it  was  to 
receive  and  disburse  the  money  raised  un- 
der the  resolution,  to  procure  from  the  next 
Legislature  legal  sanction  of  the  proceed- 
ings, and  to  co-operate  with  the  town  au- 
thorities in  carrying  out  the  measure,  were 
Geo.  W.  Bradford,  N.  Randall,  J.  RI.  Scher- 
merhorn,  G.  J.  J.  Barber,  George  Cook,  W. 
T.  Hicok  and  A.  W.  Kingsbury.  This  fifty 
dollar  bounty  was  paid  by  the  town  outside 
of  the  State  or  county  ;  but  thereafter  the 
town  made  the  amount  of  its  bounties  to 
correspond  with  the  suggestions  and  regu- 
lations of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  the 
county,  thus  preventing  unnecessary  com- 
petition among  the  different  towns  in  filling 
their  quotas.  Whenever  calls  were  made 
for  troops,  and  the  quotas  of  the  towns  were 
established,  with  the  amount  of  bounties  to 
be  paid  throughout  the  county,  the  free- 
holders of  Homer  never  failed  to  call  special 
meetings  for  the  consideration  of  the  mat- 
ters involved.  Thus,  when  the  president 
issued  a  call  for  500,000  men  in  1864,  an- 
other special  town  meeting  was  called  un- 
der date  of  July  2 1st,  wliich  was  signed  by  J. 


Murray,  P.  C.  Kingsbury,  I.  W.  Brown,  W'm. 
Coggshall,  Geo.  W.  Bradford,  C.  M.  Clark, 
Geo.  J.  J.  Barber,  Thomas  D.  Chollar,  D. 
D.  R.  Ormsby,  W.  T.  Hicok,  C.  A.  Collins, 
J.  M.  Pierce,  O.  Bowen,  Samuel  Babcock, 
George  Murray,  Lorenzo  Bennett  and  Luke 
Babcock.  The  meeting  was  held  on  the 
30th  of  Jul\%  pursuant  to  the  call,  and  the 
following  was  offered  for  consideration  :  — 

"  Whereas,  On  the  27th  day  of  July,  1864, 
the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  Cortland  county  in 
special  session,  at  the  court-house  in  Cortland 
village,  in  said  county,  recommended  to  the 
electors  of  the  several  towns  to  hold  special 
meetings  in  their  respective  towns  and  adopt  the 
following  resolution  :  — 

"  Resolreii,  That  the  town  of  Homer  hereby 
offers  bounty  to  each  volunteer  of  $150  for  all 
who  enlist  for  one  year,  and  the  sum  of  $250  to 
each  volunteer  who  may  enlist  for  two  years,  or 
for  a  longer  term,  and  who  shall  be  accepted  and 
mustered  into  the  service  of  the  United  States 
and  credited  to  said  town,  under  the  last  call  of 
the  president  of  the  United  States  for  500,000 
troops;  and  in  case  other  counties  offer  larger 
bounties  than  those  above  named,  these  offers  be 
correspondingly  raised,  if  deemed  expedient  by 
the  committee,  —  therefore, 

^^  Resolved,  That  this  meeting  does  now  pro- 
ceed to  vote  on  the  above  resolution,  by  the  town 
clerk  recording  the  ayes  and  noes  of  each  elector 
who  may  desire  to  vote  on  said  resolution." 

The  certificate  of  the  clerk  showed  that 
the  whole  number  of  votes  cast  was  one 
hundred  and  forty-seven,  of  which  one 
hundred  and  forty-two  were  in  favor  of  it. 

On  the  30th  of  August,  1864,  the  free- 
holders of  the  town  again  met  to  consider 
the  propriety  of  raising  the  bounty  of  sol- 
diers ;  this  meeting  terminated  in  a  request 
to  the  town  clerk  to  call  a  special  town 
meeting  of  the  electors  of  the  town,  to  be 
held  on  the  7th  day  of  September,  1864. 
The  meeting  was  held  and  the  following 
resolution  adopted  :  — 

"  Resolved,  I'hat  the  town  of  Homer  will  en- 
dorse the  resolution  of  the  war  committee  of  the 


202 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Board  of  Supervisors,  given  on  the  3d  day  of  Sep- 
tember, increasing  the  bounty  to  volunteers  and 
substitutes  to  one  thousand  dollars  ;  and  that  we 
hereby  instruct  our  supervisor  to  endorse  the  same 
to  date  from  the  3d  day  of  September,  1864,  and 
for  all  volunteers  who  have  enlisted  and  have 
been  credited  to  the  town  under  the  president's 
last  call  for  500,000  men,  except  tiie  thirteen  men 
previously  credited." 

At  a  meeting  of  the  board  of  town  audi- 
tors of  the  town  of  Homer  on  the  lOth  day 
of  November,  1 864,  the  following  resolution 
was  adopted :  — 

"  Jieso/vfi/,  That  the  supervisor  of  the  town 
of  Homer  be  directed  to  levy  upon  said  town  at 
the  next  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of 
the  county,  the  sum  of  eight  hundred  dollars,  for 
the  purpose  of  paying  additional  bounty  and  in- 
cidental expenses  incurred  in  filling  the  quotas 
of  this  town  under  the  call  of  the  president  of 
July,  1864." 

The  following  resolution  was  also  passed 
at  that  meeting  :  — 

"  Resolved,  That  the  sum  of  fifty-eight  dollars 
and  eighty-five  cents  be  raised  in  like  manner, 
for  roads  and  bridges  in  said  town." 

Another  special  town  meeting  was  held, 
pursuant  to  call,  on  the  10th  of  January, 
1S65,  at  which  the  electors  of  the  town  voted 
to  offer  a  bounty  of  $400  to  each  volunteer, 
or  substitute  who  should  enlist  for  one  year; 
$500  for  two  years,  and  $600  for  three 
years.  The  number  of  votes  cast  at  this 
meeting  was  one  hundred  and  twenty-six, 
of  which  one  hundred  and  fifteen  were  in 
favor  of  the  measure.  It  was  also  further 
resolved  that  Chester  RI.  Clark,  Nathan 
Randall  and  J.  H.  Munger  be  a  town  com- 
mittee for  the  purpose  of  procuring  enlist- 
ments to  fill  the  quota  of  the  town,  under 
the  last  call  of  the  president  for  300,000 
men. 

At  a  town  meeting  held  on  the  21st  of 
February,  1865,  it  was  resolved  to  pay  a 
bounty  in  addition  to  that  offered  pursuant 
to  the  action  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors, 
sufficient  to  make  the  whole  amount  $1,000. 


We  have  thus  given  at  considerable 
length  all  of  the  important  proceedings  by 
the  town  authorities  in  the  matter  of  filling 
the  different  quotas  of  soldiers,  the  pay- 
ment of  bounties,  etc.  It  will  be  seen  that 
the  proceedings  conformed  in  all  essential 
particulars  to  those  of  the  Board  of  Super- 
visors of  the  count}-,  as  detailed  in  the 
chapter  of  the  general  history  devoted  to 
this  subject ;  and  as  the  meetings  in  the 
different  towns  held  for  the  same  purpose, 
and  the  proceedings  of  the  same  were,  in 
their  main  features  similar  to  those  above 
described,  we  shall  not  deem  it  necessary 
to  occup)'  our  space  with  their  iletails  in 
the  separate  town  histories  in  subsequent 
pages. 

The  names  of  all  the  \-olunteers  of  the 
town  of  Homer  are  given  in  the  following 
list,  except  those  of  the  first  thirteen  enlist- 
ments. Of  those  we  have  only  the  names 
of  George  Snyder  and  Eugene  R.  Rawson, 
his  brother-in-law,  who  was  promoted  to 
lieutenant-colonel,  and  killed  in  Jul}',  1865, 
and  Joseph  Hotchkiss  :  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  Bounty 
paid,  $300.  Total,  $15,000.  —  Oscar  El- 
mer, Charles  A.  Ford,  William  A.  Wilcox, 
Hiram  Burt,  Ezra  P.  Haight,  Lester  H. 
Benedict,  William  H.  Tubbs,  Alonzo  Miller, 
Deloss  Sperry,  William  A.  Benedict,  Beman 
Crosby,  Arden  Haight,  Albert  Dyde,  Icha- 
bod  Chapman,  Burdin  H.  Barrett,  Albert 
G.  Sheffield,  Charles  J.  Earle,  Oliver  Scher- 
merhorn,  William  H.  Gillett,  Richard  S. 
Valentine,  Rensselaer  Mills,  John  Reys, 
Dwight  Chapman,  Franz  Dick,  Franklin  B. 
Corl,  E.  Washburn  Moore,  John  G.  Sim- 
mons, Jay  J.  Salisbury,  Joseph  Bushby, 
James  M.  D.  Pierce,  Edwin  B.  Swift,  Frank- 
lin Winslow,  Luman  S.  Hicks,  Charles 
Doole,  George  W.  Burdick,  John  G.  John- 
son, William  Connell,  Robert  S.  Howard, 
Martin  Darling,  William  Reese,  Benjamin 
Wilson,    James    Oakly,    Nathaniel    Butler, 


Town  of  Homer. 


203 


Benjamin  F.  Biirch,  Thomas  Dunn,  William 
Sears,  William  H.  Brotherton,  Lavvison 
Stebbins,  Theodore  De  Bar,  Thomas  Jones. 

Call  of  Jul}-  1 8th,  1864.  Bount\-  paid 
$1,000,  except  $500  to  three,  and  $700  to 
four.  Total  bounty,  $52,300.  Brokerage, 
$'.375-  —  Michael  O'Brien,  sub.  for  P.  C. 
Kingsbury,  William  Morehead,  sub.  for 
Charles  E.  Bates,  Lewis  V.  Huttleson,  Al- 
bert J.  Donaldson,  Daniel  A.  Berry,  sub.  for 
S.  M.  Barber,  Daniel  Hands,  sub.  for  J.  H. 
Price,  Lewis  W.  Shorinder,  sub.  for  Levi 
Klock,  John  Smith,  sub.  for  C.  A.  Persons, 
James  Mongovan,  sub.  for  Stephen  Klock, 
Simon  Fox,  sub.  for  M.  M.  Hibbard,  John 
Ripley,  William  W.  Briggs,  Robert  P.  Bush, 
Peter  Conine,  Philo  Conine,  Philip  Conine, 
Washington  Dayton,  Leroj-  Galpin,  Chris- 
topher H.  Gettey,  Theron  Geutcheous, 
Frederick  H.  Goodell,  James  W.  Henry, 
Earl  A.  Hill,  William  Howe,  Henry  D. 
Keeling,  James  R.  Mann,  Charles  M.  Ma- 
cumber,  John  R.  Miller,  Asahel  P.  Nott,  Asa 
Palmer,  Earlman  R.  Palmer,  Henry  M.  Phil- 
lips, Elijah  B.  Pender,  Martin  L.  Rose,  Ruel 
H.  Rose,  Jeremiah  Starkey,  George  W. 
Stebbins,  Olivier  H.  Topping,  Charles  H. 
Weaver,  William  M.  Whiting,  Peter  York, 
Chas.  H.  Gould,  sub.  for  Jed.  Barber,  2d., 
William  E.  Kerby,  Thomas  Baldin,  Abra- 
ham Wolf,  John  Williams,'  sub.  for  D.  N. 
Hitchcock,  Jacob  Stickle,  John  Brown,  sub. 
for  H.  P.  Hull,  William  Bliss,  sub.  for  J.  D. 
Hull,  William  T.  Reed,  William  O'Conner, 
Thomas  Green,  sub.  S.  H.  Hibbard,  Edwin 
M.  Seaver,  Beverly  Johnson,  Archie  Taylor. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bounty 
paid,  $300.  Total,  $15,500.  Brokerage, 
$390.00. — John  Blanch,  James  Williams, 
Eugene  Collins,  James  Kelly,  Patrick  Foley, 
Patrick  Mansfield,  Jeptha  W.  Owen,  Rob- 
ert W.  Leach,  William  B.  Kimball,  James 
Hall,  John  Cameron,  William  Garwood, 
Louis  Zenloich,  Joseph  Lewis,  John  Sum- 
mons, Renna  Wearanger,  David  Williams, 


Elisha  S.  Lawrence,  James  Francis,  William 
L.  Stickney,  Nathan  Givens,  Richard  Epps, 
Joseph  Dunger,  John  Cane,  Frederick  Roj-, 
Samuel  Rand. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  February  and 
March,  1864,  $15,000;  paid  for  filling 
quota,  call  July  i8th,  1864,  $53,675  ;  paid 
for  filling  quota,  call  December  19th,  1864, 
$15,890.      Grand  total,  $84,565. 

HOMER    VII.L.VGE. 

What  is  now  the  pleasant  and  prosperous 
village  of  Homer  was  once,  of  course,  but 
a  mere  collection  of  houses,  around  which 
the  insignificant  business  of  early  days  grad- 
ually collected  ;  there  was  then  more  busi- 
ness in  the  surrounding  vicinity  of  what  is 
now  the  center  of  the  village,  than  directly 
among  the  dwellings  that  constituted  the 
nucleus  of  the  place.  Every  new  settle- 
ment shows  more  or  less  hesitancy  about 
selecting  its  business  center.  Here  springs 
up  a  small  industry  ;  there  is  built  what  be- 
comes a  popular  public  house,  and  yonder 
is  located  a  store  by  a  man  who  shows  a 
capacity  for  success,  and  the  mind  of  the 
little  public  vacillates  until  some,  perhaps, 
trivial  event  decides  the  question  of  the  site 
of  a  village  in  favor  of  some  particular  lo- 
cality. Of  tlie  scattering  industries  referred 
to  we  will  speak,  before  entering  upon  the 
business  history  of  the  village  proper;  they 
were  w^hat  gave  early  life  and  energy  to  the 
young  settlement,  and  are  thus  worthj-  of 
particular  mention. 

The  Wright  Hotel.  —  On  the  northward 
of  Amos  Beebe's  farm,  and  separated  from 
it,  is  the  farm  on  which  James  Wright  was 
quite  an  early  settler.  Whence  he  came, 
or  just  how  long  he  remained,  is  not  now 
known ;  but  he  cleared  his  land  of  the  for- 
est, placed  it  under  cultivation,  and,  after  a 
few  years'  residence  in  a  log  cabin,  erected 
a  frame  dwelling  of  larjfer  dimensions  than 


204 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


characterized  most  of  the  earl)-  dwellings, 
and  eventually  opened  it  as  a  hotel.  It 
may  seem  singular  to  many  at  the  present 
day  that  a  public  house  should  be  opened 
in  a  locality  apparently  secluded  ;  but  this 
was  on  one  of  the  main  thoroughfares 
through  Central  New  York,  then  denom- 
inated the  Cooperstown  Turnpike,  which  di- 
verged from  the  Great  Western  Turnpike  at 
Cherry  Valley,  and  came  westward  through 
the  central  portion  of  the  State.  This  road 
was  heavily  traveled  for  man)-  years  by 
teams  hauling  produce,  etc.,  and  especially 
wheat  to  .\lbany.  It  was  prior  to  the  con- 
struction of  railroads  or  canals,  and  conse- 
quently a  tavern  for  the  accommodation  of 
the  teamsters  and  other  travelers,  if  not  an 
actual  necessity,  would  be  a  great  conven- 
ience, and  sure  to  command  considerable 
business.  Such  turnpike  inns  were  thickly 
scattered  throughout  the  State  in  early 
days. 

Mr.  Wright  kept  his  hotel  for  many  years, 
and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  on  the 
same  farm,  which  is  now  owned  by  the 
heirs  of  Edmund  Butler,  to  whom  it  was 
deeded  by  Wright, 

A  little  northward  from  Mr.  Wright's 
lived  a  Mr.  Tanner,  who  was  one  of  the 
first  (if  not  the  ver)-  first)  weaver  in  the 
town.  He  made  a  specialt)'  of  weaving 
coarse  hair  cloth  for  use  in  sieves.  He  died 
at  that  place. 

The  first  tailor  in  the  vicinity  of  Homer 
village  was  Hooker  Ballard,  who  came  here 
in  1803.  He  is  remembered  as  a  worthy 
man  and  a  good  workman,  who  lived  a  quiet 
and  retiring  life. 

Nathan  Stone  came  to  the  \icinit)-  of  Ho- 
mer village  in  1800,  and  for  man)-  )-ears 
worked  at  his  trade  of  brick  and  stone  mason. 
He  located  upon  the  farm  now  occupied  by 
Erastus  Jones.  His  brother,  David  Stone, 
the  youngest  of  five  brothers,  also  came 
here  and  worked  at  the  trade  of  carpenter. 


We  have  already  referred  to  the  arrival 
of  Daniel  Crandall  in  1798,  and  his  work- 
ing at  shoe  mending,  and  finally  at  shoe 
making,  in  the  house  of  Judge  Keep,  at 
East  River.  He  was  undoubtedly  the  first 
shoemaker  in  the  town,  and  perhaps  in  the 
count)-. 

Samuel  Hotchkiss,  who  came  in  1798, 
was  originally  a  shipbuilder;  he  located  a 
little  east  of  Mr.  Todd's  farm,  and  worked 
as  a  carpenter.  He  built  the  house  now- 
occupied  b)-  Thomas  Fisher,  in  which  he 
lived  for  a  time.  He  had  charge  of  the 
erection  of  the  frames  of  many  of  the  houses 
in  this  vicinity  at  an  earl)-  day. 

During  the  earlier  years  of  the  history  of 
the  town  the  manufacture  of  whisky  was 
one  of  the  leading  industries ;  it  probably 
stood  at  the  head  in  this  respect.  It  was  a 
practical  and  profitable  method  of  dispos- 
ing of  surplus  grain  at  home,  instead  of 
transporting  it  many  miles  to  other  mar- 
kets. The  liquor  was  then  used  with  a 
freedom  that  would  at  the  present  time 
cause  a  general  sentiment  of  horror  in  any 
conmiunity ;  but  at  the  same  time,  the 
knowledge  of  chemistry  was  not  .so  pro- 
found among  the  distillers  as  it  is  to-day, 
and  their  products  consequently  were  of  a 
much  purer  and  more  wholesome  character 
than  a  great  deal  of  the  spirits  sold  at  present. 
As  late  as  the  year  1829,  as  we  are  informed 
on  good  authority,  there  were  ten  distil- 
leries in  the  town,  at  least  si.x  of  which  w-ere 
within  the  present  boundaries  of  Homer, 
and  four  within  the  limits  of  Cortland\ille. 
It  is  probable  that  there  were  more ;  but  per- 
haps it  is  well  to  not  push  the  investigation 
any  farther.  Orrin  Utley  had  one  at  East 
River;  Samuel  Griggs  one  "on  the  turn- 
pike," and  Ira  Bowen  one  where  the  Homer 
cheese  factory  now  stands  ;  Benajah  Tubbs 
one  on  "  Brewery  Hill ; "  Dr.  Lynde  one 
where  Amos  Hobart  now  lives,  and  Jede- 
diah   Barber  one  in  the  villa"e.     The  lover 


Town  of  Homkr. 


205 


of  ardent  spirits  in  those  days  could  go  to 
a  distillery,  buy  his  gallon  of  whisky  for 
twenty- five  cents,  and  be  presented  with  a 
jug  in  which  to  carrj-  it  home.  Yet  it  is 
said  that,  while  there  was  undoubtedly 
much  more  liquor  consumed  to  the  number 
of  the  population  than  there  is  now,  still 
there  was  no  more  of  what  ma)-  be  called  in- 
toxication than  there  is  at  the  present  day. 

The  business  of  tanning  leather  was  one 
of  the  prominent  early  industries,  also. 
Hitchcock  &  Bennett,  two  skillful  boot  and 
shoe  manufacturers,  erected  a  tannery  on 
the  summit  of  the  hill  near  David  Han- 
num's  farm,  at  an  early  day,  and  continued 
the  business  there  for  many  years.  Andrew 
Burr,  who  came  to  Homer  village  in  1809, 
in  compan\-  with  a  man  by  the  name  of 
Coats,  erected  a  tanner}-,  in  addition  to  other 
buildings  which  he  had  built ;  but  it  appears 
that  the  business  did  not  prosper  under 
their  management,  as  Mr.  Burr  sold  out  his 
interest  in  1816,  and  not  long  afterward  Mr. 
Coats  disposed  of  his  share  in  it  and  re- 
moved from  the  town. 

Homer  village  is  delightfully  situated  on 
the  west  branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  river, 
on  the  southern  boundary  of  the  town,  and 
nearly  central  from  east  to  west.  It  is  three 
miles  north  of  the  village  of  Cortland,  on 
the  Syracuse,  Binghamton  and  New  York 
Railroad.  For  a  number  of  years  in  the 
early  history  of  the  place  it  was  the  most 
important  village  in  Cortland  county;  it 
now  contains  four  churches,  an  academy, 
a  newspaper,  a  bank,  two  hotels,  several 
manufactories,  numerous  stores,  and  about 
2,500  inhabitants.  The  streets  and  walks 
of  the  village  are  broad  and  ornamented 
with  beautiful  and  thrifty  shade  trees,  and 
lighted  with  gas.  There  arc  many  tasteful 
residences  and  several  fine  business  blocks. 
Main  street  is  about  a  mile  in  length  ex- 
tending north  and  ,':outh  and  embraces 
most  of  the  business  part  of  the  village. 


Near  the  center  of  the  village  is  a  beau- 
tiful park,  along  the  west  side  and  facing 
which  stand  the  Baptist,  Congregational, 
Methodst  and  Episcopal  Churches,  and  the 
Cortland  Academy.  The  village  contains 
two  public  halls  —  Keator  (formerly  Bar- 
ber) and  Wheadon  Hall ;  the  former  is 
finished  and  furnished  in  good  style  and 
has  a  seating  capacity  of  one  thousand  ; 
the  latter  is  forty  by  fifty  feet  in  size. 

The  family  that  first  settled  on  any  part 
of  the  ground  now  occupied  by  Homer 
village,  was,  from  the  best  information  now 
available,  that  of  John  House,  who  located 
in  the  northeastern  part  of  the  village,  near 
what  is  now  known  as  the  upper  bridge,  and 
probably  on  the  site  of  the  present  residence 
of  Erastus  Goodell;  but  there  is  some  dif- 
ference of  opinion  in  the  minds  of  the  pres- 
ent generation  as  to  the  exact  site  of  the 
dwelling.  But  little  is  now  known  of  Mr. 
House  —  whence  he  came,  the  length  of 
time  he  remained,  or  whither  he  went.  He 
was  succeeded  on  his  place  of  residence  by 
Stephen  Knapp,  who  had  previously  lived 
in  a  house  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  on  the 
farm  now  owned  by  Andrew  Kingsbury. 
Mr.  Knapp  was  succeeded  on  the  farm  near 
the  bridge  by  William  Cummins,  and  he  by 
Henr}'  Woodward. 

Asahel  Miner  came  to  Homer  about  the 
year  1797  and  located  first  on  the  road 
north  of  the  old  factory  building.  In  1803 
he  removed  to  the  village  and  occupied  the 
house  where  his  son,  Martin  Miner,  subse- 
quently li\-ed  for  many  years.  Asahel 
Miner  resided  on  this  place  until  his  death 
in  18 17.  It  has  been  said  of  him  that  dur- 
ing his  residence  in  Homer  (which  was 
about  twenty  years)  he  was  called  to  fill 
more  positions  of  responsibility  and  trust 
than  any  other  man  in  the  town.  Among 
the  early  settlers  of  Homer  village  were  the 
five  brothers  by  the  name  of  Ballard,  who 
came    here    from     Brimfield,     Mass.,    and 


206 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


located  upon  grt)und  now  occupied  b\'  tlic 
village  and  its  immediate  vicinity.  Their 
names  were  John,  Hooker,  Slicrebiah,  Jon- 
athan and  Joshua.  John  and  Hooker  Bal- 
lard came  to  Homer  in  1803.  The  former 
purchased  a  farm  on  the  west  side  of  Main 
street,  locating  his  first  dwelling  on  the  site 
of  Mr.  Schermerhorn's  house.  This  dwell- 
ing was  used  by  him  as  a  tavern  and  was 
the  one  in  which  he  was  succeeded  by  Enos 
Stimson,  and  where  the  Indian  orgie  oc- 
curred, as  before  narrated.  In  1804  John 
Ballard  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Legis- 
lature and  in  1807  was  elected  to  the  State 
Senate.  He  was  clerk  of  the  county  in 
1808-09  and  1811-12.  Joshua,  who  ar- 
rived here  in  1797-98,  bought  a  farm  on 
the  east  side  of  the  river,  being  a  part  of 
the  farm  since  occupied  by  E.  Kingsbury. 
He  subsequently  purchased  land  lying  be- 
tween Main  street  and  the  river,  and  erected 
buildings  on  or  near  the  corner  of  Albany 
and  Main  streets. 

Hooker  Ballard  purchased  a  farm  adjoin- 
ing that  of  John  on  the  south  and  extend- 
ing to  the  south  line  of  lot  45,  which  now 
forms  the  boundary  line  between  the  towns 
of  Homer  and  Cortlandville.  Jonathan 
Ballard  located  on  lot  54,  adjoining  the 
farm  of  Mr.  Knapp.  The  two  farms  owned 
by  Daniel  Knapp,  and  those  of  Hooker 
and  Jonathan  Ballard,  were  situated  in  the 
corners  of  four  different  lots  —  44,  45,  54 
and  55  —  one  corner  of  each  farm  meeting 
at  the  same  point. 

The  original  house,  now  occupied  by  Mr. 
Schermerhorn,  was  erected  by  Caleb  Bal- 
lard. He  died  in  1836  and  his  brother, 
Marsena  Ballard,  married  his  widow,  re- 
moving from  the  town  a  few  years  later. 
In  1830  the  property  passed  into  possession 
of  Andrew  Dickson,  by  whom  important 
additions  were  made.  Marsena  Ballard 
bought  it  of  him  ;  it  then  became  the  resi- 
dence of  Col.  Williams  and  Robert  Ellis  be- 


came its  nc.Nt  owner  ;  he  refitted  antl  im- 
proved it.  The  premises  subsequently  passed 
into  the  hands  of  the  present  owner,  who  in 
the  course  of  time  made  the  additions  and 
improvements  which  gave  the  place  its  pres- 
ent magnificent  appearance. 

Joshua  Ballard,  before  1820,  erected  the 
house  afterwards  owned  and  occupied  by  I. 
M.  Samson.  The  eastern  part  of  this  build- 
ing was  fitted  up  for  a  store.  In  1822  it 
was  kept  as  a  hotel  and  was  afterwards 
owned  and  occupied  by  Col.  Benajah  Tubbs. 
In  1 8 19  Mr.  Ballard  removed  to  Cortland 
village. 

A  little  northward  of  the  cabin  built  by 
John  Ballard,  Hezekiah  Roberts  erected  a 
house  on  the  southeast  corner  of  the  lot  now 
occupied  by  A.  T.  Ney.  He  also  built  the 
house  now  occupied  b}'  James  P.  Sher- 
man ;  but  the  dates  when  these  buildings 
were  erected  are  not  now  known.  The  lat- 
ter named  house  was,  subsequent  to  the  year 
1840,  owned  by  Townsend  Ross,  and  then 
by  Oliver  M.  Shedd.  It  is  stated  that  Rev. 
John  Keep,  who  came  to  Homer  in  1821  or 
1822,  also  resided  here  for  several  years, 
being  succeeded  by  Chas.  W.  Lynde.  Al- 
bert Sherman  now  owns  and  occupies  the 
premises. 

The  two  houses  on  Main  street,  one  at 
present  owned  by  Miss  Emily  Ormsby  and 
the  other  by  G.  Frazier,  were  evidently 
built  at  an  early  day ;  they  were  formerly 
owned  by  E.  and  C.  Shirley,  who  came  to 
Homer  about  1825. 

Andrew  Burr,  who  occupied  the  house 
situated  on  the  east  side  of  Main  street, 
directly  south  of  the  building  erected  on  the 
corner  of  Albany  street  by  Joshua  Ballard, 
came  to  Homer  from  Connecticut  in  1809. 
Who  built  the  house  occupied  by  him  is 
uncertain.  It  was  at  first  three  stories  in 
height  and  was  used  for  a  time  as  a  hotel. 
Mr.  Burr  purchased  the  building  and  re- 
duced its  height  to  two  stories. 


( 


Town  of  Homer. 


207 


Jared  Babcock  came  to  the  town  at  an 
early  day  and  erected  the  building  on  the 
north  side  of  Albany  street,  second  house 
from  the  corner.  He,  in  company  with  J. 
T.  Clapp,  also  erected  the  building  long 
known  as  the  old  brewery  and  were  engaged 
ill  the  brewing  of  strong  beer  for  many 
years.  The  business  was  disposed  of  to 
Almus  Stebbins,  who  continued  it  mitil  the 
building  was  burned. 

The  residence  next  to  that  of  Mr.  Bab- 
cock on  the  east  appears  to  have  been  built 
at  an  early  day,  but  by  whom  is  not  known. 
Almus  Stebbins  began  his  residence  there 
prior  to  1830  and  lived  there  a  number  of 
years.  It  was  afterwards  occupied  by  Mosely 
Clark,  who  was  succeeded  by  Col.  Eleazer 
May,  both  of  whom  died  there  at  upwards  of 
ninety  years  of  age.  Calvin  Bosworth  and 
family  removed  to  the  house  next  and  re- 
mained for  a  time. 

Just  east  of  the  residence  of  Mr.  Babcock 
and  across  the  river  at  the  stone  bridge  is  a 
dwelling  occupied  by  Charles  Mead,  the 
front  portion  of  which  was  built  by  Clement 
Hayden  in  181 5.  The  house  on  the  oppo- 
site corner,  occupied  by  George  Martin,  was 
also  built  at  a  very  early  day.  A  little  north 
of  this  on  what  is  now  a  vacant  lot  was  the 
house  of  Isaac  Chaffy,  who  was  an  early 
settler.  He  was  a  house  joiner,  was  a 
member  of  the  Congregational  Church  and 
of  the  choir,  and  for  several  years  their  or- 
ganist. 

Going  northward  from  the  present  resi- 
dence of  A.  K.  Hibbard  we  come  to  the 
site  formerly  occupied  by  Seth  Shaw,  where 
his  dwelling  stood  at  a  very  early  day.  The 
front  of  his  house  was  two  stories  high,  the 
rear  but  one,  as  it  stood  on  the  side  hill. 
Mr.  Shaw  was  a  wheelwright  and  manufac- 
tured the  wheels  used  in  those  days  for 
spinning  wool  and  flax.  He  was  a  brother- 
in-law  of  Titus  Stebbins  and  died  about 
1825  or  1826. 


In  1808  Adin  Webb  erected  a  dwelling 
house  on  the  site  now  occupied  by  the 
Barber  Block,  but  a  few  years  afterward 
disposed  of  it  and  purchased  a  lot  of  Capt. 
Hezekiah  Roberts,  now  occupied  by  the 
Baptist  Church,  where  he  built  a  house. 
He  subsequently  sold  this  to  Chauncey 
Keep,  and  lived  two  years  in  the  southern 
part  of  the  village.  In  J  823  he  removed 
to  Cortland. 

Daniel  Glover,  an  enterprising  mechanic, 
occupied  the  first  residence  south  of  Mr. 
Clark's.  He  came  to  Homer  in  1825,  or 
1826.  He,  in  company  with  others,  erected 
"Mechanics'  Hall"  a  few  years  afterward 
and  subsequently  purchased  the  house  on 
North  Main  street  of  M.  B.  Butterfield, 
where  he  remained  until  he  went  to  live 
with  his  son-in-law,  where  he  died.  His 
house  in  the  soutli  part  of  the  village  was 
for  several  years  owned  and  occupied  by 
Judah  Pierce,  sen.,  who  died  there. 

The  oldest  house  now  standing  in  the 
village  of  Homer  was  erected  by  Andrew 
Burr  and  is  now  owned  by  Miles  Van  Hoe- 
sen,  it  being  a  wing  of  the  house  in  which 
he  resides.  It  was  used  as  a  meeting-house 
for  a  time. 

In  the  year  1800  there  were  but  six 
houses  within  the  present  corporation  limits; 
these  have  been  noticed  in  connection  with 
the  many  others  above  referred  to.  In 
1798  the  first  school-house  was  erected;  it 
stood  about  twelve  rods  bej'ond  where  the 
railroad  crosses  the  road  leading  to  Little 
York.  The  first  grist-mill  was  also  erected 
in  that  year,  where  the  Darby  mill  now 
stands;  there  religious  meetings  were  first 
held ;  but  there  seems  not  to  hav'e  been  any 
trading  carried  on  up  to  this  time. 

MERCANTILE   INTERESTS. 

The  first  store  in  Homer  village  stood  a 
little  north  of  the  present  residence  of  J.  A. 
Sherman ;   it  was,  as  was  customary  in  early 


2o8 


History  oi-'  Curtland  County. 


times,  filled  with  a  miscellaneous  stock  of 
goods  for  the  retail  trade,  adapted  to  the 
wants  of  pioneers.  The  building  was 
erected  b\'  Iliv.ekiah  Roberts,  who  also 
built  the  house  now  occupied  by  Mr.  Sher- 
man, prior  to  1809.  It  is  not  known  how 
long  Mr.  Roberts  remained  in  the  \'illage, 
or  where  he  went.  He  appears  to  have 
been  a  man  of  some  prominence  in  the 
community;  was  made  the  commander  of 
an  indei)endent  company  of  light  grenadiers 
which  became  famous  for  the  excellence  of 
its  drill  and  discipline.  In  1821  or  1822 
the  Rev.  John  Keep  took  possession  of  the 
house  erected  by  Mr.  Roberts  and  resided 
in  it  several  years.  The  house  and  store 
subsequently  became  the  property  of  Chas. 
W.  Lynde,  who  continued  mercantile  busi- 
ness for  several  years  and  resided  in  the 
house  several  years  after  closing  his  business. 
He  accumulated  considerable  property,  be- 
ing considered  one  of  the  wealthiest  men 
in  the  place  at  the  time  he  left.  He  was 
surrogate  of  the  county  from  1828  to  1831 
inclusive,  and  State  Senator  from  1831  to 
1 834  inclusive.  He  resided  in  Homer  about 
twenty  years  and  removed  to  New  York, 
or  Brooklyn,  about  the  year  1840.  The 
old  store  was  occupied  subsequent  to  Mr. 
L)-nde's  period  of  trade  by  Giles  Chittenden, 
and  later  by  G.  W.  Sturtevant  &  Co.,  but 
was  several  years  ago  removed  to  the  west 
part  of  the  village,  on  Cayuga  street,  re- 
paired and  fitted  up  for  a  dwelling.  Hiram 
Herrick  lived  in  it  for  a  time  and  afterwards 
Oliver  Arnold,  whose  heirs  now  own  it. 

Some  of  the  older  residents  of  Homer 
believe  that  Reuben  Washburne  was  the 
first  merchant  in  the  village;  but  if  this  is 
true,  it  cannot  be  definitely  settled  at  this 
time.  The  old  building  he  occupied  was  a 
frame  structure  and  is  now  owned  by  Justin 
Pierce.  It  formerly  stood  between  the 
Windsor  House  and  William  Sherman's 
"  Homer  Exchange,  "  and  now  stands  just 


back  of  the  latter  building.  Mr.  Washburne 
died  just  before  Mr.  Sherman  built  his  store, 
and  upon  the  erection  of  the  Exchange,  the 
old  .store  was  removed  to  its  present  position. 
Mr.  Washburne  raised  a  respectable 
family,  one  son  becoming  a  ilistinguished 
physician.  During  the  war  he  was  surgeon 
of  a  New  York  regiment  and  died  during 
that  period.  His  widow,  a  daughter  of  ex- 
congressman  Reed,  formerly  of  Homer,  is 
now  in  California. 

Goodwin  states  in  his  History  that  the 
first  merchant  in  Homer  was  John  Coats  and 
that  "his  store  stood  on  the  ground  near 
Harrop's  sign  post "  (the  Mansion  House), 
but  if  so,  it  could  not  have  been  so  early; 
as  it  was  after  he  and  Andrew  Burr  sold 
out  their  tannery  before  referred  to  and  not 
much  before  18 16,  when  Coats  left  town; 
nor  could  Coats  and  Burr,  who  erected 
their  tannery  in  1809  have  been  early 
enough  to  have  afterwards  established  the 
pioneer  store  in  the  place. 

Jedediah  Barber  was  the  first  permanent 
merchant  who  settled  in  the  place.  He 
came  to  the  village  in  i8i  i,  but  did  not  en- 
gage in  the  mercantile  trade  until  1813. 
The  original  part  of  his  store,  long  known 
as  the  "Great  Western,"  was  erected  about 
that  time.  He  entered  into  business  with 
limited  means,  but  was  very  successful  and 
eventually  became  the  heaviest  dealer  in 
the  Tioughnioga  valley,  establishing  a  finan- 
cial reputation  unrivaled  in  the  county.' 

The  "Great  Western"  stood  where  the 
Keator  block  (former!)-  called  the  Barber 
block)  is  now  located  and  was  known  by 
that  name  up  to  the  time  it  was  burned. 
The  Keator  block  was  built  on  these 
grounds  some  ten  years  afterwards,  the  lot 

1  A  wager  was  iiiacie  between  two  men  at  one  time  rel- 
ative to  the  stock  of  goods  Mr.  Barliej-  carried.  One  bet 
that  any  article  of  commercial  value  needed  in  the  county 
could  be  found  in  his  store.  The  other  taking  the  bet, 
they  called  for  a  goose  yoke.  Upon  inquiry  it  was 
found  in  stock  and  the  bet  was  paid. 


Town  of  Homek. 


309 


being  idle  during  tlie  interim.  Mr.  Barber 
did  more  to  improve  and  beautifs-  the  vil- 
lage of  Homer  than  an)-  other  man  and 
left  a  name  identified  with  the  history  of 
the  count)-. 

Benjamin  Roberts  hauled  the  first  stock 
of  goods  sold  by  Mr.  Barber  from  Albany 
in  a  four-horse  wagon.  He  also  moved 
Horace  Wilson  from  Massachusetts  to  Ho- 
mer in  1824  or  1825,  it  taking  three  weeks 
to  make  the  trip. 

William  Sherman,  the  second  pioneer 
merchant,  came  to  Homer  during  the  sum- 
mer of  18 1 5,  and  first  engaged  in  the  man- 
ufacture of  nails.  In  1827  he  erected  the 
"Homer  Exchange,"  corner  of  Mill  and 
Main  streets,  and  for  nearh'  thirty  years 
thereafter  conducted  a  heav\'  mercantile 
trade. 

About  the  year  1 8 19  Colonel  Benajah 
Tubbs  erected  the  building  on  the  corner 
of  Albany  street,  at  present  occupied  by 
G.  Chittenden.  Mr.  Tubbs  was  succeeded 
in  the  store  b}'  Thaddeus  Archer,  following 
whom  came  Horace  White,  Marsena  Bal- 
lard and  Amos  Graves.  The  cost  of  the 
brick  part  of  the  structure  was  $4,000. 

Caleb  Ballard,  son  of  John  Ballard,  en- 
gaged in  trade  a  few  }-ears  before  his  death 
in  1830.  His  brother,  Marsena,  succeeded, 
[nirchasing  the  goods  left  by  his  brother, 
but  after  a  few  years  left  the  town. 

In  1853-54  Mr.  Sherman  built  his  new- 
brick  structure  to  the  south  and  adjoining 
the  "  Exchange."  His  brother,  John  Sher- 
man, and  William  E.,  now  deceased,  were 
at  one  time  actively  engaged  in  the  mer- 
cantile business  with  him.  John  subse- 
quently left  the  firm  and  established  the 
store  on  the  corner  of  Main  and  Clinton 
streets,  where  W.  A.  Keilogg's  residence 
is  now,  and  continued  there  some  time. 

George  J.J.  Barber  succeeded  his  father, 
Jedediah,  as  a  merchant,  and  afterwards 
formed  a  partnership  with   C.    O.    Newton, 


who  has  been  engaged  in  mercantile  busi- 
ness in  the  village  for  more  than  thirt\- 
years.  George  J.  J.  Barbtr  is  now  a  resi- 
dent of  Syracuse. 

George  W.  Phillips  is  well-known  in  the 
county  as  an  enterprising  merchant  of  over 
thirty  years'  standing.  Mr.  Phillips  has 
been  nine  years  supervisor  of  the  town  and 
was  assemblyman  two  years. 

Giles  Chittenden  was  one  of  the  success- 
ful earl)-  merchants  of  the  place.  He  com- 
menced business  in  Hezekiah  Roberts's 
store,  as  before  stated,  and  afterwards  built 
the  store  now  occupied  by  Geo.  W.  Phil- 
lips. He  has  been  for  fifty  years  a  money 
lender  and  has  accumulated  a  large  fortune. 

Prior  to  the  year  1849  the  stores  of  the 
village  were  general  in  character,  each  car- 
rying a  full  line  of  all  kinds  of  goods;  but 
about  the  time  mentioned  business  began 
to  be  divided,  difterent  merchants  dealing 
in  special  lines. 

About  1854  Danziger  Brothers  began 
the  manufacture  of  clothing  on  Main  and 
James  streets,  where  they  carried  on  an  ex- 
tensixe  business  for  eight  years,  both  whole- 
sale and  retail.  They  are  now  located  in 
Syracuse  in  the  same  business.  O.  H.  Short, 
son  of  the  well  known  Hammond  Short,  also 
carried  on  dr)-  goods  business  tor  a  few  years. 
He  was  succeeded  by  Kingsbur)-  &  Walrad 
in  I  86 1,  who  traded  in  the  Wheadon  block 
until  1866,  when  W.  H.  Haines  formed  a 
partnership  with  Mr.  Kingsbury,  and  under 
the  name  of  Haines  &  Kingsbury  did  busi- 
ness in  the  Keator  block  (formerly  the  Bar- 
ber block)  until  1869,  when  G.  D.  Daniels 
succeeded  Mr.  Haines,  the  firm  name  being 
Kingsbury  &  Daniels.  In  1875  C.  A,  Skin- 
ner was  taken  into  the  firm,  which  is  now 
known  as  Kingsbury,  Daniels  &  Co. 

Arnold,  Woodruff  &  Pierce  formed  their 
partnership  in  1877.  J.  D.  Hebard  engaged 
in  the  trade  of  fancy  goods  and  notions  a 
year  or  so  afterward,  and  is  now-  carrying  a 


2IO 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


special  line.  In  1877  Miss  E.  S.  Dresser  & 
Co.  established  the  millinery  business  and 
are  still  engaged  in  it.  In  1880  Mrs.  G.  \V. 
Cottrell  also  began  this  trade,  and  in  1832 
Mrs.  Baldwin,  who  was  succeeded  by  Miss 
Libbie  Fisher  in  the  spring  of  1883.  Each 
of  these  ladies  carries  on  a  successful  busi- 
ness. 

Grocers.  —  The  general  store  of  former 
times  excluded  special  lines,  and  especially 
in  the  grocerj' business.  The  following  short  | 
sketch  relates  particularly  to  that  branch  of 
trade  :  The  general  store  of  early  days  sup- 
plied the  inhabitants  with  all  their  family 
groceries  ;  this  w  as  the  case  down  to  a  com- 
paratively recent  period.  Not  far  from  the 
year  1832,  when  "Mechanics'  Hall"  was  j 
built,  Benjamin  Roberts  kept  a  small  gro-  < 
eery  in  the  east  part  of  that  building.  Wm. 
Smith  probably  kept  the  next  grocery  store 
in  the  village.  It  was  in  the  building  now- 
occupied  by  ^Ir.  Simmons  as  a  meat  market. 
Mr.  Smith  traded  there  a  number  of  )'ears. 
Tiie  special  line  of  groceries  was  carried  a 
number  of  years  before  the  war  by  Horace 
Storr,  and  some  time  afterward  b\'  G.  K. 
Farrington,  who  was  succeeded  in  1865  by 
P.  F.  Smith  &  Co.  The  firm  soon  changed 
to  Riggs  &  Smith  (1866)  and  remained  such 
until  1877,  when  Smith  sold  out  to  Riggs. 
but  in  1878  Mr.  Smith  bought  out  Mr. 
Riggs  and  now  conducts  the  business.  His 
store  is  well  stocked  and  his  trade  is  good. 
Mr.  Smith's  store  was  burned  down  on  the 
1 6th  of  December,  1883.  He  immediately 
rebuilt  and  moved  into  his  new  and  com- 
modious quarters  during  the  month  of  Sep- 
tember following. 

L.  P.  Babcock  began  the  grocery  busi- 
ness in  1862.  In  1868  he  sold  to  his  son, 
O.  A.  Babcock,  who  took  in  Geo.  H.  Daniels 
and  traded  with  him  until  1872,  when  Ljtle 
F'erguson  bought  Daniels  out  and  remained 
until  1875.  Wm.  Gilkerson  took  his  place 
in  1876  and  sold  out  to  John   Gilkerson  in 


1877,  and  was  succeeded  by  Joseph  Mapie- 
thorpe  in  1878,  but  in  1879  Mr.  Babcock 
took  the  store  alone.  His  store  was  burned 
Deceml)cr  4tli,   1879. 

The  firm  of  I'Vederick  &  Hovey  was  es- 
tablished in  1882,  in  the  building  erected  by 
Henry  Watrous,  who  had  been  in  the  gro- 
cer)- business  some  years  previous.  The 
business  carried  on  bj-  Andrews  Brothers, 
grocers,  was  established  by  O.  B.  and  Ho- 
mer Andrews  in  September,  1882.  The 
present  store  building  of  Newcomb  & 
Churchill  was  erected  by  F.  T.  Newcomb 
in  1878.  Mr.  O.  C.  Churchill  bought  out 
Mr.  New  comb  in  1879  aiul  in  1882  tlie  pres- 
ent partnership  was  formed. 

Druggists.  — The  drug  business  was  first 
conducted  in  Homer  b\-  Geo.  Cook,  who 
kept  his  stock  on  one  side  of  his  hat  store. 
His  establishment  was  on  the  corner  of  Main 
and  Pine  streets.  He  sold  his  stock  to  Ed- 
win  Miles,  who  was  succeeded  bj-  J.  H. 
Munger  and  he  b}'  W.  C.  Coggeshall,  who 
continued  the  business  until  December, 
1 87 1,  when  J.  C.  Atwater  bought  an  inter- 
est. .\  few  months  later  W.  H.  Kellogg 
became  a  member  of  the  firm  and  they  have 
since  carried  on  the  business  together.  Dr. 
Loomis  kept  a  drug  store  for  some  years, 
and  about  the  \-ear  1 86 1  John  Watson  put 
a  line  of  drugs  in  his  store;  he  was  suc- 
ceeded in  I  880  by  C.  .A.  Watson. 

Confectioners. —  The  pioneer  fruit  and 
confectioner}-  store  of  Homer  was  estab- 
lished b\'  H.  A.  Kendall  in  1846.  He  did  a 
good  business  for  a  number  of  \'ears.  Geo. 
W.  Cottrell  afterwards  carried  on  the  busi- 
ness and  has  been  very  successful.  Jolinston 
Brothers  established  their  store  in  1877.  In 
1880  H.  H.  Johnston  took  the  business  and 
has  continued  it  to  the  present  time. 

Manufactures,  Milling,  etc.  —  Clement 
Hayden  began  the  business  of  cabinet  ma- 
ker in  Homer  as  early  as  181  5,  and  for  a 
time  carried  on  quite  an  extensive  business  ; 


Town  of  Homer. 


21  I 


but,  owing  to  the  influence  of  some  bad 
habits,  became  bankrupt.  His  house  was 
the  one  at  present  occupied  by  Cliarles 
Mead,  the  largest  portion  of  which  was  used 
as  a  cabinet  shop.  The  house  was  subse- 
quently owned  by  Philip  Putnam,  and  after- 
wards by  Joseph  Clapp,  who  erected  one  of 
the  additions  on  the  rear.  Cabinet  and  fiu'- 
niture  manufacture  was  next  carried  on  in 
Homer  by  two  brothers,  E.  and  C.  Shirk-)-, 
natives  of  New  Hampshire,  who  came  to 
Homer  about  1825.  The)-  continued  the 
trade  for  several  years  and  became  the  own- 
ers of  a  lot  on  the  west  side  of  Main  street 
(the  north  corner  of  what  is  now  James 
street),  where  the)-  erected  a  large  addition 
to  the  building  already  on  the  lot.  This 
building  was  consumed  b)-  fire  some  )'ears 
afterward.  The  Shirley  brothers  eventually 
dissolved  partnership ;  C.  Shirley  went  to 
Syracuse  and  the  other  brother  carried  on 
business  for  some  years  in  a  shop  on  James 
street,  w-ith  sale  rooms  on  Main  street. 

William  N.  Brockwa)'  began  furniture 
manufacture  in  1852.  His  large  wareroom 
was  kept  filled  with  a  variety  of  finel}-  made 
and  finished  goods  ;  he  employed  a  number 
of  skilled  hands  and  built  up  a  very  large 
trade.  His  place  of  business  was  first  lo- 
cated on  the  corner  of  Cayuga  and  Main 
streets,  where  he  also  carried  on  the  busi- 
ness of  undertaking.  In  1855  he  removed 
into  the  handsome  warerooms  now  occu- 
pied by  Tripp  &  Williams,  where  he  con- 
tinued until  1882,  when  the  above  named 
firm  succeeded  him.  Injanuar)-,  1884,  Mr. 
Tripp  went  out  of  the  firm,  leaving  Mr. 
Williams  sole  proprietor. 

The  first  saddle  and  harness  business  in 
Homer  was  probably  carried  on  by  An- 
drew Burr,  who  began  the  enterprise  prior 
to  1 8 16,  while  he  was  yet  engaged  in  the 
tannery  business.  For  man)-  )-ears  there- 
after he  followed  this  trade  very  success- 
fully.      Eight  or  ten  years   later   Mr.  Burr 


formed  a  partnership  with  Hammond  Short, 
who  came  to  Homer  from  De  Ruyter,  Mad- 
ison county;  they  continued  together  for 
several  )-ears.  In  the  mean  time  Mr.  Short 
erected  the  house  south  of  Mr.  Burr's  resi- 
dence, now  occupied  by  Thomas  S.  Ran- 
ne)- ;  he  also  built  another  structure  on  the 
same  lot  which  he  occupied  as  a  harness 
shop,  in  w-hich  he  continued  the  business 
several  )'ears  succeeding  the  dissolution  of 
the  firm,  and  until  the  erection  of  Mechan- 
ics' Hall,  in  1833,  when  he  removed  his 
business  into  that  building,  taking  forty  feet 
of  the  eastern  front.  This  building,  for 
man)-  )-ears  the  most  pretentious  in  the  \-il- 
lage,  was  erected  by  a  compan)-  consisting 
of  Horace  Babcock,  Hammond  Short,  Dan- 
iel Glover  and  a  Mr.  Bliss.  Mr.  Burr  pur- 
chased the  building  previously  occupied  by 
Mr.  Short,  and  removed  it  to  the  opposite 
side  of  the  street,  where  he  continued  the 
harness  business  for  some  \-ears.  He  died 
in  1872.  Both  Mr.  Short  and  Mr.  Burr 
had  the  reputation  of  being  reliable  me- 
chanics and  enterprising  business  men. 

C.  H.  Wheadon  w-as  long  engaged  in 
this  branch  of  manufacture  and  trade,  be- 
ing at  first  associated  with  Mr.  Short,  and 
continuing  alone  during  a  period  of  more 
than  thirty  years  in  all.  Ira  Tubbs  was 
was  also  a  harness  maker  for  sexeral  years, 

I  occup)'ing  a  shop   in   the   Mechanics'    Hall. 

!  R.    B.    Newcomb    began    the    business    in 
1869,  and  in    1878  sold  out  to  his  son,  W. 

j  B.  Newcomb,  who  still  continues  it.      C.  A. 

!  Ford  &  Co.  ha\e  been  engaged  in  the  trade 

\  since  1872,  at  w-hich  time  the)-  bought    out 
Mr.  Wheadon. 

George  Murra)-  established  the  hardware 
trade  and  tin  and  copper  manufacturing  in 
Homer  in  1842.  His  store  was  the  pioneer 
in  the  village  in  that  line  ;  he  continued  for 
many  )-ears,  until  succeeded  b)-  his  sons, 
G.  &  J.  Murra)-,  in  1869,  who  enlarged  the 
stock,  extetided  the  scope  of  the  business 


212 


History  of  Cokti.and  County. 


and  built  u[)  a  \'cr\'  lart^c  trailc.  J.  J.  Mur- 
ray is  now  the  sole  proprietor ;  it  is  tlie 
only  hardware  store  in  Homer. 

Samuel  H.  Hitchcock  came  tu  the  tovvii 
at  an  earl)-  tia\-.  ills  father,  Peter  Hitch- 
cock, who  lonj;  resided  with  his  son,  was 
elected  one  of  the  deacons  of  the  first  church 
of  Homer  upon  its  organization.  Mr. 
Hitchcock  settled  first  upon  the  land  re- 
cently owned  by  David  Hannum,  near  the 
summit  of  the  hill  ;  his  brother-in-law,  John 
I5ement,  also  settled  near  him.  Thoc  two 
men  erected  a  tanner)-,  but  how  long  thc)- 
continued  the  business  we  have  been  unable 
to  learn.  The)-  were  both  practical  boot 
and  shoe  makers,  and  subseijuently  moved 
to  the  village,  where  Mr.  Hitchcock  carried 
on  the  latter  business  in  a  building  owned 
by  Mr.  Rowen,  on  Main  street.  It  is  stated 
on  good  authority  that  Hitchcock  &  Bc- 
ment  obtained  from  the  government  the 
first  patent  for  securing  the  soles  of  boots 
and  shoes  to  the  uppers  with  w-ooden  pegs. 

Daniel  Glover  removed  to  Homer  from 
De  Ruyter,  Madison  county,  about  the  )-ear 
1825  or  1826.  He  was  a  thrift)'  mechanic, 
and  followed  boi)t  and  shoe  making  for  many 
years.  He  was  one  of  the  company  that 
erected  Mechanics'  Hall,  and  continued  his 
business  in   that   building  for  several  years. 

Lorenzo  Bennett  was  an  early  boot  and 
shoe  maker,  and  was  succeedeil  by  Bene- 
dict &  Corey.  In  1845  Asa  Core)-  was 
succeeded  by  David  B.  Corey,  and  contin- 
ued until  1 86 1,  when  A.  H.  Bennett  suc- 
ceeded Mr.  Benedict.  In  1877  Mr.  Corey 
died,  and  since  that  time  Mr.  Bennett  has 
successfully  carried  on  the  business. 

Messrs.  Chollar  &  Jones  kept  a  prosper- 
ous boot  and  shoe  store  in  the  place  for  a 
number  of  years,  beginning  in  1849.  They 
were  practical  business  men,  well  c|ualified 
for  their  work,  and  secured  a  liberal  patron- 
age. After  a  partnershij)  of  seven  years 
Mr.  Chollar  continuetl    the    business   alone 


until  1879,  wlicii  he  was  succeeded  by  Al- 
len &  Shattuck,  who  still  continue  it.  In 
1874  C.  I-",.  Wills  began  this  trade  in  a  small 
wa)-,  and,  with  considerable  increase  in  his 
stock,  is  now  engaged  in  it. 

The  first  silversmith  in  the  \illage  of 
Homer,  who  made  a  permanent  location, 
was  John  Osborne.  He  erected  a  building 
directly  east  of  the  one  on  the  corner  of 
Main  street,  north  of  (iiles  Chittenden's 
present  residence,  and  w  hich  \\  as  used  for  a 
long  time  as  the  post-office.  Mr.  Osborne 
came  to  Homer  about  the  year  1826,  and 
followed  his  calling  until  somewhat  ad- 
vanced in  age,  when  he  sold  his  business 
and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  retire- 
ment;  he  died  many  years  since.  He  was 
succeeded  in  this  line  by  I).  U.  R.  Ormsby, 
whiise  honorable  business  career  extended 
over  many  years.  George  Dana  traded  after 
this  for  a  time,  but  left  the  village  in  1881. 
J.  J.  Reider  began  the  business  in  1879,  and 
is  now  the  onl)'  jeweler  in  the  village. 

Matthias  Cook  came  to  Homer  about  the 
year  1809,  and  began  the  manufacture  of 
hats  —  the  first  establishment  of  the  kind 
in  Homer.  He  erected  a  building  suitable 
for  his  purpose,  which  is  still  standing  near 
the  river.  Mr.  Cook  was  a  young  man 
possesseil  nf  industr)'  ,uul  integrit)-,  and 
built  up  a  successful  trade.  He  was  made 
county  clerk  in  1821  ;  Member  of  Assem- 
bl)-  in  1824,  antl  received  a  second  nom- 
ination in  1831.  but  was  defeated  by  An- 
drew Dickson.  This  e\ent  produced  sucli 
a  depressing  efifect  u])on  .Mr.  Cook's  mind 
as  to  partiall)-  unsettle  his  reason,  in  which 
condition  he  committed  suicide  in  No\'em- 
ber,  1831.  .After  Mr.  Cook's  death  his 
son,  B.  K.  Cook,  succeeded  to  his  father's 
business;  but  his  death  about  the  year 
1832  transferred  the  establishment  to  his 
brother,  George  Cook,  who  continued  it  for 
many  years,  graduall)-  relinquishing  the 
manufacturing  branch. 


Town  of  Homer. 


213 


C.  A.  Collins,  hatter  and  clothier,  began 
business  in  1850,  and  still  carries  a  stock  of 
hats,  though  his  principal  trade  is  in  ready- 
made  clothing.  I'.  Higbee  is  also  engaged 
in  the  same  business.  He  was  associated 
with  Mr.  Babcock  from  1877  to  iiS7g,  and 
witli  Mr.  Darb\-  until  recently.  The  mer- 
chant taik)ring  business  in  Homer,  formerly- 
conducted  by  C.  A.  Collins,  has  been  since 
1S82  in  the  competent  hands  of  Mr.  D.  B. 
Quick. 

In  1798  the  first  grist-mill  in  the  town,  as 
it  was  also  the  first  in  the  count}',  was 
erected  by  John  Keep,  Solomon  Hubbard 
and  Asa  White.  It  was  biu-ned  in  1840  and 
at  once  rebuilt  as  the  present  Uarby  mill. 
The  first  stones  were  procured  from  the 
bank  east  of  Lyman  Hubbard's.  The  bolts 
were  purchased  by  Mr.  White  in  Utica. 
The  mill  in  its  original  condition  produced 
flour  of  a  ver}'  ordinary'  character;  but  it 
being  the  onI\'  one  in  the  county,  the  in- 
habitants were  not  disposed  to  be  very  par- 
ticular as  to  the  fineness  or  qualitx'  of  their 
flour.  Mr.  White  subsec]uentl)-  jjurchased 
the  interests  of  his  partners  and  refitted  and 
greatly  improved  the  mill.  The  structure 
was  at  that  time  probably  the  most  preten- 
tious and  imposing  building  in  the  place; 
for  there  religious  meetings,  public  gather- 
ings, social  parties  and  balls  were  held.  At 
one  of  the  early  social  parties  the  managers 
were  placed  in  a  rather  unpleasant  predica- 
ment, as  neither  rum  nor  molasses  was  to  be 
found  in  town.  The  lack  of  these  necessa- 
ries at  a  ball  in  those  days  would  luu-e  been 
considered  almost  an  unpardonable  breach 
of  gallantr}'  on  the  part  of  the  gentlemen, 
so  a  special  messenger  was  dispatched  post 
haste  a  distance  of  thirty  miles  to  Manlius 
Square,  for  a  gallon  of  rum  and  half  as  much 
molasses,  with  which  "black  strap"  was 
made  for  the  company.  The  grist-mill 
passed  through  many  hands.  Messrs.  Bowen 
&  Goodell  owned  it  in    1855.     Tovvnsend 


Ross  and  Noah  R.  Smith  each  owned  it  for 
a  time.  In  1863  Darby  &  Wilcox  sold  ft  to 
L.  &  L.  Darby,  who  transferred  it  to  Stone 
&  Sheldon  in  1865.  In  1871  Darby  &  Son 
bought  it  and  in  1871  Darby  &  Huntington 
were  the  owners.  In  1875  L.  &W.  H.  Darby 
took  it  and  in  1880  the  present  owner,  W. 
H.  Darby,  became  the  proprietor.  The  mill 
has  four  run  of  stone  and  grinds  15,000 
bushels  of  wheat  annuall}-. 

Adjoining  the  old  mill  built  b)-  Keep, 
Hubbard  and  White,  was  a  wool  carding 
and  cloth  dressing  mill  built  by  Analgias 
Jenks  at  a  very  early  day.  It  was  a  great 
convenience  to  the  people  and  did  a  large 
business.  There  were  a  number  of  proprie- 
tors, among  whom  were  Henry  Devoe,  Jus- 
tin Pierce  and  Simeon  S.  Bradford.  The 
mill  was  burned  in  1841  and  was  not  re- 
built. 

Aaron  Benedict  built  the  original  grist- 
mill on  the  site  of  the  present  stone  mill, 
south  of  the  village,  having  bought  the  site 
of  Daniel  Knapp  ;  it  was  a  frame  building 
and  gave  place  to  the  stone  structure,  built 
by  Dr.  Lewis  Riggs  in  1837  ;  he  sold  it  to 
Mr.  Westcott.  J.  A.  Tisdale  is  the  present 
owner  and  has  recently  converted  it  to  a 
roller  mill.  A  saw-mill  was  connected  with 
this  grist-mill  for  many  years. 

The  original  cotton  factory  that  stood  op- 
posite the  present  stone  structure,  now  used 
as  a  grist-mill  by  Geo.  W.  Southwick,  was 
built  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  cent- 
ury by  Asa  White.  It  was  a  profitable  en- 
terprise until  it  was  burned  soon  after  the 
War  of  181  2.  A  grist-mill  was  then  built 
on  or  near  that  site,  but  that  was  torn  down 
to  give  place  to  the  present  stone  structure, 
which  was  erected  by  a  stock  company  in 
1834.  In  the  company  were  Jedediah  Bar- 
ber, Wm.  Sherman,  Colonel  Williams,  Judge 
Berry  and  others.  Its  use  was  abandoned 
for  quite  a  period.  J.  O.  Pierce  &  Co.  bought 
it  in  1S51  and  kept  it  eight  years.      In  1859 


214 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


it  was  sold  to  J.  B.    Kent,   now  a  merchant 
in  Syracuse.     In  1862  John  L.  Boorum  & 
Co.  purchased  it,   dismantled  it  of  the  cot- 
ton   machinerj-  and    arranged    it   for   flax- 
breaking  purposes.      It  then  was  idle  a  few 
years  previous   to  its  being    changed  to  a 
grist-mill  by    its  present    owner    in     1875. 
Barney  Payne  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of 
J.  O.  Pierce  &  Ci).     During  their  proprietor- 
ship tiiere  were  5  i  looms  and  2,400  spindles 
in  the  factory.      They  manufactured  wide 
cloths,    sheeting,  batting    and    flour  sacks. 
Steam   power  was  added  in    1852,   and  the 
basement  was  used  as  a  machine  shop  for 
building  and  repairing.     On  the  second  floor 
was  the  carding  and   spinning  and  on   the 
third  weaving,  while  the  fourth  was  devoted 
to  spinning  and  dressing.       The  cotton  was 
bought  in  New  York  and  the  manufactured 
goods  returned  there  for  sale.      Belonsine 
to  the  factory  were  thirty  or  forty  acres  of 
land  on  which    stood   thirteen   or  fourteen 
tenement  houses  for  the  employees.      Labor 
was  then  very  cheap.      W'eavers  worked  b\- 
the  rut  and  could  earn   but  from   $2.50  to 
$5.00  a    week.      Skillful  spinners     received 
twent}-  shillings  and  board  ;   mule  spinners 
$9.00  a  week  and  other  hands  about  $2  a 
week.       They   were    paid    off  every  three 
months,  but   in   the    mean  time  credit  was 
given  them  at  the  general  store  on  the  prem- 
ises and  belonging  to  the  firm.      Cotton  was 
then  worth  from  seven  and  a  half  to  eleven 
cents  a  pound  and  although  wages  were  low 
this  industry,  with  its  large  number  of  em- 
ployees, served  to  keep  up  a  good  degree  of 
activity  in  the  village. 

William  Sherman  came  to  Homer  village 
in  the  summer  of  1815  and  located  near  the 
cooper  shop.  He  soon  after  erected  a  ma- 
chine shop  for  the  manufacture  of  nails  — 
the  first  factory  of  the  kind  in  the  State. 
The  machinery  was  adapted  to  feed,  cut  and 
head  the  nails,  without  manual  assistance. 
On  the  liead  of  each  nail  was  stamped  the 


letter  "S."  Four-penny  nails  were  then 
worth  twenty-five  cents  a  pound.  Mr.  Sher- 
man and  Mr.  Barber  were  aLso  engaged  in 
the  manufacture  of  oil  at  an  early  period. 

The  first  cooperage  was  done  in  the  \il- 
lage  b)-  Benjamin  S\-monds  at  an  early  day  ; 
he  was  located  between  the  residence  of  Mr. 
Cook  and  the  river,  and  continued  the  busi- 
ness until  late  in  his  life,  when  he  was  fol- 
lowed by  his  sons.  They  finally  sold  out 
and  went  to  Katon,  Madison  county. 

The  tannery  now  owned  by  Abel  Gere 
was  originally  established  by  Chester  Col- 
lins and  p;iijah  Pierce.  It  was  built  for  them 
b}-  Hosea  Sprague,  who  removed  a  build- 
ing from  near  the  site  which  had  been  used 
as  a  pottery.  The  building  was  erected  in 
'  1825  and  was  burned  in  1878,  when  the 
present  structure  was  built.  Twent)--fi\-c 
years  ago  Thomas  Boland  owned  the  prop- 
;  erty,  continuing  it  for  eight  years.  Wm. 
Coggeshall  succeeded  him  for  eight  j^ears, 
and  in  1875  the  present  owner  took  it. 

Jacob  Sanders,  jr.,  located  in  Homer  \il- 
lage  in  the  fall  of  1825,  erected  buildings 
and  began  the  foundr}-  business  on  a  very 
limited  scale  at  first.  His  bellows  used  to 
raise  the  heat  for  melting  ore  was  moved 
by  horse-power.  This  foundry  was  on  the 
east  side  of  Main  street  at  the  southern  end 
of  the  village.  The  iron  plow  had  been  in- 
vented not  long  previous  and  Mr.  Sanders 
entered  quite  largely  into  the  manufacture 
of  this  necessary  farm  tool.  His  business 
constantly  increased  and  in  1838  he  erected 
the  building  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
street,  enlarged  his  plant  and  put  in  a  ma- 
chine shop.  This  structure  was  burned  on 
the  night  before  elecfion  in  1 844,  but  the 
steam-engine  was  saved.  Mr.  Sanders  im- 
mediately rebuilt  and  continued  the  busi- 
ness until  1853,  when  he  transferred  the 
property  to  J.  W.  &  A.  Stone,  who  have 
for  the  long  period  since  that  time  con- 
ducted the  establishment.    The\-  no\\-  manu- 


''__,/:7  -^-Y/^C/:^- 


'U 


^a^^^e^'. 


Town  of  Homer. 


215 


facture  circular  saw-mills,  mill  and  general 
machinery,  farming  machinery,  etc. 

The  edge  tool  manufactory  of  R.  Hlan- 
shan  &  Co.  stood  on  the  cast  bank  of  the 
river  and  was  run  by  steam,  for  the  manu- 
facture of  a.xes  and  other  edge  tools.  The 
building  was  erected  b)'  William  Heberd,  a 
brother-in-law  of  Jedediah  Barber.  The 
business  wasoriginally  begun  prior  to  181 2. 

Messrs.  Gross  &  Robinson  began  the 
manufacture  of  writing  ink  in  Homer  in 
1853,  on  a  rather  limited  scale.  They 
made  the  American  chemical  writing  fluid, 
which  attained  a  large  sale.  The  business 
is  now  abandoned. 

The  planing-mill  and  carpenter  shop  of 
George  W.  Almy  was  erected  in  1853.  Tiie 
building  was  thirt}-  b_\'  si.vty  feet  and  a 
fifteen  horse-power  engine  drove  the  ma- 
chiner\-.  A  turning  shop  was  afterward 
built  for  the  manufacture  of  tool  handles. 
A  large  business  was  carried  on  for  a  num- 
ber of  years.  A  shoe- peg  factor}-  was 
afterwards  placed  in  the  same  building. 
The  mill  was  run  b}'  Hicok,  Barber  &  Co., 
until  their  failure  a  few  years  since. 

The  great  cutter  manufactory  of  Gage, 
Hitchcock  &  Co.  was  first  established  by 
Gage  &  Bishop  in  1868.  The  firm  manu- 
factured during  their  first  year  105  cutters 
and  emplo\ed  but  one  man.  The  original 
firm  continuetl  until  1879,  when  it  was 
changed  to  its  present  composition.  In 
that  year  3,000  cutters  were  made;  in 
1880,  8,000;  in  1 88 1,  14,000;  in  1882, 
15,000,  and  in  1883,  15,000.  About  100 
men  are  employed  and  their  product  is 
shipped  to  all  parts  of  the  Northern  States. 

The  butter  firkin  factor)-  of  S.  M.  Clark 
was  established  in  1873,  and  is  now-  manu- 
facturing about  15,000  tubs  and  10,000 
pails  annually,  giving  employment  during 
the  bus)-  season  to  twelve  to  fifteen  men. 

Westcott's  foundr)-  and  machine  shop 
was  established  by  George  N.  Westcott,  in 


1877.  It  is  a  successfully  managed  estab- 
lishment, doing  an  exclusive  jobbing  busi- 
ness, and  is  well  supplied  with  machiner)- 
and  tools  for  general  custom  work. 

The  Hon-ier  oil  cloth  manufacturing  com- 
pany is  becoming  one  of  the  leading  in- 
dustries of  the  place.  The  compan)-  was 
organized  in  1882,  since  w'hich  time  the 
business  has  increased  beyond  the  anticipa- 
tions of  the  managers.  Under  the  efincient 
immediate  direction  of  George  Murray,  jr., 
another  large  building  is  soon  to  be  erected 
to  meet  the  demands  of  the  business.  The 
capital  stock  of  the  company'  was  made 
$100,000,  which  will  undoubtedl)'  be  in- 
creased. The  product  of  the  factor)-  is 
carriage  and  floor  oil-cloths,  with  a  present 
capacity  of  600  yards  per  da)-.  The  pres- 
ent officers  of  the  compan)-  are  :  Coleman 
Hitchcock,  president;  Charles  O.  Newton, 
vice-president;  George  Murray,  jr.,  secre- 
tary and  treasurer.  The  board  of  directors 
consists  of  Coleman  Hitchcock,  C.  O.  New- 
ton, George  Murra)-,  jr.,  Byron  Ma.xson 
and  W.  F.  Hitchcock. 

A  manufacturing  interest  of  importance 
was  established  in  Homer  in  July,  1874,  by 
Willett  Fisher,  for  the  production  of  the 
celebrated  Fisher  platform  spring  wagon 
gears.  Only  four  or  five  men  were  em- 
ployed at  the  first,  which  number  has  in- 
creased to  twenty-one.  About  3,500  gears 
are  manufactured  annual!)-,  which  find  a 
market  in  all  parts  of  the  countr)-. 

In  the  year  1875  \V.  N.  Brockw-a\-  began 
the  manufacture  of  platform  spring  wagons 
in  Homer,  in  a  building  opposite  the  found- 
r)-  at  the  southern  end  of  the  \illage.  The 
first  )-ear  about  fift)-  wagons  were  turned 
out  and  an  equal  number  of -buggies.  Un- 
der good  management  the  business  rapidl)- 
increased,  until  it  is  one  of  the  most  prom- 
inent industries  of  the  place.  Several  large 
new-  buildings  have  been  erected,  nearer  the 
center    of    the    village,     and   a  fifty  horse 


2l6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


power  cn^nnc  funiislics  motive  ])o\ver  for 
the  cstablishiiieiit.  Tlic  blacksniitli  shop  luis 
twelve  fires,  is  i6ob)-  30  feet  and  employs 
40  men  in  ironing  the  wajjons.  About  150 
men  arc  employed  and  2,500  excellent 
\ehicles  are  turned  out  aniuiall}'. 

The  banking;  business  of  Homer  is  now 
transacted  b_\-  the  I'"irst  National  Hank  w  hicli 
was  organized  on  the  7th  of  September, 
1878,  with  a  cash  capital  of  $100,000. 
lousiness  was  begun  in  this  institution  on 
the  8th  of  October  of  the  year  mentioned. 
The  executive  officers  have  remained  un- 
changed since  the  organization,  with  one 
exception.  They  are  G.  N.  Cojieland,  presi- 
dent ;  George  Murray,  xice-president  ;  W. 
H.  Crane,  cashier.  The  directors  arc  J.  M. 
Schermerhorn,  J.  P.  Cottrell,  George  Con- 
able,  G.  W.  Phillips,  A.  W.  II. .hart,  Nathan 
l\.inne\-,  P.  C.  Kingsbur)-,  A.  P'rancisco, 
with  the  president,  \ice-president  and 
cashier.  'Phc  bank  has  been  \ery  success- 
ful and  its  credit  is  high. 

it  will  be  inferred  from  the  foregoing  rc- 
\iew  of  the  manufacturing  and  mercantile 
interests  of  Homer  village  that  rapid  strides 
in  those  directions  have  been  made  since 
the  incorporation  of  the  place ;  indeed,  a 
good  deal  had  been  accomplished  in  this 
respect  previous  to  that  event.  The  popu- 
lation had  reached  about  one  thousand,  and 
it  was  generally  belie\'ed  that  the  \'illage 
would  be  the  leading  one  of  the  county. 
But  better  facilities  for  communication  with 
distant  markets  were  sadly  needed.  All 
hopes  of  making  the  Tioughnioga  river  per- 
manently available  as  a  commercial  high- 
way had  been  gi\en  up,  and  reliance  placed 
upon  State  roads,  teams,  stage  coaches  and 
ordinary  wagons.  Prior  to  the  opening  of 
the  Erie  canal  in  1825,  the  merchants' 
goods  were  brought  up  to  Albany,  then 
conve\-ed  by  land  to  Utica  and  thence  to 
Homer;  or,  were  sent  through  Wood  creek, 
Oneida  lake,  Onondaga  river  and  down  the 


Tioughnioga.  Wheat,  potash  and  other 
products  were  either  shipped  on  rafts  and 
boats  down  the  Tioughnioga  and  Susque- 
hanna rivers  to  Baltimore,  or  were  trans- 
pt)rted  to  distant  markets  by  teams.  This 
unpromising  state  of  affairs  led  to  frequent 
and  an.xious  discussion  of  railroad  connec- 
tiiiii  with  the  outer  world,  resulting  finall}' 
in  the  building  of  the  Syracuse  and  Bingham- 
ton  Railroad.  The  charter  was  first  secured 
in  1836,  but  the  road  was  not  built  antl 
opened  for  business  until  1S54.  iJeacon 
Amos  Rice,  Jedediah  Barber  and  Israel 
Boies,  of  Plomer,  were  very  prominent  in 
forwartling  this  enterprise,  which  was  des- 
tined to  be  of  such  vast  importance  to  the 
tow  11.  Further  details  of  the  construction 
and  opening  of  this  railroad  will  be  found 
elsewhere  in  these  pages. 

Incorporation.  —  By  the  year  1821  Ho- 
mer village  had  reached  an  important  posi- 
tion in  the  count}'.  There  was  not  \'er\' 
nuich  wealth  in  the  place,  but  a  good  deal 
of  business  was  done,  princif)all)-  in  the 
way  of  exchange.  Jedediah  Barber,  Cap- 
tain Tubbs,  Hezekiah  Roberts,  Giles  Chit- 
tenden, Keep  &  Dickson  and  Andrew  Burr 
each  had  a  store.  The  cotton  factory  and 
grist-mill  were  doing  a  prosperous  business; 
numerous  asheries  and  distilleries  were  in 
operation;  travel  was  considerable,  stages 
running  north  and  south  through  the  val- 
le\',  from  S\"racuse  to  Binghamton  and  Owe- 
go,  and  to  De  Ruyter.  Goods  were 
transported  from  Albany  to  Homer  at  one 
dollar  per  hundred  pounds,  and  hotel  pat- 
ronage was  good.  There  were  then  (1821) 
but  three  brick  houses  in  the  village  —  that 
of  Dr.  Owen,  where  George  Murray  now 
resides,  and  those  of  Newell  Jones  and  Cap- 
tain Tubbs. 

Mr.  William  O.  Bunn  came  to  the  village 
in  1834  and  has  given  us  a  brief  description 
of  the  place  at  that  time.  The  number  of 
stores  had  considerabh'  increased.      Russell 


Town  of  Homer. 


217 


Williams  carried  on  a  general  trade  in  a 
wooden  bnilding  where  \\'.  Kellogg's  resi- 
dence is  now  located,  and  William  and  John 
Sherman  where  John  Arnold  is  now.  Dea- 
con Loammi  Kinney,  now  more  than  eighty 
years  old,  cut  and  made  clothing  for  the 
gentry  in  a  little  shop  standing  on  ground 
now  occujiied  b\-  the  Homer  bank.  Har- 
din Slocum  was  located  near  by  in  a  gun 
shop,  where  he  repaired  and  made  guns  for 
many  years.  Mr.  Barber's  store  stood  where 
the  Keator  block  now  is.  Coye  &  Stone 
had  a  wagon  shop  where  the  Wheadon  block 
stands.  Joel  Heberd  was  near  by  in  a  gen- 
eral store  and  just  south  of  him  Dr.  Lewis 
Riggs  was  located.  Harr\'  Coburn  sold 
groceries,  and  Mr.  Southwick  was  conduct- 
ing the  cotton  factory.  Cahin  Slocum 
kept  the  hotel  which  is  now  the  Hotel 
Windsor.  Wm.  Heberd  was  offering  cast 
steel  axes  (work  done  by  Stephen  \'ail)  at 
$1.75  ;  old  axes  jumped  and  ground  for 
seven  shillings,  as  we  learn  from  the  Cort- 
land Observer.  Giles  Chittenden  was  deal- 
ing in  dry  goods.  Miles  Morgan  and  E.  & 
C.  Shirle)^  were  in  the  cabinet  business. 

Such  was  the  general  business  aspect  of 
the  village  when  steps  were  taken  for  its 
incorporation.  P"or  this  purpose  a  meeting 
of  the  inhabitants  was  called  in  the  base- 
ment of  the  old  Calvary  Church,  which  was 
long  used  as  a  town  hall,  on  the  first  Tues- 
day in  June,  1835,  under  and  in  pursuance 
of  the  act  of  Legislature,  entitled  an  act  to 
incorporate  the  village  of  Homer,  passed 
May  iith,  1835.  Augustus  Donnell\- and 
Lewis  B.  Canfield  presided  as  inspectors  of 
the  election  of  trustees  directed  to  be  chosen. 
Candidates  were  voted  for  separately,  re- 
sulting as  follows :  Augustus  Donnelly, 
David  Coye,  Russell  Williams,  Hammond 
Short,  Lewis  S.  Owen,  Geo.  J.  J.  Barber. 
Jonathan  Hubbard  was  chosen  clerk. 

These  trustees  held  a  meeting  at  the  office 
of  Augustus  Donnelly  on  the  i8th  of  June, 


at  which  Mr.  Donnelly  was  elected  presi- 
dent of  the  board.  The  board  again  con- 
vened on  the  25th  of  June,  and  their  first 
enactment  was  as  follows  :  — 

"It  is  hereby  ordained  by  the  trustees  of  the 
village  of  Homer,  that  from  and  after  the  first 
day  of  July  next,  all  firingof  crackers  and  squibs 
be  prohibited  at  all  time;  that  all  firing  of  can- 
non, guns  and  pistols,  ringing  of  bells,  making 
any  noise  so  as  to  disturb  the  quiet  of  the  inhab- 
itants within  the  corporation  between  the  hours 
often  o'clock  in  the  evening  and  four  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  be  prohibited,  under  the  penalty 
of  five  dollars  for  each  offence." 

The  following  arc  the  present  officers  of 
the  village :  — 

.  Trustees  —  Coleman  Hitchcock,  Joseph 
W^atson,  Frank  T.  Newcomb.  Philip  Zim- 
mer  and  James  A.  Sherman. 

Clerk — John  M.  Coats. 

Treasurer  —  Charles  O.  Newton.' 

Police  Justice  —  A.  Judson  Kneeland. 

Police  Constable  —  Wm.  A.  Shirley. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  village  board  on 
June  25th,  above  referred  to,  they  resolved  to 
take  into  consideration  the  expediency  of  rais- 
ing money  for  the  purpose  of  building  a  fire 
engine  house,  procuring  hooks,  ladders  and 
"  for  such  other  business  as  shall  be  deemed 
necessary."  For  this  purpose  a  special 
meeting  was  called  for  Friday,  the  3d  day 
of  July.  It  was  there  decided  to  build  a 
suitable  house,  large  enough  to  contain  two 
engines,  the  building  to  be  located  in  the 
center  of  the  public  green  ;  the  cost  to  be 
$150.  A  small  hand  engine  was  subse- 
quently bought,  which  is  still  in  use  and 
sustaining  the  reputation  it  has  always 
borne  for  efficienc)'  in  extinguishing  fires, 
in  spite  of  its  insignificant  size.  The  little 
engine-house  is  also  still  standing. 

These  were  the  facilities  for  extinguishing 
fires  until  in  March,  1873,  when  steps  were 
taken  towards  the  purchase  of  a  steam  fire 

1  Mr.  Newton  failing  to  qu.ilify,  the  board  appointed 
W.  TI.  Crane,  who  now  fills  tlie  ofhce. 


2l8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


engine.  This  was  accomplished  at  a  cost 
of  $5,600,  including  hose  cart,  1,000  feet 
of  hose  and  other  appurtenances.  Hoel 
Pierce  was  the  first  engineer,  at  a  salary  of 
$125  a  year.  .\  W.  Hobart,  C.  Collins 
and  John  Van  Hoescn  were  made  a  com- 
mittee to  purchase  a  lot  for  the  engine 
house.  This  resulted  in  the  purchase  from 
T.  D.  Chollar  of  a  lot  28  feet  front  and 
43^  feet  deep  on  James  street,  for  which 
$285  was  paid.  The  engine  house  was 
built  in  1873  b\-  -A.  H.  Pcrr\-  at  a  cost  of 
$2,100. 

Post-Office. — Townsend  Ross  was  the 
first  postmaster  in  the  \'illage  of  Homer. 
The  office  was  first  located  in  a  building 
near  the  store  of  George  W.  Phillips.  John 
Osborne  was  the  second  official  in  the  office, 
and  he  was  followed  b\-  Dr.  Lewis  Riggs, 
who  came  to  Homer  1818.  Then  there 
were  successively  in  the  office,  George  Ross, 
J.  P.  Stone,  G.  J.  J.  Barber,  A.  \\'.  Kings- 
bur}'  and  the  present  incimibent,  Newell 
Jones.  Each  of  the  last  three  mentionetl 
held  the  position  eight  years.  I-"ivc  mails 
are  received  and  distributed  daih-  from  the 
post-oflice  at  the  present  time. 

Hotels.  — The  first  tavern  established  in 
Homer  village  was  kept  by  John  Ballard; 
it  was  opened  to  the  little  public  soon  after 
Mr.  Ballard  came  in,  in  1803.  He  pur- 
chased his  farm  on  the  west  side  of  Main 
street  and  built  his  log  cabin  on  the  ground 
now  occupied  b\^  the  residence  of  J.  M. 
Schermerhorn  ;  to  this  he  added  a  room 
inclosed  with  boards  and  hung  out  his  sign 
of  entertainment.  It  is  probable  that  this 
pioneer  hotel  was  not  kept  open  more  than 
a  short  time. 

The  first  permanent  hotel  in  the  village, 
was  what  is  now  the  Hotel  Windsor,  which 
was  built  by  Major  Stimson,  who  conducted 
it  for  many  years.  In  1829  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Calvin  Slocun>,  who  continued  it 
until  1850.      Thomas  Harrop  was  the  ne.xt 


proprietor  of  the  house  ;  he  gave  it  his  own 
name,  but  retired  five  years  later  and  was 
followed  by  L.  Van  Anden  ;  the  house  en- 
joyed a  prosperous  career  as  Van  Anden's 
Hotel.  He  was  followetl  b\-  John  Patten, 
who  kept  it  for  several  years,  since  which 
time  there  have  been  numerous  changes  in 
the  management,  which  need  not  be  special- 
ly alluded  to.  The  present  proprietors, 
Thomas  White  &  Son,  took  the  house  in 
1883,  and  under  their  experienced  direction 
it  has  become  a  popular  one. 

The  Mansion  House  was  erected  about 
the  same  time  as  the  other  house.  The 
The  e.xact  dates  in  either  case  are  not 
1  available,  but  it  is  generally  believed  both 
houses  in  their  original  form,  were  built  as 
early  as  the  War  of  1812.  Judge  Bowen 
was  probabl}-  the  first  landlord  of  the  Man- 
sion House,  and  afterwards  his  son,  Oren 
Bowen,  kept  it  down  to  1853,  when  it  was 
sold  to  Amos  Graves.  T.  D.  Chollar  was 
the  next  owner  (1859)  but  three  years  later 
he  sold  it  to  Richard  Beck,  of  New  York, 
whose  heirs  still  own  it.  The  house  was 
leased  to  Thomas  \\'hite  in  i860,  he  suc- 
ceeding Thomas  Harrop,  who  had  con- 
ducted it  as  a  temperance  house  under  Mr. 
Chollar's  ownership.  In  1868  Ingles  & 
Mills  took  the  house  for  three  years.  A 
Mr.  Tripp  then  occupied  it  ;  then  Thomas 
White  until  1877;  John  Klock  until  1879; 
George  Crane  until  1881;  Thomas  White 
again  until  1883.  In  April  of  that  year 
the  property  passed  under  the  management 
of  John  R)'an,  the  present  proprietor. 

The  third  hotel  in  the  village  was  the 
building  at  present  occupied  and  owned  as 
a  dwelling  house  by  Miles  Van  Hoesen. 
It  was  not  open  to  the  public  ver\'  long. 

The  fourth  public  house  was  built  in 
1 8 16  by  Joshua  Ballard,  and  is  at  present 
used  as  a  store  and  dwelling  by  I.  M.  Sam- 
son. Peter  Westerman  kept  it  for  a  time 
about  1824.      He  was  followed  by  Benajah 


Town  of  Homer. 


219 


Tubbs,  who  was  there  in  1832.  Jud^e 
Harris,  a  son-in-law  of  Mr.  Tubbs,  then 
kept  it  for  a  time  and  was  followed  bj'  Geo. 
W.  Samson,  1838-39;  Hiram  Bishop, 
1848-50;  George  VV.  Samson  to  1853; 
I.  M.  Samson,  his  son,  from  1853  to  1873, 
when  it  was  closed  to  the  public. 

A  glimpse  over  the  local  newspapers 
twenty  years  after  the  incorporation  of  the 
village  (1855)  will  give  us  an  indication  of 
its  growth  and  its  business  status  at  that 
time.  Here  we  find  notice  of  a  meeting 
of  the  stockholders  of  the  American  Chem- 
ical Ink  Company,  of  which  H.  H.  Gross 
was  president.  Babcock  &  Kinney  an- 
nounced a  great  rush  at  the  Homer  clothing 
store.  Wm.  Sherman  &  Son  were  in  the  dr\- 
goods  trade  and  made  announcement  indi- 
cating a  thrivingbusiness.  Mrs.  Preston  dec- 
orated the  heads  of  the  ladies,  and  Chester  A. 
Collins  was  then  doing  a  successful  business 
as  a  merchant  tailor.  George  W.  Phillips 
offered  to  make  hafd  times  easier  by  selling 
his  dr)-  goods  cheaper  than  the  cheapest. 
C.  O.  Newton,  grocer\'man,  advertised  a 
large  stock  of  goods,  but  during  the  follow- 
ing year  formed  a  copartnership  with  Geo. 
J.  J.  Barber  and  V.  T.  Stone,  in  the  "Great 
Western."  Paris  Barber  was  engaged  in 
the  lime,  plaster  and  sand  trade.  ChoUar 
&  Jones  were  in  a  shoe  store  in  the  north 
half  of  the  Bank  block,  doing  a  business 
of  $10,000  a  year.  E.  F.  Phillips  carried 
a  stock  of  gloves,  etc.,  and  Lorenzo  Ben- 
nett of  boots  and  shoes.  E.  H.  Osborne, 
and  Geo.W.  Bradford  were  selling  books,  and 
Hepry  B.  Burr  was  in  the  insurance  busi- 
ness. Ray-mond  Smith  was  manufacturing 
wagons  near  the  southern  ri\'er  bridge  and 
Wm.  N.  Brockway  had  just  entered  his  new 
furniture  warerooms.  Chas.  W.  Wheadon 
announced  the  removal  of  his  stock  of  new 
harness,  saddlery,  etc.,  a  few  doors  south 
of  J.  Barber's  store.  D.  D.  R.  Ormsby 
was   in   the  jewelry    business,  while    L.    P. 


Wood  sold  the  heavier  metals  in  the  shape 
of  iron  and  copper  ware  at  No.  8  Sherman 
Building.  Bennett  &  Woodruff  sold  cloths 
and  clotliing.  W.  P.  Beck  was  the  well  known 
daguerrean  artist.  A.  Roberts,  who  had 
purchased  the  grocery  store  of  Wm.  R. 
Smith,  advertised  ice  for  sale.  What  is  now 
the  Hotel  Windsor  was  then  \'an  .\nden's 
Hotel,  while  the  Mansion  House  was  then 
occupied  b\-  Thomas  Harrop,  for  many 
years  a  popular  landlord.  W.  L.  &  C.  A. 
Morgan  kept  a  restaurant  under  Wheadon's 
Hall.  R.  D.  Cornwell  &  Co.  had  a  liverj' 
stable  and  ran  a  daily  line  of  stages  to  Glen 
Haven.  J.  C.  Terry  also  was  in  the  livery- 
business.  J.  Ball,  G.  W,  Bradford,  Josiah 
Patterson,  C.  Green  and  W.  R.  Brown  were 
the  physicians  of  the  place. 

Schools.  — The  first  school-house  erected 
in  the  village  of  Homer  was  located  about 
twelve  rods  beyond  where  the  railroad 
crosses  the  wagon  road  leading  to  Little 
York.  The  second  school  building  stood  on 
the  public  green  ;  it  was  a  small,  rude  aftair 
and  was  built  prior  to  i8oi.  The  third  build- 
ing for  school  purposes  was  also  erected  on 
the  green  ;  it  was  a  two-story  structure  in 
which  were  employed  two  teachers.  This 
building  stood  until  the  y-ear  1839,  when  it 
was  sold  at  auction  and  bid  off  by  "  Squire  " 
Canfield  for  the  Methodist  Church  society. 
In  it  the  first  court  in  the  county  was  held 
prior  to  1809.  The  building' is  at  present 
owned  by  Pembroke  Pierce  and  stands  on 
the  corner  of  ICagle  and  Cayuga  streets  In 
the  year  1 8 19  the  first  academy  building 
was  erected.  It  was  originally  two  stories 
high  and  of  wood,  54  by  32  feet  in  dimen- 
sions ;  subsequent  additions  were  made  until 
it  was  54  by  lOO  feet.  It  was  used  until  1 869, 
when  the  present  handsome  structure  was 
erected. 

Joshua  Ballard  was  the  first  teacher  in  the 
town  of  Homer ;  but  it  is  not  now  known 
how  long  he  presided  in  either  of  the  early 


220 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


school-houses.  The  next  teacher  of  ])ronii- 
nence  was  Adin  Webb,  who  is  described  as 
"a  tall,  straight,  sprightly  young  man,  dig- 
nified in  deiiieanor  and  with  a  good  educa- 
tion." With  but  <Mie  year  as  an  exception 
Mr.  Webb  taught  seventeen  successive 
j'ears.  He  was  a  native  of  Windham  county. 
Conn.  ;  his  father  was  one  of  tile  heroes  of 
the  Revolution  and  served  in  that  portion 
of  the  army  that  was  engaged  in  the  battle 
of  Bennington  and  the  capture  of  Burgoync. 
In  1800  Mr.  Webb  was  married  to  Deborah 
Carter,  and  the\-  came  with  his  parents  to 
this  State,  locating  near  Cazenovia  lake. 
In  1805  he  was  solicited  b\-  friends  to  come 
to  Homer  and  teach  the  village  school  for  a 
term  of  ten  months.  Being  a  capable  singer 
he  taught  singing  school  at  the  same  time, 
and  being  successful  in  both  \ocations,  he 
decided  to  remain  and  make  his  permanent 
home  in  Homer.  During  the  whole  period 
of  his  residence  here  he  was  leader  of  the 
choir  in  the  Congregational  Church.' 

In  this  connection  mention  should  be 
made  of  the  name  of  Stephen  W.  Clark, 
who  for  a  number  of  )-ears  was  principal  of 
the  Academy.  He  was  a  man  of  varied  at- 
tainments and  was  the  author  of  an  analysis 
of  the  English  language,  an  etymological 
chart  and  a  practical  grammar,  in  which 
words  and  phrases  are  classified  according 
to  their  offices  and  their  various  relations  to 
one  another,  all  of  which  works  met  with 
general  recognition.  Mr.  Clark  was  the  third 
son  of  Joseph  and  Mary  Clark,  and  younger 
brother  of  M}Mon  H.  Clark,  e.x-governor  of 
New  York.  He  was  born  at  Naples,  N.  Y., 
April  24th,  1 8 10.  After  spending  his  earlier 
years  in  agricultural  pursuits  in  his  native 
town  and  as  a  mercantile  clerk  in  Canan- 
daigua,  he  finished  his  preparatory  studies 
in  Franklin  Academy,  Prattsburg,  N.  Y., 
and  entered  Amherst  College  in  1833.    Here 

1  Further  reference  to  Mr.  Webb'.s  life  will  be  found 

in  the  liisl()r\'  of  the  town  of  C\)rtlan(l. 


he  devoted  himself  especially  to  the  study 
of  natural  sciences,  graduating  with  honor 
in  1837.  He  soon  entered  upon  his  chosen 
profession  and  followed  teaching  almost 
withotit  interruption  for  man}-  years.  He 
was  at  different  times  principal  of  Croton 
Academy,  the  Monroe  Collegiate  Institute, 
East  Bloomficld  .\cadem_\'  and  Cortlantl 
Academy. 

From  the  common  school  which  was  so 
long  and  so  successfully  taught  by  Adin 
Webb  on  the  sj^aciotis  "green"  grew  the 
Cortland  Academy,  which  has  for  si.xt)--five 
years  nestled  among  the  chtirches,  gradu- 
ally and  siux'U'  earning  a  rc])titation  and 
making  for  itself  a  history  honorable  to  its 
conductors  and  to  the  county.  The  academy 
was  chartered  under  its  present  name  on  the 
2d  of  Eebruar)-,  1819.  Among  its  original 
trustees  were  Rev.  l^lnathan  Walker,  Dr. 
Lewis  S.  Owen,  Dr.  John  Miller,  John  Os- 
borne, Chaimcey  Keep,  David  Coye,  Noah 
R.  Smith  and  Rufus  Boies.  Revs.  Alfred 
Bennett,  John  Keep  and  Hon.  E.  C.  Reed 
were  soon  after  elected  to  fill  vacancies  in 
the  board.  Prosperit}-  attended  the  school 
almost  from  its  first  opening.  The  inhab- 
itants of  Homer  and  surrounding  towns  took 
a  deep  and  abiding  interest  in  the  institu- 
tion,   patronized    the   school    liberallj-   and 

I  aided  its  success  in  man\'  other  ways.  It 
soon  became  the  most  popular  and  widely- 

'  known  institution  of  learning  within  a  cir- 
cuit of  man}'  miles.  The  only  endowment 
ever  possessed  by  the  academy,  other  than 
the  good  will  of  the  people,  was  the  use  of 
a  county  school  lot,  which  was  sold  in  1835 
for  $3,733.  The  prosperit}'  of  the  academ}- 
continued  until  the  breaking  out  of  the  Re- 
bellion, which  partiall}'  paralyzed  its  work 
for  a  time. 

In  1873,  an  unsuccessful  cftbrt  having 
been  made  to  secure  an  endowment,  and 
the  condition  of  educational  matters  in  the 
village  demanding  the  prox'ision   of  better 


Town  of  Homer. 


221 


facilities  fisr  free  instruction,  fi\e  districts 
were  mainly  consolidated  in  Union  District 
No.  I ,  of  Homer,  the  trustees  of  the  acad- 
emy resigned  their  trusts,  according  to  law, 
to  a  board  of  education,  the  district  as- 
sumed all  the  indebtedness  of  the  academy, 
and  guaranteed  to  maintain  a  first-class 
classical  and  academic  tlcpartment,  and  the 
school  was  reorganized  under  the  present 
system  and  name.  Each  year  since  this 
change  was  effected  has  increasingh-  shown 
its  wisdom  and  witnessed  the  growing  pros- 
perity and  success  of  the  institution. 

It  is  impossible  in  this  brief  sketch  to 
name  the  subordinate  teachers  who,  during 
all  these  \'ears,  have  helped  forward  the 
good  work  of  the  school ;  much  less  can  the 
man\'  noble  names  enrolled  among  the  grad- 
uates of  Homer  be  here  recorded.  The  first 
principal  of  the  academy  was  Prof  Catlin. 
He  was  shortly  succeeded  by  Prof  Noble 
D.  Strong.  Then  came  Prof  A\'er\',  now 
of  Hamilton  College  ;  Prof  Franklin  Sher- 
rill,  and  Dr.  Taylor,  now  of  Auburn.  In 
1830,  Dr.  Samuel  H.  W'oolworth,  now  Sec- 
retary of  Board  of  Regents,  accepted  the 
principalship,  which  position  he  held  for 
twenty-two  years.  To  him  the  school  was 
greatly  indebted  for  its  prosperity'  and  com- 
manding influence  during  this  period  and 
for  years  succeeding.  He  was  followed  b\' 
Prof  Stephen  W .  Clark,  who  remained  for 
twelve  years.  Then,  during  the  trying  days 
of  the  academy's  history,  came  successively 
Profs.  Nichols,  Sanford  and  Manley.  The 
first  year  following  the  reorganization  the 
school  was  under  the  charge  of  Prof  C.  W. 
Verrill,  since  which  time  (1871)  it  has  been 
under  the  care  of  Prof  Kzra  J.  Peck,  A.  M. 

A  substantial  fund  is  in  trust  for  the  acad- 
em\-,  through  the  bequest  of  Zebadiah  Co- 
burn,  tiie  avails  of  which  are  used  in  pay- 
ment of  tuition  for  Christian  _\-oung  men  of 
all  denominations  who  stud)-  here  in  prep- 
aration for  the  university. 


The  present  instructors  of  the  academy 
are:  E.J.  Peck,  A.  M.,  principal;  Latin 
and  Greek.  Miss  C.  E.  Hutchings,  A.  B., 
preceptress ;  Higher  English,  French  and 
German.  H.  Frank  Miner,  A.  B.,  mathe- 
matics and  natural  science.  Charles  V. 
Coon,  preparatory.  William  A.  Coon,  first 
intermediate  department.  Mrs.  H.  M.  Shel- 
don, second  intermediate  department.  Miss 
F"lora  Copeland  and  Miss  Kmily  C.  Ormsby, 
third  intermediate  department.  Mrs.  S.  C. 
Webb,  first  primary  department.  Miss 
Elma  L.  Williams,  second  primary  depart- 
ment. 

The  board  of  education  consists  of  Wm. 
A.  Robinson,  president,  Thomas  D.  Chol- 
lar,  Edward  J.  Bockes ;  terms  e.Kpire  1885. 
Vernon  T.  Stone,  George  Murra)-,  jr., 
Sumner  C.  Webb,  M.  D. :  terms  expire 
1883.  J.  Clayton  Atwater,  Caleb  Green, 
M.  D.,  George  W.  Phillips;  terms  expire 
1884. 

CHURCHE.S. 

The  First  Baptist  Church.  —  The  three 
Baptist  Churches,  namely,  in  Homer,  Cort- 
land and  McGrawville,  having  had  a  com- 
mon origin  in  the  original  Baptist  Church 
of  the  old  town  of  Homer,  it  is  proper  that 
a  preliminary  sketch  should  be  made  in  this 
place,  beginning  in  the  spring  of  1793, 
after  four  or  five  families  had  moved  in  and 
made  a  permanent  settlement,  and  reaching 
up  to  the  organization  of  the  present  socie- 
ty in  1827. 

The  first  inhabitants  of  Homer,  irrespec- 
tive of  creed,  met  in  common  on  the  Sab- 
bath for  worship,  until  the  )-ear  1 80 1,  when 
circumstances  occurred  which  led  the  Bap- 
tist members  of  the  little  community  to 
make  provision  for  their  divine  worship. 
On  the  3d  day  of  October,  1801,  sixteen 
persons  united  and  were  publicl\-  recognized 
as  a  Baptist  Church.  The  council  consisted 
of   Rev.    James    Bacon,   New   Woodstock ; 


222 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Rev.  Natliaii  liaker,  De  Ruyter.  witli  one 
la)-  brotlicr,  and  Rev.  Joseph  Cornell,  a 
missionary  wlio  was  providentially  present. 
This  was  the  first  church  of  an)'  denomina- 
tion formed  within  the  limits  of  Cortland 
county;  but  it  was  only  nine  da)'S  earlier 
than  the  organization  of  the  Congregational 
Clnirch.  The  names  of  the  first  members 
of  the  Baptist  society  were  John  Keep, 
Joseph  Beebe,  Daniel  Crandall,  Peleg  Bab- 
cock,  Cornish  Messenger,  Roderick  Beebe, 
James  H.  Wheeler,  Frances  Keep,  Rhoda 
Beebe,  Submit  Keep,  Rhoda  Miner,  Martha 
Messenger,  Mary  Bishop,  Susannah^  Cran- 
dall, Esther  Wilcox  and  Moll)'  Wheeler. 
John  Keep  was  appointed  clerk  of  the 
church,  which  office  he  held  for  twent)- 
seven  years.  Joseph  Beebe  was  appointed 
deacon,  but  he  died  about  se\'en  months 
later,  and  Prince  Freeman,  of  \'irgil,  was 
appointed  to  the  office. 

No  regular  pastor  was  stationed  in  the 
hamlet  for  some  time ;  but  an  ordained 
minister  named  Leisure  preached  for  the 
church  once  in  two  months  until  Re\'.  Ru- 
fus  Freeman  was  called  to  preach  once  a 
month  for  one  year.  Prior  to  this  time 
they  had  occasional  sermons  from  Rew 
Joseph  Cornell,  James  Bacon  and  P.  P. 
Root. 

The  first  effort  to  raise  mone)-  to  support 
the  Gospel  was  an  a\'erage  assessment  upon 
each  member,  which  amounted  to  seven 
dollars  and  two  cents.  The  highest  amount 
paid  was  two  dollars  and  si.x  cents  and  the 
lowest  thirteen  cents. 

Rev.  Alfred  Bennett  subsequently  be- 
came pastor  of  the  clurrch.  He  was  a  re- 
markabl)'  gifted  man  and  became  known 
throughout  the  country  as  such.  He 
served  this  church  twenty  years,  having 
come  to  the  town  in  1803  and  united  with 
the  church  in  1804.  He  began  preaching 
in  1805.  In  April,  1806,  the  church  rec- 
ord shows  the  following  :  — 


■•*\'otcil,  that  Brother  .Mfred  IV-nnctt  have 
liberty  to  improve  his  gifts  where  (Jod,  in  His 
Providence,  shall  oi)en  a  door." 

A  resolution  was  recorded  in  Februar)-, 
1807,  calling  him  to  ordination,  which  e\'ent 
occurred  on  the  i8th  of  June  of  that  year, 
in  Judge  Keep's  barn,  which  is  still  stand- 
ing. At  the  same  meeting  whicii  passed 
this  resolution  for  the  ordination,  the  fol- 
owing  was  passed  :  — 

"Voted,  that  Dr.  .^sa  Bennett  be  on  trial  for 
a  deacon." 

It  appears  he  united  with  the  church  by 
letter  in  1806.  Thomas  ChoUar  united 
with  the  church  by  letter  in  iSio,  and  was 
made  a  deacon  in  1812;  he  filled  that  office 
for  about  thirty  years.  His  son.  Deacon 
T.  D.  Chollar,  was  called  to  the  same  office 
forty-two  years  ago  and  has  ever  since 
maintained  the  same  high  Christian  stand- 
ard of  character  of  which  he  had  an  exam- 
ple in  his  father. 

The  increase  and  changes  in  the  pioneer 
church  during  the  first  ten  years  of  its  life 
were  as  follows:  Added  by  baptism,  67; 
b)'  letter.  65 ;  dismissed  b)-  letter,  47  ; 
seven  were  excluded  and  fi\e  died.  Dur- 
ing this  period  the  meetings  were  held  al- 
ternately in  Homer,  Cortland  village,  Port 
Watson,  on  the  East  river;  and  finall)',  b\- 
the  united  energies  of  the  denomination,  a 
site  was  secured  on  the  road  from  Homer 
to  Cortland,  at  the  point  wliere  it  turns 
northward,  now  within  the  boundaries  of 
Cortland  village;  there  a  comfortable  church 
building  was  erected;  it  was  52  by  36  feet, 
with  galler\-  on  three  sides,  and  without 
steeple.  This  church  was  erected  in  181 1 
and  was  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  God 
in  June,  18 1 2.  In  the  building  of  the 
church  a  debt  was  incurred  of  about  $i,ooo, 
or  nearly  one- half  its  cost,  and  they  were 
without  means  to  pay  it;  but  before  a  year 
had  passed  the  society  had  doubled  its 
membership,  the  debt  was  paid  off  and  the 


Town  ok  Homer. 


223 


regular  congregations  were  large  and  de- 
vout. In  the  revivals  of  that  period,  forty- 
nine  heads  of  families  were  converted  and 
brought  into  the  ciiurch. 

As  early  as  1808  the  societj-  voted  to 
meet  on  a  given  day  to  improve  themselves 
in  singing  :  from  that  time  forward  a  few  of 
the  members  devoted  their  indefatigable  ef- 
forts to  raising  the  standard  of  the  church 
music.  From  181 1  to  1821  was  a  period 
of  remaikable  prosperity  to  the  church,  the 
nimiber  of  members  increasing  from  si.xty- 
eight  to  over  four  hundred.  In  1820  there 
was  a  revival  which  added  to  the  number 
largely;  but  towards  the  close  of  the  year 
the  little  communit)-  suffered  irreparable 
loss  to  its  Christian  workers  in  the  death  of 
Rev.  EInatlian  Walker,  of  the  Presb}-terian 
Church,  and  not  long  after,  the  death  of 
Deacons  Jacob  Hobart  and  Asa  Bennett, 
and  John  Keep. 

In  1820  Moses  Curtis  and  Oliver  Sted- 
man  were  elected  deacons  of  the  church. 
During  this  second  decade  of  its  existence 
there  were  added  to  the  church  b_\-  baptism 
],^;^,  and  by  letter  107  ;  there  were  dis- 
missed by  letter  seventy-nine;  twenty-one 
were  excluded  and  twent\'-tuo  died.  In 
the  year  1827  the  church  contained  nearl\- 
500  members,  and  the  little  edifice  had  be- 
come far  too  small  to  contain  the  congre- 
gations who  assembled  from  .S.ibbath  to 
Sabbath,  The  result  was  the  establishment 
of  three  Baptist  Churches  —  one  in  Homer 
village,  one  in  Cortland  \'illage,  and  one  in 
McGrawx'ille.  New  buildings  were  erected 
in  these  places,  leaving  the  mother  church 
in  the  center,  which  was,  however,  soon 
abandoned,  and  a  new  structure  erected  in 
Cortland,  as  stated  in  the  history  of  that 
village.  After  these  changes  the  pastor 
continued  his  labors  in  Homer  village  until 
1832,  when  lie  was  succeeded  in  the  Cort- 
land church  by  Rev.  I'eleg  Card,  and  he 
by   Rev.   Alfred   Gates ;    in    the   McGraw- 


ville  church  b)'  Abner  Sylvester.  The 
number  of  members  added  to  the  church 
from  1820  to  the  time  of  its  division  in  1827 
was  about  122  by  baptism  and  fift>--two  b)- 
letter. 

The  great  popularity  of  Rev.  ^Alfred  J3en- 
nett  led  to  his  being  offered  and  solicitetl 
to  take  the  nomination  for  Assemblyman 
against  Samuel  Nelson.  The  latter  was  a 
candidate  who  could  be  defeated  only  by 
one  whose  popularity  would  draw  the  en- 
tire strength  of  the  Republicans,  and  the 
approaching  convention  for  the  revision  of 
the  State  constitution  made  the  election 
one  of  the  greatest  importance.  But  Mr. 
Bennett  demurred  to  allowing  the  use  of 
his  name  for  political  office,  and  finally  pos- 
itivel}-  declined ;  he  was,  however,  made 
the  candidate  against  his  wishes,  and  was 
defeated  only  b\'  a  few  votes  from  members 
of  his  church,  who  voted  against  him  from 
Christian  principle. 

As  the  church  became  larger,  and  the 
community  advanced  in  culture  and  refine- 
ment, Mr.  Bennett's  innate  modesty  and 
distrust  of  his  own  power  led  him  to  urge 
the  society  to  accept  his  resignation,  and 
put  in  his  place  a  man  with  broader  educa- 
tion. With  much  reluctance  these  requests 
were  finally  acceded  to,  and  after  securing 
the  services  of  Rev.  W.  R.  Whiting,  Mr. 
Bennett  resigned  and  accepted  the  office  of 
agent  of  the  foreign  missionary  board  of 
the  Baptist  Church  in  the  United  States, 
which  place  he  filled  for  twent}'  years. 
Rev.  Mr.  Whiting  remained  with  the  church 
about  two  years,  and  then  became  con- 
nected with  the  American  Union  Baptist 
Bible  Societies,  and  for  the  next  forty  years 
labored  on  translations  of  the  Bible,  in 
which  work  he  became  eminent. 

The  next  pastor  was  the  Rev.  Edward 
Bright,  D.  D.,  now  editor  of  the  Examitier, 
the  most  extensively  circulated  Baptist 
journal  in  the  world.      Following  him  came 


224 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


Revs.  Reuben  Morey,  Hezekiali  Harvey, 
Mr.  Clark,  G.  W.  Brighani,  and  some  oth- 
ers, for  short  periods,  until  1880,  when 
Rev.  S.  E.  Wilco.x  became  pastor.  He 
has  recently  resigned  (1884).  The  mem- 
bership is  now  two  hundred  and  si.xty.  T. 
D.  ChoUar,  M.  A.  Radway,  M.  M.  Newton, 
Joel  (^ates  are  the  deacons.  C.  1..  Bene- 
dict is  superintendent  of  the  Sunday-school. 
The  Congregational  Church.'  —  This  has 
often  been  styled  a  church  with  a  history, 
not  onl\-  as  one  of  the  oldest  churches  of 
this  denomination  in  tiiis  \icinity,  but  es- 
pecially because  of  its  eventful  record,  and 
its  prominence  and  influential  position 
among  the  churches  of  Central  New  York, 
is  this  designation  appropriate.  The  early 
settlers  of  the  town  often  impress  their 
characteristics  upon  the  subsequent  history 
of  that  town  in  a  marked  degree.  If  they 
are  pious  and  God-fearing  men,  the  insti- 
tutions they  found  and  the  prevalent  tone 
of  society  they  give  will  long  manifest  the 
effects  of  their  godly  and  self-sacrificing 
character.  Homer  was  peculiar!}'  blessed 
in  this  respect.  Of  the  two  men,  Amos 
Todd  and  Joseph  Beebe,  who  made  the 
first  settlement  here  in  1791,  the  first  named 
was  a  constituent  member  of  the  Congre- 
gational Church,  and  the  other  a  member 
and  office-bearer  in  the  Baptist  Church. 
As  soon  as  si.x  families  had  settled  here,  in 
'793.  religious  worship  was  in.stituted  upon  1 
the  Sabbath,  and  it  has  been  steadily  main-  [ 
tained  from  that  day  to  this.  Well  may 
"Father"  Keep  e.xclaim  in  his  historical 
sermon,  preached  in  1824,  "Memorable 
was  the  day  and  mighty  in  its  influence 
upon  the  character  of  this  town  when  these  \ 
six  families  erected  a  public  altar  for  the 
honor  of  God."  Such  was  the  character  of 
these  pioneers  of  society  here  that  it  passed 
into  an  adage  that  it  would  not  do  for  any 
but  "  go-to-meeting  folks  "  to  settle  in  Ho- 

1  Prepared  by  Rev.  William  A.  Ro1)insoii. 


mer.  At  the  first  the  Sabbath  services  were 
held  in  the  houses  or  barns  of  the  settlers, 
and  most  frequently  near  the  present  Glen- 
wood  Cemetery.  The  first  school-house  — 
a  rude  log  structure,  built  in  1795,  which 
stood  a  little  north  of  the  present  site  of  the 
village,  was  sometimes  used  as  a  meeting- 
place.  In  the  fall  of  1798  a  grist-mill  was 
built  upon  the  site  still  occupied  for  like 
purpose  near  Mill  street,  in  this  village. 
This  structure  was  used  as  a  place  for  Sab- 
bath worshijj  when  the  cold  was  not  too  in- 
tense. During  these  }-ears  the  inhabitants 
themselves  conducted  their  public  services 
on  the  Lord's  day.  From  the  spring  of 
1798,  however,  there  were  occasional  visits 
to  the  town  by  missionaries  sent  out  by  the 
Connecticut  Missionar)-  Society  and  the 
Presb}'terian  (jeneral  Assembly. 

The  first  sermon  preached  in  town  was 
by  Rev.  Asa  Hillyer,  D.  D.,  of  New  Jersey, 
in  the  early  summer  of  1798.  Not  long 
after  Rev.  Seth  Williston,  of  blessed  mem- 
ory in  all  this  region,  spent  some  weeks  in 
special  labors  here,  and  a  number  were 
hopefully  con\erted  to  God.  September 
lOth,  1799,  the  first  religious  society  of 
Homer  was  organized,  and  duly  incorpor- 
ated on  the  25th  of  November  following. 
This  society  still  maintains  a  vigorous  ex- 
istence, supporting  the  institutions  of  the 
Congregational  Church.' 

1  In  the  society's  record  book,  following  the  preamble 
and  articles  of  this  organization,  is  the  following  cove- 
nant :  "  Know  all  men  by  these  presents.  That  we  whose 
names  are  hereunder  written,  for  the  consideration  of 
twelve  cents,  received  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the 
first  religious  society  of  Homer,  etc.,  do  covenant,  prom- 
ise and  agree  to  pay  the  sums  set  to  our  names,  to  be  aj)- 
propriatcd  to  the  maintenance  of  the  preaching  of  the 
Clospel,"  etc..  with  a  proviso  that  any  ])ersons  removing 
to  a  greater  distance  than  four  miles  from  the  jjlace  of 
worship  should  be  discharged  from  their  obligations  un- 
til their  return.  Various  sums  are  subscribed,  as  $150, 
$100.  fifty  cents,  etc.,  down  to  twelve  and  a  half  cents. 
( If  the  latter  there  is  a  large  proportion.  Xe.vt  on  the 
book  appears  a  record  of  the  election  of  two  trustees,  Ue- 
cember  6th,  1799.  In  the  record  it  is  staled — ''There 
being  no  elders,  church  warden  or  vestry  belonging  to 


Town  of  Homer. 


225 


A  few  days  after  the  incorporation  of  tliis 
society,  viz.:  December  1st,  1799,  a  build- 
ing, designed  to  serve  the  double  purpose 
of  a  school-house  and  place  for  public  wor- 
ship, was  dedicated,  the  sermon,  from  I. 
Kings,  VIII  chapter,  38th  verse,  being 
preached  by  Rev.  Mr.  Lindsley.  This  pe- 
culiar edifice  was  divided  within  by  an  im- 
mense swing  partition,  and  stood  near  the 
northeast  corner  of  the  present  village 
green.  Prior  to  the  organization  of  the 
first  religious  society,  the  formation  of  a 
church  had  been  proposed,  and  at  a  meet- 
ing held  in  the  fall  of  1798  twenty  persons 
presented  themselves  for  that  purpose  ;  but 
questions  of  church  polity  and  denomina- 
tional preference  arose,  and  though  dis- 
cussed temperately,  and  in  a  Christian 
spirit,  caused  the  postponement  of  any 
church  organization,  all  continuing  to  wor- 
ship together  and  to  sustain  the  first  relig- 
ious society.  A  satisfactory  adjustment  of 
the  questions  about  polity  was  made  in  the 
fall  of  1 80 1,  and  on  October  12th  fourteen 
persons  entered  into  solemn  covenant  with 
God  and  with  each  other,  as  "The  Congre- 
gational Church  of  Homer."  The  follow- 
ing were  the  constituent  members  in  this 
important  organization :  Eliphalet  Rice, 
elected  the  first  deacon  of  the  church,  April 
2ist,  1803,  and  his  wife,  Mary;  Samuel 
Hoar  and  his  wife,  Dorothy ;  Timothy 
Treat  and  his  wife,  Beulah  ;  Darius  Kinney 
and  his  wife,  Lydia,  who  was  the  last  sur- 
vivor of  the  original  fourteen,  dying  in  1845  ; 
Peter  Hitchcock,  the  second  deacon,  elected 
December  13th,  1804;  John  Ballard,  Thom- 
as L.  Bishop,  John  Baker,  Daniel  Miner 
and  Amos  Todd,  already  mentioned  as  one 
of  the  two  pioneers  of  the  settlement  of  the 
town. 

At   the   time    of    the    formation   of   the 

said  society,  the  members  do  agree,  nominate  and  ap- 
point that  the  said  society  shall  be  hereafter  distinguished 
by  and  tal^en  for  tire  first  religious  society  in  the  town  of 
Homer." 


church,  Mr.  Abial  Jones,  who  is  styled  in 
the  records  "a  candidate  preacher,"  was 
chosen  as  the  moderator  and  served  in  the 
ministry  of  the  word  till  the  following  year. 
In  the  fall  of  1802  Rev.  Nathan  Darrow 
came  to  Homer  and  December  loth  he 
was  called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  church. 
Accepting  their  invitation  he  was  ordained 
and  installed  February  3d,  1803,  by  a 
council  of  representatives  of  the  churches 
in  Manlius,  Geneva,  Owasco,  Lisle,  Pom- 
pey,  Clinton  and  Cazenovia.  This  was  a 
marked  e\'ent  in  the  history  of  this  church 
and  of  religious  progress  in  Central  New 
York.  Less  than  a  year  after  this,  "  the 
middle  association  "  was  formed  at  Marcel- 
lus,  this  church  being  one  of  the  constitu- 
ent churches  and  being  represented  by  its 
pastor  and  Deacon  Rice.  Rev.  Mr.  Darrow 
is  described  as  a  man  of  medium  size,  with 
brown  hair,  a  light  hazel  eye,  endowed  with 
good  natural  talent,  but  without  extensive 
culture ;  somewhat  austere  in  his  manner, 
but  full  of  energy  and  decision,  and  faithful 
in  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  He  filled 
the  ofifice  of  pastor  till  1808,  and  the 
church,  which  numbered  about  twenty 
when  he  came,  had  received  ninety-three 
additions  under  his  ministry,  nearly  half  of 
them  the  fruit  of  a  revival  enjoyed  in  1806. 
During  his  pastorate  the  church  took  efficient 
action  in  looking  after  the  education  of  the 
children  and  youth  of  the  town,  instituted 
"the  standing  committee,"  to  attend  to  ex- 
ecutive affairs  of  the  church,  and  established 
"the  Thursday  p.  m.  meeting,"  which  has 
been  sustained  with  remarkable  vigor  to  the 
present  time.  In  1805  a  church  edifice, 
50  by  72  feet  in  size,  was  erected  upon  the 
site  now  occupied  by  the  present  church 
edifice,  six  acres  of  land,  including  the  pres- 
ent village  green,  having  been  given  to  the 
society  for  this  purpose  and  for  public  uses. 
It  was  a  great  undertaking  for  that  day,  to 
build  so  commodious  and  elegant  a  struct- 

"5 


226 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ure ;  and  with  subsequent  repairs  and  en- 
largements, it  served  the  uses  of  the  con- 
gregation till  replaced  by  the  present 
edifice. 

Rev.  Mr.  Darrow  was  succeeded  in  the 
pastorate  by  Rev.  Elnathan  Walker,  who 
was  ordained  and  installed  October  24th, 
1809.  ^''■-  Walker  was  a  person  of  digni- 
fied bearing  and  fine  personal  presence.  He 
was  tall  and  erect  in  carriage,  easy  and 
graceful  in  speech  and  gesture,  of  fair  com- 
plexion and  clear  gray  eyes,  looking  out 
through  the  spectacles  which  he  constantly 
wore.  He  was  a  native  of  Taunton,  Mass., 
and  a  graduate  of  Brown  University.  He 
is  the  only  pastor  who  has  died  in  town. 
His  death  occurred  June  4th,  1S20,  and 
occasioned  universal  sorrow.  A  plain  marble 
shaft  in  the  cemetery  bears  this  inscription 
to  his  memor)' :  — 

"This  monument  is  erected  by  an  affectionate 
people,  as  the  last  testimony  of  respect  to  their 
beloved  pastor." 

The  pastorate  of  Mr.  Walker  covered 
what  was  a  determining  period  in  the  growth 
and  prosperity  of  this  church  and  society. 
The  church,  which  numbered  99  members 
when  he  came,  had  increased  to  427  at  the 
time  of  his  death.  Especially  did  the  three 
marked  revivals  enjoyed  during  this  time 
contribute  to  this  result.  The  memorable 
one  of  1812-13  added  188  persons  to  the 
church  in  a  single  year.  That  of  18 16  was 
also  one  of  especial  power,  while  the  one 
that  immediately  preceded  Mr.  Walker's 
death  was  inaugurated  by  a  peculiar  victory 
of  divine  grace  over  personal  estrange- 
ments and  animosities.  Some  members  of 
the  church  had  become  alienated  from  the 
pastor  and  at  length  a  council  was  called  to 
consider  and  act  in  reference  to  these  griev- 
ances; but  being  debarred  by  the  rules  of 
the  Presbytery  (with  which  the  church  had 
become  associated  in  181 1)  from  acting 
oflScially,  the    members   of  the   council   set 


themselves  at  work  to  effect  a  reconciliation. 
In  this  they  were  remarkably  successful  and 
the  records  say,  "  Mutual  concession  and 
forgiveness  commenced  and  after  a  most 
tender  and  melting  season  of  two  days,  all 
their  difficulties  were  amicably  settled." 

The  successor  of  Mr.  Walker  in  the  pas- 
torate was  Rev.  John  Keep,  who  was  in- 
stalled November  7th,  1 82  i.  Mr.  Keep  was 
a  man  of  sterling  good  sense,  strong  in  his 
convictions  and  interested  in  all  matters  of 
public  welfare.  He,  with  the  church,  took 
pronounced  position  upon  temperance,  and 
were  foremost  in  every  good  work.  In  1824 
the  meeting  house  was  thoroughl)'  repaired 
and  re-dedicated  November  23d.  The  fol- 
lowing year  the  Presbyterian  Church  at 
Cortland  was  formed,  several  members  be- 
ing dismissed  from  Homer  to  co-operate  in 
its  organization.  In  1826  the  church  was 
blessed  with  a  revival  and  fiftj'-seven  addi- 
tions. In  July,  1827,  the  present  Baptist 
Church  of  Homer  was  established.  The  fol- 
lowing year  the  town  of  Homer  was  divided 
by  act  of  Legislature  and  the  town  of  Cort- 
land organized.  The  academy,  which  had 
been  incorporated  in  18 19,  found  in  Mr. 
Keep  a  wise  counselor  and  staunch  sup- 
porter. Under  Mr.  Keep's  leadership  the 
church  inaugurated  the  holding  of  so-called 
"protracted  meetings"  in  1831,  and  six 
such  seasons  were  held  within  three  years 
and  large  accessions  made  to  the  member- 
ship of  the  church.  In  the  last  of  these 
meetings  held  in  June,  1833,  Rev.  Jed. 
Burchard  labored  in  his  own  eccentric  way 
and  with  mixed  results  of  good  and  evil  for 
the  church ;  as  one  effect,  the  pastor  re- 
signed his  charge  and  was  dismissed  the  3d 
of  October,  1833. 

In  December  of  the  same  year  Rev.  Den- 
nis Piatt  was  called  to  the  pastorate  and  was 
installed  March  12th,  1834.  Mr.  Piatt  was 
a  decided  and  positive  man  and  held  a  firm 
hand  in  the  discipline  of  the  church.      He 


Town  of  Homer. 


227 


was  a  good  sermonizer  and  possessed  of  no 
ordinary  executive  ability.  The  year  1835 
was  a  year  of  in- gathering,  eighty-two  be- 
ing added  to  the  church.  Mr.  Piatt  resigned 
his  pastorate  and  was  dismissed  April  7th, 
,  1842,  His  death  occurred  in  Norwalk, 
Conn.,  in  1878.  All  of  his  successors  in 
the  pastoral  office  are  yet  living  at  the  time 
of  this  writing,  and  therefore  no  reference 
will  be  made  to  their  personal  characteris- 
tics. The  immediate  successor  to  Mr.  Piatt 
was  Rev.  Thomas  K.  Fessenden,  who.  was 
called  by  the  church  December  ist,  1842, 
and  installed  early  the  next  year.  The  year 
of  his  installation  was  also  a  year  of  revival, 
si.xty-three  being  added  to  the  church. 
The  chapel  was  erected  in  1843  and  dedi- 
cated with  appropriate  services  January 
1 2th,  1844.  Another  revival  was  enjoyed 
in  1850.  During  Mr.  Fessenden's  pastor- 
ate, W'hich  was  terminated  at  his  request,  in 
1853,  276  persons  were  added  to  the  church. 
Throughout  this  period  the  benevolent  con- 
tributions, which  were  faithfully  watched 
over  for  many  years  by  Dr.  Geo.  W. 
Bradford,  steadily  increased.  For  a  year 
after  Mr.  Fessenden's  dismissal  the  pulpit 
was  ably  supplied  by  Rev.  Thomas  Louns- 
bury,  D.  D.  March  6th,  1855,  Rev.  J.  A. 
Priest  w^as  invited  to  the  pastorate  and  soon 
after  installed,  and  again  a  pastor's  first  year 
of  service  was  gladdened  with  a  precious 
revival  and  eighty-two  added  to  the  church. 
The  pastoral  relation  with  Mr.  Priest  was 
dissolved  in  May,  1858,  at  his  urgent  re- 
quest, on  the  ground  of  his  health.  Sep- 
tember 7th  of  the  same  year  Rev.  Albert 
Bigelow  was  called  to  the  pastorate,  soon 
after  installed  and  continued  in  that  ofl^ce 
till  he  resigned  and  was  dismissed  October 
1st,  1863.  The  8th  of  the  previous  July 
the  present  commodious  and  elegant  church 
edifice  was  publicly  dedicated  to  the  service 
of  the  Most  High.  The  sermon  on  the  in- 
teresting occasion  was  preached  by  Presi- 


dent Fisher,  of  Hamilton  College,  and  Rev. 
John  Keep  was  present  and  participated  in 
the  services.  In  addition  to  the  generous 
and  liberal  efforts  of  the  church  and  society 
in  building  its  substantial  house  of  worship, 
the  later  years  of  Mr.  Bigelow's  pastorate 
witnessed  the  inception  of  the  War  of  the 
Rebellion,  and  pastor  and  people  felt  the 
urgent  demands  upon  their  patriotism  and 
nobly  responded  with  earnest  efforts  to 
provide  men  for  the  army,  and  generous 
contributions  through  the  Sanitary  and 
Christian  Commissions  to  alleviate  the  hor- 
rors of  war. 

February  23d,  1864,  Rev.  John  C.  Hol- 
brook,  D.  D.,  was  called  to  the  pastorate 
and  was  installed  in  July,  1865.  In  1868  a 
very  powerful  revival  was  experienced  and 
148  were  added  to  the  church.  The  same 
year  the  church  withdrew  from  the  presby- 
tery, with  which  it  had  been  connected  on 
the  "  plan  of  union,  "  and  assisted  in  the 
formation  of  the  "  Central  Association." 
In  October  of  the  same  year  the  "  State 
Association "  met  at  Homer,  Deacon  S. 
Holmes  serving  as  moderator,  and  L.  \V. 
Bacon,  D.  D.,  preaching  the  sermon.  In 
September,  1870,  Dr.  Holbrook  accepted  a 
call  to  Stockton,  Cal.,  and  was  dismissed 
from  his  pastorate  of  this  church. 

April  l8th,  1871,  Rev.  Wm.  A.  Robinson 
received  a  unanimous  call  to  the  pastorate 
and  began  his  labors  here  June  8th.  He 
was  installed  by  council  on  the  13th  of  the 
following  December.  In  1873  the  State 
Association  again  met  in  Homer,  H.  M. 
Storrs,  D.  D.,  serving  as  moderator,  and 
Wm.  M.  Taylor,  D.  D.,  preaching  the  ser- 
mon. The  following  year  the  chapel  was 
thoroughly  repaired  and  refurnished.  In 
1S75  the  church  edifice  was  renovated  and 
improved  in  its  interior,  at  an  expense  of 
over$i,200.  October  12,  1876,  the  church 
and  congregation  celebrated  with  great  in- 
terest the  7Sth  anniversary  of  the  formation 


228 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


of  the  church.  An  historical  sermon  was 
preached  b)'  the  pastor.  Letters  from  for- 
mer members  and  from  the  sons  of  Homer 
in  the  ministry  were  read,  su<^gestive  trib- 
utes were  paid  to  some  of  the  earher  pas- 
tors and  deacons,  and  the  work  and  influence 
of  the  church  set  forth  in  appropriate  ad- 
dresses. The  present  pastorate  has  con- 
tinued at  the  time  of  tliis  writing  nearly 
thirteen  years,  being  the  longest  upon  the 
record  of  the  church.  It  has  covered  a 
period  of  peculiar  transition.  Very  many  of 
the  fathers  and  mothers  who  were  conver- 
sant with  the  earlier  history  of  the  church 
have  finished  their  earthly  course  during 
these  years.  Marked  changes  have  also 
occurred  in  the  business  condition  of  the 
village  and  town,  and  in  the  character  of 
the  population.  Reorganization  of  the 
academy,  long  the  pride  of  the  town,  has 
also  been  effected  during  this  time,  and  a 
school  brought  up  to  the  efficiency  and 
success  of  its  palmiest  days.  The  pastor  of 
this  church  has  been  for  nearly  eleven  years 
president  of  the  board  of  education,  and 
has  helped  to  secure  the  results  in  the  quality 
and  work  of  the  academy  which  have  been 
accomplished.  Amid  all  these  changes  this 
church  has  kept  steadfastly  on  its  way, 
doing  a  noble  work  and  exerting  an  in- 
fluence that  is  widely  recognized  by  an  intel- 
ligent and  genuine  public  spirit,  by  a  ready 
and  generous  beneficence.  By  a  staunch 
and  evangelical  faith,  and  by  the  endca\or 
to  use  those  methods  that  tend  to  build  up 
and  strengthen  true  Christain  character  in 
young  and  old,  it  has  been  true  to  its  for- 
mer history  and  able  to  maintain  its  honor- 
able position. 

The  review  of  the  record  of  this  church, 
so  closely  and  influentially  identified  with 
the  history  of  the  town,  discloses  several 
causes  which,  under  God's  blessing,  have 
contributed  to  its  notable  strength  and  effi- 
ciency.     It  has  been  blessed  with  a  succes- 


sion of  able  and  consecrated  officers.     Its 

ministers  have  been  faithful  and  ilevoted, 
and  some  of  them  men  of  rare  ability  and 
power.  lis  deacons  have  been  earnest  and 
capable,  and  not  a  few  of  them  have  been 
conspicuous  examples  of  the  truth  that 
"they  that  have  used  the  office  of  a  deacon 
well,  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  degree 
and  great  boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus."  The  church  has  also  enrolled 
upon  the  list  of  its  members  an  unusual 
proportion  of  men  and  women,  strong  in 
their  convictions,  catholic  in  their  spirit, 
devoted  in  their  piety,  generous  in  their 
giving,  and  consecrated  in  their  life  and  ex- 
ample. It  has  from  the  first  taken  a  wise 
and  consistent  interest  in  the  right  training 
of  the  young.  Throughout  the  years  it  has 
watched  over  the  home  nurture  and  school 
instruction  of  the  \-outh  with  sedulous  care. 
It  was  foremost  in  the  sacrifices  which 
brought  the  academy  into  being,  and  which 
have  accompanied  its  history.  Its  Sa,bbath- 
school  was  just  about  coeval  in  date  of 
origin  with  the  academy,  and  it  has  enjoyed 
the  faithful  labors  of  officers  and  teachers 
throughout  these  more  than  si.xty-five 
years.  In  benevolent  contributions  to  car- 
ry forward  the  great  evangelical  movements 
at  home  and  abroad,  this  church  has  an  en- 
viable record.  By  its  organization  of  young 
and  old  for  this  end,  and  by  its  stated  gifts, 
it  has  fostered  the  missionary  spirit,  and 
tried  to  do  its  part  in  fulfilling  our  Lord's 
great  commission  to  his  followers.  For 
man)-  years  there  has  been  upon  the  whole 
a  steady  increase  in  the  amount  of  such 
benefactions,  till  for  the  last  decade,  under 
the  faithful  care  of  Dr.  S.  C.  Webb,  they 
have  averaged  over  $i,6oo  per  year.  The 
social  meetings  have  from  the  first  been 
both  the  evidence  and  the  aid  of  genuine 
spiritual  life.  The  Thursday  p.  m.  meet- 
ings, already  spoken  of,  and  the  young  peo- 
ples' meetings  have  contributed  greatly  to 


Town  of  Homer. 


229 


the  efficiency  and  growth  of  the  church. 
More  than  a  score  of  the  sons  of  the  church 
have  entered  the  ministry,  and  many  of 
these  in  missionary  fields  at  home  and 
abroad,  or  in  important  pastorates,  have 
wrought  ably  in  the  Master's  name.  About 
2,500  persons  have  been  enrolled  as  mem- 
bers of  the  church.  Its  greatest  numerical 
strength  was  during  the  pastorates  of  Mr. 
Fessenden  and  Dr.  Priest.  According  to 
the  report  of  1883,  its  membership  now 
numbers  405  persons. 

Reviewing  the  notable  history  of  this 
church,  who  can  fail  to  be  impressed  with 
the  thought  of  the  breadth,  imjjortance  and 
duration  of  its  direct  and  indirect  influence. 
From  this  quiet,  rural  town,  by  its  aid, 
streams  of  blessing  have  flowed  out  and  on, 
whose  renewing  and  refreshing  power  has 
been  felt  near  and  far,  and  whose  results  for 
human  good  only  eternity  can  disclose.  If 
"they  who  direct  an  age's  intellect  are  more 
potent  than  they  who  do  its  deeds,"  cer- 
tainly the  work  of  a  church  like  this,  which 
has  done  so  much  to  direct  the  intellect, 
inspire  the  faith,  cultivate  the  character  and 
shape  the  life  of  so  man\',  may  claim  an  im- 
portance and  grandeur  which  words  cannot 
fulh*  portray. 

The  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. — Mem- 
oranda from  which  to  make  a  history  of  this 
church  is  exceedingly  meagre.  The  church 
records  have  been  mislaid  or  lost,  and  but 
few  facts  are  now  attainable.  The  first  organ- 
ization was  formed  at  the  comparativelj-  re- 
cent date  of  1833.  The  Methodists  of 
Homer  were  formerly  connected  with  the 
church  in  Cortland,  and  thirteen  of  the  orig- 
inal members  of  the  Homer  church  were 
from  that  society.  To  these  were  added  six- 
teen others,  making  the  first  membership  of 
the  Homer  church  twenty-nine,  a  little  band 
which  has  grown  into  a  flou&ishing  society. 
The  first  public  services  were  held  in  the 
second   story   of  the   public   school-house, 


which  was  afterward  purchased,  repaired, 
and  transformed  into  a  church.  This  was 
used  until  the  year  1841,  when  a  new  church 
was  built  at  a  cost  of  about  $2,400 ;  Rev. 
George  Parsons  was  the  pastor  at  that  time. 
In  1864  the  church  was  enlarged  and  re- 
paired, during  the  pastorate  of  Albert  L. 
York.  Again,  in  the  year  1881,  an  addi- 
tion was  made  to  the  church  building  by 
raising  it  and  putting  under  it  a  basement. 
It  was  also  refitted  and  furnished,  at  a  cost 
of  about  $4,400  ;  Rev.  R.  C.  F'ox  was  then 
pastor. 

The  first  trustees  of  the  church  were 
Caleb  Cook,  David  Baker  and  Samuel 
Lane. 

The  successive  pastors,  with  the  years 
of  their  service,  have  been  the  follow- 
ing: — 

Nelson  Rounds,  1834;  Rufus  Stoddard, 
1835-36;  John  Crickman,  1837;  John  E. 
Robie,  1838;  E.  L.  Wadsworth,  1839; 
John  Nason,  1840;  George  Parsons,  1841- 
42;  William  Bixby,  1843-44;  John  E. 
Robie,  1845;  E.  G.  Bush,  1846;  Z.  D. 
Paddock,  1847-48;  William  N.  Cobb, 
1849;  J.  Hartwell,  1850-51  ;  S.  H.  Brown, 
1852-53;  Isaac  Foster,  1854;  W.  H.  Wil- 
lis, 1855-56;  H.  Gee,  1857-58;  H.  S. 
Richardson,  1859-60;  J.  L.  Wells,  1861- 
62 ;  A.  L.  York,  1 863-64 ;  Alexander 
Hale,  1865;  D.  R.  Carrier,  1866-67;  A. 
M.  Lake,  1868-69;  A.  N.  Damon,  1870- 
72;  J.  V.  Benham,  1873-74;  M.  S.  Leet, 
1875  ;  S.  Ball,  1876-78;  R.  C.  Fox,  1879- 
81  ;  M.  S.  Leet,  1882-84. 

Trustees  —  S.  F.  Salisbury,  ¥.  Pierce,  J. 
Wilber,  W.  H.  H.  Blaney,  E.  J.  Bockes,  J.  J. 
Woodruff,  J.  J.  Arnold,  Warren  Salisbury, 
Charles  Joslyn. 

Stewards  —  S.  F.  Salisburj-,  J.  J.  Wood- 
ruff", Charles  Joslyn,  M.  J.  Pratt,  J.  J.  Ar- 
nold, Warren  Salisburj-,  H.  D.  Allen,  H.  C. 
Wildey. 

Local  elder — L.  J.  W'heelock. 


230 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Local  preacher — E.  D.  Tcrpcnning. 

Class  leaders  —  F.  G.  Williams,  John 
Van  Denberg,  J.  J.  Woodruff,  J.  J.  Arnold, 
G.  N.  Bryant,  K.  N.  Warfield, 

The  congregation,  at  present  under  the 
charge  of  Rev.  M.  S.  Leet,  is  in  a  flourish- 
ing condition,  and  the  membership  is  some- 
thing o\'cr  two  hundred. 

Calvary  Church.  —  The  first  service  of 
the  Episcopal  Church  within  the  limits  of 
the  present  town  of  Homer,  was  held  in 
tiie  Congregational  meeting-house,  bj-  the 
Rev.  Reuben  Hubbard,  rector  of  St.  James's 
Church,  Uanbury,  Conn.,  in  June,  1813. 
Mr.  Hubbard  was  visiting  relatives  then 
living  here  and  had  many  kinsfolk  among 
the  early  settlers  of  the  town,  and  on  one 
or  more  Sundays  in  June,  18 13,  was  in- 
vited by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Walker,  the  pastor 
of  the  Congregational  Church  to  officiate 
in  his  pulpit.  While  \isiting  here  Mr. 
Hubbard  called  on  a  family  in  the  western 
part  of  the  town  by  the  name  of  Terrill, 
and  baptized  several  children.  This  was 
probably  the  first  time  a  sacrament  of  the 
Episcopal  Church  was  ever  administered  in 
this  county. 

The  next  ten  years  came  and  went  with 
no  record  of  visitation  of  any  clergyman 
of  this  church,  except  that  Bishop  Hogarth 
passed  through  the  county  and  preached, 
but  whether  at  Homer  or  Cortland  is  not 
known. 

In  1823  Mr.  Hubbard  again  visited  Ho- 
mer and  on  the  evening  of  February  23d 
preached  in  the  Congregational  Church,  by 
invitation  of  Rev.  Mr.  Keep,  then  its  pas- 
tor. In  1828  Mr.  Hubbard  again  came  to 
Homer  and  again  on  March  2d  preached  in 
the  Congregational  Church,  b\-  invitation 
of  Rev.  Mr.  Keep. 

In  February,  1831,  Rev.  Henry  Gregory, 
then  missionary  at  Moravia  and  Genoa, 
visited  Homer  and  held  service  on  Monday 
evening,  February  14th,  in  the  upper  room 


of  the  old  academy,  and  shortlj'  afterward 
arrangements  were  made  by  which  Mr. 
Gregory  was  to  officiate  at  Homer  one- 
third  of  the  time.  It  was  soon  determined 
to  organize  a  parish  and  due  notice 
ha\ing  been  gi\'cn  according  to  law,  on 
Monday,  June  6th,  1831,  Calvary  parish 
was  regularly  organized  by  the  election  of 
Daniel  Glover  and  Augustus  Donnelly, 
wardens ;  Lyman  Kendall,  John  C.  Mar- 
vin, Asa  Austin,  Am'mi  Beers,  Hiram  Bliss, 
Joel  Hubbard,  Marsena  Ballard,  Albert  F. 
Boland,  vestrj-men.  On  December  5th, 
1831,  the  first  meeting  of  the  vestry  with 
reference  to  building  a  church  was  held, 
and  on  June  21st,  1832,  the  corner-stone  of 
Calvary  Church  was  laid  ;  on  Advent  Sun- 
day, December  2d,  1832,  the  church  was 
occupied  for  the  first  time.  The  Rev. 
Thomas  Meacham  officiated  for  several 
months  on  the  Sundays  when  Rev.  Mr. 
Gregory  was  absent,  and  on  February  14th, 
1 833,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gregory,  having  resigned 
his  charge  at  Moravia  and  Genoa,  became 
rector  of  the  parish  and  continued  as  such 
until  November  loth,  1835,  when  here- 
signed  to  become  a  missionary  to  the  In- 
dians at  Green  Bay.  The  Rev.  Charles 
Jones  succeeded  him  and  remained  in  charge 
of  the  parish  till  October  23d,  1836,  when 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Gregory  was  invited  to  take 
the  rectorship  again,  at  a  salary  of  $500 
and  expenses  of  his  return.  June  13th, 
1837,  Mr.  Gregory  reached  town  and  re- 
sumed his  charge.  In  September,  1838, 
Mr.  Gregory  was  granted  leave  of  absence 
for  one  year,  in  order  that  he  might  go  as 
missionary  to  the  Indians  at  Fort  Leaven- 
worth, Kansas.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Ogle  acted 
as  minister  of  the  parish  during  the  rector's 
absence.  In  November,  1 840,  Mr.  Gregory 
was  c^^lled  to  the  rectorship  of  St.  Paul's 
Church,  SyraQjse,  and  offered  his  resigna- 
tion to  the  vestry,  which  was  regretfully 
accepted.      In   Januarj-,    J  841,    Re\'.    E.  B. 


Town  of  Homer. 


231 


Foote,  of  Newark  College,  Delaware,  was 
invited  to  become  the  rector  of  the  parish, 
and  shortly  after  he  accepted  the  charge, 
which,  however,  he  retained  but  two  years, 
when  he  was  succeeded  b)-  Re\'.  Samuel 
Goodale,  who  remained  as  rector  until  July 
I st,  1 846,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Rev. 
G.  M.  Skinner,  who  remained  until  the  fall 
of  1848,  when  the  Rev.  Charles  E.  Phelps 
became  rector  and  continued  as  such  until 
August,  185  I.  He  was  succeeded  b\^  the 
Rev.  Reuben  Hubbard,  who  remained  three 
years  and  w  as  succeeded  by  the  Revs.  Geo. 
L.  Foote  and  H.  V.  Gardner,  as  ministers 
in  charge  of  Calvary  Church  and  the  out- 
lying parishes  of  Cortland,  McLean  and 
Tru.xton.  In  1857  Rev.  Peyton  Gallagher 
became  rector.  He  was  followed  b\'  the 
Rev.  C.  S.  Percival,  who  resigned  in  the 
spring  of  1864.  In  the  fall  of  1865,  after 
an  interval  of  more  than  a  year  without  a 
service,  the  church  was  opened  and  services 
were  resumed.  Lewis  B.  Henry,  esq.,  of 
New  York  City,  having  returned  to  this  vil- 
lage, acted  for  a  time  as  lay  reader,  and 
through  his  influence  among  church  people 
in  New  York,  funds  were  raised  by  which 
the  interior  of  the  building  was  refitted, 
and  in- April,  1866,  Rev.  A.  W.  Cornell,  of 
Jamaica,  L.  I.,  was  called  to  the  rectorship. 
Mr.  Cornell  remained  in  charge  of  the  par- 
ish until  the  sunmier  of  I  87  I.  From  that 
time  until  1874  only  occasional  services 
were  held  by  visiting  clergymen.  In  the 
fall  of  1874  Rev.  J.  W.  H.  Weibel  was 
called  to  the  rectorship  and  remained  nearly 
two  years,  since  which  time  services  have 
been  held  at  very  infrequent  intervals,  until 
the  present  year,  when  Rev.  A.  D.  Allen, 
missionary  in  charge,  has  established  regular 
and  stated  services. 

LITTLE    YORK. 

This  hamlet  is  situated  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  town  of  Homer,  on  the  line  of 


the  Syracuse  and  Binghamton  railroad  ;  it 
is  a  small  place  containing  one  grist-mill,  a 
store,  hotel  and  about  twenty  houses. 

The  early  settlers  on  this  lot  (No.  6) 
where  Jabez  Cushman,  who  was  one  of  the 
very  first ;  William  and  I.  Blashfield,  and 
Oren  Cravath.  Cushman  was  probably  from 
Massachusetts,  and  erected  the  mills,  the 
saw- mill  being  built  first.  This  mill  was  in 
use  in  1813,  when  Thomas  Howard  removed 
to  Preble,  and  ma)'  possibly  have  been  the 
one  in  which  the  lumber  was  sawed  for  the 
first  frame  houses  built  in  Preble  before 
1806.  Mr.  Cushman  also  built  the  carding- 
mill  at  this  place,  in  an  early  period.  Daniel 
Radway  probably  purchased  it  of  him.  In 
the  Cortland  Observer  of  December  28th, 
1832,  we  find  the  following:  — 

"  The  subscribers  having  taken  the  woolen  fac- 
tory in  Little  York,  of  Mr.  Daniel  Radway,  will 
manufacture  cloths,  cassimeres,  satinets  and  flan- 
nels as  low  as  any  other  establishment  in  the 
county.  They  will  manufacture  either  on  .shares 
or  by  the  yard,  all  colors  except  indigo  blue. 
Also  carding  and  cloth-dressing  at  the  usual 
prices.  The  best  of  machinery  for  manufactur- 
ing will  be  put  into  operation.  Being  all  expe- 
rienced workmen,  they  flatter  themselves  that 
they  will  give  general  satisfaction. 

"  Ralph  Palin, 
" Joseph  Bradley, 

"  WiLLL'VM  TaVLOR. 

"  Homer,  June  20,  1832." 

This  business  continued  prosperous  for 
many  years,  Jedediah  Barber  owning  it  at 
one  time ;  but  it  gradually  declined,  as  was 
the  case  with  all  similar  factories  in  the  vi- 
cinity, and  the  building  is  now  used  as  a 
general  shop  by  B.  J.  Salisbury. 

The  grist-mill  was  erected  soon  after  the 
building  of  the  factory ;  but  it  changed 
hands  a  number  of  times.  J.  E.  Gushing 
bought  one-half  of  it  in  1840  and  contin- 
ued in  it  until  i860;  Gideon  Curtis  owned 
the  other  half  Anthony  Kenyon,  Gustavus 
Lyman,   whose    name  was  changed  at  his 


232 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


request  by  the  legislature  to  Nathaniel  Brad- 
ford, and  others  owned  the  mill.  Mudgc 
&  Son  have  owned  it  for  about  twelve  years 
past  and  it  now  does  a  good  class  of  cus- 
tom work  only.  Mr.  Powers  Mudge  has  the 
entire  management  of  the  mill. 

It  is  probable  that  the  early  trading  at 
Little  York  was  done  by  Jabez  Cushman 
(but  nothing  very  definite  regarding  it  is 
known)  until  the  arrival  of  Isaac  Otis  and 
Gideon  Curtis  in  1830.  They  had  an  in- 
terest in  the  mill  property  and  probably 
had  a  small  store  in  connection  with  their 
other  interests.  Curtis  was  an  intelligent 
Quaker  and  was  Member  of  the  Assembly 
in  1829.  Mr.  Otis  removed  to  the  West. 
Mr.  Curtis  continued  the  store  from  1834 
to  1846.  In  1844  J.  E.  Cushing  joined 
with  Curtis  in  the  store  and  in  1 846  bought 
out  his  partner  ;  since  that  time  he  has  con- 
ducted the  business  alone.  The  post-office 
has  always  been  kept  in  the  store,  the  pro- 
prietors of  which  have  been  the  postmasters. 

A  public  house  has  been  kept  in  Little 
York  from  an  early  period.  Mr.  Cushing 
first  kept  a  boarding-house  during  his  stay 
in  the  place,  and  in  1833  John  L.  Wilcox 
built  a  private  house  which  he  afterwards 
transformed  into  a  tavern  ;  this  was  subse- 
quently burned.  The  present  hotel  was 
erected  in  1875,  by  Chas.  Foster.  Charles 
Gay  took  possession  of  the  property  in  1 883. 

The  shop  for  the  manufacture  of  churns 
and  chopping  knives  was  established  in  1 883, 
by  Isbell  &  Cushing.  Their  knives  are 
made  from  the  best  Sheffield  steel,  are  cor- 
rugated and  reversible,  and  promise  to  at- 
tain a  large  sale.  They  also  manufacture 
the  celebrated  rotary  gang  churn. 

Of  the  early  settlers  on  this  lot  one  of  the 
most  prominent  was  Oren  Cravath,  a  noted 
abolitionist  and  one  of  the  foremost  sup- 
porters of  the  "underground  railroad,"  an 
organization  engaged  in  helping  southern 
slaves  to  attain  their  freedom. 


In  order  to  secure  the  stoppage  of  the 
railroad  trains  at  Little  York  (which  was  at 
first  refused  by  the  companj)  the  citizens 
built  a  small  frame  depot,  the  use  of  which 
they  gave  to  Frank  Donegan,  an  industri- 
ous employee  of  the  road.  On  the  morn- 
ing of  May  15th,  1877,  while  Mrs.  Donegan 
was  out  milking  her  cow,  the  building 
caught  fire  ;  it  was  a  period  of  drought,  and 
before  assistance  could  be  rendered  the  little 
structure  was  burned  to  the  ground,  and  the 
lives  of  five  children,  the  oldest  of  whom  was 
but  nine  years,  were  sacrificed.  The  people 
of  Little  York  rendered  all  possible  assist- 
ance to  the  afflicted  family  and  immediately 
rebuilt  the  present  depot. 

EAST    HOMER. 

This  is  a  small  hamlet  situated  on  the  east 
branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  river,  and  con- 
tains a  hotel,  Methodist  church,  a  store, 
two  blacksmith  shops  and  a  carpenter  and 
wagon  shop. 

The  first  settlement  made  on  this  site 
was  in  1797,  by  John  Albright,  a  Revolu- 
tionary soldier  who,  for  his  services  in  that 
struggle,  was  assigned  a  bounty  lot,  which 
he  resolved  to  set  out  in  search  of,  thinking 
he  would  dispose  of  it  and  return  to  New 
York.  He  had  married  and  had  four  daugh- 
ters. Mrs.  Albright  had  a  different  object  in 
view,  and,  as  sometimes  happens,  her  plans 
were  carried  out.  She  resolved  to  accom- 
pany her  husband  on  his  expedition  into 
the  wilderness,  and  if  they  succeeded  in  lo- 
cating their  lot,  to  settle  upon  it  and  make 
it  their  home.  The  family  left  New  York 
with  a  span  of  horses  and  wagon  and  pro- 
ceeded as  far  as  Johnstown,  then  in  Mont- 
gomery county,  where  they  left  their  wagon 
and  children  in  the  care  of  friends  and  pro- 
ceeded on  horseback,  arriving  in  Homer  in 
the  year  above  noted. 

They  succeeded  in  finding  their  lot  (No. 
29),  built  a  log  cabin  on  a  small  piece  of 


SU.AS  BLANCHARI). 


Town  of  Homer. 


233 


ground  which  they  cleared,  returned  to 
Johnstown  and  brought  their  family  and 
Httle  outfit  to  their  forest  home.  Upon 
this  lot  is  situated  the  little  village  of  East 
Homer.  Mr.  Albright's  house  stood  a  few 
rods  distant  from  the  site  of  the  Methodist 
chapel.  From  Charles  Kingsbury's  pub- 
lished reminiscences  of  Homer,  we  copy  the 
text  of  the  original  deed  which  secured  to 
Mr.  Albright  his  land  :  — 

"The  deed  'grants  and  confirms  unto  John 
Albright  all  that  tract  of  land  lying  and  being  in 
the  county  of  Montgomery,  and  in  the  township 
of  Homer,  known  as  lot  No.  29,  containing  si.x 
hundred  acres,  with  all  the  rights  and  appur- 
tenances to  the  same  belonging;  excepting  and 
reserving  to  ourselves  all  gold  and  silver  mines, 
and  also  five  acres  of  every  one  hundred  acres 
of  the  said  lot  of  land  for  highways ;  on  condi- 
tion that  within  the  term  of  seven  years  from  the 
first  of  January  next  ensuing  the  date  thereof, 
there  shall  be  one  actual  settlement  made  on  the 
tract  or  lot  of  land  hereby  granted.  Otherwise, 
these,  our  letters  patent  to  the  estate  hereby 
granted  shall  become  void.'  " 

This  deed  is  dated  at  the  city  of  New 
York  the  eighth  day  of  July,  1790,  and 
passed  the  secretary's  office  on  the  4th  of 
the  following  September.  It  is  quite  a  cu- 
riosity, and  bears  the  old-fashioned  heavy 
detached  seal  of  the  state,  which  is  made  of 
wax  enclosed  in  paper  and  tied  with  a  stout 
string  to  the  parchment. 

After  Mr.  Albright's  settlement  in  the 
wilderness  he  experienced  some  trouble  and 
several  narrow  escapes  from  wild  animals. 
On  one  occasion,  after  having  killed  and 
dressed  a  pig,  he  carried  some  of  the  pieces 
to  a  brook  a  few  rods  away,  when  a  wolf, 
which  had  scented  the  blood,  bounded  on 
the  scene.  Mr.  Albright  placed  himself  in- 
side the  fence  surrounding  the  yard ;  but 
none  too  soon,  for  the  wolf  was  close  to  the 
fence  on  the  other  side.  When  Mr.  Al- 
bright assumed  the  offensive  from  behind 
the  fence  the  cowardly  brute  disappeared  in 
the  forest. 


On  another  occasion  Mr.  Albright  started 
in  search  of  his  cows.  He  soon  learned  by 
the  sound  of  their  bell  that  they  were  in 
the  woods  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
He  forded  the  river,  but  as  night  came  on 
the  sound  of  the  bell  ceased,  the  animals 
having  lain  down.  As  he  stood  under  the 
branches  of  a  tree,  gun  in  hand,  listening 
for  some  sound  which  would  indicate  the 
whereabouts  of  tiie  cows,  he  heard  a  move- 
ment in  the  boughs  of  the  tree  directly  over 
his  head.  Immediately  a  large  bear  de- 
scended the  tree,  reaching  the  ground  near 
where  Mr.  Albright  stood,  and  he  shot  him. 
Before  he  had  finished  reloading  his  gun  a 
second  bear  came  down  from  the  same  tree 
and  escaped.  The  third  bear  then  came 
down  and  was  shot,  and  while  Mr.  Albright 
was  reloading  two  more  of  the  animals  de- 
scended from  the  tree  and  disappeared  in 
the  woods;  thus  he  killed  two  out  of  five 
bears,  in  the  darkness. 

A  Mr.  Holford  was  probably  the  second 
inhabitant  of  east  Homer ;  he  built  his  cabin 
for  the  tiiTie  being  on  Mr.  Albright's  land. 
On  one  occasion  when  Mr.  Albright  was 
absent  fropi  home,  Mrs.  Holford  heard  a 
disturbance  near  the  house,  where  a  pig  was 
shut  in  a  pen.  On  going  to  the  door  she 
discovered  a  bear  of  such  size  and  strength 
that  he  took  the  pig  of  135  pounds  weight 
and  carried  him  bodily  over  the  fence. 
Mrs.  Holford  comprehended  the  situation 
at  a  glance  and  hastening  into  the  house,  she 
grasped  the  loaded  gun,  ran  out  and  fired  at 
the  bear  with  such  excellent  effect  that  he 
fell  dead  in  his  tracks.  The  pig  was  un- 
harmed. 

An  early  settler  at  east  Homer  was  James 
Smith,  who  came  to  that  localitj-  in  1798 
and  built  a  log  cabin  near  the  southwest 
corner  of  the  lot,  a  few  rods  from  the  pres- 
ent road,  on  the  southeast  side  and  a  short 
distance  from  Mt.  Etam.  Whence  he  came 
is    not  now  known,  but  he    spent    se\'eral 


234 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


years  of  his  life  here  and  liad  two  sons,  one 
of  whom,  Cornelius  Smith,  lived  to  an  ad- 
vanced age  and  passed  his  entire  life  in  the 
town. 

The  first  tavern  in  the  vicinity  of  East 
Homer  (on  lot  29)  was  built  b}-  George  W. 
Samson,  who  removed  to  the  place  in  181 2. 
He  erected  his  buildings  on  the  steep  hill- 
side, excavating  for  that  purpose,  and 
opened  a  hotel  in  1825,  to  which  premises 
he  gave  the  name  of  Mt.  Etam.  From  a 
spring  on  the  side  of  the  hill  he  brought  ex- 
cellent water  in  a  pipe,  for  domestic  uses 
and  to  suppl}-  a  reservoir  at  the  roadside 
for  travelers.  Near  at  hand  he  set  up  a  post, 
on  the  side  of  which  and  protected  from  the 
weather  by  a  glass,  was  posted  a  paper  on 
which  was  inscribed,  in  one  of  Mr.  Samson's 
poetic  effusions,  the  invitation  of  the  foun- 
tain, as  follows :  — 

"  Come,  traveler,  slake  thy  parching  thinst, 
And  drive  away  dull  care  ; 
Thou  needst  not  broach  thy  little  purse, 
For  I  am  free  as  air. 

"  My  source  is  on  the  mountain  side. 
My  course  is  to  the  sea ; 
Then  drink  till  thou  art  satisfied, 
Yea,  drink,  for  I  am  free." 

Mr.  Samson  resided  at  Mt.  Etam  for  a 
number  of  years,  but  finally  sold  the  prem- 
ises to  Peter  Westerman,  and  removed  to  a 
hotel  in  Preble. 

In  the  year  i8o6,  or  1807,  Benjamin  Goff, 
an  industrious  laboring  man,  came  to  East 
Homer  from  Vermont.  He  married  the 
eldest  daughter  of  John  Albright  and  dur- 
ing the  life  of  his  first  wife  resided  on  the 
eastern  side  of  Mr.  Albright's  lot.  He  af- 
terward married  the  youngest  sister  of  his 
first  wife;  he  kept  the  tavern  from  1831  to 
1837,  '■''  the  same  house  now  kept  by  Mrs. 
L.  R.  Rose,  to  which  locality  he  removed 
when  Mr.  Albright  made  a  division  of  his 
property.  Luther  R.  Rose  was  Mr.  Goff's 
son-in-law;   he   kept  the    hotel    from    1840 


until  his  death  in  1881,  and  it  is  continued 
by  his  widow.'  Travel,  however,  has  been 
comparatively  light  through  this  place  since 
the  completion  of  the  Utica,  Ithaca  and  El- 
mira  railroad  through  the  valley,  as  else- 
where described.  Formerly  the  village  and 
vicinity  was  given  an  appearance  of  thrift 
and  business  by  the  passing  teams  engaged 
in  the  transportation  of  goods,  and  by  stages, 
all  of  which  made  East  Homer  a  stopping 
place  for  rest  or  refreshment.  Tavern-keep- 
ing at  such  points  was  then  a  profitable  bus- 
iness ;  but  like  many  other  small  villages 
located  between  those  of  greater  size,  the 
building  of  the  railroad  carried  awaj-  the 
larger  share  of  its  trade  to  other  points. 

Trade  and  Manufactures.  —  Benjamin 
Goff  was  the  first  citizen  of  East  Homer  to 
engage  in  a  manufacturing  industry.  He 
began  early  in  the  manufacture  of  rakes  and 
other  minor  agricultural  implements  and 
eventually  carried  on  quite  a  profitable  bus- 
iness. He  subsequently  built  a  saw-mill, 
which  is  now  in  the  possession  of  his  heirs. 

The  present  blacksmith  and  wagon  shop 
was  erected  b\'  Henry  Meeker  some  years 
prior  to  the  last  war.  The  structure  was 
originally  built  for  a  grist-mill  and  was  used 
as  such  for  a  time.  It  was  finally  sold  to 
Leroy  Smith  and  others,  and  at  last  passed 
into  possession  of  D.  D.  Locke,  who  changed 
it  to  a  wagon  shop  about  the  year  i860. 
S.  B.  Hoag  took  possession  of  the  property 
in  1876,  and  is  now  manufacturing  about 
forty  wagons  annually. 

Jabez  Haight  began  blacksmithing  in 
East  Homer  at  a  very  early  da)-,  and  fol- 
lowed the  trade  for  over  forty  years.  His 
son,  George  Haight  is  a  skilled  taxidermist 
and  has  become  eminent  in  that  \\ork. 

Physicians.  —  Dr.  Sheldon  Hinman  came 
to  this  place  in    1864  and  is  the  only  phy- 

'  It  is  woilhy  of  remark  that  at  one  time  Mr.  GofTs 
father  ami  mother,  ami  liis  wife's  parents  all  resided  with 
him,  making  four  occupants  of  one  dwelling  all  of  whom 
were  lietween  the  ages  of  82  and  89  years. 


Town  of  Homer. 


235 


sician  now  in  East  Homer.  He  is  of  the 
homceopatliic  school,  a  Ucentiate  of  the 
Cortland  County  Medical  Society.  He 
succeeded  Dr.  Barris,  who  was  eclectic  in  his 
practice.      He  was  the  first  physician  here. 

Post-Office. — The  post-office  of  East 
Homer  was  probably  first  kept  by  William 
Haight.  He  came  to  the  village  in  the 
year  1809  and  was  for  several  years  an  em- 
inent preacher  in  the  Methodist  Church. 
He  married  the  second  daughter  of  Mr. 
Albright,  became  a  drunkard,  forfeited  his 
license,  but  afterward  reformed  and  did  use- 
ful work  for  the  church.  William  Bennett 
afterward  took  the  post-office,  and  was  the 
first  to  establish  a  store.  Mrs.  Bennett  fol- 
lowed the  trade  until  1883,  when  it  passed 
into  the  hands  of  the  present  proprietor, 
W.  R.  Woodward.  Mrs.  Melissa  Haight 
now  has  charge  of  the  post-office. 

The  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. — This 
church  had  its  beginning  in  the  humble 
home  of  Mr.  Albright,  of  which  denomina- 
tion he  was  an  exemplary  member;  his 
house  was  the  place  of  worship  for  quite  a 
period.  The  present  church  building  is  an 
old  structure,  the  main  part  having  been 
erected  in  1841,  since  which  time  it  has 
been  somewhat  improved  and  repaired.  It 
was  dedicated  in  1842.  Rev.  H.  Hawley 
was  the  first  pastor.  The  present  member- 
ship is  between  sixty  and  seventy.  The 
Rev.  T.  F.  Harris  came  here  from  Wood- 
stock in  1883  and  assumed  charge  of  the 
church;  he  is  also  superintendent  of  the 
Sabbath-school.  The  present  trustees  are 
Abram  Grit'fith,  Pardon  Lyon,  Levi  Klock 
and  Andrew  Briggs. 

Hibbard's  cheese  and  butter  factory  is 
situated  about  a  mile  and  a  half  north  of 
East  Homer.  The  building  was  erected  in 
1866,  and  is  30  by  120  feet,  two  stories 
high.  Modern  appliances  have  been  put 
in  for  the  perfect  manufacture  of  butter 
and  cheese,  and  a  larwe  business  is  done. 


EAST    RIVER. 

This  is  a  hamlet  of  a  dozen  houses  on  the 
line  of  the  Utica,  Ithaca  and  Elmira  rail- 
road, about  four  miles  from  Cortland  village. 
James  Horton  was  an  early  resident  at  this 
place  and  carried  on  a  tannery.  He  was 
thrifty  in  his  business  and  secured  a  compe- 
tency. His  tannery  buildings  were  once 
burned  ;  but  he  rebuilt  them  and  finally 
disposed  of  his  real  estate  to  Conrad  Kleine, 
who  continued  the  business  for  several 
}'ears  on  a  much  larger  scale.  The  tannery 
was  subsequenth'  burned  again  and  was  not 
rebuilt. 

The  first  saw-mill  erected  at  East  River 
was  located  near  the  present  P^ast  River 
Mills,  and  was  built  by  Daniel  Crandall.  He 
had  purchased  and  moved  to  lot  No.  38  in 
1800,  and  built  for  himself  a  house  on  the 
site  now  occupied  by  the  mill.  It  was  a 
characteristic  pioneer  structure,  apparently 
not  adapted  for  occupancy  by  human  be- 
ings; but  Mr.  Crandall  was  a  man  of  in- 
dustry, sound  judgment  and  integrit}',  and 
he  prospered  accordingly.  In  company 
with  Saniuel  Griggs  he  finally  erected  a 
grist-mill,  which  did  a  good  business  for  a 
number  of  years.  He  also  erected  other 
buildings  on  his  farm  and  at  the  time  of  his 
death  (1857)  had  a  large  and  excellent  house 
there. 

The  water  power  at  this  site  is  a  very 
valuable  one.  In  18 16  Eli  Carpenter  came 
from  Tolland,  Conn.,  purchased  a  share  in 
the  water  privilege  and  lands  contiguous 
thereto  and  put  up  a  fulling-mill  and  facili- 
ties for  dyeing  and  dressing  cloth,  with 
carding  machine,  etc.  This  establishment 
was  very  prosperous  for  several  years  and 
the  business  was  further  extended  by  Mr. 
Carpenter  in  the  manufacture  of  carpets  of 
brilliant  colors,  d)-ed  by  himself  In  the 
mean  time  Mr.  Crandall's  mills  had  become 
somewhat  impaired  by  age  and   about  the 


236 


History  of  CoRXLANn  County. 


year  1835  or  1836,  he  became  the  sole 
owner  of  the  site  and  water  power,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  erect  new  mills.  The  business 
revived,  but  the  domestic  manufacture  of 
cloth  declined  yearly  and  was  eventually 
abandoned.  The  mills  erected  by  Mr.  Car- 
penter are  still  standin<^,  but  have  been 
much  enlar<^ed  and  changed  to  meet  the 
growing  needs  of  the  vicinity.  A  large  bus- 
iness is  done  in  the  manufacture  of  flour  and 
feed  and  in  the  production  of  lumber.  Al- 
fred Utley  succeeded  Mr.  Carpenter  in  the 
mills,  following  whom  came  the  present 
proprietors,  the  Holmes  brothers  in  the 
saw-mill,  and  the  Cortland  Wagon  Company 
in  the  grist-mills,  which  are  managed  for 
the  company  by  Wm.  H.  Moore.  Mr.  Car- 
penter was  a  man  of  energy  and  business 
ability  and  prospered  in  whatever  he  under- 


took. He  was  justice  of  the  peace  a  num- 
ber of  times,  and  died  in   1863. 

Hosea  Sprague,  a  native  of  Brimfield, 
Mass.,  came  to  East  River  with  his  brother- 
in-law,  Samuel  Sherman,  in  I  82  I.  He  was 
a  good  mechanic,  a  carpenter  and  joiner,  at 
which  he  worked  until  the  year  1850,  when 
he  settled  in  Homer  village  and  retired  from 
business.  Mr.  Sprague  was  one  of  the  pio- 
neer carpenters  of  the  town  and  has  helped 
to  erect  many  of  the  early  buildings  in  this 
part  of  the  county.  He  still  lives  in  Homer 
village  and  enjoys  good  health  at  the  age  of 
ninety-three  years. 

The  mill  built  by  Asa  Austin  passed  into 
the  hands  of  Samuel  Summers ;  then  to 
Isaac  and  Wm.  Miller ;  then  to  John  Ham- 
mond, who  sold  it  to  Samuel  Byram,  the 
present  owner. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


HISTORY  OF  TIIK  TOWN  OF  CORTLANDVILLF.. 


Tllh^  town  of  Cortlandville .  was  not 
formed  until  the  iith  day  of  April, 
1829,  at  which  time  it  was  set  off  from  the 
old  military  township  of  Homer  (No.  19) 
of  which  it  comprises  the  southern  half; 
two  lots  from  the  town  of  Virgil  have  been 
added  to  Cortlandville  since  its  first  forma- 
tion. It  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  the 
town  of  Homer;  on  the  east  by  Solon  and 
Freetown;  on  the '  south  by  Virgil  and 
Freetown,  and  on  the  west  by  Tompkins 
county.  It  is  nearl}-  centrally  located  be- 
tween the  northern  and  southern  county 
boundaries,  and  upon  its  western  border. 
Its  surface  is  sufficiently  varied  to  give  it  a 
picturesque  aspect,  being  made  up  of  lofty 
hills  in  the  eastern  and  southern  portions, 
gentle  eminences  between  the  eastern  and 
western   branches  of  the  Tioughnioga   river 


and  in  the  central  and  western  portions, 
while  along  the  river  and  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  junction  of  the  two  branches  of  the 
stream  are  broad  level  valleys  that  are  not 
excelled  for  beauty  and  productiveness. 
Upon  the  broad  plain  which  stretches  away 
southward  and  westward  from  the  locality 
where  the  waters  of  the  two  river  branches 
start  southward  towards  the  sea,  seven  dif- 
ferent valleys  of  varying  widths  converge 
from  as  many  different  points  of  the  com- 
pass. On  this  plain  has  grown  the  beautiful 
village  of  Cortland.  The  surrounding  hills, 
broken  by  these  numerous  valleys;  the 
broad  plain  cleft  by  the  classic  stream  and 
its  swiftly-flowing  tributaries  and  stretching 
away  to  a  distance  of  two  miles  in  either 
direction,  and  the  thriving  village  set  in  the 
midst,  combine  to  form  a  scene  of  rare  nat- 


Town  of  Coktlandville. 


237 


iiral  beaut\-  when  viewed  from  any  adjacent 
eminence,  and  a  site  worthy  of  a  great  city. 

The  soil  of  the  town  of  Cortlandville  is 
composed  of  a  rich  alluvial  deposit  along 
the  \alleys  of  the  streams,  while  portions  of 
the  ]5lain  in  the  central  part  of  the  town 
and  the  hilly  regions  are  gravelly  and  ar- 
gillaceous loam.  There  is  very  little  of  the 
town  that  is  not  susceptible  of  cultivation, 
but  the  hilly  portions  are,  perhaps,  better 
adapted  for  grazing  than  for  tillage. 

The  town  is  well  watered  and  drained; 
both  the  east  and  west  branches  of  the 
Tioughnioga  flow  through  it,  forming  a 
junction  not  far  from  the  center,  the  main 
stream  then  continuing  southward  to  the 
boundary.  Into  the  river  and  its  branches 
flow  Otter  creek  from  the  west  and  Trout 
creek  from  the  east,  which  are  in  turn  fed  by 
numerous  clear  springs  that  send  their  whole- 
some waters  through  all  parts  of  the  town. 

This  region  was  originally  heavily  tim- 
bered, beech,  maple,  elm  and  hemlock  being 
most  abundant,  and  interspersed  with  ash, 
cherry  and  other  woods.  Much  of  the  site 
of  Cortland  village  was  formerly  covered 
with  a  forest  of  towering  elms. 

Speaking  with  direct  reference  to  the 
boundaries  of  the  town,  John  Miller  and  his 
family  were  the  first  settlers  within  the 
present  limits  of  the  town  of  Cortlandville, 
outside  of  the  extreme  probability  that 
Beebe  and  Todd  built  their  first  habitation 
in  the  town,  as  stated  by  Mr.  Kingsbury, 
in  the  preceding  history  of  the  town  of  Ho- 
mer. Mr.  Miller  made  his  permanent  set- 
tlement in  the  spring,  1792,  having  explored 
the  valleys  of  the  Tioughnioga  branches  the 
previous  season,  with  Amos  Todd  and  Jo- 
seph Beebe.  He  had  two  sons,  of  one  of 
whom  but  little  is  known  ;  but  he  probably 
died  at  an  early  age.  The  other  was  Daniel 
Miller,  afterwards  well  known  throughout 
the  county  as  "  Deacon  "  and  "  General  " 
Miller. 


The  family  settled  on  lot  56,  where  they 
erected  a  rude  shanty  at  the  junction  of  the 
two  roads  now  leading  from  the  villages  of 
Homer  and  Cortland  to  Truxton,  and  just  in 
front  of  the  present  residence  of  T.  Mason 
Loring.  Daniel  Miller  was  about  eighteen 
years  old  at  the  time  of  their  arrival  in  town.' 
They  paid  for  their  land  and  began  improv- 
ing it  by  clearing  off  the  timber.  Not  long  af- 
terward a  young  man  appeared  on  the  scene 
and  laid  claim  to  the  land  on  the  ground 
that  he  had  been  a  soldier  and  had  drawn 
the  lot,  and  had  not  conveyed  it  away  ;  that 
if  they  had  bought  and  paid  for  it  they  had 
been  imposed  upon  ;  furthermore  that  he 
himself  was  a  minor  and  could  not  legally 
have  conveyed  the  land  to  any  one.  Un- 
der these  circumstances  Mr.  Miller  made  a 
bargain  with  him,  by  which  he  was  to  re- 
main with  Mr.  Miller  until  he  was  twenty- 
one  years  old,  when  he  could  give  them  a 
title  to  the  land.  When  that  time  arrived, 
the  Millers  paid  him  for  the  land  and  he  dis- 
appeared. It  afterwards  developed  that  he 
had  deceived  them  in  regard  to  his  age,  and 
that  he  was  not  twenty-one  when  he  sold 
them  the  land.  His  friends,  being  dissatisfied 
with  the  terms  on  which  he  had  settled  with 
Mr.  Miller,  sent  him  away,  circulated  re- 
ports of  his  death,  and  then  claimed  the  land 
as  his  heirs  ;  this  scheme  was  not  successful, 
however,  and  they  then  brought  him  to 
life  and  began  anew.  During  several  years 
Mr.   Miller  was  harassed  with  threats,  dis- 

1  When  Mr.  Miller  came  to  the  spot  where  he  built  his 
dwelling  he  thrust  into  the  ground  a  willow  twig  which 
he  had  broken  from  a  little  tree  in  front  of  a  settler's 
house  on  the  way.  The  settler's  wife  was  indignant  and 
told  her  husband  that  the  man  who  had  just  passed  on 
horseback  had  ruined  their  tree,  upon  which  the  irate 
pioneer  followed  Mr.  Miller,  overtook  him  and  berated 
him  for  breaking  their  tree ;  but  he  returned  crest-fallen 
when  he  saw  that  it  was  a  mere  whip  which  had  been  ap- 
propriated. This  twig  has  grown  into  a  great  tree,  the 
two  branching  trunks  of  which  now  measure  respectively 
sixteen  and  twelve  and  a  half  feet  in  circumference.  It 
is  an  old  and  well-known  landmark  at  the  junction  of  the 
two  roads. 


23S 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


putes  and  vexations  of  various  kinds,  until 
at  length  a  final  settlement  was  made  and 
another  deed  obtained.  He  now  supposed 
that  all  trouble  about  his  farm  was  ended. 
But  still  later  another  stranger  appeared  and 
presented  a  claim  to  fifty  acres  on  the  north- 
east corner  of  the  lot,  which  had  been  sold 
for  non-payment  of  taxes.  He  claimed  to 
be  the  purchaser  and  to  hold  a  valid  title 
to  the  land.  This  included  the  ground  on 
which  the  Millers  had  made  most  of  their 
improvements ;  consequently  there  was  no 
other  course  available  but  to  settle  ^\  ith  the 
intruder,  which  they  finally  did  by  the  pay- 
ment of  four  dollars  an  acre.  Thus,  after  li\'- 
ing seven  years  in  a  log  cabin,  which  would 
now  be  considered  hardly  good  enough  for 
a  horse  stable,  and  paying  for  their  land 
twice  and  for  a  portion  of  it  three  times, 
they  secured  a  valid  title. 

John  Miller  died  June  iith,  1806,  at  the 
ageof  75  years  ;  his  wife,  Hannah,  died  Oc- 
tober 25th,  1818,  aged  69  years.  Daniel 
Miller  became  a  man  of  prominence.  The 
military  organization  of  the  State  was  then 
thoroughly  maintained  and  in  March,  1803, 
he  received  the  commission  of  lieutenant  in 
a  company  of  infantry  from  George  Clin- 
ton, then  governor  of  the  State.  This  was 
followed  by  a  commission  as  captain  in 
1806,  and  as  lieutenant-colonel  in  1808.  In 
February,  181 2,  he  received  his  commission 
as  brigadier-general,  and  was  called  with 
his  brigade  to  the  Niagara  frontier.  It  is 
said  of  him  that  he  persistently  studied  mil- 
itary evolutions  with  kernels  of  corn  on  a 
board,  until  he  became  a  competent  tacti- 
cian. He  united  with  the  Congregational 
Church  in  Homer  in  1820  and  from  that 
time  until  his  death  was  a  prominent  mem- 
ber and  an  office-holder  in  the  society.  He 
died  in  1845.  His  wife  was  a  sister  of  the 
Rev.  John  Keep,  who  was  for  twelve  years 
pastor  of  that  church.  Mr.  Miller  left  two 
sons,  one  of  whom  was  Dr.  Abram  Miller. 


Gen.  Miller  is  remembered  as  a  man  of  con- 
templative cast  of  mind,  of  unswerving  in- 
tegrity and  habitual  dignity  of  manner.  He 
was  an  ardent  lover  of  nature. 

Succeeding  the  Miller  family  the  next 
settlers  in  the  tow  n  were  Jonathan  Hubbard 
and  Moses  Hopkins,  both  of  whom  came  in 
1794.  Mr.  Hubbard  selected  lands  amid 
the  stately  elms  on  the  site  of  Cortland  vil- 
lage, much  of  which  east  of  Main  street  he 
owned.  His  first  dwelling  stood  about  on 
the  site  of  the  National  Bank  of  Cortland, 
corner  of  Main  and  Court  streets.  Mr.  Hop- 
kins purchased  a  large  tract  of  land  west  of 
the  hill  now  known  as  "  Monroe  Heights," 
on  lot  64. 

It  was  fortunate  for  the  future  town  that 
such  men  as  Jonathan  Hubbard  and  Moses 
Hopkins  were  its  pioneers.  They  came,  as 
did  a  great  majority  of  the  early  settlers  in 
this  region,  from  New  England  —  that  cra- 
dle of  strong,  resolute,  active  men.  These 
two,  as  well  as  many  of  their  early  success- 
ors, were  men  of  strongly  marked  charac- 
ters, possessed  of  sagacious  foresight,  clear 
minds  and  determined  wills  ;  they  came  into 
the  wilderness  to  accomplish  something 
worthy  of  themselves,  with  no  thought  of 
obstacles  and  no  dread  of  consequences. 
Well  may  it  be  said,  then,  that  the  county 
was  fortunate  in  having  the  first  inroads 
toward  ci\-ilization  made  b\"  such  men. 

I\Ir.  Hubbard  was  about  twenty  years  old 
when  he  came  into  Cortland  —  young,  vig- 
orous and  filled  with  enthusiasm.  He  fore- 
saw (perhaps  had  already  learned  the  fact 
from  personal  experience)  that  one  of  the 
first  and  most  important  necessities  of  pio- 
neer families  was  a  grist-mill.  There  was 
already  one  in  the  county,  built  in  Homer  a 
year  or  two  previous,  but  there  was  ample 
room  for  more.  Choosing  the  most  eligible 
site,  therefore,  Mr.  Hubbard  made  the  build- 
ing of  a  grist-mill  his  first  occupation.  It 
was  located  where  now  stands  the  mill  of 


'■*W^^'iPS?pvS->' 


A.   LEROY  COLE. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


239 


Thomas  F.  Braj-ton,  and  was  the  first  one  in 
the  town;  it  was  long  known  as  Hubbard's 
mill,  and  still  later  as  "the  Red  Mill."  As 
soon  as  the  structure  was  far  enough  ad- 
vanced Mr.  Hubbard  and  his  joung  wife, 
a  sister  of  David  McClure,  occupied  it 
as  a  residence  until  his  dwelling  was  built. 
In  just  what  year  the  mill  was  finished 
and  put  in  operation  appears  to  be  in  doubt. 
It  has  been  given  as  early  as  1797  and  as 
late  as  1803.  It  was  between  those  dates 
and  undoubtedly  not  long  after  the  one  first 
given.  In  any  event  his  daughter  Abigail, 
afterward  the  wife  of  Daniel  Hawks,  a  prom- 
inent Cortland  attorney  and  county  judge, 
was  born  while  the  family  lived  in  the  mill ; 
her  birth  occurred  in  May,  1805.  In  the 
same  year  his  wife  died,  and,  in  18 10,  he 
married  Polly  Trowbridge  ;  from  this  union 
was  born  in  March,  1813,  Jonathan  Hub- 
bard, jr.,  who  was,  until  his  death  in  1883, 
one  of  the  prominent  and  respected  citizens 
of  Cortland  village.  In  1806  the  first  Jon- 
athan Hubbard  joined  with  Loren  Blodgett, 
son  of  Nathan  Blodgett,  whose  settlement 
will  be  noted  a  little  farther  on,  and  erected  a 
grist-mill  at  Blodgett's  Mills,  so  named  from 
Mr.  Blodgett.  This  was  the  second  mill 
built  in  the  town,  and  its  erection  consti- 
tuted about  the  first  settlement  at  that  point. 
Jonathan  Hubbard  died  on  Christmas  Day, 
in  the  year  18 14,  at  the  comparatively  early 
age  of  forty  years  ;  but  he  filled  his  life  with 
work  which  made  an  enduring  impression 
upon  the  town,  as  will  hereafter  appear. 

Moses  Hopkins  was  also  a  man  of  more 
than  ordinary  intelligence  and  force  of  char- 
acter, energy  and  enterprise.  He  built  one 
of  the  early  taverns  in  the  village  of  Cort- 
land, on  the  corner  near  where  the  Ta}'lor 
Hall  block  now  stands ;  it  was  long  a  pop- 
ular house,  where  public  meetings  of  all 
kinds  were  held.  The  building  was  quite  a 
commodious  wooden  structure  and  was  sub- 
sequently occupied  as  a  young  ladies'  sem- 


inary. Mr.  Hopkins  held  the  offices  of 
deputy  sherifl"  and  sheriff  of  the  county. 
His  first  dwelling  stood  about  on  the  site 
occupied  in  later  years  by  his  son,  Hiram 
Hopkins. 

John  Keep  made  a  permanent  settlement 
in  1795  on  lot  56,  where  he  built  the  orig- 
inal part  of  the  county  poor-house.  He  was 
from  Massachusetts.  Mr.  Keep  and  his  wife, 
Miss  Frances  Goodell,  were  baptized  by 
Rev.  Daniel  Irish,  in  September,  1798,  be- 
ing the  first  administration  of  the  rite  in 
Cortland  county.  They  were  also  among 
the  sixteen  who  constituted  the  first  Baptist 
church  of  Homer,  in  1801,  and  gave  libe- 
rally of  their  time,  money  and  influence  to 
the  building  up  of  that  society  and  for  the 
general  good  of  the  community.  Judge 
Keep  was  made  a  justice  of  the  peace  as 
early  as  1797,  long  before  the  organization 
of  this  county,  and  in  18 10  he  was  first 
judge  of  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  the 
first  officer  of  that  character  in  the  county, 
which  position  he  filled  with  honor  until 
1823.  He  was  not  bred  to  a  profession,  but 
his  eminent  integrity  and  sound  judgment 
enabled  him  to  fill  his  judicial  office  with 
satisfaction. 

An  incident  in  the  life  of  Judge  Keep, 
which  was  related  by  a  former  inmate  of 
the  alms  house,  is  worthy  of  passing  notice. 
Just  before  the  family  of  Judge  Keep  finally 
removed  from  his  home  on  the  banks  of  the 
river  he  made  his  accustomed  prayer  in 
which  he  entreated  that  "the  house  he  was 
about  to  leave  might  ever  remain  in  the  fu- 
ture as  it  had  been  in  the  past,  an  asylum 
for  the  poor,  the  unfortunate  and  the  dis- 
tressed." 

Not  many  years  later  the  house  and  farm 
were  sold  to  the  county  for  an  alms  house, 
making  it,  indeed,  for  all  time,  "  an  asylum 
for  the  poor  and  distressed." 

From  an  old  book  containing  a  record  of 
Judge  Keep's  official  acts,  we  quote  verba- 


240 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ti)ii  the  following  which  will  be  read  with 

interest: — 

"  County  of  Onondaga,  ss. : 

"To-\vit:  Beit  remembered  that  on  the  29th 
day  of  May,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  One  Thou- 
sand Eight  Hundred,  Levi  White  was  convicted 
before  me,  John  Keep,  one  of  the  justices  of  the 
peace  of  said  county  of  Onondaga,  of  doing  ser- 
vile work  on  Sabbath  day,  the  eighteenth  day  of 
this  present  instant,  May,  at  the  town  of  Solon. 
(}iven  under  my  hand  and  seal,  the  day  and  year 
above  said. 

"Fine,  75  cents;  costs  37  cents  5  mills. 

"John  Keep,  Justice  of  the  Peace. 
"  Onondaga  County,  ss. : 

"Viz.:  Be  it  remembered  that  on  the  26th 
day  of  December  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  One 
Thousand  Eight  Hundred,  Elijah  Hayden  was 
convicted  before  me,  John  Keep,  Esq.,  one  of 
the  justices  of  the  peace  in  and  for  the  said 
county,  of  swearing  ten  profane  oaths,  in  the 
town  of  Homer,  in  the  said  county.  Given  un- 
der my  hand  and  seal  the  day  and  the  year 
above  said. 

"  Fine  paid,  $3.75." 

It  would  seem  that  the  penalty  for  swear- 
ing one  oath  must  have  been  thirty-seven 
and  a  half  cents.  This  appears,  when  viewed 
from  the  stand-point  of  the  present  day,  as 
a  high  penalty,  and  leads  one  to  reflect 
upon  the  enormity  of  the  income  which 
might  have  been  derived  from  this  source 
if  Judge  Keep  could  have  held  his  office 
until  1884  and  had  "let  no  guilty  man  es- 
cape." 

From  among  the  records  of  various  mar- 
riage ceremonies  performed  by  Judge  Keep, 
we  select  a  few  of  people  who  will  be  re- 
membered by  old  residents  as  prominent  in 
Cortland  and  Homer  :  — 

"Homer,  26th  June,  1800.  This  day 
married  Asa  White,  jr.,  to  Clarissa  Keep, 
both  of  Homer."  Mr.  White  was  the  father 
of  Horace  and  Hamilton  White,  the  suc- 
cessful bankers,  later  of  Syracuse. 

"March  14th,  1799.  This  day  married 
Asahel  Minor  to  Rhoda  Keep,  both  of  Ho- 


mer." Mr.  Minor  was  the  first  clerk  of  Cort- 
land county,  and  held  other  positions  of 
trust. 

"April  4th,  1799.  This  day  married 
Wm.  Lucas  to  Sallic  Knapp,  both  of  Ho- 
mer." Mr.  Lucas  was  a  prominent  man 
and  an  office  holder  for  about  a  quarter  of 
a  century. 

"  Married  at  Homer,  March  25th,  1802, 
Prosper  Cravath  to  Miriam  Kinne."  Of  this 
family  Mr.  Ballard  wrote  in  his  Reminiscences 
as  follows:  —  "Whether  we  view  this  mar- 
ried couple  with  their  daughters,  'like  olive 
plants  around  their  tabic,'  in  their  Cortland 
home,  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  the  land- 
scape surrounding  it,  made  up  of  plain,  river 
and  distant  hill ;  or  in  their  new  dwelling- 
place  on  the  plains  of  Wisconsin,  rising  above 
all  is  the  memory  of  that  parental  dignity  and 
tenderness,  that  child-like  simplicit)'  of  man- 
ner and  integrity  of  heart,  all  consecrated 
by  a  Christian  faith  daily  strengthened  on 
the  altar  of  devotion.  Such  were  their  shin- 
ing traits  of  character." 

The  meetings  preliminary  to  building  the 
First  Baptist  church  of  Homer  (which  stood 
at  the  junction  of  Adams  street  with  the 
road  to  Homer)  were  held  at  his  house ;  the 
first  one  in  August,  1806,  when  John  Keep, 
Asa  Bennett  and  Benjamin  Salisbury  were 
chosen  a  committee  to  found  a  constitution. 

Previous  to  the  year  1800  a  large  tract 
of  land,  bordering  the  river  eastward  of 
Cortland  village,  was  owned  by  Elkanah 
Watson,  a  Massachusetts  man,  from  whom 
Port  Watson  received  its  name.  It  may  be 
that  others  were  interested  with  him  in  the 
speculation  which  was  intended  as  the  foun- 
dation of  a  thri\ing  village  at  that  point ; 
but  the  sales  of  land  are  nearly  all  made  in 
his  name,  or  that  of  his  attorney.  The  tract 
was  surveyed  by  Harvey  I.  Stewart,  prob- 
ably as  early  as  1800,  and  laid  out  in  streets 
and  lots,  and  the  latter  placed  in  market. 
The  principal  street  was  Washington  street, 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


241 


running  north  and  south  on  the  line  of  the 
present  street ;  but  it  is  said  to  have  been 
originally  laid  out  much  wider  (eight  or  ten 
rods  in  width)  and  was  intended  for  a  mag- 
nificent avenue  of  a  mile  or  more  in  length, 
directly  through  the  center  of  the  future 
village ;  it  was  extended  northward  across 
the  west  branch  of  the  Tioughnioga,  which 
was  to  have  been  bridged  at  that  point, 
about  midway  between  Hubbard's  mill  and 
the  confluence  of  the  two  branches  of  the 
river  ;  the  bridge  was  never  built,  but  streets 
were  opened  running  from  the  road  to- 
wards Truxton,  north  of  the  stone  bridge, 
eastward  to  meet  the  main  (\\'ashington) 
street.  Running  eastward  from  Washing- 
ton street  were  laid  out  and  opened  nar- 
rower avenues,  reaching  to  the  river,  which 
were  named  from  the  numerals. 

There  are  records  of  land  sales  in  this  vi- 
cinity, made  b)'  Elkanah  Watson  prior  to 
1800,  and  from  that  time  to  18 12,  scores  of 
transfers  of  lands  in  and  about  Port  Watson 
are  on  record.  A  few  examples  of  these  sales 
will  be  interesting  :  — 

In  1800  Watson  sold  to  Charles  Todd 
Hotchkiss,  100  acres  on  lot  41  (see  map)  for 
80  pounds. 

In  1805  Jonathan  Hubbard  bought  lot 
142,  of  the  Port  Watson  survey,  for  $50. 
In  the  same  year  Alfred  Allen  bought  of 
Watson  lot  149,  "on  town  plot  of  Port  Wat- 
son," for  $45. 

In  the  next  year  Moses  Hopkins  bought 
of  Watson  lot  126,  "on  town  plott  of  Port 
Watson,"  for  $26.06. 

In  181 1,  Watson  sold  to  "Luman  Rice,  of 
the  village  of  Port  Watson,  all  that  village  lot 
lying  in  the  village  of  Port  Watson,  known 
as  lots  60  and  61,  bounded  by  Washington 
street,  containing  each  one-half  acre,"  for 
$95  ;  also  the  north  half  of  lot  29  on  "  East 
Homer  river,"  bounded  "west  by  road  ;  east 
by  lot  30,  and  south  by  a  line  through  the 
middle  of  lot  29." 


In  1 8 1 2  Watson  sold  to  Thomas  Tillot- 
son  for  $2,000  one-fourth  of  lot  66,  with 
saw-mill,  hotel  and  store-houses.  Tillotson 
is  recorded  as  from  Rhinebeck.  This  sale 
indicates  that  there  was  a  saw-mill  at  or 
near  the  confluence  of  the  river  branches 
earlier  than  181 2,  and  a  hotel  near  by;  but 
we  have  been  unable  to  learn  anything  more 
definite  of  them. 

Jacob,  well  known  as  "Captain,"  Badgley, 
purchased  "lot  120  of  the  town  platt  of 
Port  Watson,"  in  18 12,  for  $50.  Capt. 
Badgley  was  an  uncle  of  Alonzo  Blodgett. 

In  October,  18 10,  Thomas  and  Andrew- 
Stockholm  bought  of  Watson  land  on  the 
"east  bank  of  East  river,  due  east  of  the 
south  line  of  6th  street,  in  the  village  of  Port 
Watson,  and  at  the  northwest  corner  of  lot 
15  ;  thence  east  four  chains;  thence  south 
ten  chains,  to  north  line  of  lot  21  ;  thence 
east  twenty-seven  chains  to  the  east  bank  of 
the  river ;  then  up  the  river  to  the  place  of 
beginning  —  about  five  acres,"  for  $200. 

Watson  also  sold  to  Nathan  Blodgett, 
grandfather  of  Alonzo  Blodgett,  a  part  of 
lot  66,  lying  "immediately  west  of  Port 
W'atson,  on  the  south  side  of  West  Homer 
river — twenty  acres,  for  $240."  William 
Lowe  joined  in  this  sale,  which  was  made 
in  December,  1805. 

These  transfers  are  given  merely  as  ex- 
amples of  many  others,  indicating  the  ac- 
tivity in  the  land  traffic  at  that  point;  it  is 
much  to  be  regretted  that  the  map  of  Port 
Watson  village  is  not  now  available ;  while 
we  have  found  traces  of  such  a  map,  our 
utmost  efforts  have  failed  to  secure  it. 

Sales  of  lots  at   Port   Watson   continued 

to   be   pushed    with   vigor ;   the   point    was 

clearly  the  head  of  navigation  on  the  river, 

and  the  site  was  in  e\'ery  wa\-  so  favorable 

for  the  location  of  a  village   that  it  was  not 

until  after   the   first  decade  of  the   century 

that  the   then  hamlet  of  Cortland  began  to 

outstrip  Port  Watson  in  growth  and  prestige. 

16 


242 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


During  the  year  1795  a  few  more  settlers 
came  into  tlie  town.  Among  these  was 
Dr.  Lewis  S.  Owen,  who  came  from  Albany 
and  located  on  lot  66,  where  he  subsequently 
erected  the  first  frame  house  in  the  county. 
It  stood  a  little  east  of  where  Russell  Hub- 
bard lived  in  later  years.  Dr.  Owen  re- 
moved to  Homer  village  after  three  years. 
In  the  same  year  Thomas  Wilcox,  from 
W'hitestown,  settled  on  lot  64,  and  Reuben 
Doud,  originally  from  New  Haven,  James 
Scott,  John  Morse  and  Levi  Lee  all  located 
on  lot  75. 

Considerable  accession  was  made  to  the 
population  of  the  town  during  the  succeed- 
ing five  years  and  prior  to  the  beginning  of 
the  century.  In  1796-97  Samuel  Critten- 
den and  Eber  Stone  came  from  Connecticut 
and  located  on  lot  66.  The}-  bought  one 
hundred  and  sixty  acres,  the  tract  belonging 
to  them  being  divided  by  a  line  nearly  par- 
allel with  the  present  Main  street.  Mr. 
Crittenden  afterward  built  a  house  a  little 
east  of  the  site  of  A.  Mahan's  store.  He 
made  the  journey  from  Connecticut  with  an 
ox  team,  being  twentj'-five  days  on  the 
road.  Mr.  Crittenden  removed  to  Tomp- 
kins county  prior  to  1858,  where  he  held 
several  judicial  ofiices  and  represented  the 
count)-  in  the  Legislature  three  successive 
years. 

Aaron  Knapp  settled  on  lot  55  during 
the  period  under  consideration,  and  Enoch 
Hotchkiss  on  lot  76.  In  the  year  1798 
Samuel  Ingalls  and  his  son,  Samuel,  jr., 
migrated  from  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  and 
located  on  lot  75,  the  former  becoming 
the  owner  of  much  of  the  land  on  which 
the  southwestern  portion  of  the  village  is 
situated.  He  built  and  kept  the  first  tavern 
in  the  town. 

During  the  first  decade  of  the  century, 
although  the  advancement  of  settlement 
was  not  remarkably  rapid,  many  men  and 
families  located  within  the  boundaries  of  the 


town  who  were  destined  to  wield  an  influ- 
ence in  the  community  and  leave  the  per- 
manent impress  of  their  toil  and  energy 
upon  the  new  county.  Many  of  these  have 
alread)-  been  mentioneil  in  the  history  of  the 
town  of  Homer,  and  while  we  cannot  trace 
the  precise  dates  of  arrival  and  localities  of 
settlement  of  all  those  worthy  pioneers, 
something  ma\-  be  said  of  the  more  i:)romi- 
nent  of  them  ;  others  will  be  found  in  sub- 
sequent pages  devoted  to  the  village  history 
of  the  town. 

David  Merrick  came  from  Massachusetts 
in  the  year  1 800  and  located  on  lot  44.  He 
was  accompanied  by  his  son  Danforth,  after- 
ward a  prominent  citizen.  In  iSio  they  set- 
tled in  Cortland  village  on  lot  65,'  where 
he  built  what  was  then  the  largest  hotel  in 
the  place,  just  west  of  the  Cortland  House 
site,  which  he  kept  as  a  tavern  more  than 
twenty  }-ears. 

Obadiah  Boies  and  Joshua  Hassett  arrived 
in  town  about  cotemporar\-  with  Mr.  Mer- 
rick. Mr.  Boies  built  his  dwelling  about 
where  the  Union  Hall  block  now-  stands,  and 
Mr.  Bassett  near  the  site  of  the  First  Na- 
tional Bank.  Mr.  Boies  became  a  promi- 
nent citizen  and  held  the  office  of  county 
treasurer  for  man\'  years.  Mr.  Bassett  was  a 
jeweler,  the  first  in  the  village. 

Waterman  and  Levi  Phillips  were  from 
Connecticut,  and  the  former  located  on  lot 
69,  near  where  Trout  creek  joins  the 
Tioughnioga,  where  he  purchased  one  hun- 
dred acres.      He  afterward  removed  to  Ho- 

iMr.  Merrick  came  lo  Wliilestown  in  Lhe  year  1797,  to 
purchase  a  tavern  stand  and  100  acres  of  land,  then  val- 
ued at  $300.  His  means  being  limited,  he  concluded 
not  to  purchase  and  returned  home.  The  next  year  he 
again  visited  Whitestown  for  the  express  purpose  of  clos- 
ing a  bargain,  but  the  property  was  then  valued  at  $10,- 
000,  and  consequently  he  did  not  secure  it,  ami  came  on 
to  Hoiner.  .\  few  years  later,  having  been  ejected  from 
his  premises  three  times,  and  being  threatened  with  the 
s.ime  treatment  a  fourth  lime,  he  concluded  to  leave  and 
settle  at  Little  York ;  but  in  1810  he  returned  to  Cort- 
land village. 


r?y 


^.M 


'?''e&ry 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


243 


mer  village.  Jefferson,  Abel  K.,  and  George 
Phillips  were  his  sons. 

At  this  time  (iSoo)  there  was  no  road  be- 
tween Homer  village  and  the  little  settlement 
at  Cortland;  or,  at  least,  none  other  than  a 
mere  cutting  through  the  woods.  One  of 
the  pioneers  of  Cortland  who  drew  saw-logs 
to  the  Homer  mill  in  the  winter  of  1800—01, 
said  that  two  trips  a  day  through  the  mud 
and  slush,  "snaking"  a  log  one  way,  was 
all  he  could  accomplish.  A  road  had  been 
cut  out  to  Virgil  Corners  where  it  inter- 
sected the  State  road ;  another  had  been 
cut  through  to  Locke  (now  Groton) ;  a  third 
to  McGrawville ;  a  fourth  to  Truxton  and 
the  one  to  Homer,  above  mentioned. 

In  the  )'ear  1800  W'ilmot  Sperr\-  located 
in  the  town,  on  lot  73  ;  he  was  from  Wood- 
bridge,  Conn.  Two  years  later  William 
Mallory  came  in  from  Columbia  county  and 
permanently  located.  He  soon  afterward 
built  a  house  where  the  Keator  block  now 
stands,  corner  of  Main  and  Port  Watson 
streets.  He  was  the  second  sherift'  of  the 
count}-,  appointed  in  1809,  and  was' a  man 
of  unusual  character  and  acquirements.  In 
i8i4hewas  elected  to  the  Assembly  and 
as  county  clerk  in  1815.  In  1819  he  was 
elected  to  the  State  Senate,  and  was  ap- 
pointed count}' judge  in  1823.      He  died  in 

1837- 

John  A.  Freer  came  into  town  at  this 
time  from  Duchess  county,  and  located  on 
lot  74.  He  became  a  prominent  citizen  of 
the  village,  as  did  also  his  sons,  Anthony 
and  S.  D.  Freer,  the  latter  of  whom  still 
lives  there. 

In  1S03  Samuel  McGraw  made  the  long 
journey  from  New  Haven  and  located  on 
lot  87,  where  he  purchased  100  acres.  In 
1 809  he  removed  to  the  site  of  McGrawville, 
(which  was  named  from  him)  where  he  pur- 
chased 200  acres ;  at  that  time  there  were 
but  three  families  in  the  vicinit}'  of  the  vil- 
lage of  McGrawville.      Mr.    McGraw  was  a 


man  of  prominence  and  did  much  toward 
building  up  the  place  which  bears  his  name. 
He  was  the  father  of  twelve  children,  eight 
of  whom  were  sons.  He  died  in  1849. 
One  of  his  sons,  Harry  McGraw,  became  a 
prominent  citizen  of  Cortland,  held  several 
offices,  and  was  the  father  of  Hon.  P.  H. 
McGraw,  now  of  McGrawxille. 

James  T.  Hotchkiss  came  into  town  in 
1803,  from  Woodbridge,  locating  on  lot  54, 
northwest  of  the  village.  He  was  conspic- 
uous in  the  War  of  1812  and  fell  at  the 
battle  of  Oueenstown,  in  18 13,  while  serving 
as  one  of  Gen.  Dearborn's  life-guards.  He 
left  eight  children  who  became  well  known 
and  respected  people. 

The  first  church  organization  in  the 
county  (1801)  has  already  been  alluded  to  in 
the  history  of  the  town  of  Homer.  It  was 
the  result  of  joint  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
good  people  in  Homer  (village),  Cortland, 
Port  Watson  and  East  River,  and  led  to  the 
building,  in  181 1,  of  a  church  which  stood 
about  "one-half  mile  north  of  the  old  court- 
house," as  its  location  has  been  defined. 
Its  site  was  in  reality  on  the  northwest  cor- 
ner at  the  junction  of  North  Main  street 
with  Adams  street  and  the  Homer  road. 

The  first  ]\Iethodist  meetings  in  this  town 
were  held  at  the  Iwuse  of  Jonathan  Hubbard 
in  1  804,  and  they  were  continued  at  private 
houses,  school-houses,  etc.,  until  the  time 
arrived  when  a  societ}'  was  organized  and  a 
church  built  in  1S21,  as  detailed  in  subse- 
quent pages.  Elder  Bachellor  was  a  Meth- 
odist minister  who  preached  on  a  circuit 
embracing  Cortland  village,  as  early  as  1 805. 

Among  the  earliest  settlers  in  the  eastern 
part  of  the  town  were  Russell  Dodd,  Rufus 
Persons,  Enon  Phelps  and  others.  Enon 
Phelps  (father  of  E.  W.  Phelps,  who  came 
to  this  localit}-  in  1817)  remained  where  he 
settled  in  this  town  but  one  year  (1795-96), 
and  then  removed  to  Homer.  Mr.  Persons 
was  a  native  of  Connecticut,  was  married 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


January  1st,  1807,  and  moved  upon  the 
farm  now  occupied  by  Lorenzo  Persons, 
wliere  he  built  a  saw-mill. 

Isaac  Alger,  a  native  of  Vermont,  came  to 
New  York  State  in  1  Soo.  He  was  the  father 
of  Joseph  C.  Alger,  of  McGrawville,  who 
came  there  from  Schoharie  county  in  1831. 
His  first  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Job  Card, 
one  of  the  early  settlers  on  lot  57.  His 
present  wife  was  Mary  B.  Cowles,  daughter 
of  Judah  Cowles,  also  an  early  settler,  who 
came  from  Chathanf,  N.  Y.,  and  located  on 
land  now  owned  by  Charles  O.  Alger,  in 
1810. 

Nathan  Blodgett  was  one  of  the  more 
prominent  of  the  early  settlers  locating 
here  in  1804.  He  was  from  Massachusetts 
and  his  purchase  of  lands  from  Elkanah 
Watson  has  already  been  noted.  He  died 
in  1845,  leaving  five  children  —  Loren  (be- 
fore mentioned  as  building  the  first  mill  at 
Blodgett's  ^lills),  Lewis,  Benjamin  Franklin, 
Lydia  and  Elizabetli.  The  son,  Benjamin 
F.,  succeeded  to  the  ownership  of  the  farm. 
He  was  a  useful  and  respected  member  of 
the  community  and  made  the  farm  one  of 
the  best  in  this  section.  His  life  exhibited 
the  Christian  virtues  in  an  enviable  degree. 
He  left  four  children ;  a  daughter  married 
Dr.  T.  C.  Pomeroy,  now  of  Syracuse,  and 
another  the  Rev.  O.  H.  Seymour.  His  son, 
Alonzo  Blodgett.  now  owns  and  occupies  ' 
the  homestead  near  Brajton's  mills,  where 
he  has  built  a  handsome  residence. 

Jacob  Sanders  settled  on  lot  56  in  1803  i 
he  was  from  Swansea,  Mass.  He  had  a 
family  of  ten  children,  who  became  well 
known  and  respected  people. 

John  Calvert  came  from  Washington 
county  to  Virgil  in  1800  and  about  1812 
removed  to  lot  82,  between  Cortland  and 
McLean,  where  Leroy  Gillett  now  lives. 

Nathan  and  James  Knapp  were  early  set- 
tlers on  lot  84,  south  of  Cortland  village, 
and  Gilbert  Budd  and  Jeremiah  Chase  on  j 


lot  74.  John  Stillman  located  on  lot  65, 
now  within  the  village  limits,  at  a  very  early 
day.  Judge  Keep's  old  record  book  con- 
tains Mr.  Stillman's  marriage  to  Mary  Hub- 
bard, sister  of  the  pioneer,  Jonathan  Hub- 
bard, under  date  of  January  22d,  1801. 
Elisha  Crosb\-  and  Lemuel  Ingalls  were 
early  settlers  also  on  lot  65.  John  McNish 
was  also  an  early  farmer  in  the  vicinity  of 
South  Cortland. 

Gideon  Curtis,  a  native  of  Massachusetts, 
came  here  in  1 807  and  located  near  the 
Port  Watson  bridge,  where  he  owned  a 
tannery  for  a  time.  He  afterwards  removed 
to  Little  York.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Legislature  in  1822. 

In  1808  John  Ingalls  located  on  lot  74 
and  Lemuel  and  Jacob  Cady,  who  came 
from  Massachusetts,  on  lot  y^,  all  southwest 
of  the  village  towards  South  Cortland.  Ed- 
mund Mallory,  from  Duchess  county,  set- 
tled on  lot  74.  also,  and  John  Wicks  on  J^. 

Oliver  Wiswell,  the  first  lawyer  in  the 
town  and  the  first  postmaster  (1814),  prob- 
abl\- came  before  18 10.  Other  early  attor- 
ne\-s  were  Henry  Stephens  and  Samuel  N. 
Perkins,  the  former  of  whom  became  very 
prominent ;  was  sent  to  the  Legislature ; 
was  county  judge  and  later  president  of  the 
Syracuse  and  Binghamton  railroad. 

These  pioneers  of  the  town  who  came  in 
before  the  year  18 10,  though  their  num- 
bers were  comparatively  small,  were  gene- 
rally men  of  strong  characters  and  wills, 
men  whose  lives  and  works  left  an  indeli- 
ble impression  upon  the  town. 

The  second  decade  of  the  century  wit- 
nessed long  strides  in  the  advancement  and 
growth  of  the  town,  and  the  establishment 
of  its  early  institutions.  The  erection  of  the 
court-house  pursuant  to  the  act  of  April, 
1810.  and  the  rivalry  it  occasioned  in  the 
three  villages  of  Homer,  Port  Watson  and 
Cortland,  have  been  detailed  in  a  previous 
chapter.     The  little  hamlet  of  Cortland  be- 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


245 


gan  to  assume  the  character  of  a  village, 
and  mills,  asheries,  distilleries  and  tanneries 
were  multipl}-ing  in  difterent  parts  of  the 
town.  William  and  Roswell  Randall  came 
to  Cortland  village  in  18 12  and  soon  began 
the  important  business  enterprises  which 
placed  them  at  the  head  in  this  respect,  a 
position  which  thc>-  occupied  for  many 
years.  They  were  originally  from  Stoning- 
ton  but  came  to  Cortland  from  Brookfield, 
Conn.  Saw-mills  had  been  erected  at  South 
Cortland,  Blodgett's  Mills,  one  near  Horace 
Dibble's  carding-mill  and  one  at  Port  Wat- 
son. The  carding-mill  operated  for  so 
many  j-ears  by  Mr.  Dibble  was  built  as 
early  as  181 5,  by  David  McClure  and  in 
iSiB^  Moses  Hopkins  advertised  in  the 
Republican  that  he  had  "  two  new  carding- 
machines  ready  for  operation  in  Mr.  Hig- 
day's  shops,  a  little  east  of  the  Red  mills 
(formerly  Hubbard's  mill)." 

1  "  Goodwin's  Pioneer  History  makes  mention  of  a  Wil- 
liam Sherman,  who  came  to  Homer  in  the  summer  of 
1815,  and  'soon  after  he  erected  a  machine  shop  for  the 
manufacture  of  nails  —  the  first  of  the  kind  in  the  Slate 
of  New  York  —  the  machinery  being  so  arranged  as  to 
feed,  cut,  head  and  stamp  without  assistance.  On  the 
head  of  each  nail  was  stamped  the  letter  S.  Four-penny 
nails  were  then  worth  twenty-five  cents  per  pound.'  I 
am  under  the  impression,  however,  that  Sherman  began 
manufacturing  nails  in  this  building,  which  was  erected 
by  a  man  named  McClure  about  1816,  and  had  a  saw- 
mill in  the  rear,  run  by  the  same  water  privilege,  and 
that  he  subsequently  removed  the  nvichinery  to  Homer, 
where  he  continued  to  manufacture  nails  for  a  number 
of  years.  Mr.  Dibble  states  that  when  he  passed  through 
Cortland  in  1821,  nails  were  then  being  made  here  by 
Sherman's  machine,  and  I  have  now  in  my  possession 
several  nails  with  the  letters  W  and  S  stamped  on  their 
heads,  which  were  with  some  difficulty  drawn  out  of  the 
clapboards  covering  the  rear  of  the  old  liuilding,  by  me, 
a  few  moments  before  these  lines  were  written,  and  which 
there  is  every  reason  for  believing  were  among  the  first 
nails  manufactured  by  that  machine." 

This  paragraph  is  printed  in  a  pamphlet  recently 
issued  in  Cortland  as  a  historical  advertising  medium ; 
but  there  is  probably  no  ground  for  presuming  that  \Vd- 
liani  Sherman  ever  made  nails  in  Cortland.  The  nails 
Ijearing  his  initials  on  the  heads  were  doubtless  made  by 
him  in  Homer  and  sold  to  the  builder  of  the  carding- 
mill.  The  fact  of  their  being  found  in  that  old  structure 
is  no  argument  in  favor  of  the  supposition  that  they  were 
made  there. 


The  Randalls  had  at  least  two  asheries 
within  the  present  limits  of  the  village,  and 
distilleries  dotted  the  landscape  in  every  di- 
rection. Whisky,  as  we  are  told  by  an  old 
resident,  was  so  plenty  that  one  could  go 
and  buy  a  gallon  for  twenty- five  cents  "and 
have  a  jug  thrown  in  to  carry  it  home  in." 

The  first  school  was  established,  the 
building  standing  on  the  site  of  the  Messen- 
ger House,  and  the  old  Baptist  Church  soci- 
ety was  in  a  flourishing  condition. 

In  the  year  1 8 1  5  further  school  facilities 
being  demanded,  steps  were  taken  which  led 
to  the  building  of  the  old  school-house 
which  preceded  the  academy.  Moses  Hop- 
kins, Samuel  S.  Baldwin  and  Solomon  Hub- 
bard were  the  trustees  of  the  districts.  No- 
tice was  given  by  them  that  proposals 
would  be  received  for  building  a  school- 
house  26  by  56  feet  in  dimensions,  and  two 
stories  high.  The  structure  was  erected  in 
1 8 16,  and  from  that  time  onward  was  occu- 
pied for  school  purposes  below,  while  the 
upper  story  was  often  used  for  religious 
meetings.  In  the  year  1841  it  was  enlarged 
and  became  the  well  known  and  successful 
academy.  It  stood  between  the  Presbyte- 
rian and  Methodist  churches,  on  Church 
street.  In  1868  it  was  removed  and  the  lot 
given  to  the  Normal  School  grounds. 

William  Wood,  a  native  of  Hinsdale, 
Vermont,  migrated  to  Herkimer,  N.  Y., 
and  in  18 14  came  into  the  town  of  Homer, 
locating  at  first  on  the  road  leading  from 
the  East  river  valley  to  the  farm  of  Enon 
Phelps,  on  lot  48.  Here  he  resided  two 
years,  when  he  removed  southward  to  lot 
58  in  the  town  of  Cortlandville,  and  again 
removed  in  18 19  to  lot  39  in  Homer,  ad- 
joining the  farm  of  Capt.  Crandall;  but 
after  planting  an  orchard  and  making  other 
valuable  improvements  on  the  place,  he  was 
forced  to  leave  it  in  1833,  for  want  of  a 
valid  title.  He  removed  into  the  valley, 
and  subsequently  to  the   hill   again,  on  the 


246 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


northwest  side  of  the  river,  where  he  died 
in  1850,  as  stated  in  the  preceding  history 
of  Homer.  His  farm  on  lot  58  passed  into 
the  hands  of  Asa  Loring,  who  came  to  the 
town  from  Petersham,  Mass.,  in  181 8  and 
bought  Mr.  Wood's  interest  in  the  farm. 
Mr.  Loring  removed  to  lot  48  in  Homer, 
but  again  changed  his  location  to  the  old 
Deacon  Miller  farm  at  the  junction  of  the 
Homer  and  Cortland  roads  leading  to  Trux- 
ton.  Mr.  Loring  early  manifested  a  deep 
interest  in  the  science  of  surveying  and  ea- 
gerly availed  himself  of  whatever  knowledge 
he  could  gain  on  the  subject;  he  began  its 
practice  at.  the  age  of  nineteen  and  soon 
gained  a  reputation  for  industry  and  ac- 
curacy that  was  most  en\iable.  He  fol- 
lowed the  business  until  he  was  more  than 
eighty  years  old,  retaining  his  sight  to  such 
a  degree  that  he  never  had  to  use  glasses. 
Mr.  Loring  held  various  offices  —  commis- 
sioner of  schools,  commissioner  of  highways, 
commissioner  of  deeds,  etc.,  and  in  1825 
was  elected  captain  of  a  company  of  in- 
fantry, in  the  old  58th  regiment,  then  under 
command  of  Roswell  Randall.  Following 
is  a  transcription  of  Captain  Loring's  muster 
roll  of  1 826  now  in  possession  of  his  son,  T. 
Mason  Loring,  which  will  show  some  of  the 
men  who  then  gave  their  aid  to  the  military 
organization  of  the  State:  — 

Captain  —  Asa  Loring. 

Lieutenant  —  Polydore  B.  Corwin. 

Ensign  —  John  McGraw. 

Sergeants  —  Austin  Graves,  Alonzo  Tis- 
dale,  Elisha  H.  Cohin,  James  S.  V^an  Valk- 
enberg. 

Corporals  —  Wm.  Eldredge,  Samuel 
Thompson,  James  Stewart,  Evander  Hise. 

Musicians  —  Speilman  Graves,  Amos 
Sparks,  Lyman  Palmer,  Lester  Graves, 
Walter  G.  Dye,  Ari  T.  Boynton,  Orin  Hise. 

Privates  —  Stilman  Eaton,  Tilly  Coburn, 
Nehemiah  Lewis,  Reuben  G.  Doud,  Amos 
Pritchard,  Morris   Bishop,  Smith  P.  Brock- 


wa)',  Hiram  Boon,  Horatio  Brockway,  Jo- 
seph Brockway,  Aaron  Coburn,  Lyman 
Graves,  I-lvander  Hise,  Levi  Davis,  Henrj- 
Canehan,  Ezekiel  Hotchkiss,  Robert  Dal- 
giish,  Jos.  Whitnej",  Aaron  S.  Reynolds, 
Hiram  Baker,  Isaac  Allen,  Lothrop  Far- 
nam,  Alvirus  Stedman,  Oliver  Bugby,  Geo. 
Stoning,  James  Stewart,  \\"m.  Jacobs,  Nel- 
son Spencer,  Archibald  Campbell,  Gilmore 
Kinne}',  Clark  Pendleton,  Whitman  Rowe, 
Ezra  Mills,  Chas.  Higgins,  Philip  Kno.x, 
Zimri  Russell,  Harry  Coburn,  Zalmon  P. 
Barnum,  Daniel  Danielson,  David  Fisk, 
Isaac  Fisk,  J.  E.  Buchanan,  Danford  Hise, 
Joseph  King,  Loren  Keep,  Parker  Butter- 
field,  Fred  K.  Austin,  Edwin  Cook,  Ben- 
jamin Johnson,  Jacob  Ogden,  Truman 
Doud,  Nelson  Clark,  Samuel  King,  Samuel 
B.  Houd,  Philander  Merrill. 

These  were  the  men,  many  of  whom  were 
from  this  town,  who  helped  to  increase  the 
glory  of  the  old  "  general  training  da\-s.  " 

On  the  30th  day  of  June,  18 15,  occurred 
an  event  in  Cortland,  which  is  always  one 
of  importance  in  every  new  community. 
That  da\'  witnessed  the  issue  of  the  first 
newspaper  in  the  town,  and  the  second  one 
in  the  county.  It  was  published,  during 
the  first  few  months  of  its  e.vistence,  by 
James  Percival,  and  was  a  very  creditable 
journal  for  the  period  ;  but  its  columns  are 
of  very  litde  account  in  furnishing  historical 
matter,  as  \\as  common  witli  earlj'  newspa- 
pers. Local  news  was  almost  entirely  ig- 
nored by  the  editor,  while  column  after  col- 
umn was  devoted  to  events  happening  in 
foreign  countries.  Further  reference  to  this 
newspaper  will  be  found  in  the  chapter  de- 
voted to  the  press  of  the  county,  in  the 
general  history  of  the  county. 

In  the  Republican  of  September  13th, 
1 8 17,  appeared  a  notice  of  which  the  fol- 
lowing is  a  transcription  :  — 

'■  DOCTOR  G00DVE.\R, 

•'  From    New    Haven,  Conn.,  has    opened    an 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


247 


office  in  this  village,  where  he  is  ready  to  attend 
to  the  duties  of  his  profession;  and  respectfully 
solicits  the  patronage  of  the  public,  so  far  as  they 
shall  (after  an  acquaintance)  find  him  deserving.  " 

This  was  the  beginning,  very  modestly 
announced,  of  a  professional  career  extend- 
ing over  a  period  of  about  sixty  years,  by 
one  of  the  most  eminent  and  deserving 
physicians  of  the  count}'  or  State.  The 
name  of  Miles  Goodyear  became  a  cherished 
household  word  in  numberless  homes,  where 
his  gentle  and  successful  ministrations  to 
the  distressed  will  never  be  forgotten.'  A 
daughter  of  Dr.  Goodyear  is  now  the  wife 
of  Dr.  Frederick  H\-de,  of  Cortland  \illage; 
she  is  a  lady  of  rare  intelligence  and  acquire- 
ments, beloved  b)-  all  who  know  her. 

Jethro  Bonney  was  an  early  settler  at  Port 
Watson,  coming  here  from  Essex  county  in 
1816.  Mead  Merrill  was  the  owner  of  a 
saw-mill  at  Port  Watson  at  that  time  and 
Mr.  Bonney  leased  the  mill.  He  operated 
it  but  a  few  years,  however,  wlun  he  re- 
moved with  his  famil)'  to  Ponipey.  After  a 
residence  of  many  years  in  different  locali- 
ties, he  returned  to  Cortland  and  died  in  the 
village.  Sally  Bonne}',  who  now  lives  on 
Pendleton  street,  was  his  daughter. 

The  early  advancement  of  the  agricultu- 
ral interests  of  the  count}-  was  manifested 
by  the  organization  of  an  agricidtural  soci- 
ety in  the  year  1 8 1 8.  The  first  fair  was  held 
in  the  fall  of  that  year.  This  e\ent  was 
looked  upon  b}-  the  inhabitants  of  the  vil- 
lage, as  well  as  those  of  the  country  sur- 
rounding, as  of  prime  importance  and  likely 
to  result  in  permanent  benefit  to  the  com- 
munity. Elaborate  preparations  were  ac- 
cordingly made  for  the  fair,  which  were  suc- 
cessfully carried  out.  The  date  was  the  3d 
day  of  November,  and  in  the  glowing  ac- 
count given  of  the  event  in  the  village  paper 
we  find  that  "at  the  rising  of  the  sun  there 
were  three  discharges  of  cannon,  reniinding 

1  More  extended  notice  of  Dr.  Coodyear  will  be  found 
in  the  history  of  the  Cortland  County  Medical  Society. 


US  that,  imder  Providence,  with  one  hand  we 
defend  our  soil  and  liberties,  and  with  the 
other  reap  the  harvests."  The  attendance 
was  evidently  quite  large  and  the  exhibition 
of  stock,  etc.,  creditable  for  that  period.  After 
the  committees  had  prepared  their  reports  a 
procession  was  formed  which  marched  to  the 
court-house,  accompanied  by  a  band  of 
music.  There  the  proceedings  were  opened 
by  "an  able  and  pertinent  prayer,"  by  the 
Rev.  Thomas  Purinton,  of  Truxton.  Pres- 
ident Levi  Bowcn,  of  Homer,  addressed  the 
audience  and  vice-president  John  Miller 
opened  the  reports  of  the  committees  and 
delivered  the  certificates  to  the  successful 
exhibitors.  The  exercises  closed  with  a 
prayer  by  "the  Rev.  p:iijah  Bachellor,  of 
Homer,  commending  the  society  and  spec- 
tators to  the  protection  of  heaven."  A 
sumptuous  dinner  was  then  served  at  David 
Merrick's  tavern.  The  premiums  offered 
amounted  to  only  about  $100;  but  in  that 
day  this  seemed  to  be  sufficient,  when  coup- 
led with  the  deep  interest  of  the  farmers  of 
the  county  to  produce  a  good  exhibition 
of  farm  products. 

About  the  year  1820  Nelson  Spencer 
came  to  Cortlandville,  from  Hartford,  Conn., 
and  purchased  a  tract  of  land  in  Port  Wat- 
son which  covered  the  spot  where  the  two 
branches  of  the  river  unite.  There  he  erected 
a  paper-mill,  several  tenant  houses,  a  store 
building,  and  founded  a  large  business  in 
the  manufacture  of  paper,  book-binding 
and  book-selling.  It  soon  became  one  of 
the  most  important  manufacturing  indus- 
tries in  the  county. 

In  the  spring  of  1832,  Spencer  having 
failed,  the  property  passed  into  possession 
of  Thomas  Sinclair  and  John  J.  Speed,  both 
of  Ithaca.  Mr.  Sinclair  removed  his  family 
to  Cortland  and  undertook  the  work  of  re- 
fitting the  mill,  which  had  become  a  good 
deal  run  down  ;  nothing  but  coarse  paper 
had  yet  been  made  there,  with  machinery 


248 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  the  most  primitive  kind.  The  paper  was 
made  b)'  a  haiul  process,  dipping  the  pulp 
from  a  vat  in  a  seive-likc  frame  and  forming 
the  sheet  b)-  gently  shaking  the  frame,  a 
tedious  process  and  requiring  skillful  ma- 
nipulation. Speed  &  Sinclair,  as  the  new 
firm  was  called,  put  new  machinery  in  the 
mill  and  made  the  manufacture  of  fine  pa- 
pers a  specialty;  their  product  soon  stood 
foremost  in  the  local  market.  Mr.  Sinclair 
died  in  the  spring  of  1841,  and  the  mill  was 
for  a  time  leased  to  the  employees.' 

The  old  paper-mill  subsequently  passed 
into  the  hands  of  Wm.  H.  Smith  and  John 
Duff,  and  perhaps  others,  and  was  finally 
bought  by  Daniel  Bradford,  of  Cortland, 
who  conducted  it  chiefly  for  the  manufact- 
ure of  coarse  paper.  Mr.  Bradford  took  it 
in  about  the  j-car  1847,  '^'^d  continued  the 
business  until  1864,  when  the  buildings 
were  purchased  by  Sears,  Freer  &  Cottrell 
(Francis  Sears,  S.  D.  Freer  and  John  B. 
Cottrell)  and  machinerj-  introduced  for  the 
manufacture  of  linseed  oil.  This  partner- 
ship was  dissolved  in  1866  and  Mr.  Freer 
conducted  the  works  until  1871,  when  the 
business  was  abandoned.  In  July,  i88i,the 
property  was  bought  by  the  Cooper  Broth- 

1  John  J.  Speed  possessed  many  noble  traits  of  charac- 
ter, accompanied  with  some  peculiarities.  In  the  dis- 
patch of  business  he  was  rarely  excelled.  He  was  a  Vir- 
ginian by  birth  and  a  prominent  member  of  the  Methodist 
denomination.  All  enterprises  of  mora!  reform  found 
in  him  an  enthusiastic  friend.  He  was  an  exemplary  mem- 
ber of  the  church,  bold  and  outspoken  in  all  that  related 
to  its  welfare  and  the  order  of  its  religious  exercises. 
The  old  Methodist  chapel  had  a  basement  room.  It 
happened  on  a  warm  summer  Sabbath,  during  the  fore- 
noon exercises,  that  several  mastiffs  which  had  accompa- 
nied their  masters'  teams  to  the  church,  came  trotting 
through  the  0])en  doors  and  along  the  aisles,  apjiarently 
in  search  of  their  owners,  and  in  some  instances  mount- 
ing the  pew  doors  with  their  fore  feet.  This  was  too 
much  for  Father  Speed.  He  abhorred  dogs.  At  the 
close  of  the  sermon  he  arose  in  his  place  (with  a  red 
silk  handkerchief  around  his  head  to  protect  its  naked- 
ness from  the  flies)  and  announced  the  proposal  that  in 
the  afternoon  the  people  assemble  in  the  basement,  and 
the  dogs  in  the  audience-room.  No  dogs  attended  that 
church  thereafter.  — Hon.  Horatio  Ballard's  Rc-minis- 
cences. 


ers,  who  now  condtict  a  very  successful 
foundry  and  machine  shop. 

With  the  completion  and  opening  of  the 
Erie  canal  in  1825,  furnishing  cheap  and  ex- 
tensive transportation  facilities  between 
Syracuse  and  eastern  markets  and  ports, 
the  people  of  Cortland  county  and  vicinity 
were  imbued  with  an  earnest  desire  for  rail- 
road connection  with  the  great  waterway  at 
Syracuse,  thirty  miles  distant ;  this  feeling 
found  expression  in  an  application  to  the 
Legislature  of  1826  for  a  railroad  charter, 
the  road  to  run  from  Binghamton  to  Syra- 
cuse, directly  through  Cortland  county. 
The  charter  was  granted  (the  first  in  the 
State)  but  the  road  was  never  built  under  its 
authority.  It  was  thirty  j-ears  later  before 
Cortland  was  favored  with  railway  connec- 
tions to  distant  points. 

In  writing  of  the  settlement  and  estab- 
lishment of  business  in  Cortlandville  prior 
to  the  year  1829,  we  have  referred  to  that 
territory  only  as  a  portion  of  the  old  "  ten 
miles  square"  of  the  town  of  Homer.  Cort- 
landville, as  a  town,  had  no  existence  until 
in  April,  1829,  when  it  was  set  off  from 
Homer,  by  a  line  dividing  it  in  halves  from 
east  to  west  along  the  lines  of  the  two  mid- 
dle tiers  of  lots.  The  boundaries  of  the 
town  thus  established  remained  unchanged 
until  the  year  1845,  when  lot  No.  10  in 
Virgil  was  added  to  this  town  ;  and  in  the 
next  year  all  that  portion  of  lot  No.  9  in 
Virgil  Ij'ing  east  of  the  Tioughnioga  river 
was  added  to  it. 

It  has  been  otir  purpose  thus  far  in  the 
history  of  this  important  town  to  give  the 
dates  of  arrival  of  most  of  the  prominent 
pioneers,  where  they  located,  etc.,  and  the 
establishment  of  some  early  industries  ;  but 
it  is  manifestly  impossible  to  follow  individ- 
ual arrivals  farther,  or  to  note  all  the  im- 
portant events  in  their  lives,  except  as  such 
will  necessarily  appear  in  the  village  histo- 
ries in  subsequent  pages. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


249 


TOWN    ORGANIZATION. 

The  first  town  meeting  for  the  town  of 
Cortland\ille  was  held  at  the  old  Eagle  Tav- 
ern on  the  2d  day  of  March,  1830.  Present, 
Henry  Stephens  and  Samuel  M.  Perkins, 
as  stated  in  the  records.  Henry  Webb  was 
chosen  clerk  pro  tevt.  Reports  from  the 
school  commissioners,  highway  commis- 
sioners and  poormasters  were  read  and  ac- 
cepted, and  the  next  meeting  ordered  held 
at  the  court-house,  on  the  2d  Tuesday  of 
March,  1831.  The  following  town  officers 
were  elected :  — 

Commissioners  of  highways  —  Parker 
Butterfield,  Eleazer  May,  Wm.  R.  Bennett. 

Assessors —  Harr>'  McGraw,  Daniel  Mal- 
lory,  Dan  Hibbard. 

School  commissioners  —  Rufus  Boies, 
Gilbert  Edgcomb,  jr..  Asa  Loring. 

School  inspectors  —  Marvin  Huntington, 
Joseph  C.  Morse,  Chas.  Chamberlain. 

Commissioners  of  the  gospel  and  school 
lot  —  Rufus  Boies  and  Canfield  Marsh. 

Poormasters  —  Daniel  Miller,  Tercius 
Eels. 

Constables  —  Eleazer  Carpenter,  H.  S. 
Brockway,  Hezekiah  M.  Sanders,  Gilmore 
Kinney. 

Collector  —  Micah  Hotchkiss. 

Sealer  of  weights  and  measures  —  Ed- 
ward Allen. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  Jacob  Badgley, 
Hiram  McGraw,  Jonathan  L.  Woods. 

John  Miller  had  been  made  the  first  su- 
pervisor and  Homer  Gillett,  town  clerk ; 
they  were  re-elected  in  1831.  At  the  first 
town  meeting  $100  was  appropriated  for 
the  support  of  the  poor,  and  a  like  sum  for 
bridges.  The  town  was  divided  into  fifty- 
three  road  districts,  and  several  new  roads 
were  laid  out,  notable  among  which  were 
what  is  now  Mill  street,  Railroad  street  and 
a  portion  of  Port  Watson  street.  At  that 
time  a  road  known  as  "the  Baptist  road" 
ran  from  Port  Watson,  starting  on  the  Main 


street  a  little  northward  from  the  bridge, 
diagonally  across  the  "square,"  coming  out 
near  the  junction  of  Adams  street  with  the 
road  to  Homer,  where  the  old  Baptist  church 
was  situated.  Much  of  the  flat  land  just 
east  from  the  village  and  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  present  location  of  the  D.,  L.  &  W.  de- 
pot was  then  low  and  swampy  ;  so  much  so 
that  the  "Baptist  road  '  had  to  be  "cordu- 
royed" to  render  it  passable  ;  and  the  anti- 
quarian in  a  small  way  can  find  there  the 
logs  of  the  old  roadway  in  some  places  at 
the  present  day.  Another  road  then  ran 
over  "court-house  hill"  from  about  where 
V^irgil  street  joins  Tompkins  street,  coming 
out  on  the  north  end  in  the  vicinity  of  Ad- 
ams street.  Both  of  these  roads  were  sub- 
sequently closed ;  on  account,  it  is  said,  of 
the  fact  that  too  many  people  from  the 
southern  portions  of  the  county  who  came 
to  the  business  center  to  trade,  took  one  or 
the  other  of  these  roads  which  naturally  car- 
ried them  past  Cortland  and  into  Homer. 

At  the  town  meeting  of  183 1,  which,  it 
will  be  remembered,  was  ordered  held  at  the 
court-house,  it  was  ordered  that  the  next 
meeting  be  held  again  at  the  Eagle  Tavern. 
It  might  prove  interesting  and  may  be  amus- 
ing to  know  the  real  reason  for  this  change; 
but  it  is  one  of  those  abstruse  matters  that 
will,  probabh',  never  be  solved. 

More  roads  were  opened  in  1832,  among 
which  was  the  one  running  westward  from 
the  "back  road"  between  Homer  and  Cor- 
land  villages,  and  that  from  South  Cortland 
to  Virgil.  Extensive  changes  were  also 
made  in  the  road  districts  of  the  town.  In- 
deed, the  principal  business  of  the  town 
officers  in  those  days  fell  upon  the  highway 
commissioners.  In  1834  Greenbush  street 
was  extended  to  the  "  Baptist  road." 

It  was  down  to  the  date  last  mentioned 
and  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years  previous, 
that  the  Tioughnioga  river  presented  an 
animated  scene  about  three  times  a  year. 


250 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


When  tlic  fall  rains  occurred  and  when  the 
snow  melted  away  in  the  spring,  as  well  as 
often  in  the  month  of  June,  the  stream  would 
be  filled  to  overflow  and  became  a  wild  rush- 
ing torrent.  Then  there  was  bustle  and 
excitement  at  the  different  business  points 
along  its  banks,  and  espcciall)-  at  Port  Wat- 
son, wliich  was  calleil  the  head  of  naviga- 
tion. At  that  place  a  boat-yard  did  a  lively 
business  for  many  years,  and  arks  and  scows 
in  large  numbers  were  built  for  the  trans- 
portation of  produce,  potash,  whisky,  pot- 
ter)--ware,  maple  sugar  and  such  other 
commodities  as  could  be  spared  and  turned 
into  money  in  the  markets  of  Pcnns)-l\ania 
along  the  Susquehanna.  When  the  waters 
of  the  river  began  to  rise,  these  craft,  some 
of  which  are  said  to  have  been  ninety  feet 
long,  were  moored  at  the  Port  Watson  dock 
and  a  strong  complement  of  tcmporar\- 
'longshoremen  engaged  to  load  them  as 
rapidly  as  possible.  The  famous  pilots, 
among  whom  were  Marsena  Morgan,  Cap- 
tain Radgely,  Major  Shapley,  Luman  Rice, 
Wakefield,  Chapman  and  others,  assumed 
unusual  importance,  esjiecially  in  the  eyes 
of  the  younger  generation,  to  whom  a  water 
trip  to  Baltimore  was  then  looked  upon 
with  more  awe  than  a  voyage  to  England 
can  now  inspire.  When  the  boats  were 
loaded,  the  pilots  and  the  crews  would  go 
on  board,  the  lines  were  cast  off  and  away 
down  the  swift  current  they  went,  singly  or 
lashed  together  by  twos  or  threes,  amid  the 
plaudits  of  their  owners  and  others  on  the 
dock. 

It  was  at  such  times  that  the  local  news- 
papers complacently  enlivened  their  col- 
umns with  such  announcements  as  the  fol- 
lowing, under  date  of  April  6th,  1818:  — 

PORT  WATSON  — HIGH  \V.VIT:R. 

CLE.'VRED. 

Exporter  —  G.  Rice,  master,  for  HanislHirj;: 
kiden  with  cheese  and  gypsum. 


Crazy  y<i'i/' — I,.  Rice:  laden  with  gypsum, 
for  Harrishurg. 

Dutch  Trader — Shapley,  master;  gypsum. 

j'Varii:;atnr —  Parsons,  for  Columbia  ;  gypsum. 

Brotlicr  'yoiiatJiaii  —  Taylor,     "  " 

Gold  Iluntcr — Sherwood,  "  " 

Indian  Chief —  Billings,  "  " 

Restdulion  —  May  ;  for  Marietta,  gy]isum. 

Perseverance  —  Wakefield,     '■  " 

Enterprise — Wakefield.  for  Middletown  ; 
gypsum. 

Lazy  Torn  —  Wakefield,  for  Nortluimberian<l; 
gypsum. 

Sour  Cnvit — Wnkefiel<],  for  Nortlunnherland; 
gypsum. 

Yankee  Ro,i;ue — Wakefield,  Sunbury  ;  gypsum. 

A  few  days  later,  and  doubtless  on  the 
trip  above  referred  to,  Luman  Rice  met 
with  a  terrible  accident,  while  endeavoring 
to  land  at  Northumberland.  He  had  coiled 
a  rope  around  his  left  arm,  with  one  end  of 
it  fast  to  the  boat.  He  threw  the  other 
end  around  a  tree  that  leaned  over  the  river, 
when  the  momentum  of  the  boat  instantly 
tightened  the  coil  and  severed  his  arm,  as 
if  with  a  knife.  He  fell  into  the  stream, 
and  actually  swam  ten  rods  with  his  bleed- 
ing limb,  until  he  was  rescued.  His  wounded 
member  had  to  be  amputated.  In  the 
following  year  (18 19)  the  following  craft 
cleared  from  Port  Watson  in  November:  — 

Boat  S'cvif till  re  —  Cross,  master;  for  Colum- 
bia, with  thirt\'-eight  barrels  of  salt. 

Independence — Chapman,  master,  for  Colum- 
bia, with  thirty-si.\  barrels  of  salt. 

Rani^vr — ^\"akefield  :  thirty-si.x  barrels  of  salt, 
for  the  same  port. 

Ark,  Neptune — May,  master,  for  Middle- 
town,  with  thirty  barrels  salt. 

With  the  construction  of  numerous  dams, 
necessitating  the  building  of  shallow  scows 
only  for  river  transportation,  and  greatly 
increasing  the  risk  and  danger,  with  the 
gradual  diminution  of  the  volume  of  water 
in  the  river,  these  methods  of  transportation 
had  to  be  abandoned  ;  but  old  settlers  used 
to  relate,  in  the  most  vi\'id  style,  incidents 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


251 


connected  with  river  na\-igation  —  the 
"shooting"  of  dams,  running  of  rapids, 
grounding  in  sharp  bends,  and  their  night 
amusements  when  tied  up  at  different  points 
— ■  that  would  vie  with  the  wildest  tales  of  a 
Mississippi  river  pilot.  There  was  very  lit- 
tle boating  down  the  Tioughnioga  after  the 
year  1840. 

In  the  summer  of  1832  considerable  ap- 
prehension was  felt  throughout  the  country 
on  account  of  a  threatened  invasion  of  Asi- 
atic cholera.  The  appearance  of  the  dread 
disease  in  New  York  city  was  announced 
over  the  land,  and  active  measures  were 
adopted  in  all  sections  to  avert  its  terrors. 
J.  Badgley,  H.  Stephens,  H.  McGraw,  J.  L. 
Woods,  justices  of  the  peace,  and  Tercius 
Eels,  overseer  of  the  poor,  met  on  the  3d 
day  of  July  of  that  year,  under  the  law  of 
June  22d,  "for  the  preservation  of  the  pub- 
lic health,"  to  determine  if  it  was  expedient 
to  constitute  a  board  of  health  and  appoint 
a  health  officer  for  the  town  of  Cortland- 
ville. 1 

Messrs.  Harry  McGraw,  Joshua  Ballard, 
Mead  Merrill,  Danforth  Merrick,  Wm.  Bart- 
lit,  Wm.  H.  Shankland  and  Wm.  Randall 
were  made  a  board  of  health,  with  Dr. 
Miles  Goodyear  as  health  officer.  This 
board  adopted  ordinances  providing  in  sub- 
stance that  no  stage  or  other  public  con- 
veyance should  carry  through  the  town  any 
person  sick  with  cholera  or  who  had  been 
exposed  to  it,  unless  such  person  bore  a  cer- 
tificate that  no  danger  need  be  apprehended 
in  the  case,  under  a  penalty  of  $100.  Cit- 
izens were  required  to  cleanse  their  prem- 

1  In  the  Cortland  Advocate  of  this  date  appeared  the 
following  card  :  — 

"Contemptible  Speculatio.v. —  To  the  editor  of  tlie 
Advocate:  I  understand  that  vultures  are  abroad  pur- 
diasing  'cholera  medicines,'  such  as  camphor,  etc.,  in- 
tcntling  to  reap  a  rich  harvest  from  the  miseries  of  the 
human  family.  May  heaven  avert  the  doom,  but  if  the 
cholera  should  appear  among  us,  it  is  hoped  the  .=pecu- 
lators  will  ticed  the  medicines  they  have  acquired  by 
such  dishonorable  means.  Scott." 


ises,  under  penalty  of  $25.  The  health  offi- 
cer was  required  to  report  all  cases  of  infec- 
tious diseases  to  the  board  at  9  o'clock  each 
morning  and  citizens  were  also  requested  to 
report  all  infectious  cases. 

The  disease  swept  over  the  countr)%  but 
owing  to  these  precautions  on  the  part  of 
the  people  of  Cortland  county,  and  partic- 
ularly of  this  town,  and  the  interior  location 
of  the  county  away  from  the  great  lines  of 
through  travel,  the  epidemic  was  but  little 
felt  here. 

An  institution  called  the  "  Cortlandville 
Literary  Association"  was  organized  No- 
vember 29th,  1852.  Its  officers  were  Fred- 
erick Hyde,  president ;  G.  K.  Stiles,  vice- 
president;  H.  G.  Crouch,  secretary;  Ste- 
phen Brewer,  treasurer.  A  committee  of 
five  was  appointed  to  arrange  for  a  course 
of  lectures.  Lewis  Kingsley,  Rev.  H.  R. 
Dunham,  E.  F.  Gould,  H.  G.  Crouch  and 
James  L.  Burst  were  the  executive  commit- 
tee. It  may  be  assumed  that  with  such 
men  as  those  named  at  the  head  of  this  as- 
sociation, it  accomplished  its  aim,  and  fur- 
nished the  people  with  good  lectures. 

Although  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  of 
Cortlandville  had  their  hopes  of  railroad 
communication  with  distant  markets  raised 
to  a  high  pitch  on  several  occasions,  begin- 
ning with  the  grant  of  a  charter  for  a  road 
from  Syracuse  to  Binghamton  in  1826,  their 
hopes  failed  of  realization  until  1854-55, 
when  the  Syracuse  and  Binghamton  railroad 
was  opened  for  business.  The  first  steps 
towards  the  inauguration  of  this  enterprise 
were  taken  in  1848-49,  and  the  work  of 
construction  was  begun  in  1852.  The  road 
was  built  entirely  by  subscription,  and  this 
town  was  not  behind  any  other  in  the 
county  in  supporting  the  enterprise ;  the 
farming  comnnmit)',  as  well  as  the  citizens 
of  the  villages,  opened  their  purses  and  lib- 
erally contributed  towards  the  desired  ob- 
ject.    The  road  was  finished  and   formallj- 


252 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


opened  on  the  i8th  and  19th  of  October, 
1854,  the  details  of  which  event  have  been 
given  in  the  general  history.  It  was  sub- 
sequently sold  on  a  mortgage,  to  the  loss 
of  indivitlual  stockholders  ;  but  even  with 
that  disaster  charged  against  it,  the  benefits 
to  the  town  at  large  from  the  road  can 
scarcely  be  overestimated. 

The  advent  of  the  locomotive  displaced 
the  former  important  stage  business  through 
the  \-alley,  of  which  Cortland  was  a  promi- 
nent station  ;  changed  the  prospects  of  vil- 
lages and  gave  to  this  town  and  especially 
to  the  village  of  Cortland  an  impetus  the 
force  of  which  is  still  felt,  and  which  enabled 
it  to  far  outstrip  the  other  towns  of  the 
county.  Previous  to  1835  Homer  was  the 
leading  \illage,  but  the  population  was 
about  equal  in  the  two  towns  at  that  date. 
At  the  time  of  the  completion  of  the  rail- 
road, Cortlandville  had  nearly  si.x  hundred 
more  inhabitants  than  Homer,  while  the 
county  seat  was  fairlj-  started  on  its  career 
of  prosperity  and  growth  which  has  contin- 
ued to  the  present  time. 

In  the  )ear  1852  the  stone  bridge  at 
what  was  theiv  known  as  Mudge's  mills, 
was  built,  and  five  years  later  (in  1857)  ^^^^ 
town  appropriated  $400  to  rebuild  the 
bridge  at  Port  Watson.  Henry  Stephens, 
P.  H.  McGraw  and  J.  P.  Ingraham  were 
made  a  committee  to  decide  on  what  kind 
of  abridge  should  be  constructed.  In  1873 
the  iron  bridge  at  Blodgett's  Mills  was  con- 
structed, at  a  cost  of  over  $5,000. 

For  a  few  years  preceding  and  succeed- 
ing 1870  the  people  of  this  town,  as  well 
as  of  some  other  parts  of  the  county,  be- 
came deeply  imbued  with  a  desire  for  more 
railroads,  and  they  were,  in  consequence, 
prominently  instrumental  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  (formerly)  Ithaca  and  Cortland 
road;  the  bringing  in  this  direction  of  the 
branch  of  the  Midland  road,  and  tlie  inau- 
guration of  the  enter[)rise   of  building   the 


Utica,  Chenango  and  Cortland  railroad, 
which  has  not  yet  been  finished.  In  aid  of 
these  roads  the  town  voted  to  bond  itself  to 
the  amount  of  $100,000  for  the  Ithaca  and 
Cortland  road,  and  $150,000  for  the  Utica, 
Chenango  and  Cortland  road.  While  these 
heavy  in\cstmcnts  have  at  times  imposed  a 
grievous  burden  upon  the  tax-payers,  it  is 
generally  conceded  that  the  additional  rail- 
road connections  thus  secured  are  well  worth 
the  price.  To  them  maj-  be  attributed  much 
of  the  late  phenomenal  growth  of  Cortland 
village.  Something  of  an  efibrt  has  been 
made  within  the  past  two  or  three  years  to 
inaugurate  a  contest  against  the  payment  of 
the  railroad  bonds  of  the  town  ;  but  it  is  a 
pleasure  to  write  that  at  the  regular  meeting 
in  Januar)-,  1884,  it  was  definitely  settled 
that  the  bonds  should  be  paid  in  full. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  of  the  town,  from  its  organiza- 
tion to  the  present  time,  the  name  of  the 
super\isor  being  given  first  in  each  in- 
stance: — 

1830-31,  John  Miller,  Homer  Gillett. 
1832,  Washington  G.  Parker,  Homer  Gil- 
lett. 1833-34,  Joshua  Ballard,  Homer  Gil- 
lett. 1835,  Harry  McGraw,  Homer  Gil- 
lett.     1836,  Joshua  Ballard,  Homer  Gillett. 

1837,  Harry     McGraw,     Homer     Gillett. 

1838,  Dan  Hibbard,  Tercius  Eels.  1839— 
40,  H.  McGraw,  Tercius  Eels.  1841, 
Oren  Stimpson,  James  C.  Pomero)-.  1842, 
Abiram  L.  Bassett,  R.  A.  Reed.  1843-44, 
Abiram  L.  Bassett,  J.  C.  Pomeroy.  1845, 
Marcus  McGraw,  Adin  Webb.  1846-47, 
Oren  Stimpson,  Adin  Webb.  1848,  Hi- 
ram McGraw,  Adin  Webb.  1849,  Hiram 
Hopkins,  Adin  Webb.  1850,  Hiram  Mc- 
Graw, Adin  Webb.  1851,  Amos  Rice, 
Adin  Webb.  1852,  Hamilton  Putnam, 
Adin  Webb.  1853,  Abram  Mudge,  Adin 
Webb.  1854-55,  Harvey  S.  Crandall, 
Adin  Webb.  1856-57,  Abram  Mudge, 
Adin  Webb.      1858,  Deloss  McGraw,  Adin 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


253 


Webb.  1859,  S.  E.  Welch,  Adin  Webb. 
i860,  C.  L.  Kinney,  Adin  Webb.  1861, 
Francis  H.  Hibbard,  Adin  Webb.  1862- 
63,  S.  E.  Welch,  Adin  Webb.  1864-65, 
Deloss  McGraw,  H.  A.  Randall.  1866,  S. 
E.  Welch,  H.  A.  Randall.  1867,  Norman 
Chamberlain,  H.  A.  Randall.  1868,  S.  E. 
Welch,  A.  N.  Rounsville.  1869.  S.  E. 
Welch,  W.  J.  Mantanye.  1870,  S.  E. 
Welch,  Lewis  Bouton.  1871,  Deloss  Mc- 
Graw, Geo.  L.  Waters.  1872,  S.  E.  Welch, 
Geo.  L.  Waters.  1873-74,  Wm.  D.  Fred- 
erick, Geo.  S.  Sands.  1875,  Deloss  Mc- 
Graw, L.  P.  Hollenbeck.  .1877,  T.  Mason 
Loring,  L.  P.  Hollenbeck.  1878-79,  De- 
loss  McGraw,  L.  P.  Hollenbeck.  1880, 
Deloss  McGraw,  L.  P.  Hollenbeck.  1881- 
82-83,  R.  Bruce  Smith,  L  P.  Hollenbeck, 
1884,  Deloss  McGraw,  H.  A.  Dickinson. 

The  record  of  the  town  of  Cortlandville 
in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  is  a  noble  one. 
The  call  for  help  in  putting  down  the  un- 
holy attack  upon  the  life  of  the  government 
had  scarcely  gone  forth  before  a  company 
went  forward  under  Captain  Martin  C.  Clark 
and  Lieut.  Alvah  D.  Waters,  while  enlist- 
ments in  other  organizations  were  frequent. 
And  when  the  darkest  days  of  the  contest 
came,  and  call  after  call  for  great  armies  of 
soldiers  were  issued  from  the  national  capi- 
tal, men  and  money  were  both  freely  fur- 
nished by  Cortlandville  to  fill  the  se\eral 
quotas.  Special  meetings  were  held  in  ac- 
cordance with  directions  of  the  Board  of 
Supervisors,  as  already  detailed  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  town  of  Homer,  and  the  votes 
were  in  each  instance  almost  unanimous  for 
increasing  the  bounties  paid  for  enlistments 
to  the  highest  figures  proposed.  In  the 
cemetery  in  the  village,  and  in  many  an  un- 
marked grave  on  southern  battle-fields,  lie 
the  remains  of  the  brave  men  who  went 
forth  from  this  town  to  offer  up  their  lives 
in  sacrifice  for  the  Union.  Much  of  the 
record  of  their  deeds  has  already  been  w  rit- 


tcn  in  the  chapter  of  the  general  history 
devoted  to  that  subject.  The  names  of  all 
the  men  who  enlisted  from  the  town  and 
were  paid  bounties,  is  as  follows: — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  Bounty 
paid  to  each,  $300.  Total,  $27,600.  —  Ed- 
ward P.  Merritt,  Henry  Hollenbeck,  Abel 
G  Tuttle,  George  Ellsworth,  John  R.  Be- 
den,  George  L.  Waters,  Wilson  J.  Dayton, 
John  G.  Cobb,  Alfred  B.  Hicks,  Darius 
Lindsley,  Frank  Dolson,  John  D.  Frederick, 
Franklin  Hotchkiss,  Daniel  Johnson,  Al- 
bertus  Pierce,  Sylvester  Rounsevell,  Isaiah 
Simpson,  John  L.  Mann,  John  B.  Daball, 
John  Paulson,  William  H.  Mason,  Andus 
Berggren,  John  Lundin,  James  Stowell,  H. 
Deloss  Cole,  Franklin  D.  Russell,  William 
Otis  Tiffany,  Joseph  Hicks,  Clark  A.  Edg- 
comb,  George  A.  Marshal,  Michael  P.  Mas- 
ten,  Oringer  Stimpson,  Harrison  Webster, 
Nathan  P.  Allen,  William  C.  Tripp,  Peter 
C.  Carr,  Stephen  A.  Hastings,  James  M. 
Boorr,  John  Sullivan,  Peter  Smith,  William 
Jones,  Henry  Ward,  Robert  Gilmore,  John 
Jones,  James  Pierce,  Charles  H.  Waters, 
Charles  A.  Van  Hagen,  Frederick  B.  Farn- 
ham,  Charles  R.  Leonard,  William  A.  Clark, 
John  W.  Stebbins,  William  Brown,  Isaac 
Benson,  Adin  W.  Danes,  James  H.  Curtis, 
William  Hollenbeck,  Charles  B.  Hollenbeck, 
Caspar  Hable,  Theodore  F.  Noble,  William 
H.  Burdick,  George  W.  Newton,  John  W. 
Dougherty,  Winfield  S.  Carrier,  John  J. 
Joyner,  vet.,  Archibald  Bowker,  John  H. 
Crocker,  Edmund  Andrews,  Gillispie  B. 
Corwin,  vet,  Lyndon  H.  Goodenough,  John 
C.  Sherman,  Charles  H.  Estabrook,  Barney 
Carter,  George  W.  Barrett,  Albert  G.Wood, 
vet.,  Martin  Edgcomb,  vet.,  William  H.  My- 
ers, vet.,  John  Van  Rensselaer,  Watts  L. 
Bishop,  vet.,  John  Corl,  Elwood  F.  Gates, 
Roswell  Johnson,  Charles  Francis,  vet., 
Franklin  J.  Johnson,  Samuel  Hammond, 
Darius  S.  Ellis,  George  Harrington,  Albert  J. 
Jarvis,  vet.,  Robert  Arlow,  Charles  W.  Cook, 


254 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


William  H.  Galpin,  Thomas  G.  Meacham, 
James  Simpson. 

Call  of  July  i8th,  1864.  Bounty  paid 
$1,000,  except  $600  paid  to  seven  ;  $300 
to  five  ;  $500  to  four  ;  $700  to  two  ;  $900 
to  one,  and  $925  to  one.  Brokerage  $25. 
Total  bounties,  $77,925.  Total  brokerage, 
$2,125. — John  Gray,  jr.,  Henry  J.  Mudge, 
W'ni.  W.  Hatha\va\-,  sub.  for  A.  B.  Rowley, 
Ezra  R.  Puterbaugh,  sub.  for  I.  Y.  Carr, 
Miles  Sage,  sub.  for  H.  P.  Randall,  Alonzo 

D.  Goodwin,  sub.  for  PI  A.  Fish,  John 
Brown,  sub.  for  Chas.  E.  Rowe,  Thomas  J. 
Mills,  sub.  for  I.  D.  Warren,  Wm.  Norris, 
sub.  for  E.  L.  Stillman,  Daniel  Auringer, 
sub.  for  C.  Wickwire,  Patrick  Nolan  sub. 
for  H.  Bingham,  R.  Garrutt,  sub.  for  J.  D. 
Schermerhorn,  James  Harrington,  sub.  for 

E.  D.  Chafy,  Francis  White,  sub.  for  R.  B. 
Smith,  James  Neaville,  sub.  for  C.  W.  Col- 
lins, John  Wesley,  sub.  for  T.  Parks,  Seth 
Rogers,  sub.  for  A.  D.  Blodgett,  James 
Snow,  sub.  for  H.  E.  Rogers,  Eugene  D.  Ar- 
nold, Charles  O.  Alger,  Charles  F.  Beers, 
Frank  H.  Bement,  Horton  E.  Bates,  Daniel 
E.  Baker,  E.  Clinton  Ball,  Joel  Benson,  Ira 
T.  Brum,  Frederick  Burch,  William  Burns, 
Charles  H.  Chamberlain,  Elisha  P.  Crosby, 
Alonzo  Carpenter,  Thomas  Ellsworth, 
Charles  C.  Etz,  John  AI.  Fish,  Joseph  Fisher, 
Matthias  W.  Fritz,  Charles  E.  Gurley, 
George  Goodell,  Alphonso  Gross,  Harrison 
Givens,  Andrew  Hall,  Cornelius  Hicks,  Da- 
vid W.  Hodges,  Eli  B.  Hubbard,  Grove  E. 
Jarvis,  Refine  Eatting,  David  Eoomis,  Dan- 
iel Maltbj^  P'rank  Alabury,  Eucian  Maburj-, 
William  H.  Miller,  William  N.  Owen,  Al- 
bert W.  Pierce,  Royal  E.  Palmer,  Frank  F. 
Peck,  Albertus  H.  Peckham,  Powell  C. 
Plumb,  Joseph  G.  Rockwell,  Burdette  Rich- 
ardson, William  E.  Simpson,  Melvin  Sher- 
man, \\'illard  Smith,  William  P.  Stone, 
Hamilton  Spoor,  Daniel  S.  Terwilliger,  Wil- 
liam H.  Traver,  Martin  Totman,  Charles  E. 
Wood,  David   ¥.  Wallace,    Isaac   B.  Wain- 


wright,  Orlando  Barber,  Charles  Barnes, 
Pembroke  Pierce,  R.  D.  Graham,  Wm.  S. 
Bunnell,  sub.  for  I.  W.  Brown,  Edward 
Fleck,  sub.  for  J.  M.  Pomero)-,  Wm.  H. 
Douglass,  sub.  for  Deloss  McGraw,  Hiram 
E.  Hawley,  George  H.  McGee,  sub.  for  J. 
A.  Nixon,  Chas.  W.  Fox,  sub.  for  Carmi 
Persons,  Bernard  Gill,  George  Washin<jton, 
Major  Coles,  George  Washington,  Franklin 
Kenfield.  George  E.  Kelley. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bounty 
paid  to  each,  $600,  except  $300  to  one,  and 
$500  to  seven.  Total  bounties,  $33,700. 
Total  brokerage,  $855.  Of  this  bounty  the 
town  paid  $8,100. — Wm.  Kilkenny,  sub.  for 
J.  S.  Barber,  Simeon  D.  Sampson,  Frank 
Eoomis,  Henry  E.  Jones,  George  Dunlap, 
George  Martin,  Charles  Smith,  James 
Rudd\-,  Frederick  Kane,  Henry  Ferris,  Jo- 
seph Fenton,  Isaac  Brjant,  Wm.  Brown, 
Charles  Deitzer,  James  Washington,  Henry 
Williams,  Edinboro  Taylor,  James  Smith, 
Owen  McEntyre,  John  Kelley,  F.  A.  Bur- 
dell,  Patrick  Hunt,  \\'illiam   Riley,  August 

I  Bank,  Matthew  Beatty,  Randolph  Mann, 
Anthony  Howard,  Charles  Howard,  Daniel 
T.  Shaw,  John  McCarty,  George  J.  Will- 
iams, Peter  West,  Andrew  Bradley,  William 
Burtell,  Michael  Murra}-,  Charles  Herron, 
George  Winter,  Daniel  J.  MuUau,  John 
Eambert,  Phillip  Herrberg,  Patrick  Tully, 
William  West,  Eewis  Holberg,  James  K. 
Miller,  Thomas  P.  Fitzgerald,  John  Snell, 
John  Talbert,  Thomas  Farlay,  Thomas  By- 
ran,  George  Clark,  John  Hughes,  Frank 
Ma}',  Peter  \\  ells,  Benjamin  McMarlin,  John 

j  Simpson,  James  Kinlcck,  Freeman  A.  Hun- 
ter, Richard  Freeman. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  February  ist,  1864, 
March,  1864,  $27,600.00;  paid  for  filling 
quota,  call  July  i8th,  1864,  $80,050.00; 
paid  for  filling  quota,  call  December  19th, 
1864,  $26,455.00;     grand     total,     $134,- 

I   105.00. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


25s 


CORTLAND  VII.LACIE. 

A  little  to  the  north  of  the  center  of  the 
town  of  Cortlandville,  the  diversified  topog- 
raphy of  which  renders  it  a  series  of  pictur- 
esque landscapes,  is  situated  a  broad  plain 
a  little  less  than  two  miles  in  average  ex- 
tent in  either  direction,  apparently  level, 
but  descending  very  gradually  to  the  east- 
ward. Near  its  western  boundary,  but  sep- 
arated from  it  by  a  narrow  portion  of  the 
plain  itself,  rises  a  rounded  hill  to  the  height 
of  from  one  to  two  hundred  feet;  this  hill 
is  somewhat  longer  from  east  to  west  than 
in  its  north  to  south  diameter.  Along  its 
foot  on  the  western  and  northwestern  sides, 
flows  the  clear,  spring-fed  stream  called  Ot- 
ter creek.  Across  the  plain  from  north  to 
south  and  near  its  eastern  boundar)-  flows 
the  Tioughnioga  river,  formed  b}-  its  two 
branches ;  one  coming  down  directly  from 
the  northward,  and  the  other  (the  west 
branch)  flowing  along  at  the  foot  of  the 
high  hill  which  forms  the  northern  btiund- 
ary  of  the  plain,  jutting  down  into  it  and 
separating  the  two  valleys  of  the  river 
branches.  From  seven  different  points  of 
the  compass  valleys  of  varying  widths,  but 
all  of  them  possessing  features  of  natural 
beauty,  open  upon  this  broad  plain.  If  there 
is  a  spot  in  the  Empire  State  that  is  better 
adapted,  either  in  practical  adxantages  or 
natural  attractiveness,  for  the  site  of  a  vil- 
lage or  city,  it  is  not  known  to  the  writer ; 
and  here  has  grown,  during  the  past  eighty 
years,  the  present  populous  and  thriving 
village  of  Cortland. 

The  first  settlements  within  the  present 
corporate  limits  of  this  village  have  already 
been  referred  to  in  the  early  pages  of  the 
history  of  the  town.  With  the  location  and 
pioneer  labors  of  such  men  as  Jonathan 
Hubbard,  Moses  Hopkins,  Obadiah  Boies, 
William  Mallory,  David  Merrick,  Joshua 
Bassett,  Oliver  Wiswell,  Henry  Stephens, 
and    scores    of   others    to    whom  we  shall 


herein  refer,  will  forever  be  honorably  as- 
sociated the  early  growth  and  prosperity  of 
Cortland  ;  and  their  noble  example  seems 
to  ha\e  brought  to  life  in  the  later  daj's  of 
unexampled  advancement  in  the  village 
the  same  qualities  which  inspired  their 
hearts  when  the  broad  \-alle\-  was  forest- 
covered  and  the  liill-tops  echoed  with  the 
nightly  howls  of  the  wolf 

Jonathan  Hubbard  and  Moses  Hopkins 
were  the  pioneers  of  Cortland  village ;  and 
when  in  1804  the  former  had  become  set- 
tled in  his  first  dwelling  —  the  first  one  built 
on  the  site  of  the  village  —  on  what  is  now 
the  corner  of  Court  and  Main  streets,  there 
were  but  two  other  houses  within  the  pres- 
ent corporation  limits,  unless,  perhaps,  a 
few  had  been  erected  at  Port  Watson.  Mr. 
Hubbard  lived  only  long  enough  to  seethe 
nucleus  of  a  village  rising  around  him  ;  but 
his  work  down  to  his  death  on  Christmas 
day,  1 8 14,  was  of  the  greatest  influence 
upon  the  future  of  the  place. 

Mead  Merrill  was  one  of  the  earl\-  settlers 
in  what  is  now  the  corporation  of  Cortland. 
He  lived  near  Port  Watson  and  made  many 
permanent  improvement>s  in  that  section. 
He  built  a  saw-mill  there  which  was  in  oper- 
ation in  1 8 16  and  about  the  year  1820,  or 
earlier,  erected  the  substantial  house  recent- 
ly owned  and  occupied  by  Frederick  Con- 
able.  Mr.  Merrill  is  credited  b}'  Mr.  Ballard, 
in  his  published  Rcunnisaiices,  as  being  the 
leader  of  the  Federal  political  party  until  its 
dissolution.  He  was  appointed  surrogate  in 
the  spring  of  18 10  and  county  clerk  in  18 13. 
Mr.  Merrill  was  a  strong  Universalist  in 
religious  belief,  and  it  was  largely  by  his 
efforts  that  the  cobble-stone  church  was 
erected  here. 

Josiah  Cushman  was  a  resident  of  Cort- 
land village  (or  its  site)  soon  after  1800, 
and  became  well  known  through  his  build- 
ing of  the  first  court-house,  as  heretofore 
described. 


256 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Nathan  Luce  was  one  of  the  carhest 
merchants  in  Cortland,  and  about  tlic  year 
1S18  built  a  hotel  which,  with  subsequent 
enlargements,  made  the  long  famous  Eagle 
Tavern,  and  which  was  burned  in  1862. 

Jacob  Wheeler  came  here  in  181 2  and 
was,  probablj-,  about  the  first  blacksmith  in 
the  village  and  a  maker  of  edge  tools.  He 
was  an  industrious  and  enterprising  man 
and  did  not  purpose  to  fail  in  life  through 
the  delinquencies  of  creditors,  as  is  shown 
b\-  the  following  card,  which  appeared  in 
the  newspaper:  — 
"  Dear  Friends  : — 

"  All  notes  and  accounts  whicli  remain  un- 
settled on  the  first  day  of  August  next  will  have 
to  be  paid  to  a  justice  or  constable  without  any 
reserve,  for  I  will  pay  my  debts. 

"jAcor.  Wheeler." 

His  shop  was  on  the  site  of  the  Freer 
foundry. 

Joshua  liassett  was  another  of  the  first 
prominent  citizens  to  locate  on  the  site  of 
Cortland  village.  His  residence  stood 
where  the  Calvert  block  now  is.  He  with 
his  son,  W.  H.  Bassett,  were  the  first  jew- 
elers and  silversmiths  in  the  place. 

William  Bartlit  settled  in  Cortland  village 
not  long  after  the  beginning  of  the  century. 
He  was  a  saddle  and  harness  maker,  the 
first  in  the  place,  and  long  had  a  prosperous 
trade,  giving  employment  to  a  number  of 
hands.  His  advertisement  appears  in  the 
local  paper  soon  after  it  was  started  in  1 8 1  5. 
Mr.  Bartlit  was  one  of  the  commissioners 
appointed  to  superintend  the  building  of 
the  court-house.  He  was  elected  to  the 
Senate  in  1842,  from  the  (then)  seventh 
district. 

The  literary  tastes  of  the  people  of  Cort- 
land village  were  exhibited  as  early  as  1 8 1  5, 
when  an  association  was  formed  for  the  es- 
tablishment of  "The  Cortland  Village  Li- 
brary," the  trustees  being  Levi  Lee,  John 
Burnham,  Roger  Edgcomb,  Nathan  Blodg- 


ett  and  Roswell  Randall.  The  library  was 
purchased,  embracing  a  respectable  number 
of  the  then  standard  works  in  historical  and 
general  literature.  It  was  a  circulating  li- 
brary and  was  kept  in  the  office  of  the  county 
clerk  during  its  existence  of  several  years. 
Roswell  Randall  is  said  to  have  been  the 
moving  spirit  in  this  enterprise.' 

Among  other  prominent  citizens  of  the 
little  village  who  came  here  as  early  as  1 8 1  5^ 
or  earlier,  were  James  Percival,  the  accom- 
plished editor  of  the  first  new'spaper  printed 
here  and  already-  more  fully  noticed  ;  Ben- 
jamin S.  and  David  Campbell,  also  printers 
and  editors,  who  became  proprietors  of  the 
Cortland  Republican  in  Februar\',  1S17,  the 
former  being  then  sheriff  of  the  county  ; 
and  Asahel  Lyman,  who,  about  the  year 
1 8 16,  erected  the  old  brick  building  still 
standing  on  the  corner  of  Main  street  and 
Groton  avenue,  and  owned  by  John  S. 
Samson.  This  is  now  the  oldest  brick 
building  in  the  village.  Here  Mr.  Lyman, 
and  later  the  firm  of  A.  P.  &  G.  N.  L}-man, 
did  a  prosperous  business  for  a  number  of 
years.  Samuel  Hotchkiss,  also,  settled  in 
Cortland  as  early  as  1815  and  became  a 
prominent  citizen.  He  was  made  deputy 
clerk  of  the  county  by  Wm.  Mallory  in 
18 1 5,  and  held  the  office  under  him  and  two 
succeeding  clerks,  Joshua  Ballard  and  Mat- 
thias Cook,  until  January  1st,  1823.  He 
was  elected  clerk  under  the  new  constitu- 
tion of  1822  and  held  the  office  for  twelve 
successive  years.  He  was  again  elected  for 
the  term  beginning  in  January,  1844,  and 
again  in  1847.  Mr.  Hotchkiss  lived  in  Cort- 
land a  respected  citizen  until  1883,  when 
he  died. 

1  We  are  compelled  to  record  the  fact  that  little  has 
been  done  since  the  time  of  this  first  lil)rary  (which  was 
a  very  creditable  one  for  that  jieriod)  towards  establish- 
ins;  a  library  in  Cortland  village,  until  quite  recently, 
when  the  ladies  have  taken  the  matter  in  hand.  They 
should  receive  such  support  as  will  result  in  the  speedy 
establishment  of  a  large  library  which  will  be  a  credit  to 
the  village. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


257 


Edward  Allen  came  to  Cortland  in  18 17, 
and  became  a  citizen  of  the  village  ;  he  was 
universally  respected  and  his  life  might 
well  have  served  as  a  model  for  the  young 
men  of  his  time.  He  was  a  blacksmith  and 
purchased  a  lot  on  Mill  street  and  adjoining 
on  the  east  the  corner  premises  of  Samuel 
Nelson,  now  owned  and  occupied  by  Fred- 
erick Ives.  Charles  Collins  has  built  his 
handsome  brick  dwelling  where  stood  the 
one-story  house  of  Mr.  Allen.  Mr.  Ballard 
gives  the  following  account  of  Mr.  Allen's 
life:  "His  life  is  a  striking  illustration  of 
manual  labor  dignified  by  nobility  of  char- 
acter. His  trade  was  that  of  a  blacksmith. 
His  pecuniary  means  were  limited.  He  was 
endowed  with  robust  health  and  freedom 
from  personal  vices.  He  was  honest,  in- 
dustrious and  intelligent,  full  of  neighborly 
kindness  and  sociall)'  alwa}-s  welcome.  He 
was  attentive  to  all  the  public  questions  of 
that  period  and  became  influential  ;  filled 
the  office  of  justice  of  the  peace,  and  was 
one  of  the  county  superintendents  of  the 
poor  for  several  years.  Mrs.  Allen  is  well 
remembered  for  unafifected  dignity  and  se- 
renity of  manner,  nobleness  of  person  and 
Christian  devotion.  They  had  sons  and 
daughters  that  adorned  the  household  and 
who  in  after  life  reflected  honor  upon  their 
parents."  One  of  the  sons  (Edward)  re- 
moved to  Aurora,  Illinois,  where  he  became 
mayor  of  the  city  and  State  Senator.  Wil- 
liam also  removed  to  that  city  and  became 
wealthy  and  influential. 

Judge  Samuel  Nelson  came  to  Cortland 
in  1818.  His  eminent  career  has  already 
been  detailed  herein.  Between  the  years 
1815  and  1820  the  little  village  grew  apace 
and  a  number  of  new  establishments  were 
opened.  The  mercantile  firm  of  Lyman  & 
Blair  was  formed  and  did  an  extensive  busi- 
ness for  several  years.  Chas.  W.  Lynde 
opened  a  new  store  just  south  of  where  the 
Union  Hall  block  now  stands.      Grove  Gil- 


lett  opened  a  tavern  where  A.  Sager'sdrug 
store  is  located.  David  Campbell  built  his 
dwelling  on  Main  street,  on  the  lot  now  oc- 
cupied by  Mr.  Garrison.  Joseph  R.  Cran- 
dall  opened  his  carriage  and  sleigh  manu- 
factory, which  is  referred  to  in  our  record 
of  the  manufacturing  interests. 

In  the  mean  time  the  two  brothers,  Wil- 
liam and  Roswell  Randall,  who  established 
themselves  here  as  early  as  18 13,  had  ex- 
tended their  business  operations  to  a  won- 
derful extent  for  so  small  a  place  and  early 
a  period.  They  had  two  large  stores,  one 
operated  by  Roswell,  where  the  new  Squires 
block  stands,  and  the  other  run  b\-  William 
in  the  Randal!  Bank  building.  They  owned 
distilleries  and  asheries,  two  of  the  former 
being  located  on  South  Main  street.  They 
dealt  in  everything  the  farmers  had  to  dis- 
pose of,  from  tow  cloth  to  live  stock,  and 
early  laid  the  foundation  of  the  wealth  they 
subsequently  acquired. 

The  settlement  of  Dr.  Goodyear  in  the 
village  has  already  been  alluded  to.  .  David 
Merrick  came  here  just  as  the  village  began 
its  growth  and  became  a  prominent  cit- 
izen. He  built  what  was  then  the  most 
pretentious  hotel  in  the  place,  which  stood 
just  west  of  the  site  of  the  Cortland  House. 
Here  Samuel  Nelson  boarded  when  he  first 
began  the  practice  of  the  law  in  Cortland. 
He  had  several  sons.  Danforth  built  the 
Cortland  House  and  conducted  it  for  man\- 
years.  Marcus  was  a  physician  and  re- 
moved to  the  west  and  Miner  Merrick  still 
lives  in  the  town. 

William  Elder  was  one  of  the  early  res- 
idents of  the  village  and  one  of  the  first 
manufacturers  in  the  vicinity.  About  the 
year  1824  he  became  the  owner  of  real  es- 
tate at  Port  Watson,  where  he  built  the  well 
known  tannery,  which  did  a  large  business. 
He  removed  to  the  village  at  an  early  day 
and  became  conspicuous  in  all  movements 
for  the  welfare  and  advancement  of  the  vil- 


258 


History  of  Coriland  Countv. 


lage.  He  was  a  prominent  nicnihcr  of  the 
Prcsbj'tcrian  Church  and  was  one  of  the 
building  committee  for  the  erection  of  the 
cluirch  edifice.  He  was  a  trustee  in  tlie  for- 
mation of  the  old  cemetery,  w  hich  was  loca- 
ted in  what  is  now  the  Normal  School 
grounds,  and  was  also  a  trustee  for  man\' 
years  of  the  academy.  He  was  one  of  the 
first  boot  and  shoe  merchants  and  manufact- 
urers in  the  village  and  carried  on  a  prosper- 
ous business  for  many  years.  Mr.  Elder 
had  four  daughters,  one  of  whom  married 
the  Rev.  Lemuel  S.  Pomero\-;  anotlicr  the 
Rev.  Azariah  Smitii,  of  Manlius;  and  a  third 
married  the  Rev.  Addison  J.  Strong. 

Among  the  persons  employed  at  an  early 
day  by  W.  &  R.  Randall  was  Elcazcr  \V. 
Edgcomb,  who  acted  in  the  capacity  of 
clerk.  He  was  iniiustrious  and  possessed  of 
excellent  business  capacity,  which  soon 
placed  him  in  a  foremost  position  in  the 
village.  Mr.  Ballard  wrote  of  him:  "He 
was  an  efficient  salesman  behind  the  counter; 
as  a  trader  in  produce  in  the  towns  along 
the  Susquehanna  river,  in  which  he  largely 
engaged,  he  was  an  accomplished  pilot  of 
boats  from  the  wharf  at  Port  Watson  to 
Harrisburg,  in  Pennsylvania,  and  for  about 
twenty  years,  beginning  in  1830,  he  was 
one  of  the  most  active  and  influential  po- 
litical managers  in  the  county.  In  1823 
he  formed  a  copartnership  with  Adin  Webb 
in  the  mercantile  business,  occupying  the 
store  formerly  used  by  W.  &  R.  Randall, 
and  becoming  very  prominent  among  the 
early  merchants;  an  ashery  was  connected 
with  their  business.  Produce  was  exten- 
sively purchased  by  them  for  transportation 
down  the  river.  Their  chief  clerk  for  years 
was  Hamilton  White,  who  subsequently  be- 
came a  leading  banker  of  Syracuse.  It  was 
in  the  employ  of  this  firm  that  Marsena 
Morgan  and  'Major'  Shapley  gained  im- 
perishable renown  as  skillful  river  pilots. 
In    No\'ember,    1837,    Mr.    P^dgcomb    was 


elected  sheriff  He  was  village  magistrate 
several  years  and  was  one  of  the  building 
committee  for  the  erection  of  the  present 
court-house.  Mr.  I'kigcomb  married  the 
eldest  daughter  of  Major  Adin  Webb.  She 
is  still  a  resident  of  the  village.  " 

We  have  already  referred  to  the  early  set- 
tlement of  Nathan  Blodgett  near  the  junc- 
tion of  the  east  and  west  branches  of  the 
river  about  a  mile  east  of  Main  street.  He 
died  there  at  a  good  old  age,  leaving  his 
son,  Henjamin  Franklin  Plodgett,  in  posses- 
sion of  the  homestead.  We  again  quote 
from  Mr.  Ballard:  "Benjamin  adopted  it  as 
his  home,  adding  to  its  value  by  the  erec- 
tion of  a  commodious  new  dwelling.  On 
the  16th  of  April,  1832,  during  the  ministry 
of  Nathaniel  E.  Johnson,  he  united  with  the 
Presbyterian  Church,  his  w  ife  luuing  previ- 
ously unitctl  with  the  same  church  in  1826. 
In  all  his  relations  with  the 
chuich  .uid  society  Mrs.  Blodgett  exhibited 
marked  loveliness  of  demeanor. 
One  of  his  daugliters  married  Dr.  Theodore 
Pomeroy  and  another  Rev.  O.  H.  Seymour. 
His  son,  Alonzo,  succeeded  to  the  owner- 
ship of  the  homestead  and  his  exemplary 
life  reflects  that  of  his  revered  father."  Lo- 
ren  Blodgett,  another  son  of  Nathan  Blodg- 
ett, w'as  associated  with  Jonathan  Hubbard 
in  building  the  first  mill  at  Blodgett's  Mills 
in  1806.  He  was  a  prominent  and  useful 
member  of  the  Baptist  Church  and  an  in- 
telligent and  enterprising  citizen. 

William  Mallor)-,  already  mentioned, 
moved  into  the  village  before  1815,  and  be- 
came a  prominent  and  influential  citizen 
and  politician.  He  built  his  residence  on 
the  site  of  the  Squires  block.  On  the  same 
lot  was  a  small  building  which  served  the 
purposes  of  county  clerk's  office  until  the 
old  brick  building  was  erected  in  1819.  Mr. 
Mallory  had  a  distillery  a  little  west  of  the 
Rock  Spring  cheese  factory.  He  was  sher- 
iff from    1800  to    1810;   count}^  clerk   from 


Town  ok  Corti.andvili.e 


259 


1815  to  1819,  and  in  1823  was  appointed 
judge  of  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  suc- 
ceeding Judge  Keep. 

The  life  of  Adin  Webb  has  been  alhided 
to  in  the  history  of  the  town  of  Homer;  but 
he  was  so  long  a  prominent  citizen  of  Cort- 
land \illage  that  his  career  merits  some  at- 
tention here.  He  came  to  Cortland  from 
Homer  in  1 823,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
mercantile  firm  of  Webb  &  Edgcomb,  and 
afterwards  of  the  firm  of  Webb  &  Bishop. 
Previous  to  this  time  he  had  taught  school 
for  seventeen  successive  years  in  Homer. 
He  was  elected  town  clerk  in  1809,  which 
office  he  held  twenty  years.  In  18 16  he 
was  appointed  surrogate  and  held  that  of- 
fice for  seven  years.  In  1829  he  was  elected 
sherift';  in  1S40  he  was  again  appointed 
surrogate,  holding  the  office  four  years,  and 
in  1845  he  was  made  town  clerk  of  Cort- 
landville,  which  office  he  held  for  eleven 
years.  He  united  with  the  Congregational 
Church  of  Homer  in  18 13,  and  when  he  re- 
moved to  Cortland  joined  the  Presbyterian 
Church.  For  man\-  }-ears  he  was  chorister 
and  a  few  of  the  older  inhabitants  of  the 
place,  who  have  listened  to  his  voice  Sab- 
bath after  Sabbath,  will  remember  him,  per- 
haps, in  that  capacity  more  vividly  than  in 
any  other.  It  is  sufficient  praise  of  Mr. 
Webb  to  say  that  all  of  the  public  trusts  to 
which  he  was  called  were  deserved  by  him 
and  their  duties  fulfilled  with  abilit\-  and 
loyalty  to  the  public  good. 

Joshua  Ballard  was  a  cotemporary  of  Mr. 
Webb  and  came  to  Homer  in  1797,  and  for 
one  season  taught  one  of  the  first  schools 
there.  He  removed  to  Cortland  about  the 
year  1819,  in  which  year  he  was  apppointed 
county  clerk.  He  was  one  of  the  founders 
of  the  Cortland  Academy  and  raised  and 
commanded  the  first  ca\  alr_\-  compan\-  in  the 
county.  Various  town  offices  were  conferred 
upon  him  and  he  was  an  eminently  respected 
and  useful  citizen.      Of  these  two  men   Mr. 


Ballard  wrote :  "  The  public  confidence  in 
the  intelligence,  integrity  and  fidelity  of 
Joshua  Ballard  and  Adin  Webb,  evidenced 
in  their  services  in  these  various  civil 
stations,  is  a  sufficient  encomium  upon 
their  memory  as  citizens.  One  reached 
in  age  almost  eighty-one,  the  other  eighty- 
five,  and  the  pilgrimage  of  each  was  distin- 
guished by  the  even  tenor  of  a  Christian 
example." 

Early  in  the  year  18 18  the  first  steps 
were  taken  towards  the  organization  of  the 
first  county  agricultural  society,  Levi  Boies, 
Chas.  W.  Lynde  antl  Henr\-  Stephens  being 
the  committee  to  draft  the  constitution. 
This  society  will  be  found  described  in  an- 
other place  in  these  pages. 

We  have  spoken  of  Joshua  "Bassett  as 
having  been  the  first  jeweler  in  the  village. 
Of  his  family  and  others  of  his  time  we  quote 
as  follows  from  Mr.  Ballard:  "  In  the  third 
number  of  the  first  village  paper,  and  over 
the  date  of  July  1 2th,  1815,  Joshua  Bassett 
and  his  son,  William  H.  Bassett,  announce 
to  the  public  that  thev  are  '  clock  and 
watchmakers,  gold  and  silversmiths  and  have 
lately  opened  their  shop  in  Cortland,  where 
they  make  to  order  all  kinds  of  work  in  their 
line,  ha\'ing  recently  received  from  New 
York  a  fresh  supply  of  materials.'  This 
shop  was  upon  the  same  lot  as  the  dwelling 

house  of  Mr.  Bassett.     Located  on  the  west 

I 

side  of  Main  street  and  about  in  the  center 
of  the  village,  it  was  one  of  the  hand- 
somest as  well  as  one  of  the  most  eligible 
sites  of  the  town.  Part  of  it  is  now  occu- 
pied b)'  the  Calvert  block  and  the  First 
National  Bank. 

"There  were  sons  and  ilaughters  in  the 
family  of  Mr.  Bassett,  and  for  over  sixty 
years  the  family  name  was  represented  in 
the  village.  Parents  and  children  were  dis- 
tinguished for  intelligence  and  uprightness 
of  character.  The  eldest  son,  Wm.  H.,  pos- 
sessed more  thaiv  ordinary  talent.    He  spent 


26o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


some  \'cars  in  Philadelphia  as  a  ]ni|)il  of  dis- 
tinguished artists.  He  became  an  accom- 
plished engraver  and  a  member  of  the 
Graphic  Companj-  located  in  Hartford, 
Conn.,  then  perliaps  the  most  celebrated 
company  of  artists  in  the  United  States.  .  . 
He  was  attractive  in  person,  cjracefnl  in  man- 
ner, winning  in  conversation  and  an  e.\qiiis- 
ite  humorist.  The  second  son,  Abiram  L. 
was  a  genius  in  his  way,  and  an  acute  ob- 
server of  men,  especially  of  their  follies  and 
weaknesses,  and  lu.xuriated  in  fun.  Pao-es 
might  be  written  of  his  grotesque  operations 
on  the  unsuspecting,  which  are  still  related 
with  the  traditions  of  that  period.  One  of 
the  daughters  married  Wm.  Randall  and 
another  married  Samuel  Moody  Perkins, 
one  of  the  early  attorneys  of  the  villao-e 

■'  •'  fc>      * 

■'  Adjoining  the  premises  of  Mr.  Bassett 
on  the  north,  were  the  grounds  of  Col.  Oba- 
diah  Boies,  a  time  honored  name  of  Cort- 
land, and  one  intimately  connected  with  the 
enterprises  and  political  movements  of  that 
period.  For  a  time  he  was  proprietor  of 
the  village  newspaper.  He  was  a  man  of 
ability,  active  and  influential,  and  filled  va- 
rious stations  of  public  trust.  .  .  .  Levi 
Boies,  a  brother  of  the  colonel,  was  an  early 
resident  and  physician  who  for  years  had 
an  extensive  and  lucrative  practice.  His 
residence  was  just  west  of  the  Cortland 
House  site,  where  John  S.  Samson  now 
lives.  He  married  a  daughter  of  David 
Merrick. 

"  John  Thomas  came  to  Cortland  in  1824 
and  became  the  law  partner  of  Henry  Ste- 
phens. He  was  a  graduate  of  Yale  College 
and  a  man  of  exxeptional  ability.  He  rep- 
resented the  county  in  the  Legislature  in 
1837.  He  became  a  resident  of  Galesburg, 
111.,  just  before  the  late  war.  Daniel  J.  Betts 
was  at  one  period  a  partner  of  Mr.  Thomas. 
He  came  from  Cooperstown  in  the  sprino- 
of  1823,  to  fill  the  position  of  clerk  in  equity 
in    the   sixth  circuit,  to    which  he   was   ap- 


pointed b_\-  Judge  Samuel  Nelson.  Mr. 
Betts  was  an  able  man  and  was  rapidlj- 
gaining  a  foremost  position  in  his  profes- 
sion, when,  by  overtaxing  his  strength  and 
taking  a  severe  cold,  he  was  prostrated  with 
a  fever  and  died  in  the  fiill  flush  of  man- 
hood. 

"  Truman  Doud's  name  must  forex'cr  be 
intimately  connected  with  the  early  ad- 
vancement of  Cortland  village.  He  was 
one  of  the  most  active  and  enterprising  bus- 
iness men  of  the  ]ilace  while  he  li\'ed,  and 
became  the  owner  of  a  large  tract  of  land  on 
both  sides  of  the  east  branch  of  the  Tiougii- 
nioga  between  the  old  Miller  farm  and  Bra}'- 
ton's  mill ;  was  an  extensive  dealer  in  cattle 
and  horses,  shipping  them  to  Philadelphia 
and  other  eastern  markets.  It  is  said  of  iiim 
by  an  old  resident  that  '  he  was  a  man  who 
had  a  good  many  irons  in  the  fire  and  none 
of  them  burned.'  He  died  at  the  early 
age  of  forty-four  years  and  his  loss  was 
deeply  felt  throughout  the  community.  The 
scenes  at  the  funeral  were  unusually  im- 
pressive for  that  period.  In  addition  to 
other  evidences  of  regard  tor  his  memory, 
upwards  of  fifty  citizens  of  the  highest  re- 
spectability formed  in  procession  on  horse- 
back at  the  residence,  nearly  two  miles  from 
the  cemetery,  and,  leading  the  carriages  in 
attendance,  accompanied  the  remains  to  the 
grave.  "^ 

Abram  Mudge  was  a  pi-ominent  citizen 
of  early  years  and  long  owned  the  old  "  red 
mill,"  now  operated  by  Thomas  F.  Brayton. 
Mr.  Mudge  was  the  supervisor  of  the  town 
a  number  of  years  and  was  the  father  of 
Ebenezer  Mudge,  now  of  this  village,  and  of 
Byron  and  Romeyn  Mudge.  Byroii  Mudge 
married  Julia  Rollo,  a  lady  whose  memory 
will  be  long  cherished  in  Cortland. 

At  this  point  it  will  be  proper  and  in- 
teresting to  quote  from  Mr.  Ballard  his 
comparison  of  the  village  in  early  days  with 

^Mr.  Iiallard's  Rt'/nijiisct'/ices. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


261 


its  condition  at  the  time  of  liis  writing,  but 
a  few  years  since.  Said  he  :  "It  is  a  pleas- 
ure to  recount  events  in  the  history  of  the 
village.  A  few  are  still  living  who  were  fa- 
miliar with  its  site  when  it  was  covered 
by  a  majestic  forest,  dotted  only  by  half  a 
dozen  humble  dwellings.  It  was  not  then 
imagined  that  in  the  circle  of  a  lifetime  it 
would  become  one  of  the  handsomest  towns 
in  the  Empire  State.  Standing  upon  the 
elevated  ground  just  east  of  the  village,  at 
an  hour  when  the  morning  sun  is  lighting 
up  the  distant,  gentlj'-swelling  hills,  cover- 
ing the  mists  of  the  valley  with  a  roseate 
hue,  while  beyond  temple,  tower  and  town 
reflect  the  radiance  of  the  King  of  Day, 
with  the  foreground  beautified  by  a  spark- 
ling, flowing  stream,  altogether  compose  a 
landscape  not  to  be  forgotten. 

"Take  another  stand-point  on  the  eleva- 
tion at  the  west  end  of  Court  street,  at  an 
hour  when  town  and  plain,  river,  valley,  and 
distant  hills  are  covered  with  a  sunset  glow-, 
and  gaze  upon  that  scene  until  it  melts 
into  the  softened  gray  of  tw'ilight,  and  )'ou 
have  a  panorama  of  surpassing  beauty. 
The  luxurious  fields  are  adorned  with  grand 
old  elms,  whose  strength  and  beauty  have 
increased  during  the  lapse  of  years  until 
the}'  have  become  monuments  to  perpetu- 
ate the  memor}-  of  the  founders  of  the  vil- 
Jage. 

"  Earl)-  residents  occaisonall)-  return  here 
from  their  distant  homes  in  the  West  and 
look  with  delight  upon  the  growth  and 
beauty  of  Cortland.  It  possesses  many  nat- 
ural advantages.  To  these  w-ere  added  the 
enterprise  and  energy  of  sagacious  men. 
Quite  early  in  its  local  history  advances  be- 
gan in  its  material  prosperity  and  the  cul- 
tivation of  the  morals  of  society.  Although 
the  date  of  its  origin  was  about  the  year 
18 1 5,  scarcely  a  building  of  that  period  now 
remains  of  its  original  foundation.  All 
have  been  taken  down,  all  pushed  aside,  to 


be  supplanted  by  loftier  and  more  costly 
structures.  The  old  yellow  store,  which 
Stood  for  nearly  forty  years  on  the  southeast 
corner  of  Main  street,  built  and  occupied  by 
Wm.  and  Roswell  Randall,  the  theatre  of 
their  early  fortunes,  and  once  resonant  with 
the  vocies  of  their  far-famed  clerks,  Eleazer 
W.  Edgcomb  and  Delos  Moody,  had  to 
move  from  its  position  and  take  a  place 
on  a  retired  street.  Jacob  Wheeler's 
blacksmith  shop  has  given  place  to  the 
foundry,  and  the  modest  home  of  Daniel 
Laisdell,  for  }-ears  a  furniture  dealer,  has 
been  dismissed  for  the  tasteful  residence 
of  Stephen  Brew'cr.  Luce's  tavern  has 
yielded  the  supremacy  to  the  Messenger 
House.  The  Squires  block  is  upon  the  lot 
which  for  years  was  the  cherished  home 
of  the  Hon.  William  Mallory ;  and  upon 
the  same  lot  was  a  small  wooden  building 
kept  as  a  clerk's  office  as  late  as  the  summer 
of  1 8 19.  Nearly  opposite  these  premises 
was  the  lot  on  which  stood  the  residence 
and  office  of  Oliver  Wis  well.  Judge  Wis- 
well  and  Judge  Stephens  were  law  partners. 
It  was  the  earliest  law  firm  in  the  county 
and  for  years  they  stood  at  the  head  of  the 
bar.  But  residence  and  office  have  gone 
into  the  past,  and  the  grounds  upon  which 
they  stood  are  now  covered  with  beautiful 
flowers,  which  are  suggestive  of  other  things 
which  are  beautiful  —  of  gentleness,  faith 
and  hope. 

"  Passing  along  upon  the  west  side  of 
Main  street,  the  corner  is  reached  where 
once  stood  a  tavern  which  for  several  years 
was  the  principal  inn  of  the  village — after- 
wards converted  into  a  female  seminary 
and  finally  crumbled  away  to  make  room 
for  the  Ta)-lor  Hall  block. 

"  On  the  lot  now  owned  by  the  Wick- 
wire  brothers  stood  a  building  in  former 
years  which  was  the  store  of  Chas.  W. 
Lynde,  and  afterwards  of  his  brother,  Geo. 
Lynde,  both  prominent  and  influential  men. 


262 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  former  a  State  Senator,  the  latter  an  ac- 
complislied  physician. 

"  The  old  store  of  Tercius  Eels  has  moved 
back  to  allow  the  splendid  Garrison  block- 
to  come  to  the  front.  The  corner  lot  where 
stands  the  noble  brick  edifice  of  Major  Aaron 
Sager  and  the  Dexter  House,  was  once  oc- 
cupied by  a  tavern  building  of  ordinary  size, 
owned  by  Grove  Gillett,  with  whom  Sam- 
uel Nelson,  afterward  one  of  the  judges  of 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States, 
took  board  for  a  time. 

"  Almost  the  only  landmarks  of  early 
years  in  the  way  of  buildings  now  left  on 
their  original  foundations  are  the  Lyman 
stores,  so  called,  and  the  dwelling  house 
built  by  Samuel  Nelson  —  the  former  owned 
by  John  S.  Samson,  the  latter  by  Frederick 
Ives.  They  were  both  attracti\e  buildings 
at  the  period  of  their  erection  and  their 
durabilitj'  proves  the  worth  of  the  materials 
and  the  faithfulness  of  the  workers.  In 
that  dwelling  house  Samuel  Nelson  spent 
the  first  three  years  of  his  married  life,  and 
in  an  upper  room  in  that  brick  store  he  be- 
gan the  practice  of  law  in  the  year  1817." 

In  referring  to  the  business  pursuits  of 
the  citizens  of  Cortland  village  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  year  1821,  Mr.  Ballard  wrote 
as  follows :  — 

"  Then  Truman  Doud,  Harry  Griffin, 
Gideon  Messenger,  Rufus  Jennings  and 
others,  were  engaged  in  the  purchase  from 
time  to  time,  of  immense  droves  of  cattle 
for  the  Philadelphia  market.  Joshua  Bal- 
lard and  Bela  Pierce,  from  )-ear  to  jear, 
were  purchasing  horses  of  prime  value, 
sometimes  for  market  in  Philadelphia  and 
sometimes  for  market  in  the  city  of  Hart- 
ford. In  the  month  of  March  in  the  year 
1 82 1  they  started  a  procession  of  fifty 
horses  from  this  village  to  Philadelphia,  and 
the  following  year  another  drove  to  Hart- 
ford. At  the  same  period  our  merchants 
and  produce  buyers  were  loading  arks  of 


forty  tons  burthen  and  boats  of  half  that 
tonnage,  with  gypsum,  salt,  oats,  potatoes 
and  pork,  and  floating  them  in  the  seasons 
of  freshet,  from  the  wharves  at  Port  Wat- 
son, for  Northumberland  and  Harrisburg 
on  the  Susquehanna.  Crowds  of  spectators 
were  accustomed  to  assemble  on  the  banks 
of  the  Tioughnioga,  just  above  the  bridge 
at  Port  Watson,  to  witness  the  start  of  the 
fleet  of  arks  and  boats  on  the  swollen  cur- 
rent of  the  river,  accompanied  with  shouts 
and  adieus  to  the  merry  crews  as  they 
darted  down  the  stream." 

It  was  on  the  23d  day  of  November, 
18 1 5,  that  the  local  newspaper  announced 
the  opening  of  the  dry  goods  store  of  Asahel 
L\man  —  the  first  establishment  of  that 
character  in  the  \-illage.  It  was  in  the  old 
brick  building  now  occupied  for  the  same 
purpose  by  John  S.  Samson,  or  on  that  site. 
Mr.  Lyman  was  from  Massachusetts,  "  pos- 
sessed an  intelligent  mind,  a  handsome  per- 
son and  an  agreeable  address."  Of  his 
family  and  his  business  connections,  Mr. 
Ballard  saj-s  :  "  In  a  year  or  two  he  formed 
a  copartnership  with  Sylvester  Blair,  the 
brother  of  Mrs.  Lyman,  and  for  many  years 
the  mercantile  firm  of  Lyman  &  Blair  ex- 
isted, attended  with  success.  Mr.  Blair  was 
endowed  with  an  excellent  capacity  for  bus- 
iness and  in  his  earh-  jears  was  active  and 
enterprising.  He  was  fortunate  in  his  mar- 
riage. His  wife  was  Nancy  Lyman  of 
Newark.  Beautiful  in  person,  and  lovely 
in  character,  she  lent  a  charm  to  the  domes- 
tic circle.  In  1829  he  originated  a  pottery 
establishment  in  this  village  and  for  years 
carried  on  an  extensive  trade  in  that  line, 
in  connection  with  his  mercantile  business. 
In  after  years  Madison  Woodruff  became 
the  proprietor  of  the  pottery  where  stone 
ware  of  superior  quality  and  workmanship 
is  still  manufactured." 

"  Mr.  Blair  built  a  brick  dwelling  house  on 
the    lot    now    occupied    by    Masonic    Hall 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


263 


block,  and  a  brick  store  adjacent,  wliich  he 
occupied  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  which 
occurred  in  the  city  of  New  York,  in  Octo- 
ber, 1839.  The  copartnership  of  Lyman  & 
Blair  was  dissolved  in  the  autumn  of  1826. 
About  the  year  1840  Mr.  Lyman  retired 
from  business,  and  was  succeeded  by  his 
sons,  Asahel  P.  and  Geo.  N.  Lj-man,  who 
continued  in  trade  until  about  the  year  1 846, 
and  having  disposed  of  their  property  here, 
they  located  in  the  west,  Asahel  in  Sheboy- 
gan and  George  at  Ripon,  Wisconsin. 

"About  the  year  18 17  Samuel  Blair,  a 
brother  of  Sylvester,  became  a  resident  in 
Cortland.  He  was  an  intelligent  man,  affa- 
ble and  gentle  in  manner,  leading  a  quiet 
life  and  pursuing  the  business  of  cooperage. 
Mrs.  Blair  was  a  woman  of  decided  worth. . 
.  .  .  Her  life  was  spared  to  witness  a  won- 
derful success  in  the  acquisition  of  wealth 
attending  her  sons,  Chauncej-  B.  Blair,  Ly- 
man Blair  and  W'm.  Blair.  Chauncey,  at 
an  early  day,  emigrated  to  Michigan  City 
and  engaged  largely  in  the  purchase  and 
sale  of  lands.  He  finally  went  to  Chicago 
and  became  president  of  the  Merchants' 
National  Bank,  and  after  the  great  fire  his 
was  the  onl)^  banking-house  that  was  not 
compelled  to  succumb  to  the  great  confla- 
gration, but  continued  to  meet  its  engage- 
ments and  pursue  its  business. 

"  Lyman  Blair  has  amassed  a  fortune  in 
Chicago  in  the  'packing  business,'  so  called, 
and  is  now  somewhat  retired  from  active  em- 
ployment. \Vm.  Blair  has  also  gathered  a 
fortune,  and  his  firm  is  one  of  the  foremost 
hardware  establishments  in  Chicago.  Ann 
Eliza  Blair  married  Eleazer  VV.  Densmore, 
of  Chicago.  Caroline  Blair  married  Parker 
Crosby,  formerly  a  resident  of  Cortland. 

"Another  son,  Samuel  Blair,  is  a  resident 
of  Cortland,  by  occupation  a  farmer,  in  the 
enjoyment  of  a  pleasant  liome,  surrounded 
in  abundance  with  all  that  is  needful  in  this 
life,  a  kind  husband  and  a  good  citizen. 


"  Such  is  a  brief  retrospect  of  this  remark- 
able family,  affording  a  useful  illustration  of 
what  can  be  accomplished  by  individual 
enterprise,  beginning  without  money,  but 
sustained  by  devoted  industry,  frugality, 
patience  and  an  exalted  moral  worth.  The 
mother  reached  the  age  of  seventy-seven, 
and  the  father  almost  eighty-one. 

"  Asahel  P.  Lyman,  in  Sheboygan, 
Wis.,  engaged  in  the  mercantile  trade  and 
in  the  commerce  of  the  lakes,  and  be- 
came the  owner  of  several  vessels,  and 
encountered  the  risks  attendant  upon  such 
property. 

"  George  N.  Lyman,  at  Ripon,  embarked 
largely  in  real  estate  enterprises  and  the 
purchasing  af  cattle  for  market. 

"  There  is  one  other  member  of  the  family 
of  Asahel  Lyman  who  is  worthy  of  remem- 
brance. He  had  an  only  daughter,  named 
Dolly  Ann,  whose  name  will  sound  familiar 
to  many  still  residing  here.  About  the  year 
1824  Mr.  Lyman  became  the  owner  of,  and 
resided  in,  the  house  built  by  Judge  Nelson 
and  now  owned  by  Frederick  Ives.  There 
Dolly  Ann  passed  happy  years  in  the  spring- 
time of  Hfe.  She  was  thoroughly  educated, 
refined  in  taste,  gentle  and  attractive  in 
manner.  In  1826,  and  while  William  Bacon 
was  the  minister,  and  when  the  services 
were  held  in  the  old  court-house  on  the  hill, 
a  remarkable  addition  to  the  recently  formed 
church  took  place.  While  in  the  flower  of 
youth,  Dolly  Ann  Lyman,  Ursula  Webb, 
Sarah  Boies  Dayton,  Pamelia  Hubbard, 
Emeline  Avery,  Minerva  Dayton,  Stata 
Hotchkiss,  Ada,  Laura,  Lavinia,  Phebe  and 
Esther  Cravath,  Daniel  Wheeler,  William 
Curtis  Boies,  Thomas  Farnham  and  many 
others  were  enrolled  as  members.  For 
years  afterwards  these  were  household 
names  in  Cortland,  and  they  are  yet  hal- 
lowed in  memory.  To  allude  to  them  now 
it  seems  like  '  light  from  heaven's  shore,' 
most  of  them  having  gone  to  their  rest.      In 


264 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


after  years  Dolly  Ann  became  the  wife  of 
Ceylon  North,  of  Ripon,  Wis." 

Thus  beneath  the  laboring  and  govern- 
ing hands  of  such  men  and  women  as  have 
been  brieflj'  mentioned,  the  young  village 
grew  in  wealth  and  numbers  and  strength, 
and  waited  patiently  for  the  day  when  her 
turnpike  stages  should  give  place  to  rail- 
roads and  her  streets  become  busy  with  the 
hum  of  manufacturing  machinery.  We 
cannot  follow  the  records  of  individual  life 
and  labor  beyond  the  comparatively  early 
settlers,  except  as  they  will  further  appear 
in  these  pages  in  the  history  of  the  pro- 
fessions and  the  industries  of  the  place, 
where  manj'  names  that  will  always  be 
prominent  in  every  reference  to  the  advance- 
ment of  the  village  will  be  found  associated 
with  the  various  mercantile  and  manufac- 
turing establishments  that  are  the  outgrowth 
of  their  enterprise. 

The  forefathers  of  Cortland  loved  amuse- 
ment, as  well  as  their  descendants ;  but  in 
early  days  there  was  little  to  divert  atten- 
tion from  the  daily  routine  of  work.  Gen- 
eral training  and  the  old-fashioned  celebra- 
tion of  the  F"ourth  of  July  were  about  all 
the  events  towards  which  the  inhabitants 
turned  for  amusement,  except  such  other 
as  they  could  devise  themselves.  The 
owners  of  fast  horses  in  the  village  of  to- 
day will  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  it 
was  more  than  sixty  years  ago  that  racing 
was  inaugurated  in  what  was  then  consid- 
ered grand  style  and  which  would  not  suffer 
in  comparison  with  later  events  of  that 
character ;  yet  such  is  the  case,  as  appears 
from  a  newspaper  announcement  of  Aug. 
20th,  1820,  as  follows:  — 

"  Cortland  Races. —  The  heats  will  commence 
at  Cortland  village,  on  Tuesday,  the  19th  day 
of  September  next,  and  continue  three  days; 
free  for  any  horse,  mare  or  gelding,  carrying 
weight  for  age;  three  mile  heats. 

"A  purse  of  $100  will  be  awarded  to  the  win- 
ning horse  on  the  first  day.     $75  to  the  winning 


horse  on  the  second  day  —  first  day   winning 
horse  excluded. 

"The  five  per  cent,  entrance  money  required 
on  the  purses  of  the  first  two  days  to  constitute 
a  purse  to  be  awarded  to  the  swiftest  three-year- 
old  colt  on  the  third  day  —  one  mile  heat. 

"  The  riders  must  be  dressed  in  jockey  style. 
No  jockeying  or  running  in  company  will  be  tol- 
erated, and  should  it  be  discovered,  the  purse  will 
Ijc  withheld. 

"  .\11  differences  will  be  settled  by  the  judges. 
"Truman  Doud, 
"Chas.  W.  Lvnde, 
"Stephen  Knapp, 
"  RoswELL  Randall, 

"Judges." 

Mr.  Ballard  gives  the  following  account 
of  the  first  event  of  this  kind  :  — 

"  At  length  the  long  wished  for  day  arrived, 
and  such  a  gathering  in  of  people  from  this  and 
adjacent  counties,  Cordand  had  not  before  wit- 
nessed. It  was  delightful  autumnal  weather. 
Far-famed  horses  had  been  ]jracticing  on  the 
course  for  several  days  previous.  Everything 
denoted  a  great  trial  of  speed.  The  contestants 
were  here  from  remote  counties  and  adjacent 
States.  Intelligence  of  the  coming  struggle 
reached  throughout  the  adjacent  country  and  for 
the  week  agricultural  pursuits  were  suspended. 

"  The  spot  arranged  for  these  races  was  the 
beautiful  level  easterly  of  the  Ithaca  and  Elmira 
railway  station.  The  course  was  circular,  one 
mile  around.  On  a  natural  mound  nearly  in  the 
center,  the  judges' stand  was  built.  The  multi- 
tude encircled  the  field  and  were  held  in  order 
by  an  appropriate  police.  As  the  hour  approached 
the  horses  were  led  in.  Soon  the  riders  in  full 
jockey  dress  appeared.  In  a  few  moments  the 
bugle  sounds,  the  horses  and  their  riders  come  to 
the  scratch,  and  five  in  number  contend  for  the 
prize.  On  no  occasion  since  has  there  been  an 
equal  struggle  of  bottom  and  speed  in  Cortland. 
On  this  day  the  grey  mare,  '  Highland  Polly,' 
won  the  purse.  It  was  a  memorable  week  in 
the  history  of  Cortland.  The  races  were  re- 
peated for  a  year  or  two  afterward  until  a  boy 
rider  named  Hiles,  from  Dryden,  was  thrown 
against  a  tree  and  instantly  killed,  to  the  dismay 
and  horror  of  the  crowd.     Thus  ended,  from 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


265 


that  day  on,  the  running  of  'heats'  in  Cortland. 
Soon  the  circus  and  the  menagerie  began  to  ap- 
pear and  they  supplied  the  people  with  amuse- 
ment. Meanwhile  the  race-course  of  former 
years  is  crossed  by  the  railway,  the  bugle  call 
for  the  courser  is  exchanged  for  the  locomotive 
whistle  and  the  running  of  horses  for  the  rush  of 
trains." 

Meanwhile  the  "Cortland  Village  Li- 
brary" was  established!  (1815),  the  trustees 
being  Levi  Lee,  John  Burnham,  Roger 
Edgcomb,  Nathan  Blodgett  and  Roswell 
Randall  ;  the  first  agricultural  society  was 
organized  (1818)  and  its  first  fair  held  in 
November  of  that  year ;  the  Presbyterian 
Church  was  erected  (1826)  as  elsewhere  de- 
tailed; the  Baptist  Church  was  erected 
(1833)  ^nd  dedicated  on  the  9th  of  October 
of  that  year  ;  the  "  Cortland  Village  Female 
Seminar)-"  was  founded  (1828),  with  Wm. 
Randall,  Henry  Stephens,  Nathan  Dayton, 
Wm.  Elder,  Danforth  Merrick  and  Rev. 
Luke  Lyons  prominent  among  the  early 
trustees;  the  academy  was  opened  (1842) 
and  its  long  career  of  usefulness  begun ; 
the  railroad  was  completed  (1854)  causing 
rejoicing  throughout  the  county,  which  was 
soon  followed  (i860)  bj-  the  advent  of 
Hiram  J.  Messenger  and  the  era  of  exten- 
sive building  operations  inaugurated  by 
him  ;  an  era  of  manufacturing  operations 
which  has  not  yet  closed,  and  probably 
never  will  close,  and  has  led  up  to  the  pres- 

'  "What  is  eminently  needed  in  this  village  is  a  well- 
•  selected  circulating  or  lending  library,  under  the  care  and 
supervision  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association. 
Such  libraries  exist  in  almost  every  considerable  town 
throughout  the  State.  Their  usefulness  is  fully  vindicated. 
What  a  refuge  of  rest  and  improvement  it  would  afford 
after  the  weary  hours  of  toil !  How  many  it  would  tend 
to  wean  from  the  resorts  of  idleness  and  vice !  It  is 
almost  a  reproach  to  our  town  that,  with  its  five  thousand 
inhabitants,  it  has  no  circulating  library.  He  would  be 
a  public  benefactor  who  would  start  such  an  enterprise. 
Il  is  only  a  question  of  time.  It  will  come  and  it  will 
Iria.iipii.  The  wealth  of  intelligence  and  virtue  which 
it  would  add  to  the  place  would  be  more  valuable  and 
lasting  than  added  gold.  The  growing  capacity  of  the 
working  classes  would  appreciate  and  improve  the  priv- 
leges  conferred  thereby."  —  Mr.  Ballard's  Rmiiniscences. 


ent  exalted   position   of   the  village   in  all 
things  bearing  upon  its  material  prosperity. 

Incorporation  and  Subsequent  Public 
Measures.  —  For  si.x  weeks  prior  to  the  1st 
of  October,  1853,  the  following  notice  was 
published  in  the  columns  of  the  Cortland 
Democrat,  printed  in  Cortland  village  :  — 

"  Take  notice :  That  an  application  will  be 
made  at  the  ne.xt  court  of  Sessions  to  be  held  at 
the  court-house  in  Cortlandville,  in  and  for  the 
county  of  Cortland,  on  the  second  Monday  of 
October  next,  at  10  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  of 
that  day,  or  as  soon  thereafter  as  petitioners  can 
be  heard,  for  an  order  to  incorporate  the  follow- 
ing described  territory  as  a  village  by  the  name 
of  Cortland,  situate  lying  and  being  in  the  town 
of  Cortlandville  in  said  county,  bounded  and 
described  as  follows  :  —  Beginning  at  the  south- 
west corner  of  lot  No.  65,  Cortlandville,  south 
one  and  three-fourths  degrees  west,  ninety-four 
rods,  crossing  the  Dryden  road,  to  a  stake  near 
the  west  bounds  of  the  Virgil  road,  for  the  south- 
west corner.  Thence  south  88  and  a  half  de- 
grees east  one  rod  twenty  links,  to  the  center  of 
said  Virgil  road,  81  rods  to  the  center  of  Main 
street,  219  rods  to  the  center  of  Pendleton  street, 
two  hundred  and  twenty  rods  to  a  stone  stake 
on  lot  No.  75,  for  the  southeast  corner.  Thence 
north  one  and  three-fourths  degrees  east  forty- 
four  rods  to  the  north  line  of  said  lot  No. 
75,  being  the  center  of  Port  Watson  street, 
two  hundred  and  eighty-one  rods  eighteen 
links  to  the  center  of  Main  street,  crossing  the 
west  branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  River,  three 
hundred  and  twenty  rods  to  an  apple  tree,  for 
the  northeast  corner.  Thence  north  eighty-eight 
and  a  half  degrees  west,  eight  rods  to  the  center 
of  the  Truxton  road,  one  hundred  and  seventy- 
eight  and  a  half  rods  to  the  center  of  said  river, 
two  hundred  and  six  rods  to  the  center  of  the 
Syracuse  and  Binghamton  railroad,  two  hundred 
and  ninety-eight  rods  and  twenty-three  links  to 
the  center  of  the  plank  road  leading  from  Cort- 
land to  Syracuse,  three  hundred  and  twenty  rods 
to  the  west  line  of  said  lot  No.  65,  for  the  north- 
west corner,  in  the  center  of  the  road  leading  by 
the  premises  of  I.  I.  Adams  to  Homer  village. 
Thence  south  one  and  three-fourth  degrees  west, 
one  hundred  and  forty-four  and  a  half  rods  along 


266 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  road  and  the  west  line  of  the  lot  No.  65,  to 
the  center  of  the  Groton  road,  two  hundred  and 
twenty-six  rods  to  the  place  of  beginning,  contain- 
ing 640  acres,  or  one  square  mile;  and  notice  is 
hereby  further  given  that  an  accurate  survey  and 
majj  of  the  above  described  territory  and  an  accu- 
rate census  of  the  resident  population  of  such  ter- 
ritory as  it  was  on  the  23d  day  of  Augu.st,  1853, 
and  the  names  of  every  head  of  a  family  resid- 
ing therein  on  such  day,  and  the  number  of  per- 
sons belonging  to  every  such  family,  have  been 
left  with  Edwin  F.  Gould,  a  resident  of  said  ter- 
ritory, at  his  office  therein,  subject  to  examina- 
tion at  all  reasonable  hours  by  every  person  in- 
terested in  such  application." 

Tiie  application  for  the  order  of  the 
court  was  signed  by  the  following  per- 
sons :  Horace  P.  Goodrich,  James  W. 
Sturtevant,  E.  N.  Doud,  O.  R.  Robinson,  W. 
A.  Thayer,  R.  H.  Diiell,  James  S.  Squires, 
M.  Rowley,  D.  C.  Cloyes,  H.  G.  Buell, 
George  S.  Taylor,  John  Rose,  N.  McDan- 
iels,  H.  F.  Lyman,  Car!  Aug.  Kohlcr,  David 
Fisk,  Daniel  Schernierhorn,  J.  S.  Samson, 
Oliver  Hitchcock,  John  L.  Luce,  Wm.  Ga- 
ger,  Daniel  P.  Rounds,  David  Peck,  Horace 
Buell,  L  M.  Seaman,  J.  B.  Horton,  A.  G. 
Burr,  Jeremiah  Van  Valen,  Daniel  Smith, 
Samuel  S.  Woodruff,  Henry  Woodruff,  Ed- 
win F.  Gould. 

This  constituted  the  first  step  towards 
giving  the  village  of  Cortland  a  corporate 
existence.  The  population  of  the  village  on 
the  date  mentioned  was  twelve  hundred  and 
fift}'-nine. 

On  the  5th  of  November,  1853,  a  meet- 
ing of  the  electors  within  the  boundaries  de- 
scribed was  held  at  the  town  hall  for  the 
purpose  of  voting  upon  the  question  of  in- 
corporation. At  this  meeting  232  votes 
were  cast,  130  of  which  were  in  favor  of  the 
application,  and  102  against  it.  An  elec- 
tion of  village  officers  was  held  on  the  26th 
of  November,  at  which  Joseph  Reynolds, 
Horace  P.  Goodrich,  William  O.  Barnard, 
James    W.     Sturtevant     and    William    A. 


Thayer  were  elected  the  first  board  of  trust- 
ees. Joseph  Reynolds  was  elected  presi- 
dent of  the  board,  and  Charles  Foster  clerk. 
Three  assessors  were  elected,  in  the  persons 
of  Abram  Mudge,  David  Fisk  and  David 
R.  Hubbard  ;  Leavitt  Cudworth  was  elected 
collector;  Wm.  R.  Randall,  treasurer,  and 
Henry  Scutt,  pound-master.  Village  by- 
laws were  adopted  at  the  meeting  of  the 
8th  of  December,  1853.  The  yard  in  rear 
of  the  store  of  D.  Schermerhorn  was  ar- 
ranged for  the  village  pound.  On  the  15th 
of  December  a  resolution  of  the  board  was 
adopted,  that  an  engineer  be  employed  to 
take  the  level  of  Otter  creek,  to  ascertain 
"if  the  water  from  said  creek  can  in  any 
manner  be  made  more  available  to  the  use 
of  the  village."  A  report  on  this  topic  was 
made  at  the  ne.xt  meeting  embodying  the 
statement  that  the  bed  of  Otter  creek  270 
rods  above  the  Cortland  House  is  three  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sidewalk  at  the  Cort- 
land House.  The  water  question  was  dis- 
cussed, as  it  has  been  on  so  many  occasions 
since,  and  "laid  over."  As  far  as  Otter  creek 
is  concerned  it  has  "lain  over"  until  the 
present  y-ear  (1884). 

The  first  list  of  accounts  audited  by  the 
village  board  was  a  bill  of  $2.50  in  favor  of 
A.  Green;  of  $2.50  to  Stephen  Brewer; 
$3.75  each  to  Ancil  Snow  and  Z.  C.  Allis; 
and  $9.40  to  Charles  Foster. 

Under  the  administration  of  the  new 
village  government  improvements  were 
rapidly  introduced.  Provision  was  made 
for  the  purchase  of  adequate  fire  extin- 
guishing apparatus,  which  was  eftected  in 
the  latter  part  of  the  year  1S54;  streets  were 
improved  and  sidewalks  ordered  in  various 
parts  of  the  village.  Among  the  latter 
were :  — 

"A  plank  walk  u\wn  the  west  side  of  Main 
street  from  \V.  R.  Randall's  corner  opposite  the 
post-office,  north  to  the  turn  of  the  plank  road 
at  ^\'elcll's  corner. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


267 


"  A  plank  walk  upon  the  east  side  of  Main 
street  from  Doud  &  Clark's  marble  shop  south 
to  L.  Reynolds's  store  building;  the  portions  of 
said  walk  now  laid  with  stone  to  be  relaid  with 
that  material  or  plank  substituted  therefor  at  the 
option  of  the  owners  of  the  respective  lots. 

"  A  plank  walk  on  both  sides  of  Port  Watson 
street,  from  Main  to  Greenbush  street. 

"A  plank  walk  on  the  north  side  of  Mill  street 
fron'^Iain  street  to  the  railroad. 

"  A  plank  walk  on  the  east  side  of  Church 
street,  from  Mill  street  to  Port  Watson  street. 

"  A  plank  walk  on  both  sides  of  Railroad  street 
from  Church  to  Greenbush  street,  and  on  the 
south  side  of  Railroad  street  from  Greenbush 
street  to  the  railroad." 

When  we  reflect  that  it  was  only  tliirty 
years  ago  that  these  and  many  other  sim- 
ilar improvements  were  needed,  the  rapid 
advancement  of  the  village  is  vividl}-  ap- 
parent. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  board  held  on  the 
5th  of  August,  i860,  the  following  pream- 
ble and  resolution  was  adopted,  whicli  is 
self-  explanatory :  — 

"  Whereas,  James  A.  Schermerhorn,  of  the 
village  of  Cortland,  in  behalf  of  himself  and  as- 
sociates, has  petitioned  the  constituted  authorities 
of  said  village  for  the  privilege  of  opening  the 
streets,  lanes  and  thoroughfares  of  said  village, 
for  the  purpose  of  introducing  main  and  service 
pipes,  that  the  various  buildings,  etc.,  may  be 
furnished  with  gas  — 

"  Now,  therefore,  we  the  subscribers,  believing 
the  said  introduction  of  gas  to  be  a  public  ben- 
efit to  our  village,  by  virtue  of  the  authority 
vested  in  us  as  officers  of  said  village,  hereby  au- 
thorize the  said  Schermerhorn  and  associates,  or 
assigns,  to  lay  said  pipes  and  open  said  streets, 
agreeable  to  said  petition,  being  an  exclusive 
privilege  for  twenty-five  years,  the  three  first 
without  tax." 

This  act  concluded  with  the  usual  provis- 
ion against  injuring  the  streets  and  was 
signed  by  all  of  the  trustees. 

Down  to  this  time  there  had  been  pro- 
gress made  in  the  village  in  other  directions 
than  the  introduction   of  gas.      Numerous 


sidewalks  had  been  laid,  and  they  were 
gradually  increasing  in  width,  while  the 
number  of  roving  cows  that  found  their 
way  from  the  streets  to  the  public  pound 
constantly  decreased.  In  1861  the  village 
by-laws  then  in  existence  were  repealed  en- 
tire, and  new  ones  substituted,  which  were 
broader  in  scope  and  more  stringent  in  the 
government  of  the  place,  and  in  1864  a  new 
charter  was  adopted. 

Gas  pipes  having  been  introduced  through 
the  village  and  the  company's  works  being 
in  operation,  $130  was  appropriated  by  the 
trustees  of  1 863  for  the  erection  of  ten  gas 
street  lamp  posts,  and  $125  for  gas  for 
lighting  the  same.  This  was  an  improve- 
ment that  was  heartily  appreciated  ;  Thos. 
Stephenson  took  the  first  contract  for  light- 
ing the  lamps,  at  fifteen  cents  a  night. 

Cortjand  village  was  re-chartered  b}'  the 
Legislature  of  1864,  and  the  first  election 
under  the  new  charter  was  held  on  the  3d 
day  of  May  of  that  year.  Chas.  Foster  was 
elected  president.  Theodore  Cornvvell  and 
Abram  Mudge  were  elected  trustees  to 
serve  two  years  ;  A.  Leroy  Cole  and  Henry 
Bates  for  one  year.  Harlow  G.  Buell  was 
elected  treasurer.  Moses  Rowley  was 
elected  assessor ;  and  Joseph  T.  Bates,  col- 
lector. Meetings  of  the  board  were  set 
down  for  the  first  Monday  of  each  month. 
The  by-laws  were  amended  and  new  ones 
adopted  to  meet  the  growing  requirements 
of  the  \illagc  and  the  new  government  be- 
gan its  work  with  energy. 

In  Februar\-,  1866,  resolutions  were 
adopted  empowering  Chas.  Foster  to  apply 
to  the  Legislature  for  power  to  borrow  mon- 
eys with  which  to  pave  Main  street,  and  to 
amend  the  charter  so  as  to  allow  the  ap- 
pointment of  police  constables  for  the  village, 
not  exceeding  four  in  number.  The  first 
named  resolution  referred  to  the  first  piece 
of  paving  done  in  the  village.  The  sum  to 
be    borrowed    was  not    to  exceed   $4,000. 


268 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


The  contract  for  the  work  was  executed  in 
June,  1866,  at  a  cost  of  $3,500,  for  wliich 
amount  the  village  bonds  were  issued,  pay- 
able in  four  equal  annual  installments. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  the  question  of 
securing  the  location  of  the  Normal  School 
in  this  village  was  agitated.  Three  sites 
were  offered  by  the  village  authorities  for 
this  purpose,  each  containing  five  acres  of 
land  of  a  valuation  of  from  $5,000  to  $8,000 
each,  with  the  sum  of  $25,000  in  cash,  if 
the  school  should  be  located  here.  Hora- 
tio Ballard  and  Chas.  Foster  were  author- 
ized to  proceed  to  Albany  on  the  20th  of 
November,  1866,  to  present  these  proposals 
to  the  proper  authorities,  with  discretionary 
power  to  increase  the  amount  of  cash  offered 
to  $50,000.  The  same  gentlemen  were 
made  a  committee  to  prepare  petitions  for 
circulation  outside  of  the  corporation,  to 
raise  funds  in  aid  of  this  measure. 

The  proposal  (upon  the  $50,000  basis) 
was  accepted  by  the  commission,  provided 
the  amount  of  the  donation  should  be  in- 
creased to  $75,000  in  case  that  amount 
should  be  found  necessary,  and  a  meeting 
of  the  citizens  of  the  \'illage  was  held  on  the 
iith  of  December,  at  which  this  question 
was  voted  upon.  Three  hundred  and  twelve 
voted  in  favor  of  accepting  the  proposition 
of  the  commission,  to  ele\en  against  it. 
The  site  of  the  building  between  Church 
and  Greenbush  streets  was  selected  May, 
1857,  '^'^^  the  structure  erected  by  J.  N. 
Greene,  under  the  supervision  of  Mr.  Wil- 
cox, the  architect.  Its  further  history  is 
given  a  little  farther  on. 

On  the  first  day  of  May,  1873,  a  special 
election  was  held  to  vote  upon  an  act  "  to 
supply  the  village  with  pure  and  whole- 
some water,"  for  which  a  ta.x  was  to  be  im- 
posed. The  vote  was  largely  against  the 
measure.  Another  effort  in  this  direction 
was  made  in  1874,  when  Frederick  Knight, 
Frederick  Ives,  N.  J.  Parsons,  John  McF"ar- 


land  and  William  R.  Randall  were  appointed 
a  committee  to  report  the  present  means  of 
furnishing  water  for  fire  purposes,  and  also 
to  report  .some  means  whereby  sufficient 
water  could  be  procured.  Nothing  came 
of  these  efforts,  except  their  possible  influ- 
ence on  later  measures. 

In  the  year  1875,  it  having  become  ap- 
parent that  a  new  engine  house  was  an  im- 
perative necessity,  steps  were  taken  by 
which  the  present  handsome  and  substantial 
structure  was  erected,  at  a  cost  of  about 
$7,500.  L.  J.  Viele  was  the  builder.  In 
the  same  year  a  proposition  to  raise  $5,900 
with  which  to  purchase  a  steam  engine, 
hose,  etc.  was  voted  down  ;  but  the  follow- 
ing year  the  measure  was  adopted,  and 
$5,000  was  raised  for  the  purchase  of  en- 
gine and  equipments  and  $2,500  for  addi- 
tional wells,  with  wliich  the  \'illage  is  now 
thoroughly  supplied. 

The  \illage  was  divided  into  four  wards 
in  December,  1877,  chiefly  for  the  purpose 
of  locating  fires  more  readily  by  strokes  of 
the  bell  corresponding  to  the  number  of  the 
ward.  Main  street  was  made  the  dividing 
line  north  and  south  and  Court  and  Rail- 
road streets  east  and  west. 

While  the  above  improvements  constitute 
some  of  the  more  important  measures 
adopted  for  the  better  government  and  the 
general  welfare  of  the  village,  many  other 
minor  impro\'ements  have  kept  pace  with 
the  rapid  growth  of  the  place.  Especially 
is  this  true  of  the  opening  of  streets,  the 
improvement  of  those  already  open,  the 
building  of  sidewalks,  and  other  matters  de- 
noting a  thorough  understanding  of  what  is 
needed  and  a  determination  on  the  part  of 
the  authorities  to  make  Cortland  village 
second  to  none  in  the  State  as  a  place  of 
business  or  residence. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  presidents  and 
clerks  of  the  village,  from  the  date  of  its  in- 
corporation  to  the  present  time,  the    name 


Town  of  Cortlandvii.le. 


269 


of  the  president  being  given  first  in  each 
instance :  — 

1853  to  1856,  inclusive,  Joseph  Reynolds, 
Chas.  Foster;  1857,  A.  S.  Higgins,  Chas. 
Foster;  1858,  A.  S.  Higgins,  H.  Crandall. 
1 859-60, Thos.  Keator,  H.  A.  Randall ;  1 86 1 , 
Thos.  Keator,  Chas.  Foster;  1862,  Allen  B. 
Smith, \Vm.  R.Stone;  1863,  Henry  Brewer, 
H.  L.  Collins;  1864,  John  T.  Barnes,  B.  B. 
Andrews;  1865,  Chas.  Foster,  B.  B.  An- 
drews; 1866,  Chas.  Foster,  H.  A.  Randall; 
1867,  Chas.  Foster,  I.  H.  Palmer;  1868-69, 
Chas.  Foster,  H.  A.  Randall;  1870,  H. 
Crandall,  H.  A.  Randall;  1871,  J.  S.  Bar- 
ber, I.  M.  Seaman;    1872,  W.  H.  Crane,  B. 

A.  Benedict;  1873,  W.  D.  Tisdale,  Dorr  C. 
Smith;  1874,  J.  C.  Carmichacl,  Dorr  C. 
Smith  ;  1 875,  Jas.  AI.  Smith,  Dorr  C.  Smith ; 
1876,  Jas.  C.  Carmichael,  John  C.  Putnam; 
1877-78,  J.  S.  Barber,  E.  S.  More;  1879,  R. 

B.  Smith,  E.  S.  More;  1880,  L.J.Fitzgerald, 
E.  S.  More;  1881-82,  I.  H.  Palmer,  J. 
Hubbard;  1883,  A.  Mahan,  J.  Hubbard;' 
1884,  D.  E.  Smith,  F.  Hatch. 

CHURCH  HISTORY. 
Methodist  P2piscopal  Church.  —  In  the 
year  1804  there  were  but  three  dwellings 
within  the  present  boundaries  of  Cortland 
village,  one  of  which  was  that  of  Jonathan 
Hubbard,  and  stood  on  the  northeast  cor- 
ner of  Main  and  East  Court  streets,  where 
the  National  Bank  of  Cortland  is  now  lo- 
cated. A  religious  society  had  been  par- 
tially organized  in  Homer,  but  as  far  as 
known  no  services  had  been  held  on  or  very 
near  the  site  of  Cortland  village.  At  this 
time  the  Rev.  William  Hill,  who  had  for- 
merly been  a  Baptist  preacher,  came  to  Cort- 
land. Mr.  Hubbard  was  a  Presbyterian, 
but  his  Christian  faith  was  broad  enough  to 
enable  him  to  welcome  any  minister  of 
Christ.  He  accordingly  took  Mr.  Hill  into 
his  home,  assisted  him  in  sending  notices  to 

1  J.  Hubbard  died  during  the  year,  and    the   vacancy 
was  iilled  by  F.  Hatch. 


all  of  the  families  within  reach,  and  the  first 
meeting  was  held  in  his  house.  Mr.  Hill 
went  away,  leaving  an  appointment  for  his 
second  service,  and  so  continued  doing  un- 
til the  winter  of  that  },ear,  when  he  received 
into  the  church  Jonathan  and  Mary  Hub- 
bard, James  Hubbard,  Abigail  Hubbard, 
Elijah  Batchelor,  Martha  Batchelor,  Isaac 
Bassett,  Polly  Bassett,  William  Bassett  and 
Catherine  Sherwood,  and  formed  a  class, with 
Mr.  Batchelor  as  leader.  This  was  the  germ 
of  the  Methodist  Church  in  Cortland.  It  was 
then  attached  to  the  Cayuga  Circuit,  Genesee 
District,  of  the  Philadelphia  Conference. 

Preaching  was  contiimed  with  regularity 
once  in  two  weeks,  later  by  Elder  Batchelor, 
while  he  remained  here;  after  which  praj^er 
and  class-meetings  were  held.  In  the  year 
1 8 ID  the  first  quarterly  meeting  was  held 
in  Cortland,  in  an  unfinished  barn.  The 
work  went  on  with  sufficient  good  results 
to  inspire  the  little  body  of  Christians  with 
faith  in  the  future,  until  1S12,  when  Rev. 
James  Kelsey  was  appointed  to  the  charge. 
There  were  then  tweh'e  or  fifteen  families  in 
the  little  hamlet  and  others  in  the  \'icinit}'.  Mr. 
Kelsey  was  a  man  of  much  power  and  a  great 
revival  followed  his  ministry,  almost  every 
family,  or  some  members  of  it,  joining  the 
church.  Solomon  Cogswell,  one  of  the  early 
settlers  at  Port  Watson,  was  then  class-leader. 

The  meetings  during  this  early  period 
were  held  in  private  houses;  in  the  school- 
house  after  it  was  built  and  later  in  the  up- 
per room  of  the  academy.  Often  in  sum- 
mer, when  the  congregation  was  too  large 
for  the  most  available  building,  the  people 
would  repair  to  the  woods,  and  there,  under 
the  thick  foliage,  offer  their  adoration  to  God. 

Thus  matters  went  on  until  the  year  1 82 1 , 
when,  on  the  13th  of  March,  a  meeting  of 
the  male  members  of  the  church  was  held 
at  the  house  of  John  Stillman.  Rev.  Mr. 
Kelsey  was  chairman  and  Solomon  Cogs- 
well clerk.      At  that  meeting  was    formed 


270 


HisioRv  OK  Cortland  Countv. 


the  "  I'irst  Society  of  the  Mcthothst  Episco 
pal  Clnirch  of  Homer.  "  John  Stilhnan, 
Jonathan  Hubbard  and  Isaac  Bassctt  were 
chosen  trustees.  Mr.  Cogswell  and  Amos 
Norton  were  added  a  little  later.  At  this 
nieetini:^  it  was  tlecided  to  make  an  effort  to 
build  a  church  edifice.  For  about  ten  years 
Cortland  xiUas^e  had  boasted  a  court-house 
and  a  jail,  but  no  house  of  worship  graced 
its  streets.  To  their  honor,  be  it  said,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  place  gave  the  movement 
their  undivided  assistance.  A  building 
committee  was  appointed  consisting  of  Chas. 
W.  Lynde,  Roswell  Randall  and  Samuel 
Nelson.  It  was  made  a  condition  that  no 
debt  should  be  contracted  in  erecting  the 
building,  and  the  work  of  obtaining  sub- 
scriptions went  on.  The  corner-stone  was 
laid  on  the  4th  of  Jul\-,  iS_'i,  -with  imposing 
and  somewhat  peculiar  ceremonies.  The 
entire  community  was  invited  to  participate 
in  the  event.  The  meeting  was  held  in  the 
forenoon  in  the  old  Baptist  meeting-house, 
north  of  the  village,  where  services  were 
opened  by  a  prayer  by  Rev.  Alfred  Ben- 
nett. Major  Adin  Webb,  with  liis  choir 
from  Homer,  conducted  the  music,  and  Rev. 
George  W.  Densmore  delivered  the  dis- 
course. Then,  at  the  close  of  the  services,  a 
procession  was  formed  under  the  marshal- 
shipof  Gen.  Daniel  Miller  and  Martin  Keep, 
which  marched  through  the  beautiful  grove 
of  forest  trees  that  skirted  the  northern  part 
of  the  village  and  down  Main  street  to  the 
site  of  the  church.  The  stone  was  laid  by 
the  building  committee,  and  addresses  were 
made  by  Re\'.  Mr.  Kelsey  and  Rev.  Mr. 
Baker,  of  Auburn.  After  these  ceremonies 
the  procession  marched  to  the  hotel  of  Na- 
than Luce,  on  the  site  of  the  Messenger 
House,  where  a  dinner  was  served  "  at 
thirty-one  cents  each.  "  After  the  cloth  was 
removed,  toasts  were  drank  to  the  number 
of  twenty  or  more,  am(.>ng  them  being  such 
subjects  as   "our    country,"    "the   dough-   1 


faces,"  "agriculture,"  "the  army  and 
navy,"  "slavery,"  "our  donors,"  "the 
ladies,"  etc.  All  this  seems  strange  at  this 
day,  as  a  part  of  the  ceremonies  of  laying 
the  corner-stone  of  a  Methodist  church  ; 
but  at  that  time  it  was  considered  an  ap- 
propriate and  fitting  programme. 

The  clunxli  building  was  i^ot  finished 
until  the  year  1823,  on  account  of  a  scarcity 
of  money.  It  was  finally  consecrated  by 
Rev.  Geo.  W.  Densmore.  A  revival  was 
cxperinced  in  IcSjq  and  another  memorable 
one  in  1  <S39. 

A  Sunday-school  was  established  in 
1 83 1,  and  a  female  missionary  society  the 
same  year.  The  present  handsome  church 
edifice  was  erected  in  1 866,  at  a  cost  of  about 
$30,000  and  the  societ)*  is  now  and  has 
been  for  many  \'ears  in  a  thri\"ing  condition. 
Following  is  a  list  of  all  the  pastors  who 
have  served  the  church  and  the  dates  of 
their  ministr\' :  — 

1804-05,  William  Hill;  1806,  Joseph  Poi- 
hcmus;  1807,  J.  P.  Weaver;  1808,  Jo.seph 
Scull;  1809,  Elijah  Batchelor;  1810,  Ann- 
ing  Owen  ;  181  I,  I'^lijah  Batchelor;  1812, 
James  Kelsey;  1813,  Dan.  Barnes;  18 14, 
Palmer  Roberts;  1 8  1  5,  Jonathan  Huistus; 
1816,  Loring  Grant;  181  7-18,  James  Kel- 
sey; 1819,  J.  Kimberlin  ;  1  S20,  James  Kel- 
sey ;  1 82 1 ,  Geo.  W.  Densmore  ;  1822,  Elias 
Bowen  ;  1823,  John  Dempster  ;  1824,  Seth 
Mattison  ;  1825-26,  Geo.  W.  Densmore; 
1827,  Zenas  Jones;  1828,  C.  N.  Flint; 
1 829-30,  Geo.  White  ;  1 83  i ,  W.  W.  Ninde ; 
1832-33,  J  S.  Mitchell;  1834-35,  Robert 
Fox;  1836,  P.  M  Way;  1837,  Joseph 
Cross;  1838,  Selah  Stocking  ;  1839-40,  H. 
F.  Rowe;  1841-42,  Selah  Stocking  ;  1843, 
Fred  Humphreys;  1844-45,  Moses  Adams; 
1846-47,  Hanford  Collins;  1848,  J.  B.  Ben- 
ham;  1849-50,  W.  N.  Pearnc;  1851-52, 
Daniel  Cobb;  1853-54.  L  D.  Davis; 
1855-56,  A.  S.  Graves;  1857-58,  G.  W, 
Bridge;    1859-60,  E.    C.Brown;    1861,   A. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


271 


J.  Grover;  1862-63,  E.  Hoag ;  1864-65, 
E.  Owen  ;  1 866-67-68,  E.  C.  Curtis  ;  1 869- 
70-71,  J.  T.  Crippen;  1872-73-74,  A. 
Roe;  1875-76,  J.  Alabaster;  1877-78, 
G.  W.  Izer;  1879-80,  Elijah  Horr;  Rev. 
W.  H.  Annable  is  the  presnt  pastor. 

The  Presbyterian  Church.  — On  the  25th 
of  November,  1824,  pursuant  to  previous 
notice,  a  meeting  of  the  citizens  of  Cortland 
was  held  in  the  court-house,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  forming  a  Presbyterian  church  and 
society.  Daniel  Budlong  was  called  to  the 
chair  and  David  Joline  appointed  secretary. 
A  constitution  was  reported  for  considera- 
tion and,  it  ha\ing  been  read,  further  action 
was  deferred,  on  motion  of  William  Elder, 
until  the  next  meeting,  which  was  held  on 
the  2d  of  December,  1824,  on  which  day 
the  constitution  was  adopted  and  the  soci- 
et}^  formed.  On  motion  of  Hon.  Samuel 
Nelson,  seconded  by  Hon.  Henry  Stephens, 
six  trustees  were  chosen,  as  follows :  — 
Wm.  Randall,  Wm.  Elder,  Prosper  Cravath, 
Salmon  Jewett,  ]\Ioses  Kinne  and  Lemuel 
Dady.  In  the  following  spring  a  church 
was  organized  and  the  Rev.  Wm.  Bacon 
began  his  ministry,  with  a  membership  of 
only  six,  and  a  salary  of  $600. 

Before  two  years  had  elapsed  the  society 
numbered  one  hundred  and  thirty-seven, 
embracing  nearly  one-fourth  of  the  entire 
population  of  the  village.  The  church  edifice 
w-as  dedicated  January  ist,  1828.  The  ser- 
mon was  preached  by  Rev.  D.  C.  Lansing, 
of  Auburn,  from  the  text  Gen.  xxviii.  17, 
"  This  is  none  other  but  the  house  of  God, 
and  this  is  the  gate  of  Heaven."  In  Octo- 
ber, 1827,  Rev.  Luke  Lyon  succeeded  Mr. 
Bacon,  and  remained  until  June,  183  i. 

Mr.  Lyon  w^as  succeeded  by  Nathaniel  E. 
Johnston,  who  remained  until  November, 
1834;  then  he  resigned,  and  Rev.  Joseph 
Q.  Foot  became  pastor.  In  October,  1837, 
Rev.  Peter  Lockwood  succeeded  Mr.  Foot, 
and  remained  until  July,  1842.      Mr.  Lock- 


wood  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  H.  R.  Dun- 
ham, who  continued  into  the  year  1856. 
He  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  O.  H.  Seymour, 
who  remained  until  1863,  when  Irving  L. 
Beman  became  pastor,  and  continued  until 
May,  1866.  After  Mr.  Beman  the  pulpit 
was  supplied  by  Rev.  S.  F.  Bacon,  A.  G. 
Hopkins,  and  Dr.  Condit.  In  October, 
1869,  Rev.  Samuel  H.  Howe  became  pas- 
tor, and  remained  until  September,  1872. 
In  May,  1873,  he  was  succeeded  by  Rev. 
Thomas  Street,  and  under  his  auspices  the 
semi-centennial  celebration  of  the  church 
was  observed  in  April,  1875.  It  was  then 
announced  by  Mr.  Street  that  the  member- 
ship of  the  church  "from  six,  in  1825,  had 
reached  the  number  on  its  rolls  of  one  thou- 
sand two  hundred  and  two."  Mr.  Street  was 
succeeded  by  the  Rev.  Alfred  J.  Hutton,  and 
he  by  the  Rev.  J.  L.  Robertson  in  August, 
1882.  The  trustees  are  James  C.  Cirmi- 
chael,  Alonzo  D.  Blodgett,  Calvin  P.  Wal- 
rad,  Samuel  Keator,  Leavitt  D.  Garrison, 
Edward  H.  Brewer,  Marcus  McGraw,  Dr.  F. 
Hyde.  J.  Milne,  superintendent  of  Sabbath- 
school. 

The  Baptist  Church.  — The  First  Baptist 
Church  of  Christ  in  Cortlandville  was  or- 
ganized, and  publicly  recognized  as  such, 
on  the  3d  day  of  October,  1801,  and  was 
the  first  Christian  church  organized  in 
Cortland  county,  then  a  township  ten  miles 
square  in  Onondaga  county. 

The  church  thus  organized  consisted  of 
sixteen  members,  viz.,  males,  —  John  Keep, 
Joseph  Beebee,  Daniel  Crandall,  Peleg  Bab- 
cock,  Cornish  Messenger,  Roderick  Beebee, 
and  James  Wheeler  :  females,  —  Frances 
Keep,  Rhoda  Beebee,  Submit  Keep,  Rhoda 
Miner,  Martha  Messenger,  Mary,  Bishop, 
Susannah  Crandall,  Esther  Wilcox,  and 
Molly  Wheeler.  The  officers  were :  John 
Keep,  clerk,  which  office  he  filled  for 
twenty-seven  years,  or  until  the  church  was 
divided ;   Joseph     Beebee    w-as    appointed 


272 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


deacon,  who  died  about  seven  nmntlis  subse- 
quent to  his  a[)pointment,  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Prince  Freeman,  of  Virgil. 

The  church  had  no  settled  pastor  until 
June,  1807,  when  the  Rev.  Alfred  Bennett 
was  ordained  to  the  work  of  the  gospel 
ministry,  having  been  licensed  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  April,  1806,  by  a  vote  of  the 
the  church,  of  which  he  became  a  member 
in  April,  1804.  There  seems  to  have  been 
no  regular  salary  paid,  or  agreed  to  be  paid, 
t(3  him  b\-  the  church.  The  first  meeting- 
house built  by  this  church  was  a  wooden 
structure,  commenced  in  181 1,  and  cost  two 
thousand  dollars ;  the  size  of  which  was 
fifty-two  by  thirty-six  feet,  with  a  gallery 
on  three  sides.  It  was  dedicated  in  June, 
181  2,  and  was  located  one-half  mile  north 
of  the  old  court-house,  on  the  road  leading 
from  Cortland  to  Homer. ' 

The  Rev.  Alfred  Bennett  remained  pas- 
tor of  the  church  until  the  j^ear  1827,  at 
which  time  the  church  was  divided,  a  por- 
tion forming  the  church  at  McGrawville, 
another  a  church  at  Homer,  and  he  became 
the  pastor  of  the  Homer  branch. 

The  second  meeting-house  built  by  the 
church  was  a  wooden  structure,  and  was 
built  in  the  village  of  Cortland,  on  the  site 
of  the  present  one,  at  a  cost  of  about  three 
thousand  dollars,  and  was  dedicated  Octo- 
ber 9th,  1833.  Their  present  brick  church 
edifice  was  commenced  in  the  autunin  of 
1872,  and  was  completed  in  1874,  at  a  cost 
of  thirty-two  thousand  five  hundred  dollars. 
It  was  dedicated  February  22d,  1874.  It  is 
si.\ty-five  feet  wide  and  one  hundred  and 
ten  feet  long,  with  a  seating  capacity  in  the 
audience-room  of  eight  hundred  persons. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  pastors,  com- 
mencing in  1827:  Rev.  Peleg  Card,  from 
1827  to  1830;  Rev.  Nathan  Peck,  from 
1830  to  1833;   Rev.   Zenas  Freeman,  from 

1  Further  details  of  this  fir,st  church  will  be  found  in 
the  history  of  the  town  of  Ilomcr,  preceding. 


1833  to  1836;  Rev.  Ozeb  Montague,  from 
1836  to  1840;  Rev.  J.  P  Simmons,  from 
1840  to  1 851;  Rev.  Henry  Bowen,  from 
185  I  to  1 86 1  ;  Rev.  Thomas  Goodwin,  from 
1 86 1  to  1863  ;  Rev.  Andrew  Wilkins,  from 
1863  to  1870;  Rev.  William  N.  Tower,  from 
1870  to  1874;  Rev.  William  M.  Kincaid 
became  pastor  in  1874,  and  was  succeeded 
by  the  present  pastor.  Rev.  J.  W.  Putnam. 

Trustees.  —  James  S.  Squires,  E.  P.  Slaf- 
ter,  Frank  Hastings,  F.  H.  Cobb,  N.  Cham- 
berlain, F.  S.  Capen,  C.  F.  Brown,  E.  A. 
Fish. 

E.  A.  F"ish,  superintendent  of  Sunday- 
school. 

The  Universalist  Church.  —  The  first 
Universalist  Society  in  Cortland  was  formed 
November  i6th,  1813,  at  the  court-house. 
The  following  persons  were  elected  trustees: 
Moses  Hopkins,  Allen  Baney,  John  Cham- 
berlain, David  Merrick,  Mead  Merrill  and- 
Roger  Edgcomb;  John  Chamberlain,  clerk. 

The  Cayuga  Association  of  Universalists 
convened  at  the  Baptist  Church  in  Cortland 
June  7th  and  8th,  1815.  June  19th,  1829, 
a  meeting  was  held  at  the  home  of  David 
Merrick,  when  a  society  was  formed  by  the 
name  of  the  "  First  Universalist  Society  of 
Homer  "  (Homer  at  that  time  comprised  the 
present  towns  of  Homer  and  Cortlandville). 
David  Peck,  Jacob  Badgley  and  David  Mal- 
lery  were  elected  trustees,  and  Lewis  Boies, 
clerk.  Since  1833  the  society  has  held 
regular  annual  meetings,  electing  its  officers, 
etc.  The  present  neat  church-edifice  was 
completed  in  1837,  at  a  cost  of  about  six 
thousand  dollars.  The  lot  upon  \\hich  it  is 
located  was  donated  by  Calvin  Bishop. 
Since  the  building  of  the  church  the  organ- 
zation  has  been  called  the  "  First  Univer- 
salist Society  of  Cortlandville  ;"  and  on  the 
9th  of  January,  1872,  the  church  and  so- 
ciety was  organized,  adopting  the  Articles 
of  Faith  of  the  Universalist  Association  of 
the  State  of  New  York.      Its  prosperity  has 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


273 


\'aricd  at  diftcreiit  periods  of  its  liistor\-,  but 
at  all  times  having  some  faithful,  earnest, 
Christian  members,  who  havx-  borne  its 
standard  through  evil  as  well  as  good  re- 
port. The  church  has  secured  an  annual 
income  from  a  legacj'  bequeathed  to  it  b\- 
Roswell  Craw,  of  the  town  of  Virgil.  The 
following  are  some  of  the  pastors  who  have 
officiated  for  the  society :  Doolittle,  Saun- 
derson,  Bollard,  Strickland,  Whitcomb, 
Brown,  Corgill,  Fish,  Crain,  Austin,  Peck, 
H.  W.  Hand  ami  Rev.  Cieo.  Adams,  who 
is  the  present  pastor. 

The  trustees  are  Josiah  Hart,  H.  J.  Mes- 
senger, Rev.  and  Airs.  H.  W.  Hand,  W.  W. 
Kelsey,  W.  T.  Blanchard. 

Grace  (Protestant  Episcopal)  Church.  — 
In  181 7  missionaries  of  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  from  ]\Ianlius  and  On- 
ondaga Hill  officiated  in  Cortland  count)-, 
but  it  was  not  until  after  the  organization 
of  a  congregation  at  Homer,  in  June,  I  83  I, 
that  services  were  held  at  Cortlandville. 
The  Rev.  Henr\-  Gregory,  then  missionary 
at  Homer,  officiated  and  preached  in  the 
Presbyterian  church.  This  was  ])robably 
the  first  public  use  of  the  liturgical  worship 
in  Cortland\ille.  As  there  was  no  conven- 
ient place  for  the  people  tc)  meet,  and  the 
distance  to  Homer  was  only  two  miles,  those 
who  were  attached  to  the  communion  usu- 
ally went  to  the  latter  place  to  worship,  and 
remained  niai)\-  \^ears  destitute  of  regular 
services. 

In  1833  the  Rev.  H.  Gregory  officiated 
and  preached  once,  and  in  1835  eleven 
times.  Upon  the  settlement  of  Rev.  Sam- 
uel Goodale  in  Homer,  in  1844,  he  held  a 
third  service  on  Simdays  in  Cortlandville, 
and  this  was  continued  until  June,  1846.  A 
Sunday-school  also  was  successfulh-  kept 
up  the  same  time. 

In  1847  tilt-  Rev.  Geo.  M.  Skinner,  from 
Homer,  officiated  nineteen  times  and  con- 
ducted a  bible-class.      In  October  (26th)  of 


that  year  Bishop  De  Lanccy  preached  in 
the  Presbyterian  Church.  The  services 
more  commonly  were  lield  in  the  large  room 
of  the  academ\',  or  in  the  stone  meeting- 
house. 

In  1848  a  societj'  was  incorporated  under 
the  name  of  Grace  Church,  and  asked  ad- 
mission into  union  with  the  convention. 
On  account  of  some  supposed  informality 
in  the  paper,  however,  it  was  not  at  that 
time  received.  From  November,  1848,  to 
1852,  the  Rev.  Charles  E.  Phelps  had  charge 
of  Grace  Church  in  connection  with  Homer, 
but  seldom  officiated,  on  account  of  the 
difficult}'  of  finding  a  suitable  place  of  wor- 
ship. About  this  time  the  ladies  of  the 
congregation  very  zealously  and  success- 
fully solicited  subscriptions  for  the  building 
of  a  church  edifice,  but  the  work  was  post- 
poned. 

In  June,  1850,  the  use  (jf  the  court-house 
was  obtained,  and  Rev.  Mr.  Phelps  held  a 
Sunday  afternoon  ser\ice  there  every  fort- 
night. 

In  1852  Mr.  Phelps  was  succeeded  b\-  the 
Rev.  Reuben  Hubbard,  who,  in  the  follow- 
ing jear  officiated  four  or  five  times,  the 
services  being  held  in  the   Baptist  Church. 

In  1854  the  missionary  at  McLean,  the 
Rev.  George  L.  Foote,  assumed  charge  of 
Grace  Church,  and  officiated  at  Cortland- 
ville one^fourth  of  the  time.  By  him  the 
hoi}-  communion  A\as  first  administered 
there  in  public  to  eleven  persons. 

At  Plaster,  in  1855,  the  Rev.  H.  V. 
Gardner,  Rector  of  Calvary  Church,  Homer, 
was  associated  with  Mr.  Foote  in  mission- 
ary services,  and  by  this  arrangement  ser- 
vices were  held,  for  a  time,  every  Sunday 
afternoon  at  Cortlandville.  Mr.  Gardner 
remo\'ed  from  this  mission  in  April,  1857, 
and  in  the  following  August  the  Rev.  Pey- 
ton Gallagher  entered  upon  it,  officiating 
at  Cortlandville  once  a  fortnight, —  the  ser- 
vices being  held  in  the  session- room  of  the 


274 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Presbyterian  Cliinch.  This  arrangement 
after  about  one  year  was  broken  off  by  the 
ill-lieaith  of  Mr.  Gallagher,  and  Cortland 
county  was  left  without  services,  except 
that  the  Rev.  Edward  Pid.sley  from  McLean 
officiated  once  a  month  in  Cortlandville. 

In  1859  fresh  efforts  were  made  for  the 
erection  of  a  church  edifice,  and  were 
crowned  with  complete  success.  Since  then 
its  pastors  have  been  as  follows,  the  date  at 
which  each  was  called  only  being  given  :  — 

i860.  Rev.  T.  G.  Meacham;  1863,  Rev. 
Thomas  Applegate ;  August,  1865,  Rev. 
George  S.  Teller;  July,  1868,  Rev.  John 
Boyle  ;  January,  1869,  Rev.  Albert  Danker; 
August,  1869,  Rev.  J.  M.  Benedict  was 
called.  In  February,  1872,  Rev.  J.  P.  Fos- 
ter was  called.  August,  1875,  Rev.  J.  A. 
Robinson  was  called,  and  is  the  present 
rector. 

The  present  vestry  are  Henry  B.  Hub- 
bard, Henry  L.  Rogers. 

Wardens,  S.  M.  Benjamin,  E.  M.  Hul- 
bert,  A.  Mahan,  Wm.  Newkirk,  H.  C.  Ca- 
ney,  Wesley  Hooker,  Chas.  H.  Parker, 
Edward  D.  Webb. 

Catholic. — The  first  Catholic  Church  in 
Cortland  was  erected  in  1855,  by  Rev.  Mr. 
Callen.  It  was  a  wooden  structure,  and 
located  on  Washington  street.  The  rapidly 
increasing  Catholic  population  soon  neces- 
sitated the  building  of  a  more  spacious  edi- 
fice, and  the  present  fine  church-building  on 
North  Main  street  was  erected  in  1868,  by 
Rev.  B.  F.  McLoghlin,  who  is  the  present 
pastor.  The  building  is  still  unfinished, 
lacking  a  tower,  which,  when  built,  is  to 
contain  a  chime  of  bells.  The  church  has 
about  one  thousand  members. 

The  First  Congregational  Church.  —  In 
the  year  1 88 1  steps  were  taken  towards  form- 
ing a  Congregational  society  and  the  erection 
of  a  church  edifice  in  Cortland.  An  active 
interest  was  soon  aroused,  different  means 
were  adopted  for  the  raising  of  funds  and 


the  project  of  church  building  was  soon 
fairly  under  way.  The  corner-stone  of  the 
edifice  was  laid  on  the  5th  day  of  Septem- 
ber, 1882,  in  presence  of  a  large  audience. 

The  exercises  were  opened  with  singing 
by  the  congregation,  leil  by  the  choir.  Col. 
F.  Place,  Mrs.  B.  T.  Wright,  Miss  Lina 
Palmer,  Messrs.  W.  D.  Lord  and  Geo.  H. 
Briggs. 

Rev.  J.  A.  Robinson,  pastor  of  the 
fCpiscopal  Church,  read  from  the  i6th  chap- 
ter of  Matthew,  also  the  looth  Psalm,  and 
was  followed  with  an  earnest  prayer  by 
Rev.  J.  W.  Putnam,  pastor  of  the  Baptist 
Church,  after  which  Rev.  J.  L.  Robertson, 
pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  gave  out 
the  hymn,  which  was  sung  by  the  congrega- 
tion. 

Rev.   C.  M.  T)'ler,  pastor  of  the  Congre- 
gational Church  of  Ithaca,  delivered  an  in 
teresting  and  appropriate  address. 

Mr.  Peter  Burns,  of  Syracuse,  placed  the 
corner-stone  in  position  in  the  southwest 
corner  of  the  building. 

Rev.  H.  T.  Sell,  the  pastor  of  the  church, 
read  the  following  list  of  articles,  which  were 
inclosed  in  the  tin  box  placed  in  the  cavity 
in  the  stone:  "  A  copy  of  the  Bible;  copies 
of  recent  date  of  the  Democrat,  Standard, 
News  and  Congregatiotialist ;  proceedings 
of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  Cortland 
county,  from  1814  to  1825,  as  published  in 
the  Ncivs ;  manuscript  history  of  the 
church,  including  names  of  the  oflRcers  and 
members  of  the  church,  and  of  the  superin- 
tendent, teachers  and  members  of  the  Sab- 
bath-school; names  of  the  architect,  builder 
and  building  committee  of  the  church; 
photograph  of  the  pastor.  Rev.  H.  T.  Sell ; 
Roy's  Manual  of  Congregationalism  ;  and  a 
collection  of  coins  of  the  present  time." 

The  exercises  were  closed  with  singing 
by  the  congregation  and  benediction  by 
Rev.  C.  M.  Tyler. 

Rev.  Mr.  Sell  has  remained  in  charge  of 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


275 


the  church  from  the  first.  The  trustees  are  : 
George  B.  Jones,  James  H.  Blanchard, 
Frank  Place,  Edward  H.  Bates,  Alonzo  W. 
Gates,  L.  Melvin  Loop,  Ira  W.  Watkins, 
Geo.  W.  Davenport,  R.  C.  Tillinghast.  A. 
E.  Buck,  superintendent  of  Sunday-school. 

SCHOOLS. 

Institutions  for  the  education  of  the 
young  have  always  occupied  a  prominent 
place  in  the  history  of  Cortland  village, 
and  the  school  system  has  gradually  and 
in  conformity  to  the  needs  of  the  com- 
munity grown  from  the  smallest  beginning 
to  its  present  prosperous  and  commendable 
position.  The  dates  of  the  building  of  the 
early  common  school-houses  we  have  been 
unable  to  obtain  ;  but  we  may  rest  assured 
that  while  much  of  the  site  of  the  x-illare 
was  still  forest-covered,  the  children  of  the 
scattered  inhabitants  found  a  place  where 
they  could  receive  the  rudiments  of  educa- 
tion. So  active  and  interested  in  this  im- 
portant subject  were  the  early  inhabitants 
that  about  ten  years  after  the  village  had 
begun  to  assume  its  character,  namely,  in 
the  year  1828,  an  educational  institution 
was  founded  in  its  midst,  which  had  an 
honorable  and  useful  career. 

In  April,  1828,  a  statute  was  passed  in- 
corporating the  "  Cortland  Village  Female 
Seminary."  The  act  declared  that  the 
"Design  and  object  of  this  incorporation  is 
the  establishment  and  support  of  a  seminary 
for  the  education  of  females."  The  pay- 
ment of  ten  dollars  was  the  price  of  mem- 
bership and  this  gave  the  right  to  vote  for 
trustees.  In  the  same  year  (1828)  a'school 
was  opened  in  the  large  building  then  stand- 
ing a  little  back  from  the  street  on  the  lot 
now  occupied  by  the  Taylor  Hall  block. 
Oliver  Brewster,  then  recently  arrived  in 
the  place  from  Onondaga,  took  the  man- 
agement of  the  boarding  hall,  which  was 
kept  in  the  building.      Miss  Jane  Ingersoll, 


of  Springfield,  Mass.,  was  made  principal 
of  the  school,  aided  by  Miss  Brewster  (after- 
ward the  wife  of  Samuel  B.  Woolworth, 
secretary  of  the  Board  of  Regents),  Miss  Mc- 
Donald of  Ithaca,  teacher  of  drawing,  and 
Miss  Dutton,  of  New  Haven,  teacher  of  mu- 
sic. It  was  an  accomplished  faculty  and  soon 
gave  the  school  an  exalted  standing  and  an 
extensive  reputation.  Among  the  ladies  who 
received  their  education  at  this  institution 
and  who  subsequently  reached  distinguished 
positions  in  married  life  were  Miss  Wal- 
bridge,  of  Lockport,  who  became  the  wife 
of  Gov.  Washington  Hunt;  Miss  Noxon, 
wife  of  Hon.  Geo.  F.  Comstock,  of  Syra- 
cuse;  Jane  R.  Polhemus,  of  Auburn,  wife 
of  Hon.  Henry  S.  Randall ;  Ellen  Birdseye, 
of  Pompey,  the  wife  of  Charles  Wheaton,  of 
Syracuse  ;  Miss  Earl,  of  Onondaga,  wife  of 
Hon.  Vivus  W.  Smith,  of  Syracuse  ;  Emily 
Wood,  of  Syracuse,  wife  of  Mr.  Brackett, 
and  many  others.  Among  the  daughters 
of  Cortland  who  attended  the  institution 
Mr.  Ballard  recalled  the  names  of  Emeline 
Allen,  Maria  Allen,  Antoinette  Randall, 
Wilhelmina  Randall,  Lucy  Maria  Randall, 
Harriet  Randall,  Ursula  Webb,  Helen  Bal- 
lard, Dolly  Ann  Lyman,  Marette  Elder, 
Venette  Stephens,  Elvira  Goodyear,  Blen- 
dina  Miller,  Annette  Edgcomb  and  Caroline 
Blair.  For  a  number  of  years  the  institution 
was  self-sustaining  and  it  exerted  a  salutary 
influence  upon  the  social  life  of  the  village. 
Cotemporaneous  with  this  seminary  a 
"classical  school  for  young  men"  was 
opened  in  the  building  afterward  occupied 
by  the  Cortlandville  Academy,  under  the 
principalship  of  J.  N.  Bellows,  a  brother  of 
the  celebrated  divine,  of  New  York  city. 
The  trustees  of  this  school  were  Roswell 
Randall,  Miles  Goodyear,  Eldward  Allen, 
Asahel  Lyman,  William  Bartlit,  Gilmore 
Kinney,  Jonathan  I.  Wood.  The  advertise- 
ment of  this  institution  announced  that 
j'oung   men  "  were  fitted   for  the   store,  or 


276 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  counting-room,  or  for  colUcgc,  or  in  the 
art  of  teaching,  accompanied  with  lectures 
upon  scientific  subjects.  '  Ideas,  not  words,' 
is  the  motto  of  tliis  scliooi."  This  institu- 
tion was  a  practical  success  and  protluc- 
tive  of  much  good.  The  existence  of  two 
such  schools  in  the  little  x'illage,  which  were 
well  supported  and  abl_\'  conducted,  is  ample 
evidence  of  the  interest  felt  by  the  people 
in  the  cause  of  education  during  this  period. 

The  "  Cortland  Female  Seminary  "  had  a 
prosperous  existence  of  about  ten  years, 
when  its  splendid  career  was  closed  to  make 
way  for  a  still  more  extensi\'e  educational 
institution  —  the  old  academy.  The  popula- 
tion of  the  village  was  then  about  1,500; 
the  acadeni}'  of  Homer  was  at  the  height 
of  its  long  and  eminent  career,  and  the  want 
of  an  academic  institution  in  Cortland  was 
deeply  felt,  both  for  the  accommodation  of 
the  public  and  the  reputation  of  the  county 
seat.  The  first  meeting  for  this  purpose  was 
held  on  the  27th  of  No\-ember,  1841  ;  this 
was  followed  by  others,  at  which  negotiations 
relative  to  the  site  and  other  matters  were  dis- 
cussed during  the  year  i  S42.  The  first  report 
made  to  the  regents  of  the  university  bears 
date  the  3d  day  of  Januarj-,  1843,  and  gives 
the  condition  of  the  Cortlandville  academ)- 
up  to  the  6th  of  December,  1842,  the  close 
of  its  first  term,  as  follows: — The  \-alue 
of  the  ground  and  building,  $2,700.  The 
number  of  volumes  in  the  library,  206,  and 
value  thereof,  $170.69.  Philosophical  ap- 
paratus, \-alue,  $154.50. 

The  first  faculty  of  the  academ>^  was 
C(';mposed  of  Joseph  R.  Dixon,  principal  ; 
Henry  E.  Ranney,  assistant  teacher;  Miss 
Catharine  Hamlin,  principal  of  female  de- 
partment; Miss  Fanny  Nelson,  assistant 
preceptress.  One  hundred  and  twcnt\-five 
students  attended  the  first  term.  Such  was 
the  comparative!}'  humble  beginning  of  this 
afterward  prosperous  and  respected  institu- 
tion.     In    after    years    it    reached    a    high 


standard  of  merit  and  its  ])atronage  was  so 
liberal  as  to  req'iire  extensive  additions  to 
the  building. 

Pursuant  to  an  arrangement,  the  use  of 
the  acadeni}'  lot  was  conveyed  to  the  State 
to  form  a  part  of  the  Normal  School  grounds 
on  the  condition  that  the  academic  depart- 
ment be  maintained  in  the  new  school,  and 
that  children  of  parents  and  wards  of  guar- 
dians residing  within  the  bounds  of  the  cor- 
poration should  receive  their  tuition  free  of 
charge.  Accc)rding!}',  earl}-  in  1869  the 
academy  was  closed  and  the  building  re- 
moved. 

The  State  Normal  School. —  The  State 
Normal  and  Training  ScIkkjI  in  Cortland 
was  established  under  ch.  466,  laws  of  1866. 
The  corner-stone,  which  is  on  the  northern 
front  of  the  building,  bears  on  its  eastern 
face  this  inscription  : — 

"Laid  by  M.  W.  John  I,.  I.t-wis.  P.  (;.  M., 
Sept.  17.  A.  L.  5867." 

And  on  the  northern  fiice  the  following: 

"  State  Normal  School,  erected  by  the  village 
of  Cortland,  A.  D.  1867.  Charles  Foster,  jjresi- 
clenl.  Frederick  Ives,  Aaron  Sager,  J.  C.  Car- 
michael,  B.  B.  Woodworth,  trustees:  H.  M.  Wil- 
co.x.  architect;  J.  C.  Greene,  builder." 

Buildings  and  Grounds. — The  building  is 
made  of  brick  ;  its  extreme  length  east  and 
west  is  238  feet;  the  width  of  the  center  is 
85  feet ;  there  are  three  stories  above  the 
basement.  The  building  was  designed  to 
accomiuodate  boarders,  the  third  stor}-  con- 
taining dormitories.  The  second  story 
contained  school-rooms  and  twc5  suits  of 
rooms  for  teachers.  The  first  story  con- 
tained in  the  center  of  the  building  an 
office,  a  library,  a  parlor,  a  large  dining- 
room,  and  rooms  for  the  janitor  ;  school- 
rooms for  the  schools  of  practice  are  situ- 
ated on  the  east  and  west  ends  of  this  floor. 
The  heating  apparatus  was  for  steam.  The 
boilers  exploded  l'"ebruar}'  20th,  1 870.  and 
stoves  were  used  to  heat  the  buildine:  until 


JAMES  HARMON  HOOSE. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


277 


1875,  when  furnaces  took  the  place  of  the 
stoves.  The  boarduig  department  was  dis- 
continued after  a  few  years  ;  the  dining- 
room  and  the  teachers'  rooms  were  con- 
verted into  school-rooms.  The  Legislature 
made,  in  1879,  an  appiopriation  to  repair 
the  building  and  to  enlarge  the  grounds  on 
the  east.  The  library  was  moved  at  this 
time  into  the  spacious  room  that  was  for- 
merly the  dining-room.  The  building, 
grounds,  and  other  propert)-  belonging  to 
the  school,  cost  the  corporation  of  the  vil- 
lage of  Cortland  about  $98,000. 

Library,  Cabinets  and  Apparatus. — The 
school  received  the  library  and  apparatus 
that  belonged  to  the  Cortlandville  Academj-. 
Large  additions  have  been  made  to  them 
from  time  to  time;  the  Legislature  also 
made,  in  1 871,  an  appropriation  of  $5,000 
to  increase  the  librar\-  and  apparatus.  Mrs. 
Henr)'  S.  Randall  donated,  in  1880,  the 
valuable  private  cabinet  of  geological  and 
mineralogical  specimens  which  her  husband 
had  collected  ;  this  cabinet  occupies  a  large 
room  in  the  third  stor}'  of  the  building  and 
is  known  as  the  Randall  Cabinet.  Dr. 
Thomas  B.  Stowell,  of  the  chair  of  science 
of  the  school,  has  selected  a  valuable  col- 
lection of  apparatus.  The  librar\-  has  an 
extensive  collection  of  valuable  books. 
Normal  students  enjoy  rare  opportunities 
in  having  access  to  the  library,  to  cabinets, 
and  to  the  apparatus  of  the  school. 

Organization  of  the  Local  Board.  —  Hon. 
Abram  B.  Weaver,  Superintendent  of  Pub- 
lic Instruction,  appointed,  December  i6th, 
1868,  nine  citizens  of  Cortland  to  be  the 
local  board  of  the  school.  These  gentle- 
men were  Hon.  Henry  S.  Randall,  Hon.  R. 
Holland  Duell,  Dr.  F"rederick  Hyde,  Hon. 
Horatio  Ballard,  and  Messrs.  Charles  C. 
Taylor,  Norman  Chamberlain,  William 
Newkirk,  Henry  Brewer,  and  Arnold  Staf- 
ford. Mr.  Randall  was  made  b)-  the  board 
chairman,    Mr.    Duell   secretar\',    and    Mr. 


Taylor  treasurer.  Mr.  Stafford  died  June 
27th,  1872,   and  Mr.  Robert  Bruce    Smith 

:  was  appointed    to   fill    the   vacancy.       Mr. 

i  Randall  died  August  I2th,  1876,  and  Mr. 
James  S.  Squires  was  appointed  to  the  vacan- 
cy; Dr.  Hyde  was  appointed  chairman  of  the 
board  at  this  time.  Mr.  Ballard  died  Oc- 
tober 8th,  1878,  and  Mr.  James  C.  Car- 
michael  was  appointed  to  the  vacancy. 
The  officers  of  the  board  now  are :  Dr. 
Hyde  president,  Mr.  Norman  Chamberlain 
secretary,  and  Mr.  Taylor  treasurer.  Mr. 
Newkirk  succeeded  Mr.  Duell  as  secretary, 
and  Mr.  Chamberlain  succeeded  Mr.  New- 

;  kirk. 

Opening  of  the  School- Facult}'. — The 
school  opened  March  3d,  1869,  with  the 
following  board  of  instructors :  James  H. 
Hoose,  principal,  science  and  history  of 
education  ;  Norman  F.  Wright,  ancient  lan- 
guages ;  Frank  S.  Capen,  mathematics ; 
Thomas  B.  Stowell,  natural  sciences  ;  Mar- 
tha Roe,  superintendent  of  training  school, 
teacher  of  methods  ;  Helen  K.  M.  Babcock, 
history,  rhetoric,  geography ;  Martha  E. 
Couch,  modern  languages  ;  Marianne  Bates, 
vocal  music,  four  hours  daily  ;  Lemoyne  A. 
Hoose,  drawing,  four  hours  daily ;  Helen 
K.  Hubbard,  principal  of  intermediate  de- 
partment ;  Margaret  Hunter,  principal  of 
primary  department  ;  Charles  A.  Fowler 
(temporary),  part  time,  assistant  intermedi- 
ate department. 

Teachers  who  have  been  connected  with 
the  school :  ^  — 

James  H.  Hoo.se,  A.  M.,  Ph.  D.,  Princi- 
pal, mental  science  and  philosophy  of  edu- 
cation, ^Larch  3d,  1869. 

Norman  F.  Wright,  A.  M.,  Latin  and 
Greek,  March  3d,  1869 -January  30th, 
1877. 

Thomas  B.  Stowell,  A.  M.,  Ph.  D.,  nat- 
ural sciences,  March  3d,  1869. 

I'riie   dales    refer   respectively   to  the  beginning   and 
close  of  service. 


278 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Frank  S.  Capen,  A.  M.,  mathematics, 
March  3d,  1869. 

Martha  Roc,  mctliods,  and  superintend- 
ent of  training  school,  March  3d,  1869. 

Helen  E.  M.  Babcock,  history,  rhetoric, 
geography,  until  1870,  then  modern  lan- 
guages, March  3d,  1869-July  2d,  1872. 

Mrs.  Martha  E.  Couch,  modern  lan- 
guages, March   3d,  1869-July   20th,    1869. 

Marianne  Bates,  vocal  music,  March  3d, 
1869-July  20th,  1869. 

Mrs.  Lemoyne  A.  Hoose,  drawing, 
March  3d,  1869-July  20th,  1869. 

Helen  K.  Hubbard,  principal  and  critic 
in  intermediate  department,  March  3d, 
1869-July  2d,  1872. 

Margaret  Hunter,  principal  and  critic  in 
primary  department,  March  3d,  1869-Feb- 
ruary  ist,  1870. 

Charles  A.  Fowler,  assistant  in  interme- 
diate department,  March  3d,  1869-July  ist, 
1870. 

Mary  Morton,  drawing,  September  8th, 
1869-January  28th,  1873. 

Mrs.  O.  S.  Douglass,  vocal  music,  Sep- 
tember 8th,  1869-October  1st,  1869. 

Mary  F.  Hall,  critic  in  intermediate  de- 
partment, September  8th,  1869-July  ist, 
1870. 

Mrs.  Helen  D.  Kendall,  critic  in  primary 
department,  September  8th,  1869-July  ist, 
1870. 

Mary  F.  Hendrick,  reading,  elocution, 
gj'mnastics,  rhetoric,  English  literature, 
September  8th,  1869. 

Mary  Marsh,  vocal  music,  October  1st, 
1869-January  2Sth,  1872. 

Mrs.  Helen  M.  Smith,  principal  and  critic 
in  primary  department,  February  i6th, 
1870-September  14th,  1870. 

Amanda  J.  Hopkins,  critic  in  intermedi- 
ate department  until  September  24th,  1873, 
then  principal  and  critic,  September  14th, 
1870-June  27th,  1876. 

Sarah  M.  Sutton,  English  grammar  and 


history,    September     14th,     1870-January 
27th,  1874. 

Mrs.  Theodore  Perkins,  principal  and 
critic  in  primary  department,  September 
14th,  1870-January  31st,  1 87 1. 

Mary  E.  Lester,  principal  and  critic  in 
primary  department,  February  15th,  187  i- 
January  28th,  1873. 

Julia  H.  Willis,  critic  in  primary  depart- 
ment, February  15th,  1871-January  20th, 
1872. 

James  H.  Shults,  principal  of  academic 
department  until  September,  1877,  then 
department  of  English,  physics  and  Greek, 
first  time,  September  6th,  1871-July  1st, 
1873;  second  time,  September  6th,  1876- 
July  2d,  1878. 

Emily  E.  Cole,  principal  and  critic  in 
primary  department,  February  14th,  1872- 
January  23d,  1883. 

Clara  E.  Booth,  modern  languages,  Sep- 
tember 4th,  1872. 

Mary  A.  Hubbard,  principal  and  critic 
in  intermediate  department,  September  4th, 
1872,  died  September  24th,  1873. 

Helen  P.  Eels,  critic  in  primary  depart- 
ment, P'ebruary  12th,  1873-July  ist,  1873. 

Sara  A.  Saunders,  critic  in  primary  de- 
partment, September  3d,  1873. 

Henrietta  Van  Ness,  critic  in  intermedi- 
ate department,  September  24th,  1873- 
June  30th,  1874. 

M.  Anzolette  Drake,  vocal  music  and 
drawing,  September  3d,  1873-January 
19th,  1874. 

James  M.  Milne,  principal  academic  de- 
partment, then  Latin  and  Greek,  first  time, 
September  3d,  1873-June  27th,  1876;  sec- 
ond time,  September  5th,  1877. 

Mrs.  E.  P.  Halbert,  vocal  music  and 
drawing,  January  19th,  1874. 

Samuel  J.  Sornberger,  Ph.  M.,  English, 
science,  Latin,  first  time,  September  2d, 
1874-June  27th,  1876;  second  time,  Sep- 
tember 4th,  1878. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


279 


Elizabeth  Rase,  critic  in  intermediate 
department  until  September  6th,  1878, 
then  principal  and  critic,  September  2d, 
1874. 

Mrs.  Lottie  T.  Corlcw,  critic  in  interme- 
diate department,  September  6th,  1876— 
May  2d,  1882. 

Josephine  Folger,  critic  in  intermediate 
department.  May  2d,  j882-June  27th,  1882. 

Ellen  J.  Pearne,  critic  in  intermediate 
department,  September  6th,  1882. 

Mary  L.  Roberts,  principal  and  critic  in 
primary  department,  January  23d,  1883. 

Organization  of  the  School.  —  The  school 
is  organized  into  two  departments;  one  is 
that  of  theory,  and  the  other  is  that  of 
practice.  The  department  of  theory  com- 
prises three  courses  of  study.  The  ele- 
mentary English^  course  extends  over  two 
two  years ;  the  advanced  English  course 
extends  over  three  years  ;  and  the  classical 
course  extends  over  four  years.  The  last 
year  of  each  course  is  devoted  to  profes- 
sional work;  this  work  includes  the  history 
and  philosophy  of  education  and  of  teach- 
ing and  practice  in  the  art  of  teaching. 
This  department  of  practice  consists  of  the 
thoroughly  organized  school  of  about  300 
pupils  whose  ages  extend  from  five  years 
upwards ;  these  pupils  are  classified  into 
ten  grades,  the  lowest  being  designated  as 
the  first.  There  are  a  few  pupils  in  the 
school  who  have  passed  out  of  the  tenth 
grade  and  do  not  rank  as  normal  students ; 
these  pupils  are  classified  as  academic  pupils 
and  recite  in  normal  classes.  Students  must 
be  sixteen  years  of  age,  at  least,  in  order 
to  be  registered  as  normal  students.  Tu- 
ition and  rent  of  text-books  are  free  to 
normal  students.  The  department  of  prac- 
tice is  under  the  supervision  of  the  teacher 
of  theories  of  practice ;  while  the  depart- 
ment is  under  the  immediate  personal  su- 
pervision of  four  experienced  and  capable 
critics  who  devote  all  their  attention  to  the 


work  of  the  teachers-in-training.  The 
principal  of  the  school  devotes  directly, 
also,  much  of  his  attention  to  the  welfare 
of  this  department  of  the  school.  Theories 
of  teaching  are  tested,  observations  are  re- 
corded, and  the  teachers-in-training  have 
the  benefits  of  all  results  obtained  from 
these  professional  studies.  Graduating 
classes  visit  various  systems  of  public  schools 
in  the  cities  of  the  State  in  order  to  in- 
spect them  professionally. 

Attendance  of  Normal  Students.  — The 
following  table  exhibits  the  yearly  at- 
tendance of  normal  students  from  the 
date  of  opening  of  the  school  to  the  close 
of  the  fifteenth  annual  report  of  the  local 
board : — 


2 

c 

Average 

el 

1 

Age. 

VE.\R. 

0 

i 

V 

to 

V 

.c 

a 

W 

6 

b 

s 

^ 

1 

z 

< 

S 

E^: 

I 

March  3, 

1869.  to  October  i,  i 

869-. 

116 

S3 

19 

'9 

2 

October  I 

1869,  to  October  i, 

1870. 

322 

123 

19 

^9 

3 

October  1 

1870,  to  October  i, 

1871. 

401 

162 

20 

"9 

4 

October  I 

1871,  to  October  i, 

1872. 

370 

161 

19 

19 

5 

October  i 

1872,  to  October  I, 

1873. 

390 

163 

20 

''9 

6 

October  i 

1873,  to  October  i, 

1874. 

399 

■77 

20 

19 

7 

October  I 

1874,  to  October  i, 

1875. 

370 

'79 

20 

22 

8 

October  I 

1875,  to  October  I, 

1876. 

377 

157 

20 

20 

9 

October  i 

1876,  to  October  i, 

1877. 

398 

177 

20 

'9 

10 

October  i 

1877,  to  October  i, 

1878. 

361 

197 

21 

20 

II 

October  i 

1878,  to  October  i. 

1879. 

324 

'53 

21 

20 

12 

October  i 

1879,  to  October  I, 

18S0. 

449 

220 

21 

20 

^3 

October  I 

1880,  to  October  i, 

1881. 

364 

213 

19    7 

19 

14 

October  i 

1881,  to  October  1, 

1882. 

498 

226 

19.84 

19.  II 

■5 

October  i 

1882,  to  October  i. 

1883. 

504 

275 

20 

19.16 

The  following  brief  address  which  Dr. 
Hoose  made  to  the  citizens  at  the  close  of 
commencement  exercises,  January  22d, 
1884,  gives  a  concise  statement  of  the 
prosperity  and  condition  of  the  school : — 

These  exercises  close  fifteen  years  of  history 
of  the  Cortland  Normal  School.  Two  thousand 
three  hundred  and  forty-one  different  normal  stu- 
dents have  been  connected  with  the  school  in 
this  time.  These  students  have  represented 
nearly  all  the  counties  in  the  State. 

The  records  of  the  school  show  that  449  nor- 
mal students  were  enrolled  during  the  year  which 
ended  Oct.   ist,   1880;  the  average  age  of  the 


28o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ladies  was  twenty  years,  and  that  of  the  gentle- 
men was  twenty-one  years ;  that  364  normal 
students  were  enrolled  for  the  year  whicli  ended 
Oct.  I  St,  1881  :  the  average  age  of  the  ladies 
being  nineteen,  and  that  of  the  gentlemen  being 
about  nineteen  and  one-half;  that  498  were  en- 
rolled for  the  year  which  ended  Oct.  ist,  1882. 
150  of  this  number  entering  in  September,  1882  ; 
the  average  age  of  the  women  being  a  little 
above  nineteen  years,  and  that  of  the  men  being 
nearly  twenty ;  that  504  normal  students  were 
enrolled  for  the  year  which  ended  Oct.  ist,  1883; 
the  average  age  of  the  women  being  about  nine- 
teen and  one-fifth  years,  and  that  of  the  men  be- 
ing twenty  years. 

The  average  age  of  the  normal  student  indicates 
the  maturity  of  mind,  the  scholarshij),  and  the 
experience  in  teaching  which  students  possess ; 
it  indicates  also  the  \alue  of  the  school  when  it 
is  considered  what  the  students  can  do  as  teachers 
in  the  public  schools  of  the  State.  The  higher 
the  average  age  the  more  valuable  to  the  State 
is  the  Normal  .School.  Hence  a  high  average 
age  of  the  students  is  of  greater  importance,  if 
possible,  to  the  jiurposes  of  the  scliool  than  the 
number  in  attendance. 

Including  this  ]jresent  class.  418  normal  stu- 
dents have  been  graduated.  These  graduates 
occupy  places  of  ini])ortance  and  of  prominence 
in  the  educational  ranks  of  the  country.  Our 
graduates  are  in  demand  for  those  positions 
which  require  superior  qualifications  of  scholar- 
shij) and  of  executive  ability ;  they  are  command- 
ing marked  success  as  teachers  and  as  men  and 
women.  Our  graduates  take  high  rank  in  all 
higher  institutions  where  they  enter  and  pursue 
higher  branches. 

Estimates  made  for  the  first  ten  years  of  the 
school  show  that  over  fifty  per  cent,  of  our  nor- 
mal students  teach  more  or  less  during  any  given 
year  of  their  attendance.  Inasmuch  as  a  large 
majority  of  the  students  attend  school  more  than 
one  year,  it  follows  that  nearly  all  normal  stu- 
dents teach  more  or  less  in  the  public  schools  of 
the  State ;  and  very  many  teach  years.  These 
facts  show  that  our  school  is  the  center  of  great 
influence  in  the  commonwealth. 

In  order  to  exhibit  the  rank  of  the  Cortland 
Normal  School  among  the  Normal  Schools  of 
the  State,  the  following  statistics  of  attendance 


are  pre.sentcd  from  the  published  report  for  the 
year  which  ended  Oct.  1st,  1882. 

Albany  Normal  School  enrolled  401  normal 
students;  Brockport,  407;  Buftalo,  261  ;  Cort- 
land, 498  :  Fredonia,  180;  Geneseo,  461;  Os- 
wego, 394;  and  Potsdam,  406.  Cortland  out- 
ranked them  all,  and  the  attendance  was  larger 
for  1883  than  it  was  for  1882. 

These  statistics  demonstrate  the  wisdom  which 
has  controlled  the  administration  of  the  local 
board  since  the  school  began  its  liistory.  The 
board  has  proceeded  on  the  theory  that  the  cit- 
izens of  the  State,  who  pay  the  taxes  which  sup- 
port the  school,  demand  in  return  men  and  wom- 
en who  can  teach  better  schools  because  they 
have  been  here ;  that  the  public  demands  men 
and  women  of  sterling  character,  who  are  lo)al 
to  theirduties  ;  that  it  is  the  business  of  the  school 
to  give  to  its  students  these  qualifications.  His- 
tory bears  all  honor  to  the  board  for  the  success 
which  has  crowned  its  administrations. 

Memorandum  of  History.  —  The  Cort- 
land Normal  School  has  liad  a  career  that 
will  go  down  into  history  as  one  of  tiie 
most  remarkable  in  the  annals  of  educa- 
tional history  in  the  United  States.  Hon. 
Abram  B.  Weaver  was  Superintendent  of 
Public  Instruction  when  the  school  opened 
in  1869.  Hon.  Neil  Gilmour  succeeded 
him  in  the  ofifice  in  April,  1874,  and  he 
was  succeeded  in  ofifice  in  April,  1883,  by 
Hon.  W.  B.  Ruggles.  The  school  opened 
March  3d,  1869,  and  flourished  from  the 
beginning,  because  the  local  board  estab- 
lished at  first  a  firm  and  conscientious  pur- 
pose to  serve  only  the  best  interests  of  the 
school ;  the  board  has  never  deviated  from 
this  purpose. 

It  began  to  appear  in  1876  that  the  super- 
intendent of  public  instruction  had  con- 
cei\'ed  a  purpose  to  control  the  normal 
school  system  of  the  State.  This  purpose 
revealed  itself  towards  the  Cortland  Nor- 
mal School  in  a  series  of  overt  acts  which 
were  calculated  to  destroy  the  unity  and 
harmony  of  the  administration  of  the  school, 
and  to  wrest  from  the  board  its  legal  pre- 
rogatives of  authority. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


281 


The  superintendent's  first  overt  act  was 
a  charge  against  the  loyalty  of  Dr.  Thomas 
B.  Stowell,  of  the  chair  of  science  in  the 
■school;  this  charge  was,  in  August,  1876, 
to  the  principal,  who  replied  to  the  super- 
intendent that  his  charge  had  no  foundation 
in  fact.  The  second  overt  act  was  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  superintendent  filled  the 
vacancy  in  the  local  board  caused  by  the 
death  of  Mr.  Randall,  which  occurred  in 
August,  1876.  The  board  followed  its 
previous  custom  and  recommended  to  the 
superintendent  a  suitable  person  to  fill  the 
vacanc\- ;  but  he  appointed  in  September, 
1876,  without  notice  and  without  explana- 
tion, another  gentleman,  Mr.  J.  S.  Squires. 
No  divided  vote  had  ever  been  cast  in  the 
deliberations  of  the  board  before  the  advent 
of  this  appointee.  The  third  act  was  a 
vain  effort  to  secure  the  resignation  from 
the  board  of  Hon.  R.  H.  Duell. 

The  fourth  act  of  the  superintendent  was 
a  fruitless  effort,  made  in  1877,  to  compel 
the  board  to  nominate  to  him,  against  its 
best  judgment,  a  certain  gentleman  for  the 
chair  of  Latin  and  Greek,  then  vacant. 
Pending  the  confirmation  of  the  nominee 
of  the  board,  an  attempt  was  made  to  cause 
the  retirement  from  the  board  of  its  presi- 
dent, Dr.  Hyde ;  failing  in  the  attempt, 
the  nominee  of  the  board.  Prof  James  M. 
Milne,  was  confirmed  June  5th,  1877.  The 
sixth  act  was  an  extraordinarj-  order  issued 
June  1 2th,  1877.  directing  the  board  to  re- 
nominate to  him  for  re-appointment  all  the 
members  of  the  faculty.  There  being  no 
vacancies,  the  board  sent  to  him  a  memo- 
randum of  the  facult}'  as  it  then  existed  ; 
he  assumed  this  statement  to  be  a  recom- 
mendation, and  purported  to  reconfirm, 
July  5th.  the  appointments,  attaching  to 
his  confirmation  conditions  not  pro\-ided 
for  by  statute  ;  chief  among  these  condi- 
tions was  the  clause:  "Said  approval  to 
continue  in  force  during  the  pleasure  of  the 


local  board  and  the  superintendent."  The 
seventh  act  took  place  in  a  meeting  of 
the  principals  of  the  Normal  Schools  of  the 
State,  convened  by  his  order,  and  held  at 
Albany  in  December,  1877.  The  superin- 
tendent presided;  he  alluded  to  several 
personal  matters,  and  said  among  other 
things,  that  the  principals  "  must  obey  him." 
The  eighth  act  was  his  manner  of  appoint- 
ing Mr.  J.  C.  Carmichael  to  fill  the  vacancj- 
in  the  board  caused  by  the  death  of  Mr. 
Ballard,  which  occurred  October  8th,  1878; 
the  appointment  was  made  October  28th 
with  no  consultation  with  the  board.  The 
superintendent  continued  to  1880  to  mani- 
fest his  displeasure  with  the  board  and  with 
its  administration,  because  neither  it  nor 
the  principal  of  the  school  could  be  won 
by  favor  or  b\-  fear  to  deviate  in  the  least 
from  the  plain  line  of  clearly  defined  duties 
which  the}'  legall)'  and  morally  owed  to 
the  State.  The  superintendent  was  a  can- 
didate to  be  his  own  successor  in  office,  in 
April,  1880.  The  principal  of  the  school 
and  members  of  the  board  expressed  a 
preference  for  Hon.  John  I.  Gilbert,  who 
was  also  a  candidate  for  the  position;  but 
Mr.  Gilbert  was  unsuccessful,  and  the  form- 
er superintendent  was  reinstated. 

The  superintendent  made,  in  1880,  his 
ninth  effort  to  gain  control  of  the  school. 
He  sent,  June  28th  of  that  year,  an  auto- 
graph order  to  Dr.  Hoose,  directing  the 
latter  to  send  to  him  by  Jul)^  6th  his  "per- 
emptory resignation  "  as  principal  of  the 
school.  The  board  was  composed  at  this 
time  of  Messrs.  Hyde,  Duell,  Taylor,  Cham- 
berlain, Newkirk,  Brown  and  Smith  ;  and 
Messrs.  Squires  and  Carmichael.  The  first 
seven  mentioned  members  of  the  board, 
constituting  the  majority,  claimed  by  law 
a  voice  in  selecting  teachers  for  the  school ; 
they  requested  the  specific  charges  against 
the  principal ;  the  superintendent  replied, 
Juh'  6th,  that   "there  are  no  charges"  and 


282 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


that  he  virtually  proposed  to  act  independ- 
ently of  the  board.  Dr.  Hoose  refused,  July 
8th,  to  resign ;  the  superintendent  with- 
drew, July  1 2th,  his  approval  of  the  cm- 
plo)-mcnt  of  Dr.  Hoose,  that  had  been  given 
by  him  in  July,  1877  ;  the  board  by  act,  on 
July  17th,  refused  to  concur  with  the  super- 
intendent. August  4th  lie  purported  to 
appoint  another  principal  to  the  school ; 
August  7th  the  board  refused  to  recognize 
this  appointee,  and  offered  to  agree  with  the 
superintendent  on  a  case  to  construe  the 
statute,  and  carry  the  matter  to  the  courts ; 
the  superintendent  offered,  August  19th,  to 
consent  to  carry  the  case  to  the  courts,  pro- 
vided the  board  would  first  give  to  him  the 
control  of  the  school,  and  threatened  to 
close  the  school  in  case  the  board  did  not 
comiily  with  his  terms.  August  26th  the 
board  refused  to  comply  with  his  terms. 
The  term  opened  Sept.  ist.  ;  the  appointee 
of  the  superintendent  appeared  at  the  build- 
ing and  demanded  possession  of  it,  in  the 
name  of  the  superintendent;  the  board  re- 
fused to  recognize  him  as  principal,  and  di- 
rected Dr.  Hoose  and  the  teachers  to  open 
the  school ;  his  appointee  then  ordered  all 
the  teachers  to  withdraw  from  the  building 
as  he  retired  to  his  office  at  the  Messenger 
House.  The  faculty  was  composed  at  that 
time  of  Dr.  Hoose,  Dr.  Thos.  B.  Stowell, 
Prof  S.  J.  Sornberger,  Mrs.  E.  P.  Halbert, 
Misses  E.  Rase,  S.  A.  Saunders,  E.  E.  Cole ; 
and  Prof  F.  S.  Capen,  Prof  J.  M.  Milne, 
Miss  M.  Roe,  Miss  M.  F.  Hendrick,  Miss  C. 
E.  Booth,  and  Mrs.  Corlew.  The  first  seven 
mentioned  teachers  obeyed  the  orders  of 
the  board  ;  the  vacancies  in  the  faculty  were 
filled  immediately  ;  the  list  of  these  teach- 
ers who  taught,  were  : —  D.  Eugene  Smith, 
Wm.  C.  Bennett,  Helen  E.  Bradford,  Gard- 
ner Fuller,  R.  S.  Bingham,  Kate  M.  Sorn- 
berger, Helen  K.  Hoose,  Herbert  M.  Hill, 
Hiram  J.  Messenger,  Mary  A.  Knapp,  Wil- 
liam L.  Bates,  E.  M.  Ladd. 


The  superintendent  purported  to  remove 
from  the  school,  Sept.  2d,  those  six  teach- 
ers who  remained  with  the  principal,  obedi- 
ent to  the  concurrent  authority  of  the  board, 
but  they  continued  to  teach,  nevertheless; 
this  was  his  tenth  overt  act  against  the 
school.  The  next  was  his  order  to  close 
the  school,  issued  Sept.  7th.  The  board 
refused  to  close  the  school,  or  to  allow  it  to 
be  closed  by  others.  The  twelfth  act  of  the 
superintendent  was  his  application  at  the 
special  term  of  the  .Supreme  Court  for  a 
writ  of  mandamus  to  compel  the  board  to 
accept  his  construction  of  the  statute.  The 
case  was  argued  Oct.  27th,  1880;  the  de- 
cision was  not  rendered  until  Jan.  4th,  1881  ; 
it  sustained  the  position  of  the  superintend- 
ent, although  the  final  service  was  not  made 
upon  the  board  until  Feb.  7th,  1 88 1.  The 
school  continued  to  flourish  from  Sept.  1st, 
1880,  notwithstanding  the  attacks  of  the 
superintendent,  who  also  refused  to  certify 
to  any  of  the  current  expense  accounts 
of  the  school  for  the  term.  A  class  of 
eighteen  normal  students  was  graduated 
January  i8th,  1881,  but  the  superintendent 
refused  to  prepare  diplomas  for  the  grad- 
uates. 

Under  the  orders  of  the  court  the  superin- 
tendent took  sole  charge  of  the  school  P^eb. 
7th,  1881.  The  board  carried  the  case  to  the 
General  Term  of  the  Supreme  Court ;  it  was 
argued  May  13th,  the  decision  was  handed 
down  Sept.  20th,  1 88 1 ,  and  affirmed  the  de- 
cision of  the  court  below.  The  board  car- 
ried the  case  to  the  Court  of  Appeals  Dec. 
20th,  1 88 1 .  January  3  i  st,  1 88 1 ,  the  super- 
intendent argued  in  court  on  his  motion  to 
to  throw  the  case  out  of  court  on  the  ground 
that  the  board  having  obeyed  the  courts 
below  had  lost  its  right  of  appeal.  The 
court  denied,  Feb.  7th,  his  motion.  The 
case  was  argued  before  the  Court  of  Appeals 
March  24th,  Hon.  Samuel  Hand  appearing 
for  the  board.      April  18th  the  court  handed 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


283 


down  its  decision,  reversing  the  courts  below. 
April  26th,  1882,  Dr.  Hoose  and  the  six 
teachers  thus  sent  out  by  the  superintendent 
re-entered  the  school  under  command  of 
the  courts.  The  superintendent  vainly  ap- 
pealed, in  May,  to  the  Legislature  to  enact 
a  law  giving  to  him  absolute  control  of  the 
Normal  Schools  of  the  State.  He  then 
sought  in  vain,  in  June,  July,  and  August, 

1882,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Regents  to  unite 
with  him  to  remove  the  board  from  the  Cort- 
and  Normal  School.  In  Oct.,  1882,  Miss 
Martha  Saltsman,  of  Harford,  Cortland 
county,  began  an  action  for  a  mandamus  to 
compel  the  superintendent  to  grant  to  her  a 
diploma,  she  having  graduated  January  1 8th, 
1 88 1.  In  December  the  superintendent 
prepared  diplomas  for  her,  and  for  the  bal- 
lance  of  her  class.      He  certified  in  January, 

1883,  to  the  current  expense  accounts  of 
the  school  and  for  a  portion  of  the  salaries 
due  for  the  time  when  he  had  possession  of 
the  school.  Measures  were  instituted  to 
collect  from  the  State  the  balance  of  salaries 
due  to  April  26th,  1882,  and  the  Board  of 
of  Claims  awarded  to  the  teachers  in  Jan- 
uary, 1884,  the  amount  of  salary  due  for 
said  time. 

This  controversy  was  watched  with  deep- 
est interest  by  friends  of  education  every- 
where, and  public  sentiment  generally  sus- 
tained the  local  board,  and  those  teachers 
who  remained  under  the  board.  The  bus- 
iness men  of  Cortland  continued  to  furnish 
the  supplies  which  were  necessary  to  meet 
the  needs  of  the  school  during  the  time  that 
the  superintendent  refused  to  certify  to  the 
bills ;  all  of  these  bills  have  been  paid. 
Among  the  citizens  of  Cortland  village  who 
sustained  the  board  were  Hon.  A.  P.  Smith, 
Mr.  D.  F.  Wallace,  Major  A.  Sager,  Mr. 
Morgan  L.  Webb,  Mr.  H.  Hubbard,  and  Mr. 
George  Warren. 

The  school  is  in  a  highly  prosperous 
state,     notwithstanding     this    controversy. 


The  self-sacrifice,  devotion,  firmness  and 
perseverance  of  the  majority-seven  of  the 
board  and  of  their  sympathizers  have  ele- 
vated to  a  higher  plane  the  tenure  and  in- 
dependence of  the  position  of  the  teachers, 
and  the  dignity  and  worth  of  the  profession 
of  teaching,  and  have  given  a  new  and  il- 
lustrious example  of  manhood  defending 
the  freedom  and  rights  of  American  citizens. 
The  legal  points  which  the  controversy 
established  are  the  following  (89  New  York 
Reports,  pp.   11-12):  — 

"  The  superintendent  of  public  instruction 
has  no  power  to  remove  the  princiijal  of  a  nor- 
mal school  established  under  the  act  of  1866 
(Chap.  466,  Laws  of  1866),  without  the  con- 
currence of  the  local  board. 

"The  provision  of  said  act  (§4)  declaring 
that  the  '  employment '  of  teachers  in  said  schools 
shall  be  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  superin- 
tendent, refers  to  the  act  of  hiring.  When  the 
approval  is  once  given,  the  contract  of  employ- 
ment is  complete,  and  the  teacher  can  only  be 
discharged  by  the  authority  in  whom  the  power 
to  employ  is  vested,  /.  e.,  by  the  concurrent  act 
of  the  local  board  and  the  superintendent. 

"  It  is  not  within  the  power  of  the  superin- 
tendent, by  annexing  conditions  to  his  approval, 
to  change  the  law  regulating  the  discharge  of 
teachers  of  these  schools. 

"  The  local  board  of  a  normal  school  employed 
one  H.  as  principal,  which  employment  was  ap- 
proved by  the  superintendent  '  to  continue  in 
force  during  the  pleasure  of  the  board  and  the 
superintendent ; '  thereafter  the  superintendent 
withdrew  his  approval  and  directed  the  local 
board  to  recommend  another  principal,  and 
upon  its  declining  so  to  do,  made  an  appoint- 
ment himself  which  the  board  refused  to  recog- 
nize. In  proceedings  by  inandainus  to  compel 
such  recognition,  held,  that  the  superintendent 
had  no  authority  to  attach  to  his  approval  the 
qualification  stated ;  that,  notwithstanding  the 
action  of  the  superintendent,  H.  remained 
principal,  and  the  refusal  of  the  board  '  to  make 
a  new  appointment  was  not  an  omission  to  dis- 
charge its  duties'  within  the  meaning  of  the 
amendatory    act  of   1869  (Chap.  18,   Laws  of 


284 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1869)  and  so  did  not  authorize  the  superintend- 
ent to  discharge  sucli  iluties." 

CORTLAND  VILLAGE  POSTAL  SERVICK. 
It  is  ordinarily  a  difficult  matter  to  give  a 
detailed  record  of  the  post-office  of  any 
given  village,  as  the  t)nly  documents  from 
which  such  a  record  can  be  made  arc  on 
file  in  the  Post-office  Dei)artment  at  VV'ash- 
ington.  An  c.\cc[)tion  nia\-,  ho\\e\er,  be 
made  of  the  Cortland  village  ol'iice,  owing 
to  the  enterprise  of  Wm.  H.  Clark,  proprie- 
tur  of  the  Cortland  Slaiu/an/,  who  obtained 
data  from  the  deiiartnient  records  at  the 
time  the  office  was  removed  into  the  new 
Standard  building  on  the  night  of  April  2d, 
1883,  anil  printed  therefrom  in  his  journal  a 
liistor)'  of  the  pi)st- office  from  its  first  estab- 
lishment, h'rom  that  record  we  compile 
the  following  :  — 

The  first  postmaster  of  Cortlaiul  village 
was  Oliver  Wiswell,  one  of  the  earliest  law- 
yers in  the  place,  who  resided  wliere  W.  R. 
Randall  now  lives,  and  k-e[)t  the  olTice  in  a 
front  room.  llis  term  of  office  extended  to 
Jidy  25tli,  I. Si  7,  when  Roswell  Randall  suc- 
ceeded him,  and  continued  to  serve  for 
about  fotn-  years,  keeping  the  office  in  his 
store,  on  the  corner  now  occupied  by  the 
Keator  block,  being  followed  by  Samuel 
Nelson,  a]3pointed  Maj-  nth,  1822.  This 
gentleman  resided  where  Mr.  1'.  Ives  now 
lives,  corner  of  Main  and  Mill  streets,  and, 
as  near  as  we  can  learu,  kept  the  post-office 
in  his  house.  The  post-office  of  that  time 
was  a  ver)'  small  afiair  compared  with  the 
one  of  the  present,  as  persons  were  consid- 
ered luck)-  who  received  one  letter  a  month, 
and  in  order  to  get  that  had  often  to  pay  as 
high  as  twenty- five  cents.  The  mail  was 
brought  froin  Syracuse  b)-  a  fom-horse 
stage,  the  horn  announcing  its  arrival  being 
"  tooted  "  vigorously  from  the  upper  end 
of  Main  street  to  Mr.  Nelson's  door.  The 
arrival  of  the  one  m.iil  and  the  ile|)arture  of 
the   same    were  the   onl\-  cnli\enin<j    e\'ents 


of  the  day.  Postmaster  Nelson  afterwards 
became,  first,  chief  justice  of  the  State  of 
New  York,  and,  later  on,  associate  justice 
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States. 
He  also  recei\'ed  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from 
Columbia  College.  He  died  in  1872  in 
Cooperstown,  at  the  age  of  82.  Charles 
Lynde  succeedetl  him,  the  date  of  liis  ap- 
pointment being  June  2d,  1823.  Mr.  Lynde 
was  a  merchant  and  kept  the  office  in  his 
store,  which  was  on  Main  street,  on  the  spot 
where  Mrs.  Thomas  Keator  now  resides. 
He  had  charge  of  it  until  Dec.  20tli,  1824, 
I  when  his  brother,  John  Lynde,  took  his 
I  place.  The  latter  gentleman  was  a  doctor, 
and  kept,  as  was  the  custom  then,  the  post- 
office  and  his  business  office  together.  He 
lived  about  half  way  between  Cortland  and 
Homer.  lie  remained  in  office  u[)  to  April 
28th,  1825,  when  Roswell  Randall  was  ap- 
pointed for  the  second  time.  His  office  was 
in  the  old  Lagle  block,  which  stood  on 
South  Main  street,  and  was  absorbed  in  the 
new  Squires  block.  He,  in  turn,  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Canfield  Marsh,  appointed  July 
28th,  1830,  who  was  a  manufactin-er  of  and 
dealer  in  hats.  His  store  was  an  old  wood- 
en building  situated  where  Union  Hall 
block  now  stands. 

About  this  lime  the  name  of  the  village 
was  changed  by  dropping  the  "  u  "  from 
"  Courtlandt,"  making  it  "  Cortlandt  Vil- 
lage." Richard  Scouten,  the  proprietor  of 
the  old  Eagle  Tavern,  was  the  next  post- 
master, his  date  of  appointment  being  Nov. 
14th,  1839.  lie  kept  the  post-office  in  the 
tavern,  which  at  that  time  was  two  stories 
high.  A  third  story  was  added  shortly 
afterward,  and  in  Januar)-,  1862,  the  whole 
structure  was  burnt  down,  Isaac  Fairchilds 
owning  it  at  the  time.  The  post-office, 
however,  before  this  e\ent  had  passed  into 
the  hands  of  Joel  15.  Hibbard  Feb.  24th, 
1841.  Mr,  Hibbard  was  a  partner  of  An- 
drew Dickson,  who  afterwards  had  charge  of 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


285 


the  office  himself,  and  kept  a  general  country 
store  in  a  brick  block  built  by  Messrs,  Bishop 
&  Mclgcomb,  on  the  site  of  the  present  Kea- 
U)V  block  The  next  postmaster  whose  name 
is  on  record  was  Tercius  liels,  appointed 
May  15th,  1841,  who  was  a  merchant  and 
kept  his  store  and  the  office  in  a  long,  low, 
white  building,  afterwards  occupied  by 
Charles  W.  Collins,  where  Garrison's  block 
now  stands.  Danforth  Merrick,  who  kej)! 
the  "  Cortland  Ta\'ern"  (on  the  site  of  the 
Cortland  House),  took  the  post-office  tem- 
porarily, and  kept  it  in  his  hotel  from  May 
24th,  1842,  till  Sept.  6th,  1842,  when  An- 
drew Dickson,  before  mentioned,  took 
charge  of  it,  remo\ing  it  again  to  the  site  of 
the  present  Kcator  block.  Jehiel  Taylor, 
a  mechanic,  came  next,  his  appointment 
bearing  date  April  i8th,  1849,  ^"d  trans- 
ferred the  office  to  a  small  wing  attached  to 
the  building  where  Eels  had  kept  it.  Upon 
the  expiration  of  Ta\'lor's  term  of  office, 
Hiram  Crandall  was  appointed  and  filled 
the  ])lace  till  March  19th,  1 86 1.  He  first 
kept  the  office  near  where  the  National  l^ank 
of  Cortland  now  is,  and  afterwards  removed 
it  to  where  Mahan's  block  is  at  present  lo- 
cated, Nos.  9  and  1 1  Court  street.  This 
building  was  a  small  wooden  structure, 
about  twenty  feet  square,  formerl}-  an  old 
justice's  office,  and  which  was  afterwards 
moved  up  to  No.  92  Adams  street,  where  it 
is  now  occupied  by  John  Van  Rensselaer. 
Here  we  find  the  first  record  of  a  separate 
building  being  used  for  post-office  purposes 
alone,  unassociatetl  with  any  other  business 
or  profession. 

At  this  time,  too.  the  "  t  "  at  the  end  of 
"Cortlandt  "  was  dropped,  making  the  name 
of  the  office  read  "  Cortland  Village.  " 

With  the  incoming  of  a  Republican  ad- 
ministration, on  the  19th  of  March,  1861, 
Horace  A.  Jarvis  was  appointed,  and  held 
the  position  for  over  seventeen  years  (the 
longest  term  of  any  postmaster  in  the  place). 


up  to  July  13th,  187S.  He  commenced 
where  the  gas  office  now  is,  in  the  rear  of 
the  National  Hank  of  Cortland,  but  shortly 
afterward  removed  to  where  the  office  was 
before  its  change  to  the  Standard  building 
(in  the  building  on  the  corner  of  West  Court 
and  Main  streets).  Mr.  Jarvis  was  the  first 
to  introduce  the  glass  and  lock-boxes. 
James  A.  Nixon,  the  present  incumbent, 
was  appointed  July  13th,  1878,  and  has 
since  made  many-  and  marked  imjjrove- 
ments.  The  name  of  the  office  was  still 
further  changed,  Sept.  23d,  1880,  by  drop- 
ping the  word  "  Village,"  leaving  it  plain 
"Cortland,"  as  it  will  probabU' always  con- 
tinue. 

The  new  location  in  the  Standard  build- 
ing is  eminently  fitted  for  accommodating 
the  office,  combining  as  it  does  all  the  con- 
veniences of  steam  heat,  good  ventilation, 
plenty  of  light  and  an  abundance  of  room. 
The  jiresent  apartment  has  two  entrances 
on  Tompkins  street  in  addition  to  the  one 
upon  Main,  thus  providing  for  the  preven- 
tion of  the  crowd  and  rush  usually  attendant 
upon  the  delivery  of  the  mails. 

The  business  sections  of  the  office  arc  in- 
closed by  glass,  including  the  delivery  de- 
partment, which  is  in  the  form  of  an  elon- 
gated bay,  the  w-hole  constructed  in  a  con- 
venient and  appropriate  shape  for  the  rapid 
dispatch  of  business.  On  the  extreme  right 
is  an  entrance  into  the  business  room,  and 
on  the  same  side  are  the  Yale  lock-boxes, 
229  in  number.  Mr.  Nixon's  administra- 
tion of  the  office  gives  excellent  satisfaction 
to  the  communitN'. 

The  Professions.  —  Readers  of  the  gen- 
eral county  history  embodied  in  preceding 
chapters  are  already  familiar  with  the 
records  of  the  legal  and  the  medical  pro- 
fessions of  this  county.  The  former  has 
contributed  man\'  eminent  men  to  the 
count)-,  by  far  the  larger  portion  of  them 
having,    naturally,    been    residents    of    this 


286 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


village.  For  the  details  of  their  ]irofessional 
lives,  their  labors  performed  in  public  office 
and  in  other  fields  to  which  the)-  have  been 
called,  the  reader  is  rcferretl  to  the  chapter 
devoted  to  that  profession.  The  medical 
profession,  too,  has  been  especially  honored, 
and  is  at  the  present  time,  by  the  names 
of  man\-  who  have  devoted  their  lives  to 
the  healing  of  mankind  in  this  county,  and 
who  occupy  positions  of  high  distinction  in 
their  chosen  profession.  These  will  be 
found  properl)-  treated  in  their  appropriate 
place  and  hence  need  not  be  further  referred 
to  in  this  connection. 

The  Dental  Profession  of  Cortland  Vil- 
lage. —  The  first  dentist  in  the  village  of 
Cortland  was  Dr.  Levi  R.  Gleason,  who 
came  here  in  about  the  year  1852.  He  was 
a  native  of  the  town  of  Virgil,  was  an  ex- 
cellent operator  and  a  worthy  citizen.  He 
remained  about  ten  years  and  sold  out  his 
business  and  office  appliances  to  Dr.  F.  O. 
Hyatt,  a  native  of  Otsego  county.  Dr. 
Hyatt  came  into  the  county  in  1844,  locat- 
ing first  in  Marathon.  He  received  his 
dental  education  in  Towanda,  Pa.,  under 
Dr.  Mcintosh  and  L.  B.  Hyatt,  and  began 
practicing  first  in  Marathon  in  1848.  He 
then  took  up  his  residence  in  Cortland  as 
stated.  He  soon  gained  an  enviable  business 
and  a  reputation  as  a  first-class  operator. 

Dr.  Hyatt  is,  aside  from  his  profession, 
an  artist  of  recognized  ability,  possessing 
genius  and  talent  of  a  high  order,  especially 
as  a  portrait  painter.  Although  he  never 
had  instruction  in  the  art,  some  of  his  works 
evince  merits  that  entitle  them  to  rank  with 
those  of  our  eminent  artists.  His  first  at- 
tempt was  a  portrait  of  his  brother,  C.  S. 
Hyatt.  The  distinctive  features  of  e.Kcellent 
portraiture  were  so  apparent  in  this  work 
that  he  has  since  received  commissions  from 
a  large  number  of  prominent  men,  both  in 
Cortland  county  and  at  a  distance.  In  the 
fire  on  the  corner  of  West  Court  and  Main 


streets.  May  24th,  1884,  Dr.  Hyatt  lost 
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  choice  paint- 
ings, besides  his  dental  rooms. 

Dr.  Monroe  Frank  came  to  Cortland  about 
1868,  and  not  long  afterward  Dr.  A.  H. 
Matson,  now  a  leading  dentist  of  Syracuse, 
located  here.  They  remained  but  a  few 
years.  Messrs.  Pettingill  &  Spencer  then 
opened  rooms  and  remained  in  the  business 
about  nine  years.  They  were  succeeded 
by  Dr.  Todd,  who  was  a  student  in  Dr. 
Hyatt's  office.  He  continued  four  or  five 
years  when  he  sold  to  H.  G.  &  C.  E.  In- 
galls,  who  have  now  carried  on  a  successful 
practice  about  twelve  \-ears. 

George  L.  Holden  came  to  Cortland  from 
McGrawville  and  practiced  a  few  years, 
when  he  died,  in  1877.  Dr.  G.  H.  Smith 
came  also  from  McGrawville  and  studied 
with  Dr.  Hyatt  from  1871,  and  in  1879 
formed  a  partnership  with  him.  He  is  still 
here.  G.  \V.  Hull  has  enjoyed  a  successful 
practice  here  for  a  number  of  years,  and  L. 
T.  White,  also,  who  has  been  in  practice  a 
few  years. 

The  Cortland  Water  Company.  —  The 
water  drawn  from  the  numerous  wells  of 
Cortland  village  has  always  been  of  an  ex- 
cellent character.  These  wells  were  dug 
through  the  gravelly  soil  and  stoned  up  in 
the  ordinary  manner,  until  the  invention 
and  patenting  of  the  well  known  driven 
well  by  Mr.  Suggett,  of  Cortland  village. 
Since  that  event  driven  wells  almost  with- 
out number  have  been  put  down  in  the  vil- 
lage, the  soil  being  especially  well  adapted 
for  the  use  of  that  device.  Not  onl\-  this, 
but  the  same  plan  was  adopted  some  years 
since  as  a  means  of  supph'ing  the  village 
with  water  for  extinguishing  fires  and  other 
public  purposes.  Driven  wells  were  sunk 
of  several  inches  calibre  and  four  or  more 
of  them  connected  with  one  discharge  pipe 
at  the  top,  to  which  the  suction  of  a  fire 
engine   could    be    attached.       These    wells 


Town  of  Cortlandvii.le. 


287 


have  served  their  purpose  effectively  and 
have  been  put  down  on  most  of  the  prom- 
inent street  corners.  But  the  recent  rapid 
growth  of  the  village  and  the  distance  of 
the  wells  from  each  other,  with  constantly- 
increasing  danger  from  fires,  has  made  it 
apparent  that  some  other  and  more  exten- 
sive system  of  water  works  was  one  of  the 
imperative  needs  of  the  place.  The  sub- 
ject was  often  agitated,  as  we  have  already 
stated,  of  bringing  water  into  the  village 
from  Otter  creek,  and  other  less  promising 
plans  have  been  suggested,  but  without 
practical  effect,  until  the  year  of  this  writing 
(1884),  when  the  question  of  giving  the 
village  an  abundant  supply  of  pure  water 
has  undoubted!}'  reached  its  solution, 
through  the  organization  of  the  Cortland 
Water  Works  Company.  This  is  a  private 
corporation  which  entered  into  a  contract 
with  the  firm  of  Hinds,  Moffat  &  Co.,  of 
Watertown,  to  construct  and  equip  a  water 
system  on  the  following  general  plan  : — 

First,  To  erect  a  pump  house  to  be  lo- 
cated at  the  Otter  creek  springs  and  to 
place  therein  pumps  known  as  the  "  Worth- 
ington,"  of  sufficient  capacity  to  pump  to 
summit  of  court-house  hill  1,200  gallons 
per  minute,  with  proper  boiler,  feed  pump, 
connections,  etc.  The  land  to  be  purchased 
and  a  good  and  sufficient  basin  to  pump 
from  prepared. 

Second,  A  ten-inch  pipe  to  run  from 
pump  to  reservoir. 

Third,  Reservoir  to  be  of  iron,  to  be 
forty  feet  high  and  fort}'  feet  in  diameter. 

Fourth,  Mains  starting  from  reservoir 
with  ten-inch  pipe  running  down  Prospect 
street  to  Messenger  House  corner  via 
Tompkins  street,  mains  to'  run  from  the 
Wickwire  factory  on  South  Main  to  Grant 
street,  Port  Watson  street,  to  cross  Dele- 
ware,  Lackawanna  and  Western  railroad, 
on  Court  street.  Railroad  street.  Elm,  Mill, 
Grant,  Lincoln  avenue.  West  Court,  Tomp- 


kins, Reynolds  avenue.  Union,  Church  and 
Greenbush  streets. 

Fifth,  Hydrants  to  be  placed  along  line 
of  pipes  as  trustees  of  village  may  direct. 
The  hydrants  to  be  frost  proof 

Sixth,  Gates  to  be  placed  at  all  places 
available  along  pipe  so  pipes  may  be  re- 
paired without  shutting  off  from   reservoir. 

At  the  annual  meeting  held  in  F'ircmen's 
Hall,  on  the  i8th  day  of  March,  1884,  the 
following  resolution  was  voted  upon  and 
passed  :  — 

"■Resolved,  Third,  That  the  sum  of  $2,000  be 
raised  by  special  ta.x,  for  the  puqiose  of  purchas- 
ing and  contracting  for,  from  the  Cortland  Water 
Works  Company,  the  use  of  forty  hydrants  of 
water  for  protection  from  fire  and  for  other  i)ur- 
poses  during  the  coming  year,  to  be  located  as 
by  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  village  directed, 
with  three  public  drinking  fountains  on  Main 
street." 

The  plans  of  the  water  company  have 
been  carried  out  in  all  essential  particulars, 
and  the  village  will  hereafter,  without 
doubt,  be  supplied  with  water  which  can 
be  taken  into  every  dwelling  and  place  of 
business,  besides  beiijg  always  at  hand  for 
fire  purposes.  It  is  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant improvements  ever  made  in  Cort- 
land village. 

Public  Halls,  Theaters,  etc.  —  The  first 
public  hall  in  Cortland  village  that  was 
prepared  expressly  for  amusements,  public 
meetings,  dancing  parties,  etc.,  was  what 
was  known  as  Re}nolds's  Hall,  and  later  as 
Squires's  Hall,  after  the  building  passed 
into  possession  of  James  S.  Squires.  The 
hall  continued  in  use  for  its  intended  pur- 
poses for  many  years  and  until  H.  J.  Mes- 
senger built  what  is  now  called  Taylor  Hall 
block,  in  the  }-ear  1864.  This  place  of 
amusement  was  fitted  up  with  a  stage,  a 
limited  amount  of  scenery  and  other  acces- 
sories to  render  it  available  for  theatrical 
entertainments.  It  was  called  Messenger 
Hall  until  the  building  was  transferred  to 


288 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Will.  1'".  &  Clias.  'ra_\-li)r,  wlicn  tlic  name 
was  chaiiLjed  to  Taylor  Hall.  The  interior, 
the  stage,  scenery,  etc.,  ha\-e  been  renewed, 
extended  and  improved  at  difterent  times 
since  it  was  first  opened. 

The  subject  of  a  new  opera  house  in 
Cortland  has  been  often  discussed  and  agi- 
tated within  the  past  ten  )-ears.  While  the 
size  of  the  village  and  the  tastes  of  the  in- 
habitants demanded  public  amusements  df 
a  high  order,  the  fact  of  there  being  no  atl- 
equate  accommodations  for  first-class  dra- 
matic and  musical  organizations  has  kept 
many  such  from  making  engagements  here 
which  otherwise  would. 

The  current  j'ear  (1884),  which  has  wit- 
nessed so  many  other  needed  improvements 
in  the  village,  will  also  see  the  consumma- 
tion of  plans  for  a  beautiful  theater  which 
will  be  erected  at  a  cost  of  about  $35,000. 
For  this  purpose  a  number  of  leading  citi- 
zens have  united  their  means  and  taken  the 
necessary  responsibility.  J.  II,  Kirbx,  of 
S}'racuse,  was  employed  to  make  the  plans 
for  the  new  theater  and  has  given  his  pa- 
trons a  buikling  which  will  be  a  credit  to 
himself  and  to  the  place.  The  seating 
capacity  of  the  theater  is  about  1,100  and 
the  walls  are  of  Trenton  brick. 

Homer  and   Cortland   Gas  Company.  — 
This  compan}^   was  organized  in   the  j'ear  i 
i860,  for  the  purpose  of  suppl)'ing   the  two  j 
villages  of  Homer  and  Cortland  with  ilhini- 
inating  gas.      Nathan  Randall  was  the  prin-  | 
cipal  promoter  of  the  enterprise  and  J.   M. 
Schermerhorn  subsequently  became  largely 
interested  in  it.      The  first  certificate  of  stock 
was  issued  to  Mr.   Schermerhorn  on  the  1st 
day  of  December,  1861,  and   the  first  read- 
ing of  meters  was  made  in  October  of  that 
year.     The  works  are  located   midway  be-  ; 
tween  the  villages.     The  stock  passed  from 
the  possession  of  the  original  holders  to  Mr. 
Schermerhorn    in    1874,  and   was  afterward 
bought  by  the  Wilkinsons,  Trucsdall  S:  Hlair  , 


and  A.  C.  \\()(id,  all  of  S\"racuse,  who  now 
own  nearl)'  the  whole. 

There  are  at  the  present  time  99  street 
lamps  in  Cortland  village  and  48  in  Homer. 
There  are  about  400  consumers  in  tlie  for- 
mer village  and  150  in  the  latter.  11  B. 
Woodworth  has  been  superintendent  since 
August  3d.  1880,  with  his  office  in  Cortland. 

Fire  Department. — The  first  movement 
towards  providing  the  village  with  adequate 
apparatus  for  extinguishing  fires  was  made 
at  the  fourth  meeting  of  the  board  of  trus- 
tees, December  29th,  1853,  when  the  fol- 
lowing resolution  was  adopted:  — 

^'■Resolved,  That  the  clerk  is  hereby  author- 
ize<l  to  cause  a  notice  to  be  published  in  the 
Cortland  Deiiwcrat,  calling  a  meeting  of  the 
voters  of  Cortland  for  the  j)urpose  of  raising  the 
sum  of  $1,150  for  engine  and  hose;  $150  for 
engine  house  and  $250  for  reservoir  and  con- 
ductors. " 

The  notice,  for  some  unkown  reason,  was 
not  published  as  directed,  and  at  the  next 
meeting,  Januar)-  ijtli,  1854,  a  resolution 
was  adopted  embodying  the  same  authority 
and  directing  that  the  meeting  to  vote  on 
the  question  of  raising  the  above  named 
sums  be  held  on  the  loth  of  February,  in- 
stant. Other  delays  occurred  so  that  the 
meeting  was  not  held  until  the  i8th  day  of 
April. 

The  sum  authorized  to  be  raised  for  the 
engine  house  was  changed  from  $150  to 
$100  and  the  resolutions  were  adopted. 
At  a  meeting  of  the  board  on  the  29th  of 
May  a  resolution  was  passed  requesting 
that  those  persons  who  wished  to  become 
members  of  the  fire  compain-  to  be  organ- 
ized would  hand  their  names  to  the  trustees 
on  or  before  the  5th  of  June,  then  next.  It 
was  also  resolved  that  the  engine  to  be  pro- 
cured should  be  named  the  "Tioughnioga." 

The  president  of  the  board  was  then  au- 
thorized to  contract  for  a  suitable  engine, 
hose  and  hose  carriage  and  other  necessary 
apparatus,  at  as  early  a   date    as    possible. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


289 


At  the  meeting  of  June  5tli  the  following 
names  were  read  as  constituting  the  first 
fire  company  of  the  village  :  — 

J.  C.  Jarvis,  E.  Gurley,  Glen  Cuyler,  E. 
F.  Gould,  C.  S.  Crouch,  J.  B.  Fairchild,  A. 
Lyman,  E.  Gatty,  Giles  Rexford,  G.  Brad- 
ford, J.  A.  Graham,  John  Murray,  Ballard 
Stephens,  C.  L.  Todd,  S.  Benjamin,  I.  M. 
Seaman,  H.  Buell,  H.  Bates.  J.  T.  Bates,  H. 
Mead,  H.  A.  Jarvis,  J.  Knowlton,  VVm. 
Powers,  H? Danes,  F.  Hotchkiss,  R.  Rounds, 
T.  Cornwell,  D.  Fisk,  jr.,  A.  Sweet,  D.  Mal- 
lory,  W.  Van  Schaak,  I.  Seaman,  W.  Rooks, 
E.  Merritt,  H.  Rouse,  J.  B.  Horton,  R.  Lee, 

W.  Gager,  C.  Jones,  Bass,  E.  Johnson, 

Maycumbcr,  J.  C.  Pomeroy,  D.  Smith, 


J.  Wiles,  A.  A.  Sweet,  Chas.  Taylor,  W.  Al- 
vord,  R.  Mudge. 

At  a  meeting  held  August  2d  the  follow- 
ing persons  were  appointed  to  fill  places  of 
others  who  had  resigned  or  refused  to 
serve  — 

Chas.  Snyder,  James  Carmichael,  Geo. 
Potter,  Samuel  Bush,  John  Ticrney,  Wm. 
Burt,  C.  Rogers,  C.  W.  Crofoot,  O.  E. 
House,  Lyman  Mead. 

It  will  be  quite  clear  to  the  older  residents 
of  Cortland  that  nearly  all  the  respected  cit- 
izens of  the  village  at  the  time  the  fire  com- 
pany was  organized,  joined  it. 

Stephen  R.  Hunter,  Henry  Brewer,  G. 
K.  Stiles,  Rufus  A.  Reed  and  S.  D.  Freer, 
were  made  the  first  fire  wardens  of  the 
village. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  board  of  August 
1 8th  the  name  of  the  engine  was  changed 
to  "Water  Witch."  The  engine,  with  hose 
cart  and  other  apparatus,  cost  $1056.60, 
which  was  paid  in  Nov.,  1854.  An  addi- 
tional sum  of  $150  was  voted  for  the  en- 
gine house  early  in  the  year  1855  and  a  lib- 
eral amount  was  expended  in  digging  and 
enlarging  wells,  which  work  was  continued 
by  succeeding  boards  of  trustees. 

In  March,  1855,  proposals  were  called  for 


for  the  construction  of  three  cisterns  on 
Main  street,  nine  feet  deep,  of  oval  form, 
sixteen  feet  in  the  longest  axis  and  ten  feet 
in  the  shortest,  with  cobble-stone  walls  laid 
in  water-lime.  Two  of  these  were  subse- 
quently built,  with  slight  modifications,  by 
John  Sullivan,  at  a  cost  of  about  fifty  dol- 
lars each. 

In  the  latter  part  of  1855  an  engine 
house  was  built  by  contract  with  Ira  Meads, 
costing  $262.  In  the  following  year  $216 
were  raised  with  which  the  lot  was  pur- 
chased whereon  the  engine  house  was  built. 

In  1857  three  ladders  were  made  by  or- 
der of  the  trustees.  The  committee  ap- 
pointed for  that  purpose  reported  that  the 
ladders  "had  been  made  at  a  cost  of  $13.75, 
and  thought  those  would  be  all  that  would 
be  necessary  at  present." 

The  first  appropriation  of  money  to  the 
fire  company  by  the  village  trustees  was 
made  in  February,  i860,  to  the  amount  of 
$25.  An  appropriation  of  $150  was  made 
in  the  same  year  for  purchasing  a  bell  and 
putting  up  the  same,  and  for  other  fire  ex- 
penses. In  1 86 1  the  company  received  from 
the  village  $23.30,  the  amount  of  tax  re- 
ceived on  foreign  insurance  companies,  and 
additional  hose  was  purchased  at  a  cost  of 
$100.86.  New  wells  and  cisterns  were  also 
added. 

In  1863  $150  were  appropriated  for  the 
purchase  of  hook  and  ladder  apparatus  and 
a  like  sum  for  wells  and  cisterns.  Dr.  F.  O. 
Hyatt  was  given  authority  at  a  subsequent 
meeting  to  purchase  hook  and  ladder  truck 
and  appurtenances,  at  a  cost  of  $360.  On 
the  24th  of  August  of  this  year  a  resolution 
was  passed  by  the  trustees,  granting  the 
privilege  to  the  Water  Witch  Fire  Company 
to  organize  a  separate  hose  company,  which 
should  however  be  under  direction  of  the 
fire  company. 

The  board  of  trustees  of  1 864,  at  their 
December  meeting,  voted  to  accept  the  res- 


290 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


olution  of  disbandmcnt  of  tlic  hook  and  lad- 
der company,  and  appointed  tlie  following 
named  gentlemen  as  members  of  a  new 
company,  with  power  to  meet  on  the  loth 
of  December  to  elect  officers  :  — 

Byron  Phelps,  C.  W.  Collins,  \V.  W.  Gale, 
M.  H.  McGraw,  Thomas  Sims,  A.  Sager, 
Frank  W.  Freeman,  L.  Uexter,  J.  P.  Hotch- 
kiss,  Geo.  J.  Allen,  M.  P.  Callender,  D.  Ed- 
wards, Harry  Lewis,  J.  A.  Corwin,  John  El- 
lison, Geo.  G.  Spcrry,  D.  T.  Williams,  and 
B.  H.  Webster.  At  the  same  time  $cSo  were 
voted  the  new  company,  with  which  to  pur- 
chase shirts. 

In  March,  1865,  the  following  additional 
members  of  the  companj'  were  appointed  : 
—  P:.  D.  Mallory,  N.  Minturn,  J osiah  Ste- 
vens, J.  H.  Gatland,  J.  B.  P'airchild,  John 
Ryan,  Geo.  Nottingham,  Marvin  G.  John- 
son, Simon  Lynn,  L  M.  Seaman. 

The  Cortland  P'ire  Department,  as  organ- 
ized under  the  charter,  must  now  consist  of 
a  chief  engineer,  first  and  second  assistant 
engineers,  a  secretary  and  treasurer,  with 
the  necessary  organized  companies.  The 
officers  are  elected  on  the  last  Wednesday 
of  each  year.  The  foremen  of  companies 
are  empowered  to  call  meetings  for  the  elec- 
tion of  officers.  General  meetings  for  in- 
spection and  re\'iew  are  held  in  September 
of  each  year.  At  a  special  meeting  held 
P'eb.  13th,  1866,  J.  C.  Carmichacl  was  ap- 
pointed chief  engineer.  He  was  succeeded 
in  1873  by  W.  W.  Gale;  1874,  H.  F.  Shirley; 
1878,  I.  H.  Palmer;    1880,  C.  E.  Ingalls. 

By  a  resolution  of  the  board  in  1873 
Water  Witch  Hose  Company  was  author- 
ized to  become  a  separate  incorporation  ; 
and  in  1878  Orris  Hose  Company  was  in- 
corporated. Excelsior  Hook  and  Ladder 
Company  was  incorporated  in  1877.  Em- 
erald Hose  Company  was  incorporated  in 
1878. 

In  the  year  1875  e.\tensi\e  improvements 
and  additions  were  made  in  the  fire  depart- 


ment ;  the  present  handsome  and  con\'cn- 
ient  engine-house  was  erected  under  a  con- 
tract made  with  L.  G.  Viele,  and  the  first 
steps  were  taken  towards  procuring  a  steam 
fire  engine.  At  the  annual  meeting  in  1876 
the  sum  of  $2,500  was  voted  fur  the  exten- 
sion of  the  well  system  in  the  village  and 
$5,000  for  engine,  etc.  A  rotary  Silsby 
steamer  was  purchased,  which  has  since 
proved  its  efficiency  on  several  occasions 
when  the  \illage  has  been  visiied  by  de- 
structive fires. 

P"ollo\ving  arc  the  present  officers  of  the 
fire  department :  — 

Chief  engineer — M.  F.  Cleary. 

First  assistant  —  Thomas  Button. 

Second  assistant — Del.  Barber. 

Treasurer  —  Thomas  Grady. 

Secretary  —  Y\rthur  M.  Delavan. 

The  Cortland  Protective  Police  is  an  effi- 
cient organization  acting  in  co-operation 
with  the  fire  department.  F"ollowing  are 
the  officers :  — 

Captain  —  A.  Sager. 

Lieutenant  —  R.  A.  Smith. 

Sergeant  —  Geo.  W.  Davenport. 

Treasurer  —  C.  P.  W'alrad. 

Secretary  —  C.  W.  Collins. 

Property  clerk  —  F.  A.  Bickford. 

Following  are  the  officers  of  W'ater  Witch 
Fire  Company  No.   i :  — 

P'oreman  —  A.  G.  Newton. 

P'irst  assistant —  B.  Delavan. 

Second  assistant  —  John  Chamberlain. 

Secretary  —  O.  D.  Ra\-mond. 

Treasurer  —  J.  W.  I^owen. 

Property  clerk  —  O.  D.  Ra}mond. 

The  officers  of  Orris  Hose  ComiKUi}-  are 
as  follows  :  — 

President  —  C.  S.  Strowbridge. 

Foreman  —  Burnett  K.  "SUWer. 

First  assistant  —  E.  L.  Rodgers. 

Second  assistant  —  S.  H.  Strow^bridge. 

Secretar\-  —  H.  A.  Dickinson. 

Treasurer — F.  R.  Woodworth. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


291 


The  officers  of  Emerald  Hose  Company- 
are  :  — 

President  —  Daniel  Dolan. 

Vice-president  —  James  Dowd. 

Foreman — John  Dowd. 

First  assistant  —  John  Dallton. 

Second  assistant  —  Thomas  Purcell. 

Secretary  —  A.  McSweney. 

Treasurer  —  Patrick  Dwyre. 

Property  clerk  —  Michael  Healey. 

The  officers  of  the  Excelsior  Hook  and 
Ladder  Company  are  as  follows  :  — 

Foreman —  F.  W.  Kingsbury. 

First  assistant — Earl  Stimson. 

Second  assistant  —  Frank  Howard. 

Secretary  —  Charles  Thompson. 

Treasurer  —  John  Phelps. 

Property  clerk  —  Arthur  M.  Delavan. 

Cortland  and  Homer  Horse  Railway 
Company. —  This  company  was  organized 
in  1882  for  the  purpose  of  constructing  a 
street  car  line  which  should  connect  the  two 
villages  of  Homer  and  Cortland.  Different 
lines  of  omnibuses  had  hitherto  run  between 
the  villages  and  their  patronage  was  such 
as  to  warrant  the  prime  movers  in  the  en- 
terprise in  going  forward  with  the  work. 
During  the  summer  of  1883  the  track  was 
laid  from  the  southern  portion  of  the  village 
to  the  point  where  the  D.  L.  &  W.  railroad 
crosses  the  road  to  Homer,  and  from  Ho- 
mer to  near  the  same  point.  Here  an  un- 
expected obstacle  was  encountered  in  a 
refusal  of  the  D.  L.  &  W.  Railroad  Company 
to  allow  the  street  car  line  to  cross  its  tracks. 
The  question  was  taken  into  the  courts  and 
a  decision  from  the  Court  of  Appeals  was 
given  in  favor  of  the  horse  railway  com- 
pany. The  tracks  will  now  be  made  con- 
tinuous to  Homer  village. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  stockholders  of  the 
company,  held  the  first  week  in  March, 
1884,  the  following  directors  were  elected 
for  the  ensuing  year: — 

Chas.  H.  Garrison,    R.  H.  Duell,   L.   D. 


Garrison,  J.  C.  Carmiciiael,  W.  H.  Clark, 
J.  D.  Schermerhorn,  Wm.  N.  Brockway, 
S.  E.  Welch,  C.  C.  Taylor,  L.  J.  Fitzgerald, 
E.  A.  Fish,  J.  M.  Milne  and  Coleman 
Hitchcock. 

At  a  subsequent  meeting  of  the  new- 
board  of  directors  the  following  officers  were 
chosen : 

President — Chas.  H.  Garrison. 

Vice-president  —  J.  C.  Carmichael. 

Secretary  —  J.  M.  Milne. 

Treasurer  —  S.  E.  Welch. 

Attorney  —  R.  H.  Duell. 

Engineer  —  F.  E.  Knight. 

Executive  com.  —  L.  J.  Fitzgerald,  W. 
H.  Clark,  J.  D.  Schermerhorn. 

MANUFACTL'RIXG    INTERESTS. 

We  have  not  to  go  very  far  into  the  past 
in  search  of  the  beginning  of  manufactur- 
ing in  Cortland  village ;  at  least  upon  a 
scale  that  would  call  for  any  special  atten- 
tion in  this  work.  While  this  place  has  al- 
ways possessed  important  advantages  as  a 
manufacturing  center,  and  particularly  so 
since  its  railroad  connections  have  been 
developed,  yet  it  was  many  years  after  it 
had  become  entitled  to  creditable  mention 
among  the  thriving  interior  villages  of  the 
State  before  its  manufacturing  industries  felt 
that  forward  impulse  which  has  within  the 
past  decade  made  its  name  familiar  in  al- 
most every  State  of  the  Union,  and  given 
it  a  growth  in  population  that  is  almost 
phenomenal. 

To  establish  manufactures  in  e\ery  bus- 
iness center  is  the  hopeful  desire  of  pro- 
gressive citizens  the  country  over ;  for  it  is 
well  known  that  they  are  the  never-failing 
key  to  advancement.  But  it  is  often  only 
after  years  of  patient  waiting  th^t  the  bold 
spirits,  imbued  with  energy  and  persever- 
ance, are  found  who  will  take  the  initiatory 
steps  in  great  undertakings.  When  this  is 
once  accomplished,  there  are  seldom  want- 


292 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


in^  onoiigli  others  who  will  follow  in  tlic 
cstablislimcnt  of  other  industries  and  the 
community'  takes  on  now  life.  The  manu- 
facturinyj  industries  of  Cortland,  a  large  pro- 
portion of  wliich  have  been  established 
within  the  past  ten  years,  have  been  almost 
uniformly  successful,  and  this  fact  should 
act  as  a  stimulant  to  others.  Aside  from 
the  one  feature  of  water  power  (and  that 
sooner  or  later  gives  way  to  steam),  Cort- 
land possesses  facilities  for  the  manufact- 
urer that  are  almost  luiexccUeil.  Promi- 
nent among  these  are  her  ship|)ing  advan- 
tages —  a  feature  that  is  of  more  importance 
in  this  connection  than  any  other. 

The  Syracuse,  l^inghamton  and  New 
York  Railroad  connccls  at  Hinghamton 
with  the  New  York,  Lake  Erie  and  West- 
ern, and  Delaware,  Lackawanna  and  West- 
ern Railroads ;  at  Syracuse  with  the  New 
York  Central  and  West  Shore  roads  ;  the 
Utica,  Ithaca  and  Elmira  connects  at  El- 
mira  also  with  the  Erie  and  Delaware,  Lack- 
awanna and  Western,  and  at  I-'reeville  with 
the  Southein  Central,  and  the  Cazenovia, 
Canastota  and  De  Ruyter  Railroad  also  con- 
nects at  Canastota  with  the  New  York  Cen- 
tral—  thus  giving  a  choice  of  shipment 
over  five  of  the  greatest  rival  lines  in  the 
State,  and  there  is  good  reason  for  predict- 
ing that  these  ample  railroad  connections 
will  ere  long  be  supplemented  by  otliers. 
The  village  authorities  are  alive  to  the  im- 
portance of  offering  a  warm  and  liberal 
welcome  to  all  contemplating  manufact- 
urers, which  fact  is  becoming  widely  known 
and  cannot  fail  to  attract  capital. 

Tile  heaviest  manufacturing  interest  in 
Cortland  at  the  present  time  is  that  of  road 
vehicles  —  wagons,  carriages  and  cutters. 
In  connection  with  this  industry  Cortland 
village  is  known  throughout  the  United 
States  and  in  many  foreign  countries. 

Wagon  making  in  Cortland  was  begun 
at  an  early  day,  one   of  the  first  manufact- 


urers being  Joseph  Crantlall,  who  began 
the  business  in  the  spring  of  1820.  He  was 
an  enterprising,  progressive  man  and  car- 
ried on  cpiite  a  large  business  for  that 
period.'  The  first  shop  used  by  Crandall 
stood  on  tlic  site  now  occupied  by  Barney 
Doud's  tavern  on  Port  Watson  street ;  this 
old  shop  was  burned.  Crandall's  second 
sIio[)  was  the  building  now  owned  by  W.  P. 
Randall  and  occupied  b}'  Niver's  livery  sta- 
ble. Crandall  was  succeeded  in  that  shop 
by  Wilber  &  Collins,  who  afterward  sold  to 
William  K.  Parker.  He  was  the  last  man- 
ufacturer of  wagons  in  that  building,  which 
was  sold  to  Henry  Smith,  who  used  it  as  a 
sash  factory  for  a  time  and  sold  it  to  Mr. 
Randall  in  1848.  Here  he  kept  one  of  the 
most  extensive  livery  stables  in  the  county 
for  a  period  of  thirty  years.  At  one  time 
during  his  career  in  this  business,  in  the 
palmy  days  of  staging  from  Syracuse  to 
Binghamton,  Mr.  Randall  kept  about  one 
hundred  horses. 

The  manufacture  of  wagons  in  Cortland 
attracted  but  little  attention  until  the  foun- 
dation was  laid  for  one  of  the  largest  estab- 
lishments in  the  world — that  of  the  Cort- 
land Wagon  Compan\'.  In  the  year  1869 
L.  J.  Eitzgerald  and  O.  C.  Gee  began  mak- 
ing wagons  in  the  usual  manner  of  similar 
works  in  villages,  in  the  building  now  occu- 
pied by  the  office  of  the  Cortland  Democrat ; 
there  they  turned  out  about  150  wagons 
annual!)-  and  the  business  was  continued  on 
about  that  basis  until  1872,  when  Mr.  Gee's 
interest  was  purchaseil  by  Chas.  W.  Kinne. 
The  new  firm  .soon  put  in  operation  their 
plan  of  building  platform  wagons  for  the 
general  market.  New  buildings  were  erect- 
ed on  Railroad  street,  and  the  new  firm 
turned  out  500  wagons  the  first  year  of  their 

1  .\iiiong  Craiiclnll's  employees  wa.s  a  lad  wlio  Uaveled 
from  PeeUskill  to  Cortland  on  foot,  remaining  in  the  es- 
tablishment as  shop  boy  for  seven  months.  Mis  name 
was  William  li.  Kirk,  now  an  old,  respected  and  wealthy 
citizen  of  Syracuse. 


2; 


■J 


y. 


o 
■J) 

u 


Town  of  Cortlaxdville. 


293 


partnership.  The  two  men  were  full  of 
business  energy  and  they  united  their  best 
efforts  in  carrying  out  the  idea  of  building 
an  excellent  vehicle  and  pushing  the  sale  to 
to  such  a  number  annually  as  would  enable 
them  to  greatly   undersell   all   competitors. 

The  wisdom  of  the  plan  was  rapidly  dem- 
on.strated.  The  third  year  (1875)  they 
built  and  sold  i  ,000  wagons,  and  the  next 
year  1,500,  at  which  time  the  firm  took  the 
name  of  the  Cortland  Wagon  Manufacturing 
Company  and  erected  their  wood-working 
shop  on  the  site  of  their  present  immense 
factor)',  near  the  railroad  depot  of  the  D., 
L.  &  W.  road.  In  the  year  1876  2,200  wa- 
gons were  built  and  sold,  and  in  the  follow- 
ing year  Mr.  Kinne  died,  leaving  the  re- 
sponsibility of  a  large  and  growing  business 
on  Mr.  Fitzgerald's  shoulders ;  but  he  has 
proved  fully  equal  to  the  work.  In  1878 
the  production  of  the  works  was  the  same 
as  in  the  preceding  year,  and  on  the  1st  of 
January,  1879,  the  present  stock  organiza- 
tion was  formed  —  the  Cortland  Wagon 
Company  —  and  incorporated,  with  a  cap- 
tal  of  $100,000.  The  directors  were  L.  J. 
Fitzgerald,  W.  D.  Tisdale,  Hugh  Duffy  and 
M.  D.  Welch.  During  that  year  between 
5, 000  and  6,000  wagons  were  manufactured, 
which  number  was  increased  in  1880,  and 
in  1 88 1,  to  8,000. 

In  the  fall  of  1880  the  middle  building 
and  the  east  building,  which  connects  the 
north  and  south  buildings,  were  erected,  and 
on  the  first  day  of  April,  1 88 1 ,  the  old  works 
on  Railroad  street  were  abandoned  and  the 
whole  business  centered  at  this  point,  be- 
tween the  S.  B.  &  N.  Y.,  and  U.  I.  &  E. 
railroads,  with  special  tracks  from  both  roads 
running  into  the  works.  Here  the  facilities 
were  still  more  largely  increased,  until  they 
are  now  manufacturing  and  selling  12,000 
platform  spring  wagons,  buggies  and  phae- 
tons, per  year;  thirty  railway  cars  of  an 
extra  large  size  being  owned  by  the  com- 


pany and  employed  in  the  transportation 
of  their  products  to  all  parts  of  the  United 
States. 

The  present  directors  of  the  company 
are  the  same  as  given  above,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  Mr.  Welch,  who  withdrew.  Mr. 
Fitzgerald  is  president ;  Hugh  Duffy,  vice- 
president  and  general  superintendent ;  W. 
D.  Tisdale  treasurer,  and  F.  Cyrus  Straat 
secretary.  The  business  has  been  extended 
to  embrace  the  manufacture  of  buggies  and 
the  company  is  now  without  doubt  the 
largest  manufacturers  of  spring  wagons  in 
the  world.  From  300  to  350  men  are  em- 
ployed;  about  $18,000  are  paid  in  wages 
monthly,  and  the  works  are  valued  at 
$500,000  and  cover  nine  acres  of  ground. 
It  is  an  industry  of  which  any  city  or  vil- 
lage might  well  be  proud. 

C.  B.  Hitchcock's  Buggy  and  Cutter 
Works. —  In  the  spring  of  1877  C.  B. 
Hitchcock  came  to  Cortland  from  Cincin- 
natus  and  began  the  manufacture  of  cut- 
ters, on  Port  Watson  street.  He  was  a 
practical  carriage  painter  and  had  been 
proprietor  of  a  carriage  manufactory  in 
Cincinnatus,  whence  he  removed  to  satisfy 
his  ambition  to  do  a  larger  business.  In 
the  first  }-ear  of  his  trade  in  Cortland  he 
made  and  sold  100  cutters,  from  which 
moderate  success  grew  his  belief  that  the 
business  could  be  almost  indefinitely  ex- 
tended. To  this  end  he  purchased  the  old 
Methodist  Church  building  which  had  been 
removed  to  the  corner  of  Elm  street  and 
the  Syracuse,  Binghamton  and  New  York 
railroad,  and  in  the  following  year  turned 
out  250  cutters  and  100  buggies.  Addi- 
tions were  made  to  the  works  in  1879  and 
the  product  increased  to  550  cutters  and 
200  buggies.  Since  that  time  annual  ex- 
tensions have  been  made  to  the  buildings, 
to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  rapidly  in- 
crejising  sales,  which  reached  in  1883  about 
10,000   cutters    and    2,000    wagons.     The 


^94 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


works  now  comprise  a  wood-working;'  sliop 
and  engine  liouse,  6o  by  lOO  feet  in  di- 
mensions ;  blacksmith  shop,  30  by  1 50 
feet;  painting  and  stock  building,  100  b)' 
120  feet;  a  fi\e-stor\-  building,  30  by  300 
feet,  occupied  by  the  repositorj-,  trimming 
and  shipping  departments  ;  and  other  small- 
er buildings.  This  is  now  the  largest  cut- 
ter manufactory  in  the  world  and  the  busi- 
ness has  grown  from  $4,000  in  1877  to 
about  $500,000.  On  the  1st  of  Januarj-, 
lS<S4,  a  stock  compau)-  was  organized,  with 
$150,000  capital.  It  is  the  intention  of 
the  compan}-  to  greatly  extend  the  works 
and  begin  the  manufacture  of  agricultural 
implements.  The  officers  of  the  company 
are  C.  B.  Hitchcock,  president;  H.  L. 
Gleason,  secretary  and  superintendent ;  H. 
C.  Henry,  treasurer. 

The  R.  C.  Tillinghast  Carriage  and  Cut 
tcr  Works. — A  more  recent,  \^et  scarcely 
less  successful,  manufactorj-  in  the  line  of 
work  under  consideration  is  the  one  whose 
name  is  just  given.  In  the  latter  part  of 
1 88 1  a  copartnership  was  entered  into  b}- 
R.  C.  Tillinghast  and  F.  A.  Warner,  for 
the  manufacture  of  carriages  and  cutters. 
The  main  building  on  Owego  street  was 
erected  early  in  the  year  1882  and  under 
the  immediate  supervision  of  Mr.  Warner, 
who  is  a  thorough-going,  practical  carriage 
maker,  manufacturing  was  begun.  The 
business  developed  at  once  and  before  a 
year  had  expired  large  additions  were 
needed  to  the  buildings.  The  first  year 
between  300  and  400  carriages  and  about 
100  cutters  were  made  and  sold.  This 
number  has  now  increased  to  about  1,500 
carriages  and  2,000  cutters.  The  works 
comprise  six  large  buildings  and  their  prod- 
uct annually  now  reaches  a  value  of 
$150,000. 

The  Cortland  Omnibus  Companj'. — 
Raymond  Smith  came  into  the  town  of 
Homer  in    1841    and    began    farming.      In 


1850  he  removed  into  the  village  where 
he  established  a  large  wagon  shop  near  the 
lower  bridge.  He  continued  the  business 
successfull}'  until  1863,  when  he  died.  His 
son,  W.  T.  Smith,  succeeded  in  tlie  shop, 
where  he  continued  until  the  year  1881, 
during  which  period  he  had  acquired  an 
excellent  reputation  for  building  omnibuses. 
This  branch  of  his  business  increased  raji- 
idly  and  led  to  his  removal  to  Cortland  and 
the  organization  of  the  Cortland  Omnibus 
Compan)-.  From  a  hundred  to  a  hundred 
and  seventy-five  omnibuses  are  now  made 
by  the  company  annually  and  are  shipped 
to  all  parts  of  the  United  States.  The  pop- 
ularit)-  of  these  vehicles  has  been  gained 
chiefly  upon  their  lightness  and  strength 
and  their  tasteful  styles.  In  March,  1882, 
a  stock  company  was  formed  wliich  took 
control  of  the  works,  with  Mr.  Smitii  as 
superintendent.  This  is,  probabh",  the 
largest  manufactory  of  omnibuses  in  the 
United  States. 

The  E.xcelsior  Top  Compan\-. — This  im- 
portant enterprise  is  closely  allied  with  the 
wagon  manufactories  alread\-  described  and 
is  another  of  the  young  but  very  successful 
industries  of  Cortland.  It  had  its  origin  in 
March,  1881,  when  L.  K.  Tenney  and 
Graham  Straat  rented  a  portion  of  the  old 
Gee  shop  on  Port  Watson  street  and  began 
the  manufacture  of  carriage  tops  in  a  small 
wa}',  under  the  above  name ;  the)*  then 
employed  but  one  man.  The  business  rap- 
idly increased  and  in  No\-ember,  1SS2,  was 
transferred  to  Wm.  R.  Stoppard  and  Fitz 
Bo\-nton.  This  firm  continued  until  the 
last  of  the  )-ear  1883,  when  the  enterprise 
passed  into  the  hands  of  W,  H.  Newton  and 
Chas.  E.  Selo\'er,  under  the  firm  name  of 
Newton  &  Selover.  The  increase  of  the 
sale  of  their  goods  necessitated  frequent 
extensions  of  their  works,  and  in  1882 
ground  was  purchased  on  Elm  street  for  a 
new    factor)'.     This   was   occupied   on    the 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


295 


lOth  of  January,  1883,  and  is  a  building 
three  stories  high,  96  by  40  feet  in  dimen- 
sions, with  an  adjoining  structure  30  b\'  60 
feet.  Here  about  sixty-five  employees 
find  work  and  a  product  vakied  at  $160,000 
was  turned  out  in  tlie  vein  1S83,  which  was 
shipped  from  Maine  to  Cahfornia.  Car- 
riage tops,  dashes,  cusliions  and  backs  are 
made,  which  give  satisfaction  to  carriage 
builders  wherever  they  are  used. 

Whoever  has  read  thus  far  of  the  wagon 
manufactures  in  Cortland  \illage,  and  its 
allied  interests,  will  not  fail  to  be  impressed 
with  the  fact  that  here  are  established  some 
of  the  most  important  industries  in  the 
country ;  and  it  will  not  be  a  difficult  task 
to  show  that  these  are  supplemented  by 
others  entirely  different  in  character,  but  no 
less  important  to  the  village  and  of  no  less 
wonderful  growth.  For  example,  the  wire 
works  of  the  Wickwire  Brothers,  which  is 
one  of  the  enterprises  that  first  gave  an 
impetus  to  manufacturing  at  this  point,  is  a 
marvel  of  success  and  of  the  deepest  inter- 
est as  regards  the  character  of  its  work. 

Pre\ious  to  the  year  1874  the  Wickwire 
Brothers  were  engaged  in  the  retail  hard- 
ware trade  in  Cortland  —  a  business  which 
led  them  to  the  idea  of  establishing  a  woven 
wire  factory  in  the  village.  Thej-  accord- 
ingly put  in  a  small  hand  loom  and  began 
operations,  producing  about  1 50  square 
feet  of  wire  cloth  per  day.  This  product 
was  placed  upon  the  market  and  the  de- 
mand rapidly  increased.  More  looms  were 
added  and  the  second  year  after  beginning 
the  new  industry  the -firm  abandoned  the 
hardware  trade  to  devote  their  entire  en- 
ergies to  the  other  branch.  Weaving  wire 
by  hand  is  a  comparatively  slow  process, 
a  fact  which  \\as  early  noted  by  the  elder 
Wickwire,  who  determined  to  produce  a 
power  lotom.  He  is  possessed  of  a  good  de- 
gree of  inventi\e  ability,  and  with  the  open- 
ing of  the  jear  1877  he  had  the  satisfaction  of 


seeing  in  operation  a  successful  power  loom 
of  his  own  design.  These  machines  were 
put  in  place  of  the  old  hand  process,  re- 
ducing the  cost  of  their  product  and  thus 
still  further  extending  their  trade.  Thus 
far  the  firm  had  purchased  their  wire  of 
other  manufacturers.  Seeing  the  advantage 
it  would  be  to  them  to  draw  their  own  wire, 
they  erected  the  large  wire  mill  near  the 
depot  of  the  U.,  I.  &  E.  railroad  in  the 
year  1880  and  began  the  manufacture  of 
wire  on  a  large  scale  —  the  only  weavers 
of  wire  goods  in  the  country  who  draw 
their  own  wire.  This  building  is  four  stories 
high,  of  brick,  and  is  40  by  165  feet  in 
dimensit)ns,  with  a  w'ing  40  by  70  feet  and 
engine  house  40  by  34  feet.  Three  large 
frame  buildings  in  rear  of  3 1  Main  street 
are  occupied  with  the  weaving,  wood-work- 
ing, painting  and  shipping  business.  Forty- 
five  looms  are  operated,  and  a  force  of  100 
persons  is  employed.  A  forty-horse  engine 
is  used  here  while  the  wire  mill  demands 
two  engines  of  1 50  horse  power  each.  The 
entire  history  of  this  great  manufactory  is 
but  a  recital  of  Increased  demand  for  goods, 
with  proportionate  e.xtension  of  facilities 
and  gradual  cheapening  of  products.  From 
a  business  of  about  $10,000  in  1874,  it  has 
gr.own  to  more  than  $200,000,  and  from 
an  output  of  about  150  square  feet  of 
cloth  per  day,  it  has  increased  to  30,000 
square  feet.  The  price  of  fine  wire  cloth 
has  been  reduced  by  this  firm  from  five 
cents  a  square  foot,  to  two  and  a  quarter 
cents.  Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  this  great 
industr)',  which  has  conferred  and  is  con- 
ferring an  inestimable  benefit  upon  Cort- 
land village  as  well  as  enriching  its  pro- 
prietors. It  is  such  establishments  that 
lay  broad  and  strong  the  foundations  of 
prosperity  in  any  village  where  they  are 
located. 

The  working  of  iron  in  Cortland  county 
has  never  been  carried  on  \ery  extensively, 


296 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


although  in  retrent  years  it  shows  good 
evidence  of  prospective  development.  The 
village  of  Cortland  in  its  early  years  had 
its  complement  of  blacksmith  shops,  one 
of  the  first  of  which  was  that  of  Jacob 
Wheeler,  who  was  in  the  business  at  a  very 
early  day.  In  those  days  the  village  black- 
smith was  a  more  important  personage  than 
at  the  present  time,  cspeciall)-  if  he  was  a 
man  of  ingenuity  and  a  good  workman. 
This  was  undoubtedly  the  case  with  Jacob 
Wheeler,  as  he  advertised  in  the  local  paper 
for  a  journeyman  who  understood  making 
axes.  His  shop  was  located  on  the  site  of 
the  Cortland  Machine  Conipan\-'s  buildings. 
From  the  early  blacksmiths  to  the  first 
foundr)'  and  machine  shop  was  an  easy 
transition.  This  was  established  in  1832 
by  Daniel  Larned  on  the  site  of  the  Cort- 
land Machine  Company's  building.  Five 
years  later  he  transferred  it  to  the  Freers. 
Anthony  and  S.  D.  Freer  were  sons  of 
John  A.  Freer,  who  came  from  Duchess 
county  and  located  on  lot  74.  For  more 
than  twent)'  years  they  conducted  the 
foundry  and  machine  shop  and  did  a  large 
business.  From  the  year  i860  the  estab- 
lishment changed  hands  several  times  un- 
til it  was  finally  acquired  by  the  pres- 
ent company,  which  was  incorporated 
in  1875.  The  Victor  mowing  machine 
is  made  by  this  company  and  also  certain 
special  wood -working  machines,  which 
bear  an  excellent  reputation  and  have 
a  large  sale.  The  main  building,  at  Nos. 
14,  16  and  18  Port  Watson  street,  is  a  three 
story  brick  structure,  iio  by  57  feet  in 
dimensions,  occupied  by  the  storage  and 
salesrooms  and  the  office.  In  the  rear  are 
the  foundry,  machine  shop  and  the  wood- 
working shops,  all  well  supplied  with  tools 
and  conveniently  arranged,  with  a  sixty- 
horse  power  Buckeye  engine  for  driving  the 
machinery.  The  working  force  at  present 
consists   of   thirty   men,    nearly  all   skilled 


mechanics.  The  officers  of  the  Cortland 
Machine  Company  are  C.  S.  Chamberlain, 
president;  A.  T.  Dickinson,  vice-president; 
S.  B.  Elwell,  secretary  and  treasurer,  and 
J.  C.  Yager,  general  manager. 

Another  extensive  foundry  and  machine 
shop  is  that  of  the  Cooper  Brothers,  which 
is  located  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Tiough- 
nioga  river,  and  occupies  the  old  paper-mill 
buildings,  a  description  of  which  has  already 
been  given.  This  property  was  purchased 
by  the  Cooper  Brothers  in  July,  1881,  and 
fitted  up  in  a  modest  way  with  machinery 
for  repairing  and  general  work.  Their  suc- 
cess was  excellent  from  the  outset  and  in 
1882  they  felt  warranted  in  building  a  new- 
foundry  with  a  cajiacity  for  casting  two 
tons  of  iron  per  day.  They  have  also  added 
largely  to  the  machinery  equipment  of  their 
establishment  and  are  now  prepared  for 
almost  all  kinds  of  general  work. 

An  industry  of  this  village  which  merits 
especial  attention  from  the  historian,  not  so 
much  from  its  magnitude  as  from  its  age,  is 
that  of  Horace  Dibble's  carding-mill.  In 
the  year  1821  Mr.  Dibble,  then  a  young 
man  who  had  not  long  before  finished  his 
trade  of  wool-carder  and  cloth-dresser,  came 
through  Cortland  on  foot.  He  spent  the 
night  at  Merrick's  Hotel,  on  the  site  of  the 
Barber  block,  and  next  morning  proceeded 
on  his  way  through  Homer  in  search  of  em- 
ployment. Passing  the  old  building  on 
Otter  creek,  in  rear  of  which  then  stood  a 
saw-mill,  he  was  struck  with  its  favorable 
location,  the  excellent  water  power  and  its 
adaptability  for  a  carding-mill,  and  resolved 
if  it  were  possible  some  time  in  the  future 
he  would  become  its  owner  and  establish 
his  business  there.  It  is  claimed,  but  not 
upon  very-  good  authority,  that  the  build- 
ing was  then  occupied  b}'  Wm.  Sherman, 
afterward  the  well  known  merchant  of  Ho- 
mer, as  a  nail  factory.  However  this  may  be, 
the  building  came  into  possession  of  Martin 


Town  of  CortlandviIle. 


297 


Merrick  about  the  year  1824,  who  fitted  it 
up  with  wool-carding  machinery.  He  con- 
ducted the  business  until  1833,  when  it  was 
offered  for  sale.  Horace  Dibble  was  in  an- 
other county  at  that  time,  working  at  his 
trade.  Learning  that  the  object  of  his  early 
ambition  was  in  the  market,  he  came  im- 
mediately to  Cortland  and  bought  it.  Here 
he  has  remained,  carding  wool  on  the  orig- 
inal machine,  for  a  period  of  fifty-one  years 
—  an  example  of  contentment  and  industry 
rarely  met  with.  The  great  gnarled  wil- 
lows which  line  the  banks  of  the  race-way 
running  from  the  old  building  have  grown 
from  little  sprouts  set  by  Mr.  Dibble  be- 
tween the  years  1847  'i"'^  1852.  The  old 
building  remains  nearly  the  same  as  when 
it  was  erected  and  is  both  a  well  known 
landmark  and  interesting  as  one  of  the  old- 
est remaining  structures  in  the  village. 

Manufacturing  in  Cortland  has  been 
directed  during  the  past  ten  years  into 
numerous  new  and  novel  channels,  the 
products  of  which  have  gone  into  success- 
ful competition  with  those  of  the  largest 
cities  in  the  Union.  The  business  of  whole- 
sale chair- making  has  developed  from  the 
earlj'  methods  followed  in  small  cabinet 
works,  scattered  throughout  the  country, 
to  startling  dimensions  through  the  medium 
of  mammoth  establishments,  one  of  which 
is  located  in  Cortland.  The  business  was 
originally  started  as  a  general  furniture  fac- 
tor)- on  Port  Watson  street  (on  the  premises 
now  occupied  by  the  Cortland  Steam  Mill 
Company)  in  the  year  1874,  by  the  firm  of 
Hayes  &  Dellow.  It  was  transferred  to 
Orchard  street  in  the  following  year,  where 
Lewis  S.  Hayes  became  sole  owner.  It  was 
subsequently  transferred  to  what  was  known 
as  the  Cortland  Furniture  Company,  in 
which  Mr.  Hayes  was  a  partner.  In  1879 
the  works  were  removed  to  their  present 
location  on  South  Main  street  and  South 
avenue,  where  new  buildings  were   erected 


expressly  for  the  manufacture  of  a  line  of 
folding  chairs  which  Mr.  Hayes  had  pat- 
ented in  1878.  The  business  has  since  been 
extended  to  embrace  a  large  variety  of  fold- 
ing and  adjustable  chairs,  platform  rockers, 
etc.,  which  are  sold  throughout  the  United 
States  and  in  South  Africa,  Japan,  Aus- 
tralia and  the  Sandwich  Islands.  This  is 
one  of  the  important  industries  of  Cortland. 

Another  unusual  industry  which  is  help- 
ing to  give  Cortland  its  enviable  reputation 
is  that  of  the  Sanford  Fork  and  Tool  Man- 
ufacturing Company,  an  organization  which 
was  effected  principally  through  the  efforts 
of  De  Forest  Sanford,  a  son  of  the  origina- 
tor of  the  celebrated  Sanford  pitchfork. 
The  company  was  organized  and  began 
operations  in  1883.  The  works  are  on  Elm 
street  and  comprise  a  main  building  50  by 
32  feet  in  dimensions,  and  the  manufactur- 
ing building,  40  by  1 00  feet,  in  which  is  all 
of  the  machinery,  driven  by  a  60-horse 
power  engine.  Robert  Nixon  is  president 
of  the  company,  and  E.  O.  Rickard  secre- 
tary and  treasurer,  Mr.  Sanford  being 
superintendent.  Although  this  industry  is 
yet  young,  it  begins  under  the  most  favor- 
able auspices  and  can  scarcely  fail  of  being 
an  important  factor  in  the  manufactures  of 
the  village. 

A  novel  industry  has  been  started  since 
1882  in  the  Cortland  Box  Loop  Company's 
works.  This  comprises  the  manufacture 
of  carriage  loops,  buckle  and  harness  loops, 
which  are  pressed  into  perfect  shape.  The 
company  is  composed  of  E.  H.  Brewer  and 
C.  W.  Stoker,  two  of  Cortland's  enterprising 
young  men.  Their  business  promises  to 
increase  largely. 

The  lumber  interest  of  Cortland,  both  in 
manufacture  and  the  sale  of  rough  stock,  is 
largely  in  the  hands  of  Henry  F.  Benton. 
He  established  his  yards  and  planing  mills 
on  the  corner  of  Railroad  street  and  the  S., 
B.  &  N.  Y.  railroad  in    1866,  a  small   plan- 


298 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


in<^-mill  being  put  in  the  following  year. 
The  rapid  growth  of  the  village  in  later 
j-ears  anil  Mr.  Benton's  energy  and  deter- 
mination to  keep  ahead  of  the  deniand.s  of 
his  patrons,  has  given  him  his  now  exten- 
sive establishment.  Three  acres  of  ground 
arc  occupied  b\'  him,  about  one  acre  of 
which  is  under  cover.  He  handles  from 
three  .ind  a  half  to  four  million  feet  of  lum- 
ber annually,  and  manufactures  large  quan- 
tities of  doors,  sash  and  blinds.  About 
thirty  workmen  are  employed.  A  glazing 
dei)artment  has  been  added,  which  used 
1,500  bo.xes  of  glass  in  1883. 

.\  casual  \'isitor  to  Cortland  might  over- 
look theCortland  Machine  Cooperage,  which 
is  located  at  the  corner  of  Mill  aiul  East 
Ri\cr  streets.  This  establishment  was  put 
in  operation  about  the  year  1870  by  C. 
\V.  Kinne,  who  sold  out  to  Todd  &  Wal- 
lace ;  the\-  were  succeeded  b\'  Todd  &  Dol- 
phin. This  firm  soon  afterward  dissolved, 
when  John  G.  Dolphin  continued  the  bus- 
iness three  or  four  }-ears.  Thomas  F. 
Brayton  next  took  it  for  a  time,  and  it  is  now 
in  the  hands  Robert  Ni.xon,  who  has  greatly 
extended  the  business.  A  three  story 
building  with  basement  is  occupied  for  the 
manufacturing,  and  another  structure  15 
by  30  feet  for  storage.  The  factory  has  a 
capacit)-  for  producing  from  60  to  100  bar- 
rels, or  100  to  150  firkins  pvv  da\',  with  a 
large  number  of  pails  and  tubs.  The  goods 
are  sold  over  a  large  area,  extending  as  far 
west  as  Iowa,  and  be.ar  the  best  reputation. 

Marble  Working. — The  only  establish- 
ment of  this  character  in  Cortland  is  that  of 
S.  M.  Benjamin.  He  came  to  Cortland  in 
1850  and  helped  build  the  first  baker's 
oven  with  a  Mr.  Bancroft.  In  1852  he  en- 
tered the  employ  of  Doud  &  Clark  in  their 
m.irble  works.  In  1 860  he,  with  his  brother, 
J.  W.  Benjamin,  bought  the  establishment, 
under  the  firm  name  of  Benjamin  Brothers, 
which    continued    until    1882,  when   J.    W. 


Benjamin  died.      Since  that  time  S.  M.  Ben- 
jamin   has    conducted    the    business    alone. 

;   It  is  now  a  prominent   industrj-  of  the  town 
and  count}'. 

The  manufacture  of  pottery  is  one  of  the 
oldest  industries  in  the  world,  having  been 
practiced  by  the  Egyptians  some  thousands 
of  years  ago ;  and  the  most  wonderful 
feature  of  it  is  the  fact  that  there  has  been 
ver)'  little  improvement  in  the  methods  of 
manufacture  since  that  time.  To  all  intents 
and  purposes,  the  same  little  revolving  hori- 
zontal wheel  is  used  to-day  in  connection 
with  the  human  hanils,  for  shaping  jars  and 
jugs  that  is  referred  to  in  the  Bible.  To  come 
down  to  the  present  time,  this  is  also  one 
of  the  oldest  industries  in  Cortland.  In 
1829  a  small  building  was  erected  near  Ot- 
ter creek  for  this  purpose,  by  Sylvester 
Blair.  His  clay  was  brought  from  Ambo\-, 
N.  J.,  to  S\M-acuse  on  boats  and  tlrawn  from 
there  by  horses,  while  the  manufactured 
ware  was  shipped  down  the  Tioughnioga 
river  in  arks  or  was  sold  from  wagons  about 
the  country.  This  was  the  oiil}-  potter)- 
within  a  long  distance  of  Cortland,  and  the 
business  was  a  prosperous  one  for  that 
period,  reaching  about  $io,000  a  )'ear.  In 
1835  t^'i^  pottery  was  sold  to  Mason  &  Rus- 
sell, who  a  few  years  latter  transferred  it  to 
Chollar  &  Darby.  These  gentlemen  in- 
creased the  business  to  $12,500  a  year  and 
conducted  it  ten  years.  In  1849  they  sold 
out  to  Madison  Woodruff,  who  had  then 
worked  in  the  establishment  eighteen  years. 
He  added  new  buildings  and  pushed  the 
business  with  so  much  energy  that  it  was 
increased  in  1858  to  $1  5,000  a  year.  He 
has  conducted  it  ever  since,  but  of  late 
years    he    has   de\-oted    less   attention  to  it. 

!  Mr.  Woodruff"  has  lived   in   Cortland   more 
than    fift)'    years    and     has    witnessed     its 

j  growth  from  about  400   inhabitants  to  its 
present  extent. 

Cigars  are   manufactured  in  Cortlanel  b)' 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


299 


I.  H.  Holcomb,  who  established  his  business 
in  1873.  He  now  employs  five  workmen 
and  manufactures  more  than  200,000  cigars 
annuall)-.  I  lis  goods  are  ncarh-  all  sold  in 
Cortland. 

In  Januar}-,  1884,  M.  I'..  Holton  and 
Henry  Corcoran  purchased  tlie  bottling 
works  established  by  H.  C.  Harrington, 
now  located  at  No.  34  Union  street.  All 
of  the  popular  summer  drinks,  ales,  lager  j 
and  porter  are  bottled  b\-  this  establishment, 
for  family  and  other  uses.  I 

This  brief  sketch  of  the  prominent  manu- 
facturing interests  of  this  thrixing  village 
will,  we  think,  aniph-  fortifx-  our  statement 
that  Cortland  as  a  manufacturing  center  is 
destined  to  take  a  foremost  position  among 
the  villages  and  cities  of  the  Empire  State. 
With  a  proper  recognition  of  the  importance 
of  such  establishments  b_\-  the  community 
and  x'illage  officials,  and  liberal  encourage- 
ment after  they  are  established,  such  con- 
summation will  be  doubl)-  assured. 

FINANCIAL   IXSTITL'TIOXS. 

In  conjunction  with  the  manufacturing 
and  mercantile  interests  which  we  have  re- 
viewed, has  been  built  up  in  Cortland  the 
necessary  number  of  prosperous  and  wisely  i 
conducted  financial  institutions  to  accom- 
modate the  business  community.  The  first 
of  these  was  the  Randall  Bank,  established 
b\'  \Vm.  Randall,  and  continued  with  the  ' 
unfailing  confidence  of  the  entire  community 
and  surrounding  villages  for  many  years. 
Upon  the  death  of  his  father  the  banking 
business  was  continued  by  his  son,  William 
R.  Randall,  until  it  was  finallj-  closed. 
During  all  of  that  extended  period  the 
doors  of  this  staunch  institution  were  never 
c'  -s'-d  to  the  public,  who  alwa}'s  found  am- 
ple acLoii.niodation  for  their  business  needs. 
The  bank  occupied  the  rooms  now  used  by 
the  Cortland  Savings  Bank,  in  the  building 
on  the  corner  of  Main  and  East  Court  streets 


—  a  structure  that  has  changed  but  very 
little  since  it  was  erected. 

Hiram  J.  Messenger  came  to  Cortland  in 
I  860,  and  to  his  subsequent  efforts  may  be 
ascribed  in  a  great  degree  the  impetus  in 
growth  and  business  that  was  given  to  the 
village  within  the  few  succeeding  years.  In 
1863  he  erected  the  Messenger  House 
block,  then  b\'  far  the  most  imposing  brick- 
structure  in  the  village.  In  June,  1864, 
he  opened  the  Messenger  Bank.  In  the 
spring  of  the  same  year  he  purciiased  the 
tract  of  land  on  the  west  side  of  Main  street, 
beginning  near  the  north  side  of  the  Smith 
&  Kingsbury  hardware  store  and  running 
south  to  the  corner  of  Court  street.  He 
reconstructed  the  old  seminar)-  building 
into  the  hardware  store,  as  it  exists  to-da\-, 
and  in  1865  built  the  Taj-lor  Hall  block 
(then  called  Messenger  Hall).  He  next 
erected  the  wooden  structures  which  ex- 
tended to  the  corner  of  Court  street,  and 
which  have  been  recently  burned.  In  1867 
he  erected  the  Masonic  Hall  block. 

In  the  year  1864  Mr.  Messenger  began 
business  in  New  York  city  and  the  greater 
portion  of  his  time  was  thereafter  passed  in 
that  place.  1  he  bank  which  he  founded  in 
Cortland  did  a  very  prosperous  business  for 
several  years,  but  for  reasons  which  need 
not  be  detailed  here  its  doors  had  to  be 
closed  in  1868,  entailing  considerable  losses 
upon  its  depositors,  and  creating  a  good 
deal  of  feeling  against  the  banker,  as  is 
common  under  such  circumstances.  Un- 
fortunate as  this  event  was  for  Cortland,  it 
is  still  undoubtedly  true  that  the  spirit  of 
enterprise  infused  into  the  business  public  of 
the  village  by  Mr.  Messenger's  rapid  and 
extensive  improvements,  produced  an  effect 
the  benefits  of  which  were  almost  inestima- 
ble and  which  continue  to  this  day.  Mr. 
Messenger  has  been  for  some  years  engaged 
in  real  estate  and  insurance  business  in 
Cortland. 


300 


•History  of  Cortland  County. 


The  next  bank  organized  in  Cortland 
was  tlie  l'"irst  National  Bank,  which  was  in- 
corporated under  the  national  law  in  1863, 
and  was  organi/.etl  in  I'Vbriiar)-,  1864,  with 
the  following  directors,  the  capital  stock  be- 
ing $125,000:  Thomas  Keator,  president; 
Garry  Chambers,  Artluu'  Holmes,  Riifus 
{■".dwards,  James  S.  Squires,  Lansing  Carley, 
Nathan  Bouton,  Dan.  C.  Squires  and  Le- 
ander  l'"itts.  Thomas  Keator,  the  organ- 
izer of  the  bank,  died  June  35th,  1879,  and 
was  succeeded  by  S.  Keator  as  president. 
The  career  of  the  bank  has  been  a  flattering 
one,  and  a  continuation  of  the  charter  for 
another  twent)-  years  was  api)licd  for  and 
granted  February  24th,  1883,  when  it  was 
reorganized  with  the  same  board  of  direct- 
ors. The  hank  has  declared  di\itiends  of 
from  ten  to  twelve  per  cent.,  free  of  taxes, 
every  year,  and  the  statement  of  July  23d, 
1883,  shows  a  capital  stock  of  $125,000; 
value  of  real  estate,  $l6,000;  surplus  and 
undivided  profits,  $95,000;  deposits,  $190,- 

370. 

The  present  board  lit  directors  and  offi- 
cers is  as  follows :  — 

President  —  Samuel  Keator. 

Vice-president  —  R.  Bruce  Smith. 

Cashier  —  E.  Keator. 

Directors —  Hon.  A.  A.  Carley,  M.  Van 
Hoesen,  Samuel  Keator,  Ransom  Warren, 
T.  H.  Wickwire,  Samuel  Sager,  Hon.  O.  U. 
Kellogg,  R.  B.  Smith,  V..  Keator,  II.  Cow- 
an, C.  VV.  Stoker,  Robert  I'urvis,  K,  C. 
Carley. 

The  National  Hank-  of  Cortland  was  or- 
ganized March  ist,  1869,  as  the  Bank  of 
Cortland,  with  a  capital  stock  of  $100,000 
and  the  following  board  of  directors  :  — 

James  S.  Squires,  presiilcnt ;  W'm.  II. 
Sliaid<land,  James  A.  Schermerhorn,  H.  P. 
Goodrich,  Horatio  Ballard,  B.  li.  Wood- 
worth  (cashier),  1".  11.  llibbard,  S.  E. 
Welch,  Samuel  Sager,  C.  C.  Tajlor,  Lucius 
Babcock,    Jerome   liulbert,    J.  C.  Pomero)-, 


S.  R.  Hunter,  A.  B.  Lamont  and  George 
L.  Cole.  It  continued  as  the  l?ank  of 
Cortland  until  the  first  day  of  January, 
1875,  when  it  was  chartereil  as  the  National 
Bank  of  Cortland,  with  a  capital  of  $100,- 
000,  and  the  following  board  of  directors  : 
James  S.  Squires,  president ;  George  L. 
Cole,  Wni.  II.  Shankland,  Ed.  M.  liulbert, 
Hamilton  Putnam,  A.  B.  Lamont,  Byron 
A.  Benedict,  Wesley  I  looker,  John  S.  Sam- 
son, Nathan  Si)encer,  .Sanuul  Sager  and 
Stephen  R.  Hunter. 

Following   is   a  statement    <if   this    baid< 
dated  January  5th,  1884:  — 
A'l  sciinfS. 

Loans, - -.$290,891   8 1 

Bonds,  (Circulauon) 50,000  00 

Reserve, 

Cash, .$32,400   15 

From   Banks,..   36,844  87  69,245  02 

Hanking  House,  F.  and  F., 16,500  00 

Redciiiplion  I'lnid, 2,250  00 

$428,886  83 
LiahiHtics. 

Capital  stock, .$80,000  00 

Surplus  and  Profits, 33,099  44 

Circulation, 45,000  00 

Deposits, 270,787  39 

$428,886  83 

Mr.  Squires,  after  successfidl)'  filling  the 
office  of  president  of  the  bank  until  January 
8th,  1884,  resigned,  and  Wesley  Hooker 
was  elected  in  his  stead.  The  present 
board  of  directors  and  bank  officers  are  as 
follows :  — 

President  —  Wesley  Hooker. 

Vice-president — Geo.  L.  Cole. 

Cashier — Chas.  E.  Selover. 

Directors  —  Geo.  L.  Cole,  Wesley  Hook- 
er, Wm.  II.  Clark,  Chas.  H.  Parker,  I". 
Cyrus  Straat,  Robert  Bushb>-,  15.  A.  Ben- 
edict, Chas.  E.  Selover,  L.  J.  Fitzgerald, 
Hamiltt)n  Putnam,  l)a\id  !•'.  Wallace,  Chas. 
W.  Collins,  Geo.  J.  Mager,  I'".  N.  Harring- 
ton. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


301 


The  Second  National  Bank  of  Cortland 
was  organized  the  25th  day  of  November, 
1882,  with  a  capital  of  $100,000,  and  the 
following  directors  :  J.  S.  Bull,  Fitz  Boyn- 
ton,  L.  J.  p-itzgerald,  George  C.  Hubbard, 
J.  R.  Schermerhorn,  George  N.  Bliss,  Har- 
sison  Wells,  John  D.  Schermerhorn,  M.  H. 
McGraw,  D.  F.  Wallace,  E.  A.  Fish,  H.  F. 
Benton,  M.  S.  Pierce  and  W.  B.  Stoppard. 
The  bank  is  proving  a  very  successful  insti- 
'  tution,  and  the  statement  of  July  23d  1883, 
shows  a  capital  stock  of  $100,000;  surplus 
$6,200;  undivided  profit  $1,487.50;  de- 
posits, $94,000. 

The  Cortland  Savings  Bank  was  organ- 
ized April  1 3,  1 866,  a  charter  being  secured 
through  the  efforts  of  Hon.  Stephen  Pat- 
rick, of  Tru-xton,  and  the  original  trustees 
were  William  R.  Randall,  president ;  Hiram 
J.  Messenger,  Thomas  Keator,  Jcdediah 
Barber,  George  \\'.  Bradford,  Perrin  H. 
McGraw,  Henry  Stephens.  P'rederick  Hyde, 
Horatio  Ballard,  Henry  S.  Randall,  R.  Hol- 
land Duell,  Hiram  Crandall,  Horace  P. 
Goodrich,  James  W.  Sturtevant,  Alphonso 
Stone,  Silas  Blanchard,  Raj'mond  P.  Bab- 
cock,  Nathan  Smith,  Daniel  E.  Whitmore 
and  Stephen  Patrick.  The  bank  was  opened 
September  25th,  1866,  in  a  small  room  on 
the  second  floor  of  Randall's  Bank  with 
Calvin  P.  Walrad  as  secretary  and  treasurer, 
and  from  this  modest  beginning  its  business 
gradually  increased  until  it  was  necessary 
to  secure  the  large  room  now  occupied  (for- 
merly Randall's  Bank),  and  the  deposits 
amount  to  nearly  $500,000.  The  trustees 
are  now  Frederick  Hyde,  president ;  G.  W. 
Bradford,  R.  Holland  Duell,  Henry  Brewer, 
Horace  P.  Goodrich,  Charles  C.  Taylor, 
Abram  P.  Smith,  Calvin  P.  \\'alrad,  James 
C.  Carmichael,  Morgan  L.  Webb  (treas- 
urer), Stephen  Patrick,  Madison  Woodruff, 
Norman  Chamberlain,  Samuel  E.  Welch, 
Alphonso  Stone,  George  N.  Copeland,  Hen- 
ry McKevitt,  William  H.  Twiss  and  A.  Le- 


roy  Cole,  and  the  statement  of  the  bank, 
made  January  1st,  1883,  shows  the  assets 
to  be  $449, 1 5  1 .43  ;  liabilities,  $426,477.43 ; 
surplus,  $22,674.80. 

MERCANTILE  INTERESTS. 

During  the  seventy  years  which  have 
elapsed  since  the  first  business  establish- 
ments were  opened  on  the  site  of  this  vil- 
lage, the  mercantile  interests  of  the  place 
have  kept  pace  with  the  demands  of  the 
community  in  whatever  direction.  The 
superstructure  of  these  interests,  laid  by  such 
men  as  the  Randalls,  Nathan  Luce,  the 
Bassetts,  Samuel  Ingalls  and  their  contem- 
poraries, was  worthy  in  every  respect  of 
the  emulation  of  their  successors ;  and  to- 
day the  mercantile  houses  of  Cortland  will 
compare  favorably  with  those  of  any  other 
village  of  its  size  in  the  country. 

In  early  years  all  of  the  stores  in  the 
growing  villages  were  such  as  are  denomi- 
nated "  general  stores, "  selling  almost 
everything  needled  by  farmers  and  house- 
keepers; and  it  is  within  the  memory  of 
many  now  living  when  the  demand  for 
special  lines  of  goods  first  became  sufficient 
to  employ  the  time  and  effort  of  merchants 
in  one  particular  direction.  A  brief  review 
of  the  mercantile  interests  of  this  village  will 
form  a  not  unimportant  part  of  its  history. 

No  history  of  early  times  in  Cortland 
could  fail  to  make  frequent  mention  of  Wil- 
liam and  Roswell  Randall,  the  pioneer  mer- 
chants. These  brothers  came  to  Cortland 
from  Brookfield,  Madison  county,  where 
they  had  been  engaged  in  business,  in  181  3, 
and  began  trading  on  the  corner  now  occu- 
pied by  the  Keator  block.  Roswell  paid 
especial  attention  to  the  indoor  business  of 
the  store,  while  his  brother  looked  after 
their  other  extensive  operations,  embracing 
the  building  and  operation  of  distilleries, 
asheries,  buying  and  selling  stock,  farming, 
etc.     They   continued    together   for  many 


302 


HlSTOKV    OF    CORTI.AND    CoUNTV. 


years  and  finalK'  dissolved  partnership, 
when  Rosuell  built  the  old  "  Eagle  Store, " 
a  pretentious  building  for  that  period,  stand- 
ing on  the  site  of  the  new  Squires  block. 
In  that  building  he  did  an  extensive  business 
for  many  )'ears.  William  subsequently 
built  the  brick  building  on  the  corner  of 
Main  and  Court  streets  and  established  the 
Randall  Bank.  Of  these  brothers  Mr.  Bal- 
lard wrote  :  "  They  amassed  wealth,  were 
public-spirited  and  essentially  aided  in  \'a- 
rious  ways  and  at  successive  periods  in  the 
growth  and  beauty  of  the  village.  They 
have  left  their  impress  upon  the  topography 
of  the  village,  which  will  not  soon  pass  away 
—  William  as  a  successful  financier,  bank 
president  and  model  agriculturist,  exempli- 
fied in  his  splendid  possessions ;  Roswell  as 
the  finished  merchant,  faithful  postmaster, 
accomplished  brigade  commander,  the 
graceful  host  in  the  attractions  of  social  life. 
These  brothers  gave  enduring  renown  to 
Cortland.  "  Tiie  family  of  William  Randall 
consisted  of  Antoinette,  Wilhelmina  and 
William  R.,  the  two  latter  now  living'in  the 
village.  The  family  of  Roswell  Randall 
were  William  P.  and  Henry  S.  The  first 
named  is  still  a  resident  of  the  village.  The 
former  died  in  1877.  He  was  educated  as 
an  attorney,  became  a  prominent  politician  ; 
was  a  writer  of  decided  abilitj-  and  filled  an 
eminent  station  in  life. 

Nathan  Luce  was  a  cotemporar}'  in  bus- 
iness with  the  Randalls  and  conducted  one 
of  the  first  stores  in  the  place.  He  later 
built  the  original  hotel,  which  afterwards 
became  the  well  known  Eagle  Tavern. 

Asahel  Lyman  was  a  merchant  before 
1 8 16,  in  which  year  he  jauilt  the  block  now 
owned  and  occupied  b_\-  John  S.  Samson. 
Further  reference  will  be  made  to  his  es- 
tablishment and  that  of  his  sons  a  little  fur- 
ther on. 

Luman  Rice  was  an  early  business  man, 
became    largely    interested    in     freighting 


down  the  river,  as  already  alluded  to,  and 
had  a  brewery  at  Port  Watson  before  18 15, 
probabl}'  the  only  one  ever  established  in 
the  town.  In  November,  1815,  he  adver- 
tised his  brewery,  "  near  Sweet's  Tavern, 
Port  Watson,  "  saying,  "  considering  the 
vast  difference  between  the  effects  on  man- 
kind of  ardent  spirits  and  this  cheap,  whole- 
some and  cheering  liquor,  it  is  hoped  the 
community  will  find  it  to  their  advantage 
to  patronize  the  establishment."  F"orsome 
unknown  reason  he  offered  the  brewery  for 
sale  in  the  next  issue  of  the  paper  in  which 
the  above  advertisement  appeared. 

In  reviewing  the  records  of  the  present 
principal  mercantile  houses  of  the  village, 
the  names  of  many  other  early  merchants 
will  appear,  with  brief  accounts  of  their 
stores. 

The  Drug  Trade.  —  It  is  only  about 
twenty- five  years  since  the  ills  of  this  com- 
munity seemed  to  demand  that  sufficient 
drugs  should  be  kept  on  sale  to  warrant  a 
man  in  devoting  his  entire  store  and  time 
to  that  interest.  Previous  to  1856  drugs 
and  medicines  occupied  a  share  of  the 
shelves  of  groceries  and  the  general  stores 
and  the  placards  of  Brandreth's  Pills,  Jayne's 
Expectorant  and  other  popular  preparations, 
hung  conspicuously  beside  those  of  Ja\a 
coffee,  Young  Hyson  tea  and  mayhap  silks 
and  velvets.  Then  it  was  not  necessary 
for  the  Cortland  county  housewife  to  go 
shopping  from  store  to  store  in  order  to  ob- 
tain her  weekly  supply  of  household  neces- 
sities. On  the  other  hand,  she  could  enter 
any  one  of  the  several  general  stores  in  this 
village  and  purchase  her  sugar  and  tea,  her 
calico  and  sheeting,  her  "Yankee  notions" 
of  whatever  kind,  her  new  bonnet  and  her 
confectionery  for  the  little  one,  while  her 
husband  was  investing  in  nails,  crockery, 
farming  tools,  a  new  hat,  a  pair  of  boots, 
or  what  not.  In  1847  the  business  por- 
tion of  Cortland  village  was  almost  entirely 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


j^j 


confined  to  Main  street  between  the  Cort- 
land House  and  the  old  Eagle  Tavern,  and 
near!}'  all  of  it  was  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  street.  Daniel  Bradford  kept  what  was 
called  a  drug  store  then,  but  his  stock  was 
almost  too  comprehensive  to  deserve  that 
exclusive  title.  J.  W.  Sturtevant  &  Co. 
had  a  general  store,  with  a  strong  leaning 
towards  dry  goods ;  and  general  stores 
were  kept  by  W.  O.  Barnard,  co  rncr  of 
Main  and  Mill  streets,  Orin  Stimpson,  Asa 
Ljnian  and  James  Van  Valen ;  Henry 
Brewer  had  a  harness  store  ;  J.  McFarlan 
a  furniture  store ;  Homer  Gillett  a  grocery 
where  C.  F.  Thompson  is  now  located,  and 
L.  Cudworth  and  I.  M.  Seaman  also  sold 
groceries ;  A.  &  S.  D.  Freer  kept  the  onh^ 
hardware  store,  and  Andrew  Dickson  kept 
a  dry  goods  store  and  the  post-ofiice  in  a 
building  then  standing  where  the  Keator 
block  is  now  located.  These  establishments 
embraced  the  business  of  Cortland  \  illage 
thirt\--five  years  ago  —  a  short  period  to 
witness  the  development  and  growth  of 
what  has  since  that  time  been  added.  They 
were  the  predecessors  of  the  more  pre- 
tentious establishments  representing  all 
branches  of  trade,  which  we  shall  proceed 
to  notice  as  among  the  more  prominent 
mercantile  stores  of  Cortland  \'illage. 

In  the  year  1847  G.  \V.  Bradford,  then 
a  young  man,  came  to  Cortland  and  entered 
the  store  of  Daniel  Bradford  as  clerk.  He 
remained  here  nine  years  and  in  1856 
opened  a  drug  store  in  the  same  store  which 
he  has  occupied  ever  since  —  a  period  of 
twenty- nine  years,  the  only  example  of  a 
merchant  remaining  in  one  location  and  one 
line  of  business  in  this  village,  for  so  long  a 
period.  His  store  has  been  somewhat  en- 
larged and  improved,  but  otherwise  is  iden- 
tical with  his  first  place  of  business.  Mr. 
Bradford  is  a  respected  citizen  and  success- 
ful business  man. 

The  first  store   opened    in    Cortland    for 


'  the  exclusive  sale  of  drugs  and  medicines 
was  that  of  A.  Sager,  and  was  located  near 
the  corner  of  Main  and  Court  streets,  on 
the  present  site  of  the  Schermerhorn  build- 
ing ;  this  was  in  1857.  In  1861  Mr.  Sa 
ger  responded  to  the  call  of  his  country, 
'  joining  the  76th  regiment,  and  sold  his  bus- 
i  iness  to  Dr.  T.  C.  Pomeroy.  He  was  dis- 
'  charged  on  account  of  disabilities  in  May, 
1863,  when  he  returned  and  again  engaged 
in  the  same  business  in  the  old  Barnard 
block,  corner  of  Main  and  Mill  streets.  This 
was  then  and  for  manj-  years  pre\Mous,  per- 
haps, the  most  prominent  building  in  the 
village.  It  was  of  brick,  three  stories  high 
in  front  and  two  in  the  rear,  and  was  built 
b)-  W.  O.  Barnard,  who  was  for  many  years 
one  of  the  leading  merchants  of  the  village 
and  located  on  that  corner.  When  Mr. 
Sager  began  business  there  L.  Dexter  had 
a  billiard  saloon  in  an  old  two  story  wood 
building  adjoining  the  Barnard  block,  in  the 
second  story  of  which  was  Henry  Wood- 
ruffs tailor  shop.  Mr.  Sager  continued 
business  until  the  spring  of  1865,  when  he 
took  Thomas  Dalton  in  partnership  ;  the 
firm  continued  one  year  when  Mr.  Dalton 
withdrew.  In  April,  1866,  the  buildings 
above  referred  to  and  their  grounds  were 
purchased  by  Mr.  Sager  and  Mr.  Dexter, 
the  former  taking  the  corner  building  and 
the  latter  the  wooden  structure.  In  1870 
Mr.  Sager  became  associated  with  W.  A. 
Pierce,  under  the  firm  name  of  A.  Sager  & 
Co.  This  firm  continued  a  year  and  seven 
months,  when  Mr.  Pierce  withdrew.  In 
1872  the  owners  of  the  corner  rebuilt  the 
structures  into  their  present  commodious 
and  attractive  form.  The  present  firm  of 
Sager  &  Jennings  was  formed  by  the  admis- 
sion of  E.  F.  Jennings,  in  the  spring  of 
1 88 1,  and  is  doing  a  large  and  growing 
business.  Mr.  Sager's  services  in  the  army 
are  referred  to  in  the  history  of  the  76th 
regiment  herein. 


304 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


About  the  year  1868  a  drugstore  was 
established  by  Abner  L.  Smith,  who  in 
course  of  time  sold  to  Brown  &  Arnold, 
ami  the  store  then  passed  into  possession 
of  the  late  George  H.  Arnold.  He  sold  in 
1 88 1  to  Johnson  &  Barney  and  in  1883  W. 
B.  Johnson  bought  out  his  partner  and  is 
now  conducting  the  business  alone  at  No.  6 
North  Main  street. 

In  the  year  1880  the  present  firm  of 
Ikown  &  Maybury  was  formed  ;  composed 
of  Charles  F.  Brown  and  M.  M.  Maybury. 
Their  drug  store  is  located  at  No.  3  North 
Main  street. 

Dry  Goods. —  One  of  the  first,  if  not  the 
very  first  store  in  Cortland  devoted  to  the 
exclusive  sale  of  dry  goods  was  that  of  J. 
W.  Sturtevant  &  Co.,  which  was  established 
in  1846  at  the  location  now  occupied  by 
Dickinson  &  McGraw.  The  business  was 
conducted  there  by  that  firm  for  more  than 
twenty  years  and  was  favorably  known 
throughout  the  county  and  surrounding 
towns.  The  firm  was  composed  of  J.  W. 
Sturtevant  and  E.  H.  Doud  and  was  at  first 
located  where  Dickinson  &  McGraw  now 
are.  They  conducted  the  business  there  for 
more  than  twenty  years  and  were  very  suc- 
cessful. E.  A.  Fish  was  admitted  to  partner- 
ship in  1 86 1,  and  the  store  was  afterward  re- 
moved to  what  is  No.  19  North  Main  street. 
The  general  character  of  the  store  was  aban- 
doned about  1862,  and  in  1869  Mr.  Doud's 
interest  was  purchased  by  C.  P.  Walrad, 
when  the  firm  name  was  changed  to  Stur- 
tevant, Fish  &  Co.  Mr.  Walrad  came  to 
Cortland  in  1856  as  a  clerk  for  Sturtevant 
&  Doud.  In  1872  Mr.  Sturtevant's  inter- 
est was  purchased  by  the  junior  members 
of  the  firm  and  Fish  &  \\'alrad  successfully 
carried  on  the  business,  removing  in  1879 
to  more  commodious  quarters  in  the  new 
Schermerhorn  building.  On  the  5th  of 
March,  1883,  Fish  &  Walrad  sold  the  es- 
tablishment  to   Geo.  J.  Mager,  and   during 


the  same  month  Mr.  Walrad  again  became 
a  member  of  the  firm,  which  is  now  Mager 
&  Walrad.  Such  is  the  history  of  this 
staunch  house,  one  of  the  oklest  in  this  line 
in  the  town. 

S.  E.  Welch  is  one  of  the  oldest  dry 
goods  houses  in  the  county,  having  first  be- 
gun in  1845  in  Upper  Lisle.  Previous  to 
that  time  he  had  obtained  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  the  business  b)'  working  in 
stores  in  McGrawvillc.  In  the  fall  of  1846 
he  opened  a  store  in  McLean,  where  he 
remained  until  1853,  coming  then  to  Cort- 
land. He  has  been  constantly  in  the  bus- 
iness here  since  then.  In  1S69  he,  in  con- 
nection with  J.  Rose,  built  the  Union  Hall 
block  in  which  he  opened  his  store.  This 
building  suffered  from  the  fire  which  de- 
stroyed the  Garrison  block  in  Feb.,  1884. 
At  this  time  he  began  business  at  his  pres- 
ent location  on  Port  Watson  street.  Mr. 
Welch  has  been  entrusted  with  difterent  re- 
sponsible public  and  private  trusts  and  has 
been  supervisor  of  the  town  for  several 
terms. 

The  direct  predecessor  of  the  firm  of 
Warren  &  Tanner  was  that  of  Wells  & 
Mills,  which  began  business  about  1862. 
It  was  then  changed  to  Mills  &  Kinney  and 
in  1868  to  Mills  &  Warren.  In  April,  1872, 
the  firm  of  Warren  &  Tanner  was  formed 
by  a  union  of  George  L.  Warren  and  James 
E.  Tanner.  The  store  was  formerly  located 
one  door  south  of  the  present  location, 
which  was  taken  in  1882. 

In  March,  1864,  Adolphus  F.  and  Abram 
T.  Tanner  came  to  Cortland  from  Dryden, 
and  opened  a  dry  goods  and  notion  store 
in  the  Messenger  House  block.  The  firm 
was  successful  and  remained  there  until 
1 868,  when  they  removed  to  the  Moore 
block.  When  the  new  Garrison  block  was 
finished  in  1878  they  removed  to  a  commo- 
dious store  in  that  building,  and  added  car- 
pets,  etc.   to  their   stock.      In    June,    1883, 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


305 


Abram  T.  Tanner  died,  causing  not  only  an 
irreparable  loss  to  the  surviving  brother, 
but  lca\-ing  a  vacanc)'  in  the  community 
and  in  the  hearts  of  man\-  friends.  After 
the  burning  of  the  Garrison  block  recently, 
Adojphus  F.  Tanner  fitted  up  a  handsome 
store  in  the  new  Standard  building,  where 
he  is  now  located. 

In  the  1879  P.  K.  Brewster,  of  Syracuse, 
removed  to  Cortland  and  began  the  dry 
goods  trade.  He  was  joined  by  C.  N. 
Blowers  in  1882,  and  the  firm  continued 
until  the  death  of  Mr.  Brewster  in  June, 
1884,  since  wfiicli  time  Mr.  Blowers  has 
conducted  the  business  alone.  His  hand- 
some store  is  in  the  Standard  building. 

f.  S.  Samson's  father  came  into  the  town 
of  Homer  in  181  l,  bringing  his  son  with 
him.  John  S.  was  elected  sheriff  of  the 
count}'  ill  1855,  since  which  time  he  has 
lived  in  Cortland.  He  is  now  the  owner 
of  the  old  Lyman  building,  where  he  car- 
ries on  the  dry  goods  business. 

Books,  Stationer)',  Musical  Instruments, 
etc. — The  first  store  in  Cortland  devoted 
to  the  exclusive  sale  of  books,  stationery, 
wall  paper  and  kindred  goods,  was  that  of 
the  Apgar  Brothers,  which  was  opened  in 
the  Taylor  Hall  block 'about  the  close  of  the 
last  war.  The  business  was  moderately 
successful,  and  in  1868  was  sold  to  A. 
Mahan,  an  enterprising  young  man  who  had 
been  engaged  in  the  produce  business  in 
Virgil  for  several  years  previous.  Mr. 
Mahan  is  a  man  of  exceptional  business  ca- 
pacity and  under  his  enterprising  and  dis- 
creet management  the  trade  of  the  establish- 
ment was  rapidly  extended  anil  the  range  of 
stock  enlarged.  Musical  merchandise  was 
added,  and  subsequently  sewing-machines 
and  other  specialities.  In  1870  I).  F.  Wal- 
lace entered  the  firm  where  he  remained  a 
member  until  1874,  the  business  meanwhile 
becoming  largely  increased.  In  the  year 
last  named  the  firm   divided  their  interests, 


Mr.  Wallace  retaining  the  book  and  station- 
ery branch  and  Mr.  Mahan  taking  the  mu- 
sical merchandise  and  sewing-machine  in- 
terest into  the  new  building  which  he 
erected  on  Court  street,  Nos.  9  and  1  1. 
During  the  ten  years  since  that  date,  he  has 
devoted  his  best  energies  to  the  building 
up  of  a  large  trade  in  musical  instruments, 
sewing-machines,  etc.,  which  he  has  ex- 
tended throughout  central  New  York.  He 
is  also  a  member  of  the  firm  of  F.  .A.  Bick- 
ford  &  Co.,  dealers  in  guns  and  sporting 
goods,  in  the  same  building.  ^Tr.  Mahan's 
business  abilit)-  and  his  general  character 
i  as  a  citizen  is  fully  recognized  by  the  com- 
munity, as  e\'idenced  in  their  selection  of 
him  as  president  of  the  village  for  the  year 
1883,  an  office  which  he  filled  with  the  most 
satisfactory  results.  In  1 88 1  he  erected 
one  of  the  finest  residences  in  the  village, 
in  spacious  grounds  on  North   Main  street. 

Since  the  dissolution  of  the  firm  of  Ma- 
han &  Wallace,  the  latter  has  carried  on 
the  book  and  stationery,  and  wall  ])aper 
business  in  his  store  in  the  Ta\-lor  Hall 
block,  in  which  he  has  achieved  the  most 
flattering  success,  there  being  but  two  or 
three  firms  in  the  country  who  handle  more 
wall  paper  than  he,  outside  of  the  manufac- 
turers. About  a  year  ago  he  became  the 
owner  of  the  valuable  propert)-  on  the  cor- 
ner of  Main  and  West  Court  streets,  the 
buildings  upon  which  were  recently  burned. 
Mr.  Wallace  will  erect  on  the  site  a  block 
which  will  be  a  credit  to  the  place. 

The  firm  of  Bushb}'  &  Robinson  was 
formed  in  1883,  and  a  stock  of  books,  sta- 
tionery, wall  [japer  etc.,  was  added  to  the 
railroad  ticket  agenc\'  which  had  pre\-iousl\- 
been  established  by  Mr.  Robinson.  .\fter 
a  }'ear  the  firm  separated,  Mr.  Robinson 
taking  the  book  and  stationery  trade  to  No. 
24  Main  street,  and  Mr.  Bushby  retaining 
the  other  branch  of  the  business  at  the  for- 
mer location. 


3o6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


I'"ui'iiiturc. — John  Mcl'"arlaii  is  cmc  of 
the  pioneers  of  Cortland,  at  least  in  a  bus- 
iness sense.  He  came  from  Now  York  city, 
whence  he  had  i^onc  from  his  home  in 
Montgomery  count}'  and  worked  at  the 
trade  of  cabinet-maker  three  \-ears.  Dur- 
ing the  cholera  ejiideniic  of  1852  he  went 
to  Canada,  coming  from  there  to  Cortland 
in  1834.  He  was  the  first  furniture  manu- 
facturer in  Cortland,  his  shop  being  located 
for  a  short  time  on  Church  street  in  the 
building  now  used  as  a  dwelling  b_\-  Mrs. 
P-dgcomb.  He     remained     there     nine 

months  and  removed  to  Port  Watson  street, 
where  he  continued  in  the  busniess  about 
seventeen  years,  as  the  leader  in  that  line  in 
the  county.  At  the  end'  of  that  time,  in 
185  I,  J.  C.  Carmichael  became  a  member 
of  the  firm,  which  remained  as  Mcl'"arlan  & 
Carmichael  until  1866,  when  the  junior 
partner  bought  the  entire  establishment  and 
conducted  it  until  Albert  VV.  Edgcomb 
purcliased  an  interest  in  the  business.  On 
September  1st,  1883,  Mr.  Carmichael's  in- 
terest was  purchased  b\-  S.  M.  IJallard,  tlie 
firm  becoming  jiallard  &  Edgcomb.  The 
store  was  removed  to  No.  32  South  Main 
street  where  an  extensive  business  is  now- 
carried  on. 

R.  Beard  began  the  furniture  traile  in 
Cortland  in  1874.  In  1879  he  took  R.  B. 
Fletcher  into  the  business,  which  firm  con- 
tinued until  1883,  since  which  time  it  has 
carried  on  the  business  as  R.  Beard  &  Son. 
The  establishment  is  now  located  on  Port 
Watson  street. 

Harness  making.  —  Harness  making  and 
selling  was  probably  first  established  here 
by  Wm.  ]5artlit,  on  Main  street  in  a  build- 
ing which  stood  near  tlie  site  of  the  Scher- 
merhorn  residence.  Henry  Brewer,  one  of 
the  pioneer  business  men  of  the  village, 
came  into  tiie  place  wlu-n  he  was  si.vteen 
years  old  and  learnetl  his  trade  with  Mr. 
Bartlit       .After  finishing  his  ap])renticeship 


he  formed  a  |)artnei'ship  w  illi  ( )li\t'r  Cilo\-er 
and  purchased  the  stock  of  Mr.  Bartlit. 
The  firm  continued  for  onh'  a  short  time, 
when  the  first  proprietor  reijurchased  tlie 
goods,  liut  soon  sold  out  to  Almy  &  Curtis. 
The  stock  was  again  transferred  to  Henry 
Phillips,  who  was  the  last  proprietor  at  the 
original  stand.  Mr.  Brewer  began  business 
on  his  own  account  in  1834,  renting  a  room 
in  the  second  stor\-  of  the  small  building 
then  standing  on  the  site  now  occupied  by 
hi.  H.  Brewer.  In  January,  1862,  this 
building  was  burned  with  the  old  Eagle 
Tavern.  Mr.  Brewer  removed  across  the 
street,  where  he  remained  until  1S64,  when 
he  took  the  first  floor  and  part  of  the  second 
in  the  new  brick  building  erected  on  the 
original  site.  He  subsequently  admitted 
his  son,  Ileni\'  L.  Brewer,  to  a  partnership, 
undet  the  title  of  H.  MiL-wer  &  Son,  but 
upon  the  tailuie  ot  the  junior  member's 
health  this  partnership  was  dissolved  and 
Mr.  Brewer  coiitnined  the  business  alone 
until  1874,  when  he  sold  to  E.  H.  Brewer 
&  Co.,  and  retired  from  active  service.  E. 
H.  Brewer  &  Co.  conducted  the  establish- 
ment until  1877,  when  J.  .\.  Schermerhorn 
w  as  ailmitted,  and  the  firm  name  changed 
to  Brewer  &  Scherme?rliorn,  who  continued 
in  partnershi])  until  1879,  when,  b_\'  the 
death  of  Mr.  Schermerhorn,  E.  H.  l^rewer 
became  sole  pro[)rietor.  E.  H.  Brewer  is 
also  the  senior  iiK-mber  of  the  Cortland  Hon 
Eoo])  Com|)an\'. 

I.  &  M.  Edgcomb  began  harness  making 
here  in  1856,  at  the  location  now  occupied 
b_\-  Mr.  \'an  ,\lstine  as  a  shoe  store  (then 
the  old  Barnard  block).  The\-  came  to 
their  [iresent  location  in  1S60.  There  has 
been  no  changt-  in  this  lirni  111  all  these 
\-ears,  except  the  absence  of  Martin  Edg- 
comb about  three  years  in  the  ami)-. 

Nathan  Peck  carrietl  on  harness  making 
in  Cortland  a  long  time,  but  stopped  some 
twenty  years  ago. 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


307 


Hardware.  —  The  business  in  hardware 
now  carried  on  by  Xcwkirk  &  Hulbert  is 
an  outgrowth  of  the  original  foundry  and 
machine  shops  cstabHshed  by  Daniel  Lamed 
in  1832,  which  was  afterward  conducted  by 
the  Freers  for  many  years,  and  since  trans- 
ferred to  the  Cortland  Machine  Company. 
The  Freers  sold  to  Chamberlain  &  Benton 
in  1861.  In  1865  Benton's  interest  was 
purchased  by  H.  C.  Smith,  and  Chamber- 
lain &  Smith  conducted  the  business  until 
1873,  when  they  erected  the  three-story 
brick  building  at  No.  44  Port  Watson  street, 
and  engaged  in  the  hardware  trade.  The 
business  was  divided  in  1874,  the  stock 
company  known  as  the  Cortland  Foundry 
and  Machine  Company  taking  the  foundry' 
and  machine  shops,  and  the  Cortland  Hard- 
ware Company  succeeding  to  the  hardware 
business.  H.  C.  Smith  then  bought  out  the 
Cortland  Hardware  Company  and  con- 
ducted the  business  for  a  time,  and  sold  to 
C.  F.  Chamberlain,  who  was  succeeded  in 
turn  by  F"loyd  Chamberlain.  In  a  short 
time,  however,  C.  F.  Chamberlain  again 
purchased  the  business,  and  forming  a  co- 
partnership with  C.  ¥..  Huntington,  under 
the  title  of  C.  F.  Chamberlain  &  Co.,  con- 
tinued the  business  a  year  and  then  organ- 
ized the  Chamberlain  Manufacturing  Com- 
pany. In  1879  W.  S.  Xewkirk  and  Ernest 
M.  Hulbert,  forming  the  firm  of  Xewkirk 
&  Hulbert,  succeeded  the  Chamberlain 
Manufacturing  Company.  Upon  the  com- 
pletion of  the  new  Standard  building  the 
firm  removed  to  extensive  quarters  in  that 
block. 

The  hardware,  stove  and  tinware  business 
now  conducted  by  Smith  &  Kingsbury  at 
No.  12  North  Main  street,  was  established 
in  1859  by  E.  D.  Mallery,  in  the  old  Ly- 
man building,  corner  of  Main  street  and 
Groton  avenue.  This  was  the  second  tin 
and  hardware  store  in  the  village,  and  was 
started  on  a  very  small  scale,  the  storeroom 


now  occupied  by  C.  H.  Gaylord's  grocery 
being  devoted  to  the  sale  of  hardware,  and 
having  a  small  tin  shop  in  the  rear.  Soon 
after  the  business  was  established  and  dur- 
ing the  same  \'ear  {1859),  .Mallery  sold  to 
the  firm  of  Mills  &  Goodrich,  who  carried 
on  the  business  four  years,  in  1863  or  1864 
securing  the  frame  building  then  standing 
on  the  corner  of  Main  and  Court  streets 
(and  which  had  been  occupied  many  years 
as  a  seminary),  and  removing  it  to  the 
present  site  turned  it  into  a  hardware  store 
and  tin  shop.  Mr.  Goodrich  then  retired 
from  the  firm,  and  Myron  H.  Mills  continued 
as  sole  proprietor  for  two  years,  when  he 
sold  an  intere.st  to  Josiah  Stephens.  The 
business  was  conducted  by  Mills  &  Ste- 
phens about  two  years,  and  upon  the  re- 
tirement of  Stephens,  in  1867  or  there- 
abouts. Mills  continued  the  business  alone 
until  1869,  when  he  sold  the  hardware  de- 
partment to  Theodore  Perkins,  retaining 
the  tin  shop.  In  February  of  1870  he 
formed  a  copartnership  with  I'".  D.  .Smith. 
under  the  firm  name  of  Theodore  Perkins  & 
Co.,  and  the  tinware  business  was  again  in- 
cluded. \V.  S.  Newkirk  succeeded  Perkins  in 
1871,  and  Newkirk  &  Smith  conducted  the 
business  until  1 875,  when  the  present  copart- 
nership of  Smith  &  Kingsburj-  was  formed. 

H.  M.  Kellogg  began  the  hardware  bus- 
iness in  1876  with  Frank  Place,  and  pur- 
chased his  partner's  interest  in  1879.  He 
was  entirely  burned  out  in  the  disa.strous  fire 
which  destroyed  the  Garrison  block  on  the 
20th  of  February.  1 884.  He  is  now  estab- 
lished at  No.  28  Xorth  Main  street. 

Xelson  &  Call  are  engaged  chiefly  in  the 
sale  of  carriage  makers'  supplies  at  19  S. 
Main  street. 

Boots  and  Shoes.  —  In  the  Cortland 
Journal  of  1824  we  find  Xorman  Curtis 
advertising  the  boot  and  shoe  making  bus- 
iness, at  his  shop  a  few  rods  east  of  Lyman 
&  Blair's  store.     He  kept  on  hand  a  good 


3o8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


assortment  of  Icatlur  and  statctl  tliat  liis 
work  was  all  made  b\-  the  good  old  fash- 
ioned method  of  sewin<j.  John  Bemcnt 
was  also  a  shoemaker  at  that  period 
and  was  located  oi)posite  the  Methodist 
chapel.  It  is  not  probable  that  the.se  men 
were  the  first  shoemakers  in  the  place, 
t]ioun;h  the\-  ma_\-  have  been  ;  but  we  ha\e 
no  earlier  records.  Wm.  Elder  and  Wm. 
Fisk  were  long  engaged  in  the  business  at 
a  later  date,  on  the  site  of  Dickinson  &  Mc- 
Graw's  store.  The  latter  L;cntlcman  was 
bought  out  by  Dickinson  &  McGraw  in 
1864,  since  which  time  they  have  carried 
on  a  successful  trade  at  the  same  location. 

As  far  back  as  the  year  1861  C.  Van  Als- 
tine  began  shoemaking  in  Cortland  in  a 
small  building  then  standing  on  the  grounds 
of  the  Schermerhorn  residence  on  South 
Main  street.  A  few  years  later  this  building 
was  removed  to  the  rear  of  the  lot  and  Mr. 
Van  Alstine  went  into  the  old  Lyman  build- 
ing for  two  years  when  he  engaged  in  the  liv- 
ery business.  In  1 869  he  formed  a  partner- 
ship with  Henry  Furdy  and  in  1873  removed 
to  the  Calvert  block  and  began  a  wholesale 
and  retail  business  in  boots  and  shoes. 
Mr.  Purdy  died  in  1874  and  the  stock  was 
closed  out,  but  Mr.  Van  Alstine  again  en- 
gaged in  the  business  in  1875,  in  the  Cal- 
vert block.  PVom  1876  to  1878  he  occu- 
pied the  old  wooden  building  that  stood  on 
the  site  of  the  Schermerhorn  block  and  then 
went  into  the  building  recently  burned,  on 
the  corner  of  Main  and  Court  streets.  He 
remained  here  until  1880,  when  he  took  his 
present  store  in  the  De.xter  Hou.se  block. 

A.  R.  &  Jay  Peck  began  the  business  in 
1883  and  have  a  handsome  store  at  No.  21 
-South  Main  street. 

Sackett  L.  Wright  began  the  shoe  trade 
in  1875  'ind  still  continues  a  successful  bus- 
iness. 

Jewelers. — An  account  of  the  liassett 
family,  who   were   the   first  jewelers   in   the 


\-illage,  has  already  been  given.  The  next 
workmen  and  dealers  in  this  line,  as  far  as 
we  have  been  able  to  learn,  was  the  firm  of 
Boon  &  Ormsby,  located  two  doors  south 
of  the  Eagle  Ta\'ern,  whose  business  was 
transferred  in  August,  1834  to  G.  K.  Stiles. 
Many  people  now  living  in  Cortland  will 
remember  the  building  of  the  small  wooden 
store  now  occupied  by  M.  Michelson,  some 
j  forty  years  ago,  in  which  Mr.  Stiles  carried 
I  on  his  business  more  than  twentx-  years. 
Mr.  Stiles  remo\-ed  to  Brooklyn  about  the 
}-ear  1859  and  a  few  years  ago  committed 
suicide  by  jumping  into  the  East  river. 

M.  Michelson  began  the  business  here  in 
1862  and  has  continued  it  ever  since.  De- 
los  Sanders  opened  a  jewelrj'  store  a  num- 
ber of  years  ago  and  in  1882  sold  out  to  J. 
B.  Capron.  He  in  tiu-ii  transferred  the  bus- 
iness to  C.  W.  l^arney  in  August,  1883.  He 
is  now  located  in  a  part  of  A.  Mahan's  store. 

C.  E.  Baldwin  &  Co.  began  the  jewelry 
trade  at  22  North  Main  street  in  May,  1882. 
In  Januar)-,  1S84,  Mr.  Baldwin  bought  out 
his  partner  and  has  since  conducted  the 
business  alone. 

J.  C.  Gray  came  to  Cortland  and  estab- 
lished himself  in  this  business  in  the  year 
I  872  which  he  has  successfully  followed  ever 
since.  He  is  located  at  5  North  Main 
street. 

Ready-made  Clothing. — The  methods 
of  clothing  the  masses  of  the  people  have 
undergone  raelical  changes  within  the  past 
twenty  years,  and  the  consecjuent  growth 
(>f  the  ready-made  clothing  business  is  one 
of  the  niar\-els  of  American  trade.  The  first 
store  in  Cortland  for  the  exclusive  sale  of 
clothing  was  that  of  Kent  &  Sperry,  which 
was  opened  in  the  Messenger  House  block 
nearly  twent)'  years  ago.  The  establish- 
ment was  purchased  by  the  Burdick  Broth- 
ers in  1878  and  sold  by  them  to  Reid  & 
Wallace  in  j88i.  In  March,  1883,  the  firm 
became  \\.  M.  Reid  &  Co.,  and  in   October 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


309 


of  the  same  year  F.  W.  Collins  became  a 
member.  This  continued  until  April,  1884, 
when  Collins  bought  out  his  partner  and 
now  conducts  business  alone.  His  store  is 
located  at  8  North  Main  street. 

The  other  clothing  houses  of  the  village 
are  F.  N.  Harrington  &  Co.,  who  has  suc- 
cessfully conducted  the  business  for  a  num-  1 
ber  of  years;  I.  Whiteson,  20  North  Main 
street,  who  began  in  1882,  and  A.  Rosen- 
baum,  30  North  Main  street,  who  began  in 
1883.  Samuel  S.  Woodruff  and  John  Mor- 
ris are  tailors,  both  of  whom  ha\e  had  long 
and  honorable  business  careers  in  the  vil- 
lage. 

House  Furnishing.  —  In  the  year  i860 
the  firm  of  Garrison  &  Collins  was  formed, 
for  carrying  on  the  grocer\-  trade.  Mr. 
Garrison  had  been  in  the  business  for  some 
)-ears  previous,  and  when  Mr.  Collins  en- 
tered the  firm,  crocker\'  and  some  other 
house  furnishing  lines  were  added.  The  firm 
continued  together  four  years,  when  it  was 
dissolved,  Mr.  Collins  continuing  the  busi- 
ness and  gradually  going  out  of  the  gro- 
cery trade,  to  make  wa\-  for  his  present 
large  house  furnishing  business.  This  is  the 
only  store  of  the  kind  in  the  place. 

Grocers. — The  limits  of  our  space  will 
not  permit  of  a  detailed  history  of  all  the 
establishments  that  have  sold  groceries  in 
the  village ;  their  number  is  legion.  One 
of  the  earliest  dealers  of  whom  we  find 
mention  was  Homer  Gillett,  an  estimable 
citizen,  who  was  in  trade  before  1829.  Hor- 
ace Jarvis  was  a  grocer  here  for  many  years 
and  afterward  held  the  office  of  postmaster 
for  over  seventeen  years ;  he  was  a  citizen 
who  was  respected  by  the  entire  commu- 
nity. In  those  days  and  for  years  after- 
ward all  of  the  merchants  in  the  place  aided 
in  supplying  the  tables  of  the  communit\-, 
and  exclusive  grocers  did  not  exist  until 
long  afterward. 

I.    M.    Seaman    came   to   Cortland   from 


Madison  county  in  1840  and  began  business 
in  1843;  he  ^^'3S  afterward  associated  with 
L.  Cudworth  (Cudworth  &  Seaman)  until 
1 846  ;  they  had  a  grocery  and  meat  market, 
the  only  one  of  the  kind  in  the  village.  This 
firm  was  succeeded  by  B.  K.  Aldrich,  G.  N. 
Copeland  and  D.  C.  Cloyes.  The  latter 
came  to  Cortland  from  Oneida  county  in 
1852,  bought  out  Mr.  Copeland  and  con- 
tinued the  business  until  1878.  He  was 
succeeded  by  W.  B.  Stoppard,  who  now 
conducts  the  store. 

The  grocery  now  occupied  by  C.  H.  Price 
&  Co.  was  for  sixteen  years  used  by  Dan- 
iel Bradford,  who  for  many  years  before  was 
located  where  W'm.  Riley  now  is.  Mr.  Brad- 
ford was  succeeded  by  A.  C.  Carr  and  he  by 
the  present  firm. 

L.  D.  Garrison  has  already  been  men- 
tioned as  having  been  associated  with  C.  W, 
Collins.  The  grocery  firm  of  L.  D.  Garri- 
son &  Co  was  located  in  the  Garrison  block 
until  it  was  burned  in  Feb.,  1884.  C.  H. 
Gaylord  began  business  in  December,  1880, 
I  succeeding  Geo.  Williams.  C.  F.  Thomp- 
l  son  opened  the  business  in  1875,  and  the 
Sherwood  Brothers  also  began  in  the  same 
j^ear,  succeeding  Miller  &  Sherwood.  R. 
S.  Randall  &  Co.  began  in  October,  1880, 
succeeding  Smith  &  Meyers,  and  W.  H. 
Bradford  in  1882,  occupied  the  store  form- 
erly used  by  John  and  George  Bennett.  The 
firm  of  E.  F.  Squires  &  Co.  is  composed  of 
E.  ¥.  &  James  S.  Squires,  the  former  having 
pre\iousl\-  been  associated  with  C.  W.  Sto- 
ker in  the  same  business.  They  are  located 
at  23  South  Main  street.  H.  B.  Hubbard 
has  a  store  at  24  South  Main  street,  and  is 
the  successor  of  Givens  &  Hubbard.  These 
are  the  principal  firms  in  the  \-illage  in  this 
line  of  trade. 

Photography.  —  Cortland  village  has 
been  for  man)'  years  favored  with  photo- 
graphic artists  of  excellent  capabilities,  the 
first  of  whom  we  find  mention  being  Prof 


310 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Beck,  who  for  a  long  period  had  a  gallery 
in  Homer.  He  established  one  in  Cortland 
in  1852.  The  business  is  now  well  repre- 
sented by  IC.  M.  Santee,  who  succeeded 
Page  &  Santee,  and  is  a  first-class  artist. 

Bakers.  — The  first  brick  baker's  oven 
built  in  this  \illage  was  by  Benjamin  &  Ban- 
croft, in  1845  ;  but  they  were  too  early  to 
find  a  sufficient  demand  for  their  goods  and 
closed  out  in  about  a  year.  The  Cortland 
steam  bakery  was  established  in  1873  by 
F2ggleston  &  Cobb,  who  put  in  steam  power 
in  1875.  About  this  time  Mr.  Eggleston 
retired  and  the  firm  became  Cobb  &  Per- 
kins. In  January,  1881,  the  confectionery 
business  of  L.  D.  Garrison  was  purchased 
and  the  works  largely  extended,  until  now 
it  is  one  of  the  important  business  houses 
of  the  village. 

Hotels.  —  Readers  have  already  become 
more  or  less  familiar  with  the  early  hotels 
of  Cortland  and  their  proprietors.  The  first 
one  was  established  by  Samuel  Ingalls  in 
1810  and  was  long  a  popular  house.  Moses 
Hopkins,  the  leading  pioneer,  was  the  sec- 
ond landlord,  his  house  standing  where  the 
Taylor  Hall  block  is  now  located.  Then 
followed  the  tavern  built  at  Port  Watson  by 
the  company  of  eastern  men  who  believed 
that  was  to  be  the  site  of  the  future  village 
and  cit\-.  About  the  year  18 1 8  Nathan 
Luce  built  the  tavern  that  first  stood  on  the 
site  of  the  Messenger  House  and  which  was 
afterwards  enlarged  and  known  for  many 
years  as  the  popular  Eagle  Tavern.  This 
was  burned  down  in  January,  1862,  and  the 
present  hotel  erected  on  its  site.  Relative 
to  the  building  of  this  hotel  the  Hon.  Ho- 
ratio Ballard  spoke  as  follows  at  the  dedi- 
cation ceremonies  of  Messenger  (now  Tay- 
lor) Hall  in  February,  1866:  "In  Janu- 
ary, 1862,  the  'Eagle  Tavern,'  a  name  cher- 
ished in  the  memory  of  thousands  of  guests, 
was  destroyed  by  fire.  It  was  a  calamity 
to  our  town  and  a  loss  to  the   public.      But 


there    were  agencies   at   work   bej'ond   the 

penetration  of  lumiaii  imaginings,  which 
more  than  restored  the  loss.  Just  before  the 
opening  of  our  railway,  a  citizen  (Hiram  J. 
Messengeri  then  engaged  in  a  limited  mer- 
cantile trade  in  an  adjoining  town,  removed 
to  another  county  and  entered  upon  a  large 
field  of  action.  He  was  successful.  In  the 
year  i860  he  returned  to  this,  his  native 
county,  endowed  with  a  fortune  and  a  pub- 
lic spirit.  He  was  not  slow  in  discovering 
the  sure  e\'idences  of  an  ad\ancing  trade 
centering  here.  One  of  the  first  exhibi- 
tions of  his  good  will  and  devotion  to  the 
public  interests  was  his  unexpected  an- 
nouncement that  if  the  site  of  the  old 
'  Eagle  '  was  tendered  to  him,  he  would 
cover  it  with  a  hotel  not  surpassed  in  cen- 
tral New  York.  The  ofier  was  accepted 
and  rising  above  the  smouldering  ashes  was 
soon  seen  the  stately  pile,  alike  an  orna- 
ment to  the  town  and  a  boast  of  the  county." 

Such  was  the  origin  of  the  Messenger 
House,  which  has  ever  since  been  kept  as  a 
first-class  hotel.  It  was  long  under  the  ex- 
perienced care  of  Win.  S.  Copeland  and  is 
now  conducted  by  Mr.  Barry. 

David  Merrick,  as  has  already  been  re- 
corded, built  a  hotel  just  west  of  the  site  of 
the  Cortland  House,  in  an  earl}-  day,  which 
he  kept,  and  at  a  later  date  his  son,  Dan- 
forth,  erected  the  Cortland  House,  then  one 
of  the  largest  public  houses  in  the  vicinitj-, 
and  which  was  burned  but  a  short  time  ago. 
It  passed  through  several  hands  until  the 
year  1868,  when  it  came  into  possession  of 
D.  Bauder,  who  has  kept  it  since  that  time. 
He  is  at  this  writing  engaged  in  the  erection 
of  a  splendid  house  on  the  burned  site. 

The  old  Center  House,  which  stood  on 
site  of  the  Arnold  House,  came  into  pos- 
session of  Enos  Stimson  about  the  year 
1840.  He  sold  out  to  C.  J.  Etz,  of  whom 
J.  S.  Samson  purchased  it  about  1S50.  He 
kept  it  one  year  as  a  temperance  house  and 


Town  of  Cortlandville. 


311 


sold  to  Daniel  Rose.  Following  him  in  the 
proprietorship  came  Messrs.  Winston,  Mills, 
Curtis,  Samuel  Plumb,  Cornelius  Brown, 
Fairchild  and  probably  others.  In  1865 
D.  J.  Sperry  took  the  propert}-,  subse- 
quently taking  in  as  a  partner  his  son-in-law, 
W.  F.  Burdick.  The_\-  rebuilt  the  house  in 
its  present  form  in  1870.  It  next  passed 
into  possession  of  K.  F.  lUitterfield,  who 
sold  it  to  Arnold  &  Carr  in  1881. 

The  building  of  the  Dexter  House  by  L. 
Dexter   in    1866    has    already   been    men-  i 
tioned.      He   kept  a  popular   house,  which  [ 
is  continued  at  the   present    time    and  since 
1881,  by  S.  A.  Williams.  i 

The  F"armer's  Piotel  is  a  smaller  house,  ! 
located  on  Port  Watson  street,  owned  and  1 
kept  by  Bernard  Doud.  j 

MC'CR.WVVILLE.  ' 

McGrawville  is  a  thrixing  village  in  the  I 
town  of  Cortland\ille,  about  fi\'e  miles  to 
the  eastward  of  Cortland  \illage,  and  con- 
tains a  population  of  about  900.  It  has 
two  hotels,  three  churches,  the  second 
largest  corset  manufactory  in  the  Uni-ted 
States,  a  number  of  smaller  factories,  shops,  ' 
etc.,  and  is  the  center  of  considerable  mer- 
cantile and  other  business.  The  village  re- 
ceived its  name  in  honor  of  Samuel  Mc- 
Graw,  who  migrated  from  New  Ha\'en, 
Conn.,  to  Cortlandville  in  1803  and  located 
on  lot  87,  where  he  purchased  100  acres. 
In  1809  he  removed  to  McGrawville  and 
purchased  about  200  acres.  Mr.  McGraw 
was  a  native  of  Plymouth,  Vermont,  where 
he  was  born  in  1772.  He  was  married  to 
Miss  Betsey  Whitcomb  in  1794  in  Benning- 
ton, Vt.,  b)'  which  marriage  he  had  eleven 
children,  three  of  whom  are  still  li\'ing,  and 
the  first  four  of  whom,  namel)-,  William, 
Henry,  Betsey,  and  Hiram,  were  boiii  be- 
fore their  parents  remo\ed  westward. 
Samuel,  a  younger  son,  is  now  a  resident 
of  Homer  village.     The  children  all  became 


prominent  in   the   early   history  of  this  vil- 
lage.     Mr.  McGraw  died  Feb.  6th,  1835. 

When  Samuel  Mc  Graw  came  to  this 
place  he  built  a  log  cabin,  in  which  he  lived 
until  1 81 5,  when  he  there  erected  a  frame 
house.  During  this  same  period  Simon 
Phelps  moved  in  from  the  same  place  and 
located  just  east  of  the  site  of  the  village. 
During  the  same  year  Uncle  Asher  Graves 
moved  in  ;  also  Rufus  Graves,  Reuben  Per- 
sons, Jonathan  Taylor  and  others  came  to 
the  vicinity  of  McGrawville.  Elisha  Co- 
burn,  a  nati\e  of  Springfield,  Mass.,  came 
in  from  Oxford  and  located  on  lot  No.  79, 
in  181 1,  one-half  mile  south  of  McGraw- 
ville, where  he  cut  timber  and  built  an 
asher\-  and  for  many  )-ears  manufactured 
"black  salts;"  his  son,  Elisha,  now  lives  in 
the  village. 

The  year  1 8  n  is  the  first  date  we  have 
of  Deacon  Park  Morgan,  who  was  the  suc- 
cessful tanner  and  currier  of  pioneer  times. 
Of  the  old  settlers  still  living,  Daniel  A. 
Thompson,  a  native  of  Columbia  county, 
now  8j  years  old,  came  to  the  place  in  1817 
when  a  young  man  of  twent}-  years.  He 
has  been  in  the  blacksmithing  business  since 
that  time  in  the  village.  Lucius  Babcock, 
Reuben  Doud,  Wm.  Shearer  (the  last 
named  located  where  Reuben  Shearer  now 
lives),  were  all  early  settlers  of  McGrawville 
or  its  vicinity.  William  Pike,  David  Corey, 
Dr.  Hiram  Brockway,  Revs.  Peleg  R.  Kin- 
ney, Joseph  R.  Johnson,  E.  B.  Fancher,  and 
Rensselaer  Merrill,  an  associate  of  Harry 
McGraw,  are  all  prominent  names  in  the 
history  of  this  section  of  the  town,  but  came 
upon  the  field  somewhat  later  than  those 
before  mentioned. 

Samuel  McGraw  built  the  first  log  house 
in  what  is  now  the  \illage  of  McGrawville, 
on  the  site  of  the  premises  now  owned 
and  occupied  by  Mason  Kinney,  and  re- 
sided there  until  the  year  181 1,  when  he 
built  a  frame    structure    across    the    road; 


312 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


this  building  is  not  now  standing.  Henry 
McGiaw,  liis  son,  became  the  first  mer- 
chant in  the  village.  He  purchased  the 
first  goods  ever  brought  to  McGrawville  of 
Roswcll  and  Wni.  Randall,  in  Cortland  vil- 
lage, and  after  carting  them  to  his  place, 
opened  up  in  his  father's  old  log  cabin 
(1818).  After  trading  here  for  a  season 
only  he  built  tiic  second  store  in  the  place, 
a  part  of  which  is  now  occupied  as  the  post- 
office.  This  was  in  the  )ear  1822.  About 
1835  he  sold  out  to  Marcus  McGraw  and  , 
A.  V.  P.  Wilcox.  From  1841  to  1843  he 
rented  the  building  to  Greenman  &  Thomp- 
son ;  then  H.  McGraw  &  Son  (P.  II.  Mc- 
Graw) continued  the  business  until  the 
death  of  the  father  in  1849,  when  a  com-  , 
pany  was  formed,  consisting  of  P.  H.  Mc- 
Graw, Deloss  McGraw  and  Lucius  Babcock, 
and  business  was  continued  from  1 849  to 
1854  under  the  firm  name  of  P.  H.  Mc- 
Graw &  Co.,  who  had  the  third  largest  . 
store  in  the  county.  Upon  the  dissolution 
of  the  last  named  firm,  P.  H.  &  D.  McGraw 
began  in  the  produce  business  and  have 
continued  it  from  that  date  to  the  present 
time,  trading  also  extensively  in  wool,  cat- 
tle and  general  merchandise. 

In  the  McGrawville  Express,  Sept.  28th, 
1848,  we  notice  the  firm  of  Kinney  &  Mc- 
Graw advertising  common  leghorn  hats  for 
sale  in  their  store.'  McGraw  &  Green 
wanted  2,000  pounds  of  honey  ;  they  kept 
staple  and  fancy  dry  goods.  James  San- 
derson, manufacturer  of  cabinet  furniture, 
continued  his  business  at  the  old  stand  on 
the  P'reetown  road.  Geo.  Pennoyer,  at  the 
old  stand  of  L.  Graves,  manufactured  car- 
riages. M.  M.  Webster  offered  the  highest 
price  in  boots  and  shoes  or  leather  for  2,000 
cords  of  hemlock  bark,  to  be  delivered  at 
his  tannery  in  McGrawville.  Kinney  & 
Thompson  were  also  heavy  advertisers. 

The  first  special  line  of  groceries  was  car- 
ried by  John  B.  Lament,  who  came  to   the 


place  in  1851,  and  has  continued  in  the 
business  ever  since.  This  store  is  the  orig- 
inal horse  shed  owned  by  Henry  McGraw. 
A  Mr.  Torrey  traded  in  it  a  short  time  be- 
fore Lamont  took  it.  Col.  D.  S.  Lament, 
the  well  known  private  secretary  of  Gov- 
ernor Cleveland,  is  the  son  of  J.  B.  Lamont. 

Blackmer  &  Bingham  followed  in  the 
grocery  trade,  and  after  them  Albert  At- 
kins, who  bought  in  with  M.  C.  Bingham 
in  1872,  and  since  1875  has  been  trading 
alone. 

In  the  general  trade  of  dr)'  goods,  etc., 
Chas.  L.  Kinney  is  the  oldest  merchant  in 
the  place.  He  began  in  1844  and  has  since 
regularly  followed  the  mercantile  business. 
M.  C.  Bingham  began  in  1868.  He  suc- 
ceeded  E.  N.  Blackmer  and  W.  H.  Tarble. 

The  drug  trade  was  probably  represented 
in  the  stock  first  kept  by  Hiram  McGraw. 
This  was  transferred  in  time  to  C.  B.  War- 
ren who,  in  1866,  formed  a  partnership 
with  C.  A.  Jones  under  the  firm  name  of 
War.ren  &  Jones,  and  who  then  purchased 
the  small  stock  of  J.  C.  Phelps  and  con- 
tinued until  1874,  when  Jones  bought 
Warren  out  and  has  continued  until  the 
present  time.  In  1866  C.  A.  Jones  also 
established  himself  in  the  drug  trade,  and 
still  continues  it. 

Eli  Smith  established  a  hardware  busi- 
ness in  McGrawville  in  1843,  dealing  in 
copper,  tin  and  sheet  iron.  Later  he  put 
in  stoves  and  has  of  late  years  made  a  spe- 
cialty of  that  branch  of  business.  A.  J. 
Sweet  carries  a  large  assortment  of  hard- 
ware and  has  traded  successfully  in  this  line 
for  over  ten  years. 

The  furniture  business  was  carried  on  in 
McGrawville  from  1848  to  1852,  b\-  James 
Sanderson.  He  was  succeeded  by  A.  R. 
Kelsey  to  1855  ;  Col.  Alfred  Green,  now  of 
Cortland,  and  then  R.  B.  Fletcher  took  it 
up  and  since  1864  R.  H.  Graves  has  carried 
it  on.     During  the  last  few  years  Mr.  Graves 


/f^^L.2.^       X^.  y^^^ 


3i6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Hiram  Brockwa)'.  He  came  here  in  1832, 
but  remained  for  only  one  or  two  years. 
Drs.  Charles  Kingman,  Webster,  Potter, 
Wiggins,  Hill  and  Scranton  practiced  here 
later.  Dr.  Henrj-  C.  Hendrick  is  the  oldest 
physician  now  in  the  place.  He  came  from 
Willet  to  McGraw\ille  in  1857.  He  prac- 
tices in  the  old  school  and  is  now  in  part- 
nership with  Dr.  Smith,  who  came 

here  some  fi%'e  years  ago. 

This  village  was  incorporated  in  May, 
1869.  Pierce  \\'arrcn  was  the  first  presi- 
dent; W.  H.  Tarblc,  clerk.  On  the  19th 
of  Janiiar\-,  1869,  the  first  meeting  was 
held  preparator)'  to  incorporation.  It  was 
held  in  the  office  of  Pierce  Warren,  and  C. 
A.  Jones  was  made  clerk,  /»-o  tcm.  ;  Thom- 
as B.  Chaftee  was  appointed  trustee  t<5  fill 
vacancy;  Ransom  Warren,  street  commis- 
sioner; Hiram  D.  Core\-,  clerk;  Noah  H. 
Osborne,  pound  master.  The  board  voted 
$300  to  repair  streets  and  also  gave  names 
to  the  streets,  the  principal  one  being  called 
Main  street.  The  fire  department  was  or- 
ganized at  the  same  time,  with  R.  H. 
Graves  as  chief  engineer  ;  he  was  instructed 
to  raise  a  company  of  not  less  than  thirty 
nor  more  than  fifty  men.  F"rank  Wheelock 
is  the  present  chief  engineer.  The  company 
use  a  hand  engine. 

The  present  officers  of  the  village  are  :  — 

J.  W.  Cudworth,  president. 

W.  J.  \'an  Auken,  clerk. 

A.  P.  McGraw,  R.  H.  Graves,  Lewis 
Warren,  Chas.  S.  Kinne\-,  trustees. 

Churches. — The  Presbyterian  Church  of 
McGrawville  was  organized  March  ist, 
1833.  The  meeting  was  held  at  the  house 
of  Lester  Graves,  under  direction  of  the 
Rev.  M.  E.  Johnson,  and  Rev.  Mr.  Fields. 
O.  W.  Brewster,  P.  Cravath,  Aaron  Smith, 
Jonathan  Taylor, were  elected  and  ordained 
elders.  There  were  present  at  the  meeting, 
Jonathan  and  Phoebe  Taylor,  Aaron  Smith 
and  his  wife  Sarah,  Dr.  Hiram  S.  Brockwa)-, 


Fidelia  Brockway,  Lester  Graves  and  Olive 
Graves,  Lyman  and  Eliza  Graves,  Austin 
Graves,  Marcus  McGraw,  Zenas  A.  Bryant, 
Polly  Graves,  Chloe  Tracy,  Calista  Coburn, 
(  Mary  J.  Hicks,  Minerva  McGraw,  Caroline 
H.  Allen,  Caroline  Smith,  Arminda  Russell, 
James  Morey,  Lewis  Da)'.  The  Rev.  E.  B. 
Fancher,  the  first  pastor  after  the  organization 
of  the  society,  remained  in  charge  27  years; 
he  died  in  1865,  and  was  the  father  of  the 
present  editor  of  the  McGrawville  Sentinel. 
Mr.  Fancher  was  succeeded  by  Rev.  W.  H. 
Bates,  two  years;  Rev.  Geo.  Ba\-less,  ten 
)'ears;  Rev.  Chas.  S.  Coon,  ten  months; 
Rev.  J.  G.  Blue,  the  present  pastor,  came 
in  Jul)',  1882.  Before  the  pastorate  of  Mr. 
Bates  the  form  of  the  church  government 
was  changed  from  Presb)terian  to  Congre- 
gational, but  during  his  pastorate  was  again 
changed  to  its  former  government.  The  first 
house  of  worship  was  erected  in  1833,  and  at 
inter\-als  of  twenty-five  years  has  since  been 
extensively  repaired  and  improved.  The 
ruling  elders  are  now  J.  Ralston  Holmes, 
Deloss  McGraw,  E.  P.  F"ancher,  H.  C.  Hen- 
drick, H.  D.  Corey,  Wm.  Carr.  The 
deacons  are  John  Tanner,  Harvey  D.  Wa- 
ters. The  trustees  are  P.  H.  McGraw, 
Noah  Osborne,  H.  D.  Corey.  C.  L.  Kinne)-, 
G.  L.  Baker  and  Wm.  Carr. 

The  Baptist  Church  was  organized  in 
1 83 1  with  sixteen  members,  whose  names 
were  as  follows:  Russell  Warren  and  wife, 
Deacon  Pierce  and  wife.  Deacon  Forshee 
and  wife,  Israel  Palmer  and  wife,  Joshua 
Rogers  and  wife,  Russell  Dodge  and  wife, 
Mr.  Greenwood  and  wife.  Elder  Dye  was 
the  first  pastor;  he  remained  with  the 
church  until  he  lost  his  voice,  a  period  of 
sixteen  years.  He  was  followed  by  Elders 
Savage,  Day,  Alfred  Bennett,  Stone,  West- 
cott.  Smith  and  Elder  Grant,  the  present 
preacher,  who  came  in  June,  1883.  The 
deacons  are  now  Nicholas  Starr  and  Chas. 
Kinne)'.     The  trustees   are   W.    C.    Shuler, 


Town  of  Cokilandville. 


317 


Chas.  Kinney,  Arthur  Chapin,  Ransom 
Warren,  Jolm  Kenfield  and  Cornelius  For- 
shee.  Tile  first  church  edifice  was  erected 
in  1831;  it  has  since  been  remodeled  and 
impro\cd,  the  last  time  in  1865.  The 
membership  is  150. 

The  original  meetings  held  b\'  the 
Methodists  of  McGrawville  were  in  a  school- 
house  on  lands  then  owned  by  Wni, 
Shearer,  now  owned  b}'  Reuben  Shearer, 
his  son,  and  on  lot  59.  John  Lyon  and 
wife,  his  sons  William,  James  and  Andrew 
and  their  wives,  Alva  Burnham  and  wife, 
David  Short,  Drake  Se\-mour  and  wife, 
Mrs.  Haskill  and  one  or  two  others,  were 
the  original  members  of  this  society.  In 
1834  the  church  building  was  erected  in 
McGrawville  and  thereafter  the  society 
worshiped  there.  The  church  records 
reach  back  to  the  year  1843,  ^^  which  time 
L.  E.  Weaver  was  pastor  and  S.  D.  Brooks, 
local  preacher.  The  stewards  have  been 
Jehiel  Rose,  Rufus  Rowe,  Stillman  Holden, 
Linus  Stillman,  Wm.  Hicks,  Wm.  Green- 
man  and  Ransford  Palmer.  The  class 
leaders,  Jehiel  Rose,  Luther  Lyon,  Alanson 
Houghton,  Samuel  Thompson,  Ransford 
Palmer,  Morgan  Wolsey.  The  present 
pastor  is  W.  D.  Fox:  '^class  leaders,  J. 
Walker,  Lucius  Brooks,  J.  C.  Alger.  Trus- 
tees, David  I.  Brownell,  jr.,  Albert  Atkins, 
Peter  Baljay,  P.  H.  Henry,  Helmer  Jacobs. 
The  church  has  now_i5i  members. 

SOUTH  CORTL.VND. 

This  is  a  small  hamlet  situated  about  two 
and  a  half  miles  southwest  of  Cortland  vil- 
lage. There  is  but  little  business  done  here 
at  the  present  time,  although  in  earl\-  da}'s 
the  inhabitants  in  the  \icinity  entertained 
anticipations  that  it  would  be  a  thri\'ing 
business  center. 

In  the  year  1822  Nathan  W.  Rowley 
came  from  Catskill  and  occupied  a  tract  of 
some  four  hundred  acres   of  land  which  he 


had  purchased  of  speculators  at  his  own 
home.  He  built  a  large  two  story  house 
and  kept  a  ta\ern  in  the  place  until  his 
death  in  1830.  The  house  burned  in  1858. 
He  also  was  the  first  postmaster  in  the 
place,  retaining  the  office  until  his  death, 
when  it  passed  into  the  charge  of  his  son 
Philemon  Rowley.  His  successors  were 
Darius  Sanders,  P'nos  Smith,  Darius  San- 
ders and  A.  P.  Rowley,  the  present  incum- 
bent, who  took  the  office  in  1861. 

In  183  I  Philemon  Rowley  built  the  first 
store  in  the  place.  He  was  born  in  i  800, 
on  the  Hudson  river  and  was  married  when 
24  j-ears  old,  to  Mary  S.  Curtis,  a  daugliter 
of  Gideon  Curtis  the  pioneer  merchant  of 
Little  York.  Mr.  Rowle\'  came  to  South 
Cortland  in  1826  and  bought  the  place  now 
owned  by  the  heirs  of  Darius  Sanders ;  the 
latter  was  a  brother  of  Charles  Sanders  the 
school  book  author.  Mr.  Rowley  drew  his 
goods  from  Albanj-  for  his  store,  which  he 
conducted  until  the  year  1833,  when  he 
went  to  Michigan  to  live.  The  store  was 
then  sold  to  Gilbert  Edgcomb,  after  whose 
management  for  a  time  it  was  abandoned. 
The  building  was  long  used  as  a  \yeaver's 
shop  b}'  David  Sanders.  There  is  now  no 
store  at  South  Cortland.  The  second  store 
was  built  by  W.  Sturtevant  in  1832,  but  it 
was  used  as  such  for  only  a  short  period. 

In  early  years  there  was  considerable 
business  done  here,  and  the  citizens  were 
apparently  justified  in  their  hopes  of  its  be- 
ing a  thriving  business  center.  A  news- 
paper was  published  for  a  while  —  the 
Soiitli  Cortland  Luminary — and  Mr.  Row- 
ley ran  two  four-horse  stages  between  Cort- 
land and  Owego.  Travel  was  heav\-  anil 
the  prospects  were  good  for  growth.  But 
business  was  finally  drawn  to  other  sections 
and  the  hamlet  has  passed  through  the  same 
experience  of  many  others,  sacrificing  itself 
to  aid  in  the  growth  of  others  more  fortun- 
ately located. 


3>8 


HisTORV  OF  Cortland  Colntv. 


In  1842  a  Mr.  Footc  built  a  structure 
w  licrc  he  lisL'd  and  manufactured  combs  for 
six  or  eight  years. 

The  grist-mill  was  built  here  in  i<S34  or 
1835,  by  Gilbert  lidgcomb,  who  had  also 
a  saw-mill  on  Big  brook.  In  1865  A.  P. 
Rowlc\-  bought  the  grist-mill,  which  he 
owned  until  tlie  present  \-ear,  when  he  sold 
the  propert)-  to  Daniel  McNish.  The  mill 
lias  not  been  run  since  1883,  and  there  is 
now  none  in  the  immediate  vicinity. 

In  a  newspaper  of  June,  18 19,  we  find 
an  announcement  that  Samuel  Eaton  had 
"  commenced  burning  marl  lime  for  the 
season  at  his  pond  3  miles  southwest  of 
Cortland  village."  There  are  se\eral  of 
these  marl  ponds  near  South  Cortland, 
which  have  already  been  alluded  to.  Thej- 
ha\'e  been  a  source  of  considerable  income 
to  their  different  owners  since  the  first  set- 
tlement of  this  section. 

The  first  religious  society  at  South  Cort- 
land was  organized  in  1839,  when  a  sub- 
scription paper  was  circulated  for  the  build- 
ing of  a  house  of  worship  for  the  "  Chris- 
tians," or  Disciples  ;  the  subscriptions  were 
as  follows:  Zera  Tanner,  $100;  Reuben 
Cadwell,  $50;  Reuben  Cadwell,  jr.,  $100; 
Alva  Jarvis,  $12.50;  Richard  Crandall, 
$3.50;  Asa  Wilcox,  $5.00;  James  Swan, 
$15.  The  church  was  erected  in  1840  and 
IClder  Da\'id  Wade  was  the  first  pastor;  he 
remained  but  two  or  three  years  and  was 
followed  by  I'.klers  Huzzell  and  Wm.  j. 
Grimes,  who  was  the  last  regular  pastor  and 
remained  about  twelve  years,  leaving  in 
1864.  Since  then  the  society  has  gradually 
declined  and  now  has  no  organization. 

The  Methodists  never  had  a  societ\'  in 
the  place,  but  some  of  that  denomination 
formed  a  class  and  called  to  their  aid  min- 
isterial aid  at  various  times.  Ezra  Rood, 
his  son  Reuben,  Asher  Wilco.v,  Zina  Ford 
and  others  were  prominent  in  this  work. 
The\'  ne\'er  had  a  church  building  here. 


Among  the  earliest  settlers  in  this  portion 
of  the  town  we  ma)-  mention  Wm.  Hatfield, 
who  came  from  Herkimer  count)'  and  lo- 
cated on  lot  62.  lie  had  for  neighbors 
Chaunce)-  Jones,  who  settled  where  Daniel 
Terr)-  now  li\es.  Timoth)-  Allen,  who 
located  where  Thomas  Tillinghast  lives. 
Christopher  Bowman,  who  located  where 
Silas  Schermerhorn  li\-es.  Jabez  Calkins 
and  Hezekiah  Howe.  Abel  Benedict  also 
located  at  an  early  day  on  lot  61,  as  did 
also  Reuben  and  Ezekiel  Wordsworth.  Zera 
Tanner  came  from  Otsego  county  to  South 
Cortland  in  1832  ;   he  died  in  1861. 

South  Cortland  and  vicinity  forms  one  of 
the  best  farming  districts  in  the  count)',  the 
land  being  level  or  gently  rolling,  and  the 
inhabitants  are  many  of  them  well-to-do. 

kludgett's  .mills. 

This  is  a  station  and  hamlet  on  the  D. 
L.  &  W.  railroad,  about  two  and  a  half 
miles  southeast  of  Cortland  village.  The 
earliest  settler  in  this  vicinity  was  probably 
Leonard  Tisdale,  who  came  from  Massachu- 
setts in  1 804,  and  located  on  the  site  now 
occupied  by  Charles  Sprague. 

Ezra  Corwin  was  an  earl)-  settler,  and 
also  Samuel  McGraw.  We  have  already 
alluded  to  the  fact  in  the  general  county 
histor)-,  that  Nathan  Blodgett  and  Jonathan 
Hubbard,  the  prominent  pioneers,  built  a 
grist-mill  at  this  point  at  an  earl)-  da)'. 
Mr.  Blodgett  came  here  in  1805  and  pur- 
chased lands  where  his  grandson,  Alonzo 
Blodgett  now  lives.  The  mills  at  Blodgett's 
Mills  was  probably  built  within  the  following 
year;  at  an)-  rate,  it  was  very  soon  after 
his  arrival.  The  two  pioneers  first  put  uj) 
a  saw-mill  and  the  grist-mill  was  subse- 
quentl)-,  and  not  long  afterward,  erected. 
This  property  was  divided  in  1834.  The 
saw-mill  is  now-  owned  by  Byron  Utley  and 
the  grist-mill  by  Philo  Moses. 

The  first  store  at  this  place  was  built  by 


Town  of  Virgil. 


319 


James  Burt  about  the  year  1840,  and  about 
tlic  year  1852  James  Tanner  built  a  store 
on  tlie  cast  side  of  the  ri\er,  wlicre  he  did 
business  a  number  of  years.  He  also  built 
the  house,  now  used  as  a  hotel  b\-  A.  Skeel, 
in  1863,  in  which  he  carried  on  a  shoemak- 
ing  business  until  1879.  Mr.  Tanner's  son, 
Edgar,  owns  the  store  property  and  carries 
on  the  business  there  now. 

Teed  &  Wallace  owned  a  carding-niill  at 
this  place  man)-  years  ago,  which  they  op- 


erated a  long  time,  but  the  dates  we  have 
been  unable  tn  obtain.  It  was  afterward 
owned  by  R.  P.  Tanner  who  ran  it  for  eight 
\ears  when  it  was  burned. 

The  first  store  on  the  site  now  owned  by 
John  Hubbard  was  built  by  Nelson  Owen. 
He  was  succeeded  in  business  by  James 
Freer;  the  building  was  subsequently 
burned.  R.  P.  Tanner  then  began  busi- 
ness on  the  site  and  was  followed  b\-  Mr. 
Hubbard,  the  present  occupant. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  TOWX  OF  VIk(.;n„ 


THI^  townshij)  of  \'irgil  was  originall)- 
in  the  southwestern  corner  of  Cortland 
county,  on  the  southern  boundarj-  of  the 
military  tract.  It  has  since  been  divided, 
the  towns  of  Harford  and  Lapeer  being  set 
off  from  it.  The  whole  of  this  town  did  not 
belong  to  the  military  tract,  as  the  tract 
called  the  "  Massachusetts  ten  townships  " 
comprehends  about  one-half  mile  in  width 
across  the  original  south  side,  leaving,  how- 
ever, the  town  nearly  ten  miles  .square.  It 
is  situated  on  the  height  of  land  between 
the  St.  Lawrence  and  Susquehanna  rivers. 
The  waters  part  near  Virgil  Corners  and 
mingle  with  those  of  the  broad  Atlantic 
through  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  and  the 
Chesapeake  Bay.  The  surface  is  variegated 
with  hills  and  vallej's,  watered  by  numerous 
springs  and  smaller  streams  of  water.  The 
timber  is  rather  heavj-,  consists  of  maple, 
beech,  elm,  basswood,  pine,  hemlock  and 
cherry.  Some  of  the  hills  have  consider- 
able chestnut  and  oak,  and  interspersed 
through  the  whole  is  some  white  ash  and 
birch.  The  soil  is  quite  uniform  and  better 
adapted  to  grazing  than  tillage.  The  water 
is    good,    and    most  parts   are    remarkably 


well  supplied  for  common  purposes;  but 
there  are  no  large  permanent  streams  adapt- 
ed to  the  propelling  of  mills  and  machinery. 
The  Tioughnioga  river  runs  through  the 
northeast  part  of  the  town,  remote  from  the 
principal  part  of  the  population. 

To  facilitate  the  settlement  of  this  sec- 
tion of  the  country,  a  road  was  projected. 
Connecting  O.xford  with  the  Cayuga  lake, 
to  pass  through  this  town.  Joseph  Chap- 
lin, the  first  inhabitant,  was  entrusted  with 
this  work.  The  instrument  by  which  he 
was  authorized  to  engage  in  it  was  authen- 
ticated on  the  5  th  of  May,  1792.  He  spent 
that  season  in  exploring  and  surveying  the 
route,  the  length,  of  which  is  about  si.\t\' 
miles.  He  came  to  lot  No.  50,  which  he 
owned,  and  afterwards  settled,  erected  a 
house  and  prosecuted  his  work,  having  a 
woman  to  keep  the  house  and  cook  for 
workmen.  The  work  for  cutting  and  clear- 
ing the  road  was  done  in  1793—94;  so  that 
he  mo\ed  his  fimil}'  from  Oxford  over  in 
the  winter  of  1894-95,  employing  six  or 
seven  sleighs  freighted  with  famih-,  furni- 
ture, provisions,  etc. 

Mr.  Cliaplin   married  Mrs.  Abigail   Mes- 


320 


History  of  CouTi.ANn  County. 


sender,  w  Im  was  the  mother  of  Cjiiloon  Mes- 
senger,  oik-  of  the  pioneers  of  Virgil  Corners, 
and  of  Nathan  Messenger.  By  her  he  had 
three  sons  and  four  daugliters.  1  lis  son  Jo- 
seph married  a  Miss  Chatterton  and  final!)- 
died  in  the  southwestern  part  of  Illinois. 
He  was  distinguished  in  the  locality  where 
he  resided  as  a  man  of  intelligence  and  in- 
tegrity, was  chosen  a  justice  of  the  ])eace 
and  a  major  in  tiie  militia,  and  was  famil- 
iarly known,  on  that  account,  as  "  Major 
Chaplin."  His  famil)-  were  Harriet,  who 
married  a  Mr.  Patten  and  removed  to  Illi- 
nois, where  she  died  ;  Joseph,  who  was  last 
heard  of  in  Pennsylvania  ;  Aaron,  now  liv- 
ing in  Jessop,  Iowa  ;  Pollw  who  married  a 
Mr.  Cook  and  lives  in  Cazenovia ;  (iideon, 
who  died  in  Iowa ;  Cornelius,  who  married 
a  daughter  of  Sylvester  Crain,  of  Virgil, 
removed  to  Stockton,  Cal.,  where  he  died 
P""eb.  22d,  1874;  Sylvester,  now  li\-ing  in 
Harford,  this  county  ;  Catharine,  who  mar- 
ried one  of  the  Shevalier  faniih-,  of  Virgil, 
and  now  lives  at  Macomb,  111  ;  and  Jacob, 
now  living  at  Union,  Storey  Co.,  Iowa. 
Daniel  Chaplin,  the  second  son  of  the  orig- 
inal Joseph,  had  a  faniil\-,  but  we  ha\'e  not 
found  a  record  of  it. 

Benjamin  Franklin,  the  third^  son,  was 
father  of  George  A.  Chaplin,  who  now  lives 
in  Marathon,  and  of  Walter  I,.,  who  lives 
at  Messengerville.  The  daughters  were 
Sally,  Ruth,  Marietta  and  Isabella,  two  of 
whom  are  still  living.  Such  is  a  brief  rec- 
ord of  the  descendants  of  tlie  first  settlers 
of  Virgil. 

In  1794  John  M.  I*" rank,  who  had  a  pat- 
ent for  lot  No.  43,  came  to  ascertain  its  lo- 
cation and  condition.  He  came  along  lots 
by  marked  trees,  taking  the  present  south 
line  of  the  town,  upon  which  his  lot  was 
bounded,  made  his  discoveries  and  returned. 

The  next  year  he  came,  made  a  begin- 
ning in  the  forest,  erected  a  house,  returned 
to    his    family  and    made    preparations    to 


move  on.  lie  came  from  Montgomery  to 
Cooperstow  n,  then  down  the  Susquehanna 
to  Chenango  Point,  thence  up  the  Chenan- 
go and  Tioughnioga  rivers  to  Chaplin's, 
thence  on  the  State  road  to  a  point  near 
where  the  village  now  is,  thence  southerly, 
and  so  on  over  tlie  hill  to  near  where  Mr. 
Hotchkiss  now  lives,  and  then  to  the  build- 
ing he  had  elected.  Tliey  arrived  in  No- 
\'ember,  1795,  after  a  journey  of  six  weeks, 
and  from  that  time  till  spring  saw  none  but 
their  own  famil\-.  The  man  whom  he  had 
employed  to  move  them  in  brought  the. 
famil)-,  and  Mr.  Frank  came  out  on  foot 
and  drove  seven  head  of  cattle  and  six 
sheep.  The  sheep  went  away  a  little  from 
the  house  a  few  days  after  their  arrival,  got 
out  of  sight  and  were  never  heard  of  after, 
and  it  was  supposed  that  the  wolves  took 
them  The  cattle  were  wintered  on  browse, 
and  all  lived  except  one  )-earling.  Samuel 
Marvin,  who  moved  the  famil\-,  agreed  fur- 
ther that  he  would  clear  two  acres  and  fur- 
nish tlie  family  with  provisions  for  one 
year  for  three  hundred  acres  off  the  east 
side  of  the  lot,  which  agreements  were  mu- 
tualh-  fulfilled.  It  is  well  to  understand, 
that,  though  the  patents  were  for  the  whole 
scjuare  mile,  yet  the  State  reserved  to  itself 
the  right  to  retain  one  hundred  acres  in  the 
southeast  corner  of  each  lot,  and  give  an 
equal  amount  in  Ohio,  unless  the  person  to 
receive  the  patent  should  give  notice  of  his 
w  isli  to  ha\e  his  land  together;  also  charged 
the  patentee  eight  dollars  for  surveying,  and 
in  default  of  payment,  reserved  fifty  acres 
in  one  corner,  called  "  the  survey  fifty  acres." 
Mr.  h'rank  ga\e  notice  and  saved  the  one 
hundred  acres,  but  could  not  raise  the  eight 
dollars  to  save  the  fifty,  though  he  oftcrcd 
;i  cow  for  the  mone\-,  and  also  proposed  to 
mortgage  the  whole  lot  in  security ;  conse- 
quently the  fifty  acres  were  alienated,  and 
constituted  the  farm  now  owned  by  George 
P.  Dann. 


Town  of  Vikgil. 


321 


The  next  inhabitant  was  John  Gee,  also 
a  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  He  drew  lot 
No  21,  bounded  west  b>-  the  town  of  Dr}-- 
den.  He  came  in  1795,  and  two  others  with 
him,  bringing  their  provisions  with  them 
on  foot  from  Chenango  Point,  and  built 
such  a  house  as  three  men  could,  with  only 
an  axe,  without  a  board,  a  nail  or  a  pane  of 
glass,  and  returned.  He  moved  his  family 
the  ne.xt  year  from  Wj'oming,  arriving  on 
the  7th  of  June.  The  family  consisted  of 
his  father  and  mother,  his  wife  and  six  chil- 
dren, to  live  in  a  building  about  sixteen 
feet  b\-  tweh'e.i 

With  Mr.  Gee  the  neighbors  were :  J. 
Chaplin,  at  the  river,  about  twelve  miles 
by  the  road,  J.  M.  Frank,  four  miles  with- 
out road,  and  Ebenezer  Brown,  twelve  miles 
west  in  Milton  (now  Lansing).  The  near- 
est grist-mill  was  at  Chenango  l^oint,  now 
Binghamton,  and  no  store  even  there.  His 
flour  was  brought  up  in  a  canoe  to  Chap- 
lin's, and  generally  from  there  on  foot.  In 
1798  Ludlow's  mill  was  built  at  Ludlow- 
ville,  which  was  a  convenience  to  him  and 
the  very  few  others  who  had  then  settled 
in  town. 

In  the  spring  of  1797  John  E.  Roe  came 
on  from  Ulster  county,  and  made  a  begin- 

l.'Ml  the  ."itructuies  for  inhabitants  were  made  rude.  Gen- 
erally they  were  small,  built  up  of  logs,  with  a  floor  of 
plank  split  from  basswood  logs,  door  of  the  same,  hung 
with  wooden  hinges,  and  the  roof  of  bark  peeled  from 
elm  or  basswood,  without  chimney  or  glass  window. 
This  was  the  case  with  nearly  all  constructed  previous  to 
1801,  when  the  first  saw-mill  was  built.  And  I  may  also 
proceed  to  say  in  this  place,  that  the  farming  utensils, 
household  furniture,  and  all  such  necessaries  and  con- 
veniences of  life,  were  rude  and  clumsy.  The  bedsteads 
were  not  French,  but  American,  consisting  of  four  posts 
of  round  limber,  with  holes  bored  to  rccei\e  the  end  and 
side  rails,  and  bark  drawn  across  instead  of  cords.  The 
young  children,  of  which  the  number  was  considerable 
in  proportion  to  the  population,  were  soothed  to  rest  in 
sap-troughs  and  hollow  logs  for  cradles.  It  was  the  lot 
of  your  speaker  to  enjoy  the  latter,  vibrating  on  the 
plank  floor  before  described;  trenchers  or  wooden  plates 
were,  in  many  instances,  used  instead  of  earthen,  etc.  — 
Nathan  Bouton's  Historical  I'amphlet. 


ning  on  his  lot  (the  same  afterwards  occu- 
pied by  himself  and  family,  the  site  of  his 
house  now  being  occupied  by  Asa  Price), 
;  boarding  with  Mr.  F"rank.  He  cleared  a 
i  spot,  put  up  the  body  of  a  log-house,  split 
plank  and  laid  a  floor,  peeled  bark  for  a 
roof  and  agreed  with  a  man  in  Homer  to 
put  it  on.  He  also  cut  and  cured  some  of 
the  wild  grass  growing  in  the  swamp  for 
hay,  and  returned.  Preparations  were  then 
made  for  moving  on,  which  was  done  in 
the  winter  following.  He  and  his  wife  came 
in  a  sleigh  with  a  young  cow  following 
them.  When  they  came  to  the  river  oppo- 
site Mr.  Chaplin's  they  found  the  water  high 
and  the  canoe  that  had  been  used  in  cross- 
ing carried  away.  Mr.  Chaplin's  hog- 
trough  was  procured  and  Mrs.  Roc  was 
safely  carried  over  in  it.  She  then  stood 
upon  the  bank  to  await  the  crossing  of 
what  remained.  The  horses  being  urged 
in,  swam  across  with  the  sleigh,  the  cow  fol- 
lowed, and  came  near  being  carried  away  by 
the  current,  but  after  a  hard  struggle  made 
the  shore  in  safety.  They  put  up  for  the 
night,  the  horses  being  fastened  to  the 
sleigh,  as  no  accommodations  could  be  pro- 
cured ;  and  the\-  ate  from  the  bottoms  of 
the  chairs,  to  allay  the  keen  demands  of 
appetite.  The  snow  was  two  feet  deep,  with 
no  track,  and  the  whole  daj-  was  consumed 
in  coming  from  the  river  to  their  new  home. 
When  they  arrived  they  were  surprised  to 
find  their  house  without  covering,  conse- 
quently the  snow  was  as  deep  in  it  as  out 
of  it.  Persons  of  less  perseverance  would 
have  been  disheartened.  But  no  time  was 
to  be  lost.  The  snow  was  cleared  awa)- 
from  a  portion  of  the  floor,  a  fire  built 
against  the  logs,  some  blankets  drawn  across 
I  the  beams  for  a  covering,  the  horses  tied 
I  in  one  corner  with  some  of  the  coarse  hay 
before  them,  and  their  first  and  several  suc- 
cessive nights  were  passed. 

John  E.  Roe  and  Charlotte  Roe  were  the 


322 


History  ok  Cortland  County. 


parents  of  five  children,  who  lived  to  ma- 
ture life.  The  eldest,  Betsey  N.  Roe,  was 
reputed  to  be  the  first  female  child  born  in 
town.  She  grew  up  an  intelligent,  exem- 
plary woman,  early  made  profession  of  re- 
ligion, adorning  the  same  b)-  a  life  devoted 
to  its  interests.  She  removed  to  a  western 
State,  and  since  has  died. 

S.  M.  Roe,  Erastus  G.  Roe  and  Philip  T. 
Roe  were  the  other  children  of  John  E. 
Roe.  Their  history  was  common  in  that 
they  had  only  the  advantages  of  the  com- 
mon school.  All  made  profession  of  re- 
ligion and  became  officers  in  the  respective 
churches  where  thej'  became  located,  sever- 
al of  which  were  weak  and  required  much 
of  their  labor  to  sustain  them.  The  eldest, 
S.  M.  Roe,  was  deacon  in  the  Congrega- 
tional Church  in  Virgil.  Afterwards  he  re- 
moved to  Cortland,  where  he  engaged  in 
the  butter  trade.  He  was  an  elder  in  the 
Presbyterian  Church  there  seventeen  j^ears. 
John  M.  was  a  leading  and  efficient  mem- 
ber and  officer  in  the  Presbyterian  Church 
in  Marathon.  Erastus  G.  Roe  returned  to 
Fulton  county. 

Thus  in  February,  1798,  there  were  four 
families  in  the  town,  separated  by  long  dis- 
tances from  each  other,  almost  without 
roads,  suffering  in  many  respects  for  the 
necessaries  of  life,  exposed  in  their  property 
and  persons  to  the  ravages  of  wild  beasts, 
and  far  from  sympathizing  friends.  But 
the  dark,  howling  wilderness  must  be 
changed  to  fruitful  fields,  and  these  were 
the  pioneers  to  lead  on  to  this  great  work. 
Wild  beasts  were  very  numerous,  especially 
deer.  Mr.  Roe  related  that  he  had  sat  in 
his  house  and  seen  twenty-five  pass  in  a 
drove.  There  were  also  many  wolves  and 
bears,  and  Mr.  Roe  and  Captain  Knapp 
caught  and  killed  fifteen  wolves  in  one 
year;  and  during  the  time  when  they  were 
prevalent,  Mr.  Roe  lost  by  them  fifteen 
head  of  cattle  and  a  large  number  of  sheep. 


Their  ravages  were  general,  and  subjected 
the  inhabitants  to-  the  necessity  of  folding 
their  sheep  every  night  for  about  fifteen 
years. 

For  a  series  of  )cars  the  settlers  suffered 
great  hardships  and  privations,  but  they 
gradually  diminished,  so  that  in  1809  or 
'10  most  of  the  necessaries  of  life  were  ac- 
cessible to  the  mass  of  the  people. 

To  the  number  above  alluded  to  as  hav- 
ing settled  here  in  1798  may  be  added 
James  Wright,  who  located  where  Thomas 
Stanbro  now  lives;  James  Knapp,  who  set- 
tled where  M.  B.  Mynard  so  long  resided, 
on  the  corner  opposite  the  "  West  Meeting- 
house;" James  and  John  Glenny  located 
just  south  of  what  was  known  as  "  Frog 
Huddle,"  and  near  the  residences  afterward 
occupied  by  H.  P.  Jones  and  Thomas  Ham- 
montl ;  Joseph  Bailey  settled  w  here  William 
Givens  afterward  lived,  on  lot  11,  and  Wait 
Ball  where  Chas.  Miller  now  lives. 

In  February,  1799,  Finos  Bouton  came 
into  the  town  and  settled  where  Plmory  Gee 
now  lives,  on  lot  41.  He  reared  a  family 
of  five  sons  and  eight  daughters.  The  sons 
are  all  dead  except  John,  who  now  lives  at 
Virgil  Corners.  One  of  his  sons  was  San- 
ford  Bouton,  who  became  a  prominent  cit- 
izen and  held  the  office  of  justice  for  many 
}'ears  and  was  also  county  poormaster  for 
a  long  period.  Three  of  the  daughters  of 
Enos  Bouton  are  still  living.  Dana  Miles 
also  came  in  that  year,  and  others  who  are 
not  now  known,  so  that  the  number  who 
were  ta.xed  with  highway  labor  in  that  year 
was  twenty  three. 

In  1 800  James  Wright  settled  near  where 
Punter.son  West  now  lives.  John  Calvert 
near  where  N.  Chamberlain  afterward  lived. 
Seth  Larabee  located  near  where  James 
Oaks  now  lives.  John  Ellis  settled  where 
Jay  Terpening  lives,  on  lot  23.  Moses 
Rice  located  where  George  Luce  now  lives. 
Abial  Brow  n  where   Abijah    Haight  after- 


Town  of  Virgil. 


323 


ward  lived,  in  the  "Gee  District."  Moses 
Stevens  where  Barnabas  Tyler  afterward 
lived,  the  property  now  being  owned  by 
T.  Lormor,  on  lot  41. 

Some  of  the  more  prominent  of  those 
who  came  in  the  town  and  settled  in  1801 
were  Daniel  Edwards,  who  located  on  lot 
^^,  where  William  Glenny  subsequently 
lived  ;  Nathaniel  Bouton  settled  on  lot  42, 
where  he  resided  during  his  life.  He  was 
the  father  of  the  late  Nathan  Bouton,  who 
may  be  called  the  historian  of  the  town  ; 
and  of  Joseph  Bouton.  He  was  a  promi- 
nent and  enterprising  citizen.  His  son, 
Nathan  Bouton,  was  born  in  Virgil  in  July, 
1802.  Although  his  opportunities  for  ob- 
taining an  education  were  not  very  favor- 
able, he  learned  readily,  especially  in  math- 
ematics, and  his  father  therefore  resolved  to 
make  a  surveyor  of  him.  He  began  this 
study  in  18 16  in  Genoa.  He  obtained  his 
instruments  in  1823  and  for  forty-four 
years  after  continued  to  practice  the 
profession  in  many  of  the  towns  of  the 
county.  He  became  a  school  teacher  at 
the  age  of  eighteen,  and  continued  in  that 
honorable  work  at  different  times  for  many 
years.  He  was  a  Member  of  Assembly  in 
1857,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Supervisors  at  a  later  date.  He  was  a  dea- 
con of  the  Presbyterian  Church  for  many 
years,  and  was  always  an  uncompromising 
supporter  of  the  temperance  cause.  One 
of  his  sons,  Lewis  H.  Bouton,  is  a  promi- 
nent attorney  in  Cortland  village  _  and  a 
justice  of  the  peace. 

Prince  Freeman  also  settled  in  the  town, 
on  lot  ]i^,  where  Samuel  N.  Rounds  now 
lives ;  and  James  Clark  and  his  son  where 
Wm.  Terpening  now  lives,  on  lot  14. 

Jonathan  Edwards  came  in  and  settled 
in  1802  on  the  farm  now  owned  by  Na- 
thaniel Lewis,  near  West's  mill.  He  sub- 
sequently removed  to  the  Corners  and  lived 
in  the  house  now  occupied    by   Dr.   Tripp. 


He  had  two  sons,  Rufus  and  William,  and 
three  daughters,  one  of  whom  in  after  life 
became  insane  and  killed  her  father.  Rufus 
and  William  Edwards  were  among  the  early 
merchants  at  Virgil  Corners,  in  the  store 
that  stood  on  the  site  now  occupied  by  W. 
A.  Holton.  Rufus  Edwards  became  a 
prominent  citizen  of  Virgil  Corners,  and 
was  one  of  the  count}'  judges.  He  now 
lives  in  Cortland  village.  Samuel  Carson 
settled  in  this  year  near  where  Joseph  Bou- 
ton afterward  lived.  George  Wigant  lo- 
cated in  the  house  on  the  premises  now 
occupied  by  George  Hicks.  Abner  and 
Ezra  Bruce  settled  near  where  Jay  Terpen- 
ing lives.  William  Lincoln  located  on  the 
hill  southwest  of  the  village,  where  Nehe- 
miah  Sherman  now  resides. 

In  1803  Moses  Olmstead  located  on  the 
premises  now  occupied  by  Mrs.  Horace 
Robinson,  lot  23.  Peter  Powers  and  John  I. 
Gee  settled  in  the  western  part  of  the  town, 
and  Andrew  Van  Buskirk  in  the  eastern 
part. 

In  1 804  Silas  Lincoln  settled  where  Sal- 
mon Curtis  now  lives,  on  lot  23.  Alexan- 
der McNitt  took  the  place  of  James  Wright 
on  lot  3,  and  Obadiah  Glazier  located  near 
where  James  Colwell  now  lives,  lot  24. 
Jeremiah  Shevalier  also  located  in  the 
eastern  part  of  the  town,  near  where  his  son 
John  afterward  lived. 

The  town  was  now  becoming  settled  in 
nearly  all  of  its  different  sections,  but  of 
course  the  rude  dwelhngs  were  still  a  long 
distance  apart.  In  1 805  Simeon  Luce  set- 
tled on  the  hill  that  bears  his  name  (now  in 
the  town  of  Lapeer) ;  one  of  his  daughters, 
Susan,  became  the  wife  of  John  Sheerar, 
one  of  the  prominent  farmers  of  the  town. 
Isaac  Barton  located  on  the  farm  afterwards 
owned  by  Isaac  B.  Raymond,  between  \'ir- 
gil  Corners  and  Cortland.  Jotham  Glazier 
settled  where  L.  B.  Ball  now  lives.  Zophar 
Moore  settled  on  the  site  of  the  "Corners," 


324 


lIlSIOKV    OK    COKTI.AN'I)    COUNTV. 


and  was  the  first  postmaiter  here.  Oliver 
Ball  located  where  M.  H.  M_\nard  lonj^  lived, 
giving  his  name  to  the  school-house  which 
was  built  at  the  four  corners  there.  Isaac 
Klwell  settled  a  little  north  of  Mr.  Ball's 
and  near  the  present  residence  of  Jesse 
Trapp.  Comfort  Bruce,  Shubel  S.  Marsh 
and  James  Monroe  where  located  in  the 
town  as  early  as  the  year  under  consider- 
ation, but  the  exact  dates  of  their  arrival 
are  not  now  known. 

In  1806  John  Hill  settled  on  lot  41,  and 
Inlm  Snider  on  the  hill  which  has  ever 
since  borne  his  name. 

John  T\-ler,  father  of  Jeremiah  rj'ler, 
who  now  li\-es  at  Virgil  Corners,  settled  on 
lot  ^T,,  a  little  south  of  Virgil  Corners,  in 
1 8 10,  where  Gordon  Tyler  now  lives. 
This  farm  has  been  in  possession  of  the 
family  ever  since.  John  Tyler  had  ten 
children,  five  of  whom  were  boys;  of  these 
latter,  Jeremiah  is  the  only  one  now  living. 

It  is  manifest!)'  impossible  to  follow  the 
settlements  in  the  town  from  this  time  on 
in  detail,  and  we  must  content  oursehes 
with  a  mention  of  some  who  in  different 
wa\'s  became  well  known  as  officials,  bus- 
iness men,  or  through  the  influence  they 
wielded  upon  the  general  welfare  of  the 
town.  Many  of  these  will  receive  attention  | 
in  our  notice  of  the  business  and  manufac-  i 
taring  interests  of  the  professions.  [ 

Isaac  Bloomer  came  into  town  from  Del-  j 
aware  county  in   February,  18 15,  and  set-  I 
tied  on  the  State   road  east  of  the  village,  I 
where  he  died  in  1854.      His  son  now  lives 
near  and  owns  the  same  farm  on  which  his 
father  settled.      Isaac  Spencer  settled  before 
181  5  on  the  farm  now  occupied  by  his  son 
Isaac.      He   had   four  sons,    Nathan,    Isaac, 
Jairah  and  Harvey.     The  first  named  lives 
on  the  State  road  about  two  miles  east  of 
the    village.     Joseph    Reynolds    settled    in 
town  in  1808,  was  one  of  the  earliest  mer- 
chants, held  the  office  of  justice,  was  Mem- 


ber of  Assembl}'  in  1S19,  county  judge. 
Member  of  Congress  and  a  brigadier- gen- 
eral of  the  militia.  Much  of  his  life  was 
spent  in  Cortland.  Gideon  Messenger  was 
an  earl}-  settler,  and  a  step-son  of  Joseph 
Chaplin,  tlie  pioneer.  Mr.  Messenger  used 
to  state  that  he  had  been  through  on  the 
State  road  from  Chaplin's  on  the  Tiough- 
nioga  tt)  the  Ca\-uga  lake  when  there  was 
not  a  house  in  the  entire  distance.  Mr. 
Messenger  became  prominent  and  was  a 
supervisor  of  the  town.  Reuben  Gridley, 
one  of  the  foremost  pioneers  in  the  eastern 
part  of  the  town,  from  whom  "  Gridley 
Hollow  "  was  named,  and  who  was  the 
cause  of  the  State  road  being  opened 
through  that  section,  was  long  a  respected 
citizen.  He  removed  to  Michigan.  John 
T\ier  settled  in  the  town  in  1806,  and 
although  his  residence  during  much  of  his 
life  has  been  over  the  line  in  the  town  of 
Dryden,  he  has  always  identified  himself 
with  the  interests  of  Virgil.  He  is  still  liv- 
ing with  faculties  but  little  impaired.  He 
has  alwavs  been  one  ot  the  pillars  of  the 
Free-will  Baptist  Church  in  the  western 
part  of  the  tnwn. 

Ur.  Green  and  Eli  Johnson  settled  in  the 
town  about  the  year  18 13,  on  the  next 
farm  west  of  that  owned  by  Isaac  Bloomer, 
now  owned  b\'  W'm.  Barr_\-.  John  Giles 
was  an  early  settler  and  lived  where  Sam- 
uel Sager  now  resides.  Wm.  Bell  also 
came  to  the  town  earl\-  and  has  carried  on 
the  blacksmith  shoj)  two  miles  east  of  the 
\illage  for  more  than  fift\-  \ears.  A  man 
named  Blaisdell  was  one  of  the  first  settlers 
in  the  \icinit)'  of  Messengerville,  where  he 
built  one  of  the  first  saw-mills  in  the  town, 
probably  as  early  as  1805.  Abram  Smith 
settled  early  on  the  hill  north  of  Gridley 
Hollow.  He  was  the  father  of  Nathan 
Smith,  now  of  Cortland,  and  grandfather  of 
Abram  P.  Smith,  the  prominent  attorney 
and   for   several    years    county  judge,  now 


Town  of  Virgil. 


325 


living  in  Cortland  village.  Thoma.s  Ryan 
settled  in  earl)-  times  on  the  hill  near  Mr. 
Smith's ;  also  Christopher  Rorabacher, 
Samuel  Woodward  and  John  Woodward, 
and  Stephen  Benton,  who  reared  a  family 
whose  names  arc  conspicuous  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  town. 

But  we  cannot  trace  the  settlers  of  the 
town  farther  in  this  .  connection ;  many 
others  will  appear  farther  on,  and  many 
who  are  doubtless  worthy  of  recognition, 
as  having  taken  honorable  part  in  the  set- 
tlement, clearing  and  general  advancement 
of  the  communities  where  their  li\'es  were 
spent,  may  necessarih-  be  left  to  future  pub- 
lications. 

Quoting  from  Mr.  Bouton's  pamphlet  we 
learn  that  "  the  early  inhabitants  did  not 
settle  on  prairie,  where  they  could  raise 
their  provisions  the  first  year,  but  the  heavy 
forest  must  be  cleared  awa\  ,  which  was  a 
work  of  time,  before  the  laborer  could  be 
fed  from  the  soil  he  cultivated ;  and  must 
wait  a  \-ear  or  two  more  before  he  had  grass 
for  his  cows,  and  the}'  must  run  in  the 
woods,  and  much  time  be  spent  in  finding 
them  and  bringing  them  home.  And  fre- 
quently they  could  not  be  found,  especially 
if  the  search  were  commenced  late,  when 
they  would  have  lain  down  and  the  tinkling 
of  the  bell  could  no  more  be  heard.  The 
milk  was  also  of  inferior  quality,  owing  to 
the  leeks  and  other  weeds  upon  which  they 
fed.  Money  was  very  scarce  through  the 
country,  and  particularl)-  in  the  new  parts 
where  there  was  little  to  be  sold  and  much 
to  be  bought.  It  would  be  impossible  to 
express  to  the  understanding  of  this,  or  any 
audience  of  modern  times,  the  difficulties 
experienced  on  this  account. 

"  It  was  impossible  to  collect  enough  in 
the  year  to  pay  the  taxes.  This  difficulty 
was  ver)-  much  owing,  so  far  as  the  older 
parts  were  concerned,  to  the  embargo  which 
was  then  in  force,  restricting  commerce  and 


causing  a  stagnation  in  all  departments  of 
business,  and  though  the  newly  settled  parts 
had  not  much  to  sell,  they  felt  severely  the 
effect  of  this  state  of  things.  Another  diffi- 
culty existing  in  this  town  particularly,  was 
that  land  was  not  owned  by  the  inhabitants, 
but  must  be  paid  for  from  the  products  of 
the  same  to  add  to  the  capital  of  rich  men 
living  at  a  distance. 

"  Another  embarrassment  was  one  to 
which  allusion  was  made  in  the  description 
of  the  natural  features  of  the  town,  viz.  : 
The  want  of  sufficient  water  power  to  pro- 
pel mills  and  machinery,  thus  taking  busi- 
ness away,  and  while  other  places  were  ben- 
efited, this  town  was  the  loser.  There  was, 
however,  a  commendable  degree  of  enter- 
prise among  the  people,  and  the  crops  were 
for  a  number  of  years  abundant,  compared 
with  the  area  of  ground  cultivated. 

"  Their  hardships  were  also  very  much 
ameliorated  by  common  participation  and 
mutual  sympathy.  Hospitality  prevailed 
and  mutual  dependence  promoted  harmony 
and  fellow  feeling.  Thej-  met,  exchanged 
accounts  of  their  trials,  often  with  much 
humor  and  pleasantrj-,  and  cheered  each 
other  on.  If  a  log  cabin  was  to  be  raised 
for  some  new-comer  they  were  all  on  the 
spot  with  strong  arms  and  a  hearty  good 
will." 

When  first  settled.  Homer,  Solon,  Cincin- 
natus  and  Virgil  were  in  one  town  called 
Homer.  At  the  town  meeting  in  1797  it 
was  resolved  that  the  township  of  Virgil 
shall  constitute  one  highway  district. 

In  1798  Virgil  was  represented  and  James 
Knapp  was  chosen  assessor,  commissioner 
of  highways  and  overseer  of  highways,  and 
returned  eight  names  to  be  taxed  for  high- 
wa)'  work.  The  poll  tax  was  three  days, 
and  the  number  of  days  assessed  was  fifty- 
eight  and  one-half  At  the  town  meeting 
in  1799.  held  at  the  house  of  Moses  Hop- 
kins, Virgil  was  honored  with  the  office  of 


326 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


supervisor  in  the  person  of  James  Knapp  ; 
Wait  Hall  was  chosen  assessor ;  John  E. 
Roe,  overseer  of  the  poor  ;  Wait  Ball,  com- 
missioner of  highways,  and  Dana  Miles, 
overseer  of  highways,  and  returned  twenty- 
three  names  to  be  taxed. 

Thus  this  town  continued  with  Homer 
through  the  year  1804,  always  having  its 
proper  proj^ortion  of  office  and  privilege. 

The  township  of  Virgil  having  been  set 
off  from  Homer  into  a  separate  town,  the 
inhabitants  assembled  in  town  meeting,  at 
the  house  of  James  Knapp,  on  the  2d  day 
of  April,  1805,  and  proceeded  to  choose 
John  I.  Gee,  moderator ;  Gideon  Messen- 
ger, town  clerk ;  Moses  Rice,  supervisor ; 
Abner  Bruce,  John  Gee  nnd  Joseph  Chap- 
lin, assessors ;  John  Glenny,  George  Wig- 
ant  and  John  I.  Gee,  commissioners  of  high- 
ways ;  Jonathan  Edwards  and  Peter  Pow- 
ers, poormasters,  and  Shubel  S.  Marsh,  con- 
stable and  collector.  Pathmasters,  John 
Gee,  Isaac  Elwell,  Samuel  Carson,  Jona- 
than Edwards,  Comfort  Bruce,  Alexander 
McNitt,  Obadiah  Glazier,  James  Wright, 
Peter  Powers,  Joseph  Chaplin,  Elias  Thomp- 
son, Peter  Gray,  Seth  Jennings.  Moses 
Olmstead  and  Abial  Brown,  fence  viewers. 

Schools. —  The  inhabitants  of  Virgil  were 
early  awake  to  the  importance  of  education, 
and  were  resolved  that  their  children  should 
have  all  the  means  in  their  power  to  pro- 
vide for  its  acquisition.  Accordingly,  in 
1 799,  the  few  that  were  here  came  together 
and  built  a  school-house  a  short  distance 
easterly  from  the  West  Meeting-house.  The 
first  teacher  was  Charles  Joyce,  who  taught 
two  or  three  weeks.  Ne.xt  Rebecca  Ball, 
daughter  of  Wait  Ball,  taught  two  summers. 
After  her,  Abigail,  sister  of  Rebecca,  was 
employed  one  term.  The  first  school  near 
the  village  was  taught  by  Mrs.  L.  Edwards 
in  her  own  house.  Afterwards  Moses  Rice 
taught  in  what  was  known  as  the  Reming- 
ton house  in  the  winter  of  1804-5. 


The  Legislature  had  appropriated  one  lot 
in  this  town  to  the  support  of  the  Gospel 
and  schools,  and  when  the  school  law  took 
effect  in  181 3,  the  rent  was  added  to  the 
funds  derived  from  the  State,  and  has  since 
been  available  for  this  purpose.  In  that 
year  William  Powers,  Oliver  Ball  and  Gid- 
eon Messenger,  school  commissioners,  di- 
vided the  town  into  seven  school  districts. 

The  first  grammar  school  was  taught  in 
1819  by  Henry  J.  Hall,  in  the  east  part  of 
the  double  log  house  of  John  I.  Gee,  lo- 
cated where  T.  L.  Lincoln,  afterward  lived. 
This  was  the  first  effort  of  s}-stematic  in- 
struction in  that  science  in  the  town.  It 
continued  four  weeks  with  thirteen  scholars. 
Their  names  were  L.  Beebe  Ball,  Stephen  S. 
Powers,  James  Ball,  John  M.  Roe,  John  Har- 
ris, Wm.  L.  Gee,  Nathan  Bouton,  Rufus  and 
Harriet  Edwards,  Lemira  Byram,  Marietta 
Chaplin  and  Sally  and  Lucy  Messenger. 

From  1837  to  1845,  a  school  called  the 
"  Literary  Institute  "  was  taught  one-half 
of  each  year  by  N.  Bouton  and  William  E. 
Gee,  which  was  in  a  good  degree  success- 
ful. It  was  afterwards  continued  about  two 
years  by  A.  F.  Frye.  Other  select  schools 
have  been  taught  since  at  different  times. 
There  was  also  a  select  school  taught  by 
Jesse  Storrs  in  the  part  now  Lapeer,  which 
continued  several  terms. 

There  was  a  great  scarcity  of  reading 
matter  in  the  early  settlement.  Newspapers 
were  scarce  and  dear  ;  the  usual  price  $2 
per  annum,  with  less  than  half  the  reading 
matter  we  now  have,  at  double  the  price. 
To  remedy  this  defect,  in  part,  the  inhabi- 
tants set  up  a  library  called  the  "  Virgil 
Library,"  with  thirty  shares  of  one  dollar 
each,  and  a  very  good  selection  of  books 
was  procured  in  about  1807.  Another  li- 
brary was  established  about  18 14,  with  a 
capital  of  $200,  called  the  "  Virgil  Union 
Library."  Libraries  were  subsequently  es- 
tablished in  each  school  district.  , 


Town  of  Virgil. 


327 


The  first  Sabbath- school  was  instituted 
in  1822,  in  connection  with  the  Congrega- 
tional Church.  Since  that  time  the  Sab- 
bath-schools have  been  conducted  in  the 
different  churches  and  neighborhoods  with 
various  degrees  of  success. 

Churches.  —  The  first  religious  meetings 
were  begun  in  the  town  in  1802.  Prayers 
were  offered  by  I'rince  Freeman,  of  Virgil, 
and  James  Wood,  of  Dryden.  Moses  Rice 
conducted  the  singing,  and  sermons  were 
read  by  James  Glenny.  Since  that  early 
date  religious  meetings  have  been  held  every 
Sabbath,  except  in  case  of  some  remarkable 
emergency.  Before  that  date  there  had 
been  missionaries  in  the  town,  in  the  per- 
sons of  Revs.  Williston,  Phelps  and  John- 
son, of  the  Congregational  faith,  and  Root, 
Whipple  and  Cole,  Baptists.  Methodist 
preachers  also  labored  here  at  intervals  at  an 
early  day,  and  some  meetings  were  held  by 
the  Universalists,  which  were  addressed  by 
Rev.  Archelaus  Green,  a  resident  of  the 
town. 

The  first  church  society  formed  was  the 
Congregational,  on  the  28th  of  February, 
1805,  with  eight  members,  under  the  charge 
of  Rev.  Seth  Williston.  Of  this  church  Mr. 
Bouton  writes  in  his  reminiscences  :  — 

"  The  church  was  without  stated  preach- 
ing several  years.  The)-  felt  se\'erely  their 
destitute  condition,  which  will  be  seen  by 
the  following  vote  passed  December  3d, 
1806:  'That  the  church  will  see  to  the  sat- 
isfying of  Rev.  Dr.  Darrow  for  two  Sab- 
baths' service  a  year,  at  five  dollars  a  Sab- 
bath, to  attend  on  sacramental  occasions, 
and  also  to  take  the  oversight  of  the  church 
for  the  present.'  The  church  struggled  on 
through  various  difficulties,  with  preaching 
part  of  the  time,  meeting  in  various  places 
where  they  could,  after  the  '  Center  School 
House  '  was  burnt,  in  1818,  till  this  house 
could  be  used  for  that  purpose.  This  house 
was  put  up  in  1821,  but  it  was  two  or  three 


years  before  it  was  inclosed  and  made  com- 
fortable, and  the  present  seats  were  not 
built  till  1 83 1.  Its  location,  near  the  bury- 
ing-ground,  was  found  inconvenient,  and 
removed  to  this  place  in  1834.  About  two 
hundred  and  seventy  persons  have  been 
added  to  the  church,  and  it  now  embraces 
about  seventy  resident  members.  The  min- 
isters who  have  preached  statedly  to  the 
church  are  Rev.  Messrs.  Wallace,  Hitch- 
cock, Dunning,  Robertson,  Bliss,  Bradford, 
Chaffee,  Headley,  Walcot,  Thacher,  Bron- 
son,  Bates,  Otis,  Kinnie,  Burgess,  Marshall, 
Humphreys,  Kneiskcrn,  Dunning  and  Of- 
fen." 

A  Baptist  church  was  organized  in  i  807, 
and  was  fully  organized  in  18 13.  Meetings 
were  held  in  private  houses,  with  preaching 
by  Elder  Bennett,  of  Homer,  Powers,  Rob- 
inson and  others,  until  about  the  year  1826, 
when  the  church  organization  was  dis- 
banded. In  June,  1830,  it  was  reorganized 
and  the  following  year  the  church  building 
was  erected.  It  has  been  repaired  and  im- 
proved at  different  times  since  then.  Fol- 
lowing is  a  list  of  the  pastors  as  nearly  as 
we  have  been  able  to  obtain  them  :  W'illiam 

Powers,    David    Robinson,  Andrews, 

Clark,    Daniel    Robinson,  1833:   Na- 


than Peck,  1834;  Mr.  Ainsworth,  1836; 
Albert  Cole,  1838;  Stephen  Jones,  1840; 
Mr.  Lyons,  1847;  C.  D.  De  Witt,  1849; 
Mr.   Nichols,  1854;   Sidney  Wilder,    1855; 

George  Crosson,    1858;  Bctts,    1874; 

Phillips,  S.  H.  Haskell,  J.  W.  Stark- 
weather, S.  W.  Schoonover,  S.  P.  Way. 

The  first  Methodist  religious  services  in 
the  town  were  held  at  the  house  of  Robert 
Keech,  on  the  State  road,  on  the  premises 
now  occupied  by  Isaac  Bloomer,  in  the  year 
1 807  or  1 808.  The  services  were  conducted 
by  Rev.  Geo.  W.  Densmore.  There  were 
but  two  professors  of  religion  present  —  the 
wife  of  Robert  Keech  and  another,  name 
not  known.      Preaching  was  continued  from 


328 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


time  to  time  in  private  houses  till  about  the 
year  1818,  when  Israel  Reynolds,  a  local 
preacher,  fornied  a  class  on  Snider  hill. 
.  This  was  continued  until  1859,  when  the 
class  was  removed  to  Gridley  Hollow  and 
a  church  society  organized.  The  house  of 
worship,  which  had  been  built  as  a  union 
church  by  the  Universalists  and  others,  was 
purchased  and  the  society  has  been  kept  up 
since,  as  a  part  of  the  Virgil  charge.  In 
1830  and  1 83 1  the  Rev.  Wm.  C.  Mason 
was  apjxiinted  to  the  X'irgil  charge,  and 
under  his  ministrations  a  vigorous  revival 
was  experienced  and  a  strong  society  was 
built  up.  They  erected  the  house  of  wor- 
ship in  1 83 1,  which  was  used  for  several 
years,  when  it  was  removed  and  the  pres- 
ent handsome  structure  erected.  The  fol- 
lowing preachers  have  served  the  charge ; 
the  time  and  order  of  some  of  the  earlier 
terms  cannot  now  be  ascertained,  but  where 
it  is  possible  the  dates  of  appointment   are 

given:  W.  Mason,  1829;  Wood,  1S32; 

Smith  ;  Densmore  ;  S.  Minier  ;  Benham  ; 
Wadsworth  ;  W.  Woodbury;  E.  North; 
T.  Wire ;  W.  Fo.x  ;  W.  Wyatt ;  L.  Tryon  ; 
I.  Wilcox;  J.  Jameson;  S.  Brown,  1843; 
S.  Minier,  1844;  C.  W.  Harris,  1845;  ^■ 
Worthing  and  A.  Hamilton,  1847  !  J-  Hew- 
itt, 1848;  O.  L.  Torrey,  1850;  H.  Ercan- 
brack,  1852;  Z.  Barnes,  1853;  Abijah 
Brown,  1855  ;  LB.  Hyde,  1857;  K-  House, 
1858;  G.  Howland,  i860;  A.  F.  Brown, 
1863  ;  O.  N.  Hinman,  1866;  O.  L.  Torrey, 
1868;  W.  Bunnell,  1869;  S.  Luce,  1870; 
J.  Steele,  1873;  J.  Gutsell,  1876;  A.  H. 
Shurtleff,  1879;  and  the  present  pastor, 
H.  W.  Williams. 

In  the  year  1822  a  Free-will  Baptist 
society  was  organized  in  the  west  part  of 
the  town,  on  one  of  the  four  corners  near 
what  was  then  known  as  "  Ball's  School- 
House."  Meetings  were  held  in  the  school- 
house  until  the  year  1838,  when  the  pres- 
ent   house   of  worship   was   erected.     This 


church  has,  at  some  periods  of  its  existence, 
been  vigorous  and  well  supported,  but  in 
late  years  has  somewhat  declined.  There 
is  no  regular  pastor  in  charge  at  the  pres- 
ent time. 

About  the  j-ear  1834,  according  to  Mr. 
Bouton,  "  the  Universalists  formed  a  socie- 
ty, which  increased  to  about  thirty  members, 
and  continued  their  organization  and  meet- 
ings several  years.  Among  the  preachers 
who  labored  statedl)'  with  them  were  Revs. 
Brown,  Sanderson,  Doolittle,  Brown,  Fos- 
ter and  Bullard." 

Roads. — The  first  road  passing  through 
the  town,  was  the  "  State  road."  A  road 
was  slightl}-  cut  through  from  near  the  \'il- 
lage,  in  the  direction  of  the  head  of  the  lake, 
called  the  "  Bridle  road."  The  next  was 
one  laid  from  the  State  road,  commencing 
about  two  miles  east  of  Virgil  Corners, 
where  Nathan  Spencer  lives,  and  taking  a 
northeasterly  direction  till  it  intersected 
the  road  from  Port  Watson  to  Solon,  laid 
Jul)-  2d,  1798.  The  ne.xt  from  the  State 
road  on  lot  No.  24,  southwesterly  to  near 
where  the  "West  Meeting-house"  now  is 
and  turned  and  went  over  the  hill  to  the  State 
road  again.  Soon  after  a  road  was  laid 
from  the  State  road  west  of  Virgil  Corners, 
and  continued  on  to  Homer.  In  1801  this 
road  was  altered  and  run  nearly  on  its 
present  line.  About  the  same  time  a  road 
was  laid  from  where  the  \'illage  now  is 
southerly  over  Owego  Hill,  and  the  road 
leading  from  Frank's  Corners  nearly  as  it 
now  runs,  intersecting  the  road  leading  to 
the  Gee  neighborhood  at  the  West  Meet- 
ing-house, was  laid  soon  afterwards.  The 
road  from  Cortlandville  to  Virgil,  where  it 
now  is,  was  laid  in  181 6,  and  that  over 
Luce  Hill  nearh'  at  the  same  time.  The 
State  road  from  Chaplin's  this  way  was 
rather  rugged,  and  it  early  occurred  to  the 
inhabitants  that  much  of  the  hill  might  be 
saved  by  a  road  that  might  be  constructed 


Town  of  Virgil. 


329 


from  the  State  road,  passing  down  the 
stream  to  Vanderburg's  mill,  continuing  on 
past  the  saw- mill  afterwards  owned  by 
Kirk,  intersecting  the  State  road  near  the 
house  of  Joseph  Chaplin.  This  road  was 
laid  in  18 18  through  to  the  grist-mill. 
This  road  required  much  labor  and  expense 
to  make  it  passable.  It  was,  however,  cut 
and  worked  through,  so  that  it  was  traveled 
in  1833,  and  remains  a  lasting  monument 
to  the  energy  and  perseverance  of  Reuben 
Gridley,  who  was  principally  instrumental 
in  its  construction,  though  aided  very  much 
b)'  funds  appropriated  by  the  town. 

Post-Offices.  —  Previous  to  1808  there 
was  no  post-office  in  town,  and  all  intelli- 
gence was  transmitted  by  means  of  distant 
offices,  or  sent  by  inidviduals  who  might  be 
going  in  the  direction  desired,  which  was 
attended  with  much  delay  and  uncertainty. 
In  that  year  a  post-office  was  established, 
and  Zophar  Moore  appointed  postmaster, 
and  the  mail  carried  for  some  time  b}'  a 
man  traveling  on  foot;  afterwards  it  was 
carried  on  horseback  for  several  }'ears. 
The  postmasters  at  Virgil  Corners,  as  far  as 
we  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  ha\e  been 
Zophar  Moore,  since  whose  administration 
and  down  to  1 840,  w^e  have  no  records. 
In  1840  N.  Chamberlain  was  in  the  office. 
A.  E.  Heberd  was  the  next  incumbent  and 
was  followed  by  Wm.  Snyder.  W'illard 
Chatterton  then  took  the  office:  then  Mr. 
Heberd  again,  to  be  followed  by  Edwin 
Slafter.  Patterson  &  Graves  next  had 
charge  of  the  office  and  gave  it  up  to  Sam- 
uel Slafter.  He  was  succeeded  by  N.  R. 
Locke,  and  he  bj^  F..  Winslow  in  1865. 
Mr.  Winslow  has  acceptably  filled  the  of- 
fice ever  since. 

An  office  was  establisiied  in  the  south- 
west part  of  the  town,  in  1825  or  '26,  first 
named  Worthington,  afterwards  changed  to 
Harford,  and  Theodore  E.  Hart  was  ap- 
pointed   postmaster.      An    office    was    also 


located  in  the  east  part,  called  East  Virgil, 
in  1845,  ^''"J  William  Gray  appointed  post- 
master. John  Lewis  is  the  present  post- 
master there. 

Militar}-.  —  Among  the  early  settlers  a 
large  portion  were  soldiers  of  the  French 
and  Revolutionary  Wars.  Derosel  Gee, 
Thomas  Nichols  and  John  Smith  were  en-  ' 
gaged  in  the  French  War,  so  called,  of 
1754-63.  The  following  are  the  names  of 
the  Revolutionary  soldiers  who  ha\e  lived 
in  the  town:  Joseph  Bailey,  John  Gee, 
Seth  Larabee,  John  AI.  Frank,  Dana  Miles, 
James  Knapp,  James  Wright,  Nicholas 
Brown,  Robert  Ryan,  John  Smith,  James 
Sherwood,  Enoch  Smith,  John  Snider, 
Thomas  Russell,  Seth  Bouton,  George  Tot- 
man,  Elias  Thompson,  Epaphras  Shelden, 
Silas  Lincoln,  Jason  Crawford,  David  Rob- 
inson, Altamont  Donaldson,  Abner  Baker, 
Isaac  Tillotson,  Moses  Ste\'ens,  George 
Barlow,  Simeon  Leroy,  Jeremiah  Chase, 
John  Stanbro,  Cornelius  Lament,  Elisha 
Brewer,  Thomas  Kingsbury,  Adam  King- 
man, Moses  Rice,  David  Darling,  Stephen 
Kell)',  Oliver  Hopkins,  \\'illiam  Parker, 
David  Crowcll,  Robert  Smith,  Nathan 
Smith,  Henry  Turck,  Nathan  Walker,  Tim- 
othy Robertson,  Samuel  Sole,  Asa  Parker, 
Thomas  Nichols,  Lemuel  Barnes,  Joel  Mor- 
ten, John  Green,  Benjamin  Glazier,  Jon- 
athan Skeel. 

Of  these  Jeremiah  Chase,  Simeon  Leroy, 
George  Totman,  Joel  Morten,  John  Gee, 
Elisha  Brewer,  Cornelius  Lamont,  John 
Stanbro,  Enoch  Smith,  Thomas  Kingsbury, 
and  Stephen  Kelly,  were  living  in  town  in 
1840. 

The  scenes  of  the  war  through  which 
they  had  recently  passed  were  fresh  in  their 
minds  ;  and  it  is  not  strange  that  much  of 
a  military  spirit  should  exist  among  the 
people.  Consequently  the  call  for  the  per- 
formance of  military  duty  was  soon  made, 
and  the  call  was  responded  to  by  five  men. 


330 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  whom  Gideon  Messenger  was  one,  going 
to  Homer  to  train  under  Captain  Moses 
Hopldns.  Captain  I  lopkins  liad  previously 
held  lower  rank,  but  had  exerted  himself  to 
get  up  a  company  of  forty-five,  by  enlisting 
old  men  and  boys  to  obviate  the  necessity 
of  going  to  Marcellus  to  attend  company 
drills.  Soon  the  soldiers  of  Virgil  were 
permitted  to  train  in  town,  and  the  first 
meeting  for  that  purpose  was  held  at  the 
house  of  James  Knapp,  where  M.  H.  My- 
nard  afterward  lived,  under  the  command 
of  Captain  John  Ellis,  afterwards  Judge 
Ellis,  of  Dryden.  The  captains  after  him 
were  successively  Abial  Brown,  James 
Wright,  Geo.  Wigant  and  Joseph  Chaplin. 
The  company  was  then  divided,  and  Wil- 
liam Lincoln  commanded  the  cast  company, 
and  Enoch  Allen  the  west.  This  was  the 
condition  of  the  military  interest  at  the 
commencement  of  the  war  of  1812—15. 
Levies  of  troops  were  made  and  the  com- 
panies in  this  town  were  called  on  for  five 
or  six  men.  In  the  west  company  a  suffi- 
cient number  enlisted  ;  their  names  were 
John  Russell,  Moses  Woolfeen,  and  Henry 
Green.  The  east  company  drafted  for 
three,  and  John  E.  Roe,  Daniel  Price  and 
Ira  Lincoln  were  drawn.  John  E.  Roe 
procured  a  substitute.  Daniel  Price  went 
and  served  three  months,  and  Ira  Lincoln 
was  excused  on  account  of  ill  health.  At 
another  muster  David  Snider  was  drawn 
and  went,  serving  three  montlis,  the  usual 
time  for  militia.  There  have  also  been  li\-- 
ing  in  the  town  several  others  who  were 
soldiers  in  that  war.  Among  these  were 
Joel  Hancock,  Edmund  H.  Robinson,  Jacob 
Bronson,  Barnabas  Baker,  Zachariah  Low, 
John  D.  Barnes,  Thomas  Foster,  Ezekiel 
Miller,  Reuben  Gridley,  Joseph  Miller,  Jo- 
seph Terwilliger  and  Edward  Griswold. 
There  was  a  company  of  aged  men  and  in- 
valids organized  in  1813,  after  the  example 
set  in  the  time  of  the   Revolution.      Of  this 


company   Simeon    West  was  captain,  John 

S.  Squires  lieutenant,  and  William  Powers 
ensign. 

The  town  was  afterwards  divided  into 
four  companies,  out  of  which  there  has  also 
been  for  most  of  the  time  an  independent 
company.  A  company  of  riflemen  was 
raised  in  about  1813,  of  which  Joseph  Rey- 
nolds was  the  first  captain.  This  company 
was  afterwards  disbanded.  A  company  of 
artillery  was  organized  in  1828—29,  of 
which  Michael  Frank  was  the  first  captain. 
It  continued  prosperous  for  several  years, 
but  was  ultimately  disbanded.  Afterwards 
a  company  of  infantry  was  raised,  and  John 
W.  Morse  was  the  first  captain  in  uniform. 
This  company  was  discontinued  when  mili- 
tary duty  ceased  to  be  called  for. 

Mills,  Machinery,  etc. —  The  first  saw- 
mill was  built  by  Daniel  Edwards,  in  1801, 
nearly  on  the  ground  where  Murdock's  tan- 
nery was  located.  The  first  grist-mill  was 
built  near  where  the  Tyler  mill  stood,  by 
Peter  Vanderhn  and  Nathaniel  Knapp,  in 
1805.  The  mill  on  this  site  was  burned 
some  years  ago.  Hutchings's  grist-mill,  in 
the  edge  of  Dryden,  was  built  in  1809  — 
mentioned  because  this  town  was  much  in- 
terested in  it.  Previous  to  the  building  of 
mills  in  Homer  and  in  this  town,  scv-eral  in- 
dividuals practiced  going  to  Ludlow's  and 
carrying  their  grist  upon  their  backs. 
Among  these  were  Joseph  Bailey  and  Enos 
Bouton.  After  a  few  years,  and  when  these 
mills  were  built,  persons  could  go  with  a 
horse,  get  grinding  done  and  return  the 
same  day ;  and  the  yellow  horse  of  Mr. 
Luce  has  been  known  to  pace  off  the  hill 
six  times  in  a  week,  for  the  family  and 
neighbors. 

About  1 8 14  or  '15  Abner  Bruce  built  a 
grist-mill  south  of  Virgil  Corners  on  the  site 
now  occupied  bj-  P.  West's  mill.  It  was 
burnt  down  in  1820,  and  rebuilt  in  a  year 
or  two.      In    1827  it  was  bought  by  Josiah 


Town  of  Virgil. 


331 


Byram,  and  occupied  by  him  for  carding 
and  cloth  dressing  till  his  death,  in  1842. 
It  was  carried  on  subsequently  by  S.  M. 
Byram,  until  1875,  when  Mr.  West  took  it. 
It  has  been  fitted  up  at  considerable  ex- 
pense, and  is  doing  a  good  business. 

A  grist-mill  was  built  at  East  Virgil  in 
1 8 19,  by  a  Mr.  Vanderburg,  which  has 
done  considerable  business,  and  is  now  op- 
erated by  E.  D.  Angell.  Harvey  Jennings 
also  built  a  grist-mill  in  the  southeast  part, 
in  1833,  which  did  some  business  till  it  was 
burnt  in  1842. 

The  first  wool  carding  by  machinery  was 
done  by  C.  Baker,  at  his  mill  (afterward 
Tyler's),  in  about  1814.  In  1819  Henry 
Burgess  commenced  wool  carding  and  cloth 
dressing  near  the  same  place,  taking  water 
from  the  same  dam.  His  building  was 
afterwards  removed  to  near  the  place  after- 
ward occupied  for  the  same  purpose  by  H. 
P.  Jones. 

Early  Births,  Marriages  and  Deaths  — 
The  first  child  born  in  town  was  John,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Chaplin,  who  was  drowned 
in  the  spring  of  1798,  aged  two  years.  The 
first  who  lived  to  mature  age  was  John 
Frank,  in  autumn,  1797.  Next  to  him  was 
James  Gee,  in  March,  1798  ;  Betsey  N.  Roe 
and  B.  F.  Chaplin,  in  February,  1799,  and 
Hiram  Ball  and  Hiram  Bouton,  in  the  same 
year. 

The  first  marriage,  as  nearly  as  we  can 
ascertain,  was  solemnized  between  Ruluff 
Whitney,  of  Dryden,  and  Susan,  daughter 
of  John  Glenny,  of  this  town,  as  earlj-  as 
1800.  In  the  autumn  of  1801  Truman 
Terry  was  married  to  Rebecca,  daughter  of 
Wait  Bali. 

The  first  death  was  that  of  a  stranger 
passing  through,  who  undertook  to  go  from 
Ebenezer  Brown's,  in  Milton  (now  Lans- 
ing), to  Chaplin's,  at  the  river.  He  became 
fatigued,  lost  his  way,  lay  down  with  his 
pack  under  his  head  and    died.     This   was 


in  April,  1798,  and  only  four  or  five  per- 
sons could  be  got  together.  They  placed 
some  timbers  about  him,  for  a  protection 
from  wild  beasts,  and  left  him.  One  of 
their  number  went  to  Homer  to  make  the 
case  known  to  Solomon  Hubbard,  -esq.,  and 
ask  direction.  His  advice  was,  that,  as 
there  was  no  coroner  nearer  than  Pompey, 
the  few  inhabitants  should  get  together  and 
make  such  e.xamination  as  they  were  able, 
and  proceed  accordingly.  The  next  day 
they  assembled  and  had  as  much  of  an  ex- 
amination as  was  practicable  in  the  circum- 
stances concerning  the  cause  of  his  decease, 
and  it  was  agreed  as  before  stated.  They 
took  some  boards  brought  into  town  by 
John  E.  Roe,  for  the  purpose  of  making  a 
table,  and  fastening  them  together  in  the 
form  of  a  bo.x,  placed  him  in  it  and  buried 
him  in  the  grave  which  they  had  dug;  his 
bones  lie  mouldering  somewhere  between 
the  village  and  Mr.  Sager's,  near  the  hill. 
His  son  came  subsequently,  said  his  father's 
name  was  Charles  Huflrnan,  and  took  some 
shoemaker's  tools  found  with  him  at  his 
death.  The  first  death  of  an  adult  resident 
was  that  of  Mary,  wife  of  Derosel  Gee,  in 
March,  1802. 

Previous  to  1806,  when  the  public  bury- 
ing ground  was  deeded  to  the  town  by 
George  Wigant,  persons  were  buried  on  the 
premises  where  they  died.  The  first  grave- 
stone was  erected  to  the  memory  of  James 
Roe,  esq.,  in  about  1823.  It  was  about 
1808  that  the  public  ground  was  opened. 
It  turned  out  that  its  locality  was  not  gen- 
erally satisfactory,  and  within  a  few  j'ears 
a  place  was  secured  for  a  cemetery,  on  lands 
formerly  owned  by  Hon.  J.  Reynolds,  and 
where  he  had  buried  his  dead.  A  cemetery 
association,  or  organization,  was  formed 
according  to  the  law  in  such  case  made  and 
provided.  Additions  have  been  made  since 
the  first  purchase,  and  it  now  consists  of 
about  six  acres. 


332 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


The  cemetery  referred  to  is  not  in  a  ro- 
mantic place,  such  as  is  frequent!}-  chosen 
for  tlie  final  resting-place  of  the  dead, 
though  in  portions  it  is  gently  undulating, 
easy  of  access  and  very  ne^it,  commodious 
and  respectable  in  appearance,  and  very 
creditable  to  the  piety,  intelligence  and  re- 
finement of  the  people  of  the  town  and  all 
interested  as  ha\'ing  relatives  here  entomb- 
ed. It  was  a  long  time  before  the  public 
mind  became  thoroughly  united  on  this 
locality,  during  which  other  and  smaller 
grounds  were,  of  necessity,  being  filled  up. 
In  later  years  families  have  been  collect- 
ing the  remains  of  friends  from  those  scat- 
tered localities  where  they  had  been  in- 
terred, and  depositing  them  together  in  a 
family  plat  here  procured  for  that  purpose. 

Temperance  Societies.  —  The  first  distil- 
lery was  erected  in  1803  or  1804  by  James 
Wright.  Intemperance  prevailed,  as  in 
other  places,  till  in  1829  si.\  distilleries  were 
in  operation.  The  moral  and  philanthropic 
in  the  community  became  alarmed  and  in- 
quired with  solicitude  what  could  be  done 
to  stay  its  ravages.  Temperance  societies 
began  to  be  formed  in  difterent  parts,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  this  place,  on  consulta- 
tion, agreed  to  meet  and  form  a  temperance 
society.  The  fourth  of  July,  1829,  was 
chosen  as  the  time  to  organize  such  society, 
and  Michael  Frank  to  give  the  address,  at 
the  close  of  which  a  society  was  formed  with 
about  twent\'  members.  Beebe  L.  Ball 
was  the  first  president  of  that  society,  and 
while  he  lived  was  its  firm,  judicious  and 
ardent  supporter.  In  1831  a  society  was 
instituted  in  that  part  now  Harford ;  and 
one  on  Luce  hill,  and  another  on  Snider 
hill,  about  the  same  time. 

Agricultural  Matters. —  Agriculture  has 
engaged  the -attention  of  most  of  the  people 
of  Virgil.  They  have  been  employed  in 
clearing  away  the  forest  and  cultivating  the 
earth,    which    has    "cncralh-    vielded    good 


return.  The  implements  used  were  those 
incident  to  the  time.  The  plows  were  of 
the  common  rude  kind  till  the  year  181  7, 
when  the  first  cast-iron  plow  W'as  brought 
in  ^nd  used  by  Mr.  Ball.  Some  of  the 
first  settlers,  of  whom  John  M.  Frank  was 
one,  cleaned  their  grain  by  throwing  it 
across  the  barn-floor  with  a  small  scoop- 
shovel,  and  afterwards  shaking  it  up  in  a 
hand  fan  made  of  a  hollow  log,  when  the 
refuse  parts  were  brushed  off  with  a  quill. 
Afterwards  a  willow  fan  and  riddle  were 
used.  It  was  very  important  that  the  grain 
should  be  cleaned,  as  there  were  no  means 
of  taking  out  dust  at  the  mills  as  there  are 
now.  I*"anning-mills  soon  came  to  be  used; 
the  first,  however,  that  is  recollected  was 
about  the  year  1 809.  Considerable  grain 
of  the  several  kinds  has  been  raised  in  the 
town,  and  for  some  years  past  much  atten- 
tion has  been  given  to  the  dairy,  which,  in 
1 85 1,  brought  in  a  return  of  $25,000. 
Some  of  the  people  in  an  early  da}'  directed 
their  attention  to  the  cultivation  of  fruit, 
especially  apples.  Very  soon  after  his  first 
settlement  Joseph  Chaplin  sowed  the  seeds 
for  a  nurser}-  of  natural  fruit,  and  Enos 
Bouton  did  the  same  soon  after,  and  most 
of  the  oldest  orchards  are  from  these  nurs- 
eries. The  first  nursery  of  grafted  fruit 
was  put  out  by  Nathaniel  Bouton,  about 
1808,  and  01i\'er  Ball  did  the  same  soon 
after. 

The  first  barrel  of  cider  made  in  town  was 
b}-  Enos  Bouton,  in  1818  or  '[9.  The  ap- 
ples were  bruised  b}'  a  pestle  hung  to  a 
spring  sweep  like  that  referred  to  in  pound- 
ing corn.  The  pomace  was  pressed  by  a 
lever  placed  under  a  log,  passing  over  the 
cheese,  with  a  weight  at  the  other  end.  It 
was  sold  for  four  dollars. 

The  history  of  the  Virgil  Agricultiu-al 
Societ}'  is  gi\'en  as  follows  in  the  pamphlet 
of  Nathan  Bouton,  already  so  freely  drawn 
upon:    "  In  the  count}'  of  Cortl;ind  .m    ag- 


Town  of  Virgil 


333 


ricultural  society  was  early  formed,  and  has 
continued  witli  \'aried  success  to  the  pres- 
ent time.  Some  individuals  from  this  town 
attended  its  fairs  with  profit,  but  the  dis- 
tance was  such  that  few  onl}-  could  be  in- 
duced to  attend.  It  occurred  ti>  a  few 
minds  that  it  might  be  practicable  to  hold 
a  fair  in  this  town,  thus  bringing  the  bene- 
fits of  the  institution  home  to  the  people 
here.  It  is  said,  I  believe,  with  truth,  that 
the  two  Lincohis,  Theron  and  Wait,  were 
the  originators  of  this  plan.  When  spoken 
of,  it  very  soon  awakened  a  great  and  pre- 
vailing interest  on  the  subject,  which  re- 
sulted in  the  formation  of  the  Virgil  Agri- 
cultural Society  early  in  1854.  The  mem- 
bers were  generally  inexperienced  in  the 
matter,  and  other  embarrassments  tended 
to  retard  operations,  but  the  adage  '  where 
there  is  a  will  there  is  a  way'  proved  true, 
and  though  it  was  a  season  of  drought  a  suc- 
cessful fair  was  held,  and  several  agricul- 
tural men  from  other  towns  came  to  wonder 
and  admire.  The  fair  was  a  success.  The 
unquenchable  ardor  and  indomitable  en- 
thusiasm of  a  large  portion  of  the  people 
prevailed,  and  creditable  fairs  were  held  till 
1863,  making  the  number  of  ten  annual 
fairs. 

"  After  two  or  three  years  it  was  thought 
best  to  procure  a  piece  of  grouml  where 
they  might  be  held  in  successive  years  with 
convenience  and  security.  A  very  suitable 
locality  was  secured  on  a  lease  of  )'ears,  to 
the  amount  of  four  acres,  in  a  square  form 
and  surrounded  with  a  substantial  fence  of 
boards  set  upright,  eight  to  ten  feet  high, 
and  a  building  of  unassuming  pretension 
reared  in  the  center  for  a  '  Floral  Hall.' 
At  first  it  was  impossible  to  procure  suffi- 
cient funds  from  membership  and  other 
sources  to  pay  the  premiums.  At  length 
it  was  proposed  that  we  proceed  to  make  a 
large  cheese  to  awaken  more  interest  in  at- 
tendance u]Jon  our  exhibitions.      A    cheese 


was  made  and  pressed  in  a  cider-mill,  in  a 
hoop  supported  by  the  tire  of  a  wagon - 
wheel,  and  afterwards  turned  by  a  machine 
of  ingenious  contrivance,  and  presented  at 
the  fair.  The  interest  to  see  the  cheese  was 
great,  and  the  premiums  of  that  fiir  were 
fully  paid. 

"After  the  cheese  became  mature  it  was 
divided  among  those  who  had  furnished  the 
curd,  and  the  aggregate  weight  was  more 
than  five  hundred  pounds.  The  example 
and  success  of  our  fairs  awakened  an  inter- 
est in  other  towns  around  ;  and  other  socie- 
ties were  formed  which  had  the  effect  to 
draw  from  the  interest  of  this,  and  owing 
to  this  fact,  and  also  to  that  of  a  constant 
current  of  opposition  raised  by  certain  in- 
dividuals who  kept  up  a  constant  clamor 
against  it,  charging  the  administration  with 
favoritism,  etc.  ;  and  it  having  had  the  de- 
sired effect  of  awakening  an  all-controlling 
and  widely  extended  spirit  of  vigilance  and 
enterprise  on  the  subject  of  agriculture  and 
kindred  employments,  it  was  thought  best, 
on  consultation,  to  disband  and  profit  by 
what  we  had  learned,  and  b\'  what  we  might 
yet  learn  from  other  fairs  held  near  us." 

Of  those  who  held  the  office  of  president, 
the  names  are  as  follows :  N.  Bouton,  S.  G. 
Jones,  Josephus  Gee,  C.  A.  Hotchkiss,  J. 
G.  T\'ler,  Martin  Luce  and  Wait  Lincoln. 

The  following  are  the  names  of  those  who 
held  successively  the  office  of  secretary  :  S. 
G.  Jones,  C.  B.  Gleason,  W.  A.  Wood,  Or- 
rin  C.  Dann  and  A.  Mahan,  all  of  whom 
performed  the  duties  of  their  offices  with 
ability  and  fidelity. 

"The  enterprise  of  the  people  of  Virgil," 
says  Mr.  Bouton,  "  was  put  to  a  very  sig- 
nificant test  when  the  proposition  for  the 
construction  of  the  Syracuse  &  Binghamton 
road  was  made.  Though  it  was  to  pass 
only  through  one  corner  of  the  tovvn,  the 
call  was  responded  to  by  the  payment  of 
$11,100  to  its  stock,  as  I  learned   upon   in- 


334 


lllSTDRV    OF   COUTLAND    COUNTY. 


quiry  of  the  lamented  David  Halo.  It  is 
needless  to  saj'  that  this  whole  anunint  was 
lost  by  those  who  paid  it.  This  sum  was 
paiil  with  the  sknuler  hope  of  ail\;uUai,'e  that 
could  be  entertained  under  the  circum- 
stances, while  other  towns  had  the  road 
passing  them  central!)-,  where  the  people 
paid  nothinix-  Within  a  few  years  those 
residing  in  llic  west  part  have  been  called 
on,  very  urgently,  to  aid  in  the  citnstrnction 
of  the  Southern  Central,  passing  through 
the  hither  part  of  Dryden,  and  considerable 
sums  ha\e  been  jiaid  for  that  riiad.  Both 
these  roads  have  been  carried  through,  but 
neither  of  them  has  a  station  nearer  our 
village  than  six  miles,  so  that  the  ad\an- 
tages  of  such  roads  are  not  brought  very 
near  to  us.  There  is,  howex-er,  one  consid- 
eration left  for  us  that  is  rather  gratif\'ing, 
which  is,  that  our  town  is  not  bonded  for 
railroads  or  anj-  other  great  object.  Our 
town  issued  bonds  for  the  jiayment  of  boun- 
ties in  the  time  of  the  late  ci\il  war,  which 
were  felt  to  be  an  embarrassment  while  they 
remained,  and  an  evident  feeling  of  relief 
prevailed  when  the  last  of  these  were  re- 
deemed ;  anil  the)'  were  brought  together 
at  a  meeting  of  the  auditing  board,  and 
one  of  the  justices  asked  aloud,  if  any  one 
had  any  objection  to  offer  why  they  should 
not  be  destroyed  ?  No  one  raised  an)- 
objection,  and  they  were  all  placed  in 
the  stove,  and  every  one  seemed  to  breathe 
easier. 

"  Much  has  been  done  here  in  the  con- 
struction and  support  of  common  roads  and 
bridges ;  more,  probabl)-,  than  in  most 
other  towns  around,  in  proportion  to  space 
and  population.  The  alteration  of  the 
State  road,  so  called,  so  as  to  take  most  of 
the  travel  from  Snider  Hill,  so  called, 
through  Gridley  Hollow,  has  caused  a 
great  expense,  especially  to  the  people  in 
the  vicinity,  and  also  to  the  town  at  large ; 
yet  as  this  road  is  so  located  as   to   avoid 


most  of  the  hills  which  abound  in  this  por- 
tion of  the  town,  it  has  been  ailheretl  to, 
and  the  consiilerable  expense  involved  in 
sustaining  britiges,  etc.,  has  been  borne 
with  as  much  ([uietude  and  resignation  as 
could  be  reasonably  expected.  We  now 
assume  that  the  credit  of  our  people,  for 
enterprise  on  the  subject  of  the  different 
classes  of  roads  ami  bridges,  should  rank 
as  high  as  that  of  any  other  tow  n  in  this 
vicinity,  or  anywhere  else. 

"  Several  events  have  transpired  that  have 
caused  great  sensation  for  a  time,  and  made 
a  lasting  impression  on  many  minds.  The 
first  was  that  of  a  boy  lost  in  the  woods. 
In  Ma\-,  1796,  Daniel  Chaplin,  son  of  Jo- 
seph Chaplin,  and  father  of  Mrs.  Gleason, 
aged  about  fourteen  years,  set  out  to 
drive  a  cow  to  Mr.  Frank,  and  took 
with  him  a  few  pountls  of  flour.  The  cow- 
became  refractor)-  and  turnetl  out  of  the 
road,  and  in  endeavoring  to  get  her  back 
he  lost  the  road  and  wandered  in  the  track- 
less wilderness.  The  cow  returned  home, 
thus  giving  notice  that  he  was  lost.  An 
alarm  was  given  and  about  fift\-  men  as- 
sembled, which  was  a  great  number  for  so 
sparse  a  population.  He  was  gone  four 
days  and  three  nights  w-ithout  food,  and 
was  found  on  the  '  Bridge  Road,'  in  Dry- 
den, b)-  Aaron  and  James  Knapp,  of  Ho- 
mer. They  ascertained  w-ho  he  was,  and 
proceeded  to  help  him  home.  He  had  the 
flour  with  him,  but  the  weather  having  been 
rain)',  it  had  become  mouldy  and  the)-  threw 
it  away.  He  was  very  faint  and  weak,  but 
being  supported  on  each  side  he  could  walk, 
and  the)-  arrived  at  his  father's  house  about 
midnight,  where  his  mother  had  about 
thirt)-  men  in  and  about  the  house,  and 
was  preparing  victuals  for  them  to  take  in 
their  search  on  the  morrow.  Mr.  Chaplin 
was  absent  at  the  time.  We  shall  not  make 
the  vain  attempt  to  paint  the  scene  caused 
by  his  arrival. 


Town  ok  Viroii. 


335 


"The  next  to  be  noticed  was  the  great 
eclipse  of  the  sun  on  the  i6lliofJune,  I  8o6, 
which,  though  not  pecuhar  to  this  town, 
made  a  deep  impression,  and  was  an  event 
from  which  man)'  others  have  been  reck- 
oned. Aiiutlier  event  wiiich  produced  gen- 
eral solemnity,  was  that  of  a  sweeping  sick- 
ness, which  occurred  in  the  winter  and 
spring  of  1813.  In  a  very  few  weeks  four 
licads  of  families  in  that  thin  population 
were  removed  by  death.  Their  names  were 
James  Roe,  esq.,  Jacob  Chatterton,  William 
Gee,  and  Lydia,  wife  of  Benjamin  Glazier. 

"The  season  of  18 16  was  very  unfruitful, 
■generally  denominated  the  cold  season,  fol- 
lowed by  great  scarcity  of  provisions,  etc. 
In  1 82 1  tliere  was  much  suffering  on  ac- 
count of  scarcity  of  food  for  stock,  and  it 
was  also  a  time  of  great  pecuniary  embar- 
rassment. In  1836-37  there  was  also  a 
scant  supply  of  provisions  and  a  time  of 
derangement  in  pecuniary  matters,  resulting 
from  the  insane  speculations  immediately 
preceding,  in  which  many  engaged  with 
that  recklessness  characteristic  of  those  in 
haste  to  be  rich.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say 
that  these  last  were  events  common  to  the 
whole  country,  and  affecting  this  town  only 
as  a  constituent  part  of  the  same." 

Frequent  allusion  has  been  made  to  the 
division  of  the  town.  It  had  long  been  evi- 
dent to  discriminating  minds  that  this  event 
must  take  place  at  some  time,  but  the  dif- 
ferent interests  involved  and  the  condition 
of  political  parties  delayed  it  till  1846.  It 
was  then  divided  into  tiirce  towns ;  the 
north  half  constituted  one  and  retained  the 
original  name.  The  south  half  was  formed 
into  two  ;  the  west  part  receiving  the  name 
of  Harford,  and  the  east  that  of  Lapeer. 
Since  that  time  a  part  of  Virgil  has  been 
set  to  Cortlandviilc,  and  another  part  con- 
sisting of  lot  No.  20  has  been  attached  to 
Freetown.  Thus  Virgil,  from  being  one- 
fouith  part  of  one  town  in  1796,  has  become 


the  whole  of  three  and  a  part  of  two  others. 
The  population  has  increased  from  thirty  in 
1798  to  4,541  in  1845,  'I'ltl  2,410  in  1850, 
after  the  division.  Stock  taken  on  the  Syra- 
cuse and  Binghamton  Railroad  amounts  to 
$1  1,100.  Other  statistics  have  been  given 
in  their  proper  places. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Nathaniel  ]5ou- 
ton,  one  of  the  pioneers  of  Virgil,  was  the 
projector  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  Rail- 
road, and  continued  to  advocate  the  same 
till  an  influence  was  awakened  that  resulted 
in  its  construction  and  completion.  He 
conceived  the  idea  of  constructing  a  railroad 
from  the  city  of  New  York  to  Lake  Erie, 
direct  through  the  then  secluded  southern 
tier;  and  in  the  year  1828  he  examined  a 
route  through  sufficiently  well  to  know  that 
it  was  a  feasible  one,  and  with  the  aid  of 
Nathan  Bouton  he  prepared  and  published 
the  outlines  of  his  plan  in  the  Cortland  Ob- 
server, a  paper  then  issued  in  Homer  vil- 
lage. 

His  plan  was  copied  in  several  periodicals 
along  the  line  of  the  proposed  road  ;  and 
from  that  time  the  subject  of  a  New  York 
and  Erie  Railroad  continued  to  occupy  the 
public  mind  until  the  grand  project  was 
completed.  The  decease  of  De  Witt  Clin- 
ton, whose  death  was  announced  in  the 
same  sheet  that  published  Mr.  Bouton's 
plan,  was  a  cause  of  discouragement  to 
him,  for  he  had  fondly  hoped  that  his  favor- 
ite project  would  receive  the  approbation 
and  aid  of  that  distinguished  statesman  ; 
but  the  nucleus  was  formed,  the  project 
was  originated,  and  the  work  advanced. 
Mr.  Bouton  was  anxious  that  it  should  be 
a  State  work ;  he  argued  that  it  would  be 
good  policy  for  the  State  to  engage  in  it  — 
that  it  would  annualU-  yield  a  revenue 
which  might  be  advantageously  e.xijended 
for  the  support  of  schools. 

A  few  months  previous  to  the  final  com- 
pletion of  the  road  its  worthy  projector  died 


336 


History  of  Corti.and  County. 


at  his  I'csiclcncc  in  tliis  town,  where  he  hail 
lived  forty-five  years.  He  had  lived  to  sec 
the  place  of  his  adoption  transformed  from 
a  wild  anil  howlint,'  wilderness  into  a  de- 
lightful ami  well-cultivated  couiitr)-,  inhab- 
ited by  a  moral,  intelligent  and  industrious 
people.  He  had  lived,  too,  to  see  the  dis- 
tance between  his  residence  and  the  Atlan- 
tic changed  from  a  dreary  journey  of  two 
weeks  into  a  pleasant  ride  of  only  a  few 
hours,  and  this  town  enjoying  all  the  priv- 
ileges and  possessed  of  all  the  elements 
which  are  necessary  to  promote  the  happi- 
ness of  a  people. 

No  town  in  the  county  has  a  prouder 
record  than  \'irgil  in  the  war  of  the  rebel- 
lion. Her  sons  volunteered  to  the  defense 
of  liberty. and  her  representatives  were  au- 
thorized to  expend  her  wealth  freely  in  the 
common  cause.  The  following  list  shows 
the  names  of  those  who  enlisted  in  the 
army,  and  the  amount  of  bounties  paid  to 
them  under  the  different  calls  of  the  presi- 
dent for  troops:  — 

Calls  of  October  17th,  1863  and  Feb- 
ruary and  March,  1864.  Amount  of  bounty 
jiaid  $300.00.  Total  $12,600.  —  E.  F. 
Hovey,  Rolland  C.  Frank,  Jared  R.  La- 
throp,  Chester  Hillsinger,  John  Schnotte- 
beck,  Melvin  \V.  Diven,  Eugene  Johnson, 
Elias  Joyner,  Peter  Conrad,  Leander  J. 
Webber,  Riley  E.  Simmonds,  Francis  Has- 
kill,  Henry  Colligan,  Nelson  R.  Conrad, 
Peter  N.  Palmeter,  Horatio  E.  Moore,  Reu- 
ben Hawley,  Silas  L.  Griswold,  Miles  H. 
Hutchings,  Jaspar  Parker,  William  H.  Hop- 
ping, John  Summers,  Charles  H,  Spaulding, 
Charles  Winney,  Henry  Wain,  Martin  L. 
Sweet,  Henry  A.  Dean,  Otis  Graves,  Chas. 
Clark,  John  Sullivan,  James  Shields,  John 
Stevens,  John  J.  H.  Allen,  John  Corbett, 
Thomas  Benson,  George  Kelly,  Ira  Pooler, 
James  Welch,  Harry  F.  Morris,  William 
Stevens,  William  P.  F"erman. 

Call    of   July    iSth,    1864.      Amount   of 


bount)' paid  $1,000.  Total,  $46,000.  Brok- 
erage, $1 , 1  75. —  William  B.  West,  James 
Gorman,  John  Manning,  James  Cooke, 
Thomas  McFarland,  William  S.  De  Puy, 
Wilber  R.  Arnold,  James  Haskins,  Nelson 
R.  Mcintosh,  C.  Bradley  Mix,  Nathaniel 
M.  Parks,  Aaron  Williams,  Loren  D.  Gillen, 
Charles  H.  Lang,  Andrew  Olmstead,  Ben- 
jamin Pelham,  George  R.  Price,  Seymour 
Skinner,  James  Shevalier,  Hiram  G.  Con- 
rad, Nathan  Sherman,  P^verctt  H.  Jacob- 
son,  James  L.  Thomas,  Nelson  Joiner,  Hor- 
ace F.  Baker,  Edgar  Parker,  Elijah  Moffat, 
jr.,  Vinus  Johnson,  George  Butterfield,  Hi- 
ram E.  Baker,  Albert  Luce,  Storry  Kinney, 
Lafayette  Darling,  Thomas  B.  Hopkins, 
Eren  Hackett,  David  B.  Hammond,  George 
W.  Gross,  Edward  Harrison,  Purdy  H. 
Green,  Samuel  G.  Dickinson,  William  Coe, 
Alfred  D.  Ascroft,  De  Forest  Willard,  Cal- 
vin S.  Gray,  Leander  Ross,  Horace  Stafford, 
Frank  D.  Wright. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  l^roker- 
age,  $165. — John  Burnett,  Andrew  Par- 
ker, Patrick  Brown,  Charles  Dogan,  Eli  J. 
Wood,  James  Brown,  Charles  Youngs,  Syl- 
vester Ryder,  Joseph  W.  Harris,  Charles  H. 
Flint,  James  H.  Hanson. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  February  and 
March,  1864,  $12,600.  Paid  for  filling 
quotas,  call  July  18th,  1864,  $47,175. 
Paid  for  filling  quota,  call  for'  December 
19th,  1864,  $165.      Grand  Total,  $59,940. 

VIRGIL  CORNERS. 

The  j)lace  bearing  this  name  is  a  pretty 
little  village  situated  in  the  southwestern 
part  of  lot  24,  which  is  located  a  little  west 
of  the  center  of  the  town.  At  this  point 
valle\'S  from  the  eastward,  westward  and 
southward  open  upon  a  level  plain,  while  in 
other  directions  lofty  and  steep  or  rolling 
hills  arise.  The  village  now  comprises 
three  churches,  a  hotel,   four  stores,   three 


Town  of  Vir(;ii. 


2>17 


carriage  shops,  four  blacksmith  shops,  har- 
ness shop,  etc.,  with  about  fift_\-  houses.  It 
is  six  miles  south  of  Cortland  village  and 
about  the  same  distance  from  railroad  com- 
munication at  Messengerville,  on  the  Syra- 
cuse, Binghamton  and  \ew  York  railroad, 
and  at  Dryden  on  the  Southern  Central  road. 
It  has  a  dail\-  mail  from  Cortland  village. 

One  of  the  earliest  settlers  on  the  site  of 
the  N'illage  was  Jacob  Chatterton,  the  an- 
cestor of  the  numerous  fimilies  of  that 
name  who  lived  in  the  tow  n.  He  located 
in  1 800  on  the  site  of  Dr.  Muncey's  res- 
idence, where  he  subsequenth'  died. 

Thomas  Mott  was  one  of  the  earliest  set- 
tlers in  Virgil  Corners,  where  he  came  from 


Franklin,  Delaware    countv,  in    1807 


Ht 


settled  on  the  premises  now  occupied  by 
Myron  Ballon,  just  east  of  the  \'illage, 
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  He 
had  a  large  family,  among  whom  was 
Thomas  Mott,  jr.,  who  was  born  in  Frank- 
lin in  1807.  He  spent  a  long  life  at  Virgil 
Corners,  where  he  held  the  office  of  justice 
of  the  peace  for  more  than  fort}'  years  and 
until  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1882. 
Among  the  other  children  of  the  elder 
Thomas  Mott  were  the  second  wife  of  Dr. 
Horace  Bronson,  who  is  still  living  at  Virgil 
Corners ;  Mrs.  Joseph  Reynolds,  her  hus- 
band being  one  of  the  first  merchants  in 
the  place  ;  Mrs.  Dr.  Terr}',  whose  husband 
was  one  of  Dr.  Bronson's  students,  and 
Henr}-  Mott,  who  died  in  Michigan. 

Samuel  Slafter  settled  on  the  premises 
south  of  the  Corners,  where  John  Oakle\- 
now  lives.  He  subsequently  and  at  an 
early  day  removed  to  the  village,  where  he 
engaged  in  the  manufacture  and  sale  of  horn 
combs.  He  was  postmaster  at  an  early 
period.  His  son  Edwin  became  a  merchant 
in  the  place,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  and  is 
now  a  prominent  citizen  of  Cortland  xillase 

William  Lincoln  settled  in  an  earl}-  year 
on  the  farm  now  occupied  b}-  Abram  Sager, 


and  removed  to  the  Corners  some  forty 
■  }'ears  ago.  He  li\'ed  in  the  Ikjusc  now  oc- 
cupied by  Aaron  Hutchings.  He  acquired 
the  title  of  "  Major,  "  through  his  services 
!  in  the  State  militia  and  was  much  respected. 
He  had  seven  sons  —  Silas,  Theron,  Wait, 
William,  Clinton,  Le\-i  and  Oscar.  The 
latter  is  dead. 

Timoth}-  Green,  sen.,  settled  on  the  farm 
near  the  village  on  the  south,  where  James 
Mitchell  had  subsequentl}-  lived,  before 
1810.  He  had  three  sons,  Timoth}',  jr.. 
Joel  and  Jesse.  The  last  two  were  twins 
and  removed  to  the  West.  Timothy  spent 
the  most  of  his  life  on  the  farm  about  a  mile 
west  of  the  village,  and  became  an  influen- 
tial citizen.  He  was  elected  to  the  Legis- 
lature, and  was  supervisor  of  the  town. 
He  removed  to  the  Corners  late  in  life,  and 
died  there. 

Nathan  Bouton  lived  fir  a  number  of 
years  in  the  earlier  portion  of  his  life  where 
Rufus  Holton  now  li\'es  and  exerted  an  in- 
fluence for  good  upon  the  }oung  com- 
munit}-. 

Moses  Olmstead  lived  at  an  earl}'  da}' 
three-fourths  of  a  mile  west  of  the  Corners, 
on  the  farm  where  Horace  Robinson  now 
resides.  He  had  three  sons,  William, 
David  and  James.       The}'  are  all  dead. 

The  names  of  man}"  of  the  earl}'  settlers 
on  the  site  of  the  little  village  called  Virgil 
Corners,  have  already  been  mentioned.  It 
was  probably  as  late  or  later  than  1810  be- 
fore there  was  much  of  a  settlement  at  this 
point,  the  post-office  having  been  established 
in  1808,  with  Zophar  Moore  as  postmaster, 
as  before  noted.  There  were  then  two  or 
three  grist-mills  in  the  town,  several  saw- 
mills, carding-mills,  etc.,  and  a  population 
sufficient  to  make  it  evident  that  there  would 
soon  at  least  be  a  demand  for  mercantile 
business.^ 


1  Before  the  partially  cleared  farms  produced  a  sufiicient 
amount  of  grain  for  the  sustenance  of  the  people,  it  was 


338 


History  of  Cortland  Coumv. 


Tlic  first  mcrcliant  at  \'irgil  Corners  was 
probably  J.  K.  Lamplieer,  but  the  exact 
date  when  he  began  business  here  is  not 
now  accessible.  His  first  place  of  business 
was  on  the  site  of  Perkins's  wagon  shop. 
About  the  same  time  Gideon  Messenger 
opened  a  store  in  a  small  way  in  a  portion 
of  the  house  now  occupied  by  Charles  John- 
son. Joseph  Re\-nolc!s,  who  came  here  in 
1808,  began  mercantile  business  not  long 
after  the  first  store  was  opened,  in  the  build- 
ing which  is  now  used  as  a  shop  by  Mr. 
Perkins.  It  stood  then  on  the  site  of  A. 
H.  Peckham's  store.  The  site  now  occu- 
pied by  Wm.  Helton's  store  was  first  used 
for  mercantile  purposes  by  W'm.  Snider. 
He  was  succeeded  by  Rufus  and  Wm.  Ed- 
wards and  later  by  A.  E.  Heberd,  who 
transferred  the  business  to  John  Chamber- 
lain in  about  the  year  1838  and  two  years 
later  built  the  store  now  occupied  by  S.  K. 
Jones.  Chamberlain  remained  in  the  store 
on  the  Holton  site  about  two  years,  when 
he  bought  out  Mr.  Reynolds,  the  purchase 
including  the  dwelling  now  occupied  by  ¥.. 
A.  Crain.      Wm.  Snider  again  took  the  site 


common  for  the  able-bodied,  stalwart  young  men  to  go, 
as  it  was  said,  "out  to  the  lakes,"  to  work  during  harvest, 
that  they  might  supplement  the  scanty  amount  grown  on 
their  own  narrow  fields.  I  might  mention  as  a  specimen 
of  difficulties  to  be  overcome,  the  scanty  remuneration 
received  by  ministers  of  the  gospel.  One  who  had  labored 
several  years  in  a  church  made  a  statement  which  is  de- 
rived from  an  authentic  source  to  this  effect :  that  he  had 
not  received  money  enough  from  the  church  to  which  he 
ministered  to  pay  the  postage  on  letters  which  he  had  re- 
ceived on  their  account,  .\fterwards  the  .s'ame  church 
secured  the  labors  of  a  minister  on  a  salary  of  fifty  dol- 
lars. .\nother  church  passed  a  solemn  resolution  that 
they  would  endi-a-'or  to  raise  ten  dollars  to  secure  tlie 
labors  of  a  minister  two  Sabbaths  during  the  year.  .s;uch 
are  some  of  the  facts  existing,  incident  to  the  settlement 
and  progress  of  this  town.  These  have  doubtless  given 
rise  to  some  of  the  disparaging  things  that  have  Ijeen  said 
long  since,  and  have  been  repeated  in  modern  times, 
taxing  heavily  even  the"  Charity  wliich  suffereth  long 
and  is  kind."  It  will  be  the  object  of  the  writer,  in  a 
series  of  articles,  to  show  that  such  opinions,  if  enter- 
tained, are  unfounded,  and  merely  indicate  the  ignorance 
i>\'  prejuilice  of  thtisc  wlio  express  them.  —  N.   B<,iL"l"0.\. 


occtipied  b)-  Mr.  j-folton  and  continued  in 
business  there  tintil  1856,  when  he  filled 
and  closed  out  his  business.  He  was  fol- 
lowed b)-  I'atterson  &  Graves.  The  store 
was  burned  abotit  the  year  i860,  when  B. 
J.  Jones  purchased  the  lot  and  erected  a 
new  store.  The  premises  were  sold  to  Wm. 
A.  Holton  in  1873,  who  erected  the  present 
store  in  the  same  year.  He  now  carries  on 
a  successful  trade. 

Mr.  Chamberlain  failed  in  the  store  on 
Mr.  Peckham's  site  about  the  )-ear  1845, 
and  the  business  was  closed  out  by  Rufus 
Edwards.  The  store  was  next  occupied  b)- 
Piatt  F.  Grow  and  James  S.  Squires. 
Abt)iit  the  year  1850  the  old  building  was 
removed  to  its  present  location  and  the 
present  store  was  built  b\-  Dudley  Benton. 
The  building  was  partially  occupied  by  S. 
M.  Roe  as  a  produce  depot  ft>r  a  year  or 
more,  when  E.  A.  Crain  took  it  and  began 
mercantile  business,  which  he  continued 
about  two  \-ears.  He  was  followed  by 
Grow  &  Jones  for  about  the  same  length 
of  time.  Eugene  Edwards  then  took  it  and 
continued  business  abotit  four  years.  He 
sold  out  to  Wm.  H.  Smith,  who  afterwards 
associated  with  himself  D.  E.  Wallace.  '  Mr. 
Smith  retired  from  the  firm  and  in  1870 
W.  A.  Holton  and  A.  H.  Peckham  pur- 
chased tile  btisiness.  They  remained  to- 
gether until  1873,  when  Mr.  Peckham 
bought  nut  his  partner,  who  bought  and 
built  upon  his  present  location,  as  above 
stateti.  Mr.  Peckham  has  successftillv  con- 
dtictetl  till.'  btisiness  since   I  873. 

Mr.  llcbeid  continuetl  btisiness  in  the 
store  built  !)>•  him  in  1840  (now  occupied 
b\'  Mr.  Jones)  until  1847,  ^^li^-""  I't:  failed. 
He  was  followed  by  Winslow  &  Slafter  (E. 
Winslow  and  E.  P.  Slafter)  for  three  years, 
when  Mr.  Winslow  took  the  business  alone 
antl  continued  it  successfully  for  eight  years, 
or  until  1858,  having  in  the  mean  time  pur- 
chased the  building.      At  the  date  last  men- 


Town  oi'  \'ikgii. 


339 


tioned  lie  leased  the  store  to  Charles  Sny- 
der. About  the  year  I  S6o  (irow  &  Jones 
(Piatt  F.  Grow  and  H.  j.  Jones)  bet^an 
business  there,  continuing  until  the  fall  of 
i860,  when  Mr.  Grow  died.  The  business 
was  closed  up  and  the  remainder  of  the 
goods  sold  to  Mr.  W'inslow.  He  continued 
in  trade  until  1868,  when  he  sold  the  build- 
ing to  Joseph  Burt.  Howard  Hubbard  was 
associated  with  Burt  for  about  a  >ear,  when 
Burt  sold  his  interest  to  \Vm.  H.  Smith. 
In  the  year  1869  A.  H.  Peckham  became  a 
member  of  the  firm,  which  firm  a  year  later 
sold  the  whole  business  to  Mr.  Hubbard. 
In  the  mean  time  the  latter  had  transferred 
the  building  to  Andrew  Hutchings.  In 
1876  B.  J.  Jones  bought  the  store  of  Mr. 
Hutchings,  and  it  has  since  that  time  been 
occupied  with  mercantile  business  in  the 
hands  of  S.  K.  Jones. 

In  the  year  1868,  a  portion  of  the  goods 
in  the  stock  turned  over  to  Joseph  Burt 
came  back  into  his  possession.  These  he 
placed  on  sale  in  the  building  now  occupied 
b)'  Geo.  H.  Ladd  as  a  shoe  shop,  where  he 
continued  until  1872.  He  then  leased  the 
Jones  store  for  a  \'ear  or  two,  going  from 
there  to  his  present  location.  Mr.  VVinslow 
has  been  postmaster  since  1865,  the  office 
being  kept  in  his  store. 

This  record  gi\-es  the  histor}'  of  the  mer- 
cantile business  of  Virgil  Corners  as  far  as 
it  is  now  accessible.  There  have  been  at 
different  periods,  small  groceries  or  confec- 
tionery stores  kept,  but  none  of  especial 
importance. 

Physicians. — The  first  physician  in  the 
town  was  Elijah  Hartson,  but  no  details  of 
his  life  are  now  accessible.  He  was,  how- 
ever, with  Drs.  Moore,  Green  and  Worden, 
here  before  i8it)  or  1812.  Dr.  John  Wood 
was  here  about  the  latter  year  and  lived 
where  S.  Bouton  now  resides,  west  of  the 
\illage.  Dr.  Ryan  came  to  town  before 
1820,  in  which  \ear  one    of  the    most  em- 


inent phvsicians  of  the  county  took  up  his 
residence  at  V'irgil  Corners  where  he  re- 
mained in  successful  practice  during  a  pe- 
riod of  more  than  fift\-  \-ears  ;  this  was  Dr. 
Horace  Bronson.  The  ancestors  of  Dr. 
Bronson  came  from  Scotland  and  he  was 
born  in  Catskill,  N.  V.,  Sept.  8th,  1796. 
His  parents  removed  to  X'ernon,  Oneida 
count\',  when  he  was  four  or  fi\e  \'ears  old 
and  became  well-to-do  farmers.  Horace 
earl\-  e\'inced  a  natural  taste  for  study,  es- 
peciall}-  of  natural  histor)-,  in  \\  hich  he  for- 
tunately received  encouragement  from  his 
parents.  He  entered  Hamilton  College,  to 
which  institution  his  father  had  already 
been  a  donor,  and  graduated  in  due  time. 
He  attended  four  full  courses  of  medical 
lectures  and  took  his  degree  of  Doctor  of 
Medicine  from  the  Fairfield  Medical  Col- 
lege in  1819,  then  a  famous  institution  of 
Western  New  York. 

By  the  advice  of  Dr.  Lewis  Kiggs,  then 
of  Homer,  Dr.    Bronson    came   to   N'irgil  in 

1820,  as  above  stated,  where  he  continued 
in  practice  until  1873,  when  he  was  incapac- 
itated for  further  labor  b\-  the  sickness 
which  terminated  his  \aluable  lite  on  the 
30th  of  Januar)-,  1874.  He  became  a 
member  of  the  Cortland  Medical  Societ)-  in 

1 82 1.  Dr.  Bronson  was  possessed  of  much 
more  than  ordinar_\-  nati\-e  ability  and  his 
acquired  attainments  were  varied  and  useful. 
He  was  very  industrious  in  his  profession,  a 
skillful  practitioner  and  kind  and  forbearing 
towards  his  patients  who  foimd  it  difficult 
to  pay  for  medical  treatment.  Dr.  Bronson 
married  Poll\-  Ball  by  whom  he  had  one 
son  and  two  daughters.  His  second  wife 
was  Happy  Mott,  who  now  resides  in  Vir- 
eil  Corners  with  her  son-in-law,  Charles 
Johnson. 

Dr.  C.  P.  Weaver  came  to  Virgil  next  after 
Dr.  Bronson,  and  was  followed  bj'  Drs. 
Wilson  and  Robinson,  who  came  between 
1 84 1  and  1848.     The  next  physicians  were 


340 


History  or  Cortland  Countv. 


Drs.  Wm.   Fitch,  now    of  Dryden,  and  Jay 
Hall,  now  of  Cortland  village. 

In  the  spring  of  1859  Dr.  Wm.  A.  Mun-  1 
coy  came  to  Virgil  Corners  from  Wavcrly, 
Tioga  county,  N.  Y.,  where  he  had  pursued 
his  studies  and  practiced  one  year  in  part- 
nership with  Dr.  C.  M.  Nobles,  with  whom 
he  iiad  studied.  In  1874  Dr.  Muncey  grad- 
uated from  the  American  Medical  Univer- 
sity in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1881-82  finished 
a  course  and  graduated  from  the  Eclectic 
Medical  College  of  New  York.  He  has 
been  in  constant  practice  in  tlie  town  since 
his  arrival.  Dr.  Chas.  Laning  came  here 
at  about  the  time  Dr.  Muncey  came,  but 
remained  only  for  a  short  time. 

Dr.  John  D.  Tripp  is  a  graduate  of  the 
Long  Island  College  Hospital,  from  which 
institution  he  graduated  in  the  year  1865, 
immediately  after  which  he  came  to  Virgil 
Corners.  He  has  remained  here  ever  since 
and  enjoys  an  extensive  practice  and  the 
confidence  of  the  community. 

Hotel. — There  has  never  been  but  one 
hotel  of  much  pretensions  in  Virgil  Corners. 
The  first  record  of  it  that  we  have  been  able 
to  obtain  is  of  the  }-ear  1820,  when  it  was 
kept  by  John  I.  Gee.  Ezra  Bruce  next 
kept  it,  but  it  is  not  known  at  just  what 
date  nor  how  long.  Nathaniel  Knapp  kept 
it  also  for  a  time.  Eleazer  Carpenter,  and 
Reese  &  Fink  were  also  proprietors  at  an 
early  day.  In  1840  it  was  kept  by  Jerry 
Terpening;  then  b)'  Morgan  &  Terpening, 
and  again  by  Mr.  Terpening  alone.  Lewis 
Barton  kept  it  for  a  time.  A  man  named 
Humphrey  and  Horace  Wilcox  also  had 
charge  of  the  house.  Later  William  Chat- 
terton  kept  it,  it  ha\ing  meanwhile  passed 
into  possession  of  Dudlej-  Benton,  who 
made  large  additions  and  improvements  in 
the  buildings.  William  Benton  then  took 
the  proprietorship  of  the  house  and  was  fol- 
lowed by  Thomas  Perkins  for  a  short  period, 
when  the  property   came   into  possession  of 


John    D.    Benton,  who    also    made    further 

improvements.  In  I  865-66  Culver  &  Glea- 
son  took  the  house  but  kept  it  for  only  a 
year  or  two,  being  followed  by  O.  S. 
Withcy.  In  1869  F"rank  French  took  the 
house  and  was  succeeded  at  different  dates, 
which  are  not  of  special  interest,  by  John 
J.  Isaacs,  P^vans  Griggs,  Martin  ^Liricle,  T. 
Warren,  John  C.  Keefe  (1881),  F.  D.  Has- 
kell. At  about  this  time  the  property 
passed  into  possession  of  Geo.  W.  Lason. 
A.  T.  Niver  then  leased  it  in  1882,  and 
Mr.  Lason  took  it  in  1883.  The  present 
year  (i  884)  John  A.  McKinne\'  purchased 
the  propert}-  and  is  now  keeping  the  house 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  public. 

A  tavern  was  kept  for  a  time  before  the 
last  war  in  the  large  wooden  structure  lo- 
cally known  as  "  Bunker  Hill,  "  for  a  short 
time.  This  building  «as  erected  in  the 
year  1804  by  James  Knapp.  It  served  the 
double  purpose,  so  it  is  said,  of  creating  a 
good  deal  of  astonishment  among  the  in- 
habitants on  account  of  its  size  and  mag- 
nificence, and  of  ruining  its  builder.  It  now 
makes  a  convenient  wagon  shop  and  is 
owned  b\-  J.  C.  Scamans. 

John  Chamberlain  kept  something  of  a 
public  house  at  an  early  day  in  the  house 
now  occupied  as  a  residence  by  E.  A.  Grain. 
He  was  succeeded  b\- a  man  named  Tra\er, 
and  Mr.  Grain  kept  the  house  open  to  the 
public  for  a  short  time. 

E.  Winslow.  who  has  alread\'  been  often 
alluded  to  as  one  of  the  prominent  mer- 
chants, was  about  the  first  if  not  the  very 
first  person  to  engage  in  harness-making  in 
the  village.  This  was  in  the  year  184O. 
He  was  first  located  in  the  building  that 
stood  where  Mr.  Holton's  store  is  now  lo- 
cated. In  1845  lie  sold  out  tile  harness 
business  to  Jerome  Hulbert  (now  a  prom- 
inent citizen  of  Marathon  \illage),  to  en 
gage  in  the  boot  and  shoe  business.  He 
remained   in   one-half  of  the    store,  selling 


Town  of  Virgil. 


341 


boots  and  shoes,  until  1852,  when  he  be- 
came a  member  of  the  firm  of  Winslow  & 
Slafter,  as  before  stated.  After  Mr.  Hul- 
bert  moved  a\va\-  there  was  no  harness- 
making  in  the  \'illage  until  N.  A.  Gardner 
came  in  1869.  He  is  still  doing  some  work 
in  his  liouse.  II.  H.  Branch  began  the 
business  in  1876.  He  left  the  village  early 
in  tlie  present  j-ear.  Wayland  Goodell  is 
now  working  at  the  business  in  the  second 
story  of  Peckham's  store. 

Wagon-making  has  been  carried  on  in 
Virgil  from  a  very  early  period.  Timothy 
Woods  was  prubabh-  the  first  in  the  town 
and  worked  at  the  business  before  1820. 
He  was  located  north  of  the  Corners  and 
afterwards  west  of  the  "  West  Meeting- 
house." Archelaus  Green  was  also  engaged 
in  this  business  before  1825.  Jerry  Tyler, 
now  living  at  Virgil  Corners,  says  that  a 
Mr.  Hr_\-ant.  who  was  the  father  of  Lewis 
Bryant,  made  wagons  on  Luce  hill  at  an 
early  date  —  probably  as  early  as  1830.  In 
1838  he  made  a  lumber  wagon  for  him. 
which  his  son  Allen  is  still  using  in  a  very 
good  state  of  preservation.  Phillip  Colwell 
was  a  wagon-maker  here  before  1840,  and 
Samuel  Sikes  had  a  small  shop  as  early  as 
that,  a  little  north  of  where  Ebenezer  Per- 
kins now  lives.  His  old  shop  is  now  a  part 
of  Mr.  Perkins's  barn.  The  Sikes  premises 
were  purchased  b)^  Mr.  Winslow  in  1844. 
libenezer  Perkins  began  wagon- making  on 
Cortland  street  in  the  shop  now  occupied 
by  M.  B.  Williams,  which  he  built  in  the 
year  1843.  He  sold  out  to  J.  C.  Seamans 
and  he  to  Sylvester  Crain  in  i860.  The 
business  was  continued  there  bj'  Sylvester 
and  E.  A.  Crain  imtil  1875  when  they  sold 
out  to  J.  C.  Seamans.  The  Grains  pur- 
chased the  old  Methodist  church  building 
in  the  )-ear  1876-77  and  remo\-ed  it  to  its 
present  location,  where  it  has  been  used  as 
a  wagon  shop  and  undertaking  establish- 
ment since.      M.  B.  Williams  now  works  at 


the  business  in  the  shop  formerly  occupied 
by  Mr.  Perkins.  Mr.  Perkins  has  a  shop 
in  the  old  building  formerly  used  as  a  store 
by  Joseph  Reynolds. 

There  are  now  three  blacksmith  shops  in 
the  village.  One  is  operated  by  George 
Hicks,  one  by  C.  H.  Seamans,  and  one  by 
Geo.  and  J.  C.  Seamans.  Michael  Ehle 
was  one  of  the  early  blacksmiths  in  the 
place.  Isaac  Seamans  was  the  next,  and 
built  the  shop  now  occupied  by  his  son,  I. 
M.  Seamans.  Before  this  shop  was  built 
Isaac  Seamans  was  located  near  the  Meth- 
odist parsonage.  Ehle's  shop  was  on  the 
corner  where  Harry  Williams  now  lives. 
The  location  of  Hicks's  shop  was  for  several 
years  occupied  by  William  Adamy  with  a 
blacksmith  shop  more  than  thirty  years 
ago.  Mr.  Adamy  is  now  a  resident  of 
Union,  Broome  county. 

Joel  Hancock  was  one  of  the  early  set- 
tlers in  the  village  and  was  probably  the 
first  shoemaker  here.  After  him  David 
Sweet  and  Nathan  Shultz  were  in  the  bus- 
iness. A  man  named  Rogers  had  a  shop 
near  the  Murdock  tannery  at  an  early  day. 
Justin  Smith  was  a  shoemaker  here  before 
1850,  as  was  also  a  man  named  Simpkins. 
Geo.  H.  Ladd  began  work  in  this  line  in 
1850,  and  has  followed  it  ever  since.  N. 
R.  Locke  was  in  the  business  here  from 
1856  to  i860.' 

There  being  no  power  obtainable  from 
streams  within  the  village,  little  has  been 
done  in  manufacturing,  "and  the  isolation 
of  the  place  from  railroad  communication 
has  operated  against  its  growth.  It  was 
formerly  quite  an  important  point  on  the 
stage  route  from  Cortland  to  Owego,  and  in 
earlier  years  before  trade  was  diverted  to 
other  distant  points  through  the  facilities 
for  travel    offered   by   railroads,   there   was 

1  Mr.  Locke  was  the  father  of  D.  R.  Locke,  who  has 
become  famous  as  j  writer  under  tlie  nom  di  plume  of 
"Petroleum  V.  Nashy."'  He  is  coni»ected  witli  the 
Toledo  Blade. 


342 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


more     business     done    here,    undoubtedly, 
tlian  at  tlie  present  time. 

(ikini.EV   HOLLOW. 

Tiiis  little  hamlet  present.s  a  \'ivid  exam- 
ple of  the  rajjid  changes  that  are  effected 
by  time.  It  is  still  within  the  memory  of 
man)-  of  the  older  citizens  of  Virgil,  when 
there  was  much  more  manufacturing  and 
mercantile  business  done  here  than  there 
was  at  Virgil  Corners.  Now  there  is  scarcely 
a  pretense  of  either,  outside  of  the  substan- 
tial grist-mill. 

Besides  its  name  of  "  Gridle\-  Hollow," 
derived  from  Reuben  Gridley,  who  was  one 
of  the  most  prominent  pioneers  in  that  re- 
gion, the  hamlet  has  been  known  as  East 
Virgil,  and  the  post-office  now  bears  that 
name.  The  place  is  situated  on  lot  49  near 
the  southeast  corner  of  the  town,  and  the 
stream  that  has  been  called  "  Gridley  creek  " 
runs  directly  through  it.  High  and  pre- 
cipitous hills  rise  directh'  from  the  settle- 
ment, on  the  north  and  south,  while  the  bed 
of  the  creek  in  that  vicinitx-  has  cut  a  deep 
and  narrow  ravine  through  the  rocky  form- 
ation in  that  region,  adding  much  to  the 
otherwise  romantic  scenery  of  the  place. 

The  names  of  manj'  of  the  early  settlers 
at  this  point  ha\e  already  been  given.  The 
first  mill  was  built  by  a  Mr.  Vandenberg  in 
1 8 19,  on  or  near  the  site  now  occupied  by 
the  mill  of  E.  D.  Angell.  A  saw-mill  was 
also  built  at  the  same  point  and  b\-  the 
same  man.  This  property  passed  into  the 
hands  of  Reuben  Gridle)-  at  an  early  day 
and  he  operated  them  for  a  period  of  about 
ten  years.  He  subsequentlj'  remo\ed  to 
the  State  of  Michigan,  where  he  died.  The 
present  stone  mill  was  built  by  Gaius  Rudd, 
in  the  year  1S56,  after  the  disastrous  flood 
of  that  year  had  swept  away  every  mill  and 
bridge  between  Virgil  Corners  and  the  ri\er 
at  the  State  Bridge.  Rudd  occupied  the 
grist-mill,  the  saw-mill   having  been    aban- 


doned, until  the  present  owner,  E.  D.  An- 
gell, bought  it  ;  he  is  successful  in  its  oper- 
ation. 

Abram  \'an  Buskirk  was  an  earl)-  set- 
tlor in  the  Hollow  on  the  place  which  after- 
ward passed  into  possession  of  .Andrew  Bru- 
sie  at  an  earlj'  day.  He  was  an  enterpris- 
ing and  more  than  ordinaril}'  intelligent 
and  energetic  man.  He  built  a  forge  on 
the  creek,  which  he  successfully  operated 
by  water  pow  er  for  many  years,  the  quality 
of  his  iron  attaining  an  excellent  reputation. 
He  was  a  justice  of  the  peace  for  several 
years.  The  great  flood  swept  away  the 
forge  and  it  was  not  rebuilt.  Mr.  Brusie 
and  his  family  finally  removed  from  the 
town. 

Tile  first  merchant  in  the  Hollow  was 
William  Gra}-.  He  built  a  store  on  the 
south  side  of  the  creek  and  did  a  large  bus- 
iness. Hiram  J.  Messenger,  now  of  Cort- 
land N'illage,  became  his  partner,  but  the 
firm  soon  dissolved  and  Mr.  Messenger  built 
the  store  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  stream, 
and  continued  business  there  for  several 
years,  finally  remo\ing  to  Messengerville, 
after  the  completion  of  the  railroad.  Mr. 
Gray  continued  in  business  until  1849,  when 
he  was  attacked  with  cholera  after  return- 
ing from  New  York,  where  he  had  just  pur- 
chased a  large  stock  of  goods.  He  died 
suddenly  and  his  business  was  closed  up. 
Among  his  sons  were  H.  C.  Gray,  now  of 
Harford  Mills  ;  Frank  Gray,  of  Janesville, 
Wis.  ;  Alonzo  Gray,  of  Watkins,  N.  Y.,  and 
Jesse  Gray,  of  Cortland.  Wm.  Gray  was 
the  first  postmaster  in  Gridley  Hollow  (or 
East  Virgil),  established  in  1845. 

Alexander  McVean  was  an  early  settler 
at  the  Hollow  and  was  justice  of  the  peace 
for  a  period  of  forty  years.  He  was,  in 
connection  with  Isaac  Benton,  owner  of 
the  saw-mill  before  it  was  swept  awaj'.  Mr. 
Benton  was  born  in  the  town  at  an  early 
day,    and    carried    on    wagon-making    and 


Town  of  Virgil. 


343 


blacksmithing  at  the  Hollow,  employing  a 
number  of  hands  and  doing  a  large  business. 
James  McVean  also  had  a  blacksmitli  simp 
there  at  one  time,  and  Wm.  H.  Johnson 
carried  on  a  tailor  shop,  while  Jonathan  Pot- 
ter did  the  shoemaking  for  the  vicinity. 
After  the  death  of  Mr.  Gray,  Isaac  Bloomer 
removed  to  the  Hollow  and  occupied  tlie 
store  until  it  was  carried  away  in  1856. 
About  the  3-ear  1832  Hiram  Baker  built  a 
saw-mill  a  mile  and  a  half  west  of  the  Hol- 
low, and  there  was  still  another  near  that 
point.  In  1837  Isaac  Bloomer  built  a  saw- 
mill a  mile  west  of  the  Hollow  ;  but  as  the 
forests  became  cleared  away  there  was  less 
demand  for  such  mills,  and  all  that  was  left 
of  them  to  be  carried  away  ,by  the  flood 
went  down  in  that  calamity  and  the\'  were 
not  rebuilt. 

At  the  time  that  Gridlej-  owned  and  op- 
erated the  mill  in  the  Hollow,  he  also  ran 
a  distiller)',  which  did  a  profitable  business  ; 
and  another  smaller  one  was  located  di- 
rectly on  the  top  of  Snider  Hill,  which  was 
owned  by  Christopher  Rorabacher. 

A  church  was  built  at  the  Hollow  in 
1844,  b\-  the  union  of  the  members  of  the 
several  denominations  in  that  \icinit_\'.  It 
finally  passed  under  the  charge  of  the  Meth- 
odists, as  before  detailed.  Services  are  now 
conducted  there  by  the  Rev.  H.  W.  Wil- 
liams, of  the  Virgil  Corners  Methodist 
Church. 

In  early  years,  and  until  the  opening  of 
the  road  through  the  Hollow  to  connect 
with  the  State  road  (about  the  years  1833- 
34),  the  Hollow  was  reached  only  from  the 
north  and  south,  down  the  steep  hills  ;  con- 
sequently the  opening  of  this  road  was  looked 
upon  as  a  great  improvement.  The  diver- 
sion of  trade  to  Virgil  Corners  and  later  to 
other  points  on  the  railroads,  has  reduced 
Gridley  Hollow  to  a  mere  hamlet,  with  very 
little  pretense  of  business  of  any  kind,  out- 
side of  the  mill  and   a  small  store    kept  b\- 


John    Lewis,  who  is  also  the   present   post- 
master. 

.MESSENGERVILLE. 

This  is  a  hamlet  and  station  on  the  Syra- 
cuse, Binghamton  and  New  York  Railroad, 
and  on  lot  50  in  the  southeastern  corner  of 
the  town,  near  the  western  bank  of  the 
Tioughnioga  river.  A  small  hamlet  and  a 
tavern  existed  near  there  before  the  comple- 
tion of  the  railroad,  known  as  State  Bridge, 
from  the  fact  that  the  bridge  over  the  river 
on  the  State  road  is  located  at  that  point. 
When  the  railroad  was  finished  there  prom- 
ised to  be  some  trade  and  shipping  attracted  to 
this  station,  and  H.  J.  Messenger,  who  had 
been  in  business  at  Gridley  Hollow,  built  a 
store  there  and  began  trade.  He  has  been 
succeeded  by  several  others,  among  whom 
are  Dickinson  &  Husted,  Mr.  Husted  alone, 
Lincoln  &  Wait,  and  now  by  the  Seamans 
Brothers. 

One  of  the  first  saw-mills  in  the  town 
was  built  near  this  station  by  a  man  named 
Blaisdell,  which  was  swept  away  in  the 
flood  of  1 856  and  was  not  rebuilt.  A  steam 
saw-mill  was  erected  at  a  later  date  by  Eli 
Husted,  which  was  burned  a  few  years  ago. 
Walter  L.  Chaplin  is  the  postmaster  at 
Messengerville. 

FR.\XK'S   CORNERS. 

This  is  a  mere  hamlet  situated  about  a 
mile  south  of  Virgil  Corners.  It  was  here 
that  the  pioneer,  John  M.  Frank,  first  lo- 
cated, giving  the  place  its  name.  Promi- 
nent among  the  early  settlers  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  was  Charles  Hotchkiss,  who 
settled  at  an  early  day  where  his  son, 
Alonzo,  now  lives.  He  had  three  sons, 
Alonzo,  Devolso  and  Wolcott.  The  former 
is  one  of  the  prominent  farmers  of  the  town 
and  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 
Marenus  Terpening  and  his  brother  Noah 
settled  early  just  north  of  Mr.  Hotchkiss, 
where  the\-  li\ed  man\-  vears. 


344 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Caleb  Whiting,  who  located  at  what  is 
known  as  Babcock  Hollow  at  an  earl)'  day, 
removed  to  Frank's  Corners  and  for  many 
years  carried  on  an  extensive  marble- work- 
ing business.  He  was  on  the  premises  now 
occupied  by  George  Dann,  and  now  lives 
in  Ca_\Higa  county. 

A  man  named  Asel  Cannon  had  a  black- 
smith shop  at  this  point  man\-  )'ears  ago, 
and  Chester  Simons  carried  on  the  business 
there  at  a  later  period  for  many  years. 
John  Ehle  has  also  worked  at  the  business 
recently. 

Lester  Helton,  father  of  W.  A.  and  Rufus 
Holton,  of  \'irgil,  and  Mark  and  Luke  Hel- 
ton, of  Cortland  village,  followed  wagon- 
making  at  Frank's  Corners  many  years  ago. 
A  small  store  was  kept  there  by  Wm.  H. 
Smith  for  a  few  years  during  the  last  war. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  of  Virgil  from  the  first  organ- 
ization* to  the  present  time.  The  super- 
visor's name  is  gi\^en  first  in  each  instance: — 

Moses  Rice,  Gideon  Messenger,  1805-06; 
James  Roe,  Abner  Bruce,  1807-09;  James 
Roe,  Moses  Rice,  i8io;  Moses  Rice,  James 
Roe,  181 1 ;  Moses  Rice,  James  Chatterton, 
1 8 1 2  to  1 8 1 6,  inclusive ;  Gideon  Messenger, 
James  Chatterton,  18 17  to  18 19,  inclusive; 
Gideon  Messenger,  Alvan  Ryan,  1820; 
Gideon  Messenger,  James  Chatterton.  1821 
to  1824,  inclusive;  Joseph  Rej-nolds,  Wm. 
Snider,  1825  to  1830,  inclusive:  Gideon 
Messenger,  Wm.  Snider,  1831;  Joseph 
Reynolds,  Kinne  Grow,  1832;  Joseph 
Reynolds,  Wm.  Woodward,  1833-34;  Mi- 
chael Frank,  \\'m.  Woodward,  1835-36; 
Sanford  Bouton,  Augustus  Heberd,  1837; 
Josiah  Hart,  John  Chamberlain,  1838;   San- 


ford Bouton,  Augustus  Heberd,  1839—40; 
Timoth}-  Green,  John  Chamberlain,  1S41; 
Ogden  Graj-,  Norman  Chamberlain,  1842— 
43  ;  Timoth)'  Green,  Norman  Chamberlain, 
1844;  Timothy  Green,  Augustus  Heberd, 
1845;  Enoch  Branch,  Norman  Chamber- 
lain, 1846;  John  Green,  Wm.  Chatterton, 
1847;  Dudlc)-  Benton,  Wait  Chamberlain, 
1848;  Moses  Tyler,  Willard  Chatterton, 
1849;  Page  Green,  Willard  Chatterton, 
1850;  John  Green,  Samuel  Slafter,  1851; 
Madison  B.  M)'nard,  David  L.  Bronson, 
1852;  Hiram  Messenger,  Willard  Chatter- 
ton, 1853;  Josephus  Gee,  Willard  Chatter- 
ton, 1854;  Isaac  Raymond,  Willard  Chat- 
terton, 1855;  Andrew  Brusie,  Alonzo  Sni- 
der, 1856;  Jonas  Owen,  Samuel  Slafter, 
1857;  Enoch  Willet,  Samuel  Slafter,  1858; 
Nathan  Spencer,  Samuel  Slafter,  1859;  Jo- 
sephus Gee,  Piatt  F.  Grow,  i860;  Josephus 
Gee,  Charles  P.  Snider,  1861 ;  Nathan  Spen- 
cer, Alexander  Mahan,  1862;  Roswell, 
Price,  Alexander  Mahan,  1863;  Roswell 
Price,  Eber  Sweet,  1S64;  Nathan  Spencer, 
G.  H.  Ladd,  1865;  Nathan  Smith,  Alexan- 
der Collins,  1866;  Roswell  Price,  Howard 
Hubbard.  1867-68;  Nathan  Bouton,  Chas. 
Williams,  1869;  S.  M.  Byram,  Charles 
Williams,  1870-71;  Roswell  Price,  A.  H. 
Peckham,  1872-73;  Roswell  Price,  W.  A. 
Muncey,  1874;  J.  D.  Tripp,  W.  A.  Holton, 
1875  ;  Roswell  Price,  A.  H.  Peckham,  1876: 
Roswell  Price,  H.  H.  Branch,  1877;  Ros- 
well Price,  J  O.  Seamans,  1878;  W.  P. 
Mynard,  J.  O.  Seamans,  1879;  W.  P. 
Mynard,  A.  H.  Peckham,  1880;  Walter 
Chaplin,  A.  H.  Peckham,  1881  to  1883, 
inclusive;  Walter  Chaplin,  E.  A.  Grain, 
1884. 


Town  of  Marathon. 


345 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


HlS'l'OKV  OF  THE  TOWX  OF   MARATHON. 


THE  town  of  Marathon  was  formed  from 
Cincinnatus  April  2 1st,  1818.  It  was 
first  called  "Harrison,"  and  embraced  the 
southwest  quarter  of  the  militar\-  township 
of  Cincinnatus.  Its  name  was  changed  to 
Marathon  in  1828,  in  consequence  of  there 
being  another  town  in  the  State  named 
Harrison.  It  was  first  named  in  honor  of 
General  Harrison.  It  is  bounded  on  the 
north  by  Freetown,  on  the  east  b\'  Willet, 
on  the  south  by  Hronme  county  and  on  the 
west  by  Lapeer. 

The  surface  of  the  town  is  rugged  and 
hilly,  the  ridges  rising  from  500  to  700  feet 
above  the  valle)'s.  The  Tioughnioga  ri\-er 
flows  through  the  western  part  of  the  town- 
ship in  a  deep,  narrow  vallc)-,  bordered  b_\' 
precipitous  hillsides.  Hunt  creek,  in  the 
northwestern  part  of  the  town,  flows  through 
a  narrow,  deep  valley,  and  Merrill  creek,  in 
the  eastern  part,  flows  through  a  similar 
valley.  The  principal  part  of  the  arable  ; 
land  lies  along  the  valleys;  the  uplands  are 
broken  and  better  adapted  to  pasturage. 
The  soil  is  a  sand_\-  and  gravelly  loam. 

Marathon  village  is  the  only  considerable 
business  center  of  the  town.  Te.xas  valley,  1 
in  the  northeastern  part  of  the  town,  was  1 
laid  out  first  and,  it  being  on  the  State  road 
and  central  to  the  four  towns  of  Cincinnatus, 
Freetown,  Willet  and  ]\Tarathon,  was  form- 
erly regarded  as  the  most  probable  site  of 
a  thriving  business  center;  but  it  is  now  a 
mere  hamlet,  while  Marathon  contains  a 
population  of  1,100,  and  is  a  growing  and 
active  business  place.  1 

Dr.  S.  ]\I.  Hunt,  of  Marathon  village,  has  ' 
written    some    interesting    historical    notes  ; 
upon  this  town,  from   which    we    make   the 
following  extracts  : —  i 


"  The  first  white  men  wlio  entered  this 
valley  in  search  of  future  homes  were  most- 
ly from  the  New  England  States,  the  east- 
ern counties  of  this  State  or  some  portion 
of  the  Susquehanna  Vallej-.  They  cut  out 
a  narrow  path  near  the  river  and  marked 
trees  as  an  additional  guide  to  their  way; 
erected  some  rudely  constructed  log-cabins 
and  then  returned  for  their  families.  They 
brought  them  in  canoes  b_\-  the  way  of  the 
Susquehanna  ri\-er,  the  greater  part  from  a 
distance  above,  the  others  from  below,  its 
junction  with  the  Chenango.  This  entire 
section  of  the  country  was  then 
■A  vast  wilderness, — 
.\  boundless  contiguity  of  shade  ' 
well  adapted  as  a  lo'dge  for  the  longing  as- 
pirations of  the  poet,  Cowper.  They  sev- 
erally by  severe  toil  and  indomitable  energy 
succeeded  in  clearing  and  planting  a  small 
piece  of  ground  with  corn  among  the  stumps 
and  roots,  which,  when  matured,  became  the 
staple  article  of  food  for  their  families.  But 
when  the  corn  was  harvested  the)-  had  no 
means  of  reducing  it  to  meal,  except  by  beat- 
ing it  in  a  mortar,  which  was  usuall)-  con- 
structed by  scooping  out  the  top  of  a  stump, 
above  which  they  suspended  a  pestle  adapted 
to  the  size  of  the  mortar ;  attached  it  to  a 
spring-pole,  the  elasticitj-  of  which  aided  in 
raising  the  pestle.  Yet  this  substitute  for 
grinding  afforded  but  a  slow  and  \er\-  labori- 
ous process.  There  was  then  no  grist-mill 
within  fifty  miles  of  them.  Occasionally  two 
of  the  neighbors  joined  in  going  to  mill  with 
a  canoe,  taking  several  bushels  of  corn  for  the 
settlement,  making  rather  a  pleasant  trip 
down  the  stream,  but,  not  unlike  boys  riding 
down  hill  on  hand-sleds,  their  return  to  the 
starting  point  was  slow  and   attended   with 


346 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


considerable  labor.  The  nearest  mill  was 
then  located  somewhere  on  the  Susque- 
hanna river. 

"  The  timber  III'  the  town  was  generally 
of  large  size  and  \\  hen  felled  and  cut  into 
suitable  lengths  was  drawn  together,  rolled 
into  heaps  and  burned.  The  flats  were 
mostl)-  covered  with  hard  timber,  such  as 
maple,  beech,  ash,  etc.,  which  was  i-ecluced 
to  ashes  with  less  labor  than  hemlock,  which 
more  usualh'  grew  on  the  sides  of  the  hills, 
and  when  in  a  green  state  tenaciousl)-  re- 
sists combusticin.  The  latter  timber,  when 
consumed,  aflbrtlcd  no  deposits  of  any  value; 
but  the  ashes  from  hard  timber  were  col- 
lecteil,  leached  aiui  boiled  into  "black  salts,' 
a  staple  article  of  commerce  and  at  that 
time  constituting  about  the  only  article  they 
had  to  sell  for  cash  or  exchange  for  goods. 

"Their  fruit  was  of  the  wiki  kinds,  such 
as  berries  of  the  different  species.  The}- 
had  no  apples,  pears  or  plums  foi-  many 
years,  except  such  few  as  occasional!)'  were 
brought  in  by  some  person  returning  from 
an  eastern  \isit.  They  dispensed  with  tea 
and  colfee  ami  most  of  the  groceries  now 
in  use,  excepting  sugar  antl  molasses  of  their 
own  domestic  manufacture  from  the  sugar 
maple. 

"Of  fresh  meats  the)-  procured  a  variet)-, 
such  as  venison  and  bear's  flesh,  and  of  the 
lesser  quadrupeds  of  the  woods  and  wild 
game  of  the  different  kinds,  as  well  as  the 
several  species  of  fish  w  hich  the  streams  af- 
forded in  great  abundance.  While  wild 
game  could  so  readily  be  obtained,  they 
could  well  dispense  with  the  flesh  of  domes- 
tic animals,  of  which  the)-  h;id  but  few  in 
number,  and  none  to  spare  for  the  butcher. 
Their  cattle  in  the  summer  season  subsisted 
on  w  ikl  herbage  and  in  winter  on  cornstalks, 
swamp  hay  and  brow  se. 

"Residing  at  such  distances  from  an)- 
settlement  where  goods  could  be  purchased, 
the)-  were  obliged   to   dispense    with    man)- 


of  the  conveniences,  if  not  the  actual  neces- 
saries, of  life.  Their  clothing  was  of  coarse 
fabrics,  usuall)-  flannel,  home-spun,  carded 
b)'  hand  and  colored  with  butternut  bark, 
for  their  outer  garments.  Their  skirting 
was  of  the  same  material  woven  into  checks; 
as  a  substitute  for  flannel  they  sometimes 
wore  buff-colored  buckskin  for  coats,  pants 
and  \ests.  In  summer  tow  cloth  comprised 
their  entire  dress.  At  a  subsequent  period 
domestic  fulled  cloth  was  w  orn  as  their  best 
suits  for  man)'  years. 

"  Such  was  the  condition  of  the  pioneers 
of  this  section  of  the  country  in  reference 
to  food  and  clothing.  Accustomed  to 
coarse,  simple  food  and  constant  habits  of 
industr)-,  the  pioneers  enjo)ed  a  good  de- 
gree of  health,  strong,  athletic  constitutions, 
and  were  capable  of  performing  much  more 
labor  than  a  comparative  number  of  their 
descendants  in  these  degenerate  times. 
Rut  while  their  corporal  powers  were 
strengthened,  the  mental  faculties  and  ap- 
pliances were  not  much  improved.  With 
the  exception  of  the  Bible,  very  few  books 
of  any  kind  could  be  found  in  the  neigh- 
borhood. Though  destitute  of  most  of  the 
conveniences  of  life,  the)-  participated  more 
freely  in  the  domestic  and  social  blessings 
than"  the  residents  of  a  densely  populated 
community.  F"ree  from  the  pride  of  dress 
and  ostentation,  they  envied  no  man's  supe- 
rior success,  but  each  contributed  aid  to- 
wards his  neighbor's  prosperit)-  and  happi- 
ness. The)'  had  a  reputation  for  honest)-, 
benevolence  and  usefulnes  while  li\'ing,  and 
died  respected. 

"There  being  no  mail  routes  or  post- 
ofiices  in  this  entire  region  of  country  at 
the  period  under  consideration,  no  letters 
I  or  newspapers  were  received,  except  occa- 
sionally by  private  conve)'ance.  As  late 
as  during  the  last  war  with  England  a 
small  weekly  country  paper  was  brought 
into  town  b\-  a  man  on  horseback  and  sold 


Town  of  Marathon. 


347 


to  persons  anxious  to  hear   the    news  from 
the  war.  " 

The  first  actual  settlers  of  tliis  town  were 
Dr.  Japheth  Hunt  and  wife,  both  aged 
people,  two  sons,  James  and  William,  and 
three  daughters,  Betsey,  Nancy  and  Han- 
nah. The  advanced  age  of  the  parents  dis- 
qualified them  as  pioneers  of  a  new  country 
and  unfitted  them  to  encounter  the  hard- 
ships and  prix'ations  incident  to  such  an 
enterprise.  Their  children,  however,  were 
of  mature  age,  of  robust  constitutions,  and 
possessed  energ)-  of  character,  which  en- 
abled them  to  accomplish  the  laborious 
duties  which  now  devoh'ed  upon  them. 
They  entered  the  \alley  of  the  Tioughnioga 
from  the  south,  in  canoes,  in  the  \-ear  1794, 
and  located  on  a  piece  of  lanci  on  the  east 
side  of  the  river,  about  a  mile  south  of  the 
present  village  of  Mar.ithon,  since  known 
as  the  Comstock  farm  anil  now  owned  by 
Edward  Moore.  Their  log  house  was 
erected  a  few  miles  north  of  Mr.  Moore's 
barn,  on  a  knoll,  or  rolling  piece  of  ground, 
immediatel)-  west,  and  near  the  present 
highway.  Upon  this  rising  ground  were 
discovered  a  great  number  of  e.\ca\'ations 
or  depressions,  of  circular  form,  in  close 
proximity,  rendering  the  surface  of  the 
ground  uneven.  Each  of  these  depressions, 
upon  examination,  was  found  to  contain 
human  bones,  which  had,  apparenth-,  been 
deposited  there  for  several  preceding  cen- 
turies. Upon  removing  the  road  a  few 
years  since,  from  the  top  to  the  base  of  this 
hill,  some  of  these  depressions  were  opened 
by  the  plow,  and  were  found  to  contain 
not  onl)-  human  bones,  but  se\'eral  curi- 
ously carved  vessels  or  pots,  of  a  substance 
resembling  cla\',  probabl\-  wrought  b\-  the 
Indians  to  contain  succotash,  or  boiled  corn 
and  beans,  deposited  in  the  grave,  as  is 
their  custom,  to  supj)!}-  their  departed 
friends  in  their  journe\-  to  the  world  of 
spirits. 


About  the  time  that  Dr.  Hunt's  family 
settled  here  a  road  was  surveyed  and  par- 
tialh-  cut  through  the  wilderness  from  the 
south,  near  the  river,  until  passing  their 
land,  when,  diverging  from  the  stream,  it 
crossed  the  south  line  of  lot  number  72, 
about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  east  of  the 
village  of  Marathon,  and  continuing  in  a 
northerly  direction,  intersected  the  State 
road  at  the  farm  recently  owned  b)'  Mr. 
Charles  Richardson,  of  Freetown,  and  ex- 
tending north  to  its  terminus  at  the  salt 
works,  which  ga\'e  it  the  name  of  the  "  salt 
road.  " 

Another  road,  about  this  period,  was 
surveyed  and  [iartiall\-  opened  as  a  State 
road,  b_\-  the  way  of  Oxford  westerh- 
through  the  center  of  the  town  subsequently 
organized  as  Cincinnatus,  and  consequently 
on  the  north  line  ot  the  present  town  of 
Marathon,  and  crossing  the  river  at  Chap- 
lin's ford,  now  known  as  State  Bridge,  and 
thence  westerl)'  through  the  count)'  b_\' 
\'irgil  Corners. 

Dr.  Hunt  was  an  emigrant  from  one  of 
the  New  England  States,  and  had  served 
his  country  in  the  Revolutionar\-  War,  in 
capacit}'  of  surgeon.  He  died  March  7th, 
1808,  at  the  advanced  age  of  97,  and  was 
the  first  person  buried  in  the  east  burying 
eround  of  Marathon.  His  son  William 
married  Anna,  daughter  of  Matthew  Cole, 
an  earl)-  settler  on  a  farm  adjoining  the 
southern  line,  being  the  present  residence 
of  Col.  Lucian  E.  Crain.  His  son  James  was 
ne\'er  married,  and  died  at  Genoa,  Cayuga 
count)'.  His  daughter,  Nanc)',  married 
Abram  Smith,  and  died  about  fort)'-five 
\'ears  since,  lea\'ing  three  children.  Betsey 
Hunt  married  Oliver  Mack,  of  Genoa,  and 
Hannah,  the  )'oungest  daughter,  married 
Nathan  Thorp,  of  the  same  place. 

Wm.  Hunt,  some  time  after  the  death  of 
his  father,  sold  the  farm  and  located  again 
two  miles  north  of  Marathon  \illage,  where 


348 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Stephen  Johnson  now  resides,  but  finally 
emigrated  with  his  sisters  from  Genoa  to 
the  "  far  West,  "  to  some  part  of  Indiana. 
In  the  latter  part  of  the  winter  "f  1796 
John,  the  eldest  son  of  Dr.  Hunt,  who  had 
married  Lydia,  tiie  daughter  of  Major 
Samuel  Maliorj-,  of  Hillsdale,  Columbia 
count)',  was  induced  to  move  from  that 
place  into  the  new  countr\-  in  the  \  icinity 
of  his  father's  residence.  A  man  with 
horses  and  sleigh  was  employed  to  bring 
his  effects  and  famil\-,  which  then  comprised 
himself  and  wife,  one  daughter  three  years 
of  age,  and  a  son  of  six  months.  After 
several  days'  travel  over  rough  roads,  they 
arrived  at  O.xford,  then  a  new  settlement  on 
the  Chenango  river,  where  their  teamster 
left  them  and  turned  back  in  consequence 
of  poor  sleighing  produced  by  a  thaw.  Mr. 
Hunt,  ha\ing  one  horse  of  his  own,  har- 
nessed him  to  a  hastily  constructed  sled, 
and  placed  a  bed  and  a  few  necessary  arti- 
cles of  furniture  and  pnnisions,  with  his 
wife  and  children  thereon,  started  west- 
wardl)'  b}-  the  way  of  the  State  road  for 
the  place  of  his  destination.  The  first  da\' 
the\-  proceeded  about  se\enteen  miles  into 
the  wilderness  on  this  rough  road,  passing 
over  several  of  the  smaller  logs  which  had 
not  _\-et  been  removed  from  the  path,  when 
night  overtook  them  in  a  dense  forest, 
which  soon  became  xocal  with  the  sounds 
of  wild  animals.  Fortunateh'  they  soon 
came  to  a  log  cabin,  recentlj-  erected,  co\- 
ered  with  bark,  and  having  a  floor  of  slats 
.split  from  logs,  with  a  place  for  an  entrance, 
but  destitute  of  a  door  to  exclude  the  air. 
By  means  of  his  gun  and  tinder  he  kindled 
a  fire,  and  placed  his  horse  close  to  the 
opening,  with  his  provender  in  the  sled, 
which  served  for  a  manger,  and  ha\ing 
hung  up  a  blanket  at  the  entrance,  and 
placed  their  bed  on  the  floor,  being  very 
weary,  he  retired  to  rest,  and  slept  comfort- 
ably through  the  night.      Hut  his  wife,  un- 


accustomed to  such  privations,  was  less  in- 
clined to  sleep.  The  howling  of  the  wolves 
also  annoyed  her,  and  she  wondered  how 
her  husband  could  sleep  so  composedly  in 
such  a  dismal  place.  The  next  morning 
they  resumed  their  journey,  and  before 
noon  came  to  the  Otselic  river,  and  were 
cheered  with  the  sight  of  a  house  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  stream.  This  proved 
to  be  the  residence  of  Wm.  Tuthill,  who 
kindly  assisted  them  in  crossing  the  river, 
and  hospitably  entertained  them  till  the  next 
da\-.  This  was  at  a  farm  subsequently 
owned  by  Ebenezer  Crittenden.  From 
this  place  they  traveled  west  till  the\-  came 
to  the  intersection  of  the  salt  road,  when, 
turning  south  along  the  latter  path,  at  a 
distance  of  four  miles  they  found  the  new 
home  of  his  parents  and  family.  His  goods 
were  subsequent!)-  brought  in  canoes  from 
Oxford  down  the  Chenango  river  to  the 
Forks,  and  up  this  branch  (then  generally 
called  the  Onondaga)  to  their  new  location. 

John  Hunt  purchased  one  hundred  acres 
out  of  the  southwest  corner  of  lot  No.  72, 
and  moved  his  fiimily  there,  being  on  the 
east  side  of  the  river,  upon  which  a  large 
portion  of  Marathon  \illage  is  located. 
Here  his  second  son,  Samuel  M.  Hunt,  was 
born  October  30th,  1793,  being  the  first 
child  born  in  this  town.  When  a  )'Oung 
man  he  chose  the  profession  of  medicine, 
and  pursued  that  study  with  Dr.  P.  B. 
Brooks,  afterwards  of  Binghamton.  He 
has  practiced  medicine  for  thirty  years,  prin- 
cipal!)- in  Broome  county;  but  for  three 
years  past  he  has  been  located  in  Marathon 
village,  on  the  same  premises  formerly  the 
residence  of  his  parents. 

As  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century  John  Hunt  was  appointed  b)-  the 
governor  and  council  a  justice  of  the  peace  ; 
which  office  he  held  by  successive  appoint- 
ments to  the  period  of  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred August  8th,  1815,  at  the  age  of  fifty 


Town  of  Marathon. 


349 


years.  His  widow  is  still  living,  in  the 
eight)-- fifth  \car  of  her  age.  Their  eldest 
daughter  married  Mr.  Charles  Richardson, 
of  Freetown,  and  is  now  residing  in  the  vil- 
lage of  Marathon.  Two  other  daughters 
arc  _\'et  li\'iiig.  F"our  others  of  their  chil- 
dren lived  to  be  married  and  settled  in 
this  section  of  the  countrw  but  are  now 
deceased.  Abiam  Hrink  with  his  faniiK- 
moved  into  the  present  bounds  of  the  vil- 
lage in  the  spring  of  1800,  and  located  a 
few  rods  south  of  Mr.  Hunt's,  on  the  north 
part  of  lot  No.  82,  then  State  land.  He 
came  from  the  present  town  of  Union,  be- 
low Binghamton,  on  the  Susquehanna  river, 
bringing  his  famil}-  and  furniture  in  a  canoe. 
He  was  a  son  of  Captain  William  Brink,  a 
patriot  of  the  Revolution,  who  had  suffered 
much  by  the  depredations  of  tories  in  the 
war  at  Wyoming,  and  subsequenth-  lost  a 
great  amount  of  propert}'  b}'  the  great  ice- 
flood  in  that  x-alle^-.  Abram  Brink  was  a 
robust  and  industrious  citizen,  and  a  valua- 
ble pioneer  in  clearing  up  the  rugged  wil- 
derness, and  preparing  it  for  the  residence 
of  posterity.  He  kept  the  first  ta\'ern  ever 
licensed  in  this  town,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  present  century  up  to  the  time 
of  his  decease  in  1824.  Into.xicating  liquors, 
as  a  beverage,  were  at  that  time  considered 
as  necessary  as  food  in  a  tavern  for  the  re- 
freshment of  guests ;  and  although  their 
deleterious  effects  were  visible,  not  only  in 
the  physical,  moral  and  mental  prostration 
of  all  who  indulged  in  the  potation,  yet  the 
traffic  was  for  a  long  period  sustained  by 
public  sentiment  and  by  the  laws  of  the 
State.  Mr.  Brink  was  succeeded  in  the 
tavern  by  his  onl\-  surviving  son,  Chester, 
for  a  few  years,  when,  influenced  b}-  a  strong 
aversion  to  dealing  in  intoxicating  liquors, 
he  relinquished  the  business  and  emploj-ed 
himself  in  cultivating  and  improving  the 
same  farm,  antl  some  other  adjoining  lands, 
which  he  had  acijuired  b)'  purchase. 


A  few  years  previous  to  the  arrival  of 
Mr.  Brink  here  a  famih-  b\-  the  name  of 
Alford  had  .settled  about  three-fourths  of  a 
mile  south,  on  the  State's  lot,  and  some 
years  after  sold  out  to  Daniel  Huntle\',  a  son 
of  Deacon  William  H untie)-,  who  resided  for 
several  years  on  the  next  farm  south.  A 
man  by  the  name  of  Lee  also  lived  a  few 
years  on  the  premises  of  Mr.  Alford,  hav- 
ing married  his  daughter.  At  the  close  of 
the  last  century  a  traveler  from  the  north, 
in  passing  down  this  valley,  after  leaving 
the  fordwa)'  at  Chaplin's,  would  find  the 
following  residents  on  the  east  side  of  the 
river  : —  First,  the  family  of  Mr.  Hunt ;  sec- 
ond, Mr.  Brink  ;  third,  Mr.  Alford  and  Mr. 
Lee  ;  next,  Dr.  Hunt,  and  lastly,  Mr.  Cole, 
with-in  this  count)'.  South  and  near  the 
county  line  on  the  east  side  of  the  river, 
was  the  residence  of  General  Samuel  Coe, 
and  directly  opposite,  on  the  west  bank,  was 
the  house  of  Jonathan  Cowdrey. 

Soon  after  this  period  John  S.  Squires 
located  on  a  farm  south  of  Mr.  Alford,  but 
shortly  after  purchased  a  farm  in  the  pres- 
ent town  of  Lapeer,  and  removed  his  fam- 
ih- there  into  the  forest  at  quite  a  distance 
from  neighbors,  it  being  the  same  farm 
where  his  son,  Dan  C.  Squires,  afterward 
resided.  About  the  )-ear  1800  Ebenezer 
Carley  moved  into  this  town  from  Unadilla, 
and  located  on  the  west  side  of  the  river, 
where  his  son  Alanson  subsequently  re- 
sided. He  was  commissioned  captain  of 
militia  compan)-  number  one,  organized  in 
this  section  of  the  country.  He  had  a  large 
family  of  children.  Ezekiel  C.  became  a 
captain  of  the  militia  and  also  held  the  office 
of  justice  of  the  peace.  Of  this  large  fam- 
ily none  are  now  living  e.xcept  two  brothers, 
Alanson  and  Oren. 

It  would  be  a  difficult  task,  at  this  remote 
period,  to  ascertain  the  precise  date  of  the 
arrival  of  each  family  of  the  first  settlers 
here,  as  far  back  as  the  close  of  the  last  cen- 


350 


History  of  Cortland  County, 


tur\",  or  the  regular  order  as  tntlie  jiriorits' 
of  time,  in  c\ery  case,  when  thej'  entered 
this  valley.      In  F"ebniary  of  the  )-ear   1805 

Patrick  Maller\-,  wlio  some  years  after  be- 
came   a    caj^tain    of    militia,    a    brother    of 

Scjuirc  Hunt's  wife,  arrived  here  with  his 
wife  and  one  child,  and  settlecJ  on  the  farm 
one  mile  north  of  Marathon  village,  after- 
wards occupied  b\-  G.  Penno\'er.  He  re- 
sided a  few  weeks  with  his  sister's  family, 
while  erecting  a  log  house  for  the  reception 
of  his  own.  This  was  early  in  the  spring, 
when  each  famil}'  was  actively  employed  in 
manufacturing  maple  sugar.  To  secure  a 
supply  of  such  an  important  article  for  do- 
mestic use,  it  became  necessar}'  for  him  to 
tap  his  trees  prior  to  furnishing  his  house. 
The  farm  was  situated  mostl)-  on  the  west 
side  of  the  river,  and  his  maple  trees  were 
on  the  flat,  directly  across  the  stream.  Be- 
ing busil)-  engaged  one  daj-,  assisted  b}'  his 
wife,  in  gathering  and  boiling  sap,  they 
were  detained  until  approaching  darkness 
reminded  them  that  it  was  time  to  start  for 
home.  They  entered  their  canoe  and  had 
just  reached  the  eastern  shore  and  found 
the  narrow  path  that  led  down  to  the  stream 
to  Mr.  Hunt's,  when,  to  their  surprise  and 
consternation,  their  ears  were  saluted  with 
the  most  clamorous,  violent  and  discordant 
sounds,  from  directly  across  the  river,  they 
had  ever  heard.  The  woods  were  appar- 
ently full  of  monsters  in  pursuit  of  them,  as 
their  intended  victims,  and  engaged  in  fiend- 
ish strife  respecting  the  several  shares  of  the 
spoils.  How  to  escape  from  these  mon- 
strous cannibals  was  the  subject  of  an.xious 
thought  and  hasty  deliberation.  Mrs.  Mal- 
lery  advised  a  rapid  retreat;  but  her  hus- 
band, being  a  \cry  stout  man,  aiul  u  isliing 
to  retain  his  reputation  for  braverv,  had  a 
great  aversion  to  "an  attack  in  the  rear  " 
He  therefore  firmly  grasped  his  axe,  which 
he  carried  in  his  hand  as  an  instrument  of 
defense,    and    cautiousl}-   followed   his  wife, 


vv  ho  alternatclv  ran  forvvard  a  few  rods  with 
speed  and  then  fell  back  again,  urging  him 
to  make  a  more  rapid  progress.  Notwith- 
standing the  captain's  resolute  intentions,  it 
is  probable  that  tlir  ni.iich  w.is  not  very 
slow  :  and  the\-  soon  reached  the  house  of 
their  friends  without  suffering  an  attack, 
and  gave  the  alarm  of  the  approaching  en- 
emy. But  they  were  soon  relieved  of  their 
fears,  though  somewhat  mortified  to  learn 
that  these  savage  monsters  were  nothing 
more  tlian  a  class  of  nocturnal  birds  called 
owls,  incapable  of  injuring  either  man  or 
beast. 

Dr.  S.  M.  Hunt,  son  of  Ur.  Japheth 
Hunt,  was  born  in  Marathon,  on  tlie  30th 
of  October,  1798.  His  grandfather  settled 
on  the  farm  now  owned  b_v  A.  S.  Johnson, 
known  as  the  Comstock  place.  His  father 
settled  on  the  east  side  of  the  river  where 
the  Marathon  House  now  stands  ;  there  S. 
M.  Hunt  was  born.  He  finished  his  edu- 
cation in  the  Homer  Academv'.  then  one 
of  the  most  famous  educational  institutions 
in  Central  New  York.  He  studied  medi- 
cine with  Dr.  Pelatiah  Brooks  and,  after 
receiving  his  diploma,  practiced  his  chosen 
l)rofession  in  Killawog,  Upper  Lisle,  Maine 
and  Marathon.  He  held  the  office  of  jus- 
tice of  the  peace,  judge  of  the  Court  of 
Common  Pleas  and  justice  of  the  sessions. 
In  1852  he  returned  to  Marathon,  where 
he  afterwards  resided,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  years  at  Killawog.  He  was  mar- 
ried, at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  to  Maria 
Havens,  daughter  of  Mordecai  Havens  and 
sister  of  Dr.  Daniel  and  Charles  G.  Havens, 
the  latter  a  prominent  lawyer  of  New  York 
city.  Their  children  were  D.  Deloss  and 
Duray  Hunt,  now  of  Marathon,  and  Dr. 
De  Forest  Hunt,  of  Grand  Rapids,  Mich., 
and  Mrs.  C.  A.  King,  of  Albany.  Dr. 
Hunt  vvas  a  charter  member  of  the  Masonic 
Lodge  at  Marathon,  which  suffered  an  irrep- 
arable loss  in  his  death. 


Town  of  Marathon. 


35> 


According  to  Dr.  Hunt's  historical  notes, 
already  alluded  to,  mills  for  sawing  lumber 
and  grinding  grain  were  not  erected  in 
Marathon  until  1808,  although  the  want  of 
them  was  sadh'  felt  long  before  that.  They 
were  the  first  framed  buildings  on  the  site 
of  Marathon  \'illage.  Malachi  Church 
emigrated  to  Marathon  in  1805,  from 
Chenango  count}',  a  distance  of  about  fort}' 
miles.  This  journe}-  was  accomplished  in 
three  days  of  severe  toil.  He  was  born  in 
Brattleboro,  Vt,  on  the  15th  of  May, 
1769,  and  at  the  age  of  twent}'  married 
Luc}-  Blakeslee;  the}-  had  a  large  famil}- 
of  children.  He  was  a  blacksmith,  but 
upon  his  arrixal  in  the  place,  found  little 
encouragement  for  a  mechanic,  as  there 
were  then  but  a  few  residents.  Ten  or 
twelve  v'ears  after  his  arrival  he  built  a 
framed  house  and  shop  on  the  west  side  of 
the  river  a  few  rods  from  the  site  of  the 
railroad  depot.  There,  with  the  assistance 
of  his  sons,  he  carried  on  blacksmithing 
several  years.  In  181 5  he  was  made  a 
justice  of  the  peace  and  held  the  office  for 
many  years.  He  was  also  made  a  deacon 
in  the  Baptist  Church  in  1823  and  filled  the 
office  until  his  death  in  November,   1S46. 

Deacon  Huntley,  another  prominent 
pioneer,  came  into  the  valle}'  at  an  early 
da}-  and  located  about  a  mile  south  of  the 
village,  where  he  worked  at  blacksmithing 
for  a  time.  His  son  John  was  also  a  black- 
smith. 

Allen  Rice  was  an  earl}'  settler  in  the 
valley,  and  seeing  the  apparent  need  of  a 
blacksmith,  put  up  a  small  shop,  the  first 
in  the  town.  Although  he  had  not  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  trade,  he  did 
considerable  work  at  it  for  a  time,  and  then 
moved  awa}-.  He  afterwards  returned 
and  built  a  shop  for  w-ooi-carding,  near 
where  D.  Hillsinger's  mill  now  stands.  This 
proved  to  be  a  great  convenience  to  the 
inhabitants. 


An   incident    in   the    life   of   Mr.    Brink, 

whose  settlement  in  the  \illage  we  have 
already  described,  is  worth}-  of  preserva- 
tion. He  w,as  returning  from  Lisle  on  foot 
one  e\-ening,  with  a  plowshare  on  his 
back,  which  he  had  taken  to  be  repaired, 
and  had  just  entered  the  woods  on  the  west 
side  of  the  river  north  of  Killawog,  when 
he  heard  an  animal  following  his  footsteps 
along  the  narrow  path,  and  approaching  at 
times  so  near  to  him  that  he  could  see  his 
eye-balls  shining  in  the  darkness.  Mr. 
Brink's  sociabilit}-  was  not  such  as  to  incline 
him  to  a  ver}-  close  acquaintance  with  the 
stranger,  and  keeping  on  his  w-a}'  he  tried 
to  drive  the  animal  back  b}-  loud  shouts; 
but  without  avail.  He  did,  however,  keep 
the  pursuer  at  ba}-  until  he  had  nearly 
emerged  from  the  woods,  when  the  animal 
came  uncomfortabh-  close  to  his  heels.  It 
was  a  happy  thought  w-hich  led  him  to  la}- 
down  the- iron  plowshare  and  begin  ham- 
mering on  it  with  an  iron  bolt.  This 
strange  music  actuall}-  caused  the  animal  to 
retreat  into  the  forest.  Mr.  Brink  con- 
gratulated himself  the  more  when  he  learned 
that  his  pursuer  was  a  large  panther. 

About  the  year  1808,  John  Chamberlain 
moved  into  the  town  and  built  a  saw-mill 
on  the  creek  at  the  same  place  where  David 
Hillsinger's  saw-mill  now-  'stands.  Mr. 
Chamberlain  was  a  carpenter,  but  had  little 
experience  as  millwright;  yet  he  erected 
his  mill,  [)ut  in  the  wheels  and  gearing  and 
all  worked  to  his  satisfaction,  except  the 
saw.  This  persisted  in  running  out  of  a 
direct  line  to  such  an  extent  that  a  plank 
two  inches  thick  at  one  end.  would  be  cut 
down  as  thin  as  a  shingle  at  the  other.  Mr. 
Chamberlain  was  unable  to  correct  the 
difficult}-,  and  hnall}-  became  full}-  con- 
vinced that  the  mill  w-as  influenced  by 
witchcraft,  a  general  belief  in  which  was 
prevalent  in  those  days.  He  was  a  godly 
man,      subsequentl}-     becoming      a     useful 


35^ 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


])rcaclicr  in  the  I'rco-W'ill  Baptist  denom- 
ination, and  he  was  not  wiUing  to  behevc 
that  any  good  influence  was  at  work  in  his 
mill;  and  he  had  heard  of  nian\-  apparently 
well  authenticate-d  instances  of  similar  evil 
beingworked  through  the  agency  of  witches; 
the  more  he  thought  of  it,  the  more  firml)- 
he  became  convincetl  that  this  was  the 
source  of  his  trouble  in  the  mill,  and  he 
resolved  to  ilo  everything  in  his  pi)Wer  to 
eradicate  the  influence.  He  accepted  the 
prevailing  belief  that  a  witch  could  not  be 
killed  with  ordinar\-  powder  and  ball,  but 
that  if  a  silver  bullet  was  used,  fatal  results 
would  surely  follow.  He  accordingly  ham- 
mered out  a  silver  bullet,  put  a  remarkable 
charge  of  powder  in  his  gun,  followed  by 
the  costh-  ball,  and  repaired  to  the  mill  for 
his  battle  with  the  invisible  agency.  Start- 
ing the  saw,  he  stood  near,  with  leveled 
gun,  awaiting  the  first  indication  of  way- 
wardness in  the  mill.  It  soon  appeared  as 
usual,  when  he  blazed  awa)-  direct!}-  at  the 
saw.  The  eftect  was  certainly  all  he  could 
have  expected ;  for  the  extraordinary  charge 
caused  the  gun  to  "kick"  him  o\-er  in  one 
direction,  while  the  hard  silver  bullet  so 
bent  the  saw  in  the  other  that  its  days  of 
usefulness  were  over.  The  effect  on  the 
witch  was  never  ascertained.  The  services 
of  an  cxperi#nced  millwright  now  had  to 
be  called  in,  and  the  mill  was  placed  in  ex- 
cellent running  order  and  thereafter  it 
worked  satisfactorily. 

In  the  year  1808,  the  father  of  Thurlow 
Weed,  the  famous  politician  and  journalist, 
removed  to  the  town  of  Marathon,  and 
there  the  boyhood  of  tlie  future  eminent 
citizen  was  passed.  In  response  to  the 
request  of  H.  C.  Goodwin,  who  published 
a  history  of  the  count\'  man\-  \-ears  ago, 
Mr.  Weed,  then  a  resident  of  the  citj-  of 
Albany,  wrote  him  the  following  interest- 
ing letter  concerning  his  early  life  in  the 
vicinitN'  of  Marathon  : — 


•'.\l1!..vnv.  M.iy  16th.  1858. 
■■  H.  (.'.  Goodwin,  Esq.: 

••  My  Dear  Sir — Your  letter  ot  30th  of  .\pril 
lias  remained  i|uite  too  long  unanswered,  partly 
on  account  of  severe  illness  in  my  family,  but 
mainly  bei;ause  your  kind  and  nut  unusual  re- 
(|ue.st  embarrasses  me.  Several  applications,  sim- 
ihir  ill  character,  from  book-makers,  I  have 
simply  cleclined.  because,  first,  there  is  ncjthing 
in  m\-  life  entitled  to  historic  attention ;  and, 
second,  it  am  of  its  events  were  worthy  such  at- 
tention, it  is  neither  proper  or  becoming  in  me 
to  furnish  the  materials.  So  strong  are  my  con- 
victions of  propriety  in  this  regard  that,  many 
years  ago.  after  declining  to  furnish  information 
relating  to  myself,  asked  for  by  the  late  Jabez 
D.  Hammond.  1  declined  also  to  read  in  manu- 
script what  he  had  jirepared.  The  consequence 
of  that  refusal  is.  that  I  go  down  to  jjosterity — 
if  Hammond's  [jolitical  history  oudives  the  pres- 
ent generation — as  a  •  drummer  in  the  war  of 
181 2.'  Now.  I  am  entitled  to  no  such  distinc- 
tion; for  I  never  learned,  and  never  could  learn, 
a  note  or  stave  of  music.  I  remember  to  have 
gone,  when  a  boy.  once  or  twice  to  an  evening 
singing-school  :  but  after  unavailing  attempts  at 
ipiavers  and  semi-quavers,  the  teacher  snatched 
the  gamut  from  my  hand,  and  turned  me  out  of 
the  class.  I  will,  however,  in  this  instance,  de- 
part so  far  from  my  usual  practice  as  will  allow 
me  to  furnish  the  dates  you  desire,  though  in 
doing  so.  1  feel  as  1  suppose  one  should  feel  in 
robbing  a  hen-roost.  I  "ill  now  give  you  some 
'reminiscences'  connected  with  my  early  resi- 
dence in  Cortland  county. 

•■  In  the  winter  of  1808,  my  father, — an  hon- 
est, hard-working  man. — whose  industry,  subject 
to  the  various  draw-backs  of  sickness  and  ill- 
luck,  which  the  poor  only  can  understand,  en- 
abled him  to  furnish  but  a  scanty  support  for 
his  family,  in  the  hope  of  •  bettering  his  condi- 
tion.' removed  to  Cincinnatus.  in  Cortland  coun- 
ts where  Nathan  Weed,  his  youngest  brother, 
resided.  We  were  settled  in  a  log  house,  upon 
a  small  clearing,  about  a  mile  from  the  Onon- 
daga river;  or.  for  the  purpose  of  fixing  our 
locality.  I  had  better  say.  about  that  distance 
from  •  Brink's  Tavern.'  Cincinnatus  then,  what- 
ever may  be  its  present  condition,  was  in  its 
almost   wilderness  state.     1  have  not  been  there 


Town  of  Marathon. 


05  J 


in  half  a  century,  and  am  told  that  there  are  no 
forests,  or  land-marks,  or  monuments  b\'  which 
1  could  recall  or  identify  the  localities  of  which 
my  mind  retains  familiar  and  distinct  impressions. 
Inhabitants  were  then  ■  few  and  far  between.' 
Uur  nearest  neighbor  was  Mr.  Gridley.  a  farmer, 
rather  •  well  to  do  in  the  world,'  who  would 
work  hard  through  •  planting,'  or  •  hoeing,'  or 
'  harvesting,'  and  then  seek  indemnity  in  a  week 
or  ten  days'  ■  spree,'  on  new,  raw  whisky.  The 
most  fore-handed  family  in  the  neighborhood 
was  that  of  Captain  Carley,  (one  member  of 
which,  Alanson.  then  a  boy  of  my  own  age, 
was,  some  years  since,  a  respected  Member  of 
the  Legislature),  among  whose  luxuries,  as  I 
remember,  was  a  young  apple  orchard,  and  the 
only  •  bearing'  orchard  within  a  circuit  of  se\eral 
miles. 

"  My  first  employment  was  in  attenilance  upon 
an  ashery.  The  process  of  e.xtractiiig  lye  from 
ashes,  and  of  boiling  the  lye  into  black  salts, 
was  commonplace  enough:  but  when  the  melt- 
ing down  into  potash  came,  all  was  bustle  and 
excitement.  This  labor  was  succeeded,  when 
the  spring  had  advanced  far  enough,  bv  the  du- 
ties of  the  '  sap-bush.'  This  is  a  season  to  which 
the  farmers'  sons  and  daughters  look  forward 
with  agreeable  anticipations.  In  that  employ- 
ment toil  is  more  than  literally  sweetened.  The 
occupation  and  its  associations  are  healthful  and 
beneficial.  When  your  troughs  are  dug  (out  of 
basswood.  for  there  were  no  buckets  in  those 
days),  )our  trees  tapped,  your  sap  gathered, 
your  wood  cut,  and  your  fires  fed,  there  is  leisure 
either  for  reading  or  '  sparking.'  .\nd  what 
youthful  denizens  of  the  sap-bush  will  ever  for- 
get, while  •  sugaring-off,'  their  share  in  the  trans-  [ 
parent  and  delicious  streak  of  candy  congealed  ; 
and  cooled  in  snow  ?  Many  a  farmer's  son  has 
found  his  best  o])portunities  tor  mental  improve- 
ment in  his  intervals  of  leisure  while  ■  tending 
sap-bush.'  Such,  at  any  rate,  was  my  own  ex- 
perience. At  night  you  had  only  to  feed  the 
kettles  and  keep  up  your  fires — the  sap  having 
been  gathered  and  the  wood  cut  '  before  dark.' 
During  the  day  we  would  also  lay  in  a  good 
stock  of  fat  pine,  by  the  light  of  which,  blazing  i 
brightly  in  front  of  the  sugar-house,  in  the  posture 
the  serpent  was  condemned  to  assume  as  a  pen- 
alty for  tempting  our  great  first  grandmother,  I    I 


have  passed  many  and  many  a  delightful  night 
in  reading.  I  remember  in  this  wa\-  to  have 
read  a  history  of  the  French  Revolution,  and  to 
have  obtained  from  it  a  better  and  more  endur- 
ing knowledge  of  its  events  and  horrors,  and  of 
the  actors  in  that  great  national  tragedy,  than  I 
have  received  from  all  subsetpient  readings.  1 
remember  also  how  ha])py  I  was  in  being  able 
to  borrow  the  book  of  a  Mr.  Keyes,  after  a  two 
mile  tramp  through  the  snow,  shoeless,  my  feet 
swaddled  in  remnants  of  a  rag-carpet. 

••  Though  but  a  boy.  I  was  large,  healthy, 
strong,  not  laz\ ,  and,  therefore,  ambitious  '  to 
keep  up  my  row  '  in  planting  and  hoeing  ])ota- 
toes  and  corn.  The  principal  employment  of 
the  farmers  of  Cincinnatus,  fifty  years  ago,  was 
in  clearing  their  land.  Cattle,  during  the  win- 
ter, for  the  want  of  ■  fodder,'  were  turned  out  to 
'  browse '  in  the  •  slashings.'  As  the  work  of 
clearing  the  land  was  too  heavy  for  men  single- 
handed,  chopping  and  logging  ■  bees  '  were  re- 
sorted to  for  aggregating  labor.  These  seasons 
of  hard  work  were  rendered  exciting  and  festi\  e 
by  the  indispensable  gallon  bottle  of  whisky. 
There  were  '  bees '  also  for  log  house  raisings. 
After  the  loggings,  and  as  the  spring  opened, 
came  the  burning  of  the  log  and  brush-heaps,  and 
the  gathering  of  the  ashes. 

'•  But  little  wheat  was  grown  there  then,  and 
that  little  was  harvested  with  the  sickle,  the 
ground  being  too  rough  and  stumpy  for  cra- 
dling. 

"  Our  first  acquisition  in  the  way  of  ■  live 
stock  '  was  a  rooster  and  four  hens ;  and  I  re- 
member with  what  a  gush  of  gladness  I  was 
awakened  at  break  of  day  the  next  morning  by 
the  loud,  defiant  voice  of  chanticleer  ;  and  when, 
several  days  afterwards,  I  found  a  real  hen's 
nest  in  a  brush-heap,  with  eggs  in  it,  I  cackled 
almost  as  boisterousl}-  as  the  feathered  mother 
whom  1  had  surprised  in  the  feat  of  parturition. 
"  The  settlers  employed  in  clearing  and  '  bet- 
tering '  their  land,  raised  just  enough  to  live  on 
'from  hand  to  mouth.'  Their  principal,  and, 
indeed,  only  reliance  for  the  purchase  of  neces- 
saries from  '  the  store,'  was  upon  their  '  black 
salts.'  For  these  the.  merchants  always  juiiil 
'  the  highest  price  in  cash  or  goods.' 

'•  I  remember  the  stir  which  a  '  new  store,'  es- 
tablished in   Lisle    (some  seven  or  eight  miles 


354 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


down  the  river),  by  the  Rathbiins,  from  Oxford, 
created  in  our  neighborhood.  It  was  'all  the 
talk '  for  several  weeks,  and  until  a  party  of 
house-wives,  by  clubbing  with  their  products, 
fitted  out  an  expedition.  Vehicles  and  horses 
were  scarce,  but  it  was  finally  arranged, —  A, 
furnishing  a  wagon  ;  B,  a  horse ;  C,  a  mare,  and 
D,  a  boy  to  drive.  Si.\  matrons,  with  a  com- 
modity of  black  salts,  tow  cloth,  flax,  and  maple 
sugar,  went  their  way  rejoicing,  and  returned 
triumphantly  at  sun-set  with  fragrant  Bohea  for 
themselves,  plug  tobacco  for  their  husbands, 
flashy  calico  for  the  children,  gay  ribbons  for  the 
girls,  jack-knives  for  the  boys,  crockery  for  the 
cupboard,  and  snuft"  for  '  grannie.'  This  expe- 
dition was  a  theme  for  much  gossip.  The  w'on- 
ders  of  the  '  new  store  '  were  described  to  .staring 
eyes  and  open  mouths.  The  merchant  and  his 
clerk  were  criticised  in  their  de|)ortment,  man- 
ners and  dress.  The  former  wore  shiny  boots 
with  tassels;  the  latter,  a  ruffle  shirt, —  and  both 
smelt  of  pomatum  I  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
word  '  dandy '  had  then  been  invented,  or  it 
would  have  certainly  come  in  play  on  that  occa- 
sion. Thirty  years  afterwards  I  laughed  over 
all  this  with  my  old  friend.  General  Ransom 
Rathbun,  the  veritable  proprietor  of  that  '  new- 
store.' 

"  The  grinding  of  our  neighborhood  was  done 
at  ■  Hunt's  mill,'  which  on  one  occasion  was 
disabled  by  some  defect  in  the  flume  or  dam, 
and  then  we  were  compelled  to  go  with  our 
grists  either  to  Homer  or  to  '  Chenango  Forks.' 

"  I  recollect,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  to 
have  seen  boys  riding  with  a  bushel  of  corn 
(bare-back,  with  a  tow  halter)  to  the  distillery, 
and  returning  with  the  gallon  bottle  of  whisky, 
balanced  by  a  stone  in  the  other  end  of  the  bag. 

"  In  the  autumn  following  our  removal  to  Cin- 
cinnatus  I  had  '  worked  out '  and  earned  leather 
(sole  and  upper)  enough  for  a  pair  of  shoes, 
which  were  to  be  made  !))•  a  son  of  Crispin 
(Deacon  Badger,  if  I  remember  rightly),  who 
live<l  on  the  river  a  mile  and  a  half  away.  The 
deacon,  I  doubt  not,  has  gone  to  his  rest,  and  I 
forgive  him  the  fibs  he  told,  and  the  dozen  jour- 
neys I  made  barefooted  over  the  frozen  and 
'  hubby '  road  in  December,  before  the  shoes 
were  done. 

"  I   attended  one  regimental  re\iew,  or  '  gen- 


eral training,'  as  it  was  called.  It  was  an  emi- 
nently primitive  one.  Among  the  officers  were 
two  chapeaux,  to  which  Captain  Carley,  one  of 
the  two,  added  a  sword  and  sash  ;  four  feathers 
standing  erect  upon  felt  hats ;  fifteen  or  twenty 
muskets  ;  half  a  dozen  rifles  ;  two  horse  drums, 
and  as  many  '  s])irit-stirring  fifes.'  Of  rank  and 
file,  there  were  about  two  hundred  and  fifty.  In 
the  way  of  refreshments,  there  were  gingerbread, 
blackberry  pies,  and  whisky.  But  there  was 
neither  'sweat-leather,'  'little  jokers,'  or  other 
institutions  of  that  character,  upon  the  ground. 
Having,  before  leaving  Catskill,  seen  with  my 
own  eyes  a  live  governor  (Morgan  Lewis)  review 
a  whole  brigade,  I  regarded  that  training  as  a 
decided  failure. 

'•There  were  no  events  at  all  startling  during 
my  residence  at  Cincinnatus,  —  no  murders,  no 
suicides,  no  drownings,  no  robberies,  no  elope- 
ments, no  '  babes  lost  in  the  wootls,'  occurred  to 
astonish  the  natives.  .\  recruiting  sergeant  came 
along  (it  was  in  embargo  times),  and  three  or 
four  idle  fellows  (Herrings  and  Wilders  by  name, 
I  think),  '  'listed  '  and  marched  oft'. 

"  There  were  neither  churches  nor  '  stated 
preaching  '  in  town.  .A  Methodist  minister  came 
occasionally  and  held  meetings  in  private  houses, 
or  at  the  school-house.  In  the  winter  there  was 
a  school  on  the  river,  and  the  master,  who 
'  boarded  round,'  must  have  •  had  a  good  time  of 
it '  on  johnny-cake  for  breakfast,  lean  salt  pork 
for  dinner,  and  samp  and  milk  for  supper. 

"  There  were  but  few  amusements  in  those 
davs,  and  but  little  of  leisure  or  disposition  to 
indulge  in  iliem.  Those  that  I  remember  as 
most  pleasant  and  exciting  were  '  huskings '  and 
'coon-hunts.'      There  was  fun,  too.  in  smoking 

•  woodchncks '  out  of  their  holes. 

■•Dining  my  residence  there,  .Mr.  \\'attle> 
moved  into  tiie  neighborhood.  He  came,  I 
think,  t'rom  what  was  then  called  '  the  Triangle,' 
somewhere  in  Ciienango  county,  and  was  a  sub- 
land  agent.     'They  were,  for  that  region,  rather 

•  stylish  '  people,  and  became  obnoxious  to  some, 
and  caused  a  good  deal  of  remark.  One  thing 
that  excited  esjiecial  indignation  was,  that  per- 
sons going  to  the  house  were  asked  to  clean 
their  shoes  at  the  door,  a  .scraper  having  been 
placed  there  for  that  purpose.  .A  maiden  lady 
(Miss  'Theodosia   Wattles)  rendered  herself  es- 


Town  of  :\Iarathox. 


355 


pecially  obnoxious  to  the  spinster  neigitbors  by 
•  dressing  up  '  week-day  afternoons.  They  all 
agreed  in  saying  she  was  a  •  proud,  stuck  up 
thing.'  In  those  days,  '  go-to-meeting  clothes  ' 
were  reserved  for  Sundays. 

"  Leeks  were  the  bane  of  my  life   in   Cincin- 
natus.     They  tainted  everything,  but  especially   ^ 
the  milk  and  butter.     Such  was   my  aversion  to   j 
■  leeky  milk.'  that   to  this  day  I   cannot  endure 
milk  in  any  form. 

"  In  the  fall  and  winter  corn-shelling  furnished 
evening  occupation.  The  ears  were  shelled 
either  with  a  cob.  or  the  handle  of  a  frying-pan. 
There  have  been  improvements  since  in  that  as 
in  other  departments  of  agriculture. 

"  Such  are,  in  a  crude  form,  some  of  my  recol- 
lections of  life  in  Cincinnatus  half  a  century  ago. 
That  town,  then  very  large,  has  since  been  sub- 
divided into  three  or  four  towns.  Upon  the 
farm  of  my  old  friends,  the  Carleys.  the  large 
and  flourishing  village  of  Marathon  has  grown 
up.  .-^nd  then,  too,  a  substantial  bridge  has 
taken  the  place  of  the  ■  dug  out '  in  which  we 
used  to  cross  the  river.  Of  the  sprinkling  of 
inhabitants  who  had  then  just  commenced  sub- 
duing the  forests  and  insinuating  scanty  deposits 
of  seed  between  the  stumps  and  roots,  but  few, 
of  course,  survive.  The  settlers  were  industri- 
ous, honest,  law-abiding,  and.  with  few  excep- 
tions, temperate  citizens.  The  friendly  neigh- 
borhood relations,  so  necessary  in  a  new  country, 
existed  there.  .Ml  tried  not  only  to  take  care  of 
themselves,  but  to  help  their  neighbors.  Farm- 
ing implements  and  household  articles  were 
pretty  much  enjoyed  in  common.  Everybody 
'  lent '  what  they  possessed,  and  •  borrowed  ' 
whatever  they  wanted. 

"  You  must  judge  whether  these  hastily  writ- 
ten recollections  of  Cincinnatus   would    at    all 
interest  the  few  old  inhabitants  remaining  there  : 
and  having  so  judged,  you  are  at  liberty  to  ]3Ut  ■ 
them  into  your  book,  or  into  the  fire.  i 

■•  Verv  truly  yours,  i 

■'  Thurlow  Weed.'' 
J.  Zechariah  Squires,  whose  wife  was 
Abram  Brink's  sister,  came  to  the  town 
from  Binghamtoii  in  1801,  bringing  his 
family  in  a  canoe.  He  helped  Mr.  Brink 
build    a    log    house     near    where    William  i 


Squires,  his  son,  now  lives.  They  lived  in 
Mr.  Brink's  house  a  year  or  two  and  then 
located  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  south  of  Main  street; 
there  they  remained  for  a  time  and  then 
removed  to  a  f;irm  in  Lapeer. 

Settlements  in  tlie  Texas  Valley  were 
made  very  earl>'.  It  was  the  central  point 
of  the  old  town  of  Cincinnatus,  when  it 
comprised  Willet.  Freetown  and  Marathon, 
and  about  the  time  of  the  organization  of 
Cincinnatus,  in  1804,  several  families  came 
in  and  settled  at  or  near  that  point.  The 
location  was  on  the  old  State  road  and  it 
was  believed  in  view  of  this  fact  and  its  cen- 
tral situation,  that  a  thriving  village  would 
grow  up.  These  hopes  were  not  realized, 
however.  The  Tioughnioga  and  the  Otselic 
valleys  were  more  rapidly  settled  for  farm- 
ing purposes  and  mechanics  and  tradesmen 
also  located  there  more  rapidly  than  at 
other  points  in  the  town,  or  at  "  The  Cen- 
ter," as  it  was  then  called. 

Thomas  French,  a  man  advanced  in  years 
and  with  a  large  family,  moved  to  the 
"  Center "  soon  after  the  organization  of 
the  town,  built  a  small  framed  house  and 
kept  the  first  tavern  in  the  place  for  a 
number  of  years.  His  son,  Calvin,  suc- 
ceeded him  in  the  homestead,  where  he  died 
some  years  ago  at  the  age  of  eighty-five 
years.  A  few  years  later  a  man  named 
Hammond  removed  to  the  Center,  bringing 
a  large  family ;  he  located  about  eighty 
rods  west  of  Mr.  I-'rench,  where  he  kept  an 
inn  for  a  time.  He  was  also  engaged  in 
tanning  and  boot  and  shoemaking.  His 
grandson  is  now  carrying  on  blacksmithing 
at  Texas  Valley. 

Dr.  Mordecai  Lowe  located  at  the  Center 
about  the  year  18 12  and  was  engaged  in 
the  practice  of  his  profession  for  several 
years.  He  was  the  only  resident  phj'sician 
in  that  region  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years. 
He  is  remembered  as  a  man  of  fair   educa- 


356 


llisi'oRV  ov  Cortland  Countv. 


tion,  bright  intellect  ami  successful  in  his 
practice;  but  his  remuneration  for  liis  labors 
was  meager.  He  died  of  consumption 
about  fifty  years  ago.  His  son  married  a 
daughter  of  Captain  Mallery  and  removed 
to  a  western  State,  where  his  wife  tlied, 
leaving  a  daughter  who  now  lives  with  her 
aunt,  Mrs.  Nathan  Smith,  in  Cortland  vil- 
lage. Dr.  Lowe's  daughter  married  Will- 
iam Hinman,  of  Merrill  Creek,  town  of 
Marathon. 

An  elderly  man  named  Barton,  with  sev- 
eral grown  sons,  were  pioneers  in  Texas 
Valley.  The  family  were  better  educated 
and  possessed  ability  above  the  average  of 
pioneers,  who  had  few  opportunities  for 
improving  their  education  and  mental  train- 
ing. Moses  Barton  was  justice  of  the  peace 
for  some  years  and  at  one  time  one  of  the 
county  judges.  He  emigrated  to  Michigan 
some  forty  years  ago.  William  Barton,  jr., 
held  the  office  of  justice  of  the  peace  some 
years  and  was  elected  Member  of  Assembly 
in  1824.  Henry  D.  Barton,  the  youngest 
of  the  brothers,  studied  law  and  settled  in 
a  village  on  Seneca  lake,  where  he  became 
somewhat  distinguished  as  a  Democratic 
politician. 

Samuel  Edwards  was,  with  his  sons, 
early  settlers  at  the  Center.  The  Leach 
famih',  also,  came  there  at  an  early  day. 
Their  names  were  Thomas,  Alexander, 
Jonathan  and  Timoth}-,  all  large,  powerful 
men,  who  did  much  to  clear  up  the  wilder- 
ness. 

The  Meachams,  including  five  brothers, 
settled  early  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  town. 
Their  names  were  Simon,  (jideon,  Issacher, 
Isaac  and  Jonah;  the}'  located  near  Merrill 
creek.  Jonah  kept  a  tavern  for  a  time, 
where  llnmer  Wightman's  cheese  factory 
is  now  located. 

The  Sherwood  family,  consisting  of  Dan- 
iel, William  L.,  Seth,  Noah  and  Caleb  (all 
now  dead),  came  in  and   settled   on   Merrill 


creek  a  few  years  after  the  Meachams  came. 
Daniel  Sherwf)od  ser\'ed  as  justice  of  the 
peace  for  several  years,  and  was  sent  to  the 
Legislature  in  1822,  where  he  ser\'ed  three 
years.  William  L.  Sherwood  was  also 
elected  justice  of  the  peace.  Se\'eral  other 
early  settlers  on  Merrill  creek  might  be 
mentioned  with  commendation,  such  as 
Capt.  John  Da\is  and  Roswell  Hinman, 
whose  wives  were  sisters  of  the  Sherwoods  ; 
also  John  and  I'eter  Fralick,  all  of  whom 
were  useful  and  respected  men. 

The  entire  region  between  the  Tiough- 
nioga  valley  and  Merrill  creek  was  covered 
with  a  dense  forest,  so  thick  as  to  be  diffi- 
cult of  passage,  and  the  narrow  path  con- 
necting the  two  localities  continued  until  a 
comparati\el)'  late  date  to  be  a  rough, 
muddy  way  that  was  not  at  all  attractive  to 
travelers. 

Along  the  northern  border  of  the  town 
and  on  the  State  road,  about  half-way  be- 
tween the  Center  and  the  river,  a  few 
families  .settled  as  early  as  1812-15.  Of 
these  there  were  two  brothers,  Nathan  and 
Eleazer  Taft,  and  an  old  gentleman  named 
Noah  U^pham,  whose  lands  are  now  owned 
by  his  grandson,  Duane  Upham.  Nathaniel 
Bosworth  located  on  the  farm  where  Eleazer 
Meacham  and  his  sons  now  reside.  He 
was  a  man  possessed  of  more  than  ordinar\- 
abilit}',  of  fine  personal  appearance  and  ro- 
bust constitution.  He  was  commissioned  as 
captain  of  the  first  artillery  company  or- 
ganized in  this  region  of  country.  He 
made  several  applications  to  the  State  for 
a  field-piece  and  finalK'  succeeded  in  get- 
ting a  small  brass  thiee-pounder.  The 
captain  then  onlered  the  companj-  to  meet 
at  Killawog,  whither  he  had  removed,  to 
con\-e)'  the  gun  to  his  former  residence, 
where  it  was  ordered  to  be  kept.  The 
ceremony  of  its  reception  and  dedication  to 
the  use  of  the  company,  an  able  speech  b)- 
the    captain,    the  firing  of  the  cannon  and 


Town  of  Marathon. 


357 


the  military  parade,  proved  highly  inter- 
esting to  the  large  gathering  of  people  who 
came  from  far  and  near  to  \\  itness  the  dis- 
play. Many  of  them  had  heard  of  heavy 
artillery,  and  of  its  use  in  hard-fought  bat- 
tles; but  comparati\el_\-  few  had  c\cr  seen 
a  cannon,  and  imagined  that  the  gun  would 
be  as  large  as  a  man's  body  and  taking  a 
ball  as  big  as  a  man's  liead.  Several  of  the 
citizens  voluntered  to  escort  the  gun  to  its 
destination  and  followed  the  company  on 
its  march  of  six  miles,  witnessing  the  first 
loading  and  firing  at  Marathon,  where  a 
short  halt  was  made.  After  arriving  at 
their  destination  and  partaking  of  refresh- 
ments, the  militar)'  drill  was  resumed  and 
general  enjoyment  reigned,  when  a  casualty 
occurred  which  precipitated  the  entire  as- 
semblage into  the  deepest  gloom.  In  load- 
ing the  cannon  a  premature  discharge  oc- 
curred, which  horribl)-  mutilated  and  fatal- 
ly injured  a  man  named  \\'ebster,  and  the 
clay  ended  in  sorrow.  Captain  Bosworth 
was  afterward  justice  of  the  peace  several 
years.  He  was  the  father  of  Joseph  S. 
Bosworth,  who  was  born  in  the  town  in 
1808,  practiced  law  in  Binghamton  and 
subsequent!)'  in  New  \'ork  city,  where  he 
became  very  successful  and  popular,  and 
was  elected  chief  justice  of  the  Superior 
Court. 

Barnabas  Wood  and  wife,  with  a  family 
of  four  adult  sons  and  one  ilaughter,  came 
into  the  town  in  1805  and  settled  at  first 
on  the  "  salt  road  "  east  of  the  village  ;  af- 
terward the  family,  with  the  exception  of 
Erastus,  located  at  the  ri\-er  on  a  farm  north 
of  the  village,  where  Martin  Brooks  now 
lives.  Two  of  the  sons,  Erastus  and  Parley 
P.,  were  noted  for  their  legal  pretensions 
and  their  aversion  to  matrimon}-.  Barna- 
bas Wood,  jr.,  was  one  of  the  first  consta- 
bles elected  in  the  town.  He  also,  like  his 
brothers  referred  to,  continued  in  celibacy 
till  considerablv  advanced  in  \-ears,  when  he 


married  a  daughter  of  Judge  Lewis.  Au- 
gustus, the  youngest  son,  was  a  person  of 
strange  and  eccentric  habits.  He  claimed 
to  hold  frequent  personal  communications 
with  denizens  of  the  other  world,  and  his 
mind  was  occupied  with  such  delusions  to 
the  almost  entire  neglect  of  his  personal 
appearance,  dress  or  cleanliness  ;  he  refused 
to  have  his  beard  shaved  off,  a  habit  which 
gave  considerable  offense  in  those  days,  or 
to  change  his  clothing  as  civilized  people 
deem  necessar\-.  The  family,  believing  he 
was  insane,  finally  sought  the  assistance  of 
neighbors  to  compel  him  to  conform  to 
habits  of  common  decenc}-.  Accordingly, 
several  young  men  of  the  vicinity  volun- 
teered to  give  the  eccentric  man  a  general 
ablution  as  often  as  once  in  two  weeks. 
Wood  did  not  take  kindly  to  this  kind  of 
treatment,  and  at  length  decided  to  submit 
to  it  no  longer.  P'or  purposes  of  personal 
defense  he  took  a  common  case  knife, 
ground  it  sharp  on  both  edges  and  to  a 
point  and  skillfully  fitted  it  in  a  handle, 
making  a  very  dangerous  dirk.  As  the 
time  approached  for  another  bath,  Wood 
watched  for  his  enemies  anil  when  he  saw 
their  approach,  retreated  to  the  attic  of  the 
house  where  he  took  refuge  behind  the 
chimney,  the  top  of  which  protruded  but  a 
little  above  the  roof  Reaching  up  he  se- 
cured a  number  of  bricks  from  the  chimney 
top  to  aid  in  his  defense.  The  assaulting 
party  arrived  at  the  house  and  ordered  him 
to  come  down,  and  when  he  positively  de- 
clined, they  advanced  to  capture  him  ;  but 
he  used  the  bricks  with  such  effect  that  the 
party  was  forced  to  retreat.  A  ladder  was 
then  put  up  against  the  house  and  the  lead- 
er of  the  party  had  nearly  reached  a  point 
of  \'antage,  when  he  was  hit  by  a  brick 
which  would  have  knocked  him  to  the 
ground,  had  he  not  been  caught  by  one  of 
his  comrades.  A  general  and  precipitate 
assault  was  then  made  and  W^ood  was  cap- 


358 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


tured,  but  not  without  his  using  his  dan- 
gerous blade  with  smnc  unfortunate  conse- 
quences. Tlic  late  Alanson  Carley  was  one 
of  the  part}'  and  received  a  wound  on  his 
check  which  left  a  scar  that  remained 
tlirough  his  life.  Wood  was  plunged  into 
the  river  and  given  repeated  washings  that 
partially  overcame  his  peculiarity.  He  was 
soon  after  taken  charge  of  by  the  overseers 
of  the  poor  as  a  pauper,  and  after  the  divis- 
ion of  the  town,  each  of  the  four  towns  con- 
tributed equally  to  his  support.  The  board 
and  care  of  the  pauper  was  let  to  the  low- 
est bidder  and  annually  caused  a  good  deal 
of  local  excitement.  This  method  of  pro- 
viding for  the  poor  was  continued  for  some 
years,  until  the  more  humane  plan  now  in 
vogue  was  adopted. 

It  is  manifestly  impossible  to  follow  all 
of  the  early  settlements  in  detail  in  all  parts 
of  the  town  ;  but  we  have  noted  most  of 
the  important  ones,  who  were  most  instru- 
mental in  clearing  it  of  the  primeval  forest 
and  laying  the  foundation  of  the  present 
prosperity  and  wealth  of  the  communit}-. 
The  stage  line  from  Syracuse  to  Bingham- 
ton  ran  through  the  valley,  following  the 
course  of  the  river,  and  gave  the  inhabitants 
of  early  years  their  chief  coinmunication 
with  the  outer  world  ;  but  the  rapid  growth 
of  the  village  was  much  retarded  from  want 
of  railroad  communication,  until  the  con- 
struction of  the  Syracuse  and  Binghamton 
road,  as  heretofore  described.  Upon  the 
consummation  of  this  undertaking  it  soon 
became  apparent  that  the  town  of  Mara- 
thon, and  especially  the  village,  was  to  be 
one  of  the  localities  which  would  be  partic- 
ularly benefited  therefrom.  The  dairying 
interest,  which  had  already  gained  some 
prominence,  increased  rapidh-  ;  manufact- 
uring interests  received  an  impetus  and 
population  v\'as  invited  to  the  locality. 

The  first  town  meeting  in  the  old  town 
of  Harrison  was  held  at   Marathon,  March 


2d,  1 8 19.  Beginning  with  that  date,  the 
following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  of  the  town,  the  supervisor's 
name  being  given  first  in  each  year: — Dan- 
iel Steward,  I.ulher  Keyes,  1820-21  ;  Chas. 
Gerard,  John  C.  Schoonmaker,  1822  ;  John 
Davis,  Luther  Keyes,  1823;  John  Schoon- 
maker, Cephas  Comstock,  1824-25  ;  Cephas 
Comstock,  Daniel  Sherwood,  1826;  Cephas 
Comstock,  James  B.  Church,  1827;  Alan- 
son  Carle)-,  W'm.  Squires,  1828;  Alanson 
Carley,  Wm.  Barnes,  1829  to  1831,  inclu- 
sive, at  which  time  the  name  of  the  town 
was  changed  ;  Cephas  Comstock,  Caleb 
Davis,  1832;  Cephas  Comstock,  Wm. 
Barnes,  1833;  James  B.  Church,  George 
Peck,  1834;  Alanson  Carle\-,  Wm.  Barnes, 
1835-36;  Cephas  Comstock,  Wm.  Barnes, 
183710  1839,  inclusive;  Alanson  Carley, 
Wni.  Richardson,  1840;  James  F.  Jones, 
Wm.  Richardson,  1841;  Wm.  Richardson, 
James  Comstock,  1842;  Patrick  Mallery, 
Wm.  h.  Smith,  1843  ;  James  Comstock, 
Anson  Peck,  1844;  James  Comstock,  Wm. 
Barnes,  1845;  Edward  Moore,  Wm.  Barnes, 
1846;  James  Comstock,  E.  C.  Carley,  1847; 
E.  C.  Carley,  S.  Anson  Peck,  1848;  E.  C. 
Carley,  Wm.  Barnes,  1 849  ;  Ezra  W.  Strat- 
ton.  Nelson  C.  Roe,  1850;  Geo.  W.  Crock- 
er, Cyrus  W.  Newell,  1851  ;  John  Van  Ars- 
doU,  Israel  W.  Taft,  1852;  Lucien  E. 
Crane,  Israel  W.  Taft,  1853-54;  Israel 
W,  Taft,  Eli  B.  Husted,  1855;  Lucien  B. 
Crane,  Eli  B.  Husted,  1856;  Ira  Lynde,  L>- 
nian  Adams,  1857;  Alanson  Carle}-,  Lj-man 
Adams,  1858;  James  Comstock,  Anson 
Peck,  1859;  Anson  Peck,  Lewis  A.  Hazen, 
i860;  Cephas  Comstock,  Wm.  Esmay, 
1861;  Cephas  Comstock,  James  A.  Coffin, 
1862-63  ;  Patrick  Mallery,  Wm.  W.  Powers, 
1864-65;  Wm.  Squires,  Wm.  W.  Powers, 
1866;  Patrick  Mallery,  John  Q.  Adams, 
1867;  Patrick  Mallery,  Frank  I.  Maybury, 
1868  to  1870,  inclusive;  E.  C.  Carley, 
Theo.  L.  Corwin,    1871  ;   Wm.   A.  Bentley, 


Town  of  Marathon. 


559 


Randolph  R.  Maybury,  1872-73  ;  Patrick 
Mallery,  R.  R.  Maybun-,  1874;  \Vm.  A. 
Bentley,  R.  R.  Ma\bury,  1875  ;  E.  C.  Car- 
ley,  Jerome  Pollartl,  1S76;  Geo.  P. Squires, 
M.  B.  Aldrich,  1877;  Patrick  Mallery,  \V. 
B.  Aldrich,  1878;  Geo.  A.  Hulbert,  Carley 
Adams,  1879;  Albi-rtus  A.  Carley,  Hosca 
B.  Aldrich,  1880;  Lncien  E.  Crane,  A. 
Carle\-  Adams,  1881 ;  E.  C.  Carley,  Jerome 
Pollard,  1882;  E.  C.  Carley,  Jerome  Pol- 
ard,  1883. 

Town  officers  for  I  884  :  — 

E.  Clark  Carley,  supervisor. 

Thomas  W.  Reilley,  town  clerk. 

John  A.  McVean,  David  Wallace,  Geo. 
A.  Hulbert,  Moses  R.  Aldrich.  justices  of 
the  peace. 

Geo.  H.  Chaplin,  highwa\'  commissioner. 

Homer  Wightman,  E.  W.  Meacham, 
John  L.  Smith,  assessors. 

Joseph  A.  Cole,  collector. 

William  Esma\',  John  W.  Livingston, 
Frederick  Tarble,  inspectors  of  election. 

C)Tus  B.  Northrup,  Deloss  C.  Hammond, 
overseers  of  the  poor. 

Joseph  A.  Cole,  W'ni.  Da\idson,  Samuel 
A.  Heaney,  constables. 

This  town  came  forward  at  the  breaking 
out  of  the  war  of  the  rebellion  and  gave 
freeh'  of  her  resources  and  men  in  defense 
of  the  Union.  Following  is  a  list  of  all 
recruits  from  the  town  to  whom  bounties 
were  paid,  besides  whom  man\-  enlisted 
whose  names  are  not  now  available,  while 
many  sleep  the  last  sleep  on  unmarked 
battle-fields  or  in  the  quiet  cemetery:  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  18C3,  February 
and  March,  1864.  Bounty,  $300.  Total, 
$7,200. — Benjamin  F.  Whitford,  Jerry  Grif- 
fen,  Abel  N.  Barlow,  Charles  T.  Shaft,  Al- 
bert F.  Smith,  Oliver  C.  Hosier,  Edward 
Burgess,  Simon  Rockfeller,  William  Boice, 
Eugene  Wilcox,  William  F.  Gilman,  Geo. 
H.  Ralph,  Edgar  C.  Carley,  John  W. 
Waterman,  Garry  Shaple)',  George  Jackson, 


George  Prentis,  William  P.  Smith,  Oren 
Withey,  Alexander  Thompson,  George  B. 
Smith,  David  G.  Conger,  Edward  James, 
Elson  F.  Quinn. 

Call  of  July  i8th,  1864.  Bounty,  $  I, ooo. 
Brokerage,  $775.  Total,  $3  i  ,000. — Clement 
Arnold,  Henry  S.  Bacon,  Edward  A.  Bar- 
low, Charles  A.  Bunnell,  Ransom  Coon- 
radt,  James  M.  Coonradt,  John  L.  Chase, 
Hiram  Clark,  Abram  Clark,  James  Davern, 
John  Dykeman,Abel  Foster,  Jerry  S.  Gross, 
Twing  R.  Hett,  Lenden  P.  Hillsinger,  Al- 
bertus  C.  Hillsinger,  Nathan  James,  Na- 
thaniel Knapp,  George  W.  Miller,  Webster 
Pierce,  Charles  A.  Potts,  Oren  C.  Reed, 
George  Sherwood,  Albert  J.  Spencer,  Wm. 
Sullivan,  Lorenzo  Thomas,  Francis  F. 
Tompkins,  Arthur  Terpining,  Roscoe  Valen- 
tine,  Stephen  M.  Wood,   Eliakim  S.  Weld. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  of  October  17th,  1863,  February  and 
March,  $7,200.  Paid  for  filling  quota,  call 
of  July  i8th,  1864,  $31,775.  Grand  total, 
$38,975. 

MARATHON    VILLAGE. 

But  a  few  years  prior  to  the  opening  of 
the  Chenango  canal  in  1837,  what  is  now 
the  thriving  village  of  Marathon  hardly 
deserved  the  name  of  village;  it  was  in 
reality  a  mere  hamlet  of  small  dwelling 
houses,  destitute  of  commercial  interests  ; 
there  was  not  a  physician,  attorney,  minister 
or  priest  residing  here;  there  was  no  store 
in  the  place  and  very  few  sho])s,  while  an 
occasional  tailor  or  shoemaker  came  into 
the  place  for  a  brief  visit,  to  mend  or  make 
the  clothing  and  shoes  of  the  people.  The 
houses  were  mostly  quite  small,  generallj- 
of  one  story  or  at  the  most  a  story  and  a 
half  in  height  and  very  few  if  an\-  were 
painted  previous  to  1820. 

About  the  year  1840  the  village  began 
to  assume  a  considerable  degree  of  activity 
and  growth ;   but   the  process  was  slow  and 


36o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


it  was  not  until  coniparati\'ely  late  years 
that  it  has  become  a  stirring  business  cen- 
ter for  the  inhabitants  of  a  large  section  of 
surrounding  country.  At  about  the  time 
of  the  establishment  of  the  first  store  in 
the  village  there  were  not  more  than  a 
dozen  houses  here.  The  east  side  of  the 
riv^cr,  from  its  favorable  location  in  respect 
to  public  travel,  offered  better  inducements 
for  growth  and  improvement,  than  the  op- 
posite side.  The  stage  road  from  Cort- 
land to  Binghamton.the  principal  thorough- 
fare through  the  valley,  ran  along  that  side 
of  tlie  stream  and  there  was  also  located 
the  only  tavern  and  the  post-office,  all  con- 
tributing to  the  advantages  of  that  section 
of  the  place.  The  western  side  of  the 
ri\'er  at  this  point  did  not,  previous  to  1850, 
present  man)-  indications  of  an  earh"  ex- 
tension of  the  village  in  that  direction. 
There  were  a  few  respectable  dwellings 
there,  occupied  mosth-  b}-  farmers;  but 
with  tile  exception  of  a  grist-mill,  saw- 
mill, fulling-mill  and  carding- machine,  a 
cabinet  shop  and  blacksmith  shop,  there 
was  little  of  a  business  aspect  in  that 
localit)'.  When,  however,  the  building  of 
the  railroad  and  its  location  on  that  side  of 
the  river  were  assured,  business  men  and 
mechanics  were  attracted  thither  and  an 
impetus  was  given  to  the  growth  of  that 
portion  of  the  village  which  is  still  felt. 
The  building  of  this  railroad  (finished  in 
1854),  while  it  practically  killed  many  of 
the  smaller  stations  along  the  line,  was  the 
real  basis  of  the  growth  and  prosperity  of 
Marathon  \-ilIage,  giving  it  connection  with 
the  New  York,  Lake  Erie  and  Western  on 
the  south  and  with  the  New  York  Central 
on  the  north. 

Mr.  Brink,  whose  settlement  has  already 
been  alluded  to,  as  the  first  tavern-keeper 
in  Marathon,  was  also  the  first  to  erect  a 
structure  suitable  •  for  the  purposes  of  a 
store  and  lease  it  to  whoever  might  be  dis- 


posed to  make  the  first  mercantile  venture. 
The  building  stood  a  few  rods  north  of 
where  the  bank  building  is  now  located, 
and  was  rented  to  William  Snyder;  he  could 
not  have  been  very  heavily  supplied  with 
capital,  as  he  returned  from  a  trip  to  New 
York  for  the  purchase  of  goods  without 
having  bought  any,  giving  as  a  reason  that 
there  were  no  fresh  goods  in  that  city  at 
the  time.  He  later  became,  however,  able 
to  purchase  in  very  large  quantities. 

Luther  Keyes  rented  this  store  after 
Snyder  left  it  and  put  in  a  small  stock  of 
goods,  including  what  \xas  then  thought  to 
be  a  necessary  article  in  all  similar  establish- 
ments—  whisk}'.  He  there  sold  this  bev- 
erage freely  and,  as  justice  of  the  peace, 
administered  the  law,  probably  to  some 
of  his  own  customers,  in  the  same  store. 
He  made  a  failure  of  his  enterprise  and 
was  sold  out  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  his 
creditors.  His  successor  in  the  store  was 
David  Manrose,  who  was  cquall)-  unsuc- 
cessful. James  Burgess  was  also  engaged 
in  trade  in  the  same  building  for  a  few 
years. 

The  late  John  M.  Roe,  formerl)'  .1  mer- 
chant at  Freetown  Corners,  traded  in  this 
store  for  a  time,  while  awaiting  the  building 
of  a  larger  structure  for  the  reception  of 
his  goods  in  1837,  on  the  site  of  the  Hazen 
Block.  Mr.  Roe  continued  in  trade  there 
for  a  number  of  years,  a  portion  of  the 
time  with  William  Richardson  and  subse- 
quenth"  with  IraLynde.  The  latter  finally 
bought  out  the  establishment  and  continued 
the  business  for  a  time,  selling  out  to  L.  A. 
Hazen,  and  the  building  to  Henry  Carter. 
While  Mr.  Hazen  occupied  the  store  the 
building  was  burned,  but  the  insurance  on 
the  structure  and  goods  was  nearl\-  or  quite 
sufficient  to  cover  the  loss. 

Messrs.  Carley  &  Brink  built  the  store 
now  occupied  by  J.  &  G.  A.  Hulbert.  Mr. 
Carley  and  Anson  Peck  were  the  first  pro- 


Town  of  Marathon. 


361 


prietors  to  engage  in  trade  there  and  Mr. 
Carley  subsequently  purcliascd  Peck's  in- 
terest and  continued  the  mercantile  business 
successfully  for  several  years. 

The  old  store  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
street  was  also  prosperous  under  the  man- 
agement of  George  Peck  and  his  brother- 
in-law,  A.  Hibbard,  and  afterward  under 
the  management  of  Peck  &  Dickson.  Some 
years  later  the  building  was  occupied  for 
the  manufacture  and  sale  of  hats,  during 
which  time  it  was  destroyed  by  fire. 

In  the  \-car  1853  P2.  C.  Carle)-  erected 
the  first  store  on  West  Main  street,  where 
Daniel  E.  Whitmore  now  is.  Mr.  Carley 
did  business  there  for  about  two  years,  and 
was  succeeded  b\-  A.  A.  Carley  and  C.  C. 
Adams,  and  afterward  by  C.  C.  Carley  and 
Adams  &  Birch,  in  1868.  Mr.  Whitmore 
has  occupied  the  store  eight  or  ten  years. 
D.  D.  Hunt  built  the  store  just  west  of  the 
bridge  and  C.  C.  Adams  went  into  business 
at  that  location,  where  lie  has  since  re- 
mained. 

D.  D.  Hunt  began  business  in  a  general 
way  in  1855.  In  1869  he  built  the  Man- 
sard Block,  to  which  he  removed  from  the 
building  now  owned  b\-  G.  W.  Webster, 
l^'rom  about  the  time  of  his  removal  until 
1875  he  was  in  partnership  with  Oscar 
Wilde;  he  was  then  alone  until  Ma\-,  1882, 
when  his  son-in-law,  C.  M.  Chapman,  came 
into  the  firm  under  the  style  of  Hunt  & 
Chapman,  and  the\-  carr)-  a  large  stock  of 
hardware,  groceries  and  drugs,  and  enjoy  a 
liberal  patronage. 

Mack  &  Husted  ha\e  been  in  iKU'tnership 
for  a  number  years,  in  the  hardware  trade, 
and  are  among  the  prominent  business  men 
of  the  village. 

The  Peck  block  was  erected  in  1854. 
I.\niaii  Adams  began  in  the  dry  goods 
trade  in  1853.  In  1865  he  formed  a  part- 
nership with  James  H.  Tripp  and  for  seven- 
teen \-ears  thereafter  the\-  carried  on  a  suc- 


cessful trade,  the  firm  name  becoming  a 
household  word  throughout  a  wide  extent 
of  territory.  I-'or  some  years  the\'  have 
done  a  collection  business  and  in  1883  es- 
tablished the  private  banking  house,  which 
is  soon  to  be  succeeded  by  a  National  Bank. 
W.  C.  Sanders  succeeded  Tripp  &  Adams 
in  mercantile  business  in  March,  1883. 

L.  C.  Ball  came  to  Marathon  from  Har- 
ford in  I  874  with  a  business  experience  of 
about  ten  years.  He  became  a  member  of 
the  dry  goods  firm  of  Pollard  &  Ball. 
After  three  _\ears  the  firm  was  dissolved  and 
Mr.  Ball  has  since  continued  the  business 
alone. 

L.  F.  Ward  has  recently  established  him- 
self with  a  stock  of  clothing  and  furnishing 
goods. 

The  boot  and  shoe  trade  of  Marathon 
was  begun  by  E.  B.  Husted  in  1855. 
Since  that  time  A.  G.  Smith  and  Water- 
bury  &  Talmadge  have  engaged  in  the  bus- 
iness. E.  A.  Hazen  began  business  in 
1858  and  now  carries  a  stock  of  boots  and 
shoes,  clothing,  etc.  The  old  building  on 
this  site  was  burned  in  the  fall  of  1861,  and 
in  1862  E.  E.  Hazen  built  the  new  block 
which  now  bears  his  name,  E.  A.  &  E.  E. 
Hazen  were  associated  in  business  for  sev- 
eral years. 

The  grocery  trade  in  Marathon,  as  a 
separate  line,  was  begun  in  1855  by  Geo. 
E.  Swift,  who  still  continues  the  business  in 
a  small  wa}-.  David  M.  Hunt  began  the 
trade  at  about  the  same  time  and  has  for 
many  years  past  dealt  in  groceries  and 
drugs.  The  firms  of  Corwin  &  Son,  Hunt 
&  Chapman  and  Tiftan}-  &  Pulford  are  all 
enterprising  dealers  in  groceries  and  are  well 
patronized  by  the  public. 

William  Dellow  began  the  manufacture 
and  sale  of  furniture  in  Willet  soon  after 
1850,  and  removed  to  Marathon  in  the 
spring  of  1875,  where  he  has  carried  on 
the  same    business  since.      Da\'is   &    Bov- 


362 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


den  began  in  tlie  same  line  in  the  spring 
of  1884. 

It  was  about  tlic  year  1801  before  aii}- 
thing  was  done  in  iMarathon  to  provide 
milling  facilities  for  the  inhabitants.  John 
Hunt  erected  the  first  grist-mill  on  the  east 
side  of  the  river  about  twent)-  rods  north 
from  the  present  ri\er  briilge.  Some  \-ears 
afterward  John  and  William  Smith  built  a 
grist-mill  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river, 
where  L.  A.  Burgess  &  Son's  saw-mill  now 
stands.  The  first  saw-mill  was  built  by 
John  Chamberlain  in  1808,  to  which  we 
have  already  alluded.  Benjamin  Adams 
rebuilt  the  grist-mill  in  the  present  more 
con\enient  location,  and  after  running  it  for 
a  while  sold  to  A.  Carley,  the  present 
owner,  who  has  had  it  repaired  and  reno- 
x'ated  throughout  and  all  modern  improx'e- 
ments  added;  the  mill  has  a  capacit)-  of 
500  bushels  in  t\\ent\^- four  hours.  A.  Car- 
ley  &  Son  deal  large!)'  in  flour,  feed,  etc., 
snppl\-ing  the  retail  trade  in  surrounding 
towns. 

James  Li\'ingston  built  a  saw- mill  in  the 
fall  of  1859,  just  abo\e  the  \-ilIage  on  Hunt 
creek.  It  was  burned  in  1866,  but  imme-. 
diateh-  rebuilt.  It  is  now  owned  by  Wil- 
liam Dellow  &  Son.  The  Livingston 
brothers  built  a  steam  saw-mill  in  1870, 
which  was  removed  to  State  Bridge,  and 
burned  in  1877.  Tlie  Burgess  circular 
saw-mill,  built  about  the  \ear  i860,  was 
run  twelve  or  fifteen  years  and  it,  too, 
burned. 

James  Livingston,  one  of  the  earl)-  black- 
smiths of  Marathon,  was  born  in  Schoharie 
county  in  18 16,  and,  after  two  or  three  re- 
movals, came  to  this  village  in  1837  and 
began  working  at  his  trade,  which  he  has 
ever  since  continued.  His  old  shop  was 
built  in  1865,  and  the  new  one  —  the  Liv- 
ingston Machine  Shop  and  Bending  Works 
—  in  1878.  The  son,  James  Livingston, 
jr.,  put  in    machiner)'    for   bridge    building, 


and  the  establishment  is  now  vevy  prosper- 
ous and  an  important  factor  in  the  manu- 
facturing interests  of  the  village. 

O.  il.  Smith  began  blacksmithing  in  tlie 
\illage  thirt)--one  )ears  ago,  and  erected 
his  present  shop  in  1867.  His  old  sliop 
was  sold  to  I{.  D.  Baker  in  1865,  who  has 
made  additions  thereto  and  is  engaged  in 
carriage-making.  Jerome  Vunk  began 
blacksmithing  and  carriage  building  in 
1 88 1. 

The  dair)ing  interest  of  Cortland  county 
has  developed  a  large  demand  for  first  class 
butter  packages.  To  meet  a  portion  of  this 
demand  has  been  the  business  of  S.  M. 
Wood  for  more  than  twenty  years  past. 
He  began   the  cooperage   business  in  1 86 1. 

He  bought  the  factory  opposite  the  depot 
in  1874,  and,  after  carr)-ing  on  a  large  bus- 
iness at  that  location  for  seven  years,  pur- 
chased his  present  lot,  erected  his  buildings, 
and  is  extensively  engaged  in  the  manu- 
facture of  firkins,  tubs,  barrels,  etc. 

The  Stockwell  Wagon  Company  is  one 
of  the  largest  manufacturing  enterprises  in 
Marathon,  employs  thirty  hands  constantly 
and  turns  out  about  300  wagons  annually. 
W.  E.  Stockwell,  a  man  of  large  experience 
in  this  business,  is  general  manager  of  the 
works.  The  compan)-  was  incorporated 
in  May,  1882,  the  first  officers  beings  G.  P. 
Squires,  president  ;  D.  E.  Whitmore,  vice- 
president;  Wm.  A.  Stockwell,  secretary; 
Lyman  Adams,  treasurer;  W.  E.  Stock- 
well,  superintendent. 

Directors;  G.  P.  Squires,  D.  E.  Whit- 
more, Wm.  A.  Stockwell,  L.  Adams,  F. 
H.  Sweet,  D.  B.  Tripp,  C.  H.  Bouton. 

The  building  was  begun  in  June,  1882, 
and  finished  in  October  following.  During 
the  fall  of  1 883  the  company  exhibited 
samples  of  their  wagons  at  the  various 
county  fairs  in  Central  New  York  and  car- 
ried off,  in  e\er\-  instance,  the  first  pre- 
miums.     The  most  careful  attention  is  paid 


Town  of  Marathon. 


363 


to  the  production  of  the  best  wheels  it  is 
possible  to  make,  while  in  the  ironing  the\' 
use  the  best  refined  iron,  Norwa}-  iron  bolts, 
bolting  on  more  of  the  iron  than  is  gener- 
ally done.  The  result  is  a  wagon  that  it  is 
very  difficult  to  excel.  The  present  officers 
of  the  company  are  :  Geo.  L.  Swift,  presi- 
dent; D.  E.W'hitmore,  vice-president;  Wm. 
A.  Stockwell,  secretary;  L\-man  Adanis, 
treasurer;   W.  E.  Stockwell,  superintendent. 

Directors:  Geo.  L.  Swift,  W.  A.  Stock- 
well,  J.  H.  Tripp,  D.  E.  Whitmore,  L\nian 
Adams,  G.  E.  Tarbell,  Clark  Pierce. 

Horace  Dickinson  built  a  tannery  in  Mar- 
athon at  a  comparativel}'  early  date,  and 
was  also  engaged  for  some  time  in  the  boot 
and  shoe  business.  He  sold  his  tanner}-  to 
Mr.  D.  Shattuck  and  some  time  later  built 
a  new  one.  About  the  )-ear  i860  another 
large  tannery  was  erected  b)'  the  firm  of 
Phillips  &  Bentley,  which  gives  emplo\-ment 
to  about  fifteen  men  and  furnishes  a  mar- 
ket annually  for  several  hundred  cords  of 
bark.  John  Dumphy  built  the  largest  tan- 
ner}- in  this  vicinit}'  in  1877  and  now  em- 
ploys from  60  to  100  men  and  turns  out 
about  600  sides  of  leather  a  da}'.  This  is 
one  of  the  most  valuable  additions  to  the 
material  interests  of  the  village. 

The  old  cooperage  of  S.  M.  Wood  &  Co. 
passed  through  the  hands  of  !■;.  W.  Hayes 
into  those  of  C.  M.  Chapman,  who  put  in 
extensive  machiner}-  for  the  manufacture 
of  wheel-barrows,  toy  wagons,  sleds,  etc. 
From  seven  to  nine  men  are  employed. 

Tavern-keeping  in  the  old  building  al- 
read}'  described  was  relinquished  about  the 
year  1833.  This  business  in  the  days  of 
stage  coaches  and  travel  with  private  con- 
veyances was  far  more  prosperous  and  im- 
portant in  small  villages  and  along  the  main 
thoroughfares  at  the  period  mentioned  and 
down  to  the  time  of  railroad  construction, 
than  it  is  at  the  present  time.  A  mail  stage 
then  ran  from  Bint/hamton  to  Cortland  each 


way  on  alternate  days,  connecting  with  sim- 
ilar lines  to  S}'racuse,  and  the  business  of 
countr\-  hotel-keeping  was  one  of  profit. 

In  1833  David  Peck  purchased  a  small 
house,  put  up  an  addition  to  it  and  fitted  it 
up  for  a  tavern.  This  was  the  beginning 
of  the  present  Marathon  House,  which  has 
passed  through  numerous  hands,  being 
usually  enlarged  or  impro\'ed  by  each  new- 
comer, until  it  reached  its  present  commo- 
dious and  comfortable  dimensions  and  char- 
acter. C.  J.  &  A.  Tarble  succeeded  Mel- 
\in  W.  Conger  as  proprietors  of  the  house 
on  the  1st  of  February,  1884. 

The  hotel  known  as  the  Carle}-  House 
was  erected  in  1854  b}-  A.  Carle}'.  The  first 
structure,  before  it  was  entirely  inclosed, 
was  blown  down  by  a  severe  gale  of  wind. 
It  was  at  once  rebuilt  and  has  been  under 
the  management  of  Moses  Rogers  for  seven- 
teen years  past.  It  bears  the  reputation  of 
being  a  thoroughly  first-class  countr}-  hotel. 

Brown's  Hotel  was  originall}'  built  for  a 
cigar  manufactor}-.  It  was  burned  down  in 
1877  and  immediately  rebuilt. 

Law}-ers.  —  Ira  L.  Little,  the  oldest  at- 
tornev'  in  Marathon,  was  admitted  to  the 
bar  in  1855  and  soon  after  removed  to  tiie 
\-illage,  where  he  has  since  practiced  his 
profession  with  a  good  degree  of  success. 
He  was  born  in  \\'alkill.  Orange  Co.,  N.  Y., 
July  26th,  1830.  He  was  educated  in  Har- 
ford, studied  law  with  Benjamin  S.  Bent- 
ley,  in  Montrose,  Pa.,  and  was  admitted  in 
that  State  in  1852.  Besides  his  legal  abil- 
ity, Mr.  Little  has  won  considerable  literary 
distinction. 

H.  L.  Green  practiced  law  for  a  short 
time  in  Marathon,  in  1852  or  1853.  He 
now  resides  in  Salamanca, 

A.  G.  Stillson  came  next  in  1854,  but 
during  the  fall  of  the  same  }-ear  accident- 
ally shot  himself 

Garret  Z.  House  began  practice  here  in 
the  summer  of    185S   but    remained    only  a 


364 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


short    time,    going    to    Drydcii,    Tompkins 
county. 

In  the  spring  of  1863  K.  A.  Barlow  came 
to  the  village  for  the  practice  of  law  ;  but  in 
1865  he  enlisted  in  the  185th  regiment  and 
after  the  war  located  in  South  Carolina. 

B.  T.  Wright  came  iiere  in  1866  and  re- 
mained in  successful  practice  eight  or  ten 
jears,  until  elected  district  attorne\-  of  the 
count}-,  when  he  removed  to  Cortlantl  \il- 
lage. 

\V.  J.  Mantan\-e  began  practice  here  in 
1868;  G.  E.  TarbcU  in  1880  and  W.  C. 
Crombie  in  1883. 

Phj'sicians. — Dr.  Japheth  Hunt  was  the 
first  plu'sician  in  the  \illage.  His  death 
occurred  in  1808,  at  the  age  of  97  }-ears. 
His  son,  Dr.  S.  M.  Hunt,  and  his  grandson, 
Dr.  Deloss  Himt,  ha\e  already  been  alluded 
to. 

Dr.  S.  Smith  was  a  native  of  this  place  ; 
he  was  licensed  to  practice  in  1848,  but  re- 
tired in  I  85  I  and  removed  to  Scott  Center, 
where  he  practiced  dentistry. 

Dr.  A.  D.  Reed  is  a  native  of  Delaware 
count)'.  He  was  educated  at  Roxbur\', 
studied  with  Sherman  Street  and  was  li- 
censed in  1848.  He  fir.st  practiced  in  Cas- 
tleton,  Vt.,  then  at  Cincinnatus,  and  then 
removed  to  ^larathmi,  where  he  is  still 
located. 

Dr.  E.  H.  Barnes  was  admitted  to  the 
Cortland  Count)-  Medical  Society  in  1840, 
and  has  been  an  acti\e  and  useful  member 
of  the  society  ever  since.  Drs.  l'.  P.  How- 
land,  Lyman  Tiftan)-,  E.  Winter  and  W. 
H.  Hill,  and  Dr.  Apple)'  are  all  engaged  in 
practice  in  Marathon. 

The  Press.  —  The  first  newspaper  pub- 
lished in  the  \'illage  of  Marathon  was  a 
four-column,  four-page  paper,  edited  by 
Geo.  L.  Swift.  It  was  issued  monthh',  be- 
gan in  1857  and  was  called  the  Marathon  j 
Telegraph.  The  editor  stated  in  an  early  [ 
number  that  "  the  Telegraph  is  capable   of  | 


producing  wonders  ;  "  if  he  referred  to  his 
little  paper  he  failed  in  his  reckoning,  for  it 
attained  neither  a  long  life  nor  a  very  exalted 
reputation.  The  next  local  journal  was  the 
Tiottghniogan,  which  was  edited  and  pub- 
lished by  E.  S.  Weld,  the  successful  teacher, 
whose  work  in  the  old  building  now  used 
as  a  Catholic  Church  led  to  the  establish- 
ment of  the  academ)'.  The  Tioughniogan 
was  soon  merged  in  Tlie  People's  Journal, 
a  seven-column  folio,  established  in  1861 
b)'  E.  S.  Weld  and  John  R.  Bedcn.  Early 
in  the  late  war  Air.  Weld  answered  the  call 
of  his  country,  in  consequence  of  which  the 
newspaper  enterprise  was  abandoned.  The 
Marathon  Leader  was  established  in  1865 
by  P.  D.  V'radenburg,  who  afterward  sold 
to  his  brother,  C.  A.  Vradenburg.  In  1869 
C.  Dwight  Smith  bought  the  old  material 
of  this  office  and  started  the  Marathon 
A'czvs ;  but  he  soon  after  left  the  place  be- 
tween two  days.  The  Marathon  Independ- 
ent, a  haniisome  six-column  folio,  was  start- 
ed b)'  Wallace  Kelle)'  in  1870,  who  success- 
fully conducted  it  to  the  time  of  his  death 
in  1876.  It  then  passed  into  the  hands  of 
Brooks  &  Day,  with  Ed.  L.  Adams  as  ed- 
itor. In  1878  Mr.  Adams  bought  the  in- 
terest of  Mr.  Da)',  and  Brooks  &  Adams 
conducted  the  establishment  until  1880, 
when  Mr.  Adams  took  the  entire  concern. 
It  is  now  an  eight-page,  fi\'e-column  paper, 
and  one  of  the  best  countr)'  journals  in 
Central  New  York.  ^ 

Schools.  —  The  first  school  in  Marathon 
was  taught  by  Miss  Miriam  Cowdry,  a  por- 
tion of  the  time  in  a  log  barn,  and  subse- 
quentl)'  in  a  log  school-house  which  stood 
near  where  the  new  barn  of  Wm.  Squires 
is  located.  This  school  house  was  a  very 
primitixc  and  rude  affair,  the  windows  being 
covered  with  oiled  paper  instead  of  glass ; 
but  as  early  as  the  close  of  the  war  of  181 2 
the  log  houses  in  this  and  adjoining  towns 

'  See  chapter  on  the  press  of  the  county,  in  lliis  volume. 


Town  of  Marathon. 


365 


began  to  gradually  give  way  to  the  first  small 
framed  houses;  school  districts  were  organ- 
ized and  school-houses  built  and  provisions 
made  for  the  support  of  the  common  schools. 
Sonic  of  the  older  residents  of  Marathon 
village  will  rememb<;r  that  a  small  framed 
school- house  was  built  some  sixty  years 
ago  or  more,  near  the  bank  of  the  creek,  as 
it  then  ran,  where  Hazen's  store  now  stands; 
and  that  a  hea\}-  freshet  so  undermined  the 
north  side  of  the  building  that  the  structure 
assumed  an  angle  of  about  twenty  degrees. 
The  school  was,  howexer,  continued  several 
days  before  the  structure  was  repaired,  dur- 
ing which  time  one-half  of  the  pupils  must 
have  been  compelled  to  look  down  some- 
what nn  the  other  half  The  main  channel 
of  the  creek  passed  from  the  saw-mill  south- 
westerly, crossing  the  road  at  the  point 
where  the  Marathon  FTouse  is  now  located. 
An  elevated  bridge  over  the  stream  stood 
between  the  hotel  and  the  Hazen  Block. 

The  first  school-house  of  respectable  pre- 
.  tensions  was  built  by  "  Esquire  "  Burgess 
about  the  year  18 18.  He  furnished  the 
lumber  and  all  the  materials  and  painted  it 
for  the  moderate  sum  of  $100,  receiving  his 
pay  in  rye  and  corn,  which  were,  more  often 
than  money,  the  medium  of  exchange  at 
that  time. 

The  Marathon  Academy  was  chartered 
by  the  Regents  of  the  University  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1866.  The  building  in  the  condi- 
tion it  then  was  had  been  occupied  by  a 
high  school  kept  by  H  S.  Weld,  w^ho  owned 
the  building.  Mr.  Weld  enlisted  in  the  1 85th 
regiment  in  1S64  to  go  to  the  defense  of 
the  Union,  and  the  building  was  sold  to 
the  Catholic  Society  about  the  year  1872, 
who  ha\e  since  used  it  as  a  church.  The 
school  was  then  given  its  present  beautiful 
location  and  surroundings.  M.  L.  Hawle\-, 
who  subsequently  edited  the  Biiigliamtou 
Standard,  was  principal  of  the  academy 
durins;  the  first  two  \-ears  of  its   existence. 


The  institution  is  now  under  the  principal- 
ship  of  Hamilton  Terry,  who  is  assisted  b\' 
Hortense  Hodges,  Eva  D.  Gardner  and 
Hattie  Livingston.  The  present  board  of 
education  consists  of  D.  E.  Whitmore,  pres- 
ident; C.  C.  Carley,  secretary;  D.  D.  Hunt, 
treasurer;  W.  A.  Bentley,  G.  W.  ]\Iiller,  L. 
A.  Hazen,  O.  H.  Smith,  D.  R.  Hunt. 

Churches.  —  Most  of  the  early  settlers  in 
this  county  were  favorably  disposed  towards 
religious  instruction  and  cheerfully  contrib- 
uted of  their  means  for  the  support  of  such 
ministers  of  the  gospel  as  could  be  procured 
to  preach  occasionallj'  in  the  settlement, 
without  regard  to  their  creed.  The  Rev. 
Seth  Williston  is  remembered  as  a  man  of 
excellent  literary  attainments  and  an  efiect- 
ive  preacher.  He  married  a  widow  lady 
named  Dudle)-,  at  Lisle,  where  he  preached 
a  few  years,  removing  thence  to  Durham. 
Greene  county,  where  he  was  pastor  of  a 
church  a  number  of  years,  and  was  much 
esteemed  for  his  usefulness  and  Christian 
character.  He  was  one  of  the  first  pastors 
of  the  Union  society  in  Marathon,  which  was 
known  at  its  organization  as  the  Society  of 
Lisle,  Cincinnatus  and  \'irgil,  each  town 
contributing  to  the  congregation.  Its  name 
was  subsequently  confined  to  Cincinnatus  ; 
then  to  Harrison  and  finally  to  Marathon, 
after  the  town  took  that  name.  It  was  re- 
ceived under  the  care  of  the  Presbytery  of 
Onondaga  September  7th,  18 14,  and  upon 
the  division  of  that  county  was  assigned  to 
the  Presbytery  of  Cortland.  In  1825  the 
society  reported  twenty  members.  The 
Revs.  Matthew  Harrison,  James  Blakeslee, 
Peleg  R.  Kinne,  Wm.  J.  Bradford,  John  A. 
Avery  and  J.  F.  McLaury,  were  a  few  of 
the  pastors  who  have  at  different  times  sup- 
plied this  society.  The  church  has  never 
been  large  and  seems  never  to  have  been 
blessed  with  any  special  and  fruitful  revival. 
In  1832  it  had  seventy-two  members;  in 
1840  it  had  sevent}'-five  ;   in    1846    it   had 


366 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


sixty-twii  and  it  now  reports  six t\-  mcmbcTs. 
The  present  elders  of  the  churcli  are  Lewis 
W.  Uptegrove,  Daniel  Whitiiiore,  Gabriel  L. 
Oakley,  Jerome  Hulbert,  Burgess  Squires, 
Martin  L.  Brooks,  Geo.  W.  Webster,  Harris 
Ilaniiiioiul  and  John  Robertson.  The 
church  edifice  was  built  in  1831,  by  James 
Burgess;  it  was  finished  in  1S32  and  a  few 
years  later  a  bell  was  hung  in  the  steeple. 
This  was  the  first  church  building  in  the  \il- 
iatje.  It  is  still  in  use,  but  has  been  much  im- 
proved  from  time  to  time  since  its  erection. 
The  Kc\-.  John  Lawton  was  another  pio- 
neer preacher  of  the  Baptist  denomination, 
whose  voice  was,  like  that  of  his  prototype, 
"heard  in  the  wilderness."  He  was  pastor 
of  a  Baptist  church  organized  at  Upper 
Lisle  in  1804.  Two  brothers  named  Aschel 
and  Levi  Holcomb  were  at  dift'erent  subse- 
quent )'ears  pastors  of  that  church,  and  both 
of  them  occasionally  preached  in  Marathon 
and  adjoining  towns.  A  few  of  the  first 
settlers  were  members  of  a  Baptist  church 
before  their  arrival  here  ;  they  joined  the 
church  at  Upper  Lisle,  or  "  Otselic,"  as  it 
was  then  called.  A  Baptist  church  was 
formed  at  Freetown  Corners  about  the  \^ear 
1812,  and  some  of  those  who  had  united 
with  the  Upper  Lisle  church,  withdrew  and 
joined  the  Freetown  organization.  The 
pioneers  of  that  day  were,  apparent!)-,  more 
zealous  and  punctual  in  attending  religious 
meetings  than  at  the  present  time  ;  women 
not  rarel}-  went  on  foot  six  or  seven  miles  to 
listen  to  the  gospel.  Elder  Timotln-  Shep- 
herd, living  near  Upper  Lisle,  preached  at 
Freetown  a  few  years,  till  that  church  was 
divided  and  a  portion  of  the  members  went 
to  assist  in  the  formation  of  a  socict\'  at  the 
"  Center "  (now  Texas  Valle}').  Klder 
Shepherd  became  the  pastor  of  the  new 
church  at  the  latter  place  and  preached 
there  for  a  very  meager  salary,  which  was 
paid  in  rye  and  corn  at  the  regular  barter 
price.      It  is  stated,  but  not  verified  by  li\- 


ing  witnesses,  that  Elder  Shepherd  had  his 
grain  deli\ered  at  a  distillery  owned  b_\'  one 
of  his  flock  and  had  whisky  manufactured 
from  it;  that  he  took  the  liquor  home  and 
sold  what  he  could  spare  after  supplying  his 
own  wants.  While  this  ina)-  not  have  been 
the  fact,  it  is  quite  sure  that  such  a  transac- 
tion on  the  part  of  a  minister  of  the  gospel 
would  call  forth  vastly  less  censure  in  those 
days  than  it  would  at  tlie  present  time. 

An  incident  related  in  the  sketches  pre- 
pared by  Dr.  Hunt  will  not  be  out  of  place 
here.  An  old  man  named  Snyder,  father 
of  a  large  and  respectable  family  living  on 
the  hill  in  the  town  of  Virgil  which  bears 
his  name,  usually  came  to  Marathon  annu- 
alh-  to  cut  and  assist  in  making  clothing 
for  the  inhabitants.  He  was  a  natix'e  of 
Hesse  Cassel  and  one  of  the  17,000  men 
hired  in  German}'  to  come  over  and  help 
the  British  fail  in  whipping  the  Yankees. 
Snyder  was  a  pious  man  and  a  member  of 
the  Baptist  church.  It  was  then  the  cus- 
tom of  the  minister  after  the  sermon  was 
concluded,  to  call  on  members  of  the  church 
to  deliver  exhortations  or  relate  their  relig- 
ious experience.  Mr.  Snyder  was  always 
prompt  to  discharge  this  duty.  His  re- 
marks included  not  only  a  general  confes- 
sion of  his  moral  short-comings,  but  a  free 
acknowledgment  of  his  former  hostile  feel- 
ings toward  the  American  people,  expressed 
in  broken  English  and  almost  without  va- 
riation in  the  following  words:  — 

"  Mine  frients,  I  vas  once  der  pitter  en- 
em\'  of  the  'Merican  beeples,  but  der  lort 
has  obcncd  mine  eyes  to  see  I  vas  wrong. 
1  vas  told  dat  dej-  vas  all  wicket  rebels  and 
when  I  virst  come  to  'Merica,  I  would  haf 
kilt  you  all,  if  it  had  peen  in  my  power ; 
but  I  vas  treated  so  kinth"  when  taken  bris- 
oner  by  Sheneral  Washington,  and  found 
he  was  one  coot  man,  dot  I  deserted  and 
haf  been  a  coot  frient  of  de  'Mericans  ever 
since." 


Town  of  Marathon. 


367 


It  was  not  until  i860  that  a  Baptist  or- 
ganization was  effected  in  Marathon  village, 
the  believers  of  that  dcnoniinatinn  pre- 
viously attending  the  church  at  either  Free- 
town or  Lisle.  The  societ_\- formed  in  Mar- 
athon numbered  at  the  first  twenty-five 
members.  It  has  now  nearly  one  hundred 
and  is  in  a  flourishing  and  healthful  condi- 
tion. The  Rev.  Adam  H.  Todd,  the  pres- 
ent pastor,  took  charge  of  the  church  April 
1st,  1884.  A  new  church  edifice  was  built 
and  dedicated  in  1876.  R.  M.  Lovell  is 
chairman  of  the  board  of  trustees. 

The  Methodist  societ)-  was  formed  here 
in  1830  and  is  said  to  ha\-e  been  composed 
at  first  of  but  four  members,  of  whom  Or- 
rin  Carlc\-  was  tlie  class- leader.  The  so- 
ciet}' no\\-  numbers  about  157.  Their 
chapel  was  built  in  1842  by  James  Burgess, 
but  it  has  since  been  enlarged  and  consid- 
erably improved  in  appearance.  The  pres- 
ent pastor,  J.  F.  W'arner,  came  to  the 
church  in  April,  1874.  The  names  of  the 
trustees  are  O.  H.  Smith,  John  Moore,  N. 
H.  Winter,  Arthur  Butick,  C.  Hultz,  E.  D. 
Baker,  Darius  Boyden,  E.  C.  Carley  and 
John   Livingston. 

The  Catholic  society  is  quite  small. 
The\'  purchased  the  old  Academy  building 
and  have  since  worshiped  therein.  J.  L. 
Meagher  assumed  charge  of  the  church  two 
years  ago. 

Incorporation. — The  incorporation  of 
the  village  of  Marathon  took  place  on  the 
28th  day  of  December,  1861.  The  first 
election  was  held  at  the  house  of  G.  C.  Mes- 
senger, when  the  following  trustees  were 
elected  :  Asa  Hunt,  Anson  Peck,  Garrett 
Pennoyer,  James  Brooks,  E.  S.  Weld.  Asa 
Hunt  was  chosen  president  and  S.  R.  Ben- 
jamin, clerk. 

Following  is  the  record  of  the  sur\'ey  of 
the  corporation  :  "  Beginning  in  the  high- 
way on  the  west  bank  of  the  Tioughnioga 
river,  four  chains  and   eighteen   links  south 


of  seventeen  degrees  cast  from  the  north 
line  of  lot  owned  by  Nancy  Smith,  and 
running  thence  south  seventy-five  degrees 
west,  twenty-- four  chains  to  a  stake  marked 
'corporation  limits  —  southwest  corner.' 
and  standing  on  land  owned  b\-  Lawrence 
Hindle.  Thence  north  fifteen  degrees  west, 
100  chains  to  a  stake  marked  '  corporation 
limits  —  northwest  corner,'  and  standing 
on  land  owned  b\'  Garrett  Pennoj-er. 
Thence  north  seventy- five  degrees  east 
sixty-four  chains  to  a  stake  marked  '  cor- 
poration limits  —  northeast  corner,'  and 
standing  on  land  owned  b\'  James  Brooks. 
Thence  south  fifteen  degrees  east,  one  hun- 
dred chains  to  the  center  of  the  brook 
within  the  highwa\'  leading  from  the  river 
road  near  Wm.  Squires's  to  Peter  Moore's. 
Thence  south  seventy-five  degrees  west 
forty  chains  to  the  place  of  beginning,  con- 
taining 640  acres,  or  one  square  mile  of 
land.  " 

The  present  bridge  across  the  river  was 
built  in  1868.  In  a  stone  that  lies  in  the 
eighth  layer  from  the  bottom  of  the  western 
abutment,  three  feet  and  ten  inches  from 
the  corner,  are  the  following  memorials :  a 
history  of  the  settlement  of  the  town,  pre- 
pared by  Dr.  S.  M.  Hunt ;  a  sermon  b\- 
Rev.  H.  Lyman :  the  weekly  papers  of 
the  county  ;  names  of  the  contractors  and 
others  employed  in  building  the  bridge; 
U.  S.  coins  ;  a  ten  dollar  confederate  bill ; 
a  slip  of  the  apple-tree  under  which  Gen- 
erals Grant  and  Lee  arranged  the  terms  of 
the  surrender  of  the  Southern  arm\-  in  the 
late  war,  etc. 

The  bridge  is  a  handsnme  and  substan- 
tial structure. 

At  a  special  meeting  of  the  board  of  \il- 
age  trustees  held  October  15th,  1867,  the 
following  persons  were  appointed  members 
of  the  first  fire  company  of  Marathon  :  A. 
H.  Barber  (first  foreman),  B.  I^  Wright,  C. 
C.  Adams,  L.  S.  Burch,  E.  C.  Carley,  G.  L. 


368 


IIlSTORV    OF    CuKTLAND    COUXTV. 


Swift,  R.  E.  Edwards,  W.  W.  I'oucis,  Jolm 
Livingston,  Corwin  Burgess,  D.  B.  1  riiip, 
Jerry  C.  Gray,  C.  H.  Ford,  J.  O.  .\danis, 
J.  W.  Scliouten,  W.  Maynartl,  R.  U,  Mack, 
James  Livingston,  B.  Hunt,  iv  IJ.  Burgess, 
D.  A.  Maci<,  Wm.  M.  Griffith,  T.  H.  Roe, 
Smith  Sherwood,  Duanc  Burgess,  D.  C. 
Lyndc,  E.  B.  Husted,  Jas.  Livingston,  jr., 
Hiram  Cone,  J.  H.  McDowell,  F.  I.  May- 
bury,  Geo.  R.  Burgess,  F.  F.  Tompkins,  O. 
H.  Smith,  J.  Pollard,  D.  D.  Hunt,  R.  R. 
Maybury,  E.  D.  Baker,  M.  L.  Hawley, 
Chas.  Hunt,  Chas.  G.  Brink,  James  S.  Bur- 
gess, Chester  Nichols,  F.  M.  Ta\'lor,  E.  D. 
Barnes,  James  H.  Tripp. 

But  few  of  these  original  members  are 
now  in  the  company  ;  but  ever  since  its  first 
organization  few  fire  companies  in  villages 
even  much  larger  than  Marathon  have 
done  more  effective  service  or  secured  a 
greater   degree   of  respect    from   the   com- 


munit)-  than  this  one.  .An  engine  was  pur- 
chased at  Syracuse  in  i  867,  and  the  present 
engine  house  was  erected  a  little  later  The 
present  officers  of  the  company  are  as  fol- 
lows :  L.  C.  Ball,  chief  engineer  ;  L.  D.  Ter- 
williger,  assistant  engineer ;  B.  L.  Adams, 
president ;  A.  C.  Rorabacher,  vice-pres- 
ident;  J.  W.  Livingston,  secretary;  W.  R. 
Pollard,  treasurer;  J.  A.  Cole,  foreman; 
John  H.  Boyd,  assistant  foreman ;  J.  W. 
Hunt,  foreman  of  hose ;  Fred  L.  Boyden, 
assistant  foreman  ;  Thaddeus  Driggs,  stew- 
ard. The  trustees  are  Samuel  Heanej-,  I). 
B.  Livingston,  Leroy  Stevens. 

The  trustees  of  the  village  for  1884 
are  as  follows :  T.  L.  Corwin  president ; 
D.  D.  Hunt,  treasurer;  Adam  Hillsing- 
er,  collector;  J.  W.  Livingston,  clerk; 
James  Burgess,  Henr\'  Casler,  Lyman 
Adams. 

The  population  is  about  i  100. 


CHAPTER  XXni. 


HIsroRV  OF  THK  TOWN  OF  CTXCI.XX.VrUS. 


THE  town  of  Cincinnatus  was  one  of 
the  original  townships  of  the  military 
tract;  it  comprises  15,702^  acres.  It  is 
bounded  on  the  north  by  Taylor;  on  the 
east  by  Chenango  county;  south  by  W'il- 
let,  and  west  by  Freetown. 

The  surface  consists  of  the  valle}'  of  the 
Otselic  river  and  the  ridges  which  rise  upon 
either  side.  Nearly  the  entire  surface  of 
the  town  is  divided  into  steep  hills  and 
ridges  divided  by  deep  ravines,  through 
which  flow  the  tributaries  of  the  Otselic. 

The  town  was  organized  April  8th,  1804, 
and  retained  its  original  limits  until  April 
2 1st,  1818,  when  it  was  divided  b\'  the 
erection  of  Freetown,  Willet  and  Marathon. 

The  settlement  of  Cincinnatus  began  in 
1795.     The  inducements  to  pioneers  were 


!  not  so  favorable  in  this  region  as  in  some 
other  portions  of  the  count)-;  the  lands 
were  regarded  as  less  desirable  for  culti\a- 
tion,  and  the  rugged  character  of  the  sur- 
face tended  to  retard  settlement  somewhat 
until  a  comparatively  recent  period.  Later 
developments,  however,  have  proven  that 
the  town  is  one  of  the  most  productive  in 
the  county,  and  the  farmers  get  a  good  re- 
turn for  their  labor.  Tlie  soil  is  varied  in 
character,  and  is  generally  better  adapted 
to  grazing  than  the  raising  of  grain.  In 
later  years  dairying  has  engaged  a  large 
share  of  the  attention  of  tlie  farmers  of  the 
town  and  they  have  the  reputation  of  pro- 
ducing butter  and  cheese  of  the  very  best 
cjuality. 

I       The  earliest  settlers  of  Cincinnatus  were 


Town  of  Cincinxatus. 


369 


John  Kingman,  Thaddeus  Rockwell,  Zurial 
Raymond,     Dr.     John     McW'horter,     Ezra 
Rockwell  and  Samuel  \'ining.      Mr.  King- 
man   was    a    native  of  Wether.sfield,  Mass., 
where  he  was  born  October  5th,  1770.     He 
left  home  at  the  age  of  sixteen  and  learned 
the  shoemaker's  trade  with  Mr.  McGee,  in 
Sheffield.      When  he  was  twenty- five  years 
old  he  came   to   Ciiicinnatus  and  located  on 
lot  19,  bringing    with   him    his  wife  and  his 
infant  son,    John  Kingman,   jr.,    who   now 
lives  in  Cincinnatus  at   the   age  of  eighty- 
five   years.      Mr.   Kingman    was  an   indus- 
trious man,  and  being  a  good  shoemaker,  he 
worked  on  his  small  tract  of  fifteen  acres  of 
land  in  day  time  and  made  boots  and  shoes 
evenings.       He    thus    prospered    and    pur- 
chased additional    land    until   his  farm  em- 
braced   150    acres.      His  worth   as  a  citizen 
was  appreciated  by  his  townsmen,  who  kept 
him    in   the    office  of  super\'isor  for  eleven 
successive   years   and   in  other  town  offices 
at   different    times.      He  also   rose  from  the 
military    office   of   corporal    in   an    infantry 
compan}-,    to    colonel.      He    died    in    1859, 
and  his  wife  in  1854.      His  famil)-  were  Le- 
ro\'  \V.,  L\-man,  01i\'er,   Charles  and  John, 
the  last  three  settling  in  this  town.     John  is 
the  only  one  now  living,  and  is  one  of  the 
oldest  permanent  residents  of  the  town  and 
count}".      He   held    the  office  of  supervisor 
eight  )-ears  and  was  sent  to  the  Legislature 
in  [844.      Orange  Spencer,  Mr.  Kingman's 
neighbor   is  the  next  oldest  resident  of  the 
town  and  was  one  of  his  first  school-mates. 
Oliver  Kingman    was  associate  judge  from 
1828   to    1846,  and   the    family  as  a   whole 
became    prominent   members  of  the   com- 
tnunit}-,    three    of    the    sons    having    been 
elected   to    the    Legislature.      All   of  them 
were    merchants    at   some    period   of  their 
lives,    and    none    of    them    e\-er    failed    in 
business. 

The  Rockwells  came  from  Lenox,  Mass. 
Ezra  located  first    in  Solon  (now  Taylor)  in 


■793.  but  two  years  later  removed  to  Cin- 
cinnatus and  settled  on  lot  19,  where  he 
purchased  100  acres.  Thaddeus  located  on 
lot  9. 

Dr.  McWhorter  came  originally  from 
Washington  county,  in  1798,  but  came  into 
Cincinnatus  from  Oxford,  Chenango  count)'. 
He  married  a  step-daughter  of  Zurial  Ra\-- 
mond,  it  being  the  first  wedding  in  the 
town,  and  there  is  quite  a  romance  con- 
neected  with  the  event.  At  the  time  of 
the  marriage  there  was  no  person  in  Cin- 
cinnatus who  had  the  re(juired  authority  to 
perform  the  ceremon)';  consequentl}-  a 
clergj-man  was  employed  to  come  from 
Oxford  and  nfficiate.  Upon  his  arrival  a 
new  difficult}'  presented  itself;  the  minister 
had  no  authority  to  marry  outside  of  the 
county  of  Chenango.  So,  in  order  that 
the  bond  might  be  properly  tied,  the  little 
wedding  part}',  escorted  b}'  Thomas  Rock- 
well, started  on  a  trip  across  the  borders  of 
the  count}-.  Reaching  what  the}-  supposed 
was  their  destination  within  the  limits  of 
Chenango  count}-,  the}-  halted  at  a  beautiful 
sylvan  spot  in  the  opening  and  there,  sur- 
rounded onl}-  b}-  nature's  loxeliest  works, 
the  twain  were  made  man  and  wife.  It 
was  afterwards  learned  with  some  consterna- 
tion that  the  wedding  part}-  had  not  in 
reality  passed  out  of  what  was  then  Onon- 
daga county,  and  it  is  said  that  the  cere- 
mony was  again  performed  under  such 
circumstances  as  could  leave  no  doubt  as  to 
its  legalit}-.  Dr.  McWhorter  became  one 
of  the  most  prominent  men  in  the  tov\  n 
and  enjoyed  an  excellent  reputation 
throughout  the  county.  He  was  a  politician 
of  considerable  eminence,  and  was  entrusted 
with  the  administration  of  several  im- 
portant offices.  Erom  1804  to  1808  he 
was  a  Member  of  the  Assembly.  He  also 
held  the  office  of  surrogate.  He  had  a 
large  and  respectable  family  of  children. 
Zurial  Raymond,  before  mentioned,  came 

24 


370 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


from  W'illiamstow  11.  Mass.  He  located  nii 
lot  2g,  on  a  Revolutionar)-  bount\'  claim 
which  came  to  him  tlirouj^ii  his  wife,  a 
widow  Young. 

Phineas  Sergeant,  from  Oxford,  came 
into  Cincinnatus  in  1796,  and  Charles  De 
Belle,  from  Berkshire,  Mass.,  came  in  and 
located  on  lot  9,  in  1797.  He  married  a 
sister  of  Thomas  Rockwell,  and  died  in 
1854;  his  wife  li\-ing  to  a  \-ery  old  age. 
They  had  five  children. 

Jesse  Locke,  from  O.xford,  settled  011  lot 
19  about  the  year  1800.  Many  of  the  early 
settlers  in  the  old  town  of  Cincinnatus  have 
been  noticed  in  the  histories  of  Freetown, 
Willet  and  Marathon. 

The  Wyoming,  Onondaga  and  Oneida 
Indians  made  annual  visits  to  the  valle\-  of 
the  Otselic,  which  was  a  fa\orite  hunting 
and  cainping-gr(jund  with  them.  In  1796 
fort}'  Oneidas  camped  on  the  ground  now 
occupied  by  the  brick  store,  and  during  the 
fall  and  winter  the\-  killed  fort}--two  bears, 
the  oil  from  which  the)-  preserved  in  some 
of  the  larger  intestines,  using  it  for  cooking, 
etc.  Soon  after  Col.  Kingman  begfan  clear- 
ing  and  improving  his  land  the}-  removed 
farther  down  the  river. 

An  old  resident  informs  us  that  these  In- 
dians were  invariabh-  peaceable  and  well 
disposed,  and  that,  although  the  doors  of 
the  settlers'  cabins  were  seldom  fastened, 
it  was  very  rare  that  an}-thing  was  missed, 
the  taking  of  which  could  be  charged  to 
the  Indians.  He  distinctl}'  remembers, 
when  a  little  boy,  of  going  to  bed  with  his 
little  br(.)thers,  in  the  main  room  of  their  log 
house  (there  probabh-  was  but  one  room), 
a  blazing  fire  being  left  in  the  great  fire- 
place. As  the  evening  advanced,  an  Indian 
would  come  stealtliil}-  in,  making  scarcely 
a  sound,  usuall}'  followed  by  a  dog.  He 
would  deliberatel}-  lie  down  with  his  feet  to 
the  fire,  his  gun  b\-  his  side  and  the  do</ 
next    to    the    cfun.      Soon    anotlicr    Indian 


would  come  in  in  the  same  manner  and  take 
his  position  for  the  night  by  the  side  of  the 
other,  with  gun  and  dog  next  to  him.  So 
these  sons  of  the  forest  would  continue  to 
Come  into  the  house  until  frei[uenll}-  there 
would  be  eight  or  ten  of  their  swarthy  fig- 
ures lying  in  a  circle  like  the  spokes  of  a 
wheel,  with  their  feet  all  pointing  toward 
the  fire  and  usuall}-  alternated  in  each  in- 
stance b}-  a  dog  and  a  gun.  Here  the}- 
would  sleep  in  peace  through  the  chill}' 
autumn  night,  and  earl}-  in  the  morning 
start  out  on  the  chase.  Wolves,  bear  and 
other  wild  animals  were  then  numerous,  and 
it  is  not  more  than  about  si.xty  years  ago 
tliat  the  former  animals  broke  into  a  sheep 
inclosure  in  that  neighborho<.)d  and  killed 
e\'ery  one  of  the  flock. 

Among  the  early  settlers  in  the  town 
were  the  grandparents  of  Mr.  A.  M.  Greene, 
who  states  that  his  grandfather,  Thomas 
Place,  settled  here  in  1 8 18.  He  lived  until 
the  6th  of  March,  1875,  \\-hen  he  fell  upon 
a  saw-buck,  from  the  efilects  of  which  acci- 
dent he  died  in  a  few  days.  A  singular 
fatalit}-  to  the  other  members  of  the  two 
families  of  grandparents  of  Mr.  Greene  fol- 
lowed this  calamity.  The  wife  of  Mr.  Place, 
on  the  3d  of  September  following  her  hus- 
band's death,  made  a  misstep  near  the  same 
spot  where  Mr.  Place  met  with  the  accident 
from  the  effects  of  which  she  also  died  in  a 
few  da\s.  Joseph  Greene,  the  paternal 
grandfather  of  .\.  M.  Greene,  lived -in  the 
town  from  about  the  year  I  81  8  until  April 
I5tii,  1881,  when  lie  fell  over  a  precipice 
about  fifteen  feet  in  height,  while  going 
through  a  piece  of  woods,  and  was  killed. 
His  wife  lost  her  life  by  a  fall  through  a 
ha}- mow. 

Joseph  tireene's  son,  Albert  C,  is  the 
father  in-law  of  \\'illiam  O.  Greene,  the 
present  able  editor  of  the  Otselic  Wilky 
Register. 

.\lthougli  the  inhabitants  of  this  town,  in 


TuVVN    OK    ClNCIiWATUS. 


0/ 


common  with  those  of  Solon,  Taylor  and 
Willet,  were  much  elated  a  few  years  since 
by  the  bright  prospect  of  a  railroad,  which 
would  connect  them  with  the  Midland  road 
and  with  Cortland  village,  they  are  thus  far 
disappointed,  and  the  town  is  isolated  from 
railroad  communication.  This  fact  has  op- 
erated to  its  disad\-antage  in  many  ways  — 
chiefly  in  retarding  the  growth  of  its  busi- 
ness centers ;  where,  in  former  years,  as  an 
old  resident  informs  us,  at  short  distances 
on  all  the  roads  were  log  houses  filled  with 
children,  when  all  the  trading  of  the  town 
was  done  within  its  limits  ;  now  those  chil- 
dren have  grown  to  maturity  and  gone 
away  to  railroad  centers,  and  business  has 
fallen  off. ' 

The  early  inhabitants  of  this  town  suffered 
the  common  incon\enience  of  ha\ing  no 
near  grist-mills,  and  were  compelled  to  go 
to  Chenango  Forks,  Ludlowville  or  Manlius 
Square  to  have  their  grinding  done.  Their 
grists  were  usually  transported  to  those 
points  on  "  drays,"  a  very  simple  \ehicle 
constructed  of  a  crotched  tree  with  a  few 
pieces  of  board  fastened  across  the  two 
spreading  arms  with  wooden  pins.  The 
team  was  then  hitched  to  the  other  branch. 
The  pioneers  were  equal  to  any  such  task 
as  getting  eight  or  ten  bushels  of  grain  to 
mill  thirty  miles  away,  without  the  aid  of  a 
vehicle  of  an}-  description,  in  the  present 
understanding  of  that  term. 

The  first  grist-mill  in  the  present  town 
of  Cincinnatus  was  built  at  an  early  day, 
some  years  previous  to  1820,  by  Ephraim 
Fish.  It  was  located  about  half  a  mile  from 
the  village.  John  Kingman,  jr.,  states  that 
this  mill  was  owned  by  his  father  from  1820 
to  1830,  but  it  is  not  known  from  whom  he 
purchased  it.     This  mill  and  the  dam  were 

iThe  census  shows  that,  in  1820,  immediately  after  the 
town  was  divided,  the  population  of  the  town  w.ts  885. 
This  had  increased  to  1,206  in  1850,  but  w.is  only  1,119 
in  1855.  while  the  census  of  1880  shows  a  population 
of  1,093. 


'  undermined  by  a  flood  in  1830  and.it  went 
into  disuse  thereafter. 

A  Mr.  Wilcox  built  a  mill  in  the  village 
in  1829,  and  lived  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
structure;  but  it  was  operated  only  two  or 
three  years. 

About  the  year  1832  or  1833  Dr.  John 
McW'horter  erected  a  mill  at  Lower  Cincin- 
natus, which  was  operated  until  about  ilie 
year  1850,  when  it  was  transformed  into  a 
tannery  by  Kinney  &  Thompson;  it  is  now 
used  as  a  tannery  by  Augustus  Smith,  who 
is  doing  a  large  business. 

George  Cole  built  the  most  important 
mill  in  the  town — a  steam  grist-mill;  but 
it  was  subseqtiently  taken  down  and  con- 
verted into  two  dwelling  houses.  There  is 
now  no  grist-nill  within  the  limits  of  the 
town. 

As  we  ha\e  already  intimated,  the  inhab- 
itants of  this  town  have  recentlj'  turned 
their  attention  to  the  production  of  butter 
and  cheese.  About  the  year  1870  Edward 
and  Eli  Colegrove  began  the  operation  of 
their  factory  abo\^e  the  village,  turning  out 
an  excellent  product.  Since  then  Julius 
Crittenden  built  a  factory  near  the  town  of 
Willet  and  Porter  Crittenden  another  two 
miles  south  of  the  village.  These  factories 
are  all  in  operation  and  do  a  satisfactory 
and  successful  business. 

VILLAGES. 

.A  beautiful  little  village  nametl  Cincin- 
natus is  situated  on  the  Otselic  river  on  lot 
ig,  which  contains  two  churches  (Congre- 
gational and  Methodist),  an  academy,  a 
hotel  and  a  number  of  stores  and  shops, 
with  about  575  inhabitants.  Lower  Cincin- 
natus is  a  smaller  village  of  about  200  inhab- 
itants, is  located  a  short  distance  below  the 
upper  village,  and  contains  a  church,  a  hotel, 
a  store,  a  tannery  and  a  cutter  factory. 

These  are  the  only  villages  or  hamlets  in 
the  town.     The  first  merchants  in  the  place 


372 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


were  James  Tanner  and  Elijah  Bliss,  and 
the  first  store  was  erected  by  Col.  John 
Kingman  in  1 83 1.  John  Kingman,  jr., 
went  into  nu-rcantile  business  in  the  spring 
of  that  year  in  a  little  store  which  stood  on 
the  site  of  the  present  brick  store.  He  re- 
mained there  but  one  year  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Roswell  Randall  and  Jerry  Bean, 
who  built  the  brick  store  in  1832.  During 
the  same  3ear  John  Kingman,  jr.,  built  the 
store  now  owned  by  George  Cole  and  oc- 
cupied by  Charles  and  Arthur  Cogswell, 
where  he  traded  until  1842. 

In  1834  Oliver  Kingman  began  business 
in  a  little  store  on  the  west  side  of  the  creek 
where  he  continued  until  1854,  at  which 
time  he  and  his  brother  George  bought  the 
brick  store  of  Halbert  &  Bean.  In  1856 
they  sold  out  to  H.  M.  &  Jefferson  King- 
man. Following  is  a  list  of  the  successive 
merchants  w'ho  have  occupied  the  brick 
store  :  Randall  &  Bean,  Bean  &  Niles,  Bean, 
Niles  &  Boyd,  J.  C.  Bean,  Halbert  &  Bean, 
H.  M.  &  Jefferson  Kingman,  Kingman  & 
Sturtevant,  Kingman  &  Lewis,  Kingman  & 
Wheeler,  Oliver,  George  &  J.  Kingman, 
H.  M.  &  J.  Kingman. 

In  the  store  occupied  by  Chas.  and  Arthur 
Cogswell  the  following  merchants  did  bus- 
iness,  succeeding  John  Kingman,  who  was 
for  a  time  associated  with  Charles  and 
George  Kingman :  Kingman  &  Perkins, 
Haynes  &  Warren,  Jcft'ersun  Kingman, 
Monroe  Smith,  David  D.  Uftbrd,  who  was 
there  from  1866  to  1882,  in  which  latter 
named  year  he  sold  out  to  the  present  oc- 
cupants of  the  store. 

The  store  building  now  owned  by  James 
Hill  was  built  by  Porter  Crittenden  in  1864, 
who  was  there  in  business  with  his  son-in- 
law,  Monroe  E.  Smith,  until  1868.  He  was 
succeeded  by  D.  D.  Ufford,  who  continued 
until  the  spring  of  1877.  In  September  of 
that  year  Mr.  Hill  took  it  and  has  continued 
the  business  until  the  present  time. 


The  grocer)-  and   dru;. 


business  was  es- 
tablished in  the  village  about  the  year  i860. 
It  passed  into  the  hands  of  Cornell  & 
Gee,  Israel  Gee  &  Co.,  and  to  the  present 
proprietor,  Wilber  Holmes,  who  began  it  in 
1868.  lie  has  had  immediate  charge  of 
the  post-office  since  1872  and  virtually  since 
1866. 

The  first  postmaster  in  the  place  was 
Major  James  Tanner.  Then  came  Judson 
Brown,  Judge  Niles,  John  Kingman  (1844 
until  1850),  Oliver  Kingman,  George  King- 
man, Jefferson  Kingman  (1856  to  1865), 
Israel  Gee,  and  Wilber  Holmes,  the  present 
incumbent. 

The  furniture  business  was  established  in 
Cincinnatus  b}-  Hitchcock  &  Barnes,  who 
conducted  it  until  1877,  when  they  sold 
out  to  W.  W.  Grant,  the  present  proprietor. 

B.  R.  &  L.  H.  Corning  have  carried  on 
the  hardware  trade  since  1880.  C.  W. 
Smith,  hats,  caps,  and  gents'  furnishing 
goods,  since  1882.  S.  G.  Kien,  jewelry, 
hats,  caps,  etc.,  since  1876. 

The  only  hotel  in  Cincinnatus  village, 
now  kept  by  A.  E.  Perry,  was  built  by 
Charles  Kingman  in  1831.  He  kept  it  a 
few  \-ear3  and  was  succeeded  by  John  King- 
man, after  whom  I.  M.  Samson  took  the 
house.  He  kept  it  five  }-ears,  and  was  fol- 
lowed by  J.  C.  Clark,  D.  J.  Sperr}-,  Smith 
&  Sherman  Hotchkiss,  Gibson  Smith,  and 
J.  C.  Weaver,  who  repaired  it  and  sold  to 
the  present  proprietor. 

Physicians.  —  Dr.  Jolin  McW'horter  was 
the  pioneer  ph}-sician  of  Cortland  county,  a 
native  of  \\"ashington  count)',  N.  ^'.,  and 
located  in  Cincinnatus  in  1795.  He  was  an 
able  man,  a  good  physician  for  that  period, 
but  he  did  not  confine  himself  to  practicing 
his  profession,  luitering  the  political  field, 
he  was  honored  with  several  offices,  as  be- 
fore stated.  Following  him  came  Dr.  Nor- 
ris  Briggs,  Dr.  \\'hite,  Dr.  L\-man  ICldridge, 
a  man  who  became  greatly  respected  for  his 


Town  of  Cinxinnatus. 


attainments  in  the  profession,  and  as  a  citi- 
zen ;  Dr.  A.  D.  Reed  (now  of  Marathon), 
Amasa  J.  Ouiv-ey,  wlio  began  practice  in 
1862  as  an  eclectic,  but  subsequently  stud- 
ied in  the  old  school  of  medicine;  Marcel- 
lus  L.  Halbert,  Dr.  Barnes,  a  student  with 
Dr.  Reed,  and  an  assistant  surgeon  in  the 
United  States  army,  and  Dr.  Marcellus 
Smith,  now  the  oldest  physician  in  the 
place.  Dr.  Smith  became  a  member  of  the 
Count)-  Medical  Societ)-  in  1853.  He 
bought  out  Dr.  Plldridtre,  and  has  followed 
his  profession  regularly  since  that  time. 

Manufactures. — There  has  been  consid- 
erable manufacturing  done  in  Cincinnatus 
for  many  years,  and  there  are  now  several 
important  establishments  here.  Jonas  Cor- 
mick  was  the  lirst  blacksmith  in  the  town. 
He  was  here  as  early  as  1820,  and  about 
the  same  time  Solomon  Gritman  began  in 
the  upper  village.  Cook  &  Greene  were 
also  early  blacksmiths.  Joseph  Gee  worked 
for  this  firm  many  years,  and  then  went 
into  business  for  himself  In  1840  Nathan 
Dw-ight  formed  a  partnership  with  Mr.  Gee, 
which  firm  continued  until  1851,  when  Gee 
went  out  and  Mr.  Dwight  continued  alone 
until  1866.  N.  A.  Robbins  has  been  in  the 
business  here  for  twenty-two  years.  His 
shop  was  built  in  1829,  and  was  used  for 
religious  purposes  until  the  erection  of  the 
Baptist  Church.  Elder  Howe  preached  in 
this  building,  and  was  the  pioneer  Baptist 
minister  of  Cincinnatus. 

The  manufacture  of  cutters  was  estab- 
lished in  i860  by  Larabee  &  Gee,  which 
business  was  continued  until  1876,  when 
H.  C.  Larabee  removed  to  the  lower  village. 
In  1861  N.  France  and  C.  B.  Hitchcock 
came  to  the  place,  and  the  former,  after 
working  for  the  above-mentioned  firm  until 
1874,  began  business  on  his  own  accoinit. 

Churches.  —  Public  religious  worship  did 
not  begin  within  the  limits  of  Cincinnatus 
as  early  as  in  some  other  k)calities,  chiefl_\- 


on  account  of  the  proximity  of  early  church 
organizations  in  other  towns  at  no  great 
distance.  Lots  i,  16,  I"] ,  49,  53  and  62 
of  this  town  were  set  aside  for  the  support 
of  the  gospel  and  schools.  The  first  ser- 
mon ever  preached  within  the  original  lim- 
its  of  Cincinnatus   was   by    Dr.   Williston, 

i  from  the  text,  "  Hear  ye."  What  was 
known  as  the  Union  Congresational  Socie- 

j  ty  of  Cincinnatus  and  Solon  was  organized 
on  the  1 8th  of  November,  1822.  The  trust- 
ees were  John  L.  Boyd,  Barak  Niles  and 
John  Covert. 

The  Congregational  Society  of  Cincin- 
natus is  reported  on  the  minutes  of  the 
General  Assembly  as  having  been  received 

j  uttder  the  care  of  the  Presbytery  of  Cort- 
land September  14th,  183  i.  Justwhattime 
it  was  first  organized  we  have  not  learned. 
In  I  S3  I  it  had  one  hundred  and  ten  mem- 
bers, of  whom  sixty  were  received  that  year. 
In  1836  it  reported  162  members,  but  in 
1846  the  number  was  reduced  to  130.  The 
membership  is  now  much  smaller,  and  the 
society  is  feeble.  The  Rev.  Orin  Catlin 
was  the  stated  supply  of  this  church,  under 
the  patronage  of  the  American  Home  Mis- 
sionary Society,  from  October,  1832.  Rev. 
Joseph  R.  Johnson  was  ordained  and  in- 
stalled pastor  February  i6th,  1846.  He  con- 
tinued with  the  church  two  or  three  years, 
and  was  then  succeeded  by  Rev.  Eleazer 
T.Bali,  who  took  charge  June  8th,  1849.  He 
remained  until  a  few  years  prior  to  the  last 
war,  when  the  present  pastor.  Rev.  Edson 
Rogers,  accepted  the  office. 

Schools. — The  first  school-house  in  Cin- 
cinnatus was  built  b\-  John  Kingman,  and 
stood  a  short  distance  south  of  his  house. 
The  first  teacher  was  Miss  Hepsy  Beebe, 
but  in  what  \'ear  we  have  not  been  able  to 
learn  Since  that  time  schools  have  multi- 
plied throughout  the  town,  and  the  cause 
of  education  has  flourished. 

Cincinnatus    Academ\-    was    founded  in 


374 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1857,  in  which  year  a  spacious  and  con- 
venient building  was  erected.  Tliis,  with 
its  surrounding  grounds,  handsomely  laid 
out  and  pleasanth'  shaded  with  maples, 
forms  one  of  the  most  attractive  features  of 
the  beautiful  \illage.  The  people  have 
alwa\-s  been  enthusiastic  and  unanimous  in 
their  support  of  this  institution,  rendering 
it  one  of  the  most  successful  and  widely 
known  academies  in  the  State.  A  good 
library  has  been  furnished,  with  philosoph- 
ical apparatus,  etc.  Following  is  the  pres-  : 
ent  Board  of  Trustees,  of  which  H.  M. 
Kingman  has  been  jiresident  from  the  first 
organization  :  —  ; 

H.  M.  Kingman,  president;  Henry 
Knickerbocker,  secretary:  J.  W.  Sturte- 
vant,  treasurer;  B.  R.  Corning,  D.  D.  Uf- 
ford,  John  Kingman,  J.  B.  Boyd,  F.  M. 
Benjamin,  M.  R.  Smith,  M.  D.,  M.  L.  Hal- 
bert,  M.  D.,  Wilber  Holmes,  C.  ^^".  Smith, 
C.  R.  Dickinson,  Anson  Cogswell;  t\v- 
officio.  Rev.  William  D.  Johnson.  Rev.  Ed-  j 
son  Rogers,  Rev.  W".  H.  \'ork. 

The  first  corps  of  instructors  consisted  of 
Ambrose  P.  Kelsey,  A.  B.,  principal ;  Frank 
Place,  mathematics;  John  Seaber,  penman-  I 
ship;  Miss  Mary  T.  Gleason,  preceptress; 
Mrs.  Vivena  M.  Austin,  assistant  teacher ; 
Miss  Cornelia  A.  Kingman,  music. 

The  present  instructors  are  Myron  E. 
Carmer,  A.  B.,  principal  ;  Miss  Alice  Jones, 
preceptress ;  Miss  Stella  Kingman,  com- 
mon English.     Mrs.  E.  L.  Samson,  piano. 

There  are  three  courses  of  study  each  of 
which  aftbrds  a  number  of  optional  studies. 

First,  a  business  course,  including  com- 
mon English  branches,  not  complete  till  a 
regent's  preliminar\-  certificate  is  obtained. 
Book-keeping,  algebra,  physiologj-,  Ameri- 
can history,  rhetoric,  political  economy  and 
physics. 

Second,  an  academic  course.  Third,  a 
classical,  or  collegiate  entrance  course,  each 
termmatmg  m  a  regent's  academic  diploma.  \ 


There  is  a  flourishing  literarj'  society 
connected  with  the  school,  which  holds 
weekly  meetings,  and  affords  opportunities 
for  improvement  in  composition,  declama- 
tion, extemporaneous  speaking,  etc.  The 
teachers  by  their  presence  at  all  the  meet- 
ings, by  criticisms  and  suggestions,  en- 
deavor to  make  this  department  of  the 
school  as  efficient  and  at  the  same  time  as 
agreeable  as  any  other. 

Belonging  to  the  institution  is  a  well 
selected  librar\-,  to  which  students  have 
free  access.  The  leading  principles  of  the 
sciences  are  illustrated  b)-  ample  apparatus. 
Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  John  Osgood, 
students  in  physiology,  and  like  sciences, 
are  often  invited  to  examine  with  him  the 
minutest  workings  of  nature,  by  means  of 
a  powerful  histological  microscope,  while  to 
students  in  astronomy  he  reveals  her  most 
vast  and  distant  realms  through  a  telescope 
having  a  five- inch  lens. 

There  is  one  newspaper  published  in  this 
town — the  Otselic  ] 'alley  Register;  the 
publisher  is  William  O.  Greene,  who  be- 
came the  owner  of  the  establishment  in 
1879.  It  has  a  circulation  of  about  five 
hundred  and  is  an  excellent  journal  of  its 
class.  (See  history  of  journalism  of  the 
county,  in  an  earlier  chapter.) 

LOWER    CLVCIXXATIS. 

The  buildings  on  the  corner  at  Lower 
Cincinnatus  were  built  by  Dr.  John  Mc- 
Whorter,  and  the  store  building  was 
erected  about  the  }-ear  1831.  It  stood 
empty  some  time  and  was  afterward  kept 
by  Benjamin  Kingsley,  a  Mr.  Barnes  and 
others.  H.  P.  Spencer,  the  present  mer- 
chant, bought  the  property  of  Widow 
Barnes  in  1874;  the  store  being  then  kept 
by  her  son,  Frank  Barnes. 

Charles  Goodsell  carried  on  a  store  on 
the  opposite  corner  at  the  time  when  Ben- 
jamin Kingsley  was  in  business. 


Town  of  Cincixxatus. 


375 


The  manufacture  of  cutters  at  Lower 
Cinciniiatus  was  begun  by  L.  J.  Larabee  as 
early  as  the  year  1 870.  A  few  years  after- 
ward H.  C.  Larabee  came  into  the  business 
with  his  father,  and  in  1 879-80  the  large 
buildings  were  erected  to  accommodate  the 
increasing  ticmand  for  their  work.  They 
are  now  employing  about  twent\--fi\e  hands 
and  turn  out  3,000  cutters  annuall\-. 

The  iiotel  at  this  village  was  built  by  Dr. 
McWhorter  about  the  year  1833  and  was 
kept  under  his  management  several  j'ears. 
Reuben  Fish,  Cornelius  Fish  and  Isaac  Fish 
each  kept  it  for  a  few  \ears.  Mr.  Messen- 
ger then  took  the  house  for  a  few  \'ears  and 
was  followed  by  Adam  L.  Smith,  who  kept 
it  for  many  years  until  his  death,  when  it 
was  closed  as  a  public  house  until  1883. 
D.  H.  Clark,  the  present  proprietor,  then 
opened  the  house. 

The  first  Baptist  Church  at  Lower  Cin- 
cinnatus  was  organized  March  ist,  1823, 
and  was  a  part  of  the  church  in  German, 
Chenango  count}-,  which  was  organized  in 
June,  1805.  When  it  became  incon\enient 
for  the  inhabitants  of  Cincinnatus  to  attend 
there,  the  church  here  was  organized. 
Rev.  John  Lawin.  the  first  pastor,  served 
the  church  until  1825.  Re\-.  Solomon 
Howe  from  1827  to  1836.  During  the 
\-ear  1831  the  present  house  of  worship  was 
built,  services  prior  to  that  having  been 
held  in  private  houses  or  shops.  The  fol- 
lowing pastors  have  officiated  for  this 
church:  Rev.  Wm.  Holroyd,  183710  1839. 
Rev.  David  Leach,  1839  to  1840.  Geo. 
W.  Mead  (licentiate),  1840  to  1 841.  Rev. 
L.  E.  Swan,  1841  to  1844.  Rev.  E.  P. 
Dye,  1844  to  1846.  Rev.  J.  F.  Stark. 
1846  to  1852.  Rev.  Horace  Decker,  1S52 
to  1857.  Rev.  L.  W.  Nichols,  1857  to 
1859.  Rev.  Washington  Kingsle\-,  1S59 
to  1 86 1.  Rev.  A.  Galpin,  1861  to  1862. 
Rev.  M.  R.  Everts,  1862  to  1863.  Rev. 
W.  G.    Dye,  1863   to    1866.      Rev.   Samuel 


I  G.  Kein,  1866  to  1867.  Rev.  E.  Holroyd, 
1867  to  1869.      Rev.    G.  P.  Turnbull,  1869 

!  vto  1871.  Rev.  J.  B.  Cole,  1871  to  1873. 
Rev.  S.  P.  Way,  1873  to  1874.  Rev.  A. 
J.  Baskwell,  1874  to  1875.  Rev.  W.  W. 
Beardsley,  1875  to  1876.  Rev.  Daniel 
Reese,  1877  to  1879.  Rev.  C.  R.  Corning, 
1879  to   1882.      Rev.  \\'m.   L.  Johnson  as- 

:  sumed  the  pastorate  in  1882;  the  societj'uow 
numbers  eighty-two.  The  present  officers 
are  Russell  Grant,  Edwin  D.  White, 
deacons.  Joseph  Tice,  clerk.  M.  L.  Hal- 
bert,  treasurer.  Joseph  Tice,  Oscar  E. 
Nichols,  M.  L.  Halbert,  Russell  Grant,  Ed- 
win D.  White,  Lafayette  Spencer,  trustees. 
The  original  members  of  this  church  who 
were  most  prominent,  were  John  R.  Mc- 
Whorter, Alex.  Rice,  Nathaniel  Spencer, 
Ebenezer  Andrus,  John  and  Isaac  Smith, 
George  Kingman  and  others. 

The  Methodist  Episcojial  Church  of  Cin- 
cinnatus was  organized  in  1841.  The  first 
trustees  were  Oliver  L.  Sterling,  Chas.  Hig- 
gins,  Chas.  Kingman,  Lyman  Eldridge, 
Porter  Crittenden,  and  Hiram  Rogers. 
Members  of  the  society  were  David  Wliite 
and  wife,  Abner  Wood  and  wife,  Abel 
Dickinson,  L\nian  Eldridge  and  wife, 
Chauncey  Phelps,  Oliver  L.  Sterling  and 
wife,  Fabus  Kinney,  G.  L.  Cole  and  wife 
and  others.  The  church  edifice  was  built 
in  1843-44  and  cost  $1,600.  The  building 
was  repaired  and  enlarged  at  considerable 
expense  in  1872.  In  1863-64  the  church 
received  large  accessions  through  the  di- 
vision of  the  Congregational  society.  Sev- 
eral revivals  have  occurred  in  the  church, 
the  last  being  that  of  1877.  An  excellent 
parsonage  was  built  in  1859.  The  present 
membership  is  ninety.  The  ministers  who 
have  officiated  here  are  Revs.  Leonard 
Bowdish,  L.  H.  Stanley,  D.  W.  Thurston, 
Wm.  Bixb}-,  W.  H.  Miller,  Thos.  D.  Wire, 
E.  C.  Curtis,  G.  S.  White,  L.  Hartsough, 
J.  H.    Barnard,  B.    Shove,  R.    H.    Clark,  J. 


n^ 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


V.  Benham.  W.  M.  Hem-\-,  W.  D.  Fox,  A. 

C.  Smith.  W.  H.  York,  M.  Z.  Haskins, 
1884. 

At  the  breaking  out  of  the  Southern 
Rebellion,  no  town  in  tlie  count}"  came  for- 
ward with  more  patriotism  and  liberaHt)- 
in  men  and  means  in  support  of  the  go\-- 
ernment  than  Cincinnatus.  Under  the 
calls  of  the  president  for  troops  the  following 
men  enlisted  from  the  town  and  were  cred- 
ited on  the  different  quotas,  receiving  the 
bounties  as  they  appear:  — 

Call  of  October,  1863,  February  ist,  and 
March,  1864.  Bounty  to  each,  $300.  Total, 
$6,600.  —  Jeremiah  Scouton,  William  C. 
Pearse,  William  Kimball,  Flihu  M.  Cham- 
berlain, Stephen  Ansel,  Sidney  W.  Clark, 
Ira  W.  Fore.st,  Christopher  M.  Childs,  Caleb 

D.  Burlingame,  James  B.  Decker,  Volne\' 
Weeks,  James  li.  Arnold,  John  H.  Glover, 
Charles  S.  Cutting,  Herbert  Berkley,  Geo. 
Berkley,  Urbane  B.  Smith,  Augustine  L. 
Aney,  Willett  L.  McKinne\-,  Henry  West, 
Alfred  P.  Ransford,  Harlan  P.  Thompson. 

Call  of  July  18th,  1864.  Bounty  to  each, 
$1,000;  brokerage,  $25.  Total  bounties, 
$22,500;  total  brokerage,  $550.  —  John 
Savage,  John  Simpson,  John  Phillips,  Matio 
Branchett,  Jarvis  Kellej',  Marcus  Forrest, 
Darvilla  Ford,  Samuel  Gibbs,  Samuel  Van 
Wort,  Thomas  Hale,  William  J.  Holmes, 
Watson  J.  Holmes,  John  M.  Parks,  Alfred 
Rorepaugh,  James  W.  Sampson,   Isaac  W. 


Sherwood,  Orlando  Vosburgh,  Seneca 
Wright,  Peter  Ratchel,  Ivdward  Clark, 
George  Sweet,  Michael  Grant,  John  Now- 
lan,  Patrick  Hughs. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bounty 
to  each,  $600;  brokerage,  $15.  Total 
bounties,  $5,100;  total  brokerage,  $135. — 
J.  A.  Perkins,  James  Rile\-,  Phill  Beeman, 
Charles  Ernst,  Henry  Jackson,  Henr)' 
Physic,  Justus  Bloomer,  Edward  W.  Mc- 
Farland,  Robert  Bund)-. 

Recapitulation.  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  Februar\-  and  March, 
$6,600;  paid  for  filling  quota;  call  July  1 8th, 
1864,  $23,050;  paid  for  filling  quota,  call 
December  19th,  1864,  $5,235.  Grand  total 
for  all  calls,  $34,885. 

The  early  records  of  this  town  ha\e  been 
destroyed.  The  present  officers  of  the  town 
are  as  follows  :  — 

Supervisor  —  W.  W.  ^Vood. 

Town  clerk  —  W.  S.  Carruth. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  John  D.  l-'ish, 
Charles  Nichols  and  M.  L.  Halbert. 

Assessor  —  Reuben  P.  Fish. 

Commissioner  of  highways — Lewis  W'hite. 

Collector — Evander  Smith. 

Constables  — -  Evander  Smith,  Ed.  L. 
Brown,  James  M.  Torrey,  Fred  E.  Nichols, 
Luell  Harve\-. 

Overseer  of  the  poor —  Richard  Cornell. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  B.  H.  Livermore, 
Adelbert  P-.  Delcvan. 


Town  of  Truxtox. 


377 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


I1IST()K\'  or  THK  TOWN   (IK    TKUXTOX. 


THE  town  of  Truxton  lies  upon  the 
northern  border  of  the  county,  east  of 
the  center,  and  is  bounded  on  the  north  b)- 
Onondaga  countv' ;  on  the  east  by  Cuj'ler  ; 
on  the  south  by  Solon,  and  on  the  west  by 
Homer  and  Preble. 

The  town  was  named  in  honor  of  Com- 
modore Truxton,  and  was  organized  from 
Fabius,  April  8th,  1 808,  embracing  the 
southern  half  of  that  military  township. 
The  northern  tier  of  lots  of  Solon  were  an- 
nexed on  the  4th  of  April,  181  i.  The 
town  of  Cuyler  was  set  off  from  the  eastern 
side  of  Truxton  on  the  iSth  nf  No\-ember, 
1858. 

In  the  earlier  organization  this  town  was 
embraced  in  Pompey,  which  was  organized 
in  1794  and  included  Pompey,  P'abius  and 
Tully  and  also  a  part  of  the  Onondaga  Res- 
ervation lying  south  of  the  old  Genesee  road 
and  east  of  Onondaga  creek.  Fabius  was 
erected  from  Pompey  in  1798  and  at  that 
time  included  two  militar\-  townships,  Fa- 
bius and  Tully,  comprising  the  present 
towns  of  Fabius,  Tully,  Truxton,  Preble 
and  Scott,  with  portions  of  Spafford  and 
Otisco. 

The  surface  of  this  town  is  chiefly  a 
broken  upland,  divided  into  ridges  which 
have  a  northerlj-  and  southerly  direction. 
The  eastern  branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  river 
enters  the  town  near  the  center  of  the  east- 
ern border  and  flows  westerly  until  near  the 
center  of  the  town,  then  takes  a  south- 
westerl}-  course  until  it  leaves  the  town. 
The  other  streams  of  the  town  are  the  trib- 
utaries of  the  Tioughnioga,  the  Westcott 
and  Stewart  brooks  and  Labrador  creek 
from  the  north,  Cheningo  creek  from  the 
east,  and  Trout  brook  from  the  south. 


On  the  northern  border  of  the  county  is 
a  small  sheet  of  water  called  Labrador 
Pond,  which  is  noted  for  its  surrounding 
picturesque  scener_\-.  On  a  small  brook 
which  flows  into  the  outlet  of  this  pond  from 
the  east  is  a  beautiful  cascade  known  as 
Tinker's  falls,  around  which  is  also  romantic 
and  attractive  scenery. 

What  are  known  as  the  Truxton  hills   lie 
north  of  the  ri\-er.      Nearl}-  their  whole  sur- 
face is  divided  into  sharp  ridges  with    steep 
declivities,    their    summits    being     termed' 
"  hog's-backs." 

The  soil  of  the  town  is  generally  a  sand)- 
and  gravelly  loam.  -The  Truxton  flats  are 
rich  and  very  producti\"e  and  well  adapted 
to  growing  all  kinds  of  grain. 

The  town  is  next  to  the  largest  in  the 
county,  its  acreage  being  28,099;  onl)'  Vir- 
gil is  larger.  The  assessed  valuation  of 
Truxton  is  $16.95  P*^''  acre.  In  iSio  the 
taxable  property  of  the  town  was  assessed 
at  $47,673.  In  1883  the  assessed  value  of 
real  estate  was  $476,420,  and  that  of  the 
personal  property,  $20,400.  In  18 10  the 
village  of  Truxton  contained  only  twenty- 
houses.  It  now  Has  a  population  of  about 
300. 

The  first  settler  in  the  town  of  Truxton 
was  Samuel  C.  Benedict,  who  located  on 
lot  12  in  the  year  1793.  No  record  exists 
of  his  birth-place  and  little  is  known  of  his 
career  subsequent  to  coming  into  this  town. 
He  w-as  certainly  a  hardy  and  courageous 
pioneer  who  dared  push  his  wa)-  into  the 
wilderness  far  beyond  the  boundaries  of 
civilization  and  there  plant  the  standard  of 
a  new  settlement.  Yet  here  he  came  and 
builded  for  himself  a  log  cabin  which  long 
bore   for  him   the  eloquent    title,    "home." 


378 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


And  here  occurred  tlie  first  Ijirtli  in  the  town, 
as  well  as  the  first  death  —  children  of  Mr. 
Benedict  in  both  instances.  It  is  to  be  re- 
gretted that  we  can  gi\e  no  further  details  of 
the  later  life  of  Mr.  Benedict;  but  it  is  often 
the  case  that  he  who  was  most  instrumental 
in  making  the  first  footprints  of  civilization  in 
a  wilderness,  must  remain  forever  unknown 
and  almost  unhnnored  b_\-  postcrit)-. 

In  1794  Nathaniel  Potter,  Jonah  Stiles, 
Christopher  Wiiitne)-  and  Benjamin  Brown 
came  into  the  town  and  settled  in  various 
locations.  Potter  was  from  .Saratoga  count)', 
.\.  v.,  and  purchased  lots  "]"],  ?<(>  and  96. 
On  the  latter  lot  he  erected  a  small  house. 
In  July,  1798,  he  was  suddenly-  killed  b\-  a 
falling  tree. 

Jonah  Stiles  came  from  Rupert,  \^ermont, 
and  located  on  lot  4,  where  he  purchased 
100  acres,  which  farm  was  subsequently 
owned  and  occupied  b}-  Samuel  Freeman. 
His  daughter  Julia  married  John  W'icks,  and 
Sophia  married  Alexander  P^jrhes,  of  Litch 
field,  Ohio.  His  son,  Jonah,  located  at 
Seville,  Ohio  ;  Samuel  at  P"ranklin,  Dela- 
ware count)-,  N.  v.,  and  Otis  at  -Stilesville, 
X.  V. 

Christopher  Whitney  was  also  from  an 
eastern  State  and  located  on  lot  3.  One  of 
his  daughters  became  the  wife  of  Moses 
Hopkins,  a  pioneer  of  Cortland  village. 

Among  other  ver)-  carl)-  settlers  were 
Robert  Knight,  from  Monmouth,  New  Jer- 
se)- ;  Hugh  Stewart,  from  Colerain,  Mass.; 
John  Jeflrc)-  and  P^nos  Phelps,  from  New 
Jerse)-  ;  Billy  Prowbridge  and  Dr.  John 
Miller,  from  Duchess  count)-.  The  last 
named  was  the  first  ph)'sician  in  the  town, 
where  he  lived  and  practiced  his  profession 
until  the  year  1862,  when  he  died.  He  was 
one  of  the  best  known  and  most  respected 
men  of  the  count\-  durintr  his  life. 

John  Shedd  located  earl\-  in  the  )ear 
1797,  on  lot  63,  and  during  the  same  year 
the  Stewarts  came  in.      Nathaniel  PI  located 


1)11  lot  63  and  Charles  on  93,  "  State's  hun- 
dred." 

In  1798  a  number  of  settlers  came  into 
the  town  and  located.  Of  these  Robert 
McNightand  John  Jeffrey  settled  on  lot  No. 
2.  Bill)- Trowbridge  settled  on  lot  5.  He 
became  a  prominent  citizen  and  filled  sev- 
eral political  ofiices ;  was  twice  elected  to 
the  Assembl)-  and  was  sheriff  one  term. 

His  son,  Smith,  located  in  S)-racuse,  and 
John,  Levi  and   Hubbard  at  Detroit,  Mich. 

Stephen  Hedges  came  to  this  town  from 
Troy  and  settled  on  lot  93. 

Increase  M.  Hooker  was  a  native  of  Ben- 
nington, \'t.  He  was  with  Kthan  Allen 
during  a  portion  of  the  Revolutionai)-  War 
and  witnessed  the  conflict  at  Bennington 
on  the  1 6th  of  August,  1777.  He  was 
married  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  afterward 
removed  to  Greene  county,  N.  Y.  ;  in  1797 
.he  remo\-ed  to  Solon,  locating  on  lot  88. 
Soon  afterward  he  purchased  a  grist-mill 
of  Joseph  Sweetland;  it  contained  one  run 
of  stones  and  was  covered  on  the  outside 
with  bark  from  elm  trees.  It  was  rebuilt 
in  1 8 16  by  Mr.  Hooker's  .sons.  In  1842 
he  remoxed  to  New  Jersey.  In  1S48  he 
made  a  \isit  to  a  son  in  Illinois  and  while 
returning,  died  at  Onondaga  Hollow. 

Lewis  \\'icks  came  from  Saratoga  count)- 
in  1804  and  located  during  1804. 

The  Pierce  famil)-,  which  became  a  prom- 
inent one  in  the  town,  were  from  Colerain. 
Zebulon  came  in  1805  and  located  on  lot 
34.  Judah  settled  on  lot  12  in  1806.  He 
accumulated  a  large  propert)-  and  was  an 
influential  citizen;  he  married  P\Tnn)-  Smith, 
an  aunt  of  Allen  B.  Smith. 

The  Buells  of  this  count)-  originall)-  de- 
scended from  one  William  Buell,  of  Aus- 
tralia, who  went  to  Constantinople,  and  in 
1 62 1  to  Wales,  and  from  there  to  Connect- 
icut in  1634.  Thomas  Buell,  the  father  of 
F.  M.  Buell,  of  Truxton,  is  of  the  seventh 
generation  of  \\'illiam  Buell.    Thomas  Buell 


Town  of  Truxton. 


379 


came  to  Truxton  in  1806;  kept  hotel  in 
1808.  He  married  Betsej'  Freeman,  daugh- 
ter of  Elder  Freeman,  and  had  seven  chil- 
dren by  this  wife.  F.  M.  Buell  was  born 
in  1811.  He  was  married  June  gth,  1841, 
to  Emil)-  F.  Howard,  of  Coicrain,  Mass. 
In  1865  he  moved  to  the  village  of  Trux- 
ton. In  1 87 1  he  went  into  the  custom 
house,  New  York,  and  was  there  several 
years.  Howard  F.  Buell,  the  former  editor 
of  the  Cortland  News,  is  their  son. 

Rufus  Freeman,  of  Colerain,  Mass.,  came 
here  in  1806,  and  in  1807  organized  the 
Baptist  Church  of  this  place.  He  had  four 
sons,  all  Baptist  preachers.  Allen  B.  Free- 
man organized  the  first  Baptist  church  of 
that  cit}'  in  1833,  which  then  had  but 
fifteen  members. 

Deacon  James  Bell  was  from  Rupert, 
Vt.,  and  came  to  Truxton  in  the  winter  of 
181  2,  locating  on  lot  95.  In  I  82  I  he  rc- 
mo\ed  to  ^ledina  count}',  Ohio,  where  his 
sons,  James  and  Jacob,  became  active  and 
prominent  politicians,  tlic  former  being 
elected  to  the  Legislature. 

James  Kenney  and  his  wife  lived  in  Trux- 
ton as  earl\-  as  1809,  and  on  the  second  of 
May  of  that  _\'ear  his  son.  Moses  Kenne}', 
was  born.  He  became  a  well-known  and 
respected  citizen  of  the  town.  His  father 
died  when  he  was  four  years  old. 

Hosea  Kenney  is  now  the  oldest  citizen 
of  the  town  of  Truxton,  where  he  has  re- 
sided for  more  than  seventy-five  years.  He 
was  born  in  Stoddard,  N.  H.,  October  31st, 
I79i,and  is  the  sole  survivor  of  a  family 
of  four  sons  and  five  daughters,  tlie  descend- 
ants of  the  Rev.  Isaac  Kenney,  a  Baptist 
minister,  who  died  at  Roylston,  Mass.,  Sep- 
tember 2d,  1 80 1,  and  who,  according  to 
the  most  authentic  information  obtainable, 
descended  in  a  direct  line  from  Henr\- 
Kinne,  who  came  from  Holland  and  settled 
in  Salem,  Mass.,  about  1670.  From  this 
rex'erend  progenitor  has  sprung  a  numerous 


race,  numbering  more  than  three  hundred, 
and  extending  in  se\eral  instances  to  the 
sixth  generation.  The  third  son,  Hosea, 
when  he  was  thirteen  years  old  first  came 
to  this  town  with  his  elder  brother,  Isaac. 
In  1813  he  purchased  sixty  acres  of  land 
on  lot  No.  21  in  Truxton,  of  Isaac  Cooper, 
of  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  at  six  dollars  per 
acre.  July  7th,  [814,  at  Brookfield,  N.  Y., 
he  married  Nancy,  a  daughter  of  Captain 
Asa  Lamb,  a  veteran  of  the  Revolutionary 
\\'ar.  With  his  young  bride  he  immedi- 
ately commenced  the  struggle  of  life  on  his 
newl\-  acquired  woodland  home,  where, 
with  a  strong  arm  and  determined  purpose, 
the)- literalh-  "  hewed  out  "  a  competence. 
After  having,  from  time  to  time,  added  to 
his  first  purchase,  in  1842  he  retired  from 
active  life  and  took  up  his  residence  in  the 
\illage  of  Truxton,  where  he  has  since  re- 
sided. His  farm,  then  consisting  of  about 
one  hundred  and  fift)'  acres,  he  conve_\-ed  to 
his  two  elder  sons,  and  subsequent!}'  the 
title  to  the  whole  was  acquired  by  his  oldest 
son,  Hosea  M.,  who  still  holds  the  same. 
His  wife,  Nanc}-,  died  August  5th,  1862, 
and  Februar}-  15th,  1865,  he  married  Mrs. 
Marana  French,  who  died  May  14th,  1880. 
He  now  resides  with  his  youngest  son, 
Amos  L.,  and  though  vigorous  in  his  ripe 
j  old  age,  still  there  are  unmistakable  evi- 
j  dences  that  he  is  rapidly  approaching  the 
end.  In  18 16  he  united  with  the  First 
Baptist  Church  of  Truxton,  of  which  the 
Rev.  Thomas  Purinton  was  then  pastor. 
He  has  at  all  times  led  a  consistent  and 
faithful  Christian  life  and  maintained  an 
honored  standing  with  the  people  of  his 
first  choice.  His  attendance  at  the  regular 
services  of  the  church  has  been  constant, 
and  he  now  deems  it  the  greatest  of 
deprivations,  if  for  a  single  Sabbath  he 
is  pre\ented  from  listening  to  the  preach- 
ing of  the  Gospel.  Of  his  four  sons. 
Hosea    M..   James.    Ira   E.,   and   Amos    L., 


38o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


all   sur\ive  except  James,  who  died  March 
28th,  1883. 

Hosea  M.  and  his  son  Marcus  I-L.,  under 
the  firm  name  of  Kenney  &  Son,  are  re- 
tail dealers  in  hardware  anil  manufacturers 
of  tinware  in  Truxton,  and  his  elder  son, 
Manly  L.,  occupies  the  family  homestead. 

Ira  E.  graduated  in  the  theological  de- 
partment of  Madison  Universit\-  in  1848, 
and  was  ordained  to  the  ministrj-  the  same 
year  by  the  Baptist  Church  of  Truxton.  In 
1883  the  University  of  Des  Moines,  Iowa, 
conferred  upon  him  the  honorary  degree  of 
D.  D.,  and  the  same  year  called  him  to  fill 
the  president's  chair  of  that  institution, 
w  here  he  is  now  doing  a  good  work. 

Amos  L.  graduated  at  Hamilton  College 
in  1843,  was  admitted  as  an   attorne_\-   and 
counselor  at   law   in    Ma\',    1S48,   and   has 
since  practiced  his  profession    at   Truxton. 
His   only   son,    Eudorus   C,    graduated   at  j 
Cornell  University  in  1882  with  the  degree  ! 
of  B.  Sc,  with  mathematics  as  a  specialty, 
and  for  the  last  two  }-ears  has  been   the  in- 
structor in  mathematics  and  the  sciences  in  i 
the    Morgan    Park    Militar\'    Academy    at 
Morgan  Park,  Illinois. 

Alexander  Lansing  came  from  Schenec- 
tady, N.  Y.,  in  181 1,  and  located  on  lot  13, 
where  J.  O.  Wicks  now  li\-es,  and  came  to 
the  \-illage  in  1861,  where  he  died  in  1862. 
When  he  first  came  to  the  town  he  dug  a 
well  on  his  farm,  in  which  he  found  a  live 
frog  in  a  stone  which  he  had  broken  open. 
His  son,  Peter  Lansing,  became  a  candidate 
for  governor  of  Nebraska  in  1880  on  the 
Greenback  ticket,  but  was  defeated. 

Henry  Patrick,  a  native  of  Vermont, 
came  to  Truxton  about  the  year  181  5,  and 
settled  near  the  town  line.  He  had  a  tan- 
nery at  the  State  bridge  and  followed  that 
business  for  many  years.  He  died  in  1862, 
seventy- two  years  old.  His  second  wife 
was  Miss  Clara  Keeler,  a  daughter  of 
Joseph  Keeler,  said  to  be  the  second  settler 


in  the  town.  De  Witt  Patrick,  liis  son,  was 
born  in  1828,  and  was  married  to  Sabra 
Risley  in  1849.  He  has  but  one  daughter, 
Mrs.  Albert  Stevens,  of  tlie  firm  of  Stevens 
&  Cornic,  and  but  one  son,  who  is  now  of 
the  firm  of  Hilton  &  Patrick. 

In  1 8 14  Asa  Babcock,  who  was  originally 
from  Rhode  Island,  came  in  from  Madison 
county  and  engaged  in  mercantile  trade, 
which  he  continued  for  a  period  of  forty- 
three  years.  He  was  also  postmaster  for  a 
long  term,  the  office  being  located  where 
it  is  at  the  present  time. 

Asa  Campbell  was  a  native  of  Hampden 
county,  Mass.,  and  settled  at  Cheningo  in 
1816.  Stephen  Ambler  came  in  from  New 
Berlin  and  located  on  lot  83  in  1818,  pur- 
chasing 112  acres.  He  was  one  of  the 
leading  men  of  the  town,  a  successful  far- 
mer and  a  prominent  member  of  the  Pres- 
byterian society. 

Freeman  Schermerhorn,  a  worth}-  citizen 
of  Tru.xton,  was  married  to  his  present  wife, 
N.  Libbie  Radway,  October  25th,  i876,-and 
is  the  father  of  four  children,  viz.  :  George 
W.  (b)-  former  wife),  Lizzie,  \'ernie  and 
Nettie,  children  by  his  present  wife. 

Mr.  Schermerhorn  was  a  soldier  in  the 
late  war,  a  sergeant  of  Co.  G,  76th  regiment, 
from  Sept.  21st,  1861,  to  Dec,  1862.  He 
was  taken  sick  after  the  battle  of  Bull  Run, 
and  afterwards  honorablj'  dismissed  from 
the  service.  He  has  been  a  prominent  offi- 
cial member  of  the  Baptist  church  since 
1866. 

Rev.  Thomas  Purinton,  the  eminent 
divine  of  this  town,  came  here  in  1822  and 
located  .on  lot  21,  where  he  remained 
twenty-five  years.  His  son-in-law.  Alien 
B.  Smith,  now  of  Cortland,  came  from 
Colerain,  P"ranklin  count)-,  Mass.,  in  1837 
and  located  on  lot  21.  He  was  a  success- 
ful farmer,  but  after  remaining  on  his  farm 
sixteen  years,  he  removed  to  Cortland, 
where  he  engaged   in    the   hardware   trade. 


Town  of  Tkuxton. 


381 


He  married  his  second  wife,  Miss  Carrie 
Rindge,  daughter  of  Scepta  Rindgc,  in 
1859. 

These  were  the  principal  pioneeis  who 
left  the  permanent  impress  (jf  their  work 
upon  what  was  before  an  unbroken  wilder- 
ness in  this  town.  Looking  at  its  present 
aspect  as  one  of  the  most  thrifty  and  pros- 
perous farming  districts  in  the  count}',  neat 
farm  houses  thick!)-  scattered  throughout 
the  town,  with  a  lively  business  center  in 
their  midst,  it  is  q_uite  safe  to  assume  that  the 
hardy  pioneers  whose  settlements  we  have 
noted   "builded  better  than  they  knew." 

Milling,  etc. — The  streams  of  Truxton 
furnished  man)-  excellent  mill  sites  to  the 
early  inhabitants,  a  number  of  which  were 
made  available  for  different  purposes. 
There  are  now  in  the  town  two  grist-mills 
(there  were  five  at  one  period),  a  number  of 
steam  saw-mills,  several  factories  and  other 
manufacturing  works. 

The  first  grist-mill  in  the  town  was 
erected  by  Joseph  Sweetland,  on  lot  94;  it 
was  the  one  already  referred  to  as  being 
covered  with  elm  bark.  It  is  not  known  in 
just  what  year  it  was  built,  but  it  was  sold 
to  Increase  M.  Hooker  not  much  later  than 
1 800  and  passed  from  him  to  his  son,  who 
rebuilt  it  in  1S16.  In  the  course  of  time  it 
became  the  property  of  George  Pond,  and 
finally  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  present 
owner,  Kirtland  C.  Arnold,  who  bought  it 
in  October,  1S74,  paying  for  it  the  hand- 
some sum  of  $10,000. 

The  second  grist-mill  in  the  town  was 
erected  in  1809,  by  Jonah  Stiles  and  Alvin 
Pease,  on  the  site  afterward  occupied  b}- 
the  wool  exchange.  In  18 10  they  erected 
a  carding-machine. 

A  Mr.  Hitchcock  built  a  saw- mill  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  stream  at  -an  early  day, 
taking  his  water  from  the  same  dam.  This 
mill  was  running  when  A.  B.  Smith  came 
to  the  town  in  1837,  and  is  still  in  operation. 


The  plank  for  several  miles  of  the  old  Syra- 
cuse and  Cortland  plank  road  were  sawed 
at  this  mill.  Other  mills  and  manufactories 
will  be  alluded  to  in  the  historj'  of  the  vil- 
lage further  on. 

After  the  organization  of  the  town,  April 
8th,  1808,  the  first  town  meeting  was  held 
at  the  house  of  Charles  Stewart,  and  re- 
sulted in  the  selection  of  Charles  Stewart 
for  supervisor,  and  Reuben  Risley  for  town 
clerk.  The  records  of  this  town  are  incom- 
plete and  we  ha\-e  been  unable  to  obtain  a 
list  of  the  supervisors  and  town  clerks.  Dr. 
J.  C.  Nelson,  the  present  supervisor,  has 
held  the  office  of  supervisor  continuously 
since  1872. 

The  present  officers  of  the  town  are  as 
follows  :  — 

Supervisor  —  J.  C.  Nelson. 

Town  clerk  —  John  O'Donnell. 

Commissioner  of  highwa\-s  —  Daniel  J. 
Hartnett. 

Assessors  —  Patrick  O'Donnell,  L.  L. 
Schellinger,  M.  Wiegand. 

Overseer  of  the  poor  —  Jeremiah  O'Con- 
nor. 

Collector — O.  J.  Kinney. 

Constables —  Llewellyn  Perry,  J.  P.  Vin- 
cent, Josiah  McChesney,  Charles  Bosvvorth, 
O.  J.  Kinne\-. 

Excise  commissioners  —  James  L.  God- 
dard,  Dennis  Collins,  David  Wallace. 

Inspectors  —  Tiler  W.  Pierce,  John  Nott, 
and  Alvorado  Lansing. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  Charles  Hayes, 
Alvorado  Lansing  and  G.  H.  Towle. 

At  the  breaking  out  of  the  Rebellion  the 
town  of  Truxton  showed  her  patriotic  in- 
clinations by  prompt  and  liberal  offers  of 
men  and  means  in  support  of  the  govern- 
ment. The  following  list  shows  the  names 
of  the  men  who  entered  the  service  from 
the  town  under  the  different  calls  for  troops 
and  who  were  paid  bounties,  with  the 
amount  in  each  case:  — 


382 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Call  of  October  17th,  1S63.  Hoiinty, 
$300.  Total,  $13,800.  — John  J.  Dodd, 
F.dward  Dodd,  Hiram  Hall.  John  I'.  White. 
John  R.  Babcock,  Henry  Jones,  Charles 
Knight,  William  H.  Gable,  William  Laing, 
John  Kline,  Main  E.  Cooke,  James  W. 
Howry,  Isaiah  Marshal,  John  Milton,  Chas. 
Morgan,  George  W.  Steel,  John  Smith, 
Barney  Riley,  Charles  Kirby,  Daniel  O'Niel, 
James  Cranne)-,  Sylvanus  V..  Parker,  John 
Leng,  Frederick  J.  Carver,  William  Tillman, 
William  Habden,  James  Haulman,  Peter 
Voung,  Henr\'  Faruell,  Philip  Flanders, 
John  Da}-,  James  Clark,  George  H.  Acker- 
man,  Charles  E.  Whitmore,  Henry  Bonney, 
William  Armstrong,  John  Riley,  George 
Robinson,  Edward  E.  Nelson,  I'^dward  Fe- 
gan,  Lewis  Smith,  George  Chapman,  Joiin 
White,  William  Henderson,  James  McCar- 
thy, William  P.  P\ne. 

Call  of  July  i8th,  1864.  Bounty,  $600; 
$300  paid  to  se\en  ;  $700  to  two  ;  $500  to 
one.  Total,  $13,300.  Brokerage,  $600. — 
James  H.  Washburn,  Theodore  J.  Purde- 
baugh,  Samuel  R.  Pierce,  Henry  D.  Clark, 
Albert  Haynes,  Harvey  Dutcher,  Erastus 
A.  Reed,  Daniel  Jones,  James  Cain,  John 
Morris,  Egbert  E.  Palmer,  Lucian  B.  Ran- 
dall, James  Steel,  jr.,  Isaac  Dobinson,  Le\i 
S.  Henry,  Oren  W.  Munroe,  Andrew  J. 
Neff,  Benjamin  L.  Neff,  Herbert  C.  Rora- 
paugh,  George  W.  Smith,  Chester  Wood, 
W'illiam  B.  Greenleaf,  Cahin  Lane,  W'illiam 
H.  Ayrisworth,  Albert  S\l\ester,  John 
Shaver. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  of  October  17th,  1863,  and  February 
and  March,  1864,  $13,800;  paid  for  filling 
quota,  call  of  July  i8th,  1864,  $13,900. 
Grand  total,  $27,700. 

VILLAGES. 

The  pretty  village  of  Truxton  is  situated 
near  the  center  of  the  town  on  the  line  of 
tlie  Utica,  Ithaca  and  Elmira  Railroad,  and 


has  a  population  of  about  three  hundretl. 
It  contains  three  churches,  two  hotels,  sev- 
eral stores,  shops,  etc. 

Stephen  Hedges  is  said  to  ha\e  been  the 
first  merchant  in  Truxton.  The  second 
store  was  built  b\^  Asa  Babcock  in  1814. 
It  stood  just  in  rear  of  the  one  now  owned 
b\-  J.  C.  Wiegand,  and  was  rebuilt  b\-  Mr. 
Babcock  in  1834,  who  continued  mercan- 
tile business  here  until  1857,  a  period  of 
forty-three  years.  He  then  sold  out  to  S. 
Goddard,  who  conducted  the  store  until 
1878,  when  Mr.  Wiegand  purchased  the 
business.  While  Mr.  Goddard  was  in  pos- 
session he  refurnished  the  store  and  changed 
its  character  to  a  drug  store. 

Mr.  Goddard  came  to  the  village  in  1828, 
at  which  time  both  Asa  and  Gideon  C. 
Babcock  were  merchants  here.  The  latter 
was  located  in  an  old  building  afterward 
used  as  a  tin  shop,  and  which  has  been  re- 
paired and  fitted  up  for  a  dwelling  by  J.  C. 
Wiegand.  Gideon  Babcock  was  succeeded 
by  Thomas  Osborne,  John  Ferguson,  John 
Trowbridge  and  Chauncey  Hicock,  all  of 
whom  kept  the  general  stock  of  goods 
usually  sold  in  countrj-  stores.  Mr.  Hicock, 
the  last  merchant  in  the  old  store,  died  in 
1844. 

The  store  at  present  occupied  b\-  E.  B. 
Lincoln  &  Co.  was  built  by  S.  Goddard  in 
1 836  for  a  wagon  shop  ;  it  was  used  as  such 
up  to  1854  and  then  sold  to  Geo.  W.  Bliss, 
who  turned  it  into  a  store,  where  he  did 
business  until  1 868 ;  the  store  was  then 
leased  to  Leander  Maycumber,  and  in  1883 
to  the  present  proprietors. 

Mr.  Goddard  is  a  native  of  \\'indham 
county,  Vt.,  where  he  was  born  in  181  i. 
He  was  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  car- 
riages from  1828  (the  date  of  his  arrival  in 
Truxton)  until  1857.  His  work  acquired 
an  excellent  reputation  and  he  not  only 
made  many  of  the  first  carriages  used  in 
the  count}-,  but  shipped  man}-   to   the   East 


Town  ok  Truxton. 


383 


and  to  the  far  West.  Besides  his  career  as 
a  manufacturer  and  merchant,  he  has  filled 
the  office  of  supervisor  of  the  tnwii  several 
terms. 

The  dry  y;oods  trade  in  Truxton  is  now 
in  the  efficient  hands  of  Hilton  &  Patrick 
and  E.  B.  Lincoln  &  Co.,  both  of  which 
firms  have  creditable,  thri\-in<j  stores.  Hil- 
ton &  Patrick  succeeded  E.  P.  Summers  in 
1883;  the  latter  firm  having  traded  there 
since  1872. 

The  furniture  trade  was  established  b\- 
A.  L.  Pomeroy  before  1837  and  was  con- 
tinued b}-  him  more  than  twenty-five  years; 
the  store  was  then  conducted  b}-  Albert 
Fierce  one  year  and  subsequently  by  T.  I. 
Woodward,  the  present  proprietor,  who 
took  it  in  1878. 

Blacksmithiny  was  carried  on  in  the  \il- 
lage  at  an  early  day  by  \\'illiam  Jones,  who 
continued  it  for  many  years  and  became 
quite  wealth)-.  He  also  manufactured 
wagons  quite  extensively,  emp!o\-ing  often 
from  twenty  to  thirt}'  hands.  He  was 
burned  out  and  on  the  site  of  his  works 
erected  a  nice  house  and  barn.  Thomas 
Dodd,  George  Crofoot  and  Dennis  Collins 
are  the  blacksmiths  of  the  village  at  the 
present  time. 

The  butter  firkin  and  tub  factor}',  now 
under  the  management  of  Stevens  &  Con- 
nie, was  established  in  1876  by  Skeel  & 
Connie ;  it  is  an  industr\'  of  importance, 
emploj'ing  quite  a  number  of  hands.  The 
business  is  carried  on  in  a  building  which 
was  formerly  used  by  Skeel  &  Bryant  for 
a  flouring- mill.  The  present  proprietors 
also  own  a  steam  saw-mill  which  is  operated 
in  connection  with  the  factor)-. 

The  grist-mill  in  the  village  was  built  by 
O.  J.  Kenney  &  Son  in  1881  and  is  still 
operated  b\-  them. 

In  later  years  the  dair\  ing  interest  has 
developed  in  this  region  until  it  is  one  of 
the  first  imnnitance  anion"    farmers.      This 


fact  led  to  the  erection  of  cheese  factories 
in  different  parts  of  the  town.  The  Trux- 
ton cheese  factory,  situated  about  half  a 
mile  east  of  the  village  and  now  owned  by 
William  McAdam,  was  built  just  prior  to 
the  last  war  b\'  Moses  Kenne)-.  Another 
factory  is  owned  by  Chauncey  Stevens, 
three  miles  north  of  here. 

The  grocery  trade  was  first  carried  on  as 
a  separate  business  by  Chapman  &  Bos- 
worth,  some  time  before  the  last  war.  J.  O. 
Connor  &  Co.  began  trade  in  1876,  in  the 
building  erected  by  Mr.  Goddard  in  1826. 

The  first  hardware  store  in  the  village 
was  kept  in  1844  b\-  D.  Carr.  It  was  after- 
wards located  in  a  building  which  has  since 
been  changed  and  is  now  used  as  a  dwell- 
ing b)-  J.  C.  Wiegand.  The  business  was 
established  by  a  Mr.  Dr\er  about  the  year 
1855  in  a  small  wa)-,  in  connection  with  a 
work-shop  in  that  line.  Knapp  &  Kinney 
succeeded  in  1868  and  continued  until  1871, 
when  the  firm  became  Kinney  &  Son  (H. 
M.  &  M.  E.  Kinney)  who  built  the  present 
store  in  1876.  The  large  store  is  kept  well 
stocked  and  the  firm  ha\e  a  large  country 
patronage. 

The  drug  trade  was  probabh"  confined  to 
the  practicing  physicians  until  McKay  & 
Nelson  began  the  business  about  the  )'ear 
1850.  S.  Goddard  purchased  the  stock  in 
1857,  enlarged  it  and  carried  on  the  busi- 
ness until  succeeded  by  K.  C.  Arnold  & 
Bros.,  and  then  by  J.  C.  Wiegand. 

The  tailoring  business  was  established 
here  by  A.  H.  McKay  before  1838  ;  he  also 
kept  a  small  stock  of  ready-made  clothing, 
but  continued  only  a  few  years,  when  he 
sold  out  to  Miss  Winne,  who  established  the 
milliner)-  business.  Mrs.  C.  A.  Davenport 
has  traded  in  this  line  since  the  spring  of 
1883. 

About  the  )-ear  i860  Wm.  Beatie  con- 
verted a  building  on  lot  21  into  a  cheese 
factor)-  which  was  quite    largel)-  patronized 


384 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


for  a  niinibcr  of  \'cars.  He  also  had  brancli 
factories  from  which  he  brought  the  curd 
to  this  central  factory.  He  still  runs  the 
establishment. 

The  first  post-office  in  Tru.vtoii  village 
was  in  charge  of  Stephen  Hedges,  wlio  has 
alread}'  been  alluded  to  as  one  of  the  prom- 
inent early  pioneers.  Dr.  John  Miller  was 
postmaster  from  1 805  for  a  period  of  twenty- 
five  years.  Asa  Kabcock  became  post- 
master in  1837  and  held  the  office  until  his 
deatli.  Alanson  Coats  was  postmaster  a 
few  years.  It  is  now  in  charge  of  J.  C. 
Wiegand. 

Lawyers. —  The  first  lawyers  to  open  an 
office  in  Truxton  were  Messrs.  Palmer  & 
Williams.  Their  office  was  in  a  building 
which  is  still  standing  just  north  of  the  site 
of  the  old  hotel,  which  was  burned. 

Alanson  Coats  was  probably  the  next 
lawyer.  He  served  in  the  War  of  18 12  and 
came  to  Truxton  in  181  8,  where  he  followed 
the  mercantile  business  a  number  of  years. 
He  then  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Palmer 
&  Williams  and  in  1836  began  practice, 
which  he  continued  up  to  1852  or  1853, 
going  then  to  Syracuse.  A  few  years  later 
he  removed  to  Homer,  where  he  died  in 
1865. 

Amos  L.  Kenney  is  the  i:)resent  lawyer 
in  the  village.  He  studied  with  Mr.  Coats 
in  1842  and  1843. 

Physicians. —  The  first  physician  in  the 
town  and  village  of  Truxton  was  John  Mil- 
ler, who  came  to  the  place  in  1801,  locating 
on  lot  93.  He  practiced  his  profession 
twent)'-five  )'ears  and  died  in  1862.  He 
was  postmaster  in  1805  and  retained  that 
office  for  twenty-five  years  ;  was  justice  of 
the  peace  from  18 12  to  1821  and  one  of 
the  county  judges  from  18 17  to  1820  ;  was 
elected  a  Member  of  Assembly  in  1816,  in 
1820  and  again  in  1846.  In  1826-27  he 
represented  his  district  in  Congress.  He 
was   elected   an    honorary    member   of  the 


State  Medical  Society  in  1808  and  at  his 
death  was  the  oldest  member.  Dr.  Miller 
was  a  man  of  marked  character,  unswerving 
integrity  and  one  of  the  most  useful  citizens 
of  Cortland  comity  during  its  early  years. 

Dr.  Azariel  Blanchard,  a  brother  of  Wm. 
Hlanchard,  of  Cuyler,  came  here  soon  after 
the  War  of  1812  and  remained  until  1 844, 
when  he  removed  to  Wisconsin,  where  he 
died  in  1878. 

Dr.  Eli  Cook  bought  out  Di-.  Blanchard 
and  remained  in  the  \illage  eight  or  ten 
}'ears. 

Dr.  Judsun  C.  Nelson,  a  graduate  of  the 
Geneva  Medical  College  (1848),  came  here 
in  1851-52  and  has  been  the  leading  phy- 
sician since  that  time,  with  the  exception 
of  three  years  in  the  arm\-  as  regimental 
surgeon,  and  two  terms  as  Member  of  As- 
sembly—  1876  and  1883.  He  has  also 
been  supervisor  of  the  town  several  times. 

The  first  hotel  in  the  village  was  opened 
by  Thomas  Buell  in  1808. 

There  were  two  hotels  in  Truxton  village 
in  1828,  when  S.  Goddard  moved  to  the 
place.  The  first  was  kept  by  L.  L.  Merrill 
and  was  known  as  the  Mansion  House.  He 
kept  it  until  about  1845,  wfien  he  removed 
tt)  a  farm  in  the  town.  The  liouse  was 
burned  about  the  \'ear  1867. 

The  second  hotel  was  located  about 
twenty  rods  from  the  one  above  described, 
and  was  kept  by  Arnold  Hicock,  who  was 
succeeded  b)'  Abel  Perr)-,  an  eastern  man. 
He  sold  it  to  Wm.  Jones  in  1842,  who  con- 
verted it  into  a  dwelling.  It  was  burned 
about  the  year  1850. 

The  Stearns  Hotel  was  formerh-  a  dwell- 
ing and  owned  by  Enoch  Benedict,  but  was 
changeil  into  a  hotel  b)'  Abijah  Pierce. 
Rial  Schellinger  owned  it  afterwards  sev- 
eral \ears.  After  him  came  John  Hills, 
B.  F.  Stearns  (1872)  and  C.  H.  Smith,  the 
present  proprietor,  in  Januarj-,  1882. 

The  Ryan  Hotel  was  built   by  Asa  God- 


Town  of  Truxton. 


385 


dard  in  1826  ;  a  portion  of  it  was  used  by  a 
Mr.  \'an  Allen  as  a  store  and  a  portion  as  a 
dwellinij.  During  the  late  war  it  was  trans- 
formed into  a  hotel  by  Geoi;ge  Pond.  He 
kept  it  but  a  short  time,  and  was  followed 
by  I.  Rogers,  John  Wheeler,  A.  L.  Pome- 
roy,  James  H.  Ashby  and  the  present  pro- 
prietor, M.  R}'an,  who  took  charge  of  it  in 
March,  1882. 

The  early  hotels  in  the  country  places 
received  perhaps  a  more  liberal  patronage 
than  in  later  years.  The  roads  were  trav- 
eled in  such  localities  by  numerous  stage 
coaches,  and  all  the  merchandise  and  stock 
for  manufacturers  were  brought  in  by  teams, 
all  of  which  made  business  at  the  hotels. 

Tru.x'ton  was  isolated  from  railroad  com- 
munication until  the  building  of  the  Utica, 
Ithaca  and  Elmira  road.  The  consumma- 
tion of  this  undertaking  was  of  great  bene- 
fit to  the  town  at  large  and  will  undoubtedly 
be  still  more  beneficial  in  the  future.  The 
village  is  thrifty  and  the  inhabitants  are  im- 
bued with  the  belief  that  theirs  is  not  one 
of  the  places  that  is  to  be  killed  by  the  con- 
struction of  a  railroad  and  the  consequent 
diversion  of  business  to  other  points. 

Churches. — This  town  was  visited  at  a 
very  early  day  by  itinerant  missionaries  and 
public  worship  was  begun  in  1801  under 
the  leadership  of  the  Re\\  Hugh  W'allis. 
In  181 1  a  Congregational  Church  was  or- 
ganized, consisting  of  twenty-one  members, 
by  Rev.  Wm.  J.  Wilco.v,  assisted  b_\-  the 
Rev.  John  Da\enport  and  Re\-.  Joseph 
Avery,  a  missionar}-  from  Massachusetts. 
At  the  time  of  the  organization  of  the 
church,  or  soon  after.  Rev.  Mr.  Jewell  be- 
gan laboring  with  the  church  as  stated 
supply,  and  continued  for  some  time.  He 
was  succeeded  by  Rev.  Oliver  Hitchcock 
in  1 81 3  and  he  by  Rev.  Mathew  Harrison 
in  1 8 14.  How  long  Mr.  Harrison  con- 
tinued with  the  church  we  are  not  informed. 
In    1819    Rev.   Ezra    Woodworth   supplied 


the  church  and  was  succeeded  the  follow- 
ing year  by  Rev.  Caleb  Clark,  then  a  licen- 
tiate preacher.  On  the  5th  day  of  June, 
1833,  Mr.  Clark  was  ordained  and  installed 

j  pastor  of  the  church,  which  position  he 
held  until  the    15th  of  April,  1850.      Since 

I  that  time  Re\-.  Charles  K.  Averj-,  Rev. 
John  N.  Lewis  and  Rev.  Huntington  Ly- 
man have  scverall}'  been  connected  with 
the  church  as  stated  supplies.  Rev.  Wm. 
T.  Doubleday  was  the  stated  supply  in 
1848  and  remained  between  two  and  three 

I  years.      In    1813   the  church  was  connected 

!  with  the  Presbytery  of  Onondaga  and  was 
transferred  to  the  Presbytery  of  Cortland 
upon  the  creation  of  that  body.  The 
church  enjoyed  a  revival  in  1820,  when 
sixty-seven  were  added  to  its  membershi]). 
In    1825    there    were    106  members   in  the 

:  society  and  in  1837  it  reported  188.  Its 
ministers  were  always  supported  without 
foreign  aid  and  a  comfortable  and  com- 
modious house  of  worship  was  erected  in 
1820,  62  by  44  feet.  The  average  attend- 
ance at  public  worship  in  1850  was  about 
175;  but  from  that  time  the  membership 
began  to  decrease  for  various  reasons  until 
at  the  present  time  there  is  scarcely  more 
than  an  organization.  The  trustees  are 
George  Bliss,  D.  Carr  and  D.  S.  Severance. 
The  Methodist  PIpiscopal  society  was  or- 
ganized in  October,  1879,  since  which  time 
public  services  have  been  held  in  a  build- 
ing the  use  of  which  was  secured  for  that 
purpose.  W.  A.  York  and  at  the  present 
time  T.  F.  Harris,  who  visits  the  place  at 
stated  periods  from  Hast  Homer,  have 
ministered  to  the  societ)-.  Stephen  Pat- 
rick is  class-leader,  and  F.  I.  Woodward, 
Nelson  Haskins,  Dr.  Frank  Haskins  and 
Stephen  Patrick  are  stewards. 

The  first  Baptist  Church  in  the  town  and 
village  was  organized  by  Rc\'.  Rufus  P"ree- 
man  in  1806.  Mr.  Freeman  came  from 
Colerain,  Mass.,  and   was  a  preacher  in  that 


386 


lisioRv  OF  Cortland  County. 


place.  The  cluircli  edifice  was  erected  in 
1818.  Rev.  Thomas  Purinton,  one  of  the 
ablest  ministers  the  Baptist  church  ever  had 
in  Cortland  county,  came  also  from  Cole- 
rain,  Mas.s.,  in  1822,  and  located  on  a  farm 
on  lot  21,  where  he  continued  to  live  for 
many  years.  He  had  studied  medicine 
under  Dr.  Ross,  of  Colerain,  but  upon 
making  ready  to  begin  practice  was  con- 
verted, when  he  took  a  theoloj^ical  course 
of  stud}-  and  after  being  licensed  to  preach 
remained  in  the  ministry  for  a  term  of  years 
before  coming  westward.  He  followed 
farming  in  Tru.xton,  preaching  at  different 
surrounding  points.  It  was  then  his  custom 
to  preach  twice  on  the  Sabbatli  in  the 
church  in  the  village,  and  on  Sabbath  even- 
ing in  some  school-house  in  another  part  of 
the  town,  and  on  Thursdaj-  evening  again 
in  some  other  remote  place  in  the  large  old 
town,  which  was  ten  miles  square.  Mr. 
Purinton  received  as  salary  $200  a  year 
for  the  first  twenty  \'ears  of  his  ministr\-, 
and  was  paid  by  subscription  in  cash  or 
produce,  as  was  most  conxenient  and  satis- 
factor\-  to  his  people.  It  was  Mr.  Purin- 
ton's  custom  to  always  ask  for  the  subscrip- 
tion paper  after  it  had  circulated,  which  he 
would  lot)k  o\er  and  after  the  names  of  those 
whom  he  considered  unable  to  pay,  would 
write  the  word  "arranged;"  with  such  per- 
sons their  subscriptions  were  considered  as 
".settled."  The  rate  of  postage  on  letters 
was  twenty-fi\e  cents,  and  it  is  said  that 
Mr.  Purinton  did  not   recei\-e  sufficient  cash 


to  pay  postage  on  the  letters  which  his  call- 
ing compelled  him  to  write.  After  twenty 
1  years  of  hard  and  unselfish  service  in  the 
'  church,  his  salary  was  raised  to  $300  a  year, 
and  so  it  remained  during  the  succeeding 
five  years,  which  was  the  remainder  of  his 
stay  in  Truxton.  After  all  of  this  long  and 
faithful  service,  a  curious  record  was  left 
regarding  his  work.  The  church  was  de- 
sirous of  extending  to  Brother  Purinton  a 
vote  of  thanks  for  his  untiring  efforts  to 
promote  the  cause  of  religion;  this  was  ac- 
cordingly done  —  he  was  "voted  thanks" 
for  his  faithfulness;  but  the  clerk,  in  record- 
ing the  matter,  must  have  become  confused, 
for  he  wrote  —  "Brother  Purinton  was  ex- 
horted to  greater  faithfulness  "  in  the  cause 
of  Christ.  This  good  man  was  followed 
among  others  b\'  Rev.  Luke  Davis,  two 
years  ;  Rev.  William  McCarth\-,  four  \ears; 
Rev.  E.  D.  Reed,  eight  years  ;  Rev.  A.  P. 
Graves,  two  years  ;  Rev.  S.  C.  Ainsworth, 
eight  years;  Re\-.  Mr.  Taylor,  two  \-ears ; 
Rev.  A.  M.  Bennett,  five  years ;  Rev.  W. 
F.  Wakefield,  two  years;  Rev.  F.  H.  Gates, 
a  year  and  a  half  and  the  Rev.  J.  A.  Rich, 
who  took  charge  of  tlie  church  in  Februar}-, 
1 882.  and  remained  until  March,  1884.  The 
deacons  are  Hosea  M.  Kenney  and  Henry 
McKe\itt.  rile  last  named  succeeded 
Deacon  Freeman  Schermerhorn,  who  held 
this  position  from  1865  until  1883. 

The  membership  of  the  church  was  200 
in  1869.  It  is  now  something  less  than 
fiftv. 


Town  of  Cuyler. 


387 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


IlISIiiRN'  OK  TIIK  TOWX  nK  (TVLKR. 


THE  town  of  Cuyler  is  situated  in  the 
extreme  northeastern  part  of  the  coun- 
ty. It  was  formed  from  tlic  town  of  Trux- 
ton  on  the  i8tli  of  November,  1858,  and 
was  the  last  town  erected  in  Cortland 
county. 

The  surface  of  the  town  is  broken,  con- 
sisting largel}'  of  hilly  uplands,  excellently 
adapted  for  grazing.  The  principal  stream 
is  the  east  branch  of  the  Tioughnioga  river, 
which  flows  diagonally  across  the  town,  en- 
tering near  the  northeast  corner  and  cross- 
ing the  eastern  boundary  near  its  center. 
The  Onondaga  branch  of  the  river  is  its 
largest  tributary,  and  flows  directly  south 
from  Kenney's  Settlement.  The  other 
streams  of  the  town  are  small  brooks,  most 
of  them  tributar}'  to  the  Tioughnioga,  and 
generally  of  clear,  wholesome  water. 

Muncy  Hill,  near  the  center  of  the  town, 
is  the  highest  land.  The  town  comprises 
27,58i-f-  acres  of  land,  with  an  assessed  val- 
uation of  $15.04  per  acre.  The  soil  on  the 
hills  is  a  yellow  loam  with  a  clay  subsoil ;  in 
the  valleys  it  is  a  light,  sandy  loam,  mixed 
with  alluvial  deposit. 

As  before  stated,  the  town  of  Truxton 
originally  embraced  that  of  Cuyler.  The 
first  settlement  made  in  that  territory  was 
in  the  year  1793.  Prior  to  that  date  the 
region  was  a  favorite  home  of  the  bear,  the 
panther,  the  wolf  and  the  deer,  which 
roamed  in  great  numbers  o\-er  its  hills, 
through  its  gorges  and  along  its  streams, 
in  blissful  ignorance  of  the  coming  crusade 
of  the  white  man.  The  first  house  erected 
in  that  broad  domain  was  called  "  Home," 
a  name  significant  of  approaching  civiliza- 
tion, and  the  beginning  of  an  era  of  prog- 
ress. 


The  first  settlement  within  the  present 
limits  of  the  town  of  Cuyler  was  made  in 
the  year  1794,  when  Nathaniel  Potter, 
Christopher  Whitne\',  David  Morse  and 
Benjamin  Brown  came  in.  Samuel  C.  Ben- 
edict had  then  occupied  lot  number  12  for 
one  year,  during  which  period  he  was  mon- 
arch of  all,  and  more,  than  he  surveyed. 
F"rench  traders  may  have  visited  the  lands 
in  this  section  at  an  earlier  period,  coming 
in  from  Onondaga  or  Madison  county  ;  but 
if  so,  there  was  no  trace  of  them  left,  nor 
anything  to  indicate  to  the  first  settler  of 
whom  we  have  any  record  that  he  was  not 
the  onl}' white  man  who  had  thus  far  pene- 
trated this  wilderness. 

Nathaniel  Potter  came  from  Saratoga 
county,  N.  Y.,  in  the  spring  of  1794.  The 
family  consisted  of  himself,  his  wife  and  an 
infant  daughter  five  weeks  old.  Mr.  Potter 
settled  on  lot  96,  paying  one  dollar  and  ten 
cenjs  an  acre  for  his  land.  He  built  a  small 
house  near  the  State  bridge.  The  reader 
of  to-day  finds  it  difficult  to  realize  the 
privations  and  hardships  to  which  the  ear- 
liest settlers  in  the  remote  parts  of  this 
county  were  subjected.  A  bit  of  Mr.  Pot- 
ter's experience  may  aid  in  such  realization. 
!  Penelope  Potter,  the  infant  before  alluded 
to,  was  born  in  1793,  a  little  prior  to  the 
removal  of  her  parents  to  their  wilderness 
home.  In  one  year  after  their  arrival  the 
mother  died,  it  being  the  first  death  in  that 
town.  Mr.  Potter  was  then  compelled  to 
go  a  distance  of  four  miles  for  assistance  in 
performing  the  last  sad  rites  (and  doubh- 
sad  under  those  circumstances)  over  the  re- 
mains of  his  dead  companion.  Returning, 
he  found  the  infant  child  nestled  close  to 
the  breast  of  its  departed   mother,  as  was 


388 


History  of  Cortland  County, 


its  wont  wliin  satisfyiiis^  its  hunger.  The 
dead  at  such  times  had  but  few  mourners; 
but  none  can  tloubt  tlieir  depth  of  grief; 
and  tlie  preparations  for  interment  were 
necessarily  of  tlie  sim[)lest  kind.  The  coflfin 
for  Mrs.  Potter's  remains  was  constructed  in 
part  from  the  door  of  the  house,  that  furnish- 
ing the  only  suitable  boards  then  available. 

In  the  year  1798,  the  children  of  Mr. 
Potter  were  entirely  bereft,  the  father  being 
killed  in  the  month  of  July  b\-  the  falling 
of  a  tree.  His  little  boy,  then  about  five 
years  old,  was  with  him  at  the  time  of  the 
unfortunate  event.  Mrs.  Joseph  Keeler 
was  the  first  to  find  the  body,  mangled  and 
crushed  under  a  large  tree.  She  kindly  ad- 
ministered to  his  wants  as  best  she  could  ; 
water,  for  which  he  asked,  was  brought  to 
him  in  his  hat,  there  being  no  other  means 
at  hand. 

The  little  daughter,  Penelope  Potter,  al- 
ways resided  on  her  father's  land,  in  the 
homestead,  and  died  there.  Owing  to  some 
defect  in  the  title  to  the  farm  (a  common 
occurrence  in  those  days),  she  bought  and 
paid  for  the  land  a  second  time.  In  18 10 
she  was  married  to  Nathaniel  Patrick,  b\- 
whom  she  had  fourteen  children,  one  of 
whom  was  the  Hon.  Stephen  Patrick,  of  the 
town  of  Tru.xton. 

David  Morse  came  from  New  Ierse\- 
and  settled  on  lot  87,  which  embraced  the 
site  of  the  present  village  of  Cuyler.  He 
was  a  Revolutionary  soldier,  and  drew  this 
lot  as  a  bounty.  He  was  a  successful  farmer, 
and  became  a  prominent  member  of  the 
Methodist  church  at  a  later  period.  His 
two  sons,  David  and  Joseph  Morse,  located 
on  the  same  lot.  His  grandson,  William 
A.  Morse,  now  owns  and  occupies  the  house 
he  built. 

James  Lock  wood  came  with  Mr.  Morse, 
from  Pennsylvania.  They  came  up  the 
Tioughnioga  river  in  a  canoe,  and  then  took 
an  ox  team  to  their  destination. 


Heiijamin  Hrow  n  also  came  in  during  the 
year  1795.  He  was  a  nati\e  of  Connecticut, 
and  selected  lot  57,  becoming  the  first  set- 
tler in  the  Kenne)-  Settlement  neighborhood. 
Benjamin  Hroun,  his  grandson,  well  known 
as  one  of  the  early  teachers  of  the  town, 
became  a  very  successful  agriculturist,  and 
gained  the  reputation  of  an  enterprising  and 
worthy  citizen. 

Isaac  Brown  settled  on  lot  99,  about  the 
year  1806,  where  his  son,  I.  N.  Brown,  now 
resides. 

Zebediah  Gates  located  on  lot  88,  in  the 
year  1807,  where  his  son,  Elias,  now  li\es  ; 
he  was  a  native  of  Colerain,  Mass. 

Joseph  and  Martin  Keeler,  brothers,  set- 
tled on  lot  96,  about  the  year  1797,  near 
the  present  residence  of  Nelson  Keeler,  who 
is  a  grandson  of  Martin. 

Jesse  Blanchard  located  on  lot  66  in  the 
year  1798.  \\'ith  him  came  his  brother 
William ;  the\-  married  the  sisters  of 
Amasa,  ITber,  Job  and  Silas  Whitmarsh, 
who  also  migrated  the  same  year  from  Ver- 
mont and  settled  on  lot  J"].  Azariel  Blan- 
chard, father  of  Je.sse  and  William  Blan- 
chard, was  a  soldier  in  the  Re\'olutionar_\' 
War  and  in  all  probabilit}-  drew  this  lot  as 
his  bounty.  He  also  participated,  under 
General  Stark,  in  the  War  of  1812,  and 
died  in  1818,  aged  eighty-two  years. 

In  order  to  enjoy  a  feast  of  white  bread, 
Jesse  Blanchard  carried  a  sack  of  wheat  to 
.Manlius,  tweiit)'  miles  awa\- ;  that  was  then 
the  nearest  grist-mill.  He  made  the  jour- 
ney on  foot,  carr)-ing  the  sack  of  wheat 
and  guided  onl\'  by  marked  trees.  When 
he  or  his  family  needed  medical  aid  he  went 
to  Fabius.  general!}-  carrying  his  musket 
and,  if  benighted  on  the  way,  a  firebrand 
with  which  to  tlefend  himself  against  the 
numerous  wolves.  Jesse  Blanchard  tlied  in 
1847,  aged  eighty-two  years. 

William  Blanchard  took  part  in  the  War 
of    1812,   anil    uiKin    his   return    to    Cu\'ler 


Town  of  Cuyler. 


389 


followed  his  trade  of  blacksmith.  He  was 
a  skillful  mechanic,  the  first  in  that  business 
in  the  village  and  kept  his  smith)-  for  man\- 
years.  He  learneil  his  trade  of  Ale.xander 
Little,  who  seems  to  have  been  a  pioneer 
blacksmith  in  or  near  Cuyler ;  but  of  him 
we  have  been  unable  to  procure  data. 
William  Blanchard  was  for  a  time  postmas- 
ter of  Cuyler  ;  was  elected  assessor  several 
terms;  was  justice  of  the  peace  a  number 
of  times  and  was  honored  with  other  posi- 
tions of  trust,  all  of  which  he  filled  with 
credit  and  ability.  Dr.  Blanchard,  the  emi- 
nent plnsician  and  surgeon,  who  died  in 
Milwaukie  in  1871,  was  a  son  of  Jesse  Blan- 
chard ;  he  was  for  many  years  previous  to 
his  death  totallj-  blind. 

Charles  Vincent  settled  on  lot  /S  in 
1806.  James  Vincent  had  preceded  him 
si.x  N'ears.  Henry  Vincent,  son  of  Charles, 
still  lives  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty- four 
years,  retaining  to  a  remarkable  degree  his 
physical  strength  and  mental  faculties. 

Daniel  Page  settled  on  lot  79,  where  the 
\\'idow  Hinds  now  lives 

James  Dorwood,  from  Rhinebeck,  N.  \'., 
came  into  the  town  in  1806  and  located  on 
lot  79.  He  was  an  ingenious  and  skillful 
mechanic,  and  is  said  to  have  built  the  first 
carding-machine  in  the  State  of  New 
York.  He  was  a  nati\'e  of  Scotland  and 
left  his  country  when  eighteen  \-ears  of 
age  to  escape  being  forced  into  the  army 
of  King  George  the  Third.  Huldah  Dor- 
wood  lived  to  the  great  age  of  ninety-eight 
years. 

Jacob  Hollenbeck  and  John  Brown  set- 
tled on  lot  //  in  the  year  1806— 08. 
Thomas  Fairbanks  located  on  lot  60  in 
1803,  and  Ephraim  Fairbanks  on  land  after- 
ward occupied  by  Joseph  L.  Burdick,  on  lot 
80;  the  farm  was  owned  later  b\-  H.  F. 
Boyce.  Simeon  Feeney,  William  Wallace 
and  the  two  Webster  families  came  in  a  few 
vears   before   the   War  of  181  2,  as    did  also 


the  Fox   families ;  but   we   have   no  farther 
data  concerning  them. 

Hon.  Stephen  Patrick  came  to  Cuyler 
with  his  parents  in  1812,  locating  on  lot  86. 
His  father  was  Nathaniel  Patrick,  who  mar- 
ried Penelope  Potter,  before  alluded  to,  in 
1 8 10.  Mr.  Patrick  is  a  prominent  citizen; 
was  in  the  employ  of  the  Delaware  and  Hud- 
son Canal  Company  from  1833  to  1839; 
has  held  many  minor  positions  of  trust,  and 
in  the  j-ear  1866  represented  Cortland 
county  in  the  Legislature.  He  is  a  success- 
ful   farmer    and    largely   engaged  in  dairy- 

Mr.  Goodwin,  in  his  Pioneer  History  of 
Cortland  County,  refers  to  the  struggles  of 
the  pioneers  in  the  procurement  of  food  for 
their  families  in  the  following  language : 
"  The  lu.xuries  they  enjoyed  were  the  real 
necessaries  of  subsistence.  They  dealt 
only  with  the  stern  realities  of  life.  The 
follies  of  our  times  were  unknown  to  the 
primitive  settlers.  They  studied  nature  as 
she  really  was,  rather  than  as  what  they 
would  have  her  to  be.  When  success  had 
so  far  crowned  their  laborious  efforts  as  to 
enable  them  to  spare  a  portion  of  their  prod- 
ucts, they  did  not  deem  it  a  hard  task  to 
place  the  scanty  surplus  on  an  ox-sled  and 
taking  an  Indian  trail,  or  such  road  as  had 
been  cut  through  the  wilderness  b>'  wan- 
dering emigrants,  and  thus  trudge  on  from 
day  to  day  until  they  reached  Utica, 
Whitestown,  or  Herkimer,  where  they  ex- 
changed their  load  for  the  substantial  of 
the  farm  and  the  kitchen.  This  exchange 
did  not  then,  as  in  these  days  of  refinement, 
consist  of  satins,  silks  and  laces  for  their 
daughters,  but  in  a  few  \-ards  of  linsey-wool- 
sey, an  ax,  bush-hook,  grubbing-hoe,  and 
last,  though  not  least,  a  half  pound  of  old 
Bohea,  which  was  alwa\-s  received  by  the 
happ}'  matron  with  a  smile." 

One  of  the  chief  obstacles  always  en- 
countered by  the  early  settlers  and   which 


390 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


caused  them  often  great  annoj-ance  and 
loss,  was  the  depredations  of  wild  beasts. 
Wolves  were  the  most  numerous  and  troub- 
lesome. Thouj^di  great  cowards  in  day- 
light, under  cover  of  the  nights  they  would 
come  down  from  the  forest-covered  hill- 
sides in  this  town  to  prey  upon  the  farmer's 
sheep-fold,  and  only  those  which  were  care- 
fully and  substantially  fenced  were  safe  from 
the  ravenous  beasts.  The  deep  gorges  and 
densely  wooded  hillsides  of  Cuyler  afforded 
favorite  haunts  for  these  cowardly  beasts, 
where  they  gathered  in  droves,  as  was  their 
wont,  to  go  on  their  nightly  raids.  It  was 
common  for  them  to  set  up  their  concerted 
bowlings  at  about  sunset,  and  soon  the  dis- 
tant hillsides  and  the  deep  valleys  would 
resound  with  their  blended  voices,  discord- 
ant  in  themsches,  and  jet  possessing  a 
sort  of  wild,  weird  melody,  to  which  old 
settlers  often  revert  with  pleasant  memories. 
But  when  the  hour  for  their  depredation  on 
a  sheep-fold  arrived,  their  instinct  prompted 
them  to  still  their  voices  and  they  stealthily 
crept  to  the  scene  of  their  plunder ;  luckily 
for  the  farmer  if  they  did  not  kill  and  carry 
oft"  his  last  sheep.  The  bounty  offered  for 
killing  wolves  was  always  a  considerable 
one  in  pioneer  days,  and  the  settlers  some- 
times eked  out  their  slender  incomes  by 
killing  the  brutes.  John  Hooker,  of  Cuy- 
ler, on  one  occasion,  after  having  a  cow 
killed  by  them,  excavated  a  deep  pit  to  en- 
trap them,  suitably  baited  it  and  had  the 
satisfaction  of  catching  seven  ;  he  received 
a  bounty  of  about  forty  dollars. 

The  first  death  in  the  town  of  Cu\-ler  was 
that  of  Susannah  Potter,  in  June,  1795  ; 
and  the  first  birth  was  that  of  her  son,  which 
occurred  about  four  months  prior  to  her 
death. 

Wanton  Corey  and  Deborah  Morse  (the 
former  eighteen  j-ears  of  age  and  the  latter 
seventeen)  were  the  first  couple  married  in 
the    town.     The    event   occurred    in    May, 


1806.  Mr.  Corey  died  in  1 881,  at  the 
advanced  age  of  ninety-fi\e  years.  Gar- 
ret Lockwood  and  Irene  Culver  were 
married  at  about  the  same  time  of  Corey's 
marriage. 

The  first  school  was  taught  in  Daniel 
Morse's  log  house  by  Jabez  Keep,  in  1800, 
and  about  the  same  time  Thomas  Queens- 
bury  taught  a  school  in  HoUenbeck's  barn 
on  lot  "]"].  The  first  religious  services  were 
held  in  Mr.  Slingerland's  barn  on  the  same 
lot. 

Mills.  —  The  early  settlers  in  this  region 
seriously  felt  the  absence  of  saw-mills  and 
grist-mills.  With  boards,  which  are  always 
comparative!)-  cheap  where  timber  is  plent)-, 
and  a  few  common  tools,  the  average  pio- 
neer could  construct  his  house,  rude  though 
it  was,  and  out-buildings,  and  could  pro- 
vide his  wife  with  many  articles  of  conven- 
ience for  house-keeping  ;  but  without  them, 
and  with  only  his  axe  to  depend  upon  for 
the  production  of  anj-thing  bearing  even  the 
semblance  of  a  board,  and  with  saw-mills 
at  long  distances,  the  privation  was  a  serious 
one.  And  so  with  the  grist-mill ;  it  was  a 
real  necessity,  and  when  it  came  within  a 
reasonable  distance,  displacing  the  primiti\e 
enormous  pestle,  which  was  lifted  up  and 
down  in  the  mortar,  made  by  hollowing  out 
the  top  of  a  hard  wood  stump,  it  was  a 
boon  the  value  and  convenience  of  which 
are  diflicult  to  realize  at  this  day. 

The  first  mill  in  the  town  of  Cuyler  was 
built  by  John  Corbet  in  1803.  This  was  a 
saw-mill  and  it  inidoubtedlj'  found  ample 
business  in  a  territorj-  as  heavih-  timbered 
as  this  was  with  hemlock,  maple,  basswood, 
beech,  cherry  and  white  elm.  Not  very 
long  after  this  mill  was  built  James  Dor- 
wood  erected  a  carding-  mill  and  grist-mill 
on  the  same  lot  with  Corbet ;  it  was  prob- 
ably the  first  carding-mill  in  the  State  and 
was  extensi\ely  patronized.  It  afterward 
passed  into  the  hands  of  Tydaman  Hull  and 


Town  of  Cuyler. 


391 


his  son  George,  who  ran  it  until  about  i860, 
when  it  was  abandoned. 

In  1805  Joseph  Sweetland  built  near  the 
same  site  a  grist-mill,  which  soon  also  passed 
into  the  hands  of  the  Hulls.  It  was  an  old- 
fashioned  water-power  mill,  with  two  runs 
of  stone,  but  sufficed  for  the  custom  work 
of  the  vicinity.  H.  A.  lilackman  afterward 
became  its  owner,  and  finally  its  present 
owner,  W.  H.  Seamans,  bought  it. 

The  second  saw- mill  in  the  town  was 
built  by  Judge  Charles  \'incent,  on  lot  78, 
and  was  run  by  him  until  1844.  It  was  a 
prominent  mill  in  an  early  day  and  stood 
about  half  a  mile  below  the  other  one.  It 
changed  hands  a  number  of  times  and  is 
now  in  ruins. 

The  third  mill  was  a  grist-mill  and  saw- 
mill together  ;  both  were  built  by  Ephraim 
Griswold  at  the  falls  of  Tripoli  in  a  very 
early  day.  The  mill  is  now  owned  by  A. 
P.  Spicer  &  Son,  and  has  a  good  circular 
saw  and  two  runs  of  stone ;  it  is  a  good 
country  mill. 

In  addition  to  these  mills  which  we  have 
mentioned,  there  were  other  early  ones,  but 
they  were  generalh'  small  affairs,  with  in- 
adequate water  power,  and  have  been  long 
since  abandoned  in  favor  of  portable  steam 
saw-mills,  now  in  common  use.  One  of 
these  is  now  on  the  farm  of  1\I.  J.  Keeler. 
but  will  soon  be  removed  to  the  village  of 
Cuyler ;  it  is  owned  by  the  Brown  Broth- 
ers, who  are  great-grandsons  of  Benjamin 
Brown,  one  of  the  first  settlers  before 
mentioned. 

The  dairying  business  has  recei\ed  more 
attention  in  this  town  in  late  )-ears  than 
formerly  and  more  than  an)-  other  branch 
of  agriculture.  In  this  respect  the  town  of 
Cuyler  is  not  surpassed  by  any  other  part 
of  the  county ;  perhaps  no  other  similar 
portion  of  the  State.  The  rich  lowlands  and 
the  excellent  pasturage  on  the  hillsides  can- 
not be  excelled  and  the  dairy  products   are 


proportionately  fine  in  quality  and  large  in 
quantity. 

Silas  Blanchard  was  the  first  to  erect  a 
cheese  factory  in  this  town.  It  was  built 
about  the  year  1864,  in  the  village  ;  a  hun- 
dred feet  of  the  building  is  still  in  use. 
The  business  is  now  owned  b\-  M.  S.  Allen 
and  managed  by  J.  B.  Howard.  The  pat- 
ronage of  this  factory  has  been  very  large 
at  times,  consuming  the  milk  of  a  thousand 
cows  ;  at  other  seasons  it  has  been  much 
more  limited. 

The  second  butter  and  cheese  factor}^  was 
built  on  or  near  the  line  between  Cuj-ler 
and  De  Ruj-ter,  Madison  count}',  about  the 
year  1875,  by  Lewis  Sears.  Since  his  pro- 
prietorship, Edwin  Saunders,  A.  Bucking- 
ham and,  at  the  present  time,  Mr.  McAd- 
ams  have  owned  it.  The  factory  receives 
considerable  patronage  from  both  towns, 
but  it  is  not  so  large  in  capacity  as  others 
in  the  town. 

The  factory  at  Kenne\-  Settlement  is  of 
still  later  origin.  It  was  built  and  is  now 
managed  by  a  compan)'  and  commands  a 
good  patronage. 

The  Cuyler  Hill  Cheese  Eactory  Associa- 
tion, organized  about  ten  years  ago,  and  the 
Cold  Spring  cheese  factory,  located  in  the 
south  part  of  the  town,  are  each  doing  a 
moderate  business.  There  are  also  several 
dairies  in  the  town,  the  products  of  which 
rank  high  in  the  markets. 

When  the  Rebellion  broke  out  it  found 
this  town  ready  with  its  sister  towns  of  the 
county  to  send  her  young  men  to  the  bat- 
•tle-field  in  aid  of  the  government  and  will- 
ing to  pa,\-  them  well  for  the  hardship  and 
dangers  they  were  to  undergo.  Special 
town  meetings  were  held  in  about  the  same 
order  and  for  similar  purposes  as  those  al- 
ready described  in  the  history  of  Homer, 
and  bounties  were  paid  conforming  with 
those  of  the  other  towns.  Eollowing  is  a 
list  of  all  the  enlistments  from  the  town   of 


392 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


those   who    received    bounties,    witli    other 
details :  — 

Call  of  October  1 7th,  1 863.  Bounty  paid, 
$300.  Total  bounties,  $9,000.  —  Henry 
Couch,  liirani  llills,  Benjamin  Austin,  Al- 
pha v.  Culver,  John  Scott,  Harlow  I.  Phil- 
lips, William  B.  Mudge,  William  B.  Weg- 
gant,  Michael  Donnelly,  Cornelius  Steel, 
Oscar  H.  Smith,  Edmund  O.  Rice,  John  A. 
Stewart,  George  Deitz,  Charles  LoUis,  The- 
odore Knapp,  Isaac  Brocket!,  Loyd  D.  Cul- 
ver, James  Wilson,  George  Hopper,  Chas. 
Hall,  Stephen  Cornell,  Stephen  H.  Vos- 
burgh,  Albert  C.  King,  George  Ridder, 
George  Ufford,  David  P.  Rood,  Charles 
Van  Wh\-,  Azariah  C.  Torre\',  Arvin  N. 
Albro. 

Call  of  July  iSth,  1864.  Amount  of 
bounty,  $700;  except  $600  to  nine;  $300 
to  two;  $500  to  one;  and  $650  to  one. 
Total  bounties,  $18,350  Total  brokerage, 
$700. — William  H.  Shaw,  James  A.  Shaw, 
Wm.  D.  Hakes,  Thomas  Edwards,  Henry 
Kreiga,  David  H.  Lyon,  Charles  Mitchell, 
John  Beavers,  Charles  Nelson,  Sebastian 
Staff,  Christ.  Bender,  John  Sherman,  De- 
mus  \\'alsh,  Daniel  Eoster,  Ereman  Day, 
Peter  Sanger,  John  R.  Williams,  Curry 
Magnus,  John  Quinn,  Thomas  Williams, 
Jacob  Jacoba,  Stephen  R.  Nye,  John  R. 
Wells,  Wesley  Porter,  George  H.  Green 
Daniel  Hennessy,  Cyrus  A.  Smith,  S.  E. 
Corwich,  George  Bromley. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bount}- 
paid,  $400  ;  except  $600  to  two.  Total 
bounty,  $3,600.  Total  brokerage,  $120. — 
Geo.  E.  Willey,  Samuel  Johnson,  Dewitt 
C.  Burch,  Nelson  Moore,  N.  Childs,  Wm. 
Hatless,  Charles  R.  Lord,  Ezra  Stone. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  cjuotas, 
calls  of  October  17th,  1863,  Eebruar_\-  and 
March,  1864,  $9,000.  Paid  for  filling  quota, 
call  of  July  18th,  1864,  $19,050.  Paid  for 
filling  quota,  call  of  December  19th,  1864, 
$3,720.      Grand  total,  $31,770. 


The  town  of  Cu)-ler  was  without  railroad 
communication  until  about  the  year  1870, 
when  the  Midland  road  ran  its  branch  (the 
Auburn  branch,  so  called)  directly  through 
the  town,  giving  it  direct  connection  with 
Cortland  village  on  the  south  and  Norwich 
on  the  east.  This  road,  although  not  yet 
managed  so  satisfactorily  as  it  undoubtedly 
will  be  at  no  distant  da)-,  has  been  of  great 
advantage  to  the  town. 

The  resolution  to  petition  the  Legislature 
for  an  act  to  erect  the  town  of  Cuyler  was 
passed  b)-  the  Board  of  Supervisors  of  the 
county  on  the  i8th  of  November,  1858, 
and  at  the  first  town  meeting  the  following 
officers  were  elected  :  — 

Supervisor — Lewis  Sears. 

Town  clerk.  —  Alexander  Dunce. 

Justices  of  the  peace — James  Burdick, 
Wait  Besle}-,  Daniel  Fairbank. 

Assessors  —  John  A.  Keene\',  William 
S.  Merchant. 

Commissioners  of  highways  —  Ezra  Ben- 
jamin, Henry  Smith,  Scabury  B.  Henry. 

Overseers  of  the  poor —  Francis  B.  Al- 
drich,  Robert  Grisvvold. 

Inspectors  of  election — Warren  A.  Jones, 
Horace  Benjamin,  Franklin  Blanchard. 

Collector  —  James  Allen. 

Constables  —  James  Allen,  Wm.  I-'.  Wall, 
Ransom  Fairbank,  James  Breed,  Elisha 
House. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  names  of  the 
supervisors  and  town  clerks,  the  supervisor's 
name  being  given  first  in  each  instance  :  — 

For  the  years  1859-60,  Lewis  Sears, 
'  Alexander  Dunce  ;  1861  to  1864,  inclusive, 
Silas  Blanchard,  A.  W.  Dunbar;  1865, 
Silas  Blanchard,  Gilbert  S.  Poole;  i866, 
Hiram  Whitmarsh,  Geo.  F.  Fairbank;  1867 
to  1872,  inclusive,  Alexander  Dunce,  Wm. 
Blanchard;  1873,  Alexander  Dunce,  Geo. 
F.  Fairbank;  1874  to  1876,  inclusive, 
Alexander  Dunce,  Clarence  N.  Knapp  ; 
1877-78,    Henr)-   D.    Waters,  Clarence    N. 


Town  of  Cuyler. 


393 


Knapp  ;  1879-80,  John  W.  Patrick,  Clar- 
ence N.  Knapp ;  1881,  Henry  D.  Waters, 
Clarence  N.  Knapp;  1882,  Harlan  P.  An- 
drews, Clarence  N.  Knapp;  i883,Wm.  Bald- 
win, James  B.  Hills;  1884,  Harlan  P.  An- 
drews, James  B.  Hills. 

The  officers  of  the  town  of  Cuyler,  elected 
at  the  last  annual  election,  are  as  follows:  — 

Supervisor — Harlan  P.  Andrews. 

Town  clerk  —  James  B.  Hills. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  Seabury  F. 
Brown,  B.  F.  Lee,  Irvine;  Burdick,  Nelson 
Keeler,  Joel  J.  Albro. 

Assessor —  David  C.  Smith. 

Commissioner  of  highwa)s  —  W'm.  \\  . 
Thompson. 

Overseer  of  the  poor  —  Wanton  Core\'. 

Collector  —  Aaron  W.  Dunbar,  jr. 

Constables —  Aaron  W.  Dunbar,  jr., 
Jacob  Garner,  George  Bogai'dus,  Nelson 
Albro,  Stephen  Burtis. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  Lewis  Burtis, 
George  F.  Fairbank. 

Excise  Commissioner  —  Geo.  H.  Brown. 

Of  those  who  have  been  prominently 
identified  with  the  management  of  the  pub- 
lic affairs  of  the  town  of  Cu\-ler,  no  one  is 
more  honorably  conspicuous  than  Alexan- 
der Dunce.  He  was  born  in  Schenectady, 
N.  v.,  in  1809,  of  Scotch  parentage;  his 
parents  being  educated  people,  the\'  care- 
full\-  trained  their  son  in  the  same  direction. 
He  became  at  an  early  age  a  successful 
teacher  in  common  schools,  and  he  has  ever 
since  identified  himself  with  educational  in- 
terests. He  removed  to  the  town  of  Cuyler 
in  1838  where  he  continued  teaching  win- 
ters, and  farming  in  summer  seasons.  His 
capacit)'  and  education  for  official  duty  was 
soon  recognized  b\-  his  townsmen,  since 
which  time  he  has  been  honored  with  al- 
most constant  public  work,  which  engrosses 
a  large  share  of  his  time  and  attention.  He 
was  superintendent  of  common  schools  in 
the  old  town  of  Truxton  for  ten  \-ears  ;  town 


clerk  of  Cuyler,   after  it  was  set  ofif  from 

Tru.xton,  two  terms  ;  justice  of  the  peace 
two  terms;  supervisor  nine  terms  ;  railroad 
commissioner  six  years  and  has  been  notary- 
public  during  the  past  fifteen  years.  Mr. 
Dunce  was  originally  a  Whig  in  politics 
and  is  now  a  thorough-going  Republican, 
strong  in  his  convictions  of  right  and  un- 
flinching in  his  efforts  to  carry  out  his 
convictions.  Although  now  seventy-six 
years  of  age,  he  still  attends  to  his  public 
duties  with  sound  judgment  and  all  the 
vigor  and  care  of  his  \-ounger  daj's,  and 
lives  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  respect  and 
confidence  of  the  entire  communit}'. 

CUYI.ER   vill.\(;e. 

The  \'illage  of  Cuyler  is  situated  a  little 
north  of  the  center  of  the  town,  on  the 
Utica,  Ithaca  and  Elmira  railroad,  and  con- 
tains a  Methodist  church,  several  mechanics' 
shops,  three  stores,  and  a  population  of 
about  one  hundred  and  twent}'. 

The  first  trading  done  in  the  village 
proper  was  probably  by  C.  J.  Vincent,  who 
began  in  1832,  although  it  has  been  stated 
that  a  man  named  Hull  had  a  small  store 
there  as  earl}-  as  1 806.  The  successors  of 
Mr.  Vincent  were  Phillip  and  Joseph  Morse 
in  1833  ;  Alanson  Lake  in  1838;  Lewis  & 
Sprague  in  1842;  Sprague  Brothers  in 
184s  and  Abial  Davidson  in  1859. 

In  another  building  Halsey  Patrick  began 
trading  in  1858,  and  was  succeeded  by  Aus- 
tin Waters  in  i860;  Marshall  Blanchard  in 
i86i.  In  still  another  building  Frank  Wise 
began  business  in  1864  and  was  followed 
by  Adelbert  Fuller  in  1866,  who  still  con- 
tinues. H.  G.  Warner  began  business  in 
1 88 1,  and  C.  M.  Knapp,  the  present  hard- 
ware merchant,  in  1871. 

Joseph  Swectland  kei)t  the  first  inn  in 
Cuyler  in  1806,  his  sign  being  hung  upon 
a  tree.  01i\er  Mix  taught  the  first  school 
in  Mix's  bar-room,  in    1807.      Mr.  Alexan- 


394 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


der  Dunce,  who  is  excellent  authorit}'  and 
to  whom  we  are  much  indebted  for  infor- 
mation of  this  town,  thinks  that  a  Mr.  Mc- 
Whorter  kept  a  tavern  here  in  1806.  He 
was  followed  in  1820  b)'  A.  Petrie ;  in 
1822  by  David  Morse;  1824  to  18*36  by- 
Joseph  Brush;  \Vm.  Morse  from  1830  to 
1834  ;  Geo.  \V.  Samson  from  i  834  to  1 838  ; 
Peter  W'estcrman  from  1838  to  1841  ;  Wil- 
liam Blanchard  from  1841  to  1848;  A. 
Parker  from  1848  to  i860;  D.  Raj-mond 
from  1861  to  1865;  M.  D.  Eaton  1870  to 
1873;  R.  Ashley  from  1873  to  1875;  D. 
Pence,  the  last  in  the  place,  from  1875  to 
1877,  when  the  hotel  was  burned. 

Alexander  Little  was  the  first  blacksmith 
to  locate  in  Cujler,  beginning  in  18 16.  He 
was  followed  by  W'm.  Blanchard  in  1820. 
Luther  Holmes,  the  present  blacksmith,  be- 
gan business  here  in  1871. 

James  Pomeroy,  a  cabinet  maker,  began 
work  in  that  line  in  18 16;  he  died  in  1870. 
Jefferson  Vincent  began  in  1882. 

The  first  physician  to  locate  in  the  village 
of  Cuyler  was  Dr.  Christopher  L.  Main, 
who  became  a  member  of  the  Cortland 
County  Medical  Society  in  1836,  about 
which  time  he  settled  in  Cuyler;  he  re- 
mained only  to  the  year  1 840  and  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Dr.  W.  B.  Sturte\ant,  who  prac- 
ticed here  a  few  }-ears  and  removed  to  De 
Ruyter,  where  he  soon  afterward  died.  He 
became  a  member  of  the  County  Medical 
Society  in  1846.  Dr.  Frank  C.  Clark  set- 
tled here  in  1878  and  is  still  in  practice. 

The  first  lawyer  in  Cuyler  was  Joseph 
Morse,  youngest  son  of  Da\'id  Morse,  who 
settled  on  lot  87.  He  began  pettifogging 
in  justice's  court  at  an  early  day,  and  soon 
after  the  constitutional  changes  of  1846, 
which  permitted  candidates  to  be  licensed 
to  practice  in  courts  of  record,  without  re- 
gard to  the  time  spent  in  stud\-,  he  was  ad- 
mitted an  attorney  at  law  in  the  courts  of 
the  State.      He  died  in  1872  or  1873. 


The  second  lawyer  was  M.  M.  Waters,  a 
native  of  the  town.  Mr.  Waters  obtained 
a  good  education,  and  was  a  teacher  of 
some  prominence,  after  which  he  studied 
the  law,  and  was  admitted  about  1 854. 
He  practiced  in  the  count}'  until  1882, 
when  he  removed  to  Syracuse,  where  he 
is  now  the  senior  member  of  the  well 
know  n  firm  of  Waters,  Mc  Lennan  & 
Dillaye.  He  is  an  able  pleader  and  a 
wise  counselor. 

Henr\-  D.  Waters,  the  onl\-  lawyer  at 
present  in  Cu\ler,  is  a  brother  of  M.  M. 
Waters,  with  whom  he  studied  his  profes- 
sion in  Cortland  village.  At  the  breaking 
out  of  the  Rebellion  he  enlisted  in  Company 
E  of  the  157th  Regiment,  and  was  a  par- 
ticipant in  the  battles  of  Chancellorsville, 
Fredericksburg,  Antietam  and  Gettysburg. 
In  the  latter  engagement  he  lost  two  fingers 
b)'  the  bursting  of  a  shell,  on  which  account 
he  was  transferred  to  the  Veteran  Reserves, 
Mr.  Waters  was  twice  promoted,  to  the  offi- 
ces of  lieutenant  and  captain.  He  finished 
his  law  studies,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar 
after  his  return  from  the  war.  Since  that 
time  he  has  been  justice  of  the  peace  fifteen 
years,  supervisor  four  years  and  clerk  of  the 
board  two  years. 

Churches.  —  The  first  sermon  preached 
in  the  town  of  Cuyler  was  by  Benoni  Har- 
ris, in  1808.  The  services  were  held  in 
Singleton's  barn.  After  that  e\'ent  religious 
services  were  kept  up  with  something  like 
regularity  by  supplies  or  traveling  minis- 
ters, who  preached  in  priwite  houses,  or 
school-houses,  until  the  j'ear  1839,  when 
the  Methodist  church  building  of  Cuyler 
was  erected.  This  building  was  raised  by 
Alexander  Dunce,  and  the  society  has  since 
prospered.  The  Rew  James  Staunton  is 
the  pastor  at  present  in  charge  of  the  church. 
Isaac  N.  Brown,  J.  W.  Patrick,  I.  D.  Brown, 
Adam  Petrie  and  Alexander  Dunce  are  the 
trustees.       The   class-leaders  are    Isaac   N. 


Town  of  Preble. 


395 


Brown  and  George  Brown.     The  member-  j 
sliip  is  about  eight)-. 

About  the  year  of  the  organization  of  the  I 
Methodist  Church  in  the  village,  and  not 
later  than  1 840,  the  members  of  the  Baptist 
society  erected  a  frame  church  building  in 
the  Kenney  Settlement.  The  members  of 
this  were  greatly  scattered,  and  in  a  few 
j'ears  the  church  was  disbanded,  the  mem- 
bers going  to  Fabius  and  Truxton  to  attend 
worship.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Purinton  minis- 
tered to  this  people  most  of  the  time  while 
they  continued  to  meet  for  worship.  He 
was  a  man  of  sterling  Christian  character 
and  was  greatly  loved  b}'  his  congregation. 
John  A.  Kenney,  Orange  Cadwell,  ^Vbner 
Brown,  and  others,  were  among  the  earnest 
supporters  of  the  church.  The  building 
was  purchased  b\'  the  Methodists  about  the 
year  1 866,  and  is  connected  in  a  circuit 
with  the  church  at  Fabius.  The  Rev.  Mr. 
Shurtliff,  now  of  Fabius,  preaches  in  the 
church.  Edmund  I'ox,  John  B.  Webster, 
Nelson  Haskins,  Silas  Haskins,  Oren  and 
Gurdon  Hulbert,  H.  P.  Andrews,  and  oth- 
ers   are   prominently   connected    with    the 


society.  The  original  trustees  were  P.  H. 
Saunders,  Leonard  Woodruff,  Owen  Wood- 
ruff and  J.  B.  Webster.  The  present  trust- 
ees are  P.  H.  Saunders,  Hiram  Whitman, 
Isaac  Babcock,  Albert  Haskins,  Elisha  King, 
Edwin  Saunders  and  H.  P.  Andrews. 

The  Union  Church  society  of  South 
Cuyler,  consisting  of  members  from  various 
denominations,  erected  a  building  at  that 
place  just  prior  to  the  late  war.  The  socie- 
ty thus  formed  is  not  a  very  strong  one, 
but  its  members  are  earnest  in  their  desire 
to  build  up  a  church  and  regularly  attend 
all  the  ser\ices.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Ketchum 
was  instrumental  in  securing  the  subscrip- 
tion with  which  the  frame  of  the  church 
w^as  erected. 

The  Seventh  da\-  Baptist  Church  was  or- 
ganized about  the  year  1850  and  a  building 
erected  on  the  Burdick  hill.  The  Revs. 
Fisher,  Alexander  Campbell,  Joshua  Clarke 
and  Thomas  Fisher  have  preached  to  this 
society  at  difterent  periods.  Phineas  and 
James  Burdick,  Arza  Muncey,  E.  B.  Irish, 
A.  L.  Gardner  and  others  have  done  much 
for  the  prosperity  of  the  church. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


HISTdRV  OF  THE  TOWN"  OF   PREIJI.K. 


THE  town  of  Preble  was  named  in  honor 
of  Commodore  Preble,  and  was  formed 
from  the  military  township  of  TuUy  upon 
the  organization  of  Cortland  county,  April 
8th,  1808.  It  embraced  the  south  half  of 
that  township  and  also  the  present  town  of 
Scott.  The  boundaries  are  as  .follows  :  On 
the  north  by  Onondaga  county ;  on  the 
east  by  Truxton  ;  on  the  south  by  Homer 
and  Scott ;   on  the  west  by  Scott. 

The  surface  is  largely  broken  and  hilly, 
consisting  of  the  valley  of  the  west  branch 
of  the  Tioughnioga  river,   which    is   nearly 


two  miles  wide,  with  high  ridges  rising  on 
the  east  and  west.  Mount  Topping  is  the 
most  elevated  portion  of  the  town,  being 
seventeen  hundred  feet  above  tide.  North 
of  Mount  Topping  a  valley  extends  north- 
ward and  opens  into  the  \'alley  of  Otisco 
lake.  The  hills  of  Preble  are  steep  and 
many  of  the  sunmiits  terminate  in  sharp 
peaks. 

The  soil  is  a  fine  quality  of  gravelly  loam. 
Several  small  lakes  are  situated  in  the  town 
and  are  known  as  the  Little  York  lakes. 
The  following  concerning  Mount  Topping 


396 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


is  quoted  from  Goodwin  s  History  of  the 
County :  "  From  the  highest  elevation  of 
Mount  Topping  portions  of  Onondaga, 
Cayuga  and  Tompi<ins  may  be  seen,  with 
tlieir  varj'ing  sccncr)-,  blending  the  beauties 
of  rich,  productive  fields  with  the  more 
rugged  features  of  nature.  Standing  on 
that  loft)'  point  the  observer  ma\-  have  a 
fine  view  of  Homer,  Preble  and  Tully  flats, 
lands  that  will  compare  favorably  with  any 
in  the  State;  and  there,  too,  he  ma>'  \-iew 
with  admiration  and  wonder  the  works  of  the 
Deity,  as  exhibited  in  the  numerous  ridges 
and  long  sloping  valleys,  the  rounded 
knolls  and  picturesque  glades,  all  richl)'  di- 
versified and  producing  in  abundance  the 
various  crops  common  to  the  country. 
Indeed,  there  are  man)'  magnificent  views 
to  be  taken  from  this  rugged  point,  as  it 
looms  up  in  its  ancient  grandeur.  We  were 
most  agreeabh'  surprised  with  our  visit  to 
this  olden  spot  of  Indian  warfare,  where  the 
Indian  man  contested  the  right  of  inherit- 
ance with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  mountain 
glen  or  forest  glade." 

Preble  Corners,  situated  on  the  S)'racuse, 
Binghamton  and  New  York  Railroad,  con- 
tains two  churches,  a  hotel,  two  general 
stores,  one  hardware  store  and  one  drug 
store,  and  one  cooper  shop  ;  a  harness  shop, 
two  blacksmith  shops,  one  wagon  shop  and 
other  shops  of  \'arious  kinds,  with  about 
four  hundred  inhabitants.  Preble  Center 
and  Baltimore  are  hamlets,  the  latter  lo- 
cated near  the  center  of  the  town,  and  was 
formerly  a  thriving  little  village,  containing 
hotel,  post-office,  stores  and  a  tanner)'. 

The  first  settlement  was  made  in  the 
town  of  Preble  in  1796,  by  James  Cravath 
and  John  Gill.  James  Cravath  bought  lot 
68  and  paid  $1  per  acre  for  the  land.  He 
afterwards  sold  to  his  brothers,  Robert  and 
Samuel,  three  hundred  acres  of  this  land 
and  the  remainder  to  Garret  \'an  Hoesen 
in  1805,  for  which  last   named   part   he   re- 


ceived $12.50  per  acre.  After  this  trans- 
action James  Cravath  moved  to  the  Holland 
Purchase,  in  Genesee  county,  N.  Y.  His 
only  daughter,  Mrs.  Blodgett,  also  moved 
to  that  count)-.  Robert  and  Samuel  Cra- 
\ath  came  to  the  town  in  1797,  and  li\'ed 
the  remainder  of  their  lives  in  the  count)' 
and  gainctl  the  reputation  of  being  honor- 
able, upright  citizens  and  valuable  mem- 
bers of  the  community.  They  were  both 
earnest  supporters  of  the  earl)-  church  in 
Preble.  Samuel  moved  to  Homer  just  prior 
to  his  death.  James  Cravath  was  a  native 
of  Connecticut,  but  migrated  from  Pompey 
Hill.  Samuel  and  Robert  came  from  Nor- 
folk, Conn. 

John  Gill  settled  on  a  part  of  lots  76  and 
"]"].  He  settled  first  in  Scott  and  came  to 
Preble  soon  after.  It  was  at  his  house  the 
first  meeting  was  held  in  the  town  for  the 
election  of  the  town  officers. 

Harr\'  Hill  and  Elijah  Mason  came  in 
during  the  )'ear  1798.  The  former  was 
from  Montgomer)'  county,  N.  Y.,  and  lo- 
cated on  lot  87,  which  he  drew  for  military 
services  in  the  Revolutionary  War.  Elijah 
Mason  settled  on  lot  78.  Seth  Trowbridge, 
from  Montgomery  county,  located  in  the 
early  part  of  1779  on  lot  59,  and  during  the 
next  year  Samuel  Trowbridge,  Winnie 
H)att  and  Samuel  Orvis  settled  on  the 
same  lot.  Trowbridge  served  in  the  War 
of  the  Rc\'olution  and  drew  the  lot.  The 
Widow  Trowbridge,  of  Homer,  mother  of 
Mrs.  Oliver  Glover,  of  Homer,  was  a  daugh- 
ter of  Mr.  Hyatt.  Mr.  Orvis  was  from  Nor- 
folk, Conn.  He  subsec[uentl)'  rcmo\'ed  to 
Prattsburg,  Steuben  count)',  where  he  died 
in  1 85  I  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninet)'-eight 
years.  Samuel  Trowbridge  was  the  first 
inn-keeper  in  the  town  of  Preble. 

In  iSoi  .Augustus  Thorp  located  on  lot 
7<S.  In  1802  John  Osgood,  Silas  Topping, 
Samuel  C.  Buckelow  and  Jabez  Phelps 
came   in    and    settled    in    \arious    locations. 


Town  of  Preble. 


397 


Jabez  Phelps  was   originally  from  Hebron, 

Connecticut,  but  came  to  Preble  from  Caz- 
enovia.  He  located  on  lot  88,  and  for  the 
first  few  years  he  practiced  medicine  and 
vyas  honored  with  the  title  of  Doctor  ;  but 
he  subsequentl\-  turned  his  attention  to 
politics  and  was  at  different  times  elected 
to  important  positions,  creditably  filling  the 
office  of  associate  judge,  surrogate  and 
Member  of  the  Assembl)-.  He  died  Dec. 
20th,  1850,  aged  seventy-four  \'ears.  His 
widow  lived  upwards  of  four  score  years. 
Thej-  had  seven  children,  as  follows : 
The  daughter  Soplironia  became  the  wife 
of  Charles  Clark,  of  Groton  ;  Laura  Jane 
the  wife  of  Dr.  Burdick  ;  Augusta  the  wife 
of  Harry  Hobart,  of  Tru.xton  ;  Lydia,  the 
wife  of  Dr.  Alfred  Hall,  of  Navarino,  On- 
ondasa  countv;  Amanda  the  wife  of 
Ezekiel  Chew,  of  Richland,  (_)hio  ;  Abram 
J.,  of  Newark,  in  the  same  State;  Calvin 
B.,  of  Chrysoline,  Ohio. 

Osgood  settled  on  lot  "j"]  ;  Buckelow  on 
lot  67,  and  Topping  on  96. 

In  1802  Lyttle  Ferguson  from  Mont- 
gomery county  located  on  lot  65. 

In  1803  Amos-  Skeel  and  Jason  Com- 
stock  came  in  from  Schenectady  count}-, 
and  selected  locations.  The  former  settled 
on  lot  59.  He  was  an  industrious  and  val- 
uable citizen.  He  died  in  1842,  at  the  age 
of  seventy-five  years.  His  widow  survived 
him  eleven  years  and  died  at  the  ad\anced 
age  of  eighty-eight.  He  was  the  father  of 
Hon.  Ira  Skeel,  and  William  W.  Mr. 
Comstock  located  on  lot  58.  His  daughter 
Saloma  is  the  wife  D.  Ci.  Duncan.  In 
1804  John  CoUyer,  Dr.  Robert  D.  Taggart 
and  Edward  Cummings  selected  locations. 
Collyer,  father  of  Casper  CoUj'er,  came  from 
Greene  count}'  and  settled  on  lot  58.  Tag- 
gart came  from  Colerain  and  located  on  lot 
59.  He  was  an  exceedingly  active  and 
prominent  man.  Cummings  came  in  from 
Peterborough,  X.  H  .  and  settled  on  lot  59. 


He  purchased    100  acres,  and  reared  a  res- 
pectable famil}'  of  thirteen  children. 

James  Crofoot  was  one  of  the  prominent 
early  settlers  and  probabl}-  emigrated  from 
Connecticut  about  the  }'ear  1806,  arriving 
in  Preble  during  the  latter  part  of  that 
year.  He  settled  on  lot  88  and  was  one  of 
the  very  first  to  locate  in  Baltimore.  Jo- 
seph Crofoot  was  postmaster  of  that  hamlet 
for  a  number  of  years.  His  son,  David  Cro- 
foot, was  a  tanner  and  currier  and  became 
wealthy.  He  was  a  skillful  mechanic  and 
carried  on  that  business  at  Baltimore  for 
forty  }'ears.  The  old  stone  building,  still 
standing  in  that  place  and  occupied  for  that 
especial  purpose  during  the  time  Mr.  Cro- 
foot was  engaged  in  that  pursuit,  was  after- 
ward used  for  various  purposes,  such  as 
blacksmith  shop,  shoe  shop,  etc.,  but  has 
been  virtuall}-  abandoned  for  many  years. 
This  building  was  erected  about  the  year 
1810,  and  was  the  first  tannery  in  the  town. 
David  Crofoot  must  have  turned  his  atten- 
tion in  part  to  politics  ;  the  records  of  the 
town  show  him  to  have  been  supervisor  in 
1823,  '24,  '25.  '30,  '32,  'II,  '34,  '39,  40, 
'43,  '44,  '45.  '46,  '52,  and  '53  — fifteen 
years  in  all,  but  extending  over  a  period  of 
thirty  years  of  time. 

The  first  grist-mill  in  the  town  of  Preble 
was  erected  in  the  year  1806,  b}-  Samuel  C. 
Woolston,  a  native  of  Montgomery  count}-. 
In  1827  the  building  was  taken  down  and 
the  main  part  of  the  present  mill  erected  on 
the  original  site.  The  mill  was  run  until 
about  the  year  1850,  and  then  passed  into 
the  hands  of  Uriah  Philley.  In  1853  W. 
E.  Tallman  purchased  the  mill  property, 
comprising  200  acres  of  valuable  land.  He 
was  an  enterprising  citizen  of  Tull}-,  who. 
after  coming  here,  thoroughly  renovated 
and  improved  the  mill,  adding  new  bolts 
and  another  run  of  stone.  He  also  ex- 
tended .shafting  to  his  barn,  a  distance  of 
360    feet,    where    he    used    the    power    for 


398 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


thrashing,  separating  grain,  elevating  straw, 
sheUing  corn  and  sawing  wood,  thus  saving 
him  by  using  the  surphis  power,  half  the 
usual  number  of  hands  necessary  to  do  the 
same  amount  of  wcjrk.  Mr.  Tallman  also 
purchased  a  water  power  below  his  mill 
about  thirty-eight  rods  distant,  and  by  the 
use  of  shafting  627  feet  in  length,  was  en- 
abled to  operate  another  extra  run  of  stone. 
He  thus  used  a  portion  of  the  water  a  second 
time.  This  valuable  mill  privilege  is  now 
owned  by  Elijah  Stantnii.  A  saw-mill  is 
also  connected  with  it. 

By  the  year  1806  some  improvements  had 
been  made  in  the  town.  The  few  farmers 
had  made  considerable  progress  in  felling 
the  forest,  and  PLlijah  Mason  and  Samuel 
Trowbridge  had  erected  the  first  frame 
houses.  These  were  soon  followed  b\-  that 
of  John  CoUyer,  who  built  between  the 
Corners  and  the  river,  on  the  site  now  oc- 
cupied by  Henry  Haviland.  In  this  build- 
ing Mr.  Collyer  kept  hotel  in  an  early  day 
and  as  late  as  18 13,  in  which  year  Moses 
B.  Howard  moved  into  the  town. 

Captain  Church  also  had  a  tavern  near 
Woolston's  mill  at  an  earl)- day ;  but  the 
date  of  his  proprietorship  is  not  now  a\ail- 
able. 

In  1804  John  Osgood  opened  a  store  at 
Preble  Corners  and  in  1807  Wm.  Vanden- 
berg  began  keeping  a  tavern  there.  Ash— 
abel  Frost  opened  a  store  on  lot  78  about 
1812  and  Noah  Parsons  one  on  lot  68  in 
1 818. 

David  Crofoot  began  his  tanner}-  busi- 
ness about  the  year  1 8 10,  in  Baltimore,  and 
Isaac  Crofoot,  his  cousin,  some  years  later, 
opened  a  tavern  there  ;  this  passed  through 
different  hands  and  was  finally  kept  by  Geo. 
Haines,  who  closed  it  as  a  public  house 
about  1854.  A  post-office  was  located  here 
in  1 81  2  which  was  continued  until  1832. 

Preble  Center  was  a  thri\'ing  little  hamlet 
at  an   early  day,  where   business    was  done 


and  some  manufacturing  in  a  small  way; 
but  the  place  long  since  became  scarcely 
worthy  of  note. 

Jabez  Phelps  and  Joseph  Crofoot  were 
earl\-  identified  with  the  interests  of  Balti- 
more ;  but  when  the  post-office  was  re- 
moved from  there  to  the  Corners  in  1832, 
the  place  lost  its  business  activity,  until  now 
it  is  me]el_\'  a  neighborhood  of  contiguous 
dwellings. 

The  first  annual  town  meeting  of  the 
town  of  Preble  was  convened  at  the  house 
of  John  Gill  on  the  3d  of  May,  1808,  when 
the  following  officers  were  elected  :  — 

Supervisor  —  Amos  Skeel. 

Town  clerk  —  Albert  Collyer. 

Assessors  —  Garret  Van  Hoesen,  Peleg 
Babcock  and  John  Gill. 

Commissioners  of  highways  —  William 
Gillett,  Samuel  Trowbridge  and  Samuel 
Babcock. 

Overseers  of  the  poor —  Elijah  Mason, 
Wm.  Vandenberg. 

Constables  —  Samuel  Taggart  and  Wm. 
Tefft. 

Commissioners  of  roads  —  Pllijah  Mason 
and  Paul  Babcock. 

Collector — Henry  Vandenberg. 

Sealer  of  weights  and  measures  —  Joseph 
Bingham. 

Pound  masters  and  fence  viewers — Rob- 
ert Cravath,  Wm.  Vandenberg,  Henr\-  Bur- 
dick. 

Overseers  of  the  highways  —  John  Hunt- 
ington, Nathaniel  Gay,  Leonard  L.  Conine, 
Richard  Whitbeck,  Timoth)-  Brown,  Eben- 
ezer  Harrington,  Moulton  Craw,  Gad  Mer- 
rill, Abraham  Rulofsen,  John  Gillett,  John 
Ra\'mond,  Seth  Trowbridge,  Levi  Johnson, 
Bela  Harsmar. 

The  first  enactment  passed  by  this  board 
of  officers  was  that  "  hogs  shall  be  free  com- 
moners, with  yokes  and  rings." 

The  following  resolution  was  also  adopted 
at    that  meeting :    "  That  any  inhabitant  of 


Town  of  Preble. 


399 


this  town,  who  shall  kill  any  wolves  or  pan- 
thers, shall  be  entitled  to  a  bountj'from  the 
town  of  ten  dollars,  provided  said  wolf  or 
panther  shall  be  killed  within  the  bounds 
of  the  town." 

It  was  decided  that  the  next  town  meet- 
ing shall  be  held  at  the  house  of  John  Gill. 

In  1863-64  Moses  and  William  Palmer 
erected  the  Preble  cheese  factor}-,  south  of 
Baltimore,  and  carried  on  the  manufacture 
of  butter  and  cheese  very  extensively.  Their 
buildings  were  very  large,  two  stories  in 
height,  with  capacious  engine  room ;  the 
vats  were  heated  by  steam  and  the  milk  of 
hundreds  of  cows  used.  The  dairy  busi- 
ness of  the  town  of  Preble,  like  other  por- 
tions of  Cortland  county,  has  received  a 
large  share  of  the  attention  of  farmers  in 
late  years,  increased  interest  being  felt  in  it 
since  about  i860.  The  rich  Preble  flats  are 
scarcely  surpassed  for  fertility  and  beauty 
by  any  section  of  the  county,  and  the  farms 
are  admirable  examples  of  the  best  methods 
of  agriculture.  The  hopes  of  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  town  that  they  would  soon  have 
railroad  communication  with  S\racuse  and 
with  other  portions  of  this  count}-,  were  ex- 
cited as  earl}- as  1826,  when  the  charter  w-as 
granted  by  the  Legislature  for  a  road  from 
Syracuse  to  Binghamton  ;  but  the}-  were 
destined  to  disappointment  until  the  }'ear 
1854,  which  witnessed  the  completion  of 
the  Syracuse  and  Binghamton  railroad  run- 
ning directly  through  the  Preble  valle}-. 
This  was  an  era  of  rejoicing  and  the  road, 
although  its  advent  may  have  been  the  re- 
verse of  beneficial  to  the  growth  of  the  \il- 
lage,  has  been  of  incalculable  benefit  to  the 
town  at  large. 

Preble  Center  was  a  point  of  deep  relig- 
ious interest  at  a  ver}-  early  day.  Here  the 
Presbyterians  first  assembled  as  early  as 
1804,  at  which  time  there  was  a  member- 
ship in  this  creed  of  eleven  persons.  It  be- 
came a  thriving   organization.      At   a   later 


date  Jedediah  Barber,  of  Homer,  who  mar- 
ried a  Miss  Tuttlc  li\-ing  near  the  Center, 
presented  the  society  with  a  lot  for  the 
erection  of  a  church  building ;  but  there 
was  a  provision  attached  to  the  gift,  that  if 
the  church  was  ever  removed  the  lot  should 
revert  to  him.  The  church  was  removed 
to  Preble  Corners  in  I  840,  chiefly  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Elam  Dunbar,  and 
Mr  Barber  took  the  lot  into  his  possession. 
The  names  of  the  first  town  officials  have 
already  been  given.  The  first  marriage 
was  that  of  Amos  Bull  to  Sally  Mason,  in 
1 799.  The  first  birth  was  that  of  Nancy  Gill, 
October  25th,  1796.  The  first  death  was 
that  of  John  Patterson*  in  1798.  The  first 
permanent  merchant  was  Noah  Parsons,  at 
Preble  Center  in  1818.  The  first  grist-mill 
that  of  Samuel  Woolston,  erected  in  1806; 
and  the  oldest  living  native  resident  of  the 
town  is  Matthias  Van  Hoesen,  who  is  now 
seventy-nine  years  old.  Mr.  Van  Hoesen 
has  held  every  office  in  the  gift  of  his  town 
and  has  been  its  supervisor  for  nearly  a 
quarter  of  a  century.  He  was  prominent 
in  the  agitation  which  resulted  in  erecting 
the  new  county  clerk's  office,  and  he  was  a 
leader  in  the  work  of  arranging  and  erect- 
ing the  present  county  poor-house  buildings, 
which  are  among  the  finest  in  the  State. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  of  the  town  of  Preble,  the  super- 
i  visor's    name  in   each  instance  being   given 
first  and  the  clerk's  immediatel}-  after  : — 

1808-09,  Amos  Skeel,  Robert  Taggart. 
1810,  Amos  Skeel,  Joseph  Bingham.  181  i 
to  1815.  inclusive,  Amos  Skeel,  Garret  Van 
Hoesen.  1816  to  1832,  inclusive,  Jabez  B. 
Phelps,  Garret  \'an  Hoesen.  1823,  David 
Crofoot,  Jabez  B.  Phelps.  1824,  David 
Crofoot,  Martin  Lyon.  1825,  David  Cro- 
foot, Martin  Phelps.  1826  to  1829.  inclu- 
sive, Martin  Phelps,  tlrastus  Downs.  1830, 
David  Crofoot,  Christian  Ku.  1831,  Mar- 
tin L}'on,  Christian  Etz.      1832  to  1834,  in- 


400 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


elusive,  Diu'id  Crt)fiH)t,  Christian  l'",tz.  I1S35 
to  1837,  inclusive,  Elilui  Mix,  I'"rancis  (iil- 
bert.  1838,  Michael  Frank,  Jabcz  H.  Phelps. 
1839,  Uavicl  Crofoot,  Michael  Frank.  1  S40, 
David  Crofoot,  Edmund  Stevens.  1841, 
Christian  Ktz,  John  H.  Kiersted.  1842, 
Abraham  Woodward,  James  Crofoot.  i  843, 
David  Crofoot,  Seth  Kelsey.  1844  to 
1846,  inclusive,  David  Crofoot,  Andrew 
Spence.  1847,  G.  A.  Woolston,  Jabez  B. 
Phelps.  1 848,  Abel  Washbrouck,  Jabez  B. 
Phelps.       1849,    David    Hard}',    Jabez    B. 

Phelps.      1850-51, .      1852,    David 

Crofoot,  P'redus  Howard.  1853,  David 
Crofoot,  Leonard  Hardy.  1854,  Lyman  G. 
Frost,  Matthias  M.  Out.  1855,  Seth  Aid- 
rich,  Walter  Jones.  1856,  James  Baldwin, 
Matthias  Out.  1857,  Edmund  Stevens, 
Fredus  Howard.  1858,  James  Baldwin, 
John  D.  F,  Woolston.  1859,  W.  E.  Tall- 
man,  Daniel  Burdick.  i860,  W.  E.  Tall- 
man,  John  J.  Out.  1861,  Matthias  Van 
Hoesen,  John  J.  Out.  1862,  M.  Van  Hoe- 
sen,  Robert  Conine.  1863,  M.  Van  Hoe- 
sen, John  L.  Ferguson.  1864,  M.  Van 
Hoesen,  Lyman  Gay.  1865,  Silas  Bald- 
win, Horatio  M.  Van  Buskirk.  1866,  M. 
Van  Hoesen,  Caleb  D.  Kinner.  1867,  M. 
Van  Hoesen,  J.  S.  Connie.  1868,  M.  Van 
Hoesen,  L.  M.  Conine.  1869,  James  Bald- 
win, J.  H.  Burdick.  1870-71-72,  M.  Van 
Hoesen,  Alonzo  C.  Spore.  1873,  M.  Van 
Hoesen,  A.  C.  Carr.  1874,  John  D.  F. 
Woolston,  A.  C.  Carr.  1875,  F.  T.  Van 
Hoesen,  A.  C.  Carr.  1876,  Anderson  Fran- 
cisco, A.  C.  Carr.  1877-78,  A.  C.  Carr, 
Myron  J.  Muncy.  1879,  John  D.  F.  Wool- 
ston, A.  C.  Carr.  1 880- 1 881,  M.  Van 
Hoesen,  Frank  P.  Conine.  1882,  David  O. 
Crofoot,  Frank  P.  Conine.  1883,  Wm.  W. 
Wright,  F.  P.  Conine. 

The  officers  for  the  \'ear  1883  are  as  fol- 
lows: — 

Supervisor — Wm.  W.  Wright. 

Town  clerk  —  Frank  P.  Conine. 


Justices  of  the  peace  —  John  S.  Cornue, 
J.  D.  F.  Woolston,  Seth  Hobart,  H.  J.  B. 
Tully. 

Commissioner  of  highways — Henrj-  F. 
Harter. 

Assessors  —  John  L.  Haviland,  A.  H. 
Van  Buskirk  and  Roscoe  Butler. 

Collector  —  Christo]5her  Long. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  A.  M.  Loomis, 
David  H.  Foltz  and  J.  H.  Cummings. 

Constables  —  Christopher  Long,  Rich- 
mond Klock,  A.  V.  H.  Cummings  and  Ryan 
Green. 

Overseer  of  the  poor  —  Eben  Daley. 

Game  constable  —  H.  M.  \'an  Hoesen. 

Excise  board  —  A.  G.  Aldrich,  Robert 
Conine  and  Miles  Tully. 

The  town  of  Preble  practically  exhibited 
its  patriotism  during  the  late  war,  by  fur- 
nishing its  quota  of  men  called  for  b)-  the 
government,  notwithstanding  the  town  had 
more  children  than  money,  as  compared 
with  man)'  other  towns  in  the  county. 
Following  is  a  list  of  all  the  enlistments 
from  the  town  of  men  who  were  paid  boun- 
ties, with  the  amount  of  money  thus  ex- 
pended:— 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  Bounty, 
$300.  Total,  $6,600.  —  Rice  Graham,  Ben- 
ajah  A.  W'ilmot,  Oliver  Ingram,  Joseph 
R.  Ragan,  James  Phillips,  John  E.  Ladd, 
Robert  Walker,  Chester  Huntington,  John 
M.  Corr\',  Jacob  King,  George  W.  Gates, 
Edward  Hunter,  Charles  P.  Johnson,  John 
A.  Lee,  Andrew  Craft,  James  W.  Wood, 
John  Strong,  John  R.  Cain,  John  Camel, 
John  Hodges,  James  Smith,  John  Baker. 

Call  of  July  i8th,  1864.  Bounty,  $1,000; 
except  $700  to  two,  and  $600  to  two. 
Total,  $21,600.  Brokerage,  $575. — Will- 
iam Howard,  Charles  Card,  Franklin  D. 
Carpenter,  Edward  L.  Smith,  Henry  K. 
Watrous,  Albert  Arnold,  Andrew  V.  Aus- 
tin, George  W.  Briggs,  William  R.  Brown, 
Marcus    B.    Durkee,    De   Witt    II.  Eldrige, 


Town  of  Prebi.e. 


401 


Lucian  Haskins,  John  B.  Knapp,  Henry  G. 
Wakefield,  James  Wakefield,  William  W. 
Wakefield,  Ellis  Willson,  Horace  C.  Wood, 
John  Martin,  James  Wriijht,  John  Cain, 
Gabrael  Allen,  P'ranklin  C.  Crowcll. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bounty, 
$600.  Total,  $7,800.  Brokerage,  $105. — 
John  Osborn,  Daniel  O'Brien,  James  Hay- 
den,  Patrick  Kell\-,  Henry  Jackson,  George 
Doughert)-,  James  Cole,  James  Capot,  Al- 
fred Marion,  James  Smith,  Hiram  Lango, 
John  R\-an,  Anton  Tichter. 

Recapitulation.  —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  Februarj'  and 
March,  1864,  $6,600;  paid  for  filling  quota, 
call  Jul)-  1 8th,  1864,  $22,175:  paid  for 
filling  quota,  call  December  19th,  1864, 
$7,905.      Grand  total,  $36,680. 

PREBLE    CORNERS. 

The  village  of  Preble  Corners  recei\ed 
its  first  inhabitant  in  the  year  1802,  in  the 
person  of  John  Osgood,  before  alluded  to, 
who  moved  in  at  that  time  and  erected  the 
first  log  house  in  the  place  during  that  )'ear, 
and  two  years  later  opened  the  first  store. 
The  dwelling  house  stood  on  the  ground 
now  owned  and  occupied  by  John  Ga\'. 

W'hen  Garret  Van  Hoesen  moved  to  the 
town  in  1806  there  were  two  frame  houses 
in  the  town  —  that  of  P^lijah  Mason  and  an- 
other occupied  by  Samuel  Trowbridge,  both 
of  whom  settled  on  lot  78.  The  first  frame 
house  built  at  the  Corners  was  erected  by 
William  Vandenberg,  and  is  the  house  in 
which  John  Gay  now  resides.  V'andenberg 
kept  a  tavern  in  this  building  for  a  time  ; 
but  ha\-ing  failed  to  (obtain  a  good  title  to 
his  land,  and  after  becoming  reduced  from 
wealthy  circumstances  to  poverty,  he  re- 
moved away.  Elisha  Williams  succeeded 
to  his  estate.  The  land  was  afterward 
claimed  by  John  Toole,  whose  right  to  the 
title  was  undisputed  ;  but  fortune  did  not 
favor  the  possessor,  as  there  happened  to  be 


two  of  that  name,  both  soldiers  in  the  war 

of  the  Revolution,  one  of  whom  was  then 
deceased,  and  both  entitled  to  the  militarv 
bount\-.  After  considerable  litigation  the 
State  allowed  .Mr.  Williams  to  keep  the 
farm. 

Matthias  \'an  1  loesen  came  to  the  village 
in  1830  and  from  the  spring  of  that  year 
until  the  \-ear  1831  kcj)!  the  iiotel  where  it 
is  now  located.  John  Fowler  was  then  in 
a  tavern  on  the  south  side  of  the  road.  The 
next  proprietor  of  the  present  hotel  was 
Jabez  B.  Phelps,  who  came  about  the   year 


18- 


the  buildinsr  was  at   that   time   con- 


siderably smaller  than  at  present.  The 
post-ofiice  at  Baltimore  had  been  removed 
to  the  Corners  during  this  \ear  and  busi- 
ness at  that  time  began  to  center  at  this 
point.  Andrew  Spence  next  supplied  the 
traveling  public  with  tavern  fare,  and  under 
his  proprietorship  the  house  was  burned  on 
September  14th,  1840.  He  immediately 
rebuilt  it  in  its  present  size  and  accommo- 
dations. Following  .Spence  in  the  proprie- 
torship of  the  house  came  Anson  Kenyon, 
Lewis  Wilcox,  John  Bouton,  George  Hef- 
fron,  Robert  Conine,  who  kept  it  in  1852, 
and  repaired  the  building  ;  Daniel  Van  Au- 
ken,  who  took  it  in  1865  and  kept  it  until 
1878;  G.  S.  \'an  Hoesen.  Albert  \'an 
Hoesen  and  the  present  proprietor,  John 
Klock,  who  came  in  1880. 

Previous  to  the  establishment  of  the  post- 
office  in  the  town  of  Preble,  about  the  year 
1812,  the  then  central  point  of  the  township 
of  Tully,  the  settlers  received  their  letters, 
papers,  etc.,  from  Pompey  Hill.  This  post- 
office  was  located  at  the  hamlet  of  Bal- 
timore, and  was  kept  by  Jabez  Phelps,  who 
retained  the  office  a  number  of  \-ears.  The 
Cortland  Journal,  under  date  of  October 
1st,  1824,  advertises  letters  at  the  post- 
office  in  Preble  for  William  Ridgway,  Alex- 
ander Elliot,  Wm.  W.  Skeel,  Wm.  Parker, 
John    I.    Hamilton,  Chaunce)'    Cummings ; 


402 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


and  Joscpli  Crofoot  was  then  postmaster. 
In  1827  he  advertised  the  following  list  of 
letters  remaining  jn  that  office :  Abijah 
Durkee,  Barber  &  Tickner,  Ebenczer  Har- 
ris, Moses  H.  Green,  Garrett  Van  Hoesen, 
Samuel  Or\is,  Elias  Van  Cam]).  John  A. 
Johnson  and  Henry  Stebbins. 

Phineas  Burdick  was  postmaster  at  the 
time  of  the  removal  to  Preble  Corners  in 
1832,  and  was  the  first  postmaster  at  that 
village.  Matthias  Van  Hoesen  kept  it  for 
a  time  in  the  hotel,  beginning  in  the  spring 
of  1831;  then  Jabez  Phelps,  after  whom 
came  Andrew  Spence,  who  distributed 
mail  at  the  hotel,  both  before  and  after  it 
was  burned,  in  1840.  Judge  Phelps  took 
the  office  again  about  the  year  1848  and 
kept  it  until  the  beginning  of  Lincoln's  ad- 
ministration, in  1 86 1.  Chester  Markham 
succeeded,  remaining  in  the  office  until 
1875.  John  J.  Out  then  took  the  office 
and  is  the  present  incumbent ;  the  office  is 
kept  in  his  harness  shop. 

The  first  store  at  Preble  Corners  was  es- 
tablished b}'  John  Osgood,  in  1804.  He 
seems  to  have  traded  in  the  place  but  a 
short  time.  Other  transient  merchants  fol- 
lowed in  a  small  way,  until  the  }-ear  1830, 
when  Frank  Gilbert  established  a  perma- 
nent place  of  mercantile  trade  ;  he  was  fol- 
lowed by  several  successors ;  after  Frank- 
Gilbert  came  Wales  &  Kirsted  in  1830; 
Frost  &  Wood,  Frost  &  Gregg,  Geo.  El- 
more, Kinner  &  Norton,  Lewis  Carlisle,  J. 
W.  Roe,  Hobart  &  Cummings  and  the  pres- 
ent enterprising  merchants,  Conine  &  Cum- 
mings. 

The  new  and  complete  store  now  under 
the  successful  management  of  E.  M.  Van 
Hoesen  was  established  by  Markham  & 
Ferguson  in  1861  ;  the\-  were  succeeded  b_\- 
E.  M.  &  F.  T.  Van  Hoesen,  who  were  fol- 
lowed by  the  present  proprietor. 

The  drug  business  here  was  bet/un  dur- 


ing Fillmore's  adminstratiiin  b\-  W 


m  L. 


Barrett  ;  he  was  succeeded  by  A.  C.  Carr, 
following  whom  came  the  present  proprie- 
tor, J.  W.  Roe.  He  carries  a  stock  suffi- 
cient for  the  needs  of  the  place 

Zelotus  llannum  supplied  the  citizens 
with  furniture,  and  had  the  onl)-  stock  in 
that  line  in  the  town. 

James  Crofoot  was  the  first  shoemaker  in 
the  town.  He  located  on  lot  88.  The 
present  shoemaker  of  the  \  illage  is  Robert 
Conine. 

The  harness  and  saddlery  business  was 
begun  ])robabl\'  as  early  as  1835,  by  Isaac 
Bishop.  James  Plumb  worked  at  this  trade 
a  short  time,  and  J.  J.  Out,  a  skillful  nie- 
clianic,  has  done  business  in  this  line  since 
1847. 

The  first  manufacturing  ot  wagons  in  the 
town  was  carried  on  by  Daniel  Lamphire, 
who  located  on  lot  78,  where  he  remained 
for  twenty-five  years.  He  was  from  the 
town  of  Co.xsackie,  N.  Y., ;  he  did  custom 
work  wholl)-,  and  his  shop  finall_\-  went 
down.  In  1877  Richard  Bray  ton  and 
Fred.  Bennett  located  in  a  shop  on  lot  JJ, 
but  remained  only  a  \ear  or  two.  A.  H. 
Vandenberg  has  a  wagon  and  sleigh  re- 
pair shop  which  he  has  occupied  about 
fifteen  \-ears,  and  for  many  years  previous 
at  Baltimore.  His  father  was  Lambert 
Vandenberg,  who  was  an  early  resident  at 
the  Corners. 

The  first  blacksmith  shop  in  the  town  of 
Preble  was  established  by  Moses  Kent  on 
lot  57.  Martin  Phelps  ne.xt  located  on  lot 
"i-j .  in  1809.  James  Sager,  Isaac  Van  Bus- 
kirk,  Hosea  Bennett  and  Benjamin  Baker 
were  blacksmiths  in  an  earh'  da)-.  Albert 
W.  Morgan  is  now  the  leading  blacksmith 
in  the  place.  Jerome  Fulton  and  Harrison 
Kingsley  are  also  blacksmiths  doing  good 
business. 

The  first  ph)sician  in  the  town  of  Preble 
was  Robert  D.  Taggart,  who  located  on  lot 
59  in  the  north  part  oftlietown.      He  came 


Town  of  Preble. 


403 


about  the  year  1810  and  removed  to  Byron, 
Genesee  count}',  about  the  >'ear  1825.  Dr. 
Norris  located  on  lot  ]"/,  in  1812.  He  built 
one  of  the  earlier  frame  houses  in  the  vil 
lage.  Judge  Phelps  was,  during  the  first 
few  )'ears  of  his  stay  in  Baltimore,  a  prac- 
ticing physician;  but  he  subsequentlj' 
turned  his  attention  to  politics,  as  before 
stated.  Dr.  Geo.  W.  Bradford  located  at 
Preble  in  1820.  He  was  a  native  of  Ot- 
sego county,  and  after  receiving  an  academic 
education,  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Thos. 
Fuller,  of  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.  ;  he  was  li- 
censed in  1820,  b)"  the  Otsego  Medical  As- 
sociation, and  during  the  same  year  came 
to  Preble.  He  remained  here  but  a  short 
time,  however,  and  then  removed  to  Homer. 
Further  mention  of  Dr.  Bradford's  eminent 
career  will  be  found  in  the  histor}'  of  the 
County  Medical  Society. 

Dr.  Phineas  H.  Burdick  settled  in  the 
town  in  1834,  locating  at  Preble  Corners. 
He  received  an  academic  education  and  be- 
gan the  study  of  medicine  in  1823,  with  Dr. 
Hubbard  Smith,  of  De  Ruvter,  and  in  the  of 
fice  of  Dr.  Jehiel  Stearns,  of  Pompe\-.  He 
attended  lectures  at  Castleton,  Vermont,  in 
1826,  and  was  licensed  by  the  Medical  So- 
ciety of  Onondaga  county  in  1828,  begin- 
ning practice  in  Scott  the  same  year.  In 
1834  he  remo\'ed  to  Preble,  where  he  prac- 
ticed successful!)"  man)'  years  until  his 
death.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  M.  D. 
by  the  State  Medical  Society  and  became 
a  permanent  member  of  that  bod)'  in  1853. 
Dr.  Burdick  was  highly  esteemed,  both  as 
a  physician  and  a  man.  Dr.  D.  W.  Burdick, 
of  Homer,  is  his  son. 

The  present  physicians  of  Preble  are  Dr. 
Herman  D.  Hunt,  who  came  to  the  place 
in  1880,  and  H.  Johnson,  who  located  here 
in  1 88 1.  The  former  is  allopathic  and  the 
latter  homeopathic. 

Matthias  Van  Hoesen  was  the  first  prac- 
ticing law)-er  in  the  town.      He   was  never 


admitted  to  the  bar,  but  became  one  of  the 
most  successful  lawyers  in  the  county  in 
justice's  court,  in  minor  cases.  He  is  still 
living  in  Preble  at  the  age  of  seventy-eight 
years,  possesses  a  clear  brain,  excellent 
judgment,  and  powers  of  concentration  of 
thought  that  are  unusual.  John  F.  Van 
Hoesen,  his  son,  born  Ma)'  iith.  1833  be- 
gan   the   practice   of  the  law    in    Preble    in 

1856,  but  in  1859  removed  to  Cortlandville, 
where  he  died  in  i860.  He  studied  with 
Judge  Kingsley  and  Major  Hiram  Crandall, 
and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  Ala)-,  1856, 
coming  directl)'  to  Preble  Corners.  In  the 
month  of  October  following  he  removed  to 
Minnesota,  landing  at  Hastings  a  flourish- 
ing city  on  the  Mississippi,  where  he  prac- 
ticed his  profession  to  some  extent  and  also 
engaged  in  land  speculation,  by  which  he 
realized  a  considerable  fortune.  Mr.  Van 
Hoesen    finally  retured    to   Preble  in   May, 

1857,  where  he  resumed  practice,  securing 
a"  good  business,  which  continued  mitil  his 
removal  to  Cortland  two  )'ears  later. 

Churches.  —  Of  the  origin  and  earh'  his- 
tor)-  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Society  in 
Preble,  nothing  more  than  what  follows  is 
now  definitely  known  :  On  the  first  Mon- 
day in  May,  1 824,  the  male  members  of  the 
first  M.  F2.  Church  Society  of  the  j:own  met 
according  to  previous  notice  in  order  to  in- 
corporate. James  Selkrig  was  called  to  the 
chair  and  Jabez  B.  Phelps  was  appointed 
secretary.  The  society  was  then  organized 
on  a  motion.  James  Selkrig  and  Frederick- 
Wilcox  were  appointed  returning  officers; 
and  James  Selkrig,  Almon  Tickner  and 
Benjamin  Le  Ro)-  were  appointed  trustees. 

It  was  resolved  at  this  meeting  that  the 
corporate  seal  of  this  societ)'  be  a  cross.  It 
was  also  decided  that  the  annual  meetings 
should  thereafter  be  held  on  the  first  Mon- 
day of  each  year.  The  M.  E.  Church  edi- 
fice was  begun  in  the  year  1820  ;  was  fin- 
ished   in  1824  and   dedicated   b)-  the    Rev. 


404 


lisroKv  OF  C(jRTi.AN'i)  County. 


Seth  Mattison  in  tlic  fall  nf  the  last  men- 
tioned \-car.  Alterations  were  made  in  the 
pulpit  and  stairs  in  1838,  and  other  repairs 
were  made  and  a  bell  procured  in  1845. 
In  1859  the  church  buildinsij  was  moved 
eastward  and  about  tweKe  feet  added  to  its 
western  end  ;  the  audience  room  was  newly 
seated  and  the  exterior  painted,  involving 
an  expense  of  about  $1,400. 

The  membership  of  this  society  is  at  the 
present  time  (1884)  nearly  one  hundred. 
The  Rev.  W.  H.  York  took  charge  of  the 
church  in  1883.  The  trustees  are  Robert 
Van  Buskirk,  Richard  Scjuires,  Seth  Hobart. 
The  stewards  are  John  Manchester,  Rob- 
ert Van  Buskirk,  Seth  Hobart  and  Abram 
Manchester. 

Robert  Van  Buskirk  is  Sabbath  school 
superintendent. 

The  Baptist  Association  was  organized 
into  a  society  under  the  direction  of  Elder 
Abbott  in  a  very  early  day  ;  but  the  date 
is  not  now  available.  The  original  number 
of  the  members  was  fourteen.  The  church 
seems  to  have  prospered  for  a  time,  but  has 
ceased  to  e.xist. 

On  the  27th  of  August,  1804,  a  church 
of  eleven  members  was  organized  by  two 
missionaries  named  Theodore  Hinsdale  and 
Joel  Hayes,  from  the  Hampshire  Missionary 
Societv'  of  Connecticut.  It  was  at  first 
called  the  Congregational  Church  of  TuUy; 
but  subsequently  took  the  name  of  the  F"irst 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Preble.  During 
the  years  of  its  existence  it  was  connected 
with  the  middle  association,  which  was  after- 
ward dissolved,  when  tiic  church  was  as- 
signed to  the  care  of  the  Onondaga  Pres- 
bytery, and  subsequenth-  to  the  Cortland 
Presbj'ter}'.      The  church  edifice  was  erect- 


ed ,it   Preble  Center,    but    was   removed    to 
the  Corners  in  1840. 

The  first  pastor  of  this  church    was   the 
Re\'.    Matthew    Harrison,    who    began    his 
work  in  the  \-ear  1812  and  continued   until 
1822,  when  he   was  dismissed.     The   Rev. 
Enoch  Bouton  then  acted  as  stated  suppl)' 
until  1824,  and  following  him  the  two  suc- 
ceeding  years    Re\-.    L     Weld   preaclied  to 
the  congregation  one-half  of  the  time.    Rev. 
Abner    P.    Clark    followed    him,    being    in- 
stalled as  pastor  in  1827,  in  which  capacity 
he  acted  during  the    next    six    years.      The 
Rev.    Gardner    K.    Clark    was    installed    in 
1833  and  continued    his   labors   during  six 
years.      After   this    time    the   congregation 
was  supplied  by  Rev.    Mr.   Jones  for   a  few 
months,  and  then  by  Rev.  B.  T.  Foltse  two 
years.      Re\-.  Elliott  H.    Payson    began   his 
labors  here  in  1840.      In    1842    he   was   in- 
stalled  as   pastor   and    dismissed    in     1844. 
At  this  time  the  societ\-  numbered  over  one 
hundretl  members.      In   1841  a  large   num- 
ber of  the   members  separated  themselves 
from  the  church    and   organized    a   society 
called  the  First  F"ree  Church  of  Preble.      At 
the  time  of  this  division    the    building    was 
removed    to    Preble    Corners.       Whatever 
may  have  been  the  disturbing  element,  the 
results   ha\'e    been    to   diminish  the  size  of 
the  societ)-,  w  hich  now   numbers  only  about 
one    hundred    members.      The  Rev.  W.  C. 
McBeth    took    charge    of  the  societ)-  April 
8th,  18S3,  and  served  nine  months.      There 
is,  at  the   present   time    (1884),    no   pastor. 
The  elders  are  Nicholas  Van  Hoesen,  Harry 
Cunimings.    Lewis    P"rederick,    Clark    \'an 
Hoesen   and   Abram   Se\-erson.      The  trus- 
tees   are    John     Haviland,     Nicholas     \'an 
Hoesen  and  Clark  Van  Hoesen. 


Town  of  Scott. 


40s 


CHAPTER  XXVIl. 


UISTOKV  OF  THE  TOWN  OF  SCOTT. 


THE  town  of  Scott  lies  in  the  extreme 
northwest  part  of  Cortland  county  and 
comprises  a  portion  of  the  old  niilitar\-  town- 
ship No.  14  of  Tully.  It  was  formed  from 
the  town  of  Preble  on  the  14th  of  April, 
181  5,  and  named  in  honor  of  Gen.  Winfield 
Scott.  Its  surface  is  chicfl\-  an  upland, 
broken  b)-  two  deep  and  narrow  valleys, 
which  extend  north  and  south  through  the 
town.  The  declivities  of  the  hills  are  steep 
and  in  many  places  precipitous.      . 

The  town  is  drained  in  the  eastern  \'alley 
by  Cold  brook,  and  F"actor\-  brook  and 
Skaneateles  inlet  flow  through  the  western 
valle)-.  These  streams  not  only  drain  the 
town,  but  furnish  excellent  water  power. 
Skaneateles  lake  borders  on  the  northwest 
corner  of  the  town. 

The  soil  is  a  sand}-  and  gravelly  loam, 
and  the  town  embraces  many  most  excel- 
lent farms.  It  is  not,  howc\'er,  a  grain- 
growing  town,  the  land  being  generally 
better  adapted  to  grazing,  and  the  farmers 
are,  in  later  years,  turning  their  attention 
largely  to  dairying. 

There  is  but  one  village  in  the  town  of 
Scott ;  it  is  called  Scott  Center,  and  con- 
tains about  three  hundred  inhabitants.  East 
Scott  is  a  hamlet. 

The  first  permanent  settlement  was  made 
in  the  town  in  1799.  There  had,  however, 
been  a  rude  liuntcr  within  its  boundaries 
as  early  as  1795.  He  erected  a  bark 
shanty  and  lived  by  hunting,  an  employ- 
ment in  which  he  was  quite  successful.  He 
spent  about  a  year  and  a  half  in  the  solitude 
of  this  unbroken  wilderness,  when  he  was 
joined  by  a  half-breed  Indian,  who  is  said 
to  have  come  from  Canada,  and  in  a  fev\- 
months  afterward    thev    gathered    up  their 


peltry  and  made  their  way  to  a  French 
trading-post,  then  established  near  Whites- 
town,  where  they  sold  out  with  a  good 
profit.  Dividing  their  effects  they  sought 
a  retreat  in  the  wilderness  to  the  far  West. 
The  birth-place  and  other  data  in  regard 
to  this  hunter  arc  not  known  ;  though  it 
was  apparent  that  he  was  of  French  ex- 
traction. ' 

During  the  j'car  1 799  several  settlements 
were  made  in  Scott.  Peleg  Babcock,  ac- 
companied by  his  brothers,  Solomon  and 
Asa  Howard,  came  in  from  Leyden,  Mass., 
and  selected  locations.  Peleg  settled  on 
the  south  part  of  lot  82.  Solomon  located 
on  the  northwest  part  of  the  same  lot,  while 
Howard  took  up  his  abode  a  little  to  the 
east  of  his  brother  Solomon.  About  the 
same  time  George  Denison,  from  Vermont, 
pitched  his  tent  on  the  west  part  of  the 
same  lot,  making  the  fourth  settler  on  lot 
82.  Cornish  Messenger  and  Daniel  Jake- 
way  came  in  from  De  Ruyter  in    1800  and 

I  An    Indian   of  the    "  Leni  "    tribe,   from  whom    we 
gather  these  facts  and  who  occasionally  visits  the  Onei- 
das,  relates  many  characteristic  anecdotes  touching  this 
singularly  strange  yet  interesting  original.     Vears  after 
he  was  seen  standing  upon  the  bank  of  the  great  father 
of  waters  —  the  majestic  Mississippi.     There  was  heard 
a  shriek,  a  plunge,  the  waters  closed  over  the  lone  hunter 
and  all  that  was  mortal  had  disappeared  forever.     When 
the  horror-stricken   Indian,  who  was  \\  ith  him  and  had 
watched  his  movements,  called  for  the  white  man  of  the 
woods,  the  evil   genius   that   had   wrecked   his  hopes  in 
early  life  and  made  him  a  wanderer,  answered  :  — 
"  Where  the  dark  tide  runs  strongest. 
The  cliff  rises  steep  ; 
Where  the  wild  waters  eddy, 
I  have  rocked  him  to  sleep. 

"  His  sleep  is  so  strong. 

That  the  rush  of  the  stream 
When  the  wild  winds  are  abroad, 
Cannot  waken  his  dream." 

—  C.odnwiN's  History. 


4o6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


settled  on  lot  92.      In  1801  Maxoii  Babcock  [ 
came    in    from    Leyden  and  located  on  the  , 
northeast     corner    of    lot     82.       Ghershon   I 
Richardson  and  his  two  sons-in-law,  by  the  | 
name  of  Clark,  came  from    Pompey,  Onon- 
daga   county,   and   located    on    lot  71.      In 
1802    Henry   Biirdick,   a    native  of  Rhode 
Island,  migrated  from   Colerain,  Mass.,  and   j 
located  on  lot  72.     He  purchased  originally,   j 
in  compan)-  with  John  Babcock,  109  acres,   j 
He  was  an    active  and   prominent   pioneer  1 
in    his    localit}'.       Jared    Babcock    came    in 
during  the  j-ear  1804  and  spent  about  three 
or  four  years.      In  1809  he  was  engaged  in   | 
mercantile  trade  in  Spafford,  being  the  first  j 
merchant  in   that  place.      He  subsequently 
removed  to  Homer. 

John  Gillet,  from  Norfolk,  Connecticut, 
located  during  the  same  \-ear  (1805),  but 
did  not  purchase  until  1807  or  1808,  when  I 
lie  selected  100  acres  on  lot  84.  He  filled 
the  office  of  justice  of  the  peace  for  a  period 
of  twenty  years ;  that  of  supervisor  and 
other  town  offices  at  various  times ;  he  was 
associate  judge  of  the  county  court  for  fif- 
teen successive  years  and  also  member  of 
the  Legislature  and  presidential  elector. 

Jacob  Smith,  from  Delphi,  located  in 
1806  on  lot  84;  his  original  purchase  was 
fifty  acres  ;  he,  however,  made  subsequent 
additions  until  he  had  a  farm  of  one  hun- 
dred and  fi\'c  acres. 

In  1806  Daniel  Doublcday  came  from 
Lebanon,  Connecticut,  and  located  in  the 
town  of  Homer.  In  1809  he  removed  to 
Scott  and  settled  on  lot  105.  He  reared  a 
respectable  family,  accumulated  propcrt}' 
and  was  a  useful  citizen. 

In  1805  Elisha  Sabins  and  John  Babcock 
cut  and  cleared  a  road  from  Scott  Corners 
(then  called  Babcock's  Corners)  to  Spafford 
Corners.  They  transported  their  goods  to 
their  new  home  on  sleds  and  found  it  a  hard 
journey.  The  next  year  Isaac  Hall,  of  the 
latter   place,  passed    over   the  road    with    a 


wagon,  and  after  purchasing  a  load  of  lum- 
ber at  Babcock's  Settlement,  put  it  on    his 
I  wagon  and  drew  it  to  iiis  home  in  Spafford. 
I       As  an  indication  of  what  life  in  Scott  was 
at   this   earl}'  period,  it   used    to  be    related 
by  Solomon   Babcock   that   in  the    summer 
of  1799  he  was  in  the  habit  of  making  fre- 
j  quent   \'isits  to  his  brother's   corn-field,  ac- 
j  companied  by  a  small  dog,  for  the  purpose 
j  of  driving  awaj-  the  bears,  they  being  very 
I  troublesome    and    destructive    to   the   corn 
crop.      It  was  a  common  occurrence  to  find 
half  a  dozen   in  the    field  at  a  time,  and    to 
I  him  it  was  amusing  to  see  them  hasten  off 
j  at  the  bark  of  the  harmless  dog.      An  inci- 
I  dent  denoting  the  plentifulness  of  game  was 
also  related  by  Mr.  Babcock.      Early  in  the 
month  of  March  he   went  into  the    woods 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  birch  broom- 
I  stick.     The  snow  was  about  three  feet  deep 
,  and  the   crust   sufficiently  strong   to  bear  a 
man's   weight.      A    fierce   and   well-trained 
dog   belonging  to   his  brother   Peleg   bore 
him  company,  and  before    the  trunk  of  the 
little  sapling  was  secured,  he  had   actually 
killed    se\-en   deer.      The  small    feet   of  the 
animals,  as  is  well  known  to  hunters,  would 
push    through    the   snow   crust,   making    it 
impossible  for  them  to  run  with  any  speed. 
Another  hunting  incident  which  occurred 
in  this  town  is  of  sufficient  interest  for  these 
pages.     Three    persons  started    out   in  the 
i  month  of  March,   1799,  in  pursuit  of  bears, 
which    had    been    unusually  numerous   and 
bold  during  that  season.      One   of  the  men 
soon  gave  out   and  returned,  but  the    other 
two  continued  in    pursuit,  the  trail    leading 
in  the    direction    of   Skaneateles   lake;   but 
the  snow  being  very  deep,  the  others  finally 
gave  up  and   concluded  to  return    home  by 
a  circuitous   route,  in  the  hope   of  meeting 
with  an  old  bear  which  had  wintered  within 
a  mile  of  their  home.      As  they  neared  the 
spot  the  bear  was  discovered.      Both  hunt- 
ers   discharged    their    guns,    but    onl\-    sue- 


Town  of  Scott. 


407 


ceeded  in  wounding  the  animal.  He  hastily 
left  for  other  quarters,  followed  by  his  pur- 
suers, who.  after  camping  out  for  the  night 
near  Skaneateles  lake,  drove  him  in  a  clear- 
ing eight  miles  from  home,  in  .Sempronius, 
where  they  dispatched  him  and  took  off  his 
hide,  out  of  which  they  made  each  of  them  a 
cap,  as  they  had  lost  theirs  the  day  before, 
and  returned  home. 

The  first  ordained  preacher  in  the  town 
of  Scott  was  Elder  Town.  The  first  per- 
sons baptized  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Solomon 
Babcock,  the  former  in  Homer. 

The  first  merchant  was  Nathan  Babcock. 

The  first  inn-keeper  was  James  tiabcock. 
The  first  postmaster,  John  Gillet.  The  first 
marriage,  Solomon  Babcock  to  Amj-  Mor- 
gan. Their  marriage  was  solemnized  in 
the  fall  of  1802.  There  being  no  author- 
ized person  at  hand  to  perform  the  cere- 
mony, the  parties  went  to  Homer  on  horse- 
back, and  after  attending  cliurch  went  to 
'Squire  Bishop's,  on  East  Hill,  where  they 
were  wed. 

The  first  child  born  in  Scott  was  Harriet 
Babcock.  The  first  death  was  an  infant 
daughter  of  Peleg  Babcock. 

Public  religious  worship  began  about  the 
year  1806  or  '07.  The  Close  Communion 
Baptists,  the  Se\enth-Day  Baptists,  the 
Presbjterians  and  the  Methodists,  each 
formed  prosperous  societies. 

The  first  postmaster  of  East  Scott,  was 
Alvan  Kellogg,  the  cloth  manufacturer  and 
dresser  with  whom  President  Millard  Fill- 
more learned  his  trade. 

The  first  .saw-mill  in  the  town  of  Scott 
was  erected  as  early  as  the  year  1804,  b)- 
Henry  Burdick ;  it  stood  on  Skaneateles 
inlet  where  A.  L.  Whiting's  flax-mill  is  at 
present  located.  He  was  an  enterprising 
Rhode  Islander,  who  preceded  his  father 
from  Massachusetts  to  this  town  in  1802. 
Henry  Burdick,  sen.,  came  a  year  or  so 
afterward.     The  water  pri\-ilege  was  on  lot 


72,  and  owned  at  a  later  period  by  George 
S.  Green.  Henry  Burdick  sold  out  his  farm, 
originally  purchased  in  i8o2,  to  his  father 
and  removed  to  where  Henry  L.  Burdick 
now  lives.  The  saw- mill,  soon  after  its 
erection,  passed  into  possession  of  Nehe- 
miah  Brown,  who  took  it  between  the  years 
1 8 10  and  1812;  he  was  a  son-in-law  of 
Esquire  Paul  Babcock.  The  latter  was  a 
relative  of  Henry  Babcock.  Comfort 
Brown  was  the  next  owner  of  the  mill  and 
utilized  this  valuable  water  privilege  until 
the  year  1858.  James  Skillie  and  Dr. 
Babcock  each  also  had  possession  of  it  for 
a  short  time;  but  during  the  year  1863  A. 
1  L.  Whiting  bought  the  property- and  turned 
it  into  a  flax-mill.  He  used  it  first  for 
dressing  fla.x,  and  subsequently  for  manu- 
facturing tow  for  upholstering  purposes. 
The  mill  is  still  in  use. 

John    Gillett,  before   alluded   to,   bought 
1  one   hundred   acres   of  land   on    lot   84,  in 
;   1807,  and  built  the  mill  there  two  or  three 
years    later.      Mr.     Gillett    was    an    active, 
prosperous  and  prominent  man.     J.  H.  Gil- 
I  lett  now  owns  the    mill.      About   the   year 
j   1835  Harlow  Gillett,  only  son  of  John  Gil- 
lett, built  a  foundry,   which    was   run    for  a 
number  of  years  and   burned.      Upon   the 
site    now    stands  a    workshop,    owned   and 
operated    by    his    sons,    who    are    skillful 
mechanics. 

Alvan  Kellogg,  the  first  postmaster  of 
East  Scott,  came  to  the  town  in  1805,  and 
built  a  saw-mill  within  the  next  few  years. 
His  son,  Silas  Kellogg,  now  owns  the  old 
homestead,  and  Lewis  Hazard  and  Ham- 
ilton Whitney  the  saw-mill.  A  prior  owner 
was  James  Bacon,  who  placed  flax  machin- 
ery in  the  mill  in  1878,  and  the  present 
I  firm  built  a  flax  store-house  there  more 
recently. 

Messenger  &  Kenyon  built  a  grist-mill 
on  the  site  now  owned  by  George  W. 
Southwick,  in    181 7,  and    sold  it  to  Samuel 


408 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Hardy  about  the  year  1S32;  he  rebuilt 
the  structure  ahnost  entirely.  The  mill 
then  passed  successively  through  the  hands 
of  the  following  persons :  Case  &  Melville, 
George  W.  Southwick,  Sj'lvanus  Grout, 
George  W.  Southwick,  Mr.  Meade.  Ani- 
meron  &  Ellis  and  George  W.  Southwick  ; 
the  latter  has  also  operated  a  shingle- mill 
in  connection  with  the  grist-mill. 

About  the  year  1828  or  1829  Luke  Bab- 
cock  built  a  grist-mill  two  and  a  half 
stories  high,  a  short  distance  below  the 
Messenger  mill,  in  which  were  two  runs  of 
stone.  In  the  ownership  of  this  mill  he 
was  succeeded  by  Lucius  Dyer,  Edwin 
Norton,  Raymond  P.  Babcock  (who  made 
general  repairs  and  put  in  a  new  wheel), 
Isaac  Bellows,  R.  P.  Babcock,  J.  L.  &  L. 
H.  Comstock,  and  Jolin  B.  Cottrell,  the 
present  owner.  The  mill  is  located  about 
a  mile  from  Scott  Center. 

Three-fourths  of  a  mile  below  the  Cot- 
trell mill  is  the  frame  of  an  old  flax-mill  that 
was  put  in  operation  at  an  early  da)-  by  the 
West  famil}-.  who  ran  it  until  about  the 
year  1865.  The  propert}"  is  still  owned 
by  members  of  the  famil\-.  but  the  mill  is 
not  used  as  such. 

Near  the  old  saw-mill  built  b\-  Jonathan 
Scott  and  about  opposite  to  it,  is  the  oil- 
mill  built  b)'  him.  The  saw-mill  was 
erected  in  1828  and  the  oil- mill  in  1830. 
The  latter  has  alwa\'s  been  kept  in  the 
hands  of  the  Scott  fainily,  being  now  owned 
and  operated  by  Ransom  Scott.  The  site 
of  the  old  saw-mill  now  belongs  to  Esquire 
Hunt.  A  fresliet  of  twent\^  )-ears  ago  car- 
ried off  the  saw-mill,  and  three  thousand 
bushels  of  flax  seed. 

Ransom  Scott  built  a  distillery  in  the 
\'icinity  of  these  mills  during  the  War  of 
the  Rebellion.      It  was  afterward  burned. 

In  1880  a  saw- mill  was  built  by  Samuel 
Scott  a  mile  below  the  oil-mill,  which  he 
still  owns.      On   the   east   shore  at  the  head 


of  the  lake  Greeley  Cady  and  brothers 
built  a  steam  saw-mill  in  1883,  making  the 
last  of  the  numerous  mills  on  this  stream, 
in  that  direction  ;  but  there  are  others  on 
the  same  stream  northward  from  Scott 
Center.  A.  Babcock  built  one  of  these  in 
1833  ;  it  is  now  owned  by  Childs  &  Haz- 
ard, who  put  in  flax  machinerj-  soon  after 
1880.  It  is  now  a  combination  of  a  cir- 
cular saw-mill,  a  flax-mill  and  a  wagon 
shop. 

The  Townsley  saw-mill,  in  the  \icinit)'  of 
East  Scott,  was  built  b}-  Henry  Townsley, 

I  an  old  resident  of  the  place,  about  1825. 
This  was  afterward  converted  into  a  grist- 
mill and  is  now  used  for  grinding  coarse 
products. 

The     tanning     business     in     Scott     was 

j  probably  begun  in  an  early  period  by  a 
Mr.  Dowd,  a  shoemaker,  who  had  in  con- 
nection with  his  shop  a  few  vats  for  curing 
hides.  Eastman  &  Lawrence  established  a 
tannery  about    the    year    1830,  on  a  much 

1  more  extensive  scale. 

I  Prior  to  this  date,  B.  A.  Denison  carried 
on  the  business  of  carding  and  fulling  cloth. 
He  died  in  1828. 

P'rom  the  period  of  1855  to  i860  and 
down  to  the  present  time  the  farmers  of 
Scott  have  earned  an  excellent  reputation 
for  the  qualit}-,  as  well  as  the  quantity  of 
their  dair\-  products.     The    grass    lands  of 

,  the  town    are    unexcelled    and    b\-  the  im- 

i  pro\ed  methods  of  late  years,  with  which 
the  farmers  have  made  themselves  familiar, 
a  product  that  enjoys  a  first  class  reputation 
is  made.  The  cheese  factor}-,  located  just 
north  of  Scott  Center,  was  formerl)-  owned 
and  operated  \ery  successfully  b\'  John  B. 
Cottrell  &  Son. 

The  first  annual  town  meeting  of  Scott 
was  held  at  the  school-house  near  Paul  Bab- 
cock's,  according  to  appointment,  on  Tues- 
day, March  5th,  18 16,  and  the  following 
business  was  transacted  :  — 


Town  of  Scott. 


409 


Peleg  Babcock  was  chosen  supervisor  of 
the  town,  and  David   Harris,  town  clerk. 

Other  officers  were  Paul  Babcock,  Hcnr\- 
Babcock  and  Holly  Maxson,  assessors. 

George  Frink,  Ansel  Wilcox  and  Henry 
Burdick,  commissioners  of  highways. 

George  Frink  and  Benjamin  Pelton,  poor 
masters. 

Loring  Boies,  constable  and  collector. 

Paul  Babcock,  Benjamin  Pelton  and  Da- 
vid Harris,  commissioners  of  public  mone\-. 

Paul  Babcock,  Ezra  Babcock  and  Jabez 
Barber,  school  commissioners. 

John  Gillett,  Ephraim  Babcock  and  Da- 
\'id  Harris,  school  inspectors. 

It  was  \oted  at  this  meeting  that  $25  be 
raised  for  the  support  of  the  poor. 

Down  to  the  year  i860  peace  reigned 
in  the  town  of  Scott,  in  common  with  the 
remainder  of  the  count)-.  The  farmers  la- 
bored diligently  and  eftectiveK^  for  the  clear- 
ing of  their  lands,  and  though  isolated  en- 
tircl)'  from  railroad  communication  with 
other  portions  of  the  count}-  and  State, 
prosperity  prevailed  and  the  inhabitants 
were  contented.  Schools  multiplied  and 
the  youth  of  the  town  grew  up  in  an  at- 
mosphere of  intelligence.  W'hen  the  first 
gun  in  the  great  Rebellion  was  fired,  it 
found  the  people  of  this  town  imbued  with 
such  patriotism,  that  her  young  men  went 
forth  to  aid  in  sustaining  the  go\-ernment  as 
freely  as  from  an\-  other  portion  of  the 
county,  while  her  treasure  was  liberally  de- 
voted to  the  payment  of  such  bounties  as 
were  deemed  advisable  b)'  the  county  au- 
thorities. Following  is  a  list  of  the  enlist- 
ments from  this  town  of  all  men  w'fio  were 
paid  bounties :  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  k'ebruar}-  and 
March,  1864.  Bounty,  $300.  Total,  $9,- 
300.  —  Oren  D.  Wheeler,  Miles  G.  Frisbic, 
Jonathan  Scott,  David  Scott,  Clark  C.  Silen- 
cer, Edwin  P.  Burdick,  William  II.  Brown, 
Ambrose    H.    Mabie,    Henry    C.    Babcock, 


Francis  E.  Barber,  Andrew  S.  Barber,  Wil- 
liam Spencer,  Philo  Fuller,  Andrew  D.  Col- 
lins, Edmund  D.  Crosby,  James  B.  Rich- 
ardson, Sidney  Harrington,  Washington  B. 
Fisk,  William  A.  Picket,  Charles  Barnum, 
Lucius  K.  Robinson,  Janna  P.  Northaway, 
Lorenzo  D.  Whiting,  Stennett  C.  Stillman, 
John  T.  Pratt,  Charles  R.  Whiting,  Thomas 
Blundcn,  John  Wagner,  William  Stringham, 
James  B.  Clark,  James  Fenton. 

Call  of  July  I  8th,  1864.  Bount\-  $1,000. 
Total,  $6,000.  Brokerage,  $150. — James 
R.  Corl,  Nathan  M.  Bennett,  Edwin  E. 
Dunn,  Albert  G.  Geutclieous,  William  B. 
Maxson,  Daniel  B.  Pender. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bounty 
$600.  Total,  $9,600.  Brokerage,  $240. 
—  John  Brittle,  James  Gordon,  Patrick  J. 
Brady,  Thomas  Dale}-,  Thomas  Murphy, 
John  Adams,  Nicholas  Haler,  Henry  Kraft, 
Thomas  TuU}-,  William  Wolfer,  Jonathan 
Francis,  Adam  Sherr,  Edward  S.  Anable, 
|ohn  Breman,  John  Carlton,  Joseph  Suger. 

Recapitulation. —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  for  October  17th,  1863,  F"ebruar\^  and 
March,  1864,  $9,300.  Paid  for  filling  quota, 
call  July  1 8th,  1864,  $6,150.  Paid  for  fill- 
ing quota,  call  December  19th,  1864,  $2,- 
640.      Grand  total,  $18,090. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  of  the  town,  the  supervisor's 
name  in  each  case  preceding  that  of  the 
clerk  :  — 

From  1825  to  1827,  inclusive,  Aaron 
Brown,  Ezekiel  Potter;  1828,  Aaron  Brown, 
P.  Hoadley;  1829-30,  Aaron  Brown,  G.  S. 
Green;  1831,  Aaron  Brown,  Phineas  H. 
Burdick;  1832-33,  Aaron  Brown,  G.  S. 
Green;  1834-35,  Alvan  Kellogg,  John 
Barber;  1836,  Alvan  Kellogg,  Alonzo  D. 
C.  Barber;  1837-38,  Alvan  Kellogg,  Sim- 
eon M.  Babcock;  1839,  John  Barber,  Alon- 
zo C.  Barber;  1840,  Anson  L.  Whiting, 
Jerome  K.  Babcock;  1841,  Geo.  M.  Niles, 
J.    K.    Babcock;    1842,    George'  M.    Niles, 


4IO 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Thomas  Hunt;  1843,  N.  Salisbury,  Am- 
brose Higgins;  1844-45,  Alvan  Kellogg, 
;    1846,    Alvan    Kellogg,    A.    L. 


Whiting;    1847,  l^-i'isom  Scott,  Wil 


M. 


Burdick;  1848,  Chauncey  VV.  Bierce,  A. 
D.  C.  Barber;  1849—50,  Isaac  S.  Jackson, 
Sanford  D.  Kinney;  185  i,  Joseph  Atwater, 
A.  L.  Whiting;  1852,  A.  W.  Clark,  Joseph 
Atwater;  1853,  Joseph  Atwater,  A.  L. 
\\'hiting;  1854,  A.  W.  Clark,  Samuel  A. 
Childs;  1855-56,  Hammond  A.  Cottrell, 
John  J.  Wagner;  1857—58,  Samuel  A. 
Childs,  William  A.  Alvord;  1859-60,*  Ed- 
mund Spencer,  Peter  Knapp;  1861,  Chaun- 
ce\-  W.  Bierce,  John  K.  Chandler;  1862, 
S.  A.  Knapp,  P.  Childs;  1863-64,  Cyrus 
Kellogg,  Peter  Knapp;  1865,  Jeremiah  G. 
Alvord,  Peter  Knapp;  1866,  S.  A.  Childs, 
Fenn  G.  Alvord;  1867,  Raymond  P.  Bab- 
cock,  F"rank  D.  Babcock;  1868,  Isaac  M. 
Bellows,  F.  A.  Babcock;  1869-70,  S.  A. 
Childs,  S.  D.  Babcock;  1871-72,  Phineas 
Hutchins,  Wm.  A.  Morgan;  [873,  Dwight 
K.  Cutler,  W.  A.  Morgan;  1874,  Chauncey 
W.  Bierce,  W.  A.  Morgan;  1875,  Phineas 
Hutchins,  W.  A.  Morgan;  1876,  John  D. 
Cottrell,  W^  D.  Morgan;  1877,  S.  A.  Childs, 
W.  H.  Morgan;  1S78-79,  G.  D.  Crosley, 
W.  H.  Morgan;  1880,  Dwight  K.  Cutler, 
W.  H.  Morgan;  1881,  William  A.  Niver,' 
W.  H.  Morgan;  1882-83,  W.  H.  Morgan, 
S.  C.  Stillman. 

The  present  town  officers  for  the  town 
of  Scott  are  :  — 

Supervisor — W.  H.  ?kIorgan. 

Town  clerk  —  S.  C.  Stillman. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  Byron  L.  Barber, 
Wm.  D.  Hunt.  G.  F.  Barber. 

Commissioner  of  highways  —  Norman  E. 
Black. 

Assessors  —  Sylvanus  A.  Churchill.  Jared 
Babcock,  Miles  G.  Frisbie. 

Overseer  of  the  poor — D.  D.  L.  Bur- 
dick. 

Collector  —  Elbert  E.  Barker. 


Auditors — Elias  L.  Frisbie,  Henr\'  Un- 
derwood, Fenn  G.  Alvord. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  \\'.  C.  Bockes, 
James  Taft,  I'.dward  Slocum,  Edwin  P. 
Burdick,  John  Knight,  J.  B.  Underwood. 

Game  constable — H.  D.  Babcock. 

Excise  commissioner  —  Lewis  S.  Hazard. 

SCOTT  CENTER. 

The  \illage  of  Scott  (or  Scott  Center)  is 
situated  near  the  center  of  the  town  and 
contains  a  population  of  about  three  hun- 
dred. It  has  a  hotel,  three  stores,  two 
churches  and  one  or  two  shops. 

The  first  merchant  in  the  place  was  Na- 
than Babcock,  who  had  a  store  on  the 
grounds  now  occupied  by  the  present  hotel 
building.  He  was,  during  a  part  of  his 
sta\-  in  the  village,  engaged  in  teaching  a 
day  school. 

In  1828  George  F.  Green  located  in  the 
place  and  built  the  original  part  of  the 
present  hotel  building  and  also  the  house 
on  the  opposite  corner  now  owned  and  oc- 
cupied by  his  son.  After  building  the  store 
he  occupied  it  as  a  merchant  until  1840  or 
1 84 1.  He  came  from  De  Ru\ter  to  this 
place  in  1824. 

\\  illiam  Ahord  was  an  earlj-  trader  and 
bought  out  Mr.  Green.  Alvord  was  in 
business  but  about  fourteen  years.  Suc- 
ceeding came  Lewis  &  Cottrell,  and  in  1844 
L.  .\.  Whiting  also  began  trading  in  the 
village,  continuing  for  sixteen  years.  He 
was  burned  out  in  the  destructive  fire  of 
1858. 

As  early  as  the  year  1833  George  Ross 
built  the  store  just  north  of  the  present 
post-office  and  went  into  business  with 
George  Atwater.  On  the  first  of  April, 
1836,  Wm.  AKord  succeeded  and  traded 
five  years  at  that  stand,  finally  selling  out 
to  P.  H.  Van  Schaick.  Following  came 
Welch  &  Howells,  Dr.  Ira  Babcock,  Martin 
Knapp.  Miles  Bierce,  Sanford  Kinney,  Wm. 


Town  of  Scott. 


411 


H.  Alvord,  and  Philander  Knight,  wlio 
owned  the  store  in  1858,  wlien  it  was 
burned. 

The  store  building  on  the  corner,  now 
owned  by  S.  R.  McConnell,  was  built  by 
R.  P.  Babcock  about  the  year  1865  or  1866. 
Isaac  N.  Bellows  traded  here  for  a  while, 
also;  Mr.  McConnell  has  been  in  business 
at  this  locality  since    1872. 

The  store  now  owned  bj'  Tinkhani  & 
Churchill  was  built  by  Elijah  Niver  just 
before  the  late  war. 

S.  C.  Stillnian,  town  clerk  of  the  town 
of  Scott,  established  tlie  drug  business  in 
1880,  and  keeps  also  a  line  of  other  goods. 
He  has  a  tin  shop  in  connection  with  his 
store. 

The  harness  trade  was  earl)-  established 
in  the  village  b)-  Jerry  Jones,  Hiram  Her- 
rick  and  others.  John  H.  Chandler  after- 
ward engaged  in  this  business  and  continued 
it  for  many  years.  He  was  succeeded  by 
W.  H.  Morgan,  a  skillful  mechanic,  in  1866. 
Mr.  Morgan  is  also  postmaster  at  the  pres- 
ent time,  succeeding  H.  \V.  Babcock  in 
1872. 

The  first  ph\-sician,  probabl}-,  in  the  town 
was  Dr.  Huntington.  He  practiced  in  this 
place  a  number  of  years  and  died  in  1840. 
His  son  Justin  Ii\ed  in  the  town  until  he 
reached  the  advanced  age  of  eight\'-seven 
years,  dying  in  1883.  Dr.  Whiting  was 
also  an  earl}-  physician  in  the  town,  but  re- 
mo\-ed  to  the  West  about  fift\-  \-ears  ago. 
Dr.  Stowell  came  in  about  the  year  1824, 
but  remained  only  a  few  years.  Phineas 
H.  Burdick  came  in  a  little  later  and  in 
1828  became  a  member  of  the  County 
Medical  Association.  In  1834  lie  removed 
to  Preble,  where  he  continued  practice  until 
his  death  in  1870.  Dr.  Ira  L.  Babcock 
became  a  member  of  the  Count}'  Medical 
Society  in  1832.  Dr.  Wm.  M.  Truman 
studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Maxson  in  1833  ; 
afterwards    attended     college    and     begfan 


practice  in  the  village  in  1834  or  1835. 
He  remained  only  two  or  three  years  and 
then  removed  to  Lincklaen,  Chenango 
count}-.  A  few  years  later  he  returned  to 
Scott,  remaining  two  \-ears.  Dr.  Hazlett 
Wilcox  came  about  1850;  his  stay  was 
also  short.  Dr.  Clarke  Hubbard  came  in 
1854  and  practiced  here  until  his  death. 
Dr.  Waters  came  in  1859,  but  entered  the 
Union  army  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  late 
war.  Dr.  D.  C.  Sydney  came  in  1869,  but 
left  for  Friendship,  Pa.,  the  following  year. 
Dr.  I-rvin  Truman  came  in  1872.  Dr. 
Maxson,  the  oldest  physician  in  the  town, 
and   one   of  the   oldest  in  the  county,  was 

j  educated  at  Fairfield,  Herkimer  count}-,  N. 
Y.,  and  graduated  in  1830,  going  first  to 
Plymouth,  Chenango  count}-.  He  came 
from  that  place  to  Scott  in  1833.  '"  1834. 
on  the  16th  of  May,  he  became  a  member 
of  the  Count}-  Medical  Society.  He  prac- 
tices in  the  old  school  of  medicine. 

I  The  old  hotel  of  the  village  was  probably 
builf  b\-  Daniel  Royce  before  1830.  It 
was  at  that  time  a  small  affair,  serving  the 
purposes  of  a  saloon  as  much  as  of  a  hotel. 
Joseph  Royce  made  some  additions  in  1830. 
Thomas  Harrop  next  took  the  proprietor- 

j  ship  and  added  seventy  feet  to  the  building 
for  a  saloon.  This  would  indicate  that  the 
business  was  prosperous.  Following  him 
in  the  hotel  came  Nathan  Culver  for  a  few 
}-ears,  after  which  there  were  man}-  changes. 
Charles  Dunbar  was  proprietor  of  this  house 
when  it  burned  on  the  morning  of  May  4th, 
1879.  Mr.  Dunbar  then  opened  the  pres- 
ent hotel,  which  he  still  successfully  con- 
ducts. 

The  Prcsb}-terian  Church  of  Scott. —  This 
societ}-  was  organized  May  25th,  181 8,  by 
a  committee  of  the  Presbyter}-  of  Onondaga. 

1  It  remained  in  this  connection  until  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Cortland  Presbytery,  when 
it  was  assigned  to  that.  The  Congrega- 
tional form  of  government  was  adopted  in 


412 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1S25,  but  tlic  clinrcli  still  retained  its  con- 
nection with  tile  Presbytery.  Rev.  Reuben 
Hurd  was  niinisterint^  to  tlie  congregation 
during  a  portion  of  its  early  histor}-.  Re\-. 
Mr.  Dunning  was  tlie  second  minister  and 
after  liim  Re\-.  Matliew  Fiarrison  gave  one- 
fourth  of  liis  lime  to  the  church.  Re\-. 
Llewellyn  R.  Powell  began  preaching  here 
in  August,  1833,  and  was  installed  as  pastor 
August  25th,  1835  continuing  about  three 
years.  After  this  date  came  Rev.  Mr.  Red- 
field  and  Rev.  Mr.  P'oltse.  In  the  \-ear 
1842  Rev.  Daniel  She,  a  Unionist,  was  em- 
ployed for  one  \'ear.  Rev.  Hiram  Harris 
was  made  pastor  in  the  fall  of  1843.  He 
was  then  a  licentiate  preacher  and  was  in- 
stalled and  ordained  by  the  Presbytery  of 
Cortland  <in  the  18th  of  October,  of  the 
same  year.  Mr.  Harris  preached  at  Boro- 
dino one-half  of  the  time  during  the    \-ear 

1845.  The  church  has  been  alwa\'s  small 
in  membership.  In  1825  it  had  but  twenty- 
four  members  ;   in  1836,  sixty-eight,  and  in 

1846,  seventy;  since  then  it  has  gradually 
diminished  until  the  year  1878,  when  the 
building  was  removed  from  its  foundation 
and  used  for  other  jnirposes.  The  church 
building  was  erected,  but  not  entirely  fin- 
ished, in  1838. 


The  Close  Communion  Baptist  Church 
was  the  oldest  organization  in  the  town.  Its 
membership  was  the  largest  in  the  town  at 
one  ])eriod  It  has  ceased  to  exist  and 
there  are  no  available  records  of  its  career. 

The  Seventh- Day  Baptists  have  an  or- 
ganization in  this  town,  which  dates  from 
an  earl)-  period.  No  records  of  the  society 
could  be  obtained  from  which  to  compile 
its  histor)-.  The  society  is  in  a  flourishing 
condition  ;  a  good  Sabbath-school  is  con- 
nected with  it.  The  present  deacons  are 
John  Barber,  E.  H.  P.  Potter  and  Lewis 
Hazard.  Miss  Artelia  Babcock  is  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sabbath-school ;  there  is  no 
present  pastor. 

The  Methodist  Episcopal  Society  has  a 
membership  of  one  hundred,  with  a  good 
Sabbath-school,  under  the  direction  of  C. 
J.  Jones.  The  organization  dates  back  to 
an  earh'  period,  but  no  records  are  in  exist- 
ence from  which  to  write  its  histor)'.  Rev. 
Mr.  Sharpe,  the  pastor,  took  charge  of  the 
church  in  1882.  The  church  officers  are 
Chas.  Jones,  C.  Clark,  W'atson  J.  Black, 
James  Clark,  Franklin  Ticket,  Dr.  G.  \V. 
Ma.xson,  Solomon  Clark,  John  Lamphire, 
Henry  Niver,  Mrs.  Letitia  Bedell  and  Mrs. 
Jared  Babcock. 


CHAPTER  XXVUI. 


HISTORY   OF  THK  TDWN    OF   SOl.dN. 


SOLON  is  one  of  the  interior  towns  of 
the  count}-  atul  is  bounded  on  the  north 
by  Tru.xton ;  on  the  east  b}'  Taylor ;  on 
the  south  b}'  Freetown,  and  on  the  west  by 
Cortlandville  and  Homer,  thus  locating  it 
near  the  center  of  the  county. 

Solon  was  No.  20  of  the  townships  com- 
prising the  old  militar)'  tract  and  originally 
embraced  the  territor\-  now  comprising  So- 
lon, Taylor    and  the  southern    portions  of 


i  Tru.xton  and    Cu\'ler.       The    town    was   or- 
ganized   on  the    9th    of   March,    1798.      Its 
1  former  dimensions   were  reduced   in   April, 
j    181  I,  by  annexing  the  north    fourteen    lots 
I  to  Truxton,  and  again  in  1 849  b\-  the  erec- 
tion of  the  town  of  Taylor.      The  town  now 
i  comprises    19,068   acres,    with   an    assessed 
\aluation  of  $17.55  per  acre  and  a  total  val- 
uation of  $334,705. 

The  surface   of  the   town  is  broken   b\-  a 


Town  of  Solon. 


413 


number  of  valleys,  through  which  flow- 
small  streams.  On  the  eastern  border  the 
ridges  rise  to  an  elevation  of  from  fourteen  to 
fifteen  hundred  feet  above  tide.  Trout  brook 
flows  through  the  town  in  a  northwesterly 
direction  and  is  bordered  b)'  a  fertile  vallc}'. 
Pritchard,  North  and  Maybury  brooks  flow 
into  Trout  brook  from  the  north,  and  Smith 
brook  flows  from  the  southern  portion  of 
the  town  towards  the  northwest.  The  soil 
of  Solon  'is  a  gravelly  loam,  much  better 
adapted  to  grazing  than  grain-growing. 
Dairj-ing  is  the  most  prominent  interest  to 
which  farmers  now  turn  their  attention. 

There  are  in  the  town  one  post-office, 
one  store,  one  saw-mill,  one  grist-mill,  one 
cheese  factor)',  one  hotel,  one  blacksmith 
shop,  two  churches,  Roman  Catholic  and 
Baptist. 

The  first  permanent  settlement  in  Solon 
was  made  in  1794  b}-  Roderick  Beebe  and 
Johnson  Bingham.  The  former  located  on 
lot  No.  75,  on  that  portion  known  as  Mount 
Roderick.  He  came  originall)-  from  Massa- 
chusetts. 

Mr.  Bingham  was  a  nati\'e  of  Connect- 
icut, but  came  to  Solon  from  \'ermont, 
locating  on  lot  62. _  He  purchased  550 
acres;  was  justice  of  the  peace  for  about 
twenty  years,  and  associate  judge  for  quite 
a  period.      He  reared  eight  children. 

William  Galpin  was  probabl}-  one  of  the 
next  settlers  in  the  town,  locating  on  lot  4J 
in  the  }-ear  1797  :  he  came  from  New  Jer- 
sey. He  was  one  of  the  many  unfortunates 
who  bought  land  and  found  they  had  no 
valid  title,  and  he  removed  to  Pompe\-,  On- 
ondaga county. 

In  1799  John  Welch  came  into  the  town 
from  Wyoming  and  located  a  little  south 
of  the  farm  of  Roderick  Beebe.  He  re- 
mained but  a  few  years  and  removed  to 
Cleveland,  Ohio. 

Col.  Elijah  Wheeler,  from  \e\\  Ha\en, 
Conn.,  came   in    in   the   vear  1 80 1    and   lo- 


cated on  lot  100,  where  he  purchased  orig- 
inallj-  100  acres. 

Settlements  were  made  principally  in  the 
northern  and  eastern  portions  of  this  town 
during  the  earh-  period,  and  many  who 
came  in  at  an  early  day  are  noticed  in  tlie 
histories  of  those  later  di\-isions.  Captain 
Stephen  N.  Peck  came  from  Stanford,  Duch- 
ess count)',  N.  Y.,  and  located  on  lot  62  in 
March,  1804.  He  first  purcliased  ninety- 
two  acres  but  subsequently  added  consider- 
ably to  his  farm.  He  lived  on  his  place  to 
a  good  old  age. 

Garrett  Pritchard  was  one  of  the  pioneers 
who  came  into  the  wilderness  full  of  deter- 
mination to  do  his  part  towards  making  it 
"blossom  as  the  rose."  He  was  from 
Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  located  on  lot  74  in 
the  year  1807.  He  came  into  the  town 
with  a  pack  on  his  back  and  $16.50  in 
mone\-  in  his  pockets.  His  father  had  pre- 
ceded him  one  year  and  was  finding  it  difli- 
cult  to  meet  the  small  payments  falling  due 
on  his  land ;  but  the  son  came  to  his  aid 
and  paid  $500  on  his  father's  estate,  after- 
ward locating  on  lot  75.  He  became  the 
owner  of  500  acres  of  land  and  li\-ed  the 
latter  years  of  his  life  in  the  enjoyment  of 
his  competence. 

In  the  same  )'ear  of  Pritchard's  arrival 
Richard  Maybury  came  from  Luzerne,  Pa., 
and  located  on  the  State's  hundred,  lot  53, 
where  he  purchased  100  acres.  He  was  an 
industrious  and  worth)'  citizen. 

Stephen  \.  Peck,  with  his  wife  and 
two  children,  came  in  from  Duchess  count)" 
in  1805.  He  located  on  lot  62  and  li\'ed 
to  be  over  ninety  years  old,  retaining  his 
faculties  to  a  remarkable  degree.  His  sons, 
L)'man  E.,  Burlingham,  Piatt  and  John  all 
settled  in  the  town. 

Luke  Chapin,  father  of  Hiram  Chapin, 
came  from  Massachusetts  in  1805  and  set- 
tled on  lot  42.  In  the  same  year  Gen.  S. 
G.  Hathawa\',  who    was   also   from  Massa- 


414 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


cliusetts,  settled  on  lot  7 1  and  two  years 
later  removed  to  lot  "J^,  in  Solon,  where  he 
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.  In  1810 
he  was  appointed  jnstice  of  the  peace  and 
held  the  office  forty-eight  successive  years; 
he  gained  the  reputation  of  being  the 
ablest  magistrate  in  this  office  in  the  county, 
possessing  the  faculty  of  seeing  intuitively 
into  the  merits  of  cases  before  him.  making 
up  his  mind  as  to  the  facts  with  rare  judg- 
ment from  which  no  ability  or  ingenuity  on 
the  part  of  lawyers'could  swerve  him.  His 
fairness  and  justice  were  seldom  or  never 
called  in  question.  He  represented  Cort- 
land county  in  the  Legislature  in  18 14 
and  i8i8.'  In  the  last  named  year  he  pro- 
cured a  division  of  the  town  of  Cincinnatus, 
and  the  part  of  it  in  which  he  resided  at 
that  time  fell  within  the  limits  of  Free- 
town, which  was  named  after  his  native 
town  in  Massachusetts.  He  was  elected  to 
the  State  Senate  in  1822.  to  Congress  in 
1832  and  was  chosen  presidential  elector  in 
1852.  He  had  a  decided  taste  for  military 
affairs  and  rose  through  the  various  grades  of 
office  until  he  was  commissioned  major- 
general  in  1823.  He  was  an  able  politician 
and  possessed  of  those  qualities  that  give 
an  influence  over  men  and  tend  to  make 
their  possessor  a  leader.  Mr.  Hathaway 
died  without  disease,  while  sitting  in  his 
chair  at  six  o'clock  A.  M.  on  the  2d  of 
May,  1867,  in  the  eighty-seventh  year  of 
his  ase.  His  son,  Calvin  L.  Hathawa\-, 
resides  on  the  homestead  and  is  a  man  of 
prominence  in  the  county,  both  as  a  bus- 
iness man  and  a  politician. 

Henry  L.  Randall  was  one  of  the  promi- 
nent earlj-  pioneers,  who  came  from  Sharon, 
Conn.,  and  located  on  lot  74  in  1808.  He 
made  the  journey  with  his  wife  and  three 
children,  with  a  two  horse  team,  bringing  a 
few  necessary  articles  with  which  to  begin 
life  in  his  wilderness  home.  He  lived  more 
than  half  a  century    where  he    first  settled 


and  reared  a  famil)'  of  five  children,  and 
died  ill  1863.  One  of  his  sons,  Orriii  Ran- 
dall, now  li\es  on  lot  No.  6,  where  he  is 
pleasantK'  located.  He  married  Libbic 
liean,  daughter  of  Josiah  Bean  (an  early 
settler  on  the  same  lot),  and  removed  from 
lot  74  to  his  present  location  in  1876. 

Joel  Rankin,  also  from  Massachusetts, 
settled  on  lot  42  in  1807.  His  daughter 
Margaret  became  the  wife  of  .Amos  Pritch- 
ard. 

Luke  Cass,  from  New  Hampshire,  settled 
on  lot  51.  Columbus  Cass,  his  son,  came 
in  w  itli  his  father  and  afterwards  located  on 
lot  61.  Jonathan  Rundall,  from  Sharon, 
Conn.,  located  on  lot  74.  Ebenezer  Blake, 
from  Stoddard,  New  Hampshire,  settled  on 
lot  84.  Joseph  Holden,  an  early  settler, 
located  where  Edward  Holden  now  lives. 

Such  were  the  principal  pioneers  who 
came  into  this  town  at  an  early  day  to 
spend  their  lives  in  subduing  the  wilderness, 
encountering  hardships  and  privations  which 
are  all  unknown  at  the  present  time.  Set- 
tlement in  the  town  was  not  very  rapid  and 
it  was  long  after  the  close  of  the  War  of 
1812  before  all  the  land  was  occupied  and 
largely  under  cultivation. 

The  first  birth  in  the  town  of  Solon  was 
that  of  a  daughter  of  Johnson  Bingham. 
The  first  marriage  united  Robert  Smith  and 
Amy  Smith.  The  first  death  was  that  of 
Lydia  Bingham,  which  event  occurred  on 
the  ylh  of  May,  1798.  Johnson  Bingham 
died  in  1843  and  his  wife,  Annie,  died  No- 
vember 14th,  1865,  at  the  great  age  of  102 
year,  i  i  months  and  25  days. 

The  first  school  was  taught  in  Solon  by 
Ro.xana  Beebe  and  Lydamana  Stewart,  in 
the  year  1804.  Benjamin  Tubbs  kept  the 
first  store  and  Lewis  Beebe  the  first  tavern. 
The  first  mill  was  built  by  Noah  Greeley, 
and  the  first  church  was  organized  in  1804, 
by  the  Rev.  Josiah  Butler,  who  was  tlie  first 
preacher. 


Town  of  Solon. 


415 


The  mill  built  by  Noah  Greeley  was  a  saw- 
mill, and  the  first  grist-mill  was  built  by 
Eber  Wilcox ;  it  was  locateLl  on  Ma\^bury 
creek  just  below  the  site  of  the  present  mill 
and  was  erected  in  1 8 1 2.  The  water-wheel 
was  made  of  a  log  some  twent)'  feet  in  length 
and  acted  on  the  recoil  principal  which  was 
patented  before  that  time  b\'  a  M.r.  Barker. 
The  water  entered  a  hole  in  the  middle  of 
the  log,  was  conducted  through  a  large  bore 
to  either  end,  where  it  escaped  through 
smaller  holes  on  opposite  sides  of  the  log, 
the  action  of  the  water  against  the  air  serv- 
ing to  re\'olve  the  wheel.  A  child  of  Mr. 
W'ilco.x  fell  into  this  wheel  when  it  was  in 
motion  and  was  killed. 

John  Ma)'bury  built  the  present  mill,  now 
owned  by  his  nephew,  E.  B.  Ma\'bury,  prior 
to  1 840.  It  soon  afterward  passed  into  the 
hands  of  General  Hatha\\a\-  and  was  then 
leased  to  C.  Albridge,  who  ran  it  a  number 
of  years,  a  part  of  the  time  with  his  son-in- 
law,  Wm.  Dorr.  It  then  passed  into  the 
hands  of  P.  F.  Moses,  then  to  P.  P.  Moses 
and  finally  in  1874  to  the  present  owner, 
who  put  in  a  turbine  wheel ;  the  mill  has 
now  two  run  of  stones  and  does  a  flouring 
and  custom  business. 

Palmer's  furniture  factor}-  is  located  near 
the  Maybury  mill,  its  water  power  being 
drawn  from  the  same  dam.  The  building 
was  erected  in  1876,  by  E.  E.  Palmer,  who 
put  in  machinery  for  the  extensive  manu- 
facture of  all  kinds  of  furniture. 

A  cheese  factory  was  in  operation  in  this 
neighborhood  between  1874  and  1876. 
Benton  Dice  removed  the  frame  of  this 
structure  from  Blodgett's  Mills,  but  soon 
afterward  sold  it  to  Irving  Stevens ;  it  was 
burned  in  1876. 

The  only  cheese  factory  now  in  Solon  is 
located  near  the  village,  or  hamlet,  and  was 
built  in  the  winter  of  1881-83,  by  B.  T. 
Turner.  It  is  a  creamer)-  and  the  building- 
was   erected    o\er  "  Bear'spring,"  which    is 


noted  for  the  purity  and  coldness  of  its 
water.  The  establishment  is  doing  a  good 
business. 

The  hamlet  of  Solon  is  located  near  the 
center  of  the  town,  and  contains  a  store, 
post-office  and  a  hotel. 

The  first  merchant  was  Benjamin  Tubbs; 
he  was  followed  by  Samuel  Wilber.  Flint 
Phelps  kept  a  store  for  a  time  two  miles 
west  of  the  hamlet,  but  it  was  finally  aban- 
doned. Since  then  the  mercantile  trade  of 
the  town  has  all  been  done  in  Solon,  and 
was  for  many  years  conducted  by  Samuel 
Emerson.  He  was  one  of  the  pioneer  set- 
tlers, who  came  in  from  New  Eln^land  in 
1803  and  located  one  mile  west  of  the  ham- 
let. He  died  in  1869,  at  the  age  of  eighty- 
three  years.  His  father  was  in  the  Revo- 
lutionary War  and  also  in  the  War  of  18 12. 
Mr.  Emerson's  store  was  on  the  east  side 
of  the  creek. 

The  principal  merchants  of  the  place 
since  Mr.  Emerson  have  been  Lyman  Al- 
den,  Ezra  Rockwell,  A.  Stevens,  Lyman 
and  Rufus  Peck,  Willis  Holmes  and  A.  S. 
Brown,  who  is  the  present  proprietor.  He 
began  business  in  1883,  carries  a  large  gen- 
eral stock  of  goods  and  recei\-es  the  patron- 
age of  most  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town. 

The  production  of  maple  sugar  is  carried 
on  to  a  large  extent  in  Solon.  Many  of  the 
sugar  camps  contain  from  one  to  three 
thousand  trees.  During  the  sugar  making 
season  of  1884  Mr.  Brown  handled  and 
shipped  a  ton  of  this  product  per  day. 
Among  those  who  engage  most  largely  in 
this  manufacture  we  may  mention  Jerome 
White,  Luman  Maybury,  John  Maybury, 
Adelbert  Holden,  -  B.  H.  Randall,  E.  Z. 
Smith,  George  Cooper,  Joel  Pritchard,  Silas 
Stevens,  Robert  Smith,  James  Finn,  Daniel 
Morris,  Alfred  Smith,  John  Li\-ingston, 
Philander  Underwood,  S.  Marten,  Joseph 
Murphy,  Jacob  Atkins  and  Isaac  Walker. 

The  first   tavern   in  Solon    was  located   a 


4i6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


mile  or  so  west  of  tlie  hamlet,  and  \\as  kept 
by  Lewis  lieebe.  William  Copclancl,  son- 
in-law  of  Mr.  Emerson,  before  mentioned, 
was  the  first  tavern-keeper  at  the  liamlet. 
Succeeding  him  came  Noah  Goodrich,  John 
Wheeler,  Mr.  Fish,  Wm.  and  Philip  Hays, 
A.  S.  Pierce,  John  and  James  Warden,  and 
Earl  Palmer.  The  ta\'ern  is  now  kept  by 
James  Warden.  The  present  building  was 
erected  by  Earl  Palmer  in  1865. 

Churches. —  The  Baptist  Church  in  Solon 
was  organized  in  1804  by  Rev.  Josiah  But- 
ler. We  were  unable  to  learn  much  relative 
to  the  past  history  of  the  church  ;  it  is  not, 
however,  in  as  flourishing  condition  as  in 
former  \'ears. 

There  is  a  Catholic  Church  in  the  town 
which  is  under  the  effective  guidance  of 
Father  McLoghlin,  of  Cortland  village. 

The  Presbyterian. Church  was  organized 
September  iith,  1827,  with  a  membership 
of  fifteen.  The  membership  has  always 
been  small.  The  church  was  furnished  a 
portion  of  the  time  for  a  year  or  two,  with 
preaching  by  the  Presbytery  of  Cortland, 
and  was  dissolved  in  183 1. 

When  the  great  Rebellion  broke  out  the 
patriotic  people  of  Solon  volunteered  freely 
for  the  defense  of  the  Union,  and  many 
sealed  their  devotion  to  their  countrx-  with 
their  blood.  Following  are  the  names  of 
those  who  gave  their  lives  in  the  perpet- 
uation of  liberty,  from  this  town  :  — 

Lucius  Randall,  son  of  Orrin  Randall, 
killed  at  Gravelly  Run,  March  29th,  1865. 
Orrin  Reed,  killed  in  the  same  battle.  John 
Cahill  died  in  a  rebel  prison.  Dayton  Har- 
vey, son  of  Charles  Harvey,  died  from 
wounds  received  in  battle  at  Gett\-sburg. 
John  Stevens,  son  of  Jacob  Stevens,  died 
in  Libby  prison.  Job  Gillett,  died  in  hos- 
pital. Dennis  B.  Hicks,  died  of  wounds 
received  in  service.  Edwin  Fish,  died  in 
hospital  at  Hilton  Head.  James  Atwood, 
died  on  the  field.      Adelbert  Ta\'lor,   died 


in    Washington,   and    Walker   died 

after  returning  home. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  soldiers  who 
went  from  this  town  and  were  paid  bounties 
and  credited  to  this  town  ;  — 

Call  of  Oct.  17th,  1863,  I'ebruar)- and 
March,  1864.  Hount\-  paid,  $300.  Total, 
$2,700.  —  James  Sargant,  Daniel  Barnes, 
Horatio  Niles  Hicks,  Mark  Brownell,  John 
Cahill,  William  R.  Wells,  Edwin  R.  Al- 
bridge,  William  B.  Gilbert,  Luther  P.  Hicks. 

The  earh'  records  of  this  town  are  not 
now  available  ;  we  were  unable  to  find  a 
list  of  town  officers  earlier  than  1844,  since 
which  date  the  following  is  a  list  of  the  su- 
pervisors and  town  clerks,  the  supervi.sor's 
name  appearing  first  in  each  instance,  with 
the  present  town  oflicers  :  — 

1844-45,  Rufus  Rice,  John  Wheeler. 
Ezra  Rockwell,  Stephen  Kellogg,  1846. 
Ezra  Rockwell,  Russel  C.  Fowler,  1847. 
John  Wheeler,  Lewis  .M.  Wolsey,  1848. 
John  Wheeler,  Samuel  G.  Hathaway,  1849. 
John  Wheeler,  Freeman  Warren,  1850- 
51-52.  John  Wheeler,  Samuel  G.  Hatha- 
way, 1853.  Johnson  Wheeler,  Lyman 
Stone,  1854.  Johnson  Wheeler,  John  M. 
Freeman,  1855.  Johnson  Wheeler,  Lewis 
Dickinson,  1856.  David  I.  Brownell,  Lewis 
Dickinson,  1857.  David  I.  Brownell,  Ran- 
dolph R.  Ma\bury,  1858.  David  I.  Brown- 
ell, Cornelius  D.  Fish,  1859.  Philander  P. 
Moses,  Robert  B.  Fish,  i860.  Philander 
P.  Moses,  Leroy  D.  Stevens,  1861.  Calvin 
L.  Hathaway,  Earl  Palmer,  1862.  Ran- 
som Warren,  Earl  Palmer,  1863.  David  L 
Brownell,  I'^arl  Palmer,  1864.  David  I. 
Brownell.  Melvin  ^Liybury.  1865-66.  Da- 
\-id  1.  Brownell,  Har\-e}-  J.  Stone,  1867. 
Johnson  Wheeler.  Har\c\-  J.  Stone.  1868. 
Calvin  Hathaway,  L\man  Peck,  jr.,  1869. 
David  P.  Brownell,  Harvey  J.  Stone,  1870. 
John  Wheeler,  Harvey  J.  Stone,  1871.  John 
Wheeler,  Mordeca  L.  Totman,  1873.  Philo 
F.  Moses,  Mordeca  L.  Totman,  1874.    Har- 


Town  ok  Frektown. 


4'7 


ve\^  J.    Stone,    ^lordcca    L.  Totman,    1875.  Commissioner    of    highways  —  Joel    C. 

Harvc)- J.  Stone,  James  Dougherty,    1876.  1   Pritchard. 

J.  J.  Walker,  James  Uoughert)-,    1877.     J.  Collector — Oscar  Smith. 

J.Walker,    C.   T,    Feck,     1878-79.     James  Overseer  of  the  poor  —  James  l-"inn. 

Dougherty,    William     V..     Hurr,     1880-81-  |       Constables — John  Withey,    Wm.  Hurke, 

82.      James     Doughert\-,    B.    II      Randall,  Ed.  Diver,  John  Barnes 


1883. 

The  present  officers  of  the  town  (1884) 
are  :  — 

Supervisor  —  James  Doughert\-. 

Town  clerk  —  Andrew  S.  Brown. 

Assessor — A.  Holden. 


Inspectors  of  election  —  V.  H.  (iraves, 
John  Dorth)-,  Ephraim  Smith. 

Commissioner  of  excise  —  Jerome  May- 
bury. 

Justices — Alfred  Warren,  L.  W.  Green- 
man,  John  R.  Maybury,  E.  B.  Maybury. 


CHAPTER  XXLX. 


IIISTOKV  OK    IHK  TO\V.\  OK   KRKKTOWX. 


FREETOWN  is  bounded  on  the  north 
by  Solon  and  Cortlandville ;  on  the 
east  by  Cincinnatus  :  on  the  s(nith  by  Mar- 
athon, and  on  the  west  by  Virgil  and  Cort- 
landville, and  lies  a  little  south  of  the  cen- 
ter of  the  county,  on  a  ridge  between  the 
Otselic  and  Tioughnioga  rivers.  Its  surface 
is  high  and  hill)-,  broken  by  small  streams 
flowing  north  and  south  through  the  town. 
It  comprises  16,425^  acres,  with  an  as- 
sessed value  per  acre  of  $20.52:  total  as- 
sessed value  of  real  estate,  $337,145. 

This  town  was  organized  on  the  21st  of 
April,  1 81 8,  and  comprises  what  was  the 
northwestern  quarter  of  the  old  military 
township  of  Cincinnatus,  with  lot  No.  20 
which  was  taken  from  Virgil  in  1820. 
The  soil  is  a  clay  loam,  better  adapted  to 
grazing  than  grain  growing,  although  good 
crops  of  corn,  oats,  barley,  potatoes,  etc., 
are  raised.  In  later  years  especial  attention 
has  been  given  to  dairying  and  with  excel- 
lent results. 

The  pioneers  of  this  toun  encoimtered 
hardships  greater  than  were  experienced  by 
those  of  many  other   towns   in    the  county. 


The  natural  aspect  of  the  w-ilderness  in  this 
section  was  forbidding  and  the  land  difficult 
to  clear.  To  get  their  corn  ground  the 
pioneers  usually  preferred  to  go  to  Manlius 
or  Onondaga  Hollow,  rather  than  to  Che- 
nango Forks  or  Ludlowville ;  the  distance 
they  thus  had  to  travel  was  about  forty 
miles,  fording  streams  and  often  being  com- 
pelled to  camp  out  one  or  more  nights  on 
the  wa\%  exposed  to  storms  and  dangers 
from  wild  animals.  The  roads  were  mere 
paths  which  could  be  followed  only  by 
marked  trees.  These  tedious  journeys  had 
to  be  made  until  1798,  in  which  year  the 
first  grist-mill  was  erected  in  Homer,  as 
heretofore  stated  ;  and  even  this  improve- 
ment left  the  pioneer  of  Freetown  a  long 
distance  to  travel  through  the  forest  to  mill. 
The  first  settler  in  Freetown  was  Cyrus 
Saunders.  He  was  a  native  of  Rhode 
Island  and  was  born  May  19th,  1772;  he 
married  Nancy  Hiscock,  also  a  native  of 
that  State,  in  1794  and  came  to  Freetown 
in  1795,  locating  on  lot  No.  5.  He  dwelt 
there  about  fifteen  j-ears  —  years  of  severe 
toil  and  privations,  but   made   endurable  to 


4i8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


liim  by  the  tlioiiL^ht  that  he  was  making  a 
home  for  his  family  and  Ills  own  enjo\ment 
in  old  age.  When  his  last  payment  on  the 
land  was  made  he  learned  to  his  consterna- 
tion that  his  title,  like  so  many  to  which 
wc  have  referred,  was  imperfect  and  his 
farm  was  lost  to  him.  He  removed  with 
his  family  to  Factory  Hill,  in  flomer  vil- 
lage, where  he  remained  until  the  factorj' 
burned  in  1815,  his  children  working  in  the 
factory  during  that  period.  His  children 
were  Naby  (now  Mrs.  Naby  House),  Cath- 
arine, Almeda,  La\'ina,  Cyrus,  Xanc\-, 
Perry  and  Elisha. 

From  Homer  the  family  removed  to  the 
town  of  Solon,  on  lot  No.  81,  settlingf  on 
fifty  acres  of  land  for  which  he  paid  $300. 
The  tract  was  covered  with  forest  and  Mr. 
Saunders  had  practically  to  begin  life  over 
again,  the  first  step  in  which  was  to  build  a 
log  house.  They  lived  on  this  farm  about 
nineteen  years,  after  which  he  and  his  son, 
Perry  H.,  went  to  McGrawville  and  bought 
the  carding  and  cloth-dressing  mill  which 
had  been  conducted  by  Eber  Wilcox  and 
John  Peat.  This  business  the_\-  continued 
for  a  period  of  ten  years,  after  which  they 
removed  to  Cuyler,  in  what  is  known  as 
the  Kenney  Settlement.  Cyrus  Saunders 
finally  removed  to  Chautauqua  county, 
where  he  died  in  1856. 

Nancy  Saunders,  wife  of  Cyrus  Saunders, 
took  her  infant  daughter,  Naby  (now  a 
resident  of  Westfield,  Chautauqua  county),  in 
the  year  1796,  and  made  a  journey  on  horse- 
back to  her  former  home  in  Rhode  Island  ; 
she  was  accompanied  by  a  neighboring 
woman.  A  year's  residence  in  the  wilder- 
ness, where  she  had  seldom  seen  a  white 
woman,  had  given  the  young  wife  a  feeling 
of  homesickness  which  she  imagined  would 
be  dispelled  by  a  visit  to  her  old  home.  It 
must  have  been  a  long  and  trying  journey, 
but  was  made  without  serious  mishap. 
The  infant,  Naby,  was   one   of  the  children 


who  worked  in  the  Hiimcr  factory  and  is 
now  living,  as  above  stated,  and  enjoys 
good  iiealth  at  the  age  of  eighty-nine  years. 

Robert  Smith,  a  soldier  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary War,  was  one  of  the  very  early  set- 
tlers in  Freetown,  having  drawn  lot  No.  2 
for  his  services  to  the  country.  He  located 
himself  and  family  on  the  lot  in  1 800,  where 
he  had  prepared  a  mere  log  cabin  for  their 
accommodation.  After  some  years  of  se- 
vere struggles  to  make  a  home  ia  the  wil- 
derness, he  sold  his  property  to  Samuel  G. 
Hathawaj-.  Mr.  Smith's  descendants  after- 
wards li\'ed  in  Marathon. 

Soon  after  Mr.  Smith's  settlement,  Caleb 
Sheopard  and  David  H.  Monrose  moved 
from  the  eastern  part  of  the  State  and  set- 
tled with  their  families  on  lot  No.  22.  Mr. 
Sheopard  removed  to  Michigan  about  the 
year  1850.  Mr.  Monrose  remained  on  his 
farm  and  died  in  1837. 

William  Smith,  a  nati\e  of  Vermont,  mi- 
grated from  Great  Bend,  Fa.,  to  Freetown 
in  the  year  1802,  and  located  on  lot  No. 
25.  Fie  made  several  small  purchases  of 
land  until  he  owned  a  farm  of  about  165 
acres.  He  disposed  of  his  property  and 
removed  to  Cortlandville  in  1835.  He  was 
a  man  of  considerable  prominence,  held 
several  town  offices  and  military  positions. 
He  had  a  family  of  nine  children. 

In  1804  Gideon  Chapin  located  on  lot 
42,  where  he  erected  the  first  saw-mill  in 
the  town.  There  is  a  mill  on  the  same  site 
at  the  present  time,  in  which  is  one  run  of 
stone,  which  is  operated  b\'  Mr.  Under- 
wood. 

Samuel  G.  Hathaway  settled  in  Freetown 
in  1805,  ha\ing  removed  from  Chenango 
county,  where  he  had  located  two  years 
earlier.  He  purchased  300  acres  of  land 
of  Robert  Smith,  as  before  noted.  At  that 
time  Mr.  Hathaway's  nearest  neighbors  on 
the  north,  east  and  west  were  four  miles 
distant    and  eisiht  miles    on  the   south.      In 


Tu\Vi\  OF  Freetown. 


419 


1 8 1 9  he  removed  to  the  eastern  part  of  lot  7 1 
in  the  town  of  Solon,  in  tiic  history  of  which 
town  will  be  found  further  reference  to  his 
eminent  career  as  a  public  man.  The  follow- 
ing incident  which  he  related  to  Mr.  Good  win. 
the  historian,  finds  its  proper  place  here:  — 
■'  Soon  after  the  General  came  to  Free- 
town he  desired  to  make,  some  additions  to 
his  stock  of  cattle,  and  learning  that  Caleb 
Sheopard,  living  near  the  salt  road  about 
five  miles  distant,  had  a  calf  to  sell,  he  made 
arrangements  to  procure  the  animal.  Ha\- 
ing  finished  his  day's  work  he  started  for  Mr. 
Sheopard's  near  ex'ening  with  a  rope  halter 
in  his  hand  with  which  he  intended  tn  lead 
the  calf  if  successful  in  making  the  pur- 
chase ;  and  thus  equipped,  without  coat  or 
stockings,  he  plodded  on  his  course  through 
the  woods,  by  way  of  marked  trees,  there 
being  no  road.  He  succeeded  in  obtain- 
ing the  calf  and  started  for  home;  but  night 
coming  on,  and  it  being  much  darker  than 
he  anticipated,  and  carelessly  hurr\'ing  along 
with  his  treasure  by  his  side,  he  soon  found 
himself  unable  to  distinguish  the  blazed 
trees,  but  still  persevered,  hoping  to  come 
out  ricrht.  It  was  not  Ion",  however,  be- 
fore  he  found  he  was  out  of  the  right  course 
and  concluding  that  for  the  present  he  was 
lost,  very  calmh-  set  about  camping  out  for 
the  night.  He  fastened  the  calf  to  a  tree, 
and  reposing  by  its  side,  was  delighted 
through  the  long  and  dark  night  by  the 
hooting  of  owls,  how  ling  of  woh'es,  scream- 
ing of  panthers,  and  other  music  of  a  like 
interesting  character.  At  length  morning 
dawned  and  as  aurora  flung  her  gorgeous 
rays  over  the  dense  forest,  revealed  to  his 
eager  gaze  his  position  on  the  pine  ridge, 
one  or  two  miles  out  of  his  way.  His  calf 
was  hastih"  detached  from  the  tree  and  he 
again  set  out  for  home,  which  he  reached 
at  an  early  hour,  ha\ing  a  sharp  appetite 
for  his  breakfast,  and  much  to  the  gratifica- 
tion of  his  an.xioush-  waiting  mother." 


Another  incident  of  early  pioneer  life  in 
this  town  reaches  us,  which  is  worthy  of 
preservation:  In  November,  1 799,  an  old 
hunter  was  passing  between  the  Tiough- 
nioga  river  and  F"reetown  Center,  when,  on 
ascending  an  elexation,  he  struck  an  Indian 
trail  leading  to  the  pine  woods.  Soon  after 
entering  upon  the  trail  he  heard  a  piercing 
scream,  as  if  coming  from  a  woman  in  dis- 
tress. This  was  repeated  and,  as  he  quick- 
ened his  pace,  the  sounds  became  more  dis- 
tinct and  he  could  hear  moaning  as  if  a 
person  was  suffering  pain.  His  an.xiet)' 
was  soon  relieved,  howe\er,  by  seeing  an 
enormous  panther  springing  upon  a  deer 
that  was  struggling  upon  the  ground  and 
covered  with  blood.  The  hunter  was  un- 
armed and  he  hesitated  a  moment,  unde- 
cided what  to  do ;  but  concluded  to  hasten 
on,  rather  than  run  the  risk  of  furnishing 
the  panther  with  an\'  part  of  the  meal  he 
was  about  to  enjoy  from  the  deer.  He  had 
not  proceeded  far  before  he  w  as  startled  by 
what  appeared  to  be  the  leaping  of  a  pan- 
ther behind  him.  As  he  had  a  few  pounds 
of  fresh  venison,  he  picked  up  a  hea\y 
bludgeon  and  hurried  on  until  he  came  to 
a  large  log,  when  he  cut  the  venison  into 
two  or  three  pieces  and  throwing  one  into 
the  mouth  of  the  log,  which  was  partly  hol- 
low, and  the  others  a  little  distance  from  it, 
awaited  the  approach  of  the  enraged  beast. 
The  moon  was  shining  sufficiently  to  enable 
the  hunter  to  see  the  panther  .ipprnach  and 
attempt  to  enter  the  log,  when  the  hunter 
sprang  forward  and  with  one  blow  laid  the 
animal  almost  powerless  upon  the  ground. 
Repeating  the  blows,  the  huge  beast  was 
soon  dispatched  and  the  hunter  took  off  his 
skin  and  retraced  his  steps  homeward.  A 
grand  hunt  was  organized  the  following  day, 
in  which  three  panthers,  five  woh'es  and  si.x 
bears  were  killed. 

Eleazer  Fuller  was  an  earl\-  settler  in  Free- 
town,  coming    from    Northampton,    Mass., 


420 


IlisTORv  OF  Cortland  County. 


in  1806  and  locating  on   lot  No.  12,  where 

lu'  purcliasrcl  one  hundred  acres.  lie  had 
a  t'aniil)-  of  foi:r  children ;  a  daughter  be- 
came the  wife  of  W'ni.  !\Iantan\-e  ;  his  .son, 
Austin  I'^ulier,  removed  to  Indiana,  li\ed  in 
Springfield  and  became  auditor  of  that 
State. 

Rockwell  Wildm.in  and  Isaac  Robertson 
came  into  the  town  in  1808,  the  former 
locating  on  lot  No.  15.  He  died  in  1855, 
leaving  children  on  the  homestead.  The 
latter  came  from  Connecticut  and  died  in 
181 1,  followed  by  his  wife  in  181  5. 

John  Akerand  Henry  Gardner,  the  form- 
er from  Albany  county  and  the  latter  from 
Plainfield,  N.  Y.,  came  to  the  town  in  1809; 
they  both  settled  on  lot  No.  32,  where  Mr. 
Gardner  bought  one  hundred  acres.  He 
died  in  Illinois  in  1858  at  the  age  of  eighty 
years.  He  was  the  father  of  seven  chil- 
dren. About  this  time  or  a  little  later  the 
settlers  in  the  town  received  accessions  in 
the  persons  of  Charles  and  Curtiss  Richard- 
son, Wm.  Tuthill,  Jacob  Hicks,  Isaac  Doty, 
John  Backus  and  Aruna  Eaton.  Such  were 
the  hardy  men  who  made  the  first  impres- 
sions of  civilization  in  the  wilderness  of 
Freetown.  Graduall>-  the>-  cleared  away 
the  forest,  opened  and  improved  roads  and 
prepared  the  region  for  the  better  enjoy- 
ment of  those  who  were  to  come  after 
them. 

At  the  opening  of  the  War  of  181  3  the 
town  had  become  sufficient!}-  settled  so  that 
neighbors  could  reach  each  other  without 
a  pilgrimage  of  half  a  day  or  more  through 
the  woods. 

In  1812  John  Conger  migrated  from 
Granville,  Washington  county,  and  located 
on  lot  No.  12,  where  he  bought  one  hun- 
dred and  five  acres.  The  farm,  with  sub- 
sequent additions,  is  now  owned  by  Ed. 
Warren.  Mr.  Conger  was  an  enterprising  j 
and  intelligent  man  and  became  a  promi-  I 
nent  citizen.      He  died  at   tlie  age  of  fiftv- 


five,  in  1836.  He  had  five  sons  and  four 
daughters. 

Harmon  S.  Conger  \\'as  elected  to  Con- 
gress in  1846  and  1848  and  held  other  posi- 
tions of  trust,  wherein  he  earned  a  reputa- 
tion for  integrity  and  ability ;  the  entire 
family  was  one  of  the  utmost  respectability. 

In  1 81 3  Austin  Waters  removed  from 
Saybrook,  Conn.,  and  located  on  the  same 
lot  with  Mr.  Conger,  where  he  also  pur- 
chased one  hundred  and  five  acres,  then 
entirely  covered  with  forest.  By  years  of 
persevering  toil  he  cleared  and  improved 
his  land  and  li\xd  there  until  over  eighty 
years  of  age. 

Walton  Sweetland,  a  nati\-e  of  Connect- 
icut, came  from  Granville  in  18  [4  and  set- 
tled on  lot  22,  on  what  was  afterward  known 
as  the  Tripp  farm.  With  his  subsequent 
purchases  he  acquired  a  farm  of  one  him- 
dred  and  tliirt\-  acres.  He  devoted  his  at- 
tention to  clearing  and  improving  his  land 
until  1838,  when  he  sold  it,  and  in  1846 
engaged  in  mercantile  business  at  Freetown 
Corners.  He  was  a  man  of  native  ability 
and  was  elected  to  the  offices  of  school  in- 
spector, sui)erintendent,  and  justice  of  the 
peace,  holding  the  latter  position  for  twenty- 
eight  years.  In  1844  he  was  appointed 
associate  judge,  which  office  he  held  several 
years.  He  was  also  conspicuous  in  early 
military  organizations,  and  rose  from  the 
office  of  corporal  to  major. 

Geo.  I.  Wa\le,  from  Montgomery  count}-, 
N.  Y.,  settled  on  lot  No.  4  in  18 14,  where  his 
widow  now  resides.  He  purchased  there 
four  hundred  and  fift}-  acres,  was  an  industri- 
ous and  refiutable  citizen,  an<l  died  in  1835, 
leaving,  a  respectable  famil}-  of  children. 

Minor  Grant,  who  was  born  in  Chenango 
count}-,  1806,  came  to  Freetown  in  1824 
and  settled  on  one  hundred  acres  of  land, 
which  he  soon  sold  and  removed  to  Cincin- 
natus.  In  three  or  four  years  he  returned 
and  has  lived  in  the  town  e\er  since. 


Town  of  Freetown. 


421 


During  the  period  of  the  early  settlement 
of  Freetown,  it  was  generally  regarded  as 
somewhat  sterile  and  subject  to  severe 
frosts  ;  the  crops  were  often  cut  down,  which, 
with  the  rugged  character  of  the  surface, 
tended  to  retard  rapid  settlement.  But  tiie 
town  is  now  one  of  the  most  prosperous 
dairy  districts  in  the  county.  It  is  isolated 
from  railroad  communication  with  markets, 
but  is  well  supplied  with  good  roads  over 
which  numerous  stage  lines  give  direct 
connection  with  Cortland  village  and  other 
important  points.  The  log  houses  of  the 
pioneers  have  given  place  to  the  comfort- 
able and  neat  framed  farm  houses  to  be  seen 
in  all  directions,  indicating  the  general  pros- 
perity of  the  community. 

In  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  this  town 
responded  to  the  calls  of  the  country  for 
men  and  means  with  the  Siu'iie  degree  of 
patriotism  that  characterized  the  other 
towns  of  the  county.  The  following  list 
embraces  all  those  who  enlisted  in  the  town 
and  received  bounties  ;  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1S63.  Bounty 
paid,  $300.     Total  bounty,  $3,900. —  John 

B.  Richards,  Lafayette  M.  Torrance,  Henry 
Seeber,  Everett  Vosburg,  James  H.  Haight, 
Duane  Hammond,  James  C.  Tuttle,  Wil- 
liam J.  Mantanye,  Nelson  W.  Smith,  Theron 

C.  Guernsey,  D.  Webster  Smith,  George  D. 
Watrous,  James  S.  Hammond. 

Call  of  July  1 8th,  1864.  Bounty  paid, 
$1,000,  except  $700  to  one.  Total  bounty, 
$13,700.  Total  brokerage,  $350. —  Wil- 
liam A.  Brink,  Ezra  C.  Carter,  John  H. 
Cormick,  Loren  P.  Copcland,  Coleman 
Guernsey,  Adolphus  Hopkins,  Austin  Man- 
tanye, Isaac  M.  Richardson,  Clinton  D. 
Stanton,  Charles  Tanner,  Henry  S.  Tilling- 
hast,  Chauncey  L.  Judd,  Dewitt  P.  .Allen, 
William  Hamburg. 

Call  of  December  lyth,  1864.  Amount 
of  bounty  $600,  except  $500  to  two.  Total, 
$6,400.      Brokerage,  $15. — James  J.  Hig- 


gins,  William  H.  Mitchell,  William  Lamgan, 
Bernard  Derrigan,  Charles  Taylor,  Edward 
CoU'les,  Arthur  Hunt,  Ahi  W.  Coltrane, 
John  M  Creaton,  Stephen  Herdy,  M. 
Shields. 

Recapitulation. —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  February,  1864, 
and  March,  1864,  $3,900.  Paid  for  filling 
quota,  call  July  18th,  1864,  $14,050.  Paid 
for  filling  quota,  call  December  19th,  1864, 
$2,215.      Grand  total,  $20,165. 

HAMLETS. 

Freetown  Corners  is  the  largest  hamlet 
in  the  town  and  contains  about  twenty-five 
houses  and  two  churches.  The  first  mer- 
chant in  the  town  began  business  here  ;  his 
name  was  Peter  McVean.  He  continued 
only  a  short  time  and  was  succeeded  by 
John  M.  and  Sylvester  M.  Roe,  who  came 
from  Virgil ;  they  were  in  business  here  in 
1834.  At  a  later  date  Zachariah  Squires 
was  in  business  here  eight  or  ten  years  and 
was  succeeded  by  C.  B.  Perkins,  and  he  in  a 
short  time  by  Walton  Sweetland,  who  be- 
gan in  1846,  as  already  stated.  He  con- 
tinued in  trade  many  years.  Samuel  Fierce 
was  afterward  in  business  and  was  burned 
out,  since  which  time  there  have  been 
numerous  changes,  the  more  prominent 
proprietors  having  been  John  Hubbard,  and 
at  the  present  time  Alphonso  Dcarman, 
who  was  formerly  Mr.  Hubbard's  clerk  for 
several  years.  Mr.  Dearman  is  also  post- 
master in  the  place  and  clerk  of  the  town. 

Churches. — The  P"irst  Baptist  Church  at 
Freetown  Corners  was  organized  in  1810, 
by  Elder  Caleb  Sheopard,  who  first 
preached  there.  The  first  settled  minister 
was  Benjamin  W.  Capron.  This  was  the 
first  church  in  town. 

The  Presbyterian  Church  of  Freetown 
bore  the  name  of  the  original  town  of  Cincin- 
natus  until  the  year  1825.  It  was  received 
under  the  care  of  the   Presbyterj'  of  Onon- 


42: 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


daga  September  ist,  1812,  and  on  the 
division  of  tliat  count)',  was  assigned  to  the 
Presbytery  of  Cortland.  The  cluircli  seems 
to  have  always  been  small  and  feeble  and  to 
have  had  no  regular  pastor.  It  has  been 
reported  at  limes  as  statedly  supplied  and 
at  other  times  as  vacant.  Rev.  Kleazer 
Luce  preached  in  1833  ^'"^^   34- 

East  Freetown. — This  hamlet  contains 
a  post-office  and  a  church,  .Vt  an  earl_\- 
day  a  tavern  was  kept  here  b\'  Geo.  I. 
Wavle,  in  the  house  now  occupied  by 
Nanc\'  Wa\k'.  There  is  at  the  present 
time  no  hotel  in  the  town. 

The  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  at  this 
place  was  erected  in  1846  anil  is  in  the  cir- 
cuit of  Freetown  Corners.  The  building 
committee  were  A.  Underwood,  H.  Orcutt, 
M.  Grant,  L.  Peck,  S.  C.  Coleman.  W. 
Colwell  and  E.  D.  Fish.  The  earl_\-  promi- 
nent members  of  the  church,  before  the 
erection  of  the  building,  were  Hamilton  Or- 
cutt and  wife,  Miner  Grant  and  wife,  L\'man 
Peck  and  wife,  Elder  Cameron  and  wife, 
Perry  Gardner  and  wife,  Joseph  Gardner 
and  wife,  Sally  Ripley,  Russell  Grant, 
.\lanson  Underwood  and  wife,  Philander 
Underwood  and  wife,  Alden  Harrington 
and  wife,  Warren  J.  Scouten  and  wife,  and 
some  others,  most  of  whom  are  now  dead. 
The  officers  of  the  society  at  the  present 
time  are  Turner  Butman,  John  Butman,  W. 
H.  Colwell,  D.  M.  Grant,  Alanson  Under- 
wood and  Stephen  H.  Ford.  The  niember- 
shi]i  of  the  church  is  about  si.\t\'. 


There  is  a  church  society,  few  in  member- 
ship, in  the  southeast  part  of  the  town,  of 
the  Methodist  denomination.-  They  erected 
a  church  building  during  the  late  war,  the 
ground  for  which  was  donated  by  Calvin 
Eaton. 

I.  C.  Beebe  established  a  creamery  near 
Texas  Valley  in  1870  and  has  carried  on  a 
successful  business  since.  He  has  had  a 
patronage  of  425  cows  at  one  period.  The 
building  is  two  stories  high,  one  wing  being 
24  by  55  feet  and  the  other  14  by  14. 

The  post-office  at  East  Freetown  has 
been  kept  by  P.  P.  Grant  since  i860.  John 
King  hatl  the  office  in  1851  and  is  thought 
to  ha\-e  been  the  first  postmaster. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  officers  of 
this  town:  — 

Supervisor —  ]\Iarcus  Borthwick. 

Town  clerk —  .\lplu>nso  Dearman. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  S.  L.  Woods, 
Nelson  R.  Moon,  Daniel  Bowdish. 

Assessor — \\  M.  Grant. 

Commissioner  of  highway's  —  Horace 
Martin. 

Collector  —  John  S.  Woods. 

Overseers  of  the  poor  —  William  McKee, 
Ithemur  Dunbar. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  Clarence  Tripp, 
Lawrence  Caffrey. 

Town  auditors  —  Levi  Smith,  Bernard 
Caffrey. 

Constables  —  John  S.  Woods,  D.  Col- 
well, James  A.  Wavle,  Chas.  Monroe  and 
Orvil  Picket. 


Town  ok  Taylor. 


4^3 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

l^sTOK^■  OK  Tur.  town  of  tavlor. 


THE  town  of  Taylor  lies  near  the  center 
of  the  eastern  border  of  tlic  county 
and  is  bounded  on  the  north  b\'  Cuyler; 
on  the  east  b}'  Chenango  count}'  ;  on  the 
south  b)'  Cincinnatus,  and  on  the  west  by 
Solon.  As  a  civil  organization  it  is  com- 
paratively recent,  being  formed  from  Solon 
on  the  5th  of  December,  1849;  '^  ^^-'s 
named  in  honor  of  General  Zacharj-  Tay- 
lor and  comprises  18,738^7  acres  of  land. 

The  surface  of  the  town  is  \-er)-  hill)-  and 
broken.  The  declivities  are  very  steep, 
some  of  them  precipitous  and  rising  from 
600  to  800  feet  above  the  valleys.  Mt. 
Roderick,  which  lies  partly  in  this  town  and 
partly  in  Solon,  is  the  highest  point.  The 
uplands  of  the  town  are,  however,  mostly, 
arable  while  tin;  valle_\-s  arc  rich  and  pro- 
ductive. The  town  as  a  whole  is  remark- 
ably well  adapted  to  grazing,  and  butter 
and  cheese  are  the  staple  products. 

A  number  of  small  streams  flow  through 
the  town  in  a  southerly  direction,  most  of 
them  emptying  into  the  Otselic  creek. 
Ta\'lor  pond  is  a  small  bod)-  of  water  in  the 
central  part  of  the  town.  The  soil  is  largely 
a  gravelly  loam. 

The  first  permanent  settlement  within 
the  limits  of  Taylor  was  made  b)-  Ezra 
Rockwell  and  his  sons,  Ezra  and  Thomas. 
They  came  from  Lenox,  Mass.,  in  the  year 
■793  'i''"-!  'located  on  lot  jS.  Mr.  Rock- 
well, sen.,  served  in  the  Revolutionary  arm)-  j 
and  for  his  services  drew  the  lot  on  which 
the  family  located.  In  1795  Thomas  Rock- 
well remo\'ed  to  Cincinnatus  and  after  a 
residence  there  of  thirt)--two  years,  re- 
turned to  Taylor  and  located  on  lot  I  GO, 
where  he  purchased  si.\  acres  on  wiiich  the 
village  of  Ta)-lor  now  stands.     He  also   pur- 


chased one  hundred  acres  on  lot  99.  His 
house  on  lot  lOO  originally  stood  on  the 
ground  now  covered  by  the  public  house, 
which  was  afterward  owned  by  E.  W.  Fish. 
The  building  was  burned  in  1828. 

Ezra  Rockwell  was  a  man  of  consider- 
ble  prominence  in  the  town,  held  several 
offices,  among  which  was  that  of  justice, 
which  he  creditably  filled  for  a  number  of 
years.  He  was  nearly  ninety-six  years  old 
when  he  died. 

The  Beebe  family  were  originally  from 
Connecticut.  Roderick  located  on  Mt. 
Roderick,  on  lot  75,  in  the  spring  of  1794. 
He  was  a  hardy,  industrious  man,  capable 
of  great  endurance. 

Orellana  Bcebc  migrated  from  New  Ha- 
\-en  in  1796  and  settled  on  lot  7,  in  Solon, 
now  Truxton.  After  remaining  there  two 
years  he  removed  to  Taylor  and  settled  on 
lot  100.  He  lived  to  the  age  of  ninety. 
His  youngest  daughter  became  the  wife  of 
Ira  Rockwell. 

Increase  M.  Hooker  located  on  lot  88,  in 
1797,  but  removed  to  Truxton  the  follow- 
ing year.      He  came  from  Vermont. 

Lewis  Hawley,  from  Huntington,  Conn., 
located  on  the  Howe  farm  in  Pitcher,  in 
1805.  He  remained  there  but  a  brief 
period  and  then  came  to  Taylor  and  set- 
tled on  the  form  now  owned  by  Frank  Wire. 
A  few  years  later  he  removed  to  the  West, 
or  rather  started  for  that  region,  but  as  he 
was  traveling  on  the  snow-  and  it  having 
suddenly  disappeared,  he  was  unable  to 
proceed  farther  than  Bath.  The  next  fall 
he  returned  to  Lisle,  and  the  following 
spring  to  Taylor,  locating  ^n  lot  78.  He 
subsequentl)-  purchased  one  hundred  acres 
on  lot  yj,  where  he  died  January  i  5th,  1858. 


424 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


He  was  an  active  and  prominent  citizen  and 
reared  a  family  of  children.  Lewis  T.  went 
to  S)-racuse,  where  he  became  a  prominent 
member  of  the  comnuinit>-.  James  T.  set- 
tled on  lot  Sj,  and  Francis  remained  on  the 
homestead  ;  the  latter  being  now  dead.  Hi- 
ram L.  removed  to  Liverpool,  Onondaga 
county,  where  he  died.  Cyrus  M.  removed 
to  Chicago  where  he  was  a  well  known  law- 
yer, and  John  H.  went  to  Kansas. 

John  L.  Boyd  and  John  Phelps  came  to 
Taylor  from  Saratoga  county.  The  former 
located  on  lot  g8  in  1811,  where  he  pur- 
chased 1 19  acres,  to  which  he  subsequently 
added  251  acres.  The  latter  settled  on  lot 
86,  purchasing  eighty-si.\  acres,  to  which  he 
afterwards  added  more  than  a  hundred 
more.  Mr.  Phelps  found  the  region  about 
his  farm  heavily  covered  with  timber,  and 
such  was  the  case  with  some  portions  of  the 
town  a  number  of  years  later. 

In  1 8 14  David  Wire,  who  came  originalh- 
from  Connecticut,  located  on  lot  lOO,  where 
he  reared  a  family  of  eleven  children.  His 
father  was  a  native  of  England  and  had  a 
somewhat  thrilling  experience.  He  was 
kidnaped  in  London  when  he  was  but 
se\-en  years  old  and  sold  in  Boston,  where 
he  remained  until  the  beginning  of  the  war 
between  the  French  and  the  English.  He 
was  then  impressed  in  the  English  service 
for  a  term  of  six  years ;  he  subsequently 
.settled  in  Connecticut.  When  the  War  of 
the  Revolution  broke  out  he  enlisted  in  the 
American  arm\-  and  serxed  throughout  that 
conflict. 

The  earl}-  pioneers  of  this  town,  in  com- 
mon with  those  of  surrounding  localities, 
suffered  all  tiie  hardships  and  privations  in- 
cident to  life  in  the  wilderness.  They  dwelt 
in  simple  log  houses  as  a  rule  until  long 
after  the  War  of  1812.  No  mill  was  erected 
in  the  town  until  that  year,  previous  to 
which  the  inhabitants  had  to  pound  their 
corn   into  a  semblance  of  meal,  or   carr)-  it 


1  a  distance  of  from  twenty  to  forty  miles  to 
have  it  jjround.  Money  was  very  scarce, 
and  the  exchangeable  produce  of  the  clear- 
ings on  the  farms  was  barely  sufficient, 
after  the  necessities  of  the  family  were  sup- 
plied, to  obtain  the  bare  comforts  of  life. 
But    the    hardy   and    determined   pioneers 

j  were   generally  equal  to  any  lot  that  fell  to 

:  them.  Gradual!)-  their  lands  were  cleared. 
Mills   and  shops   came  nearer,    their   farms 

'  brought  them  increased  products,  money 
became  more  plenty,  the  log  cabins  were 
displaced  by  more  comfortable  framed  cot- 
tages and  general  prosperit\-  attended  the 
growing  settlement. 

Thaddeus  S.  Whitne_\-  came  into  Taylor 
from  Delaware  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1830.    His 

I  father,  David  Whitney,  was  born  in  Nor- 
walk,  Conn.,  in  1775,  and  married  Nancy 
Raymond,  removing  to  Delaware  county 
in  1805.  He  died  in  1834.  Thaddeus  S. 
married  Laura  Rockwell,  daughter  of 
Thomas  Rockwell,  in  1832. 

Newell  Cole,  a  native  of  Rhode  Island, 
came  into  the  town  before  1820,  and  lo- 
cated on  the  farm  now  ow-ned  by  Mr.  Welch. 
Besides  being  a  farmer,  he  was  a  skillful 
mechanic,  following  his  trade  of  carpenter 
for  many  years.  He  was,  moreover,  one 
of  those  pioneers  who  were  unfortunate  in 
getting  an  in\-alid  title  to  their  farms,  and 
after  making  an  ineffectual  attempt  to  pay 
for  his  land  a  second  time,  was  compelled 
to  give  it  up.  He  died  in  1864.  His  wife 
was  Susan  Potter,  daughter  of  Chas.  Potter, 
and  w-as  also  from  Rhode  Island.  Their 
daughter,  Mrs.  Edwin  E.  Hoag,  now  resides 
in  Taylorville. 

We  cannot,  in  the  space  allotted,  trace 
the  growth  of  settlement  farther  towards 
the  present  time,  the  object  being  to  pre- 
serve the  names  especially  of  those  who 
conquered  the  wilderness  and  laid  the  foun- 
1  dations  of  the  town's  present  prosperity. 
There  are    but  two   hamlets  in   the  town 


Town  of  Taylor. 


425 


of  Taylor  —  Taylorville  and  Union  Valley 
—  although  there  is  a  post-office  and  some 
business  done  at  Taylor  Center.  Taylorville 
is  situated  in  the  southeastern  part  of  the 
town  and  contains  one  store,  post-office, 
and  about  twenty-five  houses,  with  two 
churches.  Union  Valley,  in  the  northeast- 
ern part  of  the  town,  contains  a  church,  a 
store,  hotel  and  several  shops,  with  a  small 
collection  of  dwellings. 

As  a  rule  one  of  the  first  mechanics  in  a 
settlement  was  the  blacksmith.  His  trade 
could  be  made  of  such  varied  use  to  the 
pioneers  that  he  usualh-  followed  closely  on 
the  heels  of  the  first  settler  in  a  new  dis- 
trict. William  Blackman  was  the  first 
blacksmith  to  locate  in  Taylor;  but  just 
when  or  where  he  settled  we  have  not 
learned.  He  was  followed  b)-  Alexander 
Hart,  who  worked  at  the  trade,  in  connec- 
tion with  gun- smithing,  for  a  number  of 
years.  His  shop  was  sold  to  Thaddeus  S. 
Whitne)-,  who  changed  it  partly  to  a  man- 
ufactor}-  of  edge  tools,  in  which  he  did  an 
extensive  business  during  a  period  of  more 
than  twenty  years,  manufacturing  axes 
principally. 

Ambrose  Allen  was  a  blacksmith  at  Tay- 
lor for  a  time,  and  the  shop  is  now  owned 
by  Philander  Kingsbur)'. 

Edwin  E.  Hoag  owns  a  wagon  and  re- 
pair shop,  which  was  formerly  established 
by  G.  P.  Swan  many  years  ago,  and  was 
afterward  owned  by  John  D.  Joyner.  The 
first  saw-mill  in  the  town  was  built  in  18  12, 
by  Thomas  Rockwell.  He  sold  it  to  a  Mr. 
Isbell,  after  whose  proprietorship  it  passed 
through  the  hands  of  PIzra  Rockwell,  Ira 
Wicks,  Jonathan  Brooks,  Joseph  Rice,  and 
is  now  owned  by  Hiel  Tanner,  who  has  had 
possession  of  it  for  a  nimiber  of  years. 

The  grist-mill  built  at  an  early  daj-  by 
Messrs.  Wells  &  Lord  was  the  first  one  in 
the  town.  Hayes  &  Out  owned  it  in  1881 
wlien  it  was  burned. 


Mr.  Durkee  built  the  saw-mill  at  Taylor 
pond  in  1830.  It  is  now  owned  by  Isaac 
H.  Smith.  A  grist-mill  was  also  built  here 
by  Potter  Joslyn  about  the  year  i860,  but 
it  has  gone  into  disuse. 

The  first  mercantile  business  in  the  town 
was  done  at  Taylorville,  by  Hiram  Rock- 
well. The  store  afterward  passed  into  the 
hands  of  EU  Dickinson,  Ezra  Rockwell,  and 
after  a  number  of  other  changes  was  pur- 
chased by  Albert  West,  under  whose  pro- 
prietorship it  was  burned  in  the  winter  of 
1869.  Edmund  Potter  rebuilt  the  structure 
and  subsequently  sold  out  to  A.  J.  B.  Nor- 
ton. P'oUowing  him  the  business  was  con- 
ducted by  A.  West,  J.  B.  Kellogg,  Kellogg 
&  Clark,  in  1880,  who  transferred  it  to  Wil- 
liam Comstock  in  1884. 

In  Union  Valley  Messrs.  Hulbert  &  Gil- 
bert, and  afterward  Enos  and  Allen  Hul- 
bert, conducted  a  store  and  an  ashery  as 
early  as  1830.  They  subsequently  removed 
to  Gilbertsville,  and  the  property  changed 
hands  a  number  of  times.  E.  Jipson  had 
it  in  1869,  and  it  is  now  owned  b}'  Valen- 
tine Jipson. 

In  1869  Isaac  H.  Smith  did  some  trad- 
ing at  Taylor  Center  and  took  charge  of 
the  post-office  which  he  still  continues. 
There  has  been  a  little  business  done  there 
since  that  time.  J.  I.  \'.  Potter  also  kept  a 
country  grocery  there. 

In  later  years  the  attention  of  the  farmers 
of  Taylor  has  been  given  largely  to  dair\- 
ing  interests.  The  Hawley  factory,  which 
was  built  by  Lewis  Hawley  in  1866,  was 
the  first  of  its  kind  in  the  town  and  is  also 
the  most  extensive.  The  building  was  108 
by  20  feet  ;  it  received  the  patronage  of 
145  cows  and  has  always  had  the  reputa- 
tion of  manufacturing  an  excellent  product. 
It  is  now  owned  by  the  widow  of  the  orig- 
inal proprietor. 

The  cheese  factory  owned  by  William 
Brown  has  since  been  converted  into  a  town 


426 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


hall.  It  was  built  in  the  spring  of  1868, 
but  was  not  long  used  for  its  intended  pur- 
pose. 

The  factory  buih  b}-  W'illiam  Gorsline  in 
1866,  a  half  mile  from  Union  Valley,  was 
sold  to  Calvin  Warner,  who  in  turn  trans- 
ferred it  to  the  present  owner,  James  Lake. 

The  first  post-office  in  Taylor  was  opened 
at  Taylorville  in  1834,  under  the  official 
charge  of  Ezra  Rockwell  ;  he  continued  in 
the  office  for  fifteen  successive  years,  and 
al.so  had  the  oflice  in  1856.  He  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Edwin  Potter  and  Orrin  Leonard. 
G.  W.  Gage,  the  present  postmaster,  took 
the  office  in  1880.  He  is  also  clerk  of  the 
town  and  proprietor  of  a  shoe  shop. 

As  before  stated,  Isaac  H.  Smith  is  the 
postmaster  at  Taylor  Center  and  X'alentine 
Jipson  at  Union  Valley.  A  dail\'  mail  from 
Cortland  village  reaches  these  places  by 
stage. 

The  first  tavern  in  the  t(J\\  n  was  kept  by 
Orlando  Beebe,  on  lot  100,  for  man\-  )'ears. 
The  first  one  in  Taylorville  was  built  by 
Leonard  Holmes  in  1842  and  was  kept  as 
a  public  house  until  1875,  when  it  was 
bmncd.  It  was  at  difterent  times  owned 
b)'  Levi  Mallery,  Levi  Lock,  Mr.  Neal,  Mr. 
Chatficld,  E.  W.  Fish,  M.  Lock,  George 
Thorpe,  and  probablj-  others.  Mr.  Thorpe 
was  its  owner  when  it  burned 

The  hotel  in  Union  Valley  was  built  be- 
fore 1830,  but  was  afterward  used  as  a  pri- 
vate house.  P.  Kingsbur)-  kept  tavern  here 
for  some  years. 

The  first  school  teacher  in  the  town  was 
Barak  Niles ;  he  was  a  man  of  ability  and 
was  sent  to  the  Assembly  in  1825. 

The  first  birth  in  the  town  was  Hezekiah 
Beebe.  The  first  marriage  was  that  of 
Asaph  Butler  and  Luc\-  Beebe.  The  first 
death  that  of  Zerah  Beebe  in  1800. 

Of  the  physicians  of  Taylor  we  find  little 
to  record.  Dr.  Ichabod  Allen  was  one  of 
the  earliest  and  continued  in  practice  man)- 


years.  Dr.  Jerome  Angell,  of  Union  Val- 
ley, is  an  old  and  skillful  practitioner.  He 
was  vice-president  of  the  County  Medical 
Society  in  1869. 

The  inhabitants  of  Ta}-lor  paid  early  at- 
tention to  religious  matters,  and  as  soon  as 
circumstances  would  admit,  churches  were 
organized  and  houses  of  worship  built.  Dr. 
Williston,  a  Congregational  minister,  first 
preached  .as  a  missionar)-  in  the  town.  Reu- 
ben Hurd  was  the  first  settled  pastor,  but 
when  he  began  his  labors  is  not  now  known. 
He  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Pitcher  in 
18 13;  but  if  there  was  a  church  at  that 
time  or  later  of  this  denomination  in  the 
town,  it  has  long  since  closed  its  career. 

The  W'eslejan  Methodists  of  Taylorville 
and  vicinity  erected  a  house  of  worship  in 
1835,  but  their  organization  has  always 
been  weak.  The  Rev.  A.  M.  Blackman  is 
now  the  pastor.  Some  members  of  this 
society  and  others  joined  in  the  formation 
of  the  I'Lpiscopal  Church  of  this  place  a  few 
years  after  the  erection  of  the  Wesleyan 
Church  ;  but  this  organization  is  also  small 
in  numbers.  The  Rev.  W.  Robertson  is 
the  present  pastor. 

The  Union  Church  at  Union  Valley  is 
now  used  by  the  Methodist  societj',  but  has 
no  pastor  at  the  present  time.  The  M.  E. 
Church  at  Taylor  Center  was  built  in  1873. 

The  following  table  shows  the  names  of 
the  patriotic  sons  of  this  town  who  enlisted 
in  the  service  of  their  country  in  the  War 
of  the  Rebellion,  under  the  different  calls 
for  troops,  and  were  paid  bounties,  with  the 
amount  of  the  same  :  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863,  February  and 
March,  1864.  Bounty  paid  $300.  Total, 
$6,000.  —  James  W.  Smith,  Benjamin  J. 
Strong,  1-ibeas  H.  Merry,  Orlando  Oliver, 
Hiram  W.  Perry,  Oren  Coon,  Edson  C. 
Rogers,  Moses  M.  Whiting,  Dudlej-  W. 
Wier,  Lewis  Perrj-,  William  C.  Young, 
James  Mahoney,    John  W.  Foster,    Charles 


Town  ok  Taylor. 


427 


Marsh,  Henry  Williams,  John  Farrell, 
James  Vaughn,  George  Smith,  Charles  Hill, 
James  P.  Clark. 

Call  of  July  18th,  1864.  Bounty  $1,000, 
except  $600  to  two,  $700  to  one  and  $300 
to  two.  Total,  $23,100.  Brokerage,  $575. 
—  Bartholomew  Castle,  Henry  Harden, 
William  S.  Barnum,  Leonard  W.  Wood, 
John  T.  Earl,  Robert  W.  Brooks,  Martin 
E.  Cliapin,  Alfred  E.  Watrous,  Austin  A. 
Watrous,  George  W.  Chapin,  Egbert  Peck, 
Henry  E.  Phelps,  Enoch  Rood,  Nathan  W.  j 
Sperry,  Orson  B.  Torry,  Melvin  Wavle,  [ 
Edgar  Burlingham,  Edmund  Eaton,  Charles 
A.  Goodjear,  William  H.  Oliver,  Alanson 
Oliver,  Harden  Potter,  Samuel  C.  Potter, 
Welcome  J.  Potter,  Samuel  Sluth,  Joseph 
L.  Cotton,  Albert  J.  Wildman. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1S64.  Bounty, 
$600.  Total,  $6,600.  Brokerage,  $15. — 
John  Ryan,  John  Grant,  Thomas  Fannon, 
Alexander  H.  Radford,  Lewis  Stanton,  Jo- 
seph Thompson,  Theophile  Clouter,  Thomas 
W.  Ackerman,  James  Kierns.  \\  illiam  John- 
son, Charles  Edwards. 

Recapitulation. —  Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  F"ebruar)-  and 
March,  1864,  $6,000.  Paid  for  filling  quota, 
call  July  1 8th,  1864,  $23,675.  Paid  for 
filling  quota,  call  December  19th,  1864, 
$6,615.      Grand  total,  $36,290. 

The  organization  of  the  town  of  Tajlor 
was  perfected  on  the  5  th  of  December, 
1849,  and  the  officers  elected  for  the  year 
1850  were  as  follows  :  — 

Supervisor  —  Sheldon  Warner. 

Town  clerk  —  John  R.  Wire. 

Superintendent  of  schools — Nelson  L. 
Brooks. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  Stephen  Kellogg, 
Eli  Wright,  Stephen  Skinner. 

Assessors  —  Aaron  W.  Dunbar,  S.  Ful- 
ler. 

Commissioners  of  highways —  Hubbard 
Harrison,  Horace  Neville. 


Collector  —  David  Wire. 

Constables — Perry  Mudge,  David  Wire, 
2d,  Calvin  M.  Barber,  Matthew  W.  Rich- 
mond. 

Overseer  of  the  poor  —  Israel  Ellis. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  Potter  Joslyn, 
James  Blanchard,  Seth  Hulbert. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  and 
town  clerks  since  the  formation  of  the  town, 
the  supervisor's  name  occurring  first  in  each 
year : — 
I  Sheldon  Warner,  John  M.  Wire,  1851  ; 
I  Eli  Wright,  Horace  Place,  1852;  Thomas 
C.  Wentworth,  David  Wire,  1853  ;  Sheldon 
Warner,  Orrin  Leonard,  1854;  Zadoc  Short, 
Horace  Neville,  1855  ;  Leander  Greene, 
i  Samuel  B.  Kenyon,  1856;  Sheldon  Warner, 
Orrin  Leonard,  1857-58;  Wm.  C.  Angell, 
Orrin  Leonard,  1859-60;  Ir\in  Phelps, 
Orrin  Leonard,  1861-62;  Edmund  B. 
j  Heath,  PLdmund  Potter,  1863;  O.  F.  Forbes, 
Orrin  Leonard,  1864;  O.  I*".  Forbes,  D.  W. 
Whitney,  1865  ;  O.  F.  Forbes,  G.  W.  Gage, 
1866;  Ir\in  W.  Phelps,  Francis  Hawley, 
1867;  O.  F.  Forbes,  Edwin  E.  Hoag, 
1868  ;  Irvin  W.  Phelps,  Albert  Clark,  1870; 
Irvin  W.  Phelps,  Leander  Brooks,  187 1  to 
1873,  inclusi\e;  Calvin  P.  Warner,  Valen- 
tine Jipson,  1S74;  J.  Lorenzo  Cotton,  J.  B. 
Kellogg,  1875  ;  J.  Lorenzo  Cotton,  Jerome 
A.  Norton,  1876;  J.  L.  Cotton,  Leander 
Brooks,  1877  ;  J.  L.  Cotton,  N.  C.  Rock- 
well, 1878  to  1880,  inclusive  ;  G.  W.  Gage, 
Albert  Clark,  1881  ;  Jerome  Angell,  Albert 
Clark,  1882  ;  Albert  Clark,  G.  W.  Gage, 
1883-84. 

The  present  justices  are  Wm.  B.  Stetson, 
L.  R.  Serven,  Valentine  Jipson,  Sterling  A. 
Smith,  George  W.  McDonald. 

Assessors —  L.  Birdlebough,  Thomas  G. 
Brooks,  Martin  Wire. 

Commissioner  of  highways  —  Almon  W. 
Angell. 

Overseers  of  the  poor — Wm.  G.  Skinner. 
'  Burdett  Skinner. 


428 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Constables  —  John  C.  Rogers,  Ransom 
Halbert,  Benjamin  Wilcox,  A.  F.  Potter, 
Harris  C.  Allen. 


Collector  —  A.  F.  Potter. 
Inspectors  of  election  —  Jefferson  O.  Hill, 
Rufus  L.  Cass,  Lerov  W.  Finn. 


CHAPTER  XXXL 


HI.SIOKV  OF  THK  TOWN   OF   WIl.FIT. 


THF  town  of  Willet  lies  in  the  southeast 
corner  of  the  count)-  and  contains  15,- 
839.19  acres,  with  an  assessed  valuation  ot 
$15.01  per  acre,  with  an  aggregate  valua- 
tion of  $248, 135.  The  town  is  bounded  on 
the  north  b\- Cincinnatus ;  on  the  east  bj' 
Chenango  count)- ;  on  the  south  by  Broome 
county,  and  on  the  west  by  Marathon. 

The  surface  of  the  town  consists  mainl\- 
of  the  narrow-  valley  of  the  Otselic  river  and 
the  ridges  which  rise  to  a  considerable  height 
on  either  side.  The  uplands  are  broken  by 
numerous  narrow  ra\'ines  through  which 
flow  small  streams.  A  considerable  por- 
tion of  the  town  is  still  unsettled,  and  some 
of  it  is  too  rough  and  inaccessible  for  profit- 
able cultivation.  Bloody  pond  is  a  small 
sheet  of  water  in  the  northwest  part  of  the 
town.  The  soil  consists  of  gravelly  loam 
and  shale. 

Willet  hamlet  is  situated  a  little  north  of 
the  center  of  the  town  and  consists  of  two 
churches,  four  stores,  a  hotel,  two  mills, 
several  shops  and  about   twenty  dwellings. 

Burlingame  Mills,  formerly  a  place  of 
some  note,  now  comprises  a  grist-mill  and 
a  carpenter's  shop  only.  A  store  was  for- 
merl)-  located  here. 

This  town  was  formed  from  the  south- 
eastern corner  of  the  old  township  of  Cin- 
cinnatus, and  was  named  in  honor  of  Col. 
Marin  us  Willet,  who  acquired  an  honorable 
fame  wliile  second  in  command  at  Fort 
Stanwix,  in  1777,  and  who  made  a  gallant 
sail)-  upon  the  forces  of  Sir  John  Johnston, 


capturing  their  stores  and  baggage.  Col. 
Willet  drew  lot  No.  88  of  the  old  town  of 
Cincinnatus  ;  it  w-as  situated  in  the  south- 
east quarter  of  the  township  and  when  the 
division  was  made,  the  militar)-  hero  was 
honored  with  the  application  of  his  name  to 
this  new  town,  wherein  he  found  the  tract 
of  land  which  was  awarded  him  for  his  pat- 
riotic services. 

Ebenezer  Crittenden  was  one  of  the  ear- 
liest settlers  in  the  town  of  Willet,  coming 
in  in  the  )-car  1797.  He  had  married  at 
Binghamton  and  it  is  indicative  of  the  deter- 
mined character  of  the  pioneers  of  the 
county,  that  he  took  his  wife  and  one  child, 
embarked  with  their  little  all  in  a  frail  boat 
or  canoe  and  with  the  aid  of  oars  and  set- 
ting-pole, finally  reached  their  destination 
in  safet)-,  w-ith  no  other  shelter  than  the 
blue  dome  of  heaven,  and  exposed  to  what- 
ever elements  were  destined  to  overtake 
them. 

.\rrivcd  at  his  land,  Mr.  Crittenden  cut 
some  crotched  sticks,  set  them  upright,  and 
with  the  further  aid  of  some  poles  and  their 
bed  clothing,  made  a  tent  in  which  they 
li\ed  until  he  could  complete  a  sort  of  log 
house.  This  was  constructed  in  the  follow- 
ing manner:  he  cut  sufficient  logs  for  the, 
sides  and  gable  ends  of  the  cabin,  getting 
them  small  enough  to  enable  him  to  handle 
them  single-handed.  These  he  laid  up  in 
the  usual  manner,  and  then  set  up  tw-o  pairs 
of  rafters,  one  at  each  end  of  the  cabin. 
Rcachin"   from  one   to  the   other   of  these 


Town  of  Willet. 


429 


were  placed  a  few  poles,  upon  which  he  laid 
the  rough  shingles  that  he  was  able  to  split 
out  with  his  axe,  fastening  them  in  their 
places  with  wooden  pegs.  In  the  absence 
of  a  grist-mill,  he  hollowed  out  the  top  of  a 
stump,  rigged  up  a  spring  pole,  and  thus 
made  the  family  corn  meal.  His  gun  fur- 
nished the  necessary  meat  and  the  Otseiic 
his  drink.  So  life  was  begun  b}'  the  jjio- 
neers  of  Willet. 

While  this  mode  of  li\ing  must  be  looked 
back  upon  from  the  present  time  as  scarce!)" 
civilized,  yet  the  families  who  thus  began 
the  work  of  subduing  the  wilderness  un- 
doubtedly found  much  to  encourage  and 
comfort  them  in  their  rude  homes.  There 
is  almost  nothing  to  record  in  the  towns  of 
Cortland  county  of  deeds  of  blood  by  sav- 
ages ;  the  wild  animals  were  such  as  bra\e 
men  never  feared  to  encounter,  while  peace 
and  contentment,  with  the  physical  health 
that  always  attends  such  a  life,  all  tended 
to  render  the  life  of  the  pioneer  of  this  re- 
gion one  that  was  not  all  unblest. 

The  next  settlements  that  we  find  to  re- 
cord in  this  town  were  made  in  the  years 
1806  and  1807,  when  Benjamin  Wilson 
came  in  from  Oxford,  having  originally  mi- 
grated from  Westchester  count)-  ;  John 
Fisher  came  from  England  ;  Jonathan  Gaz- 
Jay  from.  Duchess  count)',  and  Thomas 
Leach  from  Madison  county.  Benjamin 
Wilson  became  one  of  the  most  prominent 
citizens  of  the  town  ;  the  same  may  be  said 
of  severaUof  his  descendants  who  now  re- 
side in  Willet.  He  was  born  on  December 
2 1st,  1764,  and  died  August  20th,  1839. 
His  wife  was  Phoebe  Merritt.  One  of  his 
daughters  was  Hetty  Wilson,  who  was  the 
mother  of  Wihson  and  Burrill  Greene,  who 
are  now  among  the  most  prosperous  farmers 
in  the  town.  Hetty  Wilson  was  born  Jan. 
2 1  St,  1786,  and  married  Benjamin  T.  Greene 
on  the  17th  of  October,  I. Si  7.  He  was  a 
native  of  Rhode  Island  and    resided  in  this 


town    from  the   date  of  his  marriage   until 

Sept.  15th,  1853,  when  he  died  at  the  age 
of  sevent)'-one  years.  The  children  were 
Harriet,  Burrill,  Giles  and  Wilson.  The 
former  is  the  wife  of  Peter  h'.aton,  of  Willet. 
Giles  Greene  is  a  well-to-do  farmer  in  Illi- 
nois. 

Jabez  Johnson  came  from  Vermont,  in 
the  )'ear  1807,  and  Phineas  Sargent,  whose 
native  place  is  unknown,  also  came  the 
same  year.  Ebenezer  Andrews  came  in 
and  located  in  1808.  He  was  from  Massa- 
chusetts. 

In  the  year  1809  Joseph  Merritt,  from  , 
Westchester,  N.  Y.  ;  Solomon  Smith,  Dan- 
iel Roberts,  from  Madison  count)',  John 
Covert  from  Windham,  Greene  county, 
William  Greene,  from  Kent  county,  R.  I., 
Ira  Burlingame,  from  Oxford,  Chenango 
county,  N.  Y.,  A.  Burlingame,  from  Kent 
county,  R.  I  ,  and  ICdward  Nickerson,  from 
Cape  Cod,  all  came  into  the  town  and  set- 
tled in  various  locations. 

Arnold  Thomas  from  North  Kingston, 
Washington  count)',  R.  I.,  came  to  the 
town  in  1 8 10.  Solomon  Dodge,  from  Ver- 
mont, came  to  Oxford  in  181 1,  where  he 
remained  but  a  short  time,  and  then  came 
to  this  town. 

In  the  )'ear  1816  Samuel  Dyer,  from 
North  Kingston,  R.  I.,  with  John  and  Perry 
Eaton,  from  Cherry  Valley,  Samuel  and 
Abraham  Canfield  from  Orange  county, 
entered  and  located  as  pioneers. 

In, the  year  1812,  the  first  death  in  the 
town  occurred,  it  being  the  wife  of  Solomon 
Smith,  whose  settlement  we  have  chronicled. 
The  first  birth  in  the  town  was  a  child  to 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Flbenezer  Crittenden.  The 
first  marriage  was  that  of  Solomon  Smith, 
which  occurred  in  1813. 

The  names  given  above  embrace  most 
or  all  of  those  who  made  the  beginnings  of 
civilization  in  this  town  and  laid  the  foun- 
dations of  its    present    advancement.      Al- 


430 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


though  the  town  is  rugged  and  hilly,  there 
are  many  producti\e  and  valuable  farms  in 
it,  among  which  maj-  be  mentioned  those  of 
Wilson  Greene,  Andrew  Babcock,  Burrill 
Greene,  G.  M.  Landers,  Peter  Eaton,  Fred- 
erick and  Austin  Moone)'.  Morris  Deiavan, 
Charles  and  Ogden  Burlingame,  Luman  B. 
Morey,  L.  D.  Meacham,  and  doubtless 
others. 

No  establishment  is  more  needed  bj-  tiie  i 
pioneers  of  a  wilderness  than  a  grist-mill, 
and  it  is  one  of  the  first  manufacturing  en- 
terprises started  in  such  regions.  It  was 
only  about  ten  years  after  Ebenezer  Crit- 
tenden first  pitciicd  his  improvised  tent  in 
W'illet,  when  a  grist-mill  was  built  by  Ben- 
jamin Wilson.  It  was  finished  in  1807  or 
1808.  He  also  erected  a  saw-mill,  a  card- 
ing works  and  a  distillery.  The  grist-mill 
and  saw-mill  stood  on  opposite  sides  of  the 
creek  on  lot  57,  and  were  continued  in 
operation  for  fifteen  or  twenty  jears. 
Mr.  Wilson  also  established  an  ashery  in 
the  same  locality.  Goodwin  says:  "Wilson 
built  his  mills  on  the  waters  of  the  Otselic, 
in  the  north  part  of  the  town,  as  may  well 
be  proved  by  most  of  the  learned  judges, 
lawyers  and  wearied  juries  of  the  county  ; 
and  of  such  importance  had  the  building  of 
those  mills  become  in  the  legal  movements 
of  the  human  mind,  that  could  they. all  be 
written  down  as  were  the  acts  of  the  apos- 
tles, they  might  well  be  called  the  '  books 
of  uncertainty.'"  Wilson's  mill  was  the 
mill  of  the  town  during  the  first  half  of  the 
century.  His  carding  machine  was  oper- 
ated until  1844  or  1845. 

Mr.  Wilson  also  erected  a  blacksmith 
shop  as  early  as  18 10  or  i8i  i,  and  in  1808 
he  kept  a  public  house.  It  will  be  correctly 
inferred  that  he  was  a  very  active  and  use- 
ful citizen  ;  and  he  was  rapidly  building  up 
a  village,  having  also  started  a  small  store. 
But  his  propert\-  finall\-  passed  into  the 
hands  of  a  Mr.    Adams,  w  ho   seems   not  to 


have  cared  particular!)'  about  making  a  bus- 
iness center  at  this  point,  and_  allowed  the 
budding  industries  to  decline.  He  con- 
tinued the  distillery  for  a  time,  but  it  is 
said  that  his  whisky  was  not  of  sufficient 
purity  to  give  it  a  selling  reputation  and 
that  industry  also  languished. 

John  Fisher  built  a  saw-mill  on  the  Ot- 
selic, in  the  southwestern  part  of  the  town, 
and  about  the  same  time  Jabez  Johnson 
built  another  on  the  outlet  of  Bloody  pond, 
in  the  northwestern  part  of  the  town. 
Johnson  also  had  a  cloth-dressing  estab- 
lishment and  a  grist-mill,  which  is  now 
known  as  the  Burlingame  mill  and  is 
owned  by  Wescott  Burlingame.  It  is  now 
the  only  grist-mill  in  tl\e  town. 

Wilson  Greene  built  a  saw-mill  in  1861, 
on  the  outlet  of  Bloody  pond,  which  was 
operated  until  1878,  when  it  was  abandoned. 
Daniel  Edwards  now  owns  one  on  the  same 
stream,  a  little  farther  up. 

This  town,  like  many  others  in  the 
county,  is  particularly  well  adapted  to  graz- 
ing;  but  it  w-as  not  until  1882  that  Julius 
Crittenden  erected  a  cheese  factory,  which 
is  now  operated  by  his  son,  Frank.  He  is 
also  proprietor  of  a  cheese  factory  in  the 
town  of  Cincinnatus. 

Thus  the  town  grew  and  prospered,  the 
forests  were  gradually  cleared  away  and  the 
lands  brought  under  a  state  of  culti\ation, 
until  the  year  1 818.  when  the  town  was  set 
off  from  Cincinnatus.  as  before  stated.  The 
first  town  meeting  was  held  at  the  house  of 
Benjamin  Wilson,  in  18 19.  Altitius  Bur- 
lingame ofTiciated  as  moderator,  and  Wil- 
liam Throop  as  justice  of  the  peace.  The 
following  officers  were  elected  for  the  term 
of  one  year : — 

Supervisor — William  Throop. 

Tow-n  clerk  —  Samuel  Dyer. 

Assessors  —  William  Throop,  John  Ea- 
ton, Benjamin  Greene. 

Collector  —  Joseph  Nickerson. 


Town  of  Wiij.et. 


431 


Overseers  of  the  poor —  Altitius  Hurlin- 
ganie,  Henry  Sawdy. 

Commissioners  of  highways  —  Benjamin 
T.  Greene,  John  Briggs  and  Jolin  Eaton. 

Commissioners  of  schools  —  John  Briggs, 
Benjamin  T.  Greene,  Abner  Wilbur. 

Constables  —  Joseph  Nickerson,  John 
Campbell. 

Commissioners  of  lands  —  Benjamin  T. 
Greene,  Altitius  Burlingame,  Peter  Eaton. 

Inspectors  of  common  schools  —  W. 
Throop,  Orlando  Salisbury,  John  Corbett, 
Anson  T.  Burt,  Bickncll  Freeman,  Samuel 
Dyer. 

Sealer  of  weights  and  measures — Alti- 
tius Burlingame. 

An  incident  occurred  in  the  town  about 
this  time  which  cast  a  gloom  over  the  com- 
munit}'.      It  is  thus  described  b\-  Goodwin  : 

"Arnold  Thomas  and  his  much-esteemed 
wife  were  drowned  in  the  Otselic  river,  at  or 
near  the  termination  of  the  o.\•-bow^  Mrs. 
Thomas  was  a  sister  of  Altitius  Burlingame. 
They  were  endeavoring  to  cross  the  river  on 
an  illy  constructed  raft,  with  a  design  to  at- 
tend a  prayer  meeting.  Miss  Hannah 
Corpse,  Nelly  Miller  and  Mr.  Burlingame 
were  in  company  w^ith  the  unfortunate 
couple.  Mr.  Burlingame,  being  an  excellent 
swimmer,  succeeded  in  saving  himself  and 
the  two  young  ladies.  The  bodies  of  Mr. 
Thomas  and  his  wife  were  recovered  from 
the  w-ater)'  element  and  now  repose  in  one 
grave,  sacred  to  their  memory,  in  Mr,  Burl- 
ingame's  orchard." 

The  first  school-house  was  erected  in  the 
town  in  18 14,  but  it  is  not  known  who  was 
the  first  teacher.  The  business  center,  as 
before  intimated,  was  on  lot  58,  where  it 
continued  to  be  until  the  enterprising  John 
S.  Dyer  came  to  the  front  and  established 
a  store  where  the  village  of  Willct  is  now 
located.  This  was  in  the  year  1834;  in 
1837  he  started  another  store,  and  a  third 
one  in  1848.      He  also  erected    the   tavern. 


which  has  since  been  considerably  enlarged. 
Mr.  Dyer  afterward  formed  a  partnership 
with  Chauncey  Bean,  under  the  firm  name 
of  Dyer,  Bean  &  Co. 

Samuel  Dyer,  father  of  John  S.,  was  the 
first  postmaster  in  Willet,  in  1823. 

The  first  store,  established  by  John  S. 
Dyer,  is  now  conducted  b\-  C.  P.  McVean. 

Samuel  C.  Dyer,  successor  to  Elbert  J. 
Dyer,  is  also  a  merchant  in  the  village.  The 
others  now  trading  there  are  David  A. 
Wiles,  who  carries  on  a  general  store,  and 
Walter  H'orshce,  who  has  a  hardware  estab- 
lishment. 

Henr\-  Wiles,  a  native  of  Otsego  count)-, 
born  January  3d,  1805,  first  migrated  to 
Cincinnatus  with  his  father,  Adam.  In 
1852  he  removed  to  Willet,  where  he  was 
in  mercantile  trade  until  his  death  in  1871. 
His  son's  store  is  now  on  the  site  of  the 
former  one  which  was  burned  in  1864. 
Rhoda  M.  Wiles,  daughter  of  Henry,  is  the 
wife  of  Wilson  Greene. 

William  Dellovv  came  to  Willet  in  1857, 
bought  a  vacant  lot  and  erected  a  shop  in 
which  he  carried  on  the  manufacture  of 
furniture  for  sixteen  years.  At  the  same 
time  Mr.  Dellow  began  business,  John  S. 
Dyer,  Geo.  B.  Morgan  and  Henry  Wiles 
were  the  merchants  in  the  place.  Adam 
Seaber  succeeded  Morgan  ;  then  the  firm 
was  Seaber  &  Weld,  then  E.  J.  Dyer,  and 
the  store  is  now  conducted  by  A.  Dyer.^ 

The  first  hotel  in  the  town  was  kept  by 
Benjamin  Wilson.  The  first  in  the  village 
was  kept  by  John  S.  Dyer,  who  continued 
in  the  business  fro.m  1832  to  1842.  The 
propert)-  was  then  rented  for  a  period  of 
about  twenty  years,  during  which  there  were 
nimierous  changes,  which  need  not  be  fol- 
lowed. In  1853  it  was  sold  to  Asa  Can- 
field,  who  remained  for   a  time,  as  did  also 

1  It  is  the  opinion  of  Wilson  Greene  that  the  first  goods 
sold  in  the  town  were  brought  in  by  a  traveling  salesman, 
who  opened  them  in  n  room  in  Samuel  Dyer's  house. 


43 : 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


William  Canfield.  The  hotel  is  now  con- 
ducted bj'  Frank  Smith,  who  makes  it  a 
po])iilar  phice. 

There  are  in  the  \ilia^e  a  reasonable 
number  of  skillful  mechanics.  George  Mo- 
ses was  probably  the  first  blacksmith  in  the 
village.  J.  McMinn  and  Silas  Leroy  are 
now  engaged  in  this  business.  Walter  For- 
shee  has  a  tin  shop.  William  (iardner  is 
the  harness  maker,  and  Joseph  L.  Hawley, 
shoemaker.  Chas.  Genson  and  Chas.  Finn 
are  the  wagon- makers. 

Churches — The  Methodists  have  been 
earnestly  engaged  in  religious  work  in  this 
town  since  asearh-as  1815  or  18 16.  Their 
number  has,  however,  always  been  small. 

The  Baptist  Church  was  organized  in 
1821,  and  the  Congregationalist  in  1852. 
The  latter  had  but  few  members  and  has 
been  abandoned  for  some  time.  The  Bap- 
tist Society  continues,  but  with  a  limited 
membership. 

Willet  was  not  behind  her  sister  towns 
in  ofFerintr  men  and  means  to  aid  the  gov- 
ernment  in  putting  down  the  Southern 
Rebellion.  The  quotas  were  filled  under 
the  different  calls  as  shown  by  the  following 
list :  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  Bounty, 
$300.  Total,  $3,900.  — Freeman  T.  Wil- 
lard,  Silas  Adams,  Valentine  Babcock,  Os- 
car Seymour,  John  Potter,  John  E.  Vos- 
burgh,  Frank  Minter,  Joseph  Quick,  Daniel 
Farmane,  Charles  L.  Tarbox,  Lyman  Joy- 
ner,  Patrick  Condon,  Edward  Condon. 

Call  of  July  i8th,  1864.  Bounty,  $1,000. 
Total,  $22,000.  Brokerage,  $550  . —  Rob- 
ert Wilson,  Charles  R.  Brown,  Theodore 
H.  Fitch,  William  B.  R.  Gritman,  Abram 
S.  Holland,  William  H.  Jones,  Ex-erett  S. 
Johnson,  George  M.  Kinney,  Uriah  Loomis, 
George  Loomis,  Ephraim  Loomis,  Charles 
W.  Robinson,  George  H.  Slack,  William  A. 
Smith,  Frederick  A.  Skillman,  William 
Taylor,  Myron  Wooster,  John  A.  Winchel, 


Roderick  Wilber,  Thomas  Torry,  James  W. 
Ostrander,  O.  F.  Pickney. 

Call  of  December  19th,  1864.  Bount}-, 
$600.  Total,  $1,800.  Brokerage,  $15. — 
S.  Wetmorc,  William  J.  Hedge,  William 
Martin. 

Recapitulation. —  Paid  for  filling  quiUa, 
calls  October  ijth,  1863,  ]-"ebruary  and 
March,  1864,  $3,900.  Paid  for  quotal  call, 
July  18th,  1864,  $22,550.  Paid  for  filling 
quota,  call  December,  19th,  1864,  $1,815. 
Grand  total,  $28,265. 

We  gi\e  below  a  list  of  the  supervisors 
of  Willet  from  the  year  1834  to  the  present 
time:  John  S.  Dyer,  1834  to  1839,  in- 
clusive; Geo.  Isaacs,  1840;  \N .  A.  Coc, 
1841—42;  Benjamin  T.  Green,  1843;  Jo- 
seph P.  West,  1844  ;  Joseph  Greene  ;  1845- 
46;  Stephen  Adams,  1847;  Silas  Court- 
ney, 1848;  Lewis  Mooney,  1849;  Silas 
Courtnc)-,  1850-51  ;  John  S.  D}er,  1852- 
53;  BurriU  Greene,  1854;  John  S.  D)-er, 
1855;  John  Miller,  1856;  John  S.  Dyer, 
1857-58;  W^m.  R.  Coles,  1859;  John  D, 
Greene,  i860;  Benjamin  S.  Coe,  1861—62; 
John  S.  Dyer,  1863  ;  Benjamin  S.  Coe, 
1864-65;  O.  C.  Hall,  1866-67;  E.  F. 
Nichols,  1868  to  1870,  inclusive;  Ogden 
Burlingame.  1871-72;  Chas.  D.  Bowen, 
1873;  S.  C.  D)'er,  1874-75;  O.  Burlin- 
game, 1876;  W.  Greene,  1877  to  1884,  in- 
clusive. 

F"ollowing  are  the  present  officers  of  the 
town  of  Willet  (1884):— 

Supervisor  —  Wilson  Greene. 

Town  clerk  —  Joseph  L.  Hawley. 

lustices —  Jefferson  Green,  John  D.  Coe, 
Wm.  E.  Bailey,  Geo.  B.  Landers. 

Commissioner  of  highways — ^eo.  Talbot. 

Assessors  —  Samuel  C.  Dyer,  Almon 
Talbot,  Wilber  J.  Delevan. 

Overseer  of  the  poor —  Elijah    Tennant. 

Excise  commissioners  —  Calvin  Bliss, 
Milton  Glovers,  Marcellus  Landers. 

Game  constable  —  Davton  Conrad. 


Town  of  Harford. 


433 


Constables  —  Coriell  Katon.  Milttus 
Hotchkiss,  Jackson  McMinn,  Win.  C.  Stern- 
berg. 


Collector  —  Coriell  Eaton. 
Inspectors  of  election — Horace  Tiffanj-, 
.\ddison  Whitmorc,  Adclbert  Babcock. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


HI.STORV  OF    I'HE  TO\V.\   OK   H.ARFORI). 


THE  town  of  Harford  comprises  the 
southwestern  quarter  of  the  original 
militar}'  township  of  Virgil,  (No.  244)  of 
the  military  tract,  and  is  now  the  extreme 
southwestern  town  in  the  count)'.  It  is 
bounded  on  the  north  by  Virgil  ;  on  the 
east  b\'  Lapeer ;  on  the  south  by  Tioga 
count)'  and  on  the  west  by  Tompkins 
county.  rhe  tow  n  was  not  organized  until 
May  2d,  1845,  and  consequentl)'  mucli  of 
its  early  history  is  identified  with  that  of 
Virgil,  in  preceding  pages. 

The  surface  of  the  town  consists  of  high 
broken  and  rugged  uplands  rising  from  500 
to  700  feet  above  the  intervening  valleys, 
and  from  1500  to  1700  feet  above  tide  wa- 
ter. The  Owego  hills  in  the  central  part 
of  the  town  constitute  the  most  elevated  por- 
tion. The  declivities  are  generally  steep 
and  often  rocky,  and  most  of  the  hilly  sum- 
mits are  still  crowned  with  heavy  forests. 
The  town  is  watered  by  small,  clear  brooks 
which  arc  fed  b)'  springs,  the  largest  stream 
being  what  is  commonly  called  Owego 
creek,  which  runs  southward  through  the 
central  part  of  the  town.  The  soil  of  the 
town  is  a  sandy,  gravelly  loam,  of  moderate 
productive  capacity  and  better  adapted  to 
grazing   than  to  grain-raising. 

Harford  is,  with  one  exception,  the  small- 
est to\\  n  in  the  county,  its  acreage  being 
but  519  more  than  that  of  Preble,  which  is 
the  smallest  town.  Harford  has  14,612 
acres. 

Settlement  in  this  town  was  more    back- 


ward than  in  most  other  sections  of  the 
county,  and  the  clearing  and  impro\ement 
of  the  more  remote  and  hilly  portions  pro- 
portionatel)-  retarded.  Even  at  the  present 
time  lumbering  is  an  industr)'  of  consider- 
able importance  to  the  town. 

Dorastus  De  Wolf  was  the  first  settler  in 
the  town  and  located,  in  1803,  o"  3  farm 
west  of  the  \illage  on  the  hill,  now  owned 
by  Norton  L.  Brown.  He  subsequent!)- 
moved  into  a  small  frame  house  which  stood 
on  the  road  north  of  the  village  near  the 
corners.  Putnam  De  Wolf,  a  brother  of  Do- 
rastus, settled  in  the  town  not  long  after- 
ward and  near  his  brother. 

The  forests  with  which  the  town  was  then 
covered  abounded  in  wild  game.  W'olves 
were  very  numerous  and  it  was  near  the 
end  of  the  first  quarter  of  the  centur)-  be- 
fore the  few  settlers  could  leave  their  sheep 
unprotected  at  night,  confident  of  finding 
them  safe  the  next  morning.  The  woods 
were  traversed  b)'  numerous  d^x'r,  which 
were  often  seen  in  droves ;  bears  were 
plentiful  and  an  occasional  elk  was  seen  in 
the  secluded  valleys. 

Josiah  Brown  was  one  of  the  early  set- 
tlers of  Harford,  coming  in  from  Chenango 
county  during  the  progress  of  the  War  of 
181 2.  He  settled  a  little  north  of  Harford 
\-illage  on  the  farm  where  Homer  Brown 
now  lives,  and  which  is  owned  by  Dexter 
Brown,  of  Marathon.  Morris  Brown  came 
in  with  his  father,  Josiah,  and  married 
Matilda     Holden,    daughter    of    Benjamin 


434 


l-llSTORY    OF   CORTLAXI)    CoUNTV. 


Holdcn,  who  settlcti  in  t!ic  tnwn  at  about 
the  same  time  with  Mr.  Brow'ii  ;  lie  came 
from  tlic  State  of  Maine  and  located  about 
a  mile  southwest  of  the  village,  on  the  farm 
now  occupied  b\-  Solomon  Roj^crs  Hcnja- 
min  Holden  was  the  grandfather  of  Samuel 
Holden,  now  a  merchant  in  Harford.  Lu- 
ther Holden,  another  grandson,  now  owns 
the  Heaton  farm  and  lives  there.  After 
the  marriage  of  Morris  Hrown  and  Matilda 
I  lolden,  the\-  settled  on  the  farm  where 
Mrs,  Brown  still  li\es,  and  where  hei'  hus- 
band died  ill  March,  1883,  about  .1  mile 
north  of  the  village ;  there  they  resided 
permanently  for  nearly  seventy  years. 

Mrs.  Brown's  niemory  of  early  settle- 
ments in  the  town  is  .still  remarkably  clear, 
and  we  are  indebted  to  her  for  details  of 
the  progress  of  settlement  at  the  date  of 
her  arrival,  wliich  was  as  earl\-  as  1815  and 
probabl)-  a  year  or  two  earlier. 

Jacob  Hemingway  was  then  in  the  town 
and  lived  where  the  hotel  now  stands,  which 
he  built  in  about  the  vear  1820. 

Of  the  settlers  who  had  followed  Ue  Wolf 
into  the  town  before  the  year  1815,  Mrs. 
Brown  gives  us  the  names  and  locations  of 
the  following:  Josiah  Hart,  father  of  Josiah 
Hart,  of  Cortland  \illage,  settled  on  the 
place  in  the  \illage  now  owned  by  Alanson 
Burlingame  and  built  the  old  red  house 
which  still  stands  there. 

Lemuel  Barnes  located  on  the  Slaterx  ille  j 
road  about  a  mile   west  of  the  \-illage.       He  | 
was  grandfather  of  George  and    Eli  Barnes, 
who  still  li\e  in  the  town. 

Barnev  Norwood  and  George  Cooley 
were  both  here  before  1815.  The  former 
was  the  father  of  I'hilip  Norwood  and  set- 
tled where  he  lived  until  recently,  and  the 
latter  located  in  the  village  ab(jut  opposite 
where  the  old  hotel  stands. 

Calvin  Totman  settled  on  what  was  long 
known  as  "  Chicken  Point,"  where  he  kept 
the  first  store  in  town       It  was  a  small  affair 


and  its  existence  has  been  forgotten  by 
most  t)f  the  old  inhabitants.  Philip  Hard- 
enburg  is  of  the  opinion  that  Totman  sold 
goods  in  the  \'illage,  or  on  the  site  of  the 
village,  for  a  short  time  before  locating  at 
"  Chicken  Point." 

Levi  Moore  settled  in  the  town  early  and 
lived  where  Mrs.  Harriet  Moore  now  re- 
sides;  she  is  a  widow  of  Le\i's  son.  Levi 
Moore  kept  a  ta\ern  on  this  corner,  which 
was  the  first  on  the  site  of  the  village  and 
one  of  the  earliest  in  the  tow  11. 

Enoch  Allen  ami  Chas.  (iraxes  were  in 
the  town  before  ]8i5  and  kept  taverns,  one 
on  each  side  of  the  road  near  the  site  of 
the  Nathan  Heaton  house.  Allen  shot 
himself  subsequentlv  in  his  own  house. 

Nathan  Heaton  settled  on  the  site  of 
Harford  Mills  before  1815  and  built  the 
grist-mill  at  lliat  point  before  the  year 
i8jo.  Warren  Hart  ami  Richard  Collins 
were  located  lure  at  the  same  time.  The 
latter  li\  cd  where  Hiram  Wilcox  now  re- 
sides. .\  saw-mill  was  built  beside  the 
grist-mill  at  I  lartord  Mills  about  the  same 
time  that  the  grist-mill  was  erected  ;  but  we 
ha\e  not  leariud  b_v  wlmm.  Colf)iiel  Hem- 
ingway built  a  saw-mill  at  Chicken  Point  at 
an  early  da\'  and  Tisdale  Jones  built  an- 
other a  little  farther  u]i  the  stream,  while 
Josiah  Hart  built  a  third  one  still  farther  up. 
These  niilN  w  i.re  in  operation  as  early  as 
about   1  S44        riiey  are  all  now  abandoned. 

Samuel  L'msby  settled  before  1815  on 
what  is  known  as  the  Beard  place,  which 
he  ownetl  and  where  he  built  a  distillery 
not  long  after  1820.  Another  earl\- distiil- 
er\-  stood  about  on  the  site  of  the  cheese 
factor\-,  which  was  operated  b_\'  .\aron  lien- 
edict.  An  asher\'  stood  near  it,  which  was 
managed  b\-  Theodore  Hart 

Israel  (iraves  and  Da\id  Crosby  were 
here  before  1815.  Graxes  lived  at  Chicken 
Point  and  Crosby  where  Robert  Purvis 
now  resides. 


Town  of  Harford. 


435 


John  Straight  settled  where  Hallock  Mar- 
tin lives,  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  village, 
before  1815.  It  is  said  that  he  owned  three 
square  miles  of  land  at  <Mie  time  ;  but  be- 
came a  too  stead)-  patron  of  the  distillery 
and  finally  lost  all  of  his  property. 

Gordon  Hurlingame  was  an  early  settler 
on  the  farm  now  owned  and  occupied  by 
his  grandson,  Allen  W.  Tyler,  his  father, 
Jeremiah  Tyler,  of  Virgil  Corners,  having 
married  Mr.  Burlingame's  daughter.  The 
brick  house  now  on  the  farm  was  built  by 
Mr.  Burlingame  in  1828,  the  brick  having 
been  made  on  the  farm  near  the  barns. 
There  were  other  brick  yards  in  the  town 
at  an  early  da)-,  which  accounts  for  the 
number  of  substantial  brick  houses  in  ditifer- 
ent  localities. 

Lorenzo  Totman,  a  brother  of  the  first 
merchant,  settled  before  1815,  about  four 
miles  east  of  the  village  on  the  road  leading- 
to  Marathon.  His  father  lived  on  that  farm 
and  must  have  been  one  of  the  earliest 
settlers. 

Daniel  Allen  was  in  the  town  before  1815 
and  built  one  of  the  first  grist-mills  in  the 
town,  near  where  Sealer  Jackson  subse- 
quentl)'  li\^ed,  about  half  a  mile  east  of  Har- 
ford Mills. 

Stephen  Cross  settled  in  the  town  before 
1 81 5  and  located  on  land  now-  owned  by- 
John  Valentine.  He  was  from  Chenango 
county.  Mr  Cross  built  the  brick  house 
now  occupied  b\-  Mr.  Valentine.  His 
son,  Marvin,  now  of  Brooklyn,  built  the 
old  wooden  house  now  occupied  b)-  Otis 
Clark,  and  kept  house  there  for  the  first 
time.  He  soon  afterward  mo\-ed  to  Brook- 
lyn and  has  become  wealth)-  in  the  lumber 
business.  Gu)-  Barnes,  a  son  of  Lemuel, 
before  mentioned,  was  an  early  resident 
about  half  a  mile  west  of  Harford  village,  on 
the  S!ater\'ille  road,  where  Spencer  Seaman 
now  lives.  John  Moss  was  another  early 
settler  in  that  \'icinit)-. 


Nathan  Heaton,  Theodore  E.  Hart,  Levi 
Moore  and  Seth  Stevens  were  among  other 
early  settlers  in  the  town.  The  Graves 
family  and  the  C"rosb\s  came  in  about  the 
year  18 14. 

Benjamin  Holden,  a  native  of  Massachu- 
setts, removed  from  the  State  of  Maine  to 
Harford  in  18 16,  and  located  on  land  now- 
owned  by  Milo  Day.  He  died  in  1842. 
His  daughter,  Betsey-  B.,  now  the  wife  of 
Dexter  Brown,  of  Marathon,  was  six  months 
old  when  her  parents  left  Massachusetts  and 
three  vears  old  when  the)-  came  to  Har- 
ford. Dexter  Brown  was  born  in  Harford 
in  1 8 16,  was  married  in  1839  and  remo\'ed 
to  Marathon  in  1876.  Until  that  time  he 
residetl  constantl)-  on  the  farm  where  he 
was  born  and  which  he  still  owns.  His 
father,  Josiah  Brown,  died  in  i860,  at  the 
age  of  ninet)--one  years. 

Henry  Ballard  was  one  of  the  compara- 
tivel)-  early  settlers  and  died  in  the  tow-n  in 
1853.  having  attained  the  gre.it  age  of  109 
years. 

This  town  is  more  fortunate  than  some 
others  in  the  county,  which  might  otherwise, 
perhaps,  have  left  it  behind  in  matters  of 
prosperity,  in  the  fact  of  its  having  ample 
railroad  communication  o\-er  the  Southern 
Central,  with  Auburn  on  the  nortl-|,  con- 
necting with  the  New-  York  Central,  and 
Owego  on  the  south,  where  it  connects  with 
the  New  York,  Lake  Erie  and  Western. 
In  the  year  1852  a  companj-  was  organized 
under  the  name  of  the  Lake  Ontario,  Au- 
burn and  New  York  Railroad  Company, 
with  a  capital  stock  of  $1 ,500,000. 

A  route  running  from  Fair  Haven  on  the 
north  to  Pugsley's  Station  jon  the  south  was 
established  and  much  of  the  right  of  wax- 
secured.  .A.bout  $375,000  was  spent  on 
grading,  when  the  company  collapsed.  In 
1853  another  company  was  organized  and 
$450,000  was  spent  in  grading  between  the 
lake   and  Weedsport.      Operations   on   the 


436 


History  or  Cortland  Colxtv. 


enterprise  were  sus])ende(l  willi  the  break- 
ing out  of  till-  Rebellion  ;  but  in  1865  the 
eonipan)-  was  reorganized  and  the  route 
ciumged  to  its  present  course.  The  road 
was  comi)leted  antl  trains  began  lunning  in 
I  869,  when  the  Owego  vallc)-  through  the 
town  of  Harford  echoed  with  the  shriek  of 
the  steam  whistle.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
town  full)'  ajjprcciated  the  importance  of 
this  improx'enient  and  celebrated  the  event 
in  a  joyful  manner.  The  railroad  lias  been 
of  vast  benefit  to  the  tow  n  and  shipments 
of  produce  and  lumber  from  the  stations  at 
Harford  and  Harford  Mills  ha\e  been  large. 

Kbenezer  Burgess  came  from  the  State 
of  Maine  with  the  Hniwn  famil\-  in  1813, 
and  located  east  of  the  village,  on  lands 
now  owned  by  Henry  Wavle.  In  the  fol- 
lowing year,  as  stated  bj-  Erving  Taintor, 
who  is  connected  with  the  family  b\  mar- 
riage, Mr.  Burgess  bought  the  apple  trees 
and  pear  trees  that  are  now  standing  on  the 
old  place.  The  trees  were  bought  of  lohn 
Straight  (elsewhere  alluded  to),  w^ho  then 
had  a  nursery. 

Asel  Sexton,  father  of  Ransom  Sexton, 
settled  in  1814  on  the  ])remises  now  occu- 
pied by  Miss  Moore  in  Harford  village. 
Ransom  was  born  in  i  8 1 3  and  came  to  Har- 
ford Mills  about  twenty-five  years  ago. 

The  late  Lansing  Hay  settled  in  Harford 
in  December,  1826,  locating  on  the  farm 
now  occupied  by  Henr}-  Bnyce.  He  was 
then  twentv  years  old.  Mr.  Ha\-  became 
one  of  the  leading  farmers  of  the  town. 
One  of  his  daughters  is  the  wife  of  H.  C. 
Gray  of  Harford  Mills  :  another  is  the  wife 
of  Ransom  Jennings;  another  lives  at  Har- 
ford Mills,  and  his  son.  I..  ]•'.  I  lav.  is  a  mer- 
chant of  Harford    Mills. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  brave  sons  of 
Harford  who  went  forth  at  the  call  of  their 
country,  with  the  amounts  paid  them  as 
bounties,  under  the  different  calls  of  the 
government  for  troops:  — 


Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  Bounty 
paid,  $300.  Total,  $6,900. —  James  Hyde, 
Alexander  Xetif,  Otis  C.  Clark,  Isaac  E. 
Keech,  Squire  Morton,  Emery  \V.  Smith, 
Prentis  Elliott,  Josephus  Haskell,  Manville 
P.  Teed,  Hallet  Shepard,  David  Douglass, 
Samuel  I.  Hulslander,  Joseph  Neff,  George 
VV.  Lason,  Rutger  B.  Marsh,  Miles  R.  Fos- 
ter, S)'l\'ester  M.  Foster,  Taylor  Maricle, 
Hugh  Caton,  Rile\'  D.  Sheppard,  Cornelius 
Morrison,  Halsey  I,.  Leonard,  Francis  L. 
Sheppard. 

Call  of  Jul)-  ivSth.  1864.  Bount)-  paid, 
$1,000,  except  $700  to  one,  and  $500  to 
one.  Total  buunt\',  $14,200.  Total  brok- 
erage, $465. —  Ciilbert  James,  Isaac  Hultz, 
James  Matterson,  .Alexander  Ogden,  Xel- 
son  Thompson,  James  R\'an,  Thomas  Ryan, 
Henr\-  .\dams,  Erastus  Babcock,  Asahel 
Tillotsiin,  Benjamin  II.  Decker,  Alonzo 
Perry,  William  II.  Tarbox,  Robert  P.  Ho])- 
kins,  Patrick  Dunn,  H.  D.  Goddard. 

Call  (if  December  19th,  1864.  Bount\- 
paid,  $600,  except  $500  to  one.  Total, 
$5,300.  Bri)kerage,  $135.  —  Ale.xander 
Dalziel.  Cliarles  H.  Chichester.  Frederick 
J.  Turner.  Inhn  Gregor\-.  Thomas  Swift, 
George  Silas,  James  Callaghan,  Charles  H. 
Bennett.  Thomas  Miller. 

Recapitulation. —  I'aiti  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  of  October  17th,  I  863,  February,  1864, 
March,  1864,  $6,900.  Paid  for  filling  quota, 
call  Jul\-  iSth,  1864,  $14,575.  •'■'''^  fo'' 
filling  quota,  call  December  19th,  1864. 
$5,435.      (Hand  total,  $26,910. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  superx'isors  and 
town  clerks  of  Harford  from  its  organiza- 
tion to  the  present  time,  with  the  e.xcep- 
tion  of  the  _\  ear  1851,  of  which  there  is  no 
record  available.  The  name  of  the  super- 
visor appears  first  in  each  instance  :  Josiah 
Hart,  Oreii  M.  Moore.  1 846 ;  Alanson 
Burlingamc,  Oren  M.  Moore,  1847-48; 
David  Da\is,  Oren  M.  Moore,  1849;  A.  F. 
Delavergne.    .\lfred    A.    Jones.    1850;   Jo- 


Town  of  Harford. 


437 


siah  Rood,  VVm.  Lincoln,  1852;  Josiah 
Rood,  J.  H.  Knapp,  1853  ;  J.  H.  Knapp, 
A.  Burlingamc,  1854;  J..  \V.  Rood,  Jas.  P. 
Smith,  1855:  Krvini;  Taintor,  S.  W.  Nel- 
son, 1856-57;  J.  J.  iM-eer,  S.  W,  Nelson, 
1858;  J.  H.  Knapp,  James  Heath,  1859; 
J.  H.  Knapp,  W'm.  Vorhees,  i86o;  S.  W. 
Nelson,  Daniel  H.  Miller,  1861-62;  Rob- 
ert Purvis,  Homer  J.  Brown,  1863  ;  Erving 
Taintor,  Homer  J.  Bro^\■n,  1864;  Ervinij 
Taintor,  H.  F.  Jones,  1865;  Erving  Fain- 
tor,  D.  H.  Miller,  1866-67;  S.  H.  Steele, 
L.  W.  Tanner,  1868-69;  S.  H.  Steele,  H. 
J.  Brown,  1870;  S.  H.  Steele,  L.  \V.  Tan- 
ner, 1871  ;  W.  J.  Baker,  L.  \V.  Tanner, 
1872;  S.  H.  Steele,  M.  S.  Da\-.  1873-74; 
S.  H.  Steele,  L.  W.  Tanner,  1875  ;  S.  H. 
Steele,  A.  W.  r\ler,  1876;  S.  H.  Steele, 
L.  W.  Tanner,  1877;  S.  H.  Steele,  B.  F, 
Silsbee,  1878;  S.  H.  Steele,  J.  C.  Ed- 
munds, 1879-80;  A.  W.  Clinton,  J.  C. 
Edmunds,  1881  ;  A.  W.  Clinton.  H.  T. 
Bushncll,  1882;  H.  C.  Gray,  G.  A.  Wavle, 
1883;     H.    T.     Bushnell,    C.     A.    Sessions, 

1884. 

In  1849  l^avid  Davis,  and  in  1859,  J.  H. 
Knapp  were  app(~iinted  b\-  the  board,  the 
vote  being  a  tie. 

The  officers  of  the  town  of  Harford  for 
the  year  1884  are  as  follows  :  — 

Supervisor — H.  T.  Bushnell. 

Town  clerk  —  C.  A.  Sessions. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  M.  S.  Day,  E.  J. 
Holdridge,  A.  W.  Brown,  R.  Blodgett. 

Assessors  —  A.  W.  Tyler,  John  Mc- 
Pherson,  Sherman  Morse. 

Overseers  of  the  poor — Philo  A.  John- 
son, George  R.  Wilcox. 

Collector  —  Willis  Johnson. 

Constables — Edwin  Dawson,  John  C. 
Edmunds,  Charles  Lang,  Smith  Allen. 

Inspectors  of  election  —  Henr)-  D.  Bris- 
tol, E.  Phelps  Corbin,  Jerome  Maricle. 

Sealer  of  weights  and  measures  —  John 
K    Miller. 


HARFORD  VILLAGE. 

The  village  of  Harford  is  a  pretty  hamlet 
in  the  southwestern  part  of  the  town,  and 
contains  two  churches,  three  stores,  two  ho- 
tels, several  shops  and  about  forty  dwell- 
ings. It  is  situated  towards  the  northern 
limits  of  what  was  known  many  years  ago 
as  "Virgil  Flats."  The  first  settlements  on 
the  site  of  the  village  have  already  been 
detailed,  and  it  remains  onh-  to  notice  the 
business  places,  etc.  It  is  said  that  Calvin 
Totman  was  the  first  merchant  here,  but 
removed  his  goods  at  a  subsequent  date  to 
"  Chicken  Point."  Theodore  Hart  began 
selling  goods  here  before  1830,  where  the 
school-house  now  stands.  Mr.  Hart  was 
the  first  postmaster  in  1825-26,  the  \'illage 
being  then  called  Worthington.  It  was 
soon,  however,  changed  to  its  present  name. 
Henr)-  Lyman  succeeded  Mr.  Hart  as  a 
merchant,  in  the  same  building,  for  about 
two  years,  and  failed.  His  place  was  taken 
by  Royce  &  Stevens.  This  store  was 
burned  about  the  year  1849. 

In  the  mean  time  Samuel  Hart  built  the 
original  store  on  the  site  now  occupied  by 
Holden  &  Bushnell.  Hart  was  succeeded 
by  Smith  &  Tjler,  and  they  by  Samuel  R. 
Griffin  about  1854.  He  died  and  his  son- 
in-law,  Samuel  W.  Winston,  closed  up  the 
estate.  The  store  stood  empty  for  a  time 
when  it  was  leased  in  1875  by  H.  T.  Bush- 
nell, who  conducted  it  for  three  years. 
The  building  was  then  bought  by  Mr.  Hol- 
den, who  rebuilt  and  added  to  it.  Mr. 
Bushnell,  who  had  been  away  for  one  year, 
returned  in  1880,  since  which  time  the  firm 
has  been  doing  a  good  business  as  Holden 
&  Bushnell. 

When  Mr.  Bushnell  first  came  to  Har- 
ford in  1872,  he  began  mercantile  business 
with  J.  C.  Stewart,  in  the  Southern  Central 
building.  The)-  were  succeeded  by  the 
present  proprietors,  R.  J.  Barnard  &  Son. 


438 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


In  1878  the  firm  of  Edmunds  &  Abels 
opened  a  meat  market  in  the  old  Presbyte- 
rian conference  room.  After  about  a  year 
L\'man  Austin  bought  out  Abels.  The 
new  firm  continued  there  about  two  years 
when  they  added  groceries  to  their  business 
and  removed  to  their  present  location  in  the 
old  hotel.  This  store  was  formerly  occu- 
pied by  Tjlcr  &  Holden.  Tyler's  interest 
was  subsequently  purchased  by  L.  C.  Ball, 
about  1870.  The  partners  divided  the 
business  in  1873,  Mr.  Holden  going  out; 
Johnson  &  Tyler  continued  together  in  that 
location  until  1880. 

Hotels.  —  The  first  hotel  in  the  village 
was  kept  b)'  Levi  Moore,  where  the  Widow 
Moore  lives.  Jacob  Hemingway  built  the 
first  installment  of  the  old  hotel  now  stand- 
ing, about  1820.  Or\ille  Hart  bought  the 
house  in  1838  and  in  turn  sold  it  to  a  man 
named  Bradle}-,  who  was  also  a  tailor  and 
worked  at  that  business  in  a  room  of  the 
house.  A  year  or  two  later  he  sold  to  a 
Mr.  McWhorter,  who  was  succeeded  about 
two  )ears  later  b>'  Samson  &  Terpening. 
The  latter  remained  in  the  firm  one  year 
and  Mr.  Samson  kept  the  house  three  years 
longer.  Then  Philip  Hardenburg  took  the 
property  (1856)  and  owned  and  managed 
the  house  until  1873,  when  he  sold  it  to  M. 
W.  Hotchkiss.  He  sold  it  to  James  Joy- 
ner,  who  still  keeps  it. 

In  1 87 1,  soon  after  the  completion  of  the 
railroad,  the  brilliant  anticipations  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Harford  village  as  to  the  fut- 
ure of  the  place,  led  twenty-two  of  their 
number  to  form  a  stock  companj-  for  the 
erection  of  a  large  hotel  near  the  railroad 
station.  This  resulted  in  the  building  of 
the  Southern  Central  House,  a  large  and 
handsome  three-story  structure,  costing 
more  than  $12,000.  As  is  too  often  the 
case  under  such  circumstances,  the  invest- 
ment proved  an  unfortunate  one.  The 
house  was  opened  by  Chas.  B.  Ellis,  but  it 


has  never  proved  a  source  of  much  profit, 
and  has  since  changed  hands  several  times, 
having  been  kept  by  C.  Shafer,  Capt.  Sig- 
ner, Fred  Rainsford,  M.  VV.  Hotchkiss  and 
now  b}'  John  Stewart. 

Blacksmiths.  —  Seneca  Howard  was  the 
earliest  blacksmith  in  the  village  of  whom 
we  have  any  information.  He  was  here  as 
early  as  1830  ;  his  shop  stood  near  the  site 
of  the  present  hotel  barn.  He  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Fay  Royce,  and  he  by  M.  B. 
Williams,  who  built  his  shop  on  the  Burlin- 
game  place  about  the  year  1842.  Nathan- 
iel Austin  and  Teal  Hackett  were  in  the 
business  later.  Wesley  Main  now  carries 
on  the  business,  and  I'rank  Maricle  occu- 
pies a  shop  built  by  Mr.  Hardenburg. 
Chas.  Leonard  began  in  the  business  in  1 880. 

Warner  Stratton  was  a  wagon  maker 
where  Burt  Sessions  li\-es  about  the  )-ear 
1842.  Nathaniel  Tompkins  was  located  in 
that  business  soon  afterward  in  the  old  two 
story  building  standing  near  the  bridge. 
Abram  Banker  was  in  the  .same  building 
later.  George  Guire  and  Frank  Maricle  are 
now  engaged  in  the  business. 

Churches.  — The  old  Union  Church  was 
erected  in  the  year  1835  by  all  the  Chris- 
tians in  the  vicinity,  the  Unixersalists  being 
prominent  in  the  work.  This  was  consid- 
ered quite  an  event  and  most  of  the  men  in 
the  communit}'  turned  out  to  the  "raising." 
The  omnipresent  whisk)' jug  was  there  and 
circulated,  as  was  the  custom  during  that 
period  at  all  similar  undertakings.  It  is 
said  that  the  late  Lansing  Haj-  mounted  the 
top  timber  of  the  spire  after  the  frame  was 
up,  swung  the  jug  aloft  and  christened  the 
building  "  The  Union  Church  of  Virgil 
Flats."  The  structure  has  since  been  re- 
built and  passed  into  the  control  of  the 
Presbyterian  denomination,  and  later  has 
become  Congregational.  The  society  has 
been  weak  for  some  years  and  there  is  no 
settled  pastor  at  the  present  time. 


Town  of  Harford. 


439 


The  Methodist  Church  was  built  about 
the  year  1858,  and  was  rebuilt  in  1882. 
Rev.  Mr.  Legg  is  pastor  at  the  present 
time. 

The  first  cheese  facturx-  was  built  nn  tlie 
site  of  the  present  factory  about  the  year 
1874,  by  D.  B.  Marsh.  He  operated  it 
about  two  years  when  he  failed  and  the  fac 
tor\-  was  soon  afterward  burned.  The  new- 
factor}-  was  built  by  Cornelius  Schernier- 
horn  some  eight  years  since.  He  conducted 
it  until  1SS4,  when  lie  sold  it  to  John  Bhi- 
mers.  It  is  now  operated  for  the  manu- 
facture of  several  different  kinds  of  fine 
cheese  and  first-class  butter,  wiiich  is  sold 
in  New  York. 

The  first  iiost-olifice  was  established  at 
Harford  in  about  the  year  1826,  under  the 
name  of  "  Worthington,"  which  was  subse- 
quently changed  to  its  present  name.  The- 
odore Hart  was  the  first  postmaster.  .Sam- 
uel Nelson  had  charge  of  the  office  for  a  long 
period,  but  in  just  what  \-cars  we  arc  not 
informed.  He  was  succeeded  by  L.  C. 
Ball  and  the  office  was  taken  in  June,  1874, 
by  Samuel  L.  Holden. 

Physicians.  —  The  names  of  Drs,  Fox, 
(^wen,  Terry,  Houghtaling,  Davis  and  Ship- 
man  ha\e  been  given  us  as  among  the  earl)- 
physicians  of  Harford.  Dr.  Terry  was  here 
in  1832.  Dr.  Ellis  was  in  the  town  as  earl)- 
as  1820  and  lived  where  Worden  Tarbox 
now  resides.  These  physicians  practiced  in 
the  town  during  periods  of  different  lengths, 
and  were  followed  by  Dr.  J.  H.  Knapp. 
Dr.  Knapp  became  a  member  of  the  County 
Medical  Society  in  1858,  and  was  elected 
its  president  in  1861  and  again  in  1867. 
He  is  a  man  o(  more  than  ordinary  promi- 
nence in  the  profession  and  has  a  large  prac- 
tice. 

Dr.  v..  A.  Allen  is  a  graduate  of  the  New- 
York  Eclectic  Medical  College  in  1879,  and 
came  to  Harford  in  1880.  He  is  a  member 
of  the  Central    New    York   Medical    Asso- 


ciation and  practices  in  the  homeopathic 
school. 

The  first  school  in  the  town  was  taught 
by  Betsey  Curran  in  the  winter  of  1806-07, 
in  the  house  afterwards  occupied  by  Abner 
Rounsville.  The  first  school-house  in  the 
village  of  Harford  was  built  probably  as 
earl)-  as  1 820  and  stood  near  the  site  of  the 
cheese  factory  ;  the  next  was  located  on  the 
site  of  the  present  school-house,  but  has 
been  rebuilt  and  otherwise  greatly  im- 
proved. .An  excellent  school  is  now  kept 
there. 

The  steam  saw-mill  of  A.  1).  &  I.  D. 
Hemingway  was  built  in  1  S6j.  It  has  since 
passed  into  possession  (if  H.  \V.  Bradley, 
w-ho  now  owns  it  and  rims  it  a  part  of  the 
time.  Since  the  forests  have  been  mostly 
cleared  away,  such  mills  find  less  and  less  to 
feed  them. 

II.VRFORI)    Mil  LS. 

This  is  a  hamlet  situated  about  one  and 
a  half  miles  south  of  Harford  \-illage,  on 
the  line  of  the  Southern  Central  Railroad,  and 
contains  tw-o  stores,  a  church,  a  hotel,  a  steam 
saw-mill,  a  grist-mill,  several  shops  and 
about  thirt)-  dwellings.  Settlements  on  the 
site  of  the  hamlet  were  made  a  little  later 
than  in  the  vicinit\-  of  Harford  village  and 
at  what  was  called  '■  Chicken  Point."  A 
post-office  was  established  here  about  the 
year  1 866,  with  David  Wilcox  as  postmas- 
ter ;  it  was  then  called  South  Harford,  but 
w-as  subsequently  given  its  present  name. 

Since  the  railroad  was  completed  this  has 
been  a  prominent  shipping  point  for  lum- 
ber, shingles,  posts,  etc.,  and  the  inhabi- 
tants shared  to  some  extent  the  bright  an- 
ticipations of  their  neighbors  as  to  the  future 
of  the  place,  leading  to  the  erection  of  the 
large  hotel,  the  Owego  Valley  House,  and 
other  buildings  which  were,  perhaps,  be- 
\-ond  the  demands  of  the  place. 

A  grist-mill   was   built    at    Harford  .Mills 


440 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


about  1820,  by  Nathan  Heaton,  which 
stood  near  the  site  of  the  present  mill.  The 
old  mill  \\as  afterward  used  as  a  shed  for 
the  present  mill,  which  was  built  by  John 
C.  Davis  in  1841.  It  has  since  been  re- 
built and  improved  at  different  times  and 
changed  hands  a  good  man}-  times ;  it  is 
now  owned  by  Simon  Seaman  and  leased 
by  the  Myers  brothers. 

Another  grist-mill  was  built  previous  to 
the  erection  of  the  Heaton  mill,  but  the 
date  of  its  completion  is  not  available.  It 
was  built  by  a  man  named  Clapp  on  Michi- 
gan creek,  a  little  way  from  the  corners  of 
the  cast  and  west  road.  He  made  his  dam 
b\'  placing  a  log  across  the  channel  from 
the  rocks  on  either  side,  driving  down  posts 
and  then  planked  it  up  perpendicularly. 
The  consequence  of  this  mistaken  engineer- 
ing method  was  that  the  bottom  of  the 
dam  swung  outward  with  the  pressure  of 
the  water  above,  and  the  dam  hung  like  a 
gate  to  the  log  across  the  gulf  Clapp  did 
not  operate  the  mill  after  this  calamity. 

Simeon  R.  Griffin  built  the  first  steam 
saw-mill  at  Harford  Mills  near  the  corners 
of  the  road  leading  to  Marathon,  in  1861- 
62.  He  sold  it  to  Perrigo  &  Fields  about 
the  year  1 867  ;  they  operated  it  about  four 
years,  when  it  was  transferred  to  Coots  & 
Lytle.  The  latter  ran  it  alone  a  year  or 
two  and  failed.  The  assignee  sold  the 
property  to  R.  W.  Clinton,  who  moved  it 
near  to  the  railroad  station  and  rebuilt  it  in 
1874.  It  was  burned  down  in  1880  and 
rebuilt  in  its  present  form. 

In  the  same  year  that  he  erected  the  mill 
Mr.  Clinton  built  the  store  building  now 
occupied  by  Clintons  &  Chappuys.  Clin- 
tons &  Bristol,  Clintons  &  Clark  and  Clin- 
tons &  Elwell  conducted  the  store  before 
the  present  firm  was  formed. 

The  first  store  at  Harford  Mills  was 
built  by  Charles  Baker.  The  building  is 
now  occupied  as  a  residence  by  the  Widow 


Hazen.  The  store  was  kept  there  succes- 
sively by  Elisha  Hart,  P.  L.  Hardenburg, 
Mr.  Burghart,  W.  J.  Baker,  who  was  there 
in  1870  and  was  closed  up;  Geo.  Peters, 
who  also  closed  out  his  business,  and  finally 
by  Carrie  Tarbox.  No  store  has  been 
open  there  for  about  seven  years. 

L.  E.  Hay  began  business  in  his  present 
location  in  1870,  having  erected  the  build- 
ing. He  has  done  a  large  business  since 
that  time  in  selling  goods,  buying  and 
shipping  produce,  etc. 

The  hotel  was  built  in  1870  by  George 
W.  Griggs.  He  was  succeeded  by  Capt. 
Signor,  John  Hammond.  Griggs  &  Kincaid, 
Kincaid  alone,  George  Saltsman,  O.  M. 
Sears  &  Son  and  Henr\-  \\'a\le,  who  is  the 
present  proprietor. 

Solomon  Smedley  was  one  of  the  earliest 
blacksmiths  at  Harford  Mills.  A  man 
named  Rowley  then  began  the  business 
and  Chauncey  Crum  opened  a  shop  about 
fort}^  years  ago.  He  was  located  where  ~> 
Damon  Miller  has  carried  on  the  business 
for  nearly  thirty  years.  Chester  Johnson 
also  had  the  shop  at  that  point  for  a  time. 
Eron  Hackett  and  Lewis  Rood,  with  Mr. 
Miller,  are  the  present  blacksmiths. 

Chas.  \V.  Harrington  is  the  first  harness- 
maker  in  the  place,  having  occupied  his 
present  location  since  1865. 

William  Hammond  is  the  present  wagon 
maker  and  A.  W.  Brown  does  repairing  in 
the  same  line. 

The  postmasters  of  the  place  since  Da- 
vid Wilcox  ha\e  been  W.  J.  Baker,  George 
Frank,  A.  W.  Clinton  and  the  present  in- 
cumbent of  the  office,  A.  Clinton. 

Churches.  —  Meetings  have  been  held  at 
Harford  Mills  since  an  early  day,  in  private 
houses,  school-houses,  etc.,  by  the  Christian 
denomination  and  the  Methodists.  Among 
those  who  have  ministered  to  the  people 
have  been  Elders  Wade,  Edward  Tyler, 
Fletcher  and    Austin    Damon,  who   is  the 


Town  of  Lapeer. 


441 


present   pastor.     Methodist    services    have  direction   of  H.    C.    Gray.     The    property 

been  conducted  by  ministers   from  Harford  had  to  be  sold  subsequently  on  a  mortgage 

at    different    times.     The    handsome    little  and  was  purchased   by  eight  of  the  leading 

church    uas    built   by  a  union  of  the  Chris-  men  of  the  place,  who  give  the  use  of  it  for 

tians  in  the  vicinity   in    1872,  chiefly  under  religious  purposes. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


mSiUKV  OF  THE  TOW.V  OF   l..\l'Kl::i<. 


THIS  town  embraces  the  southeastern 
corner  of  the  original  township  of  Vir- 
i.;il,  and  was  not  organized  until  the  2d  of 
Ma\',  1845.  It  lies  upon  the  high  ridges 
that  rise  west  of  the  Tioughnioga  ri\'er,  and 
is  upon  the  southern  border  of  the  county, 
just  west  of  the  center.  It  is  bounded  on 
the  north  by  Virgil ;  on  the  east  by  Mara- 
thon ;  on  the  south  by  Broome  and  Tioga 
counties,  and  on  the  west  by  Harford. 

The  surface  of  the  town  is,  for  the  most 
part,  hilly  and  rugged.  The  declivities  of 
the  hills  bordering  upon  the  river  are  pre- 
cipitous. Luce  Hill,  in  the  northwestern 
part  of  the  town,  is  the  highest  point,  rising 
from  1600  to  1700  feet  above  tide.  The 
hills  are  laterall)-  cut  by  narrow  ravines 
worn  by  small  streams.  Fall  creek  runs 
through  the  town,  and  upon  this  stream, 
near  the  southern  border  of  the  town,  is 
Hunt's  falls,  a  beautiful  cascade  fift)'  or 
sixty  feet  in  height.  The  soil  of  the  town 
is  a  sandy,  gravelly  loam. 

The  first  settlement  in  Lapeer  was  made 
by  a  colored  man  named  Primus  Grant  ;  he 
purchased  on  lot  594,  and  settled  on  it  in 
1799.  He  was  a  native  of  Guinea,  and  the 
farm  on  which  he  lived  long  bore  that  name. 
He  died  there  and  was  buried  on  one  of  the 
1ii_l;1i  blulTs  which  overlook  the  stream  known 
as  the  Big  brook.  The  Grant  farm  is  now 
owned  by  Orlando  Jennings. 

Peter  Gra)-,  a  nati\e  of  Fishkill,  Duchess 


county,  was  the  first  white  settler  in  the 
town.  He  came  from  Ulster  (Sullivan) 
count)-  in  Jul}',  1.S02,  and  located  on  lot 
70.  His  son,  Ogden  Gray,  afterward  lived 
on  the  farm,  which  is  now  occupied  b\-  a 
}ounger  Peter  Gra\-.  He  left  a  respectable 
faniil_\-  of  children,  the  \-oungest  of  whom 
became  the  wife  of  Dan  C.  Squires  ;  she  is 
now  dead. 

Ill  the  \-ear  1803  Seth  Jennings  settled 
on  lot  597,  where  he  remained  until  his 
death;  he  was  from  Connecticut.  His  son, 
j  Harry  Jennings,  lived  in  Harford  where  he 
died.  Seth  Jennings's  sons  were  Rufus,  Al- 
fred and  Harry.  Rufus  settled  where 
Aaron  Genung  now  lives,  and  Alfred  where 
George  Jennings  lives.  The  Seth  Jennings 
farm  is  now  owned  by  D.  D.  Dye. 

Dan  C.  Scjuires,  one  of  the  foremost  cit- 
izens of  this  town,  was  born  on  the  23d  of 
November,  1798.  His  father  was  John  S. 
Squires,  a  native  of  Connecticut,  who  re- 
moved to  Lapeer  from  Lisle,  Broome 
count}-,  and  settled  on  lot  68,  in  1 807.  Dan 
C.  Squires  acquired  a  good  education  in 
spite  of  his  limited  opportunities,  which  en- 
abled him  to  fill  many  public  oflices  and 
places  of  trust  with  signal  abilit}'.  It  is 
related  of  him  that  his  }'outhful  desire  to 
obtain  an  education  led  him  to  lie  on  the 
hearthstone,  often  the  entire  night,  studying 
b}-  the  fitful  light  of  a  pine  knot,  going  to 
his  arduous  farm  labors  the  next  da\-.      Mr. 


442 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Squires  held  the  office  of  justice  of  the  peace 
twenty-eight  years ;  supervisor  of  the  town 
fourteen  \'ears,  and  was  chairman  of  the 
board  six  years ;  was  superintendent  of 
schools  several  years  and  school  commis- 
sioner one  term  ;  justice  of  sessions  three 
years  and  Member  of  Assembh-  in  1865  and 
1872.  Mr.  Squires  was  a  successful  school 
teacher  for  some  j-ears,  and  the  faith  nf  his 
townspeople  in  his  inteijrit}' often  led  to  his 
being'  called  upon  tn  administer  estates.  He 
was  instrumental  in  prtjcuring  tin;  dixisioii 
of  the  town  and  in  giving  the  name  of  La- 
peer to  the  new  organization.  He  served 
twenty-two  years  in  the  militia  of  the  State, 
holding  the  offices  "f  captain,  lieutenant- 
colonel  and  colonel.  In  earh'  life  he  inter- 
ested himself  in  religious  matters  and  was 
among  the  first  to  espouse  the  cause  of 
temperance,  while  the  anti-slavery  move- 
ment found  in  him  a  courageous  worker. 
James  S.  Squires,  a  prominent  citizen  of 
Cortland  \illage,  was  a  brother  of  Dan  C. 
Squires. 

Timothy  Robertson,  h'om  I'cjiniecticut, 
came  to  Lapeer  about  1803  or  1804,  ^'"cl 
lived  for  a  short  time  with  Seth  Jennings. 
He  was  a  soldier  in  the  Revolutionary  War 
and  was  with  Montgomery  at  the  storming 
of  Quebec.  He  had  a  son,  I-^liphalet  Rob- 
ertson, who  made  his  home  in  Lapeer. 

Thomas  Kingsbury  and  Robert  H. 
Wheeler  settled  in  the  southeast  part  of  the 
town  in  1804.  The  former  was  a  Re\'olu- 
tionary  soldier  and  drew  a  pension  as  such. 
One  of  his  daughters  married  Marvin  Raich. 
Kingsbur_\-  and  Wheeler  were  both  from 
Connecticut. 

Simeon  Luce  located  on  lot  57,  in  1805. 
It  is  believed  that  he  kept  the  first  taxern 
in  the  town.  He  was  an  ingenious  me- 
chanic and  a  useful  citizen  generalh-.  He 
lived  to  a  very  old  age  and  left  a  large  fam- 
ily. Martin  Luce,  long  a  jirominent  resi- 
dent of  \'irgil,  was  a  son. 


In  1806  Zachariah  Squires  and  Robert 
Smith  located  on  lot  70.  The  former  was 
the  father  of  Col.  William  Squires,  after- 
ward of  Marathon.  Mr.  Smith  was  an  offi- 
cer in  the  Rexolutionary  army  and  was  a 
pensioner. 

James  Richards  settled  on  lot  79  in  I  807, 
on  the  farm  miw  owned  b)-  John  P.  Ses- 
sions. 

Si.xteen  soldiers  of  the  Revolution  settled 
in  Lapeer,  all  but  one  of  whom  died  here. 
We  have  been  able  to  obtain  the  names  of 
all  but  two.  The\'  were  Robert  Smith, 
George  Totman,  Thomas  Kingsburx',  Ste- 
phen KelK  .  Oliver  Hopkins,  Williain  Par- 
ker, l)a\id  Crowell,  Nathan  Smith,  Henr)- 
Turk,  Nathan  \\'alker,  Timoth)-  Robertson, 
Samuel  Soule,  Asa  Parker  and  James  Pol- 
lard. 

Asa  Hunt,  founder  of  Hunt's  Corners, 
was  a  native  of  Windham,  Windham  county, 
Conn.  When  eighteen  years  of  age  he  went 
to  Boston,  Mass.,  and  in  1822  came  on  foot 
to  Harford,  locating  on  lot  41,  where  he  re- 
mained until  1854,  when  he  went  to  Mara- 
thon, where  he  now  lives.  His  paternal 
grandfather  was  a  Revolutionary  soldier, 
whose  heroic  wife  did  her  share  in  the  great 
struggle  b>-  making  gunpowder  and  casting 
bullets  for  her  husband's  use.  He  married 
Sallie  Johnson,  daughter  of  Abner  Johnson, 
who  settled  on  lot  89.  Mr.  Hunt  has  been 
engaged  chiefly  in  agriculture,  but  has  also 
carried  on  mercantile  business  in  several 
different  localities.  He  has  been  justice  of 
the  peace  and  supervisor.  His  son,  Wm. 
V.  Hunt,  who  resides  on  the  homestead, 
has  been  a  prominent  citizen  of  the  town  ; 
was  elected  supervisor  in  1866,  1879  and 
1881  ;  has  held  the  office  of  justice  of  the 
peace  sexenteen  years  and  town  clerk  several 
terms. 

.\n  incident  in  the  life  of  Mr.  Hunt  will 
bear  relating.  While  a  bo\-  in  Boston  he 
worked    for  a  man    named   Sigourne\-,  and 


Town  of  Lapeer. 


443 


by  stringent  economj'  saved  the  sum  of 
five  dollars,  which  he  placed  in  the  State 
Savings  Bank  of  that  city.  Not  long  after- 
ward he  learned  of  the  downfall  of  that  in- 
stitution. With  shattered  faith  in  monetary 
establishments  he  started  for  New  York, 
without  making  any  attempt  to  regain  his 
deposit.  Two  years  ago,  in  1882,  more 
than  sixty  \-ears  after  this  occurrence,  he 
was  surprised  by  a  notification  that  the  de- 
funct bank  was  ready  to  settle  his  account, 
and  he  recei\ed  a  draft  for  $79.98.  His 
unfortunate  Boston  experience  had  entirely 
escaped  his  memor)'.  Mr.  Hunt's  father-in- 
law,  Abner  Johnson,  died  many  years  ago, 
from  the  eft'ects  of  a  slight  cut  on  his  hand. 

Jesse  Storrs  was  an  earl\-  resident  of  tiiis 
town,  who  subsecjuently  became  known  as 
a  great  nurserj'  man  throughout  a  large  part 
of  the  country.  He  was  a  school-teacher 
in  his  early  life,  and  on  a  small  property- 
which  he  owned,  turned  his  attention  to 
the  raising  of  fruit  trees.  He  subsequently 
sold  out  and  remo\-ed  to  Fainesville,  Ohio, 
where  he  was  long  the  head  of  the  nursery- 
house  of  Storrs,  Harrison  &  Co.  He  died  a 
few  years  since. 

It  will  be  correctly  inferred  that  a  large 
proportion  of  the  settlement  in  this  town 
has  been  effected  during  a  comparative!)' 
recent  period.  It  is  within  the  memor)-  of 
living  men  and  w-omen,  that  the  greater 
portion  of  the  land  was  forest- covered,  while 
the  howl  of  the  wolf  and  the  panther's 
scream  is  not  forgotten  by  them.'      We  have 

1 A  few  rods  to  the  south  of  the  residence  of  H.  Ge- 
nung,  was,  at  a  former  period,  an  Indian  canipinjj  ground. 
This  was  on  a  bluff  overlooking  and  close  to  the  Big 
|irook.  From  the  banks  of  this  stream  flowed  beautiful 
rivulets  of  cool,  transparent  water.  Here,  too,  were  im- 
mense forests  of  elms,  basswood,  maple  and  other  tim- 
ber, the  favorite  resort  of  the  black  bear,  once  so  plenty 
in  Ciirtland  county.  Deer,  too,  roamed  the  hills  and  val- 
leys. The  wolf  and  panther  made  night  hideous  with 
their  discordant  notes  of  revelry.  From  this  camping 
ground  the  Indians  daily  radiated  in  quest  of  game  and 
fish,  and  at  night  returned  to  their  cabins  loaded  with 
peltry,  the  pi'oducts  of  the  chase. 


given  a  majority  of  the  names  and  locations 
of  the  earlier  pioneers,  who,  with  their  im- 
mediate successors  and  co- laborers,  laid  low 
tlie  heavy  forests  and  brought  the  land  into 
a  state  of  cultivation  that  places  the  town 
in  a  position  that  compares  favorabl)-  with 
others  in  the  county. 

The  first  grist-mill  in  this  town  was 
erected  b)- Simeon  Luce,  in  1827.  Pre\-ious 
to  that  comparatively  recent  date,  the  in- 
habitants of  Lapeer,  like  their  brethren 
in  surrounding  towns  at  an  earl\-  period, 
were  compelled  to  go  long  distances  in 
order  to  get  the  most  imperative  necessit)- 
of  the  table  —  corn  meal  —  or  else  manu- 
facture it  themselves  in  the  primitive  way. 
We  ha\-e  not  learned  when  this  mill  ceased 
operation,  but  there  is  now  no  grist-mill  in 
the  town. 

In  1825  Samuel  and  John  Gee  btiilt  the 
first  saw-mill ;  this  was  followed  by  a  num- 
ber of  similar  mills  in  different  parts  of  the 
town  where  the  brooks  suppliefl  sufficient 
water  to  run  them.  But  the  streams  have 
all  decreased  in  volume  with  the  falling  of 
the  forests,  and  the  water-mills  lia\-e  grad- 
ually been  abandoned.  The  Gees  were 
succeeded  in  their  mill  b)-  Isaac  Barrows  ; 
but  it  ceased  operation  long  ago.  Harry 
Jennings  owned  the  last  water-power  saw- 
mill, which  w  as  burned  man)-  years  since. 

Sidney  Pease  built  his  steam  saw- mill  in 
1874.  He  has  in  connection  with  it  a  feed- 
mill,  a  planer  and  matcher,  and  a  cider-mill, 
doing  a  comparatively  large  business. 

John  Butterfield  built  a  tannery  just  west 
of  the  Corners,  which  was  subsequently 
purchased  by  Stephen  Atw  ood  and  removed 
to  and  upon  Spring  brook,  where  it  burned 
in  1883.  It  formerl)- did  a  good  business, 
which,  however,  declined  in  later  \'ears. 

Hunt  &  Kell)'  were  the  first  merchants  in 
the  town  of  Lapeer,  Mr.  Htint  afterward 
running  the  business  alone.  In  1855  W. 
E.  Hunt  and   Lewis  Swift  became  the   pro- 


444 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


prietors,  continuing  together  until  i  S6o, 
when  the  mercantile  business  at  that  point 
was  abandoned. 

The  trading  for  the  town  during  earlier 
years  was  done  largely  at  Virgil  Corners. 

Asa  Hunt  kept  the  first  and  only  tavern 
in  the  town,  at  Hunt's  Corners ;  this  was, 
however,  scarcely  a  regular  public  house, 
but  was  opened  hospitabl\-  to  \\lioc\er  hap- 
pened to  require  such  acconiniodations.  He 
purchased  of  John  Smith  the  farm  adjoining 
his  own  and  rcmoxctl  from  his  own  log- 
house  into  the  other,  which  was  a  framed 
structure  and  the  second  one  of  that  descrip- 
tion built  in  the  town.  This  building  was 
afterw  ard  mo\ed  to  'its  present  location, 
where  it  was  occupied  bj- William  K.  Hunt, 
a  son  of  Asa  Hunt.  The  house  is  now  the 
property  of  IVIrs.  Betsey  Ann  Peck.  It  is 
worthy  of  remark  that  in  all  these  years  no 
death  has  ever  occurred  in  this  house.  There 
is  now  no  hotel  in  the  tow  n. 

The  first  framed  house  in  the  town  was 
built  by  Origen  Roice,  and  is  now  owned 
b\'  Philip  Clark  and  used  as  a  barn. 

There  are  two  cheese  factories  in  the 
town.  The  one  at  Hunt's  Corners  was 
erected  in  1875,  by  a  stock  compan}-.  There 
were  twenty  shares  of  stock  of  $100  each. 
The  company  was  called  the  "  Hunt's  Cor- 
ners Cheese  and  Butter  Company,"  and  the 
following  were  the  original  shareholders : 
O.  S.  Day,  G.  H.  Brown,  Wm.  E.  Hunt, 
E.  D.  Harris,  John  Tarble,  A.  B.  Jennings. 
D.  R.  Jennings,  Geo.  W.  Goodale,  Philander 
Jennings,  Talma  Hill,  H.  H.  J.  Wattles, 
Asa  Hunt,  Seymour  Hultz,  John  P.  Ses- 
sions, S.  S.  Bliss,  S.  S.  Houghtaling,  Eugene 
Cleaveland. 

The  present  ow  ners  of  the  factor)'  are  : 
Asa  Hunt,  W.  E.  Hunt,  Geo.  H.  Little- 
wood,  C.  Day,  John  Tarble,  W.  Johnson, 
John  P.  Sessions,  Geo  Goodale,  Sally 
Cleaveland,  Talma  llill.  Mr.  Littlewood  is 
business  manager  of  the   factory  for    1.SS4 


The  product  of  the  factory  for  1883  was 
47,329  pounds  of  cheese  :  this  sold  for  ^4,- 
525.60. 

The  second  cheese  factory  was  built  by 
1{.  D.  Harris  in  1877  and  is  now  owned  b\' 
(ieo.  Gcjodalc. 

Churches. —  A  church  of  Free  or  Open 
Communion  Baptists  was  formed  in  the 
southeast  part  of  this  town  about  the  year 
1820,  by  Elder  Lake,  which  embraced 
members  from  Marathon  and  Lisle.  Their 
preachers  were  Elders  Lake,  Hart  and 
Matthews.  The  society  was  at  one  period 
(juite  strong,  numbering  nearly  eight)-  mem- 
bers. The  .Methodists  also  held  frequent 
meetings  in  that  part  of  the  town  and  there 
was  a  church  of  the  Christian  order  that 
held  meetings  in  a  school-house  near  the 
former  residence  of  Dan  C.  Squires. 

There  is  but  one  church  edifice  in  the 
town  ;  this  is  located  at  Hunt's  Corners 
and  is  called  the  Union  Church.  It  was 
built  in  1.S68.  The  original  trustees  were 
Wm.  E.  Hunt,  S.  Day,  H.  J.  Wattles, 
James  W.  Bliss,  John  Tarble,  Willard  E. 
Stockwell,  D.  W.  Ensign.  The  building  is 
now  occupied  mostly  by  Methodists.  The 
present  trustees  are  H.  J.  Wattles,  Stephen 
Atwood.  Miles  Pollard,  Wm.  E.  Hunt,  Nel- 
son Cleaveland,  C.  L.  Day,  Philip  E.  Clark. 

Dr.  Charles  Thomas  was  the  only  physi- 
cian who  ever  located  in  Lapeer.  He  be- 
came a  member  of  the  Count)'  Medical 
Societ)'  in  1848.  He  onlv'  remained  here 
about  two  years,  beginning  in  the  \'ear  just 
mentioned. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  soldiers  who  en- 
listed from  this  town  in  the  last  war,  under 
the  calls  of  the  president,  and  who  were 
paid  bounties  for  their  serxices :  — 

Call  of  October  17th,  1863.  Bounty 
paid  $300.  Total  $2,400.  —  Edgar  Free- 
man. Charles  N.  Eassley,  Lewis  Rood, 
Lynden  Parker,  Eli  Parker,  James  M.  Kells, 
Thomas  B    Hopkins,  Jerome  W.  Case. 


Hiram  J.  Messenger. 


445 


Call  of  July  1 8th,  1864.  Boiiiit\-  paid 
$900:  except  $1,000  ti)  i)iK-,  ami  $600  to 
one.  Total,  $11,500.  HrokeraL^c,  $335. 
—  John  Line.  W.  E.  Stockwell,  P'lirman 
Cook,  David  H.  Ruiixan,  Job  Avers,  Web- 
ster Parker,  Hurdett  Hammond,  Le\i  Bliss, 
William  W.  Parker,  Stephen  Potter,  Orin  S." 
Day,  James  W.  Parker,  Peter  Michaelson. 

Recapitulation.  — Paid  for  filling  quotas, 
calls  October  17th,  1863,  Feburary,  1864, 
and  March,  1864,  $2,400.  Paid  for  filling 
quota,  call  July  iStli,  1S64,  $11,825. 
(jrand  total,  $14,225. 

Following  are  the  present  officers  of  the 
town  of  Lapeer  (1884) :  — 

Supervisor  —  S.  R.  Jemison. 

Town  clerk  —  J.  L.  Talbot. 

Justices  of  the  peace  —  Wm.  E.  Hunt, 
Lero_\' Smith.  A.  B.  Johnson,  A.  A.  .Alvord. 

Assessors  —  Mortimer  Parker.  Henry 
Hay,  A.  B.  Jennings. 

Constables  —  Egbert  Peak,  J.  C.  (jra\'. 

Collector — Jason  Gra}-. 

Game  constable  —  lohn  (J.  Talbot. 


Inspectors  of  election  —  Fred  Pollard, 
{■red  Kinne}'. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  supervisors  of 
Lapeer  from  the  formation  of  the  town  to 
the  present  time,  with  the  years  of  their 
service : — 

Dan  C.  Squires,  1847;  Asa  Hunt. 
1848-49;  Noah  Pollard,  1850:  Ogden 
Gra\',  1851:  Royal  Johnson,  1852;  Elijah 
Freeman,  1853;  Ogden  Gray,  1 854:  Royal 
Johnson,  1855;  Dan  C.  Squires,  1856; 
Elijah  Freeman,  1857;  Dan  C.  Squires, 
1858;  D.  O.  Surdam,  1859-60 :  Royal 
Johnson,  1861  :  D:  O.  Surdam,  1862  to 
1865     inclusive;    Dan    C.    Squires,     1866: 

D.  O.  Surdam,  1867;  Dan  C.  Scjuires, 
1868  to  1 87 1,  inclusive;  Royal  Johnson, 
1872;  Peter  N.  Gray,  1873;  Weaker  L. 
Chaplin,  1874:    Peter  N.  Gray,  1875;  Wm. 

E.  Hunt,  1876;  Jerome  Squires,  1877-78; 
Wm.  E.  Hunt,  1879;  James  Robinson, 
1880;  Wm.  E.  Hunt,  1881  ;  F.  J.  Squires, 
1882;  Leroe  Smith.  1883;  S.  B.  Jemison, 
1884. 


CHAPTER   XXXIV. 


BKHiK.Al'HK  Al., 


HIRAM  J.  MESSENGER,  second  son 
of  Nathan  and  Averick  Messenger, 
was  born  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Tiough- 
nioga  river,  near  the  State  Bridge,  in  the 
town  of  \Mrgil,  Cortland  count}-,  N.  Y.,  on 
the  I  2th  da\-  of  August,  1816.  The  fam- 
ily residence  was  a  comfortable  log  house 
corresponding  fairl}'  with  its  neighbors. 
Owing  to  the  necessity  for  his  ser\ices  on 
the  small  new  farm,  he  was  prevented  from 
attending  school  in  the  log  school- house 
after  he  was  of  sufficient  age  and  size  to  be 
Iff  use  at  home,  consequentl)-  his  school  ed- 
ucation was  \erv   limited,  as    was    the    case 


with  most  boys  at  that  date.  His  father 
died  in  1833,  before  Hiram  was  seventeen 
years  of  age,  and  it  seemed  to  fall  upon 
him  to  take  the  little  sidehill  farm  of  thirty- 
five  acres,  pay  the  debts,  paj'  his  elder 
brothel'  and  sister  their  interests  and  sup- 
port his  mother  and  younger  sister.  This 
he  soon  learned  was  a  hard  bargain,  but  he 
fulfilled  it,  and  si.x  \ears  after,  at  the  age  of 
twenty-three,  sold  the  farm  and  other  prop- 
erty, and  with  $1,200  clear  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  business  at  F^ast  V'irgil  in  com- 
pany- with  William  Gray,  b\'  the  purchase 
of  a   lialf- interest ;   at   the   end   of  the    first 


446 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


year  he  became  sole  owner  !))■  iMirchase  of 
the  otlier  half,  and  continued  the  business 
there  on  a  much  larger  scale  from  1S39  to 
itS54,  v\'hen  he  sold  out  his  business  at  this 
place  and  also  a  branch  store  at  Killawog 
and  moved  to  Canandaigua,  \.  \  .  There 
he  engaged  in  the  mercantile  business  with 
his  brother-in-law,  William  Richardson. 
During  his  residence  in  Virgil  he  was  con- 
stable for  two  years,  justice  of  the  peace  for 
one  term  of  four  years,  supervisor  of  the 
town  one  term,  postmaster  at  East  Virgil 
for  several  years  and  was  the  candidate  of 
the  Whig  party  for  Member  of  Assembi\' 
in  1852,  but  w.as  defeated  b}-  the  temper- 
ance faction  who  put  in  nomination  the 
venerable  Ur.  Miller,  of  Truxton,  the  result 
being  the  election  of  Dr.  Patterson,  of  Ho- 
mer, the  candidate  of  the  Democratic  part)-. 
On  Januar)-  20th,  1842,  Mr.  Messenger 
married  Luana  L.  Heaton  (then  but  seven- 
teen years  of  age),  second  daughterof  the  late 
Hon.  Nathan  Heaton,  of  Harford,  who  dicil 
in  April  of  the  previous  year  at  his  home, 
while  on  a  visit  to  his  family  on  a  temporary 
leave  of  absence  from  the  Legislature,  of 
which  he  was  tiien  one  of  the  honored 
members.  This  count}'  was  then  entitled 
to  two  members,  his  colleague  being  the 
Hon.  A.  H.  Mickle,  of  Homer.  The  fruits 
of  this  marriage  are  four  children  —  one 
daughter,  now  a  resident  of  Chicago,  and 
three  sons ;  of  the  latter,  two  are  acti\  e 
members  of  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade, 
and  the  youngest,  a  graduate  of  and  now 
teacher  in,  Cornell  Uni\'ersit\\  While  a 
resident  of  Canandaigua,  horn  1854  to 
1857,  Mr.  Messenger  was  principally  en- 
gaged in  mercantile  business  and  as  a  cattle 
dealer.  In  1857,  soon  after  the  financial 
panic  and  general  bank  suspension,  he  pur- 
chased a  controlling  interest  in  the  Bank  of 
Canandaigua,  then  owned  by  Mrs.  Messen- 
ger's uncle, Theodore  E.  Hart,  and  William 
Antis.      This  bank  suspended  and  closed  its 


doors  in  August  and  remained  closed  until 
the  day  Mr.  Messenger  made  the  purchase, 
when  it  was  promptly  opened,  to  the  great 
satisfaction  of  the  citizens  of  the  place,  the 
first  business  being  to.promptl)-  rctlecm  and 
put  in  circulation  $6o,ooo  of  the  ciixulating 
notes  of  the  bank,  then  held  under  protest 
by  the  New  Vork  Clearing  House  of  the  as- 
sociated banks.  In  i858hesold  out  liis  inter- 
est in  the  mercantile  business  and  in  i860 
established  the  H.  J.  Messenger  Bank,  orig- 
inally at  Marathon,  but  mo\ed  it  to  Cort- 
land the  same  year,  taking  up  his  residence 
there  permanently  at  the  same  time.  From 
i860  to  1865  his  success  was  very  marked, 
and  during  these  years  he  ])urchased  the 
other  half-interest  in  the  Bank  of  Canan- 
daigua, established  the  new  Bank  of  Onta- 
rio at  Canandaigua,  the  Bank  of  Canton, 
Canton,  N.  Y.,  the  First  National  Hank  of 
Geneva,  N.  Y.,  a  banking  office  in  New 
York  and  one  at  Herkimer,  N.  Y. ;  his  bank 
circulation  now  being  about  $500,000,  se- 
cured by  $100,000  New  York  State  stocks 
and  $400,000  United  States  five-twenty  six 
per  cent,  bonds,  with  deposits  aggregating 
about  three  million  dollars.  In  1863  he 
was  solicited  to  build  what  is  now  the  Mes- 
senger House  at  Cortland,  on  the  site  of 
the  old  h^agle  Tavern,  which  was  burned 
in  1862.  Accepting  the  invitation,  in  June, 
1864,  that  house  was  formally  opened,  com- 
pletely furnished  for  the  accommodation  of 
the  traveling  public.  His  attention  was 
then  directed  to  the  necessity  of  a  public 
hall  and  a  plan  was  soon  matured  for  the 
construction  of  Messenger  (now  Taylor) 
Hall,  which  was  dedicated  in  February, 
1866.  On  this  occasion  an  address  was 
delivered  by  the  late  Hon.  Horatio  Ballard, 
in  which  the  following  sentence  appears  : — 
"  In  January,  1862,  the  '  Eagle  Tavern  ' 
(a  name  cherished  in  memory  by  thousands 
of  guests)  was  destroyed  by  fire.  It  was  a 
calamit}-  to  our  town  and  a  loss  to  the  public. 


James  Watts  Sturtevant. 


447 


But  there  were  agencies  at  v\ork  beyond 
tile  pcnctr.itiun  of  lumian  iniai^ininijs  wliicli 
more  than  restored  the  loss.  Just  before 
the  opening  of  our  railway  a  citizen,  then 
engaged  in  a  limited  mercantile  trade  in  an 
adjoining  town,  removed  to  anotlier  county 
and  entered  upon  a  large  field  of  action. 
He  was  successful.  In  the  year  1860  he 
returned  to  this,  his  nati\e  county,  entlowed 
with  a  fortune  and  a  public  spirit.  He  was 
not  slow  in  disco\  ering  the  sure  e\  idences 
of  an  advancing  trade  centering  here.  One 
of  the  first  exhibitions  of  his  good  will  and 
devotion  to  public  interests  was  his  unex- 
pected announcement  tliat  if  the  site  of  the 
'Old  Eagle'  was  tendered  to  him  he  would 
cover  it  with  a  hotel  unsurpas.sed  in  Central 
New  York.  The  offer  was  accepted,  and 
rising  above  the  smouldering  ashes  was 
soon  seen  the  stateh'  pile,  aliki-  an  (irna- 
ment  to  the  town  and  a  boast  to  the  count)'. 
But  he  did  not  stop  there.  He  saw  the 
business  of  the  tow  n  demanded  more  room 
and  he  projected  the  erecti(5n  of  this  block 
which  lifts  its  majestic  proportions  to  the 
sight  and  embraces  this  splendiel  hall  in 
which  we  are  now  assembled.  And  for 
these  edifices,  grand  in  size,  elegant  in  fin- 
ish, useful  in  arrangement  and  durable  in 
structure,  we  would  here  record  <jur  thanks 
and  tender  our  gratitude  to  our  noble  citi- 
zen, Hiram  J.  Messenger.  They  are  the 
monuments  of  his  genius,  his  taste  and  his 
liberalitj'.  He  has  connected  his  memory 
with  the  best  specimens  of  architecture,  and 
the  most  su])erb  styles  of  interior  finish,  as 
the  exquisite  work  of  this  loft\'  hall  fully 
attests.  \\  e    will    hold   this   [jlace 

consecrated  to  this  high  purpose:  to  the 
cause  of  Liberty  and  Union  ;  and  the  name 
of  its  generous  founder  we  will  ever  cherish 
in  grateful  remembrance  for  that  personal 
influence  and  munificence  which  he  has  so 
repeatedly  anil  signall)*  devoted  to  the  ])ros- 
perit}-  of  this  town." 


The  erection  of  otlier  buildings  followed 
this  in  succession,  among  them  being  Ma- 
sonic Hall  Block,  and  comprising  alto- 
gi'tlur  the  Messenger  House,  Messenger 
Hall,  Masonic  Hall,  twelve  stores  and 
several  other  business  places,  all  constructed 
within  the  short  space  of  four  years.  The 
war  closed  in  1865  and  depression  followed. 
The  government  tax  law  of  ten  per  cent, 
on  every  dollar  of  State  bank  circulation 
paid  out  took  effect  July  1st,  1866,  and  the 
half-million  of  State  bank  circulation  owned 
by  him  and  which  was  returning  an  annual 
income  of  forty  thousand  dollars  was,  of 
necessity,  committed  to  the  flames  b\-  the- 
superintendent  of  the  bank  tU'partment  as 
fast  as  it  could  be  gathered  up  and  sent  to 
him,  and  the  State  stocks  and  government 
bonds  becoming  depreciated  from  four  to 
thirty  per  cent,  were  sold  on  the  market, 
aggregating  a  loss  approximating  $60,000. 
Other  losses  on  mercantile  and  commer- 
cial paper  aggregating  some  $150,000  fol- 
lowed, and  after  pa\-ing  liabilities  of  over 
two  and  a  half  millions,  he  was  obliged  to  sus- 
pend in  Ma\-,  1 868,  with  less  than  half  a 
million  of  unpaid  indebtedness,  which  was 
settled  b\-  bankruptcy  proceedings  of  the 
fashionable  kind.  Since  this  occurrence 
Mr.  Messenger  has  quietl\-  pursued  the  real 
estate  and  fire  insurance  business  in  the 
town  he  helped  to  build  up.  In  politics  he 
was  a  Whig  when  and  as  long  as  that  party 
had  an  existence.  During  the  war  he  was 
activel}-  and  earnestl)'  engaged  with  the  late 
Hon  Henry  S.  Randall  and  Hon.  Horatio 
Ballard  in  filling  Cortland  county's  quota 
of  soldiers.  In  religion  he  is  a  firm  believer 
in  the  universal  salvation  of  all  and  a  warm 
supporter  of  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  K.  H.  Chapin. 


JAMh:S  WATTS  STURTKN'AXT.  The 
subject  of  this  notice  was  born  in  San- 
gerfield,  Oneida  county,  N.  V.,  on  the  25th. 
of  Julv,   I  Si  I,  and  died  in  Cortland  August 


448 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


9tli,  1873.  The  earlier  \-ears  of  liis  life 
were  passed  at  his  parental  home  near 
Madison  village,  N.  V.  His  father  was  a 
well-to-do  farmer  and  ijave  his  son  such 
opportunities  as  then  existed  in  the  vicinity 
for  securing  an  education  His  name  was 
James  Sturtevant.  His  children  were 
Thomas  Groves,  Justin,  Oman,  Abigail, 
Polly,  James  Watts,  Willard,  Hetsey,  and 
Demas.  All  of  these  with  one  exception 
were  living  at  the  time  of  James  W.'s 
death  ;   five  of  them  are  now  deceased. 

James  \V.  Sturtevant  began  mercantile 
pursuits  at  an  early  time  in  his  life,  starting 
first  as  a  traveling  salesman  in  a  small  wa\'. 
In  tliis  manner  he  accumulated  considerable 
means  with  the  \iew  of  opening  a  store  as 
soon  as  practicable.  Accordingly  he  came 
to  Homer,  N.  Y.,  in  the  spring  of  1834 
and  began  trade  under  the  firm  name  of 
Sturtevant,  Stebbens  &  Co.,  associated  with 
Kellogg  &  Son  of  Utica.  This  business 
connection  continued  for  eight  \'ears,  dur- 
ing which  period  Mr.  Sturtevant  acquired  a 
reputation  for  general  business  integrity 
and  enterprise.  In  1842  they  dissolved 
witli  Kellogg  &  Son,  went  to  Auburn  and 
continued  the  trade  under  the  firm  name  of 
Sturtevant  &  Stebbens. 

This  connection  continued  three  years 
when  the  firm  dissolved  and  Mr.  Sturtevant 
entered  into  partnership  with  Enoch  H. 
Doud  (fall  of  1845),  ^\ho  came  in  the  same 
year  to  Cortland  village  in  quest  of  a  bus- 
iness site.  Mr.  Sturtevant  came  in  1846, 
and  what  was  then  known  as  the  old  Pome- 
roy  stand  on  Main  street  was  secured,  and 
there  they  continued  in  successful  trade, 
under  the  firm  name  of  J.  W.  Sturtevant  & 
Co.,  until  1 861,  when  Emmet  .A.  Fish 
came  in  and  the  firm  name  became  Sturte- 
vant, Doud    &    Co.,   remaining    thus    until 

I 
1869.      This    firm     was    favorabh-    known  j 

throughout  the  count)'  and  was  one  of  the 
most  successful  and  honorable  in  the  history  ] 


of  Cortland.  In  1869  Mr.  Doud  retired 
and  his  place  was  taken  b\'  Cah  in  P.  Wal- 
rad,  the  firm  name  being  changed  to  Stur- 
tevant, Fish  &  Co.,  It  remained  thus  until 
Feb.,  1871,  when  Mr.  .Sturtevant  retired. 
During  the  period  covered  by  the  existence 
of  these  firms  the  reputation  and  business 
of  the  house  constantly  grew  in  favor. 

It  was  here  in  Co'rtland  that  Mr.  Sturte- 
vant met  his  future  wife,  Miss  Sarah  R. 
Freer,  daughter  of  John  A.  Freer,  an  ac- 
count of  whose  family  appears  in  these 
pages;  he  was  one  of  the  prominent  pio- 
neers of  the  county.  Mr.  Sturtevant  was 
married  on  the  24th  of  November,  1834. 
His  widow  still  resides  in  the  attractive 
homestead  in  Cortland  village. 

James  W.  Sturtevant  was  in  all  essential 
respects  a  business  man  and  his  mercantile 
afifairs  received  the  greater  share  of  his  at- 
tention and  energy.  Consequently  he 
sought  no  opportunity  to  seek  public  office 
of  any  kind.  He  was  a  man  of  positive 
convictions  on  all  current  topics  and  well 
knew  how  to  express  them.  But  the  fol- 
lowing estimate  of  his  character  from  the 
pen  of  an  intimate  acquaintance,  written  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  more  fitly  fills  this 
place  than  any  eulogy  we  are  capable  of 
writing :  — 

"  The  death  of  the  subject  of  this  sketch 
comes  home  to  me  as  a  personal  bereave- 
ment —  for  such  it  is,  in  the  fullest  sense  of 
the  term.  Not  only  ties  of  kinship,  but  of 
friendship  dating  from  my  earliest  recollec- 
tion, tend  to  deepen  and  intensify  my  sor- 
row. 

"  Never  have  I  met  a  man  of  greater  na- 
tive intellectual  force,  of  more  absolute  in- 
dependence of  thought,  of  clearer  or  sounder 
judgment,  of  higher  or  purer  moral  convic- 
tions or  principles.  This  may  seem  the 
partial  judgment  of  one  biased  by  friendship 
and  relationship  —  but  I  know  the  same  esti- 
mate was  made  b\'  men    of  wide  acquaint- 


J.  \V.  Sturtevant. —  Nathan  Salisbury. 


449 


ance  with  mankind,  and  by  those  who 
knew  best  the  quaUty  and  character  uf  the 
man.  Never  did  circumstances  bring  us 
together  without  giving  me  fresh  cause  to 
wonder  at  his  exuberant  intellectual  energy, 
at  the  keen  and  original  bent  of  his  mind, 
at  the  extent,  thoroughness  and  value  of  his 
reading,  at  his  hearty  hatred  of  shams  and 
falsehoods,  and  the  joyous  vigor  with  which 
he  took  up  the  toils  and  cares  of  life. 
Forced  b)'  the  hard  necessities  of  poverty 
to  forego,  in  his  early  years,  the  advantages 
of  a  liberal  education,  led  b\-  the  same 
cause  to  devote  the  strength  of  his  man- 
hood to  business,  which  he  prosecuted  long 
and  with  uniform  success,  he  made  up  for 
himself,  to  a  great  extent,  for  his  early  dep- 
rivations, by  a  reading  which  was  the 
wonder  of  all  who  knew  him.  His  friends 
and  intimates  recognized  in  him  a  man  who, 
under  different  circumstances,  might  have 
been  a  philosopher  and  a  scholar — a  leader 
in  the  intellectual  uorld,  as  he  was  to  them 

—  for  he  had  the  broad  and  comprehensive 
intellect,  the  pure  and  artistic  taste,  and  the 
vast  capacity  for  labor  which  go  to  make 
up  genius.  The  regret  among  all  who 
knew  him  is  keen  that  he  has  left  behind  him 
nothing  by  which  those  who  knew  him 
not  could  fair!}-  estimate  his  pow  ers  and  his 
worth.  Never  did  I  meet  him  without  be- 
ing led  into  fresh  intellectual  fields,  which 
his  acti\'e    and    restless   mind  had  explored 

—  never  without  fresh  cause  to  admire  the 
devotion  which  he  always  manifested  for 
the  truth  for  its  own  sake. 

"The  death  of  his-onl)-  child,  in  infancy, 
twenty  years  ago,  clouded  with  sadness  the 
latter  portion  of  his  life.  .A.  sorrow  which 
would  have  killed  a  man  of  less  vigor,  could 
such  a  man  feel  it  as  he  did,  did  not  make 
him  for  a  moment  misanthropic  or  morose. 

"  He  died  suddenly —  without  a  moment's 
warning.  '  His  eye  was  not  dimmed  nor 
his  natural    force   abated,'  but.  in    the  full- 


ness of  his  strength,  he  passed  at  once, 
without  the  intervention  of  aiTy  period  of 
sickness  or  suffering,  from  the  company  of 
friends  into  that  of  the  loved  who  had  gone 
before." 


NATHAN  SALISBURY.  The  earliest 
appearance  of  the  Salisbury  family  in 
this  country  was  about  A.  D.  1644.  At 
this  time,  for  political  reasons  and  to  avoid 
the  confiscation  of  property,  etc.,  during  the 
contest  between  the  Parliament  and  the  un- 
fortunate Charles  I.,  John  Salisbury  and 
Edward  Salisbury,  his  brother,  sons  of  Hen- 
ry Salisbury,  esq.,  and  younger  brothers  of 
Sir  Thomas  Salisbury,  quietly  got  them- 
selves away  from  Denbigh  and  emigrated 
to  this'  countr)'.  The  former  settled  at 
Swansea,  Massachusetts,  and  the  latter  near 
Mount  Hope,  in  Bristol,  Rhode  Island. 
Thomas  Salisburj-  of  Llanrust,  Denbigh 
count}',  either  came  with  tliem  or  followed 
soon  after,  and  settled  in  Cranston.  From 
family  records  and  traditions,  Thomas  was 
supposed  to  be  a  brother  of  John  and  Ed- 
ward, but  it  appears  from  P2nglish  records 
that  he  was  probably  not  a  brother  but 
cousin.  John  and  Edward  derived  from 
Henr\-  Salisbury,  second  son  of  John  Salis- 
bur}-,  who  became  heir  of  Lleweni  by  rea- 
son of  the  death  of  his  elder  brother,  Thomas, 
who  suftered  death  Sept.  20th,  1586,  for 
endeavoring  to  deliver  Mary,  Queen  of 
Scots,  from  imprisonment. 

Thomas,  derived  from  Robert  Salisbury, 
fourth  son  of  Thomas  Salisbury  heir  of 
Lleweni. 

The  branch  of  the  family  to  which  the 
subject  of  this  sketch  belongs  derives  from 
Thomas  Salisbury,  who  settled  in  Cranston. 

"  The  Salisbury  family  took  its  rise  in 
Germany,  and  long  before  the  conquest  of 
England  its  head  resided  in  Bavaria.  The 
original  name  of  the  family  was  Guelph,  and 
its  leading  member,  Henry  Guelph.  was   in 


450 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  year  1024  made  Duke  of  Jiavaria, 
by  the  Kinpeior  Comad  the  Second.  The 
fii-st  duke  liad  .several  sons,  the  voungestof 
wlioni,  Trinco  Adam,  came  over  to  Eng- 
land in  the  train  of  William  of  Normandy, 
in  the  year  io66.  This  young  prince  did 
not,  iiowever,  come  with  William  as  a  sub- 
ject of  his  Xorman  dukedom,  for  he  owed 
him  no  allegiance  ;  but  he  came  in  the  char- 
.icter  of  a  soldier  of  fortune,  and  in  that 
ciiaracter  took  his  part  in  the  great  battle 
o(  Hasting-s.  For  his  services  on  that  occa- 
sion he  was  rew  arded  bj^  King  William  with 
a  grant  of  an  extensive  tract  of  land  in  Rich- 
mondshire.  running  southward  to  the  river 
Ribble  in  L;incashire,  and  it  was  in  this 
place  the  x'ounger  branch  of  the  royal  fam- 
ily of  Bavaria  (ii-st  settled  in  England. 

■■  Adam  Guelph  soon  dropped  his  German 
surname.  He  followed  the  Xorman  fashion 
of  taking  up  the  name  of  a  particular  place 
for  a  surname  and  thus  became  a  dc  Saltz- 
burg,  or  Adam  of  Saltzburg  —  S;iltzburg 
being  tl\e  name  of  die  place  in  Bavaria  from 
which  he  came.  He  settled  upon  hts  new 
possessions,  built  himself  a  home  at  no 
great  distance  from  Preston,  called  it  after 
his  new  name,  and  b\  that  name.  Salms- 
bury  Court  or  Salebury  Hall,  it  is  known 
to  this  day. 

""  Adam  de  Saltzburg  was  not,  as  many  of 
his  descendants  proudly  suppose,  a  Norman, 
but  a  pure  Saxon,  having  the  same  origin 
as  the  House  of  Saxony." 

The  time  of  Adam  de  Saltzburgh's  death 
is  uncertain,  but  in  the  year  1 102  his  eldest 
son,  Alexander  de  Saltzburg,  had  succeeded 
to  the  fathers  vast  jK^ssessions  .\le.\ander 
died  in  1153  He  left  two  sons,  Alexander 
and  Henr\  The  eldest  succeeded  to  the 
l^ancashire  property-  and  Henry  to  an  es- 
tate in  Cheshire. 

Nathan  Salisburx-  was  bom  in  Cranston, 
Rhode  Island.  Oct.  loth,  1793.  His  pater- 
nal grandfather,  whose  wife's  maiden  name 


was  Pierce,  resided  at  Cranston  at  the  time 
of  his  death. 

The  following  were  his  children:  Peleg, 
know  11  as  the  "  (^/jj  Wiiii  0/  Wiirwick,"  Mar- 
tin, Job,  Mial,  Nathan,  Rebecca  and  Phoeba. 
Nathan,  sen.,  the  father  of  the  subject  of 
this  sketch,  was  born  Dec.  ist.  1751,  and 
married  May  i6th,  1 77 1.  .Abigail  Stone  — 
born  Oct.  16th,  1753,  only  daughter  of  Dea. 
Joseph  Stone,  of  Cranston,  a  descendant  of 
Hugh  Stone  "  tfu-  stokii  boy"  Abigail 
Stones  mother s  maiden  name  was  Brown, 
a  near  relative  of  John  Brown,  the  founder  of 
Rhode  Island  College,  afterwards  Brown 
Univei^sity. 

Nathan  Salisbury,  sen.,  was  Lieutenant 
under  Capl.  Burgess  of  the  company  which, 
from  Warwick  Neck,  fired  into,  captured, 
and  burned  the  British  schooner,  Gtispf  in 
1772.  He  resided  in  Cranston  until  1795. 
when  he  moved  to  Providence.  R.  I.  In 
March,  1803,  'ic  moved  his  family  to  Hart- 
ford, Washington  county.  New  York,  where 
he  purchased  a  fanii  and  remained  until 
1S06,  when  he  again  moved  his  family  to 
Cazenovia,  Madison  county.  New  York. 
At  this  place  he  only  remained  through  the 
winter,  and  in  Marcli,  1807.  came  witli  his 
famil\-  to  Homer,  then  in  Onondaga  county. 

He  purchased  land  and  reared  a  log  cabin 
on  lot  5,  located  on  the  waters  of  Cold 
brook,  where  his  family  settled  in  the  fall 
of  xhc  same  \ear.  Here  he  remained  until 
his  death,  which  occurred  May  4tli.  1S17. 
his  wife  surxiving  him  until  Dec,  I4tli. 
1S36.  The  following  were  their  eleven 
children  :  Waity,  Sally,  John,  Joseph  Mar- 
tin, who  followed  the  sea  and  died  on  a  voy- 
age returning  fr«m  Cliina.  Anna,  Mar\-. 
Lucinda,  Ambrose.  Cynthia,  Nathan,  jun.. 
and  Phoeba.  .\t  the  time  of  the  families' 
settlement  on  Cold  brook,  but  half  a  dozen 
pioneers  had  recently  reared  their  log  cabins 
on  tlie  adjacent  slopes  of  the  valley.  Tlie 
wx>lf  still    prowled   in   the  hemlock's  deep 


^'^a.;t^ayn  CZ^^J-^c^/ry- , ^^-- 


Nathax  Salisbury.  —  EBEXEziiR  Mudge. 


45' 


shadov\s,  deer  and  other  game  were  abund- 
ant, and  the  cool  streams  swarmed  with 
beautiful  trout.  Hence,  it  is  not  strani^c  that 
young  Nathan  should  sometimes  ha\e  fol- 
lowed the  deer  trail,  often  with  great  suc- 
cess. In  1813  he  was  baptized  by  Rev. 
Alfred  Bennett  and  received  into  the  Bap- 
tist Church  of  Homer,  subsequently  remov- 
ing his  standing  to  the  First  Baptist  Church 
of  Scott,  where  a  large  and  flourishing  so- 
ciety e.xisted  for  many  years.  Always  in- 
terested in  the  welfare  of  the  young,  he  has 
devoted  much  time  to  organizing  and  con- 
ducting Sabbath  and  singing  schools.  In 
181 5  he  purchased  a  farm  on  lot  95  in  the 
southeast  corner  of  Scott,  then  an  unbroken 
wilderness,  which  is  the  present  site  of  Ever- 
green Terrace,  the  Sa/isbmy  Home.  The 
next  summer,  1816,  known  as  the  "cold 
season,"  he  raised  two  acres  of  corn  ;  and 
in  1 8 18,  was  able  to  raise  thirty  acres  of 
fine  wheat.  Thus,  gradually  the  forest  fell, 
and  in  its  place  waxed  fields  of  golden 
grain. 

June  2  I  St,  i8i8,  he  was  married  to  Lu- 
cretia  A.  Babcock  (born  September  30th, 
1792),  daughter  of  James  Babcock  and 
Mar}'  Gibbs,  who  emigrated  from  Blanford, 
Mass.,  to  Scott,  N.  Y.,  in  May,  181  5.  They 
reared  the  following  nine  children  :  Justin, 
Justus,  James  Henry,  Samuel,  John,  Lucre- 
tia  A.,  Adeline,  Mary  and  Matilda. 

The  fire  which  Nathan  Salisburj-  kintlled 
upon  the  first  hearthstone  is  still  burning. 
Around  it  ha\c  clustered  and  been  reared 
eight  children  —  Amanda  A.,  Charles  B., 
James  H.,  Milton  L.,  Burdett  J..  Charlotte 
A.,  Wallace  W.  and  Nathan,  jun.,  all  of 
whom  are  now  lixing.  Of  these,  James  H. 
is  a  well  known  physician  of  Cleveland  O., 
now  of  New  York  cit\-.  \\'allace  W.  is  a 
graduate  of  Albany  Law  Uni\'ersit_\-. 

During  a  long  life  Nathan  Salisbur\'  has 
occupied  various  positions  of  honor  and  trust 
and  enjoN'ed  the    respect  of  all    who    knew 


him.  Possessed  of  good  judgment  and  per- 
severance, his  undertakings  were  successful. 
For  many  )ears  he  was  engaged  in  breed- 
ing and  handling  sheep  and  cattle.  As  a 
floriculturist  and  horticulturist,  he  delights 
to  adorn  his  home  with  the  beautiful,  and 
has  devoted  much  time  to  the  production 
of  fine  fruit,  being  the  originator  of  several 
fine  varieties  of  seedling  pears. 

As  an  agriculturist  his  fields  are  produc- 
tive and  his  granaries  seldom  empty.  Hav- 
ing a  taste  for  the  natural  sciences,  as  an 
amateur  geologist,  he  has  collected  and  ar- 
ranged at  his  home  a  cabinet  of  rocks, 
fossils  and  minerals,  second  to  few  private 
collections. 

Resulting  from  an  accident,  his  estimable 
wife  died,  much  lamented,  March  4th,  1 88 1, 
in  the  eighty- ninth  year  of  her  age. 

At  this  writing,  Sept.,  1884,  he  lacks  but 
a  month  of  being  ninety-one  years  of  age. 
For  one  who  has  seen  the  snows  of  so  many 
winters,  he  has  great  vitality  and  still  pos- 
sesses his  natural  faculties  in  a  remarkable 
degree. 


EBENEZER  MUDGE.  —  Among  the 
prominent  millers  of  Cortland  countv 
should  be  mentioned  the  name  of  Ebenezer 
Mudge.  He  came  to  Cortland  village,  then 
but  a  small  hamlet,  in  1839,  with  an  already 
large  experience  in  his  business.  He  fol- 
lowed it  until  the  \-ear  r866,  when  he  re- 
tired from  acti\e  pursuits.  His  father. 
Abram  Mudge,  was  a  native  of  Otsego 
count)-,  in  this  State,  but  subsequentlj- 
remoxed  into  Montgomer\-  county,  where 
he  operated  a  mill  previous  to  his  removal 
to  Cortland.  He  ser\ed  as  a  soldier  in  the 
war  of  1812.  After  coming  to  this  count)- 
he  became  the  owner  of  the  mills  now  oper- 
ated b)'Thos.  F.  Bra)-ton,  in  the  eastern  por- 
tion of  Cortland  village,  which  he  continued 
to  run  for  about  eighteen  years,  when  he  re- 
tired from  business.      He  was  born  in  1793 


452 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


and  died  in  1869.  He  served  the  people 
of  Cortland  county  several  terms  as  super- 
visor, in  which  office  he  was  often  chosen 
on  committees  having  charge  of  the  most 
important  interests  of  the  public.  In  such 
positions  his  judgment  and  his  integrity 
were  always  unquestioned.  His  family  con- 
sisted of  six  children,  four  sons  and  two 
daughters ;  their  names  being  Isaac,  Ebe- 
nezer,  Byron,  Romeyn,  Harriet  and  Eliz- 
abeth. Ebenezer  is  the  only  one  who  now 
resides  in  this  county.  The  early  years  of 
his  life  were  spent  in  the  town  of  Charles- 
town,  Montgomery  county,  where  he  was 
born  on  the  6th  of  April,  18 16.  His  father 
soon  afterward  moved  into  the  town  of  Can- 
ajoharie,  in  the  little  village  of  Ames,  where 
he  operated  a  mill,  in  which  PZbenezer  as- 
sisted during  portions  of  each  year,  alter- 
nating his  labor  with  attendance  at  district 
school,  and  later  at  the  academ)-.  When 
he  came  to  Cortland  he  found  the  mill 
which  he  owned  for  so  many  years  in  a  bad 
state  of  repair,  doing  but  little  business  and 
the  general  prospect  anj'thing  but  attrac- 
tive. But  he  went  to  work  with  energy, 
repaired  the  buildings,  put  the  machinery 
in  better  order  and  gave  his  unremitting  at- 
tention to  his  business.  These  improve- 
ments, with  the  excellent  character  of  the 
product  of  his  mill,  soon  had  their  expected  ' 
effect  and  the  business  increased  every  sue-  j 
ceeding  year.  Mr.  Mudge  remained  in 
charge  of  this  mill  for  a  period  of  twent)' 
eight  years,  during  which  time  he  made  for 
himself  a  large  circle  of  business  acquaint- 
ances and  friends,  and  gained  ;i  reputation 
for  integrit)'  and  ^terlin;.;  char.icter  as  (.lui- 
able  as  it  was  deserved.  He  retired  in  1866, 
having  secured  a  handsome  competence. 
He  has  never  sought  public  office  or  dis-  j 
tinction  of  any  kind,  being  content  with  the 
successful  prosecution  of  his  own  affairs  and 
the  respect  of  the  communit\ . 

In   I  8  ^7  Mr.  Mudge  was  married  to  Miss  . 


Hannah  C.  Hodge.  Four  children  were 
born  (if  this  union  —  Powers  C.  Mudge, 
now  proprietor  of  the  well-known  grist-mill 
at  Little  York  ;  Mary  E.  Mudge,  now  the 
wife  of  Charles  VV.  Collins,  of  Cortland  vil- 
lage; Charles  Jay  Mudge,  who  died  in  in- 
fancy; and  Olivia  L.  Mudge,  who  died  at 
the  age  of  fourteen.  Mrs.  Mudge  died  in 
1867.  Mr.  Mudge  was  again  married  to 
Harriet  E.  Phelps,  dauijlitcr  of  Judge  Henr)- 
J.  Phelps,  of  Michigan. 


ALFRED  L.  CHAMBERLAIN.  The 
subject  of  this  sketch  is,  probably,  the 
oldest  living  citizen  of  Cortland  county  who 
was  born  in  the  village  of  Homer.  He  is  a  son 
of  Deacon  Charles  Chamberlain,  who  came 
to  Homer  in  1801,  purchased  fift}'  acres  of 
ground  embracing  the  site  of  the  village, 
and  building  his  dwelling  just  back  of  the 
site  of  the  Congregational  Church.  Of  the 
land  he  had  purchased  he  deeded  six  acres 
(Mr.  Garrison,  the  former  owner  of  the  tract, 
doing  likewise)  for  what  is  known  as  the 
village  '■  green." 

Mr.  Chamberlain  came  from  Dudley,  Con- 
necticut. He  was  a  man  of  considerable  ed- 
ucation for  those  times,  and  a  good  deal  of 
natural  force  of  character  ;  he  taught  school 
for  a  short  time,  was  one  of  the  first  trustees 
of  Cortland  Academy,  and  in  1803  returned 
to  Brimfield,  Mass.,  where  he  married  Miss 
Ro.vsc)-  Lyon.  During  the  following  year 
their  oldest  son,  the  subject  of  this  sketch, 
was  born.  In  1807  he  remo\ed  to  Sum- 
merhill,  where  he  li\ed  about  eighteen  years, 
when  he  returnee!  to  Cortland  and  pur- 
chasetl  a  farm  on  lot  34,  in  the  village  of 
Homer.  Here  he  resided  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  on  the  6tli  of  October,  184 1, 
at  the  age  o(  fift\-cight  \ears.  He  was  an 
active  man,  both  in  the  community  at  large 
and  in  the  church,  filling  several  positions 
of  trust  and  responsibilit\-  to  the  satisfac- 
tion of  his  fellow  citizens       IK-  was  a  super- 


Alfred  L.  Chamberlain.  —  Silas  Blaxchard. 


453 


visor  in  Tompkins  county  several  terms,  and 
justice  of  the  peace,  and  was  deacon  in  tlie 
Presbyterian  Cliurcli  for  many  years.  His 
wife  died  on  the  26th  nf  No\embcr.  1843, 
at  the  age  of  si.xty  years.  Their  children 
were  Alfred  L.,  Ormond,  Charles  V.,  Car- 
oline, George  W' .  and  Mary.  Charles  be- 
came a  prominent  and  wealth)-  merchant 
(^f  South  Carolina  and  was  in  that  State 
during  the  late  war.  Caroline,  Mrs.  Hib- 
bard,  was  a  resident  of  Vincenncs  Ind., 
where  her  hushand  was  also  a  merchant. 
She  died  the  i8th  of  December,  1843. 

Alfred  L.  Chamberlain,  being  the  oldest 
of  the  children,  performed  much  of  the  ar- 
duous farm  labor  in  his  early  life,  that  nat- 
urally devolved  upon  him  ;  but  at  the  same 
time  he  made  the  best  possible  use  of  the 
opportunities  gi\en  him  for  securing  an  ed- 
ucation, and  when  he  had  reached  a  proper 
age,  completed  his  studies  by  a  course  in 
the  Cortland  Academy,  of  which  he  was  in 
later  life  a  trustee.  He  was  married  on  the 
23d  of  April,  1834,  to  Miss  Semantha  Boies, 
daughter  of  Capt.  Rufus  Boies,  who  came 
from  Blanford,  Mass.,  with  an  o.x  team  in 
the  year  1812,  and  located  on  lot  54.  His 
children  were  Dolly,  Leverett,  Semantha, 
Israel,  William  and  Caroline.  Israel  Boies 
became  a  prominent  citizen  of  Homer  and 
was  one  of  the  foremost  in  securing  the  con- 
struction of  the  Syracuse  and  Binghamton 
Railroad.  William  and  Leverett  went  west, 
and  Caroline  is  now  the  widow  of  the  late 
Manly  Hobart. 

After  Mr.  Chamberlain's  marriage  he 
purchased  the  old  Major  Ballard  farm,  where 
he  lived  for  thirteen  years.  He  then  pur- 
chased his  present  property  of  Caleb  Cook, 
formerly  owned  by  the  Rev.  F'Llnathan 
Walker.  He  has  always  been  prominent 
in  the  agricultural  interests  of  the  county, 
devoting  himself  stricth"  to  it  and  apph-ing 
thorough-going  business  princi]iles  to  the 
work.      His  success  has  been  most  gratify- 


ing in  practical  results.  He  has  been  a 
prominent  member  of  the  Cortland  County 
Agricultural  Society  and  was  its  president 
for  several  years.  He  early  turned  his  at- 
tention to  the  breeding  of  Merino  sheep, 
anil  finall\-  sold  his  \-aluable  flock  to  the  late 
Hon.  Henry  S.  Randall,  thus  starting  that 
j  gentleman  in  this  industry.  He  also  en- 
gaged largely  in  raising  Durham  cattle,  in 
which  he  was  eminentlysuccessful  and  gain- 
ed an  extended  reputation.  He  was  for  many 
years  president  of  the  Cemetery  Association, 
and  it  is  but  simple  justice  to  state  that  to 
his  generous  labor  and  unselfish  interest  is 
due  much  of  the  beaut\-  of  the  Homer  cem- 
eter)-. 

Mr.  Chamberlain  has  always  been  a 
member  of  the  Congregational  Church  So- 
ciety and  has  lived  in  broad  harmony  with 
his  professions.  He  is  the  father  of  Mrs. 
Grace  Walrad,  wife  of  Calvin  P.  Walrad,  of 
Cortland  village.  He  has  had  three  other 
daughters,  all  of  whom  are  dead.  Although 
he  is  now  nearly  eighty  years  of  age,  Mr. 
Chamberlain  still  possesses  remarkable  vigor 
and  energy  of  both  body  and  mind,  and 
is  receiving  the  unqualified  respect  of  all 
who  know  him. 


SILA^ 
ofC 


SBLANCHARD.  The  Blanchards 
Cortland  county  are  descended  from 
a  family  consisting  of  three  brothers  who 
came  from  England  to  America  some  time 
in  the  i6th  century.  William  Blanchard, 
of  Windham  Co.,  Conn.,  seems  to  have 
been  the  ancestor  of  those  in  this  part  of 
the  State.  His  son  Azariel  was  born  June 
13th,  1 741,  and  was  first  married  to  Abigail 
Mason  January  lOth,  1764.  He  was  thrice 
married,  his  second  wife  being  P-unice  Culver 
and  his  third.  Thankful  Peck*.  He  was  the 
grandfather  of  Silas  Blanchard.  Abigail 
Mason  was  born  April  3d,  1741,  and  their 
son  William  was  the  father  of  Silas.  He  was 
born  Nov.  13th,  1772,  died  Sept.  16th,  1S54. 


454 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Silas  Blanchard  was  born  in  the  town  of 
Ciiyler  on  tlie  stli  of  June,  1814,  and  died 
at  his  home  in  Homer  villatjc  July  loth, 
1 88 1.  His  father  was  Wm.  Blanchard,  as 
stated,  and  his  mother  was  Hannah  Whit- 
marsh,  born  Sept.  28th,  1775.  She  died 
Oct.  21st,  1844.  They  were  married  Feb. 
22d,  1797,  and  migrated  immediately  there- 
after to  the  town  of  Fabius,  aftcrw  arc!  Tru.x- 
ton  and  now  Cuyler,  locating  on  lot  66. 
Their  immediate  neighbors  then  were  Chris- 
topher Whitney  (lot  96),  Nathaniel  Potter, 
father  of  Mrs.  Nathaniel  Patrick  (lot  57), 
Hcnjaniin  Brown  (lot  47),  Simon  Keeney, 
Wm.  Wallace  and  one  or  two  families  of 
the  Websters  and  F"o.\es  on  lots  47  and  57. 

Azariel  Blanchard  was  a  soldier  in  the 
War  of  the  Re\'olution  and  was  on  duty  in 
the  \icinity  of  Lake  Champlain  He  was, 
probabl}",  captain  of  a  compan\',  as  he  al- 
ways bore  that  title.  His  wife  died  of  small- 
pox ;  the  children  of  William  Blanchard 
were  Asahel.born  Jul\- 1 6th,  1 798,  died  Aug. 
Stli,  1801;  Daniel,  born  Dec.  29th,  1799; 
Asahel,  born  Aug.  31st,  1801  ;  Harry,  born 
Dec.  30th,  1803  ;  Eliza,  born  Dec.  18th, 
1806;  Clarissa,  born  Dec.  7th,  1808;  Wil- 
liam W.,  born  Sept.  25th,  1810  ;  died  March 
13th,  1831  ;  Azariel  Mason,  born  Aug.  5th, 
1812;  Silas,  born  June  5th,  18 14;  Levi, 
born  I\Li)'2ist,  1816;  Lewis,  born  Aug. 
4th,  1 8 18,  died  July  4th,  uS2o;  Lewis  2nd, 
born  Oct.  21st,  1820. 

Silas  Blanchard  spent  his  earl\-  lift  on  his 
father's  farm  in  Cuyler,  attending  school 
but  a  small  portion  of  the  time.  By  his 
natural  aptness  for  study  and  his  tempera- 
ment, he  became  a  good  mathematician. 
He  was  married  to  Miss  Elvira  Wilson, 
daughter  of  Reynold  Wilson,  on  the  31st 
of  October,  1839.  Mr.  Wilson  was  a  na- 
tive of  Windsor,  Conn.,  and  in  February, 
18 1 7,  removed  with  his  wife  (who  was 
Chloe  Mallery)  to  the  town  of  Fabius, 
where  he  resided  until  his  death  on  the  14th 


of  September,  1835  ;  his  wife  died  Aug. 
30th,  1843,  aged  si.\ty-two  j'ears.  Mr. 
Wilson  was  prominent  in  the  town,  having 
been  repeatedly  elected  to  the  office  of  su- 
pervisor and  to  other  positions  of  trust. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Wilson  had  a  family  of  eight 
children,  Mrs.  Blanchard  being  the  eldest 
of  the  four  now  living. 

Mr.  Blanchard  began  his  married  life  on 
a  farm  purchased  of  Henry  and  Seth  Purin- 
ton,  where  he  carried  on  dairying  some- 
what extensively.  He  soon  became  gen- 
erally recognized  as  one  of  the  leading  citi- 
zens of  his  town,  which  fact  is  indicated  by 
his  election  first,  for  two  terms,  as  justice 
of  the  peace.  In  1861  he  was  elected  su- 
pervisor, which  office  he  filled  for  five  terms. 
In  1870  he  was  elected  superintendent  of 
the  countj'  alms-house,  which  position  he 
filled  until  his  death  in  I  88  I.  He  became 
a  Christian  belie\er  in  1856  and  ever  after 
lived  a  life  consistent  with  his  faith. 

As  superintendent  of  the  poor,  Silas 
Blanchard  was  a  model  officer ;  always 
alert  for  securing  the  best  interests  of  the 
county  and  the  comfort,  as  far  as  posssible, 
of  the  unfoitunates  under  his  care.  His 
peculiar  fitness  for  this  trust  and  his  suc- 
cessful administration  of  the  same,  are  shown 
by  his  repeated  re-election  to  it.  Previous 
to  his  removal  to  Cortland  he  had  filled  the 
office  of  supervisor,  as  stated,  and  to  the 
best  of  satisfaction  to  his  constituents.  As 
a  member  of  the  board  of  education  of  the 
academy  he  was  painstaking  and  earnest, 
and  as  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episco- 
pal Church,  was  always  mindful  of  the  best 
interests  of  the  societ}'.  As  a  man,  a  neigh- 
bor, he  was  greatly  missed  in  all  the  ordi- 
nary relations  of  life.  His  funeral  was  at- 
tended very  largel}',  including  the  academj' 
board  and  the  directors  of  the  First  Na- 
tional Bank  who  attended  in  a  body. 

Though  a  man  of  active  labor  in  life  and 
therefore   recognized    as   of  great  worth  to 


Silas  Bi.anchard.  —  A.  W    Gates. 


455 


the  community,  Mr.  Blanchard  was,  never- 
tliele.'is,  (|uiet  and  nnassimiini;  and  of  few 
words.  He  acted  rather  than  talked:  his 
work  was  noiseless  and  liencc  all  that  he  ac- 
complished was  not  know  n  to  the  world.  1  le 
was  not  impulsive;  slow  to  act  until  he  knew 
he  was  right,  when  he  became  the  embodi- 
ment of  perseverance  and  quiet  industr\-. 
His  on!)-  child  was  Wilson  Blanchartl,  born 
Aug.  3d,  1841  ;  died  Oct.  19th,  1.S42.  His 
widow,  Mrs.  Eh'ira  Blanchard,  is  still  li\ing, 
one  of  the  honored  and  bclo\'ed  members 
of  society  in  Homer. 

At  a  special  meeting  of  the  board  of  ed- 
ucation of  Homer  Acadeni}'  and  Union 
School,  held  nn  Tuesdaj' Jul_\-  12th,  1S81,  in 
recognition  of  the  death  of  Silas  Blanchard, 
the  following  resolutions  were  unanimousl)' 
passed  by  the  board  and  (Ordered  published: 

"  Jl'/u'/rds,  The  hoard  of  education  of  Homer 
Acadeni)'  are  deeply  afflicted  in  the  removal  by 
death  of  OLU' honored  associate.  Mr.  Silas  Hlanch- 
ard,  therefore. 

■'  /ifso/'i'c'i/.  I'hat  we  hereb)'  record  our  appre- 
ciation of  the  urbane,  wise  and  t'aithful  services 
of  our  brother  during  his  long  term  cif  office  upon 
this  board. 

'^Resolved,  That  we  hereby  express  our  deep 
feeling  of  personal  loss  and  berea\'enient  in  the 
death  of  one  so  efficient  and  trustworthy  and  so 
eminently  courteous   in  all  his   relations  w  ith  us. 

•'  Resolved.  That  we  hereby  tender  to  the  im- 
mediate family  and  Iriends  of  our  departed  col- 
league, our  sincere  sympathy  in  the  scjrrow  that 
peculiarly  rests  upon  theui  ;  assured  as  we  are 
that  their  best  consolation  will  come  tVoui  the 
example  and  memory  of  him  whom  we  mourn, 
and  from  the  same  truths  and  the  same  faith 
which  shaped  his  life.  ga\e  him  victory  in 
death  and  ens\u-od  tor  him  the  eternal  life  of  a 
Christian." 

A  similar  series  of  resolutions  were 
adopted  by  the  trustees  of  the  Methodist 
Church  of  Homer,  but  they  need  not  be 
quoted  here.  They  are  simply  an  added 
testimony  to  the  general  worth  in  lite  and 
the  loss  felt  in  the  death  of  Silas  lilanchard. 


A. 


W.  GATES.  The  subject  of  this 
sketch  is  the  grandson  of  Amos  Gates 
and  Susan  i'ike.  natives  of  Massachusetts. 
His  fatlier  was  Da\is  Gates,  who  left 
Harnestown  with  his  father  in  1824,  and 
came  to  Caroline,  Tompkins  county,  N.  Y. 
He  was  born  Sept.  7th,  1803,  and  married 
Lucinda  Bonney  January  i8th,  1827,  the 
l\e\  .\lfVed  Bennett,  of  Homer,  ])crforming 
the  ceremony.  Lucinda  Bonney  was  the 
daughter  of  Capt.  Jethro  Bonney  and  Lu- 
cinda Webster.  Jethro  Bonney  was  born 
in  Litchfield  Co.,  Conn.,  in  1771.  He 
died  of  dropsy  Nov.  loth,  1866,  aged  ninety- 
six  years.  At  the  age  of  fourteen,  he  re- 
moved to  this  State  and  settled  in  what  is 
now  Washington  county,  where  he  married 
Lucinda  Webster  Sept.  22d,  1791.  In 
1800  he,  with  his  in\alid  wife,  remo\-ed  to 
Homer  (now  Cortland).  His  wife  died  in 
1820.  In  1787  Mr.  Bonney  entered  the 
military  serxice,  being  but  sixteen  years  of 
age,  and  served  twenty-five  years,  passing 
through  the  different  official  grades  to  a 
captaincy ;     he     filled     these    offices    with 

I  honor,  and   resigned  just  before  the  war  of 

!  1812.  During  this  war  he  enlisted  in  a 
company  of  exempts,  paying  his  own  ex- 
penses, and  recei\'ed  from  the  governor  a 
second  captain's  commission.  In  this  vet- 
eran band  he  did  \aliant  service.  He  lived 
to  the  age  of  ninuty-six  and  died  in  the  vil- 
lage of  Cortland.  Lucinda  Webster  was  a 
daughter  of  Oliver  Webster  (uncle  to  Dan- 
iel Webster)  and    Patience  Wriglit,  both  of 

I  Massachusetts,  and  Daniel  Webster  was  a 
double  cousin  of  Silas  Wright,  governor  of 
the  State  of  New  York  in  early  years. 

Lucinda  Bonney  was  a  native  of  St. 
.Albans,  Vt.,  and  was  born  Noxcmber  13th, 
1803,  and  is  at  present  living  in  vigorous 
health    at    Lyons.    Clinton     county,    Iowa. 

t  Davis  Gates  and  Lucinda  Bonney  were 
married  in  the  old  log  house  on  lot  51,  in 
the  tow  n  of  Cortlandville.      This  house  and 


456 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


lot  of  fifty  acres  was  then  owned  by  her 
brother. 

During  the  year  following  the  marriage 
of  Lucinda  Bonney  and  Davis  Gates  the 
family  made  three  removals,  returning  to 
Caroline,  Tompkins  county,  where  Alonzo 
W.  Gates  was  born  Feb.  5th,  1829.  In  1830 
they  removed  to  Clarance,  Erie  county, 
where  Jethro  Gates  was  born,  Oct.  28th  of 
that  year.  During  their  stay  in  Erie 
county  Mr.  Gates  purchased  the  propcrt}' 
belonging  to  his  wife's  brother  in  Cortland- 
ville  and  came  back  in  1834  to  the  liouse 
in  which  they  were  married,  and  where 
Berintha  was  born  Sept.  17th,  1835,  and 
Olive  Mary  July  7th,  1837. 

On  this  farm  of  fifty  acres  the  earlier 
years  of  Alonzo  \V.  Gates  were  spent  in 
aiding  to  clear  and  till  the  land  and  to  per- 
form other  severe  labor  incident  to  pioneer 
life.  When  seventeen  years  old  he  assisted 
his  father  in  building  the  frame  house  which 
still  stands  on  the  site  ;  this  was  his  first  ex- 
perience as  a  carpenter.  In  this  \-ocati()n 
he  was  well  known  to  the  communit)'  of 
former  years.  His  leisure  hours  and  a  por- 
tion of  each  winter  he  devoted  to  stud}-, 
and  to  such  good  purpose  that  he  fitted 
himself  for  the  academy,  which  he  entered 
when  nineteen  years  of  age,  and  where  he 
qualified  himself  for  teaching.  This  pro- 
fession he  followed  for  several  \-ears  in  the 
schools  of  Homer  and  Cortland,  becoming 
eminentl}-  successful.  He  was  fitted  for 
this  work  not  only  by  education,  but  by 
nature,  being  able  to  enter  into  sympathy 
with  those  under  him  and  awaken  in  them 
a  desire  to  learn.  This  is  the  first  and  im- 
portant step  towards  securing  an  education. 
His  labors  as  an  educator  brought  him  in 
due  time  a  fitting  reward  ;  he  having  re- 
ceived a  State  teacher's  certificate  on  the 
14th  of  November,  i860,  from  the  Hon.  H. 
H.  Vandyck,  State  superintendent  of  pub- 
lic instruction.     This  honor  was  conferred 


at  the  instance  of  the  Hon.  Daniel  E. 
W'hitmorc.  now  of  Marathon,  then  county 
school  superintendent,  and  whose  knowl- 
edge of  Mr.  Gates  warranted  his  bringing 
him  to  the  proper  notice  of  the  State 
official. 

In  1856  Mr.  Gates  removed  to  Knox 
county,  111.,  settling  and  building  a  house 
in  the  village  of  Wataga,  where  he  taught 
school  for  two  years,  when  the  death  of  his 
father  occurred  in  1858,  and  he  returned  to 
Cortland,  bought  out  the  other  heirs  to  his 
father's  estate  and  has  since  that  time  re- 
mained in  this  town.  In  his  school  work 
in  Wataga  Mr.  Gates  was  also  eminent!)' 
successful.  He  began  with  fort)'  pupils, 
but  his  fame  as  an  educator  soon  spread 
over  the  surrounding  country,  and  pupils 
from  abroad  increased  his  enrollment  to  a 
hundred  and  fifty.  This  increase  necessi- 
tated an  addition  to  the  building  and  an 
assistant  teacher,  which  were  promptl)' 
granted  him  by  his  board. 

In  1852  he  was  married  to  Miss  Jerusha 
M.  Carr,  daughter  of  Wm.  Carr  and  Rule 
Underwood,  of  Freetown,  in  this  count)'. 
Mr.  Carr  was  a  native  of  Rhode  Island  and 
when  nineteen  years  old  came  to  this  State 
and  subsequently  settled  on  what  is  now 
lot  20  of  the  town  of  Freetown.  This  was 
in  the  year  1820.  He  became,  through 
his  characteristics  of  energy,  combined  with 
a  nature  of  fine  sensibilit)',  and  deep, 
thorough  religious  convictions,  a  man  of 
j  prominence  and  the  utmost  respectability. 
He  died  in  1873,  on  the  17th  of  Januar)', 
while  in  attendance  at  a  debating  society  in 
his  own  neighborhood.  He  was  an  active, 
vigorous  debater,  and  the  same  character- 
istics governed  his  conduct  in  other  pursuits. 
1  He  died  suddenly  after  making  an  earnest 
eftbrt  in  behalf  of  his  Master.  His  wife 
Ruie  was  a  sweet-spirited  Christian  woman, 
revered  and  loved  by  all  who  knew  her. 

Mrs.  Gates    has  been    to  her   husband  a 


ALONZO  W.  GATES. 


A.  W.  Gates.  —  Charles  W.  Gage. 


457 


helpmeet  in  the  broadest  meaning  of  the 
term.  During  their  married  hfe  of  thirty- 
two  years,  and  especially  so  during  their  j 
sixteen  years'  administration  of  the  affairs  of 
the  Countj--house,  beginning  in  1864. 
Here  she  labored  assiduous!)-  in  caring  for  . 

the  wants  of  the   unfortunates  placed  under  j 

1 
her  care  and  with  a  degree  of  success  known  I 

only  to  those  who  have  felt  the  gentle  influ- 
ence of  her  presence  and  kindness. 

As  we  have  said,  Mr.  Gates  was  first  ap- 
pointed superintendent  of  the  Cortland 
count)'  alms-house  and  farm  in  1864, 
serving  two  )'ears,  and  was  re-appointed  in 
1868,  from  which  date  he  held  the  office 
fourteen  successive  years,  and  was  re-ap- 
pointed, but  owing  to  the  ill  health  of  his 
wife,  declined  the  position.  The  length  of 
this  term  and  the  unqualified  satisfaction 
with  which  he  performed  the  duties  as- 
signed him,  speak  eloquentl)-  of  his  fitness 
for  responsible  public  or  private  station. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gates  have  but  one  child, 
Althea  Eudora  Gates,  now  the  wife  ofTa\-- 
lor  A.  Gage,  of  Cortland  village. 

Mr.  Gates  has  been  a  lifelong  member  of 
the  church.  While  in  Illinois  he  assisted 
in  the  organization  of  the  First  Methodist 
church  of  Wataga  village,  and  was  its  first 
class-leader,  and  has  long  filled  an  official 
position  in  the  church  of  this  place.  As 
superintendent  of  the  poor,  Mr.  Gates  has 
always  been  assiduous  in  his  labors,  pains- 
taking in  all  his  duties  ;  he  possesses  a  sym- 
pathetic heart  that  instinctivel)'  turns  to- 
wards those  unfortunates  whose  hopes  in 
life  have  been  blasted  and  need  the  kind- 
ness of  a  considerate  overseer  to  ameliorate 
their  unhappy  condition  ;  and  it  is  gratify- 
ing to  know  that  the  people  of  Cortland 
county,  in  consideration  of  the  fitness  of 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gates  for  this  place,  repeat- 
edly re-elected  him  to  the  position. 

Mr.  Gates's  principles  were  strongly  anti- 
slaver)-  for   several    )-ears    previous   to  the 


formation  of  the  Republican  party,  and  he 
was  an  active  participant  in  the  first  Re- 
publican Convention  of  Cortland  county, 
when  that  party  was  organized,  and  has 
been  a  supporter  of  its  principles  ever  since. 
He  has  retired  to  a  great  extent  from  active 
business  and  lives  to  enjoy  his  home  and 
the  respect  of  all  w-ho  know  him. 


CHARLES  W.  GAGE  is  a  descendant 
of  William  Gage,  of  Albany,  a  relative 
of  General  William  Gage  of  colonial  days 
and  the  Revolutionary  War,  and  one  of 
three  brothers  who  came  to  America  in 
the  earlier  portion  of  that  period.  One 
of  these  brothers  settled  in  Massachusetts, 
one  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  one  in  Madison 
county,  N.  Y.  F"rom  William  Gage,  of 
Albany,  descended  Wesson  Gage,  father  of 
the  subject  of  his  sketch.  Wesson  Gage 
was  born  in  1797  and  was  inured  to  the 
hardships  of  pioneer  life,  laboring  on  his 
father's  farm.  In  1813  he  married  Martha 
Miller.  In  181  5  he  became  a  member  of 
the  Methodist  Church  and  was  an  earnest 
worker  in  the  cause  until  his  death.  In 
the  year  1818  he  received  a  license  to 
exhort;  in  1822  to  preach,  and  in  1826 
was  ordained  a  regular  minister  of  the 
gospel.  His  life  in  tiie  ministry  was 
replete  with  all  that  entered  into  the  hard- 
ships of  earl)-  Methodism,  and  before  the 
8th  of  March,  1831,  he  had  preached  at 
one  hundred  and  ten  funerals,  and  before 
his  death,  which  occurred  in  August,  1847, 
he  had  officiated  on  similar  occasions  three 
hundred  and  ninety-nine  times,  besides 
performing  a  large  number  of  baptisms. 
During  his  ministerial  work  he  also  carried 
on  farming.  His  labors  in  the  ministry 
were  never  for  a  stated  salar)-,  but  were 
given  to  the  cause  without  cost  while  he 
labored  as  a  farmer  for  his  means  of  living. 
He  was  an  adept  in  the  use  of  tools,  was 
ingenious  and  possessed    inventi\-e  genius 


45S 


History  ok  Corti.axu  Countv. 


Man)-  devices  originated  by  him  were 
afterward  patented  by  others.  As  neces- 
sity arose  in  his  own  experience,  joined 
with  a  desire  to  economize  time  and  labor,  it 
was  natural  for  him  to  study  out  some 
means  to  the  desired  end.  riu-  results  of 
such  study  were  in  several  instances  taken 
advantage  of  b}'  others,  who  reaped  sub- 
stantial benefit  therefrom.  The  revoking 
ha\'  rake  was  one  of  his  iiuentions  and  was 
Lised  a  long  time  before  being  finall\-  pat- 
ented b\-  others.  It  was  unixersally  em- 
ployed until  recent  years.  This  was  on!}-  one 
of  man\'  practical  devices  of  his,  which  en- 
title him  to  rank  high  as  an  earl}-  mechanic. 
He  was  born  Feb.  7th,  1793,  and  died  Jul)- 
29th,  1847.  His  wife  was  born  Jan.  20tli, 
1795.  Their  children  were  Ira,  William  M., 
Da\-id  W.  Jeremiah,  Henry  S.,  Irena,  Lor- 
ena,  Martha,  Sidne}-  V.,  Naiic}-,  Charles  W., 
Ruth  M.,  Zephaniah,  Hannah  and  Wesson, 
jr.      But  four  of  these  are  now  living. 

Charles  VV.  Gage,  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  was  born  Mny  19th,  1833,  in  the 
town  of  Knox,  Albany  county,  X.  \'  In 
1843,  when  ten  years  of  age,  his  mother 
died,  antl  when  thirteen  \-ears  old  his  father 
died  leaving  him  to  make  his  own  way  in 
the  world.  Being  one  of  a  ver}-  large 
famih-  of  children,  there  was  but  little  pat- 
rimony for  each.  And  necessit\-  drove  him 
to  start  out  in  life  for  himself  When  six- 
teen years  of  age  he  began  work  for  a  far- 
mer, who  put  him  at  chopping  wood.  The 
first  da)''s  wurk  was  well  jjerformed,  but 
upon  being  sent  into  the  timber  the  second 
da)-,  to  do  a  class  of  labor  which  he  had 
been  accustomed  to  perform  b\-  horse 
power,  he  was  disgusted  with  the  backward 
character  of  his  cmplo\-er's  management, 
stuck  his  axe  in  a  log  ;uid  left  without  sa)- 
ing  good-bye.  Years  after  this  occurrence 
his  employer  settled  with  Mr.  Gage  for  his 
labor,  as  far  as  the  principal  of  the  debt 
was  concerned. 


Mr.  Gage  then  went  to  Cleveland, 
Oswego  county,  N.  Y.,  where  he  began 
work  in  the  chair  factor)-  of  Hitchcock  & 
Son.  He  remained  here  one  year  and  a 
half  and  by  economy  saved  a  little  money, 
which  he  expended  in  the  laudable  work 
of  securing  more  education,  attending 
school  in  Alban\-  countv  one  year.  He 
ne.vt  sought  .md  obtained  work  in  a  car- 
riage shop  at  Bainbridge,  N.  Y.  Here  he 
became  acquainted  with  his  present  wife. 
He  subsequently  worked  for  Geo.  Ben- 
noyer,  in  Greene,  Chenango  coimt\',  X  Y.,' 
for  two  )-ears.  On  the  14th  of  March,  1854, 
he  was  married  to  Abigail  Bearsall,  daugh- 
ter of  Samuel  Bearsall,  a  farmer  of  Che- 
nango count)-.  In  the  fall  of  1855  Mr. 
Gage  removed  to  Homer  and  began  work 
for  Ra)-niond  Smith,  a  carriage  maker;  but 
he  soon  gave  rein  to  his  in\-entive  talent 
and  devoted  his  energy  to  the  patent  busi- 
ness for  several  years.  Some  of  the  inven- 
tions of  Mr.  Gage  made  during  this  period 
are  w-ell  known  and  extensixel)-  used. 
Among  these  we  ma\-  mention  Gage's  but- 
ter-worker, Gage's  churn,  Gage's  anti- rat- 
tling shaft  coupling,  and  others. 

In  1 868  he  first  established  what  has 
developed  into  the  immense  business  of 
which  he  is  now-  the  head.  The  beginning 
was  coniparati\-el)-  small  and  was  located  in 
a  shop  improvised  out  of  his  barn.  The 
first  year  he  employed  no  help  and  manu- 
factured 105  cutters,  doing  all  the  work 
himself  These  were  readih-  sold,  and  the 
second  year  he  employed  two  hands,  which 
force  w-as  rapiilh-  augmented  as  the  demand 
grew.  Now  he  has  ninct\-  skilled  workmen 
in  his  employ  and  his  shops  have  been  ex- 
tended until  thcv  embrace  several  large 
buildings  three  and  four  stories  in  height ; 
:  these  stand  as  a  significant  exposition  of 
j  of  Mr.  Gage's  tireless  energ)-  and  indomita- 
ble spirit. 

When  Mr.   Gage  first  began   this  whole- 


C.  \V.  Gage.  —  James  Henry  Salisbury. 


459 


sale  manufacture  of  cutters,  the  facilities  for  ' 
doing  the  work  were  of  such  a  character  j 
that  the  cost  of  manufacture  was  from  four 
to  six  times  what  it  now  is.  This  great 
reduction  is  due  almost  entirel)'  to  improve- 
ments in  machinery  invented  by  Mr.  Gage. 
VVe  cannot  in  this  limited  space  mention 
but  one  of  the  more  important,  which  is 
called  the  novel  saw-mill.  The  scarcity  of 
basswood  and  the  necessitj'  of  producing 
cheaply  first  class  thin  lumber  of  large 
width,  for  dash-boards,  were  the  causes 
which  led  to  the  inx'cntion  of  this  machine, 
coupled  with  the  waste  suffered  in  being 
able  to  use  onh'  the  "white"  or  sap  wood 
of  the  logs  for  this  purpose.  The  mill  in 
question  simply  saws  thin  boards  from  the  t 
circumference  of  a  log,  exactly  as  one  would  i 
unroll  a  carpet.  The  devices  adopted  to 
eftect  this  wonderful  work  cannot  be  de- 
scribed here,  but  the)-  are  wonderful  in  in- 
genuity and  yet  simple  in  construction. 
This  machine  is  controlled  through  patents 
by  Mr.  Gage  and  his  son.  Five  of  them 
are  constanth'  running  in  their  works.  ■ 

Adelbert  S.  Gage,  of  the  firm  of  Gage,  i 
Hitchcock  &  Co.,  is  the  son  of  Charles  \V., 
and  possesses  in  a  large  degree  the  in\en- 
tive  genius  of  his  father,  while  his  excellent 
business  qualifications  render  him  an  indis- 
pensable factor  in  the  great  business.  The 
direct  management  of  the  manufactory 
devolves  largely  upon  him.  The  nati\'e 
urbanity  and  courteous  and  affable  disposi- 
tion of  both  father  and  son  serve  them  well 
in  the  daily  contact  with  many  employees, 
from  whom  they  win  not  onh'  good  service, 
but  respect  and  confidence. 

Mr.  Gage  has  four  children,  one  son  and 
three  daughters.  The  son,  Adelbert  S., 
married,  on  the  i  ith  of  January,  1877,  Miss 
Delia  Watrous ;  they  ha\e  one  son,  Carl 
VV.  Of  the  daughters.  Belle  M.  is  the  wife 
of  Edwin  C.  Johnson,  a  farmer  of  Chenango 
counlw  and  a  banker;   Carrie  M    is  the  wife 


of  Frank  Rronson,  a  tobacconist  of  Cortland 
village  ;   Franc  D.  is  living  at  home. 

Mr.  Gage  erected  his  handsome  residence 
in  Homer  in  1882,  on  the  site  of  his  former 
dwelling,  which  was  burned  on  the  memor- 
able cold  morning  of  Feb.  2d,  1876.  Mr. 
Gage  is  a  gentleman  of  pleasant  social 
cpialities.  His  address  is  easy  and  uncon- 
ventional, his  manner  affable  and  his  gen- 
eral demeanor  such  as  evinces  a  courteous 
regard  for  the  rights  and  feelings  of  others. 
He  has  been  a  trustee  of  the  village  of  Ho- 
mer for  three  years,  and  is  at  the  present 
time  president  of  the  Agricultural  Society' 
of  Cortland  countv. 


JAMES  HENRY  SALISBURY,  B.  N. 
S.,  A.  M.,  M  D.,  was  born  at  "Evergreen 
Terrace,"  Scott,  Cortland  county,  New 
York,  October  13th,  1823,  and  was  the 
second  son  of  Nathan  Salisburj-  and  Lucre- 
tia  A.  Babcock,  who  were  married  June 
2  I  St,  1818.  Nathan  was  born  in  Cranston, 
Rhode  Island,  October  loth,  1793,  and  his 
wife,  in  Blandford,  Massachusetts,  Septem- 
ber 30th,  1792.  Nathan  is  still  living  at 
"Evergreen  Terrace"  (No\ember  28th, 
1881),  in  his  eight\-ninth  year,  and  is  yet 
\igorous  mentally  and  ph\-sically.  His 
wife  died  in  her  eighty-ninth  year  from  an 
injur)'.  Nathan  Salisbur\-  was  the  son  of 
Nathan  Salisbury,  who  was  born  December 
1st,  1751,  and  married  May,  i6th,  177 1, 
Abigail  Stone  (born  October  i6th,  1753), 
onlv  daughter  of  Deacon  Joseph  Stone,  of 
Cranston,  Rhode  Island,  a  descendant  of 
Hugh  Stone,  "  the  stolen  boy."  Abigail 
Stone's  mother's  maiden  name  was  Brown. 
She  was  a  near  relative  of  John  Brown,  the 
founder  of  Rhode  Island  College,  afterwards 
Brown  Universit)-.  Nathan  Salisbury  was 
lieutenant  of  the  compan)'  under  Captain 
Burgess  that  from  Warwick  Neck  fired  into 
and  captured  the  British  frigare  Gc7S/>f 
a  short  time  before  the  Revolutionary  War. 


46o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


The  earliest  appearance  of  the  family  in 
this  country  was  in  about  1644.  At  tliis 
time,  for  political  reasons  and  to  a\()id  the 
confiscation  of  property,  etc.,  during  the 
contest  between  the  Parliament  and  the 
unfortunate  Charles  I,  John  Salisbur}-  and 
Kdward  Salisbury,  his  brother,  sons  of 
Henry  Salisbury,  Esq.,  and  yountjer  broth- 
ers of  Sir  Thomas  Salisbury,  quiet))-  i;ot 
themselves  awaj-  fi-om  Denbigh  and  emi- 
grated to  tin's  country.  The  former  settled 
at  Swansea,  Massachusetts,  and  the  latter 
near  Mount  Hope,  in  Bristol,  Rhode  Island. 
Thomas  Salisbury  of  Llanrwst,  Denbigh 
county,  either  came  with  them  or  followed 
soon  after,  and  settled  in  Cranston.  From 
family  records  and  traditions,  Thomas  was 
supposed  to  be  a  brother  of  John  and  Ed- 
ward, but  it  appears  from  English  records 
that  he  was  probabl)-  not  a  brother,  but  a 
cousin.  Jt)hn  and  Edward  derived  from 
Henry  Salisbury,  second  son  of  John  Salis- 
bury, who  became  heir  of  Elcweni  b)' 
reason  of  the  death  of  his  elder  biother, 
Thomas,  who  suffered  death  .September 
20th,  1586,  for  endeavoring  to  deliver 
Marj-  Queen  of  Scots,  from  imprisonment. 
Thomas  derived  from  Robert  Salisbury, 
fourth  son  of  Thomas  Salisbury,  iieir  of 
Lleweni. 

The  branch  of  the  famii}-  to  which  the 
subject  of  this  sketch  belongs  deri\es  from 
Thomas  Salisbury,  who  settled  in  Crans- 
ton. "The  Salisbur)'  family  took  its  rise 
in  German)-,  and  long  before  the  con- 
quest of  Flngland  its  head  resided  in 
Bavaria.  The  original  name  of  the  family 
was  Guelph,  and  its  leading  member, 
Henry  Guelph,  was  in  tlic  year  1024 
made  Duke  of  Bavaria,  b)'  the  emperor, 
Conrad  the  Second.  The  first  duke  had 
several  sons,  the  youngest  of  whom. 
Prince  Adam,  came  over  to  England  in  the 
train  of  William  of  Normand)-,  in  the  year 
1066.     This   young   prince   did    not,    how- 


ever, come  with  William  as  a  subject  of  his 
Norman  dukedom,  for  he  owed  him  no  al- 
legiance ;   but  he  came  in  the  character  of  a 
soldier    of   fortune,  and    in    that    character 
took  his  part    in    the    great    battle  of  Hast- 
ings.     For  his   service   on    that  occasion  he 
was    rewarded    b)-    King    William    with    a 
grant  of  an  extensive  tract  of  land  in  Rich- 
mondshire,  running  southwards  to  the  river 
.  Ribble  in    Lancashire,    and    it    was   in    this 
i  place    the    younger     branch    of   the    royal 
!  famil)-  of  Bavaria  first  settled  in  England. 
j       "  .Adam   Guelph    soon    dropped  his  Ger- 
man surname.      He    followed    the    Norman 
I  fashion  of  taking  up  the   name  of  a  particu- 
lar place  for  a  surname,  and  thus  became  a 
I  de    Saltzburg,    or     Adam    of   Saltzbur"  — 
Saltzburg  being   the    name    of  the  place  in 
I   Ba\-aria  from    which    he  came.      He  settled 
I  upon    his    new    possessions,  built   himself  a 
home  at  no   great    distance    from    Preston, 
called  it  after  his    new    name,  and    b)-   that 
name  —  Salmesbur)-     Court    or     Salebur)- 
Hall  —  it  is  known   to  this  da)-.      Adam  de 
Saltzburg  was  not,  as  many  of  his  descend- 
ants  proudh'   supposed,  a    Norman,  but   a 
pure  Sa.von,  ha\-ing  the  same  origin  as    the 
house  of  Saxon)'."     The  time  of  Adam  de 
Saltzburg's   death    is    uncertain,  but   in  the 
year    i  102    his    eldest    son,  Alexander    de 
Saltzburg,    had    succeeded    to    the   father's 
vast  possessions.      Alexander  died  in  1153. 
He  left   two    sons,  Alexander    and    Henr\'. 
The    eldest    succeeded    to    the    Lancashire 
propert)',     and     Henr)-     to     an     estate     in 
Cheshire. 

The  following  curious  document  ma)'  be 
of  interest.  It  is  copied  from  Mr  \\'il- 
lianis's  Records  of  Deitbigh  : 

"  Ru/ii/.   Pobnc  of  Chester,  Aid.,  Deputy  to 

the  Office  of  A  rmes. 

■•  lo  all  .\tain  people  to  uiiojii  iliis  present 
writing  shall  come  to  be  scene  or  read,  Greet- 
inge,  in  our  Lord  God  Everlastinge,  —  Know  ye 
that    whereas    Mr.     Foulke    Salisburv,    one    of 


^/^/^J/U^yr-  y^4)- 


James  Henrv  Salisbury. 


461 


the  24  alderman  of  the  City  of  Chester,  and 
also  one  of  his  Majesties  Coroners  for  the  said 
Citty  is  desirous  to  have  a  Certyficate  of  his 
descent,  that  the  same  may  appear  by  good  Tes- 
timony, for  to  remayne  upon  record  for  his  future 
posterity,  and  also  to  cleare  all  douhtes  and  cpics- 
tions,  that  eather  now  are  or  hereafter  may  arise 
conserninge  his  progenv,  hath  requested  vs  his 
kinsmen,  beinge  descended  of  the  same  blood 
and  familey,  \  nder  our  hands  for  to  Certifie  the 
truth  thereof,  by  this  our  Testimoniall  to  w*^''  his 
lawful  request  and  desire  wee  have  yealded,  as 
Christian  Charity  byndeth  vs  thereunto,  to  de-  | 
dare  and  relate  the  same  when  and  so  often  as 
wee  be  thereunto  desired.  Wherefore  we  do 
Certyfie  that  the  said  Mr.  Foulke  Salisbury  was 
borne  Evenighted  in  the  County  of  Denbigh 
and  was  second  sonne  by  birth,  but  now  heyre, 
to  Henry  Salisbury  of  Evenighted  aforesayd,  in 
the  County  of  Denbigh,  Gent.,  lawfully  begot 
ten  of  Margery  his  wife,  dau.  to  Peirs  Salisbury 
of  Llanrayder,  in  the  said  County,  Gent.,  w"^""  sayd 
Henry  dyed  in  Chester,  6th  October  1637,  be- 
inge of  great  age;  and  was  youngest  sonne  to 
Foulke  Salisbury  of  Maes  Kadarne  in  the  sayd 
County  Gent ,  lawfully  begotten  by  Morvith  his 
wife,  daughter  of  Merideth  Lloyd  of  Havod\nos. 
in  the  County  of  Carnarvon,  Esq.,  and  the  for- 
sayd  Foulke  Salisbury  was  3  sonne  to  Peirs  Salis- 
bury of  Brachymbydd.  or  Ruge,  in  the  County 
of  Denbigh,  Esquier.  laxvt'ully  begotten  by  Mar- 
garet his  first  wife ;  daughter  and  heyre  to  Evan 
.\p  Holl,  Ap  Rees  of  Ruge,  in  the  said  County, 
Esq"'',  and  sayd  Piers  Salisbury  was  sonne  and 
heyre  to  John  Salisbury  of  IJrachymbydd,  in  the 
County  aforesayd.  Esij''-  lawfully  begotten  of 
Lowreyhis  wife:  dau.  and  heyre  to  Robt.  .\p 
Meredith  -\p  Tudyr  Estj''-  and  the  sayd  Joiin 
Salisbury  «as  a  younger  somie  of  I'homas  Salis- 
bury Hen  of  IJeweny  in  the  County  of  Den- 
high,  Esq'-  and  brother  to  S'-  Thomas  Salisbury; 
who  was  Knighted  at  Blackheathfield,  1464,  of 
whom  is  decended  S'-  Thomas  Salisbury  of 
Lleweny,  baronett  no«  lixinge,  both  beinge  law- 
fully begotten  of  the  body  of  Ellen  daughter  to 
S''  John  Done  of  Vtkington  in  the  County  of 
Chester  Kt.  and  the  said  I'ho :  Salisbury  Hen 
was  Sonne  and  heyre  to  Henry  Salisbury  of 
Lleweny,  Esq"'  lawfully  begott  of  .\gnes  daugh- 
ter and  hevre  of  S''-    [ohn    Curtevs.  Kt.  and  the 


said  Henry  was  sonne  and  heyre  to  Rafe  or 
Rawlyn  Salisbury,  sonne  and  heyre  to  William, 
sonne  and  heyre  to  Henry,  sonne  and  heyre  to 
S"'-  John,  sonne  and  heyre  to  Thomas,  sonne 
and  heyre  to  Alexander,  sonne  and  heyre  to 
.\dam  Salisbury,  all  of  whose  Matches  remayne 
to  be  seen  in  the  several!  pedigrees  of  the  said 
famileys.  from  w"''  this  lyne  mentioned  in  this 
Certyficate  was  care-fully  and  diligently  extract- 
ed, at  the  request  of  the  sayd  Foulke  Salis 
bury,  and  for  more  verity  hereof,  wee  have  here- 
unto subscribed  our  names  the  14th  day  of  No- 
vember 1638. 

"  Tho.  Powell  of  Berkhead.  baronett. 

"John  Conway,  Kt.  de  Botry  Dan. 

"Thomas  Mvddelton,  Kt.  de  Chirk. 

"  Roger  Mostvn,  Kt.  de  Mostyn. 

••  Thomas  Mostvn,  Kt.  de  Cilken. 

"  Simon  'Thelwall  de  Placeward,  Esq. 

■■  \\illl\m  Wynne  de  Llanvayre,  Esq. 

"John  Lloyd  de  Llanryder,  Esq. 

•  Peter  Evans  of  Northop,  Esq. 

••  Hugh  Nanny  of  Nanny,  Esq. 

••John  Lloyd  of  Ruedock,  Esq. 

•'  Willia.m  Salisbury  of  Ruge,  Esq. 

••  John  Salisbury  of  Brachegrigh.  Esq.  [sonne. 
•John  Salisbury  of   Brachegrigh.   Esq.,  his 

•■  William  Salisbury  of  Llanraydrer,  Esq. 

'•Willia.m  Thomas  of  Carnarvon,  Esq. 

■  John  Jeffreys  of  Ro\  ton.  Esq. 

•'  Willia.m  Conway  of  Perthekensey.  Esq. 

■•  PJdward  Conway  of  Sughton. 

•■  Hugh  Parry  of  Chester,  Doctor. 

"  RouLAND  Griffith  of  Carnarvon. 

■•John  Powell  of  Lhvynskotog. 

•■  Jenkin  CoNWA^ . 

'•  John  Lloyd  of  Llanynjs. 

••  Foulke  Salisbury  of  Denbigh. 

••Thomas  Salisbury  of  Denbigh. 

••John  'Thelwall  of  Ruthen. 

••Gabriell  (iooD.MAN  of  Ruthen. 

••John  F^aton  of  Lleeswood,  Esq. 

••  Thomas  Mostyn  of  Rhed,  Esq. 

••  Piers  Conwa\  of  Ruthland.  Esq. 

••  Rich.  Perry  of  Combe.  Esij. 

••  Peter  Wynne  of  Tythcn.  Esq. 

■•Thomas  Salisbury  of  Ledbrooke,  Esq. 

•'  Hugh  Lloyd  of  Foxhole.  Esq. 

••  Jarrait  EvroN  of  Eyton,  Esq. 

■  Edward  Norris  of  Speke,  Esq." 


462 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


James  H.,  the  subject  of  this  sketch, 
received  his  early  education  .a  I  lonier 
Academy,  Cortiaiu!  cminlx-.  New  York, 
then  presided  over  b>-  the  justly  celebratetl 
Professor  Samuel  \\'oi>lworth,  who  was  for 
many  j'ears  —  up  to  his  recent  death  — 
secretary  of  the  board  of  regents  of  the 
University  of  the  State  of  New  York.  He 
received  the  degree  of  Batchelor  of  Natural 
Sciences  (B.  N.  S.)  at  the  Polytechnic  In- 
stitute of  Troy,  New  York,  in  1846,  pre- 
vious to  which  he  had  been  appointed  as- 
sistant under  professor  P'benezer  Emmons, 
in  the  chemical  department  of  the  Geological 
Survey  of  the  State  of  New  York,  which 
place  he  filled  till  January  1st,  1849,  when 
he  was  made  principal,  with  his  brother, 
Charles  B.,  as  assistant,  until  1852. 

Dr.  Salisbury  received  the  degree  of 
Doctor  of  Medicine  from  the  Albany  Med- 
ical College  in  Januar_\-,  1850.  and  that  of 
Master  of  Arts  from  Union  College,  Sche- 
nectady, New  York,  in  August,  1852. 
He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  American 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science 
in  1848,  and  the  same  year  was  also  made 
a  member  of  the  Albany  Institute.  In 
1853  he  was  elected  corresponding  member 
of  the  Natural  History  Society  of  Montreal. 
In  1878  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  In- 
stitute of  Micrology,  a  position  he  continues 
to  hold.  In  1857  he  was  elected  member 
of  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  and 
in  1876  was  made  vice-president  of  the 
Western  Reser\-e  Historical  Societ)'.  In 
1879  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Phil- 
osophical    Society    of    Great    Britain.      In 

1848  Dr.  Salisbur\-  received  the  prize  gold 
medal  from  the  \'oung  Men's  Association 
of  Alban\-,  for  the  best  essay  on  the 
"  Anat(jniy  and   Histolog)-  of  Plants."      In 

1849  he  won  the  prize  of  three  hundred 
dollars,  ottered  by  the  New  York  State 
Agricultural  Society  for  the  best  essay  on 
"  The  Chemical  and  Physiological  Examin- 


ations   of    the     Maize     Plant,    during    the 
!  various  stages  of  its  growth."     This  made 
a  work    of  over   two    hundred   pages,    and 
was  [niblished  in  the  New  York  State  Agri- 
cultural Reports  for  1849,  and  subsequent!)- 
copied  entire  in  the  State  Agricultural  Re- 
I  ports  of  Ohio.      In  1851  and    1852  he  gave 
[  two   courses   of   lectures   on    "  Elementary 
;  and  applied  Chemistry"    in    the  New  York 
!  State   Normal   .School.      He  also  conducted 
a  series   of  experiments   on    different   sub- 
jects,   which     were    embodied     in     several 
papers  read  before  the   American   Associa- 
tion  for  the    Advancement    of    Science  in 
1851,  and  were  published   in  their  transac- 
tions, and  also  in  the   A^ezv    York    yoiinial 
of  Medicine  of  a  later  date. 

While  in  charge  of  the  State  Laboratory 
of  New  York  from  1849  to  1852,  he  was 
constantly  engaged  in  chemical  and  medical 
investigations,  the  results  of  man\'  of  them 
being  published  in  the  Transactions  of  the 
American  Association  for  the  Advancement 
of  Science,  in  State  Geological  and  Agri- 
cultural Reports,  and  in  the  various  scien- 
tific and  medical  journals  of  that  period. 
In  1849  li"^  began  his  studies  in  Microscopic 
Medicine,  in  which  he  has  been  so  success- 
ful. He  has  persevered  in  these  studies, 
with  scarcely  any  intermission,  ever  since, 
devoting  much  of  his  time  daily  to  micro- 
scopic investigations.  In  1858  he  began 
the  study  of  Healthy  and  Unhealthy  Ali- 
mentation, and  the  influence  the  latter  has 
in  producing  the  x'arious  chronic  diseases 
that  are  supposed  to  be  incurable.  He  has 
found  by  his  long  continued  and  persistent 
researches  in  this  direction  that  consump- 
tion, Bright's  disease,  diabetes,  meilitus, 
rheumatism,  gout,  nearh-  all  abnormal 
growths,  the  wirious  paralytic  diseases  — 
aside  from  those  which  are  the  result  of  in- 
jury—  and  nearly  all  cases  of  mental  de- 
rangement and  fatty  disease  of  organs,  arise 
from  unhealth\-  feeding  and  drinking.      He 


James  Henry  Salisbury. 


463 


was  the   pioneer  in   demonstrating  that  the  1 
various    infectious  anil   contagious   diseases 
were  produced  b\'  specific  germs,  eacli  kind 
always    producing  its  special   disease.      He 


began  these  investigations,  connected  with 
the  various  germ  diseases,  in  1849,  ''''"'  ^^'"^s 
vigorously  criticised  both  in  Europe  and 
this  country,  up  to  1865,  when  Professor 
Ernest  Hallier,  of  Jena,  Prussia,  an  able 
cryptogamic  botanist,  in  reading  his  papers, 
became  so  interested  that  he  began  investi- 
gations in  the  same  field,  and  in  1868  he 
wrote  him  with  much  enthusiasm  that  he 
had  confirmed  every  investigation  that  he 
(Salisbury)  had  made  and  published,  and  if 
desired  he  would  come  on  and  join  him  in 
these  interesting  labors,  he  taking  charge 
of  the  botanical  and  Dr.  Salisbury  the  med- 
ical. Soon  after  this  Pasteur,  and  then 
Huxlej'  and  Tyndall,  became  interested  in 
this  line  of  labor,  and  now  no  one  doubts 
the  truth  of  the  so-called  "  (ierm  Theorj- " 
of  disease. 

Farther  on  will  be  gi\'en  a  list  of  the  pa- 
pers on  the  various  germ  diseases  he  has 
investigated,  with  the  dates  of  publication. 
In  i860  he  began  a  series  of  investigations 
to  discover  if  possible 'where  blood  was 
made,  and  the  office  and  offices  it  pla}'ed 
in  the  organism.  Strange  as  it  may  appear, 
no  one  up  to  this  time  had  explored  this 
field  with  any  success.  A  large  share  of 
his  time  for  two  years  was  devoted  to  this 
work,  all  the  microscopic  work  being  con- 
ducted upon  living,  healthy  animals,  which 
were  placed  under  the  influence  of  chloro- 
form, and  kept  there  while  the  necessar\- 
dissections  antl  niicroscoiiic  Lxaminations 
were  going  on.  .\ftcr  a  long,  tedious,  per- 
sistent and  painstaking  labor,  during  which 
several  hundred  animals  had  fallen  a  sacri- 
fice to  the  work,  the  mystery  was  solved, 
and  the  great  blood  gland  was  found  to  be 
the  splfot,  and  the  smaller  ones  the  mesen- 
teric and  l\-mphatic.      These    investigations 


were  embodied  in  a  paper,  and  published  in 
the  American  Journal  of  Medical  Sciences, 
Philadelphia,  for  April,   1866. 

rile  extended  labors  of  iiiinself  and  broth- 
er, C.  B.  Salisbur\-,  on  the  "  .Ancient  Earth 
and  Rock-writing"  of  this  countr\',  in  con- 
nection with  the  earth  and  rock  works  of 
the  ancient  mound-builders,  ha\e  been  em- 
bodied in  a  large  quarto  volume  with  thirt)'- 
nine  plates,  which  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
American  Antiquarian  Society,  and  is  only 
partially  published. 

The  great  labors  of  his  life,  comprising, 
as  he  claims,  .ui  explanation  of  the  causes 
and  successful  treatment  of  nearly  every 
chronic  disease  that  is  supposed  to  be  in- 
curable, are  )-et  unpublished.  In  January, 
1864,  Dr.  Salisbury  came  to  Cleveland  to 
assist  in  starting  "  Charity  Hospital  Medical 
College."  He  gave  to  this  institution  two 
courses  of  lectures  in  1864-65  and  1865-66 
on  ph\siology,  histolog)%  and  the  micro- 
scope in  disease.  From  January,  1864,  to 
the  present  time,  he  has  been  constantly  en- 
gaged in  treating  chronic  diseases — espe- 
cially those  which  have  hitherto  been  con- 
sidered fatal,  and  his  success  in  this  field  is 
widely  known. 

The  following  list  of  his  published  and 
unpublished  works  and  papers  will  ser\c  to 
give  some  idea  of  the  extent  and  variety  of 
his  labors : 

I'l'lil.lSIIEn   WORKS    A.\D   PAPERS. 

1.  .\nal\sis  of  l'"ruits,  Vegetables  and 
(irains.  New  York  State  Geological  Re- 
ports.     1 847-48-49- 

2.  Prize  Essay. — Chemical  Investiga- 
tions of  the  Maize  Plant  in  its  various  stages 
of  growth,  with  the  temperature  of  the  soil 

i  at  various  depths,  and  that  of  trees  in  dif- 
j  ferent  seasons  of  the  >ear.  Two  hundred 
I  and  six  pages.  State  Agricultural  Reports 
1  of  New  York  and  Ohio.      1849. 


464 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


3.  Chemical  Analysis  of  Five  Varieties 
of  the  Cabbage.      1850. 

4.  Rheum  rhaponticum.  Chemical  ex- 
amination of  the  \'arious  part.s  of  the  plants. 
1850. 

5.  Chemical  Examination  of  Rumex 
Crispus.      1855. 

6.  Experiments  and  Observation  on  the 
Influeirce  of  Poisons  and  Medicinal  Agents 
upon  Plants.      185  i. 

7.  Chemical  Examination  of  the  Fruit  of 
five  varieties  of  Apples.      1850. 

8.  Chemical  Investigations  connected 
with  the  Tomato,  the  Fruit  of  the  Egg  Plant, 
and  Pods  of  the  Okra.      1 85  i . 

9.  History,  Culture,  and  Composition  of 
Apium  Grax'olens  and  Cichorium  intibus. 
1851. 

18.  Some  Facts  and  Remarks  on  the  In- 
digestibility  of  Food.      1852. 

11.  Compositions  of  Grains,  Vegetables 
and  Fruits.  Ohio  State  Agricultural  Re- 
ports.     1 86 1. 

12.  Microscopic  Researches,  resulting  in 
the  discovery  of  what  appears  to  be  the 
cause  of  the  so-called  "  blight  "  in  apple, 
pear,  and  quince  trees,  and  the  decay  in 
their  fruit ;  and  the  discovery  of  the  cause 
of  the  so-called  "  Blister  and  Curl  "  in  the 
leaves  of  peach  trees  ;  with  some  observa- 
tions on  the  development  of  the  peach  fun- 
gus. Illustrated  with  six  plates.  Ohio 
State  Agricultural  Reports.      1863. 

13.  Chronic  Diarrhoea  and  its  Complica- 
tions, or  the  diseases  arising  in  armies  from 
a  too  exclusive  use  of  amylaceous  food,  with 
interesting  matter  relating  to  the  diet  and 
treatment  of  these  abnormal  conditions,  and 
a  new  armj-  ration  proposed,  with  which 
this  large  class  of  diseases  may  be  avoided. 
The  Ohio  Surgeon -General's  Report  for 
1864. 

14.  Something  about  Cryptogams,  Fer- 
mentations and  Disease.  St.  Louis  Medical 
Reporter.      February,   1869. 


1 5.  Probable  Source  of  the  Steatorzoon 
folliculorum.  St.  Louis  Medical  Reporter. 
January,  1869. 

16.  Investigations,  Chemical  and  Micro- 
scopical, resulting  in  what  appears  to  be 
the  discovery  of  a  new  function  of  the  spleen 
and  mesenteric  and  lymphatic  glands.  Do., 
August,  1867.      Twent)'-nine  pages. 

17.  Defective  Alimentation  a  Primary 
Cause  of  Disease.  Do.,  March  and  April 
1st  and  15th,  1868.  Seventy  pages  and 
two  plates  of  illustrations. 

18.  On  the  cause  of  Intermittent  and 
Remittent  Fevers,  with  investigations  which 
tend  to  prove  that  these  affections  are  caus- 
ed by  certain  species  of  palmellje.  Amer- 
ican Journal  of  Medical  Sciences,  1866. 
Also,    in    Revue    Scientifique,      November, 

j    1869. 

I        19.    Some    Experiments    on    Poisoning 
I  with    the    Vegetable  Alkaloids.      American 
j  Journal  of  Medical  Sciences,  October,  1862. 
Twenty-eight  pages. 

20.  Discovery  of  Cholesterine  and  Sero- 
;  line  as   secretions  in  health  of  the  salivary, 

tear,  mammary  and  sudorific  glands  ;  of  the 
j  testis  and  ovary  ;  of  the  kidneys  in  hepatic 
derangements;  of  mucous  membranes  when 
congested  and  inflamed,  and  the  fluids  of 
ascites  and  that  of  spina  bifida.  Do.,  April, 
1863.     Two  plates.      Seventeen  pages. 

21.  Remarks  on  Fungi,  with  an  accouut 
of  experiments  showing  the  influence  of  the 
fungi  of  wheat  and  rye  straw  on  the  human 
system,  and  some  observations  which  point 
to  them  as  the  probable  source  of  camp 
measles,  and  perhaps  of  measles  generally. 
Do.,    July.     1862.       One    plate.       Twent\- 

'  pages. 

22.  Inoculating  the  Human  Sj'stem  with 
Straw  F^ungi  to  protect  it  against  the  con- 
tagion of  measles,  with  some  additional  ob- 
servations relating   to  the  influence  of  fun- 

,  gold  growths  in    producing  disease,  and    in 
:  the   fermentation    and    putrefaction    of  or- 


James  Henry  Salishury. 


465 


ganic  bodies.      Do.,  October,  1862.      Eiglit 
pages. 

23.  Parasitic  Forms  (Ie\'clopccl  in  Parent 
Epitlielial  Cells  of  tlie  Urinary  and  Genital 
Organs,  and  in  the  Secretions.  With  34 
illustrations.      Do.,  April,  1868. 

24.  Remarks  on  the  Structure,  l'"unctions, 
and  Classification  of  the  Parent  Gland  Cells, 
with  microscopic  investigations  relative  to 
the  causes  of  the  several  varieties  of  rheu- 
matism, and  directions  for  their  treatment. 
One  plate  of  illustrations.  Do.,  October, 
1867.      Nineteen  pages. 

25.  Microscopic  Researches  relating  to 
the  Histology  and  Minute  Anatomy  of  the 
Spleen  and  Lacteal  and  Lymphatic  Glands, 
showing  their  ultimate  structure  and  their 
organic  elements,  of  their  highly  interesting 
and  important  functions,  with  some  remarks 
on  the  cause  of  ropiness  of  mucus  and  the 
tendency  of  all  healthy  and  man\'  diseased 
cells  to  be  metamorphosed  into  filaments. 
One  plate.  Tliirty-four  pages.  Do.,  April, 
1866. 

26.  Description  of  two  new  Algoid  Veg- 
etations, one  of  which  appears  to  be  the 
specific  cause  of  syphilis  and  the  other  of 
gonorrhcca.  With  16  illustrations.  Do., 
1867.      Also,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Parasitcnkunde. 

1873- 

27.  Geological  Report  of  the  MiUcreek 
Canal  Coal  Field.  With  i  map  and  2  plates. 
Published  in  Cincinnati,  1859. 

28.  Anal}-sis,  Organic  and  Inorganic,  of 
the  Cucumber.      Cultivator.      1849. 

29.  Experiments  on  the  Capillary  At- 
tractions of  the  Soil,  explaining  some  im- 
portant and  interesting  principles  and  phe- 
nomena in  agriculture  and  geology.  The 
American  Polytechnic  Journal.      1853. 

30.  A  New  Carbonic  Acid  Apparatus. 
Do.,  1853. 

31.  Analysis  of  Dead  Sea  Water.      1854. 

32.  Two  interesting  Parasitic  Diseases; 
one  we  take  from   sucking  kittens,  and  the 


other  from  sucking  puppies — trichosis  fc- 
linus  and  trichosis  caninus.  Boston  Medical 
and  Surgical  Journal,  June  4,  1868.  Six 
illustrations.  Also,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Parasit- 
cnkunde, Hallier,  Jena,  1875. 

33.  Pus  and  Infection.  Boston  Journal 
of  Chemistry.     January,  1878. 

34.  Microscopic  Examinations  of  Blood 
and  the  Vegetations  found  in  Variola,  Vac- 
cine, and  Typhoid  Fever.  Sixty-six  pages 
and  62  illustrations.  Published  by  Moor- 
head,  Bond  &  Co.,  New  York.      1868. 

35.  Vegetations  found  in  the  Blood  of 
Patients  Suffering  from  Erysipelas.  Hal- 
lier's  Zeitschrift  fiir  Parasitcnkunde.  1873. 
Eight  illustrations. 

36.  Infusorial  Catarrh  and  y\sthma. 
Eighteen  illustrations.     Do.,  1873. 

37.  Analysis,  Organic  and  Inorganic,  of 
the  White  Sugar  Beet.  The  Albany  Cul- 
tivator.     October,  185  i. 

38.  Analysis,  Organic  and  Inorganic,  of 
the  Parsnip.  New  York  State  Agricultural 
Report.      185 1. 

39.  Ancient  Rock  and  Earth  Writing 
and  Inscriptions  of  the  Mound  Builders, 
with  a  description  of  their  fortifications,  en- 
closures, mounds,  and  other  earth  and  rock 
works.  Thirty-nine  plates.  In  the  hands 
of  the  American  Antiquarian  Socict)',  and 
only  partially  published  in  their  transac- 
tions and  in  the  Ohio  Centennial  Report. 
1863. 

40.  Influence  of  the  Position  of  the  Body 
upon  the  Heart's  action.  American  Jour- 
nal of  Medical  Science.      1865. 

41.  Material  Application  of  Chemistry  to 
Agriculture.     Albany  Cultivator.      185 1. 

42.  Analysis,  Organic  and  Inorganic,  of 
the  Several  Kinds  of  Grains  and  Vegetables. 
The  Albany  Cultivator.     August,  1849. 

43.  Drinks,  Food,  Bathing,  Exercise, 
Clothing  and  Medical  Treatment  in  Con- 
sumption. Virginia  Medical  Monthly.  Sep- 
tember, 1879. 


466 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


44.  Drinks,  Food,  Bathing,  Exercise, 
Clothing  and  Medical  Treatment  in  Bright's 
Disease.  Virginia  Medical  Monthly.  No- 
vember, 1880. 

45.  Drinks,  h'ood,  ]5atliing.  Exercise, 
Clothing  and  Medical  Treatment  in  Dia- 
betes Mellitus.  Virginia  Medical  Monthly. 
1880. 

46.  Diet  Lists  in  Consumption,  Bright's 
Disease,  and  Diabetes  Mellitus.      1881. 

UNPUBLISHED  WORKS  AND  PAPERS. 

1.  Diphtheria,  its  cause  and  treatment. 
Three  plates  of  illustrations.      1862. 

2.  Asthma,  the  various  forms  of,  ,and 
their  causes  and  treatment.  Three  plates 
of  illustrations.      Ready  for   press  in    1866. 

3.  Consumption,  its  cause  and  treat- 
ment. Four  plates.  Ready  for  press  in 
1867. 

4.  Hog  Cholera,  its  cause  and  prevention. 
1858. 

5.  Ultimate  Structure  and  Functions  of 
the  Liver.      1865.     Three  plates. 

6.  Ultimate  Structure  and  Functions  of 
the  Kidneys.      1864.     Two  plates. 

7.  Geological  Report  of  the  Coal  Fields 
of  Virginia  and  Kentucky.  1857.  With 
maps  and  many  illustrations. 

8.  Histology  of  Plants.  Prize  es.say. 
Sixty-five  illustrations.      1848. 

9.  Causes  and  Treatment  of  Bright's  Dis- 
ease.     1865. 

10.  Causes  and  Treatment  of  Diabetes. 
1864. 

11.  Causes  and  Treatment  of  Goitre, 
Cretinism,  Ovarian  Tumors,  and  other  Col- 
loid Diseases.      1863. 

12.  Causes  and  Treatment  of  Progressive 
Locomotor  Ataxy.      1867. 

13.  Cause  and  Treatment  of  P'atty  Dis- 
eases of  the  Heart,  Liver,  and  Spleen. 
1864. 

14.  Cause  and  Treatment  of  Paresis. 
1865. 


15.  One  of  the  most  Common  Causes  of 
Paralysis,  with  treatment.      1867. 

16.  Microscopic  Examinations  Connect- 
ed with  Spermatozoa  and  Ova,  with  con- 
tents of  pollen  grains  and  modes  of  devel- 
opment of  zoosporoiil  cells.      i860. 

17.  Cryptogamic  Spores  in  the  Tissues 
of  the  Living  Animal.  Their  development 
in  food  one  source  of  disease,  and  a  cause 
of  fermentation,  gangrene,  or  death  and 
decay  in  organized  bodies.  Seven  plates 
and  102  illustratit)ns. 

18.  Microscopic  Investigations  Connect- 
ed with  the  Exudation  and  Expectoration 
of  Angina  Membranacre  and  Gangrenosa 
and  Scarlatina  Anginosa,  resulting  in  the 
discovery  of  the  true  source  of  and  the 
pathological  progress  by  which  the  exuda- 
tions are  produced ;  and  the  further  dis- 
covery of  a  peculiar  fungus  belonging  to  the 
genus  peronospora,  developing  in  the 
sloughs  and  membranes,  the  spores  of 
which  are  infectious  and  produce  the  dis- 
sease  ;  also  some  general  conclusions  on  the 
etiology  of  fevers,  the  peculiar  functions  of 
the  epithelial  cell  envelope,  and  the  pro- 
bable way  in  which  the  system  receives  a 
more  or  less  permanent  protective  immu- 
nity by  one  attack  of  certain  contagious 
diseases  against  a  second  invasion  of  the 
same.  Three  plates.  One  luuulretl  and 
sixty  illustrations.      1862. 

19.  Description  of  several  new  species  of 
ascaridse  found  on  and  in  the  human  body, 
and  a  brief  account  of  several  new  entoz()a. 
Two  plates  and  30  figures.      1S65. 

20.  Investigations  Connected  with  the 
Cause  and  Treatment  of  Paral}-sis  of  the 
Will,  Paralysis  of  the  Memory,  and  Paraly- 
sis of  the  entire  Intellectual  and  Moral 
I""aculties,  causing  a  peculiar  mental  state 
and  insanity. 

2  1.  Uterine  I-'ibroids,  Ovarain  Tumors, 
Cancers,  and  Fibrous  Growths  generally. 
Their  treatment  and  cure  b}-  drinks  and  diet. 


yfO^-TytylJ      QJ'l-^ 


^/^iyyHef, 


James  S.  Squires. 


467 


He  was  married  on  the  26th  of  June, 
i860,  to  Clara  Brascc,  daughter  of  Hon. 
Jolin  T.  Brasee,  of  Lancaster,  Ohio.  She 
was  born  April  26th,  1839.  They  have 
the  following  children  :  Minnie  B.  Salisbury, 
born  August  27th,  1866,  and  Trafford  B. 
Salisbury,  born  January  22d,  1S74. 


TAMES  S.  SQUIRES,  of  Cortland,  is  de- 
I  scended  from  one  of  thioc  brothers  who 
emigrated  from  England  in  the  earlier  his- 
tory of  our  country,  and  located  at  Say- 
brook,  Connecticut.  His  graadfather,  Sam- 
uel Stent  Squires,  was  born  in  Saybrook  in 
the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century  and 
participated  in  the  French  and  Indian  War, 
particularly  in  the  conflicts  ot  Braddock's 
defeat  and  at  Fort  Du  Ouesne.  He  received 
his  discharge  at  Perth  Amboy,  N.  J.,  at  the 
close  of  that  war.  He  also  served  the  full 
period  of  seven  years  in  the  Revolutionary 
War,  entering  into  the  spirit  of  those  times 
and  fighting  as  all  others  did,  and  sacrific- 
ing as  many  had  to,  for  our  liberty  and  in- 
dependence. He  married  Margaret  Cook, 
the  mother  of  the  father  of  our  subject,  John 
S.  Squires.  The  latter  was  born  in  New  Ha- 
ven, Conn.,  in  1 77 1,  and  removed  to  P'arm- 
ington.  Conn.,  in  1793,  when  t\vent}'-two 
years  old,  and  there  married  Huldah  Had- 
sell.  Her  father,  James  Hadsell,  was  also 
a  Revolutionary  soldier,  and  his  wife  was  a 
teacher  who  supported  her  family  and  seven 
children  during  those  long  years  of  anxiety 
and  privation  by  teaching  a  common  school. 
In  1800  John  S.  Squires  moved  to  Choco- 
nut,  Broome  Co.,  where  he  remained  one 
summer,  removing  thence  to  near  Mara- 
thon, where  he  located  just  below  tlic  pres- 
ent village.  His  trip  westward  from  his  na- 
tive town  was  made  with  an  ox  team  and 
one  horse.  He  crossed  the  Hudson  on  the 
ice  and  made  his  way  to  the  State  turnpike 
leading  west  at  a  time  when  there  was  no 
other  road  e.Kcept  a  line  of  marked  trees. 


He  accomplished  this  trip  in  about  three 
weeks. 

In  1800  there  was  one  saw-mill  and  one 
grist-mill  only  in  the  vicinity  where  Mr. 
Squires  first  located  in  Broome  county. 
These  were  patronized  after  the  Squires 
famil)'  removed  to  Marathon,  the  settlers 
generally  going  to  and  from  the  mills  in  frail 
and  rudely  constructed  canoes  or  "dug- 
outs" up  and  down  the  Tioughnioga.  There 
was  a  mill  at  Cayuga  lake,  twenty  miles  dis- 
tant, but  this  was  not  so  easily  readied,  the 
journey  being  overland. 

The  first  house  erected  by  Mr.  Squires  in 
Marathon  and  Virgil  had  no  door  save  a 
blanket,  and  the  only  windows  were  open- 
ings covered  w  ith  paper.  The  floor  was 
made  of  planks  or  "  puncheons  "  split  from 
logs. 

In  1807  John  S.  Squires  moved  to  Vir- 
gil and  took  up  four  hundred  acres  of  land, 
where  he  resided  until  his  death  June  24th, 

1835- 

He  was  a  man  of  splendid  physical  pro- 
portions, weighing  about  two  hundred  and 
fifty  pounds,  active  and  energetic,  and  was 
thus  able  to  accomplish  much  towards  sub- 
duing the  wilderness  and  bringing  it  under 
cultivation.  He  was  lieutenant  of  a  com- 
pany of  aged  men  which  was  organized  in 
18 1 3  for  frontier  defense  against  Canada. 
Simeon  West  was  captain  and  Wm.  Powers 
ensign.  Mr.  Squires  reared  a  family  of 
twelve  children,  six  sons  and  six  daughters. 
The  daughters  were  all  married  and  be- 
came mothers  of  families,  and  lived  to  be 
over  sixty  years  old.  The  three  oldest 
sons  all  died  before  they  were  twenty-one 
years  old.  John  A.,  his  fourth  son,  was  a 
prominent  resident  of  Iowa,  where  he  died 
some  years  ago.  Dann  C.  Squires,  mem- 
ber of  assembly  in  1864,  and  again  in  1874, 
and  who  was  for  thirty  years  justice  of  the 
peace  and  forty-four  years  district  clerk, 
was   the    next   son.      He  died    in    the   old 


46S 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


homestead  in  what  is  now  Lapeer,  Decem- 
ber 17th,  1874. 

James  S.  Scitiircs,  the  subject  of  this  sketch, 
was  the  youngest  member  of  the  family, 
and  was  born  in  Virgil,  Jan.  31st,  1819. 
His  early  life  was  spent  on  the  farm,  t<iiling 
early  and  late,  going  to  school  onl)-  on  such 
days  as  he  could  not  work  out  on  account 
of  inclement  weather.  His  school  privi- 
leges were  therefore  limited  to  a  few  days  or 
weeks  in  winter  of  each  year.  His  zeal  for 
learning  was  great,  and  notwithstanding  the 
difficulties  in  the  wa}',  he  diligently  pursued 
his  .studies  at  home,  often  stretching  him- 
self before  the  open  fire-place  in  the  even- 
ing and  poring  over  his  books  by  the  light 
of  the  fire.  When  he  reached  the  age  of 
si.xteen  years  his  father  died,  leaving  a  large 
family  of  children,  and  James  S.  saw  before 
him  a  life  in  which  he  must  stand  or  fall  by 
his  own  efforts.  Accordingly  in  the  follow- 
ing year  he  made  pre[)arations  to  start  out 
into  the  world  for  himself.  His  mother  was 
a  devoted  Christian  woman  from  her  girl- 
hood, and  changed  her  faith  from  Presby- 
terian to  Baptist  principles  soon  after  her 
husband's  death.  She  now,  as  her  \'oung- 
est  son  was  about  to  leave  her  side,  admon- 
ished and  counseled  him  as  to  his  future 
habits.  She  obtained  from  him  promises  that 
he  would  never  use  tobacco  in  anj'  form  ; 
would  abstain  from  intoxicating  drinks; 
would  never  gamble  in  any  way ;  would 
strictly  observe  the  Sabbath  day,  and  would 
in  all  things  be  guided  by  her  Christian 
teaching  and  advice.  These  promises  he  has 
always  tried  faithfully  to  keep  and  they 
have,  in  his  estimation,  been  the  foundation 
stones  upon  which  he  has  built  up  a  suc- 
cessful career  as  a  business  man  and  gained 
the  esteem  and  friendship  of  all  his  ac- 
(juaintances.  Following  naturally  upon  the 
habits  formed  from  those  promises,  came 
honesty,  uprightness  and  a  conscientious 
regard  for  the  rights  of  his  fellowmen.      As 


a  merchant  he  never  permitted  his  clerks  to 
misrepresent  goods  for  the  purpose  of  effect- 
ing a  sale,  and  in  all  things  enilca\'ored  to 
have  them  conform  to  his  correct  business 
methods ;  in  short,  he  followed  the  only 
course  through  life  upon  which  can  be  es- 
tablished a  successful  and  justifiable  record. 
When  eighteen  )'cars  old  he  attended  school 
one  full  term,  under  the  late  Nathan  Bou- 
ton,  in  Virgil,  and  made  such  rapid  ad- 
vancement that  his  teacher  gave  him  a  cer- 
tificate to  teach.  In  this  occupation  he  af- 
terwards learned  more  than  he  had  been 
able  to  under  his  previous  limited  advan- 
tages. 

But  Mr.  Squires  was  a  born  merchant, 
and  this  characteristic  showed  itself  when 
he  had  reached  only  the  age  of  ten  years ; 
he  then  purchased  a  quantity  of  top-onion 
seed  of  his  brother  at  six  cents  a  quart, 
which  he  sold  among  his  neighbors  during 
evenings  at  ten  cents.  In  this  way  he  made 
fifty  cents,  which  he  invested  in  a  lamb, 
which  he  let  for  a  term  of  years  to  double, 
and  from  the  increase  of  this  investment  he 
found  himself  the  possessor  at  the  time  of 
his  first  marriage,  when  he  was  twenty-four 
N'ears  old,  of  thirty-two  sheep.  Of  these 
he  sold  twenty-five  for  $50,  a  profit  of  a 
dollar  for  each  original  penny  invested. 
The  other  seven  sheep  were  sold  to  a  tailor 
and  served  to  pay  for  cutting  and  making 
his  wedding  suit,  himself  furnishing  the 
goods. 

In  the  \-ear  1S43  Mr.  Squires  began  mer- 
cantile business  for  himself  in  Virgil;  but 
through  endorsements  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  others,  this  venture  failed,  leaving 
him  twent)'-two  hundred  dollars  in  debt. 
Contrary  to  the  advice  of  his  friends  and 
others  he  devoted  his  best  energies  to  the 
payment  of  his  hea\'\'  burden,  which  he  ac- 
complished within  a  few  years.  The  wis- 
dom of  this  course  was  shown  when  the 
people  of  the  town   made  him   postmaster 


James  S.  Squires. 


469 


soon  after  the  failure,  and  the  next  year  su- 
perintendent of  schools,  which  office  he  held 
while  he  remained  in  the  town. 

He  subsequently  (1853)  removed  to 
Cortland  village,  where  he  engaged  in  mer- 
cantile business  of  a  general  character  and 
succeeded  in  building  up  an  annual  trade 
of  about  $100,000  a  year.  His  store  was 
known  as  the  largest  in  the  county  at  that 
time  and  the  most  successful,  employing 
much  of  the  time  ten  clerks,  several  of  whom 
remained  with  him  fifteen  years  and  are  now 
numbered  among  the  foremost  business 
men  of  Cortland  and  other  places. 

In  1869  Mr.  Squires  became  president 
of  the  Bank  of  Cortland,  which  responsible 
position  he  filled  with  abilit\-  for  fifteen 
years  until  1SS4,  when  he  resigned  to  de- 
vote all  of  his  time  to  his  personal  business. 
He  was  prominentU-  instrumental  in  secur- 
ing the  location  of  the  State  Normal  School 
at  Cortland,  and  has  also  done  much  to 
encourage  the  establishment  of  manufactur- 
ing interests  in  the  place,  contributing  lib- 
erally of  his  own  means  to  this  purpose. 
He  was  made  treasurer  of  the  Ithaca  and 
Cortland  railroad  and  of  the  Utica,  Che- 
nango and  Cortland  railroad,  which  offices 
he  has  held  until  the  present  time.  lie 
gave  liberally,  also,  to  the  fund  for  the 
erection  of  the  Baptist  Church  in  Cortland, 
of  which  he  has  for  many  years  been  a 
faithful  and  consistent  member.  lie  was 
elected  trustee  of  the  society  in  1858  and 
has  held  the  office  ever  since.  He  was  ap- 
pointed treasurer  in  i860  and  still  holds 
that  position.  He  has  been  one  of  the  pul- 
pit committee  since  1861  and  was  elected 
deacon  in  1875,  still  holding  the  office.  In 
1876  he  was  elected  president  of  the  board 
of  trustees  and  now  holds  that  office. 

Mr.  Squires  built  his  handsome  residence 
in  Cortland  on  the  corner  of  Tompkins  antl 
Prospect  streets  in  1871.  It  is  one  of  the 
most  attractive  private  dwellings  in  the  vil- 


lage and  has  been  greatly  improved  by  the 
addition  of  conservatories,  piazzas,  etc.  In 
1876  he  purchased  the  site  of  the  Old  Eagle 
store,  built  early  in  the  century  by  General 
Roswell  Randall,  and  erected  thereon  the 
handsome  and  valuable  Squires  building  at 
a  cost  of  about  $40,000,  containing  seven 
stores,  eight  offices  and  ten  flats. 

Mr.  Squires  has  been  married  three 
times,  the  first  event  occurring  on  Decem- 
ber 24th,  1843,  when  he  was  united  with 
Miss  Lucia  Chamberlain,  formerly  of  Otsego 
county.  She  was  born  Feb.  5th,  1 821,  and 
died  March  i6th,  1862.  She  was  a  de- 
voted and  Christian  wife  and  ninther,  and 
died  strong  in  her  faith  in  Jesus.  The  old- 
est child  of  this  union  was  Lucia  Verdine 
Squires,  who  w\as  born  Aug.  5th,  1847. 
She  was  married  to  Jerome  R.  Hathway  in 
1868,  and  died  May  28th,  1877.  The 
second  child  was  Francesca  Eudell  Squires, 
born  Dec.  6th,  1849;  she  is  now  the  wife 
of  Geo.  W.  Edgcomb,  of  Cortland.  Two 
sons  were  born  of  this  marriage  also;  the 
oldest  is  James  Duane  Squires,  now  a  mem- 
ber of  the  law  firm  of  Thornall,  Squires  & 
Constant,  120  Broadway,  New  York  city. 
He  was  born  in  Cortlandville,  Feb.  8th,  1855, 
attended  school  at  the  Cortlandville  Acad- 
emy and  later  at  the  Normal  School,  where 
he  graduated  at  the  age  of  si.xteen.  After 
teaching  one  season  he  took  an  extra  course 
at  the  Rochester  Collegiate  Institute  where 
he  graduated  and  took  the  first  prize  for 
commencement  oration. 

In  1873  he  entered  the  Rochester  Uni- 
versit)- where  he  graduated  in  1877.  After 
studying  law  a  short  time  in  Cortland  he 
went  to  New  York  cit\-  and  entered  the 
office  of  Hon.  Everett  P.  Wheeler  as  a 
student.  He  afterwards  became  a  clerk  in 
the  office  of  Deane  &  Chamberlain,  one  of 
the  largest  real  estate  law  firms  in  the  city. 
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  May,  1881, 
and  in  May,  1882,  was  made  a  junior  mem- 


470 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ber  of  the  firm  of  Dcanc  &  Chamberlain. 
This  firm  dissolved  in  the  early  jiart  of 
1884,  when  he  became  a  member  of  the 
law  firm  above  mentioned. 

The   other   son    is    Earl    I'rank    Squires, 
born  in  Cortlandville  Aug.   2d,  1857.      He 


business  in  Cortland,  of  which  he  is  now 
the  junior  member.  Me  was  married  to 
Miss  Ophelia  Evans,  daughter  of  W.  R. 
ICvans,  of  Dallas,  Texas,  July  30th,  1S79. 

Mr.  Squires'  second  marriage  occurred  on 
the    8th    of   Aug.     1865,    to    Miss    Libbie 


&\t0,  hU 


If 'IfS  '§ 

mm         '^\ 


t  ii»,_t- 


g<r;» 


,#i^^2fcd 


!  osrT'irK  /rr 


THE  SQUIRKS  BUILDING,  CORTLAND,  N.  V. 


was  educated  at  the  Normal  School,  and 
afterwards  engaged  as  clerk  in  the  mercan- 
tile business  and  to  some  extent  in  farm 
work  in  his  native  town.  In  1877  he  be- 
came a  member  of  the  firm  of  Stoker  & 
Co.,  grocers  and  provision  dealers,  which 
was  very  successful.  In  1882  the  firm  of 
Squires  &  Co.,  was  organized  for  the  same 


Adclia  Purinton,  daughter  of  Dr.  Purinton, 
of  West  Virginia,  and  granddaughter  of 
Elder  Purinton,  of  Tru.xton.  She  was 
born  in  Truxton  May  13th,  1839,  and  died 
November  30th,  1S71,  and  was  a  lady  of 
excellent  qualities.  Vernon  P.  Squires,  the 
eldest  son  born  of  this  union,  was  born 
Nov.  4th,  1866,  and  is  now  in  the  Cortland 


James  S.  Squires. 


471 


Normal  School  preparing  for  college. 
Emma  Maud  Squires  was  born  May  25th, 
i86g,  and  is  now  in  the  Normal  School, 
preparing  for  Vassar  College.  Louis  Al- 
mon  Squires,  born  Nov.  24tli,  1871,  is  now 
in  the  Normal  School,  pursuing  his  regular 
course  of  studies. 

Mr.    Squires   was    again    married   on  the 
14th    of   May,    1873,    to    Mary    EHzabcth 


man  whose  tastes  lead  him  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  home,  and  hence  he  has  freely  be- 
stowed of  his  wealth  to  make  the  surround- 
ings and  interior  of  his  dwelling-place  as 
attractive  as  possible,  with  a  conservatory 
and  its  numerous  plants  and  flowers  for 
winter,  and  his  beautiful  yard  for  summer, 
with  which  he  and  his  family  have  ever 
taken  much  pleasure. 


RKSniENCE  OF  J.\MES  S. 

Lester,  of  Ringhamton,  who  had  been  a 
teacher  many  years  and  principal  of  the 
primary  department  of  the  Cortland  Nor- 
mal School.  Their  children  by  this  mar- 
riage are  Mary  Louisa,  born  July  19th, 
1875,  died  Aug.  17th,  1876;  and  Fred 
Dann  Lester,  born  Feb.  2d,  1877,  now  in 
the  Normal  School. 

Mr.  Squires  lives  to  enjo)-  the  fruits  of 
his  well  spent  life,  in  a  domestic  circle  which 
is  in  all  respects  one  to  be  envied.      He  is  a 


SQUIRES,  CUKILAXH,  N.  V. 

THE  SQUIRES  BUILDING. 
The  accompanying  illustration  gives  a 
good  view  of  the  new  Squires  building, 
erected  by  James  S.  Squires  in  the  summer 
of  1883.  It  occupies  the  historic  corner 
(Tompkins  and  South  Main  street). where 
stood  what  was  known  as  the  old  Eagle 
store,  a  portion  of  which  structure  is  em- 
braced in  and  built  aroimd,  so  to  speak,  by 
the  new  building.  The  old  Eagle  store  was 
built  by  Gen.  Roswell   Randall  nearly  sev- 


472 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


cnty  years  ago,  and  was  then  one  of  the 
most  pretentious  buildings  in  the  State  west 
of  Albany.  There  was  an  arcade  or  rotunda 
in  the  center,  from  which  a  winding  stair- 
case led  to  each  of  the  three  stt)ries.  In 
that  building  Mr.  Randall  kept  a  store  for 
many  years,  wliich  was  well  known  through- 
out the  count)'.  The  new  Squires  building 
has  seven  stores  on  the  ground  floor,  all  of 
which  are  now  occupied.  The  second  story 
is  divided  into  offices  anci  flats.  The  ten 
suits  of  offices  are  also  all  occupied.  The 
third  story  is  designed  for  flats,  or  suits  of 
living  rooms,  for  which  it  is  admirably  fitted 
and  supplied  with  all  modern  improve- 
ments. A  handsome  tower  surmounts  the 
corner  of  the  building  in  which  is  an  illu- 
minated clock.  As  a  whole  the  Squires 
l)uikling,  occupying  as  it  does  one  of  the 
most  conspicuous  and  convenient  corners 
in  the  village,  is  a  handsome  structure 
and  is  a  credit  to  the  village  and  an  honor 
to  its  owner. 

RESIDENCK    OF  J.VME.S    S.    SQUIRES. 

In  the  )-ear  1853  Mr.  Squires  purchased 
of  David  R.  Hubbard  the  lot  numbered  44 
Tompkins  street,  Cortland  village,  on  which 
he  built  a  frame  house  tiiat  he  occupied 
until  1871,  and  this  was  the  first  dwelling 
house  on  the  north  side  of  that  street,  west 
of  the  Randall  property  (with  the  exception 
of  some  untenable  buildings),  and  in  1871 
this  house  was  removed  and  his  handsome 
brick  residence  was  erected  on  the  same 
street.  The  street  is  now  one  of  the  finest 
in  Cortland  village,  with  respect  to  the 
character  of  its  jirivate  residences  and 
grounds,  and  is  one  of  the  most  popular 
and  attractive  thoroughfares  in  the  place. 
Mr.  Squires'  residence,  as  will  be  seen  by 
the  engraving  herein,  is  characterized  by 
its  modest  elegance  and  plain,  yet  synmiet- 
rical  architecture.  The  grounds  arc  hand- 
somely laid  out  and  carefully  attentled. 


CALEB  BARDANO  HITCHCOCK,  the 
subject  of  this  sketch,  is  one  of  the  repre- 
sentative business  men  of  Cortland  coun- 
ty. His  grandfather,  Noah  Hitchcock,  was 
among  the  pioneer  settlers  of  Homer,  N.  Y. 
His  father,  Caleb  Hitchcock,  moved  to  Dry- 
den,  N.  Y.,  where  Caleb  B.  was  born  March 
30th,  1839.  In  1 841  his  father  died,  leav- 
ing his  mother  with  six  children,  of  whom 
Caleb  was  the  youngest,  being  only  two 
years  of  age.  Mrs.  Hitchcock  then  removed 
to  Homer  with  her  j-oung  family,  and  b\' 
her  own  industry  and  economy  secured  to 
her  children  the  advantages  of  a  good  edu- 
cation. Wlien  thirteen  years  old,  Caleb  B. 
went  to  Venice,  Cayuga  coimt)-,  and  worked 
on  the  farm  of  Jesse  Tillet  for  two  years, 
attending  the  winter  terms  of  the  district 
school.  Returning  to  Homer  at  the  end 
of  this  time  he  attended  tlie  academy  four 
terms,  which  completed  his  school  educa- 
tion. Thus,  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  he 
started  out  to  begin  the  battle  of  life  and  to 
win  a  [josition  among  men.  Two  }-ears 
later  found  him  an  emploj-ee  in  the  tluii  cel- 
ebrated carriage  factory  of  S.  W.  Catch',  at 
Tully,  Onondaga  Co.,  N.  Y.,  where  he  ob- 
tained a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  parts  of 
carriage  work. 

At  the  end  of  three  years'  service  he  went 
to  Cincinnatus  and  worked  in  the  shop  of 
Larabee  &  Gee,  where,  a  year  later,  with  the 
earnings  which  his  frugality  had  enabled 
him  to  save,  he  purchased  an  interest  in  tiie 
business,  afterwards  becoming  the  sole  pro- 
prietor. 

After  a  time  he  disposed  of  his  carriage 
shop  and  opened  a  furniture,  undertaking 
and  livery  business,  in  which  he  remained 
until  about  1877.  During  this  time  he  oc- 
casionally finished  a  few  cutters  and  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  the  large  manufacturing 
interest  which  now  bears  his  name. 

Recognizing  the  limit  and  inconvenience 
placeil  upon  business  in  an  inland  town,  and 


^^^ 


-5^1^ 


=y-^ 


Caleb  Bardano  Hitchcock.  —  Alonzo  D.  Blodgett. 


473 


observing  the  growing  impulse  for  exten- 
sive manufactories  developing  in  Cortland, 
he  removed  there  in  the  spring  of  1877,  to 
attempt  to  put  into  practical  execution  some 
of  the  plans  he  had  been  maturing  to  build 
up  a  large  wholesale  manufactory  for  cutters 
and  sleighs.  To  this  end  he  rented  the  Gee 
property  on  Port  Watson  street,  and  the 
first  )-ear,  having  five  employees,  made  and 
sold  one  hundred  cutters  —  a  business  not 
exceeding  four  thousand  dollars.  The  fol- 
lowing season  he  purchased  what  was  then 
known  as  the  okl  church  property  on  Elm 
street,  and  each  year  thereafter  more  tlian 
doubled  the  business  —  buying  lot  after  lot 
and  putting  up  building  after  building  of 
immense  proportions,  until  the  business,  of 
four  thousand  dollars  in  1877,  reached 
nearly  half  a  million  in   1S84. 

Mr.  Hitchcock  is  eniphaticall)-  a  self- 
made  man.  Being  a  good  judge  of  human 
nature  enabled  him  to  gather  about  him  as 
employees  men  well  fitted  to  aid  him  in  his 
great  enterprises.  During  his  business  ca- 
reer he  has  made  no  misstep  through  defect 
of  his  own  judgment.  He  is  an  expert  buyer, 
and  it  is  this  superior  qualit}',  perhaps,  more 
than  any  other,  that  has  enabled  him  to  keep 
pace  and  even  surpass  many  older  and  more 
experienced  nianuficturers. 

Believing  in  the  justice  and  equity  of  giv- 
ing an  interest  to  those  who  aided  him  while 
building  up  his  large  business,  he  organized, 
in  March,  1884,  as  his  successor,  "The 
Hitchcock  Manufacturing  Company,"  with 
a  capital  of  $150,000,  and  a  charter  f)r  fifty 
years  with  C.  B.  Hitchcock  as  president,  H. 
L.  Gleason,  secretary,  and  H.  C.  Henry  as 
treasurer.  This  company,  on  the  first  day  of 
January,  will  have  built  and  sold  3,500  wag- 
ons and  10,000  sleighs,  shipping  in  the  bus- 
iest times  a  sleigh  every  five  minutes,  and 
are  fully  sustaining  their  well  earned  repu- 
tation of  building  the  largest  number  of  cut- 
ters of  any  factory  in  the  work!.      It  is  their 


intention  next  year  to  build  5,000  wagons 
and  15,000  sleighs,  thus  pushing  the  busi- 
ness close  to  a  million  dollars. 


ALONZO  D.  BLODGETT.  Following 
is  a  brief  genealogy  of  the  Blodgett 
family,  of  which  the  subject  of  this  sketch 
is  a  member :  — 

The  Blodgett  f»iiil\-  came  from  Lexing- 
ton, Mass.  Thomas  Blodgett  came  from 
London  in  1635  ;  settled  at  Cambridge. 
Children,  Daniel,  Samuel,  Susan.  Samuel 
boin  in  I'.ngland,  1633  ;  died  1687;  mar- 
ried Ruth  Ingleden,  1655.  Children,  Ruth, 
Samuel,  Susan,  Sarah. 

2.  Thomas,  born  1 660  ;  removed  to  Lex- 
ington 1699;  married  Rebecca  Tidd  1684. 
Children,  Thomas,  Rebecca,  Joseph,  Abi- 
gail, Saul. 

3.  Joseph,  jr.,  son  of  Joseph,  born  1696; 
married  (first  wife)  Sarah  Stone,  who  was 
born  at  Lexington  1700;  died  1735;  sec- 
ond wife,  Sarah  Ingersoll,  1738;  she  was 
born  at  Springfield  1718.  Joseph,  jr.,  died 
June  loth,  1783.  Sarah  Ingersoll  Blod- 
gett died  April  24th,  1774.  Children  of 
Sarah  Stone  and  Sarah  Ingersoll :  Joseph, 
April  17th,  1721;  Sarah,  November  12th, 
1722;  Anna,  April  loth,  1724;  Abigail, 
July  i8th,  1726;  Ruth,  March  ist,  1728; 
Benjamin,  June  9th,  1730 ;  Abner,  June 
6th,  1732;  Thomas,  September  26th,  1734. 
Sarah  Ingersoll's  children,  Samuel,  May 
17th,  1739;  Lydia,  February  7lh,  1741  ; 
Jonas,  November  12th,  1743;  Azubah, 
April  1 2th,  1746;  Caleb,  November  24th, 
1748;  IClijah,  October  25th,  1750;  Marse- 
na,  March  4th,  1754;  Nathan,  November 
3d,  1756;   Admatha,  December  15th,  1758. 

Children  of  Nathan  Blodgett  (born  1756), 
who  married  Abigail  Bliss,  born  August 
30th,  1760:  Loren,  born  April  22d,  1782; 
Rachel,  born  July  4th.  17S5  ;  Lot,  born 
August  20th,  1787;  Lewis,  born  March 
loth,  1790;   Ljilia,  born  September  27th, 


474 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1792;  Abigail,  born  June  9th,  1/95; 
Franlvlin,  born  January  2 1st,  1798;  Kliza, 
born  Ma)-  51I1,  1 800 ;  George  A.,  born 
Jum;  26111,  1804;  Dwight  F.,  born  March 
31st,   1806. 

I'^ranklin  Benjamin  married  Aclisah 
Ucvvey,  born  August  8tli,  1798;  married 
November  1st,  1821.  Children,  Orissa 
Blodgett,  burn  Jiil_\-  24th,  1823;  Alonzo 
Dwight,  born  June  14th,  1825;  Lewis  (ia}'- 
lord,  born  Ma\-  14th,  1827;  J.  Rand<ilph, 
born  March  12th,  1829;  Jam- Amelia,  born 
March  28th,  1831;  Mary  Louisa,  born 
April  15  th,  1833. 

Alonzo  D.  Blodgett,  the  well-known 
farmer  and  stock  raiser,  is  a  grandson  of 
Nathan  Blodgett,  an  old  colonial  soldier 
who  settled  on  the  present  Blodgett  home- 
stead in  1805.  Nathan  Blodgett  was  born 
near  Lexington,  Mass.,  and  bound  out  until 
twenty-one  years  old,  for  which  service  he 
received  one  hundred  dollars.  On  the  loth 
of -September,  1778,  he  was  appointed  ser- 
geant in  the  third  company  of  the  first  ^'cg- 
imcnt  of  Worcester,  Joseph  Putnam,  jr., 
captain;  and  on  the  2d  of  Jul)-,  1792,  was 
appointed  by  John  Hancock,  then  governor 
of  the  State,  as  ensign  of  the  same  company, 
and  on  May  15th,  1794,  he  received  an 
honorable  discharge ;  thereafter  he  was  a 
pensioner  until  his  death.  In  1804  he  came 
to  Whitestown,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1805  he  built 
his  log  cabin  near  the  site  now  occupied 
by  Alonzo  Blodgett's  house.  During  the 
following  year  he  erected  his  forge  and  was 
one  of  the  earliest  blacksmiths  in  the  town. 
On  the  homestead  stands  an  elm  tree  planted 
by  him  about  the  time  of  his  settlement, 
which  has  attained  a  circumference  about 
its  base  of  nearly  eleven  feet.  He  was  for 
a  number  of  years  commissioner  of  high- 
ways and  was  one  of  the  first  to  take  active 
steps  towards  securing  a  public  library  for 
the  village  of  Cortland.  His  son,  Franklin 
15.  Blodgett,  was  but  seven  years  old  when 


his  father  came  to  this  place.  He  was  an 
unostentatious  man,  and  sought  no  official 
honors  or  public  station  ;  he  turned  rather 
to  those  domestic  comforts  that  are  found 
ill  congenial  and  religious  households  of  the 
character  of  his  own.  He  was  a  carpenter 
and  in  18  16  assisted  in  buiklingthe  "  151od- 
gett's  Mills  "  at  the  hamlet  of  that  name; 
and  in  1850  tlie  old  part  of  the  house  now 
occupied  b)'  y\lonzo  D.  Blodgett.  He  be- 
came a  member  of  the  Presb)-terian  Church 
in  Cortland  in  1832;  was  soon  after  made 
an  elder  and  then  a  deacon  ;  these  offices 
he  held  for  forty  years,  until  1 872;  he  was 
a  member  of  the  session  thirty-seven  years. 
In  his  death  the  cinirch  lost  one  of  its  most 
valuable  members  and  one  who  had  been 
most  devoted  to  the  great  work  of  ad\anc- 
ing  the  cause  of  religion.  He  dieil  as  he 
had  lived,  strong  in  the  faith. 

Alonzo  Dwight  Blodgett,  the  eldest  son 
of  Franklin  Benjamin  Blodgett  and  Achsah 
Dewey,  was  born  in  the  town  of  Cortland, 
June  14th,  1825,  and  now  resides  on  the 
liomestead  that  has  been  the  patrimon\'  of 
the  famil)-  for  eighty  years,  and  which  is 
one  of  the  most  attractive  and  valuable 
farms  in  the  county.  Mr.  Blodgett  spent  a 
portion  of  the  earlier  years  of  his  life  at 
school,  but  being  the  oldest  son,  his  advan- 
tages in  this  respect  were  limited,  for  his 
services  were  of  too  much  consequence  at 
home.  Musical  talent  is  inborn  in  the 
family,  and  especially  in  the  subject  of  this 
sketch  ;  the  study  and  practice  of  the  divine 
art  became  a  passion  with  him,  and  being 
possessed  of  an  excellent  voice,  he  soon  took 
the  position  in  the  community  to  which  he 
was  thereby  entitled  —  a  leader  in  all  mu- 
sical matters.  As  early  as  1844,  when  he 
was  but  nineteen,  he  joined  the  choir  of  the 
Prcsb)'terian  Church  in  Cortland,  and  in 
the  following  year  became  its  leader.  This 
position  he  has  held  constantly  since  that 
time  —  a  period  of  forty  years.      No  higher 


ALONZO  D.  BLODGETT. 


Alonzo  D.  Blodgett.  —  James  H.  Tkiit. 


475 


testimonial  is  needed  tlian  tliis,  not  only  to 
his  nuisical  ability  and  devotion,  but  to  his 
faculty  for  orj^anization,  for  harnioniziuL; 
the  discords  that  often  arise  in  church  sing- 
ing bodies  and  for  promoting  the  general 
musical  interests  of  the  community.  About 
the  time  that  he  became  the  choir  leader 
he  also  commenced  teaching  vocal  music 
through  this  portion  of  the  State,  which 
arthious  work  he  followed  a  large  portion  of 
fifteen  years.  15ut  the  exposure  of  attending 
night  schools  and  his  practice  of  fulfilling  his 
engagements,  regardless  of  inclement  weath- 
er or  the  state  of  his  health,  finall_\-  produced 
such  ill  effects  upon  his  jihysical  system  that 
he  was  compelled  to  abandon  traveling  al- 
together. For  two  years  he  was  the  ad- 
vance agent  of  "The  Amphions,"  a  popu- 
lar concert  company  that  enjoyed  an  excel- 
lent reputation  wherever  they  appeared. 

But  although  Mr.  Blodgett  gave  up 
traveling  and  teaching,  his  musical  labors 
were  not  by  any  means  abandoned.  In 
the  numerous  concerts  that  have  been  given 
in  Cortland,  Homer  and  vicinity,  he  has 
always  been  looked  to  as  the  first  one  to 
depend  upon  for  success.  Whatever  the 
cause  that  has  needed  support  —  temper- 
ance, charit}',  schools,  churches,  or  any 
laudable  undertaking — Mr.  Blodgett  has 
been  found  not  only  willing  to  contribute 
his  talents  and  time  and  almost  invariably 
to  the  success  of  the  c\cnt.  In  Cortland 
alone  he  has  taken  part  in  thirty-six  con- 
certs, twenty-one  of  which  he  conducted 
in  person,  and  most  of  which  were  for  char- 
itable objects.  During  the  late  war  he  was 
generally  foremost  wherever  money  and 
troops  were  to  be  raised,  monuments 
erected,  or  widows  and  orphans  of  soldiers 
to  be  provided  for,  the  tuneful  strains  of 
patriotic  melodies  often  serving  effectually 
for  these  purposes  where  other  means  failed. 

Before  the  late  war  Mr.  Blodgett  received 
the  appointment  of  adjutant  of  the   Forty- 


second  Regiment  New  York  State  Militia, 
and  afterward  was  enrolled  in  the  same  in 
the  National  Guard.  Me  was  subsetiuently 
promoted  to  major  and  then  to  the  lieuten- 
ant-colonelcy of  the  .Seventy-sixth  Regi- 
ment National  Guard.s,  which  office  he 
now  holds. 

Mr.  Hlodgett  has  always  taken  an  active 
interest  in  the  County  Agricultural  Society, 
holding  the  office  of  secretary  seven  years, 
and  elected  president  in  1870  and  again  in 
iSSi.  As  a  farmer  he  has  kept  abreast  of 
the  limes;  was  the  first  president  of  the 
I'armer's  Club,  which  office  he  has  held  con- 
tinuously to  the  present  time,  and  which 
organization  he  has  done  much  to  support 
and   imjjrove. 

Mr.  Blodgett  was  united  in  marriage  to 
Miss  Eleanor  Dickinson  on  the  13th  of 
June,  i860;  she  is  a  daughter  of  Obadiah 
Dickinson  and  his  wife,  I'LIeanor,  of  Onon- 
daga Valley.  Her  father  was  a  native  of 
Hatfield,  Mass.,  and  came  to  this  State  in 
1844;  he  tlieil  in  1S79.  Her  mother  is 
still  living.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Blodgett  have 
two  children  living;  Edward  D.,  the  elder, 
is  in  the  class  of  '87  at  Amherst  College, 
antl  I'"rank  D.  is  attending  school  at  home. 
The  faniil)-  now  ha\'e  one  of  the  pleasantest 
suburban  homes  in  the  town. 


JAMES  H.  TRIPP,  the  banker  and  capi- 
talist of  Marathon,  N.  Y.,  was  born  in 
Ancram,  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  January 
17th,  1832.  His  grandfather  was  Daniel 
Tripp  who  was  born  in  the  town  of  Paw- 
ling, N.  Y.,  In  1 77 1,  where  he  and  his  wife, 
Elizabeth  Akin,  became  prominent  in  the 
sect  of  "P'ricnds, "  of  Quaker  Hill,  Duchess 
county,  a  religious  society  which  has  had 
an  existence  of  over  one  hundred  and  fifty 
years.  He  afterwards  removed  to  Ancram, 
Columbia  county,  N.  Y.  In  1838  he  re- 
moved to  Dr\-den,  Tompkins  county,  N.  Y., 
where  he  died  in  1856. 


4/6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Daniel  A.  Tripp,  father  of  James  H.,  was 
born  in  the  town  of  Ancram,  August  31st, 
1804.  In  1828  he  married  L6ritta  Havi- 
land,  daughter  of  Benjamin  H.  Haviland, 
of  Athens,  Greene  county,  N.  Y.  Benjamin 
II.  IIa\ilaiul  was  for  a  number  of  years 
captain  of  a  sailing  vessel  on  the  Hudson 
river.  In  1837  Daniel  A.  Tripp  removed 
to  Dryden,  Tompkins  county,  and  in  the 
following  year  moved  across  the  town  line 
into  the  town  of  Harford,  where  he  lived 
until  his  death,  December  5th,  1883.  He 
was  a  man  of  great  industry  and  strict  in- 
tegrit)-.  His  wife  died  in  1873  at  the  age 
of  si\t)--se\'en  years.  She  was  an  estima- 
ble woman,  a  great  reader,  aiul  possessed 
remarkable  powers  of  memory,  even  in  her 
later  da\s.  Their  children  were  Mrs.  E. 
H.  Lampman,  of  Co.xsackie,  Greene  county, 
N.  Y.;  J.  II.  Tripp,  of  Marathon;  Miss  C. 
H.  Tripp,  of  Harford  ;  Miss  V..  C.  Tripp,  of 
Harford  ;  Mrs.  Louisa  Thomas,  of  Dryden  ; 
D.  B.  Tripp,  assistant  cashier  of  the  bank  of 
Marathon  ;  Mrs.  Mary  Wheeler,  of  Wash- 
ington, D.  C. ;  E.  W.  Tripp,  of  Homer; 
and  John  C.  Tripii,  who  died  in  Syracuse 
in    1 88 1. 

James  H.  Tripp,  when  five  years  of  age, 
came  with  his  parents  to  this  section  of  the 
State  and  received  his  early  education  in 
the  schools  of  Harford,  with  one  term  in  the 
Cortland  Academy.  When  nineteen  years 
of  age  he  began  teaching,  which  occupa- 
tion he  followed  in  district  schools  during 
the  winter  months  of  five  years.  In  1856 
he  came  to  Marathon  and  engaged  as  clerk 
for  Peck  &  Atlams,  a  well  known  firm  of 
general  merchants  at  that  time.  He  re- 
mained with  them  in  this  capacity  until 
1859,  when  he  was  admitted  to  partnership 
under  the  firm  name  of  Peck,  Adams  & 
Tripp,  in  which  relationship  he  continued 
till  the  winter  of  1862.  It  was  at  this 
time  that  the  attention  of  H.  J.  Messen- 
ger was   attracted    toward    Mr.    Tripp   and 


discovering  in  him  superior  business  ability, 
induced  him  to  take  the  responsible  position 
of  cashier  in  his  Marathon  bank.  Up  to 
this  time  Mr.  Tripp  was  totally  ignorant  of 
banking  business  and  did  not  even  know 
the  methods  eniploj-ed  to  detect  counterfeit 
bank  bills,  although  the  country  was  flooded 
with  spurious  paper.  His  success,  how- 
ever, was  so  marked  that  in  six  months 
time  he  was  promoted  to  the  position  of 
cashier  in  the  large  bank  at  Canandaigua,  of 
which  Mr.  Messenger  was  president.  He 
remained  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Messenger 
for  a  period  of  four  years,  as  cashier  and 
as  superintendent  of  his  general  aftairs  in 
Marathon,  Canandaigua  and  Geneva. 

In  the  fill  of  1865  he  entered  into  part- 
nership with  his  old  employer,  Lj'nian 
Adams,  under  the  firm  name  of  Tripp  & 
Adams,  bu\-iiig  out  liie  interest  of  Mr. 
Peck.  This  business  relationship  has  con- 
tinued to  the  present  time,  a  period  of 
twenty  years,  eighteen  and  a  half  of  which 
were  devoted  to  general  merchandising  and 
private  banking.  In  June,  i  884,  such  had 
been  their  success  as  bankers,  the)-  felt  justi- 
fied in  the  organization  of  the  First  Na- 
tional Bank  of  Marathon,  of  which  Mr. 
Tripp  is  now  president. 

On  the  fifth  of  October,  1865,  Mr.  Tripp 
was  married  to  Sarah  Remington,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Chauncey  Remington,  a  druggist  of 
Ontario  count}-.  She  died  in  1871,  and 
and  on  November  i  ith,  1873,  he  married 
Mrs.  Louisa  Bogardus,  daughter  of  Edward 
Farrington,  a  native  of  Duchess  county,  N. 
Y.,  who  removed  to  near  Cortland  \-illage 
while  \-oung  and  at  a  later  date  to  De  Ru)-i 
ter,  Madison  county,  where  he  still  resides; 
he  is  a  prominent  farmer  at  that  place. 
Louisa  I'arrington  was  first  married  to 
Martin  1).  rxigardns,  one  of  the  leading- 
farmers  of  the  town  of  Cuyler.  He  died 
about  three  years  after  their  marriage. 
Their   ilaughter,   Anna,    who    was   born    in 


James  H.  Tripp.  —  James  IlAiaroN  IIoose. 


477 


1870,  has  been  adopted  by  Mr.  Tripp  and 
is  a  loved  and  cherished  member  of  his 
family. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Tripp  are  now  in  the  en- 
joyment of  a  beautiful  home  and  the  luxu- 
ries of  life  to  which  the}'  are  entitlctl;  and 
as  members  of  the  society  in  which  they 
live  are  tendered  the  respect  and  friendship 
of  all. 


JAMES  HARMON  HOOSE  was  born 
January  24th,  1835,  near  Warnerville, 
Schoharie  county,  N.  Y.,  where  his  [jarents 
then  lived.  His  father,  Abram  Hoose,  was 
born  October  6th,  1808,  and  was  of  Holland 
ancestry  that  settled  upon  lands  now  in- 
chiiled  in  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.  He  was 
a  man  of  much  force  of  character,  indus- 
trious, uprii:,dit,  and  possessed  a  deep  regard 
for  that  liberty  which  was  established  for 
citizens  by  the  American  Independence. 
Mrs.  Abram  Hoose,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Rosanna  Miller,  was  born  January 
26th,  1809,  and  belonged  to  German  lineage 
that  settled  upon  land  near  Florida  in 
Montgomer_\-  county,  N.  Y.  She  was  a 
woman  of  unusual  force  of  character,  and 
possessed  rare  aptitudes  and  love  for  literary 
attainments,  losing  no  opportunity  to  avail 
herself  of  the  limited  advantages  for  mental 
improvement  which  the  countr\-  then  afford- 
ed.     She  died  June  6th,  1867. 

Mr.  Abram  Hoose  and  family  moved  in 
1836  to  the  town  of  Parish,  Oswego 
county  N.  Y.,  where  he  purchased  wild 
land;  he  became  a  very  prosperous  farmer, 
and  was  held  in  high  estimation  as  a  public 
spirited  citizen;  he  was  alwa\'s  the  friend 
of  the  common  school.  The  children  in 
the  family  were  James,  who  was  the  eldest; 
Jedidiah,  five  years  younger,  who  is  now  a 
prominent  business  man  in  Mexico,  N.  Y.  ; 
and  Janettc  who  was  seven  years  younger 
than  Jedidiah  ;  she  lived  on  a  farm  near  the 
homestead  until    her  death,  which  occurred 


Oct.  7th,  1884.  The  three  children  were 
brought  up  to  be  industrious  and  persever- 
ing; they  were  taught  obedience  and  to  be 
respectful  to  others;  they  were  taught  good 
habits  of  temperance;  they  were  sent  to  the 
district  school  during  their  earlier  years, 
and  to  higher  schools  in  sub.sequent  years. 

The  elder  son,  the  subject  of  this  sketch, 
applied  himself  diligently  and  successfully 
to  his  studies  in  the  district  school;  he  was 
a  constant  reader,  reading  through  the  old 
district-school  library  and  as  many  other 
books  as  he  could  find  in  the  neighborhood. 
He  taught  his  first  term  of  school  when  he 
was  eighteen,  in  the  district  where  he  had 
always  attended  school;  the  term  was  a 
winter  school  of  four  months,  antl  his  wages 
were  twelve  dollars  per  month  and  "  board 
arountl."  In  the  following  spring  and  fall 
he  went  to  school  at  Mexico  Academy  and 
attended  also  at  Mexico  his  first  Teachers' 
Institute.  He  taught,  in  New  York  and  in 
Ohio,  district  schools  in  winter,  in  Teachers' 
Institutes  in  the  fall,  and  classes  in  the 
academy  occasionally,  and  studied  in  tlie 
academy  a  couple  of  terms  each  \'ear,  assist- 
ing his  father  upon  the  farm  during  vaca- 
tions. He  pursued  his  studies,  classical, 
mathematical,  and  scientific,  in  this  way,  at 
Mexico  Academy  and  at  Warnerville 
Seminar}-,  until  he  entered  Genesee  College 
in  die  fall  of  1859.  While  connected  with 
the  college  he  taught  sclujol  winters,  but  by 
pursuing  his  studies  as  a  ]iri\-ate  student 
with  Dr.  John  R.  French,  now  Dean  of  the 
College  of  Liberal  Arts,  Syracuse  Univer- 
sity, he  kept  his  rank  in  the  college,  and 
was  graduated  from  it  in  June,  1861. 
While  in  college  he  took  very  high  rank  as 
a  student,  especially  in  the  higher  mathe- 
matics. He  held  at  Pulaski  in  the  sj^ring 
of  i860  a  select  normal  school  for  teachers 
of  Oswego  county.  He  afterwards  became 
principal  of  Pulaski  Academy  for  a  short 
time. 


478 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Dr.  Hoose  was  one  of  the  prominent 
movers  in  organizing  the  Oswego  County 
Teachers'  Association,  serving  for  a  time  as 
its  corresponding  secretary.  He  attended 
for  tlie  first  time  the  New  York  State 
Teachers'  Association  at  its  session  held  in 
Syracuse,  in  i860;  he  has  attended  nearly 
every  session  of  the  association  since  that 
date;  he  was  its  president  when  tlie  session 
was  held  at  Saratoga  Springs,  in  July,  1872. 
He  has  attended  for  years  the  meetings  of 
the  National  Educational  Association,  be 
ing  a  life  member  of  it;  he  was  one  year 
president  of  the  normal  section  of  that 
association.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Education.  He  has  been 
an  alumni  trustee  of  Syracuse  University 
ever  since  its  establishment,  and  was  re- 
elected in  June,  1884  for  a  third  term  of 
six  years. 

He  was  conductor  of  Institutes  from  1866 
until  1869,  holding  sessions  in  nearly  every 
county  of  the  State,  although  he  was  em- 
ployed occasionally  from  1857;  he  con- 
ducted Institutes  now  and  then  from  1 869  to 
1877,  and  has  delivered  addresses  in  them 
from  time  to  time  ever  since.  He  visited 
Europe  in  1877  to  investigate  educational 
affairs  in  the  old  world.  His  pen  has  been 
busy  as  an  educational  writer.  He  was 
appointed  in  1862  one  of  the  editors  of 
The  New  York  Teaeher.  He  has  written 
many  articles  for  publication,  and  many 
addresses.  His  books  are:  Notes  on  the 
Educational  Sj'stem  of  Great  Britain;  Hints 
to  Americans  visiting  Europe;  Studies  in 
Articulation;  On  the  Province  of  Methods 
of  Teaching;  The  First  Year  Text-Book  in 
Number,  based  upon  the  Pestalozzian  Sys- 
tem. He  was  for  one  year,  1881-82,  editor 
of  the  department  of  "Notes"  in  Education. 

Dr.  Hoose  has  held  in  the  State  of  New 
York  the  following  positions  as  teacher 
since  he  was  graduated  from  college:  Pro- 
fessor of  Mathematics  in    the   Susquehanna 


Seminary,  Binghamton;  principal  of  a  large 
select  school  at  Sharon  Springs;  principal 
of  Warnerville  Seminary,  Warner\'ille; 
teacher  in  charge  of  the  English  depart- 
ment in  Cortland  Academy,  Homer;  pro- 
fessor of  Mathematics  in  the  Genesee  Wes- 
leyan  Seminary,  Lima;  principal  of  Ward 
School  No.  4,  Oswego,  and  assistant  in 
Science  in  the  Oswego  Normal  School; 
professor  of  Theory  and  Practice  and  of 
English  Language  and  Literature  in  the 
State  Normal  School  at  Brockport.  He 
entered  upon  his  duties  as  principal  of  the 
Cortland  Normal  School  in  February,  1 869, 
the  first  term  opening  March  3d,  1869. 
He  was  acting  principal  of  the  Fredonia 
State  Normal  School  two  months  in  the  fall 
of  1878,  upon  the  death  of  Dr.  J.  W. 
Armstrong,  who  had  been  principal  there 
up  to  that  date.  He  was  superintendent 
of  public  schools  of  the  city  of  Binghamton 
in  1881—82,  during  ten  months  of  the 
school-year. 

He  was  married  in  1861  to  Miss  Le- 
moyne  A.  Hale,  of  New  Haven,  N.  Y.,  who 
died  in  1871.  He  afterwards  married  Miss 
Helen  K.  Hubbard,  of  Norwich,  N.  Y. 

The  following  brief  history  of  the  impor- 
tant events  that  transpired  in  the  life  of  Dr. 
Hoose  from  1880  to  1884,  is  from  the  pen 
of  Prof  C.  W.  Bennett,  D.  D.,  of  Syracuse 
University.  [For  many  details  of  the  his- 
tory of  these  years  and  for  an  account  of 
the  continued  prosperity  of  the  school,  the 
reader  is  referred  to  another  page  of  this 
volume  which  contains  the  history  of  the 
Cortland  Normal  School.] 

Says  Dr.  Bennett:  — 

For  years  had  been  felt  the  need  of  the 
unification  of  the  educational  system  of  the 
State,  and  the  removal  of  educational  inter- 
ests from  the  realm  of  partisan  politics.  To 
the  double  headship  of  this  system  an  un- 
worthy feeling  of  jealousy  and  antagonism 
had  been  clearly  attributable.    The  colleges, 


James  Harmon  IIoose. 


479 


academies  and  academic  departments  in  the 
high  schools  were  amenable  to  the  Board 
of  Regents  of  the  University,  while  in  other 
respects  in  the  public  schools  the  superin- 
tendent of  public  instruction  had  supervis- 
ion and  control.  Thus  a  double  set  of  re- 
ports must  be  prepared,  and  a  wide  differ- 
ence of  opinion  on  the  part  of  these  two 
growing  authorities  at  times  divided  the  sen- 
timent of  teachers  even  in  the  same  room. 
These  interests  were  also  represented  by 
two  different  annual  educational  gatherings, 
viz.,  the  State  Teachers'  Association  and 
the  convocation  of  the  Board  of  Regents. 
At  times  there  was  a  manifest  tendency  to 
indulge  in  unfavorable  criticism,  and  there 
was  sometimes  wanting  that  hearty  sympa- 
thy and  frank  co-operation  that  were  need- 
ful to  secure  the  best  results. 

The  election  of  the  superintendent  of 
public  instruction  by  the  joint  ballot  of  the 
two  houses  of  the  legislature,  made  this 
officer  the  creature  of  a  party ;  hence  the 
temptation  was  often  strong  to  use  his  im- 
mense official  influence  and  patronage  for 
partisan  purposes.  Moreover  there  was  an 
autocratic  centralizationof  legislative,  judi- 
cial and  executive  power :  from  his  decis- 
ions there  was  no  appeal ;  he  could  undo 
to-day  what  had  been  done  yesterday  ;  he 
had  absolute  power  over  all  schools  and 
school  officers  ;  he  had  control  of  $3,000,000 
of  school  funds;  he  controlled  all  normal 
schools  and  school  institutes,  etc.,  etc. 

Many  of  the  closest  thinkers  and  most 
earnest  educators  of  all  political  parties  be- 
lieved that  the  system  of  educational  super- 
intendence in  the  State  of  New  York  was 
most  vicious,  and  they  desired  its  recon- 
struction after  the  model  of  tlie  .systems 
of  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  or  Pennsyl- 
vania, where  a  non-partisan  board  of  edu- 
cation appoints  its  own  superintendent  or 
secretary,  who  shall  serve  at  the  pleasure  of 
the  board  and  be  subject  to  its   instruction. 


and  amenable  to  its  authority.  Thus,  it  was 
believed,  would  the  educational  interests  of 
theState  be  mostwiselyadministered  and  the 
partisan  element  be  most  largely  eliminated. 

The  mental  characteristics  and  educational 
experience  of  Ur.  Hoose  would  not  permit 
him  to  be  an  indifferent  spectator  of  this 
movement.  He  threw  all  his  energies  on 
the  side  of  administrative  reconstruction 
and  unification.  From  time  to  time  he  was 
appointed  by  important  educational  asso- 
ciations to  write  and  speak  upon  this  vital 
question.  His  utterances  were  clear  and 
unequivocal.  He  was  a  stranger  to  those 
prudential  maxims  that  govern  the  politi- 
cian. His  was  the  earnestness  and  indiffer- 
ence to  personal  consequences  that  charac- 
terize the  true  reformer. 

This  was  the  state  of  public  feeling  in  the 
beginning  of  1879.  The  New  York  State 
Association  of  School  Commissioners  and 
Superintendents,  at  their  meeting  in  Ithaca 
in  February,  1 879,  appointed  a  committee  of 
correspondence  on  the  revision  and  consol- 
idation of  the  two  systems  of  school  super- 
vision and  superintendence  in  the  State  of 
New  York.  Of  this  committee  Dr.  Hoose 
was  made  chairman.  The  report  was  given 
December  1st,  1879.  It  was  thorough  and 
exhaustive.  Facts  gathered  from  most  ex- 
tended correspondence  with  school  officers 
in  many  States,  from  wide  examination  of 
educational  supervision  in  the  various  States, 
from  the  convictions  of  the  best  men  in  New 
York  who  had  recommended  the  needed 
reform,  from  the  work  accom])lished  under 
other  systems  as  contrasted  with  the  mea- 
ner results  attained  under  the  New  York 
system,  especially  in  the  great  centennial 
exhibition  at  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and 
from  the  partisan  action  of  the  then  incum- 
bent of  the  office  of  superintendent  of 
public  instruction,  were  made  the  basis  of  a 
most  complete,  instructive  argument  result- 
insr  in  these  conclusions  :  — 


48o 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1.  That  the  legislature  of  the  State  of 
New  York  shall  revise  and  consolidate  all 
school  supervision  and  administration  under 
a  State  Board  of  Education. 

2.  That  this  board  of  education  shall  ap- 
point the  State  Superintendent  of  Public 
Instruction,  who  shall  serve  at  the  pleasure 
of  the  board,  and  be  subject  to  its  direction 
and  instruction. 

3.  That  these  changes  be  introduced  in 
the  organic  laws  of  the  State  at  the  earliest 
date  that  is  practicable. 

To  this  entire  reform  the  then  Superin- 
tendent of  Public  Instruction,  Neil  Gilmour, 
was  persistentl)-  opposed.  Both  in  pri\-ate 
conversation  and  in  public  utterances  and 
acts,  this  opposition  was  manifest.  This  is 
conspicuous  in  his  remarks  before  the  Na- 
tional Educational  Association  at  its  session 
in  Washington  in  Dec,  1877.  The  Dep- 
uty Superintendent,  also  the  editor  of  a 
daily  journal  at  Albany,  as  early  as  1874 
fiercely  attacked  gentlemen  of  purest  char- 
acter and  widest  educational  experience, 
who  were  laboring  to  effect  wise  legislation 
in  the  interests  of  reform.  His  conduct  and 
utterances  had  shown  him  to  be  in  thorough 
sympathy  with  the  superintendent  himself 

It  was  at  this  stage  of  public  discussion 
that  strong  efforts  were  made  to  discontinue 
the  Normal  School  system  in  the  State  of 
New  York.  The  friends  of  the  system  ral- 
lied and  succeeded  in  appointing  a  commit- 
tee to  investigate  and  report  to  the  legisla- 
ture. Upon  this  committee  was  placed 
Hon.  John  I.  Gilbert,  of  St.  Lawrence,  who 
was  very  zealous  in  defense  of  the  s)-stem, 
and  to  whom  more  than  to  iiny  other  one 
man  is  due  its  defense  and  salvation  from 
the  attacks  of  its  adversaries.  During  the 
legislative  session  of  1880  Mr.  Gilbert  was 
a  candidate  for  the  office  of  Superintendent 
of  Public  Instruction  as  against  Neil  Gil- 
mour, the  then  incumbent,  and  Dr.  Hoose 
advocated  the  election  of  Mr.  Gilbert. 


On  the  28th  day  of  the  following  June, 
(1880)  Mr.  Gilmour,  the  superintendent, 
wrote  Dr.  Hoose  demanding  his  peremptory 
resignation  of  the  principalship  of  the  Cort- 
land Normal  School.  The  suddenness  and 
unexpectedness  of  this  demand  was  start- 
ling to  everybody.  It  was  the  more  strange 
because  no  charges  had  been  made,  and  most 
positive  commendations  of  his  management 
had  been  repeatedh'  made.  Dr.  Hoose 
replied  to  the  superintendent,  declining  to 
resign,  and  the  local  board,  after  notification 
of  this  action  by  Mr.  Gilmour,  inquired  of 
him  whether,  and  what  charges  had  been 
preferred.  Thus  began  the  Cortland  Nor- 
mal .School  controversy,  that  has  become  so 
famous  and  that  was  watched  with  deep  in- 
terest by  the  educators  of  New  York. 

On  the  1 2th  day  of  July,  1880,  Mr.  Gil- 
mour wrote  to  the  local  board,  also  to  Dr. 
Hoose,  purporting  to  withdraw  his  approval 
of  the  further  emplo)-ment  of  Dr.  Hoose  in 
the  Normal  School.  To  this  communication 
the  lof  al  board  replied  by  stating  their  non- 
concurrence  with  the  superintendent  in  the 
removal  of  Dr.  Hoose,  and  expressing  their 
opinion  of  the  eminent  fitness  of  that  gen- 
tleman for  his  responsible  office.  The  issue 
betw'een  the  local  board  and  the  superin- 
tendent was  thus  distinctly  made :  the  for- 
mer holding  that  the  joint  concurrence  of 
the  superintendent  and  the  local  board  was 
necessary  to  the  removal  of  teachers  who 
had  already  been  appointed  ;  the  latter  hold- 
ing (and  this  was  the  oijinion  of  the  Attor- 
ney General)  that  in  the  superintendent  re- 
sided the  sole  power  of  removal. 

The  local  board  refused  to  recognize  the 
appointment  of  a  successor  to  Dr.  Hoose, 
holding  that  as  no  vacancy  had  occurred,  no 
new  principal  could  be  appointed.  Notice 
was  served  by  the  superintendent  upon  the 
other  teachers  of  the  .school,  ordering  them 
to  report  to  his  appointee.  Si.x  obeyed  this 
summons,  while  si.x  continued  in  the  school 


James  Harmon  Hoose. 


481 


under  the  direction  of  tlie  local  board.  The 
six  vacancies  were  supplied,  and  the  year 
opened  as  usual  under  the  principalship  of 
Dr.  Hoose.  Persistent  attempts  were  made 
by  Mr.  Gilmour  to  interfere  with  the  pros- 
perity of  the  school  by  withholding  the  cer- 
tificates of  the  appointments  of  students  that 
had  been  made  b\-  the  county  authorities, 
by  diverting  the  students  to  other  Normal 
Schools,  and  by  withdrawing  his  approval  of 
the  further  employment  of  the  six  teachers 
who  had  continued  under  the  local  board. 

On  the  7th  da)-  of  September,  1880,  the 
superintendent  peremptorily  ordered  the 
School  to  be  closed,  which  order  the  local 
board  declined  to  obe\',  since  at  that  time 
nearly  six  hundred  pupils,  many  of  whom 
were  from  distant  parts  of  the  State  were  in 
actual  attendance,  and  eminent  legal  coun- 
sel had  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  su- 
perintendent had  no  right  or  authority  to 
close  said  school.  At  the  same  time,  how- 
ever, a  proposition  was  maile  to  Mr.  Gil- 
mour to  submit  the  questions  of  difference 
to  the  Supreme  Court  and  get  its  early  judg- 
ment thereon.  This  reasonable  proposi- 
tion was  rejected  at  first,  then  accepted 
w'ith  threatening  conditions,  but  afterwards 
again  rejected  b}'  the  superintendent. 

On  the  7th  day  of  February,  1881,  the 
superintendent  caused  to  be  served  upon 
the  local  board  a  peremptory  writ  of  man- 
damus issued  by  the  Supreme  Court  to 
compel  said  board  immediately  to  terminate 
the  employment  of  Dr.  Hoose  and  recog- 
nize the  appointee  of  the  superintendent. 
This  mandamus  was  issued  b)'  the  Court 
solely  on  the  ground  that  the  superintendent 
had  withdrawn  his  approval  of  said  Hoose  ; 
the  merits  of  the  case  were  in  no  sense  can- 
vassed. Dr.  Hoose  immediately  retired 
from  the  principalship  under  protest,  not 
resigning  but  only  waiting  the  final  deci- 
sions of  the  courts.  For  some  months  he  was 
engaged   as   superintendent   of  the    public 


schools  at  Binghamton,  where  his  efficient 
services  were  greatly  prized. 

On  the  18th  day  of  April,  1882,  the 
Court  of  Appeals  by  decision  set  aside  the 
order  of  the  Supreme  Court  that  had 
granteil  the  mandamus,  and  declared  Dr. 
Hoose  the  legal  principal  of  said  Normal 
School,  which  declaration  was  duly  filed 
April  26th,  1882.  Immediately  after  this 
decision  had  been  rendered  Dr.  Hoose  re- 
sumed his  duties  as  principal  to  the  great 
gratification  of  the  educators  of  the  State. 
This  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeals  was 
made  the  ground  of  a  claim  against  the 
State  for  the  amount  of  salaries  due  Dr. 
Hoose  and  the  teachers  w  ho  had  acted  with 
him  in  the  interval  between  their  ejection 
Feb.  7th,  1 88 1,  and  their  restoration  April 
26th,  1 88 1.  On  May  3d,  1884,  the  Board 
of  Claims,  after  careful  review  of  the  case, 
awarded  the  salaries,  amounting  to  $10,- 
217.81,  and  on  the  24th  day  of  May,  1884, 
Gov.  Cleveland  signed  the  bill  making  ap- 
propriation to  pay  the  award  of  the  Board 
of  Claims.  Thus  ended  this  famous  con- 
troversy. 

Amid  it  all  Dr.  Hoose  maintained  a  dig- 
nity and  quietude  truly  admirable.  The  per- 
sistence of  the  attack  upon  him  (for  this  was 
the  real  animus  of  the  entire  movement) 
was  only  equaled  by  the  coolness  and  earn- 
estness of  the  defense.  At  no  stage  of  the 
controversy  did  he  loose  courage ;  for  he 
firmly  believed  that  the  law  of  the  Empire 
State  had  not  been  so  loosely  framed  as  to 
permit  the  interests  of  great  institutions  of 
her  own  founding  to  be  imperiled  by  the 
caprice  or  the  animosity  of  a  single  officer. 

To  him  and  to  the  local  board  do  all  the 
teachers  of  the  State  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude. 
The  decisions  resulting  from  the  contro- 
versy have  given  greater  dignity  to  the 
teacher's  profession,  and  have  done  away 
with  a  craven  spirit  of  fear  that  must  oth- 
erwise have  taken  possession  of  all  teachers 


482 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


in  the  public  schools.  Those  decisions  have 
also  showed  that  the  State  will  carefully 
guard  the  reputation  and  interests  of  its 
faithful  school  servants,  and  will  curb  the 
hasty  action  of  nervous  or  jealous  officials, 
who  would  attempt  to  curb  generous  and 
manly  discussion  of  public  questions. 


THE  FREER  FAMILY.  The  imme- 
diate ancestors  of  this  prominent  Cort- 
land county  family  was  John  A.  Freer,  who, 
with  liis  wife,  Racliacl  De  Puy  Freer,  daugh- 
ter of  Joseph  and  Mary  Ue  Puy,  of  Roch- 
ester, Ulster  couuty,  N.  Y.,  with  his  family 
of  three  children,  started  on  the  1st  day  of 
November,  1802,  for  Homer  (then  in  On- 
ondaga county),  now  Cortland  county,  N.  Y. 
The  family  came  by  the  way  of  Kingston, 
Catskill,  Coxsackie,  Albanj',  Schenectady. 
Kaghnawaga,  Utica,  Wampsville,  Manlius, 
Pompey  Hill  (then  called  Butler  Hill).  One 
team  was  driven  by  the  hired  man,  and  the 
other  by  Joseph  De  Puy,  jr.,  a  brother  of 
Mrs.  Freer.  There  were  also  in  this  com- 
pany, Maria  De  Puy,  a  sister  of  Mrs.  Freer, 
and  a  hired  man  named  Jacobus  Clearwater. 
The  night  John  A.  Freer  reached  Butler 
Hill,  he  bought  a  cow  for  twenty  dollars. 
Upon  reaching  the  north  part  of  Homer 
they  stayed  at  the  house  of  Peter  Vander- 
lyne;  this  was  on  Saturday  night,  and  the 
next  day  they  came  to  the  now  village  of 
Cortland  (then  consisting  of  only  one  house), 
where  they  attended  meeting  under  the 
preaching  of  Rev.  Nathan  Darrow.  In  the 
afternoon  of  the  same  day  they  reached 
their  destination  and  located  on  the  south- 
cast  corner  of  lot  74.  This  land  he  had 
previously  purchased,  but  to  his  great  dis- 
appointment found  no  house  in  which  to 
take  shelter.  This  was  on  the  13th  day  of 
November.  He  had  been  on  the  road  thir- 
teen days.  The  snow  on  the  morning  of  their 
arrival  was  eight  inches  deep,  and  with  no 
house   for    the   family  nor   shelter   for   the 


teams  the  outlook  was  indeed  cold  and 
gloomy.  It  was  the  wish  of  Mrs.  Freer, 
that  the  tents  should  be  taken  from  the 
wagon  and  set  up  by  the  side  of  a  large 
hollow  stump,  but  it  was  finally  decided 
that  they  would  stop  at  the  house  of  Na- 
thaniel Knapp,  whose  family  consisted  only 
of  himself,  wife  and  child  ;  but  the  cabin 
was  only  18  by  20  feet  —  certainly  not  a 
very  commodious  one  —  but  here  they 
found  shelter  until  a  log  house  could  be 
built ;  this,  however,  was  commenced  the 
very  next  day.  But  the  house  was  without 
a  door,  had  few  boards  overhead,  no  win- 
dows save  holes  in  the  sides  of  the  cabin 
covered  with  blankets,  and  lacked  many 
other  conveniences  we  would  now  consider 
as  indispensable  to  housekeeping. 

The  neighbors  at  this  time  were  the 
Messrs.  Lee,  Budd,  Chase,  Morse,  Scott, 
and  the  two  Mr.  Knapps.  Upon  the 
morning  after  the  removal  into  the  new 
quarters,  Anthony  Freer  was  standing 
about  two  rods  from  the  door  place,  when 
an  animal  passed  by.  He  ran  to  tell  his 
mother  that  a  large  black  hog  was  near  the 
house,  but  the  tracks  of  the  animal  proved 
it  to  be  a  bear,  which  had  passed  within 
two  rods  of  the  boy. 

John  A.  Freer  and  his  hired  man  next 
built  a  hovel  of  logs  and  covered  it  with 
poles  and  brush,  large  enough  to  shelter  the 
teams  and  the  cow.  After  this  the}-  con-^ 
structed  a  fire  hearth  in  the  cabin  to  burn 
wood,  and  after  making  some  other  simple 
provisions  for  the  further  comfort  of  the 
family,  Mr.  P'reer  started  out  to  return  to 
his  former  home  to  get  his  sleigh  and  another 
load  of  goods.  He  started  on  Christmas 
day,  1802,  and  took  his  hired  man  with 
him,  intending  to  be  gone  but  three  weeks, 
going  by  the  way  of  Oxford.  When  he 
reached  Unadilla  the  snow  had  melted  off 
the  ground  antl  he  was  forced  to»leavc  his 
small    wood    sled    and     go    on    horseback. 


The  Frei:r  F"amily. 


483 


Upon  reaching  his  destination  he  had  to 
wait  until  tlic  last  week  in  February  before 
he  could  start  on  his  return,  and  reached 
home  on  the  3d  of  March  following. 
This  long  absence  of  the  father,  without 
word  of  any  kind,  naturally  caused  much 
uneasiness  on  the  part  of  the  wife,  and 
was  to  her  a  trying  time,  with  no  earthly 
protector  save  a  faithful  dog  and  the  kind 
assistance  of  the  neighbors,  and  from  the 
Lee  family  especiall3^  She  spent  these 
three  months  almost  in  solitude,  save  the 
howling  of  wolves  at  night  and  the  storm 
and  wind  by  day,  around  the  newly  con- 
structed log  house  ;  yet  her  faith  and  cour- 
age was  equal  to  the  emergency.  All  kinds 
of  conjectures  had  been  indulged  in  as  to 
what  had  become  of  the  father.  With  no 
mails,  and  no  post-office  nearer  tlian  Onon- 
daga, it  seemed  an  impossibility  for  her  to 
obtain  news  ^\■ithout  going  in  search  of  it  her- 
self with  three  small  children,  the  oldest  but 
seven  j'cars  of  age.  She  began  to  make 
preparations  to  return  in  quest  of  her  hus- 
band. Difficulties,  however,  (and  the  main 
one  was  in  selling  her  cow  —  the  difference 
of  two  dollars  in  the  price  decided  her  to 
stay),  prevented  the  consummation  of  her 
plans,  and  before  the  day  of  her  departure 
was  at  hand  she  was  joyfully  surprised  by 
the  return  of  her  husband. 

The  family  of  John  A.  Freer  and  wife 
consisted  often  children,  two  of  whom  died 
in  infancy.  The  remaining  eight  were 
named  as  follows,  Maria,  Anthony,  Jane 
Low,  Joseph  De  Puy,  Catherine  R.,  John 
James,  Sarah  R.  and  Stephen  Decatur. 
Maria,  the  eldest,  was  married  to  Lj'man 
Mailer)-  in  1817,  and  removed  to  Seneca 
county,  where  she  died  in  1845,  leaving  two 
children;  the  youngest,  Elias  De  Puy  Mal- 
lery,  now  lives  in  Cortland  village.  An- 
thony, a  sketch  of  whose  life  is  given  herein. 
Jane  Low  died  in  1883.  Joseph  De  Puy, 
who  was   atlmitted    to    practice   at  law   in 


1834,  as  attorney  and  solicitor  in  Chancery 
and  as  counselor  in  the  Supreme  Court  in 
1838,  died  in  1850.  Catherine  R.,  who  still 
owns  property  and  resides  there.  John 
James,  the  fifth  son,  spent  his  life  in  Cort- 
land county  as  a  farmer.  He  was  a  man 
of  strong  constitution,  excellent  habits  and 
successfully  accomplished  whatever  he  un- 
dertook. He  was  twice  married,  his  first 
wife  being  Alice  Whitney,  who  died  leav- 
ing a  family  of  five  boys;  four  now  are  liv- 
ing. He  afterward  married  a  Mrs.  Tarble, 
of  Freetown,  by  whom  he  had  four  chil- 
dren, three  of  whom  survive  him.  He  died 
in  October,  1 884.  Sarah  R. ,  widow  of  James 
W.  Sturtevant,  whose  biography  appears 
in  this  work,  still  resides  in  Cortland. 

John  A.  F"reer  and  wife  were  both  active 
members  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and 
were  among  the  original  members  on  form- 
ing the  first  Presbyterian  Church  and  So- 
ciety, which  consisted  of  only  seven  mem- 
bers on  its  organization. 

John  A.  Freer  died  in  1826,  and  Rachel 
Freer  died  in  1852. 

Anthoxv  Freer  was  the  second  child 
of  John  A.  P^rccr  and  Rachael  De  Puy 
Freer  and  was  born  August  21st,  1797. 
His  parentage  on  both  sides  can  be  traced 
back  to  the  Huguenots,  who  came  to  this 
country  about  the  year  16S0,  on  account  of 
religious  persecutions. 

Anthony  Freer  spent  his  early  life  on  his 
father's  farm  on  lot  74,  about  one  mile 
south  of  the  village  of  Cortland.  He  was 
the  oldest  of  the  family  of  boys,  and  re- 
ceived his  education  from  the  limited  schools 
then  afforded  in  a  newly  settled  country. 
While  a  young  man  and  years  before  his 
father's  death  (which  occurred  in  1826)  he 
was  noted  as  a  man  of  strong  mind,  and  of 
positive  character,  and  possessed  of  a  re- 
markably retentive  memory.  He  was  fre- 
quently employed  by  drovers  of  hogs,  cat- 
tle and  horses,  and  made  a  number  of  trips 


484 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


to  New  York,  Hartford,  Connecticut  and 
other  routes  cast,  and  it  has  been  said  he 
could  remember  every  mile  board  on  the  old 
Newburg  and  Catskill  turnpikes  after  one  of 
his  trips.  His  career  as  a  farmer  was  con- 
tinued ver)' successful!}-  until  1837,  at  which 
time  he  engaged  in  the  fountlry  business  in 
Cortland  village. 

He  was  active  and  energetic  in  the  va- 
rious callings  of  life.  He  was  a  strong  sup- 
porter of  common  schools  and  of  the  various 
interests  connected  with  the  growth  of  the 
village.  He  was  also  active  in  politics  and 
a  warm  supporter  of  the  Democratic  party. 
In  1828  he  was  one  of  the  first  in  securing 
a  division  of  the  town  of  Homer,  going  to 
Albany  as  a  lobby  member  for  this  purpose. 
He  held  the  offices  of  county  treasurer  and 
superintendent  of  the  poor  at  various  times 
and  was  surrogate  of  the  county  from  1836 
to  1840,  and  from  1844  to  1847,  when  the 
new  constitution  went  into  effect  requiring 
the  office  of  surrogate  and  county  judge  to 
be  consolidated  and  to  be  held  by  a  prac- 
ticing lawyer.  He  was  an  active  member 
of  the  county  agricultural  society  from  its 
organization  and  in  1852  was  elected  its 
president.  His  associates  in  the  political 
field  were  such  men  as  Wm.  Mallery,  John 
Gillctt,  General  Hathaway,  Oliver  King- 
man, William  Bartlett,  and  men  of  that 
stamp,  all  of  whom  were  always  present  at 
the  preliminary  meetings  and  wise  in  their 
counsels. 

His  motto  and  principle  was  always  to  do 
right,  and  never  would  consent  to  yield  his 
principles  of  right  and  justice  for  expedi- 
ency or  policy  under  any  circumstances 
whatever. 

Mr.  Freer  was  also  an  active  member 
of  the  Presbyterian  church  of  Cortland  vil- 
lage, and  served  efficiently  as  trustee  of  this 
society  for  many  years.  He  died  September 
1 2th,  1 87 1.  He  was  a  bachelor  and  spent 
sixty-nine  years  of  his  earthi}'  pilgrimage 


in  this  place.  As  stated  by  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Howe  in  his  funeral  discourse:  "He  has 
been  in  our  midst  watching  as  he  was  able  to 
do  the  growth  and  development  of  the  place 
through  all  the  successive  stages  of  its  pro- 
gress to  the  attainment  of  its  present  pros- 
perity and  beauty  ;  with  whose  history  he 
has  been  identified  and  to  whose  prosperity 
we  may  well  believe  he  has  in  no  small  de- 
gree contributed." 

He  also  bears  testimony  to  his  honesty  and 
integrity  in  the  following  words:  "After- 
wards he  was  with  his  brother  (Stephen  D. 
Freer),  for  a  term  of  years,  engaged  largely 
and  prosperously  in  business,  building  up 
and  carrying  forward  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant manufacturing  enterprises  of  the 
place,  in  the  conduct  of  which,  and  in  all 
his  business  transactions,  he  bears  an  un- 
blemished reputation  for  incorruptible  in- 
tegrity and  honesty.  That  he  was  a  truly 
honest  man  is  the  verdict  of  all,  from  which 
perhaps  no  dissent  was  ever  uttered." 

Joseph  De  Puy  Freer.  —  At  the  open- 
ing of  the  Cortland  County  Circuit,  June 
13th,  1850,  Horatio  Ballard,  in  a  few  ap- 
propriate remarks,  announced  the  death  of 
Joseph  De  Puy  Freer, —  formerly,  and  till 
his  death,  a  member  of  the  bar  of  the 
county,  and  recommended  a  meeting  of  the 
lawyers  at  the  court-house  that  day  for  the 
purpose  of  paying  a  proper  respect  to  the 
memory  of  the  deceased.  In  pursuance  of 
this  recommendation,  a  meeting  was  held 
at  the  appointed  time  when  it  was 

Resolved,  That  we  have  received  with  deep 
regret  information  of  the  death  of  Joseph  De 
Puy  Freer,  Esq.,  for  several  years  a  member  of 
the  bar  of  Cortland  county. 

Resolved,  That  the  amiable  deportment, 
known  firmness  of  character,  unblemished  integ- 
rity, and  the  legal  attainments  of  the  deceased, 
had  jusdy  acquired  for  him  the  regard  and  re- 
spect of  the  community  and  more  especially  of 
the  profession  who  was  most  intimately  associa- 
ted with  him,  and  insures  that  his  name  and 
character  will  long  be  remembered  and  respected. 


The  Freer  Family. 


485 


Resolved,  That  as  a  mark  of  respect  for  the 
memory  of  the  deceased,  wc  will  wear  the  usual 
badge  of  mourning  for  thirty  days. 

Resolved,  That  wc  sympathize  with  the  rela- 
tives of  the  deceased  in  the  loss  which  they  have 
sustained,  and  that  a  copy  of  these  resolutions 
be  communicated  to  them." 

These  resolutions  were  also  published  in 
the  newspapers  and  the  members  of  the  bar 
also  attended  the  funeral  in  a  body.  Henry 
Stephens  was  chairman  of  the  meeting  and 
Lewis  Kingsley-  was  secretary. 

This  expression  of  his  professional  asso- 
ciates is,  perhaps,  the  most  deserved  and 
just  tribute  that  we  can  here  pay  to  the 
memory  of  Joseph  De  Puy  Freer.  His  loss 
to  the  village  was  looked  upon  by  the  com- 
munity as  one  that  could  scarcely  be  re- 
paired. Had  he  lived  he  would,  without  a 
doubt,  have  attained  an  eminent  position 
before  the  public  and  won  a  still  larger  cir- 
cle of  friends. 

Stephen  Decatur  Freer,  the  young- 
est of  the  ten  children,  was  born  in  181  5, 
and  has  passed  his  already  long  life  in  Cort- 
land. His  younger  days  were  spent  on  his 
father's  farm.  When  fourteen  years  of  age  he 
began  attendance  at  the  village  school,  and 
attended  for  one  year  the  high  school  kept 
there  by  Orlin  Oatnam,  on  the  plan  of  the 
Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  of  Troy. 
As  an  indication  of  his  proficiency  in  study, 
it  is  related  that  he  was  called  on  while  a  boy 
in  school  at  fourteen,  by  Samuel  Hotchkiss, 
then  county  clerk,  to  make  a  map  of  the 
then  town  of  Homer,  locating  in  full  the  lot 
boundaries,  roads,  streams,  business  points, 
etc.  This  map  was  made  and  was  used  in 
procuring  the  subsequent  di\isi(in  of  the 
town. 

At  the  age  of  seventeen  Mr.  l'"rccr  en- 
tered the  postoffice,  then  kept  by  Canfield 
Marsh,  as  a  clerk  and  apprentice  at  the  hat 
finishing  trade.  He  did  not  remain  there 
long,  however,  and  in  1834  entered  Gene- 
ral Randall's  store  on  the  southwest  corner 


of  Main  and  Tompkins  streets,  as  a  clerk. 
In  1837  he  went  into  the  employ  of  his 
brother,  Anthony,  in  the  foundry  business, 
and  in  1838  the  firm  of  A.  &  S.  D.  Freer 
was  formed.  They  conducted  tiie  foundry 
and  a  large  hardware  store  until  1861,  when 
they  sold  their  goods  to  Chamberlain  & 
Benton.  In  the  mean  time  he  had  engaged 
in  the  coal  trade,  upon  the  opening  of 
the  S.,  B.  &  N.  Y.  railroad,  in  1854,  and 
also  conducted  that  business  until  1865. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Sears, 
Freer  &  Cottrell,  organized  in  1864,  who 
manufactured  flax-seed  oil  in  the  old  paper- 
mill  for  a  few  years ;  and  entered  the  coal 
business  again,  after  the  failure  of  this  in- 
dustry to  prove  a  success,  in  1873.  His 
last  venture  proved  a  decided  success,  and 
in  1874  he  purchased  the  large  frame  build- 
ing on  the  corner  of  Railroad  street  and  the 
S.  B.  &  N.  Y.  railroad,  where  he  success- 
fully continued  in  this  business  until  Au- 
gust, 1883,  when  he  removed  to  the  new 
coal  buildings  and  offices  just  completed, 
opposite  the  Cortland  Wagon  Company's 
works.  The  buildings  arc  the  finest  in  this 
section,  the  coal  pocket  structure  being  one 
hundred  and  eighty-eight  feet  in  length  and 
forty-eight  feet  in  height,  with  a  capacity 
for  dumping  fifteen  cars  at  one  time.  It 
is  supplied  with  all  the  improvements  in 
screens,  sie\es,  etc.,  for  preparing  the  coal 
without  labor  while  loading  on  wagons,  and 
is  a  model  of  its  kind. 

Mr.  Freer  was  married  in  1841  to  Miss 
Sarah  M.  De  Puy,  of  Ulster  county,  N.  Y. 
She  was  a  daughter  of  Joseph  De  Puy,  jr. 
They  have  four  children. 

Mr.  Freer  has  been  a  resident  of  Cort- 
land for  three-score  and  ten  years  and 
has  been  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church  for  a  long  period.  I  Ic  was  the  chief 
officer  of  the  County  Agricultural  Society, 
and  it  was  mainl)-  through  his  influence 
that  the  fair   grounds  were  purchased  and 


486 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


the  temporary  buildings  erected  in  1858. 
In  1S62  he  was  again  elected  chief  officer, 
when  he  successfully  planned  and  carried 
into  effect  the  erection  of  the  buildings  now 
on  the  ground,  and  was  re-elected  in  1863. 
I  !c  has  always  been  noted  for  his  energy  and 
activity  "in  all  things  that  have  demanded 
his  attention.  It  has  been  aptly  said  that 
with  him,  "  The  best  is  never  too  good." 
This  may  account,  in  a  measure,  for  the  rep- 
utation he  has  always  had,  of  keeping  the 
best  of  goods  in  his  store,  while  his  charac- 
ter for  integrity  secured  a  rapid  extension 
of  business.  When  he  left  the  foundry  and 
hardware  business  in  i86i,»he  had  2,200 
names  on  his  books,  and  unsettled  accounts 
of  about  $1  1,000.  Of  this  amount  he  has 
collected  but  about  $l,000. 


AZOR  LEROY  COLE  is  a  grandson  of 
General  Azor  Cole,  a  Revolutionary 
soldier  and  pioneer  settler  of  South  Cortland. 
He  came  from  Albany  to  Cortland  on  horse- 
back in  (|uest  of  what  was  to  be  his  future 
home.  This  journey  was  made  at  a  time 
when  there  were  but  three  houses  in  the  vil- 
lage ;  the  old  pioneer's  last  da\-'s  ritle  was 
fifty  miles,  and  upon  reaching  the  place  he 
made  the  statement  that  he  was  seventy- 
five  years  old  and  could  "throw  any  man 
in  the  county,  square  hold." 

1  lis  wife  had  died  before  he  started  for  his 
new  home.  She  had  experienced  the  hor- 
rors of  Indian  warfare  during  the  Revolu- 
tionary struggle  ;  at  one  time  she  was  driven 
from  her  home  by  the  savages  and  slept  dur- 
ing the  severe  blast  of  a  wintry  night  with 
her  two  sons  in  a  hole  she  had  dug  under 
the  side  of  a  great  log  in  the  forest.  These 
two  sons  were  John,  the  father  of  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch,  and  Azor,  both  of  whom 
came  with  their  father  to  this  place  and  set- 
tled on  the  farm  now  owned  in  part  by  R. 
B.  Smith. 

General  Azor  Cole  was  a  remarkabl)'  well 


preserved  man,  straight  as  a  reed,  and  lived 
to  be  ninety- nine  years  and  nine  months 
old.  He  was  the  first  man,  in  this  section 
at  least,  to  discover  the  process  of  making 
quicklime.  The  opportunity  was  afforded 
him  by  an  accident.  They  had  fallen  some 
heavy  timber  into  a  small  pond  and  upon  its 
being  "snaked"  out  to  be  burned,  drew 
forth  upon  it  some  of  the  marl  which  had 
been  deposited  at  the  bott(.)m  of  the  pond. 
When  the  timber  was  burned  it  was  noticed 
by  him  that  the  marl  was  changed  to  quick- 
lime, and  thereafter  a  kiln  was  built  and  the 
business  followed  some  time  by  Mr.  Cole 
and  his  sons. 

John  Cole,  son  of  Azor,  married  for  his 
first  wife  Joanna  Edgecomb,  and  for  his 
second  wife  Betsy  McNish.  The)'  reared  a 
large  family  of  children,  si.x  of  whom  are 
still  living,  two  only — Harrison  De  Loss 
and  A.  Leroy — residing  in  the  count)-. 

John  Cole  was  in  the  War  of  18 12,  him- 
self and  his  horses  having  been  impressed 
into  the  service  for  the  transportation  of 
army  supplies.  He  was  a  mason  by  trade 
and  li\'ed  in  South  Cortland  until  he  went 
to  Penns)'lvania,  where  he  died  in  1850  at 
the  age  of  eighty-eight  years. 

Azor  Leroy  Cole  was  born  in  South  Cort- 
land Aug.  13th,  1828.  Here  he  spent  his 
early  life,  with  limited  school  advantages, 
and  working  most  of  the  time  for  Swain  & 
Crandall,  in  the  manufacture  of  lime.  In 
1855  he  worked  one  year  at  Pokeville  for 
Palmer  &  Gleason  in  a  door  and  sash  fac- 
tory. He  then  came  to  Cortland  village  and 
for  three  years  was  baggageman  at  the  Syra- 
cuse &  Binghamton  railroad  station.  During 
the  following  year  he  was  clerk  for  Stephen 
D.  Freer  in  his  hardware  stoor,  at  the  close 
of  which  term  his  partnership  was  formed 
with  G.  N.  Copeland  and  James  A.  Scher- 
merhorn  under  the  firm  name  of  Copeland 
&  Co. ;  this  firm  carried  on  the  grocery 
trade  successfully  for  si.x  years.     ^Ir.  Cole 


AzoR  Leroy  Cole.  —  Dr.  Caleb  Green. 


487 


then  removed  to  his  present  residence 
(1866)  and  has  since  that  time  managed  the 
large  real  estate  interests  of  William  R. 
Randall. 

Mr.  Cole  was  elected  trustee  of  the  village 
in  1 86 1,  which  office  he  has  held  three 
terms.  He  is  a  trustee  of  the  Savings 
Bank,  Cortland,  and  is  also  one  of  the 
trustees  of  the  Cortland  Rural  Cemetery ; 
he  is  president  of  the  Cortland  County  Bi- 
ble Society.  He  became  a  member  of  the  M. 
E.  Church  in  1854  and  has  been  a  trustee 
and  class-leader  ever  since.  He  has  also 
filled  the  position  of  usher  for  twenty-eight 
years  and  has  been  superintendent  of  the 
Sabbath-school  for  many  years.  His  work 
in  the  church  has  been  of  a  positive  and  im- 
portant character,  especially  in  relation  to 
the  Sabbath-schools;  and  his  labors  have  also 
been  effective  in  building  up  country  Sabbath 
schools  and  in  reclaiming  the  misguided  and 
ill-spent  time  of  young  men.  His  wife  is 
also  an  earnest  Christian  worker  and  a  wo- 
man of  most  estimable  qualities,  whose  ac- 
quaintanceship and  esteem  are  highly  prized 
by  all  who  know  her.  Her  name  was  Pa- 
melia  C.  Richardson,  daughter  of  James 
Richardson,  who  came  from  Broome  county 
and  entered  the  employ  of  Mr.  Randall, 
under  whose  tuition  Mrs.  Cole  was  reared. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cole  were  married  March  8th, 
1854,  and  have  had  two  children  —  George 
L.,  deceased,  and  William  Randall  Cole,  a 
promising  lad  of  fifteen  years. 


DR.  CALEB  GREEN  was  born  in  La 
Fayette,  Onondaga  county,  N.  Y.,  No- 
vember 14th,  1 8 19.  On  the  paternal  side  he 
was  of  English  extraction  ;  on  the  maternal, 
Scotch.  He  is  of  patriotic  blood,  his  grand- 
fathers having  both  fought  in  the  War  of  the 
Revolution,  —  one  of  them  beginning  with 
the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill  and  the  siege  of 
Boston,  was  in  the  battles  of  Bennington, 
Saratoga,  White   Plains,  and  other  engage- 


ments of  that  historic  struggle.  His  father 
was  a  soldier  of  the  war  of  1812. 

From  a  volume  published  in  Philadelphia 
in  1877,  entitled  The  Physicians  and  Sicr- 
gcons  of  the  United  States,  w-e  gather  some 
of  the  following  facts  in  Dr.  Green's  his- 
tory :  Being  the  son  of  a  farmer,  he  had  the 
usual  experiences  of  a  farmer's  boy  —  hard 
work  and  a  plenty  of  it,  and  a  training  in 
the  habits  of  frugality  and  rigid  economy. 

His  early  education  was  obtained  in  the 
"  freeman's  college  "  —  the  common  school. 
He  also  attended  the  La  Fayette  High 
School,  and  afterwards  the  old  Cortland 
Academy  in  its  palmy  days,  under  the  man- 
agement of  that  prince  of  educators,  the 
late  Dr.  Samuel  B.  Woolworth. 

In  the  winter  of  1840-41,  while  teaching 
a  select  school  in  his  native  village,  he  com- 
menced the  study  of  medicine,  which  he 
afterwards  pursued  in  the  office  and  under 
the  instruction  of  Dr.  Frank  H.  Hamilton, 
at  that  time  Professor  of  Surgery  in  Geneva 
Medical  College.  He  attended  three  courses 
of  lectures  in  that  college,  acting,  a  portion 
of  the  time,  as  prosector  to  the  professor  of 
surgery.  He  graduated,  receiving  his  de- 
gree of  Doctor  of  Medicine,  January  23d, 

1844. 

In  March,  1844,  he  entered  on  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession  in  Homer,  where  he 
has  since  remained. 

He  took  an  active  part  in  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Medical  Association  of  Southern 
Central  New  York  in  1847,  and  issued  the 
circular  as  chairman  of  the  committee  ap- 
pointed by  the  County  Medical  Society  to 
call  a  convention  for  the  purpose  of  such 
organization.  From  1849  to  1855  he  was  its 
Recording  Secretary,  and  edited  its  Trans- 
actions. In  1S48,  at  the  request  of  the 
president  of  the  association,  ho  read  a  report 
on  Vital  Statistics,  with  special  reference  to 
the  climatic  and  hygienic  conditions  of  tlie 
valley   of  the   Tioughnioga.      In    1849,   as 


488 


HisTORV  OF  Cortland  County. 


chairman  of  the  committee  appointed  to  re- 
port on  "The  (juaHfications  requisite  for 
commencing  the  study  of  medicine,"  he 
presented  one  of  the  earliest  essays  pub- 
h'shed  in  this  coimtry  on  a  subject  which 
was  then  beginning  to  interest  and  stimu- 
late the  medical  profession.  This  paper 
was  published  in  the  Transactions  and  re- 
viewed, with  cnmnicndations,  in  some  of  the 
journals. 

As  an  undergraduate,  in  1843,  he  had 
publisheil  in  tlie  Boston  Medical  and  Sur- 
gical Journal  an  essay  on  "  Epidemic  In- 
fluenzas, with  special  reference  to  the  Epi- 
demic of  1843,"  which  he  had  clinically 
studied. 

In  the  same  journal,  in  1845,  he  pub- 
lished his  thesis  "On  the  Functions  of  the 
Oblique  Muscles  of  the  Eye,"  based  on  orig- 
inal investigations. 

He  became  a  member  of  the  Cortland 
County  Medical  Society  in  1845,  and  was 
elected  its  president  in  1852.  The  subject 
of  his  annual  address  in  1853  was  "The 
Physician  a  NaturaHst,"  and  by  vote  of 
the  society  a  copy  of  the  address  was  com- 
municated to  the  State  Medical  Society,  and 
by  it  published  in  its  Transactions  for  1853. 
In  1S54  he  was  elected  delegate  to  the 
State  Medical  Society  for  four  years,  and  in 
1858  was  elected  a  permanent  member  of 
that  society.  In  1862  he  was  again  elected 
president  of  the  Count}-  Medical  Society. 
He  became  a  member  of  the  American 
Medical  Association  in  1853.  In  i860, 
1870  and  1880  he  w\as  a  delegate  from  the 
New  York  State  Medical  Society  to  the 
National  Convention  for  Re\  ising  the  United 
States  I'harmacopa-ia  —  acon\'ention  which 
meets  dccenniall}-  in  Washington,  D.  C^ 
In  1881-82  he  was  president  of  the  Central 
New  York  Medical  Association.  At  the 
organization  of  the  New  York  State  Med- 
icah  Association,  in  February,  1884,  he  was 
elected  its  Recording  Secretary.      In  1870, 


on  the  retirement  of  the  late  venerable  Dr. 
George  VV.  Bradford  as  Secretary  of  the 
County  Medical  Society,  an  ofifice  in  which 
he  had  most  efficiently  served  the  society  for 
forty- five  years  consecutively,  Dr.  Green 
was  chosen  as  his  successor,  a  position 
which  he  has  held  for  the  last  fourteen 
years. 

In  1855  he  was  appointed  to  the  profes- 
sorship of  Materia  Medica  and  General 
Pathology  in  Geneva  Medical  College.  In 
1858  there  was  a  re-classification  of  the  de- 
partments in  the  college,  and  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  the  chair  of  Physiology  and  Pa- 
thology. In  March,  1862,  he  resigned  this 
professorship,  but  was  afterward  offered  the 
chair  of  Obstetrics,  but  declined.  In  1872, 
on  the  organization  of  the  medical  depart- 
ment of  Syracuse  University,  he  was  elected 
to  the  chair  of  Obstetrics  and  Diseases  of 
Women  and  Children,  but  did  not  accept  it, 
as  he  preferred  to  devote  himself  entirely  to 
the  practice  of  his  profession. 

Some  years  ago  Madison  University  con- 
ferred on  him  the  honorary  degree  of  Mas- 
ter of  Arts. 

Dr.  Green  has  devoted  some  attention  to 
various  departments  of  natural  science,  as 
leisure  has  permitted,  never  allowing  the 
fascinations  of  their  pursuit  to  encroach  on 
his  strictl}-  professional  duties.  In  this  mat- 
ter he  has  alwaj's  sacrificed  his  tastes  and 
inclinations  to  the  obligations  of  his  calling, 
which  have  daily  pressed  upon  him.  Hence 
he  has  never  taken  time  for  original  investi- 
gations. He  has,  however,  kept  his  eyes 
attentively  open  to  the  book  of  nature, 
wherever  its  pages  ha\e  [Presented  them- 
selves, and  whatever  accumulations,  either 
in  the  literature  or  the  field  work  of  natural 
history,  have  been  acquired,  are  the  result 
of  patient  industry  during  the  few  leisure 
moments  which  have  occasionally  come  to 
him. 

Many  years  ago  he  was  elected  an   hon- 


Dr.  Caleb  Green.  —  Samuel  G.  Hatiiewav. 


489 


orary  member  of  the  Buffalo  Natural  His- 
tory Society.  Ill  1879  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  American  Association  for  the 
Advancement  of  Science,  and  in  1882  he 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  American  So- 
ciety of  Microscopists.  He  is  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Central  New  York  Microscopical 
Club. 

For  about  twenty  years  he  has  been  much 
of  the  time  connected  with  the  school 
boards,  —  first  as  a  trustee  of  Cortland 
Academy,  and  for  the  last  few  years  as  a 
member  of  the  board  of  education  of  the 
Homer  Academy  and  Union  School. 

In  addition  to  an  ample  library,  riv.h  not 
only  in  the  old  medical  classics,  for  which 
he  has  a  penchant,  but  also  in  the  latest 
modern  treatises,  with  transactions  of  med- 
ical societies,  and  other  serials,  he  provides 
his  office  with  several  of  the  leading  med- 
ical and  scientific  journals,  thus  keeping 
himself  posted  in  whatever  is  new  of  prac- 
tical interest  in  his  profession  as  well  as  in 
general  science. 

On  the  8th  of  September,  1845,  Dr.  Green 
was  married  to  Miss  Roxanna  R.  Parsons, 
of  Northampton,  Mass.,  for  several  years  a 
teacher  under  Mary  Lyon  in  Mt.  Holyoke 
Female  Seminary.  They  have  had  three 
children.  The  first  dying  in  infincy,  the 
youngest,  Frederick  Hyde  Green,  dying  at 
the  age  of  five  years  and  six  months.  The 
second  son,  Dr.  Frank  Hamilton  Green, 
graduated  at  the  College  of  Medicine  of 
Syracuse  University  in  June,  1882. 

Dr.  Green,  after  forty  years  of  accumu- 
lated experience  and  hard  work,  is  still,  day 
and  night,  pursuing  the  active  duties  of  his 
profession. 


MAJ.-GEN.    SAMUEL   G.   HATHE- 
WAY.i  The  death  of  one  of  the  found- 
ers of  our  county,  who,  for  more  than  half 

1  From    the    Memorial,  ]iubli.she(l   by   the   late    Hon. 
Henry  S.    Raiulall,   in    1867. 


a  century,  took  a  leading  part  in  its  affairs 
—  of  a  man  whose  life  was  a  career  of  vicis- 
situde, action  and  success  —  calls  for  some- 
thing more  than  the  usual  brief  obituary. 
It  is  due  to  the  deceased,  and  furnishes  a 
useful  lesson  to  the  living. 

Samuel  Gilbert  Hatheway,  was  born  in 
Freetown,  Bristol  Co.,  Massachusetts,  in 
1780.  His  paternal  ancestors  emigrated 
from  Devonsliire,  I-^ngland.  Their  descend- 
ants were  active,  and  frequently  successful 
business  men,  occupying  prominent  places 
in  the  comnumit)'.  His  father  and  grand- 
father were  substantial  farmers.  His  grand- 
mother, in  the  paternal  line,  was  a  descend- 
ant of  Sir  Humphrey  (iilbert,  the  distin- 
guished maritime  explorer,  and  of  William 
Bradford,  second  governor  of  Plymoutii 
Colony.  His  mother  was  descended  from 
the  same  families,  and  she  counted  among 
her  ancestors  John  Aldcn,  of  Plymouth, 
who  went  a  wooing  for  Miles  Standish  so 
successful!} for  himself} 

The  father  of  Samuel  Gilbert  Hatheway 
died  near  the  time  of  his  birth,  leaving  him 
to  the  care  of  his  paternal  grandfather.  1 1  is 
grandmother  and  mother  taught  him  in  his 
infancy,  and  at  four  years  old  he  could  read 
the  Bible.  Both  of  these  relatives  were 
superior  women.  The  dignity,  benevolence 
and  force  of  character  possessed  by  his 
grandmother,  are  yet  remembered  in  neigh- 
borhood tradition  ;  and  were  constantly  re- 
verted to   by  him    to   the   end   of  his  life. 

iNathanid  Gilbert,  a  descemlanl  of  Sir  Humphrey, 
married  Welthca,  a  grantUlaiitjlUer  of  Governor  Hrail- 
ford.  Their  daughter  Wellhea,  or  Wealthy  I'.ilberl, 
married  l-:benezer  Hatheway,  and  these  were  the  grand- 
liarents  of  Samuel  tlilbert  Hatheway.  Ezra  Chase,  a  de- 
scendant of  John  Aldcn,  married  Jerusha  Gilbert  and 
their  daughter  married  Shadrach  Hatheway.  These 
were  the  i)arenls  of  Samuel  Gilbert  Hatheway.  He  wa.s 
a  second  son.  His  only  brother  was  educated  under  the 
care  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Andrews,  and  was  a  fine  scholar. 
Just  as  he  reached  manhood,  he  was  lost  at  sea  in  the 
vessel  which  heeomnianded.  His  only  sister,  .Mice,  mar- 
ried Walter  Ucan,  a  farmer  of  \Vinds<ir.  She  died  early, 
leaving  several  children. 


490 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


When  old  enough  the  boy  was  sent  to 
scliool.  He  was  an  eager  and  ambitious 
scholar  and  was  oftenest  of  any  at  the  head 
of  his  class.  He  was  a  great  favorite  with 
his  uncles,  one  of  them  often  predicting,  in 
a  phrase  of  that  day,  that  "  he  would  cut  a 
wide  breadth  in  the  world."  These  were 
happy  days,  but  a  sad  change  was  approach- 
ing. The  uncle,  Samuel  Gilbert,  who  had 
charged  himself  with  the  future  care  of  the 
young  orphan,  died.  The  Gilberts  had  been 
mostly  loyalists  when  the  American  Colo- 
nies shook  off  their  allegiance  to  the  Crown  ; 
their  estates  had  been  confiscated  ;  and  they 
had  retired  to  New  Brunswick,  where  they 
received  a  grant  of  land  from  the  British 
government.  His  uncles,  on  the  father's 
side,  were  in  a  situation  where  they  might 
have  extended  a  helping  hand  to  him,  but 
according  to  the  ideas  of  those  stern  Puri- 
tan times,  they  felt  that  it  was  every  one's 
duty  to  earn  his  own  bread  by  the  sweat  of 
his  brow.  At  nine  years  old  he  left  his 
grandfather's  house  and  became  entirely 
dependent  upon  his  own  exertions. 

Of  the  period  between  this  and  his  ma- 
jority, we  have  few  facts  to  record.  He 
lived  with  various  persons,  toiling  hard,  go- 
ing to  school  winters,  studying,  and  devour- 
ing every  book  he  could  borrow,  by  the 
light  of  kitchen  fires,  when  the  day's  work 
was  over.  His  character  was  too  robust  to 
sink  under  the  change  which  had  taken 
place  in  his  circumstances  and  prospects  ; 
he  uttered  no  complaints  and  resolutely 
performed  his  duties — but  he  deeply  felt  the 
loneliness  of  his  situation,  and  was  wholly 
unreconciled  to  his  narrow  and  hopeless 
mode  of  life.  As  he  approached  manhood 
he  tried  different  ways  of  bettering  his  con- 
dition, and  finally,  influenced  by  the  exam- 
ple of  an  older  brother,  who  had  speedily 
risen  to  the  command  of  a  vessel,  went  to 
sea.  But  a  single  voyage  to  the  West  Indies 
disgusted  him  with  his  sea-faring  life. 


Having  now  by  careful  saving  laid  up  a 
small  store  of  money,  he  resolved  to  join 
the  tide  of  emigration  which  was  then  pour- 
ing from  New  England  into  the  western 
wilderness.  Standing  on  the  hill  that  looks 
down  on  the  village  of  Assonet,  in  his  na- 
tive town,  he  said,  "  I  shall  probably  never 
see  this  place  again ;  the  wide  world  is  be- 
fore me  and  I  will  be  a  man  in  it."  He 
then  walked  to  Windsor,  took  leave  of  his 
mother  and  sister,  purchased  him  a  stout 
roadster,  and  set  out. 

Toil  had  knit  and  privation  had  hardened 
his  sinewy  frame  until  it  was  almost  insen- 
sible to  fatigue,  hunger  and  exposure.  His 
morals  were  pure,  his  will  firm,  his  self  re- 
liance great,  and  the  key  note  of  his  life 
had  been  sounded  on  the  hill  of  Assonet. 
Thus  he  entered  upon  manhood. 

It  was  in  1 803  that  he  turned  his  horse's 
head  westward,  and  after  some  days'  riding 
through  the  forests  of  Central  New  York, 
he  reached  Chenango  count)',  where  he  set- 
tled. Two  years  after  he  removed  to  Cin- 
cinnatus,  in  Onondaga  county.  In  1808 
Cortland  county  was  organized  and  em- 
braced that  town.  He  first  purchased  three 
hundred  acres  of  land,  thus  incurring  what 
was  then  regarded  as  a  great  load  of  debt. 
There  was  a  small  new  clearing  on  the  place 
and  a  log  house.  Otherwise  he  was  in  the 
midst  of  the  primeval  forest  —  his  nearest 
neighbor  being  some  miles  distant.  As 
soon  as  he  could  get  together  a  stock  of 
provisions,  he  sent  for  his  mother  and  two 
orphan  nieces  —  daughters  of  his  only  sister 
—  and  they  lived  with  him  until  the  nieces 
married,  and  the  mother  died.  She  sur- 
vived until  1826. 

His  early  experiences  in  the  wiklerness 
were  those  of  all  our  pioneers.  It  recjuired 
a  sharp  struggle  to  obtain  their  plain  food 
and  raiment.  The  commonest  comforts  of 
life  were  scanty,  and  lu.xuries  undreampt  of 
But  he  was  now  eating  the  blessed  bread  of 


Samuel  G.  Hatheway. 


491 


independence  and  hope,  and  he  toiled  on 
stoutly  and  cheerfully,  felling  the  forest  and 
enlarging  his  cultivated  fields.  Every  set- 
tler was  compelled  to  place  his  domestic 
animals  in  high  pens  at  night,  to  protect 
them  from  the  wolves.  The  Indians  were 
sometimes  dangerous.  Every  man  slept  with 
the  gun  and  axe  within  the  reach  of  his 
hand.  He  never  knew  what  it  was  to  fear. 
On  one  occasion  an  accident  had  exposed 
his  cattle  to  the  wolves.  Aroused  at  mid- 
night by  the  near  yells  of  a  large  pack,  he 
looked  out  and  saw  what  had  occurred. 
The  wolves  were  just  seizing  his  stock. 
Bidding  two  hired  men  wlio  were  sleeping 
in  the  house  to  follow,  he  threw  himself 
among  them  armed  only  with  a  club.  The 
men  dared  not  leave  the  house.  He,  there- 
fore, fought  on  alone,  holding  the  wild 
beasts  at  bay  until  his  animals  were  secured. 

It  was  his  custom  to  labor  throughout 
the  entire  day,  and  then  if  he  had  business 
with  others  to  transact,  to  transact  it  at 
night.  He  thus  often  walked  miles  ^bare- 
foot to  save  his  shoes  —  through  the  forest, 
dimly  lit  by  the  moon,  wolves  and  panthers 
uttering  their  cries  around  him.  His  in- 
dustr\-  and  frugality  were  equaled  by  his 
judgment  in  the  farming  and  other  business 
of  border  life,  and  thus  his  plans  prospered 
and  his  property  accumulated. 

In  1808  he  married  Miss  Sally  Emerson, 
of  Solon,  a  woman  well  fitted  by  her  energy 
and  providence  to  advance  the  interests  of 
such  a  husband  —  but  beautiful,  kindly, 
and  possessing  a  charity  to  this  day  warmly 
remembered  by  her  old  townsmen.  The 
wife  of  a  well  known  gentleman  who  was 
present  at  her  funeral  says  :  "All  the  peo- 
ple of  the  surrounding  countr\-  were  as- 
sembled. The  funeral  services  were  long 
delayed.  The  multitude  talked  of  nothing 
else  but  the  deceased.  The  women  gath- 
ered together  in  groups.  Many  of  them 
had    experienced   the    sharp   privations  of 


pioneer  life.  Each  had  a  deed  of  mercy  to 
herself  or  to  some  of  her  household  to  pro- 
claim. Who,  they  asked  each  other,  will 
now  take  care  of  the  poor  and  the  sick  ? 
They  would  then  gaze  at  the  corpse  and 
break  out  into  lamentations."  She  died  in 
1832. 

He  received  the  commission  of  Justice  of 
the  Peace,  from  the  Council  of  Appoint- 
ment, in  1 8 10,  and  continued  to  hold  the 
office  by  appointment  or  election  for  no  less 
than  forty-eight  consecutive  years,  and  un- 
til he  declined  to  hold  it  an)'  longer.  The 
explanation  of  so  unusual  a  fact  may  be 
found  in  the  declaration  made  to  us  by  a 
gentleman  who  was  long  first  judge  of  this 
county,  and  who,  in  early  life,  often  con- 
ducted suits  before  him,  then  a  political  op- 
ponent. He  affirms  that  he  was  as  inde- 
pendent and  impartial  a  magistrate,  and  de- 
cidedly the  ablest  orte  in  this  capacity,  he 
ever  knew  ;  that  he  at  once  saw  through  the 
facts  and  law  of  the  case,  and  that  no  ability 
or  ingenuity  on  the  part  of  lawyers  could  in 
the  least  degree  mislead  or  swerve  him. 
And  our  informant  adds,  that  he  never  in  a 
single  instance  heard  his  fairness  called  in 
question.  There  was  no  other  town  office, 
to  which  a  justice  of  the  peace  was  eligible, 
which  he  did  not  repeated!)-  hold,  and  in  all 
he  gave  like  satisfaction. 

He  represented  Cortland  county  in  the 
legislature  in  1814  and  1818.  In  the  last 
named  year  he  procured  a  division  of  the 
town  of  Cincinnatus,  and  the  part  of  it  in 
which  he  resided  fell  witiiin  the  limits  of 
Freetown  —  named  after  his  native  town. 
He  removed  to  Solon  in  1 8 19  where  he  con- 
tinued for  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  was 
elected  to  the  State  Senate  in  1822,  to  Con- 
gress in  1832,  and  was  chosen  a  Presiden- 
tial Elector  in  1852. 

In  1848  he  married  Miss  Catharine  Sax- 
ton,  of  Groton,  New  York,  and  this  excel- 
lent and  accomplished  lady  still  survives. 


492 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


He  was  fond  of  military  affairs,  and  rose 
through  the  various  grades  of  office  until 
he  was  coniinissioncd  a  Major-General  in 
1823.  In  this  cajiacity  he  possessed  largely 
the  confidence  of  the  different  State  exec- 
utives, and  was  often  employed  by  them  in 
making  those  reorganizations  and  other 
arrangements  which  became  necessary  to 
carry  out  the  various  military  laws  enacted 
during  his  long  term  of  command. 

15ut  it  was  in  politics  that  he  most  de- 
lighted. He  studied  the  principles  of  our 
government  and  the  history  of  parties  from 
his  childhood.  His  family  were  Federalists, 
but  before  he  became  a  voter  his  views 
became  fi.xed  on  the  other  side.  He  prided 
himself  on  casting  his  first  vote  for  Jeffer- 
son. He  put  on  his  armor  in  that  terrible 
war  of  passion,  unequaled  in  intensity  and 
bitterness  in  our  countr\-,  and  he  never 
took  it  off 

He  possessed  the  personal  traits  of  lead- 
ership. He  was  as  firm  as  the  li\'ing  rock, 
and  possessed  a  tough,  active  persistency  of 
purpose  which  never  slumbered  and  never 
rested.  Years  might  roll  away  —  defeats 
might  come — but  not  even  the  sharp  edge 
of  the  resolve  was  blunted,  or  the  tireless 
.pursuit  for  a  moment  slackened.  Few 
could  match  him  in  soliil  argument  —  we 
never  saw  him  excelled  in  the  rough  and 
tumble  encounter  with  opponents  on  elec- 
tion day.  His  facts,  his  logic,  and  his  wit 
were  equall)'  rc'ad}'.  The  latter  was  some- 
times rough  enough,  but  it  was  always 
scorching.  He  often  turned  the  flank  of  a 
prosy  debater  by  a  suilden  sarcasm,  which 
stung  like  a  barbed  arrow,  while  the  sur- 
rounding crowd  laughed  down  his  discom- 
fited adversary. 

The  years  were  but  one  long  election 
campaign  to  him.  If  victorious  he  imme- 
diately commenced  organizing  to  retain 
victor)-.  If  beaten,  the  same  hour  saw  him 
up  again,  covering  the  retreat,  rallj-ing  the 


broken  squadrons,  and  preparing  by  every- 
thing which  judgment  could  devise  or 
ingenuity  compass  to  win  victory  the  ne.xt 
time.  1  lis  townsmen  were  devoted  to  him, 
and  how  often  their  compact  phalan.x 
changed  the  fortunes  of  the  day  I  Our 
older  citizens  well  remember  the  common 
saying  on  an  election  evening,  w  hen  reports 
came  in  from  one  town  after  another  of 
Anti-Democratic  victories:  "  Wait  till  you 
hear  from  Solon  !"  About  midnight  would 
be  heard  the  tramp  of  horses  —  the  cry, 
"  Solon  is  coming,"  the  proclamation  of  its 
vote  in  the  deep  bass  notes  of  "  the  general " 
—  and  the  thundering  shouts  of  the  Demo- 
crats over  a  victory  "  snatched  from  the 
fire." 

Gen,  Hathewaj-  had  higher  traits  of  lead- 
ership. I  ie  was  an  acute  judge  of  men,  and 
towartls  those  against  whom  his  prejudices 
were  not  excited,  a  sure  one.  He  was  too 
much  disposed,  like  all  men  of  the  same  class 
of  character,  to  tmderrale  opponents  and 
especially  so  if  their  talents  were  mi.xed  with 
certain  classes  of  foibles,  such,  for  example, 
as  assumption  in  the  young,  vanity  in  the  old, 
pompousness  or  foppery  in  any  one.  These 
were  gall  and  wormwood  to  tastes  based  on 
the  old  Puritan  models  of  manners,  and  ob- 
scured fi'om  his  ken  the  better  qualities 
which  sometimes  lay  below\  But  among 
friends  he  accurately  estimated  every  one's 
cajxicities  and  qualities,  and  knew  just  when 
antl  how  f  u'  he  could  be  trusted.  This  was 
well  known  to  Democratic  executives  and 
the  great  party  leaders.  He  almost  con- 
trolled the  early  executive  appointments  in 
his  district,  and  was  rarely  voted  down  in 
the  County,  Senatorial  and  Congressional 
Conventions  which  he  so  constantly  at- 
tended. Man_\-  prominent  men  owed  their 
start  in  political  life  to  him.  Judge  Nelson, 
of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court,  who 
commenceil  his  career  as  a  law\'er  in  this 
count\',  told  a  member  of  the  Onondasja  bar 


Samuel  G.  Hatheway. 


493 


that  "  whatever  he  liad  gained,  he  owed  the 
fouiuling  of  his  fortunes  to  General  Hathe- 
way." Others  but  a  Httle  less  prominent 
could  have  trutlifully  said  the  same. 

But  it  \\as  in  the  great  councils  of  his 
]iart\-  that  he  most  markedly  exhibited  the 
vigor  of  his  mind  and  cliaracter.  His  creed 
was  the  creed  of  Jefferson  and  the  early 
Democratic  fathers,  pure  and  simple.  No 
man  had  weighed  every  word,  every  letter, 
the  whole  spirit  and  intent  of  it,  or  imder- 
stood  every  iota  of  it,  better  than  he  :  and 
it  sufficed  him.  He  lo\-ed  no  new  planks 
in  the  platform — no  hewing  over  or  refitting 
of  old  ones.  When  the  times  brought  up 
new  questions  and  the  necessity  of  new 
party  issues,  few  were  so  capable  as  he -to 
decide  what  course  best  conformed  to  old 
principles  and  established  precedents ;  and 
to  do  this  as  strictly  as  possible  was  the 
only  political  expediency  he  knew.  He  had 
not  a  particle  of  the  trimmer  or  time  server 
in  his  composition.  No  temporary  popu- 
larities or  unpopularities  daunted,  or  even 
influenced  him.  The  rage  of  popular  ex- 
citement fell  on  him  like  spray  on  the  rock. 
If  adverse,  it  only  strung  to  greater  tension 
his  nerves  of  steel.  In  this  regard,  he  was 
one  of  those  who,  in  bloody  epochs,  would 
have  been  a  hero  or  a  martyr. 

He  loved  the  stern  joy  of  victory  —  he 
loved  personal  success  —  but  he  would  have 
marched  to  the  scaffold  or  stake,  rather 
than  buy  preferment  by  abandoning  his 
cause  or  his  friends.  His  contempt  for 
temporary  popular  impulses  sprung  from 
no  contempt  for  the  people.  He  was  a 
Democrat  in  the  essence  as  well  as  the  name. 
It  is  rather  because  he  deeply  trusted  the 
people  and  felt  unshaken  faith  that  when 
they  were  wrong,  the  "  sober  second 
thought  "  would  bring  them  right. 

It  was  this  high  adherence  to  principle, 
this  sharp  discrimination  in  respect  both  to 
principles  and  the   appropriate   leaders  and 


subordinate  agents  to  carry  them  out  — 
this  sure  judgment  in  planning  —  this  nerve 
and  persistency  in  executing — which  gave 
him  so  much  weight  in  those  high  secret 
councils  of  party  to  which  but  the  few  are 
admitted.  He  possessed  the  entire  confi- 
dence of  the  patriotic  Daniel  D.  Tompkins, 
and  of  every  succeeding  executive  of  the 
strict  party  faith.  We  speak  from  our  own 
personal  knowledge  when  we  say  that  such 
statesmen  as  Van  Buren,  Wright,  Marcy, 
Nelson,  Dix,  Flagg  and  others  of  like  calibre, 
considered  him  one  of  the  soundest  and 
safest  of  party  advisers.  He  was  one  of 
the  marked  favorites  of  President  Jackson, 
when  in  Congress. 

And  it  was  the  same  qualities  which  gave 
him  a  full  share  of  influence  in  the  deliber- 
ative bodies,  legislative  and  political,  of 
which  he  was  a  member.  He  possessed  no 
forensic  powers.  Keen,  ready  and  pungent 
as  he  was  in  private  discourse,  his  voice  was 
rarely  heard  in  legislative  bodies,  never  in 
a  set  speech.  He  had  not  been  trained  to 
it,  and  he  was  both  too  modest  and  too 
proud  to  undertake  to  do  what  he  could 
not  do  well.  He  possessed  no  ingratiating 
arts  in  such  places.  His  deportment  was 
grave  and  formal,  and  to  a  stranger  cold,  if 
not  stern.  Ilis  face  bore  the  same  expres- 
sion. He  did  not  thaw  readily  into  genial- 
ity. He  gave  his  confiiience  slowly,  and 
until  he  gave  it,  was  reserved  in  his  bearing 
and  reticent  in  the  expression  of  his  opin- 
ions. He  possessed  no  pliancy  of  mind  or 
manners.  He  inherited  all  over  the  stiff, 
sturdy,  unchanging,  uncourtierlike  features 
of  the  stock  from  which  he  sprung. 

He  was  fair  and  bold  in  his  politics.  He 
never  shrunk  from  the  issue,  and  the  whole 
issue.  He  fearlessly  avowed  and  defended 
every  plank  in  the  adopted  platform, 
whether  it  suited  or  did  not  suit  his  hearer. 
His  convictions  were  strong  and  his  preju- 
dices   were    equally    strong.      He    was    a 


494 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


thorough  friend  and  an  uncompromising 
opponent.  He  struck  slashing  blows  and 
always  waged  the  war  to  the  end ;  but  he 
always  struck  face  to  face,  and  never  did  in 
the  dark  what  he  was  unwilling  to  avow  in 
the  broad  light  of  day.  He  was  upright 
and  unvcnal.  Who,  in  the  wildest  rage  of 
parties,  ever  uttered  the  suspicion  that  he 
was  guilty  of  that  political  and  official  cor- 
ruption, which  now  flows  putrid,  like  a 
river  of  death,  through  our  land?  Our  old 
party  giants  fought  with  gloves  off.  They 
exhibited  little  delicacy  or  magnanimity 
towards  opponents.  They  often  mixed 
personal  with  political  animosities;  but  they 
did  not  play  the  hypocrite  and  lie  to  each 
other.  They  did  not  steal,  even  from  the 
public.  They  did  not  sell  their  votes  or 
official  influence  for  bribes,  after  the  mode 
of  these  milder  and  more  cultivated  daj's. 

We  are  sure  we  speak  from  no  partial 
stand  point  when  we  pronounce  General 
Hatheway  a  man  of  marked  and  powerful 
abilities.  It  was  not  always  our  fortune  to 
agree  with  him.  We  have  felt  the  biting 
edge  of  his  hostile  blade.  But  we  have 
ever  believed  that  this  county  or  region 
never  produced  or  nurtured  a  man  his 
superior  in  mental  capacity,  scarcely  an 
equal  in  natural  parts.  We  believe  that, 
with  professional  education,  he  could  have 
reached  high  distinction  in  any  intellectual 
calling.  We  believe  that  weaker  men  have 
been  nursed  by  training,  by  circumstance^ 
and  by  opportunity  into  renowned  lawyers, 
eminent  statesmen,  and  great  men  in  other 
pursuits. 

But  it  would  be  conveying  an  entirely 
erroneous  impression  to  speak  of  him  as  an 
uneducated  man  in  the  true  sense  of  the 
word.  His  school  attainments  were  com- 
paratively nothing,  and  he  never  reached 
anything  like  the  full  and  rounded  literary 
culture  which  he  prized  in  others  and  was 
so  anxious  to  bestow  on  his  children.      15ut 


he  was  a  self-educator  from  his  boyhood  to 
the  last  hour  of  his  life.  He  not  only  read 
but  devoured  all  useful  books.  He  care- 
fully mastered   every  idea  and  every  detail 

—  appropriated  everything  valuable  —  and 
then  laid  it  away  for  future  use  in  a  mem- 
ory of  almost  marvelous  retentiveness. 
Nor  was  it  rendered  practically  useless  by 
being  piled  away  in  confusion  or  discon- 
nected scraps,  after  the  fashon  of  those  who 
read  without  system  and  merely  from  curi- 
osity. He  digested  and  classified  all  he 
read  by  careful  reflection  ;  and  everything 
bearing  on  the  same  point  was  placed  in 
the  same  pigeon  hole  of  memory  so  that 
it  could  be  rendered  instantly  available. 
Thus  he  studied  the  Bible,  in  which  he  was 
so  familiar  that  not  a  word  of  it  could  be 
misquoted  or  transposed  without  his  instant 
detection.  Thus  he  studied  the  rich  pages 
of  Grecian,  Roman,  English  and  American 
history.  Thus  he  studied  a  great  variety 
of  publications  on  numerous  and  especially 
on  utilitarian  subjects.  He  had  no  taste 
for  light  reading.  It  was  like  offering  child's 
posset  and  confectionery  to  a  hungry  giant. 

He  was  better  educated  still.  What  is 
education  but,  as  the  word  implies,  a  draw- 
ing forth  —  a  development?  His  powers 
were  all  drawn  forth,  all  exercised  and  ma- 
tured in  the  school  of  action  and  events. 
His  whole  life  was  action,  struggle,  contest 

—  in  scenes  which  train  every  thew  and 
sinew  of  the  understanding  and  judgment. 
Of  the  two,  such  an  education  is  vastly 
more  thorough  and  effective  than  a  mere 
scholastic  one.  The  former  always  strength- 
ens, the  latter  sometimes  emasculates.  How 
few  of  our  sturdy,  unlettered  pioneers  who 
were  men  of  large  natural  capacity,  have 
left  sons  who,  though  carefully  educated  in 
schools,  entirely  fill  their  fathers'  places ! 

General  Hatheway,  as  we  have  already 
said,  well  knew  his  powers.  He  possessed 
perfect  self-reliance  in   all  matters  on  which 


Samuel  G.  Hatheway. 


495 


he  possessed  sufficient  knowledge  to  feel 
competent  to  decide  and  act.  Hence  he 
adhered  to  his  views  with  tenacity.  The 
celebrated  Joshua  A.  Spencer  was  employed 
in  an  important  law  suit  for  him.  They 
differed  as  to  the  theory  on  which  it  should 
be  conducted  by  the  former.  Neither  could 
convince  the  other.  Mr.  Spencer  was  dis- 
charged and  the  event  justified  his  client's 
sagacity.  Such  anecdotes  might  be  multi- 
plied. 

As  a  business  man  he  was  eminently 
successful  and  accumulated  a  large  property. 
This  was  accomplished  by  large  and  judi- 
cious forecast,  by  making  investments  with 
a  correct  estimate  of  the  present  and  future 
value  and  availability  of  property,  rather 
than  by  extra  painstaking,  or  bj'  commer- 
cial exactitude.  He  was  not  a  speculator, 
but  like  all  men  of  English  blood,  loved  to 
accumulate  land,  which  rose  greatly  in  value 
on  his  hands.  At  the  time  of  his  death  his 
estate  consisted  of  several  thousand  acres. 

He  was  an  extremely  lenient  creditor, 
never  sueing,  or  taking  any  advantage  of  a 
failure  to  meet  engagements  with  him,  pro- 
vided no  evasion  or  dishonesty  was  at- 
tempted. A  legal  gentleman  of  this  county 
recently  remarked  to  us  that  he  foreclosed 
fewer  mortgages  than  any  man  he  ever 
knew  who  held  so  many.  He  was  a  kind 
neighbor,  an  indulgent  landlord  and  a  peace 
making  magistrate.  He  terminated  num- 
berless law  suits  brought  before  him  by  his 
townsmen,  by  pointing  out  to  them  the 
proper  terms  of  an  amicable  settlement. 
But  strictly  honest  himself  he  required 
honesty  in  others.  Those  who  attempted 
to  defraud  him  received  no  indulgence. 
And  those  who  committed  what  he  re- 
garded as  an  aggression  of  any  kind  on  him, 
opened  a  score  which  was  never  closed 
until  the  reparation  was  extorted  or  the 
penalty  inflicted. 

W'e    have    painted,    so    far,    a   character 


which  all  must  respect,  but  which  few,  per- 
haps, would  love.  But  he  was  loved  — 
intensely  loved  by  his  family  and  connec- 
tions. Few  men  had  more  warm  personal 
friends,  and  these  embraced  many  of  the 
first  men  among  his  contemporaries  in  our 
county.  Judges  Nelson,  Dayton,  Woods, 
Gray  and  others  of  like  mark,  were  not 
onl}-  attached  to  him  while  their  interests 
were  common  and  when  he  could  so  pow- 
erfully serve  them,  but  we  are  not  obliged 
to  speak  from  hearsaj-,  when  we  aver  that 
they  carried  that  attachment  to  other  scenes 
of  action  and  retained  it  to  the  end  of  life. 
So  it  was  among  many  of  our  old  leading 
citizens,  who  ha\-e  died  in  this  count}',  or 
who  still  remain  among  us. 

In  truth,  there  was  an  inner  portion  of 
his  character  which  we  have  scarcely 
touched  upon.  His  early  struggle  with 
disappointment  and  want  chilled  his  exte- 
rior and  perhaps  circumscribed  the  range 
of  his  personal  sympathies.  But  the  pent 
up  fire  only  burned  the  more  intensely 
within  its  narrower  limits.  Such  friends  as 
we  have  named,  if  threatened  with  danger 
in  some  unexpected  turn  of  the  election 
campaign,  had  only  to  call  on  him  for  suc- 
cor. It  mattered  not  whether  the  messen- 
ger came  at  midnight,  or  in  tempest ;  the 
chief  was  at  once  in  the  saddle,  his  pennon 
displayed,  and  he  and  his  retainers  spurring 
to  the  rescue.  Neither  friends  nor  foes 
will  forget  the  tremendous  vigor  of  his 
onslaught  on  such  occasions.  And  he  stood 
by  his  friends  as  staunchly  in  private  trans- 
actions as  in  public  life. 

His  domestic  affections  glowed  like  molt- 
en lava.  Who  that  witnessed  them  has  for- 
gotten the  scenes  of  voiceless,  tearless,  ter- 
rific agon}',  impressed  for  years  in  awful 
characters  on  his  face,  when  the  partner  of 
his  youth,  and  when  his  sons,  the  gifted 
Samuel,  John,  the  favorite  of  the  army, 
George,  the  gentle  and  well  beloved,  and 


496 


History  of  Cortand  County. 


his  daughter,  the  brilliant  and  accomplished 
Mrs.  Hoyd,  preceded  him  to  the  tomb. 
Never  was  there  a  kinder  husband  or  more 
loving  and  indulgent  parent.  And  how 
tenderly  he  gathered  under  his  protecting 
wing  his  grandchildren,  and  other  relatives. 
He  seemed  to  seek  compensation  for  the 
deprivations  of  his  own  youth  in  leaving 
nothing  lacking  to  make  that  of  his  de- 
scendants happy.  Every  avenue  to  educa- 
tion and  enjoyment  was  opened  to  them. 
He  gratified  all  their  wants.  He  conversed 
and  associated  with  them  as  equals,  and 
joined  in  their  amusements.  He  was  ever 
ready  to  mount  his  horse  and  accompany 
the  young  ladies  on  a  ride.  He  kept  them 
amused  and  delighted  by  his  wit  and  by  his 
quaint  raillery.  Oftentimes  he  would,  with 
serious  face,  affect  to  ridicule  their  fashion- 
able apparel,  their  taste  for  gathering  flow- 
ers, their  going  to  look  at  some  favorite 
scenery,  or  the  like,  —  but  they  could  detect 
the  repressed  smile  which  showed  that  he 
was  only  teasing  them,  and  they  well  knew 
who  so  carefully  provided  the  apparel,  who 
called  their  attention  to  the  flower  when 
they  overlooked  it,  and  who,  if  they  thought 
of  turning  back,  always  proposed  to  ride  a 
mile  further  to  get  the  best  view. 

There  was  indeed  an  aesthetic  corner  in 
his  practical  and  utilitarian  mind.  He  loved 
good  equipage  —  he  loved  pleasant  and 
tasty  surroundings — he  loved  trees  and 
flowers,  and  the  song  of  birds  —  he  loved 
striking  scenery.  He  was  not  a  careful 
farmer,  but  he  dearly  loved  the  fields.  He 
often  spent  hours  riding  over  them  with  his 
wife  or  family,  with  no  other  object  but  the 
.satisfaction  of  seeing  them  and  enjoying  the 
sunlight  and  air.  These  tastes  increased 
strongly  in  his  later  )-ears,  for  he  then  had 
time  for  them  and  companions  who,  without 
the  neglect  of  duty,  could  participate  in  his 
enjoyments. 

The    domestic    features    of   the    portrait 


would  be  incomplete  if  we  omitted  to  speak 
of  his  hospitalit}'.  This  was  unbounded. 
He  delighted  to  be  surrounded  by  company 
of  all  ages  and  se.\es.  He  was  markedly 
attentive  to  his  guests.  His  table  was  lib- 
eral and  elegant.  Unless  well  acquainted, 
his  manners  were  at  first  formal ;  but  he 
soon  relaxed,  and  his  quaintly  told  anec- 
dotes and  keen  repartees  "  set  the  table  on 
a  roar."  The  guests  were  importuned  to 
remain.  Carriages  and  saddle  horses  were 
ready  for  each.  Their  stay  was  made  a 
scene  of  festivity  and  amusement.  We  well 
remember  how  Nelson  and  the  other  friends 
we  have  mentioned  loved  to  gather  round 
his  table  of  an  afternoon  and  evening,  and 
then  gallop  home  in  the  "small  hours." 

The  general  had  one  propensity  in  his 
younger  days  which  caused  many  a  hearty 
laugh  in  this  county.  As  we  have  said,  he 
was  full  of  humor.  He  loved  teasing  and 
joking,  and  could  not  sometimes  resist  the 
temptation  of  playing  a  practical  joke. 
These  were  never  very  serious  in  their  con- 
sequences, but  were  wonderfully  mirth  pro- 
voking to  all  but  the  subjects  of  them.  We 
never  heard  of  his  thus  victimizing  any  one 
without  provocation  ;  but  when  the  provo- 
cation was  offered,  and  there  was  no  other 
appropriate  way  to  pay  the  score,  woe  to 
the  opener  of  the  account !  If  we  had  space 
and  skill  in  recounting  such  matters,  we 
should  like  to  place  some  of  these  amusing 
incidents  on  record  ;   but  we  have  neither. 

Age  mellowed  the  good  fruit.  Old  feuds 
were  gradually  forgotten  —  old  prejudices 
softened.  The  circle  of  his  sympathies  ex- 
panded. He  continued  to  the  last  to  read  and 
to  transact  his  accustomed  business.  He 
grappled  with  all  the  new  questions  of  the 
day  with  keen  interest.  We  saw  him  at 
eighty  years  old  in  a  county  convention, 
leading  his  side  with  all  his  old  vigor.  He 
was  warmly  urged  the  same  year,  by  lead- 
ing friends  of  one  of  the  presidential  candi- 


Samuel  G.  Hatiieway. 


497 


dates,  to  attend  the   National  Democratic 
Convention  at  Charleston. 

His  faculties,  and  his  force  and  individu- 
ality of  character,  remained  unimpaired  until 
death.  He  continued  to  ride  daily  in  the 
saddle  until  the  snow  storms  of  last  winter. 
He  then  took  a  cold  and  suffered  somewhat 
from  indisposition — the  first  illness  of  his 
life  —  but  his  constitution,  naturally  power 
ful  and  unimpaired  by  excesses  of  any  kind, 
rallied  and  he  felt  himself  nearly  well.  He 
resumed  his  reading  and  his  rides.  When 
the  weather  permitted,  he  busied  himself 
superintending  the  arrangements  of  his 
garden.  A  week  before  his  death  he  drove 
a  number  of  miles  with  his  wife,  and  spoke 
with  great  pleasure  of  preparations  he  had 
made  for  their  thus  traveling  together  the 
coming  summer.  Two  days  afterwards  he 
rode  with  her  to  McGrawville,  and  on  his 
return  took  his  favorite  route  through  his 
meadows.  The  day  before  his  death  he 
was  well  as  usual,  and  very  cheerful  except 
when  he  called  the  attention  of  his  family 
to  the  fact  that  it  was  the  anniversary  of 
the  day  on  which  his  wife  was  to  have  been 
buried.  (His  own  death  marked  the  anni- 
versary of  her  burial).  He  looked  out  often 
during  the  day  on  the  cold  storm  of  rain 
and  snow  then  falling,  pitying  the  newborn 
lambs,  and  speaking  of  the  backwardness 
of  the  season.  In  the  evening  he  took  his 
tea  as  usual,  and  talked  over  business  mat- 
ters with  his  accustomed  interest,  with  his 
son.  He  seemed  in  an  uncommon  flow  of 
spirits,  spoke  much  of  his  old  New  England 
home,  and  tokl  many  pleasant  anecdotes  of 
his  grandmother  Hatheway,  and  of  others 
he  had  known  in  his  youth,  thus  prolonging 
his  ordinary  hour  of  retiring.  He  awoke 
the  next  niDrning  in  the  same  cheerful 
mood,  listening  for  awhile,  as  was  his  wont, 
to  the  matin  songs  of  the  birds,  inter- 
changed many  cheerful  remarks  with  his 
wife,  and  left  the  room  with  a  pleasantry  on 


his  lips.  He  met  in  the  dining-room  a 
bright,  sensible  girl  of  thirteen,  who  belonged 
to  the  family.  He  stepped  to  the  window 
and  exclaimed  :  "What  a  pleasant  morning 
— I  am  so  glad  the  storm  is  over."  He 
then,  as  he  often  loved  to  do,  commenced 
jesting  and  laugiiing  with  the  little  girl. 
She  observed  that  he  was  paler  than  usual ; 
left  the  room  a  moment,  and  on  her  return 
found  him  sitting  by  the  stove,  his  head 
slightly  leaning  on  one  side,  and  gazing, 
she  thought,  into  the  fire.  But  there  was 
something  strange  in  his  look,  and  she 
immediately  gave  the  alarm.  His  wife  was 
at  his  side  in  an  instant,  and  his  family  and 
a  physician  (Dr.  Meacham),  sleeping  in  the 
house,  a  moment  after.  The  latter  saw  at 
a  glance  that  a  great  change  had  taken 
place — that  the  soul  had  departed  to  God 
who  gave  it.  An  expression  of  perfect 
placidity  rested  on  the  face  of  the  corpse. 
Death  had  come  and  left  no  trace  of  pain. 
One  of  his  family  physicians.  Dr.  Hyde, 
informs  us  that  he  died  without  any  disease 
— that  the  physical  machine  stopped  because 
it  was  worn  out.  This  seems  to  us  the 
most  natural  and  happiest  form  of  death. 
The  event  took  place  at  6  o'clock  A.  M.,  on 
the  2d  of  May,  1867,  in  the  eighty-seventh 
year  of  his  age. 

On  the  7th,  in  the  presence  of  a  number 
of  old  friends,  the  fathers  of  the  county,  of 
various  distinguished  gentlemen  from 
abroad,  who  attended  in  despite  of  the  bad- 
ness of  the  weather,  and  of  crowds  of  his  sor- 
rowing townsmen,  the  solemn  burial  service 
of  the  Episcopal  church  was  read  by  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Meacham,  and  followed  by  some 
impressive  remarks  by  the  same  gentleman. 
The  remains  were  then  borne  from  the  home 
he  had  so  loved,  to  the  beautiful  fimiily 
burial  place,  "The  Cedars,"  and  placed  as 
he  had  requested,  "between  the  wife  of 
his  youth  and  his  first  born  son." 

He  left  a  son.  Colonel  Calvin  L.  Hathe- 


498 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


way,  and  three  dautjhters,  Sarah,  the  wife 
of  Dr.  Whitney,  of  iUiffalo;  Livinia  and 
I^Hzabcth;  also,  tiiree  jjranddaugliters, 
Juha,  Helen  and  Caroline  Boyd,  daughters 
of  Gen.  Boyd,  of  Wisconsin. 

Ilie  effect  of  Gen.  Hatheway's  death 
throughout  the  country  was  striking.  His 
positive  and  unyielding  character,  his  par- 
tisan blows,  and  his  great  success  had  of 
course  engendered  enmities.  These  were 
dying  away,  but  some  of  the  old  scars  still 
smarted.  When  the  stately  old  oak  sud- 
denly fell,  the  natural  sense  of  justice  in 
every  man's  heart  vindicated  itself  Every 
old  prejudice  was  burled  in  his  grave. 
Every  one  admitted  the  uprightness  and 
massiveness  of  his  cliaracter.  Every  one 
felt  that  one  of  the  strongest,  bravest  and 
truest  of  the  old  fashioned  stock  of  men 
had  passed  away. 


DR.  FREDERICK  HYDE.  The  an- 
cestors of  F"rederick  Hyde  were 
among  the  first  settlers  of  Norwich,  Conn, 
(in  1660),  Elizabeth  Hyde  being  the  first 
white  child  born  there.  His  grandfather, 
Gen.  Caleb  Hyde,  settled  in  Lenox,  Mass.  ; 
here,  in  1774,  his  name  appears,  with  that 
of  his  brother  Moses,  appended  to  a  petition 
from  that  town  against  British  aggression. 
An  important  part  was  borne  by  several  of 
the  family  in. the  Revolutionary  War,  Major 
Elijah  Hyde  being  a  cavalry  officer  and  a 
confidential  friend  of  Gov.  Trumbull;  also 
Capt.  Eliphalet  Hyde  saw  service.  Ebcn- 
ezer  died  on  board  the  Jersey  prison  ship. 
Gen.  Hyde  was  sheriff  for  some  time  of  Berk- 
shire county,  Mass.  About  1790  he  remov- 
ed to  Lisle,  Broome  count}-,  N.  Y.  He  was 
major-general  of  the  State  militia,  elected 
a  Senator  from  the  western  district  of  New 
York  in  1803  and  in  1804  was  chosen  by 
the  Assembly  as  one  of  the  council  of  ap- 
pointment. His  wife  was  Elizabeth  Sacket, 
daughter  of  Captain  Sacket,  a  physician  of 


Oblong,  N.  Y.  —  a  woman  of  rare  excel- 
lence, man)-  traditions  existing  of  her  ability 
to  meet  the  emergencies  of  the  times  ;  to 
train  a  large  family ;  to  convey  by  her  tact 
news  of  the  enemy's  plans  to  our  army;  to 
help  liL-r  husband  exercise  a  graceful  and 
generous  hospitality.  Once  several  officers 
of  distinction  called  to  paj'  their  respects  to 
the  general  when  he  was  absent.  She 
killed  and  dressed  the  porker  in  the  pen 
and  when  he  returned  he  found  his  guests 
merry  over  a  bounteous  table,  charmed 
with  their  hostess,  whose  fluent  conversa- 
tion enlivened  a  feast  fit  to  set  before  a  king. 
If  this  woman  had  any  faults  time  has  ob- 
literated them  from  the  record. 

Dr.  Hyde's  father,  Ebby,  was  the  thir- 
teenth child  and  lived  at  W'hitney's  Point, 
where  he  married  Elizabeth  Osborn,  daugh- 
ter of  Deacon  Osborn,  and  kept  a  country 
store.  The  pioneers  usually  sent  their  chil- 
dren back  to  Lenox  Academy  for  their  in- 
struction and  these,  in  turn,  taught  the 
growing  children  at  home.  Some  progress 
must  have  been  made  in  education,  for 
Frederick,  just  previous  to  his  fifteenth 
birthday,  started  one  cold  winter's  day  on 
foot  thirteen  miles  to  Freetown,  Cortland 
count}-,  to  teach  a  district  school,  and  the 
chilling  remembrances  of  those  months 
were  enough  to  last  a  lifetime.  After  this 
the  rule  seemed  to  be,  teach  winters,  attend 
school  summers,  until  teaching  took  all  the 
time;  but  then  he  usually  had  some  enter- 
prise of  study  on  hand,  till  we  find  him  in 
the  family  of  Dr.  Hiram  Moe,  of  Lansing, 
where  he  began  the  reading  of  medicine, 
afterward  pursued  under  Dr.  Horace  Bron- 
son,  of  Virgil,  in  1833.  Previous  to  this  his 
father  had  removed  to  this  town.  While  a 
student,  having  attended  one  course  of  lect- 
ures at  Fairfied.N.Y.,  he  joined  the  Cortland 
County  Medical  Society,  though  he  did  not 
take  his  degree  of  M.  D.  until  1836.  Soon 
after   this   he   came   to  Cortland,  N.  Y.,  to 


Frederick  Myde. 


499 


live,  becoming  a  partner  of  Dr.  Miles  Good- 
year, whose  daughter,  Elvira,  he  married 
January  24th,  1838. 

He  has  two  children  living  in  Cortland, 
Augusta  Hyde,  and  Miles  G.  Hyde,  who 
graduated  in  1865  at  Yale  College,  and  in 
1868  at  Geneva  Medical  College,  and  has 
since  practiced  his  profession  here,  at 
one  time  taking  part  in  the  teaching  at 
the  Syracuse  Medical  College,  and  often  pre- 
senting papers  of  interest  to  the  County 
Medical  Society. 

The  details  of  a  busy  life,  spent  wholly 
for  half  a  century  in  his  profession,  though 
full  of  startling  events  to  himself  and  per- 
sons concerned,  could  have  little  general 
interest  to  the  community.  In  1S41  he 
first  attended  the  New  York  State  Medical 
Society  and  read  a  paper  on  fever.  A  cir- 
cular issued  in  1853  shows  that  at  that  time 
he  had  a  private  anatomical  school  at  Cort- 
land. This  lasted  three  or  four  years. 
Some  of  the  sessions  were  held  in  the  upper 
story  of  the  old  Eagle  store. 

In  1854  Dr.  Hyde  was  appointed  pro- 
fessor of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of  women 
in  Geneva  Medical  College.  In  1855  he 
was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  surgery  in 
the  same  institution,  and  occupied  that 
position  until  the  closing  of  the  college,  and 
the  organization  of  the  medical  department 
of  Syracuse  University  in  1872,  when  he 
became  a  professor  of  surgery  in  the  faculty 
of  that  school.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Southern  Central  Medical  Association  of 
New  York,  and  has  been  its  president.  He 
is  a  permanent  member  of  the  New  York 
State  Society  and  in  1865  was  president  of 
that  body  In  1868  he  was  a  delegate 
from  this  society  to  the  State  Medical  So- 
ciety of  New  Jersey.  He  was  one  of  the 
original  members  of  the  American  Medical 
Association,  and  is  a  permanent  member  of 
that  organization.     In   1884  he  was  one  of 


the  founders  of  the  New  York  Medical 
Association,  a  voluntary  association  which 
promises  well  for  the  future  of  the  profes- 
sion. In  1876  he  was  a  delegate  to  the 
International  Medical  Congress  held  at 
Philadelphia  in  connection  with  the  centen- 
nial exhibition,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the 
British  Medical  Association  held  at  Belfast, 
to  which  place  he  was  elected  in  May,  1 884, 
from  the  American  Medical  Association. 

In  Dr.  Hyde's  long  and  successful  pro- 
fessional career,  extending  now  over  a  period 
of  more  than  forty-eight  years,  he  has  con- 
tributed many  and  valuable  articles  to  med- 
ical literature,  and  has  treated  a  large  num- 
ber of  remarkable  cases  in  general  practice, 
and  has  likewise  performed  many  of  its 
most  difficult  operations  in  surgery. 

In  1883  Dr.  Hyde  was  appointed  by 
Governor  Cleveland,  to  be  a  trustee  of  the 
Asylum  for  Idiots  at  Syracuse,  which  office 
he  holds  at  the  present  time.  He  was 
elected  and  has  served  as  president  of  the 
Cortland  Savings  Bank  since  1876.  Dr. 
Hyde  has  been  very  active  in  promoting  the 
welfare  of  public  education.  He  was  presi- 
dent of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Cortlandville 
Academy  for  eighteen  of  the  twenty- five 
years  of  its  existence,  and  has  been  a  mem- 
ber of  the  local  board  of  the  Cortland  Nor- 
mal School  since  it  was  organized  in  1869, 
and  president  of  that  body  since  the  death 
of  Hon.  Henry  S.  Randall  in  1876;  audit 
was  during  his  administration  that  the 
State  superintendent  was  foiled  in  his  at- 
tempt to  wrest  the  Normal  School  from  the 
concurrent  authority  of  the  board,  although 
the  superintendent  carried  the  controversy 
into  the  Supreme  Court.  While  the  first 
two  decisions  were  against  the  board,  the 
Court  of  Appeals  sustained  it  and  the 
controversy  secured  enlarged  liberty  to 
teachers  and  added  to  the  dignity  of  the 
teacher's  profession. 


500 


History  of  Cortand  County. 


DEACON  MANLY  HOBART.i— The 
town  of  Hiinifield,  Mass.,  contributed 
not  a  few  of  the  early  settlers  of  the  town 
of  Homer.  Among  them  were  Samuel  and 
Dorothy  Hoar  or  Hobart,  the  grandparents 
of  the  subject  of  this  sketch.  The}-  were  of 
the  same  famil}'  whence  descended  the  dis- 
tinguished Senator  Hoar,  of  Massachusetts, 
and  other  influential  men  in  that  Common- 
wealth. 

In  the  summer  of  1798  Mr.  Samuel  Ho- 
bart had  visited  Homer,  located  his  farm 
upon  the  place  now  owned  by  Mr.  John 
Scott  and  put  up  a  log  cabin  for  the  accom- 
modation of  his  large  family.  The  ensuing 
winter  they  moved  with  an  ox  team  from 
Massachusetts  to  what  came  to  be  known 
for  many  years  as  "  the  Hobart  farm."  Ar- 
riving in  Homer  they  found  that  the  heavy 
snows  had  broken  in  the  roof  of  their  cabin 
and  accepted  gratefully  the  hospitality  of 
Deacon  Peter  Hitchcock,  whose  log-house 
was  the  only  one  then  standing  between  their 
farm  and  the  site  of  Homer  village.  Re- 
pairing speedily  their  humble  cabin,  they 
began  their  residence  there  and  interested 
themselves  at  once  in  all  that  pertained  to 
the  welfare  of  the  infant  settlement. 

It  was  Mrs.  Dorothy  Hobart  to  whom 
especially  is  traced  the  inception  of  the 
action  which  brought  about  the  formation 
of  the  Congregational  Church  in  this  town. 
Of  the  children  of  these  godly  parents,  Gid- 
eon, the  father  of  Manly,  was  nineteen  years 
of  age  when  they  came  to  Homer.  In  1806 
he  married  Electa  Wadsvvorth,  of  the  well 
known  Wadsworth  family,  in  whose  veins 
coursed  the  blood  of  a  heroic  ancestr\'  and 
among  whose  kin  have  been  numbered  some 
of  America's  distinguished  patriots.  Their 
children  were  Amos,  Sophronia,  Manl)' 
(born  May  7,  18 10),  Horace,  Orrin,  Eurctta, 
Celinda,  Mary  M.  and  Clark  E. 

Of  the   childhood   and  youth    of  Manly 

1  By  Rev.  Wm.  A.  Robinson. 


little  need  be  said.  His  opportunities  of 
education,  limited  though  they  were,  were 
diligently  improved  and  he  early  developed 
those  qualities  of  decision  and  energy  which 
contributed  so  greatly  to  his  success  in  life. 
Inheriting  the  blessings  that  came  from  a 
godly  ancestry,  receiving  the  instructions 
and  counsels  of  pious  parents  and  trained  in 
the  e.xercise  of  those  traits  of  character 
which  are  of  highest  value,  he  came  up  to 
manhood  peculiarly  fitted  for  its  duties,  and 
prepared  to  fill  the  prominent  place  he  held 
in  the  esteem  and  trust  of  his  fellow  men. 

June  22d,  1842,  he  was  married  to  Miss 
Caroline  A.  Boies,  daughter  of  Captain  Ru- 
fus  Boies,  an  influential  citizen  of  Homer, 
who  held  many  positions  of  responsibility 
and  trust  in  church  and  academy  and  town 
affairs.  To  them  were  born  four  daughters, 
Ellen  F.,  Clara  A.,  Alice  B.  and  Mary  S. 
All  of  these  daughters  are  married  and,  with 
the  exception  of  the  youngest,  who  resides 
in  Syracuse,  have  their  homes  in  Homer. 
The  oldest  daughter  is  the  wife  of  Mr.  Geo. 
D.  Daniels,  of  the  firm  of  Kingsbury  & 
Daniels,  merchants.  Her  children  are  Alice 
C,  Anna  B.  and  Manly  Hobart  Daniels.  The 
second  daughter  is  the  wife  of  Mr.  Lyman 
H.  Heberd,  who  now  resides  upon  the  Ho- 
bart homestead.  Her  children  are  Marian  A. , 
Caroline  S.,  Grace  E.  (deceased),  Cora  E. 
and  Jessie  A.  Heberd.  The  third  daughter 
is  the  wife  of  Mr.  Charles  A.  Skinner,  until 
recently  a  member  of  the  same  mercantile 
firm  with  Mr.  Daniels.  Her  onl}' child  was 
baptized  Clark  Hobart  Skinner  by  the  dying 
bed  of  his  grandfather  Hobart.  The  young- 
est daughter  is  the  wife  of  Mr.  J.  M.  Knapp, 
of  Syracuse.  Her  onl)-  child  is  Martin  Ho- 
bart Knapp. 

In  the  relations  of  the  home  Deacon  Ho- 
bart was  a  true  son,  caring  tenderly  for  the 
comfort  of  his  parents  till  their  death  —  a 
kind  and  loving  husband,  a  wise  and  tender 
father   and  a  judicious  and  helpful   brother 


Manly  Hobart. 


501 


and  friend.  He  showed  the  quahty  of  his 
nature  in  his  pecuHar  interest  in  children 
and  youth,  and  in  the  way  in  which  even 
the  youngest  of  his  grandchildren  loved  and 
trusted  him.  To  his  employees  and  de- 
pendents he  was  uniformly  just  and  forbear- 
ing, and  among  the  most  sincere  mourners 
at  his  funeral  were  some  who  had  known 
him  intimately  in  such  relations  for  years. 

Deacon  Hobart  was  in  his  early  years  con- 
secrated to  God  b)-  his  pious  parents,  and  in 
1841  made  public  profession  of  his  faith  in 
Christ  and  united  with  the  Congregational 
Church  in  this  village.  As  a  Christian  he 
was  positive,  humble  and  faithful.  He  took 
such  strong  hold  by  faith  of  God  and  his 
promises,  that  he  knew  much  of  the  joy  and 
inspiration  of  conscious  fellowship  with  the 
Lord.  He  was  always  decided  in  his  con- 
victions and  lo\-al  to  them,  and  ready  for 
every  good  word  and  work.  In  1856  he 
was  elected  a  deacon  of  the  church,  a  posi- 
tion which  he  held  by  repeated  elections  till 
his  death,  and  which  he  so  filled  that  he 
"purchased  to  himself  a  good  degree  and 
great  boldness  in  the  faith.". 

Endowed  with  a  large  measure  of  good 
common  sense,  he  turned  it  to  sanctified 
use  in  official  counsels,  and  as  an  adviser 
and  helper  in  every  good  and  benevolent 
enterprise. 

His  sagacity  and  soundness  of  judgment 
made  him  constantly  sought  by  those  who 
needed  a  wise  and  true  counselor,  and  no 
small  part  of  his  sacrifice  of  himself  for 
others'  welfare  was  manifest  in  his  cheerful 
and  careful  attention  to  demands  of  this 
nature.  In  the  use  of  the  large  property, 
which  by  diligence  and  business  sagacity  he 
had  accumulated,  he  sought  to  promote  the 
great  ends  to  which  his  life  was  consecrated. 

To-day  missionaries  on  American  and^ 
foreign  soil  are  preaching  the  gospel  who 
were  largely  helped  in  their  preparation  for 
their  work  b)-  his  munificence. 


He  was  practically  and  generously  inter- 
ested in  several  great  benevolent  societies. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  was  president  of 
our  County  Bible  Society,  and  foremost  in 
the  support  of  its  interests.  But  while  he 
took  an  intelligent  and  liberal  interest  in 
these  broad  ministries  of  good,  he  did  not 
lose  sight  of  important  institutions  at  home 
nor  prove  wanting  here  in  an  enlightened 
and  generous  public  spirit. 

For  church  and  academy,  for  business 
enterprises  and  public  improvements  he  was 
ready  to  plan  and  labor  and  give. 

Besides  the  important  offices  in  the  church 
and  in  other  religious  and  educational  or- 
ganizations which  Deacon  Hobart  so  well 
filled,  he  was  repeatedly  elected  to  places 
of  trust  in  business  institutions  and  in  the 
administration  of  town  and  countj^  affairs. 
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  had  been  for 
sev^eral  terms  a  director  of  the  First  National 
Bank  of  Homer.  At  difterent  times  he  had 
served  as  a  supervisor,  and  in  other  similar 
positions  held  by  him  had  proved  alike  his 
capability  and  faithfulness. 

Deacon  Hobart's  last  sickness  was  short. 
He  was  at  the  preparatory  lecture  of  his 
church  on  Saturday  afternoon,  September 
1st,  and  though  quite  unwell,  also  went  to 
church  the  following  day,  saying  that  it 
might  be  his  last  communion  service  on 
earth.  His  disease,  pneumonia,  was  com- 
plicated with  other  ailments,  and  he  sank 
rapidly  under  its  power  till  he  gently 
breathed  his  last,  I'riday  evening,  Septem- 
ber 7th,  1883.  But,  though  the  body  yielded 
to  the  fell  power  of  disease,  the  soul  was 
victor  in  the  strife.  In  the  face  of  suffer- 
ings inten.se  and  at  times  agonizing,  he  bore 
clear  and  triumphant  testimony  to  the  worth 
and  sufficiency  of  Christian  faith  and  the 
Christian's  Master,  to  sustain  and  bless  even 
to  the  end. 

His  dying  counsels  to  children  and  grand- 
children,   to    pastor,    physician    and   other 


S02 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


friends  will  not  soon  be  forgotten,  while  the 
promises  of  God  and  the  words  of  prayer 
were  often  upon  his  lips.  The  last  words 
that  could  be  understood  from  him  were, 
"The  Lord  is  my  strength." 

It  is  eminently  fitting  that  in  a  history  of 
Cortland  county  the  name  and  memorial  of 
this  good  man  should  have  permanent  place. 
The  engraving  which  pictures  his  face  may 
give  to  those  who  never  knew  him  some 
idea  of  the  bright,  positive,  energetic  char- 
acter that  had  stamped  its  evidence  in  the 
lineaments   of  his  countenance,  but  to  the 


many  who  knew  and  loved  and  honored 
him  it  may  serve  to  recall  the  features  of 
one  whose  true  vigor  of  mind  and  worth 
of  character  make  the  brief  words  of  this 
biography  seem  poor  and  tame,  and  whose 
manifold  services  in  helping  forward  the 
interests  of  his  generation,  and  of  the  in- 
stitutions he  loved,  form  in  truth  his  noblest 
memorial,  and  highest  encomium,  next  to 
the  word  that  as  we  believe  welcomed  him 
above : — 

"Well   done,   good   and    faithful  servant, 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord." 


BRIEF    PERSONALS. 


CINCINNATUS. 

Bennett,  AltVeil  L.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatiis,  farmer, 
born  in  Hector,  Tompkins  county  (now  Schuy- 
ler), in  1834,  settled  in  county  in  1836;  wife, 
Sarah  Halbert,  daughter  of  Seth  and  Sophia 
Halbert,  born  in  Taylor  in  1835;  married  in 
1864,  and  died  in  1875.  Parents,  Philip  S.  and 
Lousia  Ann  (Smith)  Bennett,  natives  of  Duchess 
county;  the  former  died  in  1881,  and  the  latter 
in  1868. 

Carruth,  William  S.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  dental 
surgeon,  born  in  Jefferson  county,  N.  Y.,  March 
23(1,  1823,  settled  in  Cincinnatus  in  1858;  has 
been  town  clerk  four  years  and  was  elected  again 
in  1884;  first  wife,  Catharine  E.  Huntington,  mar- 
ried in  Norwich,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  7th,  1844,  and 
died  in  1868;  second  wife,  Amelia  A.  Brooks, 
daughter  of  Luther  Brooks,  married  in  Norwich 
N.  Y.,  Feb.  6th,  1869.  Parents,  William  and 
Eleanor  (Patterson)  Carruth;  the  former  died 
in  1849,  the  latter  March  19th,  1859.  Dr. 
Carruth  began  the  practice  of  dentistry  in 
Owego,  N.  Y.,  in  1857,  and  in  1858  came  to 
Cincinnatus  and  has  given  it  his  attention  up  to 
the  present  time. 

Crittenden,  Amos  G.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  far- 
mer, stock  dealer  and  dairy  produce,  works  450 
acres,  born  in  Cincinnatus  in  1862  ;  wife,  Addie 
M.  Smith,  born  in  1862,  married  in  18S:.  Pa- 
rents, Porter  and  Triphena  (Delano)  Crittenden, 
married  in  1839,  children  three:  Hattie,  born  in 
1842,  Adelbert  J.,  born  in  1847,  and  Amos  G., 
born  in  1862.  Grandfather,  Ebcnezer  Critten- 
den, settled  in  Cincinnatus  in  1794. 

Crittenden,  Burt  B.,  j).  o.  Cincinnatu.s,  farmer 
and  dairy  produce,  born  in  Cincinnatus  in  1848; 
wife,  Louisa  ("onrad,  born  in  Marathon;  married 


in  1880,  children  two:  Julius  E.,  and  Porter  R. 
Parents,  Julius  and  Altany  (Courtney)  Critten- 
den, the  former  born  in  Cincinnatus  in  1806. 

Fish,  Reuben,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  farmer,  bom 
in  Freetown  in  1839;  was  assessor  from  1881  to 
'84;  wife,  Hattie  R.  Harrington,  daughter  of 
Porter  and  Adaline  M.  (Hoadley)  Harrington, 
born  in  1848;  married  in  1872,  one  child.  Pa- 
rents, E.  Dewel  and  Phoebe  (Orcutt)  Fish ; 
grandparents,  Reuben  and  Betsey  (Cleveland) 
Fish,  the  former  born  in  1780,  married  in  1799, 
and  died  in  1855;  the  latter  born  in  1781,  and 
died  in  1870;  children  twelve. 

Harrington,  Porter  C.,p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  farmer, 
stock  and  dairy  dealer,  born  in  Cincinnatus  in 
1822;  has  been  assessor  three  years;  wife,  Ada- 
line  M.  Hoadley,  born  in  Solon  in  1822;  married 
in  1844,  children  five:  Depea,  Dr.  A.,  Harriett  M., 
who  married  Reuben  Fish,  .Addie,  and  Cora,  who 
married  Randolph  Grant.  Parents,  Dr.  and  Sally 
(Crittenden)  Harrington;  the  former  came  from 
Mass.  to  Cortland  county  where  he  died  in  1867. 
He  served  in  the  war  of  181 2;  second  wife, 
Dolly  (Moore)  Harrington,  now  draws  a  pension. 

Jones,  Benjamin,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  retired 
farmer,  owns  180  acres,  born  on  present  farm 
February  4th,  1820;  wife,  Hannah  C.  Tilling- 
hast,  born  in  Rhode  Island  September  3d,  1S30; 
married  in  1849,  children  five:  Henry  T.,  El- 
mer E.,  Carrie  M.,  Alice  .-\.,  and  Myrta.  Hen- 
ry T.  married  Ada  F.  Tillinghast  in  1880;  chil- 
dren two  :  Nena  May  and  Clarence  Ray;  Elmer 
married  Mary  Cain;  one  child,  Leon  J.;  Carrie 
married  Byron  N.  Johnson ;  one  child,  Glen  H. 
Parents,  Henry  T.  and  Prudence  (Vaughn) 
Jones,  natives  of  Rhode  Island,  who  settled  in 
Cincinnatus  in  1816;  children  three:  Julia,  Han- 
I  nah  and  Benjamin. 

503 


504 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Nichols,  Charles,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  born  in 
Otsego  county,  in  1820,  settled  in  county  in 
1822;  has  been  assessor  two  terms,  justice  of  the 
peace  six  years,  and  held  other  offices;  wife, 
Rhoda  C,  daughter  of  John  and  Polly  (Moore) 
Jones,  born  in  Cincinnatus  in  1828;  married  in 
1848,  one  son,  Fred  L.,  born  in  1857.  Pa- 
rents, Abijah  and  Anna  (Hoit)  Nichols,  the  for- 
mer of  Bennington  Vt.,  died  in  1857,  aged  sixty- 
seven  ;  the  latter  of  Pennsylvania,  died  in  1880, 
aged  ninety  years.  Grandparents,  Samuel  and 
Esther  Nichols,  who  came  to  county  in  1812, 
and  died  in  county. 

Place,  William  R.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  farmer, 
born  in  Rhode  Island  in  181 2,  settled  in  county 
in  1818;  was  assessor  nine  years,  and  held 
other  offices;  wife,  Julia  Johns,  born  in  R.  I. 
in  i8i6;  married  in  1837,  and  died  in  1878, 
leaving  five  children  :  Frank,  Marilla,  Susan,  El- 
bert, and  Edwin.  Parents,  Thomas  and  Anna  T. 
(Cole)  Place,  of  R.  I.,  who  came  to  county  in 
1818;  the  former  died  in  1875,  aged  eighty- 
eight,  the  latter  in  1875;  children  six,  two  sous 
and  four  daughters. 

Silvernail,  James  H.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  car- 
penter and  builder,  born  in  German,  N  Y.,  in 
1834;  wife,  Mrs.  Amanda  (Williams)  Silvernail, 
widow  of  Robert  Silvernail,  born  in  1842,  mar- 
ried second  husband,  James  H.,  in  1878;  chil- 
dren four:  Claud,  Ida  May,  Carl  M.,  and  Mary 
R.  Parents,  Benjamin  and  .Adaline  (Sitts)  Silver- 
nail, natives  of  Montgomery  county,  who  came  to 
Cortland  county  in  1850. 

Smith,  Marcellus  R.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  ijhysi- 
cianand  surgeon, born  in  Solon  (now Taylor)  June 
29th,  1816;  commenced  teaching  common  school 
at  17,  at  21  entered  Pitcher  Academy  under  Prof 
R.  K.  Bourne,  where  he  studied  algebra,  geome- 
try and  surveying ;  from  tliere  he  entered  Cort- 
land .'\cademy  at  Homer  under  Prof.  Samuel  B. 
Woolworth,  where  he  remained  some  two  years, 
studying  Latin,  Greek,  mathematics  and  the 
natural  sciences;  he  continued  teaching  until 
he  entered  the  law  office  of  Drs.  Branch  & 
Powers,  at  Moravia,  N.  Y.,  and  pursued  the 
study  of  medicine  until  he  graduated  at  Geneva 
Medical  College  during  the  term  of  1847  and 
1848,  and  commenced  jjractice  at  Union  Valley. 
He  was  married  to  Deriah  Lord,  June  8th,  1854. 


She  was  born  June  2d,  1832.  They  have  had 
three  children,  the  oldest,  Sumner  M.,  died  in  his 
seventeenth  year ;  the  second.  Dr.  Samuel  L., 
is  now  practicing  medicine  at  Smithville  Flats, 
N.  Y.,  and  the  third,  Frankie,  married  Milan  D. 
Tallett  and  now  lives  in  the  city  of  Minneapolis, 
Kansas.  Dr.  M.  R.  Smith  moved  to  Cincinna- 
tus in  1858,  where  he  now  practices  medicine. 
He  has  for  the  last  two  years  been  president  of 
the  County  Medical  Society,  and  is  now  a  mem- 
ber of  the  New  York  State  Medical  Association. 

White,  jr.,  David,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  farmer, 
dairy  and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Cincinnatus  in 
18 1 6.  Parents,  David  and  Tamor  (Waters) 
Wiiite,  natives  of  Westchester  county.  His 
wife,  Sarah  (Briggs)  White,  daughter  of  John 
and  Margaret  (Jones)  Briggs,  was  born  in 
WiUet  in  1820,  married  in  1842.  One  son, 
James  White,  born  in  1851,  married  Julia  C. 
Tracy  in  1876;  one  child,  Willie  J.  White,  born 
in  1879. 

White,  Stephen,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  saw-mill, 
■  and  dealer  in  lumber,  born  in  Chenango  county 
in  1831,  settled  in  county  in  1848;  wife,  F.liza 
M.  HiUard,  born  in  1837;  married  in  1854,  chil- 
dren ten.  Parents,  Jacob  and  Martha  (Mack) 
White.  Stephen  White  began  the  lumber  busi- 
ness in  1866,  purchased  his  present  site  and 
erected  his  mill,  72  by  18,  and  now  has  an  ex- 
tended custom  business. 


CUYLER. 

."Vllen,  Harvey  B.,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns 
157  acres,  born  in  Petersburgh,  N.  Y.,  in  1836, 
settled  in  Cuyler  in  i860.  Was  assessor,  and 
held  the  office  of  postmaster  at  South  Cuyler ; 
wife,  Mary  J.  Philliiis,  daughter  of  Rodney  and 
Phoebe  (Monroe)  Phillips;  married  in  1856, 
children  three:  Ella  M.,  Eva  S.,  and  Wells  H. 
Parents,  James  and  Susannah  (Phillips)  .■\llen, 
of  New  Albany,  Pa. 

.\ndrews,  LLarlan  P.,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer, 
owns  250  acres,  born  in  Fabius  in  1837,  settled  in 
county  in  i860 ;  was  assessor  two  terms,  is  pres- 
ent supervisor ;  wife,  Phcebe  P.  Brown,  daugh- 
ter of  Bcnj;nnin  and  Sarah  (Bogardus)  Brown,  of 
Cuyler;  married  in  1S60,  children  three:  Burnett 


Brief  Personals. 


SOS 


B.,  Myrta  I.  and  Lina  P.;  second  wife,  Marion  Bo- 
gardus,  daughter  of  Israel  R.  and  Irene  (Brown) 
Bogardus,  of  111.;  married  in  1870,  children 
three :   Howard  I.,  Mildred  E.,  and  Irene. 

Babcock,  Isaac  C,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns 
58  acres,  born  in  Fabius  in  1824  ;  wife,  Mary  A. 
Fairbanks,  daughter  of  Arad  Fairbanks,  of  Cuy- 
ler; married  in  1849,  children  four,  one  living: 
John  W.  Parents,  Benjamin  T.,  and  Polly 
(Cale)  Babcock,  pioneers  of  Fabius. 

Baldwin,  William,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer  and 
lumber  dealer,  born  in  Lincklaen,  Chenango 
county,  in  1843,  settled  here  in  1873,  was  super- 
visor of  Cuyler  in  1883;  wife,  Emma  C.  Ran- 
dall, daughter  of  Zebulon  C.  and  Polly  (Cong- 
den)  Rand.all,  of  Chenango  county  ;  married  in 
1868,  children  three:  Vinnie  R.,  U'illiam  N., 
and  Julia.  Parents,  Joseph  and  Mary  (Newell) 
Baldwin,  natives  of  Yorkshire,  England,  who 
came  here  in   182^. 

Brown,  Benjamin,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  300 
acres,  born  in  Truxton  in  1814,  and  died  in 
June,  1878;  wife,  Sarah,  born  in  Tru.xton  in  1S18, 
daughter  of  Stephen  and  Sarah  (Tripi))  Bogar- 
dus; the  former  w-as  born  in  Duchess  county, 
the  latter  in  Columbia  county  ;  married  in  1836, 
children  eleven.  Parents,  Seabury  and  Polly 
(Fox)  Brown,  natives  of  Connecticut. 

Brown,  John  W.,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns 
125  acres,  born  in  Cuyler  in  1817;  wife,  Polly 
Whitmarsh,  daughter  of  Silas  and  Charlotte 
(Vincent)  Whitmarsh  ;  children  five :  Wesley,  a 
resident  of  Cuyler,  married  Alice  Gates,  of 
Pompey,  in  1849,  ^""'^  '^-  carried  Volney  Vin- 
cent in  1863,  Sarah  R.  married  Hiram  Gibbs 
in  1868,  Stephen,  a  resident  of  Cuyler,  married 
Mary  C.  Tucker  in  1875,  John  A.,  a  resident  of 
Pompey,  married  Nora  V.  Stillman,  of  Cuyler, 
in  1878.  Parents,  John  and  Jamima  (Hollen- 
beck)  Brown;  both  were  born  in  1771. 

Brown,  Seabury  F.,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  of  the  firm 
of  Brown  Brothers,  proprietors  of  steam  grist- 
mill, born  in  Cuyler  in  1854;  wife,  Ida  M. 
Morse,  daughter  of  Addison  and  Maria  (Hamil- 
ton) Morse,  who  were  among  the  early  settlers 
of  the  town:  married  in  1878,  one  child,  Sarah 
W.  Parents,  Benjamin  and  Sar.ah  (Bogardus) 
Brown,  early  settlers  of  Cuyler. 

Colgrove,  Eli  J.,  p.   o.    Cuyler,  manufacturer 


of  lumber  and  farmer,  born  in  Cuyler  in  1842; 
wife,  Anna  J.  Kenyon,  daughter  of  Joseph  L. 
and  Sally  M.  (Chase)  Kenyon,  of  Pitcher,  Che- 
nango county,  married  in  1878.  Parents,  Eli 
S.  and  Sally  B.  (Wilcox)  Colgrove. 

Dunce,  Alexander,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  born 
in  Schenectady  in  1809,  settled  in  county  in  1839, 
was  constable  and  collector,  town  sui)erintend- 
ent  of  schools,  justice  of  the  peace,  supervisor 
nine  terms,  chairman  of  the  board  one  year,  and 
notary  public  since  1869;  wife,  Nancy  M. 
Turner,  of  Madison  county;  married  in  1840  and 
died  in  1875  ;  second  wife,  Mrs.  Pierce,  daugh- 
ter of  Joseph  and  Huldah  Allen,  of  Cuyler;  mar- 
ried in  1877. 

Farrington,  Edward,  p.  o.  De  Ruyter,  farmer, 
owns  130  acres,  born  in  Flushing,  L.  I.,  in  1821, 
setded  in  Cuyler  in  1850;  wife,  Mary  Hill, 
daughter  of  Daniel  and  Ruth  Hill,  who  died  in 
1864;  one  child,  Maria  L.,  now  Mrs.  James 
Tripp,  of  Marathon ;  second  wife,  Emelina 
Clark,  daughter  of  Josephus  Clark,  of  Fabius, 
Onondaga  county. 

Fuller,  Adelbert,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  postmaster  and 
general  merchant,  born  in  Taylor  in  1837,  was 
justice  of  peace;  wife,  Sarah  Porter,  daughter 
of  Daniel  and  Aseneth  Porter,  of  Taylor;  married 
in  1864,  children  three:  Allie,  Fred  A.,  and 
May.  Parents,  Sullivan  and  Polly  (Cole)  Ful- 
ler, of  Taylor. 

Irish,  Elias  B.,  p.  o.  De  Ruyter,  farmer,  owns 
215  acres,  was  assessor  several  terms;  wife,  Al- 
mira  Muncy,  daughter  of  James  and  Esther 
(Clark)  Muncy,  early  settlers  of  this  town  ;  mar- 
ried in  1845,  children  two:  Elsie  C,  now  Mrs. 
Charles  J.  York,  of  Cuyler,  and  Oscar  J.,  of 
Iowa.  Parents,  Elias  and  Catherine  (Coon) 
Irish,  natives  of  Rhode  Island,  who  settled  here 
in  1814. 

Keeler,  Nelson,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns 
430  acres,  was  assessor,  and  is  present  justice  of 
peace ;  wife,  Sarah  R.  Harris,  daughter  of  Evan 
and  Sally  (Bragg)  Harris;  married  in  1849,  chil- 
dren living  five :  M.  J.,  Anna  J.,  now  Mrs.  John 
Davis,  of  Truxton,  Ada,  Frank  N.,  and  Alta. 
Parents,  Martin  and  .-\nna  (Woodruflf)  Keeler, 
who  came  from  Massachusetts  in  1795. 

Knapp,  Clarence  N.,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  dealer  in  ag- 
ricultural implements,  stoves  and  house  furnish- 


5o6 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


ing  goods,  born  in  Spafford,  Onondaga  county, 
in  1836,  was  town  clerk  of  Cuyler  for  nine  years ; 
wife,  Olivia  I,.  Barber,  daughter  of  Silas  M.  and 
Phtebe  (Burdick)  Barber,  of  Scott,  married  in 
1858.  Parents,  Peter  and  Saberah  (Babcock) 
Knapp,  of  Spafford. 

Morse,  William  A.,  j).  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns 
443  acres,  born  in  Cuyler  in  1827,  was  assessor; 
wife,  Maria  Hamilton,  of  New  Berlin;  married 
in  1850,  children  three:  Orlando  E.,  Elba  A., 
now  Mrs.  John  McCallister,  of  Cuyler,  Ida, 
now  Mrs.  S.  E.  Brown,  of  Cuyler.  Parents,  Wil- 
liam and  Betsey  (Hills)  Morse,  natives  of  Cuyler. 
Grandfather,  David  Morse,  came  from  New  Jer- 
sey to  Cuyler  in  1793. 

Patrick,  John  W.,  son  of  Hon.  Stephen  and 
Angelina  Patrick,  was  born  in  town  of  Tru.xton, 
in  1841,  enlisted  on  the  26th  day  of  April,  1861, 
being  the  first  enlistment  in  the  town,  was  in  the 
first  company  raised  in  the  county  during  the 
Rebellion,  was  discharged  as  sergeant  at  Elmira, 
May  26th,  1863,  on  account  of  expiration  of 
term  of  service,  came  to  Cuyler  in  1864,  owns 
the  Patrick  homestead  consisting  of  431  acres, 
which  was  deeded  by  the  State  to  Penelope  Pat- 
rick for  services  rendered  by  her  father;  was 
married  in  1866  to  Agnes,  daughter  of  John  and 
Anna  Robbins,  of  Truxton ;  has  three  children 
living:  Stella  A.,  Wesley  B.,  and  William  K. ;  has 
held  the  offices  of  a.ssessor  and  supervisor  of  the 
town. 

Pease,  Elijah,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns  102 
acres,  born  in  Eaton  in  1821,  setded  in  county 
in  1856;  wife,  Lucy  Ann  Hamilton,  daughter 
of  Alexander  and  Lydia  (Button)  Hamilton,  of 
Georgetown  ;  married  in  1849,  children  two  :  D. 
Edgar,  of  Cuyler,  and  George  E.  Parents,  Wil- 
liam and  Ruth  (Vinton)  Pease,  of  Eaton,  N.  Y. 

Petrie,  Adam,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns  200 
acres,  settled  in  county  in  1825,  has  been  as- 
sessor ;  wife,  Lucinda  Kinney,  daughter  of  Thos. 
and  Elmira  (Brown)  Kinney;  married  in  1847, 
one  child.  Belle,  now  Mrs.  Eugene  Curtis,  of 
Cortland.  Parents,  Abraham  and  Nancy  (Har- 
ter)  Petrie. 

Potter,  Oliver  C,  p.  o.  South  Cuyler,  farmer, 
owns  170  acres,  born  in  Richfield,  Otsego 
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1817,  came  to  county  in  1822  ; 
wife,  Amelia  U.    Hyer,  daughter  of  Chas.  and 


Betsey  (Cleveland)  Hyer,  of  Guilford,  N.  Y.; 
married  in  1858,  one  child,  Helen  L.,  now  Mrs. 
Edward  H.  Knajjp,  of  Onondaga  county.  Pa- 
rents, Charles  and  Perlina  (Carver)  Potter,  na- 
tives of  R.  I. 

Risley,  Wait,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  born  in  Cuyler,  Janu- 
ary nth,  1820;  farmer,  owns  390  acres;  wife 
Eunice  J.  Vincent,  daughter  of  Cornelius  and 
Harriet  (Smith)  Vincent;  married  in  1865,  chil- 
dren two :  Lena  B.,  and  Grant  W.  Parents, 
Waite  and  Polly  Risley,  natives  of  Connecticut. 

Smith,  David  C,  p.  o.  Kenney,  farmer,  owns 
268  acres,  born  in  Lincklaen,  Chenango  county, 
in  1842,  settled  in  Cortland  county  in  1869,  is 
present  assessor;  wife,  Emeline  Jones,  daughter 
of  William  and  Mary  Jones,  of  Truxton  ;  married 
in  1869,  children  four:  Nellie,  Fannie,  Hattie, 
and  Richard.  Parents,  William  and  Lovina 
(Congdon)  Smith,  of  Lincklaen. 

Steel,  George  G.,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer,  owns 
300  acres,  born  in  Herkimer  county  in  181 2, 
came  to  county  in  1842,  and  died  in  1880;  wife, 
Mary  Ann  Putman,  of  Danube,  N.  Y. ;  married 
in  1834,  children  ten,  nine  living:  Cornelius, 
John,  Elias,  Elizabeth,  now  Mrs.  Cyrus  Smith, 
of  Truxton,  George  W.,  Almonzo,  Mary,  now 
Mrs.  Theodore  De  Barr,  of  Truxton,  Maria,  now 
Mrs.  Vincent  Heath,  of  Cuyler. 

Whitmarsh,  Hon.  Hiram,  p.  o.  Cuyler,  farmer, 
owns  280  acres,  born  in  Cuyler  in  1830,  was  as- 
sessor and  supervisor  in  the  year  1867,  and 
member  of  assembly  in  the  year  i86g;  wife, 
Zelia  D.  Brown,  daughter  of  Seabury  and  Polly 
(Fox)  Brown,  of  Cuyler;  married  in  1854,  chil- 
dren four:  Carrie,  Jesse  B.,  Fred  C.,and  Paul  L. 
Parents,  Job  and  Arvilla  (Wheat)  Whitmarsh, 
who  were  among  the  first  settlers  of  Cujler. 


FREETOWN. 

Borthwick,  Marcus,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
farmer,  born  in  Middleburg,  Schoharie  county, 
Dec.  ist,  1830,  was  supervisor  in  1844,  and  town 
auditor  several  years;  wife,  Charlotte  Carter, 
daughter  of  Eleazer  and  Sarah  (Curtis)  Carter, 
born  in  Onondaga  county  in  1833;  married  in  1867, 
one  daughter.  Parents,  .Andrew  and  Sally  Bush- 
nell  Borthwick,  natives  of  Schoharie  county,  who 
settled  in  Freetown  in  1832 ;  children  nine. 


Brief  Personals. 


507 


Brainard,  Alanson,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
farmer  and  retired  dairyman,  born  in  Herkimer 
county  in  1820,  settled  in  county  in  1867  ;  wife, 
Maria  A.  Legg,  born  in  Massachusetts  in  1824; 
married  in  1844;  children  seven  :  Josephine  M., 
George  W.,  Henry  H.,  Joshua  B.,  David  L.,  Ar- 
thur E.,  and  Charles  J. ;  George  W.  died  in  1873, 
Henry  H.  enlisted  in  the  iS6th  Regiment 
N.  Y.  v.,  in  1864,  and  David  L.,  joined  the 
Greeley  expedition  in  exploring  the  Arctic  re- 
gions;  he  reached  Lat.  3.24,  N.  Long.  40.46, 
VV.,  the  most  northern  point  reached  by  any  ex- 
plorer ;  he  was  rescued  with  the  remainder  of  the 
Greeley  survivors  June  2  2d,  1884.  Parents  of  Alan- 
son  Brainard  were:  Joshua  and  Freelove  (Ellis) 
Brainard,  natives  of  Connecticut,  who  setded  in 
Herkimer  county  in  1800  where  they  died. 

Eaton,  Calvin,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners,  farmer 
and  dairyman,  owns  230  acres,  born  in  Ashford, 
Windham  Co.,  Conn.,  in  1808,  settled  in  county 
in  1847,  was  commissioner  four  years,  and  asses- 
sor six  years ;  wife,  Caroline  H.  Campbell,  born 
in  Willett  in  1827  ;  married  in  1849,  children 
four:  Florilla  D.,  born  in  1850,  Estella,  born  in 
1856,  Frank,  bom  in  1861,  Fred,  bom  in  1866. 
Parents,  James  and  Fannie  (Rickards)  Eaton, 
natives  of  Connecticut,  who  came  to  New  York 
in  1815;  the  former  died  in  Otsego  county,  the 
latter  in  Freetown. 

Edwards,  Joseph  D.,  ]).  o.  Texas  Valley, 
farmer,  born  in  Freetown  in  1850;  wife,  Louisa 
Maynard,  daughter  of  Madison  B.  and  Maria 
Maynard,  born  in  Virgil  in  1854  ;  married  in 
1874,  children  two:  Wellington  F.  and  Wesley 
J.  Parents,  Stephen  and  Sally  (Bowdish)  Ed- 
wards, the  former  born  in  Cincinnatus  in  1821, 
died  in  1883,  the  latter  born  in  Newstead  in 
1819. 

Grant,  Philander  D.,  p.  o.  East  Freetown,  P. 
M.  and  retired  contractor-builder,  born  in  Free- 
town in  1832,  has  been  postmaster  eighteen 
years,  constable  seven  years,  and  held  other  dis- 
trict offices ;  wife,  Joanna  Hickey,  born  in  Ho- 
boken  in  1832;  married  January  2d,  185 1,  chil- 
dren two:  Ellen  F.,born  October  8th,  1851,  and 
Emmet  C,  born  September  i  ith,  1856.  Parents, 
Miner  and  Ziba  Underwood,  the  former  born  in 
1806,  the  latter  in  1808  ;  married  in  1828,  chil- 
dren nine. 


Harvey,  Thomas,  p.  o.  Freetown,  famier  and 
stock  dealer,  carpenter  and  builder,  born  in 
England  in  1824,  settled  in  county  in  1832; 
wife,  Mrs.  Sarah  (Cameron)  Livingston,  born  in 
Freetown  in  1837;  married  in  1875,  one  child, 
Eugene  L.  Parents,  William  and  Sarah  (Stark- 
ey)  Harvey,  natives  of  England,  came  to  Free- 
town with  six  children  in  1832,  the  former  died 
in  1862,  aged  seventy-two  years,  the  latter  died 
in  1852. 

Madison,  Eri,  p.  o.  Texas  Valley,  farmer,  born 
in  Blenheim,  Schoharie  county,  in  1821,  edu- 
cated at  a  common  school,  taught  school  from 
1842  till  1848  in  the  winter;  married  Harriet 
Carter,  daughter  of  Ezra  and  Dimmis  Carter, 
February,  1848;  was  elected  justice  of  peace 
in  1834,  and  in  1856  was  elected  supervisor  and 
re-elected  in  1857,  since  which  time  he  has  held 
various  town  offices.  Parents,  David  and  Re- 
becca (Hull)  ^Lldison,  the  former  born  in  Rens- 
selaer county  in  1788  and  died  in  1866;  the 
latter  died  "in  i88i,  aged  eighty-five;  her  father 
was  Ebenezer  Hull,  came  from  Connecticut. 
Grandfather  David  Madison,  sr.,  was  born  in 
Delaware  county,  and  his  parents  were  among 
the  first  settlers  in  the  town  of  Middletown. 

Martin,  Aldin,  p.  o.  East  Freetown,  farmer 
and  dairyman,  born  in  Freetown  in  1853;  wife, 
Amy  E.  Hammond,  daughter  of  John  and 
Evaline  Hammond,  born  in  1856;  married  in 
1880,  one  child,  Carrie  E.  Parents,  Simmons 
and  Lucy  (Wildman)  Martin,  the  former  born  in 
Conn,  in  1807,  came  to  county  in  1813,  the 
latter  born  in  1817,  children  six. 

Metzgar  James,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners,  far- 
mer and  dairyman,  born  in  Northampton  county, 
Pa.,  in  1818,  settled  in  county  in  1839;  wife, 
Clarissa  M.  Wildman,  daughter  of  Marcus  and 
Sibyl  (Rogers)  Wildman;  married  in  1842,  chil- 
dren four:  Lucetta  M.,  Tryphena  A.,  Almeron  H. 
and  Ina  E.  Parents,  Jonas  and  Mary  (Merwin) 
Metzgar,  natives  of  Northampton  county,  Penn. 

Seeber,  James  H.,  p.  o.  Freetown,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Freetown  in  1833,  was  su- 
pervisor two  terms,  assessor  six  years,  and  held 
other  offices  ;  wife,  Martha  Smith,  daughter  of 
Giles  M.,  born  in  Marathon  in  1833  ;  married  in 
1857,  died  in  1870,  leaving  two  children:  Clay- 
ton W.,  and  Arthur  A. ;  second  wife,  Mrs.  Jane 


5o8 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Smith,  daughter  of  Daniel  and  Emeline  Wight- 
man  married  in  1870,  one  child,  Martha  E. 
Parents,  James  and  Eliza  Ste[)hens,  the  former 
born  in  Schoharie  county,  the  latter  in  Oneida 
county;  children  six.  Grandparents,  Sophrenus 
and  Elizabeth  Seeber,  natives  of  Schoharie 
county,  came  to  Freetown  in  1820,  and  settled 
on  James  H.'s  present  farm  of  300  acres;  chil- 
dren six. 

Slocum,  Ransom,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
farmer  and  dairy,  born  in  Oneida  county  in 
1825,  settled  in  county  in  1853,  was  assessor 
three  years,  and  held  other  district  offices ;  wife, 
Celestia  M.  Ho])kins,  born  in  Oneida  county  in 
1828;  married  in  1854,  children  five :  Frank  R., 
Emily  C,  Charles  H.,  Nelson  H.,  and  Edgar 
J.  Frank  R.,  married  Susan  Dietrich.  Parents, 
Henry  and  Sally  (Bull)  Slocum  ;  the  former  was 
born  in  Vermont,  and  is  still  living,  the  latter  was 
born  in  Oneida  county,  and  died  in  1876;  chil- 
dren eight,  six  living. 

Smith,  Chauncey,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
farmer  and  dairyman,  born  in  Freetown  in  1837, 
was  supervisor  three  years;  wife,  Mary  Parker, 
born  in  Vermont,  married  in  1863,  and  died  in 
1873,  leaving  two  children  :  Lettie  and  Lucinda  ; 
second  wife,  I^lla  Lampher,  born  in  1856;  chil- 
dred  four :  Mary,  Dudley  C,  Walter  and  Clark. 
Parents,  Dudley  and  Nancy  M.  (Carpenter)  Smith, 
the  former  born  in  Norway,  Herkimer  county, 
N.  v.,  came  to  Freetown  in  1837,  died  in  1873, 
aged  68  years;  the  latter  died  in  1879,  aged  68 
years ;  children  seven. 

Tanner,  George  J.,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
farmer  and  inventor  and  patentee  of  the  milk 
tester,  owns  170  acres,  born  in  Trenton  in  1836, 
settled  in  county  in  1840,  was  assessor  four 
years;  wife,  Dimmes  Carter,  daughter  of  Au- 
gustine and  Olive  (Richardson)  Carter,  born  in 
1845  ;  married  in  1863,  children  eight.  Parents 
L.D.  and  Mary  (Holliday)  Tanner,  the  former  of 
Herkimer  county,  settled  in  Freetown  in  1840, 
and  was  a  Methodist  Episcopal  clergyman  for 
many  years. 

Tarbell,  William  N.,  p.  o.  East  Freetown, 
farmer,  born  in  Freetown  in  1857,  is  justice  of 
peace;  wife,  Genevieve  Hill,  born  in  Will  county, 
Illinois,  in  1857  ;  married  Sept.  igtli,  1877, 
one  son,  Leon  J.,  born  March  24th,  1879.      Pa- 


rents, Lorenzo  and  Julia  (Cameron)  Tarbell,  the 
former  born  in  Groton  in  181 9,  was  justice  of 
peace  twelve  years,  the  latter  born  in  1821,  mar- 
ried in  1840  and  died  in  1877  ;  children  six. 
Grandfather,  Daniel  Tarbell,  settled  in  Free- 
town in  1835. 

Underwood,  Alanson,  p.  o.  East  Freetown, 
retired  farmer,  owns  400  acres,  born  in  Edmon- 
son, N.  Y.,  in  1806,  settled  in  county  in  1813; 
wife,  Laura  Staftbrd,  born  in  Otsego  county  in 
1807;  married  in  1829,  children  eleven,  seven 
now  living :  Joseph,  Alanson  jr.,  and  Susan 
(twins),  Lyman,  Lewis,  Levina  and  Laura.  Pa- 
rents, Vander  and  Jerusha  (Wood)  Underwood, 
the  former  born  in  Woodstock,  Conn.,  in  1781, 
and  died  in  A])ril,  1862,  the  latter  born  in  Mans- 
field, Vt.,  in  1781,  married  Nov.  17th,  1803,  and 
died  in  1847  ;  children  seventeen. 

Underwood,  Vander,  jr.,  p.  o.  McGrawvilie, 
farmer  and  stock  grower,  born  in  Freetown  in 
1821,  is  a  large  land  owner  in  Mississippi;  wife, 
Julia  A.  Grant,  daughter  of  Russell  and  Betsey 
(Loveless)  Grant,  born  in  Freetown  in  1825; 
married  in  1846,  children  six,  three  now  living: 
Electa,  Betsey  and  Louisa.  Parents,  Vander  and 
Jerusha  (Wood)  Underwood. 

Watrous,  Benjamin  B.,  p.  o.  FreetowMi  Cor- 
ners, retired  farmer,  born  in  Washington  county 
in  1803,  settled  in  county  in  181 1,  held  many 
district  offices  and  was  a  deacon  in  the  Baptist 
Church  for  many  years  ;  wife,  Elizabetli  Lam- 
pher, born  in  Munson,  Mass.,  in  1803;  married 
in  1824,  children  twelve,  six  now  living :  Laura 
Jane,  born  in  1826,  Emerette  in  1832,  Benjamin 
F.  in  1840,  Jerusha  in  1842,  Austin  A.  in  1846, 
Edgar  A.  in  1848.  Parents,  Austin  and  Sally 
(Backus)  Watrous,  natives  of  Connecticut,  the 
former  born  in  1778,  and  died  in  1864,  the  latter 
born  in  1781,  and  died  in  1844. 

Watrous,  Leonard  J.,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
farmer,  born  in  Freetown  in  1834  ;  wife,  Ema- 
line  Slocum,  daughter  of  Henry  and  Sally  (Bull) 
Slocum,  born  in  Oneida  county  in  1832;  mar- 
ried in  1864,  children  two:  Roscoe,  horn  .4ug. 
2Sth,  1870,  and  died  in  1879,  and  Addie  Luella. 
Parents,  Joseph  and  Lydia  (Leach)  Watrous,  the 
former  born  in  Washington  county  in  1801,  set- 
tled in  Freetown  in  i8io  with  his  parents;  chil- 
dren seven. 


Brief  Personals. 


509 


Wildman,  Joseph,  p.  o.  East  Freetown,  born 
in  Freetown  in  1S09,  ami  died  March  9th,  1878; 
wife,  Mrs.  Ann  Eva  Van  Slyke,  daughter  of 
Jolin  and  Lydia  (Marenus)  Van  Slyke,  born  in 
Otsego  county  in  1821;  married  in  1838,  chil- 
dren five:  Rollin,  born  in  1839,  Josephine  A., 
born  in  1841,  Mahalah,  born  in  1843,  Marcus 
N.  in  1844,  and  King  L.  in  1847,  ^^'^o  married 
Margaret  Metzgar  in  1873;  children  four.  Pa- 
rents, Joseph  and  Mindwell  Wildman.  Grand- 
father Wildman  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in 
the  old  town  of  Cincinnatus. 

Woods,  Elisha,  jr.,  p.  o.  Freetown  Corners, 
retired  boot  and  shoe  manufacturer,  born  in 
Bainbridge,  N.  Y.,  in  1804,  settled  in  county  in 
1 8 13.  was  deputy  sheriff,  collector  four  years, 
constable  ten  years,  and  held  other  offices ;  wife, 
Sally  Montgomery,  daughter  of  James  and  Bar- 
bara (Moon)  Montgomery,  of  Rhode  Island, 
born  in  1802;  married  in  1824,  children  seven, 
five  now  living:  Silvester,  Lydia,  Sherman,  Eliza, 
and  E.  B.  Parents,  Elisha  and  Hannah  (Spen- 
cer) Woods,  natives  of  Vermont,  settled  in 
Chenango  county  in  1789,  children  six.  Elisha 
was  a  Revolutionary  soldier  and  one  of  General 
Washington's  body  guards.     He  died  in   1842. 


HARFORD. 

Bradley,  Horace  W.,  p.  o.  Harford,  steam 
lumber,  planing,  lath,  flour,  feed,  and  shingle 
mill,  owns  400  acres,  born  in  New  Haven,  Conn., 
in  1844,  setded  in  county  in  1853;  wife,  Eliza, 
beth  M.  Sutton,  born  in  England  in  1849,  came 
to  America  with  parents  in  1852,  who  located  in 
Chautauqua  county,  N.  Y. ;  married  in  1868, 
children  four.  Parents,  Woodward  and  E.  (Hem- 
mingway)  Bradley,  the  former  born  in  Conn,  in 
1806,  died  in  1852,  the  latter  was  a  daughter  of 
Col.  Jacob  and  Eunice  Hemmingway,  early 
setders  of  county.  H.  W.  Bradley  enlisted  in  Co. 
E,  157th  N.  Y.  Vols,  in  1862,  was  wounded  at 
the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  served  to  close  of  war 
and  was  discharged,  after  which  he  spent  some 
years  in  the  Penn.  oil  regions,  then  relumed  to 
Harford  and  purchased  his  mill  and  has  since 
done  a  very  extensive  business. 

Brown,  Homer  J.,  p.   o.   Harford,  farmer  and 


dealer  in  farm  implements,  born  in  Harford  in 
1840,  has  been  town  clerk:  wife,  Georgia  Dick- 
enson, born  in  1839;  married  in  1867,  died  in 
1874,  leaving  two  children:  J.  Grove  and  Grace 
D ;  second  w'ife,  Eva  D.  Lathrop,  married  in 
1876.  Parents,  Dexter  and  Betsey  (H olden) 
Brown,  the  former  born  in  1815,  the  latter  in 
1813  ;  married  in  1838,  children  two.  Grand- 
parents, Josiah  and  Sophia  (Graves)  Brown. 

Brown,  Norton  L.,  p.  o.  Harford,  fanner,  bom 
in  Harford  in  1820  ;  wife,  Judith  Edminister 
daughter  of  Henry  and  Mary  (Barnes)  Edminis- 
ter, born  in  Harford  in  1824;  married  in  1842, 
children  four:  De  Ette  L.,  Abbie  R.,  Dexter  D., 
and  Charles  J.  (deceased).  Parents,  Morris  and 
Matilda  (Holden)  Brown,  the  former  born  in 
Chenango  county  in  1799  and  died  March  23d, 
1883,  the  latter  born  in  Maine  in  1799,  married 
in  1819,  children  three.  Grandparents,  Josiah 
and  Sophia  (Graves)  Brown,  natives  of  Mass., 
who  settled  in  county  in  18 14. 

Burlingame,  Charles  C,  p.  o.  Harford  Mills, 
farmer,  born  in  Windham  county.  Conn.,  in 
1838,  setded  in  county  in  1853,  has  been  justice 
of  the  peace,  and  held  other  minor  offices  ;  wife, 
Mary  C.  Griswold,  daughter  of  Rev.  William  and 
Lovina  (Kilner)  Griswold,  born  in  Tioga  county, 
in  1842;  married  in  1861,  children  two:  Hattie 
L.,  and  Nettie  J.  Parents,  Peter  and  Harriet 
(Dean)  Burlingame,  the  former  was  a  minister 
and  settled  in  Harford  in  1853,  wife  died  in 
1853;  second  wife,  Nancy  Brown,  of  Homer, 
married  in  1855,  children  two.  Charles  C.  Bur- 
lingame enlisted  in  Co.  E,  157th  Reg.,  under  Col. 
P.  P.  Brown,  in  August,  1SC2,  served  three  years, 
was  promoted  to  lieutenant  and  afterward  to 
captain. 

Bushnell,  H.  T.,  j).  o.  Harford,  dealer  in  dry 
goods,  groceries,  hardware,  clothing,  boots  and 
shoes  and  all  farm  implements,  born  in  Ohio  in 
1843,  was  supervisor  in  1884,  and  had  previously 
held  the  offices  of  town  clerk,  notary  public  and 
constable;  wife,  Jennie  H.  HoUett,  born  in  1839; 
married  in  1868,  one  child,  Charles  Laverne. 
Parents,  Lewis  and  Elizabeth  (Treat)  Buslinell, 
of  Ohio.  H.  T.  Bushnell  began  the  mercantile 
business  in  Harford  in  1872- and  in  1S80  be- 
came a  partner  with  Samuel  N.  Holden  ;  the 
business  is  now  conducted  under  the  name  of 
Holden  &  Bushnell. 


5IO 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Clinton,  Austin  W.,  p.  o.  Harford  Mills,  dealer 
in  knnl)cr,  horn  in  Newark  Valley,  in  1850; 
settled  in  county  in  1875,  has  heen  supervisor; 
wile,  Alice  Davis,  of  Scranton,  married  in  1875. 
Parents,  R.  W.  and  Anna  (Knapp)  Clinton; 
Children  three:  A.  W.,  Arthur,  who  married  Ad- 
die  Roys,  and  Ella  who  married  Morris  Ehvell. 
R.  W.  Clinton's  Sons  began  the  lumber  trade  in 
Harford  in  1872,  a  fire  destroyed  their  mill  in 
1880,  a  new  one  was  erected,  the  main  building 
of  which  is  80x32,  two  stories  high,  the  other 
50x26,  two  stories  high,  run  by  steam  which  also 
heats  their  dwelling  houses,  as  well  as  their  store 
and  office,  the  sawdust  is  used  for  fuel.  They 
run  six  circular  saws,  a  planing  and  lath  mill,  and 
own  500  acres  of  timber  and  farming  land. 
They  have  a  very  extensive  trade  in  the  eastern 
markets  and  N.  J.,  where  they  make  a  specialty 
of  furnishing  lumber  for  building  and  govern- 
ment purposes.  Austin  W.  was  a  graduate  of 
Cornell  University  in  1872,  was  .professor  of 
natural  science  in  Kingston,  Penn.,  traveled  in 
Europe,  visiting  nine  different  countries,  returned 
and  settled  at  his  present  business  in  1875.  The 
brothers  are  now  building  a  mill  at  Pike  Mills, 
Pa.,  with  a  capacity  of  one  hundred  thousand 
feet  per  day. 

Corbin,  Joseph,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer,  born  in 
Connecticut,  October  22d,  1799,  settled  in  county 
in  1858,  on  a  farm  of  70  acres,  and  died  May 
22d,  1883;  wife,  Ellen  Loomis,  born  in  Smith- 
ville,  N.  Y.,  Feb.  15th,  1803  ;  married  Sept.  6th, 
1820,  died  Aug.  27th,  1876,  leaving  four  chil- 
dren :   Betsey,  born  in  1824,  John  in  1826,  Mary 

A.  in  1827,  and  Lois  A.  in  1833;  John  enlisted 
in  t^he  157th  regiment  in  1862,  and  served  to 
close  of  war;  married  Elizabeth  A.  Ford,  chil- 
dren two ;  Betsey  married  Andrew  Smith  and  re- 
sides in  Taylor,  Cortland  county  ;  children  six. 

Culver,  George  VV.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer, 
born  in  Truxton  in  1825;  wife,  Mary  M.  Lason, 
born  in  1824;  married  in  1850,  children  four: 
Viola,  John,  Lizzie  and  Willie.     Parents,  Simon 

B.  and  Betsey  (Vincent)  Culver,  the  former 
born  in  New  jersey  in  1798,  the  latter  born  in 
Herkimer  county  in  1804;  married  in  1821,  chil- 
dren six.  Grandparents,  George  and  Jemina 
(Morse)  Culver,  natives  of  New  Jersey,  settled  in 
Truxton  in  1802,  purchased  100  acres  of  land  at 
$3.44  per  acre. 


Edmonds,  Jonathan  C,  p.  o.  Harford,  grocer 
and  general  market  for  flour,  seeds  and  all  staple 
articles;  born  in  Saratoga  county  in  1842,  was 
town  clerk  three  years,  assessor  one  term,  com- 
missioner three  terms,  deputy  sheriff  one  year  and 
constable  for  several  years;  wife,  Emma  Holden, 
daughter  of  Benjamin  and  Maria  (Lathrop)  Hol- 
den, born  in  1844;  married  in  1862,  one  child, 
Nellie.  Parents,  Frances  and  Eliza  (Burge)  Ed- 
monds, who  settled  in  Harford  in  1854.  J.  C. 
Edmonds  began  the  grocery  business  in  1879, 
and  he  still  continues  to  deal  in  all  leading 
goods. 

Hemenvvay,  Morris  B.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer, 
born  in  Harford  in  1834;  wife,  Bethesda  B. 
Rood,  daughter  of  Josiah  \V.  and  Bethesda  (Bliss) 
Rood,  born  in  Otsego  county  in  1837  ;  married 
in  1866,  one  child,  Carrie  A.  Parents,  Lyman 
and  Rachael  (Holden)  Hemenvvay,  the  former 
born  in  1804,  settled  in  county  in  1821,  married 
in  1827  and  died  in  187 1,  children  six;  the  lat- 
ter still  resides  on  the  farm  they  first  purchased 
with  her  son  Morris. 

Holden,  Luther,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer  and 
dealer  in  blooded  stock,  born  in  Harford  in 
1849;  wife,  Sarah  Hartson,  daughter  of  Samuel 
and  Evaline  (Winters)  Hartson,  born  in  Penn- 
sylvania in  1848  ;  married  in  1870,  children  two  : 
Berdette,  born  Jan.  13th,  1872,  and  Ada,  born 
Oct.  27th,  1878,  and  died  Sept.  30th,  1884. 
Parents,  Benjamin  and  Maria  (Lathrop)  Holden  ; 
the  former  died  in  January,  1875,  the  latter  in 
1878;  children  two:  Emma  born  in  1844,  and 
Luther  born  in  1849. 

Holden,  Samuel  N.,  p.  o.  Harford,  dealer  in 
general  merchandise  and  all  kinds  of  farm  im- 
plements, born  in  county  in  1844;  wife,  Lillian 
Wattles,  daughter  of  Glover  P.  Wattles,  born  in 
1854;  married  in  1872,  one  child,  Jennie,  who 
died  in  Sept.,  1875,  aged  T4  months,  and  an 
adopted  daughter,  Agnes  Louise.  Parents, 
Walter  and  Relief  (Tanner)  Holden ;  the  former 
born  in  Maine  in  1803,  and  died  in  1880,  the 
latter  born  in  1S06,  and  died  in  1851,  leaving 
ten  children,  three  now  living.  Grandparents, 
Benjamin  and  Emma  (Farwell)  Holden,  the 
former  of  Maine  and  the  latter  of  Boston,  setded 
in  Harford  in  18 13;  children  twelve. 

Holdridge,  Enoch  J.,  p.  o.   Harford,    farmer 


Brief  Personals. 


5n 


and  carpenter,  born  in  Madison  .county  in  1827, 
settled  in  county  in  1830,  was  assessor  twelve 
years  and  elected  justice  in  i88i ;  wife,  Clarissa 
Teri)ening,  daughter  of  Noah  and  Polly  Terpen- 
ing,  born  in  Virgil  in  1825;  married  Nov.  10th, 
1850,  children  two:  Medora,  born  in  1856,  and 
A.  Eugene,  born  in  1864;  Medora  married  Sher- 
man Grennell  in  1877.  Parents,  Daniel  and 
Anna  (Chaffee)  Holdridge,  the  former  died  Oct. 
3d,  1882,  and  the  latter  died  in  1846,  leaving 
nine  children,  six  now  hving. 

Johnson,  Philo  A.,  p.  o.  Harford,  born  in  Vir- 
gil in  1818;  wife,  Ruth  Lincoln,  bom  in  1819; 
married  Oct.  6th,  1842,  died  March  4th,  1862, 
leaving  eight  children ;  second  wife,  Caroline 
Seymour,  born  in  1824,  married  in  1863.  Pa- 
rents, Eli  and  Lucretia  (Smith)  Johnson ;  the 
former  born  in  Otsego  county  in  1792  and  died 
in  1875,  the  latter  in  1794  and  died  in  1S75; 
married  in  1813,  children  nine,  four  now  living: 
Ezra  I.,  Horace  B.,  Philo  A.,  and  Marrilla. 

Knapp,  John  H.,  M.  D.,  p.  o.  Harford,  phy- 
sician and  surgeon,  born  in  Fairfield  in  1819,  was 
member  of  assembly  in  1854-55,  supervisor 
three  terms,  and  held  other  town  offices  for  many 
years ;  wife,  Sarah  Wattles,  of  Broome  county, 
born  June  5th,  1826;  married  Dec.  24th,  1844, 
children  four,  all  died  in  infancy.  Parents,  Am- 
me  P.  and  Polly  (Hull)  Knapp,  natives  of  Con- 
necticut, who  settled  in  Chenango  county  in 
1822.  The  former  died  in  1872,  aged  84,  wife 
still  living,  aged  88  years.  Dr.  J.  H.  Knapp  read 
medicine  in  Sherburne,  and  attended  lectures  at 
Albany  Medical  College;  commenced  practice 
at  Marathon  in  1843,  and  in  1845  went  to  Etna, 
Tompkins  county,  and  in  1849  returned  to  Cort- 
land and  settled  in  Harford,  where  he  now  re- 
sides, having  a  large  practice. 

McPherson,  John,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer,  born 
in  Orange  county  in  1837,  settled  in  county  in 
1878,  has  been  assessor  and  excise  commissioner; 
wife,  Isabetta  Shaw,  born  in  Wyoming  county, 
Pennsylvania,  in  1843;  married  in  1861,  chil- 
dren seven  :  George  B.,  Frank  E.,  Elizabeth  M., 
Sarah  G.,  Ada  B.,  Robert  O.  and  Edward  T. 
Parents,  Robert  and  Mary  E.  (Coleman)  Mc- 
.Pherson,  born  in  Orange  county,  the  former  in 
1812,  and  the  latter  in  1818,  married  in  1835; 
children  two  :  John  and  Emma,  the  latter  born  in 
1842,  married  Theron  G.  Wilcox  in  1864. 


Purvis,  Robert,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer,  sheep 
and  stock  dealer;  born  in  Otsego  county  in 
1825,  settled  in  county  in  1830,  was  supervisor, 
school  superintendent  and  held  many  town  offi- 
ces; wife,  Jennie  M.  Bouton,  daughter  of  Na- 
thaniel, jr.,  and  Julia  E.  (Southworth)  Bou- 
ton, born  in  Marathon  in  1842,  married  in  1881. 
Parents,  Andrew  and  Nancy  (Hale)  Purvis;  the 
former  born  in  Scotland,  came  to  America  in 
1809,  the  latter  born  in  Rhode  Island,  married 
in  i8i2,  moved  to  Otsego  county  in  1822,  set- 
tled in  Harford  in  1830;  children  seven,  two 
now  living. 

Rood,  Josiah  W.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer,  born 
in  Schoharie  county,  Feb.  19th,  1806,  .settled  in 
county  in  1840,  was  supervisor,  assessor  and  held 
other  offices,  and  died  in  1880;  wife,  Bethesda 
Bliss,  married  March  28th,  1830,  and  died  Feb. 
7th,  1837,  leaving  three  children:  Alonzo  W., 
born  in  1833,  Amanda  M.,  born  in  1835,  Be- 
thesda B.,  born  in  1837  ;  second  wife,  Lucy  Mc- 
Farland,  born  in  1813;  married  May  30th,  1838, 
children  three:  Lorin  W.,  born  in  1839,  Lucy  A., 
born  in  1844,  and  Mary  E.  Rood,  born  Jan.  20th, 
1850.  Parents,  Ezra  and  Parthena  Rood,  of 
Massachusetts  ;  the  former  died  in  Otsego  county 
and  the  latter  in  Homer. 

Rood,  Lorin  W.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer,  stock 
dealer  and  dairy  produce,  owns  350  acres; 
born  in  Plainfield,  April  4th,  1839,  settled  in 
county  in  1840;  wife,  Abbie  Decker,  born  in 
1841;  married  in  1S62,  children  three:  Hattie, 
born  Dec.  14th,  1863,  Minnie  and  Myrtie  (twins), 
born  June  12th,  1872.  Parents,  Josiah  W.  Rood 
and  Lucy  (McFarland)  Rood,  who  settled  in 
Harford  in  1838. 

Strong,  Erastus  S.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer  and 
retired  teacher,  holds  a  state  certificate  since 
June  23d,  1856,  over  signature  of  V.  M.  Rice. 
Born  in  Cato  in  1821,  settled  in  county  in  1846, 
was  assessor  twelve  years,  justice  of  peace  six- 
teen years,  teacher  eleven  years  ;  wife,  Elizabeth 
L.  Tryon,  born  in  Cayuga  county  in  1821  ;  mar- 
ried in  1845,  children  five,  four  now  living :  Sa- 
rah C,  who  married  Reuben  Shepard,  Horatio 
W.,  who  married  Adel|)ha  Frank,  and  Francis 
E.,  who  married  Mary  Shevaleer,  and  .Vsa  H., 
now  living  at  home.  Parents,  Erastus  and  Cath- 
arine (Kelly)  Strong  ;  the  former  born  in  Galway 


512 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


in  1795,  and  died  in  1822,  the  latter  born  in  1798 
and  died  in  1834. 

'lyler,  A.  W.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer,  born  in 
Virgil  in  1838,  was  assessor  and  town  clerk  two 
terms  each  ;  wife,  Mary  E.  Branch,  daughter  of 
Enoch  and  Matilda  (Mynard)  Branch,  born  in 
1845;  married  in  1868,  children  three:  Martha 
A.,  John  ]>.  and  J.  Hart  Tyler.  Parents,  Jere- 
miah and  Mahalah  (Burlingame)  Tyler;  the 
former  born  in  1807,  setded  in  Virgil  in  18 10, 
the  latter  born  in  18 12. 

Wavle,  James  H.,  p.  o.  Harford,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Freetown  in  1826;  wife, 
Emeline  Coleman,  bom  in  Orange  county  in 
1822;  married  in  1849,  died  Ajjril  24th,  1872, 
leaving  six  children;  second  wife,  Emma  Valen- 
tine, born  in  Marathon,  married  in  1880.  Pa- 
rents, Andrew  and  Eva  (Smith)  Wavle,  the  former 
born  in  Schoharie  county,  settled  in  Cortland 
county  in  1818,  and  died  in  1840,  the  latter  died 
in  1879,  leaving  four  children. 

Weiler,  George  Frederick,  p.  o.  Harford, 
farmer,  born  in  Baden,  Germany,  Oct.  20th, 
1833,  setded  in  county  in  1854,  has  held  several 
district  offices,  and  has  been  steward  of  the  M. 
E.  Church  twenty  years ;  wife,  Harriet  L.  Reed, 
daughter  of  Asa  D.  and  Marina  (Curtis)  Reed, 
born  August  15th,  1829  ;  married  Jan.  22d,  i860, 
children  two  :  Florence  R.,  born  Feb.  19th,  1862, 
and  C.  Franklin,  born  Aug.  loth,  1872.  Parents, 
Jacob  and  Rosenna  (Carterer)  Weiler,  of  Baden, 
Germany.  Frederick  was  penniless  when  he 
landed  in  New  York,  but  dirough  his  own  exer- 
tions and  prudence  has  accumulated  a  large 
I)roperty  and  is  now  the  possessor  of  several 
hundred  acres  of  land,  and  has  the  confidence 
of  the  community  where  he  resides,  and  has  paid 
liberally  for  benevolent  purposes. 

Wilcox,  Theron  G.,  p.  o.  Harford,  stock  dealer 
and  dairy,  owns  140  acres,  bom  in  Smithville  in 
1842;  setded  in  county  in  1868,  was  iiighway 
commissioner  one  terni  and  held  other  district 
offices;  wife,  Emma  McPherson,  daughter  of 
Robert  and  Mary  McPherson,  born  in  1842; 
married  in  1864,  children  two:  Eddie  and 
John.  Parents,  Simon  G.  and  Hannah  (Loomis) 
Wilcox;  the  former  of  Oxford,  died  in  1883, 
aged  72,  the  latter  died  in  1867,  leaving  eight 
children. 


HOMER. 

Alibott,  Alfred,  p.  o.  Homer,  owns  70  acres, 
dealer  in  live  stock,  born  in  Homer  in  1818; 
wife,  EstlierH.  Bowen;  married  in  1841,  children 
four:  Irving,  Cornelia  (now  Mrs.  Henry  Keel- 
ing), of  Homer,  Oresta  (Mrs.  Elias  Frisbie),  of 
Scott,  Frank  H.,  Lillie  (now  Mrs.  Wesley 
Holmes),  of  Earlville. 

Alvord,  Henry  S.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
120  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1826;  wife,  Mary  C. 
Smith,  of  Fabius  ;  married  in  1852,  children  two: 
Lucy  M.,  and  Hattie  E. 

Alvord,  Lucius,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
300  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1832;  wife,  Sylvina 
Brown,  daughter  of  Moses  and  Sarah  (Matteson) 
Brown;  married  in  1856,  children  four:  Mrs. 
Eugene  Eaton,  of  Cayuga  county,  Llyn,  Millie 
M.,  and  Benette  B.  Grandfather  Ebenezer 
Alvord  was  born  in  Farmington,  Conn.,  in  1767, 
and  came  to  Homer  in  1794. 

Atkinson,  Geo.,  p.  o.  East  River,  farmer,  owns 
213  acres,  born  in  England  in  1814,  settled  in 
county  in  i860;  wife,  Isabella  King,  of  Martin- 
dale,  England;  married  in  i860,  children  seven: 
Maria  A.  (Mrs.  John  Onsby),  of  Tully,  Jennie, 
Geo.  K.,  Isabella  A.,  James,  WOliam  and  Mary 
E. 

Babcock,  Oscar  A.,  p.  o.  Homer,  grocer,  born 
in  De  Ruyter  in  June,  1838,  settled  in  county  in 
1849,  was  second  sergeant  in  Co.  H,  iS7th  N.  Y. 
S.  v.,  enlisted  in  Aug.,  1862,  discharged  at  close 
of  war ;  wife,  Laurette  L.  Maltby;  married  June 
5th,  1866,  children  three:  Lydia  L.,  born  in 
1867,  Maud  E.,  and  Mabel  J.  (twins),  in  187 1. 

Bates,  Alexander,  p.  o.  Homer,  carriage  and 
sleigh  manufacturer,  born  in  Washington  county 
in  1 814,  setded  in  county  in  181 7,  was  drum- 
major  in  157th  N.  Y.  S.  v.;  wife,  Lavina  Yale,  a 
descendant  of  the  Yale  who  founded  Yale  college; 
married  in  1834,  children  eight:  George  W., 
William  H.  (deceased),  Lury  M.,  William  E., 
(Prof,  of  music  in  Columbus,  Ind.),  Helen  L., 
J.  Franklin,  of  Iowa,  Newton  A.,  John  E.,  and 
Charles  H. 

Barker,  Albert,  p  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  106 
acres,  born  in  Washington  county,  January  8th, 
1800,  removed  to  Oneida  county  when  five 
years  old,  settled  on  the  same  farm  where  he 
now  resides  in  1837,  married  to  Sophronia  East- 


Brief  Personals. 


S13 


man  in  Paris,  Oneida  county,  June  2otli,  1822, 
who  died  in  March,  1884.  There  were  six  chil- 
dren, four  of  which  are  still  living:  Mercy,  the 
eldest,  married  H.  G.  Short,  now  living  in  Tioga 
county,  Pa.;  Luther  E.,  now  living  on  the  old 
homestead;  Carrie  A.  died  in  1864;  Jennie  E.> 
wife  of  M.  N.  Allen,  Titusville  Pa.,  died  in  Sept. 
1884;  Martha  L.,  wife  of  William  Crandall,  of 
Minnesota;  and  Albert  C,  of  Minnesota. 

Beach,  William  B.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
226  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1827  ;  wife,  Mary 
E.  Hammon;  married  in  1854,  children  three : 
Jenny  E.,  Ida  M.,  and  Clarissa  O.  Father 
Nathaniel  Beach  was  born  in  1790,  came  to 
county  in  1820,  and  died  Oct.  4th,  1873. 

Bell,  Robert,  p.  o.  Homer,  born  in  England, 
came  to  Homer  in  1858,  and  died  in  1883  ;  wife, 
Jannett  Harkness,  of  Dunfrieshire,  Scotland ; 
married  Nov.  17th,  1865,  children  three:  John 
H.,  Jennie  H.,  and  Fannie  E. 

Blashfield,  H.  W.,  p.  o.  Homer,  manufacturer 
of  lumber  and  cider,  owns  95  acres,  born  in  Ho- 
mer in  1830,  was  supervisor  one  term,  justice  of 
peace  twenty-five  years ;  wife,  Lura  M.  Bates, 
born  in  Leno.x  ;  married  in  1854,  children  two  : 
Nellie  L.,  and  Frank  E.  Father  William  PSlash- 
field  came  to  Homer  in  1802,  from  Brimfield, 
Mass.,  and  died  in  1864. 

Brockway,  Henry  S.,  p.  o.  Homer,  Supt. 
Brockway  Wagon  and  Sleigh  Manufiicturing  Co., 
born  in  Groton,  Nov.  19th,  1839,  settled  in 
county  in  1S42  ;  wife,  Francis  L.  Hoyt ;  married 
in  1867,  one  child,  Harry  L. 

Brockway,  W.  N.,  p.  o.  Homer,  manufacturer 
of  wagons  and  sleighs,  born  in  Cortland  in 
1829,  was  trustee  of  the  village  of  Homer;  wife, 
P'.dith  Hine,  of  Preble,  N.  Y.;  married  in  i860, 
children  four,  living:  Florence  I.,  Geo.  A.,  Josie 
A.,  and  Fannie  M. 

Burnham,  Marvin,  p.  o.  P'ast  Homer,  honey 
producer,  born  in  Homer  in  181 1  ;  wife,  Caroline 
C.  Webster,  of  Truxton  ;  married  in  1836,  chil- 
dren three:  U.  A.,  who  was  first  lieutenant  in 
Co.  D,  76th  N.  Y.  S.  v.,  E.  A.,  in  Co.  A,  76th 
N.  Y.  S.  v.,  and  Josephene  A.  (now  Mrs.  Ben- 
jamin Bennett),  of  Syracuse. 

Burnham,  Shepard  C,  p.  o.  East  Homer, 
owns  133  acres,  farmer,  born  in  Homer  in  1850; 
wife,  Anna  J.  Griffeth,  born  in   1855,  daughter 


of  Abram  B.  and  Jane  E.  (.\lexander)  Griflfeth, 
of  Homer;  married  in  1874,  children  three: 
Edna  S.,  born  in  1876,  Jennie,  born  in  1881,  and 
Albert  G.,  born  in  1884.  Parents,  William  H., 
of  Homer,  and  Harriet  M.  (Crane)  Burnham,  of 
Marathon. 

Butler,  Ralph,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  122 
acres,  born  in  Cayuga  county  in  1848;  wife, 
Addie  Mott,  of  Cayuga  county;  married  in  1871, 
children  four:  Elmer  A.,  who  died  Feb.  17th, 
1875,  P'ddie  G.,  who  died  in  1877,  Bertha  L., 
and  Leve  J.  Ralph  Butler  is  living  on  the  old 
homestead  owned  by  his  father,  Edmond  C,  who 
was  an  immigrant  from  Connecticut,  and  first  set- 
tled in  Cayuga  county  in  1838,  came  to  county 
in  1848.     He  died  in  1865;  wife  died  in  1877. 

B)Tam,  Samuel  M.,  p.  o.  Cortland,  grist  and 
saw-mill,  born  in  Virgil,  in  1837,  was  supervisor 
of  Virgil ;  wife,  Laura  Scott,  born  in  Conland ; 
married  in  1868,  children  three:  Nellie  S.,  Willie 
S.,  and  Charles  J.  Parents,  Josiah  and  Rhoda 
Byram,  who  came  from  Broome  county  to  Vir- 
gil in  1828. 

Carl,  Harry,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  117 
acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1816;  wife,  Lucy  Dun- 
bar, of  Solon;  married  in  1852,  died  in  April 
1S83;  children  three:  Porter  E.,  Letlie  E.,  and 
Adelbert  D. 

Carl,  Jacob,  p.  o.  Cortland,  farmer,  owns  100 
acres,  born  in  Locke,  Cayuga  county,  in  1807, 
settled  in  county  in  1836  ;  wife,  Eliza  Lascels,  of 
Haverstraw;  married  in  1836,  children  two: 
Elijah  E.,  and  Sarah  E.  (now  Mrs.  Willington 
Wood),  of  Homer.  Parents,  Henry  L  ami  NLiry 
Carl,  came  to  county  in  18 10. 

Carver,  David  W.,  p.  o.  Little  York,  larmer, 
owns  1 13  acres,  born  in  Spafford,  Sept.  4th,  1839, 
settled  in  county  in  1865;  wife,  Harriet  F. 
Wright,  of  Preble;  married  in  1864,  children 
four:  Helen  M.,  Herman  W.,  Fred.  U.  and 
Hattie.  Mr.  Carver  was  the  first  farmer  to  raise 
cabbage  for  shipping  purposes. 

Carpenter,  C.  De  Witt,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer^ 
owns  165  acres,  born  in  1832  ;  wife,  .Adeline  Ball, 
of  Onondaga  county;  married  in  1855,  children 
three:  Cora  A.,  Vaeilette  A.,  and  Helen  A. 
Asaph  H.  Carpenter  came  on  the  ])resent  farm 
in  1799.  F.  B.,  the  artist  brother  of  C.  D.,  was 
born  in  1830,  and  is  at  present  in  New  York. 


514 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Coats,  John  M.,  p.  o.  Homer,  notary  public, 
conveyancer  and  surveyor,  born  in  Truxton  in 
1820,  was  town  clerk  of  Truxton  seven  years 
and  at  present  corporation  clerk  of  Homer;  wife, 
Almira  A.  McKnight ;  married  in  1847,  children 
three:  Edward  M.  (now  a  merchant  in  Spring- 
field, Mass.),  Damon  N.,  a  merchant  in  New 
York  city,  Mary  E.,  at  present  teacher  in  a  Nor- 
mal school  in  Hampton,  Va. 

Chittenden,  Giles,  p.  o.  Homer,  retired,  born  in 
New  Milford,  Conn.,  in  1800,  settled  in  county 
in  1824,  was  supervisor  several  terms  and  justice 
of  peace  twelve  years ;  first  wife,  Samantha  Mc- 
Whorter,  born  in  Cincinnatus  and  died  in  1838, 
leaving  one  child ;  second  wife,  Mary  Ann  Mc- 
Whorter,  died  June  21st,  1846,  leaving  one  child  • 
third  wife,  Mrs.  Olivia  Munson,  born  in  Jefterson 
county  in  18 10,  married  1848. 

Clark,  Simeon  N.,  p.  o.  Homer,  manufacturer 
of  tubs,  etc.,  born  in  Otisco  in  1844,  settled  in 
Homer,  Cortland  county,  in  1873:  wife,  Emma 
E.  Howard,  born  in  England,  married  in  1879. 

Coon,  Hammill  T.  (deceased),  was  born  in  Ot- 
sego county,  N.  Y.,  and  died  in  1862  ;  wife,  Ro- 
sanna  Decker;  married  in  1852,  and  settled  in 
Homer  same  year;  children  six:  John  C,  Ham- 
mill  T.,  of  Cortland,  William  A.  and  Charles  V., 
who  are  teachers  in  Homer  Academy,  Irvin  H. 
and  Nina  M. 

Cummings,  Daniel  M.,  p.  o.  Litde  York, 
farmer,  owns  106  acres,  born  in  Preble  in  1838; 
wife,  Climena  Pratt;  married  in  1 861,  children 
two  :  Mary  Louise  and  Orrin  Pratt. 

Fisher,  Willet,  p.  o.  Homer,  manufacturer  of 
patent  platform  spring  wagons,  born  in  Dryden, 
Tompkins  county,  in  1841,  setded  in  county  in 
1859;  wife,  Caroline  S.  Pierce;  married  in  i860, 
children  two  now  living :  Eugene  and  Charles. 

Foster,  John,  p.  o.  Little  York,  farmer,  owns 
200  acres,  born  in  England  in  1822,  settled  in 
county  in  i860;  wife,  Jane  Miller,  of  l^igland; 
married  Dec.  3d,  1851  ;  children  ten,  seven  now 
living. 

Gage,  .\.  S.,  ]).  o.  Homer,  manufocturer  of 
cutters,  born  in  Greene,  Chenango  county,  Jan. 
5th,  1855,  settled  in  county  in  1855;  ^^■''^, 
Delia  C.  Watrous,  born  in  Virgil;  married  Jan. 
nth,  1877,  one  child,  Carl  W.  Gage,  born  Aug. 
2d,  1878. 


Gage,  C.  W.,  p.  o.  Homer,  cutter  manufactu- 
rer, born  in  Knox,  Albany  county,  in  1833,  set- 
tled in  county  in  1855,  was  trustee  of  village; 
wife,  Abigail  Pearsall ;  married  in  1856,  children 
four  :  A.  S.  Gage,  Belle,   Carrie  and  Frankie  D. 

Gallu]),  Francis  A.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  80 
acres,  born  in  Connecticut  in  1840,  settled  in 
county  in  1857  ;  wife,  Mary  J.  Phillips,  born  in 
1838;  married  in  1 861,  children  four,  three  liv- 
ing: Frank  L.,  Oren  P.  and  Nattalee  E. 

Gates,  Joel  L,  p.  o.  Litde  York,  former,  owns 
123  acres,  born  in  Vermont  in  [816,  settled  in 
county  in  181 7;  wife,  Hannah  C.  Weeks;  mar- 
ried May  28th,  1844,  and  died  in  1845,  leaving 
one  child,  Gertie  (now  Mrs.  Charles  Taylor  of 
Truxton) ;  second  wife,  Maria  Severance,  of 
Truxton;  married  in  1847,  children  four:  John 
S.,  Jerome  D.,  Clara  E.  and  Albert  R. 

Gay,  Alvin,  p.  o.  Little  York,  proprietor  of 
Hotel  York,  born  in  Preble  in  1853;  wife,  Al- 
meda  Ackels,  born  in  Preble;  married  in  1872, 
one  child,  Edith  M. 

Gilkerson,  William,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
58  acres,  born  in  Cortland  in  1844;  wife,  Sarah 
C.  Coon,  born  in  Fabius,  Onondaga  county; 
married  in  1871,  children  three:  George  S., 
Mary  H.  and  William  R. 

Goodelle,  C.  B.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  117 
acres,  born  in  Massachusetts  in  1812,  settled  in 
county  in  1816;  first  wife,  Uretta  N.  Hobart; 
married  in  1840,  died  in  1843  ;  one  child,  Uretta 
H.,  born  in  1843,  died  in  1856;  second  wife, 
Mary  Lake;  married  in  1845,  one  child,  Charles 
L.,  born  in  1850;  married  Charlotte  P.  Beebe  in 
1873,  one  child,  born  in  1874,  died  in  1876. 

Haight,  Watts,  p.  o.  East  Homer,  farmer  and 
manufacturer  of  lumber,  owns  94  acres,  born  in 
Homer  in  1834;  wife,  Laura  L.  Lamb,  of  Vine- 
land,  N.  J. ;  married  in  1882,  one  child,  J.  Clyde. 
Parents,  Jabez  and  Emily  (Preston)  Haight;  the 
former  of  Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,  and  the 
latter  of  Connecticut. 

Hammon,  Chas.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
69  acres,  born  in  1845 ;  wife,  Rebecca  M.  New- 
man, of  Little  Falls;  married  in  1868,  children 
three  :  Herbert  A.,  born  in  1870,  Chas.  W.,  born 
in  May,  1872,  and  Howard  R.,  born  Feb.  i8th, 
1876. 

Hammond,    William,    p.  o.    Homer,  farmer. 


Brief  Personals. 


S'S 


owns  loo  acres,  born  in  Goshen  in  1827,  settled  in 
county  in  1830;  wife,  Nancy  K.  Williams,  born 
in  Homer;  married  in  1849  and  died  Sept.  24th, 
1884;  children  five:  Helen  L.,  born  July  ist, 
185 1,  Phoebe  E.,  born  in  1854,  Fred  A.,  born  in 
1858,  Mary  E.,  born  in  1866,  and  Susie  E.,  born 
in  1869. 

Hough,  Ezra,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  90 
acres,  born  in  Homer,  Feb.  9th,  1851;  wife, 
Martha  E.  Knapp,  of  Scriba,  Oswego  Co.,  N. 
Y. ;  married  Feb.  i8th,  1879,  one  child,  (Jeorge 
Walter. 

Heberd,  Lyman  H.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer, 
owns  375  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1837;  wife, 
Clara  A.  Hobart ;  married  in  1864,  children  four  : 
Marion  A.,  Caroline  L.,  Cora  E.  and  Jessie  A. 

Henry,  John  B.,  p.  o.  East  Homer,  farmer, 
owns  90  acres,  born  in  East  Homer  in  1840; 
wife,  Elizabeth  Miller,  born  in  East  Homer ; 
married  in  1868,  children  two:  Frank  M.  and 
Edwin  J.  Parents,  Abram  and  Polly  Henry ; 
the  former  died  in  1872,  aged  59  years. 

Henry,  Nathan  J.,  p.  o.  Homer,  carpenter  and 
builder,  born  in  Homer  in  1836  ;  wife,  Ann  Eliza 
Tompkins,  of  Cayuga  county;  married  in  1862, 
children  four:  Geo.  L.,  Frank  G.,  Ead  T.  and 
Mabel  G. 

Heydon,  John  S.,  p.  o.  Homer,  mason,  born 
in  Salina,  Onondaga  county,  settled  in  county  in 
1867 ;  wife,  Martha  A.  Burnet,  of  Cayuya  county ; 
married  in  1854,  one  child,  William  Carlton. 

Hibbard,  Randolph,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer  and 
carriage  manufacturer,  owns  80  acres,  born  in 
East  Homer  in  i860  ;  wife,  Mattie  A.  Ballard,  of 
Dryden;  married  in  1882.     Parents,  M.  M.  and 
Ada  Hibbard. 

Hitchcock,  Edward,  [i.  o.  Homer,  Presbyte- 
rian clergyman,  owns  220  acres,  born  in  Homer 
in  1833;  wife,  Josaphene  CottcU  Fithian,  born  in 
New  Jersey  ;  married  in  1882. 

Hoag,  Zelora,  p.  o.  Homer,  carpenter  and 
builder,  born  in  Cassville,  Oneida  county  ;  set- 
ded  in  county  in  1838  ;  wife,  Amelia  Jagger,  of 
Preble;  married  in  1862. 

Hull,  Geo.  N.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  74 
acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1819  ;  wife,  Elvena  Wil- 
liams ;  married  in  1844,  children  seven :  Frank 
W.,  Nancy  E.,  Edward  Z.,  Fannie  A.  (now  Mrs. 
Albert  Sessions),  Henry  H.,  Porter  M.  and  Lou- 
isa A. 


Hutchens,  Orrin  B.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
23  acres,  born  in  Spafford,  Onondaga  county,  in 
1827,  settled  in  county  in  1874,  was  constable 
in  Spafford  seventeen  years ;  wife,  Mary  Mc- 
Daniels,  of  Spafford  ;  married  in  1854. 

Johnson,  George,  p.  o.  Homer,  fanner,  owns 
195  acres,  born  in  Little  Horton,  Cumberland 
county,  England,  in  1828;  came  to  county  in 
1838.  Parents,  Thomas  and  Jane  (Miller)  John- 
son, natives  of  England ;    the   former   died    in 

1857- 

Jones,  Newell,  p.  o.  Homer,  postmaster,  born 
in  Dover,  Vt.,  in  i8i8,  setded  in  Homer,  Cort- 
land county,  in  1828,  held  the  office  of  post- 
master since  April  ist,  1876;  wife,  Polly  Harvey, 
of  Chenango  county ;  married  in  1844,  one  child, 
who  died  Dec.  28th,  1870. 

Jones,  Walter,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  ow-ns  240 
acres,  born  in  Hillsdale,  N.Y.,  setded  in  county  in 
1833,  was  justice  in  Preble  three  years;  wife, 
Martha  J.  Welch,  born  in  Homer;  married  in 
1850,  one  child,  A.  Kate. 

Joslyn,  Orrin  N.,  p.  o.  Homer,  owns  118  acres, 
born  in  Homer  in  1842;  wife,  Theadosia  M. 
Johnson,  of  East  Homer;  married  in  1865,  one 
child,  Etta  E.  Parents,  Daniel  and  Maria  (Udey) 
Joslyn ;  the  former  was  a  native  of  Windham 
county  and  settled  here  at  an  early  date. 

Kenfield,  John,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  farmer, 
owns  140  acres,  born  in  1837  ;  wife,  Jane  Shearer, 
daughter  of  John  and  Sally  (Northrup)  Shearer; 
married  in  i860,  children  three:  Jennie  C.  (now 
Mrs.  Fred  McElheny),  of  McGrawville,  George 
D.,  of  Homer,  and  Adin  J.,  who  is  at  home. 
Parents,  Elijah  L.  and  Susan  (Ogden)  Kenfield; 
the  former  was  born  in  Hebron,  Washington 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  and  came  here  with  his  ])arents  in 
181 1,  and  died  in  1880. 

Kennedy,  Thomas  H.  About  three  miles  dis- 
tant from  the  village  of  Homer  the  pleasure- 
seekers,  en  route  for  Glen  Haven,  pass  a  dwell- 
ing situated  in  a  glen-like  formation  of  upland, 
away  from  but  overiooking  the  thoroughfare. 
In  former  years  this  was  the  chosen  home  of 
Thomas  H.  Kennedy.  He  was  born  in  the  [par- 
ish of  Morton,  Dumfries,  Scotland,  on  the  loth 
of  Feb.,  1758,  and  died  at  his  residence  in  Ho- 
mer, Cordand  Co.,  N.  Y.,  on  the  i8th  day  of 
April,  1849,  at  the  age  of  upwards  of  ninety-one 


5i6 


History  of  Cortand  County. 


years.  His  life  was  an  eventful  one.  With  a 
mind  accomplished  by  education,  extensive  read- 
ing and  acute  observation  in  his  early  years, 
traits  of  character  began  to  shine  out  which 
made  him  interesting  in  every  social  circle,  and 
which  glowed  with  serene  beaut)'  in  his  declining 
years.  He  was  a  frequent  traveler  over  Great 
Britain  and  the  continent,  and  was  an  eye-wit- 
ness of  many  stirring  scenes  in  the  French  Rev- 
olution, preceding  the  empire  of  the  first  Naiio- 
leon.  He  married  his  wife  (Margaret  Carmi- 
chael)  in  Ayershire,  where  Burns  resided.  To 
him  Burns  confided  his  early  attachments,  im- 
mortalized in  the  two  exquisite  and  pathetic  effu- 
sions entitled  "  Highland  Mary  "  and  to  "  Mary 
in  Heaven."  He  carried  letters  to  her  from 
Burns.  Ayershire  and  Dumfries  joined,  and  for 
years  he  was  often  with  Burns.  Drove  the  team 
while  Burns  held  the  plow  —  knew  the  persons 
from  whom  many  of  his  poetic  characters  were 
drawn,  especially  Tarn  O'Shanter  —  was  familiar 
with  the  scenes  of  the  poems,  and  heard  Burns 
recite  many  of  them  before  publication.  He  used 
to  relate  an  incident  whicli  occurred  in  Novem- 
ber, 1785  (while  he  was  the  teamster  and  Burns 
the  |)lowman),  of  turning  up  the  nest  of  a  mouse 
with  the  ])low,  and  under  the  inspiration  of  the 
hour,  and  while  in  the  field,  Burns  wrote  the 
beautiful  poem,  "To  the  Mouse."  In  1792,  at 
the  age  of  thirty-four,  he  emigrated  to  New  York 
and  first  engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  Pearl 
street,  then  in  Greenwich  street,  corner  of  Duane. 
He  soon  became  deeply  attached  to  our  free  in- 
stitutions. He  had  lived  in  New  York  a  year 
before  the  second  inauguration  of  Washington. 
In  after  years  he  became  a  great  admirer  of  De 
Witt  Clinton,  and  was  quite  conversant  with  po- 
litical affairs.  In  May,  1824,  he  came  to  Cort- 
land to  look  after  his  landed  property  in  this 
county.  He  was  then  the  owner  of  one-third  of 
lot  No.  80,  in  Solon  (now  Taylor),  and  one-third 
of  lot  No.  3  in  Homer.  He  had  then  reached 
the  age  of  sixty-six  and  resolved  to  select  a  spot 
for  a  permanent  home  in  which  to  finish  his  pil- 
grimage. His  lands  were  valuable.  With  true 
Scottish  taste  the  site  selected  for  his  dwelling  is 
an  upland  dell,  now  with  a  lovely  landscape  in 
the  foreground  and  hills  in  the  distance.  He 
was  a  Scotch  Presbyterian.  His  wife  died  in 
.\pril,  1856,  aged  86.     Two  daughters  married 


and  lived  in  New  York, — one  only  is  living. 
Two  sons,  Thomas  and  Robert,  are  upon  the  old 
farm.  The  former  was  born  in  1802,  married 
Sally  Price  in  1828,  six  children  were  born  to 
them,  four  now  living:  Thomas  H.,  John  H., 
Rhoda  A.  (now  Mrs.  Walter  Stoker,  of  Scott), 
and  Margaret  M. 

Klock,  Stephen,  p.  o  East  Homer,  farmer, 
owns  86  acres,  born  in  St.  Johnsville  in  1827, 
settled  in  county  in  1847,  ''■'''s  i)een  justice  of 
peace  since  1869;  wife,  Maranda  Hibbard,  born 
in  1830;  married  in  1856,  children  two:  George 

A.  and  Edgar  R. 

Kneeland  A.  J.,  p.  o.  Homer,  lawyer,  born  in 
Marcellus,  Onondaga  county,  in  1821,  settled  in 
county  in  187 1,  was  supervisor,  justice  of  peace 
and  member  of  assembly  ;  wife,  Esther  Griswold, 
born  in  Truxton ;  married  in  1852. 

Keeling,  Henry  D.,  p.  o.  Homer,  fiirmer,  owns 
86  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1841 ;  wife,  Cornelian 
L.  Abbott,  of  Homer;  married  in  1865,  children 
three,  now  living :  Fred  D.,  Grace  L.  and  Ber- 
tha. Mr.  Keeling  was  in  Co.  E,  185th  Regi- 
ment N.  Y.  S.  V. 

Kingsbury,  A.  D.,  p.  o.  Cortland,  farmer,  owns 
154  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1834,  was  assessor 
three  terms;  wife,  Emily  Hawks;  married  in 
1859,  one  child:  Charles  D.,  born  in  Michigan 
in  1872. 

Knight,  Philander,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
197  acres,  born  in  Scott  in  1823,  was  justice  of 
peace;  wife,  E.  Louisa  Burdick;  married  in  1845, 
one  child  living,  Arthur  L.  Eldest  child,  Jose- 
phene  Louisa,  died  when  three  years  old.  Father 
Joab  Knight  came  to  county  in  1814  and  died 
in  1881.  Philander  Knight  was  one  of  those 
uncompromising  abolitionists  who  voted  for 
James  G.  Birney  for  president  in  1844,  and  con- 
tinued the  warfare  against  slavery  till  it  was  dead 
and  buried  beyond  the  hope  of  resurrection.  He 
is  now  battling  as  ardently  for  the  prohibition  of 
the  liquor  traffic ;  for  the  home  against  the  sa- 
loon, as  he  ever  did  against  African  slavery,  and 
expects  to  continue  the  fight  till  the  home  is  tri- 
umphant and  the  saloon  is  forever  banished  from 
his  native  land. 

Lord,  George  W.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
96  acres,  born  in  Homer  in   1839;  w-ife,  Sereph 

B.  Flint,  born  in  Butler;    married  in  1865,  chil- 


Brief  Personals. 


S>7 


drgn  six,  three  living:  George  E.,  Mary  E.  and 
Lulu  N.  Father  Eli  Lord  came  from  Connecticut 
in  1820;  George  W.  resides  on  the  same  farm 
purchased  at  that  time. 

Markham,  Hiram,  p.  o.  Little  York,  owns  88 
acres,  retired,  born  in  Madison  county  in  1796, 
settled  in  county  in  1853  ;  wife,  Jane  Porter,  born 
in  Fabius  ;  married  in  1861.  Mr.  Markham  was 
always  an  advocate  of  prohibition  and  anti- 
slavery  and  both  liimself  and  wife  are  members 
of  Syracuse  Plymouth  Churcii. 

Metzger,  Jacob,  p.  o.  Homer,  restaurant,  and 
billiard  parlor,  and  manager  Keator  Opera 
House,  born  in  Germany  in  1849,  settled  in  Ho- 
mer in  1864;  wife,  Helen  L.  Beaman,  born  in 
Massachusetts;  married  in  1868,  children  three, 
one  living,  Lena  F. 

Miles,  Joseph,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  59 
acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1831,  was  constable; 
wife,  Margaret  Peters,  of  Cayuga  county;  mar- 
ried in  i860,  children  two  :  Eugene  and  Herman 
J.  Father  Philo  came  from  Connecticut  to 
county  in  1817. 

Miller,  George  P.,  p.  o.  East  Homer,  steam 
Saw-mill  and  farmer,  owns  77  acres,  born  in  Ho- 
mer in  1842,  was  in  Co.  D,  iS7th  N.  Y.  Vols., 
enlisted  in  1862,  was  transferred  from  Co.  D, 
157th  N.  Y.  Vols.,  to  the  55th  Co.,  2d  Bat.  V. 
R.  C,  G.  O.  No.  365,  dated  Washington,  D. 
C,  November  13th,  1863,  and  discharged  in 
1865;  wife,  Lucinda  ^L  Baker;  married  in  1865, 
children  five:  William  F.,  Carrie  P.,  Lillie  M., 
George  B.,  and  John  B. 

Miller,  John  H.,  p.  o.  Homer,  born  in  TruMon 
in  1S44,  farmer,  owns  212  acres;  wife,  Ann  E. 
Bell,  of  Truxton,  daughter  of  James  and  Mary 
(Graham)  Bell,  natives  of  England,  who  settled 
in  Tru.\ton  in  1852;  married  in  1872,  children, 
two :  Jennie  E.  and  Jessie  B.  Parents,  Isaac 
and  Elizabeth  (Harrison)  Miller,  natives  of  Eng- 
land, who  came  here  in  1842. 

Moore,  William,  p.  o.  Cortland,  farmer,  born 
in  England  in  1832,  settled  in  county  in  1S64; 
first  wife,  Sarah  Stephenson;  married  in  i860, 
children  six:  Mary  Ann,  Sarali  J.,  John  S.,  Thos. 
H.,  Joseph  B.  and  Libbie  G. ;  seconti  wife,  Lo- 
rinda  Gross,  born  in  McGrawville,  married  in 
1876. 

Moore,  William  H.,  p.  o.   East  River,  super- 


intendent and  general  manager  of  East  River 
Milling  Company,  born  in  1824,  settled  in  county 
in  1851,  was  justice  of  peace  in  the  town  of  Vir- 
gil in  1856,  and  is  present  jiostmaster;  wife,  Fi- 
delia McVean  ;  married  in  1853,  children  two: 
William  A.  and  John  C. 

Mynard,  James  E.,  p.  o.  I-'.ast  Homer,  farmer, 
owns  162  acres,  born  in  Virgil  in  1830;  wife,  Ja- 
nette  Bennett,  of  Truxton  ;  married  in  1854,  chil- 
dren, five:  Delia  O.  (now  Mrs.  Stephen  Briggs), 
Libbie  J.  (now  Mrs.  Frank  Hinman),  Pearl,  Mar- 
tin and  Kittie. 

Newton,  C.  O.,  p.  o.  Homer,  wholesale  dealer 
in  hay  and  grain,  owns  30  acres,  born  in  Hamp- 
den county,  Mass.,  in  1826,  settle<l  in  Cortland 
county  in  1852;  wife,  Elizabeth  S.  Newton,  of 
Homer,  daughter  of  Lemuel  D.  Newton,  who 
settled  here  in  1S16;  married  in  1852,  one  child, 
Frank  M. 

Oakes,  Russell,  p.  o.  Homer,  former,  owns  78 
acres,  born  in  Otsego  county  in  1841,  settled  in 
county  in  1881  ;  wife,  Agnes  .\.  Bettes,  of  Percy, 
Canada;  married  in  1881,  one  child,  Lewis; 
Freddie  R.  is  Mrs.  Oakes's  child  by  a  former 
marriage. 

Owen,  Duane  I).,  p.  o.  liomer,  gearing  wood 
worker,  born  in  Homer  in  1845  ;  wife,  Josephene 
E.  Bardett,  of  Homer;  married  in  1875,  one 
child,  Pearlette. 

Payne,  Barney  W.,  farmer,  owns  20  acres,  born 
in  Georgetown,  N.  Y.,  in  1812,  removed  to 
Hamilton  the  same  year,  making  that  place  his 
home  until  1844,  having  been  engaged  in  the 
dry  goods  trade  for  a  number  of  years  previous 
to  1844,  then  removed  to  Jefiferson  Co.,  N.  Y., 
and  engaged  in  farming  and  continuing  the  trade 
in  dry  goods  and  serving  as  justice  of  the  peace 
until  1851.  He  then  removed  to  Homer  and 
engaged  in  the  manufacturing  of  cotton  cloth, 
etc.,  served  as  assistant  assessor  of  internal  rev- 
enue for  eight  years ;  wife,  Lucy  A.  Bicknell,  born 
at  Marblehead,  Mass.;  married  in  1S41. 

Peacock,  John,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns  68 
acres,  born  in  Huntingtonshire,  England,  in 
1828,  settled  in  county  in  1869;  wife,  Levina 
Culley,  of  England;  married  in  1859,  children 
four:  Charies  H.,  Jesse  J.,  \Liry  E.  and  Anna  C. 

Perry,  Ebenezer,  p.  o.  Homer,  retired,  born  in 
Aurelius  in  1802,  settled  in  county  in  1824  ;  first 


518 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


wife,  Amy  Alvord,  daughter  of  Ebenezer  and 
Rachael  (Crampton)  Alvord,  born  in  1 80 1,  chil- 
dren seven,  three  living :  Ebenezer  A.,  Ruth  and 
Rhoda  V. ;  second  wife,  Margaret  Lake,  mar- 
ried in  1873;  third  wife,  Lusia  Norton,  daughter 
of  David  and  Dinah  (Welton)  Norton.  Father 
Ichabod  served  in  the  Revolution,  born  in  1763, 
and  died  in  1824. 

Phelps,  Darius  B.,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  farmer, 
owns  56  acres,  born  in  Cortland  county,  in  1826; 
wife,  Mary  A.  Kenney,  daughter  of  Isaac  and 
Nancy  (Lewis)  Kenney,  of  Tru.xton;  married  in 
1858,  children  two:  Ada  M.  (now  Mrs.  Frank 
W.  Eastman),  of  McGrawville,  and  Lida  E.  (now 
Mrs.  Byron  E.  Widger),  of  Homer.  Parents, 
Benjamin  C.  and  Phoebe  (Fisher)  Phelps,  who 
came  to  county  in  1796. 

Phillips,  Edwin  \.,  p.  o.  East  Homer,  wagon 
maker,  born  in  Homer  in  1844,  enlisted  in  Co. 
D,  157th  N.  Y.  Vols.,  in  1862. 

Porter,  Oliver,  p.  o.  Homer,  lawyer. 

Pratt,  Edwin  W.,  p.  o.  Little  York,  farmer, 
owns  35  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1830;  wife, 
Mary  E.  Churchill,  of  Scott,  born  in  1824;  mar- 
ried in  1858. 

Pratt,  Franklin  F.,  was  born  in  Homer  in 
1835.  (He  was  the  youngest  of  four  sons.)  His 
father's  name  was  David  and  came  from  Wind- 
ham Co.,  Conn.,  in  1817,  tc>  this  county.  Frank- 
lin had  the  advantage  of  a  good  common  school 
education,  also  attended  the  academy  at  Homer 
several  terms  under  S.  W.  Clark  as  principal. 
From  1853  to  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  he 
taught  school  winters  and  worked  at  farming  the 
remainder  of  the  time.  Oct.  4th,  1861,  he  en- 
listed in  the  76th  Regt.  N.  Y.  S.  Vols.,  and  served 
f;iithfully  in  the  war  in  that  Regiment  till  Aug., 
1864,  when  he  was  transferred  with  another  com- 
rade to  U.  S.  Marine  Corps  at  their  own  request. 
He  was  discharged  from  service  in  Dec,  1864, 
by  special  order  of  President  Lincoln  on  account 
of  his  father's  death  and  being  the  only  son  left  to 
care  for  his  widowed  mother.  He  was  married  in 
Oct.,  1866,  to  Sarah  Brayton,  daughter  of 
Thomas  Brayton,  formerly  of  Cumberland  Co., 
England.  He  has  five  children  :  Lillian  E.,  Ro- 
sella  A.,  Nellie  M.,  Gracie  E.  and  Charles  F. 
Since  1875  Mr.  Pratt  has  owned  a  farm  of  124 
acres  and  followed  the  dairy  business. 


Pratt,  Melvin  J.,  p.  o.  Little  York,  farmer,  o\jns 
113  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1843,  was  justice 
of  the  peace;  wife,  Cornelia  E.  Salisbury;  mar- 
ried in  1867,  children  two:  Stephen  S.,  and 
Melvin  E. 

Raymond,  Alfred  B.,]).  o.  Little  York,  farmer, 
cheese-maker,  owns  10  acres,  and  has  accommo- 
dations for  summer  boarding,  boating  and  etc., 
born  in  Aug.,  1838,  has  been  constable;  wife, 
Pearlette  E.  Albro;  married  in  1866,  children 
three,  all  dead. 

Rice,  Albert,  born  in  1805,  and  died  in  1874, 
settled  in  county  in  1810;  wife,  Rosanna  Cramp- 
on, of  Conn.;  married  in  1835,  chikiren  si.\ : 
Elizabeth,  Francis  U.,  now  Mrs.  H.  1'.  Hull,  of 
Homer,  Albert  B.,  who  died  in  1862,  R.  W.,  L. 
F.,  and  Franklin  D. 

Rice,  Franklin  D.,  p.  o.  Homer,  manufacturer 
and  dealer  in  lumber,  cider,  and  pure  cider  vin- 
egar, born  in  Homer  in  1855;  wife,  Clara  J. 
Price,  of  Homer,  married  in  1879  ;  children  two  : 
Alice  L.,  and  .'\lbert  B. 

Saunders,  William  F.,  p.  o.  Homer,  livery, 
born  in  Cuyler  in  1853;  wife,  Ellen  M.  Skinner, 
of  Taylor;  married  June  17th,  1880,  one  chiUi; 
Wallace  W. 

Salisbury,  Warren,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
1 1  acres,  bom  in  Homer  in  1832,  was  excise  com- 
missioner ;  wife,  Roxanna  E.  Gay,  of  Preble ; 
married  in  1862,  one  child,  Cora  L. 

Salisbury,  W.  W.,  p.  o.  Little  York,  farmer, 
owns  45  acres,  born  in  Scott  in  1834,  was  secre- 
tary of  county  fire  relief  association  ;  wife,  Mar- 
garet L.  Rice,  of  Albany;  married  in  i860,  chil- 
dren three:  James  Rice,  Elizabeth  D.,  now  Mrs. 
A.  Rust,  of  Scott,  and  W.  W.,  jr. 

Schermerhorn,  Henry,  p.  o.  East  River,  re- 
tired, born  in  Homer  in  1808;  wife,  Eliza  Emer- 
son, of  Mass.;  married  in  1834,  children  six: 
Freeman,  of  Truxton,  Lucy  (deceased),  Daniel 
15.,  of  Kansas,  Eunice,  now  Mrs.  William  Mc- 
Lean, of  Wisconsin,  Annie  J  .,  now  Mrs.  William 
Miller,  of  Oregon,  and  Seymour. 

Seacord,  Jefferson,  p.  o.  Homer,  wagon  nianii. 
facturer,  born  in  Taylor  in  1862;  wife,  Ada 
Colby,  of  .Akron  ;  married  in  1878,  children  two  : 
Neva  and  Ella. 

Seeley,  Orlando  E.,  p.  o.  Homer,  born  in 
Spafford  in  1 847,  settled  in  county  in  1883;  wife, 


Brief  Personals. 


519 


Anna  Eddy,  of  Saratoga  county ;  married  in  1870, 
children  two  :   Francis  Irving,  and  liurton  R. 

Sessions,  Henry,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
165  acres,  born  in  Stafford,  Conn.,  in  1830,  came 
here  with  his  father  and  settled  where  he  now 
resides  in  1831 ;  mother,  Catharine  Pool,  of  Con- 
necticut; wife,  Louisa  F.  Phillips,  daughter  of 
Levi  Phillips;  married  in  1852,  children  four: 
Francis  A.,  now  Mrs.  F.  A.  Holenbeck,  of  Syra- 
cuse, George  A.,  Cora  E.,  now  Mrs.  Charles 
Gilbert,  of  Homer,  and  Lena  M. 

Sherman,  A.  James,  ]).  o.  Homer,  retired,  born 
in  1817,  owns  90  acres,  was  vice-president  Mer- 
chant's National  bank  of  Syracuse;  wife,  Sarah 
A.  Sherman,  of  Homer;  married  in  1858. 

Short,  David,  p.  o.  East  Homer,  born  in  1S12, 
owns  1 12  acres;  wife,  Miriam  Buchanan,  of  Cort- 
landville;  married  in  1841.  Fatlier  settled  here 
in  1810,  came  from  Bristol,  Mass. 

Smith,  Abel  B.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  born  in 
Dryden,  Tompkins  county,  settled  in  county  in 
1873,  owns  48^  acres;  wife,  Mary  Crane,  of  Ca- 
yuga county;  married  in  1870,  children  four: 
Abbie  B.,  Arthur  G.,  Wheeler  A.  and  Lela  E. 
Mr.  Smith  has  on  his  place  the  first  frame  barn 
built  in  Homer,  said  to  have  been  built  by  the 
Beebes  the  first  settlers  in  the  town  near  his 
place. 

Sprague,  Hosea,  p.  o.  Homer,  retired  builder^ 
born  in  Brimfield,  Mass.,  in  1793,  settled  in 
county  in  1821,  was  trustee  of  village  ;  wife,  Ann 
Hobart,  daughter  of  Capt.  Josejih,  who  came 
from  Brimfield,  Mass.,  in  1800. 

Stafford,  Henry,  ]).  o.  Homer,  farmer,  born  in 
Virgil  in  18 17,  owns  185  acres,  was  school 
trustee  and  teacher  a  number  of  years  ;  first  wife, 
Britania  C.  Sessions;  married  in  1844,  died  in 
1864;  second  wife,  Ada  Sessions;  married  in 
1865,  children  eight,  three  living:  Leonard  L, 
D.  C,  of  Nebraska,  and  .\da  C.  (now  Mrs.  .-\. 
Styles),  of  Cayuga  county. 

Stewart,  Edwin  F.,  p.  o.  Homer,  firmer,  owns 
16  acres,  born  in  West  Eaton  in  1852,  settled 
in  county  in  1856;  wife,  Josephenc  Hollenbeck, 
of  Scott;  married  in  1870,  ciiildren  two  :  Jennie 
and  Stella. 

Stoker,  Benjamin,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
85  acres,  born  in  Yorkshire,  England,  in  1822, 
settled  in  county  in  1836;  wife,  Catharine  Ham- 


mon,  of  Orange  county;  married  in  1845,  chil- 
dren eight,  four  living :  Sarah  E.,  Fannie  (now 
Mrs.  Manly  Terrel),  of  Cortland,  Daniel  B.  and 
Nellie. 

Stone,  Alphonso,  ]).  o.  Homer,  foundry  and 
machinist,  born  in  1818,  was  supervisor  three 
terms,  superintendent  of  the  poor  seven  years, 
and  president  of  the  village  four  years ;  wife, 
Maria  Beach;  married  in  1850,  children  four: 
Charles  C,  Louis  A.,  Eliot  L.,  and  F.  Eugene, 
all  living  at  home. 

Thompson,  Hammill,  p.  o.  Homer,  born  in 
Cherry  Valley  in  1799,  settled  in  county  in  1826, 
was  assessor  three  terms,  died  Nov.  27,  1884; 
wife,  E.xperience  Oakes,  of  Rensselear  Co.,  N. 
v.;  married  in  1826,  children  two ;  Alzoa,  who 
married  Rev.  Chester  Hawley^died  in  187 1,  leav- 
ing two  children. 

Van  Denburg,  John  R.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer, 
104  acres,  born  in  Preble  in  1818;  wife,  Lucinda 
M.  Babcock,  born  in  Scott;  married  in  1840, 
children  three :  Marvin  W.,  of  Fort  Edward,  N. 
Y.,  Almeron  H.,  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  and  Ella 
F.  Father  Richard  Van  Denburg  came  from 
Coxsackiein  i8o6  to  Preble. 

Wadsworth,  Manly,  p.  o.  Homer,  former,  owns 
55  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1817  ;  first  wife,  Lois 
Howe;  married  in  1838,  children  two  :  Enosand 
George  R. ;  second  wife,  Lurinda  Howe;  mar- 
ried in  1844,  one  child,  Berice  M.,  now  Mrs. 
Wadsworth  Reed,  of  Cortland;  third  wife,  Lu- 
cina  Stambro  ;  married  in  1869,  one  child,  Willie 
A. ;  a  fourth  wife,  Amanda  Crane,  of  McGraw- 
ville,  married  in  1877,  one  child,  Manly  D. 

Welch,  William  L.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
58  acres,  born  in  Solon  in  1839  ;  wife,  Mary 
Jane  Newton;  married  in  1862;  children  two: 
Sarah  Maud  and  Grace  May. 

White,  Thomas,  p.  o.  Homer,  proprietor  Hotel 
Windsor,  born  in  South  Salem  in  1822,  settled  in 
county  in  1856;  wife,  Sylvia  Slocum,  of  Cayuga 
county;  married  in  1844,  children  four:  Joseph 
White,  Mary  E.,  deceased,  Carrie,  now  Mrs.  D. 
N.  Miller,  of  Homer,  Libbie,  now  Mrs.  B.  M. 
Hyde,  of  Moravia,  N.  Y. 

Wilson,  Alfred  C,  p.  o.  Homer,  mason  and 
builder,  born  in  Homer  in  1833  ;  wife,  Jane  F. 
Powers,  of  .\lbany  ;  married  in  1855,  one  child, 
Porter  J.,  of  Medina. 


S20 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Woodward,  Charies  N.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer, 
owns  150  acres,  born  in  1826;  wife,  Charlotte 
M.  Brown,  of  Homer,  born  in  1828,  died  in  1856; 
one  child,  Charles  B.,  druggist,  of  Great  Bend, 
Pa. ;  second  wife,  M.  Elizabeth  Dada,  native  of 
Onondaga  county;  married  in  1857.  Charles 
N.  has  been  for  many  years  connected  with  the 
Sunday  school  work  of  the  State. 

Woodward,  Day  E.,p.  o.  Homer,  farmer,  owns 
30  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1839;  wife,  Melissa 
Burdick,  of  Otsego  county;  married  in  i860; 
father,  Isaac  D.,  came  on  foot  from  New  Hamp- 
shire to  Homer,  and  brought  the  first  payment 
on  the  farm,  in  1S22. 

Woodruff,  Jerome  J.,  p.  o.  Homer,  farmer, 
owns  59^  acres,  born  in  Fabius,  Onondaga 
county,  in  1835,  settled  in  county  in  1874,  was 
school  commissioner  and  ist  Lieut,  in  Co.  I 
6ist  N.  Y.  Vols.;  wife,  Myra  Wheat,  born  in 
Cortland  county;  married  in  1864,  children  six: 
James  D.,  Arthur  J.,  Anna  J.,  Charles  T.,  Trow- 
bridge B.,  and  Alson  E. 

Woodward,  Norris  G.,  p.  o.  Cortland,  farmer, 
born  in  Homer  in  1842,  was  overseer  of  the 
poor  two  terms  in  Homer;  wife,  Elizabeth  Ire- 
land, of  Truxton;  married  in  187 1,  children 
three:   Herold  E.,  Ernest  I.  and  George  N. 

Wright,  Egbert  A.,  p.  o.  Little  York,  farmer, 
owns  126  acres,  l)orn  in  Greene  county  in  1822, 
settled  in  county  in  1840;  wife,  Miriam  Wins- 
low,  of  Preble,  is  a  descendant  of  the  Winslow's 
who  came  over  in  the  Mayflower ;  married 
Jan.  i6th,  1842,  children  seven:  Annie  M.  (now 
Mrs.  Abram  Knapp),  Harriet  F.  (now  Mrs.  Da- 
vid Carver),  Mary  (now  Mrs.  Richmond  Klock), 
Jennie  E.  now  (Mrs.  Merrill  Hollenbeck),  Lewis 
C,  Robert  and  RoUin  E. 


LAPEER. 

Boice,  Henry,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners,  farmer, 
born  in  Columbia  county  in  1843  ;  wife,  Estelle 
Clark,  daughter  of  John  and  Lucy  J.  (Turk) 
Clark,  born  in  Tioga  county  in  1839;  married 
in  1862,  children  two:  Lucy  E.  and  Ermine. 
Parents,  William  and  Polly  (Decker)  Boice,  of 
Columbia  county  ;  the  former  settled  in  Cort- 
land county  in  1843,  and  died  in  1872,  aged  75; 
wife  died  in  1836. 

Burden,  John  I.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  born 


in  Lapeer  in  1857;  wife,  Hannah  Clute,  of  Sul- 
livan county;  married  in  1876,  one  child,  Clifford. 
Grandparents,  John  and  Susan  (Hopkins)  Bur- 
den, who  settled  in  county  in  1820,  children 
three.  The  former  was  born  is  1791,  and  is  still 
living.     The  latter  died  in  1876. 

Clark,  Daniel,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners,  farmer 
and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1848; 
wife,  Lorane  Tryer,  born  in  Broome  county  in 
1853  ;  married  in  1873,  children  two:  Charles  H., 
and  John  Clark.  Parents,  John  and  Lucy  J. 
(Turk)  Clark,  the  former  born  in  1808  and  died 
in  1877,  the  latter  born  in  1815;  children  eight, 
six  now  living. 

Cleveland,  Nelson,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners,  car- 
penter, builder,  and  farmer,  born  in  Virgil  (now 
Lapeer),  in  1827;  wife,  Phebe  Tryon,  born  in 
Virgil  (now  Lapeer)  in  1835;  married  in  1855, 
children  five:  Caroline,  born  December  16th, 
1855,  Ida  H.,  born  October  3d,  1861,  Esther, 
born  January  29th,  1865,  Henry  M.,  born  Octo- 
ber 2d,  1871,  and  D.Hugh, born  May  nth,  1879, 
died  Sept.  28th,  1884.  Parents,  Henry  M., 
and  Sarah  (Fox)  Cleveland,  the  former  born  in 
Davenport,  Delaware  county  in  1797,  was  jus- 
tice of  peace,  car[)enter,  builder,  and  farmer,  died 
August  17th,  1884;  the  latter  born  in  N.  H.  in 
1807,  and  died  in  1881,  children  five,  two  now 
living. 

Day,  Mrs.  Almira  S.,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners, 
born  in  Lapeer  in  1828;  husband,  Orrin  Smith 
Day,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1825,  was  assessor  one 
term  and  commissioner  many  )'ears,  enlisted  in 
the  Rebellion,  served  till  close  of  war,  incurred 
disease  which  resulted  in  his  death  which  oc- 
curred in  1882;  married  in  1854,  children  three  : 
Mary  L.,  born  in  1855,  Carroll,  born  in  1858, 
and  Kate  E.,  born  in  1862.  Parents,  John  and 
Lucy  (Baldwin)  Butterfield,  who  settled  in  Mar- 
athon in  1823,  the  former  died  in  1849,  the  lat- 
ter in  1872;  children  ten. 

Freeman,  Delos,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  car- 
])enter  and  builder,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1835;  wife, 
Francis  Brown,  born  in  1841  ;  married  in  1858, 
children  five:  Addie  E.,  Luna  C,  Clinton  E., 
Anna  L.,  and  Palmer  D.  Parents,  Elijah  ami 
Adeline  C.  (Mclntyre)  Freeman,  the  former 
born  in  1806,  and  died  in  1880,  the  latter  born 
in  1808,  is  still  living;  children  four,  three  living  : 


Brief  Personals. 


521 


Georgie  A.,  Laura  E.,  and  Delos.  Grandpa- 
rents, Prince  and  Bethia  (White)  Freeman,  who 
settled  in  Virgil  in  1800,  and  on  the  farm  now 
owned  by  Delos  in  1 813.  | 

(ioodale,  George  W.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  ] 
born  in  Virgil  in  1823;  wife,  Frances  A.  Huls- 
lander,  born  in  Dryden  in  1842  ;  married  Nov. 
nth,  1863,  children  four:  Giles,  born  in  1865, 
Carrie,  August  i8th,  1868,  Jason,  April  26th, 
1871,  and  Bertha,  April  24th,  1876.  Parents, 
Asaph  and  Betsey  (Parmenter)  Goodale,  natives 
of  Massachusetts,  settled  in  county  in  1819  ;  chil- 
dren nine,  three  now  livil^g ;  the  former  died  in 
i866,  the  latter  in  1S6S. 

Gray,  Peter  N.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  born  in 
Virgil  in  1824,  was  supervisor  two  terms,  asses- 
sor one  term;  wife,  Jerusha  Watrous,  daughter 
of  Austin  and  Sally  Watrous,  born  in  Freetown 
in  1824  ;  married  March  4th,  1846,  children  two  : 
Elizabeth  and  Jason  E.,  the  former  married  Dr. 
J.  E.  Peebles  in  1866,  children  two;  the  latter 
married  Mary  Dillenback  in  1878,  children  two. 
Parents,  Ogden  and  Susan  (Barnes)  Gray,  the 
former  born  in  1797  and  died  in  1866,  the  latter 
born  in  Pennsylvania  in  1799,  married  in  1819, 
and  still  resides  at  Cortland  ;  children  eleven, 
nine  now  living. 

Hunt,  William  E.,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners,  farmer, 
born  in  Lapeer,  was  town  clerk  three  years, 
supervisor  three  terms,  justice  of  the  peace  sev- 
enteen years,  postmaster  sixteen  years  and  no- 
tary public  five  years;  wife,  Lucretia  P.  Lake, 
daughter  of  Jedediah  and  Patience  (Church) 
T,ake,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1833  ;  married  in  1855, 
children  seven  :  Sarah  P.,  Asa  L.,  Lewis  W.,  died 
1880,  George  B.,  Mary,  Henry  M.,  and  Mabel. 
Parents,  Asa  and  Sally  (Johnson)  Hunt,  the  for- 
mer born  in  Connecticut, in  1802, settled  in  county 
in  1821,  taught  school  for  one  year  and  went  to 
Lapeer  in  1827  ;  the  latter  born  in  1807,  married 
in  1827,  children  five.  Lucretia  died  in  1862;  she 
was  the  wife  of  Prof.  Lewis  Swift,  of  Rochester. 
Jennings,  Aaron  B.,  p.  o.  Killawog,  Broome 
county,  farmer,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1826,  was  as- 
sessor two  terms,  and  held  other  offices ;  wife, 
Harriet  Tarbel,  born  in  1835;  married  in  1852, 
children  seven  :  Maranda,  bom  in  1853,  Acklison 
R.,  in  1856,  Andrew  M.,  in  1859,  Albert  A.,  in 
1864,  Eva  L.,  in  1866,  Hattie  May,  in  187 1,  and 


Erma  L.,  in  1877.  Parents,  Rufus  and  Betsey 
(Benedict)  Jennings,  the  former  born  in  1789, 
and  died  in  1851,  the  latter  died  in  1832, 
children  six,  four  now  living.  Grandparents, 
Seth  and  Hannah  (Balch)  Jennings,  married  in 
1785,  the  former  died  in  1820,  the  latter  in 
1826. 

Jennings,  Orlando,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners, 
farmer,  born  in  Lisle  in  i8ig;  wife,  Harriet  M. 
Sessions,  daughter  of  Marcus  and  Celestia 
(Squires)  Sessions,  born  in  1824  ;  married  in  1843, 
children  three:  Esther  M.,  born  in  1847,  Frede- 
rick M.,in  1850,  and  Celestia  in  1861.  Parents, 
Alfred  and  Betsey  (Lossing)  Jennings.  Grand- 
parents, Seth  and  Hannah  (Balch)  Jennings ; 
married  Nov.  24th,  1785,  settled  in  county  in 
1 80 1,  with  six  children. 

Jennison,  Smith  B.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1837,  was  supervisor  in  1S84, 
assessor  three  years ;  wife,  Orpah  Eldridge,  born 
in  1838;  married  in  i860,  children  three:  Wal- 
lace, Oliver  and  Mary.  Parents,  Levy  N.  and 
Lucy  (Smith)  Jennison,  the  former  born  in  Wor- 
cester county,  Mass.,  in  1799,  and  died  in  1863; 
the  latter  born  in  Massachusetts  in  181 1,  children 
six:  Marion,  Smith  B.,  Lurana,  Larkin,  Levy, 
and  Adelbert. 

Johnson,  Horace,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Lapeer  in  1837,  and  died  June  29th, 
1874;  wife,  Hannah  Clark,  daughter  of  John  and 
Lucy  J.  (Turk)  Clark,  born  in  1842 ;  married  in 
1862,  children  two,  Polly  and  Ida.  Parents, 
Abner  H.  and  Rebecca  (Parker)  Johnson. 

Parker,  Thomas,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  born 
in  New  Jersey  in  1803,  settled  in  county  in  1818, 
was  poormaster  thirteen  years;  wife,  Aurilla 
Chase,  born  in  Triangle  in  1807;  married  in 
1825,  died  in  1877,  children  ten.  Parents,  Wat- 
son and  Rhoda  Parker,  of  New  Jersey,  who  set- 
tled in  La|>eer  in  1818,  with  seven  children. 

Robinson,  Alanson,  p.  o.  Messengerville, 
fiirmer,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1824;  wife,  Ann  Ho- 
bart;  married  in  1849.  Parents,  Eliphalet  and 
Amy  (Parker)  Robin.son  ;  the  former  born  in  Con- 
necticut in  1796  and  died  in  1872,  the  latter 
born  in  1800  and  died  in  1858,  leaving  ten  chil- 
dren. 

Robinson,  James  R.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer 
and  stock,  born  in  Laiieer  in  1841,  was  super- 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


visor  one  term ;  wife,  Ellen  K.  Pierce,  born  in 
1849;  "■'arried  in  1876,  one  child,  Arthur  P. 
Parents,  Eli[)halet  and  Amy  (Parker)  Robinson. 
Robinson,  Simeon,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer  and 
dairy,  born  in  Lapeer  in  18 19,  was  highway  com- 
missioner three  years  and  lieutenant  in  militia; 
wife,  Sarepta  Ann,  daughter  of  Artemus  and 
Lydia  Darling,  born  in  1824;  married  in  1840, 
children  two:  Addie  L.,  born  in  1864,  and 
Simeon  E.  in  1866. 

Surdam,  Daniel  Orville,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners, 
farmer  and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Vernon,  N.  Y., 
in  1814,  has  been  supervisor  six  terms,  assessor 
three  terms,  and  held  other  offices;  wife,  Mary 
M.  Hay,  daughter  of  Henry  and  Mary(Lawton) 
Hay,  born  in  1823;  married  in  1842,  and  died 
March  9th,  1844,  leaving  one  daughter,  Frances 
M.,  who  married  Talma  Hill;  children  three. 
Parents,  Daniel  and  I.etty  (Slater)  Surdam  ;  Dan- 
iel, born  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  Letty,  in  Bedford, 
N.  Y.,  settled  in  Salisbury,  removed  to  Vernon, 
Oneida  county,  N.  Y.,  thence  to  Scipio,  Cayuga 
county,  thence  to  Marathon,  Cortland  county, 
in  1818,  and  died  in  Tioga  county;  children 
eight,  four  now  living. 

Tarble,  John,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners,  farmer,  re- 
tired, born  in  Jericho,  Chenango  county,  in  1806, 
settled  in  county  in  1810,  was  assessor  over 
twelve  years;  wife,  Maranda  Gross,  born  in 
1813;  married  in  1834,  and  died  in  1842  ;  chil- 
dren four ;  second  wife,  Susan  Gross,  born  in 
1821;  married  in  1844,  and  died  in  1847,  one 
son,  John;  third  wife,  Ruth  Smith,  born  in  1823; 
married  in  1850,  children  five.  Parents,  Robert 
and  Sarah  (Parker)  Smith,  natives  of  Rhode  Isl- 
and, and  early  settlers  of  county;  the  former 
died  in  1870,  aged  86. 

Torry,  Rev.  Orrin  Lewis,  p.  o.  Marathon,  M. 
E.  minister,  and  member  of  Central  N.  Y.  Con- 
ference, M.  E.  Church,  superannuated  and  retired 
to  a  farm  in  Lapeer,  where,  by  hard  labor,  un- 
aided by  the  church,  he  earns  an  hone.st  liveli- 
hood. Was  licensed  to  exhort  and  preach,  and 
was  recommended  to  the  Oneida  Annual  Con- 
ference, July,  1847,  of  which  he  was  a  member 
until  the  Central  Conference  was  formed.  His 
field  of  labor  has  been,  besides  extras,  all  through 
the  county  and  in  adjoining  counties.  Caroline 
and  Speedsville;  Marathon  five  years,  Factory- 


ville,  Waverly,  Athens  and  Pipe  Creek,  Virgil, 
East  Virgil  and  Harford,  Tully  and  Vesjjer,  Cuy- 
ler  and  De  Ruyter,  Homer,  McGrawville,  Whit- 
ney's Point  and  Lisle,  and  New  Berlin  and  Co- 
lumbus Centre.  Was  born  in  Coventry,  Che- 
nango county,  Oct.  23d,  1821  ;  wife,  Sally  Ann 
Sessions,  daughter  of  Urial  and  Nancy  (Price) 
Sessions,  of  Marathon,  born  May,  1823;  married 
in  July,  1849,  one  child,  born  Dec,  1850,  Lewis 
J.,  who  married  Anna  Wright,  of  Chicago,  where 
he  resides.  Rev.  O.  L.  Torry  was  a  graduate  of 
the  Homer  Lnstitute  through  his  sacrifice  and 
perseverance.  Many  Fevivals  resulted  from  his 
labors,  and  many  memorable  incidents,  now  fresh 
in  the  recollections  of  thousands  to  whom  he  has 
ministered  in  their  afflictions,  have  to  be  omitted. 

Valentine,  George  N.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer 
and  carpenter,  born  in  Marathon  in  1845,  was 
highway  commissioner  one  term  ;  wife,  Emma  C. 
Freeman,  daughter  of  John  and  Mary  A.  (Ken- 
nedy) Freeman,  born  in  1848;  married  in  1867, 
children  two :  Ralph  C.  and  Leighton  F.  Pa- 
rents, John  A.  and  Rhoda  (Salisbury)  Valentine; 
the  former  born  in  1815,  and  died  in  1867,  the 
latter  in  1817,  is  still  living;  three  children  :  Es- 
ther, G.  W.  and  Charles  A. 

Young,  David,  p.  o.  Hunt's  Corners,  farmer, 
carjjenter  and  builder,  born  in  Herkimer  county 
in  1840,  settled  in  county  in  1846,  was  assessor 
seven  years ;  wife,  Emma  G.  Houghtaling,  born 
in  Broome  county  in  1852;  married  in  1872, 
children  two :  David  H.  and  Francie.  Parents, 
Hiram  and  Polly  (Hay)  Young,  of  Herkimer 
county;  the  former  died  in  1848,  the  latter  in 
the  same  year,  leaving  four  children.  David  en- 
listed in  Co.  E,  76th  Regt.,  in  1861,  served  six- 
teen months  under  Col.  Greene,  and  was  dis- 
charged on  account  of  impaired  health.  His 
home  was  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lyman  and  Mar- 
tha Watrous,  of  Lapeer,  since  his  father's  death. 


MARATHON. 

Aldrich,  Moses  B.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  born  in 
Susquehanna  county,  Pa.,  in  1842,  settled  in 
county  in  1872,  was  town  clerk,  and  elected 
justice  of  peace  in  1882;  wife,  Clara  Smith, 
daughter  of  O.  H.  Smith,  born  in  1857  ;  married 
in   1876,  children  two:    Clarence  and   H.  Ray. 


Brief  Personals. 


523 


M.  B.  Aldrich  acquired  the  profession  of  dentis- 
try at  Binghamton  and  practiced  in  Marathon 
with  much  success. 

Baker,  Joseph,  jr.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  retired  far- 
mer, born  in  Delaware  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1806, 
settled  in  county  in  1848,  was  highway-commis- 
sioner, assessor  sevei)  years  and  delegate  to 
county  conventions;  first  wife,  Catharine  Haver, 
born  in  Schoharie  county,  married  in  1835,  died 
in  1869;  second  wife,  Julia  Yarrington,  born  in 
Chenango  county  in  1835,  married  in  187 1. 
Parents,  Joseph  and  Eunice  (Follet)  Baker,  the 
former  born  in  Massachusetts,  the  latter  in  Con- 
necticut, children  thirteen,  six  now  living. 
Gi'andparents  emigrated  from  Scotland,  England 
and  Wales,  and  all  lived  to  be  about  eighty-two 
years  old. 

Ball,  L.  Clinton,  p.  o.  Marathon,  dealer  in  dry 
goods,  crockery,  etc.,  born  in  Virgil,  July  6th, 
1840,  served  in  the  late  war  for  three  years  in 
different  positions,  was  justice  of  the  peace  one 
term;  wife,  Mary  A.  Brown,  born  in  1841,  mar- 
ried in  1865;  one  child,  Willie  D.,  born  in  1872. 
Parents,  Lewis  Ball  and  Rebecca  Powers. 
Lewis  Ball  was  son  of  Wait  Ball  who  was  among 
the  first  setders  of  the  county  and  was  justice  of  the 
peace  for  nearly  forty  years,  and  at  one  time  one 
of  the  three  county  judges. 

Boyden,  Fred  L.,  Marathon,  furniture  and 
undertaker,  born  in  Willet  in  1857;  wife,  .Addie 
Montgomery,  born  in  1863,  married  in  i88r. 
Parents,  Luther  O.  and  Nancy  (Dibble)  Boy- 
den, the  former  of  Willet,  the  latter  of  Broome 
county.  Frank  L.  began  the  furniture  business 
in  1883,  and  deals  in  all  kinds  of  house  furnish- 
ing goods. 

Brooks,  Charles  A.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  postmas- 
ter, and  manufacturer  of  Mitchell's  copy  case, 
blackboard,  and  desk,  born  in  Danby,  N.  Y., 
in  1857,  setded  in  county  in  1874,  was  post- 
master in  1882,  and  town  auditor;  wife,  Mary 
A.  Squires,  daughter  of  Hon.  Dann  C.  Squires ; 
married  in  1878,  one  daughter,  Irene  Mack. 
Parents,  Rev.  Asa  and  Permelia  (Griffin)  Brooks, 
the  former  was  pastor  of  the  M.  E.  Church  in 
1874,  and  now  located  in  Broome  county. 

Carley,  A.  A.,  p.  o.  Marathon. 

Carter,  Charles,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  born 
in  Bainbridge,  N.  Y.,  in    1813,  settled  in  Mara- 


thon in  1835,  was  assessor  one  term,  and  held 
other  offices;  wife,  Abigail  Ostrander,  born  in 
Broome  county  in  1812;  married  in  1841,  chil- 
dren six:  Charles  A.,  Emily  D.,  Almira,  George 
G.,  Simon  W.,  and  Edwin  A.  Parents,  Ezra 
and  Dimmes  (Bidwell)  Carter,  the  former  bom 
in  Connecticut,  and  the  latter  in  Massachusetts, 
settled  in  Broome  county  very  early,  came  to 
Cortland  county  in  1836,  the  former  died  in 
1861,  the  latter  in  1876. 

Dellow,  William  R.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  manufac- 
turer  and  dealer  in    furniture,  and    undertaker, 
born   in    Madison    county    in    1834,  settled    in 
county  in  1858,  was  town  auditor  and  held  other 
offices;   wife,  Elvira   Danforth,  born   in  Vermont 
in  1834;   married  in  1855,  children  three:   Frank, 
Fred  and    Hattie.     Parents,  Daniel   and   Mary 
\.  (Simmons)  Dellow,  married  in  England,  and 
settled  in  Madison  county  in  1832.     W.  R.  Del- 
low  began  the  sale  of  furniture  at  Willet  in  1858, 
and  in  1872  moved  his  business  to  Cortland,  and 
in  1875  opened  his  present  factory  at  Marathon. 
Gardener,    Henry,   p.    o.    Marathon,   farmer. 
Parents,  William   and   Anna  (Martin)  Gardener, 
the  former  born  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  in   1796, 
settled  in  county  in   1806,  married  in  1820;  the 
latter  was  born  in    1799,  and  died   Sept.    12th, 
1845,  children  nine,  five  now  living:  Mrs.  Polly 
M.    Jones,   Mrs.    Sarah    Smith,    Mrs.     Emeline 
Baker,  Nelson   and   Henry.     Second    wife,  Lo- 
vena  Parmer,  born   in    1800,  married  in   1846, 
and  now  resides  on  the  homestead. 

Hammond,  Cautious  S.,  p.  o.  Te.xas  Valley, 
retired  farmer,  and"  shoe  manufacturer,  owns  125 
acres,  born  in  Canada  in  1806,  settled  in  county 
in  1807,  was  collector  one  year;  wife,  Loisa 
Eggleston,  bom  in  1809;  married  in  1828,  died 
in  1841 ,  children  eight,  four  living.  Second  wife, 
Charity  Shiffer,  daughter  of  Henry  H.  and 
Albertine  Shiffer,  born  in  181 2,  married  in  1844. 
Parents,  Henry  and  Mary  (Stoddard)  Hammond, 
the  former  bom  in  Long  Island,  died  in  1846, 
the  latter  in  Vermont,  died  in  1S66;  children 
six,  three  now  living. 

Hammond,  Delos  C,  p.  o.  Texas  Valley, 
blacksmith  and  farmer,  born  in  Cincinnatus  in 
1830;  wife,  Betsey  Cleveland;  married  in  1852, 
children  five:  Sarah  L.,  born  in  1855,  Florence 
I.,  in   1859,  Frank   D.,   in   1863,  Minnie  L.,  in 


524 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1865,  and  Mattie  J.,  in  1867.     Parents,  Cautious 
S.  and  Louisa  (Kggleston)  Hammond. 

Hauimon,  Samuel,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Marathon  in  1814,  was  a.ssessor  twenty- 
one  years,  and  held  other  offices;  wife,  Lucy  Ann 
Stanley,  daughter  of  Harris  and  .Vnnie  (Sedg- 
wick) Stanley,  born  in  Lapeer  in  1820;  married 
in  1845,  children  six,  three  now  living:  Clark  S., 
John  H.,  and  Samuel,  jr.  Parents,  John  and 
Phebe  (Davis)  Hammon,  the  former  was  born 
at  Suflblk,  L.  L,  in  1776,  setded  in  county  in  1813, 
died  in  1S43,  the  latter  born  in  1773  and  died  in 
1865;  children  fourteen. 

Hawley,  De  Forest  D.,  \i.  o.  Marathon,  far- 
mer, born  in  Marathon  in  1847.  Parents,  Zina 
A.  and  Margaret  (Fuller)  Hawley,  the  former 
of  Delaware  county,  the  latter  of  Cortland,  set- 
tled in  Marathon  in  1830,  the  latter  died  in 
187 1, leaving  si.\  children:  De  Forest  D.,  Alex- 
ander F.,  Elizabeth,  Margaret,  Mary,  and  Maria. 
Grand[)arents,  Jacob  and  Maria  Fuller,  settled  in 
Marathon  in  1800. 

Hays,  Edward  W.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  merchant 
and  cooper,  born  in  Herkimer  county  in  1832, 
settled  in  county  in  1866;  wife,  Elmira  Rutt, 
born  in  Fulton  county  in  1834;  married  in  1854, 
children  two:  Nellie  Francis,  born  in  1S62,  and 
Eddie  C,  born  in  1868. 

Hilsinger,  David,  \).  o.  Marathon,  lumber 
dealer,  carpenter  and  builder,  owns  360^  acres, 
born  in  Marathon  in  1821,  was  commissioner  of 
highways  seven  years  ;  wife,  Louisa  Jones,  daugh- 
ter of  Thomas  and  Hannah  (.\dams)  Jones,  born 
in  Marathon  in  1829;  married  in  1S49,  children 
two  :  Albert  and  Thomas.  Parents,  Conrad  and 
Eva  Hilsinger,  natives  of  Schoharie  county. 

Frelick,  Elias,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  born  in 
Marathon  in  1804 ;  wife,  Abigail  Beach,  daughter 
of  Elijah  and  Anna  Beach,  who  settled  in  county 
in  1830,  born  in  1825,  married  in  1850.  Pa- 
rents, John  and  Rachael  (Fuller)  Frelick,  the 
former  born  in  1776,  and  died  in  1850,  the  lat- 
ter died  in  1856;  children  eight,  four  now  living. 
Grandparents,  Benjamin  and  Mary  (Smith)  Fre- 
lick, who  came  to  Marathon  in  1802. 

Johnson,  Abram  B.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
stock  grower  and  dealer,  owns  2po  acres,  born 
in  Virgil  in  1826;  wife,  Charlotte  Shepard, 
daughter  of  Nathaniel  Shepard,  born   in  Upper 


Lisle  in  1829,  married  in  1850.  Parents,  Wash- 
ington and  Ann  (Brink)  Johnson,  the  former 
born  in  1802,  died  in  1883,  the  latter  was  born 
in  1806,  died  in  1844. 

Johnson,  Herbert,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
butcher  and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Virgil  in  1843  ; 
wife,  Ella  Dalton,  born  in  Ireland  in  1854;  mar- 
ried in  1875,  children  three:  Lena,  Anna,  and 
Willie.  Parents,  Stephen  S.  and  Sally  Ann 
(Carley)  Johnson,  the  former  born  in  Broome 
county  in  i8o6,  married  in  1838,  children  nine. 

Jones,  Warren,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer  and 
dairy,  owns  140  acres,  born  in  Marathon  in 
1S52  ;  wife,  Nettie  Johnson,  born  in  Dunkirk  in 
1S57;  married  in  1876,  children  two:  Charles 
and  Flora.  Parents,  Thomas  and  Hannah  (Ad- 
ams) Jones;  the  former  born  in  Marathon  in 
1807;  married  in  1826,  died  in  1880;  the  latter 
born  in  1808  and  died  in  1882  ;  children  eleven, 
nine  now  living. 

Lathrop,  Ezra  H.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer  and 
dairy,  born  in  Marathon  in  1862  ;  wife,  Sarah 
Seymour,  born  in  1829  ;  married  in  1855,  died 
in  1881  ;  second  wife,  Mrs.  Hulda  E.  Spencer, 
widow  of  Jirah  P.  Spencer,  born  in  183 1;  mar- 
ried Mr.  Lathrop  in  1838.  Parents,  Horace  and 
Betsey  (Hartson)  Lathrop;  the  former  of  Con- 
necticut, the  latter  of  Broome  county ;  children 
twelve,  six  now  living. 

Leach,  Christopher  W.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  har- 
ness maker  and  farmer,  born  in  Marathon  in 
1814,  was  collector  and  held  other  town  offices  ; 
wife,  Lucetta  Livermore,  born  in  Chenango 
county  in  1816;  married  in  1835,  died  in  1870, 
leaving  thirteen  children ;  second  wife,  Mrs.  S. 
S.  Cox,  married  in  1871.  Parents,  Jonathan  and 
Lydia(Pattengail)  Leach,  natives  of  Massachu- 
setts, who  settled  in  Marathon  in  1800;  chil- 
dren seven,  three  now  living.  The  former  died 
in  1840,  the  latter  in  1854. 

Livingston,  James,  jr.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  bridge 
builder,  steam  foundry  and  machinist,  born  in 
Otsego  county  in  1837,  settled  in  county  in 
1838;  wife,  Fannie  Peebles  of  Marathon,  born 
in  1840;  married  in  1858,  children  four:  John 
W.,  George,  Desman  B.,  and  Mary.  Parents, 
James  and  Elizabeth  Livingston  ;  the  former  of 
Otsego  county,  the  latter  of  Schoharie ;  children 
four.     Mr.   Livingston   is  one  of    the  best  iron 


Brief  Personals. 


525 


bridge  builders  in  the  State ;  he  has  erected 
many  in  his  town  and  county,  also  in  adjoining 
counties,  which  give  the  best  of  satisfaction. 

Lovell,  Ransom  M.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Marathon  in  1823,  was  commissioner  of 
highways  and  held  other  offices ;  wife,  Mary 
Hilsinger,  born  in  1828;  married  in  1849,  died 
in  1853;  second  wife,  Dorcas  E.  Meacham, 
born  in  1835;  married  in  1856,  children  six. 
Parents,  Joseph  A.  and  Lucy  Carpenter  Lovell; 
the  former  born  in  Vermont  in  1782,  the  latter 
in  1787;  married  in  1801  ;  Lucy  died  in  1848, 
and  Joseph  A.  died  in  1853;  children  fourteen, 
three  now  living :  Mary  V.,  Ransom  M.  and 
Joseph. 

Mallery,  Patrick,  p.  o.  Marathon,  retired 
farmer,  born  in  Marathon  in  1806,  was  super- 
visor eight  terms,  assessor  four  terms,  and  held 
other  minor  offices ;  wife.  Avis  Rowland,  born 
in  1805,  married  in  1830  and  died  in  1876;  sec- 
ond wife,  Frances  .\.  Phelps,  born  in  1847,  mar- 
ried in  1878,  one  child,  Ralph  P.  who  died  in 
1882.  Parents,  Patrick  and  Anna  (Olmstead) 
Mallery,  who  settled  in  Marathon  in  1805  ;  chil- 
dren eleven,  nine  now  living. 

Mantanye,  William  J.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  attor- 
ney and  counselor. 

Meacham,  Edgar  N.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Marathon  in  1837,  was  assessor  in  1883, 
e.xcise  commissioner  three  terms,  and  deputy 
sheriff;  wife,  Ann  Frances  Lawrence,  born  in 
1838;  married  in  1866,  one  child,  Lawrence 
Hale.  Parents,  Eleazer  and  Eliza  (Leach)  Mea- 
cham ;  the  former  born  in  Massachusetts  in 
1800,  the  latter  in  Cortland  county  in  t8o6; 
married  in  1827,  children  five.  Grandparents 
came  to  county  in  1809. 

Meacham,  E.  Delos,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Marathon  in  1833,  was  justice  of  peace 
two  terms;  wife,  Ruth  Lovell,  born  in  183 1  ; 
married  in  1853,  children  eight :  P'rank  E.,  Cecil 
D.,  Ada,  Nettie  E.,  Lillie  B.,  May,  Grace  E.,  and 
Ernest  I).  Parents,  Eleazer  H.  and  Eliza  Leach ; 
the  former  was  born  in  Massachusetts  in  1800, 
and  died  in  1879;  the  latter  born  in  1806,  mar- 
ried in  1827,  died  in  1872,  children  four. 

Montgomery,  Dubois,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer 
and  dairy,  owns  200  acres,  born  in  Roxbury, 
Delaware  county,  in  1825,  setded  in  county  in 


1845,  was  commissioner  of  highways  three  years, 
and  overseer  of  the  poor;  wife.  Marietta  May- 
dole,  daughter  of  John  and  Mary  Maydole; 
married  in  1848,  children  five:  Alice,  Julia,  Al- 
phie,  Addie  and  Irvie.  Parents,  William  and 
Sally  (Conkey)  Montgomery. 

Potts,  William  M.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer, 
born  in  Marathon  in  1850;  wife,  Julia  F.  Mont- 
gomery, daughter  of  Dubois  and  Mary  Etta 
Montgomery,  born  in  1852,  married  in  1873. 
Parents,  Cornelius  M.  and  Cynthia  (Martin) 
Potts,  who  settled  in  Marathon  in  1842  ;  the 
former  died  in  187 1,  aged  58  years,  the  latter 
died  in  1883,  aged  71;  one  child. 

Reed,  Dr.  Aaron  D.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  physi- 
cian and  surgeon,  born  in  Delaware  county  in 
1824,  settled  in  county  in  1854;  wife,  Marion 
Hubbell,  born  in  1831;  married  in  1849,  chil- 
dren two :  Mary  Eva,  and  Ida  Viola.  Parents, 
Oliver  and  Eunice  (De  Long)  Reed  ;  the  former 
of  Connecticut,  the  latter  of  Delaware  county, 
settled  in  Cortland  in  1850.  Dr.  Reed  was  a 
graduate  of  the  Castleton  Medical  College  in 
1849,  settled  in  Middletown  in  1854,  moved 
t©  Cincinnatus  in  1869,  then  moved  to  Marathon, 
where  he  still  resides. 

Shevalier,  Bruce  C,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer 
and  dairyman,  born  in  Marathon  in  1856,  has 
held  district  offices ;  wife,  Alphie  Montgomery, 
born  in  1856;  married  in  1S82.  Parents,  Nich- 
olas and  Delia  (Barnes)  Shevalier;  the  former 
born  in  Virgil  and  died  in  1882,  the  latter  in 
Delaware  Co.,  N.  Y.,  died  in  1883,  aged  48, 
children  five :  Bruce  C,  Charles  T.,  Mary,  Jen- 
nie L.,  and  Fannie  D.  Grandfather  John  Shev- 
alier was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  Virgil. 

Smith,  .Mfred  G.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  dealer  in 
boots  and  shoes  and  rubber  goods,  born  in  Lon- 
don, England,  in  1827,  came  to  this  country  in 
1845,  to  Syracuse  in  1846,  and  to  Marathon  in 
1861,  has  been  a  member  of  the  boawl  of  educa- 
tion, and  twice  president  of  the  village,  has  taken 
an  active  part  in  Republican  ])olitics,  having  fre- 
quently served  as  a  delegate  to  the  county,  con- 
gressional, senatorial  and  State  conventions  of 
the  party  ;  is  a  man  of  fine  literary  abilities  and 
attainments,  public  spirited  and  energetic,  hav- 
ing been  identified  with  most  of  the  improve- 
ments in  Marathon  during  his  residence  in  the 


526 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


village;  was  married  in  1850  to  Annie  Kimbcr, 
daughter  of  the  late  Thos.  Kimber,  Esq.,  of  On- 
ondaga. Mr.  Smith  commenced  the  business  he 
is  now  engaged  in,  in  1861. 

Smith,  John  I,.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer,  born 
in  Pitcher,  Chenango  county  in  1832,  settled  in 
county  in  i86g,  was  assessor  three  terms  and 
held  other  district  offices;  wife,  Hannah  M. 
Tanner,  daughter  of  L.  D.  Tanner,  born  in 
1838;  married  in  1857,  children  three :  Charles 
F.,  Lawson  J.,  and  Manson  L.  Parents,  Ed- 
ward and  Mary  (Lawson)  Smith ;  the  former 
died  at  Marathon,  in  1875,  the  latter  in  Che- 
nango county ;  children  two.  Mr.  John  Smith 
was  one  of  thirteen  to  organize  the  Marathon 
Grange  society,  in  1882;  it  numbered  70  mem- 
bers in  1883,  and  is  in  a  flourishing  condition. 

Squires,  George  P.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  farmer  and 
stock  breeder,  bom  in  Marathon  in  1839;  wife 
Ann  E.  Pennoyer,  daughter  of  Garret  and  Eliza 
Jane  Pennoyer,  born  in  1840;  married  in  1862, 
one  child,  Harry,  born  in  1866.  Parents,  William 
and  Lucy  (Church)  Squires,  the  former  born  in 
1798,  settled  in  Marathon  in  1801,  with  his  father 
and  mother,  the  latter  born  in  Brattleboro,  Vt., 
in  1802,  married  in  1823,  children  eleven,  three 
now  living. 

Stanley,  Davison  H.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  retired 
farmer,  born  in  Virgil  in  1817;  wife,  Eliza  M. 
Johnson;  married  in  1843,  and  died  in  1844; 
second  wife,  Julia  A.  Johnson,  born  in  1819,  mar- 
ried in  1845,  children  three :  Minard  H.,  born  in 
1848  and  died  in  1849,  Seward  S.,  born  in  1852 
and  Edgar  H.,  born  in  1855.  Parents,  Harris  and 
Anna  (Sedgwick)  Stanley  ;  the  former  of  Massa- 
chusetts, who  died  in  1883,  the  latter  of  Connecti- 
cut, died  in  1861,  children  three. 

Stockwell,  Willard,  p.  o.  Marathon,  born  in 
Bainbridge,  Chenango  county,  in  1828,  settled 
in  Marathon  in  1882,  was  justice  of  peace,  town 
clerk  and  postmaster  of  Lapeer ;  wife,  Susan  Al- 
lison, of  Chenango  county;  married  in  1849,  chil- 
dren two:  William  A.,  born  in  1855,  and  Katie, 
born  in  1867.  Parents,  Abel  and  Milly  (Davis) 
Stockwell.  Mr.  Stockwell  formed  a  stock  com- 
pany, called  the  Marathon  Stockwell  wagon 
manufacturing  company  in  Marathon  in  1882, 
and  at  present  gives  employment  to  twenty  to 
twenty-five  hands  and  intends  to  further  enlarge 
the  factory  and  increase  its  capacity. 


Tripp,  James  H.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  banker,  of 
Tripp  &  Adams. 

Turner,  Russell,  p.  o.  Marathon,  retired 
farmer,  born  in  Long  Island  in  1804,  settled  in 
county  in  181 1;  wife,  Agnes  Shepard,  daugh- 
ter of  Robinson  and  Abigail  (Leach)  Shepard,  of 
Connecticut,  born  in  Madison  county  in  1804; 
married  in  1827,  one  adopted  son,  J.  Edwin 
Turner,  born  in  1833.  Parents,  Samuel  and  Cla- 
rissa (Rogers)  Turner,  of  Long  Island,  who  set- 
tled in  Virgil  in  iSii,  moving  by  wagon  with 
three  children  ;  they  had  nine  children  in  all, 
four  of  which  are  now  living.  The  father  died  in 
1867,  and  the  mother  died  in  Indiana  a  few  years 
since. 

Webster,  George  W.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  dealer 
in  flour,  feed,  coal,  etc.,  born  in  Freetown  in 
1836,  was  county  treasurer  three  years  and  col- 
lector four  years ;  wife  Maria  A.  Fairchild,  of 
Pitcher,  Chenango  county,  born  in  1841  ;  mar- 
ried in  1863,  one  child.  Jay,  born  in  1866.  Pa- 
rents Harvey  S.  and  Ann  (Leach)  Webster,  the 
former  born  in  1800  in  Vermont,  came  to  county 
in  1818,  died  in  1870,  the  latter  born  in  Cort- 
land county  in  1795,  married  in  1818,  children 
nine.  George  W.  enlisted  in  Co.  K,  44th  N.  Y. 
volunteers,  September  25th,  i86r,  served  until 
the  loss  of  his  arm  in  the  second  batde  of  Bull 
Run,  in  1862,  and  now  draws  a  pension. 

Wightman,  Homer,  p.  o.  Marathon,  cheese 
manufacturer  and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Scho- 
harie county  in  1832,  settled  in  county  in  1836, 
was  assessor  three  terms;  wife,  Catharine  Smith, 
born  in  Herkimer  county  in  1835;  married  in 
1856,  children  four:  Dudley  A.,  Daniel  E., 
Clara,  and  Earl  B.  Parents,  Daniel  and  Eme- 
line  (Post)  Wightman,  the  former  of  Connecticut, 
born  in  1802,  the  latter  of  Schoharie  county,  died 
in  Freetown,  leaving  five  children. 

Wilcox,  Thurston,  p.  o.  Marathon,  retired  far- 
mer, born  in  Rhode  Island  in  1803,  settled  in 
county  in  1841,  came  to  Marathon  in  1863,  held 
town  offices  in  Willet;  wife,  Lydia  Townsend,  of 
New  Hampshire;  married  in  1830,  died  in  1864, 
leaving  two  children :  Frances  T.,  and  Emeline, 
Second  wife,  Mahala  Stewart,  married  in  1867. 
and  died  in  1869;  third  wife,  Mrs.  Fannie  A. 
(Pratt)  Comstock  ;  married  in  1871,  chidren  two, 
by  first  husband:  Charles  E.,  and  Wallace  R. 
Pollard. 


Brief  Personals. 


527 


Winter,  Nicholas  H.,  fjirmer  and  stock  dealer, 
one  mile,  east  of  Maratlion  village,  born  in  Vir- 
gil June  24th,  1838.  Parents,  Ambrose  and 
Lydia  (Hugaboom)  Winter,  prominent  and  early 
settlers  of  Virgil,  Cortland  county ;  wife,  Susan 
A.  Pierce,  daughter  of  Lyman  Pierce;  married 
in  1862,  died  in  1867,  leaving  one  daughter, 
Cora  B.,  born  March  19th,  1866.  Second  wife, 
Martha  A.  TiUinghast,  daughter  of  Thomas  Till- 
inghast,  born  Sept.  2d,  1848,  in  Freetown,  mar- 
ried June  i8th,  1875. 

Wood,  Stephen,  M.,  p.  o.  Marathon,  cooper, 
born  in  Rensselaer  county  in  1830,  settled  in 
county  in  1844;  wife,  Mariette  E.  Seeber,  bom 
in  1829;  married  in  1852,  children  three:  How- 
ard S.,  Carrie  L.,  and  Lena  E.  Parents,  Thomas 
D.  and  Aseneth  Wood,  who  settled  in  county  in 
1844.  Mr.  Wood  began  the  cooperage  business 
in  Marathon  in  1863,  and  in  1874  entered  into 
partnership  under  the  name  of  S.  M.  Wood  & 
Co.,  until  1881,  when  he  sold  out  and  built  a 
factory  on  the  east  side  of  the  river  40  by  32, 
where  he  put  in  steam  power  and  improved 
machinery  which  enables  him  to  do  the  best  of 
work. 


PREBLE. 

Aldrich  Seth,  p.  o.  Preble,  retired  farmer, 
owns  200  acres,  born  in  Vermont  in  1S06, 
settled  in  county  in  1813,  was  supervisor,  asses- 
sor, highway  commissioner,  and  poormaster  for 
fifteen  years ;  wife,  Elmira  Smith,  of  Connecticut, 
married  in  1830,  children  three :  Mary  L.,  now 
Mrs.  Richard  Squire,  of  Preble,  Alice  D.,  now 
Mrs.  Frank  L.  Hall,  M.  D.,  of  Amber,  and  George 
H.,  who  died  in  1873. 

Beattie,  James  A.,  j).  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns 
112  acres,  born  in  Dunfrieshire,  Scotland,  settled 
in  county  in  1850;  wife,  Mary  Jane  Egbertson,  of 
Preble,  daughter  of  Barnet  and  Mary  Egbertson, 
natives  of  Greene  county;    married  in  1876. 

Briggs,  John  B.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns  170 
acres,  born  in  Delhi,  N.  Y.,  in  1828;  wife,  Au- 
gusta N.  Dunbar,  born  in  Poughkeepsie  N.  Y., 
1835,  daughter  of  Elam  and  Catharine  (Millard) 
Dunbar,  of  Preble,  who  came  to  county  in  1845  ; 
married  in  1852,  children  three  living  :  Marshall 
A.,  Walter  D.,  and  Fred  M.     Parents,  John  and 


Nancy  (Bailey)  Briggs,  who  came  to  Preble  in 
1845. 

Butler,  Adalbert,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Preble  in  1841,  owns  180 
acres,  was  assessor  and  highway  commissioner; 
wife,  Aronett  Welch,  daughter  of  Russell  F.,  and 
Azubah  (Ingalls)  Welch,  of  St.  Lawrence  county, 
N.  Y.,  married  in  1865.  Parents,  Thomas  E. 
and  Tamor  (Drake)  Butler,  who  came  from  Con- 
necticut to  county  in  1815. 

Butler,  Roscoe,  p.  o.  Preble,  bom  in  Preble  in 
1835,  farmer,  and  owns  140  acres,  has  been 
a.ssessor  nine  years;  wife,  Catherine  Gleason  ; 
married  in  1859,  children  four:  Fannie  M.,  Ed- 
ward J.,  Thomas  L,  and  Ida  B.  Parents, 
Thomas  E.  and  Tamor  (Drake)  Butler,  who 
came  from  Connecticut  and  settled  in  this  county 
in  1815. 

Collier,  Casper,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  bom  in 
Preble  in  1807,  was  constable  and  collector; 
wife,  Hannah  Severson,  daughter  of  Nicholas 
and  Jane  Severson,  who  came  to  county  iu  1808; 
married  in  1828,  children  four,  two  living  :  Frank- 
lin J.,  of  Preble,  and  Nicholas  D.  Parents,  John 
and  Hannah  Collier,  descendants  of  the  Holland 
Dutch. 

Collier,  Franklin  J.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  osvns 
250  acres,  born  in  Pike,  Alleghany  county,  in 
1837,  settled  in  county  in  1842,  was  justice  of 
peace;  first  wife,  Lydia  Crofoot,  daughter  of 
David  and  Elizabeth  Crofoot;  married  in  1861, 
children  two :  Lucy,  now  Mrs.  P.  McCormick, 
of  Preble,  and  F.  Edward  ;  second  wife,  Lydia 
C.  Van  Buskirk,  of  Preble;  married  in  1876,  one 
child,  Bessie  C. 

Crofoot,  David  O.,  p.  o.  Preble,  flour,  feed  and 
lumber  mill,  born  in  Preble  in  1833,  was  super- 
visor and  assessor;  wife,  Sarah  E.  Tallman,  of 
TuUy;  married  in  1867,  children  four:  John  T., 
Mary  E.,  Henry  C,  and  Wellington  A. 

Cummings,  Adrian,  p.  o.  Tully,  farmer  and 
surveyor,  born  in  Preble  in  1842,  owns  100  acres, 
the  original  farm  owned  by  his  father,  also  by  his 
grandfather ;  wife,  Sophia  Willis,  of  Tully  ;  mar- 
ried in  1866,  children  four:  Willis  E.,  Cora  L., 
Chester  E.,  and  JuliaR. 

Cummings,  Chester,  p.  o.  Tully,  retired,  owns 
i5oacres,  born  in  Preble  in  1815  ;  wife,  Deborah; 
married  in  183S,  children  two:  Abigail  Leona, 
and  Lurinda  Elmerrah. 


528 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Cummings,  Corwin  E.,  p.  o.  Tully,  farmer,  owns 
I  oo  acres,  born  in  Preble  in  1853;  wife,  Helle, 
daughter  of  Theron  and  Sarah  E.  Klock  ;  mar- 
ried in  i&TJ,  one  child,  Ada.  Parents,  William 
and  Patty  M.  Cummings;  grandparents,  Ed- 
ward and  Sally  Cummings. 

Cummings,  Harlan  P.,  p.  o.  Tully,  farmer,  born 
in  Preble  in  1840,  owns  100  acres,  was  higliway 
commissioner ;  wife,  Mary  N.  Banks,  of  Delaware 
county;  married  in  1864,  children  two:  Herbert 
A.,  and  Erwin  E.  Parents,  Silas  and  Amanda 
Taggart. 

Cummings,  Harvey,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns 
X43  acres,  born  in  Preble  in  1820,  was  highway 
commissioner;  wife,  Lydia  A.  Baldwin,  of  Cayuga 
county;  married  in  1842,  children  two  :  Orlando 
J.,  and  Alice  C.  (now  Mrs.  Edwin  P.  Ide),  of 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  Parents,  Edward  and  Sally 
Cummings. 

Cummings,  Homer,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns 
104  acres,  born  in  Preble  in  1848;  wife,  Harriet 
Shevalier  daughter  of  Isaac  and  Nancy  A.  (Smith) 
Shevalier;  married  in  1874,  one  child.  Angle  L. 
Parents,  William  and  Martha  M.  Cummings. 

Cummings,  James,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns 
156  acres,  born  in  Preble  Nov.  5th,  1834;  wife, 
Cornelia  M.  Miles,  of  Fabius,  Onondaga  county, 
born  in  1835;  married  in  1855,  children  two : 
James  M.,  born  in  Preble,  December  30th,  1856, 
and  married  Emeline  G.  Thayer,  of  Fabius,  in 
1881,  and  Estella  D.,  born  in  1858  (now  Mrs. 
Edward  G.  Wallace),  of  Fabius.  Parents,  Ed- 
ward and  Abigail  Cummings. 

Cummings,  John  B.,  p.  o.  Tully,  farmer,  owns 
400  acres  in  valley  two  miles  south  from  Tully, 
born  in  Preble  in  1832  ;  wife,  Frances  C.  Jones,  of 
Auburn,  N.  Y. ;  married  in  1852,  children  three: 
Charles  J.,  a  farmer;  Frederick  D.,  senior  in 
Cornell  University;  and  Frank,  prejjaring  for 
legal  professon,  with  Duell  and  Benedict,  Cort- 
land N.  Y.  Parents,  Edward  and  Abigail  Cum- 
mings, who  settled  here  in  1800. 

Cummings,  Marvin  E.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer, 
owns  88  acres;  wife,  Frank  Reynolds,  daughter 
of  John  W.  and  Emeline  (Briggs)  Reynoltls,  of 
Preble;  married  in  1866,  children  two  :  Eva  M., 
and  Clifford  J.  Parents,  Edward  and  Mary  (Van 
Hoesen)  Cummings. 

Gray,  John  E.,  p.  o.  Preble,  born  in  Hamden, 


Delaware  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1840,  farmer,  owns  75 
acres;  wife.  Flora  Terwilliger,  daughter  of  Lewis 
and  Lucy  (Briggs)  Terwilliger,  of  Preble;  mar- 
ried in  1867,  children  two:  Lewis  A.,  and  Frank 
D. 

Harris,  Naomi,  p.  o.  Preble,  owns  250  acres, 
daughter  of  Cyrus  and  Lucy  (Spring)  Harris, 
who  came  from  Stephentown,  N.  Y.,  in  1809; 
children  six  :  Cynthia,  Loretta,  Lucy,  Cyrus  H., 
Naomi  S.,  and  Nicholas  P.  Naomi  is  the  only 
one  who  survives  and  lives  on  the  old  homestead. 

Hobart,  Seth,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns  120 
acres,  born  in  Erie  county  in  1830,  was  assessor 
nine  years,  is  present  justice  of  the  peace;  wife, 
Cordelia  M.  Van  Patten,  of  Preble,  married  in 
1852.  Parents,  Leman  and  Letticia  (Shevalier) 
Hobart. 

Horter,  Henry  F.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns 
113  acres,  born  in  Herkimer  county  in  1841,  w-as 
highway  commissioner  one  term;  wife,  Lydia 
Scheli,  daughter  of  Markes  and  P^lizabeth  (Ful- 
mer),  of  Herkimer,  Herkimer  county  ;  married  in 
1862,  children  four:  Mary  E.,  Martha  M.,  Isaac 
and  Belle.     Parents,  Isaac  and  Mary  A.  Hysard. 

Hunt,  Herman  D.,  p.  o.  Preble,  physician  and 
surgeon,  born  in  Moravia  in  1846,  settled  in 
county  in  1855,  was  a  graduate  of  Syracuse  Uni- 
versity; wife,  Emma  A.  Hobart,  of  Preble;  mar- 
ried in  1872,  children  two  :   D.  S.  and  Iva. 

Manchester,  James  H.,  p.  o.  Preble,  born  in 
Preble  in  1831,  farmer,  owns  310  acres;  wife) 
Nancy  E.  Joslyn,  daughter  of  Daniel  and  Maria 
Udey  ;  married  in  1858,  children  three:  J.  Eu- 
gene, Minnie  E.  and  Jennie  A. 

Maycomber,  Geo.  W.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer, 
owns  200  acres,  born  in  Preble  in  1833;  wife, 
Huldah  Roe,  daughter  of  John  W.  and  Pru- 
dence (Sheldon)  Roe,  of  Scott;  married  in  1859, 
children  six  living  :  Frank  E.,  Flora  V.,  now  Mrs. 
Carl  Mulnex,  of  Scott,  Geo.  W.,  Helen  D.,  Mil- 
dred D.  and  Roe  S.  Parents,  Matthew  and 
Phoebe  A.  (Wilder)  Maycomber. 

Morgan,  W.  A.,  p.  o.  Preble,  blacksmith  and 
carriage  maker,  born  in  Tully  in  1844,  settled  in 
Cortland  county  in  1868;  wife,  Julia  E.  Lewis, 
of  Fabius,  N.  Y. ;  married  in  1865  ;  W.  A.  en- 
listed in  loth  N.  Y.  S.  V.  and  served  four  years. 

Outt,  S.  D.,  p.  o.  Preble,  miller,  born  in  Preble 
in  1850,  was  justice  of  the  peace  in  Taylor;  w^ife, 


Brief  Personals. 


529 


Josaphene  A.  Hays,  of  Auburn,  married  in  1874, 
one  child,  Pearl  C. 

Price,  Richard  P.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns 
88  acres,  bom  in  Homer  in  i  S49 ;  wife,  Madora 
B.  Hammond,  bom  in  Otsego  county ;  married 
in  Homer  in  1870.  Parents,  Joseph  and  Harriet 
(^Miitney)  Price,  of  Wayne  county ;  the  fomaer 
bom  in  New  Jersey,  came  to  Wayne  count)-,  and 
from  thence  to  Cortland  county. 

Pratt,  Orrin,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer,  owns  60  acres, 
bom  in  Homer  in  1816,  was  justice  of  peace  and 
poormaster;  first  wife,  Ruth  E.  Capren,  of  Mont- 
gomer)-  count)-;  married  in  1838,  children  four: 
Climena  (now  Mrs.  D.  M.  M.  Cummings,  of  Ho- 
mer), Amelia, who  died  in  i882,w-ife  of  X.  Collier, 
of  Preble,  Meh-in  J.  Pratt  of  Homer,  and  Esther 
E.  (now  Mrs.  La  Fayette  Churchill  of  111.);  sec- 
ond wife,  Sophia  C.  Howard,  of  Preble  ;  married 
in  1851,  children  three:  Abigail  R.,  Nellie  S., 
who  died  in  1864,  and  Carrie  B.,  who  died  in 
1869. 

Re)-nolds,  John  W.,  p.  o.  Preble,  bom  in 
Delhi,  X.  y.,  in  1818,  farmer,  ow-ns  70  acres ; 
wife,  Emeline  Briggs,  daughter  of  John  D.  and 
Xancy  (Bailey)  Briggs,  of  Delhi;  married  in 
1 843,  children  three :  De  Francie  L.,  now  Mrs. 
Mar%-in  Cummings,  of  Preble,  Edwin  J.  and  Lucy 
yi.  Parents,  Elisha  and  Rachael  (Van  Hoesen) 
Reynolds. 

Salisbur)',  Wm.,  p.  o.  Preble,  retired  farmer, 
bom  in  Woodstock  in  1819,  moved  to  Christian 
Hollow  at  two  years  of  age,  settled  in  Cortland 
count)'  in  1865.  was  assessor  and  justice  of 
peace ;  wife,  Francis  S.  Daley,  of  Connecticut, 
married  in  1852. 

Stanton,  Elijah,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer  and  owner 
of  Preble  mill,  266  acres,  bora  in  Littie  Falls, 
April  I  ith,  1805  ;  wife,  Anna  Feeter,  born  in  Lit- 
tle Falls,  Jan.  9th,  1808;  married  Jan.  t4th, 
1828,  children  li^■ing  five:  James,  Geo.  H., 
Emily,  Elizabeth  (now  Mrs.  Walter  Nelson),  and 
John  W. 

Van  Buskirk,  Robert  H.,  p.  o.  Preble,  farmer, 
ow-ns  62  acres,  bom  in  Preble  in  1833:  wife, 
Juliette  Manchester,  daughter  of  Samuel  and 
Sarah  Manchester,  of  Preble;  married  m  1858, 
children  two:  Eureta  and  John  H.  Parents, 
Isaac  and  Elizabeth  Van  Buskirk. 

Van  Hoesen,  Matthias,  p.  o.  Preble,  retired, 


owns  15  acres,  bom  in  Athens  in  1805,  settled 
in  county  on  lot  68,  Preble,  and  removed  to 
Preble  village  in  1830,  where  he  now  resides,  was 
constable,  collector,  justice  of  the  peace  twenty 
years,  supervisor  fourteen  years  and  twice  chair- 
man of  the  board ;  wife,  Susan  Talley,  bom  in 
Athens:  married  in  1829,  children  nine:  Louisa, 
Susan  M.,  John  F.,  Eugene  M.,  Catharine  A., 
Helen  M.,  Flavilla  J.,  Harriet  H.  and  Fred  T. 
John  F.  and  Harriet  H.  are  now  dead. 

Van  Denburgh,  Cornelius,  p.  o.  Preble,  bom 
in  Scott  in  1836,  farmer,  owns  60  acres;  wife, 
Mar)-  A.  Tabor,  daughter  of  George  and  Louis 
(Victor)-)  Tabor,  of  Cato,  Cayuga  county ;  mar- 
ried in  1861,  one  child,  X.  Tabor.  Parents,  Rich- 
ard and  Leah  (Collier)  Van  Denburgh,  natives 
of  Coxsaclde,  X.  Y. 

Van  Patten,  John  R.,  p.  o.  Preble,  bom  in 
Preble  in  1815,  farmer,  owns  500  acres,  was  as- 
sessor, road  commissioner,  and  justice  of  the 
peace ;  w-ife,  Betsey  Egbertson,  daughter  of  An- 
drew and  Deborah  (Shevalier)  Egbertson ;  mar- 
ried in  1839,  children  eight.  Parents,  Ryer  and 
Mar)'  (Spence)  Van  Patten,  who  came  here  in 
1809. 

Wilber,  Isaac,  p.  o.  Preble,  fanner,  owns  72 
acres,  bom  in  Scipio,  N.  Y.,  in  1818,  settled  in 
county  in  1819,  was  town  collector  m  1847  ;  wife, 
Eliza  H.  Maycomber,  daughter  of  Humphrey 
and  Polly  (Willis)  Maycomber,  who  came  to 
county  in  1839  :  married  in  1S43,  children  seven, 
five  liv-ing:  Frances  M.,  now  Mrs.  Ransom 
Pierce,  of  Broome  county,  Helen,  now  Mrs. 
Theron  Gutches,  of  Homer,  Geo.  A.,  Charies  E., 
and  Carrie  E.,  now  Mrs.  J.  Taylor  of  Cortland. 
Parents,  Thomas  and  Mariam  Wilber,  who  came 
here  in  1819. 

Wright,  William  W.,  p.  o.  Preble,  station  agent 
of  S.  B.  &  N.  Y.  R.  R.,  bom  in  Preble  in  1845, 
was  overseer  of  poor,  town  auditor,  justice  of 
peace,  elected  super%isor  in  Februar)-,  1883,  and 
re-elected  in  1884;  Nvife,  Lucmda  Lampman; 
married  in  1869,  children  four  :  Geo.  W.,  Charles 
S.,  Lena  R.  and  William  W.,  Jr. 


SCOTT. 


Ames,  Samuel  D.,  p.  o.  East   Scott,  farmer, 
owns  107  acres,  bora  in  Scott  in  1854,  is  present 

34 


530 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


justice  of  peace  and  school  trustee ;  wife,  Mag- 
gie J.  Adams,  daughter  of  Richarti  and  Ellen 
(McDonald)  Adams;  married  in  1877,  children 
three:  Alvin  G.,  Richard  J.,  and  Jennie  S.  Pa- 
rents, Alvin  B.  and  Celestia  C.  (Case)  Ames. 
The  former  died  in  1862. 

Babcock,  L.  H.,  p.  o.  Scott,  physician  and 
surgeon,  born  in  Scott  in  1833,  was  justice  of 
peace,  associate  judge,  coroner  and  notary  pub- 
lic ;  wife,  Surnia  A.  Babcock,  of  Scott ;  married  in 
1857,  children  two.  Mr.  Babcock  attended  the 
New  York  City  Honueopathic  Medical  College 
in  1868  and  1869,  has  been  in  constant  practice 
since  1869,  received  di])loma  from  the  Homoe- 
opathic Medical  society  of  the  counties  of  Tomp- 
kins, Tioga  and  Cortland  in  1875  ;  has  grown 
into  an  extensive  and  lucrative  practice,  extend- 
ing into  three  counties  and  is  often  called  in 
consultation  to  neighboring  cities  and  villages. 

Babcock,  Raymond  P.,  p.  o.  Scott,  retired, 
born  in  Hopkinton,  R.  I.,  in  1799,  settled  in 
county  in  1S24,  was  supervisor,  assessor,  justice 
of  peace  and  member  of  assembly;  first  wife, 
Olive  Denison,  of  Fabius  ;  married  in  1823,  chil- 
dren six  :  Lucy  L.,  Andrew  J-,  George  P.,  Har- 
vey W.,  Adelia  E.,  and  Olive  J. ;  second  wife, 
Pha>be  A.  Camp,  of  Connecticut ;  married  in 
1848,  one  child,  Sarah  C. 

Black,  Norman  C,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns 
167  acres,  born  in  Scott  in  1831.  Parents,  Ely 
and  Louisa  (Hull)  Black;  the  former  a  native 
of  Massachusetts,  the  latter  of  Connecticut,  who 
came  to  county  in  1827. 

Brown,  Wm.  Francis,  born  in  Scott,  Feb.  lotli, 
1838,  farmer,  owns  117  acres;  wife,  Angeline 
Hart,  daughter  of  John  and  Annie  (Thompson) 
Hart;  married  Sept.  4th,  1862,  children  four: 
Ella  M.,  Merton  D.,  Jay  D.  and  Earl  Durell. 
Parents,  Jesse  and  Mary  (Ostrander)  Brown. 

Butts,  Elias  H.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  born  at 
Belvidere,  N.  Y.,  in  1813,  came  with  his  parents 
to  Dryden  in  1825,  settled  in  Virgil  in  1838, 
married  in  1839  ;  wife,  Laura  Terpening,  daughter 
of  Merenes  Terpening,  who  settled  in  Virgil  in 
1814;  children  three:  Reuben,  and  Ortogral  P., 
who  enlisted  in  1862  in  Co.  E,  is7th  N.  Y.  S. 
v.,  and  who  died  at  Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1882, 
and  Effie  A.,  now  Mrs.  Edwin  D.  Hutchinson, 
M.  D.,  of  Huntington,  Mass. 


Childs,  Ernest  W.,  p.  o.  Scott,  manufacturer 
of  lumber,  born  in  Scott  in  1853;  wife,  Hattie 
E.  Burdick,  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  daughter  of 
A.  B.  and  Amanda  M.  ( Hardy)  Burdick  ;  married 
in  1883.  Parents,  Hon.  Samuel  A.  and  Lucelia 
(Whiting)  Childs,  of  Scott. 

Childs,  Hon.  Samuel  A.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer, 
owns  160  acres,  born  in  Tioga  county  in  1830,  set- 
tled in  county  in  1847,  was  supervisor  ten  terms, 
chairman  of  board  in  1877,  and  member  of  as- 
sembly in  1880 ;  wife.  Lucelia  O.  Whiting,  of 
Scott;  married  in  1853;  children  three:  Ernest 
W.,  Henry  W.,  and  Harold,  who  died  in  1877.  Pa- 
rents, Charles  and  Mtiry  (Hemstraught)  Childs; 
the  former  was  a  native  of  Connecticut. 

Cottrell,  John  B.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  520 
acres,  born  in  Scott  in  1826,  and  still  resides  on 
the  original  lot  No.  62  where  he  was  born,  was 
supervisor  and  assessor  six  years ;  wife,  Sarah 
Barker,  of  SpafTord,  N.  Y. ;  married  in  1848,  chil- 
dren ten  ;  Wm.  J.,  Mary  L,  J.  D.,  Ella,  Emma 
J.,  Sallie,  Lottie,  who  died  in  1879,  George  N., 
Jerry,  and  Charles,  who  died  in  the  same  year. 
Parents,  Jeremiah  and  Sally  (Peckham)  Cottrell, 
of  Rensselaer  county,  who  settled  here  in   1817. 

Cottrell,  William  J.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns 
122  acres,  bom  in  Scott  in  1849,  is  present  as- 
sessor; wife,  Lizzie  J.  Lee,  daughter  of  Ely  and 
Emily  (James)  Lee,  of  Cuyler;  married  in  1881, 
children  two :  John  E.  and  Grace  E.  Parents, 
John  B.  and  Sarah  M.  (Barker)  Cottrell. 

Cutler,  Dwight  K.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns 
315  acres,  born  in  Cayuga  county  in  1835,  set- 
tled in  county  in  1869,  was  justice  of  peace  and 
supervisor  two  terms ;  wife,  Phoebe  K.  Wilcox ; 
married  in  1857,  children  three:  Mary  E.,  Alice 
M.  and  X.  Cutler. 

Frisbie,  Elias  T.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  43 
acres,  born  in  Scott  in  the  house  he  now  owns 
and  occupies  in  1844;  wife,  Oresta  L.  Abbott, 
daughter  of  .-\lfred  and  Esther  H.  Abbott ;  mar- 
ried m  1865,  children  two:  Fannie  D.,  Edith  E. 
Parents,  George  and  Hannah  (Babcock)  Frisbie; 
the  former  was  a  native  of  Connecticut  and 
came  to  county  in  1817. 

Gillett,  Charles,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer  and  saw- 
mill, born  in  1852;  wife,  Theodocia  Ripley, 
daughter  of  John  and  Sarah  (Peak)  Ripley; 
married  in  1879.  Parents.  John  and  Julia  (Peak) 
Gillett. 


Brief  Personals. 


531 


Gillett,  Joel,  p.  o.  Scott,  proprietor  of  grist  and 
feed  mill  and  manufacturer  of  carriages,  born  in 
1847,  was  appointed  postmaster  at  East  Scott  in 
1879,  his  grandfather  was  the  first  postmaster, 
the  office  being  discontinued,  and  Joel  was  ap- 
pointed when  the  office  was  reopened ;  wife, 
Ella  L.  Van  Camp,  born  in  TuUy  in  1859,  chil- 
dren three :  Earl  H.,  Mabel  V.  and  Eva  B. 

Gillett,  John,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  235 
,  acres,  born  in  Scott  in  1838,  member  of  the  firm 
of  Gillett  &  Miller,  dealers  in  agricultural  im- 
plements ;  wife,  Alice  N.  Saltmarsh,  daughter  of 
Thomas  W.  and  Sarah  A.  (Stevens)  Saltmarsh ; 
married  in  1865,  children  four:  John  S.,  Nora  A., 
Kate  L.  and  Scott. 

Green,  G.  W.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  45 
acres,  born  in  Madison  county  in  1814,  settled 
in  county  in  1834,  was  justice  of  peace  and  col- 
lector ;  wife,  Harriet  Burdick,  daughter  of  Joseph 
and  Polly  (StUlman)  Burdick,  who  settled  here 
about  1807:  married  in  1838,  children  two. 

Hazard,  Francis  M.,  p.  o.  Scott,  manufactu- 
rer of  lumber,  of  the  firm  of  Hazard  &  Childs, 
owns  40  acres;  wife,  Eliza  A.  (Frink)  Scott, 
daughter  of  Martin  and  Nancy  Frink.  Parents, 
Henry  and  Almira  (Anthony)  Hazard. 

Hazard,  Henry,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  60 
acres,  born  in  SpatTord  in  181 6,  settled  in  Scott 
in  1843;  married  in  1841  to  Almira  Anthony, 
daughter  of  Rufus  and  Hannah  (Billings)  .An- 
thony, children  three  :  Francis  M.,  Nancy  F.  and 
Myron  J.  Rufus  .-Vnthony  came  into  Scott  in 
180J.  with  his  parents  at  the 'age  of  fourteen  ; 
he  was  in  his  93d  year  when  he  died. 

Kellogg,  C.  S.,  p.  o.  Scott,  fiirmer,  owns  220 
acres,  born  in  Cayuga  county  in  1822,  set- 
tled in  county  in  1825,  was  supervisor  three 
terms,  and  assessor  several  yeare ;  wife,  Amanda 
A.  Salisbury,  daughter  of  Nathan  and  Lucretia 
(Babcock)  Salisbury;  married  in  1845,  children 
three  :  William  A.,  a  druggist  of  Homer,  p:meline 
A.,  and  Charles  L.,  of  New  York.  Parents, 
Alvan  and  Sylvia  (Stowe)  Kellogg,  natives  of 
Cayuga  county,  who  settled  here  in  1825.  Mr. 
Kellogg  was  a  dresser  of  cloth  in  New  Hope, 
and  Millard  Fillmore,  who  became  president  of 
the  United  States,  learned  his  trade  of  him.  He 
built  a  clothing-mill  here  in  1826,  and  in  1843 
built  the  saw-mill  now  used  by  Hazard  &  Whit- 


ing. He  was  supervisor  for  several  years  and 
served  in  the  state  legislature  as  assemblyman 
one  year. 

Morgan,  William  H.,  p.  o.  Scott,  harness  man- 
ufacturer, born  in  Brookfield,  Madison  county, 
N.  Y.,  settled  in  county  in  1866,  was  postmaster 
since  1872,  supervisor  in  -1882-83,  =i"d  town 
clerk  since  1870,  enlisted  in  Co.  D,  15 7th  N.  Y. 
Vols.,  served  till  close  of  war,  was  commissioned 
first  lieutenant  in  1864;  wife,  Flora  Churchill,  of 
Spafford;  married  in  1 871,  children  five:  Eva, 
May,  Bessie,  John  and  Florence. 

Newman,  James  W.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns 
60  acres,  born  in  Little  Falls,  Herkimer  county, 
in  1844,  settled  here  in  1867,  was  in  Co.  F,  iS7th 
N.  Y.  Vols.,  and  served  three  years;  wife,  Sarah 
Van  Denburgh,  of  Scott,  daughter  of  Richard 
and  Leah  (Collier)  Van  Denburgh;  married  in 
1870,  one  child,  Maude  Leah. 

Northway,  Jerad  H.,  p.  o.  Scott,  born  in  Nor- 
folk, Conn.,  in  1803,  came  to  Homer  with  his 
parents  in  1805,  removed  to  Scott  in  1810;  wife, 
Mary  E.  Hull,  a  native  of  Connecticut,  who  died 
in  1881 ;  one  adopted  child,  who  still  lives  with 
Mr.  Northway. 

Peck,  A.  T.,  p.  o.  Scott,  born  in  Scott  in  1821, 
farmer,  owns  155  acres;  wife,  Jane  E.,  daughter 
of  Eri  and  Mary  (Cottrell)  Pickett;  married  in 
1863,  children  two:  Edward  J.,  and  Charles  E. 
Parents,  Joel  and  Abigail  (Tuttle)  Peck,  natives 
of  Chesire  Conn.,  who  settled  here  in  1815. 

Pickett,  E.  Franklin,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns 
180  acres,  born  in  Scott  in  1834,  is  present  road 
commissioner;  wife,  Alvina  J.  Branch,  bom  in 
Cayuga  county  ;  married  in  1858,  one  child,  Wal- 
lace F.  Parents,  Eri  and  Mary  (Cottrell) 
Pickett,  the  former  came  from  Connecticut  in 
1804. 

Potter,  E.  H.  P.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  130 
acres,  born  in  Petersburgh,  \.  V.,  in  1818,  held 
several  important  offices  in  town ;  wife,  Roxana  E. 
Burdick,  daughter  of  Jesse  and  Sally  (Babcock) 
Burdick,  who  settled  here  in  1805;  married  in 
1842,  children  three:  Harlan  E.  J.,  a  farmer, 
Leman  W.,  now  a  physician  in  Homer,  and 
Mary  E.  Parents,  Ezekiel  G.  and  .\bigail  (West) 
Potter,  who  settled  on  farm  now  occupied  by 
son,  in  March,  1819. 

Salisbury,  Artemas,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  born  in 


532 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Homer  in  i8 12,  first  wife,  Mary  T.  Gushing; 
married  in  1836,  one  child,  Mary  T.,  now  Mrs. 
Eugene  F.  Whitcomb,  of  Wisconsin;  second  wife, 
Deha  J.  Frink,  daughter  of  Martin  and  Nancy 
(Barber)  Frink;  married  in  1874,  one  child, 
Artemas  H.  Parents,  Major  Thomas  and  Han- 
nah (Fisk)  Salisbury,  natives  of  Rhode  Island, 
who  settled  in  Homer  in  18 10. 

Stoker,  Walter  L.,  p.  o.  East  Scott,  farmer, 
owns  90  acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1848;  wife, 
Rhoda  Kennedy,  daughter  of  Thomas  and  Sally 
(Price)  Kennedy,  who  settled  in  Homer  in  1824; 
married  in  1873,  one  child,  Margaret  F.  Pa- 
rents, John  and  Rachel  (Black)  Stoker. 

Stoker,  John  H.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  owns  70 
acres,  born  in  Homer  in  1847;  wife,  Nancy  F. 
Hazard,  granddaughter  of  Rufus  Anthony,  who 
settled  here  in  1804  ;  married  in  1869,  children 
two  :  Mira  R.,  and  Herman  H.  Parents,  John 
and  Rachel  (Black)  Stoker,  natives  of  England. 

Salisbury,  Nathan,  p.  o.  Little  York,  born  in 
1793,  settled  in  Homer  in  1807,  and  in  Scott  in 
1814,  owns  220  acres,  was  justice  of  the  peace, 
assessor,  road  commissioner,  and  supervisor  a 
number  of  terms;  wife,  Lucretia  A.  Babcock,  of 
Massachusetts;  married  in  18 18,  and  died  in 
1881,  leaving  eight  children :  Amanda  A.,  Charles 
B.,  James  H.,  who  is  a  leading  physician  of 
New  York  city,  Milton  L.,  BurdetteJ.,  Charlotte 
A.,  William  W.,  and  Nathan,  jr. 

Underwood,  Harlow  E.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer, 
owns  103  acres,  born  in  Chenango  county  in 
1823,  settled  in  county  in  1835,  was  justice  of 
peace  and  assessor;  wife,  Phoebe  .-Vmes,  daugh- 
ter of  Samuel  and  Polly  (Brown)  Ames;  married 
in  1851,  children  five:  Adelia  A.,  Jay  B.,  Eu- 
gene H.,  .Addie  B.,  and  George  H.  Parents, 
Chester  and  Betsey  (Tuttle)  Underwood,  the  for- 
mer of  Massachusetts,  and  the  latter  of  Connect- 
icut. 

Warner,  T.  R.,  p.  o.  Scott,  farmer,  born  in 
Preble  in  1829,  was  constable  and  is  ])resent 
deputy  sheriff;  wife,  Eliza  A.  Bassett,  daughter 
of  George  and  Sarah  ( Ru.ssell)  Bassett ;  married 
in  1851,  children  five:  Lillian  M.  (Mrs.  Arthur 
L.  \Villiams),  Antoinette  E.  (Mrs.  .Ansel  D. 
Fisk),  of  Homer,  Frank  T.,  of  Moravia,  Minnie 
A.,  and  Jesse  F. 

Whiting,  Anson    L.,  p.   o.   Scott,   farmer  and 


retired  merchant,  owns  407  acres,  born  in  Kent, 
Litchfield  county.  Conn.,  in  1807,  came  to  Spaf- 
ford,  Onondaga  county  in  181 1,  settled  in  county 
1831,  was  road  commissioner  in  1833,  assessor 
in  1834-40,  supervisor  and  town  clerk  several 
years,  also  justice  of  peace  and  overseer  of  poor; 
wife,  Nancy  Burdick ;  married  in  1829,  children 
five  :  Lucelia,  now  Mrs.  Samuel  A.  Childs,  Henry 
Lee,  Hamilton  J.,  Francina  W.,  now  Mrs.  James 
B.  Spencer,  and  Add,  now  Mrs.  Leland  Griffin, 
all  of  Scott. 

Whiting,  Hamilton  L,  p.  o.  Scott,  merchant, 
born  in  Scott  in  1839,  was  supervisor  in  1884; 
wife,  Josephine  A.  Truman,  daughter  of  Dr.  Wm. 
M.  and  Huldah  Truman;  married  in  1859,  chil- 
dren four :  Willie  L,  Lena  M.,  Merton  A.,  and 
Mary  E.  Parents,  Anson  L.  and  Nancy  (Bur- 
dick) Whiting,  the  former  a  native  of  Connecti- 
cut. 


SOLON. 


Adams,  Eli,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns  60  acres, 
born  in  Pittsfield,  Otsego  county,  in  181 2,  was 
assessor  and  justice  of  the  peace  ;  wife,  Phcebe 
Miller,  daughter  of  Abner  and  ^L^ry  (Kelsey) 
Miller,  married  in  1838.  Parents,  Azor  and 
Hannah  Laflin,  of  Otsego  county. 

Atkins,  Lorenzo  B.,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns 
93  acres,  born  in  Richmondville,  Schoharie  Co., 
in  1S38,  enlisted  in  Co.  G,  185th  N.  Y.  S.  V. 
in  1864;  wife.  Patience  M.  Walker,  daughter  of 
Samuel  and  Lucy  (Rice)  Walker,  married  in 
1864;  children  three:  Ida  M.,  .Annie  L.  and 
Floyd  L. 

Barnes,  John,  p.  o.  .Solon,  farmer,  owns  60 
acres,  born  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  in  1841,  en- 
listed in  Co.  G,  76th  N.  Y.  S.  V.  in  1861,  was 
discharged  in  1864  for  the  lo.ss  of  an  arm  at 
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg. 

Bean,  Milford  G.,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  farmer, 
born  in  Solon  in  1848,  was  justice  of  the  peace; 
wife,  Lydia  .A.  Brownell,  of  Solon,  married  in 
1874;  one  child:  Louis  .A.  Bean.  Parents, 
Albert  and  .Adelia  (Wheeler)  Bean. 

Daugherty,  James,  ]>.  o.  Solon,  born  in  Solon 
in  1857,  studied  law  with  Bouton  &  Champlin, 
of  Cortland,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in 
t88i,  was  supervisor  of  Solon  when  he  was 
twenty-one  years  of  age  and   has  been  elected 


Brief  Personals. 


533 


to  the  seventh  term  in  succession,  was  the  can- 
didate before  the  people  last  fall  for  member  of 
assembly. 

Finn,  James,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns  137 
acres,  born  May  28th,  1S31;  wife,  Laura  Har- 
vey, daughter  of  Calvin  and  Polly  (Wheeler) 
Harvey,  of  Solon,  born  Feb,  22d,  1832,  married 
in  1854;  children  four:  Nettie  L.,  now  Mrs. 
Emory  A.  Ford,  Eddie  }.,  Eva  A.  and  Willie  L. 
Parents,  Thomas  and  Polly  (Phelps)  Finn. 

Hewitt,  Henry,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns  150 
acres,  born  in  Monroe  county  in  1846,  enlisted 
in  Co.  K,  85th  N.  Y.  S.  V.,  in  1861,  served  his 
time  and  re-enlisted  in  the  field  and  served  dur- 
ing the  war.  Nine  companies  of  his  regiment 
were  captured  and  he  was  helil  a  prisoner ;  wife, 
Lucy  Underwood,  married  in  1S71;  children 
two  :  Carrie  and  Lottie  J.  Parents,  Henrv  and 
Sally  (Hollenbeck)  Hewitt,  natives  of  Monroe 
county. 

Holden,  Edward  C,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns 
135  acres,  born  in  Solon  in  1839;  wife,  Jemima" 
Watrous,  daughter  of  George  and  Jemima 
(Travers)  Watrous,novv  of  Ohio,  married  in  1861 , 
one  child  :  May  Bell.  Parents,  John  and  Sally 
(Cotton)  Holden,  who  settled  in  county  in  1820. 

Livingston,  John  D.,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns 
100  acres,  born  in  Solon  in  1840;  wife,  Ruth 
E.  Cline,  daughter  of  Daniel  and  Malissa  (Cur- 
tis) Cline,  of  Chenango  county,  married  in  i860  ; 
children  two:  Clara  M.,  now  Mrs.  E.  A.  Dwight, 
of  Chenango  county,  and  Burton  J. 

McKendrick,  John,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns 
365  acres,  born  in  Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,  in 
1832,  was  justice  of  the  peace,  collector,  com- 
missioner of  highways  and  assessor ;  wife,  Bridget 
Farl,  of  Pennsylvania,  married  in  1864;  children 
six  living :  John  J.,  Daniel,  Charles,  Maggie, 
James  P.  and  Mary.  Parents,  Peter  and  Bridget 
(Cain)  McKendrick. 

Maybury,  John  R.,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns 
65  acres,  born  in  Solon  in  1828,  enlisted  in  Co_ 
L,  loth  N.  Y.  V.  cavalry  and  served  three 
years,  was  corporal,  and  is  present  justice  of  the 
peace;  wife,  Emogene  Pierce,  daughter  of  A.  T. 
and  Judy  A.  Pierce,  of  Truxton,  married  in  1866  ; 
children  four:  Mary  R.,  Rena  D.,  Helen  and 
Sarah.  Parents,  Josiah  and  Dorcas  (Blake) 
Maybury,  who  came  to  county  in  1807. 


Maybury,  Lucian  B.,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns 
47  acres,  was  constable,  collector  and  assessor  six 
years,  born  in  Solon  in  1837;  wife,  Marcia 
Auringer,  daughter  of  Moses  and  Hope  (Darl- 
ing) .\uringer,  of  Onondaga  county,  married  in 
1857;  children  three:  Delphene,  now  Mrs. 
John  Monroe,  of  Solon,  Nettie,  now  Mrs.  Henry 
A.  Webster,  of  Virgil,  and  Fred  I).  Parents, 
Josiah  J.  and  Dorcas  (Blake)  Maybury. 

Pritchard,  .4mos,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns  60 
acres,  born  in  Greenbush  in  1807,  was  highway 
commissioner,  collector  and  assessor ;  wife,  Mar- 
garet Rankin,  daughter  of  Joel  Rankin,  of  Trux- 
ton, married  in  1832;  children  four:  Harriet 
E.,  Joel  C,  Jane  E.  and  Uri  A. 

Pritchard,  Garret  (decea.sed),  was  born  in 
Litchfield,  Conn.,  in  1792,  settled  in  Solon  in 
1808  and  died  in  1874,  aged  82  ;  first  wife,  Phi- 
lena  Beebe,  married  in  1815  ;  children  three:  Al- 
bert, Chauncey  and  Louisa;  second  wife,  Hul- 
dah  Ford,  married  in  1848;  children  two:  Gar- 
ret P.  and  Lucetta  \. 

Rawley,  James  H.,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  farmer, 
occupies  225  acres,  born  in  Oneida  county  in 
1836, held  town  offices  several  terms;  wife,  Emma 
Evans,  daughter  of  Mordica  and  Elmina  (Hul- 
bert)  Evans,  of  Freetown,  married  in  1858; 
children  four:  Hattie  E.,  Charles  H.,  Milton  B. 
and  Cora  A.  Parents,  Daniel  and  Almira  (Allen) 
Rawley,  natives  of  Oneida  county. 

Shuler,  Wm.  C,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  born  in 
Montgomery  county  in  1829;  wife,  Esther  M. 
Eastman,  daughter  of  William  and  Lydia  (Tay- 
lor) Eastman,  married  in  1857  ;  children  two: 
Willis  D.  and  Florence  N.  Parents,  Remson 
and  Hannah  (Haughton)  Shuler,  who  came  to 
county  in  1830. 

Stevens,  John  (deceased),  born  in  Solon  in 
1810  and  died  in  1883;  wife,  Jane  Darling, 
daughter  of  William  and  Polly  (Hunt)  Darling, 
who  came  to  county  in  1830.  Parents,  John 
and  Thankful  (Cady)  Stevens. 

Stevens,  Silas,  p.  o.  Solon,  farmer,  owns  75 
acres,  born  in  Solon  in  1828,  is  exci.se  commis- 
sioner; wife,  Eliza  NL  Priest,  daughter  of  James 
and  Mary  (Taylor)  Priest,  of  Chenango  county, 
married  in  1866;  children  three:  Ida  May, 
Burtie  B.  and  Henry  S.  Parents,  Joseph  and 
Diantha  (Pritchard)  Stevens. 


534 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Underwood,  Reuben,  p.  o.  McGravvville, 
farmer,  owns  105  acres,  born  in  Solon  in  1847  ; 
wife,  Mary  Stafford,  daughter  of  Josiah  and 
Eliza  Stafford,  born  in  England,  married  in 
1868;  children  two:  Ida  A.  and  George  E. 
Parents,  Eliab  and  Julia  A.  (Madison)  Under- 
wood, natives  of  county. 

Walker,  Isaac  J.,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  farmer, 
owns  62  acres,  born  in  Montgomery  county  in 
1839,  settled  in  Solon  in  1857,  was  supervisor 
three  years,  1877-80,  enlisted  in  Co.  C,  15 7th 
N.  Y.  S.  v.,  in  1862,  served  during  the  war; 
wife,  Lucinda  Pierce,  daughter  ot  Isaac  and 
Polly  (Gordenier)  Pierce,  married  in  1866;  chil- 
dren five :  Helen  S.,  Charles  W.,  George  S., 
Moss  K.  and  Thomas  I.  Parents,  Samuel  and 
Lucy  (Rice)  Walker,  of  Montgomery  county,  the 
former  died  in  1875. 


TAYLOR. 

Angel,  Almon,  p.  o.  Union  Valley,  farmer, 
owns  112  acres,  born  in  county  in  1841,  was 
justice  of  the  peace  and  road  commissioner; 
wife,  Vira  J.  Kinney,  born  in  county  in  1844, 
married  in  1866;  one  daughter :  S.  Maude. 

Bort,  George  H.,  p.  o.  Taylor,  farmer  and 
dealer  in  agricultural  implements,  owns  102 
acres,  born  in  Madison  county  in  1851,  settled 
in  county  in  1852  ;  wife,  Ida  E.  Bolster,  born  in 
Steuben  county  in  1854,  married  in  1871;  one 
child :   Frances  D. 

Elwood,  Wilson  M.,  p.  o.  Taylor,  farmer,  owns 
112  acres,  born  in  Chenango  county  in  182 1, 
setded  in  Cordand  county  in  1843,  was  assessor 
and  commissioner  for  his  town;  wife,  Olive  Will- 
iams, born  in  Chenango  county  in  1835;  chil- 
dren five.  Mr.  Elwood  served  in  the  late  rebel- 
lion in  the  76th  regiment. 

Finn,  Leroy  D.,  p.  o.  Solon,  firmer,  born  in 
county  in  1838,  was  commissioner  three  terms. 
Father,  Robert  Finn,  came  to  county  in  1817. 

Hill,  J.  O.,  p.  o.  Taylor,  farmer,  owns  214 
acres,  born  in  Massachusetts  in  1827,  settled  in 
county  in  1833;  first  wife,  Lucy  D.  Perry,  born 
in  Solon,  in  1831,  died  in  1872;  second  wife, 
Mrs.  Martha  J.  Rounds,  born  in  Homer  in  1842, 
married  in  1873;  children  five. 

Jipson,  Valentine,  p.  o.  Union  Valley,  mer- 
chant, born  in  county  in  1849,  has  been  justice 
of  the  peace  for  eight  years. 


Miner,  Oscar  P.,  p.  o.  Taylor  Center,  dairy 
farmer,  120  acres,  born  in  Spafford,  Onondaga 
county,  March  28th,  1841,  the  fifth  of  a  family 
of  six  children,  three  boys  and  three  girls.  He 
was  brought  up  on  a  farm  and  educated  in  the 
common  school  of  his  native  town  and  at  Cort- 
land Academy,  Homer,  N.  Y.,  from  which 
school,  in  the  fall  of  1861,  he  enlisted  in  Co.  U, 
76th  N.  Y.  S.  v.,  and  served  nearly  three  years. 
His  father  died  when  he  was  ten  years  old  and 
he  lived  with  his  sister  till  old  enough  to  support 
himself  which  he  did  by  working  on  a  farm 
summers  and  teaching  and  attending  school  falls 
and  winters.  At  the  close  of  the  war  in  1S65  he 
settled  in  Taylor,  and  was  married  to  Julia  M. 
Bentley  of  the  same  place  in  186S.  who  was 
born  in  1849.  He  has  been  justice  of  the  peace 
fourteen  years  and  justice  of  sessions  one  year; 
children  two  :   Floyd  B.  and  Carroll  P.. 

Phelps,  I.  W.,  p.  o.  Cincinnatus,  farmer,  200 
acres,  born  in  Taylor  in  1834,  has  held  the 
office  of  supervisor ;  wife,  Almira  Cole,  born  in 
Cincinnatus  in  1840,  married  in  1864;  children 
three:   Karl  C,  Myra  Pearl  and  Alice  Mabel. 


TRUXTON. 

Bliss,  George  W.,  p.  o.  Truxton,  retired  mer- 
chant, born  in  Massachusetts  in  1822,  settled  in 
Truxton  in  1823;  wife,  Sojihia  F.  Hooker, 
daughter  of  John  H.  Hooker,  born  in  1826, 
married  in  1846;  children  three:  Charles  E., 
Henry  S.  and  George.  Parents,  George  and 
Charlotte  (Ames)  Bliss,  who  settled  near  Trux- 
ton village  in  1823. 

Gates,  Irvin  L.,  p.  o.  McGrawville,  farmer, 
owns  1 60  acres,  born  in  Truxton  in  1 843 ;  wife, 
Helen  M.  Safford,  daughter  of  Silas  B.  and  Har- 
rietta  (De  Lameter)  Safford,  of  Onondaga  county, 
married  in  1866;  children  three:  Frank  L., 
Hatde  M.  and  Willie  D.  Parents,  Martin  D.  ' 
and  Sally  (Dunbar)  Gates. 

Kenney,  Marcus  E.,  junior  partner  of  Kenney 
&  Son,  dealers  in  hardware  and  agricultural  im- 
plements, born  in  Truxton  in  1848;  wife,  Lettie 
A.  Freeman,  daughter  of  Rufus  and  Emily  Free- 
man, of  Truxton,  married  in  1869;  one  cliild  : 
.•\rthur  M.  Parents,  Hosea  M.  and  Lauretta 
(Lucas)  Kenney,  of  Truxton. 

McKevitt,  Henry,  p.  o.  Truxton,  farmer  and 


Brief  Personals. 


535 


dairyman,  owns  36  acres,  born  in  Ireland  in 
1818,  settled  in  town  in  1828,  was  assessor  one 
term  ;  wife,  Elizabeth  Nesbitt,  born  in  Weeds- 
port,  Cayuga  county,  daughter  of  Allen  and 
Mary  Nesbitt,  married  in  1841  ;  children  four: 
James  H.,  Mary  A.  Johnson,  Nancy  J.  Sever- 
ance, and  Sarah  E.  Pierce.  Parents,  Owen  and 
Judy  McKevitt. 

Nelson,  Judson  C,  p.  o.  Truxton,  physician 
and  surgeon,  born  in  Danby,  Tompkins  county, 
came  to  Truxton  in  1848,  is  a  graduate  of  the 
medical  college  at  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  was  appointed 
surgeon  of  the  76th  Regt.  N.  Y.  S.  V.  in  1861, 
served  three  years  in  hospital  and  field,  was 
elected  supervisor  thirteen  consecutive  terms, 
chairman  of  the  board  two  terms,  and  member 
of  assembly  two  terms;  wife,  Henrietta  S. 
Walter,  of  Tioga  county,  married  in  1848;  chil- 
dren two  :  Arthur  t^.,  a  hardware  merchant  of 
Cortland,  and  M.  Isabel,  now  Mrs.  Charles  Til- 
linghast,  of  Cortland ;  second  wife,  Florence 
Irwin  Snyder,  of  Middleburgh,  Schoharie  county, 
N.  Y.,  married  in  1S83,  daughter  of  Hon.  Hadly 
Snyder,  of  Middleburgh. 

Patrick,  Hon.  Stephen,  p.  o.  Truxton,  insur- 
ance agent  and  farmer,  owns  220  acres,  born  at 
Saratoga  Springs  in  181 1,  settled  in  town  in 
1S12,  was  assemblyman  in  1866,  assessor  two 
years,  and  supervisor  in  1 860 ;  wife,  Angeline 
Dickenson,  married  in  1846 ;  children  eight : 
John  W.,  x\lvah,  Hattie  Gleason,  Richard,  Eliza 
Radway,  Nathaniel,  Nellie  and  Nelson.  Par- 
ents, Nathaniel  and  Penelope  (Potter)  Patrick. 

Saunders,  Franklin  P.,  p.  o.  Truxton,  born  in 
Fabius  in  1849,  dealer  in  life  stock  ;  wife,  Hattie 
L.  Peck,  daughter  of  Piatt  and  Mary  A.  Peck, 
married  in  1879;  children  two  living:  Arthur 
Franklin  and  Anah  Hattie.  Parents,  Perry  H. 
and  Sarah  (Emmerson)  Saunders. 


VIRGIL. 

Angell,  E.  D.,p.  o.  East  Virgil,  farmer  and  mer- 
chant miller,  born  in  Otsego  county  in  1816,  set- 
tled in  county  in  1817,  was  assessor  in  Lapeer 
three  terms;  wife,  Sarah  Lake,  born  in  1828, 
married  in  1848;  children  six:  Luricia  A.  Dell, 
Sarah  Lucretia,  Julia  L.,  Erasmus  D.  jr.,  Jed 
and  James  W.  Parents,  James  and  Polly  Ann 
(Crandell)  Angell,  natives  of  Rhode  Island,  the 


former  born  January  26th,  1775,  and  died  in 
1825,  the  latter  born  in  1786  and  died  in  1861  ; 
children  twelve. 

Atwood,  Timothy,  p.  o.  Blodgett's  Mills, 
farmer,  born  in  Otsego  county,  September  4th, 
1808,  .settled  in  county  in  1809  ;  wife,  EVua.  Jane 
Fuller,  daughter  of  James  and  Mary  (Finch) 
Fuller,  born  in  1813,  married  in  1835;  one 
daughter,  Helen  P",ugenie,  born  in  1847,  married 
Andrew  Thayrc  in  1870;  chiklren  two.  Parents, 
Joseph  H.  and  Mary  (.Andrews)  .Xtwood,  who 
setded  in  county  in  1809. 

Bloomer,  Isaac  B.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  retired,  born 
in  Ulster  county  in  1812;  wife,  Hannah  Trow- 
bridge, born  in  i8io,  married  in  1833,  died  in 
1883  ;  children  ten,  six  now  living.  One  son 
enlisted  in  Co.  .\,  76th  N.  Y.  Vols.,  in  1862,  and 
died  soon  after  his  return  home,  from  disease 
contracted  in  the  army,  aged  22.  Parents,  Isaac 
and  Anna  (Barlow)  Bloomer,  who  settled  in  Vir- 
gil on  lot  25  in  1815,  the  former  died  in  Virgil 
in  1856,  aged  73  years,  the  latter  died  in  1868, 
aged  87  years  ;  children  seven,  two  now  living. 

Branch,  Enoch  D.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  former,  horn 
in  Vermont  in  1796,  settled  in  county  in  18 15, 
and  died  July  i6th,  1876,  was  supervisor  two 
terms  and  held  other  minor  offices ;  wife,  Ma- 
tilda Mynard,  daughter  of  Benajah  and  Lydia 
(Purple)  Mynard,  natives  of  Connecticut,  born 
in  Rensselaer  county  in  1813,  married  Novem- 
ber 25th,  1838;  children  seven:  Harley  H., 
Butler  M.,  Edwin  D.,  Hepsey  P.,  Mary  E., 
Ellen  D.  and  Rollo  P.  The  latter  is  a  Presby- 
terian clergyman.  Parents,  Jeptha  and  Irene 
(Arnold)  Branch,  who  settled  in  Virgil  in  1815  ; 
children  seven,  one  now  living. 

Bristol,  Benjamin  F.,  p.  o.  South  Cortland, 
correspondent  of  the  Cortland  News  and  farmer 
by  occupation,  born  in  Cortland  in  1837  ;  wife, 
Ophelia  Tompkins,  daughter  of  William  and 
Maria  (Weaver)  Tompkins,  born  in  Westchester 
county  in  1840,  married  in  1859;  children 
eleven,  nine  now  living:  Charles  H.,  born  in 
i860,  William  A.,  in  1862,  Clara  C,  in  1S64, 
John  E.,  in  1865,  Georgia  A.,  in  1867,  Addie 
J.,  in  1869,  Lawrence  F.,  in  1873.  Emma 
M.,  in  1875,  and  Delta  M.,  in  18S1.  Parents, 
Charles  and  Dolly  (Allen)  Bristol,  the  former  of 
Connecticut  and  the  latter  of  Ohio,  married  in 


536 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


1832,  the  latter  died  in  1863,  aged  52  years; 
children  three  :   B.  F.,  Cornelia  C.  and  Geo.  H. 

Bronson,  Dr.  Horace,  p.  o.  Virgil,  physician 
and  surgeon,  born  in  Catskill,  Greene  county,  in 
1796,  settled  in  county  in  1820  and  died  in 
1874,  was  a  graduate  of  Hartford  College;  wife, 
Polly  Ball,  daughter  of  Judge  Ball,  born  in  1803, 
married  in  1822,  and  died  March  31st,  1842; 
children  four,  all  now  dead ;  second  wife,  Hap- 
py Mott,  daughter  of  Thomas  and  Susan  (Wy- 
gant)  Mott,  born  May  12th,  1812,  married  in 
1842;  children  two:  Happy  E.,  born  in  1845 
and  died  in  1864,  and  Senora  De  Etta,  born 
March  29th,  185 1.  Parents,  Davitl  and  Nancy 
Bronson,  of  Catskill,  the  former  died  in  Virgil  in 
1840,  and  the  latter  at  Adams. 

Chaplin,  Walter  L.,  p.  o.  Messengerville, 
farmer  and  surveyor,  born  in  Virgil  in  1825,  was 
postmaster  and  su])ervisor  in  1884,  and  held 
other  offices  ;  first  wife,  Abigail  Shevalier,  born 
in  1828,  married  in  1849,  and  died  in  1866, 
children  three;  second  wife,  Camilla  C.  Gault, 
born  in  1827,  married  in  1868,  died  in  1873; 
third  wife,  Mrs.  Rhoda  M.  (Darling)  Shevalier, 
born  in  183S,  married  in  1874;  cliildren  three. 
Parents,  Benjamin  F.  and  Lucy  (Holden)  Chap- 
lin, the  former  born  in  Virgil  in  1799,  ^^'^  ^"P' 
posed  to  be  the  first  white  child  horn  in  Virgil, 
died  in  1882,  the  latter  born  in  1800,  married  in 
1820;  children  two:  George  H.  and  Walter  L. 

Chrisman,  Josiah,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Oneida  county  in  1817; 
wife,  Abigail  Penney,  daughter  of  David  and 
Fannie  (Smith)  Penney,  who  settled  in  Virgil  in 
1837,  born  in  1823,  married  in  1844;  children 
eight.  Parents,  William  and  Nancy  (Oaks) 
Chrisman,  who  .settled  in  county  in  1835;  chil- 
dren thirteen,  but  seven  now  living. 

Curtis,  Salmon,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer  and  dairy- 
man, born  in  Sullivan  county  November  15th, 
1812  ;  wife,  Harriet  Seamans,  born  in  1822,  mar- 
ried in  1840,  and  died  August  ist,  1876;  chil- 
dren five ;  second  wife,  Augusta  Seamans,  daugh- 
ter of  Isaac  and  Amarilla  (Sheldon)  Seamans 
and  sister  of  first  wife,  born  in  1843,  married  in 
1878.  Parents,  Nehemiah  and  Lusina  (Hubbell) 
Curtis,  natives  of  Connecticut,  who  came  to 
Virgil  in  1830;  children  eight,  three  now  living. 

Dann,   George   P.,   p.   o.   Virgil,   farmer  and 


stock  dealer,  owns  386  acres,  born  in  Virgil  in 
1822  ;  wife,  Marilla  Tuller,  born  in  Virgil  in 
1824,  married  October  17th,  1S44;  children 
four,  two  now  living :  Antonnette  and  Martin  L., 
the  former  married  Reuben  Butts  in  1866,  and 
the  latter  married  Alice  Mason  in  1871.  Par- 
ents, Amariah  and  Nancy  (Purvis)  Dann,  the 
former  born  in  1791,  the  latter  in  1795,  married 
in  1812;  children  eleven;  the  former  died  in 
Virgil  in  1873,  and  the  latter  in  1858. 

Davern,  James,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer,  owns  179 
acres,  born  in  Ireland  in  1839,  settled  in  county 
in  1846;  wife,  Louisa  Sawdey,  daughter  of  Asa 
and  Eliza  Sawdey,  born  in  1849,  married  in  1868; 
children  five:  Lizzie  M.,  born  in  1870,  Susie, 
in  1872,  Rose  E.,  in  1876,  Clara  L.,  in  tS82, 
and  James  Mark,  in  1884.  Parents,  James 
and  Ellen  (Ryan)  Davern,  natives  of  Ireland, 
the  latter  died  in  Ireland,  leaving  six  sons  and 
two  daughters,  the  former  came  to  Syracuse 
where  he  died;  James,  jr.,  enlisted  in  the  iSsth 
regiment  in  1864,  and  was  discharged  at  close 
of  war;  he  was  promoted  to  corporal,  was  dis- 
abled in  the  war,  and  received  a  pension  from 
the  government. 

Deyoe,  Simeon  D.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  born  in  Har- 
ford in  1850,  owns  150  acres,  was  assessor  in 
1879  and  again  in  18S3;  wife,  Ann  Vinette 
Green,  daughter  of  Page  and  Tirzah  (Merrill) 
Green,  born  in  183S,  married  in  1873;  children 
two:  Glenn  and  M.  C.  Page  Green  was  a 
prominent  lawyer  of  Cortland  county,  and  en- 
joyed a  large  practice  in  his  profession  ;  wife, 
Tirzah,  was  daughter  of  John  and  Joanna  Mer- 
rill, who  came  to  Connecticut  in  1804. 

Glazier,  Ezra  B.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer,  gardener 
and  apiarist,  born  in  Virgil  in  18 17,  was  excise 
commissioner  since  1882  ;  wife,  Loretta  J.  Web- 
ber, daughter  of  Rodney  and  Aurilla  (Shepard) 
Webber,  born  in  1S31,  married  in  1848;  chil- 
dren five :  Adin,  Dana,  Lillie,  Nathan  B.  and 
Harlan  E.  Parents,  Artemus  and  Sally  (Clark) 
Glazier,  the  former  born  in  Massachusetts  in 
1782,  married  in  1816,  died  in  1865,  the  latter 
died  in  1864;  children  eight.  Grandparents, 
Jotham  and  Kesiah  (Stacey)  Glazier,  natives  of 
Massachusetts,  who  came  to  county  in  1806; 
children  twelve. 

Griswold,    Daniel   P.,   p.   o.   South   Cortland, 


Brief  Personals. 


537 


pension  soldier,  tailor  and  farmer,  born  in  Dry- 
den  in  184s,  was  collector  two  terms;  wife, 
Annette  Tyler,  daughter  of  Samuel  P.  and  Je- 
mima (Hopkins)  Tyler,  born  in  1848,  married  in 
1871  ;  children  two:  Bernicle  E.,  born  in  1875, 
and  Clyde  T.,  born  in  1877.  Parents,  F,dward 
and  Mary  (Tyler)  Grisuold,  the  former  died  in 
Virgil  in  1869,  aged  75,  and  the  latter  in  1854; 
children  eleven,  six  now  living.  Daniel  P.  en- 
listed in  Co.  C,  76th  N.  Y.  Vols.,  in  1861,  was 
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg  in  1863, 
and  receives  a  pension  of  $30  per  month. 

Hall,  Amos  T.,  p.  o.  Blodgett's  Mills,  farmer, 
carpenter  and  builder,  born  in  Virgil  in  1818; 
wife,  Maria  E.  Merical,  daughter  of  Henry  and 
Catherine  (Adney)  Merical,  born  in  Schoharie 
county  in  1828,  married  in  1846;  children  four, 
two  now  living  :  William  H.  and  Anna.  Will- 
iam married  Alice  J.  Frear  and  Anna  married 
Joe  Stafford.  Parents,  Girden  and  Polly  (Pea- 
body)  Hall,  natives  of  Connecticut,  who  settled 
in  Virgil  in  18 16,  married  in  1818;  children 
eleven,  seven  now  living,  the  former  served  in 
the  war  of  181 2,  drew  a  pension  of  $96  yearly, 
and  died  in  1874. 

Hammon,  Riley,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer  and  dairy, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1841,  has  represented  his  dis- 
trict at  State  conventions;  wife,  Charlotte  L. 
Woodard,  daughter  of  Samuel  and  Deborah  A. 
Woodard,  born  in  Virgil  in  1843,  married  in 
i860  ;  children  five,  two  now  living  :  Luetta  M. 
and  Willie  E.  Parents,  John  and  Louisa  (Keys) 
Hammon,  natives  of  Vermont,  the  former  born 
in  i8i8,  married  in  1834  and  died  in  1875,  the 
latter  born  in  181 8. 

Haskins,  James  B.  F.,  p.  o.  South  Cortland, 
farmer  and  dairy,  born  in  Virgil  in  1842 ;  wife, 
Maggie  Pike,  daughter  of  De  Villo  and  Sarah 
(Calvert)  Pike,  born  in  1848,  married  in  1867  ; 
children  two :  Clyde  F.,  born  in  1880,  and  Earl 
A.,  born  in  1884.  Parents,  Alanson  and  Clarissa 
(Andrews)  Haskins,  both  of  Fabius,  N.  Y.,  set- 
tled in  Virgil  in  1825,  the  former  died  in  1869, 
the  latter  is  still  living,  aged  83  years;  children 
seven. 

Holton,  William  A.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  general  mer- 
chant and  dealer  in  groceries,  drugs,  hardware, 
etc.,  born  in  ^Virgil  in  1845,  was  justice  of  the 
■peace,   town   clerk   one    term    and    held    other 


offices ;  wife,  Delphine  Brooks,  born  in  1847, 
married  in  1874.  Parents,  Lester  and  Betsey 
(Tanner)  Holton,  the  former  born  in  1816,  died 
in  1857,  the  latter  born  in  18 18,  died  in  1874; 
children  five,  four  now  living  :  L.  C,  M.  E.,  R. 
E.  and  W.  A.  Grandparents,  Dr.  Rufus  and 
Althea  (Smith)  Holton,  who  settled  in  Madison 
county  in  1820  and  Cortland  county  in  1827. 
William  A.  Holton  began  the  mercantile  business 
in  1870,  the  firm  being  Peckham  &  Holton,  and 
sold  his  interest  in  1873,  purchased  his  present 
site  and  erected  the  present  two-story  building, 
the  store  and  dwelling  where  he  now  resides. 

Homer,  Henry  F.,  j).  o.  Virgil,  farmer,  born 
in  Virgil  in  1839;  wife,  Sophia  Hammond, 
daughter  of  John  and  Louisa  Hammond,  born 
in  Virgil  in  1842,  married  in  i860;  one  child, 
Julia,  born  in  1866.  Parents,  Edmund  and 
Rohamey  (Johnson)  Homer,  the  former  born  in 
1801  and  died  in  1854,  the  latter  born  in  1800 
and  died  in  1842;  children  three,  two  now  liv- 
ing: Henry  F.  and  Henrietta,  who  married 
John  Winters,  of  Virgil. 

Hotchkiss,  Charles  Alonzo,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer 
and  dairy,  born  in  Virgil  in  1829;  wife,  Jeanett 
Hopkins,  daughter  of  James  and  Margaret 
(Smith)  Hopkins,  born  in  Dryden  in  1825,  mar- 
ried in  1852;  children  three:  Eva  May,  born 
Feb.  2ist,  1855,  died  Dec,  5th,  1878 ;  Harriet 
B.,  bom  in  1856,  and  Elsworth  A.,  born  in  1861. 
Eva  M.  married  Egbert  D.  Spencer  May  28th, 
1874;  Egbert  D.  died  May  15th,  1S75;  Eva 
M.  married  again  W.  B.  Main  Nov.  24th,  1876; 
one  child.  Harriet  married  Rev.  Geo.  F.  Hum- 
phreys, of  Massachusetts,  in  1875;  children 
three.  Elsworth  married  Jennie  L.  Sessions  in 
1883;  one  child.  Parents.  Charles  and  Polly 
(Stillman)  Hotchkiss,  married  in  1807,  the  former 
died  in  1868,  aged  84.  the  latter  born  in  1789, 
died  May  6th,  1874;  children  si.x,  three  now 
living:  Jane,  born  in  1819,  Charles  A.,  bom  in 
1829,  Enoch  D.,  born  in  1834. 

Lang,  Robert,  jr.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  born  in  York- 
shire, England,  in  1820,  settled  in  county  in 
1841  ;  wife,  Mary  Carr,  daughter  of  William  and 
Sophia  Carr,  born  in  Freetown  in  1S27,  married 
in  1847,  died  in  1883;  children  six,  five  now 
living:  Mary  Ann,  Ruie  S.,  William  R.,  Merton 
D.  and  Lillian  E.  Parents,  Robert  and  Mary 
Lang,  of  Yorkshire,  England. 


538 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Lewis,  Nathaniel,  p.  o.  Virgil,  retired  fanner, 
born  in  Dryden  March  4th,  1815,  settled  in 
county  in  1818,  was  president  and  trustee  of 
Virgil  Cemetery  Association,  and  United  States 
mail  agent  for  sixteen  years ;  wife,  Mila  Glazier, 
daughter  of  Stacy  and  Axsie  (Branch)  Glazier, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1821,  married  in  1840;  children 
five,  four  now  living :  Truman,  Augusta,  Mary 
and  Isaac  R.  Parents,  John  and  Jemima 
(Steenburgh)  Lewis,  of  Orange  county,  settled 
in  county  in  1818,  the  former  died  in  1850,  and 
the  latter  in  1838;  children  ten. 

Lincoln,  Wait,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer,  born  in 
Virgil  in  1817;  wife,  Melissa  Muncey,  born  in 
1827,  married  in  1844  ;  children  eight,  three  now 
living:  Alice,  Ella  L.  and  Willis  P.  Parents, 
Major  William  and  Ruth  (Sexton)  Lincoln,  the 
former  from  Massachusetts  and  the  latter  of 
New  York. 

Johnson,  Senora  D.,  p.  o.  Virgil. 

Lowe,  Garrison  H.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer,  owns 
93  acres,  born  in  Sullivan  county  in  1825, 
settled  in  county  in  1839;  wife,  Polly  Ann 
Ballou,  of  Onondaga  county,  daughter  of  Silas 
and  Polly  (Shumway)  Uallou,  who  settled  in 
Virgil  about  1816,  married  in  1848;  children 
five :  Silas  B.,  Jane  Ann,  Garrison  Demont, 
Idris  and  Edith.  Parents,  Zachariah  and  Jane 
(Drake)  Lowe,  of  Sullivan  county,  the  former 
born  in  Duchess  county,  died  in  Virgil ;  children 
seven,  three  now  living. 

McKinney,  John  A.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  owner  and 
proprietor  of  Virgil  Hotel,  born  in  Virgil  in  185 1 ; 
wife,  Mary  Jane  Brown,  born  in  Ireland,  set- 
tled in  Virgil  in  1867,  married  in  1872,  died 
Oct.  24th,  1883,  leaving  two  children,  Irving 
J.  and  R.  T.  Parents,  John  and  Mary  Ann 
(Steele)  McKinney,  natives  of  Ireland,  married 
and  settled  in  Virgil  in  1850,  the  former  died 
Oct.  24th,  1882;  children  eight,  six  now  hving  : 
Robert,  John  A.,  Thomas  E.,  William  G.,  Henry 
S.,  Nancy  J.  and  Mary  H.  Robert  enlisted  in 
the  185th  regiment  in  1864,  served  to  close  of 
war,  and  died  in  February,  1878.  John  A. 
purchased  the  Virgil  House  in  spring  of  1884. 

Muncey,  Dr.  William  A.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  physi- 
cian and  surgeon,  born  in  Truxton  in  1832; 
wife,  Lodema  J.  Brooks,  of  Cortland,  daughter 
of  Ransom  J.  Brooks,  born  in  1843,  married  in 


1864 ;  children  two :  Wilfred  B.  and  Ransom 
B.  Parents,  Stearns  and  H.  (Nicholson)  Mun- 
cey, the  former  of  Rensselaer  county,  died  in 
Chemung  county  in  1883,  the  latter  of  Chenango 
county,  died  in  Tioga  county  in  1873.  Dr.  Wm. 
A.  Muncey  was  a  graduate  of  Philadelphia 
American  University  in  1874,  also  the  New 
York  Eclectic  Medical  College,  in  1882,  read 
medicine  with  Dr.  Nobles,  of  Waverly,  com- 
menced practice  in  \\'averly  in  1858  under  the 
old  State  law,  and  in  1859  settled  in  Virgil 
where  he  now  resides. 

Mynard,  Wellington  P.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer 
and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Virgil  in  1841,  was 
supervisor  two  terms  and  overseer  of  the  poor 
one  year.  Parents,  Madison  B.  and  Maria 
(Bouton)  Mynard,  the  former  born  in  1810  and 
died  in  1859,  the  latter  born  in  1813  and  died 
in  i860;  children  seven,  five  now  living:  Wel- 
lington P.,  born  in  1841,  Eliza  H.  in  1846,  Mad- 
ison A.  in  1851,  Maria  Louise  in  1854,  and 
George  in  1857. 

Oaks,  James  H.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  insurance  agent 
and  dairy  farmer,  born  in  Herkimer  county  in 
1833,  settled  in  county  in  1834;  wife,  Henriette 
Champlin,  daughter  of  Henry  and  Mary  (Chris- 
man)  Champlin,  born  in  1842,  married  in  1866; 
children  two :  Eva  M.  and  Mary  Ettie.  Par- 
ents, Abraham  and  Maria  (Smith)  Oaks,  the 
former  born  in  1809  and  died  in  1858,  the  latter 
born  in  18 13,  married  in  1831  ;  children  nine, 
seven  now  living.  Grandfather,  Henry  Oaks, 
born  in  Germany,  came  to  America  when  ten 
years  of  age.  He  enlisted  in  the  Revolutionary 
war,  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians,  made 
his  escape,  married  in  Montgomery  county ; 
children  three. 

Price,  David  R.,  p.  o.  Cortland,  farmer,  born 
in  Virgil  in  1820  ;  wife,  Deborah  Hutchins,  born 
in  Ulster  county  in  1820,  married  in  1844;  chil- 
dren eight :  George  R.,  Emma,  Elmer,  Maurice, 
Ephraim  E.,  Antha,  Manley  and  Ina.  George 
married  Rose  Langworthy;  Ina  married  Aaron 
Overton ;  Emma  married  Charles  Robinson ; 
Ephraim  married  Alice  Dearman  ;  Antha  mar- 
ried George  S.  Sherman ;  Maurice  married 
Emma  Spencer.  Parents,  Zachariah  and  Eliza- 
beth (Ryan)  Price,  the  former  born  in  Rensse- 
laer county,  came  to  Cortland  in  1809,  the  latter 
born  in  Montgomery  county  in  1801,  married  in 


Brief  Personals. 


539 


i8i  I  and  died  in  1883  ;  children  eleven.  Grand- 
parents, Jacob  and  Catharine  (Barringer)  Price, 
who  settled  in  Virgil  in  1816;  children  ten. 

Saltsman,  Frederick  F.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer, 
born  in  Cortland  county,  has  been  highway  com- 
missioner two  terms;  wile,  Loretta  J.  House, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1847,  married  in  1869;  children 
two:  Carlton  Lee  and  Ray  Frank.  Parents, 
John  and  Phebe  (Frank)  Saltsman,  the  former 
born  in  Montgomery  county  in  1810,  the  latter 
born  in  Virgil ;  children  five  :  Susannah,  Mary 
Ann,  Sarah  Jane,  F.  F.  and  Cora  Atane.  Grand- 
parents, George  and  Nancy  (Cook)  Saltsman, 
natives  of  Montgomery  county,  came  to  county 
in  1821 ;  children  six. 

Shevalier,  Nathan  L.,  p.  o.  Messengerville, 
farmer,  born  in  Virgil  in  1858;  wife,  Augusta 
Weller,  of  Onondaga  county,  daughter  of  Jere- 
miah Weller,  born  in  1857,  married  in  1878; 
one  child,  Ina.  Parents,  Isaac  and  Nancy 
(Smith)  Shevalier,  the  former  died  in  1878,  aged 
47 ;  children  four :  Harriet,  Dick  A.,  Eugenie 
and  Nathan  L. 

Smith,  Nathan  J.,  p.  o.  Messengerville,  farmer, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1847;  wife,  Luricia  Adelle 
Angell,  daughter  of  E.  D.  Angell,  born  in  1850, 
married  in  1 86g ;  children  two :  M.  Louise  and 
Wilmer  A.  Parents,  Nathan  and  Lucy  (Mal- 
lery)  Smith,  the  former  born  in  Marathon  in 
1808,  the  latter  in  1809;  children  seven,  four 
now  living :  A.  P.,  Nancy  A.,  Angeline  and 
N.J. 

Spencer,  Nathan,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Virgil  in  1821,  was  super- 
visor three  terms;  first  wife,  Polly  Ann  Price, 
married  in  1843  and  died  in  1863;  children 
five  :  Earl  W.,  Henry  F.,  Emma  Dett,  Alice  V. 
and  Egbert  D. ;  second  wife,  Mrs.  Angeline 
(Smith)  Homer,  married  in  1866;  one  son,  Lin 
C.  Parents,  Isaac  and  Nancy  (Peabody)  Spen- 
cer, natives  of  Otsego  county.  Grandparents, 
Amos  and  Dorcas  Spencer,  natives  of  Rhode 
Island,  the  former  was  a  Revolutionary  soldier, 
and  died  in  Otsego  county. 

Stafford,  George  W.,  p.  o.  Blodgett's  Mills, 
farmer,  born  in  Virgil  in  1846.  Parents,  Josiah 
and  Eliza  Ann  (Male)  Stafford,  born  in  Broad 
Oak,  England,  in  i8i7,the  latter  came  to  county 
in  1837,  the  former  died  in  1877,  aged  62  years. 


Grandparents,  Joseph  and  Susan  (Hopkins) 
Stafford,  natives  of  Rhode  Island,  settled  in  Vir- 
gil in  1816,  the  former  died  in  i860,  the  latter 
in  1872;  children  eleven. 

Stafford,  Hopkins,  p.  o.  Blodgett's  Mills, 
farmer  and  dairy,  born  in  Ot.scgo  county  in 
1813,  settled  in  county  in  1816;  wife,  Nancy 
Allen,  born  in  Virgil  in  1817,  married  in  1838, 
died  in  1862;  children  ten,  five  now  living: 
Charlotte,  Timothy,  Amy,  Job  B.  and  Cynthia 
L.  Parents,  Joseph  and  Susan  (Hopkins)  Staf- 
ford. 

Stafford,  Miles,  p.  o.  Blodgett's  Mills,  farmer, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1828;  wife,  Roby  Westcott, 
daughter  of  Nathaniel  Westcott,  born  in  Penn- 
sylvania in  1830,  married  in  1851 ;  children  four: 
Emeline,  born  in  1852,  Nathaniel,  born  in  1856, 
Minnie  in  1862,  Layton  in  1868.  Parents, 
Joseph  and  Susan  (Hopkins)  Stafford,  natives 
of  Rhode  Island. 

Stowell,  John,  p.  o.  Blodgett's  Mills,  farmer, 
born  in  Virgil  in  1828;  wife,  Henrietta  Luce, 
daughter  of  John  and  Betsey  Luce,  born  in 
1832,  married  in  1854;  one  child,  Melvin  Mon- 
roe, born  in  1857  and  married  Eva  F.  Luce  in 
1880.  Parents,  Lucius  and  Sally  (Ketcham) 
Stowell,  the  former  born  in  Connecticut  in  1792, 
took  up  150  acres  of  land  in  Virgil  in  i8io,  and 
afterward  bought  150  more,  was  drafted,  served 
in  the  war  of  181 2,  and  drew  a  pension,  died  in 
1882,  the  latter  born  in  1799  and  died  in  1876; 
children  six.  Lucius  Stowell  took  up  300  acres 
of  land  in  Virgil  in  1810  at  $1.75  per  acre.  His 
parents  emigrated  with  a  yoke  of  cattle,  a  heavy 
wagon  and  one  lumber  wagon.  John  still  lives 
on  the  homestead  where  he  was  born. 

Shults,  David,  p.  o.  Virgil,  farmer  and  stock 
grower,  born  in  Montgomery  county  in  1817; 
wife,  Mary  E.  Reese,  born  in  Montgomery  county 
in  1829,  married  in  1848;  children  four:  Jacob 
R.,  born  in  1852,  James  H.  in  1854,  Wilber  F. 
in  1861,  and  Katie  E.  in  1866.  James  H.  is  a 
professor,  graduating  from  Syracuse  University 
in  1876,  married  Grace  Hubbell,  of  Rochester, 
in  1876;  children  two:  Elbert  and  Clarence. 
Parents,  George  and  Elizabeth  Shults,  of  Mont- 
gomery county,  N.  Y. 

Teri)enning,  Eddie  D.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  born  in 
Lapeer  in  1849  ;  wife,  Jessie  C.  Chubbj  daughter 


540 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


of  Abraham  and  Mary  E.  Chubb,  born  in  1852, 
married  in  1877;  one  adopted  child,  Alta,  born 
in  October,  1878,  adopted  February  19th,  1884. 
Parents,  VViHiam  and  Clarissa  (Ballou)  Terpen- 
ning,  born  in  Virgil,  married  in  1845;  children 
three:  Emma  D.,  Eddie  D.  and  Evaline. 
Grandparents,  Marenus  and  Peggy  Terpenning, 
who  settled  in  ^'irgil  in  181 5;  children  nine, 
six  now  living. 

Trap]),  Fred  L.,  p.  o.  McLean,  farmer,  Ijorn  in 
Virgil  in  i860.  Parents,  David  R.  and  Nancy 
A.  (Bush)  Trapp,  the  former  born  in  18 15  and 
died  in  1878,  the  latter  born  in  1S26;  children 
seven,  five  now  living :  William  J.,  George  H., 
Frank  E.,  Harrison  1).  and  Fred  L.  Grand- 
parents, William  and  Catharine  Trapp,  early 
settlers  of  Cortland  county. 

Trapp,  William  J.,  p.  o.  McLean,  farmer,  born 
in  Tomjjkins  county  in  1848;  wife,  Eliza  Mc- 
Elheney,  daughter  of  Marshall  and  Catharine 
(Bush)  McElheney,  born  in  1848,  married  in 
1872;  children  two:  Leroy  D.  and  .Anna  A. 
Parents,  David  and  Nancy  A.  (Bush)  Trapp,  the 
former  born  in  1815,  died  in  1878,  tlie  latter 
born  in  1S26;  children  seven,  five  now  living. 

Tripp,  Dr.  John  D.,  p.  o.  Virgil,  ])hysician 
and  surgeon,  born  in  Dryden  in  1843,  was  super- 
visor one  term ;  wife,  Josephine  E.  Lamb, 
daughter  of  Alfred  and  Elizabeth  (Merrill) 
Lamb,  born  in  Skaneateles,  Onondaga  county, 
married  in  1870.  Parents,  George  W.  and  Caro- 
line (Brown)  Tripp.  Dr.  John  D.  Tripp  was 
graduated  in  1865,  began  the  practice  of  medi- 
cine in  Virgil  in  1865,  where  he  has  a  very  e.x- 
tended  practice. 

Veeder,  Cornelius,  yj.  o.  Virgil,  owns  231 
acres,  and  dairy,  born  in  Montgomery  county  in 
1824,  settled  in  county  in  1828,  has  held  several 
offices;  wife,  Laura  Jane  Joiner,  daughter  of 
John  and  Polly  (Baker)  Joiner,  born  in  1835, 
married  in  1854;  children  three:  Cora,  Ada 
and  Hattie.  Parents,  Adam  and  Hibert  (Bradt) 
Veeder,  who  came  to  Virgil  in  1828,  the  latter 
died  in  1863,  the  former  is  still  living,  aged  92; 
children  eleven. 

West,  Punderson,  p.  o.  Virgil,  miller,  born  in 
Tompkins  county  in  1816,  settled  in  county  in 
1817  ;  wife,  Jane  Tyler,  born  in  Dryden  in  1828, 
married  in   1855.     Parents,  Erastus  and  Abigail 


Tarbox,  natives  of  Connecticut,  who  settled  in 
Virgil  in  1817,  the  former  died  in  1855,  aged  78, 
the  latter  died  in  1862;  children  five.  Mr.  P. 
West  i)urchased  his  present  mill  in  1875,  it  has 
two  run  of  stone  and  fed  by  Spring  Brook  creek,  it 
was  formerly  used  as  a  carding  and  cloth  dress- 
ing mill. 

Wood,  M.  R.,  p.  o.  Cortland,  born  in  Virgil 
in  1832;  wife,  Martha  B.  Calvert,  daughter  of 
John  and  Samantha  (Goodale)  Calvert,  born  in 
1833,  married  in  1858;  one  child,  F.  Adelle, 
born  in  1S60,  married  N.  F.  Webb  in  1884. 
Parents,  Jonas  and  Catharine  (Cornwell)  Wood, 
who  settled  in  Virgil  in  1818,  the  former  died  in 
1881,  aged  82,  the  latter  died  in  1856. 

Wood,  Warren  .\.,  ji.  o.  Virgil,  mason  and 
farmer,  born  in  X'irgil  in  1S23 ;  wife,  .\seneth 
Griswold,  born  in  Dryden  in  1821,  married  in 
1845,  died  in  1863;  children  four:  Mary  E., 
Sarah  M.,  Frank  C.  and  Hattie  L.  Parents, 
C)rrin  and  Sally  (Morse)  Wood,  who  settled  in 
Virgil  in   1822. 


WILLET. 

Babcock,  .Vndrew  M.,  ]).  o.  Willet,  farmer, 
born  in  Otsego  county  in  1815,  settled  in  county 
in  1835  ;  wife,  Mary  Ann  Jones,  daughter  of 
Enoch  and  Wealthy  (Williams)  Jones,  born  in 
Schoharie  county  in  1830,  married  in  1853;  one 
child,  Elvin  A.,  born  Oct.  17th,  1865.  Parents, 
Jonathan  and  Sarah  (Johnson)  Babcock,  who 
came  to  county  in  1835  with  seven  children,  of 
which  but  two,  Andrew  M.  and  Marvin,  survive. 

Babcock,  Marvin,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer,  born  in 
Otsego  county  in  1821,  settled  in  county  in  1835, 
has  lieen  collector  three  years,  assessor  six  years, 
and  held  several  other  offices ;  wife,  Eliza  Jane 
Jones,  daughter  of  Enoch  and  Wealthy  (Williams) 
Jones,  born  in  Chenango  county  in  1834,  mar- 
ried in  1855;  one  child,  Adelbert  S.,  born  in 
1863.  I'arents,  Jonathan  and  -Sarah  (Johnson) 
Babcock,  the  former  born  in  Stephentown,  N. 
Y.,  Nov.  2oth,  1788,  and  died  Sept.  isth,  1856, 
the  latter  born  July  24th,  F788,  and  died  in 
1844. 

Bliss,  Calvin  J.,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and  retired 
teacher,  born  in  Preston,  Chenango  county,  in 
1822,  settled  in  county  in  1846,  has  been  justice 
of  the  [jeace  nine  years  and  teacher  eleven  years  ; 


Brief  Personals. 


541 


wife,  Betsey  A.  Landers,  daughter  of  Charles 
and  Lucinda  (Shc|)aril)  Landers,  who  came  to 
county  in  1846,  married  in  1850;  children  two: 
Charles  Emery  and  Cora  L. ;  Charles  married 
Florence  Sherwood  in  1874.  Parents,  Solomon 
and  Anna  (Packer)  Bliss,  the  former  of  Massa- 
chusetts, who  died  in  1861,  aged  75,  the  latter 
in  1866,  aged  80. 

Brigham,  Archibald,  p.  o.  Upper  Lisle,  farmer 
and  stock  dealer,  born  in  Willet  in  1825  and 
died  in  1865  ;  wife,  Esther  Ann  Rooks,  daughter 
of  Willard  and  Polly  (Crittenden)  Rooks,  born 
in  Cortland  county  in  1828,  married  in  1854; 
children  two:  Hiram  L.,  born  in  1855,  and 
Hattie  L.,  born  in  1857.  Parents,  Orleans  and 
Mercy  (Stafford)  Brigham,  natives  of  Rhode 
Island,  who  settled  in  county  in  1812;  children 
eleven,  five  now  living. 

Covey,  Edward  W.,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and 
tanner,  born  in  Otsego  county  in  1805,  settled 
in  county  in  1838;  wife,  Mercy  Bradley,  daugh- 
ter of  Zachariah  Bradley,  of  Connecticut,  born 
in  1813,  married  in  1829  ;  children  five  :  Loron 
B.,  born  in  1832,  Edward  W.  in  1835,  Charles 
H.  in  1838,  Lydia,  in  1841,  and  George  W.  in 
1851.  Parents,  William  and  Esther  (Yarns) 
Covey,  born  in  Duchess  county,  and  were  among 
the  early  settlers  of  Otsego  county. 

Dyer,  Samuel  C,  p.  o.  Willet,  merchant,  vocal 
and  instrumental  music  teacher,  has  been  assessor 
four  years,  town  clerk  several  years,  and  super- 
visor in  1875;  wife,  Ervilla  J.  Smith,  born  in 
Willet  in  1841,  married  in  1862.  Parents,  John 
S.  and  Harriet  (Shaw)  Dyer,  the  former  was  first 
merchant  in  Willet,  served  as  justice  of  the  peace 
for  many  years,  and  died  in  1873.  Grandpar- 
ents, Samuel  and  Lydia  (Jones)  Dyer,  the  former 
born  in  Stonington,  Conn.,  in  1777,  the  latter  in 
Rhode  Island,  married  in  1799,  and  settled  in 
Willet  in  1816;  children  six,  the  former  died  in 
1842,  the  latter  in  1862. 

Eaton,  John  C,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer,  born  in 
Willet  in  1827;  wife,  Melvina  Wilson,  daughter 
of  Henry  and  Sally  (Livermore)  Wilson,  born  in 
Willet  in  1830,  married  in  1846;  children  three  : 
Florence  R.,  Rollen  S.  and  Alphonzo  D. ;  F'lor- 
ence  married  Wm.  R.  Burgel  in  1874;  children 
five.  Rollen  married  Ardell  J.  .-Me.vander  in 
1873;    children   two.     .\lphonzo   married    Ella 


A.  Maine  in  1879;  children  two.  Parents, 
Peter  and  Polly  (Van  Sice)  Eaton,  natives  of 
Cherry  Valley,  who  settled  in  Willet  in  1815,  the 
former  held  many  town  offices  and  died  in  1881, 
the  latter  died  in  1844;  children  seven. 

Eaton,  Peter,  p.  o.  Willet,  bom  in  Willet  in 
1822,  farmer,  owns  500  acres;  wife,  Harriet 
Greene,  born  in  Willet  in  1818,  married  in  1849; 
children  four :  Hattie  R.,  who  married  Rev. 
Adelfred  J.  Brown,  of  Syracuse,  Elfie  L.,  who 
married  John  D.  Coe,  of  Willet,  Coriell  G.,  who 
married  Ida  B.  Olmstead,  of  Triangle,  and  Elbert 
P.,  who  is  unmarried.  Parents,  Peter  and  Polly 
(Van  Sice)  Eaton,  natives  of  Otsego  county. 

Eaton,  Ulysses,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer,  born  in 
Willet  in  1818,  served  many  years  as  commis- 
sioned officer  in  the  old  military  company ;  first 
wife.  Marsh  M.  Hazzard,  born  in  18 18,  married 
in  1839,  died  in  1864,  leaving  four  children ; 
second  wife,  Sarah  Augusta  Dutton,  born  in 
Afton  in  1824,  married  in  1865.  Parents,  Peter 
and  Polly  (Van  Sice)  Eaton. 

Forshee,  Walter,  p.  o.  Willet,  dealer  in  hard- 
ware, stoves,  tin,  household  furnishing  goods 
and  farm  implements,  born  in  Cortlandville  in 
1838  ;  wife,  Eliza  Leach,  daughter  of  Christo- 
pher and  Lucetta  Leach,  born  in  1848,  married 
in  1879;  children  two:  Isaac  C.  and  John  Ir- 
ving. Parents,  Isaac  and  Elizabeth  (Newman) 
Forshee,  natives  of  Orange  county,  who  settled 
in  Cortland  in  1833,  the  latter  died  in  1872, 
leaving  three  children  :  Cornelius,  Augusta  and 
Walter,  who  caiYie  to  Willet  in  1876. 

Gardiner,  Ishmael  E.,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and 
dairyman,  born  in  Columbus,  Madison  county, 
in  1832,  settled  in  county  in  1839;  ^^''^'^i  Lizania 
Eaton,  daughter  of  Abel  and  Elvira  Eaton,  born 
in  Willet  in  1840,  married  in  1856;  children 
six:  Arthur  E.,  Minnie  E.,  Ernest,  Jennie  .•\., 
Alice  M.,  and  Lewellyn.  Arthur  married  Belle 
Morey  in  1878,  Minnie  married  W.  H.  Jones  in 
1878. 

Greene,  15urrill,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and  stock 
grower,  owns  36.0  acres,  born  in  Willet  in  1820, 
has  been  supervisor  one  term,  justice  of  the  peace 
four  terms,  and  held  other  district  offices ;  first 
wife,  Rosilla  Babcock,  born  in  Otsego  county 
in  18 17,  married  in  1855,  died  in  i860  ;  children 
three:   Leetta  R.,  B.  Jefferson  and  Harriet  R. ; 


542 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


second  wife,  Phebe  E.  Greene,  born  in  North 
-Scituate,  R.  I.,  in  1828,  married  in  1867.  Par- 
ents, Benjamin  T.  and  Hettie  (Wilson)  Greene, 
who  were  among  the  very  first  settlers  of  the 
county. 

Greene,  Henry  O..  p.  o.  Willet,  carpenter  and 
builder,  born  in  Willet  April  17th,  1824;  wife, 
Lovantia  Tennant,  seventh  daughter  of  Robert 
and  Polly  (Eaton)  Tennant,  born  in  Willet 
October  26th,  1828,  married  in  1846;  Robert 
Adelbert,  only  child  of  Henry  and  Lovantia 
Greene,  born  December  19th,  1849,  married 
Ella  F.  Ferris,  December  4th,  1869;  one  child, 
Clara  A.,  daughter  of  Robert  and  Ella  F., 
born  June  i6th,  187 1.  Parents,  Joseph  and 
Permelia  (Wilson)  Greene,  the  former  from 
Rhode  Island  and  the  latter  of  Willet,  the 
former  held  many  town  offices,  and  died  April 
25th,  1882,  leaving  eight  children. 

Greene,  Wilson,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and 
stock  grower,  owns  400  acres,  born  in  Willet  in 
1828,  was  supervisor  eight  terms,  justice  of  the 
peace  one  term,  and  school  su]ierintendent  one 
term ;  wife,  Rhoda  Wiles,  daughter  of  Henry 
and  Julia  A.  (Moore)  Wiles,  born  in  Willet  in 
183 1,  married  in  1865  ;  children  three  :  G.  Mau- 
rice, Belle  and  Alice  B.  Parents,  Benjamin  T. 
and  Hettie  (Wilson)  Greene.  Grandparents, 
William  and  Mary  Greene,  who  settled  in  county 
with  four  sons  and  one  daughter  in  1808. 

Jones,  Asiel,  p.  o.  Upper  Lisle,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Schoharie  county  in  1831, 
settled  in  county  in  1 843  ;  wife,  Deliah  Salisbury, 
adopted  daughter  of  Ebenezer  Salisbur)',  of 
Rhode  Island,  born  in  1836,  married  in  1862  ; 
one  adopted  daughter,  Luella  M.  Jones.  Par- 
ents, Enoch  and  Wealthy  (William)  Jones,  who 
settled  in  Willet  in  1843,  t^'^^  former  died  in  1875, 
the  latter  in  1877,  leaving  ten  children,  eight 
now  living. 

Landers,  Charles,  p.  o.  Upper  Lisle,  retired 
farmer,  born  in  Afton,  Chenango  county,  in 
1796,  moved  to  Broome  county  in  1802  and 
Cortland  county  in  1836,  has  been  assessor  sev- 
eral terms  and  held  other  offices ;  wife,  Lucinda 
Shepherd,  daughter  of  Timothy  Shepherd,  born 
in  Triangle  in  1805,  married  in  1824,  died  in 
1879,  leaving  three  children :  Garry  S.,  Betsey  A. 
and    Marcellus.     Parents,  John   and  Charlotte 


(Patterson)  Landers,  the  former  bom  in  Massa- 
chusetts in  177 1  and  died  in  Broome  county  in 
181 3,  the  latter  of  Litchfield  county.  Conn.,  died 
in  1855,  aged  85. 

McVean,  Charles  P.,  p.  o.  Willet,  merchant 
and  postmaster,  bom  in  Solon  in  1833,  has  been 
associate  judge,  justice  of  the  peace  and  post- 
master since  1874  ;  wife,  Phebe  Bailey,  daughter 
of  Col.  Wm.  B.  Bailey,  born  in  New  York  city 
in  1838,  married  in  i860.  Parents,  Peter  and 
Charity  (Snider)  McVean,  the  former  bom  in 
Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  began  the  mercantile  trade  at 
Texas  Valley,  with  his  son  as  partner,  in   1868. 

Mooney,  Austin,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer,  born  in 
Willet  in  1845  ;  wife,  Eliza  A.  Coles,  born  in 
Chenango  county  in  1849,  daughter  of  William 
and  Eliza  (Geer)  Coles,  who  settled  in  Willet  in 
185 1,  married  in  1869;  one  child,  Lewis  R. 
Parents,  Lewis  and  Eliza  (Adams)  Mooney, 
natives  of  Willet. 

Mooney,  Frederick,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and 
stock  grower,  bom  in  Willet  in  1837 ;  wife, 
Dorcas,  daughter  of  Henry  and  Julia  A.  (Moore) 
Wiles,  married  in  1869.  Parents,  Lewis  and 
Eliza  (Adams)  Mooney. 

Mooney,  Lewis  (deceased),  born  in  Putnam 
county,  October  21st,  1807,  and  died  in  January, 
1878,  was  supervisor,  assessor  and  highway  com- 
missioner ;  wife,  Eliza  Adams,  daughter  of  Steph- 
en and  Abby  Jane  (Steadwell)  Adams,  born  in 
Duchess  county  in  1809.  married  Dec  26th,  1832; 
children  five,  four  living  :  Frederick,  born  in  1837, 
Stephen  A.,  bom  in  1839,  Susan,  born  in  1842, 
and  Austin,  born  in  1845.  Stephen  now  resides 
in  Missouri.  His  daughter,  Eliza  Jane  Mooney, 
was  bom  January  13th,  1835,  married  Dr.  H. 
C.  Hendrick,  October  12th,  1854,  died  in  Mc- 
Grawville,  June  12th,  1858. 

Morey,  Leeman  B.,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and 
dairy,  born  in  Duchess  county  in  1816,  settled 
in  county  in  1852,  has  been  assessor  three 
terms ;  first  wife,  Judah  M.  Bailey,  married  in 
1838,  died  in  1854;  second  wife,  Polly  L. 
Greene,  born  in  Willet  in  1819,  married  in 
1856;  children  two:  Isabella  and  Marell,  the 
former  married  Arthur  Gardner  in  1878;  chil- 
dren two :  Earl  and  Loie  M.  Parents,  Stephen 
and  Susan  (Weller)  Morey,  natives  of  Duchess 
county. 


Brief  Personals. 


543 


Newcomb,  Curtis  S.,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer  and 
stock  dealer,  born  in  Willet  in  1843  ;  wife,  Pluma 
Mathews,  of  Bradford  county,  Penn.,  bom  in 
1845,  married  in  1867,  died  in  1883;  children 
three :  Minnie  Bell,  Samuel  G.  and  Phebe  May. 
Parents,  Samuel  and  Emma  (Tyler)  Newcomb, 
natives  of  Pennsylvania,  who  came  to  Willet 
in  1840,  the  former  died  in  1883,  aged  77 
years,  the  latter  died  in  1864,  leaving  twelve 
children. 

Smith,  Frank,  p.  o.  Willet,  proprietor  and 
owner  of  American  Hotel  at  Willet,  born  in 
German,  Chenango  county,  in  1848,  Settled  in 
count)-  in  1879;  wife,  De  Etta  Leach,  daughter 
of  Christopher   and    Lucetta    Leach,    born    in 


Marathon  in  1854,  married  in  1873;  children 
two:  Christopher  J.  H.,and  Mary  Ann  Lucetta- 
Frank  Smith  purchased  the  hotel  in  1879,  which 
was  built  by  John  S.  Dyer  over  fifty  years  ago, 
and  has  made  many  changes  and  extensive  re- 
pairs to  the  same. 

Tennant,  Elijah,  p.  o.  Willet,  farmer,  owns 
200  acres,  bom  in  Willet  in  1831  ;  wife,  Lucy 
Fuller,  bom  in  Triangle,  Broome  county,  in 
1832,  married  in  1852;  children  two:  Augustus 
O.,  bom  in  1853,  and  Elva  M.,  bora  in  1862. 
Parents,  Robert  and  Mary  (Eaton)  Tennant, 
the  former  of  Connecticut,  bom  in  1782,  settled 
in  Willet  in  181 7,  died  in  1844,  the  latter  bora 
in  1788  and  died  in  1882  ;  children  twelve. 


INDEX. 


Active  war  against  the  Iroquois  by  the  French,  39. 

Adams.  C.  C,  361. 

Adams,  Ed.  L.,  130,  364.  * 

Adams,  John  J..  81. 

Adams.  Lyman,  361. 

Adams,  S..  178. 

Advertisements  in  early  newspapers.  66-7. 

Agricultural  .Society.  74. 

Agricultural  Society,  the  second,  81. 

Allen.  William  B..'8l. 

Andrews,  Elnathan,  74. 

.'\ndre\vs,  William,  81. 

An  Indian  "Summer  Resort,"  47. 

Attack  on  Schenectady  by  the  French,  40. 

Habcock,  Peleg,  60,  405. 

Babcock,  Gideon,  81. 

Babcock,  Solomon,  406. 

Baker.  Elnathan.  59. 

Ball.  L.  C.  361. 

Ball,  Wait,  70. 

Ballard,  Augustus  L.,  142. 

Ballard,  Horatio,  81,  94,  141. 

Ballard.  Hooker.  178. 

Ballartl  lamilv,  the.  188. 

Baldwin.  C.  F.  &  Co.,  308. 

Ballard.  S.  M..  306. 

Ballard,  Joshua,  94,  259. 

Barber,  John  S.,  145. 

Barber.  George.  94. 

Barber.  Jedediah,  77,  81. 

Barney,  Dr.  .-Mien,  153. 

Barnes,  Dr.  Eleazer  H.,  169. 

Bartlit,  William,  80,  81. 

Bateson,  P.  H.,  125. 

Bassett.  Joshua.  259. 

Beebe,  Joseph,  57. 

Beebe,  Orellana.  61. 

Beebe.  Roderick,  59. 

Benjamin.  Frank  ^I..  t46. 

Bench  and  Bar  of  Cortland  county,  ihe.  133. 

■Benedict.  Byron  A.,  T46. 

Benedict,  A.  H.,  132. 

Benton,  H.  F.,  182,  297. 

Benjamin,  S.  M.,  298. 

Benjamin,  Alvah,  80. 

Bingham,  Johnson,  59. 

Bierce,  Stanley.  149. 

Birdseye,  Victory,  136. 


Biographies,  445. 

Bl.ick  salts.  65. 

Blanchard.  Dr.  Ajariah,  169. 

lilanchard,  Silas,  1 1 8,  453-5. 

Blair,  Samuel,  263. 

]51air,  Sylvester,  262. 

Blashfield,  H.  W.,  180. 

Blodgett,  Alonzo  D.,  181,  473  -5. 

Blotlgett,  Nathan,  66,  241,  244.  258. 

Bloomer,  Lsaac.  324. 

Blowers.  C.  N.,  305. 

Boies,  Dr.  Levi.  157. 

Boies,  Obadiah,  79,  260. 

15oating  on  the  Tioughnioga.  66. 

Bourne.  Roswell  K.,  142.  178. 

Boundaries  of  county,  9. 

Bourne.  R.  W.,  178. 

Bouton,  Lewis,  146. 

Bouton,  Nathan,  323. 

Bouton,  Nathaniel.  323.  335. 

Bouton,  Enos,  322. 

Bouton.  Sanford.  80. 

Bounties  on  wolves,  75. 

Boynton.  Fitz.  178. 

Bradford,  Dr.  George  W.,  163  to  166. 

Bradford.  Daniel,  303. 

Bradford,  G.  W.,  303.  -— 

Brant,  42,  44. 

Brant  ascends  the  Susquehanna,  42. 

Brayton,  Thomas  F.,  298. 

Brewer,  E.  H.,  297,  306. 

Brewer,  Henry.  81. 

Brink,  Abram,  349. 

lirooks.  Charles  A.,  130. 

Bronson.  Dr.  Hor.ice.  147,  168. 

Brown,  C.  F.,  304. 

Brown.  Benjamin.  58. 

Buell.  Clayton  H..  130. 

Bunn,  William  O.,  121. 

Burlingame,  Miles  E.,  147. 

Burdick.  Dr.  I'hinras  H.,  166. 

Burdick.  William  F..  178-9. 

Burgess,  Lewis.  180. 

Calvert,  John.  322. 

Campbell,  B.  S.  &  D.,  122. 

Canal  from  Syracuse  to  Port  Walson.  78. 

Canada,  establishment  of  French  colony.  38. 

Carley,  Alanson,  81,  358. 

IS 


546 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Carley.  E.  C.  361. 
Carmicliael,  J.  C,  107. 
Carpenter,  F.  I)..  178. 
Ceitlral  Riforiiwr,  the,  132. 
Celebr.iled  law-suit,  a,  137. 
Chaplin.  Joseph,  58,  60,  319. 
Chanipliii,  Kiley,  146. 
Chapin,  Hiram,  413, 
Chatterton,  James,  74. 
Civil  list  of  eoiinly,  90-92, 
Cincinnatus,  58. 

formation  and  boundaries,  368. 

natural  features,  368. 

early  settlements,  368  to  371. 

Cincinnatus  villajre,  371. 

mercantile  interests,  372. 

manufactures,  372, 

churches,  373, 

scliools,  373. 

newspaper,  374. 

Lower  Cincinnatus,  374-5. 

the  town  in  the  rebellion,  375. 

town  officers,  376. 
Claims  of  riv.il  powers,  35-6. 
Clark,  William  H.,  127.  2S4, 
Cleary,  M.  F.,  181. 
Clerk's  office,  first,  74. 
Clearing  lands,  65. 
Climate  of  the  county,  12, 
Clinton,  Ue  Witt,  76. 
Cole,  C.  v.,  125,  129. 
Collins,  Charles,  182,  309. 
Colonists  of  New  York  and  the  fur  trade,  39. 
Cole,  .Azor  Lerov,  486-7. 
Conable,  ^L^rtin,  iSi. 
Conger,  Harmon  S.,  I  24. 
Conger,  B.  S.,  181. 

Contested  claims  to  military  lands,  52. 
Comstock,  Cephas,  81. 

Commission  to  adjust  claims  of  Iroquois,  44. 
Copeland,  Charles,  181. 
Copeland,  W.  S..  179,  310. 
Cortland  Co.  with  reference  to  Indian  occupation,  26. 

county  press,  1 19. 

Standard,  the,  122,  127. 

County  Kepiihlican,  the.  121. 

County  W'liig.  the.  121,  124. 

Gazette,  the.  125. 

journal,  the.   123. 
Weekly  Journal.  \.\\k.  126. 

Xe^us.  the,  130, 

County  Democrat,  the,  129. 

Standard  and  Journal,  the,  126. 

Co.  Medical  Society,  organization  of,  150. 

County  Farmers'  Club,  the,  181. 
organization  of.  181. 
first  officers,  181. 
permanent  members,  181. 

County  liible  Society,  the,  182. 

Anierhan,  the,  87,  125. 

Academy,  the,  83. 

village,  triumph  ol",  74. 

county,  pioneers  of,  56. 

county,  formation  of,  54, 

county's  escape  from  border  wars,  47. 

county,  genealogy  of,  48. 

Courier,  the,  66,  119. 

Republican,  the,  66, 


Cortlandville,  59. 

formation  of.  79. 

history  of,  236. 

formation  of  the  town,  236. 

boundaries,  236. 

soil  and  drainage,  237, 

early  settlements,  237  to  247, 

early  land  sales,  241. 

church  organization,  243. 

an  old  militia  roster.  245. 

town  organization,  249. 

first  officers,  249. 

Tioughnioga  navigation,  250. 

effects  of  the  first  railroad,  251. 

supervisors  and  town  clerks,   252. 

in  the  rebellion,  253, 

Cortland  village,  255. 

earlv  business  interests,  256. 

early  amusements.  264. 

village  library.  265. 

incorporation,  265. 

first  village  meeting,  266. 

gas  company,  267. 

list  of  presidents,  269. 

church  history,  269. 

schools.  275. 

normal  school,  276. 

postal  ser\ice.  284. 

the  dental  profession,  286. 

water  company,  286. 

gas  company.  288. 

fire  department,  289. 

manufacturing  interests,  291. 

mercantile  interests,  299. 

banks.  299. 

McGrawville,  311  to  317. 

South  Cortland,  317. 

Blodgett's  .Mills,  318. 
Corey.  H.  D..  314- 

Courcclles's  e.spedition  against  the  Mokawks,  38. 
Count  Frontenac's  expedition  against  the  Mohawks, 

40. 
Count    F'rontenac  s   expedition   against    the   Onon- 

dagas,  40, 
Courts,  terms  of  78. 
Court  House,  location  67. 

description  of,  68. 

site  for,  67. 

strife  for  location  of,  67. 

contract  for  building,  68-9. 
Courts  established  at  formation  of  county,  55. 
Council  of  Appointment.  77. 
Courtney.  J.  it  T.  E.,  149. 
Courier,  the  Cortland,  description  of,  120, 
County  societies,  etc.,  180. 
County  Agricultural  Society,  the,  iSo. 

organization  of.  180. 

first  officers,  180. 

list  of  presidents.  180-1. 
County  clerk's  office,  the,  183. 
Coye,  David,  94. 
Crandall.  Hiram.  88.  118.  143. 
Crandall.  L.  S.,  129. 
Cravath,  Orrin,  132. 
Cravalh,  James,  59. 
Crane,  W.  H.,  178. 
Crittenden,  Ebenezer,  59. 
Crosley,  E,  P„  149. 


Index. 


547 


Crouch,  H.  G.,  82,  123. 
Cuyler.  Glen.  136. 
Cuyler,  formation  of  the  town.  387. 
natural  characteristics,  387. 
early  settlements,  387-9. 
early  mills,  390. 
in  the  rebellion.  392. 
first  town  officers,  392. 
supervisors  and  town  clerks,  392, 
|)resent  town  officers,  393. 
village,  393. 

mercantile  interests,  394. 
churches,  394. 
Dailey,  W.  N.  P.,  182. 
Dairvins  interest,  the,  S3. 
Dana,  H.  T.,  170,  178. 
Dayton,  Nathan,  140. 
Day,  A.  H.,  1 30- 
Day.  Jeremiah,  94. 
De.ath  penalty,  the  first,  S6. 
Democrat,  the,  81,  125.  129. 
Destruction  of  the  Iroquois  League,  44. 
Dellow,  Fred  S.,  180. 
Dexter,  L.,  311. 
Dibble,  Horace,  178,  296. 
Dickinson  &  McGraw,  308. 
Dickinson.  Eli,  94. 
Dickson,  Andrew,  17,  81. 
Dixon,  Joseph  R.,  121. 
Donnellv.  -Xugustus  A..  78,  80. 
Doubletiay.  Gen.  Abner,  102. 
Doud.  Truman,  260. 
Doud.  E.  H..  304. 
Dougherty.  James.  150. 
Drainage  of  the  countv,  10. 
Duell.  R.  Holland.  88,  144. 
Early  peace  treaties,  37. 
ICarly  newspapers,  119. 
Early  American  courts,  133. 
Early  advertisements,   120. 
Early  religious  meetings,  62. 
Early  schools.  63. 
Early  roads,  60,  61. 
E.arly  productions,  65. 
Early  dwellings  of  pioneers.  64. 
ICarly  land  frauds.  52. 
Early  civil  divisions  of  territory.  47. 
Edgeconib.  A.  W.,  306. 
Edgecomb.  E.  W.,  67,  258. 
Edgecomb,  Is.iac,  306. 
Edgecomb,  Martin,  306. 
Edwards,  Jonathan,  323. 
Eels.  Tercius,  81. 
Effects  of  the  railroad,  85-6. 
Eggleston,  J.  E.,  147. 
Elder,  William,  257, 
Eldreilge,  Dr.  Lyman,  169. 
Eq.di/ed  valu.ition.  18,  20,  75. 
Encounter  between  A.  J.  Mc.Nett  and  N.  W.  Green, 

96. 
Erie  canal,  the,  76. 

opening  of,  77. 
European  discoveries,  35  to  46. 
Extent  of  county,  9. 
Expedition  of  Cal.  Van  Schaick,  43. 
Fancher,  E.  P.,  131. 
Fancher,  E.  P.  h  ].  R.,  3'3- 
Fancher,  J.  R.,  I3>- 


Farmers'  Journal,  the,  66,  i2o. 

Fenton,  Eneas,  131. 

Fifth  Great  Western  Turnpike  Company,  70. 

First  newspaper  in  Cortland  village,  71. 

First  birth  in  Cortland  county,  63. 

First  religious  society  nf  Homer,  62. 

First  settlers  in  different  towns,  58. 

First  settlers  in  the  county,  57. 

First  officers  of  the  county,  56. 

Fish,  E.  A.,  304. 

Fitzgerald,  L.  J.,  181,  292. 

Florida,  discovery  of,  35. 

Forbes,  O.  F..  118. 

Ford,  A.  M.,  126. 

Formation  of  Cortland  county,  54. 

Foster,  Ch.irles,  143. 

Fourth  of  July,  1815,  71. 

Frank,  John  Kl.,  320. 

Frank,  Monroe,  286. 

Freer,  John  A.,  243.  296. 

Freer.  Anthony,  80,  81. 

Freer.  S.  D.,  296. 

Freer,  J,  De  Puy,  81.  94. 

Freer  family,  the,  482-6. 
Free  Soil  movement,  the,  125. 

Freetown,  59. 

formation  of  town.  417. 
natural  features.  417. 
early  settlements.  417. 
in  the  rebellion.  420. 
Freetown  Corners.  421. 
churches,  421-22, 
town  officers,  422. 

French  settlement,  .advance  of,  35. 

Fur  trade,  the,  37. 

French  trading  posts,  38. 

Gage,  Charles  W.,  181,  457-9- 

Gates,  Isaac  A.,  81. 

Garrison.  L.  D.,  182,  309. 

Gates,  A.  W..  80,  455"?- 

Gastile  ami  lUiitner.  the,  26. 

Geere,  Luther,  74. 

Geologv  of  the  county,  11,  12. 

Gill,  John,  59. 

Gillett,  C.  H.,  178. 

Gillett.  Lerov,  181. 

Gilbert.  W.  B.,  84. 

Gillett,  Grove,  74- 

Gillett,  John,  81. 

Gleason,  Henry  L.,  149- 

Gleason,  Levi  R.,  286. 

Glover,  Oliver,  81. 

Goddard,  Solomon,   117. 

Goodell,  R.  A.,  178. 

Goodrich,  Hon.  Milo,  143. 

Goodrich,  H.  P..  181. 

Goodyear.  Fr.inklin,  178. 

Goodyear,  Dr.  Miles,  157  to  160. 

Gott.  Daniel,  139. 

Gould,  E.  G..  1 82. 

Gould,  Edwin  F.,  87.  125. 

Gray,  J.  C,  308. 

Gray,  Peter,  60. 
Graves,  Asher,  311. 
Graves,  John  Henry,  131. 
Graves.  Lester,  313. 
Graves,  R.  H.,  312. 
Graves,  Reuben,  311. 


548 


History  of  Cortland  County. 


Green,  Dr.  Caleb,  1 50,  487-9. 

Green,  Nelson  W.,  95. 

(ireene.  Will  ().,  131,  374. 

Grcenman,  C.  1).,  313. 

Grimn,  B.  II.,  178, 

Grisl-mills,  61. 

Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  discover)'  of,  35. 

Haight,  Seth,  124. 

Harford,  formation  of  town,  433. 

natural  rliaracteristics,  433. 

early  settlcnient.s,  433-35. 

in  the  rebellion,  436. 
Harford  village,  437. 

business  interests,  437-8. 

churi'lies.  43cS. 

Harford  Mills.  439. 

l)usiness  interests,  440. 
Harmon,  Al\,ih,  80. 
Harrington,  K.  N.,  309. 
Harrington,  H.  J.,  178. 
Harris.  Judge  Ira,  139. 
Hart.  Josiali.  jr..  178. 
Match.  Fred,  149. 
Hathaway,  Gen.  .S.  G.,  74.  79,  80,  81.  413-14.   419, 

489  to  498. 
Haves,  Lewis  .S.,  297. 
Helidrick.  Dr.  H.  C.  172. 
Hibbard,  F.  IL.  181. 
Hibbard,  Joel  H.,  8t. 
Highest  point  in  the  county.  10. 
Hill   James.  372. 
Hitchcock,  S.  G..    126. 
Hitchcock,  Dwight  H.,  181. 
Hitchcock,  Coleman,  217. 
Hitchcock.  Caleb  Bardano.  293,  472-3. 
Hobart,  Manley.  181.  500-2. 
Hollenbeck.  Lucius  I'.,  147. 
Hollister,  H.  T.,  178. 
Homer,  57. 

boundaries,  183. 

natural  characteristics,  184. 

early  settlements,  184. 

early  dwellings,  185. 

Mrs.  Beebe's  trial,  186. 

new  version  of  her  story,  186-7. 

later  settlers,  188  to  197. 

organization  of  the  town,  198. 

list  of  supervisors  and  town  clerks,  199. 

in  the  rebellion,  200. 

Homer  village,  203. 

early  hotels,  204. 

early  distilleries,  205. 

early  buildings,  206. 

mercantile    and     manufacturing    interests, 
207  to  216. 

incorporation,  216. 

oflficers  of.  217. 

post-oltice,  218. 

hotels,  218. 

newspapers,  219. 

schools,  219. 

churches.  221  to  230. 

Little  York.  231. 

East  Homer,  232. 

East  River,  235. 
Homer  F.agle,  the,  123.  124. 
Homer  Rcpuhliiaii,  the,  126. 
Homer  Herald,  the,  126. 


Homer  village  incorporated,  79. 

Homer  &  Elbridge  Turnpike  Company.  70. 

Homer  it  Cayuga  Turnpike  Company,  70. 

Homer  ct  Geneva  Turnpike  Company,  70. 

Homer,  division  of  town,  79. 

Holmes,  Wilber,  372. 

Hoose,  James  Harmon.  130.  181.  2S0,  477-82. 

Hooker.  Weslev,  126. 

Hopkins,  \\.  L.',  80. 

Hopkins,  Moses,  59.  66,  77. 

Hotchkiss.  Samuel,  77,  139. 

House,  John,  58.     — ■ 

Hubbard.  Jonathan.  59.  62,  66. 

Hudson  River,  discovery  of,  35. 

Hughes,  Dr.  J.  W.,   173. 

Hulliert.  George  A.,  195. 

Hulbert,  J.  &  G.  A.,  360. 

Hulbert.  E.  M.,  307. 

Hull,  G.  \V.,  286. 

Hunt,  S.  .\L,  345.  350. 

Hunt.  Dr.  Japheth,  58,  347. 

Hunter,  S.  R.,  17S. 

Hvde.  Dr.  Frederick.  81.  498-9. 

Hy.itt.  F.  O..  286. 

Huntington,  William  A.,  131. 

Independent  Order  of  Odd  Fellows,  179. 

Tioughnioga  Lodge  No.  263,  179. 

Homer  Lodge  No.  280,  179. 

N^^arathon  Lodge  No.  415,  179. 
Indi.ins  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  28 
Indian  history,  13-34. 
Indians,  habitations,  30. 

dress,  29. 

marriages,  31. 

amusements,  31. 

objects  of  worship,  32. 

festivals,  32-3. 

burials.  33-4. 

hospitality.  34. 

social  habits.  29. 
Indian  hi.story,  sources  of,  13. 
Indians,  origin  of,  13. 
Indian  relations  in  Central  New  York,  26. 
Indian  war.  close  of,  42. 

Indian  title  to  military  tract  extinguished,  5t. 
Indian  missions,  44-6. 
Indian  and  Tory  atrocities.  43. 
Ingalls.  Samuel,  67. 
Ingalls,  C.  E.,  178. 
Iroquois  Confederacy,  the,  14.  15. 

tradition  as  to  origin  of,  15-17. 

characteristics  of,  18  to  21. 

military  status,  23. 

causes  of  downfall,  25. 

Indians,  14  to  34. 

superiority  of,  24. 
Ithaca  &  Cortland  Railroad  Co..  89. 
Jail,  action  of  supervisors  relative  to,  72-3. 

increased  accommodations,  88. 

the  first,  72. 
Jarvis,  Horace  A.,  2S5. 
Jewett,  Dr.  H.  O..  169,  181. 
Johnson,  Guy,  42. 
4-4ohnson,  John,  42,  44. 
Johnson,  Sir  William,  42. 
Jones.  Elder  S.  G.,  59. 
Jones,  George  B.,  88,  144. 
Jones,  C.  A.,  312. 


Index. 


549 


Jones,  Benton  B.,  129,  130. 

Joyner,  D.  V.,  131. 

Justice's  Courts  and  Courts  of  Special  Sessions,  135. 

Keator,  E.  M.,  178. 

Keep.  Chauncy,  93, 

Keep,  John,  61,  68,  80. 

Kelky.  Wallace.  130. 

Kellogg,  Hon.  O.  U.,  146. 

Kellogg,  H.  M.,  307. ,^   /.;,  ,  .   ^ 

Kenney,  Amos  L.,  144.  '  /,. 

Kenney,  Hosea,  379. 

Kenney.  James,  379. 

Kinne,  C.  \V.,  292. 

Kinney.  C.  L.,  178. 

Kinney,  F.  G.,  126,  130,  180. 

Kinney,  Darius,  58,  188. 

Kinney,  Charles  I...  312. 

Kingman,  Dr.,  181. 

Kingman,  John,  58,  70,  369. 

Kingman,  H.  M.  k  J.,  372. 

Kingsbury.  A,  \Y,,  178. 

Kingsbury,  Charles.  184. 

Kingsley,  Lewis.  i.fi. 

Knapp,  Dr.  John  H..  173. 

Knapp,  Stephen,  94. 

KneelancI,  Hon.  A.  Judson.  147. 

Knight.  Arthur  L..  148. 

Knight.  Fred  E.,  89. 

Know  Nothing  party,  87. 

Kno.x,  .S.  S..  178. 

Kohler,  C.  A..  129. 

Lakes  of  the  county.  1 1. 

Lament.  J,  H..  312. 

Lament.  D.  S.,  312. 

Lansing.  E.  .M.,  130. 

Lapeer,  formation  of  the  town.  441. 

natural  characteristics.  441. 

early  settlements,  441-44. 

churches.  444. 

in  the  rebellion.  444-5. 

supervisors  and  clerks,  445. 

present  officers.  445. 
Leach.  James  S.,  Si, 
Lee,  Roswell,  94. 
Legend  of  the  Tioughnioga,  28-9. 
Leni  Lenape  Indians,  the,  26, 

traditionary  origin  of,  26-7. 
Livingston,  James,  362. 
Location  of  county,  9. 
Log  houses,  building  of,  64. 
Logging  "  bees,"  65, 
Loring  T.  Mason,  181. 
Liberty  Herald,  the,  132. 
List  of  battles  of  76th  regiment,  106. 
Little,  Ira  L.,  145. 
Livermore,  William  H.,  126. 
Lucas.  William.  74. 
Lyman,  Asahel,  72. 
Lyndes,  William  P.,  81. 
Lynde,  John,  78,  157. 
Lyons,  J.  E.,  131. 
Mack  &  Husted,  361. 
Mager  George  J.,  304. 
Mahan,  A.,  305. 
Mallory,  William,  74,  258. 
Mallery,  Patrick,  118,  350. 
Mantayne,  William  J.,  146. 
Marathon  Itutepentient,  the,  130 


Afarrtt/ion  Mirror,  the,  130, 
Marat  lion  Xe'iUS,  the,  130. 
Marathon,  88. 

formation  of  the  town,  345. 

natural  features,  345. 

early  selllcment.s,  386. 

Thurlow  Weed's  rrniiniscencc.  352. 

first  town  meeting.  358. 

list  of  supenisors  and  rlrrks.  358. 

in  the  rebellion.  359. 

Mar.ithon  village.  359. 

mercantile  interests,  361. 

manufacturing  interests,  362-3. 

attorneys.  363. 

newspapers.  364. 

schools.  364. 

churches.  365. 

village  incorporation.  367. 
Massachusetts  ten  townships.  82. 
Massacres  of  Wyoming  and  Cherr)-  Valley,  43. 
M.isonic  Order,  the.  177. 

first  lodge  in  the  county,  177. 

Hesper  Lodge  237,  177. 

Truxton  Lodge  333,  177. 

Cortland  Lodge  371,  177. 

Lafayette  Lodge  409,  177. 

Western  Union  Lodge  417.  177. 

Cortlandville  Lodge  470.  178. 

Cortlandville  Lodge,  charter  members.  178. 

Homer  Lodge.  352,  178. 

Royal  Arch  Masonr\-,  178. 

Royal  Arch  Masonry,  Center  Mark  Lodge 
50,  178. 

Cortland  Chapter  194.  178. 

Knights  Templar —  Cortland  Commandery 
50,  179- 
Matthews.  J.  D..  94. 
Matthews.  David,  58,  81. 
Maybury,  M.  M..  304. 
May,  Eleazer,  94. 
McFarlan.  John.  306. 
McGraiinnlle  Sentinel,  the.  131. 
McGrawville  Express,  the,  132. 
McGraw,  Lucius,  313. 
McGraw,  P.  H.  &  A.  P..  315. 
McGraw,  Samuel,  243,  311. 
McGraw,  William.  313. 
McGraw,  P.  H.,  88-9,  312. 
McGraw,  D.,  312. 
McGraw,  Hiram,  312. 
McGraw,  Harry,  81. 
McNett,  A.  J.,  96. 
McKay,  Hiram  C,  94. 
McVean,  J.  A.,  88. 
McWhorter,  Dr.  John.  58.  369. 
Medical  Society  —  chronological    list   of  members. 

174-6. 
Memorable  law-suit,  a,  76. 
Merrick.  Danforth,  81. 
Merrick.  David.  62. 
Merrill,  Mead,  68,  136-7. 
Messenger.  Gideon.  320. 
.Messenger.  Hiram  J.,  265,  299,  445-7. 
Mexico  conquered  bv  Spain.  35. 
Midland  Railroad,  89. 

Mililar>'  career  of  the  76th  regiment,  96  to  106. 
Military  histon',  92. 
Military  bounty  bonds,  52. 


552 


History,  of  Cortland  County. 


Treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  42. 
Treaty  of  Utrecht,  the,  41. 

Treaty  l)et\veen  the  Iroquois  and  the  French,  38. 
Trial  of  Colonel  N.  W.  Green,  97. 
Tripp.  Dr.  John  D.,  174. 
Tripp,  James  H.,  361,  475-7, 
Trowbridge,  Billy,  72. 

True  American  and  Rcligiotn;  Examiner,  the,  131. 
Truxton,  58. 

situation  and  boundaries,  377. 

natural  features,  377, 

early  settlements,  377  to  369. 

early  mills,  381. 

first  town  meeting,  381. 

town  officers,  381. 

in  the  rebellion,  382. 

Truxton  village,  382. 

mercantile    and    manufacturing   interests, 

383-4. 

churches,  385. 
Turnpike  companies,  61,  70. 
Tultle,  William  D.,  148. 
Twenty-hfth  Congressional  District,  79. 
Twenty-second  Congressional  District,  79. 
Tyler,  John,  324. 

Utica,  Chenango  ct  Cortland  Railroad,  89. 
\'an  Auken,  Willard  J.,  148. 
Van  Alstine.  C,  308, 
\'an  Bergen,  P.,  178. 
\'an  Hoesen,  Garrett,  401. 
\'an  Hoesen.  Matthias,  117,401. 
Van  Slyke,  E.  D.,  125. 
\'an  \'redenberg,  1'.  D.  A;  C.  A.,  130. 
Vining,  .Samuel,  59. 
Virgil",  58. 

formation  of  town,  319. 

natural  features,  319. 

first  settlement,  319. 

first  town  meeting,  326. 

first  town  officers.  326. 

early  schools,  326. 

early  churches,  327. 

post-offices,  329. 

early  marriages  and  deaths,  331. 

agricultural  matters,  332. 

in  the  rebellion.  336. 

Virgil  Corners,  336-8. 

physicians,  339. 

Gridley  Hollow,  342. 

Messengerville,  343. 

Frank  s  Corners,  343. 

supervisors  and  town  clerks,  344. 
Wainwright,  Colonel  William,  99. 
Wallace,'  D.  F.,  283,  305. 
Walrad,  C.  P.,  304. 
Ward,  S.  R.,  131. 


War  of  the  rebellion,  the  county  in,  95. 

losses  in  by  the  county,  1 16. 

prompt  action  of  the  |)eople,  95. 

movement  to  organize  regiment,  95. 

the  76th  Regiment.  96. 

composition  of  76th  Regiment,  97. 

officers  of  76th  Regiment,  97. 

marching  orders  of  76th  Regiment,  98. 

official  action  in  county,  117. 

first  public  act,  1 17. 

bounties,  1 17-1 18, 

bonds  issued,  1 19. 
War  of  1812.  the,  64. 
sVarren,  William  H.,  145. 
'Varren,  Dr.  L.  C,  314. 
Warren,  George  L.,  178,  283,  304. 
Waters,  M.  M.,  145. 
Waters,  Henry  D.,  148, 
Watson,  R.  J.,    178. 
Watson,  Joseph,  217. 
Watson,  Eikanah,  59,  66,  241. 
Webb,  Major  .Adin,  139,  259. 
Webb,  Morgan  I..,  283,  301. 
Welch,  S.  E.,  117,  304. 
Western  Courier,  the,  122-3. 
Wheeler.  Dr.  Elijah  G.,  153. 
Wheeler,  Jerome,  80. 
Wheeler,  Jacob,  67. 
Whig,  the,  81. 
White.  Asa,  61. 
Whitmore,  D.  E.,  iSt,  361. 
Whitmore.  Parley,  74. 
Whitney,  Christo|)her,  58. 
Wickwire  Brothers,  295. 
Willet,  59. 

formation  of  town,  428. 

natural  features,  428. 

early  settlements,  428-31. 

first  town  meeting,  430. 

in  the  rebellion,  432. 

supervisors  and  clerks,  432. 

present  officers,  432. 

churches,  432. 
Wills,  Charles  E..  178, 
Winslow,  John  E.,  149. 
Wiswell,  Oliver,  74,  137,  284. 
Weed,  Thurlow,  352. 
Woodcock.  David,  74. 
Woodrutr,  Madison,  298. 
Wright.  Benjamin  T.,  146. 
Young  Men's  Christian  As.sociation. 

organization  of,  182. 

charter  members.  182. 

first  officers,  182. 

present  officers,  182. 
Zimmer,  Philip,  217.  .' 


\ 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  014  113  005  5 


