Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



t 

/■■■'♦■ 



EXTRACT 



FROM THB 



TENTH ANNUAL REPORT 



OF THE 



STATE BOARD OF CHARITIES 



OF THK 



• ••••• •••• •••••••• •• • 



• • • 

• • • 



RELATING TO 



THE CAUSES OF PAUPERISM. 



BT 



Secretary qf the Board, 

THE PROPERTY OF THB 

NEW YORK HOSPITAL 

BY BEQUEST OF 

ALONZaetARKTMru:. l l d. 

TRANSMITTED TO THB LEGISLATURB JANUABY 18, 1877. 




JEIIOME B. PARMENTER, STATE PRINTER. 

1877. 



• • 



• • • 






• • 



• • 



• • < 



• • • 



STATE OF NEW YOBK. 



MEMBERS AND OFFICERS 



or THB 



State Board of Charities, 



1 S7 7. 



EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS. 

Hon. WM. DORSHEIMER, Lieutenant-Governor, - - - - Albaht. 

Hon. JOHN BIGELOW, Secretary of State, - - - - Albany. 

Hon. FREDERICK P. 0LC50TT, Comptroller, - - - - Albany. 

Hon. CHAS. S. PAIRCHILD, Attorney-General, _ - - Albany. 

MEMBERS AFFOnrrED BT THE GOVEMOB AITD SEITATR 

Fir9t Judical District, - I'HEODORE ROOSEVELT, 94 Maiden Lane, New York. 

New T(yrk Cmnty, - - HENRY L. HOGUET, 48 West 28th Street, New York. 

do do - - MRS. C. R LOWELL, 120 East 80th Street, New York. 

(Under Chapter 571, Laws of 1878.) 

8eo(ynd Judicial JHstriot, HARVEY G. EASTMAN, Poughkeepsle. 

Kings County, - - - A. A, LOW, 8 Pierrepont Place, Brooklyn. 

( Under Chapter 671, Laws of 1878.) 

Third Judicial District, JOHN V. L. PRUYN, 18 Elk Street, Albany. 

Fourth Judicial District, EDWARD W. POSTER, Potsdam, St. Lawrence County. 

Fifth Judicial District, JOHN C. DEVEREUX, Utica. 

Sixth Judicial District, SAMUEL P. MILLER, Franklin, Delaware County. 

Seventh Judicial District, MARTIN B. ANDERSON, Rochester. 

Eighth Judicial District, WM. P. LETCHWORTH, Buffalo. 

OFFICERS. 

JOHN V. L. PRUYN, - - - - Prksident. 

WM. P. LETCHWORTH, _ _ - - Vice-President. 

CHAS. S. HOYT, Albany, - - - - Secretary. 

JAMES O. panning; Albany, - - - Assistant Secretary. 



OFHOE OF THE BOARD, 11 HIGH STREET, ALBANY. 



REPORT. 



To the State Board of Charities : 

In compliance with the instructions of yo'nr Board, directing me to 
make an examination of the inmates of the various poor-houses and 
alms-houses of the State, under the supervision of the commissionere 
of the several districts, with a view of determining, as far as practica- 
ble, the causes of the increase of pauperism, agreeably to the concur- 
rent resolution of the Senate and Assembly of May 27-29, 1873, and 
to communicate to you the results of such examination, I beg to 
submit this, my 

EEPOET. 

The schedule of inquiries prepared for the purposes of the investi- 
gation was approved by the Board July Slst, 1874, and the examina- 
tion soon thereafter commenced. The inquiry was completed in 
fifty-four counties in that year and the children were examined in all 
the counties. The facts obtained regarding this class, and the general 
progress of the work to the close of 1874, have already been com- 
municated to the Board. The inquiry was renewed early in 1875, 
and has been completed in all the counties. 

In conducting the investigation, the several poor-bouses and alms- 
houses throughout the State were all, in turn, visited, and each of 
the inmates examined separately. The inquiries were, in part, 
addressed to the persons examined, but the answers to many of them, 
for obvious reasons, were obtained from the proper officers. A copy 
of the inquiries used in the examination is hereto annexed for refers 
ence, and marked schedule Ko. 1. 

This schedule, as will be observed, contained sixty (60) questions, 
which were so framed as to obtain the name, sex, age, color, birth- 
place and birthplaces of the parents of each person, the age at which 
they became dependent, the time they had been in poor-housei, 
asylums or other charitable institutions, their education, early disci- 
pline, industrial training, habits and occupation ; the condition of their 
ancestors and near relatives, going back two generations ; the degree 



6 

of disability existing and the bodily and mental states connected 
therewith, and also as to the probable future of the person, respecting 
recovery fi*om the cause of dependence. It was thus designed by the 
inquiry to make as complete a record as possible of the life of each 
person from their birth to the time of the examination. The extent 
and magnitude of the undertaking can only be contemplated by taking 
into consideration the number and character of the persons examined, 
embracing the young and aged, the sick, infirm, insane, idiotic, 
imbecile, and also many of the vicious, debased and depraved. 

The poor-houses and alms-houses contained no proper system of 
records of the inmates. A register of the name, sex, age, etc., was 
kept in most of these institutions, but no record as to the condition 
of the persons before becoming dependent, or as to their ancestors, 
or near relatives, was maintained in any of them. This fact greatly 
embarrassed the work and rendered its progress slow and tedious. 

My labors in the prosecution of the inquiry were greatly light- 
ened, however, by the commissioners of the several districts accom- 
panying mo on numerous occasions, and assisting in the examina- 
tion. The attendance of the superintendents of the poor, and the 
keepers of the poor-houses and alms-houses throughout the State, 
was very generally scoured. These officers possessed a large amount 
of information regarding those under their care, and they rendered 
important and valuable aid in the matter. In a number of counties 
the volunteer services of gentlemen of extended acquaintance in the 
locality were also secured. Many of these devoted considerable time 
and attention to the work, and their aid was of great benefit. 

It will thus be seen that no pains were spared to make the investi- 
gation as thorough and complete as possible. In all cases where the 
information desired upon any point could not be satisfactorily 
obtained, the matter was noted accordingly. It is believed, there- 
fore, that the statements recorded are as accurate and reliable as it is 
possible to obtain upon the subject. My grateful acknowledgements 
are due to the officers and gentlemen before referred to for their 
generous aid in securing these important and valuable results. 

The general plan of the inquiry and the manner of conducting 
the work having been thus briefly stated, some of the more import- 
ant results obtained will next be noticed, with such conclusions upon 
the subject as the occasion may seem to make desirable. The princi- 
pal facts developed by the inquiry have been carefully analyzed and 
tabulated, and the schedules will be found hereto annexed. Notes 
of the examination in the several counties,. with special mention of 



interesting individual cases, hereinafter appear and form a part of 
this report. As the facts regarding the children examined have here- 
tofore been reported to the Board by the vice-president, no extended 
mention of this class here is deemed to be necessary. 

NuMBEB OF Paupers Examined. 

There are in the State fifty-six (56) county poor-houses, and includ- 
ing those of New York and Kings counties, six (6) city alms-houses. 
There are also two (2) town poor-houses, both of which are situated 
in Queens county. The counties of Hamilton and Schuyler have no 
poor-houses, or other institutions for the dependent classes. 

At the time of the inquiry these institutions contained, in all, 
twelve thousand six hundred and fourteen (12,614) pauper inmates, 
of whom twelve thousand two hundred and seventy-five (12,275) 
were white, and three hundred and thirty-nine (339) colored. Of 
these six thousand three hundred and eighty-four (6,384) were males, 
and six thousand two hundred and thirty (6,230) females. The num- 
ber who were single was seven thousand two hundred and fifty-three 
(7,253) ; married, two thousand five hundred and ninety-nine (2,599) ; 
widows, one thousand five hundred and thirty-nine (1,539) ; widowers, 
one thousand two hundred and twenty-three (1,223). Of those single, 
five hundred and eighty (580) were idiots, and two thousand one 
hundred and seventy-nine (2,179) children under sixteen years of age. 

Schedule No. 2 shows the location of the several poor-houses and 
alms-houses, and the number of pauper innjates each contained at 
tlie time of the examination, and schedule No. 3, shows the number 
of such inmates, by counties. 

The following is a statement of the number of paupers in each of 
these class of institutions : 



INSTITUTIONS. 



County poor-houses 
City alms-houses . . . 
Town poor-houses . 

Totals 



Male. 


Female. 


Total. 


Per centage 
males. 


8,065 

8,270 

49 


2.689 

8,519 

22 


5,754 

6,789 

71 


68.27 

48.17 
69.01 


6,884 


6,230 


12,614 


60.61 



Per centage 
females. 



46.78 
61.88 
80.99 



49.89 



This statement embraces the paupers coming from the fixed popu- 
lation only. As other measures were being taken by the Board for the 
examination and registration of transient paupers, this class was not 
included in the inquiry. 



8 

Birthplaces. 

Tho InrthplaooB of the paupers examined, as far as could be ascer- 
taiiuHl, art) shown by tho following statement : 

Number. Per centage. 

Now Vork 5,035 39.92 

Other Stnto3 of tho Union 800 6.34 

I'^iinadH 170 1 .35 

l>thor North AmorioAu British Provinces 22 .17 

Kn^liuul 502 4r. 

IMand 4,328 34.31 

SvviUnvL 118 .93 

Wale* 19 .15 

Ktauvv 90 .71 

Vl^nuAUY 1^23 8.90 

Ortier Kurv^p<?an ovnnurie* 175 1 . 38 

Oiher vvuntrt^w 19 .15 

r«*jv>»rt*med 213 1.69 

Tv>ul 12-614 iw. 

Tb» bu:capMik>^ bj s.va:i;ie!k *n? shown ia schedule Xo. 4. 

PrsTH or Pabltst^. 

T\^ biortii::^^ *> ro :Iie *:^i.rti!:^lJu•e^ ■:: :lie rvxrenrs o: :I:e i^ersons 

«> ^ ^ 

rvvrccosjes vVcaki*:«ec to r^rxcis >fi.-::Li: o- :ae su>\o:, ar.i :I.e 

»«C^r Til? $c:i:X'Ji!ec:s :£ ±e rdirers ::roc :Iie >::'-;cc: l.ii. tliens- 
tS>fx»v :tra^:r">f r^* >* :ii*ii. I: ttlzt ,"iat< ir^je -arcr^e :>: v:::-^. or 



^p^^~— ^ ■■■■ 









IIR^ -in* :.^ 2.*:^ ».-y «.T5 :^.:: 








Alien Paupebs. 

The schedule of inquiries was so framed as to collect all the infor- 
mation possible bearing upon the subject of alien paupers. In the 
examination of the paupers of foreign birth, careful inquiry was, in 
all cases, made as to the time they had been in the United States, 
how long in this State, as to the port at which they landed, and also 
whether naturalized. The information obtained upon this point has 
not as yet been fully analyzed, but it shows that the poor-houses and 
alms-houses of the State contain a very considerable number of 
unnaturalized foreign born peraons, many of whom have been public 
burdens from the time of their landing in the country. It is believed 
that the various asylums, hospitals and other public charities of the 
State also give shelter to large numbers of this class. A portion of 
these reach us at the port of New York, a portion at the ports of other 
States, but by far the larger number by way of Canadian ports. The 
evil has become one of great magnitude, and is likely still further to 
increase unless proper corrective measures are applied. 

Ages at the time of becoming Inmates of Poor-houses. 

The facts regarding this matter were obtained with great diflttculty 
in consequence of the absence of proper records, as before stated, 
upon the subject. The books containing the original entries of admis- 
sions, in the cases of many of the older inmates, could not be found, 
and the statements of the persons had to be taken upon the subject. 
The following shows the ages at which dependence commenced accord- 
ing to the facts as obtained : 

Number. Peroentsge. 

At birth 422 3.36 

Under 2 years ... 276 2.19 

2 years and under 5 ; 485 3 . 84 

5 years and under 10 889 7.05 

10 years and under 20 1,006 7.98 

20 years and under 30 2j070 16.41 

30 years and under 40 2,157 17.10 

40 years and under 50 1,743 13.82 

50 years and under 60 1 ,443 11 .43 

60 years and under 70 1,213 9.62 

70 years and under 80 669 5.30 

Over 80 years 241 1.91 

Total 12,614 100. 



10 

From this statement it appears that four hundred and twenty-two 
(422) became inmates of poor-houses at birth, and two thousand six 
hundred and fifty-six (2,656), or over twenty-one per cent, before 
arriving at the age of twenty years. The number becoming depend- 
ent between the ages of twenty and sixty years, the period in life of the 
greatest physical and mental activity, was seven thousand four hun- 
dred and thirteen (7,413) or nearly fifty-nine per cent, while only 
two thousand one hundred and twenty-three (2,123), or less than 
seventeen per cent, had been compelled to accept public aid after 
they were over sixty years old. The facts regarding the matter are 
given, by counties, in schedule No. 6. 

Ages at the Time of the Examination. 

The ages of the persons at the time of the examination may be 
summarized as follows : 

Namber. Percentage. 

Under 2 years 373 2.96 

2 years and under 5 403 3 . 19 

5 years and under 10 854 6 . 77 

10 years and under 16 549 4 . 35 

16 years and under 20 336 2.66 

20 years and under 30 1,411 11.19 

30 years and under 40 2,068 16.40 

40 years and under 50 1,828 14.49 

50 years and under 60 1,638 12.99 

60 years and under 70 . 1,538 12. 19 

70 years and under 80 1,163 9.22 

Over 80 years 453 3 . 59 

Total 12,614 100. 



♦ • ■"• ■ 1 



By the foregoing statement it will be observed that at the time of 
the examination two thousand one hundred and seventy-nine (2,179), 
or nearly eighteen per cent, of the inmates of the poor-houses were 
under sixteen years old. The number between that age and sixty, 
was seven thousand two hundred atid eighty-one (7,281), or more 
than fifty-seven per cent, and the number over sixty years, three 
thousand one hundred and fifty-four (3,154), or about twenty-five per 
cent. Of the latter, four Imndred and fifty-three (453) had passed 
the age of eighty years. Schedule No. 7 shows the facts regarding 
the ages of the paupers when examined, by counties. 



11 

Length of Tihb in PooR-npusEs. 

The length of time spent in poor-houses by the persons who were 
inmates at the date of the inquiry, appears as follows : 

Namber. Per centage. 

Less than one year 3j085 24.46 

1 year and less than 2 years. Ij628 12.91 

2 years and less than 5 years 3>455 27.39 

5 years and less than 10 years 2j292 18.17 

10 years and less than 20 years Ij581 12.53 

20 years and less than 30 years 423 3.35 

30 years and less than 40 years 112 .89 

Over 40 years 38 .30 

Total 12,614. 100. 



The entire time spent by all of these persons in poor-houses, at 
the date of the examination, amounted, in the aggregate, to sixty-one 
thousand five hundred and ninety-five (61,595) years. 

The average time in the various counties varied from 3.76 to 10.72 
years. The highest average appeared in the rural counties, and the 
lowest in counties in which are situated large cities. The average time 
of dependence of all the inmates amounted to nearly 4.88 years. 

The facts relative to the matter, by counties, are shown in schedule 

No. 8. 

Other forms of Relief Furnished. 

The preceding statement does not give the full measure of relief 
which had been extended to these persons. It was found, by the 
examination, that many of them, before entering the poor-houses, had 
been in asylums, hospitals, or other charitable institutions, as public 
beneficiaries. The facts upon this point, however, could not be 
obtained with sufficient fullness to give accurate results. A large 
portion of those of adult age admitted having received out-door aid, 
and many of them for a number of years. It is believed that great 
abuses have heretofore, and still exist, to a large extent, in the admin- 
istration of this mode of public relief, which need to be corrected. 

Education. 

The educational attainments of the persons examined were probably 
obtained with greater accuracy than any other matter connected with 
the inquiry. In all cases in which doubt existed regarding the 
declarations of the persons upon the subject the appropriate test was 
applied. The number of persons examined over sixteen years of age, 



12 

exclusive of unteaehable idiots, was nine thousand eight hundred and 
fifty-five (9,855). The educational attainments of these were ascer- 
tained to be as follows : 

Nnmber. Per cratage. 

Unable to read or write 3> 106 31 . 52 

Could read only 1,447 14.68 

Could read and write 2»384 24. 19 

Keceived a fair common-school education 2)918 29.61 

Total..., 9,855 100. 



The foregoing statement shows the inmates of poor-houses to be 
generally uneducated, only two thousand nine hundred and eighteen 
(2,918), or 29.61 per cent, having received the advantages of a com- 
mon-school training, a very few of them being advanced in the higher 
grades of learning. The number without any education whatever was 
three thousand one hundred and six (3,106), or 31.52 per cent, while 
one thousand fonr hundred and forty-seven (1,447), or 14.68 per cent, 
could read only, and two thousand three hundred and eighty-four 
(2,384), or 24.19 per cent, could read and write. Schedule No. 9 
gives the details upon this subject, by counties. 

Habits. 

In tracing the habits of the persons examined great difficulties 
were, in most cases, experienced, owing to a general inclination to 
conceal the practices of early life. A few indeed freely admitted 
having had habits of inebriety, but, in the majority of cases, the facts 
regarding the matter were given with great reluctance. In arriving 
at conclusions upon the subject, the opinions of the superintendents 
and keepers were, therefore, in all cases obtained. The information 
secured upon the matter has been carefully snmmarized as regards all 
of those over sixteen years of age, and of proper intelligence, and may 
be stated as follows : 



Male 

Female... 

Totals 



^ 








•i 


§ 


si 


"SS 


-J 




otallf 
abstii 


odera 
drink 


eriodi 
drink 




.|8 


^ 


S 


PL, 


O 


n 


683 


1,493 


998 


1,194 


844 


3,509 


953 


376 


685 


831 


a, 193 


3,445 


1,374 


1,779 


1,165 



Total. 



4,711 
5,144 

^,855 



If we apply the ratio of temperate and intemperate obtained in 



IS 



the casofi whose habits were determined, to the unascertained cases, 
we h&ve the following results : 



Male... 
Female 



Totals 



t 


a 


• 


If 

11 


787 
2,985 


8,974 
2,159 


4,711 
5,144 


15.64 
58.03 


8,722 


6^133 


9,856 


37.77 



II 

84. 8H 
41 97 



62.23 



Tlie proportion of intemperate among the male inmates appeared 
much greater than in the case of the females. The ratio of intem- 
perate in the former ^^as 84.36 per cent; in the latter 41.97 per cent; 
of both sexes, 62.23 per cent. The facts upon the subject are shown, 
by counties, in schedule No. 10. 

Habits of Paeents. 
The diflSculties heretofore referred to in obtaining information 
regarding the habits of the persons examined, were found to exist in 
a much greater degree in pursuing the inquiry as to the habits of 
their ancestors. In many cases there was an evident desire to con- 
ceal the facts upon the feubject, while others, owing to their youth, or 
because of imbecility or mental infirmities, were wholly incapable of 
giving any reliable testimony in the matter. The information upon 
this point was, therefore, obtained mainly from the superintendents 
and keepers, and it is as full as practicable to secure. The following 
is a statement of the results obtained : 



Fathers . 
Mothers. 



• 

1 

i 


1 

1 


Unascer- 
tained. 


8,935 
5,937 


8,167 
1,280 


5,512 
5,397 



ToUl. 



12,614 
12,614 



If the ratio of temperate and intemperate thus established in the 
cases whose habits were determined, be applied to the unascertained 
cases, we have the following results : 



• 




• 




V V 


• 




9> 

I 




• 


52 


§2 

Is. 




s 


v 


5 


u » 


^^ 




0) 




o 


«♦* 


£ a 




^ 




^ 


PL, 


PL,- 


Fathers 


6,989 
10,879 


6,625 
2,235 


12,614 
12,614 


55.41 
82 28 


44.59 


Mothers 


17.72 



Schedule No. 11 shows the facts secured upon this point, by counties. 



14 



Habits of the Insane. 
The number of insane examined was four thousand and forty-Beven 
(4,047). As these were, generally, chronic cases, and many of them 
of long standing, it was found extremely difficult, in most instances, 
to trace their former habits. In the insane departments of the alms- 
houses of New York and Kings counties, especially in the former, 
the records were quite full upon the subject, but in the other counties 
the statements of the officers in charge were wholly relied upon in 
the matter. The information obtained upon the subject, applied to 
the unascertained cases according to the ratio of temperate and intem- 
perate established in the cases whose habits were ascertained, gives 
the following results regarding the habits of the insane examined : 



Male 

Female ... 

Totals 



s 


5 






1 




i 

o 


8a 

S2 


E^ 


a 


H 


Pk 


833 


1,269 


1,602 


20.79 


1,931 


524 


2,445 


78.66 


2,254 


1,793 


4,047 


55.70 



e 

I 

79.21 
SI .44 



The facts regarding the habits of the insane will be found in 
schedule No. 12, by counties. 

Previous Occupations. 
The previous occupations of the persons examined, exclusive of 
idiots and children under sixteen years of age, it was learned, had 
been as follows : 

Number. Per centage. 

Laborers 2,086 21.17 

Domestic 3,844 39.01 

Agricultural 629 6.38 

Mechanical 1,421 14.41 

Commercial ■ 185 1 , 88 

Professional 109 1.11 

No occupation 827 8.39 

Unascertained 754 7 . 65 

Total 9,855 100. 



Schedule No. 13 exhibits the facts, by counties, as ascertained upon 

this subject. 

Previous Industrial Habtis. 

The opinion very generally prevails that the poor-houses and alms- 
houses of the State give shelter largely to persons who, through mia- 



10 

fortune in business or otherwise, have fallen from high estate, and are 
consequently entitled to great public consideration. The facts 
obtained by the inquiry, however, do not, by any means, warrant this 
opinion. In examining the intelligent adult inmates, their previous 
pecuniary condition and habits of life, as regards industry, thrift and 
saving, were in all cases carefully inquired into, and the information 
obtained upon these points accordingly noted. It was thus learned 
that but few of them had ever owned any real estate or been possessed 
of other property to any considerable extent. An occasional excep- 
tional case was found, but the mass confessed to idle and shiftless 
habits in early life with little or no thought regarding the future. 

Tiiat these persons prematurely break down, and sink to the line 
of public dependents, is in no wise surprising ; indeed, it is but the 
legitimate result of neglected early opportunities. It is believed that 
a very large portion of the inmates of the poor>houses and alms-houses 
of the State at present are of this class. The facts relative to a great 
number of individual cases of this character in the several counties 
are hereinafter given. 

It is gratifying to be able to state that our charitable institutions 
afford ample shelter and care for every case of unfortunate depend- 
ence, and that the people are swift to relieve their every necessity. 
In view of the fapts just stated, however, should not the lines between 
voluntary pauperism and unavoidable dependence be more sharply 
defined ; and while we recognize the claims of helplessness, from any 
cause, to suitable protection and care, should not more stringent cor- 
rective measures be adopted as regards the idle and shiftless classes of 
community, who, in the end, are likely to become public depend- 
ents? This would seem to be demanded both from consideration of 
the welfare of society and in strict justice to those who are compelled 
to bear its burdens. 

CoNDmoN OF Ancestors and other near Relatives. 

In all the poor-houses were found, at the time of the examination, 
more or less inmates whose ancestors were paupers, and who had also, 
living or dead, other near pauper relatives. The fhformation upon this 
subject was obtained with considerable fullness in the rural coun- 
ties, where the history of pauper families was generally well known 
to the officers and others assisting in the examination. In the cities, 
however, but little could be learned bearing upon the subject. 

Of the whole number of persons examined it was ascertained that 
three hundred and ninety-seven (397) or nearly 3.15 per cent were 



16 

the offspring of pauper fathers, and one thonsand three liiindredaod 
»ixty-one (1,361) or 10.79 per cent of pauper mothera. The depea^ 
ence extended back to the third generation in fifty-five (55) eases oi 
the |)jitenial, and in ninety-two (92) cases on the maternal aide. One 
tlioutiand one hundred and twenty-two (1,122) had (living or dead) 
pauper brothers; nine hundred and fifty-one (951) pauper sisteis; 
one hundred and forty-three (143) pauper uncles, and one hundred 
and thirty-two (132) pauper aunts. The facts regarding this sub- 
ject, by counties, are given in schedule No. 14. 

Grouping of Families in Poob-houses. 

The nurnl)er of families represented by the persons examined was 
ten thousand one hundred and sixty-one (10,161). It will be thus 
seen tliat two thousand four hundred and fifty-three (2,453) of tbe 
paupers were grouped in families. The following facts were ascer- 
tained regarding these families : 

Tlie total number of persons in these families (three generations, 
living and dead), known to have been dependent upon public charity, 
was fourteen thousand nine hundred and one (14,901); the total num- 
ber of insane in the same families (living and dead), four thousand nine 
hundred and sixty -eight (4,968); the total number of idiots in the 
same families (living and dead), eight hundred and forty-four (844); 
and the total number of inebriates in the same fanAilies (living and 
dead), eight thousand eight hundred and sixty-three (8,863). 

Schedule No. 15 shows the facts upon these points, by counties. 

Condition of the Children of Poor-house Inmates. 

The number of heads of families in the poor-houses, at the time of 
the inquiry, consisting of one or both parents, was two thousand seven 
hundred and forty-six (2,746). These were said to have, in all, seven 
thousand and forty (7,040) living children. The condition of these 
children was stated to be as follows : In poor-houses, one thousand 
and ten (1,010) ; in asylums, one hundred and forty-nine (149) ; in 
hospitals, two (2) ; in refuges, twenty-nine (29) ; in prisons and peni- 
tentiaries, nine (9); bound out, three hundred and forty-six (346); 
self-supporting, four thousand five hundred and eighty-six (4,586) ; 
condition unascertained, nine hundred and nine (909). 

It is thus shown that one thousand five hundred and forty-five 
(1,545), or nearly twenty -two per cent of these children of poor-house 
parents, were also in the line of public dependents either as pauper 
or criminal, many of them, doubtless, to remain public burdens 
through life. There is good reason to believe that a considerable 



17 

portion of those whose condition could not be ascertained were also 

dependent. 

Schedule No. 16 classifies the facts obtained upon these points, by 

counties. 

Existing Cause of Dependenob. 

Owing to the length of time that a large portion of the persons 
examined had been inmates of poor-houses, it was found to be wholly 
impracticable, in most cases, to determine the remote or exciting 
cause of the pauperism. The immediate or existing cause of depend- 
ence, or the condition of the persons at the time of the investigation, 
was, therefore, inquired into, and the facts obtained were moted 
accordingly. The following is a statement of the condition in which 
the various persons were found when examined : 

Number. Per centage.- 

Homeless children (illegitimate) 312 2.47 

Homeless children (abandoned) 432 3 .42 

Homeless children (by death of father) 277 2 . 20 

Homeless children (by deatli of mother) 154 1 . 22 

Homeless children (by death of both parents) .... 107 . 85 

Homeless children (by pauperism of parents) 674 5 . 34 

Homeless children (by imprisonment of parents). . 74 .59 

Homeless women abandoned by husbands 204 1 . 62 

Homeless women by death of husbands 74 .59 

Old and destitute 2,081 16.50 

Permanently diseased 795 6.31 

Temporarily diseased 463 3 . 68 

Crippled 240 1.90 

Deformed 17 .13 

Blind 303 2.40 

Deaf mutes 29 > .23 

Insane .... 4,047 32.08 

Idiots 580 4.60 

Epileptics 268 2.12 

Paralytics 322 2.55 

Feebleminded 394 3.12 

Vagrant and idle 767 6.08 

Total 12,614 100. 



It appears from the foregoing statement that two thousand and 

thirty (2,030), or 16.09 per cent of the persons examined were, from 

various causes, homeless children, and that two liundred and seventy- 

2 



18 



• 



eight (278) were homeless women because of the abandonment or 
death of their husbands. The number of old and destitute peraont 
was two thousand and eighty-one (2,081) ; the number who were per- 
manently disabled seven hundred and ninety-five (795) ; temporarily 
disabled four hundred and sixty-three (463) ; the crippled and deformed 
numbered two hundred and fifty-seven (257) ; the blind three hundred 
and three (303) ; and the deaf and dumb twenty-nine (29). The num- 
ber suffering from special infirmities, as insanity, idiocy, epilepsy, 
paralysis and general feebleness of mind, was five thousand six hun- 
dred and eleven (5,6tl); the number of vagrant and idle, seven 
hundred and sixty-seven (767), 

At the time of the inquiry it thus appears that most of the inmates 
of the poor-houses had reached a condition of utter helplessness ; but 
the testimony shows that this helplessness, arising from disease, 
insanity, old age, etc., was induced largely by immoral and sensual 
habits, long indulged, or by habits of shif tlessness and idleness, which 
in many cases might have been arrested by early proper measures. 
Most of them had then passed the period in life in which to correct 
the evils resulting from such habits and indulgences, and the public, 
in consequence, is compelled to bear the burden of their support. 

The condition of the persons examined is shown, by counties, in 
schedule No. 17. 

FUTUBB OF THE InMATES OF PoOB-HOUSES. 

The inquiry was extended in all cases, so as to determine, as nearly 
as possible, the probable future of each of the inmates of the poor- 
houses. In arriving at conclusions in the matter, the character of 
the persons examined, their age, the length of time they had been 
dependent, and their mental and physical condition, were taken into 
consideration, and the opinions of the officers and others aiding in the 
inquiry were, in all cases, obtained. The following are the conclu- 
sions reached upon the subject : 

Number. Percentage. 

Permanently dependent 8 > 145 64 . 57 

Will probably recover 1 j 116 8 . 85 

May recover under proper training 1 ^ 379 1 . 93 

Future doubtful 1,974 15.65 

Total 12,614 100. 



Schedule No. 18 shows the probable future of the persons exam- 
ined, by counties. 



Id 



NOTES OF THE EXAMINATION. 



In the notes of the exaiuiDation following, will be found brief 
descriptions of the buildings in use for the poor in the several 
counties; the number of persons in each, at the time of the inquiry, 
their sex, age, nativity, etc.,' and also special mention of individual 
cases, representing the various classes of paupers in the respective 
localities. These facts appear by counties, alphabetically arranged. 

Albawt Ooumrr* 

The alms-house of Albany city and county consists of three brick 
buildings, having accommodations, in all, for two hundred and fifty 
persons. The insane asylum, also of brick, is situated on the grounds 
of the alms-house, and furnishes room for about fifty patients. The 
institution is under the control of the common council of the city of 
Albany, but i^eceives paupers from all the towns of the county. Two 
of the buildings are old, but the other has been erected only a few 
3'ears. They are, generally, in good repair, and arranged so as to 
allow a partial classification of the inmates. The institution is pleas- 
antly located in the city of Albany. 

At the time of the inquiry the institution contained two hundred 
and fifty-nine (259) pauper inmates, including seventy-five (75) insane. 
Of these one hundred and forty-three (143) were males, and one hun- 
dred and sixteen (116) females. Two hundred and fifty were white, 
and nine colored. Ninety-two were natives of New York, four of 
other States of the Union, two of Canada, and one hundred and fifty- 
eight were foreign born. The birthplaces of three could not be 
ascertained. The parents of two hundred and twenty-seven on the 
paternal, and two hundred and thirty-one on the maternal side, were 
of foreign birth. Fifty-one were under sixteen years of age; one 
hundred and twenty-two between the ages of sixteen and fifty ; and 
eighty-six were over fifty years old. Fifty-six had been inmates less 
than one year ; one hundred and thirty-four one year and less than 
five years; sixty-six five years and less than twenty ; and three over 
twenty years. The time spent by all the inmates in the alms-house, 
summed up at the time of examination, amounted to nine hundred 
and seventy-four years, or an average, to each person, of 3.76 years. 

But few of the inmates presented evidences of intelligence or former 
respectability. A considerable number of those in middle life were 



20 

only partially disabled, and twenty -five of them were classed as vag- 
rantB. Fifty-one of the men and twenty-six of the women were eon- 
firmed drunkards, and all the others of adult age, except sixteen, were 
said to have been addicted, more or less, to habits of inebriety. Fifty- 
three had received a fair education, while one hundred and forty-two, or 
over sixty-eight per cent of those of mature age, were unable to read. 

The number of families represented in the institution was two 
hundred and thirty-three. These families, as far as could be ascer- 
tained, had produced, in three generations, three hundred and seven- 
teen dependents, ninety-one insane, ten idiots, and two hundred and 
thirty-one inebriates. Five of the inmates were the offspring of 
pauper fathers, and thirty-three of pauper mothers. Twenty-five had 
pauper brothers, and nineteen pauper sisters. There were seventy- 
seven heads of families, consisting of one or both parents, in the insti- 
tution. These were said to have one hundred and fifty-five living 
children, of whom eighteen were in poor-houses, fourteen in asylums, 
five in refuges and twenty-seven bound out, thus making, in all, 
sixty-four, or over forty-one per cent, dependent. The number of 
such children said to be self-supporting was seventy-seven ; the con- 
dition of fourteen could not be ascertained. 

The following were some of the more remarkable family groups 
observed in the institution : A man and his wife, aged respectively 
forty-three and forty years, had with them two children, both boys, 
one aged fifteen and the other nineteen years ; all were said to be 
intemperate, and one of the boys had been an inmate of the peniten- 
tiary ; there were also two other children belonging to the family, 
one of whom, a son, was in State prison, and the other, a daughter, 
in the house of refuge; a widowed woman, with two illegitimate 
children, aged respectively three and five years ; the woman had led 
a dissolute life and was given to habits of periodical inebriety ; the 
children were intelligent, and it was said would probably soon be 
placed in an asylum ; a single woman, with an illegitimate child 
seven years old ; a widowed woman with a child five years of age; 
a married woman aged thirty-three, with four children, ranging in 
ages from one to seven years, abandoned by her husband ; a woman 
with three small children, the husband being in the penitentiary; a 
brotliei- and sister, aged respectively seven and five years, the mother 
dead, and the father intemperate ; two young children, brothers, 
abandoned by their father ; two other young children deserted by 
their father, their mother being in the insane asylum ; a sister and 
brother, who have other sisters and brothers supported by outside relief. 



21 

also abandoned by their father ; two brothers, both feeble minded, the 
father of whom died intemperate, abandoned by their mother ; and a 
married woman, heretofore in jail for vagrancy and drunkenness, now 
insane, having a child with her four years old, an idiot and blind, the 
father being aged and feeble minded, and formerly an inmate. 

The institution contained a considerable number of persons who 
had long led vagrant lives, and others in whom dependence was 
doubtless induced by the debasing influence of pauper and criminal 
associations. The following, among others, were cases of this class: 
A single woman, forty years old, of foreign birth, and nine years in 
the United States, the mother of seven illegitimate children, only 
one being alive, and this cared for in aq asylum ; tlie woman degraded 
and debased, and soon again to become a mother ; a widowed woman 
sixty-four years old, had two sons in the penitentiary ; the woman 
and her sons, as well as other members of the family, said to bo 
grossly intemperate; a colored child, illegitimate, deserted by its 
mother; a boy four years old, father dead, mother in the asylum; 
both said to have been intemperate; a man aged fifty years, intem- 
perate, and formerly in the penitentiary; a woman forty-four years 
old, feeble minded and intemperate, the mother being insane ; an 
illegitimate girl aged fifteen years, born in the poor-house, mother 
intemperate and a pauper ; a boy nineteen years old, epileptic, both 
parents drunkards ; and an idiot boy aged nineteen years, the parents 
intemperate and paupers. 

The probable future of the inmates of this institution may be 
stated as follows : Permanently dependent, one hundred and eighty- 
seven ; will probably recover, twelve ; may recover if proper agencies 
are employed, twenty-two ; future doubtful, thirty-eight. 

The provision for the care of the chronic insane of this county 
is wholly inadequate to that purpose. The building is small, and 
at all times over crowded. The authorities began the transfer of this 
class to the Willard asylum upon its opening in 1869. The number 
of chronic insane in the alms-house asylum was seventy-five ; in the 
Willard asylum, one hundred and twenty-two; total supported by 
the county, one hundred and ninety -seven. 

An arrangement exists in tlie county by which dependent children 
are placed in appropriate asylums. A large portion of those now in 
the alms-house are too young, or diseased, so as to preclude their 
admission to these institutions. The city and county contribute 
moderately toward the maintenance and care of the children while in 
the various asylums. 



22 

Alleoant Couhty. 

The poor-Iioiifie of this county is situated near Angelica. It is aa 
old building, with sniall rooms badly ventilated, and untnited for 
classification. The sexes are separated at night, but during the day 
the association is necessarily indiscriminate. The institntioQ baa do 
adequate accommodations for tiie chronic insane, and this class are 
mainly sent to the appropriate State asylum. 

The inquiry showed sixty-three (63) inmates, twenty-eight (28) 
males and thirty-five (35) females. Seven of these were under aizteen 
years of age ; the others were mostly in advanced life, twenty-seven 
being over sixty, of whom six had passed the age of eighty years. 
Fifty-four were natives, thirty-seven of whom were born in New 
York. The parentage of the parents of the inmates was also largely 
native. Nearly one-fonrth of those of adult age had been confirmed 
drunkards tH5fore admission, and many of the others were said to have 
iMitiU given^ more or less, to habits of inebriety. They were generally 
igfi'/rafit, twenty of those of adult age, or nearly thirty-two per cent, 
b^iny HuMts ti> roa^i, and only ten had received a fair education. 

Thi« iitmuty d<MM not Hutfer to any great extent from transient or 
iraii>|/ioj^ |/au|>4;r», the inmates of the house belonging generally to 
iU4$ i^lMtm i4 HiLi^^l dLi\Miu*UinU, The number of families repi*e8ented in 
tUM MMfiUtivii wuM tifly^ix. These families had produced, as tar as 
ouid ^ j4#arii¥<J, oiAAj hun<liXMl and two public dependents, in three 
^«;£i«$rativni> ; twenty bix intuinti; seven idiots, and fifty-five habitual 
4runkar<l«' Thi; prt^Miut inujatcM hiul, in the aggregate, been aup- 
lH^4'Us4 i/y t^iA; i'A^k^uiy live Uuminal and fitly-two years, or an average 
iA ^.W >i»a** tor iau'h j>oiv>n. Four wore descendants of pauper 
liitlu'i>; riiiiiuiui vf pi^N{>itr ni<>thors ; and, in two instances, the 
pMUj^iinhUi WM tiagc^i Wi U) lUn third gunomtion. Thirteen were 
pHi4*nt* liiiviiig thiit.^ rtiA living i'lii|«lrttu. Of those five were in poor- 
WuMi^, liiA l><>uud out iuuj thrcu in MH^hnns; the others were said 

tv U* toi'lf »»uj>i><ii'tinf(. 

A vi^ojoufr *»>*Uiii* ot i^liuiiig i;ui <thil(lren now exists in this 
<>.^uht^, iiud ii^ io.oiili0 MX' upj>aicJM in a utoady decrease in the 
uumUrut i>iiiHHj> 'J'li4- o;uiii> »iil| friilfurn to tnmsiderable extent, 
Uvwi-vci, fioni Uic i>»Hoiuo o( ioiuiiiing uhi|i|run in the poor-house 
iii tvniuir yi;iti>, ftt^vc^il ni i.in ^m-^m iiHimlon having been in the 
iu4*tiuuii>n in iiImUHm/.m! TIu- at'ui \,ii\u^ pluood in families, in 
iiuiii rotiinujti, an*i If^w i.iin, .Miii.mu.l ii^ l^j piiUlio buixiens. 

'yiic t'ollwyvin^ vvi« iuin. .,1 II,. i.u„ili.i» ^t.mi|hu1 in the inatitn- 



■Wrt 



leaiie and a pauper; two men with their wives; and ihreo wonien, 
each having a child. One of these women, seventeen ^eara old, was 
in the poor-house in early lile, her mother being then a pauper 
iinate. Alter remaining eome time in the institution she was pro- 
ied for in a family, but returned before sixteen years old, to give 
■th to an illegitimate child, and it is ,quite probable that she will 
lereafter continue to be a pnhlie charge. The child, being in the 
third generation of a family of panpers, gives but little hope of 
becoming selt-snp porting, unless early removed from poo^house 
influences and placed ujider proper supervision. 

The future of the iumatea of this institution, may be summed up 
as follows: Fifty-five will pi-obably remain dependent through life; 
three will-, doubtless, go out and become self-supporting; and the 
future of five is uncertain. A portion of the latter are ciiildren, 
Tlieso, if early removed and suitably provided for, may be educated 
to asefulness. 

As before stated, the building of this county has long been in use, 
and it will soon need to be replaced by a new and better designed 
structure. 

Bboouj: Codntt. 

The Broome county poor-houee, recently built, is pleasantly situated 
iiboat three miles from the city of Binghamton. The plan of the 
edifice comprises a centre building and two lateral wings. The 
intre and right wing are completed, and it is said that the left wing 
ill soon be erected. The building is constructed of brick, is three 
iries in height, and when finished according to the plan adopted, 
ill aiccommodate two hundred inmates. It is plain and substantial, 
id propei'ly designed for its purposes. 

At the time of the examination the iiistitutiou contained forty-four 

:) male and thirty-four (34) female pauper inmates, making a total 

seventy-«ight (78). Four of these were under sixteen years, three 

whom were infants. Twenty-eight were between the ages of 

sixteen and fifty ; forty-one between fifty and eighty ; and five wer« 

over eighty years old. Fifty were natives of New York, thirteen of 

other United States, and fitteen were of foreign birth. 

The evils incident to the rearing of children in the association of 
adult paupers received an effectual check in this county in 1868, by 
the removal of the children then in the county poor-house to the 
Susquehanna Valley Kome, at Binghamton. Since then all the 
dependent children of the county have, from time to time, been sent 
that institution, and the expenses met by annual appropriations bj 



24 

the board of supervisors. The chronic insane are generally pro- 
vided for at the State asylum at Ovid, thus leaving only the aged, 
fiick and infirm under county care. 

The county is still burdened, however, with supporting a consid- 
erable number of persons who, in early life, were inmates of the 
poor-house. Many of these, after a stay of a few yeai-s, were placed 
in family homes, but failed to retain their places and returned to the 
institution. Of those present four were the offspring of pauper 
fathers, and eleven of pauper mothers. One had a pauper grandfather, 
a-nd two, pauper grandmothers. There was also considerable group- 
ing of brothers and sisters, and other near relatives in the older 
inmates of the institution. Among these the following may be 
noted : 

A man and his wife, aged respectiv(?ly fifty-two and fifty years, 
with their daughter, twenty-two years old, constituted one family 
group. The parents had been inmates of the house only a short time, 
but it was stated that they and the entire family, consisting of five 
children, had been largely aided outside for a number of years. The 
daughter was sent to the poor-house when a child, the father being 
then in the penitentiary. She remained in the institution about six 
months, was then placed back in the family, but soon returned, and 
has spent most of her time since then in this and other poor-houses. 
She married at nineteen but soon separated from her husband, The 
brief time spent by this woman in the poor-house, when a child, 
seems to have broken down all self-respect, and she will, probably, 
remain hereafter a public charge. It will be fortunate if society is 
not also burdened with the support and care of her ofl*spring who 
may be born in misfortune. 

Another family group was composed of a widowed woman aged 
seventy-five, a married daughter aged forty-three, abandoned by her 
tusband, and a granddaughter, unmarried, aged eighteen years. The 
first of these had been an inmate five, and the two latter each six 
years. They had all been aided outside several years before admis- 
sion to the institution. All were intemperate, and it was stated that 
other members of the family were addicted to habits of inebriety. 

A man aged eighty-four, and his wife, seventy years old, had been 
inmates only a few months. Each had been twice married. The 
former had eight, and the latter three living children, all said to be 
self-supporting. It would seem that the parents of so many children 
able to provide for themselves should have been spared the degrada- 
tion of becoming public dependents in their declining years. 



25 

An aged man and his wife, both of whom were insane, had been 
in the institution nearly six years. They were very quiet, and it was 
stated required no special supervision. It was learned that they have 
two children who are self-supporting, but without the ability to pro- 
vide suitably for their parents in their infirmity. 

Two young, unmarried women, each the mother of an illegitimate 
child, were also inmates. One of these women, twenty-one years 
old, was sent to the house, when a child, with her mother and three 
sisters. She was afterwards placed in a family, but failed to retain 
her place, and subsequently was committed to the penitentiary. A 
few months since she returned to the house where she gave birth to 
her child. She appeared to be thoroughly debased, and will, proba- 
bly, continue a public burden. The other woman had been an inmate 
.nearly a year, and was employed in the kitchen. It is the intention 
to remove both of the children when they arrive at the age of two 
years. 

The inmates of the house, at the time of the examination, repre- 
sented sixty-nine families. These families, in three generations, had 
produced, so far as could be ascertained, the following: Public 
dependents, one hundred and eighteen ; insane, thirteen ; idiots, 
fifteen ; inebriates, ninety-seven. Twenty-one of those present were 
parents, having, in all, forty-seven living children. The condition of 
these was said to be as follows : In poor-houses, eight ; bound out, 
four; self-supporting, thirty-three; condition unascertained, two. 

The following is the probable future of the inmates of this institu- 
tion : Permanently dependent, sixty-nine ; may recover under proper 
influences, seven; future doubtful, two. At the time of the inquiry 
the inmates had been supported at the public expense, in the aggre- 
gate seven hundred years, or an average to each person of 8.97 

years. 

Cattaraugus County. 

The Cattaraugus county poor-house, erected in 1868, is pleasantly 
located near Machias. It is a plain, three-story, stone edifice, warmed 
by furnaces, well ventilated, and fully supplied with water brought 
by pipes from enduring springs. There are also several out-buildings 
occupied by the paupers, the entire institution furnishing accommo- 
dations for about one hundred and fifty persons. 

Upon the occasion of the inquiry the institution contained ninety- 
one (91) pauper inmates, including thirty-five (35) chronic insane, of 
whom fifty (50) were males and forty-one (41) females. Twenty-eight 
were foreign born ; fifty were born in New York, and six in other 



2e 

States of the Union. Tlie biilhplaces of seven could not be Mce^ 
tained. Five wece under sixteen yearg of age ; forty-one betweoi 
sixteen and fifty ; thirty-six between fifty and eighty ; and nin^ 
were over eigiity years old. The large proportion of aged persons, 
as it thus appears, was a noticeable feature in the character of the 
inmates, most of whom were infirm and helpless. 

Tiie ages of the inmates, when received in the institution, show 
the proportion of those in early life to have been much smaller than 
the general average in the State. Eleven only were admitted under 
twenty-one years of age ; forty-eight when between the ages of twenty 
,and fifty ; twenty-eight when between fifty and eighty ; and four 
after they had passed the latter age. Forty-six had been inmates less 
than five years ; forty-three five years and less than thirty ; and two 
had been under care each over forty years. The time spent in the 
house, by all the inmates, when examined, aggregated six hundred 
and six years, or an average to each person of 6.66 years. 

Of the seventy-seven adult persons in the institution, eight men 
and twenty-two women claimed to be totally abstinent ; twenty-nine 
of the men and ten of the women were intemperate ; and nineteen 
were said to be habitual drunkards. The proportion of intemperate 
in the parents of the inmates, as far as ascertained, was quite small. 
The educational attainments of the inmates were as follows : Forty- 
eight of those of mature age had received fair common school instruc- 
tion ; three could read and write ; four could read only ; and twenty- 
two were witliout any education. 

Tlie number of families represented by the inmates of the institu- 
tion was eighty-three. These families, in three generations, as far as 
could be learned, had produced, in all, one hundred and seven 
dependents ; fifty-eight insane persons ; nine idiots ; and fifty-one 
inebriates. Six of the inmates had pauper mothers, and two pauper 
fathers ; while the pauperism could be traced to the third generation 
only in a single instance. Twenty-four were parents having fifty- 
three living children. Of these four were in poor-houses ; seventeen 
bound out ; thirty self-supporting, and the condition of two was in 
doubt. 

An efilcient plan of placing out children exists in this county, and 
as a result only eight of the inmates were found grouped in families, 
as follows: A man and his wife, aged respectively sixty-five and 
sixty-seven yeai's, both intemperate but said to be useful in the insti- 
tution ; two sisters, unmarried and both insane; a woman with two 
young children, abandoned by her husband ; and a widowed woman 



27 

with two illegitimate children, both bom iu the poor-bouse. Two of 
the children were soon to be placed in families, and the others on 
an'iving at proper age. 

The insane women occupy the upper storj of the main building. 
The rooms are comfortable and have the conveniences to secure clean- 
lineFS. The insane men are mostly provided for in the detached 
buildings. The county has but two clironic insane at the State insti- 
tution. The facts regarding some of the idiots, insane and those 
suffering with other forms of disease, inquired into and debigned to 
show the probable causes of the infirmities, are hei*e given. An in- 
sane woman thirty-seven years old, mother and one brother also insane ; 
an idiot, female, twenty-six years of age, near consanguinity in the 
parents and the mother a pauper ; an insane woman, aged thirty- 
eight, her father grossly intemperate, no other insanity in the family ; 
an insane man seventy -four yeai-s old, has a brother feebleminded, 
and a daughter insane ; an educated man aged sixty-six, insane nine- 
teen years, said to have been very studious, but at times intem- 
perate; an insane man sixty-four years old; one brother, insane; 
parents first cousins; a man aged forty two, insane fifteen years; 
a sister also insane, parents said to be feeble-minded ; a married man 
fifty-three years old, suffering with chorea ; mother and grandfather 
thus diseased, and has a son and daughter so affected; a feeble- 
minded woman, aged forty years, of incestuous parents ; has an ille* 
gitimate child born in the poor-hou^e, said to be intelligent ; and an 
idiot boy fifteen years old, father weak-minded and intemperate. 

Other cases are here noted, showing the various phases of pau- 
perism in the county, and tending to throw light upon its aourcet. 
A man aged seventy-two, a widower, nineteen years an inmate, a 
good mechanic, but very intemperate ; a woman fifty years old, said 
to have led a dissolute life, now sick and enfeebled ; has had four hus- 
bands, the whei*eabouts of none of whom are known ; an aged woman, 
twelve years an inmate and apparently respectable ; twice married, 
both husbands drunkards; lias two children of whom she has no 
knowleilge ; a man eighty-four years old, four years in the house, 
grossly intemperate, and had a dissolute daughter who died in the insti- 
tution ; and a woman aged fifty-three years, of foreign birth, un- 
known in the county, and admitted on account of temporary disease. 

The probable future of the inmates of this institution may be 
summed up as follows : Eiglity-three will doubtless remain dependent 
through life; two will probably go out and provide for themselves ; 



28 

one may be made self-supporting if properly trained, and the future 

of five is in doubt. 

Cayuga County. 

The poor-house of Cayuga county is located in the town of Sennett, 
about three miles from Auburn. It is a substantial brick edifice, in 
good repair, and meets appropriately the object to which it is applied. 
The grounds are well laid out and planted, and the place has an air 
of great neatness and comfort. The institution will accommodate 
about one hundred and fifty persons. 

The house contained eighty-four (84) pauper inmates at the time 
of the examination, of whom twenty-two (22) were chronic insane. 
Tiie number of males was forty-seven (47); females thirty-seven (37). 
Forty-one were natives of New York ; ten of other States of the 
LTnion ; thirty-two were foreign born, and the nativity of one was 
unknown. The parentage of the inmates, as far as ascertained, was 
about equally native and foreign. 

All of the inmates, except five, were over sixteen years old, and 
these were under two years. The number between the age of sixteen 
and fifty was twenty-one ; between fifty and eighty,, fifty-four ; over 
eighty years, four. The proportion of aged, it will be thus seen, was 
unusually large, and only tliree were observed who could properly be 
classed as vagrants. Five became dependent at birth ; forty-three 
when between the ages of ten and fifty ; twenty-seven when between 
fifty and seventy ; and nine after they were seventy years old. 
Nineteen had been in the house less than one year ; forty-two one 
year and less than ten years ; twenty-one ten years and less than 
forty ; and two more than forty years. The whole time spent in the 
poor-house by all the inmates, at the time of the inquiry, footed up 
six hundred and twenty-seven years, or an average each of 7.46 
years. 

This county was among the first to avail itself of the accommoda- 
tions, by the State, for the chronic insane. There were forty of this 
class in the poor-house at the opening of the Willard asylum in 1869, 
At the time of the examination it contained twenty-eight, and the 
Willard asylum was providing for thirty-nine, thus making sixty- 
seven chronic insane in all, being then supported at the expense of 
the county. Those in the county institution were generally cases of 
long standing, and but little could be learned regarding their early 
life. The accommodations provided for them are quite comfortable, 
and they appeared to receive such attention and care as their condi- 
tion seemed to require. 



29 

The orplian and destitute children of this county, for a number of 
years, hare been provided for in the Cayuga Asylum for Destitute: 
Children, at Auburn. Tlie effect of this system has been generally 
to deter persons with children from breaking up their families and 
entering the poor-house. As a result the county is remarkably 
exempt from that species of pauperism running through successive 
generations, as is the case in many localities. The inmates, at the 
tiiTie of the examination, represented eighty-two. families, the only 
instance of family grouping being in the case of a young unmarried 
girl with two illegitimate children. The number of dependents in 
three generations of these families footed up one hundred and one ; 
the number of insane twenty-four ; the number of idiots sixteen ; 
and the number of inebriates forty-seven. Only two of those under 
care had pauper fathers, and but six pauper mothers. In no instance 
could the pauperism be traced to the third generation. 

Twenty-one of the inmates were parents, said to have fifty-five 
living children, situated in life as follows : In poor-houses, four; in 
asylums, four ; bound out, seventeen ; self-supporting, thirty-five ; 
condition unknown, ten. Twenty-seven of the adult inmates had 
received a common school education ; four could read only ; eight 
could read and write, and thirty-two were without any education 
whatever. Fifteen were said to be strictly temperate ; thirty-two 
confessed habits of inebriety ; while in twenty-four cases nothing could 
be learned as regards their habits. 

The following cases of those examined are noted, as showing to 
some extent, the sources of pauperism in the county : A man sixty- 
eight years old, discharged several times since first admitted and always 
returning intoxicated ; could be provided for by children were he not 
intemperate; a girl twenty-one years old, neglected in childhood, 
now a vagrant; an insane man aged seventy-three, admitted at fifty- 
nine and has never been at the State asylum ; a man twenty-seven 
years old, idiotic, father intemperate; an idiot, male, aged fifty, 
provided for by mother until thirty-three years old, when she was 
compelled from age and lack of means to relinquish his care ; a njan 
twenty-nine years old, an idiot, six years in the house ; father, 
mother and brothers and sisters formerly paupers, and parents intem- 
perate ; a woman aged sixty, admitted eleven years ago with her hus- 
band, who was intemperate and is now dead ; and a single man thirty- 
six years old, committed to State prison for burglary, became insane, 
and was sent to the poor-house^ is probably incurable, and wholly 
dependent. 



90 

It it prolMble thai seventy-five of the inmatee of thia honae will 
burden tins public through life ; three will doubtless go ont and provide 
for themselvei»; five may become selfHsupporting nnder proper man- 
agement ; and the future of one is doubtfoL 

Chautauqua County. 

The Chautauqua county poor-house, erected in 1869, is pleasantly 
located oil the nortiiorly shore of Chautauqua lake, near Majville. 
It is a well constructed, convenient, three-story brick strnctare and 
will accommodate and properly classify two hundred and Hfty inmates. 
The edifice presents a fine appearance externally, and the iuaide is well 
and appropriately furnished. The grounds are under-drained, graded 
and finely laid out and planted, and the institution thronghont has 
an air of great neatness and comfort. 

The number of pau[)er inmates when the exfimination was made 
was one hundred and sixty-one (161), of whom eighty-eight (88) were 
males and seventy-three (73) females. Of these, seven were under 
sixttien years of age; twenty-four were between sixteen and thirty; 
fifty-nix, iHJtwccn thirty and fifty ; sixty-three, between fifty and 
eighty, and eleven were over eighty years old. The proportion of 
aged was quite large, and nearly all were of the helpless and infirm 
classes. Fifty-four were admitted before reaching the age of thirty 
years ; seventy-six when between the ages of thirty and sixty ; twenty- 
seven when between sixty and eighty, and four after they had passed 
the age of eighty years. Twenty -four had been inmates less than one 
year; one hundred and one, over one year and less than ten years; 
thirty-three, ten years and less than thirty, and three over thirty 
years. When examined, the entire time spent in the institution, by 
all the inmates, aggregated one thousand and nineteen years, an 
average of 6.83 years to each person. 

The birthplaces of the inmates were as follows : New York, eighty- 
four; other States of the Union, thirty-five; Canada, two; foreign 
countries, thirty-seven ; unascertained, three. The birthplaces of the 
parents, as nearly as could be learned, was divided about equally 
between the United States and foreign countries. A better intelli- 
gence was found to exist among the inmates of this house than gen- 
erally in institutions of like character. Eighty-three of those of 
adult age, or nearly fifty-five per cent, were said to have had the 
benefits of a common school education ; six of the others could read 
and write ; seventeen could read only ; while the residue were 
entirely ignorant. Of the men, nineteen claimed to be wholly absti- 



31 

neut ; fifty eight admitted being intemperate ; and the habits of four 
oould not be satisfactorily learned. Of the women, twelve were 
classed as inebriates; forty-seven as entirely temperate; and the 
habits of eleven could not be ascertained. The proportion of the 
parents of the inmates said to be temperate was unusually large. 

The persons under care iu this house represented one hundred and 
fifty families. The number of dependents in these families, in three 
generations, living and dead, summed up two hundred and thirteen ; 
the number of insane ninety-eight ; the number of idiots seven ; the 
number of inebriates one hundred and five. The pauperism was 
traced to the third generation only once on the maternal and twice 
on the paternal side. Seven had pauper fathers, and nine pauper 
mothers. There were thirtv-seven heads of families in the insti- 

m 

tution having eighty-one living children, said to be situated in 
life as follows : In poor-houses five ; in asylums one ; in refuges 
one; bound out nineteen; supporting themselves forty-nine; condi- 
tion unknown six. Well directed efibrts have been made by the 
proper officers of this county, for a number of years, to provide for 
its dependent children outside of the poor-house. A few are sent to 
the Saint Mary's Orphan Asylum at Dunkirk, but by far the greatest 
portion are placed directly in families. The results are shown in the 
small number of children among the paupers who are in the line of 
public dependents. 

The only grouping of families in the institution, at the time of the 
examination, was as follows : A man and his wife, the former aged 
thirty-nine and the latter thirty-seven years, with three children and 
a grandchild, the parents said to be useful and the children intelli- 
gent ; two brothers and a sister, aged respectively twenty-two, nine- 
teen and sixteen years, all feeble minded ; the parents feeble minded, 
and also five other of their children ; a man aged sixty-two years, 
and his wife aged sixty-three years ; have both been inmates of the 
house fourteen years, before which time they spent several years in 
otlier poor-houses, reputed to have two children, but their condition 
unknown ; the man intelligent but intemperate, vile, and thoroughly 
debased ; the woman feeble minded ; a widowed woman aged thirty- 
six years, with two children, the youngest illegitimate ; and a debased 
and degraded woman with an illegitimate child, deserted by her 
husband. 

The general character of the inmates of this institution, and some 
of the causes operating to produce pauperism in the connty, are 
shown by the following cases taken from the notes of inspection : A 



32 

respectable man eighty years old, once wealthy but lost his property,' 
deserted by his children ; a weak minded man, entered the poor- 
house when fourteen years of age, now fifty-one years old ; a man 
eighty-nine years old, very intemperate, seventeen years an inmate ; 
a single woman forty-five years old, intemperate and paralyzed; 
father said to have been an inebriate and mother addicted to opium 
eating ; a feeble minded woman aged thirty-nine years, came to the 
poor-house twenty-two years ago with an illegitimate child, since 
married; husband probably in some other poor-house; an idiot, 
male, aged twenty-nine years, admitted when eight years old; grand- 
father pauper, father drunkard, and other members of the family 
paupers ; a man eighty-four years old, thirty-seven years an inmate,' 
apparently respectable, and said to be temperate ; another man, aged 
eighty-nine, temperate and seemingly well preserved ; was recently 
admitted and has no near relatives ; a man seventy-one years old, 
intemperate, seven years in this and two years in other poor-houses, 
said to have a family in Canada; a soldier of the war of 1812, and a 
British soldier, both aged ; the former pensioned but refuses to reside 
with his family, the latter friendless ; a feeble minded woman, aged 
fifty years, seven years an inmate ; two of her grandparents and also 
several other members of the family, paupers ; a woman aged thirty- 
two, admitted to the house when twelve years old, with father, 
mother, two brothers and an infant sister; was afterwards placed 
out but returned, gave birth to an illegitimate child, and subsequently 
married a pauper ; a vagrant woman, very intemperate, aged forty- 
two years and married, husband blind and probably in some other . 
poor-house; another woman of the same class, also intemperate, 
several years an inmate of the poor-houses of this and other States, 
and known to have been once in jail for drunkenness ; and a woman 
fifty-five years old, admitted when twenty-two as a vagrant ; said to 
have been married but the condition of her husband is unknown ; 
has been discharged from the house and returned repeatedly for the 
past thirty-five years, during which time she has had six illegitimate 
children. 

Included in the number of paupers examined were sixty-eight (68) 
chronic insane, thirty (30) men and thirty-eight (38) women. These; 
occupy a separate building and are under the charge of attendants 
employed for the purpose. The accommodations, while somewhat 
crowded for the past year or two, have been recently extended and 
improved. As yet the county has not transferred any of this class 
of insane to State custody. 



83 

The following cases, selected from the notes of inspection regard* 
ing the insane, idiots, paralytics, epileptics, etc., show the general 
character of these classes in the county, and also famishes considera- 
ble data as to the sources of these infirmities : A man aged fifty-two 
years, inteUigent bat grossly intemperate, partially paralyzed from 
exposure while intoxicated, sixteen years a pauper, and once in jail ; 
a single man twenty-eight years old, insane and mother also insane ; 
an epileptic, single man, twenty-six years old, has near relatives also 
insane ; a woman aged sixty-one, the mother of ten children, insane 
twenty years; no other insanity known in the family ; a single woman 
thirty-two years old, insane nine years, has had a brother and two 
sisters insane ; a Oerman woman aged thirty-three years, said to have 
been sent to this country by friends soon after giving birth to an ille- 
gitimate child ; has been ten years a pauper inmate, now insane ; is 
married and has two living children, but has no knowledge at present 
regarding the whereabouts of her husband; an epileptic girl in her 
twentieth year,, four years an inmate, grandmother said to have been 
insane, but no insanity in others of her family ; a married woman 
aged thirty-five years, bom in Sweden and only three years in the 
country ; admitted at the age of thirty-four, insane, with five children 
all said to have been bom within eight years; the husband does 
nothing toward her support, the children provided for in homes ; an 
idiotic woman forty-five years old, nine years an inmate ; had a brother 
weak' minded, and has a niece idiotic and a pauper inmate ; no record 
as to her parents ; and a man aged sixty-seven, twelve years insane, 
very intemperate; fitther also intemperate, and has an inebriate 
brother once an inmate. 

One hundred and forty-six of the inmates of this bouse were 
r^^rded as fixed dependents; two seemed likely to go out and 
maintain themsdves ; three had capacity to become self-supporting if 
properly trained ; and the condition of ten was such as to involve 
their future in doubt 

Cheicuxo Couxtt. 

The poor-honse of this county is situated near Breesport. It is a 
wooden stmctore in fair repair and comfortably fumished. The in- 
stitution will accommodate about seventy persons. 

When the examination was conducted the Jiouse contained thirty- 
six (36) inmates, twenty (20) males and sixteen (16) females. Twenty- 
one of these were natives of New York, nine of other States of the 

Union, and six were foreign bora. All except one had passed the 

3 



34 

age of sizteeu years. Eighteen were between the ages of aixteraaod 
fifty years ; six between fifty and seventy, and eleven were Ofer 
seventy years old. One was born in the poor-hoose; twenty-ooe 
became dependent before arriving at the age of fifty yean ; eleven 
when between the ages of fifty and eighty, and three atler they were 
eighty years old. Seven had been inmates less than one year; eigh- 
teen, one year and less than ten years, and eleven over ten years. 
The nnmbor of families represented in the institntion was thirty- 
three. The aggregate duration of life spent by the inmates in the 
poor-house, when examined, was two hundred and twentj-five yean, 
equivalent to an average of 6.25 years to each person. 

This county has had a thorough system of placing children in 
families for a number of years, and for the past ten years cousidSra- 
ble numbers have been provided for in the Southern Tier Orphan 
Asylum, at Elmira. As a result of such action, there is, at preseut, 
but little grouping of families in the poor-house, and the number of 
fixed dependents in the county is, each year, steadily decreasing. 
Only two of the inmates had pauper parents, and the dependence 
extended back to the third generation in but a single instance. The 
whole number of dependents belonging to the families represented in 
the institution, in three generations,' living and dead, was forty-ooe; 
idiots, nine; inebriates, eleven. Two of the inmates were parents 
having three living children. Of these two were in poor-houses, and 
one was said to be self-supporting. The chronic insane of this county 
are provided for mainly at the State asylum for this class. 

It is quite certain that thirty-two of the inmates of this house will 
continue dependent the remainder of their lives; one will probably 
go out and become self-supporting ; two may be trained to provide for 
themselves if soon removed and placed under proper influences; and 
the future of one is regarded as uncertain. 

Chenango County. 

This county has made very good provision for its dependent classes. 
The poor-house is a commodious frame building, in good repair and 
properly designed for its uses. A comfortable building near by is 
used for the chronic insane, most of this class being retained under 
county care. The institution is pleasantly situated near Preston, 
about six miles from Norwich. It will accommodate one hundred 
and twenty-five inmates, exclusive of the insane. 

The number of persons under care at the time of the examination, 
including twenty-two (22) chronic insane, was eighty-five (85), of 



35 

whom thirty-nine (39) were males and forty-six (46) females. Fonr 
of these were colored. Sixty-one, or nearly seventy-two per cent 
were born in New York ; ten in other United States and eight in 
. foreign countries. In six cases the places of birth could not be deter- 
mined. The birth of the parents was also mostly native, a considera- 
ble portion being of the Kew England States. There were only eight 
inmates of the house under sixteen years of age, two of these being 
infants. Twenty-four were between the ages of sixteen and forty 
years; twenty-five between the ages of forty and sixty; twenty-three 
between sixty and eighty, and five had passed eighty years of age. 
Four became dependent at birth ; sixteen before they had reached 
the age of twenty years ; thirty-seven when between the ages of 
twenty and fifty ; twenty when between the ages of fifty and seventy, 
and eight after they were seventy years old. Eleven had been in the 
house less than one year ; twenty-one, over one year and less than 
five years ; forty-nine, five years and less than twenty ; three, twenty 
years and less than forty, and one more than forty years. The sum^ 
miqg up showed that the average time spent in the institution by the 
then inmates, was 7.02 years, or an aggregate of five hundred and 
ninety-seven years. 

The inmates of this institution, upon the whole, were above the 
average of this class of persons in intelligence and apparent respecta- 
bility. Thirty-two of those of adult age were educated in common 
schools ; five of the others had learned to read and write ; ten 
could read only, and eighteen were without any education. Five of 
the men and twenty-one of the women claimed to bo strictly temperate, 
while nineteen of the former and two of the latter were said to have 
habits of inebriety. The habits of two of the men and sixteen of 
the women could not be ascertained. But little could be learned 
regarding the habits of the parents of the inmates. As far as ascer- 
tained, however, the greater portion it was said were temperate. 

For the past seven years this county has provided for a portion of 
its dependent children in the Susquehanna Valley Home, at Bing- 
hamton, and for several years previously, and also at the present time, 
has an efScient plan of placing such children in families. The result 
is shown in the almost entire absence of any family grouping in its 
pauper class. Of those examined six were descendants of pauper 
mothers, and two of pauper fathers, but in nb instance did the pau- 
perism extend back to the third generation. The following were the 
only cases in which there were two or more inmates of the same 
family : A married woman aged twenty-seven, with an illegitimate 



86 

child, abandoned by her husband ; a single woman fifty-nine yean 
old, tainted with Indian blood, and an illegitiniate daughter, thirty* 
nine years old, insane, both aided outside several years before admia- 
sion ; a mother and her child, aged respectively fifty and seven years, 
abandoned by husband ; a woman aged forty-five years, deserted by 
her husband, ten years an inmate, and her feeble minded child, nine 
years old; has also one child at the State Idiot Asylum, and two 
said to be self-supporting ; and an insane woman, forty-three yean 
old, with an infant. 

In the families of the inmates examined, there were known to have 
been, in three generations, one hundred and five dependents ; thirty- 
two insane ; eighteen idiots, and thirty-seven inebriates. Twenty-two 
of the inmates were heads of families, having, as far as coald be as- 
certained, sixty-one living children. Of these, five were in poor- 
houses, six in asylums, and ten bound out; twenty-nine, it was said, 
were maintaining themselves ; the condition of eleven could not be 
learned. It is thought that seventy-five of the persons examined will 
hereafter remain paupers ; one probably will go out, and one may be 
so trained as to be self-supporting, while the future of eight is 
involved in doubt. 

The following facts obtained regarding a portion of the cases 
examined are here given, as showing the general character of the 
dependent persons of this county, and, at the same time, throwing light 
upon the sources of pauperism, disease and insanity : A man fifty- 
one years old, vagrant and idle, recently admitted; had a pauper 
sister ; a man aged twenty-one years, illegitimate and an idiot, 
thirteen years in the State Idiot Asylum ; mother licentious and 
dissolute ; a boy thirteen years old, with congenital deformity of the 
lower extremities ; is bright and intelligent but entirely helpless ; 
parents said to be temperate and respectable ; an idiot, male, aged 
thirty-six years, thirty years an inmate, and said to be illegitimate ; 
a girl aged sixteen years, born in the poor-house of an adjoining 
county ; committed to this house as a vagrant at the age of fourteen 
years ; offers but little hope of reformation ; a girl eighteen years 
old, was thrown into the fire when an infant, by her mother, who was 
at the time intoxicated, and then sent to the poor-house, where she 
has since remained ; is ba*dly deformed in the face and probably with- 
out remedy ; a woman aged thirty-four years and feeble minded ; 
had a pauper brother, but no information obtained as to her parentage ; 
a girl fourteen years old, remarkably intelligent, two months an 
inmate ; confirmed in habits of vagrancy and vice, and said to have 



37 

been neglected in early childhood ; father intemperate ; a man aged 
forty-eight years, unknown in the county, committed on account of 
sickness ; is believed to have been guilty of criminal practices, and 
probably has been in State prison ; an unmarried girl seventeen 
years old, fairly intelligent, recently admitted ; was orphaned at the 
age of twelve years, since which time she has been homeless and at 
service ; a woman, said to be one hundred and two years old, and 
twelve years an inmate ; parentage and habits of early life unascer- 
tained ; a single woman aged eighty-six years, of New England 
parentage, twelve years in the house ; is temperate, fairly intelligent 
and respectable, the last of her family generation, and a fair type of 
some twenty other inmates; an idiot boy thirteen years old, five 
years an inmate ; is filthy and beastly in his habits, and the father 
said to have been grossly intemperate ; a vagrant boy thirteen yeai-s 
old, admitted at the age of seven years, placed afterwards in an 
asylum but returned to the house ; an epileptic girl aged nineteen 
years, recently admitted, father intemperate; an insane woman fifty 
years old, once at the State asylum, and fourteen years an inmate of 
the house ; abandoned by her husband, and hopelessly incurable ; 
another insane woman, also fourteen years an inmate, after treatment 
at the State asylum, and likewise deserted by her husband ; and a 
widowed woman eight years insane, two years at the State asylum ; 
DO other insanity in her family. 

The helpless condition of the inmates of this house will be seen 
by the following statement of the conclusions arrived at during 
the examination, regarding their future : Seventy-five will hereafter, 
probably, remain paupers ; one seemed likely to go out, and one may 
probably be trained so as to become self-supporting. The future of 
the othera was considered doubtful. 

Clinton Countt. 

This county began the erection of a new poor-house in the spring 
of 1874, which was completed and occupied at the close of that year. 
It' is a substantial, well arranged brick edifice, situated near the site 
of the old house at Beekmantown, six miles from Plattsburg. It will 
accommodate about one hundred and twenty-five persons. 

At the time of the inquiry the paupers occupied the old building. 
The number then under care was fifty-two (^52), of whom thirty -seven 
(37) were males and fifteen (15) females. Three were under sixteen 
jears of age ; twenty-one between the ages of sixteen and forty ; 
twenty-three between forty and eighty ; and five were over eighty 

3 



38 

yeara old. Eleven became paupers before arriving at the age of 
twenty years ; twenty-two when between the ages of twenty and 
fifty; sixteen when between fifty and seventy; and three after they 
had pnsHod the age of seventy years. Ten had been inmates leea than 
one year ; seventeen, one year and less than five years ; thirteen, five 
years and Icps than ten ; nine, ten years and less than twenty; one 
over twenty ; one over thirty, and one over forty years. The sam 
of poor-house life of all the inmates amounted to three haodred and 
sixty-four years, or an average of seven years each. 

The nativity of the inmates was as follows: New York, nineteen; 
other United States, six; Canada, twelve; foreign born, fifteen. Of 
the adult intelligent inmates nineteen were wholly uneducated; fonr 
could read only ; one had learned to read and write ; and ten had 
received common school instruction. Four of the men and eight of 
the women were said to be strictly temperate; and seventeen of the 
former and one of the latter admitted having had habits of inebriety. 
The habits of four could not be ascertained, and but little was known 
as to the habits of the ancestors. Four had pauper fathers, and seven 
pauper mothers; and in one case the pauperism extended back to the 
third generation. There were fifteen heads of families in the house, 
embracing one or both parents, said to have thirty-two living children, 
bituated in life as follows: In poor-houses, seven; bound oat, two; 
providing for themselves, fourteen; condition unknown, nine. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was forty-seven. 
These families, so far as could be ascertained, had produced, in three 
generations, sixty-nine paupers, five insane, sixteen idiots, and thirty- 
six inebriates. The following cases, taken from the notes of the 
examination, show the general character of the inmates, and also 
tend to throw light upon the sources from which pauperism is derived 
in the county : 

A man, widower, eighty-five years old, grossly intemperate, and 
his daughter, aged twenty-two years and feeble minded ; the former 
an inmate twenty-five and the latter eighteen years ; an unmarried 
woman, aged twenty-seven years, and her illegitimate child five years 
old ; a man aged eighty-five years, with a son, feeble minded, forty- 
five years old, a daughter forty years of age, also feeble minded, and 
a grandson eleven years old, an idiot, born in the poor-house ; the 
first an inmate forty-five years, the second forty years, the third 
thirty-five years, and the fourth eleven years,' making an aggregate of 
one hundred and twenty-six years spent by them in the institution, 
or nearly thirty-five per cent of the time spent in the house by all of 



89 

its other inmates, and it was said that several other members of the 
family had also been paupers ; an unmarried man, sixty-four years 
old and feeble minded, and an insane sister, single, aged fiflty-three 
years ; a single woman, twenty-seven years old, crippled, and an ill^ 
gitimate child aged five years; a married woman, blind, abandoned 
by her liusband, the tnother being an inmate of the poor-house of 
an adjoining county ; an insane, married man, aged fifty-one yeai'S, 
had been in the State prison for homicide ; is violent and destructive, 
and at times dangerous ; and an idiot, female, twenty-four years old, 
father, mother and one brother paupers. 

In reference to the future of the inmates of this house, it is thought 
that forty-three will remain public dependents the balance of their 
lives ; one will probably go out and become self-supporting ; five 
may provide for tliemselves if removed and placed under good influ- 
ences, while the condition of thi*ee was such as to involve their future 
in doubt. 

Columbia County. 

The Columbia county poor-house is a three-story brick structure, 
situated at Ghent, about ten miles from Hudson city. The location 
is pleasant and the building comfortable, and in good preservation. 
It furnishes room for about one hundred and fifty persons. 

The institution, at the tinie of the inquiry, was giving shelter to 
one hundred and eighteen (118) pauper inmates, seven (7) of whom 
were colored. The number of males was seventy-three (73) ; the 
number of females, forty-five (45). Their nativity was as follows: 
New York, sixty -nine; other States of the Union, four; foreign 
born, forty-three ; birthplaces unknown, two. The parents of over 
one-lialf of them were said to be of native birth. All the inmates 
but four had passed the age of sixteen years ; thirty-two were between 
the ages of sixteen and forty ; thirty-three, between forty and sixty ; 
twenty-four, between sixty and seventy ; fifteen, between aeventy 
and eighty ; and ten were over eighty years old. The proportion of 
aged, it thus appears, was very large, forty-nine, or nearly forty-two 
per cent of the inmates, being over sixty years of age. Of those in 
middle life eighteen were classed as vagrants. The admissions occurred 
quite largely in advanced life, fifty-three having entered the institu- 
tion after they were fifty years old. Eighty had been inmates lesa 
than ten years; twenty-two, ten years and less than twenty; thirteen, 
twenty years and less than thirty ; two over thirty, and one over • 
forty years. The time spent in the house by all the inmates footed 



y 



iO 

op, at the time of the inquiry, nine hundred and thirty-one years, or 
an equivalent of 7.89 years to each person. 

Of the ninety-two intelligent adult inmates of this institution, 
thirty-seven were without any early educational training; sixteen had 
learned to read ; four could read and write, and thirty-five had been 
instructed in common schools. Forty-seven of the men and ten of 
the women were said to be intemperate. Only ten, five men and five 
women, claimed to be totally abstinent, while in twenty-five cases, 
nothing satisfactory could be ascertained regarding their habits. A 
majority of the parents, it was said, were temperata 

Tlie inmates of the institution, when examined, represented one 
hundred and fourteen families. It was ascertained that there had 
been in these families, in three generations, one hundred and forty- 
three paupers ; twelve insane ; thirty- two idiots, and one hundred and 
twenty-seven intemperate persons. Twenty-six of the inmates were 
heads of families, having fifty-one living children. Of these, eight 
were said to be in poor-houses; two, in asylums; ten bound out, and 
twenty-nine were providing for themselves. The condition of two 
could not be definitely learned. Four were the descendants of pauper 
fathers, and seven of pauper mothers. In two instances the pauper- 
ism was traced back to the third generation. It was thought all the 
inmates except ten would remain public burdens through life. 

The following brief notes regarding seveml of the inmates exam- 
ined, it is believed, will show the more prominent canses which 
operate to induce pauperism in this county : A man aged sixty-one 
years, with a second wife, fifty years old, married while paupers in 
the poor-house of an adjoining county, both uneducated and intem- 
perate, the wife being in the third generation of a family of paupers; 
a congenital deaf mute, female, thirty-six years old, born in the poor- 
house; nothing definite known as to her parentage; three idiotic 
brothers, ages respectively sixteen, eight and four years, the oldest 
un teachable, the two others capable of being educated; the father 
said to have been intelligent, industrious and temperate, the mother 
feeble minded ; a weak minded unmarried woman, aged twenty-four 
years, sixteen years an inmate, with an illegitimate child ten months 
old, born in the poor-house ; a feeble minded girl nineteen years old, 
having an illegitimate child aged one month; has also another 
illegitimate child provided for by relatives; a vagrant woman, single, 
forty years of age, sixteen years in the house ; has two illegitimate 
children bound out ; an idiot female, twenty-seven years old ; parents 
both intemperate and weak minded ; a girl aged twenty years, illegiti- 



41 

mate and born in the poor-house ; is fairly intelligent, bat vagrant 
and completely debased ; a widowed woman aged forty-six years a 
paralytic ; has two children bound out ; a woman forty-seven years 
old, feebleminded, nineteen years an inmate; has two illegitimate 
children placed out in families; a widowed woman, seventy-three 
years old, thirty-five years in the institution, and the husband died in 
the house; a man, widower, seventy years old; very intemperate, 
two years an inmate ; a man aged seventy-eight, strictly temperate, 
wife dead, only six months dependent ; and a married man fifty-nine 
years old, foreign born, six years in the county and ten months in the 
house. 

This county very early transferred most of its chronic insane to 
State custody. It has two small buildings in connection with the 
poor-house, in which are retained a few quiet, harmless cases. These 
buildings are also appropriated, in part, to idiots. The following 
insane, among others, were noted at the time of the examination : A 
single man, forty-six years old, insane twenty years; mother a pauper, 
and has other near pauper relatives ; was formerly violent and confined 
in a cell manyyeare; is now quiet and a good laborer; has never 
been at a State asylum ; a married woman, aged fifty-six years, twelve 
years insane and abandoned by her husband ; has never been treated 
at a State asylum ; is generally quiet and a good laborer ; and a 
woman thirty-five years old and married ; was six months at the 
State asylum and has been an inmate of the house three years ; is 
very quiet and engages in general work. 

The dependent children of this county are temporarily provided 
for in the Orphan Asylum at Hudson city, and as fast as practicable 
placed thence in family homes. 

Cortland County. 

This county erected a new poor-house in 1873. It is a plain, well 
built brick structure, properly designed for its purposes, and furnishes 
room for about one hundred and twenty-five persons. The location 
is near the site of the old house, about three miles from the village 
of Homer. 

At the time of the inquiry, the institution contained seventy (70) 
pauper inmates, including seventeen (17) chronic insane, of whom 
thirty -nine (39) were males and thirty-one (31) females. Forty-four 
were born in New York, eight in other United States and two in 
Canada. Five were foreign born, and the birthplaces of eleven could 
not be ascertained. The parentage of the inmates, so far as could be 



42 

learned, was also quite largely native. Six of the inmates were unde 
sixteen years of age ; twenty-two were between the ages of sixteei 
and fifty years; twenty-five were between fifty and seventy; an 
seventeen were over seventy years old, of whom seven had passedM 
the age of eighty years. Twenty-five became dependent before arriv- — 
ing at the age of thirty years ; twenty-nine when between the ages of^ 
thirty and sixty, and sixteen after they were sixty years old. Thir — 
teen had been inmates less than one year; fourteen, one year and - 
less than five years; thirty-two, five years and less than twenty; 
seven, twenty years and loss than thirty, and four over thirty years. 
The whole period of dependence of all the inmates, when examined, 
amounted to six hundred and fifty-nine years, an average of 9.41 
years to each. 

For the past six years this county has sent a portion of its depend- 
ent children to the Susquehanna Valley Home, at Binghamton, and 
has also had an efibctive system of placing such children in families. 
Previous to that, however, this class were retained in the poor-house, 
and endeavors made to educate and train them in a school connected 
with the institution. At times they were allowed to accumulate in 
considerable numbers in the poor-house, and the county still suffers 
largely from the effects of the practice, many of the older paupers 
having been inmates in childhood. Of those examined, eleven were 
the offspring of pauper mothers, and nine of pauper fathers ; eleven 
had pauper brothers; fourteen, pauper sisters; four, pauper uncles, 
and three, pauper aunts. In three cases, the pauperism, both on the 
paternal and maternal side, was traced back to the third generation. 

The inmates, examined, represented sixty-two families. These fami- 
lies, in three generations, were said to have had members conditioned 
in life as follows: Patipers, one hundred and thirty-two; insane, 
twenty-three ; idiots, fourteen ; inebriates, eighty-four. Nineteen 
of the inmates were parents of forty-three living children. Of these, 
seven were in poor-houses; four, in asylums; five, bonnd out, and 
twenty-six self-supporting. The conditii^n of one could not be learned. 

The general character of the inmates of this house was found to 
vary but little from that of this class in other poor-houses. Of the 
fifty-five adult paupers of intelligence, twenty-one had been instructed 
in the branches taught in common schools ; seven had learned to read 
and write; twelve, to read only, and fifteen were without any educa- 
tion. Eleven of the men said they had been temperate through life ; 
nineteen admitted habits of inebriety, and many of them confessed 
being confirmed drunkards. All the women, except two, it was said, 



were temperate. But little could be learned regarding the habits of 
tlieir ancestors. 

The following cases, taken from the notes of the inquiry, show 
the character of some of the families grouped in the institution : A 
man fifty-seven years old, and a son and daughter aged respectively 
eighteen and twenty-two years; was admitted twelve years ago with 
his wife and seven children ; the wife and one child died in the house; 
two of the other children bound out, and two self-supporting ; the 
father feeble minded and both of the children idiots ; family tempo- 
rarily aided before admission, and the preceding generation also 
paupers; a married woman aged forty-seven years and a daughter 
nineteen j-ears old ; the mother twenty-one, and the daughter seven- 
teen years in the house; the first husband of the woman dead, the 
second has been in State Prison and the Penitentiary, but his where- 
abouts at present uukno>\'n ; the parents of the woman were paupers, 
and it is said every member of the family in three generations has 
at some time been a public charge ; all were ignorant and weak 
minded, and generally intemperate; an unmarried woman twenty- 
seven years old, with her infant child, born in the poor house ; has 
been the mother of four illegitimate children, two of whom are dead, 
and four of her sisters have also had illegitimate children ; the woman 
fairly intelligent and educated, but thoroughly debased and vagrant; 
parents said to be respectable ; a married woman aged forty-seven 
years, deserted by her husband, and a daughter fifteen years old, 
also married, her husband being in jail for drunkenness ; other 
members of the family formerly paupers ; and a widowed woman 
eighty-two years of age, thirty-seven years an inmate, with her 
idiot daughter, aged fifty-five years; the husband was intemperate 
and a pauper, and three other children were once paupers ; all largely 
aided outside for several years. 

Other cases were noticed as follows : A single woman thirty-three 
years old, five years an inmate, an epileptic, the father intemperate 
and a pauper; an idiot, female, twenty-one years old, illegitimate 
and born in the poor-house ; father temperate, mother intemperate and 
a pauper; a widowet] woman aged seventy years, three years an 
inmate; has two children self-providing; a married man sixty-three 
years old, paralytic, grossly intemperate and said to have led a life of 
debauchery ; a paralytic woman, fifty-seven years old, married ; long 
intemperate; an idiot, male, aged forty years, the eleventh of a 
family of fourteen children, fatlier intemperate; a woman seventy 
years old, one-fourth Indian blood, intemperate, twenty years an 



44 

inmate ; an nneducated blind man, aged thirty years, seventeen years 
a pauper in various poor-houses ; two other blind children in the 
family, one of whom died a pauper ; and a married man sixty-four 
years old, intemperate ; father, mother and two brothere paupers, 
the first also intemperate. 

The chronic insane of this county are provided for in a single story 
wooden building, situated near the poor-house. The building has 
recently been altered and repaired, yet it has few conveniences neces- 
sary for its purposes. The more violent and excited insane are sent to the 
appropriate State Asylum. Among the cases examined were the fol- 
lowing: A woman aged sixty-six years, thirteen years an inmate, and 
was never at any State Asylum ; father, and one brother and a sister 
have been paupers ; an educated woman seventy years old, twenty 
years an inmate, a waif, and the duration of the insanity unknown ; 
an unmarried man aged forty-eight years, twenty years insane and an 
inmate, and never at any State asylum ; father intemperate; and a 
married woman fifty-four years old, nine yeai*s an insane inmate, 
without treatment at the State asylum; is intemperate, and six other 
members of her family, including the father, are said to be inebriates. 

The probable future of the inmates of this institution was summed 
up as follows : Permanently dependent, sixty-one ; will go out and 
provide for themselves, three ; may become self-supporting if soon 
removed and properly encouraged, two ; future doubtful, four. 

Delaware County. 

The poor-house of this county is situated near Delhi. The build- 
ing is a plain wooden edifice, in fair repair, and furnishes room for 
about one hundred persons. Its location is pleasant and the accomo- 
dations appear to be sutHcient for the present requirements. 

The number of paupers at the time of the examination was forty- 
five (45;, of whom twenty-seven (27) were males and eighteen (18) 
females. Thirty-two of these were native born and thirteen were 
foreigners. Two were under five years old ; twenty-five were between 
the ages of twenty and sixty years ; fifteen between sixty and eighty, 
and three had passed the age of eighty years. One was born in the 
poor-house ; eighteen were admitted before arriving at the age of 
forty years; seventeen when between the ages of forty and sixty, and 
nine after they were over sixty years old. Six had been dependent 
less than one year ; eighteen, one year and less than five years ; thir- 
teen, five years and less than ten, and eight over ten years. The 
entire time spent by all the inmates in poor-houses was two hundi^ed 



45 

and ninety-eight years, equivalent to an average of 6.62 years to each 
pei*8on. 

Of the thirty-seven inmates of mature age, sixteen, or over forty- 
three per cent were without any education. Three had learned to 
read only ; four could read and write, and fourteen were said to have 
received common school instruction. Sixteen of the men admitted 
habits of inebriety, and iive claimed to be totally abstinent. Only 
two of the women, it was said, were known to be intemperate. The 
habits of the parents, as far as could be learned, were about equally 
divided as between temperate and intemperate. The future of the 
inmates of the institution may be stated thus: Thirty-nine will prob- 
ably continue dependent through life; one doubtless will, and one 
may become self-supporting, and the future of four is quite uncertain. 

This county, in 1869, entered into arrangements with the Susque- 
hanna Valley Home, at Bingliamton, for the temporary care of its 
dependent children. Since then, all of this class have been sent to 
that institution, and thence placed out as opportunities offered, in fami- 
lies. Before this ari-angemen t was effected the cliildren were sent to the 
poor-house, and while there exposed, more or less, to the association 
with adult paupers. The evil effects of this practice are still seen in 
the county, many of the older paupers having been inmates in early 
life. Of those examined, four were the offspring of pauper Withers, 
and seven of pauper mothers, and, in two instances, the line of pau- 
per descent was traced through three generations. The number of 
inmates who were heads of families was twelve. These, it was 
learned, had twenty-three living children, thus situated: In poor- 
liouses, six; in asylums, three; bound out, three; self-supporting, 
seven ; condition unknown, four. The inmates came from forty-two 
families, of which sixty-one members, in three generations, had been 
paupers ; nine, insane ; eight, idiots, and forty-seven inebriates. 

The following were among the paupers examined in this house : 
A man aged seventy years, said to be temperate, and bnt two months 
an inmate, and his widowed daughter, twenty-two years old, having 
an illegimate child, aged ten months ; a single woman aged twenty- 
funr years, illegitimate, and neglected in early life, having a child 
two years old, also illegitimate; an unmarried woman sixty years of 
age, uneducated and twenty-five years an inmate; another single 
^voman, sixty-six years old, in the third generation of paupers in her 
family, and seven years in the house ; ako another unmarried woman 
aged seventy -seven years, uneducated but temperate, thirty-one years 
dependent; a married woman, forty-five years of age, an inmate 



46 

three years; has one child in an asjliira and three aelf-snpporting ; a 
widowed woman aged sixty-one years, fifteen years in poor-honae, 
and previously aided several years oatside; is an habitual opium eater, 
and deserted by her husband ; a single man fifty-seven years old, 
foreign born and three years dependent ; is educated but very interap' 
erate ; an idiot male, thirty -six years of age and a pauper five yeai-s; 
father intemperate and mother once in the poor-house; the entire, 
family aided a number of years outside; also another idiot male, 
aged forty-six years, twenty-seven years an inmate, the father and 
mother having been paupers ; and a woman ninety-four years old, 
widowed and eight years in the house; has three children, but their 
whereabouts at present unknown. 

This county early began to transfer its chronic insane to the Wil- 
lard Asylum. At the time of this examination it had nine of this 
class under State care and four in the poor-house. The latter were 
all quiet, harmless cases, and in association with the other inmates. 

Dutchess County. 

The number of paupers of this county, under care, at the time of 
the inquiry, was, males, ninety-five (95) ; females, sixty-seven (67) ; 
total one hundred and sixty-two (162). Of these, ninety-two (92) 
were at the Dutchess county poor-house, and seventy (70) at the 
Poughkeepsie city alms-house. Six of those in the former and eight 
in the latter were colored. 

The Dutchess county poor-house is situated at Washington Hollow, 
fifteen miles from the city of Poughkeepsie. It is a three-story frame 
building, in fair repair, and will accommodate about one hundred 
and fifty persons. There is a separate building on the premises for 
the superintendent and his family. The location is pleasant and 
healthy, and the institution, though not fully supplied with modern 
conveniences, appears to be, for the time being, adequate for its 
purposes. 

At the date of the examination the inmates were divided, as to sex, 
as follows: Male, fifty-six (56); female, thirty-six (36). Five were 
under sixteen years of age; thirty between the ages of sixteen 
and sixty years, and fifty-two were over sixty years old. Of the 
latter, five had passed the age of eighty years. Fifty-four were borii 
in this State; five in other States; one, in Canada, and the residue 
were foreigners. Two became dependent at birth ; forty-one before 
reaching the age of fifty years, and forty-nine after they were fifty 
years old. Twenty-two had been in the house less than two years ; 



forty-seven, two years and less than ten ; twenty-one, ten years and 
less than twenty, and two over twenty years. The average time 
which had been spent in the institution by the inmates, when exam- 
ined, was 6.01 years, being an aggregate of five hundred and fifty- 
three yeai's. 

Five of the inmates were classed as vagrants; the others were 
generally feeble and infirm, and apparently proper subjects of charity. 
Of the adult persons, thirty-nine were educated in common schools ; 
two had learned to read and write ; eighteen to read only, and twenty- 
four were without any education. Forty-three of the men were 
intemperate, of whom twenty-two were said to be confirmed drunk- 
ards ; and thirteen of the women admitted that they had formed 
habits of inebriety. The inquiry showed that a considerable portion 
of the parents of these had also been intemperate. 

The dependent children coming under the direction of the superin- 
tendent of the poor of this county are sent to the Poughkeepsie Orphan 
Home at Poughkeepsie, where they are temporarily provided for, and 
afterwards placed in family homes. In this way the line of pauper 
descent in families is broken, and the children of the dependent classes 
are absorbed into the self-supporting population. At the time of the 
inquiry, twenty-two of the inmates were parents, having thirty-eight 
living children, of whom only one was a pauper, while thirty-one 
were said to provide for themselves. One of the inmates had a pau- 
per father, and six pauper mothers, but in no instance, could the 
dependence be traced back to the third generation. The number of 
families represented in the institution was eighty-eight. These fami- 
lies, in three generations, it was ascertained, had produced one hun- 
dred and eight paupers ; seventeen insane ; four idiots and seventy- 
nine inebriates. 

The following are some of the more notable cases examined : A 
vagrant woman aged forty-five years, widowed, with an illegitimate 
child two years old. and born in the house ; the woman orphaned in 
childhood and neglected; is intemperate and debased, and had been 
in other poor-houses ; a widowed woman sixty-one years old, twelve 
years dependent, foreign born, and twenty-three years in the country ; 
has four children in the State, said to provide for themselves ; a 
woman seventy-seven years old and ten years in the house, uneducated, 
but apparently respectable; is widowed and childless; a feeble 
minded woman aged thirty-eight years and unmarried; admitted 
when twenty three years old ; father intemperate and mother died in 
the house, a pauper ; has had two illegitimate children, both of whom 



48 

are dead ; another weak minded woman, thirty-one years old, and 
four years an inmate ; has an illegitimate cliild provided for in an 
asylum ; a woman over seventy years old, separated from her husband ; 
intemperate and debased, and once in jail for drunkenness ; has been 
nine years in the institution ; said to have three self-supporting chil- 
dren ; a man aged eighty-five years, only one year in the house ; is well 
educated and seemingly respectable ; wife dead and has no children ; 
a single man sixty-six years old, foreign born, and thirty-eight years 
in this country ; has been a soldier in foreign armies and in the 
United States service ; is intemperate and wholly uneducated ; a 
childless widower aged seventy-seven, four years in the house ; is well 
educated but grossly intemperate ; once occupied a respectable station 
in society, and has held responsible public positions ; is infirm and 
wholly dependent; an intemperate single man, seventy-one years 
old, recently admitted ; has had considerable property from family 
estate, but squandered it in a life of idleness and dissipation ; a single 
woman aged sixty-five, admitted at the age of thirty-six years having 
an illegitimate child ; remained only a short time, went out and after- 
wards returned; is temperate, industrious, but uneducated; a man 
seventy-one years old, a widower, recently admitted; is fairly educated, 
temperate and industrious; has five self-supporting children ; a man 
aged forty-nine, foreign bom, educated, intemperate but vagrant; 
has been five years in this house, and is said to have spent most of his 
time in poor-houses since arriving in this country ; two sisters aged 
respectively twelve and eight years, the younger bom in the house ; 
both intelligent, and it is thought will soon be placed out ; an illegiti- 
mate child, a boy one year old, also bom in the poor-house, the 
mother being dead ; and a single man a^ed forty-two years, intem- 
perate, and father also intemperate ; was admitted to the house with 
his mother when twelve years old, remained a time and was placed in 
a family but soon came back ; goes out in the summer and returns as 
the winter approaches; has had two brothers who were paupers. 

This county has fifty-six chronic insane under care at the Willard 
Asylum, and at the time of the examination, there were fifteen in 
the county poor-house. There were also four idiots, one epileptic 
and four paralytics. The following are a few of the cases of these 
classes examined: A married woman sixty-one years old, insane 
twenty-seven years, and during this time an inmate of the house ; 
has never been at any State institution ; mother also insane ; an 
unmarried man aged fifty-six years, insane seventeen years, three of 
which have been spent at the State asylum and fourteen in this house; 



49 

had au insane brother; a man forty-seven yeai*8 old, single and insane 
thirteen years, all of which time he has been in this institution ; and 
a single man aged thirty-four years, insane fifteen years, four of which 
were spent at the State asylum; is dean in his person and habits; 
frequently escapes ; the mother also insane; an unmarried man thirty- 
three years old, an epileptic, recently admitted ; is educated, but very 
intemperate ; an idiot woman aged thirty years, until recently sup- 
ported by relatives ; will probably continue dependent ; and also an 
idiot boy nine years old and wholly unteachable; has been an inmate 
four years; father said to be intemperate. 

As to the future of the inmates of this house, it is believed 
that eighty-two will continue to be public burdens through life ; the 
character and condition of three are such as to render it probable that 
they will go out and provide for themselves ; two may be trained to 
become self-supporting if early i-emoved and placed under proper 
influences ; and the future of live is involved in doubt. 

Poughkeepaie City Alms-house. — Under provision of the Legisla- 
ture, thie city of Poughkeepsie provides for its own poor, and is 
relieved from any expense in connection with the county poor-house. 
The alms-house is a substantial three- stoiy and basement brick struc- 
ture, and has the impi*ovements and conveniences requisite for its 
purposes. It is pleasantly located in the easterly part of the city, 
and will accommodate and properly classify about one hundred per- 
sons. 

Upon the occasion of the inquiry, there were thirty-nine (39) male, 
and thirty-one (31) female jjauper inmates. Seven of these were under 
sixteen years old ; thirty-four had passed the age of sixty years; and 
the others were in medium life, of whom nine were vagrants. Their 
nativity was as follows: New York, thirty-seven ; other States of the 
Union, ten ; foreign born, twenty-three. The birth of the parents 
was nearly equally divided between native and foreign. Five of the 
inmates became dependent at birth ; thirty-one before they had arrived 
at the age of fifty years; and thirty-four after they had passed the 
latter period in life. Twenty-six had been inmates less than two 
jrears; thirty-four over two years and less than ten ; eight ten years, 
and less than thirty ; and ten over thirty years. The whole time 
6pent by all the inmates then, appeared to have been three hundred 
and twenty-eight years, equal to an average of 4.68 years to each. 

Of the sixty intelligent adult inmates, eighteen were without any 
education ; ten had learned so as to read; and thirty-two had received 
the benefits of common school education. Twenty-six of the men 



60 

and sixteen of the women were more or less intemperate, and four- 
teen of the former and four of the latter, it was stated, were con- 
firmed inebriates. A considerable portion of the parents of these, it 
was ascertained, were also intemperate. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was sixty-four. 
In these f^nilies it was learned that there liad been in three generations, 
in all, ninety dependents, sixteen insane, three idiots, and sixty-six 
inebriates. Thirty of the inmates were the heads of families having, 
as fer as could be ascertained, sixty-nine living children. Of these, 
five were said to be in poor-houses, and sixty-four self supporting. 
The city provides for the temporary care of its dependent children in 
the Poughkecpsie Orphan Home, hence but few cases of entailment 
of pauperism in families were found. One had a pauper father, and 
ten had pauper mothers ; but, in no instance, could the pauperism be 
traced to the grandparents. It is believed that four of those exam- 
ined will eventually provide for themselves, and that three may be 
rendered self-supporting, if sent out and properly encouraged. In 
fifty-three cases, the dependence will probably be permanent, while 
the future of ten is doubtful. 

A brief mention of a few of the persons examined is here made, 
which will show the general character of the inmates^ as a whole, and 
also serve to throw light upon the sources through which they have 
been brought upon the public for support : A single woman aged 
thirty-two years, three years an inmate, with an illegitimate child, 
born in the house; is intemperate and uneducated, and her father is 
said to have been an inebriate ; has led a dissolute life and gives no 
hope of improvement; an educated temperate man, sixty-five years 
old, and greatly enfeebled, with his wife, aged fifty-eight years, ignor- 
ant, intemperate and debased ; inmates only a few months, but proba- 
ble to remain public burdens ; a married woman aged thirty-seven 
years, deserted by her husband ; has been several years an inmate 
with two children, one eleven and one six years old, the younger 
illegitimate and born in the institution ; is able-bodied, intemperate 
and thoroughly debased ; a woman, married, but abandoned by her 
husband; has a child with her, born in the house; both likely soon 
to go out; a colored woman twenty-four years old, born in the poor- 
house; is grossly intemperate, and has been in jail and the peniten- 
tiary for drunkenness and vagrancy ; mother, one brother and three 
sisters paupers ; a boy aged seven years, recently admitted, mother 
and one sister paupers, and father intemperate ; a man seventy-five 
years old, feeble and infirm, and in the house only a short time ; said 






61 

to have three self-supporting children ; and a respectably appearing, 
educated, temperate and industrious woman, aged seventy-three years, 
three years an inmate and totally blind ; has two children who pro- 
vide for themselves. 

The following are a few of the cases noted, suffering from insanity 
and other forms of disease: A woman, widowed, sixty-nine years old 
and about twenty-five years insane; was two years at the State asylum, 
and the remainder of the time has been in the poor-house ; a mar- 
ried man aged sixty-seven, and his son twenty-eight years old and 
also married; tlie former insane four, and the latter two years; the 
father an habitual drunkard, the son temperate; neither have been at 
any State asylum, and both are probably incurable; an epileptic girl 
thirteen years old, and five years a dependent; nothing could be 
learned as to her parentage ; a woman aged thirty-three, an epileptic, 
admitted when twenty-five years old ; father intemperate, and mother 
has led a dissolute and abandoned life ; an idiot boy aged nineteen 
years, seven years in the house ; father intemperate, habits of mother 
unknown ; and also another idiot boy sixteen years old, admitted at 
the age of eight years; mother and one sister paupers; habits of 
parents not ascertained. 

The chronic insane occupy a detached building, and are as well 

provided for as circumstances will admit. The accommodations, 

however, are quite limited. A considerable number of this class 

have been transferred to the appropriate State asylum, and it is the 

purpose of the authorities to retain only quiet cases, under local 

control. 

Ewe County. 

The Erie county poor-house is located on Main street, about five 
miles from the business centre of the city of Bufialo. It is a substan^ 
tial stone edifice, three stories in height above the basement. The 
centre building is ninety by sixty-five feet on the ground, and there are 
two lateral wings, each having an area of one hundred by forty-five 
feet. There is also a hospital building at the rear of the main struc- 
ture, eighty by forty feet in area, which contains twelve wards and 
several small rooms. The buildings are warmed exclusively by stoves, 
and are very well ventilated, but there is a lack, at times, of an 
adequate supply of water. The location is healthy and pleasant, the 
grounds are well laid out, planted and kept clean, and the institu- 
tion has an air of neatness and comfort. 

The lunatic asylum, also of stone, is situated near the poor-house 
edifice. The main building was erected in 1874. This is three stories 



62 

in height and contains the offices and apartments for the snperiutend- 
ent and his family, and also furnishes room for some of the more 
qaiet and better class of patients. There is a wing at the right, two 
stories high and one hundred and eighteen by forty feet on the ground, 
occupied by women, which has been in use for several years. The 
plan of the asylum contemplates the erection of a wing at the left. 
At present, a portion of the men occupy small wooden pavilions 
situated in the rear. 

The number of persons in the care of this institution upon the 
occasion of the examination, including two hundred and three (203) 
insane, was fonr hundred and sixty-two (462). Of these, two hun- 
dred and thirty-nine (239) were males, and two hundred and twenty- 
three (223) females. Ninety-two were natives of New York ; thirty- 
five of other States of the Union, and thirteen of Canada. The 
number foreign born was three hundred and seven ; and, in fifteen 
cases their places of birth could not be ascertained. The birth of the 
pai'ents was as follows: Fathers, native, fifty-four; foreign, three 
hundred and twenty-six; unascertained, eighty two; mothers, native, 
fifty -eight ; foreign, three hundred and twenty-four ; birthplaces 
imknown, eighty. 

For tiie past two yeai-s this county, through the board of supervi- 
sors, has temporarily provided for its dependent children in the 
various orphan asylums and other appropriate institutions of Buffalo. 
A thorough and effective system of placing children in families, by 
the proper officials, is also maintained. As a result of this action, the 
poor-house partakes largely of the character of a home for the aged, 
with an infirmary department for the sick. Of the inmates examined, 
all except eleven had passed the age of sixteen years, and six of these 
were under two yeai^s old. Tlii-ee hundred and thirty-five were 
between the ages of sixteen and sixty yeare ; one hundred and three 
between sixty and eighty, and thirteen were over eighty years of age. 

The dependence in tinrty-eight cases, began before the persons 
were twenty yeai*s old ; in two hundred and seventy cases, when 
between the ages of twenty and fifty years; in one hundred and 
twelve cases, when between fifty and seventy, and in forty-two cases 
after they' had passed tlie ago of seventy years. One hundred and 
sixty-eight had been inmates less than one year; one hundred and 
twenty -five, one year atul less than five yeai*s; one hnndred and fifty- 
four, five years and less than twenty ; twelve, twenty years and less 
than thirty, and thi^ee over thirty yeai^s. The total time spent in the 
house by all the inmates up to the time of the examination, amounted 



68 

to two thousand and sixtj-four years, being an average of 4.47 JGftri 
for each person. 

Of the adult inmates examined, two hundred and twenty, or Marly 
fifty per cent, it was found had been instructed in the branches iisnally 
taught in common schools ; forty-one had learned to read only ; forty- 
five to read and write, and one hundred and thirty-five had no educa- 
tion. One hundred and eighty-one of the men, and eighty-eight of 
the women wei'e intemperate, and seventy of the former and twenty- 
seven of tlie latter were said to have been confirmed inebriates. 
Twenty-nine were classed as vagrants. The pauperism was traced to 
the mother in eighteen cases ; to the father in six cases, and to the 
grandparents in only a single instance. Ninety-four of the inmates 
were said to be heads of families, having in all two hundred and 
twenty-one living children. The condition of forty-four of these 
children could not be definitely ascertained. The others were 
accounted for as follows : In poor-houses, thirteen ; in asylums, six- 
teen ; in refuges, three ; in prisons and penitentiaries, three ; bound 
out, thirty-four ; self-supporting, one hundred and eight. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was four hun- 
dred and fifty-two. The number of paupers in these families, in three 
generations, living and dead, amounted to five hundred and twenty- 
two ; the number of insane, two hundred and thirty-five ; the num- 
ber of idiots twenty-six, and the number of inebriates, three faitndred 
and seventy-six. The supposed future of the inmates of this institu- 
tion may be thus stated: Three hundred and eighty-six will, without 
doubt, remain public burdens the remainder of their lives ; seventeen 
will probably leave the institution and provide for themselves; thirty 
inay be educated to become self-supporting if removed and placed 
under proper surroundings; and the condition of twenty-nine was 
such as to render it diflScult to predict, with any degree of certainty, 
as to their future. 

The following were some of the family groups in the institution, 
at the time of the examination: A man aged seventy-four and )iis 
wife seventy years old ; both temperate and apparently respectable, 
eight years inmates; two sisters, aged respectively forty-nine and 
thirty-five years; once were possessed of considerable property, which 
was lost by improvident habits ; inmates only four months, but will 
probablj'^ continue dependent hereafter, as neither seems inclined to 
self-assertion ; a married woman uneducated and intemperate, thirty- 
two years old, with an infant born in the house ; the woman thoroughly 
debased and vagrant; has been two years an inmate and twice in the 



64 

penitentiary ; husband also intemperate and bis present whereabouts 
unknown; has one child in a reformatory ; anotlier married woman 
aged twenty-four years, abandoned by her hasband, said to be intem- 
perate ; lias an infant born in the poor-honse ; the woman temperate 
and industrious, and seems probable soon to go out and provide for 
herself; an uneducated and intemperate woman aged thirty years, 
deserted by her husband, has two children with her, the younger only 
one month old, born in the poor-house; the father also intemperate; 
an unmarried woman twenty-five years old, well educated and tem- 
perate ; was early orphaned and left homeless ; has an illegitimate 
child with her, born in the institution ; and a single girl aged eigh- 
teen years, with an infant born in the house ; voluntarily left her 
home when young, and has since led a vagrant life ; will probably con- 
tinue dependent. 

Other cases among those examined, tending to show the general 
character of the inmates of the institution, and also to develop some 
of the causes of pauperism in the county, are here noted : A married 
man, fifty-seven years old, two years an inmate; is very intemperate, 
having frequently been in jail for intoxication ; a married woman, 
forty-three years of age, the mother of whom was a pauper ; is intem- 
perate and debased, and abandoned by her husband ; first entered tbe 
institution at the age of eighteen yeai's, and since then has alternated 
between the poor-house and penitentiary; when set at liberty she 
enters upon a course of dissipation which continues until committed 
again ; has been discharged and returned seven times during the past 
year; oflers no hope of improvement; a woman aged forty-nine years 
and three times married ; has been the mother of eight children, 
two of whom died in the poor house; is grossly intemperate, vile and 
debased ; a widowed woman, sixty -four years old, five yeai's an inmate, 
had good early advantages, but for several years past has led a dissipated 
and vagrant life ; is nearly helpless from chronic rheumatism ; a feeble 
minded single woman, foreign born and an inmate six years ; noth- 
ing known as to her family history ; a widowed woman, seventy-two 
years old, very intemperate and eleven years dependent ; her husband 
died in tiie poor-house, and she has had a daughter and grandchild in the 
institution ; a married woman, aged thirty-six years, recently admitted 
and deserted by her husband ; is grossly intemperate and dissolute, 
having been several times in the penitentiary ; has three children, one 
with relatives and two in asylums; gives but little hope of reforma- 
tion, although well educated and in early life surrounded by good 
influences ; a man, widower, seventy-three year? old, had been in the 



56 

bouse onlj a short time ; is intemperate and was once in jail for 
intoxication ; has six children living, all of whom provide for them- 
selves ; an unmarried man, recently admitted, aged fifty-nine years ; 
has been a soldier; is intemperate and was once in the penitentiary; 
is quite infirm and claims to have relatives able to provide for him ; a 
married man, sixty^tive years old, three years in this, and six months 
in an Ohio poor-house ; is uneducated and a confirmed inebriate; has 
six children said to be self-supporting; a colored man, widower, aged 
over ninety years; has been in this house two years, and previously 
several j^eai's in poor-houses of Pennsylvania; has no relatives in this 
State ; and a single man, twenty-two years old, intemperate and a 
vagrant ; has led a dissolute life and seems a proper subject for refor- 
matory treatment. 

The insane asylum is under the immediate control of a warden, 
and has a small number of attendants. Eightj'-six (86) of the insane 
were men, and one hundred and seventeen (117) women. Fifty-seven 
of the former, and twenty-nine of the latter were said to be intem- 
perate. Nearly all were chronic cases, and many of them of long 
standing. No proper records have heretofore been maintained in the 
institution, and but little could be learned as regards the causes 
of insanity. The following were a few of the cases examined: 

A single woman, forty-seven years old, insane four years ; was a few 
months at the State asylum, returned to friends, and recently sent 
to the institution ; is quiet and harmless, and probably incurable; a 
widowed woman, aged thirty-nine years, eight months insane and has 
never been at any State asylum ; was a confirmed inebriate several 
years ; at times is excited, violent and noisy ; has one child in an 
orphan asylum and one bound out; a woman thirty-five years old, 
born in Bohemia, and landed in Oalveston, Texas, six years ago ; is 
a widow, well educated, temperate and apparently respectable, but 
has evidently sufiered great hardships ; has been in the institution 
insane about six months, and may recover; a single woman, aged 
thirty-one yejfi's, five years in the institution and was previously at 
the State asylum ; is generally quiet, but has occasional paroxysms of 
great violence, and is probably incurable; an unmarried woman 
twenty-six years old, one year insane, and has had no treatment at 
any State asylum ; is educated and temperate, and seems likely to 
recover; a single woman aged twenty-one years, and four months an 
inmate; is educated, but has led a dissolute and profligate life, and 
offers no hopes of recovery ; a married man thirty-four years old, in 
the institution six years; is very quiet and a good laborer, has never 



66 

been in any State asylum ; a widower, aged fifty-two years, well 

educated, but intemperate, nineteen years in the institution ; is qaiet 

and gives but little trouble; and a man, unmarried, thirty-six years 

old, and five years an inmate; offers no prospects of recovery. 

The insane of this institution are under good industrial training. 

Nearly all the labor upon the poor-house farm is carried on hy the insane 

men, and the women perform the domestic work of the asylum. The 

institution is much crowded and additional accommodations are greatly 

needed. 

Essex County. 

• 

The Essex county poor-house is situated near Whalonsburgh, about 
six miles from the village of Essex, the county seat. An addition 
was made to the house during the past year, which gives it a capacity 
in all, for alx^ut one hundred and twenty-five inipates. The building 
is a substantial brick structure, in good repair', and i^enos to meet 
properly the present requirements. 

The institution, at the time of the examination, }\ad eighty-six (86) 
persons qnder oare, including twelve (12) insane. Of these, six (6) 
were colored. The number of males was thirty-three (33) ; females 
fifty-three (53). Fifty-two were natives of this State ; eight of other 
l^tates of the Union, and fifteen of Canada. Nine wore foreign born, 
and the birthplaces of two were not known. The p^^rentage of the 
inmates was also largely native. Twenty-five, or over twenty-mne 
per cent, were under sixteen years old ; thirty-foiir were between the 
ages of sixteen and fifty years; twenty-three, between fifty and 
eighty, and four had passed the latter age. Twelve were born in the 
poor-house and had been dependent from birtU; seventeen were 
admitted before they were ten years old ; thirty-fowr when between 
the ages of ten and forty yeara; eleven when between forty and sixty; 
nine when between sixty and eighty, and three after they were over 
eight}' years of age. Nineteen had been in the inslitution less than 
two years; twenty, two years and less than five; twenty-four, five 
years and less than ten; fourteen, ten years and less \han twenty; 
eight, twenty years and less than forty, and one o-ver forty years. 
The aggregate duration of time spent in poor-houses, by all tlie 
inmates when they were examined was six hundred and thirty-nine 
years, or an average to each person of 7.43 years. 

The inquiry showed that the inmates of this house belonged lai)i^ly 
to the ignorant and debased classes. Of those Of adult age, twenty- 
five or nearly fifty per cent were without any eduction ; four luid 
learned to read; four to read and write, and eighteen had been 



67 

instructed in common schools. Seven of the men and thirty of the 
women claimed to have been temperate through life ; all of the others 
confessed habits of inebriety. The fathers of thirty-six and the 
mothers of nineteen, were said to be intemperate. The inmates of 
the house, at the time of the examination, represented sixty-seven 
families. These families, so far as could be learned, had produced, 
in three generations, the following: Public dependents, one hundred 
and forty-five ; insane, twenty-one ; idiots, twenty*five ; prison con- 
victs, four, and inebriates, twenty-three. 

It has been and still is the practice of this county, to send its 
dependent children, whether orphaned or having parents living, to 
the poor-house, and endeavor to educate and train them in a school 
connected with the institution ; but the efforts thus made in their 
behalf, seem to have resulted in little or no lasting benefit. The 
pauper associations to which they are subjected, tend to break down 
self-respect, and many of them, on being placed in families, return to 
the poor-house in after life, to burden the public, and not unfrequently 
with a numerous, enfeebled and dependent offspring. The evil effects 
of this system of rearing children were very apparent in the institu- 
tion at the time of the inquiry. Seven of the inmates were the 
offspring of pauper fathers, and twenty-eight, or nearly thirty-three 
per cent, of pauper mothers, while the pauperism, in one instance, 
OH the paternal and in three instances on the maternal side, was 
traced back to the third generation. It was also learned that nine of 
the inmates had pauper brothers; sixteen, pau{^r sisters; eight, 
pauper uncles, and nine, pauper aunts. Moreover, the entailment 
of pauperism in these families appeared to be still going on. Twenty- 
two of the inmates were parents having sixty-two living children. 
Of these, fifteen, or nearly twenty-five per cent, were in poor- 
houses; six were bound out; thirty-five were said to be self-support- 
ing, and the condition of the others could not be ascertained. This 
growth of pauperism in these families, and its social evils, it is believed, 
might readily be checked by the separation of the children from poor- 
house associations, and providing temporarily for their care in fami- 
lies or appropriate asylums, resulting also in the end, in great saving 
to the public. 

The following were some of the family groups in the house at the 
time of the examination : A wWowed woman, twenty four years old, 
and two children aged respectively four and five years ; both illegiti- 
mate and feeble minded, and born in the poor-house, the latter being 
a mulatto; the woman was sent to the house when six years old. 



68 

was afterwards placed out but soon returned, and has since spent 
most of her time in this and other poor-houses ; has also had three 
brothers and one sister who were paupers, and is soon again to become 
a motlier ; is thoroughly debased and will probably remain with her 
children a public burden through life ; a woman, widowed, and 
seventy-six years old, admitted to the house five years since with her 
daughter, then aged forty-two years, also widowed, and having three 
children, wliose ages were respectively eight, six and two years, the 
oldest being an idiot ; the two youngest children are soon to be placed 
out, but the remainder of the family group will probably continue 
dependent ; a married woman, abandoned by her husband, having 
with her a weak-minded boy, fifteen years old, and a girl three years 
old, born in the house soon after her admission ; the woman educated 
and temperate but crippled by disease, the husband said to be intem- 
perate and debased ; a man and his wife, the former aged eighty-nine 
and the latter sixty-five years, both temperate and apparently respect- 
able, and only one year in the house, have two children who pro- 
vide for themselves but said to be unable to support their parents ; 
two sisters, aged respectively nineteen and forty-nine years, both 
unmarried, the younger feeble minded, recently admitted to the 
house, where she gave birth to an illegitimate child which is with 
her ; the other also feeble minded, sent to the house when twenty- 
six years old, since then has been repeatedly placed out to service 
but always soon returning; has been the mother of seven illegitimate 
children, some of whom have died in the poor-house, the condition 
of the others being unknown ; a married woman thirty years old, 
with an illegitimate child aged ten months ; a black woman, wid- 
owed, aged forty-nine years, her daughter single, aged twenty-four 
yeare, and her grandson, a mulatto four years old, illegitimate and 
born in the house; the first has been the mother of ten children, 
seven illegitimate, all at various times having been in the house, 
three dying in the institution ; the second has had three illegitimate 
children, two being dead ; both women intemperate and thoroughly- 
depraved and quite certain to remain public burdens, each having 
already been nineteen years in the house ; and a feeble minded sin- 
gle woman, thirty-nine years old, born in the institution, with an 
illegitimate child aged five years, also born in the house. 

A few other cases examined in the mstitution will next be noticed : 
A widowed woman aged sixty years became an inmate of the poor- 
house of a neighboring county when twenty-six years old, and since 
then has spent in all about twenty years in poor-houses, admitted to 



house about one year since and will probably remain ; a vagrant 
girl, fifteen years old, admitted about one year since, is eouipieteiy 
debased and BJionld be in a reformatory ; an illegitimate congenital 
deaf ninte girl, born in llie liouse, and has had no epcicial training ; an 
illegitiiuttte, feeblo minded boy, eleven years old, two years an 
inmate ; the grandfatlier was a pauper and several other neai- relatives 
have also been paupers ; a weak minded unmarried woman aged fifty- 
one years, of which thirty have been spent in thislionae, caine from 
Canada with her parents when a child, and was soon abandoned and 
thrown upon the charity of the public ; a girl ten years old, had been 
six years an inm;ite, was abandoned by her parents who brought her 
from Canada ; a t'etibte minded woman aged thirty-one years, twenty 
years in the house ; an idiot male, twenty-nine years old and five 
years an inmate, both said to have also been brought from Canada 
[lien children and abandoned by their parents. 
3'he buildings contain no epeciul accommodations for the insane. 
we present at the time of the examination wore all chronic, harm- 
) cases and presented no marked peculiarities. The men, it is 
said, do considerable work upon the farm, and the women are 
employed about the house. The county at present has but one of 
this class of insane at tlio State asylum. 

In summing up as to the probable future of the inmates of this 
institution, the following conclusions were reached : Sixty-three will 
doubtless remain dependent through life ; four exhibited intelligence 
and powere of self-assertion, so as to render it quite certain tliat they 
Would soon go out and provide for their support ; nine, it was thought, 
might be traijied to become self-sustaining, if promptly removed and 
placed under good surroundings; and the condition of ten was such 
B to render their future uncertain. 

Pkanklin Coontt. 

itlie poor-house of Franklin county, erected in 1870, is pleasantly 

sated near Maloiie, the county seat. The building is a well built 

brick edifice, containing modern conveniences, and is appropriately 

and comfortably furnished. It will accommodate and suitably classify 

^^HO hundred inmates. 

^^^Bt the time of the inquiry, the institution contained nineteen (19) 

^^Hk, and twenty-four (24) female pauper inmates, making w all 

^Torty-three (43). Of these, four were under sixteen years old; ten 

were between the ages of sixteen and forty yeai-s ; fourteen, between 

forty and seventy; eight, between seventy and eii;bty, and seven 

e over eighty years old. Only three of them were admitted to 



M to ; 



60 

the house under ten years of age. Nineteen became dependent when 
between the ages of ten and forty years; twelve, when between forty 
and seventy, and nine after having passed tho age of seventy years. 
Seven had been in tlie house less than one year ; sixteen one year 
and less than five years; fourteen five years and less than twenty, 
and six over twenty years. The average duration of time spent in 
poor-houses by all the inmates was 7.60 years ; the aggregate, three 
hundred and twenty-seven years. 

The nativity, educational attainments, habits, and probable future 
of the inmates of this institution, may be summed up as follows: 
Twenty-two were born in the United States, of whom ten were natives, 
of this State ; ten in Canada ; ten in Ireland, and in one instance 
the birthplace could not be ascertained. Of those of adult age and 
proper intelligence, sixteen were wholly uneducated ; two had been 
instructed so as to be able to read ; one so as to read and write, and 
fifteen had attended common schools. Nine of the men and two of 
the women were said to be inebriates ; the others claimed to be strictly 
temperate. Thirty-five will doubtless continue to be public burdens 
through life; one will probably become self-supporting; three may 
be trained to provide for themselves^ while the future of four is 
uncertain. 

For a number of years, a vigorous and well-directed system of 
placing dependent children in families, has been in operation in tins 
county. The result is shown in a steady decrease in the number of 
paupere in the county, and also in the absence of the entailment of 
pauperism in families. Only two of the inmates were descendants 
of pauper fathers, and four of pauper mothers, and in nu case conld 
the pauperism be traced back to the third generation. Tlie number 
of families represented in the institution was forty-one, from which, 
it was ascertained, there had sprung in three generations, fifty -seven 
paupers, twelve insane, fifteen idiots and twenty-four inebriates. 
Twenty of the inmates were parents having in all eighty living chil- 
dren. These were said to be situated in life as follows : In poor-houses, 
five; bound out, nine; self-supporting, forty-nine; condition not 
learned, seventeen. 

A few of the cases examined are here noted, which will serve to 
show the general character of the inmates of the institution and also 
some of the sources of pauperism in the county : A man seventy- 
two years old, widowed, and two years an inmate, is fairly educated, 
temperate and apparently respectable ; a single, feeble minded 
woman, aged forty-six years, and her illegitimate son, an idiot, twen- 



61 

« 

ty-three years old, each nine years in the house ; the first had a pau- 
per sister, also the mother of an illegitimate child, and the second a 
brother who was a pauper; a vagrant girl, fifteen years old, an 
inmate two years, lias been twice placed in good families and 
returned as incorrigible, the mother said to be temperate and respect- 
able, the father intemperate, immoral, sensual and debased ; a single 
woman, weak minded, aged forty-six, and twenty-eight years a pau- 
per inmate, has been the mother of two illegitimate children^ one 
white and one colored, both born in the house and died in the insti- 
tution ; is wholly dependent and too feeble minded for self-protection ; 
an unmarried woman, thirty-four years old, was early orphaned and 
admitted to the poor-house when twenty-one years old, has an ille- 
gitimate child bound out; the father, one brother and one sister have 
been paupers; an idiot female, illegitimate and incestuous offspring, 
twenty-eight years old and an inmate from birth; and a woman, 
widowed, aged one hundred and four years, eight years in the house. 
In 1869, this county sent the more violent and disturbed cases of 
its chronic insane, then in the county poor-house, to the Willard 
Asylum at Ovid ; and since then the authorities, from time to time, 
have transferred others of this class to that institution. The number 
in the State Asylum at the time of the inquiry was eleven ; in the 
county poor-house nine — total, being provided for by the county, 
twentj'. Those under local care were all mild, quiet cases, and pre- 
^nted no characteristics of special interest. 

Fulton County. 

The Fulton county poor-house is a wooden building, with capacity 
for about one hundred persons, and is situated near Gloversville. 

Upon the occasion of the examination, the institution had in its 
care fifty-eight (58) pauper inmates ; of these thirty (30) were males 
and twenty-eight (28) were females. Forty -seven were born in New 
York, five in other States of the Union, and six in foreign countries. 
The parents of these were also mainly of native birth. Four of the 
inmates were under two years old ; nine were between the ages of 
two and sixteen years; nineteen between sixteen and fifty ; eighteen 
between fifty and seventy, and eight were over seventy years of age. 
Seventeen were admitted before they reached the age of twenty 
j'ears; twenty-six when between the ages of twenty and fifty years, 
and fifteen after they had passed the latter age. Fifteen had been in 
the house less than one year; nineteen one year and less than five 
years; twenty-one five years and less than twenty, and three over 



62 

twenty years. The whole time spent by all the inmates in the insti- 
tution when the examination was made, amounted to two hundred 
and seventy-six years ; being an average of 4.76 years to each person. 

The examination showed considerable grouping of near relatives 
in the institution, the number of families represented being forty- 
three. These families, in three generations, as far as could be learned, 
had produced seventy-nine public dependents, eight insane, twelve 
idiots, and forty-seven intemperate persons. Seven of the inmates 
were the offspring of pauper fathers, and thirteen of pauper mothers. 
In four instances the pauperism had descended through three genera- 
tions on the paternal side, and in one instance on the maternal side. 
Fourteen had pauper brother, thirteen pauper sisters, one a pauper 
uncle, and three pauper aunts. Sixteen of the inmates were heads of 
families, having thirty-four living children ; of these twelve, or over 
thirty-five per cent, were said to be in poor-houses, eight were bound 
out, ten it was thought were providing for themselves; the condition 
in life of the others could not be ascertained. 

The general character of the inmates of this house will be seen by 
the following statement : Six were insane, seven idiots, two epilep- 
tics, three feeble minded and six vagrant ; of those of adult age sev- 
enteen, or nearly forty-five per cent, were imable to read or write ; 
six had learned to read only, and fifteen claimed to have been 
instructed in common schools ; ten of the men and four of the women 
were inebriates, and the fathers of twenty-four and the mothers of 
seven were said to be intemperate. 

A portion of the family groups in the institution jvill next be 
noticed : A married woman thirty-nine years old and three years a 
pauper, abandoned by her husband, having with her three children, 
the oldest aged nine and the youngest four years; the woman unedu- 
cated and indolent and the husband intemperate and depraved, the 
oldest child feeble minded, the others fairly intelligent ; a man sixty- 
eight years old and his second wife aged thirty-six, with three chil- 
dren aged respectively fourteen, five, and two years ; the man said to 
be temperate and industrious but infirm, the woman healthy but 
indolent and both uneducated ; have three other children bound out, 
and those present are to be soon placed in families; inmates of the 
house only nine months, but the parents seem probable to remain ; 
a man sixty-three years old and his wife aged sixty, inmates over 
twenty years, both temperate but uneducated and shiftless, have an 
insane son in the house, forty years old and fifteen years an inmate, 
and also four other children who are aided outside; and two broth- 



i, one six and the other four yenre old, the father intemperate and 
the mother iiiBaiie. 

Other cases serving to show tlie causes of pauperism in the county, 
may he noted, as follows: A man aged eighty-three years, two years 
in the house, is well educated, temperate and reapectable, has one 
child living hut unahle to provide fur liim ; a single woman twenty- 
two years old and seven years an inmate, fatlier intemperate ; is an 
epileptic and has an illegitimate child bound out; a widowed woman 
aged niiiely-six years, dependent only about one year, has been the 
mother of eleven children, all of whom died at mature age, is tem- 
perate, industrious, frugal and (][uite respectable; an idiot woman, 
thirty-six years old, in the institution sixteen years, father intemper- 
ate and debased ; has an illegitimate child, providad for in a family ; 
and a vagrant, woman, aged nineteen years, admitted to the house 
when four years old ; the mother was a pauper and the father said to 
be intempemte and shiftless, and the family heretofore largely aided 
outside. 

This county transferred most of its chronic insane to the WUlard 
Asylum soon after its opening; it now has eixteen of this class in 
that institution. Those under county care are rery mild cases, and 
receive no special attention. 

The probable future of the inmates of this house was summed up, 
at the time of the inquiry, as follows : Permanently dependent, forty- 
two; may recover, if removed and placed under good influences, 
four; future doubtful, twelve. 

Genesee Cohni't. 

The poor-house of this county is situated in the town of Bethany, 
near the village of Linden. The buildings are partly of brick and 
partly of wood, and furnish room for about one hundred persona, 
exclusive of the accommodations for the insane. 

At the data of the inquiry, the iustitution contained seventy-one 
(71) pauper inmates, including twenty-one (31) chronic insane. Of 
these, tliirty-nine (39) were males, and thirty-two (32) females. They 
were mostly of the infirm and helpless classes, forty of them being 
over fifty years old. Seven were under sixteen years of age; nine 
between the ages of shtteen and thirty, and fifteen between tJiirty and 
fifty years. Four were born in the poor-house ; eleven were admit- 
ted before they were twenty years old ; eighteen, when between the 
ages of twenty and forty years; twenty-eight, between forty and 
, HTenty, and ten, after they had passed the latter age. Seventeen 



64 

had been in the honse less than two years ; thirty-five two years and 
less than twenty, and five more tlian twenty years. The average time 
that had tlien been spent in the institution, by the inmates, was 6.31 
years ; the aggregate, four hundred and forty-eight years. 

Tlie greater portion of the inmates were natives, thirty-three 
liaving been born in New York, and twelve in other States of the 
Union. The parentage was also largely native. The educational 
attainments of the inmates appeared to be much superior to that 
of this class of persons, generally, tliirty-four of those of adult age, 
or nearly fitty-nine per cent, having been trained in common schools. 
Of the othere, eight had learned to I'ead ; four, to read and write, 
and twelve were without any education. Twenty-two of the men, 
or over sixty-four per cent, were said to have formed habits of ine- 
briety, while only four of the women were classed as intemperate. 
As to the future of the inmates of this institutioQi it is thought that 
sixty will remain public burdens the balance of their'lives; four will 
probably go out and become self-supporting; three may be trained to 
provide for themselves, if early removed and placed under proper 
influences, and the future of four may be regarded as in doubt. 

The authorities of this county, until recently, have relied excla- 
sively upon finding homes in families for its dependent children, and 
generally, it is said, with good success. At times, however, there 
has been an accumulation of this class in the poor-house, with its 
attendant evils. During the past year arrangements were made with 
the Ontario County Orphan Asylum, at Canandaigua, to provide 
temporarily for such children, as could not be readily placed in fami- 
lies, and since then none of this class over three years old and of proper 
izitelligence, have been sent to the poor-house. This has served to 
break the line of pauper descent in dependent families of the coanty, 
and, it is believed, already resulted in great and permanent good. 

The inmates examined, represented sixty-six families. These fenii- 
lies, in three generations, it was ascertained had produced the fol- 
lowing : Public dependents, ninety-three ; insane, twenty-nine ; idiots^ 
thirteen ; intemperate persons, forty-seven. Of those in the house, 
five were descendants of pauper fathers, and eleven of pauper mothers; 
ten had pauper brothers and seven pauper sisters, but in no caw 
could the pauperism be traced back to the third generation. Twenty- 
one of the inmates were parents. These were said to have in all fifty- 
one living children, conditioned as follows: In poor-houses, five; 
bound out, nine; self-supporting, thirty-seven. 

A few cases of those examined are here given : A widowed woman. 



66 

forty-nine years old, of foreign birth and three years in the county, 
eight months of which have been spent in the poor-house, lias three 
ehildrcn, the eldest of whom, a boy, provides for himself; the young- 
est is placed out and the other, a girl aged twelve years, very deaf 
and partially blind is with the mother ; the woman uneducated yet 
temperate and apparently respectable but in poor health ; a single 
woman, aged twenty-six years, admitted when eighteen years old, 
has three illegitimate children with her, aged respectively seven 
years, three years, and eight months, all of whom were born in the 
house, and also another child, bound out ; was orphaned in early life, 
and being neglected soon became vagrant and idle, and will probably 
continue to be a public burden ; a widowed woman, seventy-two 
years old, and in the house about two years with her daughter, aged 
thirty years, and single, the former feeble and infirm and the latter 
lielpless with incurable disease ; a single man, aged twenty-six years, 
admitted to the house eight years since, is educated, moderately tem- 
perate and industrious, but badly crippled from rheumatism, and 
will doubtless remain dependent through life; a married man fifty 
years old, uneducated, intemperate and indolent, has been two years 
in the house, and previously in jail and State prison, and gives little 
hope of becoming self-supporting; a single man aged seventy-six 
years, has been eleven years in the house and had a brother and sis- 
ter who died in the house; a widower seventy-five years old and six 
years an inmate, is friendless and will quite certainly continue depend- 
ent the remainder of his life ; an idiot, male, aged twenty-five years, 
five years in the house, and previously for some time at the State 
Idiot Asylum, the mother and two other children formerly in the 
house, the latter dying in the institution ; and a married man, fifty- 
five years old, twenty-nine years in the institution, is an epileptic and 
wholly dependent. 

The chronic insane of this county are provided for in a building 
adjoining the poor-house; this building has been in use several years 
but has been recently repaired, yet its accommodations are quite 
indiflTerent. The county has only four of this class of insane at the 
State asylum. The following were among the cases under county 
care at the time of the examination : A single man of foreign birth, 
thirty-nine years old, had been eight years in Ihe county and two 
years insane, is educated but intemperate and at times violent ; has 
had no treatment in any other institution ; an unmarried woman aged 
forty-four years, educated and temperate, an inmate six years and 
probably incurable ; and a single man thirty-two years old, four years 



insane, one year at the State asjlum and three yeani in the honsey ia 
well educated and temperate, served in the late war of the rebeUioo 
and is suffering from wounds, probably causing tlie iiiaanity. 

The other insane cases were naostly of the qniet and harmlete data, 
and presented no marked peculiarities. 

Green R Countt. 

The Greene county poor-house is a wooden stmcture situated near 
Cairo, about ten miles from the village of Catskill. The building 
has been in use for a lorg time, and will need soon to be replaced by 
a new edifice. It furnishes room for about one hundred and twenty- 
five inmates. 

The number of persons in the care of the institution, upon the occa- 
sion of the inquiry, was one hundred and four (104), of whom fifty- 
five (55) were males, and forty-nine (49) females. Eleven of them 
were colored. The birthplaces were as follows : United States eighty- 
five, of whom seventy-eight, were natives of New York ; England, 
three ; Ireland, ten ; Scotland, one ; Germany, two ; unknown, three. 
The fathers of fifty-six and the mothers of sixty-four were also native 
born. Twenty-two of the inmates when examined, were under six- 
teen years of age ; twenty-six were between the ages of sixteen and 
fifty years; forty-nine, between fifty and eighty, and seven were over 
eighty years old. Ten were born in the poor-house ; thirteen were 
admitted before they were ten years of age ; thirty-two when l>etween 
the ages of ten and forty ; twenty-four when between forty and sixty, 
and twenty-five after having passed the age of sixty years. The 
dependence in eighteen cases had existed less than two yeai*s ; in fifty- 
eight cases, two years and less than ten ; in twenty-three cases, ten 
years and less than thirty ; in four cases, thirty years and less than 
forty, and in one instance, for over forty years. The whole duration 
of dependence of all the inmates, footed up eight hundred and forty- 
nine yeai*s, equivalent to an average to each person, of 8.16 years. 
It is thought that seventy-eight will continue to be public burdens the 
remainder of their lives; three will quite probably become self-sus- 
taining, and two may be trained to provide for themselves, if soon 
removed and placed under proper surroundings. The future of the 
others was considered as being in doubt. 

The examination showed the inmates of this institution to be largely 
ignorant, and many of them vicious and depraved; six belonged to 
the vagrant class. Of those of adult age, thirty-two, or over forty- 
three per cent were wholly uneducated. Thirty-two of the men and 



67 

eleven of tlie women were known to have been intemperate^ and 
seventeen of the former and five of the latter, were said to be con- 
firmed inebriates. A lai'ge proportion of tlie parents of the inmates, 
so far as their habits could be ascertained, were also intemperate. 

It has been the practice of this county, in providing for its orphan 
and dependent childi-en, heretofore, to depend almost solely upon 
placing them in families. The opportunities in this direction have 
not alvrays proved adequate for the purpose, and the children, there- 
fore, from time to time, have accumulated in considerable numbers 
in the county poor-house. This has resulted in the grouping of entire 
families as paupers, and it is believed, has served greatly to swell the 
number of dependents in the county. The institution, at the time 
of the inquiry, contained representatives from eighty-six families, 
from which there was said to have sprung, in three generations, one 
hundred and thirty-seven public dependents, twenty-two insane per- 
sons, twelve idiots, and ninety-two inebriates. Of those examined, 
twenty-three were the offspring of pauper mothers, and in three 
instances, the pauperism on the maternal side, had been transmitted 
down from the third generation. Twenty-eight were parents, known 
to have sixty-six living children, in all, said to be situated in life as 
folio w^s: In poor-houses, seventeen; bound out, four; providing for 
themselves, forty-five. It will thus be seen that the pauper entail- 
ment in these families was still going on, nearly twenty-six per cent 
of the children of such families being in poor-houses. Arrangements 
have recently been made temporarily, to provide for this class in 
asylums, and afterwards transfer them to family homes, and it is said 
with satisfactory results. 

The following were some of the family groups found in the insti- 
tution : A married woman aged forty-three yeai-s, her husband being 
in State prison for bigamy ; first came to the institution when twenty- 
eight years old and has been an inmate, in all, nine years; has three 
living cliildren, two of whom now support themselves, the other ag^ 
six years, said to be illegitimate and born in the poor-house, is still 
in the institution ; the woman was orphaned when four years of age 
and neglected in childhood, has led a dissolute life and is now in poor 
health ; a woman forty-four years old, married and having three chil- 
dren with her, the oldest being eight and the youngest two years of 
age, was aided outside several years before admission ; a woman 
twenty-seven years old and twice married, three years in the house, 
with two children, aged respectively eight and six years, the youngest 
being illegitimate ; was divorced from her first husband, said to have 



68 

been intemperate, is abandoned by her second husband a drunken 
vagrant, the children fairly intelligent ; a widowed woman fifty-two 
years old, twenty-four years in the institution, with a feeble minded 
boy aged fourteen years and born in tlie house, has had three other 
children in the institution who now provide for themselves; a 
vagrant unmarried woman forty years old and first an inmate when 
twenty-one years of age; goes out from time to time but soon 
returns, and will doubtless continue a public burden through life; has 
five illegitimate children two of whom are bound out and three are 
now in the house, the oldest being eight years and the youngest one 
year old ; an unmarried girl eighteen years of age having two ille- 
gitimate children, the youngest of whom, an infant, was born in the 
house ; was early orphaned and entered the poor-house when only 
seven years of age, the mother a pauper, and she has had one brother 
and two sisters also paupers ; is thoroughly debased and offers but lit- 
tle hopes of reformation ; a widowed woman seventy-five years old 
and three years an inmate, having a daughter an idiot, in the house 
twenty-two years ; and a married woman aged thirty-five yeai*8, the 
mother of three children, abandoned by her husband ; the oldest pro- 
vides for himself, the two youngest aged respectively eight and four 
years, both illegitimate and born in the house, being with the 
mother ; the woman entered the institution when twenty-two yeara 
old, the husband being then in the army, has frequently gone out but 
as often returns, and will probably continue to be a public charge the 
balance of her life. 

The facts regarding a few other inmates of this institution, tending 
to show the causes of pauperism in the county, are here noted : A 
married man, seventy-six years of age, an inmate only a few months, 
has a good professional education but is very intemperate ; is nearly 
blind and greatly enfeebled and will probably hereafter remain a public 
dependent, having no near relatives able to provide for him ; a wid- 
owed woman seventy-eight years old, fairly educated, temperate and 
respectable, recently admitted, is childless but said to have near rela- 
tives able to provide for her care ; an idiot, woman, twenty-two years 
of age, four years in the house, and her brother, sixteen years old, 
also an idiot and six years an inmate, the parents said to be first 
cousins ; a married woman forty-five years old, an inmate nine years 
and abandoned by her husband, is suffering from chorea, and the 
mother was also affected, and a pauper ; has one child supported by 
tiie husband ; a single woman aged fifty-five years, a deaf mute and 
also blind, nineteen years in the institution, had no early special 



69 

training ; is the mother of one illegitimate child properly provided 
for; and a single man seventy years old and over twenty years an 
inmate, is well educated and respectably connected but very intem- 
perate. 

This county has made no special provision for its chronic insane ; a 
portion of the poor-house building is set apart for the more quiet of 
this class, but the others are sent to the appropriate State asylum. 
The number in the house at the date of the inquiry was eleven, and 
there were nine at the same time in the State institution. Those 
under county care presented no peculiarities worthy of mention. 

Hamilton County. 

This county furnishes aid to its poor mainly in the form of tempo- 
rary relief. It has no county poor-house, but the authorities occa- 
sionally send paupers to the poor-house of Fulton county. There 
are none at present, however, in that institution. 

Hebkimeb County. 

The poor-house of Herkimer county is situated near Middleville, 
about seven miles north of the village of Herkimer. The buildings 
are partly of wood and partly of stone. They have been in use a long 
time, are considerably out of repair and wholly unsuited for classifi- 
cation. The institution has room for about one hundred and twenty- 
five persons. 

There were found in the house at the time of the inquiry, seventy- 
seven (77) paupers. Fifty-two (52) of these were males, and twenty- 
five (25) females, classified by birth as follows : New York, forty ; other 
States of the Union, three ; Canada, two ; foreign countries, twenty- 
nine ; unknown, three. The birth of the parents, as far as could be 
ascertained, was largely native. A great portion of the inmates were 
aged and infirm, only five being under sixteen years old. Twenty- 
one were between the ages of sixteen and fifty years; twenty-six 
between fifty and seventy, and twenty-five had passed the age of 
seventy years. The dependence, in ten cases, commenced before the 
persons had reached the age of twenty years ; in thirty-one cases 
when between the ages of twenty and fifty years, and in thirty-six 
cases after they were over fifty years old. Ten had been inmates less 
than one year; thirty-five, one year and less than ten years; twenty- 
eight, ten years and less than twenty ; eleven, twenty years and less 
than forty, and one over forty years. The average time spent in the 
poor-house, by the inmates, up to the time of the examination, was 



70 

found to have been 9.78 years, or, an aggregate of seven hundred and 
fifty-three years. 

Although a large portion of the inmates of this institution did not 
reach a condition of dependence until in advanced life, it would not 
bo proper to ascribe the pauperism, to any considerable extent, to the 
helplessness of old age, but rather to early vicious and pernicious 
practices wholly avoidable. Of the adult inmates, only five men and 
five women claimed to be temperate. Thirty-six of the men and seven 
of the women were said to have had habits of inebriety, and most of 
them were represented as being shiftless and improvident. Twenty- 
eight were without any education whatever ; seven could read only ; 
two had learned to read and write, and thirty-three stated that they 
had attended public schools. Twelve had been ordinary laborers, and 
fourteen had never followed any occupation. 

The inmates at the time of the inquiry were from sixty-eeved fami- 
lies. These families, in three generations, it was traced out, had pro- 
duced in all one hundred and twenty-eight paupers ; twenty-one 
insane ; twelve idiots and sixty-four habitual drunkards. For several 
years past the county has provided temporarily for a portion of its 
dependent children in orphan asylums, at Utica, and has endeavored 
to secure homes for others in families. The county is still burdened, 
however, with the care of considerable numbei's who were in the poor- 
house in childhood, and, after being placed out, retunied to the insti- 
tution. The evidences of entailment of pauperism in certain fami- 
lies in the county, is therefore, quite marked, especially among the 
older inmates. Six of those examined were the offspring of pauper 
fathers and twelve of pauper mothers; and the pauperism in two 
instances on the paternal, and in three instances on the maternal side, 
was traced back to the third generation. Seventeen had pauper 
brothers and thirteen, pauper sisters ; and it was also found, that 
many of them had other near pauper relatives. Twenty-one of those 
present were parents, having in all forty-nine living children. These 
were said to be situated in life as follows : In poor-houses, four ; in 
asylums, two; bound out, eight; selt^upporting, thirty-two; condi*' 
tion unknown, three. 

The following were some of the family groups in the institution at 
the time of the inquiry : A man aged sixty and his wife aged thirty- 
nine years, and an illegitimate child of the latter five years old bom 
in the poor-house ; the woman with her mother one brother and six 
sisters were formerly inmates of the poor-house of an adjoining 
county ; after being discharged she married and soon lost her husband 



aeus ; 



71 

}j death, since whieli titue elie lias liad threo illegitimute cliildreii, 
two of whom are dead ; her present hushaud a pauper at the time of 
their marriage, Clie child tUirly intelligent and may he trained to uaa* 
fulness ; a man sixty-oue yeaw old, his wife forty years old and tw9 
illegitimate children of tiie latter aged respectively two and liv« 
years, both hum in the pour-iioime ; the man an inmate twenty years, 
grossly intemperate and a piuipor by habit, education and taste, thi 
woman a pauper from eliildiioud and twelve years in the house; Cha 
children may be edneatod to provide tor themselves if placed under 
proper iuliuences, but the parents will probably continue pubUc bur- 
deus ; a widowed woman dfty years old, and an idiot daughter aged 
euty-fiix years, both inmates eigbteen years, has three other living 
lldren who provide for themselves; and a man and his wife, aged 
ictively sixty-oue and forty-one years, eitch twice married aud 
.upers at thcii- secoiid marriage ; tlie man has one and tbe woniaa 
three living children, all of whom provide for themselves ; the former 
ail inmate twenty-thi'ee and [he latter eighteen years. 

A few other cases are here given, showing the general character of 
the inmates of the institution at the time of the examination : A 
single man thirty-four years old and an inmate twenty years, has coa- 
genital deformity of the lower extremities and is nearly helpless ; tho 
mother and one sister were paupers aud the father very intemperate; 
a woman aged thirty-six years, a pauper at fifteen years of age and 
said to have been twice married ; had an illegitimate child when tjuit« 
young and has since Jiad two children, only one of whom is living; g 
idower, aged sixty years, recently adnutted, is educated and 
perate but partially blind ; has two living children who provide 
themselves ; a weak minded single woman aged forty-four years, 
.rteeu years a pauper inmate, has three illegitimate children pro- 
sd fur in families ; a married man lifty years old, admitted to th« 
'-house when three years of age, was placed out but soon returned, 
has, in all, been forty years in the institntiun ; has imperfect via- 
Aiid is nearly helpless ; the fatlier, motiier, one brother and one 
:er liave also been paupers; and a single woman aged aixly-four 
years, twenty of which have been spent in the poor-iiouse; has had 
sii Illegitimate children, four of whom have been paupers but aow 
provide tor themselves. 

ty lias no proper accommodations for its chronic insane. 
twenty-one of this class at the State asylum, and eleven in the 
;nty-liouBe at tlie lime of the examination. The latter were all 
Id and harmless cases and received no special altention. 




72 

. As regards the future of the inmates of this institution it is 
thought that the county will be burdened with the care of sixty-eigbt 
of them the remainder of tlieir lives; two exhibited such traits of 
character as to render it probable that they would soon leave the 
house and provide for themselves ; three may be trained to self- 
maintenance if promptly removed and placed under good surround- 
ings ; and the condition of four was such as to involve their future 

in doubt. 

Jeffeeson County. 

This county early made provision for the care of its poor in a sub- 
stantial stone edifice, near Watertown. The building has been 
recently repaired and enlarged, and is fully adequate to the present 
requirements. It will accommodate about one hundred and fifty per- 
sons. A detached building, having room for sixty patients, is appro- 
priated to the care of the chronic insane. It has been in use several 
years, but is in fair repair and meets very properly its purposes. The 
location is pleasant, the grounds are extended and well inclosed, and 
are kept neat and clean. 

The institution, at the time of the inquiry, contained in all one hun- 
dred and forty-eight (148) inmates, fifty-throe (53) of whom were 
chronic insane. The number of males were fifty-eight (58), females 
(90). Their ages were as follows: Three were under two years old; 
twelve were between the ages of two and sixteen years; forty-two 
were between sixteen and forty ; sixty-one between forty and seventy, 
and thirty were over seventy years old, of whom fifteen had passed 
the age of eighty years. Eight were born in the poor-house; fifty- 
one were admitted before they had reached the age of thirty years ; 
forty-five when between the ages of thirty and fifty; thirty when 
between the ages of fifty and seventy, and fourteen after they were 
seventy years of age. Eleven had been in the house less than one 
year ; thirty-seven one year and less than five years ; forty-one five 
years and less than ten; forty-two ten years and less than twenty; 
twelve twenty years and less than thirty, and five over thirty years. 
The whole time spent by all the inmates in the institution, at the date 
of the examination, footed np twelve hundred and forty-seven years. 
This gives an average of 8.43 years of poor-house life for each inmate. 

The inquiry sliowed that a majority of the inmates were natives, 
seventy-nine of whom were born in New York; sixteen were natives 
of Canada and other British American Provinces; four of England; 
thirty-one of Ireland, and seven of other European conntries. In 
four instances the birthplaces could not be traced out. The birth of 



73 

the parents, it appeared, was about Qjjually divided between native 
and foreign. The degree of intelligence of the inmates varied but lit- 
tle from the geneml average of this class of persons. Of those of adult 
age, sixty-three, or nearly forty-eight per cent, were without any edu- 
cation whatever; two could readonly ; eight had learned to read and 
write, and lif ty-nine had been instructed in common schools. The 
proportion of intemperate among the men was quite large, thirty- 
three, or over sixty-nine per cent, admitting habits of inebriety, of 
whom nine were said to have been confirmed drunkards. Fifty-nine 
of the women claimed to be temperate ; ten were known to be dissi- 
pated ; in the cases of the others, nothing definite could be learned 
Hs to their habits. The fathers of fifty-eight and the mothers of 
eleven were classed as intemperate. 

For several years past the dependent children of this county have 
been mainly provided for in the Jeflferson County Orphan Asylum, 
at Watertown, and it is said, with satisfactory results. The evil 
effects of poor-house association upon children is still apparent, how- 
ever, to some extent, in the county, many of the older inmates 
having been in the institution in childhood^ who upon being j)laced in 
families, failed to retain their situations and returned to its shelter. 
Of those in the house at the time of the examination, thirteen were 
the offspring of pauper fathers, and twenty-seven of pauper mothers. 
Twelve had pauper brothers; fourteen, pauper sisters; two, pauper 
uncles, and one a pauper aunt. In two instances on the paternal and 
dn three instances on the maternal side, the pauperism had descended 
through three generations. The number of families represented by the 
inmates was one hundred and twenty-four, from which had sprung in all, 
80 far as could be learned, one hundred and ninety-three public depend- 
ents, eighty-seven insane, five idiots and ninety-one inebriates. Forty- 
one of those under care were found to be parents, having, in the aggre- 
gate, eighty-nine living children. These were said to be situated in 
life as follows : In poor-houses, sixteen ; in an asylum, one ; bound 
out, ten ; self-sustaining, fifty-six. The condition of six could not be 
definitely learned. Appearances indicated that twelve of the inmates 
of this institution would probably go out and provide for themselves, 
and that eight others, if early removed, might be trained to become 
self-supporting. One hundred and sixteen will ^doubtless continue to 
be public charges the balance of their lives ; regarding the remainder, 
no opinion as to their future could be formed. ♦ 

The following cases taken from the notes of the examination show 
the general character of the families grouped in this institution : 



74 

An educated married woman aged thirty years, with a cliild eight 
months old, recently admitted on account of desertion of husband; 
has also one child in an asylum and two at service ; will probably 
soon go out and provide for herself; a man sixty-three years old, 
twice married and. eighteen yeai*s in the house, has two children by 
his second wife, both of whom are inmates, one a vagrant girl nine- 
teen years old and married and the other a feeble minded boy eleven 
years of age ; the wife has four children by her former husband, three of 
whom provide for themselves, and the other, a weak minded woman, 
aged twenty-nine years, is with the mother; the entire time spent by 
this family in tliis institution footed up sixty- two years ; three vagrant 
sisters aged respectively thirty-five, thirty-three and nineteen years, 
the first two married and deserted by their husbands, each having an 
illegitimate child with her born in the house ; the eldest of the sisters 
admitted when ten years of age, has been frequently placed in fami- 
lies, but failed to retain the positions; the mother died a pauper, and 
the grandparents are now being aided outside; a man forty-six yeaw 
old, widowed and said to be very intemperate, with a daughter aged 
twenty-one years and a girl two years old as inmates, the former hav- 
ing an illegitimate child born in the house ; the man wholly disabled by 
rheumatism and permanently dependent, the daughter intelligent and 
educated and may go out and provide for herself; a man seventy -one 
years old, grossly intemperate and seventeen years an inmate, and 
his wife, aged thirty -four years, thirteen years in the institution ; they 
have two children, both born in the house, and the woman an ille- 
gitimate girl thirteen years old, also born in the institution ; and a 
onarried man said to be one hundred and eight years old, and his 
granddaughter aged twenty-one years, single and probably soon to 
become a mother. 

A few of the other cases, taken from the notes of the inquiry, are 
here given which will serve to throw light upon the sources of pau- 
perism in the county : A man twenty-fouh years old, crippled in 
childhood and an inmate eight years, will probably remain a public 
burden throngli life ; the mother, one brother and two sisters have 
also been paupers; a man aged seventy years, a widower, three years 
an inmate, is of foreign birth and became a pauper within a few 
weeks after coming into the country from Canada; is very intemper- 
ate, badly crippled by rheumatism and oftei's no hope of recovery ; 
a single woman, twenty-five years old, uneducated and intemperate, 
was admitted when fourteen years of age, remained a short time and 
was placed out, but failed to retain the position ; has one illegitimate 



78 

child and is again eoon to become a niotlier; an unmarried woman, 
aged tweiity-oue years, an inmate siuce one year old, is uneducated, 
has only partial epeecb, and will probaMy burden the county tiie 
balance of lier life ; and a woman, single, tifty years of age and six 
years in the liouee; is a deaf mute and wholly uneducated; the 
father, uiotlier and two brothers were paupers. 

Tlie insane were wholly of the ebronic class, iifteen (15J of whom 
were men and thirty-eight (38) women. The facts regarding a few 
of the cases are here noted ; A man ninety-four years of age, admit- 
ted wlien titly years old, and has since then remained in the instU 
tutioD ; committed homicide before itdmission, and for several years 
after was said to be extremely violent and dangeivjus and kept in con- 
fiiienicnt; at present is very feeble and entirely harmless; an edu- 
cated single man thirty-two years old, bei-ame insane while in the 
army, during the lato war; was two years at the State asylum with- 
out improvement ; at times quite violent, and ofi'ers little hope of 
i-ecovery; a man aged fifty-live years, of whom nothing is definitely 
known, has been only a short time in the iuBtitntion and is supposed 
to be from Canada; is subject to frequent paroxysms of excitement 
and it is said gives njuch trouble ; iiu unmarried woman Hfty years 
old, has been in the house over tiiirty years, and little is known as to 
her condition in the early stage of the insanity; is at present very 
quiet and well disposed ; a single woman aged twenty-one, two 
years insane, but has not been at any State asylum, is frequently vio- 
lunt, and is said then to require close supervision ; maternal grand- 
father, father and mother and also one brother said to have been 
insane; and an unmarried woman forty years old, insane ten years 
and three years in the institution, was at the State asylum two years 
without improvement, father and other members of the family have 
also been insane ; is very quiet and causes no trouble. 

The following conclusions were reached regarding tlie future of the 
lane of this county : Wholly incurable, iitty-one ; will probably 
jr, two; future duubtfvd, one. 

Kings County. 
Phis county has made provision for its pauper classes in a series of 
jEldings situated near the village of Flatbush, about tour miles 
1 the central part of the city of Brooklyn. These, known as the 
1 county ahns-house, consist of four departments, as follows: 
B-honse proper, hospital, nursery and lunatic asylum. Each of 
e departments is under the iimnediate charge of a resident officer, • 



♦ 



76 

the entire establiBhment being subject to the general control and 
management of the Board of Commissioners of Cliarities of Kings 
county. The facts obtained by the inquiiy regarding the inmates of 
these various departments will be considered in the order as above 
stated : 

Alms-house proper, — This consists of two substantial brick build- 
ings, one for males and one for females ; the former was erected in 
1870, and the latter lias been in use for several yeare. There are 
also several small buildings used for various purposes, the entire 
department affording accommodations for about one thousand persons. 

At the time of the inquiry, this department contained five hundred 
and seventy-six (576) inmates. Of these, two hundred and ninety- 
three (293) were males, and two hundred and eighty-three (283) 
females. They were generally aged persons, and a large proportion 
of them disabled and infirm. The institution is plainly furnished, 
and seems adequate to the purposes to which it is applied. 

Hospital. — This is a commodious brick building, furnished with 
the appliances and comforts for the treatment of the sick, and will 
accommodate about three hundred patients. It is under the superin- 
tendence of a resident physician, and has a corps of attendants and a 
consulting medical staff. The patients in the institution at the time 
of the examination numbered two hundred and seventeen (217), of 
whom ninety-nine (99) were males, and one hundred and eighteen 
(118) females. 

Nursery. — Tliis department, designed for children between the 
ages of five and sixteen years, is a brick structure having room for 
about four hundred of this class. Upon the occasion of the examina- 
tion it had under care two hundred and fifty-one (251) boys, and one 
hundred and fifty-one (151) girls, making a total of four hundred 
and two (402). The condition of these children was so fully set forth 
in the report of the vice-president to the Board in 1875, before 
referred to, that no further mention regarding them here is thought 
to be necessary. The department has been broken up since then, 
and the children transferred to the various orphan asylums in Brook- 
lyn. All of this class becoming a public charge are now sent, by the 
proper officers, direct to these asylums, and provided for at the rates 
agreed upon by the authorities. Tlie building heretofore in use for 
the children is now being remodeled, and, it is said, will be appro- 
priated to the chronic insane. 

Lunatic Asylum, — This is a commodious, well-built brick edifice 
in good repair, and furnishes room for about six hundred patients. 



77 

ew of the more quiet and liarmless cases occupy the old asylum 
ice. When the nureery building shall be fitted up, the entire 
blishment will give adequate accommodations for nine hundred 
ne. The institution receives and provides for the acute and 
>nic insane of both sexes, the county being exempt from the 
ration of the general statutes relating to the insan^. At the time 
he inquiry it had six hundred and seventy-five (675) patients, in 
under its care. Of these two hundred and sixty-three (263) were 
es, and four hundred and twelve (412) females. As no patients 

discharged from the asylum except upon recovery or improve- 
3t, the proportion of chronic cases was unusually large as compared 
h those of other institutions for the insane. 

Total Inmates of the Alma-house, — The total number of inmates 
ill the departments of this alms-house at the time of the inquiry, it 
►eared, was eighteen hundred and seventy (1870). Of these nine 
idred and six (906) were males, and nine hundred and sixty-four 
i) females, classified by birth as follows: New York, five hundred 

fifty-four ; other States of the Union, eighty-eight ; Canada and 
2r British American provinces, twelve ; England, seventy-two ; 
and, eight hundred and fifty-four ; Scotland, eighteen ; Germany, 

hundred and thirteen; France, nine; other European countries, 
nty-four ; birthplaces unknown, twenty-six. The fathers of two 
dred and seventy-four, and the mothers of two hundred and fifty- 
>e, were of native birth ; and the fathers of fourteen hundred and 
ty and the mothers of fourteen hundred and sixty-eight, were 
ign born. The birth of the fathers of one hundred and sixty-six, 

of the mothers of one hundred and forty-nine, could not be 
ned. 

he following is a classification of the ages of the inmates, accord- 
to the inquiry: Under two years of age, twenty-one; between 

ages of two and sixteen years, three hundred and forty-two ; 
v-een sixteen and thirty, two hundred and sixty-four; between 
ty and fifty, six hundred and fifty-seven ; between fifty and eighty, 
hundred and forty-two ; over eighty years old, forty-four. Twenty- 
it became dependent at birth ; two hundred and ninety-six before 
''had reached ten years of age ; one hundred and thirty-eight, 
n between the ages of ten and twenty years ; seven hundred and 
, when between twenty and forty; four liundred and eighty-two, 
•n between forty and sixty, and two hundred and twenty-five after 
f had passed sixty years. The duration of the dependence wag 
irtained to have been as follows : Less than one j'ear, four hundred 



78 

and Bixty-two ; one year and less than two years, two hundred and 
seventy-three; two years and less than five, five hundred and seven; 
five years and less than ten, three hundred and sixty-one; ten yeHn . 
and less than twenty, two hundred and twenty-four ; twenty years 
and less than thirty, tln'rty-seven ; thirty years and less than forty, 
five ; over forty years, one. The average duration of the depend- 
ence, up to the time of the examination, appeai*ed to have been 4.31 
years; the aggregate, eight thousand and fifty-four years. 

Tlie educational attainments and habits of the inmates of this insti- 
tution are shown by the following statement : Of those of adult age 
and proper intelligence, only two hundred and forty-one, or a little 
over sixteen per cent had received a fair common school education; 
five hundred and ninety had learned so as to read only ; two hundred 
and twenty-four could read and write, and four hundred and thirty- 
three were without any education. Four hundred and ninety -one of 
the men, or nearly seventy-five per cent, and three hundred and seven 
of the women, or about thirty-seven per cent, admitted that they had 
formed habits of inebriety. The previous habits of forty-two of the 
men, and one hundred and sixty-five of the women, could not be ascer- 
tained. The fathers of five hundred and nineteen, and the mothers 
of two hundred and sixty-four, were said to have been intemperate. 

The number of families represented in the institution was sixteen 
hundred and sixty-eight. The dependent, unfortunate and vicious 
outgrowth of the families, in th]*ee generations, as far as could be 
learned, had been as follows: Paupers, two thousand and forty-nine; 
insane, seven hundi'ed and fifty-five; idiots, twenty-three ; inebriates, 
nine hundred and seventy-five. Five hundred and thirty-two of the 
inmates were parents. These, it was ascertained, had thirteen hun- 
dred and forty-five children living, of whom one hundred and fifty- 
two were in poor-houses, nine in asylums and six in refuges. Eleven 
hundred and forty-three were said to be self-supporting, while the con- 
dition of thirty-five was not definitely known. 

The evidences of entailment of pauperism in the families repre- 
sented in the institution, appeared as follows : Forty-six were the 
ofl'spring of pauper fathers ; two hundred and fourteen of pauper 
mothers, and in eleven instances, the pauperism on the maternal sid( 
was traced back to the third generation. Two hundred and seven 
had pauper brothel's; one hundred and seventy-three, pauper sisters^ 
five, pauper uncles, and thirteen, pauper aunts. 

The following conclusions were formed regarding the future of th^ 
inmates of this institution : Three hundred and thirty-seven will prol>- 



79 

J go out and provide for themselves ; three hundred and eighteen 
J be trained to self-supporting industries, if soon removed and 
ced under proper influences, and nine hundred and forty-two are 
te 8ui*e to remain dependent the balance of their lives. The con- 
ion of two hundred and seventj-three was such as to render it 
dcult to predict, with any degree of certainty, as to their future. 

Lewis County. 

Fhis county has a substantial poor-house edifice, pleasantly situated 
ir Lowville. It is a three-story brick building, nearly new, in 
jellent repair, and surrounded by commodious and finely condi- 
ned yards. A small detached brick structure is appropriated to 
5 chronic insane. It is in good preservation, comfortably furnished, 
d meets very properly the requirements of this class. 
The institution, upon the occasion of the inquirj', had under its 
re fifty-three (53) pauper inmates, twenty-nine (29) males and 
renty-four (24) females. These varied in age as follows: under six- 
en years, three ; between the ages of sixteen and thirty years, seven ; 
'tween thirty and fifty, fifteen ; between fifty and seventy, seven- 
m ; over seventy years old, eleven. One was born in the house ; 
rht were admitted before reaching the age of twenty yeara; 
snty-one when between the ages of twenty and forty ; seven when 
v^een forty and sixty ; and sixteen after they had passed sixty 
Lrs of age. Seven had been in* the house less than one year ; 
inty-three, one year and less than five years; sixteen, five years 
I less than twenty ; five, twenty years and less than thirty ; one, 
^*ty years and less than forty ; and one over forty years. The sum 
all the time spent in the institution by its inmates, when exam- 
<i, amounted to four hundred and nine years, equivalent to an 
^rage of 7.71 years to each. 

Che examination showed that the greater portion of the inmates 
i*e natives — twenty-nine naming New York, and two, other 
tes of the Union, as their places of birth. One was said to have 
in born in Canada; four in Ireland ; seven in Germany, and six 
other European countries. The birthplaces of four could not be 
i*ned. The birth of the parents, as far as ascertained, was found 
be about equally native and foreign. The education and habits 
the adult inmates were stated thus : Thirteen had been instructed 
Common schools ; six could read and write ; ten liad learned to 
td only, and twelve had grown up without any educational train- 
§. Four of the men and ten of the women claimed to be totally 



^ 



80 



alv^tinent, while thirteen of the former and two of tlie latter, it w^^a 

wid, had formed habits of inebriety. In the other cases, nothin g 

detinito could be learned regarding their former habits. 

The innmtes represented forty-seven families, which, in three gei^ -i- 
eratiousi, it was ascertained, had prodaced, in all, seventy-three pnbE!^5c 
dejvndont*^ thirty -six insane persons, ten idiots and sixteen inebr±=i- 

ate^*- Ki^hteen were parents having an aggregate of forty-thre e 

living children. These were said to be conditioned in life as follows 
In |\vj>lKmse«^, four; bi>und out, one; self sustaining, thirty-eight. 

A vi^^rv>us system of placing out children in fiiniilies is now i 
toiw in the c^.>untY^ and its beneficial re&alts are quite apparen 
Soiju^ v>f the eviU incident to the rearing of diildrai in poor-hous— ^ 
afjkk.viv^ci\.>ii$^ a* practiced in former years in the county, are, howeve 
;tfi!l oN>ervabIe in the in^s^ttution^ but these are gradually psssin 
AWAY. VY thv.njc examined^ five were the otj^pcing of pauper tathe 
athl aine of pauper tuv^her^: seven had pauper bcodtera^ and 
^Hiuper :}i<>!:^r^ ; and in two cafse$ the panpertfim had run through 

Ch^ tVI lowing were the families grouped in Ae house when tfa 



— 9 






c.vi:aiTtA:iv>a wa:> ;nade : A man atred ^tr^ and his wife seventrTeai 
cld> v:a.\i\>>6jL .^mU \vav>IIy dependent: the fiidier« ntodier and 
!>iv:hci>^ oi :lw Vruier were patipens* and the latter haa pauper 
rivv't^; '.Ki^v^ Xvti iti :ae inc>ci:ucion four years^ and were previouBl, 
.^d^\i oucsxide :k?K^raI v^jiir^: a widowed ^roman* ae^entr-two ▼ 
v\u^ a :ac hoa<j^ :si\ >>Nir« with three idiotie vjuldren* two males 
s^v tciuvcc^ .^\\i :\ti^H\'CiveIy dtly, thirty-^igtit and tiiirty; 
tuochsK u:.^\iuv'<4:\.\i^ >uc !i^d to have >mu teatperaca^ 
rVu^ti!^ :vw ^^^Iv; 'ncvat{.>erace .uid vieoaiied : 4 3ian and wi&» h 
.iX\u o;is' ^v\<i>« uw tOiiuci' 9<'^t^ucy^i^ic, the .actor juty-eigfttj 
.\d . x\v^ cv^Xv .VKi -udiuu .iiid .iivx'd :br :scme dmd Mforw 
iiv^ii . u^c A o.xv;^avVi% XiS 10% ^vV^ :o '.Mrevide Ar 
.viid :^v^' x>.v\^ ,Vvi dK\iv\ tiw Sevier ei^ic^n ind tba younger 
vvA,^ , : i^v% ii:i.u<.v> .HO ^0^*.. AW 'ACtt^'f .ind :ttccherp 

X*.C A* \h'C X\-* ^^ HC*A^ 'lUviW'v. 

'i<^*CvvV\\ > >v0.i A .\, V.\vv\^ *i 1 Aiv. > . i %CiUaU ;^i^ 

^*»d ws: % ^k.v,.vv»k^ \.c» \n^s , ...\ . .»s ^v«.^ '' 'vi xa«se» Mff r' 
ouixivvi ^. - \ V ' s^ i '. :\ V v; \ s V* . > \ . .• . V, Hv ^1 >csOii . ^ :rie ■Tii>cner oJ 
two'^.^.*'-, ..'.-.vUs X .\ ^ ^ >s\^ '•..' * vxv ■^. « '•■ ^^iL»:t ^ded one- 
>4de 4 A^^i s.iOK i^sv ^x uss . ^ . . > '^ss*. ? ... vv cia»> -1 rae inscitii-^'"^ 





tion ; liitd a weak miiid«^ pitupur eUter, tlie tniiClier of twu ille^iti- 
iiiAte childrtsn ; the tacher Buiii to have been an habitual drunkard.; 
and a inamed Jtian sixty-live years of age, weak iiuiided and nearly 
blind; has three cliildreu living, one iaielligeut and twu of feeble 
ilitelleul, all of whom, as yet, provide fur themselves. 

The general character of the insane iit this institution will be seen 
by tlie following cases : A married woinau tifty-une years old and the 
Bdother of two children ; was taken insane at the age of twenty-nine, 
■ Bpeiit two years at the State asylum and the balance of the time iu 
tliia institution; father and mother were paupers, the latter dying 
insaae ; a married man forty-five years of age, very intemperate aiid 
three years insane, two of whieli were passed in the State institution, 
iias five living cbildren, a!l of whom it is said provide for themselves ; 
Duthiug satisfactory could be ascertained as to his family or the prob- 
able cause of the disease ; an unmarried man twenty-five years old, 
insane three years, and ireated first at the Estate asylum ; the mother 
Was feeble miuded and tlie maternal grandmother died insane; one 
materual aunt boro two illegitimate eiiildren in the poor-house, 
another, with a child, was an inmate of the liou:iO six years, and 
another led a dissolute life and was also a pauper ; a single man aged 
forty-one years and seventeen years in the house, without treatment 
at the State asylum ; tlie mother died insane and two brothers and a 
sister were thus diseased; an educated married woman forty-nine 
years old, nine of which have been spent in this house insane; liad a 
aister who died ijisane; a married woman, twenty-six years of age, 
iasane two years, during one of which was under treatment at the 
State asylum; mother died insane, and a maternal uncle and aunt 
were insane ; a woman thirty-five years old, married and aiiandoned 
by her husband; sixteen years insnue, two of which were spent at 
the Stftte asylum and the balance mostly in this liouse; mother and 
paternal grandfather died insane; and a single man aged thirty-two 
jears, very intemperate; was taken insane in the army when twenty 
jears of age; under care of the State asylum one year, without 
improvement; father and mother intemperate, the latter being fee- 
l)le minded. 

The ntter helplessness of the inmates of tliis house will be 
observed by the following statement of the conclusions arrived at 
regarding their future, at the lime of the exainination : Of those then 
under care only two will probably go out and provide for themselves; 
one may be trained to become self-supporting if early removed and 



82 

placed under good influences ; and fifty will, donbdesBi be dependent 
apon the public the remainder of their lives. 

Livingston County. 

The poor-house of this county is pleasantly located near tb& village 
of Oeneseo. It is a substantial brick building in good repair, and 
surrounded by tastefully laid out and well kept grounds. The 
chronic insane are provided for in a detached brick structure, situated 
near tlie main edifice. It is comfortably furnished and meets very 
properly the necessities of this class of insane. 

At the time of the inquiry, the institution had under its care one 
hundred and six (106) paupers, twenty (20) of whom were insane. 
Tliey were divided as to sex, as follows : Males, fifty-five (65) ; females, 
fifty-one (51). Sixty-two were born in New York; fourteen in other 
States of the Union, and two in Canada. Of the others, seventeen 
were born in Ireland, and eight in other European countries. The 
birthplaces of three could not be learned. The parentage of the 
persons examined, so far as ascertained, appeared also to be mostly 
native. 

The following statement shows the education and habits of the 
inmates of this institution : Of those of adult age, thirty-three had 
attended common schools ; eleven had learned to read only ; ten could 
read and writ«, and twenty-nine were wholly without educational 
training. Six of the men and twenty of the women, were said to 
be strictly temperate; twenty-nine of the former and seven of the 
latter, confessed the immoderate use of intoxicating drinks, and in 
twenty-one instances, the former practices could not be ascertained. 
The fathers of thirty-two and the mothers of fifty-one, were said to 
have been temperate. 

The periods in life in which the inmates of this institution became 
dependent, according to the facts obtained, were as follows: At 
birth, eight; before arriving at the age of twenty years, fourteen ; 
when between the ages of twenty and thirty years, sixteen ; when 
between thirty and fifty, twenty-four; when between fifty and 
seventy, twenty-eight ; after they had passed seventy years of age, 
sixteen. When examined, their ages were thus classified: Under 
two years old, four; between the ages of two and sixteen years, 
thirteen ; between sixteen and thirty, fourteen ; between thirty and 
fifty, twenty-three; between fifty and eighty, forty-one; over eighty 
years old, eleven. Ten had been in the institution less than one 
year; fifty, one year and less than five years; twenty-three, five 



piac 



83 

lara and less than ten ; fifteen, ten years and lees tlian twenty, aud 
eight orer twenty years. The average time spent in the house by all 
the inmates had been 5.18 years, the aggregate, live hnndred and forty- 
nine years. 

The number of families represented in the institution, was eighty- 
nine. There had sprung from these families, in three generations, bo tar 
as could be traced out, one hundred and tliirty-two public dependents ; 
twenty-four insane ; nine idiots, and seventy-three intemperate per- 
sons. Twenty-two of the inmates were parents, said to have in all, 
sixty-two living children. The condition of three of these children 
could not be folly ascertained. Tlie situation of the others was stated 
to be as follows : In poor-houses, fifteen ; bound ont, seven ; self- 
snpporting, thirty-seven. 

Until recently, this county has allowed its dependent children to 
be retained in the poor-house, and endeavored to edncate and train 
them in a school connected with the institution. A wiser policy 
regarding this class is now, however, in force. The children are tem- 
porarily provided for in asylimis, at Rochester, under lavorable terms 
to the county, and thence, as good opportunities offer, they are 
placed in families in the city or country. The evil effects of the 
Tnier practice of consigning children to the poor-house, are still 
lervable in the institution among its older inmates, and considera- 
time ranst intervene before these are fully eradicated. Five of 
examined were the offspring of pauper fathers and eighteen of 
pauper mothers ; nine had pauper brothers and thirteen pauper sis- 
ters, and in one instance, the pauperism extended back to the third 
generation, both on the paternal and maternal sides. 

The following were some of the families grouped in the ioatita- 
tion : A woman forty-four years old, wiih a boy aged nine and a 
girl six years old, born iu the institution ; was admitted to the poor- 
house of a neighboring county, with her sick husband, sinca dead, 
when twenty-nine years of age, where shg gave birth to her first 
child, and remained about One year; has five children in all, three of 
whom are bouud out; the bDy, now with her, was placed in a family 
when six years old, but soon returned to the institution ; both chil- 
intelligent and healtliy, and if removed might probably be 
d to provide for themselves ; the woman nneducated but said 
temperate, indnstrions and very useful ; two sisters aged 
itively fifty -three and forty years, both of feeble intellect; the 
r single and an inmate since twenty years of age, the latter 
married, now a widow, and iu the house nearly five yea 



84 

Imr oMimL ('liild, h daiij^litcr, aged twenty-one jeare, and also feeble 
miUmIcuI ; liHH fi younger child placed out and said to be doiDg well; 
Mil iuiinfirru*(| wotiiiin twenty-five years of age, with an illegitimate 
olilld tmo ycMir old, Ixirn in the poor-house of an adjoining conn ty ;. 
liMM II HiHt(*r, an epileptic, also in the institution; have been inmate 
inly ahont ont» ycuir, bnt both probably will continae to be public bnr 
loiiM tlu'iMii^h life; a Hinglo woman thirty-three years old and eigh 
>ourii an innii\tn ; is very well educated and said to be temperate an 
M ^iuhI liiboivr ; Iikh an illegitimate boy nine years old, who w 
uilinlttcul with hor, and a girl six years of age, bom in the instit^^:;^. 
ti«n) ; both (*lnldivn are fairly intelligent and if removed could t:^^ 
iminctl to UHofulnoHs ; the mother, debased by poor-honse associatiocr^a 
htu no inolinMtion to leave the institution; a bright, intellige^ :it 
woll odnotitfHl nninurriiHl woman, twenty years of age, recently adu:^ j^. 
li^«K \vith :in illogitimato child six months old; is said to be respe^<>t 
aMv «^Mnuvt(Hi and well l>ehavcd, and will probably soon be remov^<j. 
{4 nin^lo «sOor«Hl girl aginl oightoen years, with an illegitimate eliild 
ono \tvir oltK Iv^rn it) tlu> house; has tlie ability to provide, for her- 
M'll' HUf) A\\\\\s vot will not pri>l>ably do so : a widowed woman ninety 
y^x^ old .ind f^^i^lly blinds with an unmarried daughter aged sixty. 
l\Mir \o,-4i-N itvhlo mindiHl and an epileptic; have both been six years 
\n |1u' hou>o :4nd an^ wliolly do^vndent; a married woman of feeble 
^v.u^^^v^ A^sJ ihirtythixv yoarss alundonei by her hnsbdrnd, having 
A olr,ld x>ill^ h«^r mwlv thr^v yi>ar? old; has two older diildren pro- 
\ )vKs) lov 1\> ihoir tkthor : a man and hi$ wife* both abont fifty jeara 
^''l A<;>\ )^<' toi^n^^r an inniaio ^ix and tite kxter axteen jean, tlie 
\^o*,^,^v' V.'^x ^^ic A*"5 'i',\>jr:iiinau\ opiii'^piir inrl in tbe IwiiBe, fifteen jean 
xv,4^ .vs^» a". ';'V^\x ro vsv^r>.ino doi>otni«ii the babaiee rf their lives; 
nxs"^ V^-ivs-Nv^ a^? nf<s^jX\*;i\C!\v oii""'.! and 5dx TiearE^ bodi intdligent, 
^•-'Os ■ ^ "i^;**^ ^XK^^ x-^-iv; V'X ^nc^\yctr oosii and i^ iiober iatienipeiite, 
•^ x^v iv ife ,\ ,v<^h»s^\; VM A >a?S»'fP<v3 wcanaEB ;i^<ed tiirtr-tlirec 
\s\ov X* «',** ,*»^ ^.^r^'^'^^hc y^rTyjrtC hoinxr Akcoii -Mie ^w old, and 

^"^ ,• -. 1^.. *.i>Mi;i .M^o" .Tte*<^ 11. Tiif imscinsSMi aft tlie tiiBe 01 

V X vM \v>* • '»,' ,v.j!'> A woiiiftr. fC w«k iniieiQert. aced 

V \ ,v • ., ^v.vv iM i».i, M,^ . i.T»:. 1:1"- .f. 'f ;vt>a'^ sa. innuoie: htshad 



85 

ueglected; admitted to the poor-house in early life, went out soon 
after, but returned when twenty years old, and will probably con- 
tinue to be a public burden ; a widowed woman, aged eighty-nine 
years, and two years in the institution ; is apparently respectable^ but 
has no children or relatives able to provide for her maintenance; a 
man ninety-five years old, twice married, but now a widower; is 
fairly educated and temperate; has been an inmate only about one 
year, and is wholly dependent; a colored man, single, aged twenty- 
four years, an inmate only a short time ; is paralytic and nearly help- 
less ; a single man, seventy-seven years of age, well educated, and 
said to have been industrious and frugal ; admitted to the house 
some fifteen years ago on accouat of sickness, recovered soon and 
went out, but raturned two ye^rs sinc6, and will, doubtless, hereafter 
burden the county ; and a man thirty years old, a widower, one year 
an inmate ; lias no education, is intemperate and vagrant, and has 
been in jail for drunkenness and disorderly conduct ; is industrious 
under proper restraint, but, left at large, is said to be idle, shiftless 
and vicions. 

The insane were all of the chronic class, and most of thera quite 
aged, but they presented no marked peculiarities. The records 
showed that a considerable portion of them had been treated at the 
State asylum. Many of them had been in the house for a long time, 
and they were generally deemed to be incurable. 

The indications were that eighty-five of the inmates of this insti- 
tution would burden the public the remainder of their lives ; three 
will probably go out and provide for themselves ; four may be trained 
to self-assertion, if soon removed and placed under proper influences ; 
and the future of fourteen seemed in doubt. 

Madison County. 

The Madison county poor-house is an old dilapidated structure, 
and poorly suited for its purposes. The apartments occupied by the 
insane have been recently repaired and improved, and are quite 
comfortable. The institution is pleasantly situated near the village 
of Eaton. Its accommodations are for about one hundred and fifty 
pei*sons. 

The number of inmates at the time of the examination was: males, 
forty-five (45), females, forty-four (44), total, eighty-nine (89). Of 
these, twenty-one (21) were chronic insane, and two were colored. 
They were classified by birth as follows: New York, forty-six; other 
States, sixteen ; Canada, one ; England, three ; Ireland, fourteen ; 

6 



86 

other European countries, five; birthplaces unknown, four. The 
fathers of fifty, and the mothers of fifty-one, were born in the 
United States, and the fathers of twenty-eight and the mothers of 
twenty-seven were of foreign birth. In eleven cases the birthplaces 
of the parents could not be ascertained. 

The inquiry showed that the inmates of this poor-house were 
mostly of mature age, only three being under sixteen years old ; fif- 
teen were between the ages of sixteen and thirty years ; twenty-two 
between thirty and fifty ; twenty-seven between fifty and seventy ; and 
twenty-two were over seventy years old, of whom ten had passed the 
age of eighty years. Twelve became dependent before reaching the 
age of twenty years ; twenty-five when between the ages of twenty 
and forty ; twenty-nine when between forty and sixty, and twenty- 
three after they were sixty years old. Nineteen had been dependent 
less than two yeara ; twenty-eight two years and less than five ; sixteen 
five years and less than ten; twenty-four, ten years and less than 
thirty, and two over thirty years. The average time spent in poor- 
houses by all the inmates was 7.80 years; the aggregate, six hundred 
and ninety-four years. 

The educational attainments of the inmates of this institution were 
ascertained to be as follows : Of those of adult age and having capacity 
to receive instruction, twenty-nine, or less than thirty-six per cent, 
had enjoyed the advantages of common school training ; fifteen had 
learned to read and write ; ten could read only, and twenty-four were 
without any education. The proportion of intemperate appeared 
quite large. Six of the men and sixteen of the women claimed to be 
totally abstinent, while thirty of the former and ten of the latter, 
admitted having formed habits of inebriety, of whom twenty-one, 
or nearly twenty-seven per cent, confessed that they had been con- 
firmed drunkards. The habits of three of the men and thirteen of 
the women, could not be satisfactorily learned. A large proportion 
of the parents, it was stated, was also intemperate. 

Until within a few yeai*8, the practice of consigning dependent 
children to poor-houses, has prevailed in this county, with the evil 
and baneful results every where attending the system. To properly 
meet the needs of this class, the Madison County Orphan Asylum, 
in 1874, was established. This institution, founded solely through 
the munificence of a distinguished and philanthropic citizen of the 
county, since deceased, is located at Peterboro. It receives and pro- 
vides for the dependent children of the county, who, otherwise, would 
be sent to the poor-house. These are educated and trained for a time 



87 

in tlie institution, and tlience are placed iu faiailies, and thus absorbed 
into the vigoroiia and selt'-supporting population. This tends to break 
tlie line of pauper deseent, in the dependent tamiliea of the county, 
and its beneficial results, social as well as financial, are already felt. 
Of the inmates of the poor-house examined, only three were the 
oft'spriug of pauper fathere, and four of pauper mothers. These were 
cases that had been for a long time in the institution, and no further 
entailment of pauperism in their cases, seemed probable. In no 
iustauce could the dependence be traced hack to the thiixl geu- 
eration. 

The inuaates of this institution were representatives of eighty-three 
families, from which it was ascertained there had sprung, in three 
generations, one hundred and two public dependents ; thirty-four 
insane ; ten idiots and seventy-one inebriates. Tweuty-seven of them 
were parents having au aggregate of fifty-two living children. These 
Were said to be situated in life as follows; In poor-houses, thi-ee; in 
asylums, eight; iu prisons and penitentiaries, two; bound out, four; 
Bel f-sii staining, thirty-two; condition unknown, three. . 

The various phases of pauperism, and the chief agencies which have 
operated iji inducing dependence in this county, may be best shown 
ty extracts from the notes of the inquiry. The following were among 
the cases examined: A married man fifty-eiglit years old, feeble 
minded and two years an inmate ; has one deaf mute child in au asy- 
lum, and nine other children said to provide for themselves; was 
aided outside with his family over ten years before admission to the 
house; a mau eighty years old and widowed; was admirted to the 
poor-house of an eastern county, when fifty two yeare old, with his 
wife and two children; has been in this house twenty-four years, 
where his wife and children died; is very intemperate and entirely 
dependent ; a single man thiny-nine years of ago, said to be a refugee 
from a southern State, sufEering with chronic rheumatism ; has been 
in the house about six yeare and will probably continue to burden the 
county; a mau sixty-five years old, widowed, and grossly intemper- 
ate ; was admitted to the house at the age of forty-five years and since 
tlien has been in various other poor-houses, and repeatedly iu jail for 
drunkenness; the father and two sisters have been paupers; has two 
cliildren, one of whom is known to be self-supporting ; an idiotic 
woman, mulatto, fifty-eight yeai-a old, admitted when ten years of 
age; said to have been longer in the house than any other of the 
inmates; is completely helpless, and nothing is known regarding her 
Kitage ; a single mulatto woman, thoroughly depraved, aged 



^■vwits 



88 

iwenty-four yeara, i-eeeived in the house when eleven years oM ; htt 
been placed in families several times, but returned as incorrigible; is 
the mother of two illegitimate children, in the care of the asylum; 
a weak minded woman forty years old, twenty of which liave been 
spent in this house ; married a pauper inmate some five years since, 
and has one child in the asylum ; recently abandoned by her husband, 
and is wholly dependent; a single woman aged twenty-three years^ 
with an illegitimate cliild one year old, and has another child adopted 
into a family ; was orphaned in early life and bad no fixed home after 
fifteen years of age ; is fairly educated and temperate, but debased 
and vagi*ant, and gives no hopes of improvement ; a widowed woman 
eighty years old, only one year in the house; has one selt-supporting 
child, and one in an insane asylum ; is well educated, temperate and 
respectable; and a single woman of foreign birthj aged forty-«ix 
years; came to this country some nine yeara ago, crippled with rheu- 
matism, and soon after entered the poor4iou9e, where slve has since 
remained ; is wholly dependent, and will doubtless burden the county 
the balance of her life. 

A few cases of the insane examined, it is thought, may properly 
be noticed here: A single man aged twenty-nine years, and an 
unmarried sister twenty-four years old ; the former insane seven and 
the latter four years, two of which were spent at the State asylum ; 
the parents said to have been weak minded ; an unmarried man aged 
thirty years, two years insane at the State asylum and five years in 
this house; is quiet and harmless and considered incurable; a single 
man thirty-three years old, insane seven years; was a soldiei* in the 
late war, and the insanity is supposed to have been induced by the 
service ; has not been at any State asylum ; a man forty-five years of 
age and unmarried ; has been insane twenty yearSj the whole of the 
time in this house ; no other cases of insanity known to have occur- 
red in the family ; a single woman aged sixty years ; has spent twen- 
ty-five years in the house, as insane, without any treatment etee- 
where ; an unmarried woman, thirty-nine years old, insane less than 
one year, and no application made for her admission to the State asy- 
lum ; has fair physical organization and would seem to be curable; a 
married woman forty -four years of age ; taken insane when twenty- 
eight years old ; has been, in all, about three years in the house; is 
an habitual drunkard, and considered incurable ; a widowed woman 
aged sixty-nine years ; has been in the house three years, and give* 
no hope of recovery; and two sisters, twins, unmarried, and fifty- 
nine years old ; one insane three years, two of which were spent at. 



the State aeylam, and the other ono year ; both helpless and regai-ded 

se wholly dependent. 

Tlie inquiry showed that the inmatea of this house were generally 
of the helpless and dependent class of paiipere, only two exhibiting 
powers of self-asseclion so as to warrant the belief they would go out 
and provide for themselves ; the condition uf tbree was such as to 
involve their future in donbt ; and two, it was thought, might become 
Bfilf-Bupporting if soon removed and placed under proper surround- 
^^lOgs. The others, it seemed quite certain, would continue to be pub- 

W 

^uasei 



MoNitOB COUBTY. 

.iThe poor-house of this county, erected in 1872, is sitnated near the 



of Bochester. It is a substantial, well. designed three story and 
lement brick edifice, consisting of a central building and two !at- 
«i-al wings, and has accommodations for five hundred inmates. TJie 
location is pleasant and Jiealthfiil, the grounds are well undei'dniined 
aod finely laid out, and the institution contains all the conveniences 
and comforts requisite for its purposes. The hiuatie asylum is a brick 
etrnctnre pleasantly situated near the main edifice, and has accommo- 
dations for about one Jmndred and iif^y patients. It receives, under 
authority of the Legislature, both acute and chronic insane, and is 
managed by trustees selected by the board of snpervisoi's, a reai- 
it physician having the immediate charge. The expenses are met 
the income from paying patients and by appropriations from the 
inty treasniy. 

tlpon the occasion of the inquiry, the whole number of panpers 
ler county care, including one hundred and forty-six (146) insane, 
three hundred and twenty-seven (337); of these one hundred and 
;y-Bix (166) were males and one hundred and sixty-one (161) females, 
lifted by birth as tbllows r New York, ninety; other States of 
le Union, fifteen ; Canada, eleven ; England, seventeen ; Ireland, 
one hundred and thirty-eight; Scotland, nine; Germany, forty-one ; 
other European countries, six. The fathers of fifty-four and the 
pothers of fifty-five were born in the United States ; and the fathers 
■ two hundred and forty-four and the mothers of two hundred and 
Pmy-five were of foreign birth. The nativity of the fathers of thirty- 
two and of tlie mothers of twenty-seven could not be ascertained. 
Nine of the inmates were homeless children ; one was a woman aban- 
doned by her husband ; seventy-two were old and destitute persons ; 
irty-two were permanently, and thirteen temporarily diseased; 



90 

three were crippled, two deformed and nine blind, one bnudred and 
forty-six insane, twelve idiotic, three epileptic, seven paralytic, six 
feeble minded, and twelve vagrant. 

The following is a classification of the ages of the inmates : Under 
two yeare old, seven ; between the ages of two and sixteen years, three ; 
between sixteen and forty, ninety-four; between forty and sixty, one 
hundred and thirteen ; between sixty and eighty, ninety-five ; over 
eighty years of age, fifteen. Six became dependent upon the county 
at birth; eighty-two before they were thirty yeareold; sixty-seven 
when between the ages of thirty and forty ; one hundred and two 
when between forty and sixty ; thirty-eight when between sixty and 
seventy, and thirty-two after they had passed the latter age. Sixty- 
five had been in the institution one year; one liundred and four 
one year and less than five years ; one hundred and forty-four five 
years and less than twenty ; thirteen twenty years and less tha\i thirty, 
and one over thirty years. The whole time spent in poor-houses by 
all the inmates, as. sununed up, amounted to two thousand one hun- 
dred and ten years. This would give an average of 6.45 years of 
poor-house life to each inmate. 

The examination showed a greater degree of intelligence among 
the inmates of this institution than is generally found in this clase In 
poor-houses. The following is a summary of the fact^ obtained upon 
this point : Of those of adult age and having the capacity for instruc- 
tion, one hundred and eighty-seven, or over sixty-one per cent, had 
been educated in common schools; thirteen could read, and twenty 
were able to read and write. From the admissions of the pereons 
and the testimony of the officers of the institution, it appeared that a 
large proportion of the inmates had been intemperate, one hundred 
and twenty-five of the men and forty-seven of the women, or over fifty- 
six per cent, being set down as having formed habits of inebriety ; and 
of this number seventy nine^ or nearly twenty-six per cent, were said 
to have been confirmed drunkards. The habits of four of the men 
and of five of the women could not be ascertained. The others 
claimed to be totally abstinent. According to the information 
obtained, the parents of a considerable portion of the inmates were of 
the intemperate class. 

The authorities of this county early adopted the system of classifi- 
cation, as far as practicable, in the support of the dependent portion 
of its population. For several years past arrangements have existed 
with the managers of the various asylums, hospitals and homes of 
Rochester, for the reception, treatment and care of such cases as the 




county authorities might deBire, from time to time, to send to these 
InBlitiitionB, Under these arrangements the children thrown upon 
the pnblic for support, have been sent to the asyluins and thence put 
out in lamilies; the sick have been transferred to the hospitals, and 
placed under akilli'ul treatment, and the more respectHble aged and 
infirm poor have been provided for in hotnes for this claas, havhig all 
the conveniences necessary for tlieir welfare and comfort. The 
adoption of this wise policy has served largely to check the growth 
of pauperism in the county, by properly educating and training its 
dependent children, and promptly restoring to society, without loaa 
of self-respect, those who from sickness or misfortune were compelled 
to seek public aid, Siuce the erection of the present poor-house, with 
its adequHte hospital accommodations, the sink have been mainly 
treated in tliat institution, but the arrangements as to the care uf the 
cjiildren are still in force with the various asylums. 

The inquiry showed but little grouping of families in the institn- 
tion ; the chief causes of dependence being old age, sickness, insan- 
i tj and the various infirmities developed by in temperance and vicious 
f>Vai:tifes and indulgences. Two of the inmates had pauper fathers, 
O-mi ten pauper mothers. In a single instance only could the pau- 
P»«riBm be traced hack to the third generation. Ninety-three of the 
*T»Qiate8 were parents who, it was siiid, had one hundi'ed and seventy- 
Si i living children, irondilioned in life as follows: In poor-houses, 
■^ iue ; in asylums, seven ; in refuges, two ; in prisons and penitentia- 
■"ies, three ; indentured in families, three; providing for tliemaelves. 
Owe hundred and fifty ; condition unknown, two. TJie number of 
*'5*milies represented by the inmates was three hundred and ten. 
i-'here had sprung from thete fumilies, so far as could be learned, in 
*-Vii'ee generations, four hundred and two dependents; one hundred 
^iid sixty-one insane ; twenty-one idiots, and one hundred and ninety- 
^iglit inebriates. The condition of twenty-five of the inmates of this 
inBtitution was such as to involve their future in doubt; nineteen 
k vrill probably go out and provide for themselveB ; eight may be trained 

I to self-support if promptly removed and placed under proper sur- 

H t'oondings ; and two hundred and seventy-live are quite certain to 

■ harden the public the balance of their lives. 

■ The following were some of the family groups in the institution, 

■ at the time of thoinquiiy: A married man of foreign birth aged 
■ I "ftventy-four years, fitYeen years an inmate, with his wife sisty-five 

L years of age ; served in the English and United States armies twenty- 
^^b fi*e years, and also three years in the United States navy ; is well edn- 



92 

cated and temperate ; lost his right arm after being discharged from 
the service and is wholly dependent ; a mamed woman thirty-six years 
of age, said to be abandoned by her husband, with an infdnt born in the 
house ; has ah older child in the Truant Home ; is fairly educated and 
will probably soon go out and provide for herself; a single woman 
twenty-five years old, one month an inmate, having an illegitimate 
child with her five yeareof age ; is well educated and temperate, and 
it is thought will become self-supporting; an educated married 
woman twenty-two yeai^s old, abandoned by her husband ; has been 
in the house about four months, and has a child born in the insti- 
tution, said to be legitimate; is temperate and industrious, and 
seems likely soon to provide for her maintenance ; and a man thirty- 
two years of age, able bodied but gi'ossly intemperate, and his wife 
aged twenty-seven years, suffering from general debility ; with them 
two children, one seven years of age and the other one year old ; have 
been in the house only a few days, and will probably soon go out. 

A few of the other cases examined will next be noted, as showing 
the general character of the inmates of the institution, and th6 causes 
operating to induce pauperism in the county. A widowed woman 
eighty-eight years old, thirty-foi:r of which have been spent in the 
poor-house ; has been twice married, both husbands dying in this insti- 
tution ; is temperate, but uneducated and without relatives or friends 
to aid her; a married woman aged thirty years, was seized with 
epilepsy when twenty years old, abandoned by her husband and con- 
signed to the poor-house, where she has since remained ; has an epi- 
leptic sister in the insane asylum, and another who is provided for by 
friends ; is the mother of one child in the care of an orphan asylum, 
and will doubtless' burden the county through life ; a man thirty-seven 
years old and totally blind ; was placed in the asylum for the blind 
when eight years of age, educated and instructed in the trades usually 
taught this class, and soon after being discharged entered the poor- 
house of a neighboring county; has been twenty yeare in this and 
other poor-houses, and seems likely to remain dependent; a weak 
minded girl twenty years old, illegitimate and born in the poor-house ; 
was placed in an orphan asylum when a child, but returned in a short 
time and has spent fourteen years in the institution ; the mother and 
one brother died paupers, and she will doubtless hereafter burden the 
public ; a widowed woman fifty-four years of age, well educated but 
very intemperate; has been two years an inmate and offers little hope 
of reformation ; has an intemperate sqn in the penitentiary, and a 
daughter who is an inebriate; an unmarried woman aged thirty-three 



93 

j'eara, ten years in tlie house ; is au Imbitual driinkard, well educated 
and eitid to be a ^ood laborei* ; lias an iilegitimate child provided for 
iu an as)'lnin; a single man seventy-eix jears old, entered the pooi- 
lionse wlien Hftj-six yenrs of age; is uneducated, intemperate aud 
never Iiad a fixed home; an unmarried man aged aeventy-four years, 
blind (Voni injuries ; has been tbnrteeii yeare in the house and is entirely 
friendleee ; a married man eighty -seven years of age, feeble and infirm; 
is educated and temperate, and has been live years an inmate; has a 
wife who IB blind, and a daughter eleven years old, who subsist by 
begging upon the aCreets ; a single woman recently admitted, twenty- 
live years old, educated and temperate; early orphaned and without 
a fixed home, and is soon to become a mother ; and a married woman 
aged thirty-eight years, childless and deserted by her husband; ia 
intelligent and educated, but very intemperate and debased ; has been 
several tiinea in the penitentiary tor drunkenness, and her mental 
'acuities are impaired so as to preclude recovery. 

Ol' the insane under county management, twenty-one were iu the 
poor-house edifice, and one hnndi'ed and twentj'-five in the asyluin 
building. The former were all of the quiet cbroTiic class, requiring 
'*<i special supervision. Included in the latter, lioweve.r, were a con- 
S'<3erable number of recent eases. Fifty-six (56) were males and 
'• i iiety (90) females. 

The various phases of insanity in the institution, and the cauaes 

'^ Iterating to produce the disease in the county, may probably be best 

^» > own by copying from the notes of the inquiry. A (ew of the recent 

•^efcses will first be noticed; An unmarried man twenty-five yeai-s old, 

^*liicated and temperate, insane six months; father, mother and one 

'^•^fllernal aunt said to have been insane; is quiet and harmless, but 

'-'fl'ei-s little hope of recovery ; a married man aged forty years, four 

^^lenths insane, ia thoroughly educated and of correct habits, disease 

t*t"ogre6sing rapidly aud is probably incurable ; no insanity, ae tar as 

■^nown, in other membei's of the tamily ; a woman thirty-three yeai-s 

<'»f age, married and the mother of three living children ; is educated, 

*-eTn[>ei-ate and of good physical organization, aud thought to becura- 

We, having been insane only one uiontli; a single man aged thirty 

y*are, insane two months; is a moderate drinker, well educated, and 

footed npon as convalescent; a married woman forty-eight years old, 

"fieiJucated, childless and intemperate ; has been insane three months, 

*"(i is not regarded as a favorable ease for recovery ; a single man 

"gwi thirty-six years, one year insane ; is without any education, dis- 

ted, and has led a roving life ; prospects of recovery not encoiir- 



94 

aging; an unmarried woman, twenty-five years old, educated and 
temperate; insane six months, father paralytic, mother intemperate, 
and recovery doubtful ; a married woman, forty-five years of age, 
having one living child ; is educated but intemperate and filthy; has 
been insane three months, and deemed to be incurable ; a married 
man aged forty-six years, insane four months ; is fairly educated, has 
been a moderate drinker and an industrious laborer; had a sister 
who died insane, and his prospects of recovery appear doubtful ; and 
a woman thirty-five years old, married and the mother of four living 
children ; has been insane and under treatment two months without 
improvement ; mother and sister died insane, and her recovery is not 
deemed probable. 

AmoAg the chronic cases were the following : A married man fifty- 
four years old, temperate and thoroughly educated ; before admission 
here had been in a private asylum, and twice at the State asylum, on 
each occasion being discharged improved ; is subject to frequent par- 
oxysms of excitement, at such times requiring careful supervision ; 
deemed incurable, father and mother having died insane; a man 
forty-two years of age, insane thirteen years; is married and has two 
living children, both of whom are in the penitentiary ; has been very 
intemperate and gives no hope of recovery ; a married woman sixty- 
one years of age, and a daughter, single, aged thirty-eight years ; the 
former insane fourteen, and the latter four years, two of which were 
spent at the State asylum ; the mother ignorant and dissipated, the 
daughter fairly educated and temperate ; both are filthy and destruc- 
tive and looked upon as hopeless cases ; a single man, forty-six years 
old, five years insane ; is well educated but grossly intemperate and 
debased ; has led a roving life and been in prison for burglary ; is 
considered incurable; a man aged fifty-one yeare, unmarried, and 
insane seventeen years; is of foreign birth, unknown in the county, 
and will doubtless burden the public through life ; a single woman, 
thirty-six years of age, taken insane when twenty-six years old, spend- 
ing two years thereafter at the State asylum ; is uneducated and 
intemperate and has an illegitimate child in the poor-house ; an 
unmarried man sixty-six years old, uneducated and intemperate ; was 
admitted to the poor-house when fourteen years of age, and has since 
been a public charge, and for the past seventeen years insane and an 
inmate of the asylum ; a single man aged thiity-two years, two years 
insane; is uneducated and very dissipated, and both parents were 
said to have been intemperate ; has led a life of vagrancy and crime, 
and is likely hereafter to burden the public; and a married woman 



93 

Torty-five yeara old, educated and temperate ; lias two sisters insane, 
and gives no hope of recovery. 

The following concluaiona were arrived at regarding the futnre of 
the insane of this county: Nine will probably recover ; the condi- 
tion of ten was sucli as to involve their future in doubt ; and one 
hniidred and twenty-seven were deemed to be incurable. 

»M0ST00MEBT COUNTT. 
This county provides for the support of its poor, under contract 
made, from time to time, by the board of supervisors. The building 
occnpied for the purpose, formerly the property of the county, is 
situated near Fonda. It has been in use a long time but is in fair 
condition and comfortably furnished, and has room for about one hun- 
dred persons. 

The number of paupera nnder care at the time of the inquiry, 
uicludiug tliirteen (IS) classed as insane, was forty-four (44) ; of these 
twenty-four (24) were males and twenty (20) femal(^, aged as fol- 
lows : Under sixteen yeara, seven ; between the ages of sixteen and 
thirty years, nine; between thirty and fifty, thirteen ; between fifty 
and eighty, fifteen, six of the latter being over seventy yeara old. 
Four were born in the poor-honse; three were received before they 
had arrived at the age of ten years ; seventeen when between the 
ages often and thirty; twelve when between thirty and fifty; 
and eight after they had passed the age of fifty yeara. Five had 
been in the house less than one year; fourteen one year and less 
than five years ; twenty-two five years and less than twenty; and 
three over twenty years. The entire time spent in the houae by all 
the inmates, it was found, amounted to three hundred and twenty- 
five years, being for each person an average of 7.39 yeai-s. 

It appeared from the inquiry that thirty-three of the inmates were 
natives of New York, and two of other States ; six were born in 
Ireland and two in Germany; in one instance the birthplace could 
not be ascertained. The fathers of twenty-nine and the mothers of 
thirty-two were native, and the fathers of thirteen and the mothers 
of eleven, foreign born ; the nativity of the fathers of two and of the 
mother of one was unknown. 

Of the inmates of proper age and having capacity to receive 
instruction, only eleven had enjoyed the advantages of common 
Bohool training ; two had learned to read and eight to read and write. 
The remainder were without any education. One man and three 
men claimed to have been totally abstinent, while in the cases of 



96 

six of the fonner and four of the latter, nothing could be satisfac- 
torily learned regarding their habits. All of the others confessed 
intemperate practices, and thirteen were said to have been habitual 
drunkards. The parents of a considerable portion of the inmates 
were known also to have been intemperate. 

This countv has never availed itself of the accommodations of 
orphan asvlams, to anv considerable extent, in the care of its depend- 
ent children, but relied mainly upon placing them direct in families. 
In the absence of proper opportunities offering so to dispose of them 
they have been sent, for the nme being, to the poor-house. As a con- 
sequence, the children from time to time have accumulated in this 
institution, thus perpetuating panj^rism in families, and resulting in 
great and lasting evils. Of the inmates at the date of the examina- 
tion, nine were the offspring of pauper fathers and twelve of pauper 
mothers ; eight had pauper brothers and thirteen pauper sisters, and 
in two cases, both on the paternal and maternal side, the panperism 
was found to run back to the third generation. The number of fami- 
lies represented in the institution by the inmates was thirty-six, 
from which families there had sprung in three generations, as far as 
could be ascertained, iifVy-seven public dependents, twenty-one insane 
persons, eight idiots and thirty-three inebriates. Ten of those exam- 
ined were parents having, in all, it was said, twenty-two living chil- 
dren, situated in life as follows: In poor-houses, four; in asylums, 
one ; bound out, three ; self-supporting, fourteen. 

The following cases, taken from the notes of the inquiry, will serve 
to show the more pn.»minent causes which have operated to induce 
panperism in this county : A woman twenty years old, illegitimate, 
piled ncated and vagrant ; has two children in the bouse aged respect- 
ively three years, and six months, both ill^timate, and the latter 
born in the institution ; recently married an intemperate crippled 
man, formerly a paupen and the county will doubtless be farther 
burdened with additional progeny ; a widowed woman, twice mar- 
ried, aged seventy-five years, and seven years an inmate ; is unedu- 
cated but temperate and apparently respectable ; has one self-support- 
ing child, but is likely to continue a public chai^; two feeble 
minded sisters, the elder aged twenty-one, and the younger fifteen 
years ; the former an inmate of the house eighteen years, and the 
latter from birth ; both maternal grandparents, as well as lather, 
mother and other near relatives, have been paupers, and most of them 
intemperate ; the degeneracy of the family renders it probable that 
other dependents may spring from it unless stringent precautioDary 



97 

measures are adopted; a single woman twenty years old, blind since 
five years of age, and two brothers aged respectively fifteen and nine 
years, the former epileptic and the latter idiotic, offspring of con- 
sanguineous marriage and three years inmates; both father and 
mother and three other of their children have been paupers, the par- 
ents being uneducated and grossly intemperate; the entire family 
physically and mentally degenerated from long practices of dissipa- 
tion and debauchery, some of its members being found in the poor- 
house of an adjoining county, and the public seems likely to be 
largely burdened with its support until wholly extinct ; a man and 
his wife, the former fifty-six years of age and the latter thirty -eight ; 
admitted to the house, with one child, eleven years ago, since which 
time three children have been born to them, the two youngest being 
in the institution ; the man of good intellect but uneducated, intem- 
perate and crippled; the woman of pauper descent, shiftless and 
ignorant but the children fairly intelligent ; a man seventy-four yeai*s 
old, twice married but childless; had no opportunities for an educa- 
tion and formed habits of dissipation in early life; has been an 
inmate three years, prior to which he served a short term in the peni- 
tentiary, and is not probable to reform ; a weak minded woman, 
mulatto, forty-five years old, father intemperate and mother ignorant 
and debased ; has been six years an inmate and is wholly dependent ; 
and a married man sixty years of age, three of which have been spent 
in the institution ; is well educated but intemperate and debased ; 
has been frequently in jail and once in the penitentiary for drunken- 
ness, and is deemed incorrigible. 

This county has made no special provision for its chronic pauper 
insane, but avails itself mainly of the State accommodations for this 
class. The following were among those under county care at the 
time of the inquiry : An unmarried man fifty years old and twenty 
years insane ; is educated and temperate and causes little trouble ; 
was in the State prison for theft before taken insane, but has not 
been at the State asylum ; a man thirty years of age, single, and 
insane ten years ; was at the State asylum for a time without improve- 
ment, and is wholly dependent ; the mother died a pauper, and an 
idiot brother eighteen years old has been in the house since ten j^ears 
of age; a single woman aged forty years, well educated and temper- 
ate ; has been insane eight years, two of which were passed at the 
State asylum ; is very quiet and labors to a considerable extent, but 
considered incurable; an unmarried woman forty-five years old, 
insane three years without having been at the State asylum ; is fairly 



98 

educated, and once possessed propei'ty but lost it through improvi- 
dence; is now entirely dependent, and* offers no hope of reoovery ; a 
married woman aged fifty years, insane twenty-two years and aban- 
doned by her husband ; was under treatment at the State asylum in 
the early stage of the disease without improvement, and will proba- 
bly remain a public burden through life ; and a single man thirty 
years old, ten years insane, two of which were spent at the State 
asylum and eight in this house ; the mother and one brother died 
paupers, yet no other members of the family are known to have been 
insane ; is quiet and harmless but wholly dependent and regarded as 
incurable. 

The following conclusions formed as to the probable future of the 
inmates of this house, show their general helplessness and also the 
extent of the burden thrown upon the county for their care hereaf- 
ter : The condition of four was such as to render their future doubt- 
ful; two, it was thought, might be trained to self-supporting labor if 
soon removed and given proper opportunities ; and thirty-eight 
appeared quite sure to remain dependent the remainder of their 

lives. 

New York Count r. 

The variouB departments of charities, constituting the alms-house 
of New York county and city, are situated mainly upon the several 
islands formed by the Harlem and East rivers, and are under the 
general control of the Commissioners of Public Chai'ities and Cor- 
rection of New York, who also direct the management of the peni- 
tentiaries, work-houses and city prisons. The following is a list of 
those several institutions: Alms-house proper, hospital for incura- 
bles. New York city lunatic asylum, epileptic and paralytic hospital. 
New York city asylum for the insane, nurseries and nursery hospi- 
tals, idiot asylum, and infant hospital. Besides these institutions 
there are also Bellevue hospital, at the foot of Twenty-sixth street. 
East river ; the charity and small-pox hospitals, on Blackwell's 
island ; and the relapsing fever hospital, on Hart's island. As these 
latter institutions are devoted mostly to the treatment of cases who, 
upon recovery, go out and provide for themselves, no examination of 
their inmates was conducted. 

The ^Alms-house proper, — This institution, devoted to the care 
of the aged, is situated on Blackwell's island, and consists of a depart- 
ment for males and a department for females. The former contained 
five hundred and seventy-five (575) and the latter five hundred and 
twenty-four (524) inmates. In these numbers are included one hun- 



9S 



:j-sis (146) blind persons, generally aged, provided for 
in separate wards and under speciiil aiiperviaion, Tlie buildings are 
substantial stone structnrea, and altboiigh in use a long time, they 
are in fair preservation. The entii* department has acconiniodations 
for about twelve hundred pereons. Of those under care at the 
time of the inquiry it was tliouglit that nine hundred and fii\y- 
eigbt, or nearly eighty-eight per cent, would probably burden the 
public the remainder of their lives. The condition of the others van 
such ae to ofl'er but little ho]>e that any considerable portion of them 
would, hereafter, become self-supporting citizens. 

The Hospital for IncitraUea is situated on Blackwell's island, 
near the alms-lionse proper. The buildings are single-story pavilionB, 
built of wood, and have room for about one hundred and twenty-five 
patients. The number under care at the time of the examination, 
was one luindred and five (105), of whom filty-one (51) were males 
and fii1:y-four (54) females. All except three were over forty years 
old, and thirty had pasaed the age of eighty years ; thirteen were 
native and ninety-two foreign born. At the time of the inquiry 
they iiad spent an aggregate of five hundred and fifty-sis years in 
the instiiution, an average of nearly five and one-third years to each 
pereon. It seemed quite probable that tlie entire number would con- 
tinue to bo dependent hereafter upon public charity. 

jVtfKJ York City Lunatic Asylum. — This asylum is located on the 
northerly extrenn'ty of Blackwell's island. The principal building is a 
stone edifit;^, erected in 1848, and has room for about six nundred 
insane. Connected with tin's are several single-Story wooden pavilions, 
and also a number of other out-buildings appropriated to patients. 
The whole number of insane under care upon the occasion of the 
esamination was eleven hundred and sixty-five (1,165); of these 
twenty-seven (27) were males and eleven hundred and thirty-eight 
(1,138) females; one thousand one hundred and furty-fonr (1,144) 
were wiiite and twenty-one (21) colored. The number of native 
birth was one linndred and seventy-one ; of foreign birth, nine hun- 
dred and ninety-tour. The fathers of three and the motliers of two, 
only, wore born in the United States; the paternal birth of one 
hundred and forty-seven and rhe maternal birth of one hundred and 
forty-six could not be learned. The parents of the othera were 
foreign born. 

The following classification as to the ages was made from the 
records of the institution ; Under twenty years old, twelve ; between 
tlie ages of twenty and forty years, five hundred and ninety-two ; 



100 

between forty and sixty, four hundred and ninety-seven ; over sixty 
years old, sixty-four. Fifty-three became insane before they had 
reached the age of twenty years ; three hundred and sixty-sevefi when 
between the ages of twenty and thirty ; three hundred and eighty- 
seven when between thirty and forty ; two hundred and forty-eight 
when between forty and fifty ; seventy-seven when between fifty 
and sixty ; and thirty-three after they had passed the age of sixty 
years. One hundred and twenty-eight had been under care less than 
one year; one hundred and sixty-nine one year and less than two 
years; three hundred and fifty two years and less than five; three 
hundred and twenty-one five years and less than ten ; one hundred 
and forty ten years and less than twenty ; fifty twenty years and less 
than thirty ; six thirty years and less than forty ; and one over forty 
years. The average time which had been spent in the asylum per 
inmate was 5.62 years, the aggregate time six thousand, five hundred 
and fifty-seven years. 

The probable future of the inmates of tliis institution, according 
to the opinion of the resident physician, is as follows: Permanently 
dependent, seven hundred and thirty-four; will most likely recover 
and provide for themselves, twenty-two ; future doubtful, four hun- 
dred and nine. 

The Epileptic and Paralytic Hospital is situated near the luna- 
tic asylum, the buildings being of wood and in the pavilion style of 
architecture. The number of patients in its charge was, males sixty- 
three (63), females forty-five (45), total one hundred and eight (108). 
Of these fifty-seven (57) were epileptics, forty-seven (47) paralytics, 
and four (4) were suffering with* other forms of mental diseases. 
Forty-three were native and sixty-five fofeign born. The great- 
est portion were in middle life, and only fifteen had been in the hos- 
pital over five years. The aggregate time spent by all the patients 
in the institution, at the time of the inquiry, was two hundred and 
sixty years, being an average of 2.40 years to each person. It was 
thought that only one was likely to recover, and that fifty-five were 
hopelessly dependent. The condition of the others was such as to 
render it extremely doubtful as to their future. 

New York City Asylum for Insane. — This institution is a com- 
manding brick edifice, recently erected, situated on Ward's island. 
It is used exclusively for men, many of the patients having been 
transferred from the.asylum on Black well's island. The number of 
insane under its care at the time of the examination was six hundred 
and seventy-five (675), of whom seventeen (17) were colored. One 



hnodred and sixty-one were of native birtli, and five hundred and 

foHvteen foreign born, classified as to agee as follows ; Under thirty 

years, one hundred and eighty-one; between the ages of thirty and 

fifty years, three hundred and ninety-seven ; between fifty and 

seventy, ninety-one ; over seventy years old, six. Thirty-five became 

ui6aue before they were twenty years of age ; four hundred and forly- 

Lrniue when between the ages of twenty and forty years; one hundred 

Bfmd Beveuty-four when between forty and sixiy ; and seventeen after 

I they had passed the latter age. One hundred and thirty had been 

in tlie institution less than one year; one hundred and twenty-six 

one year and less than two years ; three hundred and eighty -five two 

years and less than five ; and thirty-four over five years. The average 

time for each pei-son under care had been a little over two years; 

the aggregate time one thousand four hundi'ed and ninety-seven 

[jyeai-a. 

m The records of this asyJum regai-ding the antecedents of the 
PpatleDte, especially as to their educational attainments and habits are 
kept and preserved with gieat care. From these the followinj^ facts 
were collected respecting those in the institution at the time of the 
inquiry : Two hundred and twenty-one had been instructed in the 
branches tauglit in common schools ; two hundred and thirty-five had 
learned so as to read and write ; one hundred and one so as to read 
only ; and one hundred and eighteen were without any education. 
Their previous habils appeared to have been as follows: Totally 
abstinent, thirty ; moderate drinkers, one hundred and seventy-eight; 
periodical drinkers, four hundred and thirty-three ; constant drinkers, 
fifteen ; habits unknown, nineteen. The fathers of two hundred and 
forty-seven and the mothers of three hundred and sixty-seven were 
said to have been temperate ; and the fathei-s of two hundred and 
ninety-three and the mothers of one hundred and sixty-five intem- 
perate. The habits of the parents of the others had not been satis- 
factorily ascertained. 

The following conclusions were reached regarding the future of the 
inmates of this institution : Forty will probably fully recover and 
provide for themselves; three hundred and sisty-four are quite cer- 
tain to he dependent upon charity through life ; and the condition 
of two linndred and seventy-one was such as to involve their future 
in doubt. A few of the latter may recover; othere will, doubtless, 
improve, hut the greater portion, it is believed, will hereai^er require 
Supervision, and thus burden the public, 
, TAe Xfureerlea and Nursery Ilofjnlals, situated on Randall's 



102 

island, consist of a gronp of buildings devoted to the care and 
treatment of dependent children. The number of inmates of the 
nursery at the time of the inquiry was six hundred and eighty-five 
(685) ; of the nursery hospitals, two hundred and seventeen (217) ; 
total, nine hundred and two (902). Of these one hundred and thir- 
ty-three (133) were adult employes, laborers and attendants, and 
seven hundred and sixty-nine (769) children under sixteen yeara 
of age. 

As the facts regarding these institutions, based upon the inquiry 
and personal examinations by the vice-president, have already been 
communicated to the board, it is not deemed necessary further to 
refer to them in tliis report. It may be proper to state that since 
the inquiry was conducted, the nursery department has been broken 
up, and the children transferred to the various asylums and other 
appropriate institutions of the city. The nursery hospitals, however, 
are still maintained, and have under care a considerable number of 
sick, feeble and infirm children. 

The Idiot Asylum^ situated on Randall's island, erected in 1866, 
is a well-conditioned building, appropriately furnished and sur- 
rounded by finely conditioned grounds. It receives both the teach- 
able and unteachable classes, and possesses proper facilities fur* 
instruction and custodial care. The number of idiots in the asyluna. 
at the time of the examination was one hundred and sixty-five (165)^ 
of whom sixty-five (65) were under sixteen years of age. Ther(5 
were also eighteen (18) adult paupers, engaged as laborers; thus mak- 
ing, in all, one hundred and eiglity-three (183) inmates. Of thos^ 
classed as idiots, twenty-seven were suft'ering from epilepsy and two 
from general paralysis. One hundred and twenty-seven were native 
and fifty-six foreign born. The average time of dependence per 
inmate had been about four and one-third years. 

Infant Hospital. — This institution, also situated on RandaH'r^ 
island, is a commodious brick structure, erected in 1868. It receives 
nursing mothers with their children, and such foundlings and homeless 
infants as from time to time may be thrown upon the public for care. 
The number of inmates at the date of the examination was, males, 
one hundred and fifty-seven (157) ; females, three hundred and four 
(304); total, four hundred and sixty-one (461). Of these two hun- 
dred and sixty-five were under ten years of age, one hundred and 
eighty-eight being less than two years old. The number of mothers, 
nursing women and attendants was one hundred and ninety-six. 

The following summary of facts regarding the nativity, duration 



■108 



>endetice, etc., of tliose under care were obtained from tbe 
)rds of the institution : Tlireo hundred and nine, or over sixty- 
n per cent, were born in the United States. The fathera of 
5 hnndred and twenty-six and tlie mothers of three hundred and 
hitj were of foreign biilli. The birthplaces of the fathers of 
Ighty-Boven and of tlie mothers of fifty-six could not be ascertained. 
! hundred and six had been dependent from birtii, and three 
iondred and twenty-five had been in the institution less than one 
Thirteen were known to have iiad pauper fathers, and two 
hundred and four pauj^r mothers, Eigbty-four were said to be ille- 
gitimate. The average time spent in the institution, per inmate, 
Lad been less than one year. 

The iioepital is under the control of a resident physician, and has 
a number of paid nurses and attendants. Previous to 1868, infants 
and foundlings were sent to the alms-iiuuse and placed under pauper 
female inmates, and the rate of mortality was exceedingly large ; the 
i^atio of deaths under the present sysleiu lias been greatly diminished, ■ 

Iiing, it is said, about the same as the rate of infant mortality in 
te city. 
'General Summary. — The whole number of pauper inmates in the 
krious departments of the New York alma-house at the time of the 
lamination, it appears, was four thousand six hundred and ninety- 
glit (4,698) ; of whom two thousand two hundred and thirty-two 
(S,232) were males and two tiionaand tour hundred and sixty-six 
(2,466) females, classified as follows: Homeless children, one thou- 
sand and fifteen ; women rendered homeless by the abandonment of 
their husbands, sixty-six ; women lionietesB on account of the death 
of tlieir hiisbanda, twenty-nne ; old and destitute pcrsone, four hundred 
and sixty-seven ; permanently disabled persons from disease or sick- 
ness, two hundred and eight ; temporarily disabled persona, sixty- 
nine ; crippled and deformed, eighty-seven; blind persons, one hun- 
dred and fii^y-two; deaf mutes, tliree ; insane, one thousand eight 
hnndred and seventy-eiglit ; idiots, one hundred and seventy-six; 
epileptics, eighty ; paralytics, one hundred and filty-seven ; feeble 
minded, tJiirty-four; vagrant, two hundred and eighty-five, 

Tlie birthplaces of the inmates of this alms-house were given as 
follows ; New York, one thousand four hundred and sixty-nine; 
other States of the Union, one hundred and ninety-eight ; Canada, 
t*enty-two ; otJier British American provinces, twelve; England, 
two hundred and seven ; Ireland, two thousand and forty ; Scotland, 
furly.five; Wales, three; France, forty-two; Germany, five hun- 




104 • 

dred and seven ; other European countriep, ninetj-one ; other 
countries, thirteen ; birthplaces unascertained, forty-nine. The 
fatliers of three hnndred and seventy-six and the mothers of three 
hundred and seventy-nine were natives of tlie United States ; and 
the fathers of tliree thousand six hundred and thirty and the motliers 
of three thousand six hundred and eighty-four were foreign born ; 
the birthplaces of the fathers of six hundred and ninety-two, and of 
the mothers of six liundred and thirty-five were not known. 

The ages of those present at the time of the examination were 
found to be as follows : Under two years old, one hundred and 
eighty-eight; between the ages of two and five years, one hundred 
and seventy-seven ; between five and ten years, four hundred and 
fifty -nine ; between ten and sixteen years, two hundred and eighty- 
one; between sixteen and twenty years, one hundred and twenty- 
eight ; between twenty and thirty years, six hundred and eleven ; 
between thirty and forty years, nine hundred and sixteen ; between 
forty and fifty years, six hundred and ninety-three; between fifty 
and sixty years, five hundred and ten ; between sixty and seventy 
years, three hundred and ninety-seven; between seventy and eighty 
years, two hundred and fiftj^-six ; over eighty years of age, eighty- 
two. One hundred and fifteen had been dependent from birth ; one 
hundred and thirty-two were admitted before they were two j-ears 
old ; two hundred and twenty-four when between the ages of two and 
five years; five hundred and fourteen when between five arid ten 
years; three hundred and eighty-four when between ten and twenty 
years; eight hundred and twenty-four when between twenty and 
thirty years; nine hundred and twelve when between thirty and 
forty years; six hundred and twelve when between forty and fifty 
years ; four hundred and forty-nine when between fifty and sixty 
years; three liundred and thirty one when between sixty and seventy 
years, and two hundred and one after they had passed seventy years 
of age. One thousand three hundred and seventy-four had been 
under care less than one year; six hundred and ninety-two one 
year and less than two years ; one thousand four hundred and fifty- 
four two years and less than five ; seven hundred and fifty-one five 
years and less than ten ; three hundred and thirty-seven ten years and 
less than twenty; seventy-six twenty years and less than thirty; 
twelve thirty yeare and less than forty, and two over forty years. 
The average time under care per inmate was found to have been 
3.40 years ; the aggregate time fifteen thousand nine liundred and 
sixty-eight years. 



105 

« 

TLe educational attainments and liabits of the adult intelligent 
id mates of this alms-house, according to the information obtained, 
were as follows : Five hundred and twenty-one, or only a fraction 
over fifteen per cent, had enjoyed the advantages of common school 
instruction ; one thousand three hundred and twenty-two had 
learned to read and write; six hundred and twenty-one could read 
only, and nine hundred and fifty-three were without any education. 
One thousand two hundred and twenty-six, or over eighty-six per 
cent, of the men, and eight hundred and ten, or nearly forty-one per 
cent, of the women, were said to have been intemperate ; and eight 
hundred and two of the former, and three hundred and eighty-one 
of the latter, were classed as confirmed drunkards. The former 
practices of forty-eight of the men and of one hundred and seventy- 
four of the women, could not be learned. The proportion of the 
parents of the inmates who had been intemperate, so far as their 
habits could be ascertained, appeared also quite large. 

In the examination of the inmates of this alms-house, it was found 
extremely difficult to obtain much reliable information regarding 
their family history. The number of families represented in the 
institution was said to be four thousand and ninety-two. From these 
families there had sprung, in three generations, so far as could 
be ascertained, five thousand one hundred and forty-nine public 
dependents, two thousand two hundred and fifty-seven insane per- 
sons, one hundred and ninety-eight idiots, and three thousand four 
hundred and ten inebriates. The fathers of seventy-seven, and the 
bothers of three hundred and ninety-one were paupers ; three hun- 
dj'ed and eighty-five had pauper brothers, two hundred and fifty-one 
pauper sisters, fifty-nine pauper uncles, and thirty pauper aifnts. 
■*^he pauperism was traced back to the third generation in only six 
^es on the paternal, and in ten cases on the maternal side. The 
'dumber of inmates who were parents was six hundred and eighty- 
^*ne; these were said to have two thousand and fifty-eight living 
children, situated in life as follows: In alms-houses, three hundred 
*^d eleven ; in asylums, twenty-seven ; in hospitals, two ; in refuges 
*^d prisons, thirteen ; bound out, eight ; self-supporting, one thousand 
^^© hundred and thirty-eight ; condition unknown, five hundred and 
^ty-nine. 

The following conclusions were reached regarding the future of the 
^'^ixiates of this institution : Two thousand four hundred and seventy- 
^^x are quite certain, hereafter, to burden the public ; four hundred 
*nd seventy-four will probably go out and provide for their mainte- 



106 

nance ; six hundred and Bixty-tliree may be trained to self-support- 
ing industries il* given favorable opportunities ; and the condition of 
one thousand and eighty-five was such as to involve their future in 

doubt. 

Niagara County. 

This county has made provision for its pauper classes in a substan- 
tial stone edifice, situated some three miles from the city of Lockport. 
The building has recently been thoroughly repaii^ed and improved, 
and meets very properly the purposes to which it is applied ; it will 
accommodate and partially classify about one hundred and fifty 
persons. 

The number of paupers under care at the time of the inquiry was: 
Males, sixty-nine (69); females, forty-six (46); total, one hundred 
and fifteen (115). Of these one hundred and nine (109) were white 
and six (6) colored. The places of birth were asce.rtained to have been 
as follows: New York, forty-seven; other States of the Union, nine; 
Canada, six; England, eight; Ireland, twenty-nine; other European 
countries, sixteen. The fathers of sixteen and the mothers of twen- 
ty-seven were of native birth, and the fathers of eighty and the 
moliiers of seventy-one were foreign born. The nativity of the 
fathers of nineteen and of the mothers of seventeen could not be 
determined. 

At the time of the examination, twenty-six of the inmates were 
under sixteen years old ; eleven were between the ages of sixteen and 
thirty years; thirteen between thirty and fifty ; thirty-eight between 
fifty and seventy ; twenty between seventy and eighty, and seven had 
passed eighty years. Two became dependent at birtli ; twenty-five 
before ihey had arrived at the age of ten years ; sixteen when between 
the ages of ten and thirty years ; twenty-two when between thirty 
and fifty ; thirty-seven when between fifty and seventy, and thirteen 
after they were seventy years old. The duration of the dependence 
was ascertained to have been as follows : Less than one year, twenty- 
two ; one year and less than five years, fifty-one ; five years and less 
than twenty, thirty-six; twenty years and less than forty, five; over 
forty j^ears, one. The entire time of dependence of all the inmates, 
when the inquiry was made, footed up six hundred and seven years. 
This would give an average of 5.28 years' dependence for each person 
then under care. 

The inquiry as to the educational attainments of the inmates of this 
house showed that of those of adult age, thirty-six* or nearly forty- 
four per cent, had been instructed in common schools ; six could read ; 



107 

seventeen read and write, and twontj-tliree were withont any educa- 
tion. The proportion of intemperate, as will bo seen by the following 
Btatement, was exceedingly largo : Thirty-eight of the men, or over 
eigbty-four percent, admitted having formed habits of dissipation. 
Of the women, ten claimed to have been totally abstinent, while 
t-wenty-four, or nearly eighty-five per cent, confessed intemperate 
practices. Twenty-nine of the men and ten of the women were 
known to have been confirmed inebriates. A considerable portion of 
tlie parents whose habits were ascertained, appeared also to have been 
intemperate. 

There can be no doubt that this county suffers very largely, on 
account of the faihire heretofore to provide for its dependent chil- 
dren otherwise than in the poor-house. It is true, a system of placing 
Buch children in families as opportunities offered has existed, but expe- 
rience has demonstrated that this has been inadequate to provide for 
the whole of this class. As a result, children from time to time have 
accumulated in the poor-house, and notwithstanding the effort to 
keep them separate from the other inmates and educate them to use- 
fulness, they have been thrown more or less in the company of adult 
paupers, with the serious and lasting evils attending sucli association. 
The number of children in the poor-house, at the time of the inquiry, 
^8 has been stated, was twenty-six, or nearly twenty-three per cent of 
'^n the inmates. An effort was soon thereafter made to remove the 
children, and provide for their temporary care in the Home for the 
-^Hendless at Lockport, and other appropriate institutions, which has 
®ince been fully accomplished. Tt will require considerable time, 
*^ovrever, entirely to eradicate the evils arising from the former sys- 
^^rci existing in the county, regarding this class. 

The following summary of facts obtained respecting the inmates 
^f this poor-house, at the time of the examination, sliows fully the 
^vilg referred to : The number of families represented in the institu- 
tion was ninety. From these famih'es, so far as could be learned, 
^here had sprung, in three generations, two hundred and seventy-one 
Persons as burdens upon the public and the disturbers of social order. 
^^ these one hundred and forty-nine were paupers; thirteen insane ; 
^Welve idiots and ninety-seven inebriates. The fathere of six and the 
^others of twenty-three of those under care, belonged to the pauper 
^*^p, and a large nnmber had brothers, sisters and other near rela- 
^^ves who were, or had been, paupers. In two cases, the pauperism, 
It was found, had descended through three generations. The number 
^f inmates who wei'e parents was twenty-seven. These were said to 



108 

< 

liavo in all fifty-fivo living children, of whom eighteen were in poor- 
houses and five bound out. The condition of one could not be ascer- 
tained ; the others, it was thought, were self-supporting. 

The following were some of the family groups in the institution : 
A man sixty-two years of age, and his third wife, forty-five years old, 
with her two children, aged respectively twelve and seven years ; 
the man an inmate six, and the woman and children four years; 
both the man and wife very intemperate and debased ; the children 
fairly intelligent and attend the school in the house; a weak minded, 
uneducated single woman, twenty-nine ye^irs old, and two illegiti- 
mate children, one aged five and the other three years ; have been 
inmates two years, and the mother will probably remain a public 
burden ; the children, if removed, may probably be trained to use- 
fulness ; a widowed woman, thirty-three years of age and three chil- 
dren, seven, four, and three years old respectively ; have been 
inmates only a few months; the woman educated, temperate and 
healthy, and could provide for herself were the children removed ; 
an uneducated, intemperate married woman aged twenty-four years, 
abandoned by her husband ; has one child with her, five, and one 
three years old ; have been inmates only a short time; were the chil- 
dren placed out the mother could maintain herself; a weak minded, 
ignorant, intemperate married man forty-eight years of age, and his 
wife, fifty-two years old, a woman of fair intellect, good health, and 
temperate, and three idiotic children, aged respectively twenty-seven, 
twenty-five and twenty-three years ; the family provided for near the 
poor-house, by the county, the mother assuming the care of the chil- 
dren, one of whom is blind and one epileptic; they have been thus 
maintained about four years, and seem likely to continue public bur- 
dens ; have three other children who are said, at present, to provide 
for themselves ; an unmarried woman, thirty-seven years of age, and 
an illegitimate child three years old, born in the house; the woman 
was an inmate of the institution in childhood, was placed out, but 
afterwards returned, and will probably remain through life; the father, 
mother, two brothers and one sister, paupers ; a. woman forty-six 
years old, abandoned by her husband, and an inmate nine years ; has 
four children in the house, aged respectively nineteen, ten, eight and 
four years, three of whom were born in the institution ; the eldest 
two years in the house of refuge for truancy, and is now helpless 
from disease ; the others healthy and intelligent, and under proper 
training might probably be made useful ; an aged man and his wife, 
the former well educated, the latter ignorant, and both intemperate ; 



109 

have been inmates five years, are childless, and, probably, fixed bur- 
dens upon the county ; and a married woman twenty-seven years of 
age, with an illegitimate child one year old ; abandoned by her hus- 
band soon after marriage, and has since led a vagrant life; has been 
c'gJit yeai-s in the poor-house, and offers no hope of improvement. 

Among the other cases in the institution the following may be 
noted : An unmarried man seventy-two years old, educated and tem- 
perate ; lost both eyes by a powder blast when twenty-seven years 
of age, and has since been in the house, being the oldest inmate of 
the institution ; has no friends or relatives living, and is entirely 
dependent upon the public ; a single man, foreign born, aged sixty- 
five years; came to this county thirty-one years since with a sister, 
being then totally blind; has been twenty-six years in the house, and 
as he has no relations to provide for him, is likely to remain a charge 
upon the county through life; an idiot male, fifty years of age ; was 
brought by his parents from Canada when about twenty-four years 
old, abandoned by them, and has since been an inmate; is entirely 
helpless and probably a permanent burden ; a man seventy-two years 
of age, a widower, five years an inmate ; is uneducated, very intemper- 
ate and has been in jail for drunkenness ; has had four deat-mute chil- 
dren educated in the State institution, three of whom are now living, 
and provide for themselves ; an educated widowed woman eighty-four 
years old, thirteen years in this and other poor-houses; has been 
♦wice married, her last husband being sentenced to State prison 
during life for crime ; is said to have been the mother of twelve chil- 
dren, but has no knowledge as to their condition ; has probably led a 
dissolute life, and is wholly dependent; a colored woman sixty-seven 
years of age, widowed, and two years an inmate ; is educated, tem- 
perate, and said to have been industrious; has been blind several 
years and is without friends to assume the burden of her care ; a sin- 
gle noau aged fifty-one years, of foreign birth, educated but intem- 
pemte; became an inmate of the house on account of disease 
contracted from exposure six years ago, soon after arriving in this 
country; is without friends and probably incurable; and a married 
^an sixty-four years old, educated but debauched by intemperate and 
^'icions habits; was once possessed of considerable property, but now 
wholly destitute ; has five children who are said to provide for 
tliemselves. 

Upon the opening of the State asylum for the chronic insane, the 
^authorities of this county transferred most of those then under local 
Cftreto that institution. Since then nearly all of this class coming 



110 

upon the public for support liavo been thus provided for, so that, at 
the time of the inquiry, there were only eight chronic insane, five 
men and three women, in the county asyhiin ; these were all mild 
and harmless, and require no special mention. 

The examination of the inmates of this house led to the conclusion 
that four of them only were likely to go out, of their own accord, 
and provide for themselves. It was thought that five, if soon 
removed, might be trained to self-supporting industries, while the 
condition of twenty-six was such that no reliable opinion could be 
formed as to their future. The others, amounting to nearly seventy 
per cent of all those under care, it seemed quite certain would hereaf- 
ter burden the county. 

Oneeda Covnty. 

The Oneida county poor-house is a commodious three-story brick 
edifice, located near the city of Rome. The building is well arranged 
for its purposes, kept in good repair, and is furnished with every 
needed comfort for the inmates. It will accommodate and suitably 
classify about two hundred and fifty persons. The lunatic asylum 
situate near the main building is a well built brick structure, comfort- 
ably furnished, and has room for about one hundred and fifty patients. 
The location is pleasant and healthy, and tlie grounds are finely laid 
out, underdrained, and ornamented with shrubbeiy and plants. 

When the inquiry was conducted, the entire institution had three 
hundred and twelve (312) persons under its care. One hundred and 
eighty (180) of these were in the poor-house proper, and one hundred 
and thirty-two (132) in the insane department. Of the former, one 
hundred and ten (110) were males, and seventy (70) females ; of the 
latter, forty-six (46) were males, and eighty-six (86) females ; the sexes 
in the whole institution being thus equally divided. The nativity as 
shown by the records was as follows : New York, one hundred and 
twenty-six; other States of the Union, forty; Canada, five; Eng- 
land, nineteen; Ireland, seventy-seven; other European countries, 
thirty-six ; tfnknown, nine. The fathers of seventy-eight and the 
mothers of eighty-one were native born. The birthplaces of the 
fathers of ninety and of the mothers of eighty-seven could not be 
ascertained. The parents of one hundred and forty-four it thus 
appears were of foreign birth. 

The ages of the inmates of the institution, at the time of the exam- 
ination, were as follows : Under ten years old, eighteen ; between 
the ages of ten years and twenty, thirteen ; between twenty and 



Ill 

forty, ninety-four ; between forty and fifty, forty-five ; between fifty 

and sixty, forty-nine ; between sixty and seventy, forty-two ; between 

seventy and eighty, thirty-three ; over eighty years of age, eighteen. 

Eight became dependent at birth ; thirty-nine before they had reached 

the age of twenty yeara ; sixty-eight, when between tlie ages of twenty 

and thirty years; ninety-seven, when between thirty and fifty; 

seventy-one, when between fifty and seventy, and twenty-nine after 

tljey had passed the latter age. Eighty-eight had been dependent less 

than one year ; ninety-eight, one year and less than five years ; one 

handi*ed and seven, five years and less than twenty ; eighteen, twenty 

years and less than forty, and one over forty years. The entire time 

of dependence of all the inmates, at the time of the inquiry, footed 

up one thousand nine hundred and forty-seven years. This would 

giv^e an average dependence of 6.24 years per inmate. 

Xlie degree of intelligence of the inmates of this house was found 
to \>e about the same as the average of this class, in similar institu- 
tions, while the proportion of intemperate, especially in the case of 
the men, appeared unusually large. The. following are the facts 
obtained upon these points : Of the adult inmates of proper capacity 
to receive instruction, one hundred and twenty, or about forty-two 
per cent, had enjoyed the advantages of common school training ; 
forty -could read only, and the same number had learned so as to read 
and write ; the others, comprising about twenty-nine per cent, were 
withont any education. Twenty-five of the men, and sixty-five of 
the \^omen, it was said, had been strictly temperate. Of the men, 
one hundred, or over. seventy-one per cent, confessed habits of ine- 
briety, and twenty-six of the women were known also to have been 
intemperate. The habits of fifteen of the former and fifty-two of 
tli© latter could not be ascertained. The proportion of the parents 
of the inmates classed as intemperate seemed also quite large. 

-this county was among the first in the State to provide for its 
dependent children separate from adult paupers. For a number of 
years arrangements have existed with the various orphan asylums in 
the city of Utica, by which this class of children have been tempo- 
rarily maintained and cared for in these institutions, and thence 
placed in families. The expense, it is said, has been somewhat 
Plater than it would have been to provide for them in the poor-house ; 
OQt this it is thought, has been more than counterbalanced by the 
^^vantages enjoyed by the children, and the facilities with which 
ihey have been placed in families, and thns restored to the self sup- 
porting population. As a result of this policy regarding its depend- 



112 

ent children, the county is remarkably exempt from pauperism entailed 
in families, which exists so largely in many of the counties, the 
source of grqat social evils, and imposing heavy burdens upon the 
public. The following facts elicited by the inquiry, and bearing upon 
this point will serve to show more fully the advantages derived from 
the policy thus pursued by the county, in respect to its dependent 
children. 

The inmates examined represented two hundred and ninety-eight 
families, all therefore, except fourteen, being cases of individual pau- 
perism. Five only were the ofl'spring of pauper fathers, and twenty 
of pauper mothers, and in no instance could the pauperism be traced 
back to the third generation. The number who were parents w-as 
thirty-five, having in all, it was said, seventy-nine living children. 
Twelve of these, mostly infants, were in poor-houses ; eight were in 
asylums ; nine weie adopted in families, and forty-nine were pro- 
viding for themselves. The condition of one could not be definitely 
ascertained. 

Conclusions regarding the probable future of the inmates of this 
institution were formed as follows : Two hundred and fifty-six seemed 
quite certain to burden the public the remainder of their lives; seven 
will doubtless go out and provide for their own maintenance ; and 
twenty -four may become self-supporting. The condition of the others 
was such as to preclude any definite opinion as to the future. 

The following cases, taken from the notes of the examination, may 
be of interest as showing the general character of the inmates of the 
institution, and the souices of pauperism in the county. A few of 
the family groups will first be noticed : A man and his wife, the for 
mer aged seventy-three and the latter sixty-one years ; the man igno- 
rant and intemperate, the woman fairly educated but nearly blind ; 
have been inmates ten years, are childless and without friends to aid 
in their support ; a married woman of foreign birth, twenty-three 
years old, abandoned by her husband, and an inmate within three 
years after her arrival in this country ; has three young children, two 
of whom (twins) were born in the institution soon after her admis- 
sion ; went out thereafter, cohabited a short time with her husband, 
returned and gave birth to the other child ; will be discharged soon, 
and the children sent to an asylum ; three married women, aban- 
doned by their husbands, each with a child as an inmate; two young 
women, single, each having an illegitimate child in the house; two 
sisters aged respectively fifteen and twenty-four years and eight . 
years inmates; the younger feeble minded, the elder epileptic; both 



113 

likely to remain dependent through life, the father and mother hav- 
ing been paupers ; and a widowed woman, eighty years old, with an 
idiot daughter, thirty -five years of age ; both inmates twenty years. 

Among other eases in the institution, the following maybe noticed ; 
A boy thirteen years of age, abandoned by his parents when an 
infant, and admitted to the house; was transferred to an asylum 
when three years old, where he remained nine years ; was recently 
returned to the institution on account of diseased eyes, probably 
entailed from parents, and incurable; father and mother both intem- 
perate, debased and profligate, and with others of their children have 
been paupers; an unmarried woman thirty-four years old, fourteen 
of which have been passed in poor-houses ; was neglected in early 
life and formed habits of vagrancy and idleness; is uneducated, noto- 
riously debased, and has been repeatedly in jail for drunkenness ; a 
single woman aged fifty-seven years, admitted to the poor-house when 
thirty years old ; was three years in the house of refuge when a child, 
and has also been in jail ; is intemperate, uneducated, diseased and 
nearly blind, and doubtleiss a fixed dependent ; a woman eighty-two 
years of age, and an inmate thirty-eight years; is crippled, nearly 
blind and entirely helpless ; a weak minded man, single, uneducated 
and intemperate ; was in the house of refuge when a boy, and for the 
past ten years has spent most of the time in poor-houses; is thor- 
oughly debased, and will probably burden the public through life; 
and three young men, all single, fairly educated, and claiming to be 
out of employment ; have been inmates only a short time, and are 
expected soon to go out and provide for themselves. 

The insane under care were wholly chronic cases ; and it is the 
policy of the county to retain all of this class, who become public 
charges, under local management. Sixty-four were born in the 
United States, one in Canada, and the others were of foreign birth. 
Thirteen of the men and thirty-five of the women were said to be 
temperate; the habits of fifteen of the former and forty-four of the 
latter could not be ascertained ; the others were classed as inebriates. 

The following facts regarding the ages of the insane, the duration 

of the disease, etc., were compiled from the records at the time of the 

inquiry: Sixteen were under thirty years of age; ninety-eight were 

between the ages of thirty and sixty years, and eigliteen were over 

sixty years old. Fifty-three were taken insane before they had 

reached the age of thirty years ; fifty-six when they were between the 

ages of thirty and fifty years ; and twenty-three after they had 

passed the latter age. The whole time spent by them in the institu- 

8 



114 

tioQ summed up one thousand and forty years. This gives an aver- 
age dependence of 8.06 years, while the average dependence of the 
inmates of the poor-house proper amounted only to 4.95 years. 

The following opinions were held by those in charge as to the 
probable future of the insane of this institution : One hundred and 
twenty-seven were looked upon as wholly incurable ; three it was 
thought would recover; while the future of two was regarded 

doubtful. 

Onondaga County. 

The Onondaga county poor-house is a massive stone structure com- 
mandingly situated at Onondaga Hill, three miles from the city of 
Syracuse. It has good arrangements for heating, ventilation and 
bathing, and hospital apartments for the sick. Tlie building through- 
out is in good repair and appropriately furnished. It will accommo- 
date about two hundred persons. The department for insane, consist- 
ing of two buildings, one for men and one for women, is also of stone, 
situated adjoining the main edifice. It is well furnished and arranged 
so as completely to separate the sexes, and also enables a partial classi- 
fication. It affords room for over one hundred patients. 

At the time of the inquiry, the poor-house proper contained one 
hundred and seventeen (117), and the insane department ninety-five 
(95) inmates ; total in the entire institution, two hundred and 
twelve (212). The sexes were represented as follows : In the poor- 
house, males, eighty-three (83); females, thirty-four (34); in the 
insane department, males, thirty-two (32) ; females, sixty-three (63). 
The classification according to birth was as follows: New York, 
seventy-seven; otlier States of the Union, twelve; Canada, three; 
Ireland, seventy-nine ; other European countries, forty-one. The 
fathers of seventy-three and the mothers of seventy-six, were native 
born ; and the fathers of one hundred and thirty-eight, and the 
mothers of one hundred ^nd thirty-five, foreign born. The birth- 
places of the parents of one could not be ascertained. 

The inmates were mostly of mature age, only twenty-one being 
under thirty years old, and many of tliem as will be seen, were in 
advanced life. Eighty-eight, were between the ages of thirty and 
fifty years; seventy-one between fifty and» seventy; twenty-eight 
between seventy and eighty, and four were over eighty yeare old. 
Eleven only became dependent before they had reached the age of 
twenty years; one hundred and twenty-nine, when between the ages 
of twenty and fifty ; fifty-four, when between fifty and seventy, and 
eighteen after they had passed seventy years of age. The depend- 



115 

hi fortj-niiie cases bad exigted lees than one year ; in Bixty-fi^e 
cases, one year and less than five years ; in eighty-six cases, five years 
and less than twenty, and in twelve cases, over thwenty years. The 
whole time of dependence of the inmates of the poor-houses had been 
six liaudred and five years; of the insane department, six hundred 
and thirty-eight years ; aggregate dependence, twelve hundred and 
fortj^-three years. This gave an average duration of dependence of 
those in the poor-house, of 6.17 years ; of those in the insane depart- 
inent, 6.70 years, and of all 5.86 yeai's. One hundred and seventj'^- 
one ivere regarded as fixed dependents; twenty-two, it was thought, 
would go out of their own accord and provide for themselves ; five 
W'ere soon to be removed and placed in self-supporting situations; 
and the condition of fourteen was such as to involve their future in 
doubt. 

The educational attainments of the inmates of this house were 
found to be fiir in advance of this class of persons, generally, in the 
State. The proportion of intemperate appeared unusually large, 
especially in the case of the men. The facts obtained regarding tliese 
points were as follows: One hundred and twenty-one, or nearly sixty 
per cent, of the adult inmates of proper capacity had been instructed 
^'^ common schools; fifteen had learned to read only, and eleven 
^*ould read and write. The remainder were without any educa- 
^*on. Of the men, eighty-nine, or over eighty per cent, admitted 
l^H.ving formed habits of dissipation, and fifty of these were said to 
'^^vebeen confirmed drunkards. Eighteen of the women also con- 
*^^8ed to former practices of inebriety. The habits of five of the men 
^'^d of ten of the women could not be satisfactorily learned. The 
^"thers claimed to have been heretofore strictly temperate. The pro- 
Pc>rtion of intemperate of the parents of the inmates, so far as their 
^^liits were ascertained, appeared quite small. 

This county suflers in a comparatively small degree from entailed 
I^^uperism. For a number of years, a vigorous system of placing out 
^ ^pendent children has been in operation in the county, and those 
^^lio could not be thus readily disposed of, have been temporarily 
Provided for in the various asylums of Syracuse. In this way a com- 
Pl-^te Separation of this class of children from adult paupers has been 
^"ffected, and the line of pauper descent in families broken. The 
beneficial results of this system is shown in a small ratio of pauperism 
^ the population, in the county, as will be seen by comparison with 
^^at of many other counties. The following facts bearing upon this 
f^^iut were elicited by the inquiry : The persons then under care rep- 



116 

resented two hundred and nine families, from which it appeared that 
all except three, were isolated cases of pauperism. The number of 
public dependents in these families, in three generations, was said to 
have been two hundred and twenty-five; insane, ninety-eight; idiots, 
ten; inebriates, one hundred and eighty-five; inmates of penitentia- 
ries and prisons, six. Fifty-one were parents, having in all, ninety- 
six living children, of whom three were in poor-houses; eight in 
asylums; one was bound out and seventy-nine were self-supporting. 
The condition of five could not be ascertained. 

The following were the only family groups in the poor-house at the 
time of the examination : A man aged seventy-six and his second 
wife, seventy-four years old, the former an inmate one year and the 
latter eight years; each fairly educated, but grossly intemperate; 
were aided outside for some time and are now wholly dependent ; an 
unmarried woman forty-two years of age, sixteen of which have been 
spent in poor-houses ; has a weak minded illegitimate girl with her, 
nine years old, born in the house, and has also two other illegitimate 
children whose condition is unknown ; the woman orphaned when 
young, neglected thereafter, and early entered upon a life of 
debauchery and shame ; is uneducated and thoroughly depraved, and 
oflFers no hope of reformation ; a single woman aged thirty-two years, 
having an illegitimate girl with her three years old ; the woman fairly 
intelligent, but uneducated, vagrant and debased ; has been an inmate 
four years, and her child from its birth ; and an unmarried woman 
twenty-one years of age, one year an inmate with an illegitimate 
child ; said to be educated, temperate and industrious, and likely soon 
to go out and provide for herself. 

Among other cases in the institution the following maybe noticed: 
An unmarried woman forty-eight years old, uneducated and intem- 
perate; has spent six years in this poor-house at various times, being 
last committed for vagrancy, and has also been in the penitentiary 
for drunkenness; is healthy, industrious and useful in the institution, 
but thoroughly incorrigible when at large ; a feeble minded woman 
twenty-five years of age, and unmarried ; has been three years in the 
house, and has an illegitimate child at the idiot asylum ; seems proba- 
ble to burden the public the remainder of her life ; a man said to be 
over one hundred years old, a widower, and an inmate seven years ; 
is educated but very intemperate, and a laborer by occupation; has 
one child, unable to provide for him, and is therefore wholly 
dependent ; a married man aged seventy-six years, educated and tem- 
perate, an inmate only a short time; is in the hospital department. 



the 
^B fun 
■ Igei 
^ft the 

V' 
niil< 

eral 

tiid II 



117 

and entirely helpless ; has five children, said to be able but unwilling 
to provide for his inaiutenanue; a man seventy-three years of age, a 
widower, and in the house only two weeks ; is uneducated, a moder- 
ate drinker, and said to hare been industrious and saving; has two 
children in good circumstaucea who refuse to care for him ; is quite 
infirm, and uuable to provide for hiinaelf ; a boy sixteen years old, 
the youngest of sis children, admitted to the house when ten years 
of age; is uneducated, nearly blind, and wliolly dependent ; father 
and mother intemperate, and with other children have been pauper 
inmates, and several of them also in the peuitontiai-y ; and a man, 
a widower, aged fifty-live years, eighteen of whieh have been 
passed in poor-houses ; is well educated, but intemperate and 
depraved ; has ability to provide for himself, yet from habits of drunk- 
enuess and debauchery seems probable lo burden the public through 
life. 

The insane of this county presented no marked peculiarities. All 
were chronic cases aud many of them had been under care a long 
time. Furty-eight were native boru ; one was born in Canada; and 
forty-seven wei'e of foreign birth. Seventy-seven were regarded an 
wholly incurable ; seven seemed likely to recover ; and the future of 
eleven was thought to be uncertain. As yet the county has declined 
the State accommodations fur the chronic insane, the authorities pre- 
ferring, for the present at least, to retain this class under local niiiii' 
agemeut. The buildings in use are, for the time being, suflicieut for 
the purpose, aud the supervision and care seem to be adequate and 
iper. 

0nT4KIO CotTNTY, 

Tlie Ontario county poor-house is pleasantly situated about three 
milee from the village of Canaudaigua. It has been in use for sev- 
eral years, but is ill good preservation, aud has been recently repaii-ed 
tiid iiuproved. The grounds are well laid out and planted, aud the 
'^'" ' air of neatness and comfort. The institution willaccom- 

idate about one hundred and twenty-five persons. 

The number of pauper inmates at the time of the inquiry was, 
males, Beveuty-one (71) ; females forty-two (42) ; total, one hundred 
aud thirteen (113). Of these sixty-nine were born in tlie United 
StaEeB, tifty-six being natives of New, JTork ; four in England ; thirty- 
five in Ireland, and four in other European countries. The birth- 
place of one cculd not be ascertained. The father of thirty-seven 
■ad the mothers of forty-three were natives ; and the fathers of fifty- 
'tfght and the mothers of fifty-seven were foreign born. The nativ- 




118 

ity of the fathers of eighteen and of the mothers of thirteen was 
unknown. 

It appeared from the records that seven of the inmates became 
dependent at birth ; twenty-one before they had reached the age of 
ten years ; thirty-four when between the ages of ten and forty years ; 
tliirty-three when between forty and sixty ; fifteen when between 
sixty and eighty ; and three after they Iiad passed eighty years of age. 
When examined twenty-three were under the age of sixteen years; 
thirty-seven were between the ages of sixteen and fifty; thirty-four 
between fifty and seventy ; and nineteen were over seventy yeai-s 
old. Fourteen had been dependent less than one year ; forty-three 
one year and less than five years ; seventeen five years and lesa than 
ten; twenty-six ten years and less than twenty; and thirteen more 
than twenty years. The whole time spent by all of them in poor- 
houses, aggregated eight hundred and eighty-seven years : equivalent 
to an average of 6.85 years to each person. 

As will be seen by the following statements this county suffers 
largely from entailed pauperism, and the grouping of families in its 
poor-house: Twelve of the inmates had pauper fathers; twenty-six, 
pauper mothers; sixteen, pauper brothere, and eighteen, pauper 
sisters. In two instances, both on the paternal and maternal side, 
the pauperism had descended in an unbroken line through three 
generations, and the pauper entailment in these familes was still going 
on. The inmates represented ninety families, from which it was ascer- 
tained there had sprung, in three generations, one hundred and sixty- 
eight public dependents; twenty-six insane persons; twelve, idiots, 
and one hundred and three inebriates. Twentv-six of those under care 
were parents, having in all, it was said, sixty-three living children. 
Of these, nineteen were in poor-houses; five bound out ; thirty-eight 
self-supporting, and the condition of one was not known. 

The educational attainments of the inmates of this house and their 
habits, are shown by the following statement : Of those of adult age 
and capacity for instruction, thirty-seven, or about forty four per cent, 
had attended common schools ; fourteen of the others had learned to 
read; seven to read and write, and twenty-six were without any edu- 
cation. Forty-three of the men, or nearly eighty per cent, and 
ten of the women, or over thirty-three per cent, were known to 
have been intemperate ; and nine of the former and sixteen of the 
latter, professed total abstinence. The habits of two of the men and 
of four of the women could not be ascertained. A large portion of 
tlie parents was said to have been also intemperate. 



119 

Until quite recently and since the inquiry' was instituted, no sepa- 
:a:ution of the dependent children of this county from the adult paupers 
^%Fa8 effected. It had been the practice of the authorities to admit this 
c^lass of children to the poor-house, whether orphaned or having parents 
living, train and educate them in a school maintained on the grounds 
of the institution, and thence place them in families as opportunities 
presented. A portion of them in this way were absorbed into the 
eelf-uupportiug population, and became useful members of society, 
l>ut large numbers, upon the first discouragement in their new relations, 
xeturned to the institution again to burden the county, and many of 
-them through life. The system recently adopted by the county in 
providing temporarily, in the asylums at Canandaigua, for such chil- 
<lren as cannot readily be placed in families, is said, thus far, to have 
^worked satisfactorily and with good results. The county, however, 
etill suffers to a large degree from the evils growing out of the former 
practice regarding this class, and wliich will require a long time fully 
to eradicate. These evils may be best observed by reference to some 
of the pauper families in the institution at the time of the examina- 
tion, the more prominent of which were the following : A man and 
Lis wife aged respectively sixty-five and fifty-five years, the former 
eighteen and the latter twenty-five years in the house ; the man 
uneducated, intemperate and shiftless, said to have been in several other 
poor-houses, and also repeatedly in jail for drunkenness ; the woman 
temperate and industrious, but feeble and infirm ; have one child, 
formerly an inmate, but at present in family care ; two feeble minded 
brothers, one aged forty and the other thirty years ; the former an 
inmate twenty-five years, and the latter from birth ; the father intemp- 
erate, idle and vagrant, the mother weak minded and died a pauper ; 
a man forty-sixyeai'S old, uneducated and intemperate, his wife thirty- 
two years of age, and a boy and a girl aged respectively thirteen and 
nine years; the man an inmate fifteen years, the woman and boy each 
ten years, and the girl from birth ; have two other children who have 
been inmates, one of whom is now self sustaining, the condition of 
the other being unknown ; the family aided outside before admission, 
is thoroughly debased and seems likely to continue to burden the 
public ; a feeble minded married man aged fifty-five years, and a son, 
an idiot, twenty years old ; the former an inmate since thirty-five 
years of age, and the latter from birth ; the wife, formerly a pauper, 
is said to be intelligent and now provides for herself; a woman aged 
thirty-five years, admitted to the house with her husband, intemper- 
ate, when twenty -one years old; has a legitimate feeble minded child. 



120 

BIX years of age, born in the institution, and since being widowed 
Las given birth to two illegitimate children who are also inmates ; the 
woman weak minded, uneducated and debased, seems likely to bur- 
den the county through life, and probably with additional progeny ; 
a married woman aged fifty-three years, admitted when thirty-eight 
years old with her husband and a female childj then one year of age ; 
has two older children said to be self supporting; the husband intem- 
perate and thriftless, but at present provides for himself ; a woman 
forty-three years of age, married, educated, temperate and industri- 
ous, abandoned by her husband, said to be intemperate und depraved ; 
has been an inmate one year with five children, one boy and four girls, 
aged respectively nine, seven, six, four and two years ; children fairly 
intelligent and if relieved of their care, the mother could procure her 
own maintenance ; a brother and sister, colored, the former aged 
eight and the latter six yeai*s, two years inmates ; the parents intemp- 
erate, indolent and debased ; the children intelligent and may be 
trained to support themselves; a married man sixty-six years of age, 
with a son twenty-one years old, inmates six years; the former 
uneducated, intemperate and infirm, the latter feeble minded and 
both probably fixed dependents ; a widowed woman aged forty years, 
fairly educated and seemingly respectable, an inmate one year with 
an intelligent male child twelve years old ; has four other children, 
three of whom have also been in the house, one at present being ont 
on trial, and the others maintained by relatives ; is capable of self- 
supporting labor, and were her child removed would doubtless take 
measures to provide for herself; and a married woman twenty-six 
years of age, frequently in jail for intoxication, two years an inmate 
with a male child three yeai-s old, and an infant girl aged two months ; 
led a vagrant life in childhood, the father, mother and four sisters 
being paupers ; is debased and thoroughly degraded by sensual and 
immoral practices, and gives little promise of reformation ; the lius- 
band said to be able, but declines to provide for her support. 

A few of the individual cases examined will now be noticed : A 
colored man, widower, and said to be one hundred and eleven years 
of age, providing for his support by his labor until within the past 
two years ; is fairly educated, has been a habitual drinker from early 
life, and possesses all of his natural faculties nearly unimpaired ; has 
no children and is hopelessly dependent ; a single man sixty-two 
years old, of foreign birth, one year in the country, and recently 
admitted to the house; is well educated but intemperate and has led 
a roving life; has no relatives in the country, and appears quite 



121 

probable to continue a public charge; a girl eighteen years of age, 
unmarried, and only three months in the house; is well connected, 
prepossessing in appearance, but shameless in conduct ; was early 
orphaned, and has led a roving vagrant life ; is soon to become a 
mother and offere no hope of reformation ; a widowed woman sev- 
enty-five years old, twenty-five of which have been spent in this poor- 
liouse; is educated and temperate, and has fcair self-supporting chil- 
di'en, but they make no provision for her maintenance; and a single 
ma.!) aged thirty-one years, under sentence as a vagrant ; has been in 
I>oor-houses and jails most of the time for the past eight years, and 
ms likely hereafter to burden the public. 

The future of the inmates of this institution it seems probable will 
as follows: Permanently dependent ninety-one ; will go out and 
vide for themselves, six ; may be made self-supporting if removed 
d placed under proper influences, nine ; future doubtful, seven. 
This county began to transfer its chronic insane to the custody of 
"tlie State upon the opening of the Willard Asylum, and now has 
Bome fifty of this class under care in that institution. The number 
iri the poor-house at the time of the examination was ten, seven 
^^aexiaird three women. These were all quiet, harmless cases, and 
^•eceive no special attention. 

Orange County. 

This county, at the time of the inquiry, had two hundred and eight- 
^^n (218) paupers, in all, under local care, as follows : In the Orange 
^^ounty poor-house one hundred and sixty (160) ; in the Newburgh 
oity and town alms-house, fifty-eight (58). Of these one hundred and 
"^n (110) were males and one hundred and eight (108) females. The 
^^ounty poor-house contained thirty (30), and the city and town alms- 
l^ouse four (4) colored inmates. 

Orange C(m^ty Poor-house, — This institution is situated about 
three miles from the village of Goshen. The building is a substan- 
tial stone edifice, in good repair and furnished with modern conven- 
^^^ices. It will accommodate about two hundred persons. 

The inmates at the date of the examination were divided as to 
^^x as follows : Males, seventy-eight (78); females, eighty-two (82). 
O^ie hundred and seventeen were natives of New York, and three of 
^t^ier States of the Union ; thirty-eight were foreign born ; and the 
^^^'thplaces of two could not be determined. One hundred and four 
of the parents, or sixty-five per cent, were of native birth. 
The ages of the inmates were ascertained to be as follows : Under 



122 

sixteen years, twenty-nine ; between the ages of sixteen and forty, 
thirty-seven ; between forty and seventy, fifty-two ; between seventy 
and eighty, thirty-two ; over eighty yeare of age, ten. Fourteen had 
been paupers from birth ; seven became dependent before they were 
two years old ; eleven when between the ages of two and ten years; 
thirty- two when betw^een ten and thirty; thirty-nine when between 
thirty and fifty ; forty when between fifiy and seventy, and seven- 
teen after they had passed the latter age. Thirteen had been inmates 
less than one year ; seventy, one year and less than five years ; thir- 
ty-one, five years and less than ten; twenty-five, ten years and less 
than twenty ; nine, twenty years and less tlian thirty ; ten, thirty 
years and less than forty ; and two over forty years. The time of 
dependence of all the inmates summed up one thousand and sixty- 
five years. This would give an average dependence of 6.66 years 
to each pei*son. 

The examination showed that a large number of the inmates of 
this institution had become objects of charity on account of old age, 
sickness, and other causes, over which they had no control, but a con- 
siderable portion of them, it seemed, had sunk to the line of public 
dependence by reason of vicious practices and indulgences which if 
avoided would probably have saved them from pauperism. As a class 
they were generally ignorant and intemperate, and many of them 
debased and depraved. This will be observed by the following sum- 
mary of facts obtained upon these points: Of those of adnlt age and 
capacity to profit by instruction, only thirteen, or less than eleven 
per cent had a common school education. Twenty had learned to 
read, and forty-seven could read and write. The othei's were without 
any education. All except six of the men and twenty-one of the 
women, so far as their habits could be ascertained, were said to have 
been intemperate. The proportion of intemperate among the parents 
was also found to be quite large. 

A very prolific source of pauperism ii^ this county has been the 
association heretofore of dependent children with adult paupers. 
Until within a short time, and since the inquiry was conducted, it 
has been the practice to provide for this class of children of the 
county at the poor-house, until homes could be secured for them in 
families. A school was maintained at the institution, and every 
endeavor possible made to educate and train the children to useful- 
ness, but generally, it is said, with poor success, many of them after 
being placed out returning to the poor-house, thereafter to burden 
the county through life. Under the present system, the children are 



123 

for the time being provided for in asjlnms, subject to the gupervi- 
8ion of the superintendent of the poor, and from these institutions are 
transferred to family homes as situations offer. This system thus far 
has worked satisfactorily, and the results are said to be gratifying. 
A considerable time must intervene, however, before the evils arising 
from the former practice regarding the care of dependent children of 
the county aro fuUy eradicated. These evils will be clearly seen by 
the following facts obtained by tlie inquiry respecting the inmates of 
the institution then under care: 

The number of families represented by the inmates was one hun- 
dred and thirty. According to the records there had sprung from 
these families, in three generations, two hundi*ed and forty-three 
paupers, twenty-one insane, thirteen idiots, and one hundred and six- 
teen inebriates. Of those then in the institution, nine had pauper 
fathere, thirty-one pauper mothers, six pauper grandfathers, three 
pauper grandmothers, nineteen pauper brothere, eighteen pauper 
8i8tei*s, four pauper uncles, and nine pauper aunts. The number who 
were parents was twenty-nine. They were said to have sixty-one 
lining children, situated in life as follows: In poor-houses, twenty- 
five; bound out, four; self-supporting, twenty-nine; condition 
unknown, three. 

The foHowing were some of the more notable pauper families in 
tlie i^istitution at the time of the examination: A woman, widowed, 
eighty years old, educated and temperate ; admitted with her hus- 
band, since deceased, and three female children, two of whom are 
dead, twenty years ago ; a daughter forty-four j'ears old, ignorant and 
(Jopraved, married at nineteen, now widowed ; had three children by 
h^r husband, one only being living, and subsequently four illegiti- 
inate children, all of whom are dead ; two granddaughters, one 
t'^^enty-four, and the other thirteen yeai^ of age; the former single, 
uneducated, ignorant and debased, and the latter an idiot ; and a 
great-granddaughter, three years old, illegitimate, also an idiot and 
blind; two brothei-s, aged respectively sixteen and twelve, inmates 
three years ; the older uneducated, vicious, and depraved, the younger 
*^ idiot ; the father intemperate, the mother dead ; a widowed 
^vonaan, twenty-eight years of age, educated and temperate, one year 
*^ inmate; has five children, one self-supporting, one bound out, one 
•ided in a family, and two in the poor-house, the youngest, an infant, 
^^Tig illegitimate; is industrious and healthy, and will probably soon 
provide for herself; an unmarried woman, twenty years old, with an 
iWegitimate child, and her sister, aged thirty-six years, with two ille- 



124 

gitimate children; both women feeble minded and uneducated, and 
probably permanent burdens upon the county ; a man, eighty years, 
single, uneducated and intemperate, and his sister, seventy-eight years 
old, a widow having three self-supporting children ; the former an 
inmate two, and the latter ten years ; both feeble and iniirm, and 
seem likely to burden the public through life; an unmarried woman, 
forty years of age, with an illegitimate child four years old, born in 
this house ; the child healthy and intelligent, and if removed the 
mother might proyiit for herself; a married woman aged twenty-five 
years, abandoned by her husband, an inmate four years ; has two 
children with her, the youngest being illegitimate and born in the 
house; is educated, but intemperate and depraved, and offers little 
hope of reformation ; a widowed woman, fifty years old, uneducated 
and intemperate, and her daughter, twenty -one years of age, inmates 
two years; the former feeble and infirm, the latter an epileptic, and 
both hopelessly dependent ; an unmarried woman twenty-two yesn's 
of age, an inmate five years, with an illegitimate child ; is ignorant, 
idle and vagrant, and will probably entail further burdens upon the 
county ; two brothers, aged respectively sixteefi and ten years, inlnates 
one year, abandoned by their parents, said to be intemperate and 
vagrant ; are fairly intelligent, and if removed might probably be 
trained to usefulness ; and a man eighty-four, with his wife eighty- 
two years of age ; both educated and industrious, but the former very 
intemperate; have been afded outside several years-, are childless, 
infirm and wholly dependent. 

Among the single cases under care at the time of the inquiry, the 
following may be noted : A weak minded single woman, forty-six 
years old, and an inmate since two years of age ; is entirely depend- 
ent, the parents having died paupers ; an unmarried man, eighteen 
years of age, in the house five years; both paa^ents, maternal grand- 
father, and one brother have been paupers; is fairly intelligent, has 
learned to reajl and write, and if secured a good situation might be 
made useful ; a single woman, twenty-one years old, educated, indus- 
trious and temperate ; has been an inmate thirteen years, and her 
mother, a brother and a sister, have also been paupers ; is crippled, 
but free from vices, and under favorable surroundings might provide 
for herself; a widowed woman, aged seventy years, ten of which have 
been spent in this institution ; has two self-supporting children, and 
one child in a poor-house in an adjoining State; is infirm, helpless, 
and wholly dependent ; a boy, seventeen years old, illegitimate, 
vagrant and depraved, the mother having been a pauper; has been 



125 

n inmate seven years, and gives little promise of reformation ; and a 
ii*l aged ten years, admitted when six years old, on account of the 
cloatli of her parents; is intelligent, and might be trained to useful- 
tx OSS if removed and placed under proper surroundings. 

This county early began the transfer of its chronic insane to the 
tate institution for this class. The number under county care at the 
me of the inquiry, was only fifteen, most of whom were quiet, harm- 
less cases. Since then the county has erected a building adjoining 
poor-house and appropriately furnished it with the view of retain- 
its chronic insane under local management. It has in all about 
t't^'-live of this class, provided for at the public expense. 
The following conclusions were reached regarding the probable 
nre of the inmates of this house, at the time of the examination : 
rmanently dependent, one hundred and sixteen ; will go out and 
l>rovide for themselves, seven ; may become self-supporting if removed 
a-Tid placed under proper influences, nineteen ; future doubtful, eighteen. 
Newhurgh City and Town Alms-house, — This institution, designed 
for the poor of Newburgh city and town, is located about two miles 
from Newburgh, and is entirely distinct in its management from the 
county poor-house. The building is a well designed brick edifice, 
pleasantly situated, and supplied with every convenience and comfort 
recjuisite for its purposes. It will accommodate about one hundred 
persons. 

Of those under care at the time of examination, thirty-two (32) 

'Were males, and twenty-six (26) females, classified by birth as follows : 

United States, thirty ; England, six; Ireland, seventeen; Germany, 

one ; places of birth unknown, four. Eleven were under sixteen years 

of age; twelve were between the ages of sixteen and forty ; twenty- 

^^e between forty and seventy; nine between seventy and eighty; 

*nd five were ov^r eighty years old. Fifteen became dependent 

^fbre they had attained the age of twenty years ; thirteen, when 

between the ages of twenty and forty ; twelve, when between forty 

*nd sixty ; sixteen, when between sixty and eighty ; and two after they 

"*d passed the age of eighty years. Twelve had been under care less 

than one year; thirteen, one year and less than two years; fifteen, 

two years and less than five ; seventeen, five years and less than 

twenty; and one over forty years. The average time. of dependence 

W^ inmate, it appeared, had been 4.38 years; the aggregate two 

^^ndred and fifty-four years. 

The greater portion of the inmates of this institution, it was ascer- 
tained, were ignorant, arid the ratio of intemperate also appeared to 



126 

be quite large. Of those of adult ago only one had enjoyed the 
advantages of thorough training in school; live had learned to read, 
and twenty-six to read and write. The education of the others had 
been wholly neglected. Two of the men and four of the women 
claimed to be strictly temperate ; twenty-two of the former and seven 
of the latter were know^n to be intemperate; and the habits of three 
of the men and six of the women could not be ascertained. Thirty- 
five were looked upon as fixed dependents; twenty-two, it seemed, 
might be trained to self-supporting industries ; and the future of one 
was regarded as doubtful. 

The number of families represented by the inmates of this institu- 
tion was fifty-one. The burdensome and disturbing classes of society 
produced by these families in three genemtions, so far as could be 
learned, had been as follows: Public dependents, sixtynsix; insane 
persons, seven; idiots, three; inebriates, thirty-nine. Five were par- 
ents, said to have in all fourteen living children. Of these, eight 
were in poor-houses, and three self-supporting. The condition of the 
others was unknown. 

A few of the cases under care at the time of the inquiry will now 
be noticed : A man ninety-four years of age, a widower, seven years 
in the institution ; is uneducated, intemperate, childless and wholly 
dependent ; a widowed woman thirty-five years old, an inmate one 
yeiar, with three children aged respectively six and four years, and 
five months, the latter illegitimate and born in this house ; is igno- 
rant intemperate and depraved, and likely to continue a public bur- 
den ; a married woman thirty-six years of age, abandoned by her 
husband, and recently admitted with three children, the eldest aged 
eleven and the youngest six years; the woman uneducated and an 
inebriate; the children comely and intelligent, and might be trained 
to usefulness, if removed to proper surroundings; a woman thirty 
years eld, divorced, and two years an inmate ; has two children in 
the house, one aged nine, and one two years, the latter being illegiti- 
mate ; is intemperate, uneducated and vagrant, and gives little promise 
of reformation ; two sisters, aged respectively fifty-two and sixty-six 
years, the former feeble minded, the latter nearly blind ; tlie younger 
an inmate five, and the elder ten yeare; both uneducated, given to 
inebriety, and regarded as fixed dependents; and a boy fourteen years 
old, an orphan, lately received on account of sickness; is intelligent 
and well behaved, and likely soon to recover and provide for himself. 

The institution has separate apartments for the chronic insane, but 
the authorities send most of this class to the appropriate State asylum^ 



137. 

in^mnitier under care at tl.e time of 
I, none of who 



liry was seven. Tliese 
preeented any fraitnres worthy 



were mild, qniet caa 
of epecial mention. 

Orleans County. 
Tiie poor-house of this county is situated about three miles from 
the villrtge of Albion, It is a small brick etractai'e, much worn, and 
bas uo proper conveniences for its purposes. Tiie authorities, it is 
said, design to erect a more commodione and suitable bnilding at an 
early day. 

There were fifty-eight (58) persons in tbis house at the time of the 
inquiry, being supported at the public expense. Of these, tbirty-aix 
(36) were males, and twenty-two (22) females, classified by birth as 
follows: United States, forty-two; Ireland, eleven ; otJier European 
countries, three; places of birth unknown, two. The birth of the 
pai-ent6,'aa far as could be ascertained, appeared also to bo largely 
native. 

The examination showed more intelligence in the inmates of this 
house than is usually found in this class of persons in such institu- 
tions; and that a large portion of them had been reduced to pauper- 
ism by vicious practices and indulgences, who, otherwise, might 
probably have been self-supporting. The following information was 
gained upon these points; Of those of mature age, twenty-eight, or 
nearly sixty-one per cent, had been fairly educated ; two of the others 
could read; and four could readaud write. Twenty-four of the men, 
or eighty per cent, were known to have been intemperate, of whom 
sixteen were classed as conSi'med drunkarda ; and seven of the women, 
or over forty-two per cent, confessed having formed habits of ine- 
briety. The proportion of intemperate of the parents, so far as their 
Iiabits could be ascertained, appeared quite smalt. 

The following facts regarding the ages of the inmates of tins insti- 
tution, the period of life in which the dependence commenced, and 
'lie duration of the pauperism were obtained by the inquiry ; Six 
Were under sixteen years of age ; eight were between the ages of six- 
teen and forty; twenty-two between forty and sixty; twenty one 
lieiTeon sixty and eighty ; and one was over eighty years old. Three 
Imd Wen dependent fi'om birth; eiglit became public charges before 
'"ey had i-eacbed the age of twenty years ; twelve, when between the 
"Ses of twenty and forty years; thirty, when between forty and seventy ; 
*nd five after they had passed seventy yeare of age. Eighteen had 
™6a in tlie houseless than two years; thirteen, two years and leas 
tlmn live ; twelve, five years and leas than ten ;4eleven, ten years and 



X28 

less than thirty; three, thirty years and less than forty; and one 
over forty years. The summing up showed an aggregate dependence 
of all the inmates amounting to four hundred and forty-seven years, 
giving an average dependence of 7.71 years to each person. 

A department for children was being maintained by this county at 
the time of the inquiry, on the grounds of the poor-house. This was 
soon after broken up, the children then under care being transferred 
to asylums or placed in families ; and since then, all of this class 
thrown upon the public for support, have been thus provided for. 
The effects of the former practice regarding the care of children are 
still seen in the county in the form of entailed pauperism, the evils of 
which will doubtless be felt for considerable time. Of the persons 
examined, three were the offspring of pauper fathers, and six of pau- 
per mothers ; and seven had pauper brothers, and five, pauper sisters. 

The inmates were representatives of fifty families, from which, it 
was ascertained, there had sprung in three generations the following 
burdensome, unfortunate and turbulent classes of society: Public 
dependents, seventy-six ; insane persons, twelve ; idiots, seven ; ine- 
briates, fifty-three. Sixteen were said to be parents having in the 
whole thirty -one living children. Of these, six were in poor-houses, 
one was indentured, and twenty-two were self-supporting. The condi- 
tion of two could not be ascertained. 

The following were among the family groups in the house at the 
time of the inquiry: A married woman, colored, thirty years of age, 
and her illegitimate child four months old ; is ignorant, vicio-us and 
degraded, and offers no promise of reformation ; has two other chil- 
dren, one bound out, and one self-supporting; a man and his wife 
aged respectively fifty-eight and forty-four years, and their daughter 
thirteen years of age, inmates four years ; the parents educated but 
debased by habits of inebriety and debauchery ; have both been in 
the work-house for drunkenness, and seem likely to continue public 
burdens; the child intelligent, and under proper corrective agencies 
might be trained to usefulness; and a man seventy-five years old, and 
his wife fifty seven years of age, the former an inmate five and the 
latter six years; both fairly educated, but dissolute and intemperate, 
childless, and wholly dependent. 

A few of the single cases examined will next be noticed : An unmar- 
ried man sixty-five years old, foreign born, uneducated and intemper- 
ate, twenty-three years an inmate ; is incapacitated for labor from 
practices of debauchery, and classed as a fixed dependent; a man aged 
seventy-three years, a widower, nine years in the house; is ignorant, 



tntemperate and childless, and has lost all trace of relatives; baa 
repeatedly been in jail for drunkenness, and seems probable to burden 
the public tlirongh life; a single man ibrtj-seven years of age, uned- 
ncated, intemperate, and nearly blind : entered the poor-honae of a 
neighboring county when eighteen yeara old, and since then has led 
R vagrant life, alternating most of the time between poor-lionsea and 
jaiJB ; has been in this house about one year, and being helpless will 
donbtiess remain a public charge ; an unmarried woman forty-nine 
years of age, educated but intemperate, five years an inmate ; is feeble 
and infirm, and gives little hope of recovery; a single woman aged 
seventy-five years, said to have been in the house fifiy yeai*s; has had 
three illegitimate children all of whom are dead; is feeble minded, 
ignorant, nearly helpless, and wholly dependent; a woman forty-live 
jears old, widowed, and an inmate ton years; father, mother and one 
«iBter have been paupers ; is fairly educated and temperate, but infirm 
and a fixed burden; and an nninarried woman believed to be nearly 
one hundred years old, thirty of which have been spentin this house; 

infirm and helpless, entirely friendless and totally dependent. 

This county has no accommodations for its chronic insane, it being 
the purpose of its authorities to send all of this class requiring special 
•upervision to the appropriate State asylum. The number of insane 
in the house at the time of the inquiry was five, of whom two were 
men, and three women. They were all quiet, harmless cases, min- 
gling freely with the other inmates, and were said to be good laborers. 

The fntiire of the inmates of this institution, it is believed, may be 
BUinmed up as follows: Permanently dependent, fifty-two; likely to 
go out and provide for themselves, two; future doubtful, fonr. 

Oswego Cotjntt. 

At the lime of the inquiry there were one hundred and fifteei 
(115) paupers being supported in this county nuder local management^l 
IB follows: In the Oswego county poor-liouse seventy-one (71) 
the Oswego city alms-house forty-fonr (44). The sexes were, males 
Bixty-three (PS); females lifty-two (52). 

Oswego County Poor-house. — This is a plain, two-story and high 
basement brick edifice, containing modern improvements for heating, 
ventilation and bathing, and planned to accommodate one hundred 
persons. It is pleasantly situated near the village of Mexico, The 
huialie asylum is also of brick, and fnrnishcs room for about fifty 
patients. The grounds are finely laid out and planted, and the place 
Iihb a neat and inviting appearance. 



L 




130 

Of the inmates then under care thirty-six (36), eighteen (18) aiales, 
and eighteen (18) females, were in tlie poor-liouse proper ; and thirty- 
five (35), nineteen (19) males and sixteen (16) females, in the insane 
department. These were classified by birth as follows : United States, 
forty-five ; Canada, two ; England, five ; Ireland, fifteen ; Germany, 
one. The birthplaces of three were unknown. Tlie parentage of 
the inmates, as far as could be ascertained, was also mainly native. 

All of the inmates except one were over sixteen years of age. 
Twenty-five were between the ages of sixteen and forty years; twenty- 
seven between forty and sixty; fifteen between sixty and eighty; and 
three had passed the latter age. One had been dependent from birth ; 
four became public charges when they were between the ages of ten 
and twenty years ; seventeen when between twenty and thirty ; 
twenty-nine when between thirty and fifty ; fourteen when, between 
fifty and seventy ; and six after they were seventy years old. Tlie 
dependence in eight cases had existed less than one year; in twenty- 
seven cases, one year and less than five years ; in twenty-one cases, 
five years and less than ten ; in fourteen cases, ten years and less than 
thirty ; and in one instance over thirty years. The whole time spent 
in the institution by all the inmates was ascertained then to have 
been four hundred and seventy-five years, equivalent to 6.69 to each 
person. 

The inmates of this institution in intelligence were above the aver- 
age of this class of persons, thirty-nine, or over sixty-six per cent of 
those of adult age having been educated in common schools. The 
following facts were obtained regarding their habits : Twenty of the 
men and eight of the women were known to have been intemperate ; 
and eleven of the former and two of the latter were classed as con- 
firmed inebriates. The habits of two of the men and four of the 
women were not known ; and but little could be ascertained respect- 
ing the habits of the parents. 

The authorities of this county for a number of years have looked 
with great care after the welfare of its unfortunate and dependent 
children. A considerable portion of these are placed directly in 
families, and the others are sent to the Oswego Orplian Asylum, and 
thence transferred to homes, as good situations from time to time are 
secured. Under this system the children are cared for entirely sep- 
arated from adult paupers, and thus reared and trained to usefulness. 
The following facts elicited by the inquiry are of interest as bearing 
upon this point : Fifteen of the inmates were parents, having in all 
twenty-seven living children. Of these one only, an infant, was in 



131 . 

tbe poor-hoase ; tbi'ee were in asylums; three bonnd out; and nine- 
teen were self-supporting. The condition of one could not be 
^finitely ascertained. 

The number of families represented in the institution was seventy. 
Tbe number of persons in these families, in three generations, known 
to have been dependent upon public charity, was ninety-seven ; the 
number of insane, forty-two ; idiots, twenty ; inebriates fifty-one. 
Three were the offspring of pauper fathers ; six of pauper mothers : 
and in one instance tlie pauperism had descended through three 
generations. Sixty-eight were regarded as fixed dependents, and tlie 
future of three was looked upon as doubtful. 

A few of the cases in the poor-house department will now be 
noticed : A man sixty-eight years old, educated and industrious, but 
intemp^^te, five years an inmate ; is a widower, has two self-sup- 
porting children, yet likely to remain a public burden ; a man aged 
sixty-nine years, six of which have been spent in this, and one in the 
poor-house of an adjoining county ; is well educated and intelligent, 
'but intemperate, licentious and debased ; has five children, said to 
provide for themselves, but seems probable to burden the county 
through life ; an unmarried man, eighty-nine years of age, thirteen 
years an inmate; is educated and industrious, but debased by intem- 
perate habits and wholly dependent ; a married woman deserted by 
her husband ; is the mother of two children, one being in an asylum 
and the other bound out; has been an inmate only a short time, but 
gives little promise of becoming self-supporting; a woman aged 
eighty-three years, forty-two yeara a widow, and four years in the 
house; is educated, industrious and temperate, but infirm and hope- 
lessly dependent; and an unmarried woman, twenty-nine years of 
age, bom in the poor-house of a neighboring county ; has had five 
illegitimate children, one of whom only is living ; the father, mother 
and five sisters have been paupers; is ignorant, shiftless and vagrant, 
and gives no hope of reformation. 

The insane under care at the time of the examination, were wholly 
chronic cases. A few of this class have been transferred to the State 
institution, but it is the policy of the county to retain its chronic 
insane, generally under local management. The buildings, for the 
time being, are quite sufficient for this purpose, and the attention and 
care seems adequate and proper. 

The Oswego City Alms-house^ is a conveniently planned and well 
built brick structure, situated upon a productive and highly cultivated 
farm some three miles from the city. It receives and provides for 



. 132 

the poor of Oswego city and is under the management of a board of 
commissioners. It will accommodate about one hundred persons. 

The inmates at the time of the inquiry were twenty-six (26) males, 
and eighteen (18) females. Tliirty-five of these were considered as 
fixed dependents ; four it was thought might recover ; and the future 
of five was regarded as in doubt. Seven were under sixteen yeai-s 
old ; ten were between the ages of sixteen and forty ; seven between 
forty and sixty ; fifteen between sixty and eighty, and five were over 
eighty years of age. The classification by birth was as follows : 
United States, thirteen; Canada, four; Ireland, nineteen; other 
European countries, eight. 

The dependence in four cases began before the persons had reached 
the age of two years ; in five cases, when between the ages of two and 
ten years; in twelve cases, when between ten and thirty; in ten 
cases, when between thirty and sixty; and in thirteen cases, after 
they were sixty years of age. Twelve had been public charges less 
than one year; ten one year and less than five years; and twenty- 
two more than five years. The average duration of dependence, it 
appeared had been 5.80 years ; the aggregate, two hundred and fifty- 
five years. 

The following is a statement regarding the educational attainments 
and habits of the persons examined : Of those of mature age, eighteen, 
or nearly fifty-three per cent, had been instructed in common schools ; 
five of the others had learned to read ; and eleven were witliout any 
education. Two of the men and nine of the women were said to be 
strictly temperate; and twenty of the former, and two of the latter, 
were classed as inebriates. The fathers of eleven, and the mothers 
of seven, were said also to have been intemperate. 

The authorities of this institution pursue the same general policy 
regarding dependent children as those of the county institution, plac- 
ing temporarily in the Oswego Orphan Asylum such of this class as 
cannot readily be secured situations in families. Of the persons 
under care at the time of the inquiry only one had a pauper father, 
and seven, pauper mothers. The number of families represented in 
the institution was thirty-seven, from which had sprung in three 
generations, fifty-two dependents, three insane persons, three idiots 
and thirty-six inebriates. Four were parents having eleven living 
children. These were said to be conditioned in life as follows: In 
asylums, two ; bound out, two ; self-sustaining, seven. 

The following were among the cases in the institution, upon the 
occasion of the examination : A man, aged eighty-two years, a widower 



13; 



SJiitly admitted; ia educated, temperate and industrious; has ten 

iiipporting children, but seems probable to remain a public bur- 

j a miin and liia wife, aged respectively seventy-seven and seventy- 

! years, six jeai-a in this honse ; both educated, temperata and 

Hadnstrions, bnt childless and wholly dependent ; a man seventy-nine 

s old, a widower, uneducated, intemperate and shiftless ; has been 

1 years an inmate, and regarded as a fixed dependent; a widowed 

'vman, seventy-eight years of age, educated, temperate, and aeeni- 

y respectable ; has been an inmate only a siiort time, but is ciiild- 

feeble and infirm, and likely to remain ; a feeble minded, 

iucated, married woman, thirty-one years old, seven years an 

bmate ; has two illegitituato children placed out, and seema probable 

pirther to burden the public with her progeny ; and an uneducated 

JnuglQ woman, aged forty years, six years in the house; is weak 

minded, feeble and iutirm, and regarded as a fixed dependcTit. 

The institution has no accommodations for the insane. Only two 

_of this class, one man and one woman, were under care at the time of 

B inquiry. Both of these were mild chronic cases, well behaved, 

pd requiring no special supervision. 

Otsego County. 
f The Otsego county poor-liouse ia situated about three miles from 

e village of CoopersEown, the county seat. The building has been 
3 for a number of yeai-s, is much worn, and will require soon to 
B replaced by a new structure. A separate building ia set apart for 

3 chi-onio insane, but it contains few conveniences requisite for its 

iii'poses. 

The institution, at tiie time of the inquiry, had eiglity-two (82) 
pauper inmates. Of tlieae forty-four (44) were males, .ind thirty-eight 
68) females, of tlio following nationalities: United States, sixty-six; 
Hteknd, ten ; otlier European eountriee, six. Tlic fathers of forty- 
SBven KTid the mothers of iifty-four were of native birth ; and the 
&Uiei-8 uf twenty-fuur, and tlio mothers of nineteen, foreign born. 
The birthplaces of the fathers of eleven, and of the mothers of nine, 
could not be determined. 

The following facts were ascertained as to the agesj etc., of the 
persons examined: Nineteen were under sixteen years old; twenty- 
tliree were between the ages of sixteen and forty years; sixteen, 
Wtween tbrty and sixty ; tweuty-one, between sixty and eighty ; and 
tlu'ee had passed the latter age. Ten had been dependent from 
liii'lli; tiiirteen of t!ie otliers were tlirown upon the public for sup- 



134 

port before they had reached the age of ten years ; twenty-one, when 
between the ages of ten and thirty; twenty-three, when between 
thirty and sixty ; thirteen, when between sixty and eighty ; and two 
after they were eighty years old. Twelve had been in the house less 
than two yeai*s; twenty-three, two years and less than five; nineteen, 
five years and less than ten ; twenty-foar, ten years and less than 
thirty ; and four, over thirty years. The aggregate time of depend- 
ence of all the inmates was found to have been six hundred and 
eighty-eight years ; the average to each person 8.39 yeai-s. 

In point of intelligence, the inmates of this house compared favor- 
ably with others of this class, in similar institutions; but a large 
proportion, especially of the men were found to be addicted to intem- 
perate and vicious practices. Twenty-three of those of mature age, 
or about fifty-two per cent had been fairly educated in common 
schools; three of the others could read, and the same number had 
learned to read and write; the residue were without any education. 
Of the men, eighteen, or over seventy-eight per cent were said to be 
intemperate; and five of the women, or nearly twenty-four per cent, 
admitted having formed habits of inebriety. The ratio of intemper- 
ance among the parents of these appeared also to be proportionably 
large. 

It has been the practice of this county, to maintain a department 
for children in connection with its poor-house, and employ teachers 
to educate and train them in that institution. The evil effects of tins 
practice is plainly stamped upon the dependent population of the 
county, as will be seen by the following statement regarding the 
inmates of the house at the time of the examination: Thirteen of 
these were the offspring of pauper fathers, and twenty, of pauper 
mothers; fifteen had pauper brothers, and nineteen, pauper sisters; 
and in five cases, the pauperism was traced back to the grandparents 
on both the paternal and maternal side. The number of families 
represented by the inmates was seventy-six, from which there was 
known to have sprung, in three generations, oiie hundred and six 
public dependents; fourteen, insane persons ; twenty-one idiots ; and 
fifty-one inebriates. Eighteen of those in the house were parents, 
having in all sixty-two living children. Tliese wore said to be situated 
in life as follows : In poor-houses, sixteen ; indentured in families, 
two ; self-providing, thirty -six ; condition unknown, eight. 

Since the inquiry was conducted, the department for children in 
this institution has been broken up, and the children then under care 
transferred to the Orphans' Home at Cooperstown. They there enjoy 



135 






Ae advantages of a thorough educsitioti, and individual tmiuing, free 
froiD the afisouHtion of »dult pnupei'S, and better facilities than in tlie 
poor-house are at hand to Becure situations for tliein in families. In 
tliis manner the children are being rapidly absorbed into the self-anp- 
purting population, the lino of pauperism in families brokun, and the 
public biirdeiifl thereby greatly iesseiied. The evils of Che former 
practice regarding the care of dependent children in this county will 
readily observed by brief mention of some of the cases under care 
lit the time of the examination. 

A few of the families then grouped in the institution will ba first 

itiued: A woman thirty years old, twice married, an inmate three 

■years, and her second husband agud seventy-one years, thirteen years 

in llie house; liave one child bound out, and two in the institution 

aged i-espectively live and two years ; the woman educated and tera- 

perste, but from an idle and thriftless family, three brothers and one 

sister having been paupers; the man ignorant, intemperate, sliiftless 

utiddebascd, and repeatedly in jail for vagrancy and petty offenses; both 

oliildren apparently intelligent, and under proper influencoa, might 

prubably be trained to support themselves; a widowed woman aged 

thirty-three years, educated and temperate, twice married and an 

mate twelve years ; has live children in the house, three by the Hrat 

id two by tlie second husband, the eldest being twelve, and the 

ingest two years of age, three of whom were born in the institu- 

HI ; the children are liealthy and seemiugly intelligent, and if placed 

good situations, might be educated to usefnlness ; a married woman 

id twenty-nine years deserted by her husband, leaving two children 

this house, the elder four years, and the younger one year old ; 

) woman ignorant, intemperate and shiftless, her father, mother, 

le brother and two sisters having been paupers; was in the poor- 

ise when a child, afterwards placed out, but returned, and has been 

mate in all eleven years; seems likely to burden the public 

ii^ngh lite, and the children can be saved from permanent depend- 

'WKe only by removal to proper surroundings; two sisters, colored, 

■i respectively twenty and ten years, four years inmates; the 

■aier has two illegitimate children in the house, the elder five years 

age, the younger an infant, and born in the institution; is 

iroi^hly ignorant and depraved, and seems likely with her pro- 

, long to burden the county; a feeble minded single woman, 

twenty-seven years, admitted with her mother, when nine years 

)ld; has an illegitimate child three years of age, born in the house, and 

'III appear probable to remain public charges ; and a weak minded 



136 

» 

Woman, thirty years of age, single, and an inmate since ten years 
old ; has an illegitimate, idiotic child, aged seven years, and both are 
doubtless fixed dependents. 

Other cases examined, and thought desirable to note : A man fifty- 
nine years of age, an idiot, and forty-seven yeai*s in the house ; no 
records as to his family, or other relatives, and he is wholly dependent ; 
a colored man, a widower, seventy-three yeare old, educated, indus- 
trious but intemperate, two years in the house; has one self-support- 
ing child, but is probable to burden the county through life ; a^single 
man aged thirty years, and seven years an inmate; is uneducated, an 
epileptic, entirely friendless, and gives no hope of recovery; an 
unmarried man sixty-four years of age, early education neglected, and 
grossly intemperate ; has spent fifteen years in this and other poor- 
houses, is infirm and crippled by disease and exposure, and wholly 
dependent ; a married ^oman eighty years old, nine of which have 
been passed in this house; is well-educated and remarkably intelli- 
gent, but notoriously intemperate ; has six self-supporting children, 
and is the only member of her family belonging to the pauper class ; 
a widowed woman aged thirty-five years, three times married, first 
when only thirteen years of age ; is ignorant, intemperate and vagrant, 
and has spent twelve years in poor-houses: has seven living children, 
three of whom have been paupers, and she seems likely to burden the 
public with additional progeny; an unmarried woman thirty-three 
years old, two years in this house ; is uneducated, intemperate and 
licentious, and diseased so as probably to burden the public through 
life; and a single, weak minded girl seventeen years of age, born of 
intemperate parents, four yeara an inmate; has an illegitimate child 
provided for in a family, and is considered hopelessly dependent. 

The number of insane in this county under local care at the time 
of the inquiry was thirteen. Five of these were men and eight 
women. All of them were chronic cases, and many of them had been 
inmates for a long time. They were generally quiet, well behaved 
cases, and nothing was observed in any of them appearing to require 
special mention. 

As regards the future of the inmates of this house, it seemed rea- 
sonably certain that 'fifty -three of them would require to be cared for 
by the public the remainder of their lives ; fourteen, mostly children, 
it was thought might be trained to self-supporting industries ; and 
the condition of fifteen was such as to involve their future in 
doubt 



137 

Putnam County. 

The poor-house of this county is located near Carmel, tlie county 
seat. The building has been in use a long time, is much dilapidated, 
SLTXi needs to be replaced by a new structure. It has room for about 
fifty pereons. 

The number of paupers in the house when the examination was 
made was, males twenty-one (21); females eighteen (18); total 
tliirty-nine (39). Thirty-three of these were born in New York ; 
four in Ireland ; and two in Germany. The birth of the parents 
tbns appeared: Fathers native, nineteen; foreign, sixteen; unascer- 
tained, four; mothers native, twenty-one; foreign, fifteen; unascer- 
tained, three. 

The following was learned regarding the ages of the inmates at the 
time of the inquiry, the ages at which the dependence began, and the 
duration of the pauperism : Seven were under five years of age ; nine 
were between the ages of five and sixteen years ; eight between six- 
teen and fifty ; seven between fifty and seventy ; and eight were over 
seventy years old. Two were born in the house ; twelve were received 
before they were ten years of age ; seven when between the ages of 
ten and thirty years ; ten when between thirty and sixty ; and eight 
^fter they had passed the latter age. Nineteen had been inmates less 
than two years ; twelve two years and less than ten ; three ten years 
*^d less than thirty; four thirty years and less than forty; and one 
^ver forty years. The average time of dependence appeared to have 
heen 7.13 years; the aggregate two hundred and seventy-eight years. 
The inquiiy showed that ten, or nearly fifty-nine per cent of the 
^dult inmates of this house, of proper intelligence, had been trained 
^^ common schools. Two of the others had learned to read, and five 
^ere without any education. All of the men, and three, or over 
^^ty-four per cent, of the women, were known to have been intem- 
perate ; and six of the former, and two of the latter were classed as 
Confirmed drunkards. But little could be learned regarding the 
"ftbits of the parents of the inmates. 

It has been heretofore, and is still the policy of this county to con- 
®^Sn to the poor-housesuchof its dependent children as cannot readily 
^ provided for in families, and thence place them out as situations 
^flfer. Under this policy large numbers of children, from time to 
t^^^e, accumulate in the institution, the number in its care upon the 
^^easion of the inquiry being sixteen, or over forty-one per cent of all 
the inmates, most of whom were fairly intelligent. That this policy 
uas proved disastrous to the best interests of the county, is apparent 



188 

from the facts obtained by the examination, regarding the persons 
then in the institution. The number of families i*epreseDted by the 
inmates was twenty-seven, the outgrowth from which, in three genera- 
tions, summed up ninety-four of the burdensome, unfortunate, and 
turbulent classes of society as follows : Paupers, fifty-six ; insane, 
five; idiots, six; inebriates, twenty-seven. Ten of those then under 
care, or nearly twenty six per cent, were the descendants of pauper 
mothers; one had a pauper father ; six, pauper brothers'; and nine, 
pauper sisters. Fourteen were parents having in all forty-seven liv- 
ing children, of whom twelve, or over twenty-five per cent were in 
poor-houses ; and one was indentured in a family. The others were 
said to be self -providing. 

The following were the family groups in the institution : A man 
seventy-six years old, and his daughter, an idiot, fifteen years of age, 
inmates one year ; the man well educated, but very intemperate, 
degraded and debased, and the child entirely helpless; has five other 
children, supporting themselves but unable to provide for his main- 
tenance; a widowed woman aged thirty-six years, and a female child 
twelve years old, an idiot, crippled and helpless ; the woman fairly 
educated, has formed habits of drink but appears respectable ; is in 
receipt of a pension, part of it being applied for the maintenance of 
her children ; have been inmates one year, and seem probable to 
remain as wards of the county ; a single woman thirty-three years 
old with two illegitimate children, a girl seven years of age, and a 
boy an infant, the latter born in the institution, inmates only a tew 
months ; has had another illegitimate child who died in the poor-house 
of an adjoining county ; the woman educated and temperate, but lost 
to seli-respect from vicious and degrading practices long indulged, 
and offers little hope of reformation ; an educated married woman 
aged thirty-four years, deserted by her husband, has been in the house 
four years with her eldest child, a girl seven years of age, and has 
with her another child, also a girl, three years old, bom in the insti- 
tution ; the woman, intelligent, healthy and industrious, and relieved 
of her children, would, doubtless, provide for herself; a woman thirty- 
seven years old, married and abandoned by her husband, having with 
her three children, all boys, aged respectively ten years, five years, 
and one year; have been in the house only a few months, but were 
aided outside over two years before admission ; the woman unedu- 
cated, but temperate, healthy and seemingly respectable ; has three 
children self supporting, and if the others were placed out, might 
provide for her maintenance ; a married woman, thirty-six years of 



fl!^, witli three cliildren, a girl eix year-a old, and two hoys, one aged 
ciglib, and tlio otlier five years ; the woman niiediicaled, but temper- 
Me, well behaved, and a good laborer, and tho children healthy and 
iutelligent; have been inmatee nearly (ive years, and the husband, 
Bdiil to be intemperate and diaaolute, inakes no provision tor their 
maintenanee, nor inquires as to their welfare ; and two brothers, the 
elder tbUr, and the younger three years old, inmates one year; the 
mother dead, and the father intemperate and profligate, and neglects 
to provide for them ; both children Bceuiingly intelligent, and under 
proper training, might probably be reared to usefulness. 

Among otlier oases in the institution were the following: A mar- 
ried man eighty-four years of age, edncated, temperate and seemingly 
i^pcctable \ is said to have been once in good circurostanues, but was 
wronged by his children of whom he has three self-supporting ; has 
been live years in the institution, and appears likely to remain the 
balaii<% of his life ; an educated married man of good habits, seventy- 
two years old, one year an inmate; has nine aelf-providing children, 
)>at they make no provision for liia maintenance; is paralytic, and 
greatly erjfeebled, and seems probable, permanently to burden 
the county; a widowed woman forty-six years of age, and for the 
past eleven years an inmate of the house; was ia the institution 
wliBii a cliild with other members of her family, and subsequently 
placed out ; is ignorant, degraded and debased by vicious practices 
snd indulgences, and greatly enfeebled; has six self-supporting chil- 
dren, but declines to live with any of them, preferring the associa- 
tions of the poor-house; and a feeble minded single woman, fitly- 
Seven yeare old, an inmate since twenty-five years of age ; has borne 
two illegitimate children, one of whom, a daughter, is living, and 
provides for hei-aelf; is feeble, infirm and nearly helpless, and 
Undoubtedly a permanent burden upon the county. 

This county has several chronic insane provided for at the State 
AsyUini. The number under local care at the time of the inquiry, 
Was four, one man and three women. All were mild, harmless eases, 
sud mingled freely with the other inmates. 

It seemed probable that two of the inmates of this house would, 
of their own accord, go out and pi-ovide for their maintenance ; and 
Ihni twelve, mostly children, if removed and placed under proper 
eiirroiindings, might be trained to usefulness. The condition of 
four was such that no definite conclusions could he formed as to 
their future. The others were regarded as fixed dependents. 



140 

Queens County. 

Tlie number of paupers examined in this county was one hundred 
and nine (109), as follows: In the Queens county poor-house thirty- 
eight (38); in the Hempstead town poor-house thirty-nine (39); in 
the Oyster Bay and North Hempstead town poor-house thirty-two 
(32). Of these seventy (70) were males, and thirty-nine (39) females. 

The Queezis County Poor-house^ completed and occupied only a 
few weeks prior to the examination, is situated on a small island, on 
the south shore of Long island, about five miles from the village of 
Hempstead. Its inmates examined, were twenty-one (21) males, and 
seventeen (17) females, classified by birth as follows : United States, 
twenty-one; Ireland, twelve; Germany, two ; birthplaces unknown, 
three. Five were under sixteen years old ; fourteen were between 
the ages of sixteen and forty years; twelve between forty and fifty; 
and seven were over fifty years of age. Three became dependent 
before they were two years old ; sixteen when between the ages of 
two and twenty years; eleven when between twenty and thirty; 
and eight after they had passed the age of thirty years. The dura- 
tion of the pauperism had been as follows : Less than one year, 
nine; one j^ear and less than two years, seven ; two years and less 
than five, twelve; five years and less than twenty, ten. 

Of the adult, intelligent inmates, eleven had enjoyed the advan- 
tages of common school training; three could read; nine could read 
and write; and ten were without any education. Two were the 
offspring of pauper fathers, and five pf pauper mothers. Seven 
were parents, said to have in all thirteen living children, of whom 
five were in poor-houses, four indentured, and four providing for 
themselves. The number of families represented by the inmates 
was thirty-three, the unfortunate and vicious outgrowth from which, 
in three .generations, was ascertained to have been as follows : Pub- 
lic dependents, forty-seven ; insane persons, sixteen ; idiots, three ; 
inebriates, twenty-three. 

. The indications were that two of the inmates of this house would 
go out and provide for themselves; five seemed to have capacity to 
become self-sustaining, if removed and properly trained ; the others 
belonged to the permanently dependent class. 

The Hempstead Town Poor-house^ is a convenient and well fur- 
nished wooden edifice, situated near Hempstead village. Its pauper 
inmates at the time of the inquiry were twenty-seven (27) males, 
and twelve (12) females, of whom twenty-three were natives, and 
sixteen foreign born. Six were under sixteen years of age ; fifteen 



141 

were between the agea of sixteen and fifty years; fourteen between 
fifty and eighty ; and four were in advance of the latter age. The 
dependence in tlireo of the cases eonnnenced before thej had arrived 
at the age of two yeai-s ; in four oases when between the ages of two 
nnd thirty years; i[i fitWn Leases wlieti between thirty and fifty; 
ill ten cases when between fifty and seventy; and in seven cases 
sfter they were seventy yea''B old. Twenty-four had been dependent 
leas than one year ; four one year and less than two years ; nine two 
years and less than tun ; and two more than ten yearj. 

The inmates of this honse exhibited about tiie usual intelligence of 
tliis class of persons, sixteen, or nearly iifty per cent of those of mature 
age, having been educated in common schools. The proportion of 
intempenite however appeared to be very large, tweTity-one of the 
men, or eighty-four per cent, and four of llie women, or fifteen per 
cent, admitting the use of intoxicating drinks. Eighteen of the 
"leii, and the four women, were classed as habitual and confirmed 
drunkards. The nnuiber of families represented by the inmates was 
tiiirty ; the number of dependents sprung from these families in ihree 
gfinerations, fifty-five; and the number of inebriates, forty. Five of 
tn(«e under care were the offspring of pauper fathers, and six of 
[Jsnper motliers. Twenty were parents, having an aggregate of sixtj- 
tliree living children, of whom or;>ht were in poor-houses; one was 
bfiind ont; and fifty-four were said to be self-sustaining. 

The following were the family groups in the institution, at the time 
of the int^uiry ; A man thirty-nine j'ears of age, his wife aged thirty- 
iKree years, and a female child two yeare old, inmates only a few 
^eeks; the man ignorant and grossly intemperate, tlie woman edu- 
cated, temperate, industrious and seemingly respectable ; botli of good 
"onstitution and healthy, and probable soon to go out ; a man and his 
''ife, the former aged thirty-eight, and the latter thirty-five years, and 
llieir two children, a girl nine, and a boy three years of age ; the man 
L-dacated but intemperate, the woman ignorant, yet totally abstinent, 
""d the children apparently intelligent; have been inmates four 
"'onths, and it is thought will early be discharged; an nnmarried 
fseble minded woinan, forty years old, and an illegitimate idiot child 
tiiirteen years of age ; both lia^e been twelve years under care, and 
*fe quite likely to remain public burdens; a married woman aged 
fiftj-t Wo years, and hcrboy nine years old, inmates four yeai-s; received 
>good education, married when twenty-nine years of age, afterwards 
'•Wame dissipated and separated from her husband, and for a number 
"f years was aided ontside; has one child provided for in a family, 



142 

and the other if removed and suitably trained would doubtless grow 
up to usefulness; and a man seventy-five years old and his second 
wife aged sixty years, recently admitted ; both uneducated, but said 
to have been temperate and industrious ; the former has five and the 
latter four self-supporting children, yet both seem probable hereafter 
to burden the public. 

A few of the other cases examined, will next be noticed: A single 
man fifty-four years of age, well educated, and recently admitted ; 
is in feeble health and entirely friendless and offers little hope of 
recovery ; a widow aged forty-two years, educated, but very intemper- 
ate : is temporarily disabled by disease, and expected soon to go out ; 
a married man thirty-seven years old, foreign born, and an inmate 
only a short time; is well educated but an habitual drunkard, too 
indolent to provide for himself; a man aged eighty-four years, twice 
married, now a widower, and two years in the house; is fairly edu- 
cated and temperate, but quite feeble and infirm ; has four self-suport- 
ing children, yet appears probable to remain a public charge the 
balance of his life ; and an unmarried man thirty-five years old, ignorant 
and intemperate, recently received in the house ; is in full health but 
shiftless and improvident and quite likely to become a fixed dependent. 

The future of three of the inmates of this house was regarded as 
doubtful ; sixteen, it was thought would in the end go out and provide 
for themselves; two of the others were believed capable of self- 
supporting labor if properly encouraged ; and eighteen were looked 
upon as permanent burdens. 

The Oyster Bay and North Hempstead Tovm Poor-house^ is 
situated near Brockville and receives and provides for the poor of 
those towns. At the time of the inquiry it had twenty-two (22) male, 
and ten (10) female pauper inmates, eight of whom were colored; 
representing twenty-six families from which there had sprung in three 
generations, so far as could be ascertained, forty-nine public depend- 
ents. Three of those under care were the children of pauper fathers, 
and nine, of pauper mothers ; 'and four had pauper brothers, and two, 
pauper sisters. The number who were heads of families was seven. 
These were said to have twenty-nine living children, conditioned in 
life as follows: In poor-houses, four; in family situations, three; 
self sustaining, twentj^-two. 

The nativity and ages of the inmates appeared as follows: Native 
born, twenty-two; foreign born, nine; birthplace unknown, one. 
Under sixteen years of age, seven ; between the ages of sixteen and 
forty years, two ; between forty and sixty, thirteen ; over sixty years 



143 

old, ten. Six were born in the poor-house ; two of the others were 

ftdmitted before they were twenty years of age ; ten, when between 

the ages of twenty and fifty ; twelve, when between fifty and seventy ; 

and two after they had pasbed the latter age. Eight had been 

dependent less than two years ; fourteen, two years and less than ten ; 

six, ten years and less than twenty ; and four, over twenty years. 

As a whole, the inmates of this house wore extremely ignorant, 
and a large proportion of them intemperate. The following is a 
summary of the facts collected upon these points : Of those of mature 
ELge and capacity for instruction, eight had learned to read and write ; 
t^wo could read only ; and the others were without any education. 
Tliirteen of the men, or nearly eighty-seven per cent, and three of 
tbe women, or seventy-five per cent, were said to have been intem- 
perate ; and ten of the former, and one of the latter, were classed 
as confirmed inebriates. The proportion of the parents known to 
have been intemperate appeared also quite large. 

The following were the families in the care of tbe institution upon 
the occasion of the examination : A man and his wife, aged respec- 
tively sixty-eight, and fifty-eight years, uneducated and intemperate, 
inmates ten years ; the former partially blind, the latter paralytic, 
and both looked upon as fixed dependents ; a widowed woman, twice 
married, forty-two years of age, and an inmate most of the time since 
thirty-five years old ; has six living children, four self-supporting, 
and two, a boy aged five years, and a girl one year old in this house ; 
18 aneducated and indolent, and gives little hope of providing for 
herself; a man seventy-two years of age, and his second wife, forty- 
nine years old, the former an inmate sixteen, and the latter twenty- 
eight years ; the woman has borne four illegitimate children, one of 
^hom, an idiot girl, fifteen years old is now in this house ; the man 
ftnd woman both, ignorant, shiftless and depraved, and classed as per- 
manent burdens ; and two illegitimate children, brother and sister, 
^6 former aged four and the latter eight years, inmates from birth; 
^th bright and intelligent, and under proper surroundings might bo 
Wned to usefulness. 

Among other cases in the institution were the following : A single 
^^^y sixty-five years of age, an inmate ten years; is uneducated, 
^"temperate, paralytic, and nearly helpless ; a man fifty years old, a 
Widower recently admitted ; is ignorant, grossly intemperate, nearly 
ol^tid, and wholly dependent ; an unmarried feeble minded woman, 
^^d forty years, twenty of which have been spent as a pauper, and 
gives no promise of future self support ; a single weak minded 



144 

woman twenty-four years old, illegitimate, and an inmate from birtli ; 
has borne one illegitimate child, now dead, and is regarded as a fixed 
burden ; an unmarried woman forty-six years of age, ignorant, very 
intemperate, and a vagrant ; lias passed five years in the institution 
and offers little hope of reformation ; and a single man aged thirty 
years, illegitimate, uneducated and debased ; has been an inmate 
three years, also repeatedly in jail, and seems likely to burden the 
public through life. 

It appeared probable that four of the inmates of this institution, if 
placed under good influences, might grow up to usefulness; eighteen 
were looked upon as fixed public burdens ; and the future of ten was 
regarded as in doubt. 

•Rensselaer County. 

The poor-house of this county stands on elevated ground, near the 
city of Troy. The buildings have been in use a number of years, but 
they are in fair condition, and comfortably furnished. The institu- 
tion has room for about two hundred and fifty persons. 

The pauper inmates at the time of the examination were: Males 
eighty-three (83) ; females seventy-three (73); total, one hundred and 
fifty-six (156). These were classified by birth as follows: United 
States, seventy-four ; Canada, two; Ireland, seventy ; other European 
countries, ten. The fathers of one hundred and ten, and the mothers 
of one hundred and nine were foreign born ; and the birthplaces of 
twenty-eight of the former, and of twenty-two of the latter could not 
be learned. 

The following facts were obtained by the inquiry, respecting the 
ages, time of dependence, etc., of the persons there under care: 
Fifteen were under two years old ; twelve were between the ages of 
two and five years; seven, between five and sixteen; thirty-six, 
between sixteen and forty ; forty -four, between forty and sixty; thirty- 
eight, between sixty and eighty; and four in advance of the latter 
age. Sixteen were born in the institution ; nine of the others entered 
it before they were two years of age ; fourteen, when between the 
ages of two and twenty years; fifty-tw^o, when between twenty and 
forty; fifty-three, when between forty and seventy; and twelve after 
they were seventy years old. Forty-eight had been in its care less 
than one year; fifteen, one year and less than two years; thirty-six, 
two years and less than five; twentj^-three, five years and less than 
ten ; twenty-five, ten years and less than twenty; seven, twenty years 
and less than thirty ; and two over thirty years. The entire time 



145 

spent in the house by all the inmates, footed up eight hundred and 
sixteen years, being an average of 5.23 years per inmate. 

A large proportion of the persons in care of this institution belonged 
-to the ignorant and intemperate class of paupers, as will be seen by 
-the following statement of facts collected upon the subject : Of those 
of mature age, only forty-three, or about thirty-eight per cent, had 
"been trained in school ; fourteen of the others had learned to read, 
and seven to read and write ; the remainder were without any educa- 
tion. Fifty of the men, or nearly ninety-one per cent, and twenty-two 
of the women, or over sixty-six per cent of those whose habits could 
be ascertained, were classed as intemperate ; and thirty-two of the 
former and eleven of the latter, it was said, had been habitual and 
confirmed drunkards. Bat little could be learned respecting the 
liabits of their ancestors. 

This county, several years since, adopted a thorough system of 
claseification, in the case of its dependent classes. Under this system 
the children over three years of age, have been sent to the various 
asylums at Troy; the more urgent sick and surgical cases to the 
hospitals of that city ; and the insane, both acute and chronic, to the 
appropriate institutions for these classes. Evidences of pauper entail- 
naent to the third generation existed in three instances only, on the 
i=>^aternal, and in no instance on the paternal side. Among the inmates 
examined, seven descended from pauper fathers, and thirty-two from 
pauper mothers. The latter were mostly infants, to be disponed of 
^pon arriving at proper age. 

The families represented by the inmates numbered one hundred 
^tid thirty-six. The burdensome, unfortunate and vicious classes, 
^hich had sprung from these families in three generations, so far as 
^own, had been as follows: Paupers, one hundred and ninety-seven ; 
insane, twenty-four; idiots, ten; inebriates, one hundred and three} 
criminals, fifteen. Thirty-six of those under care were said to be heads 
^f families in which were numbered eighty-nine living children. The 
^ndition of fifteen of these was unknown ; forty-four were providing 
^^^ themselves ; and thirty were dependent. Of the latter, twenty- 
four were in poor-houses, and six in asylums. 

The following were some of the family groups in the institution 

^Pon the occasion of the inquiry : A married woman thirty-one years 

^^ age, separated from her husband nearly twelve years, since which 

^inae she has borne three illegitimate children, one of whom is dead, 

^^d two are now with her, the youngest being four months old ; is 

^S^orant, vagrant and depraved, and gives little promise of future 

10 



146 

self-Bupport ; an unmarried woman aged twenty-seven years, with 
two illegitimate children, the elder being thYee years of age, and has 
another child in asylum care ; is uneducated, intemperate and debased, 
and has been an inmate most of the time for the past six years ; may 
in time go out, but is quite probable to return, further to burden the 
county ; a married woman thirty years of age, deserted by her hus- 
band, recently admitted with an infant ; is fairly connected, and 
temperate, but in poor health, with future uncertain ; a woman thirty 
years old, abandoned by her husband, said to be intemperate and 
profligate, an inmate one year ; has two children, one in an asylum, 
and the other, a girl three years of age with her ; is temperate and 
healthy, but ignorant and disinclined to self-exertion ; a colored woman, 
aged fifty-nine years, married but separated from her husband ; has 
borne twelve children, one only, a girl seven years old, being alive 
and an inmate ; is uneducated, and grossly intemperate, having been 
repeatedly locked up for drunkenness; was recently admitted, yet 
appears likely hereafter to burden the public; a woman thirty-two 
years of age, twice married, but abandoned by her second husband ; 
has two children, the elder, a boy, in an asylum, and the other, an 
infant girl, an inmate ; is educated, temperate, and apparently respect- 
able, and seems likely soon to provide for herself; a colored married 
woman, forty-five years of age, separated from her husband, and 
recently received with an infant child said to be illegitimate; is 
uneduoatod and very intemperate, having been twice in the peniten- 
tiary for drunkenness and vagrancy, and appears probable further to 
bunion the public; and an unmarried girl nineteen years old, foreign 
born, and onlv a few months in the countrv; was admitted to the 
institution soon after her arrival, where she gave birth to a child; is 
uneducatiHl, but tem^>erate and industrious, and bids fair in the end 
to gt'fc out and provide for her maintenance. 

A tow of the other clashes examined will next be noticed : A widowed 
woman fitVy-four years of ago, uneducated and intemperate and sev- 
eral tinuvsi in the jH>nitontiary for drunkenne^ and disorderly conduct ; 
has lHH>n an inmate ton years, is the mother of two self-supporting 
ohildr^nu but pn^lvablo to nnnain a public charge the balance of her 
life : an unmarrioii woman agtni fit\y-tour years* fifteen of which have 
betMi S}M*nt in this house ; is untHiu<*attHi, confirtned in habits of drunk- 
enness^ and Wktni ujhmi as a fixtnl do[Hnident: a married woman, 
forty-tivo yt^rs of agi\ st^jvarattnl tVvnu hor husband* and an inmate 
at various tiuuvsi for the jV4st ton voar^: is ignorant* intemperate and 
Y)^i^nt and not likely to W rooIaiuKxi ; a single luau aged thirty-five 



HfeOBl 



■ 147 

rears, uneduoated, vagrant and intemperate; has been an inmate 
three years, and also in jail for drunkenness, and regarded as incor- 
rigible; a weak minded unmarried man tiiirty-oiie years old, and 
fifteen years in the house; is in I'eeble liealth, without friends, and 
wholly dependent ; a man seventy years oi' age, a widower, edneated 
but very intemperate and an inmate twenty years; has six self-sup- 
porting children, but is looked upon aa a permanent burden upon the 
county; and an unmarried man fifty-eigbt years old, and an inmate 
since thirty-seven years of age; is crippled, infirm and friendless, and 
classed as a fixed dependent. 

The probable future of the inmates of this house may be thus 
summed up : Eighty-nine give no hopes of future self-support ; 
twenty-three seem likely of their own accord to go out and provide 
for themselves; nine may be trained to usefulness if removed and 
!ed under proper guidance; while the prospects of thirty-five, 
.tly infants, may be regarded as doubtful. 

EicEuoND County. 

The Richmond county poor-house is situated in 
Northfield, near the village of New Doi-p. It li 
years, hut has recently undergone repairs and alterations 
comfortable. The institution will accommodate about o 
and twenty-live persons. 

The number of paupers in the care of the institution upon the 
occasion of the inquiry was eighty-four (84). Of these forty^ix (46) 
were males, and tbirty-eight (38) females, classified by birth as follows : 
New York, tliirty-six ; other States of tlie Uuion, eight; Canada, 
one; England, two; Ireland, twenty-nine; Germany, five; other 
European countries, three. The fathers of nineteen, and the mothers 
of twenty-one, were native born, and the fathers of sixty-five, and 
the mothers of sisty-three were of foreign birth. 

The following facts were obtained regarding the ages of the inmates 
when examined, the periods in life in which they became dependent, 
and the duration of the pauperism: Eighteen were under sixteen 
years old ; six, were between the ages of sixteen and thirty years ; 
twenty-two, between thirty and filty; twenty-tive, between fifty and 
seventy; ten, between seventy and eighty ; and three were in, advance 
of the latter age. Eight, were born in poor-houses; eleven of the 
others were admitted before they were ten years old ; twelve, when 
between the ages of ten and thirty years; twenty-seven, when 
between thirty and fifty; thirteen, when between fifty and sixty; 



town of 
9 been in use several 
Lud is quite 
le hundred 



148- 

seven, when between sixty and seventy; and six after they had 
passed the age of seventy years. Twenty had been dependent less 
than one year; three, one year and less than two years; twenty-six, 
two years and less than five ; fourteen, five years and less than ten ; 
sixteen, ten years and less than twenty ; and four, over twenty years. 
The average dependence per inmate, appeared then to have been 6.39 
years ; the aggregate, five hundred and thirty-seven years. 

The inmates of this house were largely characterized by their 
ignorance, and by early pernicious habits and indulgences. Of those 
of mature age, twenty-seven, or nearly forty-one per cent were wholly 
uneducated ; five, had learned to read ; six, to read and write ; and 
twenty-eight had been trained in common schools. All of the men 
except three, whose habits could not be learned, admitted practices 
of inebriety ; and twenty-seven of them, or over seventy-seven per 
cent were known to have been habitual drunkards. The habits of 
the women were classified as follows: Totally abstinent, sixteen; 
moderate drinkers, eight; periodical drinkers, four; confirmed inebri- 
ates, two; habits unknown, one. The fathers of nineteen, and the 
mothers of forty-four were classed as temperate ; and the fathers of 
fifty-one, and the mothers of twenty-three, as intemperate. The 
habits of the fathers of fourteen, and of the mothers of seventeen, 
could not be ascertained. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was sixty-nine. 
The total burdensome, unfortunate and turbulent classes, of these 
families in three generations, so far as could be learned, summed up, 
one hundred and ninety-nine persons, as follows : Public dependents, 
ninety-four ; insane, thirteen ; inebriates, ninety-two. Three were 
the descendants of pauper fathers ; thirteen of pauper mothers ; and 
in one instance the pauperism was traced to the grandparents. 
Twenty-seven were heads of families having in all eighty-two 
living children. Of these, fifteen were in poor-houses ; five in asy- 
lums ; five indentured in homes ; and fifty-six were said to be self- 
sustaining. The condition of one could not be learned. The children 
in the institution at the time of the examination have, since then 
been removed, and placed in families, or asylums, and the system of 
poor-house care of this class has been wholly abandoned. These 
ends have been readily attained by the authorities, and it is believed 
with highly beneficial results. 

The evils attending the association of dependent children with 
adult paupers, will be clearly seen by the following cases of families 
grouped in this institution at the time of the inquiry : A married 



149 

woman, thirty years old, deserted by her hasband, with four children 
aged respectively six, four, three and two years ; the woman unedu- 
cated and intemperate, and her husband also an inebriate ; have been 
inmates nearly two years, and the woman, being allowed to retain 
her children, evinces no desire to go out and provide for herself; an 
uneducated, intemperate woman, thirty-five years of age, widowed, 
and nine years an inmate ; has two children with her, the elder seven 
and the younger five years old, both born in the house, the father 
having been a pauper and grossly intemperate ; a widowed woman, 
thirty-seven years old, an inmate nine years ; has a son ten years old 
who entered the poor-house with her, and another five years of age, 
born in the institution ; the woman healthy, but ignorant, intemper- 
ate and depraved, and seems likely to remain a public burden ; the 
children intelligent, and, if removed to proper surroundings, might be 
trained to usefulness ; three young single women, each with an ille- 
gitimate child, and one widowed woman with two illegitimate chil- 
dren, all except one uneducated, intemperate and vagrant, and quite 
probable further to burden the public with their progeny ; a man 
eighty years of age, twice married, but childless, an inmate twenty 
years, and his brother, sixty-five years old and ten years in the house ; 
both well educated but habitual drunkards, and looked upon as fixed 
dependents; and two brothers, one aged fifty-eight and one fifty 
years, inmates four years ; the elder single, the younger a widower, 
having five self-supporting children ; both uneducated and enfeebled 
by habits of dissipation, and seem probable hereafter to burden 
the public. 

A few of the other cases examined will next be noticed: A 
widowed woman thirty-two years of age, educated and temperate*and 
an inmate ten years ; has had two children since her admission to 
the house, one of whom is dead, and one provided for in a family ; 
was early orphaned and homeless, and gives no promise of future self- 
support ; a man aged sixty-two years, a widower, foreign born, nine 
years in this country, and four years a pauper inmate ; ^s ignorant, 
intemperate and profiigate, and quite certain to remain a public 
charge ; a widower sixty-five years old, well educated, but very intem- 
perate, and an inmate four years ; has five children who provide for 
themselves, but is regarded as a permanent burden upon the public ; 
a single man fifty-nine years of age, thoroughly educated but an 
inveterate drunkard and vagrant ; has been an inmate only a short 
time, yet seems likely to remain through life ; and an uneducated, 
intemperate single woman, thirty years old, ten years an inmate ; has 



150 

been repeatedly in jail for drunkenness and vagrancy, and is thor- 
oughly degraded by vicious and debasing practices, and offers no 
hope of reformation. 

The authorities of this county provide for its chronic insane 
mainly in the appropriate State asylum for this class. The number 
under care at the time of the inquiry was ten (10) of whom four (4) 
were males, and six (6) females. All were quiet, harmless cases, 
looked upon generally as incurable, and receiving no special atten- 
tion. 

The following conclusions were reached regarding the probable 
future of the inmates of this house : Permanently dependent, fifty- 
three ; likely to provide for themselves, two ; capable of self-mainte- 
nance under proper guidance, seventeen; future doubtful, twelve. 

KooKLAND County. 

The institution for the poor of this county is situated at Monsey, 
six miles from tlie village of Suffern. It consists of two wooden 
buildings adjoining, having accommodations for about seventy-five 
persons. The buildings are old but comfortable, and appropriately 
furnished, and the location is pleasant and healthy. 

Upon the occasion of the inquiry the institution had fifty (50) per- 
sons under its sheltering care — thirty-two (32) males, and eighteen 
(18) females. Twenty-nine of these were natives of New York ; 
four of other States of the Union j five of England ; eight of Ireland ; 
one of France ; and three of Germany. The parents of twenty-four 
were native, and^of twenty- six foreign born. 

The ages, duration of dependence, etc., of the inmates of this 
institution, appeared as follows : Fourteen were under sixteen years 
old ; eight were between the ages of sixteen and forty years ^ thir- 
teen between forty and sixty ; six between sixty and seventy ; and 
nine had passed the latter age. Three were born in the poor-house ; 
seven were admitted before they had reached the age of ten years ; 
six when between the ages of ten and twenty ; ten when between 
twenty and forty; thirteen when between forty and sixty; and eleven 
after they were over sixty years old. The dependence in eleven 
cases had existed less than one year ; in sixteen cases, one year and 
less than five ; in fourteen cases, five years and less than ten ; in 
eight cases, ten years and less than twenty ; and in two cases, over 
twenty years. The summing up showed an aggregate dependence 
of all the inmates when examined of two hundred and sixty-two 
years ; and an average to each person of 5.24 years. 



151 

Tlie educational attainments of the inmates of this house were 
found to be about the game as tliat of this cla^s generally iu like 
institutions; but the proportion of illiterate, espeeially in the 
,cases of the men, appeared quite large. Of thoae of proper age, 
seventeen had enjoyed the advantages of common school training; 
four Lad been educated to read, and one to read and write ; the 
others were entirely ignorant. Four of the men and six of the 
women claimed to be totally abstinent ; while nineteen of the former 
and four of the latter confeBsed having formed habits of inebriety. 
Of these, fourteen, or forty per cent, were known to have been 
habitual drunkards. The habits of two could not be ascertained. 
The proportion of intemperate among the parents of the inmates, so 
far as known, appeared also quite large. 

The inmates when examined represented forty-six families, from 
which there were known to have sprung, in three generations, seventy 
paupers, four insane persons, two idiots, and thirty-one inebriates. 
The beads of families, consisting of one or both parents, numbered 
fourteen. The ciiildren of these families then living, footed up fifty- 
two, situated in life as follows ; In poor-houses, five ; placed out, 
two; self-providing, forty-one; condition unknown, four. Five of 
those under care were the offspring of panper mothers. In no 
instance could the pauperism be traced to the third generation. 

The following were the families in the institution at the time of 
the examination : A widowed woman thirty years old, uneducated 
and intemperate, an inmate only a few months; has six living chil- 
dren, three of whom are self-BUpporting, and three inmates with her, 
the youngest, an infant, being ill^itimate and born in the poor-house ; 
, IB friendless, and seems probable hereafter to burden the public; a 
L-married woman aged twenty-seven years, deserted by her husband, 
l-with an infant child born in this institution ; has been an inmate 
P'Only a short time, is educated and temperate, and appears likely soon 
Vto provide for herself; two orphaned children, the elder aged ten, 
■^d tiie younger five yeare, inmates one year ; and two other children, 
1 • boy seven, and a girl six years old, abandoned by their father. 

Other cases were examined as follows: An unmarried woman aged 
forty-two years, eleven years an inmate ; has had four illegitimate 
^shildren, two of whom are dead, and two provided for in families ; is 
baducated, but intempei-ate and vagrant, and gives no promise of 
l,teformation ; a single woman, nineteen years of age, first admitted 
wta the poor-house when twelve years old, and for some time past has 
[ led a vagrant, tramping life ; is ignorant, shiftljess and degraded, and 



( 



162 

looked upon as incorrigible; an unmarried naan aged thirty years, 
uneducated, intemperate, and nearly blind ; has been eighteen years 
an inmate, is without friends, and regarded as a fixed burden ; a 
single woman ninety years of age, twenty-five years in the house ; is 
uneducated, but tempei*ate, without friends, and wholly dependent ; 
an ignorant, intemperate, unmarried colored man, forty years old, 
eight years an inmate, and oifers no hope of future self-support; 
and a widowed woman aged fifty-five years, nine years in the house ; 
is educated and temperate, but an epileptic, and likely to burden the 
public through life. 

The county provides for its chronic insane mainly at the State 
asylum for this class. The number under county care at the time 
of the examination was two, both women. These were quiet, well- 
behaved cases, and allowed to mingle with the other inmates. 

The condition of the inmates of this house led to more hopeftil 
conclusions respecting their future than is generally reached as to this 
class in similar institutions. Twenty-four, or only forty per cent, were 
looked upon as hopelessly dependent. Of the others it was thought 
that three would soon go out and provide for themselves, and that 
eleven if promptly removed and properly guided might be made self- 
supporting. The future of twelve was regarded as uncertain, though 
it seemed probable that a portion of them, at least, might be educated 

to usefulness. 

St. Lawebnoe County. 

The St. Lawrence county poor-house, erected in 1869, is a substan- 
tial brick edifice containing modern improvements for heating, bath- 
ing, etc., and will accommodate and suitably classify about two hundred 
and fifty inmates. It is pleasantly situated near the village of Canton. 

The number of persons in the care of the institution upon the 
occasion of the inquiry was, males forty-three (43) ; females sixty-one 
(61) ; total one hundred and four (104). Of these, five were born in 
the poor-house; twenty-three of the others were admitted before 
arriving at the age of twenty years ; eighteen when between the ages 
of twenty and forty ; thirty-two when between forty and sixty ; 
twenty-one when between sixty and eighty ; and five after they were 
in advance of eighty years. The ages at the time of the examination 
appeared as follows : Under two years, six ; between the ages of two 
and sixteen years, seven ; between sixteen and thirty, fifteen ; 
between thirty and fifty, twenty-one; between fifty and seventy, 
thirty ; between seventy and eighty, fifteen ; over eighty years old, 
ten. Twenty-four had been in the house less than one year; thirty- 



168 

seven, one year and lesB than five years ; thirty, five years and less 
tlian ten ; seven, ten years and less than twenty ; four, twenty years 
&iid less than thirty ; and one more than thirty years. The aggregate 
time of dependence then had been four hundred and forty-six years ; 
tlie average per inmate 4.29 years. 

The birthplaces of eight of the inmates of the house could not be 
ascertained. Of the others, thirty-four were bom in New York ; 
fourteen in other States of the Union ; seventeen in Canada ; five in 
England; twenty-two in Ireland; and four in other European coun- 
tries. The fathers of twenty-one, and the mothers of twenty-nine, 
native, and the fathers of forty, and the mothers of thirty-eight, 
ign bom. The birthplaces of the fathers of forty, and of the 
ixiothers of thirty-seven, were unknown. The following facts were 
developed by the inquiry, regarding the education and habits of the 
iximates of the institution: Of those of mature age and capacity for 
instruction, twentynseven, or nearly thirty-five per cent were without 
education ; eleven of the others had learned to read ; seven to 
and write ; and thirty-three had enjoyed the advantages of cora- 
i^^^on school training. The habits of three of the men, and of nine 
of the women could not be learned. Of the others, three of the men 
o^ly, and twenty-seven of the women, were classed as temperate ; 
^he residue were said to have formed habits of drunkenness. The 
^^thers of forty, and the mothers of nine were known also to have 
*^^eii intemperate. 

In the disposition of the dependent children of this county, the 
^tithorities have chiefly relied upon family agencies ; and it is said, 
triey have generally been able properly tlius to provide for all of this 
^laae. The amount of pauper entailment in the cases of the persons 
Glider care, when the inquiry was made, appeared to be quite small, 
Only two being the offspring of pauper fathers, and twelve, mostly 
^^fants, of pauper mothers. The number of families represented in 
^l^e institution was ninety-two. The burdensome, unfortunate and 
disturbing classes of society in these families, in three generations, 
^^tamed up two hundred and thirty-five, as follows : Public depend- 
^^ts, one hundred and sixteen ; insane persons, twenty-seven ; idiots, 
^^Khteen ; inebriates, seventy-four. Thirty-one of those under care 
^©i*e parents having in all seventy-four living children. The condi- 
^^on of twenty-one of them could not be satisfactorily determined. 
^f the others, ten were in poor-houses, eleven in family situations, 
^*^<i thirty-two self-supporting. 

1?he following were the family groups in the house at the time of 



164 

the inquiry: A single woman twenty-six years old, an inmate only 
a few months ; has two illegitimate children with her, the younger 
born in the house, and has also another illegitimate child, provided 
for by friends ; is educated and temperate, but confirmed in habits of 
vagrancy, and likely hereafter to burden the public ; an idiot male, 
thirty-one years old, and his sister twenty-two years of age, also an 
idiot and epileptic, the former an inmate six, and the latter four years, 
the father being feeble minded and intemperate and aided outside ; 
an unmarried girl eighteen years of age, with an illegitimate child 
seven months old, inmates six months ; is educated, temperate and 
healthy, and bids fair soon to go out and provide for herself; a single 
woman thirty-three years old, uneducated, vagrant and depraved, nine 
months an inmate, with two illegitimate children, the elder aged 
seven years, and the younger, one year ; a widowed woman aged sixty 
years, and her daughter, crippled, thirty-six years old, inmates thirty- 
two years; both ignorant, feeble and infirm, and regarded, as fixed 
dependents ; a woman, widowed, seventy-two years of age, an inmate 
eight years, with her married daughter an epileptic, aged forty-nine 
years; is the mother of two other children self-sustaining, and the 
daughter has four children, two providing for themselves, and two 
placed in families ; both women feeble and helpless, and quite certain 
to remain public charges ; an uneducated intemperate married woman, 
aged forty-nine years, supposed to be from Canada, with a child six 
years old, inmates four years, and both probably permanent depend- 
ents ; a temperate married man, fifty-eight years old, suflTering from 
chorea, and his sister aged forty-two years, ignorant and weak minded, 
the former an inmate seven months, and the latter two years, and both 
likely to remain through life ; and an unmarried woman aged twenty- 
five years, and an inmate since nineteen years old ; has an illegitimate 
child with her, aged three months, born in the house, and also two 
other children, placed out; is ignorant, vagrant and debased, and gives 
little promise of reformation. 

Included with the other cases examined were the following : A 
man fifty-seven years of age, a widower, nine years in the house on 
account of the accidental loss of eyes and wholly dependent; a 
single woman aged twenty-four years, in the house two weeks, com- 
mitted as a vagrant ; has been so committed twice before, and also 
several times to jail for like oflense, and is looked upon as incorrigible ; 
a deaf mute single woman, fifty-four years of age, uneducated, and 
an inmate nearly fifty years; an unmarried feeble minded woman, 
aged fifty-six years, fourteen of which have been spent in this house ; 



165 

parentB first coneins, ifirnorant, intemperate, idle and shiftless ; a sin- 
gle woman twenty-eight years old, six years an inmate, and has two 
illegitimate children provided for in families ; tlie father, mother and 
one brother have been paupers, and she seems likely hereafter to bur- 
den the county; an uneducated intemperate man, a widower, aged 
eeventy-thfee years, only five months in the house; is paralytic, 
nearly blind, and regarded as a fixed burden ; and an idiot, a female, 
thirty-two years old, eight years in the house, and entirely fi-iendlese. 
Also the following : A feeble minded single woman, twenty-five 
years of age, an inmate twenty-three years, a waif, and hopelessly 
dependent; an ignorant, grossly intemperate man, a widower, ninety 
years old, recently admitted ; has five set f-suppoi' ting children, but is 
looked upon as a fixed burden; a single woman, aged thirty-seven 
years, five years an inmate, is educated and temperate, but sick and 
infirm, and not likely to recover; an unmarried man sixty-one years 
old, recently from Canada, in the house one year, and seems probable 
to remain through lifej a single woman thirty-eight years of age, 
and six years a pauper inmate; first entered the poor-house when 
sixteen years old, remained only a short time, went out and led a 
vagrant, dissolute life until thirty-two yeare of age, returning then to 
the institution ; is suffering from disease induced by debasing practices, 
and appeal's likely to burden the public through life; and an unmar- 
ried girl aged seventeen years, ignorant, vagrant, and in feeble health, 
an inmate six years; the father, mother, one brother and one sister 
have been paupere, and she offers little promise of future self-support. 
Upon the opening of the Willard Asylum in 1869, this county 
transferred its chronic insane, then in the county poor-houae, to that 
institution. Since that date others of this class have been thus dis- 
posed of, and the system of county care for the insane was, for some 
time, entirely abandoned. Within the past year, however, the 
authorities Ijave set apart and fitted up apartments in the poor-house 
for a limited number of the more quiet and orderly of this class with 
the view of retaining them under local control. The number of such 
insane in care of the institution at the time of the inquiry was, males 
four (4) ; females seventeen (17) ; total twenty-one (31). 

As regards the future of the inmates of this house, it was the 
opinion that seventy-three of them would probably burden thecounty 
through life ; two it was thought would, of their own accord, soon go 
out and provide for themselves ; eight seemed capable of maintaining 
themselves if removed and placed under good surroundings; and the 
future uf twenty-one was looked upon as doubtful. 



166 

Saratoga County. 

The erection of a new poor-house was begun in this county in 1869, 
but it was not fully completed until 1872. The building is a plain 
brick structure, well planned and arranged, and is wholly adequate 
to the present requirements. It is pleasantly located on the site of 
the old edifice, near the village of Ballston. 

The examination showed that there were then one hundred and 
fourteen (114) paupers in the care of this institution, of whom twenty- 
three (23) were insane. The number of males was sixty (60) ; females 
fifty-four (54). They were classified according to birth as follows: 
New York, sixty-six; others of the United States, five; England, 
two ; Ireland, thirty-eight ; other countries of Europe, three. The 
parents of sixty-tNyo were native, and of forty-seven foreign born. 
The birthplaces of the parents of five could not be ascertained. 

The proportion of aged in the institution, as appeared by the 
inquiry, was exceedingly large. Of those then in its care, fourteen 
were under twenty years of age ; sixteen were between the ages of 
twenty and • forty ; thirty-two between forty and sixty ; twenty-one 
between sixty and seventy ; twenty-three between seventy and 
eighty ; and eight had passed the latter age. Three were born in 
the poor-house ; fifteen of the others became dependent before they 
were twenty years of age ; twenty-seven when between the ages oi 
twenty and forty ; thirty-eight when between forty and sixty ; sixteen 
when between sixty and seventy ; and fifteen after they were seventy 
years old. Twenty had been inmates less than one year ; ten, one 
year and less than two years ; thirty-three, two years and less than 
five ; eighteen, five years and less than ten ; twenty-two, ten yean 
and less than twenty ; eight, twenty years and less than thirty; and 
three, more than thirty years. The average time spent in the poor- 
house per inmate had been 7.12 ; the aggregate, eight hundred and 
twelve years. Ninety were looked upon as permanent dependents; 
seven, as likely soon to go out and provide for themselves ; five, as 
capable of self maintenance under proper, supervision ; and the future 
of twelve was regarded as doubtful. 

Of the inmates of adult age, thirty-seven, or nearly forty per cent, 
had been instructed in common schools ; eleven of the others had 
learned to read only ; and nine to read and write. The remainder 
had never received any educational training. Twenty of the men 
and sixteen of the women claimed to be totally abstinent ; and thir- 
ty-four of the men and twenty-four of the women admitted habits of 
inebriety. Of these, twenty-five of the former and twenty-two of the 



157 

Ifttter were classed as confirmed dninkards. But little could be 
learned lespectiug the habits of the parents of the inmates. 

The opportunities for placing dependent diildreii in family homes 
in this county are said, generally, to have been adequate to the 
requirements of this class. At times, however, the children have 
been allowed to accumulate in the poor-house, aud its evil effects 
were seen in some of the inmates examined. Six of those under 
care were the offspring of pauper fathers, and thirteen of pauper 
mothers. In two cases the pauperism was traced back to tlie third 
generation. The number of heads of families in the institution was 
twenty-seven, who were said to have in all sixty-one living children, 
conditioned in life as follows : In poor-houses, ten ; in asylnms, two ; 
provided with situations, three; self-supporting, forty-four; condition 
unknown, two. The inmates examined represented one hundred and 
one families, from which there had sprung in three generations one 
hundred and thirty-five public dependents, twenty-three insane per- 
sons, ten idiots, and seventy-one inebriates. 

The following were the family groups in the institution at the 
time of the inquiry : A married man aged fifty-seven years, an inmate 
one year, with a daughter twelve years old, feeble and infirm ; the 
man educated, healthy, and able to provide for himself, but seems 
inclined to remain in the institution, his wife being employed as a 
cook; a woman recently admitted, forty-one years of age, married, 
and the mother of eight children, five of whom are inmates, the eld- 
est being thirteen years, and the youngest nearly one year old ; the 
woman is uneducated, intemperate and deserted by her husband, said 
also to be intemperate ; the children fairly intelligent and if removed 
might probably be trained to usefulness ; an uneducated, intemper- 
ate married woman, abandoned by her husband, an inmate two years ; 
was at the State asylum for tlie insane about one year, since which 
she has given birth to a child, now one year old and an inmate ; her 
mother, one brother and four sisters have been paupers, and she will 
probably hereafter burden the public ; a married woman aged thirty 
years, ignorant, inleniperate, able-bodied and vagrant, an inmate only 
u few mouths, with two children, the elder, a boy, ten, and the 
younger, a girl, two years old ; a man and hie wife, the former aged 
Beventy-eight and the latter eighty-eight years, ignorant, intemper- 
»le and childless, inmates three years and wholly dependent; a man 
seventy-six years old with his wife seventy years of age, both intem- 
perate and ignorant, and ten years in the house ; have two self-sup- 
porting children, yet they seem likely to remain dependent through 



158 

life; a paralytic wonlan, a widow, sixty-one years old, and her daugh- 
ter aged forty-two years, feeble minded, inmates ten years, both igno- 
rant and habitual drunkards, and regarded as fixed dependents ; an 
idiot female, fifty years of age, twenty-five of which have been spent 
in the institution, and her illegitimate daughter, twenty-two years old, 
also an idiot, born in the house, and an inmate from birth ; a wid- 
owed woman aged fifty-one years, ignorant, intemperate and vagrant, 
ten years an inmate, and her grandson, six years old, a mulatto, ille- 
gitimate, and two years in the house ; and a colored man and his 
wife, the former aged one hundred and the latter ninety-five years, 
both uneducated but temperate, childless and entirely helpless. 

Other cases appeared as. follows: A married man, forty-five years 
of age, sufiering from disease, irecently admitted ; is uneducated, con- 
firmed in habits of inebriety, and likely to continue a public charge ; 
a single man, thirty-one years old, twelve years an inmate, a para- 
lytic, of intemperate parents, both of whom were paupers, and died 
in this house ; a man ninety-two years of age, a widower, educated 
and temperate, eight years an inmate, childless and entirely depend- 
ent ; a weak minded single woman, fifty-one years old, having two 
illegitimate self-supporting children, an inmate twenty years, and 
looked upon as a fixed dependent ; and an unmarried man, sixty- 
seven years of age, educated, but notoriously intemperate, an inmate 
two years, and enfeebled so as probably to burden the county 
through life. 

The authorities of this county have not yielded a ready compliance 
with the law regarding the chronic insane. A few of this class have 
been sent to the appropriate State asylum, but the mass thus far have 
been retained under county control. A department of the poor- 
house is set apart for this purpose. The following were among the 
cases under care at the time of the inquiry : • 

A married woman, educated, but very intemperate, insane, and an 
inmate three years, without having received treatment at any State 
asylum ; a woman thirty-two years old, married, and deserted by her 
husband, insane five years, two of which were spent at the State 
asylum without improvement ; a widowed woman, educated and 
temperate, fifty-three years of age, and insane fifteen years, without 
treatment in a State institution ; a married man aged forty-one years, 
educated but intemperate, two years at the State asylum, without 
improvement, and eight years since in this house, and regarded as 
incurable ; a man sixty-five years of age, married, ignorant and 
intemperate, and eighteen years an insane inmate, without other 



159 

treatment ; and a single man, forty-three years old, educated and 
temperate, at the State asylum two years, without improvement, and 
twelve years since then, in this house, being entirely dependent. 

Schenectady County. 

The poor-house of this county is situated in the suburbs of the 
city of Schenectady. The building is old, but comfortable for the 
time being, yet a new structure will soon be required. It will accom- 
modate about one hundred persons. 

The number of persons in the care of the institution at the time 
of the inquiry, including nineteen (19) insane, was fifty-six (56). Of 
these, twenty-six (26) were males, and thirty (30) females, twenty- 
eight of whom were natives of New York. They were mostly in 
advanced life, five only being under forty years old ; eighteen were 
between the ages of forty and sixty ; twenty, between sixty and 
seventy; nine, between seventy and eighty, and four had passed 
eighty years. One only entered the poor-house under ten years of 
age ; seven, when between the ages of ten and thirty ; ten, when 
between thirty and forty ; twenty-two, when between forty and sixty ; 
and sixteen after in advance of the latter age. Two had been under 
care less than one year ; three, one year and less than two years ; 
thirteen, two years and less than five ; seven, five years and less than 
ten ; twenty-one, ten years and less than twenty ; nine, twenty years 
and less than thirty ; and one, more than thirty years. The time of 
dependence of all the inmates then summed five hundred and fifty- 
four years, being an average of 9.89 years to each person. 

The inquiry showed a fair degree of intelligence among the 
inmates of this house ; twenty-eight of those of adult age, or nearly 
sixty per cent, having been trained in common schools. The propor- 
tion of intemperate, however, appeared quite large. All except one 
man and eleven women admitted habits of inebriety, and seventeen 
of these, or over thirty-six per cent, were classed as confirmed drunk- 
ards. But little was known as to the habits of their parents. 

The authorities of this county have endeavored, and generally with 
good success, to provide for its dependent children otlierwise than in 
the county poor-house, relying mainly upon family agencies for this 
purpose; and the county is remarkably exempt from entailed or 
hereditary pauperism. Of those under care at the time of the exami- 
nation, only one had descended from a pauper father, and four from 
pauper mothers ; and in no instance could the pauperism be traced 
back to the third generation. The number of families represented in 



160 

the institution was fifty-one ; the number of dependents in these fami- 
lies, in three generations, sixty-one ; the number of insane, twenty- 
five; the number of idiots, seven; the number of inebriates, 
forty-nine. Thirteen of those under care were parents, having in all 
thirty-six living children. Of these, three were in poor-houses; 
three under family care; twenty-nine self-supporting; and the condi- 
tion of one was unknown. 

The only family group in the institution at the time of the 
inquiry was the following : A widowed woman, eighty-two years old, 
educated, temperate, industrious, and seemingly respectable, an 
inmate twenty-three years, with three daughters, idiots, aged respect- 
ively sixty, forty -seven and forty-four years, and entirely helpless. 

Among other cases then under care the following may be noticed : 
A single man, forty-five years of age, uneducated but temperate, 
crippled by an accident, and an inmate twenty-three years; an edu- 
cated married woman, aged sixty-nine years, an inmate twelve years, 
enfeebled by habits of dissipation, and wholly dependent; a man 
sixty-five years old, a widower, educated and temperate, and six years 
in the house, on account of loss of sight; an idiot, female, aged fifty 
years, twenty-two years an inmate, and entirely friendless ; an igno- 
rant vagrant girl, nineteen years old, recently admitted, and soon to 
become a mother; and a married woman, fifty-two years of age, 
enfeebled by disease and deserted by her husband, an inmate sixteen 
years and regarded as a fixed public burden. 

This county has transferred some of its more excitable chronic 
insane to State custody, but the greater portion are still retained 
under county control. Of those present at the time of the inquiry, 
four (4) were men and fifteen (15) women. They occupied apart- 
ments separate from the other inmates, and were generally quiet, 
harmless cases. All were looked upon as incurable. * 

Fifty-one of the inmates of this house* were regarded as fixed 
dependents ; one bid fair soon to go out and become self-supporting, 
and four were thought capable of providing for tjieir maintenance if 
early removed and properly encouraged. 

Schoharie County. 

The Schoharie county poor-house is located near the village of 
Middleburgh. Tt is an old building, greatly out of repair, and con- 
tains but few conveniences for its purposes. A few of the more 
respectable aged women are provided with separate apartments, but 
the other inmates associate indiscriminately. 



161 

At the time of the inquiry the institution had fifty (50) persons in 
rits care, including eight (8) chronic insane. Of these, twenty-three (23) 
'Were males and twenty-seven (27) females, classified by birth as fol- 
lows : New York, forty-two ; England, one ; Ireland, three ; Ger- 
many, two ; birthplaces unknown, two. The parentage of a large 
j[>ortion of the inmates was also native. 

The facts ascertained regarding the ages of the inmates when 

examined, the period in life in which they became dependent, and 

tthe duration of the pauperism, were as follows : Ten were under 

isixteen years old ; seven were between the ages of sixteen and forty ; 

^even between forty and sixty ; seventeen between sixty and eighty ; 

£i.nd five had passed the latter age. Seven were born in the poor- 

lioiise ; nine of the others entered it before they had reached the 

£LgG of twenty years ; fifteen when between the ages of twenty and 

fifty ; nine when between fifty and seventy ; and ten after they were 

over seventy years old. Four had been in the house less than one 

yea,r; seventeen, one year and less than five years; twenty-two, five 

yc3ars and less than twenty ; five, twenty years and less than thirty; 

ari<3 two, more than thirty years. The summing up showed that the 

tii.:i:ie spent in the house by all the inmates then amounted to four 

hi:indred and forty-six years, giving an average dependence of 8.92 

yo^rs to each person. 

Of the adult inmates, fourteen, or over forty-one per cent, were 
triable to read or write ; four could read only; seven could read and 
"^iv-rite; and nine had a common school education. Five of the men 
Q'^d fourteen of the women claimed to be temperate ; and eight of 
^he men and three of the women were classed as inebriates. The 
ha-bits of the others could not be ascertained. But little was known 
^^specting the habits of their ancestors. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was forty ; the 
pauper outgrowth from which in three generations had been seventy- 
tlxi-ee persons. The same families had also produced twelve insane, 
^ine idiots, and twenty-one inebriates. Four of those under care 
^^ore the oflEspring of pauper fathers and ten of pauper mothers ; 
^^glit had pauper brothers, and nine pauper sisters. The pauperism 
'^ad descended through three generations in one case on the paternal, 
^^d in four cases on the maternal side. Eleven were parents having 
^^ all twenty-four living children, of whom six were in poor-houses, 
^oxir under family care, and fourteen self-supporting. 

It has been the practice heretofore in this county to place in the 
Poor-house such dependent children as could not readily be provided 



1 1 



162 

for in families, and educate and train them in that institution. A 
better system of placing out such children now prevails in the county, 
yet the evil eflFects of the former practice in regard to this class, are 
still seen to a considerable extent. Among the family groups in the 
institution at the time of the inquiry were the following : 

A brother and sister, the former aged twenty-one and the latter 
eighteen years, both idiots and entirely helpless ; an unmarried vagrant 
colored woman, illegitimate, and born in the house, having two chil- 
dren, both also born in the institution ; an aged man and his wife, 
recently admitted, and a granddaughter, the mother of whom died 
in the house ; a man fifty-six years old, a widower, shiftless, indolent 
and depraved, an inmate sixteen years, and two children, both boys, 
aged respectively ten and five years, and born in the institution ; two 
sisters, the elder said to be intemperate, vile and debased, having a 
granddaughter in the house ; and a man and his wife, both unedu- 
cated, intemperate and vagrant, and their child a bright intelligent 
boy six years old, inmates two years. 

A few other cases in the institution will next be noticed : A man 
fifty-seven years of age, a widower, uneducated but temperate, 
fourteen years in the house, infirm, childless, and wholly dependent ; 
a single man eighty years old, educated and temperate, nine years an 
inmate, and entirely helpless ; an idiot, male, sixty years of age, an 
inmate thirty years, the father, mother, one brother and two sisters 
having died in the house ; a feeble minded single woman thirty-two 
years old, admitted when twelve years of age, and has one child born 
in the house, but now under family care ; and a married woman aged 
fifty years, deserted by her husband, an inmate twenty years, and the 
mother of four children, all said to be self-supporting. 

The insane under care were one man and seven women. The 
former was in chains, the latter generally at large, and receiving no 
special attention. One had been in the house thirty years; one 
twenty years ; two, each fifteen years, and the others, respectively, 
nine, eight, six and three years. Only three had been treated at the 
State Asylum, and all were regarded as incurable. 

The probable future of the inmates of this house may be summed 
up as follows : Forty will doubtless continue public burdens the 
remainder of their lives ; one seems likely to go out and become self- 
supporting, and nine, all children, may be trained to usefulness if 
early removed and placed under good influences. 



163 

ScHUTLEB County. 

This coanty has no poor-house for its dependent classes. The insane 
provided for in the State institutions ; and such children as become 
-public charge, in families or asylums. All other classes needing 
blic aid are assisted at their homes. 



Seneca Countt. 

The poor-house of this county is a substantial stone edifice situated 
^IxDut three miles from the village of Waterloo. It is in good repair, 
mits of a partial classification of the inmates, and has hospital rooms 
r the sick. It will accommodate about one hundred persons, 
^t the time of the inquiry, the institution had thirty-six (36) 
ns in its care. Of these twenty-one (21) were males, and fifteen 
) females. The only chronic insane were three (3) men, this class 
ng mostly provided for in the State institution. 
The dependent children of the county have heretofore been placed 
^ families, but recently, such of this class as cannot be readily thus 
imposed of are sent to asylums. 

The inmates examined were mostly natives, twenty-four being bom 
this State. Seven were under sixteen years old; twelve were 
*^^t;ween the ages of sixteen and fifty ; nine between fifty and seventy ; 
^ti<3 eight had passed the latter age. Four were bom in the poor- 
*^*c>use; nine of the others were admitted before they were twenty 
^'^iirs of age; eleven when between the ages of twenty and fifty, and 
^"^^Ive after they-were fifty years old. Ten had been in the house 
^^^^6 than five years; thirteen, five years and less than ten ; six, ten 
^"^^rs and less than twenty ; five, twenty years and less than thirty ; 
^Xi<i two over thirty years. The average time of dependence per 
-^^^^riaate, then had been 9.19 years, the aggregate three hundred and 
^J^irty-one years. ^ 

Of the adult inmates, nine were without any educational training ; 
en bad learned to read ; and eleven had received the advantages 
common school instruction. Two of the men,, and five of the 
men were said to be totally abstinent; and twelve of the men 
classed as intemperate. The habits of the balance of the women 
^^vi.ld not be ascertained, and but little could be learned regarding 
^^ habits of the parents of the inmates. 

"Xhe number of families represented in the institution was thirty- 

^'o, from which there had sprung in three generations forty-seven 

^^IdHc dependents. Four of those under care were the ofispring of 

^'Oper fathers, and seven of pauper mothers, and five had pauper 



164 

sisters. In one instance the pauperism was traced back to the grand- 
parents. Seven were heads of families, having in all fourteen living 
children. The condition of two of these could not be learned. Of 
the others, three were in poor-houses and nine self-supporting. 

The following were the family groups in the institution, at the 
time of the examination : A married woman, uneducated, forty-one 
years old, abandoned by her husband, and an illegitimate cliild, a 
girl five years of age, the former an inmate thirteen years, and the 
latter from birth ; an intelligent girl, eleven years of age, and ten 
years an inmate, and her sister five years old, illegitimate and born 
in the house ; two idiotic brothers, aged respectively thirty-eight and 
thirty-six years, inmates twenty-eight years, and hopelessly depend- 
ent ; and a man sixty-four years of age, a widower, educated and 
temperate, five years in the house, and his child, a girl four years 
old, and three years an inmate ; an uneducated married woman aged 
sixty-eight years, and her feeble minded daughter twenty-seven years 
old, inmates fourteen years, and regarded as fixed burdens. 

Among other cases present were the following : A single, weak 
minded woman, forty years old, an inmate twenty years and entirely 
friendless ; an unmarried man aged fifty-seven years, ignorant and 
intemperate, an inmate twenty-seven years, and has also been in jail 
for drunkenness; a married woman, sixty-five years of age, a para- 
lytic, entirely helpless, and eight years in the house ; a widowed 
woman seventy-five years old, recently admitted, childless and wholly 
dependent ; a single man aged sixty-eight years, educated but very 
intemperate, an inmate ten years, and a fixed burden ; an unmarried 
woman, thirty-eight years old, feeble minded and deformed, an 
inmate three years, and likely to remain through life ; and a mar- 
ried man aged thirty-eight years, four years an inmate, enfeebled by 
habits of dissipation, and gives little promise of future self-support. 

It seemed probable that three of the inmates of this house might 
be trained to usefulness, if removed and properly educated; the 
future of five was regarded as doubtful ; and twenty-eight, or over 
seventy-seven per cent, were looked upon as permanent burdens. 

Steuben County. 

The buildings constituting the poor-house of this county are old 
and greatly dilapidated. The institution has no facilities for classifi- 
cation, and contains but few conveniences for its purposes. Its loca- 
tion is near the village of Bath. 

The number of inmates at the time of the examination, including 



165 

twelve (12) insane, was: Males, forty-seven (47); femaleH, forty (40); 
total, eighty-seven (87). Six of these were under ten years old ; nine 
were between the ages of ten and sixteen ; fourteen between sixteen and 
thirty; twenty-seven between thirty and sixty ; tw en ty-o no between 
sixty and seventy ; and ten were in advance of seventy years. 
Twenty-three became dependent before they were twenty ye^rs old, 
of wliom six were horn in the house; nineteen when between the 
ages of thirty and forty; twenty-five when between fortj' and sixty; 
twelve when between sixty and seventy ; and eight after they were 
seventy years old. Eighteen had been in the institution less than 
one year ; nineteen, one year and less than two years ; fourteen, two 
years and less than five; seventeen, five years and less than ten; 
sisteen, ten years and less than thirty ; two, thirty years and less 
llian forty; and one, more than forty years. The entire time of 
dependence of all those then under care, footed up four hundred and 
eighty-seven years, which gave an average per inmate of 5.60 years. 

The educational attaiinneuts of the adult inmates appeared as 
follows: Instructed in common schools, twenty-seven; learned to 
read, eight; to read and write, eight; no education, twenty-one. 
Twenty-nine claimed to be totally abstinent, and twenty-five con- 
fessed habits of inebriety. The habits of ten could not be ascer- 
tained ; and very little was known as to the habits of the parents of 
the inmates. 

The number of families represented in the institution was seventy- 
two. The pauper outgrowth of these families in three generations, 
as far as could be traced out, numbered one iiundred and six persona. 
Tliere had also been in the same families, twelve insane, ten idiots, 
and forty inebriates. Of those then under care, five had pauper 
fathers, and ten pauper mothers. In one case, the pauperism 
extended back to the grandparents. Thirty-two were parents, said 
to have in all seventy-nine living children. Tlie condition of seven- 
teen of these could not be ascertained. Tlie others were aeconnted 
for as follows: In poor-houses, ten; provided for in families, two; 
self-supporting, fifty. 

The families in the house at the date of the inquiry were the 
following : A widowed woman twenty-seven years old, temperate and 
seemingly respectable, an inmate six montJis with three children, aged 
respectively seven years, three years, and one year, and likely ere 
long to be removed ; an edncated temperate married woman, thirty 
years of age, deserted by her husltand, a confirmed drunkard, an 
inmate only a few weeks with her child, a boy four years old, and 




166 

bids fair soon to go out ; a man forty-three years old, fairly educated 
and temperate, and his wife, aged thirty-nine years, with their child, 
a girl five years old, and also a son of the woman by a former husband, 
seventeen years of age, the first an inmate five years, the second 
twelve years, the third from birth, the fourth two months, and all 
excepts the last regarded as permanent burdens; an educated, tem- 
perate blind man sixty-two years old, recently admitted with his 
wife, aged sixty-five, each twice married, tlie former having one and 
the latter five self-supporting children, but unable to provide for their 
parents ; a married woman twenty-six years of age, abandoned by her 
husband with an infant child, inmates only a short time, and not 
likely to remain long; a single woman twenty years old, in the 
thil-d generation of a family of paupers, an inmate five years, having 
a child nearly two years of age born in the institution ; an unmarried 
girl aged eighteen, admitted to the house when five years old with 
her mother and other children, subsequently placed out, but recently 
returned to give birth to her child, now an inmate, and is soon again 
to become a mother ; a single woman twenty-one years of age, unedu- 
cated and vagrant, with a young child born in the house, and is very 
likely further to burden the public ; a debased, uneducated and 
grossly intemperate married woman, thirty-five years old, twenty-five 
years in the institution, and has also been in jail and the work-house 
for drunkenness, her husband being at present in State prison, and 
her only child a pauper inmate; and a married woman twenty- 
six years of age, deserted by her husband, an inmate two years, 
with an illegitimate child, and gives little promise of future self- 
support. 

A few of the other cases in the institution will now be noticed : 
An unmarried man seventy-nine years old, ten years an inmate, 
educated and temperate, once possessed considerable property, but 
now wholly dependent ; a weak minded single man, aged twenty-two 
years, in the house since ten years of age, and appears likely to remain 
through life ; an uneducated woman, sixty-five years old, twice 
widowed, two years an inmate, and entirely helpless; a man sixty- 
eight years of age, temperate and industrious, twice married, but now 
a widower, one year an inmate, and regarded as a fixed dependent ; a 
married man fifty years old, ignorant and intemperate, separated from 
his wife several years, recently admitted and will probably hereafter 
burden the public ; a man forty-three years of age, married and has 
two self-supporting children, an epileptic, and gives no hope of recov- 
ery; and a married woman nineteen years old, deserted by her 



167 

husband, edncated and temperate, but a confirmed vagrant, one year 
an inmate, and seems probable hereafter to burden tlie county. 

Tliis county provides mainly for its chronic insaue in the State 
asylum (or this class. A separate building is set apart for those 
retained under local control, but it is quite interior in its accommoda- 
tions, in fact wholly unsuited for the purposes to which it is applied. 
The cases uuder care at the time of the examination were mostly of 
long standing, and regarded generally as incurable. 

The condition of eighteen of the inmates of this house was such 
hat no reliable opinion as to their future could be formed. It was 
thought that th^ee of the others would probably go out and provide 
for themselves, and that eight might become self-supporting if 
removed and placed under proper supervision. The balance were 
looked upon as hopelessly dependent. 



Suffolk Countt. 
This county, until 1S71, maintained its poor in houses situated in 
the several towns. In that year a county poor-house was erected at 
Taphank, and the system of town poor-houses discontinued. The 
tuilding is a wooden edifice containing modern appliances for heating, 
ventilation and bathing, and enables a partial cl as si ti cation of the 
inmates. It will accommodate about two hundred and fifty pereons. 
The number of persons in care of the institution, at the time of 
the examination, was one hundred and thirty (130), of whom forty- 
six (46) were insane. Of these sixty-seven (67) were males, and sixty- 
three (63) females, classified by birth as follows : New York, ninety-six ; 
. .other States of the Union, five; Ireland, eleven; other European 
l-SODntries, eighteen. The fathers of ninety and the mothei-s of ninety- 
were native, and the fathers of thirty-eight and the mothers of 
E thirty-four foreign born. The birthplaces of the fathers of two were 
[ unknown. 

The ages of the inmates when examined, tlie period in life in which 

[' they became dependent, and the duration of the pauperism appeared 

f .as follows : Fonr were under two years old ; seven were between the 

[. Hges of two and sixteen years; seventeen between sixteen and thirty; 

[ thirty-three between thirty aud &t\y ; forty between fifty and seventy ; 

f twenty-three between seventy and eighty ; and six were in advance 

of the latter age. Eight were born in poor-houses; fifteen were 

admitted before they had reached the age of twenty years; thirty 

vhen between the ages of twenty and forty ; sixteen when between 

i forty and fifty ; forty-two wiion between fifty and seventy ; and 



168 . 

nineteen after they had passed the age of seventy years. Thirty- 
eight had been dependent less than one year ; nineteen, one year 
and less than two years; forty-seven, two years and less than five; 
thirteen, five years and less than ten ; seven, ten years and less 
than twenty ; four, twenty years and less than thirty ; one over 
thirty, and one over forty years. The aggregate dependence of all 
the inmates, at the time of the inquiry, had been five hundred and 
fifty years ; the average to each person 4.23 years. 

Of the adult inmates of proper inteUigjence, fifty-one had been 
instructed in common schools ; sixteen of the others had learned to 
read only ; twelve to read and write ; and the residue comprising 
nearly thirty-one per cent, were without any education. Twelve of 
the men, and twenty-one of the women were classed as temperate ; 
and forty-two men and twenty women as intemperate. The habits 
of five men and fourteen w^omen could not be ascertained. The 
parents of a considerable portion of the inmates, it appeared, were 
also intemperate. 

Since the establishment of its county poor-house, the authorities of 
this county have been very vigilant in looking after its dependent 
children, and in providing for their care in families and otherwise, 
separate from adult paupers. Under the system of town poor-houses, 
as heretofore existing in the county, the children were sent to these 
institutions and placed in the association of the other inmates, and its 
evil eflects are still observable, many of these with their progeny being 
now in the county institution. Of those under care at the time of 
the inquiry, six were the offspring of pauper fathers, and eighteen 
of pauper mothers ; seven had pauper brothers, and eight, pauper 
sisters ; and four had pauper uncles, and two, pauper aunts. In two 
instances on the paternal, and in four instances on the maternal side, 
the pauperism was found to have descended through three gen- 
erations. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was one hun- 
dred and eighteen. The number of dependents traced out in these 
families, in three generations, was one hundred and sixty-one. There 
was also known to have sprung from the same families fifty-three 
insane persons, twelve idiots, and one hundred and thirteen inebriates. 
Thirty-eight of those under care were parents, having in all ninety- 
nine living children. The condition of nineteen of these was unknown ; 
the others were said to bo situated in life as follows : In poor-houses, 
twelve; adopted or otherwise provided for in families, thirteen; 
self-supporting, fifty-five. 



169 

The following were the family groups in the institution at the time 
of the inquiry : A colored man and his wife, the former aged ninety- 
eight, and the latter seventy-four years, both educated and temperate, 
recently admitted, and wholly dependent ; a widowed woman seventy 
years old, uneducated but temperate, and her daughter aged thirty- 
two years, ignorant and vagrant, the former an inmate of a town 
poor-house when forty years of age, and the latter in childhood, and 
both classed as fixed dependents ; an uneducated blind man and his 
wife, aged respectively seventy and seventy-four years, inmates only 
a short time, childless and entirely helpless ; a man aged seventy-four, 
and his wife sixty-four years, intemperate and ignorant, inmates three 
years, formerly in the town poor-house, and regarded as permanent 
charges ; a married colored woman forty-one years old, deserted by 
her drunken husband, recently admitted to give birth to her child, 
also an inmate; an epileptic woman thirty years of age, married and 
abandoned by her husband, an inmate six months with her child, a 
girl two years old, the latter soon to be removed ; a married woman 
aged thirty-four years, educated and temperate, separated from her 
husband, an inmate one year and having a child with her born in the 
house ; a weak minded single girl seventeen years old, and her child, 
a boy aged three years, the former an inmate since fourteen years of 
age, and the latter from birth; an educated, temperate, married 
colored woman, twenty-seven years old, abandoned by her husband, 
in the house three years, having a female child born soon after her 
admission ; a single girl aged eighteen years, ignorant and vagrant, 
an inmate a few months with an infant child born in the institution ; 
a weak minded single woman, twenty-six years old, dependent from 
birth, the father, mother and two brothers having been paupers, and 
her child, a deaf-mute girl, six years old, born in the house ; an edu- 
cated man aged sixty-six years, very intemperate and frequently in jail 
for drunkenness and disorderly conduct, an inmate six years with his 
wife, a feeble minded woman, forty-one years of age, and both looked 
upon as permanent burdens ; and a married woman forty years old, 
educated and temperate, deserted by her drunken and dissolute hus- 
band, an inmate one year with her two children, both girls, the elder 
aged four, and the younger two years, bright and intelligent, and 
soon to be removed. 

Among the other cases examined, the following may be noticed : 
A feeble minded single woman, seventy-three years of age, admitted 
to the town poor-house with her mother when ten years old, having 
thus spent sixty-two years as a public dependent ; an ignorant, intern- 



170 

• 

perate, unmarried woman aged sixty-one years, eighteen of which 
have been passed in poor-houses, giving birth during the time to three 
children, one being a pauper, and two self-$upporting ; a widowed 
woman seventy-four years old, uneducated and intemperate, whose 
father, mother, and one brother were paupers, had been an inmate 
five years, and regarded as a fixed burden ; a colored man seventy- 
eight years of age, educated and temperate, twice married but now a 
widower, an inmate three years, and entirely helpless ; an educated, 
temperate, industrious man, seventy-two years old, a widower, child- 
less, paralytic, and wholly dependent ; a feeble minded single woman 
aged thirty-four years, twenty-nine years in poor-houses, the father 
and mother having also been paupers and grossly intemperate ; and 
an educated man twenty years of age, two years in the house as a 
vagrant, having frequently been in jail, and the refuge for petty 
oifenses, and offers no promise of reformation. 

The insane under care were twenty-five (25) men, and twenty-one 
(21) women. All were chronic cases, a portion of them having been 
treated at State asylums, and others transferred from the various 
town poor-houses. They occupy apartments separate from the other 
inmates, are under the care of attendants employed for the purpose, 
and visited periodically by the physician to the institution. The men 
work upon the farm, and the women in domestic duties, and the 
greater portion are good laborers. 

The condition of eight of the inmates of this house was such as to 
involve their future in doubt ; seven bid fair soon to go out and pro- 
vide for themselves ; eleven seemed to be capable of self-maintenance 
under proper supervision ; and one hundred and four were regarded 
as hopelessly dependent. 

Sullivan Countt. 

The Sullivan county poor-house is a comfortable wooden edifice, 
situated near Monticello. It will accommodate about one hundred 
persons. 

The number of inmates at the time of the inquiry was seventy- 
six (76), of whom twenty-nine (29) were chronic insane. Of these, 
forty-one (41) were males, and thirty-five (35) females, whose ages 
were as follows : Under sixteen years old, nine ; between the ages 
of sixteen and thirty years, eight ; between thirty and fifty, nine- 
teen ; between fifty and seventy, twenty-four ; between seventy and 
eighty, twelve ; over eighty years of age, four. Five were said to 
have been born in poor-houses ; ten of the others became dependent 



before tliey were twenty years of age ; thirty-two when between the 
(Bof twenty and fifty ; twenty-two whou between fifty and seventy; 



and I 



after they bad passed the latter i 



Only two had 



BBven . 

been in the bonse lees than one year; nineteen, one year and let 
thaTi two years ; twenty-four, two years and less than five ; ten, five 
years and less than ten; eleven, ten years and less than twenty; 
eevcn, between twenty and thii-ty yeai-s; and three more than thirty 
yeai's. The whole time of dependence of the then inmates, summed 
up, four hundred and ninety-one years, equivalent to an average of 
fi.46 years to each person. 
The following were the facta obtained regarding the birthplaces 
■ ■^' the inmates : New York, forty ; other States of tlie Union, two ; 
inada, two ; Ireland, eleven ; Germany, fourteen ; other European 
jDmitries, three ; birthplaces unknown, four. The fathers of twenty- 
:, and the mothers of thirty-three were born in the United States ; 
i the fathers of thirty-two, and the mothers of twenty-eight were 
reign born. The birthplaces of the parents of the others could 
Pbt be ascertained. 

f Of the adult inmates, twenty-three or nearly thirty-six per cent. 
sra without any education. Four of the men, and eleven of the 
tbmen were said to be temperate ; and twenty of the men, and two 
f the women were classed as inebriates. The habits of nine of the 
, and eighteen of the women could not be ascertained ; and but 
) could be learned regarding the habits of the parents of the 
Ifttes. 

• tJpon the establishment of the Snsqnelianna Valley Home, at Bing- 
liamton, in 1869, the authorities of this county transferred its chil- 
<3i'en then in the county poor-house, to that institntion ; and since 
■that time, tlie dependent children of the county have been mainly 
sent to its care. Of the inmates of the poor-house at the time of the 
examination, only two were the ofEspring of pauper fathers, and 
seven of pauper mothers. The namber of families represented in the 
institution was sixty nine. There bad sprung from these families in 
three generations, bo far as could be traced out, eighty-eight public 
dependents, twenty-nine insane, three idiots, and twenty-six inebri- 
atee. Three of tliose then under care were parents having six living 
children, all of whom, mostly infants, were in the poor-honse. 
The families grouped in the house at the time of the inquiry were 
J following: An unmarried woman aged forty-five years, weak 
1 intemperate, an inmate five years, having three illegiti- 
Ute children with her, the eldest four, and the youngest two years 



176 

of age, and all born in the house; a feebleminded single woman 
twenty-one years of age, and her child, a boy foiiV years old, also 
feeble minded, born in the institution, and since then permanent 
inmates; an uneducated widowed woman aged twenty-five years, in 
the house one year, with her child four years of age, since which she 
has given birth to an illegitimate child also an inmate ; and an igno- 
rant single man aged forty-five yeare, and his weak minded sister, 
sixty-two years old, the former an inmate one year, and the latter 
four years, and both regarded as fixed dependents. 

Among the other cases examined the following may be noticed : 
An unmarried man ninety years old, ignorant and intemperate, one 
year an inmate, and entirely friendless ; a single man aged sixty- 
eight years, uneducated, and a confirmed inebriate, having been in 
jail for drunkenness, an inmate only a short time, yet likely hereafter 
to burden the public ; a married woman forty years of age, of feeble 
intellect, deserted by her husband, an inmate ten years, and is proba- 
ble to remain through life ; and an uneducated married woman, sixty- 
five years old, separated from her husband, two years in the house, 
infirm and wholly dependent. 

The insane under care at the date of the inquiry were ten (10) 
men, and nineteen (19) women. They occupy a detached building, 
and are not allowed to mingle with the other inmates. All were 
chronic cases, and looked upon as wholly incurable. 

The following conclusions were reached regarding the future of t}ie 
inmates of this institution : Permanently dependent, sixty-two ; will 
probably go out and provide for themselves, four ; may become self- 
supporting under proper supervision, eight ; future doubtful, two. 

Tioga County. 

The poor-house of this county is situated near the village of Owego. 
It is an old building, but in fair repair, and adequate to the present 
requirements. It will accommodate about seventy-four persons. 

Upon the occasion of the inquiry the institution had thirty-two (32) 
male and fourteen (14) female inmates, making a total of forty-six 
(46). Of these, twelve (12) were insane. The birthplaces of two 
could not be ascertained. The nativity of the others was as follows : 
United States, thirty-eight ; Canada, one; Ireland, five. The fathers 
of twenty-two, and the mothers of twenty-three, were native born ; 
and the fathers of six, and the mothers of five, were of foreign birth. 
The nativity of the parents of eighteen could not be learned. 

The ages of the inmates, the period of life in which the depend- 



^nce began, and the duration of the pauperism appeared as follows : 

Six were under sixteen years of age ; nine were between the ages of 

sixteen and forty ; fourteen between forty and sixty ; fifteen between 

^ixty and eighty; and two were over eighty years old. Eleven 

T3ecanne dependent before they were twenty years of age, of whom two 

^^ere born in the poor-house ; twelve when between the ages of 

twenty and forty ; eight when between forty and fifty ; nine when 

l>€tween fifty and seventy ; and six after they had passed the latter 

Ten had been in the house less than two years ; fourteen, two 

cars and less than five ; seven, five years and less than ten ; nine, 

f:^n years and less than twenty ; and six, more than twenty years. 

^The entire time spent in the house by all the inmates, was found to 

l^&ve been three hnndred and thirty-five years, making an average of 

^n.2S years to each person. 

Seven of the adult inmates only, had received the advantages of 
oommon school instruction ; eight of the others had learned to read ; 
to read and write ; and thirteen were without any education, 
o of the men and six of the women claimed to be totally absti- 
t ; and the habits of six of the men, and four of the women could 
be learned. The others were known to have been intemperate, 
of whom, or over twenty-seven per cent were classed as habitual 
^ii'innkards. 

The authentic of this county now provide for its dependent 

children in the Susquehanna Valley Home, at Binghamton. Before 

^'^ho establishment of that institution such children were sent to the 

poor-house, and several of the present adult inmates were in the 

i^Btitution in childhood. Of those examined, three had pauper 

fetters, and nine, pauper mothers, and in one instance the pauperism 

^^« traced back to the grandparents. Nineteen were parents having 

^^ all forty-six living children, said to be conditioned in life as fol- 

^<^A^8 : In poor-houses, seven ; in asylums, two ; under family care, 

foin^Pj self-supporting, twenty-eight ; condition unknown, five. 

The number of families represented in the institution was thirty- 
^1^^, The unfortunate, vicious and debased classes in these families 
^'^ three generations, summed up ninety-five persons, as follows: 
^^-upers, fifty-eight ; insane, sixteen ; idiots, five ; inebriates, thir- 
^^n ; criminals, three. 

The foUovring were the family groups in the house at the date of 

^•^^ inquiry; A man seventy-four years of age, nine years in the 

'^Oxige, and his second wife, fifty-five years old, an inmate eleven 

y^ars, and a pauper at the time of their marriage, and two children 



174 

of the latter by her first husband, aged respectively twenty-eight and 
twenty-one years, the elder a male idiot, the younger an insane man, 
both admitted with their mother ; a man and his wife, the former 
aged sixty-nine, and the latter, a paralytic, fifty-four years, inmates 
ten years, and wholly dependent ; an uneducated and intemperate 
man, fifty-six years old, his wife, aged forty-three, and an idiot boy 
eleven years of age, the first an inmate two, the second four, and the 
third nine years, and all looked upon as permanent burdens; a 
woman aged sixty-nine years, twice married, educated but grossly 
intemperate, and frequently in jail for drunkenness, an inmate six 
years, and her unmarried daughter thirty-five years of age, ignorant 
and intemperate, admitted when five years of age, spending most of 
the time since then in jails, work-houses and poor-houses, and having 
an illegitimate child with her one year old, born in the institu- 
tion ; a single feeble minded woman thirty years of age, a pauper 
eleven years, the mother of two illegitimate children, both born in 
the house, the elder being provided for in a family, and the younger, 
a boy four years old, an inmate ; and two brothers, aged respectively 
eight and six years, bright, intelligent, recently admitted, and soon 
to be removed. 

A few of the other cases under care will now be noticed : A mar- 
ried man aged fifty-five years, uneducated and very intemperate, fif- 
teen years an inmate, suffering from disease resulting from vicious 
and debasing practices, and deemed wholly incurable ; a man seventy- 
three years of age, a widower, uneducated but temperate, the father 
of five self-supporting children, recently admitted, and likely to 
remain through life ; an unmarried man seventy-seven years old, igno- 
rant and grossly intemperate, three years in the house and looked 
upon as a permanent charge ; a single man aged sixty-five years, unedu- 
cated and a confirmed drunkard, an inmate two years, committed 
as a vagrant, and gives no promise of providing for himself; a weak 
minded single woman forty years of age, seven years in the house, 
infirm, friendless, and wholly dependent ; an idiotic woman sixty-one 
years old, two years an inmate, and probable hereafter to burden the 
public ; and a widowed woman aged seventy-six years, once possessed 
of property, four years in the house, and regarded as a fixed burden. 

The insane were seven (7) men, and five (5) women. They occupy 
a separate building, having but few conveniences, however, for its 
purposes. The following were among the cases examined : A mar- 
ried woman forty-four years old, insane, and in the house twenty-two 
years, without treatment at the State asylum ; a widowed woman 



17fl 

Jiity-two years, twenty-six yeara an insane inmate, and has 
never been at any State aayluni ; an uneducated siugte woiuau forty- 
one years old, an iuaane inmate twenty years, witliout treatment in 
any other institution; a married man twenty-seven years oid, insane 
four years, two years at tlie State asylum, and two years in the house, 
and ofEers no hope of recovery ; and a single man, thirty-six years 
of age, fourteen years an inmate, without treatment at tlie State 
asyliiin, and regarded as wholly incurable. 

The conclusions formed regarding the future of the inmates of this 
house, were as follows: Permanently dependent, forty-one; capable 
of aelf-niaintenauee under proper supervision, four ; future doubtful, 

■ Tompkins County. 

jbe poor-house of this county is a wooden edifice situated in the 
n of Ulyases, about four miles from Ithaca, The building has 
recently been altered and repaired, and meets very properly its pur- 
poses. It has room for about seventy-five persons. 

When the examination was made the institution had twenty-four (2i) 
male and fifteen (15) female inmates; total, thii-ty-nine (39). Two of 
them only were under sixteen years old ; eeveu were between the ages of 
sixteen and fifty ; thirteen between fifty and seventy; sixteen between 
seventy and eighty; and one was over eighty years of age. Three 
became dependent before they were ten years old ; nine when between 
the ages of ten and forty ; thirteen when between forty and sixty ; and 
ioarteen after they had passed the latter age. Four had been in the 
I house less than one year ; thirteen, one year and less than five years ; 
Beven, five years and less than ten ; eleven, ten years and less than 
twenty ; three, twenty years and less than thirty ; and one more than 
forty years. The entire dependence of all the inmates, at the time of 
the inquiry, footed np three hundred and tbii'ty years ; the average to 
each person 8.46 yeai's. 

The birth-places of the inmates were as follows : United States, 

twenty-eight ; England, two ; Ireland, four ; other European eoun- 

Tiea, two ; birth-places unknown, three. Of those of mature age, 

ten had a fair common school education ; eight had learned to read ; 

I five to read and write ; and the others were without any educational 

I training. Nine of the men and twelve of the women were said to 

be totally abstinent ; the others were classed as intemperate. But 

little was known respecting the habits of the parents of the inmates. 

The authorities of this county maintain a vigorous system of placing 

dependent children in family homes, and rely mainly upou these 



176 

agencies in providing for this class. The only family found in the 
house at the date of the inquiry was a weak minded single woman, 
fifty-five years old and her daughter, of feeble intellect, twenty-two 
years of age. The former had been an inmate thirteen and the latter 
eighteen years. The number of dependents in the families of the 
inmates, in three generations, had been forty-six ; the number of 
insane, eight ; the number of idiots, six ; the number of inebriates, 
thirty-two. Thirteen of those under care were parents, having in all 
twenty-seven living children. Of these, one was in the poor-house ; 
two were bound out ; twenty-one were self-supporting ; and the 
condition of three was unknown. 

A few of the cases examined will now be noticed : An uneducated 
but temperate man, a widower, fifty-five years old, fourteen years an 
inmate, disabled by disease ; a feeble minded single woman, aged 
thirty-seven years, ten years in the house, friendless and wholly 
dependent ; a widowed woman seventy-five years of age, uneducated 
and very intemperate, an inmate since fifty-six years old, and regarded 
as a fixed burden ; an educated man, a widower, grossly intemperate, 
and six years in the institution ; a drunken, feeble minded single man, 
thirty-two years of age, sixteen years a pauper inmate, and likely to 
remaiq through life ; a married man sixty-eight years old, ignorant 
and intemperate, nine years in the house, and looked upon as a per- 
manent charge; an idiot, male, sixty-five years of age, an inmate 
forty-five years, and entirely friendless ; and a weak minded man, 
aged twenty-one years, of intemperate parents, recently admitted, and 
gives no promise of future self-support. 

This county provides for its chronic insane mainly, at the State 
institution for this class. The number under county care upon the 
occasion of the inquiry was six (6). All were mild and harmless cases, 
receiving no special attention. 

All of the inmates of this house except one, were regarded as 
permanent dependents. 

Ulster County. 

The paupers examined in this county were as follows : In the 
Ulster county poor-house, one hundred and four (104:) ; in the Kings- 
ton city alms-house, forty-nine (49) ; total, one hundred and fifty- 
three (153). 

The Ulster County Poor-house is an old wooden edifice, situated 
near New Paltz. The inmates at the time of the inquiry, were sixty- 
six ijoQ) males, and thirty-eight (38) females, classified by birth as 



177 

York, seventy-three ; other States of the Union, two ; 
(anadii, one; England, one; Ireland, sixteen; Germany, five; 
li-places unascertained, six. The fathers of fifty-six, and the 
mothers of fifty-nine were native, and the fathers of twenty-aix, and 
the mothere of twenty-four, foreign born. The birth-places of the 
fathers of twenty-two, and of the mothera of twenty-one were 
unknown. 

The ages of the inmates when examined, the period in life in which 
they became dependent, and the duration of the panperiara, accord- 
ing to the record, appeared as follows : Seven were under two years 
old ; fourteen were between the ages of two and sixteen years ; thirty 
between sixteen and forty; twenty-five between forty and fifty; 
fifteen between fifty and seventy ; ten between seventy and eighty ; 
and three were in advance of the latter age. Eight were bora in 
poor-houaea; eleven of the others were redaeed to dependence before 
they had reached the age of ten years ; twenty-seven when between 
the ages of ten and thirty; tweiity-fonr when between thirty and 
lifty ; twenty-eight when between fifty and seventy; and six after 
they had passed seventy years. Thirty-five had been in the house 
less than one year; nine, one year, and less than two years; twenty- 
uine, two years, and less than five; eighteen, five years and less than 
ten ; ten, ten years and less than twenty ; one over twenty, one over 
thirty, and one o^^er forty years. The entire time of their depend- 
ence, amounted to four hundred and forty-seven years, beiug an aver- 
age of i.29 years per inmate. Sixty were looked upon as perma- 
nent burdens ; twelve seemed likely to go ont and provide for theua- 
eelves; seven exhibited capacity for self-maintenance under proper 
supervision; and the future of twenty-five, mostly children, was 
regarded as doubtful. 

Of the adult inmates of this institution, nine only were educated ; 
thirteen of the others had learned to read, and seventeen to read and 
write; the residue, comprising fifty per cent, were wholly ignorant. 
All of the men except seven, wiiose habits could not be learned, 
admitted practices of inebriety, twenty-four being classed as moderate 
driokora, five as periodical drinkers, and eight as confirmed drunk- 
ards. Nine of the women were said to tie temperate, eleven intem- 
perate, and the habits of six were unknown. But little could be ascer- 
tained respecting the habits of the parenla of tlie inmates. 

The practice of consigning dependent children to the poor- 
house has long prevailed in this county, and at times there have 
accumulated considerable numbers in the institution. At the time of 



178 

the inquiiy, there were twenty-nine of the inmates who were parents, 
having in all eighty-six living children. The condition of twelve of 
these could not be ascertained. The others were said to be condi- 
tioned in life as follows : In poor-houses, nineteen ; in asylums, 
two; bound out, two; self-supporting fifty-one. The number of 
families represented by the inmates was eighty-four. The burden- 
some, unfortunate and disturbing classes of society in these families, 
in three generations, so far as could be learned, footed up two 
hundred and eighty-five persons, as follows : Public dependents one 
hundred and ninety ; insane thirteen ; idiots ten ; inebriates seventy- 
two. Of those under care, nine were the offspring of pauper fathers, 
and twenty-four of pauper mothers ; one had a pauper grand father, 
and four, pauper grand mothers ; nineteen had pauper brothers, and 
seventeen, pauper sisters. • 

The family groups in the house when the examination was made, 
were the following: An able-bodied, ignorant, intemperate man, 
thirty-five years of age, and his wife twenty-eight years old, inmates 
one month, with two children, the elder aged two years, and the 
younger seven months ; a widowed woman thirty-eight years of age, 
educated but very intemperate and vagrant, one year in the house, 
with her child, a girl nine years old ; a married woman separated 
from her husband, ignorant and an habitual drunkard, four years an 
inmate, having an illegitimate child with her, a boy three years old, 
and born in the house ; a widowed woman aged eighty years, unedu- 
cated and intemperate, an inmate two years with her daughter, a 
. married woman thirty-four years old, deserted by her husband, and 
two grand children, a girl aged five, and a boy, illegitimate, aged 
three years, their father being in State prison ; an uneducated married 
woman twenty-nine years of age, abandoned by her husband, an 
inmate only a short time with an infant child, and likely soon to go 
out; a vagrant married woman aged twenty-five years, separated 
from her husband, an inmate two years, having an illegitimate child 
one year old, born in the institution ; a weak minded single woman, 
nineteen years of age, two years an inmate, with an illegitimate child, 
a girl, born in the house ; an unmarried, ignorant, intemperate and 
vagrant woman thirty-four years old, an inmate eight years, having 
two illegitimate children with her, the elder, a boy aged four, and 
the younger, a girl aged two years, both born in the institution ; a 
feeble minded single man forty-eight years of age, an inmate four- 
teen years, and his unmarried sister, thirty-one years old, also feeble 
minded, an inmate three years, with two male children, the elder an 



179 



idiot aged fourteen, and the younger intelligent, aged six years ; a 
single woman fifty-seven years old, uneducated and intemperate, an 
inmate since fifty years of age, having an illegitimate child with her, 
I a boy seven years old and dependent from birth; a hrother and his 
n^ter, the former aged two years and the latter ten months, inmates 
Hpiily a short ^me, the mother dying in the house, the father being 
Kntemperate, idle and vagrant; a man seventy-two years of age, and 
wbis wife, tbrty-one years old, each twice married, the former having 
^^ve, and the latter two self-supporting children, recently admitted 
■btit regarded as fixed dependents; and an uneducated Intemperate 
RipaD sixty-sis years old, and his wife forty years of age, also ignorant 
wU)d intemperate, inmates twelve years and likely to continue public 
Hardens. 

B A few of the other cases under care will now be noticed : A mar- 
^Bed man, seventy years of age, educated but grossly intemperate, an 
H&mato seven years, friendless, infirm and wholly dependent ; a single 
^noman, thirty-five years old, ignorant and a confirmed inebriate, 
^■Rving been frequently in jail for drunkenness, an inmate five years, 
^Bagrant, dissolute and depraved, and regarded as incorrigible; a wid- 
^Bwed woman, fifty-eight yeara of age, uneducated and intemperate, 
^Kxteen years iu the house aud likely to remain through life ; an 
^pducated, intemperate single man, aged fifty-nine years, vagrant and 
H|ebaeed, an inmate four years, and gives little promise of eelf-sup- 
K'port; a married woman, aged thirty-nine years, uoedncated, vagrant 
B'ftnd depraved, abandoned by her hnsband, an inmate seven years, and 
Klwlced upon as a permanent charge ; and a man seventy-five years 
^bld, ignorant and intemperate, an inmate eight years, a widower, 
^Bebleand infirm, and entirely dependent. 

^K The insane under cai'e were four (4) men, and sis (6) women. All 
^Here clirbnic cases, and regarded incurable. 

^K The Kingston City Alms-liouse is a commodious brick edifice, 
^nearly new, eligibly situated, and well adapted to its purposes. Its 
^Kmates at the time of the examination were thirty-five (35) males, 
^Pod Ibnrteen (14) females, of the following nativities: United States, 
Hp>urteen; England, six; Ireland, twenty-two; other European coun- 
Btriee, seven. Thirteen were under sixteen years of age; nine were 
■Aietween the ages of sixteen and forty ; fourteen between forty and 
■faty ; nine between sixty aud seventy, and four Iiad passed the latter 
H^. Fourteen became dependent before they were twenty years of 
Btee ; ten when between the ages of twenty and forty ; sixteen when 
^wtween forty and sixty ; and nine alter they were sixty years old. 



180 

Twenty-eight had been in the institution less than one year ; nine, 
one year and less than two years ; and twelve more than two years. 
The aggregate time then spent in the institution footed up forty- 
nine years, being an average of one year to each person. Many of 
them had heretofore been in the county poor-house, but no record as 
to the time spent there was at hand. Twenty-four of the adult 
inmates, or over sixty-nine per cent, had received a common school 
education. Two of the jpaen, and one woman only, claimed to be 
temperate. Of the others, six men were said to be moderate drinkers, 
four periodical drinkers, and fifteen confirmed inebriates ; and of the 
women, five were moderate drinkers, two habitual drunkards, and the 
habits of one could not be ascertained. The fathers of twenty-three, 
and the mothers of thirty-four were temperate ; and the fathers of 
fifteen, and the mothers of five, intemperate. The habits of the 
fathers of eleven, and of the mothers of ten were unknown. 

The number of families represented in the institution was thirty- 
seven. The number of dependents in these families in three genera- 
tions footed up fifty-three ; the number of insane, six ; and the 
number of inebriates forty-five. Four of those under care were the 
offspring of pauper fathers, and nine of pauper mothers; twelve had 
pauper brothers, and eleven, pauper sisters. The number who were 
parents was eleven, having in all twenty-eight living children, situated 
in life as follows: In poor-houses, nine; bound out, one; self- 
supporting, eighteen. 

The following were the family groups in the institution at the 
time of the inquiry : An uneducated widowed woman, thirty-four 
years old, apparently respectable, an inmate one year, with four chil- 
dren, three boys and one girl, aged respectively ten, eight, six and three 
years, all intelligent, and if removed might be trained to usefulness ; 
a single woman twenty-six years of age, of foreign birth, and only a 
few months in the country, recently admitted with an illegitimate 
child, a girl two years old, and will probably soon provide for herself; 
an intemperate, uneducated vagrant woman, a widow, thirty-six years 
of age, an inmate one year with four intelligent children, the eldest 
aged thirteen, and the youngest two years, the latter being illegiti- 
mate; and a family of four children, two boys and two girls, aged 
respectively eleven, nine, six and four years, the mother being dead, 
and the father a confirmed drunkard, all intelligent, and it is said, 
will be provided for in families. 

Among other cases examined were the following: A married man 
forty-six years of age, uneducated and grossly intemperate, having 



been repeatedly id jail for drnnkenness, an inmate two years, a 

paralytic and hopelessly dependent ; a single man sisty-two years old, 
educated, but very intemperate, eighteen years dependent, fourteen 
of which were spent in the Ulster county poor-house, and regarded 
as apermanent burden ; an unmarried man aged thirty-eight years, 
well educated, but a coufirined inebriate, recently admitted, suffering 
L,^m disease, and probably incurable; an educated single man, 
■#xty-foar years of age, only a short time in the house, enfeebled by 
ractiees of dissipation, and likely to remain through life; a man 
y-tive years old, a widower, formerly in the county poor-lionse, 
inmate two years, educated, but intemperate and vagrant, and 
looked upon as a fixed charge ; an educated married woman, aged 
ixty-one years, separated from her husband, transferred from the 
kter county poor-house, where she had spent twelve years, and 
■ seems probable to burden the public through life; a widowed woman 
forty-nine years old, ignorant and intemperate, also transferred from 
the Ulster county poor-house, and gives no promise of future self- 
support ; and a single woman sixty-five years of age, educated, but 
intemperate and debased, having been in v ari on s poor-houses for the 
past fourteen yeai-s, and several times in jail for intoxication and 
disorderly conduct, and deemed permanently dependent. 

The following conclneions were reached regarding the future of the 
inmates of tliis institution: Permanently dependent, twenty-six; 
will probably go out and provide for themselves, seven ; may be edu- 
cated to usefulness if placed under proper surroundings, thirteen; 
fnture doubtful, three. 



Waebkn CoTrarr. 
The Warren county poor-lioase has been in use several years, bnt 
s recently been repaired, and is quite comfortable. It is situated 
;he village of Warrenaburgh. 

3 number of inmates at the time of the inquiry was fifty-seven 

[87), of whom thirty-three (33) were males, and twenty-four (2i) 

lies. Forty-two were natives of New York ; six of other 

3fl of the union ; two were born in Canada ; and seven were 

breign birth. Eight were under sixteen years old; fourteen 

I between the ages of sixteen and forty ; and thirty-five were 

r forty years of age, of whom two had reached an age beyond 

ighty years. A considerable number of the aged were feeble 

eI infirm, and several were unable to leave their rooms. Two had 

sen inmates from birth; thirteen of the othere became dependent 



182 

before they were twenty years of age ; thirty-two when between the 
ages of twenty and sixty ; and ten after they had passed the latter 
age. Seven had been inmates less than one year ; thirty-two, one 
year and less than ten years ; and eighteen more than ten years. The 
aggregate duration of poor7hoiise life of all the inmates, then had 
been four hundred knd forty-eight years ; the average to each person 
7.86 years. 

Of the adult inmates, eighteen had received a common school edu- 
cation ; two could read only ; and twenty-four were without any 
education. Five of the men and nine of the women were said to 
have been temperate, and the habits of one man and two women 
could not be learned. The others were classed as intemperate. 

The number of families represented in the institution was forty-nine. 
The number of dependents in these families in three generations, so 
far as could be learned, had been seventy-seven ; the number of insane 
fifteen ; the number of idiots, nine ; the number of inebriates sixty- 
two. Of those under care at the time of the inquiry, six had pauper 
fathers, and ten pauper mothers ; and in one instance on the maternal 
side the pauperism was traced back to the third generation. Eigh- 
teen were parents, having ^n all twenty-nine living children, said to 
be conditioned in life as follows : In poor-houses, eight ; bound out, 
nine ; self-supporting, twelve. 

The family groups in the institution were the following: An 
uneducated widowed woman, an epileptic, sixty-seven years old, an 
inmate five years with her daughter twenty-four years of age, having 
an illegitimate child, a girl, six years old, also epileptics, two years 
in the house, and regarded as wholly incurable ; two brothers (twins), 
aged ten years, orphaned and recently admitted, both intelligent and 
soon to be removed ; an ignorant, intemperate woman twenty-seven 
years of age, deserted by her husband, an inmate one year, having 
an illegitimate child six months old, and born in the house ; and a 
married woman aged twenty-three years, educated and temperate, 
in the house only a few weeks with an infant child, and likely soon 
to be discharged. 

The following were among the other cases examined: A man 
seventy-one years of age, a widower, uneducated but temperate, 
sixteen years an inmate and entirely dependent; an ignorant married 
man sixty-two years old, crippled and infirm, five years in the house, 
and probably a fixed burden ; an educated but grossly intemperate 
single man sixty-six years of age, an inmate two years, enfeebled by 
debasing practices, and likely to remain through life ; an idiot, male, 






183 

aged thirty-three years, parents intemperate, twenty years an inmate 
and entirely friendless; a feebled minded single woman, forty years 
old, an inmate nineteen years and a permanent charge; an ignorant 
unmarried woman, sixty-nine years of age, in the institntion since 
twenty-two years old, having an illegitimate child in the poor-house 
of an adjoining connty; and a single, uneducated, intemperate and 
vagrnnt woman, twenty-three years old, admitted to the house when 
five years of age, since which slie has given birtli to one illegitimate 
child, now bound out, and is likely soon again to become a mother. 

The probable future of the inmates of the house was summed up 
as follows; Permanently dependent forty-eight; may be trained to 
nsefulness if removed and placed under proper surroundings, four ; 

itare doabtful, five. 

Washington Codnty. 

The poor-house of Washington comity is a two-story brick structure, 
situated near the village of Argyle. The number of inmates, at 
the time of the inquiry, was one hundred and eight (108). Of 
these, sixty-one (61) were males, and forty-seven (47) females, classified 
by birth, as follows: New York, sixty-four; other states of the Union, 
nine; Canada, four ; Ireland, twenty-four ; other European countries, 
four; birth-places unknown, three. The birth-places of the fathers of 
the inmates were, native, forty-nine; foreign, forty- 1 h ree ; unknown, 
sixteen. Mothers, native, forty-nine; foreign, forty-six; unknown, 
'thirteen. 

Four of the inmajes were under two years of age ; twelve were 

itween the ages of two and sixteen yeare; twenty-two between six- 
teen and forty ; forty-four between forty and seventy ; and sixteen 
had passed the latter age. Eight were born in poor-houses ; three 
Were admitted before they were two years of age ; four wJien between 

le ages of two and ten years ; fourteen when between ten and twenty ; 

lirty-one when between twenty and forty ; fourteen when between 

irty and fifty ; seventeen when between fifty and sixty ; twelve when 

itween sixty and seventj'; and five when in advance of seventy 
Twenty-one had been iu the house less than one year; nine- 
in one year aud less than two years ; twenty-five, two years and less 
I five ; seventeen, five years and less than ten ; sixteen, ten years 
less than twenty ; five, twenty yeare and less than thirty ; four, 
ty years and less than forty ; aud one more than forty years. The 

itire time spent in the house by al! the inmates, when examined, 
to seven hundred and seventeen yeara, being an average to 
D of 6.64 years. 



Of the adult inmates, twenty-eight were without education ; 
eighteen of the otliers had learned to read ; one to read and write ; and 
forty had been instructed in the branches taught in common schools. 
The habits of the men were said to have been as follows : Totally 
abstinent, eight ; moderate drinkers, twelve ; periodical drinkers, 
twelve ; constant drinkers, eleven ; habits unknown, three. Of the 
women, totally abstinent, eleven ; moderate drinkers, five ; periodical 
drinkers, four ; constant drinkei*9, two ; habits unknown, nineteen. 
The fathers of twenty-four, and the mothers of fifty-two were classed 
as temperate ; and the fathers of fifty-one and the mothers of ten, as 
intemperate. The habits of the fathers of thirty-three and of the 
mothers of forty-six, could not be ascertained. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was ninety- 
five. The unfortunate, burdensome and disturbing classes in these 
femilies in three generations, so far as known, summed up two hun- 
dred and ninety-one persons, as follows: Public dependents, one hun- 
dred and thirty-six; insane, thirty-three; idiots, six; inebriates, 
ninety-seven. Six of those under care were the offspring of pauper 
fathers, and fourteen of pauper mothers. Thirty-one were heads of 
families, having in all eighty-seven living children. The condition 
of twenty of these was unknown. The others were said to be con- 
ditioned in life as follows: In poor-houses, fourteen; bound out, 
seven ; self-supporting, forty-six. 

The following were among the family groups in the institution, 
upon the occasion of the inquiry : An uneducated married woman, 
thirty-nine years of age, separated from her husband, seventeen years 
in the house, the mother of three children, the youngest being an 
inmate ; a boy, fifteen years old, suffering from an incurable disease, 
and his feeble mii)ded sister, seventeen years of age, the former an 
inmate four, and the latter seven years, and both regarded as perma- 



nent burdens; an educated married man, fifty years old, intemperate^^^«e 
and committed as a vagrant, an inmate three months, with his child 
a crippled boy, five years of age, and gives little promise of futnr 
self-support ; two brothers, idiots, aged respectively forty and thirtys^'^^^ 
years, recently received in the house, but likely to remain throughzf ^^ 
life ; a widowed woman, twenty-three years of age, ignorant an(E> 
vagrant, an inmate one year, with two children, the elder aged six.:^* 
and the younger two years, the latter being illegitimate; a weaf- 
minded, unmarried woman, an epileptic, fifty-seven years old, ar^^ i 
inmate forty-six years, and her daughter aged twenty-eight years, an»-^^K'w/3 
born in the house, where she has given birth to three illegitimay^ ^ry ati 



185 

ii]dren, all of whom are dead ; and a widowed woman, thirty-two 
years of age, ignorant and grossly intemperate, the inoiher of five 
children, recently admitted with the youngest, an intant, and seems 
pi-obable hereafter to burden the public. 

Of the other cyises examined, the following may be noticed: A 
single man, eixty-nine years of ago, ignorant and intemperate, an 
inmate seventeen years, enfeebled by vicious and debasing practices, 
and daeeed as a fixed dependent ; an intelligent vagrant boy sixteen 
years old, admitted to the house when six years of age, frequently 
placed out, but failed to retain his places, and regarded as incorrigible ; 
a weak minded, married man, twenty-two years of age, separated from 
his wife, ignorant and intemperate, an inmate most of the time, since 
eight years old, and regarded as a permanent charge ; a vagrant boy, 
ftged fifteen years, an inmate five yeare, and offers little hope of 
reformation; and a crippled man, a widower, uneducated and intem- 
perate, recently admitted, friendless and wholly dependent. 

This county retains most of its chronic insane under local control. 
The number in the institution at the time of the inquiry was twenty- 
eight (28), of wliom twelve (12) were males, and sixteen (16) females. 
They occupied a separate building, but it has few conveniences for 
its purposes. All were looked upon as incurable. 

The conclusions reached regarding the future of the inmates of this 
bouse were as follows: Permanently dependent, seventy-four; bid 
fair to go out and provide for themselves, three ; capable of self main- 
tenance under proper supervision, seven ; future doubtful, twenty- 
four. 

Wayne Countt, 
le Wayne county poor-house is a two story and basement stone 
ice, situated near the village of Lyons. The number of inmates 
at the time of the inquiry was seventy-two (72), thirty-seven (37) of 
whom were males, and thirty-live (35) females, of the following nation- 
ahties: United States, fifty-four j England, three; Ireland, eight; 
Germany, five ; other European countries, two. The fathers of thirty- 
Beveii, and the mothers of thirty-eight, were native born ; and the 
fathers of twenty-three, and the mothers of twenty-two were of 
foreign birth. The birth-places of the parents of twelve were 
unknown. 

The ages of the inmates when examined, the time in life in which 

the dependence began, and the duration of the pauperism, aocording 

to the inquiry, appeared as follows : Three were under two years 

J four were between the ages of two and twenty years ; nineteen 



£ 
^^< 



186 

between twenty and forty ; fourteen between forty and sixty; twenty- 
eight between sixty and eighty ; and four had passed the latter age. 
Five were born in poor-houses; ten of the others were admitted 
before they were twenty years old ; eighteen when between the ages 
of twenty and forty years ; seventeen when between forty and sixty; 
ten when between sixty and seventy; and twdve when they were in 
advance of seventy years. Nineteen had been dependent less than 
one year ; seven, one year and less than two years ; fifteen, two years 
and less than five ; twenty-five, five years and less than twenty ; and 
six more than twenty years. 'The average dependence per inmate, 
had been 6.31 years ; the aggregate, four hundred and fifty-four years. 

Of the adult inmates, thirty-six had received a common school edu- 
cation; two of the others had learned to read, and six to read and 
write ; the residue were without educational training. Twelve of 
the men, and twenty-one of the women were said to be temperate ; 
and eighteen men and three women, intemperate. The habits of two 
men, and of seven women, could not be ascertained. The fathers of 
twenty-three, and the mothers of thirty-four were classed as temper- 
ate ; and the fathers of fourteen, and the mothers of three, as intem- 
perate. The habits of the parents of thirty-five were unknown. 

The number of families represented in the institution was sixty- 
five. The pauper outgrowth of these families in three generations, 
so far as could be learned, summed up ninety-six persons. The 
same families had also produced twenty-six insane ; five idiots, and 
thirty-nine inebriates. Four of those under care were the offspring 
of pauper fathers, and nine of pauper mothers ; but in no instance 
could the pauperism be traced to the grand parents. Twenty-three 
were the heads of families, having in all sixty-seven living children. 
The condition in life of five of these, was unknown ; the others were 
accounted for as follows : In poor-houses, seven ; bound out, one ; 
self-sustaining, fifty-four. 

The families in the house at the time of the examination were as 
follows: A man aged seventy-one, and his wife seventy-two years, 
both educated and temperate, aided olitside nearly twenty years, 
recently admitted, and wholly dependent ; a man and his wife aged 
respectively seventy-three and seventy years, the former educated and 
temperate, and the latter ignorant and a confirmed drunkard, inmates 
only a few months, but looked upon as permanent burdens ; an edu- 
cated, temperate widow, sixty-eight years old, an inmate twenty-seven 
years, with her daughter, an idiot, aged thirty-four years, having also 
six other children, all said to be self-supporting; an unmarried woman, 



187 

of weak intellect, aged fifty-two years, in the house since thirty-eight 
years of age; the mother of a feeble minded girl fourteen years old, 
born in the institution and an inmate from birth ; an ignorant mar- 
ried woman, thirty-nine years of age, separated from her husband, an 
inmate twenty years, having one illegitimate child bound out, and 
another, a girl six years old, with her, and born in the house ; a single 
woman twenty-one years of age, educated and temperate, recently 
admitted, has given birth to a child, and bids fair soon to go out ; a 
feeble minded widowed woman, twenty-five years old, an inmate 
eight months, with an infant born in the institution, and likely 
hereafter to burden the public, her father, mother, and other mem- 
bers of the family having been paupers ; and a single woman aged 
thirty-eight years, weak minded and vagrant, an inmate only a few 
months, having an illegitimate child with her, born in the institution. 

A few of the other cases examined will now be given : A man 
aged eighty years, twice married, educated and temperate, an inmate 
two years and entirely helpless ; a feeble minded single man forty 
years of age, admitted when an infant and wholly dependent ; an 
unmarried woman sixty-six years old, uneducated and intemperate, 
two years in the house, suftering from disease, with no prospect of 
recovery ; a widowed woman, forty-three years of age, educated and 
temperate, fifteen years an inmate, and quite likely to remain through 
life ; an educated married woman, aged thirty-six years, an epileptic, 
deserted by her husband, one year in the institution, and probably a 
fixed burden ; and a widowed woman, sixty-two years old, educated 
and temperate, an inmate twelve years, and regarded as a fixed 
dependent. 

The insane under care were seven (7) men, and thirteen (13) 
women ; total, twenty (20). All were looked upon as incurable. 
The sexes occupy separate buildings, which have recently been 
repaired and are quite comfortable. 

Appearances indicated that three of the inmates of this institution 

would, of their own accord, go out and provide for themselves, and 

that four, if soon removed and given proper opportunities, might be 

trained to self-maintenance. Of the others, fifty-nine were looked 

upon as permanently dependent, and the future of six, was regarded 

as doubtful. 

Westohesteb County. 

The poor-house of this county is a substantial edifice situated near 
the village of Tarrytown, and will accommodate about two hundred 
and fifty persons. The inmates at the time of the inquiry were, 



188 

males, one hundred and two (102) ; females, eighty-six (86) ; total, 
one hundred and eighty-eight (188). Of these, ninety-seven were born 
in the United States, and eighty-eight were of foreign birth. The 
birth-places of three could not be ascertained. The fathers of fifty- 
nine, and the mothers of fifty-five were native, and the fathers of 
one hundred and twenty, and the mothers of one hundred and 
twenty-three foreign born. The nativity of the fathers of nine, and 
of the mothers of ten was unknown. 

The ages of the inmates at the time of the examination, the period 
in life in which the dependence began, and the duration of the pau- 
perism appeared as. follows : Ten were under two years of age ; 
thirty-five were between the ages of two and sixteen years ; thirty- 
eight between sixteen and forty ; fifty-one between forty and sixty ; 
twenty-eight between sixty and seventy ; eighteen between seventy 
and eighty ; and eight had passed the latter age. Eleven were born 
in the poor-house; six of the others became inmates before they 
were two years old ; twenty-eight when between the ages of two 
and ten years ; thirty-one when between the ages of ten and thirty ; 
forty-six when between thirty and fifty ; twenty-nine when between 
fifty and sixty ; twenty-three when between sixty and seventy ; and 
fourteen after they were seventy years old. Eighty-two had been 
in the house less than one year ; twenty-five, one year and less than 
two years ; fifty, two years and less than five ; eighteen, five years 
and less than ten ; eight, ten years and less than twenty ; four, 
twenty years and less than thirty ; and one, more than thirty years. 
The aggregate time then spent in poor-houses by all the inmates, 
had been five hundred and fourteen years, being an average to each 
person of 2.73 years. 

The facts obtained regarding the educational attainments and 
habits of the inmates were as follows : Of those of mature age, 
seventy-three, or nearly fifty-one per cent had received the advan- 
tages of a common school education ; three of the others had learned 
to read and write, and twenty -three to read only ; the residue were 
without any education. Ten of the men, and thirty-two of the women 
claimed to be temperate, and sixty-one of the men and twenty-six of 
the women were known to have been intemperate. The habits of the 
others could not be learned. The fathers of one hundred and four, 
and the mothers of one hundred and forty-three were classed as tem- 
perate ; and the fathers of forty-six, and the mothers of eleven, as 
intemperate. The habits of the fathers of thirty-eight, and the 
mothers of thirty-four were unknown. 



189 

The number of families represented in the institution was one hun- 
dred and fifty-six. The unfortunate, disturbing and vicious classes in 
these families, in three generations, so far as could be traced out, had 
been as follows : Public dependents, two hundred and thirteen ; 
insane, thirty-one ; idiots, four ; inebriates, one hundred and thirty- 
five ; inmates of penitentiaries and prisons, four. Nine of those 
under care were the offspring of pauper fathers, and thirty-one of 
pauper mothers ; two had pauper grand fathers, and three pauper 
graaA mothers ; and nineteen had pauper brothers ; and twenty-four, 
pauper sisters. Fifty-seven were parents, having in all one hundred 
and forty-four living children. The condition of ten of these could 
not be ascertained ; the others were said to be situated in life as 
follows : In poor-houses, twenty-eight ; in an asylum, one ; bound 
out, seven ; self-supporting, ninety-eight. 

The following were some of the family groups in care of the insti- 
tution at the time of the inquiry : An educated, intemperate, widowed 
w-oman, sixty-nine years of age, her daughter, a feeble minded mar- 
ried woman, aged twenty-eight years, deserted by her husband, and a 
grand child, a boy nine years old, the former an inmate three, and 
tile last two, each two years, the grand child being the only one likely 
to become self-supporting; a married woman, aged twenty-six years, 
educated but temperate, abandoned by her husband, an inmate nearly 
tliree years, with two children, the elder a girl six years of age, the 
younger, also a girl, born in the house soon after her admission ; a 
^^f^arried man, fifty-nine years old, ignorant and a confirmed drunkard, 
^ri inmate nine years, having a boy three years old born in the house, his 
^"ife being employed in the institution ; a married woman aged thirty- 
^ine years, uneducated but temperate, deserted by her drunken hus- 
t^^nd, an inmate one year, with two bright and intelligent children, 
the elder, a girl eight years of age, and the younger, a boy six years 
^Id; a widowed woman forty yeare of age, uneducated and intem- 
perate, recently admitted with two children, a girl aged five, and a 
^oy two years ; an uneducated intemperate married woman twenty- 
seven years of age separated from her husband, a confirmed inebriate, 
^^ the house only a few months, with two children, a boy six years, 
^nd a girl one year old ; a widowed woman thirty years of age, 
educated but intemperate, an inmate six months with two children, 
^oth boys, the elder aged four, and the younger two years ; a mar- 
^^ woman twenty-eight years old, uneducated but temperate, sepa- 
^ted from her husband, two months in the institution with three 
children, the two eldest girls, aged respectively nine and four years, 



190 

and the younger, a boy one year old; an ignorant, intemperate 
married woman thirty-one years of age deserted by her husband, a 
confirmed drunkard, an inmate over two years, having three children, 
the eldest a boy aged nine years, and the two youngest girls, aged 
respectively two years and four months, and both born in the insti- 
tution ; an uneducated, vagrant, single woman twenty-four years old, 
an inmate one year with an illegitimate child, a girl, five years of 
age ; a single woman thirty years of age, educated and temperate, 
an inmate a few months only, with an infant child, a boy, born in 
the house ; a married woman thirty-nine years old, educated and of 
good habits, abandoned by her husband, an inmate seven years, 
with two children, both girls, the elder aged eleven, and the younger 
nine years ; an ignorant, vagrant, unmarried colored woman, thirty- 
two years of age, an inmate six years, having two illegitimate chil- 
dren provided for in families, and two, (twins) one year old, with 
her, born in the institution ; a widowed woman aged eighty years, 
uneducated but temperate, an inmate seven months with two grand 
children, both boys, the elder aged twelve, and the younger eight 
years ; a girl sixteen years old, unmarried, ignorant and vagrant, an 
inmate six months, having an infant, born in the house ; an educated, 
temperate, married woman eighteen years of age, of foreign birth, 
and only four months in this country, one month an inmate with an 
infant ; and a married woman twenty-two years old, deserted by her 
husband, three months an inmate with a young child, born in the 
institution. 

Among the other cases examined were the following : An unedu- 
cated intemperate widowed woman, seventy-three years old, fourteen 
years an inmate, infirm, childless, and wholly dependent; a feeble 
minded single woman thirty-three years of age, in the house since 
eleven years old, and regarded as a fixed burden ; an unmarried 
weak minded woman aged forty years, an inmate most of the time 
since ten years of age, having been also in jail for vagrancy, the 
mother of two illegitimate children both provided for in families ; a 
single woman fifty years old, educated and temperate, an epileptic, 
ten years in the institution, and looked upon as incurable ; an unmar- 
ried woman, sixty-five years of age, ignorant and a confirmed 
drunkard, four years in the house, and gives no promise of future 
self-support ;* an uneducated, intemperate single man, sixty years old, 
four years an inmate and likely to remain through life ; a single man, 
forty-three years of age, well educated, but a confirmed inebriate, 
twenty-two years an inmate, and hopelessly dependent ; a married 



• 



191 



man, sixty-seven years old, fairly educated but grossly intemperate, 
having been frequently in jail for drunkenness, an inmate nine years, 
and considered a fixed burden ; and an ignorant, intemperate man, 
a widower, fifty-three years old, recently admitted, but has been 
repeatedly in jail for drunkenness, and bids fair hereafter to burden 
the purWic. 

This county provided for its chronic insane mainly at the State 
Asylum for this class. The number under local care at the time of 
the examination was fifteen (15) men, and thirteen (13) women ; total, 
t^wenty-eight (28). They occupied a separate building, but it con- 
tained few conveniences for its purposes. All were regarded as 
io curable. 

It was thought that twenty-five of the inmates of this house would, 
of their own accord, go out ai^d provide for themselves ; one hundred 
and one were considered permanently dependent ; twenty-five seemed 
capable of self-maintenance under proper supervision ; and the future 
of thirty-seven was regarded doubtful. 

Wyoming County. 

The poor-house of Wyoming county, located near Varysburg, had 
sixty-three (63) persons under care at the time of the inquiry, of 
w-liom twenty-three (23) were chronic insane. Of these, twenty-two 
(Si 2) were males, and forty-one (41) females, classified by birth as 
tollows: New York, twenty-seven; other States of the union, six- 
teen ; England, two ; Ireland, seven ; other European countries, ten ; 
t^ii'th-places unknown, one. The fathers of twenty-three and the 
^^others of twenty-four were born in the United States ; and the 
^^.thers of twenty-six, and the mothers of twenty-five were foreign 
t>orn. The birth places of the parents of fourteen could not be 
^Bcertained. 

All of the inmates except two were over sixteen years old ; twenty- 
^^^ were between the ages of sixteen and fifty ; twelve, between fifty 
^^d sixty; seventeen, between sixty and eighty; and six were in 
^^vance of eighty years. One was born in the poor-house ; three of 
^lie others were admitted before they were five years old ; twelve 
^'^hen between the ages of five and thirty years ; sixteen when between 
^tirty and forty; fourteen when between forty and sixty ; and seven- 
^^en after they had passed the latter age. The dependence in eigh- 
teen cases had existed less than one year ; in eleven cases, one year 
Hnd less than five years; in sixteen cases, five years and less than ten ; 
ill ten cases, ten years and less than twenty ; in seven cases, twenty 



192 

years and less than thirty ; and in one case over thirty years. The 
entire time of dependence of all the inmates footed np four hundred 
and ninety-six years, being an average of 7.87 years to each person. 

Of the adult inmates, twelve were without any education ; six of 
the others had learned to read ; and thirty-seven, or nearly sixty-eight 
. per cent, had enjoyed the advantages of common school instruction. 
Three of the men, and thirteen of the women were known to have 
been temperate; and sixteen of the men, and twenty-one of the 
women, were classed as intemperate. The habits of two of the women 
could not be ascertained. The fathers of the inmates were : Tem- 
perate, thirty-two; intemperate, twelve; habits unknown, nineteen. 
Motliers : Temperate, forty ; intemperate, two ; habits unknown, 
twenty-one. 

The number of families represented by the inmates was fifty-eight, 
from which there had sprung in three generations, so far as could be 
learned, seventy-two public dependents. The same families had also 
produced thirty-six insane ; eleven idiots ; and forty-two inebriates. 
Three of those under care were the offspring of pauper fathers, and 
five of pauper mothers ; and in two cases the pauperism on the 
maternal side had descended through three generations. The num- 
ber who were heads of families was twenty-seven. These were said 
to have in all seventy-one living children situated in life as follows: 
In poor-houses, two; bound out, four; self-supporting, sixty-four; 
condition unknown, one. 

Tlie grouping of families in the institution was as follows : An 
educated unmarried woman, thirty-four years old, recently admitted, 
having an infant with her, born in the house, and is likely soon 
to go out and provide for herself; two feeble minded sisters, the elder 
aged twenty-six, and the younger twenty-three years, inmates twenty- 
two years, friendless and wholly dependent; a widowed woman 
twenty-one years of ago, uneducated but temperate, in the house only 
a short time with an infant, and gives promise, ere long, of earning her 
maintenance; a brother and sister, idiots, aged respectively forty- 
throe and thirty-one years, the former an inmate twelve, and the lat- 
ter nine years, and both looked upon as fixed burdens ; and a widowed 
woman fifty -eight years old, educated but intemperate, the mother of 
one self-supporting child, and her married sister, fifty-two years of 
age, also educated but an inebriate, the mother of three children who 
provide for themselves, the former an inmate two, and the latter 
eight years, and both regarded as permanent dependents. 

Of the otiier cases examined the following may be noticed : 'A 



iridowed woman seventy-four years old, iinedueiited and intemperate, 
Mntly admitted to the hoaae, having heen aided outside several 
^eara, and now considered a fixed burden ; an uneducated single 
" woman, seventy-live years of age, an inmate three years, and likely 
toreraain tlirongh life; a single wijman twenty-aix years old, educated 
and temperate, recently admitted as a vagrant, and likely soon to 
become a mother; a feeble minded unmarried woman, thirty-eight 
years of age, an inmate twenty-four years, her father, mother, two 
brothers and three sisters having been paupers; an educated, intem- 
perate man, a widower seventy-seven years old, an inmate one year 
and'classed as a permanent charge ; and an ignorant, debased, intem- 
perate married man, aged seventy-six years, an inmate seven years, 
and likely to burden the public through life. 

The insane occupied a detached bnilding and appeared to be com- 
fortably provided for. Five (5) were men, and eighteen (18) woman. 
All were classed as incurable. 

Fifty-£ve of the inmates of this institution seemed likely to remain 
public burdens through life ; two bid fair soon to go out and provide 
foi' tlienisolvea, and the future of six was regarded doubtful. 



Yates Oomrrr. 

The Tatea county poor-houae is an old dilapidated edifice, situated 

in the town of Jerusalem, about live miles from Penn Yan, the county 

|_Seat. Its pauper inmates at the time of the inquiry were : Males, 

sventeen (17) ; females, fifteen (15) ; total, thirty-two (32). Of these, 

wenty-one were born in New York ; two in other States of the 

jTnion ; and seven in Ireland. The birth-places of two could not be 

wrtained. The fathers of fourteen, and the mothers of eighteen 

Jrere native, and the fathers of eleven, and the mothers of eight 

l|breigD born . The nativity of the fethers of seven, and of the mothers 

f six was unknown. 

The agea of the inraatea ranged as follows: Under sixteen years 

I, five; between the ages of sixteen and thirty years, four; between 

Qiirty and sixty years, nine; between sixty and seventy -years, six; 

[>Ter seventy years of age, eight. Three were born in poor-houses ; 

(or of the others were admitted before they had reached the age of 

n years ; seven when between the ages of teu and thirty ; six when 

Mtween thirty and fifty ; nine when between fifty and seventy, and 

e after they had passed tiie latter age. Five had been in the house 

6 than iwo years ; nine, two years and less than ten ; fourteen, ten 

Mrs and leas tiian twenty ; one, twenty years and less than thirty; 

13 



194 

two, thirty years and less than forty, and one, more than forty years. 
The aggregate time spent in the institution by the persons under care 
up to the date of the examination, amounted to three hundred and 
forty-three years ; the average per inmate, 10.72 years. 

The inquiry showed that eight of the adult inmates were without 
education ; six of the others could read ; two could read and write ; 
and nine had enjoyed the advantages of common school instruction. 
One of the men, and nine of the women claimed to be strictly tem- 
perate, alid eleven of the men, and three of the women confessed 
habits of inebriety. The fathers of fourteen, and the mothers of 
twenty-two were classed as temperate, and the fathers of thirteen, 
and the mothers of four as intemperate. The habits of the fathers 
of five, and of the mothers of six were unknown. 

For several years past, the authorities of this county have pro- 
vided temporarily for its dependent children in the Ontario Orphan 
Asylum at Oanandaigua, placing them therefrom in families, as 
opportunities offer. The evil effects of the former practice of rearing 
children in the poor-house, associated with adult persons are still 
apparent in the institution, especially among the older inmates. Of 
those under care at the time of the examination, three were the 
offspring of pauper fathers, and seven of pauper mothers ; and in one 
instance the pauperism on the maternal side had descended through 
three generations. Five had pauper brothers ; seven pauper sisters ; 
one, a pauper aunt ; and three, pauper uncles. The number of 
families represented by the inmates was twenty-six, from which there 
had sprung in three generations, so far as could be traced out, fifty- 
nine public dependents, four insane, two idiots, and thirty-one ine- 
briates. Ten were parents, having children conditioned in life as 
follows : In poor-houses, four ; placed out in families, four ; self-sup- 
porting, twenty-three ; total, thirty-one. 

The following were the family groups in the house at the time of 
the inquiry : A man aged fifty-two, and his wife aged forty-two 
years, the former crippled, and an inmate thirteen years, and the 
latter twenty-two years, having in all seven living children, five 
bound out, and two in the house, the elder a boy aged six, and the 
younger, a girl four years old, both born in the institution ; a man and 
his wife aged respectively eighty-four and sixty-eight years, inmates 
five years, having also spent several years in other poor-houses, and 
both regarded as fixed burdens ; an ignorant, debased, married 
woman, twenty years of age, an inmate most of the time since twelve 
years old, having an illegitimate child, a mulatto, aged two years, 



195 

and born in the house ; and a married woman twenty-one years old, 
ignorant, intemperate and separated from her husband, recently 
admitted with a female child three years old, and giv6s little promise 
of future self-support. 

Among the other cases examined were the following : A married 
woman, fifty-four years old, educated but intemperate, abandoned by 
her husband, an inmate twelve years, totally blind, and entirely 
dependent ; an educated, temperate woman, a widow aged seventy- 
four years, childless and wholly friendless ; a single man, eighty-two 
years old, ignorant and grossly intemperate, an inmate eight years, 
friendless and regarded as a fixed burden ; an educated man, fifty- 
three years old, a widower, and a confirmed drunkard, recently 
admitted with diseased eyes, resulting probably from vicious praa- 
tices, and oflers little hope of recovery ; a weak minded, single man, 
nearly blind, aged sixty-five years, thirty of which have been spent 
in poor-houses, and being wholly friendless, seems likely to burden the 
public through life ; an educated, temperate man, a widower, seventy- 
one years old, ten years an inmate, friendless and entirely dependent ; a 
feeble minded man, a widower forty-two years of age, eighteen years 
in the house, and regarded as a permanent charge ; an educated mar- 
Tied man, aged seventy-seven years, confirmed in habits of drunken- 
aiess, an inmate sixteen years, and offers no promise of future 
«elf-support ; and a single man, sixty years of age, foreign bom, 
thirty-five years in the country, educated, but a confirmed inebriate, 
Having been repeatedly in jail for drunkenness, an inmate ten years, 
nd also several years in other poor-houses, enfeebled by debasing 
ractices, and a permanent burden. 

The following conclusions were formed respecting the future of the 
nmates of this house : One will probably go out and become self- 
upporting ; three may be trained to usefulness, if removed and placed 
nder proper surroundings ; the future of two was regarded doubtful, 
nd twenty-six were considered fixed dependents. 



CONCLUSION. 

^ few of the more prominent causes that have operated to induce 
Pauperism in this State, as developed by the inquiry, will now be 
^'^oticed : 

1. The examination has made it clear that by &r the greater num- 
of paupers have reached that condition by idleness, improvidence, 
^^'ruikenness, or some form of vicious indulgence. It is equally clear 
"^^t these vices and weaknesses are very frequently, if not oniver- 



196 

sally, the result of tendencies which are to a greater or less degree 
hereditary. The number of persons in our poor-houses who have 
been reduced to poverty by causes outside of their own acts is, con- 
trary to the general impression, surprisingly small. These two 
classes of persons ought not to be confounded ; neither ought they 
to be compelled to associate with each other. The whole policy of 
the State should move in the direction of caring for the really unfor- 
tunate and worthy sick poor in hospitals, while a vigorous system of 
labor should be organized and administered for the vicious and 
unworthy. 

2. The element of heredity enters so largely in the problem of 
pauperisni that it should receive special attention. The degraded, 
vicious and idle, wlio, when in good health, are always on the verge 
of pauperism, and who, at the approach of old age and illness, inevit- 
ably become paupers, are continually rearing a progeny who, both 
by hereditary tendencies and the associations of early life, are likely 
to follow in the footsteps of their parent^ There is a large number 
of families throughout the State which are kept together by private 
and public charity, the sole end of whose existence seems to be the 
rearing of children like themselves. It is in the highest degree con- 
trary to sound policy to keep such families together ; in fact, the 
sooner they can be separated and broken up, the better it will be for 
the children and for society at large. The line of pauper descent is 
very diflScult to break, but unless vigorous efforts are directed toward 
this end, the number of the dependent classes will grow in a con- 
stantly increasing ratio. 

Few persons who have not given detailed attention to the subject 
realize how much of vice and pauperism, idiocy and insanity is 
hereditary. It is believed to be the duty of society to take posi- 
tive measures to remedy this. evil. What forms these measures 
should take, and how far the effort should be carried, present the 
most serious questions which press upon the legislator. It is a sub- 
ject to which little attention has hitherto been given, at least outside 
of treatises on physiology; but the time is rapidly approaching 
when its importance will compel the attention of the moralist as 
well as the law maker. 

3. It appeared in the course of the inquiry that large numbers of 
those examined had been trained and educated for the poor-house by 
out-door relief administered by law or by private charity. When 
persons, naturally idle and improvident, have for a few months 
experienced the convenience of existing upon the labor of others, 



197 

they are very likely to resort to this mesna of living aa often and ae 
continuously as possible. Charity given in the shape of advice, pro- 
curing employment and furnishing capital in small amoanls for start- 
ing in some kind of business would be vastly more productive than 
when expended in maintaining people in idleness. It may be laid 
down as a principle of very general, thougli not universal application, 
tiiat when out-door relief becomes chronic it is contrary to public 
policy and also to the well being of the parties aided. 

It is believed that no out-door relief, whether pnblic or private, 
should be given without careful investigation into the character and 
cii'cura stances of the recipients. In times of eonimercial disaster 
many persons of this class fai! to obtain employment for want of 
energy and intelligence. Such feeble minded persons are always best 
assisted by finding them employment. Persons who visit the poor 
at their own homes might also advise them as to their housekeeping, 
care of their health, food and clothing. They should be impressed 
■with the necesssity of self-denial as well as industry, with the import- 
auce of saving their earnings during the snmmer, snfRcient to carry 
them throngh the winter; and in health, to maintain them in dis- 
ease. In genera!, all out-door relief should be discontinued the 
instant the necessity for it has passed. 

4. The examination shows tliat pauperisra has been largely 
increased in the State by defective systems of poor-houae manage- 
ment. The old and the young, the chronic cases of pauperism and 
those whom sickness or extraordinary conditions have compelled to 
seek temporary relief have been herded together, and the tendency 
has been to bring all down to the level of the lowest, and especially 
to train up the children in habits and associations which break down 
their seli-respect and prepare them to become paupers in old age 
if not in mature life. The practice of receiving parents and children 
into poor-houses together has been a prolific-source of evil. 

5. Neglected insanity, neglected wounds and diseases have tended 
greatly to increase the list of paupers. Through failure of immediate 
and careful treatment many cases of acute insanity have become 
chronic, and a permanent charge upon the public. Iiisnrticient atten- 
tion and care in sickness very frequently disable pereons for life. 
With a very large segment of the population, elironic disease and 
pauperism are inseparable. Whatever tends then to promote health 
and secure careful treatment of disease of whatever kind, wards off 
the occasion for charitable relief; and the encouragement of temper- 
HDce has also the effect to diuiinisli pauperism. 



198 

6. The absence of employment in poor-houses has tended very 
much to the increase of pauperism. Persons who have sought there 
temporary aid in times of sickness or special distress have become 
habituated to idleness and to the condition of mind which inevitably 
grows up through freedom from care in providing for the wants of 
the passing day. When this condition of mind has become fixed, 
they naturally and permanently pass into the pauper class. Such 
persons, if kept at vigorous and compulsory labor, would have acquired 
or strengthened the mental and physical discipline which would 
have prepared them to work for and support themselves. When 
made conscious of their own power of achievement they soon 
become unwilling to lose the results of their labor, and naturally 
leave the poor-house and make the effort to provide for themselves. 
The absence of employment in poor-houses tends to make those who 
are temporarily dependent, chronic and incurable paupers. 

It is believed that no reform of our poor-house system is more 
needed than the organization of a uniform system of labor — a sys- 
tem which should employ every person out of the hospital in some 
kind of useful if not profitable labor. Many idle and shiftless vaga- 
bonds drift into the poor-houses, especially during the winter months, 
attracted by the life of listless idleness which so generally prevails. 
Such labor would make the poor happier and would be a training and 
discipline which should teach them how to take care of themselves. 
There is one kind of labor which can always be provided, which is 
that requisite for the most perfect cleanliness in the rooms of the 
house, the bedding and the apparel. This discipline of cleanliness 
carried into the most minute particulars will always have an elevating 
effect upon those unfortunate classes of persons. For this reason, if 
for no other, an abundant supply of water should be provided for 
every poor-house. 

The importance of hard labor for tramps who, after all, make up 
a considerable element of our poor-house population during the 
winter, is coming to be widely recognized. It is well understood that 
this class is very careful not to make application for a lodging many 
times over, at least where they are obliged to earn by hard labor 
whatever they obtain. We believe that a thoroughgoing* system of 
employment would, in a short time, diminish very largely our poor- 
house population. The poor-house would cease to be attractive to 
the indolent, and a large per centage of those who resort to it through 
ignorance and ineflSciency would, in a short time, be taught to sup- 
port themselves. 



199 

7. As has been stated in the preceding pages of this report, our 
poor-houses and other charitable institutibns are burdened with large 
numbers of alien paupers. It is believed that at least ten per cent 
of our whole foreign pauper population are unnaturalized persons who 
have never been engaged to any extent in productive labor within the 
State. A large number of these persons have been shipped fraudu- 
lently by the parishes to which they belong, and by the families upon 
whom they were dependent. The maintenance and care of this 
numerous class adds largely to the public burdens for charitable pur- 
poses, and would seem to demand remedial action. 

We are careful, under existing laws, to send home to our sister 
States all paupers belonging to them which have strayed into our 
boundaries. It is believed that this policy, which is admitted on all 
hands to be just as it regards other States, would, for a still stronger 
reason, be just if it were put in practice upon these alien paupers. 
If such of this class as are sufficiently healthy to endure the 
voyage, were to be shipped back to the countries where they 
belong, the system which has so long prevailed in Europe of 
shipping their paupers to America would very soon come to' an end. 
This, together with a vigorous and faithful execution of the laws 
prohibiting the importation of dependent persons from other coun- 
tries, would work an important and far-reaching reform and afford 
sensible relief of the burdens of pauperism in all our large, and 
especially our maritime cities. 

Before concluding this report, it is deemed desirable briefly to 
refer to some of the beneficial results which have already resulted 
from the inquiry : 

First The removal of the children of intelligence over three years 
old, generally, from the poor-houses and alms-houses of the State. 
The condition of this class of unfortunate dependents, as developed 
by the inquiry, fully demonstrated that these institutions could not 
be made fit places in which to rear children. The matter was fully 
brought to the notice of the Legislature in the annual report of the 
Board of 1875, which resulted in the act of that year (chapter 173, 
Laws of 1875), directing the removal of all such children from poor- 
houses, and prohibiting their being sent hereafter to these institutions. 
These children are now being temporarily provided for in families 
and asylums, and most of them eventually, it is believed, will become 
absorbed in the vigorous and self supporting population. If this 
wise provision for the care of unfortunate and dependent children is 
continued, pauperism in this State, it is believed, will in consequence 



900 

be largely diniioiehed, and the burdens of taxation for charitable 
purposes greatly lesaeoed. 

Second. The eBtablishmeat of a naiform Bystem of records of the 
iumateB of poor-honsee sod alms-hoiueB. Ab before stated, the 
ioqniry faUj developed the &ct that do proper system of registration 
of the inmates of poor-honses and alms-honses was maintained in any 
of these institutions, nor were any records made regarding their con- 
dition at the time of admiESion calculated to throtr light npon the 
causes of pauperism. It was found that the superintendents and 
keepers, especially in the rural counties, had acquired much important 
information regarding those under their care, but owing to the failure 
properly to record this information, it was of no benefit to the public. 
Under the act chapter 140 of the Laws of 1875, a uniform system of 
records is now maintained in all the poor-houses and alms-houses 
of tlie state, and a large amount of valuable information respecting 
the dependent classes and the sources of pauperism is being thus col- 
lected and preserved. 

Third. A more careful and wiser discrimination in the adminis- 
tration df charitable relief generally by public ofBcials. In conduct- 
ing the inqniry, the attendance of the superintendents and keepers 
in the various counties, as before stated, was, as far as practicable, 
secured. These officers gave close and cai'efnl attention to the work, 
and in most instances, became greatly interested in the matter. 
The taste for investigation thus acquired by them regarding those 
under their control, and as to the subject of the care of the poor 
generally, has awakened an increased interest in their work throngh- 
out the State, and gives promise of valuable results. 
All which is respectfully submitted. 

CHARLES S. HOTT, 

Seeratary qf the Board. 

Dated Albadt, Dectmber 5, 1876. 




SCHEDULES. 



202 



SCHEDULE No. 1. 

Schedule of Inquiries used in the examination of the Inmates 
the Poor-houses and Alrns-houses of the State of Nev> York^ 
the State Board of Charities^ under the Concurrent Resoluti 
of the Senate and Assembly of May 27-29, 1873. 




^ 



County Poob-house. 

ExandnatUm No 

I. Naxb, Sbx, Age, Social Condition, Color, 

BiBTHFLAOE, ETC. 

1. Name 

2. Sex (Male M. Female P.) 

8. Age at last birthday years. 

(If nnder one year state the months) . . 

4. Social condition (Single, Married, Widow, 

Widower, Divorced) 

6. Color (White, Black— if mixed, state degree), 

6. Birthplace (State or Country 

County Town 

City ). (If born in a poor-house 

or other public institution, state the fact.) 

If of foreign birth, how long in the United 
States? 

How long in this State ? at what 

port landed ? 

7. Birthplace of Father (State or Country), 

County Town 

City ). (If born in a poor-house 

or other public institution, state the fact.) 

8. Birthplace of Mother (State or Country), 

County Town 

City ). (If born in a poor-house 

or other public institution, state the fact.) 

n. Length of Time a Dependent. 

9. At what age did this person first become de- 

pendent upon public charity ? 

10. What was the first mode of aid?, (State 

whether by neighborhood, church, organ- 
ized society, temporary relief by public 
ofiScials, or full support in a poor-house, or 
other public institution, the name of which 
should be given.) 

11. If first aid ed outside of institutions, how long 

was this continued ? 

12. At what age did this person first become an 

inmate of a poor-house ? years. 

(If under one year give the months.) 

18. How long an inmate of this poor-house? 
years. (If lees than one year 

give the months.) 

14. Has this person been in other poor-houses ? 



16. 
16. 



17. 



18. 



24. 



25. 



26. 



27. 



28 



29. 



If 80, how many ? _ 

How long in all has this person been an. 

mate of poor-houses ?. y^& 

(If less than one year give the montti: 

Has this person been an inmate of an^^ 
sane asylum, blind asylum, idiot asy^l 
deaf and dumb asylum or refuge ? (I^ 
y tate which, and how long ?) 



m. 

19. 

20. 

21. 
22. 



Has this person been in jails, work-ho-a 
penitentiaries or prisons, conyicted. 
crime ? (If so state which, how lon.^; 
inmate, and the nature of the ofiTense. > 

Personal and Family History op 

Dependent. 
Is this person of legitimate or illegiti. 

birth? (Write which.) . 

Is there consanguinity in the parents ? 

so, write what degree.) . 

Can this pereon read and write ? . 

Did this person receive a fair school ed 

tion? 

If not, why neglected ? 



L D- 

VS. 
«•) 

Jin. 

10, 



Of 

ao 



^ • « 



23. Had this person habits of idleness ? . . . • 
Had this person habits of thrift and 



ig» 



Was this.pcrson totally abstinent? 

Was this person a moderate drinker ?. . . - 

Was this person a periodical drinker ? - 

Was this person a constant drinker?.. . - 

Had the Father habits of idleness ? . - 

Had the Father habits of thrift and sa. 



-mg^' 




Was the Father temperate or intemp^ 

(Write which.) - - 

Had the Mother habits of idleness ?. . . . - 
Had the Mother habits of thrift and sa. 
Was the Mother temperate or intemp^ 

(Write which.) « - 

Was the Father Immoral, sensual or oth^^^ 

debased? (State facts.) « - 

Was the Mother immoral, sensual or 

wi se debased ? (State facts. ) 

Did this person receive moral and rel 

training in youth ? - - ' " 

Did youthful habits of vagrancy and idl«**** 

exist? (State facts.) - "• 

Did this person have a fixed home, or J^*" 

a roving life before becoming depend^^* * 



186 



er- 



4700 



203 



80. What trade did this person ever learn, or what 

occupation pnrsae ? 

81. Why was it abandoned ? 

82. What was the occupation of the Father of 

this person ? 

If a wife, what was the occupation of the 

husband? .. 

88. Was the Father a pauper ? 

Was the Mother a pauper? 

Was the Grandfather a pauper ? 

Was the Grandmother a pauper ? 

Were anj- of the brothers of this person 
paupers ? 

Were any of the sisters of this person 
paupers ? 

Were any of the uncles of this person 
paupers ? 

Were any of the aunts of this person 
paupers ? 

(Where there are two or more persons of the 
same family to be examined, questions 34 
to 89, inclusive, should be put to one mem- 
ber only.) 
84. Total number of persons in the above group 
of families (three geueratious living and 
dead), known to have been dependent on 

public charity? 

35. Total number in the same group (living and 
dead), known to have been self-support- 
ing? 

86. Total number of insane (living and dead), in 

the same group ? 

87. Total number of idiots (living and dead), in 

the same group ? 

88. Total number of inebriates (living and dead), 

in the same group ? 

89. Total number who have been in penitentia- 

ries or State prisons (living and dead), in 

the same group ? 

(Question No. 40 and 41 should be put to the 
Father only, if both parents are living and 
present; if not, then to the only living 
parent.) 

40. If a parent, how many children has this per- 

son n ow living ? 

41. What is their condition ; are they in poor- 

houses, asylums, hospitals, refuges, etc., 
or are they self-supporting? (Write the 
fact.) 

IV. EziBTme Causes of Dependenob. 

IS. Homeless childhood (illegitimate) 

Homeless childhood (abandoned) 

Homeless childhood (by death of Father), 

HomdeeB childhood (by death of Mother), 



42. 



43. 

44. 
45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 



50. 



51. 



52. 



53. 



54. 



55. 



56. 



57. 



58. 



59. 



60. 



Homeless childhood (by death of both pa- 
rents) 

Homeless childhood (by pauperism of pa- 
rents) 

Homeless childhood (by imprisonment of 
parents for crime) 

Homless by abandonment of husband 

Homeless by death of husband 

Old age and destitution 

Permanent disabling disease (write the name 
of it) 

Temporary disabling disease or sickness 
(write the name of it) 

Crippled (how) 

Deformed (how) 

Loss or impairment of any of the Ave special 
senses. (State which and how.) 

Loss or impairment of any other natural 
faculty or bodily power? (Write what 
faculty or power, and how lost or impaired.) 

Insanity? Idiocy? 

Epilepsy ? Paralysis ? 

General feebleness of the mind ? 

General feebleness of the body ? 

Impairment or degeneration of the bodily 
powers, or mental faculties from inebria- 
tion ? (State the facts.) 

Is there proof of insanity, epilepsy, paraly- 
sis, special feebleness of mind or body, 
syphilis, or any other entailment of bodily 
or mental misfortune from parentage in 
this person^s history? (If so note the 
fact.) 

Is there mental or moral perversion, or mor- 
bid and debasing conditions of mind ? (If 
so state the fact and the causes to which 
attributed.) 



Is this person capable of self-supporting labor 
without supervision ? 

Is this person capable of self-support under 
direction and supervision? 

How is this person* s time employed in this 
institution ? 

What is the chief cause of dependence in 
the case of this person, and what, if any, 

the remedies ? 

t 

What appears to be the destiny of this per- 
son as respects recovery from the cause of 
dependence ? 

What family relatives of this generation, if 
any, have the pecuniary ability to suitably 
proi^de for, or take care of this person? 
(State facts and evidence.) 



204 



■ 

o 

p 

o 







1 






s 

o 

en 



VH VH ^ VH vHlOtO^OI ^^ ©11^ »^ 1^ !-• 1^ to ?0 C* 



O 
^ 



^SS:SSo^S9S$co^Ss5g2^§iSS$^S|^S^^s:3:S?S|S§!S 






08 







g2S 



o 

OB 

o 



s «| ol s § « s s 1 1 § 







B 








9 



oa 



o 



3 

OB 

o 

<5 iJ K C2 Cu S ►» s.^ O iw t^ .^^ .w 

.;=.S^.« Z> 08 o o o a> V « o a> 



O, 
ou 
O 



206 



of 



&g$s$98S$s;sss^^?;siss^s2SSi:s9SS;?iSS8S:9($ss9:s 








O 



206 



CO 

o 

& 

Q 

W 

o 

CO 






kO 






5S 



si 

s 






00 












*»^ 



•^ 
g 
« 



I-? 



u 

9 

o 


« E- « -<*• "* t- 00 • fc- O 00 -♦ Jf- CO 00 O »0 00 « 


• ioaoeeot<«<«ae«a«iosaoao^c»oootOM^ 

tH 00 


• 

1 


M lO ^ «0 OO lO O ■« CO-« t-aoO 00 1- -« OOtx 

1 
« 


>o^g<«c»eeaoet»»aaMio>oo<i4<«4<ooio 


• 
OS 


• 





'to 

a 

•fH 

OQ 



i^^^;3Sggisssss^s§ss;§s^s 



)Si®55oeo§t2ooo»oi5«o«ol3e«xFr-< 

> r^ 00 1-1 »^ tH 

r «- 



o 



C»Q*-^ 



THO» 



t-rliH^OOCO 



THlOr-l 



e«|pr-ieo9*aoio^coor-ico^-^ 



OiO 



l«OfaQ0lO00Q0lOr-icDT>«9Ma0TPlOSO» 



r^OD r-i CO » t-i CO C< tH i-l tH tH 



O 
^ 



i>Ho5e3^eot«rH^T<4^eoi-i«oetiae«e«eo^ 



^Si^:3^SSS$SS9§^Si8SS^ 



TH ^ 1^ »-< 



ef 



'3 



Tt«e«<^i5^QoSteoeot«eos«o»raeoi-ieoMio 



o(oe«AiaiOcQ-^e«acp-^i^o«eo^i^oeo 
ioi3ooii9<vv»e<e<3cDiOi-it*i-icS«D'V9it«2o 

of 



5 

o 



SQO^Ti<i-icoiQe«ooo>Aa«e««eoap<-i^ 't-ooo 



T4 1^'<^ 



r-lQO t-l 



• ^QP>oe<s«eoaoqQtoe«Aacp 

I <D 1-1 00 0< *-i M T-l »-<»M 



CO 



o 



V 



00 o 






- oS 






207 



teokcee^co •^coaootaoaoc«'«QOcoQoaoiO 



OOiOCOOftAiO 



eoQOaot^eoQOoaoL-AtraDe* 



SIS 



m 



a0iO9»^«OCD lO«PQiO<V«^G«br«Dr^OO 



S'«2?S 



SS'^S^SSRSSSS 



of 



lomSSaoSS 






eteoMAot^ 



oteof iH 



• 1-ir^eoeoio '00 



SS^SSZ^ .S3S^$S9SS$|3SS 



s; 

of 



sssssss; 



^§S3;?issas^ss;i!:s 



$SS9SS§i 



s;^&;;S2(5S»S5sa^ 



SSS::SS :SSoS^$SSSSg!S3S 



of 




o 



208 



>a 






•♦* 



^ 



(yi 



'ponpn^oaflVQH 



ooot 



f^CO 



M^ 



iOM^ 



•O'^fi^ae^ 



S 



'•9|J)imo3J8q)o 



.»-lOt .»-l 



• • • 



'odojiiH JQ 
sapqunoojaqio 



ee • 'iHatio 



• • • • 



00 






00 






'iavouao 



lO . 8» t- »-• O *-• T-i 



coi-ietcet- 



ooot 



ooeoeet-Mi-i^MgOiMM^oom 

09 w 



*0Oinu,2 


• • 

• • 


• • • 

• • • 

• • • 


.1-100 • • -iHOOM iH •»'« • 'T-l •M^00<^ 'Ot • 

• ••• ••••• • •• * ^1* • • 

• ••• ••••#• ••• •• 




, 


*ea[«ii 


• • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 


• • 
• 

• • 


• •••■• fi^ • • • > • • • ^4 • ^^ • ^^ v^ • 00 • t* • • • • 

• •••••• ••••••• • • ■ • •••• 

• •••••• ••••••• • • • • ••■ 

• • •••■ •••••• • • • • •••• 



*pii«i;o38 






• • • r^ >CtCi* 

« • « • • 

• • • • • 
« • • • • 



■ • 



*tH • Ot tHOO -^h 



00O» 40t000t -^ • 



'pmiMi 



)coa«9*»^ooioeeseot-vH|*ioo^eoo 



" of 



*pirei8izg[ 



i-iiHOOceoo^ot^M^^ototQOi-i '^Aoo 'OO^fft •^ootr* •t*aoa»o^Oi-i 



-ojdavoiJdmy 
qs^lJa jaq^o 


« .|W , • _4 a • 


. »4 «-M lA a* 


* 


• • • • • • tH •••••• 

• ••••• ■•••• 


•vpvnvQ 


Qt • • • •oi • •©• • ct -v^ooo© • • • 

• ••• •• • • ••• 

■ ••• .• • • ••• 


r^ tH •M • • • 

• ■ • • • 

• • • • • 


•ao|U£i oqi 


^fC0(0OS0>O«D^Q0v-4i0!fiaDOl0G«t» 


. 00 t-QOm ^ CD lO e* QgA Q M eOiOfc* 

• 



•aiaoi Mo^ 



SS;SS9SS$S^$9S3SSS32^ISg5 



9fSgfiS$SSS§^§E:S§S 




i-« rH t-i^ '^ • T-lOO 1-1 00 COi^C09It^M 



GO 



O 
O 



209 



>«0 'iHCt 



t«e«D '09 •ooiHot 



s 



1-4 09 



>1H • *1H .0% 



.»H0* • 'l^ 






g 



CO •OtflOOOO 



otooot 



T-l .Cft^ 



1-IQO •TllOt-t- 



s; 



iH . • • • aOtr^r^ 
• • • '^^ • 


• 
• 


• 


• 


• 
• 


• 


• 
• 


• 
• 


• 


• 
• 


S 


• • • • • 


• 


• 


• 


• 


m 


• 


• 


• 


• 




• • • • • 


• 


• 


• 


• 


m 


• 


• 


• 


• 






• 


• 


• • - • 


• 


• 


• 




• « • 


• 


^ 




• 
• 
• 


• 
• 


• • • • 

• • • • 

• • • • 


• 

• 
• 


• • 

• • 

• • 


• 
• 
• 


• 
• 
• 


« • • 
• • • 
« • • 


• 
• 
• 


»-i 


•» .inf-iotiHiH 01 


• 


• 


• v-IOt 


• 


• e« 


• 


• 


•«^ 


• 


22 


• • # 


• 


• 


• • 


• 


• 


« 


• 


• 


• 


^^ 


• • • 


• 


• 


• • 


• 


• 


• 


• 


• 


• 


T^ 


• « • 


• 


• 


• 


• 


• 


• 




• 


• 





ss^sea^as*-* 



^;:s;:«^8^ai«8'-'- 



a»^ •i^eeotoiooteoi^ - '^lo • •e«t-eeeocot-o« 

• • • • • 



n 



• v^OtiH -t- 



• Ml-I 'iHOt^ .iH 



■ • 



• « 



fc*«o •c»»ao^'«o^ • •eoioioetcoE-oocoAO^ceet 



ISSSSSSSISS2S9 



^ss?§$sss9s^§ss;ss 










o 



13 



210 



o 

O 

w 

o 



S CO 
g 00 

^^ 






5>i 



tx,S 



.^ 












■I 



3 



•S5*S;:§^8'°*^'^SSg*»*^^55 



T-l id< ri ^ »^ 6* eOr-iQO T-tOOilr^ 



2 

o 



(gi CO • ^ C* <0 »-< r-l 



00 



o 

>■ 



8S3SSS22SS«gg5S^StS^^^S 



C* flO T^ 






-d 

s 



»s®ss§8SS'^*°s*^ss*'«*"'s; 



eoTt!<pa>cbi-ieie4<:«o»Or-ioo«pco'^i 

C«S 5irH03 OSr-l» i-l o5 »-i r-1 ' 






'iMC«eoe3io 1-iTO'^ 1-1 1« ^ CO o< 1-1 00 ot 



t-eoowttJOQi-ieoQOid^ooqpQOOO©^ 
m«osoa4ooc<rrr-ieocoTt<eoto«>i-i»<N 



O) 



00 



0) 



5lw3c5oot- Oi-« w«55« t-iO'^i-i^ooo 



eosei-o4'^ioio54t-i-iF't-ooT-<^oo'^ 

0>* CO i-< 



5 
o 



oseooo»-<'*ii-t5P»Qe«ooo»Ofl«©»5Pe5QO^^ 

Of ^-^ TH 1-^^ 1-t 



t-ococo«ast-^Qp»oe««*coQOQP»oej 

1-iOD r-i CO ;0 1-1 CO « 1-1 ©t T-« 



QQ 



o 



• • • • 



• • • • 



• ■ • • • 



• •so 
■ • p 

OS b8"ja^^*;2 o c « s'E S S a o 2- as o'g.s o.^ « o_o o.s c p p 






c3 



P Q 5 01) 



p 
o 

*-" i 

02 



i" « at; WJyj 

-1 brrr' C"r 



be: 



t~> *- 






:a 



(^ S3 



cs-a 



OS o 






?o5l& 



= g 



0) bo 

o > ^ 



211 



toe* 



^n : :$; 



loo^ .000 •ioaooMt-eoo»o^<o 



S5§SS^S85:S'^ 



*SSS"'*S*SSSS^« 






MS^m^SoSS 



??9S§s^^S99§g:§s;s 



^.i" 



^AQQ . «iO>Ot- • T~« b- e« lA OO CO 00 1- CO M a ^ f 



SSSS^^^S' 



o»o»gss3coa»vHcoeo 



*S§8S 



eOOCOrH 

0*09 el th 



CO 



Ti'qti-ir-ietotcooioS 



s;;:8g^3^s:$9gs^;s 



00 

o» 
of 



SSSSSSSiSS 






1-1 
CO 

of 




■S'S 

l5 



ll 



«/3 



'u*af Mt^l* "^O I 



ID pa* timi All 






'"1 



■11 8 

It'" 









::Si=2-E-SSS9 



: = $|22 = 8*g = 3' 



' = S'""=2"|''S'° 






|e££53g!IS2£^SS|S93?S ;^||SS£g3|SSg 



213 



■ • •••• ••• 

• • •••• ••• 


v4 

2C 


• 
• 


§ 


02|«««^»^t-««»a>« ;««g5;2;^aogt.«og«^ 




JS85S:S2'^SSS«S8JiS« iw^Qo^ooooot-t^og^^ 


1 









9 
^ 






of 



ooooioiSotooiotDt-eoeA^ee 

^*T^ OtiH v^Ot ^H 



MMeooQO^Qetoooeot-ee 



etooogi 



s 












fe*9oioiio«ee9^cot-cO'«i-iv-i •oteoiHoti-icoQoet • .eo*-i 






I 



^ao*-i^io^t-a»e« •e«*-i 



• •coet 99 



tH • 'Ot •0O0O«OO<tH 



• • 



§ 



t"ioooiHeot<o<oaoeeiooo •£• •'^oooioot •ooMooiOTHi^eo 

»H ^< »H • • • ^4 



• • 



i 













o 



214 






O I 00- 









<» 



00 






'9I99Ji 
Jk.%T{S\9 jaAO 






japan pa« 
BivaX iC^aaAOg 



80004 a» t« o 00 tr* -^ >o o <o o go (O 00 eo iH a» 



?:t98SS?58*S8S8S 



'X^aoAdB japan 
pa«8j«aXX;z|8 



SS2$:ss8'*sss;:S8S*^*S5: 



SS$«JS^S~|S55!S 



'i)xi9 japan 
pa« sjvaX i^ju 



r-i'«o«o^iQ-^fcoQO-<>-«a»eoa»eia»eeo 






'X;i;g japan 
pav8j«aXi!(joj 



gjH»»gcogr^oocooooao»ogo»oo^QOiH :«ggo^ogc-gt-«Qt:» 



^^»-t 



japan pa« 
uvaiC i^Jiqx 



9S A 



S^«8*oKnSS$:«'°SS8?; 



japan pa« 
BJvaX X;|aaMx 



^ 00 a» ^ a» o -^ a» o e« 00 00 et » ■« ^ « f CO 



e« CO 



'i;|aaAi; 
japan pa« 
sjvaX aaa)Z|g 



i^MtOOtr-l^ei^r^ 



eoeo -oooATHeoei"^ • •eooe«oteoa»e«Qoeot-oo< 

V4 'fl' vt 



'aaapr|8 japan 
pa« i3j«ai aax 



eoeoiHOt 't-i .^w -^^ . oo ^ o» ©» co i-« c« -etioo? . ^ ri th ei j-; <o «o '^ » 

r^ .... ' TH ' H 

.... ^ (71 



-aa) japan 
pa« 8J«aA dA}^ 



Oiw* .tH .00 • 0»' 
y^ • • • 



>ei •■^ -00 •^^i-i •eteicveoo -eii-iaAio^ 

... ri • c- • »Q 

... ^^ '9' 



'aAg japan 
pa« BJvaA OMX 



»H ... 

. . . . 



icor^;© •e«iH«o •▼^*ot: -00 






*PI0 sjvaX 
OM) Japaxi 



t-meov-iioe«T-(e« .e»e«»-i«ccc««'^iHeo ; '."S •'*e«b-e»ag«QO •« 



3 

O 



|S22SSS§8SSSgig||S^Sp:S j^SiSISg^iSssS 



o 




215 









s 



g5««S««§|®*SS8^ :«SSSS"*-SSSSSS*°'^ 






r, 



t-o:oocooo"^iO'N«ei-«j*0'fl' 



;oaoaor-iQo^e9090)OQQO'^ 



Q^OOlOCOQOOiOOi-iO<^ 
Ct 0«vN 1^ i^ f-i r^ t^ 



oioudooioeootooo^o 



s*°sss;s 



ot 



t-OOWi-i 



cof tOMOio ei 



fHr^mt«eootest-e«a>e««oeo 



etiHOoet . eo !-• th iH lo e« th »-• • • oo «o r-i i-i r^ « « ^ «-* e» -t-i 



ooetot^^ioeor^^oi^r-ieo -iHetr-i^e) •cd^'^ih^ -yt 



I 



o«xeeb-iof^i^co^e9f-c« ^-^th 






g| :^ 



r^ ^4 • • • 

• • • • • 

• • ■ • - 


1 


«Ov-4C<C0Clv-ilOG9CtcO00 «C<I .i-h;o^v-Ii-4 . f G<I "^ SO O G*< • 

• • • 

• a • • 


i 










o 



11 



ll 



ill 



II 



■Jli 






aiqi ner pm 



mi Q8X 



ano asm esaq 



SI6 



£Sg§§§S§i3iiiiigSls:^gilzilSSgSlg3 



g-=SSSS5=aS"S8=;"''32 :SS: 



S3SSa?"SHasSigSS2SHS ^S^E^SJSIS^eSSSSS 



ssasss'tss^^sssss^ss ^ssgssssssssssg 






2">3:!2SS" = £'S«SS=;'-2*= iSSS'-S-'S^gSSSSS 



|3PS35BSa2eigSgS5SFS if:SgSSS§3|222S| 



ffll lllllllli ill If ill kH lit ll ft 



217 



fc^«o od f' "V* io' (O o ^' f' oi od • a» o ^ CD b-'oD CO £^ ocd eat t-' o 



s 



^woOc-iOi-iCoaS'^rHi 



§8i 



;$! 



I op 9 i~i « 1^ A ' 



to 



rHe«Olr-i . • iH 



s 



eot-ic«^ eiiH .THeorHOi •etetr^eo • .»-»rH^ .iHi-ia» 



■QOaiO >lO0«^t-<0e9iH'«iO<0'«fe-iH 



§ 



'•as«sas*'-ass 



«^t-i-»THO«COOOOO^ 






oiesc»toooeo^^oaot*>-* •oot-eeoc«t-aoiot-ioao(e' 

r<00»-i »^ 0* T-t r^ CO »^ tH •i^iHfMrH ^4 v^ ,.H T4 v^ v^ 






SSS«^88S«RS2S i"^^^] 



1 1-1 »^ '* r^ ©€ r^ 3b 



ocoQC'-ieoioeoooooco'^ 



i-iiH^H T^ fM Ot . 



000(0 00 



g«,oogogg;.g;g«^ 



««g««^gr-55a5goooo 



S:SS^SSSS3;^SS :^SDS^$3SSSg!SSS 



to 
of 




o 



218 



^ 



•♦* 



«Ki 






ss2S9S«sg'»ssss;;s:?§3SSsss :SS§ssssg;^§$ggl; 



pav pvai pinoQ 



*-i»-ieoec'^«0"*iot-i^t-'^e»>Q'^TH 



«' 



• oiaoo<Doiooo«e««oQ*-4t» 

* S CO 



'i[aoptidjp[aoo 






t-Ot 






'9;{jAi pav 
p«9i o; d[qBUj[i 



^S8S§?5gSSS5;t2Sg8^SSS8 



gssi^s^s;:si{S8SS 



o 






o 

o 

o 



'k. 



lO 



en 

I— I 

O 









*»o 




219 



S«&SSS;$sssgi;s« 






'"SSS^SfSS* 



00 

at 



g2' 



00 • o» K- ;o 1-1 1- o» e< t- 



aoeinaaof 



iH«oeo 



O) 



e( 



S^S 



00e««O-^tOTl«r-ir-i;O-^ 



t-QO«Qoaoooi-40(ooe«eo<o« 

1-1 «« ri C# 



s 



as5!^'^s^s;2S;s;:;3! :»55ssssgs§?s^s* 



8 

r-l 

05* 



S^S^^SSS^IS^^^ 



§;s;?sg§ss^gs^is^ 



• • • 



o 



as "^ 



s'52»s5« 



00 



<o??.oS2'32i?^^«-2J 



a 
o 

tc 



S • J<! • S = -^ ^ •- • -if 



0) C 






«•«£ 



tt 




CO 

O 
Eh 



220 






<t>d 



•-^ -^ -s 



o 

c/2 



^ ^ ^ 

op ^00 



^ St 



3 



7t 



WOX 



SSK%S3^:!:S:::38SSgSS^a8 ;8ISgS93SS|l;9SS 



-jaoflvaji 


gt.«^g^^««o 


• • 
• 


i«TH«e«D 


• 


*8J0i|aijp 


• • • 

• • • 


• 


*udi|aijp 
nojpopaj 


• • • • 

• • • 


• • 

• • 


• • • 

• • • 

• • • 


• • • • 


'U9i|a|jp 


^M^f ioooe««-ie9 

• 
• 


• 
• 


• MOO"** 

• 
• 
• 


• 90^»M«ieTH^A'i«oeo«9 

• 



XlWox 



;:ssg3*5:*53«'«S'=-«8S;2:S5;s i-'sssssg^assss 



*W0X 






*p9ai«) 

tJ938«aXl 






lOOt 



'8J&i{aijp 
9uv;saoo 



lO r-i rH T-1 r-l 8* »-• 09^ »-• 



CO»g««jH«^g5jJJgOO 



*iuai{a|jp 
I«0|poiJai 



^ ' ^^ ; J ^ T< €0 S «tT< 



• • • 



• • 



*sj9i{afjp 

9!)«I9pOI{ 



K-fHaoe9eta««fHo^ooa»«s»e«io^^o •00Q090t-iO'«e««^^afeK*«»<o 






^O *Ot>Q090t-lO'«g««^^afeg«»<0 



')a9a;)sq« 



ioeoiooooo»<Dio-^iOr-iiOi-4SDfe«io>oa»K- ;'O®S'^*o<0fi^^^£fc" 



3 

o 



1^ of 




321 






9 






• • 



eoet 'v-ir-iiHt-evTHOiaiMvH . •v-iet •fHfHioeeetMiOTHfH 



SI 



k>«Neo •iH^^'<«i 'iF^ .MfH 






• • 






.fH^^ •r^e* 



§ 



Oi^t*'i|iC«G>ti-HaOCOOOtCO^ •^<DGt • -OtOOftOiHOQOM 



• • • • 

• • • a 



8S' 



a'-8;S««;3S«S;S;::S 






r^eveoa 



SSS$«8SS3(ISSSi^ 



$:SSSSSSSS^S9SSl:SS 






e9e»«D •«-! 






ooio«eeao>ocoj 



fto 'QO •^t-aot-ae«D^fe«ga»«D 






0^9* t^ntH^Ct OiOi 00-^99 iOe* •T-"00»H 1-1 •eB^M09«DfHT4 



• • 






«oet«Daoio<D<Da»aOTH 



^S^^^^S'^S^S*^' 



I 









s 



^^s^^se^ssg^s^ss 



s;s;s:sibSSS9&S9igs 




222 






CO 
00 



^ 

^ 






«Ki 



'k. 





^ 




•^ 




2* 




Q 




00 




«» . 


1-H 

• 


1 


o 


4 
« 


^' 


?>, 


^ 

& 


'^ 




Q 


K 


S 


Q 


SJ' 


OQ 


•9^ 






55 



Si 

I 






% 






»^ 



00^ 












00 












SS53$S$?SSSSS^S|9^S(^S 






B 

5 






«;:|'^ssg'=°|*ssss«5: 



Q 
o 






to 1-1 O r^ t-i ri 

of 






ss^3^$^sssgs;:9g^s^sss 



of 



B 



s«5J;:ss*°;:;:g5SiSsa8^ssSc3 



to T-» O 



B 
o 



8g?:2:§K5;Si9*gS2S8l:S°°J5SS 



o5 »-« CO Ti "^ 



3 

O 









OQ 

a 

Eh 



O 
O 



*^ X ^- 
1— fcfl — 

« 2) c 



CD 

to • o'u9^ ; «— • ft) 03 

eS «3 5 3 = S^ = OS S 

5 3 = C C-Ji S-S So 

OS o8ja^-c-;3 o o « = 







223 



S«SS^^SS5S9 



ss;9SS^S£$3Ss;' 



1— t-50»o»«ot-i-i 



e« 



fe«aoaaoeoi-<e«Ti« 






^S^S^SS^iS' 



^SS^S^SS3S99gl 






3S 



i S 1-1 r-i m So M 9 



SgS5S^SISSS8S8S2« 



09 



SS^^SSSi?^^^ 



«assgj;:9gss;s;5?5S 



of 



S55Sgjssg;:g* 



'^SSS^^SSSSSSS 






SS5S^$SSgSg!SS§l 



of 



s 






CD 

d 






««» -s? 2 p E ay's o : fl 'a :•= : „■ £P • =5 = 

i "S 2 S jg-S^i-^ rt » o 3 H s«2s iog z fc » >.%, o v 



2 



234 



a 

o 



'SSS 



^fH«oo9ooK-ie«v4oao 'oo 



8g**;S8*|*8S*S*5 



% 



i 



5 






th^«hoo'<«i^ -lOfHW :M'^£;<^ : :«•' ;»owg{THfc-ap»-i«« .^o*^»r-i 



aOfHMiO«H«D 









^«.gj^ 




fHTH .M^M • 



iea»coAv-it*covHi-it-i«o 






lO0tT-l( 



e« 






gJ|00«-HO^g«gJ5;^«^^ 



lo^iot-o •Qoeoett-eoe««Qt-^>o 



g«^jgt.g 



«gt.^«5^C0 .»S|0;3fc.gt.gi05gg5t-©«g 



^ "fe 



<» 



5 



t-MMM^OO .OOTHf* . ;'<'05 



ooMfH . •a»«peoao«-i«Dfe«QQ 'lO^ ^lO 'OO 



SS :^ 



I 



^OtiHOrHtO eOMfHiOMlOI^MOIflt^ 



s< 



M^geocofltg -9 •op'OiOetMO 



s 



a 



3 

o 






r-lMMa^ 



^lO 



to eoeoet oo 



Mtoeoeo 












09 

a 



o 
o 






>^ 



225 



aoe9«0ri<ooifr-oiofe« 









f 



.too • 


lO 


t- 





otfe-iO'^ 



^iHOV 



M 



oocNioieeOfH 



»-l -^T-lt-OO 



aeeo 



v^eo 



fe«iOiO<D 



"« <0 "^ rH t4 tH 00 M « « OO rH 



S 



^eo^T4 



eooaoot-ioiOQoevfc-iOiOTH 



•8S 



loaoi^ 



fHf-l'<l«0^ 



OOtHOOtHiO 



^ 



1-if-HMe* ei^oo • «i-ie«^e«e«i-i«««ofc-fHao>Oi-4 



a» -th •iHeot>a«r-i< 



i-ie9ioe« 



eo-^ov^ootzjoooiao 






o«d«i-i 



ss8s*3S8asa" 



I 




_ _ Jdjd^a P S^5 O 9 CD 08 08 OS « >»%, 



OQ 

o 



u 



226 



ec 



Q 

o 



■w 



V 



a> 



^U 



Co 



^•cC> 






eor-ii-<eoiOi^^Mt- 



*H « »-< 



o»et iHOk 



^•28 



t-io to coget goo^«i 




a»o)0>o^^io>o^ioa»ao>oe2AM^aoiH •'«d*a6gQoe9coooeoco^Ofc«oo<^ 



»HCO -Olr-tTH 



eo-^o* 



OOt-t 



o»K-fHet 





: :2 


riM 


.^ : 



3 

B 

a 

a 





^•^ . 




f-i 






^Ht^^H 














;5 




e« 


S : 


>i-^ . 



1 

a 



« 
» 






^^ ^^ ^^ ^^ ^w* 



g 

•g. 



*H *H rH «-• 1-t Of T^O* T-l 'i-tf^ rHr^rHOt lO rH 00 1-4 



o 

p 



S52^SS5g^^"SS"'^SS'^^Sg5 






00 

s 

o 

3 



1-t 



«SS"»SES'*S8!f:SSSS 



3 

o 



,^— «l»^^Q»Q'^is«Qt-oo^»H^QQaO'^ .OGiflQ«-400QO>oeit«e4e993^«e«D 
iiovt^t'iocoiooboiooo-^^icobeoiot- •£*ooao^5ofr-093rHQocooaO(B9 



03 

a 



O 



•••m«-B •• • ••••• £*•• •••• 

>»0 2 § OS 2 S C C-Q 3 S S • -SnOoSSg • •£. O $ 2^ S 08,5 o © 2 

<]<<noQOOQOOoPl::)P4P>^l^P^00mnH9Ml-3l-3!a^>^SK:z400O0O 



227 






.^»ec3g|c« 



<^Q0ia(pe4ecT-i 



'iSS 






CSf 



lo^ocoooeooi 



lOiOOO 



00 o) o< ^ t- >o 00 ay*-4 






"^« .tH 



fH-^ .et 



• eteoei 













•TH 


00 ; 


1H 


•iHl-l 





s 



• O;ooo0i-40eo9l;o^ 



iK-9ie4<DiOfcrt-a»«0iO-^e< 



0* 



lOfc- •OOCOO-^lO'^t-'* 

• 


CO «e Of « ©» t- w «e lo^o t- ©t th 


1 


ogt-«^egogo.5;^«o 


«^8S^::S'«S'^S2S 


1 
CO' 


• 

• 
• 
• 


§ 

et 




»-< 1-» T^ 


or 


















S^:S 



00 



d 

2 

to 



o 

00 to 

« d 




x3 di^ d 00 



5 >»») 

«4 03 a> 



O V 



3 

o 






228 



« 



^ 



10 



< 

n 

m 



• a*Ti»H 



•vHoiMeov^coatvHeo 



' 00^ 09 V 00 



;g'^'^ 



*i;iniy 



•wpaii 



• fHi-l^etM'^QOT-tfH 



■00 



■ 69 0)10 



•0»Av4 



S^ 



o»oaaot-eO'« 



>>oioco^eo«oao«o^e9K- 



*gI9;8IS 



1^ ^HTi Ti e« 



> eo ii* 09 00 00 CO fr* 00 •-^ 4o CO 



'uaq!)aig 



«i-t 



OiO<Deofr-*H«ee«iOi-ii-4e9-^o»eO'^ofr- 



fc-06ioeoaoi 



;s' 



'uaq^OH 



eo*-4«D«ooaet<D£»e»r-iK-«0QoaQ'^eo*-4 



S2:: 



i-iK-ceooao-^eoT-ieo 



e5g-g««^o«ggjg 



'U9q:(«j 



lO^^OtOtf 



oc^-^o»-^«««0fet£-io 



«oeocoioioeoe<a»e-<oio 



'Udinompiituo 



iHOtTH 



«-i«^eo9i -iHeo 



CO 'OOOS^fH^-i 



iietoi-i 



'8J9invjpatMO 



M 



• ^0OC9 • ^H tH 



etot 



»-it^ ■ •e««oiH 



3 

O 



0»C2QO^:a^ri5S»fiOJQOO»QS«OOOQOjH3i; 

•Q@e>a6aD«0M35i0T->t-TPc09a0Ti«iSt-o 



1^00 T-i CO ®T-ieo 



>o 



>o 



*» 



GO 

H 

P 
O 
O 



^:S 




229 



• e«0ae«i-i 



■ iH -00 -fH 



• e« 



■ e»iOfH 



• THOt 



>eo 



S 



• « 



• OJ-^Wi-l 



ot 



• TiT-ie* 



.•^f-l .TH 



OCtH 



00 






iOiHOo»o»Heogoeo^^^>ot- 



S 



00 <0 r-< t> « lO ;0 eo Ot 00 0» «0 «0 ri 00 •<D'^t->Oe0T-i;^fc-r-itO9»K-tO 
1-10* I-* iH(5<t-i • CO 1-t i-« 



gl 



oocorH^oroooQOieoiooieo^o •K-OQOt-o»e«eooTi*a»;Hiafc* 

C>«'V '-^ W r-i ^ CO 1-t rH tH i-» • i-»T^ Wi-tr^ CO 



^ 



ooe«a»oo^cQiHOt-eo •o(«Oi>«'« • -^ to <d e« eo e< co «o ;o -^ os eo eo 



eteo 



»-«io 



I CO 



e«et 



^»-i 



eoG«TH 



S 



• otto 


TllO 






• ^4 




1 





»-l •iHtHO* 



• 0« 



to 
to 



^i-<r-iJ3»^^ooeootoabtoorii5i5 

0<»-i(N rl ^-Irl i-» Tl 



§§So^^$^SgS^SSS§ 



"* 

s 

ef 



a 



rt O (U ay 

B S b> ki 

oooo 



en c 



8 



tic© S 
6 to 2 









^ ^ ■-« 

CO 



a 

*< 08 ,\ 



2'S o 

d 

0) 



3.2 



(B 



d 



a a 



■2i 
: (B bo 
<u a 






Q O Ph OTQ K K CO CC QQ QQ OQ OQ OQ OQ C» E-i E-* P ^ ^ ^ ;> »$ r^ 



5 

o 






■oil 

lis 



^1* 



•Slit 



KijB^aai aesq 



BjqOAIll] 



-iadjoiSfiflmuiwcii 



gSKS^SseS^SS^II^KSSiS ;3Sg£^?SS! 



■-2='S'-"2SS3*^Sa225a :S-=SS"2; 



:S£SSS :^'°=S''ES|;SS''SS; jSSS^SSSSSg 



tg5|3S5SS^S3|SS£PSg .SS||SS8|S3 



;S^!SSS1SS%:!:S?Sgg;3Slg :£Sii;£l2SSI 






illlilllllHliillililJWIIJI^ 



231 



oi»dlSotoSaoiae4S»c5Seot-tr"vo» 



QOOOO 



rt *H T-i 






otooofoa 



iooe«eoiO«ooo)<oio^r-iot 



s^g^^sjgs»«ss;s^s§?^s 



«SSS^S"StS§8^SS" 






r^r-i 0« T-i W 






.1 






s ! 






Ti eo w i-H a<i 



§§&3^^SSgSf:S8SS 



2 

of 




o 
Eh 



1' 



■i ^ I 
11 « 






4jqinno "WO J, 



iisjHd 10 jsquinn 



|TSSSS$"83S)S^SS83SS!S 



:»8S3SE;SSS£s3 



3SS3a£"£3SSSi|gSSfflBS :SS^?33gl!gg? 



P25S5S"SSS5SS3i5S3SSS 



55:S5SJSg2iSS 



|SS55SSSS2eS3|S5;SPS :P||3|£g3|£2 



liilliiilll|isilirfl|«p||lij 



233 












^eSS^^»SS<<<STi<eo^^T-4 



o»<5jg 



'S 






iH lO ^ 1^ to 99 ri OO • >0 0* T-« 00 00 '^ • • €« 00 •^e« OOO) t»i-4 t*'^^ 



• • 



00 • . .lo • • •«to • •e< e« -e* • .1-1 . . 

• •• ••• •• •••••• • ••> •• 

• •• ••• •• ••••••• • •• •• 

• • ••• • •••• •• • • •• 



9 



eoa»eo«Oi-i«ooit>'d«io>ooooo;o 

r^OO r^r^r^Oir-^ i-4 1-4 



00 O e« «0 fr- 1-1 GD QO '^ t» QO 0« "d* 



50eo»pTHQooit-»03>(»e»Tj<TH»^ 
o»t-ooco;o<<<oSoaoo^•(090S4 



1-it-oa ^«i-ieioo»^t-oo 



s 



S^SSSSSSSSSSSSS;: .'-838«SS2§$2saBS5S 






e*9OQoaooai0)®;Q'^Q^-^coQ 

J2i-ij;mJi-i00CC©«50DOO»-<»5«O 

Wf»-lOI 1^ 1-11^ T^ 1-1 



$$BS^$gsgsg!agS3 



of 






.rcj 



«8 S S fc^ 08 -tt T" 







5 

o 



II 


MuiiBop puss3«pio 


234 

SESaS65S=555JS-SSsa .«SJ=Ss8-|3e 


|0i 
II 


■pD«q«L"1 JO 




■paii(linq;o)i»nnw 

■piiuqn^qBasiJinuH 


...-„ ,. : ;._.,. :„. ^ ,.. :. ,. ,.,. 


w— ssia 


•::in;:i:M::H!rM;i=;:;:l':i 


P 

= 1 


-Hi JO niSJJ^IllKl'!^ 


— -"— "-^--'"^■" 


aai°?»SE 


"!;:;;-;- M ;:" I ;:: i"- : i ; ;s r 


?.3 


■pooqpnRJ MjpuioH 


" i i : i : : i : : ; i : i ■ ; ; r : ; ;s ; ; ; ; :s ; : 






--pMiMii-iinnr'riir- 


li 

11 

jji 

ill 
1 ~ 


'^^rosit-i 


iS" ;"- ; 1 ; : :" :- ;— := ;— E |" — :5=- 


w;r,;a5«„ 


__.. , ; -_ «=«=„ .-3 .„ = g-.-„,,g^« 


„^ 




1 





S-S-""??-^*^-! :=5£;»5' 



335 



S5|3^SiiS7z?rsS :SS£^SS5&S!:SS3 : 



''■ijiiitliiliijiliitiif^ I 



Il 




asp pus 33. p[0 


234 




paiiqgn 


^sa'aoiuu 


--::::;::";-:":::;::---;:=-" 


Is 


■p|| 


snr 


iTOiauo 


"""- :^ , ;«-««» ;^-= , ;«^ ^-» ;- ;g»3 


■po 


"qpTq™ 




•:■::; i: i : i :: i i : i I'i : i " i : i i is :i 


51 


-BIII01U9IJ 


dDBdiq 


=--"":--:-*"i-":M-» ■!•-!"• 


■pD0iipiii|3 aaaiODion 


" i ;;;;;- i- M r- ;;:;;»- i :; ;^ r 




■pDoqpKiiD 


l[l«p.(q 
SS131DDH 


"U;;:M;:i;;::::;-:::^::i;i=:i 


5<^ 


'po. 


qpiiqa 


iaijnioH 1 ■;■:;:■::: : : : ; : : : : : : :- 




'pu 


psnop 


;?„.H 


=- ;- i ; i ; ;" r ;"- r ;"'= i""" ;==' 


■po 


aiSHi]H.4a[|! 


=_..^^^„„..™^.,^..,-..,.,.. 


i3 


■IWOJ, 




•Pi 




^ 







235 



5)« CO « r-i C^ ri eCW ri i-((N CO !-• 1^ 



'*S8SI*52^*SSgS» 



e« 



OOi-t'^ 


. . . .y-ti-H 

• • • • 

• • • • 
• • • 


?t 


• 


• 1^1^ 


1H 


• 
• 


•Mrl 0009 

• • 

• • 

• • 


• 

• • 

• < 


7S 






• 


• 


t- 












eO'^QO 


• 
• 


rH r-i »-« ^H • 

• 

• • 

• 


• 
• 
• 


• 
• 
• 


• 
• 


• 
• 
• 
• 


• 


• 
• 


• 


i 


• ■ • 

• • • 

• • • 


; ; ; ; :®* 




• 


• • • 

• • • 

• • • 

• • • 


• 
• 
• 
• 


• 
• 


• CO 

• 
• 
• 


• • • 

• • • 

• • • 


• ■ 

• • 

• • 

• • 


?: 









I o «o 1-1 tn o» 00 OS 00 00 00 '^d* -oo •'^t-toeii-i . -^ eo -^ n oo f-i( 






• • ^1 • • • 

• • • • • 

• • • • • 


• • * r^ 

• • • • • • 

• • • • ■ • 


• • • • 

• • • • 




• • • « 

• • 








• • • • .^H 


• • • • • 


^ • • • • 

• • • • 

• • • • 


• • • • • 

• • • • 


• • • • 

• • ■ ■ 


l-H 


s 





• • • 

• • • • 

• ■ • • 



•OtrH .©» 



•00 9) 






•CO 



t- 



i-lOOOO-^ . rH C* i-H ■^ lO JO ri ;0 iH ©» • ix ri iH 00 iH (<• 09 00 •'^ -iH 



eo 



34 i-H o <-i 00 >n 00 >o CO o 9) o) e« •'4< •eoiA'^«Aet • t» i^ ;o «o oo i^ «-• 



00 






CO 



• • • 



S) 



aj 



CO 



> a> s 



as - X «- 



e3 o 

O *^ 

oooooo;iHO*»5;w 



as 

0) XI 

S a; 



5-^ 



23 



c •'2 • • 



• • • 



« 3 c ja 



'W' »ri -A 



j2-^-J rf (U O fl 



a 



;5 O 



• c3 a 



a 






2 • » 

ts/0 c> 

C IX) jC 
'^ _ fi 



a 



9S aSj£j3 a 






5 

o 
Eh 



, ,g,,^.Dgl«, 



=S|S853!2g»ag2g">K 



11 IM||IWiiipi|ill«lliftMIIH^ 



[avaia^aoSn^S^SusK&ZoSooBS 



237 






i^i-i<O00 



>«ot>iHeoet -et t-ntoiooototoceo^i-ieooo 



«0 «~l -^ « ^ Ot 1-1 ;0 00 



■ • 



ooioe* •iHv-i«oi^iH -t-i-i 



• ^'^eiei 



.00'*i-i 



• • • 

• • • 



>^«-iM«-i 



^«oe«o -i-ieoaot-co • m ao lO eo oo ^d* a >o lo eo i-i «o o« 



2^ <*• »-* ^M i^CO AOO 



«?5^SS«;:Sg?8§i§?«* 



3 



'M9» 



• ••• • ••ta »• 



§$ 



eto«'^^v-i 



• • I 

• • • 



■ iHoo ©» 1-t lo iH e« o« 1^ 1-t 1^ 



«oeoe«e«eoo« -i^ooih •rie^io '^loooi^i^ 



^ 



et 



»-lO«'*i-t 



■ • • 



1^ lo et «-• 1^ CO • 'co-^ • • 



«oo«aooteoeo • t* -^ ao ot « rt e« e< t- oo eo o« -^ 




5 

o 



238 



00 

a 

o 



»Ka 






^ ^ ? 



a 

o 



£ 



s 









;2:«'^^ffi8S;a^S5^« 




<N fr« rt lO 00 e< ri lo eo e« iH ao o o» 00 ri* CO e« 



00 00 00 ri ^ e< 00 9) CO U3 ^ to a» o ▼-• ei 

00 fO 



I- 

p > 



^ 



©100 • e« CO 0* iH r^ Tt ©» 00 1-1 1- 1- •^ 1^ 



"^00 



e^ o) ^ o) 00 ot a» •^'«4*fr-g|oaoi-ie» 
00 ^ 



IS. 



ao>a;oQOfr--^oot--^o;coooo^^^^^l^ 



oo;oe4QiQe«u3QQcDOcD«-ii-ii-ic«eo 
«i-.^i5a5oofr-«>t-QO»5fr-05ioioo, 



of 



5 

o 
Eh 



0( 1-t rH »^'«r »^ 



b-QCOc900)t>'^aooc«o<ooaoaDio 

t-^t-«0O00C*^04r-n-i»-i»-«»-«i0»H 
1-100 i-H 90 1-t 00 G< 1-1 Ot «-■ 



GO 

e 

Eh 



O 
O 






a> 






OS 



cs s B 



« O s 

ft) G ^ 

J=S O 



'W t- CO 

S 03 V 

5i 3:^ 



•a •© 



«2g 



5 © fl 

SoSgo 



a 
o 



C * 2 s o t. a <y^.5 o.i; «$ o 









2 08^ O « 2 



5^ " 






239 



lo -^ 00 to e< e« ^ (N • 

ri !-• 55 ri ri 3« 1-t ; 






^gojj^g^e* 


S 

^ 




COOOj^OO^rlO'^^fr-'^UJ 


eo 


r^ 


•C«Og5©l«C*t-^r1 






cot-'* 


o» -eoeooG^ 


»-< 








Q03Q'^(NrHqQ«OQ0^9SlQ£ 




QDCCOlOQOlOO'-iOia 



soooo5t-^cooi30fc-®S6D 2; 





• 1^ • • 


• 
• 


• eo bo • 






s 


>. «• 






