Author. 


****/> 


o 
o 


*  *  *  * 


Title 


517 
.5 


Imprint. 


16-^7372-2         tro 


•  •        i  •  ■  I 
'  '  \\  \ 
'     !    !  ■: 

•■"'•.- 

'  :  :  rv)vv>v*  iJHA\V  ' 

■  i     ■      \   • . .  j  !  •  ; 


The  21st 
Missouri 
Regiment 
Infantry   ;! 
Veteran    ! ; 
Volunteers 


! 


r-"r  /  '  <  >  • 

I  i  J ,  i  1 1  • 

limy 


i  j.i  t  .  ? 


.  , 


ill 


The 


2Ist  Missouri  Regiment 


Infantry  Veteran  Volunteers. 


Historical  Memoranda. 


COMPILED    BY 

N.  D.  Starr  and  T.  W.  Holman. 


July,  1899. 

roberts  &  roberts,  printers, 

fort  madison,  iowa. 


Fs 


■  5 
■21  jt 


1 


EXPLANATORY  PREFACE. 


AT  the  close  of  the  war  and  after  their  discharge  the 
members  of  the  21st  Missouri  Regiment  scattered 
over  Missouri  and  other  States  of  the  Union.  No 
effort  was  made  to  keep  the  organization  alive  until  1888, 
when  T.  W.  Holman,  responding  to  the  whisperings  of 
memory  for  a  sight  and  hand  clasp  of  the  old  comrades  of 
'6i-'66,  on  his  own  responsibility  published  a  call,  in 
August,  1888,  for  a  meeting  of  the  survivors  at  Arbela, 
Mo.  The  result  was  a  large  gathering  of  the  veterans 
and  the  organization  of  the  21st  Missouri  Infantry  Veteran 
Volunteers  Association.  From  that  date  to  the  present 
time  annual  meetings  have  been  held.  At  the  meeting  in 
1896,  Messrs.  T.  W.  Holman  and  N.  D.  Starr  were  made 
Regimental  Historians,  to  compile  an'1  perpetuate  the 
history  of  the  regiment.  At  the  next  meeting,  in  1897, 
these  comrades  made  a  partial  report,  and  at  the  Edina, 
Mo.,  meeting  in  1898,  submitted  the  result  of  their  labors 
in  manuscript  form.  A  motion  was  then  made  and  carried 
that  T.  W.  Holman  continue  the  labor  and  revise  and 
prepare  the  manuscript  for  publication  and  have  it  printed 
for  the  use  of  the  Association.  In  accordance  with  the 
foregoing  instructions  the  succeeding  pages  are  respectfully 
submitted. 

T.  W    Holman. 


lyf. 


DAVID  MOORE, 
Colonel  21st  Regiment  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols. 


THE  CALL  TO  ARMS. 


Organization  of  the  ist  and  2d  North  Missouri  Regiments, 
June  and  July,  1861. — Campaigning  in  North  Missouri 
During  the  Summer  of  1861. — Order  Consolidating  the 
ist  and  2d  North  Missouri  Regiments,  Thereafter 
Known  as  the  21st  Regiment,  Missouri  Infantry  Vols. 


AFTER  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln  in  i860  many 
political  disturbances  and  difficulties  arose  and  he 
was  inaugurated  during  a  time  of  overwhelming 
excitement.  The  government  of  Missouri  at  that  time 
was  in  the  hands  of  those  who  were  clamoring  for  seces- 
sion from  the  Union  of  States.  Claiborne  F.  Jackson,  who 
had  been  trained  in  the  political  school  of  "  States  Rights," 
was  elected  Governor.  Early  in  the  spring  of  1861  Camp 
Jackson  was  established  in  St.  Louis  and  troops  for  State 
service  were  mustered  at  that  point. 

The  Southern  states,  one  after  another,  withdrew  from 
the  Union  and  on  April  the  nth,  1861,  Fort  Sumter  was 
fired  on  by  the  Confederates.  This  was  the  bugle  call  to 
arms,  and  President  Lincoln's  proclamation  for  75,000  men 
to  serve  for  ninety  days  followed.  Frank  P.  Blair,  after- 
wards Major  General,  received  authority  from  the  general 
government  to  organize  and  muster  into  service  troops  for 
the  prosecution  of  the  war  for  the  preservation  of  the 
Union. 


The  muster  of  troops  for  the  state  was  very  irregular 
and  was  the  cause  afterwards  of  considerable  confusion. 
Some  men  were  enlisted  for  the  war,  some  for  one  year, 
then  for  three  years;  some  to  serve  in  the  state  only,  while 
others  were  enlisted  for  service  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
state  and  others  for  the  southern  part.  The  army  thus 
organized  was  one  of  questionable  authority.  The  Gov- 
ernor maintained  that  the  general  government  had  no 
right  to  invade  the  state,  and  the  latter  hesitated  in  regard 
to  sending  troops  into  a  state  not  in  open  revolt  against 
the  government. 

During  this  period  of  hesitation  and  confusion  Col.  D. 
Moore  was  commissioned  Colonel  and  received  authority 
to  enlist  and  organize  the  ist  North  Missouri  Volunteers; 
and  Col.  H.  M.  Woodyard  was  given  like  authority  to 
organize  the  2d  North  Missouri  Volunteers.  In  the  sum- 
mer and  fall  of  1861  these  troops,  acting  separately,  held 
North  Missouri  against  the  Confederates  under  Cols.  Porter 
and  Green.  The  anomalous  conditions  then  existing  in 
the  state  are  explained  by  the  position  of  the  Confederates, 
who  claimed  that  they  were  resisting  armed  invasion  of  the 
State  by  the  Federal  Government. 

THE    FIRST   NOTE   OF    DEFIANCE. 

About  May  30,  1861,  Col.  Moore  received  authority 
from  Gen.  Lyons  to  raise  a  regiment  for  the  Federal  ser- 
vice, taking  the  field  at  the  head  of  ten  men.  Clear  and 
ringing  as  a  bugle  blast  he  sounded  the  following  chal- 
lenge, which  was  posted  in  hand  bills  over  Northeast 
Missouri  and  Southern  Iowa: 

The  undersigned  is  authorized  to  raise  a  company  of 
volunteers  in  the  county,  for  the  Union  service.  All  who 
are  willing  to  fight  for  their  homes,  their  country  and  the 
flag  of  the  glorious  Union,  are  invited  to  join  him,  bring- 
ing with  them  their  arms  and  ammunition.  Until  the 
Government  can  aid  us  we  must  take  care  of  ourselves. 
Secessionists  and  rebel  traitors  desiring  a  fight  can  be 
accommodated  on  demand.  D.    MOORE. 

(The  above  is  a  verbatim  copy. — T.  W.  H.) 


7 
Cols.  Moore  and  Woodyard,  with  their  commands,  were 
so  continuously  engaged  with  the  enemy  either  in  skir- 
mishing, scouting  or  fighting,  that  no  time  was  left  them 
for  looking  after  recruits.  Hence  when  the  time  came  to 
be  regularly  received  into  service  both  regiments  were 
short  of  the  requisite  number  of  men.  Consequently  the 
two  regiments  were  consolidated  into  what  is  known  as 
the  21st  Regiment  of  Missouri  Volunteers,  by  the  follow- 
ing order: 

Headquarters  State  of  Missouri,  ^ 

Adjutant  General's  Office.  V 

St.  Louis,  December  31,  1861.     J 

SPECIAL  ORDERS,  NO.   15. 

1st.  The  battalion  of  Missouri  Volunteers  heretofore 
known  as  1st  North  Missouri  Regiment,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Col.  D.  Moore,  and  the  battalion  of  Missouri  Vol- 
unteers heretofore  known  as  the  2d  North  Missouri  Regi- 
ment, under  the  command  of  Col.  H.  M.  Woodyard,  are 
hereby  consolidated  into  a  regiment  to  be  hereafter  known 
and  designated  as  the  21st  Regiment  of  Missouri  Volun- 
teers. 

2d.  Col.  D.  Moore  is  hereby  appointed  Colonel,  and 
Col.  H.  M.  Woodyard  is  hereby  appointed  Lieutenant- 
Colonel,  of  the  regiment  thus  formed. 

By  order  of  the  Commander  in  Chief. 

Chester  Harding,  Jr. 

Adjutant  General. 

As  a  result  of  the  above  order  the  two  regiments  were 
consolidated  on  the  1st  day  of  February,  1862,  and  were 
mustered  into  the  service  of  the  United  States  by  Lieut. 
Col.  Fetterman,  as  the  21st  Missouri  Infantry  Volunteers, 
with  the  following  field  officers: 

D.  Moore,  Colonel. 

H.  M.  Woodyard,  Lieutenant  Colonel. 

B.  B.  King,  Major. 

Charles  C.  Tobin,  Adjutant. 

The  ten  companies  of  the  regiment  had  the  following 
officers: 


8 

Company  A — Charles  Yust,  Captain. 

Henry  Menn,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Edwin  Turner,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  B — Joseph  Story,  Captain. 

L.  D.  Woodruff,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Edward  Fox,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  C — Simon  Pearce,  Captain. 

William  Lester,  ist  Lieutenant. 

T.  H.  Richardson,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  D — N.  W.  Murrow,  Captain. 

Henry  McGonigle,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Louis  J.  Ainslee,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  E — Geo.  W.  Fulton,   Captain. 

T.  M.  McQuoid,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Wm.  J.  Pulus,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  F — Joseph  T.  Farris,  Captain. 

Alex.  F.  Tracy,  ist  Lieutenant. 

F.  A.  Whitmore,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  G — T.  H.  Roseberry,  Captain. 

E.  R.  Blackburn,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Daniel  R.  Allen,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  H — Jno.  H.  Cox,  Captain. 

Peter  S.  Washburn,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Wm.  P.  Rickey,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company    I  — Wm.  Harle,  Captain. 

Joseph  Oliver,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Hudson  Rice,  2d  Lieutenant. 
Company  K — Frederick  Leeser,  Captain. 

A.  D.  Starkweather,  ist  Lieutenant. 

Geo.  M.  Davis,  2d  Lieutenant. 

It  was  in  Canton  where  the  regiment  was  mustered  into 
service  and  about  the  15th  of  February  it  left  that  place 
and  inarched  by  way  of  LaGrange  and  Palmyra  to  Hanni- 
bal, Mo.,  where  several  weeks  were  spent  in  training  in 
military  duties.  On  the  28th  of  March  orders  came  to  go 
to  the  front.  Camp  equipments  were  soon  packed  and  the 
regiment  on  the  way  to  St.  Louis.  After  a  brief  stop  there 
it    was    taken   by   boat   to  Savannah,    Tennessee.     This 


9 

place  was  General  Grant's  headquarters,  who  was  then 
making  the  plans  which  resulted  in  the  fall  of  Corinth. 
The  regiment  reported  to  Gen.  Grant  and  was  sent  imme- 
diately to  the  front  and  assigned  to  the  ist  Brigade,  6th 
Division,  Army  of  West  Tennessee,  under  command  of 
Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss. 

The  men  were  soon  to  see  fighting  in  earnest  now. 
They  were  on  the  ground  where  the  memorable  battle  of 
Shiloh  was  fought  a  few  days  after  their  arrival,  to- wit: 
the  6th  and  yth  of  April,  1862,  and  on  account  of  their 
advanced  position  they  were  the  first  to  become  engaged 
with  the  enemy.  The  regiment  suffered  heavily  in  the 
fight,  losing  one  officer  and  thirty  men  killed,  with  four 
officers  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  men  wounded.  Three 
officers  and  sixty-eight  men  were  also  taken  prisoners.  It 
was  here  that  the  gallant  Maj.  King  fell  mortally  wounded. 
The  reports  of  the  battle  by  Cols.  Moore  and  Woodyard, 
published  here,  give  a  full  account  of  the  part  taken  by 
the  regiment: 

Cols.  Moore  and  Woodyard' s  Reports. 

Headquarters  2ist  Mo.   Infantry,  "] 
6th  Division,  Army  of  the   Tennessee,  > 

April  iith,  1862.  J 
SIR: — In  pursuance  of  the  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  B.  M. 
Prentiss,  commanding  6th  Division,  Army  of  West  Ten- 
nessee, I,  on  Saturday,  (April  5th,)  proceeded  to  a  recon- 
noisance  on  the  front  of  the  line  of  Gen.  Prentiss'  division, 
and  on  the  front  of  Gen.  Sherman's  division.  My  com- 
mand consisted  of  three  companies  from  the  21st  Missouri 
Regiment,  companies  commanded  by  Capt's  Cox,  Harle 
and  Pearce.  A  thorough  reconnoisance  over  the  extent  of 
three  miles  failed  to  discover  the  enemy.  Being  unsuc- 
cessful, as  stated,  I  returned  to  my  encampment  about  7 
p.  m.  On  Sunday  morning,  the  6th  inst.,  at  about  6 
o'clock,  being  notified  that  the  picket  guard  of  the  ist 
Brigade,  6th  Division,  had  been  attacked  and  driven  in,  by 
order  of  Col.  Everett  Peab'ody,  commanding  the  ist  Bri- 
gade, 6th  Division,  I  advanced  with  five  companies  of  my 
command  a  short  distance  from  the  outer  line  of  our  en- 
campment. I  met  the  retreating  pickets  of  the  ist  Bri- 
gade bringing  in  their  wounded.     Those  who  were  able  for 


IO 

duty  were  ordered  and  compelled  to  return  to  their  posts, 
and  learning  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  in  force  I  ad- 
vanced with  the  remaining  companies  of  my  regiment, 
which  companies  having  joined  me  I  ordered  an  advance 
and  attacked  the  enemy,  who  was  commanded  by  Brig. 
Gen.  Ruggles,  of  the  Rebel  army.  A  terrific  fire  was 
opened  upon  us  from  the  whole  front  of  the  four  or  five 
regiments  forming  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  which  my 
gallant  soldiers  withstood  during  thirty  minutes,  until  I 
had  communicated  the  intelligence  of  the  movement 
against  us  to  my  commanding  General.  About  this  time, 
being  myself  severely  wounded,  the  bone  of  the  leg  below 
my  knee  being  shattered,  I  was  compelled  to  retire  from 
the  field,  leaving  Lieut.  Col.  Woodyard  in  command. 

D.  Moore, 
Colonel  21st  Mo.  Volunteers. 
To  Capt.  Henry  Binmore, 
Act.  A.  G.,  6th  Division, 
Army  of  West  Tennessee. 

Headquarters  2ist  Mo.  Infantry,  1 
Pittsburg,  Tenn.,  April  12,  1862.  j 
SIR: — I  have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  morning 
of  the  6th  of  April,  before  sunrise,  Gen.  Prentiss  ordered 
Col.  Moore,  with  five  companies  of  our  regiment,  to  sus- 
tain the  pickets  of  the  12th  Michigan  Infantry.  The  Col. 
had  not  proceeded  more  than  half  a  mile  when  he  met  the 
pickets  coming  in  with  many  killed  and  wounded.  Col. 
Moore  immediately  dispatched  Lieut.  Menn  for  the  re- 
maining five  companies.  Gen.  Prentiss  being  in  camp, 
ordered  me  to  join  Col.  Moore.  We  marched  some  three 
hundred  yards  together,  after  I  formed  the  junction,  in  a 
nearly  westerly  direction,  flank  movement,  four  ranks, 
when  the  head  of  the  column  came  to  the  northwest  cor- 
ner (this  should  have  been  the  northeast  corner. — T.  W.  H.) 
of  a  cotton  field.  We  were  here  fired  upon  and  Col. 
Moore  received  a  severe  wound  in  the  right  leg,  and  Lieut. 
Menn  was  wounded  in  the  head.  I  then  assumed  com- 
mand of  the  regiment  and  formed  a  line  of  battle  on  the 
brow  of  a  hill,  on  the  cotton  field,  facing  nearly  west.  I 
held  this  position  for  some  half  or  three-quarters  of  an  hour 
and  kept  the  enemy  in  check.  He  fell  back  and  endea- 
vored to  outflank  me.  Discovering  this  I  moved  my  line 
to  the  north  of  the  field  again.  I  was  then  joined  by  four 
companies  of  the  16th  Wisconsin  Infantry.  Having  no 
field  officers  with  them  I  ordered  them  to  a  position  east  of 


II 

the  field,  and  as  soon  as  this  was  done  joined  them  with 
my  command.  This  line  of  battle  was  formed  facing 
south,  behind  a  small  incline,  enabling  my  men  to  load 
and  be  out  of  range  of  the  enemy's  fire.  The  position 
proved  a  strong  one  and  we  managed  to  hold  it  for  upward 
of  an  hour.  Finding  they  could  not  dislodge  us  the  enemy 
again  tried  to  outflank  us  and  deal  a  cross  fire.  I  then  fell 
back  in  good  order,  firing  as  we  did  so,  to  the  next  hill. 
Col.  Peabody,  commanding  the  ist  Brigade,  here  came  up 
with  the  25th  Missouri  Regiment.  I  requested  him  to 
bring  his  men  up  to  the  hill  on  our  right,  as  it  would 
afford  protection  to  his  men  and  be  of  assistance  to  my 
command.  He  did  so,  but  the  enemy  coming  by  heavy 
main  center  and  dealing  a  heavy  cross-fire  from  our  right 
and  left,  we  could  not  maintain  this  position  for  over  thirty 
minutes.  We  gradually  began  to  fall  back  and  reached 
our  tents,  when  the  ranks  got  broken  in  passing  through 
them.  We  endeavored  to  rally  our  men  in  the  rear  of  our 
tents  and  formed  as  well  as  could  be  expected,  but  my  men 
got  much  scattered,  a  great  many  falling  into  other  regi- 
ments, under  the  immediate  command  of  Gen.  Prentiss. 
Others  divided  to  other  divisions  but  continued  to  fight 
during  the  two  days. 

Falling  back  to  the  second  hill,  Maj.  Barnabas  B.  King 
received  a  mortal  wound  and  died  in  about  thirty  minutes. 
He  rendered  me  great  assistance  in  the  action,  cheering  on 
and  encouraging  my  men.  His  death  is  a  heavy  loss  to 
us.  He  was  ever  active,  energetic  and  at  his  post  of  duty, 
vigilant  in  attending  to  the  wants  of  the  men.  Adjt.  C. 
C.  Tobin,  who  is  now  missing,  also  proved  himself  very 
active  on  the  field.  He  is  supposed  to  be  a  prisoner  and 
taken  at  the  same  time  with  Gen.  Prentiss.  I  cannot  too 
highly  praise  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  my 
command,  and  of  the  companies  of  the  16th  Wisconsin, 
who  acted  in  concert  with  me. 

Respectfully  submitted, 

H.  M.  Woody ard, 
Lieut.  Col.  Com'd'g  21st  Mo.  Regt. 

To  Capt.  Henry  Binmore, 
Act.  A.  G.,  6th   Division, 
Army  of  West  Tennessee. 

To  go  back  to  the  battle  of  Shiloh: 

It   was  here   that  Gen.  Prentiss  was  captured  and  Gen. 


12 

Peabody  killed.  The  21st,  after  losing  Gen.  Prentiss,  was 
under  the  command  of  his  successor,  Gen.  McKean,  who 
then  directed  the  movements  of  the  6th  Division.  The 
1st  Brigade  of  the  6th,  to  which  the  21st  was  attached,  was 
commanded,  after  Gen.  Peabody,  by  Gen.  McArthur. 

The  gallant  21st  had  no  time  to  rest  and  recuperate  after 
its  severe  fight  at  Shiloh.  Under  Gen.  Halleck,  who  suc- 
ceeded- Gen.  Grant  after  the  Shiloh  engagement,  the  regi- 
ment took  an  active  part  in  the  siege  of  Corinth.  On  the 
30th  of  April  began  the  march  on  this  formidable  Confed- 
erate stronghold.  It  was  fighting,  advancing  and  building 
breastworks,  until  the  enemy  finally  evacuated  the  town 
and  our  victorious  soldiers  entered,  on  the  29th  day  of 
May,  1862. 

The  regiment  laid  around  Corinth  until  about  June  10th, 
when  it  was  taken  to  Chewalla,  Tennessee,  about  ten  miles 
away,  on  the  Memphis  &  Charleston  R.  R.  Here  they  did 
light  guard  duty  and  enjoyed  a  well  deserved  rest  until 
August  30th.  The  country  was  picturesque  and  beautiful 
and  abounded  in  fruits  of  all  kinds;  but  even  here  the  21st 
had  its  troubles  and  trials.  Small  pox  broke  out  in  the 
camp.  More  than  seventy  cases  were  on  hand  at  one  time 
— and  those  not  afflicted  or  doing  guard  duty  had  to  take 
their  turns  at  nursing  their  comrades.  But  the  malady 
finally  run  its  course,  after  leaving  a  death  list  of  thirty- 
odd  men.  On  leaving  Chewalla,  the  regiment  returned 
to  Corinth  and  was  ordered,  on  September  10th,  to  Kos- 
suth, Mississippi,  for  outpost  duty;  but  in  a  few  days  was 
ordered  back  to  Corinth,  reaching  there  on  the  morning  of 
the  3d  of  October. 

The  regiment  had  just  got  settled  in  its  tents,  on  the 
morning  of  the  3d  of  October,  on  its  return  from  Kos- 
suth, when  the  bugle  call  to  arms  summoned  the  men  to 
rush  out  and  fall  into  line  of  battle.  The  battle  of  Corinth 
began  about  daylight,  and  the  men  of  the  21st  were  in  the 
midst  of  it.  The  report  of  Col.  Moore,  here  published, 
shows  the  part  the  21st  took  in  the  engagement: 


*3 

Col.  Moore's  Report. 

Headquarters  2ist  Mo.  Infantry  Vols.,^1 
ist  Brigade,  6th  Division.  V 
Corinth,  Miss.,  October  17,  1862.      J 
Capt.  J.   Bates  Dickerson, 

Ass't  Adjt.  Gen.  ist  and  2d  Brigades,  6th  Division. 
Captain: — I  have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by 
the  21st  Mo.  Vols,  in  the  engagement  before  Corinth,  Miss., 
October  3  and  4,  1862.  On  the  afternoon  of  Oct.  2,  1862, 
I  was  relieved  from  outpost  duty  and  command  of  the  post 
of  Kossuth,  Miss.,  by  Col.  Smith,  43d  Ohio.  We  returned 
to  our  camp  at  Corinth,  Miss.,  the  same  night,  arriving  at 
3  o'clock  a.  m.  About  4:30  a.  m.  we  heard  artillery  fire 
some  distance  to  the  front;  the  battalion  was  formed 
promptly  in  line,  and  shortly  after  we  were  directed  to 
take  position  upon  the  Memphis  &  Charleston  R.  R.,  in 
support  of  battery  E;  here  we  remained  until  9  a.  m.,  when 
we  were  ordered  to  march  two  miles  to  the  front  and  take 
position  upon  a  high  ridge  to  the  left  of  the  Memphis  & 
Charleston  R.  R.,  and  upon  the  extreme  left  of  the  line  of 
battle,  continuously  with  the  16th  Wisconsin  Vols.,  of  the 
6th  Division,  and  two  regiments  of  Gen.  Davie's  Division, 
who  were  stationed  immediately  to  the  right  of  the  rail- 
road. We  had  been  in  position  but  a  few  minutes  when 
the  enemy  opened  fire  on  our  flank  and  front.  We  replied 
promptly  and  continued  showing  the  most  determined  re- 
sistance, the  enemy  being  in  so  far  superior  numbers  that 
we  were  temporarily  driven  from  the  line.  About  this 
time  my  horse  was  shot  under  me,  bruising  severely  my 
amputated  leg.  I  here  turned  the  command  over  to  Major 
Moore,  who,  with  great  gallantry,  assisted  by  the  officers 
of  the  regiment,  rallied  the  men  and  repeatedly  drove  the 
enemy  from  the  hill.  The  fire  to  the  right  became  very 
severe, — the  regiment  stationed  there,  and  battery,  gave 
way  before  the  masses  of  the  approaching  enemies.  See- 
ing this,  and  our  men  being  nearly  out  of  cartridges,  hav- 
ing fired  forty  rounds,  the  battalion  was  ordered  to  fall 
back,  which  was  done  in  good  order  and  firing.  It  is  with 
pleasure  I  notice  the  bravery  of  my  field  staff  and  line 
officers — they  were  equal  to  the  emergency.  Corporal 
Jesse  Roberts,  Company  I,  21st  Mo.  Inf.  Vols.,  showed 
great  bravery;  he  gallantly  seized  the  colors  (after  Color 
Sergeant  had  fallen  back),  causing  great  enthusiasm 
among  the  men.     Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  Moore, 
Col.  Com'd'g  2 ist  Mo.  Inft.  Vols. 


14 
•  Maj.  Ed.  Moore's  Report. 

Headquarters  2ist  Mo.  Infantry  Vols.  \ 

October  18,  1862.      j 
Lieut.  R.  Rees, 

Adjt.  21st  Mo.  Infantry  Vols. 

Sir: — I  have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the 
21st  Mo.  Vol.  Infantry  Regiment  in  the  Battle  of  Corinth, 
Miss.,  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  the  3d  and  4th  of  October, 
1862.  After  Col.  Moore,  commanding  the  regiment,  was 
carried  off  the  field,  I  assumed  the  command.  The  men 
were  going  back  from  their  original  position.  With  the 
assistance  of  the  line  officers  I  succeeded  in  rallying  the 
men,  who  went  boldly  forward  to  the  front  and  drove  the 
enemy  from  the  position  that  we  occupied  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  engagement.  As  soon  as  the  position 
was  gained  fighting  became  desperate,  our  lines  being 
distant  from  those  of  the  enemy  less  than  fifty  paces.  The 
command  held  this  ground  until  the  force  upon  our  right, 
consisting  of  artillery  and  infantry,  had  given  away  and 
was  in  full  retreat.  About  this  time  the  enemy  was  flank- 
ing us  on  our  left  and  dense  columns  of  infantry  pressed 
us  on  our  front.  I  ordered  the  regiment  to  retire.  In 
doing  so  some  of  our  men  got  scattered.  We  succeeded 
again  in  rallying  the  men,  and  formed  on  the  flanks  of  a 
line  being  formed  by  Brig.  Gen.  McArthur,  to  construct  a 
temporary  breastwork  of  logs,  and  did  so;  but  before  com- 
pleting the  same  we  were  ordered  to  a  position  on  the 
extreme  left  in  the  vicinity  of  the  seminary.  We  were 
engaged  with  the  enemy  while  in  this  position.  About 
2:30  P.  M.,  I  was  ordered  to  proceed  to  Battery  C  and 
report  to  Brig.  Gen.  McArthur.  Having  three  companies 
of  skirmishers  in  the  rear,  under  his  direction  we  scoured 
the  woods  but  found  no  enemy  excepting  a  few  stragglers. 
We  then  took  the  south  bridge  road  in  the  direction  of 
Mr.  Alexander's,  the  rebel  cavalry  fleeing  before  our 
advance.  We  succeeded  in  capturing  a  great  number  of 
prisoners,  from  one  of  whom  I  learned  the  rebel  hospitals 
were  in  the  vicinity.  It  was  now  dark.  I  pushed  forward 
and  took  possession  of  all  property  and  persons.  A  great 
many  prisoners  were  taken  that  night  and  early  next 
morning  trying  to  escape  through  the  lines.  The  total 
number  captured,  including  the  wounded,  amounted  to 
nearly  900  officers  and  men.  We  also  captured  460  mus- 
kets, 400  cartridge  boxes  and  a  quantity  of  belts,  etc. 
Under  the  instructions  of  Brig.  Gen.  McArthur  I  remained 


i5 

at  the  hospitals  with  the  command  until  Sunday  about 
noon,  when  Col.  Moore  took  command  of  the  regiment. 
Our  loss  during  the  engagement  is  one  killed,  seventeen 
wounded  and  six  prisoners.  I  mention  with  satisfaction 
the  behavior  of  the  line  officers.  They  used  every  exer- 
tion to  keep  their  men  together  and  remained  with  them 
during  the  engagement,  thereby  setting  a  good  example  to 
the  men  to  do  their  duty.  During  the  action  a  great  many 
of  our  guns  were  useless;  after  firing  fifteen  or  twenty 
rounds  of  ammunition  it  was  impossible  to  load  them. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be, 

Your  obedient  servant,  Edwin  Moore, 

Maj.  21st  Mo.  Infantry  Vols. 

At  the  close  of  the  Corinth  engagement  the  whole  num- 
ber of  the  regiment  did  not  exceed  400  men.  Over  600 
during  the  period  the  command  had  been  in  active  service 
had  been  lost  either  in  battle,  sickness  or  captured  by  the 
enemy.  While  at  Chewalla  a  detail  had  been  sent  home 
to  muster  recruits  and  a  few  days  after  the  Corinth  fight 
the  whole  regiment,  or  what  was  left  of  it,  was  furloughed 
for  thirty  days.  The  men  returned  home,  where  they 
found  recruiting  offices  had  been  opened  by  the  detail  of 
men  sent  from  Chewalla,  at  Memphis  and  Edina.  North 
Missouri  was  still  bubbling  over  with  patriotism  for  the 
Stars  and  Stripes.  The  tattered  and  worn  condition  of 
the  400  survivors  of  the  21st,  with  their  battle  torn  flag, 
gave  a  new  impetus  to  the  war  spirit.  Volunteers  sprung 
up  from  every  side  and  in  an  incredibly  short  while  the 
regiment  was  recruited  to  double  its  number.  Canton 
was  the  rallying  point  for  the  men  and  from  that  place  on 
the  10th  of  December,  1862,  tents  were  folded,  good-byes 
to  loved  ones  said,  and  the  gallant  old  21st  once  more 
started  for  the  bloody  theatre  of  war.  The  objective 
point  was  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  where  the  old  6th  Division 
of  the  Army  of  West  Tennessee  was  encamped. 

At  St.  Louis  the  regiment  boarded  the  steamer  known 
in  history  as  the  Di  Vernon,  and  got  as  far  as  Columbus,  Ky. , 
on  December  the  20th,  where  the  command  was  stopped. 
Instead  of  proceeding  to  Holly  Springs,  the  regiment  was 
ordered    by    Gen.    Asboth,    commander   of  the    Columbus 


i6 

Post,  to  Union  City,  Tenn.,  twenty  miles  from  Columbus, 
to  do  outpost  duty  guarding  Gen.  Grant's  line  of  commu- 
nication between  Columbus  and  Corinth,  which  had  been 
interrupted  by  raids  of  Confederate  cavalry  under  Gen. 
Forrest. 

Here  barracks  of  logs  and  stockades  were  built  and  the 
men  camped  for  the  winter,  doing  guard  duty  and  every- 
thing else  incident  to  a  military  camp,  facing  a  vigilant 
enemy.  In  this  time  Gen.  Grant  had  gotten  as  far  as 
Milliken's  Bend,  on  his  way  to  Vicksburg,  and  on  the  first 
of  March,  1863,  the  regiment  pulled  up  stakes  to  join  him. 
But  again  the  fortunes  of  war  decreed  otherwise.  Gen. 
Forrest,  of  the  Confederacy,  had  made  another  raid  in  the 
rear  of  Gen.  Grant,  and  at  Columbus  the  regiment  was 
switched  off  to  Clinton,  Ky.,  where  for  two  months  it  was 
engaged  again  in  the  same  kind  of  service  as  at  Union 
City.  On  May  nth  orders  again  came  to  move  on  towards 
Vicksburg.  At  Columbus  the  regiment  boarded  the 
steamer  J.  J.  Rowe  and  started  south  to  join  the  old  6th 
Division  operating  under  Gen.  Grant.  On  May  15th 
Memphis  was  reached  and  orders  were  found  waiting  us  to 
report  to  Gen.  Hurlburt,  Post_Commander  there.  Here  the 
regiment  was  kept  at  garrison  duty  until  about  January 
25th,  1864.  While  in  garrison  at  Memphis  the  21st  was 
attached  to  the  1st  Brigade,  3d  Division,  of  the  16th  Army 
Corps,  commanded  by  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith.  The  1st  Brigade 
was  composed  of,  besides  the  21st,  the  89th  Indiana,  119th 
Illinois,  58th  Illinois,  and  the  9th  Indiana  Battery,  com- 
manded by  Col.  David  Moore.  On  January  the  28th  the 
command  boarded  a  steamer  en  route  for  Vicksburg.  On 
the  way  down  the  river,  opposite  Islands  Nos.  70  and  71, 
the  vessel  was  fired  on  from  the  shore  by  Confederates 
under  Gen.  Marmaduke,  and  three  men  were  killed  and 
four  wounded.  With  no  other  incident  the  regiment 
reached  Vicksburg  on  the  1st  of  February. 

On  the  next  day,  with  the  army  under  Gen.  Sherman, 
the  march  to  Meridian,  Miss.,  began.  They  met  and 
skirmished  with  the  enemy  at  Champion  Hills,  on  Febru- 


MAJ.  ABEL  C.   ROBERTS. 

Surgeon  21st  Regiment  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols. 

President  21st  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols.  Association. 


i7 
ary    5th,  Brandon    on    February    12th,    and    Meridian    on 
February  14th. 

From  Meridian,  Miss.,  the  regiment  was  sent  back  to 
Vicksburg,  returning  by  the  way  of  Canton,  reaching 
there  on  March  4th,  where  most  of  the  regiment  re-enlisted 
for  three  years  more,  or  till  the  war  was  ended.  At  Merid- 
ian and  on  the  trip  back  our  army  destroyed  some  forty 
miles  of  railroad  and  inflicted  other  damages  on  the 
enemy. 

Returning  to  Vicksburg  the  veterans  re-enlisting  were 
granted  a  thirty  days'  furlough.  There  was  a  happy 
home-coming  for  these  scarred  warriors  of  the  21st,  who 
had,  by  their  gallant  services,  well  earned  their  holiday. 
But  there  was  quite  a  number  of  the  21st,  about  two 
hundred  and  fifty,  who  failed  to  enlist  as  veterans  under 
the  holiday  offer.  These  were  assigned  to  Gen.  Banks' 
army  and  took  part  in  what  is  known  to  history  as  the 
Red  River  Campaign. 


THE  RED  RIVER  CAMPAIGN. 


Seventy  Days  of  Almost  Uninterrupted  Fighting,  When  the 
Singing  of  the  Bullets  was  the  Only  Music  Heard  from 
Morning  till  Night. — General  Banks  Criticised. — How 
General  Smith's  Division  Became  Known  as  Smith's 
Guerrillas. —  Fighting  A.  J.  Smith. — General  Banks 
Anxious  to  Get  Back  to  New  Orleans. 


A  Graphic  Account  of  the  Campaign 

TOLD   BY   T.    W.    HOLMAN. 

ABOUT  the  5th  of  March,  the  regiment  having  returned 
to  Vicksbnrg  from  the  Meridian  Campaign,  the  vet- 
erans were  sent  home  on  a  thirty  days'  furlough. 
Those  of  the  regiment  who  did  not  re-enlist,  about  one 
hundred,  and  about  one  hundred  and  forty  recruits,  were 
assigned  to  the  24th  Missouri  for  duty.  The  24th  Missouri 
belonged  to  Col.  Shaw's  brigade  and  was  designated  the 
2d  Brigade,  3d  Division,  16th  Corps,  and  was  composed  of 
the  following  named  regiments:  The  14th,  27th  and  32d 
Iowa,  and  24th  Missouri,  with  the  detachment  of  the  21st 
Missouri.  The  21st  Missouri  men  were  consolidated  and 
made  three  companies,  about  eighty  men  to  the  company. 
There  being  no  commissioned  officers  with  us,  Lieuts. 
Denny,  Yarbrough  and  Shadel,  officers  of  the  24th,  were 
assigned  to   command    the    three  companies  of  the  21st. 


19 

Gen.  Banks  having  called  on  Gen.  Sherman  for  ten 
thousand  men  to  assist  him  in  the  Red  River  Campaign, 
the  ist  Division,  17th  Corps,  Gen.  Joe  Mower  command- 
ing, and  the  3d  Division,  16th  Corps,  Col.  R.  C.  Moore,  of 
the  117th  Illinois,  commanding,  under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith, 
were  assigned  to  this  duty,  and  ordered  to  report  to  Gen. 
Banks.  The  expedition  left  Vicksburg  about  the  8th  of 
March,  reached  the  mouth  of  Red  river  on  the  12th,  and 
was  there  met  by  Admiral  Porter  with  a  gun  boat  fleet. 
Under  convoy  of  the  same  the  expedition  started  up  Red 
river,  reaching  Simm's  Landing,  on  the  Atchafalaya  river, 
about  5  p.  m.  Col.  Shaw  was  ordered  to  disembark  his 
brigade  and  picket  the  road  towards  Fort  De  Russy. 
March  13th  Col.  Shaw  was  ordered  to  move  out  on  the  Fort 
De  Russy  road.  He  advanced  with  his  brigade  along 
Bayou  Rapides  about  four  miles  to  Yellow  Bayou.  Here 
he  found  some  earth  works  and  a  regiment  of  Confederate 
troops,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery.  On  our  approach  they 
at  once  fell  back  towards  Fort  De  Russy.  We  then 
returned  to  the  landing.  During  our  absence  the  balance 
of  our  troops  disembarked  and  went  into  camp. 

On  the  14th  we  had  orders  to  move  with  two  days' 
rations  and  forty  rounds  of  ammunition,  and  7  a.  m.  found 
us  on  the  road  with  "Col.  Shaw's  brigade  in  the  advance, 
the  24th  and  21st  Missouri  in  front.  It  was  about  eighteen 
miles  across  the  bend  of  Red  river,  where  rumor  reported 
heavy  earthworks  and  forts,  and  some  six  thousand  Con- 
federate troops  under  command  of  Gen.  Walker.  The 
roads  were  good  and  our  column  moved  rapidly,  reaching 
Fori  De  Russy  about  3  p.  m.  Col.  Shaw's  brigade  went 
into  line  some  four  hundred  yards  from  the  upland  fort, 
with  the  3d  Indiana  battery  in  the  center.  We  met  a 
warm  reception  from  fourteen  guns  in  the  upland  fort  and 
from  heavy  guns  in  the  water  battery.  We  advanced 
sharpshooters  and  our  Indiana  battery  of  four  guns  and 
commenced  pounding  away  on  the  upland  fort.  By  5  p. 
m.  our  sharpshooters  had  the  guns  in  the  forts  silenced,  or 
at  least  made  it  such  hazardous  work  to  load  and    fire  that 


20 

the  guns  were  only  served  occasionally.  This  was  the 
signal  for  the  assault.  About  6  p.  in.  Gen.  Mower  ordered 
Col.  Shaw  to  charge.  His  brigade  fixed  bayonets  and  with 
a  yell  made  a  dash  for  the  enemy's  works.  The  ground 
over  which  we  had  to  pass  was  open,  the  timber  having 
been  used  in  the  construction  of  the  forts  and  bomb  proofs. 
In  our  charge  we  were  supported  by  the  balance  of  our 
division.  While  charging  we  received  a  fringe  of  musket 
fire  from  the  thin  line  of  men  inside  the  fort.  In  three 
minutes  we  were  at  the  ditches  and  the  garrison,  seeing 
that  further  resistance  was  useless,  ran  up  a  white  flag. 
The  24th  and  21st  Missouri  were  the  first  regiments  to 
plant  their  flags  on  the  fort,  and  in  recognition  of  that  fact 
and  as  a  reward,  we  were  detailed  the  guard  of  honor  and 
remained  in  the  fort  during  the  night,  with  our  regimental 
colors  flying  on  the  ramparts. 

The  fruits  of  the  victory  were:  in  the  upland  fort,  four- 
teen guns;  in  the  water  battery,  three  guns,  two  of  them 
120  pounders,  and  one  rifle  42,  a  large  amount  of  ammuni- 
tion and  quartermaster's  stores,  with  three  hundred  and 
fifty  prisoners.  Commodore  Porter,  who  was  on  his  way 
up  the  river  with  his  gun  boat  fleet,  did  not  get  up  in  time 
to  participate  in  the  capture.  About  ten  miles  below  the 
forts  the  enemy  had  driven  piling  and  anchored  a  large 
raft  of  timber  across  the  channel  of  the  river,  preventing 
his  arrival. 

During  the  night  our  transports  arrived,  and  at  10  a.  m. 
on  the  15th  we  hauled  down  our  colors,  marched  out  of 
the  fort  and  embarked  with  the  balance  of  the  troops,  and 
again,  under  convoy  of  the  gun  boats,  moved  up  the  river 
to  Alexandria,  arriving  there  about  4  p.  m.  on  the  16th. 
The  enemy  fell  back,  burning  some  of  his  quartermaster's 
stores  and  forage.  We  disembarked  and  went  into  camp 
east  and  south  of  town,  to  await  the  coming  of  Maj.  Gen. 
Banks  with  the  13th  and  19th  Army  Corps. 

Alexandria  was  a  small  town  of  some  eight  hundred 
inhabitants,  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  rapids  of  the  river. 
The  country  around  Alexandria   was  very    rich    and    the 


21 

inhabitants  very  disloyal  and  bitter.  We  now  had  to  wait 
until  about  March  25th  for  the  coming  of  Gen.  Banks  to 
form  a  junction  with  Gen.  Smith  at  this  place.  Gen. 
Banks'  troops  were  leisurely  marching  across  the  country 
from  the  south,  and  upon  his  arrival  with  the  13th  and 
19th  corps,  our  combined  forces  of  all  arms  consisted  of 
about  35,000  men.  Gen.  Banks'  men  having  been  doing 
garrison  duty  at  New  Orleans,  were  well  clothed,  and  with 
their  new  uniforms  and  paper  collars  made  a  very  fine 
appearance  compared  with  the  men  of  the  16th  Corps,  who 
had  been  fighting  and  marching  for  the  past  three  months 
and  were  ragged  and  dirty,  which  condition  no  doubt  had 
much  to  do  with  influencing  Gen.  Banks  to  remark  when 
he  saw  us,  "Why!  I  asked  Gen.  Sherman  to  send  me 
10,000  soldiers  and  he  has  sent  me  a  band  of  ragamuffins 
and  guerrillas. "  This  is  where,  and  how  it  came  to  pass 
that  we  received  the  name  which  stuck  to  us  until  the 
close  of  the  war.  Intended  in  derision  by  Gen.  Banks,  no 
doubt,  it  soon  became  a  pseudonym  by  which  one  of  the 
best  divisions  in  the  western  army  was  ever  afterwards 
known,  "  Smith's  Guerrillas. " 

March  26th  we  broke  camp  and  marched  up  the  river. 
It  was  now  generally  known  that  Shrevesport  was  our 
objective  point — a  strongly  fortified  position.  March  29th 
we  reached  and  camped  at  a  point  on  Red  River  known  as 
the  Burr  Patch.  We  here  again  embarked  on  transports 
and  under  convoy  of  gunboats  moved  up  the  river  to  a 
landing  called  Grand  Ecore.  At  this  point  we  disembarked 
and  lay  in  camp  till  the  7th  of  April,  when  we  moved  out 
in  the  rear  of  Gen.  Banks'  army,  which  had  passed  this 
point  some  two  days.  It  seemed  that  we  had  made  such 
an  unfavorable  impression  on  Gen.  Banks  that  he  wished 
us  as  much  out  of  sight  as  possible  and  hence  kept  us 
about  a  dav's  inarch  in  the  rear. 


Battle  of  Sabine  Cross  Roads. 

The  13th  Corps   encountered   in   force  at   Sabine    Cross 
Roads,  on    the  8th   of  April,    Generals   Kirby  Smith  and 


22 

Taylor,  commanding  the  enemy,  who  were  apprised  of  the 
fact  that  Gen.  Banks'  troops  were  scattered  along  the  road 
for  twenty  miles.  Upon  this  knowledge  they  determined 
to  give  battle  outside  the  defenses  at  Shrevesport,  and 
chose  this  point,  about  forty-five  miles  southeast.  The 
result  of  the  battle  was  a  complete  defeat  and  route  of 
Gen.  Banks'  army  in  detail.  The  night  of  the  8th  of 
April  closed  in  with  the  13th  and  19th  Corps  in  full 
retreat,  falling  back  on  Pleasant  Hill.  The  16th  Corps, 
under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  had  marched  hard  all  day  the  8th, 
reaching  Pleasant  Hill  at  dark,  and  went  into  camp  in 
close  column  by  regiments.  We  had  heard  Gen.  Banks' 
artillery  all  the  afternoon  of  the  8th,  and  knew  he  was 
being  driven  back.  This  meant  that  the  men  whom  Gen. 
Banks  had  called  guerrillas  would  be  in  demand  on  the 
morrow. 


Battle  of  Pleasant  Hill. 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  April  Gen.  Smith's  guer- 
rillas had  no  revielle.  About  3  a.  m.  our  company  officers 
came  around  nudging  the  sleeping  men  in  the  sides,  in 
commands  given  in  whispers  ordered  them  to  fall  in  line, 
and  we  were  held  in  readiness  to  move.  At  daylight  Col. 
Shaw's  brigade  moved  out  on  the  Mansfield  road  about 
one  mile,  relieving  our  cavalry,  who  were  already  skirm- 
ishing. We  were  posted  in  a  strong  position  along  the 
east  side  of  a  cotton  field,  facing  west,  with  a  section  of 
the  25th  N.  Y.  Battery.  We  lay  in  this  position  all  the 
forenoon  with  nothing  to  relieve  the  monotony  except  an 
occasional  shell  from  our  artillery  feeling  for  the  enemy 
in  the  woods  beyond  and  frequent  shots  from  the  enemy's 
sharpshooters.  About  2  p.  m.  the  enemy  opened  on  our 
line  with  artillery.  Our  two  pieces  of  artillery  at  once 
limbered  up  and  went  to  the  rear  under  whip.  The  ene- 
my,' thinking  this  was  a  continuation  of  the  rout  of  the 
day  before,  charged  our  lines  with  a  regiment  of  Texas 
cavalry.      They,   little  dreaming  that  in    the  timber  on  the 


23 
other  side  of  the  field  lay  a  line  ot  grim  veterans  who  had 
seen  service  at  Fort  Donelson,  Corinth,  the  Hornet's 
Nest  at  Shiloh,  and  in  the  trenches  around  Vicksburg, 
made  a  magnificent  charge  to  defeat  and  death.  The  ene- 
my's infantry  then  charged  and  our  small  brigade  was  soon 
fighting  in  front  and  flank.  We  held  our  position  until 
the  enemy  had  nearly  cut  us  off  from  our  main  line,  when 
we  were  compelled  to  fall  back.  We  took  a  position  two 
hundred  and  fifty  yards  from  our  first  stand,  which  we 
held  for  over  an  hour  and  a  half.  Here  occurred  the  most 
desperate  fighting  of  the  day,  being  almost  a  face  to  face 
combat.  Overwhelming  numbers  at  last  forced  us  back  to 
our- reserve  line,  after  losing  quite  a  number  taken  prison- 
ers. About  sundown  the  final  crash  came  when  the 
enemy  dashed  against  our  massed  line  of  artillery  and 
infantry  held  in  reserve.  Night  closed  in  with  Smith's 
guerrillas  victorious  and  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  towards 
Mansfield.  The  heaviest  loss  in  the  battle  fell  on  Shaw's 
brigade,  being  estimated  at  two  thirds  of  the  whole  loss 
sustained  in  the  engagement,  amounting  to  some  five 
hundred  men  killed,  wounded  and  taken  prisoners.  The 
enemy's  loss  was  estimated  at  one  thousand  killed  and 
wounded,  eight  hundred  prisoners  and  eleven  pieces  of 
artillery. 

While  Smith's  guerrillas  were  fighting  the  battle  of 
Pleasant  Hill,  Gen.  Banks,  with  the  13th  and  19th  Corps, 
were  improving  the  time  in  retreating.  After  caring  for 
our  wounded  by  placing  them  in  hospitals  and  detailing 
surgeons  and  nurses  from  our  ranks  to  care  for  them,  about 
noon  of  the  10th  we  commenced  to  fall  back  towards 
Grand  Ecore,  following  Gen.  Banks'  army,  which  had 
preceded  us,  a  shameful  retreat  and  one  that  would 
never  have  been  made  had  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith  been  com- 
mander-in-chief. But  Gen.  Banks  was  whipped  and 
thoroughly  incompetent  to  command,  and  seemed  to  only 
have  one  idea — that  was  to  get  back  to  New  Orleans  as 
quickly  as  possible.  His  men  under  him  seemed  to  share 
fully  his   demoralized    condition.     The    16th    Corps   were 


24 

saucy  and  full  of  fight  aud  had  the  utmost  confidence  in 
Gen.  Smith,  a  feeling  that  was  mutual  between  the  com- 
mander and  the  men  under  him.  We  arrived  at  Grand 
Ecore  on  the  12th,  and  learning  that  our  transports  and 
gunboats  were  cooped  up  at  Blair's  Landing,  some  twenty 
miles  up  the  river,  with  some  of  the  transports  aground 
and  a  confederate  battery  below  them,  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith 
at  once  crossed  the  river  and  hurried  to  their  relief  with 
the  16th  Corps.  After  driving  away  the  battery  below  and 
seeing  the  fleet  safely  on  their  way  down  the  river,  we 
returned  to  Grand  Ecore  and  on  the  22d  of  April  took  up 
our  line  of  retreat  for  Alexandria.  During  this  time 
Generals  Kirby  Smith  and  Taylor,  commanding  the  Con- 
federate forces,  had  not  been  idle,  but  were  moving  troops 
down  the  river  to  harass  our  retreat  as  much  as  possible. 
On  the  23d  we  had  a  lively  skirmish  with  them  at  Coul- 
terville.  Again  at  Monett  Bluff  April  23d.  Here  we 
found  the  enemy  posted  in  a  strong  position  on  the  bluff 
on  the  east  side  of  the  river.  The  16th  Corps  was  guard- 
ing the  rear;  the  13th  and  19th  Corps  failing  to  drive  the 
enemy,  we  were  ordered  up  from  the  rear,  forming  on  the 
right  of  the  19th  Corps,  fixed  bayonets  and  charged.  The 
enemy  fell  back  and  gave  us  for  the  time  undisputed  pos- 
session of  the  right  of  way.  It  was  here  that  Gen.  A.  J. 
Smith  informed  Gen.  Banks,  in  language  more  forceful 
than  eloquent,  that  he  would  do  the  fighting  at  either  end 
of  the  line  of  retreat,  front  or  rear,  but  would  not  do  both. 
We  resumed  our  march  on  the  24th,  the  16th  Corps  guard- 
ing the  rear,  without  much  trouble  from  the  Johnnies,  but 
when  they  pushed  us  too  closely  we  would  form  a  line  of 
battle  and  they  would  very  prudently  keep  at  a  safe  dis- 
tance. In  this  manner  we  continued  to  retreat  to  Alexan- 
dria, reaching  there  about  April  30th. 

The  fleet  had  already  arrived,  but  the  water  on  the  falls 
was  so  low  it  began  to  look  like  we  would  have  to  lose 
our  gunboats  or  stay  there  and  guard  them.  In  the  mean- 
time, to  complicate  the  situation,  Gen.  Dick  Taylor,  com- 
manding the    Confederate   forces,    came    up     with    about 


N.  D.  STARR. 

1st  Lieut.  Co.   E,  21st  Regiment  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols. 
Vice-President  21st  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols.  Association. 


25 
18,000  men.  On  the  2d  of  May  the  16th  Corps  was  busily 
engaged  at  Henderson's  Hill  skirmishing  with  their 
advance  lines.  The  situation  was  now  a  gloomy  one 
indeed,  but  at  this  critical  moment  Col.  Bailey,  of  the  28th 
Wisconsin,  suggested  that  the  water  on  the  falls  could  be 
raised  by  building  wing  dams,  and  as  chief  engineer  he 
was  detailed  to  superintend  this  work,  and  the  13th  and 
19th  Corps  placed  at  his  disposal  to  do  the  work,  while 
Gen.  Smith,  of  the  16th,  was  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle, 
south  and  east  of  town,  watching  the  enemy;  skirmishing 
with  them  May  3d  at  Jones'  Plantation,  May  4th  at  Bayou 
LaMore,  May  6th  and  7th  at  Bayou  Boeuf.  Gen.  Taylor 
then  drew  off,  moving  down  the  river  some  twenty  miles, 
planting  his  batteries  on  the  river  bank  and  sinking  two 
of  our  light  gunboats  and  capturing  our  mail  boat  and 
mail. 

About  the  12th  of  May,  the  dam  proving  a  success,  the 
fleet  passed  below  the  falls.  On  the  14th  we  resumed  our 
line  of  march  for  the  mouth  of  Red  River,  Gen.  Taylor 
falling  back  in  front  of  us.  On  the  16th  we  found  him 
drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  on  the  Marksville  Prairie. 
After  three  hours'  fighting  he  fell  back  and  took  a  position 
on  Bayou  De  Glaze.  On  the  17th,  after  a  sharp  skirmish 
with  him,  he  drew  off  to  one  side  and  let  us  pass.  We  then 
moved  on  down,  the  13th  and  19th  Corps  going  into  camp 
at  Simmsport,  on  the  Atchafalaya  river,  while  the  16th 
Corps  took  up  a  position  some  three  miles  in  the  rear,  on 
the  east  bank  of  Yellow  Bayou. 


Battle  of  Yellow  Bayou. 

May  the  18th,  1864,  the  long  roll  called  us  to  arms 
about  12  m.  Shaw's  Brigade  with  Battery  E,  2d  Mo. 
Artillery,  crossed  the  Yellow  Bayou  and  double-quicked 
about  a  half  mile  to  the  front  and  immediately  became 
engaged  with  the  enemy's  advance.  As  fast  as  the  several 
regiments  of  the  16th  and  17th  Corps  reached  the  field 
they  formed  on    our   left.      All    the    afternoon    the   tide  of 


26 

battle  ebbed  and  flowed  along  the  south  bank  of  Bayou 
Rapides.  Night  closed  in  with  Gen.  Taylor  falling  back 
and  Gen.  Smith's  men  in  possession  of  the  battle-field. 
Our  loss  was  about  five  hundred  killed  and  wounded.  The 
enemy's  must  have  been  much  greater  as  they  made  seve- 
ral determined  assaults  on  our  lines.  We  captured  about 
three  hundred  and  fifty  prisoners  and  from  them  we  learned 
that  Gen.  Taylor  had  about  fifteen  thousand  men  engaged, 
about  twice  the  number  under  Gen.  Smith.  About  dark 
on  the  evening  of  the  18th,  the  13th  Corps  arrived  on  the 
field  and  took  position  in  front  of  Smith's  tired  and  bleed- 
ing troops. 

May  the  19th,  early  in  the  morning,  the  13th  Corps 
marched  back  to  Simm's  Landing,  leaving  Geu.  Smith  with 
the  1 6th  and  17th  Corps,  at  the  front.  Gen.  Taylor  show- 
ing no  disposition  to  resume  hostilities  and  learning  that 
the  13th  and  19th  Corps  were  safely  across  the  pontoons  on 
the  Atchafalaya  river,  about  1  p.  m.  we  took  up  our  pon- 
toon bridge  across  Yellow  Bayou  and  the  16th  Corps  fol- 
lowed and  crossed  to  the  east  bank  of  the  Atchafalaya  and 
camped,  just  sixty-five  days  from  the  time  we  first  camped 
on  the  west  bank  on  our  way  to  Fort  De  Russy.  On  the 
20th  of  May  we  reached  the  mouth  of  Red  River.  We 
here  met  our  transports  and  the  portion  of  the  21st  Mo. 
that  went  home  on  veteran  furlough,  and  embarked  for 
Vicksburg.     The  13th  Corps  went  south  to  New  Orleans. 


Comments  on  the  Seventy  Days'  Campaign. 

The  Red  River  Campaign  was  at  last,  after  seventy 
days,  at  an  end.  It  was  a  failure  and  as  barren  of  results  so 
far  as  having  any  visible  effects  in  hastening  the  close  of 
the  war,  as  it  would  have  been  if  made  to  the  North  Pole. 
History  records  it  as  one  of  the  severest  campaigns  of  the 
war.  The  men  suffered  more  from  hardships  and  priva- 
tions than  any  other  portion  of  the  army.  Especially 
was  this  true  of  the  16th  Corps,  which,  on  account  of  the 
incompetency  of  Gen.  Banks  and   his  apparent   dislike   of 


27 

the  Corps,  was  always  placed  in  the  most  exposed  positions, 
either  in  the  advanced  front  or  in  the  rear.  It  was  also 
unprovided  with  clothing  and  shoes  and  at  the  close  of  the 
campaign  presented  a  most  abject  appearance.  Indeed 
Gen.  Banks  might  in  truth  have  called  the  men,  from  their 
appearance,  "  Smith's  Guerrillas. " 

SUMMARY. 

The  following  is  the  list  of  the  battles  and  skirmishes 
engaged  in  during  the  seventy  days'  fighting  by  the 
detachment  from  the  21st  Missouri. 

Fort  De  Russey,    La March  14th,  1864 


Pleasant  Hill, 
Coulterville 
Cane  River, 
Henderson's  Hill, 
Jones'  Plantation, 
Bayou  La  More, 
Bayou  Boeuf, 
Marksville, 
Bayou  De  Glaize, 
Yellow  Bayou, 


.April 


.May 


9th, 

22d, 

2d, 

3^ 

4th, 

6th-7th, 

16th, 

17th, 

18th, 


Gen.  Banks'  losses  in  the  13th  and  19th  Army  Corps  were 
about  three  thousand  men,  killed,  wounded  and  prisoners, 
twenty-two  pieces  of  artillery  and  one  hundred  and  forty- 
five  wagons  loaded  with  commissary  stores  and  camp 
equipments.  The  losses  of  the- parts  of  the  16th  and  17th 
Army  Corps  present,  commanded  by  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith, 
were  about  one  thousand  from  all  causes.  In  the  several 
battles  and  skirmishes  we  were  engaged  in  we  captured 
from  the  enemy  two  thousand  prisoners  and  thirty  pieces 
of  artillery.  These  captures  were  made  in  battles  fought 
by  Gen.  Smith's  command,  in  which  Gen.  Banks'  men 
had  no  part.  Col.  Shaw's  Brigade  sustained  the  greatest 
loss  of  any  on  the  expedition  and-  it  was  equal  to  about 
one-half  that  sustained  by  the  whole  command  under  Gen. 
Smith. 


28 

The  detachment  of  the  21st  Missouri  lost  about  fifty 
men,  killed,  wounded  and  prisoners,  including  one  officer 
of  the  24th  Missouri,  assigned.  That  we  did  our  whole 
duty,  I  need  only  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  after  the 
battle  of  Pleasant  Hill,  La.,  Maj.  Robt.  Fyan,  command- 
ing the  24th  and  detachment  of  the  21st  Missouri,  person- 
ally thanked  the  members  of  the  21st  for  gallantry  during 
the  action.  The  loss  of  the  24th  and  21st  combined  dur- 
ing the  campaign  was  three  officers  killed,  namely:  Capt. 
Robinson,  Lieuts.  Shadel  and  Stone,  and  one  Color  Ser- 
geant killed  and  one  wounded,  Wm.  O'Connor  of  the  21st, 
making  a  total  loss  of  about  one  hundred  men  killed, 
wounded  and  missing. 


Parting  Between  the  21st  and  24th. 

We  reached  Vicksburg  about  the  21st  of  June  and  there 
took  leave  of  the  24th  Missouri,  and  returned  to  our  own 
regiment,  which  had  returned  from  its  veteran  furlough 
north.  While  we  were  with  the  24th  Missouri  we  became 
very  much  attached  to  the  officers  and  men.  The  officers 
were  courteous  and  the  men  true  comrades. 

In  writing  the  foregoing  account  of  the  part  taken  by 
our  brigade  and  regiment  I  have  had  nothing  to  aid  me 
except  my  memory  of  the  events  narrated,  in  all  of  which 
I  was  an  active  participant.  And  in  conclusion  I  now  ask 
the  charitable  consideration  of  comrades  and  the  general 
reader  for  any  imperfections  it  may  contain. 

T.  W.  Holman, 
Co.  D,  21st  Missouri  Infantry. 


T.  W.  HOLMAN. 

Private,  Co.  D,  21st  Regiment  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols. 

Sec'y  and  Treas,,  21st  Missouri  Inf.  Vet.  Vols.  Association. 


Resumption  of  the  History  of  the  21st. 


AT  Vicksburg  the  detachment  of  the  21st  taking  part  in 
the  Red  River  campaign  joined  their  comrades  who 
had  returned  at  the  expiration  of  their  thirty  days'  fur- 
lough. On  June  4th  the  regiment  left  Vicksburg  on  a 
steamer,  en  route  up  the  river  for  Memphis.  The  Confed- 
erates, however,  had  erected  batteries  on  the  west  bank  of 
the  river,  preventing  the  transports  from  proceeding.  A 
landing  was  made  at  a  point  called  Columbia,  on  June  5th, 
and  on  the  following  day  the  regiment  was  marched 
around  Lake  Providence  and  had  an  engagement  with  the 
enemy  at  Lake  Chicot.  The  Confederates  were  completely 
routed  and  the  blockade  of  the  river  removed.  On  the  7th 
the  command  re- embarked  on  the  transports  and  arrived  at 
Memphis  on  the  10th  without  any  further  incident. 

On  June  the  12th  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  the 
relief  of  Gen.  Sturgis,  who  had  been  defeated  a  few  days 
previous  at  Gun  Town.  The  retreating  Federals  were 
met  at  Colliersville,  and  under  the  escort  of  the  21st  made 
the  trip  into  Memphis  without  being  molested  by  the 
enemy. 

On  June  25th  the  regiment,  along  with  the  1st  Brigade, 
3d  Division,  to  which  it  belonged,  moved  out  of  the  city 
and  encamped  at  Moscow,  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston 
Railroad,  and  on  the  26th  held  Division  review.  On  June 
27th-  the  regiment  was  moved  to  La  Grange,  Tenn., 
where  it  was  encamped  until  July  8th.  At  this  time  it 
was  marched  to  Pontotoc,  Miss.,  going  by  way  of  Ripley, 
and  traversing  a  distance  of  over  one   hundred   miles,  and 


3° 
on  the  route  the  regiment  was  continuously  fighting  and 
skirmishing  with  the  cavalry  of  the  enemy  under  Gen. 
Forrest.  On  July  13th  another  move  was  made,  to  Tupelo, 
Miss.,  a  distance  of  twenty  miles,  where  an  engagement 
with  the  enemy,  known  to  history  as  the  battle  of  Tupelo, 
took  place.  The  21st  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  this 
engagement,  as  will  be  seen  by  reading  the  report  of  Col. 
Edwin  Moore,  here  published: 

Col.  Moore's  Report. 

Headquarters  2ist  Mo.  Inf.  Vols.  \ 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  July  i8th,   1864.  | 
Lieut.  Sam'l  D.  Sawyer, 

A.  A.  Gen-'l,  ist  Brigade. 
Lieutenant: — I  have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken 
by  the  21st  Mo.  Infantry  Volunteers  at  the  battle  of  Tupelo 
on  the  14th  day  of  July,  1864.  About  6  o'clock  a.  m.  we 
were  formed  in  line  of  battle  with  the  brigade,  the  119th 
Illinois  Infantry  Volunteers  being  on  our  left  and  the  58th 
Illinois  Infantry  on  our  right.  About  7:30  a.  m.  the  ene- 
my opened  on  us  with  artillery,  which  continued  until  9 
o'clock  a.  m.,  when  they  advanced  their  infantry  in  line 
of  battle,  driving  in  our  skirmishers  precipitately. 
They  came  within  twenty  paces  of  our  line  when  I  gave 
the  order  to  fire  and  immediately  after  to  advance.  The 
fire  was  well  directed  and  took  the  enemy  by  surprise,  who 
fled  in  great  disorder,  with  the  regiment  in  pursuit,  and 
for  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  a  continuous  and  deadly  fire 
was  poured  in  upon  them;  its  effect  was  visible  on  the 
field.  There  being  no  enemy  in  sight  after  advancing 
four  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  we  returned  to  our  former 
position  and  were  not  again  attacked  during  the  day, 
although  frequently  subjected  to  a  heavy  artillery  fire. 
The  officers  and  men  of  the  command  behaved  with  the 
utmost  gallantry,  obeying  every  order  with  that  prompt- 
ness which  secures  success.  Our  loss  was  one  man  killed 
and  fifteen  wounded. 

Edwin  Moore, 
Lieut. -Col.  21st  Mo.  Inf.  Vols.,  Com. 

On  the  day  following  the  Tupelo  fight  the  command 
was  ordered  back  to  Memphis.  On  the  same  day,  while 
encamped  for  dinner,  we  were  attacked  by  the  Confederates 


3i 
who  were,  however,  repulsed  after  a  lively  skirmish,  and 
the  men  resumed  their  meal.  This  time  they  were 
allowed  to  eat  in  peace  and  to  finally  reach  Memphis  with- 
out any  further  brushes  with  the  enemy.  On  August  5th 
the  regiment  was  sent  on  another  excursion  in  pursuit  of 
the  Confederate  General  Forrest,  who  was  reported  to  be 
rendezvousing  in  the  vicinity  of  Memphis.  On  the  Tala- 
hatchie  river  they  first  encountered  the  enemy,  when  a 
lively  skirmish  took  place.  This  was  on  August  9th. 
The  next  brush  with  the  Confederates  occurred  on  the  12th, 
and  again  at  Hurricane  Creek  on  the  13th.  Oxford,  a 
distance  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  Memphis,  was 
reached  August  22d.  Here,  after  meeting  and  repulsing 
the  enemy,  startling  news  was  received  from  Memphis,  by 
courier,  to  the  effect  that  Forrest  had  captured  and  was  in 
possession  of  the  city.  There  was  an  immediate  call  to 
arms  and  in  double  quick  time  the  command  was  hurried 
on  the  journey  back  to  recapture  the  city.  They  arrived, 
however,  to  find  that  the  Confederate  leader  had  been  in 
the  city  but  had  taken  his  departure. 

On  September  5th,  1864,  the  regiment  embarked  on  the 
steamer  W.  R.  Wallace  for  Cairo,  111.  They  were  confined 
on  board  transports  at  Cairo  when  orders  were  received  to 
proceed  to  St.  Louis  to  assist  in  repelling  the  invasion  of 
Missouri  by  the  Confederates  unde*r  Gen.  Price.  On 
arriving  at  St.  Louis  the  regiment  was  moved  down  the 
Iron  Mountain  R.  R. ,  to  De  Sota,  to  intercept  Gen.  Price, 
who  was  reported  at  or  near  Pilot  Knob.  Gen.  Price 
failed  to  show  up  at  that  point  but  was  reported  moving 
in  the  direction  of  Jefferson  City.  On  learning  this  fact 
the  command  was  hastily  put  on  cars  and  returned  to  Jef- 
ferson Barracks,  near  St.  Louis.  Then  commenced  the 
long,  weary  inarch  after  Price,  through  Central  Missouri, 
going  by  way  of  Franklin,  Jefferson  City,  Sedalia,  Lex- 
ington and  Independence.  The  command  came  up  with 
the  rear  guard  of  the  enemy  at  Little  Blue,  about  three 
miles  west  of  Independence,  on  October  23d.  Here,  after 
skirmishing,  they  were  routed.     Gen.  Price  being  harassed 


32 
by  Federal  troops,  both  front  and  rear,  commenced 
retreating  out  of  the  State,  the  infantry  following  him 
south  to  Harrisonville,  where  the  chase  was  abandoned  by 
the  infantry,  the  cavalry  following  him  on  into  Arkansas. 
The  infantry  returned  towards  St.  Louis,  marching  by 
way  of  Pleasant  Hill,  Lexington  and  Glasgow,  where  they 
crossed  over  to  the  north  side  of  the  Missouri  river; 
resuming  the  march  from  the  river,  by  way  of  Fayette, 
Columbia,  Warreuton,  High  Hill  and  St.  Charles,  where 
the  command  crossed  back  to  the  south  side  of  the  Mis- 
souri river,  marching  to  and  arriving  in  St.  Louis  on  the 
23d  of  November.  On  this  pursuit  after  Gen.  Price  the 
division,  with  which  was  the  21st  Missouri,  made  a  forced 
march  of  fifty-six  miles,  which  was  the  longest  continued 
march  known  in  military  history. 

On  the  trip  back  to  St.  Louis  the  command  was  being 
continually  annoyed  by  Quantrell's  and  Anderson's  guer- 
rillas, and  lost  several  men  killed  by  these  outlaws. 

Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  commanding  the  16th  Army  Corps, 
having  received  orders  to  report  to  Gen.  George  H. 
Thomas  at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  the  21st  Missouri  embarked 
on  board  the  steamer  Mars  en  route  for  Nashville,  where 
they  arrived  on  the  30th  of  November.  Leaving  the 
steamer,  the  21st  was  moved  out  two  miles  southwest  of 
the  city  and  threw  up  breastworks  to  assist  in  repelling  the 
attack  of  the  Confederate  General  Hood,  which  was 
hourly  expected.  Hood  appeared  on  December  the  1st 
and  began  a  regular  siege  ot  Nashville,  which  continued 
until  the  15th  of  December,  when  Gen.  Thomas  moved 
out  of  his  intrenchments,  hurling  the  16th  Corps,  which 
held  the  position  on  his  right,  against  Hood's  left.  The 
enemy  was  driven  back,  doubling  his  left  flank  back  on 
his  center,  capturing  a  number  of  prisoners  and  several 
pieces  of  artillery.  The  night  of  the  15th  closed  in  with 
Hood's  crushed  and  bleeding  army  driven  back  to  a  strong- 
ly fortified  position  in  the  Brentwood  Hills,  some  three 
miles  from  the  position  he  held  in  the  morning.  The 
battle  was  resumed  early  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  with 


33 
varying  results  until  3  p.  m.,  when  Gen.  Thomas,  seeing 
the  decisive  moment  had  come,  ordered  a  general  assault, 
and  Hood's  broken  and  reeling  columns  were  sent  whirl- 
ing down  the  pikes  in  the  direction  of  Columbia,  Tenn. 
Thus  ended  the  vain  boast  of  President  Davis,  at  Macon, 
made  to  the  Tennessee  troops  after  the  capture  of  Atlanta 
by  Sherman:  "  Tennesseeans,  be  of  good  cheer;  you  will 
soon  see  the  green  fields  of  Kentucky."  The  remnant  of 
the  proud  army  that  had  dealt  Gen.  Sherman  so  many 
crushing  blows  was  hurrying  to  make  its  escape  across  the 
Tennessee  river — to  escape  complete  annihilation. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  of  December,  1864,  the  16th 
Corps,  under  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  was  ordered  in  pursuit  of 
Gen.  Hood's  fleeing  army.  The  pursuing  army  followed 
to  Clifton,  by  way  of  Pulaski,  and  arrived  at  Clifton  on 
the  2d  of  January.  Here  they  embarked  on  board  trans- 
ports en  route  for  Eastport,  Miss.,  where  they  arrived  on 
the  7th  of  January,  1865,  and  went  into  camp,  remaining 
in  camp  and  performing  usual  routine  duty  until  February 
9th,  when  they  embarked  on  transports  for  New  Orleans, 
where  they  landed  on  February  21st.  They  remained  in 
New  Orleans  in  camp  until  March  22d,  when  they  took 
steamer  and  were  carried,  by  way  of  Lake  Pontchartrain 
and  the  Gulf,  to  Dauphin  Island,  at  the  foot  of  Mobile 
Bay,  where  they  camped,  arriving  on  the  24th.  A  few 
days  afterwards  another  move  was  made  to  Spanish  Fort, 
near  Mobile,  via  Fish  river  and  a  land  march.  The  Fort 
was  invested  and  captured  on  April  8th.  On  the  3d  of 
April  the  division,  in  which  was  the  21st  regiment,  began 
operations  against  Fort  Blakely,  taking  part  in  the  many 
skirmishes  in  the  approach  and  siege  of  that  important 
Confederate  stronghold,  and  in  its  final  capture  on  April 
9th.  In  the  charge  on  the  fortifications  on  the  9th,  the 
21st  had  two  color  bearers  killed  and  was  the  first  regi- 
ment to  plant  its  flag  on  the  ramparts.  In  the  charge  the 
loss  of  the  regiment  was  heavy,  about  equal  to  that  of  the 
whole  brigade. 

We  had  at  Blakely  the  rumor  of  Lee's  surrender,  during 


34 
the  afternoon  of  the  charge  and  capture  of  the  fort.  The 
bugle  sounded  the  charge  at  6  o'clock  p.  m.  and  in  seven 
and  one-half  minutes  the  fort  surrendered.  This  was  the 
last  battle  of  the  war.  The  Federal  loss  was  two  thousand 
killed  and  wounded.  We  captured  thirty-two  cannon  and 
four  thousand  prisoners.  Thus  the  21st  Missouri  was 
engaged  in  the  last  battle  of  the  war  as  well  as  in  one  of 
the  first. 

On  April  13th  the  21st  Regiment  marched  with  the  16th 
Corps  to  Montgomery,  Alabama,  arriving  on  the  27th  and 
going  into  camp  two  miles  northeast  of  the  city.  Here 
they  remained  in  camp  until  June  1st,  when  they  were 
taken,  with  the  brigade,  to  Providence  Landing,  on  the 
Alabama  River,  reaching  there  June  4th,  and  embarked 
on  a  steamer  the  same  day  for  Mobile.  On  the  arrival  of 
the  regiment  at  Mobile  they  went  into  camp  in  the  sub- 
urbs. Here  they  remained,  doing  outpost  and  other  guard 
duty  until  March,  when  they  were  ordered  to  Fort  Mor- 
gan for  duty,  and  on  April  19th,  1866,  were  mustered  out. 

This  was  the  last  day  of  the  organization  known  as  the 
21st  Missouri  Infantry  Volunteers.  After  their  long  and 
arduous  labors  in  defence  of  their  country  came  the  sol- 
diers' reward — an  honorable  discharge  from  the  service 
and  then  the  going  home  to  family  and  loved  ones.  But 
there  was  many  a  long  drawn  sigh,  for  who  among  the 
survivors  of  this  heroic  band  failed  to  recall  some  gallant 
comrade,  who,  full  of  pride  and  patriotic  ambition,  left 
the  Missouri  home  never  to  return.  On  this  battle  field 
and  that  one  their  bodies  lay  buried;  a  soldier's  grave, 
unmarked  and  unidentified;  a  family  of  expectant  loved 
ones,  in  fond  old  Missouri,  waiting  and  watching  in  vain. 
But  this  was  war,  the  cruel  war  now  over. 

Camp  was  broken  on  the  19th  of  April,  1866,  and  with 
their  discharges  the  men  took  their  departure  for  their 
Missouri  homes. 


35 
SOME  STATISTICAL  FACTS. 

In  service  from  July  15th,  1861,  to  April  19th,  1866. 
For  the  whole  period  of  service,  total  enrollment: 

Field  Officers 21 

Line  Officers 78 

Privates  and  Non-Commissioned  Officers, 1580 

Grand  total 1 679 

Losses  during  the  war  from  all  causes 834 

Survivors  on  April  19th,  1866 845 

The  above  figures  are  not  claimed  to  be  absolutely  cor- 
rect. There  is  a  great  lacking  of  data  in  the  written 
records  of  the  regiment  and  reports  of  officers,  but  they 
are  compiled  by  those  familiar  with  the  history  of  the 
regiment,  from  its  organization  to  its  discharge,  and  after 
great  pains  and  labor  they  give  them,  believing  that  they 
are  at  least  very  nearly  true. 


DATES  OF  CHANGES  IN  NUMBERS  OF  DIVISIONS. 

December  30th,  1864,  the  designation  of  the  3d  Division, 
16th  Army  Corps,  was  changed  to  2d  Division,  Detach- 
ment Army  of  the  Tennessee,  Maj.  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith  com- 
manding; Brigadier  Gen.  Kenner  Garrard  commanding 
the  2d  Division. 

February  22d,  1865,  the  designation  of  the  Army  of  the 
Tennessee  was  changed  to  the  16th  Army  Corps,  and  the 
2d  Division,  Brig.  Gen.  Garrard  commanding,  formerly 
the  old  3d,  16th  Army  Corps,  was  thereafter  known  as  the 
2d  of  the  reorganized   16th  Corps. 

During  the  war  the  21st  Missouri  was  attached  to  the 
following  Divisions: 

1st  Brigade,  6th  Division,  Army  of  West  Tennessee. 
1st  Brigade,  3d  Division,  16th  Army  Corps. 
1st  Brigade,  2d  Division,  Detachment  Army  of  the  Tenn. 
1st  Brigade,  2d  Division,  16th  Army  Corps. 


COMPLETE  ROSTER. 

Col.  D.  Moore,  Jan.  17,  1862;  mustered  out,  expiration  of  term,  Feb.  11, '65. 
Col.  James  D.  Lyon,  Aug.  17,  1865;  resigned  as  Lieut.  Col.  Aug.  7,  1865. 
Col.  Joseph  G.  Best,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

Lieut.  Col.  H.  M.  Woodyard,  Jan.  17,  1862;  resigned  Jan.  27,  1864. 
Lieut.  Col.  Edwin  Moore,  March  30,  1864;  mustered  out,  expiration  of  term, 

Feb.  11,  1865. 
Lieut.  Col.  James  D.  Lyon,  April  20,  1865;  promoted  Colonel. 
Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  G.  Best,  Aug.  17,  1865;  promoted  Colonel. 
Lieut.  Col.  Henry  McGonigle,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

Maj.  Barnabas  B.  King,  Jan.  17,  1862;  killed  at  Shiloh,  Tenn.,  April  6,'62. 
Maj.  Edwin  Moore,  May  27,  1862;  promoted  Lieut.  Col.  March  30,  1864. 
Maj.  George  W.  Fulton,  Aug.  5,  1864;  resigned  Dec.  11,  1864. 
Maj.  Charles  W.  Tracy,  Jan.  25,  1865;  revoked. 
Maj.  James  D.  Lyon,  Sept.  29,  1864;  transferred  from  24th  Mo.  Infantry; 

promoted  Lieutenant  Colonel. 
Maj.  Joseph  G.  Best,  May  30,  1865;  promoted  Lieut.  Col.  Aug.  17,  1865. 
Maj.  Henry  McGonigle,  Aug.  17,  1865;  promoted  Lieut.  Col.  Sept.  30,  '65. 
Maj.  E.  K.  Blackburn,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

Adjt.  Chas.  C.  Tobin,  March  27,  1862;  died  in  prison  May  6,  1862. 
Adjt.  Jas.  B.  Comstock,  July  9,  1863;  promoted  Capt.  A.  A.G.  U.S. Vols. 
Adjt.  Stephen  Hall,  Aug.  2,  1865. 
Quarter  Master  D.  W.  Pressell,  March  25,  1862. 

Surgeon  R.  H.  Wyman,  Dec.  21, 1861;  mustered  out  S.  O.  241,  April  23, '62. 
Surgeon  R.  H   Wyman,  May  21,  1862;  restored  to  service;  resigned  June 

11,  1862. 
Surgeon  David  Skillings,  June  18,  1862;  vacated  S.  O   108,  A.  A.  G.  Mo. 
Surgeon  J.  H.  Seaton,  July  26,  1862;  resigned  June  2,  1863. 
Surgeon  Abel  C.  Roberts,  July  9,  1863. 

Ass't  Surg.  J.  H.  Seaton,  March  25,  1862;  promoted  Surgeon  July  22,1862. 
Ass't  Surg.  W.  Knickerbocker,  April  25,  1863. 
Ass't  Surg.  F.  G.  Stanley,  June  12,  1863. 
Chaplain  John  H.  Cox,  May  20,  1862;  resigned  April  23,  1864. 

CO.  A. 

Capt  Charles  Yust,  March  27,  1862. 

1  st  Lieut.  Henry  Menn,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  July  12.  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  August  Gloeser,  July  22,  1862;  resigned  April  21,  1864. 

1st  Lieut.  Thomas  E.  Amburn,  Nov.  26,  1864. 

2d  Lieut.  Edwin  Turner,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  May  1,  1862. 

2d  Lieut.  Edward  F.  Nelson,  May  27,  1862;  resigned  Oct.  27,  1864. 

2d  Lieut.  G.  F.  Malthaner,  Sept.  30,  1865. 


37 

CO.  B. 

Capt.  Joseph  Story,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  July  12,  1862. 

Capt.  Josiah  W.  Davis,  Jan.  5,  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  L.  D.  Woodruff,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  July  13,  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  Richard  Reese,  Aug.  2,  1862. 

2d  Lieut.  Edward  Fox,  March  27,  1862;  died  May  19,  1862. 

2d  Lieut.  Jeremy  Hall,  Oct.  4,  1862;  mustered  out  at  expiration  of  term  of 

service,  Dec.  5,  1864. 
2d  Lieut.  Owen  S.  Hagle,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  C 

Capt.  Simon  Pearce,  March  27,  1862;  mustered  out  March,  1865. 

Capt.  Benjamin  S.  Palmer,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

1st  Lieut.  William  Lester,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  March  29;  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  W-  H.  Simpson,  May  20,  1862;  resigned  Aug.  31,  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  T.  H.  Richardson,  Jan.    5,  1862;  died   in   hospital  at  Memphis, 

Tenn.,  June  11,  1863. 
1st  Lieut.  Frank  M.  Goff,  Sept.  12,  1864;  died  of  wounds  April  10,  1865. 
1st  Lieut.  Stephen  Hall,  July  6,  1865;  promoted  Adjutant  Aug.  20,  1865. 
1st  Lieut.  Benjamin  S.  Palmer,  Aug.  2,  1865;  promoted  Captain. 
1st  Lieut.  C.  D.  Dowell,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  T.  H.  Richardson,  March  27, 1862;  promoted  1st  Lieut.  Dec. 29, '62. 
2d  Lieut.  James  McFall,  Jan.  5,  1863;  resigned  March  21,  1864. 
2d  Lieut.  Frank  M.  Goff,  Aug.  22,  1864;  promoted  1st  Lieut. 
2d  Lieut.  Ezra  Hambleton,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  D. 

Capt.  N.  W.  Murrow,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  July  12,  1862. 

Capt.  Henry  McGonigle,  Oct.  4,  1862;  promoted  Major  Aug.  17,  1865. 

Capt.  Joshua  Hagle,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

1st  Lieut.  Henry  McGonigle,  March  27,  1862;  promoted  Capt.  July  13,  '62. 

1st  Lieut.  Joshua  Hagle,  Feb.  11,  1863;  promoted  Captain. 

1st  Lieut.  Charles  L.  Norton,  Sept  30,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  Lewis  J.  Ainslie,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Oct.  22,  1862. 

2d  Lieut.  Charles  C  Murray,  Feb.  27,  1863;  resigned  Aug.  29,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  Benjamin  F.  Jenkins,  Oct.  18,  1865. 

CO.  E. 

Capt.  Geo.  W.  Fulton,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Jan.  16,  1863. 

Capt  E.  B.  Shafer,  Sept.  12,  1864. 

ist;Lieut  T.  M.  McQuoid,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Dec.  17,  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  James  B   Comstock,  Feb.  24,  1863;  commissioned  Adjutant. 

1st  Lieut    E.  B.  Shafer,  April  23,  1864;  promoted  Captain. 

1st  Lieut.  Nehemiah  D.  Starr,  Sept.  12,  1864;  resigned  Aug.  2,  1865. 

1st  Lieut  Martin  N.  Sinnott,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

2d  Lieut  W.  J.  Pulis,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  April  22,  1862. 

2d  Lieut.  James  B.  Comstock,  Aug.  14,  1862;  promoted  1st  Lt.  Jan.  1,  '63, 

2d  Lieut.  E.  B.  Shafer,  Feb.  24,  1863;  promoted  1st  Lieut.  April  23,  1863. 


38 

2d  Lieut.  N   D.  Starr,  May  24,  1864;  promoted  1st  Lieut. 

2d  Lieut.  Martin  N.  Sinnott,  Sept.  12,  1864;  promoted  1st  Lieut. 

2d  Lieut.  William  H.  Smith,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  F. 

Capt.  Joseph  T.  Farris,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Jan.  16,  1863. 

Capt.  Alex.  F.  Tracy,  Feb.  23,  1863;  resigned  Aug.  29,  1865. 

Capt.  Isaac  C.  Schram,  Sept.  30, 1865. 

1st  Lieut.  Alex.  F.  Tracy,  March  27,  1862;  promoted  Captain  Jan.  17,  '63. 

1st  Lieut.  F.  A.  Whittemore,  Feb.  23,  1863;  mustered  out  expiration  term 

of  service,  Feb.  11,  1865. 
1st  Lieut.  Richard  D.  Andrews,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  F.  A.  Whittemore,  March  27,  1862;  promoted  1st  Lt.  Jan.  17, '63. 
2d  Lieut.  Peter  H.  Orr,  Feb.  23,  1863;  killed  on  picket  duty  Oct.  27,  1863. 
2d  Lieut.  Isaac  C  Schram,  April  22,  1864;  promoted  Captain. 
2d  Lieut.  David  Danforth,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  G. 

Capt  T.  H.  Roseberry,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Aug.  31,  1862. 

Capt.  E.  K.  Blackburn,  Jan-  5,  1863;  promoted  Major  Sept.  30,  1865. 

Capt.  Daniel  R.  Allen,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

1st  Lieut.  E.  K   Blackburn,  March  27,  1862;  promoted  Capt.  Dec.  29,  '62. 

1st  Lieut.  Daniel  R.  Allen,  Jan.  5,  1863;  promoted  Capt.  Sept.  30, 1865. 

1st  Lieut.  Robert  H.  Harris,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  Daniel  R.  Allen,  March  27,  1862;  promoted  1st  Lieut.  Dec.  30/62. 

2d  Lieut.  Robert  H.  Harris,  Jan   5,  1863;  promoted  1st  Lieut.  9ept.  30,  '65. 

2d  Lieut.  Thomas  H.  Roseberry,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  H. 

Capt  John  H.  Cox,  March  27,  1862;  commissioned  Capt.  April  22,  1862. 

Capt.  Charles  W.  Tracy,  May  27,  1862. 

Capt.  James  Smith,  July  6,  1865. 

1st  Lieut.  Peter  Washburn,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Aug.  31,  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  Logan  Tomkins,  Nov.  19,  1862;  resigned  Dec.  20,  1864. 

1st  Lieut.  James  Smith,  Feb.  24,  1865;  promoted  Captain. 

1st  Lieut.  G.  K.  Jones,  July  6,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  W.  P.  Rickey,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  April  22,  1862. 

2d  Lieut.  James  Smith,  May  27,  1862;  promoted  1st  Lieut. 

2d  Lieut.  G.  K.  Jones,  Feb.  24,  1865;  promoted  1st  Lieut. 

2d  Lieut.  Geo.  Coffman,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  I. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Harle,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  July  11,  1862. 

Capt.  Joseph  G.  Best,  July  22,  1862;  promoted  Major  May  30,  1865. 

Capt.  Jeremiah  Hamilton,  July  6,  1865. 

1st  Lieut.  Joseph  Oliver,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  June  12,  1862. 

1st  Lieut.  Joseph  G.  Best,  June  18,  1862;  promoted  Captain. 


39 

ist  Lieut.  Geo.  W.  Stein,  Jan.  5,  1863;  mustered  out  expiration  of  term  of 

service,  Dec.  5, 1864. 
ist  Lieut.  Jeremiah  Hamilton,  Dec.  17,  1864;  promoted  Captain, 
ist  Lieut.  Henry  Deems,  July  6,  1865. 

2d  Lieut.  Hudson  Rice,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  July  22,  1862. 
2d  Lieut.  Geo.  W.  Stein,  Aug.  2,  1862;  promoted  ist  Lieut. 
2d  Lieut.  Cyrenus  Russel,  Jan.  5,  1863;  mustered  out  at  expiration  of  term 

of  service  Feb.  3,  1865. 
2d  Lieut.  William  H.  Smith,  Sept.  30,  1865. 

CO.  K. 

Capt.  Frederic  Leeser,  March  27,  1862^  resigned  Jan.  7,  1863. 

Capt.  Louis  Puster,  March  28,  1863. 

ist  Lieut.  A.  D.  Starkweather,  March  27,  1862;  resigned  Oct.  27,  1864. 

ist  Lieut.  W.  A-  Weaver,  Dec.  16,  1864. 

2d  Lieut.  Geo.  M.  Davis,  March  27,  1862;  discharged  disability  Dec.  11, '63. 

2d  Lieut.  Carlton  T.  Shamp,  Sept,  30,  1865. 

All  officers  not  noted  by  death  or  otherwise  discharged,  or  resigned  from 
the  service,  served  until  the  close  of  the  war  and  were  mustered  out  with 
the  regiment  on  the  19th  of  April,  1866. 

All  officers  whose  commissions  are  dated  March  27,  1862,  ranked  from 
July  15th,  1861;  all  others  from  date  of  commission. 


THE  REUNION 


Of  the  21st  Missouri  at  Edina,  Missouri. 


It  is  near  thirty  years  since  we  came  here  to  recruit  after  the 
battles  of  Shiloh  and  Corinth. 

POETRY   INSPIRED  BY  THE    OCCASION. 

As  we  grasp  old  comrades  by  the  hand, 

The  tears  unbidden  flow, 
And  memory  swiftly  calls  us  back 

To  some  thirty  years  ago. 

When  with  but  one  blanket  to  our  back, 

As  we  lay  upon  the  snow, 
And  slowly  munched  our  last  hard  tack 

Near  thirty  years  ago, 

And  talked  of  scenes  of  mortal  strife 

Through  which  we've  had  to  go, 
Thinking  of  home  and  the  dear  wife, 

While  time  moved  on  so  slow. 

And  as  we  pass  the  lone  grave  yards, 

Where  all  in  time  must  go, 
We  often  think  of  lonely  graves 

Made  some  thirty  years  ago. 

Think  of  the  breast  works  we  have  charged, 

Where  the  dead  so  thickly  lay, 
And  how  we  tumbled  them  into  the  trench, 

The  blue  as  well  as  the  gray. 

We  seem  to  hear  the  long  roll  beat, 

That  warns  us  of  the  foe, 
Then  hear  them  sound  their  own  retreat, 

And  it's  all  peace  here  below. 

And  when  we've  heard  the  last  roll  call, 

Seen  our  last  of  earthly  scenes, 
With  our  old  blue  coat  for  a  pall 

We'll  lay  down  to  pleasant  dreams. 

And  with  our  flag  still  waving  o'er  us, 

That  blessed  emblem  of  the  free, 
We'll  join  in  that  immortal  chorus 

And  help  sound  the  jubilee. 

Composed  by  A.  W.  Harlan,  of  Co.  F,  21st  Mo. 

Croton,  Ioiva,  Sept.  24th.  1892. 


\      \l.l>" 

s  h\»»U'  \a 


i\Vi    vVsv<  ';. 


