GENEALOGY  COLLECTICN 


ALLEN  COUNTY  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


3  1833  01415  4584 


GENEALOGY 

929.2 

P3743P 


/  J 


■^ 


^Jc         (L^-u^    J 


^^.. 


L    l^^^i 


CcM     /  .6-    l^j  i-~3  . 


'^^'^.^UilsaS^ 


%i:\ 


BRIAN  PENDLETON 


AND  HIS  MASSACHUSETTS, 
1634  -  1681 


by 
Everett  Hall  Pendleton 


11G4755 


"Produce  your  cause  saith  the  Lord ;  bring  forth  your  strong 
reasons,  saith  the  King  of  Jacob." 

"Let  them  bring  them  forth,  and  shew  us  what  shall  happen: 
let  them  shew  the  former  things,  what  they  be,  that  we  may  con- 
sider them,  and  know  the  latter  end  of  them;  or  declare  us  things 
for  to  come:'— Isaiah,  41 :21,  22. 

"Say  not  thou.  What  is  the  Cause  that  the  former  days  were 
better  than  these .?  for  thou  dost  not  inquire  wisely  concerning 
this." 

"That  which  hath  been  is  now ;  and  that  which  is  to  be  hath 
already  been ;  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  past." — Ecclesi- 
astes,  7:10 -,3:15. 

"The  past  is  dead  except  as  it  lives  and  works  in  the  charac- 
ter and  purposes  of  men  today.  .  .  .  History  has  value  for  us  only 
in  so  far  as  it  can  illumine  the  present  and  help  us  direct  the  fu- 
ture. I'd  like  to  know  if  there  are  laws  in  it,  or  at  least  lessons ; 
.  .  .  whether  the  past  can  guide  us  as  we  plunge  into  the  future.  I'd 
like  to  know  men  as  great  statesmen  knew  them — without  delu- 
sion— "    Will  Durant,  The  Mansions  of  Philosophy,  p.  308. 


This  Book  Is  Dedicated 

To  All  Puritans, 

Living  oe  Dead. 


CONTENTS 

chapter  page 

1.    The  Puritans 1 

Si          2.    Watertown,  Mass.,  1634-1638 10 

^          3.    Sudbury,  Mass.,  1639-1646 29 

1          4.    Watertown  and  Topsfield,  Mass.,  1646-1651 41 

vfe         5.    Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1651-1652 61 


^ 


6.    York  County,  Maine,  1652-1653 75 

0        7.    Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1653-1654 87 

^  '        8.    Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1655-1658 103 

\          9.    The  Quakers 124 

>^       10.    Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1659-1664 150 

.  ^      11.    Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1664-1665 170 

^     12.    Winter  Harbor,  Maine,  1665-1675 184 

13.  King  Philip's  War,  1675-1676 211 

14.  The  Last  Years,  1677-1681 230 

Notes 242 

Index  to  Brian  Pendleton 249 

General   Index    251 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

0pp.  Page 

Monument  to  Founders  of  Watertown Frontispiece 

St,  Martin's  Church,  Birmingham,  England 5 

First  Page  of  Town  Records,  Watertown,  Mass. 12 

Old  House  at  Ipswich,  Mass. 58 

Letter  to  Mr  Symonds 82 

Petition  to  General  Court  for  Services  in  Maine 85 

First  Town  House  at  Boston 107 

Petition  to  General  Court,  Account  Frozen  Man 121 

Old  Gaol  at  York,  Maine 193 

Letter  to  County  Auditors 221 

Warner  House,  Portsmouth,  N.  H. 230 


FOREWORD 

No  one  can  be  more  conscious  than  the  writer  of  the  short- 
comings of  this  work,  put  together  as  it  was  over  a  period  of  many 
years,  added  to,  re-written,  and  revised  time  and  again.  It  makes 
no  pretense  of  being  a  new  history  of  early  Massachusetts.  It 
covers  only  certain  phases  of  the  militant  Puritanism  prevailing 
there,  as  witnessed  and  as  practised  for  nearly  fifty  years  by 
Major  Brian  Pendleton. 

One  of  the  most  ardent  supporters  of  the  Bay  Colony,  his 
long  and  active  life  in  public  affairs  brought  him  into  direct  con- 
tact with  virtually  all  its  eiforts  to  expand  its  physical  boundaries 
while  restricting  the  spiritual  ones.  And  there  he  saw  the  work- 
ings of  the  Puritan  theocracy,  which  once,  in  Massachusetts,  ruled 
supreme.  There  in  the  Bay  Colony  it  created  what  it  conceived 
was  "a  little  kingdom  of  Christ  on  Earth,"  and  there  it  gave  pos- 
terity a  most  terrifying  example  of  a  people  religiously  governed, 
of  tyranny  in  the  name  of  Righteousness,  of  the  power  of  a  church 
over  a  civil  government. 

Let  us  enter  this  kingdom  with  one  of  its  apostles,  follow  his 
career  patiently  step  by  step  as  he  helps  build  up  new  settlements, 
makes  laws,  dispenses  justice,  plays  at  politics,  conducts  business, 
and  works  zealously  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  Colony  in  every 
way.  Let  us  go  on  now  to  consider  Brian  Pendleton  and  his 
Massachusetts,  so  much  of  which  he  saw,  and  part  of  which  he  was. 

Everett  H.  Pendleton 


South  Orange,  New  Jersey, 

November  30,  1950. 

vji 


BaiAN  Pendletok 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

In  the  preparation  of  this  work  grateful  acknowledgement 
for  help  rendered  should  be  given  to  Mr.  Frederic  W.  Cook,  Sec- 
retary of  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  to  the  late  John 
H.  Edmonds,  archivist  of  that  state,  to  Mr.  Julius  H.  Tuttle, 
Librarian  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  as  well  as  to 
Mr.  Otis  G.  Hammond,  Director  of  the  New  Hampshire  Historical 
Society,  Miss  Mae  Gilman,  Librarian  of  the  Maine  Historical  So- 
ciety, Prof.  George  L.  Kittredge,  of  Harvard,  and  Mr.  G.  Fred- 
erick Robinson  of  Watertown,  Mass. 

Nor  should  I  fail  to  mention  Mr.  Ralph  H.  Pendleton,  of 
Philadelphia,  whose  researches  in  the  Massachusetts  archives,  and 
whose  discovery  of  the  references  to  Brian  Pendleton  in  Bishop's 
New  England  Judged,  were  so  largely  responsible  for  getting  this 
work  started,  nor  Charles  S.  Pendleton,  Ph.D.,  of  Nashville, 
Tenn.,  who  contributed  many  a  helpful  criticism.  And  last,  but 
not  least  of  all  by  any  means,  special  thanks  are  due  my  sister-in- 
law,  the  late  Julia  Estabrook  Lawry,  who  so  carefully  and  pains- 
takingly deciphered  and  typewrote  all  my  terrible  manuscript, 
full  of  interlineations  and  revisions  as  it  was.  E.  H.  P. 


Inthoductory  ix 

ABBREVIATIONS 

Used  in  Citations  of  Authorities 
(Published  Works  Are  Italicized) 

Bishop — George  Bishop,  New  England  Judged  hy  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  (London,  1661;  Second  Part,  1667).  A  second  edi- 
tion, somewhat  abbreviated,  was  issued  there  in  1703,  a  reprint 
of  which  was  made  at  Philadelphia  in  1885.  Unless  the  original 
issues  are  specified  citations  of  Bishop  refer  to  the  Philadelphia 
reprint. 

Bond — Henry  Bond,  M.  D.,  Genealogies  and  History  of  Water- 
town,  Mass. 

Colonial  Papers  —  Calendar  State  Papers  —  Colonial  Papers, 
America  and  West  Indies. 

Documentary  History — Docurnentary  History  of  the  State  of 
Maine,  Vols.  I-XXIV,  published  by  the  Maine  Historical  So- 
ciety, Portland  1869-1916. 

Essex  Court  Records — Records  and  Files  of  the  Quarterly  Courts 
of  Essex  County,  Mass.,  1636-1683  (8  Vols.).  Published  by  the 
Essex  Institute,  Salem,  1911-1913. 

Folsom — George  Folsom,  History  of  Saco  and  Biddeford  (1830). 

Hackett — Frank  W  .Hackett,  Portsmouth  Records,  161^5-1656. 
A  Transcript  of  the  First  Thirty-five  Pages  of  the  Earliest 
Town  Book,  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire  (1886). 

Jenness  —  John  Scribner  Jenness,  Transcripts,  Original  Docu- 
ments in  the  English  Archives  Relating  to  the  Early  History  of 
New  Hampshire. 

Massachusetts  Archives — The  manuscript  archives  of  the  Com- 
monwealth of  Massachusetts,  bound  in  326  volumes,  and  lodged 
in  the  ofiice  of  the  Secretary  in  the  State  House  at  Boston. 

Massachusetts  Records — Records  of  the  Governor  and  Company 
of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  in  New  England.  Nathaniel  B. 
Shurtleff,  Editor.  (Boston,  1853-1854.) 


X  Brian  Pendleton 

Register  —  The  quarterly  magazine  of  the  New  England  His- 
toric-Genealogical Society  (Boston,  1847-  ). 

Savage  —  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  New  England  (Boston, 
1860-62,  4  Vols.). 

Sewel  —  W.  Sewel,  History  of  the  People  Called  Quakers  (Phila- 
delphia, 1811). 

Suffolk  Court  Files  —  Ancient  files  of  the  General,  Superior  (cir- 
cuit), County,  and  other  Courts  of  Massachusetts  now  in  the 
custody  of  the  Clerk  of  the  Supreme  Judicial  Court,  Boston. 

Winthrop  —  Gov.  Winthrop's  Journal  or  History  of  New  Eng- 
land, edited  by  James  Savage  (Boston,  1853).  Scribner's  Edi- 
tion, edited  by  James  Kendall  Hosmer,  L.L.D.,  was  published 
in  1908. 

York  Court  Records  —  This  citation  refers  to  the  Baxter  Tran- 
scripts of  the  original  records  from  1672-1692.  The  earlier 
ones,  from  1653-1672,  were  published  by  the  Maine  Historical 
Society  in  1928  as  Vol.  1  of  their  Maine  Proviiice  and  Court 
Records,  as  cited  in  this  work.  While  the  later  period  has  been 
covered  by  the  two  succeeding  volumes  issued  by  the  Society, 
our  citations  of  the  York  Court  Records  have  not  been  changed. 
It  should  be  understood  that  where  the  second  volume  of  the 
above  published  records  is  referred  to,  some  item  is  mentioned 
which  escaped  my  search  of  the  transcripts. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  early  court  records  in  Maine,  those  for 
New  Hampshire  have  been  published  since  my  search  of  the  origi- 
nals, appearing  as  Vol.  XL  of  the  State  Papers  of  New  Hamp- 
shire. Again,  to  save  time,  I  have  let  my  citations  stand  to  the 
three  sources  of  information  noted  above.  Any  references  to  Vol. 
XL  of  the  State  Papers  would  be  supplemental  to  what  I  already 
had. 

It  is  suggested,  in  order  to  preserve  the  continuity  of  the  nar- 
rative, that  no  attention  be  paid  to  the  footnotes  on  the  first  read- 
ing. Many  of  these  merely  serve  to  document  the  text,  but  some 
of  the  others  may  prove  of  much  interest  on  a  second  reading  of 
the  book. 


Introductory  xi 

Note.  The  Manuscript  records  of  the  early  New  Hampshire  Courts  held  at 
Dover  and  Portsmouth  are  now  in  the  custody  of  the  New  Hampshire  His- 
torical Society  at  Concord.  Those  for  the  years  1640-16.52  are  in  the  first 
volume  of  the  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  while  the  second  volume — 
some  500  pages — covers  the  period  from  1654-1672.  No  court  records  are  mixed 
in  with  the  deeds  after  this. 

Beginning  in  1659  a  new  set  of  hooks  was  opened,  known  as  the  County 
Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire.  This  title  applies  very  v/ell  to  the  first 
volume  in  this  series — 600  pages  of  odds  and  ends,  but  with  few  court  records 
themselves  for  the  years  from  1659  to  1672.  After  that  date  the  records  of  the 
Court  sittings  are  included  in  the  following  six  volumes  of  this  series  extending 
through  the  year  1685. 

Besides  these  bound  volumes,  there  is  a  large  collection  of  loose  papers 
known  as  the  New  Hampshire  Court  Records  preserved  by  the  Historical 
Society,  in  separate  and  numbered  folders.  While  all  these  various  records  are 
thoroughly  card  indexed  much  time  was  spent  nevertheless  in  going  through 
the  second  vohmie  of  Deeds  and  the  first  volume  of  Papers  page  by  page,  to 
make  sure  nothing  was  missed. 


OTHER  ABBREVIATIONS 

The  early  records  show  various  standard  abbreviations  in 
the  spelling  of  words,  but  for  the  sake  of  clarity  these  are  not  re- 
produced in  this  book  with  the  exception  of  those  instances  where 
the  letter  "y"  is  used  in  place  of  "th".  The  abbreviation  "ye", 
"ym",  "yt",  should  be  read — and  pronounced — as  "the",  "them", 
or  "that". 


CHAPTER  1 


THE  PURITANS 


Depart  ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  thence,  touch  no  unclean  things ;  eo 
ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her;  be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord. 

For  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste,  nor  go  by  flight:  for  the  Lord  will  go 
before  you;  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  reward.— /saiaft  62:11-12. 

The  causes  that  impelled  the  Puritan  migration  to  Massa- 
chusetts are  too  well  known  to  require  much  discussion  here.  Their 
religious  policy  in  the  Commonwealth  they  founded  is,  however, 
much  less  generally  understood.  Just  as  we  still  see  frequent  refer- 
ences to  the  witches  "burnt"  in  Salem,  so  does  that  other  wide- 
spread error  persist  that  the  Puritans  left  their  old  homes  in  Eng- 
land for  the  sake  of  establishing  "freedom  to  worship  God."  In  the 
light  of  the  records  they  were  so  careful  to  leave  to  posterity,  it 
is  difficult  to  understand  how  such  errors  concerning  them  ever 
came  into  existence. 

The  Puritans  of  Massachusetts  had  not  the  slightest  concep- 
tion of  liberty  of  conscience  in  matters  of  religion  as  we  under- 
stand it  today.  The  freedom  of  worship  they  sought  was  for  them- 
selves alone.  Quite  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  their  times,  toler- 
ation of  any  other  belief  was  abhorrent  to  them.  Outside  of  Hol- 
land, after  the  expulsion  of  the  Spaniards,  and  later,  in  the  colony 
Roger  Williams  founded,  such  a  monstrous  thing  as  religious 
toleration  was  inconceivable. 

Next  to  heresy  it  ranked  as  a  pernicious  error,  and  to  the 
Non-Conformist  there  was  but  little  difference  between  the  repres- 
sive measures  applied  by  the  Church  of  Rome,  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land— or  the  Church  of  Masachusetts.  One  organization  might 
use  the  torture  chamber  and  the  stake,  another  the  prison,  the 
whipping  post,  and  the  gallows,  but  the  basic  situation  was  vir- 
tually the  same.  Wherever  a  church  claimed  dominion  over  the 
mind  of  man  and  had  the  civil  power  under  its  control,  torment 
and  death  awaited  him  who  raised  his  voice  against  its  tyranny. 

In  this  respect  the  Puritans  brought  no  new  dispensation 
across  the  sea.  They  believed  in  a  rigid  conformity.  Theirs  was 
still  the  old  ideal  of  the  church-state,  where  all  the  inhabitants 


2  Brian  Pendleton 

should  be  of  one  faith.  But  while  the  general  pattern  was  the  same, 
the  details  were  different.  Each  of  their  churches  was  a  unit  in 
itself,  although  the  same  as  other  Puritan  churches  in  creed.  There 
was  no  hierachy,  no  ritual,  no  Purgatory,  no  Prayer  Book.  The 
Bible  alone  was  to  be  their  rule  of  life,  consulted  for  guidance  in 
all  matters  both  great  and  small.  They  would  purify  religion  from 
the  dross  of  human  inventions.  They  would  purge  society  of  its 
corruptions.  They  would  make  their  faith  a  part  of  their  daily 
lives,  a  living  force,  not  a  perfunctory  or  superstitious  observance 
of  ancient  rites  that  had  become  meaningless.  But  back  of  this 
exalted  concept  there  loomed  an  awful  God,  and  underneath  still 
glowed  the  eternal  flames  of  Hell. 

Old  Testament  parallels  fired  their  imagination.  They  saw 
themselves  as  children  of  Israel  escaping  from  Egypt's  bondage. 
They  too  would  found  a  Zion  in  the  wilderness  where  God  should 
walk  with  them  and  reveal  His  will  to  the  righteous.  Enthusiasts 
all,  they  had  not  only  the  terrible  zeal  of  fanatics,  but  the  vigor 
and  tenacity  of  their  race.  They  would  press  on  in  the  course  they 
had  set,  regardless  of  opposition  from  any  source.  They  would 
bring  to  the  earth  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  as  they  conceived  it,  a 
state  ruled  solely  by  the  word  of  God.  What  glory  would  have 
been  theirs  if  they  had  accomplished  this — if  they  had  made  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  the  basis  of  their  Commonwealth  instead  of 
the  terrors  of  the  Old  Testament !  But  they  were  imbued  with  the 
spirit  of  Calvin  and  not  of  Christ— and  they  preferred  a  God  of 
Wrath  to  a  God  of  Love. 

To  realize  their  ideal  of  a  church-state  they  had  to  provide 
against  two  dangers:  first,  interference  by  the  home  authorities, 
and  second,  dissensions  among  themselves.  Against  the  first,  time 
and  distance  worked  in  their  favor.  They  were  far  away  from 
England.  To  cross  the  ocean  and  return  was  a  matter  of  months. 
They  could  temporize  and  delay.  They  became  gifted  in  evading 
issues.  With  an  eye  to  future  eventualities  they  had  cannily 
brought  with  them  to  Massachusetts  the  Charter  granted  them 
by  King  Charles,  and  this,  next  to  their  Bible,  they  came  to  regard 
as  their  refuge  and  their  strength.  Its  liberal  provisions  lost  noth- 
ing through  their  own  interpretations — and  they  were  experts  in 
casuistry.  "A  stubborn  and  elusive  people",  as  one  of  their  con- 
temporaries called  them,  they  conceded  nothing  that  was  not 
forced  upon  them. 


The  Puritans 


As  to  the  second  menace  that  threatened  them,  they  never 
temporized  nor  delayed  in  handling  that.  Almost  from  the  time  of 
their  landing  on  these  shores  they  were  so  busily  engaged  in  weed- 
ing out  the  tares  from  the  Lord's  vineyard  that  a  stream  of  the 
banished  either  returned  to  England  or  started  settlements  of 
their  own  outside  of  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts.  For  over 
fifty  years  the  Colony  ruled  almost  as  an  independent  state,  a 
state  designed  to  promote  the  interest  of  its  church,  and  to  sup- 
press any  heresy  which  would  undermine  the  power  of  its  clergy. 
Like  so  many  other  reform  movements,  or  noble  experiments, 
theirs  quickly  fell  into  the  hands  of  its  extremists  and  under  their 
savage  control  became  just  another  form  of  tyranny. 

It  is  doubtful  if  many  of  them  fully  realized  this.  They  were 
terribly  in  earnest.  They  were  fiercely  convinced  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  their  cause,  the  tremendous  importance  of  their  adventure. 
They  felt,  as  one  of  them  wrote  with  prophetic  vision,  "the  Lord 
Christ  intends  to  achieve  greater  matters  by  this  little  handful 
than  the  world  is  aware  of".^  A  glamorous  vision  held  them,  swept 
them  on,  a  chosen  people  doing  the  will  of  God.  In  such  a  fanatical 
community  there  was  no  room  for  dissenters  and  the  ruthless  ardor 
with  which  the  Puritan  leaders  of  Massachusetts  held  to  their  ideal 
furnishes  the  key  not  only  to  their  persecution  of  other  sects,  but 
also  to  their  obstinate  resistance  to  any  interference  in  their  af- 
fairs by  either  King  or  Council.  They  had  sought  the  wilderness 
in  order  to  live  their  faith.  That  faith  they  would  defend  at  any 
cost.  Their  sacrifices  should  not  be  in  vain.  They  would  yet  tri- 
umph over  the  Powers  of  Darkness.  For  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  ter- 
rible and  mighty,  led  them,  an  invincible  army,  an  army  with  ban- 
ners. Their  hymns,  like  martial  music,  stirred  them,  and  through 
those  lofty  strains  they  seemed  to  hear  the  sound  of  far  off  trum- 
pets, and  feel  a  shaking  of  the  earth.  But  under  their  fervor  there 
lurked  a  primitive  ferocity,  and  their  exaltation  could  run  to  wild 
excess. 

So  they  came,  fired  by  an  ardent  zeal  to  work  out  their  ex- 
periment, unwitting  that  it  is  not  good  for  any  community  to  be 
too  religious,  to  set  up  standards  that  are  merely  repressive,  to 
put  all  human  instincts  under  harsh  restraint.  Men  of  imagina- 
tion, yet  intensely  practical,  they  had  a  genius  for  organization,  a, 

^Edward  Johnson,    Wonder-Working  Providence   of  Zion's   Saviour  in  New 
England. 


4  Bbiax  Pendleton 

talent  for  self-government — and  an  inordinate  aptitude  for  mak- 
ing laws.  They  were  capably  led.  An  aggressive  and  domineering 
clergy  saw  to  their  spiritual  welfare  and  worked  hand  in  glove 
with  the  civil  power  to  maintain  authority.  For  years  the  political 
government  was  vested  in  a  small  and  aristocratic  group,  Win- 
throp  and  Dudley  alternating,  with  occasional  interruptions,  as 
Governor  and  Deputy  Governor,  followed  by  Endicott,  Belling- 
ham,  Leverett,  and  Bradstreet.  The  Court  of  Assistants  was  also 
nearly  self-perpetuating,  and  in  the  County  Courts  the  same  Jus- 
tices served  year  after  year.  The  House  of  Deputies  alone  showed 
any  traits  of  a  democracy.  On  the  whole,  the  government  was 
most  strongly  centralized,  and  the  leading  men  in  the  towns  remote 
from  Boston  seem  to  have  been  designedly  chosen  to  carry  out  the 
austere  program  of  the  rulers  at  the  Bay. 

The  maintenance  of  the  Colony's  solidarity  depended  upon 
these  local  authorities.  Their  tasks  were  many  and  trying.  They 
ran  the  town's  affairs,  drilled  the  militia  companies,  or  "train 
bands"  as  they  were  called,  laid  out  land  grants,  sat  as  Justices, 
served  on  commissions  of  all  kinds,  acted  as  arbitrators,  went  as 
Deputies  to  the  General  Court,  combated  the  unruly  tendencies  of 
frontier  life,  suppressed  any  murmering  in  the  ranks,  supported 
the  ministry.  Vigorous  and  forceful  men,  captains  of  the  advance 
troops  in  that  army  of  the  Lord,  they  held  the  outposts  firmly  for 
Massachusetts,  maintained  her  dignity,  and  enforced  her  laws. 
Strong  men  in  the  organization,  these  stalwarts  of  old,  rulers  of 
wilderness  towns  or  near-forgotten  seaports,  few  were  given  the 
opportunity  to  play  at  politics  as  was  Brian  Pendleton  while 
maintaining  authority  over  the  non-Puritan  settlements  which 
Massachusetts  absorbed  "at  the  Eastward". 

You  will  find  him  mentioned  in  the  old  histories  of  the  Colony ; 
Hubbard  refers  to  him,  as  does  Hutchinson,  and  also,  alas.  Bishop, 
the  Quaker  protagonist,  in  his  terrible  indictment,  New  England 
Judged.  And  he  is  named  by  the  early  historians  of  New  Hamp- 
shire and  Maine,  Belknap,  and  Sullivan,  and  later  by  Williamson 
and  Sanborn,  as  well  as  by  those  who  have  written  the  stories  of 
the  various  towns  where  he  lived  as  he  went  from  one  settlement  to 
another,  seeking  at  first  his  mission  in  life,  and  later  finding  the 
work  for  which  he  was  fitted.  An  active  and  energetic  man,  some- 
what inclined  in  his  earlier  days  to  liberality,  but  later  an  ardent 
partisan,  a  typical  Puritan  of  his  time,  not  too  merciful  when  en- 


The  Pxjhitaks  5 

gaged  in  enforcing  the  laws,  tenacious  in  whatever  he  undertook, 
acquisitive  and  generous,  devout,  and  most  pragmatical  in  every 
sense  of  the  word,  his  long  career  in  public  affairs  touched  upon 
many  of  the  most  interesting  phases  of  the  Colony's  early  history. 

Born  about  the  year  1599,^  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  reign,  no 
record  has  yet  been  found  of  his  birthplace  or  parentage.  There 
is  evidence,  however,  that  he  belonged  to  the  ancient  family  of  the 
name  in  Manchester,  England,  several  of  whom  were  prominent 
there  as  merchants  and  churchmen  during  the  sixteenth  century. 
And  it  is  pretty  well  established  he  was  closely  related  to  that 
Francis  Pendleton  who  went  to  London,  became  wealthy,  and  was 
a  stockholder  in  the  Virginia  Company,  chartered  to  colonize  a 
certain  part  of  North  America.^  In  any  event,  his  background  in 
England  was  sufficient  to  give  him  immediate  standing  among  his 
fellow  colonists,  and  to  accord  him  at  once  that  title  of  respect — 
"Mr."  (Master) — by  which  our  somewhat  snobbish  colonial  re- 
corders took  pains  to  designate  those  they  regarded  as  of  the 
best  condition.* 

How  Brian  Pendleton  came  by  that  estate  is  not  yet  known. 
Up  to  the  present  time  only  three  references  to  him  have  been 
found  in  the  vast  accumulation  of  early  records  in  England.  The 
first  of  these,  which  appears  in  the  parish  registers  of  St.  Martin's 

» In  a  deposition  he  made  2  July,  1669,  Pendleton  stated  his  age  was  "about 
seventy  years". — New  Hampshire  Provincial  Papers,  XII,  101. 
» Brown's  Genesis  of  the  United  States,  I,  302.  Francis  Pendleton,  son  of  Rev. 
Dr.  Edward  Pendleton  of  Eccles,  Manchester,  was  born  in  1571,  but  in  his  will 
— 1624r— he  named  only  two  sons,  Michael  and  Richard.  [Principal  Probate 
Registry,  London. — "No.  77  Byrde".]  Francis  Pendleton  had  a  brother,  Ed- 
ward, Jr.,  born  1570,  who  was  probably  the  Edward  Pendleton  of  Lincoln  Col- 
lege, Oxford  University,  in  1591,  although  his  age— 19— as  there  given  does  not 
correspond  with  Edward,  Jr.'s  in  that  year.— Oxford  Mat.  Register,  III,  1141. 

'The  abbreviation  "Mr."  used  in  the  records  during  this  period  is  not  to  be 
read  as  "Mister",  a  weaker  form  which  has  well  nigh  lost  its  ancient  significance. 
The  Englishman's  idea  of  caste,  a  heritage  from  feudal  times,  lasted  for  genera- 
tions in  the  colony,  and  manifested  itself  in  many  odd  ways.  The  case  of  Josias 
Plaistow  is  famous.  Convicted  of  stealing  corn  from  the  Indians  he  was  sen- 
tenced to  make  double  restitution,  fined  £5,  and  degraded — "hereafter  to  be 
called  by  the  name  of  Josias,  &  not  Mr,  as  formerly  hee  used  to  be."  [Massa- 
chusetts Records,  1,  92.]  The  seating  of  the  congregation  in  the  meeting  houses 
was  as  delicate  a  problem  to  the  settlers  as  that  which  vexes  our  social  arbiters 
at  Washington  when  giving  a  state  dinner.  And  at  Yale  and  Harvard,  almost 
up  to  the  time  of  the  Revolution,  when  it  was  discovered  that  all  men  were 
born  free  and  equal,  the  names  of  the  students  in  the  college  catalogues  were 
arranged  according  to  their  supposed  social  rank  instead  of  alphabetically. — 
See  Century  Dictionary  for  the  definition  of  the  word  "Mister";  also  Palfrey, 
History  of  New  England,  1,  300;  C.  S.  Hall,  Hall  Ancestry,  pp.  4-7,  and  Owen, 
Old  Times  in  Saco,  pp.  47-48. 


6  Brian  Pendleton 

Church,  Birmingham,  records  his  marriage  to  Eleanor  Price  on 
April  22,  1619.  This  entry  is  followed  by  the  record  of  the  bap- 
tism of  their  first-born  son,  Nicholas,  of  whom  nothing  further  is 
known.^  An  old  "View  of  Ancient  Birmingham",  taken  "from 
Ravenhurst  (neere  London  road)  on  the  Southeast  .  .  .  1640,"* 
shows  that  great  city  was  then  hardly  more  than  a  large,  com- 
pactly built  town,  surrounded  by  pleasant  fields  and  groves,  and 
dominated  by  St.  Martin's  standing  at  the  top  of  a  ridge  up  which 
clambered  narrow  streets  lined  with  tall  and  slender  houses.'^ 

Pendleton  seems  to  have  left  Birmingham  not  long  after  the 
birth  of  his  first  child,  no  subsequent  record  of  him  there  having 
appeared.  In  all  likelihood  he  soon  took  that  road  to  the  southeast 
which  ran  near  Ravenhurst,  and  removed — or  perhaps  returned 
— to  London,  then  as  now,  the  great  metropolis  of  England.  Here 
a  few  years  later  we  find  him  established  as  a  householder,  when 
in  1625 — the  year  that  Charles  I  was  crowned — one  Elizabeth 
King,  of  the  parish  of  St.  Sepulchre's  without  Newgate,  willed  her 
entire  property  to  "Hellen  Pendleton,  wife  of  Bryan  Pendleton  in 
whose  house  she  lodges".*  It  is  quite  likely  that  Pendleton's  other 
children  were  baptized  in  this  church,  but  the  early  registers  are 
no  longer  in  existence.  They  are  supposed  to  have  been  destroyed 
in  the  Great  Fire  of  London  in  1666,  which  so  badly  damaged  the 
edifice  that  its  subsequent  repairs  and  rebuildings  have  left  it  little 
semblance  to  its  original  appearance.^ 

Of  Pendleton's  life  in  London  nothing  definite  is  known.  From 
his  later  activities  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  he  was  engaged  in 
some  business  there  which  was  fairly  prosperous,  and  he  may  also 
have  been  a  member  of  one  of  the  city's  military  companies.  His 
connection  with  St.   Sepulchre's,  however,  quite  possibly  had  a 

"Only  fifty  copies  of  the  early  register  of  this  church  were  printed.  One  of 
these  is  owned  by  the  New  York  Historical  Society.  The  marriage  record 
shown  on  page  108  appears  as  "Bryene  pendelton  et  EUinor  prise." 

•  Reproduced  in  Knight's  Old  England,  Vol.  2,  p.  225. 

'At  last  accounts,  St.  Martin's  Church,  a  handsome  stone  edifice,  was  still 
undergoing  repairs  from  the  heavy  damage  inflicted  on  it  during  the  German 
air  raid  on  Birmingham  in  April,  1941.  The  early  parish  register,  however, 
escaped  destruction. 

•  Abstracts  of  English  records  made  by  Messrs.  Waters,  Withington,  and 
Lea,  now  deposited  with  the  Essex  Institute,  Salem,  Mass.  Card  index  to  this 
will  gives  reference  as  "Const.  London  (1G21-6)  G09." 

•  Interesting  accounts  of  this  ancient  church,  which  dates  back  to  the  twelfth 
century,  appear  in  Pennant's  London  [p.  236],  and  Daniell's  London  City 
Churches. 


The  Pukitans  7 

most  determining  influence  on  his  future  career.  Up  to  this  time 
it  is  doubtful  if  he  had  been  fired  with  the  zeal  of  the  religious 
reformers  who  were  then  boring  from  within  to  obtain  control  of 
the  Church  of  England  and  strip  it  of  all  vestiges  of  Rome.  What- 
ever savored  of  "Popery"  was  anathema  to  them — they  even  abol- 
ished Christmas  later  on^^ — and  we  can  hardly  conceive  of  a  good 
Puritan,  as  these  reformers  had  come  to  be  called,  naming  a  son 
by  any  such  heathenish  name  as  Nicholas,  particularly  when  that 
Saint's  day  may  have  been  the  very  one  on  which  the  child  was 
born.^^ 

But  if  Pendleton  was  still  unregenerate  when  he  came  to  Lon- 
don this  was  soon  to  be  changed.  The  ferment  working  so  long  in 
the  churches  of  England,  now  entered  St.  Sepulchre's  when  the 
famous  Puritan  divine,  Hugh  Peters,  came  there  as  a  lecturer.^^  It 
is  due  to  him,  perhaps,  that  Pendleton  was  brought  to  a  state  of 
grace,  becoming  a  seeker  of  perfection.  Fired  with  the  reformer's 
zeal,  an  apostle  of  righteousness,  he  became  one  of  those  deter- 
mined to  make  others  see  the  light  as  he  saw  it  himself.  And  other 
influences  there  may  also  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  him  to 
kindle  his  imagination.  A  still  more  famous  man  than  Peters  was 
a  communicant  of  this  church  at  the  time — no  less  a  personage 
than  the  adventurer-explorer,  Capt.  John  Smith,  then  busily  en- 
gaged in  writing  of  the  new  lands  beyond  the  seas,  an  early  propa- 
gandist trying  to  arouse  his  countrymen  to  vision  England's  fu- 
ture as  it  appeared  to  him. 

Stirring  years  these,  ominous  years.  Years  of  a  leaven  work- 
ing, an  inevitable  contest  coming  to  a  head,  a  King  who  would  be 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  I,  366. 

"According  to  the  Century  Dictionary  [IX,  736]  St.  Nicholas'  Day  is  Decem- 
ber 6th.  But  under  the  Julian  Calendar  which  was  in  effect  in  England  up  to 
1751,  it  would  have  fallen  on  November  25th — and  Pendleton's  son,  Nicholas, 
was  baptized  on  the  following  December  4th. 

"Rev.  Hugh  Peters  (or  Peter),  born  in  Cornwall  in  1598,  received  the  degree 
of  B.  A.  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  in  1616,  and  M.  A.  in  1622.  Soon  after- 
wards he  was  ordained  by  Dr.  Mountain,  Bishop  of  London,  and  licensed  as  a 
lecturer  in  the  church  of  St.  Sepulchre.  A  fiery  preacher,  he  made  thousands 
of  converts  to  the  truth  as  he  saw  it,  until  the  persecution  of  Bishop  Laud 
caused  him  to  flee  to  Holland.  Here  he  remained  for  five  or  six  years,  emi- 
grating to  New  England  in  1635.  In  the  following  year  he  became  minister 
of  the  First  Church  at  Salem.  In  1641  he  was  sent  as  the  Colony's  agent  to 
England  and  filled  important  ofl5ces  under  Cromwell  during  the  years  of  the 
Commonwealth.  Upon  the  Restoration  he  was  imprisoned  in  the  Tower  of 
London  and  tried  and  convicted  as  an  accomplice  in  the  execution  of  Charles 
I.  He  was  hanged  17  Oct.,  1660. — Lechford's  Note  Book,  p.  x;  Rev.  Samuel 
Peters'  History  of  Rev.  Hugh  Peters,  A.  M.  (1807). 


8  Brian  Pendleton 

absolute  in  the  state,  a  Bishop  who  would  be  absolute  in  the  church, 
Parliament  twice  dissolved,  scores  of  ministers  deprived  of  their 
livings  because  of  their  Independent  leanings,  the  Englishman's 
constitutional  rights  trampled  under  foot.  But  ever  as  the  pres- 
sure from  arbitrary  authority  increased,  the  greater  became  the 
resistance,  the  harder  the  Puritan  will,  until  in  time  there  came 
an  identification  of  the  religious  struggle  with  the  concurrent  one 
for  civil  rights. 

By  1629  both  causes  seemed  at  their  lowest  ebb.  Parliament, 
remonstrating  against  the  enforcement  of  ritual  in  the  church,  was 
dissolved  for  the  second  time — not  to  be  summoned  again  for 
eleven  years — and  seven  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  were 
imprisoned.  Vexatious  duties  were  imposed,  obnoxious  old  customs 
revived  for  raising  money,  especially  fines  levied  by  the  Court 
called  the  Star  Chamber.  The  King  was  the  state.  Bishop  Laud  the 
church — and  over  their  heads  there  slowly  grew  the  gathering 
storm  of  civil  war.  Thunder  in  the  air,  but  they  could  not  hear  it ; 
a  nation's  growing  wrath,  but  they  could  not  feel  it.  Stubbornly 
the  one,  grimly  the  other,  they  held  to  their  course,  and  went  on 
to  their  doom. 

But  that  doom  was  long  in  coming.  Despair  fell  upon  the 
leaders  of  the  Puritans.  They  seemed  to  be  living  again  under 
Egypt's  bondage.  Open  rebellion  was  not  yet  possible.  Escape 
seemed  the  only  way  out,  escape  to  a  new  Canaan  across  the  At- 
lantic, where  they  could  practice  their  pure  religion  without  inter- 
ference by  either  King  or  Bishop.  The  venture  did  not  prove  diffi- 
cult of  accomplishment.  Their  plan  fitted  in  very  well  with  the 
growing  idea  that  England's  destiny  lay  beyond  the  seas.  The 
Spaniards  were  already  firmly  established  in  Central  and  South 
America,  the  French  were  in  Nova  Scotia  and  on  the  St.  Law- 
rence, the  Dutch  on  the  Hudson.  England  had  lagged  behind  in 
the  race  for  empire,  although  claiming  all  of  North  America  by 
right  of  discovery.  Outside  of  Virginia  her  attempts  at  coloniz- 
ing had  had  thus  far  but  little  organized  backing,  and  were  more 
in  the  nature  of  trading  adventures  sent  out  by  wealthy  men  like 
Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges  and  John  Mason,  who  had  received  more 
or  less  vague  grants  in  New  England  and  had  spent  large  sums 
in  trying  to  obtain  a  foothold  there.  Their  experiments  had  not 
been  financially  profitable,  and  the  desperate  struggle  of  the  Pil- 
grims at  Plymouth  for  very  existence  was  not  a  particularly  en- 


The  Pueitans  9 

couraging  prospect  to  those  who  now  decided  the  time  had  come 
to  leave  a  country  which  had  grown  intolerable  to  them.^^ 

In  spite  of  the  ill  fortune  that  had  attended  the  earlier  at- 
tempts at  colonizing  in  New  England,  the  leaders  of  the  extremist 
group  in  the  Puritan  party  decided  nevertheless  to  found  their 
settlements  there,  organizing  a  stock  company.  A  patent  was  se- 
cured from  the  Council  for  New  England  in  1628,  and  John  Endi- 
cott,  with  a  few  followers,  was  sent  over  to  take  possession.  In  the 
following  year  a  charter  was  procured  from  the  King  confirming 
the  territory  granted  in  the  patent  and  providing  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  plantation.  Several  hundred  settlers  went  over  in  that 
year,  but  the  great  exodus  did  not  start  until  the  Spring  of  1630 
when  John  Winthrop,  Thomas  Dudley,  Sir  Richard  Saltonstall, 
and  other  leaders,  with  nearly  a  thousand  of  their  fellow  enthu- 
siasts, embarked  for  Massachusetts  Bay,  the  Promised  Land.  The 
Great  Migration  was  now  definitely  under  way. 


"  In  view  of  the  examples  the  Puritans  had  before  them,  it  would  seem  that 
some  modern  historians  have  rather  overdone  the  "economic  theory"  as  one  of 
the  chief  causes  of  the  migration.  The  great  majority  of  the  planters  were  of 
the  English  yeomanry,  and  few  of  them  had  known  poverty  or  want  before 
landing  on  these  shores.  When  Massachusetts  went  through  the  first  financial 
crisis  in  1640,  only  a  few  hundred  of  the  settlers  left  for  the  Puritan  colonies 
in  the  West  Indies.  The  remainder  held  on  with  a  tenacity  which  had  its  roots 
in  deeper  soil  than  the  mere  desire  to  improve  a  financial  status. 


CHAPTER  II 


WATERTOWN 
1634  -  1638 


In  rightousness  shalt  thou  be  established:  thou  shalt  be  far  from  oppres- 
sion; for  thou  shalt  not  fear:  and  from  terror;  for  it  shall  not  come  near  thee. 
— Isaiah,  54:14. 

Governor  Winthrop's  flagship,  the  Arbella,  largest  and  fast- 
est of  the  fleet,  dropped  anchor  off  Salem  on  June  12  [1630], 
sixty  days  out  of  Southampton.  The  Jewell  arrived  the  following 
day,  the  Ambrose,  a  few  days  later.  But  it  was  not  until  the  sixth 
of  July  that  the  last  four  of  the  eight  slower  ships  finally  strag- 
gled in. 

Salem  was  only  a  port  of  call  for  them,  however.  The  lead- 
ers of  this  migration  had  other  plans  in  mind.  They  had  good 
reason  for  occupying  the  land  at  the  mouth  of  the  Charles  river 
before  another  patentee  could  get  established.  The  pioneers  at 
Salem  had  already  gone  down  there  and  built  a  large  house  for 
them  at  the  river's  mouth  and  here  they  made  their  rendezvous, 
calling  the  place  Charlestown. 

Within  the  next  few  weeks,  as  ship  after  ship  came  in,  the 
settlers  scattered  over  the  adjacent  territory.  Some  of  them,  in- 
cluding Governor  Winthrop,  crossed  the  river  and  founded  Bos- 
ton. Other  groups  went  a  few  miles  south  and  settled  Dorchester 
and  Roxbury.  A  fourth  contingent,  of  about  one  hundred  fami- 
lies, led  by  the  Rev.  George  Phillips  and  Sir  Richard  Saltonstall, 
went  up  the  river  and  founded  Watertown.^ 

This  was  an  ideal  site  for  a  new  settlement,  on  tide  water 
as  it  was,  and  with  plenty  of  fertile  land  for  cultivation.    The 

^Sir  Richard  Saltonstall  with  his  younger  children,  returned  to  England  in  a 
year  or  two,  where  he  remained  a  good  friend  of  the  Colony.  He  was  minister 
to  Holland  for  a  time  and  while  there  had  his  portrait  painted  by  Rembrandt. 
He  left  two  sons  in  Massachusetts  and  their  descendants  have  been  prominent 
there,  as  well  as  in  Connecticut,  for  generations.  One  of  them,  Leverett  Salton- 
stall, was  chosen  Governor  of  Massachusetts  in  1938,  was  re-elected  in  1940, 
and  for  some  years  past  has  been  one  of  the  state's  Senators  at  Washington. 

A  statue  of  Sir  Richard  surmounts  the  Memorial  erected  to  the  founders 
of  Watertown  on  its  three  hundredth  anniversary.  On  the  tablets  at  the  base 
of  the  monument,  the  names  of  the  earliest  settlers  are  inscribed,  Brian  Pendle- 
ton's appearing  among  them. 

10 


Watertown  11 

Indians,  years  before,  had  cleared  this  tract  for  their  own  corn 
fields,  burning  off  the  underbrush  and  the  smaller  trees.  But  there 
were  few  Indians  left  around  Massachusetts  Bay  when  the  first 
settlers  arrived.  A  strange  pestilence,  probably  brought  from 
overseas  by  earlier  visitors  had  decimated  the  tribes  in  1617  and 
their  lands  lay  open  to  the  English — an  act  of  Providence  as  many 
of  them  believed,  "God  casting  out  the  heathen  to  make  room  for 
His  people".^ 

Whether  or  not  Brian  Pendleton  came  with  the  Winthrop 
fleet  is  uncertain.  No  record  has  yet  been  found  of  his  "license 
to  go  beyond  the  seas",  nor  has  his  name  so  far  appeared  in  any 
passenger  list  that  has  come  down  to  us  from  those  tiny  emigrant 
ships  of  the  olden  times^ — ships  so  small  and  cramped  for  quar- 
ters that  the  hardships  of  the  west-bound  passage,  from  sixty  to 
ninety  days  as  a  rule,  were  exceeded  only  by  the  privations  the 
first  settlers  underwent  when  trying  to  establish  themselves  in  the 
new  world.'* 

While  some  of  Watertown's  historians  say  that  Pendleton 
was  there  in  1630,  we  have  been  unable  to  confirm  this.^  He  was 
not  among  the  hundred  and  eighty  men — twenty-five  from  Water- 
town — who  applied  for  admission  as  freemen  of  the  colony  in  Oc- 
tober that  year,  and  were  accepted  as  such  in  1631,^  before  church 
membership  became  a  pre-requisite. 

The  records  of  the  Watertown  church  are  not  extant  before 
1686,  and  those  of  the  community  itself  do  not  begin  until  the 

*  As  piously  affirmed  by  their  historian,  the  Rev.  William  Hubbard,  in  his  Gen- 
eral History  of  New  England  [p.  195].  This  early  chronicler  died  at  Ipswich, 
Mass.,  in  1704  aged  83.  His  History  was  published  by  the  Massachusetts  His- 
torical Society  in  1815.  The  comment  noted,  while  applied  to  an  epidemic  of 
small-pox  which  he  says  afflicted  the  savages  in  the  winter  of  1633-34,  is  equally 
applicable  to  their  former  calamity. 

*  Charles  E.  Banks  in  his  Winthrop  Fleet  lists  the  names  of  some  seven  hundred 
emigrants  who  made  that  voyage,  but  Pendleton's  name  is  not  among  them. 
Nor  does  it  appear  in  Hotten's  List  of  Emigrants. 

*■  It  will  be  remembered  that  of  the  passengers  on  the  famous  Mayflower  In 
1620,  nearly  one  half  died  during  their  first  winter  at  Plymouth.  Those  on  the 
Winthrop  fleet  suffered  from  some  epidemic  which  broke  out  soon  after  they 
landed  and  in  their  weakened  condition  nearly  two  hundred  died  within  a  few 
weeks.  While  the  nature  of  this  disease  is  vaguely  stated  as  a  "fever",  small- 
pox might  be  suspected,  as  fourteen  passengers  on  one  of  the  ships,  the  Talbot, 
died  from  that  plague  on  the  voyage  over. — Hubbard's  History,  p.  131. 
^Robinson  and  Wheeler  in  their  Great  Little  Watertown  (1930),  p.  129,  say 
that  Pendleton  "came  over  in  1630",  while  Dr.  Henry  M.  Bond  in  his  monu- 
mental work,  History  and  Genealogies  of  Watertown  (1860),  incorrectly  gives 
1632  as  the  date  of  Pendleton's  admission  as  a  freeman. 

*  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  79,  80,  366;  Great  Little  Watertown,  p.  19. 


12  Brian  Pendleton 

23rd  of  August,  1634 J  Yet  from  the  very  first  entry  made  under 
that  date  in  its  original  book  of  "Town  Proceedings",  we  know 
that  Pendleton  must  have  been  a  resident  of  Watertown  for  some 
time.  Town  meetings  had  been  held  there  regiilarly  but  the  growth 
of  the  settlement  had  been  such  that  its  affairs  could  not  be  well 
handled  by  the  entire  male  populace,  particularly  when  it  came 
to  the  distribution  of  the  public  lands.  A  more  efficient  method 
was  evidently  required,  and  in  the  necessity  for  this  there  came 
into  existence  the  institution  of  town  government,  a  system  not 
provided  for  in  the  colony's  charter. 

This  innovation  was  brought  about  in  Watertown  at  the 
general  meeting  held  there  on  the  date  already  noted.  At  this 
time  it  was  "Agreed  by  the  consent  of  the  Freeman,  that  there 
shallbe  Chosen  three  persons  to  be  [in  charge  of?]  the  ordering 
of  the  civill  affaires  of  the  Towne.  One  of  them  to  serve  as  Towne 
Clark,  and  shall  keep  the  Records  and  Acts  of  the  Towne.  The 
three  chosen  are  William  Jennison,  Brian  Pembleton,  John 
Eddie".« 

Obviously  no  new  comers  would  have  been  chosen  for  Water- 
town's  first  selectmen,  as  these  officials  soon  came  to  be  known. 
They  must  have  been  there  for  no  inconsiderable  while,  taking 
an  active  part  in  all  the  town's  affairs,  and  impressing  themselves 
upon  the  settlers  as  men  fully  competent  to  look  after  the  general 
interests. 

We  know  that  Jennison  had  been  there  for  at  least  three 
years,  as  he  was  one  of  those  made  a  freeman  of  the  Colony  in 
1631.  He  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  First  Settlers  of  Watertown, 
although  his  name,  like  Pendleton's  is  not  included  in  Banks'  par- 
tial list  of  those  who  came  over  with  Winthrop.  He  remained  ac- 
tive in  the  town's  affairs  for  several  years  as  Selectman,  also  as 
its  Deputy  to  the  General  Court;  in  1636  he  commanded  a  com- 
pany against  the  Indians  on  Block  Island.    Jennison's  choleric 

'The  early  records  of  Watertown  were  published  in  1894  by  the  Watertown 
Historical  Society.  Henry  D.  Locke's  An  Ancient  Parish  (1930)  includes 
Brian  Pendleton's  name  in  a  list  of  the  early  members  of  the  Watertown 
church. 

8  Evidently  Pendleton  did  not  serve  as  the  Town  Clerk  for  otherwise  his  name 
would  not  have  appeared  in  this  corrupted  form,  as  it  did  not  infrequently 
when  entered  by  careless  recorders.  His  own  signature  was  never  anything 
but  Brian  Pendleton.  Similar  errors  in  orthography  occur  continually  through- 
out the  early  records.  In  the  cases  of  his  fellow  Selectmen,  Jennison  appears 
as  "Gennison",  while  Eddy  is  variously  "Eddie",  "Edy",  and  "Edye". 


First  Page  of  Records,  Watertown,  Massachusetts 
(Courtesy   of   Watertown  Historical  Society) 


:\ 


Watertown  13 

disposition  and  outspokenness,  however,  brought  him  into  con- 
flict with  the  authorities,  and  after  some  years  he  returned  to 
England.® 

Eddy,  like  Pendleton,  did  not  enter  the  freeman's  estate  until 
eleven  days  after  their  election  as  Selectmen  of  Watertown.^^  He 
was  re-elected  in  the  two  following  years  and  served  again  in  1670. 
He  must  have  been  an  exceptionally  hardy  man  for  at  the  age  of 
seventy-seven  he  asked  to  be  excused  from  military  training.  While 
not  one  of  the  First  Settlers  of  Watertown,  he  is  said  to  have  re- 
moved there  soon  after  his  arrival  in  1630  at  Plymouth,  where 
he  had  a  brother.^^ 

Watertown's  claim  to  the  distinction  of  having  the  first  Board 
of  Selectmen  in  the  Colony  against  the  rival  claims  of  Charles- 
town  and  Dorchester  for  priority,  has  been  well  championed  by 
its  latest  historians,^^  but  in  any  event  while  its  rivals  have  long 
since  been  incorporated  into  the  city  of  Boston,  Watertown,  still 
independent,  runs  its  own  affairs  as  always,  and  its  Board  of  Se- 
lectmen continues  to  function  there,  as  one  after  another  has  been 
doing  for  over  three  hundred  years. 

This  body  of  men  varied  in  number  from  eleven  to  seven  up 
to  1742,  when  it  was  reduced  to  five.  In  1825  the  town  reverted  to 
the  original  three  and  this  is  the  number  that  has  held  office  there 
ever  since.'^^  The  first  change  in  the  Board's  membership — and  it 
was  a  big  one — came  without  delay.   It  would  seem  that  the  peo- 

*  That  Jennison  found  free  speech  was  costly  in  those  days  is  shown  by  a  fine  of 
£20  levied  upon  him  in  1634  "for  upbraydeing  the  [General]  Court  with  in- 
justice, uttering  theis  words:  I  pray  God  deliver  mee  from  this  Court,  profess- 
ing hee  had  wayted  from  Court  to  Court  &  could  not  have  justice  done  him". — 
Massachusetts  Records,  I,  132.  He  was  again  in  difficulties  with  the  Court 
ten  years  later,  and  his  return  to  England  may  have  been  caused  thereby. 
^*  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  369. 

"  An  interesting  item  regarding  Eddy  appears  in  Governor  Winthrop's  Journal 
[Vol.  I,  p.  99],  and  reads  as  follows:  "One  John  Edye,  a  godly  man  of  Water- 
town  fell  distracted  and  getting  out  one  evening  could  not  be  found;  but  eight 
days  after,  he  came  again  of  himself.  He  had  kept  his  strength  and  color,  yet 
had  eaten  nothing  (as  must  be  conceived)  all  that  time.  He  recovered  his 
understanding  again  in  good  measure,  and  lived  very  orderly,  but  would  now 
and  then  be  a  little  distempered." 

It  has  been  suggested  that  what  seemed  so  miraculous  to  the  good  Gov- 
ernor has  a  much  more  rational  explanation.  Eddy  had  probably  slipped  ofif 
by  himself  on  a  visit  to  his  brother,  and  as  a  law  had  been  passed  in  April, 
1631,  prohibiting  the  settlers  from  travelling  to  Plymouth  except  in  armed 
groups  [Massachusetts  Records,  I,  85],  Eddy  might  well  have  suifered  a  con- 
venient lapse  of  memory  when  he  returned  to  Watertown. 
^Robinson  and  Wheeler,  Great  Little  Watertown  (1930),  pp.  40-44. 
^^  Ibid.,  p.  40. 


14  Brian  Pendleton 

pie  of  Watertown  were  not  altogether  satisfied  with  its  experiment 
of  having  only  three  men  manage  its  affairs  in  1634,  or  else  these 
men  themselves  felt  they  needed  some  help.  At  any  rate,  at  the 
next  annual  meeting  the  number  of  Selectmen  was  jumped  to 
eleven,  among  whom  Brian  Pendleton  and  his  two  former  associ- 
ates were  included.  So  it  would  seem  that  as  far  as  they  were 
concerned  personally  there  was  no  dissatisfaction  with  them.  And 
this  was  again  the  case  when  they  were  re-elected  in  1636  to  an- 
other Board  of  eleven  members. 

One  of  the  duties  expressly  delegated  to  this  body  was  "to 
divide  the  lands"  among  the  inhabitants,  a  task  in  which  Pendle- 
ton was  already  engaged  when  chosen  on  a  special  committee  for 
that  purpose  in  November,  1635.^'*  For  a  man  of  his  acquisitive 
proclivities  this  kind  of  work  must  have  been  peculiarly  delight- 
ful, but  if  at  times  he  seems  to  have  done  fairly  well  for  himself 
in  these  distributions,  it  should  be  remembered  that  this  was  then 
about  the  only  way  by  which  the  leading  men  in  the  various  towns, 
outside  of  the  ministry,  could  be  rewarded  for  their  public  serv- 
ices. And  we  may  be  very  sure  that  in  those  little  democracies 
no  one  was  permitted  to  get  away  with  a  larger  share  than  his 
fellow  townsmen  thought  he  deserved — as  Pendleton  was  to  find 
out  for  himself  on  one  occasion. ^^ 

In  the  "Great  Dividends"  at  Watertown  in  1636,  Sir  Rich- 
ard Saltonstall  received  100  acres,  Thomas  Mayhew,  Lt.  Robert 
Feake,  and  the  Rev.  George  Phillips  80  acres  apiece,  Brian  Pen- 
dleton and  William  Paine — his  business  partner  in  later  years — 
70  acres  each.  Only  two  other  men  received  as  much,  most  of 
the  grants  running  from  30  to  50  acres.  According  to  an  inven- 
tory of  his  property  there,  made  in  1644,  at  which  time  his  hold- 
ings amounted  to  147  acres,  Pendleton  was  the  original  grantee 
of  nine  lots  but  there  are  evidences  he  had  received  two  or  tliree 
others  also.  Bond  suggests  his  first  place  of  residence  in  the  town 
may  have  been  east  of  Mt.  Auburn,  but  later  his  homestall  of 
fourteen  acres  stood  on  what  is  now  a  part  of  School  Street,  not 
far  from  the  Meeting  House  built  in  1635 — a  very  desirable  loca- 
tion according  to  the  ideas  of  our  Puritan  forefathers.^^ 

"  Watertown,  Mass.,  Records,  I,  4,  6. 

^  See  account  in  Chapter  X  of  the  division  of  land  Pendleton  and  his  associates 

acquired  for  the  town  of  Portsmouth  [N.  H.],  in  1660/61. 

"Bond,  pp.  1021-33,  1083,  1090;  Watertown  Records,  I,  76,  21. 


Watertown  15 

Unlike  the  system  that  prevailed  in  the  Crown  and  Proprie- 
tary Colonies  to  the  South,  land  in  the  Puritan  colonies  in  New- 
England  was  neither  sold  nor  rented  to  the  original  grantees, 
but  was  given  them  outright — a  dispensation  which  must  have 
been  no  inconsiderable  factor  in  reconciling  them  to  the  hard- 
ships and  privations  of  those  early  years,  as  well  as  to  the  growing 
rigors  of  their  church-ruled  government.  And  here  the  rulers 
showed  wisdom.  There  was  never  any  attempt  made  to  restrict 
the  ownership  of  land  to  church  members,  as  the  franchise  was 
soon  to  be  restricted.  Such  a  policy  would  have  driven  many  out 
of  the  colony,  instead  of  into  the  churches,  and  the  authorities, 
anxious  to  build  up  a  strong  commonwealth  out  of  their  common 
poverty,  saw  to  it  that  no  discrimination  was  shown  here  against 
those  who  were  not  freemen.  As  early  as  1635  it  was  enacted  that 
non-freemen  should  share  equally  in  the  allotments  of  land^^  but 
it  would  seem  that  the  law  was  not  always  strictly  observed  and 
had  to  be  enforced.^* 

Originally,  the  freemen  consisted  only  of  those  men  who 
were  stockholders  in  the  company.  Under  the  provisions  of  the 
Charter,  they  alone  were  to  have  any  voice  in  the  Colony's  gov- 
ernment, or  in  the  choice  of  its  Governors,  Deputy  Governors 
and  Magistrates — or  Assistants  as  they  were  generally  called. 
As  few  of  these  men  ever  came  to  Massachusetts,  feeling  perhaps 
that  buying  stock  in  the  Company  was  adventure  enough  for  them, 
it  quickly  developed  that  a  bare  handful  of  the  settlers  had  the 
power  to  elect  the  rulers  of  the  Colony. 

This  situation  was  peculiarly  gratifying  to  the  clergy  and 
to  the  little  oligarchy  which  had  sprung  up  automatically.  The 
idea  of  democracy  was  abhorrent  to  most  of  them.  Even  John 
Winthrop  accounted  it  "the  meanest  and  worst  of  all  forms  of 
government",  there  being  "no  such  government  in  Israel". ^^  And 
the  Rev.  John  Cotton  could  not  conceive  "that  ever  God  did  or- 
deyne  it  as  a  fit  government  eyther  for  church  or  commonwealth. 
If  the  people  be  governors,"  he  asked  in  bewilderment,  "who  shall 
be  governed?"^® 

'"Massachusetts  Records,  I,  137. 

"The  following  item  tells  its  own  story:  At  a  Quarter  Court  held  in  Boston, 
1  December,  1640,  "Watertowne  ffreemen,  promising  to  yield  to  evry  towns- 
man his  proportion  alike,  according  to  rule,  without  respect  to  freedome  or 
not  freedome,  were  dismissed". — Massachusetts  Records,  I,  310. 
"  R.  C.  Winthrop,  /.  Winthrop,  Vol.  II,  p.  430— spelling  modernized. 
*  Hutchinson,  History,  Appendix,  Vol.  I,  p.  437. 


16  Bhiak  Pendletok 

But  these  ideas  were  not  shared  by  the  populace  at  large. 
Almost  immediately — in  October,  1630 — a  large  group  of  the 
settlers,  as  already  noted,  had  requested  to  be  added  to  the  ex- 
tremely limited  number  of  freemen.^^  Assent  seemed  dangerous 
if  control  was  to  be  kept  in  the  right  hands.  Refusal  would  be 
still  more  dangerous  as  it  might  disrupt  the  Colony  almost  at  the 
very  start.  The  problem,  held  over  for  consideration  during  the 
winter,  was  finally  solved  in  a  masterly  way.  The  Charter  pro- 
vided that  new  freemen  might  be  admitted  by  the  General  Courts 
"as  they  shall  thinke  fitt," — ^^  and  who  were  better  fit  than  mem- 
bers of  the  church.?  So  at  the  Court  held  in  the  following  May 
[1631]  the  momentous  decision  was  made  "to  the  end  that  the 
body  of  the  commons  may  be  preserved  of  honest  &  good  men, 
it  was  likewise  ordered  and  agreed  that  for  time  to  come  noe  man 
shalbe  admitted  to  the  freedome  of  this  body  polliticke  but  such 
as  are  members  of  some  of  the  churches  within  the  lymitts  of  the 
same."^^  A  masterpiece  of  simplicity,  cunningly  worded  to  hide 
the  real  intent !  Out  of  their  sterile  field  of  thought  they  had  in- 
fallibly selected  this  foundation  stone  for  their  church  state,  on 
which,  buttressed  by  supporting  statutes,  they  could  build  the 
glorious  edifice  of  their  dreams — a  commonwealth  where  their 
church  members  alone  should  have  any  voice  in  the  government. 

There  was  no  danger  of  the  electorate  becoming  overcrowded. 
While  virtually  all  the  settlers  were  Puritanically  inclined,  yet 
the  great  majority  could  not  bring  themselves  to  undergo  the 
ordeal  required  for  admission  to  the  church.  To  stand  before 
the  congregation  and  make  a  public  confession  of  sin  and  spiri- 
tual regeneration  was  impossible  to  those  who  had  always  lived 
blameless  lives,  while  for  the  others,  a  natural  reticence  sealed 
most  lips.-^  Under  such  a  requirement  it  is  not  surprising  that 
barely  a  fourth  of  the  inhabitants  ever  became  church  members. 
Nor  is  it  surprising  that  only  a  part  of  these  went  to  the  further 
trouble  of  taking  the  freeman's  oath.  For  it  was  becoming  more 
and  more  evident  as  successive  laws  were  passed  that  greater  re- 
sponsibilities were  to  fall  upon  these  men  than  any  but  the  politi- 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  79-80. 

"-''Ibid.,  I,  11-12. 

23  Ibid.,  I,  87.   Such  a  qualification  for  the  franchise  was  almost  unique  among 

the  New  England  colonies,  New  Haven  alone  sharing  this  requirement  with 

Massachusetts. 

^  See  Lechford,  Plain  Dealing,  pp.  66  ff,  also  J.  T.  Adams,  Founding  of  New 

England,  pp.  253-4. 


Watertown  17 

cally  minded  would  care  to  assume.  And  so  again  a  large  body 
held  aloof,  disinclined  to  take  a  step  that  might  force  them  into 
public  life  against  their  desires. 

Pendleton  had  no  such  shrinkings.  There  was  hardly  a  year 
of  his  long  life  in  the  Colony  when  he  did  not  hold  one  office  or 
another.  At  times  he  even  held  five  or  six  at  once.  As  already 
noted,  he  exposed  himself  to  the  lightning  by  taking  the  freeman's 
oath  on  September  3rd,  1634,^^  just  after  his  election  as  one  of 
the  first  selectmen  of  Watertown.  Perhaps  he  had  received  ad- 
vance information  as  to  another  restrictive  step  about  to  be  taken 
— the  law  passed  in  the  following  year  under  which  freemen  alone 
were  to  have  any  vote  in  town  affairs^® — but  at  any  rate  he  had 
evidently  decided  to  qualify  himself  fully  for  whatever  might  be 
in  store,  and  at  the  same  time  have  a  direct  voice  in  anything 
that  affected  his  personal  interests.  His  first  taste  of  this  new 
freedom  came  two  months  later  when  the  Court  appointed  "Lieut. 
Feakes,  Mr.  Richard  Browne,  Mr.  Pendleton  &  Epharim  Childe 
[to]  take  an  inventory  of  the  goods  &  chattels  of  Mr.  Craford, 
lately  disceased  &  returne  the  same  into  the  nexte  Court" — ^'^ 
a  duty  which  he  was  to  be  called  upon  to  perform  many  times 
as  the  years  went  by,  particularly  when  the  decedent  had  been 
in  his  debt. 

This  year  of  1634  is  notable  for  two  events  in  the  Colony — 
the  enactment  of  its  first  sumptuary  laws,  and  the  introduction 
of  actual  representative  government.  That  meddlesome  disposi- 
tion of  Puritanism  which  seeks  to  standardize  all  men's  tastes 
and  habits  into  a  drab  uniformity  and  achieve  a  mass  production 
of  negative  virtues  by  statute,  had  already  shown  its  presence 
as  early  as  1631.  At  that  time  all  persons  having  "cards,  dice, 
or  tables  in  their  houses"  were  ordered  to  "make  away  with  them 
before  the  nexte  Court  under  paine  of  punishment."   A  year  later 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  369.  As  only  the  members  of  some  recognized 
church  in  the  Colony  were  eligible  to  be  made  freemen  at  this  time,  it  is  obvious 
that  Pendleton  must  have  belonged  to  the  Watertown  congregation.  The  loss 
of  its  early  records,  however,  makes  it  impossible  to  fix  the  date  of  his  affilia- 
tion with  that  church. 

'^  Ibid.,  I,  161.   Tliis  law  was  afterwards  modified. 

"Ibid.,  I,  132;  also  in  Records  of  the  Court  of  Assistants,  11,  48.  Richard 
Browne  named  above,  had  been  ruling  Elder  of  a  church  of  Separatists  at 
Hawkedon,  Sufi'olk,  England  and  held  this  office  in  the  Watertown  church,  until 
removed  in  1632,  because  of  too  liberal  sentiments  [Bond,  pp.  122-3].  He  was 
one  of  Watertown's  first  Deputies  to  the  General  Court,  and  served  for  many 
years  thereafter.  Feakes  was  also  a  Deputy  from  1634  to  1638,  while  Childe 
was  elected  to  this  office  in  '35  and  subsequently. 


18  Brian  Pendleton 

the  use  of  tobacco  in  public  came  under  the  ban,  while  in  1634 
this  was  forbidden  in  taverns,  or  even  in  private  houses  if  stran- 
gers were  present,  nor  was  it  permissible  anywhere  for  two  or  more 
people  to  use  it  together.  The  enactment  of  this  dour  law  having 
put  our  ancestral  prohibitionists  into  the  proper  frame  of  mind, 
they  next  turned  their  attention  to  "some  newe  &  immodest  fash- 
ions" which  met  their  disapproval.  It  was  consequently  ordered 
that  any  persons  wearing  lace  or  embroidery  on  their  garments, 
or  silver,  gold,  or  silk  ornaments,  should  have  such  garments 
forfeited — whether  publicly  or  privately,  the  statute  fails  to  state. 
And  the  wearing  of  long  hair  by  men  was  also  made  taboo.^* 

These  petty  enactments  were  of  little  import,  however,  ex- 
cept as  showing  the  tendencies  present  to  bend  the  twig  of  Ameri- 
can legislation  in  its  early  days.  Of  far  more  importance  was  the 
emergence  of  a  House  of  Deputies  as  a  check  upon  the  power  of 
the  Assistants,  this  innovation  marking  the  definite  cleavage  that 
existed  between  the  rulers  and  those  they  had  nearly  come  to 
regard  as  subjects. 

The  men  of  Watertown  were  largely  responsible  for  making 
the  government  of  the  Colony  more  democratic,  more  representa- 
tive of  the  people.  In  February,  1631/2,  the  Assistants  had  voted 
a  general  tax  for  building  a  stockade  around  Newtown  (Cam- 
bridge),^® a  measure  which  started  the  first  outcry  in  America 
against  taxation  without  representation.  When  the  warrant  for 
levying  their  part — £8 — reached  Watertown,  "the  pastor,  the 
elder,  and  others  taking  alarm  at  what  they  considered  to  be  an 
unjustifiable  exercise  of  power,  assembled  the  people  and  delivered 
their  opinions  that  it  was  not  safe  to  pay  moneys  after  that  sort 
for  fear  of  bringing  themselves  and  posterity  into  bondage." 
Summoned  before  the  Governor  and  Assistants  to  answer  for 
their  resistance,  after  much  debate  and  explanation,  they  finally 
acknowledged  their  fault,  "and  so  their  submission  was  accepted 
and  their  offence  pardoned."^" 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  84,  101,  126.  The  laws  against  tobacco  seem  to  have 
been  difficult  to  enforce.  They  were  subsequently  repealed,  re-enacted — and 
generally  ignored  if  we  may  judge  by  an  act  passed  in  164.6  providing  fines  for 
those  who  smoked  during  the  session  of  the  General  Court!  [Massachusetts 
Records,  I,  204,  206,  241-2;  III,  83.]  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  prohibi- 
tion of  the  sale  [Ibid.,  I,  136]  was  construed  not  to  extend  to  its  exportation 
[Ibid.,  I,  180].  Evidently  the  Puritans  could  compromise  with  evil  on  occasions. 
They  were  a  commercial  as  weU  as  a  religious  people. 
=»  Ibid.,  I,  93. 
"»  Winthrop— Savage,  I,  84;  Hosmer,  I,  74. 


Watertown  19 

While  for  the  time  being  these  objectors  let  Governor  Win- 
throp  persuade  them  that  inasmuch  as  the  freemen  elected  the 
Assistants  they  delegated  the  taxing  power,  yet  the  spirit  against 
such  an  interpretation  continued  to  grow.  These  magistrates 
were  already  arrogating  to  themselves  the  legisative  power  as  well, 
and  it  was  time  that  the  freemen  asserted  themselves  if  they  were 
to  have  any  rights  at  all.  Two  years  later  representatives  from 
every  town  inspected  the  Charter,  and  at  the  meeting  of  the  Gen- 
eral Court  held  soon  afterwards  the  freemen  immediately  moved  to 
recover  the  ground  they  had  lost  through  their  own  indifference. 
At  this  time  it  was  declared  that  none  but  the  General  Court  had 
power  to  choose  and  admit  freemen,  make  and  establish  laws,  elect 
and  appoint  officers,  raise  money  and  taxes,  or  dispose  of  lands — 
an  affirmation  of  their  charter  rights.  It  was  also  provided  on  ac- 
count of  the  inconvenience  and  possible  danger  involved  in  having 
all  the  voters  leave  their  homes  at  the  same  time  to  attend  the 
Courts,  that  it  should  be  lawful  for  those  of  each  town  to  choose 
two  or  three  men  to  represent  them  as  Deputies  at  each  session  and 
act  in  their  place.  The  new  spirit  that  had  come  into  the  govern- 
ment is  strikingly  evinced  by  a  fine  levied  by  this  Court  upon  the 
Assistants  for  employing  some  Indians  "to  shoot  with  peeces", 
contrary  to  law.^^ 

This  new  spirit  did  not  extend  to  religious  matters,  however. 
Politically  the  freemen  might  give  their  name  some  force  and  mean- 
ing, but  when  it  came  to  affairs  of  the  church  they  were  quite  will- 
ing at  first  to  obey  the  dictates  of  their  leaders  and  pass  any  law 
demanded  of  them.  Only  a  year  later  we  find  the  General  Court, 
now  composed  of  Assistants  and  Deputies,  providing  fine  or  im- 
prisonment for  those  who  absented  themselves  from  church  ser- 
vices.^^  Of  far  greater  significance,  as  indicative  of  the  Colony's 
determined  policy,  was  the  banishment  of  one  John  Smyth  for 
venting  "dyvers  dangerous  opinions",  and  the  similar  sentence 
passed  upon  that  famous  minister,  the  free-thinking  and  pugna- 
cious Roger  Williams,  whose  outspoken  views  were  highly  antago- 
nistic to  the  theocratic  government  that  was  developing  in  the 
Bay.33 

^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  117-118 — 14  May,  1634.  This  was  the  second  repre- 
sentative   p;overnment   established    on   the    American   continent,    the   Virginia 
House  of  Burgesses  coming  first  by  fifteen  years. 
■^  Ibid.,  I,  140. 
*«  Ibid.,  I,  159,  160-1. 


20  Brian  Pendleton 

The  screws  were  tightened  a  bit  further  at  the  session  of  the 
Court  held  in  March,  1635/36,  when  Pendleton  made  his  initial 
appearance  there  as  a  Deputy  from  Watertown,  in  company  with 
Lieut.  Feakes  and  Ensign  Jennison.^^  This  was  a  trying  year  for 
the  colonists,  as  unforseen  troubles  came  thick  and  fast  upon  them. 
Their  enemies  in  England,  led  by  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges,  had  al- 
ready succeeded  in  getting  the  Lords  Commissioners  for  Planta- 
tions to  demand  the  recall  of  their  charter  and  appoint  that  wor- 
thy knight  as  Governor.  The  Pequot  Indians  in  Connecticut  were 
turning  hostile.  Worst  of  all,  a  bitter  controversy  was  developing 
in  the  First  Church  of  Boston  over  points  of  doctrine  which, 
while  hardly  intelligible  today,  threatened  to  split  the  Colony 
apart.  The  question  whether  a  minister  preached  a  "Covenant  of 
Grace"  or  a  "Covenant  of  Works"  means  nothing  in  this  genera- 
tion, but  it  was  a  burning  issue  in  the  Massachusetts  of  1636-37 
when  Mistress  Anne  Hutchinson  and  her  brother-in-law,  the  Rev. 
John  Wheelwright,  attempted  to  bring  a  little  hope  into  the 
gloomy  teachings  of  the  Church.^^ 

All  these  "weighty  occasions"  and  many  other  matters  great 
and  small  had  the  earnest  attention  of  this  General  Court.  The 
threatening  news  from  England  was  met  with  a  spirit  which  shows 
how  determined  the  Colonists  were,  even  in  that  early  day,  to  re- 
sist any  attempt  the  home  government  might  make  to  deprive  them 
of  their  liberties.  Resolutions  were  passed  to  erect  breastworks 
and  place  six  cannon  at  Fort  Hill  in  Boston.  Three  pieces  were 
allotted  to  Charlestown,  and  the  work  on  the  defences  at  Castle 
Island  was  ordered  to  be  continued.^^   David  and  Goliath  again — 

8*  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  164.  The  record  here  refers  to  him  as  "Mr  Pennle- 
ton". 

^This  so-called  "Antinomian"  controversy  has  been  treated  at  lenfrth  by  C.  F. 
Adams  in  his  Three  Episodes  of  Massachusetts  History,  pp.  363-581,  and  more 
briefly  by  J.  T.  Adams  in  his  Founding  of  New  England,  pp.  165-174,  as  well 
as  by  R.  N.  Jones  in  The  Quakers  in  the  American  Colonies,  pp.  4-25. 
"'^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  165-6.  What  transient  visitors  from  England 
thought  of  this  "Spirit  of  1636"  is  reflected  by  an  item  in  the  records  of  the 
Quarter  Court  held  at  Boston  the  7th  of  June  in  that  year,  when  Thomas  Mil- 
lerd  "pilot  and  mate  to  Mr.  Fearnes  in  the  Hector  was  committed  to  prison 
for  certain  seditious  and  approbious  speeches,  saying  we  are  all  rebels  and 
traitors".  [Mass.  Records,  I,  176.]  The  Massachusetts  Puritans  always  protest- 
ed their  lovalty  to  the  mother  country  just  as  they  denied  having  separated 
from  the  Church  of  England.  Their  actions,  however,  must  have  given  the  home 
authorities  frequent  suspicion  that  they  did  protest  too  much.  Their  leaders 
proposed  to  rule  as  independently  as  possible,  but  recognized  they  were  not 
strong  enough  to  set  themselves  up  as  a  free  state.  "Though  we  had  our  liberty", 
wrote  Pynchon  to  Winthrop  as  early  as  1646,  "we  cannot  as  yet  subsist  without 
England."    [4  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  VI,  383]. 


Watertown  21 

nine  little  cannon  and  an  unfinished  fort  down  the  harbor  ready 
to  withstand  the  power  of  England  if  need  be!  Act  sublimely 
ridiculous,  ridiculously  sublime  —  challenge  prophetic  of  greater 
days  to  come — back  of  the  Minute  Man  of  future  years  we  see  the 
grim  and  militant  Puritan,  foe  of  all  tyrannies  other  than  his  own, 
lighting  a  torch  of  liberty,  priming  the  shot  heard  round  the 
world ! 

But  that  shot  was  not  fired  then,  nor  was  the  Charter  ever 
returned  in  spite  of  recurrent  demands,  and  writs  issued  to  vacate 
it.  For  over  fifty  years,  through  evasion  and  delay,  through  means 
at  times  devious  and  underground,  the  colony  saved  its  patent  un- 
til at  last,  the  patience  of  the  English  authorities  worn  out,  they 
annulled  that  precious  document  and  sent  a  Royal  Governor  to 
rule  the  obstinate  people  of  the  Bay.  But  this  was  long  after  Gor- 
ges was  dead.  His  great  schemes  came  to  naught.  The  ship  built 
for  his  triumphal  voyage  broke  apart  when  launched.  Mason,  his 
chief  supporter,  died  suddenly.  Mysterious  influences  working 
through  circles  close  to  the  King  were  brought  to  bear.  For  the 
time  being  all  further  proceedings  were  dropped,  and  the  Charter 
remained  in  Massachusetts  where  you  may  still  see  it  today  care- 
fully preserved  in  the  State  House  at  Boston. 

One  of  its  provisions  was  modified  by  an  act  passed  by  this 
Court  of  March,  1635/36,  which  provided  that  only  two  General 
Courts  should  be  held  in  the  future,  one  for  election  in  May,  the 
other  in  October,  although  special  sessions  might  be  called  by  the 
Governor.  This  relief  was  made  possible  by  the  organization  of 
four  County  Courts  established  at  the  same  time  to  be  held  quar- 
terly for  the  trial  of  minor  civil  and  criminal  cases,  while  four 
"Great  Quarter  Courts"  to  be  conducted  by  the  Assistants  were 
also  arranged  for  to  hear  appeals.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
in  providing  for  the  County  Courts  it  was  stipulated  that  they 
should  be  presided  over  by  at  least  one  of  the  Assistants  and  that 
none  of  those  who  could  attend  should  be  excluded.  A  firm  hand 
was  to  be  kept  on  justice.  The  remaining  members  of  these  lesser 
courts,  known  as  "Associates"  were  to  be  "persons  of  worth" 
nominated  by  the  freemen  and  appointed  by  the  General  Court.^'^ 

The  rapid  increase  in  population  which  made  these  innova- 
tions necessary  had  also  created  other  problems.     Some  of  the 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  169. 


22  Brian  Pendleton 

newer  arrivals  seem  to  have  been  dissatisfied  with  the  church  mem- 
bership requirement  for  the  franchise,  and  large  groups  from 
Watertown,  Cambridge,  and  Dorchester  had  already  received  per- 
mission to  settle  elsewhere,  and  were  about  to  leave  for  Connecti- 
cut. To  check  any  further  general  exodus  it  was  ordered  by  this 
Court  that  the  majority  of  the  magistrates  should  have  the  power 
"to  dispose  of  the  sitting  downe  of  men  in  any  newe  plantation,  & 
that  none  shall  goe  without  leave  from  them".^*  The  people  were 
not  to  scatter  about  as  they  pleased.  Strength  and  unity  could  not 
be  built  up  in  that  way,  and  there  was  wisdom  in  this  act,  no  mat- 
ter how  oppressive  it  may  have  seemed  to  many. 

For  a  similar  reason,  and  to  entrench  a  uniform  orthodoxy 
more  firmly,  this  Court  went  on  to  vote  that  it  would  not  recognize 
any  new  churches  formed  in  the  Commonwealth  unless  they  were 
first  approved  by  the  Magistrates  and  the  majority  of  the  elders 
of  the  existing  churches ;  it  was  also  provided  that  those  who  might 
join  such  organizations  as  failed  to  pass  muster,  should  be  denied 
the  rights  of  freemen.^®  The  single-minded  purpose  of  the  rulers 
becomes  more  manifest.  There  was  to  be  but  one  church  in  Massa- 
chusetts— and  they  would  see  to  it  that  its  teachings  were  never 
changed. 

Of  the  many  other  acts  passed  at  this  busy  session  of  the 
Court,  there  was  one  in  which  Pendleton  must  have  taken  a  lively 
concern — may  indeed  have  introduced  himself,  as  it  checks  up  with 
some  of  his  personal  interests.  This  was  the  measure  empowering 
the  freemen  in  every  town,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  to  dispose 
of  their  own  lands  and  woods,  grant  lots,  choose  their  own  officers, 
and  make  such  local  ordinances  as  might  be  necessary."*^  The 
Deputy  from  Watertown  had  already  taken  an  active  part  in  these 
very  affairs  and  from  what  we  shall  see  of  his  somewhat  legalistic 
habit  of  mind,  he  would  quite  naturally  want  some  lawful  sanction 
for  what  he  had  already  done  and  might  do  in  the  future  as  a  dis- 
tributor of  the  public  land. 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  146,  148,  167. 

«» Ibid.,  I,  168.  Three  years  later  one  John  Smyth  was  fined  £20  and  imprisoned 
for  attempting  to  form  a  church  at  Weymouth,  contrary  to  this  law.— Ibid., 
I,  252. 

*°  Ibid.,  I,  172.  Some  historians  have  claimed  this  act  was  extra-legal,  no  pro- 
vision for  town  government  having  been  incorporated  in  the  Charter,  but  the 
provision  giving  the  Company  power  to  make  such  laws  as  might  be  necessary 
should  cover  this.  The  Colonists,  however,  never  let  charter  limitations  bother 
them. 


Watebtown 


His  early  interest  in  military  affairs  is  first  indicated  as  a 
result  of  two  other  measures  ordered  by  this  Court.  On  account 
of  the  general  apprehension  of  an  Indian  uprising  it  was  voted 
that  during  the  general  elections  to  be  held  in  the  following  May 
the  freemen  in  the  towns  most  distant  from  Boston  might  send 
their  votes  in  by  proxy,  while  all  the  nearer  towns  should  each  send 
ten  of  their  electors  completely  armed.^^  The  colony  furnished  the 
weapons  in  some  instances,  and  we  find  that  Pendleton  signed  the 
receipt  for  the  ten  "calivers"— light  weight  muskets— and  ten 
swords  delivered  to  Watertown  two  weeks  before  the  election. ^2 

While  at  this  time  he  seems  to  have  held  no  commissioned 
office  in  the  Watertown  "train-band",  yet  his  fellow  townsmen 
evidently  felt  he  had  some  worth-while  knowledge  of  the  military 
art,  for  they  next  chose  him  a  Deputy  to  the  General  Court  of 
April,  1637,  which  had  been  "assembled  for  the  special  occasion 
of  prosecuting  the  war  against  the  Pecoits".''^  We  have  no  evi- 
dence, however,  to  show  whether  or  not  he  saw  any  active  service 
in  the  three  months'  campaign  which  virtually  exterminated  the 
Pequot  tribe  that  summer,  nor  do  we  know  if  he  was  one  of  the 
volunteers  in  Endicott's  inglorious  expedition  against  them  in  the 
preceeding  year.  There  is  a  chance  he  may  have  served  in  this,  as 
Ensign  Jennison  of  Watertown  commanded  one  of  the  companies 
in  that  ill-advised  raid  which  only  served  to  infuriate  the  savages 
and  bring  on  the  war  in  earnest. 

Another  war  was  waged  at  the  same  time.  While  the  soldiers 
from  Massachusetts  were  hunting  Indians  in  Connecticut,  her 
ministers  and  magistrates  were  hunting  heretics  in  Boston.  The 
Wheelwright-Hutchinson  schism  had  grown  to  alarming  propor- 
tions. Young  Henry  Vane,  who  had  been  elected  Governor  in  May, 
1636,  was  an  adherent,  so  was  Capt.  Underbill,  one  of  the  com- 
manders against  the  Pequots.  Even  the  Rev.  John  Cotton,  pastor 
of  The  First  Church  of  Boston,  was  mildly  infected.  This  could 

*^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  166. 

*^"Pincheon  Papers",  2   Massachusetts    Historical   Society   Collections,    VIII, 

228-9.    His  name  appears  here  as   Brian  "Pemberton",  probably  an  error  in 

transcribing.  William  Pynchon  was  Treasurer  of  the  Colony  at  the  time  and 

later  was  commissioned  to  govern  the  settlements  on  the  Connecticut  River 

within  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts. 

*^  Massachusett  Records,  1,  191-2.  The  secretary  of  the  Colony  came  a  little 

closer  to  his  name,  this  time  entering  it  as  "Mr.  Bryan  Pendleton".    Jennison, 

now  styled  "Captain"  and  "Mr."   Richard  Browne  were  his   fellow   Deputies 

from  Watertown  at  this  session. 


24.  Brian  Pendleton 

not  go  on.  The  forces  of  orthodoxy  rallied  and  in  the  following 
March  the  General  Court  adjudged  Wheelwright  "guilty  of  con- 
tempt and  sedition",  but  imposed  no  sentence  on  him  then.  At  the 
same  time,  Steven  Greensmith  "for  affirming  that  all  the  ministers 
(except  Mr.  Cotton,  Mr.  Wheelwright  &  hee  thought  Mr.  Hooker) 
did  teach  a  covenant  of  works"  was  imprisoned  and  fined  £40.'** 
Vane,  when  his  term  expired,  was  replaced  as  Governor  by  Win- 
throp,  Cotton  crept  back  into  the  fold,  and  a  vigorous  policy  was 
determined  upon  against  doctrinal  novelties  or  "errors". 

Whether  or  not  Pendleton  was  opposed  to  these  measures  is 
uncertain,  but  there  is  some  indication  that  the  clergy  did  not 
regard  him  as  being  sufficiently  subservient  to  their  authority  to 
work  their  will  at  all  times.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  they 
had  a  great  deal  to  say  in  picking  the  candidates  the  freemen 
voted  upon.  Consequently,  there  may  be  more  than  a  coincidence 
in  the  fact  that  Pendleton  was  not  a  Deputy  to  any  of  the  three 
General  Courts  held  during  1637  when  the  Wheelwright-Hutchin- 
son  case  was  at  issue,  and  that  the  only  session  he  did  attend  in 
that  year  was  the  one  called  for  the  special  purpose  of  making  war 
on  the  Pequots,  and  not  on  the  believers  in  a  "Covenant  of  Grace." 
As  we  shall  see  later  on  in  a  case  somewhat  similar,  he  showed  him- 
self not  without  mercy,  and  mercy  has  no  place  in  the  scheme  of 
a  religious  despotism. 

While  Pendleton  was  a  member  of  the  Grand  Jury  in  Septem- 
ber that  year,  this  body  presented  only  the  usual  indictments.'*^ 
The  General  Court  alone  seems  to  have  dealt  with  the  schismatics, 
but  it  was  not  until  November  that  a  new  Court — the  Deputies  in 
which  seem  to  have  been  "hand-picked"  by  the  ministers — finally 
rid  themselves  of  the  two  trouble-makers  by  banishing  them  from 
the  Colony.  One  of  their  adherents,  William  Aspinwall,  a  Deputy 
of  Boston,  was  also  banished  at  the  same  time,  and  several  others 
disfranchised.  A  few  days  later  the  Court,  fearing  some  outbreak 
by  the  faction,  ordered  a  large  group  disarmed.^^  Wheelwright 
and  a  number  of  his  disciples,  became  the  founders  of  Exeter,  New 
Hampshire,  but  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  because  of  an  impending  addi- 
tion to  her  family,  was  permitted  to  stay  in  custody  at  Roxbury 
during  the  winter. 

Bond's  History  of  Watertown  [Vol.  II,  p.  1062]  says  that 

"  Massaclmsetts  Records,  I,  189. 
«  Ibid.,  I,  203,  202. 
"  Ibid.,  pp.  207-212. 


Watertown-  25 

Brian  Pendleton  was  a  Deputy  to  this  purging  Court  of  Novem- 
ber, 1637,  in  company  with  Capt.  William  Jennison  and  Mr.  Rich- 
ard Browne.  This  is  obviously  an  error  as  the  Massachusetts 
Records  [I,  205]  in  listing  the  Deputies  then  present  do  not  show 
his  name  at  all.  Jennison  and  Browne  are  included,  but  the  third 
member  of  Watertown's  delegation  is  given  as  Mr.  Thomas  May- 
hew,  father  of  that  Thomas,  Jr.,  who  became  famous  in  later  years 
as  a  missionary  to  the  Indians  in  Martha's  Vineyard.^'^ 

While  Mayhew  may  have  been  picked  as  a  man  more  easy  to 
handle  than  Pendleton,  yet  an  error  seems  to  have  been  made  in 
sending  Jennison  to  this  Court.  According  to  Hutchinson's  His- 
tory he  was  among  those  Deputies  who  refused  to  vote  when  the 
verdict  was  sought  against  the  schismatics — another  instance  per- 
haps of  the  more  liberal  spirit  prevailing  in  Watertown, 

Pendleton  saw  the  last  chapter  written  in  this  episode  when 
once  more  a  Deputy  to  the  General  Court  held  in  the  following 
March  [1638]  it  was  ordered  that  Mrs.  Hutchinson  "shalbee  gone 
by  the  last  of  this  month,"  while  eleven  of  her  followers  were  also 
directed  to  take  themselves  oif.^^  With  her  final  departure  the  re- 
ligious hysteria  from  which  the  Colony  had  been  suffering  quieted 
down  for  a  number  of  years,  only  to  break  loose  again  in  more 
violent  attacks  later  on. 

Outside  of  a  piece  of  legislation  in  which  he  was  particularly 
interested,  discussion  of  which  will  come  in  the  following  chapter, 
only  one  other  resolution  of  any  importance  was  voted  either  at 
this  session  of  the  Court  or  at  the  one  which  Pendleton  attended 
two  months  later.  This  was  an  order  appointing  a  committee  to 
make  a  digest  of  the  Colony's  laws,  the  lack  of  any  written  ones 
having  occasioned  "many  doubts  &  much  trouble."^^    Moreover, 

"  It  might  be  noted  here  that  Bond's  error  in  regard  to  Brian  Pendleton  having 
been  a  member  of  this  particular  session  of  the  General  Court  has  been  re- 
peated in  G.  Frederick  Robinson's  recent  compilation — Watertown  Soldiers  in 
the  Colonial  Wars  and  the  American  Revolution.  Mr.  Robinson  states  he  took 
Bond  as  his  authority  for  this,  but  has  lodged  a  correction  of  it. 
*^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  220,  223,  226.  The  Hutchinsons  with  a  number  of 
their  followers  removed  to  what  is  now  Rhode  Island  where  they  founded  the 
towns  of  Newport  and  Portsmouth.  In  1642  after  the  death  of  her  husband 
Mrs.  Hutchinson  took  up  some  land  near  the  present  town  of  Pelham  Manor, 
New  York.  Here  in  the  following  year  the  Indians  murdered  her,  together 
with  nearly  all  her  children  and  servants.  Winthrop  seems  to  have  looked  upon 
this  tragedy  as  a  "judgment".  Thomas  Hutchinson,  the  last  royal  governor  and 
the  first  real  historian  of  Massachusetts,  was  one  of  her  descendants.  Several 
biographies  of  Anne  Hutchinson  have  been  written  and  the  Hutchinson  River 
Parkway  in  Westchester  County,  New  York,  v,as  named  in  her  honor. 
"  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  227,  222. 


26  Brian  Pendleton 

many  of  the  statutes  provided  no  specific  penalties  for  their  in- 
fraction and  the  Court  order  of  1636,  that  where  there  was  no 
law  the  Magistrates  should  determine  all  cases  "as  near  the  law 
of  God  as  they  can",^*^  although  peculiarly  satisfactory  to  those 
who  were  firmly  convinced  of  their  infallibility  as  Divine  interpre- 
ters, left  very  much  to  be  desired  by  the  less  fortunate  public.  As 
might  be  expected,  this  effort  to  bring  some  order  out  of  the  legal 
chaos  did  not  meet  with  any  enthusiastic  support  from  the  minis- 
try, and  it  was  ten  years  before  the  laws  of  Massachusetts  were 
finally  put  into  print  for  the  benefit  of  all. 

It  is  diflBcult  to  over-estimate  the  power  of  the  clergy  in  the 
Colony.  They  were  invariably  consulted  on  all  important  legisla- 
tion, instigated  most  of  the  reactionary  laws,  and  constituted  the 
real  authority.  They  were  regarded  with  reverence  and  awe  as  su- 
perior beings,  veritable  "men  of  God".  Noble  spirits  there  were 
among  them,  men  like  Roger  Williams  and  John  Wheelwright  who 
were  banished,  and  Thomas  Hooker,  the  founder  of  Connecticut, 
who  could  not  endure  the  blighting  tyranny  of  the  Bible-Common- 
wealth. Nor  should  we  forget  Joshua  Moodey,  who  resisted  the 
witchcraft  delusion.  But  the  great  majority  seem  to  have  burned 
so  with  religious  fanaticism  that  they  became  insensible  to  human- 
ity. They  were  unbalanced  by  excess  of  zeal,  and  under  such  lead- 
ers inevitable  tragedy  was  in  store. 

The  furor  raised  by  the  schism  of  Mrs.  Hutchinson  and  her 
followers  gave  the  clergy  further  opportunity  to  forge  new  shack- 
les. In  March,  1637,  the  General  Court  declared  that  no  person 
should  henceforth  be  chosen  to  any  office  in  the  Commonwealth  but 
such  as  were  freemen,  that  is,  church  members.  In  November  a  law 
was  passed  against  "defaming"  any  Magistrate  or  Court.  In  Sep- 
tember, 1638,  it  was  voted  that  those  who  did  not  voluntarily  con- 
tribute to  the  support  of  the  ministry  should  be  compelled  to  do  so 
by  assessment.  At  the  same  time  it  was  ordered  that  any  who  had 
been  excommunicated  by  the  churches  and  did  not  seek  to  reinstate 
themselves  within  six  months  should  be  proceeded  against  by  the 
Court  of  Assistants  with  fine,  imprisonment,  banishment,  "and 
further" — an  ominous  sounding  expression,  whatever  it  meant.^^ 
No  wonder  that  the  friends  of  the  Colony  in  England,  alarmed  at 

^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  175. 

^Ibid.,  I,  188,  212-213;  240-241;  242.  The  act  against  the  excommunicated  was 

repealed  a  year  later,  seemingly  at  the  instigation  of  the  Deputies — Ibid.,  I,  271. 


Wateetown  27 

the  growth  of  this  tyranny,  remonstrated  agamst  these  acts,  or 
that  a  few  brave  spirits  in  Massachusetts  occasionally  raised  their 
voices  in  protest.  The  voices  were  quickly  silenced.  The  Perfect 
State  was  almost  at  hand.^^ 

There  was  nothing-  quite  like  it  before  or  since.  A  church  has 
often  been  the  power  behind  a  throne,  but  to  find  it  imposing  an 
iron  rule  in  a  semi-democracy  is  a  rare  phenomenon.  It  can  only  be 
enforced  by  a  reign  of  terror  that  shuts  off  all  questionings  and  dis- 
cussions, and  so  stunts  intellectual  growth.  The  Puritan  type  in 
Massachusetts  would  almost  seem  to  have  been  one  of  dual  per- 
sonality. Hard  headed  as  the  colonists  were  in  practical  affairs, 
the  majority  lost  all  reason  in  matters  spiritual  and  would,  as 
Buckle  says  in  commenting  on  a  similar  anomalous  condition  in 
Scotland,  "tremble  like  sheep  before  their  pastors  and  yield  assent 
to  every  absurdity  .  .  .  provided  their  church  has  sanctioned  it."  ^^ 
But  the  vigor  of  its  political  life  saved  the  Colony  from  complete 
mental  death.  In  its  purely  civil  affairs  the  House  of  Deputies 
often  showed  a  spirit  of  independence,  and  the  town  governments 
gradually  became  democratized.  These  latter  organizations  came 
into  being  spontaneously,  fathered  by  necessity  and  mothered  by 
a  church  congregation  politically  active.  But  what  a  strange 
birthplace  the  system  had !  The  same  "Meeting  House"  where  the 
most  autocratic  of  ministries  held  sway,  where  the  voice  of  author- 
ity bellowed  its  fearful  threats  of  eternal  damnation,  the  same  dire- 
ful edifice  that  heard  forever  those  endless  sermons  on  unending 
torments,  torments  described  gloatingly  and  with  lurid  eloquence, 
heard  too  another  voice — the  birth-cry  of  democracy  in  Massa- 
chusetts. Feeble  and  almost  silenced  at  first,  this  voice  became 
more  articulate  as  the  years  went  by.  Its  murmurings  deepened. 
Its  mutterings  grew  to  thunder.   And  then  at  last,  it  spoke  to  Su- 

^As  a  few  examples  of  the  suppression  of  free  speech:  At  a  meetino;  of  the 
General  Court,  13  March  1638/39,  "Mr.  Ambros  Marten,  for  calling  the  church 
covenant  a  stinking  carryon  &  a  human  invention,  &  saying  hee  wondered  at 
Gods  patience,  feared  it  would  end  in  the  Sharp,  [i.e.  in  a  sudden  calamity]  & 
said  the  ministers  did  dethrone  Christ,  &  set  up  themselves;  hee  was  fined  10£, 
&  counselled  to  go  to  Mr.  Mather  [the  Rev.  Richard  Mather]  to  bee  instructed 
by  him."  Had  it  not  been  for  the  sacrosanct  title  of  "Mr."  which  he  bore,  this 
outspoken  wortliy  would  undoubtedly  have  adorned  the  whipping  post  for 
his  loose  remarks.  This  was  the  punishment  meted  out  to  James  Brittane  at 
this  same  time  for  his  "contempt  of  ministers,  churches,  &  covenant",  while  in 
}}}f  f^llpwing  June,  Samuel  Norman  was  imprisoned  and  whipped  for  saying 
if  ministers  .  .  .  will  but  raile  against  England,  some  would  receive  them" — 
Massachusetts  Records,  I,  262,  254  265. 
^  History  of  Civilization  in  England,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  191,  192. 


28  Brian  Pendleton 

perstition — and  where  was  Hell?    It  spoke  to  Tyranny — and  we 
were  free.^^ 

But  that  was  a  long  time  in  the  future.  Pendleton  never  saw 
it  in  all  his  life.  The  Massachusetts  that  he  knew  had  a  hard  and 
bloodstained  road  to  travel  first.  His  eyes  were  to  see  the  growth 
of  tyranny.  His  hand  was  to  help  extend  its  power.  He  was  to 
participate  in  much  that  was  evil  in  later  years.  But  now  a  rest- 
lessness had  come  over  him.  The  pioneering  spirit  drove  him  on  to 
try  new  fields — well  nigh  barren  fields  as  they  proved  if  he  had  had 
any  political  ambitions  be3^ond  their  narrow  confines.  Immersed 
in  the  petty  affairs  of  a  little  settlement  he  had  helped  to  found, 
Brian  Pendleton  almost  disappears  from  the  Boston  scene.  The 
next  seven  years  of  his  life  are  the  least  interesting  of  his  whole 
career — a  dull  interlude  hard  to  account  for  in  so  active  and  vig- 
orous a  man. 


"  The  great  change  that  has  come  in  religious  beliefs  in  the  last  hundred  years 
is  nowhere  more  strikingly  in  evidence  than  in  New  England.  Here  today 
scores  of  the  churches  known  as  the  "First  Congregational"  because  of  their 
origin,  are  Unitarian  in  belief.  This  is  the  situation  at  Watertown  where 
the  Unitarian  Society,  as  is  generally  the  case,  has  the  earliest  church  records 
while  the  church  of  the  old  orthodox  faith  is  known  as  the  "Second  Congrega- 
tional". If  the  founders  of  New  England  could  have  foreseen  this  frightful 
metamorphosis  it  is  doubtful  if  they  would  have  left  their  old  homes. 


CHAPTER  III 


SUDBURY 

1639  -  1646 


The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  clad  for  them;  and  the 
desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose. — Isaiah,  35:1. 

They  helped  every  one  his  neighbor;  and  every  one  said  to  his  brother, 
Be  of  good  courage. — Isaiah,  61:6. 

In  spite  of  the  many  restrictive  laws  enacted  by  Massachu- 
setts the  influx  of  settlers  continued  rapidly  up  to  1640,  by  which 
time  it  is  estimated  some  fourteen  thousand  had  entered  the  col- 
ony.^ As  early  as  January,  1635,  the  first  planters  of  Water- 
town,  feeling  themselves  a  little  cramped  for  room,  voted  that  no 
more  new  comers  should  have  liberty  "to  sett  down  amongst  us" 
without  first  having  the  consent  of  the  freemen  there.  This  early 
immigration  law  not  working  out  satisfactorily,  it  was  voted  later 
in  the  year  "there  being  too  many  Inhabitants  in  the  Towne  & 
the  Towne  thereby  in  danger  to  be  ruinated,  that  no  Foreainer 
comming  into  the  Towne  .  .  .  shall  have  any  benefitt  either  of 
Commanage  or  Land  undivided  but  what  they  shall  purchase".^ 
Evidently  there  were  to  be  no  more  free  allotments  of  land  except 
to  the  old  residents. 

While  this  local  congestion  was  somewhat  lessened  in  the 
following  year  by  a  considerable  number  of  the  more  liberal 
minded  inhabitants  removing  to  the  Connecticut  Valley,  the  relief 
seems  to  have  been  only  temporary.  In  November,  1637,  "a  great 
part  of  the  chief  inhabitants  of  Watertown"  petitioned  the  Gen- 
eral Court  that  on  account  "of  their  straitness  of  accomodation, 
&  want  of  medowe,  they  might  have  leave  to  remove,  &  settle  a 
plantation  upon  the  ryver  wch  runs  to  Concord."  The  Court 
granted  this  petition  and  appointed  a  committee  to  set  out  a  de- 
sirable place  on  the  river  where  there  were  1500  acres  of  meadow 
suitable  for  fifty  or  sixty  families.    The  Court  also  granted  the 

^  A  Century  of  Population  Growth,  p.  9 

"  Watertozvn  Records,  1,  4.  The  word  "foreigner"  at  that  time  was  generally 
applied  to  non-residents  regardless  of  their  nativity,  even  to  those  living  in 
neighboring  towns — a  restricted  meaning  of  the  word  which  lasted  in  Massa- 
chusetts until  after  the  Revolution. 


30  Brian  Pendleton 

petitioners  liberty  to  apportion  the  lots  in  the  new  settlement  and 
to  sell  their  houses  and  improved  grounds  in  Watertown,  but 
stipulated  that  all  the  rest  of  the  land  there,  not  improved,  should 
"remain  freely  to  the  inhabitants  which  shall  remaine  behind,  & 
[to]  such  others  as  shall  come  to  them".^ 

This  discouragingly  worded  proviso  must  have  given  the 
petitioners  quite  a  set-back.  If  their  rights  in  their  unimproved 
allotments  were  to  revert  to  the  community,  what  chance  would 
they  have  for  a  little  extra  profit?  Was  their  title  to  the  soil  to 
be  limited  after  all?  Could  the  town  give,  and  the  Court  take 
away?  The  influx  of  new  arrivals  had  seemingly  given  the  earlier 
settlers  an  opportunity  to  dispose  of  their  surplus  holdings  to 
advantage,  and  if  this  was  to  be  denied  them  the  incentive  to  found 
a  new  plantation  was  greatly  reduced.  Before  they  went  any 
further  in  the  undertaking  they  evidently  determined  to  settle 
the  question  raised  by  the  Court  as  to  their  proprietary  rights 
in  all  the  allotments  that  had  been  made  them  by  the  town,  im- 
proved or  unimproved. 

The  men  of  Watertown,  as  we  have  seen,  had  already  played 
no  small  part  in  getting  some  degree  of  civil  rights  for  the  free- 
men of  the  colony.  They  were  now  to  wage  a  contest  for  their 
property  rights.  To  champion  them  in  this  cause  they  chose 
Thomas  Mayhew,  Richard  Browne,  and  Brian  Pendleton  as  their 
Deputies  to  the  General  Court  which  opened  on  the  12th  of  March, 
1637/38.  Pendleton,  as  shown  by  a  later  record  of  the  Court, 
was  one  of  the  promoters  of  the  new  settlement,  and  as  he  was 
also  the  grantee  of  numerous  tracts  of  land  in  Watertown,  he 
had  a  direct  and  personal  interest  in  securing  a  more  liberal  dis- 
pensation than  had  been  given  by  the  preceding  Court.  This,  how- 
ever, does  not  seem  to  have  been  regarded  as  politically  heinous 
in  that  time.  It  should  be  remembered  also  that  a  great  many  of 
his  constituents  were  equally  interested  in  the  same  affair,  so  that 
he  represented  their  interests  as  well  as  his  own. 

To  accomplish  their  purpose  it  is  quite  likely  that  Deputies 
Mayhew,  Brown,  and  Pendleton  used  about  the  same  line  of  argu- 
ment— plus  some  well  chosen  Scriptural  texts — as  would  be  em- 
ployed today  in  a  similar  case.  They  perhaps  pleaded  for  less 
governmental  interference  in  business,  made  the  discovery  that 
public  policy  should  not  limit  private  enterprise,  pointed  out  that 

>> MassacJiiKietts  Records,  I,  210,  211. 


Sudbury  31 

to  let  the  Court's  former  ruling  stand  would  establish  a  bad  prece- 
dent, and  as  a  last  resort  may  have  threatened  to  abandon  the 
project  altogether  if  the  Court  wasn't  more  liberal. 

Whatever  their  arguments  were,  they  won  their  point.  The 
Court's  reversal  of  its  former  restriction  is  briefly  expressed: 
"Concerning  the  remove  of  Watertowne,  the  Court  thinketh  meete 
they  should  have  libertie  to  sell  their  alotments  in  Watertowne, 
&  they  are  to  give  their  full  answear  the  next  Court  whether  they 
will  remove  to  the  newe  plantation."* 

Apparently  the  "remove"  did  not  begin  at  once.  There  seems 
to  have  been  some  delay  in  the  proceedings,  perhaps  caused  by 
the  failure  of  the  locating  committee  to  act  promptly,  or  because 
there  was  some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  amount  of  land 
the  petitioners  should  have.  In  the  following  September  [1638] 
the  Court  voted  that  "the  petitioners,  Mr.  Pendleton,  Mr.  Noyse, 
Mr.  Brown  &  Company  are  alowed  to  go  on  in  their  plantation," 
and  at  the  same  time  a  new  committee  was  appointed  to  set  out 
its  bounds.^  At  the  same  session  of  the  Court  it  was  later  voted 
that  the  new  plantation  should  join  to  Concord  and  have  four 
miles  upon  the  river  according  to  the  plot  turned  in.® 

Once  started  the  settlement  of  the  town  proceeded  rapidly. 
Fifty-four  families  were  soon  located  there,^  not  a  few  of  whom 
came  direct  from  the  mother  country  in  the  great  Puritan  exodus 
of  1638.  Some  of  the  new  arrivals  were  from  Sudbury  in  Eng- 
land,^ and  it  was  probably  due  to  them  that  this  frontier  town 
in  Massachusetts  received  its  name. 

We  do  not  know  exactly  when  Pendleton  disposed  of  his  Wa- 
tertown  holdings*'  and  set  out  with  his  family  and  their  household 

*  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  221. 

^  Ibid.,  I,  238.  In  the  margin  of  this  record  is  noted  "Sudbury  plantation". 
This  memorandum  was  probably  written  in  at  some  later  date  as  the  town 
was  not  oiEcially  so  named  until  a  year  later  when  on  the  4th  of  Sept.,  1639, 
the  General  Court  ordered  that  the  new  plantation  by  Concord  should  be 
called    Sudbury. — Massachusetts   Records,    1,   271. 

"Ibid.,  I,  242.   This  and  later  grants  to  Sudbury  covered  much  of  the  territory 
now  comprised  by  the   present  to\vns   of  Wayland,   Framinghara,   and   May- 
nard,  besides  Sudbury  itself. 
""'Bi^Centennial  of  Sudbury",  p.  5 

*  Monuments  to  Thomas  Plympton  and  to  John  Smith  in  the  old  cemetery  at 
Sudbury  Center,  Mass.,  bear  inscriptions  to  that  effect. 

"Pendleton  seems  to  have  disposed  of  all  his  Watertown  grants  before  he 
removed  to  Sudbury  but  these  sales  were  made  prior  to  the  establishment  of 
the  Middlesex  County  Registry  of  Deeds,  and  we  find  only  indirect  references 
to  them  in  the  Watertown  records. 


32  Brian  Pendleton 

effects  on  the  old  Indian  trail  that  led  through  the  wilderness  to 
their  new  home.  The  date  seems  to  have  been  either  in  the  late 
Autumn  of  this  year  or  early  in  the  following  Spring,  for  he  was 
well  established  in  Sudbury  in  the  Summer  of  1639,  as  shown  by 
the  deed  the  proprietors  of  the  township  received  from  Karte — 
or  Cato — the  local  Indian  chieftain.  As  this  deed  is  typical  of 
so  many  others  under  which  the  settlers  acquired  such  shadowy 
title  as  the  Indians  had  in  the  soil,  it  is  worth  giving  in  full  just 
as  it  appears  in  the  "Note  Book"  of  Thomas  Lechford,  the  first 
lawyer  in  the  Colony.^*^    Briefly  drawn,  it  reads  as  follows: 

"Cato,  otherwise  Goodmanes,  for  five  Coates,  five  wastcoats, 
five  shirts,  five  payres  of  stockings,  five  payre  of  shooes,  five 
hatchetts,  five  knives,  five  pounds  of  tobacco  and  ten  fadome  of 
wampum  pege,^^  All  wch  I  have  received  of  George  Munnings, 
in  the  behalfe  of  himselfe  &  the  rest  of  the  planters  of  the  new 
plantation  lying  south  of  Concord  call[ed]  Nannitt  Doe  by  this 
my  writing  give  and  grant,  bargaine  and  sell  unto  the  said  George 
Munninge  and  the  sd  planters  of  said  new  plantation  and  their 
successors  forever.  All  that  tracte  of  land  conteyning  two  myles 
square  from  the  now  Dwelling  house  of  Bryan  Pendleton  gentle- 
man, on  all  sydes  but  on  the  north  side  to  Concord  lyne,  be  it 
two  myles  more  or  lesse,  etc, ;  the  20th  of  the  5th  month  [July] 
in  the  yeare  that  Christians  write  of  Christ  the  Lord  one  thousand 
six  hundred  thirty  and  nyne". 

At  the  time  the  Rev.  A.  L.  Hudson  wrote  his  History  of  Sud- 
bury, this  document  had  not  come  to  light  but  from  certain  refer- 
ences made  to  it  in  a  later  deed  from  Karte  to  the  settlers  there, 
Hudson  obtained  a  pretty  good  idea  of  the  original  transaction. 
In  commenting  on  the  first  grant  he  says  it  is  supposed  that  Mun- 
nings acted  as  agent  for  the  settlers  and  that  he  and  Brian  Pen- 
dleton advanced  the  money  required  in  making  the  purchase.^^ 
This  George  Munnings  had  lost  an  eye  in  the  Pequot  War,  and 
it  is  possible  he  was  employed  to  negotiate  the  purchase  because 
of  some  superstitious  awe  the  savages  may  have  entertained  for 
a  one-eyed  man.    As  an  ex-tavern  keeper  in  Watertown  he  may 

*•>  Lechford  was  the  only  lawyer  in  Massachusetts  until  1641  when  he  fell  out 
with  the  Puritan  leaders  and  returned  to  London.  His  "Note  Book",  pub- 
lished in  1885  by  the  American  Antiquarian  Society  as  Volume  VII  of  their 
Transactions  and  Collections,  contains  many  interesting  items  relating  to  the 
early  colonists.  The  deed  from  Karte  appears  at  pages  129-130. 
"  "Wampumpege"  (Wampumpeag)  is  usually  abbreviated  as  "wampum". 
"  Hudson's  History  of  Sudbury,  3Iass.,  p.  64. 


Sudbury  33 

also  have  had  some  other  qualifications  which  are  helpfiil  at  times 
in  making  a  good  bargain — for  one  side  at  least. 

Mannings  did  not  remain  in  Sudbury  long,  but  in  accordance 
with  the  pleasant  New  England  custom  of  commemorating  the 
actors  in  its  past,  a  point  of  land  on  the  river  was  known  by  his 
name  for  many  years.  Similarly,  adjoining  the  village  of  Sud- 
bury Center  and  lying  to  the  north  and  east,  the  maps  still  show 
two  elevations,  Pendleton  Hill  and  Goodman  Hill,  named  respec- 
tively in  memory  of  the  man  who  promoted  the  settlement  and 
of  the  savage  who  sold  the  land. 

Part  of  Pendleton  Hill  is  now  occupied  by  Mt.  Pleasant 
Cemetery.  It  was  originally  called  Pine  Hill  but  became  known 
by  its  present  name  after  part  of  it  had  been  "laid  out  to  the 
right  of  Brian  Pendleton",  12  June  1725 — long  after  his  de- 
cease.^^  This  Cemetery  is  immediately  back  of  the  Sudbury  Town 
Hall  and  while  it  does  not  seem  to  be  on  high  land,  yet  it  com- 
mands a  very  extensive  view  over  the  surrounding  country.  A 
much  older  cemetery  lies  across  the  road,  and  some  of  the  first 
settlers  of  Sudbury  are  buried  there. 

The  first  settlement  in  Sudbury  was  in  the  present  town  of 
Wayland,  east  of  the  river,  where  Pendleton's  home  lot  of  five 
acres  lay  on  the  old  Watertown  Trail,  north  of  the  Pond  brook.^* 
This  part  of  old  Sudbury  was  set  off  as  the  town  of  East  Sud- 
bury in  1780,  the  name  being  changed  to  Wayland  in  1835.  In 
1887,  Sudbury's  historian  "went  to  look  for  traces  of  houses  on 
the  lots  assigned  to  Brian  Pendleton  and  Thomas  Noyes  just  be- 
yond Clay  Pit  bridge,  and  there  in  the  exact  locality  were  distinct 
depressions  just  where  they  were  looked  for."^^  In  his  later  Annals 
of  Sudbury,  Wayland  and  Maynard  (1891,  pp.  112-113),  Hud- 
son describes  this  location  more  particularly,  placing  it  just  north 
of  the  ToAver  Hill  railroad  station,  "where  the  cellar  hole  of  Brian 
Pendleton's  house  was  well  defined,  about  ten  rods  after  crossing 
the  brook,  and  a  little  way  up  the  hill."  Hudson  was  a  careful 
and  painstaking  historian,  and  on  account  of  his  thorough  re- 
searches and  his  intimate  knowledge  of  local  affairs  there  can  be 
no  doubt  but  that  he  came  very  close  to  identifying  the  spot  where 
Pendleton  first  lived  within  the  ancient  limits  of  Sudbury  before 

"  Hudson's  History  of  Sudbury,  Mass.,  pp.  292,  582. 

"Sudbury  Records,  "Roads  and  Perambulations",  1693-1771,  p.  13. 

^  Hudson's  History  of  Sudbury,  Mass.,  pp.  76-78. 


34  Brian  Pendleton 

his  removal  to  the  west  side  of  the  river. 

As  one  of  the  founders  of  the  place,  Pendleton  took  an  active 
part  in  nursing  it  along.  There  was  much  to  be  done  in  a  com- 
munity way — lands  to  be  allotted,  a  grist  mill  provided,  a  bridge 
built  across  the  Sudbury  river,  the  "train  band"  formed,  and  of 
course,  a  minister  secured,  and  a  meeting  house  erected.  Small 
town  affairs,  trivial  affairs  seemingly  important  only  to  those 
directly  concerned,  prosaic  and  humdrum  days,  pioneer  days  full 
of  toil  and  privation,  days  to  be  repeated  over  and  over  in  count- 
less settlements  stretching  westward  and  ever  westward,  spanning 
the  continent  at  last  after  many  generations.  One  town  much  the 
same  as  another,  each  a  replica  of  all  that  had  gone  before  in  the 
Colony,  and  would  go  on  until  the  last  frontier  was  reached,  a 
microcosm  here  at  Sudbury  of  America  in  the  making. 

First  of  all  there,  the  distribution  of  the  town  lands.  As 
soon  as  the  settlers  had  housed  themselves  and  planted  and  gath- 
ered in  such  scanty  crops  as  they  could  raise  in  their  first  summer, 
they  sent  in  a  petition  to  the  General  Court  asking  that  definite 
acreages  be  laid  out  to  them  individually.  In  September  [1639] 
the  Court  commissioned  Pendleton  and  some  others  to  undertake 
this  task,  directing  that  the  allotments  should  be  made  to  the  in- 
habitants "according  to  their  estates  and  persons"^^ — and  the 
committee  went  ahead  with  its  work  on  a  definite  basis  of  appor- 
tionment.^^ 

Judging  from  the  number  of  times  Pendleton  signed  his  name 
to  the  record  of  these  allotments  which  appear  in  the  first  fifty 
pages  of  the  book  of  Sudbury's  "Town  Proceedings"  started  in 
the  following  year,  he  was  kept  fairly  busy  on  this  work,  and  was 
not  overpaid  when  given  a  "gratulation"  of  sixteen  acres  for  his 
services.  The  following  thirty  pages  of  this  book  deal  with  "town 
orders",  and  as  his  name  is  signed  throughout  he  was  evidently 
one  of  the  Selectmen  there  during  these  early  years,  although 
we  do  not  find  record  of  his  election  as  such  until  June  25th, 
1644.^« 

18  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  271. 

"  For  the  meadow  lands  this  apportionment  was  "To  every  Mr   [master]    of 

a  family  6  Akers,  To  every  wife  61/0   akers,  To  every  child,   ly,  Akers.    To 

every  mare,  cow,  ox,  or  any  other  animal  that  may  amount  to   £20  3  Akers," 

[Sudbury  Records,  vide  Hudson's  Annals  p.  41],  a  basis  well  enoug:h  inten- 

tioned  but  one  which  must  have  led  to  many  an  argument  over  the  proper 

valuation  of  the  cattle. 

18  Sudbury  Records,  Wayland  Transcripts,  I,  48. 


SUDBUBT  35 

The  modern  Chamber  of  Commerce  which  offers  special  con- 
cessions for  new  industrial  enterprises  is  only  repeating  history. 
Over  three  hundred  years  ago  the  little  town  of  Sudbury  adopted 
the  same  expedient  to  bring  a  grist  mill  there.  Early  in  January, 
1639/40,  Pendleton  and  the  other  town  commissioners  agreed  to 
give  "Ancient"  [Ensign]  Cakebread  a  hundred  and  ten  acres  of 
land  there  if  he  would  erect  a  mill  "fit  to  grind  the  towne  corn  by 
the  29th  day  of  September  next.^^  A  somewhat  similar  arrange- 
ment was  made  with  Ambrose  Leech  to  build  a  bridge  across  the 
river.  Pendleton  and  Walter  Haynes  signed  the  contract  with 
him  on  behalf  of  the  town  under  which  they  agreed  to  furnish  and 
frame  the  necessary  planking,  etc.  For  his  services  Leech  was  to 
have  forty  acres  of  land  given  him  and  also  to  be  admitted  as  a 
townsman  with  full  rights  to  commonage  and  later  divisions  of 

"P^^"d-'"  1164755 

Material  affairs  had  not  made  the  settlers  neglect  the  spiri- 
tual. They  had  organized  their  church  there  in  1640,  choosing 
Edmund  Brown  to  be  their  pastor.  The  building  of  the  Meeting 
House  was  postponed  for  three  years,  however,  when  its  erection 
was  made  a  community  affair.  Pendleton  again,  with  five  others 
acting  on  behalf  of  the  town,  contracted  with  one  John  Rutter 
"to  fell,  saw,  hew,  and  frame  a  house  for  a  meeting  house,  thirty 
foot  long,  twenty  foot  wide,  eight  foot  between  joint,"  that  should 
be  "ready  to  raise  the  first  week  in  May  next."  At  a  town  meeting 
held  the  first  day  of  that  month  [1643]  the  site  of  the  building 
was  designated,  and  it  was  ordered  that  every  householder  should 
attend  the  raising  or  send  an  able  bodied  man  to  help.^i  A  sol- 
emnly gala  day  this  for  all  the  inhabitants  of  Sudbury,  a  day  of 
days,  when  they  erected  that  symbol  of  their  political  and  religious 
union,  listened  to  an  interminable  prayer  from  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Brown,  ate,  drank,  and  were  merry  in  their  Puritanic  way,  while 
the  visiting  Indians  looked  on  gravely,  wondering  about  the 
strange  customs  and  the  still  stranger  Manitou  of  the  pale  faces ! 

In  a  church-state,  taxes  to  support  the  ministry  are  quite 

"Suffolk  Court  Files,  Dockets  3420,  26111.  The  name  of  this  miller  is  as  sin- 
gularly appropriate  as  that  of  Gilbert  Crackbone,  constable  of  Cambrido-e 
Mass.,  in   1654.  '^ 

^Sudbury  Town  Records,  vide  Hudson's  History,  p.  93. 

"^  Sudbury  "Town  Proceedings",  I,  27;  Hudson's  History,  pp.  100-101. 


36  Brian  Pendleton 

in  order  and  there  was  nothing  unusual  in  the  law  we  have  already 
noted  under  which  every  inhabitant  of  a  town,  whether  a  church 
member  or  not,  should  contribute  to  the  maintenance  of  its  local 
minister  either  voluntarily  or  by  assessment.  Such  a  levy  was  or- 
dered at  Sudbury  about  the  time  the  meeting  house  was  raised, 
and  Pendleton  and  Walter  Haynes  were  requested  to  make  the 
coUection,^^  a  task  which  they  undoubtedly  looked  upon  as  a  high 
privilege. 

In  later  years  Pendleton  could  find  time  to  run  the  affairs  of 
another  town,  serve  as  a  Magistrate,  command  its  local  militia 
company  and  represent  it  in  the  General  Court,  but  he  never 
served  as  a  Deputy  there  from  Sudbury.  He  did  not  let  that  body 
forget  him,  however.  From  what  we  know  of  his  land  hunger  in 
later  years,  as  well  as  his  propensity  for  sending  in  petitions,  we 
may  be  very  sure  he  had  a  hand  in  getting  another  mile  added 
to  the  plantation  in  1640,  as  well  as  in  having  it  exempted  from 
the  general  taxes  in  the  same  year,  and  later  in  securing  a  grant 
of  £20  from  the  public  treasury  for  completing  its  bridge  across 
the  river.^^  More  definitely  we  find  him  signing  a  memorandum 
to  the  Court  in  '39,  together  with  John  Johnson,  the  Colony's 
Surveyor  of  Arms,  suggesting  the  recompense  that  should  be  paid 
its  Secretary,  Edward  Rawson,  in  the  proposed  making  of  gun- 
powder and  salt-peter.^^ 

Pendleton  was  much  concerned  in  everything  that  pertained 
to  the  defense  of  the  colony  and  his  activity  in  its  military  affairs 
continued  until  his  old  age.  All  able-bodied  men  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  magistrates,  the  clergy,  and  those  engaged  in  the 
fisheries  or  in  ship-building,  were  enrolled  in  the  train  bands  which 
in  the  early  days  held  weekly  drills,  followed  by  contests  in  marks- 
manship. All  members  of  these  train  bands,  servants  excepted, 
could  vote  for  their  officers  but  their  choice  for  each  was  limited 

^  Hudson's  History,  p.  99.    As  Haynes  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  west  of 

the  river  it  is  fair  to  assume  Pendleton  was  then  living  at  the  other  end  of 

the  town.   Not  long  afterwards,  however,  he  evidently  disposed  of  his  holdings 

there  and  became  a  neighbor  of  Haynes,  for  in  the  deed  of  all  his  Sudbury 

property  to  his  son  James  some  years  later,  he  described  his  homestead  as 

lying  west  of  the  river. 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  289,  292;  II,  102. 

'^  Massachusetts  Archives,  LIX,  I.    See  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  17,  29-30, 

for  the  regulations  adopted  for  making  the  latter — a  striking  example  of  the 

thrift  born  of  necessity. 


Sudbury  37 

not  only  to  a  freeman  (i.e.,  a  church  member),  but  to  "some  prin- 
cipal! man  ...  in  each  towne"^^ — a  politico-military  fusion  which 
led  to  many  a  disaster  when  it  was  put  to  the  test. 

While  we  do  not  find  record  of  any  military  title  given  Pen- 
dleton until  1648,  at  which  time  he  was  called  "Lieutenant"  when 
named  by  the  General  Court  as  one  of  a  committee  to  inspect  the 
bridge  over  the  Mystic,^®  yet  he  had  probably  attained  that  office 
several  years  before  this  date.  Only  the  usual  "title  of  respect" 
was  given  him  when  he  was  requested  by  the  Court  to  drill  the 
Sudbury  Company  in  1640,"^  a  duty  to  which  he  was  again  as- 
signed by  the  Assistants  three  years  later^*  after  Ensign  Cake- 
bread  had  rendered  this  service  for  a  year  as  Ensign.^^  The  Court 
in  appointing  Cakebread  drillmaster  evidently  took  pains  to  leave 
no  question  as  to  his  rank,  and  it  is  further  significant  that  when 
Pendleton  headed  a  petition  from  Sudbury  in  1645  asking  that 
William  Pelham  be  made  Captain  of  the  Company  there  and  Ed- 
mund Goodnow,  Ensign,  no  reference  is  made  to  its  Lieuten- 
antcy.^"  It  is  quite  possible  he  was  then  holding  this  office  himself. 

While  it  is  not  unlikely  that  Pendleton  had  had  some  military 
training  in  England,  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  he  had  spe- 
cialized somewhat  along  these  lines  in  order  to  fit  himself  for  com- 
mand at  Sudbury.  About  a  year  before  his  removal  there,  some 
of  the  leading  men  of  Boston  and  vicinity  "out  of  their  care  of 
the  publike  weale  &  safety",  organized  a  company  for  "the  ad- 
vancement of  the  millitary  arte,  &  exrcise  of  armes" — a  sort  of 
training  school  for  officers.  Owing  to  the  opposition  of  certain  of 
the  magistrates,  two  years  elapsed  before  its  charter  was  granted. 
According  to  Winthrop  there  was  some  fear  that  a  military  oli- 
garchy might  be  established,  and  then  too  the  Hutchinson-Wheel- 
wright  imbroglio  may  have  been  a  deterring  factor.    However, 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  187,  188. 
'"Ibid.,   II,  227. 
'"Ibid,   I,   291. 

'^Records,  Court  of  Assistants  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  II,  133.  The  sol- 
diers of  those  days  must  have  needed  considerable  training.  No  less  than 
forty-eight  motions  were  required  to  load  and  fire  the  cumbersome  "match- 
locks" of  Pendleton's  time,  according  to  an  old  English  treatise  quoted  in 
Grose's  Antiquities. 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  28.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  this  Ensign  Cakebread 
was  that  Capt.  Thomas  Bredcake,  who  was  lent  two  small  cannon  and  com- 
missioned by  the  Massachusetts  General  Court  in  1G44  "to  take  any  Turkish 
pirates."  [Ibid.,  II,  79,  83.]  Perhaps  this  is  another  forgotten  "father  of  the 
American  navy". 
=»  Massachusetts  Archives,  LXVII,  40;  Records  II,  124. 


38  Brian  Pekdleton 

these  alarms  were  finally  quieted  and  in  March,  1639,  the  Court 
granted  a  charter  to  what  they  designated  should  be  called  "the 
Military  Company  of  the  Massachusets".^^  Although  its  existence 
has  been  threatened  at  times,  this  organization  still  flourishes 
today  as  that  unique  institution  of  Boston  known  as  "The  Ancient 
and  Honorable  Artillery  Company". 

There  is  good  evidence  that  Pendleton  was  one  of  the  foun- 
ders of  this  Company.  While  its  original  rolls  are  no  longer  to  be 
found,  they  must  have  been  in  existence  in  1820  when  they  were 
published  in  Zachariah  Whitman's  "Historical  Sketch"  of  the 
organization.  According  to  this  work  [p.  148],  the  twenty-first 
name  on  the  Company's  roster  in  1637  was  that  of  "Lieut.  (Jo- 
seph) Pendleton",  the  parentheses  indicating — as  stated  in  a  note 
on  the  preceding  page — that  the  name  enclosed  therewith  "cannot 
be  ascertained  by  the  records  for  certainty".  As  there  was  no 
adult  Pendleton  in  New  England  at  this  time  other  than  Brian, 
and  as  his  name  appears  upon  the  Company's  roster  of  1646 — 
given  correctly  this  time  but  with  the  added  title  of  "Major"^^ 
— Whitman  had  good  reason  for  his  uncertainty. 

The  appearance  of  Pendleton's  name  upon  two  rolls  of  the 
Company  is  of  special  significance.  This  happened  not  infre- 
quently with  the  early  members,  some  of  whom  would  drop  out 
of  the  organization  for  a  time  and  then  rejoin  later.^^  Evidently 
this  is  exactly  what  happened  in  Pendleton's  case.  Upon  his  re- 
moval to  the  frontier  town  of  Sudbury  he  was  no  longer  able  to 
attend  the  Company's  sessions  with  any  convenience  or  regularity, 
and  so  dropped  out,  resuming  his  membership  the  very  year  he  re- 
turned to  Watertown. 

Pendleton's  departure  from  Sudbury  was  inevitable.  Sooner 
or  later  he  would  have  tired  of  his  humdrum  existence  there  and 
sought  other  fields  for  his  activities.  The  place  was  now  well 
established.  He  had  worked  hard  to  get  it  going — and  suddenly 
it  all  seemed  paltry  and  not  worth  while,  a  wasted  interlude  in 

^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  250-1.  The  petition  for  this  charter  has  disap- 
peared but  it  must  have  been  in  existence  in  1820  when  the  first  history  of 
this  organization  was  written. 

^  Military  titles  on  the  Rolls  of  the  "Ancients"  have  no  chronological  sig- 
nificance. They  merely  glorify  the  membership.  Pendleton  did  not  become  a 
Major  until  twenty-two  years  after  this  date,  and  may  not  have  been  a  Lieu- 
tenant  until   after   1637. 

^See  Preface  to  Roll  of  the  Ancient  and  Honorable  Artillery  Company  of 
Massachusetts,  1637-1894. 


SUDBUEY  39 

his  life — seven  years  thrown  away  on  the  petty  affairs  of  a  wil- 
derness town,  years  of  stagnation  in  an  obscure  backwater  of 
Massachusetts,  while  in  England  the  earth  had  shaken  to  the  rush 
of  Cromwell's  cavalry  and  a  king  had  lost  his  throne. 

Was  it  the  faint  echo  of  that  distant  thunder  which  roused 
Pendleton  from  his  dreaming — or,  more  prosaically,  did  he  have 
a  falling  out  with  his  townspeople?  Something  of  that  kind  seems 
to  have  happened.  The  fragmentary  records  are  tantalizing 
enough — a  court  order  to  return  some  of  his  goods  which  had 
been  seized  by  the  town,  then  mention  of  a  suit  he  brought  against 
Sudbury,  with  Watertown  as  an  interested  party,  but  nothing 
to  show  what  the  trouble  was  all  about,  nor  how  it  was  settled. 

The  Wayland  transcripts  of  the  first  volume  of  the  Sudbury 
records  have  the  following  items: 

P.  73.  "To  the  Constable  of  Sudbury  or  his  deputies  .  .  . 
You  are  required  the  goods  of  Mr.  Pendleton  [in  the  possession] 
of  Hugh  Griffin^*  or  any  other  levied  or  dis  [trained  by  the]  town 
and  deliver  to  Mr.  Pendleton  or  his  [attorney  he]  having  already 
given  bond  according  to  law  [therefor]  provided  and  so  make  a 
true  return  hereof  and  [fail  not]  dated  the  6th  of  the  (1)  1646" 
— meaning  6  March,  1646/47. 

P.  74.  Date  torn  off.  This  is  copy  of  warrant  to  the  Constable 
of  Sudbury  to  notify  the  town  to  appoint  some  man  or  men  to 
appear  at  the  Court  in  Boston  .  .  .  "to  answer  a  complaint  of  Mr. 
Pendleton  in  action  of  [distrai]ninge,  the  [goods]  of  his  estate. 
And  also  the  complaint  of  the  town  of  Watertown  ...  in  another 
action  of  the  case  concer[ning]  of  Mr.  Pendleton's  estate  pay- 
able to  Watertown". 

P.  74.  On  March  30,  1647,  Sudbury  chose  Capt.  Pelham 
and  Edmund  Goodenow  to  appear  for  them  in  this  suit. 

For  trial  in  Boston,  this  case  must  have  been  appealed  from 
the  Middlesex  County  Court,  but  the  earliest  records  there  are 
no  longer  extant,  nor  can  anything  be  found  relating  to  this 
case  among  such  records  as  have  come  down  to  us  from  the  Court 
of  Assistants,  or  from  the  General  Court. 

Whatever  the  difficulty  may  have  been,  Pendleton  seems  to 
have  lost  nothing  by  it,  nor  did  he  jeopardize  any  of  his  rights  in 
further  divisions  of  the  town  lands  in  later  years.   But  now  it  was 

"  Hugh  Griffln  was  clerk  of  the  writs  at  Sudbury. — Massachusetts  Records, 
II,  97. 


40  Brian  Pekdleton 

time  to  go.  He  could  not  stand  Sudbury  any  longer.  Nothing  of 
consequence  would  happen  there  forever.  It  was  no  place  for  a 
man  of  energy  and  ambition.  There  were  undoubtedly  greater 
opportunities  elsewhere.  He  would  return  to  Watertown  and  look 
about  for  a  time — get  into  public  affairs  again.  So,  like  a  man 
escaping  from  bondage  he  turned  his  back  on  Sudbury,  on  its 
meeting  house,  and  its  bridge,  and  its  mill,  and  started  out  on  his 
reconnaissance.  He  would  yet  find  the  life  he  was  fitted  for,  the 
kind  of  activity  he  would  most  enjoy. 


CHAPTER  IV 


WATERTOWN  AND  TOPSFIELD 
1646  -  1661 


Those  quiet  and  obscure  years  of  Pendleton's  life  in  Sudbury 
were  not  altogether  wasted.  He  did  not  have  to  sell  any  of  his 
holdings  there  in  order  to  purchase  two  considerable  properties  in 
Watertown  upon  his  return.^  Evidently  his  capital  had  suffered 
no  impairment,  may  indeed  have  increased  somewhat.  Nor  had  he 
lost  his  former  prestige  among  his  old  neighbors.  Almost  imme- 
diately —  undoubtedly  at  their  suggestion  —  the  General  Court 
called  upon  him  in  May  [1646]  to  serve  as  one  of  the  arbitrators 
in  a  long-standing  dispute  between  them  and  Richard  Dummer, 
one  time  Assistant  and  Treasurer  of  the  Colony.^  And  a  year 
later  his  towns-people  elected  him  again  as  their  Deputy  to  the 
Court  in  company  with  his  old  colleague,  Richard  Browne.^  It  was 
as  if  he  had  never  been  away. 

This  illusion  could  easily  have  been  strengthened  when  the 
Court  opened.  As  before,  the  government  was  headed  by  Win- 
throp  and  Dudley,  and  once  again  Pendleton  found  himself  in- 
volved in  the  last  act  of  another  episode  which  served  to  establish 
authority  still  more  definitely  in  Massachusetts.  Nine  years  ear- 
lier he  had  been  present  at  the  final  conclusion  of  the  Wheelwright- 
Hutchinson  affair.  He  was  now  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  fa- 
mous case  of  Doctor  Robert  Child  and  his  fellow  Remonstrants,  a 
case  which  again  raised  politico-religious  issues,  but  in  a  broader 
way  and  with  consequences  infinitely  more  far  reaching.   The  ear- 

^  Suffolk  Deeds,  I,  71.  These  records  state  Pendleton  bought  the  dwelling  house 
and  outlying  lots  belonging  to  Robert  Lockwood  on  April  30th,  and  the  adja- 
cent property  of  Nicholas  Knapp  on  May  6,  1646,  but  in  his  deed  disposing  of 
these  purchases  he  notes  that  he  acquired  them  both  on  April  27th.  According 
to  Bond,  the  house  lots  were  centrally  located  on  what  is  now  Grove  Street  and 
Walnut  Street. 

'Massachusetts  Records,  III,  70—6  May,  1646.  The  other  arbitrators  were 
Richard  Browne  of  Watertown  and  Humphrey  Atherton  of  Dorchester.  The 
latter  became  an  Assistant  of  the  Colony  in  1654  and  Major  General  in  1661. 
His  sudden  and  violent  death  in  the  midst  of  the  Quaker  persecutions  excited 
much  superstitious  comment. 
"Ibid.,  II,  186;  III,  105. 

41 


42  Brian  Pendleton 

lier  affair,  in  spite  of  its  bitterness,  was  hardly  more  than  an  in- 
ternal dissension  over  points  of  doctrine,  but  this  one  struck  at 
the  very  roots  of  the  Colony's  policy,  involved  the  right  of  appeal 
to  England,  and  as  one  aftermath  helped  to  make  the  civil  govern- 
ment subservient  to  the  clergy. 

Just  what  Child  expected  to  accomplish  through  his  Remon- 
strance or  petition  has  always  been  a  matter  of  dispute.  Presented 
to  the  General  Court  the  year  before  [1646],  this  daring  memorial 
accused  the  Magistrates  of  arbitrary  and  tyrannical  conduct, 
complained  of  the  political  disabilities  of  those  who  were  not 
Church  members,  demanded  their  enfranchisement,  and  also  the 
preposterous  right  of  establishing  churches  "according  to  the  best 
reformations  of  England  and  Scotland."  As  an  added  affront, 
the  petitioners  threatened  to  appeal  to  Parliament  for  redress  if 
their  prayers  were  not  granted.^ 

Parliament  at  this  time  was  temporarily  in  control  of  the 
Presbyterians  and  as  Child  was  known  to  favor  their  form  of 
Church  government,  the  authorities  were  quick  to  scent  a  plot  to 
subvert  their  rule  to  the  Presbytery.  Some  of  the  phrasing  in  the 
Remonstrance  could  easily  have  given  weight  to  that  idea,  but  it 
takes  more  than  one  man  to  form  a  conspiracy.  With  the  possible 
exception  of  Thomas  Burton,  the  Doctor's  fellow  petitioners  could 
hardly  have  been  in  sympathy  with  any  such  aim.  Rather  does 
their  action  seem  to  have  been  that  of  men  who  wished  to  register 
a  protest  against  existing  conditions  regardless  of  what  ulterior 
purposes  their  ring-leader  may  have  had  in  mind. 

Of  the  petitioners,  Dr.  Child  was  a  graduate  of  the  University 
of  Padua,  a  friend  of  the  younger  John  Winthrop,  and  known  to 

*  Hutchinson  Papers,  I,  214-223.  Contemporary  accounts  of  the  Child  affair  are 
given  in  Winthrop's  Journal,  John  Child's  New  England's  Jonas,  Winslow's 
New  England's  Salamander  and  Johnson's  Wonderworking  Providence.  Hub- 
bard in  his  History  of  New  England  (Ed.  of  1815,  pp.  500,  512-518),  follows 
Winthrop  in  part.  He  states  that  the  actual  instigator  of  the  Remonstrance  was 
William  Vassall,  an  ex-Assistant  of  Massachusetts  who,  dissatisfied  with  its 
policies  had  returned  to  England,  later  settling  at  Scituate  in  the  Plymouth 
Colony  where  he  was  regarded  as  a  trouble  maker.  Of  later  historians,  Palfrey, 
in  his  History  of  New  England  (Book  II,  Chapter  4),  gives  an  admirable  ac- 
count of  the  affair,  as  does  W.  T.  R.  Marvin  in  his  reprint  of  New  England's 
Jonas  (Boston  18G9).  The  most  exhaustive  review  of  the  case,  however,  is  that 
of  Prof.  George  E.  Kittredge  in  his  Dr.  Robert  Child  the  Remonstrant  which 
originally  appeared  in  the  publications  of  the  Colonial  Society  of  Massachusetts 
for  1919.  I  have  followed  Prof.  Kittredge's  narrative,  without  citing  his  numer- 
ous authorities,  but  cannot  fully  agree  with  his  theory  that  the  Remonstrants 
desired  to  bring  Massachusetts  under  the  authority  of  the  Presbyterian  Church. 


Watertown  and  Topsfield  43 

his  opponents  as  "a  gentleman  and  a  scholar".  Burton  of  Hing- 
ham,  had  been  a  prothonotary's  clerk  in  England.  David  Yale  and 
Thomas  Fowle — and  apparently  John  Dand — were  Boston  mer- 
chants, the  former  being  the  father  of  Elihu  Yale  who  later 
founded  Yale  College.  John  Smith  was  of  Providence,  and  so  was 
an  outsider.  Samuel  Maverick,  the  only  non-member  of  the  Con- 
gregational Church  to  be  made  a  freeman,  was  living  upon  an 
island  in  Boston  Harbor  when  the  Puritans  arrived.  He  returned 
to  England  about  1660,  and  was  one  of  the  Royal  Commissioners 
Bent  over  in  1664  to  regulate  the  Colony's  affairs.  His  pamphlet, 
A  Brief e  Description  of  New  England,  is  a  bitter  arraignment  of 
Massachusetts. 

Despite — or  because  of — the  petitioners'  demand  for  an  im- 
mediate reply  to  their  Remonstrance  the  Court  took  no  action  in 
the  matter,  unless  we  assume  the  calling  of  a  synod  of  the  churches 
at  this  time  was  a  preliminary  move.^  The  petition  was  held  over 
for  the  Fall  session,  and  in  the  meantime  the  Doctor  and  his 
friends  busied  themselves  in  giving  it  wide  circulation  and  in  trying 
to  gain  additional  adherents  to  their  cause. 

When  the  Court  opened  in  October,  1646,  a  committee  was 
appointed  to  draw  up  a  reply  to  Child's  Remonstrance,  and  to  ar- 
range with  Edward  Winslow,  to  act  "as  an  agent  for  us  to  answer 
to  what  shalbe  objected  against  us  in  England.^  Winslow,  often 
the  Governor  of  the  Plymouth  Colony,  had  acted  formerly  as  its 
agent  in  England.  Bradford,  in  his  History,  (orig.  pp.  269-270), 
notes  that  Massachusetts  engaged  Winslow  to  look  after  its  inter- 
ests there,  not  only  in  the  Child  case  but  in  that  of  Gorton.  He 
seems  to  have  been  a  successful  diplomat,  as  Maverick  in  writing 
of  this  affair  years  later,  speaks  of  him  as  "a  Smooth  tongued  Cun- 
ning fellow,  who  soon  gott  himselfe  into  Favor  of  those  then  in 
Supreame  power,  against  whom  it  was  in  vaine  to  strive."  ^ 

^  Palfrey  and  Marvin  both  assume  that  this  action  on  the  part  of  the  General 
Court  was  induced  by  the  Remonstrance,  but  Kittredge  points  out  that  the 
Elders  had  proposed  it  at  the  previous  session  in  October,  1645,  and  that  the 
synod  was  called  several  days  before  the  Remonstrance  was  presented.  It  is 
entirely  possible,  however,  that  the  Court  had  cognizance  of  the  Petition  before 
its  actual  presentation,  and  there  is  no  certainty  that  the  request  for  a  minis- 
terial conference  would  have  been  acted  upon  so  soon  if  Doctor  Child  had  not 
appeared  upon  the  scene.  The  fruits  of  the  synod's  deliberations  will  be  touched 
upon  later. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  162. 
''  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Proceedings,  I,  240. 


44  Brian  Pendleton 

The  answer  to  Dr.  Child's  Remonstrance  was  adopted  at  an 
adjourned  session  of  the  Court  early  in  November.  From  a  letter 
Governor  Winthrop  wrote  his  eldest  son  some  two  weeks  later  it 
would  appear  the  Magistrates  were  satisfied  to  let  the  matter  rest 
there  but  that  the  Deputies  insisted  the  petitioners  be  examined. 
All  but  Maverick  appeared  when  summoned,  but  their  bearing  was 
so  contemptuous,  and  their  appeal  to  Parliament — or  to  the  Com- 
missioners of  Plantations — before  any  sentence  was  passed  upon 
them,  was  such  a  denial  of  the  Court's  jurisdiction  that  their  for- 
mal trial  was  inevitable. 

This  took  place  about  the  middle  of  the  month.  The  Remon- 
strants— except  Fowle  who  was  at  sea — were  brought  before  the 
Court  and  given  a  hearing  on  the  twelve  charges  that  had  been 
prepared  against  them.  Among  other  misdemeanors,  they  were 
accused  of  defaming  the  government,  slandering  the  churches,  and 
fomenting  sedition.  Adjudged  guilty,  they  were  subjected  to  vari- 
ous fines  unless  they  would  publicly  acknowledge  their  errors.* 
This  they  refused  to  do  and  again  appealed. 

Child  immediately  prepared  to  go  to  England  to  lay  his 
case  before  Parliament.  The  night  before  he  was  to  sail,  the  au- 
thorities, no  doubt  having  information  as  to  his  activities  during 
the  summer,  decided  to  hold  him  for  payment  of  his  fine,  and  to 
search  his  trunk  as  well  as  Dand's  study.  Nothing  incriminating 
was  found  in  the  Doctor's  possession  but  certain  papers  that  Dand 
had  prepared  seemed  even  more  revolutionary  than  the  original 
Remonstrance. 

These  included  a  petition  to  the  Commissioners  of  Planta- 
tions signed  by  twenty-five  "non-freemen"  calling  for  liberty  of 
conscience  and  for  a  general  governor.  Another  petition  from  the 
original  Remonstrants  cited  the  harsh  treatment  they  had  received 
and  asked  for  "settled  churches  according  to  the  reformation  of 
England",  and  for  the  imposition  of  the  "oath  of  allegiance  and 
such  other  covenants"  as  the  Parliament  might  decide  upon  to  test 
the  sentiments  of  the  colonists  "to  the  State  of  England  and  true 
restored  Protestant  religion".  A  third  document  questioned  the 
validity  of  the  charter  and  inquired  "how  it  might  be  forfeited, 
and  whether  such  and  such  acts  or  speeches  in  the  pulpits  or  in  the 
Courts  were  not  high  treason". 

«  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  90-91,  94. 


Watertown  and  Topsfteu)  45 

As  soon  as  the  Council  had  looked  over  these  highly  interest- 
ing documents,  Child  and  Dand,  together  with  Smith,  who  was 
found  with  the  latter,  were  put  under  arrest  and  bound  over  to 
the  next  Court  of  Assistants.  Child,  upon  giving  sureties  to  re- 
main in  Boston,  was  left  at  liberty  but  the  other  two  were  com- 
mitted to  prison  as  they  refused  to  be  examined.  When  the  Assist- 
ants met  in  March,  1646/47,  the  whole  affair,  because  of  its  seri- 
ousness, was  referred  to  the  next  General  Court.  Smith  and  Dand 
were  released  on  bail,  but  Child  elected  to  go  to  prison  this  time 
and  was  so  committed.  Maverick  who  had  been  busy  in  getting 
signatures  to  the  petition  of  the  non-freemen,  was  also  bound  over. 
No  proceedings  were  undertaken  against  Yale  and  it  is  likely  he 
had  not  been  a  party  to  the  further  activities  of  the  Remonstrants. 

The  General  Court  which  Pendleton  attended  opened  on  May 
26,  1647,  but  seems  to  have  been  in  no  hurry  to  take  up  this  case. 
Small  matters  were  given  first  attention.  The  tavernites'  ad- 
diction to  the  game  of  shovelboard  was  frowned  upon.  Jesuits  and 
priests  were  forbidden  to  enter  the  Colony.  Mr.  Elliott  was 
awarded  £10  "as  a  gratuity  for  his  great  pains  in  instructing  the 
Indians",  and  "Capt.  Pelham  and  Mr.  Pendleton"  were  directed  to 
lay  out  a  thousand  acres  of  land  which  two  of  the  Governor's  sons 
had  purchased.^  The  affair  of  Child  was  approached  by  degrees. 
The  winter  before  some  difficulty  had  been  experienced  in  raising 
sufficient  funds  to  send  Winslow  to  England,  and  it  had  become 
evident  that  the  methods  for  collecting  taxes  needed  revising. 
Either  in  recognition  of  his  financial  abilities  or  as  a  penalty  for 
his  long  absence  from  the  Court,  Pendleton  was  assigned  to  a  com- 
mittee to  draft  a  new  order  for  the  gathering  of  taxes  and  "to 
frame  a  law  for  redressing  grievances  of  those  at  sea".  A  real 
labor  this,  the  tax  law  as  adopted  at  the  next  sitting  of  the  Court 
taking  up  a  little  over  two  of  the  large  pages  in  the  printed  rec- 
ords.i« 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  first  writing  we  have  found 
in  Pendleton's  hand — outside  of  such  entries  as  he  made  in  the 
Sudbury  records — appears  as  a  memorandum  among  the  docu- 
ments in  this  case.  On  a  scrap  of  paper  barely  two  inches  square 
he  set  down  his  opinion  that  "The  leaving  out  of  the  ministers  per- 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  189  (2),  193,  195;  III,  106-7,  112,  114. 
^"Ibid.,  II,  212-214;  III,  116-118;  Archives,  C,  19  (and  Calendar). 


46  Brian  Pendleton 

sons  &  estates  I  conceive  is  contrary  to  the  orders  of  the  Country 
which  was  left  out  in  Middlesex"  ^^ — an  item  not  without  signifi- 
cance as  to  the  man's  habit  of  thought  nor  without  value  to  the 
colony,  for  in  the  final  draft  of  the  law  only  the  Magistrates  were 
exempted  from  taxation. 

Perhaps  as  a  result  of  the  Remonstrants'  activities  in  stirring 
up  a  long  smouldering  resentment,  the  General  Court  decided  at 
this  May  session  to  let  down  the  bars  a  little  by  allowing  non-free- 
men who  had  taken  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  vote  for  town  officers 
and  to  serve  on  juries.  Whether  or  not,  as  Winthrop  implies,  this 
small  concession  was  made  in  spite  of  and  not  because  of  the  Re- 
monstrance,^^ we  cannot  be  altogether  certain,  but  the  fact  re- 
mains that  nothing  had  been  done  to  extend  the  suffrage  even 
this  small  degree  until  after  Child's  petition  had  been  presented.^^ 
As  with  the  synod  of  the  churches,  called  four  days  before  the  doc- 
tor had  been  heard  from  officially,  his  action  seems  to  have  precipi- 
tated a  number  of  events  which  were  in  a  state  of  suspension. 

For  reasons  best  known  to  themselves  the  Court  had  not 
dealt  too  harshly  with  the  petitioners  six  months  earlier.  An 
apology  and  retraction  would  have  enabled  them  to  escape  paying 
their  fines  then.  But  a  more  severe  spirit  was  manifested  when 
their  second  trial  took  place.  Their  offenses  had  been  deeper.  Pos- 
sibly too  it  was  not  known  before  just  what  backing  Child  had, 
either  here  or  abroad.  This  was  no  longer  a  mystery.  Only  twenty- 
five  non-freemen  had  signed  the  new  petition,  and  of  these  some 
few  were  not  even  residents.  Besides  this,  the  Presbyterian  cause 
in  England  was  on  the  wane.  There  seemed  little  to  fear  from  that 
source.  These  agitators  could  now  be  dealt  with  properly. 

Yet  when  the  Court  finally  took  up  their  case  along  in  June 
[1647]  friction  quickly  developed.  Of  the  culprits'  general  guilt 
there  was  no  doubt,  but  how  this  varied  individually  and  what  sen- 
tences should  be  imposed  were  matters  of  contention  and  debate. 

Much  ill  feeling  seems  to  have  been  stirred  up.   Pendleton  and 

"  Massachusetts  Archives,  C,  18b, 

"  Winthrop  states  this  extension  of  voting  right  would  have  been  made  a  year 

earlier  had  not  Child's  Remonstrance  been  presented  just  at  that  time. 

"  In  commenting  on  this  action  of  the  General  Court,  Sanuiel  Eliot  Morrison 

in  his  Builders  of  the  Bay  Colony   (1930)    [p  261]   says,  "This  township  act  of 

1647   was  the  entering  wedge   for   democracy   in   Massachusetts   Bay;   it   gave 

manliood  suffrage  in  the  towns,  and  opened  to  non-church  members  the  town 

meeting,  the  most  important  school  of  self  government  in  New  England,  if  not 

in  the  United  States.   For  this  may  Robert  Child  be  thanked." 


Watertowk  akd  Topsfield  47 

a  somewhat  liberal-minded  minority  who  favored  lighter  punish- 
ments than  the  Court  had  decided  upon,  were  evidently  accused  of 
being  in  sympathy  with  Child.  As  an  offset  they  drew  up  a  memo- 
randum in  which  they  set  down  their  thoughts  in  most  minute 
detail  regarding  Avhat  might  be  legally  charged  against  the  various 
culprits — "Not  to  direct  the  Court,"  they  state,  but  through  their 
desire  "to  cleare  orselves  from  some  Jelosys  [i.e.,  suspicions]  that 
may  seeme  to  arise  from  or  Conterary  desent."^"*  Their  effort  to 
temper  justice  with  mercy  was  in  vain.  Pressure  was  brought  to 
bear  upon  them,  and  when  sentence  was  finally  pronounced  only 
eight  of  the  fourteen  Deputies  who  signed  this  memorial  stuck  to 
their  guns  by  noting  their  exceptions. 

The  penalties  were  severe  enough.  Child  and  Dand  were  fined 
£200  apiece;  Smith  and  Burton  £100;  Maverick  £150.^^  Of  the 
opposing  Deputies,  Jacob  Barney  disagreed  with  these  sentences 
altogether,  while  the  other  seven  who  had  neither  been  persuaded 
nor  intimidated,  "somewhat  differing  from  ye  sentence  of  ye  Courte 
in  degree  only"  had  their  desire  granted  that  their  "contradicentes 
might  stand  on  record".  And  there  they  stand  to  this  day,  eloquent 
testimony  to  the  fact  that  even  in  that  time  and  place  there  were 
men  who  could  not  go  along  the  whole  way  with  their  spiritual  and 
political  mentors  in  fixing  punishments  for  those  who  saw  in  Massa- 
chusetts neither  a  new  Heaven  nor  a  new  Earth  but  only  the  old 
tyranny  in  a  different  guise. 

The  dissenters  were  markedly  individualistic.  Each  one  had 
his  own  idea  as  to  the  exact  penalties  that  should  be  meted  out. 
Most  lenient  of  all  next  to  Barney,  "Brian  Pendleton  sentenced 
Mr.  Dand  100";  Mr.  Mavericke,  Mr.  Smith,  &  Mr.  Burton, 
40  "  apeece.  Doctor  Child  he  could  not  proceed  to  sentence  besids 
his  imprisonment."  Deputies  Paine  and  Carlton  also  felt  that 
Child  had  been  punished  enough,  but  the  other  four  conscientious 
objectors  fined  the  Doctor  varying  amounts,  while  generally  re- 
ducing the  penalties  fixed  by  the  Court  for  his  associates. ^^ 

"Massachusetts  Archives,  CVI,  6-6a.  This  interesting  document  is  published 
in  full  by  Kittredge  [pp.  53-55].  Pendleton  was  the  third  signer. 
"Authorities  differ  as  to  what  £200  in  1647  would  be  worth  today.  Estimates 
vary  from  $4,200  to  $20,000.  Perhaps  $6,000  would  be  about  right. 
^'Massachusetts  Records,  III,  113-114.  Dr.  Child  was  evidently  a  man  of 
means,  for  he  paid  his  heavy  fine  and  returned  to  England.  Dand  remained  in 
prison  for  a  year  when  he  was  released  and  his  fine  remitted.  [Ibid.,  II,  241.] 
Maverick,  after  several  efforts,  had  half  his  fine  abated  in  1650.  [Ibid.,  Ill,  200; 
IV,  pt.  1,  18].   No  record  of  any  clemency  shown  Smith  and  Burton. 


48  Brian  Pendleton 

This  disposition  on  the  part  of  the  Deputies  to  do  their  own 
thinking  had  long  been  a  source  of  vexation  to  the  Magistrates  and 
the  clergy.  Only  recently  the  lower  House  had  snatched  Gorton's 
band  of  "Heretics"  from  death,  and  still  earlier  they  had  stayed 
the  persecution  of  the  excommunicated.  It  was  foreseen  from  the 
first  that  as  the  number  of  Deputies  increased  with  the  growth  of 
population  it  would  become  more  and  more  difficult  to  keep  them 
under  control.  As  early  as  1639  it  had  been  voted  that  no  town 
should  send  more  than  two  representatives  to  the  Court,  and  five 
years  later  an  unsuccessful  attempt  had  been  made  to  reduce  their 
total  number  to  twenty.^^  No  doubt  as  a  result  of  their  lack  of 
accord  in  the  Child  case  another  effort  at  suppression  was  made 
when  the  Court  reconvened  in  November.  At  this  time  a  bill  was 
rushed  through  providing  that  no  town  should  have  more  than 
one  representative.  This  it  was  alleged  would  cut  down  the  cost  of 
government.  On  reconsideration  it  was  voted  that  the  operation 
of  this  law  should  be  suspended  until  after  the  next  Court  of 
Elections.  Still  dissatisfied,  the  more  far-sighted  Deputies,  now 
thoroughly  aroused  to  the  minor  role  it  was  intended  they  should 
have  in  the  future,  finally  mustered  enough  votes  to  have  the  whole 
proposition  put  up  to  the  freemen  for  a  referendum.^*  Economy 
in  government  was  well  enough,  but  proper  representation  was 
equally  important  if  the  people  expected  to  have  any  voice  at  all. 

Minor  set-backs  never  discourage  the  zealot.  The  reactionary 
element  now  took  a  definite  step  to  fasten  its  system  upon  the 
rising  generation.  The  problems  of  the  day  had  been  ably  handled. 
They  had  resolutely  suppressed  all  schisms  among  themselves. 
They  had  successfully  resisted  any  interference  in  their  affairs  by 
England.  The  invisible  government  of  the  Colony  now  began  to 
function  more  definitely.  The  first  fruits  of  the  Cambridge  synod 
had  appeared  in  certain  laws  passed  by  the  General  Court  in 
November,  1646.  Under  these,  regular  church  attendance  was 
made  obligatory  upon  all  inhabitants ;  heresies  were  made  punish- 
able by  fine ;  blasphemy  by  death.  Death  was  also  made  the  penalty 
for  those  who  either  denied  the  Scriptures  to  be  the  word  of  God, 
or  reproached  religion  "as  if  it  were  but  a  politick  [i.e.,  crafty] 

"Massachusetts  Records,  I,  271,  254;  II,  88. 
i8  76iU,  11,209,216-7. 


Watertown  and  Topsfeeld  49 

device  to  keep  ignorant  men  in  awe" — ^'^  an  indication  that  there 
were  free-thinkers  even  in  those  days  among  the  Puritans. 

Free  thought  is  dangerous  to  any  system  founded  on  a  fan- 
tastic theology.  The  old  theory  of  politico-religious  control  was 
based  upon  keeping  the  masses  in  ignorance.  The  Reformation 
had  changed  all  that.  It  had  created  a  new  problem.  There  might 
be  too  much  light  let  into  dark  places.  This  would  have  to  be 
prevented.  The  authorities  in  Massachusetts  went  about  the  task 
in  a  thorough-going  way.  Aware  of  the  prevailing  unrest  as  indi- 
cated by  the  Child  Remonstrance,  and  to  prevent  similar  outbreaks 
in  the  future,  they  undertook  the  religious  education  of  the  young 
by  establishing  at  this  November  Court  of  1647  the  public  school 
system  of  the  Commonwealth. 

Instruction  of  a  more  or  less  haphazard  sort  had  been  pro- 
vided by  the  different  towns  but  the  matter  was  far  too  important 
to  be  left  to  local  auspices.  A  deep  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  by 
the  general  populace  was  held  most  essential  in  the  Bible-Common- 
wealth, To  inculcate  this  it  was  ordered  that  towns  of  fifty  families 
should  provide  some  persons  to  teach  the  children  to  read  and 
write,  while  those  of  a  hundred  families  should  "set  up  a  grammar 
school"  where  "youth  may  be  fitted  for  the  university" — ^^  Har- 
vard, then  chiefly  engaged  in  training  ministers.  No  chances  were 
to  be  taken  with  the  kind  of  education  the  young  would  receive. 
The  schools  as  well  as  the  state  were  merely  adjuncts  to  the  church. 
A  limited  literacy  could  be  used  as  a  means  for  strengthening  the 
faith  by  seeing  to  it  that  the  Scriptures  were  properly  interpreted. 

So  the  youth  of  Massachusetts  were  hedged  about  with  all 
proper  safe-guards.  The  school  teachers  were  carefully  selected 
from  the  most  orthodox.  Learning  meant  Scriptural  learning  only. 
Religious  instruction,  still  so  dear  to  certain  ecclesiastics,  was  the 
rule.  Nourished  on  the  New  England  Primer,  the  child  graduated 
to  such  light  reading  as  was  furnished  by  the  horrors  of  Wiggles- 
worth's  Day  of  Doom,  or  the  printed  sermons  of  various  divines. 
A  rigid  censorship  prevented  the  importation  of  any  literature 
that  might  corrupt,  and  the  one  printing  press  in  the  Colony  was 
closely   supervised.    The  clergy   ruled,   and   through  the  proper 

^^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  176-8;  III,  98-100.    The  Communists  have  a  text 
today  that  "Religion  is  the  opiate  of  the  people". 
'^Ibid.,  II,  208. 


50  Brian  Pendleton 

education  of  the  young  schemed  to  perpetuate  their  power.  They 
succeeded  only  too  well.  It  took  generations  to  overcome  the  evil 
results  of  the  restricted  schooling  the  early  New  Englanders 
received.  Eventually,  however,  their  tree  of  knowledge,  rooted  in 
darkness,  a  gnarled  and  stunted  growth,  a  tree  of  bitter  fruit,  did 
somehow  struggle  to  the  light.  And  when  it  did,  the  people's  in- 
grained zeal  for  learning  as  a  means  to  religion  gradually  changed 
to  a  devotion  to  learning  for  itself  alone.  In  time  education  became 
to  them  their  second  religion  and  their  most  important  contribu- 
tion to  our  national  life.^^ 

II. 

At  the  October-November  session  of  this  1647  Court,  the 
synod  of  churches  which  was  still  in  conference  was  asked  to  pre- 
pare a  confession  of  faith.  A  recommendation  was  made  that  the 
laws  "being  ready  to  be  put  in  print,  it  is  meete  that  they  should  be 
conveniently  penned."  And  of  still  greater  interest  it  was  ordered 
that  a  strong  box  of  oak  be  provided  in  which  to  preserve  the 

records  of  the  Colony  "for  the  good  of  present  &  Succeeding 
ages."22 

They  felt  they  were  making  history,  these  old  Puritans.  They 
sensed  they  were  the  founders  of  a  new  state,  and  while  they  could 
not  foresee  how  mighty  it  was  to  become,  nor  what  a  leading  part 
their  descendants  would  have  therein,  yet  they  were  anxious  to 
hand  their  records  down  to  posterity  so  that  it  might  be  known  in 
generations  to  come  how  they  wrought  and  toiled  to  make  their 
enterprise  a  success.  Perhaps  too,  they  had  the  very  human  desire 
that  they  themselves  should  not  be  forgotten  after  they  had  gone 
in  fear  to  meet  their  terrible  God,  but  that  their  names,  saved  from 

="  Even  so  generally  astute  a  commentator  as  J.  A.  Doyle  seems  to  have  fallen 
into  error  on  this  subject  when  in  speaking  of  American  Puritanism  he  says: 
"It  never  dealt  with  learning  as  the  privilege  of  a  class.  It  might  silence  its 
opponents;  it  never  sought  to  deaden  or  sophisticate  the  minds  of  its  disciples. 
Bigoted  itself,  it  so  dealt  with  them  as  to  make  like  bigotry  impossible  in  the 
future."  [English  Colonies  in  America,  The  Puritan  Colonies,  II,  88.]  For  the 
contrary  viewpoint  see  J.  T.  Adams'  The  Founding  of  New  England,  [pp.  369- 
372]  in  which  he  notes  that  the  original  object  of  education  there  was  religious, 
questions  if  its  earlier  influence  was  not  narrowing  rather  than  broadening,  and 
concludes  that  "the  concentration  of  an  awakened  mental  life  almost  wholly 
upon  the  problems  of  election  or  damnation  created  a  condition  of  ethical  mor- 
bidity and  bequeathed  to  us  the  legacy  of  what  may  almost  be  called  that  sec- 
tion's fourth  contribution  to  American  life — The  New  England  Conscience,  with 
its  pathological  questionings  and  elaborate  system  of  taboos." 
'^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  200,  209,  208. 


Watertown  and  Topsfieuj  51 

oblivion,  might  live  on  and  be  remembered  with  their  deeds,  their 
struggles  to  conquer  the  wilderness,  the  savages — and  themselves. 

Certainly,  they  left  out  nothing  in  their  records.  Passionate 
men,  drunk  with  religion,  their  virtues  and  their  vices  exaggerated 
thereby,  they  step  out  clearly  defined  from  the  fading  documents 
they  were  so  careful  to  leave  us — not  "Saints"  as  they  conceived 
themselves,  not  devils  as  they  have  so  often  been  depicted,  but 
something  of  both,  cruel  and  ruthless  when  their  religious  frenzies 
were  upon  them,  full  of  common  sense  at  other  times,  repealing  the 
sumptuary  laws  they  could  not  enforce,"^  failing  to  convict  the 
guilty  when  the  penalties  were  extreme,"'*  temporing  justice  with 
mercy — so  they  come  to  us,  men  very  much  like  ourselves,  too  much 
given  to  reforming  by  statute,  oppressors — and  oppressed. 

They  took  life  far  too  seriously,  these  older  Puritans.  Their 
thoughts  were  too  much  occupied  with  the  Hereafter.  Joyousness, 
gayety,  and  the  instinct  of  play  were  frowned  upon  as  unseemly 
in  those  who  mostly  were  predestined  for  the  fires  of  Hell.  Nature 
took  its  vengeance  upon  them  for  these  repressions.  To  the  con- 
sternation of  the  rulers  and  the  clergy,  the  more  the  horrors  of 
Hell  were  dwelt  upon  the  more  the  young  and  vigorous  indulged 
themselves  in  "wickedness."^^  And,  darker  still,  the  less  stable 
minds  that  brooded  too  much  over  the  promised  certainty  of  an 
almost  general  damnation  broke  down  under  the  horror  of  the 
threatened  doom. 

We  have  already  noted  how  one  of  Pendleton's  fellow  select- 
men at  Watertown  was  mentally  afflicted  at  times.   A  more  violent 

**  Note  particularly  the  repeal  of  the  laws  against  the  use  of  tobacco,  and  the 
drinking  of  healths.  [Massachusetts  Records,  I,  206;  II,  121].  Our  present 
day  reformers  have  not  yet  profited  by  these  lessons  of  the  past. 
"  Adultery  having  been  made  a  capital  ofPense,  convictions  were  most  difficult 
to  obtain,  save  where  the  accused  confessed.  As  an  example,  a  jury  which  tried 
such  a  case  in  1667  brought  in  a  verdict  that  if  lying  abed  together  constituted 
adultery  the  accused  were  guilty,  but  not  otherwise. — Records,  Courts  of  As- 
ssitants  of  the  Mass.  Bay,  III,  192. 

^  Bradford's  comment  shows  some  perception  of  what  fostered  so  much 
viciousness,  when  expressing  his  horror  over  the  sinfulness  then  rife  he 
suggests  one  reason  may  be  "as  it  is  with  streams  that  are  dammed  up,  when 
they  gett  passage  they  flow  with  more  violence.  ...  So  Wickedness  being  here 
more  stopped  by  strict  laws,  and  ye  same  more  nerly  looked  unto,  so  as  it  can- 
not rune  in  a  comone  road  of  liberty  as  it  would  ...  it  searches  everywher, 
and  at  last  breaks  out  wher  it  getts  vente."  [History  of  the  Plymouth  Planta- 
tion, (State  Edition,  1898),  p.  460].  His  further  suggestion  that  there  were 
proportionately  no  more  such  evils  there  than  elsewhere,  but  that  they  were 
more  readily  discovered  because  of  the  small  population,  and  the  watchfulness 
of  the  churches,  would  seem  to  neutralize  his  first  conclusion  to  a  large  extent. 


52  Bhian  Pendleton 

case  of  insanity  there  is  touched  upon  at  this  date  when  the  Court 
voted  that  because  of  the  great  expense  Watertown  had  been  put 
to  by  keeping  Thomas  Philpot,  "a  distracted  man",  in  prison,  the 
town  should  be  empowered  to  sell  his  property,  while  "Mr.  Bryan 
Pendleton  &  Michael  Bairstow"  were  allowed  to  take  so  much  out 
of  his  house  "upon  the  sale  thereof,  as  to  discharge  their  engage- 
ment of  about  £6  to  ye  keeper  of  him."^*'  At  this  same  session  of 
the  Court  there  is  a  reference  to  a  still  sadder  case — that  of  John 
Hayden's  child  who  was  "bereaved  of  its  senses."  Some  commenta- 
tors have  suggested  that  this  incidence  of  insanity  among  their 
children  is  the  worst  indictment  of  the  religious  teachings  of  the 
Puritans.^^ 

While  it  would  be  a  fine  point  to  determine  how  much  Puritan- 
ism contributes  to  insanity,  or  how  much  insanity  contributes  to 
Puritanism,  yet  considering  all  the  factors  that  influenced  their 
lives,  we  must  admit  that  the  early  settlers  of  Massachusetts  were 
in  general  an  exceptionally  hard-headed  lot.  They  were  sane 
enough  outside  of  purely  religious  matters.  And  they  were  very 
human  too — especially  so  when  it  came  to  public  service.  The 
great  majority  ducked  this  whenever  they  could,  in  spite  of  their 
teachings  as  to  responsibility.  While  all  freemen,  except  Maverick, 
were  church  members,  it  did  not  follow  that  all  church  members 
were  freemen.  As  already  noted  a  good  many  no  doubt  avoided 
entering  this  estate  through  fear  of  subsequent  election  to  some 
undesirable  or  unremunerative  office. 

This  condition  gave  serious  concern  to  the  authorities.  As 
early  as  1643  the  General  Court  ordered  that  the  churches  should 
be  advised  to  deal  with  their  members  who  refused  "to  take  their 
freedom".^^  Evidently  nothing  much  came  of  this,  so  at  this  Fall 
sitting  in  '47  a  more  drastic  step  was  taken.  Noting  that  "There 
being  many  church  members  who  to  exempt  themselves  from  all 
public  service  .  .  .  will  not  come  in  to  be  made  freemen",  it  was 
ordered  that  all  such  should  not  escape  that  way,  but  should  be 
compelled  to  serve  as  constables,  jurors,  selectmen,  or  surveyors  of 

*«  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  216,  200. 

"  For  the  effect  of  these  teachings  upon  an  adolescent,  see  the  diary  of  Judge 
Samuel  Sewall  which  gives  several  vivid  accounts  of  the  hysterical  attacks  his 
fourteen  year  old  daughter,  Elizabeth,  suffered  from  through  her  terror  that 
"she  should  goe  to  Hell,  her  Sins  were  not  pardon'd" — Entries  of  13  January, 
22  February,  1696/6,  3  May,  1696. 

'^  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  38. 


Watebtown  and  Topsfield  53 

highways  if  elected  by  the  freemen,  or  be  subject  to  a  fine  if  they 
refused  the  honors  thrust  upon  them.^^  That  this  act  may  have 
been  used  to  increase  a  town's  revenue  may  be  more  than  suspected, 
and  then  too  the  proletariat  may  have  thought  it  a  rare  joke  to 
elect  some  local  dignitary  to  an  office  he  would  not  accept.  Years 
later,  when  Pendleton  was  running  the  affairs  of  Portsmouth,  his 
rival  merchant,  John  Cutt,  the  richest  man  in  the  town,  was  elected 
constable — and  fined  £5  for  refusing  to  act.^" 

Of  Pendleton's  activities  during  the  following  winter  we  catch 
but  a  glimpse.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Watertown  complaining 
about  their  land  allotments — a  frequent  source  of  dispute  among 
the  early  settlers — he  was  chosen  at  a  town  meeting  held  on  the 
10th  of  January  1647/8,  to  serve  on  a  committee  of  investigation. 
The  committeemen  made  their  report  twenty  days  later  at  which 
time,  perhaps  not  entirely  to  their  satisfaction,  they  were  delegated 
to  carry  their  recommendations  into  effect.^^ 

While  the  records  are  silent  we  may  be  very  sure  that  a  quiet 
campaign  took  place  during  these  months  in  preparation  for  the 
referendum  over  the  proposed  restriction  in  the  number  of  Depu- 
ties. The  clergy  no  doubt  advocated  the  measure  on  the  old  familiar 
grounds  of  economy,  while  the  more  liberal  elements  in  the  colony 
pointed  out  how  its  adoption  would  put  too  much  power  in  the 
hands  of  the  Magistrates.  There  can  be  no  doubt  where  Pendleton 
stood  in  this  matter — in  fact,  from  what  developed  later  he  may 
have  promised  to  find  another  way  to  cut  down  the  cost  of  govern- 
ment. 

The  liberals  triumphed  for  the  time  being.  When  the  special 
session  of  the  Court  opened  in  March  [1647/8]  it  was  found  that 
the  freemen  had  defeated  the  plan  to  reduce  their  representation, 
evidently  preferring  to  pay  a  few  more  pennies  in  taxes  than  have 
the  magistrates  with  their  clerical  backing  become  too  powerful.^" 
The  agitation  over  this  affair  could  not  have  improved  the  relations 

'^  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  208, 

'^  Portsmouth  (N.H.)  Town  Records,  1,  87.   An  old  English  custom  this — men 

were  fined  over  there  when  refusing  to  accept  knighthood. 

^  Watertown  Records,  II,  67,  69,  71. 

"^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  231.   Five  years  later  "the  interests"  found  a  way 

to  keep  the  number  of  Deputies  from  becoming  too  unwieldy  by  getting  a  law 

passed  that  their  expenses  in  attending  Court  should  be  borne  by  the  towns 

sending  them  instead  of  being  at  the  Country's  charge — a  clever  piece  of  work 

— almost  a  masterpiece  of  political  cunning. — Massachusetts  Records,  III,  320; 

IV,  pt.  1,  154. 


54  Beian  Pendleton 

between  the  two  Houses.  The  pride  of  the  Deputies  had  been  hurt, 
and  when  they  found  the  people  were  back  of  them  they  adopted  a 
measure  which  may  have  been  inspired  quite  as  much  by  a  desire 
for  reprisal  as  by  a  thirst  for  economy.  Coming  just  at  this  time 
there  seems  to  be  something  malicious  in  their  choosing  Pendleton 
together  with  the  Auditor  General  and  William  Parks  of  Roxbury 
as  a  committee  "to  take  an  account  of  the  magistrates  expenses  for 
dyet  for  this  session"  and  in  providing  further  that  two  of  the 
Deputies  should  be  chosen  for  this  purpose  at  all  succeeding 
meetings.^^ 

Whatever  satisfaction  the  Deputies  may  have  felt  over  this 
maneuvre  was  to  be  shortlived.  They  might  have  known  it  would 
be  a  boomerang.  Almost  immediately  upon  the  opening  of  the  new 
General  Court — 10  May,  1648 — Pendleton,  who  had  been  re- 
elected as  Deputy  from  Watertown,^"*  was  assigned  to  a  committee 
with  Daniel  Denison  and  Robert  Keayne  to  extend  to  the  lower 
House  its  own  principle  of  economy  in  government.^^  The  expenses 
of  the  Magistrates  had  been  rashly  put  under  scrutiny.  Those 
responsible  for  this  should  have  theirs  checked  up  as  well. 

A  few  days  later  the  committee  presented  the  draft  of  a  most 
depressing  law  which  must  have  caused  many  a  Deputy  to  wonder 
if  public  service  was  worth  while.  At  each  session  henceforth  two 
of  the  members  were  to  be  chosen  as  stewards  to  "regulate  the  diet 
of  the  house".  These  kill- joys  were  also  to  audit  and  approve  the 
Deputies'  expense  accounts  in  attending  the  Courts  so  that  all 
unnecessary  charges  might  be  avoided  and  "no  further  charges  be 
put  on  the  Country  but  the  just  &  necessary  expenses  of  the 
members  only".^^  Alas  for  the  "Saints"!  Obviously  there  had 
been  abuses.  Too  many  had  succumbed  to  the  fleshpots  of  Boston 
and  the  wayside  inns,  had  dined  and  wined  too  well,  and  evidently 
had  also  done  more  or  less  entertaining  at  the  public's  expense.  All 
this  was  ended — no  more  f eastings,  no  more  jollifications,  just  a 

^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  227.    On  the  same  page  we  find  the  reference  to 
"Leift"  Pendleton  noted  in  the  preceding  chapter, 
"^Ibid.,  II,  238;  III,  121. 

^^Massachusetts  Archives,  XLVIII,  29.  Denison  was  a  graduate  of  Cambridge 
University,  a  deputy  to  the  General  Court  from  Ipsw^ich  for  eight  years,  a 
Speaker  of  the  House,  and  an  Assistant  from  1G54  until  his  death  in  1680.  He 
was  also  a  Major  General  of  the  Militia.  Keayne,  a  wealthy  merchant  of  Bos- 
ton was  frequently  a  Deputy  to  the  Court,  and  the  first  commander  of  the 
Military  Company  of  Massachusetts. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  122. 


Wateetown  and  Topsfield  66 

bare  living — unless  the  stewards  were  reasonable !  Sadly  the 
Deputies  agreed  to  these  recommendations  as  a  standing  law  to  be 
inserted  in  the  records.  They  could  not  refuse  to  take  the  same 
medicine  they  had  prescribed  for  the  Magistrates  two  months 
earlier. 

It  is  a  coincidence  that  Pendleton's  intermittent  appearances 
at  the  General  Court  brought  him  into  more  or  less  contact  with 
nearly  all  the  persecutions  in  which  the  theocracy  engaged.  He 
had  missed  the  proceedings  against  Samuel  Gorton  and  his  band  of 
religious  eccentrics  in  1643,  but  he  saw  the  final  chapter  in  that 
episode  which  came  to  a  conclusion  at  this  time.  Expelled  suc- 
cessively from  Plymouth,  Portsmouth  (R.  I.),  and  Providence, 
Gorton  and  his  fellow  trouble  makers  had  finally  settled  at  what  is 
now  Warwick,  Rhode  Island.  Here  their  purchase  of  some  Indian 
lands  which  the  Massachusetts  coveted  brought  them  into  collision 
with  the  Bay  authorities.  Although  their  settlement  was  outside 
of  that  colony's  jurisdiction  they  were  seized  nevertheless  and 
brought  to  Boston  for  trial  on  charges  of  heresy  and  sedition. 
The  Magistrates,  at  the  instigation  of  the  clergy,  passed  a  sentence 
of  death  but  the  Deputies  would  not  concur  in  this.  After  a  period 
of  confinement  the  Gortonites  were  liberated  and  banished  on  pain 
of  death  if  they  returned. 

With  a  number  of  his  satellites  Gorton  finally  made  his  way 
to  London,  where  he  presented  his  case  to  the  Commissioners  of 
Plantations.  Although  these  were  largely  of  the  Puritan  persua- 
sion, they  had  no  sympathy  with  its  fanatical  manifestations  and 
gave  him  a  letter  of  safe  conduct  through  Massachusetts,  ordering 
that  he  should  not  be  further  molested  in  the  possession  of  his  land 
until  its  title  was  settled.  It  is  an  evidence  of  the  stiff-necked  atti- 
tude of  the  rulers  of  Massachusetts,  as  well  as  of  their  contempt  of 
England's  authority,  that  when  Gorton  arrived  with  his  letter  in 
Boston  in  this  month  of  May,  the  General  Court  allowed  him  this 
safe  conduct  through  their  jurisdiction  by  a  majority  of  only  one 
vote^^ — an  evil  augury  for  the  future. 

A  foreshadowing  of  still  another  dark  episode  in  the  history 
of  Massachusetts  came  at  this  session  of  the  Court,  when  it  was 
ordered  that  the  method  "taken  in  England  for  the  discovery  of 
witches  by  watching  them  a  certain  time"  be  put  into  effect  imme- 

^^  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  41,  46,  50-53,  67,  242;  III,  93,  127.  Rhode  Island 
Colonial  Records,  I,  367;  Winthrop,  II,  392-3. 


66  Brian  Pendleton 

diately  in  the  case  of  a  woman  under  suspicion,  "and  that  the 
husband  may  be  confined  to  a  private  room  and  be  also  there 
watched."  This  affair  is  undoubtedly  referred  to  by  Winthrop  in 
his  Journal  when  he  says  "At  this  Court  one  Margaret  Jones  of 
Charlestown  was  indicted  and  found  guilty  of  witchcraft  and 
hanged  for  it."^^ 

We  find  another  reference  to  this  case  when  "Mr.  Browne  & 
Mr.  Pendleton"  were  made  bondsmen  for  the  good  behavior  of 
Samuel  Straiton  and  his  wife  of  Watertown  who  had  been  fined  for 
saying  "that  Jones  died  wrongfully  and  that  she  was  no  witch",  as 
well  as  for  passing  defamatory  remarks  about  the  Magistrates, 
and  clergy — "the  magistrates  could  be  bought  and  the  members 
[i.e.  the  Deputies]  were  no  better".  For  this  they  were  ordered  to 
make  acknowledgment  of  their  errors  before  the  public  assembly 
in  Watertown.^^  Free  speech  was  dangerous  in  old  Massachusetts. 
Reticence  became  a  New  England  trait. 

In  the  summer  of  this  year  Pendleton  deeded  a  small  tract  of 
land  in  Sudbury  to  his  son  James  as  a  free  gift,  the  date  of  this 
grant — 5  July,  1648 — possibly  marking  that  young  man's  twenty- 
first  birthday.  The  entry  of  this  deed  refers  to  the  grantor  as  "of 
Sudbury",^"  obviously  an  error,  as  he  was  still  a  resident  of  Water- 
toAvn  in  the  following  September,  when  on  the  16th  of  that  month 
he  was  chosen  "to  appraise  for  the  town  the  pay  Robert  Salton- 
stall  was  to  have"  in  settlement  of  another  long-standing  dispute. 
As  this  pay  was  to  be  in  merchantable  corn  and  cattle  we  have 
evidence  here  that  inasmuch  as  the  appraiser  must  necessarily  have 

^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  242;  III,  126;  Winthrop,  II,  327.  A  footnote  says 
she  was  hanged  on  the  15th  of  June  [1648].  The  sentence  no  doubt  was  passed 
by  the  Court  of  Assistants. 

Hubbard  in  his  History  of  New  England  [p.  530]  says  of  Margaret 
Jones  "She  was  proved  to  have  such  a  malignant  touch  that  whomsoever  she 
touched  (man,  woman  or  child)  with  any  affection  of  displeasure,  were  taken 
presently  with  deafness,  vomiting  or  other  violent  pains  or  sickness.  Soon  after 
she  was  executed,  a  ship  riding  over  against  Charlestown,  of  300  tons,  having 
in  her  hold  an  hundred  and  twenty  tons  of  ballast,  and  eighty  horses  aboard 
her  for  the  Barbadoes,  was  on  a  sudden  observed  to  roll  as  if  she  would  have 
turned  over.  The  husband  of  that  witch  lately  executed,  had  desired  passage  in 
that  ship  to  Barbadoes,  which  not  obtaining,  that  accident  was  observed  to 
follow" — and  more  of  this  nonsense  is  added. 

=»  Middlesex  County,  Mass.,  Court  Records  (Transcripts),  I,  5.  The  date  of  this 

record  is  30  October  ,  probably  1648,  although  the  part  of  the  page 

carrying  the  year  is  missing  in  the  original. 

*"  Sudbury,  Mass.,  Records,  "Roads  and  Perambulations",  p.  14. 


Wateetown  and  Topsfteld  67 

been  conversant  with  their  grades  and  market  value  he  was  prob- 
ably dealing  in  these  commodities  himself."*^ 

Evidently  by  this  time  he  had  concluded  that  larger  oppor- 
tunities lay  elsewhere.  Just  a  week  before  the  appointment  noted 
above  he  had  purchased  of  John  Whittingham  of  Ipswich  a  six 
hundred  acre  farm  near  that  thriving  town,  with  all  the  housing 
and  appurtenances  thereon."*^  It  is  unlikely  that  he  removed  to  this 
new  home  before  the  following  Spring  as  he  did  not  sell  his  Water- 
town  property  until  the  20th  of  March,  1648/49,  at  which  time  he 
described  himself  as  still  a  resident  there.'*^  There  would  be  no 
particular  reason  for  him  to  attempt  the  life  of  a  country  gentle- 
man before  Spring  anyway,  and,  besides,  he  would  naturally  want 
to  stay  in  Watertown  until  he  had  disposed  of  his  property  there 
himself.  So  we  may  conclude  he  spent  the  Fall  and  Winter  in  his 
old  home  town,  in  which  event  he  would  undoubtedly  have  attended 
the  October  sitting  of  the  General  Court. 

Direct  evidence  of  this  is  lacking.  He  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
records  of  this  session  and  from  the  time  the  Deputies  were  elected 
annually  their  names  are  given  for  the  May  term  only.  Neverthe- 
less, there  is  good  reason  to  believe  he  was  here  at  this  time.  Evi- 
dently recognized  as  one  of  the  leaders  among  the  Deputies  in  the 
effort  to  cut  down  the  costs  of  government,  he  had  been  chosen  with 
John  Johnson  and  John  Glover  to  confer  with  the  Magistrates  in 
regard  to  reducing  the  expense  of  the  annual  muster  of  the  Colony's 
three  regiments.  This  appointment,  together  with  the  report  signed 
by  these  three  delegates,  in  conjunction  with  Thomas  Dudley,  the 
Deputy  Governor,  and  William  Hibbens,  on  behalf  of  the  Magis- 
trates, appears  on  an  undated  paper  in  the  Archives.  As  their 
recommendation  that  each  regiment  should  be  mustered  in  rotation 
every  third  year  is  entered  almost  word  for  word  as  an  order  in  the 
records  for  this  session,  we  may  feel  pretty  certain  that  Pendleton 
was  then  present,  this  law  not  being  of  such  a  nature  as  would 

"  Watertown  Records,  IT,  75;  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  201-3,  Robert  Salton- 
stall  was  the  son  of  Sir  Richard  Saltonstall,  one  of  the  founders  of  Watertown. 
*^  Suffolk  Deeds,  I,  99.  Whittingham  was  a  wealthy  resident  of  Ipswich.  His 
wife  was  a  sister  of  Rev.  William  Hubbard,  the  historian.  He  died  shortly 
after  selling  this  farm  as  his  will  was  probated  27  March,  1649.  In  this  docu- 
ment he  gave  to  his  three  daughters  the  £150  "dewe  unto  me  from  Mr.  Pendle- 
ton for  my  ffarme  Lately  sould  unto  him". — Essex  County,  Mass.,  Probate 
Records,  I,  104. 

**This  was  the  first  deed  recorded  in  the  records  of  Middlesex  County,  Mass. 
The  purchaser  was  Robert  Daniel  of  Cambridge  and  the  consideration  £83. 
Prior  to  this  time  deeds  were  entered  in  the  town  books. 


68  Brian  Pendleton 

require  any  great  amount  of  time  for  deliberation  by  the  con- 
ferees.^^ 

Few  items  of  general  interest  are  recorded  at  this  sitting  of 
the  Court.  We  catch  another  glimpse  of  the  Colony's  intolerance 
in  the  proceedings  brought  against  Edward  Starbuck  of  Dover, 
accused  "with  profession  of  Anabaptism" — Baptists  then  being 
about  as  highly  esteemed  in  Massachusetts  as  Papists.  A  modern 
note  is  struck  in  new  regulations  to  discourage  drunkenness,  a  vice 
which  singularly  enough  seemed  to  be  increasing  in  spite  of  "whole- 
some laws"  against  it.  And  at  last  the  Book  of  Laws  was  ordered 
sent  to  the  press — each  member  of  the  Court  to  receive  a  copy 
free — thus  ending  the  long  struggle  with  the  clergy  who  had 
opposed  this  printing.'*^ 

Pendleton's  interest  in  his  new  property  near  Ipswich  is  shown 
by  another  undated  paper  in  the  Archives — a  petition  he  signed 
with  William  Paine  and  Zaccheus  Gould  asking  the  Court  "to 
bestowe  a  name  upon  oure  village  at  the  new  medowes  at  Ipswich, 
which  wee  suppose  may  be  an  Incouragement  to  others  to  come  and 
live  amongst  us;  and  also  a  means  to  further  a  ministry  amongst 
us  wee  thinke  hemsteed  will  bee  a  fit  name  if  the  Court  plese  to 
gratifie  us  herewith."  *^  The  Deputies  granted  this  petition  but 
the  Magistrates  proposed  another  name — "Toppesfield"  which  was 
adopted  on  the  27th  of  October  [1648].*'^  Unfortunately,  the  early 
records  of  Topsfield  have  been  destroyed  by  fire,  and  of  his  life 
there  during  the  next  three  years  nothing  has  come  to  light.  From 
what  we  know  of  him,  however,  we  may  be  very  sure  he  took  his 
usual  active  part  in  town  affairs,  and  was  busy  in  getting  others 

*«  Massachusetts  Archives,  LXVII,  7-7a;  Records,  II,  256;  III,  137. 
*^ Massachusetts  Records,  II,  253,  257,  262;  III,  134-5,  139,  144.  No  copy  of  the 
first  edition  of  this  Book  of  Laws  was  known  to  be  in  existence  in  1887  when  a 
reprint  was  made  of  the  Second  Edition  of  1672.  The  title  page  of  this  book 
bears  a  delightfully  appropriate  text  from  the  Puritan  viewpoint:  "Whosoever 
therefore  resisteth  the  Power,  resisteth  the  Ordinance  of  God,  and  they  that 
resist  receive  to  themselves  Damnation.  Rom.  13,  2."  Some  people  still  feel 
the  same  way  towards  the  laws  they  make  for  others,  even  though  general 
reverence  is  lacking. 

*^  Massachusetts  Archives,  CXII,  9. 

"Massachusetts  Records,  II,  258;  III,  139.  In  proposing  the  name  "Hemp- 
stead" for  this  settlement  the  petitioners  evidently  had  in  mind  the  town  of 
Hemel  Hempstead  in  England  where  Zaccheus  Gould  had  lived  before  coming 
to  America,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  in  changing  the  name  to  Topsfield 
(as  it  is  now  spelled)  the  Court  of  Assistants  adopted  the  suggestion  of  one 
of  its  members,  Sanmel  Symonds,  who  owned  an  estate  in  Toppesfield,  Eng- 
land.— Benjamin  A.  Gould,  Family  of  Zaccheus  Gould,  p.  25. 


«!^::iSta^bii,^t^^ 


Watertown  and  TopsrasLD  B9 

to  settle  there.  And  aside  from  this  he  came  into  close  contact 
with  abler  men  than  either  Watertown  or  Sudbury  could  boast. 
For  Topsfield  was  but  an  off-shoot  of  Ipswich,  where  dwelt  some 
of  the  wealthiest  and  most  influential  men  in  the  Colony.  Denison 
lived  there,  and  Samuel  Symonds,  one  of  the  Magistrates,  later  to 
be  a  Deputy  Governor,  while  Simon  Bradstreet  had  just  removed 
to  Andover  although  still  owning  a  farm  adjoining  Pendleton's — 
all  vigorous  men  with  whom  he  was  to  be  associated  in  business  or 
in  politics  for  years.  And  there  too,  were  Richard  Saltonstall,  Jr., 
another  of  the  Magistrates,  and  William  Paine,  the  merchant,  who 
was  to  be  his  business  partner  later  on. 

Wliile  Pendleton's  residence  in  Topsfield  was  of  but  short 
duration,  its  influence  upon  his  later  career  was  long  and  lasting. 
In  the  semi-obscurity  at  Sudbury  he  had  accumulated  capital.  In 
the  total  obscurity  that  envelops  him  at  Topsfield  he  had  secured 
backing.  The  records  may  be  blank  but  the  results  are  plain  enough. 
He  had  made  close  contacts  with  the  right  people  and  had  im- 
pressed himself  upon  them  as  a  man  worth  while.  The  system  now 
was  to  claim  him  for  its  own. 

Up  to  this  time,  Pendleton's  successive  removals  from  one  town 
to  another  seem  to  have  been  due  to  his  own  restlessness,  and  to  a 
desire  to  better  himself  financially,  but  the  one  he  was  now  to  make 
may  not  have  been  wholly  of  his  own  choosing.  The  Bay  Colony  was 
developing  its  schemes  to  extend  its  boundaries  north  and  south. 
Participation  in  the  Pequot  war  had  given  it  claim  to  some  of  the 
territory  formerly  occupied  by  that  tribe  and  a  settlement  had 
been  established  at  Southerton,  now  Stonington,  Connecticut. 
Providence,  in  order  to  rid  itself  of  Gorton  and  his  associates,  had 
put  itself  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Massachusetts  for  a  time, 
and  the  four  towns  in  New  Hampshire  had  also  been  gathered  in 
at  the  first  opportunity. 

Conditions  in  one  of  these  little  settlements  "to  the  Eastward" 
became  unsettled  in  1651  and  from  all  evidences  we  have  it  would 
appear  that  the  Puritan  rulers  in  casting  about  for  a  suitable 
agent  to  maintain  their  authority  there,  as  well  as  to  assist  in 
furthering  their  schemes  in  Maine,  selected  Pendleton  as  the  one 
most  available  for  the  tasks  they  had  in  mind.  However  that  may 
be,  he  removed  that  year  to  the  seaport  town  then  known  as 
"Strawberry  Bank" — now  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire — where 


60  Brian  Pendleton 

as  Felt  quaintly  observes  "he  becomes  noted".^^  Described  years 
later  by  an  enemy  of  the  Bay  Colony  as  "a  great  ring-leader  to 
others  to  the  utmost  of  his  power",  zealous  in  the  faith,  and  an 
ardent  supporter  of  the  cause  of  the  Massachusetts,  he  was  now 
to  enter  upon  a  career  for  which  he  was  peculiarly  fitted.  Did  his 
character  change  as  responsibilities  came  upon  him?  Was  he  the 
same  man  who  once  showed  mercy  to  Dr.  Child?  Or  did  he  become 
as  harsh  and  cruel  as  the  laws  he  enforced  against  the  Quakers? 
We  cannot  say.  All  we  know  is  that  he  did  his  duty  as  he  saw  it. 
Faithful  and  painstaking  always,  proud  of  the  service  he  was  able 
to  render  the  Commonwealth,  he  steps  forth  a  definite  figure.  His 
energies  now  have  direction,  he  has  a  mission  in  life,  he  has  found 
himself  at  last.  He  has  become  Brian  Pendleton  of  the  Massachus- 
etts— the  Massachusetts  that  could  do  no  wrong.  With  his  worldly 
goods,  his  Bible,  and  his  Book  of  Laws,  he  fares  forth  on  his  new 
adventures — a  militant  Puritan,  eager  to  rule  and  zealous  to 
reform. 


*«J.  B.  Felt,  History  of  Ipswich,  Mass.  (1834),  p.  74.  Felt  gives  the  year  of 
Pendleton's  removal  as  1653,  evidently  assuming  this  from  the  date  when  he 
sold  his  Topsfield  property.  Of  his  three  sons  then  living,  James  continued  for 
several  years  in  Sudbury,  where  he  had  a  wife  and  family.  After  his  brother 
Joseph's  death  in  1657,  he  rejoined  his  father  in  Portsmouth,  where  the  young- 
est brother,  Caleb,  was  also  living. 


CHAPTER  V 


PORTSMOUTH 
1661  - 1652 


So  the  children  went  in  and  possessed  the  land,  and  thou  subduedst  be- 
fore them  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  the  Canaanites,  and  gavest  them  into 
their  hands,  with  their  kings,  and  the  people  of  the  land,  that  they  might  do 
with  them  as  they  would.  Nehemiah,  9:24. 

Up  to  the  time  of  his  removal  from  Topsfield  to  New  Hamp- 
shire, Pendleton  had  lived  among  the  strictly  Puritan  settlements 
where  law  and  order  ruled  with  an  iron  hand,  and  where  short 
shrift  was  given  those  who  opposed  authority.  The  rest  of  his  long 
life  was  to  be  spent  amid  quite  different  surroundings,  among  a 
people  who,  for  the  most  part,  adherents  of  the  Church  of  England 
and  hostile  to  the  domination  of  Massachusetts,  lost  no  oppor- 
tunity to  give  voice  to  their  antagonism.  Here  in  New  Hampshire 
and  later  in  Maine  he  encountered  what  came  as  near  to  being  an 
opposition  party  as  could  be  found  anywhere  in  New  England,  and 
his  struggle  to  control  this  unruly  element  made  his  life  far  more 
colorful — and  perhaps  more  enjoyable — than  it  would  have  been 
if  he  had  remained  in  the  towns  near  Boston. 

The  territory  now  comprised  by  the  present  two  northeastern 
states  of  New  England  was  originally  granted  to  several  patentees, 
among  whom  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges  and  Capt.  John  Mason  were 
the  only  ones  to  make  any  considerable  attempts  at  colonizing. 
Mason  sent  over  a  body  of  settlers  who  located  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Piscataqua.  On  the  "Great  Island"  in  the  river  (now  Newcastle) 
they  built  a  fort  and  a  number  of  houses  and  put  up  the  "Great 
House",  so  called,  on  the  mainland  adjacent  where  the  city  of 
Portsmouth  now  stands.  Here  rising  ground  covered  with  wild 
strawberries,  gave  the  place  the  name  by  which  it  was  known  for 
twenty  years — "Strawberry  Bank".  Saw  mills  sprang  up  along 
the  river  and  lumbering  became  an  important  industry.  Not  far 
up-stream  the  Hilton  brothers  secured  a  patent  and  founded  Dover, 
which  grew  rapidly.  A  few  miles  off  shore  the  Isles  of  Shoals  were 
occupied  and  became  an  important  center  of  trade  and  a  rendez- 
vous for  all  the  fishermen  along  the  coast. 

61 


62  Brian  Pendleton 

Outside  of  Exeter  and  Hampton  the  settlers  in  these  parts 
were  mainly  Episcopalians  who  largely  on  that  account  made 
objectionable  neighbors  for  the  Bay  Colony.  Not  only  was  it  dis- 
tasteful to  the  Puritans  to  have  communities  of  the  ungodly  so  near 
at  hand,  but  it  irked  them  to  know  that  those  banished  from  Mass- 
achusetts, or  who  fled  to  escape  its  rigors,  could  find  a  sanctuary 
there.  Then,  too,  the  splendid  harbor  at  the  mouth  of  the  deep 
Piscataqua  might  in  time  become  a  rival  to  Boston  and  threaten 
its  commercial  supremacy.  Hence  it  was  natural  that  the  rulers 
of  the  Bay,  although  violating  one  of  the  Commandments,  began 
early  to  cast  a  covetous  eye  upon  this  territory.  They  gave  careful 
study  to  their  charter  to  see  if  there  was  any  chance  of  so  constru- 
ing its  terms  as  to  extend  their  northern  boundary.  This  was 
described  as  a  line  "three  English  miles  to  the  northward  of  the 
river  called  .  .  .  Merrymack  or  to  the  northward  of  any  and  every 
part  thereof"^ — a  vague  description  considering  the  river's  course, 
but  clear  enough  in  intent  at  the  time  when  drawn,  the  direction  of 
the  stream  then  being  supposed  to  run  from  west  to  east. 

When  it  was  found  that  this  assumption  was  an  error,  the 
Massachusetts  government  appointed  a  surveying  expedition  in 
September,  1638,  to  lay  out  the  line  "three  miles  northward  of  the 
most  northermost  'part  of  the  Merrimac.^^^  The  wording  of  this 
order  indicates  that  the  Bay  authorities  had  hit  upon  an  ingenious 
scheme  whereby  this  boundary  provision  of  their  patent  could  be 
interpreted  very  much  to  their  advantage.  They  did  not,  however, 
press  the  issue  at  once.  They  seem  to  have  been  content  at  this  time 
to  set  up  a  claim  for  future  use  if  necessary,  working  out  their 
plans  along  other  lines  to  encompass  the  settlements  on  the  south 
of  the  Piscataqua. 

As  a  preliminary  step  some  of  their  friends  in  England 
acquired  an  interest  in  the  Hilton  patent,  and  Capt.  Thomas 
Wiggin,  a  staunch  partisan  of  the  Massachusetts,  who  later  be- 
came an  Assistant  of  the  Colony,  was  sent  to  that  region  as  Gover- 
nor, together  with  a  considerable  body  of  new  settlers  of  the 
Puritan  persuasion  to  give  him  backing.  A  church  squabble  there 
some  years  later  gave  Massachusetts  the  waited  for  opportunity, 
one  faction  petitioning  the  Bay  to  take  them  under  its  jurisdiction. 
A  similar  petition  came  in  from  the  settlers  on  the  lower  Piscata- 

^  Mnssacusetts  Records,  I,  4-5. 

*  Ibid.,  I,  237.   The  italics  are  mine. 


Portsmouth  1651-1662  63 

qua,  who  after  Mason's  death  in  1635  had  divided  his  property 
amongst  themselves  in  lieu  of  wages,  and  had  become  uneasy  over 
what  action  his  heirs  might  take  against  them.  It  is  possible  this 
fear  may  have  been  stirred  up  by  an  emissary  the  Bay  authorities 
had  sent  among  them,  no  less  a  personage  than  the  Rev.  Hugh 
Peters,  who  upon  his  return  reported  them  "ripe  for  our  govern- 
ment".^ 

The  affair  was  in  negotiation  for  about  a  year.  Finally,  in 
June,  1641,  Massachusetts  took  over  the  Hilton  patent  and  in  the 
following  October  the  General  Court  after  stating  rather  cautious- 
ly that  "it  appeareth  that  by  the  extent  of  the  line  (according  to 
our  patent)  that  the  river  of  Pascataquack  is  within  the  juris- 
diction of  the  Massachusetts",  ordered  "with  the  consent  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  said  river  .  .  .  that  henceforth  the  said  people 
there  are  &  shalbe  accepted  &  reputed  under  the  government  of 
the  Massachusetts."  Provision  was  made  for  Courts  to  be  held  on 
the  river  and  for  two  Deputies  to  represent  the  towns  in  the  Gen- 
eral Court.'*  Later  it  was  provided  that  all  the  present  inhabitants 
there  "who  formerly  were  free — shall  have  liberty  of  freemen  in 
their  several  towns  to  manage  all  their  town  affairs  though  the}^ 
be  not  at  present  church  members."  ^ 

This  dispensation  on  the  part  of  Massachusetts  anticipated 
by  six  years  the  similar  voting  privilege  given  her  own  inhabitants 
who  were  not  members  of  the  Church,  and  a  still  more  liberal 
arrangement  was  made  with  the  people  of  Maine  when  they  were 
taken  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Ba}^  Colony.  While  expediency 
seems  to  have  dictated  this  policy,  yet  if  the  settlers  in  these  "east- 
ern parts"  thought  that  freedom  to  vote  meant  they  were  also  to 
have  freedom  in  worship,  they  were  quickly  undeceived.  The  unre- 
generate  inhabitants  of  these  frontier  towns  might  be  given  partial 
or  even  full  suffrage  without  any  religious  tests  as  an  inducement 
to  enter  the  fold,  but  once  in  they  would  find  too  late  that  there 
was  room  for  only  one  church  wherever  Massachusetts  held  swa}^ 
Willy-nilly  they  would  have  Puritanism  thrust  upon  them. 

At  Strawberry  Bank  the  inhabitants  had  established  fifty 
acres  of  glebe  land,  had  built  a  parsonage  house  and  chapel  before 

'If  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  VI,  108. 

*  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  324-5,  332,  343-3. 

^  Ibid.,  II,  29.  It  would  seem  from  later  petitions  that  the  inhabitants  of  at  least 

one  of  these  towns   (Portsmouth)   did  not  have  any  further  extension  of  the 

suffrage  given  them. 


64  Brian  Pendleton 

1640,  and  chosen  Richard  Gibson  as  their  minister,^  They  did  not 
enjoy  his  rituals  long,  as  Massachusetts  soon  found  means  of  get- 
ting rid  of  him  by  charging  him  with  denying  their  title.  He  was, 
however,  graciously  permitted  to  return  to  England  without 
punishment.  The  real  complaint  against  him  is  indicated  by  Win- 
throp^  who  states  Gibson  was  "wholly  addicted  to  the  hierachy  and 
discipline  of  England — and  did  marry  and  baptise  at  the  Isles  of 
Shoals". 

Evidently  realizing  there  was  no  hope  of  ever  getting  another 
Episcopalian  cleric,  "those  of  the  lower  part  of  the  Pascataqua 
invited  Mr.  James  Parker,  of  Weymouth,  a  godly  man,  to  be  their 
minister",  in  December,  1642.  According  to  Winthrop,  he  con- 
verted about  forty  people  to  the  Puritan  creed,  although  "most  of 
them  fell  back  again  in  time  embracing  this  present  world".  Ap- 
parently, the  true  Puritan  is  born,  not  made,  and  while  a  nucleus 
of  the  faithful  kept  the  church  alive  there,  yet  when  Pendleton 
arrived  in  town  he  found  the  need  of  a  spiritual  re-awakening  most 
urgent  among  the  inhabitants  at  large. 

The  rough  and  ready  settlers  on  the  Piscataqua  and  those 
further  East,  together  with  the  gentler  born  among  them,  did  not 
leave  England  because  of  religious  reasons,  but  merely,  as  one  of 
them  said,  "to  fish  and  trade". ^  They  had  little,  if  anything, 
spiritually  in  common  with  the  austere  rulers  of  Boston.  There 
was  a  mutual  antipathy  between  them.  The  devout  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts felt  nothing  but  contempt  for  the  Anglican  settlers  to  the 
eastward,  while  they  on  their  part  thought  of  the  Bay  Puritans 
as  "Great  Syndics,  or  censors  or  controllers  of  other  men's  man- 
ners".^ Thomas  Wanneton  of  Strawberry  Bank,  as  early  as  1635, 
declared  they  were  "all  rouges  and  knaves  at  the  Bay  and  he  hoped 
to  see  their  throats  cut".^°  A  charming  and  simple  people  these, 
among  whom  the  man  from  Massachusetts  would  find  life  taking 
on  an  added  zest,  and  business  many  an  easy  profit — or  unex- 
pected loss. 

Their  profane  pursuits  seem  to  have  been  but  little  hampered 

"  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  97.   Full  copy  published  in  the  New  Hampshire 

Oenealogical  Record,  I,  1-3. 

''Journal — Savage,  II,  79;  Hosmer,  II,  61. 

8  Mather,  Magrmlia;  Eliot,  History  of  New  England,  p.  237. 

*  John  Jocelyn  [Josselyn],  Voyages  to  New  England,  p.  138. 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  I,  152.    J.  S.  Jenness  in  his  Isles  of  Shoals,  [p.  166] 

gives  1644  as  the  date  of  this  pious  wish. 


Portsmouth  1651-1652  65 

by  the  governors  or  stewards  appointed  by  Mason's  widow  to  look 
after  the  revenues  of  that  vanishing  estate.  Finally,  about  1651, 
after  matters  had  gone  from  bad  to  worse,  she  made  her  late  hus- 
band's nephew,  Joseph  Mason,  her  attorney,  and  sent  him  over 
from  England  to  enforce  the  claims  of  the  heirs.  On  the  4th  of 
July  in  that  year  he  issued  a  legal  protest  against  those  who  had 
occupied  his  uncle's  land,  and  warned  them  against  cutting  or  sell- 
ing any  of  the  timber  thereon  without  the  widow's  consent. -^^ 
About  the  same  time  he  started  suit  against  the  former  steward 
for  an  accounting,  but  the  latter,  according  to  Mason,  took  refuge 
in  Boston  where  "for  better  shelter  and  protection"  he  joined  the 
Church,  "and  conspired  with  the  Massachusetts  to  seize  upon  the 
province  of  Hampshire"  ^" — a  statement  which  probably  had  ref- 
erence to  the  Bay  Colony's  attempt  to  stretch  its  boundary,  the 
political  control,  as  noted,  having  already  been  effected 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Mason's  activities  helped  to  bring 
to  an  issue  the  plan  Massachusetts  had  had  in  mind  for  years. 
Nor  does  it  seem  a  coincidence  in  view  of  his  subsequent  career  in 
this  region  that  Pendleton  should  have  appeared  on  the  scene  at 
this  particular  time.^^  We  first  find  him  there  in  the  very  next 
month,  when  on  the  11th  of  August  [1651]  he  was  granted  a  par- 
cel of  land  at  Strawberry  Bank  for  a  house  and  garden  "in  the 
behalfe  of  Mr.  William  Paine",^^  while  at  the  County  Court  held 
at  Dover  on  the  2nd  of  the  following  October,  he  was  named  with 
Richard  Waldron  and  William  Wentworth  as  an  arbitrator  in  a 
lawsuit  pending  there.^^  Evidently  by  this  time  he  had  established 
himself  as  a  resident,  making  his  home  on  the  "Great  Island" 
where  he  was  to  live  for  the  next  fourteen  years  of  his  long  and 
active  life — a  period  during  which  he  was  to  have  many  other 
contacts  with  Waldron  as  they  both  served  on  the  bench  of  the 
County  Courts. 

Richard  Waldron   (or  Walderne   as   usually   spelled  in   the 

"  Colonial  State  Papers,  II,  No.  36  [  Jenness,  p.  38] . 

^New  England  Papers,  XLII,  No.  139  [Jenness,  pp.  54-60]. 

^^  Sanborn,  in  his  History  of  New  Hampshire   [p.  42],  takes  this  view,  when, 

in  referring  to  the  appeal  the  inhabitants  made  to  Massachusetts  to  protect 

them  against  the  claims  of  Capt.  Mason,  he  states  that  Pendleton  "who  had 

transferred  himself  and  his  large  property  to  New  Hampshire  where  he  at 

once  became  influential  and  aggressive  .  .  .  seems  to  have  been  there  very  much 

for  that  purpose". 

"Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  5;  [Hackett,  p.  16]. 

^^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  I,  91. 


66  Brian  Pendletok 

old  records)  was  born  in  Alcester,  Warwick,  England,  in  1615, 
and  settled  at  Cocheco,  now  Dover,  New  Hampshire,  in  1640.  He 
was  a  magistrate  there  for  many  years,  often  a  Deputy  to  the 
General  Court  of  Massachusetts  and  at  times  Speaker  of  the 
House.  He  became  a  Captain  in  1672,  a  Major  in  1674,  and 
Major  General  in  1680.  When  New  Hampshire  was  separated 
from  Massachusetts  he  was  one  of  its  first  Councillors  under  the 
new  form  of  government  and  served  as  Deputy  President,  succeed- 
ing to  the  Presidency  upon  the  death  of  the  original  incumbent, 
John  Cutt.  Waldron  was  a  Puritan  of  the  harshest  type,  noted  for 
cruelties  to  the  Quakers,  and  for  his  seizure  of  a  large  body  of 
Indians  who  had  come  to  Dover  to  confer  with  him  during  King 
Philip's  War.  These  prisoners  were  sent  down  to  Boston  where 
some  were  executed  as  murderers  and  the  others  sold  into  slavery. 
The  savages  wiped  out  their  old  scores  with  Waldron  by  putting 
him  to  death  after  torture  during  the  massacre  at  Dover  in  1689. 

Just  when  Pendleton  bought  his  home  on  the  "Great  Island" 
is  a  bit  uncertain.  No  deed  is  to  be  found  of  record  and  it  is  not 
until  1657  that  we  find  any  reference  to  the  purchase.  At  this  time 
the  town  in  granting  him  an  acre  of  land  described  its  location  as 
"adjoining  his  house  which  he  lately  bought  of  Francis  Trickey, 
adjoining  George  Walton's  wharf". ^^  It  is  possible  he  had  rented 
this  property  originally,  for  in  trying  to  arrange  for  the  settle- 
ment of  a  dispute  between  William  Paine  and  Edward  Gillman  in 
1653  the  old  Norfolk  County  Court  provided  that  a  meeting  for 
arbitration  should  be  held  "at  Mr.  Pendleton's  house  on  Pasca- 
taqua".^^  A  year  earlier  the  town  had  ordered  Trickey  "to  clear 
[his  residence]  of  Goodman  Greene  and  his  wife  and  children  in  a 
month's  time",^^  and  it  is  quite  likely  this  house-cleaning  was  done 
for  Pendleton's  benefit,  just  prior  to  his  taking  possession. 

The  acquisition  of  this  property,  together  with  the  adjacent 
lots  he  purchased  from  Dr.  Fernald  and  from  Henry  Sherburne, 
with  two  more  acres  granted  him  by  the  town,  besides  one  acre 

"  Portsmouth  Town  Records  I,  42.  Probably  the  same  acre  laid  out  to  Pendle- 
ton in  1661,  "next  to  George  Walton"  [Ibid.,  I,  64].  According  to  Brewster's 
Rambles  About  Portsmouth  [Second  Series,  p.  363],  Walton's  house  was  situ- 
ated about  one  quarter  mile  from  the  Newcastle  end  of  the  present  bridge  from 
Portsmouth,  on  the  North  side  of  the  road  to  Fort  Constitution,  adjacent  to 
"a  small  and  beautiful  cove" — a  description  which  gives  us  the  approximate 
location  of  Pendleton's  house  on  the  Great  Island. 
"  Essex  Court  Records,  I,  326. 
^«  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  7;  [Hackett,  p.  16]. 


Portsmouth  1651-1652  67 

apiece  to  his  sons  Joseph  and  Caleb^^ — all  "shore  acres"  lying  on 
the  north  side  of  the  island  as  shown  by  later  deeds,  gave  Pendle- 
ton a  fairly  good  sized  tract  of  water  frontage  in  what  was  con- 
sidered the  most  valuable  location  there.  Here  before  long  he  had 
a  warehouse  of  his  own,  together  with  such  other  buildings  as  he 
required  for  the  various  enterprises  he  established,  and  here  too  he 
quickly  built  up  his  political  machine  which  dominated  the  town 
for  years. 

As  often  happens  in  politics,  a  blunder  made  by  the  opposi- 
tion gave  him  his  start.  Certain  malcontents  at  Strawberry  Bank, 
no  doubt  emboldened  by  the  arrival  of  Mason  and  evidently  hav- 
ing nothing  to  lose  should  he  make  good  his  claims,  undertook  to 
break  away  from  the  control  of  the  Massachusetts.  This  flurry 
happened  at  just  about  the  time  of  Pendleton's  advent  there,  and 
it  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  he  was  the  man  who  warned  Governor 
Endicott  of  the  incipient  rebellion.  While  this  movement  was  nip- 
ped in  the  bud,  the  governor  ordering  an  immediate  investigation 
and  the  arrest  of  the  ring  leaders  in  the  sedition,^^  the  incident 
gave  Pendleton  opportunity  to  go  among  the  older  settlers  and 
work  upon  their  fears  as  to  what  might  happen  to  them  should 
Massachusetts  lose  control.  "Their  agitators",  says  Mason,  evi- 
dently referring  to  these  activities  but  not  with  his  usual  accu- 
racy, "invited  some  of  the  Inhabitants  to  petition  the  said  Massa- 
chusetts to  be  taken  under  their  government  and  protection,  under 
specious  promises  of  great  advantages  that  would  accrue  unto 
them".^^ 

This  "protection"  as  we  have  noted,  had  been  extended  to 
them  ten  years  earlier,  but  the  time  had  now  come  to  test  its 
advantages,  if  any,  and  to  make  the  government  more  effective. 
Late  in  October,  barely  two  months  after  his  arrival  on  the  Pisca- 
taqua,  Pendleton  appeared  before  the  General  Court  in  Boston 
with  a  long  petition  signed  by  five  of  the  leading  men  of  Straw- 
berry Bank  "in  the  behalfe  and  by  the  free  consent  of  all  the  said 
inhabitants."  That  he  drew  up  most  of  this  document  himself  can 
hardly  be  doubted.  Reading  between  the  lines,  we  sense  his  eager- 
ness to  get  hold  of  more  public  lands  for  distribution,  his  Puritanic 

"Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  42,  63,  82;  10;  62;  [Hackett,  p.  19]. 

*  Massachusetts  Archives,  III,  343;  [Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I, 

195-6]. 

''^New  Hampshire  Papers,  XLVIII,  410-411;  [Jenness,  pp.  75-82]. 


68  Briak  Pendleton 

zeal  to  correct  the  horrifying  social  conditions  he  had  found,  and 
perhaps  too  we  may  suspect  a  little  ambition  for  himself. 

After  reminding  the  Court  that  in  the  year  1641  it  had  ac- 
cepted the  governing  of  the  community,  the  petitioners  requested 
"if  ...  we  are  yours  by  streching  of  ye  Line,  that  you  would  be 
pleased  to  give  order  for  the  Laying  out  our  townshipe  for 
want  of  which  wee  deeply  suffer,  &  to  confirme  the  same  to  us." 
Secondly,  that  "we  may  have  here  &  at  Dover  two  Courts  every 
year  with  two  Magistrates  and  their  Assistants  whereof  this  Barer 
Mr.  Bryan  Pendleton  to  bee  one  of  the  Assistants  Chosen  for  this 
place ;  And  whereas  by  reason  of  divers  shippings  &  others  coming 
into  this  harbour,  as  likewise  some  of  our  owne  Inhabitants,  sev- 
eral abuses  are  committed  &  noe  Magistrate  neere  at  hand  to  ad- 
minister justice  uppon  the  parteys  soe  offending,  that  before  jus- 
tice can  be  done  many  depart  hence  without  punishment,  &  others 
suffer  rather  than  seek  so  farre  for  justice.  Humbly  praye  that 
Mr.  Pendleton  may  have  more  than  ordinary  power  what  other 
assistants  have  for  the  rectifying  &  punishing  such  abuses  to  be 
Committed".  And  lastly  the  petitioners  requested  their  rights  in 
the  lands  they  inhabited  should  be  maintained  against  the  claims 
of  the  Mason  heirs  "if  by  stretching  of  the  Lyne  the  Lands  bee 
within  your  jurisdiction."  ^^ 

This  put  the  whole  situation  squarely  before  the  Court.  Was 
it  ready  to  accept  all  the  responsibilities  involved  in  "stretching 
the  line.''"  There  seems  to  have  been  some  doubt  as  to  the  legality 
of  such  a  procedure.  The  claim  set  up  ten  years  earlier  was  only  a 
shadowy  one.  How  could  a  township  grant  be  made  unless  title  to 
the  land  was  clear.''  However,  a  little  cautious  encouragement 
might  be  given  the  petitioners  in  the  shape  of  "all  the  land  between 
Hampton  and  them  that  is  not  already  graunted  to  townes  or 
persons,  Squamset  pattent  excepted."  If  they  could  find  anything 
worth  while  in  that,  they  would  do  well.  Pendleton  himself  was 
also  encouraged  at  the  same  time  by  receiving  an  appointment  to 
serve  for  one  year  as  an  Associate  Justice  and  to  hold  one  court 
annually  at  Strawberry  Bank  with  Ambrose  Lane  and  Henry  Sher- 
burne as  fellow  Associates,  and  with  Thomas  Wiggin  as  presiding 
Magistrate.  It  would  also  appear  that  the  order  invested  these 
Associates  with  the  powers  of  Commissioners  to  try  small  civil 

^^  Massachusetts  Archives,  CXII,  38.  [Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I, 
192-3.1 


Portsmouth  1651-1652  69 

actions,  issue  warrants,  bind  offenders  over  to  the  County  Court, 
etc.  But  there  was  not  a  word  of  comfort  to  the  petitioners  about 
protecting  them  against  the  Mason  claims.^^ 

The  policy  of  Massachusetts  seems  to  have  been  to  avoid  any 
legal  entanglements  at  this  time  as  to  the  rightful  proprietorship 
of  the  lands  involved,  in  spite  of  the  claim  set  up  in  1641.  The 
Colony  was  soon  to  make  its  claims  extend  still  further,  but  the 
prudence  with  which  they  were  handled  on  the  lower  Piscataqua 
indicates  there  were  misgivings  as  to  the  legality  of  the  contention. 
In  fact,  later  on  the  Colony  recognized  Mason's  rights  to  some 
extent  by  giving  his  heirs  damages  in  a  trespass  suit  brought  by 
Joseph  Mason  against  one  Richard  Leader.^^ 

The  cautious  attitude  of  the  Court  is  further  reflected  at  the 
session  held  in  May,  1652,  when  "In  answer  to  the  petition  or 
letter  of  Mr.  Brian  Pendleton  in  behalf  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Strawberry  Bancke",  it  was  rather  evasively  stated  "the  Court 
is  willing  to  consider  of  their  enlargement  when  they  propose 
anything  to  consideration."  Poor  comfort  in  this  for  the  peti- 
tioner, but  his  chagrin  was  undoubtedly  assuaged  by  an  immediate 
reappointment  as  an  Associate  Justice  for  his  town,  this  time 
with  Bellingham  and  the  judges  of  the  Dover  Court.  The  term 
of  service  was  not  limited  to  one  year,  as  was  the  case  in  1651, 
but  was  to  continue  until  the  inhabitants  should  present  someone 
else  in  his  place.^^  The  authorities  evidently  had  more  important 
work  for  him  to  do  than  merely  dividing  up  land. 

Pendleton  entered  upon  this  new  dignity  the  following  8th  of 
October,  when  with  Bellingham  and  Wiggin  as  presiding  Justices 
he  sat  in  the  Court  then  held  at  Strawberry  Bank,  Richard  Wal- 
dron  and  George  Smythe  being  his  fellow  Associates.  At  this  sit- 
ting it  was  ordered  that  Pendleton  and  Waldron  should  approve 
of  the  Court's  expenses,  apportioning  them  equally  between  the 
towns,  and  establish  the  tax  rate  to  cover  them.  The  com- 
ing of  a  new  regime  is  indicated  by  a  pair  of  stocks  being 
ordered  for  Strawberry  Bank  and  another  pair  for  the  Great 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  69,  70.    The  boundaries  of  the  Squamscott 
grant  were  not  well  defined  at  this  date. 
^  Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  1,  pp.  94,  138,  156. 

'^Ibid.,  Ill,  277;  IV,  pt.  1,  90-91.  The  Town  had  requested  that  Pendleton, 
Richard  Leader,  and  Ambrose  Lane  should  be  confirmed  as  Associates,  but  it 
would  appear  from  the  above  record  that  the  Court  did  not  feel  the  latter  two 
were  sufficiently  qualified.  See  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  p.  9;  [Hackett,  p. 
18]. 


70  Brian  Pendleton 

Island.^^  The  collection  of  the  Court's  charges  seems  to  have  been 
rather  difficult,  however,  for  in  May,  1660,  Pendleton  and  the 
other  Selectmen  of  Portsmouth  were  directed  at  a  town  meeting  to 
confer  with  the  Selectmen  of  Dover  to  settle  the  magistrates' 
salaries,  then  in  arrears  since  1655,  amounting  to  £8-5-0.  The 
stocks  also  appear  to  have  met  with  delaj^s  and  difficulties  for  in 
1657  Portsmouth  engaged  two  carpenters  to  build  a  pair  "within 
one  month",-'^  and  in  1664  the  Court  directed  the  town  to  replace 
them  at  once,  they  having  been  "lately  broken  by  seamen".^*  The 
records  that  have  come  down  to  us  indicate  these  irreverent  sailors 
should  have  been  very  popular  with  a  large  element  among  the 
inhabitants  of  old  Portsmouth,  who  were  a  fairly  turbulent  lot 
themselves. 

Notwithstanding  the  large  amount  of  business  they  gave  the 
Court,  however,  they  either  were  satisfied  with  Pendleton  as  a  dis- 
penser of  justice  or  else  could  find  no  one  else  to  take  his  place. 
Like  Waldron  at  Dover,  he  became  a  fixture  as  the  local  magis- 
trate, serving  regularly  from  one  year  to  another.  While  we  do 
not  find  a  town  record  between  1652  and  1661  showing  his  election 
as  an  Associate,^^  yet  the  Court  records  themselves  in  the  years 
following  his  initial  appearance  name  him  as  one  of  the  magis- 
trates in  1654,  and  in  every  year  from  1659  to  1665  inclusive.^*' 
Although  the  records  are  missing  for  the  years  1653  and  1658, 
while  those  for  1655-57  omit  the  names  of  the  magistrates,  there 
is  not  much  doubt  but  that  his  service  on  the  bench  continued 
uninterruptedly  during  the  entire  period  of  his  residence  in  New 
Hampshire.^^ 

The  court  records  themselves  fill  in  two  of  the  gaps  above 
noted.  In  June,  1655,  his  County  Court  directed  that  Anthony 
Ellens,  who  had  been  elected  a  constable  of  Portsmouth,  should 
take  his  oath  of  office  before  "Master  Pendleton" — good  evidence 
that  he  was  then  an  Associate  Justice,  Commissioners  being  re- 
stricted to  giving  oaths  to  deponents.  A  year  later  he  was  named 
as  arbitrator  in  a  law  suit  between  Joseph  Mason  and  John  God- 

^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  I,  98,  100. 

^  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  66,  41. 

^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  92a. 

^  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  76. 

^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  1,  22b,  23,  39a,  59b,  66a,  74a,  86a  105b. 

«Ibid.,  II,  7b;  14b. 


Portsmouth  1651-1652  71 

dard,  his  fellow  arbitrators  being  Captains  Thomas  Wiggin  and 
Thomas  Clarke,  both  of  whom  served  quite  regularly  as  Justices 
of  the  County  Court.  As  it  was  the  custom  in  those  days  in  order 
to  save  the  Court's  time  and  expense  when  involved  civil  suits  came 
to  trial,  to  appoint  a  number  of  the  Justices  to  act  as  arbitrators, 
binding  the  litigants  to  accept  their  award,  it  is  reasonable  to 
assume  that  these  three  men  were  serving  together  as  magistrates 
at  this  time.^^ 

The  same  condition  holds  true  as  to  the  period  during  which 
he  acted  as  a  Commissioner ;  this  seems  to  have  been  contempo- 
raneous with  his  service  as  an  Associate.  Wliile  the  town  records 
of  Portsmouth  note  his  election  to  this  minor  office  in  only  three 
years — 1654,  '56  and  '63^^ — yet  there  are  other  records  which 
indicate  he  held  this  position  continuously.  In  October,  1658, 
Capt.  Thomas  Wiggin  was  directed  to  administer  him  the  Com- 
missioner's oath  to  act  as  such  in  the  town  of  Portsmouth  ;^^  the 
County  Court  records  refer  to  him  as  a  Commissioner  in  1652, 
'57,  '59,  '62,  '63,  and  '64.^^  He  administered  oaths  to  witnesses 
in  1655  and  1657,^^ — a  power  given  Commissioners  by  an  act 
of  the  General  Court  in  1652,^^ — and  there  is  an  acknowledgment 
of  a  deed  taken  before  him  as  Commissioner  in  1660.^^ 

In  addition  to  these  judiciary  responsibilities  at  Portsmouth 
and  Dover,  he  served  for  a  time  at  the  County  Court  in  Kittery, 
across  the  river  in  Maine,  and  later  became  an  Associate  for  the 
County  Court  of  York,  his  earliest  appearance  there  being  in 
1664.^^  Besides  this  he  was  also  on  the  bench  for  Norfolk  County 
(now  Essex)  when  that  Court  met  at  Hampton.  His  first  ap- 
pointment there  of  which  we  have  record  was  in  October,  1654, 
when  he  was  sworn  as  an  Associate  with  Richard  Dummer  and 
Robert  Clement, ^^  The  Court  records  of  this  County  in  the  early 
days  seldom  give  the  names  of  the  presiding  magistrates,  but  from 

^Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  19  [Hackett,  28],  47,  87. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  34-8;  Archives,  XXXIX,  48. 
^New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  I,  98;  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I, 
17;  Deeds,  II,  31a,  72a,  72b,  110b. 
»=  Ibid,  II,  8a,  20a. 

^'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  103. 
""  Suffolk  Deeds,  11,390. 

'*  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  I,  186. 

^^  Essex  Court  Records,  I,  369.  Indication  that  he  was  a  Justice  of  this  Hamp- 
ton Court  in  1658  also,  is  noted  in  Chapter  VIII  following. 


72  Brian  Pendleton 

another  source  we  find  Pendleton  among  those  present  at  a  rather 
violent  session  at  Hampton  during  the  Quaker  persecutions  of 
1663.^° 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  his  service  here  may  also  have  been 
continuous,  Portsmouth  and  Hampton  then  being  adjoining 
towns,  and  having  various  interests  in  common.  All  told,  Pendle- 
ton's judiciary  activities  in  one  Court  and  another  covered  nearly 
thirty  years,  and  when  it  is  considered  that  many  of  the  cases  on 
which  he  had  to  pass  judgment  involved  his  neighbors,  and  many 
others  whom  he  must  have  known  personally,  we  get  some  idea 
of  the  compelling  sense  of  duty,  which  with  a  certain  hardness 
of  fibre,  enabled  him  to  continue  these  often  unpleasant  services 
for  so  long  a  period  and  into  such  an  advanced  age.  He  evidently 
felt  it  his  obligation  to  make  the  Piscataqua  region,  and  later  the 
Province  of  Maine,  completely  subservient  to  Massachusetts,  and 
he  furthered  this  aim  by  every  means  in  his  power,  regardless  of 
the  personal  sacrifices  involved. 

At  Strawberry  Bank,  however,  there  were  opportunities  in 
the  beginning  to  make  public  service,  properly  handled,  bring  in 
some  small  private  gain.  Not  long  after  his  arrival  there — 5 
April  1652,  to  be  exact — Pendleton  was  elected  a  Selectman  of 
the  town  and  at  the  same  time  the  board  was  given  power  to  lay 
out  land  "according  as  they  think  best."^^  For  the  time  being,  how- 
ever, he  had  to  content  himself  with  allotting — and  acquiring — a 
few  small  tracts  on  the  Great  Island,  and  on  the  mainland  nearby, 
but  he  still  kept  in  mind  the  greater  opportunities  that  a  definitely 
bounded  township  would  afford  to  an  experienced  man.  The  mat- 
ter was  persistently  agitated.  At  a  town  meeting  held  in  August, 
1652,  Pendleton  and  another  were  directed  to  write  a  letter  in 
response  to  "an  answer  of  the  General  Court,"^^ — evidently  the 
evasive  one  already  noted  which  dodged  the  town's  request  for 
"enlargement."  Wlien  this  new  letter  or  petition  came  before  the 
October  session  of  the  Court,  action  was  postponed  until  May, 
1653.« 

*°  Bishop,  p.  240.    Pendleton  may  have  served  frequently  at  the  Hampton  Court 

as  indicated  by  the  General  Court  in  1648  directing  the  Dover  Bench  to  sit  at 

Hampton  also.     [Massaclmsetts   Records,   IH,   127.]      While  this   appointment 

was  only  for  the  year  following  it  could  well  have  been  continued  as  a  regular 

practice. 

^1  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  1;   [Hackett,  p.  13]. 

♦^  Ibid.,  I,  9;  [Hackett,  p.  19]. 

*" Masxachmettti  Records,  III,  293;  IV,  pt.  1,  115. 


PoBTSMOUTH  1651-1652  73 

Believing  no  doubt  that  better  results  could  be  secured  by 
personal  contact  than  by  correspondence,  Pendleton  now  ar- 
ranged to  get  himself  sent  to  Boston  as  the  town's  Deputy.  A 
little  obstacle  was  in  the  way,  however.  As  already  noted,  at  the 
time  the  inhabitants  along  the  Piscataqua  submitted  to  the  juris- 
diction of  Massachusetts  they  were  given  the  liberty  of  sending 
two  Deputies  to  the  General  Court,  but  in  the  meantime  the  free- 
men of  Dover  had  increased  to  such  a  number  that  under  another 
law  they  were  entitled  to  have  two  Deputies  of  their  own.  This 
would  leave  no  room  for  one  from  Strawberry  Bank.  The  rise  of 
a  new  power  on  the  Piscataqua  is  seen  in  the  action  taken  by  the 
Court  in  October,  1652,  when,  after  citing  the  above  facts,  the 
road  was  cleared  for  Pendleton  by  ordering  that  Strawberry 
Bank  should  have  the  privilege  of  sending  one  Deputy  "according 
to  former  agreement."^^  His  election  to  this  office  followed  as  the 
natural  course  of  events  on  the  14th  of  March  1652/53.^^ 

With  the  political  affairs  of  the  little  town  well  in  hand, 
Pendleton  turned  his  attention  to  matters  military.  Here  there 
seems  to  have  been  no  organization  at  all — a  dangerous  situation 
considering  the  ever  present  menace  of  an  Indian  uprising.  The 
man  who  had  drilled  the  train  band  at  Sudbury  and  had  helped 
form  the  Military  Company  of  Massachusetts,  could  not  tolerate 
the  unpreparedness  he  found  at  Strawberry  Bank.  And  then  too, 
the  men  needed  discipline.  They  had  been  at  loose  ends  too  long. 
They  needed  to  acquire  more  respect  for  authority.  Military  drill, 
if  inflicted  often  enough,  might  give  them  a  proper  deference, 
make  them  more  amenable  to  the  Puritan  domination. 

So  we  see  Pendleton  taking  the  first  step.  At  a  town  meeting 
held  in  May,  1652,  barely  thirty  days  after  his  election  as  a  Se- 
lectman, it  was  ordered  that  each  inhabitant  should  provide  him- 
self with  arms  suitable  "for  a  foot  company ;  within  the  space  of 
one  month  after  the  date  hereof".^^  Then  of  course  the  inevitable 
and  pre-determined  second  step,  when  two  weeks  later  "Mr.  Briant 
Pendillton  is  chosen  this  day  commander  of  the  Trayn  Band"."^^ 
An  ambitious  man,  this  Pendleton,  an  active,  aggressive  man,  one 
who  went  after  what  he  wanted  either  by  means  direct  or  indirect, 

**  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  108. 

*=  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  13;  [Hackett,  p.  22]. 

"Ibid.,  1,  7;  [Hackett,  p.  17]. 

"Ibid.,  p.  9;  [Hackett,  p.  18]. 


ff^  Beian  Pendleton 

never  resting  content  until  he  had  achieved  his  ends.  But  it  is 
one  thing  to  be  elected  Captain  and  another  thing  to  make  sol- 
diers out  of  the  electorate.  The  militant  spirit  of  Puritanism 
did  not  burn  in  many  breasts  at  Strawberry  Bank.  The  mtricate 
manual  of  arms  was  most  confusing,  marching  and  countermarch- 
ing too  exhausting— exasperating  too,  when  the  tavern  doors 
stood  so  invitingly  open.  That  this  Company  proved  a  sore  trial 
to  its  commander  we  shall  see  later.  Its  calibre  may  be  guaged 
in  the  action  the  Massachusetts  authorities  took  m  despatching 
a  body  of  soldiers  to  the  Piscataqua  "to  quiet  the  mmds  of  the 
inhabitants"  during  the  Indian  alarm  in  the  followmg  Sprmg. 
Pendleton's  "Trayn  Band"  as  warriors  seem  to  have  been  good 

fishermen.  . 

All  told,  these  were  busy  years  for  this  emissary  of  Massa- 
chusetts.   Not  only  was  he  building  up   a  political  machme  m 
Portsmouth,  as  the  town  was  soon  to  be  named,  but  he  was  also  an 
active  agent  in  securing  the  submission  of  Maine  to  the  Bay  Col- 
ony    The  emergence  of  a  political  ruler  is  always  an  mterestmg 
study,  and  the  sudden  rise  of  this  one,  a  Puritan  from  Massa- 
chusetts, to  a  commanding  position  on  this  frontier,  must  have 
seemed  like  an  ominous  portent  to  many  of  the  early  settlers  there 
Indeed  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  among  those  who  still  yearned 
for  the  ancient  rituals  of  their  banished  faith,  or  who  looked  back 
with  regret  to  the  good  old  days  of  free  and  careless  livmg,  to 
all  such  as  they  the  advent  of  this  Master  Pendleton  with  his  pro- 
clivity for  organizing  and  petitioning,  his  faculty  for  scheming 
and  contriving,  his  passion  for  disciplining  and  reforming,  to  say 
nothing  of  his  ability  in  gathering  in  the  pounds  and  shillings— it 
is  not  too  much  to  say  that  among  these  easy  gomg  people  the 
advent  of  such  a  man  as  this  was  more  than  a  portent--it  was  a 
calamity.    Though  a  combination  of  events  was  to  end  his  rule 
over  them  in  time,  they  were  to  experience  durmg  the  years  that 
intervened  all  the  rigors  of  Puritanism  and  have  besides  a  unique 
demonstration  of  the  ways  of  the  righteous  when  exercismg  politi- 
cal  control. 
«  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  165. 


CHAPTER  VI 

YORK  COUNTY,  MAINE 
1652  -  1653 


And  thou,  Ezra,  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God,  that  is  thine  hand,  set 
magistrates  and  judges,  which  may  judge  all  the  people  that  are  beyond  the 
river,  all  such  as  know  the  laws  of  thy  God;  and  teach  ye  them  that  know 
them  not. — Ezra^  7:25. 

We  have  just  seen  how  Massachusetts  grasped  an  opportu- 
nity to  extend  its  jurisdiction  to  the  Piscataqua.  A  larger  adven- 
ture in  annexation  was  now  to  be  undertaken.  The  times  were 
favorable.  The  Puritans  ruled  England.  Their  old  enemy,  Sir 
Ferdinando  Gorges,  was  dead,  and  the  little  settlements  he  had 
planted  in  his  Province  of  Maine  seemed  deserted  by  his  heirs. 
The  inhabitants  there,  left  to  their  own  devices,  formed  a  con- 
federacy or  "combination"  and  elected  as  governor  one  of  Gorges' 
former  Councillors,  Edward  Godfrey,  an  able  and  vigorous  man.^ 
Judging  from  the  unruly  character  of  the  general  populace  in 
those  parts  it  is  doubtful  if  he  could  have  maintained  control  over 
them  for  any  great  length  of  time.  His  downfall,  however,  did 
not  come  about  through  any  internal  dissensions  among  these 
people,  but  was  due  to  his  own  ambitions  coming  into  conflict  with 
those  of  his  somewhat  unscrupulous  neighbors  on  the  South. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Godfrey  was  one  of  the  prime 
movers  in  trying  to  get  his  fellow  orphans  to  petition  Parliament 
to  grant  them  the  Province  for  themselves.  Neither  can  there  be 
much  uncertainty  as  to  who  brought  the  news  of  this  undertaking 
to  the  attention  of  the  Massachusetts  General  Court  in  October, 
1651.  As  noted  in  the  preceding  chapter,  Pendleton  attended  this 
session  on  a  mission  from  Strawberry  Bank,  and  it  is  significant 
that  the  Court's  reference  to  this  "late  endeavor"  at  "Kettery 
&C",  should  come  immediately  after  its  action  on  his  petition.^ 
Circulating  as  he  had  done  among  the  inhabitants  in  that  region, 

^  A  biography  of  Godfrey,  written  by  Col.  Charles  E.  Banks,  appears  in  the 
publications  of  the  Maine  Historical  Society,  and  has  been  reprinted  as  a 
separate.  ^ 

'Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  70. 

76 


76  Brian  Pekdleton 

and  with  Kittery  only  across  the  river  from  his  home  on  the  Great 
Island,  he  was  bound  to  hear  of  any  movement  that  might  be  on 
foot  there,  and  would  naturally  report  this  to  the  Bay  authori- 
ties. At  the  same  time  we  may  feel  pretty  sure  he  recommended 
they  take  the  same  course  of  action  north  of  the  Piscataqua  which 
he  requested  should  be  taken  at  "the  Bank".  In  fact,  it  is  not  at 
all  unlikely  that  when  Pendleton  drew  up  his  petition  he  had  an 
eye  across  the  river. 

If  Massachusetts  "by  stretching  the  line"  as  suggested  in 
that  document  could  take  in  Strawberry  Bank  why  not  stretch 
it  a  bit  further  and  take  in  the  Eastern  settlements  as  well?  The 
seed  of  this  idea  had  been  germinating  for  years  and  was  now  to 
blossom  forth.  Acting  on  the  information  received  and  on  the 
hint  given  them  in  Pendleton's  petition,  the  Court  resolved  that 
inasmuch  as  "by  the  extent  of  the  line  of  our  patent  it  doth  ap- 
peare  that  the  towne  of  Kyttery,  and  many  miles  to  northward 
thereof  is  comprehended  within  our  graunt  ...  and  considermg 
how  prejudicial  it  would  be  to  this  government  if  the  aforesaid 
place  and  river  should  be  possessed  by  such  as  are  no  friends  to 
us,  hath  ordered  that  a  loving  letter,  and  friendly,  be  sent  from 
this  Courte  to  the  inhabitants  of  Rettery  &C,  acquainting  them 
with  our  foresaid  right  &C,  and  commission  graunted  to  Mr.  Sy- 
mon  Bradstreete,  Major  Daniell  Dennison,  and  Capt.  Wm.  Hau- 
thorne,  to  treat  wth  them,  and  according  to  instructions  given 
to  receive  them  under  this  government,  if  terms  of  agreement  can 
be  concluded  uppon  by  mutuall  consent;  otherwise  having  made 
knowne  our  right,  and  laid  claime  to  the  place,  to  protest  against 
any  further  proceedings  by  virtue  of  their  combination".^ 

The  Commissioners  made  their  appointed  visit  to  Kittery,  but 
met  with  no  success.  Their  attempt  was  naturally  resisted  by  Gov- 
ernor Godfrey,  who  sent  a  vigorous  letter  of  protest  to  the  Massa- 
chusetts authorities.  This  was  answered  courteously  by  Secretary 
Rawson,  but  without  abating  in  the  slightest  the  claims  that  had 
been  set  up.  The  time  had  now  come  to  establish  these  definitely, 
not  hint  at  them  vaguely,  as  had  been  done  thirteen  years  earlier 
when  the  elastic  nature  of  that  northern  boundary  was  first  dis- 
covered. 

The  matter  was  simple  enough.  All  it  needed  was  a  public 
declaration  and  this  the  General  Court  took  care  of  on  May  31, 

^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  250-1;  IV,  pt.  1,  70. 


York  County,  Maine  77 

1652,  when  after  "perusal  of  our  charter"  it  was  voted  that  the 
northern  boundary  should  be  "uppon  a  streyght  Ime  east  &  west, 
to  each  sea" ;  three  miles  north  "from  the  northermost  part  of  ye 
River  Merimacke".  Two  members  of  the  Court  were  commissioned 
to  determine  the  latitude  of  this  point,  employing  such  "artists  & 
other  assistants"  as  they  deemed  necessary.^  Such  a  line  would 
obviously  overrun  all  of  the  Gorges  patent,  as  well  as  part  of  that 
much  disputed  one  on  the  north  known  as  the  Lygonia  patent,  and 
if  substantiated  by  the  English  authorities,  make  those  grants  well 
nigh  worthless. 

As  soon  as  Godfrey  heard  of  this  action  he  sent  another  spicy 
letter  to  the  Bay  authorities,  disputing  their  claims  and  calling  it 
preposterous  "to  talk  gravely  of  artists  to  settle  your  latitude." 
Another  commission  from  Boston  met  with  Godfrey  and  his  Coun- 
cil at  Kittery  Point  in  the  following  July  but  could  not  reconcile 
them  to  coming  under  the  Massachusetts  government.  When  the 
General  Court  reconvened  in  October  they  received  the  report  of 
the  surveying  expedition  which  gave  them  the  latitude  of  the 
source  of  the  Merrimac  "where  it  issues  out  of  the  lake  called 
Winnapuscakit,"  and  immediately  after  this  "having  perused  the 
letter  from  the  gentlemen  to  the  Eastward  and  not  being  satisfied 
therein",  they  judged  "it  meete  that  our  former  challenge  to  the 
place  be  further  prosecuted,  and  there  be  commissioners  sent 
thither  with  all  convenient  specde  wth  full  power  to  exercise  juris- 
diction amongst  them."  ^ 

The  appointment  of  the  commissioners  followed  at  once. 
Twice  as  many  were  selected  this  time  as  formerly.  Bradstreet, 
Denison  and  Hawthorne,  who  had  failed  on  the  first  mission  the 
year  before,  were  named  again,  perhaps  as  a  matter  of  courtesy. 
Two  of  the  magistrates,  Samuel  Symonds,  and  Capt.  Thomas 
Wiggin,  were  added,  together  with  "Mr.  Brian  Pendleton",  whose 
appointment  was  probably  due  not  only  to  the  record  he  had  made 
as  an  organizer  at  Strawberry  Bank  but  also  because  the  authori- 
ties wanted  at  least  one  man  on  the  Commission  this  time  who 

*  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  274,  278;  IV,  pt.  1,  93,  98-99. 

^Ibid.,  Ill,  288;  IV,  pt.  1,  109.  The  dissatisfaction  noted  undoubtedly  refers  to 
another  letter  of  protest  sent  them  from  Godfrey  after  the  abortive  meeting  of 
July  11th.  A  summary  of  this  appears  in  Clayton's  History  of  York  County, 
Maine,  while  the  peppery  governor's  first  two  letters  are  given  there  in  full.  The 
originals  are  in  the  Massachusetts  Archives. 


78  Brian  Pendletok 

had  more  or  less  acquaintance  among  the  people  with  whom  they 
were  to  deal. 

A  strong  Commission  this — vigorous  and  determined  men,  the 
heavy  artillery  of  the  Commonwealth,  one  of  its  members.  Brad- 
street,  destined  to  be  among  its  early  Governors;^  Symonds,  a 
Deputy  Governor;^  Denison,  who  had  served  with  Cromwell,  be- 
came the  Major  General  of  Massachusetts;  Hawthorne,  Speaker 
of  the  House  of  Deputies  and  Commissioner  for  the  United  Colo- 
nies;  and  Pendleton,  years  later,  the  Deputy  President  of  the 
Province  they  were  about  to  invade. 

The  authority  given  them  was  sweeping  enough.  They  were 
authorized  to  summon  the  inhabitants  of  Kittery,  the  Isles  of 
Shoals,  Aggamenticus  [York],  and  the  other  settlements  "to  the 
most  northerly  extent  of  our  patent",  declare  the  rights  of  Massa- 
chusetts over  them,  require  their  subjection  thereto,  hold  Court  or 
Courts,  appoint  Commissioners  and  constables,  confirm  proprie- 
ties, grant  privileges  and  protections,  in  short,  to  do  all  that  was 
needful  to  settle  the  civil  government  there  under  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  Massachusetts.® 

For  some  reason  Denison  and  Hawthorne  could  not  under- 
take this  mission  but  the  other  four  repaired  to  Kittery  where  on 
the  15th  of  November  [1652]  they  summoned  the  inhabitants  to 
appear  before  them  the  following  day  at  William  Everett's  house 
between  seven  and  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning.  They  had  evi- 
dently decided  their  cause  would  have  better  chance  of  success  by 
bringing  it  directly  before  the  people  than  by  holding  any  more 
conferences  with  their  obstinate  rulers.    "At  the  time  appointed", 

"Simon  Bradstreet  was  born  in  Rolling  Horbling,  Lincolnshire,  England, 
where  he  was  baptized  18  March,  1603/4.  He  entered  Emanuel  College  in 
1618  when  he  was  fourteen  years  old  and  in  two  years  took  the  degree  ot  li.A. 
and  in  1624  the  Master's  degree.  He  came  to  New  England  m  1630,  and  not 
long  afterwards  married  as  his  first  wife,  Anne  Dudley,  daughter  of  Gov 
Thomas  Dudley.  She  was  the  first  American  poetess.  He  was  an  Assistant 
of  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony  for  forty-eight  years,  Colonial  Secretary, 
thirteen  years.  Deputy  Governor,  five  years,  and  Governor,  tf.n  years  He 
lived  successively  in  Ipswich,  Andover,  and  Sa  em,  where  he  died  27  March 
1697,  age  91  years.— Essex  County  Historical  and  Genealogical  Registei  (1894) 
^Samuel  Symonds  of  Ipswich,  "a  gentleman  of  ancient  family"  was  born  at 
Yeldham,  Essex,  England.  Was  admitted  freeman  of  Massachusetts  in  1638 
Elected  Deputy  to  the  General  Court,  and  served  as  an  Assistant  from  lb4d 
to  1673,  when  he  became  Deputy  Governor,  holding  this  office  until  his  death 
in  October,  1678.  One  of  his  daughters  married  as  her  second  husband,  j^ichara 
Martyn  of  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  one  of  the  overseers  Pendleton  named  in  his 
will.— Savage,  IV,  246. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  288-9;   IV,  pt.  1,  109-110. 


York  County,  Maine  79 

say  the  commissioners  in  their  report,  which  is  a  model  of  terse- 
ness, "the  inhabitants  appeared  &  a  Court  was  held."  The  main 
issue  was  pressed  at  once — submission  to  the  Bay.  Some  favored 
this,  others  were  opposed,  the  prudent  wanted  terms.  Feeling  ran 
high.  "Whilst  matters  were  in  debate",  say  the  report,  "com- 
plainte  was  made  against  one  Jno  Bursly  for  uttering  threatning 
words  against  the  Commissioners  and  such  as  should  submit  to  the 
government  of  Massachusetts.  Michael  Brance  and  Charles  Frost 
were  witnesses  against  the  said  Bursly.  The  said  Bursly  upon  his 
examination  at  length,  in  open  Court  did  confesse  the  words,  and 
uppon  his  submission  was  discharged."  ^ 

This  show  of  authority  by  the  commissioners  and  their  un- 
compromising attitude  finally  broke  down  the  opposition.  But  a 
last  effort  was  made  to  get  terms  before  yielding.  To  quote  again 
from  the  report:  "And  after  long  agitation  with  the  inhabitants 
about  the  whole  buisines  in  hand,  they  offered  to  come  under  the 
government  of  the  Massachusetts,  provided  that  the  articles  and 
conditions  tendered  by  themselves  might  be  received  as  the  ground 
thereof,  which  being  wholy  denied  by  the  Commissioners  who  told 
them  they  must  first  submitt  to  the  government,  and  then  they 
should  be  ready  to  afford  such  liberties  and  immunities  as  they 
should  think  meete  to  graunt;  whereupon  at  length  they  did  sub- 
mitt"— and  there  follows  a  list  of  forty-one  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Kittery  who  acknowledged  themselves  subject  to  the  government 
of  Massachusetts  Bay.^^ 

This  unconditional  surrender  first  obtained,  terms  were  then 
discussed.  Apparently  these  conferences  lasted  three  or  four  days 
for  "the  grant  to  Kittery"  was  not  dated  until  November  20th. 
Its  terms  were  more  liberal  than  might  have  been  expected.  The 
whole  tract  of  land  north  of  the  Piscataqua,  together  with  the 
Isles  of  Shoals,  was  established  as  a  county  to  be  known  as  York- 
shire with  its  own  County  Courts  and  Associate  Justices,   All  land 

^bid.,  IV,  pt.  1,  123. 

^"Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  123-124.  The  report  states  they  signed 
this  agreement  Nov.  16,  i.e.,  the  same  day  the  Court  opened,  and  not  after 
several  days  of  argument,  as  noted  in  Burrage's  Beginnings  of  Colonicd 
Maine  (p.  374).    The  debates  came  afterwards. 

Stackpole  in  his  Old  Kittery  and  Her  Families  (p.  141),  points  out  that 
the  original  articles  of  submission  were  signed  by  only  thirty-four  men,  and 
he  assumes  that  the  other  seven  listed  in  the  Commissioners'  report  must  have 
given  their  consents  afterwards — a  conclusion  borne  out  in  at  least  one  case 
by  the  letter  Pendleton  wrote  Symonds  a  month  later. 


80  Brian  Pendleton 

titles  were  confirmed.  Kittery  was  to  remain  as  a  town,  and  all 
its  present  inhabitants,  after  taking  the  freeman's  oath,  were  to  be 
"freemen  of  the  country",  with  liberty  to  vote  for  the  election  of 
Governor,  Assistants  and  other  general  officers.  They  were  also 
given  the  privilege  of  sending  either  one  or  two  Deputies  to  the 
General  Court  as  they  saw  fit.  But  not  a  word  as  to  requiring 
these  new  freemen  by  annexation  to  be  members  of  the  Congrega- 
tional Church — in  fact  it  was  specifically  stated  they  should  "en- 
joy the  same  priviledges  that  Dover  hath,  uppon  theire  coming 
under  this  government",^^  and  as  has  been  noted,  the  people  there 
were  granted  full  suffrage  without  the  necessity  of  being  church 
members.  The  rule  that  was  so  binding  in  Massachusetts  became 
as  elastic  as  the  boundary  line  once  the  old  frontier  was  crossed. 

After  appointing  Pendleton  and  two  others  to  hold  one 
County  Court  at  Kittery,  and  to  serve  there  as  Justices  mean- 
time,^^  the  Commissioners  repaired  to  "Accomenticus"  where  they 
sent  out  a  notice  to  the  inhabitants  to  meet  with  them  there  at  the 
house  of  Nicholas  Davis  between  seven  and  eight  on  Monday  morn- 
ing, November  22nd.  Only  one  day  was  required  here  to  bring  the 
matter  to  a  successful  issue.  "After  some  time  spent  in  debate- 
ments",  says  the  report,  "and  many  questions  answered  and  objec- 
tions removed,  [the  inhabitants]  acknowledged  themselves  subject 
to  the  government  of  the  Massachusetts  in  New  England ;  only  Mr. 
Godfrey  did  forbeare  until  the  vote  was  past  by  the  rest,  and  then 
immediately  he  did  by  word  and  vote,  express  his  consent  also". 
Then  follows  the  list  of  the  fifty  inhabitants  who  took  the  oath  of 
freemen,  with  the  grant  to  Accomenticus  which  it  was  agreed 
should  "henceforth  be  called  Yorke".  The  same  rights  were  given 
the  people  as  had  been  granted  those  at  Kittery,  and  an  attempt 
was  made  to  mollify  Edward  Godfrey  by  appointing  him  as  one 
of  the  justices  to  hold  the  County  Court. ^^ 

Owing  to  "some  urgent  and  emergent  occasions"  the  commis- 
sioners were  unable  to  proceed  further  on  their  peaceful  conquest 
at  this  time,  and  accordingly  sent  a  letter  to  the  people  north  of 
York  notifying  them  they  would  "repair  to  your  parts  in  the 

^^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  125. 
^Ibid.,  p.  127. 

^^  Ibid.,  pp.  128-131.  Godfrey  could  not  be  reconciled,  however.  He  returned 
to  England  not  long  afterwards  where  he  remained  as  an  enemy  to  Massa- 
chusetts, biding  his  time  to  bring  action  against  them.  His  efforts  came  to 
nothing  however,  and  impoverished  in  his  old  age  he  died  in  a  debtor's  prison. 


York  County,  Maine  81 

Spring"  to  receive  their  submission  to  Massachusetts/*  a  com- 
munication which  to  many  must  have  given  rise  to  more  gloom 
than  joy. 

Meanwhile  there  was  one  small  matter  at  Kittery  which 
needed  straightening  out,  and  Pendleton  seems  to  have  been  dele- 
gated to  attend  to  this.  Some  time  previously  one  Richard  Leader 
had  persuaded  a  number  of  the  inhabitants  there  to  sign  a  petition 
to  Parliament  in  a  sly  attempt  to  get  himself  appointed  governor 
over  them.  Under  date  of  December  20th  [1652],  a  new  petition 
was  drawn  up  requesting  the  former  one  be  disregarded  as  the 
people  were  satisfied  to  remain  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Massa- 
chusetts.^^ 

Pendleton  received  this  document  the  following  day  and  for- 
warded it  at  once  to  Samuel  Symonds  at  Ipswich.  His  accompany- 
ing letter,  after  noting  that  the  ground  was  being  prepared  for 
further  exploitation  in  the  Spring,  and  that  another  stray  had 
come  into  the  fold,  strikingly  reveals  the  Puritan's  odd  combina- 
tion of  extreme  piety  and  common  sense.  While  implying  with  calm 
conviction  that  their  will  in  this  affair  was  the  Lord's — that  terri- 
fying notion  which  has  always  obsessed  the  Righteous — he  makes 
haste  to  suggest  nevertheless  that  the  next  invasion  of  Maine 
should  not  be  delayed — in  other  words  "Trust  God — but  lose  no 
time."  This  interesting  communication,  the  earliest  found  so  far 
under  his  hand,  runs  as  follows : 
"Honored  Mr.  Simons 

Sir  it  was  untill  this  present  below  this  Remon- 
strance came  to  my  hand:^^  for  the  people  of  Kittery 
could  not  get  oportunitie  to  meete  &  consent  jointlie 
together  untill  the  eleventh  of  this  present :  and  as  opor- 
tunitie of  wether  did  advantage  I  posted  it  away :  I  pray 
let  noe  means  be  wantinge  to  send  it  to  the  Governor 
with  all  speed  :  hoe  I  hope  will  hast  [en]  it  for  Jany  Court : 
I  have  heard  from  the  Eastward  that  they  are  desireous 
of  the  Commissioners  comminge  &  will  willingelie  Receive 
their  power  &  glad  of  it :  Mr.  George  Leader  hath  taken 
the  oth :  all  spirits  will  be  setled  in  a  litle  time  I  hope : 
the  Lord  hath  the  hearts  of  men  in  his  owne  hand  &  will 

^*  Massachusetts  Archives,  III,  188a. 

^^  Documentary  History,  IV,  43-44. 

"Read   this   as:   "It   was   not   until  this   present   date  below   noted   that   this 

Remonstrance  came  to  my  hand:" 


Brian  Pendleton 

make  all  men  doe  what  hee  intends :  If  god  permit  I  wish 
you  leave  as  timelie  in  the  Springe  as  you  can:  I  pray 
sir  send  mee  word  how  Mr.  Cotton  doth :  this  with  my 
prayers  for  you  &  all  the  Israeli  of  God  &c.  Rest  this: 
21 :  of  Decem  52 

Yours   to  use  in   any 

Cristian   service   as   I 

am  bound 

Pendleton^ 


.17  Bi 


When  Spring  came  and  the  General  Court  resumed  its  ses- 
sions, the  commissioners  submitted  the  reports  of  their  proceed- 
ings, signed  jointly  by  Bradstreet,  Wiggin,  Symonds,  and  Pendle- 
ton. Their  returns,  being  approved,  were  spread  upon  the  records, 
and  the  Court  ordered  "that  due  &  harty  thanks  be  rendered  to 
them  .  .  .  for  their  pains  and  service  therein,  and  shallbe  willing 
and  ready  to  make  them  further  sattisfaction  in  the  graunt  of 
some  land  to  each  of  them  respectively,  when  any  shall  be  pre- 
sented".^^ 

To  complete  what  had  not  yet  been  accomplished  beyond  the 
Piscataqua,  a  new  commission  was  appointed  on  June  3rd  [1653]. 
This  delegation  was  even  more  formidable  than  the  preceding  one, 
as  it  was  headed  by  no  less  a  personage  than  Richard  Bellingham, 
then  the  Deputy  Governor,  and  in  later  years  the  Governor  of  the 
Massachusetts,  Edward  Rawson,  the  Secretary  of  the  Colony,  to- 
gether with  three  of  the  former  commissioners,  Wiggin,  Denison, 
and  Pendleton. ^^  Notice  was  sent  to  the  inhabitants  of  Wells, 
Saco,  and  Cape  Porpoise  [Kennebunk]  to  appear  before  these 
men  on  July  4th  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Emerson  in  the  former  town. 
The  emissaries  from  Massachusetts  were  there  at  the  appointed 
time  but  only  a  handful  of  the  residents  of  Wells  put  in  an  appear- 
ance. The  rest  apparently  had  decided  to  ignore  the  summons. 

"This  letter,  never  before  published,  is  in  the  manuscript  collections  at  the 
Boston  Athenaeum— No.  1  in  Vol.  1652-1700.  The  "Mr.  Cotton"  referred  to 
here  was  of  course  the  Rev.  John  Cotton,  pastor  of  the  First  Church  of  Boston 
who  died  23  December,  1652.  George  Leader — as  noted  by  Stackpole— was 
one  of  the  seven  men  in  Kittery  who  did  not  sign  the  original  submission  to 
Massachusetts  but  whose  names  appear  in  the  list  reported  by  the  Commis- 
sioners. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  122-132.  The  originals  of  these  reports 
are  in  Vol.  Ill  of  the  Massachusetts  Archives. 

^"Massachusetts  Archives,  III,  217.  Bellingham,  a  man  of  gloom  and  melan- 
choly, is  reputed  to  have  had  spells  of  insanity  in  his  latter  years.  His  sister, 
Mrs.  Anne  Hibbens,  also  of  marked  peculiarities,  was  executed  for  witchcraft 
in  1656. 


-^^^/^nr-^vJ     JCw^L-      y.'rf^S"-'^  '^<-^^y     '^"'^      '--'/-f^M 

f-prc^-*. >*&T^  ^<> "*'  '^»»'^«*^W^r;^ *>— v^>  ^ " >  "^  tf     ^^/'  f^A-^*-   x-^-^n. ^>.^/- T4*.*y /i^ 
l^^t^c    •^I'Wfk  /^^^     /^^^*     <»Vt#'/<4*^w*t)'    Z/.^./    />t^j,,  ^>.j,v*  ^iv"*^ ''**<«■* 

-  <^v  .        ^1  j  /     ,'7  /  ^  ^  ' 


cJ 


iL. 


Kkdickd  Facsimilk  ok  BiuAX  Pkxim.etox' 


s  Letter  to  Symon 


York  County,  Maine  83 

The  situation  that  confronted  the  Commissioners  is  rather 
amusingly  brought  out  in  their  report:  "And  whilst  the  names  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Wells  were  calling  over,  William  Wardell,  one 
of  the  inhabitants  there,  coming  by,  was  called  to  come  in  and  an- 
swer to  his  name,  which  he  refused,  and  contemptuously  turned 
his  back  on  the  Court."  Warrant  for  his  arrest  for  this  contempt 
was  immediately  issued  to  the  newly  appointed  constable  and  the 
Court  adjourned  to  Mr.  Ezekiel  Knight's.  Here  Wardell  was 
brought  before  them — an  ingenious  fellow  "who  excused  himself 
that  his  intent  was  not  to  contcmne  the  Court,  but  rather  to  en- 
deavor to  get  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  of  Wells  that  had  not  ap- 
peared to  come  in  and  make  their  appearance" !  An  affront  and 
then  effrontery!  Was  the  fellow  laughing  at  them  in  his  sleeve? 
Bellingham  and  Rawson  might  well  have  narrowly  escaped  apo- 
plexy. Whipping  was  too  good  for  such  an  impertinent  scamp. 
Nevertheless  "the  Court,  at  the  request  of  the  inhabitants  .  .  . 
dismist  the  said  Wardell,  and  adjourned  the  Court  till  the  next 
day  at  eight  of  ye  clocke".^*^ 

Whether  or  not  Wardell  searched  out  the  missing,  he  ap- 
peared with  eighteen  of  them  at  the  appointed  time,  when  after 
giving  in  their  submissions  they  received  the  freeman's  oath.  This 
was  also  administered  the  same  day  to  sixteen  men  from  Saco  and 
to  a  dozen  from  Cape  Porpoise  who  had  obeyed  the  summons  to 
come  to  Wells  and  submit  to  Massachusetts.  The  grants  made  to 
these  towns  followed  the  same  lines  as  those  made  to  York  and 
Kittery  the  year  before,  but  this  time  the  commissioners  took  a 
hand  in  the  religious  affairs  of  the  community.  While  they  might 
grant  full  suffrage  without  any  requirement  of  church  member- 
ship, they  did  not  propose  there  should  be  any  services  held  that 
were  not  strictly  orthodox.  Warning  was  issued  to  those  who  had 
created  a  dissension  in  the  church  at  Wells ;  John  Baker  was  cen- 
sured "for  holding  private  meetings  and  prophecying",  and  was 
forbidden  to  preach  publicly  any  more.  A  similar  interdiction 
was  laid  upon  George  Barlow  of  Saco,  while  Robert  Booth  was 
given  liberty  "to  exercise  his  gifts  for  the  edification  of  the  people 
there",  the  town  being  "destitute  of  a  good  minister."  As  at  Dover 
and  Strawberr^^  Bank  there  could  be  but  only  one  true  faith  where 
Massachusetts  ruled. 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  158. 


84  Brian  Pendletok 

The  Commissioners  proceeded  no  farther  than  Wells,  having 
some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  location  of  the  boundary .^^  It  was  not 
until  a  year  later  that  a  survey  determined  the  eastern  extremity 
of  this  line  fell  upon  an  island  in  Casco  Bay,^^  and  without  this 
definite  knowledge  the  men  from  Massachusetts  took  a  conserva- 
tive course.  Their  report  from  which  we  have  quoted  was  submit- 
ted to  the  General  Court  in  September  [1653],  was  approved  and 
appears  at  length  in  the  records.^^  Part  of  it  is  signed  by  all  five 
commissioners,  but  the  grants  to  Saco  and  Cape  Porpoise,  by  Bel- 
lingham,  Denison,  and  Rawson  only.  As  before,  the  Commissioners 
received  the  thanks  of  the  Court,  and  the  promise  of  "the  grant  of 
some  lands  to  each  of  them." 

Bradstreet  and  Symonds  received  their  reward  at  once — five 
hundred  acres  apiece  for  their  services  at  York  and  Kittery.  A 
year  later  Rawson  was  granted  two  hundred  acres  on  the  Cocheco 
kiver,  these  to  be  laid  out  by  Capt.  Brian  Pendleton  and  Peter 
Coffin ;  two  hundred  acres  more  were  awarded  him  in  1657.  Wiggin 
and  Denison  secured  grants  of  two  hundred  acres  each  in  1655, 
the  latter  having  his  increased  to  five  hundred  acres  two  years 
later.  Hawthorne,  who  apparently  had  served  only  on  the  fruit- 
less mission  of  1651,  was  awarded  three  hundred  acres  "for  his 
services  to  the  Eastward",  but  nothing  was  done  for  Pendleton 
who  played  the  part  of  the  patient  waiter  for  five  years,  while 
these  large  grants  were  being  made  to  his  fellow  commissioners.^* 

Finally  in  May,  1658,  evidently  coming  to  the  conclusion 
that  he  had  been  forgotten  and  that  his  modesty  was  likely  to  be 
its  own  reward,  he  sharpened  a  goose  quill  and  with  a  thick  ink 
which  soaked  into  the  paper  under  the  heavier  strokes  of  his  firm 
hand  he  inscribed  the  following  message: 

"To  the  Honored  Generall  Court  now  assembled  at 

Boston  of  Magistrates  &  Deputyes :  the  Humble  petition 

of  Brian  Pendleton 
Humbly  Sheweth 
That  beinge  twice  employed  to  take  in  the  Esterne 

parts  at  Kittery  Yorke  Welle  &C :  with  the  Honored  Mr. 

=^As  noted  in  letter  from  the  General  Court  to  "Mr.  Jocelyn  and  Mr.  Jor- 
dan"— Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  305-6. 
^^Massachiisefts  Records,  III,  361-2;  IV,  pt.  1,  267-8. 
'^Ib!d.,  Ill,  332-339;  IV,  pt.  1,  157-165. 
^  Ibid.,  Ill,  339,  336-7,  378-9,  430;  IV,  pt.  1,  180,  211,  304,  240,  304. 


Reduced  P'acsimile  of  Biuax  Pendleton's  Petition   on 
Account  of  His  Services  in  Annexing   Maine. 


York  County,  Maine  85 

Broadstreet  &  others  one  time :  &  Avith  the  Honored 
Deputy  Governor  &  others  the  2d  time:  A  Return 
of  their  aksions  was  presented  to  the  Gen^^  Court 
1653  which  the  Court  acksepted  &  was  pleased  to  prom- 
ise to  Gratifie  with  some  Land  (as  appeareth  by  the  Rec- 
ord as  they  had  to  other  Gentlemen  soe  Imployed  ffor- 
merly:  some  of  which  they  Gratified  with  five  hundred 
acres  of  Land :  Where  by  I  am  Incouraged  to  move 
this  Honored  Gen^^  Court  to  graunt  mee  (on  the  consid- 
erations aforesd)  five  hundred  acres  of  Land  on  Co- 
checkea  River  above  Dover  bounds  as  neere  to  the  Land 
layd  oute  to  Mr.  Edward  Rawson  as  may  bee;  to  bee 
Layd  out  by  Mr.  Edward  Starbucke  &  Peter  Coffin  &  yr 
peticoner  shall  pray  &c  i 

Yor  Humble  Searvant  to  Comand 

Brian  Pendleton"  ^^ 
The  man  would  have  been  more  than  human  who  could  have 
drawn  up  this  petition  without  feeling  some  rankling  sense  of  in- 
justice, and  we  may  be  very  sure  that  although  Pendleton  worded 
his  message  according  to  the  prescribed  forms,  the  humbleness 
was  all  on  paper  and  not  at  all  in  his  spirit.  Those  Brahmans  of 
Boston !  They  took  care  of  their  own  all  right — see  what  was  given 
Bradstreet  and  Symonds !  They  didn't  have  to  ask  for  theirs. 
And  that  Hawthorne — hoAv  was  he  entitled  to  anything  at  all? 
What  success  had  he  had?  In  fact,  what  success  had  any  of  them 
had  until  he,  Brian  Pendleton,  went  with  them?  And  Rawson — 
only  two  days  at  Wells — and  four  hundred  acres !  And  who  was 
it  that  had  been  delegated  to  lay  out  the  first  two  hundred  for  him? 
That  was  surely  rubbing  it  in !  To  get  nothing  for  oneself,  and 
then  to  be  asked  to  lay  out  a  gratuity  for  somebody  else !  No  won- 
der the  ink  spread  as  Pendleton  wrote.  Was  he  not  entitled  to  as 
much  land  as  anyone?  Had  he  not  spent  a  week  away  from  his 
business  while  at  Kittery  and  York,  where  after  much  mental 
travail  the  first  grant  was  drawn  up,  the  grant  which  served  as  a 
model  for  all  the  later  ones  ?  Had  he  not  been  at  Wells  also  ?  And 
what  had  he  received  for  his  pains  so  far?  Nothing  but  thanks. 
Surely  five  hundred  acres  were  little  enough  to  ask  for — and  bear- 
ing down  hard  he  signed  his  name,  large  and  bold — and  the  ink 
spread  again. 

^^Massachusetts   Archives   XVI,   349;    (Documentary   History,   IV,   155)    Re- 
production of  this  petition  appears  opposite. 


86  Brian  Pendleton 

But  the  Honored  General  Court  seems  to  have  taken  a  less 
liberal  view  of  the  value  of  Pendleton's  services  than  he  placed 
upon  them  himself.  He  was  not  a  Magistrate  of  the  Colony — only 
a  county  magistrate,  an  occasional  Deputy,  or  a  Commissioner 
when  there  were  tasks  to  be  done.  A  good  man  in  the  organization, 
a  good  worker,  but  not  of  the  Inner  Circle.  He  should  be  a  little 
more  modest  in  his  requests.  So  the  Court  "In  answer  to  the  peti- 
tion of  Capt.  Brian  Pendleton  ...  in  reference  to  his  services 
performed  with  other  gentlemen  in  taking  in  the  Easterne  parts 
&c  .  .  .  do  grant  him  two  hundred  acres  of  land  on  Cocheca 
River  above  Dover  bounds,  as  neere  to  the  land  laid  out  to  Mr.  Ed- 
ward Rawson  as  maybe,  to  be  laid  out  by  Mr.  Edward  Starbuck 
&  Peter  Coffin".^* 

Pendleton  might  possibly  have  fared  a  little  better  if  he  had 
struck  when  the  iron  was  hot.  The  intervening  years  had  seen  no 
extension  of  the  Colony's  authority  beyond  Saco.  Various  notices 
to  the  inhabitants  of  Black  Point,  Blue  Point,  and  Casco  Bay  to 
come  to  the  Court  at  York  and  make  their  submission,  had  been 
regularly  ignored.  Finally  at  this  session  of  the  General  Court 
[May,  1658],  a  new  commission  was  appointed  to  go  to  these 
people  and  bring  them  into  the  fold.  This  was  accomplished  in  the 
following  summer^^  but  Massachusetts  was  to  find  these  new  citi- 
zens prone  to  stray  whenever  they  had  opportunity.  Such  an  op- 
portunity came  to  them  before  many  years,  and  for  a  time  they 
were  again  independent  of  the  Bay  Colony.  But  it  was  only  for  a 
little  while — and  then  old  Brian  Pendleton  who  had  come  to  live 
amongst  them,  cast  his  nets  and  they  were  gathered  in  once  more.^^ 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  S^l. 

^  Ibid.,  pp.  305-6,  312,  338,  358-361. 

-8  Maine  did  not  achieve  its  independence  from  Massachusetts  until  the  year 

1820,  when  it  entered  the  Union  as  the  twenty-third  State. 


CHAPTER  VII 


PORTSMOUTH 
1653  -  1654 


Pendleton's  association  with  the  arrogant  Commissioners  from 
Boston  during  their  invasion  of  Maine  in  November,  1652,  may 
have  had  much  to  do  with  his  instigating  a  similarly  high-handed 
procedure  not  long  afterwards.  In  the  Spring  of  that  same  year 
the  General  Court  had  prescribed  heavy  penalties  for  those  who 
should  willfully  deface  any  public  record,^  and  yet  in  defiance  of 
this  law,  and  on  their  own  responsibility  as  far  as  known,  the  se- 
lectmen of  Strawberry  Bank,  immediately  after  a  town  meeting 
held  on  the  13th  of  January,  1653,  gathered  at  the  house  of 
George  Walton  on  the  Great  Island,  where  they  "exsamed  the  ould 
Towne  Booke  .  .  .  crossed  out  what  was  not  aproved",  leaving 
the  rest  "to  be  Recorded  in  this  Booke  and  to  be  confermed  by  the 
present  selectmen."  ^ 

The  entry  of  this  extraordinary  act  as  recorded  in  their 
new  book  was  signed  by  the  full  board  headed  by  Pendleton,  who 
was  probably  chairman,  and  followed  in  order  by  his  fellow  select- 
men— or  shall  we  say  confederates.'' — Henry  Sherburne,  Renald 
Fernald,  John  Pickering,  and  James  Johnson.  Certainly  there  is 
nothing  secret  about  this,  nothing  savoring  of  guilt,  nor  anything 
in  the  way  of  explanation  or  excuse.  It  is  just  a  bald  statement  of 
fact  such  as  would  be  entered  as  the  ordinary  minute  of  a  matter 
of  routine,  and  yet  the  very  casualness  of  their  action  and  the 
deductions  that  can  be  drawn  therefrom  have  puzzled  commen- 
tators for  many  years. 

What  occasioned  this  remarkable  proceeding  is  still  a  matter 
of  speculation.  Three  theories  have  been  advanced  to  account  for 
it.  The  first  of  these,  as  noted  by  Sanborn,  suggests  it  was  done  at 
Pendleton's  instigation  "partly  to  obliterate  certain  recorded 
transactions  which  might  help  the  case  of  Mrs.  Mason."  ^    Hack- 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  263;  IV,  pt.  1,  79. 

^Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  12;  (Hackett,  p.  21). 

*  F.  B.  Sanborn,  History  of  New  Hampshire   (1904),  pp.  42-44. 

87 


88  Briak  Pendleton 

ett,  however,  some  years  earlier,  after  an  exhaustive  review  of  the 

case,^  had  already  dismissed  this  conjecture  as  "unworthy 

of  even  a  passing  consideration".  He  seems  to  give  more  weight  to 
the  idea  "that  the  act  accorded  with  the  views  of  the  Massachu- 
setts, if  not  done  at  their  actual  dictation",  and  after  noting  the 
Bay  Colony's  seizure  of  Kittery  and  York,  he  suggests  that  a  con- 
nection may  exist  between  these  events,  the  extension  of  the  au- 
thority of  Massachusetts  to  these  distant  localities  being  "at- 
tended almost  immediately  with  a  disappearance  of  the  early  rec- 
ords," a  phenomenon  which  some  have  regarded  as  "a  studied  plan 
of  seizing  upon  territory  and  following  up  its  occupation  by  a 
suppression  of  every  recorded  entry  that  might  make  against 
their  claim." 

In  this  connection  Hackett  cites  the  disappearance  of  the 
original  Saco  records  prior  to  1653,  the  year  Massachusetts  took 
control.  This  loss  he  also  attributes  to  Pendleton  who  had  settled 
there  in  1665,  and  who  seven  years  later  was  requested  by  the  se- 
lectmen to  transcribe  the  early  records  of  the  town  into  a  new 
book,  with  the  result  as  noted.^  In  spite  of  these  suspicious  cir- 
cumstances, however,  which  might  be  construed  as  the  settled 
policy  of  the  Bay  Colony  to  destroy  any  records  that  conflicted 
with  its  claim  to  title,  Hackett  finally  inclines  to  the  theory  that 
the  action  of  the  Selectmen  at  Strawberry  Bank  can  be  accounted 
for  "by  reasons  lying  within  a  somewhat  narrower  compass".  He 
deems  it  highly  significant  that  the  crossing  out  of  the  old  records 
took  place  only  a  few  hours  after  a  town  meeting  when  a  large 
number  of  outlying  lots  had  been  distributed — Pendleton  getting 
thirty  acres,  and  his  son  Joseph,  ten® — and  that  some  months 
earlier  the  town  had  empowered  the  Selectmen  to  confirm  any 
previous  grants  of  land  if  such  could  be  proved^ 

After  noting  further  that  some  early  land  transactions  at 
Strawberry  Bank  shown  in  the  Suffolk  County  Deeds  do  not  ap- 
pear in  the  new  town  book,  and  that  twelve  years  later  a  large 
group  of  the  inhabitants  there  complained  against  Pendleton  and 

*  In  the  Appendix  to  his  Portsmouth  Records,  pp.  50-68. 

^  While  Pendleton  may  have  felt  no   respect  for   records   made   there   in   the 

pre-Puritan  days,  the  disappearance  of  the  book  itself  may  not  have  been  due 

to  him.    There  is  the  very   great  possibility  that  it  was  destroyed  with  his 

house  which  the  Indians  fired  in  1676. 

"Portsmouth  Town  Records  I,  11-12;   (Hackett,  p.  20) 

^Ibid.,  I,  7;  (Hackett,  pp.  16,  66). 


Portsmouth  1653-1654  89 

his  associates  for  treating  them  unfairly  in  the  distribution  of  the 
public  lands — certain  "honest  men"  getting  none  at  all,  while 
earlier  grants  had  been  disowned  and  laid  out  to  others — Hackett 
finally  concludes  "that  the  inroad  upon  the  town  records  was  de- 
signed in  part  to  cut  off  grants  and  privileges  from  certain  of 
the  settlers  who  were  out  of  favor  with  the  party  in  power.  A 
summary  and  convenient  way  was  thus  presented  of  throwing  into 
the  hands  of  the  selectmen  the  whole  body  of  outlying  land  to  be 
parcelled  out  in  conformity  with  a  new  order  of  things",  in  which 
"those  who  had  taken  part  in  the  seditious  movement  of  1651  .  .  . 
should  be  made  to  feel  how  futile  it  was  to  attempt  to  resist  the 
power  of  the  Bay  government."  ^ 

This  theory,  however,  in  view  of  other  evidences,  seems  to  re- 
quire supplementing.  If  the  enemies  of  the  Massachusetts  were  to 
be  punished,  were  not  its  friends  to  be  rewarded?  We  know  Pen- 
dleton had  a  healthy  appetite  for  land  grants,  and  we  have  seen 
the  persistent  effort  he  was  making  to  get  the  town  "enlarged". 
The  larger  the  town,  the  larger  the  grants  he  might  receive  if  he 
had  a  hand  in  their  distribution.  All  the  steps  to  this  end  were 
taken  in  logical  sequence.  The  very  first  record  copied  into  the  new 
town  book  is  the  one  giving  the  selectmen  power  to  lay  out  the 
public  lands  to  the  inhabitants.  Later  they  entered  the  related 
minute  already  noted  under  which  they  had  authority  to  confirm 
what  might  he  proved  to  be  earlier  grants.  Then  they  crossed  out 
many  of  the  old  records  on  which  proof  of  ownership  must  have 
depended.  That  they  occasionally  caught  a  Tartar  in  trying  out 
some  of  their  schemes  was  inevitable  but  when  we  see  how  Pendle- 
ton and  his  associates  took  the  lion's  share  in  a  big  land  deal  they 
engineered  a  few  years  later,  we  again  realize  that  politics  in  Puri- 
tania  could  be  just  as  practical  as  in  the  modern  New  York  or 
Philadelphia.  Our  present  day  bosses  who  of  necessity  must  work 
by  stealth  and  through  complicated  ways  to  achieve  their  equally 
simple  ends,  may  well  envy  the  fathers  for  their  more  direct  and 
open  methods  in  going  after  what  they  wanted.  Finesse  and  artis- 
try have  displaced  the  cruder  methods  of  other  days,  and  yet 
while  methods  change,  politicians  remain  brothers  under  their 
skin,  regardless  of  any  religious  afliliations  they  may  profess. 

The  rape  of  the  old  town  records  of  Strawberry  Bank  passed 

*  Hackett  (Appendix),  p.  67.  The  full  complaint  against  the  Portsmouth 
"ring"  will  appear  in  a  later  chapter. 


90  Brian  Pendleton 

unnoticed  by  the  Massachusetts  authorities  who  seemingly  wore 
well  content  that  a  law  should  be  transgressed  if  their  party  might 
profit.  Nor  does  the  act  seem  to  have  alarmed  the  local  freemen — 
if  they  heard  about  it — for  at  the  town  meeting  held  two  months 
later,  Pendleton,  Sherburne,  and  Fernald  were  re-elected  select- 
men for  the  ensuing  year  and  given  the  same  powers  as  before.  At 
the  same  time  Pendleton,  as  already  noted,  was  chosen  their 
Deputy  to  the  General  Court.^ 

It  had  been  five  years  since  he  was  a  member  of  this  Assembly 
and  in  that  interim  a  growing  spirit  of  ruthlessness  had  come  upon 
the  rulers  of  the  Bay.  The  old  leaders  were  gone.  Winthrop,  gov- 
ernor for  so  many  years,  had  died  in  1649  and  John  Cotton,  minis- 
ter of  the  First  Church  of  Boston,  closed  his  earthly  labors  three 
years  later.  With  their  passing,  whatever  restraining  influences 
were  present  among  the  rulers  came  to  an  end.  The  fanatical  John 
Endicott  became  Governor,  the  gloomy  Bellingham,  Deputy  Gov- 
ernor, while  the  fiercely  bigoted  reverends,  Wilson  and  Norton, 
preached  in  the  Boston  Church.  The  synod  of  ministers  which 
began  its  conferences  in  1646  produced  the  famous  rule  of  disci- 
pline, known  as  the  Cambridge  Platform,  two  years  later.  Under 
this,  the  civil  power  was  definitely  committed  to  enforce  religious 
conformity — the  ideal  of  all  ecclesiastics  from  time  immemorial. 
This  platform  was  not  adopted  by  the  General  Court  until  1651, 
much  opposition  developing  among  the  Deputies,  fourteen  of  whom 
entered  their  dissents  upon  the  records  when  the  ill-omened  mea- 
sure was  finally  voted. ^"  There  was  evidently  a  vigorous  public 
sentiment  in  the  Colony  which  was  fearful  of  too  much  clerical 
domination,  and  that  this  fear  was  only  too  well  grounded  events 
were  to  prove. 

Much  of  the  Court's  session  in  May,  1653,  was  taken  up  with 
affairs  in  which  Pendleton  had  had  a  direct  part.  As  noted  in  the 
previous  chapter,  the  lengthy  reports  of  the  Commissioners  to  the 
Eastward  were  presented  and  approved,  and  a  new  Commission 
appointed,  himself  included,  to  continue  the  work  of  annexation. 
In  addition  he  brought  in  three  petitions  from  his  constituents. 
The  first  of  these  was  in  the  form  of  a  remonstrance  over  the  lack 

•Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  13;   (Hackett,  p.  21.— Date  given  erroneously 
as  1652). 

^°  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  240;  "Cambridge  Platform"  in  Walker's  Creeds, 
pp.  195,  237. 


Portsmouth  1653-1654  91 

of  fortifications  on  the  Piscataqua  "to  withstand  any  forraine 
forces",  and  was  evidently  the  result  of  an  action  taken  at  a  town 
meeting  held  at  Strawberry  Bank  two  months  earlier  when  it  was 
voted  that  "Mr.  Briane  Pendelton,  Mr.  Richard  Cutt  and  Renald 
ffernald  are  Requested  to  confer  with  our  naybors  of  Dover  and 
Kittree  about  sending  unto  the  generall  courte  about  forttifyinge 
the  River  for  our  defence".^^  Both  Cutt  and  Pendleton  signed  this 
remonstrance  in  behalf  of  the  town,  as  did  also  representatives  of 
Dover  and  Kittery,  as  well  as  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  but  nothing 
much  came  of  the  endeavor.  The  Deputies  professed  inability  to 
satisfy  the  desires  of  the  petitioners,  but  three  of  the  Assistants 
"conceived  that  [they]  should  have  four  guns  .  .  .  provided  they 
shall  fetch  them  and  also  mount  them  at  their  own  expense".^" 

Wliether  or  not  this  idea  was  ever  carried  out  does  not  ap- 
pear. Apparently  the  only  action  taken  on  this  remonstrance  was 
the  loan  of  "two  barrels  of  good  powder  to  Mr.  Pendleton"  which 
the  Court  voted  a  few  days  later,  "to  be  returned  again  upon  the 
tender  of  the  sum  of  thirteen  pounds,  nineteen  shillings  and  tenn- 
pence."  ^^  Possibly  the  Court  thought  that  if  the  allegations  in  a 
petition  presented  by  Joseph  Mason  at  this  session  were  truthful, 
as  to  the  disappearance  of  the  ordnance  sent  over  by  Capt.  John 
Mason  for  the  protection  of  his  settlement,  the  inhabitants  there 
were  themselves  largely  responsible  for  the  condition  they  com- 
plained about  and  were  not  entitled  to  much  aid  or  comfort,  be- 
yond a  little  powder  for  the  one  cannon  left  in  the  old  fort. 

This  petition  of  Mason's  is  not  referred  to  in  the  Massachu- 
setts records,  but  a  copy  exists  in  the  British  Archives.^'*  In  this 
document  he  complains  of  the  dissipation  of  the  property — "our 
.  .  houses  have  decayed,  the  fort  ruined  &  our  Gunns  carried 
away" — and  also  of  "Sundry  Incroachments  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Strawberry  Bank  .  .  .  upon  the  said  lands,  who  disposeth  of 
the  same  among  themselves  by  vertue  of  their  Township  (as  they 
pretend)  the  authority  whereof  .  .  .  should  bee  derived  from  this 
honored  Court  and  not  from  themselves."  In  conclusion  he  asks 
that  the  men  of  Strawberry  Bank  be  called  to  account  for  their 
doings  and  that  the  selectmen  there  be  notified  to  "act  no  further 
by  their  pretended  power". 

"Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  13;    (Hackett,  p.  22). 

"Massachusetts    Archives,    III,   212;    {Documentary   History,    IV,   51). 

^^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  300;  IV,  pt.  1,  147. 

^^  Colonial  State  Pajjers,  XII,  No.  3  (Jenness,  pp.  40-42). 


92  BniAN  Pendleton 

Wliilc,  as  Mason  says  in  a  later  document,  the  Court  paid  no 
attention  to  his  requests/^  yet  his  complaint  may  have  held  up 
action  again  in  setting  the  boundaries  of  the  township.  A  long 
petition  signed  by  Pendleton,  Cutt,  Fernald,  Haynes,  and  Sher- 
burne on  behalf  of  the  settlement  was  presented  at  this  time,  once 
more  citing  their  need  for  additional  territory  because  of  the  in- 
creasing number  of  families — "between  fifty  and  sixty" — and  "the 
quality  of  the  land  wee  live  upon — soe  badd  its  incredible".  The 
petition  also  requested  that  the  name  of  the  place  be  changed  to 
Portsmouth,  "as  most  suitable — it  being  the  Rivers  mouth,  &  a 
good  [Port?]  as  any  in  the  land".^®  The  first  committee  appointed 
to  consider  this  petition  thought  action  should  be  deferred  "be- 
cause of  Mr.  Mason's  claim  to  the  lands",  and  Capt.  Wiggin's 
patent,  the  exact  boundaries  of  which  had  not  been  determined 
although  Wiggin  too  had  a  petition  in  at  this  time  asking  for  a 
division  thereof.^^ 

Finally,  the  Court  agreed  "In  answer  to  the  petition  of 
Strawberry  Bank  it  is  ordered  that  there  town  shalbe  called  Ports- 
mouth &  that  the  lyne  of  theire  township  should  reach  from  the 
sea  by  Hampton  lyne  to  Winacout  River,  leaving  the  proprietors 
to  theire  just  rights  and  interests".^*  This  decision  meant  but  lit- 
tle to  the  land  hungry  of  Portsmouth,  for  in  effect  it  gave  them  no 
rights  to  grant  land,  and  left  them  to  unsnarl  with  Hampton  and 
Dover  their  confused  and  conflicting  interests.  That  the  Massa- 
chusetts authorities  secretly  felt  they  had  no  good  ground  for 
"stretching  the  line"  of  their  northern  boundary  as  set  forth  in  the 
Charter,  is  indicated  by  the  pussy-footing  they  did  on  these  peti- 
tions for  enlarging  Portsmouth.  They  evidently  did  not  want  to 
commit  themselves  too  deeply,  leaving  Pendleton  and  his  associates 
to  work  out  their  problem  as  best  they  could. 

The  third  petition  from  Portsmouth  that  came  in  at  this 
time,  signed  by  Pendleton's  fellow  selectmen,  Messrs.  Cutt,  Sher- 
burne, Fernald,  and  Haynes,  on  behalf  of  the  inhabitants,  re- 
quested first  that  the  petitioners  be  given  equal  privileges  with 
York  and  Kittery  in  choosing  magistrates,  etc ;  next,  that  the 

^Jenness,  pp.  78-79. 

"Massachusetts  Archives,  CXII,  58;   (Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire, 

I,  207-8). 

"  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  135. 

^Ibid.,  111,309. 


Portsmouth  1653-1654  93 

Magistrates  "who  keep  Court  among  us  be  given  power  to  appoint 
Commissioners  for  the  ending  of  differences  under  £10";  and  last, 
"that  you  will  be  pleased  to  confirm  our  military  officers  for  we 
have  between  seventy  and  eighty  men  able  to  bear  arms."  ^^  While 
Pendleton  may  have  instigated  this  petition  he  was  hardly  in  a 
position  to  sign  it  himself,  having  been  one  of  those  who  the  year 
before  had  given  the  people  of  York  and  Kittery  full  suffrage  with- 
out the  necessity  of  Church  membership.  It  would  appear  from 
this  that  there  was  some  restriction  on  the  suffrage  enjoyed  by 
non-churchmembers  at  Portsmouth,  and  a  complaint  from  certain 
of  them  thirteen  3'^ears  later  says  they  were  denied  the  benefit  of 
freemen.  Evidently  their  right  to  vote  was  not  as  great  as  some 
commentators  have  thought,  but  limited  to  their  own  town  affairs 
as  noted  in  the  record  quoted  under  which  Massachusetts  extended 
its  jurisdiction  over  these  settlements  in  1641. 

The  Court  did  not  look  favorably  upon  the  first  request  in 
this  petition,  denying  it  flatly,  and  stating  the  petitioners  "should 
be  satisfied  with  the  privileges  granted  them  when  they  came  under 
this  Government".  As  to  the  other  requests,  it  was  voted  that  the 
Courts  at  Dover  and  Portsmouth  be  empowered  to  confirm  such 
military  officers  as  might  be  presented  to  them,  also  to  appoint 
Commissioners  for  deciding  small  lawsuits.^''  It  would  seem  though, 
that  something  went  wrong  here  as  the  Portsmouth  records  show 
that  the  people  there  continued  to  elect  their  Commissioners  right 
along.  Care  was  taken,  however,  to  limit  their  freedom  of  choice. 
Seventeen  months  later  the  General  Court  ordered  that  all  Com- 
missioners must  be  "unoffensive  in  their  conversation  and  of  known 
fidelity  to  the  Country"  ^' — in  other  words,  Puritan.  And  as  fur- 
thermore these  minor  justices  had  to  be  confirmed  by  their  County 
Courts,  there  wasn't  much  chance  of  anyone  serving  who  was  not 
"regular". 

Ordinarily  these  officials  were  residents  of  the  towns  where 
they  tried  the  cases  brought  before  them,  but  we  have  one  instance 
where  this  arrangement  was  somewhat  changed.  On  a  petition 
from  the  inhabitants  of  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  asking  for  liberty  to 
determine  civil  actions  there  up  to  the  value  of  £10,  the  General 
Court  appointed  five  Commissioners  to  handle  such  cases ;  three 

"  Massachusetts  Archives,  CXII,  56. 
'^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  304;  IV,  pt.  1,  147. 
"^Ibid.,  Ill,  357-8;  IV,  pt.  1,  202. 


94  Brian  Pendleton 

of  these  were  local  men,  but  the  other  two,  Pendleton  and  Shap- 
leigh,  were  outsiders.  The  poor  opinion  the  Massachusetts  au- 
thorities entertained  for  these  Islanders  is  further  reflected  in  the 
provision  they  next  made  that  while  any  three  of  these  Commis- 
sioners were  empowered  to  act,  either  "Mr.  Pendleton  or  Mr. 
Shapley"  must  be  one  of  the  three.^^  Evidently  the  Court  thought 
that  the  unregenerate  at  the  Shoals  couldn't  even  be  trusted  to 
settle  their  own  affairs  unless  at  least  one  organization  man  sat 
in  with  them. 

The  minor  cases  that  Pendleton  tried  there  must  have  been 
enlivened  by  spicy  testimony.  Sometime  prior  to  1647  the  court 
at  York,  Maine,  had  prohibited  women  from  living  at  "the  Shoals" 
because  most  of  the  inhabitants  were  young  unmarried  men,  while 
many  fishermen  resorted  there  summers.  Our  ancestral  prohibi- 
tionists, however,  showed  some  sense  in  dealing  with  unenforceable 
laws,  and  this  silly  order  was  repealed  in  1650,  the  Court  remark- 
ing rather  helplessly  that  "the  fishermen  of  the  Isles  of  Shoals  zdll 
entertain  womanhood."  ^^ 

The  affairs  of  the  Eastern  settlements  did  not  engross  the 
whole  attention  of  the  Court,  however.  While  the  inhabitants  on 
the  Pisacataqua  might  find  such  protection  as  they  could  in  one 
decrepit  cannon  and  two  barrels  of  powder,  £200  was  voted  for  re- 
pairing the  "great  battery"  at  Castle  Island  in  Boston  Harbor. 
Much  consideration  was  also  given  to  the  powers  of  the  Commis- 
sioners of  the  United  Colonies,  the  Confederacy  that  Massachu- 
setts, Plymouth,  Connecticut,  and  New  Haven  had  formed  in  1642 
for  mutual  protection  having  developed  into  one  for  general  con- 
troversies. 

At  this  time  two  thousand  acres  of  land  were  granted  to  Har- 
vard College  for  its  encouragement,  and  the  invitation  extended 
to  the  Rev.  John  Norton  which  brought  him  to  Boston  as  pastor 

'^^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  307-8;  This  "Mr.  Shapley"  was  no  doubt  Nicholas 
Shapleiph  of  Kittery,  Maine,  who  was  frequently  a  selectman  there  and  one  of 
the  Provincial  Councillors  from  1644-1652.  After  Massachusetts  took  Maine 
under  its  control  he  was  appointed  Major  of  the  York  County  militia.  In  1658 
he  served  on  a  Commission  from  the  Bay  Colony  which  annexed  several  other 
towns  in  the  Province.  Because  of  his  sympathy  with  the  Quakers  he  was 
deposed  froin  office,  liut  some  years  afterwards  was  restored  to  favor  and 
served  as  County  Treasurer  as  well  as  on  the  Commission  which  concluded 
peace  with  the  Indians  who  had  ravaged  the  Province.  He  was  killed  by  acci- 
dent at  the  launching  of  a  ship,  29  April  1682. — Stackpole,  Old  Kittery  and 
Her  Families,  pp.  112-113;  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  132,  165,  358-361; 
pt.  2,  75,  76;  V,  72. 
^  J.  S.  Jenness,  The  Isles  of  Shoals,  pp.  128-129. 


Portsmouth  1653-1654  95 

of  the  First  Church.  A  case  of  homicide  was  also  brought  before 
the  Court,  and  one  of  the  earliest  instances  of  ballot  box  stuffing 
in  America  came  up  when  John  Guppy,  "being  under  a  great  fine 
for  putting  in  more  cornes  than  one  for  the  choice  of  a  magistrate 
.   .   .  hath  his  fine  abated  to  twenty  shillings".  ^^ 

The  hand  of  the  church  party  is  seen  in  an  order  passed  at 
this  session  of  the  Court,  when  it  was  voted  that  because  the 
newer  settlements  were  often  destitute  of  persons  qualified  to  un- 
dertake the  work  of  the  ministry,  whereby  some  "bolder  spirits" 
might  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  "vent  their  errors", 
no  person  should  start  preaching  regularly  unless  approved  by 
the  elders  of  the  four  next  neighboring  churches,  or  by  the  County 
Court.^^  This  law  aroused  so  much  public  resentment  that  it  was 
repealed  at  the  very  next  session,  not  however  without  the  theoc- 
racy reserving  the  right  to  question  any  "erroneous  doctrine",  nor 
without  making  an  example  of  one  of  its  opponents.  Lieut.  Robert 
Pike  of  Salisbury,  for  saying  that  those  who  had  voted  for  the 
law  had  violated  their  oaths  as  freemen,  inasmuch  as  the  act  was 
against  both  civil  and  religious  liberty,  Avas  summoned  before  the 
Court.  He  appeared  on  September  7th,  was  given  a  hearing, 
judged  guilty  of  defamation,  fined  twenty  marks,  sentenced  to  be 
disfranchised,  and  was  disabled  to  hold  public  office,  or  to  plead 
any  case  but  his  own  in  any  court.^® 

It  is  possible  the  furor  created  by  this  attempt  to  standard- 
ize the  kind  of  preaching  that  might  be  indulged  in,  was  the  occa- 
sion for  this  session  of  the  Court,  due  in  October,  having  been  held 
much  earlier — from  August  30th  to  September  10th.  At  this  time 
the  forbidding  spirit  of  Puritanism,  as  reflected  by  the  "Lord's 
Day  Alliance"  of  the  period,  looking  sourly  upon  those  who  tried 
to  find  some  pleasure  and  recreation  in  the  Sabbath  outside  of 
church-going,  and  attempting  then — as  now — to  improve  their 
"morals"  by  statute,  was  inspired  to  concoct  an  elaborate  enact- 
ment to  prevent  "Sabbath  breaking",  particularly  on  the  part  of 
the  young:  "Children  playing  in  the  streetes  and  other  places, — 
youths,  maids,  and  other  persons  .  .  .  uncivily  walking  the 
streets  and  feilds,  travailing  from  toune  to  toune,  going  on  ship- 
board, frequenting  common  houses  and  other  places  to  drincke, 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  149,  141-144,  136,  132-133,  145;  III,  316. 

^  Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  1,  122. 
'^Ibid.,  pp.  151,  156-157. 


96  Briax   Pendleton 

sport,  and  otherwise  to  mispend  that  precious  time" — all  such  in- 
decorous activities  on  the  Sabbath  were  put  under  the  ban. 

Parents  or  guardians  were  made  responsible  for  the  conduct 
of  children  of  above  seven  years  of  age, — "not  that  wee  approve 
younger  children  in  evill",  our  ancient  pietists  made  haste  to  add 
— while  those  of  fourteen  and  over  were  to  be  called  to  direct  ac- 
count for  any  profanations  of  the  Sabbath  which  might  arouse 
secret  envy  in  the  breasts  of  the  godly  or  impair  their  peculiar  en- 
joyment of  their  Day  of  Gloom.  It  is  perhaps  an  interesting  com- 
mentary on  the  actual  workings  of  Puritanism,  that  the  very  next 
act  passed  by  the  Court  ordered  that  all  beer  should  be  sold  at 
two  pence  the  quart,  it  being  no  longer  possible  to  trust  its  dis- 
pensers to  sell  one  grade  at  that  price  and  a  better  grade  at  three 
pence.^^  Outward  godliness  might  be  enforced,  but  inward  honesty 
proved  more  elusive. 

Wliether  or  not  Pendleton  had  attended  this  pre-October  ses- 
sion of  the  Court  is  uncertain,  as  the  names  of  the  Deputies  pres- 
ent do  not  appear  in  the  records.  He  continued  active  in  the  af- 
fairs of  Portsmouth  throughout  the  Winter,  and  early  in  the  fol- 
lowing Spring — 27  March,  1654 — was  again  chosen  as  a  select- 
man of  Portsmouth — the  only  member  of  the  former  board  to  be 
re-elected.  At  the  same  time  he  was  made  Town  Treasurer,  and 
a  Commissioner  as  well.^^  His  collection  of  the  major  public  of- 
fices in  the  gift  of  Portsmouth  was  added  to  this  year  by  his  re- 
election as  its  Deputy  to  the  General  Court,  where  he  appeared  at 
its  opening  session  on  the  3rd  of  May,  this  time  as  Captain  Brian 
Pendleton.^*^  At  this  sitting  of  the  Court  the  perennial  question  of 
orthodoxy  again  came  up  when  it  was  voted  that  the  overseers  of 
the  College  and  the  selectmen  of  the  various  towns  should  take 
special  care  that  no  one  "who  is  unsound  in  the  faith"  should  be 
permitted  to  teach  the  young.^^  The  case  of  Robert  Pike,  that  in- 
dividualist of  Salisbury,  also  came  to  the  front  once  more  upon 
receipt  of  a  petition  from  various  inhabitants  of  that  town  with 
other  signers  in  Hampton,  Newbury,  Haverhill,  and  Andover,  re- 

'"  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  316,  317;  IV,  pt.  1,  150-151. 

»  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  14,  18,  19,  20;   (Hackett,  pp.  22,  26,  27,  28). 

'^Massachusetts  Records,   III,  340;   IV,  pt.   1,   182.    The   record  in  Vol.   Ill 

states  that  Mr.  Valentine  Hill  was  also  a  Deputy  from  Portsmouth  but  this 

is  ot)viously  an  error.  Hill  bein^  a  resident  of  Dover  and  a  Deputy  from  that 

town  with  Capt.  Richard  "Waldern"  as  shown  in  Vol.  IV,  pt.  1. 

"^ Massachusetts  Records,  III,  343-4;  IV,  pt.  1,  182-3. 


Portsmouth  1653-1654  97 

questing  that  the  former  sentence  against  him  be  revoked.  The 
widespread  interest  in  this  affair  was  "deeply  resented"  by  the 
Court,  no  such  request  having  come  from  Pike  himself,  and  com- 
missioners were  appointed  to  investigate  and  ascertain  how  so 
many  were  induced  to  sign  the  petition.  Evidently  the  authorities 
feared  some  new  schism  might  be  developing  and  they  took  vigor- 
ous action  to  nip  it  in  the  bud,  ordering  later  that  those  who  had 
signed  the  petition  in  his  favor  should  be  summoned  to  appear  be- 
fore the  County  Courts  to  answer  for  their  offense.^^ 

No  other  matter  of  any  great  moment  was  brought  up  at 
this  session,  although  a  large  grist  of  miscellaneous  affairs  went 
through  the  mill,  so  much  so  in  fact  that  the  Court  ordered  the 
County  Courts  to  transfer  no  more  cases  to  them,  either  civil  or 
criminal,  which  properly  came  within  the  County  jurisdiction. 
After  considering  many  other  matters,  down  to  such  trifles  as 
fining  one  or  two  men  who  were  living  apart  from  their  wives,  the 
Court  adjourned  until  October  17th  following.  Before  this  meet- 
ing occurred  two  special  sessions  were  called  by  the  Governor, 
but  as  they  lasted  only  a  few  days  it  is  doubtful  if  Pendleton  at- 
tended. On  October  3rd  [1654i]  he  was  sworn  in  at  Hampton 
with  Mr.  Richard  Dummer  and  Mr.  Robert  Clement  as  an  Asso- 
ciate of  the  Norfolk  County  Court,^^  and  after  serving  there, 
went  on  to  Boston  for  the  sitting  of  the  General  Court  where  he 
appeared  armed  with  petitions  as  usual.  One  referred  to  a  dispute 
between  Portsmouth  and  Hampton  as  to  their  boundary  line, 
on  which  a  committee  was  appointed  to  settle  the  matter.^^  The 
deputy  from  the  Piscataqua  still  nourished  his  vision  of  a  larger 
Portsmouth  and  being  a  persistent  man  kept  trying  to  make  his 
dream  come  true. 

The  next  petition  was  a  more  personal  one  in  which  he  asked 
for  and  was  given  administration  on  the  estate  of  one  John  Wat- 
ten,  deceased,  a  trust  which  later  gave  him  more  or  less  vexation. 
With  Eleazer  Lusher,  the  Deputy  from  Dedham,  whose  services 

"  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  194,  215.  Pike's  civil  rights  were  restored  in 
1657  and  he  was  immediately  returned  as  a  Deputy  to  the  General  Court  in  1658. 
At  that  time,  the  Quakers  having  invaded  Massachusetts,  the  Court  passed 
another  act  requiring  new  ministers  to  be  approved  by  their  neighboring 
churches,  and  Pike  seems  to  have  assented  to  this.  He  had  evidently  become 
"regular"  for  we  find  him  later  on  an  Associate  Justice  with  Pendleton  in  the 
Norfolk  County  Courts.— /6id.,  IV,  pt.  1,  313,  321,  328. 
^"^  Essex  Court  Records,  I,  369. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  363;  IV,  pt.  1,  211. 


98  Bhiak  Pendleton 

were  often  called  upon  in  matters  of  auditing,  Pendleton  was  next 
appointed  on  a  committee  to  examine  the  accounts  of  the  estate 
of  Mr.  James  Astwood,  and  to  make  a  return  of  their  thoughts 
concerning  what  part  was  due  the  widow  who  had  sold  some  of 
the  property  and  gone  back  to  England.  Their  carefully  con- 
sidered report  is  a  good  example  of  clear  thinking  and  was  ac- 
cepted by  the  Court.^^ 

The  growing  rigors  of  Puritanism  are  clearly  reflected  in  a 
number  of  measures  passed  at  this  session.  It  was  ordered  that  no 
man  should  be  accepted  as  a  Deputy  to  the  General  Court  who 
was  "unsound  in  doctrine,  scandalous  in  conversation  or  unfaith- 
ful to  this  government."  Those  who  voted  for  any  such  undesir- 
ables were  made  subject  to  heavy  fine.^^  A  similar  restriction,  as 
already  noted,  was  laid  upon  Commissioners.  Measures  were  taken 
to  prevent  tippling  on  the  premises  of  those  licensed  to  sell  "strong 
waters",  although  it  was  noted  that  those  addicted  to  the  vice 
of  drunkenness  "finde  out  wayes  to  deceive  the  lawes" — a  phe- 
nomenon which  is  still  a  matter  of  astonishment  to  our  latter  day 
reformers. 

An  attempt  to  put  an  end  to  drunkenness  among  the  Indians 
was  made  at  this  time  when  the  sale  or  barter  of  any  wine  or  strong 
liquor  to  them  was  prohibited  except  by  a  limited  number  of  per- 
sons immediately  named.  The  statement  in  this  order  that  the 
natives  were  often  made  drunk  by  the  traders  "as  to  much  affect 
theire  owne  proffitt",  is  a  sad  commentary  on  those  whose  zeal  to 
convert  the  heathen  blinded  them  to  still  greater  opportunities 
nearer  home.  The  omission  of  any  prohibition  as  to  giving  liquor 
to  the  natives  was  a  loophole  big  enough  to  roll  a  hogshead 
through,  and  evidently  the  traders  who  coveted  the  furs  brought 
in  by  the  Indians  also  "found  ways  to  deceive  the  laws",  and  drive 
a  hard  bargain  with  their  drunken  victims.  Three  years  later 
another  effort  was  made  to  end  this  abuse  when  it  was  ordered 
that  the  sale  or  gift  of  any  strong  liquor  whatsoever  to  the  In- 
dians was  absolutely  prohibited  except  when  prescribed  by  physi- 
cians, or  given  as  an  act  of  charity  in  amounts  not  exceeding  one 
dram  in  bona  fide  cases  of  "sudden  extremity,  sickness  or  faint- 
ing.^^    Such  cases  must  have  been  exceedingly  common  and  the 

^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  366;  IV,  pt.  1,  210,  215-6. 

^Ibid.,  Ill,  357;  IV,  pt.  1,  206. 

^Ibid.,  Ill,  359,  369,  425-6;  IV,  pt.  1,  201.-3,  283,  290. 


Portsmouth  1653-1654  99 

charitably  inclined  many  if  we  may  judge  from  later  laws  passed 
on  this  subject,  which  note  that  the  vice  of  drunkenness  among 
the  natives  continued  to  increase.^^ 

The  constant  struggle  of  our  forefathers  to  control  the  liquor 
traffic  with  the  Indians  was  largely  dictated  by  motives  of  self 
protection,  drunken  savages  being  generally  more  liable  to  com- 
mit crimes  of  violence  than  civilized  men  under  the  same  condition. 
And  so,  while  we  can  look  upon  these  restrictive  efforts  seriously, 
the  concurrent  struggle  the  Puritans  waged  to  control  the  rising 
generation  cannot  be  regarded  that  way  at  all. 

We  have  already  touched  upon  the  attempt  the  General 
Court  made  the  year  before  to  curb  the  young  people  in  their 
out-of-door  activities  on  the  Sabbath  Day,  and  now  we  come  upon 
a  further  piece  of  legislation  designed  to  regulate  their  conduct, 
this  time  in  connection  with  their  attendance  at  church. 

"The  unreverent  carriage  and  behavior  of  divers  young  per- 
sons" during  the  services  greatly  distressing  their  elders,  an  act 
was  now  passed  to  "reform  all  such  disordered  persons  as  shall 
offend".  Score  that  much  for  the  ministry — but  the  congregation 
had  the  last  word.  The  members  of  the  General  Court  may  have 
been  good  Puritans  but  they  were  also  fathers  of  families.  They 
knew  from  their  own  experience  how  restless  the  young  become 
after  listening  a  few  hours  to  the  direful  raving  from  the  pulpit, 
and  how  difficult  it  is  to  repress  the  hair-trigger  risibilities  of 
youth  should  a  fly  light  on  the  minister's  nose,  or  someone  snore 
unexpectedly  during  a  temporary  lull  in  the  thunders  from  Sinai. 

And  so,  in  sympathy  with  their  offspring,  and  perhaps  out 
of  some  affliction  of  their  own,  the  Court  went  on  to  suggest  with 
no  small  degree  of  courage,  but  with  a  suavity  that  is  delightful, 
that  "the  reverend  elders  .  .  .  according  to  their  wisdom  will  so 
order  the  time  of  their  public  exercises  (i.e.,  services)  that  none 
shall  be  ordinarily  occasioned  to  break  off  from  the  congregations 
before  the  full  conclusion."^* 

A  suggestion  like  this,  coming  from  a  Court  so  generally  sub- 
servient to  their  will,  must  have  been  a  shocking  surprise  to  the 
ministry,  and  to  some  it  may  have  seemed  almost  as  blasphemous 
as  the  statements  of  one  Benjamin  Saucer,  a  soldier,  who  was  im- 

=*'See  references  in  Massachusetts  Records,  Vol.  IV,  pt.  2. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  358;  IV,  pt.  1,  200-201. 


100  Brian  Pendleton 

prisoned  for  "sajang  Jehovah  was  the  devil,  that  he  knew  no  God 
but  his  sword."  While  the  Court  was  debating  the  case,  Saucer 
escaped.  George  Munnings,  the  keeper  of  the  prison,  was  dis- 
missed in  consequence  and  was  replaced  a  month  later  by  William 
Salter  who  before  long  was  to  come  into  unenviable  notoriety 
through  his  cruelty  to  the  Quaker  prisoners  that  fell  into  his 
hands.3^ 

If  the  Boston  censors  of  today  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  public 
morals  by  forbidding  certain  realistic  fiction  to  be  sold  there, 
those  of  1654  were  equally  zealous  to  see  that  no  literature  which 
might  corrupt  the  true  religion  should  be  circulated  among  the 
elect.  At  the  brief  session  of  the  Court  held  in  August  a  ban  was 
placed  on  the  blasphemous  book  recently  published  in  England 
by  John  Reeves  and  Lodowick  Muggleton,  and  all  those  having 
copies  were  directed  to  turn  them  over  to  the  nearest  magistrate. 
In  October,  a  literary  auto-de-fe  of  these  books  was  ordered,  all 
those  "in  custody"  to  be  burned  "on  the  next  lecture  day  ...  in 
the  market  place,  by  the  executioner,  at  Boston".^*^  The  Funda- 
mentalists and  uplifters  of  today  would  have  felt  quite  at  home 
had  they  sat  in  this  Court  whose  efforts  to  reform  mankind  by 
passing  laws  helped  to  prolong  the  session  into  November.  They 
would,  however,  have  been  considerably  upset  by  an  arrangement 
then  made  to  conserve  the  legislators'  time  as  much  as  possible. 

Our  early  law-givers  were  extremely  busy  men  while  attend- 
ing the  General  Court.  Not  only  were  they  concerned  with  every- 
thing that  pertained  to  the  welfare  of  the  colony,  both  temporal 
and  spiritual,  domestic  and  foreign,  but  they  also  combined  in 
their  activities  much  that  is  now  handled  by  the  executive  and 
judicial  departments  of  government.  All  kinds  of  grist  came  to 
their  mill.  They  not  only  made  the  laws,  and  saw  to  it  that  they 
were  enforced  as  far  as  humanly  possible, — and  even  the  Puritans 
could  not  enforce  all  their  laws — but  they  also  served  as  a  Court 
of  last  resort,  both  in  criminal  cases  involving  capital  punishment 
and  in  civil  actions  taken  to  them  on  appeal  from  the  County 
Courts.  Naturally  their  days  were  crowded  full,  and  so  to  make 
every  minute  count,  it  was  arranged  at  this  October-November 
session  "as  most  comly,  convenient  &  conduceable  to  the  dispatch 
of  publicke  service"  to  have  the  Deputies  "dyett  together,  espe- 

^0  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  363;  IV,  pt.  1,  213,  218,  220. 
">Ibid.,  Ill,  356;  IV,  pt.  1,  199,  204. 


Portsmouth  1653-1664  101 

cially  at  dynner"  at  all  ensuing  meetings  of  the  Court.  For  the 
coming  year,  Lieut.  Phillips,  keeper  of  the  "Shipp  Taverne"  in 
Boston,  agreed  to  furnish  them  with  meals,  including  wine,  in  the 
"new  court  chamber"  with  "beere  betweene  meales,  with  fire  &  beds 
at  the  rate  of  three  shillings  per  day."  The  wine,  however,  was 
limited  to  "a  cupp  each  man  at  dynner  &  supper,  &  no  more", 
while  those  who  took  dinner  only  at  the  tavern — at  the  special 
price  of  eighteen  pence — found  their  beer  was  a  la  carte.'*^ 

After  what  seems  to  have  been  a  forced  adjournment  due  to 
a  majority  of  the  magistrates  absenting  themselves — and  for 
which  action  they  were  handsomely  rebuked  by  the  Deputies^^ — 
the  Court  reconvened  on  November  20th.  This  session  was  prin- 
cipally devoted  to  the  affair  of  the  Iron  Works,  which  for  some 
years  had  been  a  source  of  growing  embarrassment  to  the  Colony. 
The  Court  had  largely  promoted  the  undertaking  not  only  by 
liberal  grants  of  land,  tax  exemptions,  etc.,  but  also  by  offering 
for  sale  £1500  of  stock  in  the  enterprise,  stating  it  was  "very 
successful".^^  Forges  were  set  up  at  Braintree  and  at  Lynn  but 
such  little  ore  as  was  present  in  those  localities  was  quickly  ex- 
hausted, and  the  undertaking  proved  a  costly  failure,  productive 
of  numerous  law-suits.  It  was  also  of  much  concern  to  the  General 
Court  which  spent  a  great  deal  of  time  in  trying  to  ascertain 
what  had  become  of  the  stockholders'  money. 

The  Magistrates  and  Deputies  had  already  had  a  falling  out 
over  this  affair  at  the  first  session  of  the  Court  this  year,  Pendle- 
ton at  that  time  voting  with  the  majority  which  backed  up  the 
Deputies'  affirmation  that  the  sheriff  of  Ipswich  was  legally  right 
in  levying  upon  the  personal  property  of  Mr.  Henry  Webb  of 
Boston  for  satisfying  a  judgment  granted  by  the  Norfolk  County 
Court  to  Mr.  John  Gifford  against  the  London  interests  in  the 
iron  works,  Gifford  having  been  their  agent.  Webb  had  been  ap- 
pointed by  the  General  Court  in  1645  to  receive  the  payments 
from  the  Colonial  optimists  for  their  stock  subscriptions  in  the 
undertaking,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  some  of  the  Deputies 
who  had  lost  money  in  the  venture  would  have  felt  some  dour  satis- 
faction in  seeing  him  ruined.  They  did  not  enjoy  this  spectacle, 
however,  for  it  was  next  voted  that  Webb  was  not  such  an  owner 

*^  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  352-3. 

"/6id.,  Ill,  352. 

^  Ibid.,  II,  61,  81,  103,  125. 


102  BaiAN  Pendletok 

in  the  iron  works  as  to  make  him  liable  for  a  judgment  against 
the  principals'^ — an  adroit  mancEuvre  which  saved  Webb  his 
money,  the  sheriff  his  countenance,  the  Norfolk  Court  its  dignity, 
the  Deputies  their  Christian  spirit,  and  all  at  no  cost  except  to 
poor  Gifford  for  whom  much  greater  trouble  was  in  store. 

The  whole  affair  was  threshed  out  at  this  late  November 
session.  Gifford  who  had  been  managing  the  iron  works  was  then 
in  jail,  evidently  on  charges  of  falsifying  his  accounts.  The  case 
against  him  was  first  tried  in  the  Suffolk  County  Court  which  ap- 
pointed "certain  select  meete  persons"  to  audit  his  books.  Pen- 
dleton was  one  of  these  auditors  together  with  Eleazer  Lusher 
and  John  Wiswall,  if  we  may  judge  from  an  undated  and  almost 
undecipherable  report  they  submitted  on  the  petition  of  "Mr. 
Gifford",'^  all  of  these  men  being  Deputies  to  the  General  Court 
in  1654  and  the  two  latter,  auditors  of  the  accounts  of  the  Col- 
ony's treasurer  in  that  year.'*^ 

The  report  not  being  fully  satisfactory,  the  Deputies  re- 
quested the  case  be  tried  by  the  whole  Court  which  was  done,  al- 
though with  much  travail,  the  accounts  being  intricate  and  many 
of  the  particulars  "very  doubtful  and  suspicious".  However,  a 
verdict  was  finally  reached,  a  second  action  against  Gifford  for 
breach  of  contract  being  postponed  for  hearing  at  the  next 
Court.'^  The  whole  affair  seems  to  have  been  badly  managed, 
but  is  no  more  than  the  usual  experience  which  governments  un- 
dergo when  engaging  in  what  should  be  private  enterprise. 

Ironworks  were  started  at  other  places  later,  the  Colony 
rescinding  the  monopoly  given  to  the  first  undertaking,"^^  but  the 
authorities  never  undertook  any  further  promotions,  one  experi- 
ence of  the  kind  evidently  being  enough.  If  Pendleton  bought 
stock  in  the  original  venture,  as  is  quite  likely,  his  investment  was 
not  enough  to  cripple  him.  He  had  been  accumulating  capital 
steadily  since  his  arrival  in  Massachusetts,  and  the  next  ten  years 
were  to  see  him  prospering  still  more. 


^*  Massachusetts  Records,  III,  351;  IV,  pt.  1,  188. 

''^  Suffolk  Court  Files,  Case  No.  26,  111. 

^''Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  181,  202. 

"Jbid.,  IV,  pt.  1,  217-220.    Vol.  Ill    (pp.  370-372)   gives  this  session  as  held 

in  Sejitember,  which  v/as  probably  an  error.    In  June,  1655,  the  Court  refers 

to  Mr.  Gifford's  case  "which  was  tried  in  November  last". — Vol.  IV,  pt.  1,  241. 

*^  MassachusettsRecords,  IV,  pt.  1,  311. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


PORTSMOUTH 

1655  -  1G58 


Up  to  this  period  we  have  had  but  few  glimpses  of  Pendleton's 
acti%dties  outside  of  those  public  affairs  to  which  he  devoted  so 
much  of  his  time  and  attention.  From  such  clues  as  we  have,  how- 
ever, he  seems  to  have  been  engaged  in  business  right  along.  As 
early  as  1637,  we  find  the  first  case  where  he  was  appointd  admin- 
istrator on  the  estate  of  one  of  his  debtors,  Gabriel  Wheatley  of 
Watertown,  on  the  latter's  death-bed  request.^  The  History  of 
Sudbury  says  that  Pendleton  "was  one  of  the  foremost  business 
men"  of  the  settlement,  and  we  have  noticed  how  he  was  able  to 
hold  his  property  there  upon  returning  to  Watertown — an  indi- 
cation that  he  was  accumulating  capital.  We  have  also  noted  his 
appointments  on  various  committees  where  a  knowledge  both  of 
accounting  and  of  valuations  was  most  essential.  It  was  not  until 
he  had  been  in  Portsmouth  for  several  years,  however,  and  when 
his  operations  were  on  a  large  scale  that  he  began  to  describe  him- 
self as  "merchant" — a  forbearance  which  seems  to  accord  with 
his  habit  of  particularity. 

From  the  old  court  records  that  have  come  down  to  us,  where 
he  often  appears  as  plaintiff  and  occasionally  as  defendant  in  civil 
suits,  we  find  indications  that  as  early  as  October,  1651,  he  was 
interesting  himself  in  the  lumber  business  on  the  Piscataqua.  At 
that  time,  together  with  the  Puritanically  named  Hatevil  Nutter, 
of  Dover,  he  witnessed  the  deed  of  sale  of  a  saw  mill  on  Sturgeon 
Creek,^  and  in  the  following  year,  seemingly  as  agent  for  William 
Paine  &  Co.,  of  Ipswich,  he  gave  receipts  for  six  thousand  pine 
boards,  part  of  the  assets  turned  over  to  Paine  by  Edward  Gilman 
and  his  son,  for  debt.^ 

Of  more  interest,  however,  we  find  that  almost  as  soon  as  he 
had  established  himself  on  the  Great  Island,  he  opened  a  ware- 

^  Register,  III,  79-80. — Abstracts,  Suffolk  County,  Mass.,  Probate  Records. 
"York  Deeds,  I,  15;  Suffolk  Court  Files,  Case  2470. 
^  Essex  Court  Records,  I,  298. 

103 


104  Brian  Pendleton 

house  and  a  general  store  where  he  exchanged  shoes  and  soap, 
tobacco  and  ginger,  cotton  and  knives,  sugar  and  salt,  for  the 
pipcstaves  and  cured  fish  traded  in  by  the  settlers.^  It  is  evident 
by  looking  over  the  various  lawsuits  in  which  he  engaged  in  his 
local  courts,  besides  those  in  York  County,  Maine,  and  Essex 
County,  Massachusetts,  that  long  credits  were  the  order  of  the 
day  in  his  time,  and  that  his  activities  covered  a  wide  area  as  he 
had  dealings  of  one  kind  or  another  as  far  away  as  Virginia  and 
the  West  Indies.  Some  of  the  more  interesting  of  these  affairs 
will  be  touched  upon  later  but  of  more  immediate  concern  is  his 
partnership  with  William  Paine  and  its  sequel  of  events. 

In  a  preceeding  chapter  we  have  noted  how  he  signed  a  peti- 
tion with  Paine  and  Zacheus  Gould  in  1648  to  give  a  name  to  the 
new  village  they  were  forming  near  Ipswich — the  settlement  which 
the  General  Court  christened  as  "Toppesfield".  But  he  must  have 
known  Paine  long  before  this,  for  the  latter  had  lived  in  Water- 
town  for  some  five  years  before  his  removal  to  Ipswich  in  1640.^ 
Here  he  evidently  made  the  right  connections  for  five  years  later 
he  joined  with  Simon  Bradstreet,  Richard  Saltonstall  (Jr.),  Sam- 
uel Symonds,  and  three  other  prominent  men,  in  petitioning  the 
General  Court  to  grant  them  various  privileges  as  "a  free  com- 
pany of  adventurers"  to  engage  in  trading  operations  on  a  large 
scale.^ 

Pendleton's  long  acquaintance  with  Paine,  which  probably 
dated  back  to  their  early  days  in  Watertown,  and  their  business 
dealings  together  later  on,  finally'  resulted  in  their  forming  a  part- 
nership on  the  18th  of  March,  1656/57,  Paine  contributing  £1500 
in  stock — equivalent  in  value  to  about  $50,000  today.  This  inter- 
est he  transferred  to  his  son,  John,  two  years  later,  together  with 
"all  the  produce  and  profits  of  the  said  stock".'^    The  elder  Paine 

*  As  noted  in  a  suit  brought  in  1662  against  William  Robards  (Roberts)  of 
Oyster  Bay  for  debt.  A  copy  of  the  account — which  originated  in  1652 — is 
still  on  file,  "out  of  Capt.  Brian  Pendleton's  Booke".  Among  the  items  charged 
are  the  first  six  listed  above.  Credit  was  given  Roberts  for  340  pipe-staves 
at  £1-5-0.  (County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I,  143,  145).  Judging 
from  the  early  date  when  these  charges  started  and  from  the  fact  that  the 
suit  was  brought  by  James  Pendleton  and  William  Howard  as  attorneys  for 
Brian  Pendleton  and  John  Paine,  it  would  appear  that  the  former  had  con- 
tributed his  accounts  receivable  to  the  partnership  when  he  formed  it  with 
the  elder  Paine  in  1657. 

^  Robinson  and  Wheeler,  Great  Little   Watertown,  p.   128. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  138. 
■'  Suffolk  Deeds,  IX,  345-6. 


Portsmouth  1655-1658  105 

must  have  had  a  great  deal  of  confidence  both  in  Pendleton's  abil- 
ity and  honesty,  for  as  far  as  known  he  never  lived  in  Portsmouth. 
The  little  grant  of  land  Pendleton  had  secured  for  him  there  so 
soon  after  his  own  arrival  in  the  place,  did  not  mean  anything  to 
him.  He  evidently  felt  that  greater  opportunities  existed  in  Bos- 
ton and  he  had  removed  to  that  metropolis  after  leaving  Ipswich. 

Seemingly  he  was  quite  content  to  trust  Pendleton  to  handle 
his  investment  profitably,  but  after  his  death  in  1660,  son  John 
soon  had  a  falling  out  with  his  father's  old  friend  and  partner.  It 
would  appear  that  he  was  dissatisfied  with  the  profits  of  the  busi- 
ness, and  had  dark  suspicions  that  Pendleton  was  doing  more  or 
less  trading  on  his  own  account.  So  they  dissolved  the  firm  in  '61,^ 
the  Portsmouth  member  appointing  his  own  son,  James,  as  his 
attorney  "to  gather  up  the  debts  due  the  co-partnership";®  and 
the  two  ex-partners  sued  and  counter-sued  each  other  for  years 
in  all  the  courts  from  York  to  Boston.  Next  to  their  religious  bat- 
tles the  Puritans  enjoyed  their  lawsuits. 

It  is  likely  the  impending  deal  his  father  was  about  to  make 
with  William  Paine  had  much  to  do  with  James  Pendleton's  re- 
moval to  Portsmouth.  We  know  he  was  still  living  in  Sudbury, 
Massachusetts,  as  late  as  December,  1656,  when  he  was  among  the 
petitioners  for  a  bridge  there,^**  but  in  the  following  January,  he 
was  a  witness  to  a  deed  made  in  Portsmouth.^'  The  other  witness 
to  this  document  was  none  other  than  Seth  Fletcher,  his  brother- 
in-law,  then  a  resident  at  Wells,  Maine.  What  event  could  have 
brought  these  two  widely  separated  men  together  at  that  time  is  an 
interesting  speculation.  The  most  likely  assumption  would  be  that 
they  had  gone  there  to  attend  the  funeral  of  James'  brother, 
Joseph  Pendleton,  about  whom  nothing  is  known  after  1653  when 
he  received  a  ten  acre  grant  of  land  at  Portsmouth.  The  records 
there  show  this  tract  was  laid  out  to  James  Pendleton  some  years 
later,  and  it  is  significant  that  Joseph's  name  does  not  appear  in 
the  list  of  Portsmouth's  inhabitants  who  had  come  there  up  to  the 
year  1657.'^ 

^  Paine  Genealogy — Ipswich  Branch,  p.  68. 

*  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  95b — 96a. 

^"Wyman's  Abstracts,  Middlesex  County,  Mass.  Court  Records,  p.  SQi/o. 

"  New  Hampshire  County  Court  Papers,  1681-82,  p.  349,  also  on  pp.  333  and 

347.    It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  this  deed  was  a  transfer  of  property  on 

the  Great  Island  known  as  "Mosquito  Hall"  and  belonged  to  the  John  Watton 

estate  of  which  Pendleton  was  administrator. 

"Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  13,  127,  69;   (Hackett,  p.  20). 


106  Brian   Pendleton 

While  James  Pendleton's  name  is  included  in  that  list  there 
may  be  some  little  doubt  as  to  just  when  he  definitely  took  up  his 
residence  at  Portsmouth.  Only  recently  he  had  taken  unto  himself 
a  young  Sudbury  girl  as  his  second  wife  and  apparently  she  was 
most  reluctant  to  leave  her  people  there. -^^  Some  special  induce- 
ment seems  to  haA^e  been  necessary  to  bring  James  to  Portsmouth 
to  fill  the  gap  caused  by  his  brother's  death.  This  inducement  was 
quickly  arranged.  Only  four  days  after  entering  upon  his  part- 
nership with  William  Paine,  Brian  Pendleton,  with  Eleanor,  his 
wife,  "for  the  love  and  naturall  affection  they  beare  unto  their 
Eldest  Sonne,  James  Pendleton",  deeded  to  him  as  a  free  gift  all 
the  property  that  Pendleton  still  owned  in  Sudbury,  together  with 
all  his  rights  as  an  original  proprietor  in  any  further  divisions  of 
the  town  lands. ^^ 

That  Pendleton  intended  making  this  son  his  business  as  well 
as  his  political  heir  is  clear  enough  from  the  records,  and  while  he 
had  sufficient  influence  to  bring  his  latter  ambition  about,  start- 
ing James  off  as  constable  of  Portsmouth  in  1661,  and  getting 
him  elected  as  a  selectman  there,  as  well  as  Town  Clerk  two  years 
later,-^^  yet  he  did  not  realize  his  ambition  to  make  a  successful 
merchant  out  of  James. 

For  the  time  being,  however,  Pendleton  seemed  to  prosper. 
He  extended  his  trading  activities  to  Maine,  acquired  much  prop- 
erty there,  "grub-staked"  fishermen,  placed  and  foreclosed  mort- 
gages, acquired  a  warehouse  on  one  of  the  Isles  of  Shoals,  set  up 
a  windmill  on  the  Great  Island  for  grinding  corn,  operated  a 
brewery  there,  imported  salt  and  sugar,  brought  in  tobacco  by 
the  hogshead  from  Virginia,  patronized  John  Hull's  mint  —  in 
short  became  a  merchant,  just  as  he  said  he  was.  In  1654  he  felt 
affluent  enough  to  donate  £5  (in  boards)  to  Harvard  College,  a 
gift  worth  about  $150.00  today. ^^  Three  years  later  he  subscribed 
— and  paid — a  like  amount  in  cash  toward  the  building  of  a  new 

"  Her  first  two  children,  Brian,  and  Joseph  Pendleton,  were  born  in  Sudbury 
in  1659  and  1661  respectively,  as  shown  by  the  vital  records  there.  Either  her 
husband  divided  his  time  between  that  place  and  Portsmouth,  or  she  had  gone 
back  there  for  her  confinements. 

"  Middlesex   County,   Mass.,   Deeds,   II,  30.    The   reference   to  James   in   this 
deed  as  the  "eldest  sonne"  may  have  meant  the  eldest  surviving  son,  if  the 
deceased  Joseph  had  been  the  older. 
1=  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  76,  85. 

^^  Harvard  College  Records,  vide  Colonial  Society  of  Masachusetts,  Publica- 
tions, XV,  214. 


Portsmouth  1655-1658  107 

Town  House  in  Boston,  the  sum  devised  for  that  purpose  in  the 
will  of  Capt.  Robert  Keayne  not  having  proved  sufficient.^^ 

Of  all  the  other  subscribers  to  this  undertaking  only  five  men 
gave  larger  amounts  than  Pendleton,  and  it  would  be  of  interest 
to  know  what  moved  him  to  contribute  so  liberally  to  a  purely 
local  enterprise  in  a  town  where  he  was  never  a  resident.  Possibly 
sentiment  had  something  to  do  with  it.  Keayne,  like  himself,  came 
from  London,  where  they  might  have  been  old  friends.  Then  too, 
both  were  charter  members  of  the  Military  Company  of  Massa- 
chusetts, of  which  organization  Keayne  was  the  first  commander. 
On  the  other  hand,  Pendleton  may  have  been  impelled  to  make  this 
donation  through  that  very  human  trait  which  is  not  averse  to 
advertising  a  recently  acquired  prosperity. 

Another  opportunity  to  put  his  name  on  a  subscription  list 
came  to  him  in  the  following  year  [1658]  when  he  contributed  £5 
toward  the  maintenance  of  the  new  minister,  the  Rev.  Joshua 
Moodey,  whom  he  had  brought  to  Portsmouth.  This  amount  was 
second  only  to  that  of  the  wealthy  John  Cutt's  in  generosity.^^ 
Possibly  at  that  time  Pendleton  felt  he  was  going  to  be  as  rich  as 
his  fellow  merchant,  but  his  practice  of  extending  credits  too  lib- 
erally did  not  help  to  establish  the  family  fortune. 

Besides  his  various  activities  as  a  merchant  and  as  an  ex- 
porter and  importer  we  find  Capt.  Pendleton  was  also  interested 
in  shipping  at  one  time,  although  his  investment  here  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  a  profitable  one.  Much  to  the  disgust  and  dis- 
appointment of  the  mother  country,  the  enterprising  colonists  in 
New  England  began  building  ships  almost  as  soon  as  they  had 
finished  building  their  houses.  And  in  these  home-made  vessels  they 
started  a  lively  commerce  with  the  West  Indies,  taking  them  lum- 
ber and  fish,  and  bringing  back  cargoes  of  sugar,  molasses,  and 
salt — thus  depriving  English  shipping  of  the  profits  in  the  carry- 
ing trade. ^® 

Pendleton's  venture  in  this  field  did  not  turn  out  so  well,  judg- 

^''Proceedings,  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  III,  338;  Bostonian  Society 
Publications,  III,  105-149.  •^' 

'^Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  57. 

"According  to  a  statement  made  by  Robert  Tufton  Mason  in  1671,  Ports- 
mouth "had  a  great  trade  to  all  ports",  exporting  annually  20,000  tons  of  deal 
or  pipe  staves,  ten  thousand  quintals  of  fish,  ten  shiploads  of  masts,  and  sev- 
eral thousand  beaver  and  other  skins.  The  imports  amounted  to  three  hundred 
tons  of  wme  and  brandy,  two  hundred  tons  of  goods  from  the  Leeward  Is- 
lands, and  two  thousand  tons  of  salt. — Jenness,  pp.  53-54. 


108  Brian  Pendleton 

ing  from  an  item  in  the  court  records  of  York  County,  Maine.  In 
an  action  "Capt.  Bryan  Pendleton  &  his  Partners"  brought  in 
July,  1660,  against  one  Daniel  Paul,  "concerning  the  insufficiency 
of  a  vessel  built  for  them  to  the  valew  of  £700,  whereby  the  plain- 
tiffs have  been  much  damnifyd",  the  jury  found  for  the  defendant 
and  awarded  him  the  costs  of  the  trial.^°  For  once,  no  appeal 
seems  to  have  been  taken  from  the  verdict.  We  have  found  no  refer- 
ence to  the  case  in  any  other  court  records,  and  have  no  means 
of  knowing  how  much  this  affair  may  have  contributed  to  the  Cap- 
tain's subsequent  financial  embarrassments. 

Due  perhaps  to  the  growing  demands  of  his  business  interests, 
he  was  not  quite  as  active  politically  in  1655  and  '56  as  he  had 
been  formerly.  Or  else  the  non-Puritan  element  in  the  town  was 
temporarily  in  control  of  its  affairs.  At  any  rate  the  local  Board 
of  Selectmen  functioned  without  him  during  those  two  years.^^ 
Nor  did  he  represent  Portsmouth  in  the  General  Court  again  until 
1658,  although  in  view  of  the  fact  that  no  other  Deputy  was  sent 
there  from  his  community  meantime  this  lack  of  representation 
may  have  been  due  more  to  a  policy  of  retrenchment  than  to  any 
other  reason.  As  already  noted,  his  services  on  the  bench  con- 
tinued without  interruption,  and  he  also  kept  in  ofl^ice  as  a  Com- 
missioner as  well  as  Town  Treasurer  during  these  two  years ;  ^^ 
and  we  may  be  very  sure  he  labored  with  his  Trainband  as  best  he 
could. 

His  keen  interest  in  promoting  a  greater  Portsmouth  did  not 
lapse  during  this  time.  Chosen  by  the  town,  together  with  John 
Pickering,  in  April,  1655,  to  determine  its  boundary  lines  with 
Hampton  as  well  as  with  Dover,^^  his  visit  to  the  former  place 
gives  us  a  striking  instance  of  his  high  regard  for  a  meticulous 
exactitude.  He  had  already  exhibited  this  trait  the  year  before 
when  he  petitioned  the  General  Court  for  some  clarification  of  its 

^  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  II,  88. 

21  Of  the  five  Selectmen  who  served  in  1655  as  named  in  the  Portsmouth  rec- 
ords [I,  29,  30;  (Hackett,  pp.  32,  33)],  Thomas  Walford  had  been  banislied 
from  Massachusetts  some  twenty  years  earlier,  while  Anthony  Brackett,  and 
James  Johnson  were  among  those  who  petitioned  against  Pendleton  and  his 
associates  in  1665.  Johnson  was  the  only  one  of  the  five  re-elected  in  1656, 
the  other  four  being  Richard  Cummings,  Renald  Fernald,  John  Jackson,  and 
"Mr."  Henry  Sherburne,  the  latter  being  the  only  one  thus  dignified.— Ports- 
mouth Town  Records,  I,  35;    (Hackett,  p.  36). 

=2  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  30,  34,  37;    (Hackett,  pp.  34,  36). 
^'  Ibid.,  I,  31;  (Hackett,  p.  34). 


PoETSMOUTH  1655-1658  109 

order  appointing  him  to  administer  John  Watton's  estate,  a  re- 
quest which  brought  him  what  came  as  near  being  a  rebuke  as  he 
ever  received  from  his  beloved  Massachusetts.^^  And  now  on  this 
boundary  expedition  his  legalistic  tendencies  became  most  ram- 
pant. The  credentials  submitted  by  the  Hampton  men  who  were  to 
act  with  him  were  not  satisfactory  to  his  way  of  thinking.  An  "i" 
had  failed  to  be  dotted,  or  a  "t"  was  not  crossed.  So  he  had  to 
stay  over  there  until  a  meeting  of  their  selectmen  could  be  held, 
when  all  technicalities  being  properly  observed,  an  agreement  was 
reached  and  the  boundary  marked  on  the  seashore  the  following 
day.25 

No  record  exists  of  his  determination  of  the  Dover  line,  but 
a  year  later  the  General  Court  called  upon  him  to  serve  as  a  Com- 
missioner in  settling  the  bounds  between  Hampton  and  Salisbury 
which  had  been  in  dispute  for  some  years.  This  time,  however,  he 
ran  afoul  of  certain  people  who  were  even  more  disposed  than  he 
was  to  be  exacting.  Still  dissatisfied  they  again  called  upon  the 
General  Court  to  send  a  new  commission,  one  of  whom  should  be 
competent  "to  assist  the  commissioners  in  drawing  out  a  platt, 
and  running  the  line" — an  indication,  perhaps,  that  Pendleton 
had  no  knowledge  of  surveying,  no  matter  how  competent  he  may 
have  been  as  an  arbitrator.^^ 

n. 

Of  the  various  depositions  taken  by  Pendleton  during  this 
period,  none  is  of  particular  interest  until  we  come  to  those  in  the 
case  of  Jane  Walford,  accused  of  witchcraft.  Belief  in  this  ancient 
superstition  still  persists  in  some  benighted  corners  of  the  world 
as  well  as  among  the  ignorant  in  communities  otherwise  enlight- 
ened. We  can  have  no  conception  today  of  the  frightful  hold  this 
delusion  had  upon  the  general  populace  in  the  middle  ages  and 
even  into  the  eighteenth  century.  A  heritage  from  a  still  darker 
past,  and  vouched  for  in  the  Bible,  it  was  not  an  illogical  belief 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.   1,  236.    The  Court  told  him  rather   tartly 

that  he  had  been  given  full  power  the  year  before  to  act  in  the  premises,  was 

to  present  a  full  inventory  of  the  estate,  and  "should  proceed  according  to 

an  ordinary  course  of  law  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Court's  order  in  the 

case". 

'^Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  XII,  99-101.    It  was  in  his  deposition 

regarding  this  affair,  made  on  2  July,  1669,  that  Pendleton  stated  his  age  was 

"about  seventy  years". 

"^  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  282,  292. 


110  Beian  Pendleton 

when  tied  up  with  the  credulous  acceptance  of  a  personal  Devil. 
That  "Prince  of  Darkness",  always  at  war  with  everything  that 
was  good,  was  supposed  to  have  power  to  suspend  the  laws  of  na- 
ture in  order  to  accomplish  his  evil  designs  upon  the  souls  of  men. 
This  malignant  power,  it  was  believed,  could  be  invested  in  those 
who  would  enter  into  compact  with  his  Satanic  Majesty,  so  that 
they  could  work  ph3^sical  injury  upon  their  fellow  mortals  either 
by  direct  contact  or  by  a  malevolent  form  of  absent  treatment 
which  they  could  exercise  at  will. 

What  a  fantastic  theology  our  forefathers  had  with  their 
creations  of  a  demon  God,  and  a  god  Demon!  And  what  mad 
vagaries  and  persecutions  their  beliefs  engendered !  It  seems  in- 
credible that  symptoms  which  today  would  be  recognized  as  hys- 
teria, alcoholism,  or  insanity,  should  be  considered  as  evidence 
that  a  person  so  afficted  was  "possessed"  by  evil  spirits,  that  is, 
was  a  victim  of  witchcraft.  Equally  preposterous  is  it  that  the 
testimony  of  one  so  "possessed"  should  be  regarded  as  of  equal 
weight  with  that  of  any  ordinary  witness.  And  yet  such  testi- 
mony was  gravely  considered  by  the  courts,  generally  accepted  as 
truth,  and  the  laws  against  witchcraft  executed  upon  those  judged 
guilty. 

It  is  a  striking  commentary  upon  Puritanism  that  the  witch- 
craft delusion  in  England  reached  its  height  during  the  years  of 
the  Commonwealth,  and  that  where  this  creed  was  most  virulent, 
as  it  was  in  Massachusetts,  there  the  delusion  became  a  mania 
where  finally  no  one  was  safe  against  accusation.  This  morbid  con- 
dition, as  Lecky  has  pointed  out  "was  simply  the  natural  result  of 
Puritanical  teaching  acting  on  the  mind,  predisposing  men  to  see 
Satanic  influence  in  life,  and  consequently  eliciting  the  phenomena 
of  witchcraft."  Belief  in  this  superstition,  he  states,  is  engendered 
wherever  there  is  an  intense  realization  of  a  religion  "which  rests 
in  a  great  measure  on  a  system  of  terrorism,  and  which  paints  in 
dark  and  forcible  colors  the  misery  of  men  and  the  power  of  evil 
spirits."  ^^  Add  to  this  the  sour-natured  suppression  of  any  joy 
in  life,  the  cultivation  of  gloom,  the  constant  hammering  on  the 
theme  of  eternal  torments,  and  you  have  all  the  elements  present 
to  make  an  outraged  human  nature,  goaded  beyond  endurance, 
burst  forth  into  the  ferocities  of  a  delirium  of  panic. 

It  is  significant,  as  Arnold  notes,  that  this  infatuation  "never 

^  Rationalism  in  Europe,  Vol.  I,  pp.  37,  102,  125,  143,  144. 


Portsmouth  1655-1658  111 

extended  to  the  less  gloomy  people  of  Rhode  Island".  Wliile  "the 
offence  [witchcraft]  appears  on  the  statute  book,  no  prosecutions 
were  ever  had  under  it.  The  people  of  the  colony  had  suffered  too 
much  from  the  superstitions  and  the  priestcraft  of  the  Puritans, 
readily  to  adopt  their  delusions,  and  there  was  no  state  clergy  to 
stimulate  the  whimsies  of  their  parishioners".^^ 

In  the  Eastern  settlements  too,  where  the  Puritan  domina- 
tion was  political  rather  than  religious,  in  spite  of  the  ban  on  other 
forms  of  worship,  the  craze  never  reached  any  height.  As  a  con- 
temporary writer,  Joshua  Scottow,  states  in  his  Narrative  of  the 
Planting  of  the  Massachusetts  Colony^^  "there  hath  not  been  a 
convicted  witch  on  the  other  side  of  the  Piscataquay  river".  Scot- 
tow  knew  what  he  was  talking  about  for  he  lived  at  Black  Point, 
Maine,  for  a  number  of  years  before  the  Indian  War  drove  him 
out.  We  shall  meet  him  again. 

In  the  Connecticut  and  New  Haven  colonies  a  number  of 
women  were  executed  for  witchcraft  between  1646  and  1653.^^ 
The  first  outbreak  of  the  delusion  in  Massachusetts  occurred  at 
Springfield  in  1645,  all  those  accused  being  acquited.^^  Three 
years  later  Margaret  Jones  of  Charlestown  was  executed  for  the 
crime,  and  as  we  have  noted,  Pendleton  was  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Court  which  tried  the  case.  Sporadic  instances  of  the  kind 
occurred  from  time  to  time,  the  best  known  victim  being  Mistress 
Ann  Hibbens,  widow  of  one  of  the  Assistants  of  the  Colony,  and 
sister  of  no  less  a  personage  than  Richard  Bellingham  who  was 

then  its  Deputy  Governor.  She  was  hanged  at  Boston  in  June, 
1656.32 

These  cases  were  only  a  prelude  to  the  inevitable  catastrophe 
which  came  to  a  head  at  Salem  in  1691-2.  Here,  when  the  people 
at  last  awakened  to  what  they  had  done  during  their  period  of 
frenzy  and  panic,  some  twenty  so-called  "witches"  had  been 
hanged,  one  pressed  to  death  by  piling  weights  on  him,  and  over 
one  hundred  more  lay  in  various  prisons  awaiting  trial.^^   The  ac- 

'^  History  of  Rhode  Island,  Vol.  I,  p.  525. 
^Massachusetts    Historical   Society    Collections,    IV,    311. 
^"S.  G.  Drake,  Annals  of  Witchcraft  in  New  England,  p.  56  et.  seq. 
^  Hutchinson,  History  of  New  England,  p.  382. 

^'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  269.  Hubbard  in  his  History  of  New 
England  suggests  she  was  of  unsettled  mind,  an  affliction  which  befeU  her 
brother  in  later  years. 

^  No  witch  was  ever  burned  to  death  in  New  England,  despite  the  widespread 
belief  that  such  was  the  case.  This  myth  is  often  mentioned  as  fact  by  his- 
torical reviewers  who  should  know  better. 


112  Brian  Pendleton 

cusers  rather  than  their  victims  were  indeed  "possessed"  by  evil 
spirits,  among  whom  the  Rev,  Cotton  Mather  and  certain  other 
divines  played  the  leading  roles.  They  stirred  up  the  people's 
fears,  incited  mob  hysteria,  silenced  the  doubters,  and  achieved 
an  enduring  infamy.  The  clergy  lost  standing  for  the  part  they 
played  in  this  tragedy.  They  had  led  their  deluded  followers  into 
a  religious  debauch  and  the  awakening  was  bitter  indeed.  It  was 
years  before  they  recovered  some  of  their  former  prestige  but 
never  again  could  they  compass  the  taking  of  human  life.  They 
might  damn  souls  for  eternity,  but  they  could  not  hasten  the 
event. 

The  same  year  that  saw  the  execution  of  Ann  Hibbens  wit- 
nessed an  outbreak  of  the  delusion  at  Portsmouth  where  several 
of  the  inhabitants  were  accused  of  the  crime  of  witchcraft,  and  one 
of  the  accused  bound  over  for  trial.^'*  This  unfortunate  was  the 
wife  of  that  Thomas  Walford  who  had  already  known  persecution 
at  the  hands  of  the  Bay  authorities.  Probably  one  of  the  little 
group  of  planters  sent  over  by  Gorges,  Walford  was  comfortably 
settled  at  what  is  now  Charlestown,  Massachusetts,  when  the 
Puritans  arrived  there  in  force  in  1630  and  shattered  his  sylvan 
idyl.  Quite  naturally  they  looked  upon  him  as  an  interloper,  and 
as  he  undoubtedly  regarded  his  new  neighbors  with  even  greater 
aversion,  much  friction  ensued.  Their  emotions  of  mutual  disgust 
at  each  other's  presence  lasted  a  year  when  the  rulers  fined  Wal- 
ford forty  shillings  and  enjoined  him  and  his  wife  "to  depart  out 
of  the  limits  of  this  patent  .  .  .  for  his  contempt  of  authoritie,  & 
confrontinge  officers."  He  paid  his  fine  by  killing  a  wolf  ^^  and 
then  removed  to  the  Piscataqua.  Here  he  seems  to  have  been  well 
regarded  by  his  fellow  churchmen  for  they  chose  him  a  warden  of 
their  chapel  at  "Strawberry  Bank"  before  the  Puritans  took  con- 
trol, and  later,  as  already  noted,  made  him  a  selectman  of  the 
town  in  1655,  electing  him  again  in  1658-9.^^ 

Walford's  popularity  does  not  seem  to  have  been  shared  by 
his  wife,  judging  from  the  repeated  charges  of  witchcraft  brought 
against  her.  The  "evidence"  which  was  given  in  one  of  these  cases 
is  worth  presenting  here  as  an  example  of  the  silly  stuff  that 
thrilled  our  forefathers — and  sent  hundreds  of  innocent  men  and 

*'  Hutchinson's  History,  vide  White's  Early  History  of  Nero  England,  p.  383. 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  I,  86,  243. 

=°  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  29;    (Hackett,  pp.  32,  47). 


Portsmouth  1665-1658  113 

women  to  death  throughout  Christendom.^^    Susannah  Trimmings 
"of  Little  Harbour,  Pascataqua"  will  tell  her  story  first : 

"On  Lord's  Day  30th  of  March  at  night,"  she  de- 
poses, "going  home  with  Good  Wife  Barton,  she  sepa- 
rated from  her  at  the  freshet  next  her  house.  On  her  re- 
turn between  Goodman  Evens'  and  Robert  Davis'  she 
heard  a  rustling  in  the  woods,  which  she  at  first  thought 
was  occassioned  by  swine,  and  presently  after,  there  did 
appear  to  her  a  woman  whom  she  apprehended  to  be  old 
Goodwife  Walford.  She  asked  me  where  my  consort 
was ;  I  answered  I  had  none.  She  said,  thy  consort  is  at 
home  by  this  time.  Lend  me  a  pound  of  cotton.  I  told  her 
I  had  but  two  pounds  in  the  house,  and  I  would  not  spare 
any  to  my  mother.  She  said  I  had  better  have  done  it; 
that  my  sorrow  was  great  already,  and  it  should  be 
greater — for  I  was  going  a  great  journey  but  should 
never  come  there.  She  then  left  me,  and  I  was  struck  as 
with  a  clap  of  fire  on  the  back,  and  she  vanished  toward 
the  water  side  in  my  apprehension  in  the  shape  of  a  cat. 
She  had  on  her  head  a  white  linen  hood  tied  under  her 
chin,  and  her  waistcoat  and  petticoat  were  red,  with  an 
old  green  apron  and  a  black  hat  upon  her  head. 
Taken  upon  oath,  18th  April  1656. 
before 

Brian  Pendleton 
Henry  Sherburne 
Renald  Fernald" 
The  somewhat  appalling  color  scheme  of  this  apparition  was 
enough  to  startle  anyone,  but  how  these  varied  hues  could  have 
been  recognized  at  nightfall  is  a  question  that  only  women  can  an- 
swer.   Susannah's  husband,  Oliver,  carries  the  story  along.    He 
testifies  that  on  the  night  of  this  fearsome  encounter  his  wife 
came  home  in  a  sad  condition. 

"She  passed  by  me  with  her  child  in  her  arms,  laid  her 
child  on  the  bed,  sat  down  upon  the  chest  and  leaned 

="  The  "testimony"  following  is  from  the  New  Hampshire  Historical  Society 
Collections,  I,  255-257.  This  Society  has  in  its  keeping  the  original  early  Court 
Records  of  the  Colony,  but  the  various  depositions  in  the  Jane  Walford  case 
are  no  longer  to  be  found.  Like  many  other  old  documents  they  are  probably 
in  some  private  collection  now,  if  still  in  existence.  "Le  affaire  Walford"  is 
also  given  in  extenso  in  the  Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire  [I,  217-219 
(copied  from  above  but  with  erroneous  page  reference)],  Adams'  Annals  of 
Portsmouth  [pp.  38-40],  McClintock's  History  of  New  Hampshire  [p.  58],  and 
various  other  works  dealing  with  Portsmouth. 


114  Brian  Pendletok 

upon  her  elbow.  Three  times  I  asked  her  how  she  did, — 
She  could  not  speak.  I  took  her  in  my  arms  and  held  her 
up,  and  repeated  the  question.  She  forced  breath,  and 
something  stopped  in  her  throat  as  if  it  would  have 
stopped  her  breath.  I  unlaced  her  clothes,  and  soon  she 
spake  and  said.  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me,  this  wicked 
woman  will  kill  me.  I  asked  her  what  woman.  She  said, 
Goodwife  Walford.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  it  was  only 
her  weakness.  She  told  me  no,  and  related  as  above,  that 
her  back  was  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  her  lower  parts  were 
as  it  were  numb  and  without  feeling.  I  pinched  her  and 
she  felt  not.  She  continued  that  night  and  the  day  and 
night  following  very  ill,  and  is  still  bad  of  her  limbs  and 
complains  daily  of  it.    Sworn  as  above." 

Eliza  Barton  who  was  probably  Susannah's  consort  on  the 
fateful  night  "deposed  that  she  saw  Susannah  Trimmings  at  the 
time  she  was  ill,  and  her  face  was  coloured  and  spotted  with  sev- 
eral colours.  She  told  the  deponent  the  story,  who  replied,  that 
it  was  nothing  but  her  fantasy ;  her  eyes  looked  as  if  they  had 
been  scalded." 

Nicholas  Rowe  too  has  had  a  gruesome  experience  with  the 
suspected  witch — a  romantic  one  perhaps  had  she  been  younger. 
According  to  his  testimony, 

"Jane  Walford,  shortly  after  she  was  accused,  came  to 
the  deponent  in  bed  in  the  evening  and  put  her  hand 
upon  his  breast  so  that  he  could  not  speak,  and  was  in 
great  pain  till  the  next  day.  By  the  light  of  the  fire  in 
the  next  room  it  appeared  to  be  Goody  Walford,  but  she 
did  not  speak.  She  repeated  her  visit  about  a  week  after 
and  did  as  before,  but  said  nothing." 

John  Puddington  also  has  a  word  to  say  about  Goody  Wal- 
ford. Three  years  ago  she  "Came  to  his  mother's  —  She  said  that 
her  own  husband  called  her  an  old  Witch;  and  when  she  came  to 
her  cattle,  her  husband  would  bid  her  begone,  for  she  did  over- 
look the  cattle,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  in  our  country,  be- 
witching." 

This  John  also  figures  in  the  charges  brought  against  the 
wife  of  William  Evans  at  this  time,  by  concurring  in  the  testi- 
mony of  Agnes  Puddington  who  deposed  that 

"On  the  11th  of  April,  1656,  the  wife  of  W.  Evans 
came  to  her  house  and  lay  there  all  night;  and  a  little 
after  sunset  the  deponent  saw  a  yellowish  cat ;  and  Mrs. 


Portsmouth  1655-1658  115 

E.  said  she  was  followed  by  a  cat  wherever  she  went. 
John  came,  and  saw  a  cat  in  the  garden — took  down  his 
gun  to  shoot  her;  the  cat  got  up  on  a  tree,  and  the  gun 
would  not  take  fire,  and  afterwards  the  cock  would  not 
stand.  She  afterwards  saw  three  cats — the  yellow  one 
vanished  away  on  the  plain  ground:  she  could  not  tell 
which  way  they  went." 

That  sane-minded  men  could  have  given  the  slightest  cred- 
ence to  any  such  nonsensical  rubbish  as  this,  made  up  of  fantastic 
imaginings,  gossip  and  nightmares,  is  beyond  our  comprehen- 
sion today,  and  yet  the  Commissioners  of  Portsmouth,  two  hard- 
headed  business  men  and  a  physician,  thought  there  was  sufficient 
evidence  against  Goody  Walford  to  warrant  them  in  putting  her 
under  bonds  to  appear  at  the  next  County  Court.  Wliat  hap- 
pened to  William  Evans'  wife  at  this  time  does  not  appear,  al- 
though eight  years  later  we  find  "Goody  Evans"  was  in  prison  at 
Boston,  the  town  of  Portsmouth  then  arranging  to  bring  her  back 
and  care  for  her.^^  It  is  quite  probable  she  was  insane. 

Jane  Walford  was  more  fortunate.  When  she  was  brought 
before  Pendleton  and  his  fellow  magistrates  at  the  County  Court 
held  at  Portsmouth  on  the  27th  of  the  following  June  "upon  sus- 
picion of  witchcraft",  her  son  Jeremy  was  put  under  bonds  of  £20 
for  her  appearance  at  the  next  County  Court  to  be  held  at  Dover 
a  year  later.  It  appears  evident  that  the  magistrates  wisely  de- 
cided to  let  the  matter  rest  for  a  time.  Wiser  still,  they  discharged 
her  a  year  later.^^  As  Albee  suggests,  they  "couldn't  see  it  clear 
and  adjourned  for  more  light.  It  grew  lighter  for  the  summer 
was  advancing;  the  cats  left  off  their  pranks;  Mrs.  Susannah 
Trimmings  presented  her  Oliver  with  a  fine  little  Trimmings,  got 
over  her  'fantasy'  which  Eliza  Barton  made  bold  to  tell  her  was 
the  only  witch  in  the  business,  and  the  neighborhood  planted  its 
corn  and  cured  its  fish  as  usual." 

And  quite  as  usual  too  they  continued  the  malicious  gossip  of 
the  small  town — deadly  gossip  in  those  days  when  witchcraft  was 
a  capital  offense  because  the  Bible  stated  you  should  not  suffer  a 
witch  to  live.  What  if  the  magistrates  did  not  entertain  the  charges 
against  Jane  Walford  seriously  ^  Her  neighbors  still  regarded  her 

*«  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  88. 

^  Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  XL,   122,  129. 

*° Newcastle:  Historic  and  Picturesque,  p.  84. 


116  Briax  Pendleton 

as  guilty,  a  worker  of  mischief,  contriver  of  all  the  mischances  that 
befell  them.  Did  a  blight  fall  upon  the  corn?  That  was  Walford's 
doing.  Did  the  fish  spoil  in  curing.?  Goody  Walford  was  to  blame. 
There  was  no  doubt  about  it.  She  had  a  malignant  power,  and 
there  was  worse  besides.  Sometimes  on  wintry  nights  of  storm, 
there  would  come  with  the  shrieking  of  the  wind  down  the  chimneys 
a  burst  of  wild  and  mocking  laughter — Goody  Walford's  voice 
as  she  swept  jubilantly  over  the  housetops,  bound  for  some  hideous 
revel  at  fearful  rendezvous. 

Finally  the  evil  reports  about  her  not  dying  out  with  the 
years,  she  decided  to  take  her  fate  in  her  hands  and  bring  suit 
against  one  of  her  traducers.  At  the  County  Court  held  in  Ports- 
mouth in  June,  1670,  she  appeared  as  plaintiff  against  one  Robert 
Couch  in  an  action  of  slander  "for  sa3dng  the  said  Jane  was  a 
witch  and  he  would  prove  her  one."  Couch  acknowledged  he  had 
made  the  statement  but  he  seems  to  have  fallen  down  in  the  proof, 
the  jury  awarding  the  plaintiff  £5  damages  and  costs.^^  While 
her  townspeople  were  pleased  enough  to  gossip  about  her,  yet  it  is 
fairly  evident  they  did  not  take  all  this  silly  chatter  as  seriously  as 
it  might  have  been  taken  elsewhere.  There  seems  to  have  been  a 
leaven  of  common  sense  working  amongst  them,  or  else  there  was 
no  fanatical  minister  present  to  arouse  the  fears  and  passions  of 
the  Puritan  element  in  the  town.  A  more  moderate  sentiment  pre- 
vailed there  generally,  and  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  what 
effect  this  may  have  had  upon  the  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey  who  came 
to  Portsmouth  in  1658  and  held  the  pastorate  for  years.  The  op- 
position he  exhibited  to  the  witchcraft  delusion  at  the  time  of  the 
Salem  craze  ma}^  been  fostered  by  his  life  among  the  harder-headed 
people  on  the  Piscataqua  who  instead  of  hanging  their  witch, 
awarded  her  damages. 

Ill 

The  year  that  preceded  Moodey's  advent  in  Portsmouth  was 
long  remembered  there  for  the  lively  struggle  which  arose  over  the 
building  of  a  new  meeting-house.  There  does  not  seem  to  have  been 

"  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  163.  Jane  Walford  might  almost  be 
regarded  as  Portsmouth's  professional  witch,  for  as  early  as  1648  she  had 
sued  Elizabeth  Roe  for  callinp:  her  one,  and  had  been  awarded  £2  and  costs. 
[Proviiicial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  XL,  38]  Jane  was  one  of  the  few  who 
made  such  accusations  pay  off.  It  was  probably  fortunate  for  her  that  she  did 
not  live  in  Salem. 


Portsmouth  1655-1658  117 

much  argument  at  first  as  to  the  need  of  one.  Admittedly  the  little 
log  chapel  put  up  by  the  first  settlers  was  far  too  small ;  and  be- 
sides it  was  quite  a  handicap  in  getting  a  worthy  minister,  now 
that  the  Rev.  James  Brown  had  left,  if  you  couldn't  offer  him  a 
more  attractive  edifice  for  his  preaching,  something  more  modern, 
with  a  steeple  perhaps,  or  a  belfry  at  least,  something  more  in 
keeping  with  the  town's  growing  importance.  Only  the  ultra- 
thrifty  or  the  non-religious  could  object  to  such  a  program  as  this, 
but  the  real  battle  did  not  start  until  the  question  came  up  as  to 
just  where  the  new  House  should  be  located. 

Two  factions  immediately  locked  horns  over  this,  the  main- 
landers  in  general  fighting  any  change,  while  the  Great  Islanders, 
led  by  Capt.  Pendleton,  demanded  that  the  new  meeting-house 
should  be  built  at  some  place  more  conveniently  situated  for  them 
than  was  the  original  site  at  the  north  end  of  the  "Bank".  Such  a 
request  was  reasonable  enough — meeting-houses  were  generally 
built  as  near  the  village  centers  as  possible — and  the  opposition 
that  developed  to  this  proposal  may  have  had  more  back  of  it  than 
mere  human  inertia.  Something  of  sentiment  perhaps  that  bound 
the  old  settlers  to  the  place  where  they  had  once  practised  the 
rituals  of  the  Church  of  England,  something  of  antagonism  toward 
anything  fathered  by  that  Puritan  schemer  down  the  river.  Should 
half  the  town  be  discommoded  to  suit  his  convenience?  If  he  was 
half  as  devout  as  he  professed  to  be  why  all  this  pother.''  He 
shouldn't  mind  an  extra  mile  or  two  in  coming  to  worship.  As  for 
themselves,  they  made  no  such  pretensions.  It  was  bad  enough 
having  to  listen  to  Puritan  sermons,  let  alone  going  out  of  the 
way  to  hear  the  Word.  The  old  time  chapel  was  good  enough  for 
them  after  all.  It  had  been  good  enough  for  the  Great  Islanders 
too  until  their  Master  Pendleton  had  stirred  them  up  with  his 
new-fangled  ideas.   So  they  proposed  to  stand  pat. 

They  seem  to  have  controlled  the  board  of  selectmen  at  this 
time.  Thomas  Walford  was  one  of  its  members,  and  there  were 
others  included  who  were  to  petition  against  Pendleton  and  his 
group  some  years  later.  Nothing  constructive  could  be  expected 
of  them.  The  personnel  of  the  board  needed  changing.  The  first 
effort  in  that  direction  proved  over-hasty.  At  a  town  meeting  held 
early  in  April  [1657],  attended  by  only  twenty  men,  Pendleton 
and  four  of  his  friends  were  elected  selectmen  of  Portsmouth.  This 
somewhat  suspicious  action  was  quickly  repudiated  by  a  vote  of 


118  Brian  Pendleton 

the  "whole  town"  seventeen  days  later,  when  the  former  board  was 
chosen  to  remain  in  office  for  the  time  being.^^ 

Temporarily  ^efeated,  Pendleton  now  carried  his  struggle  to 
the  General  Court.  On  a  petition  presented  there  in  the  following 
month,  praying  that  body  to  settle  the  dispute  about  the  meeting 
house,  as  well  as  to  establish  a  minister  at  Portsmouth,  it  was  or- 
dered that  a  committee  be  chosen  to  decide  the  issue  as  they  should 
judge  most  conducive  "to  the  peace  and  welfare  of  the  town". 
One  man  from  each  faction  was  to  serve  on  this  committee,  the 
third  member  of  which  was  to  be  selected  by  the  County  Court  of 
Dover  and  Portsmouth.^^  As  Pendleton  was  one  of  the  Associates 
in  that  Court  it  may  be  suspected  that  the  deciding  arbitrator 
was  not  entirely  neutral.  The  decision  favored  the  Great  Islanders. 
The  site  chosen  for  the  new  meeting  house  was  much  more  con- 
veniently situated  for  them  than  the  old  one  as  it  lay  in  the  south 
end  near  the  fork  of  what  is  now  South  Street  and  Marcy  Street.^^ 
The  opposition  was  completely  routed  in  August,  when  at  a  gen- 
eral town  meeting  a  strongly  Puritan  ticket  headed  by  Pendleton, 
with  both  John  and  Richard  Cutt,  Henry  Sherburne,  and  William 
Seavy  swept  into  power  as  selectmen,  with  the  Captain  as  Treas- 
urer once  more.  At  the  same  time  authority  was  given  them  to 
engage  a  minister  and  undertake  the  building  of  the  new  meeting 
house.^^ 

But  it  was  not  so  easy  getting  the  right  man  for  the  pulpit, 
now  vacant  for  nearly  twelve  months,  although  Pendleton  must 
have  been  intimately  acquainted  with  the  neighboring  incumbents. 
He  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  pillar  of  the  church  for  in 
this  very  year  the  General  Court  had  appointed  him  on  a  commit- 
tee of  certain  wealthy  and  orthodox  laymen  to  inquire  into  the 
condition  of  ministers'  families,  some  of  which  were  said  to  be 
destitute.^'  And  the  clergy  seems  to  have  thought  well  of  him  per- 

"  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  40,  41. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  III,  428-9;  IV,  pt.  1,  297-8. 
"  Rev.  L.  H.  Thayer's  Story  of  a  Religious  Democracy,  p.  49. 
*^  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  41.    The  contract  signed  by  these  selectmen 
and  the  builder  John  Huchins  may  still  be  seen  in  the  New  Hampshire  Prov- 
ince Deeds — Vol.  II,  p.  34b.    It  called  for  a  structure  forty  feet  square,  six- 
teen feet  high  with  twelve  windows  and  three  doors,  but  no  pews.    Huchins 
seems  to  have  had  difficulty  in  obtaining  payment  for  his  services  as  years 
later  he  brought  suit  against  Pendleton  and  Cutt  on  behalf  of  the  town  for 
not  satisfying  him  in  respect  to  this  contract.    Settlement  was  probably  made 
as  the  suit  was  withdrawn — Essex  Court  Records,  IV,  12. 
*•  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  286, 


PoBTSMOUTH  1655-1668  119 

sonally  if  a  remembrance  given  him  in  the  will  of  Rev.  Daniel  Maud 
of  Dover  is  any  indication.^^  Yet  in  spite  of  his  standing  with  them, 
and  the  inducements  the  growing  wealth  of  Portsmouth  had  to 
offer,  to  say  nothing  of  the  opportunity  for  saving  many  a  soul 
there,  no  one  seemed  anxious  to  heed  the  call. 

The  Reverend  Samuel  Dudley  of  Exeter  had  already  refused 
to  listen.  A  Mr.  Wooster  also  turned  a  deaf  ear.'**  Perhaps  they 
felt  the  description  the  Portsmouth  townspeople  had  applied  to 
the  land  there — "soe  badd  its  incredible" — might  also  apply  to 
the  community's  spiritual  estate,  and  they  had  no  desire  to  let 
their  gospel  seed  fall  on  stony  ground.  Finally  the  long  search  for 
a  minister  brought  the  settlement  a  man  of  parts,  the  famous 
Joshua  Moodey,  already  mentioned,  who  was  qualified  in  all  re- 
spects to  help  keep  the  unruly  in  subjection  to  authority,  as  well 
as  to  aid  in  their  regeneration.^®  With  his  coming  the  law  and  the 
gospel  joined  forces.  He  brought  new  vigor  to  the  Puritan  rule 
of  the  town,  worked  hand  in  glove  with  Pendleton,  and  no  doubt 
was  partly  instrumental  in  the  reform  movement  which  took  place 
there  soon  after  his  arrival.^^ 

"  Register,  V,  241-2.  This  bequest  is  not  mentioned  in  the  copy  of  the  will  that 
appears  in  the  Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  XXXI,  27-29. 
«As  indicated  by  the  Portsmouth  town  records  [I,  37,  42].  This  Dudley  was 
probably  the  same  Samuel  Dudley  who  went  surety  with  Pendleton  on  a  bond 
given  by  WiUiara  Paine  in  April,  1656— Suffolk  Court  Files,  Docket  238. 
*'  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey  was  graduated  from  Harvard  in  1653,  began  preaching 
at  Portsmouth  about  1658,  but  was  not  regularly  ordained  until  1671.  New 
Hampshire  was  made  a  Royal  Province  in  1679  and  three  years  later  Moodey 
came  into  conflict  with  Gov.  Cranfield  for  refusing  to  conduct  his  services 
according  to  the  ritual  of  the  Church  of  England.  For  this  he  was  imprisoned 
thirteen  weeks  and  then  forbidden  to  preach  any  more  in  New  Hampshire. 
Removing  to  Boston  he  became  assistant  pastor  of  the  First  Church  and  a 
Fellow  of  Harvard  College,  declining  its  Presidency  which  was  offered  him. 
In  1690  he  was  Chaplain  of  the  expedition  the  New  England  Colonies  sent 
against  Port  Royal.  He  was  opposed  to  the  Witchcraft  delusion  in  1692,  and 
for  helping  Philip  English  and  his  wife,  two  of  the  accused,  to  escape  from 
prison,  was  dismissed  from  his  pastorate  and  returned  to  Portsmouth.  He 
died  in  Boston,  where  he  had  gone  for  medical  treatment,  4  July  1697,  aged 
64  years.  Moodey  was  a  witness  to  the  will  of  Brian  Pendleton  and  probably 
wrote  the  entire  document.  He  is  often  mentioned  in  Sewall's  Diary. 
■"At  a  County  Court  held  in  Dover,  28  June,  1659,  Pendleton  appeared  as 
complainant  against  some  Portsmouth  revellers  who  had  staged  a  drunken 
party  lasting  for  several  days,  ending  up  in  a  wife  beating  episode.  On  other 
complaints  of  much  drunkenness  and  fighting  there,  even  on  the  Sabbath,  the 
sale  of  liquor  was  prohibited  on  that  day  except  to  fishermen  who  might  be 
lodging  in  taverns.  Only  two  such  licenses  were  to  be  issued  at  Portsmouth, 
and  the  tavern  keepers,  George  Walton  and  Walter  Abbott,  were  restricted 
to  selling  wine  and  ordered  to  get  rid  of  their  "strong  waters"  before  October. 
And  only  one  private  housekeeper  was  to  be  licensed  to  sell  strong  liquor, 
but  not  to  suffer  anyone  to  drink  it  on  the  premises. — Court  Papers  of  New 
Hampshire,  I,  1;  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,   II,  26a-b. 


120  Briak  Pkxdleton 

Pendleton  had  already  made  some  effort  in  that  direction. 
That  affair  of  the  new  meeting  house  and  the  ousting  of  the  old 
Board  of  Selectmen  in  August,  1657,  had  shown  who  was  boss.  But 
there  were  some  who  wouldn't  believe  it.  He  needed  further  con- 
firmation of  his  power.  So  in  the  following  May  [1658]  we  find 
him  elected  once  more  as  Deputy  from  Portsmouth  to  the  General 
Court  which  opened  on  the  19th  of  that  month.^^  And  he  went 
down  to  Boston  full  of  determination  to  put  certain  people  in  their 
place — a  desire  which  has  fathered  many  a  reformer  before  and 
since.  That  redoubtable  trainband  of  his — those  ancient  and 
dishonorable  tavernites  ^o  cr^^^  only  to  be  led  beside  the  dis- 
stilled  waters — had  they  n<?|ytfited  him  on  occasions?  Had  they 
not  been  highly  insubordiiBM|f,  ignoring  his  calls  to  drill.''  Let 
them  watch  their  step  here^pCT.  He  would  show  them  he  was  not 
a  man  to  be  trifled  with. 

"Whereas"  says  the  Court  record,  "information  hath  been 
given  to  this  Court  that  several  of  the  souldjers  at  Portsmouth 
doe  apprehend  themselves  not  under  the  command  of  there  com- 
mander .  .  .  but  account  themselves  at  liberty  to  traine  when  they 
please,  this  Court  thinks  meete  to  declare,  that  the  souldjers  of 
the  toune  aforesaid  .  .  .  are  subject  to  the  same  way  and  order  of 
discipline  with  ourselves,  &  ought  to  attend  theire  owne  commander 
therein,  and  in  case  of  any  remissnes  therein  to  be  liable  to  the 
same  fines  as  ourselves."  To  make  this  declaration  more  pointed 
the  Court  ordered  "that  the  inhabitants  of  Portsmouth  shall  at- 
tend all  military  service  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Brian  Pen- 
dleton, according  to  the  laws  of  this  jurisdiction."  Another  warn- 
ing to  his  unruly  constituents  is  put  into  this  same  order  when 
the  Court  went  on  to  declare  it  expected  "that  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Pascataqua  doe  attend  the  observanc  of  our  lawes,  in  particu- 
lar those  concerning  the  selling  of  strong  liquors  and  good  order 
to  be  kept  in  ordinaries,  and  that  the  Court  commissioners  and 
officers  there  take  speciall  care  therein.^^ 

So  that  was  settled  to  his  satisfaction.  He  would  show  them 
when  he  returned.  And  now  for  certain  other  matters  where  satis- 
faction was  also  due  him.  Portsmouth's  Deputy  usually  attended 
these  General  Courts  armed  with  various  petitions  in  which  he  had 

"^Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  47;  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.   1,  321. 
^''Massachusetts  Records,   IV,  pt.   1,  329,  338;   also   Massachusetts   Archives, 
LXVII,  10. 


POBT8MOtJTH  1655-1658  121 

a  more  or  less  personal  interest,  and  this  meeting  was  no  exception 
to  the  rule.  We  have  noted  in  a  previous  chapter  the  favorable 
action  he  secured  at  this  time  on  his  request  for  a  grant  of  land  to 
reward  his  services  on  the  Commissions  to  the  Eastward,  but  on 
another  claim  he  met  with  delay  although  through  no  fault  of  the 
Court.  This  petition  reads, as  follows: 

"To  the  Honored  Generall  Court  of  Magistrates 

att  Boston  asembled  this  present  moh  1658. 

The  Humble  Request  of  Brian  Pendleton  of  Pascatta- 

quak 

Sheweth  that  in  the  last  month  Aprill :  it  happened  that 

t;R^o  seamen  beinge  drawn  out  of  our  River  in  a  canow ;  the 

one  of  the  sd  men  beinge  Ded  with  Could  or  ffrost  the 

other  beinge  much  ff rozen  came  into  our  Hand :  &  beinge 

made  aquainted  with  it  wee  tooke  what  course  wee  could 

ifor  his  good;  but  seeinge  his  nesesity  Required  better 

meanes  I  hired  a  man  &  a  horse  &  sent  him  to  hamton 

wheare  the  Charge  will  be  greate  whether  hee  Line  or 

Dy- 

My  Humble  Request  therefore  to  this  Honered 
Court  is  that  they  will  be  pleased  to  giue  such  order  from 
this  Court  that  I  may  haue  power  to  Rayse  the  sd  Charge 
ffrom  the  several  townes  on  the  River  (videliset)  ffrom 
Portsmouth  Doner  &  [Kittery]  :  which  may  be  an  Incour- 
agment  to  yr  servant  ffor  to  put  himselfe  forward  in 
time  to  Come  in  such  workes  of  Charity  &  Rest  at  yr 
servise  at  all  times  in  what  I  may."  ^ 

Just  matter  of  fact,  a  skeleton  outline,  this  petition.  No 
hint  as  to  the  identity  of  these  frozen  men,  nor  how  they  came 
there,  nor  why,  nor  from  what  strange  adventure — just  a  bare 
recital,  the  dead  and  the  half  dead  drifting  in  from  the  icy  sea,  the 
mystery  left  untouched — but  the  thought  expressed  that  the  peti- 
tioner should  be  reimbursed  for  his  outlay  in  an  act  of  charity.^^ 

^Massachusetts  Archives,  LX,  67;  Maine  Historical  Society  Collections,  VI, 
11-13.  Because  of  the  opposition  of  Dover  and  Kittery  against  standing  any 
part  of  this  expense,  it  was  three  years  before  Pendleton  could  collect  for 
his  outlay. 

"There  was  no  mystery  in  the  affair.  Indeed  the  facts  must  have  been  gen- 
erally known  for  Hubbard  refers  to  them  in  his  History  of  New  England 
[p.  647].  "April  20,  1658",  he  says,  "was  observed  to  be  the  coldest  night  in 
all  the  year,  in  which  two  men  going  from  aboard  a  ship  which  lay  in  Pas- 
cataqua  river,  towards  Kittery  side,  and  being  so  drunk  that  they  were  not 
able  to  get  to  the  ship  again,  were  found  next  morning  near  the  shore,  one 
dead  .  .  .  the  other  so  frozen  ...  he  rotted  away  by  piece  meal,  and  so  died." 


'122  Brian  Pendleton 

The  Court  agreed  with  the  idea  of  their  business-like  Samaritan, 
and  then  after  appointing  him  on  a  commission  with  Capt.  Nicho- 
las Shapleigh  and  Nicholas  Frost  to  determine  the  boundary  line 
between  York  and  Wells,^^  and  assigning  him  to  a  committee  to 
hear  the  appeal  of  the  notorious  Edward  Colcord  in  a  civil  suit,^® 
went  on  to  the  consideration  of  more  important  matters. 

There  were  plenty  of  these — the  twenty-six  duties  of  a  con- 
stable to  be  defined,  the  perennial  iron  works  case  wrangled  over, 
another  commission  appointed  to  extend  the  colony's  jurisdiction 
in  Maine,  the  teaching  of  "unsound  doctrine"  in  the  churches  pro- 
vided against,  and  most  important  of  all,  additional  laws  enacted 
to  suppress  a  strange  and  militant  sect — the  Society  of  Friends — 
whose  continued  invasions  of  the  Puritan  sanctuary  had  filled  the 
rulers  with  wild  alarm.^^  Thanks  to  one  Capt.  Thomas  Bond,  who 
had  but  recently  dropped  anchor  in  the  Piscataqua,  Pendleton  had 
already  encountered  two  of  its  emissaries.  As  the  local  magistrate 
he  seems  to  have  dealt  with  them  as  provided  for  under  a  former 
statute,  and  the  Court  now  asked  him  to  certify  to  their  deporta- 
tion when  made.  Spiritually  invigorated  by  his  direct  contact  with 
Boston's  mounting  fury  in  a  new  crusade,  there  can  be  no  doubt 
but  that  he  returned  to  Portsmouth  more  determined  than  ever  to 
lay  a  heavy  hand  upon  those  who  challenged  the  laws,  the  institu- 
tions, or  the  faith  of  Massachusetts. 

The  challenge  had  already  come.  The  inevitable  catastrophe 
was  drawing  near,  foreshadowed  by  the  earlier  persecutions  the 
colony  had  waged  to  enforce  conformity  to  its  politico-religious 
system.  Roger  Williams,  John  Wheelwright,  Ann  Hutchinson, 
Dr.  Child  and  his  fellow  Remonstrants,  the  hapless  Gortonites,  the 
Baptists  from  Rhode  Island,  all  these  in  turn  had  felt  the  rigor 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  340-1.  The  commission's  report,  dated 
27  Marcli  1658/59,  was  presented  to  the  General  Court  in  May  that  year,  and 
was  accepted  by  them. — Ibid.,  pp.  373-4. 

^  Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  1,  340.  Pendleton's  fellow  committeemen  were  Lieut.  Robert 
Pike — whom  we  have  met  before — Valentine  Hill,  and  Thomas  Bradbury,  all 
of  whom  at  times  were  Associate  Justices  of  the  Hampton  Court — an  indica- 
tion perhaps  that  they  were  serving  on  that  bench  this  year.  The  meeting 
of  the  Committee  with  the  litigants  was  held  at  Pendleton's  early  in  the  fol- 
lowing October,  but  the  report  was  not  favorable  to  Colcord.  {Ibid.,  p.  350; 
Massachusetts  Archives,  XXXIX,  26.)  He  seems  to  have  been  the  champion 
litigant  of  the  country,  so  much  so  in  fact  as  to  become  a  public  nuisance. 
Some  years  later  his  exasperated  neighbors,  worn  out  by  his  activities  in 
"having  the  law  on  them",  petitioned  the  General  Court  to  take  action  against 
him  as  a  "litigious  man" — Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,   11. 

<"  Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  1,  324-7,  331,  338,  328,  321. 


Portsmouth  1656-1668  123 

of  its  intolerant  spirit.  And  now,  through  the  adoption  of  the 
"Cambridge  Platform"  this  intolerance  had  become  mandatory 
upon  the  civil  power.  The  state  was  but  a  robot  of  the  church,  an 
instrument  of  oppression,  as  it  always  is  when  in  the  hands  of  the 
clergy.  It  was  in  vain  that  the  friends  of  the  colony  in  England, 
alarmed  by  its  growing  tyranny,  sent  over  a  protest  "that  you 
fine,  whip  and  imprison  men  for  their  consciences",  vain  for  them 
to  pray  "that  the  Lord  would  give  you  meeke  and  humble  spirits, 
not  to  strive  so  much  for  uniformity".^*  It  was  too  late.  The 
habit  of  persecution  had  become  second  nature  to  the  savage  bigots 
who  now  controlled  the  government.  Again  they  felt  the  rising 
clamor  in  their  blood,  a  growing  excitement,  age  old  emotions  ris- 
ing and  swelling — primitive  emotions,  fear  and  hatred,  the  fierce 
joy  in  hating,  the  lust  to  destroy  the  hated,  the  devilish  rapture 
in  cruelty.  Drunk  with  their  own  zeal  and  with  none  to  restrain 
them,  hounded  on  by  a  fanatical  clergy,  they  were  now  to  fare 
forth  upon  the  most  vindictive  and  cruel  pogrom  of  all.  The  dark 
days  of  Massachusetts  were  at  hand. 


**  From  letter  of  Sir  Richard  Saltonstall  to  the  Reverends  John  Cotton  and 
John  Wilson.  {4  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  II,  327.) 
Several  passages  from  this  famous  letter  are  inscribed  on  the  pedestal  sup- 
porting the  statue  of  Sir  Richard  which  surmounts  the  Memorial  erected  to 
the  Founders  of  Watertown. 


CHAPTER  IX 
THE  QUAKERS 

"So  I  returned  and  considered  all  the  oppressions  that  are  done  under 
the  sun;  and  beheld  the  tears  of  such  as  were  oppressed,  and  they  had  no  com- 
forter; and  on  the  side  of  their  oppressors  there  was  power;  but  they  had  no 
comforter." — Ecclesiastes,  4:1. 

"And  moreover  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of  judgment,  that  wicked- 
ness was  there;  and  the  place  of  righteousness,  that  iniquity  was  there." — 
Ecclesiastes,  3:16. 

We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapters  how  the  Puritans  of 
Massachusetts  established  their  theocracy,  cast  out  dissenters 
from  their  ranks,  denied  the  suffrage  to  all  but  the  members  of 
their  church,  and  extended  their  control  over  the  Eastern  settle- 
ments. The  triumph  of  their  party  in  England  had  left  them  free 
to  work  out  their  schemes  of  aggrandizement.  There  was  neither 
King  nor  Bishop  to  interfere  with  them.  They  had  consolidated 
their  power.  They  had  perfected  that  most  unholy  of  all  alliances, 
the  union  between  church  and  state.  But  now  their  system  of  gov- 
ernment was  to  be  challenged  by  a  new  and  militant  sect  which  had 
sprung  up  in  England.  This  sect  was  the  Society  of  Friends — the 
Quakers,  as  their  opponents  originally  called  them  in  derision.  The 
fanatical  struggle  to  keep  them  out  of  the  major  New  England 
colony  is  the  Dark  Age  of  Puritanism  —  the  night  that  always 
comes  when  ecclesiastics  control  a  government. 

As  a  hard-headed  business  man,  Pendleton  may  have  felt  some 
misgivings  as  to  the  existence  of  any  such  beings  as  witches,  and 
for  that  reason,  perhaps,  did  not  carry  to  a  final  conclusion  the 
Portsmouth  witchcraft  case  of  1656.  But  when  it  came  to  Quakers, 
he  does  not  seem  to  have  regarded  them  with  much  less  abhorrence 
than  shown  by  his  fellow  magistrates.  Most  aggressive  of  all  the 
sects  spawned  by  the  Civil  War  in  England,  the  Quakers  went 
the  furthest  in  stripping  religion  of  dogma  and  ceremonial.  Their 
principles  upset  all  established  orders.  In  a  world  where  almost 
universally  church  and  state  were  one,  they  believed  in  the  com- 
plete separation  of  church  and  state.  They  defied  all  ecclesiastical 
authority,  and  all  civil  laws  that  supported  its  power.  They  would 
not  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  ministry  nor  would  they  per- 
form military  service.  They  refused  to  take  oaths.  To  symbolize 

124 


The  Quakers  126 

their  idea  of  the  equality  of  man  they  kept  their  hats  on  when 
haled  before  the  Courts.  In  all  ways  they  violently  antagonized 
the  theocracy,  and  ministers  and  magistrates  vied  with  each  other 
in  their  efforts  to  exterminate  a  sect  which  both  regarded  with  the 
same  abhorrence  that  churchmen  and  people  of  property  feel  to- 
day towards  the  Communist. 

To  the  Puritan  the  Quaker  was  an  iconoclast — an  iconoclast 
of  formalized  religion.  His  doctrine  of  the  "Inner  Light",  or  pri- 
vate inspiration,  was  peculiarly  abominable.  It  involved  an  abso- 
lute right  to  interpret  the  Scriptures  according  to  one's  personal 
judgment.  No  wonder  the  theocracy  was  wildly  alarmed.  It 
recognized  in  the  Quaker  a  deadly  enemy  to  its  power  for  whoever 
teaches  man  to  question  dogma  or  creed,  to  think  for  himself,  to 
break  loose  from  fear  and  superstition,  strikes  at  the  very  founda- 
tion of  all  the  priestcrafts  that  have  ever  been.  In  their  rational- 
istic views  the  Quakers  were  over  two  hundred  years  ahead  of  their 
time  and  like  the  advanced  thinkers  in  all  ages  they  paid  the  pen- 
alty for  urging  their  ideas  against  the  established  order  and  be- 
liefs that  dominated  society  then. 

And  so  they  were  persecuted  in  both  England  and  New  Eng- 
land. At  one  time  more  than  four  thousand  of  them  were  in 
English  jails.  No  established  church  can  tolerate  competition — 
or  heresy,  its  religious  synonym.  The  theologian  has  always  be- 
lieved it  the  sacred  duty  of  truth  to  persecute  falsehood.  And 
falsehood  is  always  whatever  else  the  other  man  believes.  But  be- 
lief cannot  be  controlled  by  statute,  nor  changed  by  fear  of  pun- 
ishment, nor  even  by  fear  of  death  itself.  It  is  not  like  a  suit  of 
clothes  to  be  changed  with  the  changing  weather  or  with  the  time 
of  day  or  night.  The  zealot  does  not  possess  his  beliefs ;  they  pos- 
sess him,  and  the  more  firmly,  the  more  violently,  when  he  is  per- 
secuted for  them.  It  had  been  so  with  the  Puritans.  It  was  to  be 
still  more  so  with  the  Quakers.  Fanatics  both,  they  staged  on  the 
soil  of  Massachusetts  another  act  in  that  tragic  conflict  which 
man  has  waged  for  centuries — the  war  for  the  freedom  of  belief, 
the  struggle  for  the  liberty  of  conscience. 

For  it  was  in  Massachusetts  alone  that  the  drama  became 
tragedy.  Rhode  Island,  to  its  everlasting  credit,  refused  to  join  in 
the  persecution.  Urged  by  the  commissioners  of  the  United  Colon- 
ies of  Massachusetts,  Plymouth,  Connecticut,  and  New  Haven  to 
banish  and  exclude  all  Quakers,  Rhode  Island  declined  to  take  any 


126  Brian  Pendleton 

such  action,  stating  they  had  no  law  "to  punish  any  for  only  de- 
claring by  words  their  minds  and  understandings  ...  as  to  sal- 
vation and  our  eternal  condition",  and  that  they  still  prized  the 
freedom  of  different  consciences  which  was  the  principal  ground 
of  their  charter.  Threatened  by  Massachusetts  with  loss  of  trade 
unless  she  changed  her  policy,  Rhode  Island  appealed  to  Cromwell 
for  protection.  "Let  us  not  be  compelled",  they  prayed,  "to  exer- 
cise any  civil  power  over  men's  consciences."  ^ 

The  other  colonies  passed  more  or  less  severe  laws  against 
the  Quakers,  enforced  them  for  a  time,  then  let  them  lapse.  They 
could  not  go  to  the  extremity  urged  by  the  iron-willed  rulers  of 
Boston.  For  the  Bay  Colony  was  dominated  by  fanatical  bigots, 
Endicott,  Bellingham,  and  the  pastors  of  the  First  Church,  Wilson 
and  Norton,  ruthless  and  implacable  men,  who  having  determined 
to  stamp  out  heresy  at  any  cost,  went  grimly  on  until  an  aroused 
public  sentiment  and  an  order  from  the  King  stayed  them  in  their 
deadly  course.  Worse  than  the  stigma  of  the  witchcraft  mania, 
an  ancient  and  general  superstition,  the  persecution  of  the  Quak- 
ers remains  as  the  ugliest  blot  in  the  history  of  the  Commonwealth 
for  it  was  based  on  religious  intolerance,  and  the  struggle  of  a 
theocracy  to  maintain  its  power. 

Both  the  clerical  leaders,  John  Wilson,  and  John  Norton, 
were  products  of  Cambridge  University,  England,  Wilson  receiv- 
ing his  A.  B.  degree  at  Christ's  College  there  in  1606 — the  year 
Norton  was  born — and  A.  M.  in  1609.  For  some  years  he  held  a 
ministry  at  Sudbury  in  Suffolk,  but  becoming  disgusted  with  the 
growth  of  ritual  and  vestments  in  the  Church  of  England,  took  to 
Puritanism  and  joined  the  company  that  came  over  with  Governor 
Winthrop.  Active  in  the  persecution  of  Rev.  John  Wheelwright, 
enraged  that  the  Gortonites  escaped  death,  the  white  heat  of  his 
intolerant  spirit  was  again  shown  when  the  three  Baptists  from 
Rhode  Island  who  had  been  seized  at  Lynn  in  the  summer  of  1651, 
were  tried  by  the  Court  of  Assistants.  Sentenced  to  pa}^  heavy 
fines,  or  be  whipped,  one  of  them,  Obadiah  Holmes,  "exprest  my- 
self in  these  words;  I  blesse  God  I  am  counted  worthy  to  suffer 
for  the  name  of  Jesus;  whereupon  John  Wilson  (their  pastor  as 
they  call  him)  strook  me  before  the  Judgment  Seat,  and  cursed  me, 
saying,  'the  Curse  of  God,  or  Jesus  goe  with  thee'."^ 

"^  Rhode  Island  Colonial  Records,  I,  377-380;  395-399. 

"John  Clark,  III  Newes  from  New  England  (London,  1652),  in  4  Massachu- 
setts Historical  Society  Collections,  II,  33,  et  seq. 


The  Quakehs  127 

Later,  when  the  Quakers  appeared  on  the  scene,  Wilson  be- 
came violent  again,  saying  "He  would  carry  fire  in  one  hand,  and 
fagots  in  the  other,  to  burn  all  the  Quakers  in  the  world."^  This 
"great  saint  and  worthy  man",  as  the  Rev.  Cotton  Mather  called 
him,  went  to  his  reward  7  August,  1667.  His  colleague,  Norton, 
who  ably  seconded  him  in  his  godly  works,  came  to  the  Boston 
Church  from  Ipswich,  Massachusetts  in  1653,  after  the  decease  of 
Rev.  John  Cotton.  His  death  occurred  5  April,  1663,  hastened, 
many  believed,  by  his  grief  over  the  insinuations  made  against  him 
and  Bradstreet  for  the  poor  success  of  their  recent  mission  to  Eng- 
land in  the  Colony's  behalf.** 

The  first  Quakers  to  reach  Boston  were  two  women,  Anne 
Austin  and  Mary  Fisher,  who  arrived  in  a  vessel  from  Barbados 
in  May,  1656.  The  fame  of  their  sect  had  preceded  them.  In  the 
absence  of  Gov.  Endicott,  the  Deputy  Governor,  Richard  Belling- 
ham,  had  the  women  arrested  and  lodged  in  jail.  As  the  Bay  Col- 
ony at  that  time  had  no  laws  against  Quakers,  as  such,  the  two  were 
held  on  suspicion  of  witchcraft,  a  trumped  up  charge,  which  proved 
abortive.  The  old  laws  against  heretics  were  then  invoked  against 
them,  and  on  the  11th  of  August  it  was  ordered  that  their  books 
and  papers  should  be  publicly  burnt,  and  that  they  be  kept  in 
close  confinement  until  the  shipmaster  who  brought  them  in  could 
return  them  to  Barbados.^ 

No  sooner  was  Boston  rid  of  them,  however,  than  eight  or 
nine  more  of  these  undesirables,  both  men  and  women,  arrived 
there  direct  from  London.  They  too  were  immediately  clapped  into 
jail  where  they  remained  closely  confined  for  eleven  weeks  until 
they  could  be  deported.  Alarmed  by  what  seemed  a  growing  men- 
ace, the  authorities  considered  measures  for  keeping  such  intrud- 
ers out  of  Massachusetts  and  preventing  the  spread  of  their 
revolutionary  doctrines.  The  first  steps  in  this  direction  were  taken 
at  the  session  of  the  General  Court  held  in  the  following  October 
when  open  war  was  declared  upon  the  Quaker  and  all  his  works. 

After  seriously  considering  the  fact  that  "there  is  a  cursed 
sect  of  heretics  lately  risen  up  in  the  World  which  are  commonly 
called  Quakers,  who  take  upon  them[selves]  to  be  immediately 
sent  of  God  and  infallibly  assisted  by  the  Spirit  to  speak  and  write 

'Bishop,  p.  102. 

'Savage,  IV,  583-5;  Appleton's  Cyclopedia  of  American  Biography,  IV,  636. 

^New  England's  Ensign   (London,  1659),  p.  7;  Bishop,  pp.  9-16. 


128  BaiAN  Pendleton 

blasphemous  opinions",  the  Court  ordered  first,  that  any  ship  mas- 
ter who  knowingly  brought  Quakers  "into  this  jurisdiction"  should 
be  fined  one  hundred  pounds  and  give  security  to  carry  them  back 
to  the  place  whence  he  brought  them;  second,  that  any  Quakers 
who  gained  entrance  should  be  committed  to  the  house  of  correc- 
tion, whipped  severely  upon  entrance  and  kept  constantly  at  work 
while  there  confined ;  third,  a  penalty  of  five  pounds  should  be  im- 
posed for  bringing  in  Quaker  books  or  writings  while  anyone  who 
defended  their  heretical  opinions  should  be  fined  and  subject  to 
banishment  for  repeating  the  offence.^ 

This  order,  published  in  several  places  in  Boston,  by  beat  of 
drum,  claimed  its  first  victim  in  Nicholas  Upsall,  the  proprietor 
of  the  Red  Lyon  Tavern.  Although  a  church  member  and  freeman 
of  the  colony  since  1631,  yet  he  was  not  so  Puritan  as  to  have 
become  flinty  of  heart.  He  had  already  bribed  the  jailer  to  let  him 
supply  Anne  Austin  and  Mary  Fisher  with  food  while  they  were 
imprisoned,  and  now  when  he  heard  this  law  promulgated  against 
the  Quakers,  he  made  bold  to  say  that  he  looked  upon  it  "as  a  sad 
fore-runner  of  some  heavy  judgment  to  fall  on  the  Country". 
Some  tale  bearer  informed  the  magistrates  of  this,  and  Upsall  was 
called  before  them  the  next  day  to  answer  for  his  words.  Here  he 
did  not  improve  his  case  by  suggesting  that  they  should  "take  heed 
lest  ye  should  be  found  fighters  against  God",  so  he  was  fined  £20 
and  sentenced  to  banishment — an  evil  augury  of  what  the  future 
had  in  store.^ 

To  the  Quakers,  however,  the  laws  that  banned,  merely  in- 
vited. A  steady  trickle  of  them  filtered  through  from  Rhode  Is- 
land. Imprisoned  and  cruelly  whipped,  many  of  them  as  soon  as 
released,  would  appear  at  some  other  place  and  resume  their 
heretical  teachings.  Persecution,  as  always,  aroused  sympathy  for 
them,  helped  to  make  them  converts.  The  law  was  not  accomplish- 
ing its  purpose.  To  the  Puritan  mind  such  a  failure  could  be  due 
to  one  reason  only — not  the  law,  but  its  penalties  must  be  at 
fault.  Hence  the  penalties  must  be  made  more  severe,  more  drastic. 
If  flogging  would  not  keep  the  Quakers  out  of  Massachusetts,  the 
fear  of  mutilation  might  give  them  a  greater  respect  for  the  stat- 
ute that  barred  them. 

"  MassacJni.ictts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  277. 

■^Bishop,  pp.  13,  36,  96,  220;  Massachusetts  Records,  IV.  pt.  1,  279.  Upsall 
returned  to  Boston  three  years  later  and  was  twice  imprisoned.  A  biography 
of  him  appears  in  the  Register,  for  January,  1880. 


The  Quakebs  129 

Accordingly  at  the  October  session  of  the  General  Court  the 
following  year  [1657]  it  was  ordered  that  every  male  Quaker,  who 
having  once  suffered  what  the  law  required  but  again  presumed 
"to  come  into  this  jurisdiction",  should  for  the  first  offense  have 
one  of  his  ears  cut  off,  and  for  the  second  offense,  his  other  ear. 
Female  Quakers  who  persisted  in  returning  were  to  be  severely 
whipped  the  first  and  second  times,  while  for  the  third  offense  both 
sexes  were  to  have  their  tongues  bored  through  with  a  hot  iron. 
Under  this  same  act,  all  persons  were  forbidden  to  harbor  or 
entertain  Quakers,  while  those  "arising  from  amongst  ourselves" 
were  to  be  dealt  with  as  provided  for  foreign  Quakers.^ 

Pendleton  was  not  a  member  of  these  two  Courts  which  passed 
the  preliminary  laws  against  the  Friends  but  as  already  noted,  he 
was  again  a  Deputy  from  Portsmouth  at  the  session  which  opened 
19  May,  1658.  As  before,  Quakerism  was  very  much  to  the  front. 
The  sect  was  evidently  spreading  in  spite  of  legislative  interdic- 
tion. The  very  first  act  of  this  Court  was  an  addition  to  the  former 
laws  against  Quakers,  making  more  stringent  the  penalties  to  be 
inflicted  upon  those  who  were  converted  to  their  "pernicious  ways", 
or  helped  to  spread  their  "diabolical  doctrine". '^  On  the  20th  of 
the  month  the  Court  received  a  petition  from  Capt.  Thomas  Bond, 
the  shipmaster  already  mentioned,  asking  for  the  remitment  of  the 
£100  fine  imposed  upon  him  for  bringing  "two  Quaker  maids  from 
Jamaica"  into  the  Piscataqua  River.  In  spite  of  his  ingenuous 
plea  that  he  did  not  know  that  river  was  in  the  jurisdiction  of 
Massachusetts,  and  that  he  had  no  desire  "to  transgress  any  laws 
in  such  places  as  I  come  unto,  much  less  when  I  come  amongst  such 
a  people  soe  godly",^^  the  Court  decided  his  bond  should  stand 
good,  "until  Capt.  Pendleton  or  some  other  person  of  knoune 
credit"  should  certify  that  he  had  "observed  the  law  in  keeping 
the  said  Quakers  from  conversing  with  any  of  this  jurisdiction 
whiles  they  stay  heere  on  board  his  shipp  &  that  he  .  .  .  hath  carried 
them  to  England  or  ye  place  from  whence  they  came".^^  It  would 
seem  from  this  that  the  act  of  1656  was  working  well  enough  as 
far  as  concerned  the  bringing  in  of  Quakers  direct.  But  they  still 
slipped  in  "by  a  back  door"  as  Massachusetts  complained  later 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  308-9.    Bishop   [pp.  76-7]   says  this  savage 

law  was  applied  to  three  Quakers  who  had  their  right  ears  cut  ofp. 

»Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  1,321. 

^^  Massachusetts  Archives,  X,  240. 

^^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  328-9. 


130  Brian  Pendleton 

on,'-  this  "back  door"  being  the  much  hated  colony  of  Rhode 
Island. 

The  frantic  measures  to  suppress  the  Quakers  were  now  ap- 
proaching a  climax.  Whippings  and  imprisonments  were  not 
enough.  The  cutting  off  of  ears  was  not  enough.  The  final  penalty 
remained.  "But  to  compass  that,"  says  Sewel,'^  "proved  very 
difficult ;  for  there  were  many  honest  people  who  abhorred  such  a 
cruelty.  Yet  John  Norton,  and  the  other  priests,  petitioned  the 
magistrates  to  cause  the  Court  to  make  some  law  to  banish  the 
Quakers  upon  pain  of  death.  This  gave  encouragement  to  the 
magistrates  for  since  the  churchmen  pushed  on  so  wicked  a  busi- 
ness, no  scruple  was  made  to  go  on  with  this  bloody  work." 

The  measure  was  brought  before  the  October  session  of  the 
Court  but  was  not  carried  without  a  struggle.  Had  it  been  pre- 
sented at  the  May  session,  it  would  probably  have  met  a  different 
fate.  At  that  time  thirty-four  deputies  were  returned  by  the  dif- 
ferent towns,'^  but,  as  in  Pendleton's  case,  quite  a  number  of  these 
were  undoubtedly  elected  for  that  sitting  only.^^  With  fewer  mem- 
bers present,  and  these  probably  from  towns  nearer  Boston,  the 
oligarchy  had  a  better  chance  to  work  its  will.  Even  at  that,  how- 
ever, the  measure  nearly  failed  of  passage;  of  the  twenty-six  Depu- 
ties present,  the  Speaker  and  fourteen  others,  according  to  Bishop, 
were  opposed  to  the  bill.  One  of  them  unfortunately  became  ill, 
and  two  others  yielded  to  pressure,  so  that  finally  the  law  was 
passed  by  a  vote  of  thirteen  to  twelve.  Of  these  twelve  all  but 
two  were  finally  mollified  by  an  amendment  to  the  law  providing 
for  the  Quakers  to  be  tried  by  a  special  jury  instead  of  by  three 
judges  only,  as  originally  proposed.^* 

The  opposition  to  the  law  among  the  Deputies  is  an  evidence 

"  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  385. 

^  The  History  of  the  People  Called  Quakers,  1,  342. 

'^*  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  320-1. 

"  The  Portsmouth  records  under  date  of  18  May,  1658,  state  that  Capt.  Brian 

Pendleton  was  chosen  Deputy  "to  go  to  the  General  Court  .  .  .  this  present 

Court,  beginning  19  May,  1658",  but  do  not  show  that  any  Deputy  was  sent 

to  the  Court  in  the  following  October,  although  a  town  meeting  was  held  on 

the  12th  of  that  month. 

"  Bishop,  pp.  83-4.  The  Massachusetts  Records  do  not  give  the  names  of  the 

Deputies  present  at  this  session.    The  law  as  passed  appears  in  Volume  IV, 

part  1,  at  page  346.  Two  years  later  it  was  specified  that  those  Quakers  "found 

in  this  jurisdiction  after  banishment  on  pain  of  death"  should  be  tried  by  a 

jury  of  twelve  men  (Ibid.,  pp.  432-3) — further  evidence  of  the  drift  of  public 

opinion. 


The  QuAKEiis  131 

of  the  change  that  was  taking  place  in  public  sentiment,  inasmuch 
as  there  was  no  general  reluctance  in  prescribing  the  death  penalty 
in  those  days.  No  less  than  fifteen  capital  crimes  were  on  the  early 
statutes  of  Massachusetts.  Included  were  such  offences  as  blas- 
phemy, witchcraft,  "presumptuous  Sabbath  breaking",  and  curs- 
ing or  striking  one's  parents.^^  As  the  infliction  of  the  penalty 
seems  to  have  been  avoided  except  in  cases  of  murder  or  other 
crimes  of  violence,  it  meant  little  more  than  a  threat  in  relation  to 
the  ecclesiastical  offences,  and  it  is  quite  likely  the  majority  of 
those  who  voted  for  this  infamous  law  against  the  Quakers  never 
expected  it  would  be  carried  into  effect.  They  overlooked  the  mar- 
tyrdom-seeking spirit  of  the  fanatic.  They  failed  to  estimate  the 
bigot  ferocity  latent  in  Endicott  and  Norton.  They  thought  to 
set  up  a  scare-crow — and  to  their  horror,  it  came  to  life. 

The  fate  they  challenged  was  not  long  deferred.  In  June, 
1659,  two  English  Quakers,  William  Robinson  and  Marmaduke 
Stevenson,  came  to  Boston  from  Rhode  Island  and  were  impris- 
oned. Mary  Dyer,  wife  of  the  Secretary  of  that  Colony,  coming 
to  visit  them,  was  also  jailed.  She  had  already  suffered  imprison- 
ment in  Boston  for  being  a  Quaker.  All  three  were  sentenced  to 
banishment  upon  pain  of  death,  and  were  released  on  the  12th  of 
September.  Mrs.  Dyer  returned  to  Rhode  Island  but  Robinson 
and  Stevenson  went  to  Salem  the  following  day,  and  then  to  the 
Piscataqua  region  where  they  remained  "in  the  service  of  the 
Lord",  as  Bishop  says,  for  nearly  a  month. 

Although  the  sentence  imposed  upon  them  gave  them  only 
two  days  to  leave  the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts,  yet  none  of 
the  magistrates  to  the  north  of  Boston  seems  to  have  taken  any 
notice  of  their  presence  in  those  parts.  It  is  quite  possible  these 
magistrates  had  no  desire  to  become  accessories  to  the  death  of 
these  fated  men  and  so  let  them  stay  unmolested.  However  that 
may  be,  the  two  deliberately  retraced  their  steps,  resolved  on  mar- 
tyrdom if  need  be,  "constrained  .  .  .  not  to  depart,  but  ...  to  try 
your  bloody  law  unto  Death". 

Finally  taken  into  custody  once  more,  they  were  sent  down  to 
Boston  where  they  arrived  October  13th  accompanied  by  six 
Quakers  from  Salem,  one  of  whom  brought  linen  "wherein  to  wrap 

'^''Colonial  Laws  of  Massachusetts,  pp.  14-16.  The  laws  of  England  at  this 
time  were  far  more  barbaric,  over  a  hundred  offenses  being  punishable  by 
death.    Convictions,  however,  may  have  been  difficult  to  secure. 


132  Brian  Pekdleton 

the  dead  bodies  of  those  who  were  to  suffer".  They  had  not  long 
to  wait.  Six  da3^s  later  they  were  examined  before  the  Court,  to- 
gether with  Mary  Dyer  who  had  again  returned  to  Boston,  heed- 
less of  the  doom  that  awaited  her  there.  On  the  20th  of  October 
the  three  were  condemned  to  death,  Governor  Endicott  pronounc- 
ing the  sentence  himself.  The  two  men  were  executed  October  27th 
but  Mary  Dyer  was  reprieved  at  the  last  moment. 

The  moving  account  given  by  Bishop  of  the  execution  of 
these  Quakers  states  that  just  as  Mary  Dyer  was  about  to  be 
hanged,  her  legs  and  arms  bound,  a  handkerchief  across  her  eyes, 
and  the  halter  about  her  neck,  "an  order  came  .  .  .  for  her  reprieve, 
upon  the  petition  of  her  son,  unknown  to  her".^^  While  this  gives 
a  dramatic  touch  to  the  narrative,  which  other  Quaker  writers 
have  not  overlooked,  the  Massachusetts  Records  put  the  matter 
in  a  somewhat  different  light.  The  reprieve  as  entered  therein 
stipulates  that  "the  sayd  Mary  Dyer  shall  have  liberty  for  forty- 
eight  bowers  after  this  day  to  depart  out  of  this  jurisdiction  .  .  . ; 
and  it  is  further  ordered  that  she  shall  be  carrjed  to  the  place  of 
execution,  &  there  to  stand  upon  the  gallowes,  with  a  rope  about 
her  necke,  till  the  rest  be  executed,  &  then  to  retourne  to  the  prison 
&  remain  as  aforesajd" — i.  e.,  until  her  son  took  her  away.  It 
would  appear  from  this  that  the  reprieve  was  granted  either  on 
the  day  of  execution  or  immediately  prior  to  that  day,  but  whether 
or  not  she  knew  of  it  when  she  went  to  the  scaffold  is  a  question. 
Bishop  says  she  did  not,  but  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  even  the 
Puritan  magistrates  would  have  perpetrated  such  a  refined  cruelty 
as  this. 

That  the  infliction  of  the  death  penalty  on  the  Quakers  was 
not  altogether  popular  in  Boston  is  shown  not  only  by  the  care 
taken  to  guard  the  prison  the  week  before  the  executions,  to  post 
sentinels  throughout  the  town,  and  to  provide  a  detachment  of  one 
hundred  heavily  armed  soldiers  to  conduct  the  three  martyrs  to 
the  gallows,  but  also  by  the  long  declaration  put  out  by  the  Gen- 
eral Court  after  the  executions  in  which  they  defended  their  course 
and  tried  to  justify  it  b}^  liberal  references  to  the  Scriptures.  One 
copy  of  this  declaration  was  handed  to  the  press,  and  other  copies 
were  sent  to  the  several  towns. ^*^  The  magistrates  evidently  felt 
that  public  opinion  was  running  against  them,  and  in  the  minds  of 

i«  Bishop,  pp.  97,  99,  110. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  383-390. 


The  Quakers  133 

some  there  must  have  been  a  haunting  doubt  which  no  attempt  at 
self- justification  could  thoroughly  allay. 

This  is  further  indicated  by  the  fact  that  when  in  the  follow- 
ing March  [1660]  those  much  persecuted  Quakers,  Joseph  Nich- 
olson, and  Jane,  his  wife,  again  appeared  in  Boston  after  banish- 
ment on  pain  of  death,  the  penalty  was  not  imposed  but  they  were 
held  in  prison  until  they  could  be  deported.  We  shall  meet  Nichol- 
son again.  Mary  Dyer,  however,  who  had  again  returned,  led  by 
her  "Inner  Light",  did  not  escape  this  time.  Called  before  the 
whole  Court  "she  acknowledged  herself  to  be  Mary  Dyer,  the  per- 
son [who]  was  condemned  by  this  Court  to  death.  Being  asked 
what  she  had  to  say  why  that  sentence  should  not  be  executed  she 
gave  no  other  answer  but  that  she  denied  our  law,  came  to  bear 
witness  against  it,  and  could  not  choose  but  come  and  do  as  for- 
merly". On  the  30th  of  May  the  Court  ordered  the  former  sen- 
tence should  be  fulfilled.^® 

And  so  on  the  first  day  of  June,  1660,  about  nine  o'clock  in 
the  morning  the  prison  door  opened  to  Mary  Dyer  for  the  last 
time.  Under  an  escort  of  heavily  armed  men,  with  drums  beating 
to  drown  out  anything  she  might  say,  she  was  again  led  to  the  gal- 
lows, unfaltering  and  unafraid.  There  was  no  reprieve  this  time. 
With  "Priest"  Wilson  calling  upon  her  to  "repent,  repent",  she 
was  turned  off  into  eternity — and  her  body  hung  there  "like  a 
flag",  as  Atherton  said,  for  others  to  take  warning  by.^^ 

The  gallows  was  to  claim  but  one  more  Quaker  victim  in  Mas- 
sachusetts. Popular  feeling  was  rising  against  the  theocracy.  It 
was  fighting  a  losing  battle.  The  Puritan  Commonwealth  in  Eng- 
land had  come  to  an  end.  After  Cromwell's  death  in  1658  it  fell 
to  pieces  rapidly.  The  royalists  seized  the  government  and  pro- 
claimed Prince  Charles  king  on  the  8th  of  May,  1660.  Under  these 
conditions  it  might  be  best  to  go  a  little  slow  in  hanging  Quakers 
in  Massachusetts.  The  Colony  already  had  plenty  of  enemies. 
News  from  its  agent  in  London  was  of  a  disturbing  nature.  A 
special  meeting  of  the  General  Court  was  called  in  December, 
1660,  to  consider  what  course  to  take. 

Pendleton,  who  had  not  attended  any  Court  since  May,  1658, 
was  a  Deputy  at  this  session.  A  fulsome  address  to  the  King  was 
prepared,  craving  that  their  civil  and  religious  liberties  might  be 

'"Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  419,  433;  Archives,  X,  261-264. 
'^Bishop,  pp.  119,  450-1. 


134  Brian  Pendleton 

continued,  and  their  patents  confirmed.  As  to  the  Quakers,  "open 
&  capital!  blasphemers",  those  who  died  brought  their  blood  on 
their  own  heads.  So  "lett  not  the  king  heare  mens  words".  Do  not 
listen  to  those  who  bring  complaints  against  us.  Our  acts  were 
only  for  our  self  protection.  Even  at  the  last,  if  the  Quakers  we 
hanged  had  promised  to  depart  and  not  to  return  without  lief,  we 
should  have  been  glad  to  let  them  go.  A  similar  address  was  pre- 
pared to  Parliament,  and  careful  instructions  laid  down  for  their 
agents  to  follow.  There  is  one  striking  sentence  in  the  memorial 
to  the  King  which  sums  up  the  Puritan  character  not  only  in  their 
time  but  for  all  time:  "Irregularities  either  in  ourselves  or  others 
we  desire  to  be  amended."  ^^ 

They  were  to  amend  only  one  more  Quaker  irregularity  by 
death.  William  Leddra,  the  fourth  and  last  martyr  to  die  in  New 
England  for  the  cause  of  religious  freedom,  was  executed  early  in 
1661.  While  his  trial  was  in  progress  a  dramatic  scene  occurred. 
Wenlock  Christison,  another  Quaker  also  under  the  death  penalty 
if  he  returned  to  Massachusetts,  strode  into  the  Court  and  warned 
the  Magistrates  to  shed  no  more  innocent  blood.  His  appearance 
daunted  them  somewhat  and  there  was  silence  for  a  space,^^  but 
nevertheless  after  he  was  removed  by  the  jailer  the  trial  proceeded 
and  Leddra  was  condemned  to  die.  The  sentence  was  carried  out 
on  the  14th  of  March,  1661.^*  About  the  time  of  his  execution 
Christison  was  brought  before  the  Court  of  Assistants,  and  also 
sentenced  to  be  hanged.  He  appealed  from  the  verdict,^^  however, 
and  was  held  a  prisoner  for  the  next  session  of  the  General  Court. 

n. 

Up  to  this  time  Pendleton  had  escaped  sitting  in  the  Courts 
of  Death,  but  he  was  again  a  Deputy  from  Portsmouth  at  the 
stormy  session  which  opened  on  the  22nd  of  May  and  lasted  until 
the  10th  of  June,  1661.^®  While  there  was  no  opposition  to  the 
re-election  of  Endicott  and  Bellingham  as  Governor  and  Deputy 
Governor  respectively,  with  the  same  group  of  Assistants  as  be- 
fore, the  Court  seems  to  have  fallen  into  difficulties  over  the  final 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  448;  450-453;  452. 

^Bishop   (1667),  pp.  13-14.     (Philadelphia  Reprint,  p.   194) 

"  Ibid.,  Title  page. 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  21. 

''Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  2,  2. 


The  Quakers  136 

disposition  of  the  Christison  case.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that 
many  there  were  most  reluctant  to  bring  it  to  a  head,  and  the 
records  indicate  it  was  put  off  as  long  as  possible  while  other 
matters  were  acted  upon  first.  In  his  account  of  this  session  of 
the  Court,  Bishop  says  "The  Lord  mingled  a  spirit  of  confusion 
among  you  so  that  you  were  in  a  manner  broken  and  could  not 
hold  together  to  put  the  innocent  to  death  .  .  .  insomuch  that 
John  Endicott  your  governor  was  wroth  and  went  away  from  the 
Court  discontented,  and  kept  from  it  for  the  space  of  two  days". 
He  was  persuaded  to  return,  however,  by  the  more  fanatical  of  the 
members  promising  him  that  Christison  would  be  proceeded 
against,  but  it  was  not  until  early  June  that  the  Quaker  was 
brought  to  trial. 

The  scene  was  now  set  for  the  last  act  in  which  a  man  should 
stake  his  life  against  the  power  of  the  Massachusetts  theocracy. 
There  were  his  persecutors  and  their  savage  adherents,  clamoring 
for  his  death.  There  was  their  law  which  he  had  flouted.  And  on 
his  side  there  were  only  a  handful  of  his  friends  who  accompanied 
him  to  Court,  and  those  of  the  Magistrates  and  Deputies  "who 
could  not  consent  to  the  putting  of  this  servant  of  the  Lord  to 
death",  their  consciousness  of  the  innocent  blood  that  had  been 
spilt  and  the  results  thereof  weighing  heavily  upon  them.  Was 
Pendleton  one  of  these?  What  emotions  stirred  him  now?  Did 
the  same  spirit  of  mercy  move  him  that  he  had  shown  long  ago  in 
the  case  of  Doctor  Child?  Or  had  he  become  more  Puritanical, 
more  intolerant,  since  then  through  his  closer  association  with  the 
colony's  leaders?  He  had  advanced  their  political  schemes  in 
every  way — was  he  now  equally  in  accord  with  their  ecclesiastical 
policy?  Had  "righteousness",  increasing  in  him,  hardened  his 
heart?  Or  had  the  years  mellowed  him  still  more?  We  do  not 
know.  We  can  only  give  the  vivid  account  of  the  "trial"  as  re- 
corded by  Bishop.^^ 

"And  after  two  weeks",  says  he,  "during  which  the  natural 
sun  shone  not  in  the  firmament — a  remarkable  demonstration  .  .  . 
of  the  displeasure  of  the  Lord  against  your  work  .  .  .  Wenlock 
Christison  was  brought  before  the  judgment  seat.    Coming  thither 

^Bishop  (1667),  pp.  30-35.  The  abstract  following  is  generally  that  of  the 
Second  Edition  of  1703,  which,  while  adhering  to  the  First  almost  word  for 
word,  maintains  the  continuity  of  the  narrative  much  better  by  cutting  out 
nearly  all  of  the  comments  that  Bishop  originally  interjected.  The  account 
of  Christison's  trial  appears  at  pp.  207-211  of  the  Philadelphia  Reprint. 


136  Brian  Pendleton 

in  good  countenance,  because  he  felt  the  power  of  God  over  all; 
and  being  there  set  your  governor  asked  him,  'What  he  had  to  say 
for  himself,  why  he  might  not  die?'  'I  have  done  nothing  worthy 
of  death'  replied  Wenlock ;  'if  I  have,  I  refuse  not  to  die'. 

"  'Thou  art  come  in  amongst  us  in  rebellion,'  said  another  of 
you,  'which  is  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft,  and  ought  to  be  punished 
.  .  .'  'I  came  not  in  among  you  in  rebellion,'  answered  Wenlock, 
'but  in  obedience  to  the  God  of  heaven ;  not  in  contempt  of  any  of 
you,  but  in  love  to  your  souls  and  bodies ;  and  that  you  shall  know 
one  day,  when  you  and  all  men  must  give  an  account  of  your  deeds 
done  in  the  body.  Take  heed',  said  he,  'for  you  cannot  escape  the 
righteous  judgments  of  God.'  Then  said  your  Major-General 
Adderton"*  'You  pronounce  woes  and  judgments,  and  those  that 
are  gone  before  you  pronounced  woes  and  judgments;  but  the 
judgments  of  the  Lord  God  are  not  come  upon  us  yet'  .  .  .  'Be 
not  proud',  replied  Wenlock,  'neither  let  your  spirits  be  lifted  up ; 
God  doth  but  wait  till  the  measure  of  your  iniquity  be  filled  up, 
and  that  you  have  run  your  ungodly  race,  then  will  the  wrath  of 
God  come  upon  you  to  the  uttermost;  and  as  for  thy  part  (See 
the  prophecy  that  soon  after  was  fulfilled)  it  hangs  over  thy 
head,  and  is  near  to  be  poured  down  upon  thee ;  and  shall  come  as 
a  thief  in  the  night,  suddenly  .  .  .  when  thou  thinkest  not  of  it.'  "^^ 

"  'By  what  law',  said  Wenlock,  'will  ye  put  me  to  death?'  'We 
have  a  law',  replied  you,  'and  by  our  law  you  are  to  die.'  'So  said 
the  Jews  of  Christ',  Wenlock  replied;'  "We  have  a  law,  and  by 
our  law  he  ought  to  die."  'Who  empowered  you',  said  he,  'to  make 
that  law?'  One  of  you  answered,  'We  have  a  patent,  and  are  the 
patentees;  judge  whether  we  have  not  power  to  make  laws.'  Wen- 
lock replied  again,  'How  have  you  power  to  make  laws  repugnant 
to  the  laws  of  England?'  'Nay',  said  your  governor.  'Then',  an- 
swered Wenlock,  'you  are  gone  beyond  your  bounds,  and  have  for- 

**  Major  General  Humphrey  Atherton. 

**  According  to  the  ideas  then  prevalent,  Atherton  tempted  Providence  by  his 
sneering  retort  to  Christison,  and  when  he  met  a  violent  end  some  three 
months  later  by  being  thrown  from  his  horse  after  a  military  review,  "the 
manner  of  his  death",  says  Hubbard,  "was  noted  by  some  as  a  judgment." 
This  comment  by  New  England's  early  historian  puzzled  Savage  who  quotes 
it  in  the  account  of  Atherton  given  in  his  famous  Genealogical  Dictionary. 
Evidently  he  had  not  read  Bishop  up  to  that  time  for  the  Quaker  protagonist 
very  definitely  states  that  Atherton's  sudden  death  was  a  direct  visitation 
upon  him  for  the  speech  quoted,  as  well  as  for  some  other  scoffing  remarks  he 
made  when  Mary  Dyer  was  hanged. — Bishop  (1667),  Title  Page,  and  pp.  137-8. 
(Philadelphia  Reprint,  pp.  305-6.) 


The  Quakebs  137 

felted  your  patent,  and  this  is  more  than  you  can  answer'.  And 
he  cried  out  and  said,  'Are  you  subjects  to  the  King?  Yea  or  nay?' 
'What  good  will  that  do  you?'  replied  your  secretary.  .  .  .  'What 
will  you  infer  from  that?'  Wenlock  answered,  'If  you  are,  say  so ; 
for,  in  your  petition  to  the  king,  you  desire  that  he  would  protect 
you,  and  that  you  may  be  worthy  to  kneel  among  his  royal  sub- 
jects, ...  or  words  to  that  effect.'  To  which  one  of  you  said, 
'Yea'.  When  Wenlock  answered  and  said,  'So  am  I,  and,  for  any- 
thing I  know,  am  as  good  as  you,  if  not  better;  for  if  the  king 
did  but  know  your  hearts,  as  God  knows  them,  he  would  see  .  .  . 
that  your  hearts  are  as  rotten  toward  him  as  they  are  toward  God. 
Therefore,  seeing  that  you  and  I  are  subjects  to  the  king,  I  de- 
mand to  be  tried  by  the  laws  of  my  own  nation.'  'You  shall  be 
tried'  replied  you,  'by  a  bench  and  a  jury'. 

"  'That  is  not  the  law',  said  Wenlock,  'but  the  manner  of  it ; 
for  if  you  will  be  as  good  as  your  word,  you  must  set  me  at  liberty, 
for  I  never  heard  nor  read  of  any  law  that  was  in  England  to  hang 
Quakers.'  Your  governor  replied,  'That  there  was  a  law  to  hang 
Jesuits.'  Wenlock  answered  'If  you  put  me  to  death,  it  is  not  be- 
cause I  go  under  the  name  of  a  Jesuit,  but  a  Quaker;  therefore', 
said  he,  'I  do  appeal  to  the  laws  of  my  own  nation.'  Then  one  of 
you  said  that  he  was  in  your  hands,  and  had  broken  your  law, 
and  you  would  try  him.  Wenlock  denied  to  be  tried  by  your  law; 
yet  you  caused  the  jury  to  be  called  over,  and  3"ou  told  him,  'He 
had  liberty  to  object  against  them,  or  any  of  them.'  Wenlock  still 
appealed  to  the  law  of  his  own  nation,  but  still  you  cried  out,  that 
you  would  try  him,  and  so  you  denied  his  appeal.  'Then',  said 
Wenlock,  'your  will  is  your  law,  and  what  you  have  power  to  do, 
that  you  will  do.  And,  seeing  that  the  jury  must  go  forth  on  my 
life,  this  I  have  to  say  to  you  in  the  fear  of  the  living  God,  Jury, 
take  heed  what  you  do,  for  you  swear  by  the  living  God,  That  you 
will  true  trial  make,  and  just  verdict  give,  according  to  the  evi- 
dence. Jury,  look  for  your  evidence;  What  have  I  done  worthy 
of  death?  Keep  your  hands  out  of  innocent  blood.'  To  which  one 
of  the  jury  replied,  'It  is  good  counsel,' 

"So  away  they  went;  but  having  received  their  lesson  from 
you,  and  being  of  the  same  spirit,  they  quickly  brought  him  in 
guilty,  whereupon  your  secretary  said,  'Wenlock  Christison,  hold 
up  your  hand.'  'I  will  not',  said  Wenlock,  'I  am  here,  and  can 
hear  thee.'  Then  he  cried, 'Guilty  or  not  guilty?'   'I  deny  all  guilt', 


138  Brian  Pendleton 

replied  Wenlock,  'for  my  conscience  is  clear  in  the  sight  of  God.' 
Your  governor  answered,  'The  jury  hath  condemned  thee.'  But 
he  answered,  'The  Lord  doth  justify  me, — who  art  thou  that  con- 
demnest?'  Then  you  voted  as  to  the  sentence  of  death,  and  were 
in  a  manner  confounded ;  for  several  could  not  vote  him  guilty,  .  .  . 
and  sentence  him  to  death,  so  far  did  the  Witness  of  God  as  to  the 
innocency  of  the  man  prevail.  Then  said  your  governor,  after  they 
had  voted  once  and  some  of  them  would  not  consent,  'I  could  find 
it  in  my  heart  to  go  home,'  being  in  a  great  rage,  and  having  such 
a  thirst  after  the  blood  of  the  innocent ;  and  he  so  misbehaved  him- 
self in  the  seat  of  judgment,  that  he  flung  something  furiously  on 
the  table.  Wenlock  cried,  'It  were  better  for  thee  to  be  at  home 
than  here,  for  thou  art  about  a  bloody  piece  of  work.' 

"Whereupon  your  governor  put  the  Court  to  vote  again, 
which  they  did,  notwithstanding  there  were  some  of  you  (Richard 
Russell  and  others)  that  would  not  consent;  which  so  filled  and 
inflamed  your  governor  with  wrath,  that  he  stood  up  and  said, 
'You  that  will  not  consent,  record  it.'  And,  being  drunk  with  blood, 
like  a  man  drunk,  he  said,  'I  thank  God,  I  am  not  afraid  to  give 
judgment.'  (See  to  what  a  narrow  strait  things  were  brought, 
that  he  was  constrained  to  force  over  judgment  in  himself.) 
'Wenlock  Christison,  hearken  to  your  sentence:  You  must  return 
unto  the  place  from  whence  you  came,  and  from  thence  to  the 
place  of  execution,  and  there  you  must  be  hanged  until  you  be 
dead,  dead,  dead,  upon  the  thirteenth  day  of  June,  being  the  Fifth 
day  of  the  week.'  Which  being  thus  cruelly  pronounced,  Wenlock 
Christison  cried  out  and  said,  'The  Will  of  the  Lord  be  done,  in 
whose  will  I  came  amongst  you,  and  in  His  Counsel  I  stand,  feeling 
His  eternal  Power  which  will  uphold  me  until  the  last  gasp ;  I  do 
not  question  it.'  Then  prophesying  that  no  more  Quakers  would 
be  put  to  death  and  defying  them  still,  he  was  led  back  to  prison.^® 

Such  Court  records  as  have  come  down  to  us  of  other  Quaker 
"trials"  are  sufficient  evidence  that  Bishop  did  not  draw  upon  his 
imagination  in  writing  out  his  account  of  Christison's  arraign- 
ment, but  there  is  one  vital  point  he  failed  to  record.  And  there  is 
something  most  novel  in  Christison's  examination.  Where  is  the 
personal  abuse  and  vituperation  to  which  the  Quakers  were  usually 

*"  Those  interested  in  Christison's  future  career  may  find  an  account  of  him  in 
Samuel  Harrison's  Wenlock  Christison  and  the  Early  Friends  in  Talbot  Couvr- 
ty,  Md.,  first  published  in  the  Collections  of  the  Maryland  Historical  Society. 


The  Quakers  139 

subjected?  You  would  almost  think  it  was  the  Court  and  not 
Christison  that  was  on  trial,  and  that  he  was  the  prosecutor  and 
they  the  defendants.  Even  the  fiery  Endicott  seems  strangely 
subdued.  Was  he  shaken?  Was  a  horror  coming  over  him?  For 
already  he  had  sent  four  of  the  Friends  to  the  gallows  and  here 
was  a  fifth  about  to  go.  And  still  another  of  the  banished  had  just 
notified  the  Court  of  his  return. ^^  Was  there  no  stopping  them? 
How  many  more  would  there  be?  Would  they  keep  coming  back 
forever?  It  was  enough  to  drive  a  man  distracted.  And  they  said 
they  came  back  not  in  hatred,  but  in  love.  Love!  What  was  that? 
Something  that  Christ  said — but  had  they  not  broken  the  law, 
had  they  not  defied  it  and  rushed  upon  their  own  destruction? 
And  who  were  the  weaklings  that  would  not  enforce  the  law,  but 
help  the  guilty  to  escape  its  penalty? 

For  the  Court  had  done  just  that — the  point  that  Bishop 
missed.  The  Massachusetts  records  tell  it  prosaically  enough: 
"The  Court,  having  considered  what  Wendlocke  Christopherson 
could  say  for  himself  in  refference  to  his  appeale  from  the  judg- 
ment &  sentence  of  the  Court  of  Asistants  pronounced  against  him 
in  March  last,  judge  meete  to  order,  that  the  Gouerno""  pronounce 
sentence  of  death  against  him  in  open  Court,  to  declare  that  the 
tjme  of  his  execution  shall  be  on  the  13th  day  of  this  moneth  of 
June  .  .  .  provided  nevertheless,  that  if  the  sajd  Christopherson 
any  time  before  his  execution  shall  desire  the  Courts  favo'',  &  by 
a  writting  Vnder  his  hand  engage  that  he  will  forthwith  depart 
this  jurisdiction  &  from  thenceforth  returne  no  more  into  it  .  .  . 
he  shall  therevpon  be  discharged.  The  Gouenor"^  in  open  Court,  the 
prisoner  being  at  the  barr,  pronounced  the  sentence  of  death  ag  * 
him,  &  acquainted  him  w*'^  the  Courts  favo""  in  [his]  case."  ^^ 

No  wonder  that  Endicott  was  enraged  when  he  was  compelled 
to  pass  this  sentence,  that  he  felt  the  all  consuming  fury  of  a  pas- 
sionate man  unaccustomed  to  having  his  will  thwarted.  For  it 
came  to  that.  Christison  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  given 
him  and  wrote  the  Court  "I,  the  condemned  man,  do  give  forth 
under  my  hand,  that  if  I  may  have  my  liberty  I  have  freedom  to 
depart  this  jurisdiction;  and  I  know  not  that  ever  I  shall  come 

=1  Edward  Wharton  of  Salem.— Bishop  (1667),  pp.  36-7. 
"=  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  20-21. 


140  Brian  Pendleton 

into  it  any  more."  ^^  The  Court  immediately  granted  this  petition, 
ambiguously  as  it  was  worded,  and  ordered  that  Christison  to- 
gether with  all  the  other  Quakers  then  in  custody  should  be  "forth- 
with acquainted  with  the  new  law  against  them  &  forthwith  re- 
leased from  prison  &  sent  from  constable  to  constable  out  of  the 
jurisdiction."  ^* 

This  new  law  was  a  victory  for  the  Deputies  and  while  it  was 
cruel  enough  and  did  not  definitely  abrogate  the  one  of  October, 
1658,  yet  it  put  off  the  infliction  of  the  death  penalty  in  such  a 
way  that  severe  whippings  were  about  the  worst  that  banished 
Quakers  could  expect  if  they  persisted  in  returning.  "Being  de- 
sirous", it  begins,  "to  try  all  means  with  as  much  lenity  as  may 
consist  with  our  safety  to  prevent  the  intrusions  of  the  Quakers 
who  .  .  .  like  rogues  &  vagabonds  come  in  upon  us,"  the  Court 
ordered  that  every  such  vagabond  Quaker  found  within  any  part 
of  its  jurisdiction  should  be  apprehended  and  upon  conviction  as 
such  by  any  magistrate,  he  or  she  "shall  ...  be  stripped  naked 
from  the  middle  upwards,  &  tied  to  a  carts  tail  &  whipped  through 
the  town,  &  from  thence  immediately  conveyed  to  the  Constable 
of  the  next  town  .  .  .  and  so  from  constable  to  constable  till  they 
be  conveyed  through  .  .  .  the  outwardmost  towns  of  our  jurisdic- 
tion." 

After  providing  further  punishments  for  those  "vagabond 
Quakers"  who  persisted  in  returning,  as  well  as  for  those  who 
should  arise  from  amongst  ourselves",  it  was  further  ordered 
"that  the  constables  of  the  several  towns  are  hereby  empowered 
...  to  impress  cart,  oxen,  &  other  assistance  for  the  execution 
of  this  order."  ^^ 

This  law  evidently  tried  to  satisfy  the  hatred  of  the  ministry 
against  the  Quakers  and  at  the  same  time  accord  with  public  sen- 
timent which  had  increasingly  opposed  the  death  penalty  in  the 

*»  Massachusetts  Archives,  X,  273-a.  This  letter  of  Christison  can  hardly  be 
regarded  as  a  "recantation"  as  some  writers  have  claimed,  as  he  returned  to 
Massachusetts  subsequently  and  suffered  further  persecutions.  See  Hallowell's 
Quaker  Invasion  of  Massachusetts,  footnote,  pp.  60-61. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  23,  24.  The  order  for  their  release  is  dated 
7  June,  1661  [Mass.  Archives,  X,  273]— the  day  following  Christison's  sen- 
tence if  Bishop's  account  is  correct. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  2-4.  (Spelling  modernized).  The  exact 
date  when  this  law  was  passed  was  probably  on  the  7th  of  June  when  the 
release  of  the  Quakers  was  ordered.  It  is  quite  likely  that  the  contention  over 
it  helped  to  protract  the  sitting  of  the  Court,  while  the  likelihood  of  its  passage 
contributed  to  Endicott's  disgust,  and  temporary  withdrawal  from  the  session. 


The  Quakers  1*1 

earlier  statute.  Policy  too  no  doubt  had  its  influence  upon  the 
legislators  as  already  noted,  but  underlying  all  their  reasons  for 
the  change  there  must  have  been  a  growing  realization  that  they 
were  grappling  with  greater  forces  than  they  could  control,  that 
the  penalty  of  death  had  no  terror  for  the  Quaker  and  was  in 
fact  only  an  invitation  to  the  boon  of  martyrdom. 

Christison  had  told  them  as  much.  Four  Friends,  clothed  in 
sack-cloth  and  ashes,  accompanied  him  when  he  stood  trial.  Sen- 
tenced to  die,  he  said  to  the  Court  "Do  not  think  to  weary  out  the 
living  God  by  taking  away  the  lives  of  His  servants.  What  do  you 
gain  by  it.?  For  the  last  man  that  you  put  to  death,  here  are  five 
come  in  his  room :  and  if  you  have  power  to  take  my  life  from  me, 
God  can  raise  up  the  same  principle  of  life  in  ten  of  His  servants 
and  send  them  among  you,  in  my  room,  that  you  may  have  torment 
upon  torment  which  is  your  portion".^^  What  was  the  use  of  try- 
ing to  combat  such  a  spirit  as  this.?  If  the  death  penalty  had 
failed  to  keep  the  Quaker  out  of  Massachusetts  what  could  be 
hoped  for  from  any  lesser  punishment,  no  matter  how  brutally 
or  cruelly  inflicted.?  The  theocracy  was  defeated  but  in  its  dying 
struggles  continued  to  make  futile  laws  to  suppress  the  hated  sect, 
striking  out  at  its  adherents  again  and  again  with  a  still  savage 
lust  to  torture  their  flesh,  when  their  spirit  had  proved  uncon- 
querable. 

The  new  whipping  orgy  that  ensued  was  soon  interrupted, 
however.  The  Quakers  in  England  had  at  last  succeeded  in  bring- 
ing their  cause  before  the  throne.  Their  great  leader,  Edward 
Burrough,  had  pleaded  for  them.  The  King  had  read  the  first  part 
of  Bishop's  scathing  denunciation.  New  England  Judged  pub- 
lished in  London  that  same  year,  one  of  the  most  terrible  indict- 
ments of  a  people  ever  written.  Leddra's  execution  was  the  last 
straw.  On  the  9th  of  September,  1661,  an  order  was  issued  by 
royal  authority  to  the  governors  of  New  England  commanding 
them  to  suspend  all  further  Quaker  scourgings  and  hangings  and 
to  send  to  England  for  trial  all  Quakers  who  were  in  prison.^'^ 

This  message  was  entrusted  to  Samuel  Shattuck,^^  one  of  the 

""Bishop  (1667),  p.  35. 

*^  Colonial  Papers,  9  Sept.,  1661.   The  order  is  given  in  Sewel's  History. 

"*  Shattuck's  arrival  and  reception  in  Boston  are  described  in  a  letter  he  sent 

his  brethren  in  England,  published  at  page  160  of  the  "Aspinwall  Papers,"  in 

4  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  Vol.  9.  See  also  Whittier's  poem, 

"The  King's  Missive." 


142  Brian  Pendleton 

many  Friends  who  had  been  banished  from  Massachusetts.  He 
presented  it  personally  to  Endicott  to  whom  it  must  have  been 
as  bitter  as  gall.  A  meeting  of  the  General  Court  was  called  for 
the  27th  of  November  to  consider  the  message.  The  authorities 
were  in  a  quandary.  They  had  always  declined  to  send  anyone  to 
England  for  trial.  They  did  not  propose  to  change  this  policy. 
But  a  definite  refusal  to  obey  a  royal  command  might  not  be  wis- 
dom. The  usual  evasion  would  be  better.  If  there  were  no  Quakers 
in  jail,  there  could  be  none  to  send  to  England.  So  all  who  had 
been  imprisoned  since  the  former  delivery  were  freed  by  order  of 
the  Court,  9  December,  1661.^®  The  record  of  that  session,  how- 
ever, cannily  omits  any  reference  to  this  procedure,  but  plaintively 
directs  that  in  accordance  with  the  King's  letter  "the  execution  of 
the  laws  in  force  against  Quakers,  as  such,  so  farr  as  they  respect 
corporall  punishment  or  death,  be  suspended  untill  this  Court 
take  further  order."  ^° 

To  the  persecuted  in  New  England  it  seemed  as  if  the  day  of 
deliverance  was  at  hand.  They  did  not  then  know  the  vacillating 
nature  of  King  Charles  II,  that  human  weather-vane,  "whose  word 
no  man  relies  on."  How  easily  his  mind  could  veer  may  not  have 
been  suspected  by  the  Puritan  authorities  either,  but  they  imme- 
diately resolved  to  try  what  could  be  done  in  that  direction.  It 
was  insufferable  to  have  the  Quakers  triumph.  Perhaps  the  King 
could  be  brought  to  see  the  issue  in  the  right  light  if  it  was  prop- 
erly presented  to  him.  So  at  the  special  session  of  the  General 
Court  which  opened  on  the  last  day  of  December,  Simon  Brad- 
street  and  the  Rev.  John  Norton  were  delegated  to  go  to  England, 
negotiate  with  the  King  and  the  Privy  Council,  remove  any  scan- 
dal made  against  the  Colony,  clear  up  any  misapprehensions  that 
may  have  arisen,  and  endeavor  to  secure  a  confirmation  of  the 
rights  and  privileges  formerly  enjoyed. 

The  emissaries  chosen  sailed  for  England  in  February,  1662, 
but  made  only  a  brief  stay.  The  Quakers  in  London  sought  them 
out,  accused  them  of  murder,  and  gave  them  anything  but  a  pleas- 
ant time.  They  returned  in  September  bearing  a  letter  from  the 
King  which  they  presented  at  the  October  session  of  the  General 
Court.  While  this  missive  confirmed  the  charter  of  the  Colony, 
much  of  it  was  highly  unsatisfactory  to  the  rulers  of  Massachu- 

«'*  Sewel,  I,  321. 

*°  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  34. 


The  Quakers  I'lS 

setts.  The  King  directed  that  none  should  be  debarred  from  using 
the  book  of  Common  Prayer  in  their  devotions,  and  that  the  fran- 
chise should  be  extended  to  all  free-holders  of  good  repute,  irre- 
spective of  their  religious  persuasions.  There  was  a  crumb  of  com- 
fort in  regard  to  the  Quakers,  however.  Their  principles,  said  the 
letter,  "being  inconsistent  with  any  kind  of  government  we  have 
found  it  necessary  .  .  .  here  to  make  sharp  laws  against  them,  and 
are  well  contented  that  you  do  the  like  there." 

The  Court  lost  no  time  in  acting  upon  this  delightful  hint, 
holding  the  other  recommendations  for  future  consideration.  It 
was  ordered  at  once  "there  being  new  complaints  of  Quakers 
abounding  especially  in  the  Eastern  parts",  that  the  Vagabond 
Quaker  law  of  May,  1661,  should  again  be  in  force  in  all  respects, 
except  that  the  whipping  be  through  three  towns  only,  the  magis- 
trates to  name  the  towns  and  the  number  of  stripes  to  be  given  in 
each.^^  It  was  evidently  intended  by  this  restriction  to  save  any 
more  Quakers  from  being  put  to  death,  as  could  have  happened 
under  this  law  as  originally  enacted. 

That  there  was  great  need  for  some  such  limitation  to  restrain 
the  fanatical  was  soon  demonstrated.  Despite  this  restriction,  with- 
in three  months  Capt.  Richard  Waldron,  of  Dover,  who  had  been 
specially  empowered  to  execute  the  laws  against  the  Quakers,^^ 
broke  all  bounds  by  issuing  his  infamous  order  to  whip  three  of 
their  women  missionaries  through  no  less  than  eleven  towns  from 
Dover  to  Dedham.  This  brutal  and  illegal  warrant  would  have 
been  their  death  sentence  had  not  Walter  Barefoot  effected  their 
release  by  getting  the  constable  at  Salisbury  to  appoint  him  his 
deputy.  These  unfortunate  women  then  made  their  way  to  Kittery 
where  they  stayed  for  a  time  with  Major  Nicholas  Shapleigh, 
and  then  returned  to  Dover  to  be  subjected  to  further  cruelties.^' 

In  the  following  June  [1663]  when  the  County  Court  assem- 
bled there,  presided  over  by  Magistrates  Hathorne  and  Lusher, 
with  Waldron,  Pike,  and  Pendleton  as  Associates,  that  much  per- 

"■  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  37;  58;  164-66;  59. 
*^  Ihid.,  IV,  pt.  2,  69. 

**  Bishop,  (1667),  pp.  56-66;  Sewel  1,561-564.  Bishop  says  that  Major  Shap- 
leigh "in  a  good  measure  gave  up  to  the  truth",  and  it  was  probably  due  to 
this  that  the  Massachusetts  General  Court  in  May,  1663,  revoked  his  commission 
as  Major  for  York  County,  and  appointed  William  PhiUips  of  Saco  in  his 
place.  [Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  75-6.]  Whittier  in  his  poem  "How 
the  Women  Went  from  Dover",  says  it  was  "Justice  Pike"  of  Salisbury  who 
released  the  women.  Whoever  was  responsible  for  their  release  seems  to  have 
known  the  new  law  better  than  Waldron. 


144  Brian  Pendleton 

secuted  Quaker,  Edward  Wharton  of  Salem,  having  heard  of  these 
cruelties  appeared  before  them  and  cried  out,  "Woe  to  all  oppres- 
sors and  persecutors,  for  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  is  against 
them — ye  who  spoil  the  poor  and  devour  the  needy,  ye  who  lay 
trips  and  snares  for  the  innocent."  ^^  For  this  contempt  of  Court 
shown  "by  words  and  gestures",  Wharton  was  put  in  the  stocks 
for  an  hour  and  then  brought  before  the  magistrates.  "Asked 
why  he  came  thither  ...  he  answered  to  bear  testimony  against 
violence  and  oppression.  Asked  again  why  he  came  there,  he  an- 
swered to  bear  witness  unto  the  truth.  His  answer  caused  the 
Court  to  look  upon  him  as  a  Vagabond  Quaker,  he  having  stated 
he  had  no  occasions  there  and  consigned  him  to  the  constable  to 
be  sent  back  to  Salem  at  a  cartstail  and  whipped  with  ten  stripes 
each  at  Dover,  Hampton,  and  Salisbury."  ^^  Refusing  to  go  to 
Hampton  unless  a  horse  was  provided  for  him  to  ride,  he  was  com- 
mitted to  the  Dover  prison  but  neither  Pike  nor  Pendleton  signed 
the  warrant.'*^ 

Pendleton  was  to  witness  another  violent  scene  a  few  months 
later,  when  in  company  with  Thomas  Wiggin,  Robert  Pike,  and 
Thomas  Bradbury,  he  sat  as  an  Associate  Justice  in  the  Hampton 
Court  presided  over  by  Simon  Bradstreet.^^  Here  among  other 
culprits  brought  before  them  there  came  one  Eliakim  Wardell — 
or  Wardwell — of  that  town  who  recentl}'^  had  been  put  into  the 
stocks  at  Dover  for  expressing  sympathy  with  the  Quaker  women 
flogged  there,  and  who  now  had  been  cited  to  appear  for  non- 
attendance  at  church.  His  wife,  Lydia,  summoned  for  the  same 
neglect,  ignored  the  writ,  perhaps  because  her  former  experience 
in  Court  had  been  a  most  painful  one.  Robbed  of  much  of  their 
property  by  continual  fines  for  several  years  since  Wenlock  Chris- 
tison  had  been  arrested  in  their  house,  and  driven  distracted  by 
the  petty  persecutions  to  which  they  had  been  subjected  for  em- 
bracing the  Quaker  faith,  the  poor  woman  had  stripped  herself 
one  Sabbath  day  and  so  appeared  before  the  horrified  congrega- 
tion of  the  Newbury  church  whither  she  had  been  called  to  give 
her  reasons  for  separating  from  them.    For  this  hysterical  but 

"Bishop  (1667),  pp.  108-110. 

^'^New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  75a,  76a.    (Spelling  modernized).  This 

was  the  same  Edward  Wharton  noted  in  the  trial  of  Wenlock  Christison. 

"  Bishop,  as   above. 

"  The  names  of  these  Justices  who  presided  at  the  Hampton  Court  in  October, 

1663,  are  not  given  in  the  Essex  Court  Files,  but  are  cited  by  Bishop  in  his 

lively  account  of  this  stormy  session. 


The  Quakers  1*5 

symbolic  act  she  was  haled  before  the  Court  at  Ipswich,  and  sen- 
tenced to  to  tied  to  a  post,  stripped  to  the  waist,  and  given  fifteen 
lashes/^ 

Disappointed,  perhaps,  that  he  was  not  to  see  this  shameless 
one,  Bradstreet  "took  occasion  to  upbraid  [her]  in  her  absence 
for  coming  [naked]  into  their  worship-house  at  Newbery".  War- 
dell,  like  any  loyal  husband,  immediately  took  issue  with  him, 
"reproving  him  for  reproaching  his  wife  so  in  Court  .  .  .  who 
was  an  honest  woman,  who  without  a  law  they  had  made  to  suf- 
fer", and  then  as  his  anger  mounted,  Wardell  lost  all  restraint, 
and  burst  out  into  a  counter  attack  on  Bradstreet's  daughter,  the 
wife  of  the  local  minister.  Seaborn  Cotton.  "Simon,  in  a  fierce 
rage,  told  the  Court  that  if  such  fellows  should  be  suffered  to 
speak  so  in  the  Court,  he  would  sit  there  no  more;  so  to  please 
Simon,  Eliakim  was  sentenced  to  be  stript  from  his  Waist  upward, 
and  to  be  bound  to  an  Oak  Tree  that  stood  by  their  Worship- 
house,  and  to  be  whipt  fifteen  lashes"*^ — a  pretty  light  punish- 
ment for  a  public  slanderer. 

Since  the  time  Capt.  Bond  had  inadvertently  brought  two 
Quaker  women  into  the  Piscataqua,  Pendleton's  town  had  been 
quite  free  of  the  sect.  The  contagion  spread  there  nevertheless, 
and  infected  his  old  neighbors,  the  Waltons,  who  fell  away  from 
Puritanism.  As  the  former  tavern  keeper  on  the  island,  Walton 
was  a  man  of  standing  in  the  communit}'  and  might  infect  many 
other  inhabitants.  In  an  attempt  to  avert  such  a  calamity  before 
taking  more  drastic  measures,  Pendleton  and  the  Rev.  Moodey 
called  upon  the  backsliders  but  were  discomfitted  by  the  riddles 
they  were  asked  to  answer.  The  encounter  is  interesting  as  it  shows 

*«  As  noted  in  the  Essex  Court  Files  [III,  64],  for  5  May,  1663.  Puritan  apolo- 
gists liave  made  much  capital  of  this  singular  incident  at  the  Newbury  Church, 
implying  that  such  scenes  were  common  and  that  they  were  a  cause  and  not 
an  eflFect  of  the  Quaker  persecutions.  One  other  woman  did  wander  unclothed 
through  the  streets  of  Salem  during  this  period,  but  she  was  demented. 

**  Our  account  of  the  persecution  of  the  Wardells,  the  incident  at  the  Newbury 
church,  and  the  passages  quoted  above,  are  from  Bishop  (1667),  pp.  67-70. 
(Philadelphia  Reprint,  pp.  238-241).  The  Essex  Court  Files— [III,  100]— 
confirm  the  sentence  imposed  on  the  husband  and  give  the  date — 13  Oct.,  1663. 
The  Wardells  evidently  removed  to  Shrewsbury,  N,  J.,  not  long  after  these 
outrages,  as  their  daughter  Elizabeth  was  born  there  in  1667.  Their  grand- 
daughter, Lydia  Wardell,  married  William  Biddle,  Jr.  about  1695  and  they 
became  the  progenitors  of  the  Biddies  of  Philadelphia,  according  to  the  Auto- 
biography of  Charles  Biddle,  1745-18^1— pp.  365-6,  and  footnotes  thereon.  This 
work  states  that  Eliakim  Wardell  was  the  Quaker  persecuted  by  Massachu- 
setts, but  errs  in  saying  they  were  French  Huguenots.  His  wife  was  a  daugh- 
ter of  Luke  Perkins,  a  freeman  of  Massachusetts. 


146  Beian  Pendleton 

not  only  the  Puritan's  violent  impatience  with  the  Quaker  doc- 
trines, but  also  the  tremendous  importance  given  in  those  days  to 
problems  of  theology  which  we  would  now  dismiss  as  trifling,  or 
absurd,  if  we  gave  them  a  thought  at  all. 

According  to  Bishop,^®  "A  question  was  put  to  Bryan  Pemble- 
ton,  one  of  your  Magistrates,  of  whom  mention  is  made  before. 
What  annointing  was  that  which  the  Apostle  John  exhorted  the 
Saints  unto  in  that  day?  Pembleton  answered  that  John  was 
either  a  Fool  or  a  Mad-man,  or  else  he  did  not  know  what  he  said. 
Then  he  was  asked,  What  was  the  Light  which  shone  about  Paul.'' 
His  answer  was.  It  was  the  light  of  the  Devil  for  ought  he  did 
know.  His  Shepheard  the  Priest  was  with  him  when  he  spake  these 
blasphemous  words.  What  other  than  rehearsed  cruelties  can  be 
expected  of  such  Blasphemers.? 

"The  Questions  put  to  Bryan  Pembleton,  and  the  Priest  con- 
cerning the  Annointing  &c.  Were  by  Alice  Walton,  and  lier  hus- 
band George,  and  her  Daughter  Abishag,  who  being  convinced  of 
the  Truth,^^  This  Magistrate  and  Priest  came  to  their  House, 
seeking  to  turn  them  therefrom,  upon  which  these  Questions  arose ; 
they  lived  on  the  great  Island  in  Piscataqua,  and  this  Alice  was 
one  of  the  most  accounted  of  the  Women  for  profession  in  the 
Island,^^  whom  it  troubled  them  to  lose ;  but  Truth  took  her,  and 
overturned  the  Priest." 

This  overturn  was  only  temporary,  however.  The  magistrate 
and  the  minister  might  be  worsted  in  argument  but  they  had  the 
law  on  their  side,  and  this  was  now  invoked.  At  the  Court  of  As- 
sociates which  Pendleton  presided  over  at  Portsmouth  in  Febru- 
ary, 1663/64,  George  Walton  and  his  wife,  "for  not  coming  to 
meetings  for  several  months"  were  convicted  as  Quakers.^^  Wliat- 
ever  penalty  was  prescribed  does  not  appear,  but  they  continued 
to  live  on  the  Great  Island  for  many  years  to  come  in  spite  of  the 
petty  persecutions  to  which  they  were  subjected  for  a  while. 

Bishop  gives  an  account  of  another  affair  involving  Pendle- 
ton at  about  this  time,  which  also  had  its  aftermath  at  this  same 

^New  England  Judged  (1667),  p.  140  [Philadelphia  Reprint,  p.  308].    In  the 

account  following  we  have  copied  the  quaint  typography  of  the  original  London 

Text.    Sewel  also  makes  note  of  this  affair  in  his  History,  following  Bishop 

almost  verbatim. 

"  i.e.,  the  truth  of  the  Quaker  teachings. 

^  Meaning  she  had  been  one  of  the  most  respected  women  of  the  Puritan  faith 

or  profession. 

^  New  Hampshire  Court  Papers,  1659-1672,  p.  172. 


The  Quakers  147 

Court.  It  was  bad  enough  to  have  his  old  friends  fall  away  to 
strange  and  novel  doctrines.  It  was  worse  still  to  have  the  Quaker 
proselytizers  invade  the  sanctity  of  his  stronghold  and  spew  their 
denunciations  abroad.  If  there  was  wickedness  there  he  could  cope 
with  it  himself.  He  needed  no  outside  help — least  of  all  from  such 
despised  being  as  these  ranters.  So  when  the  famous  Joseph 
Nicholson  appeared  there  on  his  island  with  John  Liddal — the 
same  Nicholson  who  was  once  sentenced  to  death — "crying  out 
against  the  Drunkards  and  the  Swearers,  they  were  almost  struck 
down  with  a  piece  of  Wood  by  Pembleton's  man,  the  Ruler  of  that 
place,  with  which  the  said  Bryan  Pembleton  being  not  content;  but 
to  justifie  the  violence  of  his  Servant  against  the  Servants  of  the 
Lord,  who  had  bore  Testimony  against  wickedness  as  aforesaid, 
and  to  show  his  cruelty,  ordered  them  to  be  whipt  at  a  Carts  tayl, 
at  Strawberry  Bank,  by  John  Pickering  constable,  and  to  be  de- 
livered to  the  other  Constable  where  he  was  for  the  said  end  and 
purpose,  but  the  Constable  being  cross  to  their  doings  said  that 
though  the  Law  did  require  him  to  get  a  Cart  and  Oxen,  yet  it  did 
not  require  him  to  find  Yokes,  and  therefore  unless  Pembleton 
would  find  Yokes  he  would  not  do  his  work ;  so  he  set  them  at 
liberty."  ^^ 

Bishop,  usually  most  accurate  in  his  accounts  of  what  befell 
the  Quakers,  is  not  always  so  dependable  when  it  comes  to  names. 
The  tender-hearted  constable  who  figures  in  this  episode  was  not 
John  Pickering,  but  Joseph  Morse,  as  stated  in  the  Court  records 
upon  his  presentation  for  this  neglect  of  duty.  Bound  over  to  the 
next  County  Court  held  at  Portsmouth  on  June  28th,  he  there 
confessed  his  guilt  and  was  fined  forty  shillings,  payment  of  which 
was  suspended  until  he  could  apply  against  it  "an  account  of  his 
expenses  in  the  public  service  (about  which  he  had  complained )."^^ 

There  is  something  peculiar  in  this  whole  affair — Morse's 
quibbling  refusal  to  punish  the  Quaker,  Pendleton's  acquiescence, 
the  light  fine  imposed  by  the  Court  on  the  mutinous  constable, 
these  all  seem  to  indicate  that  the  old  fury  was  dying  out.  Morse 
"Bishop  (1667),  p.  113.    (Philadelphia  Reprint,  p.  281). 

■^New  Hampshire  Court  Papers,  1659-1672,  p.  174;  New  Hampshire  Province 
Deeds,  11,  90.  The  record  reads,  "Joseph  Morse,  Constable,  having  a  warrant 
from  C.  P.  [i.e.  Capt.  Pendleton]  to  punish  J.  N.,  vagrant  Quaker,  but  let 
him  goe,"  while  a  line  crossed  out  says  "not  punishing  Joseph  Nicholson, 
Quaker."  Portsmouth  had  two  constables  at  this  time,  Morse  and  Robert 
EUet  who  were  elected  to  that  oflSce  at  the  town  meeting  held  June  8,  1663. — 
Portsmouth  Town  Records,  1,  88. 


148  Brian  Pendleton 

must  have  known  that  the  first  duty  of  a  Constable  was  "to  whip 
and  punish  any  that  are  to  be  punished,  by  order  of  authority",*^® 
and  yet  he  found  a  technicality  for  evading  this  duty. 

Pendleton  must  have  known  this  subterfuge  was  worthless 
for  he  was  a  member  of  the  Court  which  framed  the  Vagabond 
Quaker  law,  and  as  we  have  seen  it  provided  that  the  constables 
were  authorized  to  impress  not  only  carts  and  oxen,  but  also  such 
"other  assistance"  as  might  be  necessary  to  execute  those  "war- 
rants of  blood."  And  yet  in  the  only  instance  on  record  where  on 
his  own  responsibility  he  ordered  this  particular  law  to  be  carried 
out,  he  seemingly  made  no  effort  to  force  Morse  to  do  his  duty, 
but  stood  there  as  if  helpless,  and  let  the  Quakers  go.  Why 
didn't  he  deputize  his  servant  to  take  the  constable's  place.''  Was 
he  out  of  sympathy  with  the  law.?  Was  he  secretly  pleased  to  have 
it  evaded.''  For  Nicholson  was  a  brave  man,  after  all.  He  had  once 
staked  his  life — but  that  fellow  Morse  would  have  to  stand  charges 
nevertheless.  You  couldn't  wink  at  such  contumacy  if  authority 
was  to  be  preserved.  You  still  had  to  go  through  the  motions  as 
long  as  you  were  a  magistrate  even  if  you  did  wink  at  legal  hair 
splittings  now  and  then. 

A  peculiar  case  all  through.  Peculiar  that  Morse  was  not 
immediately  removed  from  office,  peculiar  that  he  was  not  sen- 
tenced to  take  the  lashes  he  had  spared  the  Quaker — most  peculiar 
when  3^ou  consider  the  complexion  of  the  Court  that  tried  him.  For 
there  presided  Daniel  Gookin  of  Cambridge,  one  of  the  Assistants 
of  the  Colony,  who  formerly,  according  to  Bishop,  had  asked  a 
fellow  magistrate  "to  send  some  Quakers  that  way,  [so]  that  he 
might  see  them  lashed."  And  Richard  Waldron  was  there,  he  of 
the  infamous  warrant  already  mentioned.  And  Pendleton  too,  still 
smarting  from  another  indignity  put  upon  him  by  Morse  only  five 
days  earlier — no  less  than  his  own  arrest  on  a  warrant  illegally 
issued — you  were  not  always  inclined  to  be  technical,  constable! 
And  yet  Morse  was  merely  fined  for  his  former  neglect  of  duty — 
and  lightly  fined  at  that. 

Perhaps  we  may  see  in  this  affair  an  indication  that  the  early 
fire  of  persecution  was  burning  itself  out.  The  desperate  course  of 
the  leaders  of  the  Bay  Colony  had  set  public  opinion  against 
them.  The  Deputies  to  the  General  Court  who  reflected  the  popu- 
lar will  far  more  than  the  Assistants,  had  repeatedly  mitigated  the 

«■  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  324. 


The  Quakers 


149 


laws  that  were  originally  forced  through.  And  now  the  leaders 
who  had  brought  this  shame  upon  Massachusetts  were  called  to 
their  own  accounting.  The  fanatical  John  Wilson  died  suddenly 
in  1663,  the  ferocious  Endicott,  two  years  later.  With  their  pass- 
ing the  chief  instigators  of  the  Quaker  pogroms  were  removed 
from  the  stage;  at  the  same  time  the  Royal  Commissioners,  who 
had  just  arrived  in  Boston  to  investigate  the  Colony's  affairs, 
ordered  that  the  Quakers  be  permitted  to  attend  to  their  daily 
vocations  unmolested.^^  The  records  of  Massachusetts  contain 
few  references  to  Quakers  for  ten  years  after  this  date.  In  1675 
the  persecutions  flared  up  again  for  a  brief  time,  but  the  sect  had 
greatly  increased  in  numbers  by  then,  and  the  authorities  were 
soon  forced  to  respect  its  rights. 

The  Quaker  martyrs  did  not  die  in  vain.  They  revealed  the 
inevitable  tyranny  of  the  church-state.  They  weakened  the  power 
of  the  priestcraft  in  Massachusetts.  They  sowed  there  the  seed  of 
religious  freedom  which  more  than  a  century  later  came  to  its  full 
fruition.  The  founders  of  this  Republic  performed  no  wiser  act 
than  when  they  wrote  into  our  Constitution  the  amendment  which 
forbids  the  Congress  to  make  any  law  respecting  the  establish- 
ment of  religion,  or  restricting  the  free  exercise  thereof.  They  re- 
membered the  persecutions  under  church-ruled  governments.  They 
resolved  to  have  no  more  of  these  here — no  state-church,  no  sub- 
sidized creed,  no  restriction  on  liberty  of  worship.  Conscience  at 
last  was  freed  from  ancient  bondage.  Christianity  was  Christian- 
ized. The  power  of  the  church  could  no  longer  call  upon  the  civil 
power  to  enforce  its  control  over  the  minds  of  men.  The  reign  of 
religious  bigotry  was  legally  ended.  This  was  the  second  Reforma- 
tion when  to  each  man  liberty  was  given  to  seek  God  in  his  own  way. 

^'Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  212-213. 


CHAPTER  X 


PORTSMOUTH 
1659  - 1664 


He  that  putteth  his  trust  in  me  shall  possess  the  land. — Isaiah,  67:13. 

In  order  to  preserve  the  continuity  of  events  in  the  New  Eng- 
land tragedy  we  have  treated  it  as  a  separate  episode,  and  have 
dealt  with  Pendleton's  role  therein  without  mentioning  his  other 
activities  in  those  dark  years.  We  have  watched  him  come  upon  the 
scene  at  Portsmouth,  at  Dover,  and  at  Hampton,  a  typical  magis- 
trate of  Puritan  Massachusetts,  grimly  enforcing  the  laws  against 
those  who  held  her  institutions  in  contempt.  We  have  heard  some 
of  the  angry  and  impatient  words  he  uttered  when  confronted  by 
the  heretic.  We  have  sat  with  him  in  a  court  of  death,  and  won- 
dered if  he  was  one  of  those  Deputies  who  opposed  the  execution 
of  the  final  penalty  upon  the  Quaker.  And  we  have  sensed  the 
change  that  had  come  over  him  as  the  liberal  impulses  he  once 
had,  shriveled  and  died  in  the  flame  of  a  religious  issue. 

It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  his  sole  activity  during 
this  period  lay  in  persecuting  a  hated  sect.  Aside  from  his  occa- 
sional conflicts  with  its  adherents,  his  life  went  on  as  usual  but 
with  an  added  intensity  due  in  all  likelihood  to  the  spiritual  stimu- 
lus he  derived  in  furthering  what  he  conceived  to  be  a  just  and 
worthy  cause.  In  this  respect  it  is  probably  no  coincidence  that 
the  most  active  years  of  his  life,  as  far  as  we  have  record,  were 
those  which  covered  and  immediately  succeeded  the  "Quaker  In- 
vasions" from  1657  to  1663. 

In  spite  of  a  growing  dissatisfaction  with  the  Puritan  rule  at 
Portsmouth  he  was  able  to  keep  himself  in  control  of  public  af- 
fairs. He  served  as  chairman  of  the  board  of  selectmen  there 
every  year  from  1657  to  1662  inclusive,  was  regularly  Town 
Treasurer,  Commissioner,  and  Associate  Justice  of  the  County 
Court,  Deputy  at  times  to  the  General  Court  in  Boston,  and  Cap- 
tain of  the  somewhat  difficult  Train  Band  of  Portsmouth,  finally 
receiving  a  regular  commission  as  such  from  the  General  Court 
in  October,  1664.'  The  high  tide  of  his  political  fortunes  seems 
^  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  139. 


Portsmouth  1669-1664  151 

to  have  come  in  1663  when  he  not  only  was  elected  Town  Treas- 
urer, Commissioner,  Associate  Justice,  and  Deputy,  but  also  re- 
ceived an  appointment  to  enforce  the  Navigation  Laws  at  Ports- 
mouth and  the  Isles  of  Shoals,"  while  in  addition  he  had  his  son, 
James,  chosen  as  Selectman  and  Town  Clerk.^ 

The  first  sign  of  the  new  spirit  that  had  come  over  the  ruler 
of  Portsmouth  is  shown  by  what  happened  to  John  Pickering  for 
trifling  with  authority.  In  anticipation  of  the  opening  of  the  new 
meeting  house,  the  inhabitants  there  had  chosen  the  selectmen  to 
determine  where  the  women  members  of  the  congregation  should 
be  seated* — a  matter  of  deep  concern  to  our  forefathers  who  be- 
lieved literally  in  putting  everyone  in  his  place.  When  the  select- 
men finally  gave  out  the  result  of  their  travail,  and  posted  the 
new  seating  list  on  the  meeting  house  door,  Pickering,  apparently 
enraged  by  what  he  took  to  be  a  lack  of  appreciation  of  his  fami- 
ly's importance,  created  some  disturbance  and  tore  down  the  of- 
fending paper. 

The  challenge  was  met  with  vigor,  not  to  say  with  enthusiasm. 
This  was  the  opportunity  Pendleton  had  been  waiting  for  to  show 
who  was  boss,  A  victim  of  prominence  was  necessary,  and  Picker- 
ing seemed  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  role.  He  had  taken  an  active 
part  in  the  town's  affairs  for  twenty  years,  was  often  a  select- 
man, in  fact  was  one  of  those  turned  out  of  office  by  the  Puritan 
upheaval  in  the  summer  of  1657,  and  he  had  been  Pendleton's  fel- 
low commissioner  in  the  Hampton  boundary  affair.  Such  a  man 
would  serve  splendidly  as  an  example  to  others. 

The  first  step  against  him  was  promptly  taken.  Called  be- 
fore the  affronted  Board  of  Selectmen — of  which  Pendleton  was 
chairman — Pickering  was  put  under  bond  to  answer  for  his  con- 
duct at  the  next  County  Court.^  Here  as  one  of  the  Associate 
Justices,  Pendleton  seems  to  have  laid  out  for  him  a  delightfully 
instructive  course  in  applied  Puritanism — the  way  of  the  right- 

'^  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  87;  The  Colonial  Laws  of  Massachusetts, 
pp.  139-140.   Also  Massachusetts  Archives,  LX,  2. 
^  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  85,  87. 

*  Ibid,  I,  51.— 14  February,  1658/59. 

*  Ibid.,  I,  52.  Pickering's  son,  John,  Jr.,  was  evidently  a  chip  off  the  old  block 
for  at  the  time  of  the  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey's  ordination  he  was  delegated  to 
seat  the  people  properly  in  the  meeting  house.  Instead  of  doing  this,  however, 
he  let  them  seat  themselves  wherever  they  pleased.  Complained  of  for  this, 
he  stated  he  "considered  one  man  as  good  as  another". — Brewster,  Rambles 
About  Portsmouth  (First  Series),  p.  60. 


152  Brian  Pendleton 

eous  with  the  ungodly.  Upon  entering  this  hard  school,  Picker- 
ing was  first  compelled  to  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  Massachu- 
setts and  was  then  fined  five  pounds  for  his  rash  act  unless  he 
would  make  a  confession  of  his  offense  and  give  bond  for  his  future 
good  behavior.  So  far,  so  good.  The  lessons  seem  in  order.  But 
now  for  the  added  curricula.  How  strange  that  at  this  time 
Pickering's  Indian  servant  should  bring  in  a  complaint  that  he 
was  insufficiently  clad — the  month  being  July !  Whence  came  this 
sudden  modesty?  How  could  the  Court  retain  its  gravity  when 
ordering  Pickering  to  give  the  lad  three  pounds  for  clothing? 
What  a  rare  jest  for  Magistrate  Thomas  Danforth  to  take  back 
with  him  to  Boston!  Summer  breeches  for  an  Indian — breech- 
clouts  by  the  thousand!  Surely  that  man  Pendleton  was  a  re- 
sourceful fellow !  He  was  wasting  his  talents  in  this  God-forsaken 
place. 

But  he  wasn't  through  with  his  pupil  yet.  There  was  another 
little  matter  which  might  prove  instructive.  By  a  further  coinci- 
dence someone  had  complained  to  this  Court  that  the  road  by 
Pickering's  mill  was  very  dangerous,  and  so  he  was  ordered  not  to 
interfere  with  its  repair  by  the  town,^  although  he  seems  to  have 
regarded  it  as  a  private  way,  and  on  his  own  land.  Thus  was  he 
graduated  from  this  course,  much  cast  down  and  dispirited,  a 
warning  to  others,  but  relieved  perhaps  that  no  capital  charges 
had  been  brought  against  him.  They  had  a  way  with  them,  those 
old  Puritans.  And  they  had  a  terrible  way  of  keeping  after  what 
they  wanted — a  single-minded  purpose  that  never  turned  aside 
from  a  desired  goal. 

In  this  respect,  Pendleton  had  never  given  up  his  dream  of 
a  Greater  Portsmouth  though  baffled  for  years  in  his  attempts 
to  secure  this  enlargement  by  act  of  the  General  Court.  With  the 
new  sense  of  power  that  had  come  to  him  of  late  through  one  cause 
and  another  he  now  conceived  the  idea  of  having  the  town  purchase 
what  it  could  not  acquire  by  grant,  and  allotting  to  himself  and 
his  associates  the  lion's  share  in  the  distribution  of  land  that 
would  ensue.  The  first  part  of  this  scheme  was  sprung  upon  the 
community  at  a  town  meeting  held  in  February,  1658/59,  when  it 
appeared  that  the  selectmen  had  already  taken  an  option  on  a 
large  tract  belonging  to  Thomas  Lake  and  that  Pendleton  and 

"  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  28a,  29b. 


Portsmouth  1659-1664  153 

John  Cutt  had  engaged  to  pay  him  thereforJ  Much  opposition 
immediately  developed  and  it  was  only  after  a  heated  debate  dur- 
ing which  one  Thomas  Everie  created  so  much  disorder  as  to  bring 
a  fine  upon  himself  that  "the  major  part"  of  those  present  agreed 
to  take  over  this  property  for  £50.^ 

Further  opposition  is  indicated  by  the  delay  that  ensued 
before  the  plan  Avas  finally  consummated.  The  thought  of  addi- 
tional expenditures  coming  upon  the  town,  on  top  of  the  cost  of 
building  the  new  meeting  house,  seems  to  have  given  pause  to  the 
the  proceedings.  While  Pendleton,  as  already  noted,  was  able  to 
keep  himself  chairman  of  the  board  of  selectmen  until  his  retire- 
ment therefrom  in  1663,  yet  his  opponents  were  again  strong 
enough  to  have  his  election  in  February,  1659/60,  set  aside.  This 
seems  to  have  been  a  last  attempt  to  stave  off  the  inevitable  for 
he  was  re-elected  a  month  later  together  with  the  same  associates 
as  before.  John  Pickering  and  Anthony  Ellins  were  added  to  the 
board  at  this  time,  and  we  may  consider  they  represented  the  op- 
position.^ 

Before  another  year  had  passed,  however,  such  antagonism 
as  remained  toward  Pendleton's  real  estate  venture  seems  to  have 
flattened  out.  The  plan  had  its  attractions.  Nearly  five  thousand 
acres  were  involved  and  the  purchase  price  was  cheap  enough — 
barely  a  pound  for  a  hundred  acres,  or  about  $30.00  at  its  pres- 
ent value.  Of  course  free  land  would  be  still  better,  but  that  had 
been  impossible  to  secure  in  spite  of  all  of  Pendleton's  efforts  in 
that  direction.  Perhaps  the  deal  wasn't  such  a  bad  one  after  all. 
Everybody  would  share  in  the  allotments  and  the  cost  per  capita 
would  be  but  trifling. 

So  finally  the  inhabitants  were  persuaded.  At  a  town  meeting 
held  in  January,  1660/1661,  three  of  the  selectmen — Pendleton, 
Stileman  and  Lewis — together  with  Richard  Cutt  and  Nathaniel 

''  This  land  was  a  third  part  of  the  Squamscott  patent  as  devised  to  Lake  and 
his  associates  in  1656  by  a  committee  appointed  by  the  General  Court.  \_Mass- 
acJiusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  266].  William  H.  Fry  in  his  New  Hampshire  as 
a  Royal  Province  [p.  44],  says  that  later  this  division  "came  into  the  posses- 
sion of  a  few  men  of  Portsmouth."  Capt.  Thomas  Lake,  a  Boston  merchant, 
operated  a  trading  post  on  Arrowsic  Island  in  the  Kennebec  river.  He  was 
killed  by  the  Indians  while  trying  to  escape  from  the  massacre  there  in  August, 
1676.  His  body  was  recovered  in  the  following  year,  and  taken  to  Boston 
where  it  was  buried  in  Copp's  Hill  Burying  Ground. — Ellis  and  Morris. 
History  of  King  Philip's  War,  p.  305;  Register,  III,  344. 
®  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  51,  53. 
» Ibid.,  I,  56,  57. 


164  Brian  Pendleton 

Drake,  were  chosen  a  committee  to  determine  who  should  share  in 
the  lands  to  be  distributed  and  how  much  each  one  should  have. 
Their  report  was  submitted  at  another  town  meeting  held  the  fol- 
lowing month,  and  with  one  modification  was  accepted.  The  provi- 
sion that  those  entitled  to  participate  should  be  "all  reputed  in- 
habitants and  free  comers  unto  the  year  1657",  together  with  their 
sons  and  daughters  of  certain  ages,  met  with  approval,  but  when 
the  allotments  came  to  be  read  off  and  it  was  discovered  that  Rich- 
ard Cutt  was  set  down  for  410  acres,  while  his  brother,  John,  and 
Capt.  Pendleton  were  to  have  350  acres  apiece,  far  more  than  al- 
lotted anyone  else,  "much  debate"  ensued. 

Finally,  to  satisfy  the  older  settlers  as  far  as  possible,  the 
three  chief  beneficiaries  agreed  to  yield  up  100  acres  apiece  and 
the  town  added  300  more  for  an  additional  distribution  among 
the  objectors  who  felt  they  should  have  more  than  the  new  com- 
ers. With  these  little  wrinkles  ironed  out  it  was  voted  that  "the 
patent  lands  bought  by  Capt.  Pendleton  and  Mr.  John  Cutt 
should  be  forthwith  purchased  of  them  for  the  town's  use  and  dis- 
tributed to  the  inhabitants."  The  various  allotments  are  entered 
at  length  in  the  records,'^  but  how  the  different  proportions  were 
arrived  at  is  a  mystery.  Had  they  been  based  solely  on  the  tax 
lists  it  is  doubtful  if  the  "big  three"  would  have  yielded  up  an  acre 
of  their  original  grants.  From  all  appearances  it  would  seem  that 
the  committee  on  distribution  took  care  of  themselves  and  their 
friends  pretty  well,  a  phenomenon  that  has  often  been  observed 
among  practical  politicians  since.'^ 

Pendleton's  long  fight  to  enlarge  his  township  had  at  last 
been  crowned  with  success.  Its  boundaries  had  been  stretched  in 
earnest,  including  not  only  what  is  now  Portsmouth  and  New- 
castle, but  also  most  of  the  present  townships  of  Rye,  Newington 

^^  Portsmouth  Town  Records  I,  65,  68-69.  Full  list  of  the  division  may  be  seen 
in  Brewster's  Rambles  About  Portsmouth  (First  Series),  pp.  27-28.  Some 
years  later  Pendleton  and  his  son  were  appointed  on  committees  for  the 
further  locating  of  these  "divident"  lands,  and  were  to  receive  three  pence 
per  acre  "for  their  pains." — Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  96. 
"  John  Scribner  Jenness  in  his  Piscataqua  Patents  [pp.  70-72]  seems  to  take 
the  view  that  this  affair  savored  of  political  jobbery,  when  in  commenting  on 
the  purchase  and  distribution  he  notes  that  Pendleton  and  his  associates  "so 
managed  the  affair  that  in  a  few  years  they  themselves  became  owners  of 
nearly  the  entire  tract."  This  is  hardly  correct  for  this  particular  group 
received  little  more  than  a  fifth  of  the  land  in  question.  Indeed  Jenness  notes 
further  on  that  a  large  portion  of  it  remained  undivided  until  1669  when 
James  Pendleton  and  others  received  grants  therein. 


Portsmouth  1659-1664  156 

and  Greenland.  Perhaps  he  was  entitled  to  the  spoils  he  received. 
A  promoter  deserves  some  profit,  and  five  percent  was  little  enough 
for  all  the  time  and  trouble  he  had  expended,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
risks  of  speculation.  That  his  enemies  should  take  quite  another 
vieAV  of  the  transaction  is  entirely  natural.  It  was  bad  enough  to 
have  this  reformer  from  Massachusetts  running  the  town's  affairs, 
but  to  see  him  walk  off  with  some  of  the  plums  was  simply  odious — 
another  score  to  be  charged  up  against  the  day  of  reckoning. 

Some  of  the  plums  that  Pendleton  coveted  were  just  beyond 
his  grasp.  The  high  hand  was  palsied  now  and  then.  The  plans  of 
the  Portsmouth  ring  miscarried  occasionally  as  in  the  cases  of 
"old  Mussell"  and  George  Walton.  Late  in  1660  the  town's  select- 
men desired  the  Captain  "to  inquire  of  old  Mussell  by  what  right 
he  possesseth  the  lands  inclosed  by  his  house  on  the  Great  Island 
&  to  inform  him  that  hee  must  surrender  it  unless  he  can  make 
better  tittle  to  it  than  the  selectmen  are  acquainted  withall."  A 
month  later,  Mussell,  who  with  three  others  had  been  fined  £10 
apiece  for  appropriating  town  lands  without  license,  came  before 
the  board,  had  his  fine  remitted,  his  house  lot  confirmed  to  him,  and 
an  additional  acre  granted  him  upon  the  Great  Island.^"  The  rec- 
ord indicates  that  the  property  in  dispute  was  adjacent  to  some 
of  the  Pendleton  holdings,  and  that  a  trading  proposition  had 
been  offered  him  is  clearly  set  forth  a  year  later  when  it  appears 
that  "Goodman  Mussell  refusing  to  let  the  town  have  there  own 
land  he  hath  fenced  near  Mr.  James  Pendleton's  house  without  a 
trial  of  a  suit  in  law  although  he  had  formerly  agreed  thereunto 
and  had  an  acre  given  him  upon  the  point  next  the  Little  Harbor 
which  he  hath  rendered  unto  the  town  again,  this  acre  of  land  is 
given  by  the  Selectmen  unto  Capt.  Pendleton  &  James  Pendleton 
to  make  tliem  satisfaction  for  what  tliey  were  to  have  of  that  which 
the  said  Mussell  had  fenced  in  against  Mr.  James  Pendleton" s 
house."'^ 

So  there's  the  cat  out  of  the  bag,  the  italics  being  ours.  Old 
Mussell  was  to  be  ousted  from  his  property  which  was  then  to  be 
granted  the  Pendletons.  The  scheme  was  well  planned  but  after 
their  canny  victim  had  had  his  fine  remitted  he  changed  his  mind 

^  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  60,  61. 

"Ibid.,  I,  82.  This  acre  was  not  laid  out  to  Capt.  Pendleton  until  1665,  the 
record  stating  it  was  "given  him  in  lieu  of  that  [which]  old  Mussell  detains 
at  the  end  of  James  Pendleton's  next  the  waterside". — Ibid.,  I,  104. 


156  Brian  Pendleton 

and  became  defiant.  The  Puritan  rule  in  England  was  at  an  end, 
and  while  it  was  to  endure  in  New  Hampshire  for  seventeen  years 
longer,  yet  the  leaders  there  could  not  but  feel  some  uncertainty 
as  to  the  future  and  were  not  inclined  to  force  the  issue  in  a  case 
of  this  kind,  when  their  own  rights  to  the  property  were  rather 
vague. 

In  spite  of  the  set-back  given  them  in  this  adventure,  the  se- 
lectmen now  undertook  to  work  a  similar  scheme  for  Pendleton's 
benefit.  At  the  same  meeting  which  saw  their  discomfiture  by  Mus- 
sell — 26  February,  1661/2 — George  Walton  was  restrained  from 
any  more  building  upon  the  Fort  Point,  the  ostensible  reason  given 
being  that  such  activities  might  "be  very  prejudicial  to  the  town 
and  country  in  regard  of  fortifications".  When  it  was  next  voted, 
however,  that  Capt.  Pendleton,  on  his  motion,  be  given  "liberty  to 
set  up  his  wind  mill  upon  the  fort  point  toward  the  beach,  the  mill 
being  of  such  common  and  public  use,"  we  see  the  real  reason  back 
of  the  action  against  Walton.  While  the  selectmen  stated  they 
considered  he  had  no  valid  title  to  the  land,  yet  some  months  later 
he  appeared  before  the  board  and  like  Mussell  refused  to  surren- 
der the  property  without  a  law  suit.^'*  As  shown  by  a  later  record, 
Pendleton  had  to  erect  his  windmill  elsewhere  than  at  the  coveted 
Point,  and  his  chagrin  over  this  may  have  contributed  somewhat 
to  the  petty  persecutions  to  which  Walton  was  subjected  after 
he  had  turned  Quaker.^^ 

Old  Mussell  seems  to  have  been  let  alone,  but  Walton  had 
joined  the  hated  sect,  and  hence  was  doubly  obnoxious.  Not  many 
months  after  his  defiance  of  the  authorities,  renewal  of  his  tavern 
license  was  refused  him  in  spite  of  his  promise  to  "keep  it  better 
than  ever."  Early  in  the  following  year  the  selectmen  find  him  £8 
"for  drawing  wine  before  this  time",'^  and  the  County  Court  kept 
the  ball  rolling  the  next  year  as  already  noted,  by  convicting  him 
and  his  wife  as  Quakers,  Pendleton  having  ordered  they  be  pre- 
sented for  not  attending  church.  Shortly  afterward  he  sued  Wal- 
ton for  withholding  half  of  a  debt  of  £239.10.3,  the  whole  amount 

"  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  82,  83. 

1^  In  laying  out  certain  highways  on  the  Great  Island  in  1663,  obviously  for 
the  benefit  of  Pendleton's  latest  venture,  the  selectmen  noted  that  one  was  to 
go  "to  the  windmill  of  Capt.  Pendleton,  and  from  thence  down  to  the  Fort." 
Another  was  to  be  only  one  rod  wide  where  it  crossed  Pendleton's  land,  but 
two  rods  wide  where  it  crossed  Walton's — a  discrimination  which  needs  no 
comment. — Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  89,  90. 
i«  Ibid,  I,  85,  87. 


Portsmouth  1659-1664  15T 

being  due  John  Paine  and  himself.  The  Pendleton-Walton  feud 
was  evidently  kept  alive  for  years,  passing  on  from  father  to  son, 
for  in  February,  1668/69,  James  Pendleton  and  Nathaniel  Fryer 
had  Walton  arrested  and  later  sued  him  for  pulling  down  the 
flakes  they  had  set  up  on  the  Point  and  spoiling  the  fish  they  were 
curing  there.'^  Walton  evidently  considered  this  part  of  the 
island  was  his  private  property  and  we  may  feel  sure  that  the 
curing  of  any  Pendleton  fish  there  would  have  been  peculiarly 
offensive  to  him. 

An  aftermath  of  this  affair  may  be  reflected  by  an  act  of 
the  General  Court  in  the  following  May  sequestering  the  land  at 
the  eastern  end  of  the  Great  Island  as  a  site  for  a  fort.  When 
Walton  sent  in  a  remonstrance  against  this  in  the  ensuing  year, 
they  declared  he  had  no  title  to  the  Fort  Point  and  ordered  him  to 
pay  £5  for  hearing  his  case.^^  There  seems  to  have  been  something 
implacable  in  these  Puritans  as  far  as  concerned  those  of  other 
faiths. 

It  would  be  of  interest  to  know  just  how  Walton  came  to  be 
so  heavily  in  debt  to  Pendleton  and  Paine,  the  sum  noted  above 
representing  over  $6,000.00  today.  Perhaps  no  small  part  of  this 
was  for  rum,  wine,  and  other  supplies  for  the  Walton  tavern — 
beer  included.  While  a  few  of  the  early  settlers  undoubtedly 
brewed  their  own,  there  is  some  evidence  that  Pendleton's  output 
of  this  popular  beverage  was  greater  than  required  by  his  family 
and  servants  alone.  For  when  his  son,  James,  mortgaged  the  Great 
Island  property  his  father  had  given  him,  he  included  his  "brew 
house,  copper  coolers,  and  appurtenances".^^  That  these  were 
formerly  operated  by  the  senior  Pendleton  may  be  indicated  in 
some  of  the  testimony  in  a  suit  for  trespass  which  James  brought 
against  one  Thomas  Crockett  in  July,  1667,  "for  interrupting  his 
peaceable  possession  of  a  Necke  of  land  bought  by  his  father  in 
Spruce  Creek."  At  that  time  the  jury  found  a  "non  Lyquitt","" 
whereupon  the  plaintiff  put  in  a  bar  against  the  verdict  and  re- 

"  County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  1659-1672,  pp.  171,  172,  182,  341; 
New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  86b,  154b. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  425,  454. 
^»New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  III,  96b-97a. 

^  Obviously,  Non  liquet  (it  does  not  appear  clear),  "a  verdict  given  by  a  jury 
when  a  matter  was  to  be  deferred  to  another  day  of  trial.  Tlie  same  phrase 
was  used  by  the  Romans;  after  hearing  a  cause,  such  of  the  judges  as  thought 
it  not  suflBciently  clear  to  pronounce  upon,  cast  a  ballot  into  the  urn  with  the 
two  letters  N.  L.  for  non  liquet". — Wharton's  Law  Lexicon,  9th  Ed.,  p.  513. 


158  Brian  Pendleton 

quired  an  arrest  of  judgment  until  the  next  County  Court.^^ 

While  the  Court  records  show  nothing  further  regarding  this 
action,  we  have  three  affidavits  concerning  it  nevertheless.  Early 
in  the  following  year,  Alexander  Jones  testified  that  about  1664, 
"being  desired  by  Capt.  Brian  Pendleton  to  fetch  wood  at  or  upon 
the  neck  of  land  whereon  Thomas  Crockett  now  liveth  ...  he  did 
cutt  and  carry  away  some  wood  of  the  said  necke  of  lande",  but 
that  as  soon  as  Crockett  heard  about  it  he  forbade  the  deponent 
cutting  any  more  for  Capt.  Pendleton's  account. 

Barnard  Squire  gave  similar  testimony,  saying  Crockett  had 
warned  him  off  from  cutting  timber  there,  claiming  it  was  his 
property,  but  we  do  not  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  dispute  until  we 
read  the  disposition  of  John  White,  taken  in  June,  1669. 

"Nine  or  ten  years  ago",  says  White,  "when  Thomas  Crock- 
ett did  brew  for  Captain  Pendleton,  being  present  at  his  brew- 
house  did  hear  Captain  Pendleton  and  Thomas  Crockett  discourse 
of  Land  and  the  s^  Crockett  did  desire  Captain  Pendleton  that  he 
would  not  meddle  with  that  land  that  he  was  about  to  buy  of  Rice 
Thommasse  because  it  was  the  s"^  Crockett's  land  and  it  would 
breed  a  great  difference  between  them,  and  then  Captain  Pendleton 
replyed,  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  any  man  wrong.  I  will  not 
meddle  with  it."  ^^ 

Crockett  at  this  time  was  a  resident  of  Kittery  but  as  he 
operated  the  ferry  between  that  town  and  the  Great  Island"^  he 
no  doubt  had  plenty  of  opportunities  to  exercise  his  talents  as  a 
brew-master  while  waiting  at  Pendleton's  for  fares  to  cross  the 
river.  Possiblj'  his  employer  made  him  the  promise  as  alleged  by 
John  White  while  in  an  expansive  mood  for  he  seems  to  have  for- 
gotten all  about  it  soon  after,  or  else  had  reason  to  change  his 
mind.  At  any  rate.  Rice  Thomas's  land  on  Spruce  Creek,  Kittery, 
came  into  his  possession  in  September,  1660,"''  and  we  may  be  sure 

"  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  I,  282. 
^=Tlie  three  depositions  noted  appear  in  York  Deeds,  II,  113, 
^  Crockett  was  licensed  in  July,  1659,  "to  Keepe  the  Ferry  over  Pischataqua 
River  from  Hugh  Gunnisons  to  Capt.  Pendletons,  .  .  .  for  his  life  tyme,  pro- 
vided hee  fitt  Conveniently  for  it."    Two  years  later,  however,  the  ferry  priv- 
ilege was   given  to   Robert   Wadleigh,  but   as   this   was   an   act   of   the   York 
County  court,  of  which  Pendleton  was  not  then  a  member,  we  could  not  say 
that  he  had   anything  to   do   with   the   transfer. — Maine   Province   and   Court 
Records,  II,  80,  102;  also  noted  in  E.  S.  Stackpole's   Old  Kittery  and  Her 
Families,  p.  225. 
^  York  Deeds,  1,  102. 


PoETSMOUTH  1659-1664  169 

that  the  only  brewing  Crockett  did  for  Pendleton  thereafter  was  in 
connection  with  lawsuits. 

The  first  of  these  came  to  trial  just  a  year  later  when  Pen- 
dleton sued  Crockett  for  trespass  in  "cutting  timber  off  his  land" 
— no  doubt  the  same  land  at  Spruce  Creek  which  Crockett  alleged 
was  his.  The  complainant  was  given  a  verdict  of  only  six  pence 
and  costs  of  £1-5-0,  yet  Crockett  nevertheless  entered  an  appeal 
to  the  next  County  Court.  What  became  of  this  action  does  not 
appear  of  record.  While  son  James  seems  to  have  had  this  little 
feud  passed  on  to  him,  as  already  noted,  his  father  took  a  hand  in 
it  again  in  1672,  when  he  sued  Crockett  "concerning  a  title  of 
land".  But  this  time  he  did  not  make  out  so  well,  the  Court  award- 
ing the  defendant  his  costs — fl-16-0.^^ 

Whether  or  not  this  squabble  with  Crockett  gave  Pendleton 
any  trouble  in  operating  his  brew  house  we  could  not  say,  but  we 
doubt  if  there  was  any  long  interruption.  As  a  good  business  man 
he  would  hardly  have  foregone  an  opportunity  to  make  a  bit  of 
profit  by  supplying  an  existing  demand,  particularly  such  a 
large  demand  as  existed  thereabouts. 

Our  Puritan  forefathers  did  not  have  the  horror  of  beer  and 
wine  professed  by  our  contemporary  reformers,  and  while  the 
liquor  problem  was  with  them  just  as  much  as  it  is  with  us  today, 
it  was  not  the  use  of  intoxicants  that  disturbed  them,  but  their 
abuse.  For  beer  itself  they  had  much  respect,  judging  from  the 
various  laws  they  passed  to  insure  its  good  quality,  and  to  keep 
its  price  low.^^  In  this  connection  it  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the 
good  ship  Arbella  which  brought  Governor  Winthrop  and  his 
party  to  Massachusetts  in  1630,  was  provisioned  for  that  famous 
voyage  with  no  less  than  forty-two  tons  of  beer,  against  only  four- 
teen tons  of  water.^^ 

Then  too,  it  is  of  much  significance  to  find  that  when  the 
synod  of  ministers  was  in  session  in  Cambridge  in  May,  1647,  the 
General  Court  voted  them  a  gift  of  twelve  gallons  of  sack,  and  six 
gallons  of  white  wine  "as  a  small  testimony  of  the  Court's  re- 

'^  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  II,  371,  233. 

'^Massachusetts  Records.   See  particularly  Vol.  IV,  pt.  1,  p.  69. 

"  Winthrop,  II,  417.  This  water,  which  was  probably  bad  enough  at  the  start, 

would  undoubtedly  have  become  entirely  unfit  to  drink  long  before  the  sixty 

days'  voyage  was  over.   Then  too,  the  colonists  had  to  bring  enough  beer  with 

them  to  tide  them  over  until  fresh  supplies  could  be  obtained. 


160  Brian  Pekdletok 

spect".^^  And  Judge  Sewall  in  his  famous  Diary,  notes  the  case 
of  a  woman  who  charged  her  husband  with  cruelty  in  giving  her 
nothing  but  water  to  drink — water  being  what  it  was  in  those 
days. 

When  it  came  to  the  "strong  waters",  however,  the  records 
of  the  county  courts  show  that  over-indulgence  in  them  brought 
about  the  same  results  then  as  it  does  today.  But  mixed  in  with 
those  sordid  accounts  of  brawls  and  fights  there  is  occasionally 
some  amusing  incident  to  brighten  up  the  faded  pages.  Consider 
for  example  the  unique  incident  at  the  sitting  of  the  County  Court 
at  Portsmouth  in  June,  1662.  The  four  dignified  magistrates, 
Wiggin,  Lusher  (!),  Waldron,  and  Pendleton  are  taking  their 
seats  on  the  bench,  the  drummer  is  beating  a  final  flourish,  when 
suddenly  a  wild-eyed  inebriate  bursts  into  the  meeting  house, 
kicks  a  hole  in  the  drum-head,  and  goes  into  a  dance  of  derision 
before  the  shocked  and  scandalized  officials.  So  the  Court,  com- 
plaint being  made  to  them  "by  the  drummer  who  attends  them  as 
their  officer  concerning  John  Pottle  for  kicking  out  the  head  of  his 
drum,  also  .  .  .  taking  notice  of  his  being  drunk  by  his  not  knownng 
the  place  where  he  did  it  and  by  his  antick  carriages  before  them 
and  other  contemptuous  cariges  and  unrulyness,  sentenced  him 
to  pay  10^  for  the  drum,  and  10^  for  being  drunk  or  to  be 
whipped  with  ten  stripes, "^^ 

Walton's  successor  as  tavern  keeper  at  Portsmouth,  Edward 
West,  did  not  find  the  business  very  profitable  in  spite  of  the  large 
consumption  of  stimulants  there.  He  had  too  much  competition, 
complaining  to  the  County  Court  finally  that  the  local  merchants 
who  were  allowed  to  retail  strong  liquor  on  credit,  cut  into  his 
revenues.^*^  Evidently  these  merchants  had  concluded  there  was 
but  little  use  in  trying  to  restrict  the  sale  of  spirits,  and  it  is  pos- 
sible they  thought  they  could  better  control  the  liquor  traffic  by 
handling  it  themselves,  at  least  in  so  far  as  concerned  their  own 
employees.  The  Cutt  brothers,  Capt.  Waldron,  and  Nathaniel 
Fryer,  were  all  licensed  "to  sell  strong  waters  at  retail  to  their 
fishermen  and  servants"  in  1664,  and  at  the  same  time  "Capt. 

'^Massachusetts  Records,  II,  194-5.    It  would  be  a  matter  of  much  interest  if 

we  could  determine  what  part  of  the  synod's  fulminations  were  engendered  on 

the  spiritual  plane  and  what  on  the  spiritous.   Sack,  it  might  be  noted,  was  the 

name  given  at  this  period  to  all  the  strong,  dry  wines  from  Spain  or  the  Canary 

Islands. 

'^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  69a. 

^^  County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I,  261. 


Portsmouth  1659-1664  161 

Pendleton  requesting  to  have  a  former  license  renewed  of  selling 
stro.  waters  by  retail,  (it)  is  granted  unto  him."^^  As  both  Pen- 
dleton and  Waldron  were  members  of  the  County  Court  at  this 
time,  and  as  the  Cutts  served  there  later,  we  may  consider  that 
the  "bench  and  bar"  on  the  Piscataqua  had  acquired  a  special 
significance,  a  charm  both  quaint  and  aromatic. 

It  may  perhaps  seem  an  oddity  that  the  Puritan  who  at- 
tempted in  so  many  ways  to  regulate  the  intimate  habits,  con- 
duct, and  even  the  dress  of  his  fellows,  should  never  have  placed 
any  ban  upon  their  temperate  indulgence  in  spirits.  There  was 
nothing  inconsistent,  however,  in  his  attitude  on  the  liquor  ques- 
tion. It  should  be  remembered  that  the  Puritans  took  the  Bible 
literally,  and  endeavored  to  live  according  to  its  teachings.  How 
then  could  they  prohibit  the  use  of  stimulants  when  it  was  ex- 
pressly enjoined  in  the  Good  Book  to  give  strong  drink  to  the 
perishing,  and  wine  to  those  of  heavy  hearts.''  Would  they  not  be 
denying  the  Scriptures  if  they  refused  themselves  this  solace.'* 
Were  not  they  too,  often  ready  to  perish  through  cold  and  heavy 
toil,  through  hunger  and  privation.?  Were  not  they  often  down- 
hearted, particularly  on  Sabbaths  and  lecture  days  when  their 
ministers  gave  them  but  little  hope,  except  of  Hell  ?  Only  through 
alcohol,  that  ancient  worker  of  magic,  could  they  alleviate  their 
gloomy  outlook  on  this  life  and  their  despair  of  the  hereafter.  So  in 
strict  accordance  with  Scriptural  sanctions  they  drank  and  for- 
got their  poverty  and  remembered  their  misery  no  more.^^ 

A  late  writer  has  called  rum  "the  life  blood  of  colonial  com- 
merce", but  aside  from  its  economic  importance  which  he  has 
stressed,^^  its  influence  upon  the  social  welfare  of  the  early  New 
Englanders  has  yet  to  be  investigated.  They  undoubtedly  needed 
the  fire-water  of  their  taverns  to  quench  the  hell-fire  of  their 
churches.  Instinctively  they  found  in  strong  liquor  an  antidote 
for  the  deadly  virus  of  Puritanism,  a  humanizing  agent,  respected 
and  respectable  when  not  indulged  in  to  excess,  a  panacea  both 
for  the  spiritual  horrors  of  their  theology  and  the  physical  rigors 
of  their  lives.  Without  rum  and  its  companion  stimuli  it  is  doubt- 
ful if  they  could  have  endured  either  themselves  or  each  other 
long.    Indeed  in  this  aspect  we  may  even  consider  that  alcohol 

^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  89b. 

'^  See  Proverbs,  31:6-7. 

'^Charles  William  Taussig,  Bum,  Romance,  and  Rebellion  (1928),  Chapter  II. 


162  Brian  Pendleton 

played  no  small  part  in  holding  the  Puritan  colonists  together 
and  in  preserving  their  faith. 

Looking  upon  alcohol  as  they  did,  seeing  no  "wrong"  in 
drink,  and  with  Scriptural  sanctions  in  mind,  there  was  nothing 
of  hypocrisy  in  their  attitude  on  the  liquor  question.  They  treated 
it  sanely,  recognizing  the  dangers  that  lurked  in  over-indulgence, 
and  doing  all  they  could  to  discourage  drunkenness. 

The  reformers  in  Pendleton's  time,  while  merely  amateurs, 
did  not  overlook  many  opportunities  for  uplifting  their  fellows 
through  prohibitory  legislation  even  if  they  did  countenance  the 
tavern  and  all  that  was  sold  therein.  Their  "Board  of  Public 
Morals"  encouraged  early  marriage  and  frowned  upon  men  and 
women  living  apart  from  their  consorts.  Some  of  the  early  settlers 
came  over  alone,  leaving  their  wives  in  England,  and  those  who 
failed  to  send  for  them  in  a  reasonable  length  of  time  were  looked 
upon  with  suspicion  as  potential  menaces  to  society.  The  General 
Court  took  notice  of  this  danger  as  early  as  1647,  when  Pendleton 
was  serving  there  as  a  Deputy  from  Watertown,  by  passing  an  act 
compelling  such  residents  to  send  for  their  families,  so  that  they 
would  not  "live  undr  great  temptations",  and  "commit  lewdnes  & 
filthines  here  amongst  us".^*  Quite  likely  he  had  this  law  in  mind 
when,  fourteen  years  later,  charges  were  brought  before  the  Dover 
Court  against  one  Richard  Allison  of  Portsmouth  who  had  not 
brought  his  wife  over  from  England. 

Allison  gave  the  magistrates  a  number  of  good  reasons  for 
his  seeming  neglect,  and  they  allowed  him  twelve  months  in  which 
to  remedy  the  situation.^^  Evidently  they  took  measures  to  save 
him  from  the  necessity  of  any  more  excuses,  for  we  find  a  certifi- 
cate signed  by  Edward  Worth  ( .'')  who  seems  to  have  been  a  ship 
master,  certifying  that  "Richard  Allison  hath  sent  for  his  wife 
by  me  and  I  have  fully  engaged  to  bring  her  over  if  she  be  willing 
and  still  living".  And  at  the  bottom  of  the  sheet  the  ever-particu- 
lar Brian  Pendleton  wrote  gravely  over  his  signature  "This  I  was 
not  willing  (to)  give  oath  for  but  doe  attest  that  this  is  Mr. 
Edward  Worth  (  ?)  his  promise  to  bringe  Rich  Alassons  wife  if 
she  will  come  with  him — 19  July  61".^^  Evidently  he  had  some 
misgivings  about  binding  a  man  by  oath  to  keep  a  promise — an- 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  II,  211-12. 

^^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  60a. 

^  County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I,  85. 


Portsmouth  1659-1664  163 

other  instance  of  his  painstaking  particularity  in  whatever  sa- 
vored of  the  legalistic,  and  an  explanation  of  how  the  Colony  was 
able  to  do  without  lawyers  for  so  many  years  if  he  was  typical  of 
his  fellow  magistrates. 

While  the  colony  could  get  along  without  lawyers,  it  could 
not  do  without  jails.  The  fear  of  future  punishment  was  not  suffi- 
cient to  curb  acts  of  violence  among  the  settlers.  Those  who  had 
come  to  New  England  with  God  in  their  hearts,  hoping  to  found 
Utopia,  soon  learned  that  somehow  the  Devil  had  slipped  in  too, 
bringing  with  him  the  old  lusts  of  the  flesh,  evil  passions,  and 
wickedness  of  all  kinds.  Only  four  years  after  they  landed  in  Bos- 
ton the  colonists  found  it  necessary  to  build  a  prison  there.  This 
sufficed  for  sixteen  years,  when  the  number  of  transgressors  hav- 
ing increased  with  the  growth  of  population,  a  second  prison  was 
ordered  to  be  built  at  Ipswich.  In  1654  one  was  ordered  for  York 
County ,^^  and  six  years  later  the  County  Court  at  Dover,  noting 
that  justice  had  been  thwarted  through  the  escape  of  evildoers, 
whereby  "many  ill-minded  persons  take  encouragement  to  doe 
wickedly",  ordered  a  prison-house  to  be  built  in  Dover,  twenty 
feet  long,  sixteen  wide,  and  seven  to  ten  feet  high,  "with  a  good 
stone  wall  ...  &  at  least  two  or  three  iron  rings  made  fast  in  the 
wall,  and  also  .  .  .  convenient  chains,  locks,  gines,  and  whatever 
utensils  are  necessary  to  lay  upon  unruly  offenders."  Captains 
Pendleton  and  Waldron  were  appointed  a  committee  to  see  this 
work  effectually  done,  and  were  also  empowered  to  raise  the  nec- 
essary funds,  and  impress  labor  as  needed.  Some  delay  evidently 
ensued,  for  two  years  later  we  note  the  Court  added  Lieut.  Ralph 
Hall  to  the  committee  on  the  prison,  and  directed  that  the  towns 
should  be  held  delinquent  if  the  work  was  not  completed  within 
the  time  fixed.^^  It  is  quite  likely  that  the  annoyance  given  the 
authorities  by  the  Quakers,  who  were  said  to  be  "abounding" 
around  Dover  at  about  this  time,  had  much  to  do  with  the  ordering 
of  this  prison,  with  its  engines  of  restraint  and  punishment. 

II 

We  have  noted  in  the  preceding  chapter  how  the  Restoration 
of  England's  King  gave  much  anxiety  to  the  rulers  of  Massachu- 
setts, moving  them  to  call  a  special  meeting  of  the  General  Court 

^'Massachusetts  Records,  I,  100;  IV,  pt.  1,  85,  214. 
^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  42a,  69b. 


164  Brian  Pendleton 

in  December,  1660,  which  Pendleton  attended  as  the  Deputy  from 
Portsmouth.  The  same  uneasiness  was  also  manifest  when  he  joined 
the  regular  session  which  opened  in  the  following  May.  There  seems 
to  have  been  a  very  great  desire  on  the  part  of  the  authorities 
to  set  their  house  in  order  and  to  appear  as  loyal  subjects — for 
the  time  being  at  least.  In  line  with  this  policy,  the  Court  ordered 
the  suppression  of  a  book  written  by  John  Elliot,  entitled  "The 
Christian  Commonwealth"  which  contained  certain  passages  "of- 
fensive to  kingly  government  in  England",  and  secured  Elliot's 
retraction  of  the  untimely  sentiments  expressed  therein.  Joseph 
Jencks,  Jr.,  was  also  made  a  scapegoat,  having  been  accused  of 
uttering  "treasonable  words  against  the  king's  majesty."  Upon 
examination,  Jencks  denied  any  such  utterances,  and  as  the  Court 
concluded  it  would  be  legally  impossible  to  prove  the  charges 
against  him  he  was  freed  from  his  imprisonment.^^ 

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  these  solemn  mummeries  and 
others  of  like  nature  were  the  veriest  kind  of  window  dressing,  in- 
tended to  beguile  whatever  wrath  might  be  in  store.  For  Massa- 
chusetts had  no  loyalty  to  the  king.  Her  loyalty  was  to  herself 
alone.  And  yet  the  times  were  most  difficult.  The  Puritan  Com- 
monwealth in  England  had  been  overthrown.  The  Stuart  dynasty 
was  again  in  power.  There  was  no  telling  what  the  future  might 
bring  forth.  Better  be  prudent,  render  a  humble  lip-service, 
flatter  and  fawn  upon  the  new  Charles,  cajole,  protest,  suppress 
books,  imprison  traducers,  be  hypocrites  if  need  be,  but  save  your 
institutions  at  any  cost! 

A  problem  this  for  the  best  minds  of  the  Colony — and  so  the 
Court  appointed  a  committee  of  eight  of  its  leading  members  to- 
gether with  four  of  the  ablest  ministers  to  "consider  and  debate  .  . 
our  patent,  lawes,  priviledges,  &  duty  to  his  majesty."  Their 
report,^*'  made  over  the  signature  of  Thomas  Danforth,  is  an  ad- 
mirable document,  terse,  straightforward,  boldly  expressed,  par- 
ticularly so  when  declaring  their  right  to  defend  themselves,  "yea, 
and  if  neede  be  by  force  of  armes  .  .  .  against  all  persons  as  shall 
at  any  time  attempt  .  .  .  the  destruction,  invasion,  detriment  or 

^"Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  5-8. 

^°  Ibid.,  pp.  26-26.  The  lay  membership  of  this  committee  was  equally  divided 
between  the  Assistants  and  the  Deputies,  Magistrates  Bradstreet,  Symonds, 
Denison  and  Danforth  representing  tlie  former,  while  Major  William  Haw- 
thorne and  Capts.  Eleazer  Lusher,  Thomas  Savage,  and  Edward  Johnson  were 
the  Deputies  chosen.  The  latter,  by  the  way,  was  the  author  of  the  famous 
work  entitled  W onder-W orking  Providence  of  Zion's  Saviour  in  New  England. 


PoBTSMOUTH  1659-1664  165 

annoyance  of  this  plantation  or  the  inhabitants  thereof".  Strong 
language  this,  even  if  intended  for  home  consumption  only — much 
stronger  than  expressed  in  the  second  part  of  this  report,  "Con- 
cerning our  duties  of  allegiance  to  our  sovereign  lord  the  king". 
Here  we  find  they  "ought  to"  do  this  and  that — only  three  articles 
here  against  eight  in  the  first  section — the  important  one,  "Con- 
cerning our  Liberties".  And  when  we  read  that  one  of  their  duties 
to  royalty  consisted  in  "a  faithful  discharge  in  the  governing  of 
the  people  committed  to  our  care" — a  right  they  had  always  in- 
sisted upon — it  is  fairly  obvious  their  allegiance  to  the  king  was 
not  to  interfere  with  their  liberties.  Their  rights  came  first,  their 
allegiance  was  only  secondary,  a  perfunctory  one  dictated  by 
self-interest  alone. 

The  approval  of  this  report  was  about  the  last  act  of  this 
long  and  stormy  session,  which  already  had  seen  the  trial  of 
Wenlock  Christison  and  additional  legislation  against  the  Quak- 
ers. In  between  these  major  affairs  much  small  grist  had  gone 
through  the  mill.  The  Court's  watchful  care  that  Maine  should 
not  become  unorthodox  is  shown  by  an  order  to  the  towns  of  York, 
Wells,  and  Scarborough  to  provide  themselves  with  a  suitable 
ministry  without  delay,  while  its  continued  interest  in  the  tempo- 
ral affairs  of  the  province  is  evidenced  by  Pendleton's  appoint- 
ment on  a  committee  which  was  directed  to  repair  to  Falmouth 
and  investigate  several  complaints  made  by  George  Cleve  against 
"Mr."  Jordan,  who  were  in  conflict  over  their  rights  to  certain 
lands.  The  Portsmouth  Deputy  was  also  appointed  a  commis- 
sioner with  Capt.  Wiggin  to  assist  in  settling  the  large  estate  of 
Valentine  Hill,  deceased,  a  kind  of  service  to  which  he  was  well 
accustomed  by  this  time.  And  he  was  finally  repaid  for  certain 
heavy  expenditures  he  had  made  three  years  earlier,  by  an  order 
of  the  Court  directing  that  the  selectmen  of  Dover  and  Ports- 
mouth "doe  forthwith,  by  an  assessment  on  the  Inhabitants  collect 
&  gather  the  some  of  tenn  pounds  eight  shillings  &  fouur  pence  out 
of  each  Toune  &  Deliver  the  same  to  the  said  Brian  Pendleton  as 
sattisfaction  for  so  much  by  him  expended  on  a  frozen  person, 
some  years  past,  yt  came  into  that  River,  whose  charity  this 
Court  Judgeth  it  meete  to  encourage  .  .  ."  ^^ 

Outside  of  his  appointment  with  Capt.  Waldron  and  Peter 
Coffin  to  make  a  final  settlement  of  the  Hill  estate,  little  in  which 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  7,  11,  13;  8-9. 


166  Brian  Pendleton 

Pendleton  had  any  personal  interest  occurred  at  the  meeting  of 
the  General  Court  which  he  next  attended  in  May,  1663,^^  but  in 
the  following  October  he  received  the  appointment  we  have  already 
noted  to  enforce  the  English  Navigation  Laws  in  the  Piscataqua 
region.  This  was  one  of  the  first  demands  made  upon  the  Colony 
by  the  new  regime  in  England  which  was  no  longer  disposed  to 
wink  at  the  activities  of  the  merchants  and  mariners  of  Massachu- 
setts in  building  up  a  commerce  of  their  own,  nor  in  allowing  for- 
eign vessels  to  trade  there  freely.  The  economic  value  of  the  colo- 
nies to  the  mother  country  would  be  sadly  diminished  if  the  latter 
could  not  profit  by  the  carrying  trade,  and  the  navigation  laws 
were  intended  to  forestall  any  such  loss. 

As  Port  Officer  of  the  Piscataqua,  Pendleton  soon  had  occa- 
sion to  investigate  a  strange  arrival  which  dropped  anchor  in 
the  river  on  July  10th,  1664.  This  was  the  "pinck",  or  small  ship 
Blue  Dove,  commanded  by  one  John  Douglas  who  had  seized  her 
off  Jamaica  late  in  June.  Douglas  claimed  part  of  her  cargo  was 
intended  for  some  Spanish  Jews  in  Amsterdam,  and  that  as  Spain 
and  Portugal  were  then  at  war  he  had  a  right  to  seize  the  ship 
under  a  commission  given  him  to  command  the  Portuguese  priva- 
teer St.  John. 

When  Pendleton  came  to  examine  the  Blue  Dove's  papers, 
however,  he  evidently  felt  that  her  captor's  claims  were  pretty  thin 
as  far  as  concerned  her  carrying  any  goods  for  Spanish  subjects. 
The  statements  to  that  effect  which  Douglas  had  craftily  ob- 
tained from  five  of  her  passengers  after  the  capture,  and  to  which 
they  swore  before  Pendleton  on  July  12th,  did  not  impress  him 
very  much.  Most  of  their  testimony  was  hearsay,  and  then  too 
were  they  in  a  position  to  be  regarded  as  reliable  witnesses.'^  What 
was  their  status  anyway.'*  Still  passengers.?  If  so,  they  were 
under  obligations  to  Douglas  for  letting  them  continue  their  voy- 
age as  such.  Prisoners.?  Then  they  might  sign  and  take  oath  to 
any  lies  their  captor  dictated.  He  was  a  violent  man — and  they 
wanted  to  get  home. 

The  more  Pendleton  considered  the  affair,  the  worse  it  looked 
to  him.  He  was  always  particular  about  details,  and  those  he  had 
put  together  in  this  case  did  not  check  up  very  well  with  the  plaus- 
ible stories  told  by  this  sea-lawyer  and  his  officers.  Moreover, 
their  behavior  was  unsatisfactory.    They  acted  like  guilty  men. 

''^  Massachusetts  Records,  pp.  83,  72. 


Portsmouth  1669-1664  167 

There  was  only  one  conclusion  possible:  Douglas  had  committed 
an  act  very  close  to  piracy — and  notice  to  that  effect  was  im- 
mediately dispatched  to  the  authorities  at  Boston. 

This  message  was  probably  sent  on  the  14th,  for  two  days 
later,  Bellingham,  the  Deputy  Governor,  and  Francis  Willoughby, 
one  of  the  Assistants,  commissioned  Captains  James  Oliver  and 
Edward  Hutchinson  to  repair  at  once  to  the  Piscataqua  and  re- 
port to  Capt.  Pendleton  and  Mr.  Richard  Cutt,  who  were  author- 
ized with  them  to  seize  the  Blue  Dove,  her  officers  and  crew,  and 
send  them  down  to  Boston  "where  a  due  proceeding  may  be  had  .  . 
according  to  law  and  Justice."  The  seizure  took  place  on  the  18th, 
and  a  few  days  afterwards  Douglas  found  himself  in  prison.  Here 
in  the  following  month  he  drew  up  a  long  plea  to  the  General  Court 
in  which  after  citing  his  Portuguese  commission  and  the  informa- 
tion he  had  received  about  the  cargo  of  the  Blue  Dove — vouched 
for  by  the  depositions  of  five  prisoners  made  "before  Capt.  Pem- 
melton  chefe  Justes  in  Pascatabay" — he  gives  the  following  ac- 
count of  the  events  that  followed  the  capture: 

"And  After  the  Sayed  Capt.  John  Dagles  toucke  the  prise 
(he)  Sayled  outt  of  the  Channel  Called  bahem*^  and  Steared  his 
Cource  to  Sayle  into  portag'll  with  this  his  Sayed  Prise,  ...  in 
which  Sayed  voydge  wanting  vettiells  and  watter  he  Arived  in 
Now  England  for  to  tack  watter  and  fitt  his  Ship  for  this  his 
Sayed  voydge  to  portugall. 

"And  (after)  he  did  Arive  att  the  port  of  Pescatabay,^^ 
the  Sayed  Capt.  Dagles  Did  Send  ashore  one  of  his  Offecers  to 
the  Sayed  Capt.  Pemmellton,  Justice  of  Putatabay,  desiering  for 
Permission  to  watter  and  to  give  him  libertey  to  sell  some  goods 
to  buye  vittells  and  to  be  goine  in  his  voydge  to  Portugall. 

"And  upon  his  Desier  the  sayed  Justase — Capt.  Pemmel- 
ton — Sent  word  to  the  sayed  Capt.  Dagles  that  he  was  verey  well- 
corn  and  that  he  had  his  libertey  to  doue  in  seviletey"*^  what  his 
mind  was  and  upon  this  his  word  the  sayed  Capt.  Dagles  was 
Obleged  to  him. 

"And  after  8  Dayes  they  toucke  the  Sayed  Capt.  Dagles  pris- 
nor  and  his  men  and  seased  upon  his  vessell  and  goods  and  pout 

*^  The  Bahama  Channel. 

**  Piscataqua. 

**  To  do  in  civility. 


168  Brian  Pendleton 

all  his  men  out  and  pout  outher  men  abord,  the  Avhich  did  Plonder 
me  and  my  men  Just  to  Ouer  Sherts. 

"Sertenly  itt  tis  a  very  Sad  Cace  that  a  Jntallman  of  his 
qualetea'^^  should  youse  a  stranger  soe  unsivell,  because  of  the 
Aleance  between  the  Crounes,^^  and  not  to  give  him  libertey  to  goe 
about  his  bousnes — and  he  had  seased  my  Commision  and  all  my 
paperes  as  if  I  ware  an  enneme  to  the  Croune  of  England." 

A  sad  case  indeed — sadder  still  for  Capt.  Douglas  when  it 
came  to  trial.  On  new  evidence  then  presented,  his  seizure  of  the 
Blue  Dove  was  declared  illegal,  thus  confirming  Pendleton's  judg- 
ment. The  vessel  and  her  cargo  were  restored  to  their  rightful 
owners,  while  Douglas  and  his  crew  recovered  their  private  prop- 
erty. Apparently  he  received  no  other  punishment  aside  from  his 
brief  imprisonment,  the  authorities  probably  considering  him  only 
an  amateur  pirate  after  all.^^ 

The  case  of  the  Blue  Dove  touches  upon  another  sequence 
of  events  which  either  directly  or  indirectly  had  a  most  determin- 
ing influence  upon  Pendleton's  future  career.  The  same  day  that 
this  little  ship  fluttered  out  of  Portsmouth  harbor,  Boston  bound, 
another  vessel  arrived  there,  bearing  one  of  the  Royal  Commis- 
sioners who  had  been  delegated  to  bring  the  New  England  colonies 
under  proper  subjection  to  the  Crown.  This  rather  ambitious 
dignitary  was  none  other  than  Samuel  Maverick,  who,  for  some 
time  since  his  participation  in  the  Doctor  Child  affair  years  be- 
fore, had  lived  in  England  nursing  his  old  grudge  against  the 
men  of  the  Bay,  and  biding  his  time  to  even  the  score.  His  inti- 
mate knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  Massachusetts,  and  the  sugges- 
tions he  had  made  for  their  better  regulation,  had  so  impressed 
the  new  government  that  he  had  been  selected  as  one  of  the  four 
Commissioners  to  put  his  schemes  into  effect. 

Like  many  others,  Maverick  soon  found  it  is  one  thing  to 
plan  and  another  to  execute.  The  personnel  of  the  Commission  as 
a  whole  left  much  to  be  desired.  They  were  no  match  for  the 
elusive  "Bostoners".   Maverick  himself  was  well  advanced  in  years, 

"  Gentleman  of  his  quality. 
"  i.e.,  of  England  and  Portugal,  1661. 

**  The  documents  in  the  case  of  the  Blue  Dove  are  in  Vol.  60  of  the  Massachu- 
setts Archives,  pp.  215-218,  220,  230,  271-2,  and,  with  the  exception  of  two  of 
the  depositions  taken  by  Pendleton,  are  given  in  full  in  J.  F.  Jameson's 
Privateering  and  Piracy  in  the  Colonial  Period  [pp.  27-45].  References  to  the 
affair  are  also  made  in  the  Massachusetts  Records — IV,  pt,  2,  126-128. 


Portsmouth  1659-1664  169 

and  it  may  be  significant  that  his  first  act  upon  landing  in  Ports- 
mouth Avas  to  send  off  a  letter  to  Capt.  Thomas  Breedon  com- 
plaining that  the  seizure  of  the  Blue  Dove  by  Capt  Oliver  and  his 
associates  was  an  infringement  upon  the  Commissioners'  author- 
ity^^— just  as  if  Oliver  had  known  the  exact  day  and  hour  when 
Maverick  was  due !  While  most  of  the  Commissioners'  other  deal- 
ings with  the  shrewdly  obstinate  rulers  of  Massachusetts  were 
equally  futile,  yet  they  did  succeed  a  year  later  in  upsetting  her 
rule  in  Maine.  This  act  no  doubt  was  largely  responsible  for  Pen- 
dleton's removal  to  that  Province,  an  event  which  followed  almost 
immediately  afterwards.  Here  in  the  new  activities  and  intrigues 
in  which  he  engaged  we  may  be  very  sure  he  quickly  forgot  the 
various  trials  and  tribulations  which  had  befallen  him  during  his 
last  years  at  Portsmouth. 

*^New  York  Colonial  Documents,  III,  65.  This  Capt.  Breedon  seems  to  have 
been  one  of  the  malcontents  in  Boston  for  the  General  Court  fined  him  £200  for 
his  insolence  towards  them  at  the  session  held  in  Oct.,  1662.  He  evidently  had 
good  connections,  however,  for  his  fine  was  remitted  in  the  following  May  upon 
the  intercession  of  the  Governors  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Connecticut.  Three  years 
later  he  was  one  of  the  sureties  on  the  bond  the  Court  required  of  Abraham 
Corbet — Portsmouth's  trouble  maker,  whose  activities  will  be  touched  upon 
in  the  following  chapter. — Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  69,  76,  305. 


CHAPTER  XI 


PORTSMOUTH 

1664  -  1665 


For  mine  enemies  speak  against  me;  and  they  that  lay  wait  for  my  soul 
take  counsel  together.  . 

Let  them  be  confounded  and  consumed  that  are  adversaries  to  my  soul; 
let  them  be  covered  with  reproach  and  dishonor  that  seek  my  hurt. 

— Psalms,  71:10,  13 

It  was  a  superstition  of  the  early  Puritans  that  misfortunes 
and  calamities  were  visited  upon  the  scoffer  and  the  evil  doer  as 
"judgments"  of  an  all-seeing  and  retributive  Jehovah.  An  eter- 
nity of  torment  for  the  wicked  was  not  sufficient  for  their  dire 
conception  of  a  vengeful  Divinity.  Their  God  of  Wrath  was  not 
so  easily  satisfied.  Crop  failures,  pestilences,  destructive  storms 
or  floods  were  regarded  as  signs  of  His  displeasure  with  the  popu- 
lace at  large,  and  days  of  fasting  and  humiliation  were  appointed 
to  appease  the  Angry  One.^  Offending  individuals  were  also  sin- 
gled out  for  special  punishment.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  touched 
them  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  their  pride  was  humbled  to 
the  dust,  their  possessions  were  swept  away  or,  worst  of  all,  they 
were  struck  down  by  sudden  death. 

The  Quakers  were  quick  to  seize  upon  this  Puritan  belief 
and  turn  it  against  their  persecutors.  They  professed  to  see  in 
the  calamities  that  befell  New  England  in  succeeding  years — the 
blighting  of  her  crops  in  1664,  the  small-pox  scourge,  her  terrible 
war  with  the  Indians,  and  the  final  catastrophe  of  the  witch- 
craft delusion — they  saw  in  these  successive  visitations  the  judg- 
ments of  the  Lord  for  her  cruelties  to  the  Friends.  And  as  for  the 
leaders  in  the  persecution,  they  pointed  out  how  soon  the  Rev. 
John  Norton  met  with  sudden  death,  while  Governor  Endicott 
perished  miserably ;  how  Bellingham  became  "distracted",  and 
Major  General  Humphrey  Atherton  was  dashed  to  death  from 
his  horse ;  how  another  of  the  persecutors  was  killed  by  lightning, 

1  For  example,  note  the  day  of  humiliation  appointed  in  August,  1664,  because 
of  "This  Court  being  sensible  of  the  Lord's  frounes  upon  us  in  taking  away 
the  f  ruites  of  the  earth  in  so  great  a  measure  as  appears  in  the  present  harvest." 
— Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  118. 


Portsmouth  1664-1665  171 

and  another  by  the  falling  of  a  tree.  They  might  have  noted  too, 
how  in  his  old  age,  Richard  Waldron,  that  savage  magistrate  of 
Dover,  was  cruelly  put  to  death  by  the  Indians,  and  how  mis- 
fortunes dogged  the  steps  of  Brian  Pendleton  all  the  rest  of  his 
life. 

His  daughter,  Mary,  who  had  married  the  Rev.  Seth 
Fletcher,  died  in  a  few  years,  and  in  October,  1660,  Fletcher  was 
dismissed  from  his  Church  at  Wells,  the  Massachusetts  authori- 
ties finding  fault  with  his  orthodoxy.^  A  petition  in  his  behalf 
from  some  of  the  inhabitants  there  was  presented  to  the  next  Gen- 
eral Court  in  May,  1661,  but  the  Magistrates  did  not  see  fit  to 
grant  it  until  such  time  as  Fletcher  could  produce  evidence  "of 
his  repentance  &  good  conversation".  The  Deputies  concurred  in 
this,  Pendleton,  although  a  member  of  the  body  at  the  time,  evi- 
dently not  having  influence  enough  to  save  his  son-in-law  when  a 
question  of  doctrine  was  involved.^  In  the  next  year  the  young 
son  of  Caleb  Pendleton  died  in  Boston,^  and  of  Caleb  himself  no 
definite  record  has  since  been  found  indicating  that  he  long  sur- 
vived. 

In  1663,  Capt.  Pendleton's  two  negro  servants  were  burned 
to  death. ^  His  son,  James,  for  whom  he  had  done  so  much,  met 
with  business  reverses  in  1672  and  lost  much  of  his  property  on 
the  Great  Island.®  Not  long  afterguards  James'  son,  Edmund,  was 
blinded  for  life  by  a  stone  thrown  at  him  by  another  boy.^  Capt. 
Pendleton  himself  saw  some  "hard  times"  in  1664,  and  not  only 
got  into  much  troublesome  litigation  but  also  met  with  a  personal 
humiliation  which  probably  upset  him  more  than  most  of  his  finan- 
cial losses. 

This  incident  may  have  resulted  from  his  growing  unpopu- 
larity at  Portsmouth,  signs  of  which  had  been  cropping  out  for 
some  time.  The  Puritan  rule  of  Pendleton  and  his  minister,  the 
Rev.  Joshua  Moodey,  no  doubt  had  become  increasingly  irksome 
to  such  of  the  inhabitants  as  were  not  rigorists,  and  there  were 
others  there  who  felt  they  had  not  received  their  share  in  the  allot- 

"  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  426,  434. 

=>  Massachusetts  Archives,  X,  92a,  96,  96a. 

*  Boston  Records  Commissioners'  Reports  (1883),  City  Document  No.  130,  p.  86. 

^New   Hampshire   Province   Deeds,   II,   76b;    County   Court   Papers   of   New 

Hampshire,  1659-1672,  p.  103. 

"  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  III,  104a. 

'  York  Deeds,  XV,  foUo  50. 


172  Briax  Pendleton 

merits  of  land.  Of  the  five  Associates  elected  in  1663,  Pendleton  re- 
ceived the  largest  number  of  votes  but  fell  below  Waldron  in  '64, 
and  almost  trailed  the  field  in  the  following  year,^  the  last  he  was 
to  serve  as  a  Justice  on  the  Bench  of  New  Hampshire. 

The  County  Court  records  of  1664  give  us  some  clues  as  to 
the  reasons  that  made  him  unpopular.  He  had  added  to  his  num- 
ber of  enemies  by  wholesale.  As  already  noted,  he  had  brought 
the  Quaker,  George  Walton,  and  his  wife,  before  the  Court  in 
February  this  year,  and  had  also  presented  Joseph  Morse,  the 
constable,  for  not  whipping  another  Quaker  at  the  cart's  tail. 
At  the  same  time  the  case  of  Thomas  Parker  came  up  on  testimony 
taken  by  Pendleton.  The  evidence  not  only  is  "racy  "svith  gossip 
of  the  seaport",  as  Sanborn  says,®  but  also  given  us  an  inkling 
of  how  the  ungodly  there  regarded  the  rulers  of  Portsmouth. 

The  first  deposition  is  that  of  John  Patridge  and  Mary,  his 
wife,  who 

"Beinge  sworne  sayth  That  aboute  six  weekes  since, 
Thomas  Parker  (shoemaker)  beinge  at  their  house, 
heard  the  s^  Parker  say  that  Mr.  Moodye  had  to  spe- 
ciall  ffriends  in  this  towne,  women,  the  one  Mr.  ffriers 
wife  &  she  supplies  him  with  ribbin  or  trimming  for  his 
cloathes,  &  William  Sevyes  wfe  &  she  supplied  him  with 
coks  &  hens  for  to  feed  [his]  ungodlie  gutts  or  wicked 
gutts  &  further  the  s*^  John  Patridge  sayth  that  hee  heard 
the  s^  Parker  say  that  Mr.  Moodye  was  a  lubber  more  fit 
for  the  plow  tayle  than  for  a  pulpit  &  further  sayth  not. 
Taken  upon  oath  23d  of  January  1663  [64] 
Before  mee  Brian  Pendleton 

Comisioner"^*^ 

That  Moodey  was  a  man  of  athletic  build  and  "had  the  face 
of  an  angel"  is  noted  by  the  Rev.  Cotton  Mather  who  preached 
his  funeral  sermon  years  later,  but  it  takes  more  than  mere  physi- 
cal attributes  to  make  an  Elmer  Gantry  of  any  minister,  despite 
the  favorite  libel  of  the  village  scandal  mongers.  This  fellow  Par- 
ker, to  quote  Sanborn  again,  "was  a  genuine  Thersitcs  when  in 

8  Quint's  Historical  Memoranda  of  Ancient  Dover,  N.  H.,  pp.  68,  69,  71. 
"  F.  B.  Sanborn,  "Major  Brian  Pendleton  in  New  Hampshire,"  Granite  Month- 
ly, Feb.,  1903,  p.  122. 

^°  County  Court  Records  of  New  Hampshire,  1659-1672,  p.  167.  This  deposition 
apparently  is  in  Pendleton's  handwriting.  Sanborn  deciphered  "coks  and  hens," 
as  "cakes  and  corn"  and  his  version  appeared  in  the  Pendleton  Genealogy. 


Portsmouth  1664-1665  173 

liquor  and  railed  against  magnates  with  fine  impartiality."  He 
did  his  best  work  in  vituperation  shortly  afterwards,  his  language 
having  so  rich  a  savor  as  to  be  worth  giving  in  full  lest  any  of 
its  piquancy  be  lost.  According  to  the  deposition  of  Enoch  Hou- 
chin  (Hutchins)  it  happened 

"That  about  three  weeks  since  being  one  evening  at 
Goodman  Pickering's  house  Gowin  Willson  &  several 
others  being  present,  he  saw  Tho®  Parker  there  (a  shooe- 
maker  who  inhabiteth  upon  Y®  great  Island)  who  was 
very  much  in  drink,  as  y^  Deponent  did  apprehend,  & 
upon  what  occasion  y*^  Deponent  knoweth  not,  but  sud- 
denly, y^  afores*^  Parker  began  to  curse  and  swear,  rail- 
ing against  both  Mr.  Cutt,  Mr.  Moodey,  Mr.  Frier  & 
Capt.  Brian  Pendleton,  saying  that  ye  old  dog  Mr.  Pen- 
dleton did  owe  him  fourteene  pence,  wishing  he  had  sope 
or  anything  for  it.  Mr.  Frier  he  was  a  bastard  &  had  a 
hundred  fathers,  owing  him  two  shillings  and  yet  that 
dog  will  not  let  him  have  bread  without  money  but  have 
it  he  would  or  have  his  throat  cut.  Mr.  Moodey  he  was 
a  whoremaster,  Mr.  Richard  Cutt  was  a  bastard  &  a 
Cheater,  asking  for  what  he  sould  more  than  y®  worth, 
wishing  him  to  y^  devill.  Mr.  Cutt,  John  Cutt  that  dog 
would  have  him  come  thither  to  live  telling  him  he  might 
have  better  trading  there  than  belowe  Y^  River,  saying 
he  was  a  whoresbird  having  many  fathers,  &  as  he  spake 
of  any  of  these  psons  he  cursed  them. 

Taken  upon  oath  23d  of  January  1663  [64] 
Before  mee 

Brian  Pendleton 

Commissioner"^^ 
As  punishment  for  his  slanders  and  abuse,  Parker  was  sen- 
tenced either  to  pay  Moodey  £5  at  once  or  to  receive  fifteen  stripes 
at  the  whipping  post,  while  for  his  drunkenness  he  was  fined  ten 
shilling  or  one  hour  in  the  stocks,-^^  a  rather  light  penalty  con- 
sidering the  nature  of  his  remarks. 

"  County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  1659-1672.  p.  179.  This  deposition 
is  not  in  Pendleton's  handwriting,  and  in  all  probability  was  written  by  the 
Rev.  Moodey.  Sanborn's  version  thereof,  in  the  article  already  mentioned,  is 
somewhat  condensed  and  expurgated,  and,  has  "pounds"  instead  of  "pence"  for 
Pendleton's  debt  to  Parker.  This  deposition  has  been  printed  in  full  at  page 
514  of  Vol.  XL,  State  Papers  of  New  Hampshire  (1943),  while  that  of  John 
Patridge  appears  at  page  506  in  the  same  volume. 
^  County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  1659-1672,  p.  172. 


174  Briak  Pendleton 

At  this  same  Court  several  other  people  besides  the  Waltons 
had  been  presented  on  warrants  issued  by  Pendleton  charging 
them  with  not  attending  church^^  while  Abraham  Corbet  was  pros- 
ecuted for  selling  liquor  because  he  was  unlicensed.  Succeeding 
records  indicate  Corbet  was  a  chronic  operator  of  the  old  time 
"blind  tiger",  or  "speak-easy".  His  activities  along  this  line,  how- 
ever, seem  to  have  made  him  popular  with  a  considerable  element 
at  Portsmouth,  for  at  a  Town  Meeting  held  in  the  following 
March  he  was  elected  clerk  of  the  writs.^^ 

Before  long  he  had  an  opportunity  to  even  his  score  against 
Pendleton,  issuing  a  warrant  against  him  in  June  on  complaint 
of  one  Samuel  Hall  who  alleged  the  Captain  was  unjustly  detain- 
ing goods  belonging  to  him.  This  paper  was  served  by  Joseph 
Morse,  the  same  constable  that  Portsmouth's  boss  was  prosecut- 
ing for  refusing  to  punish  the  Quaker,  Nicholson,  and  we  may 
feel  very  sure  that  Morse  never  served  any  other  warrant  with 
quite  so  much  personal  satisfaction  as  he  did  this  one. 

The  joy  of  these  worthies  was  short-lived.  As  a  member  of 
the  County  Court,  Pendleton  saw  to  it  that  Corbet's  election 
failed  of  confirmation  when  that  body  sat  a  few  days  later,  and 
then  turned  the  tables  on  him  by  having  him  charged  with  issuing 
warrants  illegally.  The  evidences  in  the  case  were  drawn  up  and 
sent  to  Boston,  those  who  had  been  attached  by  his  warrants  noting 
their  exceptions  on  the  back  of  each.  Pendleton,  however,  in  his 
excitement  scrawled  his  on  the  wrong  one.  In  high  indignation  he 
wrote:  "These  may  serve  to  informe  home  it  may  conserne  that 
I  being  attached  by  this  attachment  and  thereby  made  a  prisoner 
take  it  a  great  disparigment  to  my  name  &  a  great  offense  to  the 
country,  especially  to  his  Majesty's  honor:  Witness  my  hand  this 
1  of  July  1664 — Brian  Pendleton."^^ 

On  warrant  issued  by  Daniel  Gookin,  who  as  one  of  the  As- 
sistants of  the  Bay  Colony  had  presided  over  this  lively  sitting 
of  the  County  Court,  Corbet  was  arrested  and  put  under  bond 
of  £100  to  answer  before  the  next  General  Court  for  his  premature 
activities.  At  its  session  in  the  following  October,  having  con- 
sidered his  "crime  .  .  .  for  signing  severall  warrants  in  his  majes- 
ties name  in  civil  cases  against  several  inhabitants,  to  their  great 

^^  County  Court  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  1G59-1672,  pp.  171,  181. 

"  Portsmouth  Town  Records,  I,  91. 

^  Massachusetts  Archives,  XXXIX,  211. 


PoHTSMOUTH  1664-1666  175 

disturbance,  not  being  approved  of  by  any  County  Court  for 
that  service,  the  Court,  on  heering  what  he  could  say  for  himself, 
judgeth  it  meete  to  order,  that  he  be  admonisht,  &  fined  him  five 
pounds" — which  Corbet  paid.^^  It  would  seem,  however,  that  this 
lesson  was  not  enough  for  him,  for  a  year  later  he  got  himself 
into  further  difficulties  by  circulating  a  petition  against  the  rulers 
of  Portsmouth, 

Pendleton's  temporary  financial  embarrassments  came  to  a 
head  at  this  same  County  Court  of  June,  1664.  He  seems  to  have 
been  short  of  ready  cash  just  at  this  time  as  he  was  obliged  to 
confess  judgment  in  the  sum  of  £115  due  to  William  Seavey,  "pay- 
able in  English  money  for  so  much  borrowed  upon  joint  stock 
between  Mr.  John  Payne  and  himself."  ^'  Some  recent  purchases 
of  land  he  had  made  in  the  Province  of  Maine  besides  numerous 
debts  due  him  no  doubt  brought  about  this  unpleasant  situation. 

We  have  already  noted  the  suit  he  brought  against  George 
Walton  at  this  time,  and  at  this  same  Court  he  also  started  an 
action  against  his  former  partner,  John  Paine,  which  turned  out 
to  be  an  involved  affair.  This  had  to  do  with  five  hundred  "pieces 
of  eight"  in  the  value  of  £134-4-0  which  Paine  had  received  from 
John  Hull,  master  of  the  mint,  on  order  of  George  Parris  for 
Pendleton's  account  but  which  he,  Paine,  failed  to  deliver.^^  The 
Portsmouth  Court  deciding  against  Paine,  he  appealed  the  case 
to  the  higher  Court  at  Boston,  where  Pendleton's  three  page  an- 
swer is  still  on  file.^^  Evidently  this  was  drawn  up  by  a  hand  well 
practised  in  litigation,  the  various  claims  set  forth  by  the  appel- 
lant as  to  Pendleton's  debt  to  him  for  "Hun's  Cloth",  etc.,  being 
answered  categorically  and  counter  claims  advanced.  And  the 
defendant  vigorously  denied  Paine's  intimation  that  he  had  been 
trading  on  his  own  account  since  May,  1662,  as  he  could  prove 
from  his  books,  "so  farr  was  I  from  keeping  back  my  estate  in 
partnership  or  gathering  unto  myself  so  much  money  as  is  there 
summed  up" — that  is,  in  Paine's  appeal. 

The  Court's  action  in  this  case  does  not  appear  but  appar- 
ently an  arbitration  was  ordered.    A  lengthy  accounting  between 

*^  New   Hampshire  Court   Papers,   1659-1672,   174;   New   Hampshire   Province 

Deeds,    II,    9Ia;    Massachusetts    Archives,    XXXIX,    206-218;    Massachusetts 

Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  140. 

"  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  86a. 

1*  Ibid.,  II,  86b;  Essex  Court  Records,  III,  98-99. 

^o  Suffolk  Court  Files,  Docket  G39. 


176  Brian  Pendleton 

the  two  ex-partners  was  made  later,  as  of  1664,  showing  the  stock 
in  partnership  amounted  to  over  £9000 — over  $270,000  today — 
and  that  in  the  final  washout  Pendleton  owed  Paine  nearly  £600. 
It  was  arranged  in  the  settlement  that  Paine  was  to  pay  Pendle- 
ton one  hogshead  of  Virginia  tobacco  and  to  receive  from  him 
forty-seven  hogsheads  of  Tortugas  Salt  with  which  to  discharge 
a  debt  to  Simon  Bradstreet.^^  This  latter  affair  had  been  hanging 
fire  for  years.  Pendleton  had  given  Bradstreet  a  note  in  July, 
1660,  for  £100  to  be  paid  in  Lisbon  Salt  at  12  shillings  a  hogs- 
head of  eight  bushels,  and  when  the  creditor  sent  a  representative 
in  June,  1666,  to  demand  settlement,  Pendleton  immediately 
started  another  suit  against  Paine  in  the  Portsmouth  Court  "to 
save  him  harmless  from  the  worshipful  Mr.  Bradstreet  concerning 
a  parcel  of  salt  that  the  sd  Paine  stands  engaged  to  the  sd  wor- 
shipful for".2i 

Action  on  this  does  not  appear,  but  in  the  following  March, 
1666/67,  Bradstreet  sued  Pendleton  in  the  Ipswich  Court.  Some 
of  the  testimony  is  interesting.  The  Rev.  Seaborn  Cotton,  Brad- 
street's  son-in-law,  deposed  that  Capt.  Pendleton  said  he  was 
troubled  about  Mr.  Bradstreet  not  coming  for  the  salt,  and  won- 
dered that  the  latter  would  leave  it  there  so  long.  Jonathan  Thing, 
who  had  gone  on  the  collection  trip  the  summer  before,  stated  that 
when  he  had  demanded  payment  of  Capt.  Pendleton's  son,  the 
latter  said  it  had  been  paid.  Robert  Paine  deposed  French  salt 
in  November  last  had  cost  him  twenty-two  shillings  per  hogshead. 
The  Court,  evidently  concluding  that  Bradstreet's  delay  in  a 
rising  market  had  enabled  the  Pendletons  to  dispose  of  the  salt 
to  advantage  elsewhere,  awarded  the  complainant  a  verdict  of 
166-2/3  hogsheads  of  salt,  or  £175  in  money. ^^ 

Pendleton  was  no  longer  living  in  Portsmouth  when  Thing  ar- 
rived there  on  Bradstreet's  mission  in  June,  '66,  and  when  the  case 
was  decided  against  him  he  brought  another  suit  against  Paine, 
this  time  in  the  York  County  Court,  "for  not  performing  an  en- 
gagement in  the  s*^  Pendleton's  behalf  to  Mr.  Simon  Bradstreet." 
This  suit  was  withdrawn  in  July,  '69,^^  and  four  years  later 
Paine,  in  consideration  of  £180  in  "ready  silver  coin,  paid  to  Mr. 

=^New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  III,  17b-18a. 

"'  Ibid.,  II,  116b. 

"Essex  Court  Files,  III,  397. 

"'York  Court  Records,  III,  177;  II,  159. 


PoETSMOUTH  1664-1665  177 

Simon  Bradstreet,  Sr.,  some  years  since,"  deeded  to  his  old  part- 
ner seven  hundred  acres  of  land  on  the  east  side  of  the  Pawcatuck 
river — at  that  time  supposed  to  be  in  the  bounds  of  Stonington, 
Connecticut  but  actually  in  Westerly,  Rhode  Island.  A  year  later, 
Pendleton  deeded  this  property  to  his  son  James,""^  who  removed 
there  with  his  family  almost  at  once,  probably  as  the  easiest  solu- 
tion of  the  financial  difficulties  he  himself  was  involved  in  at  that 
time. 

Fortune  had  not  smiled  on  James.  He  did  not  seem  to  have 
his  father's  knack  of  getting  on  in  the  world.  Possibly,  too  much 
had  been  done  for  him.  This  Pawcatuck  deed  was  the  third  large 
benefaction  he  had  received.  The  first,  as  already  noted,  consisted 
of  the  property  at  Sudbury.  The  second  came  in  1666,  not  long 
after  Capt.  Pendleton's  removal  from  Portsmouth.  At  this  time, 
referring  to  himself  as  "now  inhabiting  upon  ye  Frontier  of  Win- 
ter Harbor  in  the  Province  of  Maine",  and  "in  consideration  of 
the  natural  affection  and  paternal  love  which  I  bear  unto  my 
dearly  beloved  son  James  Pendleton  of  Portsmouth",  he  deeded 
him  "my  goods,  houses,  warehouses,  wharfs,  lands  and  all  other 
substance  and  estate  both  movables  and  immovables  upon  the 
Great  Island  or  elsewhere  in  the  town  of  Portsmouth,  with  all  my 
land  between  York  and  the  river  of  Piscataqua,  with  all  debts, 
dues  &  demands  by  bills,  bonds,  mortgages  or  otherwise  due  from 
any  person  in  New  England  or  elsewhere".  Only  a  small  tract  of 
land  on  the  Great  Island  was  exempted  from  this  generous  gift."^ 
It  took  James  nearly  eight  years  to  run  through  this  estate,  when, 
just  as  he  was  about  to  turn  over  his  remaining  property  on  the 
Great  Island  to  satisfy  a  mortgage,  his  father  came  to  the  rescue 
and  provided  for  him  elsewhere.  But  this  time,  to  make  sure  there 
would  be  something  left,  the  donor  placed  an  entail  on  the  prop- 
erty for  the  benefit  of  James'  children  by  his  second  wife.^^ 

It  is  obvious  from  these  instances  that  the  financial  strin- 
gency Pendleton  experienced  in  1664  was  only  a  temporary  one, 
and  that  he  must  have  had  plenty  of  other  means  to  live  upon 
after  giving  his  son  so  much  of  his  property  in  '66  He  could  not 
have  been  seriously  crippled  when  he  was  able  to  pay  Bradstreet 

'^  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  III,  95b-96b. 

^  Ibid.,  Ill,  103b. 

^oibid.,  1674,  p.  7a;  Rockingham  County,  N.  H.,  Deeds,  III,  96. 


178  Brian  Pendleton 

£180 — over  $5400  today — in  cold  cash  not  long  afterwards. 
Seemingly  he  had  always  made  money.  As  far  as  the  records  show 
he  never  placed  a  mortgage  on  any  of  the  properties  he  acquired, 
either  through  grant,  purchase,  or  by  execution  against  his  debt- 
ors. Evidently  he  was  regarded  as  a  man  of  substance  as  early 
as  1648,  when  in  buying  John  Whittingham's  farm  in  Topsfield 
he  apparently  gave  his  notes  for  the  balance  due  without  being 
required  to  furnish  other  security;  and  the  fact  that  he  was  one 
of  the  few  slave  owners  in  early  New  England  is  in  itself  a  clue 
to  his  financial  status."^ 

That  he  had  probably  over-extended  himself  for  a  time  is  not 
improbable.  His  operations  covered  a  wide  area.  In  his  answer 
to  Paine  in  their  lawsuit,  and  in  the  final  settlement  between  them 
we  find  that  as  early  as  1662  he  was  buying  fish  at  Winter  Harbor 
and  shipping  it  to  Paine  at  Boston.  A  reference  to  a  freight  bill  due 
to  Daniel  Browning  tells  its  own  story  when  it  appears  some  years 
later  that  James  Pendleton  gave  a  note  to  Mr.  Daniel  Browning, 
merchant  in  Barbados,  for  5266  pounds  of  sugar.^®  In  his  strug- 
gle to  get  on  firmer  ground  we  find  in  the  numerous  suits  Capt. 
Pendleton  started  against  his  debtors  in  '63  and  '64 — not  only  in 
his  local  Court  but  in  those  of  old  Norfolk  County  (now  Essex) 
and  York — that  money  was  due  him  from  people  as  far  away  as 
Haverhill  and  Saco.  He  was  also  sued  by  the  famous  John  Wheel- 
wright of  Hampton,  the  one  time  Antinomian,  for  detaining  cer- 
tain household  goods  claimed  by  the  latter,  but  won  this  action  as 
he  did  another  case  brought  against  him  by  that  champion  liti- 
gant, Edward  Colcord  of  the  same  town.'®    Judging  from  later 

^  The  loss  of  his  negroes  in  1663,  their  scarcity  in  New  England  at  this  period, 
and  the  "hard  times"  he  experienced  in  '64,  probably  account  for  Pendleton 
making  an  offer  to  one  James  Prentiss  of  Cambridge  to  enter  his  service  in 
that  latter  year.  Prentiss,  however,  preferred  to  remain  with  his  present 
master,  although  he  admitted  he  "could  get  more  wages  from  Capt.  Pendleton". 
— Wyman's  Abstracts,  Middlesex  County,  Mass.,  Court  Records,  Vol.  1  and  2, 
p.  7  [Deposited  with  the  New  England  Historic  Genealogical  Society,  Boston]. 
^Abstracts  of  Barbados  Records,  Register  (LXVIII,  180). 
'^  Details  of  these  numerous  lawsuits  in  which  both  father  and  son  were  en- 
gaged may  be  found  in  the  published  Court  records  of  Essex  County,  Mass. 
(particularly  in  Vols.  I  and  III),  and  of  York  County,  Maine — the  latter 
known  as  the  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records.  Others  are  touched  upon 
in  the  Massachusetts  Records,  in  the  York  Deeds,  in  the  Records  of  the  Court 
of  Assistants,  Colony  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  and  in  Vol.  LX  of  the  State 
Papers  of  New  Hampshire. 

Various  documents  concerning  legal  battles  carried  on  appeal  to  higher 
tribunals  are  still  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  Supreme  Judicial  Court  of 
Suffolk  County,  Mass. 


Portsmouth  1664-1665  179 

records,  the  younger  Pendleton  found  plenty  to  do  in  trying  to 
collect  the  debts  owed  his  father,  for  they  kept  him  busy  with 
lawsuits  for  a  long  time  to  come. 

It  is  entirely  possible  that  at  some  later  date  Pendleton  would 
have  retired  from  active  business  at  Portsmouth,  and  removed  to 
Winter  Harbor  where  he  no  doubt  imagined  he  could  spend  his 
declining  years  in  peace.  A  series  of  occurrences  now  hastened 
those  events,  even  if  they  helped  to  prevent  him  leading  that 
"peaceable  &  quiet  life"  to  which  he  so  longingly  refers  in  one  of 
his  letters  written  a  few  years  later. 

In  the  summer  of  1665  Samuel  Maverick  reappeared  in 
Portsmouth  accompanied  this  time  by  two  others  of  the  Royal 
Commissioners,  Sir  Robert  Carr  and  George  Cartwright.  They 
had  not  covered  themselves  with  much  glory  during  the  preceding 
year.  They  had  settled  some  boundary  disputes  between  Connecti- 
cut and  Rhode  Island,  and  they  had  seized  the  helpless  Dutch 
settlements  in  New  Netherlands,  Col.  Nicolls,  their  fellow  commis- 
sioner, commanding  that  expedition.  But  with  the  elusive  gov- 
ernment of  the  Bay  Colony  they  were  able  to  accomplish  nothing 
worth  while  on  their  first  visit.  And  on  their  return  to  Boston 
after  their  adventures  at  Manhattan  they  fared  even  worse.  They 
had  no  power  to  enforce  their  demands  for  the  soldiers  they  had 
brought  over  from  England  had  been  left  behind  to  garrison  the 
Dutch  settlements.  Attempting  to  interfere  with  the  General 
Court's  administration  of  justice,  they  were  humiliated  by  having 
it  proclaimed  to  the  sound  of  trumpet  that  Massachusetts  denied 
them  any  right  to  hear  appeals.  Baffled  at  every  point  they  broke 
off  their  negotiations  in  disgust.  Col.  Nicolls  returned  to  New 
York — as  New  Amsterdam  had  been  re-named — while  the  other 
three  journeyed  to  the  Eastward  to  see  what  could  be  accom- 
plished among  those  who  were  dissatisfied  with  the  rule  of  the 
Puritans.^*' 

At  Portsmouth  they  were  "nobly  entertained",  their  pres- 
ence emboldening  certain  of  the  malcontents  to  present  them  with 
two  petitions.  These  had  been  prepared  and  secretly  circulated 
by  the  unchastened  Abraham  Corbet,  last  year's  issuer  of  illegal 
warrants.  While  one  of  these  documents  may  not  be  altogether 
correct  in  details,  yet  it  presents  a  fairly  accurate  picture  of  how 

^  Full  account  of  the  contest  between  Massachusetts  and  the  Royal  Commis- 
sioners appears  in  the  Massachusetts  Records,  Vol.  IV,  pt.  2,  p.  157  et  seq. 


180  Beian  Pendletox 

the  Puritan  rulers  governed  the  town,  and  for  that  reason  is  worth 
giving  in  full.  Under  date  of  July,  1665,  Corbet  and  his  group 
complained, 

"That  whereas  yo*"  peticioners  for  severall  years 
last  past  have  bin  kept  under  the  Gov'^nm*  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts by  an  ursurped  power  .  .  .  under  which  power 
five  or  six  of  the  ritchest  men  of  this  parish  have  ruled, 
swaied,  and  ordered  all  offices  both  civill  and  military 
at  their  pleasures,  none  of  y""  Hono"  peticonrs  though 
Loyall  subjects,  &  some  of  them  well  acquainted  with 
the  Laws  of  England,  durst  make  any  opposition  for 
feare  of  great  fines  or  long  imprisonment  and  for  want 
of  estates  could  not  peticon  home  to  his  Ma*'®  for  relief, 
which  the  contrary  party  well  knoweth,  have  kept  us 
under  hard  servitude,  and  denyed  us  in  our  publique  meet- 
ing the  Common  prayer  Sacram*^  and  decent  buriall  of 
the  dead  contrary  to  the  Laws  of  England  &  his  Ma"*"^ 
letter  sent  by  Simon  Broadstreet  &  John  Norton  in  the 
yeare  1662.  And  not  only  so  but  have  also  denied  us 
the  benefit  of  freemen,  contrary  to  his  Ma"®^  said  letter 
and  likewise  at  the  election  of  officers  the  aforesaid  par- 
ty or  the  greatest  part  of  them  have  always  kept  them- 
selves in  offices  for  the  manageing  of  the  gifts  of  land 
&  setling  them,  whereby  yo*"  peticoners  are  not  only  dis- 
abled but  also  descouraged  for  continuance  in  the  plan- 
tation, &  have  engrosed  the  greatest  part  of  the  lands 
within  the  precincts  &  limits  of  this  plantation  into 
theire  owne  hands  and  other  honest  men  that  have  been 
here  a  considerable  time  have  no  lands  at  all  given  them, 
and  some  that  have  had  lands  given  &  laid  out  to  them, 
the  said  contrary  party  have  desowned  the  grants  and 
laid  it  out  to  others  .... 

The  parties  we  peticon  against  are 


Joshua  Moode}'-    Mr    Minister 

Rich  Cutt 

John  Cutt 

Elias   Styleman 

Nathaniel  ffryer 

Bryan  Pendleton 


Merch*"'  31 


^Colonial  Papers,  1661-16G8,  pp.  307-8;  Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire, 


XVII,  510-512. 


Portsmouth  1664-1665  181 

This  petition  was  signed  by  thirty-two  men  among  whose 
names  those  of  George  Walton  and  John  Pickering  quite  natur- 
ally appear.  It  included  about  the  same  group  that  signed  the 
other  petition  locally.  This  was  a  much  more  ambitious  affair, 
carrying  signers  from  Dover,  Exeter,  and  Hampton,  as  well  as 
from  Portsmouth,  praying  that  these  towns  might  be  freed  from 
the  jurisdiction  of  Massachusetts.^^ 

At  a  special  meeting  of  the  General  Court  held  in  the  fol- 
lowing month  a  long  letter  was  drawn  up  to  be  sent  the  King  com- 
plaining of  the  actions  of  three  of  his  commissioners — they  ex- 
cepted Nicolls — and  a  commission  of  their  own  was  appointed  to 
repair  to  the  Eastern  settlements  and  take  such  action  as  they 
might  deem  proper  against  those  who  had  reviled  the  govern- 
ment.^^ 

These  commissioners  made  their  report  in  the  following  Oc- 
tober. They  brought  in  declarations  signed  by  the  selectmen  of 
Portsmouth  and  Dover  together  with  many  of  the  citizens  there 
den^'ing  that  the  petitions  tendered  Maverick  &  Company  had 
been  any  town  act.  The  men  of  Portsmouth  added  that  "wee  .  .  . 
doe  account  ourselves  abused  by  any  that  have  fathered  such  a 
thing  upon  us."  A  certificate  from  Exeter  was  also  brought  in 
repudiating  that  town's  having  had  any  hand  in  subscribing  to 
the  petition  sent  the  King,  and  certain  depositions  were  also  pre- 
sented naming  Corbet  as  the  man  responsible  for  causing  all  the 
trouble.  As  it  was  stated  by  some  that  Corbet  "in  other  respects 
.  .  .  was  an  occasioner  of  their  great  disturbance,  &  a  nourisher 
of  much  vice  &  wickednes  by  giving  irregular  enterteinment  of 
loose  persons  in  his  house",  an  attachment  was  granted  for  his 
appearance  before  the  emissaries  from  Massachusetts.  Corbet, 
however,  was  not  to  be  found  so  a  warrant  for  him  was  left  in 
the  hands  of  the  constable  to  summon  him  to  appear  before  the 
General  Court  once  more.^* 

Corbet  had  probably  taken  refuge  with  Robert  Carr,  the 
Royal  Commissioner,  who  was  nearby  at  the  time,  for  on  the  same 
day  the  warrant  was  left  for  him,  Carr,  writing  from  Kittery, 
sent  the  Massachusetts  commissioners  an  order  not  to  molest  any 

'"  Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  XVII,  512-3. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  274-5,  278. 
»*  Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  2,  265-272. 


182  Brian  Pendleton 

of  those  who  had  petitioned  his  Majesty.^''  This  order  the  men 
from  Boston  merely  brought  back  with  them  as  one  of  their  ex- 
hibits. When  the  Court  looked  over  the  evidences  submitted,  they 
backed  up  their  commissioners'  action  by  sending  out  an  attach- 
ment for  the  marshall  of  Dover  and  Portsmouth  to  seize  Corbet 
and  bring  him  down  to  Boston  for  trial.  Finally  appearing  there 
in  May,  1666,  he  was  convicted  of  sedition  in  stirring  up  various 
inhabitants  to  discontent  against  the  government,  and  as  besides 
the  Court  noted  he  had  been  a  cause  of  much  trouble  to  his  neigh- 
bors, while  his  house  of  common  entertainment  was  "a  seminary 
of  much  vice  &  wickednes",  he  was  fined  £20  and  £5  costs,  disabled 
from  holding  any  office  in  Portsmouth,  prohibited  from  "his  ir- 
regular practices"  in  selling  liquor,  and  put  under  bonds  of  £100 
for  his  future  good  conduct.^*'  The  Court  might  have  dealt  with 
him  still  more  severely  but  no  doubt  had  reason  to  suspect  that 
Corbet  was  merely  the  tool  of  the  Royal  Commissioners,  he  having 
drawn  up  his  petitions  perhaps  at  their  instigation  while  they  were 
in  Portsmouth. 

In  looking  over  the  list  of  those  who  signed  the  disclaimer 
from  that  town  we  note  many  familiar  names.  The  Cutt  brothers 
with  Nathaniel  Fryer  and  Elias  Stileman  head  the  roll  as  select- 
men, and  then  come  Anthony  Ellens,  John  Moses,  John  Brewster, 
William  Seavy,  Walter  Neale,  and  Joseph  Morse  besides  some 
score  of  others,  the  loyal  supporters  of  Massachusetts.  But  for 
her  former  champion  here  we  look  in  vain.  His  son,  James,  is 
there,  of  course,  the  seventh  to  sign  after  the  selectmen,  but  the 
name  of  Brian  Pendleton  is  missing.  Had  he  been  in  Portsmouth 
at  this  time  we  may  be  very  sure  he  would  have  been  one  of  the 
first  to  set  his  hand  to  the  document  and  in  the  absence  of  his 
name  thereon  we  can  come  pretty  close  to  fixing  the  date  when  he 
left  that  old  town  by  the  sea  and  established  a  new  home  at  Winter 
Harbor  on  the  coast  of  Maine. 

This  disclaimer  was  signed  on  the  9th  of  October,  1665,  and 
late  in  the  preceding  June  Pendleton  had  been  present  as  one  of 
the  Associate  Justices  at  the  sitting  of  the  County  Court  at 
Dover.  Sometime  between  these  two  dates  then  we  may  be  fairly 
sure  he  had  removed  to  his  new  home,  and  the  period  so  estab- 
lished carries  a  particular  significance.    As  far  as  local  events 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  p.  273. 
'•"^  Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  2,  293,  305. 


PoETSMouTH  1664-1665  183 

were  concerned,  there  was  no  reason  for  his  leaving  Portsmouth. 
The  financial  difficulties  he  had  experienced  the  year  before  were 
only  temporary.  His  personal  troubles  could  have  made  no  lasting 
impression  upon  him.  His  chief  enemy,  Corbet,  had  been  discom- 
fited. The  Puritan  rule  remained  unshaken.  He  was  still  a  power 
there.  Even  two  years  after  he  had  left  the  place,  Joseph  Mason, 
referring  to  the  efforts  of  Nicholas  Shapleigh  to  effect  some  settle- 
ment of  the  Mason  claims,  expressed  doubt  that  he  would  be  able 
to  accomplish  anything,  "The  men  of  best  estates  at  Piscataqua, 
Richard  and  John  Cutts,  Mr.  Fryer,  Capt.  Pendleton,  and  his 
son,  Mr.  Stileman,  the  recorder,  would  undo  him;  for  they  would 
first  confirm  themselves  in  their  own  grants  of  land,  which  they 
have  given  to  one  another  and  which  are  in  the  best  places  near 
the  Waterside,  where  100  acres  are  worth  1000  of  what  is  left".^^ 

Pendleton  could  have  remained  in  Portsmouth  the  rest  of 
his  life  had  he  cared  to  do  so.  But  he  did  not  choose  to  stay. 
Something  had  just  occurred  in  Maine  to  move  him  on,  some- 
thing no  less  than  the  overturn  of  the  government  he  had  helped 
establish  there  years  before.  Those  rascally  King's  Commissioners 
had  meddled  to  some  purpose  at  last — and  the  men  they  had  put 
in  power  were  nearly  all  Philistines — or  worse  still,  renegades, 
deserters  of  the  Cause.  It  was  intolerable.  He  would  have  to  see 
what  could  be  done  about  it. 

Did  the  Puritans  in  the  County  send  him  a  call  for  help.? 
Did  he  receive  a  hint  from  the  authorities  at  Boston — or  did  he 
go  on  his  own  initiative.?  What  could  be  more  pleasing  to  him  than 
to  strike  another  blow  for  Massachusetts — organize  her  friends, 
await  the  opportune  time,  and  then  re-establish  her  control.?  The 
idea  appealed  to  him.  Why  bother  with  the  affairs  of  Portsmouth 
any  longer.?  Let  his  son  run  the  business  there — let  him  have  it 
all  for  that  matter.  As  for  himself,  he  could  manage  well  enough. 
A  larger  adventure  called  him,  a  new  enterprise  peculiarly  suited 
to  his  talents.  He  lost  no  time.  Barely  had  the  ink  dried  on  the 
commissions  given  the  new  Justices  in  Maine,  than  Massachu- 
setts, in  the  person  of  Brian  Pendleton,  established  headquarters 
at  Winter  Harbor. 

"  Colonial  Papers,  1661-1668,  pp.  500-1. 


CHAPTER  XII 


WINTER  HARBOR 
1665-1675 


Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold;  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delight- 
eth;  I  have  put  my  Spirit  upon  him:  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the 
Gentiles. — Isaiah,  42:1. 

The  present  village  of  Winter  Harbor,  Maine,  lying  east  of 
Mount  Desert,  is  not  the  one  that  Brian  Pendleton  knew.  His  was 
the  early  settlement  near  the  mouth  of  the  Saco  river,  "a  noted 
place  for  fishers"  in  his  day,  but  now  the  quiet  and  unpre- 
tentious summer  resort  known  as  Biddeford  Pool.  Originally,  the 
little  hamlet  there,  together  with  the  straggling  farms  on  both 
sides  of  the  stream  as  far  up  as  the  falls,  comprised  the  ancient 
Saco,  described  by  a  contemporary  writer  as  a  "scattered  town  of 
large  extent,  well  stored  with  cattle,  arable  land,  marshes,  and  a 
sawmill."  ^ 

Pendleton  was  no  stranger  to  this  region.  As  already  noted, 
he  was  interested  in  the  fisheries  there  at  least  as  early  as  1652, 
and  he  was  also  the  owner  of  considerable  property  in  Maine. 
Beginning  with  his  first  purchase  of  one  hundred  acres  at  Cape 
Porpoise  [Kennebunkport]  in  1655,  he  added  to  his  estate  in  suc- 
ceeding years  until  in  time  he  was  one  of  the  largest  land  holders 
in  the  Province,  owning  some  two  thousand  acres  scattered  all  the 
way  from  Kittery  to  Winter  Harbor."  His  choice  of  that  place 
as  his  future  scene  of  political  operations  was  dictated  by  two 
reasons :  First,  its  good  opportunities  for  trade,  and  second,  the 
fact  that  various  buildings,  two  islands,  and  three  hundred  acres 
of  land  which  he  had  acquired  there  as  a  speculation,  had  twice 
come  back  on  his  hands  bringing  four  hundred  acres  more  with 
them  the  second  time.  The  original  tract  was  purchased  by  him 
jointly  with  Roger  Spencer  in  August,  1658,  and  in  the  mortgage 
that  Spencer  gave  Pendleton  the  same  day  on  his  share  of  the 

iJohn  Jocelyn  (Josselyn),  Voyages  (Boston  Reprint),  p.  139,  The  city  of 
Biddeford  was  separated  from  Saco  in  1762,  but  still  has  possession  of  the 
early  records  of  its  parent  town. 

'York  Deeds,  I,  68,  80-81,  108,  145;  II,  9,  68,  123,  139;  III,  77,  93;  IV,  94; 
VIII,  88;  X,  118. 


WiNTEE  Haebor  1665-16T5  185 

property,  reference  is  made  to  the  live  stock  they  were  to  place 
thereon.  Evidently  this  venture  did  not  turn  out  to  Pendleton's 
satisfaction  for  about  two  years  later  he  took  over  Spencer's  in- 
terest, just  after  suing  him  for  breach  of  contract  "in  regard  to  a 
neck  of  land  and  the  stock  upon  it  at  Winter  Harbor".^ 

In  the  next  year  Pendleton  found  another  customer  for  this 
property — none  other  than  Capt.  William  Phillips  of  Saco,  for- 
merly the  host  of  the  Shipp  Taverne  in  Boston,  whose  experiences 
in  catering  to  the  General  Court  may  have  driven  him  into  the 
wilderness.  Pendleton  made  a  good  bargain  with  him,  taking  a 
mortgage  on  the  place  for  £313 — only  about  three  times  what  it 
cost  him — to  be  paid  off  in  seven  years  in  amounts  of  not  less  than 
£100  at  a  time,  with  an  annual  rental  of  £30  subject  to  reduction 
as  the  principal  was  reduced.  But  Phillips  failed  to  pay  the  rental 
at  the  end  of  his  first  year's  occupancy,  and  Pendleton  sued  him 
promptly  to  forfeit  the  mortgage  which  he  valued  at  £500  in  land 
and  cattle.  The  suit  was  determined  on  the  point  that  the  non-pay- 
ment of  the  rental  did  not  constitute  a  forfeiture.  Pendleton  ap- 
pealed this  verdict  and  with  Lieut.  William  Howard  as  surety, 
gave  bond  in  £1000  to  prosecute  the  appeal  before  the  next  Court 
of  Assistants.  What  happened  there  is  not  of  record,  but  some 
compromise  was  evidently  reached  two  j^ears  later.  At  that  time 
Phillips  deeded  to  Pendleton  for  £90 — obviously  in  lieu  of  the  ac- 
crued rental — four  hundred  acres  at  a  place  called  West  Point 
on  the  Saco  river,  with  Timber  Island  throAvn  in  for  good  measure^ 
— an  easy  escape  for  Phillips,  but  an  embarrassment  to  his  credi- 
tor who  just  at  that  time — May,  1664 — needed  cash  far  more 
than  any  additional  land. 

While  Pendleton  was  thus  somewhat  involuntarily  enlarging 
his  estate  in  Maine,  and  becoming  the  holder  of  other  mortgages 

»  York  Deeds,  I,  76,  77,  101-2;  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  II,  39b.  An 
aftermath  of  this  transaction  may  be  found  in  a  Court  record  of  1675  when 
Pendleton  was  allowed  costs  "against  widow  Spencer  for  molesting  of  him 
by  an  attachment  and  not  prosecuting  the  same".  (York  Court  Records,  III, 
288).  This  neck  of  land  and  the  two  islands  adjacent  was  the  property  that 
Pendleton  deeded  in  trust  to  his  grandson,  Pendleton  Fletcher,  in  1672.  It 
was  known  as  "Pendleton's  Neck"  as  late  as  1729,  but  five  years  later  Pendleton 
Fletcher,  Jr.,  stated  it  was  known  as  Fletcher's  Neck,  "bounded  at  one  End 
by  a  Beach  &  Sea  Wall  or  Marsh,  And  on  all  other  parts  by  the  Sea",  and 
that  it  "was  formerly  the  estate  of  my  great-grandfather  Brian  Pendleton". — 
York  Deeds,  XIV,  51;  XVI,  122. 

*Ibid.,  I,  102,  112;  82;  II,  94-95;  VIII,  155;  Maine  Province  and  Court  Rec- 
ords, II,  113. 


186  Brian  Pendleton 

there,^  the  political  affairs  of  the  Province  had  again  become  un- 
settled. Upon  the  restoration  of  the  Stuarts  to  the  English  throne 
in  1660,  Mason,  Godfrey,  and  others  whose  territorial  rights  Mas- 
sachusetts had  invaded,  petitioned  Parliament  for  an  inquiry,® 
while  Gorges'  grandson  appointed  commissioners  in  1661  to  re- 
store the  former  proprietory  government  of  the  Province.  A  year 
later  the  Bay  Colony  ordered  an  investigation  of  this  attack  upon 
its  authority  to  be  made  by  Pendleton,  Denison,  Hathorne,  and 
Waldron,  but  for  some  unknown  reason  Pendleton's  name  was 
crossed  off  from  the  appointment  and  the  other  three  served  with- 
out him."^ 

While  some  temporary  compromise  seems  to  have  been 
reached,  a  paper  warfare  between  the  contending  parties  went 
on  for  several  years,  petitions,  warnings,  and  complaints  from 
both  sides  following  thick  and  fast.  On  the  whole,  however,  Massa- 
chusetts maintained  her  authority  fairly  well,  not  a  few  of  the 
towns  in  Maine  continuing  to  send  Deputies  to  the  General  Court 
at  Boston  throughout  the  period  of  the  conflict,  while  at  the  same 
time  her  Magistrates  and  Associates,  Pendleton  among  them  on 
one  occasion,  presided  over  the  Courts  held  in  that  turbulent 
County.^ 

Finally  in  June,  1664,  young  Ferdinand©  Gorges  succeeded 
in  getting  a  royal  order  for  Massachusetts  to  restore  to  him  his 
Province  of  Maine  or  else  show  reason  for  the  contrary.^  When 
news  of  this  was  brought  there,  a  number  of  his  supporters  in  the 
Province,  John  Archdale,  Henry  Jocelyn,  Robert  Jordan,  and 
Edward  Rishworth,  among  others,  sent  a  demand  to  the  Bay 
Colony  to  surrender  its  government  over  them,  and  attempted 
to  set  up  another  one  under  commission  from  Gorges.^** 

Taking  heed  of  this  attempted  revolt,  the  General  Court  at 
its  session  in  May,  1665,  ordered  that  a  notice  should  be  sent  to 
the  people  in  the  county  of  York  that  Massachusetts  would  "still 

"York  Deeds,  I,  160,  161   (2). 

« Jenness,  p.  42;  Doyle,  English  Colonies  in  America,  II,  139.    A  photostat  of 
this  petition  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society. 
'  Massachusetts   Archives,   III,   253.    Reference   to   this   commission   does   not 
appear  in  the  Massachusetts  Records,  but  their  dealings  with  Gorges'  repre- 
sentatives are  to  be  found  in  the  Colonial  Papers, 

*  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  I,  186.  The  Associates  Court  which  Pen- 
dleton held  at  Saco  in  September,  1664,  was  an  "all-Massachusetts'"  bench, 
consisting  of  Captains  Waldron  and  Pike,  "Mr.."  Elias  Stileman  and  himself. 
"Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  243-246.  "^ Ibid.,  IV,  pt.  2,  247;  245. 


Winter  Harbor  1665-1675  187 

extend  its  government  over  to  them  as  formerly";  and  Edward 
Rishworth  who  had  been  the  County's  recorder,  was  directed  to 
turn  his  books  of  records  over  to  Peter  Weare  in  case  he  should 
refuse  to  continue  that  service  under  Massachusetts.  At  the  same 
time,  two  of  the  Colony's  magistrates,  Samuel  Symonds  and 
Thomas  Danforth,  were  ordered  to  hold  a  county  court  at  York 
as  usual,  and  to  take  appropriate  action  against  any  persons  who 
might  obstruct  their  authority  "under  the  pretence  of  any  other 
authority  whatsoever"/^ 

At  the  time  this  order  was  issued  the  General  Court  probably 
had  only  the  Gorges  faction  in  mind,  but  when  magistrates  Sy- 
monds and  Danforth  arrived  in  York  to  hold  their  July  court 
they  ran  into  considerably  more  opposition  than  they  had  ever 
encountered  before. 

During  the  interim,  the  Royal  Commissioners  had  been  most 
busy  thereabouts  for  several  weeks.  After  stirring  up  trouble  for 
Massachusetts  in  the  New  Hampshire  towns  as  noted  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  they  had  crossed  over  the  Piscataqua  and  entered 
the  Province  of  Maine — or  York  County  as  the  Bay  Colony  was 
always  particular  to  call  it,  for  obvious  reasons.  Here  a  still  more 
fruitful  field  lay  open  for  their  talents — rival  claimants  for  the 
government  and  a  discontented  populace,  many  of  whom  cared 
little  for  the  rule  of  Gorges'  agents,  and  still  less  for  that  of  Puri- 
tanical Massachusetts. 

Meetings  were  held  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  different  towns 
and  no  great  difficulty  seems  to  have  been  experienced  in  getting 
many  of  them,  through  one  means  or  another,  to  sign  petitions  "to 
be  taken  into  his  magestjes  protection  and  government".  While  it 
might  be  contended  that  the  next  step  taken  by  the  Commissioners 
was  both  wise  and  logical  under  the  more  or  less  distracted  condi- 
tions existing  in  the  Province — or  county — yet  it  must  also  be 
borne  in  mind  that  a  very  human  factor  came  into  the  situation. 

These  men  had  been  rather  shabbily  treated  during  their  ne- 
gotiations in  Boston  and  their  ears  must  still  have  rung  with  the 
sound  of  the  trumpet  there  proclaiming  their  final  humiliation. 
So  here  at  last  was  an  opportunity  for  Sir  Robert  Carr,  Col.  Cart- 
wright  and  old  Samuel  Maverick  to  regain  their  self  respect  by 
showing  their  authority  and  at  the  same  time  get  back  at  those 
who  had  flouted  them  so  contemptuously  in  the  Puritan  capitol. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  pp.  245-246;  248. 


188  Brian  Pendleton 

Basing  their  action  on  the  various  petitions  they  had  ob- 
tained and  timing  its  announcement  so  as  best  to  affront  the  Bay 
Colony  in  its  undertaking  to  hold  a  Court  at  York  early  in  July, 
they  issued  a  proclamation  there  on  June  23,  appointing  eleven 
Justices  to  govern  the  Province,  and  forbidding  either  of  the  con- 
tending parties  to  interfere  with  them  "untill  his  Majestjes  plea- 
sure be  further  knoune".^^  A  Provincial  Assembly  was  later  pro- 
vided for,  to  meet  once  a  year,  and  to  be  made  up  of  Burgesses 
elected  by  the  different  towns. 

So — there  at  last  was  something  worth  while  accomplished 
against  the  hated  Massachusetts,  that  stiff-necked  colony  so  con- 
temptuous of  others'  authority,  so  rebellious  at  heart  against  the 
King  himself.  And  now  for  a  slap  at  the  Magistrates  they  were 
sending  down  to  hold  that  July  court,  a  slap  in  their  sour  faces, 
the  pious  hypocrites,  the  boundary  stretchers ! 

Just  to  show  them  who  was  who  in  Maine,  Sir  Robert  issued 
an  order  on  July  2nd  directed  to  Capt.  John  Davis  [of  York]  to 
notify  his  company  to  appear  under  arms  in  their  training  field 
on  Tuesday  morning  next,  "there  to  attend  further  order".  What 
this  "further  order"  was  is  expressed  clearly  enough  in  the  rec- 
ords, where  these  Royal  Commissioners  are  accused  of  violating  a 
Court  of  Justice  by  raising  the  militia  of  the  shire  town  "against 
his  majestjes  authority  here  settled" — that  is,  by  Massachu- 
setts.^^ So  Magistrates  Symonds  and  Danforth  had  naught  else 
to  do  but  to  return  to  Boston,  much  chagrined,  while  the  new  Jus- 
tices held  their  Court  in  triumph. 

The  commission  that  Massachusetts  appointed  in  the  follow- 
ing month  to  investigate  these  doings  "at  the  Eastward"  didn't 
fare  much  better.  They  did  collect  considerable  evidence  at  Ports- 
mouth and  vicinity  as  previously  noted,  but  they  do  not  seem  to 
have  crossed  the  Piscataqua,  though  York  had  been  included  in 
the  field  they  were  to  visit.  Perhaps  it  was  thought  it  would  not  be 
prudent  to  use  force  down  there  just  at  that  time.  There  might  be 
too  much  opposition — some  of  the  Royal  Commissioners  were  still 
in  the  Province — or  County — and  the  Justices  they  had  recently 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  249-251;  Colonial  Papers,  1661-1668,  p.  306. 
The  Justices  appointed  were  Francis  Champernoon  and  Robert  Cutt  of  Kit- 
tery,  Edward  Johnson  and  Edward  Rishworth  of  York,  Samuel  Wheelwright 
of  Wells,  Francis  Hooke  and  William  Phillips  of  Saco,  George  Munjoy  of 
Casco,  Henry  Jocelyn  of  Black  Point,  Robert  Jordan  of  Richmond  Island, 
and  John  Wincoll  of  Newigewannacke  (South  Berwick). 
^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  252. 


Winter  Harbor  1665-1()75  189 

appointed  were  pretty  truculent.  They  had  even  sent  out  a  call  to 
arms  on  August  22nd  to  resist  the  commission  Massachusetts  was 
sending  against  them.^^  So  it  might  be  wise  to  stop  at  the  Pisca- 
taqua,  and  take  other  means  to  accomplish  the  desired  results  be- 
yond the  river.  A  period  of  watchful  waiting  ensued.  The  Massa- 
chusetts records  make  no  further  reference  to  the  matter  for  three 
years. 

Meanwhile,  the  eleven  Justices  and  their  Assembly  conducted 
the  county's  affairs  well  enough.  Pendleton  came  to  their  official 
notice  at  the  very  first  Court  these  local  dignitaries  held  at  York 
on  the  18th  July  [1665],  when  they  appointed  him  adminis- 
trator of  the  estate  of  one  of  his  debtors,  William  Scadlocke,  Jr., 
of  Saco.  While  his  residence  at  this  time  is  not  stated  in  the  rec- 
ord, yet  it  seems  more  likely  that  such  a  trust  would  be  given  to 
a  fellow  townsman  of  Scadlocke's,  rather  than  to  one  who  lived 
as  far  away  as  Portsmouth. 

An  interesting  sequel  to  this  administration  came  in  the  fol- 
lowing January  when  Stephen  Kent,  executor  to  the  will  of  Scad- 
locke's father,  disputed  Pendleton's  claim  to  certain  items  in  the 
inventory  of  the  younger  man's  estate,  as  well  as  to  "a  servant 
named  William  Tommass  there  being  about  one  year  of  his  Tyme 
due  which  Mr.  Pendleton  hath  taken  though  not  in  the  inven- 
tory".-^^ Apparently  these  differences  were  amicably  adjusted 
later  on  by  the  division  of  some  of  Scadlocke's  land  between  Pen- 
dleton and  one  of  the  heirs. ^^ 

Kent's  charges  against  Pendleton  as  administrator  evidently 
did  him  no  harm.  He  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  an  acquisi- 
tion to  the  town,  at  least  by  its  Puritan  element.  According  to 
Williamson,  "His  political  and  military  knowledge,  with  good 
natural  abilities  immediately  gave  him  great  weight  of  character 
among  his  new  acquaintances".'^'^  At  their  first  opportunity — 
19  June,  1666 — they  elected  him  one  of  the  Townsmen  of  Saco. 
We  discern  his  handiwork  in  a  committee  that  was  appointed  on 
the  same  day  to  correspond  with  his  son-in-law,  the  Rev.  Seth 
Fletcher,  "about  teaching",  and  in  an  arrangement  made  a  month 
later  to  pay  Fletcher  for  the  ensuing  year.-^^ 

^*  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  I,  189;  Documentary  History,  IV,  271. 

^  Maine  Province  and,  Court  Records,  I,  221,  247. 

"Saco  Records  (Transcripts),  I,  58. 

"Williamson,  History  of  Maine  (1832  Ed.),  Vol.  1,  p.  686. 

"Saco  Records  (Transcripts),  I,  61. 


190  Brian  Pendleton 

Since  his  dismissal  from  Wells  Fletcher  had  been  supplying 
the  pulpit  at  Saco  from  time  to  time  but  in  May,  1665,  had  lost 
out  to  the  Rev.  Barnabus  Chauncey,  a  misfortune  that  was  not  to 
happen  to  him  again  with  the  backing  he  now  had.  Everything 
was  working  out  as  Pendleton  had  hoped.  He  had  assumed  leader- 
ship in  the  town's  affairs.  His  son-in-law  held  the  ministry.  The 
people  would  yet  be  brought  back  to  the  proper  government. 

One  must  move  cautiously,  however.  Samuel  Maverick,  the 
King's  Commissioner,  was  living  in  Saco  at  this  time  with  his  son- 
in-law,  Francis  Hooke,  one  of  the  newly  appointed  Justices  of  the 
Province.  Another  was  Pendleton's  old  mortgagor,  William  Phil- 
lips, who,  although  holding  a  commission  from  Massachusetts  as 
Major  of  the  York  County  militia,^^  had  gone  over  to  the  oppo- 
sition. With  such  neighbors  too  hasty  action  would  not  be  pru- 
dent. They  were  in  the  saddle  for  the  time  being  and  it  would  be 
best  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  them.  On  the  surface  everything 
was  conducted  with  decorum.  Although  the  Puritans  controlled 
the  Saco  church,  yet  when  the  new  seating  arrangements  were 
made  in  the  meeting  house  in  September,  1666,  the  standing  of 
these  local  dignitaries  was  recognized  by  giving  their  wives  front 
seats  along  with  Mistress  Pendleton.^"  And  the  Justices,  for  their 
part,  made  their  wily  enemy  surveyor  of  highways  throughout  the 
Province^^ — an  office  which  gave  him  good  opportunity  to  keep  in 
touch  with  the  well  affected  without  arousing  suspicion. 

As  far  as  Pendleton  was  concerned  there  was  only  one  high- 
way in  the  Province — the  one  that  led  to  Massachusetts — the  Bos- 
ton road.  And  the  obstructions  thereon  were  not  fallen  trees  or 
broken  down  bridges,  but  eleven  Justices  appointed  by  royal  au- 
thority— and  to  be  removed  at  the  proper  time  despite  the  King's 
order  of  April,  1666,  that  they  were  not  to  be  interfered  with. 
Clearing  the  road  for  Massachusetts  involved  engineering  that 
was  less  civil  than  political — local  leaders  to  be  selected,  a  fac- 
tional spirit  kept  alive,  desire  for  reunion  fostered.  A  guiding 
hand  was  needed  for  these  endeavors,  as  well  as  to  bring  about 
joint  action.  If  the  rulers  of  Massachusetts  were  to  overturn  a 
government  in  defiance  of  the  King's  orders  it  would  be  best  to 

^"Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  76.    He  had  been  appointed  in   1663  to 

replace  Nicholas  Shapleigh  of  Kittery. 

^Saco  Records   (Transcripts),  1,  54. 

''^  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  I,  287   (July,  1667). 


Winter  Haebor  1665-1675  191 

have  it  appear  they  acted  on  the  request  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Maine,  and  not  on  their  own  initiative. 

Pendleton  had  already  taken  his  degree  as  a  political  engi- 
neer. As  at  Portsmouth,  he  quickly  annexed  all  the  worth  while 
offices  Saco  had  to  offer  and  served  for  years  as  Selectman  and 
Commissioner.  But  here  his  activities  were  not  confined  to  purely 
local  affairs.  He  extended  his  influence  throughout  the  Province. 
His  election  as  a  Burgess  to  attend  the  provincial  assembly  in 
1667^^  gave  him  further  opportunity  to  confer  with  his  lieuten- 
ants— men  like  Peter  Weare  of  York,  Francis  Littlefield  of  Wells, 
Francis  Neale  of  Casco  Bay,  and  others,  who  nine  years  after- 
wards were  described  by  Edward  Randolph  as  "led  by  Major 
Pendleton  .  .  .  understanding  little  but  what  he  tells  them  is  law 
or  gospell".  And  it  is  no  doubt  partly  due  to  Pendleton's  activi- 
ties at  this  time  that  Randolph  refers  to  him  in  the  same  report  as 
"A  man  of  Saco  River  of  Great  Estate,  &  very  precise  independ- 
ant  [i.e.  Puritan],  beloved  only  of  those  of  his  fraternity,  being 
both  an  Enemy  to  the  King's  interest  &  Mr.  Gorges  Interest,  allso 
a  great  Ringleader  to  others  to  the  utmost  of  his  Power".^^ 

This  Edward  Randolph  first  appeared  in  Boston  in  June, 
1676,  as  a  special  messenger  from  the  English  government,  bear- 
ing a  demand  that  the  colony  send  over  agents  to  London  to  an- 
swer the  old  charges  from  the  heirs  of  Mason  and  Gorges,  as  well 
as  many  new  complaints  over  its  ignoring  of  the  Navigation  Acts. 
He  was  also  instructed  to  make  a  report  on  trade  conditions  in 
the  colony,  its  population,  industries,  and  resources,  and  the  tem- 
per and  character  of  its  leading  men — in  short,  to  collect  all  the 
information  possible  which  would  be  helpful  to  the  authorities  in 
England  when  they  began  the  task  of  putting  a  curb  on  Massa- 
chusetts. His  stay  at  this  time  was  brief,  but  long  enough  for  him 
to  gather  up  considerable  data  on  which  to  base  a  voluminous  re- 
port. The  contemptuous  treatment  he  had  received  at  the  hands 
of  Governor  Leverett  and  the  Council  naturally  biased  his  writing, 
and  he  must  have  taken  a  malicious  delight  in  noting  that  Leverett 
told  him  the  laws  made  by  King  and  Parliament  did  not  apply  to 
Massachusetts.  A  year  later  he  was  sent  to  Boston  again  as  Col- 
lector of  Customs  for  New  England,  and  as  he  was  an  honest  man 
his  activities  in  trying  to  suppress  the  illegal  trading  that  was 

*^Saco  Records   (Transcripts),  I,  56,  57,  59,  63,  68,  72,  84,  88,  89. 
'^Massachusetts   Archives,   III,  300-300a;  Documentary  History,  IV,  315. 


192  Bhian  Pendleton 

going  on  made  him  detested  by  the  merchants,  while  his  other  acti- 
vities in  sending  hateful  reports  to  London  and  in  urging  that  a 
Royal  Governor  be  appointed,  made  him  equally  unpopular  in 
other  quarters.  His  reports  and  letters  fill  several  volumes,  but 
some  of  his  statements  are  exaggerated  owing  to  his  natural  anti- 
pathy toward  the  Colony's  rulers.^^ 

Randolph's  commentary  on  Pendleton  seems  to  have  been 
pretty  accurate,  even  if  it  was  inspired  by  those  whose  authority 
in  the  Province  the  man  from  Massachusetts  had  helped  to  over- 
turn once  more.  His  leadership  of  the  Puritan  party  in  Maine  had 
come  out  into  the  open  by  that  time.  The  auspices  were  favorable. 
Maverick  was  gone.  England  was  too  deeply  involved  in  wars  with 
France  and  Holland  to  pay  any  attention  to  affairs  in  the  colo- 
nies. Early  in  1668,  the  word  was  passed  to  bring  the  issue  to  a 
head.  Simultaneously,  Pendleton's  confederates  in  the  different 
towns  in  Maine  circulated  petitions  requesting  Massachusetts  to 
resume  her  government  in  the  Province.^^ 

Favorable  action  was  taken  by  the  General  Court  in  May. 
Major  General  John  Leverett,  Captains  Richard  Waldron  and 
Robert  Pike,  and  Edward  Ting,  Esq.,  were  appointed  commis- 
sioners to  hold  a  County  Court  at  York  in  July,  directed  to  sup- 
press any  opposition  they  might  meet  and  to  confirm  such  civil 
and  military  officers  as  they  saw  fit.  Notice  was  sent  to  the  in- 
habitants to  yield  obedience  and  to  choose  Associates  and  Jury- 
men to  attend  the  Court.  And  the  Commissioners  were  also  di- 
rected to  let  the  people  understand  that  because  of  their  revolt 
"they  must  not  expect  or  have  any  privilege  but  what  is  common 
to  the  rest  of  the  shires  or  townes  in  this  jurisdiction"."^  Evi- 
dently the  experiment  of  giving  full  suffrage  to  non-church  mem- 
bers was  no  longer  to  be  continued. 

The  King's  Justices  in  Maine  did  what  they  could  to  obstruct 
this  impending  change  of  government.    In  April  they  had  com- 

^*  For  estimate  of  Randolph  see  Doyle,  English  Colonies  in  America  (Vol.  Ill, 
pp.  196-7),  and  James  Truslow  Adams,  The  Founding  of  New  England, 
pp.  377f. 

^A  letter  from  the  eleven  Justices  appointed  by  the  Royal  Commissioners 
accuses  Pendleton,  Francis  Raynes,  Ezekiel  Knight,  and  Francis  Neale  as  tlie 
instigators  of  this  action.  (Colonial  Papers,  1661-1668,  pp.  614-5).  It  is  these 
men,  no  doubt,  who  are  referred  to  as  the  "junta  of  professional  agitators", 
by  whom  "clandestine  petitions  in  considerable  numbers  were  obtained". — Col. 
Charles  E.  Banks,  manuscript  "History  of  the  Usurpation"  (p.  86),  now  de- 
posited with  the  Maine  Historical  Society  at  Portland. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  370-373. 


w 


liliU 


Winter  Hahbor  1665-1675  193 

mitted  to  prison  one  of  Pendleton's  henchmen,  Peter  Weare  of 
York,  for  his  "seditious  practices" — probably  for  circulating  the 
petition  to  Massachusetts — but  he  was  soon  "liberated  by  his  con- 
federates at  night,  breaking  the  prison  door  to  pieces".^^  Nathan- 
iel Masterson,  the  Marshall  appointed  by  the  Massachusetts  Gen- 
eral Court  to  call  the  town  meetings  for  the  election  of  Associates 
and  Jurymen,  was  also  put  under  arrest  and  the  meetings  inter- 
fered with  as  much  as  possible.  An  appeal  for  help  was  also  sent 
to  Col.  Nicolls  at  New  York,  who  warned  the  Bay  authorities  to 
keep  their  hands  off  Maine,  as  directed  by  the  King  two  years 
earlier. 

Paying  no  heed  to  this  warning  the  Commissioners  of  Massa- 
chusetts accompanied  by  a  distinguished  retinue  of  "Captains 
and  men  of  worth",  proceeded  to  Maine  at  the  appointed  time. 
That  Pendleton  joined  them  at  Portsmouth  can  hardly  be  doubted. 
He  could  not  have  restrained  his  impatience  to  wait  for  them  at 
York.  Then  too  he  could  spend  the  week-end  with  his  son,  hear  the 
Rev.  Joshua  Moodey  discourse  once  more,  give  the  delegation  from 
Massachusetts  the  latest  news.  It  would  be  pleasant  to  have  a 
little  time  to  visit  with  them,  to  renew  old  acquaintance  with  Lev- 
erett  and  Pike,  and  to  meet  their  escort  among  whom  were  certain 
Boston  merchants  besides  Capt.  James  Oliver  of  Blue  Dove  mem- 
ory. Capt.  Waldron  too  would  no  doubt  come  down  from  Dover 
to  join  his  fellow  commissioners  at  Portsmouth  and  there  would  be 
many  other  old  friends  to  greet.  All  good  enough  reasons,  but  a 
still  more  human  desire  may  have  impelled  this  old  agent  provoca- 
teur of  Massachusetts  to  make  the  journey — the  desire  to  taste 
to  the  full  his  day  of  glory,  to  participate  in  the  actual  realiza- 
tion of  his  contrivings,  to  have  the  joy  of  riding  back  into  Maine 
in  triumph. 

The  Commission  arrived  in  York  on  Monday,  July  6th,  the 
numbers  of  their  escort  augmented  by  various  ardent  partisans 
who  had  joined  them  on  the  way,  such  men  as  Richard  Cutt  and 
Elias  Stileman  of  Portsmouth,  and  Lieut.  Peter  Coffin,  of  Dover, 
who  commanded  the  mounted  guard,  that  troop  of  "armed  horse- 
men" which  so  confounded  the  helpless  Justices  of  the  Province. 
The  following  morning  a  number  of  these  dignitaries  conferred 

'"  As  stated  in  the  letter  sent  by  six  of  these  Justices  to  Col.  NicoUs,  29  Sept., 
1668.  {Colonial  Papers,  1661-16S8,  pp.  614-5)  The  prison  mentioned  was  prob- 
ably the  "Old  Gaol"  at  York  Village  which  was  built  in  1653,  and  is  still  stand- 
ing as  a  museum  open  to  the  public. 


194  Brian  Pendleton 

privately  with  the  Commissioners,  and  while  their  protests  were 
in  vain  they  parted  with  mutual  respect.  Then  "with  twelve  armed 
men  on  horseback  and  as  many  more  of  their  friends  with  swords, 
and  with  the  rebellious  petitioners,  and  with  drum  beating"  the 
Commissioners  proceeded  to  the  meeting  house  and  opened  Court. 
From  their  report  of  this  affair,  and  from  various  letters  writ- 
ten by  their  opponents,  we  get  a  lively  picture  of  the  somewhat 
turbulent  events  that  ensued.  While  the  Commissioners  were  busy 
in  opening,  sorting  and  counting  the  votes  for  Associates,  the 
King's  Justices  came  up  "&  without  doores  by  some  instrument, 
made  proclamation  that  all  should  attend  to  heare  his  majestyes 
commands".  Informed  that  the  Court  was  open  and  ready  to  hear 
any  such  orders,  "those  gentlemen  came  in  and  manifested  their 
desire  that  what  they  had  shewne  to  us  in  private  might  be  read 
in  Court  to  the  people". 

This  had  reference  to  the  authority  given  them  by  the  Royal 
Commissioners  in  1665  to  serve  as  Justices  in  the  Province,  to  a 
copy  of  the  letter  of  warning  Col.  Nicolls  had  written  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Massachusetts,  and  also  in  all  likelihood  to  the  King's 
letter  of  10  April,  1666,  prohibiting  Massachusetts  from  inter- 
fering in  Maine^^ — documents  these  Justices  had  displayed  to  the 
Bay  men  at  their  conference  earlier  that  morning  but  without  im- 
pressing them  in  the  slightest. 

Nor  were  they  impressed  now.  They  had  votes  to  count  first.  It 
was  more  important  to  determine  who  were  to  serve  as  Associates 
in  the  following  year  than  to  go  over  that  old  stuff  once  more. 
Royal  mandates  meant  nothing  to  them.  So  the  King's  men  were 
told  the  Court  was  busy  just  then  but  that  after  dinner  their  de- 
sire would  be  granted.  Whereupon  they  left — but  only  to  stir  up 
more  trouble. 

WhUe  the  men  from  Massachusetts  were  regaling  themselves 
at  dinner,  word  was  brought  to  them  that  the  King's  Justices  were 
going  to  the  meeting  house  to  hold  an  assembly  of  their  own,  they 

^  Provincial  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  I,  296;  Maine  Province  and  Court 
Records,  I,  190.  This  is  the  document  referred  to  as  "the  King's  Mandamus" 
in  the  report  of  the  King's  Justices  in  1668,  and  as  "a  writing"  in  the  General 
Court's  answer  of  11  Sept.,  1666.  The  somewhat  contemptuous  expression  used 
was  due  to  the  fact  that  Samuel  Maverick  had  presented  the  Governor  and 
Council  with  only  a  copy  of  the  original,  "without  direction  or  seale".  So  the 
wily  Bostoners  gave  it  little  weight,  implying  they  had  only  Maverick's  word 
for  its  authenticity,  "the  certeinty  whereof  seems  not  to  be  so  cleare  unto  us 
as  former  expresses  from  his  majesty  have  usually  binn". — Massachusetts 
Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  317. 


Winter  Hahbor  1065-1675  195 

having  formerly  sent  out  warrants  to  the  different  towns  to  send 
their  deputies.  And  it  was  also  reported  that  Nathaniel  Phillips — 
son  of  Major  William  of  Saco  —  and  another  adherent  of  the 
party  in  opposition  were  going  up  and  down  and  at  all  public 
places  publishing  a  paper  which  tended  to  create  a  disturbance. 
So  these  two  worthies  were  put  under  arrest. 

Dinner  finally  over,  the  Commissioners'  report  goes  on  to  say, 
"Then  we  went  to  Court,  where  we  found  the  house  full,  &  the  gen- 
tlemen to  have  taken  up  our  seats ;  so  room  being  made  we  went 
up  to  them,  &  told  them  wee  expected  that  they  would  not  have  put 
any  such  affront  upon  the  Court  nor  should  such  motions  hinder 
us  prosecuting  our  commission ;  for  wee  could  keepe  the  Court 
elsewhere". 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Leverett  demanded  angrily,  "Do  you 
want  peace  or  war?"  and  when  the  tension  was  so  great  that  "It 
came  very  near  to  the  shedding  of  blood"  ^^  an  uproar  broke  out. 
"Some  of  the  people  begann  to  speake  but  we  commanded  sylence, 
&  the  officer  was  commanded  by  us  to  clear  the  Court ;  whereupon 
the  people  departed".  Then  the  King's  Justices  coming  to  private 
discourse  with  Messrs.  Leverett,  Waldron,  Pike,  and  Ting  once 
more,  and  still  insisting  their  documents  should  be  read  in  public, 
had  their  wish  gratified  as  had  been  promised  them  as  far  as  con- 
cerned their  commissions  and  the  King's  so-called  mandamus.  But 
the  reading  of  Col.  Nicoll's  letter  was  refused,  it  being  regarded 
as  of  no  concern  to  those  present.  Finally  the  King's  Justices 
having  no  force  to  make  their  objections  of  any  effect,  and  wish- 
ing, as  they  said,  to  "prevent  a  tumult",  withdrew  from  the  scene 
after  lodging  a  formal  protest.^"    And  the  Commissioners  went 

="As  stated  in  letter  Samuel  Maverick  wrote  Lord  Arlington,  Colonial  Secre- 
tary, from  New  York  the  folowing  month:  John  Leverett  was  born  in  England 
in  1616  and  arrived  in  Boston  about  1634.  At  the  time  of  the  Civil  War  in 
England  he  returned  and  served  as  an  officer  in  Cromwell's  army.  Coming 
again  to  Massachusetts  he  was  a  Deputy  from  Boston  to  the  General  Court 
in  1651  and  four  years  later  was  sent  to  London  as  the  Colony's  agent.  He 
was  again  a  Deputy  to  the  Massachusetts  General  Court  from  1660  to  1665, 
and  Speaker  of  the  House,  an  Assistant  from  1665,  Major  General,  1663-1673, 
Deputy  Governor,  1671-1673,  and  Governor  from  1673  until  his  death,  16  March 
1678/79.  He  is  buried  in  the  Granary  Burying  Ground  at  Boston  where  his 
tombstone  is  notable  for  its  flowery  epitaph.  This  calls  him  "New  England's 
Heroe,  Mars  His  General,  Vertue's  Standard  Bearer,  Learning's  Glory,  etc, 
etc" — Massachusetts  Records;  Bridgman's  Pilgrims  of  Boston,  p.  43. 
^  Maine  Province  and  Court  Records,  I,  193.  This  protest  was  signed  by  Henry 
Jocelyn,  Francis  Champernowne,  William  Phillips,  Edward  Johnson,  Edward 
Rishworth,   Francis   Hooke,  Samuel   Wheelwright,   and  John   WincoU. 


196  Brian  Pendleton 

about  their  business,  naming  those  elected,  swearing  in  the  new 
officers,  etc. 

An  exciting  day  for  everyone  present,  an  especially  exciting 
one  for  Brian  Pendleton,  a  day  of  days  for  him  who  had  done  so 
much  to  bring  about  this  return  of  Massachusetts.  But  this  re- 
turn meant  only  more  work  for  him.  He  was  declared  elected  this 
day  as  an  Associate  Justice,  served  as  such  at  once  in  the  Court 
then  held,  was  given  magistratical  authority  within  the  County 
and  authorized  to  hold  Court  at  York  on  the  15th  of  the  follow- 
ing September.  He  was  also  appointed  Major  of  the  County's 
militia,  displacing  William  Phillips  as  its  commander,  and  was  di- 
rected "to  settle  Black  Point" — that  is,  to  receive  the  submission 
of  the  inhabitants  there  to  the  new  regime.^^ 

This  may  have  been  a  rather  difficult  task  for  Black  Point 
was  the  home  of  Capt.  Henry  Jocelyn,  who  had  settled  there  about 
1634  and  had  served  as  one  of  Gorges'  Councillors.  He  was  a  man 
of  much  ability  and  influence  and  the  fact  that  he  was  a  son  of  Sir 
Thomas  Jocelyn  of  County  Kent,  England,  gave  him  much  stand- 
ing among  the  settlers  of  humbler  origin.  He  was  one  of  the  most 
active  of  the  King's  Justices  in  opposing  the  re-establishment  of 
the  Bay  Colony's  authority  in  Maine  although  he  had  formerly 
been  one  of  its  magistrates  there,  as  well  as  a  Deputy  to  the  Gen- 
eral Court  in  Boston  in  1660.  But  he  does  not  seem  to  have  had 
much  love  for  the  Puritans,  and  it  is  entirely  likely  his  town  was 
one  of  the  two  which  had  been  hindered  from  sending  in  their  votes 
for  Associates,  as  noted  in  the  report  made  by  the  Commissioners 
regarding  their  busy  day  at  York. 

II. 

What  success  Pendleton  met  with  at  Black  Point  does  not 
appear,  but  he  seems  to  have  had  his  hands  full  at  Saco  where 
Major  Phillips  caused  him  much  trouble  in  trying  to  get  the  new 
dispensation  under  way.  Judging  from  the  affidavits  that  Pendle- 
ton took  pains  to  secure,  Phillips  was  still  a  power  there  and  some- 
what of  a  ringleader  himself.    According  to  Roger  Hill,  it  hap- 

^  Account  of  this  invasion  of  Maine  appears  in  the  Massachusetts  Records, 
IV,  pt.  2,  401-404.  For  the  letters  of  the  King's  Justices  regarding  the  af- 
fair, as  well  as  those  of  Samuel  Maverick  and  Nathaniel  Phillips,  see  Colonial 
Papers,  1661-1668,  pp.  614-615,  606-9.  Col.  NicoUs'  protest  to  the  Governor 
and  Assistants  of  Massachusetts  is  in  the  same  volume,  pp.  576-7.  A  fuller 
version  of  Phillips'  letter  is  in  Documentary  History,  V,  189-194. 


Winter  Harbor  1665-1675  197 

pened  "That  upon  the  Sabbath  day  night,  next  after  the  Yorke 
Court  for  the  Massachusetts  [i.e.  July  12],  John  Davis  stood  up 
after  evening  exercises  warning  the  Souldiers  to  meet  the  next 
morning  to  heare  what  order  the  Court  had  taken  concerning  the 
commission  officers.  Major  Phillips  stood  up,  and  demanded  by 
what  authority  (or  who  gave  him  the  order)  to  warne  this  meeting.'* 
Ma  jr.  Pendleton  stood  up  and  answered  that  he  did.  Ma  jr.  Phil- 
lips demanded  what  Authority  he  had.  He  replyed  that  in  the 
morning  he  would  shew  his  power.  Farther  than  this  the  deponent 
saith  not  concerning  the  occurances  of  things  at  that  time.  Onely 
that  Majr.  Phillips  cautioned  the  People  to  take  heed  what  they 
did,  whereupon  some  stood  up  and  answered  that  they  neither 
could  or  would  come  to  the  meeting." 

Similar  dispositions  were  sworn  to  before  Pendleton  by  John 
Sargent,  Robert  Booth,  Richard  Hitchcock,  and  John  Davis,  the 
latter  adding  that  "the  men  warned  did  not  mete",  a  humiliating 
experience  for  the  new  Major  who  must  have  felt  that  some  of  the 
glory  of  Israel  had  departed.  But  one  setback  was  not  to  thwart 
him.  Three  weeks  later  he  put  up  a  written  notice  by  the  meeting 
house  door  calling  for  the  inhabitants  of  Saco  to  assemble  on 
August  24th  to  choose  various  officers  to  attend  the  County  Court, 
"Which  order,"  says  Robert  Booth,  the  town  clerk,  "being  redd 
by  Major  William  Phillips  that  Sabbath  day  morning:  Major 
Pendleton  said  here  is  one  word  wanting  that  is  ye  place  where  to 
meet:  Major  Phillips  aforesaid;  answered  ther  is  every  word  too 
much  all  re**  for  that  is  no  legall  warning;  that  is  none  of  your 
office  Capt.  Pendleton  you  are  no  legal  asosiate;  &  y^  said  maj 
phillips  tooke  away  y®  writing  saying  he  would  keep  it:  this  de- 
ponent suposed  it  belonged  to  him  to  keep  &  major  Phillips  replied 
it  is  lyke  you  may  have  a  copy  of  it." 

Roger  Hill,  in  the  latter  part  of  his  deposition,  carries  the 
case  against  Phillips  a  step  further,  stating  that  on  Monday,  the 
third  instant,  "there  being  some  conference  &  contention  about 
the  pulling  downe  the  warrant  .  .  .  Majer  Phillips  sd  before  him  & 
severall  persons,  that  he  did  pull  it  downe  &  would  keepe  it.  Maj' 
Pendleton  asked  him  if  he  would  not  let  him  have  it.  He  answered 
he  would  not.  The  other  replyed  that  it  would  do  him  no  good. 
His  reply  was,  that  he  could  not  tell  whether  it  would  or  not. 
Robert  Booth  Sen:  made  answer  that  it  did  not  belong  unto  him, 
that  he  might  set  it  downe  in  the  Towne  book,  Maj*"  Phillips 


198  Beiai^^  Pendleton 

answered  that  it  may  be  he  might  let  him  have  a  coppie  of  it. 
Farther,  maj'  Phillips  sd  that  if  there  were  an  hundred  war- 
rents  he  would  pull  them  all  downe  if  he  were  not  hindered.  Maj' 
Pendleton  told  him  that  it  would  be  his  wisedome  to  sett  still  as 
Mr.  Hooke  did.  To  whom  he  replyed,  that  it  was  noething  to  him, 
what  m'  Hooke  did." 

"Some  persons  haveing  formerly  given  out  words  that  those 
who  were  for  the  Bay  government  their  necks  might  stretch  for  it: 
This  Deponant,  haveing  heard  of  it,  he  spake  of  it  at  this  meeting 
above  expressed,  in  the  Presence  of  Maj""  Phillips,  who  immedi- 
ately returned  this  answer,  that  it  might  be  so  for  anything  he 
knew.  Farther  this  Deponant  saith  not.  Onely  that  he  heard 
Maj'  Phillips  say,  That  he  could  Prove  that  Maj^  Pendleton  was 
not  legally  chosen  an  Associate,  for  the  majer  part  of  the  Prov- 
ince did  not  make  choice  of  him."  ^^ 

No  constable  at  hand  to  do  your  bidding  this  time,  Brian 
Pendleton,  no  force  to  back  up  your  authority !  A  magistrate 
without  a  Court,  a  major  without  even  a  corporal's  guard,  what 
chagrin,  what  humiliation,  must  have  been  yours  to  be  defied  in 
this  way,  to  have  your  power  held  in  contempt,  your  dignity 
flouted,  your  offices  denied !  "Not  a  legal  Associate"?  "Captain," 
not  Major.?  What  insolence!  What  bravado!  What  an  Ajax, 
this  Phillips,  to  defy  the  lightning  of  Massachusetts !  A  judgment 
would  surely  descend  upon  him !  But  patience  now — no  display  of 
temper — dignified  forebearance — no  drawing  of  the  sword.  The 
goose  quill  were  mightier.  So  off  the  baffled  and  sorely  vexed  man 
sends  a  letter  to  General  Leverett  reciting  his  troubles  and  making 
a  certain  recommendation. 

Phillips'  son,  Nathaniel,  refers  to  this  when  in  writing  of 
these  events,  he  notes  that  "many  towns  would  not  obey  the  usurp- 
ing power,  particularly  Saco,  where  Major  Phillips  lived,  stood 
unanimously  against  them  onely  their  new  made  Major  Pembleton 
who  hath  beene  one  of  the  greatest  Instruments  in  this  obstruc- 
tion of  government,  being  so  proud  of  his  office  began  to  ride  full 
speed  before  he  mounted  in  the  saddle,  that  is  to  say  before  he 

'^  These  various  depositions  were  sworn  to  "before  me,  Brian  Pendleton,  Aso- 
ciate",  and  with  one  exception  are  dated  Aug.  13,  1668.  The  originals  are  in 
the  Massachusetts  Archives,  CVI,  193-5,  and  were  first  brought  to  light  by 
the   Maine   Historical   Society — Documentary   History,   VI,   20-26. 


Winter  Haeboh  1665-1676  199 

had  taken  his  oath,^^  was  very  busy  in  his  Actions,  but  he  mett 
with  opposition  with  Major  Phillips  .  .  .  upon  which  the  said 
Pembleton  sent  to  Boston  to  the  Major  General  a  great  Com- 
plaint against  Major  Phillips  that  nothing  would  be  done  without 
he  was  sent  far  away,  the  hearte  of  the  people  was  soe  led  by 
him."  3^ 

This  "great  Complaint"  is  no  longer  to  be  found  but  Pen- 
dleton refers  to  it  in  another  letter  he  wrote  the  Major  General 
later  in  the  month.  Such  contumacy  could  not  be  overlooked. 
The  Marshall  General  of  Massachusetts  was  sent  to  apprehend 
Phillips  but  he  fared  even  worse  than  Pendleton,  the  rebel  refusing 
to  obey  his  authority.  He  would  go  down  to  Boston  himself — he 
wasn't  afraid — but  he  didn't  care  at  all  to  take  the  ride  even  part 
way  on  the  nag  which  Pendleton  had  sent  up  for  him.  So  there 
was  nothing  left  to  do  but  gather  up  those  evidences  from  which 
we  have  already  quoted  and  send  them  down  by  the  Marshall 
against  Phillips'  arrival  in  Boston;  a  task  which  Pendleton  must 
have  undertaken  with  considerable  satisfaction. 

Then  with  his  customary  persistence,  he  again  put  up  no- 
tices at  the  meeting  house — evidently  on  Sunday,  August  16th — 
calling  once  more  for  the  townsfolk  to  choose  officers  for  the 
County  Court,  as  well  as  for  the  Train  Band.^^  This  time  Phillips 
did  not  disturb  the  warrants,  contenting  himself  that  night  with 
warning  the  people  as  before  and  reviling  Pendleton  who  had  be- 
gun to  appear  as  an  enemy  not  to  be  held  too  lightly — a  patient 
man,  but  not  one  to  be  turned  aside  from  a  determined  course. 

After  the  doughty  ex-major  had  gone,  reports  came  to  Pen- 
dleton that  his  foeman  proposed  to  escape  punishment  for  his 
acts  by  attributing  the  opposition  as  of  Saco  rather  than  of  Phil- 
lips. So  he  sent  off  that  other  letter  to  Leverett,  recapitulating 
most  of  the  affair,  and  inclosing  two  more  depositions  for  good 

"^  Phillips  seems  to  be  confused  here  for  his  account  says  further  that  the 
Massachusetts'  Commissioners  swore  in  their  oflBcers  after  the  King's  Jus- 
tices had  quit  the  field,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  Commissioners'  Report. 
The  record  of  the  Court  they  instituted  there  on  that  day  shows  that  Pen- 
dleton was  one  of  the  Associates  present  (York  Court  Records  II,  143)  and 
so  must  have  taken  the  oath  of  oflBce  at  that  time.  Possibly  PhiUips  had 
reference  to  Pendleton's  activities  prior  to  the  meeting,  although  his  narra- 
tive is  not  so  worded. 
"  Documentary  History,  V,  192-3. 

"'^  The  warrant  for  choosing  a  constable  and  jurymen  for  the  County  Court 
is  dated  Aug.  14.  Copies  of  both  are  in  Massachusetts  Archives,  CVI,  195, 
and  appear  in  Documentary  History,  VI,  24,  25. 


200  Brian  Pendleton 

measure.  This  is  one  of  the  longest  letters  he  ever  signed  and  runs 

as  follows : 

"Winter  harbour  Aug  21,  1668 
"Maj""  Gen:  Leverett. 

Kind  Sir 

Whereas  Maj'  Phillips  wilbe 
ready  (I  question  not)  to  excuse  himself e  in  all  that 
opposition  of  his,  in  words  or  actions  as  being  noe  lett^® 
to  the  peoples  meeting  to  chuse  officers,  the  which  I  leave 
to  yo""  owne  judgement  and  consideration,  of  those  evi- 
dences that  already  have  been  sent  downe  by  the  Mar- 
shall Gen^  all  being  said  &  done  in  publique.  And  now 
since  I  heare  he  hath  procured  some  hands,  to  signifie 
that  the  people  s'^  they  would  not  act  in  the  Government 
untill  the  differen[ce]  should  be  reconciled.  The  w*^'* 
that  you  may  the  better  understand,  please  to  take  no- 
tice: That  some  small  tyme,  before  your  Court  held 
in  July  last  at  Yorke  a  warrant  was  Issued  out  under 
the  hands  of  m'  Joslyn,  Major  Phillips  &  m""  Hooke 
to  require  the  Towne  in  his  Majesties  name  to  chuse  a 
Deputy  to  goe  to  York  to  keepe  a  Court,  or  to  meet  with 
yo''selves  to  treat  w*^  you  at  y^  time.  Our  people  ac- 
cordingly mett,  but  I  suppose  not  one  halfe  of  the  hous- 
houlders  at  w*^'^  time  some  made  answer  y*  they  would  not 
act  as  is  s^  above :  but  those  that  did  speake  spake  onely 
for  themselves,  &  not  for  the  Town,  neither  was  it  any 
Towne  act,  w'^''  I  affirm  as  a  witnes,  being  there  present, 
&  another  Testimony,  you  have  here  incloased. 

"Since  my  last  to  you,  &  that  the  Marshall  Gen: 
was  here  I  sett  up  other  papers  at  the  meeting  house, 
the  coppie  whereof  you  have  inclosed  here,  endeavor- 
ing If  I  may  in  a  loving  &  peaceable  way  obtaine  sub- 
jection to  the  Massachusetts  Governement.  What  the 
Issue  of  it  wilbe  on  Monday  next  I  shall  better  know. 
Had  the  boat  stayed  till  Monday  night  you  should  have 
been  acquainted  w***  the  successe.  However,  by  the  first 
you  may  expect  to  be  informed.  On  the  last  Lord's  day 
Maj"*  Phillips  being  present  he  made  a  very  large  speech 
after  the  Evening  Sermon  of  all  the  occurences,  betweene 
the  Marsh  Gen.  &  himselfe,  as  he  did  affirme.  The  matter 
were  to  tedious  to  write  at  large,  but  the  scope  I  gather 

•"  Old  English  for  "hindrance". 


Winter  Harbor  1GG5-1676 

up  into  these  2  heads.  ( 1 )  That  wheras  he  had  opposed 
the  Massachusetts  Govnmt  as  in  referience  to  this  Coun- 
ty, he  signified  y*  he  did  not  withdraw  from  y^  Marshall 
because  he  did  desart  the  cause,  but  would  go  down  to 
Boston  aboute  it.  (2)  To  render  mee  as  odious  to  the 
people  as  he  could,  &  as  his  great  Enemie,  in  this  great 
trouble  of  his,  more  perticularly  in  sending  up  a  beast 
at  the  Marshall's  request  for  the  carrying  of  him  along 
with  him  to  Cap*  Waldrons  w'^''  I  did  not  w*'*  any  dis- 
respect at  all  to  Maj*"  Phillips  but  w**"  respect  unto  those 
whose  principle  Officer  the  Marshall  is,  w*^'*  I  shall  al- 
wayes  be  ready  to  doe  as  the  Massachusetts  shall  have 
occasion  to  make  use  of  mee.  Here  is  incloased  the  depo- 
sition of  one,  that  saw  Maj""  Phillips  pull  down  the  war- 
rant. If  need  be  you  may  (as  I  am  informed)  have  an- 
other Testimony  viz  Indigo  Potter  of  Charlestowne  who 
is  now  in  Goodman  Cumbeyes  employ. 

"This  that  you  have  above  expressed  was  intended 
to  have  beene  sent  by  Cumbey  it  being  written  that  very 
night  he  went  away  but  I  was  prevented. 

"Yesterday  being  the  24th  of  this  instant  (the  day 
appointed  for  to  choose  of  [ficers]  in)  although^^  a  con- 
siderable number  of  persons  were  present,  viz  above  2-^^ 
[as  I]  feared  so  it  proved  that  Maj""  Phillips  ample 
speech  to  the  people  the  [night]  before  his  departure, 
did  more  harme  as  in  compliance  of  their  spirits  to  the 
[Massach]usetts  Government  than  anything  he  did  be- 
fore to  hinder  yo""  proceedings.  [There  we] re  but  7  per- 
sons that  did  adhere  unto  mee.  The  rest  (viz  many  of 
them)  [saide]  that  they  would  not  act,  except  wee  could 
shew  something  from  his  [hand]  and  them  thereunto. 
Others  departed  silently  away.  I  doubt  that  this  [will 
e]ffect  others  in  the  severall  towns,  &  provoake  them  to 
make  some  [complaint]  in  reference  to  the  Court  in 
Sept.  next,  but  I  leave  it  to  yo'  [honors]  considerations 
as  not  knowing  what  to  advise.  As  the  case  stands 
[nothing  is]  done  among  the  people.  We  are  altogether 
without  any  Governm*  [but  what]  persons  as  cannot 
Govern  themselves,  will  make  of  it  (&  doe)  you  [can 
judge.]  Thus  leaving  the  businesse  &  your  selves,  unto 
the  wise  and  [powerful  h]and  of  the  King  of  Kings  & 

'^  "Scarborough"  in  Documentary  History. 
^  "Above  20"  in  Documentary  History. 


202  Brian  Pendleton 

Lord  of  Lords,  ever  begging  that  the  [blessings]  of  the 

earth,  that  Prince  of  perfect  peace,  would  graunt   [us 

that]  wee  may  whilst  wee  are  on  earth  lead  a  peaceable 

&  quiet  life. 

honesty   Amen 

I  rest  Your  humble  servant  to  be  commanded 

Brian  Pendleton" 

Deposition  inclosed  regarding 

Pulled  down  warrant.  )"^^ 

A  lengthy  communication,  but  a  waste  of  time  and  effort  as 
far  as  it  may  have  affected  Phillips.  It  could  hardly  have  reached 
Leverett  until  the  very  end  of  the  month,  and  "in  the  interim", 
says  the  culprit's  son  in  the  relation  already  noted,  "Major  Phil- 
lips coming  to  Boston  about  his  business,  not  being  Afraid  of 
his  Adversaries,  the  Governor  &  Major  General  and  Mr.  Ting 
appointed  him  a  meeting."  No  conclusion  being  reached,  the 
County  Court  on  August  26th  ordered  him  to  give  bond  in  the 
sum  of  £500  to  "peaceably  demean  himself  toward  this  govern- 
ment" or  else  give  bond  in  a  like  amount  to  appear  before  the 
next  session  of  the  General  Court  to  answer  the  charges  against 
him.  Refusing  both,  he  was  committed  to  prison,  where  after  a 
few  days'  confinement  he  repented  and  was  released  upon  binding 
himself  "not  to  act  in  any  place  of  authority  in  Maine,  nor  op- 
pose the  authority  of  Massachusetts".^® 

Much  humbled  in  spirit  Phillips  returned  to  Saco  and  we 
hear  of  him  no  more  as  an  obstructionist.  In  accordance  with  his 
bond  he  ceased  his  old  activities  in  public  affairs  and  was  not  even 
a  selectman  there  again  as  he  had  been  regularly  for  years  up 
to  this  time.  It  was  not  until  1674  that  he  came  into  conflict  with 
Pendleton  once  more,  suing  him  in  the  County  Court  on  some  un- 
stated cause.  But  here  again  he  was  discomfited,  the  suit  being 
thrown  out  on  a  technicality  and  costs  assessed  against  him."*^ 
It  must  have  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  no  match  for  this  detest- 

^*  Massachusetts  Archives,  CVI,  196.  Transcription  as  given  in  Documentary 
History,  VI,  26-28,  with  the  two  corrections  by  Maine  Proxnnce  and  Court  Rec- 
ords, [I,  193],  noted  above.  This  lengthy  report,  while  signed  by  Pendleton,  was 
evidently  dictated  to  his  son-in-law,  the  Rev.  Seth  Fletcher,  the  handwriting 
otherwise  being  identical  with  that  which  appears  in  two  of  Fletcher's  letters 
preserved  among  the  Mather  papers  in  the  Boston  Public  Library.  The  depo- 
sition which  Pendleton  inclosed  was  made  by  Wililam  Cole  on  August  21,  and 
merely  confirmed  the  others. 
*"  Documentary  History,  VI,  29. 
*^York  Court  Records,  II,  244. 


Winter  Harbor  1665-1675  203 

able  man  at  Winter  Harbor.  He  always  came  off  second  best  in 
their  encounters,  either  financial  or  political.  There  were  several 
old  scores  to  be  paid  off  here  if  he  ever  had  the  chance.  Little 
did  he  suspect  then  that  the  day  could  ever  come  when  he  would 
be  glad  to  find  shelter  under  the  roof  of  his  old  antagonist. 

in 

In  order  to  strengthen  Pendleton's  hand  against  any  other 
die-hards  of  the  former  regime,  the  General  Court  of  Massachu- 
setts at  its  session  in  the  following  October  (1668)  invested  him 
"with  magistra[tical]  authority  out  of  Court  times,  to  act  as 
any  magistrate  may  doe,  &  to  keep  Courts  there  with  the  asso- 
ciats".  Richard  Waldron,  John  Cutt,  Elias  Stileman,  and  Capt. 
Charles  Frost  were  given  similar  powers  there  at  the  same  time 
so  that  the  people  might  be  "religiously  governed" — an  expres- 
sion which  must  have  carried  an  ominous  sound  to  many  a  York- 
shireman.  With  the  exception  of  Cutt,  these  same  men  were  re- 
appointed in  the  following  May,  and  Francis  Neale  and  Ezekiel 
Knight  were  added  to  this  group  whose  duty  it  was  to  bind  Maine 
more  firmly  to  the  Bay  Colony.^^ 

From  this  time  on  Pendleton  was  elected  regularly  as  an  As- 
sociate, serving  for  years  at  nearly  all  the  Courts  held  in  York 
County.  He  alternated  with  Waldron  in  presiding  over  those 
conducted  by  the  Associates  at  Saco,  Wells,  and  Kittery,  and 
attended  the  annual  County  Courts  at  York,  held  as  was  cus- 
tomary by  various  magistrates  sent  up  from  Boston — vigorous 
and  austere  men  well  calculated  to  put  the  fear  of  God  and  of 
Massachusetts  into  the  hearts  of  the  evil  doer  and  the  disloyal. 
Leverett  was  there  again  and  Thomas  Clark  and  Daniel  Gookin 
and  Major  Simon  Willard,  and  that  unfortunate  man  who  later 
was  to  achieve  an  undying  infamy,  William  Stoughton,  the  presid- 
ing magistrate  at  the  witchcraft  "trials"  in  Salem — he  too  held 
court  at  York.^^ 

As  might  be  expected,  the  newly  elected  Associates  did  not 
find  smooth  sailing  at  first.  While  the  special  magistrates  en- 
countered no  particular  difficulty  at  the  Court  they  held  in  York 
in  September  (1668),  yet  three  of  these  men,  Waldron,  Stileman 

*^  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  406,  425. 

"York  Court  Records,  II,  147,  157,  163,  179,  214,  383,  396,  397,  407,  419;  III, 

3,  21,  40,  52,  69,  77,  87,  103,  109,  124,  203,  241,  282,  306. 


204  Briak  Pendleton 

and  Pike,  were  from  outside  the  County  and  the  populace  was 
not  on  familiar  terms  with  them.  But  when  Pendleton  held  court 
at  Wells  the  next  month  with  his  York  County  associates,  Neale, 
Raines,  and  Knight,  the  going  was  pretty  rough.  As  a  result. 
Captains  John  Davis  and  Robert  Lockwood  were  bound  over 
"for  their  contemptuous  speeches  and  carriage  toward  this 
Court".  At  the  same  time,  William  Batten,  adjudged  guilty  of 
contempt  towards  the  authorities  at  Scarboro,  was  directed  to 
apologize  to  them.  These  four  Justices  also  had  an  unpleasant 
experience  at  the  Court  they  next  held  in  Saco  in  March,  1669, 
when  John  Bonighton,  the  wild  man  of  the  Saco,  sent  in  a  scur- 
rilous letter  stating  his  opinion  of  them.^^ 

Now  there  is  some  evidence  that  Massachusetts  was  not  al- 
together fortunate  in  two  of  the  members  of  this  Court.  There 
is  a  possibility  their  neighbors  knew  them  too  well.  Capt.  Raines 
does  not  seem  to  have  served  again  after  this  year.  He  drops  out 
of  sight  until  1675  when  the  York  County  Court  fined  him  fifty 
shillings  "for  presuming  to  act  the  part  of  a  midwife" !  He  seems 
to  have  been  a  man  of  diverse  talents.  Neale  lasted  longer  as  an 
Associate  but  fades  out  of  the  picture  in  1671  when  he  was  vari- 
ously accused  of  appropriating  a  £5  fine  which  Pendleton  had 
collected  and  turned  over  to  him,  changing  the  testimony  of  wit- 
nesses, playing  cards — and  worst  of  all,  failing  to  attend  church. 
For  this  minor  offense  at  cards  his  fellow  magistrates  fined  him 
five  shillings  but  no  action  was  taken  on  the  other  charges.^^ 
While  the  General  Court  had  invested  Knight  with  magistratical 
authority  in  1670  he  does  not  appear  to  have  attended  any  of 
the  sessions  that  year  nor  afterwards,  these  three  associates  be- 
ing replaced  by  three  of  the  ex-Royal  Justices,  John  WincoU, 
George  Munjoy,  and  Edward  Rishworth  who  evidently  had  been 
forgiven  for  their  temporary  change  of  allegiance. 

Outside  of  Phillips,  Robert  Jordan  was  the  only  one  of  the 
ousted  Justices  who  seems  to  have  taken  to  heart  the  return  of 
the  Bay  government  to  power.  At  the  County  Court  held  at  York 
in  July,  1669,  a  summons  was  sent  him  to  appear  before  Major 
Pendleton  and  Mr.  Francis  Neale  for  "refusing  to  conform  to 
the  laws  &  authority  of  this  jurisdiction,  opposing  &  threatening 
the  constable",  etc.   His  interview  with  them  had  a  quieting  effect, 

"  York  Court  Records,  II,  387. 
''Ibid.,  Ill,  298;  II,  240-1,  419. 


Winter  Harbor  1665-1676  205 

but  they  were  not  so  successful  in  dealing  with  Bonighton  who  was 
given  a  like  summons  at  the  same  timc."*^  A  year  later  he  was 
brought  before  the  Associates  Court  at  Wells  for  saying  "the  Bay 
men  are  rogues  and  Rebels  against  his  Majesty  and  that  he  hoped 
that  rogue  Majir  Leverett  would  hang.^^  Put  under  bond  to  an- 
swer for  this  to  the  next  Court  of  Assistants  he  failed  to  appear 
and  Pendleton  issued  a  warrant  for  his  arrest.^^ 

Bonighton  was  a  man  of  violent  temper,  much  given  to  the 
pastime  of  assault  and  battery  and  had  been  outlawed  once  before 
for  resisting  the  authority  of  Massachusetts.  As  he  had  formerly 
threatened  "to  kill  and  slay"  any  who  might  be  sent  to  apprehend 
him,  no  chances  were  taken.  No  less  than  fifteen  men  were  des- 
patched to  bring  him  before  the  man  of  Massachusetts,  and  he  was 
then  sent  down  to  Boston  under  heavy  guard.  Pendleton's  expense 
account,  amounting  to  £14  for  suppressing  this  trouble  maker  was 
paid  by  order  of  the  General  Court  upon  his  petition  in  the  fol- 
lowing year.*^  The  change  in  conditions  in  Maine  is  very  clearly 
indicated  by  the  difference  in  the  handling  of  this  affair  and  that 
of  Phillips  three  years  earlier. 

The  duty  of  governing  the  inhabitants  there  religiously  was 
not  overlooked  while  dealing  with  these  obstructionists.  On  6 
July,  1669,  the  County  Court  ordered  that  the  towns  not  sup- 
plied with  a  minister  should  either  remedy  this  deficiency  at  once 
or  else  pay  £50  annually  to  the  next  town  having  one.^*^  And  a 
year  later  when  the  Deputies  from  Falmouth  and  Scarborough  re- 
quested the  General  Court  to  permit  an  increase  in  the  number  of 
freemen  in  those  places  they  were  reminded  that  the  most  ex- 
pedient way  to  accomplish  this  would  be  to  provide  themselves 
"with  an  able,  pious,  &  orthodox  minister"  as  ordered  by  the 
County  Court.^^    Obviously  church  membership  in  Maine,  as  in 

**  York  Court  Records,  II,  163.  This  Jordan,  a  one  time  minister  of  the  Church 
of  England,  was  the  same  man  who  sold  Pendleton  his  Winter  Harbor  prop- 
erty ten  years  earlier.  He  had  been  in  trouble  with  the  Massachusetts  au- 
thorities before,  due  to  continuing  his  practice  of  baptizing  children. — Massa- 
chusetts Records,  IV,  pt.  1,  436. 
"Ibid.,  II,  188-9,  193. 
« Suffolk  Court  Files,  Docket  1041. 

*^  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  527.  The  petition  itself  is  no  longer  to  be 
found,  but  the  expense  account,  which  originally  was  attached  to  it  as  stated 
in  the  reference  noted,  is  still  to  be  seen  in  the  Massachusetts  Archives,  C, 
59,  59a. 

"'York  Court  Records,  II,  161. 
^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  part  2,  452. 


206  Beian  Pendleton 

Massachusetts,  was  to  be  the  prime  requisite  for  full  suffrage 
hereafter.^2 

These  years  must  have  been  the  happiest  in  Pendleton's  life. 
Largely  through  his  instrumentality  the  authority  of  the  Bay 
Colony  had  been  restored  in  the  Province  and  power  had  been 
given  him  to  enforce  its  rule.  He  went  about  the  good  work  with 
enthusiasm.  One  by  one  the  obstructionists  were  silenced.  Piety, 
or  at  least  the  semblance  thereof,  was  vigorously  enforced.  Re- 
ligious irregularities  were  suppressed.  Slackers  in  church  atten- 
dance were  haled  before  him  for  admonishment.  Men  living  apart 
from  their  wives  were  banished.  John  Bonighton's  sons  were 
hauled  over  the  coals  for  neglecting  military  drill.  And  three 
selectmen  of  Kittery  "being  Quakers"  were  dismissed  from  office 
and  the  town  was  ordered  to  replace  them  within  fourteen  days.^^ 

Quakers  had  formerly  been  unmolested  in  Maine  but  Pen- 
dleton could  not  stomach  them.  At  a  County  Court  he  attended 
at  York  on  the  4th  of  July,  1671,  three  of  the  sect  were  presented 
for  not  attending  public  worship.  Their  excuses  were  the  usual 
ones,  but  their  punishments  were  not  quite  as  severe  as  in  the  old 
days.  Moses  Collins,  for  disowning  "our  worship  as  false  and 
idolatrous"  received  twenty  lashes  at  the  post.  Sarah  Mills  for 
saying  "wee  worship  devills  &  not  god",  was  given  the  same  sen- 
tence, but  Mary  Mills  was  merely  admonished  for  stating  that 
"oure  ministers  are  not  ministers  of  god,"  but  "are  ministers  of  ye 
letter  &  not  of  the  spirit."^^ 

We  find  no  other  instances  of  such  acts  of  intolerance  in 
York  County  and  it  is  likely  that  public  sentiment  there  as  in 
Massachusetts  made  the  law  against  Quakers  become  a  dead  let- 
ter. Then  too,  Pendleton  may  have  sensed  that  a  continued  sever- 
ity towards  these  inoffensive  people  would  not  be  politic.  There 
were  limits  to  everything — and  there  was  still  a  large  element  in 
the  Province  who  could  not  be  forced  to  love  Massachusetts, 
strive  as  he  might.   Besides  he  was  not  naturally  a  hundred  per- 

*°  In  his  introduction  to  the  first  volume  of  the  published  Maine  Province  and 
Court  Records,  Mr.  Charles  T.  Libby  notes  that  while  Massachusetts  never 
violated  its  agreement  that  the  inhabitants  of  Maine  who  originally  submitted 
to  its  jurisdiction  should  have  full  suffrage  without  religious  or  property 
qualifications,  "additions  to  the  voting  list  were  confined  to  those  who  had 
been  admitted  to  church  membership,  'Puritanwise'  with  a  few  men  of  prop- 
erty." 

"  York  Court  Records,  II,  238,  201,  388,  203,  164, 
•*  Ibid.,  II,  239,  243. 


Winter  Haeboe  1665-1676  207 

cent  persecutor.  He  lacked  a  certain  venom  and  animosity.  Years 
before  he  had  stood  almost  alone  in  asking  mercy  for  Doctor 
Child,  and  now  he  showed  a  similar  leniency  when  his  old  enemy, 
Abraham  Corbet,  fell  into  his  hands. 

After  his  somewhat  hurried  departure  from  Portsmouth, 
Corbet  had  settled  in  Kittery  where  he  was  licensed  to  operate 
the  ferry  across  the  Piscataqua  in  1667.  His  old  habits  following 
him,  he  was  indicted  by  the  grand  jury  the  next  year  for  selling 
liquor  without  a  license.  Pendleton  presided  at  the  Court  which 
tried  the  case  of  this  Philistine,  this  issuer  of  illegal  warrants. 
What  a  chance  to  even  up  an  old  score,  had  he  been  so  disposed ! 
This  rascally  bootlegger  had  grossly  humiliated  him.  But  that 
was  four  years  ago — it  was  only  a  personal  matter  anyway, 
nothing  to  do  with  the  church  or  the  Commonwealth — the  religi- 
ous element  did  not  enter  as  it  had  done  in  the  Walton  feud.  Let 
bygones  be  bygones.  So  Corbet,  on  his  petition  for  clemency, 
escaped  with  merely  a  nominal  fine,  and  the  next  year — still  more 
coals  of  fire — was  granted  a  tavern  license — which  he  quickly 
abused,  being  an  incorrigible  offender.^^ 

If  Pendleton  showed  no  vindictiveness  towards  this  officious 
scamp  who  had  made  him  so  much  trouble  in  the  past,  he  seems 
to  have  been  equally  lenient  towards  Richard  Palmer  and  Grace 
Bush — widow  of  his  tenant  John  Bush  of  Cape  Porpoise — who 
were  complained  of  for  living  together  only  a  few  months  after 
her  husband's  death.  Although  Palmer  confessed  to  Pendleton 
and  gave  bond  "not  to  frequent  her  company  afterwards,  he  lying 
under  the  fame  of  having  a  wife  in  England",  he  could  not  resist 
the  widow's  fascinations  and  procured  an  unlawful  marriage  with 
her.  For  this  his  bond  was  declared  forfeited  and  they  were  each 
sentenced  to  pay  a  fine  of  £5  or  be  whipped.  Yet  only  two  years 
later  (1673)  when  Pendleton  bought  one  hundred  acres  of  upland 
at  Cape  Porpoise  we  find  the  tract  described  as  bounded  on  the 
Southeast  "by  land  of  Major  Brian  Pendleton  now  in  the  occupa- 
tion of  Richard  Palmer".  And  the  deed  is  witnessed  by  Richard 
and  by  "Grace  Palmer  his  wife".^®  They  were  still  living  there 
when  Pendleton  made  his  will  (1677)  but  why,  as  stated  in  that 
document,  Richard  Palmer's  wife  should  have  been  given  the  use 
of  this  property  during  her  lifetime  still  remains  a  mystery. 

»=  York  Court  Records,  II,  29,  391,  170,  174. 

"  Ibid.,  II,  413,  414,  423,  424;  York  Deeds,  II,  123,  139-140. 


208  Brian  Pendleton 

Pendleton  lived  a  busy  life  during  this  period — busier,  if 
anything,  than  what  he  had  known  at  Portsmouth — in  spite  of 
his  advancing  years.  Besides  his  magisterial  activities,  he  still 
continued  his  trading  operations  as  shown  by  various  entries  in 
the  Court  records,  where  he  occasionally  sues  for  debts  due  him 
"by  book",  forecloses  a  mortgage,  or  acts  as  administrator  on 
the  estate  of  some  debtor.  Then  too  he  gave  much  time  to  the 
affairs  of  Saco,  both  as  selectman  and  commissioner,  and  later 
as  Town  Clerk,  to  which  office  he  was  elected  in  November,  1672.^'^ 

Running  through  the  old  records  of  Saco  that  have  come 
down  to  us  through  many  vicissitudes,  we  note  how  carefully  the 
selectmen  raised  taxes  to  pay  the  salary  of  their  minister,  Pen- 
dleton's son-in-law,  how  a  bounty  of  thirty  shillings  was  offered 
for  every  wolf  killed,  and  how  on  the  occasion  of  one  of  the  peri- 
odic Indian  alarms,  Pendleton  was  directed  in  August  1671  to 
write  a  letter  to  the  Major  General  for  a  barrel  of  powder  and 
a  hundred  weight  of  swan  shot  and  pistol  bullets  which  the  Select- 
men undertook  jointly  to  pay  for  that  Fall  in  wheat,  fish,  or 
hides.  And  later  we  find  him  chosen  on  a  committee  for  seating 
the  people  in  the  meeting  house,  at  which  time  his  wife  was  given 
a  seat  in  the  front  row  to  accord  with  his  rank  and  dignity. ^^ 

So  the  years  went  by  him  at  Winter  Harbor,  where  as  a  con- 
temporary writer  says  "he  enjoyed  a  very  comfortable  seat  and 
habitation. '"^^  The  country  had  gradually  settled  down.  Order 
had  been  restored.  He  had  passed  the  allotted  three  score  years 
and  ten.  And  now  at  last  he  seemed  to  realize  it  was  time  to  take 
in  a  little  sail.  On  his  request  to  the  General  Court  he  was  re- 
lieved of  the  command  of  the  York  County  regiment  in  October, 
1672,^*^  but  otherwise  he  went  on  as  before.  He  ruled  vigorously, 
dispensed  justice,  chastened  the  evil  doer;  continued  to  traffic  in 
corn  and  fish  and  lumber,  saw  his  flocks  and  herds  increase,  ob- 
tained a  grant  of  one  hundred  acres  of  land  from  the  town  of 

"  Saco  Records  (transcripts),  I,  82.  At  this  same  time  it  was  voted  to  pro- 
cure a  new  book  for  keeping  the  records  "and  provide  former  book  with  alpha- 
bet &  pages  transcribed." — an  action  which  as  noted  in  Chapter  VII  has 
aroused  some  suspicion  that  the  history  of  the  early  records  of  Portsmouth 
may  have  been  repeated  at  Saco. 
"^Saco  Records  (transcripts),  I,  63,  68,  72,  75,  95. 

^"William  Hubbard,  History  of  the  Indian  Wars   (Drake's  Edition),  Vol.  2, 
p.  74. 

^Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  549.   Capt.  Richard  Waldron  was  appoint- 
ed to  this  command  not  long  afterwards. 


Winter  Harbor  1665-1675  209 

Cape  Porpoise,  became  the  heaviest  tax  payer  in  Saco,  began  to 
be  referred  to  as  "Gentleman"  instead  of  "Merchant"  when  pass- 
ing title  to  property.®^  It  almost  seemed  he  was  to  enjoy  that 
peaceful  and  contented  life  to  which  he  once  so  longingly  re- 
ferred— and  would  have  done  had  not  misfortunes  intervened. 

The  first  of  these  were  the  financial  difficulties  that  had  be- 
fallen his  son.  Like  a  good  father  he  went  to  Portsmouth  for 
the  final  reckoning  with  the  creditor  and  then  gave  James  a  fresh 
start  elsewhere,  as  already  noted.  But  not  at  Winter  Harbor. 
It  did  not  seem  the  right  place  for  him.  It  would  not  be  pleasant 
to  have  him  there,  day  after  day,  a  perpetual  reminder  of  his 
failure.  Nor  for  the  same  reason  would  such  renewed  intimacy 
be  pleasant  for  James  either.  So  off  he  packed  his  unfortunate 
son  to  what  was  then  supposed  to  be  in  the  bounds  of  Stonington, 
Connecticut,  where  he  flourished  for  a  time,  served  honorably  in 
the  Narragansett  War,  was  a  Justice  under  Gov.  Andros,  was 
called  "Gentleman"  for  some  few  years,  but  died  as  a  "yeoman", 
land  poor,  owning  a  thousand  acres  at  Watch  Hill — two  centu- 
ries too  soon. 

There  was  another  reason  why  father  and  son  separated. 
James  had  a  rival — his  sister  Mary's  boy,  Pendleton  Fletcher, 
son  of  the  Rev.  Seth.  A  deed  in  the  York  County  records  tells  the 
story.  On  May  25th,  1671,  Brian  Pendleton  of  Winter  Harbor, 
"for  the  Intyre  affection  that  I  beare  unto  my  Grandson  (now 
my  adopted  son)  Pendleton  fletcher",  granted  him  "all  my  necke 
of  land  on  which  I  now  live  .  .  .  with  .  .  .  Wood  &Gibbins  Island  .  .  . 
together  with  my  dwelling  house  and  other  housing  .  .  .  with  half 
the  stock  on  said  land."  Some  one  hundred  acres  on  Little  River 
were  also  included  in  this  generous  gift  which  was  to  become  effec- 
tive after  the  decease  of  both  Pendleton  and  his  wife.  Young 
Fletcher  being  then  a  minor,  Pendleton  stipulated  that  should 
he  die  before  the  lad  came  of  age.  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey  and  Rich- 
ard Martin  should  act  as  the  boy's  guardians.  And  he  further 
stipulated  that  if  Fletcher  died  without  issue  then  the  property 
was  "to  go  to  my  son  James. "®^  But  it  never  did.  Young  Fletcher 
grew  to  manhood,  married,  and  was  the  father  of  seven  children 

«^Saco  Records,  I,  70;  York  Deeds,  II,  151;  III,  93;  New  Hampshire  Province 
Deeds,  III,  96a-b.    Reason  for  the  grant  made  to  Pendleton  by  the  town  of 
Cape  Porpoise  [1  Sept.,  1672]   is  unknown,  the  early  town  records  being  no 
longer  in  existence. 
«»  York  Deeds,  II,  97. 


210  Brian  Pendleton 

who  have  numerous  descendants  in  York  County.  Three  Pendleton 
Fletchers  in  succession  occupied  the  old  homestead,  and  the  neck 
of  land  there  is  still  known  as  "Fletcher's  Neck". 

Giving  away  what  he  had  acquired  seemed  to  be  a  habit  with 
Pendleton.  While  he  still  had  some  considerable  properties  left 
in  Saco,  Wells,  and  Cape  Porpoise  yet  it  is  not  surprising  that 
after  his  seven  hundred  acre  gift  to  his  son  in  1674,  he  began  to 
look  about  for  more  real  estate  to  conquer.  His  next  attempt 
was  the  most  ambitious  of  all.  In  concert  with  Humphrey  War- 
ren and  several  others  he  petitioned  the  General  Court  in  May, 
1675,  for  a  large  tract  of  land  for  a  new  plantation  above  Saco, 
and  was  granted  "the  contents  of  six  miles  square".®^  While  a 
committee  was  appointed  at  the  same  time  to  lay  it  out,  the  pro- 
moters never  realized  their  ambitions.  Dark  years  were  just  ahead 
when  the  settlements  in  Maine  were  to  be  repeatedly  visited  by 
blood  and  fire  and  well  nigh  swept  out  of  existence.  It  was  no 
time  to  start  a  new  township.  The  long  expected  war  with  the  In- 
dians broke  out  that  very  summer. 

^  Massachusetts  Records,  V,  37. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

KING  PHILIP'S  WAR 
1675  -  1676 

Howl  ye;  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand;  it  shall  come  as  a  destruc- 
tion from  the  Almighty. 

Behold  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh,  cruel  both  with  wrath  and  fierce 
anger,  to  lay  the  land  desolate:  and  he  shall  destroy  the  sinners  thereof  out 
of  it. 

Their  children  also  shaU  be  dashed  to  pieces  before  their  eyes;  their 
houses  shall  be  spoiled,  and  their  wives  ravished. — Isaiah,  13:6,  9,  16. 

Since  the  death  of  Massasoit  in  1662,  that  old  "friend  of 
the  English",  the  relations  between  the  unconverted  Indians  and 
the  settlers  in  Massachusetts  had  become  increasingly  strained 
from  year  to  year.  Only  a  few  of  the  weaker  tribes  had  embraced 
the  white  man's  religion.  The  others  had  cynically  remained  aloof, 
not  being  able  to  reconcile  the  professions  and  the  practices  of 
the  Christian.  They  could  see  clearly  enough,  however,  that  they 
were  no  longer  an  economic  necessity  to  the  colonists  as  they 
had  been  in  earlier  days.  The  trade  in  beaver  had  declined.  Their 
"wampum",  once  legal  tender  among  the  settlers  was  now  almost 
worthless.  They  saw  the  lands  they  had  sold  to  the  English  for  a 
song  become  valuable  under  more  skillful  cultivation.  They  could 
not  help  but  feel  that  in  time  they  would  be  crowded  out. 

But  there  were  deeper  causes  than  the  economic  which  forced 
the  races  into  final  hostilities — fear  on  the  part  of  the  settler, 
hatred  on  the  part  of  the  native,  a  hatred  engendered  by  the 
harsh  treatment  he  had  received.  The  character  of  the  militant 
Puritan  lacks  a  certain  humanity,  particularly  sympathy  and 
understanding.  He  cannot  get  along  with  other  people.  They 
must  yield  to  him  or  be  suppressed.  Unable  to  force  their  reli- 
gion on  the  more  powerful  Indian  tribes,  the  authorities  endeav- 
ored to  make  the  savages  conform  to  their  laws,  interfered  in 
their  most  trivial  affairs,  punished  them  for  offenses  they  could 
not  understand  as  such,  and  humbled  the  pride  of  their  sachems 
time  and  again  by  summoning  them  to  Boston  or  Plymouth  to 
answer  charges  and  complaints. 

The  chief  victim  of  these  bedevilments  was  none  other  than 

211 


212  Bhiak  Pendleton 

Massasoit's  son,  Metacom,  or  Philip,  as  he  was  called  by  the 
settlers,  who  had  become  sachem  of  the  Wampanoags  after  the 
death  of  his  brother.  The  rulers  of  the  Plymouth  Colony  became 
obsessed  with  the  idea  he  was  plotting  against  them,  and  adopted 
a  high-handed  attitude  towards  the  unfortunate  chieftain.  De- 
spite a  warning  from  the  Bay  government  that  they  were  embark- 
ing on  a  course  which  might  lead  to  disaster  they  persisted  in 
their  arbitrary  and  oppressive  acts.  An  attempt  to  disarm  some 
of  Philip's  tribe  proved  abortive.  Finally  one  Sassamon,  a  "pray- 
ing Indian",  who  had  formerly  acted  as  interpreter  for  Philip, 
turned  informer  against  him — and  disappeared  shortly  after- 
wards. Some  months  later  when  the  ice  broke  up  on  Assawomp- 
sett  Pond  in  the  present  town  of  Lakeville  his  body  floated  to  the 
surface.  Three  of  Philip's  men  were  accused  of  the  murder  and 
executed  at  Plymouth.  This  was  the  last  straw.  In  June  of  that 
year  (1675)  the  Wamponoags  fell  upon  the  village  of  Swansea 
and  the  war  was  on.^ 

The  Indians  were  no  longer  armed  merely  with  bows  and 
arrows  and  with  tomahawks,  as  in  the  earlier  days.  A  new  genera- 
tion had  arisen  which  had  forgotten  the  vengeance  inflicted  upon 
the  Pequots  years  before.  The  colonists  no  longer  seemed  to  them 
a  race  of  superior  beings.  Familiarity  had  bred  a  certain  con- 
tempt. They  had  acquired  the  white  man's  weapons  and  skill  in 
their  use.  And  they  knew  a  system  of  warfare  unknown  to  their 
foes — a  war  of  stealthy  attacks  on  isolated  farm  houses  and  set- 
tlements, of  ambuscades,  massacres,  and  horrible  atrocities,  a  war 
of  extermination  that  spared  neither  age  nor  sex.  Only  once  did 
the  Indians  stand  up  against  the  Colonial  forces  in  a  pitched 
battle,  but  at  all  other  times  they  vanished  through  the  forests 
when  pursued,  turned  and  struck  from  ambush,  and  vanished 
again. 

The  frightful  character  of  King  Philip's  war,  as  it  came  to 
be  known  in  later  years,  made  a  profound  impression  upon  the 

^Of  contemporary  accounts.  Rev.  William  Hubbard's  Narrative  of  the  Trou- 
bles with  the  Indians  in  New  England,  Capt.  Benjamin  Church's  Entertaining 
History,  and  Rev.  Increase  Mather's  History  of  King  Philip's  War,  are  the 
best  known  general  works.  The  latter,  however,  has  but  little  to  say  about  the 
warfare  in  Maine.  Of  later  works,  S.  G.  Drake's  Old  Indian  Chronicle  gives 
much  information,  while  Bodge's  Soldiers  in  King  Philip's  War,  and  Ellis  and 
Morris's  History  are  most  thorough  and  authoritative.  This  chapter  is  drawn 
from  so  many  sources  that  authorities  are  not  cited  except  for  those  incidents 
which  affected  the  people  of  Winter  Harbor. 


King  Philip's  War  1G76-1676  213 

settlers.  The  ministers  saw  it  as  the  visitation  of  a  wrathful  God. 
The  General  Court  of  Massachusetts  enumerated  the  offenses 
that  had  incurred  the  Divine  displeasure  and  appointed  days  of 
humiliation  as  a  means  for  atonement.  Once  started,  the  war 
lasted  for  over  a  year  in  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  and 
spread  to  the  Eastern  settlements  where  it  continued  intermit- 
tently for  two  years  longer.  By  the  time  it  ended  the  hostile  In- 
dians in  southern  New  England  had  well  nigh  been  exterminated, 
but  at  a  terrible  cost  to  the  victors.  Of  their  adult  males  nearly 
one  in  eleven  had  been  killed,  and  scores  of  their  women  and  chil- 
dren slaughtered.  In  Massachusetts  sixteen  towns  had  been  de- 
stroyed, and  an  enormous  public  debt  incurred.  Maine  was  al- 
most depopulated.  No  help  came  from  the  mother  country  and 
none  was  asked.  No  help  came  from  the  other  colonies  except 
Connecticut  which  put  many  soldiers  into  the  field  as  well  as  her 
friendly  Indians.  The  New  Englanders  worked  out  their  own  sal- 
vation. Desperate,  appalled,  as  if  in  a  death  grapple  with  the 
very  demons  of  the  Pit,  they  rallied  their  forces  with  grim  deter- 
mination and  in  spite  of  one  disaster  after  another  in  the  first 
months  of  the  conflict,  they  hunted  the  Indians  down  without  mer- 
cy, with  relentless  vigor,  and  with  a  ferocity  equaled  only  by  that 
of  the  savages  themselves. 

When  news  of  the  long  expected  conflict  reached  York  Coun- 
ty a  feeble  attempt  was  made  to  disarm  some  of  the  Eastern  In- 
dians but  this  only  served  to  infuriate  them.  The  first  bloodshed 
occurred  early  in  September  when  one  Indian  was  killed  and  a  few 
of  the  English  were  wounded  in  a  skirmish  north  of  Casco.  On 
the  9th  of  the  month  the  savages  attacked  the  isolated  farm 
house  of  Thomas  Wakeley  on  the  Presumpscott  above  Falmouth. 
The  sound  of  guns  and  "a  great  smoke  up  tlie  river"  alarmed  the 
settlers  there  but  with  characteristic  unpreparedness  an  investi- 
gating expedition  could  not  be  organized  and  started  off  until 
the  following  day.  They  returned  in  a  few  hours  when  their  com- 
mander, Lieut.  George  Ingersoll,  sent  off  a  letter  to  Lieut.  An- 
drew "Auger"  (Alger)  of  Scarborough  acquainting  him  of  their 
discovery — Wakeley's  house  burned  down,  six  members  of  his 
family  killed  and  three  others  missing. 

The  details  were  gruesome  enough — "an  old  man  and  woman 
were  half  in  and  half e  out  of  ye  house,  neere  half e  burnt ;  their 
own  son  was  shot  through  ye  body  and  also  his  head  dashed  in 


214  Brian  Pendleton 

pieces ;  this  young  man's  wife  was  dead,  her  head  skinned,  she  was 
bigg  with  child.  Two  children  having  their  heads  dashed  in  pieces 
and  laid  by  one  another  with  their  bellys  to  the  ground  &  an  oake 
planke  laid  upon  their  backs." 

It  would  seem  that  Ingersoll's  "soldiers"  lost  any  desire  to 
continue  their  explorations.  "While  we  were  upon  this  discovery," 
his  letter  continues,  "We  saw  a  smoke  and  heard  two  guns  about 
one  mile  or  more  above  in  ye  same  River,  we  judge  there  be  a  com- 
pany of  Indians  but  how  many  we  know  not;  therefore  I  would 
in  treat  Major  Pembleton  &  yourself  to  send  to  me  each  of  you 
a  douzen  men.  I  shall  then  go  to  see  whether  it  be  according  as  we 
thinke  or  noe", — and  he  concludes  his  letter  by  asking  that  it  be 
posted  away  to  Major  "Walden". 

Bad  news  travels  fast.  Alger  received  these  tidings  on  the 
same  day  they  were  sent  him  as  evidenced  by  his  unsigned  en- 
dorsement thereon.  He  further  noted  the  letter  was  "to  be  posted 
to  Major  Pendleton",  and  the  latter  undoubtedly  forwarded  it 
to  Major  Waldron  at  Dover  who  in  turn  must  have  sent  it  down 
to  the  authorities  at  Boston  for  it  is  still  there  in  the  State  House 
archives.^  Whether  or  not  Ingersoll  received  the  help  he  asked 
for  is  a  question.  His  own  house  was  burned  not  long  afterwards 
and  his  son  killed  by  the  Indians,  while  both  Lieut.  Alger  and  his 
brother  fell  victims  to  the  savages  in  the  next  month. 

The  people  living  in  these  scattered  settlements  could  hardly 
protect  themselves,  let  alone  each  other.  Warned  by  the  fate  of 
the  Wakeley  family  those  living  in  Saco  abandoned  their  homes, 
"Most  of  them,"  according  to  Waldron,  "repairing  to  Major 
Pendleton's  but  Mr.  Bonighton  and  some  other  families  to  Major 
Phillip's."  Pendleton  had  already  sent  for  aid  but  none  forth- 
coming and  the  terrified  refugees  bringing  in  wild  reports,  he 
dashed  off  another  hurried  and  urgent  note  as  follows : 

"Sacoe  18  Sept.  1675 

Major  Waldren     Sir 

"Yrs  dated  16  Sep  to  Capt  Davis  came  hither  this 
day.  One  post  you  have  had  from  us  since  ye  burning  of 
one  house;  this  afternoon  five  more  are  consumed  and 
wee  expect  ye  loss  of  all  before  morning. 

^  Volume  LXVII,  253.  Text  of  the  full  letter  appears  in  Documentary  History, 
VI,  89-90. 


King  Philip's  War  1675-1676  215 

"Every  town  from  us  eastward,  viz.  Scarborough, 
Falmouth,  Kenibeck  have  100  Indians  apeece  upon  them, 
and  we  100  also.  As  we  wrott  before  we  want  amunition 
and  men.  Pray  post  away  therefore,  yt  if  ye  Lord 
please,  life  may  be  preserved,  although  we  are  like  to 
have  many  beggars.  No  more  but  rest  yours  and  ye 
Countrey's  Servent 

Brian  Pendleton" 

When  this  letter  arrived  at  Wells  on  the  following  night  it 
was  opened  by  Lieut.  John  Littlefield  who,  endorsing  the  urgency 
of  Pendleton's  request,  wrote  Waldron,  "You  cannot  expect  any 
assistance  from  us  we  being  too  weak  to  defend  ourselves,"  and 
earnestly  requested  "that  you  will  rase  ann  army  from  Pascata- 
qua  with  all  possible  speed  for  the  preservation  of  our  lives  and 
estates."  Littlefield  concluded  his  supplication  by  saying,  "With- 
out speedy  supply  you  must  expect  no  more  posts  from  us.  The 
enemy  snapt  twice  or  thrice  at  this  post  coming  from  Saco  but 
mist  fire  as  God  would  have  it."^ 

Relief  was  already  on  the  way.  At  the  first  alarm,  Waldron 
had  despatched  fifty  men  under  Captains  John  Davis  and  John 
Wincoll,*  and  they  arrived  at  Black  Point  on  September  16th. 
Upon  receiving  further  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  depredations 
he  raised  another  force  immediately,  accompanying  it  to  the  scene 
of  action  in  order  to  get  a  first  hand  knowledge  of  the  situation. 
It  was  serious  enough.  On  all  sides  the  Indians  were  pillaging  and 
burning.  Robert  Nichols  and  his  wife  had  been  killed  in  Scar- 
borough. At  the  falls  of  the  Saco  Major  Phillips's  garrison 
house  had  been  attacked  on  September  18th,  himself  and  two  other 

*  Increase  Mather's  History  of  King  Philip's  War,  Drake's  Edition  (1862), 
footnote,  p.  87.  Drake  states  the  originals  of  these  letters  were  in  his  posses- 
sion, but  what  became  of  them  is  unknown.  They  are  not  listed  in  the  auction 
sale  catalogue  of  his  books  and  manuscripts,  nor  are  they  now  to  be  found  in 
the  Massachusetts  Archives. 

*Capt.  John  Wincoll  was  first  of  Watertown  where  he  was  freeman  in  1646 
but  soon  removed  to  Kittery  from  which  town  he  was  a  Deputy  to  the  General 
Court  at  Boston  in  1653-55,  Removing  to  that  part  of  the  town  called  Newige- 
wannacke  (now  South  Berwick)  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  Justices  for  the 
Province  of  Maine  by  the  Royal  Commissioners  in  1665,  but  being  well  affected 
towards  Massachusetts,  was  again  Deputy  from  Kittery  in  1675-'77  and  '78. 
He  was  also  an  Associate  Justice  for  the  York  County  Court  from  1670-1679, 
and  in  1680  became  one  of  the  Councilors  of  the  Province.  During  the  Indian 
War  while  he  was  on  active  duty,  the  savages  destroyed  his  house  and  barn. 
He  was  injured  by  a  fall  from  his  horse  and  died  22  Oct.,  1694. 

Capt.  John  Davis  was  probably  of  York  and,  if  so,  was  the  same  man 
who  later  became  Deputy  President  of  the  Province  after  Pendleton's  death. 


216  Brian  Pendleton 

men  wounded,  and  though  the  enemy  was  driven  off  a  shortage  of 
ammunition  compelled  him  to  withdraw  to  Winter  Harbor.  Here 
Waldron  found  him  staying  with  Major  Pendleton,  these  two 
old  enemies  evidently  having  laid  aside  their  differences  in  the 
common  danger. 

Reporting  by  letter  to  Major  General  Denison  immediately 
upon  his  return  to  Dover,  September  25th,  Waldron  gives  a  lively 
description  of  this  attack  on  Phillips's  house,^  and  there  is  also 
a  vivid  account  of  it  in  Hubbard's  History,^  both  being  in  sub- 
stantial agreement.  We  see  the  deserted  houses  across  the  river, 
Bonighton's  among  them,  go  up  in  flames ;  we  see  the  Indians 
crossing  the  river  in  canoes  and  then  disappearing  into  the  bushes 
within  gunshot  of  the  Major's  house.  Here  they  remained  con- 
cealed during  the  afternoon,  creeping  round  "deckt  with  ffearnes 
&  boughs,"  and  exchanging  shots  with  the  watchful  garrison. 
Unable  to  draw  the  English  out  of  doors  by  their  taunts  or  by 
setting  fire  to  the  out-buildings,  the  Indians  prepared  another 
expedient.  All  during  the  night,  between  the  frequent  alarms,  the 
beseiged  could  hear  their  enemies  hammering  away  at  some  con- 
trivance and  anxiously  "conceived  they  were  preparing  some  En- 
gin  wherewith  to  burn  the  house". 

Their  dark  forebodings  were  realized:  "About  four  or  five 
o'clock  in  the  morning  at  the  setting  of  the  moon,  the  Major  was 
called  by  one  of  his  men  to  look  out,  when  he  saw  [approaching] 
a  Cart  with  four  wheels  having  a  Barricade  built  in  the  Forepart 
to  keep  off  shot,  and  filled  with  combustible  matter.  Birch  rinds, 
pitchwood,  turpentine.  Straw,  Powder  and  Poles  twenty  foot 
long". 

The  garrison  immediately  opened  a  heavy  fire  upon  this  In- 
dian "tank"  and  it  was  found  later  some  of  the  shot  went  through. 
Nevertheless  the  savages  kept  pushing  their  invention  along  to- 
ward the  house  until  most  fortunately  for  the  defenders  the 
wheels  sank  in  some  wet  ground.  In  trying  to  get  the  contrivance 
started  again  the  Indians  exposed  themselves  and  those  not  shot 
were  put  to  flight.  They  continued,  however,  firing  upon  the  gar- 
rison until  about  nine  o'clock  that  Sunday  morning  (Sept.  19th), 

^  Massachusetts   Archives,   LXVII,   266.     Published   in  Documentary   History, 

VI,  93-96. 

"  (Drake's  Edition),  Vol.  II,  pp.  105-109. 


Kino  Philip's  War  1675-1676  217 

when  they  made  off.  A  few  days  later  Phillips  abandoned  his 
house — which  was  burned  within  two  weeks — and  after  staying  a 
while  with  Pendleton  he  returned  to  Boston,  remaining  there  until 
his  death  in  1683. 

Waldron  had  recommended  that  the  scattered  inhabitants 
in  the  province  be  concentrated  in  the  different  towns  and  he  left 
about  sixty  soldiers  to  garrison  Falmouth,  Saco  and  Scarbor- 
ough. Capt.  Wincoll  evidently  returned  home  with  the  others, 
for  we  next  hear  of  him  in  October  as  leading  a  band  of  sixteen 
men  who  went  to  Winter  Harbor  by  water.  They  had  hardly  ar- 
rived there  when  news  came  of  more  attacks  in  Scarborough  dur- 
ing which  the  Alger  brothers  were  killed.  Starting  for  the  scene 
of  action  on  the  13th,  Wincoll  and  his  little  band  had  not  marched 
more  than  a  few  miles  along  the  shore  before  they  fell  into  an 
ambuscade.  Although  they  finally  succeeded  in  beating  off  the 
savages  and  reaching  Black  Point,  nine  men  from  Saco  with  two 
others  who  had  hurried  to  their  assistance  were  also  trapped  and 
slain  to  a  man.^  While  the  name  of  only  one  of  these  victims,  that 
of  Thomas  Rogers,  has  come  down  to  us,  there  is  a  very  strong 
probability  that  another  to  fall  in  this  battle  was  William  Brit- 
ton — or  Brettun — who  in  all  likelihood  would  have  been  the  first 
husband  of  Pendleton's  granddaughter,  Mary,  had  not  some  ca- 
lamity intervened.* 

News  of  this  latest  disaster  evidently  reached  Boston 
promptly.  Toward  the  end  of  the  October  session  of  the  General 
Court  it  was  voted  "Upon  the  sad  intelligence  from  Saco,  &  the 
great  danger  of  all  those  parts,  it  is  ordered  that  there  be  50 
souldiers  immediately  from  Boston  &  Charls  Towne  sent  away  in 
some  vessel  or  vessels  for  the  releife  of  those  parts  &  that  they 

''Hubbard's  History  (Drake's  Edition),  II,  51,  125-127.  Ellis  and  Morris 
[p.  296]  say  Wincoll  was  attacked  when  he  landed  at  Winter  Harbor,  but  the 
actual  scene  of  this  encounter  seems  to  have  been  further  East.  The  rescuing 
party  from  Saco  were  all  killed  across  from  Black  Point,  not  far  from  what  is 
now  Old  Orchard. 

*  William  Britton  witnessed  a  deed  made  by  William  Phillips  at  Saco  in  June, 
1674.  In  the  following  winter  he  acknowledged  this  before  Pendleton.  No  fur- 
ther reference  to  him  has  ever  been  found.  He  was  probably  father  of  Mary 
Pendleton's  son  who  was  named  in  the  will  of  her  husband,  Joseph  Cross,  as 
"my  wife's  son,  Willi:  Breeden".  In  her  own  will  she  called  him  William 
Brettun.  Many  of  his  descendants  spell  the  name  Britton. — See  Brian  Pendle- 
ton and  His  Descendants,  pp.  40-41. 


218  BaiAK  Pendleton 

be  under  the  command  of  Leiftenn*  Scottaway",^  a  well  inten- 
tioned  act  which  brought  about  a  train  of  unpleasant  conse- 
quences. 

Other  news  from  the  East  had  also  reached  the  Court  this 
month.  On  the  sixteenth  the  Governor  and  Council  directed  "Ma- 
jor Brian  Pendleton,  Mr.  Humphrey  Warren,  Lt.  Joshua  Scot- 
tow  &  Mr.  George  Munjoy,"  to  inquire  into  a  complaint  regarding 
Lt,  Thomas  Gardner  of  Pemaquid  trading  with  the  French  and 
Indians,  in  spite  of  the  existing  state  of  war,  and  to  send  him 
down  to  Boston  for  trial  in  case  they  deemed  him  guilty.^**  It  is 
doubtful  if  the  magistrates  addressed  could  have  paid  any  atten- 
tion to  this  order  for  some  time,  if  ever,  they  having  enough 
trouble  at  home  without  looking  for  more  abroad.  In  any  event 
no  action  against  Gardner  was  to  be  necessary.  In  the  next  year 
we  find  him  a  refugee  upon  the  island  of  Monhegan,  where  with 
the  other  fugitives  from  Pemaquid  he  petitioned  the  Massachu- 
setts for  relief.^^  Seemingly  his  trading  operations  had  become 
too  dangerous  to  be  continued. 

During  the  rest  of  October  the  savages  continued  their  depre- 
dations. Nearly  all  the  houses  in  Saco  above  Winter  Harbor  were 
destroyed  and  by  December  some  fifty  English  had  been  killed  in 
the  Province.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  this  time  of  storm  and  stress 
Pendleton  seems  to  have  remained  serenely  indifferent  to  any  dan- 
ger in  his  own  situation.  Just  as  if  nothing  unusual  was  happen- 
ing round  about,  and  in  spite  of  the  reek  in  his  nostrils  from  the 
smoke  of  burning  houses  up  the  river,  he  bought  two  more  parcels 

^Massachusetts  Records,  V,  67.  This  Lieut.  Joshua  Scottow — or  Scottaway  as 
sometimes  spelled — a  man  of  marked  peculiarities,  was  an  early  settler  in  Bos- 
ton where  he  was  a  prominent  merchant,  a  selectman  from  1657  to  1667,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Military  Company,  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Old  South  Church. 
He  removed  to  Black  Point,  Maine,  in  1670,  and  continued  his  trading  opera- 
tions. He  became  one  of  the  Councillors  of  the  Province  in  1680.  Late  in  life 
he  returned  to  Boston  where  he  published  two  well  known  tracts,  one  of  which, 
"A  Narrative  of  the  Planting  of  Massachusetts  Bay",  has  been  reprinted  in 
4  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  IV,  279-330. 

Scottow  died  early  in  1698  aged  83  years.  His  gravestone,  oddly  enough, 
as  if  endowed  with  his  own  eccentricities,  was  discovered  a  century  and  a  half 
later  in  the  tower  of  the  Old  South  Church,  and  is  now  set  in  the  outer  wall  of 
that  Society's  present  Meeting  House  on  Boylston  Street.  A  memoir  of  him 
appears  in  Vol.  10  of  the  publications  of  the  Colonial  Society  of  Massachusetts. 

1"  Massachusetts  Archives  LXVIII,  20;   (Documentary  History,  VI,  96). 

"^Documentary  History,  VI,  118,  119. 


Kino  Philip's  War  1675-1676  219 

of  land  in  Saco  on  October  8th.^^  There  is  something  pecuKarly 
striking  in  this  procedure.  Too  old  to  go  on  the  Indian  hunts  him- 
self, he  took  the  only  means  he  could  to  show  his  fellow  townsmen 
that  he  was  going  to  stick  it  out.  It  was  as  if  he  had  said — "This 
trouble  will  be  over  soon.  Don't  be  afraid.  Land  is  permanent. 
Houses  may  burn  down  at  any  time — the  wind  may  blow  them 
away.  They  can  be  rebuilt.  Peace  will  come  again  sooner  or  later. 
Let  the  heathen  rage.  What  does  it  matter  what  happens  to  us.? 
The  land  will  be  left  for  our  children  or  our  children's  children  in 
the  days  that  are  to  come" — and  he  undoubtedly  urged  the  falter- 
ing to  "have  faith  in  Massachusetts". 

Pendleton's  confidence  was  soon  justified.  The  first  contingent 
of  soldiers  from  Boston,  commanded  by  Sergt.  Tippen,  arrived  at 
Black  Point  on  October  25th  and  these  were  rapidly  followed  by 
others.  Scottow's  Journal  gives  a  terse  account  of  the  events  that 
ensued  up  to  the  time  he  went  to  Boston  in  January  [1676].^* 
The  soldiers  were  kept  busy  guarding  houses,  bringing  in  the  har- 
vest, rounding  up  cattle,  and  hunting  Indians — who  seldom  showed 
themselves.  During  this  time  Pendleton  had  more  or  less  corre- 
spondence with  Scottow,  whose  Journal  notes:  "Oct.  25,  received 
a  Itre  from  Majr  Pendleton  and  answered  it  (at  once)".  "Oct. 
31st  Answered  Maj  Pendleton's  Itre  No,  3" — but  the  subject  mat- 
ter of  these  letters  is  unknown.  It  is  fair  to  assume,  however,  that 
the  old  Major  was  asking  for  his  share  of  the  Boston  troops — in 
fact  we  have  evidence  of  that — but  he  didn't  get  any  until  Wal- 
dron  so  directed.  On  November  20th  Scottow  wrote,  "I  received 
orders  from  Maj""  Waldron  to  fit  out  Lieut  Ingersoll  to  Maj'* 
Pendleton  which  I  wrote  to  him  I  was  upon  doing." 

Ingersoll  appeared  at  Black  Point  with  a  dozen  men  a  few 
days  later,  had  his  force  increased  to  sixty,  ranged  the  woods  for 
a  day  and  a  night,  then  dismissed  the  Boston  soldiers  and  returned 
to  Casco  without  seeing  Winter  Harbor  at  all.    A  day  or  two 

"  York  Deeds,  VIII,  88;  X,  118.  Simon  Booth  was  one  seller,  Giles  Hubin  the 
other.  These  deeds  were  not  recorded  for  many  years.  On  the  one  from  Booth 
there  is  a  memorandum  dated  22  June,  1681,  whereby  Pendleton's  widow  and 
his  son  "do  resign  up  their  right  in  this  deed  ,  .  .  unto  Pendleton  Fletcher  as  a 
gift  by  what  we  understand  was  given  unto  him  by  his  grandfather,  Brian 
Pendleton". 

"  A  transcript  of  his  Journal  covering  this  period  was  made  by  Scottow — 
probably  for  use  in  his  lawsuit  a  year  or  so  later — and  is  now  in  the  possession 
of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society.  Abstracts  noted  are  from  the  Maine 
Historical  Society  Collections,  III,  117,  120,  121,  122. 


220  Brian  Pendleton 

later  he  was  again  at  Black  Point  demanding  forty-five  men  to  go 
to  his  own  town  where  the  Indians  had  done  some  mischief  during 
his  absence.  "I  told  him",  says  Scottow,  "I  had  victualled  them 
(i.e.  the  former  expeditionary  force)  for  four  or  five  days  march 
and  he  had  dismisst  them  upon  a  day's  service,  and  the  inhabitants 
were  scattered  every  man  to  his  own  business ;  and  how  he  had 
Maj.  Pendleton's  relief  and  promising  to  go  himself  with  his  whole 
company  to  Saco,  whereupon  he  was  satisfied  with  20  men,  and  I 
made  up  Maj.  Pendleton's  relief  20  which  were  dispatched  with 
all  speed" — only  a  week  late. 

Ingersoll's  stay  at  Winter  Harbor  could  have  been  only 
transitory  for  in  December  Scottow  notes,  "There  was  an  order 
from  the  Gov.  according  to  the  Council's  determination  that  10 
of  these  [Boston]  soldiers  should  be  sent  to  Major  Pendleton  but 
he  would  not  accept  of  them."  Perhaps  he  felt  they  would  not  be 
needed  any  longer.  An  early  and  severe  winter  had  come  down 
upon  the  Province.  The  Indians  who  had  made  but  scant  provision 
against  this  while  on  the  war-path  were  glad  to  arrange  an  armis- 
tice with  Major  Waldron  in  January.  Nearly  all  the  garrison  at 
Black  Point  returned  to  Boston,  and  journalist  Scottow  went  with 
them.  Silence  follows.  There  is  no  word  from  Winter  Harbor.  The 
snow  lies  deep  on  the  burned  houses  and  the  newly  made  graves. 

When  Spring  came  Scottow  returned  to  Black  Point  and 
after  employing  the  remaining  soldiers  there  for  about  a  month 
in  strengthening  his  post  he  dismissed  them  and  they  marched 
home.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  in  that  district  felt  that  Scottow 
had  used  these  soldiers  solely  for  his  own  benefit,  and  when  he  pre- 
sented his  accounts  for  their  maintenance  the  storm  broke  over  his 
head.  A  peace  with  the  savages  had  been  patched  up  in  July  and 
the  Yorkshire  settlers  could  give  full  attention  to  the  war  upon 
the  Captain  of  Black  Point.  The  County  auditors,  Nicholas  Shap- 
leigh,  Edward  Rishworth,  and  Samuel  Wheelwright,  because  of 
complaints  sent  them  "by  Major  Pendleton,  Mr.  Munjoy  &  Mr. 
Foxwell  &  others  signifying  their  dissatisfaction  relating  to  those 
aforesaid  accounts",  held  up  all  payments  to  Scottow  and  re- 
ferred the  case  to  the  General  Court  for  advise.  A  hearing  was  set 
for  October  when  all  parties  concerned  might  appear.^^ 

The  first  gun  against  Scottow  seems  to  have  been  fired  by 

"  Massachusetts  Records,  V,  102-3. 


fj  ^- 


4^^iif^^^ 


Letter   ok   Brian   Pexdeetox  and  George  MrxjoY 

TO     THE    AlDITOUS    OK     YoUK     CoTNTY,     MaIXE. 


King  Philip's  Wah  1675-1G76  221 

Pendleton  and  Munjoy  who  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  audi- 
tors, dated  at  "Winter  Harbour  July  y*^  12th  1676": 
"Honored  friends, 

Having  this  day  had  some  conference  with  Mr. 
Munjoy  relating  to  the  affairs  of  our  late  ruined  town- 
ship of  Saco,  in  these  our  suffering  times,  think  good 
thus  to  acquaint  you,  Mr,  Munjoy  as  well  as  myself  hath 
been  very  sensible  how  matters  here  have  been  carried  & 
much  affected  therewith  in  so  much  that  we  desire  you 
will  please  to  consider  in  the  first  place,  we  had  no  hand 
in  sending  for  the  soldiers  to  Black  Point,  whereby  the 
chief  charge  is  brought  upon  us  and  the  County,  neither 
was  the  soldiers  as  intended  by  the  order  of  the  Governor 
&  Council  improved  for  the  advantage  of  our  places,  but 
wholly  employed  for  the  securing  of  Black  Point  and  in 
Scottows  interest  as  will  be  apparent  more  at  large  to 
you  this  week  ensuing,  by  sundry  testimony  whereby  we 
humbly  conceive  the  charge  ought  to  be  levied  upon  the 
person  &  place  that  hath  been  accomodated  with  the 
great  advantage  of  the  afore-mentioned  relief,  which  we 
doubt  not  but  you  will  at  our  requests  and  our  behalfs 
take  into  your  most  serious  consideration,  weighing  of  it 
with  a  great  deal  of  curiosity  in  hopes  whereof  we  [re- 
main] 

Your  f [aithful]  friends  [to]  serve  you 

Brian  Pendleton 
George  Munjoy"  ^° 
During  the  next  week  or  so  Pendleton  was  fairly  busy  in 
gathering  the  "testimonies"  he  had  promised.    Some  of  these  affi- 
davits sworn  to  before  him  or  Henry  Jocelyn  are  still  to  be  found 
in  the  Suffolk  Court  files.   Others  were  in  the  possession  of  Samuel 

^The  original  of  this  letter,  which  has  never  been  published  hitherto,  is  in  the 
possession  of  the  Maine  Historical  Society  at  Portland.  It  is  reproduced  on 
the  opposite  page.  A  copy  of  it  appears  in  the  Suffolk  Court  files — Docket 
1828.  George  Munjoy  of  Falmouth  was  one  of  the  Justices  appointed  by  the 
Royal  Commissioners  in  1665  for  the  Province  of  Maine,  but  he  seems  to  have 
been  well  disposed  toward  the  Bay  Colony.  In  1671  he  was  appointed  to  deter- 
mine the  eastern  extent  of  its  northern  boundary — left  stranded  some  years 
earlier  on  Clapboard  Island — and  from  his  report  some  few  settlements  fur- 
ther East  on  the  coast  of  Maine  were  gathered  in.  These  were  promptly  organ- 
ized as  the  County  of  Devon.  Munjoy's  suggestion  that  more  could  be  added 
if  the  source  of  the  Merrimac  was  determined  as  20'  further  north  must  have 
convinced  the  authorities  at  Boston  that  his  heart  was  in  the  right  place. 
(Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  519;  V,  16.)  His  elevation  to  the  bench  of 
York  County  took  place  the  following  year,  and  he  served  as  an  Associate 
Justice  for  several  years  thereafter. 


222  Brian  Pendleton 

G.  Drake  and  abstracts  of  them  appear  in  his  edition  of  Hub- 
bard's Narrative  as  well  as  in  Bodge's  Soldiers  in  King  Philip's 
War}^  Scottow  evidently  had  plenty  of  enemies,  and  as  he  was 
a  comparatively  new  comer  there  it  is  possible  as  Bodge  suggests 
"that  jealousy  and  envy  largely  induced  the  bitter  hostility  and 
the  very  serious  charges  that  were  preferred  against  him."  ^^ 

These  charges  may  have  been  true  in  part  but  some  of  them 
were  exaggerated.  Patrick  Denmarke  deposed  "that  to  his  knowl- 
edge Major  Pendleton  sent  sever  all  times  to  Mr.  Scottow  for 
some  part  or  supply  of  those  soldiers  who  came  from  Boston  but 
they  could  not  be  had".  Ralph  Alanson  and  Joseph  Oliver  swore 
that  Scottow  had  refused  to  send  help  to  the  Saco  men  when  they 
were  ambushed  "on  the  Saco  Sands",  and  that  he  had  used  the 
soldiers  for  the  improvement  of  his  garrison,^^  more  specifically, 
as  alleged  by  others,  in  "removing  of  a  great  barn,  paving  before 
his  house,  and  cutting  of  Palisado  stuff  for  a  pretended  fortifica- 
tion where  there  is  no  occasion  nor  need."  And  particularly  gall- 
ing to  some  of  the  local  traders  not  similarly  favored,  it  was 
charged  that  by  Scottow's  use  of  these  soldiers  "his  fishermen 
were  thereby  capacitated  to  keep  at  sea  for  the  whole  season" — 
and  they  could  not  see  why  he  should  profit  at  their  expense. 

Besides  these  declarations,  Pendleton's  friend,  Humphrey 
Warren,  the  Boston  merchant,  testified  on  20  July,  1676,  that 
"coming  in  from  Kennebec  in  November,  1675  ...  I  sent  for  Ste- 
phen Sargent,  who  I  was  told  was  at  Black  Point,  and  he  told  me 
that  Major  Pendleton  and  Mr.  Fletcher  had  twice  sent  to  Mr 
Scottow  for  help  and  been  refused.  I  went  to  Black  Point  and 
found  Mr  Scottow  urging  30  or  40  men  to  roll  his  barn  to  the  top 
of  the  hill."  ^« 

Scottow  was  able  to  make  out  a  good  case  for  himself  when 
he  appeared  before  the  General  Court  in  October.  Henry  Wil- 
liams testified  that  at  the  time  the  nine  men  of  Saco  besides  some 
of  Capt.  WincolPs  were  killed  on  Saco  Sands,  Scottow  had  no 
soldiers  from  Boston,  as  they  did  not  arrive  until  a  week  later — 
a  statement  which  is  approximately  correct.    Another  deponent 

"  Hubbard,  Vol.  II,  pp.  126-7,  footnotes;  Bodge  (3rd  Edition),  pp.  332-333.  Two 

of  these  depositions  made  before  Pendleton  were  sold  in  the  auction  sale  of 

Drake's  collections. 

'"Soldiers  in  King  Philip's  War,  p.  332. 

"  Suffolk  Court  Files,  Docket  1526. 

"  Libby's  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  Maine  and  New  Hampshire,  I,  23-24. 


King  Philip's  Wah  1676-1G76  223 

swore  that  Scottow  had  sent  twenty  men  to  Wincoll's  relief  by 
land,  and  a  group  of  the  inhabitants  of  Scarborough  bore  witness 
to  his  good  conduct  and  general  helpfulness  in  their  time  of  stress. 
The  Court  having  heard  both  sides  decided  in  Scottow's  favor, 
stating  that  he  had  "faithfully  discharged  his  trust",  and  allow- 
ing him  his  costs  and  damages.  Scottow  having  lodged  a  suit 
against  the  County  auditors  for  defaming  his  character  appealed 
his  case  to  the  Court  of  Assistants  but  was  not  able  to  recover 
anything  further.^® 

Before  this  affair  of  Scottow's  had  come  to  a  hearing,  the 
Indians  had  broken  loose  again.  They  had  been  quiet  enough  dur- 
ing the  winter  and  spring  and  the  settlers  in  Yorkshire  were  left 
alone  to  pursue  their  usual  affairs.  Pendleton,  again  elected  an 
Associate  Justice  for  the  County  in  March  [1676],  attended  the 
Court  held  at  Wells  in  the  following  month.  Here,  business  as 
usual,  Capt.  John  Davis  engaged  to  pay  him  4500  feet  in  mer- 
chantable boards  on  behalf  of  Thomas  Wills,  a  contract  which 
Pendleton  acknowledged  had  been  satisfied  when  he  attended  the 
next  Court  which  opened  there  on  July  4th.^^  And  it  was  at  this 
time  Pendleton  signed — and  perhaps  originated — a  petition  to  the 
General  Court  of  Massachusetts  praying  that  his  old  associate. 
Major  Richard  Waldron,  should  be  restored  to  magistratical  au- 
thority in  the  County  of  York.^^  This  was  the  last  time  he  was  to 
serve  as  a  Justice  for  several  years,  and  his  little  trading  opera- 
tions were  also  to  be  suspended.  The  treaty  of  peace  made  with 
the  Indians  that  same  month  proved  to  be  only  a  scrap  of  paper. 
Barely  thirty  days  later  they  descended  upon  Falmouth  and  the 
war  was  on  once  more. 

Writing  from  "Winter  Harbor  at  night  the  13  of  August, 
1676",  Pendleton  hurried  off  the  following  report,  superscribed 
"ffor  the  Honored  Govenor  and  Counsell  for  the  Matacusets  at 
Boston  with  all  speed" — 

"Honored  Governor 

together  with  the  Counsell, 

I  am  sorry  my  pen  must  be  the  messenger  of  soe 

greate  a  Tragedy e.    On  the  11th  of  this  instant  wee 

^Suffolk  Court  Files,  Docket  1828;  Massachtisetts  Records,  V,  121;  Documen- 
tary History,  VI,  114-16;  Bodge,  pp.  333-4. 
^  York  Court  Records,  III,  124-5,  127-8. 

**Libby's  Genealogical  Dictionary  of  Maine  and  New  Hampshire,  I,  6.  This 
petition  was  granted  10  Aug.,  1676. — Massachusetts  Records,  V,  101. 


224  Brian  Pendletok 

heard  of  many  killed  of  our  naybors  in  falmouth  or 
Casco-Bay:  and  on  the  12th  instant  Mr.  Joslin  sent  me 
a  briefe  letter  written  from  under  the  hands  of  Mr. 
Burras  the  minister,  Hee  gives  an  acct  of  32  killed  and 
carried  away  by  the  Indians :  himselfe  escaped  to  an  Is- 
land, but  I  hope  Black  poynt  men  have  fetched  him  of 
by  this  time.  10  men  6  women  and  16  children.  Anthony 
a[n]d  Thomas  B[r]a[c]ket  and  Mr  Munjoy  his  sonne 
onely  are  named.  I  had  not  time  to  coppye  the  letter, 
persons  beinge  to  goe  post  to  Major  Walden;  but  I  hope 
he  hath  before  this  sent  the  originall  to  you.  How  soon 
it  will  be  our  portion  wee  know  not.  The  Lord  in  mercy 
fit  us  for  death  and  direct  the  harts  and  hands  to  ackt 
and  doe  wt.  is  needfull  in  such  a  time  of  distress  as  this. 
Thus  in  haste  I  commit  you  to  Pvdounce  of  our  Lord 
God  and  desire  Your  prayers  also  for  us.  Yours  in  all 
humility  to  sarve  in 

the  Lord, 

Brian  Pendleton. "^^ 

The  fear  that  now  hung  over  the  Province  is  reflected  by  an 
item  in  the  Saco  records  made  the  following  day  when  at  a  town 
meeting  Major  Pendleton  was  chosen  to  prepare  the  tax  list  "if 
trouble  do  not  prevent."  ^'*  This  was  the  last  entry  made  in  that 
town  book  for  four  years.  A  few  days  after  the  disaster  at  Fal- 
mouth, the  Indians  attacked  the  settlements  on  the  Kennebec, 
killed  or  captured  fifty-three  of  the  English  and  plundered  their 
trading  posts.  Early  in  September  the  authorities  at  Boston  sent 
a  relief  expedition  to  Yorkshire  but  they  could  not  get  into  con- 
tact with  the  savages  although  the  work  of  destruction  still  went 
on — almost  at  times  seeming  to  follow  their  line  of  march.  Drawn 
back  from  Casco  to  Wells  by  an  attack  on  that  place.  Captain 

^The  original  of  this  letter  is  no  longer  to  be  found  in  the  Massachusetts 
Archives  and  its  present  whereabouts  is  unknown.  In  1831  it  was  in  the  hands 
of  John  Farmer,  the  historian,  as  stated  by  Willis  when  publishing  it  for  the 
first  time  in  his  History  of  Portland,  Maine  (1833)  [Vol.  I,  145].  It  has  since 
appeared  in  the  Register,  I,  53.  The  Rev.  George  Burroughs,  mentioned  in  Pen- 
dleton's letter,  fell  a  victim  to  man's  credulity  in  the  witchcraft  mania  at 
Salem.  Anthony  Brackett,  son  of  Pendleton's  old  acquaintance  at  Portsmouth, 
was  not  among  those  killed  by  the  Indians  as  reported,  but  was  taken  into 
captivity  with  his  wife,  their  five  children  and  a  negro  servant.  They  soon  made 
their  escape.  Thonias  Brackett  however,  was  among  the  slain,  as  was  also 
George  Munjoy's  son,  John,  the  one  referred  to  by  Pendleton  as  "Mr.  Munjoy 
his  Sonne" — that  ancient  construction  which  time  has  telescoped  so  far  that 
the  origin  of  our  present  possessive  is  well  nigh  forgotten. 
^*Saco  Town  Records  (Transcripts),  I,  97. 


King  Philip's  War  1675-1676  225 

William  Hathorne,  one  of  the  commanders  of  this  expedition,  re- 
ported under  date  of  October  2nd  that  he  would  have  left  some 
men  with  Major  Pendleton  at  Winter  Harbor,  but  the  latter  ob- 
jected, saying  "he  could  not  Subsist  long  &  he  had  as  good  Re- 
move while  he  had  something  as  to  stay  while  all  was  spent.  There- 
fore unless  country  send  a  supply  or  maintin  ye  Garrison  there 
he  cannot  hold  out."  ^^ 

It  needed  more  than  that  for  his  garrison  to  hold  out.  Their 
own  fears  stampeded  them  within  two  weeks.  About  October  12th 
a  large  force  of  Indians  attacked  Black  Point.  Henry  Jocelyn 
who  was  in  charge  there  during  Scottow's  absence  in  Boston  went 
out  to  parley  with  their  leader  whom  he  knew  very  well.  After 
several  hours  he  returned  to  find  to  his  amazement  that  the  entire 
garrison  and  all  the  inhabitants,  except  his  own  family,  had  taken 
boats  and  quietly  decamped.  Left  to  the  mercy  of  the  savages, 
the  Jocelyns  were  treated  well,  however,  and  soon  liberated. 

The  panic-stricken  refugees  from  Black  Point  started  an- 
other panic  at  Winter  Harbor,  which  was  also  hasily  evacuated 
that  same  day — a  humiliating  experience  for  the  old  Major  to 
report,  as  he  did  in  the  following  month. 

Writing  from  his  former  home  at  Portsmouth,  where  he  had 
somewhat  involuntarily  taken  refuge,  he  sent  off  a  long  letter  in 
November  reciting  how  he  was  forced  to  abandon  Winter  Harbor, 
and  what  losses  had  befallen  him  since  through  the  apparent 
treachery  of  those  who  had  recovered  Black  Point.  His  letter, 
written  on  a  large,  single  sheet  of  paper,  runs  as  follows : 

"Honored  Govenor  &  Counsell 

Much  Honored  Gentellmen ;    I  am  willinge  to  give 
youre  worships  a  brief  naration  of  matters  conserninge 

my  selfe  &  the  state  of  Winter  Harbor aboute  the  14 

of  Octobr.  76.  in  the  day  time  wee  heard  much  shooting 
at  blak  po^'nt  but  could  not  understand  the  ocasion  of 
it  but  did  suppose  it  had  beene  onely  the  people  that 
weare  goinge  away  did  it  to  take  theare  leave  of  those 
that  stayd  behind:    in  the  afternoone  wee   saw  boates 

'^Massachusetts  Archives,  LXIX,  65;  Documentary  History,  VI,  128-130. 
Capt.  William  Hathorne,  born  in  Salem  in  1645,  was  Lieutenant  under 
Capt.  Joseph  Gardiner  in  the  Narragansett  campaign  of  December,  1675,  and 
took  command  of  his  company  when  Gardiner  was  killed  in  the  "Swamp 
Fight".  He  was  the  son  of  William  Hathorne  [Hawthorn],  an  Assistant  of 
the  Colony,  who  was  one  of  the  first  Commissioners  to  Maine. 


226  Brian  Pendleton 

under  sayle  cominge  away  thence  &  w"*  thay  came  against 
(a  poynte)  of  Land  thay  fired  many  guns  which  wee 
took  to  bee  in  farewell  to  vs.  at  last  the  hindmost  boat 
cominge  vp  3  of  Oure  yong  men  took  a  canoo  &  went 
oute  to  sea  to  meet  that  boate  &  w°  thay  came  to  them 
thay  told  them  that  black  poynt  Garison  was  taken  and 
all  the  people  gon  except  Mr.  Josselen  &  2  or  3  old  folks 
hoe  would  not  goe  away  but  stay  theare :  &  theare  weare 
500  of  Indians  &  300  of  french  &  100  Indians  at  m'  fox- 
wells  house  &  that  if  you  love  y'  lives  bee  gon  as  soone  as 
you  can  for  thay  say  thay  will  bee  with  you  to  morrow 
morninge  or  at  night  at  farthest:  w'^  oure  soldiers  heard 
this  newes  they  weare  as  mad  to  make  away  as  ever  I  saw 
any  men  &  fell  to  tomblinge  vp  oure  goods  to  get  it 
aboard  &  with  all  plundred  us  of  many  things  w*  thay 
Could  if  my  bak  was  turned ;  oure  fishermen  alsoe  hasted 
to  get  away  supposinge  it  noe  boote  to  stay  heare 
against  such  a  multitude  of  enemyes : :  w°  I  had  got  such 
goods  I  could  a  board  &  my  family  of  women  sexs  I 
told  oure  soldiers  if  they  would  goe  &  keepe  the  Garison 
I  would  never  leave  them  soe  long  as  I  could  live:  but 
thay  would  not  heare  of  it:  soe  that  if  I  would  have 
stayed  alone  I  mite  I  should  have  noe  Company;  the 
fishermen  had  but  14  men  &  boyes  &  but  8  servisable 
guns. 

"After  wee  came  to  puscutta  theare  came  in  2 
caches  with  soldiers  vidz  Thomas  Moore  &  Silvanos 
Davis:  the  Maj"^  Generall  sent  away  Sarjent  Tippin 
with  soldiers  to  blak  poynt  &  promised  mee  if  oure  men 
which  went  by  y  ™  in  a  boate  of  oure  owne  of  Winter 
Harbor  with  8  men  in  it)  that  if  oure  men  would  asist 
theare  company  into  blak  poynt  Garison  then  thay 
shold  come  back  to  Winter  Harbor  &  asist  oure  men: 
oure  men  did  asist  them  in  &  instead  of  asistinge  oure 
men  Tippin  did  press  oure  compnie  &  force  them  to  stay 
by  him,  soe  that  our  desire  in  savinge  oure  goods  &  for 
which  thay  went,  was  frustrate:  &  while  thay  weare 
stayed  theare  against  theare  wills :  came  the  2  Caches 
from  puscateag  with  Thomas  Moore  my  old  acquaint- 
ance hoe  promised  me  to  doe  me  all  the  good  hee  could 
&  w"  hee  came  to  Winter  Harbor  with  the  Rest  went 
ashore  to  oure  house  &  killed  my  teame  of  4  oxen  &  Plun- 
dred much  of  my  goods  which  for  want  of  Roome  in 


King  Philip's  Wah  1675-1676  227 

the  vessell  I  could  not  cary  away :  of  which  goods  I  can- 
not give  account  at  present  but  shall  give  it  in  vpon 
oath  afterward  as  now  for  the  oxen,  which  is  hearin- 
closed:  much  honored  I  may  say  with  good  Jeremy 
pitty  mee  pitty  me  oh  my  friend  for  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  hath  tuched  mee.  God  hath  emtyed  me  from  vessell 
to  vessell  the  Lord  my  God  bringe  mee  fourth  to  leave 
nothinge  behind  but  dreggs  of  Corruption  that  I  may 
yet  prays  him  in  the  Land  of  the  liveinge  hoe  is  the  health 
of  my  Countenance  &  my  God :  Thus  desiring  the  Lord 
to  guide  you  all  youre  waytie  ocations  &  cravinge  par- 
don for  my  boldness  in  trobling  youre  worships  Take 
leave  Rest  yours  to  sarve  as  in  duty  am  bound 

Brian  Pendleton 

(inclosed  Deposition  regarding  4  oxen)" 

The  loss  of  a  few  oxen  and  some  other  plunder  would  hardly 
seem  to  warrant  such  a  jeremiad  as  this,  but  the  worst  had  not 
been  told.  Pendleton  saved  this  to  the  last.  Down  the  wide  margin 
on  the  left  of  the  page  he  had  otherwise  filled  he  added  a  post- 
script which  explains  his  lamentations.  With  a  sort  of  puzzled 
wonderment  over  his  ill  fortune  he  wrote, 

"The  Indians  hoe  I  never  dealt  with  onesc  in  all 
my  life  nor  never  wronged  in  any  thinge  but  did  hope 
Squando  would  becom  a  Christian  &  did  what  I  could  to 
further  it:  Yet  thay  fired  all  my  houses  for  dwellings 
Come  &  Cattle  neere  100  bushells  Indyan  Corne  neere 
40  bushels  of  pease  more  or  less  besids  old  Come  Rie  and 
Indian  thay  killed  some  sheepe  some  hoggs  &  one  cow." 
And  then  he  enclosed  the  depositions  of  three  men  of  Winter 
Harbor,  John  Layton,  Jr.,  Robert  Booth,  and  Benjamin  Trus- 
trum,  who  swore  (on  November  14th)  they  heard  Capt.  Thomas 
Moore  of  Boston  say  that  "we  had  Major  Bryan  Pendleton's 
foure  oxen  about  the  beginning  of  this  instant  month  of  Novem- 
ber",— while  Layton  and  Booth  added  that  Capt.   Moore  said 
further  "it  was  free  plunder".^^ 

**The  originals  of  this  letter  and  deposition  are  now  in  the  Massachusetts 
Archives,  LXIX,  84,  81a,  and  have  appeared  in  Documentary  History,  VI, 
141-3.  Squando,  mentioned  in  Pendleton's  letter  was  the  chief  of  the  Saco 
tribe.  Sylvanus  Davis  had  but  recently  ecsaped  from  the  massacre  at  Lake's 
trading  post  on  Arrowsick  Island  where  he  was  wounded.  In  a  later  Indian 
war  he  was  captured  and  taken  to  Canada  in  1690.  Upon  his  return  a  year 
later  he  became  a  member  of  the  Provincial  Council.  His  account  of  the  War 
is  in  3  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  I,  101. 


228  Brian  Pendleton 

All  in  conspiracy  against  him — those  cowardly  soldiers  who 
had  deserted  at  the  first  threat  of  danger,  Sergt.  Tippen  to  whom 
he  had  given  help,  Thomas  Moore  who  had  promised  aid,  and 
Squando,  that  ingrate  who  so  basely  returned  evil  for  good !  What 
wickedness  had  he  done  in  his  life  to  merit  such  trials?  Had  the 
Quakers  really  put  a  curse  upon  him?  Was  all  this  a  judgment? 
Why  had  he  ever  sent  James  away?  James  might  not  have  been 
a  success  as  a  business  man  but  he  wasn't  afraid  of  Indians.  He 
had  been  chasing  them  all  the  past  winter  through  the  Narragan- 
sett  country,  killing  and  capturing.  A  good  commander  that  son 
of  his.  It  was  a  mistake  letting  James  go  to  Stonington.  Things 
could  have  been  much  different.  Still,  he  might  have  saved  his 
property  himself  if  his  soldiers  had  not  been  so  chicken  hearted. 
The  Indians  had  not  come  there  then  after  all — they  had  gone 
off  to  the  Eastward.  His  house  was  still  standing  when  Moore 
went  there.  He  should  have  gone  back  himself — Tippen  would 
never  have  impressed  his  men  if  he  had  been  with  them.  He  might 
have  held  the  place  with  a  dozen  stout  fellows  or  so,  or  else  per- 
suaded the  Indians  to  spare  it,  as  Jocelyn  had  persuaded  them  to 
spare  Black  Point.  Was  he  getting  old — old  and  impotent  that 
men  should  obey  him  no  longer?    Or  was  God  scourging  him? 

Full  of  fury  nevertheless,  fury  against  himself  and  the  world 
in  general,  he  directed  his  wrath  towards  Sergt.  Tippen  as  the 
chief  cause  of  his  misfortunes.  His  old  friend,  Major  General 
Daniel  Denison,  who  was  then  at  Portsmouth,  gave  ready  ear  to 
his  complaints,  and  sent  the  Sergeant  a  sharp  reprimand  for  de- 
taining the  Winter  Harbor  men  at  Black  Point — as  if  that  would 
do  any  good  after  the  mischief  was  accomplished.  But  more  trou- 
ble came  from  that — the  reprimand  leaking  out,  occasioned  a  mu- 
tiny, and  then  a  long  letter  of  explanation  from  Denison  to  the 
Council  in  December."^ 

Nothing  did  much  good.  The  bill  that  Pendleton  made  out  for 

"Massachusetts  Archives,  LXIX,  86;  Documentary  History,  VI,  145-6. 

Pendleton's  anger  against  Tippen  perhaps  did  not  go  far  enough.  The 
Massachusetts  Records  [V,  129-130]  show  that  this  expedition  for  the  recovery 
of  Black  Point  was  organized  by  Capt.  Scottow  at  his  own  expense,  and  he 
had  secured  an  order  from  the  General  Court  to  put  Tippen  in  charge.  The 
sergeant  was  authorized  to  impress  the  company  sent  with  him  if  he  found  the 
place  tenable,  and  to  hold  it  for  further  orders.  He  was  also  authorized  to  im- 
press any  of  the  inhabitants,  "or  other  persons",  wlio  might  be  found  there,  so 
there  was  nothing  irregular  in  his  action.  That  Scottow  would  have  had  no 
disposition  to  help  Pendleton  can  be  easily  understood. 


King  Philip's  War  1G75-1676  229 

his  losses  due  to  Moore's  activities,  was  presented  to  the  General 
Court  in  the  following  June  [1677].  The  country  was  too  deeply 
in  debt  to  pay  much  attention  to  individual  losses.  He  was  lucky 
perhaps  in  having  £20  allowed  him  for  his  oxen.  But  "for  the 
other  things  mentioned  in  his  petition,"  the  Court  stated  "that 
he  have  liberty  to  take  it  where  he  can  find  it — "  ^^  meaning  no 
doubt  that  he  was  free  to  do  a  little  plundering  himself  should  one 
Thomas  Moore  ever  come  his  way.  Whether  or  not  he  ever  caught 
up  with  this  "old  acquaintance"  again  does  not  appear.  From 
December  to  June  we  have  no  word  of  Brian  Pendleton.  It  was 
the  winter — and  the  spring — of  his  discontent. 

'^Massachusetts  Bevords,  V,  149.  The  petition  mentioned  does  not  appear  in 
the  Archives. 


CHAPTER  XIV 


THE  LAST  YEARS 
1677  -  1681 


Thou  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way;  yet  said  thou  not,  There 
is  no  hope:  thou  hast  found  the  life  of  thine  hand;  therefore  thou  wast  not 
grieved. — Isaiah,  57:10. 

"The  inhabitants  of  Winter  Harbor",  says  Hubbard,  "being 
alarmed  with  the  surprisal  of  the  other  place  [Black  Point]  fled 
away  with  their  goods  for  a  time,  till  they  heard  the  enemies 
were  removed  further  Eastward  and  then  it  was  said  they  returned 
to  the  place  again."  ^  But  Pendleton  did  not  go  back  there  imme- 
diately. Peace  had  not  yet  come  in  those  Eastern  parts,  and  at 
seventyeight  most  men  are  conservative.  One  experience  such  as 
he  had  had  with  the  cowardly  soldiers  quartered  with  him  was 
quite  sufficient  at  his  time  of  life.  Then  too  he  had  his  aged  wife  to 
consider.  He  had  exposed  her  to  enough  danger  already.  Here  on 
the  Great  Island  they  still  had  a  home,  a  place  of  refuge  as  it  had 
turned  out,  and  here  they  could  remain  in  comparative  safety 
while  the  war  dragged  itself  out  to  a  close. 

A  period  for  serious  reflection,  a  time  for  the  searching  of 
hearts,  these  months  of  watchful  waiting.  Life  had  become  in- 
creasingly uncertain.  Roger  Plaisted,  one  of  his  fellow  Associates 
in  the  York  County  Court,  had  been  killed  by  the  Indians.  The 
Alger  brothers  and  many  others  whom  he  had  known  had  fallen 
victims  to  their  fury.  It  was  time  to  put  his  house  in  order,  to  con- 
sider what  disposition  to  make  of  his  remaining  property.  With 
his  usual  care  he  set  about  drawing  up  his  will.  He  had  already 
been  more  than  generous  with  his  son,  and  the  latter's  children  by 
his  second  wife  had  also  been  remembered.  Nothing  more  need  be 
done  for  young  Fletcher.  But  there  were  other  grandchildren — 
the  three  that  James's  first  wife  had  borne — and  these  with  his 
own  wife  were  the  only  beneficiaries  he  named  originally  when  sign- 
ing this  testament  on  August  7th  [1677].  Then  something  hap- 
pened to  make  him  change  this  will  in  part.  An  undated  codicil 
revoked  nearly  all  the  bequests  he  had  made  his  wife,  and  these 

^  General  History  of  New  England  (Drake's  Edition),  II,  186. 


The  Last  Years  1677-1681  231 

were  devised  to  James — James  who  arrived  there  in  the  following 
November,  his  only  surviving  son  for  whom  he  had  already  done 
so  much.  He  could  not  change  his  habit  of  giving  James  about 
everything  he  had.  So  he  changed  his  will  instead.  His  wife,  if  she 
survived  him,  would  be  cared  for,  but  there  was  no  telling  what  she 
might  do  with  all  the  property  he  had  thought  to  leave  her.  She 
might  not  give  it  to  James — and  he  could  not  bear  to  think  of 
that.2 

This  was  not  the  only  document  to  which  he  was  to  put  his 
name  that  year.  The  Bay  Colony  had  just  suffered  another  blow. 
It  was  not  enough  to  have  had  its  territory  ravaged  by  the  In- 
dians, its  people  killed,  or  driven  from  their  homes,  or  taken  into 
captivity.  The  longstanding  dispute  with  the  heirs  of  Mason  and 
of  Gorges  now  came  to  a  head.  In  1677  a  committee  of  the  English 
Privy  Council  examined  all  the  Charters  of  the  New  England 
colonies  and  denied  to  Massachusetts  the  right  of  jurisdiction 
over  New  Hampshire  and  Maine.  On  the  22nd  of  October  in  this 
year  Pendleton  was  one  of  the  loyal  adherents  to  the  Bay  Colony 
who  signed  a  petition  to  the  King  that  the  government  of  New 
Hampshire  might  remain  with  Massachusetts.^  This  memorial 
was  naturally  disregarded,  and  shortly  afterwards  New  Hamp- 
shire was  made  a  royal  province.  To  forestall  any  further  over- 
turn of  its  authority  the  Bay  Colony  acting  through  a  Boston 
merchant  purchased  of  Gorges'  grandson  on  the  13th  of  March, 
1677/8,  all  his  rights,  title,  and  interest  in  Maine,  and  thus  be- 
came the  Lord  Proprietor  of  the  Province.^  While  this  action  was 
a  tacit  admission  on  the  part  of  Massachusetts  that  its  earlier 
claim  to  this  region  had  no  solid  basis,  yet  the  stroke  was  most 
politic  as  henceforth  the  position  of  the  Bay  Colony  was  unassail- 
able as  far  as  Maine  was  concerned. 

In  spite  of  the  chaotic  conditions  in  Yorkshire  during  this 
period  the  County  Court  had  continued  to  function  after  a  fash- 
ion. There  were  more  estates  than  usual  that  required  attention. 
Pendleton  and  John  Sargent  took  inventory  of  one  of  these  on 

^  The  original  will  of  Brian  Pendleton  is  now  in  the  possession  of  the  writer. 
A  copy  appears  in  York  Deeds  [Vol.  V,  pt.  1].  The  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey,  who 
probably  wrote  the  document,  was  one  witness,  Ann  Moodey,  the  other.  The 
codicil  was  witnessed  by  Moodey  and  Joseph  Dudley,  a  future  Governor  of 
Massachusetts,  who  at  this  time  was  on  a  mission  to  effect  a  treaty  with  the 
Kennebec  Indians. 

^  State  Papers  of  New  Hampshire,  XVII,  527. 
*  Maine  Historical  Society  Collections,  I,  239. 


232  Brian  Pendletok 

November  6th  [1677]  ^ — an  association  which  seems  to  have  re- 
minded him  of  some  dealings  his  son  had  had  with  Sargent  years 
before.  So  that  no  future  claim  might  be  made  upon  James  or 
himself  he  secured  from  Sargent  a  few  days  later  a  joint  release 
"from  all  obligations  &  payments  of  fish,  land,  or  anything  what- 
soever from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  day" — a  statement 
sweeping  enough  to  satisfy  even  that  most  particular  of  men.^ 

On  the  same  day  that  he  disposed  of  this  contingent  liability 
— November  14,  1677 — Pendleton  bought  from  his  son,  who  was 
visiting  him  at  the  time,  a  small  tract  of  land  on  the  Great  Island 
adjoining  his  own  property.  The  price  paid  for  this  lot — £20 — 
looks  as  if  he  was  turning  over  the  money  the  General  Court  had  re- 
cently allowed  him  for  those  four  oxen.  Evidently  he  had  already 
scented  a  buyer  for  this  house-lot  for  less  than  a  month  later  he 
sold  three  rods  of  it  to  Samuel  Wentworth,  then  two  rods  more  to 
the  same  party  in  February,  and  a  final  rod  in  May.^  There  is 
something  almost  pathetic  in  this  petty  speculation  of  his  old 
age.  Of  course  he  made  a  fair  profit  on  the  transaction — he  could 
still  show  James  how  to  do  that — but  for  a  man  who  only  a  few 
years  before  had  been  thinking  of  real  estate  in  terms  of  the  square 
mile,  he  had  been  brought  pretty  low. 

Those  who  had  brought  him  to  this  pass  had  also  come  upon 
evil  days.  One  of  their  leaders,  Mogg,  had  been  killed  in  an  un- 
successful attack  upon  Black  Point,  stoutly  defended  this  time  by 
Sergeant  Tippen,  a  brave  and  resolute  soldier  regardless  of  what 
Pendleton  thought  of  him.  The  reoccupation  of  Pemaquid  by  a 
force  sent  from  New  York  still  further  discouraged  the  savages. 
They  sent  in  word  that  they  were  ready  to  make  peace,  and  the 
good  news  was  despatched  to  Boston. 

On  the  9th  of  March,  1677/78,  the  Governor  and  Council  of 
Massachusetts  wrote  Major  "Walden"  and  Major  Pendleton: 
"From  yourselves  by  several  Letters  we  have  re- 
ceived Information  of  Squando  &  the  other  Indians  last 
their  Desire  further  to  treat  the  English  of  ysse  parts 
for  a  more  firm  peace  &  that  Major  Shapleigh  &  C. 

"York  Court  Records,  III,  345-6,  The  estate  in  question  seems  to  have  been 

that  of  Richard  Foxwell. 

'  New  Hampshire  Province  Deeds,  III,  125b.  This  evidently  had  reference  to 

a  mortgage  on  property  that  James   purchased  of  Sargeant  in   1658. — Ibid., 

II,  52a. 

'  Ibid.,  Ill,  131a,  132a,  133a,  136a. 


The  Last  Years  1677-1681  233 

Champernoon  are  Desired  to  Advance  in  that  matter  as 
most  acceptable  to  the  Indians  if  themselves  or  any  other 
persons  Judged  Sutable  by  your  selves  for  such  an  occa- 
sion be  obtayned  to  treat  them  they  may:  In  the  name 
of  the  Governor  &  Councill  promise  them  a  Safe  Con- 
duct coming  &  returning  hither  in  way  of  treaty  whether 
any  thing  Concluded  or  no  as  Mog  formerly  Had  if 
otherwise  they  may  take  the  Indians  Demands,  of  which 
ourselves  here  may  Consider  &  give  Answer.  In  the 
Meantime  advising  as  the  Spring  Cometh  on  to  be  upon 
your  watch  &  guard  for  your  own  property — not  els 
but  Remaine  Srs 

you'  friend  &  servant 

Edw*^  Rawson  Secre"  ^ 

"By  ord'  of  the  Council" 

Referring  to  this  matter,  Belknap  says, 

"In  the  Spring  [1678]  Major  Shapleigh,  Captain 
Champernoon,  and  Mr.  Fryer  of  Portsmouth  were 
appointed  commissioners  to  settle  a  formal  treaty  of 
peace  with  Squando  and  the  other  chiefs,  which  was  done 
at  Casco  whither  they  brought  the  remainder  of  the  cap- 
tives. It  was  stipulated  in  the  treaty  that  the  inhabi- 
tants should  return  to  their  deserted  settlements  on  con- 
dition of  paying  one  peck  of  corn  annually  for  each 
family,  by  way  of  acknowledgment  to  the  Indians  for 
possession  of  their  lands,  and  one  bushel  for  Major  Pen- 
dleton who  was  a  great  proprietor.  Thus  an  end  was  put 
to  a  tedious  and  distressing  war  which  had  subsisted 
three  years.  The  terms  of  peace  were  disgraceful  but  not 
unjust,  considering  the  former  irregular  conduct  of 
many  of  the  eastern  settlers  and  the  native  propriety  of 
the  Indians  in  the  soil."  ® 

« Massachusetts  Archives,  LXIX,  165;  (Documentary  History,  VI,  201).  The 
letters  written  by  Pendleton  to  which  Rawson  refers  are  no  longer  to  be  found 
in  the  archives. 

•Rev.  Jeremy  Belknap,  History  of  New  Hampshire  (2nd  Ed.  1813),  Vol.  I, 
p.  129;  Farmer's  Edition,  p.  83.  Williamson,  in  his  History  of  Maine  (1832), 
[p.  553],  states  it  was  Major  PhiUips  who  was  required  to  give  the  bushel  of 
corn  to  the  Indians,  and  in  a  footnote  says:  "1  Belknap,  N.H.  p.  129 — erron- 
eously Pendleton".  The  first  edition  of  Willis's  History  of  Portland,  Me.  [(1831) 
— 1,  152],  follows  Belknap,  but  in  the  revised  edition  of  1865  [p.  230],  published 
by  the  Maine  Historical  Society  as  Vol.  I  of  their  Collections  and  Proceedings, 
Phillips  is  cited  as  the  larger  contributor.  This  is  more  likely  to  have  been  the 
correct  version,  as  Phillips  owned  far  more  land  than  Pendleton  did  in  Maine. 


234  BaiAK  Pendleton 

While  it  has  been  pointed  out  since,^*'  that  the  authority 
Belknap  cites  for  these  statements  cannot  be  found,  and  that  no 
writer  of  the  time  mentions  this  treaty — which  also  fails  of  note 
in  the  Massachusetts  archives — yet  some  peace  was  evidently  con- 
cluded with  the  savages  as  most  of  the  fugitive  settlers  returned 
to  their  former  homes  and  were  not  again  molested  for  about  ten 
years. 

Some  of  the  men  of  Winter  Harbor  had  probably  gone  back 
there  before  peace  was  declared.  Hubbard,  as  already  noted, 
states  this  rather  cautiously.  Perhaps  the  first  contingent  were 
those  who  had  been  impressed  by  Tippen  and  held  at  Black  Point. 
They  would  naturally  be  the  ones  to  mutiny  when  Denison's  letter 
came  in  reprimanding  him  for  keeping  them  there.  ^Vliile  there  is 
some  indication  that  Winter  Harbor  was  reoccupied  about  that 
time,^^  it  is  uncertain  just  when  Pendleton  returned.  From  the 
date  when  he  made  his  last  sale  to  Samuel  Wentworth  —  May, 
1678 — we  have  no  record  of  him  until  the  following  January.  He 
was  then  at  Winter  Harbor  where  with  John  Sargent  he  attested 
to  Sylvanus  Davis's  inventory  of  Benjamin  Trustrum's  estate. ^^ 
It  is  not  unreasonable  to  assume  that  he  had  gone  back  there 
during  the  summer  of  '78,  where,  with  his  aged  wife  and  grandson, 
Pendleton  Fletcher,  he  was  to  spend  his  last  few  years. 

The  population  of  Saco  had  greatly  diminished.  The  mortality 
rate  had  been  considerable  and  many  of  those  who  fled  the  place 
never  returned.  Major  Phillips  had  had  enough  of  a  frontier  life. 
The  Rev.  Seth  Fletcher,  after  a  brief  stay  in  Salem,  accepted  a 
pastorate  at  Southampton,  Long  Island,  remained  there  four 
years,  then  removed  to  "Elizabethtown,  East  Jersey",  where  he 

^"Proceedings,  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  1873-76,  p.  314.  Belknap  gave 
as  his  authority  "Ms.  Journal",  which  weU  might  mean  some  document  bor- 
rowed from  the  Mass.  Archives  and  which  like  so  many  others,  failed  to  be  re- 
turned. He  gives  the  date  of  the  treaty  as  12  April,  1678.  Daniel  Neal  in  his 
History  of  New  England  [1st  Ed.  (London,  1720),  p.  406],  also  mentions  it, 
rather  casually,  as  a  "Sort  of  Peace  .  .  .  not  very  honourable  to  the  English, 
for  [they]  .  .  .  agreed  to  .  .  .  allow  the  Indians  a  certain  Quantity  of  Corn 
yearly,  as  a  kind  of  Quit  Rent  for  their  Lands."  It  seems  evident  that  early 
historians  had  something  more  than  their  imaginations  to  draw  upon  in  their 
references  to  this  compact  with  the  Indians. 

"  Neither  the  Indians  nor  Thomas  Moore's  plunderers  had  killed  off  much  of 
Pendleton's  livestock.  The  remainder  may  have  been  cared  for  during  the  en- 
suing winter  for  when  he  made  his  will  in  the  following  August  he  mentioned 
"my  stock  of  cattle  .  .  .  upon  my  farm  at  Winter  Harbour  found  after  mine 
&  my  wife's  decease" — or  did  he  plan  to  restock  his  farm? 
"  York  Deeds,  V,  pt.  1,  41. 


The  Last  Years  1G77-1681  235 

married  again,  was  much  vexed  by  the  Quakers,  and  died  in  1681.^^ 
Pendleton's  "family  of  women  sexes"  had  also  decreased.  The 
granddaughter,  Hannah  Pendleton,  if  she  had  ever  lived  at  Winter 
Harbor,  had  married  in  Sudbury  in  1679  and  made  her  home 
there.  Her  sister,  Mary,  was  soon  to  marry  and  live  at  Wells. 
He  may  have  had  a  hand  in  arranging  that.  It  was  good  to  see 
these  granddaughters  settled  in  their  own  homes.  He  and  his  wife 
had  brought  up  two  families  in  their  sixty  years  together.  It  was 
time  that  such  responsibilities  should  end. 

Pendleton  had  aged  during  his  enforced  idleness  on  the  Great 
Island.  We  see  the  first  sign  of  this  in  his  declining  to  administer 
the  estate  of  John  Presbrej^ — the  same  John  "Presbiter",  one  time 
constable  of  Saco,  for  whom  he  had  issued  a  warrant  some  years 
earlier  for  not  collecting  the  taxes.  With  John  Sargent  he  had 
presented  an  appraisal  of  this  estate  to  the  York  County  Court 
in  April  [1679],  and  at  the  same  time  had  been  appointed  its  ad- 
ministrator and  also  guardian  of  William  Presbrey,  a  son  of  the 
deceased.  A  younger  son,  Nathaniel — or  Nathan — whom  Pendle- 
ton was  taking  care  of,  was  directed  by  the  Court  to  remain  with 
him  as  a  servant.  Three  months  afterwards,  however,  he  informed 
the  Court  he  was  incapable  to  administer  the  estate^^ — the  first 
time  in  his  life  he  had  ever  refused  or  relinquished  such  a  trust. 
But  he  did  not  give  up  young  Presbrey  then.  The  lad  may  have 
been  useful  to  him,  and  perhaps  was  still  more  so  a  year  later 
when  Massachusetts  once  more  called  Pendleton  into  the  public 
service. 

The  Bay  Colony  had  not  profited  by  stretching  its  boundary 
line  to  include  the  Eastern  settlements.  The  defense  of  those  dis- 
tant frontiers  had  proved  a  heavy  burden  and  there  were  many 
who  felt  the  price  paid  for  the  Gorges  patent  was  an  exceptionally 
poor  bargain.  Less  than  six  months  after  the  purchase  was  made 
the  General  Court  authorized  the  Governor  and  Council  to  dispose 
"of  the  said  place,  by  sale  or  otherwise  for  the  reimbursing  the 
said  money  in  the  Country's  treasury" — an  order  which  must  have 
aroused  very  diverse  emotions  in  the  distracted  County.  This  vote 
was  rescinded  in  May,  1679,  when  a  more  optimistic  feeling  pre- 
vailed.  In  the  following  February,  the  Court  requested  the  Coun- 

"See  his  letter  to  Rev.  Cotton  Mather  noted  in  Hatfield's  History  of  Eliza- 
beth, N.  J. 
"  York  Deeds,  V,  32;  Court  Records,  II,  425;  III,  165,  370. 


236  BaiAN  Pendleton 

cil  to  settle  the  government  in  the  Province  of  Maine,  by  appoint- 
ing a  President,  Justices,  and  such  other  officers  as  were  called  for 
under  the  Gorges  patent. ^^ 

With  their  usual  celerity  in  matters  political,  commissioners 
from  Massachusetts  headed  by  the  Deputy  Governor,  Thomas 
Danforth,  proceeded  to  York  in  March,  1679/80,  and  instituted 
the  new  government  there  on  the  17th  of  that  month.  This  con- 
sisted of  a  President,  with  a  Council  of  eight  members  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  the  Assistants  of  Massachusetts,  and  a  Provincial  Gen- 
eral Court  or  Assembly  to  be  chosen  by  popular  election.  The 
Councilors  served  as  Magistrates  and  made  up  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  Province,  just  as  the  Assistants  did  in  Massachusetts.  One 
of  them  was  to  be  chosen  as  Deputy  President,  while  two  others 
served  respectively  as  Recorder  and  Treasurer.  Danforth  was  ap- 
pointed as  the  first  President,  and  his  Council  consisted  of  Major 
Brian  Pendleton,  Captains  John  Davis,  Joshua  Scottow,  John 
Wincoll,  and  Charles  Frost,  together  with  Messrs.  Francis  Hooke, 
Samuel  Wheelwright,  and  Edward  Rishworth  who  was  chosen 
Recorder.  A  good  board,  made  up  of  men  who  had  been  active 
in  the  Province  for  years,  half  of  them,  indeed,  having  been  among 
the  Justices  appointed  by  the  Royal  Commissioners  fifteen  years 
before. 

According  to  the  entry  made  in  the  County  Court  records, 
noting  this  new  form  of  government,^®  John  Davis  was  appointed 
Deputy  President  for  the  first  year,  but  either  the  record  is  in 
error  or  he  refused  to  serve.  Perhaps  he  felt  the  honor  should  go 
to  the  man  who  was  the  senior  of  them  all,  both  in  years  and  in 
length  of  service  to  Massachusetts.  At  any  rate  Pendleton  held 
this  office  during  the  term  of  life  that  was  left  him,  first  appearing 
as  such  when  he  presided  over  a  Court  of  Sessions  held  at  Kittery 
the  following  April  6th.  His  old  zeal  for  economy  in  government 
was  again  manifested  at  this  time  when  it  was  voted  that  at  all 
Courts  hereafter  "a  meet  person  [should]  be  appointed  to  keep 
account  of  the  number  of  all  persons  &  meals  &  quantity  of  wine 
which  is  brought  in  &  there  expended  upon  the  Country's  charge. 
Major  Pendleton  is  desired  to  see  this  order  effected  for  the  year 
ensuing  and  expressed  his  wUlingness  to  do  it."   Evidently  he  was 

»^  Massachusetts  Records,  V,  195-6,  226,  263. 

"  Vol.  IV,  p.  1,  of  the  originals;  Vol.  Ill,  p.  383  of  the  Transcripts.  Also  noted 
in  the  published  York  Deeds,  Vol.  Ill,  Preface,  p.  9. 


The  Last  Years  1677-1681  237 

taking  prompt  action  to  forestall  any  criticism  of  his  Court's  in- 
dulging themselves  too  freely  at  the  public  expense. 

On  June  30th  [1680],  Pendleton,  as  Deputy  President,  held 
a  Court  of  Common  Pleas  at  Wells,  the  other  seven  Justices  all 
being  present.  He  seems  to  have  been  fairly  vigorous  at  this  time. 
The  inhabitants  of  Cape  Porpoise  were  directed  "to  attend  the 
order  of  Major  Pendleton  at  the  usual  place  of  training  at  Saco". 
He  was  placed  on  a  committee  to  examine  the  accounts  of  the 
creditors  of  Ralph  Trustrum  of  Winter  Harbor,  lately  deceased, 
was  asked  to  see  that  a  poor  man  and  his  family,  recently  brought 
to  Saco  from  Salem,  did  not  become  a  public  charge,  and  was  also 
requested  to  take  the  testimony  of  certain  witnesses  in  a  complaint 
brought  by  Scottow  against  Thomas  "Cussons"  for  perjury.^^ 

The  records  of  these  Courts  show  that  the  County  had  be- 
come fairly  well  settled  again.  The  inhabitants  seemingly  had  for- 
gotten the  judgments  visited  upon  them  for  their  past  wickedness. 
They  resumed  selling  liquor  to  the  Indians  and  their  conduct  in 
matters  of  sex  took  on  its  former  irregularity.  Life  went  on  as 
usual  just  as  it  always  does  after  wars  little  or  big,  laws,  good  or 
bad.  But  to  Brian  Pendleton  there  had  come  renewed  conscious- 
ness that  his  part  of  life  was  drawing  to  a  close,  when  he  would  no 
longer  dispense  justice  nor  uphold  the  Cause  of  Massachusetts, 
nor  endeavor  to  compel  others  into  the  ways  of  righteousness.  He 
had  provided  for  the  disposal  of  his  estate  but  there  were  still  some 
matters  to  be  taken  care  of  while  there  was  time.  That  sale  of  his 
Topsfield  property  years  ago — the  buyers  seemed  to  have  lost 
the  deed  to  that,  so  he  gave  them  an  acknowledgment  at  this  Court 
session  in  June  and  had  it  entered  in  the  records. ^^ 

Then  that  affair  of  his  granddaughter,  Mary  Pendleton. 
There  was  a  man  down  at  Wells  who  seemed  interested  in  her, 
Joseph  Cross,  constable  there  at  one  time,  whose  father  had  been 
killed  by  Indians. ^^  Perhaps  something  in  the  way  of  a  dowry 
would  be  helpful  in  making  him  overlook  Mary's  little  encum- 
brance, her  child,  William  Britton,  or  Brettun.  Then  a  servant  to 
go  with  her — the  Presbrey  lad  would  answer  very  well.    So  on  this 

'^York  Court  Records,  III,  203;  59,  70,  64,  69,  76;  IV.  207. 

^  Ibid.,  IV,  64.   Also  in  Essex  County,  Mass.,  Registry  of  Deeds,  V,  82. 

^^  Hubbard  says  a  man  named  Cross  was  killed  at  Wells  in  1676,  and  the  Court 

records   [III,  129,  131]   show  that  Joseph  Cross  was  appointed  administrator 

of  the  estate  of  his  father,  John  Cross,  Senr.,  in  that  same  year. 


238  Brian  Pendleton 

June  30th  a  Court  order  was  issued  directing  Pendleton  to  dispose 
of  him  "for  his  future  education  and  bringing  up,  care  .  .  .  being 
taken  for  his  writing  &  reading."  And  later  we  find  the  boy  was 
committed  to  the  care  of  Joseph  Cross  "who  married  s^  Pendle- 
ton's grandchild".^*^ 

Then  as  to  the  land — those  three  lots  in  Wells  which  made 
up  one  parcel  of  474  acres  were  purchased  from  Pendleton  by 
Cross  for  £160  on  July  3  [1680]. ^^  At  least  the  records  say  so, 
but  there  was  more  likely  a  private  understanding,  for  this  prop- 
erty had  already  been  willed  by  Pendleton  to  his  granddaughters, 
Mary  and  Hannah,  the  very  property  which  oddly  enough  he 
stated  "was  improved  by  Joseph  Cross."  ^'  Cross  had  improved 
these  lots  to  some  purpose — a  wife  went  with  them,  and  a  servant, 
and  a  little  boy  also,  his  wife's  son  of  whom  he  was  to  grow  so  fond 
that  he  made  him  a  substantial  bequest  in  his  own  will  four  years 
later.^^  So  we  may  suppose  that  all  was  well  with  Mary  even 
though  she  bore  her  husbands  no  children. 

All  arranged  now  and  provided  for  as  far  as  his  family  was 
concerned,  but  there  was  still  something  to  be  done  for  the  Bay 
Colony.  A  large  number  of  people  in  the  Province,  dissatisfied 
with  its  present  subordinate  status,  had  sent  a  complaint  to  the 
King.  This  had  to  be  counteracted.  Sometime  during  the  year 
Pendleton  headed  a  "Petition  &  Address  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  the  Province  of  Maine"  to  his  "Most  excellent  Majesty",  citing 
the  benefits  the  inhabitants  had  derived  under  the  jurisdiction  of 
Massachusetts,  and  craving  that  no  change  in  government  should 
be  made  to  discourage  them  from  rebuilding  their  "waste  and  deso- 
late towns".  This  petition  was  signed  by  Pendleton  as  Deputy 
President,  together  with  his  full  board  of  Justices,  and  the  Bur- 

=°  York  Court  Records,  IV,  66,  340.  Cross  died  within  four  years,  and  Presbrey 
was  tlien  bound  to  Nicholas  Moorey  to  learn  the  trade  of  a  carpenter.  [Ibid., 
p.  357].  Moorey  was  the  second  husband  of  Mary  Pendleton.  They  removed  to 
Taunton,  Mass.,  about  1690  and  it  is  likely  young  Presbrey  went  with  them, 
Just  as  her  son  William  Brettun  did. 
^  York  Deeds,  III,  77. 

"  The  suspicion  as  to  the  reality  of  his  sale  to  Cross  is  somewhat  confirmed 
by  an  item  in  the  will  of  James  Pendleton,  the  original  of  which  is  still  in  exist- 
ence, wherein  he  states  that  the  reason  he  gave  only  small  legacies  to  his  daugh- 
ters, Mary  and  Hannah,  was  because  his  father  had  left  them  land  in  Wells 
"which  lands  was  to  have  been  mine  if  they  had  not  been  given  to  my  two 
daughters". 
^  York  Deeds,  V,  28,  29. 


The  Last  Years  167T-1681  239 

gesses  for  York,  Wells,  Saco,  Kittery,  and  the  Isles  of  Shoals"* — 
the  last  service  he  was  to  render  the  Bay. 

There  wasn't  much  more.  In  October  there  came  a  letter 
from  Danforth  asking  him  and  Major  John  Davis  to  call  a  Court 
at  the  request  of  the  ever  busy  Edward  Randolph  to  judge  in  a 
case  between  himself  and  one  Nicolls,  master  of  a  ketch  which  had 
been  seized  in  Maine  for  violating  the  Acts  of  Trade.^^ 

There  is  nothing  else.  His  long  and  active  life  was  drawing  to 
a  close.  He  had  outlived  all  his  children  but  one.  His  first  born 
son,  Nicholas,  had  died  young,  two  others,  Joseph  and  Caleb,  had 
been  with  him  for  a  time  in  Portsmouth  and  then  they  too  had  left 
him.  He  had  buried  his  only  daughter.  There  had  been  many  sor- 
rows in  his  life,  but  he  had  borne  them  all — "The  Lord  giveth  and 
the  Lord  taketh  away".  It  was  not  for  him  to  question  the  Eter- 
nal Will.  He  had  been  a  good  father,  a  devoted  husband,  obeyed 
the  laws,  kept  the  faith.  And  he  had  always  remained  loyal  to 
Massachusetts.  He  had  served  her  to  the  best  of  his  abilities. 
Twice  had  he  changed  his  residence  and  started  life  over  again  to 
further  her  designs.  Perhaps  if  he  had  remained  at  Portsmouth 
with  James  the  family  fortunes  might  have  been  much  different. 
Yet  he  had  no  regrets.  The  service  was  regard  enough — and  in  the 
end  he  had  been  honored.    He  was  well  content. 

He  was  content  to  rest  for  a  time,  as  winter  came  down  once 
more,  content  to  listen  to  the  dull  roar  of  the  surf  beating  on  the 
rocky  shores  of  his  neck  of  land,  content  to  read  the  sonorous 
words  of  the  Bible  while  he  waited  for  another  call  but  not  from 
Massachusetts.  He  knew  it  would  not  be  long  in  coming  for  he 
felt  very  tired — and  old.  A  long  life,  a  busy  and  crowded  life. 
And  yet  it  seemed  only  a  few  days  ago  when  hardly  more  than  a 
boy  he  had  married  Eleanor  Price  in  distant  Birmingham,  and 
then  removed  to  London.  Was  it  possible  he  had  lived  in  tnat  great 
and  turbulent  city  for  nearly  ten  years.''  It  was  all  like  a  dream, 
half  forgotten.  And  he  had  dreamed  a  great  dream  there,  of  a 
new  land  where  God  should  walk  with  his  children  in  the  wilder- 
ness— a  place  of  refuge  from  realities,  where  they  might  hear  the 
Word  by  ritual  undefiled. 

But  the  realities  they  encountered  in  that  new  Zion  were 

'^Massachusetts  Archives,  III,  288,  343.    Full  text  of  this  latter  petition  is  in 
Documentary  History,  IV,  394-6. 
'^  York  Deeds,  III,  84. 


240  Brian  Pendleton 

worse  than  those  from  which  they  had  fled.  Cold  and  famine  await- 
ed them  there,  and  disillusionment,  and  the  cruel  savages — what  a 
pity  that  Squando  did  not  become  a  Christian !  And  there  were 
always  dissensions  amongst  themselves,  and  intruders  like  Bap- 
tists and  Quakers  ever  trying  to  tear  down  what  they  were  so 
painfully  building  up. 

Well,  that  was  over.  They  had  won  out  in  the  end.  They  were 
strong  men — they  were  tenacious  men.  They  never  gave  up.  Even 
when  beaten  for  a  time  and  driven  from  their  homes  they  came 
back.  And  so  far  they  had  been  more  than  a  match  for  the  rulers 
of  England.  They  had  done  about  as  they  pleased.  They  were  al- 
most an  independent  state — probably  would  be  some  day  when 
they  had  grown  still  greater.  Yes,  they  had  been  strong  men.  No 
doubt  God  had  chosen  them  for  this  great  task.  For  they  lived  a 
long  time  to  do  His  will — and  they  had  a  certain  genius  for  gov- 
ernment and  organization.  Of  course  some  of  the  first  leaders  had 
gone  beyond,  the  gentle  Winthrop,  the  fiery  Dudley,  Endicott, 
that  savage  and  ruthless  man,  the  strange  and  gloomy  Belling- 
ham,  Leverett,  the  soldier,  Symonds,  the  Magistrate — he  had  out- 
lived them  all,  all  but  Bradstreet  who  was  still  Governor  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, an  ancient  Nestor,  still  vigorous,  good  for  many  years. 
He  had  worked  with  them  all,  he  had  been  one  of  the  founders,  he 
had  marched  on  with  them.  One  of  their  Captains,  he  had  kept 
order  in  the  ranks,  suppressed  murmurings,  held  his  people  to- 
gether, ruled  with  a  strong  hand.  He  had  been  hated  and  held  up 
to  scorn,  he  had  been  grossly  humiliated — but  by  whom?  The 
enemies  of  Massachusetts.  It  was  nothing  to  worry  about  now — it 
was  no  more  than  he  should  have  expected.  Life  had  been  well 
worth  while — a  glorious  adventure  in  this  New  World,  where  an 
unflagging  zeal  had  borne  him  on  and  on.  And  he  had  been  one 
of  the  Captains — as  in  an  army  with  banners,  ever  advancing  for 
the  glory  of  God.  Hark !  What  drums  were  those — what  trumpet 
sounding  in  the  night.?  What  duty  called.?  What  Court  was  open- 
ing now.?  What  Judge ? 

But  when  at  last  the  slow  Spring  came  and  his  Court  of  Pleas 
convened  once  more  at  York  on  April  6th  [1681],  Brian  Pendle- 
ton was  no  longer  there  to  preside.  Instead,  his  will  was  ofi'ered 
for  probate,  attested  to  in  person  by  the  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey, 
while  Israel  Harding  and  John  Eldredge  were  appointed  to  inven- 


The  Last  Yeabs  1677-1681  241 

tory  the  estate.^^  There  wasn't  much  left  besides  his  lands  and  his 
flocks  and  his  herds — some  dozens  of  pewter  dishes  and  basins,  a 
silver  tankard  and  three  silver  cups,  a  rapier  and  belt,  two  old 
muskets,  a  plentiful  supply  of  blankets  and  linens,  the  "utinsells 
of  husbandry",  the  well  stocked  kitchen's  brass  and  copper.  Some- 
time during  the  winter  Pendleton  had  died,  but  no  record  of  the 
exact  date  has  been  found,  nor  does  any  stone  now  mark  his  grave. 
The  same  mystery  that  surrounds  his  place  of  birth  conceals  his 
burial  place.  But  in  between  there  is  no  mystery.  Watertown, 
Sudbury,  Watertown  again,  then  Topsfield,  Portsmouth  and 
Winter  Harbor — he  had  written  his  name  on  them  all  with  a  vigor- 
ous hand.  Though  something  of  a  rolling  stone  as  duty  called  him 
— yet  he  had  defied  the  tradition  of  the  rolling  stone.  Selectman, 
Town  Treasurer,  Commissioner,  Deputy,  Magistrate  in  the  Coun- 
ty Courts,  Captain  and  Major  of  Train  bands.  Councilor  and 
Deputy  President,  he  died  as  he  had  lived  for  nearly  fifty  years — 
Brian  Pendleton  of  the  Massachusetts,  her  faithful  servant  to 
command. 

^  York  Deeds,  V,  5-6. 


The  End 


NOTES 


CHAPTER  III 


It  is  unfortunate,  for  the  sake  of  accuracy,  that  later  his- 
torians of  the  "Ancients"  have  not  followed  Whitman's  qualifica- 
tion of  this  name  of  "Joseph"  Pendleton,  but  have  given  it  with- 
out question  as  that  of  one  of  the  men  who  founded  the  Company. 
This  bit  of  carelessness,  together  with  a  purely  imaginary  Joseph 
Pendleton,  noted  in  Rev.  Ashbel  Steel's  Life  and  Times  of  Elder 
William  Brewster,  led  to  certain  erroneous  conclusions  at  pages 
725-6  of  Brian  Pendleton  and  His  Descendants.  It  seems  rather 
obvious  now,  on  account  of  the  prominence  of  the  men  who  first 
joined  this  Military  Company  of  Massachusetts,  that  any  Joseph 
Pendleton  who  might  have  been  an  original  member,  would  have 
had  his  name  appear  elsewhere  in  the  early  records  of  the  Colony, 
if  only  when  admitted  as  a  freeman.  Yet  no  such  name  appears 
until  1651  when  it  occurs  in  the  probate  records  of  Suffolk  Coun- 
ty, Mass.,  as  one  of  the  witnesses  to  the  will  of  Robert  Turner 
of  Boston.  [Register,  IV,  285-6.]  And  this  Joseph  Pendleton,  as 
indicated  by  our  later  researches,  was  undoubtedly  a  son  of  Brian 
Pendleton. 

While  Whitman's  "Joseph"  was  in  all  likelihood  merely  a 
guess  at  a  name  well  night  illegible  on  the  old  roster  of  the  Com- 
pany, Steel  was  imposed  upon  by  a  fraudulent  deed  purporting 
to  convey  land  in  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire  from  "Joseph  and 
Hannah  Pendleton"  to  Wrestling  Brewster,  6  December,  1629. 
This  document  was  a  forgery  as  clearly  demonstrated  by  Savage, 
[I,  247],  Wresthng  Brewster  being  deceased  in  1629,  and  the  full 
date  mentioned  falling  on  a  Sunday. 


Notes 


CHAPTER  IV 


George  F.  Dow's  History  of  Topsfield,  Mass.,  published  in 
1940,  has  three  references  to  Brian  Pendleton  on  pages  16,  20  and 
39 — the  former  mentioning  him  as  the  petitioner  with  Gould  and 
Paine  as  before  noted.  The  other  references  merely  relate  to  his 
purchase  and  sale  of  the  Whittingham  farm.  According  to  Dow, 
Pendleton  sold  this  property  to  George  Bunker,  "probably  in 
1649",  but  the  published  Essex  County  Court  records  [IV,  106-7] 
indicate  the  property  was  still  in  his  possession  in  1651/52  when 
arrangements  were  made  for  a  common  in  Topsfield,  "adjoining  to 
Mr.  Pendleton's  farm",  the  Rowley  line,  and  to  Mr.  Bradstreet's, 
"and  to  land  late  Mr.  William  Paine's". 

The  Essex  County  deeds  [Book  5,  p.  82]  show  that  Pendleton 
stated  he  sold  the  farm  to  William  Dodge,  Senr.,  John  Rayment, 
Senr.,  and  William  Rayment  and  Company  in  1653  or  1654.  No 
record  has  been  found  of  any  prior  sale  of  this  property  to 
Bunker,  but  it  evidently  came  into  his  possession  not  long  after- 
wards for  the  Ipswich  deeds  under  date  of  16  February,  1656,  in 
recording  the  sale  of  some  land  owned  by  Edmond  Towne  state  it 
was  bounded  northerly  by  land  "sometime  Bryan  Pendleton's  now 
George  Bunker's". 

That  Bunker  and  Pendleton  had  some  dealings  together  is 
indicated  by  the  inventory  of  the  former's  estate  in  1658,  which 
notes  an  indebtedness  to  "Capt."  Pendleton  amounting  to  £80.  The 
nature  of  this  is  not  stated.^ 

CHAPTER  VIII  —  PAGES  121-22 

..  While  the  Court  immediately  granted  Capt.  Pendleton's  re- 
quest for  reimbursement  in  "the  case  of  the  frozen  man",  he  was 
obliged  to  ask  them  three  years  later  to  decide  if  Kittery  should 
stand  part  of  his  expenses,  the  name  of  that  town  having  been 
blotted  out  in  his  petition.  It  was  finally  ordered  that  Kittery 
should  be  exempted  while  Dover  and  Portsmouth  should  refund 
"the  some  of  ten  pounds  eight  shillings  &  four  pence  ...  to  the  said 
Brian  Pendleton  .  .  .  whose  charity  this  Court  judgeth  meete  to 
encourage."  ^ 

^  Essex  Court  Records,  II,  99. 

'Documentary  History,  VI,  11-13;  Massachusetts  Records,  IV,  pt.  2,  8-9. 


244  Bhian  Pendleton 


CHAPTER  IX 


The  first  part  of  George  Bishop's  famous  work,  New  Eng- 
land Judged  hy  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  was  issued  in  London  in 
1661,  as  an  answer  to  the  declaration  of  the  General  Court  of  the 
Massachusetts,  dated  18  October,  1658,  that  undertook  to  excuse 
the  persecutions  to  which  the  Quakers  had  been  subjected. 

After  reviewing  what  they  had  suffered  up  to  1661  he  says: 
"And  so  I  have  walked  step  by  step  through  the  cruel  and 
merciless  Order  of  your  gradual  Proceedings  from  Imprisonment 
to  Death,  to  see  if  I  could  find  any  thing  of  Law,  any  thing  of 
Fact,  any  thing  of  Justice;  any  Regular  Proceeding  according  to 
either,  on  which  ye  might  ground,  and  by  which  we  might  warrant 
what  ye  have  done ;  but  I  find  none,  and  let  the  Sober  Reader  see 
if  he  can,  or  any  other  thing  than  the  monstrous  shape  of  Cruelty 
and  Blood,  under  the  Profession  of  Religion,  and  the  greatest  In- 
humanities and  most  barbarous  Acts,  as  hath  been  produced  by 
any  Age  in  the  Earth.  For  this  let  me  say,  that  though  more 
Blood  hath  been  shed,  and  with  greater  Executions,  and  in  some 
sense  more  cruel,  by  those  who  have  not  pretended  to  Religion,  at 
least  to  Liberty  of  Conscience,  from  whom  no  other  thing  could  be 
expected,  being  delivered  to  their  Wills  ;  Yet,  from  men  pretending 
to  Religion  and  to  Conscience;  who  suffered  for  Religion,  and 
their  Consciences ;  who  left  their  Native  Country,  Friends  and 
Relatives,  to  dwell  in  a  Wilderness  for  to  enjoy  their  Conscience 
and  Religion;  From  Professors,  who  have  made  so  much  ado  about 
Religion,  and  for  their  Conscience  and  set  themselves  up  as  the 
Height  of  all  Profession  of  Religion,  and  the  most  Zealous  Asser- 
tors  of  Liberty  of  Conscience  .  .  .  Thus  to  exceed  all  Bounds  and 
limits  of  Moderation,  Law,  Humanity  and  Justice  upon  a  People, 
barely  for  tlieir  Conscience^  and  the  Exercise  of  Their  Religion 
(as  ye  have  done  in  the  Instances  aforesaid  .  .  .)  And  for  You  to 
do  it,  who  your  selves  are  the  Men  (not  Another  Generation) 
which  so  fled,  which  so  suffered,  is  beyond  a  Parallel". 

Then  after  reviewing  the  illegal  aspects  of  the  Quaker  perse- 


Notes  245 

cutions  and  hangings,  and  tearing  to  pieces  the  Puritans'  at- 
tempted justifications  thereof,  Bishop  goes  on  to  say: 

"Lastly,  oh  ye  wretched  Hypocrites  and  Murderers !  Did  ye 
not  put  the  same  Mary  Dier  to  Death  when  she  came  into  your 
Jurisdiction  after  your  Reprieve,  ...  (A  comely  grave  woman, 
and  of  a  Goodly  Personage,  and  well  bred  as  among  men,  and  one 
of  a  Good  Report,  having  an  Husband  of  an  Estate,  fearing  the 
Lord,  and  a  Mother  of  Children).  Did  ye  Pitty?  Did  ye  Spare? 
Had  ye  Compassion?  Were  Bowels  in  you?  Ye  Cruel  murtherers ! 
.  .  .  Let  the  witness  of  God  in  You  be  heard  to  speak,  for  I  am  sure 
it  will,  and  will  be  heard  in  you  one  day,  when  it  shall  arise  in  you, 
as  to  this  very  thing,  a  Worm  that  shall  never  die,  and  a  fire  that 
shall  never  go  out.  And  this  your  Cruelty  speaks  it  against  you, 
and  the  Lord  God  Eternal  hath  tried  you  by  this,  and  your  Bloody 
Laws,  and  snapt  them  asunder  by  a  woman  and  Triumphed  over 
them  and  you  again  and  again,  who  by  his  Eternal  Arm  was  made 
twice  to  look  Death  in  the  Face,  and  overcame,  rejoycing  to  die 
in  the  Will  of  God ;  and  finishing  her  Course,  her  Testimony  in  the 
face  of  Ye  All ;  Trampling  upon  You,  and  Your  Laws,  and  Your 
Halter,  and  Your  Gallows,  and  Your  Priests,  and  is  sat  down  at 
the  Right  hand  of  God.  Ye  bloody  Butchers!  Ye  Monsters  of 
Men!'  Ye  Cruel  Murderers!  whom  nothing  satisfies  but  the  Blood 
of  the  Innocent." 

The  Puritan  and  the  Quaker,  the  Catholic  and  the  Protes- 
tant, the  Jew  and  the  Mohammedan,  the  Mohammedan  and  the 
Hindoo,  all  "hating  each  other  for  the  love  of  God",  make  one 
seriously  question  if  the  various  theologies  have  ever  been  any- 
thing but  a  curse  to  mankind. 


246  Brian  Pendleton 


CHAPTER  XIII 


In  an  article  on  Major  General  Daniel  Denison,  published  in 
Volume  XXII  of  the  New  England  Historic  Genealogical  Regis- 
ter, a  letter  he  wrote  to  Capt.  Daniel  Hinchman  on  9  August, 
1675,  appears  at  page  323.  Hinchman  was  directed  "to  returne 
to  your  Company  &  Quarters  about  Pocasset;  to  fetch  of  your 
men  and  provisions  &  amunition  that  are  thereabouts,  &  what  you 
for  want  of  carriage,  cannot  bring  off  with  you,  you  are  to  lay 
it  up  safely  in  some  convenient  place  and  M""  Brian  Pendleton  is 
thought  to  be  most  suitable,  etc." 

The  reference  to  Pendleton  here  did  not  seem  to  make  sense. 
In  the  first  place,  Denison,  as  a  military  man,  would  surely  have 
referred  to  him  as  "Major".  Then,  too,  the  Indian  war  in  Maine 
did  not  break  out  until  a  month  later — and  Pocasset,  the  terri- 
tory around  the  present  Fall  River,  Mass.,  and  Tiverton,  R.  I., 
is  some  150  miles  from  Saco,  Maine.  Furthermore,  on  the  very 
day  this  letter  was  written,  Hinchman  was  at  Brookfield,  Mass. 
which  he  had  reached  after  a  leisurely  pursuit  of  the  Indians 
from  his  headquarters  at  Pocasset.^ 

Through  the  courtesy  of  Mr.  Frederick  W.  Cook,  Secretary 
of  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts,  a  photostat  of  Gen.  Den- 
ison's  letter  was  obtained,  but  an  examination  of  it  did  not  help 
to  solve  the  puzzle.  While  the  date  of  "Aug.  9  1675"  was  clear 
enough,  the  end  of  the  line  where  the  name  of  Brian  Pendleton 
supposedly  occurred  left  a  great  deal  to  the  imagination.  The 
first  name  here  is  so  badly  rubbed  as  to  be  well  nigh  indecipher- 
able— it  might  be  "William"  instead  of  "Mr.  Brian" — and  as  for 
the  last  name,  a  torn  out  piece  of  the  document  leaves  nothing 
left  of  it  but  the  initial  letter — and  what  that  is,  it  is  difficult  to 
say. 

In  any  event  we  feel  sure  Brian  Pendleton  was  not  the  man 
mentioned  in  this  letter  for  his  home  at  Winter  Harbor,  Maine, 
would  hardly  have  been  a  convenient  place  for  laying  up  any 
military  stores  left  at  Pocasset. 

*  Ellis  and  Morris,  Kin(}  Philip's  War,  pp.  81,  95. 


Notes  247 


CHAPTER  XIV 


The  fact  that  Brian  Pendleton's  will  was  made  in  Portsmouth 
seems  to  have  caused  one  of  New  Hampshire's  historians  to  jump 
to  the  wrong  conclusion.  F.  B.  Sanborn  in  an  article  on  "Major 
Brian  Pendleton  in  New  Hampshire"  {Granite  Monthly,  Feby., 
1903),  says  he  died  in  that  town  and  was  buried  there  in  the  Point 
of  Graves  cemetery.  No  evidence  is  given  to  substantiate  this 
statement.  Referring  to  this  burying  ground,  the  work  entitled 
Vignettes  of  Portsmouth  (1913)  says  that  "the  oldest  stone  now 
standing  is  dated  1682" — that  is,  at  least  a  year  after  Pendleton 
died.  Locke's  Portsmouth  and  Newcastle  Cemetery  Inscriptions, 
and  those  in  the  Point  of  Graves,  as  published  in  the  New  Hamp- 
shire Genealogical  Record  (Vol.  1,  No.  1,  p.  13),  fail  to  show  any 
Pendleton  names. 

Aside  from  this  it  seems  likely  that  if  Pendleton's  death  had 
occurred  in  Portsmouth  his  will  would  have  been  probated  in  New 
Hampshire  and  not  in  York  County,  Maine,  as  it  actually  was. 
We  think  the  probabilities  are  that  Pendleton  died  either  at  Win- 
ter Harbor  and  is  buried  in  the  old  cemetery  there — picture  of 
which  appears  in  Sylvester's  Sokoki  Trail — or  at  Wells  while 
spending  the  winter  with  his  granddaughter,  Mary,  recently  mar- 
ried to  Joseph  Cross.  The  appointment  of  two  residents  of  Wells 
to  take  inventory  of  his  estate  may  be  of  significance  here.  If  his 
death  occurred  at  Wells  he  was  probably  buried  on  the  Cross 
farm,  one  quarter  acre  of  which  was  designated  as  a  family  bury- 
ing ground  by  Joseph  Cross  when  making  his  own  will  only  three 
years  later.  (York  Deeds,  V,  pt.  1,  28).  Up  to  the  present  time, 
however,  no  gravestone  has  been  found  in  Maine  bearing  a  date 
as  early  as  1681. 


INDEX  TO  BRIAN  PENDLETON 


POLITICAL  CAREER 

Associate  Justice  of 

Portsmouth  and  Dover  Courts,  65, 

68-70,  118,  143-44,  146 
Hampton  Courts,  71,  72,  97,  144-46, 

168 
York    County    Courts,    71,    80,    186, 
196,  199n,  203,  237 
Burgess    to    Provincial    Assembly    of 

Maine,  191 
Commissioner  at 

Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  71,  96 
Isles  of  Shoals,  94 
Saco,  Me.,  191,  208 
Deputy  to  General  Court  of  Massa- 
chusetts 
From  Watertovvn,  Mass.,  19,  23,  25, 

30,  41,  54 
From  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  73,  90,  96, 
120,  129,  134,  164-65 
Deputy  President  of  the  Province  of 

Maine,  236,  238 
Enforcer  of  Navigation  Laws,  151 
Offices  held  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  70 

71,  150,  151 
On  Commissions  to  Maine,  77-80;  81- 

84 
Port  Officer  of  the  Piscataqua,  166 
Selectman  of 

Watertovvn,  Mass.,  12,  14 
Sudbury,  Mass.,  34,  35 
Portsmouth,   N.   H.,  72,  73,  90,  96, 

117,  118,  153 
Saco,  Me.,  189,  191,  208 
Surveyor  of  Highways  in  Maine,  190 
Tax  Assessor,  Saco,  Me.,  224 
Town  Clerk,  Saco,  Me.,  208 
Town  Treasurer,  Portsmouth,  N.  H., 
96,  108 


MILITARY  CAREER 

Appointed  to  drill  company  at  Sud- 
bury, Mass.,  37 

Charter  Member,  Military  Company 
of  Massachusetts,  38,  242 

Named  as  Lieutenant,  36 

Chosen  Captain  at  Portsmouth,  73 

Commissioned  Captain  by  General 
Court  of  Massachusetts,  150 

Referred  to  as  Major,  38 


Appointed    Major    of    York    County 

regiment,  196 
Relieved  of  command  at  own  request. 


PUBLIC  SERVICES 

On    Committees    Appointed    by    the 

General  Court  to: 
Allot  lands  at  Sudbury,  34 
Inspect  Mystic  Bridge,  36-7 
Act  as  arbitrator,  41 
Lay  out  land  for  Gov.  Winthrop's 

sons,  45 
Draft  two  laws,  45-6 
Audit  Magistrates'  expenses,  53 
Audit  Deputies'  expenses,  54 
Reduce   Costs   of   Annual   Musters, 

57 
Lay  out  land  for  Edward  Rawson, 

84 
Administer  James  Astwood's  estate, 

98 
Audit  accounts  of  Iron  Works,  102 
Settle  boundary  between  Hampton 

and  Salisbury,  109 
Inquire  into  condition  of  ministers' 

families,  reported  destitute,  118 
Hear  appeal  in  a  civil  suit,  122 
Settle  boundary  between  York  and 

Wells,  122 
Investigate  complaint  against  Lieut. 

Gardner,  218 
On    Committees    Appointed    by    the 

towns  of 
Watertown,  Mass.,  14,  53,  56 
Sudbury,  Mass.,  36 
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  70,  91,  108,  153-4 
Saco,  208 

LETTERS  OF 

To  Samuel  Symonds,  81-2 
To  Major  General  Leverett,  200-2 
To  Major  Waldron,  214-5 
To  County  Auditors,  221 
To  Governor  and  Council,  223-24,  225- 
27 

MISSING  LETTERS  OF 

To  Governor  and  Council,  72,  232 
To  Major  General  Leverett,  199,  203 


Index  to  Brian  Pendi-etcn 


MIGRATIONS  OF 

From  Birmingham  to  London,  Eng- 
land, 6 

From  London,  England,  to  Water- 
town,  Mass.,  12 

From  Watertown  to  Sudbury,  Mass., 
32 

Returns  to  Watertown,  39-40 

From  Watertown  to  Topsfield,  Mass., 
57 

From  Topsfield  to  Portsmouth,  N.  H., 
59 

From  Portsmouth  to  Winter  Harbor, 
Me.,  183 

PETITIONER  TO  GENERAL 
COURT  OF  THE  MASSACHU- 
SETTS 

Account    of    Services    "at    the    East- 
ward", 84-5 
Regarding  Watton  estate,  97,  108-9 
Account  frozen  man,  121 
Account  John  Bonighton,  205 
With  others  from 

Watertown,  29,  31 

Sudbury,  37 

Topsfield,  68 

Portsmouth,  69,  72,  84-5,  91,  92,  97, 
121 

Saco,  205,  210,  223 
With  others,  to  the  King  of  England 

From  Portsmouth,  231 

From  the  Province  of  Maine,  238 

MISCELLANEOUS 
REFERENCES 

Adopts  grandson,  Pendleton  Fletcher, 

209 
Appraiser,  56 
Arbitrator,  41,  65,  66,  71 


Brew  house,  157-58 

Business   Affairs,   103,   104,   106,   178, 

208 
Character  of,  4-5,  109,  191 
Complaint  against,  88-89,  180 
Conflict  with  Maj.  Phillips,  196-202 
Contributor  to 

Building  Town  House  at  Boston,  107 

Ministers'    support   at   Portsmouth, 
107 

Harvard  College,  106 
Dissents  in  Dr.  Child  case,  47 
Forced   to   abandon   Winter    Harbor, 

225 
Gifts,  to  son  James,  56,  106,  177,  210 

To    grandson,    Pendleton    Fletcher, 
209 
Grandjuryman,  24 
Granted  land  at 

Watertown,  Mass.,  14 

Sudbury,  Mass.,  16 

Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  66,  154 

Cape  Porpoise,  Me.,  208-9 
Location  of  his  home 

At  Watertown,  Mass.,  14 

At  Sudbury,  Mass.,  33 

On  the  Great  Island,  N.  H.,  66,  67 

At  Winter  Harbor,  Me.,  185n 
Made  Freeman  of  the  Massachusetts, 

17 
Marriage,  6 

Mentioned  in  Histories,  4 
Misfortunes  of,  171 
Principal  Lawsuits 

With  Sudburv,  Mass.,  39,  108 

With  John  Paine,  105,  175 

With  William  Phillips,  186,  202 

With  Roger  Spencer,  185 
Randolph's  opinion  of,  191 
Slave  owner,  171,  178 
Will  of,  230-31,  231n,  247 
WindmiU  on  Great  Island,  156 


GENERAL  INDEX 


Abbott,  Walter,  119n 

Adams,    C.    F.,    Three    Episodes    of 

Massachusetts  History,  20n 
James    Truslow,    The   Founding    of 

New  England,  16n,  20n,  50n,  192n 
Aggamenticus,  Me.,  78,  80 
Alanson,  Ralph,  222 
Allison,  Richard,  162 
Ancient     and      Honorable      Artillery 

Company,  38,  38n,  242 
Andros,  Sir  Edmund,  209 
Antinomian  Heresy,  20,  23-25 
Arbella,  Ship,  159 
Archdale,  John,  186 
Arlington,  Lord,  195n 
Aspinwall,  William,  24 
Astwood,  James,  98 
Atherton,   Humphrey,  41n,   133,   136n 

170 
Austin,  Anne,  127,  128 
Bairstow,  Michael,  52 
Baker,  John,  83 
Banks,  Charles  E.,  Col.,  75n 

History  of  the   Usurpation,  192n 

Winthrop  Fleet,  lln 

Biography    of    Edward    Godfrey, 
75n 
Baptists  persecuted,  126 
Barbados,  127,  178 
Barefoot,  Walter,  143 
Barlow,  George,  83 
Barney,  Jacob,  47 
Barton,  Eliza,  114,  116 

Goodwife,  113 
Batten,  William,  204 
Belknap,   (Rev.  Jeremy),  4,  233,  234, 
234n 

History      of      New      Hampshire, 
233n 
Bellingham,    Richard    (Gov.),    4,    69, 

82-4,   90,   111,   126,   127,   134,   167, 

170,  240 
Biddeford,  Me.,  184n 
Biddeford  Pool,  Me.,  184 
Biddle,  Charles,  146n 

William,  145n 
Birmingham,  England,  6,  239 
Bishop,       George,       Nexo       England 

Judged,  4 

Extract  from,  244-45 
Black  Point,  Me. 

Abandoned,   225 

Defended,  232 

Mentioned,    86,     111,     188n,     196, 


215,    217,    217n,    218n,    219-222, 
225,  228,  228n,  230,  232 
Blue  Dove,  Case  of,  166-8 
Blue  Point,  Me.,  86 
Bodge,  (Rev.  George  M.),  Soldiers  in 

King  Philip's  War,  222,  222n 
Bond,  Dr.  Henry  M.,  14 

Genealogies      and      History      of 
Watertown,  Mass.,  lln,  14n,  24 
Capt.  Thomas,  122,  129,  145 
Bonighton,  John,  204-6,  214,  216 
Booth,  Robert,  83,  197,  227 
Robert,  Sr.,  197 
Simon,  219n 
Boston,  Mass.,  10,  23,  55,  62,  64,  67, 

77,  87,  97,  etc. 
Boston  Town  House,  107 
Brackett,    Anthony,    108n,    224,    224n 

Thomas,  224,  224n 
Bradbury,  Thomas,  144 
Bradford,  William,  43,  51n 
Bradstreet,  Simon,   (Gov.),  4,  59,  76, 
77,  78,  82,  84,  85,  104,  127,  142, 
144,  145,  164n,  176,  177,  180,  240, 
243 
Sketch  of,  78n 
Brance,  Michael,  79 
Bredcake,  Capt.  Thomas,  37 
Breeden,  William,  217n 
Breedon,  Capt.  Thomas,  169,  169n 
Brettun,  William,  217,  217n,  237 
Brewster,  John,  182 

Wrestling,  242 
Bridgman,  Pilgrims   of  Boston,   195n 
Brittane,  James,  27n 
Britton,  William,  217,  217n,  237 
Brookfield,  Mass.,  246 
Brown,  Rev.  Edmund,  35 

Rev.  James,  117 
Browne,    Richard,    17,    17n,    23n,    24, 

25,  30,  31,  41,  56 
Browning,  Daniel,  178 
Bunker,  George,  243 
Burrough,  Edward,  141 
Burroughs,   Rev.   George,  224n 
Bursly,  John,  79 
Burton,  Thomas,  42,  43,  47 
Bush,  Grace,  207 

John,  207 
Cakebread,  Ensign,  35,  37 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  18,  22 
Platform,  90 
Synod,  43,  48,  50 
University,   England,   126 


251 


Bhian  Pendleton 


Cape    Porpoise,   Me.,   82,   83,   84,    184, 
207,  209,  210 

Carlton,  Deputy,  47 

Carr,  Sir  Robert,  179,  181,  187,  188 

Cartwright,  George,  179,  187 

Casco,  Me.,  188n,  213,  219,  224 
Bay,  Me.,  84,  86,  191,  224 

Castle  Island,  94 

Censorship  of  Books,  49 

Champernoon  (Champernowne),  Capt. 
Francis,  195n,  232-3 

Charlestown,   Mass.,   10,   56,   111,   112, 
122n,  217 

Chauncey,  Rev.  Barnabus,  190 

Child,    John,    New    England's    Jonas, 
42n 
Dr.  Robert,  41-47,  60,  135,  168,  207 

Childe,  Ephraim,  17,  17n 

Christison,    Wenlock,    Trial    of,    135- 
139 
Mentioned,    134,    140,    141,    144n, 
166 

Church,    Capt.    Benjamin,    Entertain- 
ing History,  212n 

Churches, 

Attendance   at  obligatory,   19,  48 
New  ones  must  be  approved,  22 
Synod  of,  43,  48,  50 

Clark,  John,  III  News  from  New  Eng- 
land, 126n 

Clarke,  Thomas,  71,  203 

Clement,  Robert,  71,  97 

Clergy,  Power  of,  26,  27,  90 

Cleve,  George,  165 

Cocheco  river,  86 

Coffin,  Peter,  84,  85,  86,  165,  193 

Colcord,  Edward,  122,  122n,  178 

Cole,  William,  202n 

Collins,  Moses,  206 

Concord,  Mass.,  29 

Connecticut  Colony,  125,  179,  213 

Cook,  Frederick  W.,  246 

Corbet,  Abraham,  169n  174,  179,  181, 
183,  207 

Cotton,  Rev,  John,  15,  23,  24,  28,  82, 
82n,  90,  127 
Rev.  Seaborn,  145,  176 

Couch,  Robert,  116 

County  Courts,  Established,  21 

Cranfield,  Gov.,  119 

Crin)es,  capital,  48,  49,  51n,  131 

Crockett,  Thomas,  157,  158,  159 

Cross,  Joseph,  217n,  237,  238,  238n,  247 

Cumbeye,  Goodman,  201 

Cummings,  Richard,  108n 

Cussons,  Thomas,  237 

Cutt,  John,  53,  66,  107,  118,  153,  154, 
160,  173,  180,  182,  183,  203 
Richard,  91,  92,   118,   153,   154,   160, 

107,  173,  180,  182,  183,  193 
Robert,  188n 


Dand,  John,  43,  45,  47 

Danforth,  Thomas,  152,  164,  164n,  187, 

188,  236,  239 
Daniel,   Robert,  57 

Davis,    Capt.    (and   Major)    John,   of 
York,    Me.,    188,    204,    214,    216, 
215n,  223,  236,  239 
John  (of  Saco,  Me.),  197 
Nicholas,  80 
Robert,  113 

Sylvanus,  226,  227n,  234 
Dedham,  Mass.,  143 
Democracy,   how   regarded   by   rulers 
of  Mass.,  15 

Spirit  of,  in  town  governments,  27 
Denison,   Daniel,   64,   59,   76-8,   82-84, 

164n,  186,  216,  228,  246 
Denmarke,  Patrick,  222 
Deputies,  House  of. 

Inaugurated,  18,  19 
EflForts  to  reduce  number,  48,  53 
Expenses  to  be  audited,  54 
Resists    making   laws    to   enforce 
religious    conformity,    90;    and 
death  penalty  against  Quakers, 
130 
Devon,  County  of.  Me.,  221n 
Douglas,  John,  166-7 
Dorchester,  Mass.,  10,  22 
Dover,   N.   H.,  61,  66,  68,  70,  71,  85, 
86,  91,  92,  93,  103,  108,  118,  119n, 
121,    143,   144,   150,    162,   163,   165, 
181,  182,  193,  214,  216 
Dow,  George  F.,  History  of  Topsfield, 

Mass.,  243 
Doyle,    J.    A.,    English    Colonies    in 

America,  50n,  192n 
Drake,   Samuel   G.,   221-2,   222n;   Old 

Indian  Chronicle,  212n 
Dudley,  Anne,  78n 
Joseph,  231n 
Rev.  Samuel,  119 

Gov.  Thomas.,  4,  9,  41,  57,  78n,  240 
Dummer,  Richard,  41,  71,  97 
Dyer,  Mary, 

Banished  under  penalty  of  death, 

131 
Returns  to  Boston  and  is  impris- 
oned, 131 
Condemned    to   death   but   is    re- 
prieved, 132 
Returns  again  and  is  hanged,  133 
Mentioned,  136n,  245 
Eddy,  John,  12,  13,  13n 
Education,  religious,  49 

A  second  religion,  50 
Eldredge,  John,  240 
Elizabethtown,  East  Jersey,  234 
Ellens,  Anthony,  70,  182 
EUins,  Anthony,  153 
Ellet,  Robert,  i47n 


General  Index 


253 


Elliot,  John,  164 

Ellis    and    Morris,    History    of   King 

Philip's  War,  153n,  212n,  217n 
Emerson,  Mr.,  82 
Endicott,  John    (Gov.),  4,   9,  23,   67, 

90,    126,    127,    131,    132,    134,    135, 

139,  140n,  141,  149,  165,  240 
English,  Philip,  119n 
Essex  County,  Mass.,  104 
Evans,  Goody,  115 
William,  114,  115 
Evens,  Goodman,  113 
Everett,  William,  78 
Everie,  Thomas,  153 
Exeter,  N.  H.,  24,  62,  181 
Fall  River,  Mass.,  246 
Falmouth,    Me.,    165,    205,    213,    215, 

221n,  223,  224 
Farmer,  John,  224n 
Feake,  Lt.  Robert,  14,  20 
Felt,  J.  B.,  History  of  Ipswich,  Mass., 

60n 
Fearnes,  Mr.,  20n 
Fernald,  Dr.,  66 

Renald,  87,  90,  91,  92,  108n,  113 
Fisher,  Mary,  127,  128 
Fletcher,    Pendleton,    185n,   209,   219n 

230,  234 
Pendleton,  Jr.,  185n 
Rev.   Seth,   105,   171,   189,   190,  202, 

209,   234 
Fowle,  Thomas,  43,  44 
Foxwell,  Mr.,  220 
Framingham,  Mass.,  31n 
Freemen 

Originally  stockholders,  15 

Restricted  to  church  members,  16 
Friends,  Society  of,  122,  124 
Frost,  Charles,  79,  203,  236 

Nicholas,   122 
Fry,  William  H.,  153n 
Fryer,   Nathaniel,   157,   160,   172,   173, 

180,  181,  183,  233 
Gardiner,  Capt.  Joseph,  225n 
Gardner,  Lieut.  Thomas,  218 
Gibson,  Richard,  64 
Gifford,  John,  101-2,  102n 
Gillman,  Edward,  66 
Gilman,  Edward,  103 
Glover,  John,  57 
Goddard,  John,  70-1 
Godfrey,  Edward,  75,  76,  80,  186 
Goodnow,   Edmund,  37,  39 
Gookin,  Daniel,   148,   174,  203 
Gorges,  Sir   Ferdinando, 

Patentee   of   land    in    New    Eng- 
land, 8 

Mentioned,    20,    21,    61,    76,    112, 
191,  231 

Grandson  and  Namesake,  186 
Gorton,  Samuel,  43,  48,  55,  59 


Gortonites,  55,  126 

Gould,  Benjamin  A.,  Family  of  Zac- 

cheus  Oould,  58n 
Zaccheus,  58,  58n,  104,  243 
Great  Island,  N.  H.,  61,  69-70,  72,  76, 

87,   103,   105n,   146,   155,   157,   158, 

171,  177,  230,  232,  235 
Great  Islanders,  117-18 
Greenland,  N.  H.  155 
Greene,  Goodman,  66 
Greensmith,  Steven,  23 
Griffin,  Hugh,  39 
Gunnison,  Hugh,  158n 
Guppy,  John,  95 
Hackett   (Frank  W.),  87-8 
HaU,  Lieut.  Ralph,  163 

Samuel,  174 
Hampton,   N.   H.,   62,   68,  71,   72,   92, 

97,   108,   109,   122n   144,   150,   151, 

178,  181 
Harding,  Israel,  240 
Hathorne,  Capt.  William,  225,  225n 
Harvard  College,  49,  94,  106,  119n 
Haverhill,  Mass.,  178 
Hawthorne,  William,  76,  77,  78,  84,  85, 

143,  164n,  186,  225n 
Haynes  (Samuel),  92 

Walter,  35,  36 
Hibbens,  Mrs.  Anne  (witch),  82n  111, 

112 
William,  57 
Hill,  Roger,  196,  197 
Valentine,  96n,  165 
Hilton  Brothers,  61 
Hinchman,  Capt.  Daniel,  246 
Hitchcock,  Richard,  197 
Holmes,  Obadiah,  126 
Hooke,  Francis  (Mr.),  188n,  190,  195n, 

198,  200,  236 
Hooker,  Mr.,  24 

Thomas,  26 
Houchin,  Enoch,  173 
Howard,  William,  104n 

Lieut.  WiUiam,  185 
Hubbard,  Rev.  William,  4,  57n 

General    History    of    New    Eng- 
land, lln,  42n,  121n 

History  of  the  Indian  Wars,  208n 

Narrative   of    the    Troubles   with 
the   Indians   in  New   England, 
212n,  222 
Hubin,  Giles,  219n 
Huchins,  John,  118n 
Hudson,   Rev.  A.  L., 

History    of   Sudbury,   Mass.,    32, 
32n,  33n,  36n 

Annals     of     Sudbury,     Wayland 
and  Maynard,  33 
Hull,  John,  175 
Hutchins,  Enoch,  173 
Hutchinson,  Anne,  20,  23-26 


264 


Brian  Pendleton 


Capt.  Edward,  167 
Thomas,  4,  25n 
William,  4 
Indians, 

See  Chapter  XI 

Attack   on   Maj.    Phillip's   house, 

216 
Kennebec  tribe,  231n 
Peace  with,  233 

Other  mentions,  11,  12,  20,  22,  23, 
24,  111 
IngersoU,  Lieut.  George,  213,  214,  219, 

220 
Insanity,  Cases  of,  13n  52,  62n,  82n 
Ipswich    Mass.,   57,   58,   69,    103,   104, 

105,  163,  176 
Iron  Works,  Case  of  the,  101-2 
Isles  of  Shoals,  61,  64,  78,  79,  91,  93, 
94,  151,  238 
Settled,  61 
Jackson,  John,  108n 
Jamaica,  W.  I.,  129 
Jencks,  Joseph,  Jr.,  164 
Jenness,  John  Scribner,  94n,  154n 
Jennison,  William,  12,  13n,  20,  23,  23n, 

24,  25 
Jesuits,  banned,  45 

Jocelyn,  Henry  (Mr.),  188n,  196,  200, 
221,  224-6,  228 
John,  64n,  184n,  186 
Sir  Thomas,  196 
Johnson,  Edward,  164n,  188n,  196 
Wonderworking  Providence,  42n 
James,  87,  108n 
John,  36,  67 
Jones,  Alexander,  168 

Margaret  (witch),  66,  66n,  111 
R.  N.,   The  Quakers  in  the  Amer- 
ican Colonies,  20n 
Jordan,  Mr.,  165 

Robert,  186,  204,  205n 
Josselyn,  John,  64n,  184n 
Keayne,   Robert,  54,  107 
Kennebec,  Me.,  215,  222,  224 
Kennebunk,  Me.,  82 
Kennebunkport,  Me.,  184 
Kent,  Stephen,  189 
King,  Elizabeth,  6 

Kittery,  Me.,  71,  75-6,  78,  80-1,  83-5, 
88,   91-3,   121,    143,   158,    181,   184, 
190n,  203,  206-7,  215n,  238 
Kittery  Point,  Me.,  77 
Knapp,  Nicholas,  41n 
Knight,  Ezekiel,  83,  192,  203-4 
Kittredge,  Prof.  George  L.,  Dr.  Rob- 
ert  Child   the  Remonstrant,  42n, 
43n,  47n 
Lake,  Thomas,  152,  153n 
Lakeville,  Mass.,  212 
Lane,  Ambrose,  68 
Laud,  Bishop,  8 


Laws, 

First  Sumptuary,  17,  18 

Two  Repealed,  61n 

On   Church   Attendance,    19 

Only  church  members  to  hold  of- 
fice, 26 

To     prevent     Sabbath     breaking, 
95-6 

To    control    church    conduct    by 
children,  99 

To  control  sale  of  liquor   to   In- 
dians, 98,  99 

Against    Quakers  —  See    Chapter 
IX 

Digest  of  ordered,  25 

Finally  printed,  58 
Lay  ton,  John,  Jr.,  227 
Leader,  George,  81,  82n 

Richard,  69,  81 
Lechford,  Thomas,  32 

Plain  Dealing,  16n 

Note  Book,  32 
Leddra,  William,  134,  141 
Leech,  Ambrose,  35 
Leverett,  John,  Maj.  Gen.  &  Gov.,  4, 
191-2,    195,    198-9,    202-3,    205, 
240 

Sketch  of,  195n 

Lewis,  ,  153 

Libby,  Charles  T.,  206n 

Oen.    Diet,    of    Maine    and    New 
Hampshire,  222n 
Liddal,  John,  146 
Littlefield,  Francis,  191 

Lieut.  John,  215 
Locke's    Portsmouth    and    Newcastle 

Cemetery  Inscri^jtions,  247 
Locke,  Henry  D.,  12 
Lockwood,  Robert,  41  n,  204 
London,  England,  6,  66,  107,  127,  239 
Lusher,  Eleazer,  97,  102,  143,  160,  164n 
Maine,  Province  of 

Gorges'  colonists,  8,  61,  75 

Edward  Godfrey,  Governor,  75-77 

Seizure  by  Mass.,  76-80;  81-84 

Mass.  authority  overturned,  188 

Resumed,  193-196 

Becomes  a  Province  of  Mass.,  231 

Becomes  a  State,  86 

Mentioned,  72,  166,  174,  177,  186, 
187,  215n,  221n,  236 
Manhattan,  179 
Marten,  Ambrose,  Mr.,  27n 
Martin   (Martyn)  Richard,  78,  209 
Marvin,  W.  T.  R.,  42n,  43n 
Mason,  Capt.  John, 

Secures    patent   to   land   in    New 
England,  8 

His  colonists,  61,  63 

Claims  of  his  heirs,  65,  69 

Mentioned,  91,  191,  231 


General  Index 


255 


Mrs.  (John),  87 
Joseph, 

Attorney  for  Capt.  John  Mason's 

widow,  65 
Statement   of,   67 
Petitions  of,  91,  186 
Mentioned,  69,  70,  92 
Robert  Tufton,  107 
Massachusetts  Bay,  Colony  of. 
Charter  obtained,  9 
Settlement  started,  9 
Freemen  of,  15,  16 
Religious    intolerance    in,    1,    19, 

90,  123 
Censorship  of  books  in,  49 
Persecutions: 

Of  Antinomians,  23-25 
Of  Gortonites,  55,  126 
Of  Baptists,  126 
Of  Quakers,  See  Chapter  IX 
County  Courts  Established,  21 
House  of  Deputies  formed,  18-19 
Town  governments  in,  27 
Clerical  dominance  in,  90 
Extends     jurisdiction    into     New 

Hampshire,  63 
And  over  Maine,  77-84 
Authority    in    Maine    overturned, 

188 
Resumes  authority  in  Maine,  192- 

196 
Acquires      Gorges      patents      in 

Maine,  231 
Maine    becomes     a     province    of 
Mass.,  231 
Massasoit,  Sachem,  211,  212 
Masterson,  Nathaniel,  193 
Mather,  Rev.  Cotton,  112,  127,  172 
Rev.     Increase,    History    of    King 

Philip's  War,  212n,  215n 
Rev.  Richard,  27n 
Maud,  Rev.  Daniel,  119 
Maverick,  Samuel,  43,  44,  45,  47,  52, 
168,  179,  181,  187,  190,  192,  194n 
195n,  196n 
Mayhew,  Thomas,  14,  25,  30 

Thomas,  Jr.,  25 
Maynard,  Mass.,  31n 
Merrimac  river,  62,  77,  221n 
Metacom,  Sachem,  212 
Millerd,  Thomas,  20n 
Military   Company   of   Mass.,   37,   73, 

107,  242 
Mills,  Mary,  206 

Sarah,  206 
Mogg,  Sachem,  232,  233 
Monhegan  Island,  Me.,  218 
Moodey,  Ann,  231n 
Rev.  Joshua, 
Sketch  of,  119n 


Comes  to  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  116, 

119,  119n 
Resists   witchcraft   delusion,    116, 

119n 
Slandered,  172-3 
Witnesses  Brian  Pendleton's  will, 

231n 
Mentioned,  107,  145,  171,  180,  193, 
240 
Moore,  Thomas,  226-29,  234n 
Moorey,  Nicholas,  238n 
Morrison,  Samuel  Eliot,  46n,  47n 
Morse,  Joseph,  147,  147n,  148,  172,  174, 

182 
Moses,  John,  182 
Mount  Desert,  Me.,  184 
Muggleton,  Lodowick,  100 
Munjoy,  George,   188n,  204,  218,  220, 
221,  221n,  224,  224n 
John,  224n 
Munnings,  George,  32,  100 
Mussell,  Old,  155,  155n,  156 
Narragansett  War,  209,  225 
Neal,   Daniel,  History   of  New  Eng- 
land, 234n 
Neale,  Francis,  191,  192,  203,  204 

Walter,  182 
New  Amsterdam,  179 
Nev.'bury,  Mass.,  144,  145,  145n 
Newcastle,  N.  H.,  61 
New  Hampshire, 

Made  a  Royal  Province,  119n,  231 
New  Haven,  Colony  of,  125 
Newigewannacke,  Me.,  188n,  215n 
Newington,  N.  H.,  154 
New  Netherlands,  179 
Newport,  R.  I.,  26n 
Newtown,  Mass.,  18 
New  York,  179 
Nichols,   Robert,  215 
Nicholson,  Jane,  133 

Joseph,  133,  147,  148,  174 

Nicolls,  ,  239 

Col.,   179,   181,   193,   193n,   194,   195, 
196n 
Norfolk  County,  Mass.,  Court,  97 
Norman,  Samuel,  27n 
Norton,   Rev.  John,  90,  94,   126,   127, 

130,  131,  142,  170,  180 
Noyse,  Mr.,  31 
Nutter,  Hatevil,  103 
Oliver,  Capt.  James,  167,  169,  193 

Joseph,  222 
Paine,  John,  104,  104n,  105,  157,  174, 
178 
Robert,  176 
WiUiam,  14,  68,  59,  65,  66,  104,  105, 

119n,  243 
WiUiam  &  Co.,  103 
Deputy,  47 


Brian  Pekdleton 


Palfrey    (John  G.),  History  of  New 

England,  42n,  43n 
Palmer,  Grace,  207 

Richard,  207 
Parker,  James,  64 

Thomas,   172-3 
Parks,  William,  54 
Parris,  George,  175 
Patridge,  John,  172 

Mary,  172 
Paul,  Daniel,  108 
Pawcatuck  river,  177 
Pelham,  Capt.,  39 

William,  37 
Pemaquid,  Me.,  218,  232 
Pendleton,    Brian     (son    of    James), 
106n 
Caleb,  60n,  67,  171,  239 
Edmund,  171 
Rev.  Dr.  Edward,  5n 
Edward,  Jr.,  5n 
Eleanor,  6,  106 
Francis,  5 

Hannah,  235,  238,  238n 
Hannah    (fictitious),  242 
"Hellen",   6 

James,  Capt.   (son  of  Maj.  Brian), 
Attorney  for  his  father,  105 
Given  land  by  his  father,  56,  106, 

177 
Constable,    Town    Clerk,    Select- 
man of  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  106, 
151 
Mentioned,    60n,    104n,    154n,    155 
155n,  157,  171,  178,  182,  209,  228, 
230-232n,  238n 
Joseph    (son   of   Maj.   Brian),   60n, 

67,  88,  105,  106n,  239 
Joseph   (son  of  Capt.  James),  106n 
(Joseph?),  38,  242 
Joseph   (fictitious),  242 
Mary    (dau.    of   Maj.   Brian),    171, 

209 
Mary   (dau.  of  Capt.  James),  217, 

217n,  235,  237,  238,  238n,  247 
Michael,  5n 
Nicholas,  6 
Richard,  6n 
Pequot  War,  23,  59 
Pequots,   212 
Perkins,  Luke,  145n 
Peters,  Rev.  Hugh,  7,  63 
Phillips,  Lieut.,  101 
Rev.  George,  10,  14 
Nathaniel,  195,  196n,  197,  198,  199n 
William,  Capt.   and  Maj.,  Conflicts 
with  Maj.  Pendleton,  185,  196-202 
Indian  attack  on  his  house,  215- 

217 
Mentioned,    188n,    190,    195,    204, 
214,  217n,  233n 


Philpot,  Thomas,  52 
Pickering,  John,  Case  of,  151-2 

Mentioned,  87,  108,  147,  153,  173, 
181 
Pike,  Lieut.  Robert,  95-97n,  143,  144 

Capt.,  186n,  192,  193,  195,  204 
Piscataqua    (river),   61-64,   66,   67,   69 

72-75,  79,  91,  94,  97,  103,  111,  112, 

116,   120,   122,    129,   145,   146,   161, 

166,  167,  177,  187-189,  207 
Plaisted,  Roger,  230 
Plymouth  Colony,  125,  212 
Plymouth,  Mass.,  55,  211,  212 
Plympton,  Thomas,  31n 
Pocasset,  246 
Portland,  Me.,  221 
Port  Royal,  119n 
Portsmouth,  N.  H., 

Settlement  of,  61 

Taken      under      jurisdiction      of 
Mass.,  63 

Early   records  crossed  out,  87-89 

Early  settlers  character  of,  64 

Name  given,  92 

It's  train  bound,  73,  108,  120 

Meeting  house  case,   117 

Witchcraft  case,   113-16 

Land  Purchase  and  Distribution, 
153-4 

Mentioned,  53,  59,   61,   70-72,   92, 
93,  97,  etc.,  etc. 
Portsmouth,  R.  I.,  26n 
Potter,  Indigo,  201 
Pottle,  John,  160 
Prentiss,  James,  178n 
Presbrey,  John,  235 

Nathan,  235,  237,  238,  238n 
Nathaniel,  235,  237,  238,  238n 
William,  235 
Price,  Eleanor,  6,  239 
Providence,   R.   I.,  55 
Public  Schools,  49 

Public  Service,  not  to  be  evaded,  62 
Puddington,  Agnes,  114 

John,   114,   115 
Puritans 

Ideals,  1,  2,  16 

Sense  of  making  history,  50 

Character  of,  51,  134 

Attitude  towards  intoxicants,  159, 
161-2 

Attitude    towards    King    Charles 
II,  164 

How  regarded  by  others,  20n,  64 

Superstitions  of,  170 
Quakers 

See  Chapter  IX 

Other  references,  72,  163,  206 
Randolph,    Edward, 

On  mission  from  England,  191 


General  Index 


257 


His  opinion  of  Brian  Pendleton, 
191-2 

Mentioned,  239 
Rawson,  Edward,  36,  76,  82-86,  233 
Rayment,  John,  Sr.,  243 

William  &  Co.,  243 
Raynes    (Raines),    Francis,    192,   204 
Records,  Colony,  to  be  preserved,  50 
Reeves,  John,  100 
Religious  education,  49 

Evils  of,  50 
Rhode  Island 

Religious  toleration  in,  126 

Quakers   from,   128,   130 

Indian  War  in,  213 

Refuses     to    persecute    Quakers, 
125-6 

Mentioned,  179 
Richmond   Island,   Me.,   188n 
Rishworth,    Edward,    186,    187,    188n, 

195n,  204,  220,  236 
Robards,  William,   104n 
Roberts,  William,  104n 
Robinson,  G.  Frederick,  25 

William,   131 
Robinson    &    Wheeler,    Great    Little 

Watertown,  lln,  13n 
Roe,  Elizabeth,  116 
Rogers,  Thomas,  217 
Rowe,  Nicholas,  114 
Roxbury,  Mass.,  10 
Royal    Commissioners,    179,    182,    187, 

188,  192n,  194,  215n,  221n,  236 
Russell,  Richard,  138 
Rye,  N.  H.,  154 
Saco,  Me.,  82,  83,  84,  88,  178,  184,  184n, 

185,  186n,  188n,  189,  190,  191,  193, 

198,   199,  202,  203,  204,  208,  209, 

210,  215,  217,  217n,  218,  219,  235, 

237,  238,  246 
Saco  Sands,  ambush  on,  217,  222 
Salem,  Mass. 

Witchcraft  delusion  in,   116,  203, 
224n 

Mentioned,  10,  111,  139n,  143,  144, 
234,  237 
Salisbury,  Mass.,  109,  143,  144 
Salter,  William,  100 
Saltonstall,  I.everett,  lOn 
Sir  Richard,  9,  10,  14,  67n 
Richard,  Jr.,  59,  104 
Robert,  56,  57n 
Sanborn,  Frank  B., 

History    of    New    Hampshire,   4, 
65,  87,  87n 

Major   Brian   Pendleton  in  New 

Hampshire,  172,  172n,  173n,  247 

Sargent,  John,   197,  231-2,  232n,  234, 

235 
Stephen,   222 
Sassamon,  Indian,  212 


Saucer,  Benjamin,  99,  100 
Savage,  Thomas,  164 
Scadlocke,  William,  Jr.,  189 
Scarborough,  Me.,   165,  204,  205,  213, 

215,    217 
Schools,    public,    established,   49 
Scottow,    Joshua,    Narrative     of    the 

Planting  of  the  Mass.  Colony,  111 

Sketch  of,  218n 

Correspondence  with  Major  Pen- 
dleton, 219 

Charges  against,  220-223 

Mentioned,  225,  228n,  236,  237 
Seavy,  William,  118,  172,  174,  182 
Sewall,  Elizabeth,  52n 

Samuel,   52n 
Sewairs  Diary,  119n 
Sewel,    The    History    of    the    People 

Called  Quakers,  130n 
Shapleigh,   Nicholas    (Maj.),  94,   94n, 

122.  143,  190n,  220,  232,  233 
Shattuck,  Samuel,  141 
Sherburne,  Henry,  66,  68,  87,  90,  92, 

108n,  113,  118 
Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  145n 
Smith,  John,  31n,  43,  45,  47 

Capt.  John,  7 
Smyth,  John,  19,  22 
Smythe,  George,  69 
Southampton,  L.  I.,  234 
South  Berwick,  Me.,  188n,  216n 
Southerton  (Conn.),  69 
Spencer,  Roger,  184,  185 

Widow,  185n 
Squando,  Sachem,  227,  227n,  228,  232, 

233,  240 
Squire,  Barnard,  158 
Stackpole,  E.  S.,  Old  Kittery  and  Her 

Families,  79n,  82n,  158n 
Starbuck,  Edward,  68,  85,  86 
Steel,  Rev.,  Ashbel,  Life  and  Times  of 

Elder  William  Brewster,  242 
Stevenson,  Marmaduke,   131 
Stileman,    Elias,    153,    180,    181,    183, 

186n,  193,  203 
Stonington,  Conn.,  59,  177,  209,  228 
Stoughton,  William,  203 
Straiton,  Samuel,  56 
Strawberry   Bank,    N.    H.,   59,   61-65, 

67,  69,  72,  73,  76,  77,  83,  87,  88,  91, 

92,  112 
Sturgeon  Creek,  103 
Sudbury,  Mass. 

Land  granted  for,  29 

Settled,  31 

Indian  deed  to  settlers,  32 

Brian  Pendleton  to  drill  companv 
at,  37 

Mentioned,  41,  56,  69,   106,  106n, 
177,  235 
Sullivan,  (Gov.  James),  History,  4 


Bbian  Pendleton 


Swansea,  Mass.,  Indian  attack  on,  212 

Sylvester's  Sokoki  Trail,  247 

Symonds,    Samuel    (Dep.    Gov.),   58n, 
59,   77,  78,  79n,  81,  82,  83,   84, 
85,  104,  164n,  187,  188,  240 
Sketch  of,  78n 

Synod  of  Ministers,  43,  48,  50,  90 

Taunton,  Mass.,  238n 

Taussig,  Charles   William,  Bum,  Ro- 
mance and  Rebellion,  161n 

Thayer,  Rev.  L.  H.,  Story  of  a  Re- 
ligious Democracy,  118n 

Thing,  Jonathan,  176 

Thomas,  Rice,  158 

Thomas   (Tommass),  William,  189 

Ting,  Edward,  192,  195,  202 

Tippen,  Sgt.,  219,  226,  228,  228n,  232 

Tiverton,  R.  I.,  246 

Topsfield,  Mass.,  58,  59,  61,  104,  178, 
237 

Town  House,  Boston,  107 

Towne,  Edmond,  243 

Trickey,  Francis,  66 

Trimmings,  Oliver,  113,  115 
Susannah,  113,  114,  115 

Trustrum,  Benjamin,  227,  234 
Ralph,  231 

Turner,  Robert,  242 

Underbill,  Capt.  John,  23 

United  Colonies,  94,  125 

Upsall,  Nicholas,  128,  128n 

Vane,  Sir  Henry,  23 

Vassall,   William,  42n 

Wadleigh,  Robert,  158 

Wakeley,  Thomas,  213 

Wakeley  family  massacred,  213-14 

Walderne,  Richard,  65,  96n 

Waldron    (Walderne),   Capt.   &   Maj. 
Richard, 

Career,   character   and   death,   66 

His  cruelty  to  Quakers,  143 

Mentioned,  65,  70,   143,   148,   160, 

161,  163,  165,  170,  172,  186,  186n 

192,  193,  195,  200,  203,  208n,  214, 

215,  216,  217,  219,  220,  223,  224 

Walford,  Jane   (witch),  109,  113-116, 
116n 
Jeremy,  115 
Thomas,  108n,  112,  117 

Walford,  Jeremy,  116 
Alice,  146 

George,    66,    87,    119n,    145,    146, 
155-6,   156n,   157,   160,   172,   181 

Wampanoag  tribe,  212 

Wanneton,  Thomas,  64 

Warden     (Wardwell),    Eliakim,    144, 
145,  145n 
Elizabeth,    145n 
Lydia,  144,  145n 
William,  83 

Warren,  Humphrey,  210,  218,  222 


Warv/ick,  R.  I.,  55 
Watertown,   Mass. 

Founded,  1630,   10 

Records  of,  12 

Town  meetings,  12 

Selectmen,  1634,  12 

Resists  tax  levy,  18 

Protects  property  rights,  30 

Mentioned,    14,    53,    56,    103,    104, 
162,  215n 
Watten,  Watton,  John,  97,  105n,  109 
Wayland,   Mass.,  33 
Weare,  Peter,  187,  191,  193 
Webb,  Henry,  101 
Wells,  Me.,  82,  8.3,  84,  85,  105,  122,  165, 

177,  188n,  191,  203,  205,  209,  215, 

223,  224,  235,  237,  238,  238n,  247 
Wentworth,  Samuel,  232,  234 

William,  65 
West,  Edward,  160 
Westerly,  R.  I.,  177 
Weymouth,  Mass.,  64 
Wharton,    Edward,     139n,    143,    144, 

144n 
Wheatley,  Gabriel,  103 
Wheelwright,  Rev.  John,  20,  23,  24,  26, 

126,  178 
Samuel,    188,    188n,    195n,   220,   236 
White,  John,  158 
Whitman,  Zacharich,  38,  242 
Whittier,  (John  G.),  141n,  143n 
Whittingham,  John,  57,  178,  243 
Wiggin,  Capt.  Thomas,  62,  68,  69,  71, 

77,  82,  84,  92,  144,  160,  166 
Willard,  Simon,  203 
Williams,  Roger,  1,  19,  26 
Williamson,  History   of  Maine,   189n, 

233n 
Willis,  History  of  Portland,  Me.,  233n 
Willoughby,  Francis,  167 
Wills,  Thomas,  223 
Willson,  Gowin,  173 
Wilson,  Rev.  John,  90,  126,  127,  133, 

149 
Wincoll,   John,    188n,   195n,   204,   215, 

215n,  217,  217n,  222,  223,  236 
Winslow,  Edward,  43,  45 
Winter    Harbor,    Me.     (See    Chapter 
XII,  184-210) 

Refugees  at,  217 

Abandoned,  226 

Reoccupied,  234 

Mentioned,   177-9,  183,  216,  217n, 
218-220,   226-28,    230,   235,    237, 
246 
Winthrop,  Gov.  John,  4,  9,  10,  13n,  15, 

18,  25,  37,  41,  44,  46,  64,  90,  126, 

159,  240 
John,  Jr.,  42 
WiswaU,  John,   102 


JJ.^'PIQ 


